Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/090242/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
28 Sri Devendra Sari-composed 'Shadshiti'-another name for the Karmagranth Part-
Four (Published on the 75th Diksha Jayanti of Acharya Samrat Pujya Shri 1008
Shri Anand Rishi Ji Maharaj) Explainer Pandit Sukhlal Ji Sanghvi Former
Professor-Banaras Hindu University Publisher: Shri Bardhaman Sthanakwasi Jain
Dhamic Shiksha Samiti, Badot (Meerut) 250 611

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 28 zrI devendra sarI-viracita 'SaDazIti'-aparanAmaka karmagrantha bhAga-cAra
(AcArya samrATa pUjya zrI 1008 zrI Ananda RSi jI mahArAja kI 75vIM dIkSA jayantI
para prakAzita) vivacaka paM0 sukhalAla jI saMghavI bhUtapUrva prophesara-
banArasa hindU yUnivarsiTI prakAzaka:zrI barddhamAna sthAnakavAsI jaina dhAmika
zikSA samiti, baDota (meraTha) 250 611

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
We are extremely delighted to present this illuminating treatise on Karma to the
readers, as this Karmagranth Mata, whose commentator is the revered Shri P. Tho
Sukhlalji Sanghvi, has been unavailable for a long time. To fill this gap, our
organization decided to publish all six parts of the Karmagranth. Subsequently,
with the cooperation of many helpful brothers, this important task was also
completed so that the thirst for knowledge of the Karma principles could be
quenched.  We heartily congratulate the officials and members of the Shri
Varshman Jain Poleevelinik, Badaut, for the publication of this present
Karmagranth, which becomes mandatory to read after reading the third
Karmagranth, and after reading this, it becomes easy to understand the
Panchasangrah and Kammapayari etc. texts. They have published this book at their
own expense on the auspicious occasion of the 88th birth anniversary of the most
revered Acharya Samrat Pujya Gurudev Shree Shree 1008 Shri Anand Rishiji Maharaj
and presented their devotion to the Acharya Dev.  The inspiration of Shri Vakil
Chandji Jan, the treasurer, is the main reason for the publication of this
fourth Karmagranth. He has also shown his religious spirit by working tirelessly
in getting this book printed and published.  Due to the publication after a long
time and the non-availability of error-free literature, it is possible that
there may be errors in printing. We apologize for this. Suggestions for
improvement and corrections are always welcome for future editions.  With
thanks, Sincerely, Falaash Chand An President, Shri Varshman Jain Dhaarmik
Shiksha Samiti Badaut (Meerut) 25061

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakIya prastuta krarmagrantha pAThakoM ke samakSa prastuta karate huye
hameM parama harSa kA banumaba ho rahA hai kyoMki kAphI lambe samaya se yaha
karmagrantha mAtA jisa ke bhyAkhyAkAra zraddeya zrI pa. tho sukhalAla jI
saMghavI haiM, upalabdha nahIM ho rahI thI isa kamI ko pUrI karane ke liye
hamArI saMsthA ne karmanatha ke sampUrNa 6 hI bhAgoM ko prakAzita karane kA
nizcaya kiyaa| tavauparAnta aneka sahayogI baMdhuoM ke sahayoga se isa gurUttara
kArya ko pUrNa bhI kiyA tAki karma siddhAntoM ke jJAna pipAsuoM kI tRpti ho sake
/  prastuta bauthA pharmagrantha jo tIsare karma grantha ko par3hane ke pazcAta
par3hanA anivArya ho jAtA hai aura isake par3hane ke pazcAta paMcasaMgraha va
kammapayarI Adi granthoM ko samajhanA sarala ho jAtA hai isake prakAzana ke liye
hama zrI varSamAna jaina polIvalInaka,bar3auta ke padAdhikArI va sadasyoM ko
hArdika pradhAI dete haiM jinhoMne parama zraddeya AcArya samrATa pUjya gurudeva
zrIzrI1008 zrI Ananda RSi jI mahArAja kI 88vIM janma jayantI ke pAvana avasara
para isa pustaka kA sampUrNa vyaya apane Upara lekara prakAzita karAyA aura
apanI zraddhA AcArya deva ke prati prastuta krii| isa cauthe karmanAtha ke
prakAzana meM bhI thI vakIla canda jI jana koSAdhyakSa kI preraNA mukhya kAraNa
hai  /  unhone isa anya ko chapavAne va prakAzana karAne meM bhI athaka
parizrama kara dharma bhAvanA kA paricaya diyA hai| kAphI samaya pazcAta
prakAzana hone va bhUla sahitya ke upalabdha na hone ke kAraNa mudraNa meM
azuddhiyA rahanA sambhava hai isake lie kSamA prArthI hai AgAmI saMskaraNa hetu
beTiyoM ke sudhAra evaM sukSAva sadaiva Amantrita hai| dhanyavAda sahita vinIta
: phailAza canda ana adhyakSa zrI baddhamAna sthA0 jaina dhAmika zikSA samiti
bar3auta (meraTha) 25061

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Subject | Name Sangati Outline of the Introduction. 4 + PRA ***** Ancient and
Modern Fourth Karmagrantha Fourth Karmagramya and Agama Panchasangraha and
Gommatasar Subject Introduction Special Form Similarity of Janadarsana with
Darshanantara of Gunasthanaka THA Thoughts related to Yoga The Mevas of Yoga and
their Basis ...... ● —1I 417 Yoga Upaya and Yogavasar in Gunasthanas Explanation
of words like Purva Seva etc. Yoga-born Vibhutis Buddhist Shastra-based thought
like Gunasthan ... - 1+1 + ***** 4417 .... Bridge. 1 Re 3 4 f. 10 શ્ 45 4e 46 52
5.3 보

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSaya | nAma saMgati prastAvanA kA viSayakrama  /  4 + PRA ***** prAcIna aura
navIna caturtha karmagrantha cauthA karmagramya aura Agama paMcasaMgraha tathA
gommaTasAra viSaya-praveza vizeSa svarUpa guNasthAnakA darzanAntara ke sAtha
janadarzanakA sAmya THA yoga sambandhI vicAra yogake meva aura unakA AdhAra
...... * --1I 417 yoga upAya aura guNasthAnoM meM yogAvasAra pUrva sevA Adi
zabdoM kI vyAkhyA yogajanya vibhUtiyA~ guNasthAna jaisA bauddha zAstragata
vicAra ... - 1+1 + ***** 4417 .... pula  /  1 re 3 4 f. 10 z 45 4e 46 52 5.3 bo

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Table of Contents. Subject. Mangal and the subject of the living being's Anādi,
etc. subjects explained... Subjects of less pride [1] Jiva-sthāna-Adhikāra...
Jiva-sthāna in Jiva-sthānas, in Guṇa-sthāna Jiva-sthānas, in Yoga-sthāna Jiva-
sthānas, in Upayoga... Jiva-sthānas in Leṇyā-Bandha, etc. First Adhikāra,
Appendix, Appendix "Ka", Appendix "Na", Appendix "", Appendix "", Appendix "",
Appendix "" [2] Mārgāṇa-sthāna-Adhikāra, Mārgāṇa's Mūla Med... Mārgāṇas
explained... Mārgāṇa-sthāna's Aṣānta Mer

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSayAnukramaNikA  /  viSaya  /  maGgala aura viSaya jIvasyAna Adi viSayoM ko
vyAkhyA'.. viSayoM kA kama abhimAna [1] jIvasthAna-adhikAra'.. jIvasthAna
jIvasthAnoM meM guNasthAna jIvasthAnoM meM yoga joSasthAnoM meM upayoga ...
jIvasthAnoM meM leNyA-bandha Adi prathamAdhikAra ke pariziSTa pariziSTa "ka"
pariziSTa "na" pariziSTa "" pariziSTa "" pariziSTa "" pariziSTa "" [2]
mArgaNAsthAna-adhikAra mAgaMgAke mUla meda ... mArgaNAoM ko vyAlyA ...
mArgagAsthAnake aSAntara mera

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Subject The nature of the veils of the Gatimaganga, the nature of the veils of
the Ganga The nature of the veils of the Kasyamargna, the nature of the veils of
the Yogamargna, the nature of the veils of the Ganga The nature of the veils of
the Kasyamargna, the nature of the veils of the Janamargna, the nature of the
veils of the Samyamaatra Vanamargna, the nature of the veils of the Shyamargna,
the nature of the veils of the Madhyasya Margna, the nature of the veils of the
Sampadamargna The nature of the veils of the Margna The place of the Jivas in
the Margna The nature of the veils of the Baharsaganga The place of the Gunas in
the Sagaras, the nature of the veils of the Manoyoga in the Margangas : The
nature of the veils of the Vachanayoga, the nature of the veils of the Kayayoga,
the consideration of Yoga in the Margna The use of the Margna, the Lehapa in the
Margna  - The fewness and manyness of the Margna, the fewness and manyness of
the Gatimagna 444 2) i : ... ... 74.  - www 140 ... ... -44 ! 724 . ... .. 03 A
... 4. ... 37 :: 440 : : : ... E A ... : ⠀ : ... Irr .~. 340 140 ... wa   3 42
50 52 52 보글 55 56 57 52 ૬ 65 ክን 67 80 安い Et ૨ EX 105 115 115

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSaya gatimAgaMgA ke bhekhoM kA svarUpa gaMgA ke mevoM kA svarUpa kazyamArgaNA
ke mevoM kA svarUpa yogamArgaNA ke mevoM kA svarUpa svarUpa gaMgA ke mevoM kA
kaSAyamArgaNA ke mevoM kA svarUpa jAnamArgaNA ke mevoM kA svarUpa saMyamamAtra
vanamArgaNA ke mevoM kA svarUpa zyAmArgeNA ke mevoM kA svarUpa madhyasya mArgaNA
ke mevoM kA svarUpa sampadamArgaNA ke mevoM kA svarUpa mArgaNA ke mevoM kA
svarUpa mArgaNAoM meM jovasthAna bahArasAgaMNA ke mevoM kA svarUpa sAgaroM meM
guNasthAna mArgagAoM meM yoga manoyoga ke mevoM kA svarUpa : vacanayoga ke mevoM
kA svarUpa kAyayoga ke mevoM kA svarUpa mArganAoM meM yoga kA vicAra mArgaNAoM
meM upayoga mArgaNAtroM meM lehapA - mArgaNAoM kA alpa- bahutva gatimArgaNA kA
alpa-tya 444 2) i : ... ... 74. - www 140 ... ... -44 ! 724 . ... .. 03 A ... 4.
... 37 :: 440 : : : ... E A ... :   : ... Irr .~. 340 140 ... wa 3 42 50 52 52
bogeul 55 56 57 52 6 65 kene 67 80 An i Et 2 EX 105 115 115

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Subject Page The Minor Importance of Imniya and Kaya-Margana, the Minor
Importance of Yoga and Bev-Margana, the Minor Importance of Kshan, Shan, Samyama
and Darshan-Margana The Minor Importance of Leshya, etc., the Five Margans,
Appendix to the Second Right Appendix "J" ... Appendix "S" ... Appendix "" ...
Appendix "" Appendix "" Appendix " Appendix " Appendix "" Appendix "V" ...
Appendix "" ... [ 3 ] The Right of Gunasyan ... Some Thoughts on the Principle
of Use in the Gunasthans, in the Jovasthan Gunasthans, in the Yoga Gunasthans ""
Lesha and Bandha-Hetu in the Gunasthans _... 172 Answers to Bandha-Hetus, the
Original Bandha-Hetus in the Bhava and Gunasthans 175 The Original Bandha-Hetus
of One Hundred and Twenty Prakrutis as Far as Possible .'' 179

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSaya pRSTha imniya aura kAya-mArgaNA kA alpa mahatva yoga aura beva-mArgaNA
kA alpa pahatva kaSAna, zAna saMyama aura darzana-mArgaNA kA alpa pahatva leSayA
Adi pAMca mArgaNAoM kA alpa-mahatva dvitIyAdhikAra ke pariziSTa pariziSTa "ja"
... pariziSTa "sa" ... pariziSTa "" ... pariziSTa "" pariziSTa "" pariziSTa "
pariziSTa " pariziSTa "" pariziSTa "va" ... pariziSTa "" ... [ 3 ] guNasyAna ke
adhikAra ... guNasthAnoM meM jovasthAna guNasthAnoM meM yoga guNasthAnoM meM
upayoga siddhAnta ke kucha mantavya "" guNasthAnoM meM leSA tathA bandha-hetu
_... 172 banSa-hetuoM ke uttara bheva tathA guNasthAnoM meM mUla bamba-hetu 175
eka sau bIsa prakRtiyoM ke yathA saMbhava mUla bandha-hetu .'' 179

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(4) Subject Page 206 200 A brief and detailed description of the Gunasthana ...
... 181 Bandha in Gunasthana ... Existence in Gunasthana and Udayana in Uvay
Gunasthana .. Alpa Bahutva in Gunasthana ... Six Mavs and their Mev Karma and
the feelings of Ajiva Pratyas like Dharmaastikaaya etc. 204 Mal Maya in
Gunasthana ... Consideration of number 208 Mev-Pramaev of number ... The nature
of the three Mevs of number ... 2016 Names and evidence of Pasya ... ... 210
Method of filling etc. of Palmas ... 212 Use of mustard-filled Palmas 217 The
nature of Asankhyata and Ananta 218 Regarding the Mevos of Asankhyata and
Ananta, the views of Karmagnumpika, Satiyaadhikarya ... Appendix "P"   Appendix
"F" Appendix "" Appendix No. 1 Appendix No. 2 Appendix No. 3 240 221 227

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 4 ) viSaya pRSTha 206 200 ganamA u tuoM ka sAnA tathA vizeSa varNana ... ...
181 gupasthAnoM meM bandha ... guNasthAnoM meM sattA tathA uvaya guNasthAnoM meM
udIraNA .. guNa sthAnoM meM alpa bahutva ... chaha mAva aura unake meva karma ke
aura dharmAstikAya Adi ajIva prathyoM ke bhAva 204 gaNasthAnoM meM mala mAya ...
saMkhyA kA vicAra 208 saMkhyA ke meva-prameva saMkhyA ke tIna mevoM kA svarUpa
... 2016 pasyoM ke nAma tayA pramANa ... ... 210 palmoM ke bharane Adi kI vidhi
... 212 sarSapa-paripUrNa palyoM kA upayoga 217 asaMkhyAta aura ananta kA
svarUpa 218 asaMkhyAta tathA ananta ke mevo ke viSaya meM kArmagnampika mata
satIyAdhikAra ke pariziSTa ... pariziSTa "pa" pariziSTa "pha" pariziSTa ""
pariziSTa naM. 1 pariziSTa na02 pariziSTa naM. 3 240 221 227

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fourth Karma Granth is Mala.  SANSARSHAN The soul, through its association
with the Gunasthana, becomes entangled in the cycle of birth and death. What is
the nature of this entanglement? (1) Here, in the realm of happiness and sorrow,
the soul experiences the four states of existence: birth, existence, decay, and
death. (2) In the state of non-existence, the soul is first in the state of non-
existence. In the state of existence, the soul is in the state of existence. The
soul, through its association with the Gunasthana, becomes entangled in the
cycle of birth and death. (3) The soul, through its association with the
Gunasthana, becomes entangled in the cycle of birth and death. (4) The soul,
through its association with the Gunasthana, becomes entangled in the cycle of
birth and death. (5) The soul, through its association with the Gunasthana,
becomes entangled in the cycle of birth and death. (6) The soul, through its
association with the Gunasthana, becomes entangled in the cycle of birth and
death. (7) The soul, through its association with the Gunasthana, becomes
entangled in the cycle of birth and death. (8) The soul, through its association
with the Gunasthana, becomes entangled in the cycle of birth and death. (9) The
soul, through its association with the Gunasthana, becomes entangled in the
cycle of birth and death. (10)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cauthA karmagrantha mala  /  SANSARSHAN mijiNaM jisamaggaNa,
guNaThANuvaogajogale saao| caMdhappabahabhAve, saMkhijjAI kimabi bucchaM  // 1
//  iha suhamakhAyaregi, dibiticuasNnisNnicidii| apajattA pajjattA, kameNa ca
udasa jiyadvANA  // 2 //  bAyaraasaMnivigale, apajji paDhamabiya saMni apajataM
/  ajayajua saMni pajje, satvaguNA miccha sesesu 33 //  apajattachakki kammura,
lamosajogA apajjasaMnIsu  /  te saviuvamIsa esu taNupajjesu uralamanne  // 4 //
sadhve saMni pajatte, uralaM suhame sabhAsu taM causu  /  bAyari saviusvidurga,
pajasa nisu bAra uvaogA  // 5 //  pajacariviasaMnisu, dardasa da anANa basasu
cakkhuviNA saniapajje maNanA,-NacanakhukevaladugavihagA  // 6 //  saMnidume
dralesaapa,-jjabAyare paDhama ghara ti sesesu  /  saptaTTa bandhudIra e,
saMtukyA aTTha terasasu  //  7  //  sasaTTachachegabaMdhA, saMtudayA
sattaavattAri  /  satsadRchapaMcadgaM, udIraNA saMnipajjapte nal gaiiMgie ya
kAye, joe e phasAyanANesu  /  saMz2amavaMsakalesA,-bhavasamme saniAhAre

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **2** **E** **||10||** **||12||** **||13||**  The path of the
**Suras** (heavenly beings) and **Naras** (humans) leads to **Niryaya** (hell),
due to the **Upanivis** (attachments) of the **Kkayas** (bodies). The **Bhujal**
(earth), **Jal** (water), **Anil** (air), and **Van** (fire) are like the
**Manav** (human) **Panat** (body), which is constantly changing. The **Narini**
(human) is **Nipu** (skilled) in **Kasaya** (passions), **Koham** (anger),
**Mayamaya** (illusion), and **Lomat** (greed). The **Maddamu** (pride) and
**Himana** (jealousy) are like **Kevala** (absolute) **Vihangama** (birds) that
are **Isusua** (always) **Anath** (without a home) and **Sagara** (ocean)
**Samaichek** (always seeking) **Sar** (shelter) **Ihar** (here). The **Rasuh**
(taste) **Ayaves** (of the senses) **Jayajaya** (always conquer). The
**Achakkho** (blind) **Kevaladansan** (who sees only the absolute) **Anagara**
(without a home) **Kinna** (what) **Nila** (blue) **Kahu** (says), **Teu**
(that) **Pamha** (for us) **Ya** (this) **Sukka** (dry) **Mandiyara** (desert).
**Vegakhaiguv** (quickly) **Sammi** (together) **Chhami** (we) **Sasa** (will)
**Sana** (always) **Sanniyare** (be) **Ahare** (in the) **Yera** (world)
**Meya** (like) **Suranaray** (heavenly beings) **Vibhag** (separated)
**Isusua** (always) **Hiduge** (in the) **Sammatati** (agreement) **Paha**
(see), **Sukkas** (dry) **Jhos** (heat) **Sagin** (with) **Tamasan** (darkness)
**Apjjaaju** (will not be born), **Nare** (humans) **Sabayara** (all) **Apjja**
(will not be born) **Tekae** (take). **Thavara** (permanent) **Igidi** (this)
**Padma** (lotus) **Chad** (on) **Bar** (many) **Asanti** (unpeaceful)
**Dubigale** (in the two worlds) **Das** (ten) **Charam** (extremes) **Tase**
(like) **Ajaya** (unconquerable) **Haragati** (path of destruction) **Irit**
(in) **Sukasa** (happiness) **Yaduana** (will not be) **Ane** (there). **Patil**
(in the) **Nabhavier** (future) **Achalun** (immovable) **Pumicchhi** (earth)
**Sache** (with) **Vi** (also) **Pajani** (know) **Kevalayug** (the age of the
absolute) **Sanjayam** (with control) **Manna** (mind) **Nanavesam** (with
knowledge) **Mana** (mind) **Mose** (will be). **Pan** (but) **Charan** (feet)
**Pajja** (will be) **Vayane** (in the) **Tiya** (three) **Chha** (six) **Va**
(or) **Pajjier** (will be) **Chakkhum** (eyes). **||17||**  **Srina** (hear)
**Narani** (humans) **Didi** (this) **Charam** (extreme) **Va** (or) **Anahare**
(without food) **Bu** (be) **Sanni** (always) **Chha** (be) **Apja** (will not
be born). **Te** (that) **Sahuma** (all) **Ap** (without) **Vina** (without)
**Sasani** (with) **Iso** (this) **Gune** (quality) **Vucchhan** (ask) **Etir**
(from) **U** (the) **Suranare** (heavenly beings), **Narasanniyani** (human
beings) **Vibhavvata** (in the) **Si** (with) **Sache** (truth). **Igavigala**
(this world) **Bhudagavane** (in the earth) **Dudu** (two) **Evam** (like this)
**Gaitsabhavve** (will be born). **||16||**  **Devatika** (divine) **Kaya**
(body) **Nama** (name) **Das** (ten) **Lobhesaj** (desire) **Ajaya**
(unconquerable) **Buti** (intelligence) **Anati** (without end). **||15.3||**
**||16||** **||18||**  **Baras** (twelve) **Achakkhu** (blind) **Iklu** (will)
**Su** (be) **Padhaya** (in the) **Ahwai** (world) **Charam** (extreme) **Par**
(beyond). **||20||**  **Karmagrantha** (book of karma) **Mag** (path) **Char**
(four) **——** **||11||** **||14||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2 E  // 10 //   /  /  12  /   /  /  13  /  /  suranaratirinirayagaI,
igabiyatiyacaupaNivi kkAyA  /  bhujalajalaNAnilavaNa, tasA ya maNavapaNata
gujaregA dr narinipuM sA, kasAya kohamayamAyaloma tti  /  maddamuyaca himaNa
kevala - vihaMgamaisuaanAtha sAgArA sAmAicheksarihara, rasuhAyavesajayajayA  /
acakohI. kevaladaMsaNa aNAgArA kiNhA nIlA kAU, teU pamhA yA sukka mandiyarA  /
vegakhaiguvasamami -chamIsasAsANa saMniyare AhAreyara meyA,
suranarayavibhagamaisuo hiduge  /  sammattati pahA, sukkAsa jhosa sagiM tamasaM
apajjaju, nare sabAyaraapajja Tekae  /  thAvara igidi padamA caDa bAra asanti
dubigale dasa carama tase ajayA, hAragatiritazukasA yaduanANe | patile
nAbhaviyara, - acalunapumicchi sace vi pajanI kevalayuga, -
saMjayamaNanANavesamaNa mose  /  paNa caranapajja vayaNe, tiya cha va pajjiyara
cakkhUmi  //  17  //  zrInaraNidi caramA, va aNahAre bu sa Mni cha apajA  /  te
sahumaapa viNA, sAsaNi iso guNe vucchaM etira u suranarae,
narasaMniyaNivibhavvatasi sacce  /  igavigala bhUdagavaNe, dudu evaM
gaitasaabhavve  //  16  //  devatikAya nama dasa, lobheSaja ajaya buti anAti  /
/  / 15 / 3 /   // 16 //  ||18|| bArasa acakkhu 'iklusu paDhayA ahavAI carama
para  // 20 //  karmagrantha mAga cAra ----  // 11 //   //  14 //

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **Verse 253**  **21.**  Mananagi sag jayaai,
samayache chau dunni pariharae. Kevalagi yo charama jayaah nav mad suohidugae.
**22.** Ad uvarumi cha bethagi, khaie ikkar micchati rang dete. Sumeth sathaanam
tera- jog ahaar sukkaae.  **23.** Ani padhamadugam, padamatile saasu chch du su
satt. Padamantidugajaya, anhaare magganasu guja sacchayaralisas, -cchamosapan
vah viudhvyaahara. Uralam misa kamman, im joga kammamahare narainiditsatanu -
acchalunaranapuk say sandumame. Sanni chhalesaahargah - bhavamasuohidugae sanve
tiritthi ajayasaran - anaag ubalam abhavvamindresu. Terahaaraduguna, te
uraladugun suranarae kambaavari ne savijavidug panch iginae. Chh asanti
charamavaijuy, te vijayadgun chau vigale kammuralamosavinu man, - vaisamaiyache
yach kkhum mananaane. Uralagkammmadam - timammanavai kevaladurgami manairala
parihara, risuhumi nabate umisi savibva. Deses biuviduga, kammuralamis ahalaae.
**24.**  Sijanaana naan gan va u. Dassan bar jiyalaknuvoga. Vinu mananaankeval,
nav suratiriniryaajaesu tasajoyasukkha-haaranarapan disanibhavi sa.
Nayanedharapanlesa, kasaai das kevaladuguna.  **25.**    **26.**  **27.**
**28.**  **29.**  **30.**  **31.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra  // 253 //  maNanAgi saga jayAI, samayache cau dunni
parihAre  /  kevalagi yo caramA jayAha nava mada suohiduge  // 21 //  aDa
uvarumi ca bethagi, khaie ikkAra micchatiraMga dete  /  sumetha saThANaM tera-
joga AhAra sukkAe  /  /  22  /  ani paDhamadugaM, paDhamatilesAsu cha cca dusu
satta  /  paDhamaMtidugaajayA, aNhAre maggaNAsu gujA saccayaralIsaasa,
-ccamosapaNa vaha viudhviyAhArA  /  uralaM mIsA kammaNa, ima jogA kammamamahAre
naraiNiditasataNu - acavalunaranapuka sAya saMdumame  /  saMnichalesAhAragaH -
bhavamahasuohiduge sanve tiritthi ajayasAraNa - anAga ubalama abhavvamindresu  /
terAhAraDuguNA, te uraladugUNa suranarae kambAvari ne savijaviduga paMca igiNe
/  cha asaMti caramavaijuya, te vijayadguNa cau vigale kammuralamosaviNu maNa, -
vaisamaiyache yaca kkhu maNanANe | uralagakammAdamaM- timamaNavai kevaladurgami
maNairalA parihA, risuhumi nabate umIsi savibvA  /  desesa biuvidugA,
kammuralamIsa ahalAe  // 2 //  sijanANa nANa gaNa va u. daMsaNa bAra
jiyalakNuvaogA  /  viNu maNanANakevala, nava suratirinirayaajaesu tasajoyasukkA-
hAranarapaNa disaMnibhavi sa | nayaNedharapaNalesA, kasAi dasa kevaladuguNA  //
26 //   // 27 //   /  /  28  /  /   // 30 //   // 23 //   /  / 24 /  /   // 31
//

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter Four of the Karmag̥rantha The two types of Ravyasaṃni, Padmasaṃni and
Igibityāvari Acakṣ. The three types of Darśanadurga, Anātimadabhavi Madugaṃ 6.22
Kevalayuge Niyaduṃ, Nava Tyanāṇa Viṇū Khayita Ahalāye. Darśananāṇatigaṃ Be-si
Mīti Aññāṇamīsaṃ Taṃ Maṇanāṇacavvajjā, Aṇahāri Tini Darśaṇa ca 'Cadanāṇasaṃ
Jōbasa, - Bhavēya Ōhidi ya Do Tēra Tēra Bārasa, Maṇē Kamā Aṭṭha Dṛ ca ca Du Paṇa
Titi Kāye, Jiyaguṇajōgōtra Ōgannē Chassu Lēsāsu Saṭṭhāṇaṃ,
Egidiasamṇibhudagavaṇēsu. Paumā Cauró Timṇi U. Nārayagigaggipavaṇēsu Ahāyaham
Kēvala - Dugi Sukkā Chābi Sēsaṭṭhāṇēsu 1 Naraniraya Dēva Tiriyā, Dhōvā Tu
Asaṃkhṇaṃtaguṇā Paṇacatidugidi Yōvā Tinnihiyā Anaguṇā. Tasa Thōva Asaṃkhagī,
Bhūjalānila Ahiya Vaṇa Ṇaṃtā Maṇavayaṇakāya Jōgā, Yōṣā Asaṃkhaguṇa Anantaguṇā.
Purisā Thōvā Ittho Saṃkhaguṇāvaguṇa Kōvā Māṇī Kōho Māī, Lōhī Ahiya Maganāṇiṇō
Yadā. Ōhi Asakhā Masūya. Ahiyasama Asakhā Vibhaṃgā Kēvalīṇō Paṃtaguṇā,
Mahasūyaantarāṇi Paṃtaguṇa Sullā. Suhūmā Thōyā Parihāra Saṃkha Alāya Saṃkhaguṇā
Chēyasamaīya Saṃkhā Dēsa Avaguṇa Aṃtaguṇa Ajayā Dhōbaasaṃkhadatā Ōhiyaṇa Kēvala
Acaflū.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra raviasaMni duanA, padaMsaNa igibitiyAvari acaks  /
tianANa daMsaNadurga, anAtimaabhavi madugaM 6.22 kevalayuge niyadugaM, nava
tianANa viNU khaiya ahalAye  /  daMsaNanANatigaM be-si mIti annANamIsaM taM
maNanANacavavajjA, aNahAri tini daMsaNa ca 'caDanANasaM jobasa, - bhaveya ohida
ya do tera tera bArasa, maNe kamA aTTha dR ca ca du paNa titi kAye,
jiyaguNajogotra oganne chasu lesAsu saThANaM, egidiasaMnibhudagavaNesu  /  paumA
cauro timni u. nArayagilaggipavaNesu ahAyahama kevala - dugi sukkA chAbi
sesaThANesu 1 naranirayadeva tiriyA, dhovA tu asaMkhaNaMtaguNA paNacatidugidi
yovA tinnihiyA anaguNA  /  tasa thova asaMkhagI, bhUjalAnila ahiya vaNa NaMtA
maNavayaNakAya jogA, yoSA asaMkhaguNa anaMtaguNA  /  purisA thovA ittho
saMkhaguNAvaguNa kovA mANI koho mAI, lohI ahiya maganANiNo yadA  /  ohi asakhA
masuya. ahiyasama asakha vibhaMgA kevaliNo paMtaguNA, mahasuyaantrANi paMtaguNa
sullA  /  suhumA thoyA parihAra saMkha alAya saMkhaguNA cheyasamaIya saMkhA desa
avaguNa aMtaguNa ajayA dhobaasaMkhadatA ohiyaNa kevala acaphlU 137 //   // 38 //
36  // 40 //  !  /  /  33  /  /  nANA | vayaNaM  /   /  /  34  /  /   /  /  35
/  /   // 36 //  141 //  I4ll

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Prabhava Bhaga, Chapter 43-53  **Chapter 43:**  The number of karmas is
immeasurable, like the grains of sand on the seashore. They are countless, like
the stars in the sky.  **Chapter 44:**  The speed of karmas is immense, their
power is infinite, and their duration is eternal. They are countless, like the
drops of water in the ocean.  **Chapter 45:**  Misconduct is the root cause of
all suffering. It leads to the accumulation of karmas, which bind us to the
cycle of birth and death.  **Chapter 46:**  The path of liberation is through
right conduct, right knowledge, and right faith. It is a path of self-discipline
and self-control.  **Chapter 47:**  The path of liberation is not for the weak
or the faint of heart. It requires unwavering determination and a deep
understanding of the nature of reality.  **Chapter 48:**  The path of liberation
is a path of wisdom and compassion. It is a path of self-realization and
enlightenment.  **Chapter 49:**  The path of liberation is a path of peace and
harmony. It is a path of liberation from suffering and the attainment of true
happiness.  **Chapter 50:**  The path of liberation is a path of detachment and
non-attachment. It is a path of freedom from the shackles of desire and
aversion.  **Chapter 51:**  The path of liberation is a path of self-reflection
and self-awareness. It is a path of understanding the true nature of the self.
**Chapter 52:**  The path of liberation is a path of purification and
transformation. It is a path of overcoming the obstacles that stand in the way
of enlightenment.  **Chapter 53:**  The path of liberation is a path of joy and
bliss. It is a path of liberation from the cycle of birth and death and the
attainment of eternal peace.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmaprabhva bhAga nAr pANupu divasA. thovA do saMkha NaMta do ahiyA  /
abhaviyara thoyatA, sAsaNa thoboyasama saMkhA  // 43 //  mIsA saMkhA vega,
asaMkhaguNa khaithamiccha vu anaMtA  /  saMniyara yoSa NaMsA - NahAra thovedhara
asaMkhA  //  44  //  sambajiyaThANa miche. saga sAlaNi paNa apajasa bhidgaM  /
saMbhe sanI buddhiho sesesu saMnipajjatto  /  /  45  /  /  micchabugaajai jogA -
hAraduguNA apunyapaNage u  /  manava janimIti +  // 4 //  " sAhArayuga yamate te
viuvAhAramIsa vi iyare  /  kammuraladugaMtAima, maNavayaNa sayogi na ajogI  //
47 //  tianANabuvaM sAima vuge ajai desi nANavaMsatigaM  /  se mIsi mosA samaNA,
jayAi kevala aMtaduge  //  48  //  sAsaNabhAve nANaM vijavagAhArage uralamissaM
/  nehA higayaM suyamayaM pi visAsANo 46 cha saya teuligaM igi susukkA ayogi
ahalesA  /  baMdhassa miccha aviraha kasAyajogati ca ja heU  // 50 //
abhiyamabhigahiyA, minibasiya hAMsa iyamaNAbhogaM  /  paNamiccha bAra avira,
maNakaraNAniya muddakiyavaho  //  51  //  nava sola kasAyA pana ra joga iya
uttarA u sagabadhA  /  seaNa tiguNesu catidupajao baMdho cacamicchumicchaavira,
paDavaiyA sAyasolapaNatIsA joga viNu piyA - hAragajinavajjasesAo  /  /  52  /  /
/   //  53 //

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four  **Verse 54:** Fifty-two pages, twenty-seven qualities,
sixteen virtues, nine humble, seven without attachment, not even a single iota
of arrogance.  **Verse 55:** Fifty-two wrong views, double the number of wrong
beliefs, fifty-two wrong desires, without any good karma, three types of wrong
views, six types of wrong desires.  **Verse 56:** Wrong views lead to rebirth,
wrong karma leads to long life, wrong desires lead to good qualities, twenty-six
types of wrong desires lead to happiness.  **Verse 57:** Wrong desires lead to
attachment, wrong views lead to wrong beliefs, wrong karma leads to suffering,
one type of wrong desire leads to rebirth, two types of wrong desires lead to
wrong beliefs.  **Verse 58:** Sixteen types of wrong desires lead to happiness,
ten types of wrong desires lead to suffering, without any attachment, without
any wrong beliefs, without any wrong karma, without any wrong desires.  **Verse
59:** Seven types of wrong desires lead to rebirth, seven types of wrong desires
lead to suffering, seven types of wrong desires lead to wrong beliefs, seven
types of wrong desires lead to wrong karma, seven types of wrong desires lead to
attachment.  **Verse 60:** Eight types of wrong desires lead to happiness, eight
types of wrong desires lead to suffering, eight types of wrong desires lead to
wrong beliefs, eight types of wrong desires lead to wrong karma, eight types of
wrong desires lead to attachment.  **Verse 61:** Six types of wrong desires lead
to happiness, six types of wrong desires lead to suffering, six types of wrong
desires lead to wrong beliefs, six types of wrong desires lead to wrong karma,
six types of wrong desires lead to attachment.  **Verse 62:** One type of wrong
desire leads to happiness, one type of wrong desire leads to suffering, one type
of wrong desire leads to wrong beliefs, one type of wrong desire leads to wrong
karma, one type of wrong desire leads to attachment.  **Verse 63:** One type of
wrong desire leads to happiness, one type of wrong desire leads to suffering,
one type of wrong desire leads to wrong beliefs, one type of wrong desire leads
to wrong karma, one type of wrong desire leads to attachment.  **Verse 64:** One
type of wrong desire leads to happiness, one type of wrong desire leads to
suffering, one type of wrong desire leads to wrong beliefs, one type of wrong
desire leads to wrong karma, one type of wrong desire leads to attachment.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagranya bhAga cAra paNapanna pannA liyahi-ayatta gunnvttchcugviisaa| solasa
kasa nava namra sataheNA na u aogimi  // 54 /  /  paNapanna micchi hAraga-dugUNa
sAsANi pannamiccha vinnaa| missabugakaMmaaviNu, ticatta mIse aha chacattA  // 55
//  saMmissakama ajae, avira kammara lmiibiksaaye| muttu guNavatta vese, chavIsa
sAhAra pamatta  // 56 //  aviraiigAratakatA, yatrajja apamatti mIsadugarahiyA  /
euyosa apurakhe puNa, duvosa avitadhviyAhArA  // 7 //  achahAsa sola Ayari
suhame dasa beyasaMjalaNati viNA  /  khoNuvasati alobhA, sajogi pudhyutta
sagajogA 58 //  aparamatatA satta-du.mIsaappuradhabAyarA satta  /  baMdhai
chassuhamo e, gamurimA baMdhagAjogI  // 5 //  AsuhamaM saMtudaye, aTTha vi moha
viNu satta khoNami  /  ghau carimaduga aTTha u, saMte upasaMti satta dara  // 6
//  uiraMti pamattatA, saga? mosa? veyaAja vinnaa| chaga apamattAi tao, cha
paMca suhumo paNuvasaMto  // 1 //  paNa vo khINa du jogI,-NuvIra gu ajogi yova
uvsNtaa| saMkhagaNa khoNa suhumA,-niyaTTiappubdha sama ahiyA  // 2 //
jogiapamasaiyare, saMkhaguNA dessaasnnaamosaa| aviraya ajogimicchA. asaMkhayauro
duve paMtA  // 3 //  javasamakhayamIsovaya, pariNAmA dubhavaTThAragavosA  /
tiya bheya sanivAiya saMmaM caraNaM paDhamabhAve  // 64 //

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma-grantha Bhaga Bara || 65 || || 66 || The Kevali-jnana (omniscience)
arises, the Samyak-darsana (right faith) and Laddhi (psychic powers) are
attained. Then the remaining Upayoga (modes of consciousness) are attained, but
the Samyak-virati (right conduct) and Apranamata (non-injury) are not attained
due to the absence of Siddhatva (perfection). The Samyama-lesa (traces of
restraint) and Kasaya-vega (passions) remain. The Mithyatva (false belief) is
quickly overcome by the Bhavya (capable of attaining liberation), and the three
Caturgati-soka (grief of the four states of existence) and the four Sakhayah
(friends) arise due to the rise of Parinama (transformations).  The Upasamajnana
(knowledge of equanimity) or the four Kevali-parinama-udaya-ksaya (rise,
duration and destruction of the omniscient state) are attained. || 67 || In the
Ksaya-parinama (state of destruction), the Siddhas (liberated souls) attain the
Nara-punya-yoga-upasamasredhika (the ladder of equanimity of human merit). Thus,
the Sannivaya (association), Bheda (separation), Vosana (impression) and
Asambhavino (impossibility) are overcome, and the Moha (delusion), Misa (hatred)
and Chadghata (murder) in the Anukrama (sequence) and Dharma-aparinamika (non-
transforming nature of the soul) are abandoned. The Bhava-bandha (bondage of
psychic states) and Udaya (rise) are also overcome.  || 68 || The remaining
(aspects) are...  || 70 || || 71 || The four Samayika (equanimous states), three
Caturtha (fourth stage of spiritual development), four Bhava (psychic states)
and the Panuvasama (equanimity) are attained. The four Ksonapurva (previous
lives), three Samiti (carefulness), Samkhyeya (countable) and Asamkhyeya
(uncountable) Parittagutta (minor) and Nipajjya (major) are of three types. Even
though this is the case, the Jhannam (minimum), Majjuva (medium) and Gurubha
(severe) are described, and the Lahusaravijja (light knowledge) is attained. The
Jambūdvīpa-pramana (measurement of Jambūdvīpa), Capalla-parupana (description of
the unstable), Imapallana-vaddiya-sala (this assembly hall), Padisalama (great
assembly hall) and Makkhā (delusion) are described. The Yojana-sahasra (thousand
yojanas) in depth, Saveyiyanta (filled) and Sahabharia (accompanied) are the two
directions, and thus the Khiviya (thrown) and Nitthahe (placed) in the first
(direction). Again, the first thread is filled, and then the same in the other
direction. || 74 || Quickly the Salaga-palle (bundle of sticks), like the
Salaga-lavana (salt), is thrown. Again, the second and third (directions) are
lifted up. || 75 ||  || 72 || || 73 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrabhya bhAga bAra  //  65  //   /  /  66  /  /  boe kevalajuyalaM,
saMbhaM dANAiladdhi paNa caraNaM  /  tae sesuvaogA, paNa laddhI sammaviraidugaM
aprANamasiddhattA, saMjama lesA kasAyaiveyA  /  micchaM turie bhavvA,
bhavyattajiyatta pariNAme 3 caugaI soga, pariNAmudaehiM cau sakhaiehiM  /
uvasamajuhi vA caU. kevali pariNAmudayakhaie  /  67  /  /  khayapariNAme siddhA
narANa paNajoguvasamaseDhIe  /  iya para saMnivAiya, bheyA vosaM asaMbhaviNo
moheba samo mIso cajaghAsu anukammasu ca dhammAipAriNAmiya, bhAve baMdhA udaie
vi I - L 19  //  68  //  sesA  /   /  /  66  /  /   /  /  70  /  /   //  71  //
saMmAicaulu tiga cau, bhAvA ca paNuva sAma vasate  /  cau khoNApuva timi,
sesaguNaTThANagamajie saMkhijjegamasaMkhaM parittajuttanipayajyaM tivihaM  /
evamataM pi lihA, jahannamajjuvakasA sadhye lahasaMvijyaM bucciya akSa paraM
majjhima jara gurubhaM  /  jaMbUddopamaraNaya, capallaparUvaNAi imaM
pallANavadviyasalA, -ga paDisalAmA mahAsalA makkhA  /  joyaNasahaso gADhA,
saveiyaMtA sahibhariyA tA donudadisu ivika kasarisavaM khiviya niTTae paDhame  /
paDhamaM va tantaM ciya puNe bhariya taMni taha khoNe  //  74  //  khippara
salAgapalle, -gu sarisavo iva salAgalavaNeNaM  /  punA boyo ya tao, puThi pida
tami uddharie  /  75  /  /   /  /  72  /  /   //  73  //

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four  **Verse 76:**   "Salute to the Knower. Thus read this
book, filled with essence. Write this, for you, the fourth, which is the essence
of the universe."  **Verse 77:**   "The number of leaves of the palm tree, the
number of grains of sand in the ocean, even the number of atoms in the universe,
all are less than the number of karmas."  **Verse 78:**   "The number of karmas
is vast, even the number of atoms in the universe is small compared to it. The
number of karmas is vast, like the infinite changes of time."  **Verse 79:**
"Multiply the number of atoms in the universe by itself four times, then add the
number of moments in time, and even then, you will not reach the number of
karmas. The number of karmas is vast, like the ocean, deep and vast."  **Verse
80:**   "Even if you count the number of atoms in the universe, the number of
moments in time, and the number of karmas, all together, it will still be less
than the number of karmas. The number of karmas is vast, like the infinite
universe."  **Verse 81:**   "The number of karmas is vast, like the infinite
space, like the infinite time, like the infinite number of worlds. The number of
karmas is vast, like the infinite number of beings."  **Verse 82:**   "The
number of karmas is vast, like the infinite number of particles in the universe,
like the infinite number of moments in time, like the infinite number of beings.
The number of karmas is vast, like the infinite number of worlds."  **Verse
83:**   "Even if you multiply the number of karmas by itself, you will not reach
the number of karmas. The number of karmas is vast, like the infinite universe."
**Verse 84:**   "The number of karmas is vast, like the infinite number of
beings, like the infinite number of worlds, like the infinite number of moments
in time. The number of karmas is vast, like the infinite universe."  **Verse
85:**   "The number of karmas is vast, like the infinite number of beings, like
the infinite number of worlds, like the infinite number of moments in time. The
number of karmas is vast, like the infinite universe."  **Verse 86:**   "The
number of karmas is vast, like the infinite number of beings, like the infinite
number of worlds, like the infinite number of moments in time. The number of
karmas is vast, like the infinite universe."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagranya bhAga cAra khoNe salAga taie. evaM paDhahi boyayaM bharasu  /  lehi
tasyaM tehi ya, turiyaM jA kira phuDA uro  // 76 /  paDhamatipalluddhariyA,
dIvudahI pallacausarisavA ya  /  savyo vi egarAsI, havUNo paramasaM khijja  //
77  /  /  rUbajuyaM tu parittA, saMkhaM lahu assa rAsi agbhAse  /  juttAsakhijja
lahu, AliyAsamayapariNAmaM  // 78  /  /  miticaupaMcamaguNaNaM, kamA samAsasa
samaya usattA  /  NatA te svajayA, majkSA rUSaNa guru pacchA  // 79 //  iya
sutattaM anne, bagiryAmavakasi cautthayamasaMkaM  /  hoha asaMkhAsaMkha lahu
svayaM tu taM bhajana  // 50 //  habUNamAima guru, tiyaggiu taM ime vasa
chakheve  /  logAkAsapaesA, dhammAdhammegajiyadesA  // 81  /  /
hijabaMdhAvasAyA, aNubhAgA jogacheyapalibhAgA  /  duha ya samANa samayA,
patteyanigoyae khivasu  // 12 //  puNaravi tami tivaggiya, paritaNaMta lahu
tassarAmINaM  /  agbhA se lahU juttA, NataM abhavajiyapamANaM  // 3 //  sambagge
puNa jAyaI, gaMtANaMta lahu taM va tiSalutto  /  baggasu taha vinataho,
iNaMtakheve khivasu cha ime  //  84  //  siddhA nigoyajIyA. vaNassaI kAlapuggalA
ceva  /  /  savamaloganahaM puNa, tivarigaDaM kevaladugaMmi  // 5 //  khise
gaMtANaMtaM. havei jilu tu vayaharai majjha  /  ipa suhamarathaviyAro, lihio
devivasUrIhi  // 86 //

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction | ## Name |  This chapter is popularly known as the "Fourth
Karmapranya," but its real name is "Shadsheetik." It is called "Chauya
Farmgranth" because it is the fourth in the six Karmagranths. And the name
"Shadsheetik" is assigned because it contains sixty-six original verses. This
chapter is also called "Sukma Bichar" because the author has mentioned the
phrase "Suhamstah Viyaroh" at the end of the text. Thus, it is clear that all
three names of this chapter are meaningful.  Although the version published by
Shri Bhimso Majik in "Prakaran Ratnakar Chaturth Bhag" from Nirnayasagar Press,
Bombay, contains ninety-nine original verses, it is not the original version.
Because the three verses that appear in the second, third, and fourth positions
in the original version are not actually original, but are the subject-
collection verses of this chapter. That is, these verses demonstrate what the
main topics are in this chapter and how many other topics are related to each
main topic. Therefore, the author has quoted these three verses in his own
commentary, but has not taken them as original and has not commented on them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA | nAma  /  prastuta prakaraNa kI cauthA karmapranya' yaha nAma
prasiddha hai, kintu isakA asalI nAma SaDazItika hai  /  yaha 'cauyA
pharmagrantha' isaliye kahA gayA hai ki chaha karmagranthoM meM isakA nambara
cauthA hai| aura 'SaDazItika' nAma isaliye niyata hai ki isameM mUla gAthAe~
chiyAsa haiM  /  isake fear isa prakaraNa ko sukamA bicAra bhI kahate haiM, so
isaliye ki prathakAra ne grantha ke anta meM "suhamastha viyAroM" zabdakA
ullekha kiyA hai  /  isa prakAra vekhane se yaha spaSTa hI mAlUma hotA hai ki
prastuta prakaraNa ke ukta tInoM nAma abhvarya - sArthaka haiM  /  yadyapi
dabAvAlI prati jo zrIt bhImaso mAjika dvArA nirNayasAgara presa bambaI se
prakAzita 'prakaraNa ratnAkara caturtha bhAga' meM chapI hai, usameM mUla
gAthAoM kI saMkhyA navAsI hai kintu vaha prakA * ar kI mUla hai| kyoMki usameM
jo tIna gAthAe~ dUsare, tIsare aura cauthe nambara para mUla rUpa meM chapI
haiM, ye vastutaH mUla rUpa nahIM haiM, kintu prastuta prakaraNa kI viSaya-
saMgraha gAthAe~ haiM  /  arthAt isa prakaraNa meM mukhya kyA kyA viSaya hai
aura pratyeka mukhya viSaya se sambandha rakhane vAle anya kitane viSaya haiN|
isakA pradarzana karAne vAlI gAyAeM haiN| ataeva pratyakAra ne ukta tIna gAthAeM
svopajJa TIkA meM uddhUta ko haiM, mUla rUpa se nahIM lI haiM aura na una para
TIkA kI hai|

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  2 - **Sangati**  Firstly, the subject matter of the **Karma Granthas** is
clear in the **Sangati**. That is, firstly, the **Karma Grantha** describes the
number of **Mula** and **Uttara Karma Prakritis** and their **Vipaka**.
Secondly, the **Karma Grantha** takes each **Gunasthan** and describes the
number of **Bandha**, **Upay**, **Udirana**, and **Sattagata Uttara Prakritis**
that are possible in it. And thirdly, the **Karma Grantha** takes each
**Marganasthan** and describes the **Bandha** ownership of the **Uttara Karma
Prakritis** in relation to the possible **Gunasthanas**. The third **Karma
Grantha** describes the **Bandha** ownership in relation to the **Gunasthanas**
in the **Marganasthanas**, correct. However, the **Mula** does not independently
state anywhere which **Gunasthanas** are possible in which **Marganasthanas**
and how many.  Therefore, the fourth **Karma Grantha** expounds on this subject
and fulfills the aforementioned inquiry. Just as there is an inquiry about the
**Gunasthanas** in the **Marganasthanas**, there is also an inquiry about the
**Gunasthanas** in the **Jivasthanas** and the **Jivasthanas** in the
**Gunasthanas**. Not only that, there is also an inquiry about **Yoga**,
**Upayoga**, and other subjects in the **Bahya Jivasthanas**, and about
**Jodhasthan**, **Yoga**, **Upayoga**, and other subjects in the
**Marganasthanas**, and about **Yoga**, **Upayoga**, and other subjects in the
**Gunasthanas**. The fourth **Karma Grantha** was composed to fulfill all these
inquiries. Therefore, it primarily holds three **Adhikaras**: **Jivasthan**,
**Marganasthan**, and **Gunasthan**. And each **Adhikara** respectively
describes eight, six, and five subjects, which are indicated in the meaning of
the first **Gatha** on page 2 and also in the **Sphuta Note** through the
**Sangraha Gathas**. Apart from this, there is also a discussion...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2 - saMgati pahale sona karmagranthoM ke viSayoM ko saMgati spaSTa hai  /
arthAt pahale  /  karma grantha meM mUla tathA uttara pharma prakRtiyoM kI
saMkhyA aura unakA vipAka varNana kiyA gayA hai| dUsare karmagrantha meM
pratyeka guNasthAna ko lekara usameM pathAsambhava bandha, uvaya, udIraNA aura
sattAgata uttara prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA batalAI gaI hai aura tIsare karmagrantha
meM pratyeka mArgazAsthAna ko lekara usameM yathA sambhava gaNasthAnoM ke viSaya
meM uttara karmaprakRtiyoM kA bandhasvAmitva varNana kiyA hai  /  tosare
karmaprantha meM mArgaNAsthAnoM meM guNasthAnoM ko lekara sandhasvAmitva varNana
kiyA hai sahI. phintu mUla meM kahIM bhI yaha viSaya svatantra rUpa se nahIM
kahA gayA hai ki kisa kisa mArgaNAsthAna meM kitane kitane aura kina-kina
guNasthAnoM kA sambhava hai| ataeva caturtha pharmagrantha meM isa viSaya kA
pratipAdana kiyA hai aura ukta jijJAsA kI pUrti kI gaI hai  /  jaise
mArgaNAsthAmoM meM guNa sthAnoM kI jijJAsA hotI hai, vaise hI jIvasthAnoM meM
guNasthAnoM ko aura guNasthAnoM meM jIvasthAnoM ko bhI jijJAsA hotI hai| itanA
hI nahIM bahika jIvasthAnoM meM yoga, upayoga Adi anyanya viSayoM ko aura
mAgaMNAsthAnoM meM jodhasthAna, yoga, upayoga Adi anyanya viSayoM kI tathA
guNasthAnoM meM yoga, upayoga Adi anyAnya viSayoM kI mo jijJAsA hotI hai| ina
saba jijJAsAoM kI pUrti ke liye caturtha karmagrantha ko racanA huI hai| isI se
isameM mukhyatayA jIvasthAma mArgagAsthAna, aura guNasthAna, ye tIna adhikAra
rakhe gaye haiM  /  aura pratyeka adhikAra meM kramaza: ATha, chaha vasa viSaya
vaNita haiM, jinakA nirdeza pahalI gAthA ke bhAvArtha meM pRSTha 2 para tayA
sphuTa noTa meM saMgraha gAthAoM ke dvArA kiyA gayA hai  /  isake sivAya
prasaMga

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In this text, the author has considered both emotions and numbers.   It is not a
question that, even though it is necessary to expound on the qualities of the
*maganga sthana* in accordance with the *sangati* for the third *karma prameya*,
why were not many other new topics discussed in this text, just as other topics
have been discussed in detail? Because it is impossible to discuss all topics in
one text. Therefore, it is up to the author to decide how many and which topics
to discuss and in what order. In other words, the author is independent in this
matter. No one has the right to interfere in this matter.  The ancient and
modern *chaturtha karma grantha*, "Shad-shitika", is the common name for both,
because the number of verses in both is the same, sixty. However, the modern
author has named it "Sookshmanam Vichar", and the ancient author has named it
"Agami Vastu Vichar Saar" in the end of the commentary. Just like the modern
one, the ancient one also has three main topics: *josa sthana*, *maganga
sthana*, and *guna sthana*. The secondary topics are eight, six, and five
respectively in the modern one, and the same in the ancient one. Even though the
number of verses is the same, the modern one has the special feature that the
author has described two more topics in detail by using a concise style of
description. The first topic is "emotions" and the second is "numbers". The
nature of both is detailed in the modern one and not at all in the ancient one.
Apart from this, the topics and *prama* are the same in both the ancient and
modern ones. Commentary and notes on the ancient one...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaza isa grantha meM pratyakAra ne bhAvoM kA aura saMkhyA kA bhI vicAra kiyA
hai  /  yaha prazna ho ho nahIM sakatA ki tIsare karmapramya ko saMgati ke
anusAra mAgaMNAsthAnoM meM guNasthAnoM mAtra kA pratipAdana karanA Avazyaka hone
para bhI, jaise anya-anya viSayoM kA isa prantha meM adhika varNana kiyA hai,
vaise aura bhI naye-naye kaI viSayoM kA varNana iso grantha meM kyoM nahIM kiyA
gayA ? kyoMki kisI bhI eka anya meM saba viSayoM kA varNana asambhava hai  /
ataeva kitane aura phina viSayoMkA kisa krama se varNana karanA, yaha pranyakAra
kI icchA para nirbhara hai| arthAt isa bAta meM pratyakAra svatantra hai| isa
viSaya meM miyoga-parya nuyoga karane kA kisI ko adhikAra nahIM hai| prAcIna
aura navIna catuthaM karmagrantha  /  'SaDazItika' yaha mukhya nAma donoM kA
samAna hai, kyoMki gAthAoM ko saMsthA donoM meM barAbara chiyAso hI hai| parantu
navIma andhakAra ne 'sUkSmAnaM vicAra' aisA nAma vidhA hai aura prAcIma ko TIkA
ke anta meM TokAkAra ne usakA nAma 'Agami vastu vicArasAra' diyA hai  /  navIna
kI taraha prAcIna meM bhI mukhya adhikAra joSasthAna, mArgaNAsthAna aura
guNasthAna, ye tIna hI haiM  /  gauNa adhikAra mI jaise navIna kramazaH ATha,
chaha tathA vasa haiM, vaise hI prAcIna meM bhI haiM  /  gAthAoM ko saMsthA
samAna hote hue bhI navIna meM yaha vizeSatA hai ki usameM varNana zailI
saMkSipta karake granthakAra ne do aura viSaya vistArapUrvaka varNana kiye hai
/  pahalA viSaya bhAva' aura dUsarA 'saMkhyA hai  /  ina donoM kA svarUpa navIna
meM savistAra hai aura prAcIna meM bilkula nahIM hai  /  isake sivApa prAcIna
aura navIna kA viSayasAmya tathA prama-sAmya barAbara hai| prAcIna para TIkA,
TippaNI,

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
D. Bhak Description, salvation, and auspicious voices are there. Yes, they are
like the Gujarati ones on the Nadin, but they are not ancient. For specific
information about this relationship, i.e., which interpretations are ancient and
which are new, in which language and by whom they were created, one should refer
to the table of Karma-related literature at the beginning of the Karmagranth.
The fourth Karmagranth and the Agamas, Panchasangrah and Gommatasar. Although
some parts of the fourth Karmagranth (such as Gunasthan, etc.) are found
described in Vedic and Yogic literature with different names and forms, no
specific text of the same category has been found in the literature of both
these traditions. Jain literature is divided into the Svetambara and Digambara
sects. In the literature of the Svetambara sect, the ancient texts 'Agama' and
'Panchasangrah' are the works of specific scholars, which contain the entire
subject matter of the fourth Karmagranth, or rather, the fourth Karmagranth was
created based on them. Although the topics in the fourth Karmagranth are
described in a particular order, they are not all described in the same order in
any one Agama or Panchasangrah; however, almost all of its topics can be found
in different parts of different Agamas and Panchasangrahs. This translation
provides information about which topic of the fourth Karmagranth is found in
which Agama and which part of the Panchasangrah.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 DI. bhaka vivaraNa, uddhAra, bhAvya AvAe~ haiN| hAM, nadIna para jaise gujarAtI
use haiM, se prAcIna para nahIM haiN| isa sambandha kI vizeSa jAnakArI ke liye
arthAt prAcIna aura navona para kauna-kauna sI vyAkhyA kisa-kisa bhASA meM aura
kisa phisa kI banAI huI hai, isyAdhi jAnane ke liye pahale karmagranya ke
Arambha meM jo karmaviSayaka sAhitya kI tAlikA jo hai, use dekha lenA cAhiye  /
cauthA karmagrantha aura Agama, paMcasaMgraha tathA gommaTasAra  /  yadyapi
cauthe karmagrantha kA koI-koI (jaise guNasthAna Adi) vaidika tathA yoddha
sAhitya meM nAmAntara tathA prakArAntara se varNana kiyA huA milatA hai, tathApi
usakI samAna koTikA koI khAsa grantha ukta donoM sampratrAyoM ke sAhitya meM
dRSTigocara nahIM huA  /  jaina sAhitya ivetAmbara aura vivambara ko sampradAyoM
meM vibhakta vetAmbara sampradAya ke sAhitya meM viziSTa vidvAnoM kI kRti
svarUpa 'mAgama' aura 'paJcasaMgraha' ye prAcIna grantha aise haiM jinameM ki
caube karmagrantha kA sampUrNa viSaya pAyA jAtA hai, yA yo kahiye ki jinake
AdhAra para cauthe karma grantha kI racanA hI kI gaI hai| I yadyapi cauthe karma
grantha meM aura jitane viSaya jisa krama se varNita haiM, ve saba usI krama se
kisI eka Agama tathA paJcasaMgraha kisI eka bhAga meM varNita nahIM haiM;
tathApi bhinna-bhinna Agama aura pa saMgraha ke bhinna-bhinna bhAga meM usake
sabhI viSaya lagabhaga mila jAte haiN| cauthe karmagrantha kA kauna sA viSaya
kisa Agama meM aura paca saMgraha ke kisa bhAga meM AtA hai  /  isakI sUcanA
prastuta anuvAda meM

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This commentary has been provided as much as possible in the context of that
subject, so that the practitioners of the present text may know some suitable
places of the Agamas and Panchasangraha, and may have the opportunity to
understand the differences and special features.  It is beneficial for the
practitioners of the present text to be introduced to the Agamas and
Panchasangraha; because the reason for the glory of those texts is not only
their antiquity, but also their subject-depth and clarity of subject.
'Gommatasar' is a well-established text on karma of the Digambara sect, which is
available at present. Although it is much later than the Svetambara Agamas and
Panchasangraha, yet the subject-description, subject-division and
characteristics of each subject are very clear in it. The 'Jivakanda' and
'Karmakanda' of Gommatasar are very similar to the brain. The subject of karma
is investigated in it, and it is much larger than that. Although all the
subjects of the fourth karma text are mostly described in the Jivakanda, yet the
style of description of both is very different in many respects.  The main
principles in the Jivakanda are: 1 Gunasthan, 1 Jodh Sthan, 1 Paryapti, 1 Pran,
1 Sanjna, 14 Marganas and 1 Upayog, a total of twenty. Each principle has a
detailed and detailed description in it. In many places, it also differs from
the fourth karma text. _It is not surprising that the Jivakanda is a special
thing to see for the readers of the fourth karma text. Because many special
things can be known from it. Many special things related to karma, which are the
goal in Svetambara texts, are also available in Digambara texts. Therefore, both
sects

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 usa usa viSaya ke prasaMga meM TipapNI ke taura para yathAsambhava kara dI gaI
hai, jisase ki prastuta grantha ke abhyAsiyoM ko Agama aura paJcasaMgraha ke
kucha upayukta sthala mAlUma ho tathA matameva aura vizeSatAe~ hAta ho, prastuta
grantha ke abhyAsiyoM ke liye Agama aura paJcasaMgraha kA paricaya karanA
lAbhavAyaka hai; kyoMki uma granthoM ke gaurava kA kAraNa sirpha unakI prAcInatA
hI nahIM hai, balki unakI viSaya-gambhIratA sathA viSayasphuTatA mI unake
gaurava kA kAraNa hai| 'gommaTasAra yaha digambara sampradAya kA karma-viSayaka
eka pratiSThina grantha hai, jo ki isa samaya upalabdha hai| yadyapi vaha
zvetAmbarISa Agama tathA paJcasaMgraha ko apekSA bahuta arvAcIna hai, phira bhI
usameM viSaya-varNana, viSaya-vibhAga aura pratyeka viSaya ke lakSaNa bahuta
sphuTa haiM  /  gommaTasAra ke 'jIvakANDa' aura 'karmakANDa' ye murupa bo dimAga
haiM  /  cI karmapranya kA viSaya jAMcakAta meM ho hai aura yaha isase bahuta
bar3A hai yadyapi caupa pharmavagya ke saba viSaya prAyaH jIvakANDa meM varNita
haiM, tathApi donoM kI varNanazailI bahuta aMzoM meM minma hai| jIvakAnDa meM
mukhya bosa prarUSaNAeM haiM:-1 guNasthAna. 1 jodha sthAna, 1. paryApti, 1
prANa, 1 saMjJA, 14 mArgaNAeM aura 1 upayoga, kula bIsa  /  pratyeka prarUpaNa
kA usameM anuta vistA aura viza varNana hai  /  aneka sthaloM meM cauthe
karmagrantha ke sAtha usakA matabheva bhI hai| _isameM mancheha nahIM ki cauthe
karmagrantha ke pAThiyoM ke liye jIvakANDa eka khAsa dekhane ko vastu hai| yoMki
isase aneka vizeSa bAteM mAlUma ho sakatI haiM  /  kamaviSayaka aneka vizeSa
bAteM jaise zvetAmbarISa granthoM meM lakSya haiM, vaise hI aneka vizeSa vAsa,
vigambaroya prayoM meM bhI labhya haiM  /  isa kAraNa donoM sampradAya ke

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Those who are particularly inquisitive should definitely see other texts on the
same subject. From this very amitraaya, in order to show the samya and vaishamya
of that subject in the translation, many suitable passages from the Gommatasar
have been introduced and inserted at various places.  **Subject Introduction:**
Inquisitive people do not develop an inclination to study a text until they
become familiar with the subject matter of that text. In accordance with this
rule, in order to create an inclination in qualified authorities for the study
of the present text, it is necessary to introduce the subject of the present
text at the beginning. This is called "Subject Introduction."  The introduction
of the subject can be done in two ways: general and specific.  (a) The purpose
for which the text was created, its main subject, and how many divisions it is
divided into. Describing the other subjects related to each division, how many
and which ones they are, and explaining the relationship between the subject-
soul and the word-body of the text, i.e., indicating what the main and secondary
subjects of the text are and what they are described in, is a general
introduction to the subject.  (b) Explaining the nature of each subject through
its characteristics is its specific introduction.  The specific introduction of
the subject of the present text has been done as much as possible in the
original text itself in the place where that subject is described.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vizeSa jijJAsuoM ko eka dUsare ke samAna viSayaka grantha avazya dekhane
caahie| isI amitrAya se anuvAda meM usa usa viSaya kA sAmya aura vaiSamya
dikhAne ke liye jagaha jagaha gommaTasAra ke aneka upayukta sthala udbhuta tathA
niviSTa kiye haiM  /  viSaya-praveza : jijJAsu loga jaba taka kisI bhI grantha
ke pratipAdya viSaya kA paricaya nahIM kara lete taba taka usa grantha ke
adhyayana ke liye pravRtti nahIM karate  /  isa niyama ke anusAra prastuta
grantha ke adhyayana ke nimitta yogya adhikAriyoM kI pravRtti karAne ke liye
yaha Avazyaka hai ki zurU meM prastuta grantha ke viSaya kA paricaya karAyA jAya
/  isI ko "viSaya-praveza" kahate haiM  /  viSaya kA paricaya sAmAnya aura
vizeSa do prakAra se karAyA jA sakatA hai| (ka) grantha kisa tAtparya se banAyA
gayA hai| usakA mukhya viSaya va hai aura vaha kitane vibhAgoM meM vibhAjita
hai| pratyeka vibhAga se sambandha rakhane vAle anya kitane-kitane aura kauna-
kauna viSaya haiM; ispAdi varNana karake grantha ke zabdAtmaka kalevara ke sAtha
viSaya-rUpa AtmA ke sambandha kA spaSTIkaraNa kara denA arthAt grantha kA
pradhAna aura gauNa viSaya kyA-kyA hai tathA vaha kisa-kisa kama se varNita hai,
isakA nirdeza kara denA, graha viSaya kA sAmAnya paricaya hai  /  (kha) lakSaNa
dvArA pratyeka viSaya kA svarUpa batalAnA yaha usakA vizeSa paricaya hai  /
prastuta prattha ke viSaya kA vizeSa paricaya to usa usa viSaya kA varNana-
sthAna meM hI yathAsambhava mUla meM kiyA vizecana meM karA diyA

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
7 - It has gone. Therefore, it is necessary and appropriate to introduce the
subject in general at this place. The purpose of writing this book is to
describe the different states of worldly beings and to establish that certain
states are temporary and undesirable due to being conditional, potential, or
karma-created; and certain states are permanent and desirable due to being
natural. It also aims to show that the soul's nature is primarily to evolve.
Therefore, it explains how the soul evolves according to its nature and how it
manifests its natural powers by abandoning conditional states. To achieve this
objective, this book mainly discusses five topics: (1) Jiva-sthān (State of the
Soul), (2) Mārgaṇā-sthān (State of the Path), (3) Guṇa-sthān (State of
Qualities), (4) Bhāva (Emotion), and (5) Saṅkhyā (Number). Among these, the
first three main topics are discussed along with other subjects: In Jiva-sthān,
(1) Guṇa-sthān, (2) Yoga (Union), (3) Upayoga (Application), (4) Leśyā
(Tendencies), (5) Bandha (Bondage), (6) Udaya (Arising), (7) Uvīraṇā (Covering),
and (8) Sattā (Existence) are discussed. In Mārgaṇā-sthān, (1) Jiva-sthān, (2)
Guṇa-sthān, (3) Yoga, (4) Upayoga, (5) Leśyā, and (6) Alp-bahutva (Fewness-
Manyness) are discussed. In Guṇa-sthān, (1) Jiva-sthān, (2) Yoga, (3) Upayoga,
(4) Leśyā, (5) Bandha-hetu (Cause of Bondage), (6) Bandha, (7) Udaya, (8)
Uvīraṇā, (9) Sattā, and (10) Alp-bahutva are discussed. The last two topics,
namely Bhāva and Saṅkhyā, are not discussed in conjunction with any other topic,
meaning no other topic is discussed in relation to them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 7 - gayA hai  /  ataeva isa jagaha viSaya kA sAmAnya paricaya karAnA hI
Avazyaka evaM upayukta hai| prastuta grantha banAne kA tAtparya yaha hai ki
sAMsAripha jovoM kI minna-bhinna avasthAoM kA varNana karake yaha basalAyA jAya
ki amukaamuka avasyAyeM aupAdhika, vaibhAvika kiyA karma-kRta hone se asthAyI
tathA heya haiM; aura amuka-amuka avasthA svAbhAvika hone ke kAraNa sthAyI tathA
upADeya hai  /  isake sidhA yaha bhI batalAnA hai ki, jIva kA svamAtra prAya
vikAza karane kA hai  /  ataeva vaha apane svabhAva ke anusAra kisa prakAra
vikAsa karatA hai aura tadadvArA aupAdhika avasthAoM ko tyAga kara kisa prakAra
svAbhAvika zaktiyoM kA AvirbhAva karatA hai| isa uddezya kI siddhi ke liye
prastuna grantha meM mukhyatayA pAMca nirNana ziza: (1) jIya sthAna, (2)
mArgaNAsthAna, (3 /  guNasthAna, (4) mAgha aura (5) sNkhyaa| inameM se prathama
mukhya tIna viSayoM ke sAtha anya viSaya bhI vaNita haiM :-joSasthAna meM (1)
guNasthAna, (2 yoga (3) upayoga, (4) lezyA, (5) bandha, (6) udaya, (7) uvIraNA
aura (8) sattA ye ATha viSaya varNita haiM  /  mArgaNAsthAna meM (1) jIvasthAma
{2 guNasthAna, (3 yoga, (4) upayoga, (5) lezyA aura (6) alpa-bahutva, ye cha:
viSaya vaNita haiN| sayA guNasthAna meM (1) jIvasthAna, (2) yoga (3) upayoga,
(4) lezyA, (5) bandha-hetu. (6) bandha, (7) udaya, (8) uvIraNA, (9 /  sasA aura
(10) alpa-bahatva, ye isa viSaya vaNita haiN| pichale do viSayoM kA arthAta
bhAva aura saMkhyA kA varNana anya nya viSaya ke varNana se mizrita nahIM hai,
arthAt unheM lekara anya koI viSaya varNana nahIM kiyA hai|

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Thus, the main parts of the presented Prajya's autumnal body become the main
characters. The first part is from the second to the eighth verse, which
describes the main features of the Jivasthana and describes the eight related
topics. The second part is from the ninth to the forty-fourth verse, which
mainly describes the Magganasthana and its related topics. The third part is
from the forty-fifth to the sixty-seventh verse, which mainly describes the
Gunasthana and its related topics. The fourth part is from the sixty-eighth to
the seventy-seventh verse, which only describes the emotions. The fifth part is
from the seventy-eighth to the eighty-seventh verse, which only describes the
numbers. The book ends with the description of the numbers. The nature of the
Jivasthana, etc., the main and secondary topics mentioned above, has been
written in the Acharya of the first verse. Therefore, there is no need to write
it again here. Although it is necessary to write that the purpose of creating
this book, which is written above, can be achieved by describing the Jivasthana,
etc., the above topics. Jivasthana, Magganasthana, Gunasthana and Bhava are the
various states of worldly beings. The description of Jivasthana can be used to
find out whether the form of life is in four states, depending on the species,
or on the development of the physical structure or the number of senses. This is
why all are perishable or potential and are therefore ultimately despicable. The
knowledge of Magganasthana makes it clear that all Magganas are the natural
state-form of the being.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 isa taraha dekhA jAya to prastuta prajya ke zaradAtmaka kalevara ke mukhya
pAtra hisse ho jAte haiN| pahilA hissA dUsarI gAthA se AThaSI gAthA taka kA hai,
jisameM jIvasthAna kA mukhya varNana karake usake sambandhI ukta ATha viSayoM kA
varNana kiyA gayA hai| dUsarA hissA navI gAthA se lekara cauvAlisI gAthA taka kA
hai, jisameM mukhyatayA mAgaMNAsthAna ko lekara usake sambandha se saH viSayoM
kA gharNana kiyA gayA hai  /  sIsarA hissA paMtAlisI gAthA se lekara presaThavIM
gAyA taka kA hai, jisameM mukhyatayA guNasthAna ko lekara usake mAdhaya se ukta
basa viSayoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai  /  cauza hissA causaThabI gAthA se nekara
satsaravI gAyA taka kA hai, jisameM kevala bhAvoM kA varNana hai  /  pAMcA hissA
ikahattaravoM gApA se liyAsopI gAthA taka ko hai, jisameM sirpha saMkhyA kA
varNana hai  /  saMkhyA ke varNana ke sAtha ho grantha kI samApti hotI hai|
jIyasthAna Adi ukta mulya tathA gauNa viSayoM kA svarUpa pahalI gAthA ke
prAcArya meM likha diyA gayA hai| isaliye phira se yahA~ likhane kI jarUrata
nahIM hai| yathApi yaha likha denA Avazyaka hai ki prastuta grantha banAne kA
uddezya jo Upara likhA gayA hai, usakI siddhi jIvasthAna Adi ukta viSayoM ke
varNana se kisa prakAra ho sakatI hai| jIvasthAna, mArgaNAsthAna, guNasthAna
aura bhAva ye sosArika jIvoM kI vividha avasyAeM haiM  /  jIvasthAna ke varNana
se yaha mAlUma kiyA jA sakatA hai ki jIvana rupa cauvaha avasthAeM jAtisApena
haiM kiMvA zArIrika racanA ke vikAsa yA indriyoM ko nyUnAdhika saMkhyA para
nirbhara haiN| isI se saba pharmakRta yA yaMbhAvika hone ke kAraNa anta meM heya
haiM  /  mAgaMNAsthAna ke bodha se yaha vidita ho jAtA hai ki sabhI mArgaNAeM
jIva kI svAbhAvika avasthA-rUpa

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are no other paths except for *kevalgyan*, *kevaldarshan*, *kshaayik
samyaktv*, *kshaayik charitra* and *anraaharaktva*. All other paths are
unnatural, to a greater or lesser extent. Therefore, for beings who desire the
fullness of their nature, they are ultimately to be discarded. From the
knowledge of *gunasthan*, it becomes known that *gunasthan* are the roles that
indicate the further development of the soul, which is engaged in spiritual
evolution. When the roles of the previous stages become unnecessary due to the
attainment of the roles of the later stages, all those roles are automatically
abandoned. From the knowledge of emotions, it becomes certain that except for
*kshaayik* emotions, other dense emotions, even if they are necessary during the
time of evolution, are ultimately to be discarded. In this way, the *jivasthan*
etc., which are presented in this text, are very useful for those who practice
spiritual thought, in order to distinguish what is natural and what is unnatural
for the being.  **Soul**  Spiritual texts are of two types. One type describes
only the pure nature of the soul, while the other describes the impure and mixed
nature. This text belongs to the second category. Such texts are particularly
useful for primary and secondary practitioners of spiritual knowledge, because
their perspective is practical, and through such texts, they can gradually be
made to incline towards the ultimate nature of reality.  Every practitioner of
spiritual knowledge has a natural curiosity about how and in what order the soul
evolves spiritually, and what kind of states it experiences during its
evolution. From the perspective of fulfilling this curiosity, *gunasthan* is
more important than other subjects.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nahIM haiM  /  kevalajJAna, kevaladarzana kSAyika samyaktva kSAyika cAritra
aura anarAhArakatva ke sivAya anya saba mArgaNAe~ nyUnAdhika rUpa meM
asvAbhAvika haiM  /  ataeva svarUpa kI pUrNatA ke icchuka jIvoM ke liye anta meM
ve heya hI haiN| guNa sthAna ke parijJAna se yaha jJAta ho jAtA hai ki
guNasthAna yaha AdhyAtmika utkrAnti karane vAle AtmA ko uttaratara vikAsa sUcaka
bhUmikAe~ hai| pUrva-pUrva bhUmikA ke samaya uttarIuttara bhUmikA upAdeya hone
para bhI paripUrNa vikAsa ho apane se ve sabhI bhUmikAe~ Apa hI Apa chUTa jAtI
haiN| bhAvoM kI jAnakArI se yaha nizcaya ho jAtA hai ki kSAyika bhAvoM ko chor3a
kara anya sagha mAya cAhe ye utkrAnti kAla meM upAdeya kyoM na hoM, para anta
meM heya hI haiN| isa prakAra jIvakA svAbhAvika svarUpa kyA hai aura asvAbhAvika
kyA hai, isakA vizeSa karane ke lie jIvasthAna Adi ukta vicAra jo prastuta
grantha meM kiyA gayA hai. vaha AdhyAtmika vicAra ke abhyAsiyoM ke lie atIva
upayogI hai  /  ! AtmA AdhyAtmika grantha do prakAra ke haiN| eka to aise haiM
jo sirpha ke 'zuddha svarUpa aura dUsare azuddha tathA mizrita svarUpa kA
varNana karate haiN| prastuta grantha dUsarI koTi kA hai| adhyAtma-vidyA ke
prAthamika aura mAdhyamika abhyAsiyoM ke liye aise grantha vizeSa upayogI haiM,
kyoMki una abhyAsoM kI haSTi vyavahAra - parAyaNa hone ke kAraNa aise prazthoM
ke dvArA ho kramazaH kevala pAramArthika svarUpa - prAhinI banAI jA sakatI hai
/  adhyAtmika-vidyA ke pratyeka abhyAsI ko yaha svAbhAvika jilAsA hotI hai ki
AtmA kisa prakAra aura kisa krama se mAdhyAtmika vikAsa karatA hai tathA use
vikAsa ke samaya kaisI-kaisI avasthA kA anubhava hotA hai| isa jijJAsA kI pUrti
ko dRSTi se dekhA jAya to anya viSayoM kI apekSA guNasthAna kA mahatva adhika
hai  /  isa

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This article will discuss the nature of Gunasthan in detail. It will also
explain how spiritual development is described in Jain, Buddhist, and Bhavik
scriptures. While this may be lengthy, the insights shared will hopefully
benefit curious readers and enhance their knowledge and understanding.  **The
Specific Nature of Gunasthan**  Gunasthan refers to the stages of development,
or the places of qualities (atma shaktis). In Jain scriptures, the term
Gunasthan refers to the gradual manifestation of atma shaktis in their pure,
functional form, from the initial state of Tara Samabhava Padma to the final
state of liberation. The true nature of the soul is pure consciousness and
complete non-duality. However, as long as dense clouds of karmic coverings
obscure it, its true nature remains hidden. As these coverings gradually weaken
or dissolve, the soul's true nature is revealed. When the intensity of the
coverings is at its peak, the soul remains in its primary, undeveloped state.
When the coverings are completely destroyed, the soul attains its ultimate state
- the fullness of its pure form. As the intensity of the coverings diminishes,
the soul gradually progresses from its primary state towards its ultimate state,
leaving behind its initial state and gradually gaining the benefits of its pure
form. During this journey, the soul passes through numerous stages, some higher
and some lower...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - khayAla se isa jagaha guNasthAna kA svarUpa kucha vistAra ke sAtha likhA jAtA
hai| sAtha hI yaha bhI batalAyA jAyagA ki jaina zAstra kI taraha baMvika tathA
bauddha zAstra meM bhI AdhyAtmika vikAsa kA kaisA varNana hai  /  yadyapi aisA
karane meM kucha vistAra avazya ho jAyagA, tathApi nIce likhe jAne vAle vicAra
se jijJAsuoM kI yadi kucha bhI jJAna-vRddhi tathA ruci zuddhi huI to yaha vicAra
anupayogI na samajhA jAyagA | guNasthAna kA vizeSa svarUpa | guNoM
(AtmazaktiyoM) ke sthAnoM ko arthAt vikAsa kI kramika avasthAoM ko guNasthAna
kahate haiM  /  jaina zAstra meM guNasthAna isa pAribhASika zabda kA matalaba
Atmika zaktiyoM ke AvirbhASakounake zuddha kAryarUpa meM pariNata hote rahane ko
tara samabhAvApadma abasthAoM se hai  /  AzmA kA vAstavika svarupa zuddha cetanA
aura pUrNAnanyamaya hai| para usake Upara jaba taka tIvra AvaraNoM ke ghane
bAdaloM kI ghaTA chAI ho, taba taka usakA asalI svarUpa dikhAI nahIM detA  /
kintu AvaraNoM ke kramazaH zithila yA bhadhda hote hI usakA asalo svarUpa
prakaTa hotA hai| jaba AvaraNoM kI tIvratA AvarI hara ko ho, taba AtmA
prAthamika avasthA meM avikasita avasthA meM par3A rahatA hai| aura jaba AvaraNa
bilkula hI naSTa ho jAte haiM, saba AtmA carama avasthA - zuddha svarUpa kI
pUrNatA meM vartamAna ho jAtA hai| jaise-jaise AvaraNoM kI tIvratA kama hotI
jAtI hai, vaise-vaMse AtmA bhI prAthamika avasthA ko chor3akara dhIre dhIre
zuddha svarUpa kA lAbha karatA huA carama avasthA kI ora prasthAna karatA hai|
prasthAna ke samama ina do avasthAoM ke bIca use aneka nIcI-UMcI aya --

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  11 --- One has to experience the stages. The first stage
should be understood as the culmination of involution or degeneration, and the
final stage should be understood as the culmination of evolution or liberation.
All the intermediate stages of this evolution-involution can be called both
higher and lower in comparison. That is, any intermediate stage can be called
lower than the stage above it and higher than the stage below it. The soul
progressing towards evolution actually traverses such countless spiritual
stages. But Jain scriptures have classified them in brief into fourteen
divisions, which are called "Chaudah Gunasthanas".  Of all the coverings, the
covering of attachment (moha) is the primary. That is, as long as attachment is
strong and intense, other coverings remain strong and intense. Conversely, as
attachment weakens, other coverings also weaken in the same way. Therefore, in
the development of the soul, the strength of attachment should be understood as
the main obstacle and the weakening of attachment should be understood as the
main help. For this reason, the concept of the stages of evolution in
Gunasthanas is based on the intensity, weakness, and absence of the power of
attachment.  There are two main powers of attachment. The first power does not
allow the soul to have darshan, i.e., to decide its own nature, form, or the
division or discrimination between inert and conscious. And the second power
does not allow the soul to gain liberation even after acquiring it, and
accordingly, it does not allow it to be free from practice or its consequences.
It is said that when one truly understands the nature of an object, one tries to
obtain or abandon it, and one succeeds. For the soul progressing towards
spiritual development, the main thing is the same...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 11 -- sthAnoM kA anubhava karanA par3atA hai  /  prathama avasthA ko avikAsakI
athavA adhaHpatana kI parAkASThA aura carama avasthA ko vikAsakI athavA jatkAnti
kI parAkASThA samajhanA cAhiye isa vikAsa - kama kI madhyavartinI saba avasthAoM
ko apekSA se jazca bhI kaha sakate haiM aura nIca bho  /  arthAt madhyavartanI
koI bhI avasthA apane se Upara vAlI avasthA kI apekSA nIca aura nIce vAlI
avasthA kI apekSA ucca kahI jA sakatI hai| vikAsa kI ora agrasara AzmA vastutaH
ukta prakAra kI saMkhyAtIta AdhyAtmika bhUmikAoM kA anuva karatA hai | para
jaina zAstra meM saMkSepa meM vargIkaraNa karake unake caudaha vibhAga kiye
haiM, jo "cIvaha guNasthAna" kahalAte haiN| saba AvaraNoM meM moha kA AvaraNa
pradhAna hai| arthAt jaba taka moha balavAn aura tIvra ho, taba taka anya samo
AvaraNa balavAn aura tIvra bane rahate haiN| isake viparIta moha ke nirbala hote
hI anya AvaraNoM kI vaisI hI vazA ho jAtI hai| isalie AtmA ke vikAsa karane meM
mukhya bAdhaka moha kI prabalatA aura mukhya sahAyaka moha kI nirmalatA
samajhanI caahiye| isI kAraNa guNasthAnoM kIvikAsa-ma-gata avasthAoM kI kalpanA
moha-zakti kI utkaTatA, mabhvatA tathA abhAva para avalambita hai  /  moha kI
pradhAna zaktiyoM do haiN| inameM se pahalI zakti, AtmA ko darzana arthAt
svarUpa pararUpakA nirNaya kiMvA jar3a-cetana kA vibhAga yA viveka karane nahIM
delI; aura dUsarI zaktirAtmA ko vizeSa prApta kara lene para bhI tadanusAra
pravRtti arthAt abhyAsa - para pariNati se chuTakara svarUpa lAbha nahIM karate
detI upahAra meM para-paira para yaha dezA jAtA hai ki kisI vastu kA yathArthaM
varzana-bodha kara lene para ho usa vastu ko pAne yA tyAgane kI ceSTA kI jAtI
hai aura vaha saphala bhI hotI hai| AdhyAtmika vikAsa- gAmI AtmA ke liye bhI
mukhya vo hI

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are two actions. The first is to perceive the difference between the true
self (**swarupa**) and the non-self (**pararupa**) through **darshan** (insight)
or **bhedgyan** (knowledge of differentiation). The second is to reside in the
true self. The power of attachment (**moha**) that hinders the first action is
called **darshan-moha** in Jain scriptures, and the power of attachment that
hinders the second action is called **charitra-moha**. The second power is a
follower of the first. This means that the second power does not weaken until
the first power is strong; and as the first power becomes **manva**,
**bhandatar**, and **manyatam**, the second power also gradually becomes the
same. Or, you could say that once the soul achieves **swarupa-darshan**, it then
gains the path to achieving **swarupa-labh** (attainment of the true self).  The
state of an undeveloped or completely degenerate soul is the first **gunasthan**
(stage of spiritual development). In this stage, due to the strength of both the
aforementioned powers of attachment, the soul is completely fallen in its
spiritual state. During this stage, no matter how much the soul achieves worldly
success, its inclination is completely devoid of the true goal. Like a traveler
who mistakes west for east, the soul does not find its desired destination; all
its efforts are in vain. The soul in the first stage considers the non-self as
the true self and remains eagerly longing to attain it, becoming a victim of the
eight strong blows of aversion or hatred (**viparit varjan ya mina ke 8 dvesh**)
and remaining deprived of true happiness. This stage is called **bahiratmanath**
or **miyyavarshan** in Jain scriptures. All the souls present in this stage do
not have the same spiritual state. Although both powers of attachment generally
dominate all of them, there is still some variation in the intensity of
attachment. Due to some reason...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 // kArya haiN| pahalA svarUpa tathA pararUpakA bartha darzana kiMvA bhedajJAna
karanA aura dUsarA svarUpa meM sthita honA  /  inameM se pahale kArya ko rokane
vAlI moha kI zakti jainazAstra meM "darzana- moha" aura dUsare kArya ko rokane
vAlI moha ko zakti "cAritramoha" kahalAtI hai  /  dUsarI zakti pahalI zakti ko
anugAminI hai| arthAt pahalI zakti prabala ho, taba taka dUsaro zakti kamI
nirbala nahIM hotI; aura pahalI zakti ke manva, bhandatara aura manyatama hote
hI dUsarI zakti bhI kramaza: vaisI hI hone lagatI hai  /  athavA yo kahiye ki
eka bAra AtmA svarUpa-darzana kara pAye to phira use svarUpa-lAbha karane kA
mArga prApta ho ho jAtA hai  /  avikasita kiMvA sarvathA adha:patita AtmA kI
avasthA prathama guNasthAna hai| isameM moha kI ukta donoM zaktiyoM ke prabala
hone ke kAraNa AtmA ko AdhyAtmika sthiti birukula girI huI hotI hai  /  isa
bhUmikA ke samaya AtmA cAhe Adhibhautika utkarSa kitanA ho vana karane para
unakI pravRtti tArivaka lakSya se sarvathA zUnya hotI hai  /  aMne vignamatrAlA
manuSya pUrvako pazcima mAnakara gati karatA hai aura apane iSTa sthAna ko nahIM
pAtAH usakA sArA zrama eka taraha se vRthA hI jAtA hai, se prathama bhUmikA vAlA
AtmA para-rUpa ko svarUra samajha kara usI ko pAne ke liye pratikSaga lAlAyita
rahatA hai aura viparIta varjana yA minA ke 8 dveSa kI prabala coToM kA zikAra
banakara tAtvika sukha se bacita rahatA hai| isa bhUmikA ko janazAstra meM
"bahirAtmanAtha" kiMvA "miyyAvarzana" kahA hai| isa bhUmikA meM jitane AtmA
vartamAna hote haiM, una saboM kI mI AdhyAtmika sthiti eka so nahIM hoto  /
arthAlaM sabake Upara moha kI sAmAnyataH donoM zaktiyoM kA Adhipatya hone para
mI usameM thor3A-bahuta tarantama-bhAva avazya hotA hai  /  kisI kAraNa roga

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
13 -  The influence of attachment (moh) varies, being stronger in some and
weaker in others. It is the nature of the soul to evolve. Therefore, knowingly
or unknowingly, when the influence of attachment begins to lessen, the soul
starts to progress towards liberation. It develops the strength to resist the
most intense passions (rag) and break the first power of attachment. This state
is called "pranidhi bhed" in Jain scriptures.  The task of a seeker (panthi) is
indeed difficult. Once the intense knot of passions (rag-vesh) is loosened and
broken, consider the journey almost complete. After this, the primary power of
attachment weakens quickly, and the weakening of perception-attachment (darshan
moh) automatically opens the path for the weakening of knowledge-attachment
(jnana moh). On one hand, passions exert their full force, and on the other
hand, the evolving soul also uses its energy to reduce their influence. In this
spiritual battle, mental afflictions and the soul constantly struggle for
victory.   * "Manthitti sudubheo bavakhad ghan roodh gooth garin. Jeevasma karma
janilo ghan rag dhos parinamo." (1195) * "Bhinnammi tammila bho sammattai mokkh
hekanam. Soy dulllamo parissamchitt vidhayaai vihin." (1196) * "So tattha
parissammai ghor mahasamar nigayaichch. Vijjay siddhikale jahba vigya taha
soni." (1197)  Special Commentary:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 13 - para moha kA prabhAva mAtama, kisI para gAr3hatara aura kisI para usase mo
kama hotA hai  /  vikAsa karanA yaha prAya: AtmA kA svabhAva hai| isaliye jAmate
yA anajAnate, jaba usa para moha kA pramAva kama hone lagatA hai, taba vaha
kucha vikAsa kI ora agrasara ho jAtA hai aura tIvatama rAga-Sa ko kucha mamca
karatA mA moha kI prathama zakti ko chinna-bhinna karane yogya Asmabala prakaTa
kara letA hai  /  isI sthiti ko jaina zAstra meM "pranyi bhe"* kahA hai| pandhi
meva kA kArya ar3A hI viSama hai  /  rAgaveSa kA tIvratama viSTa pranthi-eka
bAra zithila va chinna-bhinna ho gAya to phira per3A pAra ho samajhiye; kyoMki
isake bAda moha ko pradhAna zakti varzabha moha ko zithila home meM derI nahIM
lagatI aura darzanamoha zithila huA ki bAritramoha kI zithilatA kA mArga Apa hI
Apa khula jAtA hai| eka tarapha rAga-tuSa apane pUrNa bala kA prayoga karate
haiM aura dUsarI tarapha vikAsonmukha AtmA bhI unake pramAva ko kama karane ke
lie apane bIrya-cala kA prayoga karatA hai  /  isa AdhyAtmika guru meM thAno
mAnasika vikAra aura AtmA ko pratiditA meM kabhI eka to kabhI dUsarA jayalAma
karatA hai ! mameka AzmA aise *mAMThitti sudubheo bavakhar3a ghaNa rUDha gUDha
garin  /  jIvasma kamma jaNilo ghaNa rAga dhosa pariNAmo  //  1195  //
bhinnAmmi tammilAbho sammattAI mokkha hekaNaM  /  soya dullamo parissamacitta
vidhAyAI vihiM  /  /  1166  //  so tattha parissammaI ghora mahAsamara
nigayAincha  /  vijjAya siddhikAle jahabA vigyA tahA soni  //  1197  //
vizeSAvazyaka bhASya  /

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are also those who, despite manifesting the strength to almost break
through the knots (granthi-bhed), are ultimately struck by the intense blows of
attachment and aversion, defeated by them, and return to their original state.
Even after many attempts, they are unable to conquer attachment and aversion.
There are also those who neither fall back in defeat nor achieve victory, but
remain caught in the spell of that spiritual battle for a long time. Some souls,
however, use their power appropriately and conquer attachment and aversion in
that spiritual battle.  In any mental affliction, we often experience these
three states in competition: sometimes falling back in defeat, sometimes staying
in the competition, and sometimes achieving victory. This struggle is called
"sangharsh" (struggle). Struggle is the cause of development. Whether it be
knowledge, wealth, or power, any worldly object that is desired, many obstacles
arise in obtaining it, and in overcoming them, everyone experiences these three
states of competition.  When a student, a seeker of wealth, or a seeker of power
strives for their desired goal, they either give up their efforts upon seeing
the many difficulties in the way, or they overcome the difficulties and move
forward on the path to achieving their goal. Those who move forward become great
scholars, great wealthy, or great renowned. Those who flee in fear of
difficulties remain ordinary, ignorant, poor, or unrenowned. And those who can
neither conquer the difficulties nor flee back in defeat, remain in an ordinary
state, achieving no noteworthy excellence or benefit.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 -- bhI hote haiM jo karoba karIba granthibheda karane lAyaka bala prakaTa
karake bhI anta meM rAga-dveSa ke tIvra prahAroM se Ahata hokara va unase hAra
khAkara apanI mUla sthiti meM A jAte hai aura aneka bAra prayatma karane para
bhI rAgadveba para nahIM aise bhI hote haiM, jo na to hAra khAkara pIche girate
hai aura na jaya lAbha kara pAte haiM, kintu ve cirakAla taka usa AdhyAtmika
yuddha ke maMtrAma meM hI par3e rahate haiM  /  koI-koI AtmA aisA bhI hotA hai
jo apanI zakti kA yathocita prayoga karake usa AdhyAtmika yuddha meM rAgadveSa
para jayalAbha kara ho letA hai  /  kisI bhI mAnasika vikAra ko pratidvandvitA
meM ina tInoM avasthAoM kA arthAt kabhI hAra khAkara poche girane kA kabhI
pratispardhA meM DaTe rahane kA aura jayalAma karane kA anubhava hameM akasara
nitya prati huA karatA hai| yahI saMgharSa kahalAtA hai| saMgharSa vikAsa kA
kAraNa hai| cAhe vidyA, cAhe bana cAhe koli, koI bhI laukika vastu iSTa ho,
usako prApta karate samaya bhI mAnaka aneka vighna upasthita hote haiM aura
unako pratidvandvitA meM ukta prakAra kI tInoM avasthAoMoM kA anubhava prAya:
sabako hotA rahatA hai| koI vidyArthI, koi dhanArthoM yA koI kotikADa.kSI jaba
apane iSTa ke liye prayatna karatA hai| taba yA to vaha ate meM aneka
kaThinAiyoM ko dekhakara prayatna ko chor3a hI detA hai yA kaThinAiyoM ko pAra
kara iSTa prApti ke mArga kI aura agrasara hotA hai  /  jo agrasara hotA hai,
vaha bar3A bisUrana bar3A dhanavAn yA bar3A kIrtizAlI bana jAtA hai  /  jo
kaThinAiyoM se Darakara pIche bhAgatA hai, bahU pAmara, ajJAna, nirdhana yA
kItihIna banA rahatA hai  /  aura jo na kaThinAiyoM ko jIta sakatA hai aura na
unase hAra mAnakara pIche bhAgatA hai, vaha sAdhAraNa sthiti meM ho par3A
rahakara koI dhyAna khIMcane yogya utkarSa -lAbha nahIM karatA |

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- ܀ To explain this feeling, a parable is given in the scriptures* that three
travelers were going somewhere. Seeing terrible thieves in the middle, one of
the three ran away. The second was afraid of those thieves and did not move, but
was caught by them. The third, however, defeated those thieves with
extraordinary strength and skill and moved forward. The parable can give a
little idea of the victory and defeat that occurs in fighting spiritual battles
with mental disorders. * Three men, together with their families, were
traveling. When they saw thieves, one of them immediately ran away.  The second
one was afraid and did not move, so he was caught.  The third one, however, was
strong and skillful, so he defeated the thieves and continued on his journey.
This parable shows that in the battle against mental disorders, there are both
victories and defeats.  -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - // isa bhAva ko samajhAne ke liye zAstra* meM eka yaha STAnta dipA gayA hai
ki tIna pravAsI kahIM jA rahe the  /  bIca meM bhayAnaka coroM ko dekhate hI
tIna me se eka to pIche bhAga gyaa| dUsarA una choroM se Dara kara nahIM mAgA,
kintu unake dvArA pakar3A gyaa| sosarA to asAdhAraNa bala tathA kauzala se una
coroM ko harAkara Age bar3ha hI gayA  /  mAnasika vikAroM ke sAtha AdhyAtmika
yuddha karane meM jo jayaparAjaya hotA hai, usakA thor3A bahuta sthAla ukta
dRSTAnta se bA sakatA hai  /  * jar3a vA tini maNussA, jaMtaSTaviyahaM sahAba
gamaNaM  /  belA ikka mabhiyA, turaMti yattAyado corA  /  /  1211  /  /  hRdchu
madhya tatthe, ne ego maggao pasiniyattA | vittio gahilo tao mama ikkaMtu
puraMto  /  1919  //  aDavI bhavo maNUsA, jIbA kammaTTII yaho doho  /  gaMdrIya
mayaThANaM rAgaddhamA va do corA  /  /  1213  /  /  bhago liI parivuDakI, gahio
puNa gaThio o to  /  gammatta puraM evaM jo ejjAtiSNI karaNa Ni  /  /  1214  //
- vizeSAvazyaka bhASya yathA janAtrayaH ke'pi  /  mAhapura vipAsa prAptAH
vakacana kAntAre, sthAnaM caura: bhayaMkaram  //  616  /  /  tara dutaM drutaM
yAnto, dastaskaramam  /  taddaSTrA tvaritaM pazvAdeko mItaH palAyitaH  //  62
//  gRhItazcAparastAbhyAmanyata  /  bhayasthAnamatikramamya, puraM prApa
parAkramI  /  /  621 :

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 16  There are many souls residing in the first Gunasthan (stage of
spiritual development) who have slightly suppressed the intense velocity of
attachment and aversion, but they have not weakened the dominant power of
delusion, specifically, the delusion of perception. Therefore, although they are
not entirely aligned with the spiritual goal, their understanding and character
are still better than other undeveloped souls. Although the spiritual vision of
such souls is not entirely self-oriented and is actually considered Mithya
(false) or Avyakt (unmanifest), it is considered useful because it brings them
closer to the right path.  In comparison to the most intense states of
understanding, energy, and character, this false vision is categorized into four
types, marking the final stage of the Mithya Drishti Gunasthan.  **Illustrative
Explanation:**  > The life of a being is like a traveler. > The state of karma
is the knot, the place of bondage is the fearsome forest. > Attachment and
aversion are the thieves, fear is the guard. > Reaching the knot, they
experience misfortune, which binds them to the highest state. > The one who is
obstructed by attachment, aversion, and other hindrances is like a traveler
trapped in the forest. > The one who does not break the knot and does not escape
the forest is lost. > The one who reaches the desired city of liberation through
previous efforts is like a traveler who has escaped the forest. > By abandoning
attachment and aversion, he has attained right vision.  **From Lokaprakash
Sangraha 3:**  > The one who has attained the state of dullness in the middle is
like a friend who has also seen the path. > He guides others towards liberation
through his own understanding.  **Sri Yash Vijayji's Yogavatar Dwatrimsha:**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 16 -- prathama guNasthAna meM rahane vAle vikAsamAmo aise aneka Atma hote haiM,
jo rAgadveSa ke tIvratama vega ko thor3A sA dabAye hue so haiM, para moha ko
pradhAna zakti ko arthAt darzanamoha ko zithila kiye hue nahIM hote| isaliye ve
yadyapi adhyAtmika lakSya ke sarvathA anukUlagAmI nahIM hote to bhI unakA bodha
va caritra anya avikafar AtmAoM kI apekSA acchA hI hotA hai  /  yadyapi aise
AramAoM kI AdhyAtmika dRSTi sarvathA Atmonmukha na hone ke kAraNa vastutaH miyA
yA ho kahalAtI hai, tathApi vaha saSTi ke samIpa le jAne vAlI hone ke kAraNa
upAdeya mAnI gaI hai*  /  bodha, vIrya va cAritra ke tarantama bhAva kI apekSA
se usa asat dRSTi ke cAra bheda karake mithyA dRSTi guNasthAna kI antima avasthA
dRSTAntopanayazcAtra janA jIvA bhavo'yI  /  patyAH karmasthitirgranthi
dezastitvaha bhayAspadam  //  922  //  rAgadveSI taskarI dvau tadbhIto batistu
saH  /  granthi prApyAni durbhAvA, yo jeSThasthitibandhakaH  /  /  623  /  /
bhoraruddhastu sa yastAda rAgAdibAdhitaH  /  granthi bhinatti yo naiva na cApi
vanane tataH  /  /  624  /  /  satvamISTapuraM prApto yo'pUrvakaraNAd dvatum  /
rAgadveSAyapAkRtya samyagdarzana mAptavAn  //  625  /  /  -- - lokaprakAza sagaM
3  /  * madhyAkhe mandatAM prAptaM mitrAdyA api dRSTamaH  /  mArgamikhabhAvena
kurvate mokSayojanam  //  31  //  zrIyazaH vijayajI kRta yogAvatAradvAtriMzinA
/

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- 17 A good picture is drawn in the scriptures. There is no delay in gaining the
benefits of creation in these four visions that are present. The scriptures have
also divided the *Sad-drishti* into four divisions, based on the expectation of
*Sanghoṣa*, *Sad-dvaya* and *Sad-charitra*, in which all the newly developed
souls are included after abandoning *Mithya-drishti* or conquering the power of
delusion, one or both. In another way, it can be understood as follows: in which
the nature of the soul is manifested and there is a main tendency for its
attainment, it is *Sad-drishti*. On the contrary, in which the nature of the
soul is neither manifested as it is nor there is a tendency for its attainment,
it is *Asad-drishti*. Keeping in mind the *tar-tam-bhav* of *Bodh*, *Viry* and
*Charitra*, the scriptures have divided both the visions into four divisions
each, in which all the developing souls are included and whose description, when
read, makes the spiritual development dance in front of the eyes. , * - "
*Saccāsangano bhogho drishtiḥ sā vo ditā* J *Miśrā, tārā, balā, dīpā sthira
kāntā, prabhā, parā* || 25 || *Tṛṇagomya kāṣṭhāgni, kaṇomā* |
*Ratnatārācandrābhā, kramena śvādisannibhā* || 26 || ' *Ādyāśvanamra sāpāya mātā
mithya śāmiha* | *Tavato nirāpāyāca bhinnagranthēokaḥ* || 28 ||
*Yogāvatārātriśikā* | - + For this, see *Yogadrishtiḥ Samuccaya* by
Shriharibhadrasuri and *Dwātriśikā* from 21 to 24 by Upadhyaya Yashovijayaji.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - 17 kA zAstra meM acchA citra khIMcA gayA hai  /  ina cAra dRSTiyoM meM jo
vartamAna hote haiM, unako saSTi lAbha karane meM phira derI nahIM lgtii|
saGghoSa, saddvayaM va sacaritra ke tara uma bhAva kI apekSA se saddRSTi ke *
bhI zAstra meM cAra vibhAga kiye haiM, jinameM mithyASTi tyAga kara athavA moha
ko eka yA donoM zaktiyoM ko jItakara Age a nae sabhI vikasita AtmAoM kA samAveza
ho jAtA hai  /  aSa dUsare prakAra se yoM samajhAyA jA sakatA hai ki jisameM
AtmA kA svarUpa bhAsita ho aura usakI prApti ke liye mukhya pravRtti ho, vaha
saTa isake viparIta jisameM AtmA kA svarUpa na to yathAvat mAsita ho aura na
usakI prApti ke liye hI pravRtti ho, vaha asatuSTi  /  bodha vIrya va caritra ke
tara-tama-bhAva ko lakSya meM rakhakara zAstra meM donoM dRSTi ke cAra-cAra
vibhAga kiye gaye haiM, jinameM saba vikAsagAmI AtmAoM kA samAveza ho jAtA hai
aura jinakA varNana par3ane se AdhyAtmika vikAsa kA vitra AMkhoM ke sAmane
nAcane lagatA hai| , * - " saccAsaMgano bogho dRSTiH sA voditA  /  J mizrA.
tArA, balA, dIpA sthirA kAntA, prabhA, parA  //  25  //  tRNagomaya kASThAgni,
kaNomA  /  ratnatArAcandrAbhA, krameNa zvAdisannibhA  //  26  //  'AdyAzvanamra
sApAya mAtA mithya zAmiha  /  tavato nirapAyAca bhinnagrantheokAH  //  28  //
yogAvatArAtrizikA | - + isake liye dekhiye, zrIharibhadrasUri kRta yogadRSTiH
samuccaya tathA upAdhyAya yazovijayajI - kRta 21 se 24 taka kI cAra dvAtrizikAe~
/

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Due to the sensation of physical and mental suffering, the covering of *Ārama*
becomes slightly loosened in the unknown form, and due to this, the amount of
its *Anumob* and *Pauryollas* remains somewhat. Then, the purity and tenderness
of the results of that developing soul increases somewhat. Due to which, it
acquires the ability to break the knot of *Rāga-Dvesha* in some parts. This
unprecedented suffering-sensation-generated very slight self-purification is
called 'Yathāpravṛttikaraṇa' in the Jain scriptures. When the amount of self-
purification and *Pauryollas* increases even more, then the breaking of that
knot of *Rāga-Dvesha* is experienced. This self-purification, which is the cause
of the breaking of the knot, is called 'Anapūrvakaraṇa'.  "Yathāpravṛttikaraṇam,
nanvānāmogarūpakam | Bhavatyānāmogatas ca, vāyam karmakṣayo'ṅginām || 67 ||"
"Yathā mitho gharṣaṇena, grāvāgo'di nadīgatāḥ | Syuścitrākr̥tyo jñāna,-śūnyā api
svabhāvataḥ || 608 ||" "Tathā yathāpravṛttātsyū,-rpyānāmogalakṣaṇāt |
Laghusthitikakarmāṇo, jantavo'trāntare'tha ca || 609 ||" - Lokaprakāśa, Sarga 3
This is called 'Athāpravṛttikaraṇa' in the Digambara sect. For this, see the
13th *Rājvātik* of the 1st sūtra of the 6th chapter of *Tattvārtha*.
"Tībhādhārapārśakalpā, khyikāraṇena hi || Āviṣkṛtya paraṁ vīrya, granthiṁ
bhindanti ke cana || 618 ||" - Lokaprakāśa, Sarga 3.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zArIrika aura mAnasika dukhoM kI saMvedanA ke kAraNa ajJAtarUpa meM hI giri-
nImA * cyAe se AramA kA AvaraNa kucha zithila hotA hai aura isake kAraNa usake
anumaba tathA boryollAsa ko mAtrA kucha rahatI hai, taba usa vikAsagAmI AtmA ke
pariNAmoMkI zuddhi va komalatA kucha bar3hatI hai| jisakI badaulata vaha
rAgadveSa ko tovatama-durbhava granthi ko tor3ane kI yogyatA barata aMzoM meM
prApta kara letA hai  /  isa amAnapUrvaka duHkha saMvevanA-janita ati alpa Atma-
zuddhi ko jana zAstra meM 'yapApravattikaraNa' f kahA hai| isake bAra jaba kucha
aura bhI adhika Atma-zuddhi tathA pauryollAsa kI mAtrA bar3hatI hai taba rAga-
meSa kI usa burbhaka pranthi kA bhevana kiyA jAtA hai isa pranthimeva kArakA
Atmazuddhi ko ,apUrvakaraNa' : kahate haiN| yathApravRttakaraNaM,
nanvanAmogarUpakam  /  bhavatyanAmogatazca. vAyaM karmakSayo'GginAm  //  67 //
"yathA mitho gharSaNena, grAvAgo'di nadIgatAH  /  syuzcitrAkRtyo jJAna,-zUnyA
api svabhAvataH  /  /  608 //  tathA yathApravRttAtsyu,-rapyanAmogalakSaNAta  /
laghusthitikakarmANo, jantavo'trAntare'tha ca  //  6.6  // " -lokaprakAza, sarga
3 isako digambarasampradAya meM 'athApravRttakaraNa' kahate hai  /  isa ke liye
dekhiye, tattvArtha adhyAya 6 ke 1le sUtra kA 13 bAM rAjavAttika  /  +
"tIbadhAraparzakalpA,khyikAraNena hi  /  /  AviSkRtya paraM vIrya, granthiM
bhindanti ke cana  //  618 11 lokaprakAza, sarga 3  /

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Because such a cause-effect *development of the soul* is obtained for the first
time. After this, the amount of *asmi-shuddhi* and *voryolsas* increases
somewhat, then the soul surely conquers the main power of delusion -
*varshanmoha*. This victorious self-purification is called "**aniyutti karan**"
in Jain scriptures. As that self-purification takes place, the soul does not
remain without conquering *varshanmoha*, i.e., it does not retreat. This type of
purification is the second in the *aram-shuddhis*, i.e., the purification called
**apuurvakaran** is very important. Because the speed of the passions of
attachment and aversion - - - *"**parinaama vishesho'tra, karanam praaninaam
matam** ||596||" - Lokaprakash, Sarg 3.
*"**avanivrittikaranena,-tisvacchaashayaatmana. karotyant rakaran,
mantarmurhuutasamitam** ||627|| **krite cha tasminnithyaatva,-mohasthitidvidha
bhavet. tatraadyantarakarana,-vadhastannyaparovan ga** ||628|| **tatraachaayaam
sthito mithya. hak sa taddalavandanat. atitaayaamaiva tasya, sthitaavantumuha
tatah** ||626|| **praapnotyatarakaranam, tasyaabakshanam eva sah.
samyaktvamauparamik, -mapogalikamaapnuyaat** ||13|| **yatha vanadayo
dagdhe,-ndhanah praapyatrinam sthalam. svayam vidhyaapati tatha,
mithyaatvodavaanalah** ||631|| **avaapyantarakaranam. kshipram vidhyaayati
svayam. yadipashamif naam, samyataavam labhatesuman** ||632||" Lokaprakash, Sarg
3.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kyoMki aisA karaNa-pariNAma * vikAsagAmI AtmA ke liye apUrva-prathama hI prApta
hai| isake bAda asma-zuddhi va voryolsAsa kI mAtrA kucha adhika bar3hatI hai,
taba AtmA moha kI pradhAnabhUta zakti -varzanamohapara avazya vijaya lAbha
karatA hai| isa vijayakAraka Atma-zuddhi ko jainazAstra meM "aniyutti karaNa'
kahA hai| jyoki usa zAtma-zuddhi ke ho jAne para AtmA varzanamoha para mayalAbha
binA kiye nahIM rahatA, arthAt vaha pIche nahIM haTatA  /  ukta sona prakAra ko
Arama-zuddhiyoM meM dUsarI arthAt apUrvakaraNa-nAmaka zuddhi ho atyanta saMbha
hai  /  kyoMki rAga-dveSa ke sobatama bega ko - - *"pariNAma vizeSo'tra, karaNaM
prANinAM matam  // 596 /  / " -lokaprakAza, sarga 3  /
"avAnivRttikaraNenA,-tisvacchAzayAtmanA  /  karotyanta
rakaraNa,mantarmuhUrtasamitam  // 627 //  kRte ca
tasminnithyAtva,-mohasthitidvidhA bhavet  /
tatrAdyAntarakaraNA,-vadhastanyaparovaM gA  // 628 /  /  tatrAcAyAM sthito
mithyA. hak sa taddalavaMdanAt  /  atItAyAmaivatasyA, sthitAvantamuhU tataH  //
626 //  prApnotyAtarakaraNaM, tasyAbakSaNa eva saH  /  /  samyaktvamauparAmika,
-mapaugalikamApnuyAt  /  / 13 /  /  yathA vanadayo dagdhe,-ndhana: prApyAtRNaM
sthalam  /  svayaM vidhyApati tathA, mithyAtvodavAnalaH  /  / 631 /  /
avApyAntarakaraNaM. kSipraM vidhyAyati svayam  /  yadIpazamipha nAma, samyatAvaM
labhatesumAn  /  / 632 /  / '' lokaprakAza, samaM 3  /

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The extremely difficult task of restraining is done by this, which is not easy.
Once success is achieved in this task, even if the evolving soul falls from any
higher realm, it still regains its goal - the spiritual complete form, without
fail. Some clarification of this spiritual situation can be given through
practical examples based on experience.  Like a cloth that has dirt as well as
greasiness. Removing the dirt from the surface is not as difficult, if not more
laborious, as removing the greasiness. Once the greasiness is removed, the
remaining dirt can be easily removed without much effort, and the cloth can be
easily brought to its original form. The effort required to remove the surface
dirt is like "yathapravrittikarana". The special effort to remove the greasiness
is like "apurvkarana", which relaxes the most intense manifestation of
attachment-aversion like the greasiness. The remaining effort to remove the
residual dirt after the greasiness is removed is like "anivrittkarana". Among
these three types of efforts, the water-application to remove the greasiness is
the most distinctive.  Or, like a king who has divided his bodyguards into
different departments for self-defense, in which the second department is more
powerful than the other two departments, then special effort is required to
conquer that one. First, its guards have to weaken the impressions of the three
darshanmohaniyas (deluding) karmas, like the greasiness.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rokane kA atyanta kaThina kArya isI ke dvArA kiyA jAtA hai, jo sahaja nahIM
hai| eka bAra isa kArya meM saphalatA prApta ho jAne para phira cAhe vikAsAmI
AtmA Upara kI kisI bhUmikA se gira bhI par3e tathApi vaha punaH kamI-na-kabhI
apane lakSya ko - AdhyAtmika pUrNa svarUpa ko prApta kara letA hai| isa
AdhyAtmika paristhiti kA kucha spaSTIkaraNa anubhavagata vyAvahArika sSTAnta ke
dvArA kiyA jA sakatA hai| jaise eka aisA vastra ho, jisameM mala ke atirikta
cikanAhaTa bhI lagI ho  /  usakA mala Upara-Upara se dUra karanA utanA kaThina
yadi aura zrama sAdhya nahIM, jitanA ki cikanAhaTa kA dUra karanA 1 cikanAhaTa
eka bAra dUra ho jAya to phira bAkI kA mala nikAlanemeM fear kisI kAraNa vaza
phira se lage hue ga ko dUra karane meM vizeSa zrama nahIM par3atA aura vastra
ko usake asalI svarUpa meM sahaja hI lAyA jA sakatA hai  /  Upara-Upara kA mala
bUra karane meM jo bala varakAra hai, usake sA "yathApravRttikaraNa" hai  /
cikanAhaTa dUra karane vAle vizeSa bala va ama ke samAna "apUrvakaraNa" hai  /
jo cikanAhaTa ke samAna rAga-dveSa kI tIvratama pratthi ko zithila karatA hai  /
bAkI bace hue mala ko fear cikanAhaTa dUra hone ke bAda phirase lage hue malako
kama karane vAle bala prayoga ke samAna "anivRttikaraNa" haiM  /  ukta tInoM
prakAra ke bala prayogoM meM cikanAhaTa dUra karane vAlA jala-prayoga hI viziSTa
hai  /  athavA jaise kisI rAjA ne Atma rakSA ke liye apane aGgarakSakoM ko lona
vibhAgoM meM vibhAjita kara rakkhA ho, jinameM dUsarA vibhAga zeSa do vibhAgoM
se adhika balavAn ho, taba usI ko jItane meM vizeSa bala lagAnA par3atA hai|
pahale usake rakSaka rAga-dveSa ke vaise . tIna hI darzanamoha ko jItane ke
saMskAroM ko zithila karane ke

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
For the evolving soul, there are three stages of exertion. The second exertion,
which is the one that sends the knot of attachment and aversion to its most
intense state, is the most important. Just as in the three groups mentioned, the
punishment is easier to bear when the second group of bodyguards is present,
similarly, conquering the delusion of perception is easier when the intense
attachment and aversion are eradicated. Having conquered the delusion of
perception and attained the end of the first stage of perfection, the evolving
soul sees its true nature. The delusion of its true nature, which it had been
experiencing, is removed. Therefore, the direction of its effort becomes
straight instead of reversed. It becomes discerning and can differentiate
between right and wrong actions. This state is called "Antaratma Bhava" in Jain
scriptures. Because, having attained this state, the evolving soul begins to see
the subtle and natural pure Paramatma-Bhava within itself. Antaratma Bhava is
the gateway to the temple of the soul, entering which, one sees the certainty of
the Paramatma-Bhava present within that temple.  This state is the fourth stage
or the fourth stage of perfection in the evolutionary process. Attaining this
stage, the soul experiences spiritual peace for the first time. In this stage,
the spiritual vision is true (soul-oriented) and free from distortions. This is
called Samyagdrishti or Samyaktva in Jain scriptures.  "Jinoctādviparysthā,
samyagdṛṣṭinigaḍyate | Samyaktvaśālināṁ sā spā,-tamantra jāyasanginām ||596||"
Hokaprakash, Sarg 3.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 liye vikAsagAmI AtmA ko tIna bAra ala-prayoga karanA par3atA hai| jinameM
dUsarI bAra kiyA jAne vAlA bala-prayoga hI, jisake dvArA rAga-JSa kI atyanta
tIvratArUpa pranthi bhejI jAtI hai, pradhAna hotA hai  /  jisa prakAra ukta
tInoM daloM meM se alavAn dUsare aGgarakSaka dala ke josa liye jAne para ki sajA
kA parAmaya sahaja hotA hai. isI prakAra rAga-dveSa kI atitIvratA ko miTA dene
para darzanamoha para jayanAma karanA sahaja hai| darzanamoha ko jItA aura
pahale guNasthAna kI samApti huii| aisA hote hI vikAsamAmI AtmA svarUpa kA
darzana kara letA hai arthAt usako aba taka jo parakhapa meM svarupa kI bhrAsti
thI, vaha dUra ho jAtI hai  /  ata eva usake prayatna kI gati ulTI na hokara
sIdhI ho jAtI hai| arthAt vaha vivekI bana kara kartavyaakartavya kA vAstavika
vibhAga kara letA hai  /  isa dazA ko janazAstra meM 'antarAtma bhAva" kahate
haiN| kyoMki isa sthiti ko prApta karake vikAsamAmo AsmA apane andara vartamAna
sUkSma aura sahaja zuddha paramAtma-bhAva ko dekhane lagatA hai, arthAta
antarAtmabhAva, yaha Atma-mandira kA garbhadvAra hai, jisameM praviSTa hokara
usa mambira meM vartamAna paramAtma-bhAvarUpa nizcaya vebakA darzana kiyA jAtA
hai| yaha dazA vikAsakrama ko caturtho bhUmikA kiMvA caturtha guNasthAna hai,
jise pAkara AramA pahale pahala AdhyAtmika zAnti kA anubhava karatA hai  /  isa
bhUmikA meM AdhyAtmika dRSTi yathArtha ( Asmasvaruponmukha ) hone ke kAraNa
viparyAsa-rahita hotI hai  /  ji ko janazAstra meM samyagraSTi kimvA samyaktva *
kahA hai| jinoktAdaviparyastA, samyagdRSTinigadyate  /  samyaktvazAlinAM sA
spA,-tamaMtra jAyasaGginAm  /  / 596 // " hokaprakAza, sarga 3  /

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
One should understand that all the stages from the fourth, i.e., the fifth and
onwards, are all characterized by **Dristi** (vision); because in them, there is
progressive development and increasing purification of **Dristi**. In the fourth
**Gunasthan** (stage of spiritual development), by realizing the true nature of
the self, the soul experiences unprecedented peace and gains the conviction that
its delusion regarding the object of its pursuit has been dispelled, i.e., the
external and worldly happiness that it was yearning for is ephemeral, unstable,
and limited. True, lasting, and infinite happiness lies in attaining the true
nature of the self. Then, the soul begins to strive for the state of being
established in its true nature.  This development, even after weakening the
primary power of **Moha** (attachment) - **Darshanmoha** (attachment to
perception) - by realizing the true nature of the self, cannot lead to the
attainment or establishment of the true nature until its other power -
**Charitramoha** (attachment to conduct) - is weakened. Therefore, it strives to
subdue this **Moha**. When it partially weakens this power, it experiences
greater peace than in the fourth **Gunasthan**, as it abandons the external and
worldly pursuits. This is the fifth **Gunasthan** called **Veshvirati**
(abandonment of external appearances).  In this **Gunasthan**, the developing
soul begins to think that if such great peace is attained by partial
renunciation, then how much greater peace will be attained by complete
renunciation - the complete abandonment of all worldly attachments. Inspired by
this thought and strengthened by the experience of the attained spiritual peace,
the developing soul strives to weaken **Charitramoha** to a greater extent,
achieving even greater stability and attainment of the true nature than before.
Upon achieving success in this endeavor, it attains complete renunciation...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturthI se Age kI arthAt pancamI Adi saba bhUmikAeM samma dRSTi vAlI hI
samajhanI cAhiye; kyoMki unameM uttarottara vikAsa tathA dRSTi kI zuddhi
adhikAdhika hotI jAtI hai  /  caturtha guNasthAnameM svarUpa-darzana karane se
AtmA ko apUrva zAnti milatI hai aura usako vizvAsa hotA hai ki aba merA sAdhya-
viSayaka bhrama dUra huA, arthAt aba taka jisa paublika va bAhya sukha ko meM
tarasa rahA yA, vaha pariNAma - virasa asthira evaM parimita hai| pariNAma
sundara, sthira va aparimita sukha svarUpa prApti meM hI hai  /  taba gAmo AtmA
svarupa sthiti ke liye prayatna karane lagatA hai| yaha vikAsa moha kI pradhAna
zakti - darzanamoha ko zithila karake svarUpadarzana kara lene ke bAda bhI, jaba
taka usakI dUsarI zakti - cAritramoha ko zithila na kiyA jAya taba taka svarUpa
lAbha kiMvA svarUpasthiti nahIM ho sktii| isaliye vaha moha kI manya karane ke
liye prayAsa karatA hai  /  jaba * dUsarI zakti ko vaha usa zakti ko bhI
urakAnti ho yA parapariNati tyAga hone se caturtha bhUmikA kI apekSA adhika
zAnti-lAbha hotA hai  /  yaha vezavirati nAmaka pA~cavAM guNasthAna hai !
aMzataH zithila kara jAtI hai  /  jisameM pAtA hai; taba usako aura aMzata:
svarUpa- sthiratA isa guNasthAna meM vikAsayAmI AtmA ko yaha vicAra hone lagatA
hai ki yadi alpa-viratise hI itanA adhika zAnti-lAbha huA to phira sarva virati
- jar3a bhAvoM ke sarvadhA parihAra se kitanA zAnti-lAbha na hogA  /  isa vicAra
se prerita hokara va prApta AdhyAtmika zAnti ke anubhava se balavAn hokara vaha
vikA sagAmI AtmA cAritramoha ko adhikAMza meM zithila karake pahalekI apekSA bhI
adhika svarUpa sthiratA va svarUpa lAbha prApta karanekI ceSTA karatA hai  /
isa ceSTA meM kRtakRtya hote hI use sarva virati

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **23 -**  **Samyama** is attained when there is no trace of the
**Paulika** emotions, and all of the time is spent in expressing the
**Swaroop**. The **Javiriti** is a state of **Daman** (restraint). In this
state, there is a feeling of **Lok-Kalyan** (welfare of the world) and
**Savanukula** (favorable) tendencies, in addition to **Aram-Kalyan** (self-
welfare). This leads to occasional **Pramaad** (lapses) in small amounts.
Compared to the fifth **Gunasthan**, in this sixth **Gunasthan**, the
**Swaroop** expression is greater. Therefore, the developing soul experiences
more **Adhyatmik Shansti** (spiritual peace) than before. However, it cannot
tolerate the many **Pramaad** that hinder its peace experience. Therefore,
driven by a strong desire to experience the unique peace of **A-Pramaad** (non-
lapses) along with the **Sarva-Viriti** (complete restraint) peace, the
developing soul welcomes **A-Pramaad**. It abandons all activities except
**Manan-Chintan** (meditation and contemplation) in accordance with the
expression of the **Swaroop**. This is the seventh **Gunasthan** called
**A-Pramattasanyata**.  In this state, the soul experiences an intense joy
arising from **A-Pramaad**, which motivates it to stay in this state. On the
other hand, the **Pramaad**-induced **Purvakasana** (previous tendencies) pull
it back. In this tug-of-war, the developing soul oscillates between **Pramaad**
(lapses) and **A-Pramaad** (non-lapses), going back and forth between the sixth
and seventh **Gunasthan** many times. Just like a straw caught in a whirlpool or
a storm is tossed around, the developing soul becomes unstable during the sixth
and seventh **Gunasthan**.  During this internal war with **Pramaad**, the
developing...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - 23 - saMyama prApta hotA hai  /  jisameM paulika bhAvoM para mUrdA bilkula
nahIM rahatI, aura usakA sArA samaya svarUpa kI abhivyakti karane ke kAma meM hI
kharca hotA hai  /  maha 'javirati"dAma kA galAna hai  /  isameM Arama-kalyANa
ke atirikta loka-kalyANa kI bhAvanA aura savanukUla pravRtti mI hotI hai| jisase
kamI-kabhI thor3I-bahuta mAtrA meM pramApa A jAtA hai  /  pAMcave guNasthAna kI
apekSA, isa chale guNasthAna meM svarUpaabhivyakti adhika hone ke kAraNa yadyapi
vikAsamAmI AtmA ko AdhyAtmika zAnsi pahale se adhika ho milatI hai tathApi bIca-
bIca meM aneka pramAna use zAnti-anubhava meM jo bAdhA pahuMcAte haiM, usako
vaha sahana nahIM kara sakatA  /  ata eva sarva-virati-amita zAnti ke sAtha
apramANa-janita viziSTa zAnti kA anubhava karane kI prabala lAlasA se prerita
hokara vaha vikAsagAmI AtmA pramAda kA svAga karatA hai aura svarUpa ko abhikti
ke anurUla manana-cintana ke sivAya anya saba vyApAroM kA tyAga kara detA hai|
yahI 'apramattasaMyata' nAmaka sAtavAM guNasthAna hai  /  isameM eka aura
apramAvajanya utkaTa sukha kA anubhava AtmA ko usa sthiti meM bane rahane ke
liye uttejita karatA hai aura dUsarI ora pramAda-janya pUrvakAsanAeM use apanI
ora khIMcatI haiM  /  isa khIMcAtAnI meM vikAsamAmI AramA kamI pramAda ko tandrA
aura kabhI apramAva ko jAgRti arthAt chaThe aura sAta guNasthAna meM aneka bAra
jAtA AtA rahatA hai  /  bhaMvara yA bAtamamI meM par3A huA tinakA idhara se
udhara aura udhara se iSara jisa prakAra calAyamAna hotA rahatA hai, usI prakAra
chaThe aura sAtaveM guNasthAna ke samaya vikAsagAmI AtmA anavasthita bana jAtA
hai  /  pramAva ke sAtha hone vAle isa Antarika yuddha ke samaya vikAsa

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- 24 - If a progressing soul illuminates the special light of the fourfold force
of non-attachment, then it crosses over the temptations and allurements and
attains the special state of non-distraction. Having attained this state, it
prepares itself with such power that the remaining clinging attachments can be
destroyed. This role of preparation for the future battle with attachment is
called the eighth Gunasthan.  In this Gunasthan, such self-purification occurs
for the first time. As a result, some progressing souls gradually suppress the
influence of the karmas of attachment and eventually make them dormant. And
there are others with special self-purification who completely eradicate all
those karmas from the very beginning. Thus, those who progress beyond the eighth
Gunasthan, i.e., those who approach the supreme role of the Atman-nature through
the development of the inner self-nature, are divided into two categories.  One
category consists of those who completely subdue attachment once but are unable
to destroy it. Just as a measure of liquid filled in a vessel sometimes, due to
its momentum, throws the vessel up or down, or just as fire suppressed under
ashes starts working as soon as it gets a gust of wind, or just as mud settled
at the bottom of water, upon slight disturbance, rises up and makes the water
muddy, similarly, the previously subdued attachment, due to its momentum, throws
down those first-category souls who are exhausted in the internal battle. Even
after being completely subdued once, attachment, which...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - 24 - gAmI AtmA yadi apamA cAripa-bala vizeSa prakAzita karatA hai to phira
vaha pramAvoM- pralobhamoM ko pAra kara vizeSa apramatta-avasthA prApta kara
letA hai  /  isa avasthA ko pAkara vaha aisI zakti-tikI taiyArI karatA hai ki
jisase zeSa rahe-sahe moha-bana ko naSTa kiyA jA sake  /  moha ke sAtha hone
vAle bhAvI yaddha ke liye kI jAnevAlI taiyArI kI isa bhUmikA ko AThavAM
gaNasthAna kahate haiN| pahale kabhI na huI aisI Atma-zuddhi isa guNasthAna meM
ho jAtI hai  /  jisase koI vikAsagAmI AtmA to moha ke saMskAroM ke pramAva ko
kramazaH dabAtA huA Age bar3hatA hai tathA anta meM use vismula ho upazAnta kara
detA hai| aura viziSTa Atma-zuddhi vAlA koI dUsarA vyakti aisA bhI hotA hai, jo
moha ke saMskAroM ko agazaH naH dala se zu.ta' patA hai nama: amsa meM una saba
saMskAroM ko sarvathA nirmUla ho kara DAlatA hai  /  isa prakAra AThave
guNasthAna se mAge bar3hane vAle arthAta antarAtma-bhAva ke vikAsa dvArA
paramAtma-bhAva-rupa sarvopari bhUmikA ke nikaTa pahuMcane vAle AtmA do zreNiyoM
meM vibhakta ho jAte haiN| eka zreNiyAle to aise hote haiM, jo moha ko eka bAra
sarvathA thavA to lete haiM, para use nimla nahIM kara paate| anae jisa prakAra
kisI bartana meM bharI huI mApa kabhI-kabhI apane vega se usa bartanako ur3A le
mAgatI hai yA nIce girA detI hai athavA jisa prakAra rAkha ke nIce dabA huA agni
havA kA akorA lagate hI apanA kArya karane lagatA hai| kivA jisa prakAra jala ke
tala meM baiThA huA masa thor3A sA kSobha pAte hI Upara uThakara jala ko gaMdalA
kara detA hai, usI prakAra pahale banAyA huA mI moha Antarika yuddha meM thake
hue una prathama zreNi chAle AtmAoM ko apane vega ke dvArA nIce paTaka detA hai
/  eka bAra sarvathA cabAye jAne para bhI moha, jisa

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- 25 - The eleventh guṇasthāna is the one that defeats the soul from the bhūmikā
and throws it downwards.  The moh must be gradually purified, from bāvatē-cavātē
to sadhā bāvanē, and it must necessarily acquire higher and higher bhūmikās.
This is the guṇasthāna that causes the maudhā and dasarvā guṇasthāna.  The
twelfth guṇasthāna is the place of downfall, because the one who attains it,
even though they may progress further, will inevitably fall down at some point.
The second category of souls, as they gradually become lower and lower, finally
become completely lost in it.  The bhūmikā that completely eradicates it is the
twelfth guṇasthāna.  To attain this guṇasthāna, that is, before completely
eradicating the moh, one must attain the maudhā and vasā guṇasthāna in between.
Similarly, if we look at it, whether they are of the first category or the
second category, they all attain the ninth-vasavā guṇasthāna.  The only
difference between the two categories is that the second category has a
different kind of ātmā-śuddhi and ātmā-pal than the first category.  For
example, there are two types of students in a particular subject: one type is
unable to pass their exam even after trying a hundred times, while the other
type, due to their ability, overcomes all difficulties and passes the most
difficult exam.  The reason for this difference between the two groups is the
difference in their internal ability.  Similarly, the ātmā of the two categories
who attain the maudhā and vasā guṇasthāna have different levels of mādhāśmik
śuddhi.  As a result, one category, after attaining the vasavā guṇasthāna,
ultimately loses to the moh in the eleventh guṇasthāna and falls down, while the
other category, after attaining the vasavā guṇasthāna,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - 25 - bhUmikA se AtmA ko hAra dilAkara nIce kI ora paTaka detA hai, vahI
gyArahayo gugasthAna hai  /  moha ko kramaza: bavAte-cavAte sadhA bavAne taka
meM uttarottara adhika-adhika vizuddhibAlI ko bhUmikAe~ avazya prApta karanI
par3atI haiM  /  jo mauSAM tathA dasarvA guNasthAna karasAtA hai| bArahavAM
guNasthAna adha: patana kA sthAna hai| kyoMki use pAne vAlA bhAsmA Age na
bar3hakara eka bAra to avazya nIce giratA hai| dUsarI zreNIvAle prANa bhora ko
prAza: nimna karate-karate anta meM use sarvathA mila kara ho hAsate hai|
sarvathA nimUla karameko jo usa bhUmikA hai, vahI bArahavA~ guNasthAna hai  /
isa guNasthAna ko pAne taka meM arthAt moha ko sardhA nirmUla karane se pahale
bIca meM maudhoM aura vasA guNasthAna prApta karanA par3atA hai| isI prakAra
dekhA jAya to cAhe pahalI zreNiyAle hoM, cAhe vUsarI zreNivAle, para ve saba
nauvA-vasavo guNaspAna prApta karate hI haiN| donoM zreNivAloM meM asara itanA
hI hotA hai ki prathama zreNivAloM kI apekSA dUsarI zreNivAloM meM prAtma-zuddhi
va Atma-pala viziSTa prakAra kA pAyA jAtA hai| jaiseH - kisI eka varje ke
vidyArthI bhI do prakAra ke hote haiM , eka prakAra ke to aise hote haiM, jo sau
koziza karane para bhI eka bAragI apanI parIkSA meM pAsa hokara Age nahIM bar3ha
sakate  /  para dUsare prakAra ke vidyArthI apanI yogyatA ke bala se saba
kaThinAiyoM ko pAra kara usa kaThinatama parIkSA ko veSar3aka pAsa kara hI lete
haiM  /  una donoM dala ke isa antara kA kAraNa unakI Antarika yogyatA kI
nyUnAdhikatA hai| vaise hI mauve tathA yasameM guNasthAna ko prApta karane vAle
ukta donoM zreNigAmI AtmAoM kI mAdhyAsmika vizuddhi nyUnAdhika hotI hai  /
jisake kAraNa eka zreNivAle to basaveM guNasthAna ko pAkara anta meM gyArahaveM
guNasthAna meM moha se hAra khAphara nIce girate haiM aura anya zreNivAle
basaveM guNa

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
6 -.. Having attained the eleventh **guna-sthana**, they manifest such great
self-strength that in the end they completely destroy attachment and attain the
twelfth **guna-sthana**. Just as the eleventh **guna-sthana** is necessarily
recurrent, so the twelfth **guna-sthana** is non-recurrent. That is, the soul
that attains the eleventh **guna-sthana** necessarily falls from it once, while
the soul that attains the twelfth **guna-sthana** never falls from it but only
ascends. Just as students who fail in one exam, by diligence and concentration,
increase their competence and then pass that exam; in the same way, souls who
have once lost to attachment, by being vigilant and increasing their self-
control, necessarily destroy attachment again. The souls of these two categories
are like two paths leading to the highest position of the **paramatma-vi-rupa**,
spiritual purity, which are called '**upshama shreni**' and '**kshapka shreni**'
in Jain scriptures. The first one takes one up a little distance and then makes
one fall, while the second one only takes one up. Even if the one who falls from
the first **shreni** goes down to the first **guna-sthana** due to spiritual
decline, his state of decline does not remain permanent. Sooner or later, he
prepares himself with double the strength and double the caution to face the
enemy of attachment, and finally, attaining the competence of the second
**shreni**, he completely destroys attachment. In practice, that is, in the
**adhi-bhautic** realm, it is also seen that one who is defeated once can defeat
the enemy who defeated him again by being fully prepared. The main obstacle in
attaining the sovereignty of the **paramatma** is attachment. Its destruction
depends on the specific development of the inner self. Once attachment is
completely destroyed, the other coverings, which are like rust...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6 -.. sthAna ko pAkara itanA adhika Atmabala prakaTa karate haiM ki anta meM ve
moha ko sarvathA kSINa kara bArahaveM guNasthAna ko prApta kara hI lete haiM  /
jaise gyArahavA~ guNasthAna avazya punarAvRttikA hai, jaise hI bAra havA
guNasthAna apunarAvRttikA hai| arthAt gyArahaveM guNasthAna ko pAnevAlA AtmA eka
bAra usase avazya giratA hai aura bArahaveM guNasthAna ko pAnevAlA usase kadApi
nahIM giratA balki Upara ko hI car3hatA hai| kisI eka parIkSA meM nahIM pAsa
hone vAle vidyArthI jisa prakAra parizrama va ekAtA se yogyatA bar3hAkara phira
usa parIkSA ko pAsa kara lete haiM; usI prakAra eka bAra moha se hAra khAne vAle
AtmA bhI apramatta-bhAva va Atma-cala kI adhikatA se phira moha ko avazya kSINa
kara dete haiN| ukta donoM zreNivAle AtmAoM kare tara sama bhAvApanna AdhyAtmika
vizuddhi mAnoM paramAtma-vi-rUpa sarvocca bhUmikApara car3hane kI do naseniyA~
haiM jinameM se eka ko jainazAstra meM 'upazama zreNi' aura dUsarI ko
kSapakazreNi' kahA hai| pahalI kucha dUra car3hAkara girAnevAloM aura dUsarI
car3hAne vAlI hI hai| pahalI zreNi se giranevAlA AdhyAtmika adhaHpatana ke dvArA
cAhe prathama guNasthAna taka kyoM na calA jAya, para usakI vaha adhaHpatita
sthiti kAyama nahIM rahatI  /  kabhI-na-kabhI phira vaha DUne bala se aura dUnI
sAvadhAnI se taiyAra hokara moha-zatru kA sAmanA karatA hai aura anta meM dUsarI
zreNi kI yogyatA prApta kara moha kA sarvapakSiya kara DAlatA hai| vyavahAra meM
arthAt Adhibhautika kSetra meM bhI yaha dekhA jAtA hai ki jo eka bAra hAra khAtA
hai, vaha pUrI taiyArI karake harAne vAle zatru ko phira se harA sakatA hai  /
paramAtma bhAva kA svarAjya prApta karane meM mukhya bAdhaka moha hI hai  /
jisako naSTa karanA antarAtma-bhAva ke viziSTa vikAsa para nirbhara hai| moha kA
sarvathA nAza huA ki anya AvaraNa jo jaMga

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
-27-  Those who are called 'Ghatikam' in the scriptures, like the remaining
soldiers after the death of the commander-in-chief, scatter in all directions.
Then, without delay, the evolving soul immediately attains the complete
spiritual sovereignty of the Supreme Soul, that is, it fully expresses the
nature of Sachchidananda and gains the benefit of perfect peace, character,
etc., and experiences indescribable inherent bliss. Just as the full moon shines
brightly on a full moon night, so too at that time the soul's consciousness and
other primary powers are fully developed. This stage is called the thirteenth
Gunasthan in the scriptures.  In this Gunasthan, the soul, remaining in Chirfal,
takes refuge in the subtle-action-oriented, pure-knowledge-form wind to throw
away the remaining coverings, like the dust on a mirror, that is, the non-
primary, non-fatal karmas. It completely stops mental, verbal, and physical
activities. This is the culmination of spiritual development, the fourteenth
Gunasthan. In this, the soul, through the subtle-action-oriented, pure-
knowledge, attains a stable state like Mount Meru and finally, after shedding
the body, attains a transcendental state in terms of conduct and ultimate
purpose. This is the state of Nirguna Brahma. This is all-round completeness,
this is complete fulfillment, this is the final achievement of the ultimate
goal. "Yogasenyaamataratyagi, yoganannyadillaasyajet. Ityevam nirgunam brahma,
paroktam upapadyate. || 7 || Vastutastu gunah purna-manatarbhasane svatah. Rupam
tyaktatmanah madho,-nirabhrasya vidhorisha. || - ||  Nagan....

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 -27 - zAstra meM 'ghAtikama' kahalAte haiM, ve pradhAna senApati ke mAre jAne
ke bAba anugAmI saMmikoM kI taraha eka sAtha titara-bitara ho jAte haiN| phira
payA derI, vikAsagAmI AtmA turanta ho paramAtma-bhAva kA pUrNa AdhyAtmika
svarAjya pAkara arthAt saccidAnamha svarUpa ko pUrNatayA vyakta karake
niratizaya zAma, cAritra Adi kA lAbha karatA hai tathA anirvacanIya svAmAvika
sukha kA anubhava karatA hai| jaise, pUrNimA kI rAta meM mirabha candra kI
sampUrNa kalAeM prakAzamAna hoto haiM, vaise hI usa samaya AtmA ko cetanA Adi
mamI mukhya zaktipA~ pUrNa vikasita ho jAtI haiM  /  isa bhUmikA ko ana zAstra
meM terahavAM guNasthAna kahate haiN| isa guNasthAna meM ciraphAla taka rahane
ke mAtra AtmA bagcha raJju ke samAna zeSa AvaraNoM kI arthAt apradhAnabhUta
adhAtikarmoM ko ur3A kara pheMka dene ke liye sUkSmakriyApratipAtI
zulkabhyAnarUpa pavana kA mAzraya lekara mAnasika, vAcika aura kAyika TyApAroM
ko sarvathA roka detA hai  /  yahI AdhyAtmika vikAsa kI parAkASThA kiyA
caubahavo guNasmAna hai  /  isameM AtmA samucinakriyApratipAti zulka jyAna dvArA
sumeru kI taraha niSprakampa sthiti ko prApta karake anta meM zArIra tyAga-
pUrvaka vyavahAra aura paramArtha dRSTi se lokottara sthAna ko prApta karatA
hai| yahI nirguNa brahmasthiti * hai. yahI sarvAGgINa pUrNatA hai, yahI pUrNa
kRtakRtyatA hai, yahI parama puruSArtha ko antima siddhi *
"yogasenyAmataratyAgI, yogAnanyaDillAsyajet  /  ityevaM nirguNaM brahma,
paroktamupapadyate  /  /  7  /  /  vastutastu guNaH pUrNa-manatarbhAsane svataH
/  rUpaM tyaktAtmana: mAdho,-nirabhrasya vidhoriSa  /  /  -  //  nAgana....  /

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And this is the state of non-repetition. Because the only cause of the world is
delusion. Due to the complete annihilation of all karmas, there is no
possibility of an upadhi anymore.  This story is about the twelve gunasthanas
from the first to the fourteenth, including the second and third gunasthanas.
The story that was left out is this: When someone with samyaktva or tattvajnan,
who is on the path of the fourth and higher realms, deviates from the royal path
and leans towards the path of the first realm, which is devoid of true knowledge
or is based on false beliefs, there is a state in between for that soul who is
falling down. This is the second gunasthan. Although there is a little more
self-purification in this gunasthan compared to the first gunasthan, its number
is kept before the first because of this. However, it should be kept in mind
that this gunasthan cannot be called a state of transcendence. Because a soul
who has transcended the first gunasthan cannot directly attain this second
gunasthan. But a soul who falls from a higher gunasthan becomes eligible for it.
Apapasana (non-virtuous conduct) arises from delusion. Therefore, at the time of
this gunasthan, one finds the intense power of delusion's kashya (passion). Just
as after eating sweet food like khor, etc., when one vomits, a peculiar taste is
perceived in the mouth, neither too sweet nor too sour, similarly, a peculiar
state of the soul is found at the time of the second gunasthan. Because at that
time, the soul is neither on the path of true knowledge nor on the path of
complete ignorance. Or, just as a person who is climbing stairs slips and does
not immediately reach the ground, there is a peculiar state in between.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - - hai aura yahI apunarAvRtti-sthAna hai  /  kyoMki saMsAra kA ekamAtra kAraNa
moha hai| jisake saba saMskAroM kA nizeSa nAbA ho jAne ke kAraNa aba upAdhikA
saMbhava nahIM hai| yaha kathA haI pahile se caudahave guNasthAna taka ke bAraha
guNasthAnoM ko isameM dUsare aura tIsare guNasthAna ko kathA jo chUTa gaI hai,
vaha yo hai ki samyaktva kiMvA tatvajJAnavAlo Upara kI caturthI Adi bhUmikAoM ke
rAjamArga se cyuta hokara jaba koI prAsmA tasvazAna zUnya kiMvA mithyAraSTi vAlI
prathama bhUmikA ke unmArga kI ora jhukatA hai, tara bIca meM usa
adhaHpatanonmukha AsmA ko bhI kucha avasthA hotI hai, vahI dUsarA guNasthAna hai
/  yadyapi isa guNasthAna meM prathama gaNasthAna kI apekSA Atma-zuddhi vAya
kucha adhika hotI hai, isIliye isakA nambara pahale ke bhAva rakhA gayA hai,
phira bhI yaha bAta dhyAna meM rakhanI cAhiye ki isa guNasthAna ko uskrAnti-
sthAna nahIM kaha sakate  /  kyoMki prathama guNasthAna ko chor3akara utkrAnti
karanepAlA AsmA isa vUsare guNasthAna ko sIdhe taura se prApta nahIM kara
sakatA, kintu Upara ke guNasthAna se girane vAlA ho AtmA isakA adhikArI banatA
hai| apApasana moha ke janeka se hotA hai  /  ata: eSa isa gaNasthAna ke samaya
moha kI tIvra kASAyika zakti kA ANi mAMva pAyA jAtA hai  /  khora Adi miSTa
bhojana karane ke bAda jaba vamana ho jAtA hai, saba mukha meM eka prakAra kA
vilakSaNa svAva arthAt na ati madhura na ati-amla jaise pratIta hotA hai  /  isI
prakAra dhUsare guNasthAna ke samaya ApyAtmika sthiti vilakSaNa pAI jAtI hai|
kyoMki usa samaya zrAtmA na to tattvajJAna kI mizSita bhUmikA. para hai aura na
tasva-jJAna-zUnya nizcita bhUmikA pr| athavA se koI vyakti car3ane ko sIr3hiyoM
se khisaka kara jama saka jamIna para bhAkara nahIM Thahara jAtA, taba taka bIca
meM eka vilakSaNa avasthA kA

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- 26 - The soul experiences a unique spiritual state in between the fall from
the state of *samyaktva* (right faith) to the state of *mithyatva* (false
faith). This is also evident from our practical experience that when a certain
advanced state falls to a certain degraded state, a unique situation arises in
between. The third *gunasthan* (stage of spiritual progress) is the name given
to the soul's mixed state, where it has neither *samyak drishti* (right faith)
nor *mithya drishti* (false faith), but oscillates between the two. Therefore,
its intellect is not independent, and it is *sambehashol* (confused), meaning it
accepts everything that comes before it. In other words, it neither knows
*tattva* (truth) as a separate entity nor can it fully understand the true
nature of *tattva*. A soul that is progressing can move from the first
*gunasthan* directly to the third *gunasthan*, and a soul that is regressing can
also fall from the fourth *gunasthan* to the third *gunasthan*. Thus, the third
*gunasthan* is the resting place for both progressing and regressing souls. This
is the special characteristic of the third *gunasthan* compared to the second
*gunasthan*. The above-mentioned states of the soul, along with their sub-
categories, are classified in the scriptures as three states for embodied souls:
(1) *bahiratma* (external soul), (2) *antaratma* (internal soul), and (3)
*paramatma* (supreme soul). In the first state, the true and pure form of the
soul is extremely...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - 26 - manubhava karatA hai, paise ho sabhyatva se girakara mithyAtva ko pAne
taka meM prati bIca meM AtmA eka vilakSaNa prAdhyAtmika avasthA kA anubhava
karatA hai| yaha bAta hamAre isa vyAvahArika anubhava se bhI siddha hai ki jaba
kisI nizcita unnata-mavasyA se girakara koI nizcita avanata-avasthA prApta kI
jAtI hai, taba bIca meM eka vilakSaNa sthati khar3I hotI hai| tIsarA guNasthAna
AtmA ko usa mizrita avasthA kA nAma hai, jisameM na to kevala samyak dRSTi hotI
hai aura na kevala mithyA haSTi, kintu AtmA usameM dolAyamAna AdhyAtmika
sthitivAlA bana jAtA hai  /  ata evaM usakI buddhi svAdhIna na hone ke kAraNa
sambehazola hotI hai arthAt usake sAmane jo kucha AyA, vaha saba sam  /  arthAta
na to vaha tasva ko ekAnta atatvarUpa se hI jAnatI hai aura na tazvaatasva kA
vAstavika pUrNa viveka hI kara sakatI hai| koI uskrAnti karane vAlA AtmA
prathama guNasthAna se nikalakara sodhe hI tosare guNasthAna ko prApta kara
sakatA hai aura koI apa. kAnti karane vAlA AtmA bhI caturtha zAdi guNasthAna se
girakara tIsare guNasthAna ko prApta kara sakatA hai  /  isa prakAra utkrAnti
karane vAle aura apakrAnti karane bAle-bonoM prakAra ke AtmAoM kA Azraya-sthAna
tIsarA guNasthAna hai| yahI tIsare guNasthAna kI dUsare guNaspAma se vizeSatA
hai| Upara AtmA kI jina grovaha avasthAoM kA vicAra kiyA hai, umakA tathA unake
antargata avAntara saMghAtIta avasthAoM kA mahata saMkSepa meM vargIkaraNa
karake zAstra meM zarIradhArI AtmA ko sirpha tIna avasthAeM matalAI hai-(3)
bahirAtma-avasthA, (2) antarAtma. avasthA aura (3) prmaatm-avsthaa| pahalo
avasthA meM mAtmA kA vAstavika-vizuddha rUpa atyanta

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The soul, due to its false beliefs, becomes engrossed in worldly pleasures and
considers them as the ultimate goal, devoting all its energy to attaining them.
In the second stage, the true nature of the soul is not fully revealed, but the
veil over it becomes loose and thin, causing its inclination to shift from
worldly pleasures towards its pure form. This leads to a sense of renewal in the
body, despite its aging, as it is no longer bound by the old desires. This
second stage is the stepping stone to the third stage.  In the third stage, the
true nature of the soul is revealed, meaning the dense veils over it completely
dissolve.  The first, second, and third stages describe the *Bāhyātmā* (external
soul) state. The fourth to twelfth stages describe the *Antarātmā* (internal
soul) state, and the thirteenth stage describes the *Paramātmā* (supreme soul)
state.  "Others, due to the influence of false beliefs, are *Bāhyātmā*, while
those influenced by right beliefs are *Antarātmā*, and those influenced by
perfect knowledge are *Paramātmā*. The first stage is *Bāhyātmā*, followed by
the *Kṣīṇamo* (diminished) stages until the *Antarātmā*, and then the
*Paramātmā*. Similarly, *Bāhyātmā* in terms of manifestation, and *Paramātmā* in
terms of power. *Antarātmā* in terms of manifestation, and *Paramātmā* in terms
of power, *Bāhyātmā* based on past experiences, *Paramātmā* in terms of
manifestation, and *Antarātmā* based on past experiences."  - *Adhyātma
Matapariksha*, Verse 125.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAgchanna rahatA hai, jisake kAraNa AtmA mithyAdhyAsa vAlA hokara pauddha lika
vilAsoM ko hI sarvasva mAna letA hai aura unhIM ko prApti keliye sampUrNa zakti
kA vyaya karatA hai  /  sUsarI avasthA meM mAtmA kA vAstavika svarUpa pUrNatayA
to prakaTa mahIM hotA, para usake Upara kA bhAvaraNa gAr3a na hokara
zithilazithilatara, zithilatama bana jAtA hai, jisake kAraNa usako puSTi paulika
vilAsoM kI ora se haTa kara zuddha svarUpa kI ora saga jAtI hai| isI se usako
puSTi meM zarIra bhAvi kI jIrNatA meM navInatA apanI jIrNatA va navonasA nahIM
hai  /  yaha dUsarI. azsthA hI tIsarI avasthA kA da sopAna hai| tosarI avasthA
meM AtmA kA vAstavika svarupa prakaTa ho jAtA hai arthAt usake Upara ke ghane
AvaraNa bilakula vilIna ho jAte haiN| pahalA, vUsarA aura tIsarA guNasthAna
bahirAsma-avasthA kA citraNa hai| cauthe se bArahaveM sapha ke guNasthAna
antarAtma-avasthA kA vivarmana hai aura terahavA~, cauvA guNasthAna paramAtma-
avasthA kA varNana hai  /  * anye tu mithyAdarzanAdibhAvapariNato vA yAsmA,
samyagdarzanAdipariNatastvantarAtmA, kevalajJAnAdipariNatastu paramAtmA  /
tatrAdyaguNasthAnatrave vAhmAtmA, tataH paraM kSINamoguNasthAnaM yAvadantarAsmA,
tasa; parantu paramAtmeti  /  tathA vyaktyA bAhmAtmA, zaktyA paramAramAntarAtmA
ca  /  vyaktayAnta gatmA tu zaktyA paramAtmA anubhUtapUrvanayena ca bAhyAtmA,
vyaktayA paramAtmA, anubhUtapUrvanamenaya bAhyAsmAntarAtmA ca  / " - adhyAtma
mataparIkSA, gAthA 125  /

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The nature of the soul is knowledge, therefore, no matter in which state of
being it may be, it is never free from attention. From the general point of view
of the soul, there are two divisions: (1) auspicious and (2) inauspicious. From
the special point of view of the soul, there are four divisions: (1) *ārt*, (2)
*raudr*, (3) *dharma*, and (4) *śukla*, as described in the scriptures. The
first two are inauspicious and the last two are auspicious. The attention that
occurs during the predominance of the *paurāṇika aṣṭi* or the time of forgetting
the self is inauspicious, and the attention that occurs during the subordination
of the *paurāṇika aṣṭi* and under the influence of self-inquiry is auspicious.
Inauspicious attention is the cause of worldly existence, and auspicious
attention is the cause of liberation. In the first three states of being, *ārt*
and *raudr* are the types of attention that are found due to the influence of
the *tar-tam-māva*. In the fourth and fifth states of being, in addition to
these two types of attention, *dharma-dhyāna* also occurs due to the influence
of *samyaktva*. In the sixth state of being, *ārt* and *dharma* are the types of
attention. In the seventh state of being, only *dharma-dhyāna* occurs. From the
eighth to the twelfth states of being, *dharma* and *śukla* are the types of
attention. In the thirteenth and fourteenth states of being, only *śukla-dhyāna*
occurs.  "The soul, the inner soul, and the supreme soul, these three are the
objects of contemplation, as is well known in the scriptures of yoga."
(Tattvārtha, Chapter 8, Sutra 17)  "Others, who are in the state of *mithyātva*
(false belief), *samyaktva* (right belief), and *kevalajñāna* (perfect
knowledge), are those who are free from delusion, whether they are in the mixed
state or the state of diminished delusion." (Tattvārtha, Chapter 8, Sutra 18)
*Yogāvatāra* (Chapter 2, Verse 1)  "The types of attention are *ārt*, *raudr*,
*dharma*, and *śukla*." (Tattvārtha, Chapter 8, Sutra 26)  + For this, see
Tattvārtha, Chapter 6, Sutras 35-40; *Dhyānaśataka*, Verses 63 and 64; and
*Āvश्यक-हारिभद्री* commentary, page 602. In this regard, it is worth noting the
difference in opinion between the *Tattvārtha* and the *Śvetambara* texts.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAsmA kA svabhAva jJAnamaya hai, isaliye vaha cAhe kisI guNasthAna meM kyoM na
ho, para dhyAna se kadApi mukta nahIM rahatA  /  myAna ke sAmAnya roti se [1)
zubha aura (2) azuma, aise do vibhAga bhora vizeSa roti se (1) Arta, (2) raudra
, (3) dharma aura 14) zulka, aise cAra vibhAga zAstra meM kiye gaye hai  /  bAra
meM se pahale do azubha aura pichale vo zuma haiM  /  paulika aSTi kI mukhyatA
ke kiMvA mAtma-vismRti ke samaya jo dhyAna hotA hai, vaha azubha aura pauralika
raSTi kI gauNatA va AtmAnusandhAna-vazA meM jo dhyAna hotA hai, vaha zubha hai
/  azubha dhyAna saMsAra kA kAraNa aura zubha dhyAna mokSakA kAraNa hai  /
pahale tIna guNasthAnoM meM Arta aura rona, ye vo dhyAna ho tara-tama-mAva se
pAye jAte haiN| cauthe aura pAMca guNasthAna meM usa do dhyAnoM ke atirikta
samyaktva ke prabhAva se dharmadhyAna bhI hotA hai| chaThe guNasthAna meM AtaM
aura dharma, ye vo dhyAna hote haiM  /  sAtarthe guNasthAna meM sirpha
dharmathyAna hotA hai| AThaveM se bArahaveM taka pA~ca guNasthAnoM meM dharma
aura zulka, ye vo dhyAna hote haiN| terahaveM aura nauvahaveM guNasthAna meM
sirpha zulkadhyAna hotA hai  /  /  "bAmAtmA cAntarAtmA ca paramAtmeti ca yaH  /
kAyAdhiSThAyakadhyeyAH, prasiddhA yogavAGmaye  //  17  //  anye
mithyAtvasamyaktva, kevalajJAnamAginaH  /  mizre ca kSINamohe ca, vizrAntAste
tvayogini  //  18  //  yogAvatAradvAvizivA  /  *"ArtaraudradharmazuklAni  / ''
tattvArtha-adhyAya 8, sUtra 26  /  + isake liye dekhiye, tattvArtha a06, sUtra
35 se 40  /  dhyAnazataka, gA0 63 ora 64 tathA Avazyaka-hAribhadrI TIkA pR0 602
/  isa viSaya meM tattvArdha ke ukta mUtroM kA rAjavAtika vizepa dekhane yogya
hai, kyoMki usameM zvetAmbara granthoM se thor3A sA matabheda hai|

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the above description of the Pyams found in the Gunasthanas and from the
Mahiraasm-Bhav in the Gunasthanas, as described in the previous section, every
human being can generally know that he is the possessor of a particular
Gunasthana. Knowing this, the possessor of the Gyeya, Sri Nagik, is stimulated
by an intense desire for the higher Gunasthanas.  **Similarity of Jainism with
other philosophies**  All philosophies that are Astika, i.e., believe in the
soul, its rebirth, its development, and its capability for liberation, naturally
contain the idea of the gradual development of the soul in some form or another.
Therefore, this idea is found in the three ancient philosophies of Aryavarta,
namely Jainism, Vaidik, and Buddhism. This idea is known as Gunasthana in
Jainism, as Bhumikas in Vaidik philosophy, and as Abasthas in Buddhism. Although
the idea of Gunasthana is more subtle and detailed in Jainism than in other
philosophies, there is a great deal of similarity between the three philosophies
in relation to this idea. Although there are differences in the symbolism,
description, etc., there is virtually no difference between the three
philosophies in terms of the actual truth. The Vaidik philosophy, in its works
like Yoga Vasistha and Patanjali Yoga, has a good idea of the Bhumikas of the
soul.  Jainism describes the characteristics of the ignorant Gyeya as
Mithyadristi or Bahiratma, which means that one who considers the non-soul,
i.e., the inert element different from the soul, as the soul, is Mithyadristi or
Bahiratma. Yoga * "Tatra Mithyadarshanodayavashikrto Mithyasthi: 1" -
Tattvartha-Adhyaya 6, Su. 1, Rajapathik 12.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bharatA hA guNasthAnoM meM pAye jAne vAle pyAmoM ke ukta varNana se tathA
guNasAnoM meM kiye hue mahirAsma-bhAva mAvi pUrvokta vibhAga se pratyeka manuSya
yaha sAmAnyatayA jAna sakatA hai ki maiM phisa guNasthAna kA adhikArI haiN| aisA
jAna, gIya adhikArI zrI nagika atyAkAMkSA ko apara ke gaNasthAnoM ke liye
uttejita karatA hai| darzanAntara ke sAtha jainadarzana kA sAmya  /  jo varzana,
Astika arthAt AsmA, uptakA punarjanma, usakI vikAsa zIlatA tathA mokSa-yogyatA
mAnane vAle haiM, una saboM meM kisI-na-kisI rUpa meM AtmA ke kramika vikAsa kA
vicAra pAyA jAnA svAbhAvika hai  /  ata eva AryAvattaM ke jana, vaivika aura
bauddha, ina tInoM prAcIna varzanoM meM ukta prakAra kA vicAra pAyA jAtA hai  /
yaha vicAra janadarzana meM guNasthAna ke nAma se, baMdika darzana meM bhUmikAoM
ke nAma se aura zaiddha varSana meM abasthAoM ke nAma se prasiva hai| guNasthAna
kA vicAra, jaisA janadarzana meM sUkSma tathA vistRta hai, vaisA anya darzanoM
meM nahIM hai, to bhI ukta tInoM darzanoM kI usa vicAra ke sambandha meM bahuta-
kucha samatA hai| arthAt saMketa, varNanazaMsI Adi kI bhinnatA hone para mI
vastutatva ke viSaya meM tInoM darzanoM kA bheda nahIM ke gharAbara hI hai|
vaidikadarzana ke yogavAziSTha, pAtaJjala yoga Adi pranthoM meM AtmA kI
bhUmikAoM kA acchA vicAra hai  /  janazAstra meM mithyAdaSTi yA bahirAtmA ke
nAma se ajJAnI jIyakA lakSaNa batalAyA hai ki jo anAtmA meM aryAt Atma-bhinna
jar3atattva meM Atma-buddhi karatA hai, vaha miyAdaSTi thA bahirAtmA * hai  /
yoga *tatra mithyAdarzanodayavazIkRto mithyASTi: 1'' -tattvArdha-adhyAya 6, sU0
1, rAjapAtika 12  /  /

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  33 - The same characteristics of ignorant people are
found in *Vashishtha* and *Patanjali Yoga Sutra 1*. In Jain scriptures,
*Mithyatva-moha-motha* is the cause of worldly growth and decline, as explained
in *Yoga Vashishtha*.  **Māt** "The body, etc., is called the external self,
which arises from self-pride. The inner self is the controller of the body,
etc." - Yoga Shastra, Prakash 12.  "Just like a pure crystal, the inherent form
of the self is there. Due to the superimposed relationship with the limiting
conditions, the ignorant one is deluded there." - Gyanasara, Moha Ashtak.  "The
knowledge of the eternal, pure self is not present in the impure, non-self. The
Yoga Acharya has described this as ignorance." - Gyanasara, Vidya Ashtak.
**Macchava Tadikshanam** "The one who sees the external world with a deluded
vision, and is not free from the delusion of the true nature, does not find
happiness in this world." - Nisara, Tasvasht-Ashtak.  **J** "The one who
considers this body as the self due to ignorance, is overwhelmed by enemies." -
Nirman Prakaran, Purvardha, Sanga 6.  "The ignorance of the impermanent, impure,
and non-self, and the belief in the permanent, pure, and self, is ignorance." -
Patanjali Yoga Sutra, Sadhana Pada, Sutra 5.  "The relationship of the whole and
its parts, the cause and effect, should be understood from the completion of the
sentence." - Tattvartha, Adhyaya 6, Sutra 1, Bhati 31.  "The mind is the
external self, which is filled with the poison of delusion. It establishes the
world of duality." - Gyanasara, Moha Ashtak.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 33 - vAziSTha meM * tathA pAtaJjalayoga sUtra 1 meM ajJAno loga kA vahI lakSaNa
hai  /  jainazAstra meM midhyAtvamohamotha kA saMsAra vRddhi aura nuHvarUpa
paoNla maNita yogavAziSTa hai  /  mAta "AtmazriyA samupAta, kAyAdiH kIrtyate'tra
bahirAtmA  /  kAyAdeH samadhiSThAyako bhavasyantarAtmA tu  // 7 // " ' -
yogazAstra, prakAza 12  /  " nirmalasphaTikasyeva, sahajaM rUpamAtmanaH  /
adhyastopAdhisaMbandho, jaDastatra vimuhyati  // 6 //  jJAnasAra, mohASTaka |
"nitya zucyAtmatAkhyAti ranirayAzucyanAtmasu  /  avidyAtattvavidyA yogAcAryaH
prakItitAH  // 7 //  jJAnasAra, vidyASTaka | macchAvA tadIkSaNam zramadATI
bahidekhi abhrAntastattvadRSTistu, nAsyAM zete sukhA''zayA  //  2  // " -
nisAra, tasvaSTi- aSTaka | J * yasyAjJAnAtmanozasya deha eSAtmabhAvanA uditeti
vAkSa, ripavo'bhibhavanti tam  // 3 //  " -- nirmANa prakaraNa, pUrvArdha, sagaM
6  /  "anityA'zu duHkhAnAtmasu nityazucisukhAtmasyAtiravidyA  / " -
pAtaJjalayogasUtra, sAdhana-yAda, sUtra 5  /  + samudAyAvayavayondhahetutvaM
vAkyaparisamApte vizyAt  / " - tasvArtha, adhyAya 6 sU0 1, bAttika 31  /
"vikalpa parAtmA, pItamohAsavAM hyayam  /  mavoccatAlamusAla,
prapaJcamadhitiSThati  // 4 // " k - jJAnasAra, mohASTaka |

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- 34 - Nirvana + In the chapter, it is said that ignorance is the result of
ignorance. (2) In the first part of the Yoga Vasistha creation chapter, it is
described as a little less than the experience of suffering from desire due to
ignorance and the destruction of ignorance from knowledge. The same order is
described in the Jain scriptures in various places by the description of wrong
knowledge and right knowledge. (3) In the said chapter of Yoga Vasistha, the
name of ignorance from knowledge and knowledge from thought, which is mentioned,
is similar to the destruction of wrong knowledge from knowledge of knowledge,
etc., and the destruction of knowledge of knowledge from knowledge of knowledge
in Jain scriptures. (4) In Jain scriptures, mainly delusion is considered to be
the cause of bondage and the world. In Yoga Vasistha, the same + * "Because of
ignorance, the world's lineage is born. In which they reside, rule, enter and
play ||53||" "Sweetness only in the mouth, the essence is like a garment, the
state of destruction is like a thief. Born from the branch of ignorance, O Rama,
those fruits are of various forms and vast" J ||6|| First half of the creation
6, “O Radha, the birth is like a wave, the destruction is like a drop of water.
Full of the taste of enjoyment and enjoyment, the mind is eaten by worms.
||11||" "Between themselves, there is an end to them, O Rama. In the absence of
ignorance, the two are merged, the thought is destroyed. ||23|| These, O
Raghava, are absorbed, the unattainable remains. From the destruction of
ignorance, the earth is destroyed, the side of knowledge is also, O Raghava.
||24|| + Ignorance is the bondage of the cycle of birth and death, illusion,
delusion is the greatest. The names of which are imagined by all the learned.
||20|| Creation 5 | - Creation 6

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - 34 - nirvANa + prakaraNa meM ajJAna ke phalarUpa se kahI gaI hai  /  (2)
yogavAziSTha nirmANa prakaraNa pUrvArdha meM avidyA se tRSNA aura tRSNA se
duHkha kA anubhava tathA vidyA se avidyA kA + nAza, yaha kama jaisA varNita hai.
vahI krama jaMnazAstra meM midhyAjJAna aura samyakjJAna ke nirupaNa dvArA
jagaha-jagaha varNita hai  /  ( 3 ) yogavAziSTha ke ukta prakaraNa meM hI jo
avidyA kA vidyA se aura vidyA kA t vicAra se nAma batalAyA hai, vaha jenazAstra
meM mAne hue matijJAna Adi kSAyopazamikajJAna se mithyAjJAna ke nAza aura
kSAyikajJAna se kSayopazamikajJAna ke nAza ke samAna hai  /  (4) jainazAstra meM
mukhyatayaH moha ko hI bandha kA saMsAra kA hetu mAnA hai| yogavAziSTha meM vahI
+ * "ajJAnAtprasUtA yasmA, jjagatparNaparamparAH  /  yasmiMstiSThanti rAjante
vizanti vilasanti ca  // 53 // " "ApAsa mAtra madhuratvamana sattva
mAdyantavastrama khala sthiti bhaGga rattvam  /  ajJAnazAkhina iti prasUtAni
rAma, nAnAkRtIni vipulAni phalAni tAni " J ||6|| pUrvAddhaM sarga 6,
"janmaparvAhinA rAdhA, vinAzacchadracacurA  /  bhogAbhogarasApUrNA, vicAraka
ghuNakSatA  //  11 // " "mithaH svAnte tayoranta, rAmAnayoriva  /  avidhAyAM
vilInAmA, kSINe dve eva kalpanaM ||23|| ete rAghava lIyete, avApyaM pariziSyate
/  avidyAsakSayAt kSoNo, vidyApakSo'pi rAghava  //  244 + avidyA saMsRtirvandho
mAyA moho mahattamaH  /  kalpitAnIti nAmAni yasyAH sakalavedibhi ||20|| sarga 5
| - sarva 6

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
35 This is said in the Bal Rupantar. The reason given for the existence of the
body being bound is the pride or ego of the heart. (5) Just as the Granthi-mev
is described in Jain scriptures, so it is in the Yoga Vashishtha. (6) The
description of the soul acquiring the body through contact with Maya and
creating a world of thoughts and perceptions through contact with the mind, and
the destruction of the world of stationary and mobile beings at the end of the
Kalpa, can be reconciled with the Jain doctrine in this way: the soul's
transition from the state of non-action to the state of action is the soul's
acquisition of the body.  "The object of perception, the six categories of
existence, is called bondage. The perceiver is bound by the object of
perception, and is liberated in the absence of the object of perception." (22) -
Genesis Chapter, Section 1.  "The mind, which is full of wrong thoughts, is like
a demon child. It always deceives the perceiver by making it appear as the
object of perception." (38) - Genesis Chapter, Section 3.  "The separation from
the objects of perception is liberation. The thirst of the mirage, the water in
the mirage, and other such things are all just peace." (23) - Genesis Chapter,
Section 115.  "It constantly creates itself, and thus it is called a magical
illusion." (16) - Genesis Chapter, Section 1.  "All that is seen in this world,
both stationary and mobile, is like a dream in sleep, and is destroyed at the
end of the Kalpa." (10) - Genesis Chapter, Section 1.  "He is like that, but he
appears to be different. He is like a living being, but he is destined for
destruction." (13)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 35 bAla rUpAntara se kahI gaI hai| usameM jo vaya ke astitva ko bamdha hA
kAraNa kahA hai; usakA tAtparya hRdaya ke abhimAna yA adhyAya se hai 1 (5)
jaise, jainazAstra meM granthimeva kA varNana hai vaise hI yogavAziSTha meM bhI
hai| (6) ki pratthoM kA yaha varNana ki brahma mAyA ke saMsarga se jIvatva
dhAraNa karatA hai aura mana ke saMsarga se saMkalpa-vikalpAtmaka aikhajAsika
sRSTi racatA hai tathA sthAvarajaGgamAtmaka jagat kA kalpa ke anta meM nAza hotA
hai hasyAdi bAtoM kI saMgati jemAtra ke anusAra isa prakAra kI jA sakatI hai
atmA kA avyavahAra- rAzi se vyavahAra rAzi meM AnA brahma kA jIvazva dhAraNa
karanA hai P "vaSTuSTaM zmasya sattAGga, bandha ityabhidhIyate  /  draSTA
dRzyabalAbaddho, dazyA'bhAve vimucyate  // 22 // " - utpatti-prakaraNa, sa0 1  /
sammAccittavikalpastha, pizAcI bAlaka mathA  /  trinityamepAsa, draSTAraM
dRzyarUpikA  // 38 //  | " - utpatti pra0 sa0 3 | * ptibhiviccheda, stasmin
prati hi muktatA  /  mRgatRSNAmbubuddhayyAdi, zAntimAtrAtmaka stvasI  // 23 //
| " -utpatti prakaraNa, sa0 115 + tatsvayaM svaMmevAzu, saMkalpayati nityazaH  /
tenetyamindrajAlazrI, viSaseyaM ticyate  // 16 // " "yadidaM dRzyate sarva
jagatsthAvarajaGgamam  /  tatsuSuptAva svapna, kalpAnte pravinazyati ||10 // " -
utpatti prakaraNa, sa0 1  /  sa tathAbhUta evAnA strayamanya ivollasan  /
jIvatAmupayAkhIva, bhAvinAzrI kadarthitAn ||13|| "

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
6. - The first karma, subtle and minute, obtained through the mind, is the
wandering of the soul in the realm of imagination, which is the creation of the
cycle of birth and death. The liberation from the essence of karma is the end of
the worldly cycle, which is the name of the world of stationary and mobile
beings. The soul forgets its own nature and considers the material nature as its
own, which is the cause of the rise of the feeling of "mine" and "I", which is
the form of delusion. This feeling of "mine" and "I" is the cause of fear,
according to the Vedic style of description. Birth, growth, development, heaven,
hell, etc., which are the states of the soul, are described in the Vedic
scriptures. These are the cycles of the soul according to the Jain scriptures.
(7) In Yoga Vasishtha, the state of being in one's true nature is considered the
characteristic of the wise, and the state of being in one's true nature is
considered the characteristic of the ignorant. In Jain scriptures, also, right
faith is considered the characteristic of the wise, and wrong faith is
considered the characteristic of the ignorant. (8) In Yoga Vasishtha, the
characteristic of right faith is... * "Whatever is born in the world, it grows.
It attains liberation, or heaven or hell." - Uttpatti Prakaran, S. 1. "The state
of being in one's true nature is liberation, the state of being in one's true
nature is the knowledge of non-violence. This is briefly stated, the
characteristic of shamelessness and non-violence." - Uttpatti Prakaran, S. 117.
"This mantra, 'mine' and 'I', is the creator of delusion in the world. This is
the root of all evil, and its counter-mantra is the destroyer of delusion." -
Manasara, Moha Ashtak. "The nature of the soul is the cause of knowledge and
delusion. Therefore, the mind is blind, and this is said by the great souls." -
Gyanasara, Gyan Ashtak. +"The Supreme Soul exists without beginning and end."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6 - kamaSAH prathama tathA smUla manadvArA saMkSipta prApta karake kalpanAbAla
meM AtmA kA vicaraNa karanA saMkalpa-vikalpAtmaka ainamAsika sRSTi hai| pAsa
mArama-svarUpa makta hone para sAMsArika paryAyoM kA nAbA honA hI kalpa ke anta
meM sthAvara-jaGgamAtmaka jagat kA nAma hai bhAramA apanI sattA bhUlakara
jar3a-sattA ko svasattA mAmalA hai, jo ahaMsva mamatva bhAvanA rUpa mohanIya kA
udaya aura Sa kA kAraNa hai bahI mahatva-mamatva bhAvanA vaidika varNana zailI
ke anusAra kAmahetubhUta bhaya satA hai  /  utpatti , vRddhi vikAsa, svarga,
naraka mAri jo jIva ko avasthAeM vaivika panthoM meM varNita * haiM, ye ho jana-
STi ke anusAra vyavahAra-rAzi-gata jIva ke paryAya haiM  /  (7) yogavAziSTha meM
/  svarUpa-spiti ko jJAnI kA aura svarUpa-vaMza ko anAmI kA lakSaNa mAnA hai|
jainazAstra meM bhI samyakjhAna kA aura migyASTi kA kramazaH bahI svarUpa
batalAyA hai| (8) yogavAziSTha meM + jo samyakasAna kA lakSaNa * "utpadyate yo
jagati sa eva kila vardhata  /  sa eva mokSamA proti, svarga bA narakaM ca vA
// 7 // " -utpatti-prakaraNa, sa. 1  /  " svarUpAvasthitimukti,
stabhraMzo'haMsyavedanam  /  etat saMkSepataH prokta, lajjatvAzatvalakSaNam  //
5 // " -utpati-prakaraNa sa. 117 aihaM mameti mantro'yaM, mohasya jagadAdhyakRt
/  ayameva hi nabapUrvaH, pratimantropi mohajit  // 1 // " mAnasAra, mohASTaka
/  svabhAvalAbhasaMskAra, kAraNaM jJAna miSyate  /  dhyAdhyamAtramatastvandha,
tathA cokta mahAtmanA  /  / 3 // " jJAnasAra, zAnASTaka  /
+"anAdyantAvabhAsAmA, paramAtmeha vidyate  /

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- 37 - Yes, it is in accordance with Jain scriptures. (9) Jain scriptures
describe the attainment of perfect knowledge through two ways: (1) inherent
nature and (2) external causes. * The Yoga Vasistha also mentions the same way
of attaining knowledge. (10) The description of the stages of liberation in Yoga
Vasistha is very interesting and detailed, in accordance with the Jain
scriptures. Seven stages of liberation "This is the definite conclusion, wise
men know that ignorance is the cause of liberation." || 2 || -Upasama Prakarana,
S. 761 * "From the body or from the knowledge." Tattvartha-A. 1, S. 3. +"One is
said to be gradual, obtained slowly through practice. It is said to be attained
through birth after birth, or through Siddhi. || 3 || The second is sudden, for
one with a slightly awakened mind, Knowledge is attained, like the fruit of a
tree. || 4 || -Upasama-Prakarana, S. 7/ t. "The land of ignorance has seven
stages, liberation also has seven stages. There are countless stages in between,
for those who fall from one stage to another. || 2 || "The seed is planted in
the land, listen to its stages. The seed, the sprout, the young plant, the
mature plant, and the fruit. || 11 || The waking state, the dream state, and the
deep sleep state, These are the seven poisons of delusion, which are
interconnected. || 12 || The first stage is called the seed stage, listen to its
characteristics. In the first stage, the mind is pure and free from attachment.
|| 13 || It is the receptacle of future thoughts, life, and names, words, and
meanings. The seed form is in the waking state, it is called the seed-sprout. ||
14 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - 37 - hai, vaha jaina zAstra ke anukUla hai  /  (9) jaima zAstra meM sampan
parzana kI prApti, (1) svabhAva aura (2) bAhya nimita, ina do prakAra se batalAI
hai *  /  yogavAziSTha meM bhI jJAna prApti kA vaisA hI kama sUcita kiyA + hai
/  (10) jaina zAstra ke zovA mammAmoM ke mAna meM pauraha milAnoM kA varNana
yogavAziSTha meM bahuta ruci kara va vistRta hai  /  sAta bhUmi ityeko nizcayaH
phAra mamyagnAnaM vidurbudhAH  //  2  // " -upazama prakaraNa, sa. 761 *
"tanisargAdadhigamAd vA  / "  /  tattvArtha-a0 1, suu03| +"ekastAvaduruproktA,
danuSThAnAcchanaHzanaiH  /  janmanA janmabhirvApi, siddhida; samudAhRtaH  //  3
//  dvitIyastvAtmanevAzu, kiMcidvyutpannacetasA , bhavati
jJAnasaMprApti,-rAkASAphalapAsayat  /  /  4  /  /  -upazama-prakaraNa, sa. 7/ t.
"ajJAnabhUH saptapadA, zabhUH saptapadaiva hi  /  padAntarANyasaMkhyAni,
bhavantyanyAnyapatayoH  //  2  //  ' satrAropita mazAnaM, tasya bhUmIrimAH zRNu
/  bIjajAgrattathAjArAn mahAjAmasarthava ca  /  /  11  /  /  jAgratasvaprastathA
svapanaH, svaprajAsatsuSuptakam  /  iti saptaviSo mohaH, punareva parasparam  //
12  //  hilTo bhavatyenakAsyaH, zRNu lakSaNamasya ca  /  prathame cetanaM
yatsyA,- danApaM nirmala citaH  //  13  //  bhaviSyaccittajIvAdi,
nAmazabdArthabhAjanam  /  bIjarUpaM sthita jAgrata, bIjajAgrattaducyate  /  /
14  /  /

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- - The seven states of existence are described as follows, which are known in
common parlance as:  These seven states of existence, listen to the awakened
consciousness. The highest of the nine states, I declare this to be mine. || 15
||  Thus, the perception of the self, due to the absence of the perception of
the body and its attributes. This is I, this is mine, thus arises the perception
of rebirth. || 16 ||  The perception of the self is said to be strong, shining
with great awakened consciousness. Not attained or attained, in all ways it is
the self. || 17 ||  The state of mind in the awakened state, the awakened dream
is said to be. It is of two kinds, like the moon and the conch shell, and like
the mirage, etc. || 18 ||  Having attained the awakened state through practice,
the dream becomes manifold. Seen for a short time, it is not true, even so. ||
19 ||  The perception that arises after sleep, at the end of sleep. That is
called a dream, it is located in the great awakened state. || 20 ||  The body
does not bloom due to the absence of long-term vision. || 21 ||  The dream is
the sprout of the awakened state, it has gone to the state of the great awakened
state. || 21 ||  Whether the body is intact or injured, that is the perception
of the dream-awakened state. The state of the soul after abandoning the six
states. || 22 ||  The future, which is like a mirage, is called the state of
deep sleep. In this state, grass, clods, stones, etc. || 23 ||  Objects are
located, as small as atoms. These seven states are said to be, I have declared
them in my knowledge. || 24 ||  "The origin chapter 117. "The knowledge-ground
is called auspicious wish, the first is mentioned. The second is deliberation,
the third is respect. || 5 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - - kAeM zAna kI aura sAta amAna ko batalAI huI haiM, jo jana paribhASA ke eSA
sapternavAvasthA, vaM jAgratsaMsRti shRnnu| navAsUtasya parA, dayaM cAhamidaM
mama  /  /  15  //  iti ya: pratyaya. svasthasajAvar3AgabhAvanAt  /  ayaM
so'hamidaM tanma, iti janmAntaroditaH  /  /  16  /  /  pIvaraH pratyayaH prokto,
mahAjAgradipti sphuran  /  arUDhamathavA ruLa, sarvathA tanmayAtmakam  /  /  17
/  /  paujAgrato manorAjyaM jAgrassvapnaH sa ucyate  /
dvicandrazuktikArUpya,-mRgatRSNAdibhedataH  //  18  //  abhyAsAtprApya
jAgrattvaM, svapno'nekavidho bhavet  /  alpakAlaM mayA dRSTaM, evaM no
satyamityapi  //  16  //  nidrAkAlAnubhUteNe, nidrAnte pratyayo hi yaH  /  sa
svapnaH kathitastasya, mahAjAgna risthatehu~ di  /  /  20  /  /
cirasaMdarzanAbhAvA-dapraphulsayahad vapuH  /  /  svapno jAgra tayArUho,
mahAjAgratpadaM gataH  /  /  21  //  akSate vA kSate dehe, svaprajAgranmataM hi
tat  /  SaDavasthAparityAge, jayA jIvasya yA sthitiH  /  /  22  /  /  bhaviSya
Hkha jodhAhayA, sauSuptI socyate gatiH  /  ete tasyAmavasthAyAM,
tRNaloSThazilAdayaH  //  23  //  padArthAH saMsthitAH marca, paramANupramANinaH
/  saptAvasthA iti proktA, mayAjJAnasma rASava  //  24  // " utpatti-prakaraNa
sa0117  /  "jJAnabhUmiH zubhecchAkhyA, prathamA samudAhRtA  /  vicAraNA ditIyA
na, tRtIyA sanmAnaNa  //  5  //

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 36:  These (36) are indicative of the stages of *mithyarava* and
*samyaktvam* respectively. (11) In the *Yoga Vasistha*, the stages are described
as *tasvala*, *samashti*, *purnaashaya*, and *mukta purusha*.   The fourth stage
is *sthaapatti*, followed by *samsakti*. The sixth stage is *padarthaabhavi*,
and the seventh is *turyaga*. (6) Liberation is attained in the last stage, and
there is no further sorrow. (7) I am confused about these stages. I am a fool, I
should consult a learned scholar. (8) The desire to learn with humility and
respect is called *shubhechcha*. (8) The practice of *pairagya* with the
guidance of a learned scholar is called *vicharana*. (9) *Vicharana* is the
desire for good, and attachment to sense objects is called *tanumanasa*. (10)
The practice of the first three stages leads to the state of being established
in the true self, free from attachment to objects. This is called *sattvapatti*.
(11) The practice of the first ten stages, along with the ten *sangha* fruits,
leads to the state of *samsakti*. (12) The practice of the first five stages
leads to the state of *aamyantgana*, where there is no attachment to external
objects. (13) The constant contemplation of the absence of objects, through the
efforts of others, is called *padarthaabhavna*. This is the sixth stage. (14)
The practice of the first six stages, through the realization of the true nature
of the self, leads to the state of *turyaga*. (15)  *Utpatti Prakarana*, Chapter
118.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 36 - anusAra kramazaH mithyArava ko aura samyaktva kI avasthA ko sUcaka haiM  /
(11) yogavaziSTha meM tasvala, samaSTi, pUrNAzaya aura mukta puruSa kA
sasthApattizcaturthI syA, tato saMsaktinAmikA  /  padArthAbhAvI SaSThI, saptamI
turyagA smRtA  /  /  6  /  /  AsAmanta sthitA mukti, stasyAM bhUyo na zocyate  /
etAsAM bhUmikAnAM tva.-midaM visaM mahaM ! 7 sthita: ki mUDha evAsmi,
prekSye'haM zAstrasajjane  /  pairAgyapUrvamiccheti, zubhecchetyucyate budhaH  /
/  8  /  /  zAstrasajjanasaMparpha-pairAgyAbhyAsapUrvakam  /  sadAcArapravRttiA
. procyate sA vicAraNA || 6 vicAraNA zubhecchAmyA,-mindriyArtheSva saktatA  /
yatra hA tanusAmAvA,-procyate tanumAnasA  //  10  //
bhUmikAtritayAbhyAsA,-citte'rthe viratevazAt satyAtmani sthiti: zuddha,
sattvApattirudAhRtA  /  /  11  //  dazAcatuSTayAbhyAsA, dasasaMgaphalena ca  /
rUsasvacamatkArA,-proktA saMsaktinAmikA  //  12  //  bhumikApaJcakAmpAsA,
svAtmArAmatayA idam  /  AmyantagaNAM bAhyAnAM. padAryAnAmamAvanAt  //  13  /  /
paraprayuktena ciraM. prayatnenArtha bhAvanAt  /  padArthAbhAvanA nAmrI, SaSThI
saMjAyate gatiH  /  /  14 /  /  bhUmiSaTkacigamyAsA,-dendagyAnupalAmataH  /
yatsvabhAvakaniSThatvaM sA zeyA suryagA gatiH  //  15  //  utpatti-prakaraNa,
sa0 118  /

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- 4. The description refers to the unity that applies to the soul situated in
the fourfold state of qualities, according to Jain principles. The importance of
knowledge is described in Jain scriptures, * **Pog Nirvan-Pra. 0, S. 170;
Nirvan-Pra. 3, S. 116.** * **Yog. Sthiti-Prakarana, S. 57; Nirvan-Pra. 0, S.
166.** + "Jāgati jñāna-dṛṣṭiśce, tṛṣṇā kṛṣṇā'hijāmalī | Pūrṇānandhasya tanik
spā, dainyavṛścika-vedanā || 4 ||" - **Jñānāsāra, Pūrṇāṣṭaka.** "Asti
cegranthibhid jñānam, ki cistantra-yaṇṭraṇaḥ | Pradīpāḥkṣopa-yujyante, samonī
eṣṭireva cet || 6 || Mithyātvāśaila-pacchid, jñāna-dambholiśobhitaḥ | Nimayaḥ
mākravad-yogī, nandatyānanyānandane || 7 || Pīyūṣam-asamudrotvam, rasāyana
manauṣadham | Ananyāpekṣam-aścarya, jñānamāi manīṣiṇaḥ || = [1 **Jñānāsāra
Jñānāṣṭaka.** Samsāre nivasann svārtha,-sājja kajjale śmani | Lipyate nikhilo
śoko, śānasiḍdho na lipyate || 1 || Māham pudgala bhāvanā, kartā kārayitā ca |
Nānumanṣāpi ca syātma,-jñānavān lipyate katham || 2 || Lipyate pudgala-skandho,
na lipye pudgala raham | Citravyomajane-neka, dhyāyanniti na lipyate || 3 ||
Lipta-tā-jñāna-sampāta, pratipātāya kevalam | Nirlepa-śānam-agnasya, kriyā
sarvopayujyate || 4 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - 4. . jo varNana hai baha jaina-saMkatAnusAra caturma Adhi guNasthAna meM
sthita mAtmA ko lAgU ekatA hai  /  jaina zAstra meM jo jAna kA mahatva baNita
hai, * poga nirvANa-pra0 sa0 170; nirvANa -pra. 3, sa. 116  /  yoga0 sthiti-
prakaraNa, sa0 57; nirvANa-pra0 sa0 166 /  + "jAgati jJAnadRSTizce, tRSNA
kRSNA'hijAmalI  /  pUrNAnandhasya tanika spA, dainyavRzcikavedanA  //  4  // "
-jJAnAsAra, pUrNatASTaka  /  "asti cegranthibhid jJAnaM, ki cistantrayantraNaH
/  pradIpAHkkopayujyante, samonI eSTireva cet  //  6  //  mithyAtvazailapacchid,
jJAnadambholizobhitaH  /  nimayaH mAkravadyogI, nandatyAnanyanandane  //  7  //
pIyUSamasamudrotvaM, rasAyana manauSadham  /  ananyApekSamazvarya, jJAnamAi
manISiNaH  //  = [1 jJAnAsAra jAnASTaka  /  saMsAre nivasan svArtha,-sajjA
kajjalaye zmani  /  lipyate nikhilo soko, zAnasiddho na lipyate  /  /  1  /  /
mAhaM pudgala bhAvanA, kartA kArayitA ca  /  nAnumansApi casyAtma,-jJAnavAn
lipyate katham  //  2  //  lipyate pudgalaskandho, na lipye pudgala raham  /
citravyomAjaneneka, dhyAyanniti na lipyate  /  /  3  /  /  liptatAjJAnasaMpAta,
pratipAtAya kevalam  /  nirlepazAnamagnasya, kriyA sarvopayujyate  /  /  4  /  /

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"**Tapa:** (austerity) heard, etc., even if one is active, one is stained. But
one who is free from attachment and ignorance, even if inactive, is not stained.
|| 4 ||" **Jnanasar, Nilapeshtak.** "The wise ones, who are poisoned by desire,
cut off the knowledge-giving (path). Do not be afraid of sorrow, for it gives
the fruit of humility. || 3 ||" **Jnanasar, Nishsprihaashtak.** "The objects of
the senses, which are combined with the self, are experienced through the
transformation of pure consciousness, without any change in the self. || 7 ||"
"The darkness of ignorance is destroyed by the light of knowledge, which is
touched by the wise. The yogis see the Supreme Self, which is within themselves.
|| 8 ||" **Jnanasar, Vidyaashtak.** "The knowledge of the wise, which is the
greatest of all, is always happiness, which is superior to worldly happiness. ||
2 ||" "There is nothing to be hidden, nothing to be planted, nothing to be
abandoned, nothing to be given. There is no fear for the sage who sees with the
eye of knowledge. || 3 ||" "Taking up the single weapon of Brahma, the sage, who
is not deluded, does not fear battle, like a king on his throne. || 4 ||" "The
peacock of knowledge, which is the eight-fold path, conquers the forest of the
mind. It does not fear the snakes, for it is the abode of joy. || 5 ||" "The
weapon of delusion is broken by the armor of knowledge. Just as the poison of a
snake is destroyed by the antidote, so too is the fear of death destroyed by the
knowledge of the self. || 6 ||" "The foolish, who are light and heavy, are
tossed about by the wind of fear. But the hair of the wise does not tremble, for
they are heavy with knowledge. || 7 ||"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tapa:zrutAdinA masa:, kriyAvAnapi lipyate  /  bhAyanAjJAnasaMga no, nikriyo'pi
na lipyate  /  /  4  /  / " jJAnasAra, nilepASTaka  /  "chindanti jJAnadAyegA,
spRhA viSalA budhAH  /  mukhazoka ca mA ca, dainyaM yacchati yaraphalam  //  3
// " jJAnasAra, niHspRhASTaka  /  "mibhoyuktapadArthAnA, masaMkramamArakayA  /
cinmAtrapariNAmena. viSayAnubhUyate  /  /  7  /  /  avidyAtimiradhvaM se, hazA
vidyAjanaspRzA  /  pazyanti paramAtmAna, mAtmanyeva hi yoginaH  //  8 // "
jJAnAsAra, vidyASTaka  /  "bhavasaukhyena vi bhari, bhayajvalana bhasmanA  /
sadA mayojiSTAnaM jJAna, sukhameva viziSyate  /  /  2  /  /  na gopyaM kApi
nAropyaM, heyaM deyaM ca na kacit  /  kka bhayena mune: stheyaM, jeyaM jJAnana
pazyataH  //  3  //  ekaM brahmAstramAdAya, ninamohanam muniH  /  bibheti naiva
saMgrAma, zIrSastha iva nAgarATa  //  4  //  mayUrI jJAnaSTizce, pramarpati
manobane  /  veSrata bhayasANAM, na tadA'nandanandane  /  /  5  /  /
kRtamohAstradaiphalyaM, jJAnavarma vibhani yaH  /  kapha bhImsasya kka vA
bhaGgaH, kamarAMgarake liSu  //  6  //  tulavallaghavo muDhA, bhramansyabhra
bhayAnilaH  /   /  naka romApi tarjJAna, gariSyAnAM tu kampate  /  /  7  //

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- 42 — This is mentioned in the Yoga Vasistha under the name of Prajna
Mahatmya*. *Whose character is transformed into the mind, free from both*. ,
*The kingdom of ignorance, Knowledge essence, fearless octet* | P "Running after
eight meanings, without the lamp of scripture, they are dull. They attain great
sorrow, stumbling at every step. || 4 ||" "The great mantra of ignorance, dense
with the fever of self-will. The sages say that it is a swamp of virtue. || 7
||" The one who performs the actions prescribed by the scriptures, the one who
knows the scriptures, the one who teaches the scriptures. The great yogi who
performs the scriptures, attains the supreme state. || 8 ||" Knowledge essence,
scripture octet - The wise say that knowledge alone is austerity, from the
burning of actions. Then it is desired internally, external is its support. || 1
||" The flow of the current, the gentleness of the strong. The flow against the
current, the supreme austerity of the Saturnians. || 2 ||" "Those who are
engaged in good means, from the sweetness of the desirable. The eternal joy of
the Saturnians, the growth of the ascetics. || 4 ||" Knowledge essence,
austerity octet *"One does not attain the state from a good teacher, nor from
the meaning of the scriptures, nor from merit. It is attained from the company
of the virtuous, from the clear understanding of the two ways. 17 ||" By
beautiful victory, by intelligence, by wisdom as a companion. Rama attains the
state, not by any other action. || 18 ||"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - 42 -- vahI yogavAziSTha meM prajJAmAhAtmya ke nAma se ullikhita hai*  /
citte pariNataM yasya cAritramakutobhayam  /  , akhaNhajJAnarAjyasya myA
jJAnasAra, nirbhayASTaka | P "aSTArthetu dhAvantaH, zAstradIpaM vinA jaDAH  /
prApnuvanti paraM khedaM praskhalantaH pade pade  //  4 //  "ajJAnAhimahAmantra,
svAcchandyajvarasaGghanam  /  dharmArAmasudhAkulya, zAstramAhurmaharSayaH  //  7
//  zAstroktAcArakarttA ca zAstrajJa zAstra dezakaH  /  zAstrakaraNa mahAyogI,
prApnoti paramaM padam  //  8  //  jJAnasAra, zAstraSTaka - jJAnameva budhA:
prAhu, karmaNAM tApanAttapaH  /  tadAbhyantarameveSTaM bAhya N tadupakha hukam
//  1  //  anulota sikI vRtti, balAnAM sulazIlatA  /  prAtisrotasika vRtti,
zaninAM paramaM tapaH  //  2  //  "sadupAyapravRttAnA, mupeyamadhuratvataH  /
zAninAM nityamAnanda, vRddhireva tapasvinAm  //  4  //  " jJAnasAra, tapoSTaka
*"na sadgurorna zAstrArthA, puNyAtprApyate padam  /  yatsAdhusaGgAbhyuditA,
dvicAravizadAdbudaH  /  17  /  /  sundaryA vijayA buddhayyA, prajJayeva
vayasyayA  /  padamAsAdyate rAma, na nAma kriyayAnyayA  //  18  //

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
43 - Whose sharp point is turned upwards, and whose light shines like the sun.
The flame of wisdom never extinguishes the darkness of ignorance. ||19||
Difficult to overcome are the calamities, the sorrows, the anxieties, and the
troubles. They are overcome by wisdom, not by any other means, O great-minded
one. ||20|| Even a small amount of wisdom, without any support, is beneficial.
Like a small breeze, it can move a large ship. ||21|| Even without support, one
who has wisdom will achieve his goal. Without wisdom, even a small task becomes
difficult and is destroyed. ||24|| Association with learned and virtuous people
will increase wisdom. Like the watering of a plant, it will lead to the
attainment of fruits. ||24|| Wisdom is the great root, the tree of action. It
bears fruits that are very sweet, like the fruits of the neem tree. ||25||
Whatever effort is made to earn wealth, the same effort should be made to
increase wisdom. ||26|| Wisdom is the best treasure, the boundary of all
sorrows, and the seed that destroys the tree of worldly existence. ||27||
Heaven, hell, and all other desires are attained by wisdom. All is attained by
the great-souled one who has wisdom. ||28|| By wisdom, one crosses the terrible
ocean of worldly existence. Not by charity, not by pilgrimage, not by austerity.
||29|| Even those who have attained wealth, land, and other possessions, are
like ordinary people. Only those who have the vine of wisdom, taste the sweet
fruits of its growth. ||30||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 43 - yasyovalati tIkSNAgrA, pUrvApa ravicAriNI  /  prajJAdIpazikhA jAtu,
jJAhayAndhyaM taM na bApate  / 19|| durusarA yA vipado, duHkhakallosaMkusAH  /
toryate prajJayA tAbhyo, nAyA'payo mahAmate  /  / 20 /  /  prazAvirahitaM mUka-
mApadalpApi bAdhate  /  pelavacAnilakalA, sArahInamivolapam  // 21 // "
"prazAvAnasahAyo'pi, kAryAntamadhigacchati  /  duSpraza: kArya mAsATA , paEA!
nazyati  /  zAstrasajjanasaMsarga: prajJA pUrva vivadhayet  /
sekasaMrakSaNArambhaH, phalaprAptI latAmiva  /  / 24 /  /  prajJAvala
bRhanmUlaH, kAle sarakAryapAdapa.  /  phalaM phalatyatisvAdu
bhAsonimbamivaindavam  // 25 //  ya eva yatnaH kriyate, bArArthopArjana janaH  /
sa evaM yatnaH kartavyaH, pUrva prajJAvivardhane  // 26 //  sImAntaM
sarvaduHkhAnA, mApadA kozamuttamam  /  bIjaM saMsAravRkSANA, prajJAmAnya
binAzayet  // 27 //  svargAdyAyamaca pAtAlA, drAjyAdyatsamavApyate  /
tarasamAsAdyate sarvaM, prajJAkogAnmahAtmanA  /  / 28 /  /  prajJayottIryate
bhImA, tasmAtsaMsArasAgarAta  /  na dAnanaM ca nA tIrtha, stapasA na ca rAghava
// 26 /  /  paraprAptAH saMpadaM devI, mapi bhUmicarA narAH  /
prajJApuNyalatAyAsta, sphalaM svAdu samutthitam  // 30 //

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- 44 - .  . - -. Prajna, like a lion, conquers the pride of the intoxicated
elephant herd, just as a lion conquers a deer. ||31|| Even a king, who has
attained Prajna, becomes worthy of heaven and liberation. This is evident in the
wise. ||32|| The arrogant and self-opinionated do not conquer. Only those who
are valiant and fearless conquer. ||33|| Prajna is like a Chintamani gem, which
is hidden in the treasury of the wise. It grants the desired fruit, just as a
wish-fulfilling tree grants wishes. ||34|| The noble one crosses the ocean of
samsara, while the ignorant one drowns. The educated one attains liberation,
while the uneducated one wanders aimlessly. ||35|| When intellect is properly
applied, it leads to liberation. When it is not properly applied, it leads to
bondage. Like a ship without a rudder, a person wanders aimlessly in the ocean
of samsara. ||36|| The wise are not disturbed by the waves of praise or blame,
like a warrior who is well-armed. ||37|| The true nature of the world is seen
only through right knowledge. With right knowledge, neither misfortune nor
prosperity can affect one. ||38|| The ignorant soul is enveloped in the darkness
of ignorance. The cloud of egotism is dispelled by the wind of Prajna. ||39||
Upasama - 40, The greatness of Prashanta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - 44 - . . - -. prajJa yA nakharAtUna, mattavAraNayUthapAH  /  jambunijitAH
siMhA, siMhahariNakA iva  // 31 //  sAmAgharapi bhUpatna, prAptaM
prajJAvazAnaraH  /  svargApavargayogyatva prAjJasyeveha dRzyate  /  / 32 //
prazayA vAdinaH mA svavikalpavilAsina : 1 jayanti subhaTaprakhyA,
narAnaNyatimIravaH  /  / 33 /  /  cintAmaNi riyaM prajJA, hatkozasthA vivekinaH
/  phalaM kalpalatedeSA, cintita gamprayacchati  // 34 //  bhavyastarati
saMsAra, prajJa yApoyate'dhamaH  /  zikSitaH pAramAprAti. nAnA nAnotyazikSitaH
/  / 3 /  /  dhIH samyagyojitA pAra, sasamyamyojitA padam  /  nara nayapi
saMsAre, bhramantI nauriyANave  // 36 //  vivekinamasaMmuLe, prAmAzAgaNotthitAH
/  ghoSA na paribAghante, sannaddhamiva sAyakAH  // 37 //  prazna yeha
jagatsarca, samyagevAGga dRzyate  /  samyagdarzanamAyAnti, nApado na ca saMpadaH
// 38 //  pidhAna paramArkasya, jaDAtmA vitatA'sitaH  /  ahaMkArAmbudo mattaH,
prajJAvAtena bAdhyate  // 36 // " upazama-40, prazAmAhAtmya  /

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- 45 - Thoughts on Yoga. What is the difference between the concept of Gunasthan
and Yoga? From the description of the roles of the Gunasthan's various Amanas
and Gyanas, it becomes clear how the soul's spiritual development takes place.
And from the description of Yoga, it becomes clear what the means of liberation
are. In other words, the main focus of Gunasthan is the order of spiritual
development, while the main focus of Yoga is the means of liberation. Thus, even
though the main purpose of both is different, the shadow of one is always
present in the other. Because no soul can directly attain the ultimate or
immediate means of liberation, but rather attains the successive, appropriate
means in a step-by-step manner, ultimately reaching the ultimate means.
Therefore, the concept of Yoga, which is about the steps of liberation,
inevitably includes the shadow of the order of spiritual development. Similarly,
when considering the order of spiritual development, the shadow of the soul's
pure, purer, and purest states, which are the means of liberation, is also
present. Therefore, it is not inappropriate to briefly discuss the nature of
Yoga in the context of the description of Gunasthan. What is Yoga? - The soul's
Dharma-Vyapar, which is the main cause of liberation, i.e., the instrumental
cause, and which leads to results without delay, is called Yoga. Such Vyapar,
which includes Pranidhan and other auspicious * "Mokshan Yojana Dav, Yoga Patra
Niruchhyate. Lakshnam Ten Tan Mukhya, Hetu Chyaapar Taray Tu. ||1|| - Yoga
Lakshna Vishifa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - 45 - yogasambandhI vicAra  /  guNasthAna aura yoga ke vidhAra meM antara kyA
hai ? guNasthAna ke kikA amAna va jJAna-ko bhUmikAoM ke varNana se yaha jJAta
hotA hai ki AtmA kA AdhyAsmika vikAsa kisa prama se hotA hai aura yoga ke
varNana se yaha jJAta hotA hai ki mokSa kA sAdhana kyA hai  /  arthAt guNa.
sthAna meM AdhyAtmika vikAsa ke krama kA vicAra mukhya hai aura yoga meM mokSa
ke sAdhana kA vicAra mukhya hai| isa prakAra donoM kA mukhya pratiprAya prasva
bhinna-bhinna hone para bhI eka ke vicAra meM dUsare kI chAyA avazya A jAtI hai,
kyoki koI bhI AtmA mokSa ke antima anantara yA abyavahita - sAdhana ko prayama
ho prApta nahIM kara sakatA, kintu vikAsa ke pramAnusAra janarottara sammAyina
sAdhanoM ko sopAna-paramparA kI taraha prApta karatA huA anta meM parama sAdhana
ko prApta kara letA hai  /  ata eva yoga ke-mokSa sApana viSayaka vicArameM
AdhyAtmika vikAsa ke krama kI chAyA A hI jAtI hai  /  isI taraha AdhyAtmiA
vikAsa kisa krama se hotA hai, isakA vicAra karate samaya vAtmA ke zuddha,
zuddhatara, zuddhatama pariNAma. jo mokSa ke sAdhanamUta haiM, unakI chAyA bhI A
hI jAtI hai| isalie guNasthAna ke varNana-prasaGga meM yoga kA svarUpa saMkSepa
meM vikhA venA aprAsanika nahIM hai yoga kise parate haiM ? :- AtmA kA jo
dharma-yApAra mokSa kA mukhya hetu arthAt upAina kAraNa tathA binA bilamba se
phala vene. vAlA ho, use yoga * kahate haiM  /  aisA vyApAra praNidhAna Adi
zubha * "mokSaNa yojanAdava, yogA patra nirucyate  /  lakSaNaM tena
tanmukhya,-hetucyApAra tAraya tu  /  / 1 //  -yogalakSaNa viziphA  /

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Bhaṣā is an action that is performed with auspicious intentions. In the
Patañjalayāna, the restraint of the citta's vṛtti is called yoga. It has the
same meaning, that is, such restraint is the main cause of mokṣa, because it is
necessarily connected with auspicious bhavas in the form of cause and effect.
When does yoga begin? - The ātmā has been caught in the flow of birth and death
since time immemorial and has been engaged in various activities. Therefore, the
question arises that his activities have been considered as yoga. The answer to
this is given in the scriptures that as long as the ātmā is filled with
mithyātva, is like a warrior, is deluded and moving in the wrong direction, that
is, is corrupted from the āramma and the goal, then his activities are
praṇidhāna, aviśubha-bhāva: "Praṇidhānaṁ pravṛttiśca, tatha vignajayaśniyā.
Siddhiśna viniyogaśca, ete karmaśumāyāmaḥ. || 10 ||" "Etairashayogaiśtu, vinā
dharmāya na kriyā. Pratyuta pratyapāyāya, lobhamocriyā yathā || 16 ||"
-Yogalakṣaṇahādhiśikā. 1Yogasciṭṭavṛttinirōdhaḥ. —Pātajasaśūdha, Pāna 1, Sū. 1
"Mukhyatvaṁ cāntaraṅgatyāta, phalākṣepācca daśitam. Ca rame pudgalāvate, yata
etasma sambhavaḥ || 2 || Na sammārgaabhimukhyaṁ syā,-dāvarteṣu pareṣu tu.
Mithyātvaścannabuddhinā, diḍ 'mūḍhānāmivaṅginām || 3 || -Yogalakṣaṇavātrivikā,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhASa yA zubhabhAvapUrdhaka kI jAne vAlI kriyA hai  /  pAtaJjalayAna meM citta
ko vRttiyoM ke nirodha ko yoga + kahA hai  /  usakA bhI vahI matasaba hai,
arthAt aisA nirodha mokSa kA mukhya kAraNa hai, kyoMki usake sAtha kAraNa aura
kArya-rUpa se zubha bhAva kA avazya sambandha hotA hai| yoga kA Aramma kaba se
hotA hai? :-AtmA anAdi kAla se janma mRtyu-ke pravAha meM par3A hai aura usameM
nAnA prakAra ke vyApAroM ko karatA rahatA hai  /  isaliye yaha prazna paidA hotA
hai ki usake vyApArako kama se yoga svarUpa mAnA gayA  /  isakA uttara zAstra
meM yaha diyA gayA hai ki jaba taka AtmA mithyAtva se vyApta yuddhivAlA, ata
evaM vimUDha kI taraha ulTI dizA meM gati karane vAlA arthAt Arama lakSya se
bhraSTa ho, taba taka usakA vyApAra praNidhAna avi zubha-bhAva * : praNidhAnaM
pravRttizca, tathA vighnajayasniyA  /  siddhizna viniyogazca, ete karmazumAyAmAH
/  /  10  /  / " 'etairAzayayogaistu, vinA dharmAya na kriyA  /  pratyuta
pratyapAyAya, lobhamokriyA yathA  //  16 // " -yoglkssnnhaadhishikaa|
1yogazcittavRttinirodhaH  /  --pAtajasasUdha, pAna 1, sU0  /  1 "mukhyatvaM
cAntaraGgatyAta, phalAkSepAcca dazitam  /  ca rame pudgalAvate, yata etasma
saMbhavaH  //  2  //  na sammArgAbhimukhyaM syA,-dAvarteSu pareSu tu||
mithyAtvacchannabuddhInA, diD 'mUDhAnAmivAGginAm  //  3  //
-yogalakSaNavAtrivikA ,

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  47 * It cannot be called "yoga" because it is devoid of it. On
the contrary, when the darkness of *mithyatva* diminishes due to *timira* and
the soul starts to lose its delusion, and its movement becomes straight, i.e.,
towards *sammā*, only then can its activity be called "yoga" because it is
accompanied by auspicious emotions like *praṇidhāna* etc. In essence, the soul's
*anādi* worldly time is divided into two parts. One is called
*charmapudgalparāvarta* and the other is called *acharmapudgalparāvarta*.
*Charmapudgalparāvarta* is the last and very small part of the *anādi* worldly
time. *Acharmapudgalparāvarta* is its much larger part. Because remembering
*charmapudgalparāvarta*, the *anādi* worldly time, which is the magnitude of an
infinite time cycle, is called *acharmapudgalparāvarta*. When the soul's worldly
time is left with the magnitude of *charmapudgalparāvarta*, the veil of
*mithyatvamoh* starts to disappear from it. Therefore, its results become pure
and its actions also happen with pure emotions. Such actions further increase
emotional purity. Thus, due to the increasing emotional purity, the *dharma*
activity during the *charmapudgalparāvarta* time is called "yoga". The activity
during the *acharmapudgalparāvarta* time is neither done with auspicious
emotions nor is it the cause of auspicious emotions. Therefore, it is not called
"yoga" because it is traditionally not the cause of *mokṣa*. In *pāśa* darshan
also, the *nivṛtta* and *anivṛtta* nature of the *anādi* worldly time is like
this: * : "The last of the living beings, the *siddha*, is accepted by them.
From the earth, they have crossed over, one drop in the ocean." - 28 - - *Muṣya
Dveṣa Prādhānyadvātriśikā*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 47 * rahita hone ke kAraNa yoga nahIM kahA jA sakatA  /  isake viparIta jaba se
mithyAtva kara timira kama hone ke kAraNa AtmA ko bhrAnti miTane lagatI hai aura
usakI gati sIdhI arthAt sammA ke abhimukha ho jAtI hai, tabhI se usake vyApAra
ko praNidhAna Adi zubha- bhAva sahita hone ke kAraNa' yoga' saMjJA dI jA sakatI
hai| sArAMza yaha hai ki AtmA ke AnAdi sAMsArika kAla ke vo hisse ho jAte haiM
/  eka caramapudgalaparAvarta aura dUsarA acarama pudgalaparAvarta kahA jAtA hai
/  caramapudgalavarAvataM anAdi sAMsArika kAla kA AkhirI aura bahuta choTA aMza
haiM  /  agharabhapugalaparAvarta usakA bahuta bar3A bhAga hai| kyoMki
caramapudgalaparAvarta ko yAda karake anAdi sAMsArika kAla, jo anantakAlacakra
parimANa hai, vaha saba acaramapudgalaparAvarta kahalAtA hai| AtmA kA sAMsArika
kAla jaba caramapudgalaparAvarta - parimANa bAkI rahatA hai, tatha usake Upara
se mithyAtvamoha kA AvaraNa haTane lagatA hai  /  ata eva usake pariNAma nirmala
hone lagate haiM aura kriyA mI nirmala bhAvapUrvaka hotI hai| aisI kriyA se
bhAva-zuddhi aura bhI bar3hatI hai| isa prakAra uttarottara bhAvazuddhi baDhate
jAne ke kAraNa caramapudgalaparAvartakAlIna dharma vyApArako yoga kahA hai  /
acaramapudgala parAvataM kAlIna vyApAra na to zubhabhAvapUrvaka hotA hai aura na
zubha- mAva kA kAraNa ho hotA hai| isaliye va paramparA se mI mokSa ke na hone
ke sababa se yoga nahIM kahA jaataa| pAsa jaladarzana meM bhI anavi sAMsArika
kAla ke nivRtAdhikAra prakRti aura anivRttivikAra prakRti isa * : 'caramAvatino
jantoH siddherAsammatA bhavam  /  bhUmaso'bhI vyatikrAntAsteSveko bindurambudhau
//  28  //  " - muSya dveSa prAdhAnyadvAtrizikA

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- 48 - Two types of distinctions have been explained, which are synonymous with
the ultimate and non-ultimate * pudgala-paravarta of Jain scriptures. The types
of yoga and their basis. _In Jain scriptures, there are five types of yoga: (1)
Adhyatma, (2) Bhavana, (3) Dhyana, (4) Samata, and (5) Vritti-kṣaya. In the
Patanjali Darshan, there are two types of yoga: (1) Samprajñāta and (2)
Asamprajñāta. The one that is the direct cause of liberation, i.e., the one
after attaining which liberation happens immediately, is truly called yoga. Such
yoga, according to Jain scriptures, is Vritti-kṣaya and according to Patanjali
Darshan, it is Asamprajñāta. Therefore, the question arises: what is the basis
of the many types of yoga that are described? The answer is that although
Vritti-kṣaya or Asamprajñāta is the direct cause of liberation and is truly
yoga, it is not attained by a developing soul right from the beginning. Instead,
before that, it has to perform many internal religious activities according to
the development process, which enhance the development progressively and
ultimately lead to that true yoga. All those religious activities are caused by
yoga, i.e., Vritti-kṣaya or Asamprajñāta * "Yojanādyoga ityukto, mokṣeṇa
nimittaḥ saḥ | Sa nivṛtta-adhikāri, prakṛto laśato dhruvaḥ || 14 ||" -
Apunarbaddha-tridikā. + "Adhyātma bhāvanā dhyānaṁ, samatā vritti-kṣayaḥ || Yogaḥ
pañca-vidhaḥ prokto, mogamārga-viśāgdaiḥ || 1 ||" —Yogabhedadvātriśikā. See,
Pāda 1, Sutra 10 and 18.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - 48 - prakAra do bheda batalAye haiM, jo zAstra ke carama aura acarama-
pudgalaparAvarta ke jaina samAnArthaka * haiN| yoga ke bheva aura unakA
AdhAra._jainazAstra meM + (1) adhyAtma, (2) bhAvanA, (3) dhyAna, 14) samatA aura
{5) vRttiyakSaya, aise pAMca meva yoga ke kiye haiM  /  pAtajanadarzana meM yoga
ke (1) samprajJAta aura (2) asamprajJAta, aise do meva hai|  /  jo mokSa kA
sAkSAt-asmAhita kAraNa ho arthAt jisake prApta hone ke bAda tura hI mokSa ho,
vahI yadhArtha meM yoga kahA jA sakatA hai| aisA yoga janazAstra ke
saMketAnusAra vRttisaMkSaya aura pAta jalavarzana ke saMketAnusAra asamprajAta
hI hai  /  ata eva yaha prazna hotA hai ki yoga ke jo itane bheda kiye jAte
haiM, unakA AdhAra kyA hai? isakA uttara yaha hai ki alabattA vRtisaMkSaya kiMvA
asamprajJAta ho mokSa kA sAkSAt kAraNa hone se vAstava meM yoga haiN| tathApi
vaha yoga kisI bikAsagAmI AtmA ko pahale hI pahala prApta nahIM hotA, kintu
isake pahale vikAsa-krama ke anusAra aise aneka Antarika dharmavyApAra karane
par3ate haiM, jo uttarottara cikAsa ko bar3hAne vAle aura anta meM usa vAstavika
yoga taka pahuMcAne vAle hote haiM  /  ve saba dharmavyApAra yoga ke kAraNa hone
se arthAt vRnisaMkSaya yA asamprajJAta * ''yojanAdyoga ityukto, mokSeNa nimatta:
maH  /  sa nivRttAdhikAriyAM, prakRto lazato dhruvaH  /  /  14  /  / " -
apunarbandhaddhA tridiAkA  /  + "adhyAtma bhAvanA dhyAnaM, samatA vRttisaMkSayaH
/  /  yogaH paJcavidhaH prokto, mogamArgavizAgdaiH  /  /  1  /  /
--yogabhedadvAtrizikA  /  I dakhiye, pAda 1, mutra 10 aura 18  /

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
— Actions are called Yoga because they are directly or indirectly caused by
Yoga. In essence, the basis of the fruits of Yoga is the process of development.
If development were not gradual but achieved completely in one go, the fruits of
Yoga would not be considered. Therefore, Vṛtti-saṁkṣaya, which is the direct
cause of liberation, should be considered the primary Yoga. Those actions that
are counted in the category of Yoga are called Yoga because they are caused by
the primary Yoga. The totality of all these actions is called Samprajñāta in the
Pātañjala-darśana and in Jain scriptures, it is divided into four categories,
namely Ādhyātma, etc., according to the intensity of purification. When actions
that are directly or indirectly caused by Vṛtti-saṁkṣaya are called Yoga, the
question arises as to when these actions should be taken. But the answer has
already been given that the actions performed from the Dharmapura-lapravṛtta-
kāla onwards should be counted in the category of Yoga. The reason for this is
that when conducive causes are available, all those actions become conducive to
liberation, i.e., Dharma-vyāpāra. On the other hand, no matter how many
conducive causes are available, actions performed during the Acarmapudgala-
lapravṛtta-kāla are not conducive to liberation.  **Means and Stages of Yoga:**
In the Pātañjala-darśana, (1) Abhyāsa and (2) Vairāgya are the means of Yoga
that are mentioned. In it, Vairāgya is also said to be of two types, namely Apar
and Para. Considering Vairāgya as Yoga because it is the cause of Yoga, in Jain
scriptures, Apar-vairāgya is called Atavika Dharma-saṁnyāsa and Para-vairāgya is
called Ta...  * See, Pāda-sūtra, 12, 14 and 16.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 -- yoga ke sAkSAt kiMvA paramparA se hetu hone se yoga kahe jAte haiM  /
sArAMza yaha hai ki yoga ke mevoM kA AdhAra vikAsa kA krama hai  /  afa vikAsa
kramika na hokara eka hI bAra pUrNatayA prApta ho jAtA to yoga ke meva nahIM
kiye jAte  /  ata eva vRtisaMkSaya jo mokSa kara sAkSAt kAraNa hai, usako
pradhAna yoga samajhanA cAhiye usake jo vyApAra yogakoTi meM gine jAte haiM, ye
pradhAna yoga ke kAraNa hone se yoga kahe jAte haiM  /  ina saba vyApAroM kI
samaSTi ko pAtajaladarzana meM samprajJAta kahA hai aura janazAstra meM zuddhi
ke tara-tama bhAvAnusAra isa samaSTi ke adhyAtma Adi cAra va kiye haiN|
vRttisaMkSaya ke prati sAkSAt kiMvA paramparA se kAraNa hone vAle vyApAroM ko
jaba yoga kahA gayA, taba yaha prazna caivA hotA hai ki ye pUrvabhAvI vyApAra
kaba se lene cAhiye  /  kintu isakA uttara pahale hI diyA gayA hai ki
dharamapura laparAvartakAla se jo vyApAra kiye jAte haiM, ve hI yogakoTi meM
gine jAne cAhiye  /  isakA sababa yaha hai ki sahakArI nimitta milate ho, ve
saba vyApAra mokSa ke anukUla arthAt dharma vyApAra ho jAte haiM  /  isake
viparIta kitane hI sahakArI kAraNa kyoM na mileM, para acaramapudaglaparAvalaM -
kAlIna vyApAra mokSa ke anukUla nahIM hote  /  yoga ke upAya aura guNasthAnoM
meM yogAvatAra: pAtaJjala varzana meM (1) abhyAsa aura ( 2 ) vairAgya, ye vo
upAya yoga ke batalAye hue haiN| usameM vairAgya bhI para apara rUpa se do
prakAra kA kahA gayA hai *  /  yoga kA kAraNa hone se vairAgya ko yoga mAnakara
jainazAstra meM apara-rAgya ko atAvika dharmasanyAsa aura paravarAjya ko tA J -
* dekhiye, pAda sUtra, 12, 14 aura 16  /

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- 50 - The term "Swik Dharma-Sannyasa Yoga" is used. In the science of human
beings, the beginning of Yoga is considered to be "Purva Seva". From "Purva
Seva" comes "Adhyatma", from "Adhyatma" comes "Bhavana", from "Bhavana" comes
"Dhyana" and "Samata", from "Dhyana" and "Samata" comes "Vritti-Sakshama" and
from "Vritti-Sakshama" and "Vritti-Sankshaya" comes "Moksha". Therefore,
"Vritti-Sankshaya" is the main Yoga and all the religious activities from "Purva
Seva" to "Samata" are considered as "Upaya" or means. "Ashtava", who is eager to
abandon "Mithyatva" and is facing "Samyak-Darshan", has "Purva Seva" in a
"Tattvik" form and "Sakathandhak", "Sindhak" etc. have "Purva Seva" in an
"Atattvik" form. "Adhyatma" and "Bhavana" are "Apunarvasyak" and "Samyam-Ashti"
is "Tattvik" in "Vyavahar-Nay" and "Desha-Vriti" and "Sarva-Virati" are
"Tattvik" in "Nischya-Nay". In the "Gunasthanas" of "Aparamatta", "Sarva-Virati"
etc., "Dhyana" and "Samata" are "Sattvik" in nature after "Japtar". "Vritti-
Sankshaya" is... * "The first characteristic of Dharma-Sannyasa is the arising
of the vision of the defects of the objects. The second characteristic of Swik
Dharma-Sannyasa is the arising of indifference towards the objects due to the
contemplation of the truth, which is preceded by the first characteristic.
"Vairagya" is where even the Dharma that reduces the "Kshaya" is destroyed and
the "Kshayika" arises. This is our principle." - Shri Yashvijayji-Krit
Patanjali-Darshan-Vritti, Pad 10, Sutra 16. +"Purva Seva is the Yoga, the
worship of the Guru and the Devata. Good conduct, austerity, liberation, and
hatred are said to be the four." - 1 - "Purva Seva is the "Darani-Shika". * "In
this, the previous ones are considered as "Upaya", only "Manas" remains. The
"Gunasthanas" after "Tap" are considered as "Upaya" - this is the position." -
31 "Yoga-Bheda-Hani-Dhika".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - 50 - svika dharmasaMnyAsayoga kahA " hai  /  jana-zAstra meM yoga kA
prArambha pUrvasevA se mAnA gayA hai| pUrva sevA se adhyAtma, adhyAtma se
bhAvanA, bhAvanA se dhyAna sapA samatA, dhyAna tathA samatA se vRttisakSama
bhaura vRttisaMkSaya se mokSa prApta hotA hai  /  isaliye vRttisaMkSaya hI
mukhya yoga hai aura pUrva sevA se lekara samatA paryanta sabhI dharma-vyApAra
sarakSAt kiMvA pasara 23 yoga : upAyamA  /  aSTAvA , jo mithyAtva ko tyAgane ke
liye tatpara aura samyakrava-prApti ke abhimukha hotA hai, usako pUrvasevA
tAyika rUpa se hotI hai aura sakatandhaka, sindhaka Adi ko pUrvasevA atAttvika
hotI hai  /  adhyAtma aura bhAvanA apunarvasyaka tathA samyamhaSTi ko
vyavahAranaya se tAtvika aura deza-viti tathA sarva-virati ko nizcayanaya se
tArivaka hote haiN| apramatta, sarvavirati Adi guNasthAnoM meM dhyAna tathA
samatA japtarottara sAtvikarUpa se hote haiM  /  vRttisaMkSaya tera
*viSayadoSadarzanajanitamApAt dharmasaMnyAsalakSaNaM prathamam. sa tattvacintayA
viSayaudAsInyena janitaM dvitIyApUrvakaraNabhAvitAsvikadharmasaMnyAsalakSaNaM
dvitIyaM vairAgya, yatra kSAyopazAmikA dharmA api kSIyante kSAyikAzcotpadyanta
ityasmAkaM siddhAntaH  // " - zrIyazovijayajI-kRta pAtaJjala-darzanavRtti, pAda
10, sUtra 16  / .. +"pUrSa sevA tu yogasya, gurudevAvipUjanam  /  sadAcArastapo
muktya, dveSazceti prakIrtitAH  // 1 // " -pUrva sevaadrnishikaa|
*''upAyatve'tra pUrveSA, mansya evAvaziSyate  /  tappazcaguNasthAnA, dupAyo giti
sthitiH  // 31 // " yogbhedhaanidhikaa|

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
We are in the **Guṇasthāna** of **Aurhavē** (the 13th **Guṇasthāna**).
**Samprājñāta Yoga** is of four types, from **adhyātma** to **dhyāna**, and
**Asamprājñāta Yoga** is in the form of **prīti saṃkṣaya**. Therefore,
**Samprājñāta Yoga** should be present from the 6th to the 12th **Guṇasthāna**,
and **Asamprājñāta Yoga** should be present in the 13th and 14th **Guṇasthāna**.
*"Like the moon in the bright fortnight, the **Guṇasthāna** is said to be
increasing. It is the destroyer of **bhavas** (births), the destroyer of
**upaṇas** (attachments), and the destroyer of **bandha** (bondage). || 1 || The
**Guṇasthāna** mentioned earlier is the **Guṇasthāna** of **Aurhavē**. The
**Guṇasthāna** of **Aurhavē** is the path to the **Guṇasthāna** of **Aurhavē**.
|| 2 ||"*  **Apunarbhandhaka** (the 32nd **Guṇasthāna**). *"This
**Apunarbhandhaka** is **tāttvika** (real) in practice, **adhyātma** (spiritual)
in contemplation, and **niścaya** (certainty) in the next **Guṇasthāna**. || 14
|| **Sadāvartana** (the 1st **Guṇasthāna**) and others are **tāttvika** (real)
as mentioned. **Pratyāpāya** (the 2nd **Guṇasthāna**) is mainly **tāttvika**
(real), and so are **veṣa** (appearance) and others. || 15 || **Śuddha** (pure)
in relation to **rāga** (attachment), **cāritra** (conduct) and others are
**tāttvika** (real). **Dhyāna** (meditation) and other **yogas** are
**tāttvika** (real) in the **Guṇasthāna** of **Aurhavē**. || 16 ||"*  - **Yoga
Viveka** (the 32nd **Guṇasthāna**). *"**Samprājñāta Yoga** descends, **dhyāna**
(meditation) is different in reality. **Tāttvika** (real) **samāpatti**
(absorption) is without **ātma** (soul) **bhāvyatā** (becoming). || 15 ||
**Asamprājñāta Yoga** is called **vṛtti saṃkṣaya** (cessation of mental
activities). **Sarvatobhadrā** (the 10th **Guṇasthāna**) is the **karaṇa**
(cause) of **niyama** (control) and **pāpa** (sin) **gochara** (realm). || 21
||"*  - **Yoga Avātāra** (the 32nd **Guṇasthāna**).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hameM aura aurahaveM guNasthAna meM hotA hai  /  samprajJAtayoga adhyAtmase
lekara dhyAna paryanta ke cAroM mehasvarUpa hai aura asamprabhAtayoga
pRtisaMkSayarUpa hai| isaliye chauthe se bArahaveM guNasthAna taka meM
samprazAtayoga aura terahaveM -dhaurahaveM guNasthAna meM asampratiyoga samAnA
cAhie  /  *"zuklapakSenduvatprAyo, vardhamAnaguNaH smRtaH  /
bhavAbhinandidopANA, mapunarbandhako vyaye  //  1 //  asyaiva pUrvasevoktA,
musthA'nyasyopacArataH  /  asyAvasthAntara mArga, patitAbhimukho punaH  /  /  2
/  / " apunarbandhakadvAtrizikA  /  "apunarbandhakasyAyaM, vyavahAreNa tAttvika:
adhyAtmabhAvanArUpo, nizcayenottarasya tu  // 14 /  /  sadAvartanAdInA,
matAttvika udAhRtaH  /  pratyapAyaphalaprAya, stathA veSAdimAtrataH  // 15 //
zuddha rapekSA yathAyoga, cAritravatta eva ca  /  hanta dhyAnAdiko yoga,
stAttvikaH pravijRmbhate  // 16 // " -yogavivekadvAtrikSikA  /
saMprazAto'vatarati, dhyAnabhede'tra tattvata:  /  tAttvikI ca samApatti, tmino
bhAvyatAM vinA  // 15 //  asamprajJAta nAmA tu, saMmato vRttisaMkSayaH  //
sarvatobhmAdakaraNa,-niyamaH pApagocaraH  // 21 // " -yogaavtaardvaanishikaa|

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Explanation of Terms like 'Purvaseva' etc.:  [1] Worship of the Guru, Dev,
and other worthy beings, good conduct, austerity, and aversion to liberation,
this is called 'Purvaseva'. [2] Thoughtful contemplation of the essence of
scriptures according to the teachings, with a feeling of devotion, while
practicing Anuvrat and Mahavrata as appropriate, this is 'Adhyatma'. [3]
Increasingly intellectual practice of Adhyatma is 'Bhavana'. [4] Focused, subtle
understanding of a single subject, free from distractions, this is 'Dhyana'. [5]
Dispassionately recognizing the nature of desirable and undesirable things,
which are imagined by the mind, i.e., abandoning the feeling of 'mine' and 'not
mine' and adopting indifference, this is 'Samata'. [6] Complete eradication of
the tendencies arising from the union of mind and body, which are in the form of
fluctuations and actions, this is 'Vrittisankshaya'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 -- 52 * - pUrvasevA Adi zabdoM kI vyAkhyA: [1] guru deva Adi pUjyavarga kA
pUjana, sadAcAra, tapa aura mukti ke prati dveSa, yaha 'pUrvasevA' kahalAtI hai|
[2] ucita pravRtirUpa aNuvrata mahAvrata thukta hokara maMtrI Adi bhAvanApUrvaka
jo zAstra - nusAra tatva-cintana karanA, vaha 'adhyAtma ' * hai  /  [3] adhyAtma
kA buddhisaMgata adhikAdhika abhyAsa ho bhAvanA'  /  hai  /  [4] abhya viSaya ke
saMcAra se rahita jo kisI eka viSaya kA dhArAvAhI prazasta sUkSmabodha ho, vaha
'dhyAna [5] avidhA se kalpita jo iSTaaniSTa vastueM haiM, unameM vivekapUrvaka
tastha-buddhi karanA arthAt iSTasva-aniSTasva kI bhAvanA chor3akara upekSA
dhAraNa karamA 'samatA' + hai  /  [6] mana aura zarIra ke saMyoga se utpanna
hone vAlI vikalparUpa tathA ceSTArUpa vRttiyoM kA nirmUla nAza karanA
'vRttisaMkSaya' X hai  /  *"aucityAndrattayuktasya vacanAttasvacintanam |
mAdibhAva saMyukta madhyAtmaM tadvido viduH  //  2  // " -- yogabhedadvAtriMzikA
| abhyAsa vRddhimAnasya, bhAvanA buddhisaMgataH  /
nivRttirazubhAbhyAsAdbhAvavRzci tatphalam  //  e  // " - yogabhedAtrizikA |
upayoge vijAtIya, pratyayAvyavadhAnabhAk  /  zukapratyayo dhyAnaM,
sUkSmAbhogasamanvitam  //  117" - yogabhedadvAtriMzikA | + "vyavahArakuSTayoce
riSTAniSTeSu vastuSu  /  kalpiteSu vivekena, tatsvadhIH samatocyate ga2zA"
yogabhedadvAtrizikA | X"vikalya spandarUpANAM vRttInAmanyajanmanAm  /
apunarbhAvato roSaH procyate vRttisaMkSayaH ||24|| + - yogabhedAtrizikA |

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- 53 Shri Yashovijayji Upadhyay, in his commentary on Patanjali Sutras, has
given a more detailed explanation of the term "Vrittisankshaya" than the one
mentioned. In it, he has explained "Buti" as the reduction of the ability to
experience the karmic combination, which starts from the first and ends in the
fourteenth Gunasthan. This reduction is called "Vrittisankshaya". He has
included "Samprajnat" in the first twelve "Medas" and "Asamprajnat" in the last
two "Medas" before "Shukladhyan". Yogic Powers: - Patanjali Darshan describes
many powers related to knowledge, mental strength, verbal strength, and physical
strength that arise from Yoga. In Jain scriptures, "Vaikalyabuddhi",
"Aharakalabdhi", "Avadhigyan", "Manahparyaya", "Gyana", etc. are described as
Siddhis, which are the fruits of Yoga. * Su. 15, 34. In Buddhist philosophy,
too, there are stages of existence like Samsara, Moksha, etc. Therefore, it is
natural for it to describe the gradual spiritual development. Buddhist texts
describe the state of being inclined towards one's true nature to the state of
attaining the ultimate perfection of one's true nature, which is Su. Pe. Su. Pe.
6. 2, 22. " * "Dvividho'tmayam adhyatma
bhavanadhyanasamatavrittisankshayabhedena panchadhoktasya yogasya
panchamabhedavatarati" etc., See, the third Vibhutipada. 1 See, Aavashyak
Niyukti, Ga. 66 and 70. + See, Pro. Si. Vi. -Pada 1, Su. 18 | Rajavade - Edited
Majjhimanikaya: Pe. Su. Pe. 4, 48. 10

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - 53 upAdhyAya zrIyazovijayajI ne apanI pataJjalasUtra vRti meM vRttisaMzaya
zabda kI ukta vyAkhyA kI apekSA adhika vistRta vyAkhNa kI hai usameM buti kA
arthAt karmasaMyoga ko yogyatA kA saMbhaya - hrAsa, jo prathama se zurU hokara
caudahaveM guNasthAna meM samApta hotA hai, usI ko vRtisaMkSaya kahA hai aura
zulkadhyAna ke pahale vo medoM meM samprajJAta kA tathA antima do mevoM meM
asamprajJAta kA samAveza kiyA hai  /  yogajanya vibhUtiyA~: - yoga se honevAlI
jJAma, manovala vacanabala, zarIrabala Avi samvandhinI aneka vibhUtiyoM kA
varNana pAtaJjala darzana meM hai| jaina, zAstra meM vaikiyala bdhi,
AhArakalabdhi, avadhijJAna manaHparyAya, jJAna Adi siddhiyA~ varNita haiM, so
yoga kA hI phana hai  /  * sU0 15, 34. bauddhadarzana meM bhI AzmA ko saMsAra,
mokSa Adi avasthAeM mAnI huI hai  /  isaliye usameM AdhyAtmika kramika vikAsa kA
varNana honA svAbhAvika haiM  /  svarUponmukha hone kI sthiti se lekara svarUpa
kI parAkASThA prApta kara lene taka kI sthiti kA varNana bauddha pranthoM meM
hai, jo sU0 pe0 sU0 pe0 6. 2, 22. " *
dviviSo'tmayamadhyAtmabhAvanAdhyAnasamatAvRttisaMkSayabhedena paJcadhoktasya
yogasya paJcamabhede'vatarati" ityAdi, dekhiye, tIsarA vibhUtipAda  /  1
dekhiye, Avazyaka niyukti, gA0 66 aura 70  /  + dekhiye, pro0 si0 vi0 -pAda 1,
sU0 18 | rAjavAr3e - sampAdita majjhimanikAya: pe0 su0 pe0 4, 48. 10

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The path is divided into five stages. Their names are: (1) Dharmanusari, (2)
Sotapanna, (3) Sakadagami, (4) Anagami, and (5) Arhat. (1) Of these,
'Dharmanusari' or 'Shraddhanusari' is called one who is facing the path of
Nirvana, i.e., the path of liberation, but has not attained it. This is called
'Marganusari' in Jain scriptures and its thirty-five qualities are described.
(2) Due to the gradual development of the Marmas who have attained the path of
liberation, there are stages like Sotapanna etc. The Marma who is Avinipata
Dharma, Nimit and Sambhosiprayan is called 'Sotapanna'. The Sotapanna soul
attains liberation in the seventh birth. (3) 'Sakadagami' is called one who is
going to attain liberation after taking birth in this world only once. (4) One
who is born in this world and goes directly to liberation from the Brahma world
is called 'Anagami'. (5) One who destroys all the karmas and becomes
accomplished is called 'Arhat'.  The description of the above mentioned stages
of Dharmanusari etc. is very clearly given in the Manikya Manikaya. It is
described that just as a calf, a little bigger but confused calf, an adult calf,
a strong bull fit for plowing, and a full-grown bull cross the oblique flow of
the Ganges river with increasing effort, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAya vibhAgoM meM vibhAjita hai| inake nAma isa prakAra haiM:-(1) dharmAnusArI,
( 2 ) sotApala ( 3 ) sakavaragAmI. ( 4 ) anAgAmI aura ( 5 ) arahA  /  ( 1 )
inameM se 'dharmAnusAro' yA 'zraddhAnusArI' baha kahalAtA hai, jo nirvANamArga
ke arthAt mokSamArga ke abhimukha ho, para use prApta na huA ho  /  isI ko
jamazAstra meM 'mArgAnusArauM' kahA hai aura usake paitIsa guNa batalAye haiN|
(2) mokSamArga ko prApta kiye hue mAramAoM ke vikAsa kI pUnASikatA ke kAraNa
sotApasa Adi dhAra vibhAga haiM  /  jo mAramA avinipAtadharmA nimata aura
samboSiparAyaNa ho, usako 'sItApana' kahate haiM  /  sotApana AtmA sAtaveM janma
meM avazya nirzaNa pAtA hai| (3) 'sakavAgAmI' use kahate haiM, jo eka hI zara
isa loka meM amma grahaNa karake mokSa jAnevAlA ho  /  (4) jo isa loka meM janma
grahaNa ma karake brahma loka se sIdhe ho mokSa nAmevAlA ho, vaha 'anAgAmI'
kahalAtA hai  /  (5) jo sampUrNa yAtravoM kA kSaya karake kRtakArya ho jAtA hai|
use 'tharahA'  /  kahate haiN| dharmAnusArI Adi ukta poSa avasthAoM kA varNana
manijhamanikAya meM bahuta spaSTa kiyA huA hai  /  usameM varNana kiyA hai ki
tatkAsAta vatsa, kucha bar3A kintu bhula vatsa, praur3ha bassa, hala meM jotane
lAyaka balavAn baila aura pUrNa vRSabha jisa prakAra usarottara aspa-arUpa zrama
se gaGgA nadI ke tirache pravAha ko pAra kara lete haiM, . .. * dekhiye,
zrIhemacandrAcArya-kRta yogazAstra, prakAza 1  /  + dekhiye, pro. rAjavAr3e
saMpAdita marAThIbhASAntarita dIgha nikAya, pa0 176 TippanI  /  + dekhiye, pR0
156  /

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
55 - — In the same way, those who follow the Dharma, the aforementioned five
types of Asma can also conquer the bag of Mara-Kama with progressively less
effort. - Bha Ten restraints-bonds are described in the Buddhist scriptures. Of
these, five are called 'Orabhagaya' and five 'Udbhagaya'. The first is the
destruction of the Soma restraints, but it remains. After that, with the
weakening of raga, dvesha and moha, the Sakda-Gadhi state is attained. When the
five Orabhagaya restraints are destroyed, the Aupapatik Anaavrittidharma or
Anaagami state is attained, and when all ten restraints are destroyed, Arhathood
is attained. This description is similar to the description of the destruction
of karma-natures in Jainsastra. The consideration of the aforementioned four
states of Sotapanna, etc., is similar to the consideration of the Gunasthanas
from the fourth to the fourteenth, or in other words, the aforementioned four
states are merely a summary of the fourth, etc., Gunasthanas. Just as there is a
description of Labdhikas in Jainsastra, so also in Maushasastra there is a
description of Siddhis, which are called 'Abhita' and are six in number, of
which five are Lokik and one is Aloka. In Yogadarshana, the spiritual
development of Yogavibhuti is described. Such Aloka are called: * (1)
Sakkaryadi, (2) Vichikiccha, (3) Silabbat Paramas, (4) Kamarag, (5) Pati, (6)
Ruparaga (7) Arupraga (8) Mana, (9) Udhanta and (10) Avijja. Marathi translation
of Digha Nikaya, p. 175 footnote. + See - Marathi translation of Dogha Nikaya p.
156.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 55 - -- vaise hI dharmAnusArI Adi ukta pA~ca prakAra ke AsmA bhI mAra - kAma ke
baiga ko uttarotara alpa zrama se jIta sakate haiM  /  - bhA bauddha vastra meM
dasa saMyojanAe~- bandhana vaNita haiN| inameM se pA~ca 'oraMbhAgIya' aura pA~ca
'udbhAgIya' kahI jAtI haiN| pahalI soma saMyojanAoM kA kSaya ho para sonA hotI
hai  /  isake bAda rAga, dveSa aura moha zithila hone se sakadA - gAdhI
avasthara prApta hotI hai| pAMca auraMbhAgIya saMyojanAoM kA nAza ho jAne para
aupapattika anAvRttidharmA kiMvA anAgAmIavasthA prApta hotI hai aura dasoM
saMghojanAoM kA nAza ho jAne para arahA para milatA hai  /  yaha varNana
jaMnazAstra-gata karma- prakRtiyoM ke kSaya ke varNana jaisA hai  /  sotApanna
Adi ukta cAra avasthAoM kA vicAra cauthe se lekara caudahaveM taka ke
guNasthAnoM ke vicAroM se milatA-julatA hai athavA yoM kahiye ki ukta cAra
avasthAeM caturtha Adi guNasthAnoM kA saMkSepa mAtra haiM  /  jaise jaMna zAstra
meM labdhikA tathA varNana hai, se hI maukha zAstra meM bhI siddhiyoM kA varNana
hai, jinako usane 'abhitA' jAeM chaha haiM, jinameM pA~ca laukika aura gayI hai
/  yogadarzana meM yogavibhUti kA mAdhyAtmika vikAsa kAlona karate haiM  /  aisI
amieka lokottara kahI * ( 1 ) sakakAryAdidiu, (2) vicikicchA, ( 3 ) sI labbata
parAmAsa, ( 4 ) kAmarAga, (5) paTI, (6) rUparAga ( 7 ) arUparAga ( ) mAna, (e)
uddhantra aura (10) avijjA  /  marAThIbhASAntarita dIghanikAya, pR0 175 TippaNI
/  + dekhiye - marAThI bhASAntarita doghanikAya pU0 156  /

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In Buddhist scriptures, the characteristics of a Bodhisattva are described,
while in Jain scriptures, the characteristics of a Samyak-Ashtika are outlined.
The one who has attained Samyak-Ashtika, even if engaged in worldly activities
like household rituals and ceremonies, remains unaffected, like a foot placed on
hot iron, trembling or experiencing pain. Similarly, in Buddhist scriptures, a
Bodhisattva is described as being affected only by the body (Kaya-Pati) and not
by the mind (Chitta) when involved in worldly activities. They are not affected
by the mind (Chitta-Pati).  - Thus. * "Kama-Pati are these Bodhisattvas, as
declared. Their mind, even in the case of Devadatta, is wise." (1271) - "And
thus, the characteristics of a Bodhisattva, as described earlier, are also
applicable here when considered carefully. (10) If their conduct is like that of
a foot placed on hot iron, (11) then they are considered to be affected by the
body (Kaya-Pati) and not by the mind (Chitta-Pati)." - Yoga-Bindu. - Samyak-
Ashtika.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bauddha zAstra meM bodhisatva kA jo lakSaNa * hai, vahIM jaima-zAstra ke
anusAra samyahaSTikA lakSaNa haiM  /  jo sampAdi hotA hai. vaha yadi gRhastha ke
Arambha samArambhA Adi kAryoM meM pravRtta hotA hai, to bhI usakI vRtti
taptalohapavanyAsavat arthAt garama lohe para rakkhe jAne vAle paira ke samAna
sakampa yA pApa-mIda hotI hai| boddha-zAstra meM meM bhI bodhisattva kA vaisA hI
svarUpa mAnakara use kAyapAtI arthAt zarIra mAtra se [[citta se nahIM] sAMsArika
pravRti meM par3ane vAlA kahA hai  /  vaha cilla pAtI nahIM hotA  /  - iti  /  *
"kAmapAtita eveha bodhisattvAH paroditam  /  citastAva devadatrApi yuktimat 1271
//  J r "evaM ca yatparaM ruktaM bodhisatvasya lakSaNam  /  vicAryamANaM
sannItvA tadapyatropapadyate  //  10  //  taptalohapadanyAsa - tulyAvRttiH
kacidyadi  /  J ityukteH kAyAtyeva citapAtI na sa smRtaH  //  11  //  -
yogabindu  /  - samyagvaSTAzinA  /

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Namah Shri Vitragaya. Shri Veveendrasūri-viracit 'Shaḍśītik' nāmak cauthā
karmagrantha. Mangal aur viṣaya. Namiy Jiṇam Jilam-aggaṇ, Guṇṭhāṇukh Ogajoga-
lesāo. Bandha-ppabahu-bhāve, Sankhijjāi Kim-avi Buccham. || 1 || Natvā Jinam
Jīvamāgam-aṇāguṇasthān-upayoga-yogale śyāḥ. Bandhālpa-bahutvabhāvān saṅkhyādīn
kim-api vakṣye. || 1 || Artha - Śrījinēśvara Bhagavān ko namaskār karake
jīvasthān, mārgṇā-sthān, guṇasthān, upayoga, yoga, leśyā, bandha, alpa-bahutva,
bhāva aur saṅkhyā ādi viṣayōn ko main saṅkṣepa se kahūṅgā. || 1 || Bhāvartha -
Is gāthā meṁ caudah viṣaya saṅgrīta haiṁ, jinakā vicār anek rīti se is
karmagrantha meṁ kiyā huā hai. Inmeṁ se jīvasthān ādi das viṣayōn kā kathana to
gāthā meṁ spaṣṭ hī kiyā gayā hai. Aur udaya, udīraṇā, sattā aur bandha-hetu, ye
cār viṣaya 'vandha' śabda se sūcita kiye gaye haiṁ.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrIvItarAgAya namaH  /  zrIvevendrasUriviracita 'SaDazItika' nAmaka cauthA
karmagrantha  /  maMgala aura viSaya  /  namiya jiNaM jilamaggaNa, guNaThANukha
ogajogalesAo  /  baMdhappabahubhAve, saMkhijjAI kimavi bucchaM  //  1  //  natvA
jinaM jIvamAgaMNAguNasthAnopayogayogale zyA:  /  bandhAlpabahutvabhAvAn
saMkhyAdIn kimapi vakSye  //  1  //  artha - zrIjinezvara bhagavAn ko namaskAra
karake jIvasthAna, mArgaNAsthAna, guNasthAna, upayoga, yoga, lezyA, bandha,
alpabahutva, bhAva aura saMkhyA Adi viSayoM ko meM saMkSepa se kahU~gA  /  /  1
/  /  bhAvArtha - isa gAthA meM caudaha viSaya saMgRhIta haiM, jinakA vicAra
aneka rIti se isa karmagrantha meM kiyA huA hai| inameM se jIvasthAna Adi dasa
viSayoM kA kathana to gAthA meM spaSTa hI kiyA gayA hai. aura udaya, udIraNA,
sattA aura bandhahetu, ye cAra viSaya 'vandha' zabda se sUcita kiye gaye haiM  /

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This other has three divisions: (1) Jivaasthan, (2) Marganaasthan and (3)
Gunasyan. The first division considers eight topics related to Jivaasthan.
Namely: (1) Gunasthan, (2) Yoga, (3) Upayoga, (4) Leshya, (5) Bandha, (6) Ujya,
(7) Uchorana and (8) Satya. The second division discusses six topics on
Marganaasthan: (1) Jivaasthan, (2) Gunasthan, (3) Yoga, (4) Upayoga, (5) Leshya
and (6) Alpavasva. The third division describes twelve topics related to
Gunasthan: (1) Jivasyal, (2) Yoga, (3) Upayoga, (4) Lenya, (5) Banvahe, (6)
Andha, (7) Ubaya, (8) Uvirana, (9) Satya, (10) Alpamatva, (11) Bhava and (12)
Sankhyat etc. Sankhya.  1. The collection-verses of these topics are: "Namiy
Jinam Vatsancha, Chaudasjilthanaye Su Gunana. Joguvango Lesa, Bandhudaodirana
Satya. || 1 || Saha Mula Chaupamanggana, -Thanesu Basatti Uttaraesu Cha.
Jiaguṇajoguvavoga, Lesanbahuṁ Cha Chalaṇa. || 2 || Chaudasguṇesu Jiayo,
Guvogalesa Pa Banghheū Ya. Banshraich Appa, Bahu Cha To Bhavasanlai. || 3 ||"
These verses are in the Srijiva Vijayaji-krit and Sri Jayasomasuri-krit Tave. In
their place, the following three verses are also in the ancient Chaturtha
Karmaanya Harimdri Tika, Sri Devendra Suri-krit Svopagna Tika and Sri
Jayasomasuri-krit Tave: "Udasajiya Thanesu, Chaudasgunathanagani Joga Ya.
Upayogale Sabandhudu, Odiranasant Apae. || 1 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 isa anya ke tIna vibhAga hai:-(1) jovasthAna, (2) mAgaNAsthAna aura (3)
guNasyAna  /  pahale vibhAga meM jIvasthAna ko lekara ATha viSaya kA vicAra kiyA
gayA hai| yathA:-(1) guNasthAna, (2) yoga, (3) upayoga, (4) lezyA, (5) bandha,
(6) ujya, (7) ucoraNA aura (6) sattA  /  dUsare vibhAga meM mArgaNAsthAna para
chaha viSayoM kI vivecanA kI gaI hai:(1) jIvasthAna, (2) guNasthAna, (3) yoga,
[4) upayoga, (5) lezyA aura (6) alpavasva  /  tIsare dimAga meM guNasthAna ko
lekara bAraha viSayoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai:(1) jIvasyAla, (2) yoga, (3)
upayoga, (4) leNyA, (5) banavahe. (6) andha, (7) ubaya, (8) uvIraNA, (6 /
sattA, (10) alpamahatva, (11) bhAva aura (12) saMkhyAta Adi saMkhyA  /  1.. ina
viSayoM kI saMgraha-gAdhAyeM ye haiM: "namiya jiNaM vatsancA, caudasajilaThANae
su guNANA  /  joguvAMgo lesA, baMdhudaodIraNA sattA | //  1  //  saha mUla
caupamaggaNa,-ThANesu bAsaTTi uttaresu ca  /  jiaguNajoguvaogA, lesaNabahuM ca
chaLANA  /  /  2  /  /  caudasaguNesu jiajo, guvogalesA pa baMghaheU ya  /
baMzrAica appA, bahu ca to bhAvasaMlAI  /  /  3  /  / " ye gAthAyeM
zrIjIvavijayajI-kRta aura zrIjayasomasUri-kRta Tave meM haiN| inake sthAna meM
pAThAntarabAlI nimnalikhita tIna gAthAyeM prAcIna caturtha karmaanya hArimadrI
TIkA, zrIdevendra sUrikRta svopajJa TIkA aura zrIjayasomasUrikRpta Tabe meM bhI
haiM: "udasajiyaThANesu, caudasaguNaThANagANi jogA ya  /  upayogale sabaMdhuda,
odIraNasaMta apae  /  /  1  /  /

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Explanation of Jiva-sthana and other topics | (1) The subtle types
(differences) of Jivas, such as Bahir etc., are called 'Jiva-sthana'. The 'Jiva'
is that which holds the Dravya and Bhava Pranas. The five senses, three Valas,
breathing and lifespan, these ten are Prathama-Pranas, because they are large
and Karma-abhyas. Knowledge, perception etc. are Paryayas, which are the
functions of the Jiva's organs, these are Bhava-Pranas. This explanation of the
Jiva is with respect to the Samsari state, because the Jiva-sthana includes only
Samsari Jivas. Therefore, it does not apply to liberated Jivas.  ##  (2) In the
fourteen Gunasthana, the original purity is in the first. The Jiva's qualities
are combined, and there are many types of bondage.   ## (3) In the fourteen
Gunasthana, the Jiva's qualities are combined, and there are many types of
bondage. The bondage is due to the arising of the Uddirana, and there are ten
types of bondage.  ## (1) - In the Digambara literature, the term 'Jiva-samasa'
is also used in the sense of Jiva-sthana. Its explanation is as follows:  ##
(70) Those by which many Jivas and their many species are known, are called
'Jiva-samasa'.  ## (71) And so, in the case of Badar, Paryapt and each pair,
when the Aviruddha Karma (such as Aviruddha Sthavar from the subtle) arises, the
Jati Karma arises, and the state that occurs in common Jivas is called 'Jiva-
samasa'.  ## Jiva-kanda |  The similarity between the past and present of a
single object, even though it has many states over time, is called 'Urdhva-
samanya'. The opposite of this, the similarity between many objects at the same
time, is called 'Tiryak-samanya'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 -- jIvasthAna Adi viSayoM kI vyAkhyA | (1) jIvoM ke sUkSma bAyara Adi prakAroM
(bhedoM) ko 'jIvasthAna', kahate haiN| dravya aura bhAva prANoM ko jo dhAraNa
karatA hai, vaha 'jIva' hai  /  pA~ca indriyA~ tIna vala, zvAsocchavAsa aura
Ayu, ye dasa prathapaprANa haiM, kyoMki ve bar3a aura karma- jabhya haiN| jJAna,
darzana Adi paryAya jo jIva ke gurgoM ke hI kArya haiM, ve bhAvaprANa haiN| jIva
kI yaha vyAyA saMsArI vasthA ko lekara kI gaI hai, kyoMki jIvasthAnoM meM
saMsArI jIvoM kA hI samAveza hai| ata eva vaha mukta jIvoM meM laggU nahIM par3a
caudasaggaNaThaNe, mUlapaesa bisaddhi iyaresu  /  jiyaguNajogubaogA, lesappabahu
va chaThANA  //  2  //  caudasaguNa ThANesu, jimajoguvaogalesabaMdhA ya  /
baMdhudayudIraNAoM, saMtappabahu ca dasa ThANA  //  3 11' 1- - jIvasthAna ke
artha meM 'jIbasamAsa' zabda kA prayoga bhI digambarIya - sAhitya meM milatA
hai| isakI vyAkhyA usameM isa prakAra hai: - 'jehi ayA jIvA, gajjate bahuvihA vi
tajjAdI  /  te puNa saMgahidatthA, jIvasamAsA tti viSNeyA  // 70 //  tasaca
dujugANamajjhe, 'aviruddhehi jubajAdikammudaye  /  jIvasamAsA hoMti hu,
tababhavasAricchasAmaNNA  //  71  //  " jIvakANDa | jina dharmoM ke dvArA aneka
jIva tathA unakI aneka jAtiyoM kA boSa hotA hai, ve 'jIvasamAsa' kahalAte haiM
// 70 //  tathA sa, bAdara, paryApta aura pratyeka yugala meM se aviruddha
nAmakarma (jaise-sUkSma se aviruddha sthAvara) ke udatha se yukta jAti nAmakarma
kA udaya hone para jo katA sAmAnya jIvoM meM hotI hai, vaha 'jIvasamAsa'
kahalAtA hai  /  /  71  //  kAlakrama se aneka avasthAoM ke hone para bhI eka hI
vastu kA jo pUrvApara sAdRzya dekhA jAtA hai, vaha 'UrdhvatA sAmAnya hai  /
isase ulaTA eka samaya meM hI aneka vastuoM kI jo paraspara samAnatA dekhI jAtI
hai, vaha 'tiryaksAmAnya' hai  /  *

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
.- 4 - It is possible. In a liberated soul, the contemplation done with
certainty decreases. For example: the one who has the 'netana' quality is called
'Jiva' etc. (2) The places (subjects) of the retention of the qualities, yoga,
use etc. of 'margana' are called 'margana-sthana'. The various types of
'paryaya' of the Jiva, such as the sense organs, are such places, therefore they
are called 'margana-sthana'. (3) The different forms of the Jiva, which are
caused by the purity and impurity of the qualities like knowledge, conduct,
character etc., are called 'guna-sthana'. 1 "Tikkale cha pana, indiyabal
mauaanpana yo. Bavahara si jivo, nicchamanayado duvedana jassa ||3||" Dravya
Sangraha. 2 This is also stated in Gommatasar-Jivakanda: "Jah va jasu va jiva,
magijjate jaha taha dicha. Tao chodham jane, suyanane magani hoti. ||140||" The
'paryaya' through which or in which the contemplation of the Jivas is done
according to the omniscient, the vision, are 'margana-sthana'. _ In Gommatasar,
'vistara', 'adesh' and 'vishesh' are considered to be synonyms of 'margana-
sthana'.  Jina, Ga. 3. 3 Its explanation is given in Gommatasar-Jivakanda as
follows: "Jehi du lakkhijjate, udayadisus sambhavehim bhavahhim. Jaova te gunas
pranaa, nihittha sanad rasihi. |||" Darshanamohaniya tadha charitramohaniya ke
audayak adi jin bhavo (paryayo) bya dvara jiva ka bodh hota hai, ve bhav 'guna-
sthana' hai. In Gommatasar, 'sankshep', 'odh', 'samanya' and 'jivasamaas' are
synonyms of 'guna-sthana'.  -Ji. Ga. 3 and 10.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 .- 4 - sakatI  /  mukta jIva meM nizcaya haSTi se kI gaI dhyAkhyA ghaTatI hai|
jaise:jisameM netanA guNa hai, vaha 'jIva' ityAdi haiN| (2) mArgaNA ke arthAt
guNasyAna, yoga, upayoga Adi kI vidhAraNA ke sthAnoM ( viSayoM ) ko
'mArgaNAsthAna' kahate haiN| jIva ke gati indriya Adi aneka prakAra ke paryAya
hI aise sthAna haiM, isaliye ye mAgaMNAsthAna kahalAte haiN| (3) jJAna, varzana,
caritra Adi guNoM kI zuddhi tathA azuddhi ke taratama-bhAva se hone vAle jIva ke
bhinna bhinna svarUpoM ko guNasthAna' kahate haiN| 1"tikkAle ca pANA, iMdiyabala
mAuANapANo ya  /  bavahArA sI jIvoM, NicchamaNayado duvedaNA jassa ||3||"
drvysNgrh| 2isa bAta ko gommaTasAra-jIvakANDa meM bhI kahA hai: "jAha va jAsu va
jIvA, magijjate jahA tahA dichA  /  tAo codama jANe, suyaNANe mAgaNI hoti  /  /
140 // " jina padAryA ke dvArA athavA jina' paryAyoM meM jIyoM kI vicAraNA,
sarvajJa , dRSTi ke anusAra kI jAne, ve paryAya 'mArgaNAsthAna' hai| _
gommaTasAra meM vistAra' 'Adeza' aura 'vizeSa', ye tona dAbda mArgaNAsthAna ke
nAmAntara mAne gaye haiN| jInA, gA0 3  /  3isakI vyAkhyA gammiTasAra-jIvakANDa
meM isa prakAra hai: "jehi du lakkhijjate, udayAdisu saMbhavehiM bhAvahiM  /
jauvA te guNasa praNA, NihiTThA sanada rasIhi  /  /  / " darzanamohanIya tadhA
cAritramohanIya ke audAyaka Adi jina bhAvoM (paryAyoM ) ke dvArA jIva kA bodha
hotA hai, ve bhAva 'guNasthAna' hai| gommaTasAra meM saMkSepa', 'odha',
'sAmAnya' aura 'jIvasamAsa, ye cAra zabda guNasthAna ke samAnArthaka haiM  /
-jI0, gA0 3 tathA 10  /

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The states of *Jiva-sthana*, *Margana-sthana*, and *Guna-sthana* are all states
of the soul, but they differ in the following ways:  * *Jiva-sthana* is
associated with the *Jati-namakarma*, *Paryapta-namakarma*, and *Aparyapta-
namakarma*. * *Margana-sthana* is associated with the *namakarma*, *mohaniya*,
*jnanaavaraneya*, *darshanavaraneya*, and *bevanya-karma* in their *audhayika*
and *parinamik* forms. * *Guna-sthana* is associated only with the *mohaniya-
karma* in its *audhayika*, *kshayopashamic*, *opashamic*, and *kshayik* forms,
and with *yoga* in its *bhaava-abhaava* form.  (4) The activity of the *chetana-
shakti* in the form of *bodha* is called *upayoga*. It is the extraordinary
nature of the soul, through which the general and specific nature of an object
is known.  (5) The *yoga* is the movement (vibration) in the realms of the soul
caused by the *shriya-shakti* through the *mana*, *vachan*, or *kaya*.  (6) The
natural state of the soul is pure like a crystal. The different results that
occur due to the influence of specific *pudgalas* with different colors like
black, blue, etc., are called *leshya*.  (7) The relationship between the realms
of the soul and the *karma-pudgalas*, which is like that of milk and water, is
called *bandha*. It occurs due to reasons like *nat*, *mithyatva*, etc.  1. This
explanation is found in the *Gommatasar Jivakanda*. "The *upayoga* of the soul
is the *bhaava* that arises due to the *batthu-nimitta*. That is called
*gayashya*, *sayara*, *chaitrya*, and *naayara*." (671)  2. See Appendix 'K'.
3. "This result of the soul is due to the *krishnadi-syachivya*. It is called
*leshya*, just like the crystal."  + This is an ancient verse. It was taken by
Shriharibhadrasuri as a proof in the *Aavashyak Tika* on page 6.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jIvasthAna, mArgaNAsthAna aura guNasthAna, ye saba jIva ko avasthAyeM haiM, to
bhI inameM antara yaha hai ki jIvasthAna, jAti-nAmakarma, paryApta nAmakarma
aura aparyApta nAmakarma ke zrIyika sAtha hai; mArgaNAsthAna, nAma, mohanIya,
jJAnAvaraNIya, darzanAvaraNIya aura bevanIyakarma ke audAyika Adi bhAvarupa
tathA pAriNAmika bhAvarUpa haiM aura guNasthAna, sirpha mohanIya karma ke
audadhika, kSAyopazamika oNpazamika aura kSAyika bhAvarUpa tathA yoga ke
bhAvAbhAvarUpa haiM | (4) cetanA-zakti kA bodharUpa vyApAra, jo jIva kA
asAdhAraNa svarUpa hai aura jisake dvArA vastu kA sAmAnya tathA vizeSa svarUpa
jAnA jAtA hai, use 'upayoga" kahate haiM  /  (5) mana, vacana yA kAya ke dvArA
honevAlA zrIyaM zakti kA parispanva -AtmA ke pradezoM meM halacala (kampana ) -
'yoga' hai  /  (6) AtmA kA sahajarUpa sphaTika ke samAna nirmala hai  /  usake
bhinna bhinna pariNAma jo kRSNa, nIla Adi aneka raMgavAle pudgalavizeSa ke asara
se hote haiM, unheM 'lezyA' kahate haiM"  /  (7) mAmA ke pradezoM ke sAtha
karma-pugaloM kA jo dUdha-pAnI ke samAna sambandha hotA hai, vahI 'bandha'
kahalAtA hai  /  naTa, midhyAtva Adi hetuoM se hotA hai| 1- gommaTasAra
jIvakANDa meM yahI vyAkhyA hai  /  "batthu nimittaM bhAvo Avo jIvassa jo hu
ubajogo  /  so buviho gAyaSyo sAyAro caitra NAyAro  // 671  /  /  " 2 - dekhiye,
pariziSTa 'ka' 3. kRSNAdisya sAcivyAtpariNAmo'yamAtmanaH  /  sphaTikasyeva
tatrayaM lezyAzabdaH pravartate  //  " + yaha eka prAcIna zloka hai| jise
zrIharibhadrasUri ne Avazyaka TIkA pRSTha 6 * para pramANa rUpa se liyA haiM  /

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(8) The experience of the fruition of bound karma-valikas is called "udaya".
Sometimes it happens when the language period is complete, and sometimes it
happens before the fixed unhindered period is complete, due to "apna" and
"karan". (9) The act of pulling out karma-dalikas that have not yet reached
their udayakala, from their current state and placing them in the upalika, by
special effort, is called "udirana". (10) The karma-pudgal, which has been
transformed into a particular karma-rupa due to "bandhan" or "san-kram-an"
karana, remains in that form without undergoing transformation due to "nirjara"
or "san-kram", is called "sarat". 1 - The period until a bound karma comes into
udaya is called "aba-dha-kala". 2 - The reduction of the previous bound state
and rasa, mis-virya-shakti of karma, is called "apna-karan". 3 - The particular
virya by which karma is bound is called "bandhan-karan". 4 - The particular
virya by which one karma transforms into another karma of the same type is
called "san-kram-an-karan". 5 - The separation of karma-pudgalas from the atma-
pradeshas is called "nirjara". 6 - The change of the nature, state, anubhaga and
pradesha of a karma-rupa into another karma-rupa of the same type is called
"san-kram". 7 - These are the characteristics of bandha, udaya, udirana and
satta, in order, as described in the ancient fourth karma-grantha commentary:
"Jiva-st-pung-gal-an-va-jug-gan-pat-par-am-ame-evam - Michch (i-he-u-vishi-ya,
ja-gha-d-na-ish-ya-so-bandho || 30 || Kar-an-en-sa-ha-ve-gam-ni-i-va-cha-e-te-
si-mu-rat-tan-am. Jam-be-van-am-vi-va-ga-en-so-u-ud-ao-bi-na-mi-hi-o. || 31 ||"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 --er (8) baMdhe hue pharma- valikoM kA vipAkAnubhava ( phalodaya ) "udaya"
kahalAtA hai| kabhI to bhASAkAla pUrNa hone para hotA hai aura kabhI niyata
abAdhAkAla pUrNa hone ke pahale hI apanA' ANi karaNa se hotA hai  /  (e) jima
karma- dalikoM kA udayakAla na AyA ho unheM prayatnavizeSa se khIMcakara
damkAlIna sthiti se haTAkara upalikA meM barakhila karanA 'udIraNA' kahalAtI
hai| (10) bandhana' yA saMkramaNa' karaNa se jo karma- pudgala, jisa
karmarUpameM pariNata huye hoM, unakA, nirjarA" yA saMkrama' se rUpAntara na
hokara usa svapa meM banA rahanA 'sarata hai  /  1 - baMdhA huA karma jitane
kAla taka udaya meM nahIM AtA, vaha 'abAdhAkAla' hai  /  2 - karma ke pUrva
vaddha sthiti aura rasa, misa vIrya-zakti se ghaTa jAte haiM, use apanAkaraNa
kahate haiM  /  3- jisa vIyaM vizeSa se karma kA banca hotA hai, vaha
'bandhanakaraNa' kaha lAtA hai  /  4- jisa vIrya vizeSa se eka karma kA anya
sajAtIya karmarUpa meM saMkrama hotA hai, vaha 'saMkramaNakaraNa' hai  /  5
karmapudgaloM kA Atma-pradezoM se alaga honA 'nirjarA' hai  /  6 - eka karma
rUpa meM sthita prakRti, sthiti, anubhAga aura pradeza kA anya sajAtIya
karmarUpa meM badala jAnA 'saMkrama' hai  /  7- bandha, udaya, udIraNA aura
sattA ke ye hI lakSaNa yathAkrama se prAcIna caturtha karmagranma ke bhASya meM
isa prakAra hai. "jIvasta puNgalANa va juggANa patparaM ameevaM - miccha ( iheu
viziyA, jA ghaDaNA izya so baMdho  //  30  //  karaNeNa sahAvegama Niivacae
tesimurattANaM  /  jaM bevaNaM vivAgena sou udao biNAmihio  /  /  31  /  /

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(11) The karmic pudgala, which is fit for karma due to the false, non-Jain, and
Vaibhashika results, becomes transformed into the form of karma. These results
are called 'bandhahetu'. (12) The mutual increase or decrease in the nature of
substances is called 'alpbahutva'. (13) The natural or inherent state of the
jiva and ajeeva is called 'bhaava'. (14) Sankhyat, asankhyat, and anant are the
three technical terms.  **The order of the topics**  The first topic is the
Jiva-sthana because it is the most important. All other topics, such as the
Margana-sthana, are considered in relation to the Jiva. The next topic is the
Margana-sthana, which means that the practical or ultimate nature of the Jiva
can be understood through some kind of motion or other Paryaya (through the
Margana-sthana). After the Margana-sthana, the Guna-sthana is introduced, which
means that the Jivas who are in the Margana-sthana are also present in some
Guna-sthana.  " Karma is born from the special cause of the world, Which is the
strongest in its rise, entering and becoming. || 32 ||  Bondage is the lotus-
like base, the self is imperishable. Liberation is the lotus, the possibility is
the essence. || 33 ||  1- The karmic results of the soul are 'Vaibhavik
results', such as anger, etc. 2- See further in verse 51-52. 3- See further in
verse 73 onwards.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (11) midhyAtva avi jina vaibhASika pariNAmoM se karma-yogya pudgala, karma-rUpa
meM pariNata ho jAte haiM, una pariNAmoM ko 'bandhahetu' kahate haiM  /  (12)
padArthoM ke paraspara nyUnAdhika bhAva ko 'alpabahutva' kahate haiM  /  (13)
jIva aura ajIva kI svAbhAvika yA vaibhAvika avasthAko 'bhAva' kahate haiN| (14)
saMkhyAta, asaMkhyAta aura ananta, ye tInoM pAribhASika saMjJAyeM haiM  /
viSayoM ke krama kA abhiprAya sabase pahale jIvasthAna kA niveza isaliye kiyA
hai ki yaha sabameM mukhya hai, kyoMki mArgaNAsthAna Adi anya saba viSayoM kA
vicAra jIva ko lekara hI kiyA jAtA hai| isake bAda mArgaNAsthAna ke nirdeza
karane kA matalaba yaha hai ki jIva ke vyavahArika yA paramAfue svarUpa kA boSa
kisI-na-kisI gati Adi paryAya ke ( mArgaNAsthAna ke dvArA ho kiyA jA sakatA hai|
mArgazAsthAna ke pazcAt guNasthAna ke niveza karane kA matalaba yaha hai ki jo
jIva mArgeNAsthAnavartI haiM, ve kisI-na-kisI guNasthAna meM vartamAna hote hI
haiN| kammANaM jAe, karaNaviseseNa vizvacayabhAve  /  jaM udayA baliyAe pavesaNa
mudIraNA aiha  /  /  32  /  /  " baMdhaNa saMkamala - tala haka massa svaaviNAso
| nijJjaraNa saMkamehi, sambhAvo jo tha sA sattA  //  33  //  1- AtmA ke
karmodaya-janya pariNAma' vaibhAvika pariNAma' haiM jaise krodha Adi 2 dekhiye,
Age gAyA 51-52  /  3- dekhiye Age gA0 73 se Age  /

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The instruction of "Upayoga" after "Gunasthan" implies that "Gunasthan" is
possible only in those who are "Upayoga-van" (capable of using). It is not
possible in "Akasha" (sky) etc. which are not "Upayoga-shugya" (capable of being
used). The statement of "Yoga" after "Upayoga" means that without "Upayoga"
(using), one cannot "Karma-grahan" (acquire karma). For example: "Siddh"
(liberated soul). The statement of "Leshya" after "Yoga" is made with the
intention that even in the "Karma-pubgala" (karma particles) acquired through
"Yoga", the formation of "Sthitibandh" (state bondage) and "Anubhagbandh"
(experience bondage) is due to "Leshya" only. The instruction of "Bandh" after
"Leshya" means that those beings who are "Leshya-sahit" (possessing Leshya) can
"Karma-bandh" (bind karma). By stating "Alpamatva" (minor importance) after
"Bandh", the author means that those beings who "Bandh" (bind karma), while
present in "Marganasthan" (path of liberation) etc., are bound to be
"Nyunaadhik" (lesser or greater) among themselves. The statement of "Bhav"
(feeling) after "Alpamatva" means that those beings who are "Alpamatva-vale"
(possessing minor importance) are found to have "Aupashmik Pradhi" (temporary
dominance) of some feeling or the other. The statement of "Sanspat" (contact)
etc. after "Bhav" implies that the "Alpamatva" (minor importance) that exists
between beings who have "Bhav" (feeling) can only be described through "Sanspat"
(contact), "Apsyat" (attraction), and "Aavi" (number).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guNasthAna ke bAda upayoga ke nirdeza kA tAtparya yaha hai ki jo upayogavAna
haiM, unhIM meM guNasthAnoM kA sambhava haiN| upayoga-zUgya AkAzA Adi meM nahIM
/  upayoga ke anantara yoga ke kathana kA Azaya yaha hai ki upayoga vAle binA
yoga ke karma-grahaNa nahIM kara sakate  /  jaise:- siddha  /  yoga ke pIche
lezyA kA kathana isa abhiprAya se kiyA hai ki yogadvArA grahaNa kiye gaye karma-
pubagaloM meM bhI sthitibandha va anubhAgabandha kA nirmANa lezyA hI se hotA
hai| lezyA ke pazcAt bandha ke nirdeza kA matalaba yaha hai ki jo jIva lezyA-
sAhita haiM, ve ho karma bAMSa sakate haiM  /  bandha ke bAva alpabahatva kA
kathana karane se grandhakAra kA tAtparya yaha hai ki bandha karane vAle jIva,
mArgaNasthAna Adi meM vartamAna hote hue Apasa meM avazya nyUnAdhika huA karate
haiM  /  alpamahatva ke anantara bhAva ke kahane kA matalaba yaha hai ki jo jIva
alpabahatva vAle haiM, unameM aupazamika prAdhi kisI-na-kisI bhAva kA honA pAyA
ho jAtA hai  /  bhAva ke bAda saMspAta Adi ke kahane kA tAtparya yaha hai ki
bhAvavAle jIvoM kA eka dUsare se jo alpabahatva hai, usakA varNana saMsthAta,
apsyAta Avi saMkhyA ke dvArA hI kiyA jA sakatA hai|

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma Granth Part Four (1)-Jiva Sthana-Dhikar. Jiva Sthana.  Iha
Suhamantraryaregi, Dibitichuoasanisnidhidhi.  Apjatta Pajjata, Kameṇ ca Das
Jiyaṭṭhāna. ||2|| Is Sukshmavādaraikeṇdriyadi Trichaturasanśipāñcendriyāḥ.
Apattiā; Pataḥ, Kramaṇ Chaturdaś Jiva Sthānāni. ||2|| Artha- In this world,
there are seven types of beings: Sukshma Ekendriya, Bādar Ekendriya, Triendriya,
Chaturindriya, Asanśipāñcendriya, and Sañjñipāñcendriya.  These seven types are
further divided into two categories: Pāryāpta (sufficient) and Apāryāpta
(insufficient).  Therefore, the total number of Jiva Sthānas (categories) is
fourteen. ||2|| Bhāvartha- Here, fourteen Jiva Sthānas are described, which are
related to the worldly state of the Jiva.  Although all Jivas share the common
characteristic of Jivatva (being a living being), they are infinite in number
from an individual perspective.  Their karmic states are also infinite.
Therefore, it is not easy for an individual to gain knowledge about them.
Hence, the special scholars have categorized them into fourteen groups based on
their Sukshma Ekendriya nature and their birth.  All worldly Jivas are included
in these fourteen groups. Sukshma Ekendriya Jivas are those who have the
emergence of Sukshma Nāmakarma.  Such Jivas are present throughout the universe.
Their bodies are so subtle that... 1- This Gāthā is exactly the same as in the
ancient fourth Karma Granth.  2- These categories are mentioned in Panasangrah
Dwār 2, Mā. 82.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma grantha bhAga cAra (1)-jiivsthaan-dhikaar| jIvasthAna  /  iha
suhamantrAyaregi, dibiticauasaMnisanidhidI  /  apajattA pajjatA, kameNa ca dasa
jiyaTThANA  // 2 //  isa sUkSmavAdaraikendriyadi tricaturasaMzipaJcendriyAH  /
apattiA; patAH , kramaNa caturdaza jIvasthAnAni  //  2  //  artha- isa loka meM
sUkSma ekendriya, bAdara ephendriya,ndriya, zrIndriya, caturarindriya, asaM
zipaJcendriya aura saMjJipaJcendriya, ye sAtoM bheda paryApta aparyAptarUpa se
do do prakAra ke haiM. isaliye jodha ke kula sthAna ( bheda ) cauvaha hote haiM
//  2  //  bhAvArtha- yahAM para jIva ke caudaha meva vikhAye hai, so saMsArI
avasthA ko lekara  /  jIvatvarUpa sAmAnya dharma ko apekSA se samAnatA hone para
bhI vyakti kI apekSA se jIva ananta haiN| inakI karma-janya avasthAyeM bhI
ananta haiN| isase vyaktizaH jJAna-sampAvana karanA chAstha ke liye sahaja
nhiiN| isaliye vizeSadarzI zAstrakAroM ne sUkSma aikenviyitva Avi jAti kI apekSA
se inake cauvaha varga kiye haiM, jinameM sabhI saMsArI jIvoM kA samAveza ho
jAtA hai  /  sUkSma ekendriya jIva ke haiM, jinheM sUkSma nAmakarma kA udaya ho
/  aise jIva sampUrNa loka meM vyApta haiN| : naphA zarIra itanA sUkSma hotA 1-
yahI gAthA prAcIna caturtha varmagrandha meM jyoM kI tyoM hai  /  2ye bheda,
panasaMgraha dvAra 2, mA0 82 meM haiN|

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma Grantha Part Four  It is said that even if these are innumerable, they
cannot be seen: therefore, they are said to be unfit for practical use.  The
Ekaindriyas (one-sensed beings) are the Badar (gross) ones, on whom the
Badarnamakarma (karma of grossness) has arisen. These beings do not even exist
in some parts of the world; such as, in the substances like glass, silver, etc.
Although the Prithvikayika (earth-bodied) and other Badar Ekaindriyas are such
that their separate bodies cannot be seen with the eyes, yet their physical
transformation is so gross that they appear in an aggregated form. This is why
they are said to be fit for practical use. The sense organs of the subtle or
gross Samana Ekaindriyas are only the skin. Such beings are only the stationary
Prithvikayika and other five types.  The Dvindriya (two-sensed) beings are those
who have the skin and tongue as their sense organs; such as, the conch, shell,
worm, etc.  The Trindriya (three-sensed) beings have the skin, tongue, and nose
as their three sense organs; such as, the lice, etc.  The Caturindriya (four-
sensed) beings have the above-mentioned three and the eye as their four sense
organs. Bees, scorpions, etc. are counted among the Caturindriya.  The
Pancendriya (five-sensed) beings have, in addition to the above four senses, the
sense of touch also. Humans, animals, birds, etc. are the Pancendriya. The
Pancendriya are of two types - (1) Asamjni and (2) Samjni. The Asamjni are those
who do not have consciousness, and the Samjni are those who have consciousness.
Here, consciousness means the mental faculty by which the nature of an object
can be comprehended.  From the Ekaindriyas to the Pancendriya, all types of
beings are only the Sthavara (stationary) and Trasa (mobile) ones.  1. See
Appendix 'M'. 2. See Appendix 'G'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra hai ki yadi ye saMkhyAtIta ikaTTe hoM taba bhI inheM
bhI dekha nahIM sakatI: ata ela inako vyavahAra ke ayogya kahA hai| bAvara
ekendriya jIva ke haiM, jinako bAbara nAmakarma kA udaya ho| ye jIva, loka ke
kisI kisI bhAga meM nahIM bhI hote; jaise, avisasone, cAMdI Adi vastuoM meM  /
yadyapi pRthivI-kAdhika Adi vAvara ekendriya jIva aise haiM, jinake alaga alaga
zarIra, AMkhoM se nahIM cIkhate; tathApi imakA zArIrika pariNamana aisA kAbara
hotA hai ki jisase ve samuvAyarUpa meM vikhAI dete haiM  /  isI se inheM
vyavahAra-yogya phahA hai  /  sUkSma yA bAdara. samo ekendriyoM ke indriya,
kevala svacA hotI hai  /  aise jIva, pRthivIkAyika Adi pAMca prakAra ke sthAvara
hI haiN| tonidraya the haiM, jinake svacA, jIbha, ye vo indriyA~ hoM; aise jIva
zakha, sIpa, kRmi Adi haiN| zrInniyoM ke sthamA, jIbha, nAsikA, ye tIna indriyAM
hai| aise jIva , khaTamala Adi haiN| caturastiyoM ke ukta tIna aura AMkha, ye
ghAra indriyA~ haiM  /  bhaure, bicchU ASi kI ginatI paturintriyoM meM  /  /
paJcendhiyoM ko ukta cAra indriyoM ke atirikta kAma bhI hotA hai| manuSya, pazu,
pakSI Adi paJcendriya haiM  /  paJcenniya vo prakAra ke haiM - (1) asaMkSI aura
12) sNjii| asaMzI ve hai, jinheM saMjJA na ho  /  saMkSI ve hai, jinheM saMjJA
ho| isa jagaha saMjJA kA matalama usa mAnasa zakti se hai, jisase kisI pavArtha
ke svabhASa kA pUrvApara vicAra ma manusammAna kiyA jA sake  /  hIndriya se
lekara paJcapriya paryanta saba taraha ke jona bhAvara tathA basa ( calane-
phirane vAle ) hI hote haiN| 1 dekhiye, pariziSTama'  /  . ...  /  2- dekhiye|
pariziSTa 'ga'. . . . . :! .

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  There are two types of beings: (a) **Aparāpta**
(inadequate) and (b) **Parāpta** (adequate). (a) **Aparāpta** are those who
experience the **Aparāpta Nāmakarma** (inadequate name-karma). (b) **Parāpta**
are those who experience the **Parāpta Nāmakarma** (adequate name-karma). ||2||
(1 - **Guṇasthāna** in **Jīvasthāna**.)  **Bāvara-ekendriya**, **Asanṇivi-
pañcendriya**, and **Vikalendriya** (inadequate) have the first and second
**Guṇasthāna**. **Sanṇivi-pañcendriya** (inadequate) can have the first, second,
and fourth **Guṇasthāna**. **Sanṇivi-pañcendriya** (adequate) can have all
**Guṇasthāna**. The remaining seven **Jīvasthāna** - **Aparāpta** and
**Parāpta** **Sūkṣma-ekendriya**, **Parāpta** **Bāhira-ekendriya**, **Parāpta**
**Asanṇi-pañcendriya**, and **Parāpta** **Vikalendriya** - have only the first
**Guṇasthāna**. ||3||  **Meaning:** **Bāvara-ekendriya**, **Asanṇivi-
pañcendriya**, and the three **Vikalendriya** - these five **Aparāpta**
**Jīvasthāna** have two **Guṇasthāna**. However, it is important to understand
that the second **Guṇasthāna** occurs in **Karaṇa-Aparāpta** (inadequate in
terms of action), not in **Aparāpta** (inadequate in general). This is because a
being with **Sāsthāvana-samyagdṛṣṭi** (perfect vision) is not born as
**Aparāpta**. Therefore, **Karaṇa**...  (1 - See, **Pariśiṣṭa**...)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra ekendriya se lekara paJcendriya paryanta ukta saba
prakAra ke lo aparyApta', paryApta isa taraha vo do prakAra ke hote haiM  /
(ka) aparyApta de haiM, jinheM aparyApta nAmakarma kA udaya ho  /  (kha)
paryApta ve haiM, jinako paryApta nAmakarma kA udaya ho ||2|| ( 1 - jIvasthAnoM
meM guNasthAna  /  2 11 bAyaraasaMnivigale, ajji padamaviya saMni apaattaM  /
ajayajua saMni pajje, savvaguNA miccha sesesu || 3 ||
bAdarAsaMjJivikale'pparyApta prathamAdika saMjJityaparyApte | ayutaM saMjJini
paryApte, sarvaguNA midhyAtvaM dazeSeSu  //  3  //  artha - aparyApta vAvara
ekendriya, aparyApta asaMzipaJcendriya aura aparyApta vikalendriya meM pahalA
dUsarA dohI guNasthAna pAye jAte haiM  /  aparyApta saMzipacendriya meM pahalA,
dUsarA aura cauthA, ye tona guNasthAna ho sakate haiN| paryApta
saMjJipaJcendriya meM saba guNasthAnoM kA sambhava hai| zeSa sAta jIvasthAnoM
meM- aparyApta tathA paryApta sUkSma ekendriya, paryApta bAhara ekendriya,
paryApta asajJi paJcendriya aura paryApta vikaleniya zraya meM pahalA ho
guNasthAna hotA hai  //  3  //  bhAvArtha - bAvara ekendriya, asaMjJipaJcendriya
aura tIna vikaleviya, ina pAMca aparyApta jIvasthAnoM meM do guNasthAna kahe
gaye haiM; para isa viSaya meM yaha jAnanA cAhiye ki dUsarA guNasthAna karaNa-
aparyAptameM hotA hai, lakina aparyApta meM nahIM; kyoMki sAsthAvanasamyagdRSTi
vAlA jIva labdhi aparyAptarUpa se paidA hotA hI nahIM  /  isaliye karaNa , 1 -
dekhiye, pariziSTa va

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **Regarding the five states of existence, namely, the
insufficient *Bādar* one-sensed, etc., the first *guṇasthāna* should be
understood in the two *guṇasthāna*s of the insufficient *Bādar* one-sensed,
etc., and in the *āvi* and *poṣa*s.**  **The *guṇasthāna*s mentioned in the
*Bādar* one-sensed are not in all *Bādar* one-sensed, but only in the earth-
bodied, water-bodied, and plant-bodied. Because the fire-bodied and air-bodied
beings, even if they are *Bādar*, do not have the possibility of such a result
that a being with *sāsāvān* *samyak* can be born in them. Therefore, the first
*guṇasthāna* should be understood in the *Bāyar* fire-bodied and air-bodied,
similar to the subtle.**  **In this place, the statement of finding two
*guṇasthāna*s in the one-sensed is according to the opinion of the *karma*
*pratyakṣa*; because in the principle, the one-sensed is considered to have only
the first *guṇasthāna*.**  **Understanding**  **12**  **"The three *guṇasthāna*s
mentioned in the insufficient *saṁjñi* five-sensed are in this respect that when
a being dies with the fourth *guṇasthāna* and is born as a *saṁjñi* five-sensed,
then it is possible for him to have the fourth *guṇasthāna* in the insufficient
state. In this way, the being who, abandoning *samyak* and being present in the
*sāsāvān* state, is born as a *saṁjñi* five-sensed, has the possibility of the
second *guṇasthāna* until the body is fully sufficient, and all other *saṁjñi*
five-sensed beings have the first *guṇasthāna* in the insufficient state.**
**The three**  **I**  **-**  **1 - - See the commentary on the 43rd verse.**
**2 - In the *Gommatasāra*, the insufficiency is considered at the time of the
thirteenth *guṇasthāna* due to the incompleteness of *yoga* in the
*kevalasamudrāt* state, and also at the time of the sixteenth *guṇasthāna*, the
insufficiency is considered in the *āhārakamiśra* *kāyayoga* state until the
*āhārak* body is fully formed. Therefore, in the *Gommatasāra* (Jīna. Gā. 114 -
116), the *nityaparyāpta* and the *śvetāmbara* sect are famous**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra aparyApta bAdara ekendriya Adi ukta pAMca jIvasthAnoM
meM do guNasthAna aura lag-i aparyApta bAvara ekendriya Avi poSoM meM pahalA hI
guNasthAna samajhanA cAhiye  /  bAdara ekendriya meM vo guNasthAna kahe gaye
haiM so bhI saba bAvara eketriyoM meM nahIM kintu pRthivIkAyika, jalakAka aura
vanaspatikAyika meM kyoMki tejaHkAyika aura vAyukAyika jIva, cAhe ve bAdara hoM
para unameM aise pariNAma kA sambhava nahIM jisase sAsvAvanasamyakta yukta jIva
unameM paidA ho ske| isaliye sUkSma ke samAna bAyara teja- kAyika- bAdhukAyika
meM pahalA hI guNasthAna cAhiye  /  isa jagaha ekendriyoM meM dI guNasthAna pAye
jAne kA kathana hai, so karma prattha ke matAnusAra; kyoMki siddhAnta meM
ekendriyoM ko pahalA hI guNasthAna mAnA hai  /  samajhanA 12 " aparyApta saMjJi
paJcendriya meM tIna guNasthAna kahe gaye haiM, so isa apekSA se ki jaba koI
jIva catuthaM guNahayAna sahita mara kara saMjJipaJcendriyarUpa se paidA hotA
hai taba use aparyApta avasthA meM cauthe ' guNasthAna kA sambhava hai  /  isa
prakAra jo jIva samyaktvakA tyAga karatA huA sAsvAdana bhAva meM vartamAna
hokara saMjJipaJcendriyarUpa se paidA hotA hai, usameM zarIra paryApta pUrNa na
hone taka dUsare guNasthAma kara sambhava hai aura anya saba saMjJi paJcendriya
jIvoM ko aparyApta abasthA meM pahalA guNasthAna hotA hI hai  /  aparyApta
saMjJi paJcendriya meM tIna I - 1 - - dekhiye 43 vIM gAthA kI TippaNI  /  2 -
gommaTasAra meM terahaveM guNasthAna ke samaya kevalasamudrAta avasthA meM yoga
kI apUrNatA ke kAraNa aparyAptatA mAnI huI hai, tathA chare guNasthAna ke samaya
bhI AhArakamizra kAyayoga dazA meM AhAraka zarIra pUrNa na bana jAne taka apanA
mAnI huI hai| isaliye gommaTasAra jIna0 gA0 114 - 116 ) meM nityaparyApta aura
zvetAmbarasampradAya prasiddha

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter Four of the Kamnanth**  **Possible Explanation of the Gunasthanas in
the Context of Karana-Aparayapta**  It is not possible to explain the
Gunasthanas in the context of Labdhi-Aparayapta, because the necessary
qualifications are not present in the state of Labdhi-Aparayapta.  All
Gunasthanas are considered to be present in the state of Sanji-Panchendriya.
This is because a human being in the womb, who has the potential for all kinds
of auspicious and inauspicious, pure and impure results, can attain all four
Gunasthanas. They are Sanji-Panchendriya.  **Doubt:** It may be doubted that
there are only twelve Gunasthanas in Sanji-Panchendriya, and not the thirteenth
and fourteenth Gunasthanas. This is because the Sanji-svabhaava is absent during
these Gunasthanas. At that time, due to the presence of Kshayika-Jnana, there is
no Kshayopaashaamik-Jnanaatmaka-Sanjna, which is also called 'Bhaavaman'.
**Resolution:** The statement that the thirteenth and fourteenth Gunasthanas are
present in Sanji-Panchendriya is made in relation to Dravyaman, accepting the
presence of Sanji-svabhaava. However, in relation to Bhaavaman, there are only
twelve Gunasthanas in Sanji-Panchendriya.  **Karana-Aparayapta:** In Sanji-
Panchendriya, the first, second, fourth, sixth, and thirteenth Gunasthanas are
considered to be Karana-Aparayapta.  **Karmgranth:** The Karmgranth mentions
three Gunasthanas in Karana-Aparayapta Sanji-Panchendriya, considering the state
of Aparayapta at the time of birth.  **Gommatasar:** The Gommatasar mentions
five Gunasthanas, considering both the state of Aparayapta at the time of birth
and the state of Aparayapta at the time of attainment.  **Reconciliation:**
These two statements are not contradictory, as they are relative to each other.
**Labdhi-Aparayapta:** If we consider the Gunasthanas in Sanji-Panchendriya in
the context of Labdhi-Aparayapta, then the fifth Gunasthanas should also be
counted. This is because the state of Aparayapta is present in the fifth
Gunasthanas when the body is formed due to the attainment of Vikriya-Labdhi.
**Confirmation:** This point is clarified by the following verse from the
Saptaatikaani:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kamanantha bhAga cAra guNasthAnoM kA sambhava vikhAyA, so karaNa-aparyApta meM;
kyoMki labdhiaparyAta meM to gale meM vo mAna pI. yogyatA hI nahIM hotii|
paryApti saMji-paJcendriya meM saba guNasthAna mAne jAte haiM  /  isakA kAraNa
yaha hai ki garbhaja manaSya, jisameM saba prakAra ke zubhAzubha tathA
zuddhAzuddha pariNAmoM kI yogyatA hone se cauvahIM guNasthAna pAye jA sakate
haiM, ve saMkSipaJcetriya ho haiN| _ yaha zaGkA ho sakatI hai ki saMji-paJce
striya meM pannule bAraha guNasthAna hote haiM, para terahavA pauvAM , ye do
guNasthAna nahIM hote  /  kyoMki ina vo, guNasthAnoM ke samaya saMjisva kA
abhAva ho jAtA hai  /  usa samaya kSAyika jJAna hone ke kAraNa kSAyopazAmika
jJAnAtmaka saMjJA, jise 'bhAvamana' bhI kahate haiM, nahIM hotI  /  isa zaGkA kA
samAdhAna itanA hI hai ki saMjhi-paJnetriya meM terh|, caudahaveM guNasthAna kA
jo kathana hai so dravyamana ke sambandha se saMzitva kA vyavahAra aGgIkAra
karake; kyoMki bhAvamana ke sambandha se jo saMjI haiM, unameM bAraha ho
guNasthAna hote haiN| karaNa-aparyApta ) saMjJi-vendriya meM pahalA, dumarA,
cauthA, chaThA aura terahavA, ye pAMca guNasthAna kahe gae haiN| isa
karmagrantha' meM karaNa-apayApta saMjJi'pancendriya meM tIna guNasthAnoM kA
kathana hai, so utpattikAlIna aparyApta-avasthA ko lekara  /  gommaTasAra meM
pA~ca guNasyAno kA kathana hai, so utpattikAlIna, labdhikAlIna ubhaya apa.
ryApta avasthA ko lekara 1 isa taraha ye donoM kathana apekSAkRta hone se Apasa
meM viruddha nahIM hai| labdhikAlIna aparyApta-avasthA ko lekara saMjJI meM
guNasthAna kA vicAra karanA ho to pAMcavAM guNasbAna bhI ginanA cAhiye, kyoMki
uga guNasthAna meM va ikayalabdhi se vakriyazarIra raca jAne ke samaya
aparyApta-avasthA pAyI jAtI hai| 1-yahI bAta saptatikANi ke nimnalikhita pAya se
spaSTa hotI hai:

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagrantha Part Four The results of the remaining seven jiva-sthānas, which
are insufficient and sufficiently subtle, are so complex that in birth, there is
no time for any other guna-sthāna except mithyātva. ||3|| "Even in the case of
the kevali, there is dravyamāna. Therefore, they are called sanjī, but they are
not sanjī in relation to mano-jñāna." Even the kevali has dravyamāna. Therefore,
they are called sanjī, but they are not sanjī in relation to mano-jñāna. In the
kevali state, the use of sanjītvam in relation to dravyamāna is also accepted in
the Gommatasāra Jīvakāṇḍa. For example: "The speech of those who have manas is
considered to be like a bit of a fruit. This is because, in the earlier guna-
sthānas, speech is seen in those who have manas. ||227|| "The ango-angadaya-do,
the vasvam-apatta jini vacamhi. Maṇavaragaṇa khaṇṣāṇa, āgamana do maṇa jōgo.
||228|| Even though there is no manas in the saṁyogi-āvali guna-sthāna, it is
considered to be manas by way of upacāra because of the presence of speech. The
reason for this upacāra is that in the earlier guna-sthānas, speech is seen in
those who have manas. ||22|| Jinesvara also has the arrival of the skandhas of
mano-vagaṇā due to the rise of the ango-angadaya nāma-vaman for dravyamāna.
Therefore, he is called mano-yoga. ||22||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra aparyApta tathA paryApta sUkSma ekendriya Avi capayukta
zeSa sAta jovasthAnoM meM pariNAma aise saMkliSTa hote haiM ki jisase janameM
mithyAtva ke sivAya anya kisI guNasthAna kA sammaya nahIM hai  // 3 //
"maNakaraNa keliNo vi atyi, tena saMniNo bhannati, manovinnANaM pahucca se
saMniNo na bhavati ti  / " kevalI ko bhI dravyamana hotA hai. isase vai saMjI
kahe jAte haiM, parantu manojJAna kI apekSA se ve saMjJI nahIM hai  /  kevalI
avasthA meM dravyamAnake sambandha se saMjitva kA vyavahAra gommaTasAra
jIvakANDa meM bhI mAnA gayA hai  /  yathA - "maNasahiyANaM vayaNaM, biTu
tappuSyamidi samoganhi  /  utto maNokyAre, -Niviya NANeNa hoNamiha  /  / 227 /
/  aMgovaMgadayAdo, vasvamapaTTa jiNi vacaMmhi  /  maNavaragaNa khaMSANa,
AgamaNA do maNa jogo  // 228 /  /  saMyogIvAvalI guNasthAna meM mana na hone
para bhI bacana hone ke kAraNa upacAra se mana mAnA jAtA hai; upacAra kA kAraNa
yaha hai ki pahale guNasthAnoM meM manavAloM ko vacana dekhA jAtA hai  // 22 //
jinezvara ko bhI dravyamAna ke liye aGgopAGga nAmavamaM ke udaya se manovagaMNA
ke skandhoM kA Agamana huA karatA hai| isaliye unheM manoyoga kahA hai  // 22 //

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagrantha Part Four (2) - Yoga in the states of beings. [From the verses.]
Apattchashik Kamsura, Lamosajoga Apjjasanniisu. Te Savijayamees Prasa Tanu
Pajjesu Uralamanne || 4 || Apariaptashat ke Karmanoudarikami Vayogavatsanshipu.
To Sarva Kriyamishraaveshu Tanupariapteshu Oudarikamannye || 4 || 15. Meaning -
Aparyapt Sukhma Ekendriya, Aparyapt Badar Ekendriya, Aparyapt Vikasatrik and
Aparyapt Asanti Panchendriya, in these types of beings, Kamanka and
Oudarikamishra, these two are the yogas. In Aparyapt Sanjni-Pasriya, Kamanna,
Oudarikamishra and Vaikriyamishra, these three yogas are found. Other Acharyas
believe that the aforementioned seven types of Aparyapt beings, when they
complete their Sharirapariapti, then they have Oudarik Kayayoga, not
Oudarikamishra. " J Bhavartha - In the aforementioned six Aparyapt states of
beings, Sukhma Ekendriya etc., Karman and Oudarikamishra are considered to be
the two yogas. The reason for this is that all types of beings have Karmanyoga
in the interval motion and at the first time of birth-taking; because at that
time, due to the absence of Oudarik etc. gross body, the yoga tendency is only
from the Karman body. But from the second time of birth until the completion of
the appropriate pariaptis, there is a mixed yoga; because in that state, Karman
and Oudarik etc. .; 1- This topic is in Panchhastao Dwao] 1. Gav. 6-7. !

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra ( 2 ) - jIvasthAnoM meM yogaM  /  [ vo gAthAoM se  /  ]
apattachaSika kamsura, lamosajogA apajjasaMnIsu  /  te savijayamIsa prasu taNu
pajjesu uralamanne || 4 || aparyAptaSaT ke kArmaNaudArikami vayogAvatasaMzipu  /
to sarva kriyAmizrAveSu tanuparyApteSvaudArikamanye  // 4 //  15. artha -
aparyApta sUkSma ekendriya, aparyApta bAdara ekendriya aparyApta vikasatrika
aura aparyApta asaMti paJcendriya, ina vaha prakAra ke jIvoM meM kAmaMka aura
autArikamizra, ye do hI yoga hote haiM  /  aparyApta saMjJi-pazriya meM kAmaMNa,
audArikamizra aura vaikriyamizra, ye tIna yoga pAye jAte hai  /  anya AcArya
aisA mAnate hai ki ukta sAtoM prakAra ke aparyApta jIva, jaba zarIraparyApti
pUrI kara lete haiM. taba unheM mauvArika kAyayoga ho hotA hai, audArikamizra
nahIM"  //  J bhAvArtha - sUkSma ekendriya Adi uparyukta chaha aparyApta
jIvasthAnoM meM kArmaNa aura auvArikamizra do hI yoga mAne gaye haiN| isakA
kAraNa yaha hai ki saba prakAra ke jIvoM ko antarAla gati meM tathA janma-
grahaNa karane ke prathama samaya meM kArmaNayoga hI hotA hai; kyoMki usa samaya
odArika Adi sthUla zarIra kA abhAva hone ke kAraNa yoga pravRtti kevala
kArmaNazarIra se hotI hai  /  parantu utpatti ke dUsare samaya se lekara
svayogya paryAptiyoM ke pUrNa vana jAne taka mizrayoga hotA hai; kyoMki usa
avasthA meM kArmaNa aura auvArika Adi  / ; 1- yaha viSaya paJcastA0 dvA0] 1.
gAva. 6-7 meM hai  /  !

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **16**  "The gross body helps in the development of the
Audārika Yoga." The first six stages of existence are all characterized by
having an Audārika body. In the state of insufficiency, after the Kārmāṇaka
Yoga, there is the Audārika Miśra Kāya Yoga. The aforementioned stages of
existence have been described as insufficient. This insufficiency should be
understood in terms of both method and cause.  The insufficient Sanji-
Pañcendriya includes humans, Tiryak Devas, and Narakas. Therefore, in this
stage, after the Kārmāṇaka Yoga and Kārmāṇakāya Yoga, there are three types of
Yoga: Audārika Miśra Kāya Yoga in relation to humans and Niryancha, and Kriya
Miśra Kāya Yoga in relation to Devas and Narakas.  The alternative view
mentioned in the verse is that of the Shīlāṅka and other Āchāryas. Their view is
that when the body becomes fully sufficient, it becomes complete. Therefore,
even if other sufficient beings are not complete, when the body becomes fully
sufficient, the Miśra Yoga ceases to exist. However, those with Audārika bodies
experience Audārika Kāya Yoga, and those with Kriya bodies experience Vaikriya
Kāya Yoga.  According to this alternative view, in the six insufficient stages
of existence, namely Sūkṣma Ekendriya, etc., there are three types of Yoga:
Kārmāṇ, Audārika Miśra, and Audārika.  **Karmāgrantha Part Four**  Sūkṣma
Ekendriya, therefore, their...  **-**  **1** - Like  "Audārika Yoga is for
humans and Tiryak Devas, when the body becomes fully sufficient, then it is
Miśra." Āchārāṅga - Adhyāya 2, U 1, Commentary, page 24. Although the verse
mentions "Uralam", it is indicative of Vaikriya Kāya Yoga. Therefore, Kriya-
bodied Devas and Narakas should be understood to experience Vaikriya Kāya Yoga
in the state of insufficiency after their bodies become fully sufficient.  This
alternative view has been elaborated upon by Shriman Nirji in the Vṛtti of
Pañchasangraha, Dwā 1, Gā 6-7, based on an ancient Gāthā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 16 sthUla zarIra ko madada se yogapravRti hotI hai  / " Adi chahoM jIvasthAna
auvArika zarIra vAle hI haiM, aparyApta avasthA meM kArmaNakAyayoga ke bAda
auvArika mizra kAyayoga hI hotA hai  /  ukta jIvasthAna aparyApta kahe gaye haiM
/  so vidha tathA karaNa donoM prakAra se aparyApta samajhane cAhiye  /
aparyApta saMji-paJcendriya meM manuSya, tiyaM deva aura nAraka sabhI sammilita
haiN| isaliye usameM kArmaNakAmayoga aura kArmaNakAyayoga ke bAda manuSya aura
niryaJca kI apekSA se auvArikamizrakAprayoga tathA deva aura nAraka kI apekSA se
kriyamizrakAyayoga, kula tIna yoga mAne gaye haiM  /  gAthA meM jisa matAntara
kA ullekha hai, vaha zIlAGka Adi AcApa kA hai  /  unakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki
zarIraparyApti pUrNa bana jAne se zarIra pUrNa bana jAtA hai  /  isaliye anya
paryApsiyoM kI pUrNatA na hone para bhI jaba zarIra paryApta pUrNa bana jAtI hai
tabhI se mizrayoga nahIM rahatA; kintu mauvArika zarIravAloM ko audArikakAyoga
aura kriyazarIra vAloM ko vaikriyakAyayoga ho hotA hai !" isa matAntara ke
anusAra sUkSma ekendriya Adi chaha aparyApta jova sthAnoM meM kAmaMNa, auvArika
mizra aura auvArika, ye tIna yoga aura karmagrantha bhAga cAra sUkSma ekendriya
isaliye unakI " - 1 - jaise "audArikayogastigmanujayoH zarIraparyAptarUdhvaM
tadA ratastu mizraH  /  " AcAraGga - adhya02, u 0 1 ko TIkA pR0 24  /  yadyapi
matAntara ke ullekha meM gAthA meM 'uralaM' pada hI hai; tathApi vaha
vaikikAyayoga kA lakSaka (sucaka ) hai | isaliya kriyazarIrI devanArakoM ko
zarIra paryApti pUrNa bana jAne ke bAda aparyApta dazA meM vaikriyakAnayoga
samajhanA cAhiye  /  isa matAntara ko eka prAcIna gAyA ke AdhAra para
zrImanirijI ne paJcasaMgraha dvA. 1. gA0 6-7 kI vRti meM vistArapUrvaka diyA hai
/

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Ghar  "In the **Aparyapt Sanshi-Panchendriya**, the three
(**Karman**, **Audarik**, and **Vaishyamishra**) and **Kriya** should be
understood as **Kula Pani Yoga**."  Regarding the above mentioned different
opinions, it is written in **Tifa** that this opinion is **Yuktihon** (logical).
Because, just by becoming **Sharira Paryapt** (body complete), the body does not
become complete; but for its completeness, it is necessary for all the
**Strogya** (strength) **Paryaptis** (completions) to become complete.
Therefore, even after **Sharira Paryapt**, it is appropriate to consider
**Mishra Yoga** until the **Aparyapt-Ashasta** (incomplete-eight) state. ||4||
**Sanche Sanipajatate, Uralam Suhame Sabhasu Tam Chausu. Bayari Saviutiyadurg,
Pajas Nisubar Uvaoga.** ||5|| **Sayen Sanshini Paryapt Audarikam Saksme Sabhas
Tatchatusu. Badare Sarv Kiyadi Kang, Paryaptasanjishu Dwadashoupayoga.** ||5||
**Meaning:** All **Yogas** are found in **Paryapt Sanji** (complete-five-sense).
In **Paryapt Sukshma-Ekendriya** (complete-subtle-one-sense), only **Audarik
Kayayoga** exists. In **Paryapt Vikalendriya-Nik** (complete-impaired-sense-
near) and **Paryapt Asaji-Panchendriya** (complete-imperfect-five-sense), these
four **Jiva** (living being) states, **Audarik** and **Asatyamrishamachana**,
these two **Yogas** exist. In **Paryapt Vavar-Ekendriya** (complete-large-one-
sense), **Audarik**, **Kriya**, and **Niyamin**, these three **Karayogas**
exist. (Uses in **Jiva** states): All **Jamyogas** are found in **Paryapt Sanji-
Panchendriya**. ||5||  **Bhavarth:** "In **Paryapt Sanji-Panchendriya**, all six
**Paryaptis** exist," therefore its **Yogya** (competence) is of a special kind.
Therefore, it has all four **Bachan Yogas**, all four **Manoyogas**, and all
seven **Kayayogas**.  "Although **Karman**, **Audarik Mishra**, and
**Vaishyamishra**, these three **Yogas** are **Aparyapt-Avastha-Bhaavi**
(incomplete-state-future), they are also found in **Sanshi-Panchendriya** in the
**Paryapt-Avastha** (complete-state)." **Karman** and **Audarik Mishra
Kayayoga** exist in the **Paryapt-Avastha** when **Kevali Bhagwan** (liberated
soul) creates **Keli-Samuha** (group of games).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga ghAra aparyApta saMkSi-paJcendriya meM ukta tIna tathA
vaiziyamizra aura kriya, kula pani yoga samajhane cAhiye  / " ukta matAntara ke
sambandha meM TIphA meM likhA hai ki yaha mata yuktihona hai| kyoMki kevala
zarIraparyApti bana jAne se zarIra pUrA nahIM banatA; kintu usakI pUrNatA ke
liye strogya sabhI paryAptiyoM kA pUrNa bana jAnA Avazyaka hai| isaliye
zarIraparyApti ke bAda bhI aparyApta-aSasthA paryanta mizra yoga mAnanA yukta
hai  // 4 //  sance sanipajatte, uralaM suhame sabhAsu taM causu  /  bAyari
saviutiyadurga, pajasa nisu bAra uvaogA  // 5 //  sayeM saMzini paryApta
audArikaM sakSme sabhASa taccatuSu  /  bAdare sarva kiyadi kaM, paryAptasaMjiSu
dvAdazopayogAH  /  / 5 artha-paryApta saMjJI meM saba yoga pAye jAte haiN|
paryApta sUkSmaekendriya meM auvAriphakAyayoga hI hotA hai  /  paryApta
vikalendriya-nika aura paryApta asaji-paJcendriya, ima cAra jIvasthAmoM meM
auvArika aura asatyAmRSAmacana, ye do yoga hote haiN| paryApta vAvara-ekendriya
meM auvArika, 4kriya tathA niyamina, ye tIna kArayoga hote haiM  /  (
jIvasthAnoM meM upayoga:-) paryApta saMjhi-paJcendri ya meM saba jamyoga hote
haiM  // 5 //  bhAvArtha-"paryApta saMzi-paJcendriya meM chahoM paryApti hotI
hai" isaliye usako yogyatA viziSTa prakAra kI hai| ataeva usameM cAroM
bacanayoga, cAroM manoyoga aura sAtoM kAyayoga hote haiM  /  "yadyapi kArmaNa,
audArikamizra aura vaizyimina, ye tIna yoga apapti-avasthA-bhAvI haiN| tathApi
ghe saMkSi-paJcendriyoM meM paryApta-avasthA meM bhI pAye jAte hai  / " kArmaNa
tathA audArikamizrakAyayoga paryAptaavasthA meM taba hote haiM, jabaki kevalI
bhagavAn keli-samuhAta racate

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part 12  **There are eight time-proof conditions in the Kevali
ocean. In the third, fourth, and fifth times, there is Karman Kayayoga, and in
the second, sixth, and seventh times, there is Audarik Mishrakayayoga.**
**Vaikriya Mishrakayayoga is determined in the Paryapt state when a Vaikriya-
labdhi-dhari Muni, etc., creates a Vaikriya-sharira.**  **The holders of Aharak
Kayayoga and Aharak Mishrakayayoga are the Chaturdashadhar Munis.** They have
Aharak Mishrakayayoga when they create and abandon the Aharak Sharira, and
Aharak Kayayoga when they hold that body.  **The holders of Audarik Kayayoga are
all Samyaktva-paryapt humans, and the holders of Tiryanch and Vaikriya Kayayoga
are Paryapt Devas and Narakas.**  **18**  **The Sukshma Ekendriya is considered
to have Audarikayoga in the Paryapt state.** This is because it does not have a
union of mind and speech, nor does it have Vaikriya, etc., labdhi. Therefore,
Vaikriya Kayayoga, etc., is not possible in it.  **In the four jiva-sthans of
Dindriya, Shridriya, Chaturindriya, and Asanjnin Panchendriya, the Paryapt state
has Vyavahar-bhasha-asatyamrsh-bhasha because they have a mouth.** Kayayoga in
them is Audarik. Therefore, only two yogas are mentioned in them.  **1 - This is
what Bhagwan Umaswati has said:**  **"Audarik-prayokta prathama-ashta-mas-
mayayayarema-avishta. Mishra-oudaritrayokta saptama-pasht-dvitiyeshu.**
**Karman-daryash-yogi, chaturtha-ke-panchame-trtiye-cha. Samayatrave'pi tasmin
bhavati-anaha-rako-niyamat."**  **- Prashamara-rati Adhyaya 20.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga bAra haiM  /  kevali samudrAta kI sthiti ATha samaya pramANa
mAnI huI hai; isake tIsare cauthe aura pA~caveM samaya meM kArmaNa kAyayoga aura
dUsare, chaThe tathA sAtaveM samaya meM audArika mizrakAyayoga hotA hai|" "vaii
yamizra kAyayoga, paryApta avasthA meM taya hotA hai, jaba koI
vaikriyalabdhadhArI muni Adi vaikizarIra ko banAte haiN|" AhArakakAyayoga tathA
AhAraka mizrakAyayoga ke adhikArI, 'caturdazadhara muni hai|" unheM
AhArakazarIra banAne va tyAgane ke samaya AhAraka mizrakApayoga aura usa zarIra
ko dhAraNa karane ke samaya AhArakAyayoga hotA hai  / " "audArikakAyayoga ke
adhikArI, sabhI samo paryApta manuSya tiryanta aura vaMkriyakAyayoga ke
adhikArI, paryApta deva nAraka haiM  /  " 18 fr " sUkSma ekendriya ko paryApta
avasthA meM audArikAyayoga ho mAnA gayA hai  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki usameM
jaise mana tathA vacana kI sandhi nahIM hai, vaise hI vaMkriya Adi labdhi bhI
nahIM hai  /  isaliye vaikiya kAyayoga Adi kA usameM sambhava nahIM hai  /
dIndriya, zrIndriya, caturindriya aura asaMjJi paJcendriya ina cAra jIvasthAnoM
meM paryApta avasthA meM vyavahAra bhASA-asatyAmRSAbhASA hotI hai; kyoMki unheM
mukha hotA hai| kAyayoga, unameM audArika ho hotA hai| isI se unameM do hI yoga
kahe gaye haiM  /  1 - yahI bAta bhagavAn umAsvAtine kahI hai: 7
"audArikaprayoktA prathamASTa masa mayayayAremAviSTaH  /  mizraudAritrayoktA
saptamapaSThadvitIyeSu  //  : kAmaNadArIzyogI, caturtha ke paJcame tRtIye ca  /
samayatrave'pi tasmin bhavatyanAhArako niyamAt  //  276  //  " - prazamarati
adhi0 20  /

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Khar  **Mother - One-sensed beings - Five stationary
beings:** In the adequate state, there are three yogas considered: Audarik,
Vaikriya, and Kriyamishra. Of these, Audarikayoga is present in all types of
one-sensed beings in the adequate state, but this is not the case with Vaikriya.
Vaikriya yoga is only present in the **Barvaayu** body; because **Barvaayu**
beings obtain Vaikriya. When they create a Kriya body, they should understand
this as Kriyamishraka usage and Vaikriya body being fully present. Their
Vaikriya body is considered to be flag-shaped.  **1 - "Bhachan Tiryanch
Manusyaan, Devanarako Parm. Keshamchil Labdhim Advaayu, Sanjnityam Nrunam
Api."**  **1a - Lokaprakash Sarga 3:** The first (Audarik) body is present in
Tiryanch and humans; the second (Vaikriya) body is present in Devas, Narakas,
beings with Vaayu body who have obtained Vaikriya, and beings with Sanjni
Tiryanch-human body who have obtained Vaikriya. The fact that Vaayu body beings
have a Vaikriya body obtained through **Labdhi** is not clear in the
**Lattvarth** मूल and its commentary, but it is mentioned in the commentary's
**Diwa**.  **"Vayoshcha Vaikriyam Labdhpratyayameva"** etc. - **Swarth A. 2048**
commentary. There is a special feature in Digambari literature. In it, **Tejas**
body beings are also said to be the owners of a Vaikriya body, similar to Vaayu
body beings. Although no mention of the Vaikriya body of **Tejas** body and
Vaayu body beings is found in **Sarvarth Siddhi**, it is present in
**Rajavartika**.  **"Kriyikam Devanarakaanam Tejovaayu Kayik Panchendriya
Tiryanch Manusyaanam Cha Keshamchit."** - **Tattvarth A. 2, Su. 46, Rajavartika
8.** The same thing is also present in **Gommatsar Jeevakanda**:
"**Badarateubaau, Panchidia Punnama Vigubvanti. Or Liye Sariram, Vigurunapavam
Have Jesi.**"  **2 - This mantra is the same in both the Shwetambar and Digambar
sects.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga khAra mAdara- ekendriya ko- pA~ca sthAvara ko, paryApta
avasthA meM audArika, vaikriya aura kriyamizra, ye tIna yoga mAne huye haiN|
inameM se auvArikakAyayoga to saba taraha ke ekendriyoM ko paryApta avasthA meM
hotA hai, para vaiyi sA vaikriyo ke viSaya meM yaha bAta nahIM hai| gho yoga,
"kevala bAravAyukAya meM hote haiM; kyoMki bAbaravAyukAyika jIvoM ko vaikilabdhi
hotI hai| isase ve jaba kriyazarIra banAte haiM, taba unheM kriyamizrakAprayoga
aura vaikriyazarIra pUrNa yatra jAne ke ara vaikriyakAyayoga samajhanA cAhiye  /
unakA vaikriyazarIra dhvajAkAra mAnA gayA haiM  / " 1 - "bhAcaM tiryagmanuSyANAM
devanArakyoH param  /  keSAMcillabdhimadvAyu, saMjJitiyaM nRNAmapi  //  144  //
" 1ha loka prakAza sargaH 3 pahalA (dArika zarIra tiryaJcoM aura manuSyoM ko
hotA hai; dUsarA ( baikisa ) zarIra devoM, nArakoM, labdhivAle vAyukAyikoM aura
labdhivAle saMjJI tiryaJca - manuSyoM ko hotA hai  / " vAyukAyika ko labdhi-
janya vaikriya zarIra hotA hai yaha bAta, lattvArtha mUla tathA usake bhASya meM
spaSTa nahIM hai, kintu isakA ullekha bhASya kI dIvA meM hai| "vAyozca vaikriyaM
labdhapratyayameva" ityAdi  /  - svArtha a0 2048 ko bhASya-vRtti  /  digambarIya
sAhitya meM kucha vizeSatA hai  /  usameM vAyukAyika ke samAna tejaHkAyika kI
bhI vaikriyazarIra kA svAmI kahA hai| yadyapi sarvArthasiddhi meM tejaHkAyika
tathA vAyukAyika ke vaikriyazarIra ke sambandha meM koI ullekha dekhane meM
nahIM AyA, para rAjavArtika meM haiM. - kriyikaM devanArakANAM
tejovAyukAyikapaJcendri tigmanuSyANAM ca keSAMcit  //  " tattvArtha- a0 2, sU0
46, rAjavartika 8  /  yahI bAta gommaTasAra-jIvakANDa meM bhI
haiH-"bAdarateUbAU, paMcidiya puNNamA vigubvaMti  /  ora liye sarIraM,
viguruNapvaM have jesi  // 232 // " 2 yaha mantacya zvetAmbara digambara donoM
sampradAyoM meM samAna hai: 11

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Past Mother (3) - Uses in the realms of living beings.  All uses are found in
the beings with complete five senses (Saṃśipāñcendriya). Because the human
beings born from the womb (Garbhaja-manushya), in whom all types of uses are
possible, are Saṃśipāñcendriya. There are twelve uses, of which five are
knowledge (Jnana) and three are ignorance (Ajñana), these eight are concrete
(Vishesharupa), and four are abstract (Samanyarupa). Of these, only knowledge
and only abstract uses are considered to be present for a moment (Sthiti
Samaya), and the remaining ten concrete uses are considered to be present for a
very short time (Antamuhurta).  "Mamatām tatra jākara, dvaidhānām api bhūmahām.
Staḥ śarīrāṇy aniyataḥ-saṃsthānānīti tadvidaḥ ||2541||" -Lo. Pra., Sa. 5.
"Masurambudhidisui,-kalāvadhayasaṣṇiho have deho. Puḍhavī ādi baugaha,
tarutasakāya aṇeyaviha. ||200||" -Mīvakāṇḍa. 1- This thought is found in
Pañcaśaṁ Dvā. 1, Gā. 8. 2- Regarding the Antamuhurta-duration of concrete uses,
the following statements are found in the Tattvārtha-ṭīkā:
"Upayogasthitikālo'ntamahattamapariṇāma; prakarshān dravati." -A. 2, Sū. 8's
ṭīkā. "Upayogato'ntamuharsa meva jaghanyotkṛṣṭābhyām ||" -A. 2, Muh's ṭīkā.
"Upayogastu taḥ yāpyantamuhartamavasthānam." M. 2, Sū. 6's ṭīkā. This is also
mentioned in Gommatasāra: "Madisudaohimanehi ya, sagasagavisaye visheshviṇṇāṇam.
Antomuhattan kālo, uvajogo so du sādhārī ||673||"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gata mAtA (3)-jIvasthAnoM meM upayoga'  /  paryApta saMjJi-paJcendrima meM
sabhI upayoga pAye jAte haiN| kyoMki garbhaja-manuSya, jinameM saba prakAra ke
upayogoM kA sambhava hai, ve saMzipaJcendriya haiM 1 upayoga bAraha haiM,
jinameM pAMca jJAna aura tIna ajJAna, ye ATha sAkAra (vizeSarUpa ) haiM aura
cAra varzana, ye nirAkAra ( sAmAnyarUpa ) haiN| inameM se kevala jJAna aura
kevala varzana ko sthiti samayamAtra kare aura zeSa chAnasthika dasa upayogoM kI
sthiti ansamuhUrta kI mAnI huI hai| "mamatAM tatrajAkAra, dvaidhAnAmapi bhUmahAm
/  sTa: zarIrANyaniyata:-saMsthAnAnIti tadvidaH  // 2541 // " -lo0 pra0, sa. 5 /
"masuraMbudhidisuI,-kalAvadhayasaSNiho have deho  /  puDhavI Adi baugaha,
tarutasakAyA aNeyavihA  /  / 200 // " -mIvakANDa  /  1-yaha vicAra, pacasaM dvA0
1, gA0 8 meM hai| 2-chAmasthika upayogoM kI antarmuhUrta-pramANa sthiti ke
sambandha meM tasvArtha-TIkA meM nIce likhe ullekha milate
haiM:"upayogasthitikAlo'ntamahattaMpariNAma; prakarSAndravati  / " -a0 2, sU0 8
kI ttiikaa| "upayogato'ntamuharsa meva jaghanyotkRSTAbhyAm  // " -a0 2, muha kI
dIkA  /  "upayogatastu ta:yApyantamuhartamavasthAnam  / ' ma0 2, sU0 6 kI dIkA
/  yaha bAta gommaTasAra meM bhI ullikhita hai: "madisudaohimaNehi ya,
sagasagavisaye visesaviNNANaM  /  aMtomuhattaMkAlo, uvajogo so du sAdhArI  //
673 //

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma Grantha Part Four  All modes of cognition are sequential, therefore, in a
single soul, there can be only one mode of cognition at a time. 533. In the case
of the five-sensed beings without the eye-sense, there are two modes of
cognition - mati-ajnana (non-sensory knowledge) and sruta-ajnana (scriptural
knowledge). 6.  For the complete four-sensed beings and the complete five-sensed
beings without the eye-sense, there are two modes of cognition - darsana (visual
perception) and mati-ajnana. For the incomplete four-sensed beings, the
incomplete five-sensed beings without the eye-sense, the one-sensed beings, the
two-sensed beings, the deficient-sensed beings, and the auditory beings, there
are three modes of cognition - mati-ajnana, sruta-ajnana, and acaksur-darsana
(non-visual perception).   In the incomplete five-sensed beings, excluding the
four modes of cognition - manaḥparyāya-jñāna (telepathy), tiryag-darsana
(clairvoyance), kevala-jñāna (omniscience), and kevala-darsana (omnivision), the
remaining eight modes of cognition - mati-jñāna (sensory knowledge), sruta-jñāna
(scriptural knowledge), avadhi-jñāna (clairvoyant knowledge), mati-ajñāna,
sruta-ajñāna, vimanga-jñāna (intuitive knowledge), and avadhi-darsana
(clairvoyant perception) - are present. 6.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra sabhI upayoga kramabhAvI' haiM, isaliye eka jIva meM
eka samaya meM koI bhI do upayoga nahIM hote  //  533" pajacaraviasaMnisu
dudaMsa bu anANa dasasu cakbuviNA saMnipajje maNanA - Nakhaka kebala durgA viNA
//  6  //  paryApta caturindriyAsaMjJinoH, dvidarzavyajJAnaM dazasu cakSuvinA  /
saMjJinyaparyApte manojJAna vakSuH kevala dvikavihInIH  //  6  //  21 artha
paryApta caturindriya tathA paryApta asaMjJi - pacendriya meM cakSu acakSu vo
darzana aura matipUna ghI ajJAna kula dhAra upayoga hote haiN| sUkSma ekendriya,
bAvara- ekendriya, hIndriya aura zrotriya, ye cAroM paryApta tathA aparyApta
aura aparyApta caturindriya tathA aparyApta asaMzipacendriya ina dasa prakAra ke
zoSoM meM mati-ajJAna, zruta- ajJAna aura acakSurdarzana ye tIna upayoga hote
haiM  /  aparyApta saMjJi paJcendriyoM meM manaHparyAyajJAna, pazu darzana
kevalajJAna, kevalavarzana, ina cAra ko chor3a zeSa ATha ( matijJAna,
zrutajJAna, avadhijJAnadarzana, mati ajJAna, zruta-ajJAna, vimaGgajJAna aura
avazudarzana ) upayoga hote haiM || 6  //  * bhAvArtha- paryApta caturitriya
aura paryApta apicendriya meM cakSuvarzana Adi uparyukta cAra hI upayoga hote
haiM; kyoMki AvaraNa iMkmiNIhiNA vA matthe avisesI dRNaM jaM gahaNaM  /
aMtImutakAlo, uba jogo so aNAyAro  //  674 | jIvakANDa | kSAyika upayoga kI eka
samaya-samAna sthiti, "anne egaMtariyaM icchaMta sujhovaeseNaM  / " isa kathana
se siddhAnta sammata hai| vizeSa khulAse ke liye nandI su0 22, malayagirivRtti
pu0 134 tathA vidIpa 0 0 3101 kI vRtti dekhanA cAhiye  /  lokaprakAza ke tIsare
sarga meM bhI yahI kahA hai"ekasmin samaye jJAnaM darzanaM cAparakSaNe  /
sarvajJasyopayogI ho, samayAntarita savA  //  673  /  /  " 1 - dekhiye,
pariziSTa 'ca  / ' -

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Part Four  Due to the closeness and the first being the Gunasthan, they do
not have any other general uses except for Achakṣudarśana and Adhakṣuvaṁśa, and
no other special uses except for Mati-Ahāna and Śruta-Ajñāna.  In the ten types
of beings, namely Sūkṣma-Ekendriya, etc., three uses have been mentioned.
However, according to the Karmagranthik view, this is not the case according to
the Saiddhantic view.  1. See, Pariśiṣṭa 6. 2. The explanation is as follows:
The Karmagranthik scholars consider the first and second Gunasthan in the five
types of inadequate beings, namely Bādar-Ekendriya, Dwīndriya, Trīndriya,
Caturindriya, and Asamjñi-Pañcendriya. See, further Ga. 5th. However, they
consider Mati, etc., at the time of the second Gunasthan as ignorance, not
knowledge. See, further Ga. 21st. Therefore, according to their view, in the
five types of inadequate beings, namely Bādar-Ekendriya, etc., where two
Gunasthan are possible, only three uses are considered: Achakṣudarśana, Mati-
Ajñāna, and Śruta-Ajñāna. This is similar to the five beings, namely Paryaapta-
Aparyaapta-Sakṣama-Ekendriya, Paryaapta-Bādar-Ekendriya, Paryaapta-Dwīndriya,
and Paryaapta-Trīndriya, which have the first Gunasthan.  However, the
Saiddhantic scholars have a different opinion. They say that "in any type of
Ekendriya, whether it is Paryaapta or Aparyaapta, Sūkṣma or Bādar, there is no
other Gunasthan except the first. See, Ga. 46th. But in the four inadequate
beings, namely Dwīndriya, Trīndriya, Caturindriya, and Asamjñi-Pañcendriya,
there are two Gunasthan, the first and the second." At the same time, the
Saiddhantic scholars consider Mati, etc., at the time of the second Gunasthan as
knowledge, not ignorance. See, Ga. 46th. Therefore, according to their view, in
the said twelve inadequate beings, namely Dwīndriya, etc., there are five uses:
Achakṣudarśana, Mati-Ajñāna, Mati-Jñāna, and Śruta-Jñāna. And in the ten beings,
namely Sūkṣma-Ekendriya, etc., except for the four beings, namely Dwīndriya,
etc., there are three uses in the remaining six beings: Achakṣudarśana, Mati-
Ajñāna, and Śruta-Ajñāna.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAga cAra ko ghaniSThatA aura pahalA ho guNasthAna hone ke kAraNa, unameM
bakSuvarzana aura adhakSuvaMzama ke sivAya anya sAmAnya upayoga tathA mati-
ahAna, zruta-ajJAna ke sivAya anya vizeSa upayoga nahIM hote| sUkSma-e kendriya'
Adi upayukta dasa prakAra ke jIvoM meM tIma upayoga kahe gaye haiM, so
karmagranthika mata ke anusAra, saiddhAntika mata ke anusAra mhiiN| 1-dekhiye,
pariziSTa cha  / ' 2-isakA khulAsA yoM hai:-padyagi bAdara ekendriya, dvIndriya,
trindriya,caturindrapa aura asaMjJi-paJcendriya, ina pA~ca prakAra ke aparyApta
jIvoM meM kAma granthika vidvAna pahalA aura dUsarA, ye do guNasthAna mAnate
haiM dekhiye, Age gA5vIM  /  tathApi ne dUsare guNasthAnaka samaya mati Adi ko,
jJAnarUpa na mAnakara ajJAnarUpa hI mAna lete haiM  /  dekhiye, Age gA0 21vIM  /
isaliye, unake matAnuzAra paryApta-aparyApta sakSama-ekendriya, paryApta bAdara-
ekandriya, paryApta vIndriya aura paryApta nIndriya ina pahale muNasthAna-bAle
pA~ca jIvasthAnoM ke samAna, bAdara ekandriya Adi ukta pA~ca prakAra ke
aparyApta jIvasthAyoM meM bhI, jinameM do guNasthAnoM kA sambhava hai,
acakSurdarzana, matiajJAna aura zruta-ajJAna, ye tIna upayoga hI mAne jAte haiM
/  parantu saiddhAntika vidvAnoM kA mantavya kucha bhinna hai  /  ye kahate haiM
ki "kisI prakAra ke ekendriya meM-cAhe paryApta ho yA aparyApta, sukSma ho yA
bAdara-pahale ke sivAya anya gUNasthAna hotA hI nhiiN| dakhiye, gA0 46 vIM |
para dvIndriya, zrIndriya, caturindriya aura asaMjJi-paccendriya, ina cAra
aparyApta jIvasthAnoM meM pahalA aura dUsarA, ye do muNasthAna hote haiN|' sAtha
hI saiddhAntika vidvAna, dUsare guNasthAna ke samaya mati Adi ko ajJAnarUpa na
mAnakara jJAnarUpa hI mAnate haiN| dekhiye, mA0 46 vIM  /  ata eba inake
matAnusAra vIndriya Adi ukta bAra aparyApta-jIvasthAnoM meM acakSudaMzana, mati
azAna, matijJAna aura zrutajJAna, ke pA~ca upayoga aura sUkSma ekendriya Adi
upayukta dasa jIvasthAnoM meM se dvIndriya Adi utA cAra ke sivAya zepa chaha
jIva-sthAnoM meM avakSudarzana' mati-ajJAna, zruta-ajJAna, ye tIna upayoga
samajhane cAhiye  /

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmavanya Part Four  The five senses with consciousness (Sanji-Panchendriya)
are not used in the imperfect state. This is because:  * **Tiryak** and
**Samyak** Devas, Narakas, etc., have knowledge and two types of vision from the
moment of their birth. * **Mithyatvi** Devas, Narakas, etc., have three types of
ignorance and two types of vision from the moment of their birth.  The four uses
of **Manas-paryaya** (mental perception), etc., are not possible because:  *
**Manas-paryaya** can only be attained by those who practice **Samyama** (self-
control), which is not possible in the imperfect state. * **Chakshus-darshan**
(visual perception) requires the functioning of the **Dhatu-indriya** (physical
senses), which is not present in the imperfect state. * **Kevalgyan** (perfect
knowledge) and **Kevaldarshan** (perfect vision) are both results of **Karma-
kshaya** (destruction of karma), which is not possible in the imperfect state.
The five senses with consciousness (Sanji-Panchendriya) are said to have three
uses in the imperfect state, based on the expectation of **Karan-apatti**
(acquisition of the cause). This is because in the imperfect state of **Labdhi-
apatti** (acquisition of the result), there are no other uses except **Mati-
agyan** (intellectual ignorance), **Shruta-agyan** (scriptural ignorance), and
**Acha-darshan** (wrong vision).  In this verse, **Chatur-darshan** (four types
of vision) is not included in the uses of the imperfect **Chatur-indriya** (four
senses), imperfect **Asanji-Panchendriya** (five senses without consciousness),
and imperfect **Sanji-Panchendriya** (five senses with consciousness). This is
according to a different opinion. Because, according to the opinion of the
**Paksha-sangrahakar** (compiler of the arguments), in the imperfect state of
these three types of beings, **Indriya-paryapti** (perfection of the senses) is
complete, and therefore **Chakshus-darshan** (visual perception) is also
attained.  To understand the meaning of both opinions, one should refer to the
note of verse 17.  **Note:**  * This is mentioned by **Shrimala-giri-muni** as
follows:  "The imperfect and the conditionally perfect should be known.
Otherwise, in the imperfect, even **Chakshus-darshan** (visual perception) is
attained, as the **Mula-toka** (original text) states that it is attained by the
**Ayina** (one who has attained perfection)." - **Pavasan** (commentary on the
**Dwar** 1, **Gatha** 8).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmavanya bhAga cAra saMji-pancenidha ko, apalo avasthA meM upayoga me naye
haiM  /  so isa prakAra:-tIrya kara tathA samyaktvI deva-nAraka Adi ko utpatti-
kSaNa se ho sona jJAna aura do darzana hote haiM sathA mithyAtvI deva-nAraka Adi
ko janma-rAmaya se hI tIna ajJAna aura do varzana hote haiN| mana:paryANa Adi
cAra upayoga na hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki manaHparyAyazAna, saMyama vAloM ko ho
sakatA hai, parantu aparyAptaavasthA meM saMyama kA sambhava nahIM hai| tathA
cakSurdazana, dhaturindriya ke vyApAra kI apekSA rakhatA hai| jo aparyApta
avasthA meM nahIM hotA  /  isI prakAra kevalajJAna aura kesaladarzana, ye do
upayoga karmakSaya-janya haiM, kintu aparyApta-avasthA meM karma-maya kA
sambhava nahIM hai  /  saMjJi-paJcendriya ko aparyApta-avasthA meM A3 upayoga
kahe, gaye, so karaNa-apa pati ko apekSA se, kyoMki labdhi-aparyApta meM mati-
ajJAna- zruta-ajJAna aura aca darzana ke sivAya anya upayoga nahIM hote  /  isa
gAthA meM aparyApta caturindriya, aparyApta asaMji-paJcendriya aura aparyApta
saMji-paJcendiya meM jo jo upayoga banalAye gaye haiM, unameM caturvarzana
parigaNita nahIM hai, so matAntara se; kyoMki pakSamasaGgrahakAra ke mata se
ukta tInoM jIvasyAnoM meM apapti-avasthA meM mo indriyaparyApti pUrNa hone ke
bAma ca darzana hotA hai  /  donoM mata ke tAtparya ko samApane ke liye gA0 17
vIM kA noTa dekhanA cAhiye  //  6  /  /  1-isakA uslekha zrImalayagirimuri ne
isa prakAra kiyA hai: "aparyAptakAzceta sadhyaparyAptakA beditavyAH, anyathA
pharaNAparyApnakeSu caturindri yAviSvandriya payaptio satyoM cakSurvarzanamapi
prApyate mUlaTokAyAmAyiNAbhyanujAnAt  /  -pavasaM0 dvAra 1, gAra 8 kI ttiikaa|

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
24 K. Mangandh - Part Four (4-8) - Leshya-Bandha etc. in the Jiva-sthana. { From
two Gathaas.  Sanni-duge chalesap, - jabayare padham chau ti sesesu.  Sattath
bandhuvoran, santudaya att terasu. || 7 || Sanjidike sadleshya aptibhadare
pradhamaschatasnatisra: sesesu.  Saptaastabandhodiran, sadudayaavastanaam
krayodashasu. || 5 || Meaning - In the Sanji-Panchendriya, both A-pariyapt and
Pariyapt, there are six Leshyas.  In the A-pariyapt Babar-eke-striya, the first
four Leshyas, Krishna etc., are found.  In the remaining twelve Jiva-sthana, -
A-pariyapt and Pariyapt Sukshma-ekendriya, Pariyapt Paavar-ekendriya,
A-pariyapt-Pariyapt Renidhi, A-pariyapt-Pariyapt Tri-indriya, A-pariyapt-
Pariyapt Chatur-indriya and A-pariyapt-Pariyapt A-sanji-Panchendriya, there are
three Leshyas, Krishna, Neet and Kapoot. Except for the Pariyapt Sanji, in the
thirteen Jiva-sthana, there are seven or eight Karma-bandha and also seven or
eight Udorana, but the Sajja and Uday are eight each. || 7 || Meaning - Both
A-pariyapt and Pariyapt types of Sanji are considered to be the owners of six
Leshyas, the reason being that in them, both auspicious and inauspicious results
are possible.  A-pariyapt Sanji-Panchendriya means Karana-pariyapt, because in
it, six Leshyas are possible.  The remaining A-pariyapt are only entitled to
three Leshyas. Krishna etc., three Leshyas are common for all Ekendriya.  But
the A-pariyapt Madar-ekendriya has a special feature that it also has the
Seloleshya.  Because the Jyotishi, who has the Tejoleshya, is a divine being,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 24 ka.maMgandha-bhAga cAra (4-8)-jIvasthAnoM meM lezyA-bandha Adi  /  { do
gAdhAoM se  /  saMniduge chalesaapa,-jabAyare paDhama cau ti sesesu  /
sattaTTha bandhuvoraNa, saMtudayA aTTa terasasu  //  7  //  saMjidike SaDlezyA
aptibAdare pradhamAzcatasnastisraH zeSeSu  /  saptASTabandhodIraNa,
sadudayAvaSTAnAM krayodazasu  //  5  //  artha-saMkSi-viko-aparyApta tathA
paryApta saMji-paJcenniya meMchahoM lezyAyeM hotI haiM  /  aparyApta bAbara-eke
striya meM kRSNa Adi pahalI cAra leNyAyeM pAyI jAtI haiM  /  zeSa mAraha
jIvasthAnoM meM - aparyApta tathA paryApta sUkSma-ekendriya, paryApta pAvara-
ekendriya, aparyApta-paryApta rendhi ya, aparyApta-paryApta trIndriya,
aparyApta-paryApta caturitriya aura aparyApta-paryApta asaMji-paJcendriyoM meM
kRSNa, nIta aura kApota ye tIna lezyAyeM hotI hai| paryApta saMjI ke sivAya
teraha jIvasthAnoM meM vandha, sAta yA ATha karmakA hotA hai tathA udoraNA bhI
sAta yA ATha phokI hotI hai, parantu sajA tathA udaya ATha ATha karmaki hI hote
haiM  // 7 /  /  bhAvArtha-aparyApta tathA paryApta donoM prakAra ke saMzo,
chaha lezyAoMke svAmI mAne jAte haiM, isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki unameM zubha-
azubha sama tarahake pariNAmoMkA sambhava hai  /  aparyApta saMzi-paJcenniyakA
matalaba karaNAparyAptase hai| kyoMki usI meM chaha lepAoM kA sambhava hai  /
lariSa-aparyApta to sirpha tIna lezyAoM ke adhikArI haiM  /  kRSNa Adi tIna
lezyAya, saba ekendriyoM ke liye sAdhAraNa haiN| kintu aparyApta mAdara-
ekendriyameM itanI vizeSatA hai ki usanameM selolezyA bhI pAyI jAtI hai| kyoMki
tejalezyA vAle jyotiSI Adhi deva,

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  When they are filled with Leshya and are born as
Badar in the Earth, Water or Plant bodies, they have Tejo Leshya in an
insufficient state. It is a rule that the Leshya in which one dies is the same
Leshya they take at birth.  Insufficient and sufficient subtle Ekendriya etc.
are mentioned as the eleven Jiva-sthana with three Leshyas. The reason is that
all these Jiva-sthana are associated with inauspicious results, therefore the
previous three Leshyas, which are auspicious results, are not present in them.
The consideration of Bandha, Udirana, Satya and Uday in these Jiva-sthana is
based on the Mula Prakritis. In each Jiva-sthana, at any given time, how many
Prakritis are bound, how many are awakened, how many are in existence and how
many are rising, is shown. 1. Bandha.  Except for the sufficient Sanjni, all
types of Jivas bind seven Karma Prakritis at all times, except for Aayu. They
bind all eight Karma Prakritis only when they bind Aayu. The binding of Aayu
happens only once in a Bhava, until the end of the current Bhava, either in a
low or high Antarmukhurta. The rule for Aayu Karma is that the third part of the
current Aayu, the new  1 - This is mentioned as: "Jalle se marai, talle se
ubvajjaad". Iti 25 ―― I 2 - The above rule applies to Jivas with Sopakram
(decreasing) Aayu, not to those with Nirupakrama Aayu. If they are Deva, Naraka
or countless Manushya-Tiryach, then they bind the Aayu of the next Bhava only
when one month of Aayu is left. And if they are Ekendriya, Vikalendriya or
Panchendriya Manushya-Tiryach, then they bind the Aayu of the next Bhava only
when one-third of the current Bhava is left.   Brihatsangrahani, Ga. 321-323,
and Pancham Karmagrantha, Ga. 34.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra jaba usane lezyA meM bharate haiM aura bAdara
pRthivIkAya, jalakAya yA vanaspatikAya meM janma lete haiM, taba unheM aparyApta
avasthA meM tejolezyA hotI hai| yaha niyama hI hai ki jisa lezyA meM maraNa ho,
janamate samaya vahI leipA hotI hai| aparyApta tathA paryApta sUkSma ekendriya
Adi uparyukta gyAraha jIva sthAnoM meM tIna lezyAyeM kahI gaI hai| isakA kAraNa
yaha hai ki ve saba jIvasthAna, azubha pariNAma vAle hI hote haiM isaliye unameM
zubha pariNAmarUpa pichalI tIna lezyAyeM nahIM hotI  /  isa jagaha jIvasthAnoM
meM bandha, udIraNA, sattA aura udaya kA jo vicAra kiyA gayA hai, vaha mUla
prakRtiyoM ko lekara  /  pratyeka jIvasthAna meM kisI eka samaya meM mUla ATha
prakRtiyoM meM se kitanI prakRtiyoM kA bandha, kitanI prakRtiyoM kI udIraNA,
kitanI prakRtiyoM ko sattA aura kitanI prakRtiyoM kA udaya pAyA jA sakatA hai,
usI ko dikhAyA hai 1. bandha  /  paryApta saMjJi ke sivAya saba prakAra ke jIva,
pratyeka samaya meM Ayu ko chor3akara sAta karmaprakRtiyoM ko bAMdhate rahate
haiN| ATha karmaprakRtiyoM ko ye tabhI se haiM, jabaki Ayu kA bandha karate
haiN| Ayu kA bandha eka bhava meM eka hI bAra jaghanya yA utkRSTa antarmuhUrta
taka hI hotA hai  /  Ayukarma ke liye yaha niyama hai ki vartamAna Ayu kA
tIsarA, nayA~ 1 - isakA ullekha isa prakAra milatA hai: "jalle se marai, tallese
ubavajjada"  /  iti 25 ---- I 2 ukta niyama sopakrama (apavartya ghaTa sakane
vAlI ) Ayu vAle jIvoM ko lAgU par3atA hai, nirupakrama Ayu vAloM ko nahIM ne
yadi deva nAraka yA asaMkhya manuSya tiryaJca hoM to yaha mahIne Ayu bAkI rahane
para hI parabhabakI Ayu bAMdhate haiM aura yadi ekendriya, vikalendriya yA
paJcendriya manuSya-tiyaMJca hoM to vartamAna bhAva kA tIsarA bhAga zeSa rahane
para hI Ayu bacate haiN| bRhatsaMgrahaNI, gA0 321-323, tathA paJcama
karmagrantha, gA0 34  /

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Magnanth Part Four  In these twenty-seven Jhavi parts, the binding of the
lifespan of the soul occurs when the soul remains in the state of being.
According to this rule, if there is no binding, then at the end, when the
present Aamu, Antarmukhut-Praman, remains, then the binding of the lifespan for
the next birth is inevitable.  2. Udirana: In the thirteen types of living
beings, there are eight types of Udirana at every moment. The seven types of
Udirana are found in the last Aavlika of life, when there is no Udirana of
lifespan. Because at that time, due to the remaining Aavlika-matra state, the
present (Udayaman) Aamu, even if it becomes more stable, does not become
Udayaman, and therefore, there is no Udirana for the next birth. The scriptures
state this rule of Udirana: the Udirana of the karma that is Uday-prapta occurs,
not of others. And when the Uday-prapta karma remains only as Aavsika-matra,
then its Udirana stops.  1. "Udayavaliyabahririll Dihito Kasayaghiya Sahiyanam
Jogkaranenam Daliyamakadiy Udaypattaliyen Sam Anubhavanamudirana."    --- Karma-
Prakriti-Chuni.     Meaning: Pulling the Dalikas situated outside the Uday-
Aavlika, with or without Kasaya, through Yoga, and freeing them from that state,
and experiencing them along with the Uday-prapta Dalikas, is called 'Udirana'.
The meaning of this statement is that the Dalikas within the Udayavali are not
subject to Udirana. Therefore, it is according to the rule that the Udirana of
karma stops when the state of karma remains only as Aavlika-matra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mamagnantha bhAga cAra yA sattAIsA jhAvi bhAga mAkI rahane para ho paramaya ke
Ayu kA bandha hotA hai| isa niyama ke anusAra yadi jandha na ho to anta meM jaba
vartamAna Amu, antarmuhUta-pramANa vAkI rahatI hai, taba agale bhava ko Ayu kA
bandha avazya hotA hai| 2. udIraNA  /  upayukta teraha prakAra ke jIvasthAnoM
meM pratyeka samaya meM ATha kamA~ kI ubIraNA humA karatI hai  /  sAta kamIM kI
udAraNA, Ayu kI udIraNA na hone ke samaya-jIvana kI antima AvalikA meMpAyI jAtI
hai| kyoMki usa samaya , AvalikAmAtra sthiti zeSa rahane ke kAraNa vartamAna (
udayamAna ) Aghu ko aura adhika sthiti hone para bhI uvayamAna na hone go mAga
agale gA Apa ko utIraNA nahIM hotI  /  zAstra meM uboraNA kA yaha niyama
batalAyA hai ki jo karma, uvaya-prApta hai, usakI udhAraNA hotI hai, dUsare kI
nahIM  /  aura udama-prApta karma mI AvasikAmAtra zeSa raha jAtA hai, taba se
usakI udI raNA ruka jAtI hai| 1.-"udayAvaliyAbahirilla dihito kasAyag2ahiyA
sahieNaM jogakaraNeNaM daliyamAkaDhiya udayapattadaliyeNa samaM
aNubhavaNAmudIraNA  / " _-.-karmaprakRti-cUNi  /  arthAt udaya-AvalikAse bAhara
kI sthiti vAle dalikoM ko kaSAya sahita yA kaghAyarahita yogadvArA khIMcakara-
usa sthiti se unheM chur3Akaraudaya-prApta dalivoM ke mAtha bhoga lenA 'udIraNA'
kahalAtI hai| isa kapana kA tAtparya itanA hI hai ki udayAvalikA ke antargata
dalikoM ko udIraNA nahIM hotii| ata eva varma kI sthiti bhAvalikAmAtra vAkI
rahane vA samaya usakI udIraNA kA ruka jAnA niyamAnukUla haiM  /

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  In the thirteen types of living beings, those that
are *aparyapt* (inadequate) should be understood as *ladhi-aparyapt* (inadequate
in attainment), because in them, the *uvirana* (manifestation) of seven or eight
karmas can occur. They die in the *aparyapt* state, therefore, when only a
*alika* (moment) of life remains, the *uvirana* of seven karmas occurs, and
before that, the *uvirana* of eight karmas. However, there is no rule for
*karanaparyapt* (adequate in cause) beings to die in the *aparyapt* state. If
they become *lakshiparyapt* (adequate in goal), they die in the *paryapt*
(adequate) state. Therefore, it is not possible for them to have only a *alika*
of life remaining in the *aparyapt* state and for the *uvirana* of seven karmas
to occur.  3-4. **Satta** (existence) and **Uday** (arising). The existence of
eight karmas is up to the eleventh *gunasthan* (stage of virtue), and the
arising of eight karmas continues throughout all *gunasthanas*. However, for all
types of beings except *paryapt* (adequate) *sanshi* (being), the maximum
possible *gunasthanas* are the second, fourth, and fifth. Therefore, the
existence and arising of eight karmas have been considered for the thirteen
types of living beings.  **Satluchhegabandha, Satudaya Satatthachattari.
Satsadwachpanchagam Udirna Sanippajatte. || 8 ||**  **Saptaastapadbavandha,
Sadudayau Saptaastachattari.** **Saptaastaghatpanchadwika Mudarana Sanji-
Garyapte. ||**  **Meaning:** In *paryapt* *sanji* (adequate being), there are
four *bandha-sthana* (stages of bondage): seven karmas, eight karmas, six
karmas, and one karma. The *satta-sthana* (stage of existence) and *upay-sthana*
(stage of arising) are for seven, eight, and four karmas, and the *udirna-
sthana* (stage of manifestation) is for seven, eight, six, five, and two karmas.
|| 8 ||  **Explanation:** The group of *prakriti* (nature) that are bound
together (simultaneously) is called *bandhasyan*. Similarly, the group of
*prakriti* that exist...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra ukta teraha jIvasthAnoM meM jo aparyApta jIvasthAna
haiM, ve sabhI ladhiaparyApta samajhane cAhiye, kyoMki unhIM meM sAta yA ATha
karma kI uvIraNA ghaTa sakatI hai| ve aparyApta-avasthA hI meM mara jAte haiM,
isaliye unameM AvalikAmAtra Ayu bAkI rahane para sAta kama ko aura isake pahale
ATha karma ko javIraNA hotI hai| parantu karaNAparyAptoM ke aparyApta-avasthA
meM marane kA niyama nahIM hai  /  ve yadi lakSiparyApta huye to paryApsa-
avasthA hI meM marate haiM  /  isaliye unameM aparyApta-avasthA meM AlikAmAtra
zrAyu zeSa rahane kA aura sAta karma kI udIraNA kA saMbhava nahIM hai| 3-4.
sattA aura udaya  /  ATha karmoM kI sattA gyArahaveM guNasthAna taka hotI hai
aura ATha karma kA upaya sabai guNasthAna taka banA rahatA hai| parantu paryApta
saMzI ke sivAya saba prakAra ke jIvoM meM adhika se adhika pallA, dUsarA aura
cauthA, ina tIna guNasthAnoM kA saMbhava hai| isaliye ukta teraha prakAra ke
jIvoM meM sattA aura udaya ATha kamo kA mAnA gayA hai  /  /  sataluchegabaMdhA,
satudayA sattaaTa ThacattAri  /  satsadvachapaMcagaM udIraNA sanipajjatte  //  8
//  saptASTapaDebAbandhA, sadudayau saptASTacatvAri  /  saptASTaghaTpaJcadvika
mudAraNA saMjJi-garyApte  /  /  artha paryApta saMjI meM sAta karma kA, ATha
kama kA, chaha karma kA mora eka pharma kA, ye cAra badhasthAna hai, sattAsthAna
aura uvayasthAna sAta, ATha aura cAra karma ke haiM tathA ucIraNAsthAna sAta,
ATha, chaha, pAMca aura do karma kA hai  //  8  //  bhASArtha-jina prakRtiyoM kA
bandha eka sAtha (yugapat) ho, unake samudAyako bandhasyAna' kahate haiM  /  isI
taraha jina prakRtiyoM kI sattA

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 28, Karma Granth Part Four  **1. Satta Sthan:** The community of
natures whose arising is found together is called 'Satta Sthan'.  **2. Uvaya
Sthan:** The community of natures whose arising is found together is called
'Uvaya Sthan'.  **3. Dhirana Sthan:** The community of natures whose arising is
found together is called 'Dhirana Sthan'.  **4. Bandha Sthan:**  Of the above
four Sthans, the Bandha Sthan of the seven Karmas is found at the time when the
Bandha of Ayus (lifespan) does not occur. Once the Bandha of Ayus has occurred,
the time for its destruction is 'Jghanya Antarmuhurt Praman' and 'Utkrishta Fal
Antarmuhurt Karma' - a crore previous years and six months less than Tetis
Sagaropama Praman. Therefore, the state of the Bandha Sthan of Karma should also
be understood as the same, i.e., Jghanya Antarmuhurt Praman and Utkrishta
Asattam - a crore less and six months less than Tetis Sagaropama Praman.  **5.
Bandha Sthan of the Eighth Karma:**  The Bandha Sthan of the eighth Karma is
found at the time of Ayus Bandha. Ayus Bandha occurs until Jghanya or Utkrishta
Antarmuhurt, therefore, the Jghanya or Utkrishta state of the Bandha Sthan of
the eighth Karma is Antarmuhurt Praman.  **6. Antarmuhurt:**  - Nine time
Praman, ten time Praman, and so on, increasing by one time each, finally one
time less than Muhurt Praman, all these types of time are called 'Antarmuhurt'.
Jghanya Antarmuhurt is nine time, Utkrishta Antarmuhurt is one time less than
Muhurt, and Madhyama Antarmuhurt is ten time, eleven time, etc., all the types
of time in between should be understood.  - Two Ghadi (48 minutes) is called
'Muhurt'.  **7. Sagaropama and Palmopama:**  - Ten Kotakoti Pathyopamas make one
'Sagaropama', and countless years make one 'Palmopama'. (Tattvarth 4.0.15)  **8.
Utkrishta Antar of Ayus Bandha:**  - When a human being with a lifespan of a
crore previous years binds an Ayus of Tetis Sagaropama Praman in the third part
of his lifespan, then he can bind Ayus again only after six months of the
lifespan of a Deva, after binding Ayus until Antarmuhurt. From this perspective,
the Utkrishta Antar of Ayus Bandha should be understood.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 28 karmagrantha bhAga cAra eka sAtha pAyo jAya, unake samudAyako 'sattAsthAna'
jina prakRtiyoMkara udaya eka sAtha pAyA jAya, unake samudra ko 'uvayasthAna'
kSaura jina prakRtiyoM kI udIraNara eka sAtha pAyo jApa, unake samudAya ko
'dhIraNAsthAna' kahate hai  /  5. bandhasthAna | uparyukta cAra sthAnoM meM se
sAta karma kA bandhasthAna, usa samaya pAyA jAtA hai jisa samaya ki Ayu kA
bandha nahIM hotA | eka bAra Ayu kA bandha ho jAne ke bAda dUsarI bAra usakA
vadha hone meM jakaya kAla, antarmuhUrta pramANa' aura utkRSTa phAla,
antarmuhUrta-karma karor3a pUrvavarSa tathA chaha mAsa kama telAMsa sAgaropama
pramANa calA jAtA hai  /  ata eva karma ke bandhasthAna kI sthiti bhI utanI hI
arthAt jaghanya antarmuhUrtta pramANa aura utkRSTa asataM kama karor3a tathA
chaha mAsa kama tetIsa sAgaropama pramANa samajhanI cAhiye  /  - ATha karma kA
bandhasthAna, Ayu-bandha ke samaya pAyA jAtA hai  /  Ayu-bandha, jaghanya yA
utkRSTa antarmuhUtaM taka hotA hai, isaliye ATha ke bandhasthAna kI jaghanya yA
utkRSTa sthiti antarmuhUrta -pramANa hai| 1 - no samaya prabhANa, dasa samaya
pramANa, isa taraha eka eka samaya bar3hate bar3hate anta meM eka samaya kama
muhUrta - pramANa, yaha saba prakAra kA kAla antarmuhUrta' kahalAtA hai  /
jaghanya antarmuhuttaM naya samaya kA ukRSTa antarmuhUrtta eka samaya kama
muhUrta kA aura madhyama antarmuharsa dasa samaya, gyAraha samaya Adi bIca ke
saba prakAra ke kAla kA samajhanA cAhiye | do ghar3I ko - ar3atAlIsa minaTa ko -
'muhUrta' kahate haiM  /  2 2- dasa koTAkoTi patyopamakA eka 'sAgaropama' aura
asaMkhya varSo kA eka 'palmopama' hotA hai  /  tattvArtha a0 4 0 15 kA mASya  /
3:- jaba karor3a pUrva varSa kI Ayu vAlA koI manuSya apanI Ayu ke tIsare bhAga
meM anuttara vimAna kI tetIma sAgaropama pramANa Ayu bA~dhatA hai, taba
antarmuhUrtta paryanta Ayubandha karake phira vaha deva kI Ayu ke chaha mahIne
doSa rahane para hI Ayu bA~dha sakatA hai, isa apekSA se Ayu ke bandha kA
utkRSTa antara samajhanA  /

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **Six Karma Bandhasthana** are found in the first six
Gunasthana. This is because they do not have the Bandha of Aayu and Mohaniya,
and the Bandha of Bokarma is absent. The Ips Bandhasthana should be considered
as lowly as the lowest Gunasthana and as high as the highest Gunasthana. The
lowly state is equivalent to a moment, and the highest state is equivalent to an
Anlamuhurta.  **One Karma Bandhasthana** is found in the eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth Gunasthana. This is because in these Gunasthana, except for the
seventh, there is no Bandha of other Karmas. The lowly state of the eleventh
Gunasthana is equivalent to every moment, and the highest state is equivalent to
nine years minus one crore years ago. Therefore, the state of this Bandhasthana
should be understood as lowly as a moment and as high as nine years minus one
crore years ago.  **6. Sattastana**  **The first Sattastana** is found in the
first eleven Gunasthana. Its state is Anadi-Anant in relation to Abhavya and
Anadi-Sant in relation to Bhavya. This means that the Abhavya does not have a
beginning or an end to their Karma-Parampara. However, this is not the case for
the Bhavya. They do not have a beginning, but they do have an end.  **The second
Sattastana** is found only in the twelfth Gunasthana. This is the time it takes
for the most subtle, smallest, and fastest moving atom to move from one space to
another. This time is called 'Samaya'.  **The third Sattastana** is found only
in the thirteenth Gunasthana. This is the time it takes for the most subtle,
smallest, and fastest moving atom to move from one space to another. This time
is called 'Samaya'.  **- Tattvarth Sutra 4, Sutra 15 Commentary**  **1.
Samaya:** The time it takes for the most subtle, smallest, and fastest moving
atom to move from one space to another.  **2. Purva:** Eighty-four lakh years is
one Purvang, and eighty-four lakh Purvang is one Purva.  **- Tattvarth Sutra 4,
Sutra 15 Commentary**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra chaha karmakA bandhasthAna basaveM hI guNasthAna meM
pAyA jAtA hai| kyoMki usameM Ayu aura mohanIya, bo karmakA ghandha nahIM hotA  /
ipsa bandhasthAnako jaghanya tathA utkRSTa sthiti dasa guNasthAnako sthitike
barAbarajaghanya eka samaya kI' aura utkRSTa anlamuharta kIsamAnI cAhiye  /
_eka pharmakA bandhasthAna gyArahaveM, bArahaveM aura terahaveM, tIna
guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki ina guNasthAnoM ke samaya
sAtavevanIyake sivAya anya karmakA pandha nahIM hotA  /  gyArahaveM guNasthAnako
maghanya sthiti hara samayako kAra tesAI na ko uskRSTa sthiti nau varSa-kama
karor3a pUrva' varSakI hai  /  ata eva isa bandhAsthAnako sthiti, jaghanya
samayamAtrakI aura utkRSda nau varSa-kama karor3a pUrva varSa kI samajhanI
cAhiye  /  6. sattAsthAna  /  /  tIna sasAsthAnoMmeM se mATha kA sattAsthAna,
pahale gyAraha guNasthAnoM meM pAyA jAtA hai| isakI sthiti, abhaSyakI apekSA se
amAdi. ananta aura bhavyako apekSAse anAdi-sAnta hai| isakA sapaba yaha hai ki
abhavyako pharma-paramparAko jaise Avi nahIM hai, vaise anta mI nahIM hai| para
bhavyako karma paramparA ke viSaya meM aisA nahIM hai| usakI Adi to nahIM hai,
kintu anta hotA hai|| sAtakA sattAsthAna kevala bArahaveM guNasthAna meM hotA
hai  /  isa 1-atyanta sUkSma kiyAvAlA arthAt sabase jaghanya gatibAlA paramANu
jitane kAla meM apane AkAza-pradeza se anantara AkAza-pradeza meM jAtA hai, vaha
kAla 'samaya' kahalAtA hai| -tattvArtha a0 4 sU0 15 kA bhASya  /  2-caurAsI
lakSa varSa kA eka pUrvAGga aura caurAsI lakSa pUrvAGga kA eka 'pUrva' hotA hai
/  lasvArtha a04, 15 kA bhASya  /

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Granth Part Four  The **aghaanya** or **utkrusht** (excellent) state of
the **Gunasthan** is considered to be **Antamuhurt** (the final moment).
Therefore, the state of the **Sattaasthan** of the **Salaka** should be
understood in the same way. In this **Sattaasthan**, there are 7 **Mar** (death)
in the **Siyar** (cycle) of **Mohaaniya** (those who are subject to delusion).
The **Sattaasthan** of the **Chaar** (four) is found in the **Terha**
(thirteenth) and **Chauvaha** (fourteenth) **Gunasthan**. Because in these two
**Gunasthan**, only the **Chaar Aghaati Karma** (four non-destructive karmas)
remain. Combining these two **Gunasthan**, the **utkrusht** state is **Aath
Varsha Aath Maapt-Kam** (eight years eight months less) **Karod Purva-Pramaan**
(previous evidence). Therefore, the **utkrusht** state of the **Salaka**'s
**Sattaasthan** should be understood in the same way. Their **jghanya**
(inferior) state is **Antamuhurs-Pramaan** (final moment evidence).  7.
**Udayasthan**: The **Udayasthan** of the **Aath Karma** (eight karmas) resides
in the first to tenth **Gunasthan**. Its state is **Anaavi-Anarat** (without
beginning and without end) compared to **Abhavyas** (those who are not destined
for liberation) and **Anaadi-Saant** (without beginning and peaceful) compared
to **Bhavyas** (those who are destined for liberation). However, its state is
**Saavi-Saant** (with beginning and peaceful) compared to the middle state of
those who have fallen from **Upshamantheenis** (those who have attained the
state of tranquility). After falling from the **Updhaam-Shreni** (category of
higher realms), one can again attain the **Antamuhurs** category. If one cannot
attain **Antamuhurs**, then one must inevitably go through **Ashta** (eight)
**Apuugdala-Puravart** (cycles of rebirth) with some reduction. Therefore, the
**Udayasthan** of the **Aath** should be understood as having a **Saavi-Saant**
state, **jghanya** as **Antamuhurt-Pramaan** and **utkrusht** as **Vesh-Uun**
(slightly less) **Ardhpurval Puravart Pramaan** (half-cycle of rebirth
evidence).  The **Udayasthan** of the **Saas** (breath) is found in the eleventh
and twelfth **Gunasthan**. The state of this **Udayasthan** is considered
**jghanya** as **Ek Samay** (one moment) and **utkrusht** as **Antamuhurt**. The
**Jiva** (soul) who dies in the eleventh **Gunasthan** after staying for only
one moment and is born in the **Anuttar Vimaan** (highest celestial realm),
experiences the **Uday** (arising) of the **Aath Karma** upon birth. Therefore,
the **Udayasthan** of the **Saas** is considered **jghanya** as **Samay-
Pramaan** (moment evidence). The **Jiva** who attains the twelfth **Gunasthan**
will, at most, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma grantha bhAga cAra guNasthAnako aghanya yA utkRSTa sthiti antamahataM kI
mAnI jAtI hai  /  ata eva sAlake sattAsthAna kI sthiti utanI samajhanI cAhiye  /
isa sattAsthAna meM mohanIya ke siyAra ja meM 7 mara hai| cAra kA sattAsthAna
teraho aura cauvaha guNasthAna meM pAyA jAtA hai| kyoMki ina vo guNasthAnoM meM
cAra aghAti karma ko hI sattA zeSa rahatI hai  /  ina do guNasthAnoM ko milAkara
utkRSTa sthiti ATha varSa ATha mApta-kama karor3a pUrva-pramANa haiM  /  ata eva
bArake sattAsthAna kI utkRSTa sthiti utanI samajhanA cAhiye  /  unako jaghanya
sthiti to antama husaM-pramANa hai| 7. udayasthAna  /  . ATha karmakA
udayasthAna, pahale se dasaveM taka basa guNasthAnoM meM rahatA hai| isakI
sthiti abhavyako apekSA se anAvi-anarata aura bhavya kI apekSA se anAdi-sAnta
hai  /  parantu upazamantheNI se gire hue madhya kI apekSA se usakI sthiti sAvi-
sAnta hai  /  upadhAma-zreNI se girane ke bAda phira se antamuharsa meM zreNI kI
jA sakatI hai| yadi antarmuhUrta meM na kI jA sako to azta meM kucha-kama
apugdala-parAvarta ke bAra avazya ko jAtI hai| isaliye mATha ke udayasyAna ko
sAvisAnta sthiti jaghanya antarmuhata -pramANa aura uskRSTa veza-Una (kucha
kama) ardhapuravala parAvarta pramANa samajhanI cAhiye  /  sAsakA uvayasthAna,
gyAreM aura bArahaveM guNasthAna meM pAyA jAtA hai| isa uvayasthAna kI sthiti,
jaghanya eka samayako aura utkRSTa antamuhUrta kI mAnI jAtI hai  /  jo joya
gyArahave guNasthAna meM eka samaya mAtra raha kara maratA hai aura anuttara
vimAna meM paidA hotA hai, yaha paidA hote hI ATha karma ke ucaya kA anubhava
karatA hai, isa apekSA se sAtake upayasthAna ko jaghanya sthiti samaya-pramANa
kahI gaI hai  /  jo jIva, bArahave guNasthAna ko pAtA hai, vaha adhika se adhika

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The *karmagrantha* experiences the arising of seven *karmas* until the state of
*rasagunasthan* and the *mahaant* (great end). It definitely experiences the
arising of *chhar karma* after attaining the thirteenth *gunasthan*. From this
perspective, the seventh *gunasthan* is called the *utkrusht* (excellent) *ant*
(end). It is found in the seventh, thirteenth, and fourteenth *gunasthan*
because in these *gunasthan*s, no *karma* other than *aghatikarma* arises. The
state of this *utkrusht* is *jghanya* (inferior) *antarmuhurt* (within a moment)
and *utkrusht* (excellent) *besh* (more than) *un karod purv varsh* (one hundred
crore previous years).  8. *Udiranasthan*. The *udiranasthan* of eight occurs at
the time of *udorana* (arising) of the lifespan. The *udorana* of lifespan
occurs in the first six *gunasthan*s. Therefore, this *udiranasthan* is found in
these *gunasthan*s.  The *udiranasthan* of seven occurs at the time when the
*udorana* of lifespan stops. The *udorana* of lifespan stops when the remaining
lifespan is equal to one *avalika*. The first, second, fourth, fifth, and sixth
*gunasthan*s can be found at the time of the last *avalika*. The others cannot.
Therefore, the time of the *udiranasthan* of seven should be understood in these
five *gunasthan*s. The *udiranasthan* of seven does not occur in the third
*gunasthan* because this *gunasthan* is not possible when the remaining lifespan
is equal to one *avalika*. Therefore, the *udiranasthan* of eight is considered
in this *gunasthan*.  The *udiranasthan* of nine occurs from the seventh
*gunasthan* until one *avalika* remains in the eighth *gunasthan*.  1. One
*muhurt* is divided into 1.63, 73, 216 parts, and each part is called an
*avalika*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha mAga bAra rasa guNasthAna kI sthiti taka-anta mahattaM taka ke
sAta karma ke udayakA anubhava karatA hai, paucha avazya terahaveM guNasthAna ko
pAkara chAra karma ke udaya kA anumava karatA hai| isa apekSA se sApta ke
upayasthAna ko utkRSTa kA antama:': kahI hai| cA:  /  svayasthAna, terahave aura
cauvarSe guNasthAna meM pAyA jAtA hai kyoMki ina vo guNasthAnoM meM aghAtikarma
ke sivAya anya kisI karma kA udaya nahIM rahatA  /  isa ukSyasthAna kI sthiti
jaghanya antarmuhUrta aura utkRSTa, beza- una karor3a pUrva varSa kI hai  /  8.
udIraNAsthAna  /  ATha kA udIraNAsthAna, zAyu ko udoraNA ke samaya hotA hai| Ayu
ko uporamA pahale chaha guNasthAnoM meM hotI hai  /  ata eva yaha ubIraNAsyAma
inhIM guNasthAnoM meM pAyA jAtA hai| sAta kA utIraNAsthAna, usa samaya hotA hai
jisa samaya ki Ayu ko udIraNA ruka jAtI hai| Ayu ko uvIraNA taba ruka jAtI hai,
jaba bartamAna Ayu AlikA'-pramANa zeSa raha jAtI hai| vartamAna Ayu ko antima
AvalikA ke samaya pahalA, dUsarA, cauthA, pAMcavA aura chaThA, ye pAMca
guNasthAna pAye jA sakate haiN| dUsare nahIM  /  ataeva sAta ke khadIraNAsthAna
kA sammaya, ina pani guNasthAnoM meM samajhanA caahiye| tIsare guNasthAna meM
sAta ko udoraNAsthAna nahIM hotA, kyoMki mAvalikA-pramANa Ayu zeSa rahane ke
samaya, isa guNasthAna kA sambhava hI nahIM hai| isaliye isa guNasthAna meM ATha
kAhI udIraNAsthAna mAnA jAtA hai| maha kA ubIraNAsthAna sAtaveM guNasthAna se
lekara vasaveM guNasthAna kI eka mAlikA-pramANa sthiti bAkI rahatI hai, taba
taka 1- eka muhUrta ke 1. 63, 73, 216 veM bhAga kI 'AlikA' kahate hai

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagranth Part Four  It is found. Because at that time, Ayus and Vedaniya,
these two do not arise. From the last Avali of the Basva Gunasthan, where the
Udaran of Mohaniya also stops, to the last Avali of the Twelfth Gunasthan, there
are five Udaranasthanas.  From the last Avali of the Twelfth Gunasthan, where
the Udaran of Jnanaavaran, Darshanavaran and Antaraya, three Karmas, stops, to
the end of the Thirteenth Gunasthan, there are four Udaranasthanas. In the
Sixteenth Gunasthan, due to the absence of Yoga, even though it is Ucchya, there
is no Udaran of Nama-Gotra.  The above mentioned fifteen Gunasthanas,
Sattaasthanas etc. are sufficient for understanding. Because the same being is
the possessor of all the Gunasthanas. Which Gunasthan has which Anvasthan,
Sasasthan, Ukyasthan and Udaranasthan. This will be discussed further in verses
56 to 62. ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra pAyA jAtA hai| kyoMki usa samaya Ayu aura vedanIya, ina
do ko udImA nahIM hotii| basaveM guNasthAna kI antima AvalikA, jisameM mohanIya
kI bhI udAraNA ruka jAtI hai, usase lekara bArahaveM guNasthAma ko antima
AvalikA paryanta pAMca kA udIraNAsthAna hotA hai| bArahaveM guNasthAna kI antima
AvalikA, jisameM jJAnAvaraNa, varzanAvaraNa aura antarAya, tIna karma kI udIraNA
rUka jAtI hai, usase sekara terahaveM gaNasthAna ke anta paryanta cAra kA
udIraNA-sthAna hotA hai| saudahaveM guNasthAna meM yoga na hone ke kAraNa ucya
rahanepara bhI nAma-gotra kI uporaNA nahIM hotii| ukta satra pandhasthAna,
sattAsthAna Adi paryApta saMjI ke haiN| kyoMki bauvahoM gaNasthAnoM kA adhikArI
vahI hai| kisa kisa guNasthAna meM kaunasA phaunasA anvasthAna, sasAsthAna,
ukyasthAna aura udIraNAsthAna hai| isakA vicAra Age gA0 56 se 62 taka meM hai  /
/  ||

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four Appendix to the First Chapter. Appendix "K". Footnote
on page 5 of "Levaya"  1. Leshya has two divisions: (a) Dravya and (b) Bhava.
(a) Dravya Leshya is characterized by Pudgala. There are mainly three opinions
regarding its nature: (1) Karma Vargana-Nishpanna, (2) Karma-Nishyanta, and (3)
Yoga-Parinam.  1. The first opinion believes that Dravya Leshya is formed from
Karma Vargana. However, it is different from the eight Karmas: it is the Karma-
Sharira. This opinion is mentioned in Uttaradhyayana, A5 34, commentary, Dhru
650.  2. The second opinion suggests that Dravya Leshya is in the form of Karma
Nishyanta (the flow of bound Karma). When Karma exists in the fourteenth
Gunasthan, its Nishyanta leads to the absence of Leshya. This opinion is
mentioned on the same page, where the commentator Badivatal Shrisantisuri
writes, "Guru Vastu Vyachhakshase."  3. The third opinion is by
Shriharibhadrasuri and others. This opinion is explained by Shrimalayagiri in
the commentary on the Padadhana verse 17, page 330. They consider Dravya Leshya
as an independent Dravya, formed from Yoga Vargana. Upadhyay Thivinayavijayaji,
in his Agam-Dohaan-Roop Lokaprakash, Sarg 3, Shlok 285, accepts this opinion.
(b) Bhava Leshya is a specific result of the soul, which is obtained through
Sanslesha and Yoga. Due to the various divisions of Sanslesha, such as Tivra,
Tivratara, Tiyatam, Manda, Mandatara, Mamvatam, etc., Bhava Leshya is actually
of countless types. However, the scriptures have shown its nature by dividing it
into six parts for brevity. See, Ga 12. To understand the nature of these six
divisions, the scriptures provide two examples:  First: A group of men were
going to eat Jambu fruits (black plums). One of them saw a Jambu tree and said,
"Look, the Jambu tree is here. Instead of climbing up for the fruits, it would
be better to cut down this tree with its large branches laden with fruits."
Hearing this, another man said, "What is the benefit of cutting it down? Just
cut the branches."  The third man said, "That's not right either. Even by
cutting the small branches, we can get the fruits."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kArmagrantha bhAga cAra prathamAdhikAra ke pariziSTa  /  /  pariziSTa "k"|
pRSTha 5 ke "levayA" pAdapara 1-lezyA ke (ka) dravya aura (sa) bhAva, isa
prakAra do bheda hai| (ka)dravyalezyA,pudgla-vizeSAtmaka hai| isake svarUpa ke
sambandha meM mukhyatayA tIna mata haiN|(1) karmavargaNA-niSpanna (2)karma-
niSyanda aur(3)yog-prinnaam| 1le mata kA yaha mAnanA hai ki lelyA-dravya, karma-
vargaNA se bane huye hai| phira bhI ne ATha karma se bhinna hI haiM: jamA ki
kArmaNazarIra  /  yaha maMta uttarAdhyayana, a5 34 ko TIkA, dhR0 650 para
ullikhita hai| 2 re mata kA Azaya yaha hai f. lezyA-dravya, karma niSyandarUpa
(badhyamAna karma-pravAharUpa) hai| caudahaveM guNasthAna meM karma ke hone para
bhI usakA niSpandana hone se lezyA ke abhAva kI upapatti ho jAtI hai| yaha mata
ukta pRSTha para hI nirdiSTa hai, jisako TIkAkAra bAdivatAla zrIzAntisUri ne
'guravastu vyAcakSase' kahakara likhA hai| 3rA mata zrIharibhadasari Adi kA hai|
isa mata kA Azaya zrImalayagiri jI ne papradhaNA pada 17 kI TIkA, pR0 330 para
spaSTa basalAyA hai| be sezyA-dravya ko yogavargaNA-ansargasa svatantra dravya
mAnate haiN| upAdhyAya thIvinayavijayajI ne apane Agama-dohanarUpa lokaprakAza,
sarga 3, zloka 285 meM isa mata ko grAhya ThaharAyA hai| (kha) bhAvalezyA, AtmA
kA pariNAma-vizeSa hai, jI saMzleza aura yoga se anagata hai saMpaleza ke
tIvra,tIvratara,tIyatama, manda, mandatara mamvatama Adi aneka bheda hone se
vastutaH bhAvalezyA, asaMkhya prakAra kI hai tathApi saMkSepa meM chaha vibhAga
karake zAstra meM usakA svarUpa dikhAyA hai| dekhiye, gA0 12 vii| chaha bhedoM
kA svarUpa samalane ke liye pAAstra meM nIce likhe do dRSTAnsa diye gaye
haiM:pahilA:-koI challa puruSa jambUphala (jAmUna) khAne ko icchA karate huye
cale jA rahe the, itane meM jambavRkSako dekha unameM se eka puruSa
bolA-'lIjiye, jamvRkSa to A gayA  /  aba phaloM ke liye Upara car3hane kI apekSA
phaloM se ladI huI bar3I-bar3I zAkhA vAle isa vRkSa ko kATa girAnA hI acchA
hai|" yaha sunakara mare ne kahA"kSa kATane se payA lAbha ? kevala zAkhAoM ko
kATa do|" tIsare puruSa ne kahA-"yaha bhI ThIka nahIM, sroTI-choTI zAkhAoM ke
kATa lene se bhI to kAma nikAlA jA sakatA hai?"

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fourth chapter of the Karma Granth says, "Why cut the branches? Just pluck
the clusters of fruits." The fifth one said, "What is the use of the clusters?
It is better to take only a few fruits from them." Finally, the sixth man said,
"All these thoughts are pointless; because the fruits we want are already lying
down below, can't we achieve our purpose from them?"  Another story: Six men
were going to loot wealth. On the way, they came across a village, and one of
them said, "Destroy this village - kill any human, animal, bird, whoever you
find, and loot the wealth." Hearing this, the second one said, "Kill the animals
and birds, but only kill the humans who resist." The third one said, "Why kill
the poor women? Kill the men." The fourth one said, "Not all men, only those who
are armed." The fifth one said, "Why kill even the armed men who don't resist?"
Finally, the sixth man said, "What is the benefit of killing anyone? Take the
wealth in a way that it can be stolen, and don't kill anyone. It is not right to
loot wealth and kill its owners."  From these two examples, the nature of
Leshyas is clearly understood. In each example, the results of the subsequent
men are found to be auspicious, more auspicious, and most auspicious compared to
the results of the previous men. In the results of the subsequent men, there is
a decrease in affliction and an increase in gentleness. The result of the first
man should be understood as 'Krishna Leshya', the result of the second as 'Neel
Leshya', and so on, the result of the sixth man should be understood as 'Shukla
Leshya'. - Necessary Haribhadri Vritti p. 15 and Lok. Pra., S.3, Shloka 363-380.
According to the above three opinions regarding the nature of Leshya-dravya, the
existence of Bhava-Leshya should be understood up to the thirteenth Gunasthan.
This principle is also accepted in Gommatasar-Jivakand, because it calls Yoga-
pravritti as Leshya. As: "Ayoti chalesamo, suhatiyalessa du desaviravatiye tatti
suska lesa, ajogita alessan tu ||531||"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra cauthe ne kahA-"zAkhAyeM bhI kyoM kATanA ? phaloM ke
gucchoM ko tor3alIjiye" _pAMcoM bolA-"gucchoM se kyA prayojana ? unameM se kucha
phaloM ko hI ne lenA acchA hai|" anta meM chaThe puruSa ne kahA- ye saba vicAra
nirarthaka haiM; kyoMki hama loga jinheM cAhate hai, ve phana to nIce bhI gire
huye haiM, kyA unhIM se apanI prayojana-siddhi nahIM ho sakatI hai ?"
dUsarA:-koI chaH purupa dhana lUTane ke irAde se jA rahe the| rAste meM kisI
gA~va ko pAkara unameM se eka bolA:- isa gAMva ko tahasa-nahasa kara do-manuSya,
pazu, pakSI, jo koI mile, unheM mAroM aura dhana lUTa lo|" yaha suna kara dUsarA
bolA:- pazu pakSI jAdi ko mAra : kebala virodha karane vAle manuSyoM hI ko
maaro|"  /  tIsare ne kahA:"becArI striyoM kI hatyA kyoM karanA ? puruSoM ko
mAra do  / " cauthe ne kahA:-"saba pUruSoM ko nahIM jo sazastra hoM, unhIM ko
maaro|' pAMca ne kahA-"jo sazastra puruSa bhI virodha nahIM karate, unheM kyoM
mAranA  / ' anta meM chaThe puruSa ne kahA: kisI ko mArane se kyA lAbha? jisa
prakAra se dhana apaharaNa kiyA jA sake, usa prakAra se use uThA lo aura kisI ko
mArI mata  /  eka to pana lUTanA aura dUsare usake mAlikoM ko mAranA, yaha ThIka
nhiiN|" ina do dRSTAntoM se lezyAoM kA svarUpa spaSTa jAnA jAtA hai| pratyeka
raSTAnta ke chaha-chaha puruSoM meM pUrva-pUrva puruSa ke pariNAma kI apekSA
utarauttara puruSa ke pariNAma zubha, zubhatara aura zubhatama pAye jAte haiM-
uttarauttara puruSa ke pariNAmoM meM saMkleza kI nyUnaptA aura mRdutA kI
adhikatA pAI jAtI hai| prathama purupa ke pariNAma kI 'kRSNalezyA.' dUsare ke
pariNAma ko 'nIlalezyA', isa prakAra krama se chaThe puruSa ke pariNAma kA
'zuklale kyA' samajhanA cAhiye  /  -Avazyaka hAribhadrI vRtti pR0 15 tathA loka0
pra0, sa.3, zloka 363-380  /  lezyA-dravya ke svarUpa sambandhI ukta tInoM mata
ke anusAra terahaveM guNasthAna paryanta bhAva-lezyA kA sadbhava samajhanA
cAhiye  /  yaha siddhAnta gommaTasAra-jIvakANDa ko bhI mAnya hai; kyoMki usameM
yoga-pravRtti ko lezyA kahA hai  /  yathA: "ayoti chalessAmo, suhatiyalessA du
desaviravatiye tattI suzkA lessA, ajogitA alessaM tu  // 531 /  / "

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  In Sarvarthasiddhi and in the transfer of
Gommatasara, the tendency of yoga influenced by the rise of kṣaya is called
'leśyā'. Although this statement suggests that leśyā exists only up to the tenth
guṇasthāna, it is not contradictory to the previous statement because it is a
relative statement. The previous statement only regulates the result that is the
cause of the bondage of the nature-region, in the form of leśyā, while this
statement expands the result that is the cause of all four bondages, including
the state section, etc., in the form of leśyā, not just the result that is the
cause of the bondage of the nature-region. For example:  • "The tendency of yoga
influenced by the rise of kṣaya, which is the cause of emotion, is called
audayiki." Sarvarthasiddhi - Chapter 2, Sutra 6.  "Yoga-patti leśśā, kṣaya
udyārañjiyā ho. Tat-to doṣṇaṁ kajje, gandha-cakkra samuddi 486 || 35 - Jīvakāṇḍa
The consideration of the color, smell, etc. of dravya-leśyā and the
consideration of the characteristics, etc. of bhāva-leśyā are in Uttaragadhyāna,
B. 34. For this, there is prajñāpanā - leśyāpada, necessary, lokāprakāśa, etc.
in the Ākāra Grantha, Śvetāmbara literature. The first example of the two
mentioned above is in Jīvakāṇḍa, G. 506-507. To know some special things about
leśyā, it is worth seeing the leśyā-mārga-gādhikāra (P. 486-555) of Jīvakāṇḍa.
The indicator or consideration of the impurity and purity of the inner feelings
of beings, as it is in Jain scriptures. Something similar to this is the
division of six castes in the opinion of Mangali Gosal Putra, which is done on
the basis of six colors, like black and blue, based on the purity and impurity
of karma. This is described in the "Dīva Nikāya - Sāmaphala-sutta". There are
also six jīva-varṇa in the "Mahabharata" 12.286, which are somewhat similar to
the above idea.  There is also such an idea in "Pātañjala Yoga Darshan" 4.7;
because in it, by dividing karma into four parts, the purity and impurity of the
feelings of beings are separated. For this, see the Marathi translation of Doṣa-
nikāya, p. 56.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra sarvArthasiddhi meM aura gommaTasAra ke sthAnAntara meM
kapAyodaya-anuraMjita yoga pravRtti ko lezyA' kahA hai| yadyapi isa kathana se
dasaveM guNasthAna paryanta hI lezyA kA honA pAyA jAtA hai, para vaha kathana
apekSAkRta hone ke kAraNa pUrva kathana se viruddha nahIM hai  /  pUrva kathana
meM kevala prakRtipradeza bandha ke nimittabhUta pariNAma lezyArUpa se niyamita
hai aura isa kathana meM sthiti anubhAga Adi cAroM bandhoM ke nimittabhUta
pariNAma zyArUpa se vikSita hai, kevala prakRti- pradeza bandhake nimittabhUta
pariNAma nahIM  /  yathA: * "bhAvalezyA kaSAyodayarAJjitA yoga-pravattiriti
kRtvA audayikItyucyate  / " sarvArthasiddhi - adhyAya 2, sUtra 6  /  "jogapattI
lessA, kasAya udyAraMjiyA ho  /  tatto doSNaM kajje, gaMdhacakka samuddi 486 //
35 - jIvakANDa dravyalezyA ke varNa - gandha Adi kA vicAra tathA bhAvalezyA ke
lakSaNa Adi kA vicAra uttaragdhyana, bha0 34 meM hai  /  isake liye prajJApanA -
lezyApada, Avazyaka, loka prakAza Adi AkAra granya zvetAmbarasAhitya meM hai  /
ukta do dRSTantoM meM se pahalA dRSTAnta, jIvakANDa gA0 506-507 meM hai  /
lezyA kI kucha vizeSa bAteM jAnane ke liye jIvakANDa kA leNyAmArgagAdhikAra (pA0
486 - 555 dekhane yogya hai | jIvoM ke Antarika bhAvoM kI malinatA tathA
pavitratA ke tara tama bhAva kA sUcaka yA kA vicAra, jaisA jaina zAstra meM hai|
kucha usI ke samAna chaha jAtiyoM kA vibhAga, maGgalIgosAla putra ke mata meM
hai, jo karma kI zuddhi - azuddhi ko lekara kRSNa-nIla Adi chaha varNoM ke
AdhAra para kiyA gayA hai  /  isakA varNana, 'dIva nikAya -sAmaphalasutta" meM
hai  /  "mahAbhArata" ke 12.286 meM bhI chaha jIva-varNa dina hai, jo ukta
vicAra se kucha milate-julate haiM  /  "pAtaJjalayogadarzana" ke 4,7 meM bhI
aisI kalpanA hai; kyoMki usameM karma ke cAra vibhAga karake jIvoM ke bhAvoM kI
zuddhi-azuddhi pRthakaraNa kiyA hai| isake liye dekhiye, doSanikAya kA marAThI
bhASAntara pR0 56  /  .

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four, Appendix "K"  **Page 10, Line 18**  The term
'Panchendriya' refers to the five types of 'Ekendriya' etc. based on the
Dravyendriya, because all sentient beings have five Bhavendriya.  **For
example:**  "Ahva pahunch ladidiyam pipanchediya samye ||2666||" -  According to
the Visheshavashak, meaning from the perspective of Labdhindriya, all beings are
Panchendriya.  "Panchedi vv baulo, maro dhva savya-vis ovalambhao." -  According
to the Visheshavashak, G. 2001, meaning due to the ability to know all objects,
a person is like a wise Bakul tree, having five senses.  It is true that the
Bhavendriya of Dwindriya etc. are progressively more and more distinct from the
Bhavendriya of Ekendriya etc. However, there is no doubt that even those who do
not have all five Dravyendriya, still possess all five Bhavendriya. This is also
confirmed by modern science. Dr. Jagdish Chandra Bose's research has proven the
existence of memory in plants. Memory, which is a function of mental power, if
found in Ekendriya, then there is no obstacle in the existence of other senses,
which are considered to be of a lower order than the mind.  Ancient sages, who
were special visionaries, have given much thought to the subject of senses,
which is available in many Jain scriptures. Some of it is as follows:  There are
two types of senses: (1) Dravyarup and (2) Bhavarup. Dravyendriya, being
Pudgala-born, is material; but Bhavendriya is knowledge-based, because it is a
synonym for consciousness power.  (1) Dravyendriya is born from the rise of
Angopangsha and Nirman Karma. It has two divisions: (a) Nivritti and (b)
Upakaran.  (a) The shape of the sense is called 'Nivritti'. Nivritti also has
two divisions: (1) Bahir and (2) Abhyantar. (1) The external...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 R karmagrantha bhAga cAra pariziSTa "kha"  /  pRSTha 10, paMkti 18 ke
'paJcendriya' zabda para jIva ke ekendriya Adi pAMca bheda kiye gaye haiM, so
dravyendriya ke AdhAra para kyoMki bhAvendriyoM to sabhI saMsArI jIvoM ko pAMcoM
hotI haiM  /  yathAH "ahavA pahunca laDidiyaM pipaMceMdiyA samye  // 2666 // " -
vizeSAvazyaka arthAt labdhIndriyakI apekSA se sabhI sArI jAMva paJcendriya haiM
/  "paMcedi vva baulo, maro dhva savya-visa ovalaMbhAo  / " ityAdi -
vizeSAvazyaka, ga0 2001 arthAt sava viSaya kA jJAna hone kI yogyatA ke kAraNa
bakula dakSa manuSya kI taraha pA~ca indriyoM vAlA hai  /  . yaha ThIka hai ki
dvIndriya Adi kI bhAvendriya ekendriya Adi kI bhAvendriya se uttarotara vyakta
vyaktatara hI hotI hai  /  para isameM koI sandeha nahIM ki jinako dravyendriyo
pA~ca pUrI nahIM haiM unheM bhI bhAvendriyA~ to sabhI hotI hI haiN| yaha bAta
Adhunika vijJAna se bhI pramANita hai  /  DA0 jagadIzacandra basukI khoja ne
vanaspati meM smaraNa zakti kA astitva siddha kiyA hai| smaraNa, jo ki
mAnasazakti kA kArya hai, vaha yadi eke ndriya meM pAyA jAtA hai to phira usameM
anya indriyA~ jo ki mana se nIce kI zreNikI mAnI jAtI hai, unake hone meM koI
bAdhA nahIM  /  indriya ke sambandha meM prAcIna kAla meM vizeSa darzI mahAtmAoM
ne bahuta vicAra kiyA hai, jo aneka jaina granthoM meM upalabdha hai| usakA
kucha aMza isa prakAra hai : indriyA~ do prakAra kI hai. - ( 1 ) dravyarupa aura
(2) bhAvarupa | dravyendriya, pudgla-janya hone se jarUpa hai; para bhAvendriya,
jJAnarUpa hai, kyoMki vaha cetanA zakti kA paryAya hai  /  (1) dravyendriya
aGgopAGkSa aura nirmANa nAmakarma ke udaya-janya hai  /  isake do bheda haiM:-
(ka) nirvRtti aura (kha) upakaraNa  /  (ka) indriyake AkAra kA nAma 'nivRtti'
hai nirvRtti ke bhI (1) bAhya aura (2) Abhyantara ye do bheda haiM  /  (1)
indriyake bAhya

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagrantha Part Four  (1) The external shape is called 'Bahyanivritti' and (2)
the internal shape is called 'Abhyantar Nivritti'. The external part is like a
sword and the internal part is like the sharp edge of a sword, which is made of
extremely pure atoms. This pudgala form of Abhyantar Nivritti is according to
the Prajnapana Sutra - Indriyapadaki Tika 026. In Acharangiti Griha 104, its
form is described as chetanmaya.  Regarding shape, it should be known that the
shape of the skin is of many types, but there is no separation between its
external and internal shape. Whatever the external shape of the skin of a
creature, so is its internal shape. But this is not the case with other senses:
except for the skin, the internal shape of all other senses does not match the
external shape. The internal shapes of the same type of senses of all types of
creatures are considered to be of one kind. For example: the internal shape of
the ear is like a Kadamba flower, the eye is like a lentil seed, the nose is
like a flower of Ati Mukta, and the tongue is like a knife. But the external
shape is seen to be different in all species. For example: look at the ears,
eyes, nose, and tongue of humans, elephants, horses, bulls, cats, rats, etc.
(b) The subject-grasping power of Abhyantar Nivritti is called
'Upakaranendriya'. (2) Bhavaendriya is of two types: - (1) Labdhirupa and (2)
Upayogarupa. (1) The ability-speciality of the power of knowing the destruction
of Matijnana Avarana is called 'Labdhirupa Bhavaendriya'. (2) According to this
Labdhirupa Bhavaendriya, the tendency of the soul to grasp the object is called
'Upayogarupa Bhavaendriya'.  To know this subject in detail, one should see
Prajnapana-Pad 15, page 263/ Tattvarth Adhyay 2, Sutra 17-18 and Vritti,
Visheshav, Ga 26632003 and Lokaprakash-Sarg 3 Shlok 464 onwards.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra AkAra ko 'bAhyanirvRti kahate haiM aura ( 2 ) bhItarI
AkAra ko 'Abhyantara nivRtti' bAhya bhAga talavAra ke samAna hai aura Abhyantara
bhAga talavAra kI teja bAra ke samAna, jo atyanta svaccha paramANuoM kA banA huA
hotA hai  /  Abhyantara nirvRtti kA yaha pudgla svarUpa prajJApanAsUtra -
indriyapadakI TIkA 0 26 ke anusAra hai| AcarAGgaiti gR0 104 meM usakA svarUpa
cetanAmaya batalAyA hai  /  AkAra ke sambandha meM yaha bAta jAnanI cAhiye ki
svacAkI AkRti aneka prakArako hotI hai, para usake bAhya aura Abhyantara AkAra
meM judAI nahIM hai| kisI prANI kI tvacAkA jaisA bAhya AkAra hotA hai, vaisA ho
Abhyantara AkAra hotA hai  /  parantu anya indriyoMke viSaya meM aisA nahIM
hai:tvacAko chor3a anya saba indriyoMke Abhyantara AkAra, bAhya AkArase nahI
milate | saba jAti ke prANiyoM kI sajAtIya indriyoM ke Abhyantara bAkAra, eka
taraha ke mAne huye haiM  /  jaise:- kAnakA mAbhyantara AkAra, kadamba-
puSpajaisA, AMkha kA masUrake dAnA jaisA, nAkakA atimuktaka ke phUla jaisA aura
jIkA churAjaisA hai| kintu bAhya AkAra saba jAtimeM bhinna-bhinna dekhe jAte
haiM  /  udAharaNArtha:- manuSya, hAthI, ghor3A, baila, billI, cUhA Adike kAna,
AMkha, nAka, jIbha ko dekhiye | (kha) AbhyantaranirvRtikI viSaya- grahaNa-
zaktiko 'upakaraNendriya' kahate hai| (2) bhAvendriya do prakArako hai: - (1)
labdhirUpa aura (2) upayogarUpa | (1) matijJAnAvaraNake kSayopazamako betanA-
zaktikI yogyatA- vizeSako 'labdhirUpa bhAvendriya' kahate hai  /  ( 2 ) isa
labdhirUpa mAvendriyake anusAra AtmAkI viSaya grahaNa meM jo pravRtti hotI hai,
use upayoga rUpa bhAvendriya' kahate hai  /  isa viSayako vistArapUrvaka jAnane
ke liye prajJApanA-pada 15, pR0 263/ tatvArtha adhyAya 2, sU0 17-18 tathA vRtti,
vizeSAva0, gA0 26632003 sathA lokaprakAza-sarga 3 zloka 464 se Age dekhanA
cAhiye  /  " LAAM L

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 'G' | On Shambha Karma Granth Part Four Page 10 Line 16 "Sanjna" The
meaning of Sanjna is Ayog (mental activity - special). These have two divisions:
(a) Knowledge and (b) Experience. (a) Mati, Shruta, etc. five types of knowledge
are 'Jnanasanjna'. (b) Anubhavasanjna (1) Ahar, (2) Bhay, (3) Maithun, (4)
Parigraha (5) Krodha (6) Man, (7) Maya (8) Lobha, (9) Ogha, (10) Lok (11) Moh.
(12) Dharma, (13) Sukha, (14) Duhkha, (15) Jugupsa and (16) Shoka, these are
sixteen divisions. In Acharanga-Niyukti, Ga. 38-39, these sixteen divisions of
Anubhavasanjna are made. But in Bhagavati-Shatak 7. Uddeshya and in Prajnapana-
Pad, the first ten of these are specified. These Sanjnartha are found in all
beings in varying degrees, therefore these Sanjhi Asanjhi behaviors are not
regulatory. In the scriptures, there is a distinction between Sanjhi and
Asanjhi, so from one-sense to five-sense beings, the development of
consciousness is progressively greater than other Asanjna. To explain this
development, the scriptures have divided it into several parts. (1) In the first
division, the very minimal development of knowledge is intended. This
development is so minimal that beings with this development are like
unconscious, without any activity. This very subtle consciousness is called
'Ogha-Sakha'. One-sense beings have only Ogha-Sakha. (2) In the second division,
the amount of development is intended such that some long-past - not very long-
past - is remembered and there is a tendency towards desirable objects and
aversion from undesirable objects. This tendency-aversion-causing knowledge is
called 'Hetuvaadopaadeshiki Sanjna'. Two-sense, three-sense, four-sense and
fully developed five-sense beings have Hetuvaadopaadeshiki Sanjna. (3) In the
third division, the development is intended such that long-past

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 = pariziSTa 'ga' | zamba para karma grantha bhAga cAra pR0 10 paMkti 16 ke "
saMjJA " saMjJA kA matalaba Ayoga ( mAnasika kriyA - vizeSa ) se hai | inake
(ka) jJAna aura (kha) anubhava, ye do bheda hai  /  J (ka) mati zruta Adi pA~ca
prakAra kA jJAna 'jJAnasaMjJA' hai  /  (kha) anubhavasaMjJA (1) AhAra, (2)
bhaya, (3) maithuna, (4) parigraha (5) krodha (6) mAna, (7) mAyA (8) lobha, (6)
ogha, (10) loka (11) moha. (12) dharma, (13) sukha, (14) duHkha, (15) jugupsA
aura (16) zoka, ye solaha bheda hai| AcArAGga-niyukti, gA0 38 39 meM to
anubhavasaMjJA ke ye solaha bheda kiye gaye hai| lekina bhagavatI - zataka 7.
uddeza meM tathA prajJApanA-pada meM inameM se pahale dasa ho bheda, nirdiSTa
hai| ye saMjJArtha saba jIvoM meM nyUnAdhika pramANa meM pAI jAtI hai, isaliye
ye saMjJi asajJi vyavahArako niyAmaka nahIM hai| zAstrameM sajJi asaMjJI kA
bheda hai, so anya asaMjJAoMkI apekSA se ekendriya se lekara paJcendriya
paryantake jIvoMmeM caitanyatA vikAsa kramazaH adhikAdhika hai| isa vikAsake
tara-camabhAvako samajhAneke liye zAstrameM isake sthala rItipara bAra vibhAga
kiye gaye haiM  /  (1) pahale vibhAga meM jJAnakA atyanta alpa vikAsa vivakSita
hai | yaha vikAsa itanA alpa hai ki isa vikAsase yukta jIva, mUcchita kI taraha
ceSTA rahita hote haiN| isa avyaktatara caitanyakI 'oghasakhA' kahI gaI hai  /
ekendriya jIva, oSasa jJAvAle hI hai  /  (2) dUsare vibhAga meM vikAsakI itanI
mAtrA vivakSita hai ki jisase kucha bhUtakAlakA sudIrghaM itakAlakA nahI-
smaraNa kiyA jAtA hai aura jisase iSTa viSayoM meM pravRtti tathA aniSTa
viSayoMse nivRtti hotI hai| isa pravRttinivRtta-kArI jJAnako 'hetuvAdopadezikI
saMjJa' kahA hai| brondriya trIndriya, caturindriya aura sammUcchima paJcendriya
jIva hetuvAdopadezikI saMjJA vAle hai  /  P (3) tIsare vibhAga meM itanA vikAsa
vivakSata hai ki jisase sudIrgha

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **The recollection of subjects experienced in the
past and the determination of the present consequences through that recollection
is done with the help of a specific mind. This knowledge is called
'Dirghakalopadeśikī Saṁjñā'. Devas, Narakas, Garbhaja humans, and Tiryanchas
possess Dirghakalopadeśikī Saṁjñā.**  **(4) In the fourth division, specific
Śruta-jñāna is discussed. This knowledge is so pure that it is not possible for
any beings other than those who have attained Samyaktva. This pure knowledge is
called 'Dṛṣṭivādopadeśikī Saṁjñā'.**  **Wherever the terms 'Saṁjñī' and
'Asaṁjñī' are mentioned in the scriptures, 'Asaṁjñī' refers to beings with
Bhoṣa-saṁjñā and Hetuvādopadeśikī Saṁjñā. 'Saṁjñī' refers to beings with
Dirghakalopadeśikī Saṁjñā.**  **A detailed discussion of this topic is found in
Tattvārtha, Chapter 2, Sutra 25, Vṛtti, Nandī Sutra 36, Viśeṣāvaśyaka Gāthā
504-526, and Lokaprakāśa, Chapter 3, Sloka 442-463.**  **Regarding the usage of
'Saṁjñī' and 'Asaṁjñī', there is a slight difference between the Digambara and
Śvetāmbara traditions. The Digambara tradition considers Garbhaja Tiryanchas as
both 'Saṁjñī' and 'Asaṁjñī', not just 'Saṁjñī'. Similarly, they consider Saṁmūmi
Tiryanchas as both 'Saṁjñī' and 'Asaṁjñī', not just 'Asaṁjñī'. (Jīva, Gāthā
76)**  **It is also noteworthy that the three Saṁjñās mentioned in Śvetāmbara
texts, such as Hetuvādopadeśikī, are not found in Digambara scriptures.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra bhUtakAlameM anubhava kiye huye viSayoMkA smaraNa aura
smaraNadvArA vartamAna kAla ke pharsa vyoM kA nizcaya kiyA jAtA hai| yaha kAma
viciSTa manakI sahAyatA se hotA hai| isa jJAnako 'dIrghakAlopadeziko saMjJA'
kahA hai| deva, nAraka aura garbhaja manuSya tiryaJca dIrghakAlopadezikI
saMjJAyAle hai  /  * (4) cauthe vibhAga meM viziSTa zrutajJAna viSakSita hai|
yaha zAna itanA zuddha hotA hai ki samyaktvayoMke sivAya anya jIvoMmeM isakA
saMbhava nahIM hai  /  isa vizuddha jJAnako 'dRSTivAdopadeziko saMjJA' kahA hai|
36 zAstra meM jahA~ kahIM saMzI asaMzIkA ullekha hai, vahA~ sabajagaha asaMjJIkA
matalaba bhoSasaMjJAvAle aura hetuvAdopadezikI saMjJAvAle jIvoM se hai  /  tabhA
saMjJIkA matalaba saba jagaha dIrghakAlopadezikI zAvAloM se hai  /  isa viSayakA
vizeSa vicAra tattvArtha a0 2, sU025 vRtti, nandI sU0 36. vizeSAvazyaka gA0 504
- 526 aura lokapra0, sa03 zloka 442-463 meM hai| saMjJI asaMjI ke vyavahAra ke
viSaya meM digambara sampradAya meM zvetAmbara kI apekSA thor3A sA bheda hai  /
usameM garbhaja tiryaJcoMko saMzImAtra na mAnakara saMjJI tathA asaMzI mAnA hai
/  isItaraha saMmUmi tiryaJcakosirpha asaMjhI na mAnakara saMtrI asaMjJI
ubhayarUpa mAnA hai| (jIva0, ga076 ) isake sivAya yaha bAta dhyAna dene yogya
hai ki zvetAmbara -grantha meM hetuvAdopadezikI Adi jo tIna saMjJAyeM aNita hai,
unakA vidhAra digambarI prasiddha granthoM meM dRSTigocara nahIM hotA  /  ===

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four, Chapter 4: Appendix - On the Word 'Apyaapt' in Verse
11  **(a)** There are two types of 'Apyaapt' - (1) Labdhi-Apyaapt and (2) Karan-
Apyaapt. Similarly, **(b)** there are two types of 'Paryaapt' - (1) Labdhi-
Paryaapt and (2) Karan-Paryaapt.  **(a)**- A being who, due to the arising of
the 'Apyaapt' karma, possesses such strength that they die only after fulfilling
their own 'Te'tri's, is called 'Labdhi-Apyaapt'.  **(a)**-2 However, this is not
the case with 'Karan-Apyaapt'. Even with the arising of 'Paryaapt' karma, there
are 'Karan-Apyaapt' beings. This means that whether the 'Paryaapt' karma arises
or the 'Apyaapt' karma arises, as long as the 'Karans' (body, senses, etc., and
other 'Paryaaptis') are not exhausted, the being is called 'Karan-Apyaapt'.
**(b)**-1 Those who have the arising of 'Paryaapt' karma and die only after
fulfilling their own 'Paryaaptis', not before, are called 'Labdhi-Paryaapt'.
**(b)**-2 This rule does not apply to 'Karan-Paryaapt' beings. Those who are
'Labdhi-Apyaapt' are also 'Karan-Paryaapt'. Because after fulfilling the 'Ahaar-
Paryaapti' (food), at least the 'Sharira-Paryaapti' (body) is fulfilled, from
then on the being is considered 'Karan-Paryaapt'. It is a rule that even
'Labdhi-Apyaapt' beings do not die without fulfilling at least the three
'Paryaaptis' of food, body, and senses. Regarding this rule, Shri Malayagiriji
has written in the commentary on the Nandi Sutra, page 105:
_"Pasmaraagamamvaayudhya Bhriyante Sarvaev Dehinah Tasyaharasharirameey
Paryaaptiparyaaptamaamev Vyatiti"_  This means that all beings die only after
binding the lifespan of the next birth, they do not die without binding it. The
lifespan can only be bound when the three 'Paryaaptis' of food, body, and senses
are fulfilled.  Shri Dinayavijayaji has explained this in Lokaprakash Sarg 3,
Shlok 1: A being who is 'Labdhi-Apyaapt' also...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 4  //  pariziSTa "" pancha 11 ke 'aparyApta' zamda para
(ka)aparyAptake do prakAra haiM-(1)labdhi-aparyApta aura (2) karaNa-apayapti  /
vaisehI (kha)paryAptake bhI do bheda haiM-(1)labdhi paryApta(2) krnn-pryaapt|
(ka)-jo jIya, aparyAptanAmakarma ke udayake kAraNa aisI zaktivAle hoM ki ki
svayoga Te'trioM ko pUrNa kiye birA hI mara jAte haiM, ve labdhiaparyApta haiN|
2-parantu kAraNa-aparyApatake viSaya meM yaha bAta nahI,the paryAptanAmakarma ke
bhI udarapAle hote haiM  /  arthAt cAhe paryAptatAmakarmakA udaya ho yA
aparyAptanAmakarmakA, para jaba taka karaNoMkI (zarIra,indriga Adi paryAptiyoMkI
samApti naho, taba taka jIva 'karaNa-aparyApta' kahe jAte haiN| (kha)1-jinako
paryAptanAmakarma kA udaya ho aura isase jo svayogya paryAptiyoM ko pUrNa karane
ke bAda hI marate hai, pahale nahIM, ve 'labdhi-paryApta haiN| 2-karaNa-
paryAptoMke liye yaha niyama nahIM ki ve svayogya paryAptiyoM ko pUrNa karake hI
marate hai| jo labdhi-aryApta hai,ve bhI karaNa-paryApta hote hI haiN| kyoMki
AhAraparyApti vana cakaneke bAda kamase kama zarIraparyApti bana jAtI hai tabhI
se jIva 'karaNa-paryApta' mAne jAte haiN| yaha to niyama hI hai ki labdhi.
aparyApta bhI kamase kama AhAra, zarIra aura indriya. ina tIna paryAptiyoM ko
pUrNa kiye binA marate nahIM  /  ina niyamake sambandha meM zrImalayagirijIne
nandI sUtrako TIkA, pR0 105 meM yaha limkA hai - _"pasmArAgAmimavAyudhyA
bhriyante sarvaeva dehinaH tasyahArazarIremiya paryAptiparyAptAmAmeva vyata iti'
arthAt sabhI prANI agale mavakI Ayuko bA~dhakara hI marate haiM, binA bA~pa
nahIM marate  /  Ayu tabhI bAMdhI jA sakatI hai, jabaki AhAra, zarIra aura
indriya, ye tIna paryAptiyAM pUrNa bana cukI ho| isI bAtakA khulAsA
zrIdinayavijayajIne lokaprakAza sarga 3,zloka 1 meM isa prakAra kiyA hai:-jo
jIva labdhi-aparyApta hai , vaha bhI pahalI tIna paryA

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part 12  Completing the **paties** binds the lifespan of the
next birth. Having bound the lifespan until the **antmuhurt**, the being then
spends the remaining time, considered the **antmuhurt**, in a state of
**abaadhakal**. After this, upon death, it can enter the **gatyansar**. A being
that does not bind its lifespan and does not complete its **abaadhakal** cannot
die.  In Digambara literature, the term **nitt-aparyapt** is used instead of
**karan-aparyapt**. The word **hodasa** in this context refers to the body
itself. Therefore, until the **sharira-paryapti** is complete, Digambara
literature considers the being **nitt-aparyapt**. Once **sharira-paryapti** is
complete, it does not allow for the practice of **nitt-aparyapt**. For example:
"**Pajat say udaye, niniapajjati niticho ho ki. Jab shariram ayushna, shivyattim
apushnago tatra.**" (Jivakanda, 120)  The essence is that in Digambara
literature, the term **nirvriti-aparyapt** refers to a being that has not
completed **sharira-paryapti**, even though it has experienced the **udaya** of
the **paryapt** karma.  However, in Svetambara literature, the word **karan**
refers to the body, senses, and other **paryaptis**. For example:  "**Karanani
sharirakshavo ni.**" (Lo Pra, 3, 10)  Therefore, according to the Svetambara
tradition, a being that has completed **sharira-paryapti** but not **indriya-
paryapti** can still be considered **karan-aparyapt**. This means that
completing the **karan** in the form of the body makes one **karan-paryapt**,
while not completing the **karan** in the form of the senses makes one **karan-
aparyapt**.  Thus, from the Svetambara perspective, a being can be considered
**karan-paryapt** as it completes each **paryapti** from **sharira-paryapti** to
**manas-paryapti**, and **karan-aparyapt** as it fails to complete subsequent
**paryaptis**. However, once a being has completed all the **paryaptis**
necessary for **sthayogya**, it can no longer be considered **karan-aparyapt**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga bAra ptiyoMko pUrNa karane hI agrima bhavakI Ayu bAMdhatA
hai| antamuhata taka Ayubanca karake phira usakA jaghanya abAdhAkAla, jo
antamuhUrta kA mAnA gayA hai, use vaha bitAtA hai  /  isake bAda marake vaha
gatyansara meM jA sakatA hai  /  jo agrima Ayuko nahIM bAMdhatA aura usa ke
abAdhAkAlako pUrA nahIM karatA, vaha mara hI nahIM sktaa| digambara sAhitya meM
karaNa-aparyAptake badale nitti aparyApta zabda milatA hai: harSa meM hoDAsA
pani ti zabda kA artha zarIra hI kiyA huA hai  /  ata eva zarIraparyApti pUrNa
na hone taka hI digambarIya sAhitya, jIvako niyaMtti aparyApta kAhatA hai  /
zarIraparyApti pUrNa hone ke bAda vaha, nivaM tti aparyApta vyavahAra karane kI
sammati nahIM detA  /  yathAH "pajata saya udaye, NiNiyapajjati NiTico hoki  /
jAba sarIramayuSNa, zivyattimapuSNago tAtra  //  120  //  -jIvakANDa  /  sAroza
yaha ki digambara-sAhityameM paryAptanAmakarmakA udayavAlA hI zarIra-paryApti
pUrNa na hone taka 'nirvRtti-aparyApta' zabdase abhimata hai| parantu
zvetAmbarIya sAhitya meM 'karaNa' zandakA zarIra, indriya Adi paryAptiyA~, itanA
artha kiyA huA milatA hai  /  yathAHkaraNAni zarIrAkSAvoni  / ' -lo pra0, sa0 3,
zlo0 10 | ata eva zvetAmbarIya sampradAya ke anusAra jisane zarIra paryApti
pUrNa kI hai, para indriya paryApti pUrNa nahIM kI hai, vaha bhI 'karaNa-
aparyApta kahA jA sakatA hai  /  arthAt zarIrarUpa karaNa pUrNa karanese
'karaNa-paryApta' aura indriyarUpa karaNa pUrNa na karanese 'kAraNa-aparyApta'
kahA jA sakatA hai| isa prakAra zvetAmbarI sampradAyakI dRSTise zarIraparyAptise
lekara manaH paryApti paryanta pUrva-pUrva paryApti pUrNa honepara 'karaNa-
paryApta' aura uttarottara paryAptike pUrNa na honese 'karaNa-aparyApta' kaha
sakate haiM  /  parantu jaba jIva, sthayogya sampUrNa paryAptiyoMko pUrNa kara
leve, taba use 'karaNa-aparyApta nahIM raha skte|

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma Granth Part Four The Nature of Paryapti: Paryapti is the power by which a
living being takes in the necessary pudgals, such as food, breath, etc., and
transforms the taken pudgals into food, etc. Such power becomes the upacshma of
pudgals in the living being. That is, just as there is a kind of power in the
parts inside the stomach, by which the eaten food is transformed into different
forms, in the same way, such power is formed from the pudgals taken by the
living being born in the place of birth, which transforms the food, etc., into
the forms of khal, rasa, etc. That power is Paryapti. Some of the janak pudgals
are taken by the living being born in the place of birth at the very first time,
and some are taken later on at every moment, becoming like the previously taken
pudgals due to their association. There are six types of Paryapti according to
the division of the body: (1) Ahar, (2) Sharira Paryapti, (3) Indriya Paryapti,
(4) Dvama-Malam-S Paryapti, (5) Bhasha Paryapti, and (6) Manah Paryapti. Their
explanation should be seen in the meaning of the 46th verse of the Karma Granth,
from page 67 onwards. Out of these six Paryaptis, the first four Paryaptis are
possessed by the Ekendriya only. The Dwindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya, and
Asagni-Panchendriya living beings are the possessors of the remaining five
Paryaptis except Manah Paryapti. The Sagni-Panchendriya living beings are the
possessors of all six Paryaptis. This subject is in the verse, Shri
Jinamatragani Kshamasraman-Kuta Brihatsagrahana: "Ahar Saridiya-Pajatti Anapana
Bhasamanu. Prasari Pancha Chapi Ya, Egivigivigalasanneenam. || 346 ||" This
verse is recorded at number 118 in Gommatasar-Jivakanda. To know the special
nature of the present subject, these places are worth seeing: Nandi, page
104-105 Panchaso, Dwao 1, Gao 5 Vritti, Lokaprao, So 3, Shlo 7-42 and Jivakanda,
Paryapti-Adhikar, Gao 117-127.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra paryApti kA svarUpaH-paryApti, vaha zakti hai, jisake
dvArA jIva, AhAra zvAsocchavAsa Adike yogya puda gamoM ko grahaNa karatA hai
aura gRhIta pudgaloM ko AhAra-AdirUpameM pariNata karatA hai| aisI zakti jIvameM
pudgaloMke upacazme banatI hai  /  arthAt jisa prakAra peTake bhItara ke bhAga
meM vartamAna pudgloM meM eka tarahakI zakti hotI hai, jisase ki khAyA huA AhAra
bhinna bhinna rUpameM badala jAtA hai,isI prakAra janmasthAna-prApsa' jIva ke
dvArA gRhIta pUdagloMse aisI zakti bana jAtI hai, jo ki AhAra Adi pradAloMko
khala-rasa AdirupoM meM badala detI hai| vahIM zakti paryApti hai  /  janaka
pudgla meM se kucha to aise hote haiM, jo ki janmasthAna meM Aye huye jIvake
dvArA prathama samaya meM hI grahaNa kiye huye hote haiM aura kucha aise bhI
hote haiM, jo pIche se pratyeka samaya grahaNa kiye jAkAra, pUrva-gRhIta pugloM
ke saMsaga se tadrUpa bane huye hote haiM  /  kAya-bhedasa payAptike chan
bhada-5 AhAra :, zarIraparyApsi, (3) indriyapAti, (4) davAmomAlAsaparyApti, 15)
bhASAparyApti aura (6) manaHparyApti  /  inakI vyAkhyA, pahale karma granthI 46
vIM gAthAke bhAvArtha meM pR0 67 veM se dekha lenI cAhiye  /  ina chaha
paryAptiyoM meM se pahalI cAra paryAptayoM ke adhikArI ekendriya hI haiM  /
dvIndriya, zrIndri ya, caturindriya aura asajJi-paJcandriya jIva, manaH
paryAptiyoMke sivAya zeSa pA~ca paryAptiyoMke adhikArI hai  /  saMjJi-
paJcendriya jIva, chahA paryAptiyoM ke adhikArI hai |is viSayako gAthA,
zrIjinamadragaNi kSamAzramaNa-kuta bRhatsagrahaNa meM hai: "AhArasaridiya-
pajjattI aannpaannbhaasmnno| prasAri paMca chapi ya, egivivigalasaMnINaM  /  /
346  // '' pahI gAthA gommaTasAra-jIvakANDa meM 118 ve nambara para darja hai|
prastuta viSayakA vizeSa svarUpa jAnaneke liye ye sthala dekhane yogya hai:
nandI, pR0 104-105 paJcasa0, dvA0 1, gA0 5 vRtti, lokapra0, sa0 3, zlo07-42
tathA jIvakANDa, paryApti-adhikAra, gA0 117-127

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four ## 42 ## Appendix "" ## Page 21  On the word "krama
mavitva" (sequential occurrence) The use of "krama mavitva" for the liberated
soul (kevali) is debatable. There are three main viewpoints:  **(1) The Siddhant
viewpoint:** This viewpoint considers both kevalgyan (omniscience) and
kevaldarshan (omniscient perception) to be sequential. Supporters of this
viewpoint include Shri Jinbhadragani, Kshamasraman, etc.  **(2) The second
viewpoint:** This viewpoint considers both kevalgyan and kevaldarshan to be
simultaneous. Supporters of this viewpoint include Shri Mallvadi, Tarkik, etc.
**(3) The third viewpoint:** This viewpoint does not differentiate between the
two uses, considering them to be one and the same. The founder of this viewpoint
is Shri Siddhasen Diwakar.  The main arguments of each viewpoint are presented
below:  **1 (a) Siddhant:** (Nagavati Shatak 18 and 25, 6 verses, and
Prajnapanapad 30) states that both knowledge and perception are distinct and
their sequential occurrence is clearly described.   **(b) Niyukti:** (A. Ni. Ga.
277-976) clearly states that kevalgyan and kevaldarshan are distinct, with their
characteristics being knowledge and perception of all things, and the
simultaneous occurrence of both uses is prohibited.  **(c) The twelve numbers of
different coverings and uses of kevalgyan and kevaldarshan are described in the
scriptures (Prajnapan 26035, etc.).  **(d) Kevalgyan and kevaldarshan are said
to be infinite, which refers to their attainment, not their use. In terms of
use, their state is for a single moment; because infinity in terms of use is not
established in the scriptures.  **(e) The nature of uses is such that they occur
sequentially. Therefore, kevalgyan and kevaldarshan should be considered
sequential and distinct.  **2 (a) The covering-destruction (kshaya) cause and
the general and specific subjects are simultaneous, so kevalgyan and
kevaldarshan are simultaneous.  **(b) In layasthik uses, the cause-effect
relationship or the mutual dependence can occur. This is not the case in gyayik
uses; because the self, which is the nature of knowledge, when free from
coverings, both its kshayik uses should be continuous.  **(c) The infinite
nature of kevalgyan and kevaldarshan, which is mentioned in the scriptures, can
only occur in the simultaneous viewpoint; because in this viewpoint, both uses
are simultaneous and continuous. Therefore, from the viewpoint of
dravyarthiknaya, the flow of uses can be called infinite.  **(d) Whatever is
said in the Siddhant regarding kevalgyan and kevaldarshan, all of it supports
their individual distinction, not their oneness. Therefore, both uses should be
considered simultaneous.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 42 pariziSTa "" pRSTha 21 ke krama mAvoM zabda para
chabhastha ke upayoga kamabhAvI haiM, isameM matabheda nahIM hai, para kevalI ke
upayoga ke sambandha meM mukhya tIna pakSa hai: (1) siddhAnta- pakSa,
kevalajJAna aura kevaladarzanako kamabhAvI mAnatA hai isake samarthaka
zrIjinabhadragaNi kSamAzramaNa Adi haiM  /  (2) dUsarA pakSa, kevalajJAna-
kevaladarzana, ubhaya upayogako sahabhAvI mAnatA hai  /  isake poSaka
zrImallavAdI tArkika Adi haiN| (tIsarA pakSa ubhaya upayogoMkA bheda na mAnakara
unakA aikyamAnatA haiN| isake sthApaka zrIsiddhasena divAkara hai| tInoM
pakSoMkI kucha mukhya-mukhya dalIleM kramazaH nIce dI jAtI haiM: - 1 (ka)
siddhAnta (nagavatI- zataka 18 aura 25 ke 6 uddeza, tathA prajJApanA-pada 30 )
meM jJAna darzana donoMkA alaga-alaga kathana hai tathA unakA krama mAvitva
spaSTa varNita hai  /  kha) niyukti | A0ni0gA0 277-976 /  meM kevala jJAna-
kevaladarzana donoMkA bhinna-bhinna lakSaNa unake dvArA sarva viSayaka jJAna
tathA darzanakA honA aura yugapat do upayogoM kA niSedha spaSTa batalAyA hai|
(ga) kevala jJAna- kevaladarzana ke bhinna-bhinna AvaraNa aura upayogoMkI bAraha
saMkhyA zAstra meM (prajJApanA 26035 AdimeM jagaha-jagaha varNita hai  /  (gha)
kevalajJAna aura kevaladarzana, ananta kahe jAte haiM, so labdhiko apekSA se
upayoga kI apekSA se nahIM  /  upayogakI apekSA se unakI sthiti eka samayakI
hai; kyoMki upayogakI apekSA se anantatA zAstrama nAhI bhI pratipAdita nahIM hai
/  (Ga) upayogoM kA svabhAva hI aisA hai, jisase ki ve kramazaH pravRtta hote
haiN| isaliye kevalajJAna aura kevaladarzanako kramabhAvI aura alaga-alaga
mAnanA cAhiye  /  * 2 (ka) AvaraNa-kSayarUpa nimitta aura sAmAnya vizeSAtmaka
viSaya, samakAlIna hone se kevalajJAna aura kevaladarzana yugapat hote haiM  /
kha) lAyasthika upayogoM meM kAryakAraNa bhAva yA pararapara pratibandhya-
pratibandhaka bhAva ghaTa sakatA hai. jJAyika upayogoM meM nahIM; kyoMki bodha-
svabhAva zarazvata AtmA, jaba nirAvaraNa ho, taba usake donoM kSAyika upayoga
nirantara hI hone cAhiye  /  (ga) kevalajJAna kevaladarzanakI sAdi-
aparyavasitatA, jo zAstra meM kahI hai, vaha bhI yugapatR pakSa meM hI ghaTa
sakatI hai; kyoMki isa pakSa meM donoM upayoga yugapat aura nirantara hote
rahate haiN| isaliye dravyArthikanayase upayoga-dubake pravAhako aparyavasita
(ananta) kahA jA sakatA hai| (gha) kevalajJAna- kevaladarzana ke sambandha meM
siddhAnta meM jahakahIM jo kucha kahA gayA hai, vaha saba donoMke vyakti-bhedakA
sAdhaka hai, tamA vitva kA nhiiN| isa liye donoM upayogako sahabhAvI mAnanA
cAhiye  /

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 44 **Karmagrantha Part Four**  **(a)** Just as in a Shan-paryaya, many
subjects like Ghat-patadi are perceived when the material is available,
similarly, when the material like Avarana-kshaya, Vishaya, etc. is available,
only the use, the general and specific nature of the objects can be known. Just
as at the time of Kevalgyan, even though there is no Matijnanavaran, etc., Mati,
etc. are not considered separate from Kevalgyan, similarly, even though there is
a destruction of Kevaldarshanavaran, it is not appropriate to consider
Kevaldarshan separate from Kevalgyan.  **(b)** Due to the difference in Vishaya
and Kshayopashamat, a difference can be seen between Chanasthikgyan and Darshan,
but due to the infinite nature of Vishaya and the similar nature of Kshayik, no
difference can be seen between Kevalgyan and Kevaldarshan.  **(c)** If
Kevaldarshan is considered separate from Kevalgyan, then it will be considered
as having a limited subject matter, as it is only concerned with the general,
which will contradict its infinite nature as stated in the scriptures.  **(d)**
The speech of time is like a mirage, it is difficult to understand, but the
statement of the scriptures, that there is no difference, can be fully
understood.  **(e)** The difference in Avarana is relative; that is, even though
Avarana is one in reality, it should be understood as different due to the
difference in function and title. Therefore, in one use-person, Gyanatva and
Dashatva should be considered as two different Dharmas. It is not appropriate to
consider use, Gyan-darshan as two different things; therefore, both the words
Gyan-darshan are synonymous and have the same meaning.  Upadhyaya
Shriyasovijayaji has reconciled all three viewpoints in his Gyanbindu 1114: the
viewpoint of the Siddhanta, from the perspective of the pure Shuddha Rijusutra;
the viewpoint of Shrimatlavadiji, from the perspective of Vyavahar-maya; and the
viewpoint of Shri Siddhasen Diwakar, from the perspective of Sangrahanaya. A
detailed description of this subject, with supporting arguments, can be found in
Jeevakanth Ma. 3 onwards; Visheshavashyak Many Ga. 3088-3135; Dharmasangrahani
Ga. 1336-1356 by Shriharibhadra; Tattvarthatika A. 1, Su. 31, Pa. by Shri
Siddhasen; Shrimalayagiri-Nandivritti 10 134-138; and Manbindu 154-164.  In the
Digambar Sampradaya, the second viewpoint, that of use-victory, is the most
popular:  "Jagavan vadanaan, kevaljaniss basanan cha taha. Vinayarpayasatapam,
jah pattai tah muneghavan ||16||" - Niyamsar.  "Siddhanam sidhdagai, kevalnaanam
cha bansagan khayian. Samm samanaahar, upayogaanarakam apoutti ||730||" -
Jeevakanth.  "Basanpuvam janam, chhadamasthanam na vonni upajagga. Garv samha
kevali-nahe jhug tu te dho vi ||44||" - Drashyasangrah.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 3-(ka) jaise sAmagrI milanepara eka zAna-paryAya meM
aneka ghaTa-paTAdi viSaya bhAsita hote haiM, base hI AvaraNa-kSaya, viSaya Adi
sAmagrI milane para epha hI kevala-upayoga, padArthoke sAmAnyavizeSa ubhaya
svarUpaka jAna sakatA hai| khajase kevalajJAna ke samaya,matijJAnAvaraNAdikA
abhAva honepara bhI mati Adi jAna, kevalajJAnase alaga nahIM mAne jAte, vaise hI
kevala darzanA-varaNakA kSaya hone  /  para mI kevaladarzanakoM, kevalajJAnase
alaga mAnanA ucita nhiiN| (ga)viSaya aura kSayopazamatakI vibhinnatAke mAraNa,
chAnasthika jJAna aura darzana meM paraspara bheda mAnA jA sakatA hai, para
ananta-viSayakatA aura kSAyika-bhAva samAna hone se keovatrajJAna kevaladarzana
meM kisI taraha bheda nahIM mAnA jA sktaa| (gha) yadi kebala darzanako
kevalajJAnase alaga mAnA jAya to vaha sAmAnyamAtrako viSaya karane vAlA honese
alpaviSayakasiddha hogA, jisase usakAzAstrakathitaananta-viSayakatva nahIM ghaTa
sakegA  /  (Da:) kAlokA bhASaNa, sAvalazAna sAma-durvara hotA hai, maha zAstra-
kathana abheda-pakSahIma pUrNatayA ghaTa sakatA hai  /  (ca) AvaraNa-bheda
kathaJcita hai; arthAt vastuta: AvaraNa eka hone para bhI kArya aura upAdhi-
bhedakI apekSA se usake bheda samajhane cAhiye isa liye eka upayoga-vyaktimeM
jJAnatva daza natva do dharma alaga-alaga mAnanA cAhiye  /  upayoga, jJAna-
darzana do alaga-alaga mAnanA yukta nahIM; ata evaM jJAna-darzana donoM zabda
paryAyamAtra ekArthavAdhI) haiN| upAdhyAya zrIyazovijayajIne apane jJAnabindu
pa0114 meM nayI-duSTi se tInoM pakSoM kA samanvaya kiyA hai:-siddhAnta-
pakSa,zuddha RjasutranayakI apekSA se; zrImatlavAdI jI kA pakSa, vyavahAra-
mayakI apekSA se aura zrIsiddhasena divAkarakA pakSa, saMgrahanayakI apekSA se
jAnanA caahiye| isa' viSayakA savistara varNana, sammatitarka; jIvakANDa mA. 3
se Age; vizeSAvazyaka mANya gA0 3088-3135, zrIharibhadragarikRta
dharmasaMgrahaNI gA0 1336-1356, zrIsiddhasenagaNikRta tatvArthaTIkA a0 1, sU0
31, pa. zrImalayagiri-nandIvRtti 10 134-138 aura mAnabindu pa0154-164 se jAna
lenA cAhiye  /  'digambara-sampradAya meM ukta tIna pakSa meM se dusarA arthAt
upayoga-jayakA pakSa hI prasiddha hai: jagavaM vadaNANaM, kevalajANissa basaNaM
ca thaa| viNayarapayAsatApaM, jaha paTTaI taha muNeghavaM  // 16 // "
-niyamasAra  /  "siddhANaM siddhagaI, kebalaNANaM ca baMsagaM khayiyaM  /  samma
samaNAhAra, upajogANarakamapauttI  // 730 // " -jIvakANTha  /  "basaNapuvaM
jANaM, chadamasthANaM Na voNNi upjggaa| garva samhA kevali-NAhe jhuga tu te dho
vi  // 44 // " - drazyasaMgraha  /

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part 12, Appendix "Ch" ## "Bhavasumasa" Page 22, "Ekendriya
Shabda"  Three uses of Ekendriya (single-sense) have been considered. Therefore,
there is a doubt whether it is appropriate to consider the "mati" (mind) use in
Ekendriya after the destruction of the "sparshendriya-mati-jnanaavaran" karma
(karma that obscures the knowledge of the sense of touch, mind, and knowledge).
However, how can the "shruta" (hearing) use be considered in them due to the
absence of "mashaalabdhi" (ability to speak) and "shravanalabdhi" (ability to
hear)? Because the scriptures consider only those with language and the ability
to hear as having knowledge. For example:  "Bhataso - Yaldvino Jujjae M Yassa
Haritahi || 9025 ||"  Only those with the ability to speak and hear can be
"bhaavabhoot" (have the potential to become a soul). Others cannot. Because
"shrutaan" refers to the knowledge that arises in those who desire to speak or
hear words.  The solution is that just as the five "maavendriya-janya"
(generated by the five senses) knowledge exists in trees and other living beings
even in the absence of other "dravya" (external) senses, similarly, the
existence of "bhaavashruta" knowledge in Ekendriya is scriptural even in the
absence of the ability to speak and hear. For example:  "Jah Sumang Bhavitriya -
Naan Vashviviavarohe Vi. Tah Davyasuyaabhave Bhavasury Pashchivayinam || 103 ||"
Just as there is subtle knowledge generated by the "bhaavendriya" (inner sense)
in the absence of "dravya" senses, similarly, there is a small amount of
"bhaavashruta" knowledge in earth-bodied beings and others in the absence of
external causes like language. It is true that Ekendriya does not have the same
clear knowledge as others. The scriptures consider Ekendriya to have a desire
for food, which is the reason for considering their knowledge to be unclear.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga bAra pariziSTa "cha"  /  "bhAvasu masAbhi pRSTha 22 ke
'ekendriya zabda para ekendriyoM meM tIna upayoga mAne gaye haiN| isaliye yaha
zaGkA hotI hai ki sparzanendriya-mati - jJAnAvaraNa karma kA kSayopazama hone se
ekendriyoM meM mati upayoga mAnanA ThIka hai, parantu mASAlabdhi ( bolane kI
zakti ) tathA zravaNalabdhi ( sunane kI zakti) na hone ke kAraNa unameM zruta
upayoga kaise mAnA jA sakatA hai; kyoMki zAstra meM bhASA tathA zraNalabdhivAloM
ko hI jJAna mAnA hai  /  yathA: LA bhAtAso - yaladviNo jujjae ma yassa haritAhi
// 9025 sokara 45 7 - vizeSAvazyaka | bolane va sunane kI zakti vAle ho ko
bhAvabhUta ho sakatA hai, dUsare ko nahIM | kyoMki 'zrutAna' usa jJAna ko kahate
haiM, jo bolane kI icchA vAle yA vacana sunane vAle ko hotA hai  /  1 isakA
samAdhAna yaha hai ki sparzanendriya ke sivAya anya dravya ( bAhya) indriyoM ne
hone para bhI vRkSAdi jIvoM meM pA~ca mAvendriya-janya jJAnoM kA honA, jaisA
zAstra sammata haiM, vaise hI bolane aura sunane kI zakti na hone para bhI
ekendriyoM meM bhAvazrutajJAna kA honA zAstra sammata hai  /  yathA:"jaha sumaM
bhAvitriya - nANaM vazviviyAvarohe vi  /  taha davyasuyAbhAve bhAvasurya
pazcivAInaM  //  103 //  " - vizeSAvazyaka | jisa prakAra dravya indriyoM ke
abhAva meM bhAvendriya-janya sUkSma jJAna hotA hai, isI prakAra dravyazruta ke
bhASA Adi bAhya nimitta ke abhAva meM mI pRthvIkAyika Adi jIvoM ko alpa
bhAvazruta hotA hai| yaha ThIka hai ki auroM ko jaisA spaSTa jJAna hotA hai,
vaisA ekendriyoM ko nahIM hotA  /  zAstrameM ekendriyoM ko AhAra kA abhilASa
mAnA hai, yahI unake aspaSTa jJAna mAnane meM hetu hai  /

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Kamgranth Part Four  The desire for food is a specific result (adhyavasaya) of
the soul arising from the emergence of shudhavedaniya. As: - _"Maharasanya
aharabhilashah kshudaniyaoshayaprabhava khalvaatmaparinam iti."_ -Aavashyak,
Harimatti Vritti p. 580. In this adhyavasaya, which is in the form of desire,
there is an alternative of words and meaning like "It would be good if I get
such and such thing". The adhyavasaya which is with alternative is called
shrutajnana. As: _"Inshiamanonimittam jam vishnan suyanusarenam.
Nipayatyuttisamatham, tam mayasuyamai sesam. ||1001||"_ Visheshaavashyak. That
is, the knowledge arising from the senses and mind, which is capable of stating
the definite meaning, is 'bhavasch ta' and the knowledge different from it is to
be understood as 'matijnana'. If the use of senses is not considered, then how
can the desire for food, which is scriptural, occur in them? Therefore, even in
the absence of the power to speak and hear, it is necessary to believe in the
very subtle use of shruta in them.  The one who has bhapa and shravanalabdhi has
bhavashrut, the other does not. The meaning of this scriptural statement is that
the one who has the power mentioned above has clear bhavashrut and the others
have unclear.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kamagrantha bhAga cAra AhAra kA abhilASa, zudhAvedanIyakama ke udaya se hone
vAlA AtmA kA pariNAma-vizeSa (adhyavasAya) hai  /  yathA:- _ "mAhArasaMjJA
AhArAbhilASaH kSudanIyoSayaprabhavaH khalvAtmapariNAma iti  / " -Avazyaka,
hArimaTTI vRtti pR0 580  /  isa abhilASarUpa adhyavasAya meM 'mujhe amUka vastu
mile to acchA, isa prakAra kA vAbda aura artha kA vikalpa hotA hai| jo
adhyavasAya vikalpa sahita hotA hai, vahI zrutajJAna kahalAtA hai  /  yathA:
"iMziyamaNonimittaM jaM viSNANa suyANusAreNaM  /  /  nipayatyuttisamatthaM, taM
mAyasuyaM maI sesaM  // 1001" vizeSAvazyaka  /  arthAt indriya aura mana ke
nimitta se utpanna hone vAlA jJAna, jo niyata artha kA kathana karane meM
mamarca aura zrutAnusArI (zakada tathA artha ke vikalpa se yukta) hai, use
'bhAvazca ta' tathA jala se bhinna jJAna ko 'matijJAna' samajhanA cAhiye  /  zca
yadi endriyoM meM zrata upayoga na mAnA jAya lo unameM AhAra kA abhilASa, jo
zAstra-sammata hai| vaha kaise ghaTa sakegA ? isaliye bolane aura sunane kI
zakti na hone para bhI unameM atyanta sUkSma zruta-upayoga avazya hI mAnanA
cAhiye  /  bhApA tathA zravaNalabdhi vAle ko ho bhAvazruta hotA hai, dUsare ko
nahIM isa zAstra-kathana kA tAtparya itanA hI hai ki ukta prakAra kI zakti vAle
ko spaSTa bhAvazruta hotA hai aura dUsaroM ko aspaSTa  /

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four (2) - Marganasthan-Adhikar. The Fundamental Divisions
of Marganas.  **"In the body, in the senses, in the vows, in the knowledge of
the passions, in restraint, in the shedding of the karmic particles, in the
state of being a worthy soul, in right faith, and in the nourishment of the
soul, there are fourteen divisions."** (6)  **Explanation:** The divisions of
Marganasthan are: motion, senses, body, yoga, Veda, passions, knowledge,
restraint, shedding, karmic particles, worthy soul, right faith, right
knowledge, and nourishment of the soul. (6)  **The Arrangement of Marganas**
**Meaning:** (1) "Motion" refers to the state of being capable of motion, which
arises from the karmic activity of motion, and which leads to the behavior of a
human being who is capable of tearing apart.  1. This verse is from the
Panchasangraha (Dwar 1, Verse 21). In the Gommatasar Jivakanda, it is as
follows:  "In the body, in the senses, in the vows, in the knowledge of the
passions, in restraint, in the shedding of the karmic particles, in the state of
being a worthy soul, in right faith, and in the nourishment of the soul." (141)
2. In the Marganadhikar of the Gommatasar Jivakanda, the characteristics of
Marganas are summarized as follows:  (1) "Motion" refers to the state of being
capable of motion, which arises from the karmic activity of motion, and which
leads to the behavior of a human being who is capable of tearing apart. (145)
(2) "Senses" refer to the eyes, etc., which are independent of each other, like
the gods of the heavens. (163)  (3) "Body" refers to the state of being a living
being, which arises from the karmic activity of birth, and which is the constant
companion of the karmic activity of birth. (180)  (4) "Yoga" refers to the power
that is the cause of the living being's acceptance of karma, which arises from
the karmic activity of the body, and which is associated with the mind, speech,
and body. (215)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra (2) - mArgaNAsthAna- adhikAra  /  mArgaNA ke mUla bheda
/  gaidie dha kAye, joe bee kasAyanANesu  /  saMjamadaMsaNalesA, bhavasamme sa
niAhAre'  //  6  //  gatIndriye kAthe, yoge vede kaSAyajJAnayoH  /
saMyamadanalezyA bhavyasamyaktve saMjJayAhAre  //   //  artha - mArgaNAsthAna ke
gati, indriya, kAya, yoga, veda, kaSAya, jJAna, saMyama, varzana, lezyA,
bhavyazva, samyaktya, saMzitva aura AhArakasva, ye caudaha meda haiM  //  6  //
mArgaNAoM kI vyAsthA haiM bhAvArtha - ( 1 ) gatijo paryApta, gatinAmakarma ke
udaya se hote jisase jora manuSya vidAraka kA vyavahAra hotA hai, ve 'gati' haiM
/  1- yaha gAthA paJcasaMgraha kI hai (dvAra 1. gA0 21)  /  gommaTasAra
jIvakANDa meM yaha isa prakAra hai: -- "viyesu kAye, joge vede kasAyaNANe ga
saMjamasaNalessAvivAsamattasamNi AhAre  //  141  //  " 2 gommaTasAra - jIvakANDa
ke mArgaNAdhikAra meM mArgaNAoM ke jo lakSaNa haiM, ve saMkSepa meM isa prakAra
haiM: (1) gatinAmakarma ke udaya-janya paryAya yA bAra gati pAne ke kAraNabhUta
jo paryAya, ve 'gati' kahalAte haiM  /  gA0 145 (2) ahamindra deva ke samAna
Apasa meM svatantra hone se netra Adi ko 'indriya' kahate haiM  /  nA0 163  //
(3) jAtinAmakarma ke niyata sahacArI asa yA sthAvara- nAmakarma ke udaya se hone
vAle paryAya 'kAya' haiM  /  gA0 180  /  (4) pula-vipAkI zarIranAmakarma ke
udaya se mana, vacana aura kAyayukta jIva kI karma-grahaNa meM kAraNabhUta jo
zakti, vaha 'yoga' hai  /  - gA0 215

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **48**  **Part Four (2) of Karma**  (2) **Niya-khacha**
(a type of karma) is the karma that causes the burning sensation in the eyes,
which is caused by the **Jina** (liberated soul) through various means.   (5)
**Ved** is the karma that causes delusion and confusion due to the arising and
stirring of **Vedamohiya** (a type of karma), which prevents the discrimination
of good and bad qualities. - Ga 271  (6) **Pay** is the karma that causes the
attraction of the field of karma, which is vast and wide like the world, and
produces various types of grasses in the form of happiness and sorrow. - Ga 281
**Kay** is the karma that destroys **Sammanatva** (self-respect),
**Deshacharia** (following the customs of the land), **Sarvacharitra**
(following all good conduct), and **Yathakyatacharitra** (following the conduct
as it is known). - Ga 22  (7) **Shan** is the karma that enables the soul to
know various types of substances, qualities, and modifications related to the
three times (past, present, and future). - Ga 298  (1) **Sanyam** is the karma
that involves the practice of non-violence and other vows, the control of
passions like anger, the abandonment of mental and physical punishments, and the
victory over the senses. - Ga 464  (6) **Darshan** is the karma that causes the
soul to perceive things in a general way, without knowing their specific forms.
- Ga 471  (10) **Leshya** is the karma that causes the soul to accumulate
**punya** (merit) and **apa** (demerit) karma. - Pa 488  (11) **Bhan** are those
souls who are destined to attain liberation, while **Abhan** are those souls who
will never be liberated from the cycle of birth and death. - Ga 556  (12)
**Samyaktva** is the karma that causes the soul to have faith in the five
**astikaya** (categories of existence) as described by the **Vitaraga**
(liberated soul), the six **drishya** (objects of perception), and the nine
types of substances, through **praman** (proof), **naya** (logic), **nikshepa**
(deposit), and **adhigma** (learning). - Ga 560  (13) **Sanjhi** is the soul who
has overcome the **avaran** (veil) of the **no-indriya** (mind) or has gained
knowledge through it, which is called **sansha** (doubt). **Asanjhi** is the
soul who gains knowledge through the senses other than the mind. - Ga 659  (14)
**Aharak** is the soul who is capable of receiving the appropriate **varna**
(category) of body, whether it is **oudarik** (spiritual), **bainkriya**
(physical), or **aharak** (mixed). - Ga 664

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 48 karmamanya bhAga cAra (2) niya-khacA, netra mAvi jina sAdhanoM se sarvo-
garmI, (5) vedamohanIya ke udaya-udIraNA se hone vAlA pariNAma kA saMmoha
(cAJcalya), jisase guNa-doSakA viveka nahIM rahatA, vaha 'veda' hai|-gaa0 271
(6) 'pAya' jIva ke usa pariNAma ko kahate haiM, jisase sukha-duHkha rUpa aneka
prakAra ke ghAsa ko paidA karane vAle aura saMsAra rUpa vistRta sImA vAle
karmarUpa kSetra kA karSaNa kiyA jAtA hai| -gA 281  /  _ sammanatva, dezacAriya,
sarvacAritra aura yathAkhyAtacAritra kA ghAta (pratibandha) karane vAlA pariNAma
'kAya' hai| -gAta 22  /  (7) jisake dvArA jIva tIna kAla-sambandhI aneka prakAra
ke dravya , guNa aura paryAya ko jAna sakatA hai, vaha 'zAna' hai| gA 298  /
(1) ahiMsA Adi vratoM ke dhAraNa, IyA~ Adi samitiyoM ke pAsAna kaSAyoM ke
nigraha. mana Adi daNDa ke tyAga aura indriyoM kI jaya ko 'saMyama' -gA. 464 /
(6) padArthoM ke AkAra ko vizeSa rUpa se na jAnakara sAmAnya rUpa se jAnanA,
vaha 'darzana' hai| gA0 471 /  (10) jisa pariNAma dvArA jIva puNya-apa karma ko
apane sAtha milA letA hai, vaha lezyA' hai| _..-pA0488  /  (11 jina jIvoM kI
siddhi kabhI hone vAlI ho-jo siddhi ke yogya haiM, ve bhanya' aura isake
viparIta, jo kabhI saMsAra meM mukta na hoMge, ve 'abhavya' haiN| -gA556  /  (12
vItarAga ke kahe huye pA~ca astikAya, chaha dRzya yA nava prakAra ke padArthoM
para AjJApUrvaka yA adhigamapUrva pramANa-naya-nikSepa-dvArA) zraddhA karanA
'samyaktva' hai| -gA0 560  /  [13. no-indriya (mana) ke AvaraNa kA kSayopazama
yA usase hone vAlA jJAna, jise saMzA kahate haiM, use dhAraNa karane vAlA jIva
'saMjhI' aura isake viparIta, jisako mana ke mivAya anya indriyoM se jJAna hotA
hai vaha 'asaMjJI' hai| gA0 659  /  (14) audArika, baiMkriya aura AhAraka, ina
sIna meM se kisI bhI zarIra ke yogya vargaNAoM ko pathAyogya grahaNa karane bAlA
jIva 'AhAraka hai --gA0 664  /

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Granth Part Four  **Knowledge of the subjects like black, yellow, etc.
is obtained through the Uvay of Angopang and Nirman Karma, and these are called
'Indriya'.**  **(3) Kama -** The creation and growth of which are appropriate to
the Aavarik, Bakriya, etc. Pugla-Skanyas, and which is formed from the Uvay of
'Karana', is called 'Kay' (body).  **(4) Yoga -** The interaction of the power
of Viry Shakti, which results in actions like movement, eating, etc. in the
Arimka-Pradesha, through the help of Has-Mal, and which is facilitated by the
Puglas of the body, language, and Mamovargna, is called 'Yoga'.  **(5) D -** The
desire to experience pleasure from Ved-Sangam, etc., which arises from the Uday
of the Vavamohaniya Karma, is called 'D'.  **(6) Kashaya -** Mental disturbances
like being attached to someone or being angry with someone, etc., are the cause
of the growth of the world, and those which are born from the Uvay of
Kashayamohaniya Karma are called 'Kama'.  **(7) Jnan -** The use of the
consciousness power to specifically face an object is called 'Jnan'.  **(8)
Sangam -** To be separated from the Karmabandha-Janak tendency is called
'Sangam'.  **(9) Darshan -** The use of consciousness power to know the subject
of Darshan in a general way is called 'Darshan'.  **(10) Leshya -** The specific
results that combine Karma with Ashma are called 'Leshya'.  **(11) Bhanvatva -**
The ability to attain Moksha is called 'Bhanvatva'.  **(12) Samyakkarma -** The
result of the soul's actions is called Samyakkarma, which is the non-obstruction
of Moksha. As soon as it is manifested, the tendency of the soul to...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma grantha bhAga cAra kAle-pIle Adi viSayoM kA jJAna hotA hai aura jo
aGgopAGga tathA nirmANa nAmakarma ke uvaya se prApta hote haiM, ve 'indriya'
haiN| (3) kAma - jisakI racanA aura vRdhi yathAyogya auvArika, bakriya Adi
pugla-skanyoM hotI hai aura jo karanANE uvaya se banatA hai, use 'kAya' ( zarIra
) kahate haiN| (4) yogavIrya-zakti ke jisa parispada se - Arimaka-pradezoMko
hasa-mala se-gamana, bhojana Adi kriyAyeM hotI haiM aura mo parispanva, zarIra,
bhASA tathA mamovargaNA ke pugloM kI sahAyatA se hotA hai. vaha 'yoga' hai| ( 5
) veda-saMbhoga-anya sukha ke anubhava kI isachA, jo vevamohanIyakarma ke udaya
se hotI hai, vaha 'da' hai| (6 ) kaSAyakisI para bhAsakta honA yA kisI se mArAma
ho jAnA, ityAdi mAnasika-vikAra, pro saMsAra-vRddhi ke kAraNa hai aura jo
kaSAyamohanIya pharma ke uvaya-janya haiM, unako 'kAma' kahate haiN| (7) jAma-
kisI vastu ko vizeSa rUpa se sAmane vAlA cetanAzakti kA vyApAra ( upayoga ),
'jJAna' kahalAtA hai| () saMyama-karmabandha-janaka pravRtti se alaga ho jAnA,
'saMgama' kahalAtA hai  /  (6) darzanaviSaya ko sAmAnya rUpa se jAnane vAlA
cetanAzakti kA upayoga 'darzana' hai| (10) lezyA - AzmA ke sAtha karma kA mela
karAne vAle pariNAmavizeSa lakSyA' haiN| ( 11 ) madhyasva-mokSa pAne kI yogyatA
ko 'bhanyatva' kahate haiN| (12 ) sampaparava-AtmA ke basa pariNAma ko
samyakrama kahate haiM, ko mokSa kA aviroSI hai-jisake vyakta hote hI mAramA kI
pravRtti,

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The heat (**garm**) becomes **mainly** inward (**antarmuh bhithar ki or**).
**Tava-radhi**, this is the result of **pal**. **Prashma**, **sanveg**,
**nived**, **anukampa**, and **praastikta**, these five characteristics are
often found in **samyakri**. (13) The attainment of **sanjh** by **sanshriya-
dhoghankalik** is called **sammitva**. (14) To take a vow of **any kind of
food** is called **aaharaktva**. The root (**mul**) includes all sentient beings
(**samsari jiv**) in every **margana**. ||1|| ... ... ... ... 1- This is what
**Bhattaraka Piaakaldev** said: "Therefore, **samyagdarshan** is the
transformation of the self (**atmaparinam**), which is directed towards the good
(**shreyobhimukh**)." - **Tatva** A. 1, S. 2, R. 16. 5- There are three types of
**aahar**: (1) **oj-aahar**, (2) **lobha-aahar**, and (3) **kaval-aahar**. Their
characteristics are as follows: "**Sarireniyaahari**, **tapaai faseen lom
aaharo**. **Pakhe paaharo pun, kaliyo hoi namko**. " The **aahar** in the form
of **shukra-shonit** taken by the **karman-sharira** at the time of birth is
**oj**, the **aahar** taken by the **vayus** through the **swagidriya** is
**lobha**, and the **aahar** taken through the mouth, such as food (**anna**),
is **kaval-aahar**. The nature of **aahar** is described in **Gommatsar-
Jivakand** as follows: "**Udayavashnasari ro,-bayen tahahabayana chittanam**.
**Gokammavagananam, gahane aaharayam nam**. ||663|| The **aahar** is the intake
of **nokaram-varganas** that are capable of becoming **deh**, **vachan**, and
**dadhyama** due to the rise of **sharira-namakarma**. In **Digambar**
literature, there are six types of **aahar**. For example:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 garma kara mukhyatathA antarmukha bhItara kI ora ) ho jAtI hai| tasva-rAdhi,
isI pariNAma kA pAla haiN| prazama, saMvega, niveda, anukampA aura prAstikatA,
ye pAMca lakSaNa prAyaH samyakrI meM pAye jAte haiN| 13) saMzriya-dhoghaMkAliko
saMjhA ko prApti ko 'saMmitva kahate haiN| (14) AhArakarava -kisI-na-kisI
prakAra ke AhAra' ko praNa karanA, 'AhArakatva hai| mUla pratyeka mArgaNA meM
sampUrNa saMsArI jIvoM kA samAveza hotA hai  /  / 1 /  /  _... ..-.- . - -...-.
1- yahI bAta bhaTTArakA pIakAladevane kahI hai:"tasmAt
samyagdarzanamAtmapariNAmaH zreyobhimukhamadhyayasyAmaH" - tatvA a0 1, sU0 2,
rAna0 16  /  5-AhAra nIna prakAra vA hai:-| oja-AhAra, (2) lobhaAhAra aura (3)
kavala-AhAra  /  inakA lakSaNa isa prakAra hai: "sarIreNIyAhArI. tapAi phAseNa
loma aahaaro| pakkhe pAhAro puNa, kaliyo hoi naamko|" garbha meM utpanna hone ke
samaya jo zukra-zoNitarUpa AhAra, kArmaNazarIra ke dvArA liyA jAtA hai. vaha
oja, vAyu kA svagidriya dvArA jo grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai, yaha lobha aura jo anna
Adi khAdya, mukha dvArA grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai, vaha kavala-AhAra hai| AhAra kA
svarUpa gommaTasAra-jIvakANDa meM isa prakAra hai: "udayAvaSNasarI ro,-bayeNa
tahahabayaNAcittANaM  /  gokammavagaNANaM, gahaNe AhArayaM nAma  // 663 //
zArIranAmakarma ke udaya se deha, vacana aura dadhyamA ke banane yogya nokarma-
vargaNAoM kA jo grahaNa hotA hai, usAko 'AhAra' kahate haiN| digambara-sAhitya
meM AhAra ke chaha bheda kiye huye milate haiM  /  yathA:

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Bhaap Chaar  **Four types of paths (gatis) and their sub-
categories (vishesh bhed):**  **[From four verses]**  **1.  **Suranara,
Tiryancha, Naraka, and Igniyata, these are the four gatis.  **2.
**Bhujalajalanilanakan, Tasa ya Manakyatanujoga, these are the six kayas. **3.
**Guranarayi, Inirya, Gati, Rektikanik, Chatushpanchendriyaani, Prakaya, these
are the five indriyas. **4.  **Bhujan, Jwalana, Agni, Van, Sama, and
Manomachanatanuyoga, these are the three yogas.  **Meaning:**  * **Deva,
Manushya, Tiryancha, and Naraka** are the four gatis. * **Ekaindriya, Dvindriya,
Triindriya, Charindriya, and Panchendriya** are the five indriyas. *
**Prithvikaaya, Jalakaaya, Vayukaaya, Agni kaaya, Vanaspatikaaya, and Usakaaya**
are the six kayas. * **Manoyoga, Pachanayoga, and Kayayoga** are the three
yogas.  **1.  **The nature of the different paths (gatis):  **Meaning:**  *
**Devagati:** The state of being a deva, arising from the karma of Devagati,
resulting in a specific form (paryaya) and behavior. * **Manushya Gati:** The
state of being a human, arising from the karma of Manushya Gati, resulting in a
specific form (paryaya) and behavior. * **Tiryancha Gati:** The state of being a
Tiryancha, arising from the karma of Tiryancha Gati, resulting in a specific
form (paryaya) and behavior. * **Naraka Gati:** The state of being in Naraka,
arising from the karma of Naraka Gati, resulting in a specific form (paryaya)
and behavior.  **"Gokammarammaharo, Kawalaaharo, Pa Lepamaharo, Ojamano Vi Ya
Kamaso, Aharo Viho Yo."** - This is a quote from the second chapter of the
"Pramey Kamal Martanda" which explains the different types of food (aahar) in
detail.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhApa cAra mArgaNAsthAna ke avAntara (vizeSa) bheda  /  /   /
cAra gAthAoM se  /  ] suranara tirinirayamaI, iganiyatiyacauNidi chkaayaa|
bhUjalajalaNAnilakaNa, tasA ya maNakyaNataNujogA |10|| guranarayiM inirayagati
rekatikanikacatuSpaJcendriyANi prakAyAH  /  bhUjana jvalanAnigna vana samAzca
manoma canatanuyogAH  //  10  //  artha-deSa, manuSya, tiyaMJca aura naraka, ye
cAra gatiyAM haiN| ekendriya, hondriya, zrIpriya, carindriya aura paJcendriya,
ye pAca indriya haiM  /  pRthvIkAya, jalakAya, vAyukAma, agnikAya, vanaspatikAya
aura usakAya, ye chaha kAya haiM  /  manoyoga, pacanayoga aura kAyayoga, ye tIna
yoga haiM  /  /  10  /  /  (1)gatimArgaNA ke bhedoM kA svarUraH bhAvArtha 1 )
devagasinAmakarma ke udaya se hone vAlA paryAya (zarIra kA viziSTa AkAra),
jisase yaha veba' hai, aisA vyavahAra kiyA jAtA hai, yaha 'vevagati'  /  (2)
'yaha manuSya hai,' aisA vyavahAra karAnepAlA jo manuSyagatinAma karma ke uvaya-
janya paryAya, vaha 'manuSyagati'  /  (3) misa paryAya se jIya tiryaJca'
kahalAtA hai aura jo tiryaJcatimAmakarma ke ucaya se hotA hai, vaha 'tiryayAti'
/  (4) jisa paryAya ko pAkara jIya, 'nAraka' kahA jAtA hai aura jisakA kAraNa
maragati. mAmakarma kA udapa hai, vaha 'naraphagati' hai  /  gokammarammahAro,
kavAlAhAro pa lepmaahaaro| ojamaNo vi ya kamaso, AhAro viho yo  /  / "
-~-prameyakamalamArtaNDa ke dviyIya pariccheda meM pramANa rUpa se uddhapta  /

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **(2) The Nature of the Different Indriya-Manas:**
**(1)** The Nis-jati possesses only the touch indriya and is obtained through
the arising of the A-indriya-jati-namakarma. This is called 'A-indriya-jati'.
**(2)** The jati that possesses two indriyas (touch and taste) and is born from
the arising of the Dwi-indriya-jati-namakarma is called 'Dwi-indriya-jati'.
**(3)** The jati that possesses three indriyas (touch, taste, and smell) and is
obtained through the arising of the Tri-indriya-jati-namakarma is called 'Tri-
indriya-jati'.  **(4)** The jati that possesses four indriyas (touch, taste,
smell, and sight) and is obtained through the arising of the Chatur-indriya-
jati-namakarma is called 'Chatur-indriya-jati'.  **(5)** The Panch-indriya-jati
possesses all five indriyas (touch, taste, smell, sight, and hearing) and is
obtained through the arising of the Panch-indriya-jati-namakarma.  **(3) The
Nature of the Different Kaya-Margna:**  **(1)** The earthly body, formed from
earth, is called 'Prithvi-kaya'.  **(2)** The watery body, formed from water, is
called 'Jal-kaya'.  **(3)** The fiery body, formed from fire, is called 'Tej-
kaya'.  **(4)** The airy body, formed from air, is called 'Vay-kaya'.  **(5)**
The plant body, formed from plants, is called 'Vanaspati-kaya'.  These five
kayas are obtained through the arising of the Sthavar-namakarma and their
possessors are the Ek-indriya jivas like Prithvi-kapik, etc.  **(6)** The body
that can move and is obtained through the arising of the Prasa-namakarma is
called 'Sakaya'. It is possessed by all types of jivas from Dwi-indriya to
Panch-indriya.  **(4) The Nature of the Different Yoga-Margna:**  **(1)** The
mind's activity is called 'Mano-yoga', which is Avaric, Vaikriya... (See
Appendix "J").

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra (2}indriyamANA ke bhedoM kA svarUpaH (1) nisa jAti meM
sirpha svacA indriya pAyI jAtI hai aura jo jAti, ephendriyajAtinAmakarma ke
udaya se prApta hotI hai, vaha 'ephendriyajAti  /  ( 2 ) jisa jAti meM cho
igniyAM (tvacA, jIma) haiM aura jo dvIndriyajAlinAmakarma ke udaya-janma hai,
bAha 'dIndriyajAti'  /  ( 3 ) jisa jAti meM inni yo nIna (ukta do tamA nAka)
hotI haiM aura zrIndriyajAtinAmakarma kA upaya jisakA kAraNa hai, vaha
'zrIndriyajAti'  /  ; ) pradipajAti mandriyA~ cAra  /  ukta tauna tathA netra )
hotI haiM aura jisakI prApti caturindriyajAlinAmakarma ke udaya se hotI hai  /
( 5 ) paJcendriyajAti meM ukta dhAra aura kAna, ye pA~ca indriyA~ hotI haiM aura
usake hone meM nimitta paJce. driyajAtinAmakarma kA udaya hai  /
(3)-kAyamArgaNA ke bhedoM kA svarUpa: (1) pArthiva zarIra, jo pRthvI kA banatA
hai, yaha 'pRthvIkAya'  /  ( 2 ) jalIya zarIra, jo jasase banatA hai, vaha
'jalakAya'  /  ( 3 ) taMjasazarIra, jo tejakA banatA hai, vaha 'leja kAya'  /
(4) vAyavIya zarIra, jo vAyu-janya hai, vaha vAyaphAya 1 (5) banaspatizarIra, jo
vanaspatimaya hai, vaha 'vanaspatikAya' hai  /  ye pA~ca kAya, sthAvara
nAmakarma ke usama se hote haiM aura inake svAmI pRthvIkApika Adi ekendriya jIva
hai  /   /  6 ) jo zarIra ala-phira sakatA hai aura jo prasanAmakarma ke baya se
prApta hotA hai, yaha 'sakAya' hai  /  isake dhAraNa karane vAle dvIndriya se
paJcendriya taka saba prakAra ke jIta haiN| (4)- yogamArgaNA ke medoM kA
svarUpa: {1) jIva kA baha vyApAra 'manoyoga' hai, jo auvArika, vaikriya
1-dekhiye, pariziSTa "ja  / "

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma-naap, Part Four  **(2)** This is the accumulation of the **mano-vaky**
group, which is taken in by the **maharak-sharira**.  **(3)** The activity of
the **jiva** that is done with the help of **bhaasha-nadhya** that is
accumulated by the **oudarik, vaikriya, or aharak-barira** through action is
called **vachan yoga**.  **(1)** The specific activity of the **paary shakti**
of the **barira-dhari atma** is called **kay yoga**.  **(11)** The **veda** of a
man, woman, and eunuch are **narastrinpusaka**, **kashaya** are **krodh, mad,
maya, and lobha**. **Mati, shruta, avadhi, manah paryaya, and keval jnana**, and
**mati-ajnana, shruta-ajnana, and vibhang jnana** are the eight **sakar**
(specific) uses.  **(Meaning)** (1) The desire for contact with a woman is
**purusha-veda**, (2) the desire for contact with a man is **stri-veda**, and
(3) the desire for contact with both a man and a woman is **napunsak-veda**.
**(1)** This is the **lakshya-bhaga-veda**. The **dravya-veda** is determined by
external signs: the signs of a man are beard, mustache, etc. The signs of a
woman are the absence of beard and mustache, and breasts, etc. The eunuch has
some signs of both a man and a woman.  The same thing has been said in the
**prajnaapana-bhaasha** word team: "**Yoni-m duvam-sparya, mumbhta ko-svata
stano. Puska-miteti lingani, sapta sroste prachakshate** (1). **Mehanam kharata
baadhay, shoshtiya madhu dhristaata. Stri-kamiti lingani, sapta dhuro
prachakshate** (2)."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmanApa bhAga cAra yA mAhAraka- zarIra ke dvArA grahaNa kiye huye manovakSya-
samUha kI bhavada se hotA hai| (2) jIva ke usa vyApAra ko 'vacana yoga' kahate
haiM, jo audArika, vaikriya yA AhAraka-bArIra ko kriyA dvArA saMcaya kiye huye
bhASAnadhya kI sahAyatA se hotA hai (3) bArIradhArI AtmA ko pArya zakti kA
vyApAra-vizeSa 'kAyayoga' kahalAtA hai  // 1 //  -tamArgaNA lo bheToM kA maH
veya naristhinapusA, kasAya kohamayamAyalobha ti|
mahasuyavahimaNakevala,-bihaMgamaisuanANa sAgArA  // 11 //  vedA
narastrinapusakAH, kaSAyA krodhamadamAyAlomA iti  /  mAtazrutAvadhimanaH
kavayiGgamati zrutAjJAnAni sAkArANi ||1|| artha-puruSa, strI aura napuMsaka, ye
tIna veda haiM  /  krodha, mAna mAyA aura lobha, ye cAra meva kaSAya ke haiM  /
mati, zruta, avadhi, manaH paryAya aura kevala jAna tathA mati-ajJAna, zruta-
ajJAna aura vibhaGgajAna, ye ATha sakAra (vizeSa) upayoga haiM  // 11 //
bhAvArtha-(1) strI ke saMsarga ko icchA 'puruSaveva', (2) puruSake saMsarga
karane kI icchA strIveda' aura 1) strI-puruSa donoM ke saMsarga kI icchA
'bhapusakatreva' hai  /  1-yaha lakSaga bhAgavedakA hai  /  dravyavedakA nirNaya
bAharI cihnoM se kiyA jAtA hai:-puruSa ke cinha, DAr3I-mUcha Adi haiN| strI ke
cinha DAr3hI mUcha kA abhAva tathA stana Adi haiM  /  nasaka meM strI-puruSa
donoM ka kucha-kucha cinha hote haiM  /  yahI bAta prajJApanA-bhASA pada kI TIma
meM hI huI hai: - "yonima duvamasparya, mumbhatA kosvatA stno| puskAmiteti
liGgAni, sapta srosthe pracakSate  // 1 //  mehanaM kharatA bADhaya, zoSaTIya
madhu dhRSTatA  /  strIkAmiti liGgAni, sapta dhuro pracakSate  // 2 //

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four  **Verse 3:**  "Those with breasts and hair like a
woman, and with the characteristics of a eunuch, are said by the wise to be
fueled by the fire of delusion."  **Regarding the sign of a eunuch, this
statement is made from a perspective of abundance. Because sometimes, the signs
of a man are seen in a woman, and the signs of a woman are seen in a man. The
following examples are worth considering for the truth of this matter:**  "My
dear friend, Dr. Shiv Prasad, who was at the Kota Hospital (now you have left
your job with the intention of opening an independent clinic, you witnessed this
with your own eyes) says that 'during the time of Dr. Makbat Sahib (who was the
Chief Medical Officer in Kota at that time) ... a person underwent surgery
(operation) for a tumor (under the esophagus). He was anesthetized for the
surgery. Upon examination, it was found that his body had both male and female
organs. Both these organs were fully developed. After the surgery, he was
brought back to consciousness. Upon questioning, he revealed that he had used
both organs separately for their respective functions, but due to doubts about
pregnancy, he had stopped using the female organ. This person is still alive.'
"It is heard and is often true that 'in the Merwara District, a person had a
son. After becoming an adult, he passed the entrance exam. In the same way, his
parents arranged his marriage, as there was no doubt about his being a man. But
after the marriage, it was found that he was completely unfit for manhood.
Therefore, upon further investigation, it was found that this was indeed the
case, and he had the signs of a woman..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra stanAvizmayakezAvi, mAvAbhAghasamanvitam  /  napusakaM
budhAH prAha, mohAnalasudIpitam  // 3 //  bAva cinha ke sambandha meM yaha
kathana bahalatA kI apekSA se hai| kyoMki kabhI kabhI puruSa ke cinha, strI meM
aura strI ke cinha, puruSa meM dekhe jAte haiN| isa bAta kI satyatA ke liye
nIce-likhe uddharaNa dekhane yogya haiM: "mere parama mitra DATara zivaprasAda,
jisa samaya koTA hAspiTala meM the (aba Apane svatantra bheDikasa hAla kholane
ke irAde se naukarI chor3a dI hai , apanI A~khoM dekhA hAla isa prakAra jyAna
karate haiM ki 'DAkTara mekabATa sAhaba ke jamAne meM ( ki jo usa samaya koTe
meM cIpha mekhikala Aphisara pe ) ......... 'eka vyakti para muthasthA ( anDara
phasrofArma ) meM zastracikitsA ( bAparezana ) pharanI yo, zrataeva use mUcita
kiyA gayA; dekhate kyA haiM ki usake zarIra meM strI aura puruSa donoM ke jimha
vidyamAna haiM  /  ye donoM avayava pUrNa rUpa se vikAsa pAe hue the  /
zastracikitsA kiye jAne para use hoza meM lAyA gayA, hoza meM Ane para usase
pUchane para mAlUma huA ki usane una donoM avayavoM se pRthak 2 unakA kArya liyA
hai, kintu garbhAvika zaMkA ke kAraNa usane strI viSayaka avayaya se kArya lenA
chor3a diyA hai| yaha vyakti aba taka jIvita hai|' "sunane meM AyA hai aura
prAyaH satya hai ki 'meravAr3A zisTripaTa (Merwari District: meM eka vyakti ke
lar3akA huA  /  usane vayaska hone para eNTrensa pAsa kiyA  /  isI ase meM mAtA
pitA meM usakA vivAha bhI kara diyA, kyoMki usake puruSa hone meM kisI prakAra
kI zaMkA to thI ho nahIM; kintu vivAha hone para mAlUma huA ki vaha puruSatva ke
vicAra se sarvathA ayogya hai| ataeva sAkTarI jAMca karavAne para mAlUma huA ki
yaha vAstava meM yoM hai aura strI cinha ke

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagrantha Part Nar (6) The nature of the divisions of Kshaya Margna: - (1)
'Anger' is that affliction. Due to which one cannot tolerate good or bad things
or gets angry. (2) The defect due to which there is no proper respect for the
small and big, due to which there is stiffness, that is 'Pride'. Above, the male
sign has become only a name. For this reason, that sign is meaningless. -
Therefore, on removing that artificial penis of the doctor, his pure female form
was revealed and both the women (male-bodied woman and her married wife) were
married to the same person. ' This woman is said to have been alive until
recently. " Human Psychology Chapter Chha. It is not a rule that Trumpveda and
Bhava Veda are the same. Even though there is a male sign from above, there is a
possibility of experiencing the female Veda due to the burden. Such as: "Praram
R Felisankularanambhe Taya Sahaprayam Kantjayay Kichidupari Prarambhi Tabhramah.
Khimnna Pen Katitati Shithilata Dovamllirukampiratam, Pakshi Militam Aiksi
Pausharas: Strin Kun: Siddhati ||17||' Subhapitamlahar Viparit Tatrima In the
same way, there is a contradiction in the matter of other Vedas, even though
there is a similarity in the majority of the Vedas and the mother Veda, mental
reactions are found according to the sign. - Gommatamar-Jivakanda has described
the characteristics of male etc. Vedas according to the method of surgery-
nyulpati. Ma. 272-54. 1 In comparison to the slow-moderate-fast of the power of
Kshaya, the four-four divisions of each Kshaya like anger etc. are the same in
Karmagrantha and Gommatasar-Jivai. Kim Gommatasar has made fourteen-fourteen
divisions in terms of Leshya and sixteen divisions in terms of age. Their
consideration has not been seen in the Svetambara scriptures. For these
divisions, see, G. Ga. 261 to 264.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga nAra (6) kaSAya mArgaNA ke bhedoM kA svarupaH - (1) 'krodha'
vaha vikAra hai. jisase kisI kI bhalI. burI bAta sahana nahIM kI jAtI yA nArAjI
hotI hai| (2) jisa doSa se choTe-bar3e ke prati ucita natrabhASa nahIM rahatA
thA jisase aiMTha ho vaha 'mAna' hai| Upara pRSacinha nAma mAtra ko bana gayA .
isI kAraNa vaha cinha mirarthaka hai .-ataeva DAkTara ke usa kRtrima biha ko
dUra kara dene para usakA zuddha strIsvarupa prakaTa ho gayA aura una donoM
striyoM (puruSarupArI strI aura usakI vivAhitA strI) kI eka hI vyakti se zAdI
kara dI gii|' yaha strI kucha samaya pahile taka jIvita batalAI jAtI hai|"
mAnavasatizAstra prakaraNa chaa| yaha niyama nahIM hai ki Trampaveda aura
bhAvaveda samAA hI ho  /  Upara se puruSa ke cinha hone para bhI bhAra se strI
veda ke anubhava kA sammava hai  /  yathA: "prArama ra phelisaMkularaNArambhe
tayA sAhasaprAyaM kAntajayAya kizcidupari prArambhi tabhramAH  /  khimnA pena
kaTItaTI zithilatA dovaMllirukampiratam, pakSI mIlitamaikSi pauSarasa: strINa
kuna: siddhati  // 17 // ' subhApitamlAhAra viparIta tatrimA isI prakAra anya
vadoM ke viSaya meM bhI viparyayA rAmjava hai, tayApi bahatakara dala aura mAtra
veda meM samAnatAbAra cinha ke anusAra hI mAnasika vikriyApAI jAtI hai| -
gommaTamAra-jIvakANDa meM puruSa Adi veda kA lakSaNa zalya-nyulpati ke anusAra
kiyA hai  /  mA0272-54  /  1kapAyi zakti ke lAna-manda-gAva kI apekSA se
zrodhAdi pratyeka pAya ke anantAnvandhI Adi cAra-cAra bheda karma prantha aura
gommaTasAra-jIvAI meM samAna hai| kim gomadAra meM lezyA kI akSA se caudaha-
baudahU aura Ayu meM bandhAbadha ii azA se bImabIla bheda kiye gaye haiN| unakA
vicAra zvetAmbarI granthoM meM nahIM dekhA gayA  /  ina bhedoM ke liye dekhiye,
jI. gA0 261 se 264 taka  /

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 6: Karma Granth, Chapter 4  **(3)** 'Maya' is that which leads to
deceit and trickery.  **(4)** 'Lobha' is attachment to possessions. **(7)** The
nature of the different types of knowledge on the path of liberation: **(1)**
'Matijnana' is the knowledge that arises through the senses and mind, and
primarily knows present objects.  **(2)** 'Shrutajnana' is knowledge based on
scriptures, where the relationship between words and their meanings is
understood. It arises after Matijnana. For example, hearing the word 'jal'
(water) and knowing that it refers to water, or seeing water and thinking that
it is the meaning of the word 'jal', and considering its relationship to other
things. **(3)** 'Avadhijnana' is knowledge that arises without the help of the
senses or mind. It requires only the specific ability of the soul and knows
objects that have form. **(4)** 'Manahparyayajnana' is knowledge that knows the
mental states of sentient beings. It requires only the specific destruction of
karmas of the soul, not the senses or mind. **(5)** 'Kevalajnana' is the
knowledge that knows all things in time, and is perfect, eternal, and
independent. **(6)** The opposite of the correct use of Matijnana is
'Matiajnana'. For example, believing that a pot, etc., is one and the same,
meaning that it is not different from anything else. **(7)** The opposite of the
correct use of Shrutajnana is 'Shrutaajnana'. For example, hearing a word like
'Hari' and concluding that it means 'lion' and that no other meaning is
possible. **(8)** The opposite of the correct use of Avadhijnana is
'Avadhiajnana'. It is said that Shiva had this kind of knowledge because he saw
seven islands and seven seas and concluded from that that all islands and seas
were the same.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6 karmagrantha mAga cAra (3) 'mAyA' use kahate haiM, jisase, chala-kapaTa meM
pravRtti hotI hai  /  (4) 'lobha' mamazvako kahate haiM  /  (7) jJAnamArgaNA ke
bhedoM kA svarUpaH (1) jo jJAna indriya ke tathA mana ke dvArA hotA aura zro
bahutakara vartamAnakAlika viSayoM ko jAnatA hai, vaha 'matijJAna hai  /  (2) jo
zAma zrutAnusArI hai-- jisameM zabda artha kA sambandha mAsita hotA haiaura jo
matijJAna ke bAda hotA hai; jaise- 'jala' Tea sunakara yaha jAnanA ki yaha zabda
pAnI kA bodhaka hai athavA pAnI dekhakara yaha vicAranA ki yaha 'jala' zabda kA
artha hai, isa prakAra usake sambandha ko anya anya bAtoM kA vicAra karanA, vaha
'' hai| (3) 'avadhijJAna' vaha hai, jo indriyoM aura mana kI sahAyatA ke binA hI
utpanna hotA hai jisake hone meM AtmA kI viziSTa yogyatA mAtra apekSita hai aura
jo rUpa vAle viSayoM ko hI jAnatA hai  /  ( 4 ) 'mana: paryAyajJAna' yaha hai,
jo saMjJI jovoM ke mana kI avasthAoM ko jAnatA hai aura jisake hone meM AtmA ke
viziSTa kSayopazamamAtra kI apekSA hai, indriya-mana kI nahIM  /  (5)
kevalajJAna' uta jJAna ko kahate haiM, jinase kAlika saba vastueM jAnI jAtI hai
aura jo paripUrNa sthAtrI tathA svatantra hai  /  (6) viparIta matiupayoga,
'mati ajJAna' hai; jaise:-ghaTa Adi ko ekAnna sadrUpa mAnanA arthAt yaha mAnanA
ki vaha kisI apekSA se asadrUpa nahIM hai| (7) viparIta bhUta- upayoga 'bhUta
ajJAna' hai; jaise:- 'hari' Adi kisI zabda ko sunakara yaha nizcaya karanA ki
isakA artha siha hai, dUsarA artha ho hI nahIM sakatA, ityAdi  /  ( 5 ) viparIta
avadhi - upayoga hI 'vijJAna' hai| kahA jAtA hai ki zivarAjati ko aisA jJAna
thA; kyoMki unhoMne sAta dvIpa tathA sAta samudra dekhakara utane meM hI saba
dvIpa samudra kA nizcaya kiyA thA  /

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Bhaga Nar  When Mithyatva arises, the soul becomes Kavaagrahi,
unable to perceive the true nature of any object. At that time, its use, whether
it be in the form of Mati, Shruta, or Avadhi, becomes ignorant (Ayatharth-Jan).
Manahparyaya and Fevalman, these two uses, do not occur with Mithyatva; they are
inherently knowledge.  These paths of use are called Saffar because they
primarily know the general and specific aspects of an object, especially in
terms of time. ||11||  **(8) The nature of the different types of Samyama
Margna:**  Sthamaiyacheyparihara, Suhamahakhayadesajavajaya. Chaknua Chakhuohi,
Valsana Anagara. ||12|| Samayikchhadparihara, Mukshmayathakyatadeshayataya Ni.
Chakshurchakshurvadhikamvaladashananayakara. ||12||  Meaning: Samayik,
Chevopastapamo, Pariharavishukh, Sukshmasamyara, Yathakyarat, Deshaviriti and
Aviriti, these seven are the types of Samyama Margna. Chakshudarshan,
Achakshurvarshan, Avadhivarshan and Kevalvarshan, these four uses are Anakar.
||12||  Bhavarth: (1) The Samyama in which equanimity (absence of attachment and
aversion) is attained is called 'Samayik Samyama'. Its (a) 'Itvar' and (b)
'Pavaskathit' are its two types.  (a) 'Itsarsamapik Samyama' is that which is
given first to the students of the Abhyasaryas for achieving stability, and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga nAra jisa samaya mithyAtva kA udaya ho AtA hai, usa samaya
jIva kavAgrahI bana jAtA hai, jisase vaha kisI viSaya kA yathArtha svarUpa
jAnane nahIM paataa| usa samaya usakA upayogacAhe vaha matirUpa ho, zutarUpa ho
yA avadhirUpa hoajJAna ( ayathArtha-jAna ) rUpa meM avala jAtA hai| manaHparyAya
aura phevalamAna, ye do upayoga, mithyAtvo ko hote hI nahIM; isase ve jAnarUpa
hI haiN| ye pATha upayoga, sAphAra isaliye kahe jAte haiM ki inake dvArA vastu
ke sAmAnya-vizeSa, samaya rUpa meM se vizeSa rUpa (vizeSa AkAra) mukhyatayA jAnA
jAtA hai  // 11 //  (8) saMyamamArgaNA ke bhedoM kA svarUpaH
sthamAiacheyaparihAra, suhmahkhaaydesjvajyaa| caknuacakhUohI, valasANa
annaagaaraa|| 12  //  sAmAyikacchadaparihAramUkSmayathAkhyAtadezayatAyatA ni  /
cakSuracakSuravadhikaMvaladazanAnyanAkArANi  //  12  /  /  arthasAmAyika,
chevopasthApamoya, parihAravizukha, sUkSmasamyarAya, yathAkhyarata, dezavirati
aura avirati, ye sAta meva saMyamamArgaNA ke haiM  /  cakSudarzana,
acakSurvarzana, avadhivarzana aura kevalabarzana, ye cAra upayoga anAkAra haiM
//  12  //  bhAvArtha-(1) jisa saMyama meM samabhAva ko (rAga-dveSa ke abhASa
kI) prApti ho, vaha 'sAmAyikasaMyama, hai  /  isake (ka) 'itvara' aura (kha)
'pAvaskathita' ye vo meda hai| ( ka ) 'itsarasAmApikasaMyama' vaha hai, jo
abhyAsAryoM ziSyoMko sthiratA prApta karane ke liya pahale-pahala diyA jAtA hai
aura

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four  **(a)** This is a type of **san̄yama** whose duration
is considered to be from the time of **upasthāpana** until the time of taking
**bada dīkshā**. This **san̄yama** is observed in the **Airavata kshetra**
during the reign of the first and last **tīrthaṅkara**. Those who observe this
**san̄yama** have to accept the five **mahāvratas** including **pratikramāṇa**.
The **svāmī** of this **san̄yama** is **strītakalpī**.  **(b)** The **samāyika-
saṅgama** mentioned here is observed from the time of its acceptance until the
end of life. This **san̄yama** is observed in the **Airavata kshetra** during
the reign of the middle twenty-two **tīrthaṅkara**. However, in the **Mahāvieha
kshetra**, this **saṅgama** is observed by all. Those who observe this
**san̄yama** have to observe four **mahāvratas** and their **kalpa** is
**sthitā-sthita**.  **(2)** The **prathamasan̄yama** is a **paryāya** which is
**upasthāpana** (**vratāropaṇa**) again. This means that the time spent
observing the **san̄yama** previously is not counted, and the **vīkshā-kāla** is
counted from the time of accepting the **san̄yama** again. The **chhoṭe-baḍe**
are observed accordingly. This is a **kshetra-sthānīya san̄yama**. It has two
types: **(a) sātivāra** and **(b) nirati-chāra**.  **(a)** **Sātivāra-
chhedopasthāpanīya saṅgama** is the **saṅgama** which is accepted again after
the **mahāvratas** are broken due to some reason.  **(b)** **Nirati-chāra-
chhedopasthāpanīya** is the **san̄yama** which is accepted again after the
**mahāvratas** are broken due to some reason.  **Footnotes:**  * **Āchelakya,
Auddeśika, Sthātarapiṣṭa, Rājabhīṇḍa, Kr̥tikarma, Vrata, Upeṣṭha, Pratikramāṇa,
Māma, and Paryupāṇa** are the **kalpas** which are **sthitakalpī**. *
**Shayātara-piṇḍa-vrata, Jyeṣṭha, and Kr̥tikarma** are the **kalpas** which are
**sthitā-sthita** according to the rules. * The remaining six **kalpas** are
**asthita**.  **Source:** Hāribhadrī Vṛtti, p. 760, Pañcāśaka, Prakaraṇa 17.1.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra jisakI kAlamaryAdA upasthApana paryaMta bar3A dIkSA
lene taka - mAnI gaI hai| yaha saMyama bharata airavata kSetra meM prathama
tathA antima tIthaMjUra ke zAsana ke samaya grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai| isake dhAraNa
karane vAloM ko pratikramaNa sahita pAMca mahAvrata aGgIkAra karane par3ate haiM
tathA isa saMyama ke svAmI 'stritakalpI" hote haiM  /  ( kha ) yAvatkathita
sAmAyikasaMgama vaha hai, jo grahaNa karane ke samaya se jIvanaparyanta pAlA
jAtA hai  /  aisA saMyama airavata kSetrameM madhyavartI bAIsa tIrthaGkaroM ke
zAsana meM grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai para mahAviyehakSetra meM to yaha saMghama saba
meM dila zAhA hai| saMyama ke dhAraNa karane vAloM ko mahAvrata cAra aura kalpa
sthitAsthita hotA hai  /  7 58 ( 2 ) prathama saMyama paryAya kI bakara phira se
upasthApana (vratAropaNa ) karanA - pahale jitane samaya taka saMyama kA pAlana
kiyA ho, utane samaya ko vyavahAra meM na ginanA aura dubArA saMyama grahaNa
karane ke samaya se vIkSAkAla ginanA va choTe-bar3e kA vyavahAra karanA-
chetroMsthAnIyasaMyama hai| isake (ka) 'sAtivAra aura (kha) niraticAra, ye vo
seva haiN| ( ka ) sAticAra chedopasthApanIya saMgrama' vaha hai, jo kisI kAraNa
se mUlaguNoM kA mahAvratoM kA bhaGga ho jAne para phira se grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai
/  (kha) niraticAra-chedopasthApanIya' usa saMyama ko kahate -- P 1 - Acelakya,
audde zika sasthAtarapiSDa, rAjabhiNDa, kRtikarma, vrata, upeSTha, pratikramaNa,
mAma aura paryupaNA, vana dama kalpoM meM jo sthita haiM, ve 'sthitakalpI' aura
zayyAtara piNDa vrata, jyeSTha tathA kRtikarma, ina cAra meM niyama se sthita
aura zeSa chaha kalpo meM jo asthita hote haiM, ve sthitAsthita kalparI' kahe
jAte haiM  /  0 hAribhadrI vRtti, pR0 760, paJcAzaka, prakaraNa 17 1

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma is a burden, which is accepted as a great Vibha with the help of Ratvar
Samayik Samayam. This Samayam is found in the Sadhus of the first and the
supreme Tirthankara in the Bharat-Airavat Kshetra and when a Sadhu of one Tirth
enters another Tirth. For example: Keshigalaya etc. of Shri Pashrdhnath are
found in Bhagwan Mahavira; then they also have this Samayam in the form of
Punksha. (3) Parihar Vishuddha Sangha is that in which the Tapasya named Parihar
Vishuddhi is performed. The Vidhan of Parihar Vishuddhi Tapasya is as follows:
1- This is mentioned in Bhagavati Sutra. 2- To get the right to this Samayam,
the minimum age of Grihasth Paryaya is 21 years, the minimum age of Sadhu
Paryaya (Vibhakal) is 20 years and the maximum age of both Paryayas is
considered to be a few crore years ago. For example: "Epassa Sa Neo, Gihiriamo
Nahani Gantisa. Japariamo Bissa, Vosudhi Unko Sa Suna." The one who is eligible
for this Sanvar has the knowledge of 10.5 Purvas. This is mentioned in his Taba
by Shri Prayasommuri. It is considered to be accepted from the Tirthankaras or
the Antavasi near the Tirth. The Muni who adopts this Samayam can perform Niksha
and Vihar in the third Prahar of the day and meditation, Kayotsarg etc. at other
times. But there is a slight difference of opinion in the Digambar Shastra in
this regard. In it, a person of 30 years of age is considered eligible for this
Samayam. 9 Purvas or knowledge is considered necessary for the eligible person.
It is forbidden to accept this Samayam from anyone other than the Tirthankara.
Also, there is permission to go up to two Kos in any part of the day except for
the three Sandhyas. For example: "Tisan Vaso Ammai, Vasapudhattam Na Tityaya
Ramule. Pacharavanam Padhido, Sansun Lugaauy Biharo." Jivakanda.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmananya bhAga bhAra haiM, jisako ratvarasAmAyikasayama vAle bar3I vIbhA ke
rUpa meM grahaNa karate haiN| yaha saMyama, bharata-airavata kSetra meM prathama
tathA parama tIrthaGkarake sAdhuoM ko hotA hai aura eka tIrtha ke sAdhu, dUsare
tIrtha meM jaba dAkhila hote haiN| jaise:zrIpAzrdhanAtha ke kezIgAlaya' Adi
sAntAnika hA, bhagavAna mahAvIke meM khila hu5; taba unheM bhI punakSArUpa meM
yahI saMyama hotA hai| (3) parihAra vizuddhasaMghama" vaha hai, jisameM
'parihAra vizuddhi nAma kI tapasyA kI jAtI hai  /  parihAravizukSi tapasyA kA
vidhAna saMkSepa meM isa prakAra hai: 1-isa bAta kA varNana bhagavatIsUtra meM
hai| 2 isa saMyama kA adhikAra pAne ke liye gRhastha paryAya umra) phA jaghanya
pramANa 21 sAla sAdhu-paryAya (dIbhAkAla) kA jaghanya pramANa 20 sAla aura donoM
paryAya kA satkRSTa pramANa kucha-kama karoDa purva varSa mAnA hai| yathA:
"epassa esa neo, gihiriAmo nahani gnntiisaa| jApariyAmao bIsA, vosudhi unakosa
ve sUNA  / " isa saMvara ke adhikArI ko sADhe nama pUrva kA jJAna hotA hai| yaha
zrI prayasomamUri ne apane Tabe meM nivA hai| isakA grahaNa tIrthaGkaroM ka yA
tIrthalage antevAsI ke pAsa mAnA gayA hai isa saMyama ko dhAraNa karane vAle
muni, dina ke tIsare prahara meM nikSA va vihAra kara sakate haiM aura anya
samaya meM dhyAna, kAyotsarga Adi  /  parantu isa ripaba me digambara-zAstra kA
thor3A sA mata-bheda hai| usameM tIsa varSa kI umrapAle ko isa saMyama kA
adhikArI mAnA hai  /  adhikArI ke liye no pUrva yA jJAna Avazyaka batalAyA hai
/  tIrthakura ke sivAya aura kisI ke pAsa usa saMthama ke grahaNa karane kI
usameM manAhI hai| sAtha hI tIna saMdhyAoM ko chor3akara dina ke kisI bhAga meM
do kosa taka jAne kI usameM sammati hai  /  yathAH ''tIsaM vAso ammai,
vAsapudhattaM na tityaya ramUle  /  /  pacaravANaM paDhido, saMsUNa lugAuya
bihAro  // 472 /  / " jIvakANDa  /

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter Four of the Vermagranth  A group (community) of nine Sadhus consists
of four ascetics, four attendants (servants), and one Vasnaacharye. The ascetics
observe fasts during the summer: one minimal, two moderate, and three excellent.
During the winter, they observe two minimal, three moderate, and four excellent
fasts. However, during the rainy season, they observe one minimal, four
moderate, and five excellent fasts. The ascetics observe the Ayambil vow with
Abhipraha on the day of Para. This cycle continues for six months. In the next
six months, the previous ascetics become attendants, and the attendants become
ascetics.  For the next six months, the ascetics who have taken on the role of
ascetics follow the same order of austerity as the previous ascetics. However,
the Sadhus who have taken on the role of attendants always observe Ayambil.
After the next six months, for the third six months, the Vaachnaacharye becomes
the ascetic; one of the remaining eight Sadhus becomes the Vaachnaacharye, and
the rest become attendants. In this way, after the completion of these third six
months, this twelve-month austerity called "Pariharavishuddha" ends. After this,
they either accept the Jinakalp or return to the same Gachch they were
previously in, or they begin austerity again. The "Nivishmanak" and
"Nivishtakaiyik" are the two types of Pariharavishuddha austerity. The current
Pariharavishuddha is called "Nivishmanak," and the past Pariharavishuddha is
called "Nivishtakaiyik."  (4) In the austerity where the Sampray (Kashaya)
arises subtly (extremely...  2 - This is a type of vow where only food is
consumed, excluding ghee, milk, and other juices. Even then, water is consumed
only once a day, heated in a pot.  Necessary Notes: 1603 - 5.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 60 varmagrantha bhAga cAra nau sAdhuoM kA eka gaNa ( samudAya ) hotA hai,
jisameM se cAra tapasvI banate haiM, cAra unake paricAraka ( sevaka ) aura eka
vAsa nAcAyeM  /  jo tapasvI haiM, ve grISmakAla meM jaghanya eka, madhyama do
aura utkRSTa tIna upavAsa karate haiN| zItakAla meM jaghanya do madhyama tIna
aura utkRSTa cAra, upayAsa karate hai  /  parantu varSAkAla meM jaghanya soma,
madhyama cAra aura utkRSTa pA~ca, upavAsa karate haiM  /  tapasvI, pArA ke dina
abhiprahasahita Aya bila' vrata karate haiM  /  yaha krama chaha mahIne taka
calatA hai| dUsare chaha mahInoM meM pahale ke tapasvI to paricAraka banate haiM
aura paricAraka, tapasvI  /  dUsare chaha mahIne ke liye tapasvI bane huye
sAdhuoM kI tapasyA kA vahI krama hotA hai, jo pahale ke tapasviyoM kI tapasyA kA
/  parantu jo sAdhu paricAraka pada grahaNa kiye huye hote haiM, ve sadA
AyaMbila ho karate haiN| dUsare chaha mahIne ke bAda tIsare chaha mahIne ke liye
vAcanA cAhI tapasvI banatA hai; zeSa ATha sAdhuoM meM se koI eka vAcanAcArya
aura bAkI ke saba paricAraka hote haiM  /  isa prakAra sIsare chaha 3 1 mahIne
pUrNa hone ke bAda bayAraha mAsa kI yaha 'parihAravizuddha' nAmaka tapasyA
samApta hotI hai| isake bAda ve jinakalpa grahaNa karate haiM athavA ve pahale
jisa gaccha ke rahe hoM, usI meM bAkhila hote haiM yA phira bhI basI ho tapasyA
zuru karate haiM  /  parihAravizuddha saMyama ke 'nivizamAnaka' aura
'niviSTakAyika', ye vo bheva haiN| vartamAna parihArafara ko 'nivizamAnaka aura
bhUta parihAravizuddha ko 'niviSTakAki' kahate haiM  /  (4) jisa sayama meM
samparAya ( kaSAya) kA udaya sUkSma ( ati 2 - yaha eka prakAra kA vrata hai,
jisameM ghI, dUdha Adi rasako chor3akara kevala anna vAyA jAtA hai| so bhI dina
eka hI daphA pAnI ila meM garama piyA jAtA hai  /  Avazyaka ni0 gA0 1603 - 5  /
J

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Karmagranth Chapter 4**  **Subtle Samparaya Samyama**  (1)
**Subtle Samparaya Samyama** is a state where **Lomashaya** arises, but other
**Kshayas** do not. This Samyama is attained by those who are in the **Basava
Gunasthan**. It has two types: (a) **Sanklishyamana** and (b)
**Vishuddhyamana**.  (a) **Sanklishyamana Subtle Samparaya Samyama** is attained
by those who fall from **Upshamni** at the time of attaining the **tenth
Gunasthan**. This is because, due to the fall, the **Parinam** at that time are
**Sanskesha-praman**.  (b) **Vishuddhyamana Subtle Samparaya Samyama** is
attained by those who ascend to **Upshamni** or **Kshapakni** in the **Basava
Gunasthan**. This is because the **Parinam** at that time are **Vishuddhi-
praman**.  **Yathalyat Samyama**  (2) **Yathalyat Samyama** is a state where
there is no **Kshaya** arising, not even a trace. It has two types: (a)
**Chhanasthik** and (b) **Bayasthik**.  (a) **Chhanasthik Yathalyat Samyama** is
attained by those who are in the **eleventh** and **twelfth Gunasthan**. The
difference between the eleventh and twelfth Gunasthan is that in the eleventh,
**Kshaya** does not arise, but its **existence** remains. However, in the
twelfth, **Kshaya** does not even exist.  (b) **Bayasthik Yathalyat Samyama** is
attained by **Kevalis**. The **Samyama** of a **Sayogi Kevali** is called
**Sayogi Yathalyat**, and the **Samyama** of an **Aayogi Kevali** is called
**Aayogi Yathalyat**.  **Deshavirati Samyama**  (3) **Deshavirati Samyama** is
the state of being free from **Karmabandha-janak** and **Aarambha-samarambha**
to some extent. **Grihasthas** are eligible for this **Samyama**.  **The extent
of Shravaka's compassion:**  (4) **Munis** are free from all kinds of violence,
therefore their compassion is considered **complete**. However, **Grihasthas**
cannot remain completely free from violence, therefore their compassion is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagranpa bhApa cAra svalpa ) rahatA hai. vaha sUkSmasamparAyasaMyama' hai  /
isameM lomakaSAya udayamAna hotA hai| anya nahIM  /  yaha saMyama basaveM
guNasthAna vAloM ko hotA hai  /  isake (ka) 'saMlkizyAmAnaka' aura (kha)
'vizuddhayamAnaka' ye do bheda haiN| (ka) upazamaNi se girane vAloM ko dasaveM
guNasthAna kI prApti ke samaya jo saMyama hotA hai, yaha
'saMlkizyamAnakasUkSmasampara saMyama hai| kyoMki patana hone ke kAraNa usa
samaya pariNAma saMskeza-pramAna hI hote jAte haiM  /  (kha) upazamaNi yA
kSapakaNi para car3hane vAloM ko basa guNasthAna meM jo saMyama hotA hai, vahI
vizuddhayamAmakasUdaya sampA6. saMyama hai| kyoMki usa samaya ke pariNAma
vizudhi-pradhAna hI hote hai| (5) jo saMyama athAtathya hai arthAt jisameM
kaSAya kA udaya-leza bhI nahIM hai| vaha 'yathAlyAtasaMyama' hai  /  isake (ka)
'chApasthika' aura . (kha) 'bAyasthika, ye do meva haiN| (ka)
'chAnasthikapathANyAta saMyama' yaha hai, jo gyArahaveM bArahaveM guNasthAna
vAloM ko hotA hai  /  gyArahaveM guNasthAna kI apekSA garahoM guNasthAna meM
vizeSatA yaha hai ki gyArahaveM meM kaSAya kA udaya nahIM hotA, usakI sattAmAtra
hotI hai| para bArahaveM meM to kaSAya ko sattA bhI nahIM hotii| (kha)
achAmasthiphayathAkhyAtasaMyama keliyoM ko hotA hai  /  sayogI kevalI kA saMyama
'sayogIyathAkhyAta' aura amogI kevalI kA saMyama 'ayogIyathAsyAta' hai| (6)
karmabandha-janaka Arambha-samArambhase kisI aMza meM nivRtta honA
'dezAviratisaMyama' kahalAtA hai  /  isake adhikArI gRhastha haiM'  /  /
1zrAvaka kI dayA kA parimANa:munI saba taraha kI hiMsA se mukta raha sakate
haiM, isaliye unakI dayA paripUrNa kahI jAtI haiM  /  para gRhastha base raha
nahIM sakAne; isaliye unakI dayA kA

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Verma Granth Part Four**  **(7)** Not accepting any kind of restraint is
called 'Avirati'. It is found in the first four Ganasthanas.   **(8)** The four
types of Darshanamangana:  **(1)** The fault that arises from the three Naras is
called 'Paksha Darshan'.  **(2)** The fault that arises from the senses other
than the Paksha and from the mind is called 'Anardashan'.  **- -** The quantity
is said to be very gradual. If the compassion of the monks is considered to be
twenty Biswas, then the compassion of the Shravakas should be considered to be
one and a quarter Biswas. This is what is said in the Jain scriptures: "The
compassion of the Sadhus is twenty Biswas and the compassion of the Shravakas is
one and a quarter Biswas." The reason for this is that Shravakas can only give
up the violence of living beings, not the violence of stationary beings.
Therefore, the compassion of the monks is half the quantity compared to the
twenty Biswas. Even in this, Shravakas can give up intentional violence, but not
the violence that arises from the beginning. Therefore, even from that half
quantity, half is taken away, leaving five Biswas of compassion. Intentional
violence can only be given up by those who are innocent. Shravakas are not free
from the violence of the Sadhus, so they have one and a quarter Biswas of
compassion. Even from this, half is taken away. Because even the violence of the
innocent is done by the Shravakas, they do not do it intentionally. Therefore,
the quantity of the Shravakas' compassion is considered to be one and a quarter
Biswas.  To understand this concept, here is an ancient story:  "Joba Suhma
Chula, ... Aranbha Bhave Duniha. Savaraha Niravaraha, Savikkha Va Niravishkha."
For a detailed explanation of this, see Jainatarvadarshana, Chapter 18.  **(1)**
Although four types of Darshan are known everywhere, and Manah Paryaya Darshan
is not considered one of them, in some places, Manah Paryaya Darshan is also
accepted. This is mentioned in the commentary of Tattvarth-a.s. 24:  "Kechittu
Manyante Prajnapanam Mam: Paryayanaane Varshanana Padayas."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 varmagrantha bhAga cAra (7) kisI prakAra ke saMyama kA svIkAra na karanA
'avirati' hai| yaha pahale se sodhe taka cAra gaNasthAnoM meM pAyI jAtI hai|
(8)-varzanamAgaMNA ke cAra bhevoM kA svarUpa: (1) cA ( ne tra ke nArA jo doSa
hotA hai. vA pakSabarzana' hai  /  (2) pakSa ko chor3a anma indriya ke dvArA
tathA mana ke dvArA jo sAmAndha boSa hotA hai, vaha 'anArdazana' hai| - -
parimANa bahuta-krama kahA gayA hai  /  yadi muniyoM kI dayA ko bIrA aMza mAna
le to zAvakoM kI dayA ko gavA aMza kahanA cAhiye  /  isI bAta vo jaina zAstrIya
pagbhiApA meM kahA hai ki "sAdhuoM kI dayA bIsa bisvA aura zvAnoM kI dayA sazA
bisvA hai"| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki thApaka, basa jIvoM kI hiMsA ko chor3a
sakate haiM sthAvara jIvoM kI hiMsA ko nhiiN| isase muniyoM kI bIrA bisvAdamA kI
apekSA AdhA parimANa raha jAtA hai isameM bhI zrAvaka, asakI saMkalpa pUrvaka
hiMsA kA tyAga kara sakate haiM. Arambha-janya hiMsA kA nahIM  /  ata eva usa
Adhe parimANa meM se bhI AdhA hissA nikala jAne para pAMca bisvA dayA bacatI hai
/  irAdA-pUrvaka hisA bhI unhIM pramoM kI tyAga kI jA sakatI hai, jo niraparAdha
hai| sAAdha asoM kI hiMsA se zrAvaka mukta nahIM ho sakane isase hAI bisvA dayA
rhtii| isameM se bhI AdhA aMza nikala jAtA hai| kyoMki niraparA asoM kI bhI
sApekSA hisA dhAvakoM ke dvArA ho hI jAtI hai, ve unakI nirapekSAhamA nahIM
karate  /  isI se zrAboM kI dayA kA parimANa savA viravA mAnA hai  /  sa bhAva
ko jAnane ke liye eka prAcIna gAthA isa prakAra hai| "jobA suhamA culA, ...
AraMbhA bhave dunihaa| sAvarAha niravarAhA, savikkhA va niravizkhA  // " isake
vizeSa khulAse ke lie dekhiye, jainataravAdarzanA pariccheda 18vA  /  1yadyapi
saba jagaha darzana ke cAra bheda hI prasiddha haiM aura imI ko manaH paryAya
darzana nahIM mAnA jAtA hai  /  tathApi kahIM-kahIM manaH pathyAya dAna kI bhI
svIkAra kiyA hai| isakA ullekha tastrArtha-a. sa. 24 kI TIkA meM hai:- "kecittu
manyante prajJApanA mama: paryAyAne varzananA padayasa"

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  (3) For those who have overcome the five senses, the
knowledge of the general nature of the objects of perception, without the aid of
the senses, is called 'Avadhi Darshan'.  (4) The knowledge that perceives all
the objects of perception in their general form is called 'Keval Darshan'.
Darshan is called 'Aakar-Upayog' because it primarily knows the general form
(general shape) of the object, from its general and specific forms. In Nyaya-
Shevik and other Darshanas, 'Aakar-Upayog' is called
'Nirvikalpahavyavsayatmakgyan'. ||12||  (10) The nature of the six Leshyas:  A
dark blue crow, then a white one, these are the two types of 'Bhanayamargna'.
||13||  Black, blue, pigeon, bright, lotus, and white, these are the six
Leshyas. 'Bhashyatva' and 'Abhayatva' are the two types of 'Bhanayamargna'.
'Vevak' (Sayopashmik), 'Kshayik', 'Aupashbhik', 'Mithyatva', 'Mith', and
'Sasavan', these are the six types of 'Samya Parvamargna'. 'Sanshitva' and
'Asanshitva' are the two types of 'Panni Margna'. ||16||  **Meaning:**  (1) Due
to the connection of the soul with the black-colored Leshya-Aatiy Pudgals,
similar to kajal, such a result occurs in the soul, which leads to the
inclination towards the five Ashtrayas (Hisaar, etc.). The mind, speech, and
body do not remain under control; the nature becomes petty. The tendency to act
without examining the merits and demerits arises, and cruelty becomes dominant.
This result is called 'Krishna Leshya'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra (3! apazilagdhivAloM ko indriyoM kI sahAyatA ke binA hI
vapI vadhya-viSayaka jo sAmAnya ko hotA hai, vaha 'avadhidarzana' hai  /  (4)
sampUrNa prakhya-parAyoM ko sAmAnya rUpa se viSaya karane vAlA moSa
'phevalavarzana' hai  /  darzana ko anAkAra-upayoga isaliye kahate haiM ki isake
dvArA pastu ke sAmAnya-vizeSa, ubhaya rUpoM meM se sAmAnya rUpa (sAmAnya AkAra )
mukhyatayA jAnA jAtA hai| anAkAra-upayoga ko nyAya-zevika Adi darzanoM meM
nirvikalpahAvyavasAyAtmakajJAna' kahate haiM  // 12 //  (10) lezyA ke bhedoM kA
svarUpaH kiyahA nIlA kAka, teU pamhA ya sukka bhaviyarA  /
beyamakhAiguvasamami,-chamIsasAsANa saMniyare  // 13 //  kRSNA nIlA kApolA,
tejaH payA ca zulkA bhavyatarI badakalApikoSamama miyA mizramAsAdanAna
saMjhItarI  // 13 //  arthakRSNa, mIla, kApota, tejaH, padma aura zulka ye chaha
lezyAyeM haiM  /  bhaSyatva, abhayatva, pe do bheda bhanyamArgaNA ke haiM  /
vevaka (sAyopazamika), kSAyika, aupazabhika, mithyAtva. mitha aura sAsAvana, meM
chaha bheva samyAparavamArgaNA ke haiM - saMzitva, asaMmisva, ye vo meva
paMnimArgaNA ke haiM  // 16 //  bhAvArtha(1) kAjala ke samAna kRSNa varNa ke
sezyA-AtIya pudagaloM ke sambandha se AtmA meM aisA pariNAma hotA hai, jisase
hisAra Adi pA~ca AstrayoM meM pravRtti hotI hai, mana, bacana tathA zarIra kA
saMyama nahIM rahatA; svabhAva kSudra bana jAtA hai| guNa-doSa kI parIkSA kiye
binA hI kArya karane kI AvatasI ho jAtI hai aura krUratA mA jAtI hai, vaha
pariNAma 'kRSNalezyA hai|

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha - Part Four  **(2)**  A result arises in the soul from the
**leshya** of a dark blue color, similar to that of clouds, which causes envy,
intolerance, and delusion. The soul becomes entangled in Maya (illusion), and a
desire for worldly pleasures arises. This result is called **Nila-leshya**.
**(3)** A result arises in the soul from the **leshya** of a blood-red color,
similar to that of a pigeon's neck, which causes crookedness in speech, action,
and thought. There is no simplicity in any matter, atheism arises, and there is
a tendency to speak in a way that causes suffering to others. This result is
called **Kapot-leshya**.  **(4)** A result arises in the soul from the
**leshya** of a red color, similar to that of a parrot's beak, which causes a
sense of pride, a loss of humility, and a tendency to be fickle. There is an
interest in religion and a desire to benefit all beings. This result is called
**Tejo-leshya**.  **(5)** A result arises in the soul from the **leshya** of a
yellow color, similar to that of turmeric, which causes a decrease in the
passions of anger, pride, etc. There is a sense of peace, self-control, and
restraint of the senses. One can practice self-discipline, speak moderately, and
engage in virtuous activities. This result is called **Pap-leshya**.  **(6)**
The result called **Shukla-leshya** is characterized by a cessation of
attachment to worldly objects and a focus on religion and spiritual practices.
There is no hindrance in regulating the mind, speech, and body. The passions are
subdued, and there is a tendency to develop detachment.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha-bhAga cAra nIle raMga ke hai ki jisase bAdaloM se aisA IrSyA,
asahiSNutA (2) azoka vRkSa ke samAna pariNAma AtmA meM utpanna hotA tathA mAyA-
kapaTa hone lagate haiM; nilaMnlatA A jAtI hai; viSayoM kI lAlasA pradoSa ho
patA hotI hai aura sadA vaha pariNAma 'molalezyA hai  /  paudalika sukha ko
khoja kI jAtI hai, 64 (3) kabUtara ke gale ke samAna rakta tathA kRSNa varNa ke
pudaloM se isa prakAra kA pariNAma AtmA meM utpanna hotA hai, jisase bolane,
kAma karane aura vicArane meM saba kahIM vakratA ho vaktA hotI hai; kisI viSaya
meM saralatA nahIM hotI; nAstikatA AtI hai aura dUsaroM ko kaSTa ho, aisA
bhASaNa karane kI pravRtti hotI hai| vaha pari NAma 'kApotalezyA' hai  /  (4)
tote kI ca ke samAna rakta varNa ke lezyA pudagloM se eka prakAra kA azmA meM
pariNAma hotA hai, jisase ki makhatA A jAtI hai; paThatA dUra ho jAtI hai;
capalatA taka jAtI hai; dharma meM ruci tathA vatA hotI hai aura saba logoM kA
hita karane kI icchA hotI haiM, vaha pariNAma 'tejolezyA' hai  /  (5) haldI ke
samAna pIle raMga ke leyA puragloM se eka taraha kA pariNAma AtmA meM hotA hai,
jisase krodha, mAna Adi kaSAya bahuta aMzoM meM manda ho jante haiM, vitta
prazAna ho jAtA hai, Atma-saMyama jitendriyatA A jAtI hai| kiyA jA sakatA hai;
mitabhASitA aura vaha pariNAma 'papalezyA' hai  /  (6) 'zulkalezyA' usa pariNAma
ko samajhamA cAhiye, jisase ki Arta-zava-dhyAna baMda hokara dharma tathA zulka-
dhyAna hone lagatA hai; mana, vacana aura zarIra ko niyamita dhanAne meM
rukAvaTa nahIM AtI; kavAya upazAnti hotI hai aura bItarAga bhAva sampAdana
karane kI bhI anu

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Nandh Part Four  **The Coolness Becomes:** This result occurs in
relation to the straw-like beings of the white color, like a conch shell.
**(11) The Nature of the Divisions of Bhavyatva:**  **(1)** Those who attain
liberation or are capable of attaining liberation due to the a-nadi
(beginningless) Taarash-Pariṇāmik-Mār (path of liberation) are called
**'Bhasm'**.  **(2)** Those who are not capable of attaining liberation at any
time due to the a-nadi (beginningless) and various Pariṇāma (transformations)
are called **'Abhashya'**.  **(12) The Nature of the Divisions of
Samyaktvamargna:**  **(1)** The **'Aupakshamik Samyaktv'** is the self-
transformation in the form of **'Tattva-Ruchi'** (interest in truth) that
manifests from the cessation of the four Ananta-Anubandhokapāya (four infinite
attachments) and Darshan-Mohaniya (obscurations of perception). It has two
divisions: **(a) 'Granthi-Bhed-Janaya'** and **(b) 'Upsham-Shreni-Madhi'**.
**(a) 'Granthi-Bhed-Janaya Aupakshamik Samyaktv'** occurs in those who have
a-nadi (beginningless) Mithya-Drishti (false belief). The process of its
attainment is discussed in the second...  **1.** There are many Bhavyas
(liberation-worthy beings) who, despite being capable of liberation, do not
attain it because they do not find the suitable material for attaining
liberation. Therefore, they are called **'Jati-Madhya'**. There is also soil
that contains particles of gold, but due to the lack of suitable means, it has
not manifested yet and is unlikely to manifest in the future. However, based on
its potential, we can call it **'Suvarna-Mrittika'** (golden soil). Similarly,
it is not contradictory to call those beings who are capable of liberation but
cannot attain it due to the lack of specific means, **'Jati-Bhavy'**. This is
discussed in the commentary of the 18th chapter of Prajñāpanā, in the
Visheshshataka by Upadhyaya-Samayasundaragani, and in the 'Jayanti' section of
the 1st Shataka of Bhagavati.  **2.** See Appendix 'Sh'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmanandha bhAga cAra kUlasA ho jAtI hai  /  aisA pariNAma zaGkha ke samAna
zveta varNa ke leNyAjAtIya-puvAloM ke sambandha se hotA hai| (11)bhavyatvamAgaNA
ke bhedoM kA svarUpa: (1) 'bhasma' the haiM, jo anAdi tAraza-pAriNAmika-mAra ke
kAraNa mokSa ko pAte haiM mA pAne kI yogyatA rakhate haiM  /  (2) jo anAdi
tathAvidha pariNAma ke kAraNa kisI samaya mokSa pAne kI yogyatA hI nahIM
rakhate, ve 'abhazya' haiM  /  (12)- samyaktvamArgaNA ke bhedoM kA svarUpaH (1)
cAra anantAnubandhokapAya aura darzanamohanIya ke upazama se prakaTa hone vAlA
tattvarUci rUpa Atma-pariNAma, aupakSAmikasamyaktva, hai| isake (ka) 'granthi-
bheda janya' aura (kha) 'upazamazreNI-mAdhI' ye do bheda haiN| (ka) 'pranthi-
bheda-janya auSazamikasamyaktva', anAdi-mithyAravI bhathyoM ko hotA hai  /
isake prApta hone kI prakriyA kA vicAra dUsare 1-aneka bhavya aise haiM ki jo
mokSa kI yogyatA rakhate hue bhI use nahIM pAte; kyoMki unheM basI anukUla
sAmagrI hI nahIM milatI, jimase ki mokSa prApta ho  /  isaliye unheM 'jAti-
madhya kahate haiM  /  aisI bhI miTTI hai ki jimameM suvarNa ke aMza to haiN|
para anukUla sAdhana ke abhAva se ne na to aba taka prakaTa hue aura na Age hI
prakaTa hone kI sambhAvanA hai| to bhI usa miTTI ko yogyatA kI apekSA se jisa
prakAra 'suvarNa-mRttikA' (sone kI miTTI) kaha sakate haiN| jaise hI mokSa kI
yogyatA hote hue bhI usake viziSTa sAdhana na milane se, mokSa ko kabhI na pA
sakane vAle jIyoM ko 'jAtibhavya' kahanA viruddha nahIM  /  isakA vicAra
prajJApanA ke 18ve pada kI TIkA meM, upAdhyAya-samayasundaragaNi-kRta
vizeSazataka meM tathA bhagavatI ke 1 zataka ke re 'jayantI' nAmaka adhikAra meM
hai| 2 dekhiye pariziSTa 'sh|'

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Firm Granth Part Four  This is written in the tradition of the Karma Granth.
It is also called 'Prathabhopama Sampāv'.  **(b)** 'Upshamni-Mashi Aupchamik
Samyam-Sva' can be attained in the fifth, sixth, or seventh Gunasthan. But in
the eighth Gunasthan, it is definitely attained.  At the time of Upshamik
Samyak-Tva, Ayubandh, Marg, Ananta-Anubandhi Kshaya's bandh, and Ananta-
Anubandhi Kshaya's Uvay, do not take hold. But after being deviated from it, at
the time of Sasvav-Bhav, these four things can happen.  **(2)** The element-like
result that manifests from the destruction of Ananta-Anubandhi and Darshan-
Mohaniya, is called 'Kshayopa-mik Samyak-Tva'.  **(3)** The element-like result
that manifests from the destruction of Ananta-Anubandhi-Chatuk and Darshan-
Mohaniya-Nik, is called 'Mayik Samyak-Tva'.  This Kshayik Samyak-Tva happens to
Jin-Kalik humans. Those beings who attain it after binding, attain Moksha in the
third or fourth Bhav. But those who attain this Samyak-Tva before binding the
next Bhav's Aapu, they attain liberation in the present Bhav.  **1** This is a
common belief for both Shwetamber and Digamber.  **-Panchasangrah p. 1165.**
"Sagmoha-Savana, Padavago Kamma-Bhumijo Manuso. Tirapayar-Payamule Kevali-
Subakevali-Mule ||11."  **-Sandhisar.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pharmagrantha bhAga cAra karmagrantha kI rI gAthA ke mAdharSa meM likhA gayA
hai| isako 'prathabhopAmasampAva' bhI kahA hai  /  kha) 'upazamaNi-mASI
aupacAmikasamyamasva' ko prApti bANe, pA~ca,chaThe yA sAtaveM meM se kisI bhI
guNasthAna meM ho sakatI hai| parantu mAThaveM gugasthAna meM so usako prApti
avazya hI hotI hai| bopazamikasamyakrava ke samaya Ayubandha, maraga,
anantAnubandhI kaSAya kA bandha tathA anantAnubandhIkavAya kA, uvaya, ye dhAra
pAte nahIM hotii| para usase cyuta hone ke bAda sAsvAvama-bhAva ke samaya ukta
cAroM bAteM ho sakatI hai| (2) anantAnubandhIya aura dharzanamohanIya ke
kSayopazama se prakaTa hone vAlA tatva-hacirUpa pariNAma, 'kSAyopamikasamyagAva'
hai| (3) jo tatva-rUcirUpa pariNAma, anantAnubandhI-catuka aura darzanamohanIya-
nika ke kSaya se prakaTa hotA hai, vaha 'mAyikasamyamatva' hai| _ yaha
kSAyikasamyaktva, jina-kAlika manuSyoM ko hotA hai| jo jIba yubandha karane ke
bAda isase prApta karate haiM, ve tIsare pA cauthe mava meM mokSa pAte haiN|
parantu agale bhava kI Apu bA~dhane ke pahile jinako yaha samyaktva prApta hotA
hai, ve vartamAna bhava meM ho mukta 1maha mata, zvetAmbara-digambara dono ko
ekasA iSTa hai 1 saNasavaNastariho, jiNakAlIyo pumavAsubari" ityAvi  //
-paJcasaMgraha pR0 1165  /  "sagamohasavaNA,-paDavago kammabhUmijo maNuso  /
tirapayarapAyamUle kevalisubakevalImUle  // 11." sandhisAra  /

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagrantha Part Four (4) The result of the soul when it abandons the Aupashmik
Samvat and faces Mithyatva is called 'Sas Danasampad'. Its state ranges from the
most inferior, lasting for a single moment, to the most superior, lasting for
many lifetimes. During this time, the soul's results are not pure due to the
arising of Anantar Nubandik Vayas. In Sarasavan, the interest in the self is
latent, while in Mithyatva, it is manifest. This is the difference between the
two states. (5) The mixed result of both Tatva and Atatva, which arises from the
arising of Samyang Mithya Mohaniya Karma, is called 'Misamyarshva (Samyangma)'.
(6) Mithyatva is the result that arises from the arising of Mithya Mohaniya
Karma. Due to this, the soul cannot distinguish between the animate and
inanimate, and cannot turn towards the self. Kapri and other defects are its
fruits. [13] - The nature of the divisions of Sanjimaganna: (1) 'Sanjib' is the
specific mental power, i.e., the long-lasting consciousness. (2) 'Asanjitva' is
the absence of the said consciousness. ||13|| 67 (1) - Although all beings have
some form of consciousness, because without it, the soul itself is impossible,
the distinction between Sanji and Asanji that is made in the scriptures is based
on long-lasting consciousness. For this, see Appendix 'G'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra ( 4 ) aupazamikasamvat kA tyAga kara midhyAtva ke
abhimukha hone ke samaya, jIva kA jo pariNAma hotA hai, usI ko 'sAsa
danasampada' kahate haiM  /  isakI sthiti, jaghanya eka samaya kI aura utkRSTa
saha AvalikAoM ko hotI hai  /  isake samaya, anantaranubandhIkavAyoM kA udaya
rahane ke kAraNa, jIva ke pariNAma nirmala nahIM hote  /  sarasAvana meM
matasva-ruci, avyakta hotI hai aura midhyAsva meM vyakta yahI yogoM meM antara
hai  /  (5) tatva aura atatva, ina donoM kI rUcipa mizra pariNAma, jo
samyaGgamithyAmohanIya karma ke udaya se hotA hai, vaha 'misamyaRzva (
samyaGgamA) hai | (6) mithyAtva vaha pariNAma hai, jo mithyAmohanIya karma ke
uvaya se hotA hai jisake hone se joSa, jar3a-cetana kA bheda nahIM jAna pattA
isI se Atmonmukha pravRttiyAlA mI nahIM ho sakatA hai  /  kapri Adi doSa isake
phala haiM  /  [13] - saMjJImAgaMNA ke bhedoM kA svarUpaH (1) viziSTa manaHzakti
arthAt vIrghakAlikI saMza 'saMjiba' hai  /  (2) ukta saMjJA kA na honA
'asaMjJitya' he ||13|| 67 kA honA ( 1 ) - yadyapi prANImAtra ko kisI na kisI
prakAra kI saMjJA hotI hI hai; kyoMki usake binA jIvasva hI asambhava hai,
tathApi zAstra meM jo saMzI asaMjJI kA bheda kiyA gayA hai, so dIrghakAlikI
saMjJA ke AdhAra para isake liye dekhiye, pariziSTa 'ga'

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  [1] - The Living Beings in the Marganas. [From five
verses] Ahayara Bheya, Saranargyavibhagmahasuohiduge. Sammasatige Pamha,
Sukkasannisu Sanni Durga. ||14|| Ahareteri Bhedassuranaraka
Vibhangamatishrutvadhidhike. Samyaktvatrike Paklasanjnighu Sanjidwikam. ||14||
**Meaning:** The path of Ahar Karma has two categories: Aharak and Anaharak. In
the paths of Vevati and Narakati, there are two types of knowledge:
Vibhangajnan, Matijnan, Shrutajnan, Avadhijnan, and Avadhivashen. There are also
three types of Samyaktva (Oopashambhik, Shayak, and Kshayopaashambhik), and two
Leshyas (Padma and Shulka and Sanshiv). In these thirteen Marganas, there are
two types of Sanjho: Apariyapt Sanjho and Pariyapt Sanjho. These are the living
beings in these paths. ||14||  (14) The nature of the differences in the Ahar
Karma Margana: - Meaning - 1) The living being who takes in any kind of external
substance, such as Oja, Lom, and Keval, is called 'Aharak'. (2) The living being
who does not take in any kind of food from the above three types of food is
called 'Anaharak'.  Any living being present in the paths of Vagati and Narakati
is not Asanjo. Whether it is Apariyapt or Pariyapt, all are Sanjo. This is why
these two paths are considered to be the living beings.  The ability to obtain
Vimnajnan is not present in any Bhansanji. Even in them, Apariyapt-Pariyapt
Sanjho are considered to be the living beings.  1- This topic is discussed in
Panchasangrah Gatha 22 to 27. 2- Although Panchasangrah Dwaar Gatha 27th
mentions that in Vibhangashan, Sanji - Pariyapt is the only living being,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra [1]-mArgaNAoM meM jIvasthAna  /  pA~ca gAthAoM se]
AhAyara bheyA, saranaragyavibhagamahasuohiduge  /  sammasatige
pamhA,sukkAsannIsu sannidurga  // 14 //  AhAretarI
bhedAssuranarakavibhaGgamatizrutAvadhiddhike  /  samyaktvatrike pAklAsaMjJighu
saMjidvikam  // 14 //  artha AhArakamArgamA ke AhAraka aura anAharaka, ye do
meva hai  /  vevati, narakati. vibhaGgAjAna, matijJAna, zrutajJAna, avadhijJAna,
avadhivazena, tauna samyaktva (opazabhika, zAyika aura kSAyopazamika), do
lezyAe~ (padmA aura zulkA aura saMziva, ina teraha mArgaNAoM meM aparyApta
saMjho aura paryApta saMjo, ghe vo jIvasthAna hote haiM  // 14 //
(14)AhArakarmAgaNA ke bhedoM kA svarUpa:- bhAvArtha- 1) jo jIva, oja, loma aura
kevala, inameM se kisI bhI prakAra ke bAhAra ko karatA hai, vaha 'AhAraka' hai|
(2) ukta tIna taraha ke AhAra meM se kisI bhI prakAra ke AhAra ko jo jIva
grahaNa nahIM karatA hai, vaha 'anAhAraka' hai  /  vagati aura narakagati meM
vartamAna koI bhI joya, asaMjJo nahIM hotA  /  cAhe aparyApta ho yA paryApta,
para hote haiM sabhI saMjJo ho  /  isI se ina do gatiyoM meM vo hI jIvasthAna
mAne gaye haiM  /  vimanAjAna ko pAne kI yogyatA kisI bhasaMjhI meM nahIM hotI
astausameM bhI aparyApta-paryApta saMzo ye ko hI jovasthAma mAne gaye hai|
1-yaha viSaya paJcasaMgraha gAthA 22 se 27 taka meM hai| 2-yadyapi paJcasaMgraha
dvAra gAthA 27vIM meM yaha ullekha hai ki vibhaGgazAna meM saMjJI - paryApta eka
hI jIvasthAna hai,

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four, Chapter 66  **Matigyan, Shrutigian, Avadhi-shtik, and
Aupashmik, along with the three Samyak-sth and Padma-Shulk-Peshya, these nine
Margnaas are considered to have two Jeevasthanas in the Aparaapt (imperfect)
state.**  This is because, in an Asanto (non-sentient being), Samyak-tva
(perfect conduct) is not possible. And without Samyak-tva, the existence of
Matigyan, Shrutigian, etc. is impossible. Therefore, except for Sanjnis
(sentient beings), Padma or Shulk Leshya (types of karma) do not have any effect
in other beings.  **Matigyan, Shrutigian, and Avadhi-shtik are considered in the
Aparaapt state because some beings are born with these three types of
knowledge.**  A being who attains Kshayik-Samyak-tva (perfect conduct leading to
liberation) after binding their Ayus (life span) can be reborn in any of the
four Gatis (states of existence) according to their bound Ayus. This is why
Kshayik-Samyak-tva is considered in the Aparaapt state.  **Kshayopa-samyak-tva
is considered in this state because future Tirthankaras and others, when they
are born as humans after leaving the Deva (divine) and other Gatis, possess
Kshayopa-samyak-tva.**  **Regarding Aupashmik-Samyak-tva, it should be
understood that when an Aupashmik-Samyak-tva being completes their Ayus, they
attain the eleventh Gunasthan (stage of spiritual progress).**  However, this
does not contradict this Karmagrantha. Because in the original Pancha-Sangraha
(five collections), only one Jeevasthan is mentioned in Vibhang-gyan (knowledge
of differentiation). This is based on a specific perspective.  Therefore, from
another perspective, two Jeevasthanas are also considered in Vibhang-gyan. This
has been clarified in the commentary of the 27th verse of the Shramalaya-giri-
murin.  It is written that Tri-bhang-gyan (three-fold knowledge of
differentiation) does not arise in Sanjnis with five senses, Tiryanchas
(animals), and humans in the Aparaapt state. And those Asanjnis (non-sentient
beings) who die and are reborn as Narakas (hell beings) in the Ratna-Prabha
Narak (hell), also do not have Vibhang-gyan in the Aparaapt state.  From this
perspective, one Jeevasthan is mentioned in Vibhang-gyan, which is the Sanjni
(sentient being). However, from a general perspective, two Jeevasthanas should
be understood. Because those Sanjnis who die and are reborn as Devas (divine
beings) have Vibhang-gyan even in the Aparaapt state.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 66 matijJAna, zrutajJAna avadhi-STrika, aupazamika Adi
ukta tIna samyakstha aura padma-zulka-pezyA, ina nau mArgaNAoM meM do saMzo
jIvasthAna mAne gaye haiM  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki kisI asaMto meM
sabhyakatva kA sambhava nahIM hai aura sabhyavazva ke sivAya matibula - jJAna
Adi kA honA hI asambhava hai isa prakAra saMjJo ke sivAya dUsare jIvoM meM padma
yA zulka lezyA ke pariNAma nahIM ho aparyApta avasthA meM mati zruta jJAna aura
avadhi-dvika isaliye mAne jAte haiM ki koI-koI jIva tIna jJAna sahita janma
grahaNa karate haiN| jo jIva, Ayu bA~dhane ke bAda kSAyikasamyaktva prApta
karatA hai, vaha baMdhI huI Ayu ke anusAra cAra gatiyoM meM se kisI bhI gati meM
jAtA hai  /  isI apekSA se aparyApta avasthA meM kSAyikasamyaktva mAnA jAtA hai
/  usa avasthA meM kSASopazamikasamyaktva mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki bhAvI
tIrthaGkara Adi jaba deva Adi gati se nikala kara manuSya janma grahaNa karate
haiM, taba ve kSAyopazamikasamyaktva sahita hote haiM  /  aupazamikasamyaktva ke
viSaya meM yaha jAnanA cAhiye ki Ayu ka pUre ho jAne se jaba koI
aupazamikasampatvo gyArahave guNasthAna se tathApi usake sAtha isa karma grantha
kA koI virodha nahIM; kyoMki mUla paJca saMgraha meM vibhaGga jJAna meM eka hI
jIvasthAna kahA hai, so apekSAvizeSa se  /  ataH anya apekSA se vibhajJAna meM
do jIvasthAna bhI use uSTa haiM  /  isa bAta kA khulAsA zrAmalayagirimUrina ukta
27vIM gAthA kI TIkA se spaSTa kara diyA hai  /  meM likhate haiM ki saMjJi
paJcendriya tirya aura manuSya ko aparyApta avasthA meM tribhaGgajJAna utpanna
nahIM hotA  /  tathA jo asaMjJI jIva marakara ratnaprabhAnaraka meM nAraka kA
janma lete haiM, unheM bhI aparyApta avasthA meM vibhaGgajJAna nahIM hotaa| isa
apekSA se vibhajJAna meM eka paryApta saMjJirUpa) jIvasthAna kahA gayA hai|
sAmAnya-dRSTi se usameM do jIvasthAna hI samajhane caahiye| kyoMki jo sajI jI,
marakara deva yAna rUpa se paidA hote haiM, unheM apayApta avasthA meM bhI vibha
jJAna hotA hai  /  .:

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  When a being is born in the Avyavahit (uninterrupted)
state of existence, it is found in the Mareecured state of being.  **Note:**
This meaning should be understood according to the Churni and Pad Sangrah of the
Karmagrantha called "Sapta Tika". The Churni states that there are two types of
Samyaktv (right conduct) in the Naraka (hell) during the Avyavahit state:
Kshayopa-samik and Kshayik. However, in the Deva (heaven) there are three types
of Samyaktv, including Aupa-samik. The Pancha Sangrah also confirms this view in
its first chapter, verse 25, and its commentary. Gommatasar also supports this
view, as it considers the second type of Samyaktv, which is the Upa-samik, to be
present in beings in the Avyavahit state. For this, see the Jeevakanda, verse
7266.  However, some Acharyas (teachers) believe that "Aupa-samik does not exist
in the Avyavahit state. Only the Paryaya Sanjeeva (transmigrating) state of
existence should be considered in this state." In support of this view, they
argue that "since there is no Yogya (pure) Adhyavasaya (determination) in the
Avyavahit state, Aupa-samik Samyaktv cannot be newly generated, and it is not
scripturally acceptable for it to remain in the Avyavahit state. This is because
Aupa-samik Samyaktv is of two types. One is that which occurs for the first time
in an Anadi Mithyatvi (eternally false believer). The second is that which
occurs during the Upa-samik Shreni (stage). In the first type of Samyaktv, the
being does not die. Its proof is found in the Agam (scripture) as follows:
"Jhanghosh-ya mag, bandham kal-am cha sasani kunai || Uha-mik-kam pi no kunai
||" Upa-sam-sam hitto,  Meaning: "The infinite attachment, the bondage, its
arising, the bondage of life, and death, these four actions occur in the second
Gunasthan (state of being), but none of these actions occur in Aupa-samik
Samyaktv."  Regarding the second type of Aupa-samik Samyaktv, the rule is that
the current being dies, but as soon as it takes birth, the Samyaktv-mohaniya
(obscuring of right conduct) arises, and it ceases to be an Aupa-samik Samyaktv
and becomes a Kshayopa-samik. This is written in the Shatak (fifth Karmagrantha)
in the Brihat Churni.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra phayuta hokara anuttaravimAna meM paidA hotA hai, taba
aparyApta avasthA meM Mareecured pAyA jAtA hai  /  .// 1 - yaha mantavya
"saptatikA" nAmaka char3e karmagrantha kI cUrNI aura padasaMgraha ke matAnusAra
samajhanA caahiye| cUrNI meM aparyApta avasthA ke samaya nArakoM meM
kSAyopazamika aura kSAyikAM ye do; para devoM meM aupazamikasahita tIna
samyaktva mAne haiN| paJcasaMgraha meM bhI dvAra 1 gA0 25vIM tathA usakI TIkA
meM ukta cUrNI ke mata kI hI puSTi kI gaI hai  /  gommaTasAra bhI isI mata ke
pakSa meM hai; kyoMki vaha dvitIya - upamazreNI-mAdI - upazama samyaktva ho
aparyApta avasthA ke jIvoM ko mAnatA hai  /  isake liye dekhiye, jIvakANDa kI
gA0 7266ii  /  parantu koI AcArya yaha mAnate haiM ki 'aparyApta avasthA meM
aupazafree rare nahIM hotA  /  inase kevala paryAya saMjI jIvasthAna mAnanA
caahiye|' isa mata ke samarthana meM ve kahate haiM ki 'aparyApta avasthA meM
yogya (vizuddha) adhyavasAya na hone se aupazamikasamyaktva nayA to utpanna hI
nahIM ho rahA pUrve meM so usakA bhI aparyApta avasthA taka rahanA zAstra
sammata nahIM hai; kyoMki oNpazamikasa - myarakha do prakAra kA hai  /  eka to
vaha jo anAdi mithyAtvI ko pahalepahala hotA hai| dUsarA vaha, jo upazamazreNika
samaya hotA hai| isameM pahale prakAra ke samyaktva ke sahita to jIva maratA hI
nahIM  /  usakA pramANa Agama meM isa prakAra hai: "jhaNaghoSaya mAga, baMdhaM
kAlaM ca sAsaNI kuNaI  //  uhamikkaM pi no kuNaI  // " upasamasamma hiTTo,
arthAt "anantAnubandho kA bandha, usakA udaya, Ayu kA bandha aura maraNa, ye
cAra kArya dUsare guNasthAna meM hote haiM, para inameM se eka bhI kArya aupa
misamyaktva meM nahIM hotaa|" dUsare prakAra ke aupazamikasamyaktva ke viSaya
meM yaha niyama hai ki usameM vartamAna jIva maratA to hai, para janma grahaNa
karate hI samyaktvamohanIya kA udaya hone se vaha audAmikasamyaktvI na rahakara
kSAyopazamikasa bana jAtA hai  /  yaha bAta zataka | ( pA~caveM karma grantha)
ko bRhacUNoM meM likhI hai  /

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  In the Sanjnimaganna, except for the two Sanji
Jeevasthanas, no other Jeevasthan is possible, because all other Jeevasthanas
are Asanti. In the above-mentioned Magangas, like Devagati, etc., the meaning of
"A-paryapt" is "Kar-paryapt" and not "Ap" (meaning "not"). The reason for this
is that in Devagati and Narakagati, no being is found with "A-paryapt" Labdhi.
And "A-paryapt" Labdhi means Mati (intellect), Padma (Leshya), and Samyaktva
(right faith). || 14 ||  "Those who are Samsanni-ap-aj-aj-urga, they are not
born in the Narakagati. Those who are Asanni, they suffer in the four births of
the Padma." || 15 ||  "Those who are Tavasangya-paryapt, they are born in the
Narakagati. Those who are Paryapt, they are born in the Tejas. The Sthavar
(immobile) are Ekendirya (one-sensed), the Pathmanis are Chatvari (four), and
the Dwadash-manj-ini are Vikale (defective)." || 15 ||  "Those who are Upsham-
samyag-drishti, and die in the Upsham-shreni, they are brought to the
Udayavalika by the Samyaktva-mohaniya-puj-ka at the time of their death, and
they are given the Veda. Because of this, they cannot attain Upshamik-samyaktva
in the A-paryapt state."  Thus, since Upshamik-samyaktva is not possible in the
A-paryapt state, according to the opinion of those Aacharyas, only the Paryapt
Sanji Jeevasthan is considered to be Samyaktva.  In this context, Shri
Jeevavijayji, without mentioning the name of his book in his Taba, has quoted
its gatha and written that Upshamik-samyaktva falls from the eleven Gunasthans,
but does not die in them. The one who dies is Shramik-samyaktva. The gatha is as
follows:  "Those who die in the Upsham-gunas, they are the seventy-seven
Lavasattama Devas, they are all Juas."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra saMjJimAgaMNA meM do saMjJi jIvasthAna ke sivAya anya
kisI jIvasthAna kA sambhava nahIM hai, kyoMki anya saba jIvasthAna asaMtI hI
haiM  /  devagati Adi uparyukta mAgaMgAoM meM aparyApta sabhI kA matalaba kara-
paryApta se hai, apa se nhiiN| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki devagati aura naraka
gati meM labdhi aparyApta rUpa se koI jIva paiyA nahIM hote aura ma labdhi
aparyApta ko mati Adi jJAna, padma Adi lezyA tathA samyaktva hotA hai  //  14
//  samasaMniapajjajurga, nare sabAyaraapajja teUe  /  yAvara igiMdi paDhamA
catra bAra asanni du dukhigale || 15 || tavasaMgyaparyAptayutaM nare savAdarAya
paryAptaM tejasi  /  sthAvara ekendriye, pathamAni catvAri dvAdazamaMjJini t -L
vikale ||15|| 'jo javasamasammo uvasamaseoe kAlaM kare so paDhamasamaye veda
sammattapuMjaM ubayAna ligAe, choDna sammatapurale veera, tega na uvasamasamma
hiTThI apanattago lagmai  / " arthAt "jo upazamasamyagdRSTi, upazamazreNi meM
maratA hai, vaha maraNa ke prathama samaya meM ho samyaktvamohanIya pujako
udayavalikA meM use lAkara use vedatA hai; isase aparyApta avasthA meM
aupazamikasamyavatva pAyA nahIM jA sakatA  / " " isa prakAra aparyApta avasthA
meM kisI taraha ke opazamikasamyaktva kA sambhava na hone se una AjAryo ke mata
se samyaktva meM kevala paryApta saMzI jIva sthAna hI mAnA jAtA hai  /  isa
prasaGga meM zrIjIvavijaya jI ne apane TabemeM grantha ke nAma kA ullekha kiye
binA hI usakI gAthA ko uddhRta karake likhA hai ki aupamisamyaktvI gyAraha
guNasthAna se giratA hai sahI para usameM maratA nahIM  /  maranevAlA
zramikasamyaktavI hI hotA hai  /  gAthA isa prakAra hai MA 'usase pattA, maraMti
uvasamaguNeSu je sattara te lavasattama devA, saba juA  / "

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **Meaning:** In the human realm, the aforementioned
two types of sanji (insufficient and sufficient) and the asanji are present. In
the Golaya, there are three types of jeevathanas: insufficient, sufficient, and
sanji-dvik. In the five sthavar and ekaindriya, the first four (insufficient
subtle, sufficient subtle, insufficient coarse, and sufficient coarse) are
jeevathanas. In the asankhya margana, the first twelve jeevathanas are present,
excluding the sanji-dvik. In the vikendriya, there are two jeevathanas each, one
insufficient and one sufficient. ||15||  **Meaning:** There are two types of
humans: garbhaj and sammuchhim. All garbhaj are sanji, and they are found in
both insufficient and sufficient forms. However, sammuchhim humans, who are born
in the two and a half lop-samudra from the excreta, semen, and blood of garbhaj
humans, have a very short lifespan. They die before fulfilling their appropriate
sufficient karma, hence they are considered larish-apampt and asanji. Therefore,
only the aforementioned three jeevathanas are found in the general human realm.
This means that those who die in the eleventh gunasthan after attaining the
upshamshreni are considered to be in the sarvarth-siddh-vimana, with the quality
of shaminamya-akta, and are called "lavasapt-dev." They are called lavasapt-dev
because their lifespan is seven lavas less, which forces them to take birth as a
dev. If their lifespan was longer, they would have attained moksha in this very
birth without becoming a dev.  **1:** For example, Bhagwan Shyamacharya
describes in Prabhagana, page 5: "How does a sammuchhim human die, oh Muni?
Golaya! In the end, in the human realm, in the 50,000 yojanas, in the days, in
the 13 karma-bhumis, in the 36 akarma-bhumis, in the 64 sarva-bhovas, in the
human realm, in the high places, in the low places, in the games, in the anger,
in the bile, in the white, in the red, in the white-red mixture, in the various
bodies, in the sexual intercourse, in the city, in the destruction, in the good,
in the bad, in the desires, the sammuchhim human dies. He is ignorant, unaware,
and full of desires. He is unable to understand the truth. He spends his time in
the end, in the last moments."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra artha-manuSya gati meM pUrvokta saMji-dvika (aparyApta
tathA paryApta saMzo) aura apAta asaM na nIkA hai  /  goleyA meM zabara
aparyApta aura saMjI-dvika, ye tIna jIvasthAna haiN| pAMca sthAvara aura
ekendriya meM pahale cAra (aparyApta sUkSma, paryApta sUkSma, aparyApta bAbara
aura paryApta bAvara) jovasthAna hai  /  asaMkSi mArgaNA meM saMzivikake sivAya
pahale bAraha jovasthAna haiM  /  vikandriya meM do-do aparyApta tathA paryApta
jIvasthAna haiM  // 15 //  bhAvArtha manuSya ko prakAra ke hai:garbhaja aura
sammanchima  /  garbhaja sabhI saMjohI hote haiM, ve aparyApta tathA paryApta
donoM prakAra ke pAye jAte haiN| para saMmazchima manuSya, jo DhAI lopa-samudra
meM garbhaja manuSya ke mala-mUtra, zukra-zoNita mAdi meM paidA hote haiM, unakI
Ayu antamahataM-pramANa hI hotI hai| ve svayogya paryAptiyoM ko pUrNa kiye binA
hI mara jAte haiM, iso se unheM lariSa-apamApta ho mAnA hai, tathA de asaMjJI ho
mAne gaye hai  /  isaliye sAmAgya manuSya gati meM uparyukta tIna hI jIvasthAna
pAye jAte haiM  /  usakA matalaba yaha hai ki 'jo jIva upazamazreNI ko pAkara
gyArahavaM guNasthAna meM marate haiM, ve sarvArthasiddhavimAna meM
zAminAmamyaktva-yukta hI paMdhA hote haiM aura 'lavasattama dava' kahalAte haiN|
lavasaptaga kahalAne kA sababa yaha hai ki sAta lava-pramANa Ayu kama hone se
unako deva kA janma grahaNa karanA par3atA hai| madi unakI Ayu aura gI adhivaH
hotI to deva hue binA umI janma meM mokSa hotA  /  1- jaise, bhagavAn zyAmAcArya
prabhAganA pR. 5. meM varNana karate hai:_ "kahiNaM bhaMte saMmunichamamaNussA
saMmuccheti ? goyamA ! aMto magussakhettassa paNayAlIsAe joyaNasamasahassesu
abadAijjemu dIvasamahasU patrarasa kammabhUmIsutIsAe akammabhUmIsu chappanAe
asarabauvesu gamavakkaliyamaNussANaM gheva uccAresu vA pAsavaNeSu vA khelesu mA
tesu vA pittesu vA sukkasu vA soNiesu vA sukkapuraMgaparisADesu thA
vigayalIvakalevaresu vA dhopurisasaMjogesu vA nagaranikSamaNetu kA sadhvesu ceva
asuiThANasu iccharNa samucchimamaNussA saMmuNchati agusasa asaMkhabhAgamittAe
ogAhaNAe asalI bhidhiTTI annANI savAhi pasnattIhi apaJjatA aMtamuhasAuyA ceva
kAlaM karati ti|"

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Chapter  The **Tejo-leshya** is found in both **Paryapta** and
**Aparyapta** types of **Sanshis** and is also found in the **Aparyapta** state
in **Bavar-ekendriya**. This is why the above three **Jovasthanas** are
considered in that **Leshya**. **Bavar-ekendriya** is considered **Tejo-leshya**
in the **Aparyapta** state. Therefore, from this perspective, **Bhavanpati**,
**Vyantar**, etc. Devas, in whom **Tejo-leshya** is possible, when they die with
**Tejo-leshya** and take birth in earth, water or vegetation, they have **Tejo-
leshya** for some time in the **Aryal** (**Karan-Apayati**) state.  Except for
the first four **Jovasthanas**, there is no **Ekendriya** or **Sthavar-kadik**
being in any other **Jivasthan**. Therefore, **Ekendriya** and five **Sthavar-
kaya** are considered the first four **Jivasthanas** in these six **Marganas**.
The essence of this is as follows: - "When asked, Bhagwan Mahavir, Ganadhar and
Gautam say that within the human realm of forty-five lakh yojanas, in the two
and a half islands and seas, there are fifteen **Karmabhumis**, thirty
**Akarmabhumis** and fifty-six **Antadvipas**, where **Garbhaja** humans are
born in the excreta, urine, phlegm, etc. of all impure substances, whose body
size is equal to the countless parts of an inch, who are **Asangati**,
**Mithyatvi** and **Agnani**, and who are **Aparyapta** and die within a moment.
1. "**Kivha nila kau, seule sa ya bhavanvantariya | Noiss sohammisa-na teuse sa
muneyasva. 163||**" **Brihatsangrahani** | Meaning: There are four accounts like
Krishna in **Bhavanpati** and **Vyantar**, but in **Jyotish** and **Sodharma**
**Isan** **Devaloka**, there is only **Tejo-leshya**. 2. "**Pudhavi auvanassaha,
game pajjal sanchaye. Samanusana daso, sesa parisehiya thana.**" Meaning: "Only
in earth, water, vegetation and **Paryapta** are there no **Swarga-chyut**
Devas."  **Visheshavashyak Bhashya**: **Garbhaja** born with a countable number
of years of life. In other places...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cA tejolezyA, paryApta tathA aparyApta donoM prakAra ke
saMziyoM meM pAyI jAtI hai tathA vaha bAvara ekendriya meM bhI aparyApta avasthA
meM hotI hai, isI se usa lezyA meM uparyukta tIna jovasthAna mAne huye haiM  /
bAdara ekendriya ko aparyApta avasthA meM tejolezyA mAnI jAtI hai, so isa apekSA
se hi bhavanapati, vyantara' Adi deva, jinameM tejolezyA kA sambhava hai ve jaba
tejolezyAsahita marakara pRthivI, pAnI yA vanaspati meM janma grahaNa karate
haiM, taba unako aryAla (karaNa-apayati - ] avasthA meM kucha kAla taka
tejolezyA rahatI hai  /  pahale cAra jovasthAna ke sivAya anya kisI jIvasthAna
meM ekendriya tathA sthAvarakAdhika jIva nahIM hai| isI se ekendriya aura pA~ca
sthAvarakAya ina chaha mArgaNAoM meM pahale cAra jIvasthAna mAne gaye haiM  /
isakA sAra saMkSepa meM isa prakAra hai: - 'prazna karane para bhagavAn
mahAbIra, gaNadhara aura gautama se kahate haiM ki paiMtAlisa lAkha yojana-
pramANa manuSya-kSetra ke bhItara DhAI dvIpa samudra meM pandraha karmabhUmi,
tIsa akarmabhUmi aura chappana antadvIpoM meM garbhaja manuSyoM ke mala, mUtra,
kapha Adi sabhI azuci padArthoM meM saMmUmi paidA hote haiM, jinakA deha
pariNAma agula kaM. asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga ke barAbara haiM, jo asaMgatI, mithyAtvI
tathA ajJAnI hota haiM aura jo aparyApta hI haiM tathA antarmuhUrta-mAtra meM
mara jAte haiM  /  1" kivhA nIlA kAU, seUlesA ya bhavaNavaMtariyA |
noisasohammIsA-Na teUsesA muNeyazvA  /  163 // " bRhatsaMgrahaNI | arthAt
bhavanapati aura vyantara meM kRSNa Adi cAra lekhAe~ hotI haiM; kintu jyotiSa
aura sodharma IzAna devaloka meM tejolezyA hI hotI hai| 2- puDhavI AuvaNassaha,
game pajjala saMcaye  /  samanuSANaM dAso, sesA parisehiyA ThANA  /  " arthAt
"pRthvI, jala, vanaspati aura paryApta ina sthAnoM hI meM svarga-cyuta deva
nahIM  / " nv vizepAvazyaka bhASya  /  saMkhyAta varSa Ayu vAle garbhajapaidA
hote haiN| anya sthAnoM meM

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  Two of the living beings' states are called "Jiva
Sthanas". Therefore, in the "Sanjnimagana", twelve Jiva Sthanas should be
understood.  74 In each "Vikalendriya", there are two Jiva Sthanas: "Aparyapt"
(inadequate) and "Paryapt" (sufficient). Therefore, in the "Vikalendriyamargna",
only two Jiva Sthanas are considered. ||15||  Ten "Charam" (extreme) are "Ajaya"
(unconquerable), "Haragati" (destructive path), "Ritanuk" (minute particle),
"Say" (with), "Anaane" (without), "Padhamatile" (learned), "Sabhavier"
(natural), "Achakkhunpumi" (blind), "Ichchi" (desire), "Sathye" (truth), "Vi"
(and). ||16|| Ten "Charam" are "Trasayataharak" (eating with fear),
"Tiryaktannu" (animal body), "Kashayadvyajnaane" (ignorance of passions),
"Pratham" (first), "Trileshya" (three-fold), "Bhavye" (worthy), "Tara" (other),
"Achakshu" (blind), "Nishu" (in), "Mithyatve" (false belief), "Sarvani" (all),
"Api" (also). ||16||  **Meaning:** In "Sakaya" (body), the final Jiva Sthan is
"Avirati" (restlessness), "Aharak" (eating), "Tiryanchgati" (animal path),
"Kayayog" (body-yoga), "Char" (four), "Kavay" (passions), "Mati"
(understanding), "Shruta" (scripture), "Agnan" (ignorance), "Krishna" (black),
etc. The first three "Leshya" (shades), "Madhyashva" (middle horse),
"Amadhyastha" (not in the middle), "Achakshurdarshan" (blind vision), "Napumsak"
(impotent), "Ved" (knowledge), and "Mithyarathan" (false path) are found in
"Bhatu" (earth) and "Paani" (water) states. ||16||  **Meaning:** Out of
fourteen, "Aparyapt" and "Paryapt" "Sukshma" (subtle) "Ekendriya" (one-sense)
and "Aparyapt" and "Paryapt" "Bavar" (gross) "Ekendriya" (one-sense) are not
included in this. The remaining ten Jiva Sthanas are in "Trasafay" (fearful
state). Because only in these states does the "Asanama Karma" (non-destructive
karma) arise, and therefore they can move freely.  "Avirati" etc., all the Jiva
Sthanas mentioned above are considered in the eighteen "Margna" (paths) because
these "Margna" are possible in all types of beings.  "Mithyatve" (false belief)
is said to be in all Jiva Sthanas. This means that "Mithyatve" is generally
found in all Jiva Sthanas. However, in the first twelve Jiva Sthanas, "Bana
Bhog" (enjoyment of the body) "Mithyatve" should be understood. Because in them,
there is "Ama Bhog" (non-enjoyment) generated "Agnan" (ignorance) and "Jamp"
(attachment) "Atatva" (untruth) "Ruchi" (taste). In "Panchasangrah",
"Anbhigrahik Mithyatve" (non-grasping false belief) is mentioned. See, Appendix
"T".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra vaha jIvasthAnoM meM se do ho jIvasthAna saMjJI haiM  /
isI kAraNa saMjJimAgaMNA meM bAraha jIvasthAna samajhanA cAhiye  /  74 pratyeka
vikalendriya meM aparyApta tathA paryApta do-yo jIvasthAna pAye jAte haiM, isI
se vikalendriyamArgaNA meM do hI vo jIvasthAna mAtre gaye haiM |15|| dasa carama
tase ajayA, hAragati ritaNuka sAya anANe | paDhamatile sAbhaviyara,
acakkhunapumicchi sathye vi  // 16 //  daza caramANi trase'yatAhAraka tiryaktanu
kaSAyadvyajJAne | prathama trilezyA bhavyetarA'cakSurnaSu mithyAtve sarvANyapi
/  /  16  /  /  artha - sakAya meM antima basa jIvasthAna hai| avirati, AhAraka
tiryaJcagati, kAyayoga, cAra kavAya mati zruta ko ajJAna kRSNa Adi pahalI tIna
lezyAe~, madhyazva, amadhyastha, acakSurdarzana, napuMsaka veda aura
mithyArAthana bhAtu pANI) sthAna pAye jAte haiM  /  /  16  //  bhAvArtha -
caudaha meM se aparyApta aura paryApta sUkSma ekendriya tathA aparyApta aura
paryApta bAvara ekendriya isa bAra ke sivAya zeSa dasa jIvasthAna trasaphAya meM
hai; kyoMki una basa meM hI asanAmakarma kA umaya hotA hai aura isase ve hI
svatantratApUrvaka cala-phira sakate haiM  /  avirati Adi uparyukta aThAraha
mArgaNAoM meM sabhI joSasthAna isaliye mAne jAte haiM ki saba prakAra ke jIvoM
meM ina mArgaNAoM kA sambhava' hai  /  midhyAtva meM saba jIvasthAna kahe haiN|
arthAt saba jIvasthAnoM meM sAmAnyataH mithyAtva kahA hai| kintu pahale bAraha
jIvasthAnoM meM banAbhoga midhyAtva samajhanA cAhiye; kyoMki unameM amAbhoga-
janya (ajJAna - jampa atatva- ruci hai  /  paJcasaMgraha meM 'anabhigrahika -
mithyAtva ' 1- dekhiye, pariziSTa 'Ta  / '

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  It is written in those Jiva-sthānas that they are not
accepted as wave-guru-dharma, therefore, due to their false nature, those Jiva-
sthānas can also be called 'anamiprihik'. ||16||  **Only the Kevala-trika
(Kevala-jnana - Kevala-darshan), the five Samyamas (Samayika, etc.), the Manah-
paryaya-jnana, the Vaishvi-virati, the Manoyoga, and the Misamyaktva, these
eleven Marg-naas, only the Paryapta-sanjnee Jiva-sthana is present.** In the
Vachan-yoga, the last five (Dee-priya, Yondriya, Chaturi-priya, Asanti-
panchendriya, and [San-patra]) are Paryapta Jiva-sthānas. In the Chakshu-
darshan, the Paryapta three (Chaturindriya, Asanshi-panchendriya, and Sonj-
panchendriya) Jiva-sthānas, according to other opinions, are both Paryapta and
Aparyapta. Thus, there are six Jiva-sthānas in total. ||17||  **Meaning:** Only
the Paryapta-sanjnee Jiva-sthana is considered in the above-mentioned eleven
Marg-naas, including the Kevala-trika. The reason for this is that, except for
the Paryapta-sanjnee, other types of Jivas cannot have either Sarva-virati or
Vaishvi-virati. Therefore, in Jivas other than the Sanjnee, Kevala-trika, five
Samyamas, Desha-virati, and Manah-paryaya-jnana, which are related to Virati,
cannot exist. In this way, except for the Paryapta-sanjnee, other Jivas do not
have a connection with Tathavishadravya-mana, therefore, Manoyoga does not
occur, and Misamyaktva also does not have the qualification.  **In Ekendriya,
there is no Bhasha-paryapti. Without Bhasha-paryapti, Yoga is not possible. In
the Avik Jivas, Bhasha-paryapti is possible. When they complete all their
eligible Paryaptis, then Bhasha-paryapti can occur in them, leading to Vachan-
yoga.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra una jIvasthAnoM meM likhA hai, so anya apekSA se arthAt
veva-guru-dharmakA svIkAra na hone ke kAraNa una jIvasthAnoM kA midhyAtva
'anamiprahika' bhI kahA jA sakatA hai  // 16 //  pajasatI kevaladuga, saMjaya
maNanANadesamaNamIse  /  75 paNa caramapajja vayaNe, tiya cha va parijayara
cakkhumi ||17|| paryAptasaMjJI kevalahika - saMyata manojJAnadeza manomi  /  I
paJca caramaparyAptAni vacane, zroNi paD vA paryAptitarANi cakSuSi  /  /  17 //
artha- kevala Trika (kevalajJAna - kevalarzana ) sAmAyika kSAdi pA~ca saMyama,
manaHparyAyajJAna, vaizavirati manoyoga aura misamyaktva, ina gyAraha mArgaNAoM
meM sirpha paryApta saMjJI jIvasthAna hai  /  vacanayoga meM antima pA~ca
(DIpriya, yondriya, caturipriya, asaMti- pacendriya aura [saM-patra) paryApta
jIvasthAna haiN| cakSudaMrzana meM paryApta tIna (caturindriya asaMzi-
paJcendriya aura soMjJa-pacendriya) jIvasthAna matAntara se paryApta aura
aparyApta donoM prakAra ke ukta tIna arthAt phUla chaha jIvasthAna haiM  /  /
17  /  /  bhAvArtha - kevala-lika Adi uparyukta gyAraha mArgaNAoM meM sirpha
paryApta saMjJI jIvasthAna mAnA jAtA hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki paryApta
saMjJI ke sivAya anya prakAra ke jIvoM meM na sarvavirati kA aura na
vezaviratikA saMbhava hai  /  ata eva saMjJi-bhinna jovoM meM kevala vika, pA~ca
saMgama, dezavirati aura manaHparyAyajJAna, jinakA sambandha viratise hai, ve ho
hI nahIM sakate  /  isa taraha paryApta saMjhI ke sivAya anya jIvoM meM
tathAviSadravyamana kA sambandha na hone ke kAraNa manoyoga nahIM hotA aura
misamyaktva ko yogyatA bhI nahIM hotI  /  1 ekendriya meM bhASAparyApti nahIM
hotI  /  bhASAparyApti ke sivAya yoga kA honA saMbhava nahIM  /  kIndriya Avi
jIvoM meM bhASAparyAdita kA saMbhava hai  /  ve jaba sampUrNa svayogya
paryAptiyA~ pUrNa kara lete haiM, tabhI unameM bhASAparyApti ke ho jAne se
bacanayoga ho sakatA hai| isI se

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the fourth part of the Kamgranth, Vachan Yoga, the five types of departures,
including Paryapt Vindiya, are considered.   Only those with eye organs can
experience visual perception. There are three types of beings: Chaturindriya,
Asanshipanchaindriya, and Sanshipanchaindriya. All three types have eyes.
Therefore, other types of beings lack visual perception.   There are different
opinions regarding the three types of beings mentioned above.   **Two
interpretations of Indriyaparyapti are the root of these opinions:**  **(a)**
"Indriyaparyapti is the power of the Jiva that transforms the suitable Puggala,
derived from the food-like substances, into the form of Indriya."  This
interpretation is found in the Prajnapanavritti and Panchasangrahvritti, page 6.
According to this interpretation, Indriyaparyapti refers to the power that
generates the Indriya. Those who accept this interpretation believe that after
the suitable Pantiyas are fully formed (in the Paryapt state), all beings
experience Indriya-generated use, not in the Aparyapt state. Therefore, even
after becoming Paryapt, Chaturindriya, etc., are not considered to have visual
perception in the Aparyapt state.  **(b)** "Indriyaparyapti is the power of the
Jiva that transforms the suitable food-like substances into the form of Indriya,
thereby gaining the ability to experience Indriya-generated perception."  This
interpretation is found in the Vatsasangrahani, page 130, and the Bhagavati-
Vritti, page 566. According to this interpretation, Indriyaparyapti refers to
the power that performs all actions from the creation of the Indriya to its use.
Those who accept this interpretation believe that even in the Aparyapt state,
all beings experience Indriya-generated use after becoming Paryapt. Therefore,
after becoming Paryapt, due to the use of the eye organ, Chaturindriya, etc.,
should be considered to have visual perception even in the Aparyapt state. This
opinion is supported by the statement mentioned on page 5 of the Panchasangrah-
Malayagiri-Vritti:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kamagrantha bhAga cAra vacanayoga meM paryApta vIndriya aAdi upayukta pAca jI
prasthAna mAne Tvaye hai  /  AMkhapAloM ko hI cAdarzana ho sakatA hai  /
caturindriya, asaMzipaJcembriya aura saMzi-paJcendriya, ina tIna prakAra ke ho
jIpoM ko A~kheM hotI haiM  /  isI se inake sivAya anya prakAra ke jovoM meM
cakSurvarzana kA abhAva hai| ukta tIna prakAra ke javoM ke viSaya meM bhI kA
mata haiM  /  1-indriyaparyApti ko nIce-likhI do vyAkhyAyeM, ina matoM kI jar3a
(ka) "indriyapApita jIna kI vaha zakti hai jisake dvArA dhAturUpa meM pariNata
AhAra-gudamloM meM se yogya pugla, indriyarUpa meM pariNata kiye jAta hai|" yaha
vyAkhyA, prajJApanA-vRtti tathA paJcasaMgraha vRtti pR06 meM hai| isa vyAkhyA ke
anusAra indriyaparyApti kA matalaba, indriya-janakaH zakti se hai  /  isa
vyAkhyA ko mAnane vAle pahale mata kA Azaya yaha hai ki svayogya pAntiyA~ pUrNa
bana cukane ke bAda (paryApta-avasthA meM) sabako indriyajanya upayoga hotA hai,
aparyApta avasthA meM nahIM  /  isaliye indri yaparyApti pUrNa bana cakane ke
bAda, nepa hone para bhI aparyApta avasthA meM caturindriya Adi ko cakSadaMzana
nahIM mAnA jaataa| (ya) "indriyaparyApti jIva kI vaha zakti hai, jisake dvArA
yogya AhAra puloM kI indriya rUpa meM pariNata karake indriya-janya dodha kA
sAmarthya prApta kiyA jAtA hai" yaha vyAsthA vahatasaMgrahaNI pR0 130 tathA
bhagamatI-batti pR0566 meM hai  /  isaka anusAra indriparyApti kA matalaba,
indriya-racanA se lekara, indriya-janya upayoga taka kI saba kiyAoM ko karane
vAlI zakti se hai  /  isa vyAkhyA ko mAnane vAle dusare mata ke anusAra
indriyaparyApti pUrNa bana jAne se aparyApta-avasthA meM bhI sabako indriya-
janya upayoga hotA hai| isaliye indriyaparyApti bana jAne ke bAda netra-janya
upayoga hone ke kAraNa aparyApta avasthA meM bhI caturindriya Adi kA
cakSurdarzana mAnanA cAhiye  /  isa mata kI puSTi, paJcasaMgraha-malayagiri-
vRtti ke 5 pRSTha para ullikhita isa mantavya se hotI hai:

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Firm Granth Part Four 77 According to the first view, **Chakshus Darshan** is
considered to be attained only after the **Swayogya Paryaptas** are fully
developed. According to the second view, **Chakshus Darshan** is considered to
be attained even before the **Swabhogya Paryaptas** are fully developed, in the
state of **A-Paryaps**. However, for this, the complete development of **Indriya
Paryaps** is essential. Because without the development of **Indriya Paryaps**,
**Chakshus Darshan** cannot be attained due to the non-development of **Anta**
in all. According to this second view, there are six **Jiva Sthanas** in
**Chakshus Darshan**, and according to the first view, there are three **Jiva
Sthanas**. || 17 ||  **Thoner Pani Di Charma, Cha U Anahare D Sani Ch Apjja.**
**Te Suham Apjja Vina, Sasani Itto Gunne Buchcham.** || 18 ||  **Stri Nar Panch
Indriye Charmani, Chatvary Anaharake Dvau Sanjhano Pad Paryapta.** **Te Sukshma
A-Paryapta Bina, Sasadan Ito Gunan Vakyse.** || 18 ||  _Meaning - In **Stri
Ved**, **Purush Ved** and **Panch Indriya Jati**, the last four (**A-Paryapt**
and **Paryapt Asanji Panch Indriya**, **A-Paryapt** and **Paryapt Sanji Panch
Indriya**) are **Jiva Sthanas**. In **Anaharak Margna**, there are two **Sanji**
and **Sukshma Ek Indriya**, **Badar Ek Indriya**, **Vi Indriya**, **Shrotriya**,
**Chatur Indriya** and **Asanji Panch Indriya**, these six **A-Paryapt**, **Pura
Shah Jiva Sthanas**. In **Sasavan Samyaktva**, there are seven **Jiva Sthanas**
excluding **Sukshma A-Paryapt** from the above eight. Now, the **Gun Sthanas**
will be discussed. || 18 ||  **Bhavarth -** In the above mentioned three
**Margnaas**, **Stri Ved** etc., **A-Paryapt**  "**Karan A-Paryapt** in **Chatur
Indriya** and **Vish Indriya Paryapti** are also attained in **Chakshus
Darshan**."  The mention of both these interpretations of **Indriya Paryapti**
is in **Lok Pra. Sa. 3 Shlok 20-21**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pharmagrantha bhAga cAra 77 pahale mata ke anusAra unameM svayogya paryAptiyAM
pUrNa bana jAne ke bAva hI cakSurdazana mAnA jAtA hai| dUsare mata ke anusAra
svabhogya paryAptiyoM pUrNa hone ke pahale bhI-aparyApsa-avasthA meM mI-
cakSudarzana mAnA jAtA hai| kintu isake liye indriyaparyApsi kA pUrNa sama jAnA
Avazyaka hai| kyoMki indriyaparyApti na bana jAya saba taka AMta ke pUrNa na
banane se vakSudarzana ho hI nahIM sktaa| isa dUsare mata ke anusAra
cakSurvazaMma meM chaha jIvasthAna mAne hue haiM aura pahale mata ke anusAra
tIna jIvasthAna  /  /  17  //  thonarapaNidi caramA, ca u aNahAred sani cha
apajjA  /  te suhamaapajja viNA, sAsaNiitto guNe bucchaM  // 18 //
strInarapaJcendiye caramANi, catvAryanAhArake dvau sAnjhano paDaparyAptAH  /  te
sUkSmASaryApta binA, sAsAdana ito guNAn vakSye  // 18  /  /  _ artha-stroveda,
puruSaveda aura paJcendriyajAti meM antima cAra ( aparyApta tathA paryApta
asaMzi-paJcendriya, aparyApta tathA paryApta saMji-paJcendriya ) jIvasthAna
haiN| anAhArakamArgaNA meM aparyANa-paryApta do saMjI aura sUkSma-ekendriya,
bAdara-ekendriya, vIndriya, zrotriya, caturindriya aura asaMji-paJcendriya, ye
chaha aparyApta, phula zAha jIvasthAna haiM  /  sAsAvanasamyaktva meM ukta ATha
meM se sUkSma-aparyApta ko chor3akara zeSa sAta jIyasthAna haiN| aba Age
guNasthAna kahe jAyaMge  //  18  //  bhAvArtha-strIveva Adi uparyukta tIma
mArgaNAoM meM aparyApta "karaNAparyApteSu caturindriyAviSvindriyaparyAptI sasyo
cakSurvarzanamapi prApyate  // " indripraparyApti kI ukta donoM vyAsyAoM kA
ballekha, loka pra0 sa0 3 zloka 20-21 meM hai|

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Firm Granth Part Four Asanshi-Panchendriya etc. four living beings are
mentioned. Here, the meaning of insufficient is from the cause being
insufficient, not from the obtained being insufficient; because - the sufficient
is only the Dhyadev, the neuter. 78 Asanshi Panchendriya is considered here as
two beings, female and male, and in the principle, neuter; however, there is no
contradiction in this. The statement here is from the perspective of the Bhava
Veda. The contradiction is from the perspective of the Dravya Veda and the
principle. Those who have the Bhava Neuter Veda are either female or male. There
are no signs of a male in the Anahara Maggana. In the eight living beings
mentioned above, seven are insufficient and one is sufficient. All types of
insufficient beings, Anahara, are at that time when they do not take food for
one, two or three times in the Vigraha Gati (Vakra Gati). The sufficient Sanshi
is considered Anahara in this regard because the Kevalgyani, in relation to the
Madhya Mana, are called Sanjni and they do not take any kind of food because
they are Karman Kayayogi in the third, fourth and fifth times of the Kevali
Samudhata. 1) "O Bhati, is Asanshi Panchendriya, a Tirthankara, a male, a female
or a neuter? Goma! It is not a male or a female, it is a neuter." - Bhagavati 2)
"Vasanjni Paryapt is a neuter, but it is considered to be a female because it
has the form of a female." — 3 - See, Appendix 'Ru'. Sangrah Dvara 1 Ga 24
Original Commentary. P

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pharmagrantha bhAga cAra asaMzi- paJcendriya Adi cAra jIvasthAna kahe hue haiN|
isameM aparyAptakA matalaba karaNa aparyApta se hai, labdha- aparyApta se nahIM;
kyoMki - paryApta ko dhyadeva, napuMsaka hI hotA hai  /  78 asaMzipacendriya ko
yahA~ strI aura puruSa, ye do veva mAne haiM aura siddhAnta' meM napuMsaka;
tathApi isameM koI virodha kA kayama dravyaveva ko apekSA se aura siddhAnta
apekSA se hai| bhAvanapuMsakaveda vAle ko strI yA hote haiN| nahIM hai| kyoMki
yahA~kA kathana bhAyaveda kI puruSa ke bhI cinha anAhAraka mAgaMNA meM jo ATha
jIvasthAna Upara kahe hue haiM, inameM sAta aparyApta haiM aura eka paryApta
saba prakAra ke aparyApta jIva, anAhAraka e usa samaya hote haiM, jisa samaya ve
vigrahagati ( vakragati) meM eka, do yA tIna samaya taka AhAra grahaNa nahIM
karate  /  paryApta saMzI ko anAhAraka isa apekSA se mAnA hai ki kevalajJAnI,
madhyamana ke saMbandha se saMjJI kahalAte haiM aura ve kevalisamuddhAta ke
tIsare, cauSe aura pA~caveM samaya meM kArmaNakAyayogI hone ke kAraNa kisI
prakAra ke AhArako grahaNa nahIM karate  /  1NaM bhate asaMnipaJcendiya
tirikkhaojiyA ki izvivegA puriyA napuMsakaveyagA ? gomA ! no isthivega ko
purisaveyA napuMsakayegA  / " -bhagavatI 2] vAsaMjJiparyApta paryApto napusako
tathApi strIpu sali GgAkAramAtramaGgIkRtya strIpu sAbuktAviti  /  " -- 3-
dekhiye, pariziSTa 'ru  / ' saMgraha dvAra 1 gA0 24 kI mUla TIkA  /  P

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma Ranth Part Four  In the Saasaabamasampapashva, seven types of Jivas are
mentioned, out of which six are Apariapt and one is Pariyaapt. Except for the
Sukshma-Ekendriya, the other six types of Apariapt Jivasthans are considered to
have Saasadan Samyaktava because when a Jiva with Aupashaamik Samyaktava leaves
that Samyaktava and takes birth in Bawaar-Ekendriya, Domniya, Trischya,
Chaturindriya, Asanshi-Panchendriya or Sanshi-Panchendriya, then he is
considered to have Saasadan Samyaktava in the Apariapt state. But when a Jiva
vomits Aumik Samyaktava, he does not digest it in Sukshma-Ekendriya, therefore,
Saasadan Samyaktava is not possible in the Apariapt state. Except for Sanshi-
Panchendriya, no other Jiva can have Saasadan Samyaktava in the Pariyaapt state.
Because in this state, only those who have attained Aupashaamik Samyaktava are
considered to be Pariyaapt, not others. ||18||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmarantha bhAga cAra sAsAbamasampapazva meM sAta jIvasyAna kahe haiM, jinameM
se chaha aparyApsa haiM aura eka paryApta  /  sUkSma-e kendriya ko chor3akara
anya chaha prakAra ke aparyApta jIvasthAnoM meM sAsAdhanasamyaktva isaliye mAnA
jAtA hai ki jaba koI aupazAmikasamyakrava vAlA jIva, usa samyakravako chor3atA
humA bAvara-ekendriya, Domniya, trIsciya, caturindriya, asaMzi-paJcendriya yA
saMzi-paJdhendriya meM janma prahaNa karatA hai, taba usako aparyApta-avasthA
meM sAsAdanasamyaktava pAyA jAtA hai| parantu koI jIva auramikasamyaktava ko
vamana karatA humA sUkSma-epriyameM pacA nahIM hotA, isaliye usameM aparyApta-
avasthA meM sAsAdamasamyasava kA saMbhava nahIM hai  /  saMzi-paJcendriya ke
sivAya koI bhI jIva, paryApta avasthA meM sAsAvanasamtavI nahIM hotaa| payoMki
isa avasthA meM aupazAmikasabhya ruSa pAne vAle saMjhI hI hote haiM, dUsare
nahIM  // 18 //

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha - Part Four (2) - Gunasthanas in Marganas [ In Five Ganas ]
"Patiri char suranarae, narasannipanidimamavatasi samve. Igavigal bhuudagavane,
du da egan gaitasamdhche." ||16|| "Panch tirachi chatvari suranar ke,
narasanjnipanceendriyabhavyaas sarvani. Ekavikalbhuudakavane he he ek gati
prasabhavye." ||16||  **Meaning:**  There are five Gunasthanas in the five
Tiryancha Gatis. There are four Gunasthanas in the Deva and Naraka Gatis. In the
Manushya Gati, Santri, Panchendriyabapti, Bhaya and Trasakaya, all Gunasthanas
are present. In Ekendriya, Vikalendriya, Prithvikaaya, Alakaya and
Vanaspatikaaya, the first and second Gunasthanas are present. In Gasis
(Tanjikaaya and Bayakaaya) and Abhashya, only the first Gunasthanas are present.
||16||  **Explanation:**  In the five Tiryancha Gatis, the first five
Gunasthanas are present. This is because in these Gatis, it is not possible to
be completely free from the nature of the species (jati-svabhaav) and the other
Gunasthanas, like Chheka, are not possible without the presence of all the
senses (sarvadhiti).  In the Deva and Naraka Gatis, the first four Gunasthanas
are considered to be present. This is because Devas and Narakas are inherently
devoid of freedom from their nature (viratirahita) and the other Gunasthanas are
not possible without the presence of the senses (viti).  In the Manushya Gati
and the other five mentioned Marganas, all types of Gunasthanas are present
because all types of dimensions are possible in these Gatis.  In Ekendriya,
Vikalendriya, Prithvikaaya, Alakaya and Vanaspatikaaya, two Gunasthanas are
mentioned. The second Gunasthanas are only present in the state of being
insufficient (aparayaaptavasta). When the lifespan of Ekendriya etc. is bound,
the second Gunasthanas are not present.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha-bhAga cAra (2)-mArgaNAoM meM guNasthAna  /  [ pA~ca gAyA meM  /  ]
patiri cara suranarae, narasaMnipaNidimamavatasi samve  /  igavigala
bhUdagavaNe, du da egaM gaitasamadhce  // 16 //  paJca tiraci catvAri suranara
ke, narasaMjJipaJcendriyabhavyAsa sarvANi  /  ekavikalabhUdakavane he he eka
gati prasAbhavye  //  16  /  /  argha-tipaMcagati meM pAMca guNasthAna haiN|
deva tathA narakagati meM ghAra guNasthAna haiM  /  manuSyagati, saMtrI,
paJceniyabApti, bhaya aura trasakAya, ina pAMca mArgaNAoM meM saba guNasthAna
haiM  /  ekendriya, vikalendriya, pRthvI kAya, alakAya aura vanaspatikAya meM
pahalA aura dUsarA, ye do guNasthAna haiM  /  gasisa (taMja:kAya aura bAyakAya)
aura abhazya meM eka ( pahalA  /  hI guNasthAna hai | //  16  //
bhAvArthatiyazvagati meM pahale pA~ca guNasthAna haiN| kyoMki usameM jAti-
svabhAva se sarva viratikA saMbhava nahIM hotA aura sarvadhiti ke sivAya chake
Adi guNasthAnoM kA saMbhava nahIM hai| vevagati aura narakagati meM pahale cAra
guNasthAna mAne jAne kA saSaya yaha hai ki deva yA nAraka, svabhAva se hI
viratirahita hote haiM aura viti ke bimA anya guNasthAnoM kA saMbhava nahIM hai|
manuSya gati Adi upayukta pA~ca mArgaNAoM meM hara prakAra ke parimAnoM ke
saMbhava hone ke kAraNa saba gaNasthAna pAye jAte haiN| ekendriya, vikalendriya,
pRthvIkAya, sAle kAya aura banaspatikAya meM do guNasthAna kahe haiM  /  imameM
se dUsarA sthAna aparyAptaavasthA meM hI hotA hai  /  ekendriya Adi kI Ayu kA
bandha ho jAne ke

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The text discusses the concept of *karmagrantha* (karmic bondage) and its impact
on the attainment of *samyaktv* (right faith, knowledge, and conduct) in
Jainism.   It states that when a being is unable to attain *aupashamik samyaktv*
(partial liberation), it is reborn in a state of *sasavan samyaktv* (with
remaining karmic attachments) as an *ekendriya* (one-sensed being) or higher.
During this period, they may experience a second *gunasthan* (stage of spiritual
development) for a while. The first *gunasthan* is common to all *ekendriya*
beings because they are *mithyatvi* (falsely believing) due to their lack of
knowledge (*ajnana*).   The text explains that *ekendriya* beings who attain the
second *gunasthan* are *karanaparapya* (deficient in their karmic actions) but
not *labdhi-aparapya* (deficient in their knowledge). This is because all beings
who are *mithyatvi* are *labdhi-aparapya*.  The text then discusses the
*sejakaya* (earth-bodied) and *vayukaya* (air-bodied) beings, stating that they
cannot attain *aupashamik samyaktv* and that only beings who have already
attained *aupashamik samyaktv* can be reborn in these forms. This is why they
are considered to be in the first *gunasthan*.  The text concludes by stating
that *amya* (non-human) beings only have the first *gunasthan* because they are
inherently incapable of attaining *samyaktv*. It also states that attaining the
second and higher *gunasthan* is impossible without first attaining *samyaktv*.
The text then provides a list of the *gunasthan* for different types of *kṣaya*
(passions):  * **Three *vev* and *tom* *kṣaya* (anger, pride, and deceit):** The
first nine *gunasthan* are found in these passions. * ***Lobha* (greed):** There
are ten *gunasthan* in this passion. * ***Mayat* (incontinence):** There are
four *gunasthan* in this passion. * **Three *ajnana* (ignorance of knowledge,
scripture, and discrimination):** The first two or three *gunasthan* are
considered to be in these types of ignorance. * ***Ayakshadarshan*
(clairvoyance) and *chakshu* (sight):** The text does not provide information
about the *gunasthan* for these.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha mAga dhAra bAva na kisI ko aupazAmikasamyArava prApta hotA hai,
taba vaha jase tyAga karatA huA sAsAvanasamyaktvasahita ekendriya Adi meM janma
prahaNa karatA hai| usa samaya aparyApta-avasthA meM kucha kAla taka dUsarA
guNasthAna pAyA jAtA hai  /  pahalA guNasthAna to ekendriya Adi ke liye sAmAnya
hai  /  kyoMki ve saba anAbhoga (ajJAna-) ke kAraNa tattva-thabA-hIna hone se
mithyAtvI hote haiM  /  jo aparyApta ekendriya Avi, dUsare guNasthAna ke
adhikArI kaha gaye haiM, ve karaNaaparyApta haiM, labdhi-aparyApta nahIM; kyoMki
labdhi-aparyApta to sabhI joSa, mithyAtvI hI hote haiM  /  sejaHkAya aura
vAyukAya, o ganisa yA ladhinasa kAhe nAte haiM, unameM na to
aupazamikasamyakrava prApta hotA hai aura ma aupazamikasamyaktva ko bamana
karane vAlA jIva hI unameM janma grahaNa karatA hai| isIse unameM pahalA ho
guNasthAna kahA gayA hai  /  _ amayoM meM sirpha prathama guNasthAna, isa kAraNa
mAnA jAtA hai ki ke svabhAva se hI samyava-lAbha nahIM kara sakate aura
samyaktva prApta kiye binA dUsare Adi guNasthAna asambhaba haiM  // 16 //
veyatikasAya nava dasa, lobhecaja ajaya duti anANatige  /  bArasa acakkhu
cakkhusu, paDhamA ahakhAi carama cau  // 20 //  vedanikaSAye nava daza, lome
catvAryayate hai bhAgyavAnatri ke  /  dvAdazAkSukcekSuSoH, prathamAni
yathAkhyAte caramANi catvAri  /  / 20|| artha-tIna veva tathA toma kaSAya
(saMjvalana-kroSa, mAna aura mApA-) meM pahale nau guNasthAna pAye jAte haiM  /
lobha meM (saMjvalanalobha-) meM dasa guNasthAna hote haiM  /  mayata (avirati-)
meM cAra guNasthAna haiM  /  tIna ajJAna (mati-ajJAna, zruta ajJAna aura
vibhaGgAna-) meM pahale do yA tIna muyasana mAne jAte haiM  /  ayakSadarzana
aura cakSu

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 2, Karma Granth Part 4  There are twelve Gunasthanas in the first
Vamsha. The last four Gunasthanas are in the Syasacharitra. ||20||  **Meaning:**
Nine Gunasthanas are mentioned in the three Vedas and the three Sanjwalan-
Kashaya. These should be understood in relation to Uvaya. Because their
existence can be found up to the eleventh Gunasthan. By the end of the Magha
Gunasthan, the three Vedas and the three Sanjwalan-Kashaya either become Son or
Upshant. Therefore, their Uvaya does not remain in the subsequent Gunasthanas.
Sanjwalan Lobha should be considered in relation to the Ujya Gunasthan, because
its existence can be found up to the eleventh Gunasthan.  The first four
Gunasthanas in Avirati are mentioned because all the Gunasthanas from the fifth
onwards are Virati-rupa.  There are two opinions regarding the number of
Gunasthanas in Asan-Dhiko. The first opinion considers two Gunasthanas, while
the second opinion considers three Gunasthanas. Both these opinions are Karma-
granthika.  (1) The opinion of the Acharya who considers two Gunasthanas is that
even though there is no complete Yatharth-Jnana due to the absence of pure
Samyak-tva in the third Gunasthan, there is a small amount of Yamarth-Jnana due
to the presence of Min-drishti in that Gunasthan. Because the first opinion is
mentioned in the 686th verse of Gommatasar-Jiyakand. 2- "Mithyatva-
adhikasyamishra-ishterasana-bahulya samyak-tva-adhikasyapuna samyak-
amagahalyamiti."  Meaning: "When Mithyatva is dominant, there is an abundance of
ignorance in the mixed-drishti, and when Samyak-tva is dominant, there is an
abundance of knowledge."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2 karmagrantha bhAga cAra vaMzama meM pahale bAraha gaNasthAna hote haiN|
yathAsyAsacAritra meM antima cAra guNa sthAna hai  // 20 //  bhAvArtha-tIna veva
aura sIna saMjvalana-kaSAya meM nau guNasthAna kahe gaye haiM, so uvaya kI
apekSA se samajhanA caahiye| kyoMki unako sattA gyArahave guNasthAna paryanta
pAI jA sakatI haiN| maghaH guNasthAna ke antima samaya taka meM tIna veda aura
tIna sayalanakaSAya yA to soNa ho jAte haiM yA upazAnta; isa kAraNa Age ke
gRNasthAnoM meM unakA uvaya nahIM rhtaa| _sajvalana lobha meM vasa guNasthAna
ujya kI apekSA se hI samAlame cAhiye, kyoMki sasA to usakI gyArahaveM guNasthAna
taka pAyI jA sakatI hai| avirati meM pahale cAra guNasthAna isaliye kahe hue
haiM ki pAMcave se lekara Age ke saba guNasthAna viratirUpa haiN| azAna-dhiko
guNasthAnoM kI saMkhyA ke viSaya meM do mata' haiN| pahalA usameM do guNasthAna
mAnatA hai aura dUsarA tIna guNasthAna  /  ye donoM mata kArmagradhika hai| (1)
vo guNasthAna mAnanevAle AcArya kA abhiprAya gaha hai ki ki tIsare guNasthAma ke
samaya zuddha samyaktva na hone ke kAraNa pUrNa yathArtha jAna bhale hI na ho,
para usa gaNasthAna meM mina-raSTi hone se yamArya jJAna kI yor3I-bahuta mAtrA'
rahato ho haiM  /  payoMki mitra 1ina meM se pahalA mata hI gommaTasAra-
jIyakANDa kI 686vIM gAthA meM ullikhita hai| 2-'mithyAtvAdhikasya mizra
iSTerazAnabAhulyaM samyaktavAdhikasya punaH samyakAmagAhalyamiti  / '
arthAt-"mithyAtva adhika hone para mizra-dRSTi meM ajJAna kI bahulatA aura
sabhyakatva adhika hone para jJAna kI bahulatA hotI hai|"

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four  At the time of creation, when **mithyatva**
(falsehood) is predominant, the proportion of **ajnan** (ignorance) is greater
and the proportion of **jnan** (knowledge) is less. But when **mithyatva** is
subdued and **samyaktvapuvagla** (right faith, right conduct, right knowledge,
right effort) is predominant, then the proportion of **jnan** is greater and the
proportion of **ajnan** is less. Regardless of the state of **misra-sristi**
(mixed creation), due to the predominance of **jnan** in it, it is appropriate
to consider the knowledge at that time as **jnan** and not **ajnan**. Therefore,
there should be two **gunasthanas** (stages of knowledge) in **ajnan-trik**
(three stages of ignorance).  (2) The intention of the **acharyas** (teachers)
who believe in three **gunasthanas** is that although **ajnan** is called
**jnan-mishrit** (mixed with knowledge) in the third **gunasthan**, it is not
appropriate to consider **misra-jnan** as **jnan**. It should be called
**ajnan**. Because, regardless of the type of **jnan**, it is **ajnan** without
**shuddha samyaktv** (pure right faith). If **jnan** is considered as **jnan**
in the third **gunasthan** due to the presence of **samyaktv**'s element, then
**jnan** will also have to be considered as **jnan** in the second **gunasthan**
due to the presence of **samyaktv**'s element, which is not desirable. The
reason for this undesirability is that even those who believe in two
**gunasthanas** in **ajnan-trik** consider **mati** (intellect) etc. as
**ajnan** in the second **gunasthan**. Except for **siddhantvadi** (those who
follow the principles), no other **kamdhik vidvan** (learned person) considers
**mati** etc. as **jnan** in the second **gunasthan**. Therefore, it is
appropriate to consider **mati** etc. as **ajnan** in the second **gunasthan**
as well, just like in the first **gunasthan**, and consider **ajnan-trik** as
three **gunasthanas**.  In **achakshusvarshan** (blind vision) and
**chakshusvarshan** (seeing vision), there are four **gunasthanas** with this
intention:  - - - -  1. "**Misra-bhi ka misra**" etc. This means "In the
**misra-gunasthan**, **ajnan** is **jnan-mishrit** (mixed with knowledge)."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra STi ke samaya mithyAtva kA udaya jaya adhika pramANa
meM rahanA hai, taba to ajAna kA aMza adhika aura zAna kA aMza kama hotA hai|
para jaba mithyAtva kA udaya manda aura samyaktava-puvagla kA uvaya tIna rahatA
hai, taba jJAna kI mAtrA jyAdA aura abAna kI mAtrA kama hotI hai  /  cAhe mizra-
STi kI kaisI bhI avasthA ho, para usameM nyUna adhika pramANa meM jJAna kI mAtrA
kA sebhaSa hone ke kAraNa usa samaya ke jJAna ko ajJAna na mAnakara jJAna ho
mAnanA ucita hai  /  isaliye amAna-trika meM do ho guNasthAna mAnane cAhiye  /
(2) tIna guNasthAna mAnane vAle AcArya kA Azaya yaha hai ki yapi tIsare
guNasthAna ke samaya ajJAna ko jJAna-mizrita kahA hai tathApi mizna-jAna ko jAma
bhAnanA ucita nahIM; use ajJAna hI kahanA cAhiye  /  kyoMki zuddha samyaktama
hue binA cAhe kaisA bhI bAna ho, para vaha hai ajJAna  /  padi samyakta ke aMza
ke kAraNa tIsare guNasthAna meM jAna ko anAna na mAnakara jJAna ho mAna liyA
jAya to dUsare guNasthAna meM bhI sammaktava kA aMza hone ke kAraNa jJAna ko
ajJAna na pAnakara jAna hI mAnanA par3egA, jo ki iTE nahIM hai  /  iSTa na hone
kA sababa yahI hai ki amAna-nikameM do guNasthAna mAnane vAle bhI, dUsare
guNasthAna meM mati Adi ko ajJAna mAnate haiM  /  siddhAnta vAdI ke sivAya kisI
bhI kAmadhika vidvAn ko jhumare guNasthAna meM mati Adi ko jJAna bhAnamA iSTa
nahIM hai| isa kAraNa sAsAbana kI taraha mitraguNasthAna meM bhI mati Adi ko
ajJAna mAnakara ajJAna-trika tIna guNasthAna mAnanA yukta hai| acakSurvarzana
tathA cakSanarzana meM cAraha guNAna isa abhiprAya se - - - -. 1-'missabhi kA
missA" ityAdi  /  arthAt "mizraguNasthAna meM azAna, jJAna-mizrita hai|"

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Nyaya Part Four  Both of these philosophies are considered to be
*kshaatra-pashmika*. This means that they are absent during the *bhaamik* stage,
which corresponds to the 13th and 14th *gunasthanas*. This is because *kshaayik*
and *kshaayo-pashmik* knowledge cannot coexist with these philosophies.  **EX:**
The meaning of the last four *gunasthanas* in *chaaritra* is that *chaaritra* is
attained when the *mohaniya karma* arises, and the absence of *mohaniya karma*
persists from the 11th to the 14th *gunasthanas*. ||20||  *Mannaani sag jdhaai,
samaiyachey chau bunni pariharae. Kevalgi do charma jyaai hidume.* ||21||
*Manojnaane sapta yataadiini saamaayikchchede chatvaari pariharae. Kevaldvike he
charmae'yataadiini nava matishrutaavadhidvike.* ||11||  **Meaning:**  * In
*manah-paryaaya-gyaan*, there are seven *gunasthanas* starting with
*pramattasanyata*. * In *saamayik* and *chhedopasthaapaniya* *sanyam*, there are
four *gunasthanas* starting with *pramattasanyata*. * In *parihara-vishuddha-
sanyam*, there are *gunasthanas* starting with *pramattasanyata*. * In *keval*,
the last two *gunasthanas* are *mati-gyaan*, *shruta-gyaan*, and *avadhi-thik*.
These four *marganaas* have nine *gunasthanas* starting with *adhirata-samyag-
drishti*. ||214||  **Explanation:**  * The sixth to seventh *gunasthanas* are
present in *manah-paryaaya-gyaan*. The seventh *gunasthan* is attained at the
time of acquiring this knowledge, and other *gunasthanas* are attained after
that. * *Saamayik* and *chhevo-pasthaapaniya* are two *sanyams* that are
considered to be present in the sixth to tenth *gunasthanas*. This is because,
due to the absence of *veetraag-bhaav*, these *sraag-sanyams* are not possible
in the higher *gunasthanas*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma nya bhAga cAra mAne jAte haiM ki ukta donoM darzana kSAtrapazamika haiN|
isase bhAmikadarzana ke samaya arthAta terahaveM aura caudahaveM guNasthAna meM
unakA abhAva ho jAtA hai| kyoMki kSAyika aura kSAyopazamika jJAna varzana kA
sAhacarya nahIM rahatA  /  EX arrer cAritra meM antima cAra guNasthAna mAne jAne
kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki yathAsyAta cAritra mohanIya karma kA udaya eka jAne
para prApta hotA hai aura mohanIya karma kA udayAbhAva gyArahave se cauda hameM
taka cAra guNasthAnoM meM rahatA hai ||20| maNanANi saga jadhAI, samaiyacheya
cau bunni parihAre  /  kevalagi do caramA jayAi hidume  //  21  //  manojJAne
sapta yatAdIni sAmAyikacchede catvAri parihAre  /  kevaladvike he
carame'yatAdIni nava matizrutAvadhidvike  // 11 //  * artha - manaH paryAyajJAna
meM pramattasaMyata Adi sAta guNasthAna; sAmAyika tathA chedopasthApanIya-
saMyama meM pramattasaMyata Adi cAra guNasthAna; parihAravizuddhasaMyama meM
pramatasaMyata Adi vo guNasthAna; kevala hikameM antima do guNasthAna matijJAna,
zrutajJAna aura avadhiThika ina cAra mArgaNAoM meM adhiratasamyagdRSTi Adi no
guNasthAna haiM  /  /  214 . J mAvArtha mana paryAyajJAna vAle chaThe Adi sAta
guNasthAnoM meM vartamAna pAye jAte haiM  /  isa jJAna kI prApti ke samaya
sAtavA~ aura prApti ke bAda anya guNasthAna hote haiM  /  sAmAyika aura
chevopasthApanIya, ye do saMyama, chaThe Abi cAra guNasthAna meM mAne jAte haiM;
kyoMki vItarAga-bhAva hone ke kAraNa Upara ke guNasthAnoM meM ina sarAgasaMyamoM
kA saMbhava nahIM hai  /

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagrantha Part Four  In Pariharavishuddhasangraha, the sixth and seventh are
to be considered as Gunasthanas, as the श्रेणि cannot be attained while residing
in it.  Both Kevalgyan and Kevaldarshan are Kshayik. Bhashik-Shaam and Kshayik-
Darshan occur in the thirteenth and fourteenth Gunasthanas, hence they are
considered as such in Kevalasik.  Matimaan, Shrutagyan, and Avadhi-Dwikavale are
present in the nine Gunasthanas from the fourth to the twelfth. Because before
attaining Samyaktva, i.e., in the first three Gunasthanas, Mati etc. are in the
form of ignorance, and in the last Gunasthana, due to Kshayik-Upayog, their Amay
occurs.  Here, in 'Ayavidarshan', no Gunasthana is mentioned, according to the
Karmapranyik view. Karmapranyik scholars do not consider Avadhi Darshan in the
first three Gunasthanas. They say that the merging of Avadhi Darshan with
Vimanggyan should not be accepted. But according to the Siddhant, three more
Gunasthanas should be counted in it. Siddhant accepts Avadhi Darshan in the
first three Gunasthanas by considering it as merged with Vibhanggyan. || 21 ||
Ashtoopashame Chatvari Vedi, Khaye Ekadasha Mithyatrike Deshe. Sukshme Cha
Svasthanam Trayodasha Yoge Ahare Shuklaayam. || 22 ||  Meaning: In
Upashamasamyaktva, the fourth to eighth, in Vedak (Kshayopaamik-) Samyaktva, the
fourth to fourth, and in Kshayik Samyaktva, the eleventh. 1- See, Appendix 'I'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra parihAravizuddhasaMgrama meM rahakara zreNi nahIM kI A
sakatI isaliye usameM chaThA aura sAtavAM, ye ko hI guNasthAna samajhane cAhiye
/  kevalajJAna aura kevaladarzana donoM kSAyika haiM  /  bhASika-zAma aura
kSAyika-dharzana, terahaveM aura pauvaha guNasthAna meM hote haiM, isI se
kevalasika meM ukta vo guNasthAna mAne jAte haiN| matimAna, zrutajJAna aura
avadhi-dvikavAle, cauthe se lephara bArahaveM taka nau guNasthAna meM vartamAna
hote haiN| kyoMki samyaktatra prApta hone ke pahale arthAt pahale tIna
guNasthAnoM meM mati Adi ajJAnarUpa hI haiM aura antima dho guNasthAna meM
kSAyika-upayoga hone se inakA amAya hI ho jAtA hai| isa jagaha ayavidarzana' meM
natha guNasthAna kahe huye haiM, so kArmapranyika mata ke anusAra  /  kArmayika
vidvAna pahale tIna guNasthAnoM meM avadhiyarzana nahIM mAnate  /  ve kahate hai
ki vimaGgajJAna se avadhivarzana kI mimatA na mAnanI cAhiye  /  parantu
siddhAnta ke matAnusAra usameM aura bhI tIna guNasthAna ginane cAhiye  /
siddhAnto, vibhaGgajJAna se avadhivazena ko juvA mAnakara pahale tIna
guNasthAnoM meM bhI avaSivarzana mAnate haiM  /  /  21  //  aDa uvasami cau
vegi, khaie iphkAra micchatigi vese  /  suhame ya saTharaNaM tera.-sa joga AhAra
sukkAe  /  /  22  /  /  aSTopazame catvAri veda ke, kSAyika ekAdaza mithyAtrike
deze  /  sUkSme ca svasthAnaM trayodaza yoge AhAre zuklAyAm  //  22  //
arthaupazamasamyaktava meM cauthA Adi ATha, vedaka (kSAyopamika-) samyaktva meM
cauthA Avi cAra aura kSAyikasabhyaSaya cIyA 1-dakhiye, pariziSTa 'i  / '

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 86 ## Chapter Four of the Kamm Granth  There are eleven **Gunasthanas**
(stages of spiritual progress) in **Aabhi** (the state of being a Jain). In
**Mithyatva-Trika** (the three aspects of false belief: **Mithyadristi**,
**Saasvadan**, and **Mishrashakti**), **Deshaviriti** (renunciation of worldly
attachments), and **Sukshma Samparaya Charitra** (subtle conduct), each has its
own unique **Gunasthan**. In **Yoga** and **Shuklaleshyamargna**, there are
thirteen **Gunasthanas**. || 22 ||  **Aharak** (the state of being a Jain who
consumes food) and **Bhavarth** (the meaning of the text) - In **Upsham
Samyaktv** (the state of being a Jain who has attained partial liberation),
there are eight **Gunasthanas**. Of these, the first four **Gunasthanas** are
attained when one achieves **Granthi-Mev-Janaya Pratham Samyaktv** (the first
stage of liberation), and the last four **Gunasthanas** are attained when one
enters the **Upsham Shreni** (the stage of partial liberation).  **Ved
Samyaktv** (the state of being a Jain who has attained complete liberation)
occurs only when **Sammohaniya** (the subtle karmas that hinder liberation)
arises. **Samyaktvamohaniya** (the karmas that hinder liberation) arises until
the beginning of the **Shreni** (the stage of liberation) {until the seventh
**Gunasthan**}. Therefore, in **Vedak Samyaktv**, only the fourth to the eighth
**Gunasthanas** should be considered.  In the fourth and fifth **Gunasthanas**
onwards, **Kshayik Samyaktv** (the state of being a Jain who has attained
complete liberation) is attained, which remains for the **Sava** (the soul).
This is why the fourth to the eleventh **Gunasthanas** are mentioned in
**Kshayik Samyaktv**.  1 - See, Appendix ' '  The first **Gunasthan** is
**Mithyaswaroop** (the state of false belief), the third is **Mishra Drishti**
(the state of mixed belief), and the fifth is **Sukshma Samparaya Charitra**
(the state of subtle conduct). This is why each **Gunasthan** is mentioned in
**Sukshma Samparaya**.  There are thirteen **Gunasthanas** in the six **Margna**
(paths) of **Yoga**, **Aharak**, and **Shuklaleshya**; because at the fourteenth
**Gunasthan**, there is no **Yoga** of any kind, no food is consumed, and
**Leshya** (the subtle karmas that hinder liberation) is not possible.  The
mention of thirteen **Gunasthanas** in **Yoga** refers to the general **Yogas**
like **Manoyoga** (mental yoga) etc.  The second is **Saasvadan** (the state of
enjoying the senses), the third is **Bhavaroop** (the state of being in the form
of emotions), the fourth is **Deshaviriti** (the state of renunciation of
worldly attachments), and the tenth is **Mithyatva Trika** (the three aspects of
false belief), **Beshaviriti** (the state of renunciation of worldly
attachments), and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 86 kamagrantha bhAga cAra Abi gyAraha guNasthAna haiN| mithyAtva- trika
(midhyAdRSTi sAsvAdana aura mizraSTi) meM, dezavirati meM tathA sUkSmasamparAya
caritra meM sva-sva sthAna ( apanA-apanA eka hI guNasthAna ) hai  /  yoga,
zuklaleAmArgaNA meM pahale teraha guNasthAna hai  /  /  22  /  /  AhAraka aura
bhAvArtha - upazamasamyaktva meM ATha guNasthAna mAne haiN| inameM se cothA
bharavi cAra guNasthAna, granthi-meva-janya prathama samyaktva pAte samaya aura
AThavI Adi cAra guNasthAna, upazamazreNI karate samaya hote haiM  /
vedasamyatva tabhI hotA hai| jaba ki sammohanIya kA udaya ho  /
samyaktavamohanIya kA udaya zreNI kA Arambha na hone taka { sAtaveM guNasthAna
taka rahatA hai  /  isa kAraNa vedakasamyaktava meM cauthe se lekara cAra hI
guNasthAna samajhane cAhiye  /  cauthe aura pAMcaveM Adi guNasthAna meM
kSAyikasamyaktava prApta hotA hai, jo savA ke liye rahatA hai; isI se usameM
cauthA Adi gyAraha guNasthAna kahe gaye haiM  /  1 - dekhiye, pariziSTa ' '
pahalA hI guNasthAna mithyAsvarUpa, tIsarA hI mizra dRSTirUpa, pA~catra hI
sUkSmasamparAyacAritrarUpa hai| isI se sUkSmasamparAya meM eka-eka gRNasthAna
kahA gayA hai  /  tIna prakAra kA yoga, AhAraka' aura zulkalezyA, ina chaha
mArgaNAoMmeM teraha guNasthAna hote haiM; kyoMki caudahaveM guNasthAna ke samaya
na to kisI prakAra kA yoga rahatA hai, na kisI taraha kA AhAra grahaNa kiyA jAtA
hai aura na lezyA kA hI sambhava hai| yoga meM teraha guNasthAnoM kA kathana
manoyoga Adi sAmAnya yogoM dUsarA hI sAsvAdana - bhAvarUpa, deza viratirUpa aura
dasavA~ ho mithyAtva trika, bezavirati aura

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Kangranth Part Four  This is expected from the fourth part of the Kangranth.
The Ganasthanas are as follows, in relation to the specific Ghogs of
Satyamanyog, etc.:  (a) In the five Yogas of Satyamana, Asatyamrishamana, Satya
Vachan, Asatyamrishavachan, and Audarik, there are thirteen Gunasthanas.  (b) In
the four of Asatyamana, Mithmana, Asatyavachan, and Mishravachan, there are the
first twelve Gunasthanas.  (c) In Audarikmitra and Farmankayadyog, there are
four Gunasthanas: the first, second, fourth, and thirteenth.  (d) In
Vaikriyfayayog, there are the first seven Gunasthanas, and in
Kriyamishrakayayog, there are five Gunasthanas: the first, second, fourth,
fifth, and sixth.  (e) In Aharakkayayog, there are two Gunasthanas: the sixth
and seventh, and in Aharakamadhakayayog, there is only the sixth Gunasthan. ||
22 ||  Asannisus Padhambugan, Padhamtileshasu Chach Dusus Satt.
Padhamtidgagajaya, Anahare Magganasu Guna. || 23 || Asanji Pu Prathamadvik,
Prathamapileshyasu Shat Cha Dvamosmpt. Prathamaatidvikayatan Yatanahare
Marganasu Guna. || 23 ||  In Arthsanji, the first two Gunasthanas are found. In
the three Leshyas of Krishna, Neel, and Kapoot, there are the first six
Gunasthanas, and in Sej and Padam, there are the first seven Gunasthanas. In
Anaharfamargna, there are five Gunasthanas: the first two, the last one, and
Aviratsamyagdristi. Thus, the description of Gunasthanas in Margna is complete.
|| 23 ||  Meaning: In Asanji, the Gunasthanas are described. The first Gunasthan
is for all types of Attis, and the second is for some Asanjis, those who are
Asanji, Karan-Aparayapt Ekendiry Avi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kA~grantha bhAga cAra kI apekSA se kiyA gayA hai  /  satyamanoyoga Adi vizeSa
ghogoM ko apekSA se gaNasthAna isa prakAra haiM (ka) satyamana, asatyAmRSAmana,
satyavacana, asatyAmRSAvacana aura audArika, ina pAMca yogoM meM teraha
guNasthAna haiN| (kha) asatyamama, mithamana, asatyavacana, aura mizravacana,
isa cAra meM pahale bAraha guNasthAna haiN| (ga) audArikamitra tathA
phArmaNakAyadyoga meM pahalA, bUsarA, cauthA aura terahavA, ye cAra gaNasthAna
haiN| (gha) vaikriyaphAyayoga me pahale sAta aura kriyamizrakAyayoga meM pahalA,
dUsarA, cauthA, pAMcanA aura chaThA, ya pA~ca gaNasthAna hai| (ca.
AhArakakAyayoga meM chaThA aura sAtavAM, ye do aura AhArakAmadhakAyayoga meM
kevala chaThA gaNasthAna hai  //  22  //  assannisu paDhamabugaM,
paDhamatilesAsu chacca dusu stt| pahamatidgaajayA, aNahAre maggaNAsu guNA  // 23
//  asaMjJi pu prathamadvika, prathamapilezyAsu SaT ca dvamosmapta  /
prathamAtidvikAyatAnyatAhAre mArgaNAsu guNAH  /  /  23  //  arthasaMjJi proM meM
pahale do guNasthAna pAye jAte haiN| kRSNa, nIla aura kApota, ina tIna lezyAoM
meM pahale chaha guNasthAna aura seja; aura padma, ina tIna lezyAoM meM pahale
sAta guNasthAna hai  /  anA. hAraphamArgaNA meM pahale do, antima vo aura
aviratasamyagdRSTi, ye pA~ca guNasthAna haiN| isa prakAra mArgaNAoM meM
guNasthAna kA varNana huA  /  /  23  //  mAvArtha- asaMjI meM bo gaNasthAna kahe
hue haiM  /  pahalA gupasthAna saba prakAra ke attiyoM ko hotA hai aura dUsarA
kucha asaMzioMko aise asaMjI, karaNa -aparyApta ekendriya Avi hI hai, kyoMki

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Nanth, Part Four, Chapter 88  No being takes birth with the taste of
the five senses in the central adi, which is insufficient for the senses.  The
six gunasthans are considered to be in the three leshyas of Krishna, Neel and
Kapoth. The first four gunasthans are such that the said three leshyas are
present at the time of their attainment and also after their attainment. But the
fifth and sixth are not like that. These two gunasthans are of the form of
samyaktvam and virati. Therefore, their attainment occurs at the time of the
tejas maavi shubh leshyas. Not at the time of the Krishna etc. ashubh leshyas.
Even though attainment happens, the ashubh leshyas also come in those gunasthans
due to the remaining two of the narinam-gi.  Sometimes, the first four
gunasthans are said to be in the three ashubh leshyas of Krishna etc. This is
because, with respect to the time of attainment, i.e., at the time of the said
three leshyas, no other gunasthans can be attained except the first four.  In
the Sejolelya and Papaleshya, the first seven gunasthans are considered. This is
because, with respect to the pratipadyaman and purvapratipan, i.e., at the time
of attaining the seven gunasthans and also after attaining them, the said two
leshyas remain.  1. This same thing is said by Shri Bhadra Bahuswami:
"Sammatsuyam sadhya, su lahai sudhasu tisuy charetam. Pudhapariyano pun,
annayarie u lesae." (22)  Necessary appointment, page 3. Meaning: "The
attainment of samyaktvam happens in all leshyas, the attainment of charitra
happens only in the last three shudh leshyas. But after the attainment of
charitra, any leshya can come in the six."  2. For this, see Panchasangrah,
Dwaar 1, Ga 30 and Bandhaswamitva, Ga 24 and Jeevakaand Ga, 531.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmanantha bhAga cAra 88 sabdhi-aparyApta e kendriya Adi meM koI jIva
sAsvAdana-mAvasahita Akara janma grahaNa nahIM krtaa| kRSNa, nIla aura kApota,
ina tIna leNyAoM meM chaha gugasthAna mAne jAte haiM  /  inameM se pahale cAra
gaNasthAna aise haiM ki jinako prApti ke samaya aura prApti ke bAva bhI ukta
tIna lezyAeM hotI haiM  /  parantu pAMcoM aura chaThA, ye vo guNasthAna aise
nahIM haiN| ye ko gaNasthAna samyaktabamUsaka viratirUpa haiN| isaliye unakI
prApti tejaH mAvi zubha lezyAoM ke samaya hotI hai| kRSNa Adi azubha lezyAoM ke
samaya nahIM  /  to bhI prApti ho jAne ke gAla nariNAma-gi duI ke rahana vo
guNasthAnoM meM azubha lezyAeM bhI A jAtI hai| kahIM-kahIM kRSNa Adi tIna azubha
lezyAoM meM pahale cAra hI gaNasyAna kahe gaye haiM, so prApti-kAla kI apekSA se
arthAt ukta tIna leNyAoM ke samaya pahale cAra gaNasthAnoM ke sivAya anya koI
guNasthAna prApta nahIM kiyA jA sktaa| sejolelyA aura papalezyA meM pahale sAta
ga NasthAna mAne hue haiM, so pratipadyamAna aura pUrvapratipana, bonoM ko
apekSA se arthAt sAta gaNasthAnoM ko pAne ke samaya aura pAne ke bAda bhI ukta
do lezyAe~ rahatI haiN| 1yahI bAta zrIbhadra bAhusvAmI ne hI hai: "sammattasuyaM
sadhyA,-su lahai suddhAsu tIsu ya caritaM  /  pudhdhapariyanno puNa, annayarIe u
lesAe  // 22 // " Avazyaka-niyukti, pR03 marthAt "samyaktva kI prApti saba
lezyAoM meM hotI hai, cAritra kI prApti pichalI tIna zuddha lezyAoM meM hI hotI
hai  /  parantu cAritra prApta hone ke bAda chaha meM se koI lezyA A sakatI
hai|" 2. isake liye dekhiye, paJcasaMgraha, dvAra 1, gA 30 tathA bandhasvAmitva
, gAva 24 aura jIvakANDa gA, 531  /

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagrantha Part Four  The first, second, fourth, thirteenth, and Dhobahara are
the five Gunasthanas mentioned in Anaharakmarg. The first three Gunasthanas are
in relation to the Anaharak state during the Vigrahagati-kalin period, the
thirteenth Gunasthan is in relation to the Anaharasha state that occurs in the
third, fourth, and fifth times of Kelisamudhat, and the fourteenth Gunasthan
should be understood in relation to the Anaharak state that arises from Yoga-
nirodha.  It is sometimes written that death does not occur in the third,
twelfth, and thirteenth Gunasthanas, but it is possible in the remaining eleven
Gunasthanas. Therefore, there is a doubt here: if death is possible in the
remaining eleven Gunasthanas, then why are only the first, second, and fourth
Gunasthanas considered in Vigrahagati?  The solution is that the statement about
the presence of the aforementioned eleven Gunasthanas at the time of death is
based on practical death (referring to the final time of the present bhava, in
which the moksha becomes death-prone), not on certain death. The primary
emergence of the lifespan of Parbhaksha is certain death. At that time, the jiva
is devoid of Virati. The relationship of Vatika is only up to the final time of
the present bhava. Therefore, in the time of certain death, i.e., in
Vigrahagati, the fifth to eighth Gunasthanas, which have Virati, are not
possible, except for the first, second, and fourth Gunasthanas. || 23 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra anAhArakamArgaNA meM pahalA, dUsarA, cauthA, terahavAM
aura dhobaharA, ye pA~ca guNasthAna kahe hue haiN| inameM se pahale tIna
guNasthAna vigrahagati-kAlIna anAhAraka-avasthA kI apekSA se, terahavAM
gaNasthAna kelisamuddhAta ke tIsare, cauthe aura pAMcaveM samaya meM hone vAlI
anAhAraSA avasthA kI apekSA se  /  aura cauda vA~ guNasthAna yoga-nirodhajanya
anAhAraka-avasthA kI apekSA se samajhanA caahiye| kahIM-kahIM yaha likhA huA
milatA hai ki tIsare, bArahaveM aura terahaveM, ina tIna gupae sthAnoM meM
maraNa nahIM hotA, zeSa gyAraha gaNasthAnoM meM isakA saMbhava hai| isaliye isa
jagaha yaha zaGkA hotI hai ki jaba uksa zeSa gyAraha guNasthAnoM meM maraNa kA
saMbhava hai, taba vigrahagati meM pahalA, dUsarA aura cauthA, ye tIna hI
guNasthAna kyoM mAne jAte haiM? isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki maraNa ke samaya
ukta gyAraha gaNasthAnoM ke pAye jAne kA kayana hai, so vyAvahArika maraNa ko
lekara { vartamAna bhavakA antima samaya, jisameM moSa maraNonmukha ho jAtA hai,
usako lekara ), nizcaya maraNa ko lekara nahIM  /  parabhakSa kI Ayu kA
prAthamika udaya, nizcaya bharaNa hai| usa samaya jIva virati-rahita hotA hai  /
vitikA sambandha vartamAna bhava ke antima samaya taka hI hai  /  isaliye
nizcaya maraNa-kAla meM arthAt vigrahagati meM pahale, dUsare aura cauthe
guNasthAna ko chor3akara virativAle pAMcaveM Adhi ATha gaNasthAnoM kA saMbhava
hI nahIM hai  /  /  23  //

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Firmgrandamag Four (3) - Yoga in Marganas. [From six stanzas.]
Sanayaramisas, Chamosamanvaviuviahara. Uralan Misa Kamman, Iya Joga
Kammanahhare. ||24|| Satyetaramithasatyamrupamanovacho Kurvikahaarakani. Orarik
Mithani Kamanamiti Yoga: Kamanamanahhare. ||24||  Mayam-Sarap, Asaty, Misra
(Satyasaty) and Asatyamrus, these four are the types of Manoyoga. Vachmayoga is
also of the same four types. Vaikriya, Aharak and Audarik, these three are pure
and these same three are mixed, and Farman, in this way there are seven types of
Kayayoga. Altogether there are fifteen Yogas.  Anaharak-Avastha mein Karman
Kayayoga hota hai. ||24||  The nature of the types of Manoyoga:  Meaning - (1)
The Manoyoga which contemplates the true nature of the object; for example: the
Jiva is eternal from the perspective of Tasyapikanaya and non-eternal from the
perspective of Paryanathikanaya, etc., that is 'Sarayamanoyoga'.  (2) The
Manoyoga which contemplates the opposite of the true nature of the object; for
example: the Jiva is one or eternal, etc., that is 'Asatyamanoyoga'.  (3) The
Manoyoga which contemplates a mixture of truth and falsehood in some part; for
example: a person has good and bad qualities, but still he is considered...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pharmagrandamAga cAra (3)-mArgaNAoM meM yoga  /  [ chaha gAthAoM se  /   /
sanayaramIsaasa, camosamaNavAviuviyAhArA  /  uralaM mIsA kammaNa, iya jogA
kammamaNahAre  // 24 //  satyetaramithAsatyamRpamanovaco kurvikAhArakANi  /
orArika mithANi kAmaNamiti yogA: kAmaNamanAhAre  //  24 //  mayaM-sarapa,
asatya, mizra (satyAsatya ) aura asatyAmRSa, ye cAra meSa manoyoga ke haiN|
bacamayoga bhI ukta cAra prakAra kA hI hai| vaikriya, AhAraka aura audArika, ye
sIna zuddha tathA ye hI tIna mizra aura phArmaNa, isa taraha sAta bheda kAyayoga
ke hai  /  saba milAkara pandraha yoga hue  /  anAhAraka-avasthA meM kArmaNa
kAyayoga ho hotA hai  //  24  //  manoyoga ke bhaMvoM kA svarUpaH bhAvArtha-( 1
) jisa manoyogahArA vastu kA mathArtha svarUpa vidhArA jAya; jaise:-jIva
tasyApikanaya se nitya aura paryANathikanaya se anitya hai, ityAvi, vaha
'sarayamanoyoga' hai|| (2) jisa manoyoga se vastu ke svarUpa kA viparIta cintana
ho; jaise:jIva eka hI hai yA nitya hI hai, ityA , vaha 'asatyamanoyoga hai| ( 3
) kisI aMza meM yathArtha aura kisI aMza meM ayathArtha, aisa mizrita cinsana,
jisa manoyoga ke dvArA ho, vaha mizramanoyoga hai| jaise:-kisI vyakti meM guNa-
vauSa dhonoM ke hote hue bhI use sipa

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four: Understanding Bosh  This section contains a portion
of falsehood, as qualities, like faults, are questioned in the form of Bosh.
(4) The method of imagination performed by the Mano Yoga, which is devoid of
rules and prohibitions - the imagination that neither establishes nor removes
any object, is called "Asatyamutshyamano Yoga". For example: "Oh Devavasa! Oh
Indravata! Syad!" The intention of this imagination is merely to address the
Dhyapravakta in the previous action, not to establish or remove any element.
The above four are in relation to the Dhyabaharanayaka. Because from the
perspective of certainty, everything is included in the categories of truth and
falsehood. In other words, the Mano Yoga that does not involve deceit or
cunning, whether it is mixed or Asatyamutshyam, should be considered "Satyamano
Yoga". Conversely, the Mano Yoga that contains an element of deceit or cunning
is "Asatyamano Yoga".  **The Nature of the Divisions of Vachan Yoga:**  (1) The
"Vachan Yoga" that establishes the true nature of an object, for example, saying
that the Jiva is both Satrupa and Asatrupa, is "Asatyavachan Yoga".  (2) The
Vachan Yoga that proves an object falsely is "Asatyavachan Yoga", for example,
saying that there is no such thing as Dharma or that there is no such thing as
merit and demerit.  (3) The Vachan Yoga that presents a multi-faceted object as
singular is "Mishravachan Yoga", for example, calling a forest of various trees
like mango, neem, and machi, simply a mango forest.  (4) The "Vachan Yoga" that
is used to establish or remove an object...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra boSI samajhanA  /  ha sameM eka aMza mithyA hai, kyoMki
doSa kI taraha guNa bhI boSa rUpa se savAla kiye jAte haiM  /  (4) jisa mamoyoga
ke dvArA kI jAne vAlI kalpanA vidhi-niSedhazUnya ho-jo kalpanA, na to kisI vastu
kA sthApana hI pharaso ho aura na utthApana, vaha 'asatyAmUTaSAmanoyoga hai  /
ase:-he devavasa  /  he indravatta  /  syAdi  /  isa kalpanA kA abhiprAya agya
kArya meM dhyapravyakti ko sambodhita karanA mAtra hai. kisI tatva ke sthApana-
utthApana kA nhiiN| ukta cAra meva, ghyabahAranayako apekSA se haiN| kyoMki
nizcaya haSTi se sabakA samAveza satya aura asatya, ina vo bhedoM meM hI ho jAtA
hai  /  arthAt jisa manoyoga meM chala-kapaTa kI buddhi nahIM hai, cAhe mizna ho
yA asatSAmRSa, use 'satyamanoyoga' hI samalanA cAhiye  /  isake viparIta jisa
manoyoga meM chala-kapaTa kA aMza hai, vaha 'asatyamanoyoga' hI hai| vacana yoga
ke bhedoM kA svarUpa: (1) jisa 'vacanayoga' ke dvArA vastu kA yathArtha svarUpa
syApita kiyA jAya; jaise:-yaha kahanA ki jIba satrUpa bhI hai aura asapa mo,
vaha 'asatyavacanayoga' hai  /  2) kisI vastu ko ayathArtha rupa se siddha
karane vAlA bacanapoga, 'asatyavacanayoga hai; jaise:-yaha kahanA ki AramA koI
poja nahI hai yA puNya-pApa kucha bhI nahIM hai  /  (3) aneka rUpa vastu ko
ekarupa hI pratipAdana karane vAlA vacanayoga mizravacanamoga' hai  /
jaise:-Ama, nIma, mAci aneka prakAra ke vRkSoM ke vana ko Ama kA ho yana kahanA,
ityAdi  /  (4) jo 'vacanayoga' kisI vastu ke sthApana-utthApana ke liye

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four, Chapter 2  **2.**  When something is not brought
about, it is called **Asatyamushvavachanayoga**. For example, calling out "Hey
Bhojavatta! Hey Mitrasena!" to get someone's attention are just words of
address, not establishment or raising. Just like **Manoyoga** in **Yoga**, one
should understand **Satya** and **Asatya** as the two **Medas** from the
**Tattva-shti**.  **The Nature of the Divisions of Kayayoga:**  **(3)** The
activity of the **Viryashakti** through the **Vaikriya** body alone is called
**Kayayoga**. This **Yoga** is present in both **Devas** and **Narakas** in
their **Paryapta** state. In humans and **Tiryachas**, it occurs only after they
acquire a **Kriya** body from the forest of **Vaikriya** attainment.
**Vaikriya** body refers to the body that is sometimes one and sometimes many,
sometimes small, sometimes large, sometimes **Akasha-gami**, sometimes **Bhoomi-
gami**, sometimes **Rahya**, and sometimes **Avashya**. Such a **Kriya** body is
obtained by **Devas** and **Narakas** from the time of birth; therefore, it is
called **Gati**. The **Vaikriya** body of humans and **Tiryachas** is called
**Labdhipratyaya** because they obtain such a body due to **Labdhi**, not from
birth.  **-**  **Bhavana:**  **(2)** The activity of the **Viryashakti** through
both the **Kriya** and **Karmna** bodies, and the **Vaikriya** and **Audarika**
bodies, is called **Vaikriya-Mishra-Kayayoga**. The first type of **Vaikriya-
Mishra-Kayayoga** is present in **Devas** and **Narakas** from the time of their
birth until their **Aparyapta** state. The second type of **Kriya-Mishra-
Kayayoga** is found in humans and **Tiryachas** when they begin and abandon the
**Vaikriya** body with the help of **Labdhi**.  **(3)** The activity of the
**Viryashakti** through the **Aharaka** body alone is called **Aharaka-
Kayayoga**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 2 pravRta nahIM hotA, vaha asatyAmuSavacanayoga hai|
jaise: kisI kA dhyAna apanI ora khIMcane ke liye kahanA ki he bhojavatta | he
mitrasena ! ityAdi pada sambodhanamAtra haiM, sthApana utthApana nahIM  /  yoga
ke bho manoyoga kI taraha, tattva-STi se satya aura asatya, ye vo hI meda
samajhane cAhiye  /  kAyayoga ke bhedoM kA svarUpaH (3) sirpha vaikriya zarIra
ke dvArA vIrya-zakti kA jo vyApAra hotA haiM, vaha 'kAyayoga'  /  yaha yoga,
devoM tathA mArakoM ko paryApta avasthA meM saba hI hotA hai  /  aura manuSyoM
tathA tiryoM ko vaikriya labdhi ke vana se kriyazarIra dhAraNa kara lene para hI
hotA hai| vaikiya zarIra' usa zarIra ko kahate haiM, jo kabhI ekarUpa aura kabhI
aneka rUpa hotA hai, tathA kabhI choTA, kabhI bar3A mo AkAza-gAmI, kabhI bhUmi-
gAmI, kabhI rahaya aura kabhI avazya hotA hai  /  aisA-caM kriyazarIra devoM
tathA nArakoM ko janma samaya se hI prApta hotA hai; isaliye vaha 'gati'
kahalAtA hai| manuSyoM tathA tiryaJcakA vaikriyazarIra 'labdhipratyaya' kahalAtA
hai; kyoMki unheM aisA zarIra, labdhi ke nimitta se prApta hotA hai, janma se
nahIM  /  - bhAvAna (2) kriya aura kArmaNa tathA vaikriya aura audArika, ina
dodo zarIroM ke dvArA hone vAlA bIyaM zakti kA vyApAra, rvakri mizrakAyayoga'
hai  /  pahale prakAra kA vaikriyamizrakAyayoga, devoM tathA nArakoM ko utpatti
ke dUsare samaya se lekara aparyApta avasthA taka rahatA hai  /  dUsare prakAra
kA kriyamiva kAyayoga, manuSyoM aura tiryaJcoM meM lakhI pAyA jAtA hai jaba ki
ve labdhi ke sahAre se vaikriya zarIra kA Arambha aura parityAga karate haiM  /
(3) sirpha AhAraka zarIra kI sahAyatA se hone varanA vIrya-zakti kA vyApAra,
'AhArakakAyayoga' hai  /

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **(4)** 'Aharakamiithkaay Yoga' is the activity of
the *virya-shakti* (life force) that occurs through the *Aharak* and *Audarik*
bodies. *Aharakamiithkaay Yoga* occurs when the *Aharak* body is taken on and
when it is abandoned. *Atuurdashpoovarth* Munis (ascetics) create *Aharak*
bodies through *vishist-labdhi* (special attainment) to go to another region to
meet a Tirthankara, to dispel doubts, to know a subtle subject, or to see
prosperity.  **(5)** *Audarikkaay Yoga* is the activity of the *virya-shakti*
that occurs only through the *Audarik* body. This yoga occurs in all *Audarik*
bodied beings in the *paryaapt-dasha* (sufficient state). The body that
Tirthankaras and other great beings take on, through which liberation can be
attained, which requires a small amount of *puv* (past) *kalas* (time periods)
to form, and which is made of flesh, blood, and nerves, is called the *Audarik*
body.  **(6)** The activity of the *virya-shakti* that occurs with the help of
both the *Audarik* and *Kaarman* bodies is called *Audarikamiithkaay Yoga*. This
yoga occurs in all *Audarik* bodied beings from the second time of birth until
the *aparyaapt* (insufficient) state.  **(7)** The tendency of the *virya-
shakti* that occurs only through the *Kaarman* body is called *Kaarmankaay
Yoga*. This yoga occurs in all beings during the *vigrah* (disintegration) state
and at the first time of birth. It also occurs in *keli* (pleasure) *samudhaat*
(accumulation) at the third, fourth, and fifth times. The *Kaarman* body is made
of *karm-pudgalas* (karmic particles) and is mixed with the *aatma* (soul) in
the same way that milk is mixed with water. The *Kaarman* body is the foundation
of all bodies, meaning that when this body is completely destroyed, the cycle of
rebirth ends. The being then takes a new birth...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra (4) 'AhArakamithakAya yoga' vIrya-zakti kA yaha vyApAra
hai, jo AhAraka aura audArika, ina do zaroroM ke dvArA hotA hai| AhAraka zarIra
dhAraNa karane ke samaya, AhArakazarIra aura usakA ArammaparityAga karane ke
samaya AhArakamizrakAyayoga hotA haiN| aturdazapUrvadhara muni, saMzaya dUra
karane, kisI sUkSma viSaya ko jAnane athavA samRddhi dekhane ke nimitta, dUsare
kSetra meM tIrthara ke pAsa jAne ke liye viziSTa-labdhi ke dvArA AhAraphazarIra
banAte haiM  /  (5) aucArikakAyayoga, borya-zakti kA vaha vyApAra hai, jo sirpha
audArika zArIra se hotA hai  /  yaha yoga, saba audArikazarIrI joyoM ko
paryApta-dazA meM hotA hai  /  jisa zarIra ko tIrthaGkara Adi mahAna puruSa
dhAraNa karate haiM, jisase mokSa prApta kiyA jA sakatA hai, jisake banane meM
miDI ke samAna thor3e puva gloM kI AvazyakatA hotI hai aura jo mAMsa-hallI aura
nasa Adhi avayavoM se banA hotA hai, yahI zarIra, 'audArika' kahalAtA hai| (6)
vIrya-zakti kA jo vyApAra, audArika aura kArmaNa ina donoM zarIroM kI sahAyatA
se hotA hai, vaha 'aucArikamizrakAyoga' hai  /  yaha yoga, utpatti ke dUsare
samaya se lekara aparyApta avasthA paryanta saba audAriphabArIrI jIvoM ko hotA
hai  /  (7) sirpha kArmaNazarIra ko masta se vIrya-zakti kI jo pravRtti hotI
hai, vaha 'phArmaNakAyayoga' haiN| yaha yoga, vigraha gati meM tathA utpatti ke
prathama samaya meM saba jIvoM ko hotA hai  /  aura kelisamuddhAta ke tIsare,
cauthe aura pAMcaveM samaya meM pheklI ko hotA hai  /  kArmaNazarIra' yaha hai,
jo kabhaM-pudAloM se banA hotA hai aura AtmAke pradezoM meM isa taraha milA
rahatA hai, jisa taraha dUdha meM pAna.  /  saba zarIroM ko aDa, phArmaNazarIra
hI hai arthAt jaba isa zarIra kA samUsa nAza hotA hai, tabhI saMsAra kA uccheda
ho jAtA hai  /  jIva, naye janmako

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  When a being goes from one place to another to
receive something, it is enveloped by a body. This body is so subtle that even
though it has a form, it cannot be perceived by the eyes or other senses. This
body is called "Sookshma Sharira" or "Ling Sharira" in the Vaishnavic
scriptures.  Although another body called "Tejas" is also considered, which
digests the consumed food and is used by specific lump-bearing ascetics for
Tejo-leshya. Therefore, it may be doubted whether Tejas-kayayoga is also
necessary like Karman-kayayoga.  The solution to this doubt is that Tejas-
sharira and Karman-sharira are always together. That is, the liberated soul
sometimes leaves the Karman-sharira, but never the Tejas-sharira. Therefore, the
activity of the vital force, which is done through the Karman-sharira, is also
done by the Tejas-sharira according to the rules. Therefore, Tejas-kayayoga is
included in Karman-kayayoga. Hence, it is not considered separately.  **The
concept of Yoga in the Eight Paths:**  Of the fifteen Yogas discussed above,
Karman-kayayoga is the only one found in the Anaharak-Ayaspa state. The
remaining Yogas are found only in the Aharak state. It is not a rule that
Karman-kayayoga occurs only in the Anaharak state. Because even in the
fourteenth Gunasthan, in the Anaharak state, there is a kind of...  "The nature
of the said subtle body is described as 'Saptadarshak Lingam'." - Saankhya
Darshan - Chapter 3, Verse 1.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra grahaNa karane ke liye jaba eka sthAna se dusare sthAna
ko jAtA hai, tama vaha ! so zarIra se veSTita rahatA hai  /  yaha zarIra itanA
sUkSma hai ki vAha rupavAlA hone para bhI netra mAvi indriyoM kA viSaya bana
nahIM sakatA  /  isI zarIra ko vasare vArzanika granthoM meM 'sUkSmazarIra' yA
'liGgazarora' _ yadyapi tejasa nAma kA eka aura bhI zArIra mAnA gayA hai, jo ki
khAye hue AhAra ko pacAtA hai aura viziSTa lampi-dhArI tapasvI, jisakI sahAyatA
se tejolezyA kA prayoga karate haiM  /  isaliye yaha zaGkA ho sakatI hai ki
phArmaNakAyayoga ke samAna taMjasakAyayoga bhI mAnanA Avazyaka hai| isa zaGka kA
samAdhAna yaha hai ki tejasazarIra aura phArmaNArIrakA sabA sAhacarya rahatA
hai| arthAt audArika Avi anya zarIra. kabhI-kabhI kArmaNazarIra ko chor3a bhI
dete haiN| para tejasazarIra use kabhI nahIM chor3anA  /  isaliye vIrya-zakti kA
jo vyApAra, kArmaNazarIra ke dvArA hotA hai, vahI niyama se tejasa zarIra ke
dvArA bhI hotA rahatA hai  /  ata: kAmaNakAya yoga meM hI tejasakAyayoga kA
samAveza ho AtA hai| isaliye usako judA nahIM ginA hai  /  ATha mArgaNAoM meM
yoga kA vicAra: Upara jina pandraha yogoM kA vicAra kiyA gayA hai unameM se
kArmaNa kAyayoga hI aisA hai, jo anAhAraka-ayaspA meM pAyA jAtA hai  /  zeSa
baudaha yoga, AhAraka avasthA meM hI hote haiM  /  yaha niyama nahIM hai ki
amAhAraka-avasthA meM kAmaNakAyayoga hotA hI hai| kyoMki caurahaveM guNasthAna
meM anAhAraka-avasthA hone para bhI kisI taraha kA 1' uktasya sUkSmazArIrasya
svarUpamAha"saptadarzaka liGgam  /  /  .-sAkhya darzana-a0 3, sU0  /   /

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four  **Chapter 4**  Karmayoga does not occur. It is not a
rule that during the time of Karmakayayoga, the Anaharaka state is necessary.
Because even when Karmakayayoga occurs at the moment of birth, the being is not
Anaharaka, but rather takes nourishment through that very Yoga. However, it is a
rule that when a being is in the Anaharaka state, no other Yoga occurs except
Karmakayayoga. Therefore, in the Anaharaka state, only Karmakayayoga is
considered. ||24||  **Verse 25**  Naragani, Ditsatannu,
Achakhyunaranapusakasamvumage, Sannichale Sahaaraga, Bhavamuohidage Sabve.
||25||  **Verse 25**  Na Ragatapanceindriya Yatra Sa Tanvanakshanaranapusaka
Kakshayasamyavaddhike, Manjishangleshyahaaraka Bhavyamitishrutaavavidvivve
Sarve. ||25||  **Meaning:**  Human path, Panchepriya jati, Prasaphaya, Kayayoga,
Achadarshan, Purushaved, Napusaka Ved, four Kshayas, Kshayika and Bayopashamike,
these two Sammatvatvas, Sanji, six Leshyas, Aharaka, Bhavy, Matimaan, Shrutagyan
and Avadhi Dvik. In these twenty-six Marganas, all fifteen Yogas occur. ||25||
**Meaning:**  The above twenty-six Marganas are mentioned because all of them
are related to the human Paryaya, and all Yogas are possible in the human
Paryaya.  Although it is sometimes stated that Karmayoga does not occur in the
Aharaka Margana, and the remaining fourteen Yogas occur, this does not seem
logical. Because at the first moment of birth, no other Yoga is possible except
Karmayoga. Therefore, at that time, Mahakasva can be reduced through Karmayoga.
The nourishment taken at the first moment of birth, in which...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagranya bhAga cAra yoga nahIM hotA  /  yaha bho niyama nahIM hai ki
kArmaNAkAyayoga ke samaya anAhAraka-avasthA avazya hotI hai| kyoMki utpatti
kSaNameM kArmaNakAyayoga hone para bhI jIva, anAhAraka nahIM hotA, balki vaha
usI yoga ke dvArA AhAra letA hai. parantu yaha to niyama hI hai ki jela jIva ko
anAhAraka-avasthA hotI hai, taba kArmaNakAyayoga ke sivAya anya yoga hotA hI
nahIM  /  imose amAhAraka-mArgaNA meM eka mAtra kAmaNakAyayoga mAnA gayA hai  //
24 //  naragaiNi ditasataNu-acakkhunaranapukasAyasaMvumage  /
saMnichalesAhAraga,-bhavamaimuohidage sabve  // 25 //  na ragatapaJcendri yatra
sa tanvanakSanaranapusa kakaSAyasa myavaddhike  /
maMjiSaGlezyAhArakabhavyamitizrutAvavidvive sarve  // 25 //  artha--manuSyagati,
paJcepriyajAti, prasaphAya, kAyayoga, acAdarzana, puruSaveda, napUsakaveda, cAra
kabAya, kSAyika tathA bAyopazamika, ye do sammakatva, saMjI, chaha lezyAeM,
AhAraka, bhavya , matimAna zrutajJAna aura avadhi dvika. ina chuTbIsa mArgaNAoM
meM saba pandrahoMyoga hote haiM  /  / 25 //  bhAvArtha -uparyukta chabbIsa
mArgaNAoM meM pandraha yoga isaliye kahe gaye haiM ki ina saba mArgaNAoM kA
sambandha manuSyaparyAya ke sAtha hai aura manuSyaparyAya saba yogoM kA sambhava
hai  /  yapi kahIM-kahIM yaha kathana milatA hai ki AhArakamArgaNA meM
karmaNayoga nahIM hotA, zeSa ghaudaha yoga hote haiM  /  kintu vaha yuktisamata
nahIM jAna par3atA; kyoMki anma ke prathama samaya meM, kArmaNayoga ke sivAya
anya kisI yoga kA saMbhava nahIM hai| isaliye usa samaya, kArmaNa yoga ke dvArA
ho mAhAkazva ghaTAyA jA sakatA hai  /  janma ke prathama samaya meM jo AhAra
kiyA jAtA hai, usameM gajhamANa

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **Pugals are the means.** Therefore, at that time,
there is no need to believe in Karmankayayoga. To do so is futile. Because in
the first instance, the pugals taken in the form of food can become the means of
taking food in the form of the body at that very moment, but they cannot become
the means in their own nature. ||2||  **Tiryanchati, Ajasasana, Anaanauvasama,
Abhavyam, Mithyatva, these twelve are the means of destruction, pacification,
fear, and false belief. In the case of Devas and Narakas, there are thirteen
means, excluding the Audarik-Dwik.** ||26||  **Meaning:** In the ten paths of
Tiryanchati, Striveda, Aviriti, Sasvadan, Three Agnanas, Upashama Samyaktava,
Abhavyam, and Mithyatva, there are thirteen yogas, except for the Aharak-Dwik.
In the paths of Devas and Narakas, there are eleven yogas, excluding the
Audarik-Dwik, out of the aforementioned thirteen. ||26||  **Explanation:** In
the paths mentioned above, starting with Tiryanchati, all yogas are present
except for the Aharak-Dwik. Out of these, the reason for the absence of Aharak-
yoga in the eight paths excluding Striveda and Upashama Samyaktava is the
absence of Sarvaviratka. In Striveda, although Sarvaviratka is possible, the
reason for the absence of Aharak-yoga is the restriction on women, which
includes the four prohibitions...reading is prohibited. In Upashama Samyaktava,
although Sarvaviratka is possible, the reason for not considering Aharak-yoga is
that those who have attained Upashama Samyaktava do not use Aharak-nadi.  1.
See, Appendix 'T'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra pubagala hI sAdhana hote haiN| isaliye usa samaya,
kArmaNakAyayoga mAnanekI jarUrata nahIM hai  /  aisI vAGkA karanA vyartha hai|
kyoMki prathama samaya meM, AhArarupa se grahaNa kiye hue pugla usI samaya
zarIrarupa meM pariNata hokara cUsare samapa meM AhAra lene meM sAdhana bana
sakate hai, para apane praNa meM Apa sAdhana nahIM bana sakate  /  / 2 /  /
tiristhiajayasAsaNa,-anANauvasamaabhadhvamicchesu  /  terAhAraduguNA, te
uraladugUNa suranarae  // 26 //  tiryavatryayata
sAsAdanAzAnopazamAbhayamithyAtdheSu ayodazAhAra kadikonAsta audArikAdvakonAH
surenaraka  // 26 /  /  artha tirthacamati, strIveda, avirati, sAsvAdana, tIna
ajJAna, upazAmasamyakatva, abhavya aura mithyAtva, ina dasa mArgaNAoM meM
AhArakadvikake sivAya teraha yoga hote haiN| devagati aura narakagati meM ukta
teraha meM se audArika-dvikake sivAya zeSa gyAraha yoga hote hai  // 26 //
bhAvArtha-tiryaMcati Adi upayuMkta basa mAgaMNAmoM meM AhAraka-tikake sivAya
zeSa saba yoga hote haiM  /  inameM se strIveda aura upazamasamyavaraSa ko
chor3akara zeSa ATha mArgaNAoM meM AhAraphayoga na hone kA kAraNa sarvaviratikA
abhAva hI hai| strIveva meM sarvaviratikA saMbhava hone para bho AhArakayoga na
hone kA kAraNa strI jAti ko raSTibAva-jisameM cauvaha pUrva hai....par3hane kA
niSedha hai| upazamasamyabatva meM sarvaviratikA saMbhava hai tathApi usameM
AhAraka yoga na mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki upazamasamyavasvI AhArakanadhi kA
prayoga nahIM krte| 1 dekhiye, pariziSTa 't|'

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Karmagrantha states that there are thirteen yogas in Tiryanchagati. Of
these, four are Manoyoga, Dharvananayoga, and one is Audarikakayayoga. Thus,
these nine yogas are in the sufficient state. Vainkriyakapayoga and
Vainkriyamiśrakayayoga are in the sufficient state; but not for all Tiryanchas;
but for some Tiryanchas who are strong in Vainkriya, they are in the sufficient
state. Karman and Audarikamiśra, these two yogas, are only in the insufficient
state for Tiryanchas.  In Strived, the thirteen yogas are possible as follows:
four of the mind, four of the speech, two Vainkriya, and one Audarik, these
eleven yogas are in the sufficient state for humans, Tiryanchas, and Stri.
Kriyamiśrakayayoga is in the insufficient state for Devstri,
Audarikamiśrakayayoga is in the insufficient state for humans, Tiryanchas, and
Stri, and Karmankayayoga is in the sufficient state for humans and Stri, and in
the Kevalisamuddhata state for Stri.  In the seven marganas of Adhirati,
Sampashti, Sasvavan, three agyanas, Abhavya, and Mithyatva, the ten yogas of the
mind, four of the speech, Audarik, and Vainkriya are in the sufficient state.
Karmankayayoga is in the Vivahpasis and in the first moment of birth.
Audarikamiśra and Vainkriyamiśra, these two yogas are in the insufficient state.
1- Strived here refers to Dravyastrived. Because the absence of Aharakayoga is
possible in it. In Bhavastrived, Aharakayoga is possible, i.e., one who becomes
a man from Dravya and experiences Bhavastrived, is also one who has Aharakayoga.
Similarly, in the future, where twelve uses are mentioned in the Veda, the Veda
here also refers to Dravyaved. Because Kshayik-use is only for Bhagaveda, twelve
uses cannot occur in Bhavaveda. Conversely, in Gunasthan-Adhikar, Veda refers to
Bhavaveda. Because nine Gunasthanas are mentioned in the Veda, they can only
occur in Bhavaveda, Dravyaved remains until the fourteenth Gunasthan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha mAga cAra tirthaJcagati meM teraha yoga kahe gaye haiN| inameM se
cAra manoyoga, dhAra vananayoga aura eka ovArikakAyayoga. isa taraha se ye no
yoga paryApta. avasthA meM hote haiN| baiMkriyakApayoga aura
vaikriyamizrakAyayoga paryAptaavasthA meM hote haiM sahI; para sava tiyaMJcoM ko
nahIM; kintu baiMkriyA wo me bala se mimIra ghanAne pAle kucha nirgoM ko ho  /
kArmaNa aura auArikamizra, ye do yoga, tiryaJcoM ko aparyApta-avasthA meM hI
hote haiN| strIveva' meM teraha yogoM kA saMbhava isa prakAra hai:mana ke cAra
vacana ke cAra, do paMkriya aura eka audArika, ye gyAraha yoga manuSya-tiryaJca-
strI ko paryApta avasthA meM, kriyamizrakAyayoga devastrI ko aparyApta-avasthA
meM, audArikamizrakAyayoga manuSya-tiryastrI ko aparyApta-avasthA meM aura
kAmaMNakAyayoga paryApta manuSyastrI ko kevalisamuddhAta-avasthA meM hotA hai|
adhirati, sampaSTi, sAsvAvana, tIna ajJAna, abhavya aura mithyAtva, ina sAta
mArgaNAoM meM mAra mana ke, cAra vacana ke, auvArika aura vaikriya, ye dasa yoga
paryApta-avasthA meM hote haiN| kArmaNakAyayoga vivAhapasi meM tathA utpatti ke
prathama kSaNa meM hotA hai  /  audAriphamina aura vainiyamizra, ye do yoga
aparyApta-avasthA meM hote hai| 1-strIveda kA matalaba isa jagaha dravyastrIveda
se hI hai  /  kyoMki usI meM AhArakayoga kA abhAva ghaTa sakatA hai  /
bhAvastrIveda meM to AhArakayoga kA saMbhava hai arthAt jo dravya se puruSa
hokara bhAvastroveda kA anubhAna karatA hai, vaha bhI AhArakayoga vAlA hotA hai
/  isI taraha Age upayogAdhikAra meM jahAM veda ma bAraha upayoga kahe haiM,
vahA~ bhI veda kA matalaba dravyaveda se hI hai| kyoMki kSAyika-upayoga
bhAghavedara hitako hI hote haiM, isaliye bhAvaveda meM bAraha upayoga nahIM
ghaTa sakate  /  isase ulaTA, guNasthAna-adhikAra meM veda kA matalaba bhAvada
se hI hai| kyoki veda meM nau gu prasthAna kahe hue haiM, so bhAvaveda meM hI
ghaTa sakate haiM, dravyaveda to caudahaveM guNasthAna paryanta rahatA hai  /

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four:  In the state of Upasama Samyaktv, the four mental,
four verbal, Audarik and Vaishyik, these ten yogas are found in the sufficient
state. Karman and Mankriya Mishra, these two yogas should be understood in the
insufficient state in relation to the Devas, because those who believe that
those who fall from Upasaman, die and are born in the Anuttar Vimana with
Upasama Samyaktv, according to their opinion, these yogas are found in the
insufficient Devas at the time of Upasama Samyaktv. Audarik Mishra yoga is given
in Upasama Samyaktv, according to the theoretical opinion, not according to the
Karmagranthic opinion, because according to the Karmaprasthika opinion, this
yoga is not found in anyone except the family in the sufficient state. In the
insufficient state, it is found in humans and Tiryanch, but they do not have any
kind of Upasama Samyaktv in that state. According to the theoretical opinion,
Audarik Mishra yoga can decrease in Upasama Samyaktv; because theoretical
scholars do not consider Vaikriya Mishra yoga at the time of the creation of the
Kriya body, but consider Audarik Mishra yoga; therefore, this yoga can be found
in a human being with Vaikriya Sabdhi Sampatra, who has the Upasama Samyaktv of
Pranya-Meva-Janaya, at the time of the creation of the Vaikriya body.  Devagati
and Narakagati do not have the possibility of Viraati, and the Audarik body is
not possible. Therefore, these four yogas are mentioned in the said two gattis;
so it should be. || 26 ||  1 - This opinion has been indicated by the author
himself in the 46th verse ahead, with this part:  "From being, there are
Vyavaharik yogas, and from those, there are Audarik yogas, except for the
remaining eleven yogas, as far as possible, consider them."  "Vigaahar
Uralamissan"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra : upanAmasamyaktava meM cAra mana ke, cAra vacana ke,
auvArika aura vaiSiya, ye dasa yoga paryApta avasthA meM pAye jAte hai  /
kArmaNa aura maMkriyamizra, ye do yoga aparyApta avasthA meM devoM kI apekSA se
samajhane cAhiye kyoMki jinakA yaha mata hai ki upazamaNi se giranevAle joza
marakara anuttara vimAna meM upazamasamyaktava sahita janma lete haiM, unake
mata se aparyApta devo meM upazamasamyaktava ke samaya ukta yogoM yoga pAye jAte
haiM  /  upazamasamyaktva meM audArima mizrayoga diyA hai, so saiddhAntika mata
ke anusAra, kArmagranthika mata ke anusAra nahIM kyoMki phArmaprasthika mata se
paryApta avasthA meM phemalI ke sivAya anya kisI ko yaha yoga nahIM hotaa|
aparyApta avasthA meM manuSya tathA tiryaJca ko hotA hai sahI para unheM usa
avasthA meM kisI taraha kA upazamasamyakta nahIM hotA  /  saMddhAntika mata se
upazamasamyaksva meM audArikamizrayoga ghaTa sakatA hai; kyoMki saiddhAntika
vidvAn kriyazarIra kI racanA ke samaya vakriyamizrayoga na mAnakara auvArika
mizra yoga mAnate haiM; isaliye yaha yoga, pranyi-meva-janya upazamasamyarUSa
vAle vaikriyasabdhi-saMpatra manuSya meM vaikrithazarIra kI racanA ke samaya
pAyA jA sakatA hai  /  F PS5 devagati aura narakagati meM virati na sambhava
nahIM hai tathA audArikazarIra na hone saMbhava nahIM hai| isaliye ina cAra
yogoM ke ukta do gatiyoM meM kahe gaye haiM; so cAhiye  //  26  //  1 - yaha
mata svayaM grandhakArane hI Age kI 46 vIM gAyA meM isa aMza se nirdiSTa kiyA
hai hone se ho vyahArakayogoM kA se vo zrIdArikayogoM kA sivAya zeSa gyAraha
yoga yathAsambhava vicAra lemA "vigAhAra uralamissaM "

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **Verse 27:**  In the stationary karma-grantha, the
active drikas are five in the wind. In the final speech-yoga, they are four,
including the bankriya-dvik.  **Commentary:**  In the stationary karma, there
are three yogas: karma, audarik, and vik. In the one-sense beings and the wind,
there are five yogas: the three mentioned above, plus the bankriya-dvik. In the
asanjna, there are six yogas: the five mentioned above, plus the final speech-
yoga (asatyamrishanachan). In the vikalendriya, there are four yogas: the six
mentioned above, minus the bankriya-dvik (karma, audarik-mishra, audarik, and
asatyamrishanachan).  **Explanation:**  The three yogas mentioned in the
stationary karma are to be understood in all four types of stationary beings
except the wind. This is because there are two more yogas possible in the wind.
Of the three yogas, the karma-kaya-yoga is to be understood in the state of
disintegration and at the time of birth, the audarik-mishra-kaya-yoga is to be
understood in the insufficient time except at the time of birth, and the
audarik-kaya-yoga is to be understood in the sufficient state.  In the one-sense
beings, the wind is also included. Therefore, in addition to the three yogas,
the bankriya-yoga is considered, making a total of five yogas.  In the wind,
like other places, the three yogas, karma, etc., are considered. But besides
these, there are two more yogas (vaikriya and baniyamishra). This is why there
are five yogas in the wind. In the wind, the sufficient power...  **Note:** The
same thing is mentioned in the prajnapanani.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra kammuraladurga thAvari, te saviuviduga paMca igi
'ravaNe  /  cha asaMni caramavAijuya, te viuvaguNa cala vigale  // 27 //
kArmaNautArikanika sthAvare, te sakriya drikA: paJcakasmin pavane  /
paDasajjini caramavacoyutAste baiMkriyatikonAzcatvAro vikale  // 27 //  _
martha-sthAvarakAma meM, phArmaNa tathA audArika-vika, ye tIna yoga hote haiN|
ekendriya jAti aura vAyuphApa meM ukta tIna tathA baikiya-vika, pe kula pAMca
yoga hote haiM  /  asaMjJo meM ukta pAMca aura carama bacanayoga
(asasyAmRSAnacana) phula chaha yoga hote haiM  /  vikalendriya meM ukta chahameM
se baiMkriya-dvika ko ghaTAkara zeSa cAra (phArmaNa, aucArikamizra, auvAripha
aura asatyAmRSAvacana) yoga hote haiM  //  27  //  bhAvArya-sthAvarakAya meM
tIna yoga kahe gaye haiM, so vAyukAya ke sivAya anya cAra prakAra ke sthAvaroM
meM samajhanA cAhiye  /  kyoMki vAyukAya meM aura bhI do yogoM kA saMbhava hai
/  tIna yogoM meM se kAmaNakAyayoga, vigrahagati meM tathA utpatti-samaya meM,
auvArikamibhakAyayoga, utpatti-samaya ko chor3akara zeSa aparyApta-kAla meM aura
AvArikakAyayoga, paryApta-avasthA meM samajhanA caahiye| ekendriyajAti meM,
vAyukAya ke joca bhI A jAte hai  /  isaliye usameM tIna yogoM ke atirikta, vo
baikriyayoga mAnakara pAMca yoga kahe haiN| vAyukAya meM anya sthAnoM kI taraha
kArmaNa Adi tIna yoga pApe jAte haiN| para inake sivAya aura bhI do yoga
(vaikriya aura baniyamizra) hote haiN| isI se usameM pAMca yoga mAne gaye haiN|
vAyukAya' meM paryApta pAvara 1-vahI bAta prajJApanA-Ni meM kahI huI:

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Four of the Karma Granth  **10.**  Jivas who are endowed with the
ability to acquire a Vaikriya body are the only ones who possess the Vaikriya-
dvik. Not all Jivas possess this. The Vaikriya-mishraka-yoga occurs when the
Vaikriya body is being formed, and the Vaikriya-ka-yoga occurs when the body is
fully formed and being sustained.  Six yogas are mentioned for the Asanji. Five
of these yogas are related to the Vayufayako, because all Asanji are one-
sensory. The sixth yoga, Asatyamrishvaranayayoga, is related to the Dwindriya
and above, because the Dwindriya, Trindriya, Chaturindriya, and Samucchim-
panchendriya are all Asanji. The Dwindriya and above Asanji Jivas are endowed
with the ability to speak, and therefore they possess the
Asatyamrishvaranayayoga.  Four yogas are mentioned for the Vikalendriya. Because
they are not endowed with the ability to form a Vaikriya body, they cannot form
a Vaikriya body. Therefore, they do not possess any of the six yogas mentioned
for the Asanji. ||27||  "Kammuralameesavinu man, vaisa
mahayaddeyachakshumannanaane. Uraldugakamm padham, -timamanavai kevaladurgami."
||28||  "Kamaudari kamishram vina manovacharasamayik mahendachakshumanojnane.
Audarikati karmapayamantimamanovacha kavala-vike." ||29||  The six Ma-gangas
are: Manoyoga, Vachanayoga, Samayikcharitra, Chevopasthapamiyacharitra,
Chakshuvarshan, and Manoparyaya-jnana.  In the commentary on the Pakva Sangrah-
dwar 1, it is stated as evidence: "Niham tav rasiinam, veniyallalo ghedh narip.
Vaparpajjatana pi, sankhejjai bhagas ti."  This means: "The three types of
Vayukayikas, namely, the insufficient and sufficient subtle, and the
insufficient gross, do not possess the ability to acquire a Vaikriya body. The
sufficient gross Vayukayika does possess this ability, but not all of them; only
a countable portion of them possess it."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 10 karmagrantha bhAga cAra jIva, baiMkripalabdhi-saMpanna hote haiM, ve hI
vaikriya-dvika ke adhikArI haiM, saba nahIM  /  vaikriyazarIra banAte samaya,
baiMkriyamizrakAyayoga aura banA cukane ke bAda use dhAraNa karate samaya
baiMkriyakApayoga hotA hai| asaMjI meM chaha yoga kahe gaye haiN| inameM se
pAMca yoga to vAyuphAyako apekSA se; kyoMki sabhI ekendriya asaMjJo ho haiM  /
chaThA asatyAmRSAvaranayayoga, dvIndriya Adiko apekSA se; kyoMki vIndriya,
zrIndriya, caturindriya aura samUcchimapaJcendriya, ye sabhI asaMhI haiN|
bondriya Adi bhasaMjJI jIva, bhASAlabdhi-yukta hote haiN| isaliye unameM
asatyAmRSAvacanayoga hotA hai| vikalendriya meM cAra yoga kahe gaye haiN| kyoMki
ve, vaikriya sandhisaMpanna na hone ke kAraNa vaMniyazarIra nahIM banA sakate  /
isaliye unameM asaM nayI chaha yogoM meM se kina-ki nahIM hotA  // 27 /  /
kammuralamIsaviNu maNa, vaisamahayaddeyacakSumaNanANe  /  uraladugakamma
paDhama,-timamaNavai kevaladurgami  // 28  /  /  kamaudAri kamizraM vinA
manovacarasAmAyika maheMdacakSumanojJAne  /  audArikati
karmapayamAntimamanovacaH kavalavike  /  /  2  /  /  arthamanoyoga, vacanayoga,
sAmAyikacAritra, chevopasthApamIyacAritra, cakSurvarzana aura mana:paryAya
jJAna, ina chaha mAgaMgAoM meM "nihaM tAva rAsINaM, veniyalalo ghedha naripa  /
vAparapajjatANa pi, saMkhejjai bhAgassa ti|" pakva saMgraha-dvAra 1 kI TIkA meM
pramANa rUpa se uddhRta  /  arthAt-"aparyApta tathA paryApta mUkSma aura
aparyApta vAdara' ina tIna prakAra ke vAyukAyikoM meM to vaikripalabdhi hai hI
nahIM  /  paryApta bAdara vAyukAya meM hai, parantu vaha sabameM nahIM; sirpha
usake saMkhyAtaveM bhAga meM hI hai|"

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four ### 101 ### F  There are thirteen yogas except for
Karman and Audarik Mishra. Only in the Dwik, there are seven yogas: Avarik Vik,
Karman, the first and last Manoyog (Satya and Asatyamushyamano yog), and the
first and last Vachan yog (Satya and Asatyabhushavachan yog). ||28||
**Meaning:** The above six Marganas (Manoyog etc.) are found only in the Paryapt
Avस्था (state of perfection). Therefore, Karman and Audarik Mishra, these two
yogas are not found in the Aparyapt Avस्था (state of imperfection). The Kevali
(omniscient being) has these yogas in the Kevalimuddat (state of complete
liberation). Therefore, although they are possible in the Paryapt Avस्था, it
should be understood that when these yogas are present in the Kevalimuddat, none
of the above six Marganas are present. Therefore, except for the above two
yogas, the remaining six Marganas are mentioned.  In the Keval Dwik, seven yogas
are mentioned, including Audarik-tik etc., as follows: - The Yogi Kevali always
has the Audarik Kayayog; it is only absent in the six intermediate times of the
Kevalimuddat. The Avarik Mishra Kayayog is present in the second, sixth, and
seventh times of the Kevalimuddat, and the Karman Kayayog is present in the
third, fourth, and fifth times. The two Vachan yogas occur during the time of
delivering a sermon, and the two Manoyogas occur when answering a question
mentally. The meaning of answering mentally is that when a Dev (god) or a Man
Paryayajnani (knower of the cycles of existence) who is not a Tirthankara, while
remaining in their own place, mentally pleases the Kevali, then the Kevali,
knowing their pleasure through his Kevalgyan (omniscience), mentally answers
them. In other words, he receives the Manoyog and creates a response
accordingly.  2 - See, Appendix 'Th'. 2 - In the 228th verse of Gommatasar-
Jivakand, the Kevali is also considered to have a connection with the Dravya Man
(substance of mind).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 101 F kArmaNa tathA audArikamizrako ko chor3akara
teraha yoga hote haiN| kevala dvikameM avArika vika, kArmaNa, prathama tathA
antima manoyoga (satya tathA asatyAmuSAmanoyoga ) aura prathama tathA antima
vacanayoga (satya tathA asatyAbhUSAvacanayoga) ye sAta yoga hote haiM  // 28 //
bhAvArtha- manoyoga Adi uparyukta chaha mArgaNAeM paryApta mavasthA meM hI pAyI
jAtI haiM  /  isaliye inameM kArmaNa tathA audArikamizra, ye aparyApta avasthA
bhAvI do yoga nahIM hote  /  kevalI ko kevalimuddhAta meM ye yoga hote haiM
isaliye yadyapi paryApta-abasthA meM bhI inakA saMbhava hai tathApi yaha jAnanA
cAhiye ki kevalasamuddhatameM jaba ki ye yoga hote haiM, manoyoga Adi uparyukta
chaha meM se koI bhI mArgaNA nahIM hotI) isase ina chaha mArgaNAoM meM ukta do
yoga ke sivAya, zeSa kahe haiN| kevala dvikameM audArika-Tika Adi sAta yoga kahe
gaye haiM, so isa prakAra : - yogI kevalI ko, aubArikakAyayoga sadA hI rahatA
hai; sirpha kevalisamuddhAta ke madhyavartI chaha samayoM meM nahIM hotA  /
avArika mizra kAyayoga kevalisamukhAta ke dUsare, chaThe aura sAtaveM samaya meM
tathA kArmaNa kAyayoga tIsare, cauthe aura pAMcaveM samaya meM hotA hai  /  mro
vacanayoga, dezanA dene ke samaya hote haiM aura do manoyoga kiso ke prazna kA
mana se uttara dene ke samaya mana se uttara dene kA matalaba yaha hai ki jaba
koI anuttaravimAnavAsI deva yA mana paryAyajJAnI apane sthAna meM rahakara
manase hI kevalI ko prasanna karate haiM, taba unake prasanna ko kevalajJAna se
jAnakara kevalI bhagavAn usakA uttara manase hI dete haiM  /  arthAt manovya ko
grahaNakara usakI aisI racanA karate haiM ki 2 - dekhiye, pariziSTa 'tha  / ' 2
- gommaTasAra-jIvakANDa kI 228voM gAthA meM bhI kevalI ko dravya mana kA
sambandha mAnA hai  /

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha - Part Four  **Chapter 28**  The Kevali Bhagwan, who possesses
Avadhijnana (clairvoyance) and Manahparyaya Jnana (knowledge of the mind), can
understand the answer to a question by observing the mental state of the
questioner. Although the mind is very subtle, Avadhijnana and Manahparyaya Jnana
have the power to directly perceive it. Just as a psychologist can infer
someone's mental state by observing subtle changes in their facial expressions,
similarly, an Avadhijnani or Manahparyaya Jnani can directly observe the mental
state and infer that this particular mental state must have been created by
thinking about a specific meaning.  **Chapter 26**  **Ten Yogas**  There are ten
Yogas: four for the mind, four for the speech, and one for the Audarik
(generous) in Pariharavishuddha (purified conduct) and Sukshmasamprayacharita
(subtle conduct). In the Mishra (mixed) state (Samyagmithyashti), there are nine
Yogas mentioned above, plus one Vaikriya (changeable). In Deshaviriti
(withdrawal from the world), there are nine Yogas mentioned above, plus
Vaikriya-Dwik (double changeable). In Yathashyatacharita (conduct according to
reality), there are four Yogas for the mind, four Yogas for the speech, and
Audarik-Dwik (double generous), totaling eleven Yogas.  **Eleven Yogas**
**Meaning:** The Karman (action) and Audarik Mishra (mixed generous) Yogas are
insufficient for the attainment of liberation, but Charitra (conduct) is never
insufficient. The Vaikriya and Vaikriya Mishra Yogas are experienced only by
those who use the mind. However, one who has Pariharavishuddha or
Sukshmasamprayacharita never uses the mind. The Aharak (food) and Aharak Mishra
(mixed food) Yogas are fourteen...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha-bhAga cAra jisako avadhijJAna yA kevalI bhagavA manaH paryAyajJAna
ke dvArA dekhakara praznakartA hue uttara ko anumAna dvArA jAna lete haiM  /
yadyapi manodravya bahuta sUkSma hai tathApi avadhijJAna aura manaH paryAya
jJAna meM usakA pratyakSa jJAna kara lene kI zakti hai| jaise koI mAnasazAstra
kisI ke cehare para hone vAle sUkSma parivartanoM ko dekhakara usake manogata-
bhAva ko anumAna dvArA jAna letA hai, vaise hI avadhijJAnI yA manaH paryAyajJAnI
manonaya ko racanA ko sAkSAt dekhakara anumAnadvArA yaha jAna lete haiM ki isa
prakAra ko mano-racanA ke dvArA amuka artha kA hI cintana kiyA huA honA cAhiye
||28|| 102 maNavaiuralA parihA, risuhumi navate umIsi saviuvvA  /  dese sagA
sakammuralamIta ahakhAe  // 26 //  manAMtraca audArikANi parihAre sukSma nava te
tu mizra sakriyAH  /  deze sarva kriyadvikAH, sakArmaNaudArikamizrAH yathAhapAte
||26| dasa yoga hote artha- parihAravizuddha aura sUkSmasamparAyacAritra meM
mana ke cAra, aat ke cAra aura eka audArika, ye nau yoga hote haiM  /  mizra meM
( samyagmithyASTi meM ) ukta nau tathA eka vaikriya, phula hai  /  dezavirati
meM ukta nau tathA vaikriya-dvika, kula hote haiM  /  yathAzyAtacAritra meM cAra
manake, cAra vacana ke kArmaNa aura audArika-dvika, ye gyAraha yoga hote haiM
||26|| gyAraha yoga " bhAvArtha - kArmaNa aura audArika mizra, ye vo yoga
chAstha ke liye aparyApta avasthA bhAvI haiM, kintu cAritra koI bhI
aparyAptaavasthA meM nahIM hotaa| vaikriya aura bekkriyamizra, ye vo yoga i dhi
kA prayoga karane vAle hI manuSya ko hote haiM  /  parantu parihAravizuddha yA
sUkSmasamparAya cAritra vAlA kabhI belibdhi kA prayoga nahIM karatA  /  AhAraka
aura AhArakamizra, ye vo yoga caturdaza

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four  The liberated Muni (Jain monk) is from a past life.
However, one who possesses a pure conduct (**Parihar Vishuddha Charitra**) can
be from ten past lives, and one with a subtle conduct (**Sookshma Samparaya
Charitra**) can be from a hundred past lives, but still be considered impure.
Therefore, in **Parihar Vishuddha** and **Sookshma Samparaya**, there are six
**Yogas** (states of being) that do not exist: **Karmna**, **Aavarik Mishr**,
**Vaikriya**, **Vaikriya Mishr**, **Aaharaka**, and **Aaharaka Mishr**. The
remaining nine **Yogas** do exist.  At the time of **Mishra Samyaktv** (mixed
right faith), death does not occur. Therefore, in the **Apariapta** (imperfect)
state, **Samyaktv** (right faith) is not attained. This is why the **Yogas** of
**Karmna Aavarik Mishr** and **Vaikriya Mishr** do not exist in the
**Apariapta** state. Also, at the time of **Mishra Samyaktv**, knowledge from
fourteen past lives is not possible, so the **Aaharaka Yoga** does not exist.
Thus, excluding the aforementioned five **Yogas** (**Karmna** etc.), the
remaining **Yogas** exist in **Mishra Samyaktv**.  There is a doubt that in
**Mishra Samyaktv**, the **Vaikriya Mishr Yoga** is not considered to be in the
**Apariapta** state. This is correct. However, when using the **Vaaniya Labdhi**
(gaining knowledge through the senses), the **Vaikriya Mishr Yoga** that occurs
in the **Pariyapta** (perfect) state for humans and **Tribandha** (three bonds)
is not considered in **Mishra Samyaktv**. The solution is that both **Mishra
Samyaktv** and **Vaikriya Mishr Yoga** (gained through **Labdhi**) are in the
**Pariyapta** state. However, they do not coexist. This means that at the time
of **Mishra Samyaktv**, the use of the senses is not done, so the **Vaikriya
Mishr Yoga** does not exist.  A **Vratdhari** (one who observes vows) is not
**Pravak** (a liberated soul), **Chaturvash-Purvi** (from a hundred past lives),
or **Apariapta**. Therefore, in **Desh Virati** (renunciation of the world),
eleven **Yogas** are considered, excluding the two **Aaharaka** and the
**Apariapta** state **Karmna** and **Aavarik Mishr**, making a total of four.
The eleven include **Vaikriya** and **Vaikriya Mishr**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagranya bhAga cAra pUrva-dhara pramatta muni ko ho hote haiN| kintu
parihAravizuddha cAritra kA adhikArI kucha-kama dasa pUrva kA ho pATo hotA hai
aura sUkSmasaMparAyacAritra vAlA pratuvarza-pUrva-ghara hone para bhI apamata hI
hotA hai; isa kAraNa parihAra vizuddha aura sUkSmasaMparAya meM kArmaNa,
auvArikamizra, baiMkriya, vaikimizra, AhAraka aura AhAraka mizra, ye chaha yoga
nahIM hote, zeSa nau hote haiN| mizrasamyaktva ke samaya mRtyu nahIM hotI  /
isa kAraNa aparyAptaavasthA meM vaha samyaktva nahIM pAyA jAtA isIse usameM
phArmaNaaudArika mitha aura vaikriyamizra , ye aparisa-avasthA-bhAvI tIna yoga
nahIM hote  /  tathA minasammaktva ke samaya caudaha pUrva ke jJAna kA saMbhava
na hone ke kAraNa vo AhArakayoga nahIM hose  /  isa prakAra kArmaNa Adi ukta
pAMca yogoM ko chor3akara zeSa isa yoga mizrasamyakrama meM hote haiN| isa
magaha yaha zaGkA hotI hai ki mithasamyaktva meM aparyApta-avasthA-bhAvI
caMziyamizra yoga nahIM mAnA jAtA, so to ThIka hai| parantu vainiyalabdhi kA
prayoga karate samaya manuSya aura tibaMdhako paryApta-avasthA meM jo kriyamizra
yoga hotA hai, vaha mizrasamyavazva meM kyoM nahIM mAnA jAtA ? isakA samAdhAna
itanA hI diyA jAtA hai ki mithasamyaktva aura labdhi-janya bakimiznayogaH ye
donoM paryAptaavasthA-bhASI haiN| kintu inakA sAhacarya nahIM hotA  /  arthAt
mizrasamyaktva ke samaya sandhi kA prayoga na kiye jAne ke kAraNa vakriya| mizra
kAyayoga nahIM hotaa| vratadhArI prAvaka, caturvaza-pUrvI aura aparyApta nahIM
hotaa| isa kAraNa dezavirati meM do AhAraka aura aparyApta-avasthA-bhAvI kArmaNa
aura auvArikamizna, ina cAra ke sivAya zeSa gyAraha yoga mAne jAte haiM  /
gyArahameM vaikriya aura kriyamizra, ye vo yoga gine gae haiN|

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagrantha Part Four  Therefore, it is well-known in the scriptures that a
Shravaka, due to their Vaiphiyalabdhi, can obtain a Vaishya body, like 'Ambar'
etc.  A person with perfect conduct is always vigilant. Therefore, in that
conduct, there are not four yogas that are associated with Pramava, namely two
Pankriya and two Aharaka, but eleven others. The eleventh Karma and Bhava
Rikamishra, these two yogas are counted, only in relation to the Kevali Samudra.
In the sixth and seventh times of the Kailisamudra, there is Audarikamishra, and
in the third, fourth, and fifth times, there is Karmanyoga. ||26||  1. See,
Upachaitika Pu. 66. 2. See, Parishishta 'D'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra so isaliye ki 'ambara' Adi zrAvaka dvArA vaiphiyalabdhi
se vaizyizarIra banAye jAne kI bAta zAstra meM prasiddha hai| yathArapAta
cAritra vAlA apramatta hI hotA hai, isalipe usa cAritra meM do paMkriya aura do
AhAraka, ye pramAva-sahacArI cAra yoga nahIM hote, zeSa gyAraha hote haiM  /
gyArahaveM kArmaNa aura bhauvA rikamizra, ye do yoga gine gaye haiM, so kevali
samudrAta ko apekSA se  /  kailisamudrAta ke vUmare, chaThe aura sAtave samaya
meM audArikamizra aura tIsare, cauthe aura pAMcave samaya meM kArmaNayoga hotA
hai  // 26 //  1dekhiye, aupacAtikA pu. 66  /  2dekhiye, pariziSTa 'da  / '

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagrantha Part 105 (4)-Usage in Marganas. [From six stanzas] Tianaan Naan Pan
Cha 3, San Bar Jiyalakshanavoga. Vinu Mannaanadukeval, Nav Surtiriniryaajaesu
||30|| Piinyajnanani Maamani Pancha Chatvari, Darshanani Dwadash
Jivalamanamupyogaah. Vina Mamojnanadikeval Nav Surtirmanirayayateshu ||30||
Meaning: These twelve usages, which are the characteristics of the jiva, are
five knowledge and four darshanas. Of these, the three usages of Maata, Paryaya,
Karma and Kevala-dik are not found in the nine usages of vevagati, tiryanvagati,
narakagati and avirati. ||30|| Maavarth: The characteristic of any object is its
extraordinary dharma. Because the purpose of a lakshya is to show the lakshya as
different from other objects. Which can only happen in extraordinary dharma.
Usage is the extraordinary (special) dharma of the jiva and distinguishes it
from other beings. For this reason, they are called the characteristics of the
jiva. Mana: Paryaya and Kevala-dik, these three usages are relative to
sarvavirati. But vevagati, tiryanvagati, narakagati and avirati, these four
marganas do not have the possibility of sarvavirati. Therefore, excluding these
three usages, the remaining nine usages are considered. Those who are in
avirati, the pure samyakdravya should be considered to have six usages, three
knowledge and three darshanas, and the rest should be considered to have five
usages, three ignorance and two darshanas. ||30||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga pAra 105 (4)-mArgaNAoM meM upayoga  /  [ chaha gAthAoM se]
tianANa nANa paNa ca 3, saNa bAra jiylkssnnvogaa| viNu maNanANadukevala, nava
suratirinirayaajaesu  // 30 //  pINyajJAnAni mAmAni paJca catvAri,darzanAni
dvAdaza jIvalamaNamupayogAH  /  vinA mamojJAnadikevala nava
suratirmanirayAyateSu  // 30 //  arthatIma amAna- pAMca zAna aura cAra barSana
ye bAraha upayoga haiM, jo jIva ke lakSaNa hai| inameM se mAtaH paryAya kAma
aura kevala-nika. ina tIna ke sivAya zeSa no upayoga vebagati, tiryanvagati,
narakati aura avirata meM pAye jAte haiM  // 30 //  mAvArtha - kisI vastu kA
lakSaNa, usakA asAdhAraNa dharma hai| kyoMki sakSaga kA uddezya, lakSya ko Aya
vastuoM se bhinna batalAmA hai| jo asAdhAraNa dharma meM hI ghaTa sakatA hai|
upayoga, mIca ke asAvAraNa (khAsa) dharma haiM aura ajIba se usako bhimatA ko
barasAte haiN| isI kAraNa ye jIpa ke lakSaNa kahe jAte haiN| manaH paryAya aura
kevala-dika, ye tIna upayoga sarvavirati-sApekSa haiN| parantu vevati,
ticcagati, narakagati aura avirati, ina bAra mArgaNAoM meM sarvavirati kA
saMbhava nahIM hai| isa kAraNa isameM tIna upayogoM ko chor3akara zeSa nau
upayoga mAne jAte haiN| avirati vAloM meM se zuddha samyakravo ko tIna mAna,
tIna darzana ye chaha upapoga aura zeSa sabako tIna ajJAna aura do darzana, ye
pauSa upayoga samajhane cAhiye  // 30 //

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 106  **Karmagrantha** Chapter Four  **Verse 31**  *tasajoyeyasukka,
haranarani visannibhaava satve. nayaneyarapnaleesa, kasaai dasa kevalabuguna.*
*asayogavedasuklaaharaka narapanchindriyasangibhye sarve.
nayaneyatarapanchaleesyaakashaye dasa keval dvivona.*  **Meaning:**  In the
thirteen categories of *braskaatha*, three *yoga*, three *veva*, *shulka
leeshya*, *ahaaraka*, *mamuchyagati*, *panche priyajaati*, *sanji* and *bhavy*,
all ten *kevala* qualities are present.  Except for *chakshudarshan*,
*avakshurvarshan* and *shulka*, the remaining five *leeshya* and four *kashaya*
are present in the eleven categories, excluding the two *kevala* qualities.
**Explanation:**  Out of the thirteen categories mentioned above, *yoga*,
*shurukaleeshya* and *ahaarakatva* are present until the thirteenth *gunasthan*
(stage of spiritual development), while the remaining ten are present until the
fourteenth *gunasthan*. Therefore, twelve *kevala* qualities are present in all
these categories.  The presence of *deva* in the fourteenth *gunasthan* refers
to the *dravya veva* (material aspect of existence), as the *bhaava veva*
(spiritual aspect of existence) is present only until the twelfth *gunasthan*.
*Chakshudarshan* and *avakshurvarshan* are present until the twelfth
*gunasthan*, *krishna* and the other two *leeshya* are present until the sixth
*gunasthan*, *tema* and *padma* are present until the seventh *gunasthan*, and
*favapochay* is present until the eighth *gunasthan*. Therefore, in the eleven
categories mentioned above, excluding the two *kevala* qualities, the remaining
ten *kevala* qualities are present.  **Verse 32**  *charidia sanni vriana,
nadasan igibitithavari achakchu. tianaan sanadurga, anaanati gaabhavi
micchayuge.*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 106 karmagrantha' mAga cAra tasajoyayeyasukkA, hAranaraNivisaMnirbhAva satve  /
nayaNeyarapaNalesA,-kasAi dasa kevalabuguNA  // 31 //  asayogavedazuklAhAraka
narapaJcandriyasaMjibhyye sarve  /  nayanetarapaJcalezyAkaSAye daza kevala
dvivonAH  // 31 //  artha- brasakAtha, tIna yoga, tIna veva, zulka lezyA,
AhAraka, mamukhyagati, paJce priyajAti, saMjI aura bhavya, ina teraha mArgaNAoM
meM saca upayoga hote haiM  /  cakSudarzana, avakSurvarzana, zulka ke sivAya
zeSa paci lezyAe~ aura cAra kaSAya, ina gyAraha mAgaMNAmoM meM kevala-dvika ko
chor3akara zeSa dasa upayoga pAye jAte haiM ! 31 /  /  bhAvArtha-sakAya Adi
uparyuka teraha mArgaNAoM meM se yoga, zurukalecyA aura AhArakatva, pe tIna
mArgagAe~ terahaveM guNasthAna paryanta aura zeSa dasa, caudahaveM gaNa sthAna
paryanta pAyI jAtI haiN| isaliye ina saba meM bAraha upayoga mAne jAte haiM  /
cauvaha guNasthAna pati deva pAye jAne kA matalaba, dravya veva se hai| kyoMki
bhAyaveva to ma guNasthAna taka hI rahatA hai| cakSudarzana aura acakSuvaMrzana,
ye ko bArahaveM guNasthAna paryanta, kRSNa-Adi tIna lezyAeM chaThe guNasyAna
paryanta, temaH padma, do leNyAe~ sAsaveM guNasthAna paryamta aura phavApocaya
adhika se adhika ghasaveM guNasthAna paryanta pAyA jAtA hai| isa kAraNa
cakSuvaMzana Adi ukta gyAraha mArgaNAoM meM kevala-dvikake sivAya zeSa dasa
upayoga hote haiM  // 31 //  caridiasaMni vRanA, NadasaNa igibitithAvari acakchu
/  tianANa saNadurga, anANatigaabhavi micchayuge  // 32 //

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **Verse 32:** In the four-sensory and non-sentient
five-sensory beings, there are two types of knowledge (mati and shruta) and two
types of vision (chakshu and achakshu), making a total of four functions. In the
one-sensory, two-sensory, three-sensory, and five-sensory stationary beings,
there are three functions, excluding chakshu-darshan (visual perception). In the
three ashanas (abhaya, mithyatva-vik, and mithyatva-sarasadan), there are three
types of knowledge and two types of vision, making a total of five functions.
**Explanation:** In the four-sensory and non-sentient five-sensory beings, there
is no capacity to attain vibhangalana (knowledge of the nature of karma), and
due to the absence of samyaktva (right faith), the five types of knowledge
associated with samyaktva, as well as avadhi and kevala, are not present.
Therefore, only four functions remain.  In the one-sensory and other beings
mentioned above, due to the absence of matra (measure) and samyaktva, the five
types of knowledge, avadhi, and kevala, as well as the capacity for
vibhangalana, are not present. Therefore, only three functions remain.  In the
three ashanas mentioned above, there is no samyaktva or virati (cessation of
karma). Therefore, the five types of knowledge, avadhi, and kevala are not
present. Therefore, only five functions remain.  **Note:** The Siddhantis (those
who believe in the existence of the soul) and Vibhangamanis (those who believe
in the existence of karma) consider avadhi-darshan (clairvoyance) to be present
in the ashanas. However, the Sasvavanguṇasthānas (those who believe in the
existence of both the soul and karma) do not consider avadhi-darshan to be
present in the ashanas.  **For further clarification, please refer to the
commentary on verses 21 and 46.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra caturindriyAsaMzini duyajJAnadarzana
mekaditristhAyaracaH  /   /   /  nyajJAnaM darzagAdvitamajJAnatrikAmavya
mithyAtvahike  //  32  //  arthacaturindriya aura asaMji-pacnendriya meM mati
aura zruta do majJAna tathA cakSuH aura acakSuH yo varzana, kula cAra upayoga
hote haiM  /  ekendriya, hIndriya, trIndriya aura pA~ca prakAra ke sthAvara meM
ukta cAra meM se cakSurdarzana ke sivAya, zeSa tIna upayoga hote haiN| tIna
azAna, abhaya, aura mithyAtva-vika ( mithyAtva sathA sarasAdana ), ina chaha
mArgaNAoM meM tIna ajJAna aura do varzana kula pA~ca upayoga hote haiM  /   /  /
mAvArtha-caturindriya aura asaMzi-pamcendriya meM vibhaGgalAna prApta karane kI
yogyatA nahIM hai tathA unameM samyaktva na hone ke kAraNa, samyataba ke
sahacArI pAMca jJAna aura avadhi aura kevala do varzana, ye sAsa upayoga nahIM
hote, isa taraha kula Ara ke sizaya zeSa cAra upayoga hote haiN| ekendriya Adi
uparyukta bhATha mArgaNAoM meM metra na hone ke kAraga cakSadarzana aura
samyaktava na hone ke kAraNa pA~ca jAna tathA avaSi aura phevala, ye do darzana
aura tathAvidha yogyatA na hone ke kAraNa vimaGgazAna, isa taraha kula nau
upayoga nahIM hote, zeSa tIna hote hai| ajAna-trika Adi upayukta chaha mAgaNAoM
meM samyaktana: tathA virati nahIM hai| isaliye unameM pAMca zAna aura avadhi
kevala, ye vo varzana, ina mAta ke sivAya zeSa pA~ca upayoga hote haiN| .
siddhAntI, vibhaGgamAnI meM adhivazaMna mAnase haiM aura sAsvAvanaguNasthAna meM
ajJAma na mAnakA mAna hI mAnate haiN| isaliye isa mAha ajJAna-trika Adi chaha
mArgaNAoM meM avadhidarzana nahIM mAnA hai aura - khulAse ke liye 21vIM tathA
46vI gAthA kA TippaNa dekhanA cAhiye  /

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Four: The Path of Liberation  **32.** In the path of liberation,
knowledge is not considered. Therefore, according to the path of karma, it
should be considered.  **33.** Only in the state of liberation, the nine types
of knowledge are not present. In the state of liberation, there are only two
types of knowledge: **kevalgyan** (omniscience) and **kevaldarshan** (omniscient
perception).  **33.** In the state of liberation, there are only two types of
knowledge: **kevalgyan** (omniscience) and **kevaldarshan** (omniscient
perception). In the state of **kshaypika samyaktv** (perfect knowledge) and
**yathakyat charitra** (perfect conduct), there are nine types of knowledge
remaining. These nine types of knowledge are: three types of **gyan**
(knowledge) and three types of **darshan** (perception) in the state of
**dinati** (the first stage of liberation). These are the types of knowledge
that are present in the state of liberation. In the state of **misra-shti**
(mixed state), these types of knowledge are present in a more subtle form.
**Explanation:** The reason why only **kevalgyan** and **kevaldarshan** are
considered in the state of liberation is that the other types of knowledge are
not present in the state of liberation.  In the state of **kshaypika samyaktv**,
there is no **mithyarav** (false perception). In the state of **yathakyat
charitra**, there is **mithyarav** in the eleventh **gunasthan** (stage of
spiritual development), but it is only **sattagat** (existent) and not
**udayaman** (arising). Therefore, in these two stages, there are no three types
of **mithyarav**-related knowledge. The remaining nine types of knowledge are
present. These nine types of knowledge are: seven types of knowledge in the
state of **chhavastha** (the sixth stage of liberation) - four types of **gyan**
and three types of **darshan** - and two types of knowledge in the state of
liberation - **kevalgyan** and **kevaldarshan**.  In the state of
**deshavirati** (the first stage of liberation), there are no three types of
**agyan** (ignorance) because there is no **mithyatva** (falsehood). In the
state of **sarvavirati** (the second stage of liberation), there are no three
types of **agyan** because there is no **mithyatva** and because it is dependent
on **sarvavirati**.  **Note:** This is the same view as mentioned in the
**Gommatasar-Jivakanda** in the 704th verse.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kamaMgrAya bhAga cAra sAsvAmamArgaNA meM jJAna nahIM mAnA hai, so kArmapanthika
mata ke anusAra samAranA cAhiye  //  32  //  kevalage bhiyagaM, nava tianANa
viNu khaiyaahakhAye  /  baMsaganANasiMga ve,-si mIsi anANamIsaM taM  /  /  33  /
/  kevalatike nijahika, nava vyazAnaM vinA kSAyikayathAspAte  /
darzanazAnatrika deNe mizrejJAnapi tat  // 33 //  artha-kevala-tika meM nija-
tika (kevalazAna aura kevamarzama) do hI upayoga hai  /  kSApikasamyaktava aura
yathAkhyAtacAritra meM tIna samAna jogA zeSa nau sayoga hote haiM : dinati meM
tIna jAna aura tIna barzana, ye vaha upayoga hote haiM  /  mizra-STi meM bahI
upayoga mahAna-mibhita hote haiM  /  / 33 bhAvArma-kevala-tika meM kevalamAna
aura kevaladarzana do ho upayoga mAne jAne kA kAraNa yaha hai ki matijJAna mAdhi
zeSa basa bAspika upayoga, kevalI ko nahIM hote| sAyikasamparUpa ke samaya,
mibhyArava kA abhAva hI hotA hai  /  yadhAramAtacAritra ke samaya, gyArahaveM
guNasthAna meM mithyArava bhI hai| para sirpha sattAgata, udayamAna nahIM; isa
kAraNa ina do mAgaMgAoM meM mipyAsporama-sahamAcI tIna mahAna nahIM hote  /
zeSa nau upayoga hote haiN| so isa prakAra:- upata vo mArgamAoM meM
chavAsthaavasthA meM pahale cAra zAma tathA tIna varzana, ye sAta upayoga aura
phevali-avasthA meM kevalazAma aura kevasaradarzana, ye do upyog| dezAvirati
meM, mithyAtva kA upaya na hone ke kAraNa tIna ajJAna nahIM hote mora
sarvaviratiko apekSA rakhane vAle mamaHparyAyakA aura 1-yAhI mata gommaTasAra-
jIvakANDa kI 704trI mAthA meM ullikhita hai|

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagrantha Part Four  Kevala-nik, these three uses are also not used. The
remaining ones are. The six have been counted in Avadhi-vikka because the
description of Avadhi-use is found in the scriptures for the Pravaks.  In Misra-
rasthi, there are no six uses, 'Yo Nir' in it; but the special feature is that
in Misra-rasthi, three Shans are mixed, not pure, i.e. Mati-gyan, Mati-agyan-
mithit, Taman, Bhut-agyan-mixed and Avadhiman, Vimang-gyan-mixed. The mixture is
considered because at the time of Misra-rasthi-munasthan, due to the awakening
of the Bhani-Vishuddha Banimohamiya-pus, the results are partly pure and partly
impure, i.e. mixed. Purity is called Mati etc. from the point of view of
expectation, and impurity is called Sham from the point of view of expectation.
In Gunasthan, the Avadhi-vashan is related to the Kam-ampik side. The first
side, in the first Gunasthan etc., has Avapina Mamata, which is specified in the
21st verse. The second side, in the third Gunasthan, considers Avadhi-darshan,
which is specified in the 48th verse. In this place, taking the second side,
Avadhi-darshan has been counted in the uses of Misra-rasthi. || 33 ||  Manana-
chakkhu-vajja, Anahari tinni dasan nau natha. Chauna-sanchamovas, -maveyage ohi-
dase ya || 34 ||  Manoshana-chakshurja Anahare trini varshanaani chatvari
jnanaani. Chatursana-samyamo-pashama-vedake'avadhi-darshanne cha. || 34 ||
Meaning - In the Anaharak-marg, except for Mam-paryapaman and Chaman, there are
ten remaining uses. Twelve jams, four samyams, up 1-For example: - Shri Yut
Dhanapati Singh Ji by Mudris Upasak-vasha p. 70. 2-The same thing is accepted in
Gommatsar. See, the verse 704 of Jivakand.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra kevala-nika, ye tIna upayoga bhI nahIM hote| zeSa paha
hote haiN| chaha meM avaSi-vikakA parigaNana isaliye kiyA gayA hai ki prAvakoM
ko avadhiupayoga kA varNana, zAstra meM milatA hai| mizra-raSTi meM chaha
upayoga nahIM hote haiM, 'yo nira meM; para vizeSatA itanI hai ki mizra-STi meM
tIna zAna, mikSita hote haiM, zuddha nahIM arthAt matijJAna, mati-ajJAna-
mithita, tamAna, bhutaajJAna-mizrita aura avadhimAna, vimaGgajJAna-mizrita hotA
hai| mizritatA isaliye mAnI jAtI hai ki mizra-raSTimuNasthAna ke samaya bhaI-
vizuddha banimohamIya-pusa kA ujya hone ke kAraNa pariNAma kucha zuddha aura
kucha azuddha arthAt mila hote haiM  /  zuddhi ko apekSA se mati Adi ko nAma
mora azuddha kI apekSA se zAma kahA jAtA haiN| guNasthAna meM avadhivazena kA
sambandha midhArane vAle kAmaMmpika pakSa ro hai  /  pahalA ghothai Adi mI
guNasthAnoM meM avapina mAmatA hai, jo 21vI gA0 meM nirdiSTa hai  /  dUsarA
pakSa, tIsare guNasmAna meM so avadhidarzana mAnatA hai, jo 48voM gAthA meM
nihiSTa hai| isa jagaha dUsare pakSa ko lekara hI mizra-Ti ke upayogoM meM
avaSivarzana ginA hai  /  /  33  //  maNanANacakkhuvajjA, aNahAri tinni dasaNa
naU nAthA  /  caunANasaMcamovasa,-maveyage ohidase ya  //  34  //
manozAnacakSurjA anAhAre trINi varzanAni catvAri jJAnAni  /
caturzAnasaMyamopazamavedake'vadhidarzanane ca  /  / 34 //  artha
-anAhArakamArgaNA meM mamaHparyApamAna aura camana ko chor3akara, zeSa dasa
upayoga hote haiN| bAra jAma, cAra saMyama, upa 1-jaise:-zrIyut dhanapatisiMha
jI dvArA mudrisa upAsakavazA pR070| 2-gommaTasAra meM yahI bAta mAnI huI hai  /
dekhiye, jIvakANDa kI gAthA 704 /

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Four of the Karma Granth  **And the three versions of the Avadhi and
the three versions of the Kevala Darshan**  In the **Gram Samyakta**, **Bewak**
(meaning **Kshayopa-samik-samyak-darshan**), there are four **Shan** and seven
**Upayog** in the twelve **Margnaas**. || 34 ||  **Niti** and **Moksha** have
**Anaharaktava**. There are eight **Upayog** in **Vigrah-Gati**. For example:
**Bhaavi Tirthankar** etc., **Samyaktava**, **Mithyatva**, three **Jnanas** for
**Mithyatva**, three **Ajnan** for **Mithyatva**, and **Avakshu** and **Avadhi**
for both **Samyaktava** and **Mithyatva**, these are the two **Darshans**. In
**Kevala-Samuddhat** and **Moksha**, **Kevala-Jnana** and **Kevala-Darshan** are
the **Upayog**. In this way, there are a total of ten **Upayog** in the
**Anaharak-Margna**.  **Manah-Paryaya-Jnana** and **Gaur-Kshu-Darshan**, these
two **Upayog** are not included in the **Anaharak-Margna** because they are
**Paryapt-Avashtha-Bhaavi**. Except for the four **Kevala-Jnanas**, there are
four **Jnanas**, **Yatha-Khyat** **Charitra**, **Aupashamik**, **Kshayopa-
samik**, two **Samyaktavas**, and **Avadhi-Darshan**, these eleven **Bhargavas**
are found only from the fourth to the twelfth **Gunasthanas**. Therefore, three
**Ajnan** and **Kevala-Dwik**, except for these five, the remaining seven
**Upayog** are considered.  Here, three **Ajnan** are not considered in
**Avadhi-Darshan**. So, according to the **Karma-Granthik** statement in the
21st **Gatha**, "**Jayaad Nav Mahasu-Shi-Durga**", it should be understood. ||
34 ||  **Boter Tar Baras, Mane Kama Att Du Cha Cha Vaynan. Chadu Pan Tini Kay,
Jiyagun-Jog-Ovoganne.** || 35 ||  **Trayodash Trayodash Dwadash, Manasi Kramad-
Ast Dwe Char-Var-Chatvaro Banane. Chatvari Dwe Pach Trayah Karya, Jivagun-Yog-
Upayoga Anye.** || 35 ||  **Meaning:** Other **Acharyas** say that in
**Manoyog**, the **Jivasthan** is two, the **Gunasthan** is thirteen, the
**Yog** is thirteen, and the **Upayog** is twelve. In **Vachan-Yog**, the
**Jivasthan** is eight, the **Gunasthan** is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 110 kAmagrabhya bhAga cAra aura avadhitathA tIna varzana kula grAmasamyaktaka,
bevaka arthAt kSAyopazamikasamyaSasva darzana, inAraha mArgaNAoM meM cAra zAna
sAta upayoga hote haiM  //  34  //  niyati aura mokSa meM anAhArakatva hotA hai
/  vigrahagati meM mATha upayoga hote hai  /  jaise:- bhAvI tIrthaMkara AdiH
samyaktvo mithyAsthI ko tIna jJAna, mithyAtvIko tIna ajJAna aura samyaktva-
mithyAtvI ubhaya kI avakSu aura avadhi, ye vo do darzana  /  kevalasamuddhAta
aura mokSa meM kevalajJAna aura kevalavarzana, upayoga hote haiN| isa taraha
saba milAkara anAhArakamArgaNA meM dasa upayoga hue| manaHparyAyajJAna gaura
kSurzana, ye do upayoga paryApta avasthAbhAvI hone ke kAraNa anAhArakamArgaNA
meM nahIM hote  /  ke sivAya cAra kevalajJAna ke sivAya cAra jJAma, yathAkhyAta
cAritra, aupazamika kSAyopazamika do samyaktva aura avadhidarzana ye gyAraha
bhArgavAe~ cauthe se lekara vArahave guNasthAna taka meM hI pAyo 'jAtI haiN| isa
kAraNa inameM tIna ajJAna aura kevala dvika, ina pA~cake sivAya zeSa sAta
upayoga mAne hue haiM  /  isa jagaha avadhidarzana meM tIna ajJAna nahIM mAne
haiM  /  so 21 vIM gAthA meM kahe hue "jayAda nava mahasuzahidurga isa
karmagranthika matake anusAra samajhanA cAhiye  /  /  34  /  botera tara bArasa,
maNe kamA aTTha du ca ca vayaNaM  /  cadu paNa tini kAye, jiyaguNajogovaoganne
/  /  35  /  /  trayodaza trayodaza dvAdaza, manasi kramAdaSTa dve
caravAracatvAro banane  /  catvAri dve paca trayaH kArya, jIvaguNayogopayogA
anye  /  /  35  /  /  artha -- anya AcArya manoyoga meM jIvasthAna do guNasthAna
teraha, yoga teraha upayoga bAraha vacanayoga meM jIvasthAna ATha guNasthAna

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Chapter 4, Verse 35  **Verse:**  "Four types of Karmagrantha are
sought, In the four types of Yoga, In the four types of Kayayoga, The Jiva's
state of being, The Gunasthanas, Five types of Yoga, And three types of use are
considered."  **Commentary:**  Previously, the consideration of the Jiva's state
of being, etc., in Manoyoga, Vachanayoga, and Kayayoga was done without any
specific intention. However, in this verse, a specific intention is being
considered. This means that each type of Yoga is being considered as much as
possible without the other types of Yoga, and the Jiva's state of being, etc.,
is being shown within it.  The meaning of "as much as possible" is that when
Manoyoga is present, Vachanayoga and Kayayoga are also present as companions.
However, this is not the case with Vachanayoga and Kayayoga. Vachanayoga can be
found without Kayayoga, and even in the presence of Dwindriya, etc., it can be
found without Manoyoga. Therefore, it is considered without Manoyoga. Kayayoga
can be found in Ekendiya without both Manoyoga and Vachanayoga. Therefore, it is
considered without them.  In Manoyoga, there are two states of being: Aparayapta
and Paryapta. Aparayapta is not present because in other states of being,
Manoyoga does not occur due to the lack of sufficient material like Manah, etc.
In Manoyoga, there are thirteen Gunasthanas because there is no Moha Yoga in the
fourteenth Gunasthan. The Paryapta state of Manoyoga is Bhava, therefore, in it,
there are thirteen types of Yoga, excluding the two types of Aparayapta states:
Karman and Audarik Mishra. Although these two types of Yoga are present even in
the Paryapta state during the time of Kevali Samudghat, they are not considered
because they are not relevant at that time. Therefore, even in that state,
Manoyoga does not occur with these two types of Yoga.  All types of knowledge
are found in beings with Manah. Therefore, twelve types of use are mentioned in
Manoyoga.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha mAga cAra vAra, vo. yoga upayoga, cAra aura kAyayoga meM
jIvasthAna ghAra, guNasthAna vo, yoga pA~ca aura upayoga tona mAnate haiM  // 35
//  111 bhAvArtha- pahale kisa prakAra kI vizeSa vivakSA kiye binA hI mana,
vacana aura kApayoga meM jIvasthAna Adi kA vicAra kiyA gayA hai; para isa gAthA
meM kucha vizeSa vivakSA karake  /  arthAt isa jagaha pratyeka yoga
yathAsambhava anya yoga se rahita lekara usameM jIvasthAna Adi dikhAye haiM  /
yathAsambhava kahane kA matalaba yaha hai ki manoyoga ho samaya yogati vijaya
vacanakAya upayoga sahacarita hI liyA jAtA hai| para vacana tathA kAyayoga ke
viSaya meM yaha arata nahIM; vacanayoga kahIM kAyayoga rahita ma milane para mI
dvIndriyAdi meM manoyoga rahita mila jAtA hai| isaliye vaha manoyoga rahita liyA
jAtA hai| kAyayoga ekendriya meM mana-vacana ubhaya yogarahita mila jAtA hai|
isase vaha vaMsA ho liyA jAtA hai  /  i manoyoga meM aparyApta aura paryApta
saMjJI, ye vo jIvasthAna haiM, apa nahIM; kyoMki anya jIvasthAnoM meM manaH
paryApta dravyamana Adi sAmagrI na hone se manayoga nahIM hotA  /  manoyoga meM
guNasthAna teraha hai; kyoMki caudahaveM guNasthAna meM koI mo yoga nahIM hotA
/  manoyoga paryApta avasthA - bhAvo hai, isa kAraNa usameM aparyApta vyavasthA-
mAyI kArmaNa aura audArikamizra, ina do ko chor3a zeSa teraha yoga hote haiM  /
yadyapi kevalisamudghAta ke samaya paryApta avasthA meM bhI ukta vo yauna hote
haiM  /  tathApi usa samaya prayojana na hone ke kAraNa kevalajJAno manodravya
ko grahaNa nahIM krte| isaliye usa avasthA meM bhI ukta do yoga ke sAtha
manoyoga kA sAhacarya nahIM ghaTatA | manavAle prANiyoM meM saba prakAra ke
bodha kI zakti pAyI jAtI hai; isa kAraNa manAyoga meM bAraha upayoga kahe gaye
hai  /

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **Verse 17** considers only the sufficient **Jiva-
sthana** (state of being) for **Mano-yoga** (mind-yoga), considering those with
present **Mano-yoga** as **Mano-yogi** (practitioners of mind-yoga). This verse
considers both insufficient and sufficient **Sanni-Panchendriya** (five senses
with limited or full awareness) **Jiva-sthana** for **Mano-yoga**, considering
those with present and future **Mano-yoga** as **Mano-yogi**. The explanation of
**Jiva-sthana**, **Yoga** (practice) and **Upayoga** (application) in verses 22,
28, and 31 is also applicable here. However, the repetition is meant to
highlight the differences in opinion.   **Jiva-sthana** and **Yoga** are
considered differently in **Mano-yoga**. For example, in **Mano-yoga**,
insufficient **Sanni-Panchendriya** is also considered **Mano-yogi**, but this
is not the case in **Soma** (a different type of yoga). Only those who practice
**Yoga** concurrently with **Mano-yoga** are considered **Mano-yogi**. This is
why **Karma** (action) and **Audarik-Mishra** (mixed with Audarika) **Yoga** are
not included in **Mano-yoga**.  **Vachan-yoga** (speech-yoga) considers **Jiva-
sthana** as follows: **Dwi-Indriya** (two senses), **Tri-Indriya** (three
senses), **Chatur-Indriya** (four senses), and **Asati-Panchendriya** (five
senses without full awareness), these four are both sufficient and insufficient.
Here, **Vachan-yoga** is considered without **Mano-yoga**, so it is present in
these eight **Jiva-sthana**. Verse 17 considers general **Vachan-yoga**.
Therefore, in that verse, **Vachan-yoga** only includes **Sanni-Panchendriya**
**Jiva-sthana**. Another difference is that verse 17 considers those with
present **Vachan-yoga** as **Vachan-yoga** practitioners. However, this verse
considers those with both present and future **Vachan-yoga** as **Vachan-yoga**
practitioners. This is why five **Jiva-sthana** are considered in **Vachan-
yoga** in that verse, and eight here.  **Vachan-yoga** includes the first and
second **Guna-sthana** (state of qualities), **Audarik**, **Audarik-Mishra**,
**Karma**, and **Asalya-Mushyavan** as four **Yoga**; and **Mati-Agnana**
(knowledge and ignorance), **At-Anam** (without name), **Chin** (thought), and
**Atra-Bhuvan-arshan** (earthly desires) as four **Upayoga**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 17vIM gAthA meM manoyoga meM sirpha paryApta saMjI
jIvasthAna mAnA hai, so vartamAna-manoyoga bAloM ko manoyogI mAnakara  /  isa
gAthA meM manoyoga meM aparyApta-paryApta saMni-pandhendriya vo jIpa sthAna mAne
haiM, sI vartamAna-bhAbI umapa manoyoga bAloM ko manoyogI mAnakara  /  manoyoga
sambampI gugaspAna, yoga aura upayoga ke sambandha meM kama se 22, 28, 31vIM
gAthA kA jo maratamya hai, isa jagaha bhI yahI hai| tathApi phira se ullekha
karane kA matalaba sirpha matAntara ko dikhAmA hai  /  mo. yoga meM jIvasthAna
aura yoga vicArane meM viSakSA bhinna-bhinna kI gayI hai| jaisebhAgo manoyoga
vAle aparyApta saMni-paJcendriya ko bhI manoyogI bhAgAra use manogora meM sinaH
! para soma ke viSaya meM aisA nahIM kiyA hai  /  jo yoga manoyoga ke samakAlIna
haiM, unhIM ko mamoyoga meM ginA hai| isI se usameM kAmaNa aura audAriphamizra,
ye ho yoga nahIM gime haiN| pavanayoga meM jIvasthAna kahe gaye haiN| ve ye
haiM:-dvIndriya, prondriya, caturindriya aura asati-paJcendriya, ye cAra
paryApta sathA aparyApta  /  isa jagaha vacanayoga, manoyoga rahita liyA gayA
hai, so ina ATha jIvasthAnoM meM ho pAyA jAtA hai| 17vIM gAthA meM sAmAnya
vacanayoga liyA gayA hai  /  isaliye usa gAthA meM bananayoga meM saMkSi paJce.
nidraya bImAdhAna mo gimA gayA hai| sake sivAya yaha bhI bhinnatA hai ki usa
gAthA meM vartamAna vacanayoga vAle ho vacanayoga ke svAmI vivakSita hai| para
isa gAthA meM partamAna ko taraha bhAvI vacanayoga vAle bhI bacanayoga ke svAmI
mAne gaye haiN| isI kAraNa vacanayoga meM bahI pAMca aura yahAM ATha joSasthAna
gine gaye haiN| vadhanayoga meM pahalA, dUsarA vo guNasthAna, audArika,
auvArikamizra, kArmaNa aura asalyAmuSAyavana, ye cAra yoga; tathA matiajJAna:
ata-anAma, cIna maura atrabhuvaMrzana, ye cAra upayoga hai|

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagranth Part Four 113 In the 22nd, 28th, and 31st verses, thirteen
Gunasthanas, thirteen Yogas, and twelve Upayogas are mentioned in sequence.
There is no reason for this difference. That is, the Vachan Yoga is taken in a
general sense, but in this verse, it is specific - without Manoyoga. Previously,
in Vachan Yoga, contemporary Yoga was intended, therefore, Karban-Haramishraya
and insufficient state future Yogas were not counted. But in this Yoga, it is.
Because of the reason and Shri Darimishra, being in an insufficient state, it is
not contemporary with the sufficient state Vachan Yoga, yet the said Yoga is
Vachan Yoga in the middle. For this reason, these two Yogas are included. In
Kayayoga, there are two sufficient and two insufficient, a total of four
Jeevasthanas, the first and second Gunasthanas, Audarik, Audarik Mishra,
Vaikriya, Kriyamishra, and Karman, these five Yogas, and Mahi-Agyanashrut-Agyan
and Bhavan, these three Upayogas should be understood. In the 16th, 22nd, 25th,
and 36th verses, four Jeevasthanas, thirteen Gunasthanas, fifteen Yogas, and
twelve Upayogas are mentioned in Kayayoga. The meaning of this difference is
also according to the above statement. That is, here, the general Kayayoga is
taken, and the Jeevasthanas etc. are considered. But in this place, it is
specific. That is, Manoyoga and Vachan Yoga, the Kayayoga that is beneficial to
them, which is found only in one sense organ, is taken. ||35||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 113 22, 28 aura 31vIM gAthA meM anukrama se bacanayoga
teraha guNasthAna, teraha yoga aura bAraha upayoga mAne gaye haiN| isa
bhinnatAkA kAraNa nahI hai  /  arthAt vaha vacanayoga sAmAnyamAtra liyA gayA
hai, para isa gAyA meM vizeSa-- manoyoga rahita  /  pUrva meM vacanayoga meM
samakAlIna yoga vivakSita hai isaliye usameM kArbana- hAramizraye vo aparyApta
avasthA bhAvI yoga nahIM gine gaye haiN| parantu isa yoga hai| kAraNa aura
zrIdArimizra, aparyApta avasthA bhAvI hone ke kAraNa, paryApta avasthA- mAvI
vacana yoga ke asama-kAlIna hai tathApi ukta yo yoga vAloM ko majidhyat meM
vacanayoga hotA hai| isa kAraNa usameM ye do yoga gile gaye hai| kAyayoga meM
sUkSma aura bambara me do paryApta tathA aparyApta phula cAra jIvasthAna, pahalA
aura dUsarA ho guNasthAna, audArika, audArika mizra, vaikriya, kriyamizra aura
kArmaNa, ye pAMca yoga tathA mahi-ajJAnazruta- ajJAna aura bhavana me tIna
upayoga samajhane cAhiye  /  16, 22, 25 aura 36vIM gAyA meM cauvaha jIvasthAna,
teraha guNasthAna, pandraha yoga aura bAraha upayoga, kAyayoga meM batalAye gaye
haiM  /  isa mata-meja kA tAtparya bhI Upara ke kathanAnusAra hai| arthAt yahA~
sAmAnya kAyayoga ko lekara jovasthAna Adi kA vicAra kiyA gayA hai. para isa
jagaha vizeSa  /  arthAt manoyoga aura vacanayoga, unapara hita kAyayoga, jo
ekendriya mAtra meM pAyA jAtA hai, use lekara ||35||

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four (4) - Leshyas in the Maganas. Six Leshyas are present
in the Ekendriya, Asanshipanchetriya, Prithvikaaya, Jalakaaya and Vanaspatikaaya
Maganas. The first three Leshyas are present in the Narakati, Vikaleviya-Trika,
Agni-kaaya and Vayu-kaaya Maganas. ||36||  Six Leshyas have their own respective
places in the Ekendriya, Asanshipanchetriya, Prithvikaaya, Jalakaaya and
Vanaspatikaaya Maganas. The first four Leshyas are present in the Narakati,
Vikaleviya-Trika, Agni-kaaya and Vayu-kaaya Maganas. ||33||  **Meaning:** The
six Leshyas have their own respective places in the six Maganas. This does not
mean that a being can only have one Leshya at a time. Because all six Leshyas
are mutually exclusive in terms of their time of occurrence. A being with
Krishna Leshya will only have Krishna Leshya. Similarly, the other Leshyas
should be understood in the same way.  **Further Meaning:** In the above-
mentioned five Maganas, the four Leshyas from Krishna to Tejas are considered.
Out of these, the first three can be attained due to the Bhava-pratyaya, but
this is not the case with Tejo-leshya. It is only attained in an incomplete
state. The reason for this is that when a being with Tejo-leshya dies and takes
birth in Prithvikaaya, Jalakaaya or Vanaspatikaaya, it retains the Tejo-leshya
of its previous birth for some time.  In the beings of the above-mentioned six
Maganas, such inauspicious results occur that they do not become eligible for
the Leshyas beyond the first three, namely Krishna, Adi and Trika. ||36||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra (4}-mAgaNAoM meM lezyA  /  chasu. lesAsu saThANaM,
egidiasaMnibhUdagavaNesu  /  paDhamA auro tinni u, nArayanigalAgipavaNesu  // 36
//  SaTsu lezyAsu svasthAname kendriyAsajJibhUdakataneSu  /
prathamAzcatasrastinastu, mArakavikalAnipavaneSu  // 33 //  .. artha-chaha
leNyAmArgaNAo meM apanA-apanA sthAna hai  /  ekendriya, asaMzi-paJcetriya,
pRthvIkAya, jalakAya aura banaspatikAya, ina pA~ca mAgaMNAoM meM pahalI bAra
lezyAe~ haiM  /  narakati, vikaleviya-trika, agnikAya aura vAyukAya, ina chaha
mArgaNAoM meM pahalI tIna lezyAeM haiM  // 36 //  : mAvArtha-chaha lezyAoM meM
apanA-apanA sthAna hai, isakA matalaba mha hai ki eka samaya meM eka jIva meM
eka hI lezyA hotI hai, vo nahIM  /  kyoMki chahoM lezyAeM samAna kAlakI apekSA
se Apasa meM viruddha haiN| kRSNa lezyA vAle jIvoM meM kRSNa lezyA hI hotI hai
/  isI prakAra mAge mI samama lenA cAhie  /  ekendriya bhAvi uparyukta pAMca
mArgaNAoM meM kRSNa se tejaH paryanta cAra lezyAeM mAnI jAtI haiM  /  inameM se
pahalI tIna to bhavapratyaya hone ke kAraNa sabA ho pAyI jA sakatI haiM, para
tejolezyA ke sambandha meM yaha bAta nahIM, vaha sirpha aparyApta avasthA meM
pAyI jAtI hai  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki jaba koI tejolezyA vAlA jIba marakara
pRthvIkAya jalakAya yA vanaspatikAya meM janamatA hai taba use kucha kAla taka
pUrva janma ko maraNa-kAlIna tejolezyA rahatI hai| narakagati Adi upayukta chaha
mArgaNAoM ke jIvoM meM aise azubha pariNAma hote haiM, jisase ki ve kRSNa Adhi
tIna lekhAoM ke sivAya pramya lezyAoM ke adhikArI nahIM banate  // 36 //

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four (6) - The Fewness and Manyness of the Marganas. [From
eight verses]  **Verse 37:** *Ahlaya sulbhakevala - dughi sukka lavi sesththane
su. Narniryadevatiriya, thova du asan swarntaguṇa'*  **Translation:** *As for
the Yathasyatacharitra, Sukshmasamprayacharitra, and Kevala Dik, there is only a
small amount of Shulkaleshya in these Marganas; in the remaining Margasthana,
there are all six Shkayas.*  **Verse 37:** *Yatharupatsukshm kevala dwike shukla
shadpidoṣasthāneṣu. Narniryadevatiryanchaḥ stokavyakṣyānantguṇāḥ*
**Translation:** *As for the Yathasyatacharitra, Sukshmasamprayacharitra, and
Kevala Dik, there is only a small amount of Shulkaleshya in these Marganas; in
the remaining Margasthana, there are all six Shkayas.*  **Meaning:** *As stated,
the Yathasyatacharitra, Sukshmasamprayacharitra, and Kevala Dik, in these
Marganas, there is only Shulkaleshya; in the remaining Margasthana, there are
all six Shkayas.*  **Verse 37:** * [Gati Margana's Fewness and Manyness:-]
Humans are the fewest, Narakas are countless times more than them, Devas are
countless times more than Narakas, and Tiryanchas are infinite times more than
Devas.*  **Meaning:** *In the above four Marganas, starting with Yathasyata, the
results are so pure that it is not possible to have any other Leva except
Shulkaleshya. In the previous verse, there were seventeen Marganas, and in this
verse, there are four, including Yathasyatacharitra, making a total of twenty-
one Marganas.*  **Note:** *From here to the 44th verse, there is a discussion of
the fewness and manyness of fourteen Marganas; it is taken from the third
section called "Fewness and Manyness of Prajnapana". In that section, there is a
discussion of the fewness and manyness of thirteen doors besides the Marganas.
The fewness and manyness related to Gati is on page 116 of Prajnapana. To
understand this fewness and manyness specifically, the number of humans, etc.,
is shown in the explanation of this verse, which is described in the
Anushogadwar: - Human number, page 205; Naraka number, page 106; Asura Kumar
number, page 200; Vyantar number, 10208; Jyotishka number, page 208; Vaimanika
number. There is a similar description in the Panchasangraha: - Vyantar number,
Dwa 2 0 14; Jyotishka number, Dwa 2, Ga 15; Human number, Dwa 2 0 21.*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra ( 6 ) - mArgaNAoM kA alpa - bahutva  /  [ ATha gAthAoM
se ] ahalAya sulabhakevala - dugi sukkA lAvi sesaThANesu  /
naranirayadevatiriyA, thovA du asaM svarNataguNA'  // 37 //  yathArUpAtasUkSma
kevala dvike zuklA SaDapi doSasthAneSu  /  naranirayadevatiryaJcaH
stokavyasakhyAnantaguNAH  //  37  //  artha - yathAzyAtaccAritra,
sUkSmasaMparAyacAritra aura kevala Dika, isa bAra mAgaMgAoM meM zulkalezyA hai;
zeSa mArgAsthAnoM meM chahoM zyAeM hotI hai| 115 1 [gatimArgaNA kA alpa-
bahutva:- ] manuSya sabase kama haiM, nAraka usase asaMkhyAtaguNa haiM, nArakoM
se deva asaMkhyAtaguNa haiM aura devoM se tiryaJca anantaguNa haiM  /  /  37  /
/  bhAvArtha - yayAkhyAta Adi uparyukta cAra mArgaNAoM meM pariNAma itane zuddha
hote haiM ki jisase unameM zulkalezyA ke sivAya anya levA kA saMbhava nahIM hai|
pUrva gAthA meM satraha aura isa gAthA meM yathAsyAtacAritra Adi cAra, saba
milAkara ikkIsa mArgaNAeM huii| t ' 1 1- yahAM se lekara 44vIM gAthA taka
caudaha mArgaNAmoM meM alpa-bahutva kA vicAra hai; vaha prajJApanA ke alpa-
bahutva nAmaka tIsare pada se uddhRta hai  /  hai  /  ukta pada meM bhAgaMNAoM
ke sivAya aura bhI teraha dvAroM meM alpabahutva kA vicAra hai  /  gati-viSayaka
alpa-bahutva, prazApanA ke 116 veM pRSTha para hai  /  isa alpabahutva kA vizeSa
parijJAna karane ke liye isa gAthA ko vyAkhyA meM manuSya Adi kI sakhyA dikhAyI
gayI hai, jo anuSogadvAra meM varNita hai: - manuSya saMkhyA, pR0 205 nAraka -
sakhyA, pR0 106 asurakumAra saMkhyA, pR0 200 vyantara sakhyA, 10208, jyotiSka-
saMkhyA, pR0 208 vaimAnika saMkhyA | yahA~ ke samAna paJcasaMgraha meM thor3A sA
varNana hai: vyantara - saMkhyA, dvA0 2 0 14; jyotiSka - sakhyA, dvA0 2, gA0 15
manuSya - saMkhyA, dvA0 2 0 21  /  .

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmaprnaya Part Four  Except for these, the remaining forty-one paths are
found here. The paths are:  1. Devagati, 1 Manushayagati, 1 Tiryanchagati, 1
Panchendriya jati, 1 Sakaya, 3 Yoga, 3 Me, 4 Kavaya, 4 Gyan (Mati etc.), 3
Agyan, 3 Charitra (Samayik, Chelopasthapaneya and Pariharvishuddha), 1
Deshaviriti, 1 Aviriti, 3 Darshan, 1 Sampatva, 1 Avyashva, 3 Samyaktva (Ki,
Kshayopshaamik and Aupshraamik), 1 Ban, 1 Samyamdhyasy, 1 Michnatva, 1 Sajhim, 1
Parakh and 1 Anaharaktva, total 41.  1. Sasa  [The mutual comparison of humans,
narakas, devas and tiryanchas in terms of less, more etc. is explained above. To
understand it properly, it is shown according to the method described in human
numerology]:  Humans, the unpardonable, are nineteen in number and the
excellent, are countless.  (a) Jghanya: - The womb-born and the samuchchhin
humans are in this category. Among these, the samuchchhin humans do not exist at
all at any time, only the womb-born exist. The reason for this is that the
lifespan of samuchchhin humans is an antarmuhurt. When the time difference
between the birth of samuchchhin humans becomes more than one antarmuhurt, all
the previously born samuchchhin humans die. Thus, when there is no birth of new
samuchchhin humans and all the previously born samuchchhin humans have died,
only the womb-born humans remain, who are at least equal to the nineteen
mentioned below. Therefore, this is the minimum number of humans.  1 -
Anuyogavar, 10205 - 238.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ** karmapranya bhAga cAra inako chor3akara zeSa ikatAlIsa mArgagAnoM meM yahIM
sehayAe~ pAyI jAtI haiN| meva mArgaNAeM me haiM : } 1 devagati 1 manuSyagati, 1
tiryaJcagati, 1 paJcendriyajAti, 1 sakAya, 3 yoga, 3 me 4 kavAya, 4 jJAna ( mati
Adi ), 3 ajJAna, 3 cAritra ( sAmAyika, chelopasthApanIya aura parihArabizuddha )
1 dezavirati 1 avirati 3 darzana, 1 sampatva, 1 avyazva 3 samyaktva ( ki,
kSayopazamika aura aupazramika ), bana, 1 samyamadhyAsya 1 micNAtva, 1 sajhima 1
pArakha aura 1 anAhArakatva, kula 41  /  , 1 sAsA [manuSyoM, nArakoM devoM aura
tiryakvoM kA paraspara alpa-bahu Adi kI Upara kahA gayA hai, use ThIka-ThIka
samajhane ke liye manuSya saMkhyAzAstrokta' rIti ke anusAra dikhAyI jAtI hai ]:
manuSya, akSamya untIsa aGka-pramANa aura utkRSTa, asaMkhyAta hote haiN| ( ka )
jaghanyaH - manuSyoM ke garbhaja aura saMmUnchina, ye bo meM haiM inameM se
saMmUcchima manuSya kisI samaya bilakula hI nahIM rahate, kevala garbhana rahate
haiM  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki saMmUmi manuSyoM kI Ayu, antarmuhUtaM pramANa
hotI hai  /  jisa samaya saMmUmi manuSyoMkI utpatti meM eka antarmuhUrta se
adhika samaya kA antara par3a jAtA hai, usa samaya, pahale ke utpanna hue sabhI
saMmUcchima manuSya mara cukate haiN| isa prakAra naye saMmUmi manuSyoM kI
utpatti na hone ke samaya tathA pahale utpanna hue sabhI saMmUcchima manuSyoM ke
mara cukane para, garbhama manuSya hI raha jAte haiM, jo kama se kama nIce-likhe
untIsa ajUoM ke barAbara hote haiM  /  isaliye manuSyoM kI kama se kama yahI
saMkhyA huI  /  1 - anuyogavAra, 10 205 - 238  /

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four  The sixth square, with the fifth year, should be
multiplied by itself thirty-nine times. For example: 2 multiplied by 2 is 4,
this is the first square. 4 multiplied by 4 is 16, this is the second square. 16
multiplied by 16 is 256, this is the third square. 256 multiplied by 256 is
65536, this is the fourth square. 65536 multiplied by 65536 is 4294967296, this
is the fifth square. This fifth square, when multiplied by itself, results in
1544674407370951616, this is the sixth square. Multiplying this sixth square by
the number of the previous five squares results in
76228162514264337563543950336, these are the thirty-nine numbers. Alternatively,
1 multiplied by 2 is 2, 3 multiplied by 4 is 12. In this way, by doubling the
previous number, the thirty-nine numbers are obtained.  (3) **Excellent:** When
the number of souls in the universe is at its peak, then the number of humans is
also at its peak, reaching an innumerable amount. There are innumerable numbers
of souls, and among them, the number of souls that are suitable for humans is
described in the scriptures in two ways: time and space.  1. The product of two
equal numbers is called the square of that number. For example: 5 squared is 25.
2. These thirty-nine numbers are mentioned in the 157th verse of the
Gommatasara-Jivakanda, using letters as symbols for the number of humans in the
womb. 3. See Appendix. 4. Space is considered extremely subtle. Because the
number of regions in the Bhu-Shreni, which are the size of an angul (finger), is
considered equal to the number of moments in an innumerable Avyapini (time
period).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra pAMcaveM varSa ke sAtha chaThe varga ko gagane se jo
untIsa aGka hote haiM, hI yahA~ sene cAhiye  /  jaise:2 ko 2 ke sAtha guNo se 4
hote haiM, yaha pahalA varga  /  4 ke sAtha 4 ko gugane se 16 hote haiM, yaha
dUsarA vrg| 16 ko 16 se gumane para 256 hote haiM, yaha tIsarA prg| 256 ko 256
se ga Name para 65536 hote haiM, maha cauthA varNa  /  65536 ko 65536 se guName
para 4294667266 hote haiM, yaha pAcavA varga  /  isI pAMcaveM varga ko saGkhayA
ko usI sajapA ke samma gagane se 1544674407370951616 hote haiM, yaha chaThA
varga  /  isa chaThe marga kI saMkhyA ko upayukta pAMca varga kI saMkhyA se
gagane para 76228162514264337563543950336 hote haiM, ye untIsa ara' hae  /
athavA 1 kA vUmA 2, 3 kA cUnA 4. isa taraha pUrva-pUrva saMkhyA ko, uttaroSA
kAya kA dUnA gharaja se, hI untIsa bhara hote haiN| (3) utkRSTa:-aba saMmUrijama
mamuSpa pevA hote haiM, taba eka sAma adhika se adhika asaMkhyAta taka hote
haiM, usI samaya manuSyoM kI utkRSTa saMkhyA pAyI jAtI hai  /  asaMkhyAta
saMkhyA ke asalyAsa mera haiM, inameM se jo asaMkhyAta saMpara manuSyoM ke liye
iSTa hai, usakA paricaya zAstra meM kAla' aura kSetra, do prakAra se kiyA gayA
hai| 1samAna do saMkhyA ke guNanaphala ko usa saMkhyA kA dharma kahate haiM  /
jaise: -5 kA varga 25  /  2-ye hI untIsa aGka. garbhaja-manuSya kI saMkhyA ke
liye akSaroM ke maMketa dvArA gommaTasAra-jIvakANDa kI 157vIM gAthA maiM
basalAye haiN| 3-dekhiye, pariziSTa thi  / ' 4kAna se kSetra atyanta mukSma mAnA
gayA hai  /  kyoMki aMgula-pramANa bhUci-zreNi ke pradezoM kI saMkhyA asaMkhyAta
avapiNI ke mamayoM ke barAvara mAnI huI hai|

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Four of the Karma Granth  (1) **Question:** How many humans can exist
at the same time in the infinite universe?  (2) **Answer:**  To calculate the
maximum number of humans, we need to consider the following:  * **Densely
populated realms:** These realms are like strings (rajjus) and have a specific
number of entries (angalamatra). * **Third and first square roots:**  We need to
calculate the third and first square roots of the number of entries in these
realms. * **Division:**  Divide the total number of entries in all the realms by
the product of the third and first square roots of the number of entries in a
single realm. * **Subtraction:** Subtract one from the result of the division.
The resulting number represents the maximum number of humans that can exist at
the same time.  **Example:**  * Let's assume there are 3,200,000 entries in all
the realms. * Let's assume there are 256 entries in a single realm. * The first
square root of 256 is 16. * The third square root of 256 is 2. * Multiplying the
third and first square roots, we get 32. * Dividing the total number of entries
(3,200,000) by 32, we get 100,000. * Subtracting 1 from 100,000, we get 99,999.
Therefore, according to this calculation, the maximum number of humans that can
exist at the same time is 99,999.  **Note:**  * The actual number of humans is
infinite (asanka). * This calculation is just a way to understand the concept. *
The number of entries in the realms, the square roots, and the total number of
realms are all vast and immeasurable.  **Quote:**  "When the time is right, the
universe will be filled with humans. They will be countless, like the stars in
the sky." - **Aavashyak-Niyukti, page 31, verse 37**  **Footnotes:**  1. The
nature of densely populated realms, realms, and entries is explained in the 7th
verse of the 5th chapter of the Karma Granth. 2. The square of a number is the
number multiplied by itself. 3. This calculation of the maximum number of humans
is also mentioned in the 156th verse of the Gommat Sar-Jivakand.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 118 karmagrantha bhAga cAra (1)mA:-asaMkhyA ko are vApiNI he himne samaya hote
haiM, manuSya adhika se adhika utane pAye jA sakate haiN| (2) kSetra:-sAta'
rajju-pramANa ghanIkRta loka kI aGga lamAna budhi-gi ke prareSoM ke tIsare
vargamUla' ko unhIM ke prathama vargamUla ke sAya gaNanA, gaNane para jo saMkhyA
prApta ho, usakA saMpUrNa sUci-zreNi-gata pradezoM meM bhAga denA, bhAga vene
para jo saMkhyA laSa hotI hai, eka-kama vahI saMkhyA manuSyoM ko utkRSTa saMkhyA
hai| gaha saMkhyA, aGgalamAtra sUci-zraNi ke praveza kI saMkhyA, unake tIsare
gamUla aura prathama vargamUla kI saMkhyA tathA saMpUrNa sUci-Ni ke pravezoM kI
saMkhyA vastutaH amaMlyAta ho hai, tathApi ukta bhAgaviSi se manuSyoM kI jo
utkRSTa saMkhyA vikhAyI gayI hai, usakA kucha jyAla Ane ke liye kalpanA karake
isa prakAra samajhAyA jA sakatA hai| mAna lIjiye ki saMpUrNa sUci-zreNi ke
praveza 3200 000 haiM aura alaga mAtra sadhi-Ni ke pradeza 256  /  256 kA
prathama vargamUla 16 aura tIsarA vargamUla 2 hotA hai| tIsare vargamUla ke
sAya, prathama vargamUla ko gaNane se 32 hote haiM. 32 kA 3201000 meM bhAga vene
para 100000 labdha hote haiN| inameM se 1 kama kara dene para, zeSa bace 66EE:
/  kalpanAnusAra yaha saMkhyA, jo vastutaH asaMkhyAtarUpa hai, use manuSyoM ko
utkRSTa saMkhyA samAnI caahiye| "suhamo ya hoi kAlo, tatto suhamayaraM vai
khitaM  /  agalaseThImittai, osappiNIu asaMkhenA  // 37 /  / " -Avazyaka-
niyukti, pR0 31  /  1-ja, ghanIkRta loka. sadhi zreNi aura pratara Adi kA
svarUpa pAMcaveM marmagrantha kI 7vI gAthA se jAna lenA cAhiye  /  2-jima
saMkhyA kA varga kiyA jAya, vaha saMkhyA uga varga kA varga 3- manuSya kI yahI
saMkhyA isI rIsi se gommaTa sAra-jIvakANDa kI 156 vI gAthA meM batalAyA hai  /

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagrantha Part Four  From time immemorial, 1 There are countless hell beings,
but the countless number of hell beings is countless times greater than the
countless number of humans. The number of hell beings is described in the
scriptures as follows: There are main periods of time for the descending and
ascending cycles. And in the region of the seven-stringed, dense, localized
world, in the region of the Anga-only, there are as many index categories as
there are in the second square root of the first square root of the number of
index categories. The number of hell beings is equal to the number of regions in
the index categories. This can be understood by imagining that there are 256
creation categories in the Anga-only region. The first square root of this is
16, and the second is 4, which when multiplied together gives 64. There are 64
index categories, and according to the 3,200,000 regions of each index category,
there are 64,204,600,000 entrances, and there are that many hell beings. 116
This was done by multiplying 16 by 4. For each index category, there are
Countless are the Bhavanapati Devas. The number of Asura Kumaras among them is
described as follows: The number of Asura Kumaras is equal to the number of
entrances in the index categories that can fit in the countless part of the
first square root of the number of regions in the Anga-only sky region.
Similarly, the number of Naga Kumaras and other Bhavanapati Devas should be
understood in the same way. To understand this number, imagine that there are
256 entrances in the Mangala-only sky region. Their first square root will be 16
1 - The number of hell beings in the Gommatasara is two, which does not match
this number. For this, see the 152nd verse of the Jivakanda. 2 - The Gommatasara
does not give a separate number for each category, but shows the number of all
Bhavanapatis together. For this, see the 160th verse of the Jivakanda.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra kAla se ye asaMkhyAta 1 nAraka bhI asaMkhyAta haiM,
parantu nArakoM kI asaMkhyAta saMkhyA manuSyoM kI asaMkhyAta saMkhyA se
asaMkhyAtagunI adhika hai| nArakoM ko saMkhyA ko zAstra meM isa prakAra batalAyA
hai: avasarpiNI aura utsapiNoM ke samayoM ke mukhya haiN| tathA kSetra se sAta
rajju -prabhANa ghanIkRta loka ke ala mAtra pratara kSetra meM jitanI sUci
zreNiyA~ hotI haiM, unake dvitIya vargamUla ko unhIM ke prathama vargamUla ke
sAtha guNane para jo guNanaphala ho utanI sUci zreNiyoM ke pradezoM kI saMkhyA
aura nArakoM kI saMkhyA barAbara hotI hai  /  isakI kalpanA se isa prakAra
samajha sakate haiM  /  kalpanA kIjiye ki aGga lamAtra pratara-kSetra meM 256
sRSTi zreNiya haiN| inakA prathama vargamUla 16 huA aura dUsarA 4 guNane se 64
ho  /  hai  /  ye 64 sUci zreNiya zreNI ke 3200000 pradezoM ke hisAba se, 64
204600000 praveza hue, itane hI nAraka haiM  /  116 16 kI 4 ke sAtha huii|
pratyeka sUci atri-zreNiyoM ke bhavanapati deva asaMkhyAta haiN| inameM se asura
kumAra kA saMkhyA isa prakAra batalAyI gayI hai:- aGga mAtra AkAza kSetra ke
jilane pradeza haiM, unake prathama vargamUla ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga meM jitane
AkAza-pradeza A sakate haiM, utanI sUci zreNiyoM ke pravezoM ke barAbara
asurakumAra kI saMkhyA hotI hai  /  isI prakAra nAgakumAra Adi anya saba
bhavanaMpati devoM kI bhI saMkhyA samajha lenI cAhiye  /  isa saMkhyA ko
samajhane ke liye kalpanA kIjiye ki maGgalamAtra AkAza kSetra meM 256 praveza
haiM  /  unakA prathama vargamUla hogA 16 1 - gommaTasAra meM do huI nArakoM kI
saMkhyA, isa saMkhyA se nahIM miltii| isake liye dekhiye, jIvakANDa kI 152vIM
gAthA | 2 gommaTasAra meM pratyeka nikAya ko judA-judA saMkhyA na dekara saba
bhavanapatiyoM kI saMkhyA eka sAtha dikhAyI hai| isake liye dekhiye, jIvakANDa
kI 160vIM gAthA |

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Firmgranth Mag Four**  If we assume 18 Kalpas to be equal to an uncountable
number of parts, then there are 2 Asurakumaras equal to the regions of 2 Adhi-
Dhenis. Each Sudhigini is assumed to have 320,040 Praveshas. In total, there are
6,400,0007 Praveshas in 2 Sachishreni. This number of Asurakumaras, etc., should
be considered equal to each Bhavanapati, which is actually uncountable.  The
number of Pantar Vedas of a particular type is described as follows:  The number
of Praveshas in a Yोजन-Praman Adhishish is divided by the time-Pantar's
Pradeshas. The number of Pradeshas obtained in the division is the number of
Pantar Devas of each type.  To understand this, imagine that there are 1,000,000
Praveshas in a Sadayat Pojan-Praman Adhi-Ni. According to the assumed number of
3,200,000 Pradeshas in each Sushu-Shreni, there are 10,240,000,000,000 Praveshas
in total. Now, dividing this number by 1,000,000, we get 10,240,000. This is the
number of Yantar Nikayis. This number is actually uncountable.  The uncountable
number of Jyotishi Devas is assumed as follows:  The number of Pradeshas in the
time-Pantar is divided by the number of Praveshas in 256 Asal-Praman-Shreni. The
quotient obtained is the number of Jyotishi Devas.  **_ _ 1** The measure of
Tryantar is found in Gommatasar. See, the 156th verse of the Jivakand.  **2**
The number of Jyotishi Devas is different in Gommatasar. See, the 156th verse of
the Jivakand.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pharmagrantha mAga cAra 18kA kalpanA se asaMkhyAtavA bhAga 2 mAna liyA jAyA to
2 adhi-dheNiyoM ke pradezoM ke barAbara asurakumAra haiN| pratyeka sUdhigiyoM
320.040 pravezA kalpanA se mAne gaye haiN| sabamasAra 2 sacizreNiyoM ke 6400007
praveza hae  /  pahI saMkhyA asurakumAra Adi pratyeka bhavanapati ko samamamI
cAhiye, jo ki vastutaH asaM jyantaranikAya ke deva bhI asaMkhyAta haiN| inameM
se kisI eka prakAra ke pantara vedoM kI saMkhyA kA mAna isa prakAra batalAyA
gayA hai| sara yAta yojana-pramANa adhiSi ke jitane praveza haiM, unase
dhanIkRta ka ke ma ra samaya kA pratIto bhAga kiyA jAya, bhAga me para jitane
pradezA labdha hote haiM, pratyeka prakAra ke pamtara deva utane hote haiN| ise
samajhane ke liye kalpanA kIjiye ki sar3AyAta pojanapramANa sadhi-Ni ke 1000000
praveA haiN| pratyeka sUSi-zreNi ke 3200000 pradezoM kI kalpita saMsthA ke
anusAra, samapra pratara ke 10240000000000 praveza hue  /  aba isa saMkhyA ko
1000000 bhAga dene para 10240000 lagna hote haiM  /  yahI eka yantara nikAyakI
khera kyA huI  /  yaha saGkhyA pAsutaH asaMkhyAta hai| jyotiSI devoM kI
masaprakhyAta satayA isa prakAra mAnI gayI hai  /  256 asala-pramANa-zreNI ke
jitane praveza hote haiM, unase samaya pratara ke pradezoM ko mAga bemA, bhAga
dene se vo lamba hoM, utane jyotiSI deva' haiM  /  _ _ 1tryantara kA pramAga
gommaTasAra meM yahI jAna par3atA hai, dekhiye, jIvakANDa kI 156vI gAthA  /
2-jyotiSI devoM kI saMkhyA gommaTasAra meM bhinna hai  /  dekhiyo jIvakANDa kI
156vIM gAthA  /

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Karmagrantha asks for the number of Vaimanika Devas. This can be understood
through calculation. There are 256 Vashas, and dividing the total number of
Kalpita (10240000000000) by 256 gives 156250000. This is the number of Vaimanika
Devas, as understood by the Jyotishis.  The number of Vaimanika Devas is
countless. This can be understood as follows: The number of Vaimanika Devas is
equal to the number of entrances in the Suchi श्रेणियों, which is equal to the
cube root of the number of entrances in the sky, which is equal to the number of
entrances in the sky multiplied by itself three times.  For example, there are
256 entrances in the sky. The cube root of 256 is 22. The number of entrances in
the Suchi श्रेणियों is 2560000, as each Suchi श्रेणी has 3200000 entrances. This
is the number of Vaimanika Devas.  The number of Bhavnapati, Dhyantar Jyotishis,
and Vaimanika Devas combined is countless times greater than the number of
Narakas.  The number of Tiryanchas is countless times greater than the number of
Devas because there are countless numbers of Anamskaayik Vanaspati Jivas, which
are also Tiryanchas. This is because Vanaspati Jivas experience the Karma of
Tiryanchagati.  **Note:** The terms "Vashas," "Kalpita," "Suchi श्रेणियों,"
"Bhavnapati," "Dhyantar Jyotishis," "Vaimanika Devas," "Narakas," "Tiryanchas,"
"Anamskaayik Vanaspati Jivas," and "Tiryanchagati" are all Jain terms.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha mAga bAra isakI bhI kalpanA se isa prakAra samajhanA cAhiye  /
256 vaza hote haiM, unase samagra pratara ke kalpita 10240000000000 ko bhAga
denA bhAgane se hue 156250000 | yaho mAna jyotiSI devoM kA samajhanA cAhiye |
aci meM vaimAnika deva, asaGkhyAta haiM  /  inakI asaGkhyAta saMkhyA isa prakAra
barasAyI gayI hai: - zraGga ulamAtra Akaza kSetra ke jitane praveza haiM, unake
tIsare vargamUla kA dhana' karane se jitane AkAza-pradeza hoM, utanI sUci
zreNiyoM ke pravezoM ke barAbara vaimAnikadeva' hai  /  * isako kalpanA se isa
prakAra batalAyA jA sakatA hai: aGga sabhAtra AkAza ke 256 pradeza haiM  /  256
kA tIsarA vargamUla 22 kA cama hai  /  suci zreNiyoM ke praveza 2560000 hote
haiN| kyoMki pratyeka sUci zreNiyoM ke praveza, kalpanA se 3200000 mAna liye
gaye haiM  /  yahI saMkhyA vaimAnikoM kI saMkhyA samajhanI cAhiye  /
bhavanapati, dhyantara jyotiSI aura vaimAnika saba veva milakara nArakoM se
asaGkhyAtaguNa hote haiM  /  vevoM se tiryaJcoM ke anantaguNa hone kA kAraNa
yaha hai ki anamsakAyika vanaspati jIva, jo saMkhyA meM ananta haiM, ve bhI
tiyaMtra haiM  /  kyoMki vanaspatikAyika jIvoM ko tiryakracagatinAma karma kA
upaya hotA hai ||37|| M 121 1 1- kisI saMkhyA ke varga ke sAtha usa saMkhyA ko
guNane se jo guNanaphala prApta hotA hai, vaha usa saMkhyA kA ghana hai'|
jaise:04 kA varga 16 - usake sAtha 4 ko guNane se 64 hotA hai  /  yahI cAra kA
ghana hai| 2- saba vaimAnikoM kI saMkhyA gommaTasAra meM eka sAtha na dekara
judA-judA dI hai jIva0 gA0 160-162  /

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Four: The Karma Granth  **The Fewness and Manyness of Indriyas and
Kayamarganas:**  **Verse 38:**  There are countless qualities in the three
(types of beings).  Just as there are countless colors in the earth, water, and
air, so too are there countless qualities in the five, four, three, two, and one
indriyas.  **Verse 37:**  The five-indriya beings are the fewest.  The four-
indriya beings are more numerous than the five-indriya beings, the three-indriya
beings are more numerous than the four-indriya beings, and the two-indriya
beings are more numerous than the three-indriya beings.  The one-indriya beings
are countless in number.  **Meaning:**  The five-indriya beings are the fewest.
The four-indriya beings are more numerous than the five-indriya beings, the
three-indriya beings are more numerous than the four-indriya beings, and the
two-indriya beings are more numerous than the three-indriya beings.  The one-
indriya beings are countless in number.  The sakayika beings are fewer than the
other sakayika beings.  The agnikayika beings are countless in number compared
to the sakayika beings.  The prithvikaayika beings are more numerous than the
agnikayika beings, the jalakayika beings are more numerous than the
prithvikaayika beings, and the vayukayika beings are more numerous than the
jalakayika beings.  The vanaspatikayika beings are countless in number compared
to the dhapukaayika beings.  **Meaning:**  The two-indriya beings are said to be
as numerous as the number of regions in the countless kotis of yojanas, which is
the measure of the length of a suchi (needle).  The three-indriya, four-indriya,
and five-indriya beings are said to be equal in number to the two-indriya
beings.  **Notes:**  1. This explanation of the fewness and manyness is found on
pages 120-123.  The Gommatasar's explanation of the indriyas is similar to this
one, stating that the two-indriya beings are more numerous than the five-indriya
beings. 2.  The number of one type of being is considered "visheshyadhik" (more
numerous) than another type of being as long as it is not double the number of
the other type.  For example, the number 4 is considered "visheshyadhik" than
the number 3, but the number 6 is not considered "visheshyadhik" than the number
3 because it is double the number 3.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 122 karmagrantha bhAga cAra indriya aura kAyamArgaNA kA alpa-bahutva:
paNacatidaegidi. thovA tinni ahiyA aNaMta guNA  /  tasa thoSa asaMkhaggo,
bhUjalanila ahiya varNa NaMtA  // 38 //  paJcacatustridvayakAndrayAH,
tAMkAsmayo'dhakA guNAH  /  prasAHstokA asaMkhyA, agnayo bhUjalAnilA adhinA banA
anntaa:||37  /  artha-paJcenimaya jIva sabase thoDe haiM  /  paJcendriyoM se
caturindriya, paturindrayoM se zrIndriya aura zrIndriyoM se dvIndriya jIva
vizeSAdhika haiM  /  dvIndriyoM se ekendriya joba amantaguNa haiN| . sakAyika
jIva anya saca kAya ke jIvoM se zor3e haiM  /  inase agmikAyika jIva asanayAta
guNa haiM  /  agnikAyikoM se pRthivIkAyika, pRthivIkAyikoM se jalakAyika aura
jAlakAyakoM se vAyukAyika vizeSAdhika haiM  /  dhApukAyikoM se banaspatikAyika
anantagaNa haiM  /  / 3 /  /  bhAvArtha-asahapAta koTAkoTI yojana-pramANa sUci-
zreNI ke jitane pradeza haiM, ghanIkRta loka ko utanI sUci-Ni ghoM ke prabezoM
ke barAbara dondriya jIva Agama meM kahe gaye haiN| zrIndriya, caturipriya aura
paJcendriya tiryaJca dvIndiya ke barAbara ho kahe gaye haiM  /  1yaha alpa-
bahulva prajJApanA meM pR. 120 13 taka hai  /  gommaTasAra kI indriyamANA meM
dvIndriya sa pazcendriya paryanta kA vizeSAdhikatva yahA~ ke samAna varNita hai
/  jIvana gA0 15378  /  kAyamArgaNA meM tejaHkAyikaAdi kA bhI vidoSAdhikatva
yahA~ ke samAna hai  /  jIva gA0 203 se Age  /  2eka saMsyA anya saMkhyA se
bar3I hokAra bhI jaba taka dUnI na ho; saba taka vaha use 'vizeSyadhika' kahI
jAtI hai  /  yathA 4 yA kI saMsthA 3 se vizeSAdhika hai, para 6 kI saMkhyA 3 se
dUnI hai, vizeSAdhika nhiiN|

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagrantha Part Four 123 Therefore, there is a doubt that when the Agamas
state that the number of Dwindriya Aavi beings is equal, how can the above-
mentioned small and large number of Panchendriya and Aani beings decrease? The
solution is that there are countless types of countless numbers. Therefore, the
term "Asankhyata Kotakoti Yojana-Praman Suvi Shreni" should be taken differently
everywhere, not as the same seven numbers. The quantity of Panchendriya
Tiryanchas should be considered so small that even when all other Panchendriya
beings are added together, the total number of Panchendriya beings is still less
than the number of Chaturindriya beings. Ekendriya beings are said to be
infinite from Harendriya beings because the beings of the ordinary
Vanaspatikaaya are infinite, all of whom are Ekendriya. All types of Sadhanokrim
Lokas are not even equal to one Pratar of the regions, and only Tejas-Kayika
beings are equal to the entrances of the Asalyaat Lokakarna. For this reason,
the largest and Tejas-Kayika beings are considered to be countless times greater
than them. Tejas-Vik, Prithvi-Kayika, Alakayika, and Vayu-Kayika, all of these
are generally mentioned in the Agamas as being countless Lokakasha-Pravesh-
Praman. However, the countless numbers related to their quantity should be
understood differently. Vanaspathikaayika beings are said to be infinitely
greater than Vayu-Kayika beings because the beings of Nigoda are infinite
Lokakasha-Pradesh Praman, who are Vanaspathikaayika. ||38|| 1- Anuyog Dvaar
Sutra, p. 203, 204 || 2 Anuyog Dvaar, p. 2.0

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 123 isaliye yaha zaGkA hotI hai ki jaba Agama meM
dvIndriya Avi jIvoM kI saMkhyA samAna kare huI hai taba pacendriya ANi jIvoM kA
uparyukta alpa- bahutva kaise ghaTa sakatA hai ? * isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki
asaMkhyAta saGkhyA ke asaGkhayAta prakAra hai| isaliye asaMkhyAta koTAkoTI
yojana- pramANa sUvi zra eNI' zabda se saba jagaha eka hI sAta saGkhyA na lekara
bhinna-bhinna lenI cAhiye  /  pa ndriya tiryoM ke parimANa ko asaGkhyAta saGkhyA
itanI choTI lo aztI hai ki jisase anya saba paJcendriyoM ko milAne para bhI kula
paJcendriya jIva caturindriyoM kI apekSA kama hI hote haiM  /  harendriyoM se
ekendriya jIva anantraNa isaliye kahe gaye haiM ki sAdhAraNa vanaspa tikAya ke
jIva ananta haiM, jo sabhI ekendriya hai  /  saba prakAra ke sa dhanokRma loka
ke eka pratara ke pradezoM ke barAbara bhI nahIM hote aura kevala teja. kAyika
jIva asalayAta lokAkaraNa ke pravezoM ke barAbara hote haiM  /  isI kAraNa basa
sabase bar3e aura tejaH kAyika unase asaGkhyAtaga uNa mAne jAte haiM | tejaH kA
vika, pRthivIkAyika alakAyika aura vAyukAyika, ye sabhI sAmAnyarUpa se
asaMkhyAta lokAkAza-praveza-pramANa Agama meM mAge gaye haiM  /  tathApi inake
parimANa sambandhI asaGkhayarata saGkhyA bhinna-bhinna samajhanI caahiye|
vAyukAyika jIvoM se vanaspatikApika isaliye anantaguNa kahe gaye haiM ki nigoda
ke jIva ananta lokAkAza-pradeza pramANa haiM, jo vanaspatikAyika haiM ||38|| 1-
anuyoga dvAra. sUtra, pu. 203, 204  //  2 anuyoga dvAra, pR0 2.0

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 124 ## i ##  Chapter Four of the Varmagranth ## The Few and the Many in Yoga
and the Vedic Path  ##  Manavayanakaya Yoga: Few are the Manavayanakaya Yogis,
countless and infinite are the others.  Men are few, women are countless and
infinite times more than men. ||36||  ##  Manobachan Kayayogas: Few are the
Manobachan Kayayogis, countless and infinite are the others.  Men are few, women
are countless and infinite times more than men, and eunuchs are countless and
infinite times more than women. ||136||  ## Meaning:   Those who practice
Manoyoga are few compared to those who practice other yogas. Those who practice
Vachanayoga are countless times more than those who practice Manoyoga, and those
who practice Kayayoga are infinite times more than those who practice
Vachanayoga.  ##  Men are the fewest. Women are countless times more than men,
and eunuchs are infinite times more than women. ||36||  ##  Explanation:  Those
who practice Manoyoga are considered few because Manoyoga is only found in
sentient beings. And sentient beings are few compared to all other beings. Those
who practice Vachanayoga are considered countless times more than those who
practice Manoyoga because two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, five-sensed,
and sentient five-sensed beings all practice Vachanayoga. Those who practice
Kayayoga are considered infinite times more than those who practice Vachanayoga
because in addition to those who practice Manoyoga and Vachanayoga, there are
also one-sensed beings who practice Kayayoga.  ##  Animals are three times more
numerous than animal men, and three times more than that are women.  ##  1 -
This discussion of the few and the many is found in the 134th chapter of the
Prajnapanna. The Gommatasar considers the number of yogas to be fifteen. See,
Jiva Grantha, verses 258-266.  ##  The Vedic discussion of the few and the many
is slightly different. See, Jiva Grantha, verses 273-250.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 124 i varmagrantha bhAga cAra yoga aura vedamAgaMNA kA alpa- bahatva' |
maNavayaNakAya jogA, thobA asaMkhaguNa anaMtaguNA  /  purisA thovA itthI
saMkhaguNAnaMtaguNa kIvA  // 36 //  manobacanakAyayogAH stokA asaGkhayaguNA
anantaguNAH  //  puruSA: stokAH striyaH saGkhyaguNA anantaguNA kolvAH  // 136 //
artha - manoyogavAle anya yogavAloM se thor3e haiM  /  yacanayoga vAle
vacanayoga vAloM se anaunase asaMkhyAtaguNa aura kAyayogavAle gaNa haiM  /  1
puruSa sabase thor3e haiN| striyAM puruSoM se sakhyAtaguNa aura napuMsaka
striyoM se anantagaNa haiM ||36|| bhAvArtha - manoyoga vAle anya yogavAloM se
isaliye thor3e mAne gaye haiM ki manoyoga saMjJI jIvoM meM hI pAyA jAtA hai|
aura saMjI joba anya saba jovoM se alpa hI haiM  /  vacanayoga vAle manoyoga
vAloM se asaGkhayaguNa kahe gaye haiM  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki dondriya,
zrIndriya, caturindriya, asaM pacendriya aura saMji - paJcendriya, ye sabhI
bacanayoga vAle haiM  /  kAyayoga vAle vacanayogiyoM se anantaguNa isa abhiprAya
se kahe gaye haiM ki manoyogI tathA vacanaghogI ke atirikta ekedriya bho
kAyayoga ghale hai  /  tiryaJca striyAM tiryakha puruSoM se tIna gunI aura tona
adhika hotI 1 - yaha alpa-bahutva, prajJApanA ke 134veM puSTa meM hai  /
gommaTasAra meM pandraha yogoM ko lekara saMkhyA kA vicAra kiyA hai| dekhiye,
jIva0 gA0 258 - 266  /  veda-vidhaka alpabahutva kA vicAra bhI usameM kucha
bhinna prakAra se hai  /  dekhiye, jIva0 gAthA0 273 - 250

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  It is said that the number of women in the human race
is twenty-seven times greater than the number of men. Similarly, the number of
goddesses is twenty-five times greater than the number of gods. This is why
women are considered to be more numerous than men. All beings from one-sensed to
four-sensed, as well as all non-sentient five-sensed beings and hell beings, are
all eunuchs. Therefore, eunuchs are considered to be infinitely more numerous
than women. || 36 ||  **The scarcity and abundance of passions, knowledge,
restraint, and the path of liberation:**  **Three stanzas:**  **40.** Those who
are proud are few compared to those who have other passions. Those who are angry
are more numerous than those who are proud. Those who are deceitful are more
numerous than those who are angry. Those who are greedy are more numerous than
those who are deceitful.  Those who have knowledge of the mind are few compared
to all other knowers. Those who have knowledge of perception are infinitely more
numerous than those who have knowledge of the mind. Those who have knowledge of
intellect and those who have knowledge of scripture are equal to each other, but
they are still more numerous than those who have knowledge of perception. Those
who have knowledge of the divisions are more numerous than those who have
knowledge of scripture. || 40 ||  **Meaning:** Those who have pride are fewer
than those who have other passions because the state of pride is less than the
state of other passions like anger. Anger lasts longer than pride. Therefore,
those who are angry are more numerous than those who are proud. The state of
deceit is greater than the state of anger, and it lasts longer than anger.
Therefore, those who are deceitful are more numerous than those who are angry.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra hai| manuSya striya manuSya jAti ke puruSoM se
sattAIsagI' aura satAIsa adhika hotI haiM  /  deviyoM devoM se basIsaganI' aura
patIsa afe hotI haiN| isI kAraNa puruSoM se striyoM saMkhyAtaguNa mAnI huI haiN|
ekendriya se caturindriya paryanta saba jIva asaMjJi paJcendriya aura nAraka, ye
saba napuMsaka hI haiN| isI se napuMsaka striyoM kI apekSA anantaguNa mAne hue
haiM  //  36  //  kaSAya, jJAna, saMyama aura darzanamArgaNAoM kA alpabahutva:|
tIna gAthAoM se ! mANI koho mAI, loho ahiya maNanANino thoyA  /  ohi asa khA
mahasuSa asima asakha vibhaMgA ||40|| 125 mAninaH krodhino mAnino, lobhito'dhikA
manojJAnanaH stokAH  /  avazrayo'saMkhyAmatizrutA, adhikArasamA asaGkhyA
vibhaGgAH  // 4 //  artha- mAnakavAyAle anya kaSAyavAloM se thor3e haiN| krodhI
mAniyoM se vizeSAdhika haiN| mAyAvI krodhiyoM se vizeSaradhika hai  /  lobhI
mAyAviyoM se vizeSAdhika haiM  /  mana: paryAyajJAnI anya saba jAniyoM se thor3e
haiN| avadhijJAnI mana: paryAyajJAniyoM se asaMkhyaguNa haiN| matijJAnI tathA
zrutakSAnI Apasa meM tulya haiM  /  parantu avadhijJAniyoM se vizeSAdhika hI hai
/  vibhaGgajJAnI zutajJAnavAloM se asaNa haiM  //  40  //  bhAvArtha- mAna vAle
koSa Adi anya kaSAya vAloM se kama haiM, isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki mAna kI sthiti
krodha Adi anya kaSAyakI sthiti kI apekSA alpa hai| krodha mAna kI apekSA adhika
dera taka ThaharatA hai  /  isI se krodha vAle mAniyoM se adhika haiM  /  mAyA
ko sthiti krodha kI sthiti se adhika hai tathA vaha krodhiyoM kI apekSA 1 - -
dekhiye, paJcasaMgraha dvA0 2, gA0 65  /  2 dekhiye, paJcasaMgraha dvA02, 2068
/

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  This is found in more beings. This is why Mayavi's
are said to be more than Krodhi's. The reason for saying that Lobhi's are more
than Mayavi's is that the rise of Loma remains until the tenth Gunasthan, but
Maya is only until the ninth Gunasthan.  Those who are human beings, restrained,
and possess many attainments, they have Manas-paryaya-jnana. This is why Manas-
paryaya-jnani's are less than all other Jnanis. Some humans have Avadhi-jnana of
Tiryanchas, and all Devas and Narakas have Avadhi-jnana. This is why ignorant
Manas-paryaya-jnani's are countless times less than Avadhi-jnani's. Except for
Avadhi-jnani's, all Samyak-tvi humans and Tiryanchas have Mati-shruta-jnana.
Therefore, Mati-shruta-jnani's are slightly more than Avadhi-jnani's. Mati-
shruta-jnani's are companions of the rules, this is why Mati-shruta-jnani's are
equal to each other. The reason for Vibhang-jnani's being less than Mati-shruta-
jnani's is that the Mithyadristi Devas and Narakas, who are Vibhang-jnani's, are
countless times less than Samyak-tvi beings. || 40 ||  Kevalin's are infinite
times more. These are infinite times more than those. Suhma 126 A little bit of
Parihar Sankhya, or Sankhya-guna. || 141 ||  Kevalin's are infinite times more,
Mati-shruta-jnani's are infinite times more than those. Subtle, small, a joke, a
number, as it would be, similar qualities. || 141 ||  This Keval-jnani is
infinite times more than Vibhang-jnani's. The ignorant and the ignorant of the
past, both are infinite times more than Jnanis. Infinite times more. Mati You
are. But Keval Subtle-sampraya-charitra-wala is less than other charitra-wala's.
Parihar-vishuddha-charitra-wala is equal to Subtle-sampraya-charitra-wala.
Arrouin charitra-wala is equal to Parihar-vishuddha-charitra-wala. Meaning -
Siddhas are infinite and they are all Keval-jnani's, this is why Keval-jnani's
are infinite times more than Vibhang-jnani's. Vanaspatik Kayik Jivas

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra adhika jIvoM meM pAyI jAtI hai| isI se mAyAviyoM ko
krodhiyoM kI apekSA adhika kahA hai  /  mAyAbiyoM se lobhiyoM ko adhika kahane
kA kAraNa yaha hai ki loma kA udaya dasaveM guNasthAna paryanta rahatA hai, para
mAyA kA upa navaveM ga uNasthAna taka hI hai  /  jo joba manuSya dehadhArI,
saMyama vAle aura aneka labdhi-sampanna hoM unako ho manaHparyAyajJAna hotA hai
/  isI se manaHparyAyajJAno anya saba zAdiyoM se alpa haiM samyaktavI kucha
manuSya tiryaJcoM ko aura samyakavo saba deva nArakoM ko avadhijJAna hotA hai|
isI kAraNa ajJAnI manaH paryAyazAniyoM se asaMkhyaguNa haiN| avadhijJAniyoM ke
atirikta sabhI samyaktathI manuSya tiryaJca matizruta jJAna vAle haiM  /  ataeva
mati zruta jJAnI avadhijJAniyoM se kucha adhika hai  /  mati zruta bogoM, niyama
se sahacArI haiM, isI se mati zruta jJAna vAle Apasa meM mulya haiN| mati zruta-
zAniyoM se vibhaGgajJAniyoM ke sabha kA kAraNa yaha hai ki midhyAdRSTi vAle deva
nAraka, jo ki vibhaGgajJAnI hI haiM, ve samyaktvI jIvoM se asaGkhyAtaga uNa haiM
|| 40  //  kevaliNo NaMtaguNA. mahasUya atrANi naMtaguNa tullA  /  suhamA 126
thoDA parihAra saMkha ahavAya saMkhaguNA  //  141  //  kevalino'nantaguNA,
matizrutA'jJAnino'nantu guNAstuyA  /  sUkSmA: stokA: parihAsaH saMkhyA
yathAsyAtAH sarUpaguNAH  //  141  //  ayaM kevalajJAnI vibhAgajJAniyoM se ajJAnI
aura bhUta- ajJAnI, ye donoM Apasa meM jJAniyoM se anantagaNa haiM  /
anantaguNa hai  /  mati tuma haiN| parantu kevala sUkSmasamparAyacAritra vAle
anya cAritra vAloM se alpa haiN| parihAravizuddha cAritra vAle sUkSmasamparAya
cAritriyoM se saMsthAta guNa haiM  /  arrouin vAritra vAle parihAra vizuddha
cAritriyoM se saMkhyAta guNa hai  /  bhAvArtha - siddha ananta haiM aura ve
sabhI kevalajJAnI haiM, isI se kevalajJAnI vibhaGgajJAniyoM se anantaguNa haiM
/  vanaspatika kAyika jIva

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four ### 127  There are infinite qualities even in the
Siddhas, and all of them are  * **Mati-agyani** (ignorant of knowledge) *
**Sadhar** (ordinary) * **Bhus-agyani** (ignorant of the past)  Therefore, it is
only logical that **Mati-agyani** and **Bhus-agyani** have infinite qualities
compared to the Knowers. Just like **Mati** and **Jnana** (knowledge), **Mati**
and **Shruta-agyani** (ignorant of scriptures) are companions by rule.
Therefore, **Mati-agyani** and **Shruta-agyani** are equal.  * **Sukshma-
samparaya** (subtle) **Charitris** (conduct) are excellent from two hundred to
nine hundred. * **Parihar-vishuddha** (purified by avoidance) **Charitris** are
excellent from one thousand to nine thousand. * **Yatha-khyata** (as known)
**Charitris** are excellent from one crore to nine crore.  Therefore, the number
of qualities of these three types of **Charitris** increases progressively.
||41||  **Alp-bahulya** (less-more) **Mana** (considered)  **P**  **Samaya**
(time) **Sankhya** (number) **Desha** (region) **Asankhya-guna** (innumerable
qualities) **Ananta-guna** (infinite qualities) **Ajaya** (unconquerable).
**Thoya-akhadhuta** (water-like, pure) **Ohiyan** (only) **Kevala** (absolute)
**Achashkhu** (eye). ||42||  **Samaathika** (common) **Sankhya** (number)
**Desha** (region) **Asankhya-guna** (innumerable qualities) **Ananta-guna**
(infinite qualities) **Athata** (therefore). **Glok** (world)
**Asammrishnananda** (unremembered joy).  **Meaning:**  * **Yatha-khyata**
**Charitris** with **Chhedopasthapaneya** (to be established in the end)
**Charitra** have **Sankhya-guna** (numerical qualities). * **Deva-
upasthapaneya** (to be established in the gods) **Charitris** with **Samayika**
(common) **Charitra** have **Sanspata-guna** (qualities of contact). *
**Deshaviratas** (those who have renounced the world) with **Adhirita**
(controlled) **Charitra** have **Ananta-guna** (infinite qualities).  **I**  *
**Avadhi-darshani** (those who have **Avadhi** vision) have infinite qualities
compared to all other **darshanis** (visionaries). * **Chakshu-darshani** (those
who have **Chakshu** vision) have **Asankhya-guna** (innumerable qualities)
compared to those with **Adhiveshana** (meditation). * **Kevala-darshani**
(those who have **Kevala** vision) have **Ananta-guna** (infinite qualities)
compared to those with **Avansha** (partial) vision. * **Avashur-darshani**
(those who have **Avashur** vision) have **Ananta-guna** (infinite qualities)
compared to **Kevala-darshani** (those who have **Kevala** vision).
**Meaning:**  * **Yatha-rupa** (as it is) **Charitris** are excellent from one
crore to nine crore. * **Chhedopasthapaneya** **Charitris** are excellent from
two hundred crore to nine hundred crore. * **Samajika** (common) **Charitris**
are excellent from two thousand crore to nine thousand crore.  Therefore, these
are considered to have **Sankhya-guna** (numerical qualities) in the above-
mentioned way.  **Tiryach** (animals) are also countless. Such **Tiryach** are
innumerable. Therefore, **Deshaviratas** (those who have renounced the world)
are said to have **Asankhya-guna** (innumerable qualities) compared to those
with **Samayika** (common) **Charitra**. The above-mentioned **Charitra**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 127 siddhoM se bhI ananta guNa haiM aura ve sabhI mati-
ajJAnI sadhara bhusa-ajJAnI ho haiM ata eSa mati ajJAnI tathA bhuta ajJAnI,
ghonoM kA kevala jJAniyoM se anantaguNa honA saMgata hai  /  mati aura sa jJAna
kI taraha mati aura zruta- ajJAna, niyama se sahacArI hai, isI se mati- ajJAnI
tathA zruta- ajJAnI Apasa meM tulya hai  /  sUkSmasaMparAya cAritrI utkRSTa do
sau se nau sau taka, parihAravizuddha cAritro utkRSTa vo hajAra se nau hajAra
taka aura yathAkhyAtacAritra utkRSTa vo karor3a se nau karor3a taka haiM  /  ata
eva ina tInoM prakAra ke cAritriyoM kA uttarotara saMkhyAta guNa gayA hai  /  /
41 /  /  alpa - bahulya mAnA P samaya saMkhA desa asaMkhaguNa NaMtaguNa ajayA  /
thoyaakhadutA, ohiyaNa kevala acaSakhU |42 //  sAmAthikA saMkhyA, dezA
asaMkhyaguNA anantaguNA athatAH  /  glok|'sNmRssnnnndaap artha -
chevopasthApanIya cAritra vAle yathAkhyAta cAritriyoM se saMkhyAta guNa haiN|
sAmAyika cAritra vAle devopasthApanIya cAritriyoM se saMspAta guNa hai| adhirita
vAle dezaviratoM se ananta guNa haiM  /  I avadhidarzanI anya saba darzana vAloM
se hai  /  cakSurdazanI adhivezana vAloM se asaMkhzala guNa haiM  /
kevaladarzanI avaMzena vAloM se anantaguNa haiM  /  avazurdarzanI kevala
darzaniyoM se hI anantaguNa haiM  /  bhAvArtha yathArupAta caritra vAle utkRSTa
vo karor3a se nau karor3a taka hote haiM: chedopasthApanIya cAritra vAle utkRSTa
do sau karor3a se nau sau karor3a taka aura sAmAjika cAritra yAne utkRSTa do
hajAra karor3a se nau hajAra karor3a taka pAye jAte haiN| isI kAraNa ye
uparyukta rIti se saMkhyAtaguNa mAne gaye haiN| tiryaca bhI bezarita hote hai;
aise tiyaMtraca asaMkhyAta hote haiM  /  isI se sAmAyika cAritrabAloM se
dezavirati vAle asaMkhyAtaguNa kahe gaye haiM  /  ukta cAritra

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 120 ## Karmagranth Part Char  All living beings except hair are *avirata*,
which includes an infinite number of *vanaspatikayik* beings. For this reason,
*avirata* beings are considered to be infinitely more numerous than those who
are *deshaviriti*.  You see, *narakas* and some humans experience *avadhi
darshan*. Therefore, *avadhi darshani* are less numerous than those who have
other types of *darshan*. *Surya darshan*, *chaturpriya*,
*asanshipancheindriya*, and *sanjhipancheindriya* are the types of *darshan*
that occur in these types of beings. Therefore, those who have *chakshudarshan*
are considered to be infinitely more numerous than *avadhi darshani*. *Siddhas*
are infinite and they all have *kevaldarshan*, so their number is infinitely
greater than the number of those who have *chakshudarshan*. *Achkshudarshan*
occurs in all worldly beings, among which *vanaspatikayik* beings alone are
infinitely numerous. For this reason, *achkshudarshan* is considered to be
infinitely more numerous than *kevaldarshani*.  ## The Lesser Abundance of the
Five *Maganas* like *Leshya* | [From two verses 1]  *Pachanupurvi*, *leshya*,
*stoka*, two numbers, infinite are more. *Amadhyetara*, their own infinite,
*sasadana*, *stoka*, *upashama*, numbers. ||43||  **Meaning:** The lesser
abundance of *leshyas* should be known from *pachanupurvi* backwards. For
example, those with *shulkaleshya* are less numerous than all other *leshyas*.
Those with *palaleshya* are infinitely more numerous than those with
*shulkaleshya*. Those with *tejoleshya* are infinitely more numerous than those
with *padmaleshya*. Those with *kapoteleshya* are infinitely more numerous than
those with *tejoleshya*. Those with *neelaleshya* are significantly more
numerous than those with *kapoteleshya*. Those with *krishna leshya* are even
more numerous than those with *neelaleshya*. *Abhavy* beings are less numerous
than *bhavy* beings. *Bhavy* beings are infinitely more numerous than *abhavy*
beings.  ## 1 ## 3 ## *Bhavy* *Magana* ## · ## 1  *Leshya*’s Lesser Abundance
Explained *Purva Purva* 136 ## 135 ## 1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 120 karmagrantha bhAga cara bAloM ko chor3a abhya saba jIva avirata haiM,
jinameM anantAnanta vanaspatikAyika jIvoM kA samAveza hai| isI abhiprAya se
adhirata jIva dezavirati vAloM kI apekSA anantaguNa mAne gaye haiM  /  dekhoM,
nArako tathA kucha manuSya tiryaJcoM ko ho avadhidarzana hotA hai  /  isI se
anya varzana vAloM kI apekSA avadhidarzanI alpa hai  /  sUryarzana, caturipriya,
asaMzi-paJcendriya aura saMjJi-pacetriya, ina taumoM prakAra ke jovoM meM hotA
hai| isaliye cakSurdarzana vAle avadhivarzaniyoM kI apekSA asaMkhyAtaguNa kahe
gaye haiM  /  siddha ananta haiM aura ve sabhI kevaladarzanI haiM, sI se unakI
saMkhyA cakSurdarzaniyoM kI saMkhyA se anantaguNa hai  /  acazudarzana samI
saMsArI jIvoM meM hotA hai, jinameM akele vanaspatikAyika jIva hI anantAnanta
hai  /  isI kAraNa acakSurdarzana ko kevalavarzaniyoM se anantaguNa kahA hai|
lezyA Adi pAMca mAgaNAoM kA alpa bahutva' | [ do gAthAoM se 1] pachANavilesA,
thovA do saMkha gaMta do ahiyA  /  abhaviyara thovaNaMtA, sAsaNa thAyovasama
saMkhA ||43|| pavacAnupUrvyA lezyAH stokA dve saMkhye anantA adhike  /
amadhyetarAH svokAnantAH, sAsAdanA mtokA upazamAH saMkhyAH  // 43 //  artha -
lezyAoM kA alpabahutva pacAnupUrvI se pIche kI ora se--jAnanA cAhiye  /  jaise:
zulkalezyAvAle, anya saba lezyAvAloM se alpa haiM  /  pAlezyASAle
zulkalevayAvAloM se saMkhyAtaguNa haiN| tejolezyA vAle padmazyAvAloM se
saMkhyAtaguNa haiN| tejolezyAvAloM se kApotale zyAvAle anantaguNa haiN|
kApotalezyAvAloM se nIlalezyAvAle vizeSAdhika hai| kRSNale zyAvAle,
nIlalezyAvAloM se bhI vizeSAdhika haiM  /  abhavya jIva, bhavya jIvoM se alpa
haiM  /  bhavya jIva abhaya jIvoM kI apekSA anantagaNa haiM  /  1 3 bhavya
mArgaNA kA * 1 lekSyA kI alpa bahutva prajJApanA pU pU0 136 135 1

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **Sasaavan Samyagdristi** are fewer in number than
those with other types of dristi. **Aupashamik Samyagdristi** are more numerous
than **Sasaavan Samyagdristi**. ||43||  **Bhavartha:**  * **Shulkaleshya** is
experienced by **Maamik Devas** from the **Lantaka Devaloka** to the **Anuttar
Vimana**, and by some **Manushya-Siyancha** with a lifespan of
**Sankaatavarsha** born from the womb. * **Payaleshya** is experienced by
**Vaimanika** from **Sanatkumar** to **Brahmaloka**, and by some **Manushya-
Tiryacha** with a lifespan of **Sankaatavarsha** born from the womb. *
**Tejoleshya** is experienced by **Badar Prithvi**, **Jas**, **Vanaspatikayika**
beings, some **Panchendriya Tiryacha-Manushya**, **Bhavanati**, **Vyantara**,
**Jyon**, and those who possess the **5-Kama Dharma**. * **Payaleshya** are more
numerous than all those who experience **Shulkaleshya**, including those who
experience **Sanyapraveshya**. Similarly, **Tejoleshya** are more numerous than
all those who experience **Payaleshya**. This is mentioned in **Sanjhimargna**
on page 136 and **Aharakamaargna** on page 13.  The **Alpa-Bahutva** mentioned
in **Samyaktvamaargna** on page 136 is a concise summary.  The **Alpa-Bahutva**
of **Leshya** in terms of **Dravya**, **Kshetra**, **Kala**, etc., mentioned in
**Gommatasar-Jivakanda** from verses 536 to 541, is partially found here and
partially not.  In **Bhavyamaargna**, the number of **Abhavya** is mentioned as
**Jghanayuktananta**, similar to **Mangrantha**.  **-Ji Ga. 556:** The **Alpa-
Bahutva** of **Samyaktva**, **Sanji**, and **Aharakamaargna** is described.
**-Ji Ga. 656-658-662-670:**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra sAsAvanasamyagdRSTimAle, anya saba dRSTivAloM se kama
haiN| aupazamikasamyagdaSTi vAle, sAsAcana sampamhaSTi vAloM se saMkhyAtaguNa
haiM  /  / 43|| bhAvArthalAntaka devaloka se lekara anuttaravimAna taka ke
mAmikadevoM ko tathA garbha-janya saMkhyAtavarSa AyuvAle kucha manuSya-siyaJcoM
ko zulkalezyA hotI hai  /  papalezyA, sanatkumAra se brahmaloka taka ke
vaimAnikayoM ko aura garbha-janya saMkhyAta varSa Ayu vAle kucha
manuSyatiryaJcoM ko hotI hai| tejolezyA, bAdara pRthyo, jasa aura
vanaspatikAyika jIvoM ko, kucha paJcendriya tiryaJca-manuSya, bhavanati aura
vyantaroM ko, jyoM ho tathA 5-kAma phArama ke mAlikoMko hotI hai| saya
papravezyA vAle milAkara saba zulkalezyAvAloM kI apekSA seNyAtagaNa' haiN| isI
taraha sama tejolaNyAvAle milAye jAyeM to saba payalezyAbAloM se saMkhyAtagaNa
hI hote haiM  /  isI se inakA * saMjJimArgaNA kA pR0 136 aura AhArakamArgaNA kA
pR 13 para hai| alpa-bahutva pada meM samyaktvamArgaNA kA jo alpa-bahutva pR0
136 para hai, vaha saMkSiptamAtra hai| gommaTasAra-jIvakANDa kI 536 se levAra
541 vI taka kI gAthAoM meM jo lezyA kA atma-bahutva dravya, kSetra, kAla Adi ko
lekara batalAyA gavA hai, vaha kahIM-kahIM yahA~ se milatA hai aura kahIM-kahIM
nahIM milatA  /  bhavyamArgaNA meM abhavya kI saMkhyA usa meM maMgrantha kI
taraha jaghanyayuktAnanta kahI huI hai| _-jI gA0 556  /  samyaktva, saMjJI aura
AhArakAmArgaNA kA alpa-bahutva usameM varNita hai| -jI0 gA. 656-658-662670  /

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Four of the Karma Granth  **The concept of "Alp-Bahusv" (few-many) is
explained.**  It is said that beings with "Kapolaleshya" (a type of karma) have
an infinite number of "Vanaspatika" (plant) lives. This is why those with
"Kapolaleshya" are said to have infinite merits compared to those with
"Tejoleshya" (another type of karma).  Those with "Neelaleshya" (another type of
karma) have even more merits than those with "Kapolaleshya." From "Lantaka" (a
type of hell) to "Ghonka" (a type of heaven), and from "Sanatkumar" (a type of
heaven) to "Brahmaloka" (the highest heaven), there are countless "Vaimanika
Deva" (celestial beings who travel in aerial vehicles). Similarly, compared to
the "Vaimanika Deva" like "Sanatkumar," the "Jyotisha Deva" (celestial beings
who are associated with light) have countless merits.  Therefore, there is a
doubt: why are those with "Padmaleshya" (another type of karma) and
"Shuklaleshya" (another type of karma) considered to have a finite number of
merits, rather than infinite merits, compared to those with "Tejoleshya" and
"Padmaleshya" respectively?  **The solution to this doubt is as follows:**  It
is true that "Padmaleshya Deva" have infinite merits compared to "Shuklaleshya
Deva." However, "Shuklaleshya Deva" have infinite merits compared to
"Padmaleshya Deva." Similarly, while "Tejoleshya Deva" have infinite merits
compared to "Padmaleshya Deva," "Tiryancha" (animals) have infinite merits
compared to "Tejoleshya Deva." Therefore, all those with "Shuklaleshya,"
"Padmaleshya," and "Tejoleshya" have a finite number of merits compared to each
other.  In summary, if the comparison of merits is made only between the "Deva"
(celestial beings) and the three types of "Leshya" (karma) mentioned above, then
it would be considered infinite. However, this comparison is made considering
the general "Neevarashi" (a specific type of karma), and the number of
"Tiryancha" with "Shuklaleshya" compared to "Padmaleshya Deva," and the number
of "Tiryancha" with "Padmaleshya" compared to "Tejoleshya Deva," is so large
that the finite number of merits can be considered "Alp-Bahusv" (few-many).
Shri Jayam Moksur has written about the "Alp-Bahusv" nature of merits from
"Shuklaleshya" to "Tejoleshya." He has explained this by interpreting the phrase
"Do Sanstha" (two types) in the relevant verse as "Do'sanstha" (two types). He
has also mentioned in his commentary that some manuscripts have the reading "Do
Sankha" (two numbers), which suggests that the finite number of merits should be
understood as "Alp-Bahusv." However, this reading is not authentic. The correct
reading is "Do Sankha."  Based on this, the doubt regarding the "Alp-Bahusv"
nature of finite merits has been resolved. The learned Shri Malayagiri Suri has
explained the "Alp-Bahusv" nature of merits and the "Leshya" path in his
commentary very clearly. (Page 1633)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 130 karmagrantha bhAga cAra alpa- bahusva saMsthAlapaNa kahA hai| kApolalezyA,
anantavanaspatikAfre jIvoM ko hotI hai, isI sababa se kAposaleiyAvAle
tejolezyAbAloM se anantaguNa kahe gaye haiN| nIlalezyA, kApotalezyA vAloM se bhI
adhika 1- lAntaka se lekara goMko apekSa sanatkumAra se lekara brahmaloka taka
ke vaimAnikadeva asaMkhya guNa haiM  /  isI prakAra sanatkumAra Adi ke vaimAnika
devoM kI apekSA kevala jyotiSadeva hI asaMkhyAta guNa hai  /  ata eva yaha zaGkA
hoto hai ki padmalezyA vAle zuklezmA bAloM se aura tejaliyA vAle paMdmalezyA
vAloM se asaMkhzataguNa na mAnakara saMkhyAtaguNa kyo mAne jAte haiM ? I isakA
samAdhAna itanA hI hai ki padmalezyA deva zulkalelyA vAle devoM se
asaMkhyAtaguNa hai sahI, para padmalezyA vAle devoM kI apekSA zuklalezyA vAle
tiyaMtra asaMkhyAtaguNa haiN| isI prakAra padmalezyA vAle devoM se tejolezyA
vAle devoM ke asaMkhyAtaguNa hone para bhI tejalezyA vAle devoM se paleimAbAle
tiryaJca asaMkhyAtaguNa hai  /  ata eva saba zuklalezyA vAloM se saba
padmazyAvAle inase saba tejolezyAvAle saMkhyAtaguNa hI hote haiM  /  sArAMza,
kevala devoM kI apekSA zukla Adi ukta tIna lepamAoM kA anya bahutva vicArA jAtA,
taba to asaMkhyAtaguNa kahA jAtA; parantu yaha anya bahutva sAmAnya nIvarAzi ko
lekara kahA gayA hai aura padmamAvAle devoM se zuklalezyAvAle tiyevoM kI tathA
tejolezyA vAle devoM se palezyAvAle tiryoM kI saMkhyA itanI bar3I hai; jisase ki
ukta saMkhyAtaguNa hI alpa-bahuta ghaTa sakatA hai  /  zrIjayama mosUra ne
zuklalakSyA se tejolezyA taka kA alpabahutva asaM yAtaguNa likhA hai; kyoMki
unhoMne gAthA - gata 'do saMsthA' pada ke sthAna meM 'do'saMsthA' kA pAThAntara
lekara vyAkhyA kI hai aura apane dabe meM yaha bhI likhA hai ki kisI-kisI prati
meM 'do saMkhA' kA pAThAntara hai, jisake anu sAra saMkhyAtaguNa +1 alpa-bahutva
samajhanA cAhiye, jo sujhoMkI vicAraNIya de 'dokhA' yaha pAAntara vAstavika
nahIM hai| 'do sakhA' pATha hI tathya hai  /  isake anusAra sakhyAtaguNa alpa-
bahutva kA zaGkA samAdhAna pUrvaka vicAra, sujJa zrImalayagirisUri ne prajJApanA
ke apabahutva tathA lezyApatha ko apanI vRtti meM bahuta spaSTa rIti se kiyA hai
/  pR0 1633 | 1

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmaprabandha Part Four  The number of living beings with Nīlaleśyā and
Kṛṣṇaleśyā (types of psychic dispositions) increases progressively, as the
former is more complex than the latter.  The Madhyajīva (middle class of living
beings) and Abhavya (incapable of attaining liberation) living beings are
infinite in number, as they are 'Jāghanyayukta' (of the lowest order).  Compared
to the Upaśamika (quiescent) right faith, the Sāsāramsamyaktva (mundane right
faith) is much rarer, as only those who incline towards Mithyātva (false belief)
attain it, not others. Therefore, those established in Upaśamika right faith are
found to be more stable than those who fall from it.  The Miśrāḥ (mixed) are
infinite in number, having Asakkhayaguṇāḥ (infinite qualities) of Kṣāyika
(destructive) and Mithyā (false belief). The Saṃjñitara (conscious) are also
infinite, while the Anāhāraka (non-nutritive) are few in number, and the rest
are Asaṃsthāḥ (unstable).  The Upaśamika right faith holders are more stable
than the others.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra jIvoM meM hotI hai| kyoMki nIlalezyA kApota kI apekSA
kliSTatara adhyasAyarUpa aura kRSNaleiyA nIlaledayA se kliSTatama adhyavasAya
rUpa hai  /  e tA hai ki liyaaura pariNAma vAle jIvoM kI saMkhyA uttarottara
adhikAdhika hI hotI hai| madhya jova, abhavya jIvoM kI jIva 'jaghanyayukta'
nAmaka cauyo jIva anantAnanta haiM  /  apekSA anantaguNa hai; kyoMki
amadhyaanantasaMkhyA pramANa haiM, para azya 131 aupazamikasamyakya ko sthAna
kara jo jIva midhyAtva kI ora jhukate haiM, unhIM ko sAsAramasamyaktava hotA
hai, dUsaroM ko nahIM  /  isI se anya saba dRSTivAloM se sAsAvana
samyamTaSTivazle kama hI pAye jAte haiN| jitane jIvoM ko mapazamikasamyaktava
prApta hotA hai, ve sabhI usa samyaktava ko vamana kara midhyAtva ke abhimukha
nahIM hote, kintu kucha hI hote haiM; isI se aupazamikasamyama se girane vAloM
kI apekSA usameM sthira rahane vAle saMsthAgaNa pAye jAte haiM  //  43  //  mIsA
saMkhA vega, asa khaguNa khaiyamicchabu anaMtA  /  saniyara thova naMtA - NahAra
thoveyara asaMkhA 44  //  mizrAH sakhyA vedakA, asaMkhyaguNAH kSAyikamidhya
dvAvananta  /  saMjJItare svokAnantA, anAhArakAH stokA itare'saMsthAH  /  /  44
/  /  opazamikasamyaSTivAloM se saMsthAta artha - miraSTivalaM, joba guNa haiN|
vevaka (kSAvApazamika ) samyagdaSTivAle jIva, miaradhdivAloM se asaMkhyAtaguNa
haiM  /  kSAyikasamyagdRSTivAle vAloM se anamyaguNa haiN| midhyAdRSTivAle vAle
jIvoM se bhare anantagaNa haiM  /  vedakasamyagdRSTijIva, kSAyika samyagdaSTi P

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Maag Chaar, Chapter 132  **Verse 44:**  * **Sanjnee Jeevas**
(conscious beings) are less in number than **Asanjnee Jeevas** (non-conscious
beings), and **Asanjnee Jeevas** are infinitely more numerous than **Sanjnee
Jeevas**. * **Anahaarak Jeevas** (non-consuming beings) are less in number than
**Aahaarak Jeevas** (consuming beings), and **Aahaarak Jeevas** are countless
times more numerous than **Anahaarak Jeevas**.  **Explanation:**  * There are
two types of beings who attain **Mishradristi** (mixed vision):     * Those who
attain it after leaving the first **Gunasthan** (stage of spiritual progress).
* Those who attain it after falling from **Samyashti** (perfect vision). * This
is why beings with **Mishradristi** are countless times more numerous than those
with **Aupashmik Samyagdrishti** (partial perfect vision). * Beings with
**Mishradristi** are countless times more numerous than those with
**Kshayopaashmik Samyagdrishti** (almost perfect vision) because the state of
**Kshayopaashmik Samyagdrishti** is much higher than **Mishrasamyagdrishti**. *
**Mishrasamyagdrishti** lasts only for a moment, while **Kshayopaashmik
Samyagdrishti** lasts for a long time, like the duration of countless oceans. *
**Kshayik Samyagdrishti** (perfect vision) is infinitely more numerous than
**Kshayopaashmik Samyagdrishti** because **Siddhas** (liberated souls) are
infinite and they all have **Kshayik Samyagdrishti**. * **Mithyavies** (those
with false beliefs) are infinitely more numerous than **Kshayik Samyagdrishti**
because the majority of beings in the universe are **Mithyavies**, and they are
even more numerous than **Siddhas**.  **Further Explanation:**  * **Devas**,
**Naks**, **Garbhja Manusya** (human beings born from the womb), and **Garbhja-
Tyantr** (beings born from the womb) are **Sanjnee**. All other beings in the
universe are **Asanjnee**, including the infinite number of **Vanaspatikayik
Jeevas** (plant-like beings). This is why **Asanjnee Jeevas** are considered
more numerous than **Sanjnee Jeevas**. * **Siddhas** are **Anahaarak** (non-
consuming) because they are in the third, fourth, and fifth stages of
**Vigrahgati** (the process of liberation), and they are also in the fourteenth
**Gunasthan**. All other beings are **Aahaarak** (consuming). This is why
**Aahaarak Jeevas** are considered countless times more numerous than
**Anahaarak Jeevas**. * **Vanaspatikayik Jeevas** are even more numerous than
**Siddhas**, and because they are part of the universe, they are **Aahaarak**. *
There is a doubt about whether **Aahaarak**... (the text ends abruptly here)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha mAga cAra 132 saMjJI jIva asaMjJI jIvoM ko apekSA kama haiM aura
asaMtI jodha, unase anantaguNa haiM  /  anAhAraka jIva AhAraka jIvoM kI apekSA
kama haiM aura AhAraka joya, unase asaMkhyAtaguNa haiM  //  44  //  J bhAvArtha
mizradRSTi pAne vAle jIva vare prakAra ke haiN| eka to ve, jo pahale guNasthAna
ko chor3akara mizraSTi prApta karate haiM aura dUsare ve, jo samyaSTi se cyuta
hokara mizraSTi prApta karate haiN| isI se mizraraSTivAle
aupazamikasamyagdaSTibAloM se saMkhyAtaguNa ho jAte haiM  /  mizraSTAloM se
kSAyopazamikasamyamaSTivAloM ke saMkhyAtaga uNa hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki
mitrasamyaktvako apekSA kSayopazamikasamyakva kI sthiti bahuta adhika hai:
mizrasamyaktva kI utkRSTa sthiti antarmuhUrta kI hI hotI hai, para
kSAyopazamikasamyaktvako utkRSTa sthiti kucha adhika chayAsaTha sAgaropamakI  /
kSAyikasamyamatvakSAyopazamikasamya striyoM se anantaga uNa haiM; kyoMki siddha
ananta haiM aura ve saba kSAdhikasamyaktva ho haiM  /  kSAyikasamyaktivayoM se
bhI mithyAviyoM ke anantaguNa hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki satra vanaspatikAdhika
joya mithyAtvo hI hai aura ve siddhoM se bhI anantaguNa hai  /  I deva, nAka,
garbhaja manuSya tathA garbhaja-tiyaMtra ho saMjJI haiM, zeSa saba saMsArI jIva
asaMjJI haiM, jinameM ananta vanaspatikAyika jIvoM kA samAveza hai| isIliye
asaMjJo jIva saMz2iyoM ko apekSA guNa kahe jAte haiM  /  ananta aura siddha
vigrahagati meM vartamAna kevalimudghAta ke tIsare cauthe pA~ca samaya meM
vartamAna, caudahaveM guNasthAna meM vartamAna aura ye saba jIva anAhAraka haiM;
zeSa saba AhAraka haiN| isI se anAhArakoM kI apekSA AhAraka jIva asaMkhyAtaguNa
kahe jAte haiN| banaspa tikAmika jIva siddhoM se bhI anantagaNa haiM aura ve
samo saMsArI hone ke kAraNa AhAraka haiN| ana eva yaha zaGkA hotI hai ki AhAraka

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagranth Part Four Oh, the number of Anaharakas should be infinite compared
to the number of Anantmanas, how can they be countless? 133 The solution is that
there are infinite beings in each Nigod sphere; an innumerable part of them dies
every moment and remains in the state of Viprgati. It has been said above that
the beings present in Viprgati are Anaharakas. These Anaharakas are so numerous
that the number of full-fledged Aharaka beings can never be infinite compared to
the total number of Anaharakas, but they remain countless. ||144||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra ova, anAhArakoM kI apekSA anantamaNa hone cAhiye,
asaMkhya guNa kaise ? 133 isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki eka-eka nigoda golaka meM
ananta jIva hote haiM; inakA asaMkhyAta bhAga pratisamaya maratA aura vipragati
meM vartamAna rahatA hai  /  Upara kahA gayA hai ki vigrahagati meM vartamAna
jIva anAhAraka ho hote haiN| ye anAhAraka itane adhika hote haiM, jisase phula
AhAraka jIva, kula anAhArakoM kI apekSA anantagaNa kabhI nahIM hone pAte, kintu
asaMkhyAtaguNa hI rahate haiM  // 144 //  B

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four ## Appendix to the Second Chapter ## Appendix "J"  On
the "Yogamarga" Vaman on page 52, line 23, the three yogas are explained in the
Rajavartika by showing their barren and internal causes. Its summary is as
follows:  **(a)** The pulsation of the soul's province, which is directed
towards contemplation, due to external and internal causes, is "Manoyoga". Its
external cause is the dependence on Manovargna, and its internal cause is the
destruction and cessation of the Veerayantrayakarma, and the destruction and
cessation of the No-Indriya Avaranakarma (Manonadhi).  **(b)** The pulsation of
the soul's province, which is directed towards speech, due to external and
internal causes, is "Vachanayoga". Its external cause is the dependence on
Vachanavargna, which arises from the rise of the Puglavapiaki Sharira Karma, and
its internal cause is the destruction and cessation of the Veerayantrayakarma,
and the destruction and cessation of the Matijnana Avarana and Aksharashruta
Shana Avarana, etc. (Vachanalabdhi).  **(c)** The pulsation of the soul's
province, which is directed towards the subject of movement, etc., due to
external and internal causes, is "Kayayoga". Its external cause is the
dependence on some kind of Shariravargna, and its internal cause is the
destruction and cessation of the Veerayantrayakarma.  Although the internal
cause, the destruction of the Veerayantrayakarma, is the same during both the
thirteenth and fourteenth Gunasthanas, the external cause, the Vargnaalambana,
is not the same. That is, it is found during the thirteenth Gunastana, but not
during the fourteenth Gunastana. This is why there is Yogavidhi in the
thirteenth Gunastana, but not in the fourteenth. For this, see Tattvartha
Adhyaya 6, Sutra 1, Rajavartika 10.  ## Regarding the subject of Yoga:  **(a)**
There is a doubt that Manoyoga and Vachanayoga are the same as Kayayoga; because
during both these yogas, the body's activity is always present.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra dvitIyAdhikAra ke pariziSTa  /  pariziSTa "ja"  /
pRSTha 52, paGkita 23 ke 'yogamArgagA' vAmana para tIna yogoM ke bAjha aura
Abhyantara kAraNa dikhA kara unakI vyAkhyA rAjavArtika meM bahuta hI sapanA kI
gaI hai| usakA sArAMza isa prakAra hai: (vA) bAhma aura Abhyantara kAraNoM se
hone vAlA jo manana ke amimukha AtmA kA pradeza pArampanda, vaha 'manAyAMga hai|
Art, bAhya kAraNa manovargaNA kA Alambana aura Abhyantara kAraNa vIryAnta
rAyakrama kA kSayakSayopazama tathA no-indri yAvaraNakarma kA kSaya-kSayopazama
(manonadhi) hai| (kha) bAhma aura Amyanta ra kAraNa-janya AtmA kA bhASAbhimukha
pradeza parimpanda ghacana-yoga hai  /  isakA bAhya kAraNa puglavipAkI
zArIranAmakarma ke udaya se hone vAlA vacanavargaNA kA Alambana hai aura
Abhyantara kAraNa vIryAntarAyakarma kA kSaya-kSayopazama tathA matijJAnAvaraNa
aura akSarazrutazAnAvaraNa Adi karma vA kSaya-nayopazama (vacanalabdhi) hai|
(ga) bAhma aura Abhyantara kAraNa-janya gamanAdi-viSayaka AtmA kA pradeza-
parispanda 'kAyayoga' hai| isakA bAhya kAraNa kisI-na kisI prakAra kI
zarIravargaNA kA Alambana hai aura Abhyantara kAraNa zrIyantarAyakarma kA kSapa-
kSayopazama hai| yadyapi terahaveM aura caudahaveM, ina donoM guNamthAnoM ke
samaya vIryAntarAyakarma kA ayarUpa Abhyantara kAraNa samAna hI hai, parantu
vargaNAlambanarUpa bAhya kAraNa gamAna nahIM hai  /  arthAt vaha terahaveM
guNasthAna ke samaya pAyA jAtA hai, para caudahaveM guNasthAna ke mamaya nahIM
pAyA jAtA  /  isI se terahaveM guNasthAna meM yoga-vidhi hotI hai, caudahaveM
nhiiN| isake liye dekhiye, tattvArthaadhyAya 6. su. 1, rAjanAtika 10  /  yoga ke
viSaya meM paGkA-samAnAnaH (ka) yaha zaGkA hotI hai ki manoyoga aura
badhanayoga, kAyayoga hI haiM; kyoMki ina donoM yogoM ke samaya , zarIra kA
vyApAra avazya rahatA hI

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four ### 135  And the reception of the mind-substance and
speech-substance, which are the objects of these yogas, also takes place through
some kind of bodily-yoga. "The solution to this is that mental yoga and verbal
yoga are not separate from bodily yoga; but are special kinds of bodily yoga.
The bodily yoga that helps in contemplation is called mental yoga at that time,
and the bodily yoga that is helpful in speaking is called 'verbal yoga' at that
time. In short, three divisions of bodily yoga have been made for the sake of
practice. (b) There is also a doubt that the bodily yoga that helps in breathing
should be called 'breathing yoga' and there should be four yogas instead of
three. 1 The solution to this is that the specific purpose of language and mind
is seen in practice, but the purpose of breathing and body is not the same as
that of mind and body, so only three yogas have been considered. For a special
consideration of this subject, one should see the commentary 0356-364 and the
Lokaprash-Sarg 3, Shloka 1354-1355.  **Nature of Mind-Substance, Speech-
Substance and Body:** (a) The pudgalas that are fit to become mind, which are
called 'manovaggana' in the scriptures, when they become mind-like - capable of
helping in thinking, they attain such a state, they are called 'mind'. There is
no specific place for the mind-substance in the body and its fixed shape is not
mentioned in the Svetambara scriptures. According to the Svetambara sect, the
mind-substance should be understood as pervading the body and having the shape
of the body. In the Digambara sect, its place is considered to be the "heart and
its shape is considered to be like a lotus". (b) A type of pudgala that becomes
speech-like, which is called 'bhashavaggana', is called 'speech'. (c) That which
enables walking, eating, drinking, etc., which is the place of experiencing
pleasure and pain, and which is made up of audarik, vaikriya, etc. vagganas, is
called 'body'. *** -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 135 hai aura ina yogoM ke AlambanabhUta manodravya
tathA bhASAdravya kA grahaNa bhI kisI na kisI prakAra ke zArIrika-yoga se hI
hotA hai  /  "isakA samAdhAna yahI hai ki manoyoga tathA vacanayoga, kAyayoga se
judA nahIM hai; kintu kAyayoga-vizeSa hI hai| jo kAyayoga manana karane meM
sahAyaka hotA hai, bar3I usa samaya manoyoga aura jo kAyayoga, bhASA ke bolane
meM mahakArI hotA hai, vahI usa samaya 'baccanyoga' mAnA gayA hai| sArAMza yaha
hai ki vyavahAra ke liye hI kAyayoga ke tIna bheda kiye haiM  /  (kha) yaha bhI
zaGkA hotI hai ki ukta rIti se zvAsozvAsa meM sahAyaka hone vAle kAyayogako
'zvAsocchvAsayoga' kahanA cAhiye aura tIna kI jagaha cAra yoga mAnane cAhiye  /
1 isakA samAdhAna yaha diyA gayA hai ki vyavahAra meM jaisA bhASA kA aura mana
kA viziSTa prayojana dIkhatA hai, vaisA davAsocchvAsa aura zarIra kA prayojana
vaisA mana nahIM hai, jaisA zarIra aura mana vakhana kA isI se tIna hI yoga mAne
gaye haiM ? isa viSaya ke vizeSa vicAra ke liye vizeSAvazyaka bhASya 0356- 364
tathA lokaprarAza-sarga 3, zlo0 13541355 ke bIna kA gadya dekhanA cAhiye  /
dravyamana, dravyavacana aura zarIra kA svarUpa: (ka) jo pudgla mana banane ke
yogya haiM, jinakI zAstra meM manovagaMNA' kahate haiM ve jaba manarUpa meM
pariNata ho jAte haiM - vicAra karane meM sahAyaka ho sakeM, aisI sthiti ko
prApta kara lete haiM saba unheM 'mana' kahate haiM  /  zarIra meM dravyamana ke
rahane kA koI khAsa sthAna tathA usakA niyata AkAra zvetAmbarIya granthoM meM
nahIM hai  /  svetAmbara - sampradAya ke anusAra dravyamana ko zarIra vyApI aura
zarIrAkAra samajhanA cAhiye  /  digambarasampradAya meM usakA sthAna "hRdaya
tathA AkAra kamala kAsA mAnA hai| (kha) vacana rUpa meM pariNata eka prakAra ke
pudgala, jinheM bhASAvargaNA kahate haiM, ve hI 'vacana' kahalAte haiM  /  (ga)
jisase calanA-phiranA, khAnA-pInA Adi ho sakatA hai, jo sukha-duHkha bhogane kA
sthAna hai aura jo audArika, vaikriya Adi vargaNAo se banatA hai, vaha 'zarIra'
kahalAtA hai  /  *** -

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix "J" ## Page 65, Line 8, on the word "Samyaktava"  To understand its
nature, especially its specific types, it is very useful to consider the
following points:  (1) Is Samyaktava caused or uncaused? (2) What is the basis
for the distinctions like Shramik, etc.? (3) The characteristics of Aupashmik
and Shreyopashmik Samyak, and the differences between them, as well as the
characteristics of Kshayik Samyak. (4) The nature of Samadhana, Vipaday, and
Pradesh-odaya. And the explanation and clarification of Upayam.  (1) - Is Samyak
a result or uncaused? The answer to this question is that it cannot be
considered uncaused; because whatever is uncaused should be the same in all
times, in all places, or its absence should be there. Samyaktava-result is
neither the same in all nor is its absence. Therefore, it should be considered
caused. When we consider it caused, the question arises as to what its definite
cause is; the external causes like listening to sermons, worshiping the
Bhagavan, etc., which are considered as external causes, cannot be the rules of
Samyaktava, because even in the presence of these external causes, the definite
cause for the manifestation of Samyaktava-result in many beings is the special
nature of the Anadi Parinaamik called Jiva's Tathavidha Bhavya-tva. When this
Parinaamik Madhyatva matures, then Samyaktava is attained. Bhavya-tva result is
like a curable disease. Some curable diseases are cured by themselves (without
external remedies). For the cure of some curable diseases, treatment of the
bondage is also necessary, and there are also some curable diseases that
disappear after many days. Bhavya-tva-nature is like this! The Madhyatva of many
beings attains maturity without external causes. There are also beings whose
Bhavya-tva nature matures with the need for external causes like listening to
scriptures, etc. And the Bhavya-tva result of many beings matures by itself
after a long time has passed. The external causes like listening to scriptures,
worshiping the Arhat, etc., are only cooperative. Sometimes they help in the
maturation of Madhyatva, so in practice they are considered as the cause of
Samyaktava, and the need for their support is shown. But from the point of view
of certainty, the maturation of Tathavidha-Bhavya-tva is the only Samyaktava.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 126 karmagrantha bhAga cAra pariziSTa "jha"  /  pRSTha 65, pakti 8 ke
'samyaktva' zavdapara - usakA svarUpa, vizeSa prakAra se jAnane ke liye
nimnalikhita kucha bAtoM kA vicAra karanA bahuta upayogI hai : (1) sabhyaktaya
sahetuka hai yA nirhetuka? (2) zrAmika Adi bhedoM kA AdhAra kyA hai ? (3)
aupazamika aura zrayopazamika samyak kA Apasa meM abhyara tathA kSAyika sabhyatA
kI vizeSatA  /  (5) (4) mA samAdhAna, vipAdaya aura pradezodaya kA svarUpa |
aura upayamakI vyAkhyA tathA khulAsAdhAra vicAra | (1) - samyaka pariNAmaka hai
yA nirhetuka? isa prazna kA uttara yaha hai ki usako nirhetuka nahIM mAna
sakate; kyoMki jo vastu nihatuka ho, vaha saba kAla meM, saba jagaha eka sI honI
cAhiye athavA usakA abhAva honA cAhiye  /  samyaktava-pariNAma, na vo sabame
samAna hai aura na usakA abhAva hai| iliye use sahetuka hI mAnanA caahiye|
sahetuka mAna lene para vaha prazna hotA hai ki usakA niyata hetu kyA hai;
pravacana zravaNa, bhagavatpUjana Adi jo-jo bAhya nimitta mAne jAte hai. ye to
samyaktva ke niyama ho hI nahIM sakate kyoMki ina bAhya nimittoM ke hote hue
bhI. abha kyoM kI taraha aneka madhyoM ko samyaktava pariNAma prakaTa hone meM
niyata kAraNa jIvakA tathAvidha bhavyatva-nAmaka anAdi pariNAbhika svabhAva
vizeSa hI hai | jaba isa pariNAmika madhyatva kA paripAka hotA hai, tamI
sabhyaktavalAbha hotA hai| bhavyatva pariNAma sAdhya roga ke samAna hai| koI
sAdhya roga, svayameva (bAhya upAya ke binA hI zAnta ho jAtA hai| kisI mAdhya
roga ke zAnta hone meM baMdha kA upacAra bhI darakAra hai aura koI sAdhya roga
aisA bhI hotA hai, jo bahuta dinoM ke bAda miTatA hai| bhavyatva-svabhAva aisA
hI hai ! aneka jIvoM kA madhyatva, vAya nimitta ke binA hI pAka prApta karatA
hai  /  aise bhI jIva haiM, jinake bhavyatva svabhAva kA paripAka hone meM
zAstra zravaNa jAdi bAhya nimittoM kI AvazyakatA par3atI hai| aura aneka jIvoM
kA bhavyatva gariNAma dIrgha kAla vyatIta ho cukane para svayaM hI paripAka
prApta karatA hai| zAstra zramaNa, arhatpUjana Adi jo bAhya nimitta hai, ve
sahakArI mAtra hai| unake dvArA kabhI-kabhI madhyatva kA paripAka hone meM
madada milatI hai, isI se vyavahAra meM ve sabhyaktava ke kAraNa mAne gaye hai
aura unake Alambana kI AvazyakatA dikhAyI jAtI hai| parantu nizcayadRSTi se
tathAvidha-bhavyatva ke vipAka hI samyavA ko kA

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four ### 137  **Avyabhichari** (certain). The reason should
be considered. From this, the non-absoluteness of external actions like
scripture-listening, image-worship, etc., which depends on the difference in the
recipient, is revealed. This same point has been expressed by Bhagwan Umaswati
in 'Tanisargadadhigamadha' - Tasyarth-A. 1, Sutra 3, and the same point is also
in the Malayagiri commentary on Pashchagah-Dwar 1, Ga.  **(2)** The diversity of
the internal causes that manifest **Samyaktva** (right faith), which is the
basis for the various distinctions like Kshayopaamik, etc., is as follows: The
destruction of the seven natures, namely the Anantanubandhi Chatushk and
Darshanamohaniya-Trika, is the cause of Kshayopa-shama, Kshayopa-shamik-
Avyavasa, Upam, Aupasha-bhivasamyaktva, and Kshaya, Kshayik-Samyaktva. And the
arising of the Anantanubandhi Kshaya, which pulls one down from Samyaktva and
inclines towards Mithyatva (false faith), is the cause of Sasadan-Samyaktva, and
the arising of the Mishramohaniya is the cause of Mishra-Samyaktva. The specific
description of what other causes are required for Aupamik-Samyaktva, like
Kalalabdhi, etc., and how it occurs in different states with different sins, as
well as the description of Kshayik and Kshayo-pashmiv-Samyaktva, are
respectively in the Tattvarth-A. 2, Moo. 3, 1st and 2nd Rajattik, and in Su. 8
and 5, these Rajattik.  **(3)** At the time of Aupasha-mik-Samyaktva, there is
no arising of Darshanamohaniya in any way; but at the time of Kshayopa-mik-
Samyaktva, there is the Vipako-day of Samyaktva-mohaniya and the Pradesh-o-day
of Mithyatva-mohaniya. Due to this difference, in the scriptures, Aupamik-
Samyaktva is called 'Bhavasamyaktva' and Kshayopa-shamik-Samyaktva is called
'Pratyaksham-Samyaktva'. Kshayik-Samyaktva is distinct from these two Samyaktvas
because it is permanent, and these two are impermanent.  **(4)** There is a
doubt that Mohaniya-karma (karma that causes delusion) is Vaatik (permanent). It
destroys Samyaktva and Charitra-paryaya (conduct), so how can the Vipako-day of
Samyaktva-mohaniya and the Pradesh-o-day of Mithyatva-mohaniya manifest the
Samyaktva-parinam (result of right faith)? The solution is that while Mithyatva-
mohaniya is indeed Mohaniya-karma, its Dalik (sub-particles) are purified.
Because when the destructive essence of the Dalik of Mithyatva-mohaniya karma is
destroyed by pure Adhyavasaya (firm conviction), then those same Dalik, which
have a single-place essence and a two-place essence, are called 'Samyaktva-
mohaniya'. Just as transparent objects like glass, etc., do not obstruct the
function of eye-sight, similarly, the Vipako-day of the purified Dalik of
Mithyatva-mohaniya does not hinder the manifestation of Samyaktva-parinam.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagranya bhAga cAra 137 avyabhicArI (nizcina  /  kAraNa mAnanA cAhiye  /
isase yAstri-zravaNa, pratimA-pUjana Adi bAhya kriyAoM kI anekAntikatA, jo
adhikArI bheda para avalambita hai. usakA khulAsA ho jAtA hai  /  yahI bhASa,
bhagavAna umAmvAti ne 'tanisargAdadhigamAddhA' - tasyArtha-a0 1, sUtra 3 se
prakaTa liyA hai aura yahI bAta pazcagaha-dvAra 1,gA. ko malayagiri TIkAmeM bhI
hai| (2)- samyaktva gRNa, prakaTa hone ke AbhyAntara kAraNoM kI jo vividhatA
hai, kahI kSAyopamika Adi bhedoM kA AdhAra hai:-anantAnubandhi catuSka aura
darzanamohanIya-trikA, ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA kSayopazama, kSAyopaza
mikamamyavasA; upama, aupazabhivasamyaktyA aura kSaya, kSAyikasamyaktvakA kAraNa
hai| tathA samyakrana se girA kara mithyAtva kI ora jhukAnevAlA anantAnubandhI
kapAya kA udaga, sAsAdanasamyakravakA kAraNa aura mizramohanIya kA udaya,
mizrasamyalpakA kAraNa hai  /  aupaNamikasamyaktva meM kAlalabdhi Adi anya kyA-2
nimitta apekSita haiM aura vaha kisa-2 gati meM nina-2 pApoM se hotA hai, isakA
vizeSa varNana tathA kSAyika aura kSAyo-pazamiva samyaktvakA varNana
kramaza:-tattvArthaa02, mU03ke 1 aura 2re rAjattika meM tathA su0 8 aura 5 ke ye
rAjavatika meM hai| (E)- aupazamikamamyakta ke samaya, darzanamohanIya kA kisI
prakAra kA udaya nahIM hotA; para Ayoyamikamamyaktva ke samaya, samyaktva
mohanIyakA vipAkodaya aura mithyAtvamohanIya kA pradezodaya hotA hai  /  isI
bhinnatA ke kAraNa zAstra meM aupagamikasamyakAra ko, 'bhAvasamyaktta' aura
mAyopazAmina samyakranako, 'pratryasamyaktva' kahA hai  /  ina donoM samyaktvoM
se kSAyikasamyaktva viziSTa hai kyoMki vaha sthAyI hai aura ye donoM asthAyI
haiN| (4-aha zaGkA hotI hai ki mohanIyakarma vAtikama hai  /  vaha samyaktva
aura cAritraparyAya kA ghAta karatA hai, isaliye samyaktvamohanIya ke vipAkodaya
aura mithyAtvamohanIya ke pradezodaya ke samama, sampanatya-pariNAma vyakta
kaise ho sakatA hai| isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki rAmyavatvamohanIya,
mohanIyakarma hai sahI, para usake dalika nizuddha hote haiM, kyoMki zuddha
adhyavasAya se jaba mithyAtvamohanIya karma ke dalikoM kA sarvaghAtI rasa naSTa
ho jAtA hai, taba ve hI eka thAna rasavAle aura dvisthAna atimaya rasavAle
dalipha 'samyaktvamohanIya' kahalAte haiM  /  jaise:-phAMca Adi pAradarzaka
vastue~ netra darzana-kArya meM rukAvaTa nahIM satIM, vaise hI mithyAtvamohanIya
ke zuddha palikoM kA piAkodaya samyaktva-pariNAma ke AvirbhAva meM pratibandha
nahIM

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha - The Path of Four  Now, the emergence of Mithyatva (false
belief) is discussed. However, it does not hinder the outcome of Samyaktva
(right belief); because it is only the emergence of the dull Dalikas (karmic
particles) that is being discussed. Just as the dull Dalikas, which are weak in
their Rasa (taste), do not have their poison emerge when the Gunas (qualities)
are not destroyed, similarly, the emergence of dull Dalikas cannot be considered
as a possibility for the destruction of the Gunas. See the commentary on the
11th Gunasthan in the Pancha Sangrah, Chapter 1, verse 15.  (5) The synonym for
Kshayopa-shama (destruction and pacification) is "Shayopa-shaamik" and the
synonym for Upa-shama (pacification) is "Aupa-shaamik". Therefore, to understand
the true nature of any "Baya-opashik" and "Aupa-shaamik" state, it is essential
to first understand the nature of Kshayopa-shama and Upa-shama. Hence, its
nature is described according to the scriptural process...  In Upa-shama, there
are two... Mama Ma. The word "Kshayopa-shama" means both the destruction and
pacification of Karma. The meaning of destruction is the severance of the
specific connection of Karma with the soul, and the meaning of pacification is
the Karma remaining attached to the soul in its own form, but not affecting it.
This is the general meaning; however, its technical meaning is slightly
different. When the Bandhavali (bondage) is complete, and the Upa-shama of a
particular Karma begins, then the Dalikas from the present time to the Avali
(period of bondage), which are carried by the Udayatralika (path of emergence)
or Udiran Dalikas (emerging Dalikas), are destroyed (non-existence) through
Pradesh-o-thama (emergence) and Vipaka-o-dya (fructification). And the Dalikas
which are not eligible to emerge from the present time to the Avali, which are
called Upayavali-bahit (not carried by the path of emergence) or Anudiran
Dalikas (non-emerging Dalikas), undergo Upa-shama (lack of ability to fructify
or transformation from the three Rasas to the weak Rasa). As a result, when
these Dalikas obtain their Udayavali (path of emergence), their Pradesh-o-dya or
weak Vipaka-o-dya becomes weak, meaning they cannot or only minimally manifest
their fruit on the soul.  Thus, the destruction of the Karma Dalikas that emerge
until the end of the Avali through Pradesh-o-dya and Vipaka-o-dya, and the lack
of ability to fructify or the transformation of the three Rasas into the weak
Rasa of the Karma Dalikas that are eligible to emerge after the Avali, is called
Kshayopa-shama.  Karma eligible for Kshayopa-shama: Kshayopa-shama does not
occur for all Karmas; it only occurs for Ghatikarma (destructive Karmas). There
are two types of Ghatikarma: Desha-vaatik (local) and Sarva-ghati (universal).
There is some difference in their Kshayopa-shama.  (a) When the Kshayopa-shama
of Desha-vaatik Karma begins, then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha-mAga cAra karatA  /  aba rahA mithyAtva kA pradezodaya, so vaha
bhI, samyaktva-pariNAma kA pratibandhaka nahIM hotA; kyoMki nIrasa dalikoM kA hI
pradezodaya hotA hai  /  jI dalika, manda rasayAle haiM, unakA viSAkodaya bhI,
jaba guNa kA ghAta nahIM karatA, taba nIrasa dalikoM ke pradezodaya se guNa ke
dhAta hone kI sambhAvanA hI nahIM kI jA sakatI  /  dekhiye, paJcasaMgraha-dvAra
1, 15 gAthA kI TIkA meM gyArahaveM guNasthAna kI vyaakhyaa| (5)-kSayopazama-
janya paryAya 'zAyopazAmika' aura upazama-janya paryAya 'aupazamika' kahalAtA
hai| isaliye kisI bhI bAyopazika aura aupazAmika bhAva kA yathArtha jJAna karane
ke liye pahale kSayopazama aura upazamakA hI svarUpa jAna lenA Avazyaka hai  /
ataH isakA svarUpa zAstrIya prakriyA ke anusAra likhA jAtA hai; ... jopa meM do
.....mAmA ma  /  'kSayopazama' zabda kA matalaba, karma ke kSaya aura upazama
donoM se hai  /  kSaya kA matannaya AtmA se karma kA viziSTa sambandha chaTa
jAnA aura upazama kA matalaba karma kA apane svarUpa meM AtmA ke sAtha saMlagna
raha kara bhI usapara asara na DAlanA hai  /  yaha to huA sAmAnya artha; para
usakA pAribhASika artha kucha adhika hai  /  bandhAvalikA purNa ho jAne para
kisI vivakSita karma kA jaba bhayopazama zurU hotA hai, taba vivakSita vartamAna
samaya se AvalikA paryanta ke dalika, jinheM udayAtralikA-prApta yA udIrNa-
dalika vAhate hai, unakA to pradezothama va vipAkokyadvArA kSaya (abhAva) hotA
rahatA hai| aura jo dalika, vivakSita vartamAna samaya se ApalikA taka meM udaya
pAne yogya nahIM haiM jinheM upayavalikA bahita yA anudIrNa dalika kahate
haiMunakA upazama (viSAkodaya kI yogyatA kA abhAva yA tIna rasase manda rasa meM
pariNamana) ho jAtA hai, jisase ye dalika, apanI udayAvalikA prApta hone para,
pradezodaya yA manda vipAkodapaTTArA kSINa ho jAte haiM arthAda AtmApara apanA
phala pravaTa nahIM kara sakate yA kama prakaTa karate haiN| _ isa prakAra
Avali' kA paryanta ke udaya-prApta karmadanikoM kA pradezodaya va vipAkodaya
dvArA kSaya aura AvaliphA ke bAda ke udaya pAne yogya karmadalako kI
vipAkodayasambaghinI yogyatA kA abhAva yA tIna rasa kA manda rasa meM pariNa
mana hote rahane se kama kA kSayopazama kahalAtA hai| kSayopazama-yogya
karma:-ayopazama, saba kamoM kA nahIM hotA; sirpha ghAtikarmoM kA hotA hai|
ghAtikarma ke dezavAti aura sarvaghAti, meM do bheda hai| donoM ke kSayopazama
meM kucha vibhinnatA hai| (ka) jaba dezavAsikama kA kSayopazama pravRtta hotA
hai, taba usake

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four:    This section discusses the ripening (vipako-udaya)
of certain karmas (actions) with a mild (mand) rasa (taste) and their impact on
the soul's inherent qualities (svavarya guna).   It is established that karmas
with a mild rasa, even when they ripen, cannot destroy the soul's inherent
qualities. This principle is applied to the destruction (kshayopasham) of the
karma of "deshghati" (harmful to the country).  Even when the karma of
"deshghati" is destroyed, its ripening does not hinder the development of the
soul's inherent qualities.   However, it is crucial to note that during the
destruction of "deshghati" karma, which is accompanied by the ripening of other
karmas, no karma with a "sarvaghati" (harmful to all) rasa can ripen. This leads
to the conclusion that the destruction of "deshghati" karma only occurs when the
"sarvaghati" rasa transforms into "deshghati" rasa through pure determination.
There are 25 types of "patikarma" (counteracting karmas) that are "deshghatini"
(harmful to the country). Among these, eight types, including "matijnana-avaran"
(veil of knowledge), "shruta-jnana-avaran" (veil of scriptural knowledge),
"achakshu-darshan-avaran" (veil of perception), and the five "antaraya"
(hindrances), are always being destroyed. This is because the "avarya" (non-
inherent) "manishana" (mental) and other "paryaya" (categories) have been
continuously destroyed since time immemorial. Therefore, it is understood that
only the "deshghati" rasa-sparshak (contact with the harmful rasa) of these
eight types of karmas ripens, never the "sarvaghati" rasa-sparshak.  The four
types of karmas, "avadhi-jnana-avaran" (veil of clairvoyance), "manah-paryaya-
jnana-avaran" (veil of knowledge of mental categories), "chakshu-darshan-avaran"
(veil of visual perception), and "bhavadhi-darshan-avaran" (veil of perception
of the future), are destroyed occasionally (kadachitka). Their destruction
occurs only when their "sarvaghati" rasa-sparshak transforms into "deshghati"
rasa. When the "sarvaghati" rasa-sparshak does not ripen, these karmas continue
to hinder the soul. The destruction of these four types of karmas should also be
understood as being mixed with the ripening of "deshghati" rasa-sparshak.  Apart
from these twelve types of karmas, the remaining thirteen types (four
"sanjvalana" (agitations) and nine "nokashaya" (hindrances) that belong to the
"mohaniya" (delusive) category are "aghra-bodhini" (not easily perceived). When
their destruction is accompanied only by the ripening of "deshghati" karma, they
do not hinder the soul's inherent qualities and are not considered
"deshghatini". However, when their destruction is mixed with the ripening of
other karmas, they do hinder the soul's inherent qualities to some extent and
are considered "deshghatini".  (b) Twenty types of "ghatikarma" (harmful karmas)
are "sarvaghatini" (harmful to all). Among these, only "kevala-jnana-avaran"
(veil of omniscience) and "kevala-darshan-avaran" (veil of omniscient
perception) are never destroyed. This is because their karmas never become
"deshghati" rasa-युक्त (mixed with the harmful rasa) and their ripening cannot
be stopped. The remaining eighteen types of karmas can be destroyed. However, it
is important to remember that the destruction of these karmas...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra manda rasa-yukta kucha dalikoM kA vipAtrodaya, sAtha hI
rahatA hai  /  vipAkovayaprApta dalika, acya rasa yukta hone se svAvArya guNa kA
ghAta nahIM kara sakate isase yaha siddhAnta mAnA gayA hai ki dezaghAtikarma ke
kSayopazama ke samaya, vipAkodaya viruddha nahIM haiM athati vaha kSayopazama ke
kArya kosvAvArya guNa ke vikAsa ko roka nahIM sktaa| parantu maha bAta dhyAna
meM rakhanI cAhiye ki dezaghAtikarma ke vipAkodaya-mizrita kSayopazama ke
samaya, usakA sarvaghAti-rasa-pukta koI bhI dalikA, udayamAna nahIM hotA  /
isase yaha siddhAnta mAna liyA gayA hai ki jaba, sarvadhAti-rasa, zuddha-
abhyavasAya se dezAtirUpa meM pariNata ho jAtA hai, tabhI arthAt dezaghAti-
sparghaka ke hI vipAkAdaya-kAla meM kSayopazama avazya pravRtta hotA hai|
pAtikama kI paccIsa prakRtimA dezaghAtinI haiM, jinameM se matijJAnAvaraNa,
zrutazAnAvaraNa, acakSurdarzanAvaraNa aura pAMca antarAya, ina ATha prakRtiyoM
kA kSayopazama to sadA se hI pratratta hai; kyoMki AvArya manizAna Adi paryAya,
anAdi kAla se kSAyopamika rUpa meM rahate hI hai| isaliye, yaha mAnanA cAhiye ki
ukta ATa prakRttiyoM ke dezaghAti-rasasparSaka kA hI udaya hotA hai, sarvaghAti-
rasaspardhakakA kabhI nhiiN| avadhijJAnAbaraNa, manaHparyAyajJAnAvaraNa,
cakSudarzanAvaraNa aura bhavadhidarzanAbaraNa, ina cAra prakRtiyo kA kSayopazama
kAdAcitka (aniyata) hai, aryAta java unake sarvacAti-rasampardhaka, dezavAtirUpa
meM pariNata ho jAte haiM; tabhI unakA kSayopazama hotA hai aura jaba sarca
yAti-rasaspardhaka nadayamAnahote haiM,taba avadhijJAna Adi kA ghAta ho hotA
hai| ukta cAra prakRtiyoM kA kSayoMpazama bhI dezavAti-rasasparSakake vipAka
daya se mizritahI samajhanA caahiye| ukta bAraha ke sivAya zeSa teraha (cAra
saMjvalana aura nau nokaSAya) prakRtiyA~ jo mohanIya kI haiM, va aghra bodapinI
hai| isaliye jaba unakA kSayopazama, pradezodayamAtra se yukta hotA hai, taba to
ve svAvArya guNa kA lemA bhI ghAta nahIM karatIM aura na dezaghAtinI hI mAnI
jAtI hai| para jaba unakA kSayopazama vipAkodaya se mizrita hotA hai, saba ne
svAvArya guNa kA kucha ghAta karatI haiM aura dezaghAtinI kahalAtI hai  /  (kha)
ghAtikama kI bIsa prakRtiyAM sarvaghAtinI hai| inameM se kevalajJAnAvaraNa aura
kevala darzanAvaraNa, ina do kA to kSayopazama hotA hI nahIM; kyoMki unake
dalika kamI dezavAti-rasayukta banate hI nahIM aura na unakA vipAkodaya hI rokA
jA sakatA hai  /  zeSa aThAraha prakRtiyA~ aisI haiM, jinakA kSayopapAma ho
sakatA hai; parantu yaha bAsa, dhyAna meM rakhanI cAhiye ki deza

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 140, Karma Granth Part Four  When the destructive natures (घातिनी
प्रकृतियों) are destroyed, there is a manifestation of their results (विपाकोदय).
However, when the eighteen all-destructive natures (सर्वघातिनी प्रकृतियों) are
destroyed, there is no manifestation of their results. This means that the
destruction of these eighteen natures is only possible when their manifestation
(प्रदेशोदय) has already occurred. Therefore, it is established that the
destruction of natures that manifest their results (वपाकांदयवती प्रकृतियों) is
possible, but the destruction of the all-destructive natures (सर्वघातिनी) is
not.  Therefore, these eighteen natures are considered to be capable of
preventing the manifestation of results (विपाकोदय). This is because their
inherent qualities (आवार्य गुणों) are considered to be manifested in the form of
their destruction (क्षायोपशमिक स्वरुप में व्यक्त होना माना गया है), which cannot
be anything other than the prevention of the manifestation of results (विपाकोदय
केनिरोध के सिवाय षट नहीं सकता).  (2) **Upasham (उपशम):** The meaning of the word
"Upasham" in the explanation of destruction (क्षयोपशम) is slightly different
from the meaning of "Upasham" in the context of "Aupashamik" (औपशमिक). The
meaning of "Upasham" in the context of destruction (क्षयोपशम) is simply the
absence of the ability to manifest results (विपाकादयसम्बन्धिनी योग्यता का अभाव)
or the transformation of intense flavors (तीव्र रस) into mild flavors (मन्द रस).
However, the meaning of "Upasham" in the context of "Aupashamik" (औपशमिक) is the
absence of both manifestation (प्रदेशोदय) and the manifestation of results
(विपाकोदय). This is because the destruction of karma (कर्म का क्षय) continues
during destruction (क्षयोपशम), which cannot happen without at least the
manifestation (प्रदेशोदय). However, this is not the case with "Upasham" (उपवास).
When karma is destroyed (कर्म का उपशम होता है), its destruction stops (उसका क्षय
रुक हो जाता है), and therefore there is no need for its manifestation (प्रदेशोदय
होने की आवश्यकता ही नहीं रहती). This is why the state of "Upasham" (उपशम अवस्था)
is considered to be present only when the karmic particles (दलिकों) that are
capable of manifesting in the inner consciousness (अन्तरकरण के अन्तर्मुहूर्त
"में उदय पाने के योग्य दलिकों) are either already experienced (कुछ तो पहले ही
भोग लिये जाते हैं) or are made capable of manifesting in the future (कुछ बलिक
पीछे उदय पाने योग्य बना दिये जाते हैं), meaning that there is an absence of
karmic particles that are capable of being experienced (वेद्य- दक्षिकों का अभाव
होता है).  Therefore, the concise explanation of destruction (क्षयोपशम) and
"Upasham" (उपशम) is that during destruction (क्षयोपशम), there is either the
manifestation of results (विपाकोदय) or a mild manifestation of results (मन्द
विपाकोदय), but during "Upasham" (उपशम), there is neither. It should be
remembered that "Upasham" (उपशम) can only be of the destructive type (घाति का ही
हो सकता है), but not of all destructive karmas (सो भी सब धातिकर्म का नहीं), but
only of the obscuring karma (किन्तु केवल मोहनीय कर्म का अर्थात् प्रदेश और विपाक
दोनों प्रकार का उदय). If the manifestation (प्रदेश) and the manifestation of
results (विपाक) can be prevented, then it is only possible for the obscuring
karma (मोहनीय कर्म का ही). For this, see Shri Yashvijayji's commentary on the
Nandi Sutra (नन्दी, सू० की टीका, पृ० ७७), the commentary on the Karmapadiya
(कम्मपयडी, टीका, पृ० १३), the Pancha Dva (पञ्च द्वा० १, गा० २९), and the
commentary on the Malayagiri (मलयगिरि व्याख्या). For a detailed discussion of
the nature, origin, and differences of Right Conduct (सम्यक्त्व के स्वरूप,
उत्पत्ति और भेद-प्रभेदादि का सविस्तार विचार), see the Lok Pra (लोक प्र०-सर्ग ३,
श्लोक ५६६-७००).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 140 karmagrantha bhAga cAra vaise ghAtinI prakRtiyoM ke kSayopazama ke samaya,
jaise vipAkodaya hotA hai| ina aThAraha sarvaghAtinI prakRtiyoM ke kSayopazama
ke samaya nahIM hotA, arthAt ina aThAraha prakRtiyoM kA kSayopazama, tabhI
sambhava hai, jaba unakA pradezodaya hI ho| isaliye yaha siddhAntamAnA hai ki
vapAkAMdayavatI prakRtiyoM kA kSayopazama yadi hotA hai to dezaghAtinI hI kA
sarvaghAtinI kA nahIM  /  ata eva ukta aThAraha prakRtiyA~, vipAkodaya ke
nirodha ke yogya mAnI jAtI haiM; kyoMki unake AvArya guNoM kA kSAyopazamika
svarupa meM vyakta honA mAnA gayA hai, jo vipAkodaya kenirodha ke sivAya SaTa
nahIM sktaa| (2) upazamaH - kSayopazama kI vyAkhyA meM upazasa zabda kA jo artha
kiyA gayA hai, usase aupazamika ke upazama zabda kA artha kucha udAra hai|
arthAt kSayopazama ke upazama zabda kA artha sirpha vipAkAdayasambandhinI
yogyatA kA abhAva yA tIvra rasa kA manda rasa meM pariNamana honA hai, para
aupazamika ke upazama zabda kA artha pradezodaya aura vipAkodaya donoM kA abhAva
hai; kyoMki kSayopazama meM karma kA kSaya bhI jArI rahatA hai, jo kama se kama
pradezodaya ke sivAya ho hI nahIM sakatA  /  parantu upavAsa meM yaha bAta
nahIM, jaba karma kA upazama hotA hai, tabhI se usakA kSaya ruka ho jAtA hai,
ataeva usake pradezodaya hone kI AvazyakatA hI nahIM rahatI  /  isI se upazama
avasthA tabhI mAnI jAtI hai, jaba ki antarakaraNa ke antarmuhUrta "meM udaya
pAne ke yogya dalikoM ko kucha to pahale hI bhoga liye jAte haiM aura kucha
balika pIche udaya pAne yogya banA diye jAte haiM, arthAt antarakaraNa meM
vedya- dakSikoM kA abhAva hotA hai  /  ataeva kSayopazama aura upazama kI
saMkSipta vyAkhyA itanI hI kI jAtI hai ki kSayopazama kenamaya vipAkodaya yA
manda vipAkodaya hotA hai, para upazama ke samaya vaha bhI nahIM hotA  /  yaha
niyama yAda rakhanA cAhiye ki upazama bhI ghAti kA hI ho sakatA hai, so bhI saba
dhAtikarma kA nahIM kintu kevala mohanIya karma kA arthAt pradeza aura vipAka
donoM prakAra kA udaya, yadi rokA jA sakatA hai to mohanIya karma kA hI  /
isake liye zrIyazovijayajI kRta dekhiye, nandI, sU0 kI TIkA, pR0 77 kammapayaDI,
TIkA, pR0 13 paJca dvA0 1, gA0 29 ko malayagiri vyAkhyA samyaktva ke svarUpa,
utpatti aura bheda-prabhedAdi kA savistAra vicAra dekhane ke liye dekhiye, loka
pra0-sarga 3, zloka 566-700 /

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Other Killing Appendix "T". Page 74, line 21 of the word "possible".
Eighteen types of death include the blind vision. Therefore, even in that, the
plant life-form should be included. But the question arises that in blind
vision, which life-forms are considered insufficient, are they considered blind
vision because they have attained full sensory capacity in the insufficient
state, or is it blind vision even before attaining full sensory capacity?  If
the first view is accepted, then it is correct. Because after attaining full
sensory capacity, in the insufficient state, considering the general perception
through the four senses, like in the case of visual perception, three
insufficient life-forms are mentioned in the 17th verse by way of explanation.
Similarly, after attaining full sensory capacity, in the insufficient state,
considering the general perception through senses other than sight, seven
insufficient life-forms can be deducted from blind vision.  But Shri Jay
Somsuri, in his commentary on this verse, has considered blind vision even
before attaining full sensory capacity and has included insufficient life-forms
in it. And he has explained it based on the principle that in the state of
disintegration and karma, a being without visual perception experiences blind
vision. The question in this view is, how can blind vision be considered before
attaining full sensory capacity, when there is no physical sense organ? This can
be answered in two ways.  (1. There are two types of use: use generated by both
physical and mental sense organs when there is a physical sense organ, and use
generated only by the mental sense organ when there is no physical sense organ.
In the state of disintegration and before attaining full sensory capacity, the
first type of use cannot occur; but the second type of general use, which is
related to perception, can be considered. Accepting this, the commentary on
Tattvartha-al 2, Sutra 6 states:  "Because it is independent of the physical
sense organ, even for a thief, the person approaching from behind is perceived
as distinct, independent of the activity of the physical sense organ."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anya mAra pariziSTa "tt'| pRSTha 74, pakti 21 ke "sambhava' zabaera aThAraha
mArgaNA meM acakSudarzana parigaNita hai| ataeva usameM bhI paudaha jIvasthAna
samalane cAhiye  /  parantu isa para prazna yaha hotA hai ki acakSurdarzana meM
jo aparyApta jIvasthAna mAne jAte haiM. so kyA aparyAptaavasthA meM
indriyaparmApti pUrNa hone ke bAta acakSurdarzana mAna kara yA indriya paryApti
pUrNa hone ke pahala bhI acakSurdarzana hotA hai| yaha mAna kara ? yadi prathama
pakSa mAnA jAya taba to ThIka hai| kyoMki indriyaparyApti pUrNa hone ke bAda
aparyApta-avasthA meM hI caturindriyadvArA sAmAnya bodha mAna karanA jaise:-
vakSurdarzana meM tIna aparyApta jIvasthAna 17vIM gAthA meM masAntara se
batalAye huye hai vaise hI indriyaparyAsti pUrNa hone ke bAda aparyAptaavasthA
meM cakSubhinna indriya dvArA sAmAnya bodha mAna kara acakSurdarzana meM sAta
aparyApta jIvasthAna ghaTAye jA sakate haiN| parantu zrIjaya somasUri ne isa
gAthA ke apane Taba meM indriyaparyApti pUrNa hone ke pahale bhI acakSurdarzana
mAna kara usameM aparyApta jIvasthAna mAne haiM  /  aura siddhAnta ko AdhAra se
batalAyA hai ki vigrahagati aura kArmaNoga meM adhidarzana rahita jIva ko
acakSurdazana hotA hai| isa pakSa prazna yaha hotA hai ki iMndriyaparyApti pUrNa
hone ke pahale dravyendriya na hone se acakSudarzana kaise mAnanA ? isakA uttara
do taraha se diyA jA sakatA hai| (1 /  dravyendriya hone para dravya aura bhAva,
ubhaya indriya-janya upayoga aura dravyendriya ke abhAva meM kevala' mAvendriya-
janya upayoga, isa taraha do prakAra kA upayoga hai  /  vigrahagati meM aura
indriyaparyApti hone ke pahale, pahale prakAra kA upayoga, nahIM ho sakatA; para
dUsare prakAra kA darzanAtmaka sAmAnya upayoga mAnA jA sakatA hai| aisA mAnane
meM tattvArtha-ala 2, sU0 6 kI vRttikA "apavendriyanirapekSameva
taskasyacidbhaved yataH pRSThata upasarpantaM sa
suddhapaivendriyavyApAranirapekSa pavyaktIti  / "

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
142 Karmagrantha, Bhagya, and the four statements are evidence. In summary, the
solution can be reached by assuming that the non-visual perception is practical
before the completion of sensory attainment. (2) In Vigrahamat, non-visual
perception is considered before the completion of sensory attainment, but it is
in the form of power, i.e., in the form of destruction and pacification, not in
the form of use. This solution is given based on the commentary of the 46th
verse of the ancient fourth Karmagrantha: "Trayanam apyachakshurvarshanam
tasyanaaharakaavasyayaamapi labdhimadhisyaabhyupagamat." Question: Why is visual
perception not considered in the same way as non-visual perception, which is
considered to be in the form of use or destruction and pacification before the
completion of sensory attainment? Answer: Visual perception refers to the
perception generated by the specific sense organ of the eye. Such perception is
considered only when the material eye exists. Therefore, visual perception is
considered only after the completion of sensory attainment. Non-visual
perception does not refer to the general use of any one sense organ; but it
refers to the general use that occurs from a material sense organ other than the
eye, from the material mind, or from the material sense organ and material mind
+ absence, only in the form of destruction and pacification. This is why non-
visual perception is considered both before and after the completion of sensory
attainment. = == =

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 142 karmagrantha bhAgya cAra yaha kathana pramANa hai  /  sArAMza,
indriyaparyApti pUrNa hone ke pahale upayogAtmaka acakSurdarzana mAna kara
samAdhAna kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  (2) vigrahamati meM aura indriyaparyApti pUrNa
hone ke pahale acakSudarzana mAnA jAtA hai, so zaktirUpa arthAt kSayopazamarUpa,
upayogarUpa nhiiN| yaha samAdhAna, prAcIna caturtha karmagrantha kI 46vIM gAyA
kI TIkA ke "trayANAmapyacakSurvarzanaM tasyAnAhArakAvasyAyAmapi
labdhimAdhisyAbhyupagamAt  / " isaullekha ke AdhAra para diyA gayA hai|
praznaindriya paryApita pUrNa hone ke pahale jaise upayogarUpa yA
kSayopazamarUpa acakSurdarzana mAnA jAtA hai, vaise hI cakSurderzana kyoM nahIM
mAnA jAtA? uttara cakSurdarzana, netrarUpa vizeSa indriya-janya darzana ko
kahate haiM  /  aisA darzana usI samaya mAnA jAtA hai, jaba ki dravyanetra ho  /
ata eva cakSa-darzana ko indriyApti pUrNa hone ke bAda hI mAnA hai  /
acakSadarzana kisI-eka indriya-janya sAmAnya upayoga ko nahIM kahate; kintu
netra bhinna kisI dravyendriya se hone vAle, dravyamana se hone vAle yA
dravyendriya tathA dravyamana + abhAva meM kSayopazamamAtra se hone vAle sAmAnya
upayoga ko kahate haiM  /  isI se acakSurdAna ko indriya-paryApti pUrNa hone ke
pahale aura pIche, donoM avasthAoM meM bhAnA hai| = == =

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four Appendix "Th" | 1 Page 78, Pakki 11, Anaharak
Shavvapar 143 - Anaharak jivas are of two types: Chashvasth and Vitrag. All
Vitrag jivas who are ashariri (liberated) are always Anaharak; however, those
who have a heavy body are Anaharak only during the third, fourth, and fifth
times of Samudhat. Upastajiva are Anaharak only when they are in the state of
Vigrahagati.  To take birth in another life, a jiva has to leave its previous
location and go to another location. If the second location is in the Vishreni-
Patit (Vatra Rekha) from the first location, then it has to move in a Vakragati.
In relation to Vakragati, three things are considered: 11 (1) The number of
Vigraha (turns) in Vakragati, (2) The time duration of Vakragati, and (3) The
time duration of Anaharaktva in Vakragati.  (1) There are some birth locations
that can be attained by taking only one Vigraha. For some locations, two Vigraha
are required, and for some, three. No matter how far the new birth location is
from the Vishreni-Patit, it can be attained in three Vigraha. There is no
difference of opinion in Digambar literature on this subject; because
"Vigrahavato Va Sansarinah Prak Chaturbhyah." - Tattvarth A. 2, Sutra 28. In the
Sarvarth Siddhi Tika of this Sutra, Shri Pujyapada Swami has mentioned the
maximum of three Vigraha movement. Also, "Ekam Dvau Shrivama Harak" - Tattvarth
A. 2, Sutra 30. In the 60 Rajbartik of this Sutra, Bhattarak Shri Akal Dev has
also supported the maximum of three Vigraha movement. Nemichandra Siddhanta also
mentions the same opinion in the 666th verse of Gommatsar Jiva Kanda.  In other
texts, there are different opinions on this subject: "Vivati Cha Sansarinah
Chaturbhyah" - Tattvarth A. 2, Sutra 22. "Eka Hauva Anaharakah." - Tattvarth A.
2, Sutra 30. In the famous Tattvarth A. 2 commentary of the Vetambar, Bhagwan
Umaswati and Shri Siddhasen Ni in his commentary have mentioned the three
Vigraha movement. Along with this, the commentary of the said commentary also
shows the different opinion of Chaturvigraha movement. This different opinion is
mentioned in the 325th verse of Brihatsangrahani and in Shri Bhagwati Shatak 7,
Uddesh 1, Sabha Shatak 14, Uddesh 1.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra pariziSTa "Tha" | 1 pRSTha 78, pakki 11 ke anAhAraka'
zavvapara 143 - anAhAraka jIva do prakAra ke hote haiN| chazvastha aura vItarAga
/  vItarAga meM jo azarIrI (mukta) haiM, ve sabhI sadA anAhAraka hI haiM;
parantu jo zarIra bhArI hai, ve kevala samuddhAta ke tIsare cauthe aura pAMcaveM
samaya meM hI anAhAraka hote haiM  /  upastha jIva, anAhAraka tabhI hote haiM
jaba ve vigrahagati meM vartamAna ho  /  janmAntara grahaNa karane ke liye jIva
ko pUrva-sthAna chor3akara dUsare sthAna meM jAnA par3atA hai| dUsarA sthAna
pahale sthAna se vizreNi-patita (vatra rekhA) meM ho, taba use vakragati karatI
par3atI hai| baka gati ke sambandha meM isa jagaha tIna bAtoM para vicAra kiyA
jAtA hai: 11 (1) vakra - gati meM vigraha ( ghumAva ) kI saMkhpa), (2) vakra-
pati kA kAla-parimANa aura (3) vaka gati meM anAhArakatva kA kAla mAna  /  } (1
koI utpatti sthAna aisA hotA hai ki jisako bIca eka lie karake hI prApta kara
letA hai| kisI sthAna ke liye do vigraha karane paDate haiM aura kisI ke liye
tIna mI navIna utpatti sthAna se kitanA hI vizreNi-patita kyoM na ho, para vaha
tIna vigraha meM to avazya hI prApta ho jAtA hai| isa viSaya meM digambara-
sAhitya meM vighArabheda najara nahIM AtA; kyoMki"vigrahavato va saMsAriNaH prAk
catubhyaH  /  - tattvArtha a0 2 0 28  /  isa su0 kI sarvArthasiddhi TIkA meM zrI
pUjyapAdasvAmI ne adhika se adhika tIna vigrahavAlI gati kA ho ullekha kiyA hai
/  tathAH"ekaM dvau zrIvAmA hAraka tattvArtha- a0 2. sUtra 30  //  isa sUtra ke
60 rAjabArtika meM bhaTTAraka zrI akala deva ne bhIM adhika se adhika tri-
vigraha gati kA hI samarthana kiyA hai  /  nemicandra siddhAntata bhI
gommaTasAra jIva kANDa kI 666vIM gAthA meM ukta mata kA hI nirdeza va rate haiM
/  anyoM meM isa viSaya para matAntara ullikhita pAyA jAtA hai"vivatI ca
saMsAriNaH catubhyaH " tatvArtha a0 2, sUtra 22  /  "eka hauvAnAhArakaH  /  " -
tattvArtha a0 2, sU0 30  /  vetAmbara - prasiddha tattvArtha a0 2 ke bhASya meM
bhagavAn umAsvAtine tathA usakI TIkA meM zrI siddha sena Ni ne tri-vigrahagati
kA ullekha kiyA hai| sAtha hI ukta bhASya kI TIkA meM catuvigraha gati kA
matAntara bhI darasAyA hai  /  isa matAntara kA ullekha bRhatsaMgrahaNI kI 325
vIM gAthA meM aura zrIbhagavatI - zataka 7, uddeza 1 ko sabhA zataka 14, uddeza
1 kI

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
144 The Karmagrantha mentions four types of motion in its commentary. However,
wherever this view is mentioned, it is written that the instruction of the four-
fold motion is not found in any original scripture. This suggests that there are
very few beings who perform such motion. In the aforementioned scriptures, it is
clearly stated that the three-fold motion is not possible. "Avigraha,
Ekavigraha, Dvivigraha, and Trivigraha, these four types of motion are possible,
beyond these, no other motion is possible." From this statement of the
commentary and the fact that the Digambara scriptures mostly refer to the three-
fold motion, and wherever the view of the four-fold motion is mentioned in the
Bhagavati-tika etc., it is shown to be non-existent, therefore, it is more
appropriate to consider the three-fold motion as the most accepted view. (2)
Regarding the time duration of the curved motion, the rule is that the time of
the curved motion is one more than the number of vigrahas. That is, the time
duration of the motion with one vigraha is two times, similarly, the time
duration of the Dvivigraha motion is three times, and the time duration of the
Trivigraha motion is four times. There is no difference of opinion between the
Svetambara and Digambara on this rule. However, according to the view of the
four-fold motion mentioned above, the time duration of that motion is stated to
be five times. (3) The time duration of the non-eating period in the vigraha
motion is considered from two perspectives: practical and definitive. The
practicalists believe that during the time of leaving the previous body, which
is the first time of the curved motion, some particles suitable for the previous
body are taken in through the intake of food. Brihatsangrahani, verse 326 and
its commentary; Lokasangraha 3, verse 1107 onwards. However, the definitiveists
believe that at the time of leaving the previous body, i.e., the first time of
the curved motion, there is no connection with the previous body, nor is a new
body formed; therefore, no kind of food is possible at that time. Lokasangraha
3, verse 1115 onwards. Whether practicalists or definitiveists, both agree that
the last time of the curved motion, in which the being is born in a new place,
definitely involves the intake of food. According to the practical view, the
time duration of the non-eating period should be understood as follows: — The
motion with one vigraha, whose time duration is two times, the being is eating
in both times; because in the first time, the previous

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 144 karmagrantha mAga cAra TIkA meM bhI hai| kintu isa matAnsara kA jahA~-kahIM
ullekha hai, vahA~ saba jagaha yahI likhA hai ki catuvigrahagati kA nirdeza kisI
mUla sUtra meM nahIM hai| isase jAna par3atA hai ki aisI gati karane vAle jIva
ho bahuta kama haiN| ukta sUtroM ke mAdhya meM to yaha spaSTa likhA hai ki tri-
vigraha vAlI gati kA saMbhava hI nahIM hai  /  "avigrahA ekafouhA dviviprA
vivigrahA ityetAzcatussamayapavidhAgatayo bhavanti parato ma sambhavanti bhASya
ke isa kathana se tathA digambara-granthoM meM adhika se adhika tri-vigraha gati
kA hI nirdeza pAye jAne se aura bhagavatI-TI Adi meM jahA~ kahIM catuvigrahamati
kA matAntara hai, vahIM saba jagaha umako astA dikhAyI jAne ke kAraNa adhika se
adhika tIna vigrahabAlI gatihI vA pakSa bahumAnya samajhanA cAhiye  /  J (2)
vakra gati ke kAla-parimANa ke sambandha meM yaha niyama hai kiva kragati kA
samaya vaha kIapekSA eka adhika hI hotA hai  /  arthAt jisa gati meM eka vigraha
ho, usakA kAla-mAna do samaya kA, isa prakAra divipra gati kA kAla-mAna tIna
samayoM kA aura tri-vigrahagati kA kAlamAna bAra samayoM kA hai| isa niyama meM
zvetAmbara digambara kA koI mata bheva nahIM 1 hA~, Upara catuvigrahagati ke
matAntara kA jo ullekha kiyA hai, usake anusAra usa gati kA kAla yAna pAMca
gamayoM kA batalAyA gayA hai  /  (3) vigrahagati meM anAhArakatva ke bAla-mAna
kA vicAra vyavahAra aura nizcaya, do dRSTiyoM se kiyA huA pAyA jAtA hai  /
vyavahAravAdiyoM kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki pUrva zarIra chor3ane kA samaya, jo
vakragati kA prathama samaya hai, usameM pUrva zarIra- yogya kucha pudgala
lAmAhAradvArA grahaNa kiye jAte haiM  /  bRhatsaMgrahaNI gA0 326 tathA usakI
TIkA; lokala sagaM 3. zloka, 1107 se Age  /  parantu nizcayavAdiyoM kA abhiprAya
yaha hai ki pUrva-zarIra chUTane ke samaya meM arthAt vakra-gati ke prathama
samaya meM na to pUrva-zarIra kA hI sambandha hai aura na nayA zarIra banA haiM;
isaliye usa samaya kisI prakAra ke AhAra kA saMbhava nahIM  /  loka0 sa0 3,loka
1115 se Age  /  vyavahAravAdI ho yA nizcayavAdI. donoM isa bAta ko barAbara
mAnate haiM ki vakragati kA antima samaya, jisameM jIva navIna sthAna meM
utpanna hotA hai| usameM avazya AhAra grahaNa hotA hai  /  vyavahAranaya ke
anusAra anAhArakatva kA kAla mAna isa prakAra samajhanA cAhiye: -- eka
vigrahavAlI gati, jisako kAla maryAdA do samaya kI hai, usake donoM samaya meM
jIva AhAraka hI hotA hai; kyoMki pahale samaya meM pUrva

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter Four of the Karma Granth: Body-Suitable Lomahar Consumption**  This
chapter discusses the duration of the *anahaarak* (non-eating) state during the
*lomahaar* (hair-eating) stage of the *sharira-yogya* (body-suitable) diet. It
also explores the concept of *anahaarak* in relation to the different types of
*vikrah* (separation) and *gati* (motion).  **Two-Vikrah Gati:** This type of
motion, which occurs over three periods, has an *anahaarak* state in the middle
period.  **Three-Vikrah Gati:** This type of motion, which occurs over four
periods, has an *anahaarak* state in the middle two periods, even though it is
considered *ahaarak* (eating) in the first and last periods.  **The
*Nivasyashti* Perspective:** According to the *Nivasyashti* (certain)
perspective, the duration of the *anahaarak* state is equal to the number of
*vikrah*. Therefore, in a one-*vikrah* motion, there is one period of
*anahaarak*, in a two-*vikrah* motion, there are two periods, and in a
three-*vikrah* motion, there are three periods.  **The *Vyavahar* Perspective:**
The *Vyavahar* (practical) perspective suggests that the duration of the
*anahaarak* state is one period less than the number of *vikrah*. This view is
supported by the 31st sutra of the *Tattvarth* chapter 2, its commentary, and
the *Tika*. The *Tika* also mentions that according to the *Vyavahar*
perspective, there are three periods of *anahaarak* in a five-period *patvikrah*
motion.  **Reconciling the Perspectives:** The *Vyavahar* perspective suggests
that the *anahaarak* state can only be reduced from three periods to two periods
in the case of a four-*vikrah* motion. However, the *Nivasyashti* perspective
disagrees with this, stating that the duration of the *anahaarak* state is
directly proportional to the number of *vikrah*.  **The Digambara Perspective:**
The *Digambara* (sky-clad) tradition, based on the 30th sutra of the *Tattvarth*
chapter 2 and its commentaries, supports the *Nivasyashti* perspective.  **The
Swetambara Perspective:** The *Swetambara* (white-clad) tradition mentions a
four-*vikrah* motion, which, according to the *Nivasyashti* perspective, would
result in four periods of *anahaarak*.  **Conclusion:** The differences in the
duration of the *anahaarak* state between the *Swetambara* and *Digambara*
traditions are based on their respective perspectives, *Vyavahar* and
*Nivasyashti*. There is no real contradiction between the two traditions
regarding the duration of the *anahaarak* state.  **Important Note:** The
abandonment of the previous body, the emergence of the new body, and the motion
(whether it is *maj* or *bakri*) all occur simultaneously. The statement that
the new body emerges in the second period of the *vikrah* motion is based on the
*Vyavahar* perspective. According to this perspective, the last period of the
previous body, where the soul is facing the *vikrah* motion, should be
considered as the first period of the *vikrah* motion.  **Source:**
*Brihatsangrahan*, Chapter 325, *Malayagiri Tika*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra zarIra-yogya lomAhAra gahaNa kimAnAtA hai aura sAre
samaya meM navIna zarIrayogya aahaar| do vigrahavAlI gati, jo tIna samaya kI hai
aura tIna ghigrahavAlI gati. jo cAra samaya kI hai, usameM prathama tathA antima
samaya meM AhArakatva hone para bhI bIca ke samaya meM anAhAraka-avasthA pAcI
jAtI hai| arthAt ni-vigrahagati ke madhya meM eka samaya taka aura vi-vigraha
gati meM prathama tathA antima samaya ko chor3a, bIca ke do samaya paryanta
anAhAraka sthiti rahatI hai  /  vyavahAranaya kA yaha mata ki vigraha kI apekSA
anAhArakasya kA samara eka kama hI hotA hai, tattvArSa-adhyAya 2 ke 31veM sUtra
meM tathA usake bhASya aura TIkA meM nirdiSTa hai| sAtha hI TIkA meM
dhyabahAranaya ke anusAra upayUkta pAMca samaya-parimANa patavigrahavati gati ke
matAntara ko lekara tIna samaya kA anAhArakasva mI batalAyA gayA hai  /
sArAMza, myavahAranaya kI apekSA se tIna samaya kA anAhArakatva,
caturvigrahavatI gati ke matAntara se hI ghaTa makatA hai, anyathA nahIM  /
nizcayaSTi ke anusAra yaha bAta nahIM hai| usake anusAra to jitane vigraha utane
hI samaya anAhArakatva ke hote haiM  /  ata eva usa dRSTi ke anusAra eka
vigrahavAlI vakragati meM eka samaya, do vigrahavAlI gati meM do samaya aura
tIna vigrahavAlI gati meM tIna samaya anAhArakatva ke samajhane cAhiye  /  yaha
bAta digambara-pramisa tatvArtha-a0 2 ke 30 sUtra tathA usakI sarvAthasiddhi
aura rAjavAsika-TrIkA meM hai| zvetAmbara-granthoM meM caturvigrahavatI gati ke
matAntara kA ullekha hai, usako lekara nivasyaSTi se vicAra kiyA jAya to
anAhArakatva ke cAra samaya bhI kahe jA sakate haiN| sArAMza, zvetAmbarIba
sasvArtha-mASya Adi meM eka yA do samaya ke anAhArakatva kA jo ullekha hai, vaha
vyavahAraSTi se aura digambarIya tattvArtha Adi granthoM meM jo eka, do yA tIna
samaya ke anAhArakatva kA ullena hai, vaha nizcayaSTi se  /  ata eva
anAhArakatva ke kAla-mAna ke viSaya meM donoM sampradAya meM vAstavika viroSa ko
avakAza hI nahIM hai| prasaGga-bA. yaha bAta jAnane yogya hai ki pUrva-zarIra kA
parityAga, para-mavakI Aya kA udaya aura gati (cAhe maja ho yA bakrI, ye sInoM
eka samaya meM hote haiM  /  vigrahagati ke dUsare samaya meM para-bhava kI bAyu
ke sadaya kA kathana hai, so sthala vyavahAranaya kI apekSA se-pUrva-mava kA
antima samaya, jisameM jIva vigrahagati kA abhimukha ho jAtA hai. usako *
upacAra se vigrahagati kA prathama samaya mAnakara-samajhanA cAhiye  /
-bRhatsaMgrahaNA, gA0 325, malayagiri-TIkA  /

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four Appendix | Page 85, on the word 'Avamivan' in verse 11
There are two main things to know when considering the relationship between
Avadhi Darshan and Gunasthan: (1) the different viewpoints and (2) their
meaning.  **(1) Different Viewpoints:** There are two main viewpoints in this
matter: (a) Karmagranthic and (b) Siddhantic.  **(a) Karmagranthic Viewpoint:**
This viewpoint is also divided into two. The first viewpoint considers Avadhi
Darshan to be present in the fourth to ninth Gunasthanas. This viewpoint is
mentioned in the 26th verse of the ancient fourth Karmagranth, which considers
those who have ignorance in the first three Gunasthanas to not have Avadhi
Darshan in any of the ten Gunasthanas. This viewpoint is further mentioned in
the 48th verse and the 70th and 71st verses of the ancient fourth Karmagranth,
which are accepted by those Karmagranthic thinkers who consider Asham to be
present until the second Gunasthan. Both these viewpoints are found in the 690th
and 704th verses of Gommatsar Jivakalan. The first viewpoint is also found in
the Sarvarth Siddhi of the Tatvasarth-A. 1, which states: "Mashivarshane
Asanyatasampashtigani Bichkavayamsami."  **(b) Siddhantic Viewpoint:** This
viewpoint is completely different. It considers Avadhi Darshan to be present in
the first twelve Gunasthanas. This is known from the Bhagavati Sutra. Shri
Malayagiri Suri has clearly shown this viewpoint in the commentary of the 35th
verse of Panchasangrah-Bar 1 and in the commentary of the 29th verse of the
ancient fourth Karmagranth.  "Mohisanasanagaropaanalagam Bhanta. Ki nami mamani?
Goyama! Gani vi mamapi FRI ja nani te asgama tinnaano, asthagahima bajgani. Me
tignaachi, te pabhibhivohiyanani suyagani ohinani. Me parnaagi te
maminiyohimammano mupagagi ohinami magpagjavashani. Ne apani he piyama
mahamaanagi muyambani vimanganani."  Bhagavati-Shatak 8, Uddesh 2.  **(2)
Meaning:** (of the above viewpoints)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra pariziSTa "" | pRSTha 85, pati 11 ke 'avamivana' zabda
para avadhidarzana aura guNasthAna kA sambandha vicArane ke samaya mukhyatayA do
bAteM jAnane kI hai, (1) pakSa-bheda aura (2). unakA tAtparya  /  - (1) pakSa-
bheda  /  prastuta viSaya meM mukhya do pakSa haiM:-ka) kArmapranthika aura
(kha) saMddhAntika  /  (k| kAmaMgranthika-pakSa bhI do haiM  /  inameM se pahasA
pakSa cauthe Adi nau guNasthAnoM meM adhidAna mAnatA hai| yaha pakSa, prAcIna
caturtha karmagrantha kI 26vI gAthA meM nirdiSTa hai, jo pahale tIna guNasthAnoM
meM ajJAna mAnane vAle ko koI nA , hI sare Adi dasa guNasthAnoM meM
avadhidarzana mAnatA hai| yaha pakSa Age kI 48vI gAthA meM tathA prAcIna
caturtha karmagrantha kI 70dI ba 71vIM gAthA meM nirdiSTa hai, jo pahale do
guNasthAna taka azAma mAnanevAle kArmagrathikoM ko mAnya hai| ye dono pakSa,
gommaTasAra jIvakAna kI 690 aura 704vIM gAthA meM haiM 1- inameM se prathama
pakSa, tatsvArtha-a0 1ke ve sUtra kI sarvArtha siddhi meM bhI hai  /  vaha yaha
hai:"maSivarzane asaMyatasampaSTigAni bIcakavAyAmsAmi  / " (ba) saMDhAntika
pakSa vilkula bhinna hai  /  vaha pahale Adhi bAraha guNasthAnoM meM
avadhidarzana mAmatA hai  /  jo bhagavatI-sUtrase mAlUma hotA hai  /  isa pakSa
ko zrImalayagirisUri ne paJcasaMgraha-bAra 1 kI 35vI gAthA kI TIkA meM
tathAprAcIna caturtha karmagranpa kI 29vIM gApAko TIkA meM spaSTatA se dikhAyA
hai| "mohisaNasaNagAropanalAgaM bhaMte  /  ki nAmI mamAnI ? goyamA ! gANI vi
mamApI FRI jA nANI te asgAmA tiNNANo, asthagaimA bajagANI  /  me tigNAcI, te
pAbhibhivohiyaNAnI suyagANI ohiNANI  /  me paraNAgI te mAmiNiyohimamAno mupagAgI
ohiNAmI magapagjavaSANI  /  ne apANI he piyamA mahAmaNNAgI muyamabANI
vimaMganANI  / " magavatI-zataka 8, uddeza 2 /  (2)-unakA (ukta pakSoM kA)
tAtparyaH

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Bhava Char 9  **(a)** Both types of Karmagranthic scholars,
those who believe in ignorance in the first three Gunasthanas and those who
believe in ignorance in the first two Gunasthanas, differentiate between
Avadhijnana and Avadhidarshan through Avadhijnana, but not through
Vibhangashana. They say that the specific use of Avadhi is different from the
general use of Avadhi. Therefore, just as in a Samyaktvi who has Avadhi-upayoga,
Avadhijnana and Avadhidarshan are both separate, similarly in an ignorant person
who has Avadhi-upayoga, Vibhangajnana and Avadhidarshan are both truly
different. However, there is only a lack of desire to differentiate between
Vibhangajnana and Avadhidarshan. The lack of desire to differentiate is simply
their commonality. That is, just as Vibhangajnana cannot determine the true
nature of the object, similarly Avadhidarshan, being general in nature, cannot
determine the nature of the object.  Due to this lack of desire to
differentiate, according to the first opinion, Avadhidarshan should be
understood in the fourth to ninth Gunasthanas, and according to the second
opinion, it should be understood in the third to ninth Gunasthanas.  **(b)**
Saiddhantic scholars desire to differentiate between Vibhangajnana and
Avadhidarshan, not to unify them. This is why they believe in Vibhangashana.
According to them, Vibhangajnana is only possible in the first Gunasthana, not
in the second or subsequent ones. Therefore, they believe in Avadhidarshan in
the first twelve Gunasthanas, considering it to be associated with Avadhijnana
in the second to eleventh Gunasthanas and with Vibhangajnana in the first
Gunasthana. The formlessness in the vision of an Avadhijnani and a Vibhangashani
is the same. Therefore, instead of giving a separate name like 'Vibhangadarshan'
to the vision of a Vibhangashani, it is called 'Avadhidarshan'.  **Summary:**
The Karmagranthic side does not desire to differentiate between Vibhangajnana
and Avadhidarshan, while the Saiddhantic side does.  — Lokaprakash Sarg 3, Shlok
1057 onwards. This difference of opinion has been mentioned by Shri
Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman in the Visheshnavati Granth, which is mentioned in
Prajnapanapad 18, Vritti Pu. (Kolkata) 566.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAva cAra 9 * (ka) pahale tIna guNasthAnoM meM ajJAna mAnanevAle
aurapahale doguNasthAnoM meM ajJAna mAnane vAle donoM prakAra ke kArmagranthika
vidvAna avadhijJAna se avadhidarzana ko alaga mAnate haiM, para vibhaGgazAna se
nahIM, ve kahate hai kivizeSa avadhi upayoga se sAmAnya avadhi upayoga bhinna
hai; isaliye jisa prakAra avadhi-upayoga vAle samyaktvI meM avadhijJAna aura
avadhidarzana, donoM alaga-alaga haiM, isI prakAra avadhiupayoga vAle ajJAnI meM
zrI vibhaGgajJAna aura avadhidarzana, ye donoM vastutaH bhinna haiM sahI,
tathApi vibhaGgajJAna aura avadhidarzana, ina donoM ke pArasparika bheda kI
avivakSAmAtra hai| bheda vivakSita na rakhane kA savaca donoM kA sAdayamAtra hai
/  arthAt jaise vimaGgajJAna viSaya kA yathArtha nizcaya nahIM kara sakatA,
vaise hI avadhidarzana sAmAnyarUpa honeke kAraNa viSaya kA nizcaya nahIM kara
sakatA  /  isa abhedavivakSA ke kAraNa pahale mata ke anusAra cauthe Adi no
guNasthAnoM meM aura dUsare mata ke anusAra tIsare Adi isa guNasthAnoM meM
avadhidarzana samajhanA cAhiye  /  (kha) saiddhAntika vidvAna vibhaGgajJAna aura
avadhidarzana, donoM ke bheda kI vivakSA karate haiM, abheda kI nahIM  /  isI
kAraNa ve vibhaGgazAnoM meM ani mAnate hai  /  unake mata se kevala pahale
guNasthAna meM vibhaGgajJAna kA saMbhava hai, dUsare Adi meM nahIM  /  isaliye
ve dUsare Adi gyAraha guNa-sthAnoM meM avadhijJAna ke sAtha aura pahale
guNasthAna meM, vibhaGgajJAna ke sAtha avadhidarzana kA sAhacarya mAnakara
pahale bAraha guNasthAnoM meM avadhidarzana mAnate haiN| avadhijJAnI ke aura
vibhaGgazAnI ke darzana meM nirAkAratA aMza samAna hI hai| isaliye vibhaGgazAnI
ke darzana kI 'vibhaGgadarzana' aisI alaga saMjJA na rakhakara 'avadhidarzana'
hI saMjJA rakhI hai  /  1 P sArAMza, karamedhika pakSa, vibhaGgakAna aura
avadhidarzana ina donoM ke bheda kI trivakSA nahIM karatA aura saiddhAntika
pakSa karatA hai  /  -- lokaprakAza sarga 3, zloka 1057 se Age  /  isa
matabhedakA ullekha vizeSaNavatI grantha meM zrIjinabhadragaNi kSamAzramaNa ne
kiyA hai, jisa kI sUcanA prajJApanA- pada 18, vRtti pu. ( kalakattA ) 566para
hai| =0 .

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix "D" of the Karmagrantha, Part 12. Page 86, Line 2.  Consideration of
the word 'Aharaka' in relation to the diet of a Kevalajnani.  The Angokara of
Aharakatva at the time of the 13th Gunasthan is the same in the Digambara texts
as here. - Tattvartha - 1, Sutra 8, Sarvarthasiddhi. "Maharanuvatem
Aharapheshumi Gyaiishtipvanisayogakevalyanthani" The Mommatsar-Kaidi...
Bhorigaatha is also worth looking at for this. In the aforementioned Gunasthan,
the rise of Asatvedaniya is also accepted in the texts of both sects (Second
Karmagrantha, Ga. 22: Karmakanda, Ga. 271).  Similarly, at that time, in the
absence of the term Aharasanjna, the rise of Audarik-sharira-namakarma from the
rise of Karmapudgalas, like the rise of Audarik-sharira-namakarma from the rise
of Karmapudgalas, is also accepted in the Digambara texts (Labdhisar Ma 614).
The explanation of Aharakatva in Gommatsar is so clear that there is no doubt
about the acceptance of Audarik, Bhasha and Manovargna Pudgalas by the Kevali
(Jiv. Ga. 663-664).  The continuous acceptance of Audarik Pudgalas is also a
type of Ahar, which is called 'Lo Mahara'.  For this Ahar, the sustenance of the
body is known, and in its absence, the acceptance of Audarik Pudgalas until the
Yoga-pravritti is proven by other means.  In this way, Aharakatva in a
Kevalajnani, its cause, the rise of Asatvedaniya, and the acceptance of Audarik
Pudgalas, are accepted by both sects in the same way.  This agreement of thought
between the two sects is so great that the question of Kabalaahar is
automatically resolved in the eyes of the wise. Those who believe that
Kevalajnanis do not accept Kabalaahar, also agree that they accept other subtle
Audarik Pudgalas.  Those who believe that Kevalajnanis accept Kabalaahar,
believe that they are nothing but gross Audarik Pudgalas.  Thus, both those who
believe and those who do not believe in Kabalaahar agree that Kevalajnanis
accept some kind of Audarik Pudgalas.  In such a situation, making the question
of Kabalaahar a point of contention is meaningless. = = = =

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga bAra pariziSTa "Dha"  /  pRSTha 86, paMkti 2. ke 'AhAraka'
zaba para kevalajAnI ke AhAra para vicAra  / ] terahaveM guNasthAna ke samaya
AhArakatvakA aGgokAra yahA~ke samAna digambarIya granthoM meM haiN| -tattvArtha-
1, sU08kI sarvArthasiddhi  /  "mAhArAnuvAdema AhArapheSu migyAiSTipAvani
sayogakevalyantAni" isI mommaTasAra-kAidI .:. bhorI gAthA bhI isake liye dekhane
yogya hai| ukta gaNesthAnameM asAtavedanIyakA udaya bhI donoM sampradAyake
granthoM (dusarA karmagrantha, gA0 22: karmakANDa, gA. 271)meM mAnA huA hai  /
iso saraha usa samaya AhArasaMjJA na honepara mI kArmaNazarIranAmakarma ke udaya
se karmapudagloMkI taraha audArikazarIranAmakarmaka udaya se audArika- puloM kA
grahaNa digambarIya grantha (labdhisAra mA 614)meM bhI svIkRta hai  /
AhArakatvakI vyAkhyA gommaTasAra meM itanI adhika spaSTa hai ki jisase
kevalIdvArA audArika, bhASA aura manovargaNA ke pudagala grahaNa kiye jAne ke
sambandha meM kucha bhI sandeha nahIM rahatA (jIva. gA0 663-664)  /  audArika
pudagaloMkA nirantara grahaNa bhI eka prakArakA AhAra hai, jo 'lo mAhAra'
kahalAtA hai| isa AhArake liye jAnetaka zarIrakA nirvAha aura isake abhAvameM
zarIrakA ani arthAta yoga-pravRtti paryanta auvArika pUgaloMkA grahaNa anya
vyatirekase siddha hai| isa taraha kevalajJAnImeM AhArakatva, usakA kAraNa
asAtavedanIyakA udaya aura audArika pudgaloM kA grahaNa, donoM sampradAyako
samAnarUpase mAnya hai| donoM sampradAya kI yaha vicAra-mamatA itanI adhika hai
ki isakesAmane kabalAhArakA prazna viSArasIloMkI dRSTi meM Apa hI Apa hala ho
jAtA hai| kevalIjAnI kavalAhArako grahaNa nahIM karate, aisA mAnanevAle bhI
unakedrAga anya mUkSma audAripha pugloMkA grahaNa kiyA jAnA nirvivAda mAnate hI
haiN| jinake matameM kevalajJAnI kavalAhAra grahaNa karate haiN| isake mata se
vaha sthUla audArika pudglake sivAya aura kucha bhI nahIM haiM  /  isa prakAra
kavAlAhAra mAnanevAle-na mAnanevAse ubhayake mana meM kebalazAnI ke dvArA jisI-
na-kisI prakArake audArika pudAloM kA grahaNa kiyA jAnA samAna hai| aisI zAmeM
kabalAhAra ke praznako virodha kA sAbana banAnA artha-hIna hai| = = = =

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four Appendix "" | Page 66, Line 20 'Nationalism' Gyaper
[The prohibition of reading the twelfth chapter called 'Striko Drishtivav' is
under consideration.] [Equality:- Both practice and scriptures prove that women
are equal to men in both physical and spiritual development. Kumari Tarabai's
not being less than Professor Rammoorti in the physical realm, the learned Annie
Besant's thoughts and spiritual power not being less than any other male thinker
or speaker, and the learned Sarojini Naidu's poetic power not being less than
any famous male poet, are proof that women can achieve the same abilities as men
if given equal resources and opportunities. The Shvetambar Acharyas have
considered women equal to men in ability and have given them the right to
Kaivalya and Moksha, meaning complete physical and spiritual development. For
this, see Prajnapana-Su. 7, p. 18; Nandi-Su. 21, p. 130/11. They have written a
lot about the Digambar Acharyas who disagree on this matter. For this, see
Nandi-Tika, p. 131/1-133/1; Prajnapana-Tika, 20-22/1; P. Shastravasimuccaya-
Tika, p. 425-430. _ The eloquent scholar Rajokhar has shown, with a sense of
mediation, that women are equal to men, "Even women can be poets like men.
Culture within oneself is not dependent on gender, nor does heroism require
division. In the past, queens, daughters of great ministers, courtesans, curious
wives, and scholars who fought in debates, were all poets." -Kavya Mimamsa-
Chapter 10. Opposition:- The prohibition of women studying Drishtivad comes from
two perspectives: (1) From the perspective of logic and (2) From the limitations
set by scriptures. (1!- On one hand, women are considered worthy of knowledge
and Moksha, and on the other hand, they are considered unfit for studying
Drishtivad, for fear of losing their knowledge. This seems contradictory, like
giving someone a jewel and then saying that they cannot protect a cowrie shell.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra pariziSTa "" /  pRSTha 66, paMkti 20 ke 'rASTivAda'
gyapara [strIko dRSTivAva nAmaka bArahavAM aGka par3hanekA niSedhahai, isapara
vicAra  / ] [samAnatA:-vyavahAra aura zAstra, ye donoM, zArIrika aura adhyA.
tmika-vikAsameM strIko puruSake samAna siddha karate haiN| kumArI tArAbAIkA
zarIrika-dalameM pro. rAmamUtisekama na honA, viduSI ainI bIsenTakA vicAra va
dhaktatva-zaktimeManya kisI vicAraka vaktA-puruSase kama na honA evaM vidupI
sarojinI nAyaDakA kavitva-zakti meM kisI prasiddha puruSa-kavise kama na honA,
isa bAta kA pramANa hai ki samAna sAdhana aura avasara milanegara strI bhI
puruSa jitanI yogyatA prApta kara sakatI haiM  /  zvetAmbara-AcAryone *trIko
puruSa ke barAbara yogya mAnakara use kaivalya va mokSakI arthAta zArIrika aura
AdhyAmika pUrNa vikAsa vibhAga kiyA hai| isake liye dekhirI, prajJApanA-sU07,
pR0 18; nandI-sU0 21, pR0 13011  /  isa viSayameM mata-bheda rakhane vAle
dinambara-AcAryoM ke vipayameM unhoMne bahuta-kucha likhA hai| isaliye dekhiye,
nandI-TIkA, pR0131/1-133/1; prajJApanA-TIkA, 20-22/1; pa. zAstravAsimuccaya-
TIkA, pR0425-430| _ AlaGkArika paNDita rAjokharane madhyastha bhAvapUrvaka
strIjAtiko purupa jAtike tulya batalAza hai, "puruSaSat yoSito'pi kavimaveyuH  /
saMskAro hAtmani samati na straNaM pauruSaM pA vibhAgamapekSate  /  bhUpanne
sapane ba. rAjapugyo mahAmAtyaduhitarI gaNikAH kautukibhAryAzca
zAstrapratiyuddhAH kavayazca  / " -kAvyamImAMsA-adhyAya 10  /  virodha:-strIko
dRSTivAdave adhyayanakA jo niSedha kiyA hai, isameM do tarahase bigeva AtA
hai:-(1)tarka-dRSTi se aura (2) zAstrokta maryAdAse  /  (1!-eka aura strIko
kevalajJAnaM va mokSa takakI adhikAriNo mAnanA aura dUsarI ora use dRSTiyAdake
adhyayana kelime-zrutajJAna-vidoSake liyeayogya batalAnA, aisA viruddha jAna
par3atA hai, jaise kisI ko ratna sauMpakara kahanA ki tuma kaur3I kI rakSA nahIM
kara skte|

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
150/ **Chapter Four (2) of the Karma Granth -**  Prohibiting the study of
Drishtivad also hinders the limits of the cause-and-effect relationship as
stated in the scriptures. For example, one cannot attain Kevalgyan without first
attaining the five senses; the first two stages of Shulkadhyan cannot be
attained without prior knowledge, and 'prior' is a part of Drishtivad. This
limit is undeniably accepted in the scriptures. "Shulkayavah Purvavidah."
Tattvarth, Chapter 6, Sutra 36. Therefore, considering a woman ineligible for
Drishtivad as eligible for Kevalgyan seems clearly contradictory.  There are two
perspectives regarding the reasons for the ineligibility of women for
Drishtivad:  (a) The first perspective, held by Shri Jinbhadramani Kshamasraman
and others, attributes this ineligibility to mental flaws like triviality,
pride, sensory fickleness, and reliance on opinions. For this, see Vishesh
Bhashya, 552nd verse.  (b) The second perspective, held by Shri Bhadrasuri and
others, attributes this ineligibility to physical flaws in the form of
impurities. Thus: "Katham Dwadashangapratisheshah? Tathavishaviprataso Dovat."
Lalitavistara, Chapter [Removal of Contradiction from Nayashti]: The special
cause-and-effect relationship that appears in the attainment of Kevalgyan by a
woman due to her ineligibility for Drishtivad is not actually a contradiction.
Because the scriptures consider women capable of understanding the meaning of
Drishtivad; the prohibition is only for verbal study. "Shrenipatih Tu
Kamagarbhavadbhavatobhavo'ddhi Evam." - Ativishtara and its commentary by
Shrimunichandrasuri, Chapter 111. When tapas, contemplation, etc., lead to a
significant reduction and cessation of the knowledge-obscuring karmas, a woman
can understand the complete meaning of Drishtivad without verbal study and, by
attaining the two stages of Shulkadhyan, can also attain Kevalgyan. "Yadicha
'Shastrayogagamyasamayyam Yogaha Vaseya Madhatisukhsmen
Vishishtakhsayopashamaprabhamaprabhadiyogata Purvadharasyaiva
Bovatarikesadbhava"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 150/ karma grantha bhAga cAra (2) - dRSTivAda ke adhyayanakA niSedha karanese
zAstra kathita kArya-kAraNa bhAvakI maryAdA bhI bAdhita ho jAtI hai  /
jaise:-pahale pAca prApta kiye binA kevalajJAna prApta nahIM hotA; pUrva ke
jJAnake binA zulkadhyAnake prathama do pada prApta nahIM hote aura 'pUrva'
dRSTivAdakA eka hissA hai  /  yaha maryAdA zAstrameM nirvivAda svIkRta hai  /  P
"zulke va pUrvavidaH  /  tatvArtha a0 6, sU0 36  /  isa kAraNa dRSTivAdake
adhyayanakI anadhikAriNI strI ko kevalamAna kI adhikAriNI mAna lenA spaSTa
viruddha jAna par3atA hai  /  dRSTivAda ke anAdhikAra ke kAraNoMke viSaya meM do
pakSa haiM: (ka) pahalA pakSa, zrIjinabhadramaNi kSamAzramaNa AdikA hai| isa
pakSa meM strI tuccha, abhimAna, indriya cAJcalya, mati-mAnya Adi mAnasika doSa
dikhAkara usako dRSTivAdake adhyayanakA niSedha diyA hai| isake liye "dekhiye,
vize0 bhA0, 552vIM gAthA  /  (kha) dUsarA pakSa, zrIbhadrasUri AdikA hai| isa
pakSa meM azuddhirUpa zArIrika doSa dikhAkara usakA niSedha kiyA hai| thathA:
kathaM dvAdazAGgapratiSeSaH ? tathAviSavipra taso dovAt  / " 'lalitavistarA,
pu0, '' [nayaSTi se virodhakA parihAra:- ]raSTivAdake anadhikArase strIko
kevalajJAnake pAne meM jo kArya-kAraNa- bhAvakA vizeSa dIkhatA hai vaha vastutaH
virodha nahIM hai; kyoMki zAstra, strImeM dRSTivAdake artha zAnakI yogyatA
mAnatA hai; niSedha sirpha zAbdika adhyayanakA hai  /  zreNipati tu
kAmagarbhavadbhAvato bhAvo'ddhi evaM  / " - ativistarA tathA isakI
zrImunicandrasUri-kRta paJjikA, pu0 111  /  tapa bhAvanA Adi jaba
jJAnAvaraNIyakA kSayopazama tIvra ho jAtA hai, taba strI zAbdika adhyayana ke
sivAya hI dRSTivAdakA sampUrNa artha-jJAna kara letI hai aura zulkadhyAnake do
pAda pAkara kevalamAnako bhI pA letI hai"yadi ca 'zAstrayogAgamyasAmayyaM yogaH
vaseya mAdhdatisUkSmeN viziSTakSayopazamaprabhamaprabhadiyogatA pUrvadharasyaiva
bovAtarikesadbhAvA J

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Karmagrantha" Part Four, "Danashulkadhyan" has been received. There is no fault
in attaining liberation through the attainment of Kevala Jnana. Even without the
intervention of an "Apayana", the "Bhavat" is "Purvavittva" in essence. This is
explained in detail. Then, there is no fault in the "Vissayasamcha" of the
"Nigranthi"s. - Shastrava 426. - There is no rule that one cannot understand the
meaning without studying from the Guru's mouth. Many people are seen who,
without studying from anyone, acquire deep knowledge of their desired subject
through contemplation and reflection. Now, regarding the prohibition of verbal
study, many arguments arise. Is it appropriate to declare someone who is
considered capable of understanding the meaning as unfit for verbal study? Words
are merely a means of understanding the meaning. It is not appropriate to say
that someone who can acquire knowledge of the meaning through other means like
penance, meditation, etc., is unfit to acquire that knowledge through words. The
mental defects like arrogance, etc., which are shown as the reason for the
prohibition of studying the "Sharira", are they not present in men? If verbal
study is not prohibited for men in general because of the absence of these
defects in specific men, then is it not possible for specific women who are
equal to men? If it were impossible, then why is the liberation of women
described? The possibility of physical defects for studying the "Sharira" is
also not applicable to all women. If it applies to some women, then is there not
a possibility of physical impurity in some men? In such a situation, is the
prohibition of verbal study for women, excluding men, done with this intention?
In this regard, it is only necessary to say that the prohibition of verbal study
by showing mental or physical defects seems to be a practical matter, not a
prohibition of study for specific women. In support of this, it can be said that
when specific women are capable of understanding the meaning of "Dristi-vad",
"Ditaragamav", "Kevalajnana" and attaining liberation, then what is the
possibility of mental defects in them? And how can physical impurity be
attributed to women who are virtuous, attentive and have the highest pure
conduct? Even men who are considered fit for studying "Dristi-vad", like:
"Sthulbhadra", "Dubanlika", "Pushyamitra", etc., could not protect "Dristi-vad"
due to reasons like "Numchhatva", memory defects, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra dAnazulkadhyAnahaya prAptaH kevalAvApti krameNa
muktiprAptiriti na doSaH,apayanamantareNApi bhAvataH pUrvavitvasaM bhavAt, iti
vibhAthyate. tadA nigranthInAprameva visayasaMmace doSAbhAyA ! -zAstravA0 426  /
- maha niyama nahIM hai ki guru-mukha se zAbdika-Adhyayana binA kiye arthazAna
na ho  /  aneka loga aise dekhe jAte haiM, jo kisI se binA pane hI manana
cintana dvArA apane abhISTa viSayakA gaharA jJAna prApta kara lete haiN| _ aba
rahA zAbdika-adhyayanakA niSedha, so isapara aneka tarka-vitarka utpanna hote
haiN| yaSA-jisameM artha-jJAnakI yogyatA mAna lI jAya, usako sirpha zAbdika-
adhyayanake liye ayogya batalAnA kyA saMgata hai? zabda, arthazAnakA
sAdhanamAtra hai| tapa, bhAvanA Adi anya sAdhanoMse jo artha-jJAna saMpAdana
kara sakatA hai, vaha usa jJAna ko zabda dvArA saMpAdana karane ke liya ayogya
hai, yaha kahanA kahAMtaka saMgata hai? zAridakA adhyayana ke niSetranitA
tucchatva abhimAna Adi jo mAnasika-doSa dikhAye jAte haiM, ve kyA puruSa nAnimeM
nahIM hote? yadi viziSTa puruSoM meM ukta doSoM kA abhAva hone ke kAraNa puruSa
sAmAnyakeliye zAbdika-adhyayanakA niSedha nahIM kiyA hai to kyA puruSa tulya
viziSTa striyoMkA saMbhava nahIM hai? yadi asaMbhava hotA to strImokSakA varNana
kyoM kiyA AtA? zAmidaka-adhyayana ke liye jo zArIrika-doSIMkI saMbhAvanA kI gayI
hai, vaha bhI kyA saba striyoM ko lAgU par3atI hai? yadi kucha striyoM ko lAg
par3atI hai to kyA kucha puruSoM meM bhI zArIrika-azuddhikI saMbhAvanA nahIM
hai| aisI dazAmeM puruSajAtiko chor3a strIjAti ke liye zAbdikaadhyayanakA
niSedha misa abhiprAyase kiyA hai? ina takoMke sambandhameM saMkSepameM itanA hI
kahanA hai ki mAnasika yA zArIrika-doSa dikhAkara zAbdikaadhyayanakA jo niSeSa
diyA gayA hai. yaha prayika jAna par3atA hai, apati viziSTa striyoM ke liye
adhyayanakA niSedha nahIM hai| isake samarthana meM yaha kahA jA sakatA hai ki
jaba viziSTa striyAM, STi-vAdakA artha-jAna, dItarAgamAva, kevalajJAna aura
mokSa taka pAne meM samartha ho sakatI haiM, to phira unameM mAnasivadoSoMkI
saMbhAvanA hI kyA hai? tathA vaddha apramatta aura paramapavitra AcAravAlI
striyoM meM zArIrika azuddhi kaise batalAyI jA sakatI hai| jinako dRSTivAdake
adhyayana ke liye yogya samajhA jAtA hai. ve puruSa bhI, jaise:sthUlabhadra,
dubaMlikA puSyamitra Adi numchatva; smRti-doSa Adi kAraNoM se raSTivAdakI rakSA
na kara ske|

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 152  **Karma-Rampu, Part Four**  "Teg Chitiyam Bhoganonam Dis Varisse Mitti
Sihurusham Mumbai." - Aavashyak Vritti, p. 0668/1. "Sato Sharipari
Duliyapoorsamitto Ham Sayanario Dinno, Tato So Kayavi Vivase Vaynan Damana
Ayariyamuvaditi Bhagimmam Bayanan Vetass Nasati, Manch Sannayaghare Nanurahiy,
Ato Mam Arantasss Navam Pugvam Nasiihit, Tahe Aapariya Chiti-Jai Tak Eyaras
Parmahavisss Evam Sarantasss Nasah Annass Miran Vesha." Aavashyamfavatti, 10308.
Even though the situation is like this, why are women prohibited from studying?
This question can be answered in two ways: (1) Even if the material is
available, women are less qualified than men, and (2) Historical circumstances.
(1) In Western countries where women have access to education equal to men,
history shows that women can be equal to men. However, the number of qualified
individuals is higher in the male population than in the female population.  (2)
Digambara Acharyas like Kudakunda Acharya declared women unfit for even
initiation due to their physical and mental shortcomings.  "Singammi Yarponam,
Panatare Pahika Khadesam. Magio Suhamo Kano, Tasam Kah Ho Payajma." Shatpahu-
Sutrappahrist Ga. 24-25. Vedic scholars, giving priority to physical purity,
declared women and Shudra castes generally unqualified for study: "Stree Shuko
Naapiyarata."  These opposing sects had such an impact that even while
acknowledging the capability of women equal to men, the Vetambara Acharyas
started declaring them unfit for study without any fault.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 152 karmarampa bhAga cAra "tega citiyaM bhogaNoNaM disa varise mitti sIharUSaM
miumbii|" -Avazyaka vRtti,pa0668/1  /  "sato zaripari duliyapUrasamitto hama
sAyanAriyo diNNo, tato so kaIvi vivase vAyaNaM damaNa AyariyamuvaditI bhagaimama
bAyaNaM vetassa nAsati, maMca saNNAyaghare nANurahiya, ato mama araMtassa
navamaM pugvaM nAsihita, tAhe ApariyA citi-jai tAka eyarasa paramahAvissa evaM
saraMtassa nAsaha annassa mirana veSa  / " Avazmaphavatti, 10 308  /  aisI
vastu-sthiti hone para bhI striyoMko hI adhyayanakA niSedha kyoM kiyA gayA? isa
prapanakA uta ra do taraha se vidhA jA sakatA hai:-1) mamAna mAmagrI milane para
bhI puruSoM ke mukAbilemeM striyoMkA kama saMkhyAmeM yogya honA aura (2)
aitihAsika-paristhati  /  (1)-jina pazcimIya dezoMmeM striyoM ko par3hane AdikI
sAmagrI puruSoM ke samAna prApta hotI hai, vahAMkA itihAsa dekhanese yahI jAna
par3atA hai ki striyAM puruSoMke tulya ho sakatI haiM sahI, para yogya
vyaktiyoMkI saMsthA, strI jAti kI apekSA puruSa jAti meM adhika pAyI jAtI hai|
(2)-kudakunda-AcArya sarIkhe pratipAdaka digambara-AcArgAne strI jAtiko zArIrika
aura mAnasika-doSake kAraNa dIkSA takake liye ayogya tthhraayaa| siMgammi
yarapoNaM, paNatare pAhikAkhadesamma  /  magiyo suhamo kAno, tAsaM kaha ho
payajmA  // " SaTpAhui-sUtrapAhRSTa gA0 24-25 aura vaidika vidvAnoMne zArIrikA-
zuddhi ko agra-sthAna dekara strI aur| zudra jAtiko sAmAnyataH vAdhyayana ke
liye anadhikArI yatalAyA:"strIzUko nApIyaratA" ina vipakSI sampradAyoMkA itanA
asara par3A ki usase prabhAvita hokara puruSajAtike samAna strIjAtiko yogyatA
mAnate hue bhI vetAmbara-AcArya use vidoSa-adhyayana ke liye apogya batalAne
lage hoNge|

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four ### 153  Even though the right to read the eleven
Angas is accepted, the reason for the prohibition of the twelfth Anga also
suggests that the view of the "Dristivada" remained important in practice. At
that time, especially, the importance of the Vedas and other scriptures was
understood in terms of physical purity. Therefore, it is natural to imitate the
practices of other large neighboring societies to maintain its importance from a
practical perspective. For this reason, even though the Acharyas considered
women fully qualified from a spiritual perspective, they declared them
ineligible for literal study, considering their physical impurity from a
practical perspective.  Lord Gautama Buddha had declared women ineligible for
the Bhikshu (monk) position, but Lord Mahavira had from the beginning
established them as equal to men in their right to the Bhikshu position. This is
why the four-fold Sangha (community) was established from the beginning in
Jainism, and the number of Sadhvis (female monks) and Shravikas (female lay
followers) has always been greater than that of Sadhus (male monks) and
Shravakas (male lay followers). However, when Lord Buddha granted the Bhikshu
position to women at the insistence of his chief disciple, Ananda, their number
gradually increased, and after a few centuries, due to various reasons like
illiteracy, mismanagement, and others, there was a significant decline in their
conduct, which led to the Buddhist community being considered corrupted in a
way. It is possible that this situation had some impact on the Jain community,
leading to the Digambara Acharyas declaring women ineligible for the Bhikshu
position altogether. The Svetambara Acharyas, on the other hand, maintained the
high status of women, but they also highlighted weaknesses, fickleness of
senses, and other flaws that were particularly prevalent in that gender. This is
because it is inevitable that the practices of neighboring communities influence
each other.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 153 gyAraha aGga Adi par3hane kA adhikAra mAnate hue
bhI sirpha bArahaveM aGga niSedha kA sababa vaha bhI jAna par3atA hai ki
dRSTivAdakA vyavahAra meM mahatva banA rahe  /  usa samaya vizeSatayA zArIrika
zuddhipUrvaka par3hane meM veda Adi granthoMkI mahattA samajhI jAtI thI  /  STrA
isaliye vyavahAradRSTise usakI mahatA rakhanekeliye anya bar3e par3osI samAja kA
anukaraNa kara lenA svAbhAvika hai| isa kAraNa pAramArthika iSTi se strI ko
saMpUrNatayA yogya mAnate hue bhI AcAryoMne vyavahArakidRSTise zArIrikaazuddhikA
khayAlakara usako zAbdika adhyayanamAtrake liye ayogya batalAyA hogaa| bhagavAn
gautamabuddhane strIjAtiko bhikSupada ke liye ayogya nirdhArita kiyA thA parantu
bhagavAn mahAvIrane to prathama se hI usako puruSake samAna mikSupadakI
adhikAriNI nizcita kiyA thA  /  isI se janazAsana meM catuvidha saGgha
prathamase hI sthApita hai aura sAdhu tathA zrAvakoM kI apekSA sAdhviyoM tathA
zrAvikAoM kI saMkhyA Arambha se hI adhika rahI hai parantu apane pradhAna ziSya
"Ananda ke Agraha buddha bhagavAnne jaba striyoMko bhikSu pada diyA, taba unakI
saMkhyA dhIre-dhIre bahuta bar3I aura kucha zatAbdiyoM ke bAda azikSA
kuprabandha Adi kaI kAraNoM se unameM bahuta kucha AcAra bhraMza huA, jisase ki
bauddha-maSa eka taraha se dUSita samajhA jAne lgaa| sambhava hai| isa
paristhitikA jaina-sampradAyapara mau kucha asara par3A ho, jisase digambara-
AchAne to strIko bhikSupadake liye hI ayogya kara diyA ho aura zvetAmbara
AcAryoMne aisA na karake strIjAtikA ucca adhikAra kAyama rakhate hue bhI
durbalatA, indriya-capalatA Adi doSoMko usa jAti meM vizeSarUpa se dikhAyA ho;
kyoMki sahacara-samAjoMke vyavahAroMkA eka dUsarepara prabhAva par3anA anicArya
hai| ===

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 156 **Karmagranth Part Four Appendix "Th" - Text 101, Line 12**  "In the
context of Chakshudarshan, thirteen Yogas are mentioned, but Shri Malayagiriji
has mentioned eleven Yogas. He has excluded four Yogas: Karman, Audarikvamitra,
Vaikriyabhisn, and Aharakamidh.  **Commentary on the 12th verse of Pascha 1.**
The implication of accepting eleven Yogas is that in the state of Aparita
(incomplete), Chakshudarshan does not occur, and in that state, Karman and
Audarikvamitra, these two Yogas, which are associated with the state of Aparita,
do not exist. Similarly, when Kriyamitra or Aharakamisn-Kayayoga exists, until
the Vaikriyasharira or Aharakasharira is complete, Chakshudarshan does not
occur. Therefore, Vaikriyabhisn and Aharakamidh-Yoga should not be considered in
that state.  **Doubt:** A doubt may arise that if Chakshudarshan is accepted in
the state of Aparita, after the Indrimaprapti becomes complete, according to the
alternative view mentioned in the 17th verse, then how can the absence of
Audarikvamitra-Kayayoga, which is associated with the state of Aparita, be
considered?  **Resolution:** In Panchamangraha, there is an alternative view
that states that the Midh-Yoga should be considered only when the body is not
fully complete in the state of Aparita, and not after it becomes complete.
**Commentary on the 7th verse of Panchdva 1.** According to this view, when
Chakshudarshan occurs in the state of Aparita, the exclusion of Audarikvamitra-
Kayayoga from Chakshudarshan due to the absence of Misrayoga is not
contradictory.  **In this context, thirteen Yogas are considered in Manahparyaya
Jnana, which includes Aharak-Dvik. However, Gommatsar-Karmakanda does not accept
this. Because, it states that during the time of Pariharavishuddha Charitra and
Manahparyaya Jnana, the Aharakasharira and the Aharaka-Angopaanganama Karma do
not arise... Karmakanda verse 324.** Until the Aharaka-Dvik arises, the
Aharakasharira cannot be formed, and except for its formation, the two Yogas,
Aharakamisn and Aharak, are not possible. This proves that Gommatsar does not
accept the two Aharak Yogas in Manahparyaya Jnana. This view is also supported
by the 728th verse of Jivakanda. Its meaning is that when any one of these
states - Manahparyaya Jnana, Pariharavishuddha Samyama, Prathamoshamsamyak
Jnana, and Aharak-Dvik - is attained, the remaining states are not attained.  =
- =- =

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 156 karmagrantha bhAga cAra pariziSTa "th"| - pATha 101, pakti 12ke 'bhAvArtha
paraisa jagaha cakSurdarzanameM teraha yoga mAne gaye haiM, para
zrImalayagirijIne usameM gyAraha poga batalAye haiN| kArmaNa, audArivAmitra,
vaitriyabhizna aura. AhArakamidha, cAra yoga chor3a diye haiN| -pazcA0 1 kI 12vI
gAthAkI ttiikaa| gyAraha mAnanekA tAtparya yaha hai ki jaise aparita-avasthAmeM
cakSadarzana na honeme umameM kArmaNa aura audArikabhizra, ye do aparyApta-
avasthA-bhAvI yoga nahIM hote, vaise hI kriyamitra yA AhArakamizna-kAyayoga
rahatA hai, taba taka arthAt vaikriyazarIra yA AhArakazarIra apUrNa ho taba taka
cakSurdazana nahIM hotA,isaliye usameM vakriyamizra aura AhArakamitha-yoga bhI
na maannecaahiye| . isapara yaha zaGkA ho sakatI hai ki aparyApta-avasthA meM
indrimaprApti pUrNa bana jAneke bAda 17vIM gAyA meM ullikhita matAntara ke
anusAra yadi cakSudarzana mAna liyA jAya to usameM jaudArivAmizcakAyayoga, jo ki
apaparyApta-avasthA-bhAvI hai, urA kA abhAva kaise mAnA jA sakatA hai| isa
zasAkA samAdhAna yaha kiyA jA sakatA hai ki paJcamaMgrahameM eka aimA matAntara
hai, jo ki aparyApta-avasthAmeM zarIraparyApta pUrNa na bana jAye taba taba
midhayoga mAmanA hai, bana jAne ke bAda nahIM mAnatA  /  paMJcadvA0 1kI 7vI
gAthA kI ttiikaa| isa mata ke anusAra aparyApta avasthAmeM jaba pakSudarzana
hotA hai taba mizrayoga na honeke kAraNa cakSurdarzana meM
audArikamizrakAyayogakA varjana viruddha nahIM hai| isa jagaha manaHparyAya
jJAnameM teraha yoga mAne hae haiM, jinameM AhAraka dvikakA samAveza hai| para
gommaTamAra-karmakANDa yaha nahIM mAnatA; kyoMki, usameM likhA hai ki
parihAravizuddha cAritra aura mana:paryAyajJAnake samaya AhArakazarIra tathA
AhArakA-aGgopAGganAmakarmakA udaya nahIM hotA ...karmakANDa gA0 324  /  jaba
taka AhArakA-dvikakA udaya ne ho, taba taka AhArakazarIra rana nahIM jA sakatA
aura usakI racanAke sivAya AhArakamizra aura AhAraka, ye do yoga agambhana hai|
isase siddha hai ki pommaTasAra manaHparyAyajJAnameM do AhArakayoga mahImAnatA,
isI bAsakI puSTi jIvakANDakI 728vIM gAthAse bhI hotI hai  /  umakA matalaba
itanA hI hai ki manaHparyAyajJAna, parihA ravizuddhasaMyama
prathamozamasamyakrana aura AhAra kadvika, ina bhAvoM meM se kisI ephake prApta
honepara zeSa bhAva prApta nahIM hote ! = - =- =

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four 14. Appendix "6".  Pu. 104, line 'Kevalisamudhat' word
[Some thoughts on the relationship of Felisamudhat:] (a) Before creating the
future action-Kevalisamudhat, a special action is performed, which is in the
form of auspicious yoga, whose state is the inner moment proof and whose
function is to deposit the karma-dala in the udayalika. This special action is
called 'Amojikaakaran'. Because it is done by the soul that is directed
(inclined) towards liberation, it is called 'Avabhitakaran'. And because it is
necessarily done by all Kevalajnani, it is also called 'Avaspakakaran'. In the
Svetambar literature, all three names, Amojikaakaran etc., are famous. - Bishe.
A., Ga. 3050, 55; and Pancha Dwa. 1. Ga. 16 commentary. In Digambar literature,
only the name 'Avabhitakaran' is famous. The characteristic is also clear in it
"Heda Vahasanto" - Muhuttamanasji Have Karanam. Tam Cha Samugdhavasya Ya,
Ahimuhamavo Jinivassa. - Labdhisar, Ga. 117. (b) The purpose and method of the
Valigutala: When the state of Vedaniya etc. Adhativ and the state of Dalik,
Ayukarma and the state of Daliya are more than each other, then they have to be
made equal to each other by doing Kevalisamudhat. Its method is at the time of
the inner moment proof, the remaining life. (c) Swami - Only Kevalajnani creates
Kevalisamudhat. (d) Time-measure - The time-measure of Kevalisamudhat is eight
times. (e) Process - In the first time, the soul's regions are taken out of the
body and spread out. At that time, their shape becomes like a rod. This rod of
soul regions, in height, from the top of the Lok to the bottom,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 14. pariziSTa "6" /  pu0.104, paMkti ke
'kevalisamusAta' vAca para [phelisamuddhAta ke sambandhako kucha bAtoMkA
vicAra:] (ka) pUrvabhAvI kriyA-kevanisamuddhAta racaneke pahale eka vizeSa kriyA
kI jAtI hai, jo zubhayogarUpa hai, jisakI sthiti antarmuhUtta pramANa hai aura
jisakA kArya udayAlikA meM karmadAlakoMkA nikSepa karanA hai| isa kriyAvizeSako
'AmojikakAkaraNa' kahate haiM  /  mokSakI ora Avajita (jhuke hue) AtmAkadvArA
kiye jAnake kAraNa isako 'AvabhitakaraNa' kahate haiM  /  aura saba
kevalajJAniyoMka dvArA avazya kiye jAne ke kAraNa isako 'AvazpakakaraNa bhI
kahate haiM  /  zvetAmbara-sAhitmameM AyojikAkaraNa Adi tInoM saMjJAyeM
prasiddha haiN|-bishe. A0, gA0 3050, 55; tathA paJca dvA0 1. gA016 kI ttiikaa|
digambara-sAhityameM sirpha 'AvajitakaraNa' saMjJA prasiddha hai  /  lakSaNa bhI
usameM spaSTa hai "heDA vaMhassaMto'-muhattamAnasji have karaNaM  /  taM ca
samugdhAvasya ya, ahimuhamAvo jiNivassa  / ' -labdhisAra, gA0 117  /  stra ) ve
valiAgutAlakA prayojana aura vidhAna-samaya: jaba vedanIya Adi adhAtiva kI
sthiti tathA dalika, AyukarmakI sthiti tathA daliya se adhika hoM tada unako
ApasameM barAbara karane ke liye kevalisa muddhAta karanA par3atA hai  /  isakA
vidhAna, antarmuhUrta -pramANa Ayu bAkI rahane ke samaya hotA hai| (ga) svAmI-
kevalajJAnI hI kevali samuddhAtakA racate haiN| (gha) kAla-mAna-
kailisamuddhAtakA kAla-mAna ATha samayakA hai| (Da) prakriyA-pratha pamaya meM
AtmAka pradezoMko zarIrase bAhara . nikAlakara phailA diyA jAtA hai  /  usa
samaya unakA AkAra, daNDa jaisA banatA hai  /  AtmapradezoMkA yaha daNDa, U~cAI
meM lokaka Upara se nIce taka,

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 154: The Karma Granth, Part Four  The **karma granth** is fourteen
**rajjus** in length, but its thickness is only equal to the **sharira**. In the
second stage, the **danda** is stretched east-west or north-south, and its shape
is made like a **kapaata** (door). In the third stage, the **kapaata** is shaped
like a **manyaa** (mortar), meaning it is stretched east-west and north-south on
both sides, making it resemble a **rai** (churning stick). In the fourth stage,
the empty spaces in the **vidishaas** are filled with **aaram** regions, and the
entire **loka** is encompassed. In the fifth stage, the **loka**-encompassing
regions of the **aatma** are again shaped like a **manyaa** through the
**saharan** process. In the sixth stage, the **manyaa** shape is transformed
into a **kapaata** shape. In the seventh stage, the **aatma** regions are again
made into **danda** form, and in the eighth stage, they are placed in their
original position - within the **sharira**.  (c) According to the **Jain**
perspective, the **aatma**'s pervasiveness is described in texts like the
**Sangati**, **Upanishads**, and **Bhagavad Gita**. "**Vishvachasurat Vishvato
Mulo Vishvato Bahut Vishvatasya**" - **Shwetaashvatara Upanishad** 3-3, 11-15.
"**Sarvata Panipadam Tat Sarvato'bhimukham. Sarvata Shrutimalloke Sarvam Avritya
Tishthati**" - **Bhagavad Gita**, 13-13.  According to the **Jain** perspective,
this description is **arthavaad**, meaning it is indicative of the **aatma**'s
greatness and praise. The basis of this **arthavaad** is the **aatma** becoming
**loka**-encompassing in the fourth stage of **kevalimudhaat**. This point has
been stated by **Upadhyaya Shri Yashvijayji** on page 335 of **Shastra Vaarta
Samuccaya**.  Just as the **samudhaat** process is considered for quickly
experiencing **vedaniya** and other **karmas**, similarly, in **Patanjali Yoga
Darshan**, it is considered as **bahukaya nirman kriya**, which is performed by
a **tvasaakshaatkarta** yogi to quickly experience **sopkram** **karma**. -
**Paad** 3, **Sutra** 22's commentary and **vritti**; **Paad** 4, **Sutra** 4's
commentary and **vritti**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 154 karmagrantha bhAga cAra arthAt caudaha rajju-parimANa hotA hai, parantu
usakI moTAI sirpha zarIraka barAbara hotI hai  /  dUsare samayameM ukta daNDako
pUrva-pavizvama yA uttara dakSiNa phailAkara usakA AkAra, kapATa ( kivADa jaisA
banAyA jAtA hai 1 tIsare samayameM kapATakara Atma- pradezoMko manyAkAra banAyA
jAtA hai, arthAt pUrvapazcima, uttara-dakSiNa. donoM tarapha phailAne se unakA
bAkAra raI ( mathanI ) kA sA bana jAtA hai  /  caudhe samaya meM vidizAoM ke
khAlI bhAgoMko Arama pradezoMse pUrNa karake unase sampUrNa lokako vyApta kiyA
jAtA hai | pAMcaveM samaya meM AtmAke loka-vyApI pradezoM ko saharaNa kriyA
dvArA phira manyAkAra banAyA jAtA hai| chaThe samaya meM bhanyAkArase kapATAkAra
banA liyA jAtA hai| sAtaveM samaya meM Atma-pradeza phira daNDarUpa banAye jAte
haiM aura AThaveM samaya meM unako asalI sthiti meM - zarIrastha kiyA jAtA hai
/  (ca) jaina- dRSTike anusAra Atma vyApakatA ko saGgatiH - upaniSad
bhagavadgItA Adi granthoMmeM AtmA kI vyApakatAkA varNana kiyA hai|
"vizvacasurata vizvatomulo vizvato bahuta vizvatasya  / " - zvetAzvataropaniSad
3-3, 11-15 64 sarvataH pANipAdaM tat sarvato'bhimukhaM  /  sarvata zrutimalloke
sarvamAvRtya tiSThati  // " - bhagavadgItA, 13 13  /  jaina-daSTi ke anusAra
yaha varNana arthavAda hai, arthAt AtmAkI mahatA va prazazAkA sUcaka hai  /  isa
arthavAdakA AdhAra kevalimuddhAta ke cauthe samaya meM AmAkA loka-vyApI bananA
haiM  /  yahIM bAta upAdhyAya zrIyazovijayajI ne zAstra vArtA samuccayake 335
veM pRSThapara nirdiSTa kI hai| jaise vedanIya Adi kamako zIghra bhogane ke liye
samuddhAta kriyA mAnI jAtI hai, vaise hI pAtaJjala yogadarzana meM 'bahukAya
nirmANakriyA' mAnI hai, jisako tasvasAkSAtkarttA yogI, sopakrama - karma zIghra
bhogane ke liye karatA hai| -pAda 3, sU0 22kA bhASya tathA vRtti; pAda 4, sUtra
4kA bhASya tathA vRtti  /  It " .

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four, Appendix  **On the word 'Kal' in line 18 of verse
10.117:**  There have been two opposing viewpoints regarding 'Kal' (time) in
both Jain and Vedic philosophies for almost 2500 years. Both viewpoints are
described in Shwetambar texts, while Digambar texts only present one viewpoint.
**(1) The first viewpoint does not consider 'Kal' as an independent substance.
It believes that 'Kal' is the continuous flow of Jiva (soul) and Ajiva (non-
soul) substances. According to this viewpoint, the continuous transformation of
Jiva and Ajiva is considered 'Kal' in a figurative sense. Therefore, in reality,
Jiva and Ajiva should be considered as 'Kal' substance, and it is not a separate
entity. This viewpoint is found in 'Jee Gaabhin' and other texts.**  Later texts
like Tattvarth Sutra by Umaswati, Trishika by Shri Siddhasena Divakara,
Visheshavashak Madhyam by Shri Jinabhadragani Samashraman, Dharmasangrahani by
Shri Haribhadra Suri, Yogashastra by Shri Hemchandra Suri, Dravya-Guna-Paryaya
ke Ras by Shri Upadhyay Prashovijayji, Lokaprakash by Shri Vinayvijayji,
Nayachakraasar and Agamsaar by Shri Devchandraji have mentioned both these
viewpoints from the Agamas. The Digambar sect only accepts the second viewpoint,
which was first found in the texts of Bhikku Kundakunda Acharya. Later,
Pujyapada Swami, Bhattarak Shri Akal Dev, Vidyānanda Swami, Nemichandra
Siddhantachkravarti, and Banarasi Das, etc., have also mentioned this viewpoint.
**The meaning of the first viewpoint:** The first viewpoint states that the
terms like 'Samay' (time), 'Avalika' (duration), 'Muit' (moment), 'Din-Rat'
(day-night), etc., which are considered as 'Kal' in practical life, or the
states like 'Navin' (new), 'Nata' (young), 'Pugnata' (mature), 'Jostata' (old),
'Kanishthata' (younger), etc., which are considered as 'Kal' in practical life,
are all just indications of specific actions (Paryaya-vishesh). For example, the
Paryaya of Jiva and Ajiva, which is indivisible, i.e., even intellect cannot
divide it into two parts, that ultimate, extremely subtle Paryaya is called
'Samay'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagranya bhAga cAra pariziSTa "" ! 10 117, paMkti 18ke 'kAla' zabdapara
"kAla ke sambandhameM jaina aura vaidika, donoM darzanoM meM karIba DhAI hajAra
varSa pahalese do pakSa cale Ate haiN| zvetAmbara-granthoM meM donoM pakSa
varNita haiM  /  digambara-granthoM meM eka hI pakSa najara AtA hai| [1) pahalA
pakSa, kAlako svatantra dravya nahIM mAnatA  /  vaha mAnatA hai ki jIva aura
ajIva-dravyakA paryAya-pravAha hI 'kAla' hai  /  isa pakSa ke anusAra jIvAjIva-
na TyakA paryAya-pariNamana hI upacArase kAla mAnA jAtA hai| isaliye vastutaH
jIva aura ajIyako hI kAla-dravya samajhanA cAhiye vaha unase alaga tattva nahIM
hai| yaha pakSa 'jI gAbhina Adi meM hai| Agamake bAdake granthoMmeM,
jaise:-tattvArthasUtra meM vAcaka' umAsvAtine hAtrizikAme zrI siddhasena
divAkarane, vizeSAvazyaka-mAdhvameM zrIjinabhadragaNi samAzramaNane,
dharmasaMgrahaNI meM zrIharibhadra mUrine, yogazAstra meM, zrIhemacandrasUrine
dravya-guNa-paryAyake rAsa meM thI upAdhyAya prazovijayajIne, lokaprakAza meM
zrIvinayavijayajI ne aura nayacakrasAra tathA AgamasArameM thIdavacandrajIne
Agama-gata ukta donoM pakSoMkA ullekha kiyA hai| digambara sampradAya meM sirpha
dUsare pakSakA svIkAra hai, jo sabase pahile bIkundakundAcAryake granthoM me
milatA hai  /  isake bAda pUjyapAdasvAmI. bhaTTAraka zrIakala deva,
vidyAnandasvAmI, nemicandra siddhAntacakravartI aura banArasIdAsa Adine bhI usa
eka hI pakSakA ullekha kiyA hai| pahale 'pakSakA tAtparyaH-pahalA pakSa kahatA
hai ki samaya, AvalikA, muIta, dina-rAta Adi jo vyavahAra, kAla-sAdhya batalAye
jAte haiM yA navI. natA-pugaNatA, joSTatA kaniSThatA Adi jo avasthAe~, kAla-
sAdhya batalAyI jAtI haiM, ve saba kriyA-vizeSa (paryAya-vizeSa) ke hI saMketa
haiM  /  jaise:jIba mA ajIvakA jo paryAya, avibhAjya hai, arthAt buddhise bhI
jikasA dUsarA hissA nahIM ho sakatA, usa AkhirI atisUkSma paryAyako 'samaya'

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagramya Part Four  They say, countless **Paryaya** bundles are called
**Bhavalika**. Many **Balika** are called **Murhut** and thirty **Murhut** are
called a day and night. Of the two **Paryayas**, the one that happened earlier
is called **Puran** and the one that happened later is called **Navin**. Of the
two living beings, the one born later is called **Kanishth** and the one born
earlier is called **Jyeshth**. Considering this, it becomes clear that time,
**Avalika**, etc., all are **Vyavahar** and **Navinata**, etc., all are
**Mantravashta** states, which are merely indications of specific types of
**Prayayas**, i.e., **Nivigha** **Paryaya** and their small and large groups
conceived by the mind. **Paryaya** is what the living and non-living beings do,
which happens without the influence of any other element. That is, both living
and non-living beings, in their own **Garbhavarup**, are **A.P** themselves. In
reality, one should call the **Paryaya** bundle of living and non-living beings
as **Kal**. **Kal** is not an independent substance.  ## 158  **The other side's
argument:** Just as **Dharma-Astikaya** elements are considered as **Vibhinna-
Karan** for the movement and stillness of living beings and **Pudgala**, even
though they have the nature to move and be still, similarly, **Kal-Dravya**
should be considered as **Nimitta-Karan** for the **Paryaya** transformation of
living and non-living beings, even though they have the nature to transform. If
**Kal** is not considered as **Nimitta-Karan**, then there is no logic in
considering **Dharma-Astikaya** and **Adharma-Astikaya**.  **Difference of
opinion on the other side:** There are two opinions among those who consider
**Kal** as an independent substance regarding its nature.  **(1)** **Kal-
Dravya** exists in the **Manushya-Kshetra** only, in the field of motion of the
astrological cycle. It becomes the cause of changes in the entire universe, even
though it is a part of the **Manushya-Kshetra**. **Kal** helps the astrological
cycle in its motion. Therefore, it is appropriate to consider **Kal-Dravya** as
limited to the **Manushya-Kshetra** only, as it does not exist outside of it.
This opinion is found in the **Dharmagrahani**, etc., **Shwetamber** sects.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagramya bhAga cAra r kahate haiN| aise asaMkhyAta paryAyaki puJjako
'bhAvalikA' kahate hai  /  aneka bAlikAoM ko murhata aura tIsa murhata ko dina
rAta' kahate haiN| do paryAyoM maiMse jo pahale huA ho, vaha 'purANa' aura jo
pIchese huA ho, vaha 'navIna' kahalAtA hai do jIvadhAriyoMmeM se jo pIche se
janamA ho, vaha 'kaniSTa' aura jo pahile janamA ho, vaha 'jyeSTha' kahalAtA hai
/  isa prakAra vicAra karane se yahI jAna par3atA hai ki samaya AvalikA Adi saba
vyavahAra aura navInatA Adi saba vyavahAra aura navInatA Adi maMtra avasthAe~,
vizeSa vizeSa prakAra ke prayAyoM ko hI arthAt nivibhAga paryAya aura unake
choTe-bar3e buddhi-kalpita samUhoM ke hI saMketa hai| paryAya, yaha jIva ajIvako
kiyA hai, jo kisI tattvAntarakI preraNAke sivAya hI huA karatI haiM  /  arthAt
jIva ajIba donoM apane-apane garbhAvarUpameM a.pa hI phira umA karate haiM
vastutaH jIva ajIva paryAya puJjako ho kAla kahanA cAhiye | kAla koI svatantra
dravya nahIM hai  /  158 dUsare pakSa kA tAtpa - jima prakAra jIva-pudgla meM
gati sthiti karane kA svabhAva honepara bhI usa kArya ke liye
vibhinakAraNarUpase dharma-astikAya tattva mAne jAte haiN| isI prakAra jIva
ajIva paryAya pariNamanaka) svabhAva honepara bhI usake liye nimittakAraNarUpase
kAla-dravya mAnanA cAhiye  /  yadi nimittakAraNarUpase kAla na mAnA jAya to
dharma astikAya aura adharmaastikAya mAnane meM boI yukti nahIM  /  dUsare pakSa
meM mata bhedaH - kAlako svatantra dravya mAnanevAloMmeM bhA usake svarUpa ke
sambandha meM do mata haiM  /  (1) kAladravya, manuSya-kSetramAtra meM jyotiSa
cakra ke gati kSetra meM vartamAna hai 1 vaha manuSya-kSetra prabhAga hokara bhI
sampUrNa lokake parivartanoMkA nimitta banatA hai  /  kAla, apanA kArya, jyotiSa
cakrako gatikI madada karatA hai  /  isaliye manuSya kSetra se bAhara kAladravya
na mAnanAra use manuSya-kSetra - pramANa hI mAnanA yukta hai| yaha mata
dharmagrahaNI Adi zvetAmbara panthoM meM hai ! -

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four, Chapter 156 (2)  **Time-substance is not merely a
human-realm, but what is it?** It pervades the universe, but unlike the dharma-
astikaya, it is not a skandha (aggregate). It is atomic in nature. The number of
its atoms is equal to the number of regions in the loka-akasha (universe). These
atoms, being motionless, remain everywhere, in every region of the loka-akasha.
They do not form any skandha. Therefore, they do not have the power to move
laterally (tiryak prachay). This is why time-substance is not considered an
astikaya.   **Despite the absence of lateral movement, there is vertical
movement (urdhava prachay).** This leads to continuous permutations (paryaya)
within each time-atom. These permutations are called 'time'. One should
understand that each time-atom has infinite time permutations. These time
permutations are the cause of permutations in other substances. All states like
newness-oldness, seniority-juniority, etc., should be understood as a result of
the flow of time within the time-atom.   **The time it takes for a pudgala-atom
to move from one region of the loka-akasha to another at a slow pace, is the
time it takes for one time-permutation of the time-atom to occur.** In other
words, the magnitude of a time-permutation is equal to the magnitude of the slow
movement of an atom from one region to another. This is the view of the
Digambara sect.  **What is the actual situation?** From the perspective of
certain knowledge (nishcaya drishti), there is no need to consider time as a
separate substance. By considering it as a permutation of the jiva (soul), all
actions and behaviors are explained. Therefore, this view is the true one
(taatvika), while the other views are practical (vyavaharika) and conventional
(aupcharic).  **The view of considering time as a human-realm is based on the
gross worldly experience.** The view of considering it atomic is conventional.
If this is not accepted, then the question arises: If newness, oldness, etc.,
exist even outside the human realm, then how can time be considered only within
the human realm? Secondly, what is the logic in believing that time depends on
the movement of the celestial wheel (jyotish chakra)? Even if it does depend on
it, can it not, being all-pervasive, utilize the movement of the celestial
wheel? Therefore, the idea of considering time as a human-realm is based on
gross worldly experience. The idea of considering it atomic is conventional.
**Each pudgala-atom, through its own process...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 156 (2) kAladravya, manuSya kSetramAtra nahIM hai kintu
kA hai| vaha loka vyApI hokara bhI dharma-astikAyakI taraha skandha nahIM hai;
kintu aNurUpa hai| isake aNuoMkI saMkhyA lokAkAThamake pradezoM se barAbara hai
/  ve aNu gatihIna honese jahA~ tahA~ arthAt lokAkAza ke pratyeka pradeza para
sthita rahate haiM inakA koI skandha nahIM bntaa| isa kAraNa inameM tiryaka
pracala ( skandha honekI zakti nahIM hai  /  isI sababa se kAladravyako
astikAyameM nahIM ginA hai  /  tiryaka pracaya na honepara bhI Urdhva pracaya
hai  /  isase pratyeka kAla - aNu meM lagAtAra paryAya huA karate haiN| ye hI
paryAya samaya' kahalAte haiN| eka-eka kAla-aNuke ananta samaya paryAya
samajhane cAhiye  /  samaya- paryAya hI anya dravyoMke prayAyoMkA nimittakAraNa
hai| navInasA-purANatA jayeSThatA- kaniSThatA Adi saba avasthAe~, kAla aNuke
samaya pravAha kI badaulata hI samajhanI shiye| pudgla-paramANuko loka AkAsa ke
eka pradeza se dUsare pradeza taka mandagatise jAne meM jitanI dera hotI hai,
utanI dera meM kAla aNukA eka samaya-paryAya vyakta hotA hai  /  arthAt samaya-
paryAya aura eka pradeza se dUsare pradeza takakI paramANukI manda gati, ina
donoM kA parimANa barAbara hai  /  yaha mantavya digambaroMmeM haiM  /
vastusthiti kyA hai: - nizcaya dRSTi se dekhA jAe to kAlako alaga dravya
mAnanekI ko koI jarUrata nahIM hai| use jIvajIvake paryAyarUpa mAnane se hI saba
kArya va sava vyavahAra upapanna ho jAte haiN| isaliye yahI pakSa, tAttvika hai,
anya pakSa, vyAvahArika va aupacArika haiM  /  kAlako manuSya kSetra pramANa
mAnanekA pakSa sthUla loka vyavahArapara nirbhara hai| aura use aNurUpa mAnanekA
pakSa aupacArika hai, aisA svIkAra na kiyA jAya to yaha prazna hotA hai ki jaba
manuSya kSetra se bAhara bhI navattva purANatva Adi mAva hote haiM, taba phira
kAlako manuSya kSetra meM hI kaise mAnA jA sakatA hai? dUsare yaha mAnane meM
kyA yukti hai ki kAla, jyotiSa cakke saMcArako apekSA rakhatA hai ? yadi apekSA
rakhatA bhI ho to kyA vaha loka-vyApI hokara jyotiSacakra saMcArakI madada nahIM
le sakatA ? isaliye usako manuSya kSetra pramANa mAnane kI kalpanA, sthUla loka
vyavahArapara nirbhara hai-- kAlako anurUpa mAnane kI kalpanA aupacArika hai|
pratyeka pudgla- paramANuko hI upacAra se

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **160**  Kala (time) should be considered as Ramjhana (a
relative concept) and Kala-shuke (time-atom) should be considered as Apradeshtva
(non-existent).  **Chapter Four, Karma Granth**  **Consistency of the
Statement:**  If Kala (time) is not considered as Ramjhana (a relative concept)
and is considered as a separate entity, then the question arises: If Kala (time)
is considered as a separate entity, then why is it not considered as a Skandha
(constituent) like Dharma-Astikaya (the body of Dharma)?  Apart from this, there
is another question: In the Jiva-Ajiva (soul-non-soul) category, the cause of
the time-category is Nimitta-Karan (the cause of creation). But what is the
cause of the time-category? If it is natural and does not require any other
cause, then why should the Jiva-Ajiva (soul-non-soul) category be considered
natural? If we assume another cause for the Ramya-category (category of
pleasure), then it leads to Anvastha (infinite regress). Therefore, it is
appropriate to consider the Anu-Paksha (atomic theory) as a formal concept.
**The Nature of Kala (time) in Vedic Philosophy:**  There are two main
viewpoints regarding Kala (time) in Vedic philosophies. The Vaisheshika Darshan
(philosophy) - A. 2. 0. 2, Sutra 6-10, and Nyaya Darshan (philosophy) consider
Kala (time) as an all-pervasive, independent entity. Sankhya - A. 2, Sutra 12,
Yoga, and Vedanta philosophies do not consider Kala (time) as an independent
entity, but consider it as a form of Prakriti-Purusha (matter-consciousness).
This second viewpoint is based on Nishcaya-Drishti (absolute knowledge) and the
first viewpoint is based on Vyavahar (practical knowledge).  **Jain
Philosophy:**  In Jain philosophy, what is called 'Samaya' (time) and in other
philosophies is called 'Kshan' (moment), is not a separate entity called 'Kala'
(time). It is merely a concept created by worldly beings for the sake of
practical life, regarding the sequence of moments. To understand this clearly,
one should refer to Yoga Darshan, Pa. 3. 0. 520, Bhashya (commentary). The view
on Kala (time) in the said commentary is based on Nishcaya-Drishti (absolute
knowledge) and therefore appears to be the true nature of Kala (time).
**Scientific Consensus:**  Currently, science is moving towards the direction of
the theory of relativity. Therefore, we should also consider the views on Kala
(time) according to this perspective. Scientists also consider Kala (time) as a
hypothetical concept like direction, not real.  **Conclusion:**  Considering all
aspects, it is certain that there is no evidence to support the view that Kala
(time) is a separate, independent entity.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 160 kAlA rAmajhanA cAhiye aura kAlAzuke apradezatva taraha kara lenI cAhiye  /
karma grantha bhAga cAra kathanako saGgati isI aisA na mAnakara kAlANuko
svatantra mAnanemeM prazna yaha hotA hai ki yadi kAla svatantra dravya mAnA jAtA
hai to phira vaha dharma-astikAyakI taraha skandharUpa kyoM nahIM mAnA jAtA hai
? isake sivAya eka yaha bhI prazna hai ki jIva ajIva paryAya meM to
nimittakaraNa samaya paryAya hai| para samayaparyAya meM nimittakAraNa kyA hai ?
yadi vaha svAbhAvika honese anya nimitta kI apekSA nahIM rakhatA to phira jIva-
ajIva paryAya bhI svAbhAvika kyoM mAne jAya~ ? yadi rAmaya-paryAya vAste anya
nimittakI kalpanA kI jAya to anavasthA AtI hai| isaliye aNu- pakSako aupacArika
mAnanA hI ThIka hai| vaidika darzana meM kAlakA svarUpaH vaidikadarzanoM meM bhI
kAlake sambandha meM mukhya do pakSa haiM  /  vaizeSika darzana - a0 2 0 2,
mUtra 6- 10 tathA nyAyadarzana, kAlako sarva vyApI svatantra dravya mAnate haiM
/  sAMkhya-a 02, sUtra 12 yoga tathA vedAnta Adi darzana-kAlako svatantra dravya
na mAnakara use prakRti-puruSa ( jar3a-cetana) kA hI rUpa mAnate haiM  /  yaha
dUsarA pakSa, nizcaya daSTi-mUlaka hai aura pahalA pakSa vyavahAra mUlaka |
jaina darzana meM jisako 'samaya' aura darzanAntaroMmeM jisako 'kSaNa' kahA hai|
usakA svarUpa jAnane ke liye tathA 'kAla' nAmaka koI svatantra vastu nahIM hai,
vaha kevala laukika dRSTivAnoMkI vyavavahAra nirvAhake liye kSanAnukrama ke
viSaya meM kI huI kalpanAmAtra hai| isa bAta ko spaSTa samajhane ke liye
yogadarzana pA0 3 0 520 bhAdhya dekhanA caahiye| ukta bhASya meM kAlasaMbandhI 3
- jo vicAra hai, vahI nizcaya-dRSTi-mUlaka; ata eva tAtvika jAna par3atA hai|
vijJAnakI sammatiH- :- a ja kala vijJAnakI gati sasya dizAkI ora | isaliye kAla-
mabhbandhI vicAroMko usa dRSTi ke anusAra bhI dekhanA cAhiye  /  vaijJAnika loga
bhI kAlako dizA kI taraha kAlpanika mAnate haiM, vAstavika nahIM | 1 ata saba
taraha se vicAra karanepara yahI nizcaya hotA hai ki kAlako alaga svatantra
dvanya mAnanemeM chatara pramANa nahIM hai  /  ===

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Vanaath Nag Cha. (3)-Gana Sthanaadhikaara. (1)- Ganasthaano mein Visthaan.
Samvajiya thaan micche. Sag Saasani pan aajj sanni durga. Samme sanni dubiho.
Sesesu sampjatto. || 45 || Sarvaani Jeevasthaanaani mithyaa ye..ps maasaadanam
panaaparyaaptaah saajini kam. Raampatye sho dvividhah, shepesh jiparyaapt; || 45
||  **Meaning:**  All Jeevasthaanas are in the Mithyaatvaguna Sthaan. There are
five Aaparyaapta in Saasavaan. They are: Ekaindriya, Dvaindriya, Triindriya,
Chaturindriya and Asajji-Panchendriya. There are also two Sanjnee. Aapati and
Paryapta, making a total of seven Jeevasthaanas. In the Aviraat Samyagdrishti
Guna Sthaan, there are both Sajji (Aaparyaapta and Paryapta) Jeevasthaanas.
Except for the above mentioned, in the remaining eleven Guna Sthaanas, there are
only Paryapta Sanjnee Jeevasthaanas. || 45 ||  **Note:**  1. The Jeevasthaanas
or the thoughts mentioned here in the Guna Sthaan are different from those
mentioned in Gommatsaar. In Gommatsaar, the Aaparyaapta Sanjnee are considered
as two Jeevasthaanas in the second, sixth and thirteenth Guna Sthaanas. - Jeevo,
Ga. 668.  This description in Gommatsaar is relative. In the 113th verse of
Karmakaand, the Aaparyaapta Ekaindriya, Dvaindriya etc. are considered as the
owners of the second Ganasthaan and they are called as the owners of only the
first Guna Sthaan in Jeevaad. This is because of the scarcity of the Aaparyaapta
Ekaindriya etc. Jeevas in the second Ganasthaan. The owner of the sixth Guna
Sthaan is called Aaparyaapta because of the Aahaarakamishnakaya Yoga. - Jeeva
Kaand, Ga. 126.  The owner of the thirteenth Guna Sthaan, the Mayogi, is called
Aaparyaapta because of the incompleteness of his Yoga. - Jeeva Kaand, Ga. 125.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vanAtha naga c| (3)-gaNa sthAnAdhikAra  /  /  (1)- gaNasthAno meM visthAna'  /
samvajiyaThANa micche. saga sAsaNi paNa Ajja sannidurga  /  saMme sannI dubiho.
sesesu saMpajjatto  /  /  45  /  /  sarvANi jIvasthAnAni mithyA ye..psa
mAsAdanaM panAparyAptAH sajJinikam  /  rAmpatye zo dvividhaH, zepeSa jiparyApta;
|| 45  /  /  artha- mithyAtvaguNa sthAna meM saba jIsthAna haiM  /  sAsAvana meM
pAMca aparyApta  /  bAbara ephastriya, dvAtriya, trIndrigha, caturindriya aura
asaji-paJcendriya tathA do saMjJI  /  apati aura paryApta kula sAta jovasthAna
haiM  /  aviratasamyapiTa guNasthAna meM vo sajI ( aparyApta aura paryApta |
jIvasthAna haiM  /  ukta soma ke sivAya zeSa gyAraha guNasthAnoM meM paryApta
saMnojIvasyAna hai  /  /  45  //  1- guNasthAna meM javasthAna vA jo vicAra
yahA~ hai, gommaTagAra meM usase bhinna prakAra kA hai  /  usameM dUsare, chaThe
aura terahaveM guNasthAna meM aparyApta saMjJI, ye do jInasthAna mAne gae haiN|
- jIva0, gA0 668 | gommaTasAra kA yaha varNana, apekSAkRta hai  /  karmakANDa kI
113vIM gAthA meM aparyApta ekendriya, dIndriya Adi ko dUsare gaNasthAna kA
adhikArI mAnakara unako jIvAr3a meM pahale guNasthAnamAtra kA adhikArI kahA hai;
so dvitIya gaNasthAnavatI aparyApta ekendriya Adi jIvoM kI alpatA kI apekSA se
/  chaThe guNasthAna ke adhikArI ko aparyApta kahA hai| so AhArakamiznakAyayoga
kI apekSA se| -jIvakANDa, gA0 126  /  terahaveM guNasthAna ke adhikArI mayogI ke
calI ko aparyApta kahA hai, zo yoga kI apUrNatA kI apekSA se  /  -jIvakANDa, gA0
125  /

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
162 Apanagad Mag Mar Language - All types of worldly beings, from Ekendriyadi,
are to be understood. Therefore, in the first Gunasthan, all Jivastahan have
been mentioned. In the second Gunasthan, the seven Jivastahan mentioned above
are mentioned, of which six are insufficient, which should be understood as all
Karan-insufficient, because Lavidh-insufficient Jiva are already in the first
Gunasthan. In the fourth Gunasthan, insufficient Sanji have been mentioned,
which should also be understood as Karan-insufficient from the above mentioned.
Except for the sufficient Sanji, no other type of Jiva has such results that
they can attain the remaining eleven Gunasthan, leaving the first, second and
fourth. Therefore, only the sufficient Sanji Jivastahan is considered in these
eleven Gunasthan. || 45 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 162 apaMgAdha mAga mAra bhASA - ekendriyAdi saba prakAra se saMsArI jIva
mityAvI pAye jAte haiN| isaliye pahale guNasthAna meM saba jovasthAna kahe gaye
haiN| dusare gaNasthAna meM sAta jIvasthAna Upara kahe gaye haiM, unameM chaha
aparyApta haiM, jo sabhI karaNa-aparyApta samajhane cAhiye, kyoMki lavidha-
aparyApta jIya, pahale guNasthAnaghAle hI hote haiN| cauthe guNasthAna meM
aparyApta saMjI kahe gaye haiM, so bhI ukta kAragase karaNa-aparyApta ho
samajhane caahiye| paryApta saMjJI ke sivAya anya kisI prakAra ke jIva meM aise
pariNAma nahIM hote, jinase ve pahale, dUsare aura cautha ko chor3akara zeSa
gyAraha guNasthAnoM ko pA sake  /  isIliye ina gyAraha guNasthAnoM meM kevala
paryApta saMjI jIvasthAna mAnA gayA hai  /  /  45  /  /

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmaṇanth Māra Cāra 163  (2) - Guṇavānōṁ meṁ Yoś' [ Do Māthāōṁ se ]
Miśchadūgajai Jogā, - Hāragṛṇā Apugvapanaṁge U.  Mavai Jaralaṁ Sabiuṁ. - Svāmīsi
Saviuvadga Dese || 46 ||  **Translation:**  **Miśchātvavikāyate Yogā,
Āhārakadvikōna Apūrvapanchake Tu.** **Manāvac Audārikam Sarvakrim Miśre
Sarvakidvik Daśe.** || 46 ||  **Meaning:**  There are thirteen yogas in
Miśchātv, Sāsāyana and Aviratsamyāṣṭiguna sthāna, excluding Āhārak-dik. From
Apūrvakaraṇa to the fifth guna sthāna, there are four yogas of mind, four yogas
of speech and one Audārik, making a total of nine yogas. In Miśragana sthāna,
there are the aforementioned nine yogas plus one Vaiśyi, making a total of ten
yogas. In Deśaviratgana sthāna, there are the aforementioned nine yogas plus
Vaikip-dvik, making a total of eleven yogas. || 46 ||  **Bhavartha:**  In the
first, second and fourth guna sthāna, there are thirteen yogas as follows:
Kārmṇayāṁga, Vigrahagatimiṁ and in the first time of birth; Paniyamin and
Śaucārikamiśch, these two yogas are in the first time of birth, after the
insufficient state and Pār Bhaṁ, four yogas of speech, one Mōvārik and one Ve
Kriya, these ten yogas are in the sufficient state. Āhārak and Āhārakamiśch,
these two yogas are not in these three guna sthāna because they are related to
the conduct.  **Note:**  The discussion about yogas in guna sthāna is similar to
what is found in Pañcasamgraha, Dvā. 1, Gā. 16-18 and Prācīna Caturdha Karma
Grantha, Gā. 66-66.  There are some differences in Gommatasāra. It mentions nine
yogas in the first seven guna sthāna and eleven yogas in the sixth guna sthāna.
Jī. Gā. 703.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmanantha mAra cAra 163 (2)-guNavAnoM meM yoza'  /  [ do mAthAoM se ]
mizchadugaajai jogA,-hAragRNA apugvapaNage u  /  mavai jaralaM sabiuM.-svamIsi
saviuvadga dese  // 46 //  mithyAtvavikAyate yogA, AhArakadvikonA apUrvapaJcake
tu  /  manAvaca audArikaM sarvakrima mizre sarvakidvika daze  /  /  46  /  /  _
artha- mithyAtva, sAsAyana aura aviratasamyASTiguNasthAmameM AhAraka-dika ko
chor3akara teraha yoga haiM  /  apUrvakaraNa se lekara pAMca guNasthAno me cAra
mana ke, cAra vacana ke aura eka auvArika, ye nau yoga haiM  /  mizragaNasthAna
meM ukta nau tathA eka vaizyi, ye isa yoga hai  /  dezaviratagaNasthAma meM
upata nau tathA vaikipa-dvika, kula gyAraha yoga haiM  /  /  46  /  /
bhAvArtha- pahale, dUsare aura cauthe guNasthAna meM teraha yoga isa prakAra
haiM:-kArmaNayAMga, vigrahagati meM tathA utpati ke prathama samaya meM;
paniyamina aura zaucArikamitha, ye do goga utpatti ke prathama samaya ke
anantara aparyApta avasthA meM aura pAra bhana ke, cAra baccana ke, eka movArika
tathA eka ve kriya, ye dasa yoga paryApta-avasthA meM | mAhAraka aura
AhAraphamizra, ye do yoga cAritra-sApekSa hone ke kAraNa umasa tIna guNasthAnoM
meM nahIM hote| 1 guNasthAnoM meM yoga-viSayaka vicAra jaisA yahA~ hai, vaisA hI
paMcasaMgraha dvA0 1, gA0 1618 tathA prAcIna caturdha karma grantha, gA0 66 66
meM hai| gommaTasAra meM kucha vivAra-bheda hai| uttana pAna aura sAta guNa.
sthAna meM nau aura chaTha guNasthAna meM gyAraha yoga mAne haiM  /  jI0,gA 0703
/

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Saune se sar barhavam: Pasu log nahi. Kyonki main ganana nimagna and yati.bh! ii
maho pae jate. Ato hum isamen Tv aur mauka mil ho: 1 nahi hote ta le g g sthan
adharit-NE ENT: . Sah: name samav-jam sab- g n ho ya vi. • Thi.. r diyo. Napare
pradaa:..:... pach..! aur bag: . . s . .... : . Ho' 'en m... : : ... . i i [ fTS
... ... .. :. : .. : : hai.   : Da .! : . :.:: : . .!::. : ....... .. . . : : !
..... . n ma.T ST: : . . . ! ..; ; ; . : .. : ::. . . . .:: : ! : ! . . . . . .
. . main | it a... ! . p.8 : b... ... . . . . . . . .. .. ... ... .... .. . .. .
.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAune se sara barahavaM .. : pAso loga nahI  /  kapoMki meM gaNana nimagA aura
yATi.bha! ii maho pAe jaate| a: hama isameM Tv aura maukA mila ho : 1 nahIM hote
tA le ga ga sthAna adhArata-NE ENT :  /  za: name samAva-jama saba- ga na ho yA
vI. * Thi.. ra diyo  /  napare pradA:..:... paca .. /  aura bAga : . . sa . ....
:  /  ho' 'eM ma... : : ... . i i [ fTS ... ... .. :. : .. : : hai| : DA  /  /
: . :.:: : . .!::. : ....... .. . . : :  /  ..... . na mA.T ST: : . . .  /  ..;
; ; . : .. : ::. . . . .:: :  /  :  /  . . . . . . . . meM | it a... ! . pa.8 :
ba... ... . . . . . . . .. .. ... ... .... .. . .. . .

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
|| : .. M-:: ' . Four Pi, .::: | Om Bhor: Ye Nau Yag Hit i Naam ... ! .
Gajasthan mein kul PLE yo samaya | In ... mein hone karan vo bhatko ag.। 4। M
hal ke karan kaam aur shaun : . I. . ii iTo ni । L M .... le - .. .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /   / ' : .. ma-:: ' . cAra pai, .::: | OM bhora: ye nau yaga Hit i nAma ... !
. gajasthAna meM kula PLE yo samAyA | ina ... meM hona kAraNa vo bhAtako ag|| 4
/  ma hAla ke kAraNa kAma aura zauM : . I. . ii iTo ni  /  L M .... le - .. .

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
166 Karmagranth Part Four The state of *matt* is present. Therefore, in the
thirteen *yogas* of the sixth *ganasthan*, except for the aforementioned two
*yonis*, the *mar* disease is present: upon forming a *bainkriya* body or
*aaharaka* body, the state of *apramatt* is also possible. Therefore, the
*yogas* of the *apramatt* *ganasthan* include *bainkriyayoga* and
*aaharakakayayoga*. For the *sayogikevalo*, at the time of *kevalisamudghāt*,
*kāmaṇ* and *audārikamiśna*, these are the *mogas*, at all other times,
*aucharikkayayoga*, *anupsaravimānavāsī* etc., at the time of answering
questions from the mind, *mano* *yoga*, and at the time of giving *deshna*,
there are two *prachan* *yogas*. From this, seven *yogas* are present in the
thirteenth *ganasthan*. The *kevali* *bhagavan* attains the state of *ayogi* by
eliminating all *yogas*. Therefore, there is an absence of *yogas* in the
fourteenth *ganasthan*. ||47||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 166 karmagrantha bhAga cAra matta-avasthA-mAvI hai| isaliye usameM chaThe
gaNasthAna vAle teraha yogoM meM se ukta do yonI chor3akara mara roga lage haiM
: baiMkriyazarIra yA AhAraka zarIra banA lene para apramatta-avasthA kA bhI
saMbhava haiN| isaliye apramata gaNasthAna ke yogoM meM baiMpikAyayoga aura
AhArakakAyayoga kI gaNanA hai| sayogikevalo ko kevalisamudghAta ke samaya kAmaNa
aura audArikamizna, ye vo moga, anya saba samaya meM aucArikakAyayoga,
anupsaravimAnavAsI ceva Adi ke prazna kA mana se uttara dene ke samaya bo
manoyoga aura dezanA ke dene samaya do pracana yoga hote haiN| isase serahaveM
gaNa sthAna meM sAta yoga mAje gaye haiN| kevalI bhagavAn saba yogoM kA niroSa
karake ayogi-avasthA prApta karate haiN| isIliye caudahave guNa sthAna meM yogoM
kA abhAva hai  // 47  /  /

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Chapter Four of the Karma Granth**  **137**  **(3) - Uses in the
Gunasthans**  **"Tiranaranadudansahm, duge ajad besi natan te mosi misa samana,
jayai kevalad ange."** || 48 ||  **"Vijnana dridarshamadimadhikaye'yate dese
shanadarshanatrikam. Te misra misraah samanama yattadishu
kevaladvikamantashtrike."** || 48 ||  **Meaning:**  In the Gunasthans of
Madhyatva and Sasavan, there are five uses: three types of Ajnana (ignorance)
and two types of Darshan (vision). In the Gunasthans of Aviraatasabhya Drishti
and Veshavithi, there are six uses: three types of Jnana (knowledge) and three
types of Darshan. In the Misra Gunasthan, there are six uses: three types of
Jnana and three types of Darshan, but the Jnana is mixed and the Ajnana is
mixed. From the Gunasthan of Pramattasanyata to the Gunasthan of Kshina
Mohaniya, there are seven uses: the aforementioned six and Manas Paryaya Jnana.
In the Gunasthans of Sayogikevali and Ayogikevali, there are two uses: Keval
Jnana and Kambal Darshan. || 48 ||  **Meaning:**  In the first and second
Gunasthans, there is an absence of Samyak (right conduct). Therefore, the seven
uses of Samyaktva's companions - five types of Jnana, Avashisharan, and Keval
Darshan - are not present. The remaining five uses are present.  In the fourth
and fifth Gunasthans, there is no Mithyatva (false belief), so the three types
of Ajnana are not present. There is no Sarvavithi (omniscience), so Manas
Paryaya Jnana and Ghatikarma are not present. There is no Keval Vik, so a total
of six uses are not present. The remaining six uses are present.  **Note:**
This topic is discussed in Pancha Sangrah, Chapter 2, verses 16-20; Prachin
Chaturth Karma Granth, verses 70-71; and Gommatasar - Jivakand, verse 704.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 varmagrantha bhAga cAra 137 ( 3 ) - guNasthAnoM meM upayoga' | !
tianaraNadudaMsAhama, duge ajada besi nAtaM te mosi mIsA samaNA, jayAi kevalada
aMge  //  48  //  vyajJAna dridarzamAdimaddhike'yate deze zAnadarzanatrikam  /
te mizra mizrAH samanamo yattAdiSu kevaladvikamantaSTike  // 48 //  P 1 artha-
madhyAtva aura sAsAvana, ina do guNasthAnoM meM tIna ajJAna aura do darzana ye
pA~ca upayoga haiM | aviratasabhya dRSTi, vezaviti ina vo guNasthAnoM meM sIna
jJAna, lIna vana me chaha upayoga haiN| mizraguNasthAna meM bhojJAna tIna
varzana ye chaha upayoga haiM, para jJAna mizrita, ajJAna mizrita hote haiM  /
pramattasaMyata se lekara kSINamohanIya taka sAta guNasthAnoM meM ukta chaha
aura manaH paryAyazAna, ye sAta upayoga haiM  /  sayogikevalI aura ayoga kevalI
ina vo guNasthAnoM meM kevalajJAna aura kaMbala varzana, ye vo upayoga haiM  //
48 //  bhAvArtha- pahale aura dUsare guNasthAna meM samyak kA abhAva hai| isIse
unameM samyaktva ke sahacArI pA~ca jJAna, avaSirzana aura kevalarzana, ye sAta
upayoga nahIM hote, zeSa pA~ca hote haiM  /  cauthe aura pAMcaveM guNasthAna meM
midhyAtva na hone se tIna ajha na sarvaviti na hone se manaH paryAyajJAna aura
ghAtikarma kA abhAva ma hone se kevala vika, ye kula chaha upayoga nahI hote,
zeSa chaha hote haiN| 1 - yaha viSaya paJcasaMgraha dvA0 1 kI 16 20vIM, prAcIna
caturtha karmagrantha ko 70-71vIM aura gommaTasAra- jIvakANDa ko 704vIM - gAthA
meM hai  /

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
4. !" Bar 'In the first 'Sare Gaye' there are two 'Don' and ten 'Dashang', these
are the main uses. But 'Ishtti', 'Pashchit' and 'Ashuddha' are of dual nature,
knowing this, 'Anan-Mishrit' is used. From the sixth to the twelfth, in the
seven 'Gunasthanas', 'Miwat' is not the cause due to 'Agnan-Trika' and due to
the non-destruction of 'Tikarma', 'Kshetrasna-Hika' is not present. In this way,
leaving 'Pani', the remaining 'Mat' uses should be understood in them. In the
thirteenth and fourteenth 'Ganasthanas', due to the absence of 'Ghanikarma',
'Chhamstasthava-Mavo' and 'Dam' uses are not present. Only 'Kshetralaman' and
'Kevalavarshan', these are the only uses, 1148t Some views of the 'Siddhant'.
'Sasanbhave Nanam, Viuvgaharage Uralmissam. . Negivisu Sasano, Neha Himayam
Suyamyam Pi ||46||' 'Samadanabhane Gyan, Vevikaharak Audarikaabhisram.
Naikendriyesu Sasadanam, Nehaadhivrtam Shrunamatam Api. ||4||' In the 'Ary
Sasaban' state, 'Samyaggyan', 'Bainkriyasheera' and 'Aharak Sheera' formation
during 'Mauvarikamishra Kayayog' and the absence of 'Sasadan' 'Gunasthan' in
'Ekendiriya' beings, these three things are although accepted by the 'Siddhant',
but they are not relevant in this treatise. 11465 Meaning- There seems to be a
difference of opinion between the 'Siddhant' and the 'Farmgranya' on some
topics. Out of these, the author has shown three topics in this 'Gatha':

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 4 . !" bAra 'sare gae 1na meM bhI dona ma aura tena dazaMga, ye hI maha upayoga
hai  /  para iSTi, pazcita azuddhA ubhayarUpa hone ke nANa jAna, anAna-mizrita
hotA hai| chaThe se bArahave taka sAta guNasthAno meM mivAta hA kAraNa ajJAna-
trika nahIM hai aura tikarma kA kSaya na hone ke kAraNa kSetrasna - hika nahIM
hai  /  isa taraha pani chor3akara zeSa mAta upayoga unameM samajhane caahiye|
serahameM aura caudahaveM gaNasthAna meM ghAnikarma na hone se chamasthaavasthA-
mAvo dama upayoga nahIM hote. sirpha kSetralamAna aura kevalavarzana, ye vo hI
upayoga hote hai, 1148t siddhAnta ke kucha mantavya  /  sAsaNabhAve nANaM,
viuvagAhArage urlmissN| . negivisu sAsANo, nehA himayaM suyamayaM pi  // 46 //
sAmAdanabhAne jJAna, vevikAhAraka audArikAbhizram  /  naikendriyesu sAsAdanaM,
nehAdhivRtaM zrunamatamapi  /  / 4 /  /  aryasAsAbana avasthA meM samyagjJAna,
baiMkriyazarIra tathA AhAraka zarIra banAne ke samaya mauvArikamizra kAyayoga
aura ekendriya jIdoM meM sAsAdana guNasthAna kA abhAva, ye tIna bAteM yapi
siddhAnta sammata haiM tathApi isa prantha meM inakA adhikAra nahIM hai 11465
bhAvArtha-kucha viSayoM para siddhAnta aura pharmagranya kA mata-bheTa calA
bhAtA hai| inameM se tIna viSaya isa gAthA meM prazrakAra ne dikhAye haiM:

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **(a)** In the second Gunasthan, the Sisams' consider
knowledge of Mati, Shruta, etc. to be present, not absent. Conversely, in
Karmapannya, ignorance is considered to be present, not absent. The principle's
intention is that although the living being in the second Gunasthan is in front
of Mithyatva, it is not Mithyatvi; due to the presence of a part of Samyaktva,
there is some purity. Therefore, its knowledge should be considered as
knowledge. The intention of Karmagrantha is that the living being in the second
Gunasthan is not Mithyatvi, but it is facing Mithyatva. Therefore, its result
has more impurities. Therefore, its knowledge should be considered as ignorance.
1. In Bhagavati, the Indriyas are also called knowledgeable. This statement
proves that the Siddhanta calls the Indriyas knowledgeable only by considering
knowledge in the Sasadan state. Because they lack all other Gunasthanas beyond
the second. The Panchendriyas are called knowledgeable, which can also be
supported by comparison to the third, fourth, etc. Gunasthanas. But since the
Dwindriyas lack the third, fourth, etc. Gunasthanas, knowledge can only be
reduced in comparison to the Sasadan Gunasthan. This is clearly written in the
Prajnapanna-Tika. It says, "How can two knowledges be reduced in the Dwindriya?
Because it has the Sasadan Gunasthan in the Aparapsa state, two knowledges can
be reduced in comparison to that."  "Beintiyanam Bhanta. Ki Nani Anani? Goyama!
Nano Vi Anani Vi. Je Nani Te Niyama Punani. Tam Jaha - Aminimohhipanani
Suyanani. Je Anani Te Vi Niyama Tuannani. Pahama Anani Suyanani Ya." - Bhagavati
Shatak 80.2.  "Beviyars Vo Nana Kahan Lambhati? Anana, Sasayanam Panch
Tassapajjat Pass Do Gana Lati." - Prajnapanna Tika.  According to Karmagrantha,
ignorance is considered to be present in the second Gunasthan, which is clear
from the 20th and 48th Gatha. In Gommatasar, the opinion of Karmaadhik is
prevalent. For this, see the 686th and 504th Gatha of the Jeevakanda.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra (ka) sisAmsa' meM dUsare gaNasthAna ke samaya mati,
zruta Adiko jJAna mAnA hai, ajAna mahI  /  isase ulaTA karmapanya meM ajJAna
bhAmA hai, amAna nahIM  /  siddhAnta kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki pUsare guNaspAna
meM vartamAna jIva padyapi mizyAstra ke saMmukha hai, para miNyAravI mahI;
usameM samyaktva kA aMza hone se kucha vizuddhi haiN| isaliye usake zAma ko
jJAna mAnanA cAhiye  /  karmaprantha kA Azaya yaha hai ki dvitIya
guNAsthAmavartI jIva mithyAtvI na sahI, para vaha mithyAtva ke abhimukha hai|
isaliye usake pariNAma meM mAlinya adhika hotA hai| isase usake jJAna ko ajJAna
kahanA cAhiye  /  1bhagavatI meM vIndriyoM ko jJAnI bhI kahA hai| isa kathana se
yaha pramANita hotA hai ki sAsAdana-avasthA meM jJAna mAna karake hI siddhAntI
dIndriyoM ko zAnI kahate haiN| kyoMki unameM dUsare se Age saba guNasthAnoM kA
abhAva hI hai| paJcendriyoM ko jJAnI kahA hai, usa samarthana so tIsare, cauthe
Adi guNasthAnoM kI apekSA se bhI kiyA jA sakatA hai| para dvIndriyoM meM tIsare
Adi guNasthAnoM kA abhAva hone ke kAraNa sirpha sAsAdana guNasthAna kI apekSA se
hI zAmitva ghaTAyA jA sakatA hai| yaha bAta prajJApanA-TIkA meM spaSTa likhI huI
hai  /  usameM kahA hai ki dvIndriya ko do jJAna kaise ghaTa sakate haiM ?
usarausako aparyApsaavasthA meM sAsAdanaguNasthAna hotA hai, isa apekSA se do
zAna ghaTa sakate haiM  /  beiMtiyANaM bhaMte  /  ki nANI anANI ? goyamA ! NANo
vi aNNANI vi  /  je nANI te niyamA punANI  /  taM jahA - AmiNimohipanANI
suyaNANI  /  je aNNANI te vi niyamA tuannANI  /  pahAmA annANI suyaannANI ya  /
" bhagavatI zataka 80 2 /  "beviyarasa vo NANA kahaM lambhati ? aNNA, sAsAyaNaM
panca tassApajjata passa do gANA lati  / " -prazApanA TIkA  /  dUsare guNasthAna
ke samaya karmagrantha ke matAnusAra ajAna mAnA jAtA hai, so 20 tathA 48vI gAthA
se spaSTa hai  /  gommaTasAra meM kArmaadhika hI mata hai| isake liye dekhiye,
jIvakANDa kI 686 sathA 504 voM gAthA  /

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four (b) The **Siddhant** believes that when creating the
**Vaikriya** and **Aharak** bodies through **Labdhi**, there is **Audarik
Misrayog**; but when discarding them, there is **Vaikriya Misrayog** and
**Aharak Misrayog** respectively. In contrast, the **Karmagranth** believes that
when creating both bodies and discarding them, there is **Kriya Misrayog** and
**Aharak Misrayog** respectively, not **Audarik Misrayog**.  The **Siddhant**'s
intention is that when a **Kriya** or **Aharak** body is created through
**Labdhi**, it is created by the **Audarik** body, which is suitable for these
bodies. Therefore, due to the **Audarik** body's dominance, **Audarik Misrayog**
should be used when creating both bodies. However, during discarding, the
**Audarik** body does not hold dominance. At that time, the **Kriya** or
**Aharak** body's activity is the main one, so **Vaikriya Misrayog** and
**Aharak Misrayog** should be used.  The **Karmagranth**'s opinion is that
regardless of which body's activity is dominant, the **Audarik** body is
**Janma-Siddh** (innate) and the **Deutriya** or **Aharak** body is **Samdhi-
Janma** (created through association). Therefore, considering the dominance of
the specific **Jay** body, the beginning and...  170 1- This opinion is clear
from the following quote in the **Prashasana**: "**Oralya Sari Ekayavyayoghe
Moralya Misra Sarira Kayayoghe Lej Viyasa Sari Kayayoghe Aharak Sarira Kayayoghe
Aharak Misra Sarira Kayayoghe**." (Pado 16 and its commentary, page 317)  The
**Karmagranth**'s opinion is clear from the 46th and 47th verses, which mention
eleven and thirteen **Yogas** in the fifth and sixth **Gunasthanas**
respectively. The **Gommatasar**'s opinion seems to be similar to the
**Karmagranth**, as it does not consider **Audarik Misrayog** in the fifth and
sixth **Gunasthanas**. See the 703rd verse of the **Jivakand**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra (kha) siddhAnta' kA mAnanA hai ki labdhi dvArA vaikriya
aura AhAraka- zarIra banAte samaya audArika mizra kAyayoga hotA hai; para
tyAgate samaya krama se vaikiya mizra aura AhArakamitra hotA hai| isake sthAna
meM karmagrantha kA mAnanA hai ki ukta donoM zarIra banAte tathA tyAgrale samaya
krama se kriyamizra aura AhAraka mizrayoga ho hotA hai, mauvArika mizra nahIM  /
siddhAnta kA Azaya yaha hai ki labdhi se kriya yA AhAraka-vazarIra banAyA jAtA
hai, usa samaya ina zarIroM ke yogya puvarala, audArika zarahera ke dvArA hI
praNa kiye jAte haiM, isaliye auvArika zarIra kI pradhAnatA hone ke kAraNa ukta
donoM zarIra banAte samaya audArika mizrakAmayoga kA vyavahAra karanA cAhiye  /
parantu parityAga ke samaya auvArika zarIra ko pradhAnatA nahIM rahatI  /  usa
samaya kriya yA mAhAraka zarIra kA hI vyApAra mukhya hone ke kAraNa
vaikriyamizra tathA AhArakamizra kA vyavahAra karanA cAhiye  /  phArmampika-mata
kA lAspayaM itanA hI hai ki cAhe vyApAra kisI zarIra kA pradhAna ho, para
auvArika zarIra janma- siddha hai aura detriya yA AhAraka- zarIra samdhi janya
hai; isaliye viziSTa -jaya zarIra kI pradhAnatA ko dhyAna meM rakhakara Arambha
aura 170 1- yaha mata prazApanA ke isa ullekha se spaSTa hai: orAliya sarI
ekAyavyayoge morAliyamIsasarIrampayoge leja viyasarI kayipyayoge
AhArakasarIrakAyappaoge AhArakamIsasarIrakAyayoge  / " pada0 16 tathA usakI
TIkA, pR0 317 karmagrantha kA mata to 46 aura 47vIM gAthA meM pAMcaveM aura
chaThe guNasthAna meM krama se gyAraha aura teraha yoga dinAye hai, isIse spaSTa
hai  /  gommaTasAra kA mataka maMgrantha ke samAna ho jAna par3atA hai; kyoMki
usameM pA~caveM aura chaThe kisI guNasthAna meM bodArika mizrakAyayoga nahIM
mAnA hai| dekhiye. jIvakANDa kI 703rI gAthA |

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Maga Char 171  **Parityaag, both times Pakriyamish and
Mahaarakamishra should be used, not Movarikabhitra.**  **(g) Siddhanti**, in
Afeendriyas, do not accept Sasatanguṇasthān, but accept Kāmapranyik.  In the
minds of the above mentioned subjects, where there is no -m:  **(1)** Siddhanti,
consider Avadhivarshan in the first twelve Guṇasthāns, but Kārmāpanthik consider
it deceitfully in the twelfth Guṇasthān.   **(2)** In Siddhant, it is said that
there is Aupachamikasamyaktva after the end of Pranthi-Mev, but in Karmagranth,
there is Aupachamikasamyaktva. ||46||  **1** Bhagavati, Prashapana and
Jivabhigamsutra have said that Ekeendriyas are Ashani. This proves that Sasadan-
Bhash Siddhaamsasammmat is not in them. If it were, then like Dwiendriya etc.,
Ekeendriyas would also be called Gyanis.  "Egibiyaṇam Bhanta. Ki Maani Amaano?
Goyama! Mo Namni, Niyama Mantrani."  Bhagavati-Sh. 8, U. 2. The Kārmāgranthik-
mav in Panchasangrah states that Sasadan-Bhav is in Ekeendriya. As:
"Igivigilesu Jayatam" etc. Dwa. 1, Ga. 28.  In the Digambar Sampraday, both
Siddhanti and Kārmāgranthik opinions are collected. By looking at the 113 to 115
verses of Karmakand, it is clear that Sasadan-Bhav is accepted in Ekeendriyas.
In Tattvarth, A. 1, 8th Sutra, in Sarvarth Siddhi, and in Jivakand, 677th verse,
there is Siddhanti opinion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha mAga cAra 171 parityAga, donoM samaya pakriyamiSa aura
mAhArakamizra kA bhyabahAra karanA cAhiye, movArikabhitra kA nhiiN|
(ga)siddhAntI', ephendriyoM meM sAsATanaguNasthAna ko nahIM mAnate, para
kAmapranyika mAnate hai| ukta viSayoM ke dimAga viSAroM meM jo kahIM nahIM -ma :
(1)sivAntI, avadhivarzana ko pahale bAraha guNaspAnoM meM mAmale hai, para
kArmapanthika use dhokhe se bArahavaM taka mau guNasthAnoM meM, (2) siddhAnta
meM pranthi-meva ke manantara bAyopamikasamyaktavA kA honA mAmA gayA hai, kintu
karmagrantha meM aupacAmikasamyaktava kA honA  // 46 //  1bhagavatI, prazApanA
aura jIvAbhigamasUtra meM ekendriyoM ko azAnI ho kahA hai| isase siddha hai ki
unameM sAsAdana-bhASa siddhAmsasammata nahIM hai  /  yadi sammata hotA to
dvIndriya Adi kI taraha ekendriyoM ko bhI jJAnI kahate  /  'egibiyANaM bhaMte  /
ki mANI amANo? goyamA ! mo namNI, niyamA mntraannii|" bhagavatI-za0 8, u0 2  /
ekendriya me sAsAdana-bhAva mAnane kA kArmagranthika-mava paJcasaMgraha meM
nidiSTa hai| yathA: 'igivigilesu jayataM' ityAdi  /  dvA0 1, gA0 28 | digambara-
saMpradAya meM maiddhAntika aura kArmagranthika donoM mata saMgRhIta haiM  /
karmakANDa kI 113 se 115 taka kI gAthA dekhane se ekendriyoM meM sAsAdana-bhAva
kA svIkAra spaSTa mAlUma hotA hai  /  tattvArtha, a0 1 ke 8veM sUtra kI
sarvArthasiddhi meM tathA jIvakANDa kI 677vIM gAthA meM saiddhAntika mata hai|

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 172 **Karmagrantha Maga Char** (4-5) - Leshya and Bandha in Gunasthanas.
**Chasu Sabba Seutigan. Igi Chasu Sukka Ayogi Allesa. Bandhass Miich Avir'ai,
Kasayajo Gatti Ch Heu.** ||50||  **Shatsu Sarvastejas Tramekasmin Shatsu Shukla
Ayogino Leshyaah. Sy Midhyatva Aviratika Krishna Ayoga Iti Chatvaro Hetavaah.**
||10||  **Meaning:**  In the first six Gunasthanas, there are six Leshyas. There
are two opinions regarding the seventh Khaya Gunasthana. The first opinion
states that there are six Leshyas in the first four Gunasthanas, while the
second opinion states that there are six Leshyas in the first six Gunasthanas.
The first opinion is found in Sangraha-Dva 1, Ga 30, Prachina Bandhaswamitva, Ga
40; Navina Bandhaswamitva, Ga 25; Sarvarthasiddhi, page 24; and Gommatasar-
Jivakanda, Ga 703. The second opinion is found in Prachina Chaturtha
Karmagrantha, Ga 73, and Maha. Both opinions are relatively acceptable, so there
is no contradiction between them.  The first opinion implies that those with all
six types of Dravya Leshyas attain the fourth Gunasthana, but only those with
three auspicious Dravya Leshyas attain the fifth or sixth Gunasthana. Therefore,
when considering Gunasthana attainment, six Leshyas should be considered up to
the fourth Gunasthana, and only three in the fifth and sixth.  The second
opinion implies that although the fourth Gunasthana is attained with all six
Leshyas, and the fifth and sixth Gunasthanas are attained with three auspicious
Dravya Leshyas, all six Dravya Leshyas are present in those who attain the
fourth, fifth, and sixth Gunasthanas. Therefore, after attaining the
Gunasthanas, six Leshyas are considered up to the sixth Gunasthana.  **Note:**
It is important to remember that when attaining the fourth, fifth, and sixth
Gunasthanas, the Bhava Leshya is auspicious, not inauspicious. However, after
attaining these Gunasthanas, the Bhava Leshya can become inauspicious.  **1**
"**Samm Suyam Sabba Su. Lahai Suddhasu Tisu Ya Charitam. Pushapann'ago Pug,
Ann'avaroe U Lesa'ae.**"  - Aavashyak Niyukti, Ga 822.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 } 172 karmagrantha mAga cAra ( 4 - 5 ) - guNasthAnoM meM lezyA tathA bandha
hetu  /  chasu sabbA seutigaM. igi chasu sukkA ayogi allesA  /  baMdhassa miccha
avirai, kasAyajo gatti ca heu  // 50 //  SaTsu sarvAstejastramekasmin SaTsu
zuklA'yoginolezyAH  /  sya midhyAtvAviratikRSNAyayogA iti catvAro hetavaH ||10|
artha - pahale chaha guNasthAnoM meM chaha lezyAe~ haiN| eka ( sAtaveM qhai
guNasthAna mAnane ke sambandha meM do mata cale Ate haiN| pahalA mata pahale
cAra guNasthAnoM meM chaha lezyAe~ aura dUsarA mata pahale chaha guNasthAnoM meM
chaha lezyAe~ mAnatA hai| pahalA mata saMgraha - dvA0 1 gA0 30 prAcIna
bandhasvAmitva, gA0 40; navIna bandhasvAmitva gA0 25; sarvArthasiddhi, pR0 24
aura gommaTasAra - jIvakANDa, gA0 703 roke bhAvArtha meM hai| dUsarA mata
prAcIna caturtha karmagrantha, gA073 meM tathA mahA~ hai  /  donoM mata
apekSAkRta hai, ata: inameM kuchabhI virodha nahIM hai| pahale mata kA Azaya
yaha hai ki chahoM prakAra kI dravyalezyAvAloM ko cauthA guNasthAna prApta hotA
hai, para pA~cavA~ yA chaThA guNasthAna sirpha tIna zubha dravyamavAloM kii|
isaliye guNasthAna prApti ke samaya vartamAna dravadhadayA kI apekSA se cauthe
guNasthAna paryanta chaha lekSyAe~ mAnanI cAhiye aura pA~cave aura chaThe meM
tIna hI  /  dUsare mata kA Azaya yaha hai ki yadyapi chahoM lezyAoM ke samaya
cauthA guNasthAna aura tIna zubha dravyalemAoM ke samaya pAtra aura chaThA
guNasthAna prApta hotA hai parantu prApta hone ke bAda cauthe, pAMcaveM aura
chaThe, tInoM guNasthAnavAloM meM chahoM dravya lezyAeM pAyI jAtI haiN| isaliye
guNasthAnaprApti ke uttara-kAla meM vartamAna dravyalezyAoM ko apekSA se chaThe
guNasthAna paryanta chaha lezyAeM mAnI jAtI hai  /  > isa jagaha yaha bAta
dhyAna meM rakhanI cAhiye ki cauthA pAMca aura chaThA guNasthAna prApta hone ke
samaya bhAvaledayA to zubha hI hotI hai, azubha nahIM, para prApta hone ke bAda
bhAvalezyA bhI azubha ho sakatI hai  /  1 "samma suyaM sabbA su. lahai suddhAsu
tIsu ya caritaM  /  puSapaNNago puga, aNNavaroe u lesAe  /  " - Avazyaka
niyukti, gA0 822  /  -

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmapratyaya Part Four  **'**  The beginning is with the Leshyas. In the
fourteenth Gunasthan, there are three Leshyas: Tejas Padma and Shulka. From the
eighth to the thirteenth Gunasthan, there are no Leshyas in any of the
Gunasthanas. There are four reasons for Karma-bandha for the purpose of Bandha:
3 Kayas and 4 Yogas. || 50 ||  **Meaning:** Each Leshya is a form of
Vyavsayasthan (Sankeksha - mixed, Asantparinam). Therefore, it should be
understood that there are as many levels as there are: Teeravrat, Teeravratar,
Teeravratam, Mand, Mandchatar, Mandatam, etc. Therefore, the Krushna, etc.,
inauspicious Leshyas are considered to be Atimandatam in the Gunasthan and
Atiteeravratam in the first Gunasthan.  Their connection has been stated up to
the sixth Gunasthan. In the seventh Gunasthan, due to the absence of Jata and
Rod-Dhyan, the results are so pure that inauspicious Leshyas are completely
absent in that Gunasthan; however, there are three auspicious Leshyas. In the
first Gunasthan, the Tejas and Padma Leshyas are Atimandatam, and in the seventh
Gunasthan, they are Ati...  This has been discussed in detail by Shri
Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman in his Bhashya from verses 2741 to 2742, by Shri
Haribhadrasuri in his Tika, and by Maladhari Shramchandrasuri in his
Bhashyavritti. For this topic, the verses from 313 to 323 in the third Sangha of
Lokaprakash should be seen.  At the time of attaining the fourth Gunasthan,
Dravyaleshya is considered to be both auspicious and inauspicious, and
Bhavaleshya is only auspicious. Therefore, there is a doubt: Do those with
inauspicious Dravyaleshya also have auspicious Bhavaleshya?  The solution to
this is that there is no rule regarding the relationship between Dravyaleshya
and Bhavaleshya that they should be the same, because although humans are
Tripatra, whose Dravyaleshya is unstable, they have the same Bhavaleshya as
their Dravyaleshya. But Devatarak, whose Dravyaleshya is considered to be stable
(avasthit), is the opposite. That is, even though there is cruelty in Narakas,
Bhavaleshya can be auspicious. Similarly, in Devas with auspicious Dravyaleshya,
Bhavaleshya can also be inauspicious. To understand this clearly, one should see
the 17th Pada of Prajnapan and its Tika.  **Inauspicious**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmapratya bhAga cAra ' zurukalezyA hai  /  corahaveM guNasthAna meM tejaH
padma aura zulka, ye tIna leyAeM haiN| AThaveM se lekara terahaveM taka chaha
guNasthAnoM meM kevala guNasthAna meM koI bhI lezyA nahIM hai  /  bamdha hetu
karma-bamdha ke cAra hetu haiM  /  3 kayAya aura 4 yoga  //  50  //  bhAvArtha
pratyeka le 1 mithyAtva 2 avirati vyayasAyasthAna ( saMhakeza - mizrita
asaMtapariNAma ) rUpa hai| isaliye usake. tarevra tIvratara tIvratama, manda
maccatara mandatama, Adi utane hI meba samajhane caahiye| ata eva kRSNa Adi
azubha lezyAoM ko ke guNasthAna meM atimandatama aura pahale guNasthAna meM
atitIvratama mAma 1 - phara chaha guNasthAnoM taka unakA sambandha kahA gayA
hai| sAtaveM guNasthAna meM jAtaM tathA roDa-dhyAna na hone ke kAraNa pariNAma
itane vizuddha rahate haiM, jisase usa guNasthAna meM azubha lezyAeM sarvathA
mahA hoto; kintu tIna zubha lezyAeM hI hotI huuN| pahale guNasthAna meM teja
aura padya lezyA ko atimanbatama aura sAtaveM guNasthAna meM ati isakA vivecana
zrIjinabhadragaNi kSamAzramaNane bhASya kI 2741 le42 taka kI gAthAoM meM,
zrIharibhadrasUri ne apanI TIkA meM aura maladhArI zrAmacandrasUri na
bhASyavRtti meM vistArapUrvaka kiyA hai| isa viSaya ke liye lokaprakAza ke 3re
sagaM ka 313 se 323 taka ke zloka draSTavya hai  /  cauthA guNasthAna prApta
hone ke samaya bravyalezyA zubha aura azubha, donoM mAnI jAtI haiM aura
bhAvalezyA zubha hI  /  isaliye yaha zaGkA hotI hai 1 ki kyA azubha
dravyalezyAvAloM ko bhI zubha bhAvalezyA hotI hai ? isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki
dravyalakSyA aura bhAvalezyA ke sambandha meM yaha niyama nahIM hai ki donoM
samAna hI honI cAhiye, kyoMki yadyapi manuSya tipatra, jinakI dravyalecyA
asthira hotI hai, uname to jaisI dravyalezyA vaisI hAM bhAvalezyA hotI hai  /
para devatAraka, jinakI dravyalezyA avasthita sthira) mAnI gayI hai, unake
viSaya meM isase ulaTA hai| arthAt nArakoM meM dayA ke hote hue bhI bhAbalezyA
zubha ho sakatI hai| isI prakAra zubha dravyazyAvAle devoM meM bhAvalezyA azubha
bhI ho sakatI haiM | isa bAta ko khulAse se samajhane ke liye prajJApanA kA 17
vA~ pada tathA usakI TIkA dekhanI cAhiye  /  azubha

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
{74 Karmagranth Part Four, the most intense, in the same way, has also explained
the relationship of Shulkaleshya in the Gunasthanas by considering it as
Matimata in the first Gunasthana and Atitivratam in the thirteenth! Four Bandha-
Hetus' (1) 'Mimyaashva' is the result of the soul, which J 1 1- These twelve
Bandha Hetus are mentioned in the first verse of Pancha Sangrah - Dwa 4 and the
786th verse of the Dharmakaand. Although, in the first sutra of the tenth
chapter of Tattvarth, Pramada has also been considered as a Bandha Hetu, but it
is included in the Hetus like Aviriti, Kashaya, etc. For example: Pramada in the
form of Vishay Seva, Aviriti and Sabdhi Prayog in the form of Pramada, Yoga. In
reality, Kashaya and Yoga should be considered as the two Bandha Hetus;
Mithyatva and Aviriti are included in Kashaya. With this intention, only two
Bandha Hetus have been mentioned in the verse of the fifth Karmagranth. · Here,
the general Hetus of Karma-Bandha have been shown, from a general perspective;
therefore, they should be considered as Antarang Hetus. In the verses 54 to 61
of the first Karmagranth; in the sutras 11 to 26 of the sixth chapter of
Tattvarth and in the verses 800 to 810 of the Karmakaand, the Bandha Hetus of
each Karma have been mentioned, so from a practical perspective, they should be
considered as Bahirang Hetus. P Doubt - It is mentioned in the 24th verse of
Pragyapana that seven Karmas are bound at every moment except Aayu, therefore,
even while hating or destroying Shana, Gyanee, etc., the binding of other Karmas
like Gyaanavaranee, Darshanavaranee, etc., takes place. In this situation, how
can the special Hetus of Asrava, Gyaanavaranee and Darshanavaranee, etc.,
mentioned in the sutras 11 to 26 of the sixth chapter of Tattvarth, like
'Tattvadoshanihriya', etc., be possible? Solution - The special Hetus mentioned
for each Karma, like Tattvdoshaniv, etc., are in relation to Anubhagbandha, not
in relation to Prakritibandha. That is, during the consumption of any Asrava,
Prakritibandha takes place in all ways. There is a difference in Anubhagbandha.
For example: During the time of polluting Gyaan, Gyanee, Gyaanopkaran, etc., the
binding of other Prakritis like Gyaanavaranee and Darshanavaranee takes place,
but at that time, Anubhagbandha specifically takes place only of Gyaanavaranee
and Darshanavaranee Karma. In summary, the division of special Hetus has been
done in relation to Anubhagbandha, not in relation to Prakritibandha. - Satvarth
A 106, Sutra 27 of Sarvarth Siddhi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 f {74 karmagrantha bhAga cAra tIvratama isI prakAra zulkalezyA ko bhI pahale
guNasthAna meM matimama aura terahaveM meM atitIvratama mAnakara uparyukta rIti
se guNasthAnoM meM unakA sambandha batalAyA hai! cAra bandha- hetu' (1)
'mimyAzva' mAtmA kA vaha pariNAma hai, jo J 1 1- ye hI bAra bandha hetu
paJcasaMgraha - dvA0 4 kI 1 lI gAthA tathA pharmakANDa kI 786vIM gAyA meM hai|
yadyapi tattvArtha ke veM adhyAya ke 1 le sUtra meM ukta cAra hetuoM ke atirikta
pramAda ko bhI bandhahetu mAnA hai, parantu usakA samAveza avirati kaSAya Adi
hetuoM meM ho jAtA hai  /  jaise:- viSaya sevama rUpa pramAda, avirati aura
sabdhi prayogarUpa pramAda, yoga hai| vastutaH kaSAya aura yoga, ye do hI bamdha
hetu samajhane cAhiye; midhyAtva aura avirati kaSAya ke hI antargata haiM  /
isI abhiprAya se pAMcaveM karmagrantha kI gAthA meM do hI bandhahetu mAne gaye
haiM  /  * isa jagaha karma-bandha ke sAmAnya hetu dikhAye haiM,
sAmAnyabhayadRSTi se ; ata eva unheM antaraGga hetu samajhanA cAhiye  /  pahale
karmagrantha kI 54 se 61 taka gAthAoM meM; tatvArtha ke 6 adhyAya ke 11 se 26
taka ke sUtra meM tathA karma kANDa kI 800 se 810 taka kI gAthAoM meM hara eka
karma ke alaga-alaga bandhahetu kahe hue haiM, so vyavahAradRSTi se ata eSa
unheM bahiraGga hetu samajhanA cAhiye  /  P zaGkA - pratyeka samaya meM Ayu ke
sivAya sAta karmoM kA bA~dhA jAnA prajJApanA ke 24veM pada meM kahA gayA hai,
isaliye zAna, jJAnI Adi paradveSa yA unakA nihRva karate samaya bhI
jJAnAvaraNIya darzanAvaraNIya kI taraha anya karmoM kA bandha hotA hI hai| isa
avasthA meM 'tatvadoSanihRya' adi tattvArtha ke 6 adhyAya ke 11 se 26 taka ke
sUtroM me kahe hue Asrava, jJAnAvaraNIya aura darzanAvaraNIya Adi karma ke
vizeSa hetu kaise jA sakate haiM ? samAdhAna-tatpradoSaniva Adi AsravoM ko
pratyeka karma kA jo vizeSa hetu kahA hai, so anubhAgabandha kI apekSA se,
prakRtibandha kI apekSA se nahIM  /  arthAt kisI bhI Astava ke sevana ke samaya
prakRtibandha saba prakAra kA hotA hai | anubhAgabandha meM pharka hai  /
jaise: jJAna, jJAnI, jJAnopakaraNa Adi para pradUSa karane ke samaya
jJAnAvaraNIya aura darzanAvaraNIya kI taraha anya prakRtioM kA bandha hotA hai,
para usa samaya anubhAgabandha vizeSarUpa se jJAnAvaraNIya aura
darzanAvaraNIyakarma kA hI hotA hai  /  sArAMza, vizeSa hetuoM kA vibhAga
anubhAgabandha ko apekSA se kiyA gayA hai, prakRti-bandha kI apekSA se nahIM  /
-satvArtha a 106, sU0 27 kI sarvArtha siddhi  /

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four 175  **Mithyatva** arises from the emergence of
Mithyatva-mohaniya karma, which gives rise to doubt and delusion. (2)
**Avirati** is the result that arises from the emergence of Ashaya-
avaranakshaya, which hinders conduct. (3) **Kshamaya** is the result that arises
from the emergence of Charitra-mohaniya karma, which prevents or hinders the
manifestation of qualities like forgiveness, humility, simplicity, contentment,
seriousness, etc. (4) **Yoga** refers to the fluctuations (chanchalya) of the
self-intrusions, which occur due to the dependence on the appropriate puvgalas
of the mind, speech, or body. || 50 ||  **After the causes of bondage, the root
cause of bondage in the Gunasthanas.** [From two verses.]  **Abhighahiyam
abhigamana. Panchamiccha vara avir, manarakana niyam chhajjiyaho.** || 51 ||
**Abhighahika, anabhighahika, amaniveshika, sanshayika, anabhoga.**  **Pancha
mithyatva ti dvadasha aviratayo, manahkarana niyam shadjiva badha.** || 51 ||
**Meaning:** After the destruction of the five types of Mithyatva, there are: 1.
Abhighahika, 2. Anabhighahika, 3. Amaniveshika, 4. Sanshayika, and 5. Anabhoga.
There are twelve types of Avirati. These are: - Not controlling the mind and the
five senses, these six are the destruction of the six bodies, starting with the
earth body. || 51 ||  **Note:** This topic is discussed in Pancha-sangraha,
Chapter 2, verses 2-4, and in Gommatsar Karmakanda, verses 786-788. In
Gommatsar, there are five types of Mithyatva: 1. Ekanta, 2. Vipreet, 3.
Vainayika, 4. Sanshayika, and 5. Agnana.  For Avirati, refer to the 26th and
477th verses of the Jiva-kanda, and for Kshaya and Yoga, refer to the Kshaya and
Yoga-maganna respectively. In the commentary on the first sutra of the
Tattvartha chapter, there are two types of Mithyatva: Abhigrita and Anamigrita.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 175 midhyAtvamohanIya karma ke udaya se hotA hai aura
jisase vAha saMzaya ANi ghoSa paidA hote haiM  /  (2) 'avirati vaha pariNAma
hai, jo azyAyAmAvaraNakaSAya ke udaya se hotA hai aura jo cAritra ko rokatA hai
/  ( 3 ) 'kavAya', vaha pariNAma hai, jo cAritra mohanIya ke udaya se hotA hai
aura jisase kSamA, vinaya, saralatA, saMtoSa, gambhIratA Adi guNa pragaTa hone
nahIM pAte yA bahuta kama pramANa meM prakaTa hote haiN| (4) 'yoga', Atma-
pravezoM ke parispanda ( cAJcalya-j) ko kahate haiM, jo mana, vacana yA zarIra
ke yogya puvagloM ke Alambana se hotA hai  /  /  50  /  /  bandha-hetuoM ke
uttarameva tathA guNasthAnoM meM mUla bandha hetu'  /  [ do gAthAoM se  /  ]
abhighiymbhigmn| pacamiccha vAra avira, maNarakaNAniyama chajiyaho  // 51 //
abhigrahikamanAbhigrahikAmanivezika sAMzayikamanAbhogam  /  paJca mithyAtvati
dvAdazAviratayo, manaHkaraNAniyamaH SaDjIvabadhaH  //  35110 artha- mispAraNa ke
pazca bheva hai: -1 Abhigrahika, 2. anabhihika 3 Aminivezika 4. sAMzayika aura
anAzrota  /  avirati ke bAraha me hai  /  aMse:-mana aura pA~ca indriyoM, ina
ghara ko niyama meM na rakhanA, ye chaha sabhA pRthvIkAya Adi chaha kAryoM kA
vadha karanA, ye chaha 51 1 - yaha viSaya paJcasaMgraha dvA0 4 kI 2 se 4 taka kI
gAthAoM meM tathA gommaTamAra karmakANDa kI 786 se 788 taka kI gAthAoM meM hai
/  gommaTasAra meM midhyAtva ke 1 ekAnta, 2 viparIta 3 vainayika 4 sAMzayika
aura 5 ajJAna ye pA~ca prakAra haiM  /  avirati ke liye jovakANDa kI 26 tathA
477vIM gAyA aura kaSAya va yoga ke liye kramazaH usako kaSAya va yogamAgaMNA
dekhanI cAhiye  /  tasvArtha ke veM adhyAya ke 1le sUtra ke bhASya meM mithyAtva
ke abhigRhIta aura anamigRhIta, ye do hI bheda haiM  /

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Granth, Chapter 4: Four Types of False Beliefs  **1. Abhigrahika
Mithyatva:**  This is the false belief of favoring one doctrine without
examining its truth, and then rejecting other doctrines. (21)  **2. Anamihika
Mithyatva:** This is the false belief of considering all doctrines equal without
examining their truth. (13)  **3. Abhiniveshika Mithyatva:** This is the false
belief of clinging to a doctrine even after knowing its falsity. (4)
**Explanation:**  * A Samyaktva (perfectly enlightened being) never favors a
doctrine without examining it. Therefore, a person who examines a doctrine and
accepts it while rejecting others is not an Abhigrahika. * A person who claims
to be a Jain (Samyaktva) based on mere outward practices without examining the
truth is a "Jain" in name only, but in reality, an Abhigrahika Mithyatvi. * If
people who are unable to examine the truth themselves rely on a true teacher
(Geetaarth), they should not be considered Abhigrahika Mithyatvi, as relying on
a true teacher prevents the possibility of supporting false doctrines. (Dharma
Sangrah, p. 10)  **2. Anamihika Mithyatva:**  * This is found in people with
weak intellect who are unable to examine the truth. They often say that all
religions are equal.  **3. Abhiniveshika Mithyatva:**  * This is not a false
belief if someone's faith is reversed due to lack of understanding or a
misleading teacher. This is because their faith can be restored by meeting a
true teacher. * However, if someone continues to hold a false belief even after
meeting a true teacher, this is Abhiniveshika Mithyatva. * Although Acharya
Siddhasena Divakara, Acharya Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman, etc., have argued for
their respective doctrines, they cannot be called Abhiniveshika Mithyatvi. This
is because they supported their doctrines based on the unbroken tradition of the
scriptures, not out of bias. * On the other hand, Jamali Gosthamahila, etc.,
supported their doctrines even though they knew they were contrary to the
scriptures. Therefore, they are called Abhiniveshika. (Dharma, p. 40)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma grantha mAga cAra bhAvArtha 1) satvako parIkSA kiye binA hI kisI eka
siddhAnta kA pakSapAta karake anya pakSa kA lambana karanA 'abhivAhikamigyAe"
hai| (21 gaNa-doSa ko parIkSA binA kiye ho saba pakSoM ko marAbara samajhanA
'anAmihikAmayAtva hai |13apye pana ho masatya jAnakara bhI usakI sthApanA karane
ke liye durabhiniveSa (durAgraha) karanA AbhinivekSikamithyAtva' hai| (4 /  aisA
va hogA yA anya 1-.samyavasvI kadAgi aparIkSita siddhAnta kA pakSapAta nahIM
karatA ata eva jo vyakti tattva-parIkSApUrvaka kisI-eka pakSa ko mAnakara anya
pakSa kA khaNDana karatA hai| baha abhigrahika' nahIM hai  /  jo phUlAcAra mAna
se apane ko jaina (samyaktvI) mAnakara tattva kI parIkSA nahIM karatA, vaha nAma
se "jaina' parantu bastataH 'abhirA hikA mithyAtvI hai| bhASanuSa muni Adi kI
sAha tattva-parIkSA karane meM svayaM asamartha loga yadi gItAthaM (yathArtha-
parIkSaka) ke aAdhita hoM to unheM 'abhimahikamithyAtvI' nahIM samajhanA kyoMki
gItArtha yathArtha-parIkSaka) ke Azrita rahane se mithyA pakSapAla kA saMbhava
nahIM rhtaa| dharma saMgraha pR0 10 2-yaha. manda bumi vAle va parIkSA karane
meM asamartha sAdhAraNa logoM meM pAyA jAtA hai aise loga akasara kahA karate
haiM ki saba dharma barAbara hai 3-sirpha upayoga na rahane ke kAraNa yA mArga-
darzaka kI galatI ke kAraNa, jisakI zraddhA viparIta ho jAtI hai, yaha
'abhinivezikA mithyAcI' nahIM hai| kyoMki yathArtha-vaktA milane para umakA
zraddhA sAsvisa . bana jAtI hai, arthAt yathArtha-vaktA milane para bhI zraddhA
kA viparIta manA rahatAM durabhiniveza hai  /  yadyapi zrIsiddhasena divAkara,
zrIjinabhadragaNi kSamAzramaNa Adi AcAyoM ne apane-apane pakSa kA samarthana
karake bahatakucha kahA hai tathApi unheM 'AbhinivezikamizyAtvI' nahIM kaha
sate; kyoMki unhoMne avicchinna prAvanika paraMparA ke AdhAra para
zAstratAtparya ko apane-apane pakSa ke anukUla samajhakara apane-apane pakSa kA
samarthana kiyA hai, pakSapAta se nahIM  /  isake viparIta jamAli goSTAmAhila
Adi ne zAstra-tAtparya ko sva-pakSa ke pratikUla jAnate hue bhI nijapakSa kA
samarthana kiyA; isaliye ve 'Abhinivezika' kahe jAte haiN| dharma0, pR. 40  /

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four, Chapter 17  **Doubt and uncertainty about the nature
of Dharma, persisting as a burning question, is called "Saanshayikamidhyatva".
(5)** The absence of contemplation and special knowledge, meaning delusion in
its most profound state, is called "Agabhog Midhyatva".  Out of the five,
Abhigrik and Anamihik are the two major types of Midhyatva, while the remaining
three are minor. This is because the first two, not being forms of
misinterpretation, are the cause of intense suffering, while the remaining
three, being forms of misinterpretation, are not the cause of intense suffering.
**Allowing the mind to indulge in its objects without self-awareness is called
"Manavirat".** Similarly, one should understand the "Avirati" of the five
senses: skin, flesh, etc.  For earth-bodied beings, harming the earth is called
"Prithvika Avirati".  One should understand the "Avirati" of the remaining five
actions in the same way. These twelve "Aviratis" are the main ones. All other
"Aviratis", such as "Srisharvad-Avirati", "Adatt Dan-Avirati", etc., are
encompassed within these twelve.  **"Midhyatva" is primarily the ultimate
consequence of "Mohaniya Karma".** However, in this context, the external
tendencies like "Abhigrik" etc., arising from it, are called "Midhyatva". This
is not intended to differentiate between cause and effect, but rather to show
that "Avirati" is a type of...  **1. Subtle doubts are found even in the highest
order of saints, but they are not "Midhyatva" because ultimately...**  "**Samev
Sancham Nisaankam Jam Jirnohi Paveṣṭayam.**"  ...and such doubts are resolved by
accepting the scriptures as proof, based on this sentiment. Therefore, any doubt
that cannot be resolved by the authority of the scriptures is ultimately
"Midhyatva" because it leads to misconduct. - Dharma Sangraha, page...  **2.
This occurs in the smallest creatures, such as those with a single sense, and in
animals with a mouth. - Sansamprha, page...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 17 prakArakA aura dharma ke meM saMdeha-zola bane
rahanA 'sAMzayikamidhyAtva" hai  /  (5) vicAra va vizeSa jJAna kA abhAva arthAt
moha ko pragADhatama avasthA 'agAbhoga midhyAtva" hai  /  hama pA~ca meM se
abhigrahika aura anAmihika, ye do mithyAtva guru haiM aura zeSa tIna laghuH
kyoMki ye donoM viparyAsa rUpa na hone se tIvra kellAke kAraNa hai aura zeSa
tIna viparyAsa rUpa hone tIvra keldAke kAraNa nahIM haiN| mana ko apane viSaya
meM svaSTasyatApUrvaka pravRtti karane denA manaavirati hai| isI prakAra tvacA,
jilhA Adi pA~ca indriyoM kI avirati ko bhI samajha lenA cAhiye  /  pRthvI kAyika
jIvoM kI hisA karanA pRthvIkA avirati hai| zeSa pA~ca kAryoM kI avirati ko isI
prakAra samajha lenA caahiye| ye bAraha aviratiyA~ mukhya hai  /  sRSaravAda-
avirati adatta dAna- avirati Adi saba aviratiyoM kA samA veza ima bAraha meM hI
ho jAtA hai  /  " mithyAtva mohanIya karma kA audhika pariNAma hI mukhyatayA
mithyAtva kahalAtA hai  /  parantu isa jagaha usase hote bolI abhigrahika Adi
bAhya pravRttioM ko midhyAtva kahA hai so kArya-kAraNa ke bheda kI vivakSA na
karake isI taraha avirati eka prakAra kA kAthA 1- - sUkSma viSayoM kA saMzaya
ucca koTi ke sAdhuoM meM bhI pAyA jAtA hai, para vaha mithyAtvarUpa nahIM hai,
voMki antataH - "sameva saJcaM NIsaMkaM jaM jirNohi paveSTayaM  / " ityAdi
bhAvanA se Agama ko pramANa mAnakara aise saMzayoM kA nivartana kiyA jAtA hai|
isaliye jo saMzaya, Agama- prAmANya ke dvArA bhI nivRtta nahIM hotA, vaha
antataH anAcAra kA utpAdaka hone ke kAraNa mithyAtva rUpa haiM | - dharma
saMgraha pR 2- yaha ekendriya Adi kSudratama jantuoM meM aura mUha prANiyoM meM
zrasaMpraha, pR0 hotA hai|

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Four of the Karma Granth  **5** The result of karma is the fruit, but
in this context, *mano-asanyama* (lack of control over the mind) etc. are called
*avirati* (non-restraint), not considering the cause and effect as different. It
is seen that the lack of control over the mind etc., or *jova* (violence) etc.,
are all *kṣayās* (passions) themselves. ||51||  **178** There are nine and
sixteen *kṣayās* (passions), totaling twenty-five. There are fifteen *yogas*
(mental states). Thus, in total, there are fifty-seven *bandha-hetu* (causes of
bondage). ||52||  **Meaning:** There are nine and sixteen *kṣayās* (passions),
totaling twenty-five. There are fifteen *yogas* (mental states). Thus, in total,
there are fifty-seven *bandha-hetu* (causes of bondage).  In the first *guṇa-
sthāna* (stage of spiritual development), there is bondage due to all four
*hetu* (causes). In the second to fifth *guṇa-sthāna*, there is bondage due to
three *hetu*. In the sixth to eighth *guṇa-sthāna*, there is bondage due to five
*hetu*. And in the eleventh to thirteenth *guṇa-sthāna*, there is bondage due to
one *hetu*. ||52||  **Ananta-anubandha (Further Explanation):**  **Meaning:**
*Hāsya* (laughter) and *rati* (attachment) etc. are nine *noka-kṣayās* (minor
passions), and *kroṣa* (anger) etc. are sixteen *kṣayās* (passions), which have
been discussed in the previous *karma-granth*. *Hāsya* (laughter) etc. are
called *noka-kṣayās* because they are companions and stimulators of *kṣayās*
(passions), but they are *kṣayās* (passions) themselves.  The detailed
explanation of fifteen *yogas* (mental states) has already been given in the
24th verse. Twenty-five *kṣayās* (passions), fifteen *yogas* (mental states),
and the five *mithyātva* (false beliefs) and twelve *avirati* (non-restraints)
mentioned in the previous verse, all together make fifty-seven *bandha-hetu*
(causes of bondage).  **Mūla-bandha-hetu (Root Causes of Bondage) in Guṇa-sthāna
(Stages of Spiritual Development):**  At the time of the first *guṇa-sthāna*
(stage of spiritual development), all four *hetu* (causes) are present due to
*mithyātva* (false beliefs). Therefore, they are the causes of the *karma-vaśa*
(bondage to karma) that occurs at that time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 5 karmagrantha bhAga cAra pika pariNAma hI hai, parantu kAraNa se kArya ko
bhinna na mAnakara isa jagaha mano'saMyama Adi ko avirati kahA hai| dekhA jAtA
hai ki mana Adi kA asaMyama yA jova hiMsA ye saba kaSAya- anya hI haiM  /  51
//  178 nava sola kasAyA pana - ra joga isa uttarA u sagavannA  /  igacaupaNa
liMga, zesu cautidugapaJcao baMdho  /  /  52  /  /  nava SoDaza kazAyAH
paJcadaza yogA ityuttarAstu saptapaJcAzat  /  ekacatuSpaJcatriguNeSu catustri ho
kapratyayo bandhaH  // 42 //  P artha -- kaSAya ke nau aura solaha kula paccIsa
bheva haiN| yoga ke pandraha meva haiN| isa prakAra saba milAkara bandhahetuoM
ke uttara me sattAvana hote haiN| eka (pahale) guNasthAna meM cAroM hetuoM se
bandha hotA hai  /  dUsare se paciye taka cAra guNasthAnoM meM tIna hetuoM se
chaThe se vasaveM taka pA~ca guNasthAnoM meM vo hetuoM se aura gyArahaveM se
terahaveM taka tIna guNa sthAnoM meM eka hetu se bandha hotA hai ||52||
anantAnubandho bhAvArtha- hAsya, rati Adi nau nokalAya aura kroSa Adi solaha
kaSAya haiM, jo pahale karmagrantha meM kar3e jA cuke haiM  /  kavAya ke
sahacArI tathA uttejaka hone ke kAraNa hAsya Adi no kahalAte 'nokaSAya' haiM
para haiM ve kaSAya hI  /  pandraha yogoM kA vistArapUrvaka varNana pahile 24vI
gAthA meM ho cukA hai  /  pacIsa kaSAya, pandraha yoga aura pUrva gASA meM kahe
hue pA~ca midhyAtva tathA bAraha aviratiyAM, ye saba milAkara sattAvana
bandhahetu hue guNasthAnoM meM mUlabandha hetu  /  pahale guNasthAna ke samaya
midhyAtva Afa aAroM hetu pAye jAte isaliye usa samaya hone vAle karma vaSa meM
ve dhAroM kAraNa haiM  /

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four  **Chapter 4: Karmagranth**  **Verse 52:**  In the
first four Gunasthanas, all causes except Mithyatva are present. These are
considered the main causes of karma-bandha at that time. In the sixth and
subsequent five Gunasthanas, there is no Aviriti like Mithyatva. Therefore, only
Kshaya and Yoga are considered the causes of karma-bandha at that time. In the
eleventh and subsequent three Gunasthanas, there is no Kshaya, so only Yoga is
considered the cause of bandha at that time. In the fourteenth Gunasthana, Yoga
itself becomes inactive. Therefore, there is no cause of bandha at all.  **Verse
53:**  There are one hundred and twenty types of karmic substances. The causes
of their original bandha are as follows:  * **Seven Vedaniya:**  Bound by all
four causes (Mithyatva, Aviriti, Kshaya, and Yoga). * **Sixteen Naraka-Nikaya:**
Bound by Mithyatva alone. * **Twenty-five Tiryanch-Trika:** Bound by Mithyatva
and Aviriti. * **Sixty-five remaining:** Bound by Mithyatva, Aviriti, and Kshaya
(excluding Tirthankara and Adharaka).  **Meaning:**  The bandha of the seven
Vedaniya is caused by all four causes (Mithyatva, Aviriti, Kshaya, and Yoga).
The bandha of the sixteen Naraka-Nikaya is caused by Mithyatva alone. The bandha
of the twenty-five Tiryanch-Trika is caused by Mithyatva and Aviriti. The bandha
of the remaining sixty-five karmic substances (excluding Tirthankara and
Adharaka) is caused by Mithyatva, Aviriti, and Kshaya.  **Explanation:**  There
are one hundred and twenty karmic substances that are susceptible to bandha. The
seven Vedaniya are bound by all four causes, while the sixteen Naraka-Nikaya are
bound by Mithyatva alone. The twenty-five Tiryanch-Trika are bound by Mithyatva
and Aviriti, and the remaining sixty-five are bound by Mithyatva, Aviriti, and
Kshaya. This indicates that the intensity of bandha decreases as the number of
causes decreases.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagranya bhAga cAra dUsare mAvi cAra guNasthAnoM meM mithyAtyodaya ke sivAya
agya saba hetu rahate haiN| isase usa samaya hone vAle karmabandha meM sIna
kAraNa mAne jAte haiN| chaThe Adi pAMca guNasthAnoM meM mithyA rakha kI taraha
avi. rati bhI nahIM hai| isaliye usa samaya hone vAle karma:mandha meM kavAya
aura yoga, ye vo hI hetu mAne Ate haiN| gyArahaveM Adi tIna guNasthAnoM meM
kaSAya bhI nahI hotA, isa kAraNa usa samaya hone vAle bandha meM sirpha yoga hI
kAraNa mAnA jAtA hai| cauvahameM gaNasthAna meM yoga kA mI amAva ho jAtA hai|
ata eka usameM bandha kA eka bhI kAraNa nahIM rahatA  // 52 /  /  eka sau bIsa
prakRtiyoM ke yathAsaMbhava mUla bandha hetu'  /  caumichamicchaviraI,-paccaIyA
sAyasolapaNatIsA  /  joga viNu tirasvaIyA,-hAragajiNayajja sesAo  // 53 /  /
catumithyAmithyAviratipratyayakA sAtaSoDazapaJcaviMzataH  /  yogAn vinA
tripratyAyikA AhAravAjinavajazeSAH  /  / 5 /  /  artha-sAtavedanIyakA bandha
mithyAtva Adi cAroM hetuoM se hotA hai  /  naraka-nika Abi solaha prakRtiyoM kA
bandha miNyAsthamAtrase hotA hai| tiryaJca-trika Adi paMtIsa prakRtiyoM kA
bandha mithyAtva aura abirasi, ina do hetuoM se hotA hai  /  tIrthaGkara aura
AdhArakadvika ko chor3akara zeSa saba  /  jJAnAtha raNIya Adi paMsaTha)
prakRtiyoM kA bandha, miNyArava, acigati aura kaSAya, ina tIna hetuoM se hotA
hai  // 53 /  /  bhAvArtha-bandha-yogya prakRtiyA~ eka sau bIsa haiM  /  inameM
se sAtavedanIya kA badha caturhetuka (pAroM hetuoM se hone vaalaa| kahA gayA hai
/  so isa apekSA se ki vaha pahale guNasthAna meM mithyAtva se, vUsare Adi cAra
guNasthAnoM meM avirati se, chaThe Adi cAra guNasthAnoM meM 1-khiye, pariziSTa
pa  / '

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Granth: A Breakdown of Binding Causes  This section delves into the
causes of binding in the thirteen *gunasthana* (stages of existence). There are
four main causes:  * **Pāpa:** This refers to the negative karma accumulated
through actions, leading to binding in the first three *gunasthana*. * **Yoga:**
This refers to the positive karma accumulated through actions, leading to
binding in the remaining ten *gunasthana*.  Therefore, there are a total of four
causes for binding across all thirteen *gunasthana*.  **Binding due to
Mithyatva:**  The following sixteen types of beings are bound due to *mithyatva*
(false belief):  * **Naraka-trika:** Hell beings * **Jāti-matushka:** Animals *
**Sthāvara-chatuṣka:** Stationary beings (plants, etc.) * **Huṇḍa-saṁsthāna:**
Beings in the state of *huṇḍa* (a state of unconsciousness) * **Ātapa-nāma-
karma:** Karma related to suffering * **Sevāt-mahamāna:** Karma related to pride
* **Napuṣaka-vēra:** Karma related to anger * **Mithyātva:** False belief itself
These sixteen types are bound by *mithyatva* because they are considered to be
in the *mahā-leśyā* (grossest) state of existence.  **Binding due to Aviriti:**
The following thirty-five types of beings are bound due to *aviriti* (non-
restraint):  * **Tiyanjana-nika:**  Beings in the state of *tiyanjana* (a state
of subtle consciousness) * **Styāna-khi-trika:**  Beings in the state of
*styāna-khi* (a state of dull consciousness) * **Bubhang-trika:**  Beings in the
state of *bubhang* (a state of confused consciousness) * **Ananta-anubandhi-
chatuṣka:**  Beings in the state of *ananta-anubandhi* (a state of infinite
attachment) * **Madhyama-saṁsthāna-chatuṣka:**  Beings in the state of
*madhyama-saṁsthāna* (a state of moderate existence) * **Madhyama-saṁhanana-
chatuṣka:**  Beings in the state of *madhyama-saṁhanana* (a state of moderate
concentration) * **Nīcha-gotra:**  Beings of low lineage * **Ugrīta-nāma-
karma:**  Karma related to violence * **Aśubha-bihāyoga-ti:**  Beings with
unfavorable circumstances * **Strī-vēda:**  Beings with female characteristics *
**Varṣa-bhanāra-gha-saṁhanana:**  Beings with a strong attachment to the
material world * **Manuṣya-trika:**  Human beings * **A-pratyākhyāna-avara-ga-
chatuṣka:**  Beings who are unable to renounce worldly attachments * **Audārika-
dvīka:**  Beings with a strong desire for material possessions  These thirty-
five types are bound by *aviriti* because they are bound by *mithyatva* in the
first *gunasthana* and by *aviriti* in the subsequent *gunasthana*.  **Binding
due to Tri-hetu:**  The following sixty-five types of beings are bound due to
*tri-hetu* (three causes):  * **Sāta-vēdaniya:**  Beings who experience seven
types of suffering * **Naraka-trika:**  Hell beings * **Jāti-matushka:**
Animals * **Sthāvara-chatuṣka:**  Stationary beings (plants, etc.) * **Huṇḍa-
saṁsthāna:**  Beings in the state of *huṇḍa* (a state of unconsciousness) *
**Ātapa-nāma-karma:**  Karma related to suffering * **Sevāt-mahamāna:**  Karma
related to pride * **Napuṣaka-vēra:**  Karma related to anger * **Mithyātva:**
False belief itself * **Tiyanjana-nika:**  Beings in the state of *tiyanjana* (a
state of subtle consciousness) * **Styāna-khi-trika:**  Beings in the state of
*styāna-khi* (a state of dull consciousness) * **Bubhang-trika:**  Beings in the
state of *bubhang* (a state of confused consciousness) * **Ananta-anubandhi-
chatuṣka:**  Beings in the state of *ananta-anubandhi* (a state of infinite
attachment) * **Madhyama-saṁsthāna-chatuṣka:**  Beings in the state of
*madhyama-saṁsthāna* (a state of moderate existence) * **Madhyama-saṁhanana-
chatuṣka:**  Beings in the state of *madhyama-saṁhanana* (a state of moderate
concentration) * **Nīcha-gotra:**  Beings of low lineage * **Ugrīta-nāma-
karma:**  Karma related to violence * **Aśubha-bihāyoga-ti:**  Beings with
unfavorable circumstances * **Strī-vēda:**  Beings with female characteristics *
**Varṣa-bhanāra-gha-saṁhanana:**  Beings with a strong attachment to the
material world * **Manuṣya-trika:**  Human beings * **A-pratyākhyāna-avara-ga-
chatuṣka:**  Beings who are unable to renounce worldly attachments * **Audārika-
dvīka:**  Beings with a strong desire for material possessions * **Tīrthaṅkara-
nāma-karma:**  Karma related to being a *Tīrthaṅkara* (a Jain prophet) *
**Āhāraka-trika:**  Beings who are *āhāraka* (those who consume food)  These
sixty-five types are bound by *tri-hetu* because they are bound by *mithyatva*
in the first *gunasthana*, by *aviriti* in the next four *gunasthana*, and by
*kaṣāya* (passions) in the remaining four *gunasthana*.  **The Dominance of
Causes:**  While *mithyatva*, *aviriti*, and *kaṣāya* are all present in their
respective *gunasthana*, the dominant cause is the one that is most prominent in
that particular stage. Therefore, *mithyatva* is considered the primary cause of
binding in the first *gunasthana*, *aviriti* in the next four, and *kaṣāya* in
the remaining four.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma grantha bhAga gara pApa se aura gyArahavaM Adi tIna guNasthAnoM meM yoga
se hotA hai  /  isa taraha teraha guNasthAnoM meM usake saba milAkara cAra hetu
hote haiN| naraka-trika, jAti-matuSka, sthAyara-catuSka, huNDasaMsthAna,
AtapanAmapharma, sevAta mahamana, napusakavera aura mithyAtva, ina solaha
prajAtiyoM kA bandha mithyAtva-hetupha isaliye kahA gayA hai ki ye prakatimi
mahAle guNamAna meM gAMdhI jAnI haiN| tiyaMjana-nika styAnakhi-trika, bubhaMga-
trika, anantAnubandhicatuSka, madhyama saMsthAna-catuSka, madhyama saMhanana-
catuSka, nIcagotra, ugrItanAmapharma, azubhabihAyogati, strIveda,
varSabhanArAghasaMhanana, manuSyatrika, apratyAkhyAnAvaraga-catuSka aura
audArika-dvika, ina paisosa prakRtiyoM kA bampa binhetuka hai; kyoMki ye
prakRtiyo pahale guSasthAna meM mithyAtva se aura dUsare Adi yathAsaMbhava agale
guNasthAnoM meM avirati bAMdhI jAtI haiN| sAtavedanIya, naraka-trika Adi ukta
solaha, tiryaJca nika Avi ukta paiMtIsa tathA tIrthaGkara nAmakarma aura
AhAraka-tika, ina pacapana prakRtiyoM ko eka sau ghosa meM se ghaTA thene para
saha zeSa pacatI haiN| ina paisaTha prakRtiyoM kA bandha tri-hetupha isa apekSA
se samajhanA cAhiye ki yaha pahale guNasthAna meM mithyAsya se, dUsare Adi cAra
guNasthAnoM meM adhirati se aura cha Adi cAra guNasthAnoM meM kaSAgha se hotA
hai  /  yadyapi mithyAtva ke samaya ovarati Adi agale tIna hetu, adhirati ke
samaya kaSAya Avi agale do hetu aura kaSAba ke samaya ghogarUpa hetu avazya pAyA
jAtA hai  /  tathApi pahale gaNasyAna meM mithyAtvakI, dUsare Adi cAra
gagasthAnoM meM adhiratiko aura chaThe Adi cAra gaNasthAnoM meM kaSAya kI
pradhAnatA tathA anya heluoM ko apradhAnatA hai| isa kAraNa ina ga sthAnoM meM
kramazaH kevala mithyAtva, avirati ba kavAya ko bandha-hetu kahA hai|

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **181** In this place, the cause of the bondage of
Tirthankara-nama karma is only Samyak-tva, and the cause of the bondage of
Aharak-dvik is only Samyama, which is intended. Therefore, these three natures
are not counted among the Kashaya-hesauk natures. ||53||  **General and Specific
Description of Uttar Bandha-Hetus in Gunasthanas** [From five verses] Pan-panna
pan tiyachhi-achatt gan-chatt ch-chaud-gavi-sa. Sollas bas nav nav sa,-tt he-uno
na u ajogimi. ||54||  **1.** In the 16th verse of the 4th door of Panchasangrah-
dwar, "Sesa u phasae-ti." From this verse, Tirthankara-nama karma and Aharak-
dvik, these three natures are considered Kashaya-hetuk, and in the 20th Maya of
Agaji, Samyav is said to be the special Hetu of Tirthankara-nama karma and
Samyama is said to be the special Hetu of Aharak-dvik. In the Sarvarthasiddhi of
the 1st Sutra of Tatvartha-A. also, these three natures are considered Kashaya-
hetuk. But Shri Devendrasuri has not called the bondage of these three natures
Kashaya-hetuk. His intention seems to be only to show the special Hetu, not the
prohibition of Kashaya, because the causality of Yoga in the nature and Pradesh-
bandha of all karma, and the causality of Kashaya in the state and Anubhag-
bandha is established beyond doubt. Special consideration of this is worth
seeing in the Thimlayagiri-tika of the 2nd verse of Panchasangrah-dwar.  **2.**
This topic is in the 5th verse of the 4th door of Panchasangrah-dwar, and in the
786th and 760th verses of Gommatsar Karmakanda.  **Uttar Bandha Hetu** has two
divisions: general and specific. The Bandha-Hetu found simultaneously in all
beings present in a particular Gunasthana is called 'general', and the Bandha-
Hetu found simultaneously in one being is called 'specific'. In the 77th verse
of the ancient fourth Karmagrantha, and in this place, there is a description of
the general Uttar Bandha-Hetu. But in Panchasangrah and Gommatsar, there is a
description of both types of Bandha-Hetus: general and specific. In the tika of
Panchasangrah, this difference is explained very clearly. The description of the
specific Uttar Bandha-Hetu is very detailed and profound.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 181 isa jagaha tIrtharanAmakarma ke bandha kA kAraNa
sirpha samyaktana aura mAhAraka-dvika ke bandha kA kAraNa sirpha saMyama
vivakSita hai| isaliye ina tIna prakRtiyoM kI gaNanA kaSAya-hesuka prakRtiyoM se
nahIM kI hai  // 53 //  guNasthAnoM meM uttara bandha-hetuoM kA sAmAnya tathA
vizeSa varNana'  /  [ pA~ca gAthAoM se ] paNapanna pana tiyachahi-acatta
gaNacatta chacaudgavIsA  /  solasa basa nava nava sa,-tta heuNo na u ajogimi  //
54 //  1-paJcasaMgraha-dvAra 4 kI 16vIM gAthA meM sesA u phsaaettiN|" isa pada
se tIrthaGkaranAmakarma aura AhAraka-dika, ina tIna prakRtiyoM ko kaSAya-hetuka
mAnA hai tathA agAjI kI 20vI mAyA meM samyAva ko tIrtha TAranAmakarma kA aura
saMyama kA AhAraka-dvika kA vizeSa hetu kahA hai| tatvArtha-a0 haveM ke 1 le
sUtra kI sarvArthasiddhi meM bhI Ina tIna prakRtiyoM ko karAya-hettaka mAnA hai|
parantu zrIdevendrasUri ne ina tIna prakRtiyoM ke bandha' ko kaSAya-hataka nahIM
kahA  /  usakA tAtparya sirpha vizeSa hetu dikhAne kA jAna par3atA hai, kaSAya
ke niSedha kA nahIM kyoMki saba karma ke prakRti aura pradeza-bandha meM yoga kI
tathA sthiti aura anubhAga-bandha meM kaSAya kI kAraNatA nivibAda siddha hai|
isakA vizeSa vicAra, paJcasaMgraha-dvAra kI 2.vI gAthA kI thImalayagiri-TIkA meM
dekhane yogya hai| 2-yaha viSaya, paJcasaMgraha-dvAra 4 kI 5vIM gAthA meM tathA
gommaTamAra karmakANDa kI 786 ora 760vI gAthA meM haiN| uttara bandha hetu. ke
sAmAnya aura vizeSa, ye do bheda haiM  /  kisI eka guNasthAna meM vartamAna
saMpUrNa jIvoM meM yugapat pAye jAne vAle banna-heta. 'sAmAnya' aura eka jIva
meM yugapata pAye jAne vAle bandha-heta 'vizeSa' kahalAte hai  /  prAcIna
caturtha karmagrantha kI 77vI gAthA meM aura isa jagaha sAmAnya-uttara bandha-
heta kA varNana hai| parantu pandhasaMgraha aura gommaTasAra meM sAmAnya aura
vizeSa, donoM prakAra ke bandha-hetuoM kA  /  paJcasaMgraha kI TIkA meM yaha
viSama bahuta spaSTatA se rAmajhAyA hai  /  vizeSa uttara bandha-heta kA varNana
ati vistRta aura gambhIra hai  /

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Four of the Karma Granth - 55, 50, 43, 46, 49, 22, 16, 10, 9, 9, 7
**Verse 54:**  There are 55 mantra-hetu in the first guna-sthana, 50 in the
second, 43 in the third, 46 in the fourth, 49 in the fifth, 22 in the sixth, 16
in the seventh, 10 in the eighth and ninth, and 7 in the tenth. There are no
bandha-hetu in the eleventh and twelfth guna-sthana.  **Verse 55:**  In the
Misha-ashti gana-sthana, there are 55 bandha-hetu, excluding the aharaka-haka.
In the Saksha-avana gana-sthana, there are 50 bandha-hetu, excluding the five
mithyatva. In the Misha-du-ga gana-sthana, there are...  **Verse 56:**
...excluding the a-vi-ra-ti-ka-ma-u-da-ri-ka-mi-ya, a-ni-mi-shra, ...  **Verse
57:**  ...excluding the a-vi-ra-ti-ka-ma-u-da-ri-ka-mi-ya, a-ni-mi-shra, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 182 karmagrantha bhAga cAra - paJcapaJcAzat paJcAzat trivAdhika catvArimAdekona
catvAriMzat SaTcatu viviNshtiH| SoDaza daza nava nava sapta hetavo natvayogini
/  /  54  //  artha-pahale guNasthAna meM pacapana mantra-hetu haiM, dUsare meM
pacAsa, tIsare meM tetAlIsa, cauthe meM chayAlIsa, pAMcave meM untAlIsa, chaThe
meM sambosa, sAtave meM caumAsa, bhaya meM bAIza meM meM solaha, basana meM
vasa, gyArahaveM aura bArahaveM meM nau tathA serahaveM meM sAta bandha-hetu
haiM, cauvaha ma gasthAna meM bandha hetu nahIM haiM  /  / 54 /  /  paNapanna
micchi hAraga,-dugUNa sAsANi panamiccha viNA  /  missadugakamaaNaviNu, ticata
mose aha chamattA  /  / 55 //  savRmissakama ajae, aviraikammuralamIsavikasAye
/  bhuttuguNacata bese, chapIsa sAhara pamatta  // 56 //
aviraiigAratikasA,-yavajja apamati mIsadugarahiyA  /  cauvIsa apuTave puNa,
duvIsa aviuviyAhArA  // 57 /  /  paJcapaJcAzanmithyAtva AhArakaddhi konAH
sAsAdane padamithyAtvAni vinA  /  midvikakAmagA'nAvinA, tricatyArimAnmizrejya
SaTcatvAriMzat  // 55 //  sadvimitrakarmA ayate'viratikamaudAri kamiyIdvatIya
kapAyAn  /  muktva konacatvAriNaddeze, padizatiH sAhAradikA: pramase  // 56 //
aviratyekAdazakatRtIya kaSAyavarjA apramate mizradvikarahitA  /  caturvizatira
pUrva punaHkiMzatirakriyAhArAH  // 57. arya-miSyASTigaNasthAna meM AhAraka-haka
ko chor3akara pacapana bandha-hetu haiM  /  sAkSAvanagaNasthAna meM pAMca
migyAtva ke sivAya pacAsa samdha-hetu haiM  /  miSTiga NasthAna meM
auvArikamiya, aniyamizra,

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Maag Four  There are forty-three **bandha-hetu** (causes of
bondage) excluding the four **karman** (karmic actions), **anantaanubandhi**
(infinitely connected), and the **chaturshka** (four).  **183**  1. In the
**Aviratasamyadrishti** (unwavering perception) **gunasthan** (stage of
spiritual development), there are forty-six **bandha-hetu** in total, including
the aforementioned forty-three, **karman**, **auvarikamitra** (friend of the
world), and **vaikriyamishra** (mixed with the world).  In the **Deshaviriti**
(renunciation of worldly attachments) **gunasthan**, there are forty-one
**bandha-hetu** excluding the seven: **karman**, **auvarikamishra**, **tras**
(fear), **avirati** (non-renunciation), and the **apratyakhyanavaran-
chaturshka** (fourfold veil of non-rejection).  In the **Pramattasanyata**
(controlled by the senses) **gunasthan**, there are twenty-six **bandha-hetu**
excluding the fifteen: eleven **avirati**, **varan** (choice), and the **tuka**
(two).  -  **Pratyarupaana**  In the **Aparammatasanyata** (uncontrolled by the
senses) **gunasthan**, there are twenty-four **bandha-hetu** excluding the two
**mishra** (mixed) **vika** (types of karmic actions): **vaiktiy-mishra**
(individual mixed) and **aaharaka-mishra** (food mixed).  In the
**Apuurvakaran** (unprepared) **gunasthan**, there are twenty-two **bandha-
hetu** excluding the two **kayayoga** (body-related actions): **vaiktiy-
kayayoga** (individual body-related) and **aaharaka-kayayoga** (food body-
related).  **55** || **26** || **57**  **Maavarth** - In the 51st and 52nd
**gatha** (verses), fifty-seven **bandha-hetu** are mentioned. Out of these,
fifty-five **bandha-hetu** are found in the first **gunasthan** excluding the
two **aaharaka-dwika** (two food-related). The **aaharaka-dwika** are related to
**samyama** (self-control), which is absent in this **gunasthan**.  The absence
of **samyama** in this **gunasthan** is the reason for the absence of
**aaharaka-dwika**.  In the second **gunasthan**, all five **mithyatva** (false
beliefs) are absent. Therefore, fifty **bandha-hetu** are mentioned excluding
them.  In the third **gunasthan**, **anantaanubandhi** are absent because their
emergence is limited to the second **gunasthan**. Also, due to the absence of
death in this **gunasthan**, the three **yoga** (actions): **aavartika-mishra**,
**vaikriyamishra**, and **aavartika-mishra** are also absent. Thus, in the third
**gunasthan**, seven **bandha-hetu** are reduced, leaving forty-three **bandha-
hetu** out of the aforementioned fifty.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha mAga cAra kArmaNa aura anantAnubandhi catuSka, ina sAta ko
chor3akara tetAlIsa badha- hetu hai  /  183 1 aviratasamya dRSTiguNasthAna meM
pUrvokta tetAlIsa tathA kArmaNa, auvArikamitra aura vekriyamizra ye soma, kula
chyAlIsa bandha-hetu hai  /  dezaviratiguNa sthAna meM kArmaNa, auvArikamizra,
trasa avirati aura apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa-catuSka ina sAta ke sivAya zeSa uttAlIsa
bamdha hetu haiM  /  pramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM gyAraha aviratiyAM, varaNa-
tuka, ina pandraha ko chor3akara ukta untAlIsa meM se caubIsa tathA AhAraka-
dvika, kula chabIsa bazba hetu haiM - pratyArUpAnA apramatta saMyataguNasthAna
meM pUrvokta chajosa meM se mizra vika (vaiktiya mizra aura AhArakamizra) ke
sivAya zeSa caubbIsa bandha hetu haiM  /  apUrvakaraNaguNasthAna meM
vaikiyakAyayoga aura AhArakakAyayoga ko chor3akara bAIsa hetu hai  /  /  55||
||26|| ||57|| mAvArtha - 51 aura 52vIM gAthA meM sattAvana uttara bandha hetu
kahe gaye haiN| inameM se AhAraka- dvikake sivAya zeSa pacapana bandhahetu
pahale guNasthAna meM pAye jAte haiM  /  AhAraka-dvika saMyama-sApekSa hai aura
isa guNasthAna meM saMyama nahIM hotA  /  kA abhAva hai, isaliye isameM AhAraka-
dvi ka dUsare guNasthAna meM pAMcoM midhyAtva nahIM haiM. isI se unako
chor3akara zeSa pacAsa hetu kahe gaye haiN| tIsare gRNasthAna meM
anantAnubandhiagoka nahIM hai, kyoMki usakA udaya dUsare guNasthAna taka hI hai
tathA isa guNasthAna ke samaya mRtyu na hone ke kAraNa aparyApta avasthA bhAvI
phArmaNa, audArikamizra aura vaikriyamizra, ye tIna yoga bhI nahIM hote  /  isa
prakAra tIsare guNasthAna meM sAta bandha-hetu ghaTa jAne se ukta pacAsa meM se
zeSa tetAlIsa hetu haiM  /

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Path of Karma Granth: Four Stages  **Stage Four**  In the fourth stage,
even with insufficient restraint, there is still the possibility of committing
sins. Therefore, this stage encompasses three types of karma: **karmaṇ**,
**audārikamitra**, and **vaikriya**. These three, along with the six **loṣa**
(faults) related to the third stage, make a total of forty-six **bandha-hetu**
(causes of bondage) in the fourth stage. The **apratyāstānavaraṇa** (covering of
non-restraint) remains present in this stage, but it does not increase further.
Therefore, it is not found in the fourth stage.  The fifth stage is
characterized by **deśavirati** (restraint from the world), which includes **sa-
hiṁsā** (violence) and **patrasa-adhirati** (attachment to material
possessions). This stage is marked by sufficient restraint. Therefore, the two
types of karma, **karmaṇ** and **audārikamitra**, are not present in this stage.
Thus, out of the forty-six **bandha-hetu** related to the fourth stage, seven
are not present in the fifth stage. The remaining thirty-nine **bandha-hetu**
are present in the fifth stage. These thirty-nine include the **paṁśa-miśra-
kāya-yoga** (mixed body karma), but it is not present in the stage of
insufficient restraint. It is **kriyālabdhi-janya** (arising from action), which
occurs only in the stage of sufficient restraint.  At the time of the fifth
stage, **sankalpa-anya-sa-hiṁsā** (intentional violence) is not possible.
**Ārambha-janya-asa-hiṁsā** (unintentional violence) is possible, but it is very
rare. Therefore, the thirty-nine **bandha-hetu** do not include **vasa-avirasi**
(non-restraint from attachment to the world) because it is extremely rare.
**Stage Six**  The sixth stage is characterized by **sarvavirati** (complete
restraint). Therefore, the remaining eleven **avirati** (non-restraints) are not
present in this stage. The **pratyākhyānavaraṇa-kaṣāya-asuṣka** (dry covering of
non-restraint) is also not present in this stage, as it remains present only
until the fifth stage.  Thus, out of the forty-six **bandha-hetu** related to
the fifth stage, fifteen are not present in the sixth stage, leaving twenty-
four. These twenty-four, along with the two **āhārak-dvi** (two types of food)
and the four **ful** (types of food), make a total of twenty-six **bandha-hetu**
in the sixth stage.  In this stage, the four **muni** (ascetics) maintain their
**āhārak-śarīra** (food body) through the use of **caturdaśa-pūva** (fourteen
types of food). Therefore, the twenty-six **bandha-hetu** include **āhārak-vik**
(food-related karma).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 J karmagrantha mArga cAra 1 cauthA guNasthAna aparyApta vyavasthA meM bhI pApA
jAtA hai; isaliye isameM aparyApta avasthA bhAvI kArmaNa, audArikamidha aura
vaikriya mizra chana tona yogoM kA samma hai| tIsare guNasthAna sambandhI tA
losa aura ye tIna yoga kula chayAlIsa bandha-hetu cauthe guNasthAna meM
samajhane cAhiye  /  apratyAsthAnAvaraNa- catuSyA sauthe ho udayamAna rahatA
hai, Age nahIM  /  isa kAraNa vaha maiM nahIM pAyA jAtA  /  paciNAM guNasthAna
dezavirati rUpa sa- hiMsA patrasa- adhirati nahIM hai tathA yaha guNasthAna
paryApta avasthA bhAvI hai| isa kAraNa 184 guNasthAna taka pAMcaveM guNasthAna
hone se isameM kela bhAvI kArmaNa aura audArika mizra, ye do yoga bhI nahIM
hote| isa taraha cauthe guNasthAna sambandhI dapAlIsa hetuoM meM se ukta sAta ke
sivAya zeva dammAlosa bandha hetu pani guNasthAna meM haiM  /  ima umtAlIsa
hesuoM meM caiki pamizra kAyayoga zAmila hai, para vaha aparyApta avasthA bhAvI
nahIM, kintu kriyalabdhi janya jo paryApta avasthA meM hI hotA hai  /  pA~ca
sthAna ke samaya saMkalpa- anya sa-hiMsA kA sambhava ho nahIM hai  /  Arambha-
janya asa hiMsA kA saMbhava hai sahI, para bahuta kama isa liye Arambha janya
ati alpa asa hiMsA kI vivakSA na karake unhAlIma hetuoM meM vasa-avirasi kI
gaNanA nahIM kI hai| - chaThA guNasthAna sarvaviratirUpa hai| isaliye isameM
zeSa gyAraha aviratiyA~ nahIM hotii| isameM pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya asuSka,
jisakA udaya pA~coM guNasthAna paryanta hI rahatA hai, nahIM hotaa| isa taraha
pAMcaveM gaNasthAna-sambandhI uttAnosa hetukoM meM se pandraha ghaTA bene para
roja caubosa rahate haiN| ye caubIsa tathA AhAraka-dvi pha, phula chabbIsa hetu
chaThe guNasthAna meM haiN| isa guNasthAna meM caturdazapUvaM cAro muni
AhArakalabdhi ke prayoga dvArA zrAhArakazarIra rakhate haiM isase chabIsa hetuoM
meM AhAraka-vika parigaNita hai  /

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Part Four of the Permanent Text ## 55  At the time of the beginning and end
of the *vaikriya* body, there is *vaikriya* yoga, and at the time of the
beginning and end of the *aharya* body, there is *aharya* yoga. However, at that
time, due to the presence of *prabhas* (radiance), the seventh *guna* (quality)
is not present. Therefore, these two yogas are not included in the fifteen
causes of this *guna* (quality) state.  *Vaikriya* yoga occurs for those with a
*vaikriya* body, and *aharya* yoga occurs for those with an *aharya* body. These
two bodies are only eligible for the seventh *guna* (quality) and not for any
further *guna* (quality) states. Therefore, these two yogas are not included in
the *bandha* (bondage) and *moksha* (liberation) of the *pala* (stage) *guna*
(quality) states. ||55, 56, 57||  ## 28  *Maccha* (fish) has sixteen *ayari*
(causes), *suhma* (subtle) has ten *dheya* (objects) and *sanjvalana*
(agitation). *Vinu* (without) *vasati* (dwelling) *praloba* (temptation),
*sajogi* (with *yoga*) *pushpa* (flower) *sagyoga* (with *yoga*).  ## 18
*Apahaga* (destruction) has sixteen *badara* (causes), *suksma* (subtle) has ten
*bera* (causes) and *sanjvalana* (agitation) etc. *Kshina* (diminished)
*upashanta* (calm) *aloba* (without greed), *sayogi* (with *yoga*) *purvokta*
(previously mentioned) *sasayoga* (with *yoga*).  ## Meaning  In the *anivrutti*
(non-return) *samparaya* (state) *guna* (quality) state, there are sixteen
causes, excluding *hasya* (laughter) *padaka* (mark). In the *suksma* (subtle)
*samparaya* (state) *guna* (quality) state, there are ten causes, excluding the
three *vedas* (knowledge) and three *sanvyasana* (attachments) (including *loma*
(hair)). In the *upashanta* (calm) *moha* (delusion) and *kshina* (diminished)
*moha* (delusion) *guna* (quality) states, there are ten causes, excluding
*sanjvalana* (agitation) *lobha* (greed). In the *sayogi* (with *yoga*) *kevali*
(liberated) *guna* (quality) state, there are ten causes, all of which are
*yoga* (union) forms.  ## Meaning  The emergence of *hasya* (laughter) *padaka*
(mark) does not occur in the *guna* (quality) states from the eighth onwards.
Therefore, it should be understood that the remaining sixteen causes are present
in the eighth *guna* (quality) state, excluding *hasya* (laughter) *padaka*
(mark). The three *vedas* (knowledge) and *sanjvalana* (agitation) - *krodha*
(anger), *mana* (pride), and *maya* (illusion) - these six emerge only up to the
ninth *guna* (quality) state. Therefore, the remaining ten causes are mentioned
in the tenth *guna* (quality) state, excluding these six.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 parmagrantha bhAga cAra 55 kriyazarIrake prArambha aura parityAgake samaya
vaikriyamibha tathA mAhArakazarIrake bhArambha aura parityAgake samaya
mAhArakamibha-yoga hotA hai, para usa samaya prabhasa-bhAva hone ke kAraNa
sAtavAM guNavAna nahIM hotaa| isa kAraNa isa guNasthAnake pandha hetubhoMmeM ye
do yoga nahIM gine gaye haiN| vaiphriyazarIrabAleko vaikiyakAyayoga aura
AhArakazarIrapAleko mAhArakakAyayoga hotA hai| ye do zarIravAle adhikase adhika
sAtaveM guNavAnake hI adhikArI hai| Ageke guNasthAnoMke nhiiN| isa kAraNa pALace
guNasthAnake bandha-tumomeM ina do yogoMko nahIM ginA hai  // 55, 56, 57 //
machahAsa sola yAyari, suhame dasa dheyasaMjalaNati vissaa| vINuvasati pralobhA,
sajogi puSbusa sagajogA  // 28 //  apahAgaH poDaza bAdare, sUkme daza
berasaMjvalananikAdinA  /  kSINopazAnte'lobhAH, sayogini pUrvoktAssasayogAH  //
18 //  arthaanivRsithArarasaMparAyagusthAna meM hAsya paTakake sivAya pUrvoka
vAIsamese zeSa solaha hetu hai| sUkSmasaMparAyaguNayAmameM tImaveda aura tIna
saMvyasana (lomako mer3akara)ke sivAya isa hetu hai| upazAntamoha tathA
kSINamoha-gusthAnoM meM saMjvakhamalobhake sivAya mI hetu tathA
sayogikevalIguNasAnamai sAsa hetu hai jo sabhI pogarUpa haiN| _ bhAvArtha-hAsya-
padakakA udaya AThavese bhAgeke guNasthAnoM meM nahIM hotA; isaliye use
chor3akara AThave guNasthAnake vAsi tuoMmeM se zeSa solaha detu bhauce
guNasthAnameM samajhane caahiye| .. tIna veda tathA saMjvalana-krodha, mAna aura
mAyA, ina chahakA udaya naudhai guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai, isa kAraNa inheM
chor3akara zeSa dasa hetu dasa guNahAnamai kahe gaye haiN|

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagranth - Part Four  The arising of the tenfold lobha (greed) remains only
up to the tenth gunasthan. Apart from this, the remaining nine hetu (causes) are
found in the eleventh and twelfth gunasthan. These nine hetu are:  - Bar Manoyog
(intense mental attachment) - Khar Bachan yog (harsh speech) - Audarik Kayayog
(generous bodily actions)  In the thirteenth gunasthan, there are seven hetu: -
Sasy and Asatyamushmanoyog (attachment to truth and falsehood) - Saty and
Asatyamrushchanayog (speech of truth and falsehood) - Audarik Kayayog (generous
bodily actions) - Dhaudarik Miakafyog (generous mental actions) - Karman Kayayog
(actions based on karma)  In the fourteenth gunasthan, there is no amaya
(impurity) of yog (spiritual practice), therefore there is no bandha-hetu (cause
of bondage) at all. || 5 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha-bhAga cAra saMjvalanalobhakA udaya dasaveM guNavAna taka hI rahatA
rakhaliye isake sivAya uka vasameMse zeSa nau hetu gyArahave tathA bAraha
guNasthAnamai pAye jAte haiN| nau hetu ye haiM: bAra manoyoga, khAra bacanayoga
aura eka audaariphkaayyog| merahavaM guNasthAna meM sAta hetu hai:-sasya aura
asatyAmuSamanoyoga, satya aura asatyAmRSaSacanayoga, audArikakAyayoga,
dhaudArikamiakAphyoga tathA kArmaNakAyayoga ! caudahavaM guNasthAna meM yogakA
amAya hai isaliye isameM bandha-hetu sarvathA nahIM hai || 5  //

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Maag Chaar (6)  **(6)** - In the Gunasthanas, it is bound.
Apamasanta, Satt-Hamisapushvadhayara Satt. Pandhai Passuhuomo E, - Mutharima
Pandhagajogee. ||6||  **(5)** - Mpramachamsarasaptaastan,
Miabhapurvabadharasapta. Babhati Shat Cha Sukshma Ekamuparivana Abandhko'ayogi.
||5||  **Meaning:** - Until the Aprammatta Gunavan, the binding of the eight
Maath Prakruti Dhokas occurs. In the Mishra, Apurshkarana and Anivriti Vadar-
Gulkhana, all eight Prakrutis are bound, in the Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan, six
Prakrutis are bound, and in the Upshanta Moh etc. three Gunasthanas, one
Prakruti is bound. In the Ayogikevali Gunasthan, there is no binding.
**Bhavarth:** - Except for the third, from the first to the seventh, the seven
Mula Karma Prakrutis are bound in the six Gunavans. At the time of binding Aayu,
one should understand the binding of eight, and at the time of not binding, the
binding of seven.  In the third, eighth and ninth Gunasthanas, due to the non-
binding of Aayu, only the binding of seven occurs. In the eighth and ninth
Gunasthanas, the Parinamas become so subtle that they no longer have the
capacity to bind Aayu. And the nature of the third Gunasthan is such that Aayu
is not bound in it.  In the tenth Gunasthan, due to the non-binding of Aayu and
Mohaniya, the binding of one is considered. Due to the Parinamas becoming very
subtle, Aayu...  ...  ...  ...  Here, the subject matter up to this verse is
found in the Panchasangrah, 53 Bharti 2, 3rd and 5th verses.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha mAga cAra (6)-guNasthAnoMmeM bancha  /  apamasaMtA satta-
hamIsaapuSvadhAyarA satta  /  paMdhai passuhumo e,-mutharimA paMdhagAjogI  // 6
//  mapramacAmsArasaptASTAn mibhApUrvabAdarAsapta  /  babhAti SaT ca sUkSma
ekamuparivanA abandhako'yogI  // 5 //  artha-apramattaguNavAna paryanta sAsa yA
mATha prakRtidhokA bandha hotA hai| mizra, apUrSakaraNa aura anivRttivAdara-
gulakhAnameM sArA prakRsinokA, sUkSmasaMparAyaguNasthAnameM chaha prakRtiaukA
aura upazAntamoha Adi tIna guNasAnoMmeM eka prakRtikA pandha hotA hai|
ayogikevalIguNasthAnameM bandha nahIM hotA MER _ bhAvArtha-tIsareke sivAya
pahilese lekara sAta takake chaha guNavAnoMmeM mula karmaprakRtiyA~ sAta yA
bhATha bA~dhI jAtI hai| Ayu bA~dhane ke samaya pAThakA aura use na bA~dhaneke
samaya sAtakA pandha samajhanA caahiye| tIsare, pAThaye aura nau guNasvAmameM
mAyukA bandha na honeke kAraNa sAtakA hI bandha hotA hai| pAThaghe aura nauve
guNasthAnameM pariNAma itane adhika vizubha ho jAte haiM ki jisase unameM pAyu.
bandha-yogya pariNAma hI nahI rahate aura tIsare gusthAnakA khabhAva hI aisA hai
ki usameM pAyukA pandha nahIM hotaa| dasaveM guNavAnameM bhAyu aura mohanIyakA
bamdha na hone ke kAraNa pahakA bandha mAnA jAtA hai| pariNAma prasivirAddha ho
jAmese Ayu. .... - - - -yahA me daravI gAthA takakA viSaya, paJcasaMgrahake 53
bhAratI 2, 3rI aura 5vaM. gApAmai  /

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagranya Bhaga Par The bondage of the Moheeya is prohibited in it because
there is no bondage and Badarakpayokya. ... In the eleventh and subsequent three
Gunasthanas, only the bondage of the Satavedaniya occurs. Because in them, there
is no Kavayoday at all, so the bondage of other natures is impossible. In
summary, in the third, eighth, and ninth Gunasthanas, there is the bondage of
the Satka: in the first, second, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Gunasthanas,
there is the bondage of the Satka and the Pratka Andhasthan: in this, there is
the bondage of the Shaka, and in the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth
Gunasthanas, there is the bondage of the Eka. ||6|| 1-15 Vimar, Nandombaki's
also the Gathako Srimalayagirimshik 41 has passed on.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagranya bhAga pAra kA bandha aura bAdarakapAyokya na honese mohanIyakA
bandha usameM varjita hai| ... gyArahaveM Adi tIna guNasthAnoM meM kevala
sAtavedanIyakA bandha hotA hai| kyoMki unameM kavAyodaya sarvathA na honese anya
prakRtikA bandha asaMbhava hai| sArAMza yaha hai ki tIsare, AThaveM aura nau
guNasthAnameM sAtakA ho pandhakhAna: pahale, dUsare, cauthe, pA~ca, chaThe aura
sAtaveM guNavAmameM sAtakA tathA 'prATakA andhasthAna: isameM chahakA
bandhasmAna aura gyArahaveM, bArahaveM aura teraharSe guNapAnameM ekakA
bandhasthAna hotA hai  // 6 //  1-15 vimAra, nandomabakI bhI gAthAko
zrImalayagiriMsika 41ne pasapara hai|

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eight Karmas: Their Existence and Arising  **-** In the first seven to
eight Gunasthanas, there is the existence and arising of eight Karmas. In the
Kshama-moha Gunasthana, both existence and arising are of seven Karmas. In the
Sayogika-cheli and Prayogika-pheli Gunasthanas, both existence and arising are
of four Karmas. In the Upasanta-moha Gunasthana, the existence is of eight
Karmas and the arising is of seven Karmas.  **Meaning:**  Up to the subtle-
sambara-guna-sthana, there is the existence and arising of eight Karmas. In the
Kshama-moha Gunasthana, both existence and arising are of seven Karmas. In the
Sayogika-cheli and Prayogika-pheli Gunasthanas, both existence and arising are
of four Karmas. In the Upasanta-moha Gunasthana, the existence is of eight
Karmas and the arising is of seven Karmas.  **Explanation:** In the first ten
Gunasthanas, the eight Karmas are found in both their existence and arising
states. In the eleventh Gunasthana, the Mohaniya Karma remains in its existence
state but does not arise, therefore, the existence is of eight Karmas and the
arising is of seven Karmas. In the Para Gunasthana, the Mohaniya Karma is
completely destroyed, therefore, both existence and arising are of seven Karmas.
In the twelfth and thirteenth Gunasthanas, only four Karmas exist and arise.
**Summary:** The existence of Karmas is eight in the first eleven Gunasthanas,
seven in the twelfth, and four in the thirteenth and fourteenth. The arising of
Karmas is eight in the first ten Gunasthanas, seven in the eleventh and Para,
and four in the thirteenth and fourteenth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagranya bhAga pAra - (7-8)-guNasthAnoMmeM sattA tathA udaya  /  mAsuhamaM
saMtudaye, aTTa vi moha viNu satsa svImi  /  ghau carimaduge aTTha u, saMte
upasaMti sattudae  // 60 //  mAma sadudaye'STApi moI vinA sapta vINe  /  catvAri
caramadrike'STa tu, satyupazAnte satodaye  // 6 //  artha-
sUkSmasaMparAyaguNasthAna paryanta ATha karmakI sattA tathA bhAsa karmakA udaya
hai| kSoNamohaguNasthAna meM sattA aura udaya, donoM sAta kA~ke hai  /
sayogikecalI aura prayogipheyalI-guNasthAnameM sattA aura udaya cAra kamauke
haiN| upasAntamoguNasthAnameM sattA ATha karmako aura udaya sAta karmakA hai  //
10 //  bhASA-pahale dasa guNasthAnoM sattA-gata tathA udayamAna ATha karma pAye
jAte haiN| gyArahaveM guNamyAnameM mohanIyakarma saptA-rata rahatA hai, para
udayamAna nahIM, isaliye usameM sattA mATha karmakI aura udaya sAta karmakA hai|
pArA guNasthAnameM mAnanIyadarma saryathA naSTa ho jAtA hai, isaliye saccA aura
udaya dAnI sAta karma ke haiN| lerahaye aura caudahaveM guNasthAnameM sattA-gata
aura udayamAna cAra mAsikarma hI haiN| sArAMza yaha hai ki sasAsthAna pahale
gyAraha guNampAnoM meM pAThakA. bArahaveM meM sAtakA aura terahave aura
cauvahameM cArakA hai tathA udaya smAna pahale isa guNasthAnomeM AThakA, gyAraha
aura pArasmeM sAta. kA aura terahaveM aura cauvahaya meM cArakA hai ||10||

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Granth Part 11 (9) - Udirana in Gunasthanas [Two Gathaas]  **61.** The
Promantas (those who have attained the first five Gunasthanas) experience the
udirana of seven or eight karmas. The Mishragunastana experiences the udirana of
eight karmas. The Apramatta, Apurvakarana, and Anivritivadara Gunasthanas
experience the udirana of six karmas, excluding Vedaniya and Ayu. The Sukshma
Paraya Gunastana experiences the udirana of six or five karmas. The Upshantamoga
Gunastana experiences the udirana of five karmas.  **62.** **Explanation:** To
understand the concept of udirana, it is important to remember that only the
karmas that are currently arising experience udirana, not those that are not
arising. The udirana of a karma ceases when the Pratika Pratimaan (the remaining
lifespan of the karma) is exhausted.  In the first five Gunasthanas, from the
first to the sixth, excluding the third, there is udirana of seven or eight
karmas. When Ayu is not arising, there is udirana of seven karmas, and when it
is arising, there is udirana of eight karmas. According to this rule, the
udirana of Ayu ceases when the Pratimaan of the current Ayu is exhausted. Even
though the Pratimaan of the current Ayu may be very small, the Pratimaan of the
future Ayu is still greater.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 7&* karmagrantha bhAga yAra ( 9 ) - guNasthAnoM meM udIraNA  /  [ do gAyAse  //
] uraMti pamasaMtA, sagaTTha bhIsaha veyacAu SiNA  /  baga apamasAi to, cha
paMca sumo paNubasaMto  //  61  //  udIrayanti pramAntAH saptASTAni mizro'STa
vedAyuSI binA zAntaH  // 39 //  mapramAdayastataH, SaT paJca sUkSmaH
arthapramattaguNasthAna paryanta sAta yA ATha karmakI udAraNA hotI hai|
mizraguNasthAnameM ATha karmakI, apramatta, apUrvakaraNa aura anivRttivAdara ina
tIna guNasthAnoM meM vedanIya tathA Ayuke sivAya chaha karma kI sUkSma parAya
guNasthAna meM chaha yA pA~ca karma kI aura upazAntamoguNasthAnameM pA~ca
karmakI udIraNA hotI hai  // 62 //  bhASArtha - udIraNAkA vicAra samajhane ke
liye yaha niyama dhyAnameM rakhanA cAhiye ki jo karma udayamAna ho usIko udIraNA
hotI haiM, anudayamAnakI nhiiN| udayamAna karma prAlikA pramANa zeSa rahatA hai,
usa samaya usakI udIraNA ruka jAtI hai| tIsareko chor3a prathamase chaThe taka
ke pahale pA~ca guNasthAnoM meM lAta yA ATha pharmako udIraNA hotI hai| AyukI
udIraNA na hone ke samaya sAta karma kI aura honeke samaya ATha karmako
samajhanI cAhiye  /  uka niyamake anusAra bhAyukI udIraNA usa samaya ruka jAtI
hai, jisa samaya vartamAna bhayakI prAyu bhASatikA pramAsa zeSa rahatI hai|
yadyapi vartamAna-bhavIya Ayuke prAthalikAmAtra bAkI rahaneke samaya parabhIya
mAyukI sthiti AvalikAle adhika hotI hai tathApi anu |

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Khabangaach Bhaag Paar 261 Due to the presence of Nayaman, its Udeernaa does not
occur according to that rule. In the third Gunasthan, only Karma is considered
to have Udeernaa, because death does not occur in this Gunasthan. Therefore,
Mayu cannot exist in the final Aavali of this Gunasthan, as Udeernaa ceases
there. In essence, there is a perception of Saara, Saay, and Baudhau Gunvaa, but
not of Mayu and Vedaniya Karma. This is because, just as Adhyavasaya is
necessary for the Udeernaa of these two, there is no Madhyavasaya in the
aforementioned three Gunasthanas due to their extreme purity. In the tenth
Gunasthan, there is Udeernaa of either the five Karmas or the six Karmas. When
there is no Udeernaa of Mayu and Vedaniya, it should be understood as six
Karmas, and when there is no Udeernaa of the aforementioned two Karmas and
Mohaniya, it should be understood as five. The Udeernaa of Mohaniya ceases in
the final Praavali of the Yasham Gunasthan. This is because at that time, its
Spiti Bhaavali Pramaan remains. In the Myaradhi Gunasthan, there is Udeernaa of
five Karmas due to the absence of Udeernaa of Aayu, Vedaniya, and Mohaniya. In
this Gunasthan, due to the absence of Nayaman, the Udeernaa of Mohaniya is
prohibited.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kabhaMgAca bhAga pAra 261 nayamAna hone ke kAraNa usakI udIraNA usa niyama ke
anusAra nahIM hotii| tIsare guNasAnameM mAtra karmako hI udIraNA mAnI jAtI hai,
kyoMki isa guNasthAnameM mRtyu nahIM hotii| isa kAraNa mAyuko antima
mAvalikAmeM, jaba ki udIraNA ruka jAtI hai, isa guNasthAnakA saMbhava hI nahIM
hai| sAra, sAya baudhau guNavAA kI dhAraNA hotI hai, bhAyu aura vedanIya karmakI
nhiiN| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki ina ze phokI udIraNAkeliye jaise adhyavasAya
bhAvazyaka hai, ukta tIna guNasthAnoM meM ativizuddhi hone ke kAraNa baise
madhyavasAya nahIM hote| dasaveM guNasthAnameM vaha athavA pA~ca karmakI udAraNA
hotI hai| mAyu aura vedanIyako udIraNA na hone ke samaya chaha karmako tathA
ukta yo karma aura mohanIyakI udIraNA na hone ke samaya pA~cakI samajhanA cAhiye
/  mohanIyako udIraNA yazama guNavAnakI antima prAvali kAmeM ruka jAtI hai| so
isaliye ki usa samaya isako spiti bhAvalikA pramANa zeSa rahatI hai| _ myAradhi
guNasthAnameM zrAyu, vedanIya yora mohanIra kI udAraNA na hone ke kAraNa pA~cakI
udAraNA hotI hai| isa guNasthAnamai ravayamAma na hone ke kAraNa mohanIyako
vIraNA niSida hai

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 162 **Kamepannya Bhap Par** am-De Mithih ! (10)-Gunasthanas in Alp-Bahutvam.
[From two Gayanams.] Pan do Khin du Jogi,-Gudiraggu Bhajogi Yasesh Upasanta. *
Sankhgun Khin Suhma,-Niyahiav Sam Ahiya. ||2|| Par Tre Kshono De
Yogyanudaro'ayogi Stoka Upashanta. Sandhyaguna: Shiya: Sukshma'nityapurva: Sama
Aika. ||62||  **Meaning:** In the Mohagunsthan, there are five or two karmas
that are udirana, while in the Sogikevali Gunasthan, there are only two karmas.
In the Ayogikevakhiguragamyan, there is no udirana.  The Jivas in the Upashanta
Mohagunsthan are the fewest. The Jivas in the Namohagunsthan are more numerous
than them. In the three Gunasthanas of Sushmasampray, Anivritiadar, and
Apurvakaran, the Jivas with Dhanaman and Khinamohagunsthan have special
privileges, but they are equal among themselves. ||6||  **Bhashay:** In the
twelve Gunasthanas, except for the last Shravalika, there are five karmas that
are udirana at all times, except for Aayu, Vedaniya, and Mohaniya. In the last
Pradhikamsha, the Avaraniya, Darshanavaniya, and Antaraya karmas remain.
Therefore, their udirana is not possible at that time. The remaining two (Naam
and Gosh) remain udirana.  In the thirteenth Gunasthan, only four Adhatikarma
remain. Of these, Aayu and Vedaniya have already been udirana. Therefore, in
this Gunasthan, only two karmas are considered udirana.  1- This topic, Pachbha
Prah- 2ka 80 and 81 wa Vadha is Gommatsar Jivak: 322se 128 takko matha bhoume
kuchh bhitraspse hai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 162 kamepanya bhApa pAra am-De Mithi ha ! (10)-guNasthAnoMmeM alpa-bahutvaM  /
[do gAyAmoMse  / ] paNa do khINa du jogI,-gudIragu bhajogi yazeSa upsNtaa| *
saMkhaguNa khINa suhamA,-niyahIava sama ahiyA  // 2 //  para Tre kSoNo de
yogyanudAro'yogI stokA upazAntAH  /  saMdhyaguNA: zIyAH sUkSmA'nityapUrvAH samA
AIkAH  //  62 //  artha-jokha mohaguNasthAnamai pA~ca yA do pharmakI udAraNA hai
aura sogikevalIguNasthAnamai sirpha do karmakI  /  ayogikevakhIguragamyAna meM
udIraNAkA mArA hai|| upazAntamohaguNasthAna partI jIva sabase thor3e haiN|
NamohaguNasthAna-vI jIva unase saMsthAtaguNa haiM  /  sUzmasaMparAya,
anivRttiAdara aura apUrvakaraNa, ina tIna guNasthAnoM meM dhanamAna auva
kSINamohaguNasthAnavAlole vizeSAdhika hai, para Apasa meM turUpa hai  // 6 //
bhASAya-bArahane guNasthAnameM antima zrAvalikAko chor3akara anya satha samaya
meM bhAyu, vedanIya aura mohanIyake sivAya pA~ca karmazI udIraNA hotI rahatI
hai| antima prAdhAikAmazAnAvaraNIya, darzanAvaraNIya aura antarAya kI sthiti
prAlikA pramANa zeSa rahatI hai| isaliye usa samaya unakI udIraNA saka
jaatiihai| zeSa do (nAma aura goza) kI udIraNA rahatI hai| terahavaM
guNasthAmameM cAra adhAtikarma hI zepa rahate haiN| inamese Ayu aura vedanIyakI
udAraNA to pahale se ho sakI huI hai| isI kAraNa isa guNasthAnameM do karmako
udIraNA mAnI gaI hai| 1-yA viSaya, pacabha praha- 2kA 80 aura 81 vA vAdhA hai
gommaTasAra jIvakaH 322se 128 takako mAthA bhaume kucha bhitraspase hai|

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Granth - Part Four ### 143  The effect of the fourteenth virtuous yoga
is described.  Without yoga, there can be no liberation, hence the effect of
udirana is present.  In summary, in the third gunasthan, the udirana of the
eighth is present, and the udirana of the first, second, fourth, fifth, and
sixth is present in the seventh, and the udirana of the seventh is present in
the tenth gunasthan.  The udirana of the sixth is present in the twelfth
gunasthan until the last avalika of the tenth, the udirana of the fifth is
present in the twelfth gunasthan until the dharma mavalika of the twelfth, and
the udirana of the second is present in the thirteenth gunasthan until the
parambhathalika of the twelfth.  **Alpa Bahutva**  The beings in the eleventh
gunasthan are fewer than the beings in all other gunasthanas, because they are
found in the form of pratipadyaman (those who will attain that state at a
particular time) and pratipaksa (those who have attained that state before a
particular time) in the form of one, two, or three, etc.  The pratipadyaman in
the twelfth gunasthan are found in the form of one hundred and eight, and the
purvapratipaksa are found in the form of shat-prithaktva (two to nine hundred).
Therefore, they are called sansthata-guru compared to those in the eleventh
gunasthan.  The pratipadyaman in the upshamshreni are found in the form of
forty-four, and the purvapratipaksa are found in the form of one, two, three,
etc.  The pratipadyaman in the kshapakkshevika are found in the form of one
hundred and eight, and the purvapratipaksa are found in the form of shat-
prithaktva.  Both these shrenis are present in the eighth, ninth, and tenth
gunasthanas.  Therefore, the beings in these three gunasthanas are equal in
bhas, but they are more numerous than those in the twelfth gunasthan.  || 62 ||
Jogi apamatayare, sankhagupa desasasanamaamsa.  Bhavishya ajogimisha, bhaskansha
chauro duve ta.  || 63 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagramba-bhAga cAra 143 caudahaveM guNavAna yogakA prabhAva hai| yoga ke
sivAya dadaurA nahIM ho sakatI, isa kAraNa isameM udIraNAkA prabhAva hai|
sArAMza para hai ki tIsare guNasthAna meM AThahIkA udIraNAlAna, pahale, dUsare,
khoye, pA~ca aura chaThe sAtakA tathA aDakA, sAtaveMse pokara dasaveM
guNasthAnako eka avalikA bAkI rahe taba taka chahakA, dasakI antima AvalikAse
bArahave guNasthAnako dharama mAvalikA zeSa rahe taba taka pA~cakA aura
bArahaveMkI parama bhAthalikAle terahaveM guNasAma ke anta taka dokA
udIraNAsthAna pAyA AtA hai| alpa bahutva | myArahave guNasthAnayA se jIva anya
pratyeka guNasthAnavAle jIvoMse alpa hai, kyoMki ve pratipadyamAna ( kisI
vivakSita samayameM usa avasthAko pAnevAle) caumana aura pratipakSa (kisI
vivakSita samayake pahilele usa avasthAko pAye hue) eka do yA tIna Adi pAye Ate
haiN| bArahave guNasthAnavAle pratipadyamAna utkRSTa eka sau ATha aura
pUrvapratipakSa zata-pRthaktva (do sIse nau sau taka) pAye jAte haiM, isaliye ye
gyArahaveM gurusthAnavAloMse saMsthAtaguru kahe gaye haiN| upazamazreNike
pratipadyamAna jIdha utkRSTa cauvana aura pUrvapratipakSa eka, do, tIna Adi
tathA kSapakakSevike pratipadyamAna utkRSTa eka sau ATha aura pUrvapratipanna
zata- pRthaktva mAne gaye haiM  /  ubhaya zreNiSAle sabhI AThaveM, nauveM aura
dasave guNasthAnameM vartamAna hote haiN| isaliye ina tInoM guNasthAnAle jIva
bhApasameM samAna hai kintu bArahaveM guNabhAnavAloMkI apekSA vizeSaadhika haiM
/  //  62  //  jogiapamataiyare, saMkhagupA desasAsaNAmAMsA  /  bhavizya
ajogimiSA, bhasaMskha cauro duve tA  //  63 //  h

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Nayaya Part Four  **Chapter Heading:**  The Worthy Chief!  **Verse 1:**
The number of *samkhyat* (countable) *gunas* (qualities) in the *desh* (realm),
*mas* (time), and *ad* (duration) are mixed. The *mashir* (uncountable) *gunas*
are *ayogi* (unworthy), *migya* (false), *as* (non), *san* (with), *khya*
(knowledge), *ar* (being), *am* (I), *tva* (ness), *aro* (and), *dva* (two),
*pan* (to obtain), *anti* (they).  **Meaning:**  The *sayogik* (associated)
*gunas* are *samkhyat* (countable) because they are *sannyat* (limited) in the
*desh* (realm), *mas* (time), and *ad* (duration). The *pesh* (to be), *virat*
(to stop), *sasadan* (to be with), *misra* (mixed), and *aviratsamyagra*
(uninterrupted perfect) *gunas* are *prasankhyat* (countable) because they are
*sannyat* (limited) in the *desh* (realm), *mas* (time), and *ad* (duration).
The *ayopik* (unworthy) and *mithyadhi* (false) *gunas* are *asankhyat*
(uncountable) because they are *sannyat* (limited) in the *desh* (realm), *mas*
(time), and *ad* (duration).  **Explanation:**  The thirteen *gunas* are called
*samkhyat* (countable) because they are limited to two *karod* (crores) in the
*javan* (lower) *gunas* and nine *karod* (crores) in the *utkrusht* (higher)
*gunas*. The seven *gunas* are limited to two thousand *karod* (crores).
Therefore, they are *samkhyat* (countable) compared to the *sayogik*
(associated) *gunas*. The six *gunas* are limited to nine thousand *karod*
(crores). Therefore, they are *samkhyat* (countable) compared to the seven
*gunas*. The *asanshayav* (doubtless) *garbh* (womb) and *tiryach* (animal)
*chami* (birth) *desh* (realm) *virat* (to stop) are obtained, therefore, the
five *gunas* are *asankhyat* (uncountable) compared to the six *gunas*. The two
*gunas* are called *prasankhyat* (countable) compared to the *desh* (realm)
*virat* (to stop) *gunas*. This is because the *desh* (realm) *virat* (to stop)
is limited to two *gati* (movements), while the *sasadan* (to be with)
*samyaktva* (rightness) is present in all four *gati* (movements). The *sasadan*
(to be with) *samyaktva* (rightness) and *mithyashti* (false belief) are both
present in all four *gati* (movements), but the *sasadan* (to be with)
*samyaktva* (rightness) has a longer *kal* (time) *man* (measure) than the
*misra* (mixed) *gunas*. Therefore, the *misra* (mixed) *gunas* are *asankhyat*
(uncountable) compared to the *sasadan* (to be with) *samyaktva* (rightness).
The four *gunas* are always present in all four *gati* (movements) and have a
longer *kal* (time) *man* (measure). Therefore, they are *masankhyat*
(uncountable) compared to the three *gunas*. Although the *bhavasth* (state of
being) *bha yogi* (one who is in the state of being) and *apakashi* (one who is
not in the state of being) have a *paravar* (limit) of one hundred *prithaktva*
(separations), the *bhavasth* (state of being) *bha yogi* (one who is in the
state of being) ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmanAya bhAga cAra yogyapramakhatara!:, saMkhyaguNA dezamAsAdamizrAH  /
maSiratA ayogirmigyAsvani masaMkhyAramatvAroM dvApanantI  /  / 1 //  artha-
sayogiphevalo, apamasa aura mamasaguNasthAnakAle jISa pUrva-pUrva se
saMnyAtaguNa haiN| pezavirati, sAsAdana, mizra aura aviratasamyagradhi-
guNasthAnaSAle jIva pUrSa-pUrvase prasaMgAtaguNa haiN| ayopikavalI aura
mithyAdhi-guNasAnaghAle jIva pUrva-pUrvase anantaguNa haiM  // 6 //  bhAvArtha-
teraha guNasAnavAlebhATha guNavAmavAlole saMkyAtaguNa isaliye kahe gaye haiM ki
ye javanya do karor3a aura utkRSTa nau karor3a hote haiM  /  sAta guNasAnaghAle
do hajAra karor3a pAye jAte haiN| isaliye ye sayogikeliyose saMkhyAtaguNa haiN|
chaThe guNasthAnavAle nau hajAra karor3a zaka ho jAte haiN| isI kAraNa unheM
sAta guNasArapAloMse saMkhyAtaguNa mAnA hai| asaMzayAva garbhaja-tiryazcamI
dezavirati pA lete haiM, isaliye gA~ca guNasthAnavAle chaThe guNasthAmavAloM se
asaMkhyAtaguNa ho jAte haiN| dUsare guNavAnavAle dezaviratikSAloMse
prasaMkyAtaguNa kahe gaye haiN| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki dezavirAti, tirya-
manuSya do gatimeM kI hotI hai, para sAsAdanasamyaktva cAroM gatimeM  /
sAsAdanasamyaktva aura mitharaSTi. ye donoM padyapi cAroM gatimeM hote haiM
parantu sAlAnasamyaktvako apekSA mizrAdhikA kAla-mAna prasaMsthAsaguNa adhika
hai| isa kAraNa mizraraSTiyAle sAsA. danasamyaktviyokI apekSA asaMkhyAtaguNa
hote haiN| khauthA guNasAna pAroM gatimeM sadA hI pAyA jAtA hai aura usakA kAla-
mAna bhI pAsa adhika hai, ata eya boye guNasthAnayAse tIsare guNasthAnavAloMse
masaMkhyAtaguNa hote haiN| yapapi bhavastha bhayogI, apakazivAloke parAvara
arthAt zata-pRthaktyA pramANahI hai tathApi prabhavastha prayogI

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagrampa Bhaga Par 264 (Sikh) Anant hai, isliye prayogikevali jip
chaudaegunasthanghalonse anantgun kahe gaye hain. Sadharan ghanaspatikayik jidh
sikhonse bhi anantgun hai aur ve sabhi mithyatit hai. Isse mithyadhi. Thale
baudaha gunasthanavali se manamtagune hain. Pehla, chautha, paunson, chhatha,
saton aur serhvaan, ye chhe gunasthan khokame lagani maaye jaate hain, rog sar
gunayan kari gari bhi paaye jaate; paaye jaate hain tab bhi unme vartman jivonki
sankhya kami jghanaya aur kabhi uskrusht rahti hai. Upar kaha duma bhalp-bahutva
utkrisht sankhya ki apeksha se samjhna chahiye, aghanya sankhya ko ape. shase
nahi, kyonki anya sankhya ke samay jivon ka praman uparyuk alp-bahutva ke
vipreet bhi ho jata hai. Udaharanarth, kabhi gyaraha gunasthanavale barah
gunasthanbalo se adhik bhi ho jaate hai. Saransh, uparyukt bhalp-bahutya
sasgunasthanon mein jivon ke utp-sankhyak paaye jaane ke samay hi ghat sakta hai
||6|| - - - -. .-   -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrampa bhAga pAra 264 (sikha) ananta hai, isIle prayogikevalI jIpa
caudheguNasthAnaghAloMse anantaguNa kahe gaye haiN| sAdhAraNa ghanaspatikAyika
jIdha sikhoMse bhI anantaguNa hai aura ve sabhI mithyATi hai| isIse mithyAdhi.
thAle baudaha guNasthAnavAlIse manamtaguNa haiN| pahalA, cauthA, pauSoM, chaThA,
sAtoM aura serahavA~, ye chaha guNasthAna khokamai lagAnImAye jAte haiM, roga
sAra gunayAna kar3I gar3I bhI pAye jAte; pAye jAte haiM taba bhI unameM
vartamAna jIvoMkI saMkhyA kamI jaghanya aura kabhI uskRSTa rahatI hai| Upara
kahA dumA bhalpa-bahutva utkRSTa saMkhyAkI apekSAse samajhanA cAhiye, aghanya
saMkhyAko ape. zAse nahIM, kyoki anya saMkhyAke samaya jIvoMkA pramANa uparyuka
alpa-bahutvake viparIta bhI ho jAtA hai| udAharaNArtha, kabhI gyAraha
guNasthAnavAle bAraha guNasthAnabAlose adhika bhI ho jAte hai| sArAMza,
uparyukta bhalpa-bahutya saSaguNasthAnoM meM jIvoM ke utpa-saMkhyaka pAye jAneke
samaya hI ghaTa sakatA hai  // 6 //  - - - -. .- -

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Firm Granth Part Four Six Bhavas and their divisions. In five verses!
Upsamalapamiso-day, parinama dunvattharagavisa. Tiya bhay sannivaiy, samman
charan padhamaave. || 4 || Upshamakshayamibhodayparinam nighaashtaadasheka-
vimshatyah. Bhayomedastanipaatikah, samyaksh charan pradhamam aaye. || 1 ||
Pratham-aupashamik, shayik, mishra (kshayopashamik), aushayik and parivaamik,
these are the five root bhavas. These have respectively two, mou, eighteen,
rakees and three meds. The sixth bhava is sannipaatik. In the first (aupashamik)
bhava, samyaksh and charitra, these are the two divisions. || 630 Meaning-Bhava,
is called paryay. Ajiyaka's paryay is ajivika bhava and jiva's paryay is jiva
bhava. In this verse, jiva's bhavas are shown. These are the five root bhavas.
1-Praupashamik-Bhava is that which arises from upshama. The stopping of both
types of karma-udaya, pradesh and vipak, is upshama. -Gnayik-Bhava is that which
manifests when there is complete destruction of karma. ... ... ... -. -.-.... .
-  .    ... -. 1  HTHEt, anuyogadafe 113 to 127 all of them; tasvarth-a.ke rase
utakke satrmen taya satran-niki 10vi gapa nasha usko saka hai. Vasanghar- tako
mogaashame ma 2ko 3ge gathaki tika tatha samarth vichar-sarobarako 52se 57 baki
gathabhaum namka vigtaarpoorvak varnan hai. Gommatmar karmakand mein ham
vishayka 'bhavadhulika nanak ka sas prakaran hai. Bhavon bhed-umed sadh usko 15
se 19 samko maya pare. Bhage usmen ko saray bhamaasha risaye. .....

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pharmagrantha bhAga cAra chaha bhAva aura unake bhedaM  /  pA~ca gAthAoMse !
upasamalapamIsodaya, pariNAmA dunavaTThAragavIsA  /  tiya bhaya saMnivAiya,
saMmaM caraNa pddhmmaave|| 4  //  upazamakSayamibhodayapariNAma
nighaassttaadshekviNshtyH| bhayo medAstAnipAtikaH, samyakSa caraNaM prathamamAye
// 1 //  prathaM-aupazamika, zAyika, mizra (kSAyopazamika), auSayika aura
pArivAmika, ye pA~ca mUla bhAva haiN| inake kramazaH do, mau, aThAraha, rakIsa
aura tIna meDa haiN| chaThA bhAva sAMnipAtika hai| pahale (aupazAmika) bhASake
samyakspa aura cAritra,ye do bheda haiM  // 630 bhAvArtha-bhASa, paryAyako
kahate haiN| ajIyakA paryAya ajIvakA bhASa aura jIvakA paryAya jIvakA bhAva hai|
isa gAyA jIvake mASa dikhAye haiN| ye mUla bhAva pA~ca haiN| 1-praupazarmika-
bhAna yaha hai, jo upazamase hotA hai| pradeza aura vipAka, donoM prakAra ke
karmodayakA ruka jAnA upazama hai| -jJAyika-bhAva vaha hai, o karmakA sarvathA
kSaya ho jAne para pragaTa hotA hai| .. .. ...-. -.-.... . - . ... -. 1 HTHEt,
anuyogadAphe 113 se 127 sabake parame; tasvArtha-a.ke rase utakke satrameM tayA
satrAna-nikI 10vI gApA nazA usako sakA hai| vasaMghara- tAko mogASAme mA 2ko 3ge
gAthAkI TIkA tathA samArtha vicAra-sArobArako 52se 57 bAkI gAthAbhauma nAmakA
vigtArapUrvaka varNana hai| gommaTamAra karmakANDa meM hama viSayakA
'bhAvadhUlikA nAnaka ka sAsa prakaraNa hai| bhAvoM bheda-umeda sAdha usako 15 se
19 samako mAyA pre| bhAge usameM ko sarAya bhAmAzA risaaye| .....

Page #268 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part 1  **-Kshayopshamic-**  This is manifested by the
destruction of the *maayopthamik-maav*. The *karma* (karmic matter) is destroyed
by the *up. yavali-ashisht* (the remaining karmic matter), the *mand
rasaspardhak* (the weaker karmic matter), and the *anudayaman rasaspardhak* (the
stronger karmic matter). The *vipak-shakti* (the power of fruition) of the
*anudayaman rasaspardhak* is either stopped or delayed. This results in the
transformation of all three powers into the *mand shakti* (weaker power) form
(destruction, *upsham*), *kshay* (destruction).  **4-Kshayik-** This is the
*paryaay* (state) that arises from the *karma* (karmic matter) *uday* (arising).
**5-Parinaamik-** This is the state of continuous transformation into one's own
nature.  One *maay* (karmic matter) should be understood as *moolbhaash*
(original karmic matter) and two or more *maay* (karmic matter) combined should
be understood as *saamipatik maav* (combined karmic matter).  **The Different
Types of Bhaav (States):**  The *upshamik-bhaav* (state of destruction) has two
types: *samyaktva* (right faith) and *charitra* (conduct).  **(1) Samyaktva:**
The *tattva-kachi-yaak* (the knowledge of the true nature of reality) *bhaatya-
parinaam* (manifestation) that arises from the destruction of the
*magnatanubandhi-chatushk* (the four types of karmic matter that bind the soul
to the material world) and the *darshanmohaniyakarma* (the karmic matter that
obscures the vision of the soul) is called *shri-psharmik-samyaktva* (right
faith).  **(2) Charitra:** The *sthiraatamak parinaam* (stable manifestation)
that arises from the destruction of the twenty-five types of
*charitramohaniyakarma* (the karmic matter that obscures the conduct of the
soul) is called *aaupmik-charitra* (conduct). This is the same as the *yatha-
sthaat-charitra* (conduct that is in accordance with the true nature of the
soul) that is attained in the eleventh *gunasthan* (stage of spiritual
development).  The *upshamik-bhaav* (state of destruction) is the end of
suffering.  **6**  *Pee-a keval-jugalam, samyam daana-adhilbhdhayah panch
charanam. Tritiye sheshopayogah, panch sampyaya samyag-pirati-dikam.*
**Meaning:**  The second (the *kshayik-bhaav* state) has two types: *samyaktva*
(right faith), *daana* (charity), *maav* (karmic matter), and *charitra*
(conduct). These are the five *sabdhiya* (words) and *charan* (steps). The third
(the *kshayopshamic-bhaav* state) ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagranpa bhAga bhAra -mAyopathamika-mAva kSayopazamase pragaTa hotA hai|
karmake upa. yAvali-aSiSTa mamda rasaspardhakakA pAya aura anudayamAna
rasaspadhakakI sarvAsinI vipAka-zaktikA nirodha yA deNyAtilapameM parikhamana pa
tIna zaktikA manda zaktirUpameM pariNamama ( upazama), kSayo 4-audAyika-bhASa
karmaka udayase honevAlA paryAya hai| 5-pAriNAmika-bhAva svamAyane hI svarUpameM
pariNata hote rahanA hai| eka-eka mAyako 'mUlabhASa aura do yA dAsa adhika mile
hue mAcauko 'sAmipAtikamAva' samajhanA cAhiye  /  bhAvoMke uttara
bheda:aupazAmika-bhAvake samyaktva aura cAritra ye do hI meda hai| (1)
magantAnubandhi-catuSkake zayApazama yA upazama aura darzanamohanIyakarmake
upazamase jo tatva-kaci-yAka bhAtyapariNAma pragaTa hotA hai, yaha
'zrIpazarmikasamyaktva hai| (2) cAritramohanIyakI pacIsa prakRtiyoMke upazamase
vyakta honevAlA sthiratAtmaka pariNAma 'aupamikacAriza hai| yahI myArahavaM
guNasthAnameM prApta honevAlA 'yathAsthAtacAritra' hai| bhopazamika-bhAva sAdi-
sAnta hai  // 6 //  pIe kevalajuyalaM, saMmaM dANAhaladdhi paNa dharaNaM  /
taie sesuramogA, paNa ladI sammaviraidugaM  /  /  65  /  /  dicIye kevaLa
yugalaM, samyag dAnAdilabdhayaH paJca caraNam  /  tRtIye zeSopayogAH, paJya
sampayaH samyagapiratidikam  //  15  //  artha-dUsare (kSAyika-bhASake keSatA-
dvika, samyakrava, dAma mAvi pAMca sabdhiyA~ aura bAritra, ye mau meda hai|
tIsare (kSAyopazamika-)

Page #269 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmadhyaya Chapter Four  **Verse 65:**  There are eighteen distinctions of
*kshayopaśamika* (subduing) emotions, excluding the two *kevala* (perfect)
emotions. The remaining ten *upayoga* (applications), the five *sandi* (bonds),
*samyaktvam* (right faith), and *deśaviratī* (freedom from attachment to place)
and *sarvaviratī* (freedom from attachment to all) are the eighteen
distinctions.  **Explanation:**  There are nine *kshayopaśamika* emotions. The
two *kevala* emotions, *kevaladarśana* (perfect vision) and *kevalajñāna*
(perfect knowledge), manifest when the *kevalajñānāvaraṇīya* (veil of perfect
knowledge) and *kevaladarśanāvaraṇīya* (veil of perfect vision) karmas are
completely destroyed. The five *labdhi* (achievements) - *dāna* (giving),
*lābha* (gain), *bhoga* (enjoyment), *upabhoga* (consumption), and *vīrya*
(vigor) - manifest when the *dānāntarāya* (obstacle to giving), *sāmāntarāya*
(obstacle to gain), *bhogāntarāya* (obstacle to enjoyment), *upabhogāntarāya*
(obstacle to consumption), and *vīryāntarāya* (obstacle to vigor) karmas are
completely destroyed. *Samyaktvam* (right faith) manifests when the
*samyaktvam*, *anantānubandhicatuṣka* (four infinite consequences), and
*darśanamohaṇīya* (veil of perception) karmas are completely destroyed.
*Cāritra* (conduct) manifests when all the *cāritramohaṇīya* (veil of conduct)
karmas are completely destroyed. This is the "Yathākhyāta Cāritra" (conduct as
it is known) that is attained in the twelfth *guṇasthāna* (stage of spiritual
development).  All *kshayopaśamika* emotions are *sāvi* (permanent) because they
are caused by *karma* (action) and are not subject to further obscuration by
*karma*.  There are eighteen distinctions of *kshayopaśamika* emotions. For
example:  * The ten *upayoga* (applications) excluding the two *kevala*
(perfect) emotions. * The five *sandi* (bonds) - *dāna* (giving), *lābha*
(gain), *bhoga* (enjoyment), *upabhoga* (consumption), and *vīrya* (vigor). *
*Samyaktvam* (right faith). * *Deśaviratī* (freedom from attachment to place)
and *sarvaviratī* (freedom from attachment to all) *cāritra* (conduct).  *
*Matijñāna* (knowledge of mind), *mati* (mind), and *ajñāna* (ignorance)
manifest when the *matijñānāvaraṇīya* (veil of knowledge of mind) karma is
subdued. * *Śruta* (scriptural knowledge), *mahān* (great), and *śruta*
(scriptural knowledge) manifest when the *śruta* *jñānāvaraṇīya* (veil of
scriptural knowledge) karma is subdued. * *Avadhijñāna* (clairvoyance) and
*vibhanga* (knowledge of the parts) manifest when the *adhikāmavaraṇīya* (veil
of excessive desires) karma is subdued. * *Manaḥparyāya* (mental transformation)
manifest when the *manaḥparyāya* *jñānāvaraṇīya* (veil of mental transformation)
karma is subdued. * *Caturdarśana* (fourfold vision), *achakṣurdarśana* (vision
without eyes), and *avadhi* *darśana* (clairvoyance) manifest when the
*caturdarśanāvaraṇīya* (veil of fourfold vision), *achakṣurdarśanāvaraṇīya*
(veil of vision without eyes), and *avadhi* *darśanāvaraṇīya* (veil of
clairvoyance) karmas are subdued. * The five *sandi* (bonds) - *dāna* (giving),
*lābha* (gain), *bhoga* (enjoyment), *upabhoga* (consumption), and *vīrya*
(vigor) - manifest when the five types of *antarāya* (obstacle) karmas are
subdued. * *Samyaktvam* (right faith) manifests when the *anantānubandhicatuṣka*
(four infinite consequences) and *darśanamohaṇīya* (veil of perception) karmas
are subdued. * *Deśaviratī* (freedom from attachment to place) manifests when
the *apratyākhānāvaraṇīya* (veil of non-rejection) *kṣaya* (destruction) karma
is subdued. * *Pratyāyānāghāta* (non-obstruction of the path of liberation)
manifests when the *pratyāyānāghāta* *jñānāvaraṇīya* (veil of non-obstruction of
the path of liberation) karma is subdued.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmedra bhAga cAra t bhAvake kevala dvikako chor3akara zeSa dasa upayoga, dAna
Adi pA~ca abar, samyaktva aura dhirati-dvika, ye aThAraha bheda haiM  //  65  //
bhASArtha kSAyika bhAvake nau me haiN| kekI kevaladarzana, ye do mAtra kramale
kevalajJAnAvaraNIya aura kevaladarzanAvaraNIya karmake sarvathA jaya ho jAnese
pragaTa hote haiN| dAna, lAbha, bhoga, upabhoga aura vIrya, ye pA~ca labdhiyA~
kramazaH dAnAntarAya, sAmAntarAya, bhogAntarAya, upabhogAntarAya aura
vIryAntarAya-karma ke sarvathA kSaya ho jAne se pragaTa hotI hai| samyakstha,
anamtAnubandhicatuSka aura darzanamohanIyake sarvathA kSaya ho jAnese vyakta
hotA hai| cAritra, cAritramohanIya karmako saba prakRtiyoMkA sarvathA kSaya ho
jAnepara pragaTa hotA hai| yahI bArahave guNasthAnameM prApta honevAlA
'yathAkhyAta cAritra' hai| sabhI kSAyika-bhAva karma-dAya-anya hone ke kAraNa
'sAvi' aura karmase phira AvRta na ho sakane ke kAraNa ananta haiN|
kSAyopazamika-bhAva ke aThAraha bheda haiN| jaise:- bAraha upayo gause kevala
dvikako chor3akara zeSa dasa upayoga, dAna Adi pA~ca sandhi, samyaktva aura
dezavirati tathA sarvavirati cAritra  /  matijJAna-mati- ajJAna,
matijJAnAvaraNIyake kSayopazama se zrutajJAma-zruta mahAna, zrutajJAnAvaraNIya
karma ke kSayopazama se; avadhijJAna-vibhaGgajJAna, adhikAmAvaraNIya karmake
dakSayopazamaseH manaH paryAyAna, manaHparyAyajJAnAvaraNIyakarmake kSayopazama
se aura caturdarzana, acakSurdarzana aura avadhidarzana, kramase
cacturdarzanAvaraNIya acaturdarzanAvaraNIya aura avadhidarzanAvaraNIyakarma ke
kSayopazamase pragaTa hote haiN| dAna Adi pA~ca sabdhiyA~ dAnAntarAya Adi pA~ca
prakArake antarAyakarma ke dayopacamase hotI hai| anantAnuvandhakapAya aura
darzanamohanIya ke kSayopazumase samyaktva hotA hai  /  zrapratyAkhyAnAvaraNIya
kaSAyake kSayopazumase dezaviratikA AvirbhAva hotA hai aura pratyAyayAnAghara

Page #270 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four ₹66  The destruction and pacification of the nine
kṣayās leads to the cessation of all vices. Intellect, ignorance, etc., are the
kṣayās that are pacified by the destruction of the āvaraṇīya karma, which is
beginningless and endless, and the knowledge, etc., are the kṣayās that are
pacified by the destruction of the mohanīya karma, which is finite. Intellect,
knowledge, etc., are the states of the bhavya, which are both finite and
infinite, and the gifts, etc., that are obtained, and the non-perception, are
the states of the sāmsāra, which are beginningless and endless. || 65 ||  The
non-perfection of the soul, the restraint of the senses, the kṣayās, the gatis,
the vedas, and the false belief, these are the four (aupadhika) states of the
soul. The state of being a bhavya, the state of being an abhavya, and the state
of being a jīva, these are the pariṇāmika states. || 66 ||  **Meaning:** There
are many states of the soul, such as: greatness, non-perfection, non-restraint,
kṣayās, gatis, vedas, and false belief. Ignorance means both the absence of
knowledge and false knowledge. The absence of knowledge is the result of the
arising of the āvaraṇīya karma, and the false knowledge is the result of the
arising of the mohanīya karma. Therefore, both types of ignorance are aupadhika.
Non-perfection refers to the state of being in samsāra. This is the eighth...
**Explanation:**   1. Sleep, pleasure, pain, laughter, body, etc., are countless
states that arise from the arising of different karmas. All of these are
aupadhika. In this place, the author has explained the aupadhika states in a
gross way, following the statements of the previous ācāryas like Śrīmati, etc.
2. Intellect, śruta-jñāna, and vijñāna have been mentioned as kṣayās in the
previous verse. They are called kṣayās because they are caused by the
destruction of the āvaraṇīya karma, etc., and they are called kṣayās because
their cause is the destruction of the mohanīya karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra Rs66 NauyakaSAyake kSayopazama se srvvirtikaa| mati
ajJAna Adi kSAyopazamika-bhASa abhaya ke anAdi-ananta aura vijJAna prAdi-sAnta
hai  /  matijJAna Adi bhAva bhavyake sAvi-sAmta aura dAna Adi labdhiyA~ tathA
ajudarzana anAdi sAmsa haiM  //  65  //  annAyamasiddhatA, saMjamalesA
kasAgragaiveyA  /  micchraM turie bhabbA, bhavvattajiyansa pariNAme || 36 ||
ajJAnamasiddhatvA'vamalazyAkamA gativedAH  /  miSyANaM tu
bhavyA'bhavyasvajIvatvAni pariNAme  //  66  //  artha- mahAna, asitya, asaMyama,
lezyA, kaSAya, gati, veda aura mithyAtya, ye bheda cauthe (auvadhika) bhAvake
haiN| madhyatva, abhavyatva aura jIvatva, ye pAriNAmika-bhAva hai  // 66 //  1 1
bhAvArtha- zrIdayika bhAva ke ikIla bheda hai| jaise :- mahAna, asi tva
asaMyama, i lezyAe~, cAra kapAya, cAra gatiyA~, tIna veda aura mithyAtva |
ajJAna kA matalaba jJAnakA abhAva aura mithyAjJAna donoMse hai  /  hAnakA abhAva
zAmAvaraNIyakarma ke udayakA aura miupAdAna mithyAtvamohanIya karmake udayakA
phala hai| isaliye donoM prakArakA ajJAna audhika hai| asiddhatva,
saMsArAvasthAko kahate haiN| yaha, ATha 1 - nidrA, sukha, duHkha, hAsya, zarIra
Adi asaMkhyAta bhAva jo bhinna-bhinna karmake udaya se hote haiM, ve sabhI
kauTika hai, sthApi isa jagaha zrImati Adi pUrvAcAryoMke kathanakA anu saraNa
karake sthUla dRSTi auyika bhAva batAye hai| yahA~ 2 - mati zAna, zruta-tAna
aura vijJAnako pichalI gAthAmai khAyopazamika bhIra ki kahA hai| kSAyopazanika
isa apekSA se kahA hai ki ye upayoga matijJAnAvaraNIya Adi karma ke kSayopazama-
janya hai aura daki isa apekSA se kahA hai ki inakI bhAkA kAraNa
midhyAlamohanIya karmakA hRdaya hai|

Page #271 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 200 **Karma's Other Parts**  ... ... ... is the fruit of the arising of
karma. In this context, there is an absence of *pirat*. This is the result of
the arising of *apratyanapanaparanipkapkay*. Due to differences in opinion,
there are three forms of *paka*:-(1) *kashayik-parinam*, (2) *karma-parinati*
and (3) *yog-parinam*. All three are *praudyik* because *kashayik-parinam* is
the fruit of the arising of *kashay*, *karma-parinati* is the fruit of the
arising of *karma* and *yog-parinam* is the fruit of the arising of
*shuriranamakarma*. *Kashay* arises from the arising of *kayamohaniyakarma*.
*Gati*s are born from the arising of *gatimamakarma*. *Idhy* and *bhay* both
types of *ved* are *praudyik*. *Prakritik* arises from the arising of *dravya
myopasanam karma* and *abhilavarup bhasaved* arises from the arising of
*damohaniyakarma*. *Mithyatva* is an unwise, dark, and deluded state, which is
the result of the arising of *mithyatvamohaniyakarma*. *Praudyik-bhay* is
*anadi-ananta* for *abhavya* and *anadi-santa* for *many* in many cases.
*Jivattva*, *bhavya* and *abhavya* are three *parivaamik-bhav*. To sustain life
is *jivattva*. This is present in all living beings, both worldly and *siddha*,
and is therefore more widespread (more prevalent) than *bhavya* and *abhavya*.
*Bhavya* is only present in *bhavya* beings and *abhavya* is only present in
*abhavya* beings. *Parinamik-bhav* is *anadi-ananta*.  There are a total of 50
types of *bhav* across five categories: - two *shripashmik*, nine *kashayik*,
eighteen *kayopashmik*, twenty *praudyik* and three *parinamik*! 666 ||  **Four
Four-Fold**  *Parinam* arises from the four *sakhai*s. It is also born from the
four *upsamaj*s. Only *parinam* arises from the four *udyak*s. || 6 ||
*Siddha*s are in the *khag-parinam*. *Nara*s are in the *panajog* and *upsamaj*.
These are the 18 *sannivaiy*s. There are 20 *asambhavi*s. || 18 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 200 karmananya bhAga pAra -... .. . karmake udayakA phala hai| prasaMgama,
piratikA abhAva hai| yaha apratyAnapAnAparaNIpakapAyake udayakA pariNAma hai|
mata-bhedase pAke tIna svarUpa hai:-(1) kApApika-pariNAma, (2) karma-pariNati
aura (3) yogprinnaam| ye tInoM praudayika hI haiM, kyoMki kASAyika pariNAma
kavAyake udayakA, kama-pariNata karma ke udayakA aura yoga-pariNAma
zUrIranAmakarma ke padayakA kalA hai  /  kaSAya, kAyamohanIyakarmake udayase
hotA hai| gatiyA~ gatimAmakarmake udaya-janya haiN| idhya aura bhAya bonoM
prakAra kA veda audAyika hai  /  prAkRtikapa dravyada myopAsanAmakarmake udayase
aura abhilAvArUpa bhASaveda damohanIyake udayase hotA hai| mithyAtya,
avivekapUrNa gAdatama moha hai, jo mithyAtvamohanIyakarma ke udayakA pariNAma
hai| modayika-bhAya abhavyake anAdi-mananta aura manyake bahudhA anAdi-sAnta
hai| jIvatya, bhavyatva aura abhavyatva, ye tIna pArivAmika-bhAva hai| prANa
dhAraNa karanA jIvatva hai| yaha bhASa saMsArI aura siddha saba jIvoM meM
maujUda hone ke kAraNa bhavyatva aura prabhavyatvakI apekSA vyApaka (adhika-
deza-sthAyI) hai  /  bhavyatva sirpha bhavya jIpoM meM aura prabhavyatva sirpha
amavya jodhoM meM hai| pAriNAmika-mAva anAdi-ananta hai| pA~ca bhASoM ke saba
milAkara pana bheda hote haiM:-zrIpazamikake do, kSAyikake nau, kAyopazamikake
aThAraha, maudayikake ikosa aura pAriNAmikake tIna !666 //  cau caugaIsumIsaga,
pariNAmudapahiM para skhiehiN| upasamajuehi vA ghar3a, kevali pariNAmudyakhahae
// 6 //  khagapariNAme siddhA, narANa pnnjoguvsmsehiie| iya panara saMnivAiya,
bheyA vIsaM asaMbhAviNo  // 18 //

Page #272 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **Chapter 68**  There are four types of
*saannipaatika* (simultaneous) *bhaava* (states) in the four *gati* (states of
existence) due to the mixed results of *kshaayika* (destructive), *parinaamika*
(transformative), and *praudaabika* (materialistic) *bhaava*. These four
*bhaava* are found in the *gati* due to the tri-combination of the
aforementioned three *bhaava* and one *shaabika* (corporeal) *bhaava*.
Similarly, the tri-combination of the aforementioned three *bhaava* and one
*aupashamika* (pacifying) *bhaava* results in another type of *saannipaatika*
*bhaava*. Therefore, there are two types of *saannipaatika* *bhaava*, each with
four variations.  The *saannipaatika* *bhaava* resulting from the tri-
combination of *kshaayika*, *parinaamika*, and *praudaabika* *bhaava* is found
only in *kevali* (omniscient) beings with physical bodies. The *saannipaatika*
*bhaava* resulting from the dual combination of *jnaayika* (knowledge-based) and
*parinaamika* *bhaava* is found only in *siddha* (liberated) beings. The
*saannipaatika* *bhaava* resulting from the combination of all five *bhaava* is
found only in humans who are in the *upabhramshreni* (state of delusion).
Therefore, there are fifteen variations of the six *saannipaatika* *bhaava*. The
remaining twenty *saannipaatika* *bhaava* are *sanbhavi* (non-existent).
**Explanation**  *Saannipaatika* *bhaava* arises when two, three, four, or five
of the five *bhaava* (kshaayika, kshaayopashamika, aupashamika, parinaamika, and
praudaabika) combine. The *saannipaatika* *bhaava* resulting from the
combination of two *bhaava* is called *dvik-sannyoga* (dual combination), the
combination of three *bhaava* is called *trik-sannyoga* (triple combination),
the combination of four *bhaava* is called *chatussannyoga* (quadruple
combination), and the combination of five *bhaava* is called *panch-sannyoga*
(quintuple combination).  There are ten variations of *dvik-sannyoga*:  1.
*aupashamika* + *kshaayika* 2. *aupashamika* + *kshaayopashamika*  ... and so
on.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra catvArazcaturgatiSu mizrakapariNAmoda matvAraH mApakaiH
/  upadyamayutAM caskAraH, kevalI pariNAmodanAvike  // 1 zavapariNAme siddhA,
narANAM paJcabhoga upazamaSyAm  /  iti paJcadaza sAMnipAtikramedA
viMzaviramavinaH  //  68  //  artha-lAyopazamika, pAriNAmika aura praudabika,
ina sIna bhAvakA trika-saMyogarUpa sAMnipAtika-bhAva ra gatimeM pAye jAne ke
kAraNa cAra prakArakA hai| ukta tIna aura eka zAbika, ina cAra bhAvakA catuH
saMyogarUpa sAMnipAtika-bhASa tathA ukta tIna aura eka aupazamika ina cArakA
catuH- saMyogarUpa sAMnipAtika bhAva bAra gatimeM hotA hai| isaliye ve do
sAMnipAtika-bhAva bhI cAra-cAra prakArake haiN| pArigrAmiNa, audadhika
zrIrAdhikA trika-saMyogarUpa lAMnipAtika bhAva sirpha zarIradhArI kevalAnIko
hotA hai| jJAyika aura pAriNAmikakA dvika saMyogarUpa sAMnipAtika-bhAva sirpha
siddha jIvoM meM pAyA jAtA hai  /  pA~coM bhAvakA pazca saMyogarUpa sAMnipAtika-
bhAva, upabhramazreNivAle manuSyoMmeM hI hotA hai  /  rItise chaha sAMnipAtika
bhAvoMke paMdraha bheda hote haiN| zeSa bIsa sAMnipAtika bhAva saMbhavI arthAt
zunya hai  /  67 // 68 //  u y 20 bhAvArtha - zrapazamika Adi pAMca bhASomaise
do, tIna, cAra yA pA~ca bhAvoMke milane para sAMnipAtika-bhAva hotA hai| do
mAdhoke melale honevAlA sAMnipAtika 'dvika-saMyoga', tIna bhASauke melase
honevAlA 'trika saMyoga', cAra bhAvo ke mela se honevAlA 'catussaMyoga aura
pA~va bhAvake melase honevAlA 'paJca-saMyoga' kahalAtA hai| dvika-saMyogake dasa
bheda: 1 - aupazamika + kSAyika  /  2- zrapazamika + kSAyopazamika |

Page #273 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Ten Types of Trika Samyoga:  1.  Shrapashmik + Kshayik + Kshayopashmik 2.
Shrapashmik + Kshayik + Shreyik 3.  Aupashmik + Kshayik + Parinamik 4.
Aupashmik + Kshayopashmik + Audayik 5.  Aupashmik + Kshayopashmik + Parinamik 6.
Aupashmik + Shreyik + Parinamik 7.  Kshayik + Kshayopashmik + Shravchik 8.
Kshayik + Kshayopashmik + Parinamik 9.  Kshayik + Shreyik + Parinamik 10.
Kshayopashmik + Parinamik + Audayik  ## Five Types of Chatuh Samyoga:  1.
Shrapashmik + Kshayik + Kshayopashmik + Shreyik 2.  Shrapashmik + Kshayik +
Kshayopashmik + Parinamik 3.  Shrapashmik + Kshayik + Audayik + Parinamik 4.
Aupashmik + Kshayopashmik + Shreyik + Parinamik 5.  Kshayik + Kshayopashmik +
Shreyik + Parinamik

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ma 3 zrapazamika + auaudadhika  /  4- zrIpayamika + pAriNAmika 5 - kSAyika +
kSAyopazamika  /  6- kSAyika + zradayika | - kSAyika + pAriNAmika | -
kSAyopazamika + mauyika  /  hai- kSAyopazamika pArimika 10 - maudayika +
pAriNAmika | karmagramya bhAga bAra trika saMyoga ke dasa bheda: 1 zrapazamika +
kSAyika + kSAyopazamika  /  2- zrapazamika + kSAyika + zrIyika | 3- aupazamika +
kSAyika + pAriNAmika  /  4 - bhaupazamika + kSAyopazamika + auaudayika 5-
opazamika + kSAyopazamika + pAriNAmika | 6 - aupazamika + iyika + pAriNAmika | 7
kSAyika + kSAyopazamika + zravacika  /  kSAyika + kSAyopazamika + pAriNAmika |
kSAyika + zradayika + pAriNAmika  /  10- kSAyopazamika + pAriNAmika + audapi  /
catuH saMyoga ke pA~ca bheda: 1 zrapazamika + kSAyika + kSAyopazamika +
zradayika 2- prapazamika + kSAyika + kSAyopazamika + pAriNAmika 3- zrapazamika +
kSAyika + adhika + pAriNAmika  /  4 aupazamika + kSAyopazamika + pradayika +
pAriNAmika  /  5- kSAyika + kSAyopazamika + zradayika + pArizrAmika  /

Page #274 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **A Division of Post-Combination - 1: Aupashmik +
Kshayik + Kshayopa-shaamik + Audayik + Parinaamik**  All together, there are
twenty-five divisions of Sonipatik-Bhash. Out of these, the six divisions found
in living beings are shown in the Gatha-shrama.  Out of the aforementioned
divisions of Trik-Sangyog, the tenth division, Kshayopa-shaamik, is known
through the combination of Parinaamik and Shridayik. It is found in all four
gatis. Thus, in the Barogati, the living beings have Kshayopa-shaamik-Bhash in
the form of Bhavaindriya, Parinaamik-Bhash in the form of Jeevatva, and Audayik-
Bhash in the form of Kay. In this way, there are divisions of this Trik-Sangyog
in terms of Gati, Roop, and Sthan.  Out of the aforementioned divisions of
Chatuh-Sangyog, the five divisions are found in all four gatis. Therefore, there
are four divisions based on Sthan-Bhed. In all four gatis, Kshayik-Bhash is in
the form of Kshayik-Samyaktva, Kshayopa-shaamik-Bhash is in the form of
Bhavaindriya, Parinaamik-Bhash is in the form of Jeevatva, and Audayik-Bhash is
in the form of Kay.  Out of the five divisions of Panch-Sangyog, the fourteen
divisions are found in all four gatis. In all four gatis, Aupashmik-Bhash is in
the form of Samyaktva, Kshayopa-shaamik-Bhash is in the form of Bhavaindriya,
Parinaamik-Bhash is in the form of Jeevatva, and Audayik-Bhash is in the form of
Kay. This Panch-Sangyog, Sonipatik, also has four divisions based on Gati and
Sthan-Bhed.  Out of the aforementioned divisions of Trik-Sangyog, the living
beings have only one type of division, which is found in Bhavasya Kevalis. In
Kevalis, Parinaamik-Bhash is in the form of Jeevatva, Audayik-Bhash is in the
form of Kay, and Kshayik is only in the form of Kevalgyan.  Out of the
aforementioned ten divisions of Trik-Sangyog, the seventh division is found only
in Siddha Jeevas, and therefore, it is only of one type. In Siddhas, Parinaamik-
Bhash...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra pazca-saMyogakA eka bhedaH -
1-aupazamika+kSAyika+kSAyopazAmika +audAyika + pAriNAmika saba milAkara
sonipAtika-bhASa ke chumbIsa bheda hue  /  imase jo chaha bheda jIyoM meM pAye
jAte haiM, unhIMkonido gAthAzrAme dikhAyA hai| triSa-saMyogake ukta dala bhedoM
mese dasavA~ bheda, okSAyopazamika, pAriraNAmika aura zrIdayika melase patA hai,
vaha cAroM gati meM pAyA AtA hai  /  so isa prakAra:bArogatike jIvoma
kSAyopazAmika-bhASa bhAvendriya zAdirUpa, pArivAmika-bhAva jIvatva bhAdirUpa
aura auda: yika-bhAya kAgaya zrAdirUpa hai| isa taraha isa trika-saMyogake gati.
rUpa sthAna-mevaple dhAra bheda ge  /  catuH-saMyoga ke ukta gA~dha bher3oMmeMse
pA~coM bheSa cAroM gatimeM pAyA jAnA hai. isaliye isake bhI sthAna-bhedase cAra
bheda hote haiN| cAroM ganimeM kSAyika-bhAva kSAyikasamyastvarUpa, kSAyopazAmaka
bhASa bhAyendriya zrAdirUpa, pariNAmikA-bhAva jIvatva zAdirUpa aura audAyika-
bhASa kAya zrAdirUpa hai| tuH saMyogake pA~ca bhedoma caudhA bheda cAroM gatimeM
pAyA jAtA hai| cAroM gati aupazAsika-bhAva samyaktvarUpa, kSAyopazamikabhASa
bhAvendriya prAdirUpa, pAriNAmika-mAya jIyatva AvirUpa aura zrIvadhika gAva kAya
AdimApa samajhanA cAhiye  /  isa dhatuH saMyoga sAMnipAnikake bhI gatikA hAna-
bhedase cAra bheda hue| trika-saMyogake utta masa bhedoMmeMsa jIvoM da sirpha
bhavasya kevaliyoM hotAisaliye vaha eka hI prakArakA hai| kevaliyoM meM
dhAriNAmina-bhAva jIvatva zrAdirUSa, praudAyika-bhAva gali sAvikara aura kSAyika
mAtra kevalajJAna prAdhikAra hai| _vika-saMyogake ukta dasa bhedoMmeM se sAtavA~
bheda sirpha siddha jIvoMmeM pAye jAne ke kAraNa eka hI prakArakA hai| siyoM meM
pAriNAmika

Page #275 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Granth Part Four  **Ray**  The **Kshayik-Bhav** is of the form of
**Jivattva** etc., while the **Kevalgyan** etc. are of the form of **Bhir**. The
**Sannipattik-Bhav**, which is of the form of **Panch-Sangyog**, is only
**Upsham**-like. Therefore, it is of only one type: **Upsham**- श्रेणी वाले
मनुष्यों में **Kshayik-Bhav** is of the form of **Samya**, **Kshayopa-shamik-
Bhav** is of the form of **Bhavendriya** etc., **Parinamik-Bhav** is of the form
of **Jivattva** etc., and **Maudayik-Bhav** is of the form of **Leshya** etc.
Thus, there are fifteen types of **Sannipattik-Bhav** in total, according to the
**Sam-mese** (categories).  **|| 67 || 68 ||**  **Karma** and **Dharmaastikaya**
etc. are **Ajiva** substances. **Moha** is the same as **Miso**, **Vadvaisa** is
the same as **Atthakamsu**, and **Sesa** is the same as **Dhamma**.
**Parinamik** is the same as **Mave** and **Sandha** is the same as **Udaae**
and **Shi**.  **|| 66 ||**  **Moha** and **Shamo** are the same as
**Yashtakarm** and **Sesa**. **Dharma** etc. are **Parinamik** and **Skandha**
is the same as **Udaye** and **Api**.  **|| 69 ||**  **Meaning:**  The
**Upshamik-Bhav** is only of **Mohaniya Karma**. The **Mishra** (**Kshayopa-
shamik**) **Bhav** is only of the four **Ghatik** (destructive) **Karma**. The
remaining three **Bhav** (**Kshayik**, **Parinamik**, and **Maudayik**) are of
the **Bhadra** (beneficial) **Karma**.  The **Parinamik-Bhav** of
**Dharmaastikaya** etc. **Ajiva** substances is **Shraddhik** and **Parinamik**,
these two **Bhav** are of the **Putra-Skandha**.  **|| 66 ||**  **Meaning of the
Bhav:**  In relation to **Karma**, the meaning of **Upshamik** etc. **Bhav** is:
1. **Karma** is the **Bhadra**, **Panch-Sangrah-Dva** (five categories of
**Karma**) is the **Reki** (explanation) of the 25th **Gatha**. 2. The word
**Upshamik** has two meanings:     * **Upsham** etc. states of **Karma** are the
**Upshamik** etc. **Bhav**. This meaning applies to **Karma**.     * **Upsham**
etc. states of **Karma** are the **Paryaya** (synonyms) of **Upshamik** etc.
**Bhav**, which apply to **Bhav**, as explained in the 64th and 66th **Gatha**.
**1**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrabhtha bhAga cAra rAya bhAva jIvatva AdirUpa bhIra kSAyika-bhAva
kevalajJAna AdirUpa hai  /  paJca- saMyogarUpa sAMnipAtika-bhAva sirpha
upazamamedivAle matuhotA hai| isa kAraNa vaha eka hI prakArakA hai:
upazamazreNivAle manuSyoMmeM zAyika-bhAva samyayarUpa - rUpa, kSAyopazamika-
bhAva bhAvendriya zAdirUpa, pAriNAmika-bhAva jIvatva AdirUpa aura maudayika
bhAva lezyA AvirUpa hai| isa prakAra jo haha sAMnipAtika-bhAva saMbhavavAle
haiM. inake Upara hike anusAra sAma-mese saba milAkara pandraha bheda hote haiM
//  67  //  68  //  karmake aura dharmAstikAya Adi ajIvadravyoM bhASa  /  moheba
samo mIso, vaDavAisa aTThakaMmasu ca sesA  /  dhammAi pAriNAmiya, mAve saMdhA
udAe Si  //  66  //  moha evaM zamo miti yaSTakarmasu ca zeSAH 1 dharmAdi
pAriNAmikamA skandhA udaye'pi  //  69  //  artha - zrIpazamika-bhAva mohanIya
karma ke hI hotA hai| mizra (kSAyopazamika) bhAva cAra ghAtikamauke hI hotA hai|
zeSa tIna (jJAyika, pAriNAmika aura bhaudayika) bhAva bhAr3oM karmake hote haiN|
dharmAstikAya Adi ajIvadravyake pAriNAmika-bhAva hai kintu putrala-skandhake
zradayika aura pAriNAmika, ye do bhAva haiM  //  66  //  bhAvArtha karmake
sambandhameM aupazamikaM Adi bhASakA matalaba 1 - karmake bhAtra, pacasaMgraha-
dvA0 rekI 25vI gAthAmaivati hai| 2 - 0 pazamika zabda ke do artha hai: (?)
karmako upazama Adi avasthAyeM hI aupazamika Adi bhAva hai| yaha artha karmake.
bholA par3atA hai| (2) karmakA upazama Adi avasthAoMse honevAle paryAya
aupazamika Adi bhAva joke bhAvoM lAgU par3atA hai, jo 64 aura 66vI gAthAme
batalAye hai hai| 1

Page #276 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The text discusses the different states of karma, which is a key concept in
Jainism. It explains how karma manifests in various ways, affecting the soul's
journey.  **Karma Granth Mag Par**  This phrase likely refers to a specific text
or section within a text related to karma.  **States of Karma**  The text
describes different states of karma, each with its own characteristics:  *
**Upashram:** This state is characterized by the presence of all types of karma
except for Mohaniya karma (karma related to delusion). * **Kshayopa-shram:**
This state is characterized by the absence of all types of karma except for
Mohaniya karma. * **Jay:** This state is characterized by the presence of all
types of karma except for Mohaniya karma and the four Ghatikarma (karma related
to the four types of obstacles). * **Uday:** This state is characterized by the
presence of all types of karma except for Mohaniya karma, the four Ghatikarma,
and the three Bhaghatikarma (karma related to the three types of passions). *
**Paribhraman:** This state is characterized by the presence of all types of
karma.  **Types of Karma**  The text also mentions different types of karma:  *
**Mohaniya Karma:** Karma related to delusion. * **Ghatikarma:** Karma related
to the four types of obstacles:     * **Jnanavaraniya:** Karma related to the
obstruction of knowledge.     * **Darshanavaraniya:** Karma related to the
obstruction of perception.     * **Antakarma:** Karma related to the obstruction
of liberation.     * **Ayushkarma:** Karma related to the lifespan. *
**Bhaghatikarma:** Karma related to the three types of passions:     *
**Krodha:** Anger.     * **Mana:** Pride.     * **Lobha:** Greed.  **Ajiva
Dravya (Non-Living Substances)**  The text mentions five non-living substances:
* **Dharma-astikaya:** The substance that supports the soul's upward movement. *
**Adharma-astikaya:** The substance that supports the soul's downward movement.
* **Akasha-astikaya:** The substance that is space. * **Kala:** Time. * **Punya-
astikaya:** The substance that is merit.  **Pari-naamik (Transformation)**  The
text explains that the term "Pari-naamik" refers to the transformation of a
substance. This transformation can occur in various ways, such as the change in
the state of karma or the evolution of the soul.  **Conclusion**  The text
provides a detailed explanation of the different states and types of karma, as
well as the role of non-living substances in the Jain worldview. It emphasizes
the importance of understanding karma and its impact on the soul's journey
towards liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha mAga pAra ma basakI avasthA-vizeSose hai| jaise:- pharma kI
upagrAma avasthA usakA zrIpathamika-bhAva, kSayopazama avasthA kSAyopazamika-
bhAva, jayaavasthA kSAyika-bhASa, udaya-avasthA madavika-bhASa aura
paribhramanaavasthA pAriNAmika-bhASa hai| upazrama-avasthA mohanIyakarmake
sivAya anya kamakI nahIM hotI? isaliye aupazamika-bhASa mohanIyakarmakA hI kahA
gayA hai| kabopazuma cAra ghAtikarmakA hI hotA hai: isa kAraNa kSAyopazamika-
bhAva zAlikakA hI mAnA gayA hai| vizeSatA itanI hai ki kevalavAnAdharaNIya aura
kevaladarzanAvaraNIya, ina do dhAtikarma-prakRtiooMke vipAkodayakA nirodhana
honeke kAraNa inakA kSayopazama nahIM hotA  /  jJAyika, pAriNAmika aura
audayika, ye tIna bhASa ghATho karmake hai: kyoMki kSaya, pariNamana aura udaya,
ye tIna avasthAe~ ATho karma kI hotI haiN| sArAMza yaha hai ki mohanIyakarmake
pA~coM bhAva, mohanIyake sivAya sIna ghAtikarmake cAra bhAva aura cAra
bhaghAtikarma ke tIna bhASa haiM  /  ajIvadravyake bhASa  /  dharmAstikAya,
adharmAstikAya, zrAkAzAstikAya, kAla aura puchavAstikAya, ye pA~ca zrajIvadravya
haiN| punAstikAyake sivAya zeSa cAra ajIvadravyoMke pAriNAmika-bhAva hI hotA
hai| dharmAstikAya, jIva- putralokI gatimeM sahAyaka bananerUpa apane kAryameM
anAdi kAlase parikSata huA karatA hai| adharmAstikAya, sthitimai sahA 1-
pariyAmika zabdakA 'svarUpa pariNamana', yaha yaka hI artha hai, jo saba meM
lAgU tA hai| jaise:- karmakA bhI pradezoM ke sAtha viziSTa sambandha honA yA
dravya, taMtra, chAla aura bhAva Adi bhinna-bhinna nirmita pAkara bhanekarUpameM
saMkAnta (parivartita hote rahanA karmakA pAriyAda hai| jIvakA pariNamana
zrIvatvarUpameM bhavvasvarUpa meM yA abhrabhyatvarUpa meM svataH bane rahanA
hai| isI stikA Adi dravya samajha lenA caahiye|

Page #277 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  In the work of becoming, the sky-like body
(ākāśastikāya) is involved in the work of giving space, and time (kāla) is
involved in the work of self-work, which is transformed by Yama and other times.
Again, there are two aspects: Pariṇāmik and Audayik.    The atom (paramāṇu) only
has the Pariṇāmik aspect, but the skandha (skandha) has both Pariṇāmik and
Audayik aspects.    Among the skandhas, the skandhas like ghanu (dense) are only
Pariṇāmik, but the skandhas like audārik (spiritual) and śarīrarūpa (body-form)
have both Pariṇāmik and Audayik aspects. This is because they are constantly
transforming in their own form, making them Pariṇāmik, and because they are born
from the rise of audārik and śarīrarūpa, making them Audayik.  The two aspects
of pudravy (pudravy) should be understood as different from the karma-puṅgala
(karma-puṅgala). The karma-puṅgala has five aspects: aupaśamik (temporary),
etc., as explained above.  ---  **(:::)**  **(11) - The fundamental aspects in
the Gunasthānas (from the perspective of one jīva)**  Sammādi chaturyu
prayaścvasvāri, bhāva chatvāraḥ pañcopaśamanopaśānte. Chatvāraḥ kṣīma'pūrva
prayaḥ, śeṣaguṇasthānaka ekajīve. || 70 ||  **Meaning:** In the Gunasthānas
(stages of spiritual progress) starting from Sammādi (right faith), there are
four aspects. In the Uparāmak (ninth and tenth) and Upashānta (eleventh)
Gunasthānas, there are four or five aspects. The four aspects are kṣīma
(diminishing), apūrva (previous), prayaḥ (effort), and the remaining Gunasthānas
for one jīva.  ---  **(Note: See Appendix 'K' for further details)**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra banerUpa kArya meM; AkAzAstikAya, avakAza denerUpa
kArya meM aura kAla, samaya-yAMvarUpa sva-kAryameM yamAdi kAlase pariNamana Paa
karatA hai| puna pratyake zariNAmika aura audAyika, ye do bhAva hai| paramANu-
puDhalakara to kevala pAriNAmika-bhAva hai; para skasvarUpa punasake pArivAmika
aura audAyika, ye do bhAva haiN| skandhoMmaiM bhI ghaNu kAdi sAdi skandha
pAriNAmika-bhASaghAle hI haiM, lekina praudArika Adi zarIrarUSa skandha
pAriNAmika-zrIvayika do bhASa. vAle haiN| kyoMki ye sva-sva-rUpameM pariNata
hote rahane ke kAraNa pAriNAmika-bhASavAle aura audArika Adi zarIranAmapharmake
udaya-jamya hone ke kAraNa audAyika-bhAvavAle haiN| puladravya ke do bhAva kahe
hue haiM, so karma-puGgalase bhinna pulake samajhane cAhiye  /  karma-punasake
to aupazamika Adi pA~coM bhASa , mo Upara batalAye gaye haiM  //  - ::-:
(11)-guNasthAnoMmeM mUla bhAvaM  /  ( eka jIvakI apekSAse  / ) saMmAiSaumu liga
cau, bhAvA ca paNuSasAmaguvasaMte  /  bau khINApubdha timi
lesgupttttaapgegjie||70|| sampamAdicaturyu prayazcasvArI, bhAvAcatvAraH
paJcopazamanopazAnte  /  catvAraH kSImA'pUrva praya:, zeSaguNasthAnaka ekajIve
|| ..  //  artha-paka jIghako sammAdhi Adi khAra guNavAnoMmeM sIma yA cAra bhAva
hote haiN| uparAmaka (nau aura dasaveM) aura upazAnta (gyAra. i) guNasthAnameM
cAra yA pA~ca bhAva hote haiN| koemoha tathA pUrva - .. .- ... . .....
1-dekhiye, pariziSTa 'ka'

Page #278 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **In the Karan-Gunasthan, there are four Bhavas, and
in all the remaining Gunasthanas, there are three Bhavas.** ||7||  **Meaning:**
In the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Gunasthanas, there are three or four
Bhavas. These three Bhavas are: (1) **Shreevayika:** - Manushya-Pravritti etc.;
(2) **Parinaamika:** - Shreevatva etc.; (3) **Kshayopa-Shamiya:** -
Bhavaindriya, Sampatti etc. These three Bhavas are found at the time of
Kshayopa-Shamiya Samyaktv. But if the Samyaktv is Japat-Kshayika or Aupashmika,
then one should understand four Bhavas: the said three and one of the two
Samyaktv - Japat-Kshayika or Aupashmika.  In the ninth, tenth, and eleventh
Gunasthanas, there are four or five Bhavas. Four Bhavas are found when the
Samyaktv is Aupashmika and the person is Kshayopa-Shamiya. The three Bhavas are
the same as before, and the fourth is Aupashmika-Samyaktv or Charitra. In the
tenth, the fifth Bhava is Japat-Kshayika-Samyaktv, and in the eleventh, it is
Aupashmika-Charitra.  In the twelfth and thirteenth Gunasthanas, there are four
Bhavas. In the twelfth, the four Bhavas are the said three and one of the two
Samyaktv - Aupashmika or Japat-Kshayika. In the thirteenth, the four Bhavas are
the said three and Shamiya-Samyaktv and Japat-Kshayika-Charitra.  In the
remaining five (first, second, third, fourteenth, and fifteenth) Gunasthanas,
there are three Bhavas. In the first, second, and third Gunasthanas, the three
Bhavas are: Shreevayika: - Manushya-Pravritti; Parinaamika: - Jeevasvabhaava
etc.; and Kshayopa-Shamiya: - Bhavaindriya etc. In the fourteenth and fifteenth
Gunasthanas, the three Bhavas are: Shreevayika: - Manushya-Pravritti;
Parinaamika: - Jeevasvabhaava; and Kshayika: - Chaan-Praapti. ||70||  ....... ..
. .. .. . . . .   1-2 Parishishta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra karaNa-gusasthAnameM cAra bhASa hote haiM aura zeSa
saba guNasthAnoM meM tIna bhAva  // 7 //  bhAvArtha'-cauthe, pA~cave, chaThe
aura sAtaye, ina cAra guNasyAnomeM tIna yA cAra bhAva haiN| tIma bhASa ye
haiM:-(1) zrIvayikA-manumba mAdigati; (2) pAriNAmikaH-zrIvatva Adi maur|)
sAyopazamiya:bhASendriya, sampatya Adi  /  ye tIna bhASa jhAyopazamikasamyAvake
samaya pAye jAte haiN| parantu japa kSAyika yA aupathamika samyakta ho, taba ina
domeMse koI-paka samyaktva tathA ukta tIna, isa prakAra bAra bhAva samajhane
caahiye| naudhe, dasave aura gyArahave, ina tIna guNasthAnoMmeM cAra yA pA~ca
bhASa pAye jAte haiN| cAra bhAva usa samaya, jabaki proparAmiDasamyaktvI aoSa
pazamaNivAlA ho  /  cAra bhAvameM tIna to usakI aura cauthA aupazamika-samyaktva
ya caaritr| paudha ukAla caudhA kSAyikasamyaktva aura pA~cauM
praupraamikcaaritr| pAThave aura bArahaye, ina do guNasthAnoM meM cAra bhAva
hote haiN| pATha meM ukta tIna aura aupazamika aura kSAyika, ina do se koI eka
samyaktva, ye cAra bhAva samajhane caahiye| bArahavemeM ukta tIna aura cauthA
zAmikasamyaktva va kSAyikaSAritra, ye cAra bhaav| zeSa pA~ca (pahalo, dUsare,
tIsare, seraha aura baudahaye) guNasthAnoM meM tIna bhASa haiN| pahale, dUsare
aura tIsare guNasthAnameM chIvayikaH manuSya prAvi gati; pAriNAmikaH-jIvazvamAdi
aura kSAyo. pazamikA bhAvendriya bhAdi, ye tIna bhASa haiN| terahave aura
cauvaha guNasthAnameM maudapikA-manuSyatva: pAriNAmikAjIvasva aura sAyikaH-cAna
prApi, ye tIma bhAva hai  /  / 70|| ....... .. . .. .. . . . . 1-2 pariziSTa  /

Page #279 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Number Considerations  **(12) - Number Considerations**  **(dwr marià 1]
Types of Numbers**  **Karma-Mana-Bhar**  There are three types of *asankhyata*
(innumerable): (1) *parish* (pertaining to the periphery), (2) *yukta*
(combined), and (3) *nijapadayukta* (having its own position). Similarly, there
are three types of *ananta* (infinite). All of these have three sub-types:
*jayamya* (inferior), *madhyama* (intermediate), and *utkrista* (superior). ||
71 ||  **Meaning:** There is one type of *sankhyata* (countable). There are
three types of *asankhyata*, and three types of *ananta*. Thus, there are a
total of seven types of numbers. Each type has three sub-types: *jayamya*,
*madhyama*, and *utkrista*. || 71 ||  **Explanation:**  There are three types of
*samstha* (assemblies) in the scriptures: (1) *sadhya* (achievable), (2)
*asankhyata*, and (3) *shramanta* (exhausted). There is one type of *sankhyata*,
three types of *asankhyata*, and three types of *ananta*. Thus, there are a
total of seven types of numbers. Each type has three sub-types: *jayamya*,
*madhyama*, and *utkrista*.   **Note:**  Number considerations are discussed in
the *Anuyogadwar* from verses 234 to 241, and in the *Lokaprakara* from verses
112 to 122. The *Anuyogadwar* Sutra presents a theoretical perspective. The
commentary by Shrimadrasurishvara provides further details. The *Lokaprakasha*
incorporates both perspectives.  Shri Nemichandra Siddhanta's *Trilokasara*
discusses number considerations in verses 13 to 51. The term "kund" is used in
the context of "pampa sthana" (a specific location). There are also some related
terms. This usage aligns with the *Pambika* commentary.  The term "samstha" is
found in Jain literature, and it refers to a number that is slightly larger than
one. For further information, refer to the Pali-English dictionary, page 51.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 100 ( 12 ) - saMkhyAkA vicAraM  /  (dwr maria 1] saMkhyAke bheda-prabheda |
karmaca-mAna bhAra saMvivegamasaMM, parisajusaniyapayajudhaM tivihaM  /  evamapi
tihA, jahannamajbhukAsA sabbe  //  71  //  saMyamevamekama saMkhyaM
parizrayuktanijapadayutaM vividham  /  , ethamanantamapi vA
adhanyamadhyotkRSTAni varSANi  //  71  //  J artha-saMkyAta eka hai|
asaMkhyAtake tIna bheda haiM: - (1) parIza, (2) yukta aura (3) nijapadayukta
arthAt asaMkhyAtAsaMsthAta | isI taraha anantake bhI tIna bheda hai| ina sabake
jayamya, madhyama aura utkRSTa ye tIna-tIna bheda hai  //  71  //  bhAvArtha
zAstra saMsthA tIna prakArakI esao (1) sadhyA, (2) asaMkhyAta aura (3) zramanta
/  saMkhyAtakA eka prakAra, asaMkhyAtake tIna aura anantake tIna, isa taraha
saMkhyAke kula sAta bheda haiN| pratyeka bhedake jayamya, madhyama aura utkRSTa-
rUpase tIna-tIna bheda karane 1 1 1- saMkhyA-viSayaka vicAra, manuyoga-dvArake
234 se lekara 241 4 ta aura lokaprakArA- varga 1 122 se lekara 12 loka taka meM
hai| anuyogadvAra sUtrane saiddhA zika-mata hai| usakI ThIkAmai malabhArI
zrImadrasUrine kAme adhika matrakA bhI ullekha kiyA hai| lokaprakAzamai donoM
mata saMgrahIta hai| zrInemicandra siddhAn gativiracitA trilokasArako 13se
lebara 51 kI gAthAoM meM saMkhyAkA vicAra hai| usameM pampa sthAnameM 'kuNDa'
zabda prayukta hai; gana bhI kucha jur3e se  /  usakA vana kArya pambika -mavase
milatA hai| 'saMsthA' zabda gauddha-sAhitya meM hai, jisakA artha '1'ke apara
eka sI bAlI jitanI saMkhyA hai| isakeliye dekhiye, jisakA pAlI a~garejI koSakA
51 putra

Page #280 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Kamaath - Part Four **20.**  There are twenty types of numbers. They are as
follows: (1) Jghanya Sankhyat, (2) Madhyama Sankhyat, and (3) Utkrishta
Sankhyat. (4) Jghanya Pariksha Sankhyat, (5) Madhyama Pariksha Sankhyat, and (6)
Utkrishta Pariksha Sankhyat. (7) Jghanya Yuka Sankhyat, (8) Madhyama Yuka
Sankhyat, and (9) Utkrishta Yuka Sankhyat. (10) Jghanya Asankhyata Sankhyat,
(11) Madhyama Asankhyata Sankhyat, and (12) Utkrishta Asankhyata Sankhyat. (13)
Jghanya Parikshanant, (14) Madhyama Parikshanant, and (15) Utkrishta
Parikshanant. (16) Jghanya Yuktanant, (17) Madhyama Yuktanant, and (18)
Utkrishta Yuktanant. (19) Jghanya Anantanant, (20) Madhyama Anantanant, and (21)
Utkrishta Anantanant. ||71||  The nature of the three types of numbers. Bahu
Sankhyajj Huciya, Pramo Param Majjhiham Tuja Guru Bham. Jabujhiish Namany,
Parubavar Imam. ||72||  Chhaghu Sankhyeyam Vishaitaha Param Madhyamanthu
Yavadgur Kam. Kambhapapramakachatuspasyaprarupanyedam. ||73||  **Meaning:** The
smallest number is Jghanya Sankhyat. From there, all the numbers up to Utkrishta
Sankhyat are Madhyama Sankhyat. The nature of Utkrishta Sankhyat is known from
the description of the Jambudvipa-pramaan Palya. ||2||  **Meaning:** The meaning
of Sankhyat is difference (distinction). That which is perceived as different is
Sankhyat. One is not perceived as different. Therefore, even though it is the
smallest, one is called Jghanya Sankhyat. The perception of difference occurs in
two. Therefore, two is called Jghanya Sankhyat. The perception of difference
occurs in three. Therefore, three is called...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kamAtha-bhAga cAra 20 //  L para bIsa meva hote haiN| so isa prakAra:-(1)
apanya saMzyAta, (2) madhyama saMkhyAta aura (6) uskRSTa saMkhyAtA (japanya
parIcA. saMkhyAta, (5) madhyama parIcAsaMkhyAta aura.(6) u parIcAsaMkhyAta, (7)
abasya yukAsaMkhyAta, (madhyama yukAsaMkhyAta aura (8) utkRSTa zuzAsaMkhyAsa,
(10) adhanya asaMkhyAtAsaMkhyAta, 1.1) madhyama prasaMkhyAtAsaMkyAta aura (12)
utkRSTa masaMkhyAtAsaMNyAta, (13) adhamya parIttAnanta, (14)
madhyamaparIttAnanta aura (11) utkRSTa parIsAmanta, (16) jaghanya yuktAnamta,
(17) madhyama yuktAnanta aura (18) utkRSTa yukAnamtaH (18) jaghanya anantAnanta,
(20) madhyama anantAnanta aura (21) uskae zranamtAnanta  // 71 //  saMkhyAsake
tIna bhedoMkA svarUpa  /  bahu saMkhijja huciya, pramo paraM majijhama tujA
gurubhaM  /  jabUjhISa namAnya, pArUbavAra imN.|| 72  /  /  chaghu saMkhyeyaM
viSAitaH paraM madhyamantu yAvadgura kam  /
kambhApapramAkacatuSpasyaprarUpaNayedam  //  7  //  artha-cokI hI saMkhyA laghu
(jadhanya) saMkhyAta hai| isase mAge sInase lekara utkRSTa saMNyAta takakI
sarasaMkhyAe~ madhyama saMnyAta hai| utkRSTa saMkhyAtakA svarUpa jambUdvIpa-
pramANa palyoMke nirUpaNase AnA jAtA hai  // 2 //  bhAvArya saMkhyAkA matalaba
bheda (pArthakya)se hai arthAt jisameM meSa pratIta ho, vahI saMkhyA hai| ekame
meda pratIta nahIM hotaa| isa liye sabase kama honepara bhI ekako jaghanya
saMkhyAta mahI khaa| pArthayakI pratIti ko mAvimeM hotI hai| isaliye hI saMkhyA
hai| inamaise dokI saMkhyA adhamma saMkhyAta aura tInase kSekara kA

Page #281 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  All numbers between the two numbers are considered
medium numbers. In the scriptures, there is a concept of "Palyauki" to
understand the nature of the "Utkrishta Sampaatka". This is shown in the "Ayali
Gaapami".  **Names and Measurements of Palyauki:**  * Pahaana Vahiyasala, Ga-
Padisala, Ga-Mahaasala, Gakka * Jaayana Sahamogaadha, Saveshta, Sasihbhariya
||73|| * Pakshya, Anayasthita Shala, Kaamatashala, Kaamadaashala, Akhya *
Yojanasala, Yagada, Svedikaasa, Sajilbhruta ||7||  There are four types of
Palyauki: (1) Manavastthita, (2) Shalaaka, (3) Prati Shalaaka, and (4) Maha
Shalaaka. All four Palyauki are considered to be one thousand Yojan deep and
seven and a half Yojan high, reaching the "Amuneeshki Power Dhedhika". They
should be filled with mustard seeds up to the "Shikha". ||3||  **Meaning:**  In
the scriptures, there are two types of concepts: "Sat" (truth) and "Asat"
(untruth). The concept that leads to action is "Satkalpana", and the concept
that is only useful for understanding the nature of an object but does not lead
to action is "Asatkalpana". The purpose of "Asatkalpana" is to understand the
nature of "Utkrishta Sampaatka".  The four types of Palyauki mentioned are: (1)
Manavastthita, (2) Shalaaka, (3) Prati Shalaaka, and (4) Maha Shalaaka. Their
length and width are one lakh Yojan each, their depth is one thousand Yojan, and
their height is seven and a half Yojan, reaching the "Padmapar Bedika". The
depth and height of the Palyauki should be understood from the level of the
ground. In summary, these "Kashit Palyauki" are considered to be 100 Yojan in
size.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra saMkyAta taka bIcakI saba saMkhyAe~ madhyama saMkhyAta
hai| zAstra meM utkRSTa saMpAtakA svarUpa jAnane ke liye palyaukI kalpanA hai,
jo ayalI gApAmi dikhAyI hai . palyoM ke nAma tathA pramANa  /
phaannvaahiyslaa,g-pddislaagaamhaaslaagkkhaa| jAyaNasahamogADhA, savezyatA
sasihabhAriyA  // 73 //  pakSyA anayasthitazalA kAmAtazaLAkAmadAzalAkAkhyAH  /
yojanasalAyagAdA:, svedikAsA: sajilabhRtAH  /  / 7 /  /  ardha-cAra palyake mAma
kramazaH pranavasthita, zalAkA, pratizalAkA aura mahAzalAkA hai| cAroM palya
gaharAI meM eka hajAra yojana aura U~mAI meM amyUnISakI pAvara dhedikA paryanta
arthAt sAr3he pATha yojana pramANa samajhAme caahiye| inheM zikhA paryanta
sarasoMse pUrNa karane kA vidhAna hai  //  3 //  bhAvArtha-zAstrameM sat aura
asat do prakArako kalpanA hoto hai| o kArya meM pariNata ko zAsake, vaha
satkalpanA,aura jo kisI pastukA svarUpa samajhane meM upayogImAtra, para kArya
meM parisavana kI jA sake, vaha 'asarakarAnA pasyoMkA vicAra masarakalpanA hai;
isakA prayojana utkRSTa saMpAtakA svarUpa samajhAnAmAtra hai| zAkhama palpa pAra
kahe gaye haiM:-(1) mamavasthita, (2) zalAkA, (1) pratizalAkA aura (4)
mahAzAkhAkA  /  inakI lambAI-caur3AI ammdvIpa pAvaraeka-eka lAkha yojanakI,
gaharAI eka hajAra pojana kI bhaura U~cAI padmapara bedikA-pramANa arthAt sADhe
pATha yojanakI kahI huI hai| patyakI gaharAI tathA U~cAI meDako samatala bhUmise
samajhanA cAhiye  /  sArAMza, ye kAzita palpa tAme zikSA takameM 100 yojana liye
jAte haiN|

Page #282 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  Many **Anvastthitpatya** are formed. Their length and
breadth are not the same. The first **Anvastthit** (**Mulanvastthit**) has a
length and breadth of a lakh yojanas. The length and breadth of the subsequent
**Anvastthit** (**Uttaramandh sthit**) is increasingly larger. For example:
Imagine filling the **Dhanavastthit** **Patya** the size of Jambudvipa with
mustard seeds. Then, from Jambudvipa to each subsequent island and ocean, take
one mustard seed from the previous one and place it in the next. Continue this
process until the **Mulanvastthit** **Patya** is empty in a particular island or
ocean. Then, create a **Patya** the size of that island or ocean from Jambudvipa
(the original location). This is the first **Uttaranvastthit**.  Now, take one
mustard seed from this **Patya** and place it in each subsequent island and
ocean. Continue this process until all the mustard seeds from the first
**Uttaranvastthit** **Patya** are exhausted in a particular island or ocean.
Then, create another **Patya** from the original location (Jambudvipa) to that
island or ocean where the mustard seeds were exhausted. This is the second
**Uttaranvastthit** **Patya**.  Fill this **Patya** with mustard seeds and place
one seed in each subsequent island and ocean. When the mustard seeds from the
second **Uttaranvastthit** **Patya** are exhausted in a particular island or
ocean, create another **Patya** from the original location to that island or
ocean. This is the third **Uttaranvastthit** **Patya**.  Continue this process
of filling the **Patya** with mustard seeds, placing one seed in each subsequent
island and ocean, and then creating a new **Patya** from the original location
to the point where the seeds are exhausted. This process continues for as many
**Uttaranvastthit** **Patya** as are created.  211

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra anavasthitapatya aneka banate haiN| ina sabakI lambAI-
caur3AI ekasI nahIM hai| pahalA anavasthita (mUlAnavasthita) kI lambAIzrIDAI
lAkha yojanako aura Age ke satha anavasthita ( utarAmadha sthita) kI lambAI-
caur3AI adhikAdhika hai| jaise:- ambUdvIpapramANa dhAnavasthita palyako
sarasoMse bhara denA aura ambUbIpase lekara bhAgeke hara eka dvIpameM tathA
samudrama una sarasoMmeMse ekapakako DAlane jAnA  /  isa prakAra DAlate DAlate
jisa dvIpameM yA jisa samudra meM mUlAnayasthita patya khAlI ho jAya, jambUdvIpa
(bhUlasthAna) se usa dvIpa yA usa samudra takI lambAI-caur3AIvAlA mayA palya
banA liyA jAya  /  yahI pahalA uttarAnavasthita hai  /  isa patyamekara aura
maka ekako Age pratyeka dvIpameM tathA samudra DAlate jAnA  /  DAlateDAlate jisa
dvIpameM yA jisa samudra meM isa pahale uttarAnasthitapalya ke saba sarSapa
samApta ho jAya~, mUla sthAna (jambUdIpa) se usa sarSapa samApti-kAraka dvIpa yA
samudra paryanta lambA-caur3A palya phirase banA honA, yaha dUsarA
uttarAndhasthitapatya hai  /  ise bhI sarpapoMse bhara denA zrIra ke pratyeka
dvopameM tathA samudra meM eka-eka sarpapako DAlane jaanaa| aisA karanese dUsare
uttarAnavasthitapaya ke sarvapokI samApti jisa dvIpa meM yA jisa samudrameM ho
Apa, mUla sthAnase usa sarpava samApti-kAraka dvIpa yA samudra paryamta vistRta
palya phirase banAnA yaha tIsarA usarAnavasthitapalya hai| isako bhI sarpapoMse
bharanA tathA bhAgeke dvIpa, samudra meM eka-eka sarvapa DAlakara khAlI krnaa|
phira mUla sthAnase sarpapa samApti kAraka dvIpa yA samudra paryanta vistRta
pazya banA lenA aura use bhI sarva pose bharanA tathA ukta vidhike anusAra kAlI
krnaa| isa prakAra jitane uttarAnavasthitapalya banAye jAte haiM. 211

Page #283 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
212 Kamgramp Part Four All these proofs are progressively larger than the
previous ones. Due to the uncertainty of their size, these palya have been named
'Bhagavastthit'. It should be noted that even though the Kamvastthitpalya are
indefinite in width and length, they are considered to be fixed in height, with
a limit of 100 yojanas. Where should the Amavastthitpalya be made? This will be
revealed by the following verses. When each Amavastthitpalya is filled, one
sarpa is placed in a Shalaikapalya. In other words, the number of sarpas placed
in the Shalaikapalya indicates the number of times the Amavastthitpalya was
filled. When each Shalaikapalya is empty, one sarpa is placed in a
PratiShalaikapalya. The number of sarpas in the PratiShalaikapalya indicates the
number of times the Shalaikapalya was filled and emptied. When each
PratiShalaikapalya is filled and emptied, one sarpa is placed in a
MahaShalaikapalya, which indicates the number of times the PratiShalaikapalya
was filled and emptied. 73 || _ The method of filling the palya. As an example,
consider a heap of sand. When it is filled, it is considered complete. When it
is filled and then emptied, it is considered to be worn out. 7 || _ When the
sand is scattered, it is considered to be a sign of destruction. When the sand
is collected and then scattered, it is considered to be a sign of liberation. 7
||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 212 kamagrampa bhAga cAra ve sabhI pramANameM pUrva-pUrvakI apekSA bar3e-bar3e
hI hote jAte haiN| parimANako anizcitatAke kAraNa ina palyaukA nAma.
'bhagavasthita' ramamA gayA hai| yaha dhyAna rakhanA cAhiye ki kAmavasthitapalya
khambAI-caur3AIma aniyata honepara bhI U~cAImai niyata hI maryAda 100 yojana
mAna liye Ate haiN| amavasthitapalyoko kahA~ taka banAnA ? isakA khulAsA mAgeko
gAdhAose ho jaaygaa| matyeka anavasthitapalyake vAlI ho jAnepara paka-eka
sarSapa salAkApalya meM DAla diyA jAtA hai| arthAt zalAkA palyau DAle gaye
sarvayoMkI saMkhyAse yahI jAnA jAtA hai ki itanI vafA asarAmavasthitapalya bAbI
hue| hara eka zalAkApalyake khAlI hone ke samaya pakanaraka sarSapa
pratizalAkApalpameM DAlA jAtA hai| pratizalAkApalyake sarSako saMkhyAse yaha
vidita hotA hai ki timI bAra zalAkApasya marA gayA aura sAlI huaa|
pratizalAkApalyake eka-eka bAra mara jAme aura bAlI ho jAnepara eka-eka sarSapa
mahAzalAkApalyamai sala diyA jAtA hai, jisase yaha mAnA jA sakatA hai ki itanI
daphA pratizalAkApalya bharA gayA aura bAlI kiyA gayA  /  73  //  _ palpoMke
bharane bhAdikI vidhi  /  tAdIvudAhima iSi, kasarisavaM khipi pa nihie prme|
padama va tadantaM ciya, puSa bharie taMmi taha jINe  // 7it sippA mabAgapaDe,
sarisabo ipa sabAgalakSaNaM  /  pubho pIyo pa tamo, puci pi va tami uddharie  //
7 //

Page #284 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Panna Part Four  **Direct Advice Bomb, and Not Me Kind.  Sahithaya
Tedhiya, Turijakir Fuda Paro 17.**  **Vya-do-poshik-varsha-p Shipaya Nihithe
Prapame. Prathamamiva Tadantameva Punarmate Tasmintapa Liye. 4.**  **Lipyate
Shala-ka-palle Ekassa-sar-shapa Hanta Shaka-la-panena. Purna Diliyam Tata Purva-
dip Tasminnu-dhrite. 45.**  **Sone Shala-ka Triteye Evam Pratha-bheditaya Bhar.
Tesh-triteeyam Cha Turg Ya-ya-al Sphutam-atwarah. 76.**  **Mary-purna Bhagav-
sthi-ta-palyam-ense Ek-ek Sar-shapa Prip-samud-men Rakhana Chahiye, Jis Shipa Ya
Samudra Men Sar-shapa Samapt Ho Jayen, Gs Dip Ya Samudra Paryant Vistirnam Naya
Ama-vasthi-ta-pasp Banakar Use Sar-shaponse Bharna Chahiye.**  **In-mele Ek-ek
Sar-shapa Dwi-p-samudri Sat-me-par Jab Man-sthi-ta-paly Khali Ho Jay, Tab Shala-
ka-paly-men Ek Sar-shapa Shala-ma-chahiye. Is Tarah Ek-ek Sar-shapa Dalne-se Jay
Dusra Shana-ka-paly Mar Jay, Tab Use Purva-ki Tarah Uthana Chahiye.**  **Uthakar
Us-men-se Ek-ek Sar-shapa Nikal-kar Use Khali Kar-ma Aur Mati-shala-ka-men Ek
Sar-shapa Dalna Chahiye. Is Prakar Ana-vasthi-ta-se Shala-ka-ko Aur Ana-vasthi-
ta-shala-ka Bon-ause Triteye (Prati-shala-ka) Ko Aur Pehle Tin Paly-se Chauthe
(Maha-shala-ka) Paly-ko Bhar Dena Chahiye. Is Tarah Charon Palpo-ko Pari-purna
Bhar Dena Chahiye. 74-76.**  **Bha-va-rya: Sabse Pehle Saksh-yo-jan-praman Mut
Bhagav-vidhi-ta-pasya-ko Sar-shaponse Bharna Aur Un Sar-shapo-me-se Pak-ek Sar-
shapa-ko...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmapanya bhAga cAra sIdhe salAha bama, evaM nAti mI trh| sahiMtAya tediyA,
turijAkira phuDA paro 17 //  vAyadopoSikavarSapa zipayA nihite prapame  /
prathamamiva tadantameva punarmate tasmintapA lIye  //  4  //  lipyate
zalAkApalle ekassarSapa hAMta zakAlapaNena  /  pUrNA dilIyama tataH pUrvadipa
tasminnuddhRte  //  45  //  soNe zalAkA tRtIye evaM prathabheditAya bhara  /
testRtIyaM ca turga yAyAla sphuTAmatvAraH  /  /  76  //  marya-pUrNa
bhagavasthitapalyameMse eka-eka sarSapa prIpa-samudameM rAkhanA cAhiye, jisa
zIpa yA samudra meM sarSapa samApta ho jAyeM, gsa dIpa yA samudra paryanta
vistIrNaM nayA amavasthitapaspa banAkara use sarvapoMse bharanA caahiye| inamele
eka eka sarSapa dvIpa-samudrI satamepara jaba manaspitapalya khAlI ho jAya, taba
zalAkApalyameM eka sarvapa shlmaacaahiye| isa taraha eka-eka sarvapa DAlanese
jaya dUsarA zanAkApalya mara jAya, taba use pUrvakI taraha uThAnA caahiye|
uThAkara usameMse eka-eka sarSapa nikAlakara use khAlI karamA aura matizalAkAmeM
eka sarSapa DAlanA caahiye| isa prakAra anapasthitase zalAkAko aura anavasthita-
zalAkA bonause tIsare (pratizalAkA)ko aura pahale tIna palyase cauthe (
mahAzalAkA) palyako bhara denA caahiye| isa taraha cAroM palpoko paripUrNa bhara
denA cAhiye ||74-766 bhAvArya:sabase pahile sAkSa-yojana-pramANa mUta
bhagavavidhatapasyako sapaMpose bharanA aura una sarvapomese paka-eka sarpapako

Page #285 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Worm Granth Part 12**  * The Jambudvipa and all other islands and oceans
should be filled in this way. In this way, one by one, all the sarpas (snakes)
should be placed in the island or ocean where the original sarpa was located,
leaving it completely empty. From Jambudvipa (the original location) to this
sarpa-ending island or ocean, a long and wide new path should be built, which
should be the same height as the previous path. Then this newly built path
should be filled with all the sarpas, and one by one, each sarpa should be
placed in the next island or ocean. In this way, when this path is also emptied
by removing one by one all the sarpas, a sarpa shalaka (marker) should be placed
in the path indicating that the first newly built path has become empty. In the
island or ocean where the first newly built path becomes empty, a wide newly
built path should be built again from the original location (Jambudvipa) to that
island or ocean, and it should be filled with sarpas and one by one, each sarpa
should be placed in the next island or ocean. When it becomes completely empty,
a sarpa shalaka should be placed in the ending path. In this way, in the island
or ocean where the last sarpa is placed, a wide newly built path should be built
from the original location to that sarpa-ending island or ocean, and it should
be filled with sarpas and emptied according to the above method. When each newly
built path becomes empty, a sarpa shalaka should be placed in the path. When the
shalaka path becomes full of sarpas, a newly built path should be built from the
original location to the location of the last sarpa, and it should be filled
with sarpas. By this, the asthi path and the shalaka path have now been filled
with sarpas. From these two, the shalaka path should be removed, and one by one,
each sarpa from it should be placed in the next island or ocean according to the
above method. One

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 varmagrantha bhAga bAra * jambUdvIpa Adi pratyeka dvIpa tathA samudra meM
DAlanA cAhiye, isa rIti se eka-eka sarvadha bAlamese jisa dvIpa yA samudramai
mUla zramavasthitapasya bilakula khAlI ho jAya, jambUdvIpase (mUla sthAnase) isa
sarva samApti kAraka dvIpa yA samudra taka lambA-caur3A nayA patya banA honA
cAhiye jo U~cAImeM pahale patyarka barAbara hI ho  /  phira isa uttarAnavasthita
palpako sarvapoMse bhara denA aura eka-eka sapako Age ke dvIpa samudra DAlanA
caahiye| isa prakAra ekaeka sarpa nikAlane se jaba yaha palya bhI khAlI ho jAya,
taya isa prathama uttarAnavasthitapalvake khAlI ho jAnekA sUcaka eka sarvapa
zalAkA nAmake patyameM DAlanA  /  jisa dvIpameM yA jisa samudra meM prathama
utarAnasthita khAlI ho jAya, mUla sthAna (jambUdvIpase) usa dvIpa yA samudra
taka vistIrNa zranavasthitapalpa phira banAnA tathA use sarpapose bharakara Age
ke dvIpa samudra meM eka-eka sapa DAlanA cAhiye | usake bilakula khAlI ho
jAnepara samApti-suka eka sarSapa zalAkApalyameM phirale DAlanA cAhiye  /  isa
taraha jisa dvIpameM yA jisa samudra meM antima sarvadha DAlA gayA ho, mUla
sthAna se usa sarva samApti kAraka dvIpa yA samudra taka vistIrNa ekaeka
anavasthitasya pranAte jAnA aura use sarvapose bhara kara uru vidhi anusAra
khAlI karate jAnA aura eka-eka anavasthitapatyake khAlI ho cukanepara eka-eka
sarpapa zalAkApalyame DAlate jAnA  /  aisA karane se jaba zalAkApalya sarpapAse
pUrNa ho jAya, mUla sthAnale antima sarpapadhAle sthAna taka vistIrNa
anavasthitapatya banAkara use sarvapose bhara denA caahiye| isase aba taka
asthipatya aura zalAkApalya sarSapase bhara gye| ina do se zalAkApalyako uTAnA
aura usake sarpapomeMse eka-eka sarvapako ukta vidhike anusAra Ake dvIpa-
samudra meM DAlanA caahiye| eka taya

Page #286 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **ENG**  When all the sarvas are removed from the
shalaakapalya and it is completely empty, we should put one sarva from the
pratisalaakapalya into the shalaakapalya.   **H**  "The shalaakapalya is empty
and one sarva is in the pratisalaakapalya.   After this, we should put one sarva
from the anvasthitapanya into the dvipa samudra and empty it. Then, we should
put the evidence of its being empty into the shalaakapalya, which is now empty,
just like we did before. In this way, we should create new anvasthitapanya from
the original place to the place where the last sarva was placed, and fill it
with sarvas. Then, we should empty it according to the aforementioned method.
And, we should put one sarva into the shalaakapalya for each anvasthitapanya
that is emptied. By doing this, the shalaakapalya will be filled with sarvas
again. Then, we should create an anvasthitapanya from the original place to the
place where the last sarva was placed and fill it with sarvas. Now, the
anvasthitapanya and shalaakapalya are both full, and there is one sarva in the
pratisalaakapalya.  We should empty the shalaakapalya again according to the
previous method. When it is empty, we should put one sarva into the
pratisalaakapalya. Now, the pratisalaakapalya is full, the shalaakapalya is
empty, and there are two sarvas in the pratisalaakapalya.  Next, we should empty
the anvasthitapanya according to the aforementioned method and put one sarva
into the shalaakapalya. In this way, we should fill the shalaakapalya repeatedly
according to the aforementioned method..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra ENG eka sarvaca nikAlane se jaba zalAkApalya bilakula
bAlI ho jAya, rAya zalAkApalya ke kAlI ho AmekA sUcaka eka saya
pratizalAkApalpameM DAlanA caahiye| zrama taka se H """" par3A hai, zalAkApalya
khAlI ho cukA hai aura pratizalAkApalyama eka sapa par3A huA hai| isake pazcAt
abhavasthitapaNyake eka-eka sarvadako Age dvIpa samudra meM DAlakara use khAlI
kara denA cAhiye aura usake khAlI ho cukanekA subaka eka sarva pUrva kI taraha
zalAkApalyame, jAM khAlI ho gayA hai, DAlanA caahiye| isa prakAra mUla sthAnase
antima sarvapavAle sthAna taka vistIrNa nayA-nayA anavasthitapatya banAte jAnA
cAhiye aura use sarSapase bharakara ukta vidhike kAnusAra khAlI karate jAnA
cAhiye  /  tathA pratyeka anavasthitapatyake khAlI ho cukanevara eka-eka sarva
zalAkApalyameM DAlate jAnA caahiye| aisA karane se aya zalAkApalya sarpapoMsa
phirase bhara Aya, taba jisa sthAna meM antima sarSapa par3A ho, mUla sthAna se
usa sthAna taka vistIrNaM anavasthitapayako banAkara use bhI sarvapa bhara denA
caahiye| aba taka meM anavasthita aura zalAkA, ye do palya bhare hue haiM aura
pratizalA kApalyameM eka sarvapa hai  /  zalAkA patyako pUrva vidhi ke anusAra
phira se khAlI kara denA cAhiye aura usake khAlI ho cukanepara eka sarSapa
pratizalAkApatya meM rakhanA caahiye| aba taka spilya bharA huA hai, zalAkApalya
khAlI hai aura pratizalAkApalyameM do sarvatra par3he hue haiN| isake Age phira
bhI pUrvoktaH vidhike anusAra anavasthitapatyako khAlI karanA aura eka-eka
sarSapako zalAkAgatya meM DAlanA caahiye| isa prakAra zalAkApalyako bAra-bAra
bhara kara uta vidhike

Page #287 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Karmagranya Bhaga** portion should be completed.  According to the
**Anusara Jali**, after the **Pava Bali** is performed, one should place one
**Sarva** in each **Pratima Kapalya**.  The **Matita Kapalya** that was filled
with **Sarva** during childhood should also be emptied, and according to the
**Tabak** process, the **Amarasthita Pasyadvara** should be filled with **Shana
Kapasva** and the **Namavasthita Palya** should also be emptied.  Until now, the
**Anasthita**, **Ekhaaka**, and **Prati Shalaaka** have all been emptied.  We
should take the **Prati Shalaaka** and place one **Sarva** behind it, and then
place it in the **Dwipa-Samudra** in the **Bakha**.  After the **Pravisha Nakara
Lyarekhaali** is completed, one **Varsha** should be placed in the **Maha
Shalaaka Palya**, which is an indicator of the completion of the **Prati Yata
Kapasya**.  Until now, the **Anasthita** and **Shalaaka Palya** have been
filled, and there are six **Pravisha Khaka Palya** as witnesses, and one
**Varsha** is placed in the **Maha Shalaaka Palya**.  After this, the **Shalaaka
Palya** should be emptied and all the **Sarva** should be placed in the **Mati
Malaaka Palya**, and the **Malaya Asthita Palya** should be emptied and one
**Sarva** should be placed in the **Shalaaka Pasyadvara**.  In this way, a new
**Manavasthita Palya** should be created, filled with **Sarva**, and then
emptied according to the **Vidhik** process, and one **Sagavara** should be
placed in each **Shakaaka Palya**.  After each **Shalaaka Palya** is emptied,
one **Sarva** should be placed in the **Prati Shalaaka Palya**.  After the
**Prati Shalaaka Palya** is filled, it should be emptied and the **Shalaaka
Palya** should be filled by the **Anasthita**, and the **Prans** should also be
filled with the **Anasthita Palya**.  Until now, the first three **Palya** have
been filled, and the fourth one has one **Varsha**.  Then the **Prati Shalaaka
Palya** should be emptied in the same way, and one **Sarva** should be placed in
the **Maha Shalaaka Palya**.  Until now, the first two **Palya** are full, the
**Prati Shalaaka Palya** is empty, and there are two **Sarva** in the **Maha
Yata Kapalya**.  In this way, the **Maha Shalaaka** should be filled by the
**Prati Shalaaka**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagranya bhAga pAra anusArajAlI karane jAnA pavA bAlI ho jAnekara khUpha eka
eka sapa pratimAkApatya meM salave jAnA caahiye| bacapaka sapake DAlanele
matiyatAkApalya bhI pUrva nagara, tabAka prakriyA ke anusAra
amarasthitapasyadvArA zanAkApasvako maraNA aura pIche namavasthitapallAko bhI
mara rakhanA caahiye| abatako anasthita, ekhAkA aura pratizalAkA, ye sIna palpa
mara gaye haiN| hamamele pratiyalAkAko uThAkara usake sarpapIche eka-paka sapako
bhAgeke dvIpa-samudra meM bAkhamA baahiye| pravizanAkAralyarekhAlI ho cukanepara
eka varSapa jo pratiyatAkApasyAko samAtikA sUcaka hai, isako mahAzalAkApalyameM
salanA caahiye| aba taka anavasthita tathA zalAkA palpa bhare par3e 6
pravizAkhAkApalpa sAkSI hai aura mahAzatAkApalpameM eka sarSapa par3A huA hai|
isa manantara zalAkApalyako bAlI kara paka sarvapa matimalAkApalyameM DAlanA
aura malayAsthitapalyako khAlI kara zalAkApasyameM eka sarSapa sAkhanA cAhiye  /
isa prakAra nayA-mayA manavasthitapalpa banAkara use sarvapose bharakara tathA
uka vidhika anusAra use khAkhIkara eka-eka sAgavArA zAkhAkApalyako bharanA
caahiye| hara eka zalAkApalyake khAlI ho khukamepara eka-eka sarvara
pratizalAkAralyame DAlAmA cAhiye  /  pratizakhAkApalya bhara khAneke bAda
anavasthitadvArA zalAkApalya bhara lenA aura pransameM anavasthitapalpa mI bhara
denA cAhiye  /  aba takame pahale tIna palya bhara gaye haiM aura cauthemeM eka
varSapa hai| phira pratizalAkApalyako uka rItise sAlo karanA aura
mahAzalAkApalyameM eka sarSapa DAlanA caahiye| bhara takameM pahale do palpa
pUrNa hai  /  pratizalAkApalya vAlI hai aura mahAyatAkApalyameM do sapaMpa haiN|
isa raha pratizakhAkAdvArA mahAzavAkAko bhara denA caahiye|

Page #288 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part 12 **217**  When, at the time of the emptying of the
previous previous palya, one sarvap is placed in each, then the fourth, third,
and second palya should be filled with the unestablished palya, which should be
made long and wide from the original place to the island or sea with the most
sarvap. In this order, it is filled with the four palya sarvap.   **74-76**  The
use of all perfect palya. Padmatinluria Vishadhi Pallach Usarisva Ya. Samvo Vi
Egarati. Ruvani Paramasankhijjam. || 77 ||  **77**  The islands and oceans
raised from the first three palya, with four sarvap in each palya. Sakarashee,
Rumaan Paramasankhyeyam. || 77 ||  **Meaning:**  The number of islands and
oceans in which one sarvap has been placed, after the three palya have been
emptied, is one less than the number obtained by adding the number of these
islands and oceans to the number of sarvap in the four perfect palya. || 77 ||
**Meaning:**  The method described above for repeatedly filling and emptying the
unestablished, galaka, and pratisalama palya, should be followed. The number of
islands and oceans in which one sarvap is placed, is one less than the number
obtained by adding the number of all these islands and oceans to the number of
sarvap filled in the four palya.  All numbers between the highest and lowest
numbers should be considered as medium numbers. Wherever the word "sankhyat" is
used in the scriptures, it refers to the medium number. || 77 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga bAra 217 jaba bhara isa prakAra pUrva-pUrva palya ke khAlI
ho jAne ke samaya DAle gaye eka-eka sarvapa se kramaza: cauthA tIsarA aura
dUsarA pa jAya taba anavasthitapastha, jo ki mUla sthAna se atima sarSapavAle
dvIpa yA samudra taka lambA-caur3A banAyA sapoM se bhara denA caahiye| isa krama
se usa bhare jAne 74-76 !! jAtA hai, usako bhI cAroM palpa sarvapoM se ThasA
sarva paripUrNa patyoM kA upayoga  /  paDhamatinluriyA vISadahI pallaca
usarisavA ya  /  samvo vi egarAtI. rUvaNI paramasaMkhijjaM  //  77  //
prathamAtripalyoddhRtA dvIpodadhayaH palyacatuH sarSapAva  /  sakarAzI, rUmAna
paramasaMkhyeyam  /  /  77  /  /  | artha - jitane dvopa- samudroM meM eka-eka
sarSapa DAlane se pahale tIna patya khAlI ho gaye haiM ve saba dropamamutra aura
paripUrNa cAra palpoM ke mapa ina donoM ko saMkhyA milAne se jo saMkhyA hai, eka
kama vahI saMkhyA utkRSTa saMsthAta hai  // 77 //  mArtha anavasthita, galAkA
aura pratizalAmA patya ko bArabAra saMbaMdhoM se bhara kara una ho khAlI karane
ko jo vidhi Upara dilAI gaI hai. usake anusAra jitane dvIpoM meM tathA jitane
samudroM meM eka-eka sarvapa par3A huA hai, una saba dvIpoM ko tathA saba
samudrakI saMkhyA meM cAroM palya ke bhare hue sarvapoM ko saMkhyA milA dena se
jo saMkhyA hotI hai, eka kama yahI saMkhyA utkRSTa saMkhyAta hai  /  utkRSTa
saMkhyAta aura jaghanya saMkhyAta, ina bo ke bIca ko saba saMkhgata ko madhyama
saMpAta samajhanA cAhiye  /  zAstra ma jahA~-kahIM saMkhyAta zabda kA vyavahAra
huA hai, vahA~ saba jagaha madhyama saMkhyAta se hI matalaba hai  //  77  //

Page #289 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Four of the Karma Granth: The Nature of the Innumerable and the
Infinite [From the Bo Gathas]  218. We perceive the innumerable as a heap of
grains. The innumerable is small, the measure of an Avalika time. [78] The
innumerable with form is small, the measure of an Avalika time, when examined.
The innumerable with form is small, the measure of an Avalika time. [7]
**Meaning:** The excellent form is certainly examined and counted. By practicing
the examination and counting of the inferior, the inferior becomes counted. The
inferior counted is the result of the times of an Avalika. [7]  **Explanation:**
By adding one number to the excellent counted, the inferior examined and counted
is obtained. That is, the total number of the islands and oceans with one Sarvap
on each, and the four-footed Sarvaps combined, is the examined and counted.
**Note:**  1. In Digambar scriptures, the word "rupa" is also used in the sense
of a number. For example: the 107th and 110th Gathas of the Jivand, and the
commentary on the 74th Gatha of the Pravachana Sara-Shayadhikar. 2. To practice
a number, write its digits as many times as the number itself, and multiply them
together. That is, multiply the first digit by the second, and then multiply the
result by the third digit, and so on. The final product is the practice of the
desired number. For example, the practice of 5 is 1125. The method is as
follows: Write 5 five times: 5 5 5 5 5. Multiply the first 5 by the second 5 to
get 25. Multiply 25 by the third 5 to get 125. Multiply 125 by the fourth 5 to
get 625. Multiply 625 by the fifth 5 to get 3125. - Anuyogadwar-Tika, p. 316.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 218. karmagrantha bhAga cAra asaMkhyAta aura ananta kA svarUpa  /  [ bo gAthAoM
se  /  ] vayaM tu paritA-saMkhaM lahU assa rAsi abhAse  /  jusAsaMkhijjaM laghu,
AvaliyAsamayaparimANaM  // 78 //  rUpayutaM tu parIkSAsaMkhyaM ladhvasya
rAzerabhyAse  /  yuktAsaMkhyeyaM laghu, AvalikAsamayaparimANam  // 7 //  artha -
utkRSTa rUpa sa avazya parItA saMkhyAta hotA hai| jadhamma parItA saMkhyAna kA
abhyAsa karane se jaghanya yuktAsaMkhyAta hotA hai  /  jaghanya yuktAsaMdhyAsa
hI eka AvalikA ke samayoM kA pariNAma hai ||7|| mAvArtha - utkRSTa saMkhyAta meM
eka saMkhyA milAne se jaghanya parIkSAsaMkhyAta hotA hai  /  arthAt eka-eka
sarvapa DAle hue dvIpasamudroM kI aura cAra padoM sarvapoM kI milI huI saMpUrNa
saMkhyA hI parIttAsaMkhyAta hai  /  gha jaghanya parIkSA saMkhyA kA abhyAsa
karane para jo saMkhyA 5 1- digambara zAstroM meM bhI 'rUpa' zabda eka saMkhyA
ke artha meM prayukta hai  /  jaise: jIvANDa kI 107 tathA 110vIM gAyA Adi tathA
pravacanasAra-zayAdhikAra kI 74vIM gAyA kI TIkA 2 jisa saMkhyA kA abhyAsa karanA
ho, usake aGga ko utanI daphA likhakara paraspara guNanA arthAt prathama aGga ko
dUsare ke sAtha guNanA aura jo guNana - phala Ave, usako tIsare aGga ke sAtha
guNanA, isake guNana - phala ko agale ajha ke sAtha isa prakAra pUrva - pUrva
guNanaphala ko agale agale aGga ke sAtha guNanA, anta meM jo guNanaphala prApta
ho, vahIM vivakSita saMkhyA kA abhyAsa hai  /  udAharaNArtha- 5 kA abhyAsa 1125
hai  /  isakI vidhi isa prakAra hai: 5 ko pAMca daphA likhanA: 5 5 5, 5, 5  /
pahale bhU ko dUsare 5 ke sAtha guNane se 25 hue, 25 ko tIsare 5 ke sAtha guNane
se 125, 125 ko cauthe 5 ke sAtha guNane se 625, 625 ko pA~caveM 5 ke sAtha
guNane se 3125 hue| - anuyogadvAra - TIkA, pR0 316  /

Page #290 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Marg Char 216  The term "Jghanya Yuktasankhyat" is used in the
scriptures. It refers to the time of Aavlika, which is considered "Asankhyat"
(innumerable). It should be understood as "Jghanya Yuktasankhyat".    These
"Jghanya Yuktasankhyat" should not be considered as "Utkrisht Parikshasankhyat"
(excellent examination number), "Jghanya Parikshasankhyat" (inferior examination
number), or any number between them. They should be considered as "Madhyam
Parikshasankhyat" (medium examination number). || 78 ||
**Vitichoupanchamagunane, Kama Sagasankh Padhamchausatta. Nantar Te Ruvayuya,
Majsa Rukun Guru Paccha. || 76 ||**  **Dvitiyatrikayachatumaganaka Santa
Anantaaste Rupayuta Madhya Rupota Guravaha Paschat. || 36 ||**  **Meaning:**  In
the second, third, fourth, and fifth root-meditations, there are seven
"Asankhyat" (innumerable) and one "Khaya" (lost) followed by seven "Ananta"
(infinite) in sequence. When combined, these numbers become "Madhyam Sankhya"
(medium number). When one number is subtracted, they become "Utkrisht Sankhya"
(excellent number). || 76 ||  **Bhavarth:** The previous verse explained the
four types of "Asankhyat". Now, the remaining types of "Asankhyat" and all types
of "Ananta" are described.  The root-meditations of "Asankhyat" and "Ananta" are
six in number, originating from the Jina. They are: (1) Parotasat, (2)
Asankhyatasankhyat, (3) Parikshasankhyat, (4) Parikshananta, (5) Suskasankhyat,
and (6) Anantananta.  By differentiating the three types of "Asankhyat" into
"Jghanya" (inferior), "Madhyam" (medium), and "Utkrisht" (excellent), and
similarly for "Ananta", we get the types of "Yuktasankhyat" as shown in the 71st
verse.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha mArga cAra 216 bAnI hai, vaha jaghanya yuktAsaMkhyAta hai  /
zAstra meM AvalikA ke samayako asaMkhyAta kahA hai, so jaghanya yuktAsaMkhyAta
samajhanA cAhiye  /  e kama javanya yuktAsaMsthAsa ko utkRSTa parIkSAsaMkhyAta
tathA jaghanya parIttAsaMkhyAta aura utkuSTa parIsAsaMkhyAta ke bIca kI saba
saMkhyAoM ko madhyama parIsAsaMkhyAta jAnamA nAhiye  /  /  78  //
viticaupaMcamaguNaNe, kamA sagAsaMkha paDhamacausattA  /  naMtara te rUvajuyA,
majsA rUkUNa guru pacchA  // 76 //  dvitIyatRkAyacatumaganakA santA anantAste
rUpayutA madhyA rUpotA guravaH pazcAt ||36|| artha - dUsare, tIsare, cauthe aura
pAMcave mUla meda abhyAsa rane para anukrama se sAtavA~ asaMkhyAta aura pahalA,
khoyA aura sAta ananta hote haiN| eka sI milAne para ye hI saMkhyAe~ madhyama
saMkhyA aura eka saMkhyA kama karane para pIche ko utkRSTa saMkhyA  /  hotI hai
//  76  //  bhAvArtha - pichalo gAthA meM asaMkhvAra ke cAra bhedoM kA svarUpa
batalAyA gayA hai  /  aba usaka zeSa mevoM kA tathA ananta ke saba mevoM kA
svarUpa likhA jAtA hai  /  asaMkhyAta aura ananta ke mUla-meva jIna-tona hai, jo
milane se chaha hote haiN| jaise - ( 1 ) parotAsAta (2 (3) asaMkhyAtAsakhyAta
(4) parItAnanta, aura (6) anantAnanta  /  asaMkhpAta ke tInoM aura utkRSTa bheda
karane se nI aura isa taraha ananta ke bho nI usara yukkAsaMta aura (5) suskAna
sa ke jaghanya madhyama meva hote haiM, jo 71 vIM gAvA meM dikhAye hue haiM  /

Page #291 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Grantha, Part Nar  **From the six original Mevas, the second, Yukta-
Samkhyat, when practiced, results in the seventh of the nine Uttar Mevas,
Asansthata, which is the lowest Asankhyata-Samkhyat. Subtracting one from the
lowest Asankhyata-Samkhyat results in the higher Uttar Meva, Utkrishta Yukta-
Samkhyat. All the numbers between the lowest Yukta-Samkhyat and the highest
Yukta-Samkhyat are Madhyama Yukta-Samkhyat.**  **From the six original Mevas,
the third, Asankhyata-Samkhyat, when practiced, results in the first of the
infinite Uttar Mevas, Ananta, which is the lowest Parikshananta. Subtracting one
from the lowest Parikshananta results in the higher Uttar Meva, Utkrishta
Asankhyata-Samkhyat. All the numbers between the lowest Asankhyata-Samkhyat and
the highest Asankhyata-Samkhyat are Madhyama Asankhyata-Samkhyat.**  **From the
four original Mevas, the fourth, Parikshananta, when practiced, results in the
fourth of the infinite Uttar Mevas, Ananta, which is the lowest Yukta-Ananta.
Subtracting one from the lowest Yukta-Ananta results in the higher Uttar Meva,
Utkrishta Parikshananta. All the numbers between the lowest Parikshananta and
the highest Parikshananta are Madhyama Parikshananta.**  **From the five
original Mevas, the fifth, Yukta-Ananta, when practiced, results in the seventh
of the infinite Uttar Mevas, Ananta, which is the lowest Ananta-Ananta.
Subtracting one from the lowest Ananta-Ananta results in the higher Uttar Meva,
Utkrishta Yukta-Ananta. All the numbers between the lowest Yukta-Ananta and the
highest Yukta-Ananta are Madhyama Yukta-Ananta. All the numbers beyond Ananta-
Ananta are Madhyama Ananta-Ananta; because according to the Siddhanta, there is
no Utkrishta Ananta-Ananta.**  **Bhaala || 72 ||**  **1. Anuyogadwar, p. 241.**
**531**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma grantha bhAga nAra ukta chaha mUla bhejoM meM se dUsare kA arthAt
yuktAsaMkhyAta kA abhyAsa karane se nau uttara mevoM meM se sAtavA asaMsthAta
arthAt jaghanya asaMkhyAta saMkhyAta hotA hai  /  jaghanya asakhyAtAsaMkhyAta
meM se eka ghaTAne para pIche kA utkRSTa meva arthAt utkRSTa yuktAsaMkhyAta hotA
hai  /  jaghanya yuktAsakhyAta aura utkRSTa yuktAsaMkhyAta ke bIca kI saba
saMsthAeM madhyama yukta saMkhyAta hai  /  220 ukta chaha mUla mevoM meM se
tIsare kA arthAt asaMkhyAtA saMkhyAta kara abhyAsa karane se amanta ke bhI
uttara bhedoM meM se prathama ananta arthAt jaghanya parIzAnamsa hotA hai|
jadhanya parItAnana meM se eka saMkhyA ghaTAne para utkRSTa asaMkhya tArArUpAsa
hotA hai  /  jaghanya asaMkhyAtAsaMkhyAta aura utkRSTa asaMkhyAta saMkhyAta ke
bIca kI saba saMkhyAe~ madhyama asaMkhyAta saMkhyAta haiM  /  cauye mUla meda kA
arthAt parIkSAnantakA abhyAsa karane se ananta kA cauthA uttara meva arthAt
jaghanya yuktAnanta hotA hai  /  eka kama jaghanya yuktAnanta utkRSTa
parIkSAnanta hai  /  jaghanya parIsAnanta yathA utkRSTa parItAnagala ke bIca ko
saba sakhyAe~ madhyama zAna haiM  /  pA~sa mUla bhava kara arthAt yuktAnanta kA
abhyAsa karane se anantakA sAtoM uttara meva arthAt jaghanya antAnanta hotA hai|
isameM se eka kama karane para utkRSTa yuktAnanta hotA hai  /  jaghanya
yuktAnanta maura vaskRSTa yuktAnta ke bIca kI saba sakhyAe~ madhyama muktAnanta
hai| anya amaratAmanta ke Age ko saba saMkhyAe~ madhyama anantAnanta hI hai;
kyoMki siddhAnta' mata ke anusAra utkRSTa anantAnanta nahIM mAnA bhAlA  //  72
//  1 anuyogadvAra, pR0 tathA 241  /  531

Page #292 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter Four of the Karma Grantha Regarding the Infinite and Innumerable Bhavyas
1. The Karmika view. This is the scriptural statement, the separate, the fourth,
the innumerable. It is innumerable, but its form is light. 80.  2. This guru has
described the form. These are the six types. The worldly space-points, the
dharmic and adharmic, the jiva-points. 1.  3. The states, the bondage-
dispositions, the non-participation, the yoga-separation-divisions. The two
times, the individual nigodas, are thrown out. 2.  4. Again, remembering that,
the multitude, with its infinite, light, fit in the practice, the fearless jiva-
measure. 3.  5. Then, in this class, it is born, going lightly, and thrice. But
not in the class, these six types are thrown out. 4.  6. The siddhas, the
nigodas, the plants, the time-flowers, and the worldly non-beings, the three-
pointed, the single-pointed. 65.  7. Thrown, going, it becomes the eldest, it
conducts in the middle. The insightful, the written, the divine, the celestial.
56.  This, I believe, is the separate, the fourth, the innumerable, according to
the scriptural statement. The devotional-contact-innumerable, but its form is
light, is the middle one. 8.  The forms, having described the three, these ten
types. The worldly space-points, the dharmic and adharmic, the jiva-points. 81.
The states, the bondage-dispositions, the non-participation, the yoga-
separation-divisions. The two times, the individual nigodas, are thrown out. 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra asaMkhyAta tathA ananta ke bhevoM ke viSaya meM _
kArmagranthika mata  /  iya suttattaM anne, vaggiyamikkasi cautthayamasakhaM  /
hoi asaMlAkhaM, lahu rUpajayaM tu taM mamaM  /  /  80 //  rUvUNamAimaM guru
tivagigaDaM taM ime. isa khebe  /  logAkAsapaesA dhammAdhammegajiyavesA  // 1 //
Thii baMdhajjhavasAyA, abhAgA jogamacheyalibhAyA  /  duha ya samANa samayA
paseyaniyoyae khivasu  // 2 //  puNa ravi taMmiti vaggiya, pArattaNaMta saha
tassa rAsINaM  /  abbhAse lahu juttA, pataM abhadhvajiyapamANaM  // 3 //
tatvaggepuNa jAyai, gaMtAta lahu taM ca tikkhutto  /  baggasu taha vi ne taM ho,
iNata kheve khivasu cha ime  // 4 //  siddhA nigoyajIvA, vaNassaI kAlapumAlA
ceva  /  sandhamaloganahaM puNa, tiggilaM kevaladugaMmi  // 65 //  khitte
gaMtANataM, havei jiTTa tu vavaharaI mamjhaM  /  iMsuhamaviyArI, lihio
devivasUrohi  // 56 //  iti sUtrokta manye bagilaM laccaturthakamasaMkhyam  /
bhaktyasaMspAsaMkhyaM laghu rUpayutaM tu tanmadhyam  /  /  8  /  /  rUpAnamAdima
zurU trivayitvA tadimAna daza kSepAn  /  nokakAza pradezA dhamAdhamaka
jIvapradezAH  /  /  81  /  /  sthi bandhAvyavasAyA anubh|gaa
yogacchedaparibhAgAH  /  dvayozca samayoH mamayAH pratyeka nigodakAH kSipa ||2||
punarapi tAsmaritraveMgita parItAnantaM laghu tasya rAzInAm  /  abhyAse laghu
yutAnantamabhayajIva pramANam  // 53 //  5-ye hI isa kSega trilokasArakI 43 se
44 taka kI gAthAoMmeM nirdiSTa hai . 2-ye hI chaha zepa trisIkasArako 46SIM
gAthAmeM varNita haiM  /

Page #293 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **222**  **6.**  In that, the revived infinite-infinite is
small, and that too thrice. Even so, O friend, do not throw the infinite-
infinite six times.  **85.**  The Siddhas, the Nigoda-jiva, the plants, the
Kalapudgala, and all the Lokanabha, having gone thrice, become the Kevala-dvi.
**86.**  When the infinite-infinite is thrown, the greatest is obtained, but the
middle is used. Thus, the subtle meaning is explained by Devendrasuri.  **80.**
As per the sutra, the opinion has been stated. Now, the opinion of other
Acharyas is stated. By multiplying the least innumerable by itself four times,
the least innumerable is obtained. By adding one to the least innumerable, the
middle innumerable is obtained.  **80.**  By subtracting one from the least
innumerable, the previous Guru, i.e., the excellent innumerable, is obtained.
Multiply the least innumerable by itself three times and write it as "ten"
innumerable.  **1.**  To multiply a number by itself three times, square the
number, then square the square, and then square the square of the square. For
example, to multiply 5 by itself three times, square 5 to get 25, square 25 to
get 625, and square 625 to get 390625. This is 5 multiplied by itself three
times.  **2.**  The Lokakasha, Dharma-astikaya, and the four regions are all
equal to the innumerable-innumerable.  **Adharma-astikaya** and one Jiva,
**Jnanavaraniya** etc., each karma has innumerable distinctions from the least
to the greatest, due to the difference in time. For example, the least state of
Jnanavaraniya is the Antarmukhurta measure, and the greatest state is the thirty
Koti-koti Sagaropama measure. From Antarmukhurta, one time more is two times,
three times more is three times, and so on, increasing by one time each time,
until one time less than thirty Koti-koti Sagaropama, all these states are
middle. Antarmukhurta and the head...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 222 tadameM punarjIvite'nantAnantaM laghu tacca trikRtvaH  /  vayasya tathApi
na tamanantakSepAn kSipa SaDimAn  // 6 //  siddhA nigodajIvara vanaspatiH
kAlapudglAzcaiva  /  sarva malokanabhaH punastriyaM gayitvA kevaladvikaM  //  85
//  kSipte'nantAnanta bhavati jyeSThaM tu vyavaharati madhyam  /  iti sUkSmartha
vicAro likhito devendrasUribhiH  // 86 //  bhAna hara artha-pIche sUtrAnusArI
mata kahA gayA hai| aba anya AcAryo kA mata kahA jAtA hai  /  caturya asaMkhyAta
arthAt jaghanya yuktA saMkhyAta kA eka mazra varga karane se jadhanya asaMkhyAtA
saMkhyAta hotA hai  /  maghaNya asaMkhyAtA saMkhyAta meM eka saMkhyA milAne se
madhyama asaMkhyAta saMkhyAta hotA hai ||80|| adhanya asaMkhyAtA saMkhyAta meM
se eka saMkhyA ghaTA vo jAya to pIche kA guru arthAt utkRSTa yuktAsaMkhyAta hotA
hai  /  janya asaMmAtA saMkhyAta kA tIna bAra varga kara moghe likho dasa'
asaMkhyAta - 1 - kisI saMkhyA kA tIna bAra varga karanA ho to usa saMkhya kA
varga karanA, varga-janya saMsthA kA varga karatA aura varga-janya saMkhyA kA
bhI varga karanA  /  udAharaNArthaM 5 kA tIna bAra varga karanA ho to 5 kA varga
25, 25 kA varga 625, 625 kA varga 360625) maha pA~ca kA tIna bAra varga huA  /
2 - lokAkAza, dharmAstikAya, ina cAroM ke pradeza asaMkhyAta asaMkhyAta Apasa
meM tulya hai  /  adharmAstikAya aura eka jIva, jJAnAvaraNIya Adi pratyeka karma
kI sthiti ke jaghanya se utkRSTa paryanta samaya-bheda se asaMkhyAta bheda hai
/  jaise- jJAnAvaraNIya kI jadhanya sthiti antarmuhUrta pramANa aura utkRSTa
sthiti tIsa koTAkoTI sAgaropamapramANa hai  /  antarmuhUrta se eka samaya adhi
do samaya atrika, tIna samama adhika, isa taraha eka-eka samaya bar3hate
bar3hate eka samaya kama tIsa koTAkoTI sAgaropama taka kI saba sthitiyA~
madhyama hai  /  antarmuhUrta aura sIsa

Page #294 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part, Chapter 223  **223 Numbers to be included in it:** (1) The
regions of Lokakasha, (2) Between Dharmaastisagaropama, there is the effect of
countless times. Therefore, even though the Agny and Utkrishta states are of one
type, there are countless varieties of the Gnanavaraneya state due to the
inclusion of the middle states. The same should be understood regarding the
state of other karmas. The number of Adhyavasyas that are the cause of each
state is equal to countless Lokakasha regions. "Paitiisankhalogasama." - A. 55,
Pancham Karmagrantha by Devendrasur. In this place, the number of all state-
binding Adhyavasyas is intended.  **Anubhag** means the result of Kashayik,
which is the cause of Rasa. Kashayik result means countless varieties of
Adhyavasyas in the form of Teev, Teevratar, Teeasama, Mand, Mandatar, Mandtama,
etc. Each Anubhag-sthan is bound by each Kashayik result because the Rasa-
samparthakas of the Karma Paramanus taken by one Kashayik result are called
Anubhag-bandha in the scriptures. See the 31st verse of Kammapatti, commentary
by Shriyasovijayaji. Therefore, the Anubhag-sthan born from Kashayik result is
also equal to Kashayik result, i.e., countless. In this context, it should be
known that there are countless Anubhag-sthans in each state-binding. Because
there are as many Adhyavasyas as there are Anubhag-sthans, and in each state-
binding, the Adhyavasyas that are the cause are countless Lokakasha region-
proof.  **Yoga** has countless **nivibhag anshas**. The part that cannot be
divided even by knowledge is called **nivibhag ansha**. In this place, the
**nivibhag anshas** related to **mog** of all beings from **nigod** to
**sanshi** are included.  **Pratyek sharee** is the body whose owner is one
being. **Pratyek sharee** is countless. Because from Prithvi Kayik to Usakayik,
all types of **Pratyek** beings combined are countless.  **Nigod sharee** is the
body that is held by countless beings. Such **nigod sharee** is countless.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga pAra 223 saMkhyAyeM usameM milAnA  /  (1) lokAkAza ke
pradeza, (2) dharmAstisAgaropama ke bIca meM asakhyAta samayoM kA asara hai|
isaliye aghanya aura utkRSTa sthiti eka eka prakAra kI hone para bhI usameM
madhyama sthitiyA~ milAne se jJAnAvaraNIya kI sthiti ke asaMkhyAta bheda hote
haiM  /  anya karmoM kI sthiti ke viSaya meM bhI isI saraha samajha lenA cAhiye
/  hara eka sthiti ke andha meM kAraNabhUta adhyavasAyoM kI saMkhyA asaMkhyAta
lokAkAza ke pradezoM ke barAbara kahIM huI haiM  /  "paiTiisaMkhalogasamA  / "
--aa. 55,devendrasUri-kRta paJcama karmagrantha  /  isa jagaha saba sthiti-
bandhano kAraNabhUta adhyavasAyoM kIsaMkhyA vivakSita hai| anubhAga arthAt
rasakA kAraNa kASAyika pariNAma hai| kApAyika pariNAma arthAt adhyavasAyake
tIva, tIvratara, tIasama, manda, mandatara mandatama Adi rUpa se asaMkhyAta
bheda haiM  /  eka-eka bhASApika pariNAma se eka-eka anubhAga-sthAna kA bandha
hotA hai kyoMki eka kASAyika pariNAma se gRhIta karma paramANaoM ke rasa-
mparthakoM ko hI zAstra meM anubhAga bandha. kahA hai| dekhiye kammapayaTI kI 31
vI gAthA zrIyazovijayajI-kRta ttiikaa| imaliye kASAyika pariNAma-janya anubhAga
sthAna bhI kAAyika pariNAma ke tulya arthAt asaMkhyAta hI hai| prasaMgataH yaha
bAta jAnanI cAhiye ki pratyeka sthiti-bandha meM asaMkhSAta anubhAga-sthAna hote
hai| kyoMki jitane adhyavasAya utane hI anubhAgasthAna hote haiM aura pratyeka
sthiti-bandha meM kAraNabhUta adhyavasAya asaMkhyAta lokAkAzapradeza-pramANa
haiN| yoga ke nivibhAga aMza asaMkhyAta hai| jima aMza kA vibhAga kevalajJAna se
bhI na kiyA jA sake.usako nivibhAga aMza kahate haiM 1 isa jagaha nigoda se
saMzI paryanta saba jIvoM ke moga,sambandhI nimiAga aMzoMkIsaMsmAiSTa hai| jisa
zarIra kA svAmI eka hI jIva ho, vaha 'pratyeka zarIra' hai| pratyeka zarIra
asaMkhyAta hai| kyoMki pRthvI kAyika se lekara usakAyika paryaMnta saba prakAra
ke pratyeka jIva milAne se asaMkhyAta hI hai| jisa eka zarIra ke dhAraNa karane
vAle ananta jIva hoM bahA 'nigoda zarIra'  /  aise nigodazarIra asaMkhyAta hI
hai

Page #295 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagranth Part Four  **(3) The realm of Adharmastikaya, (4) The realm of
Ekpadiya, (5) The realm of Rithithi, (6) The realm of Andha-janaka Adhyavasaya,
(7) The realm of Anumana Vishesh, (8) The realm of Yoga Nirvibhaga Ansh, (9) The
realm of Avasarpini and Utsarpini, (10) The realm of each body and (11) The
realm of Nigovasharira.**  **||12||**  Add the above mentioned numbers and then
square the sum. By squaring, you get Jghanya Parisanant. By practicing Jghanya
Parisanant, you get Jghanya Yuktanashta. This is the measure of the living
beings. **||3||**  **(2) Kanik Jiva**  **1**  By squaring Jghanya Yuktanashta,
you get Jghanya Anantanant. Square Jghanya Anantanant three times. But even
after that, it does not become Utkshta Anantanant. Therefore, after squaring
three times, add the following six infinite numbers: **(1) Siddha, (2) Three
times the time of the three kalas, (3) The total number of Pudgal-Paramanu, (4)
Time, (5) Space, and (6) The entry of the space.**  Add these six infinite
numbers and then square the sum three times. Then add the number of the
K-Paryayas. In the scriptures, Anantanant is used, but it refers to Madhyama
Anantanant, not Jghanya or Utkshta Anantanant. This section, called
"Sookshmarthe Vichar", was written by Shri Devendra Bhuri. **||65||86||**
**Meaning:**  From verse 71 to 76, the description of numbers is given according
to the Sangyatik Mat. Now, according to the Karmagranthik Mat, the description
is given. There is no difference of opinion between the Saiddhantic and
Karmagranthik Acharyas regarding the nature of the first seven bhevas out of the
twenty-one bhevas. There is a difference of opinion regarding the nature of the
remaining bhevas.  **1.** The word "Alok" in the original text refers to both
Lok and Alok.  **2.** Since the number of Jneyaparyayas is infinite, the number
of Gyanaparyayas is also infinite.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra kahA ke pradeza 3 adharmAstikAya ke pradeza, 4) eka
padIya ke pradeza (5) rithitiandha-janaka adhyavasAya sthAna. (6) anumAna
vizeSa, (7) yoga ke nirvibhAga aMza (8) avasarpiNI aura utsarpiNI, ina dI kAla
ke samaya, (e) pratyeka zarIra aura (10 nigovazarIra ||12|| ukta vasa saMkhyAeM
milAkara phira usakA lona bAra varga karanA  /  varga karane se anya parItAnanta
hotA hai  /  jaghanya parIsAnanta kA abhyAsa karane se jadhanya yuktAnazta hotA
hai| yaha abhaya jIvoM kA parimANa hai  /  / 3 /  /  224 2) (kANika jIva * 1
usakA arthAt jaghanya yuskAnanta kA varge karane se jaghanya anantAnagala hotA
hai  /  jaghanya anantAnanta kA tIna bAra varga karanA lekina itane se hI vaha
utkaSTa anaztAmanta nahIM bntaa| isaliye tIna bAra varga karake usameM nIce
likhI chaha ananta saMkhyAe~ milAmA  // 4 (1) siddha (4) tInoM kAla ke samaya (
5 saMpUrNa pudagala - paramANu aura ( 3 ) samaya AkAza ke praveza, ina chaha kI
ananta saMkhyAoM ko milAkara phira se tIna bAra SagaM karanA aura usameM kevala
kake paryAyoM kI sakhyA' ko milAna | zAstra meM anantAnanta kA vyavahAra kiyA
jAtA hai, so madhyama anantAnanta kA jadhanya para utkaSTa kA nahIM  /  isa
sUkSmArtha vicAra nAmaka prakaraNa ko zrI devendra bhUri ne likhA hai  // 65 //
86 //  ) bhAvArtha- gA0 71 se 76 taka meM saMkhyA kA varNana kiyA hai, so
saMjJAtika mata ke anusAra aba kArmagranthika mata ke anusAra varNana kiyA jAtA
hai  /  saMkhyA ke ikkIsa mevoM meM se pahale sAta bhevo ke svarUpa ke viSaya
meM saiddhAntika aura phArmagranthika AcAryo kA koI matabheva nahIM hai: aTha
Adi saba mevoM ke svarUpa ke viSaya meM matabheda hai  /  1- mulake 'aloka'
padase loka aloka dono prakAra kA Avaza vivakSita hai  /  2 - jJeyaparyAya
ananta hone se jJAnaparyAya bhI ananta hai  /

Page #296 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Granth Part Four  The **Jghanya Asankhyata** is obtained by squaring
the **Kama Prabhvika Afkai Ki Jayaka** class. Then, multiply this number by
three and add the aforementioned **Asankhyata** numbers like **Lokaakash-
Pradesh** etc. Then, square the result three times. The number obtained after
this squaring is called **Anyat Paritaananta**.  **225**  By practicing
**Jghanya Paritaananta**, we get **Jghanya Yuktaanams**. The scriptures state
that **Amchya Jeevas** are infinite, so they are considered **Jghanya
Yuktaanams**.  By squaring **Adhamya Yuktaanams** once, we get **Jghanya
Anantaanams**. Then, square **Jghanya Anantaanams** three times and add the
aforementioned six numbers like **Siddh** etc. Then, square the result three
times and add the total number of **Kevalashan** and **Kevaldarshan**
categories. The number obtained after this addition is called **Utkrisht
Anantaanams**.  Regarding the nature of **Madhyama** or **Utkrisht** numbers,
there is no difference of opinion between **Sanyantik** and **Karmgraanthik**
schools. However, according to the 76th and 10th verses, the nature of **Jghanya
Asankhyata** differs based on these two schools. According to the **Siddhantic**
school, practicing **Jghanya Yukta** results in **Jghanya Asankhyata** as the
form, while according to the **Karmgraanthik** school, squaring **Jghanya
Yukta** results in **Jghanya Asankhyata**. Therefore, the nature of **Madhyama
Mushya Asankhyata**, **Utkrisht Yukta Asankhyata**, and all subsequent
**Madhyama** and **Utkrisht** numbers becomes mixed.  By subtracting one from
**Sthala Asankhyata**, we get **Utkrisht Jghanya Yukta Asankhyata**. All numbers
between **Utkrisht Jghanya Yukta Asankhyata** and **Utkrisht Yukta Asankhyata**
are...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma grantha bhAga cAra kAmaM prambika aphakAI ki jayakA varga karane se
adhagya asaMkhyAtAsaMsthAta hotA hai  /  jaghanya asaMkhyAtA saMkhyAta kA tIna
bAra varga karanA aura usameM lokAkAza-pradeza Adi kI uparyukta isa asaMkhyAta
sakhyAe~ milAnA | milakara phira tIna bAra varga karanA  /  varga karane se jo
saMkhyA hotI hai, vaha anya parItAnanta hai  /  225 jaghanya parItAnanta kA
abhyAsa karane se jaghanya yuktAnamsa hotA hai| zAstra meM amacya jIva ananta
kahe gaye haiM, so jaghanya yuktAyansa samAcAhiye  /  adhamya yuktAnanta kA eka
bAra varga karane se jaghanya anantAnanta hotA hai  /  jaghanya anantAnanta kA
tIna bAra vargakara usameM siddha Adi kI uparyukta chaha saMkhyAeM milAnA
caahiye| phira usakA tIma bAra varga karake usameM kevalazAna aura kevaladarzana
ke saMpUrNa paryAyoM kI saMkhyA ko milAnA cAhiye  /  milAne se jo sakhyA hotI
hai, vaha 'utkRSTa anantAnanta' hai  /  madhyama yA utkRSTa saMdhyA kA svarUpa
jAnane kI rIti meM saMjJAntika aura kArmaprasthikoM meM mata-meda nahIM hai,
para 76 vIM tathA da gAthA meM batalAye hue donoM mata ke anusAra jaghamya
asaMkhyAtA khyAna kA svarUpa bhinna-bhinna ho jAtA hai| arthAt saiddhAntikamata
se jaghanya yuktA saMkhyAta kA abhyAsa karane para jadhanya asaMkhyAta saM
rUpAta banatA hai aura kArmagranthikamata se jaghanya yuktAsaMsthAMta kA varga
karane para jaghanya asaMkhyAtAsaMkhyAta banatA hai| isaliye madhyama
muzyAsaMkhyAta, utkRSTa yuktAsaMkhyAta Adi Age kI saba madhyama aura utkRSTa
saMkhyAoM kA svarUpa bhinna-mizra yama jAtA hai| janghaya asaM yuktAsaMkhyAta
hotA hai  /  sthAlA saMkhyAta meM se eka ghaTAne para utkRSTa jaghanya
yuktAsaMkhyAsa aura utkRSTa yuktAsaMkhyA ke bIca kI saba

Page #297 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma is like a middle number. Just as a middle number is formed by subtracting
one from a higher number and adding one to a lower number, so too are the middle
numbers between the lowest and highest numbers of a category.  All the lowest
and all the highest numbers are of one type each; but the middle numbers are not
of one type. There are countless differences in the middle numbers, countless
differences in the middle innumerable, and countless differences in the middle
infinite, because the lowest or highest number refers to a fixed number, but
this is not the case with the middle number. There are units between the lowest
and highest numbers, there are infinitesimal units between the lowest and
highest innumerable, and there are infinite units between the lowest and highest
infinite, which are called 'middle number', 'middle innumerable', and 'middle
infinite' respectively.  Wherever the term 'infinite' is used in the scriptures,
it always refers to the 'middle infinite'.  The author of this section calls it
"Sukshmartham Vichar" because it discusses many subtle topics.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmamya mAga bAra madhyamakhyAta hai| usI prakAra Age jo kisI ghasya saMkhyA
meM se eka ghaTAne para usake pIche kI utkRSTa saMkhyA banatI hai aura jaghanya
meM eka vo Adi kI saMkhyA milAne se usake sajAto utkRSTa taka kI bIca kI
saMkhyAe~ madhyama hotI haiM  /  sabhI jaghanya aura sabhI utkRSTa saMkhyAe~
eka-eka prakAra kI haiM; parantu madhyama saMkhyAe~ eka prakAra kI nahIM haiN|
madhyama saMkhyAta saMkhyAta bheda, madhyama asaMkhyAta ke asaMkhyAta bheda aura
madhyama ananta ke ananta bheva haiM kyoMyi jaghanya yA utkRSTa saMkhyA kA
matalaba kisI eka niyata saMkhyA se ho hai, para madhyama ke viSaya meM yaha
bAta nahIM  /  jaghamya aura utkRSTa saMkhyA ke bIca saMkhyAta ikAiyA~ haiM,
jaya aura uskRSTa asaMkhyAta ke bIca arzalpAta ikAiyA~ haiM evaM neru aura
utkRSTa ananta ke bIca ananta ikAiyAM haiM, jo kramazaH ' madhyama vayAta
'madhyama asaMkhyAta' aura 'madhyama anagna' kahalAtI hai  /  zAstra meM
jahA~-kahIM anazvAnanta kA vyavahAra kiyA gayA yaha saba jagaha madhyama
anantAnanta se hI matalaba hai  /  ! upasaMgara isa prakaraNa kA nAma
"sUkSmArthaM vicAra" rakhatA hai; ki isameM aneka sUkSma viSayoM para vicAra
pragaTa kiye gaye haiM  /  226 -: kyoM 86  /

Page #298 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagrantha Part Pa. 227 Appendix to Vritiyadhikar. Appendix "P" Page 176, Line
1. On 'Mula Bandha-Hetu' This topic is in Panchasangraha Dva. 4, verses 16 and
20, but there is some difference in its description compared to Maha. In it, the
bondage of sixteen Prakruti is said to be Mithyatva-Hetuk, the bondage of
thirty-five Prakruti is said to be Aviriti-Hetuk, the bondage of sixty-eight
Prakruti is said to be Kashaya-Hetuk, and the bondage of seven Vedaniya is said
to be Yoga-Hetuk. This explanation is done taking into account Anvaya-Vyatireka,
Ubhayamaulak Kaya-Karana-Bhaavako, like - in the presence of Mithyatva, there is
bondage of sixteen, and in its absence, there is absence of bondage of sixteen,
therefore, the bondage of sixteen can occur along with Mithyatva in Anvaya-
Vyatireka. Similarly, the bondage of thirty-five should be understood as
Vyatireka with Aviriti, the bondage of sixty-eight with Kashaya, and the bondage
of seven Vedaniya with Yoga. But here, only Anvaya Mulak Karya-Karana-Bhaavako
is taken into account while describing the bondage, Vyatireka is not intended.
Therefore, the description here seems different from the description in
Panchasangraha. Anvaya - like, at the time of Mithyatva, at the time of Aviriti,
at the time of Kashaya, and at the time of Yoga, the bondage of seven Vedaniya
definitely occurs, similarly, at the time of Mithyatva, the bondage of sixteen,
at the time of Mithyatva and Aviriti, the bondage of thirty-five, and at the
time of Mithyatva, Aviriti, and Kashaya, the bondage of sixty-eight Prakruti
definitely occurs. Keeping this Anvaya-Abhava in mind, Shridevendrasuri has
called the bondage of one, sixteen, thirty-five, and sixty-eight as
Chaturhettuk, Ek-Hetuk, Dvi-Hetuk, and Tri-Hetuk respectively. The Vyatireka of
the above four bondages can only be matched with one Hetu each, according to the
description in Panchasangraha. There is a difference in the style of description
in Panchasangraha and here, but not in the meaning.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga pA. 227 vRtIyAdhikArake prishisstt| pariziSTa "pa" pRSTha
176, pakti 1. ke 'mUla bandha-hetu para yaha viSaya paJcasaMgraha dvA0 4 kI 16
aura 20 boM gAthA meM hai, kintu usake varNanameM mahA kI apekSA kucha bheda
hai| usameM 16 prakRvivoM ke andhako mithyAtva- hetuka. paitIsa prakRtiyoM ke
bandha ko avirati, hetuphA, arasATha prakRtiyoM ke bandhako kaSAya-hatuka aura
sAtavedanIya ke bacako yoga-hetuka kahA hai| yaha phaighana anvaya-vyAtaraMka,
ubhaya-mUlaka kAya-kAraNa-bhAvako ko lekara kiyA gayA hai jaise-mithyAtva ke
sadbhAva meM solahakA bandha aura usake amAva meM solaha ke bandhakA abhAva hotA
hai, isaliya solaha ke bandhakA anvaravyatireka mithyAtvaka sAtha ghaTa sakatA
hai  /  isI prakAra paitIsake bandhakA aviratika sAtha, arasaThaka bandhakA
kaSAya ke sAtha aura sAtavedanIya ke bandha kA yoga ke sAtha anyatra-vyatireka
samajhanA cAhiye  /  parantu isa jagaha kevala anvaya mulaka kArya-kAraNa-
bhAvako lekara bandha kA varNana kiyA hai, vyatireka ko vivakSA nahIM kI hai|
isI se yahAM kA varNana paJcasagraha ke varNana se bhinna mAlUma par3atA hai|
anvayaH-jaise, mithyAtvaka samaya,aviratike samaka, kaSAyake samaya aura yoga ke
samaya sAtaveyanIya kA bandha avazya hotA hai, isI prakAra mithyAtva ke samaya
solaha kA bandha, mithyAtva ke samaya tathA avirati ke samaya paitIsa kA banna
aura mithyAtva ke samaya, avirati ka samaya tathA kaSAya ke samaya doSa
prakRtiyoM kA bandha avazya hotA hai| isa anvayamAbha ko thiya meM rakhakara
zrIdevendrasUri ne eka, solaha, patIsa aura arasaTa ke bancha ko kramazaH
catuhetuka, eka-hetuka, dvi hetuka aura tri hetuka kahA hai . ukta cAroM bandhoM
kA vyatireka taM paJcasaMgnaha ke varNanAnugAra kevala eka eka hetu ke sAtha
paTa sakatA hai| pazyasaMgraha aura yahAM kI varNana-zailI me bheda hai,
tAtparya meM nahIM  /

Page #299 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
220 Karma-grantha Marga-dhara According to Tattvartha Sutra 8.1, five causes of
bondage are mentioned. As per that, Sarvarthasiddhi has considered the
activities, the causes, and the mere existence of the remaining prakritis for
the purpose of bondage. It has stated that the bondage of sixteen prakritis is
due to mithyatva (false belief), the bondage of nineteen prakritis is due to
avirati (non-abstinence), the bondage of six prakritis is due to pramada
(carelessness), the bondage of fifty-two prakritis is due to kasaya (passions),
and the bondage of one prakrti is due to yoga (activity).  It has made three
divisions of avirati: anantanubandhi-kasaya-janita (caused by passions that lead
to infinite transmigration), apratyakhyana-karana-kasaya (passions that do not
obstruct renunciation), and pratyakhyana-avarana-kasaya-janita (passions that
obstruct renunciation). The first one is the main cause of the bondage of
twenty-five prakritis, and the third one is the cause of the bondage of thirty
prakritis, making a total of fifty-five prakritis due to avirati.  In
Pañcasaṃgraha, among the prakritis whose bondage is considered to be due to
kasaya, the bondage of four prakritis is said to be due to pratyakhyana-avarana-
kasaya-janita avirati, and the bondage of six prakritis is said to be due to
pramada. Therefore, only the fifty-eight prakritis with kasaya-janita bondage
are mentioned in Sarvarthasiddhi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 220 karmagrantha mAga dhAra tatvArtha a 8 sU0 1 meM bandha ke hetu pA~ca kahe
hue hai, usake anusAra a0 6 sU. 1 ko sarvArtha siddhi meM usara prakRtiyoM ke
aura bandha hetu ke kArya-kArapA-mAtra kA vicAra kiyA hai| usameM solaha ke
bandha ko mithyAtva-hetuka, unsAlIsa ke bandha ko aviti-hatuka, chaha ke
bandhako pramAvahetuka, adAvana ke bandha ko kaSAya-hetuka aura eka ke bandha ko
yoga hetuka batalAyA hai  /  avirati ke anantAnuvandhikaSAya-janya,
apratyAnAvaraNa kaSAya anya aura pratyAkhyAnAdharaNakaSAya-janya, ye tIna bheda
kiye hai  /  prathama virAtako paccIsa ke pradhAna modA ke. aura tIsarI ko hAra
ke bandhakA kA kAraNa divAkara kula uttAlIma ke bandha ko abirati hetuka kahA
hai| paMcasaMgraha meM jina arasada prakRtiyoM ke bandha ko kaSAya hetuka mAnA
hai unameM se cAra ke bandhako pratyAkhyAtAvaraNakaSAya-janya avirati hetuka
aura chaha ke bandha ko pramAda-hetuka sarvArtha siddhi meM batalAyA hai;
isaliye usameM kaSAya-he.tuka bandhavAlI aTTAvana prakRtiyA~ hI kahI huI haiN|

Page #300 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha, Part, Appendix "F", Page 206, Line 14, "Mal Mab"  This verse,
like the one in the Pancha-Sangraha, lists the number of one-soul-dependent
states in the Gunasthanas. However, there is a slight difference in the
explanation between the commentary and the Tika-Tava of this verse and the
commentary of the corresponding verse in the Pancha-Sangraha.  The Tika-Tava
uses the terms "Upshamka" and "Jekanss" to include the ninth, tenth, and
eleventh Gunasthanas, and the term "Apuurva" to include only the eighth
Gunasthan. In the ninth Gunasthan, the "Upshamka" is considered to be the
"Palambaka" or the "Savyaktvi" or the "Kshayikambhyavtvi". In the eighth
Gunasthan, the "Upshamka" or "Kshayik" is not considered to be the
"Samyaktyamale" but the "Kshayopshamaka". This is evident from the separate use
of the term "Apuurva" in the verse. If the eighth Gunasthan also had the
"Upshamka" as the "Charitra", then the term "Apuurva" would not have been used
separately, and the eighth Gunasthan would have been included with the ninth and
subsequent Gunasthanas using the term "Upshamka". The Tika-Tava does not mention
the "Charitra" or the "Mab" related to the "Apakni-gat-jeeva" in the ninth and
tenth Gunasthanas.  The commentary of the Pancha-Sangraha, by Shri Malgirin,
uses the terms "Upshamka" and "Upshanta" to include the eighth to eleventh
Gunasthanas, which are the "Upsham" श्रेणी, and the terms "Apuurva" and "Shreen"
to include the eighth, ninth, tenth, and twelfth Gunasthanas, which are the
"Kshapaka" श्रेणी. He considers the "Upshamka" as the "Charitra" in the
aforementioned four Gunasthanas, but does not mention anything about the
"Charitra" in the four Gunasthanas of the "Kshapaka" श्रेणी. In the eleventh
Gunasthan, there is only the "Upshamka" "Charitra" because all the "Mohaniya"
are completely "Upsham". In the ninth and tenth Gunasthanas, there are two
"Charitras", "Upshamka" and "Kshayopshamaka", because some of the "Charitra-
Mohaniya" are "Upshanta" in these two Gunasthanas, but not all. Compared to the
"Upshanta" nature, the "Upshamka" ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga pAra pariziSTa "ph"| pRSTha 206, pakki 14ke mala mAba' para
guNasthAnoM meM eka-jIvAzrita bhAvoMkI saMkhyA jaisI isa gAthA meM hai, vaisI hI
paJcasagrahake dvAra 2ko 64vI gAthAmeM hai; parantu isa gAthA kI TIkA aura
TavAmeM tathA paJcasagrahako ukta gAthA kI TIkA meM thor3AsA vyAkhyA-bheda hai|
TokA-TavemeM 'upazamaka' 'jaekAnsa' do padoMse nauvA, dasoM aura gyArahavAM, ye
tIna guNasthAna grahaNa kiye gaye haiM aura 'apUrva' padase AThavA
guNasthAnamAtra  /  nauveM bhATinIna guNasthAnoM meM upayoga : ti palAmaka.
sabhyaktvIko yA kSAyikamabhyavatvIko vArizra aupazamika mAnA hai  /  AThaveM
guNasthAnameM aupazamika yA kSAyika kisI samyaktyamAleko auSamikacAritra iSTa
nahIM hai, kintu kSAyopazamika  /  isakA pramANa gAthAmeM 'apUrva zabdakA alaga
grahaNa karanA hai| kyoMki yadi ATaveM guNasthAnameM bhI aupazamikacAritra iSTa
hotA to 'apUrva' zAbda alaga grahaNa na karake upazamaka zabdase hI nau Adi
guNasthAnakI saraha AThaveMkA bhI sUdhana kiyA jAtA  /  nauveM aura dasaveM
guNasthAnake apakaNi-gata-jIva-sambandhI mAboMkA va cAritra kA ullekha TokA yA
Tabe meM nahIM hai  /  paJcasaMgrahakI TIkAmeM zrImalagirine 'upazamaka'
'upazAnta' pada se AThaveM se gyArahaye taka upazamazreNivAle cAra guNasthAna
aura 'apUrva' tathA 'zrINa' padase AThavAM, nauvA, dasavAM aura bArahavAM, ye
kSapakazreNivAle cAra guNasthAna grahaNa kiye haiN| upazamaNibAle ukta vAroM
guNasthAna meM unhoMne aupazamika cAritra mAnA hai, para kSapakaNivAle cAroM
guNasthAnake vAritrake sambandhameM kucha ullekha nahIM kiyA hai| _gyArahaveM
guNasthAnameM sampUrNa mohanIyakA upazama ho jAneke kAraNa sirpha
aupamikacAritra haiN| nauveM aura dasaveM guNasthAnameM opazamika kSAyopazamika
do cAritra haiM; kyoMki ina do guNasthAnoM meM cAritramohanIyakI kucha
prakRtiyA~ upazAnta hotI haiM, saba nahIM  /  upazAnta prakRtiyoMkI apekSAse
aupamika

Page #301 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagranth Part Four Expectation Understanding Pari And Anupashant Nature is
Required. Although this has not been explicitly stated, but by looking at the
commentary of the 25th verse of Panch. Dva. 3, there is nothing left in this
matter, because in it, the subtle Samprayacha Rikko, which occurs only in the
tenth Gunasthan, has been called Kshayopaśamik. 330 Due to the beginning of the
Charitra Mohaniya Upashama or the subsidence of some natures in the eighth,
ninth and tenth Gunasthan by the Upashama Shreni, it is considered as
Panchasangrah Tika like Orashamivarit, in the same way, there is no
contradiction in considering Kshayikcharitra in the eighth, ninth and tenth
Gunasthan by the Kshapaka Shreni, due to the beginning of the destruction of
Charitra Mohaniya or the destruction of some natures. In Gommatsar, Charitra
Opashamik has been considered in the eighth and the next four Gunasthan by the
Upashama Shreni and Kshayopaśamik has been explicitly prohibited. Similarly, in
the four Gunasthan by the Kshapaka Shreni, Kshayikcharitra has been considered
and Kshayopaśamik has been prohibited. This becomes clear by looking at the
845th and 646th verses of Karmakanda.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra apekSA pAri samajhanA aura anupazAnta prakRti cAhiye  /
yadyapi yaha bAta isa prakAra spaSTatAsenahIM kahI gaI hai parantu paJca0 dvA0
3kI 25vIM gAyA kI TIkA dekhane se isa viSaya meM kucha bhI nahIM rahatA, kyoMki
usameM sUkSmasaMparAyacA rikko, jo dasaveM guNasthAna meM hI hotA hai,
kSAyopazamika kahA haiM  /  330 upazamazreNinAle AThaveM, nauveM aura dasaveM
guNasthAna meM cAritramohanIya upazamakA Arambha yA kucha prakRtiyoM kA upazama
honeke kAraNa orazamivAritra jaise paJcasaMgraha TIkA mAnA gayA hai, vaise hI
kSapakazreNivAle ATha Adi tInoM guNasthAnoM meM cAritra mohanIyake kSayakA
Arambha yA kucha prakRtikA kSaya hone ke kAraNa kSAyikacAritra mAnanemeM koI
virodha nahIM dIkha par3atA  /  gommaTasArameM upazamaNivAle AThaveM Adi cAroM
guNasthAna meM cAritra opazamika hI mAnA hai aura kSAyopazamikA spaSTa niSedha
kiyA hai isI taraha kSapakazreNivAle cAra guNasthAnoM meM kSAyika cAritra hI
mAnakara kSAyopazamikakA niSedha kiyA haiM  /  yaha bAta karmakANDa kI 845 aura
646vIM gAthAoM ke dekhanese spaSTa ho jAtI hai  /  H

Page #302 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four, Appendix, Page 207, Line 3  This discussion on the
'Bhavarsha' rule is about the emotions found in a being during the intended time
of its existence.  The emotions found in a being at different times, and the
emotions found in many beings at the same time or at different times, are
written about in this context. In the first three Gunasthanas, there are three
emotions: Audayik, Kshayopa-shaamik, and Pari-naamik. These three emotions are
found in the eight Gunasthanas from the fourth to the eleventh. In the twelfth
Gunasthana, there are four emotions except for the Upshaamik. In the thirteenth
and fourteenth Gunasthanas, there are three emotions except for the Upshaamik
and Kshayopa-shaamik.  **Differences in emotions in Gunasthanas in relation to
many beings:**  * **Upshaamik:** In the first two Gunasthanas, there are three
Ajnan, two Darshan, five Labdhis, totaling 10. In the third, there are three
Jnans, three Darshan, Mishrashakti, five Labdhis, totaling 12. In the fourth,
there are 12 like the third Gunasthana, but with Samyaktva in place of
Mishrashakti. In the fifth, there are 12 like the fourth Gunasthana, plus Desh-
viriti, totaling 13. In the sixth and seventh, there are 14, with Desh-viriti
removed from the previous 13 and replaced with Sarva-viriti and Manah-
paryavgyan. In the eighth, ninth, and tenth Gunasthanas, there are 13, with
Samyaktva removed from the previous 14. In the eleventh and twelfth Gunasthanas,
there are 12, with Barishra removed from the previous 13. There are no Kshayopa-
shaamik emotions in the thirteenth and fourteenth Gunasthanas.  * **Audayik:**
In the first Gunasthana, there are 21, including Ajnan. In the second, there are
20, excluding Mithyatva. In the third and fourth, there are 16, excluding Ajnan.
In the fifth, there are 17, excluding Devagati and Narakagati from the previous
16. In the sixth, there are 15, excluding Tiryanch-gati and Asan-yam. In the
seventh, there are 12, excluding Krishna, etc., three Leshyas from the previous
15. In the eighth and ninth, there are 10, excluding Tejas and 56-lelya. In the
tenth, there are 4, excluding Krodha, Mana, Maya, and three Vedas from the
previous 10. In the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth Gunasthanas, there are 3,
excluding Saval-lobha. In the fourteenth Gunasthana, there are two Audayik
emotions: Manushya-gati and Asiddhatva, excluding Shulka-leshya from the
previous three.  * **Kshayik:** There are no Kshayik emotions in the first three
Gunasthanas. In the eight Gunasthanas from the fourth to the eleventh, there is
Sampatti. In the twelfth, there are two: Samyaktva and Charitra. In the
thirteenth and fourteenth Gunasthanas, there are no Kshayik emotions.  *
**Upshaamik:** There are no Upshaamik emotions in the first three Gunasthanas,
and in the three from the twelfth onwards, totaling six Gunasthanas. In the five
Gunasthanas from the fourth to the eighth, there is Samyak-karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra pariziSTa ""! pRSTha 207, paMkti 3 ke 'bhAvArSa' zAsa
parayaha vicAra eka jIvameM kiMgI vivakSita samaya meM pAye jAnevAle bhAvoMkA
hai| eka jIvameM bhinna-bhinna samayameM pAye jAne vAle bhAva aura aneka jIva
meM eka samaya meM yA minna bhinna samaya meM pAye jAnevAle bhAva prasaGga-vaza
likhe jAte haiN| pahale tIna guNasthAnomeM audAyika, kSAmopazamika aura
pAriNAmika, ye tIna bhAva cauthese gyArahaveM taka ATha guNasthAnoM meM pAtro
bhAva bArahakheM guNasthAnameM aupazamikake sivAya cAra bhAva aura terahave
tathA caudahaveM guNasthAnameM aupamika-kSAyopazAmikake sivAya tIna bhAva hote
haiN| aneka jIvoM kI apekSAse guNasthAnoMmeM bhAvoM ke uttara bheda
sAyopamikapahale do guNasthAnoMmeM tIna ajAna nA Adi do darzana, dAna Adi pA~ca
labdhiyAM, ye 10 tIsare meM tIna jJAna, tIna darzana, mizraSTi, pAMca labdhiyAM,
ye 12; caudhe meM tIsare guNasthAna bAle 12 kintu mizramiTake myAnameM samyaktva
; pAnya meM po guNasthAnavAle bAraha tathA dezavira ti, kUla 13, chaThe. sAtave
meM ukta teraha meM se deza-viratiko ghaTAkara unameM sarvavirati aura
mana:paryavajJAna milAnese 14, AThaveM, nauveM aura dasaveM guNasthAnameM ukta
caudahameMse samyaktvake sivAya zeSa 13; gyAraha bArahameM muNasthAnameM ukta
teraha meM se bArizrako chor3akara zeSa 12 kSayopazAmaka bhAva haiN| terahaveM
aura caudahaveM meM kSAyopamikabhAva nahIM haiN| audayika - pahale guNasthAnameM
ajJAna Adi 21: dUsare meM mithyAtvake sivAya 20; tIsare-caumeM ajJAnako chor3a
16, pAMcaveM meM devagati, nArakagati ke sivAya ukta ubhIsa meMse zeSa 17.
chaThemeM tiryaJca gati aura asaMyama paTAkara 15; mAtave meM kRSNa Adi tIna
lezyAoMko chor3akara ukta pandrahamese zeSa 12; AThane nauveM meM teja: aura.
56-lelyA sivAya 10; dasaveM meM krodha mAna, mAyA aura tIna vedake sivAya ukta
dasameMse zeSa 4; gyArahave, bArahaveM aura terahaveM gaNasthAna meM
savalanalobhako choDa zeSa 3 aura caudahaveM guNasthAna meM zulka nezyAke sivAya
tInamese manuSpagati aura asiddhatva, ye do auvAyikabhAya hai| _kSAyika-pahale
tIna guNasthAnoM meM zAmiyAbhAva nahIM hai| cauthese gyArahaveM taka Asa
guNasthAnoM meM sampatya, bArahaveM meM samyaktva aura cAritra do aura terahaveM
caudahaveM do guNasthAnoM meM no kSAyikabhAva haiN| auparAmika-pahale tIna aura
bArahaveM Adi tIna, ina chaha guNasthAnoM meM aupazamikabhAva nahIM hai  /   /
cauthese AThaveM taka pA~ca guNasthAnoM meM samyakrama,

Page #303 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Karmagrantha Part Four**  From the ninth to the eleventh **gunaasthanas**,
there are three **gunaasthanas** with **mamyaktva** and **charitra**, **greedi**
and **aaupshamik** **bhavas**.  **Parinaamik** - In the first **gunaasthana**,
there are three **bhavas**: **jivattva**, **bhavya**, and **mamyaktva**. From
the second to the twelfth **gunaasthanas**, there are eleven **gunaasthanas**
with **jivattva** and **bhavya**. In the thirteenth and fourteenth
**gunaasthanas**, only **jivattva** is **parinaamik**. **Bhavya** is **anaadi-
saant** because it becomes **amaatra** in the **siddh** state. After the
destruction of **ghaatik karma**, the attainment of the **mid** state does not
take much time. Therefore, **bhavya** is not considered **purvaacharya** in the
thirteenth and fourteenth **gunaasthanas**.  **Gommatsaar** - In the **karmaka**
from verses 20 to 75, **sthangat** and **gad-gat** **sanvara bhavas** are
described in detail.  **Ek-Jinaathit Bhaavi** - The different types of
**kshayopaashamak** **bhavas**:  * In the first two **gunaasthanas**: **mati-
shruta** (two) or **vimang** (three) **agyaan**, **annakhshu** (one) or
**chakshu-avakshu** (two) **darshan**, **daan** (five) **labdhiyaan**, **sime**
(two or three) **shaan**, **sime** (two or three) **darshan**, **mishrasht**
(one), **labdhiyaan** (five). * In the fourth **gunaasthana**: **sime** (two or
three) **gyaan**, **aparyaapt-avastha** (one) or **avdhi** (two) **darshan**,
**paryaapt-avastha** (two or three) **darshan**, **samyaktva** (one),
**labdhiyaan** (five). * In the fifth **gunaasthana**: **sime** (two or three)
**shaan**, **sime** (two or three) **darshan**, **samyaktva**, **deshvirati**
(one), **labdhiyaan** (five). * In the sixth and seventh **gunaasthanas**:
**sime** (two or three) or **manahparyaaptaparyant** (four) **jhaan**, **sime**
(two or three) **darshan**, **samyaktva**, **chaarim** (one), **labdhiyaan**
(five). * In the eighth, ninth, and tenth **gunaasthanas**: all
**kshayopaashamak** **bhavas** except **samyaktva** from the sixth and seventh
**gunaasthanas**. * In the eleventh and twelfth **gunaasthanas**: all **bhavas**
from the tenth **gunaasthana** except **charitra**.  **Audayik** - In the first
**gunaasthana**: **agyaan**, **asiddhtva**, **asanyam**, **leshya** (one),
**kashay** (one), **gati** (one), **ved** (one), and **mithyaal** (one). In the
second **gunaasthana**: all **audyaik** **bhavas** from the first
**gunaasthana** except **mithyaatva**. In the third, fourth, and fifth
**gunaasthanas**: all **bhavas** from the second **gunaasthana** except
**agyaan**. From the sixth to the ninth **gunaasthanas**: all **bhavas** from
the fifth **gunaasthana** except **asanyam**. In the tenth **gunaasthana**: all
**bhavas** from the ninth **gunaasthana** except **ved**. In the eleventh and
twelfth **gunaasthanas**: all **bhavas** from the tenth **gunaasthana** except
**kashay**. In the thirteenth **gunaasthana**: **asiddhtva**, **leshya**, and
**gati**. In the fourteenth **gunaasthana**: **gati** and **asiddhtva**.
**Saayik** - From the fourth to the eleventh **gunaasthanas**: **samyaktva**. In
the second and thirteenth to fourteenth **gunaasthanas**: nine **saayik**
**bhavas**.  **Aaupshamik** - From the first to the eighth **gunaasthanas**:
**samyaktva**. From the ninth to the eleventh **gunaasthanas**: **samyaktva**
and **charitra**.  **Parinaamik** - In the first **gunaasthana**: all three
**bhavas**. From the second to the twelfth **gunaasthanas**: **jivattva** and
**bhavya**. In the thirteenth and fourteenth **gunaasthanas**: only
**jivattva**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra nauvese gyArahaveM taka tIna guNasthAnoM meM mamyaktva
aura cAritra, gre dI aupa. zamibhAva hai| pAriNAmika-pahale guNasthAna meM
jIvatva Adi tInoM; dusarase bArahaveM taka gyAraha guNasthAnoM meM jIvatva.
bhavyatva, do aura terahaveM-caudahaveM meM jIvatva hI pArigAmibhAna hai  /
bhabyatta anAdi-sAnta hai| kyoMki siddhaavasthA meM usakA amAtra ho jAtA haiN|
ghAtikarmakSaya hone ke bAda miDa-avasthA prApta hone meM bahuta bilamba nahIM
lagatA; isa apekSAse teraha-caudahavaM guNAsthAna meM bhavyatva pUrvAcAryAna
nahIM mAnA hai| gommaTasAra-karmakA? kI 20 se 75 taka kI gAthAoMmeM sthAnagata
tathA gada-gata saNavArA bhAvoM kA bahuta vistArapUrvaka varNana kiyA hai  /
eka-jInAthita bhAvIke uttara bheda: kSAyopazAmakapahale do guNasthAna meM mati-
zruta do yA vimaGgasahita tIna ajJAna, annakSu eka yA cakSu-avakSu do darzana',
dAna Ati pAMca labdhiyAM sImare meM do yA tIna zAna, do yA tIna darzana,
mizraSTi, pAMca labdhiyoM cauthe meM do yA tIna jJAna, aparyApta-avasthA meM
acakSa eka yA avadhi sahita do darzana aura paryApta-avasthA, do tIna darzana,
samyaktva, pA~ca sabidhayA~ pAcave meM do yA tIna zAna, do yA tIna darzana-
samyanatava- dezaviratiH pAMca la'bdhayoM; chaThe sAtave meM do tIna yA
manaHparyApaparyanta cAra jhAna, do yA tIna darmaga, samyaktva, cArima, pAMca
labdhiyoM; AThaveM nau aura dasaveM meM samyaktvako chor3a chaThe aura sAta
guNasthAnanAle saba kSAyopazamika bhAdha  /  gyArahaveM-bArahameM meM cAritrako
choDa dasaveM guNasthAnavAle saba bhAva  /  _audayikaH-gahale guNasthAnameM
ajJAna, asiddhatva, asaMyama, eka lezyA eka kaSAya, eka gati, eka veda aura
mithvAla ; dUsare meM mithyAtyakI choDa pahane guNasthAnavAle saba odayika
tIsare, cauthe aura pAMca ghe meM ajJAna ko chor3a dUsarevAle,saba chaThese
lekara nauveM takama jhasaMyamake sivAya pASaSAle samba dasaveM meM vedake
sivAya nauvAle maba; gyArahaveM-bArahaveMmeM kaSAya ke sivAya dasavAle saba ;
terahaveM meM asiddhaba, lezyA aura gati; caudahaveM meM gati aura asistra  /
sAyika cauthame gyArahavaM guNasthAna taka meM samyaktva; aura cAritra do aura
serahaveM caudahaveM meM-nau kssaayikmaav|| aupazamika-auyese AThaveM taka
samyaktvaM nauvese gyArahaveM taka samyaktva aura caaritr| _pAriNAmikA-pahale
meM tInoM; dUsarese bArahaveM taka maiM jIvasva aura bhavyatva do; terahaveM
aura caudahameM meM eka jIvatva  /

Page #304 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagranth Part Four ... Appendix No. 11 Some similar and dissimilar views of
the Svetambara and Digambara sects. (a) The interpretation of the weapon of the
soul from the perspective of certainty and practice is the same in both sects.
Page-4. In this regard, the 'Samaadhikār' chapter of Jīvakāṇḍa and its
commentary are worth seeing. The definition of the word Mārgṇāsthān is the same
in both sects. Page-4. The style of the Gunasthān Rāva in the Karmagranth and
the Joṣakāj is similar, but there is no difference in the sāttvika meaning.
Page-4. The nature of use is considered the same in both sects. Page-5. In the
Karmagranth, the incomplete soul is considered to have three Gunasthānas, but in
the Gommatasāra, it is considered to have five. Thus, there is a difference in
the views of both on the subject of the soul, but it is relative, so in reality,
there is similarity. Page-12. Regarding the Kevalajnani, the practice of
samsitva and asamsitva is the same in the scriptures of both sects. Page-13. The
flag-like nature of the Pariira of the Vāyukāya is accepted by both sects.
Page-20.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra ... pariziSTa na011 zvetAmbaroya tathA digambarIya
saMpradAya ke [kucha] samAna tathA asamAna mantavya  /  ( ka ) nizcaya aura
vyavahAra-dRSTi se jIva zastra kI vyAkhyA dhonoM saMtravAya meM tulya hai  /
pRSTha-4  /  isa sambandha meM jIvakANDa kA 'zamAdhikAra' prakaraNa aura usako
TIkA dekhane yogya hai  /  mArgaNAsthAna zabda kI vyAzyA vonoM sAMpradAya meM
samAna hai| pRsstth-4| guNasthAna rAva kI vArUpA zailI pharmagrantha aura
jozakAja meM bhilasI hai, para usameM sAttvika artha-bheda nahIM hai  /  pR0-4
/  upayoga kA svarUpa donoM sampradAyoM meM samAna mAnA gayA hai| pR0-5  /
karmagrantha meM aparyApta saMjI ko tIna guNasthAma mAne haiM, kintu gommaTasAra
meM pAMca mAne haiM  /  isa prakAra donoM kA saMsthAviSayaka malameva haiM,
tathApi vaha apekSAkRta hai, isaliye vAstavika dRSTi se usameM samAnatA hI hai
/  pR.-12  /  kevalajJAnI ke viSaya meM saMzitva tathA asaMzisva kA vyavahAra
donoM saMpradAya ke zAstroM meM samAna hai| pR.-13  /  /  vAyukAya ke pArIra kI
dhvajAkAratA donoM saMpradAya ko mAnya hai  /  pR0-20||

Page #305 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
234 Karma Granth Part Four, the time-limit of the uses of the Chādmāsthika, both
the Antamuhutta-pramāṇa and the Sampravāya are accepted. Page-20, Note. The
nature, example, etc. of the relationship of Bhāvaleshā are the same in both the
Sampradāya. Page-33. The meaning of the fourteen Mārgaṇās is the same in both
the Sampradāya, and the Janaki Mas Gāthās are also the same. Page-47, Note. The
explanation of Samyaktv is the same in both the Sampradāya. Page-50, Note.
Although there are some differences in the explanation, there is no difference
in the essence of the nature of food in both the Sampradāya. In the Svetambara
Granths, there are always three types of food, and in the Digambara Granths, six
types are also found. Page-50, Note. The age of the person who is eligible for
the Parihāra-viśuddha-saṁgha, the knowledge required, the person from whom it
can be taken, and the time-limit of the Bihar, etc., are all similar in both the
Sampradāya. Page-51, Note 1. The fact that Māyika-samyaktv is attained by humans
in the Jina-kāla is accepted by both the Sampradāya. Page-66, Note. The
relationship of Dravyamāna in the Kevali is accepted by both the Sampradāya.
Page-101, Note. The knowledge and ignorance of the uses of Mati, etc. in the
Miśra-samyak-aṣṭi Guṇasthānas is also found in the Gommatasāra. Page-103, Note.
The twenty-nine Angas, which indicate the number of Garbhaja humans, are the
same in both the Sampradāya. Page-117, Note.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 234 karma grantha bhAga cAra chAdmasthika upayogoM kA kAla-mAna antamuMhatta-
pramANa donoM saMpravAyoM ko mAnya hai| pR0-20, noTa  /  bhAvalezyA ke sambandha
kI svarUpa, dRSTAnta Adi aneka bAte donoM sampradAya meM tulya hai  /  pR0-33  /
caudaha mArgaNAoM kA artha donoM sampradAya meM samAna hai tathA janakI masa
gAthAeM bhI ekasI haiN| pR0-47, noTa  /  samyaktava kI vyAkhyA donoM samyadAya
meM tulya hai| pR0-50, noTa  /  dhyAkhyA kucha minnasI hone para bhI AhAra ke
svarUpa meM donoM sampradAya kA tAtvika bhava nahIM hai| kvetAmbara-granthoM meM
sarvatra AhArake tIna meva haiM aura digambara-manthoM meM kahIM chaha bheda bhI
milate haiM  /  pR0-50, nott| parihAravizuddhasaMghama kA adhikArI kitanI umrakA
honA cAhiye, usameM kitanA jJAna Avazyaka hai aura vaha saMgrama kisake samIpa
grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA aura usameM bihAra Adi kA kAlaniyama kaisA hai, ityAdi
usake sambandha ko nA donoM sampradAya meM bahuta aMzoM meM samAna haiN| pR0-51,
noTa 1 mAyikasamyaktava jinakAlika manuSyoM ko hotA hai, yaha bAta dono
sampradAya ko iSTa hai  /  pR0-66, noTa  /  kevalI meM dravyamAna kA sambandha
donoM sampradAyoM meM iSTa hai| pR0-101, mott| mizrasamyAraSTi guNasthAnoM meM
mati Adi upayogoM kI jAna-ajJAna ubhayarUpatA gommaTasAra meM bhI hai| pR0-103,
noTa  /  garbhaja manuSyoM kI saMkhyA ke sUcaka untIsa aGga donoM sampradAya meM
dulya haiM  /  pR0-117, noTa  /

Page #306 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Karma Grantha, the number of Indriya Marga and Kaya Marga is the same in
both the Bondriya and Seva communities. There are 18 in total. (Page 122, Note)
The number of Vigrahas in Chakra Gati is the same in both communities. However,
the four Vigrahas mentioned in the Svetambara texts are not found in the
Digambara texts. The duration of Bapti is the same in both communities. The
duration of Anaharakatva in Chakra Gati is considered from three perspectives:
Vyavahar, Nishchay, and Drishti. According to Vyavahar, the Svetambara view is
considered, and according to Nishchay, the Digambara view is considered.
Therefore, there is no real consensus on this topic between the two communities.
(Page 143)  Regarding the number of Gunasthanas in Avadhi Vashan, there are
three perspectives: Saiddhantic, Ek, and Kasayadhik. Both the Saiddhantic and
Kasayadhik perspectives are found in the Digambara texts. (Page 146)  The
acceptance of Aharakatva, the cause of Aharakatva being the rise of
Asatavedaniya, and the acceptance of Audarik Pugalas in a Kevalgyani are all
accepted by both communities. (Page 148)  The concept of Jeevasthana in
Gunasthan appears to be slightly different in Gommatasar compared to the Karma
Grantha. However, this difference is relative and essentially the same as the
Karma Grantha. (Page 161, Note)  The number of Upayogas in Gunasthan is the same
in both the Karma Grantha and Gommatasar. (Page 167, Note)  Those who believe in
and those who do not believe in Sasabanbhava in Ekendriya...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma granthamAga bAra indriyamArgaNA meM bondriya Adi kA aura kAyamArgaNA meM
seva:kAya Adi kA vizeSAdhizva bonoM sampradAya meM samAna 18 hai| pR0-122, noTa
/  cakragati meM vigrahoM kI saMkhyA donoM sampradAya meM samAna hai  /  phira
bhI zvetAmbarIya granthoM meM kahIM-kahIM jo cAra vigrahoM kA matAnsara pAyA
jAtA hai, vaha digambarIya andhoM meM dekhane meM nahIM aayaa| tathA bapati kA
kAna-mAna bonoM sampradAya meM tulya hai| pakrAti meM AnAhArakatva kA kAla-mAna,
vyavahAra aura nizcaya, vo dRSTiyoM se vicArA jAtA hai| isameM se vyavahAra-
raSTi ke anusAra zvetAmbara-prasiddha tasvArthameM vicAra hai aura nizcaya-dRSTi
ke anusAra digambara-prasiddha tattvArya meM vicAra hai  /  ata eva isa viSaya
meM bhI donoM sampradAya kA vAstavika matameva nahIM hai  /  pR.-143  /  _
avadhivazana meM guNasthAnoM kI saMkhyA ke viSaya meM saiddhAntika eka aura
kAsayadhika do, aise jo tIna pakSa haiM, unameM se kArmapanthika donoM hI pakSa
digambaroya granthoM meM milate haiM  /  pR0-146  /  kevalajJAnI meM AhArakatva,
AhArakA kAraNa asAtavedanIya kA udaya aura audArika pugaloM kA grahaNa, ye tonoM
bAteM donoM ptampradAya meM samAna mAnya haiM  /  pR.-148  /  guNasthAna meM
jIvasthAna kA vicAra gommaTasAra meM karmagrantha kI apekSA kucha bhinna jAna
par3atA hai  /  para vaha apekSAkRta hone se vastutaH karmaprabhya ke samAna hI
hai  /  pR0-161, noTa  /  guNasthAna meM upayoga ko saMkhyA pharmagrantha aura
gommaTa sAra meM tulya hai  /  pR0-167, noTa  /  ekendriya meM sAsAbanabhAva
mAnane aura na mAnane vAle, aise jo

Page #307 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Karmagrantha is mentioned in both the Svetambara and Digambara texts. Page -
171. Note: The Svetambara texts mention the causes of karma-bandha as one, two,
or five, while the Digambara texts mention all of them. Page - 174, Note. The
causes of bandha are similar in both the Svetambara and Digambara traditions.
Page - 175, Note. Both traditions agree on the general and specific causes of
bandha. Page - 181, Note. The word "rupa" in the sense of "number" is found in
both traditions. Page - 218, Note. The eight substances and six realms mentioned
in the Karmagrantha are also found in the Trilokasara. Page - 221, Note. The
discussion of the causes of bandha due to the wrong perception of the
Uttaraprakriti in the Sarvarthasiddhi is similar to the discussion in the
Panchasangraha, although there are some differences. Page - 227. The discussion
of the one-soul-dependent emotions in the Karmagrantha and Panchasangraha is
largely similar to the discussion in the Gommatasara. Page - 226. - (b) The
Digambara texts mention the Tejaska as a Vikriya body, while other texts do not.
Page - 16, Note. The Digambara tradition has some similarities with the
Svetambara tradition regarding the concept of Sanjni and Asanjni. The Svetambara
texts have a section on the Hetubhavopadeśikā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha mAga cA 236 vo pakSa zvetAmbara-granthoM meM haiM, vigambara-
pranthoM meM bhI haiN| pR0 - 171. moTa  /  zvetAmbara - pranthoM meM jo kahIM
karmabandha ke pAra hetu kahIM vo hetu aura kahIM pA~ca hetu kahe hue haiM;
digambara-granthoM meM mo ve saba varNita haiN| pR0-174, loTa | bandha-hetuoM ke
uttara meva Adi dona saMpravApa meM samAna hai  /  pR0 - 175, noTa  /  sAmAnya
tathA vizeSa bandha-hetuoM kA vikAra donoM saMpradAya pratyoM meM hai  /
pR0-181, noTa  /  eka saMkhyA ke artha meM rUpa zabda donoM sampradAya ke
granthoM meM milatA hai| pR0 - 218 noTa karmagrantha meM varNita vasa tathA
chaha kSetra trilokasAra meM bhI haiM pR0-221, noTa  /  uttara prakRtiyoM ke
bhUla bamdha hetu kA vicAra jo sarvArthasiddhi meM hai, vaha paJcasaMgraha meM
kiye hue vicAra se kucha milA hone para bhI vastuta: usake samAna hI hai  /  pR0
- 227  /  karmagrantha tathA paJcasaMgraha meM eka-jIvAzrita bhAvoM kA jo vicAra
hai, gommaTasAra meM bahuta aMzo meM usake samAna ho varNana hai  /  pR0 226  /
- ( kha ) itara-granthoM meM tejaHkasya ko vaikriya zarIra kA kathana nahIM hai,
para digambaranthoM meM hai  /  pR0 16 noTa J zvetAmbara saMpradAya kI apekSA
digambara saMpradAya meM saMjJi asaMjI kA vaha kucha mila haiN| tathA zvetAmbara
dhanyoM meM hetubhAvopadezikI

Page #308 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samgranth Part Four  **Page 16:** The detailed description of the *Adi
Sanjnas* is present, but not in the Digambar tradition.  **Page 41:** The term
*Nitya Paryapt* is used in the *Vigamya Rashtra* in place of *Karan Paryapt*
which is famous in the Swetambar scriptures. Both terms have some similarity.
**Page 43:** The Swetambar tradition has three aspects: *Kevalgyan*, *Keval
Darshan*, and *Samavi Vishva*, while the Digambar tradition has only one aspect:
*Sahabharitva*.  **Page 55, Note:** The four *Chaumaha* and *Bosa* distinctions
of *Kashaya* in relation to *Leshya* and *Ayu* are not found in the Swetambar
tradition.  **Page 70, Note:** There are two perspectives in the Swetambar
tradition regarding the presence or absence of *Aupashmik Sammatva* in the
*Aparyapt* state, but only the first perspective is mentioned in the
*Gommatasar*.  **Page 82, Note:** There are two perspectives in the
*Karmapranth* regarding the number of *Ganasthanas* in the *Agnan Trika*, but
only one perspective is mentioned in the *Gommatasar*.  **Page 116, Note:** The
number of *Narakas* in the *Gommatasar* differs from the number mentioned in the
*Karmapranth*.  **Page 134:** The shape and location of *Yaman* is considered
differently in the Digambar tradition compared to the Swetambar tradition. The
*Rajavatik* provides a very clear description of the external causes of the
three *Yogas*.  **Page 154:** The number of *Manah Paryapaman Yogas* is not the
same in both traditions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samagrandha bhAga cAra rA Adi saMjJAoM kA vistRta varNama hai, para digambara-
anyoM meM nahIM hai  /  pR0-16 zvetAmbara-zAstra prasiddha karaNaparyApta zaSya
ke sthAna meM vigamyarazAstra meM nityaparyApta zabda hai| dhyAlyA bhI dono
zabdo kI kucha bhita hai| pR0-41| zvetAmbara-mantho meM kevalajJAna tathA
kethaladarzana kA kamAvitva, sahamAvizva aura ameva, ye tIna pakSa haiM, parantu
digambara-mantho meM sahabhAritva kA eka hI pakSa hai| pR0-43  /  lezyA tathA
Ayu ke bandhAbandha ko apekSA se kaSAya ke jo caumaha aura bosa bheda
gommaTasAra meM haiM, ve zvetAmbara-manyo meM nahIM dekhe paye | pR 55, noTa  /
aparyApta-avasthA meM aupazamikasammaktava pAye jAne aura na pAye jAne ke
sambandha meM do pakSa zvetAmbara-prAtho meM hai, parantu gommarasAra meM ukta
vo meM se pahilA pakSa hI hai| pR0-70, coTa  /  ajJAna-trika meM gaNasthAno kI
saMkhyA ke sambandha meM bo pakSa pharmaprantha meM milate haiM, parantu
gommarasAra meM eka hI pakSa hai  /  pR0-82, noTa gommaTasAra meM nArako kI
saMkhyA karmaprantha-vaNita saMkhyA se bhinna ch| pR0 - 116, nott| yamana kA
AkAra tathA sthAna digambara saMpradAya meM zvetAmbara ko apekSA bhinna prakAra
kA mAnA hai aura tIna yogo ke bAhAbhyansara kAraNo kA varNana rAjavAtika meM
bahuta spaSTa kiyA hai  /  pR0-134  /  manaHparyApamAna ke yogo kI saMkhyA dono
sampravAya meM tulya nahIM hai| pR0-154  /

Page #309 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagrantha Bhaga Bhar  In the Svetambara tradition, three terms are used for
the meaning: Ayogikaran, Avjitkaran, and Aavashyakaran. In the Digambara texts,
only Ajatkaran is used for that meaning. This is a single term. Page - 155.  238
It is believed that in the Svetambara texts, time is independent and also a
raft. But in the Digambara texts, it is considered independent. Even in the
independent view, the nature of time is not the same in the texts of both sects.
Page - 157.  The number of Yogas in the Gunasthanas is different in the
Gommatasar compared to the Karmaprath. Page 163, Note.  There are views in the
Svetambara texts that consider knowledge and ignorance at the time of the second
Gunasthana. But in the Gommatasar, only the second view is considered. Page -
166, Note.  Regarding the number of Leshyas in the Gunasthanas, there are two
views in the Svetambara texts and only one view in the Digambara texts. Page
172, Note.  [The Digambara sect believes that a Jiva, even with Samyaktvavasa,
does not die and become a woman. But this view is not acceptable to the
Svetambara sect, because they believe that Bhagwan Mahilanath was born as a
woman and with Samyaktvavasa.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga bhAra zvetAmbara panthoM meM jisa artha ke liye
AyojikAkaraNa AvajitakaraNa aura AvazyakakaraNa, aisI tIna saMjJAe~ milatI haiM,
digambaragranthoM meM usa artha ke liye sirpha AjatakaraNa, yaha eka saMkhyA hai
| pR0 - 155  /  238 mAnA hai aura zvetAmbarAmthoM meM kAla ko svatantra athya mo
raft bhI  /  kintu digambara-granthoM meM usako svatantra ho mAnA hai| svatantra
pakSa meM bhI kAla kA svarUpa donoM saMpradAya ke granthoM meM ekasA nahIM hai|
pR0-157  /  feat-feat guNasthAnoM meM yogoM kI saMkhyA gommaTasAra meM
karmaprattha kI apekSA mitra hai  /  pR0 163, moTa  /  dUsare guNasthAna ke
samaya jJAna tathA ajJAna mAnane vAle aise yo pakSa ivetAmbara-granthoM meM
haiM, parantu gommaTasAra meM sirpha dUsarA pakSa 0-166, noTa | guNasthAnoM meM
lezyA kI saMkhyA ke saMbandha meM zvetAmbara-granthoM meM do pakSa hai aura
digambara-prabhyoM meM sirpha eka pakSa hai  /  pR0 172, noTa  /  [ jIva
samyaktavasahita marakara strIrUpa meM paiM nahIM hotA, yaha bAta digambara
saMpradAya ko mAnya hai, parantu vetAmbara saMpradAya ko yaha mantavya iSTa
nahIM ho sakatA; kyoMki usameM bhagavAn mahilanAtha kA strIva tathA
samyaktavasahita utpanna honA mAnA gayA hai  /  ]

Page #310 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
On the part of the Karmagranth, 236 Appendix No. 2. Difference of opinion
between Karmagranthikas and Saiddhantikas 1 The Karmagranthika view is that
three uses are fructified in the subtle one-indriya etc. living beings.
According to the Saiddhantika view, three uses are fructified only in the six
living beings, and five uses are fructified in the remaining four living beings,
including the Vīndriya. 0-22, Note. There is a difference of opinion between the
Karmagranthikas and the Saiddhantikas regarding the number of Gunasthanas in the
Avadhivan. The Karmagranthikas consider nine and the Saiddhantikas consider
twelve Gunasthanas in it. P. 146. The Saiddhantikas consider Mana in the second
Gunasthana, but the Karmagranthikas consider Ajnana in it. P. 166, Note. There
is a difference of opinion between the Karmagranthikas and the Saiddhantikas on
the subject of which Yoga should be considered when creating and abandoning the
Kriya and Aharaka bodies. 10-170, Note. The Saiddhantikas do not consider
Sasadanava in the Ekendriya, but the Karmagranthikas do. 10-171, Note. There is
a difference of opinion between the Saiddhantika and the Karmagranthika on the
subject of which Samyakta occurs after the Pagthibheda. P. 171. *: N

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kamagranma bhAga para 236 pariziSTa naM0 2  /  kAbhagranthikoM aura
saMddhAntikoM kA mata-bheda 1 sUkSma ekendrima Adi vasa jIvasthAnoM meM tIna
upayogoM kA kathAma kArmagranthika mata kA phalita hai| saiddhAntika mata ke
anusAra to chaha jovasthAmoM meM hI tIna upayoga phalita hote haiM aura vIndriya
Adi zeSa cAra jovasthAnoM meM pAMca upayoga phalita hote haiM  /  '0-22, nott|
avadhivana meM guNasthAnoM ko saMkhyA ke saMbandha meM kArmagyikoM tathA
saMvAntikoM kA mata-bheda hai| kArmagranthika usameM no tathA yasa guNasthAma
mAnate haiM aura saiddhAntika usameM bAraha guNasthAna mAnate haiM  /  pR0-146
/  saiddhAntika dUsare guNasthAna meM mAna mAmate haiM, para kArmagranthika
usameM ajJAna mAnate haiM  /  pR0-166, noTa  /  kriya tathA AhAraka-zarIra
banAte aura tyAgate samaya kauna sA yoga mAnanA cAhiye, isa viSaya meM
kAmapanthiko kA aura savAnsikokA mata-meva hai  /  10-170, noTa  /  siddhAntI
ekenniya meM sAsAdanamAva nahIM mAnate, para phArmagranthika mAnate haiM  /
10-171, noTa  /  pagthibheda ke anantara kauna sA samyakta hotA hai, isa viSaya
meM sivAnta tathA karmaprantha kA mata-bheda hai  /  pR0-171  /  *: N

Page #311 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmachantya Bhag Bar 240 Appendix No. 3. Fourth Karmagrantha and
Panchasangraha. The consideration of yoga in Jeevasthamo is also in
Panchasangraha. P. 15, Note. The difference of opinion regarding the
relationship of yogas of insufficient Jeevasthana, which is in this Karma
Pragya, is elaborated in detail in Panchasangraha. P. 16. The consideration of
yogas in Jeevasthana is also in Panchasangraha. P. 20, Note. Karmagrantha
mentions many Jeevasthanas in Vimanggyan, and Panchasangraha mentions one
Jeevasthana. P. 68, Note. The fact that Aupashmik Samyakta can be found in the
insufficient state is also in Panchasangraha. P. 70, Note. The description of
women being more numerous than men is in Panchasangraha. P. 125, Note.
Panchasangraha has a consideration of yogas with respect to Gunasthana. P. 163,
Note. The description of yogas in Gunasthana is in Panchasangraha. P. 167, Note.
The consideration of the original Bandha-hetu in the aftermath of Bandha-hetu
and in Gunasthana is in Panchasangraha. P. 175, Note. The description of general
and specific Bandha-hetu is elaborate in Panchasangraha. P. 181, Note.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmacantya bhAga bAra 240 pariziSTa naM0 3 /  cauthA karmagrantha tathA
paJcasaMgraha  /  jIvasthAmo meM yoga kA vicAra paJcasaMgraha meM bhI hai  /
pR015, nott| aparyApta jIvasthAna ke yogo ke saMbandha kA mata-bheva jo isa
karma pragya meM hai, vaha paJcAMgraha ko dhImA meM vistAraparvaka hai  /  pa0-
16  /  jIvasthAna meM upayogoM kA vicAra paJcasAha meM bho hai  /  5 / 20, noTa
/  karmagrantha kArane vimaGgajJAna meM vo jIvasthAno kA aura paJcasaMgraha
kAgne eka jIvasthAna kA ullekha kiyA hai  /  pa0-68, noTa  /  aparyApta-avasthA
meM aupazamikasamyaktaSa pAyA jA sakatA hai, yaha bAta paJcapaha meM bhI hai  /
pR-70 noTa  /  puruSo se striyo ko sakhyA adhika hone kA varNana pAMgraha meM
hai| pu0-125, noTa  /  paJcAgraha meM mI guNasthAno ko lekara lekara yogo kA
vicAra hai| pu. 163, noTa  /  guNasthAna meM upayoga kA varNama paJcasaMgraha
meM hai  /  pR0-167, noTa  /  bandha-hetubho ke uttara bheva tathA guNasthAno
meM mUla bama-hetuokA vicAra paJcAMgraha meM hai  /  pu0-175, noTa  /  sAmAnya
tathA vizeSa bandha-hetubho kA varNana paJcasaMgraha meM vistRta hai  /
pR0-181, noTa  /

Page #312 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagranth Part Four 241 The consideration of Bandha, Ubaya, etc. in Gunasthans
is in Panchasangrah. Page-187, Note. The consideration of Alp-Mahatva in
Gunasthans is in Panchasangrah. Page-162, Note. The Bhavas of Karma are in
Panchasampra-e. 10. 204, Pot. The consideration of Us Siyon Sambai is different
in Karmagranth and Panchasangrah. 10227. The number of Jivasrita Bhavas is not
different in the original Karmagranth and the original Panchasangrah, but there
is a horse-like consideration in both the explanations. Page-226.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra 241 guNasthAnoM meM bandha, ubaya Adi kA vicAra
pandhasaMgraha meM hai| pR0-187, noTa  /  guNasthAnoM meM alpa-mahatva kA vicAra
paJcasaMgraha meM hai| pR-162,noTa  /  karma ke bhAva paJcasaMpra-e meM haiN|
10. 204, poTa  /  usa sioM saMbaI kA vicAra karmagrantha aura paJcasaMgraha meM
bhinna-bhinna zailI phara hai  /  10227  /  eka jIvAzrita bhAvoM kI saMkhyA mUla
karmagrantha tathA mUla paJcasaMgraha meM bhinna nahIM hai, kintu vonoM
vyAkhyAnoM meM dekhane yogya ghor3A sA vicAra mena hai  /  pR0-226  /

Page #313 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 242 Karmagranth Part Four Appendix No. 4. Some Special Places Worth Noting |
The Interrelation of Jiva-Sthana, Margana-Sthana and Guna-Sthana | P. - 4. The
time division of binding the age of the Parva is in which direction according to
the Adhikari-Kshetra? P. - 24 Note | How does Udirana occur and until when can
it occur? The rule of this subject. P. - 26, Note | What is the Bashya in
relation to the nature of Vy-Leva? What is Mavaleshya in Darshan and what is the
consideration of Leshya etc. in the opinion of Goshalak? P. - 33 How many Paksha
are there? What is the Yoga of all of them and the Mahabharata, what is the
imagination in the place? J The division of beings with one sense, two senses,
etc. in the scriptures, which is relative to the senses, is from what
perspective? And how many Mev Pramev are there in Itriya and what is their
nature? Etc. consideration. P. - 36. What is the nature of Sanjna and its Mev
Prabhedas and what is the regulator of Sanjnitva and Asantvi's behavior? Etc.
consideration P. - 38. The nature of Aparayapt and Paryapt and its Mev etc. and
the nature of Paryapti P. - 40. The order of Keval Sharam and Kevalvan,
Sahamathitva and A-Mev, these three Paksha are the main Balile and the said
three Paksha | From which Nayako's perspective are they? Etc. description. See -
43

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 242 krarmagrantha bhAga cAra pariziSTa naM0 4  /  kucha dhyAna dene yogya
vizeSa- vizeSa sthala | jIvasthAna, mArgaNAsthAna aura guNasthAna kA pArasparika
astara | pU~0 - 4  /  parabhava kI Ayu bA~dhane kA samaya vibhAga adhikArI-
kSetra ke anusAtha kisa dizA kA hai| pu0-24 noTa | udIraNA kisa prakAra ke karma
kI hotI hai aura vaha kaba taka ho sakatI hai ? isa viSaya kA niyama  /  pR0-26,
noTa | vya-levA ke svarUpa ke sambandha meM bAzaya kyA hai ? mAvalezyA kyA vastu
hai darzana meM tathA gozAlaka ke mata meM lezyA ke ityAdi kA vicAra  /  pR0-33
kitane pakSa haiM ? una sabakA aura mahAbhArata meM yoga, sthAna meM kaisI
kalpanA hai ? J zAstra meM ekendriya dvIndriya Adi jo indriya sApekSa prANiyoM
kA vibhAga hai vaha kisa apekSA se ? tathA itriya ke kitane meva prameva hai
aura unakA kyA svarUpa hai ? ityAdi kA vicAra  /  pR0 36  /  saMjJA kA tathA
usake meva prabhedoM kA svarUpa aura saMjJitva tathA asaMtvi ke vyavahAra kA
niyAmaka kyA hai ? ityAdi para vicAra pR0 38  /  aparyApta tathA paryApta aura
usake meva Adi kA svarupa tathA paryApti kA svarUpa pR0-40  /  kevala zarama
tathA kevalavana ke kramabhASitva, sahamAthitva aura ameva ina tIna pakSoM ko
mukhya-mukhya balIle tathA ukta tIna pakSa | kisa-kisa nayako apekSA se hai ?
ityAdi kA varNana  /  dR0-43

Page #314 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Namegranth Part Four  **On the acceptance of Bhut-Upayog in a one-sense being
when there is no power of speech and hearing, how? Consider this. Pu.-45.**
**In a male individual, female-worthy qualities are found, and in a female
individual, male-worthy qualities are found, and sometimes in a single
individual, there are external and internal symptoms of female-male diseases.
Its reliable evidence. Pr.-53, Note.**  **The "Var" of the Shravakas has not
been displaced, its disclosure. 10-61, Note.**  **Some Acharyas consider the
Man:Paryaya Upayog as a Parshanrupa, its proof. 50-62, Note.**  **Who is called
the "Jati Madhy"? Its disclosure. Pr.-65, Note.**  **In Aupamika Samyaktv, those
who consider multiple Jeevasthan and those who consider one Jeevasthan, what
arguments do the Acharyas give in support of their respective positions
regarding the presence and absence of Aupamika Samyaktv in the incomplete state?
Its detailed description. Pu.-70, Note.**  **Agamic proof for knowing the field
of origin of all humans, their color, and their age and qualifications. Pr.-7,
Note.**  **From which places are those who have fallen from heaven born? Its
statement. Pr.-73, Note.**  **In Ghaisharn, some consider three Jeevasthan and
some six. This difference of opinion depends on different interpretations of
Indriya Paryapti. Its statement with proof. Pu.-76, Note.**  **In Pharmgranya,
the non-conscious Panchendriya is considered female and male, these are the
Gods...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nAmaMgrantha bhAga cAra bolane tathA sunane kI zakti nahone para mI ekendriya
meM bhUta-upayoga svIkAra kiyA jAtA hai, so kisa taraha ? isa para vicAra  /
pu.-45  /  puruSa vyakti meM strI-yogya aura strI vyakti meM puruSa-yogya bhAva
pAye jAte haiM aura kabhI to kimI eka ho vyakti meM strI-puruSa rogoM ke
bAhyAbhyantara lakSaNa hote haiN| isake vizvasta savata  /  pR.-53, noTa  /
zrAvakoM kI vara" kA visthA nahIM kI hai, usakA khulAsA  /  10-61, nott|
mana:paryAya upayoga ko koI AcArya parzanarUpa bhI mAnate hai, isakA pramANa  /
50 62, noTa  /  jAti madhya kisako kahate haiM ? isakA khulAsA | pR0-65, noTa |
aupamikasamyaktatra meM vo jIyasthAna mAnane vAle aura eka jIvasthAna mAnane
vAle mAcArya apane-apane pakSa kI puSTi ke liye aparyApta-avasthA meM
aupazamikasabhyaktaba pAye jAne aura na pAye jAne ke viSaya meM kyA kyA yukti
dete haiM ? isakA savistara varNana  /  pura-70, nott| samUcichama manuSyoM kI
utpatti ke kSetra aura syAma tathA unakI Ayu aura yogyatA jAnane ke liye
Agamika-pramANa  /  pR0-7, bhoTa  /  svarga se chayuta hokara veva kina sthAnoM
meM paidA hote hai ? isakA kathana  /  pR0 -73. noTa  /  ghAIrzana meM koI tIna
ho jIvasthAna mAnate haiM aura koI cha  /  yaha mata-meva indriyaparyApti kI
bhinna-bhinna vyAkhyAoM para nirbhara hai| isakA sapramANa kathana  /  pu0-76,
noTa  /  pharmagranya meM asaMjJo paJcendriya ko strI aura puruSa, ye bo deva

Page #315 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Nath Part Four **144**  **1.**  A non-sentient being is considered to
be in one *guna-sthana* according to the principles. From what perspective?
Provide evidence. (Page 7, Note)  **2.** What is the intention of those who
consider two *guna-sthana* in the *maha-ma-nik* and those who consider three
*guna-sthana*? Explain. (Page 12)  **3.**  Six *guna-sthana* are considered in
this *karma-prampa* for the three *ashum leshya* of *kama*, *adi*, and *leshya*.
However, four *guna-sthana* are considered in *pan-sangrah* and other texts for
the same three *leshya*. From what perspective? Provide evidence. (Page 88)
**4.** It is said that eleven *guna-sthana* are found at the time of death. How
are only three *guna-sthana* considered in all *vigrah-gati*? Explain. (Page 86)
**5.** In *strovev*, there are thirteen *yoga*. In *vev-samanya*, there are
*bagch* uses and nine *guna-sthana*. Which type of field, from *soy* or *bhav*,
is considered to account for this difference? Explain. (Page 67, Note)  **6.**
In the *yoga* of *jap-a-sampavarav*, there is a consideration of *bhivar-ik-
mishra-yoga*. How is this possible? Explain. (Page 6)  **7.** The concept of
*shri-alpa-bahutva* in *margana* is mentioned in the *karma-granth*. Is this
concept found in ancient texts or in later texts? Provide information. (Page 15,
Note)  **8.**  Provide a well-supported statement about the subtlety of the
field in relation to time. (Page 177, Note)  **9.**  Explain the meaning of
*shulk*, *pan*, and *temo-leshya-vala* in relation to the number of *guna*,
*alpa-yatya*, *shas-samadhan*, and the relevant commentary. (Page 130, Note)
**10.**  Clearly explain the nature of the *seen yoga*, their internal causes,
and the resolution of doubts regarding the number of *yoga*. Also, explain the
nature of *dravya-mam*, *pra-dhyapan*, and *sharira*. (Page 134)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAmanAtha bhAga cAra 144 mAne haiM aura siddhAnta meM eka napusaka, so kisa
apekSA se ? isakA pramANa 1 pR0-7, moTa  /  mahAma-nika meM do guNasthAna mAnane
vAloM kA tathA tIna guNasthAna mAnane vAloM kA prAzaya kyA hai ? isakA khulAsA
/  pR. 12  /  kama Adi tIna azuma lezyAmoM meM chaha guNasthAna isa karmaprampa
meM mAne hue aura panasaMgraha Adi pranyoM meM ukta tIna lezyA meM cAra
guNasthAna mAne haiN| so kisa apekSA se ? isakA pramANapUrvaka bulAsA 1 pR0-88|
jaga maraNa ke samaya gyAraha guNasthAna pAye jAne kA kayana hai| saba
vigrahagati meM tIna hI guNasthAna kaise mAne gaye ? isakA khulAsA  /  puu0-86|
stroveva meM teraha yogoM kA tayA veva sAmAnya meM bAgcha upayogoM kA aura nau
guNasthAnoM kA jo kapana hai, soya aura bhAva meM se kisa-kisa prakAra ke kSetra
ko lene se ghaTa sakatA hai ? isakA khulAsA  /  pu0-67, moTa  /
japAmasampavarava ke yogo meM bhIvArikamizrayoga kA pariMgaNana hai, so kisa
taraha sambhava hai ? isakA khulAsA  /  pR0-6|| mArgaNAoM meM zrI alpAbahutva kA
vicAra karmagrantha meM hai, yaha Agama bhAvi kima prAcIna pranyo meM hai ?
isakI sUcanA  /  pu0-15, noTa  /  kAla kI apekSA kSetra kI ko sUkSmatA kA
sapramANa kathana  /  pR0-177 noTa zulka, pana aura temo-lekSyAvAloM ke
saMkhyAtaguNa alpa-yAtya para zAsa-samAdhAna tathA usa viSaya meM vyAkAra kA,
mantavya  /  pu0-130 noTa sIna yogoM kA svarUpa tathA unake brAhma-Abhyantara
kAraNo kA spaSTa kapana aura yogoM kI saMkhyA ke viSaya meM zaGkA-samAdhAna
tathA dravyamama, pradhyApana aura zarIra kA svarUpa  /  pR0-134,  /

Page #316 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmagrantha Part Four  **Differences Among Themselves**  Is Samyaktva (Right
Conduct) motivated or unmotivated? The basis of Kshayopa-samik (cessation of
karmic influx) and Aavi (non-attachment), the characteristics of Kshayopa-samik
and Kshaya (cessation of karmic influx) Samyaktva, the nature of some Kakokya
(statements) and Pradesh (regions), Kshayopa-samik and its explanation, and
other relevant considerations (19-136).  **Shankara-Samadhan (Shankara's
Solution)**  The non-acceptance of Chalu-shan (a type of meditation) in the
state of Apariapt (incomplete) before Indriya-pariapt (complete sensory
perception) is achieved, and the consideration of Chakshu-darshan (visual
perception) with evidence (10-141).  **245**  Detailed discussion on three
points related to Vakragati (deviation from the right path): (1) The number of
Vakragati's components, (2) The time-measure of Vakragati, and (3) The time-
measure of Anahar-kalpa (period of non-eating) in Vakragati (143).  **Regarding
the number of Gunasthanas (stages of spiritual progress) in Avadhi-darshan
(clairvoyance), the meaning of each side, and the difference between Avadhi-
darshan and Vibhang-gyan (knowledge of differentiation) (146).**
**Reconciliation of the differences of opinion regarding Kabala-ahar (food
restrictions) in the Shwetamber and Digamber sects (108).**  **It is a kind of
contradiction to prohibit the study of Shruta-gyan-vishesh (specific scriptural
knowledge) for women who can attain Keval-gyan (omniscience). Consideration of
this issue and the avoidance of contradiction from the perspective of Nay
(principle) (146).**  **How is it possible to reject Audarik-mishra-yoga (a type
of yoga) from the yogas of Kshud-darshan (limited clairvoyance)? Consideration
of this topic (164).**  **Description of various topics related to Kevali-mudhat
(the state of omniscience) in the Upanishads, and the description of the
vastness of the soul in the Gita. Matching this with the perspective of Prem-
drishti (love-vision) and information about whether the action of Kevali-mudhat
is described in any other philosophy (15).**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha bhAga cAra Apasa meM antara samyaktva sahetuka hai yA nirhetuka ?
kSAyopazamika Avi mevoM kA AdhAra, aupazamika aura kSAyopazamika samyaktva kA
kSAyika samyagavIkI una donoM se vizeSatA, kucha kAkokya aura pradeza kA svarupa
kSayopazama tathA vyAkhyA evaM anya prAsaGgika vicAra 19 - 136  /  zaGkara-
samAdhAna, upazama-zabda kI aparyApta avasthA meM indriyaparyApta pUrNa hone ke
pahile calUzana nahIM mAne jAne aura cakSurdarzana mAne jAne para pramANa
pUrvaka vicAra  /  10- 141  /  245 vakragati ke sambandha meM tIna bAtoM para
savistAra:- (1) vakragatike vigrahoM ko saMkhyA (2) vakragati kA kAla-mAna aura
(3) vakSagati meM anAhArakalpa kAla mAna  /  pu0-143 | avadhidarzana meM
guNasthAnoM kI saMkhyA ke viSaya meM pakSameva tathA pratyeka pakSa kA tAtparya
arthAt vibhaGgajJAna se avadhidarzana kA bhedAbheva  /  pu0 - 146  /  zvetAmbara
digambara saMpradAya meM kabalAhAra viSayaka matabheda kA samanvaya  /  pu0 -
108 kevala jJAna prApta kara sakane vAlI strIjAti ke liye zrutajJAnavizeSa kA
arthAt dRSTibAva ke adhyayana kara niSedha karanA, yaha eka prakAra se virodha
hai  /  isa sambandha meM vicAra tathA naya-dRSTi se virodha kA parihAra | pR0 -
146  /  kSudaMrzana ke yogoM meM se audArikamizrayoga kA varjana kiyA hai, so
kisa taraha sambhava hai ? isa viSaya para vicAra | pu0-164  /  kevalimuddhAta
sambandhI aneka viSayoM kA varNana upaniSadoM meM tathA gItA meM jo AtmA kI
vyApakatA kA varNana hai, usakA prema-dRSTi se milAna aura kevalimuddhAta jaisI
kriyA kA varNana anya kisa darzana meM haiM ? isakI sUcanA |0-15  /

Page #317 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 246, Karma Granth, Part Four  **What is the nature of time in the
Jag-Varshana and Janet-Varshana? What should be considered its true nature?
Discuss with evidence. (Page 127)**  **Should the six Selyas be considered
related to the four Gunasthanas or the six Gunasthanas? What are the arguments
for each side? How do the Leshyas differ in terms of their auspicious and
inauspicious aspects, such as the auspicious Mavalepaya during the inauspicious
Vanya Leshya and the inauspicious Paleya during the auspicious Shubha Leshya?
Discuss these differences in various Jivas. (Page 172, Note)**  **There are
different opinions regarding the number of causes for Karmabandha. Discuss these
different opinions. (Page 174, Note)**  **Explain the Amigrahik, Anamigrahik,
and Aminisheshik Mithyatva according to the scriptures. (Page 176, Note)**
**The three types of Karmabandha, namely Tirthankar-Namakarma, Saharak-Dwik, and
the three types of Karmabandha, are sometimes called Kshaya-Hetuk, and sometimes
the Tirthankar-Namakarma is called Samprapti-Hetuk and the Saharak-Dwik is
called Samyama-Hetuk. Explain the reason for this difference. (Page 181, Note)**
**Where else are the six Bhavas and their causes described? Provide details.
(Page 166, Note)**  **The ignorant are sometimes called Ayopashmik and sometimes
Auryik. Explain the reason for this difference. (Page 166, Note)**  **Where else
is the concept of number discussed and how? Provide details. (Page 208, Note)**
**Discuss the presence of one or many Jivas in different Yugas and at different
times, considering the Bhavas and the differences in the Gunasthanas in relation
to the Mavs. (Page 231)**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 246 karmagrantha bhAga cAra jaga varzana meM tathA janeta ra-varzana meM kAlakA
svarU kisa-kisa prakAra kA mAnA hai ? tathA usakA prAstavika svarUpa kaisA
mAmanA cAhiye ? isakA pramANa pUrvaka vicAra  /  pR.-127  /  chaha selyA kA
sambandha cAra guNasthAna taka mAnanA cAhiye yA chaha guNa spAna taka? isa
sambandha meM jo pakSa hai, unakA mAya tathA zubha bhAga lezyA ke azubha paleyA
aura azubha vanya lezyA ke samaya zubha mAvalepayA, isa prakAra lezyAoM kI
viSamatA kina jIyo meM hotI hai ? ityAdi vicAra  /  pU.-172- noTa  /  kamabandha
ke hetuoM kI bhinna-bhinna saMkhyA sabhA usake sambandha meM kucha vizeSa
UhApoha  /  pR0-174, noTa  /  Amigrahika, anAminahika aura AminiSezika-mithyAtva
kA zAstrIya khulAsA  /  pR0-176, moTa  /  tIrtha karanAmakarma aura sahAraka-
dvika, ina tIna prakRtiyoM ke bandha ko kaho kaSAya-hetuka kahA hai aura kahIM
tIrthakaranAmakarma ke agSa ko sampapasyahetuka tathA AhAraka-dvikake bandha ko
saMyama-hetuka, so kisa apekSA se ? isakA khulAsA pR0-181, noTa  /  chaha bhAva
aura unake bhejoM kA varNana anyatra kahAM-kahA~ minnatA hai ? isakI sUcamA  /
10-166, noTa  /  mati Adi ajJAnI ko kahIM bAyopazamika aura kahIM aurayika kahA
hai, so kisa apekSA se ? isakA khulAsA  /  pR0-166, noTa  /  /  saMkhyA kA
vicAra anyatra kahA~-kahA~ kisa-kisa prakAra hai ? isakA niveza 1 pR0-208, noTa
/  yugapara tathA bhinna-bhinna samaya meM eka yA aneka jIvAzmita pAye jAne kAle
bhAva aura aneka jIvo ko apekSA se guNasthAnoM meM mAvoM ke uttara meva  /
pu-231  /

Page #318 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma: Book Part Four Glossary of Translated Technical Terms  Technical Term |
Page --- | --- Achamastikayathasyat | [Determination] Experiential Cognition
[Anubhag] | [Anubhagabandhasthana] Antarkarana | Inner Organ [Antarmuhurata] |
[Apavartanavarana] [Abadhakal] | Abhavastha Ayogi Asatkalpana | False
Imagination [Adesa] |  Ayojikakaran | Arranging [Ayambil] Avajitakaran |
Observance of Ayambil [Avalika] |  Avasyakkaran | Necessary Vara Vara Samayika |
Periodic Introspection Utkrsta Anantananta | Highest Infinite Utkrsta Asankhyata
| Highest Innumerable Utkrsta Parinata Sankhyata | Highest Enumerable Utkrsta
Yuktamandala | Highest Conjoined Multitude Utkrsta Yuktasankhyata | Highest
Enumerable Multitude Udayasthana | Origination Site Upakaranendriyas | Auxiliary
Sense Organs Upaksama | Subsidence Upasamasrenibbhavo Upasamikasamyaktva |
Subsidence-Shedding Disposition of Right Faith [Occha] Osasanjña | Occha
Nomenclature [Utasamanya] |  Urddhvapracaya | Ascending Aggregate

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma : ntha bhAga cAra anuvAda gata pAribhASika zaboM kA koSa | anuvAdagata
pAribhASikazabdoM kA koSa zabda | paGkti  /  zabda | pRSTha | a
achAmasthikayathAsyAta [ adhyavasAya ] anubhavasaMjJa  /  [ anubhAga ]
[anubhAgabandhasthAna] antarakaraNa [ antarmuhUrta [ [ apavartanAvaraNa] |
abAdhAkAla ] abhavastha ayogI asatkalpanA A  /  [Adeza ] AyojikAkaraNa [AyaMbila
] AvajitakaraNa [AvalikA ] AvazyakakaraNa i  /  varavara sAmAyika paGkti  /  61
20 223 13 38 223 13 16 .. 140 maiM 28 1 6 2 6 1 164 25 210 17 m ex 155 60 1 155
6 31 1 155 7 57 23 pR0  /  u  /  utkRSTa anantAnanta utkRSTa asaMkhyAtA sakhyAta
utkRSTa parIsa nita utkRSTa parItA saMkhyAta utkRSTa yuktA manla utkRSTa
yuktAsaMkhpAta utkRSTa saMkhyAta udayasthAna ureraNAsthAna upakaraNendriya
upakSama upazamazreNibhAvoopazamikasamyavazva [oca ] oSasaMjJA U  /  [
utAsAmAnya ] Urdhvapracaya 247 o  /  225 11 220 220 15 216 3 220 16 220 2 217 16
28 * 28 3 37 12 136 27 66 3 14 ar 158 25 4 16 36 15

Page #319 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
248 Perhaps. Page | Au. Aupapatikasharira Shramika trafafta Karana Karana-
Apariapt Karanaparyapt [Kshayika parinam] Kshayopa-sham Kshayopa-shamik 1
(Dhana) [Dhanikrit lok] G. Paribhavajanaya aupashamik sampva-shva Gasi Gh. 62 13
138 1 167 14 Chhayasthikayathakyat Ch. Pankti ' Jghanya anantan ha jghanya
asankhyat Sansthat GT I 41 10 40 41 13 223 13 138 4 138 1 8 65 13 81 10 129 1
118 4 61 15 220 18 220 1 Shava. Padit. Page | Jghanya parotagsht 220 7 Jghanya
paritasankhyat 215 11 Jghanya yuktanant 220 13 Jghanya yukta sankhyat 218 15
Jghanya sankhyat 206 24 [Jati bhavya] [Jivasamas] Jnanasanjna Karmagranth bhag
char Tiryakprachay [Tiryaksamanya] Dravyaprana Dravyaman Bravy leshya
Dhirghkalopadeshiki Sanjna T.  =* Dravyavachan [Dravyaved] [Dravyasamyakta]
Dravyendriya { 3‍ 8 3 D. 65 ર્ 5 38 22 Drishtivadoshapeshiki sanjna 3826 3 135
13 મ 16 1 15 35 5 158 23 3 16 " 33 135 53 173 16 36 20

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 248 zAyada  /  pRSTha | au  /  aupapAtikazarIra zramika trafafta karaNa karaNa-
aparyApta karaNaparyApta [kaSAyika pariNAma] kSAyopazama kSayopazamika 1 (dhana)
[dhanIkRta loka ] g| paribhavajanya aupaza mikasampavazva gasi gha  /  62 13 138
1 167 14 chAyasthikayathAkyAta ch| paGkti ' jaghanya anantAna ha jaghanya
asaMkhyAta saMsthAta GT I 41 10 40 41 13 223 13 138 4 138 1 8 65 13 81 10 129 1
118 4 61 15 220 18 220 1 zava  /  pAr3ita  /  pRSTha | jaghanya parotAgazta 220
7 jaghanya parItAsaMkhyAta 215 11 jaghanya yuktAnanta 220 13 jaghanyayukta
saMkhyAtra 218 15 jaghanya saMkhyAta 206 24 [jAti bhavya ] [jIvasamAsa]
jJAnasaMjJA karmagrantha bhAga cAra tiryakpracaya [tiryaksAmAnya]] dravyaprANa
dravyamana bravya lezyA dhIrghakAlopadezikI saMjJA ta  /  =* dravyavacana
[dravyaveda ] [ dravyasamyaktva ] dravyendriya { 3 8 3 da  /  65 r 5 38 22
dRSTivAdoSapezikI saMjJA 3826 3 135 13 ma 16 1 15 35 5 158 23 3 16 " 33 135 53
173 16 36 20

Page #320 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma Grantha Bhaga ma 249 Shabya Prushtha. Pankti T, Sharad. . Sharad.
Prushtha. Pankti. Ashoday 137 16 [Nigodasharira] 223 28 Nirati Dharachhedopastha
[Bandh Na Karan] Paniyasanayam 58 21 Bandhasthan [Nirjara.] [Nivibhag Ansh] 222
22 Bhavpratyaya 114 15 Nivishmanakparihara Bhavath-Ayogi 164 24 Vishubasanayam
60 20 Bhav Nivishtakayikparihara Bhavran Vishuddhasanayam 60 21 Bhavaleshya 33
18 Nili-Aparyapt 41 2 [Bhavaved] 53 1 Nivritti Indriya [Bhavasamyaktva 137 17
Nishchaymaran 86 17 Bhavendriya Nokashay 176 17 M. Madhyam Anantanant 220 22
Madhyam Asankhyata Sankhyat 220 10 Paryapti 41 21 Madhyam Parittanant 220 15
[Palyosham] Madhyam Parittasanchyat 216 4 [Purva] Madhyam Yuktanant 220 20
Purvapratipann Madhyam Yuktasanyalat 220 5 [Pratar] Madhyam Sankhyat 217 22
Pratiyanaman 163 12 [Pratyeksharira 223 25 Prathamopshmasamyaktva 66 1 |
Yavatkathitsamayik 58 6

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma grantha bhAgamA 249 zabya pRSTha  /  paMkti ta , zarada  /   /  zarada  /
pRSTha  /  paMkti  /  azodaya 137 16 [nigodazarIra] 223 28
niratidhArachedopasthA [bandha na karaNa] panIyasaMyama 58 21 bandhasthAna
[nirjr|] [nivibhAga aMza] 222 22 bhavapratyaya 114 15 nivizamAnakaparihAra
bhavastha-ayogI 164 24 vizubasaMyama 60 20 bhAva niviSTakAyikaparihAra bhAvArANa
vizuddhasaMyama 60 21 bhAvalezyA 33 18 nili-aparyApta 41 2 [bhAvaveda] 53 1
nivRttIndriya [bhAvasamyaktva 137 17 nizcayamaraNa 86 17 bhAvendriya nokaSAya
176 17 ma  /  madhyama anantAnanta 220 22 madhyama asaMkhyAtA saMkhyAta 220 10
paryApti 41 21 madhyama parIttAnanta 220 15 [palyoSama] madhyama
parIttAsaMkhyAta216 4 [pUrva] madhyama yuktAnanta 220 20 pUrvapratipanna
madhyamayuktAsaMlyAta 220 5 [pratara] madhyama saMkhyAta 217 22 pratiyanamAna
163 12 [pratyekazarIra 223 25 prathamopazamasamyaktva 66 1 |
yAvatkathitasAmAyika 58 6

Page #321 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmaprāṇapāṭha Bhāga Cāra 250 Page | Line | Śāda | Page ! Line Śarada | Ri] 118
4 | Śāsa-pṛthaktva Śarīra Va | Labdhi-aparȳāpta Sarakalpana 210 15 Labdhinaśa
Sasthāna 27 25 Sabdhiparyāpta 40 10 [Samaya] 261 Viṣapratyayasārīra 62 15
Sarāmasaṃyama 14 24 Labdhāundriya 37 14 |Sāgaropam] 28 6 [Lavasattama Deva] 71
11 Sāticāra-chevopastāpalin̄gabhārīra Nīyasaṃyama [Sāmānya] Pakragati 144 15
[Sāmānya Bandha-hetu] 181 13 [Varga 117 1 Sūkṣmaśarīra [Vargamūla] [Sūciśreṇi
Vigraha 143 10 [Saṅkrama] Vipākoṣaya 137 15 [Saṅkramaṇakaraṇa]
Viśudhyamānasūkṣma Saṅkliśyamānakasūkṣmasaṃpārāyasaṃyama 61 6 Saṃpārāyasaṃyama
61 5 [Viśeṣa] [Saṅkṣepa] [Viśeṣa Bandha-hetu] 181 14 Saṃjñā [Viśeṣādhika]
[Sthitakalpī] [Vistāra] Sthitāripatakalpī] [Visvā] 62 3 Bhāvika
Vyāvahārikamaraṇa 89 15 ! Hetuvāvopadeśikakośa 38 15 x xnx a w -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmapranpa bhAga cAra 250 pRSTha  /  paMkti  /  | zAda  /  pRSTha ! paMkti
zarada  /  ri] 118 4 | zAsapRthaktva zarIra va  /  labdhi-aparyApta sarakalpanA
210 15 labdhinasa sasAsthAna 27 25 sabdhiparyApta 40 10 [samaya] 261
viSapratyayazarIra 62 15 sarAmasaMyama 14 24 labdhaundriya 37 14 |sAgaropama] 28
6 [lavasattama deva] 71 11 sAticArachevopasthApaliGgabhArIra nIyasaMyama
[sAmAnya] pakragati 144 15 [sAmAnya bandha-hetu] 18113 [varga 117 1 sUkSmazarIra
[vargamUla] [sUcizreNi vigraha 143 10 [saMkrama] vipAkoSaya 137 15
[saMkramaNakaraNa] vizudhyamAnasUkSma saMklizyamAnakasUkSmasAMparAyasaMyama 61 6
saMparAyasaMyama 61 5 [vizeSa] [saMkSepa] [vizeSa bandha-hetu] 181 14 saMjJA
[vizeSAdhika] [sthitakalpI] [vistAra] sthitAripatakalpI] [visvA] 62 3 bhAvika
vyAvahArikamaraNa 89 15 ! hetuvAvopadezikozA 38 15 x xnx a w -

Page #322 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Fourth Karma Granth La Kosh!  What part, chapter Verse number. Prakrit.
Sanskrit. Hindi. 72-Aopar Atahpara Before this. 'Sanyogakevalo' and
'Ayog48-Antadug Antavik Kevali' named Antaka - Ko-ser (Air and fourteenth
Gunasthan. 47 Antaim Antadvim Last and first. 23, 28-Antim Antim Last. 73-Akha
Alya Name. 36, 38-Aggi Agni Agnikayika-named Jich-vishesh 12, 16, 20, 25,
T'Achakshusdarshan' named Darshan Achakshus 32, 42-Achakkhu Lvishesh [62-6] 48
Achhas Ashtahas This, excluding laughter, etc. 1-[ ] The numbers inside this
bracket are the page and line numbers, where the special meaning of those words
is mentioned. 251

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cauthe karmagrantha lA koSa ! kAya bhAga bAra gaathaangk| prAkRta  /  sNskRt|
hindii| 72-aopara ataHpara isase agaadd'ii| 'saMyogakevalo' aura
'ayoga48-aMtaduga antavika kevalI' nAmake antake ko-sera (havA aura caudahavA~
guNasthAna  /  47aMtAima antAdvima akhIrakA aura zurUkA  /  23, 28-aMtima antima
akhiirkaa| 73-akkhA AlyA nAma  /  36, 38-aggi agni agnikAyikA-nAmaka jIca-vizeSa
12,16,20,25, T'acakSurdarzana' nAmaka varzana acakSuSa 32,42-acakkhu LvizeSa
[62-6] 48achahAsa aSaTahAsa yaha hAsyAdi ko chor3akara  /  1-[ ]isa koSTha ke
andarake aGka, pRSTha aura paMktiyoM ke aGga haiM, usa jagaha una zabdoMkA
vizeSa artha ullikhita hai| 251

Page #323 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Prā. | Saṃ. | Śān Mā. | 3,12,16,20,21,23 Ajay 26,30.42,46,48.56/ 47.50,54,56 }
-Ajo(yo gin, 52- Ajzhavasaya 7-2,8-32,2,35, Ayat' -nāmaka cōthā guṇasthāna siyā
uttara māma-viśeṣa! 62-1] Cōdahvaṁ guṇasthāna-vālā jīva. Pariṇāmōṁ ke darje.
Ayogīn Adhyavasaaya Aṣṭ -Aṭṭha (ḍ) Āṭha. 56,60-2.612 Aṣṭakarma Aṣṭādava
66-Aṭṭakamma 64-Aṭṭhāra 55-Aṇ An 73 -Aṇavaḍiya Anavasthita Āṭha karma. Aṭhāra.
'Anantānubandhā-nāmaka kaṣāya1 viśeṣa. [Anavasthita' nāmaka paly-vi. śeṣa.
[211-4] [ 'Anāhārak nāmaka uttara mārg. ṇā viśeṣa. Viśeṣatā-rahit. [63-5]
('Anābhīgrahik' nāmaka mithyātva-viśeṣa. [176-6] 18.23,24,34,44 -Aṇahāra Anāhāra
Karmagrantha Bhāma Cāra 12- Aṇāgāra Anākāra 51-Aṇabhigahiya Anābhīgrāhaka

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prA0  /  saM0  /  zAna maa0| 3,12.16,20,21,23 ajaya 26,30.42,46,48.56/
47.50,54,56 } -ajo(yo gin, 52- ajjhavasAya 7-2,8-32,2,35, ayata' -nAmaka cothA
guNasthAna siyA uttara mAmA-vizeSa !62-1] caudahaveM guNasthAnavAlA jIva  /
pariNAmoM ke drje| ayogin adhyavasAya aSTa -aTTha (Da) aatth| 56,60-2.612
aSTakarma aSTAdavA 66-aTTakamma 64-aTThAra 55-aNa ana 73-aNavaDiya anavasthita
ATha krm| atthaarh| 'anantAnubandhA-nAmaka kaSAya1 vizeSa  /  [anavasthita'
nAmaka ply-vi| zeSa  / [211-4] [ 'anAhAraka nAmaka uttara maarg| NA vizeSa  /
vizeSatA-rahita  /  [63-5] ('anAbhigrahika' nAmaka mithyAtva-vizeSa  /  [176-6]
18.23,24,34,44-aNahAra anAhAra karmagrantha bhAma cAra 12- aNAgAra anAkAra
51-aNabhigahiya anAbhigrAhaka

Page #324 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga. || Pra. | Sa. | 51-Anabhoga 82-Anubhaga Anabhoga Anubhaga Hi. ("Anabhoga" -
name of a particular type of Mithyatva. [77-2] "Anubhaga" - name of a particular
type of Bandha. Farmgranth Bhag Four Anant "Anant" - name of a particular type
of number. 44-2,63,71, -Anant 76.83.84 37,38.36-2,) Anantguna Anantanant
Adharma-Desha Agnana 84,86   Anantaanant 51-Adhammadeśa 6,11,26,30.66-Ana (Glana
20.32-Anatig 62 Aniyahi Antatguna. "Anantanant" - name of a particular type of
number. "Adharma" - name of a particular type of Dravya. Mithya Jnana. "Kumati",
"Kushruti" and "Vibhank" - three types of Agnana. "Aniputtibavarasampray" - name
of the ninth Gunasthan. { "Vayukayik" - name of a particular type of Moma.
[52-16] Agnana Trik Anivriti 10,38  Anil . Anil 253

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gaa0|| prA0  /  saM0  /  51-aNAbhoga 82-aNubhAga anAbhoga anubhAga hi  /  (
"anAbhoga'-nAma mithyaatvvishess| [77-2] 'anubhAga' nAmaka bandha-vizeSa  /
pharmagrantha bhAga cAra ananta 'ananta' nAmaka saMkhyA-vizeSa  /  44-2,63,71,
-aNaMta 76.83.84 37,38.36-2,) anantaguNa anantAnanta adharma-deza ajJAna 84,86
aNaMtANaMta 51-adhammadesa 6,11,26,30.66-anA (glANa 20.32-anAtiga 62aniyahi
anttgunaa| i'anantAnanta' nAmaka saMkhyA vizeSa  /  'adharma' nAmaka dravya ke
praveza  /  mithyA jJAna  /  'kumati', 'kuzruti' aura 'vibhaGkanAmaka tIna
ajnyaan| 'aniputtibAvarasaMparAya' nAmaka  /  nauvA~ gunnsthaan| { 'vAyukAyika'
nAmaka momavizeSa  /  [52-16] ajJAna trika anivRtti 10,38 anila . anila 253

Page #325 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga । Pra.। 62-Anuveeragu 4,35,50-Anna 33 Annaanamees San.। Amudeerak Anya
Agyanamiv Hi. 'Udeerna'n karnevaala jov. Aur dusre. Agyan-mishrit gyaan.
'Apyaapt'-namak jeev-vishesh. 1[11-2] 2, 3, 4–Apjatt Apyaapt Apyaapt 3,4,6,7,15.
-Apjj 18-2,45, 57,61.63-Apmat Aprammat 'Aprammat' namak saatvaan gunasthan.
'Aprammat' namak saatvaan gunasthan tak. 56 Apmat Aprammattaant
57.56,62,70-Aputv Apooarv ( 'Apooarvakaran' namak aathvaan gunasthan. Karbhanny
bhaag chaar 46-Apusvapanag Apooarvpanchak ran-namak aathvase lekar baarahvan tak
paanch gunasthan

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gA  /  praa.| 62-anuvIragu 4,35,50-anna 33annANamIsa saM0  /  amudIraka anya
ajJAnamiva hi| 'udIraNA'na karanevAlA jov| aura dUsare  /  ajJAna-mizrita
jnyaan| 'aparyApta'-nAmaka jIva-vizeSa  /  1[11-2] 2, 3, 4-apajatta aparyApta
aparyApta 3,4,6,7,15. -apajja 18-2,45, 57,61.63-apamata apramatta apramatta'
nAmaka sAtavA~ guNasthAna  /  'apramata'nAmaka sAtavA~ guNasthAna tk| 56apamatta
apramattAnta 57.56,62,70-aputva apUrva ( 'apUrvakaraNa' nAmaka AThavAM
guNasthAna  /  karbhamanya bhAga cAra 46-apuzvapaNaga apUrvapaJcaka raNa-nAmaka
AThavase lekara bArahavaM taka pA~ca guNasthAna

Page #326 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga. Pra: | Hi. 1-Appbahu 56-Abandhag Alpbahu Abandhak Karmagranth Bhag Char
78,83-Aabhas Abhyas Abhavy Abhavyetar 19.26.32-Abhav(vy) 43-Amavier 83 -
Abhavjiy 66-Abhavatt 51-Abhigahir Abhavyjeev Abhavyatva Kam aur zyada: [7-4] |
Bandhan karne wala jeev-vishesh | 'Abhyas' namak ganit ka sanfetvishesh [218-18]
| Sidd na hone wala jeev-vishesh ( Abhavy' aur 'bhakshya' namak jeev vishesh |
'Abhavy namak jeev-vishesh | Abhavyatva' namak margana vishesh | 'Aabhipahik,
namak mithyatva. vishesh [176-4] | ('Aabhiniveshik- namak mithya tva-vishesh
[176-7] | Alophakasha | Lomko chhodkar. Lenya-rahit. Aabhigrahik 51-Aabhinivesiy
4-Aloganah 85-Aloma 50-Allesha Aabhiniveshik Alokanamaas Aloba Alekya 255

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gaa| prAH | hi| 1-appabahU 56-abaMdhaga alpabahu abandhaka karmagrantha bhAga
cAra 78,83-AbhAsa abhyAsa abhavya abhabyetara 19.26.32-abhava(vya) 43-amaviyara
83 - abhavajiya 66-abhavatta 51-abhigahira abhavyajIva abhabyatva kama aura
jyAdAH [7-4]  /  bandhana karanevAlA jIva-vizeSa  /  'abhyAsa' nAmaka gaNitakA
saMphetavizeSa [218-18]  /  siddha na honevAlA jIva-vizeSa ( abhavya' aura
'bhakSya' nAmaka jIva vizeSa  /  'abhavya nAmaka jIva-vizeSa  /  abhavyatva'
nAmaka mArgaNA vizeSa  /  'Abhipahika,nAmaka mithyaatv| vizeSa [176-4) /
('Abhinivezika-nAmaka mithyA tva-vizeSa [176-7]  /  alophAkAza  /  lomako
chodd'kr| lennyaa-rhit| Abhigrahika 51-abhinivesiya 4-aloganaha 85-aloma
50-allesA Abhinivezika alokanamas alobha alekya 255

Page #327 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga. . Pra. 11-Avahi 37,83 - Avi 57-Aviuvvihahar San. . Avadi Api 26 Akriyahahar
Avirati Avirat 50,51,56,57-Avirha 63-Avirya Hi.. 'Adhigyan' named Gyana Vishesh
1156-11] bhi Yakriya' and 'Aharak-named 1 Kayayog Visheshko Chhodkar. Paryo se
Virakt na hona. Chauthe Gunasthanavala Joy. . 'Asatyamrish' named Man tatha.
Vachanyog-Vishesh [61-3]. 'Asiddhvatva'-named Audayik Bhay Vishesh [196-17].
Manrahit Jeev [10-16]. 24-Asacchmos Asatyamrish Asiddhvatva 66-Asiddhatta
2,3,15-2,23,1 Asanji 27,32,36 -As(ss)nni 38,40-2,42, 44,63,71.80 Karmranth Bhag
Char Asankhya 'Asankhya'-named Ganana-Vishesh. 80-Asankhasankh Asankhyasankhya
('Asankhyasankhyanamed Ganana7 Vishesh.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gaa| . prA0 11-avahi 37,83 - avi 57-aviuviyAhAra saM0  /  avadhi api 26
akriyAhAra avirati avirata 50,51,56,57-aviraha 63-aviraya hi.. 'adhijJAna'
nAmaka jJAna vizeSa 1156-11] bhI yakriya' aura 'AhAraka-nAmaka 1 kAyayoga
vizeSako chor3akara  /  pAryoM se virakta na honaa| cauthe guNasthAnavAlA joya
/   /  'asatyamRSa' nAmaka mana tathA  /  vacanayoga-vizeSa [61-3] .
'asiddhatva'-nAmaka audAyika bhAya vizeSa [196-17]  /  manarahita jIva [10-16]
/  24-asaccamosa asatyamRSa asiddhatva 66-asiddhatta 2,3,15-2,23,1 asaMjJI
27,32,36 -asa(ssa)nni 38,40-2,42, 44,63,71.80 karmarantha bhAga cAra asaMkhya
'asaMkhya'-nAmaka gaNanA-vizeSa  /  80-asaMkhAsaMkha asaMkhyAsaMkhya
('asaMkhyAsaMkhyanAmaka gaNanA7 vizeSa  /

Page #328 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pr. 37, 36, 42, 44 - Asankhya Guna Hi. Sa. Asankhyaguna Asanyama 66 - Ajma
[200-1] 25 - Asambhavin Karmagrantha Bhag Char Asambhavin Ath Yathakyata
Asankhyata Guna. 'Asanyama' - named Audayik Bhav Vishesh. Not possible. In the
beginning. 'Yathakyata' - named Charil Vishesh. Came into authority. More 12,
20, 26.33 Ahvay 37, 41 [61-12] 46 Ahiy 38.2.40.62 Ahiy Adhikrut Adhik 1.21.2.611
68.70 - Aiye Pratham 81 - Ashtama 48 - Aima Adi Adim Adimdwik 61 - Au 78 - Alia
Prathamik. First two. First and second Gunasthan. 'Ayush' - named Karma Vishesh.
'Aalika' - named Kalka Bhag Vishesh. Ayush Aabalika 257

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prA0 37,36,42,44- asaMkha guNa hi. saM0 asaMkhyaguNa asaMyama 66-ajama [200-1]
25-asaMbhavin karmagrantha bhAga cAra asaMbhavin atha yathAkhyAta asaMkhyAta
gunA  /  'asaMyama'-nAmaka audAyika bhAva vizeSa  /  na ho sakanevAlI bAta  /
praarmbhmeN| 'yayAkhyAta' nAmaka carila vizeSa  /  adhikAra meM AyA huaa| jyAdA
12,20,26.33 ahavAya 37,41 [61-12] 46ahiAya 38.2.40.62ahiya adhikRta adhika
1.21.2.611 68.70/-AiI prathama 81-ASTamA 48 -AimA Adi Adima Adimadvika 61-Au
78-AliyA praathmik| pahile dopahilA aura dUsarA guNasthAna  /  'AyuS-nAmaka
karma-vizeSa  /  'AlikA'-nAmaka kAlakA bhAga vizaSa  /  AyuS AbAlikA 257

Page #329 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
G. Pr. S. 258 60-Asūtuma Āsūkṣma 6.16 2224.) Āhāra (G) 15.31,4653 ) [50-6,62-25]
Āhāra (K) 2646.47/_Āhāra (-G) Āhāra (-2) 47-Āhāramoṣa Āhārakamiśra
'Sūkṣmasampaṇya' named tenth Gaṇasyān tak. 'Āhārak' named Mārgṇā, Śarīra and
Karma-viśeṣa. 'Āhārak' and 'Āhārakamiśra' . named Yoga-viśeṣa. 'Āhārakamiśra'
named Kāyayogaviśeṣa. 'Āhārak' and 'Anāhārak' named two Mārgṇā viśeṣa. 'Indriya'
named Mārgṇā-viśeṣa. One time. Eleven. One-one. One and 'Ekendiya' named
Jovajāti viśeṣa. Āhāretara 14-Āhāreyara [68-13] E-Indiya[4-1] 80-Ikkasi 22.57
Ikkā(gār 74 Ikkik 10,16,27.) Indriya Sakṛt Ekādaśa Eka Karmartva Bhāga Cār
32,50, Ig[52-

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ga0 pra0 sa0 258 60-AsuTuma AsUkSma 6.16 2224.) AhAra (ga) 15.31,4653 )
[50-6,62-25] AhAra (ka) 2646.47/_AhAra (-ga) AhAra (-2) 47-AhAramosa
AhArakamizra 'sUkSmasaMpaNya' nAmaka dasaveM gaNasyAna tk| 'AhAraka' nAmaka
mArgaNA, zarIra tathA krm-vishess| 'AhAraka' aura 'AhAraka mizra' . nAmaka yoga-
vizeSa  /  'AhAraka mizra' nAmaka kAyayogavizeSa  /  'AhAraka' aura 'anAhAraka'
nAmaka do mArgaNA vizeSa  /  indriya' nAmaka mArgaNA-vizeSa  /  eka baar|
gyAraha  /  eka-eka  /  eka tathA 'ekendriya nAmaka jovajAti vizeSa  /
AhAretara 14-AhAreyara [68-13] E-iMdiya[4-1] 80-ikkasi 22.57ikkA(gAra 74ikkika
10,16,27.) indriya sakRta ekAdaza ekaka karmaratva bhAga cAra 32,50, iga[52-

Page #330 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Gā. Pra. Sa. 52 Guṇa 52-Igapañcama Ekaguṇa Ekapratyayaka First Guṇasthāna. A
specific type of bondage arising from a single cause. Karmagranthabāga Catura
Ekavīśati 64-Igamīta 18-Ito 11.26,39-Ityi [53.15] Strī Ivam From here. A
specific Veda called 'Strāyed'. This is for them, in them. Imān 81,54 79-25 Assa
Astha Etu 24.52,68) Iti 75.80ES-Iya Itara 44,47.63. -Iyar 2,46-Iha Completed and
thus. Opposite-counterpart. Here. 26.36.46,52. 256

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gA. pra0 sa0 52gaguNa 52-igapaJcama ekaguNa ekapratyayaka pahilA guNasthAna  /
eka kAraNase honevAlA bandhavizeSa  /  karmagrantha bhAga cAra ekaviMzati
64-igamIta 18-ito 11.26,39-ityi [53.15] strI ivam yahA~ se  /  'strAyeda' nAmaka
veda-vizeSa  /  yaha inako isakA inameM imAn 81,54 79-25 assa astha etu
24.52,68) iti 75.80ES-iya itara 44,47.63. -iyara 2,46-iha samApta aura isa
prakAra  /  unttaa-prtipkssii| yahA~  /  26.36.46,52. 256

Page #331 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Gar** - **Prao** 260 61 - **Uirati** Udirayanti - they rise. 71 **Ukkass**
Utkrushta - the greatest. 52 - **Uttar** Uttar Avantaar vishesh tatha 'Audayik'
namak bhav vishesh. 7.8.60-2.67-2, Uday (ik) Uday 'Uday' namak karm ko avastha
66, 6.1.167-6, vishesh. 205-2] 78, Udirana [6] Udhorana 'Udirana' namak kaanki
av stha vishesh. 75.77 - **Uri'a** Uddharit - to take out. 4,5,24,26 Taral
[63-8] 'Audarik' namak kay yog Audarik 46.47) vishesh. 26.27.28 - **Uraldu'g**
Audarik dwik 'Audarik' aur 'Audarik mishra' namak kay yog vishesh. 4.28,26.)
**Uralmos** (miss) Audarikamiy 'Audarik mishra yog' namak kay 46.56.5 (-jog)
yog) yog-vishesh 1,5,30,35.65. - **Upaog** [5-8] Upayog 'Upayog' namak margana-
vishesh 1 - kriya pad shabd vibhakti-sathit raks gar hai. Karmgranya bhag char

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gAra - prA0 260 61 -uirati udIrayanti udita hote haiN| 71ukkassa utkRSTa sabase
bar3A  /  52-uttara uttara avAntara vizeSa tathA 'audayika nAmaka bhAva vizeSa
/  7.8.60-2.67-2, udaya (ika) udaya 'udaya' nAmaka karmoko avasthA66, 6.1.167-6,
vizeSa  /  205-2] 78,udIraNA [6] udoraNA 'udIraNA' nAmaka kA~kI ava sthA vizeSa
/  75.77-uria uddharita nikAla lenA  /  4,5,24,26 tarala[63-8] 'audArika' nAmaka
kAya yoga audArika 46.47) vizeSa  /  26.27.28 - uraladuga audArika dvika
'audArika' aura 'audArikamizra' nAmaka kAyayoga vizeSa  /  4.28,26.) uralamosa
(missa) audArikamiya 'audArikamizrayoga' nAmaka kAya 46.56.5 (-joga) yoga) yoga-
vizeSa 1,5,30,35.65.-upaoga [5-8] upayoga 'upayoga' nAmaka mArgaNA-vizeSa
1-kriyApada zabda vibhakti-sahita raksa gara hai  /  karmagranya bhAga cAra

Page #332 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga. Pra. Sa. Hi. 56.70-Urima Uparima Kappar Ka. 13,22,26,341_Uvasham[65-6,
Upsham Upsham-namak Samyaktava tatha 46.64.67.5 166-24,205.1] Bhav-vishesh.
69-Upsamseho Upsham Shreni 'Upsham Shreni' namak Shreni-vishesh. 70-Uvasamag
Nauyan aur Isa Gunasthan. 'Upshant Moh' namak Gyarahvaan 62, 70,5 Upshant
Gunasthan. Karmagranth Bhag Char 58.60.61.1-Uvasant 26-2,27,31,46.-Uun Uun
55.77,76.81, 8.56.70,71.75-Eg 51-Egjiyaves 77-Egraasi Ek Ekjivedesh Ekraashi Ek.
Ek Jivke Pradesh. Ek Samuday. Ek Indriyala Jiv-vishesh. 2.15.36,38,44-E(i)gidi
Ekendriya 2.15.36,38,46-10-11] 665-Ev Ev Ho. Is Prakar. 261 71,76-Evam Evam

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gA0 prA0 saM0 hi. 56.70-urima uparima kapara kaa| 13,22,26,341_uvazama[65-6,
upazama upazama-nAmaka samyaktva tathA 46.64.67.5 166-24,205.1] bhAva-vizeSa  /
69-upasamaseho upazama zreNI 'upazama zreNi' nAmaka shrenni-vishess|
70-uvasAmaga nauyAM aura isA guNasthAna  /  'upazAnta moha' nAmaka gyArahavA~
62, 70,5 upazAnta guNasthAna  /  karmagrantha bhAga cAra 58.60.61.1-uvasaMta
26-2,27,31,46.-UNa Una 55.77,76.81, 8.56.70,71.75-ega 51-egajiyavesa 77-egarAsI
eka ekajIvadeza ekarAzi ek| eka jIvake pradeza  /  eka smudaay| eka indriyayAlA
jIva-vizeSa  /  2.15.36,38,44-e(i)gidi ekendriya 2.15.36,38,46-10-11] 665-eva
eva ho| isa prakAra  /  261 71,76-evaM evam

Page #333 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga 73 – Ogaḍh - Ohibug 14,21.25-.. Prā. 34 - Ohiḍas 12,40, 42 – Oho | 63-1]
2.35,76 - Kam 24-2,27,26-2.) 26.47,54, 56 -2 6,11,16,25. 31.50, 20, 57, 52.66. -
Famm (ṇ) [  - Kāy [46-12] 13 - Kāka [ 64-6 ] 6,35,36 - Kāy [46-3] Saṁ. O Avagaḍh
Adhiki Avadhidaṛśana Avadhi K Kārmaṇa Kaṣāya Kāpota Kāy Gaharāī 'Avadhījnāna'
and 'Avadhidaṛśana' named Upamārgaṇā - Viśeṣa. 'Avadhidaṛśana' named Darśana -
Viśeṣa. 'Avadhidaṛśana' and 'Avadhījnāna'. Bārī-bārī. 'Kārmaṇśarīra' named Yoga
and Śarīra Viśeṣa. hatr named Mārgaṇā Viśeṣa and Kavāya 'Kāpota' named Leśyā -
Viśeṣa. 'Kāy' named Mārga and Yoga. Viśeṣa 1 262 Karmagrantha Bhāga Cār

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gA 73 - ogADha - ohibuga 14,21.25-.. prA0 34 - ohidasa 12,40, 42 - oho | 63-1]
2.35,76 - kama 24-2,27,26-2.) 26.47,54, 56 -2 6,11,16,25. 31.50, 20, 57, 52.66.
- phamma (Na) [ - kAya [46-12] 13 - kAka [ 64-6 ] 6,35,36 - kAya [46-3] saM0 o
avagADha adhiki avadhidarzana avadhi ka kArmaNa kaSAya kApota kAya gaharAI
'avadhijJAna' aura 'avadhidarzana' nAmaka ko upamArgaNA - vizeSa  /
'avadhidarzana' nAmaka darzana- vizeSa | 'avadhidarzana' tathA 'avadhijJAna'  /
bArI-bArI  /  'kArmaNazarIra' nAmaka yoga tathA zarIra vizeSa  /  hatr nAmaka
mArgaNA vizeSa tathA kavAya 'kApota' nAmaka lezyA - vizeSa  /  'kAya' nAmaka
mArga tathA yoga  /  vizeSa 1 262 karmagrantha bhAga cAra

Page #334 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Go. TO Sa. 85 Kaal Kaal Kim 13- Kinna [ 63-16 ] Krishna 1- Kim 76 - Kir 36 -
Keew Kil Kleeb 11,42 - Keval [ 56-16] Keval 65 - Keval Juyal 6,17,11,28,}
31,33,37,48,Kevaldu (g) 85. 12- Kevaldansana 63-3] 41.67 - Kevalin 11- Koh [
55-2] 40- Kohin Keval Yugal Kevaldwik Kevaldarshan Kevalin Krodh Krodhin 'Kaal'
named dravya - vishesh | 'Krishna' named leshya - vishesh. Kuch. Paadputyarth
'Napumsakaved' named upmarganga vishesh | 'Kevalgyan' named gyan vishesh tatha
'Kevaldarshan' named darshan vishesh. " 11 'Kevaldarshan' named darshan -
vishesh | Kevalgyano Bhagwan. 'Krodh' named kshaya vishesh. Krodhwala jov. A 4
Karmagranth mag char 22

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gaoN0 TO saM0 85 kAla kAla kima 13- kiNhA [ 63-16 ] kRSNA 1- kim 76 - kira 36 -
kIva kila klIba 11,42 - kevala [ 56-16] kevala 65 - kevala juyala 6,17,11,28,}
31,33,37,48,kevaladu (ga) 85. 12- kevaladaMsaNA 63-3] 41.67 - kevalin 11-koha [
55-2] 40- kohin kevala yugala kevaladvika kevaladarzana kevalin krodha krodhin
'kAla' nAmaka dravya - vizeSa | 'kRSNA' nAmaka lezyA - vizeSa  /  kucha  /
pAdapUtyartha 'napuMsakaveda' nAmaka upamArgaNA vizeSa | 'kevalajJAna' nAmaka
jJAna vizeSatathA 'kevaladarzana' nAmaka darzanavizeSa | " 11 'kevaladarzana'
nAmaka darzana-vizeSa | kevalajJAno bhagavAn  /  'krodha' nAmaka kaSAya vizeSa
/  krodhavAlA jova  /  A 4 karmagrantha mAga cAra 22

Page #335 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga Praak 264 Kha Kshayik Kshayik 13-Khaig[66-12] 22,33,44.67-2 -Kha/-Iya[196
64.6-7 16,2052 75-Khavan 6-Khit 75-Khippad 74 Khibiya 81.84 Khivsu Kshepan
Kshipt Kshipyate Vitva 'Kshayik'-namak Samyaktv Vishesh. 'Kshayik'-namak
Samyaktv tatha Mishel. Halna. Dwana hua. Dala jata hai. Dalakar. Dalo.
'Ksheenmoha' namak barahvaan gunasthan tatha nasht. 'Kshep' namak sankhya-
vishesh. Puraglon ka samuh. Kshiya 55.60622-1-Beeg Ksheen 70,74.75,76
81.84-Khesle)b Kshep Skandha Ga Karmagranth Bhag Char 6.66 -Ai [47-11] 16-Gaits
Gati Gatitras 'Gati' namak margana-vishesh. 'Tej.kay' aur 'Vayukay'-namak
sthavar-vishesh.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gA prAka 264 kha kSAyika kSAyika 13-khaiga[66-12] 22,33,44.67-2 -kha/-iya[196
64.6-7 16,2052 75-khavaNa 6-khita 75-khippar3a 74khibiya 81.84khivasu kSepaNa
kSipta kSipyate vitvA 'kSAyika'-nAmaka samyaktva vizeSa  /  'kSAyika'-nAmaka
samyaktva tathA mizela  /  haalnaa| dvAnA huaa| DAlA jAtA hai| DAlakara  /
ddaalo| 'kSINamoha' nAmaka bArahavAM guNasthAna tathA naSTa  /  'kSepa' nAmaka
saMkhyA-vizeSa  /  puragloM kA samUha  /  kSiya 55.60622-1-bIga kSINa
70,74.75,76 81.84-khesale)ba kSepa skandha ga karmagrantha bhAga cAra 6.66-Ai
[47-11] 16-gaitasa gati gatitrasa gati'nAmaka mArgaNA-vizeSa  /  'teja.kAya'
aura 'vAyukAya'-nAmaka sthAvara-vizeSa  /

Page #336 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagranya mam char Ga. Pra. 3, 18, 23, 35, 52-guna 54, 56-gupchat 1,
70-gunathan (g) [47]. 76-gunan 72, 76.81 - guru-a) guna gunasthan.
Ekonchatvarinshat untalos. Gunasthan (k) gunasthan. gunan guna karna. Uskrusht.
guru (k) aur, phir. 23.66, 84, 85-ch 2, 5, 7, 10, 15, 18.16, 20-2, 21, 27, 30,
342, 35-3, 38, 50, 52, 60, 67-3.1 70-4, 77, 76-2 66-chaugai chatur char. chatur
gati 'Manushya gati', "Dev gati', 'Tiryag gati' and 'Narak gati'-named four
gatis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagranya mAma cAra gA0 prA0 3,18,23,35,52-guNa 54,56-gupacatta
1,70-guNaThANa(ga) [47] . 76-guNaNa 72,76.81 - guru-a) guNa guNasthAna  /
ekonacatvAriMzata untAlosa  /  guNasthAna(ka) guNasthAna  /  guNana guNA krnaa|
uskRSTa  /  guru(ka) aura, phira  /  23.66,84,85-ca 2,5,7,10,15, 18.16,20-2,
21,27,30,342,35-3,38,50, 52,60,67-3.1 70-4,77,76-2 66-caugaI catura cAra  /
caturgati 'manuSyagati', "devagati', 'tiryaggati' aura 'narakagati'-nAmaka cAra
gtiyaaN|

Page #337 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga. Sa. Hi. Pra. 66-Chaugai'n Chaturthak -Chautthat 2-Chajdas 52,53-Chaupacc
72-Chaupallparuvana 8,36,63.76-Chaur 6,32-Gharidi 54,57 - Chavis 6-2,12,17.1
Chatutin 'Jnatavaran', 'Darshanavaran', 'Moh Noy' and 'Antaraya-namak char
karma. Chautha. Chaturdas Chaudah. Chatuhpratyayak laar karano se honevala bandh
vishesh. Chatushpalyaprarupana char 'palyo ka varnan. Chatur char. Chaturindriya
char indriyon gala jov-vishesh. Chatuvishati Chaubis. Chakshus 'Chakshusdarshan'
namak darshan-vishesh. Charitra 'Charitra'. Charim akhirak ka. 20,28,34-Chach
[62-4] 6465-Charan 16 17,18,20 -Charam 21,22,27 Karmagranth Bhag Char

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gA. sa hi. prA0 66-caughAin caturthaka -cautthata 2-cajadasa 52,53-caupacca
72-caUpallaparuvaNA 8,36,63.76-caUra 6,32-gharidi 54,57 - cavIsa 6-2,12,17.1
catutin 'jJAtavaraNa', 'darzanAvaraNa', 'moha noya' aura 'aMntarAya-nAmaka cAra
karma  /  cauthA  /  caturdaza caudaha  /  catuHpratyayaka lAra kAraNoM se
honevAlA bandha vizeSa  /  catuSpalyaprarUpaNA cAra 'palyoM kA varNana  /
catura cAra  /  caturindriya cAra indriyoMgAlA jova-vizeSa  /  catuvizati
caubIsa  /  cakSuSa 'cakSurdarzana' nAmaka darzana-vizeSa  /  caritra 'caaritr'|
carima akhIrakA  /  20,28,34-caca [62-4] 6465-caraNa 16 17,18,20 -carama
21,22,27 karmagrantha bhAga cAra

Page #338 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga. Pra. 60-Charimdugg San. Charimddhik Alke Do (Terahvaan and Chaudahvaan.
Gunasthan.) Karmany Bhag Char 74-Vidh 4,8-2,17,18 23,27,3637. " 46,61,50-2॥ -Ch
(Vak, G) Shat (K) 10-Chakkay [51-1] Shatkay Panch Stavar' and Ek 'S', Is Tarah
Chhe Kay. 55-Chchatt Shatchaatvarinshat Chhayaliis. 51-Chjiyavah Shadjivavadh.
Panch 'Staadhar' and Ek 'Pras' Is [177-10] Tarah Chhe Prakar Ke Movon Ka Vadh.
7.24-Chales Shadleishya Krishna, Neel, Kapoot, Pot, Padm Aur Shukl' Naamak Chhe
Leshyaen. 54-56-Chhavis Chhabbiis. 54-Chhimachatt Shaddhikchatva- Chhayaliis.
Rishat 267

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gA. prA0 60-carimaduga saM. carimaddhika alake do (terahavoM aura caudahavAM .
gUNasthAna  / ) karmayanya bhAga cAra 74-vidha 4,8-2,17,18 23,27,3637. "
46,61,50-2 //  -cha (vaka,ga) SaT (ka) 10-chakkAya [51-1] SaTkAya pAMca
sthAvara' aura eka 'sa', isa taraha chaha kAya  /  55-chacatta SaTcatvAriMzat
chayAlIsa  /  51-chajiyavaha SaDjIvavadha. pA~ca 'sthAdhara' aura eka 'prasa'
isa [177-10] taraha chaha prakAra ke movoM kA vadha  /  7.24-chalesa SaDlezyA
kRSNa, nIla, kApota, pota, padma aura zukla' nAmaka chaha lezyAeM  /
54-56-chavIsa chabbIsa  /  54-chahimacatta SaDadhikacatvA- chayAlIsa  /  rizata
267

Page #339 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga. Sa. Pra. 12, 21, 28, 42-~Chea [58-12] 'Chhedopasthaniy, namak sanayam..
Vishesh. Yat 48. Jay 10.38-Jan 113 10-Jalan [52-16] Jwalan 71-Jahan Jaghanya 72,
76-Ja Yavat 84-Jayad Jayate 35.70-Jea (y) Jiv 1, 2, 45-Jea(g)than 3-1] Jivasthan
30-Jea lakshan Jiv lakshan 86-Jitt Jyeshtha 1, 53-Jin Jit Chhatha gunasthan.
'Sman-nalak sthavar jiv. Vishesh amnikay-namak sthavar jiv vishesh. Sabse
chhota. Jab tak. Hota hai. Jiv. 'Jivasthan'. Jiv ka lakshan. Bada. Rag-dvesh ko
jitne wala. Karmayamya-bhag char

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gA0 saM0 prA0 12,21,28,42-~chea [58-12] 'chedopasthAnIya, nAmaka saMyama..
vizeSa  /  yata 48.jaya 10.38-jaNa 113 10-jalaNa [52-16] jvalana 71-jahAna
jaghanya 72,76-jA yAvat 84-jAyada jAyate 35.70-jia (ya) jIva
1,2,45-jia(ga)ThANa3-1] jIvasthAna 30-jialakSaNa jIvalakSaNa 86-jiTTha jyeSTha
1,53-jiNa jita chaThA guNasthAna  /  'smAna-nAlaka sthAvara jIva  /  vizeSa
amnikAya-nAmaka sthAvara jIvavizeSa  /  sabase chottaa| jabataka  /  hotA hai|
jIva  /  'jiivsthaan'| jIva kA lakSaNa  /  bdd'aa| rAga-dveSa ko jiitnevaalaa|
karmayamya-bhAga cAra

Page #340 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pra. Sa. 66 Jiyatt[200 14] Jeevatva 'Jeevatva' is a special Pariṇāmik Bhāva.
Karmaṇāth Bhāga Vār Sun Yukta Yuktāsaṅkhyāt Sahit. Sahit. 'Yuvata Saṁspāt' is a
special number. 3,15,27 67, (yo 76,76. 71.83 -jutt 78 - juttasankhijj [218-15]
1,622,24,31॥ 36,46,50.52,-jog (a) (y) 53,58.68) [5-11, 6-6] 12 -jogaly 6263
jogin 73  joyanasahas 72 Jambudvipamaṇay Yog 'Yog' is a special Mārgṇā.
Yogachchhava Yāng ka nāvabhāga aṁśa. Yogin is a Jeeva with the thirteenth
Guṇasthāna. Yojanasahana is a thousand Yojanas. Jambudvipapramaṇak 'Jambū' is a
Dvīpa equal to the Jambudvīpa. 37-thān 52 thiibandh Sthāna Sthitibandh
Guṇasthāna is the Mārgṇā Sthāna. Karma-Andhakī is the Kāla-Maryādā. 266

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prA0 saM0 66jiyatta[200 14] jIvatva 'jIvatva' nAmaka pAriNAmika  /  bhAva
vizeSa karmanAtha bhAga vAra suna yukta yuktAsaMkhyAta sahita  /  sahita  /
'yuvatAsaMspAta' nAmaka saMkhyAvizeSa  /  3,15,27 67,(yo 76,76. 71.83-jutta 78 -
juttAsaMkhijja [218-15] 1,622,24,31 //  36,46,50.52,-joga (a) (ya) 53,58.68)
[5-11, 6-6] 12 -jogaLya 6263jogina 73 joyaNasahasa 72jaMbUdvIvapamANaya yoga
'yoga'-nAmaka mArgaNA-vizeSa  /  yogacchava yAMga ka nAvabhAga aMza  /  yogina
terahaveM guNasthAnavAlA jIva  /  yocanasahana hajAra yojn|| jambUdvIpapramANaka
'jambU-nAmaka dvIpake barAbara  /  37-ThAna 52ThiibaMdha sthAna sthitibandha
guNasthAna yA mArgaNAsthAna  /  kama-andhakI kAla-maryAdA  /  266

Page #341 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga. Pra. San. 270 T Tatiya 65,76-2-Taiya 74,75.03-Sasmi 3-Sassa Tasmin Tasy
Tosara. In it. Its. 18.26,27-2-Tab Te By them. 26,47,48,79 76-2-Tehin (Hi)
5.33,80.818 Tat 61.75-Tao 74 Tadant Tatah Tavant From it, its end. Kaya-Yoga-
named Yoga-special. Satu (Yoga) Tan (-Jog) 10.16,25. [53-4-164-13. 4-Tan Pajj
84-Tathvagg Tanupariapt Tadg 'Pariapt' body. Its class. Kamagranth Mag Dhar
10.16,16,25 Tas [52-20] As 'S'-named Jiva-special.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gA0 prA0 saM 270 ta tatIya 65,76-2-taiya 74,75.03-sasmi 3-sassa tasmin tasya
tosraa| usameM  /  usakA  /  18.26,27-2-taba te unake dvaaraa| 26,47,48,79
76-2-tehiM (hi) 5.33,80.818 tata 61.75-tao 74 tadaMta tataH tavanta usase usake
Akhira meN| kAya-yoga-nAmaka yoga-vizeSa  /  satu (yoga) taNa (-joga) 10.16,25.
[53-4-164-13 /  /  4-taNa pajja 84-tathvagga tanuparyApta tadga 'paryApta'
shriir| usakA varga  /  kamagrantha mAga dhAra 10.16,16,25 tasa [52-20] asa
'sa'nAmaka jIva-vizeSa

Page #342 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga.Pra. Sa. Hi. Tatha Tavat Uso Prakar. Tabtak. 74,84-Tah 74-Ta 2.7.20 21.30||
32.33,38.48, 52.57.70.77. -ti (g) 76.34,35.36. 38.70) Karma Ranth Bhag Char
Seen. 32,33,48,-Trianaan Yajnan 'Kumati', 'Kushrut' and 'Vimang namak Agyan. 84
Tipkhutto Trikrutva  three times. 55.  Tichatt Trichatvarinshat Tentaliis.
52,53. Tipacc Nipratyayak three reasons from happening bandh vishesh.
10.17.64-Tiy Gai)[52-6] Trik three, three indriyayala jeev vishesh.
54-Tiyahiachatt Trikaadhikchatva Tataliis. Rinshat 271

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gA0pra0 saM0. hi. tathA tAvat uso prkaar| tbtk| 74,84-taha 74-tA 2.7.20 21.30
//  32.33,38.48, 52.57.70.77. -ti (ga) 76.34,35.36  /  38.70) karmarantha bhAga
cAra siin| 32,33,48,-trianANa yajJAna 'kumati', 'kuzruta' aura 'vimaGga nAmaka
ajnyaan| 84 tipakhutto trikRtva tIna bAra  /  55. ticatta tricatvAriMzata
teMtAlIsa  /  52,53 . tipacca nipratyayaka tIna kAraNoM se honevAlA bandha
vishess| 10.17.64-tiya gai)[52-6] trika tIna, tIna indriyoMyAlA jIva vishess|
54-tiyahiacatta trikAdhikacatvA tatAlIsa  /  riMzat 271

Page #343 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pra. 272  10, 16, 16.26/ _Tiri. -y) (Gai. 30, 37 [51-17] 81, 85-Tivagi
83-Tivaggiya 71-Trivih 71-Tiha 72, 80, 86-Tu 66, 76-Turiya 41-Tulla 50 Teutiga
**Sa.** Tiryanch (-gati) Tiryanch-gati' is a specific type of motion. To make
three groups of three. Trimigatu is done three times. Three types of Vidya.
Three types. To Turiya Tulla Tejatrika Fourth. Equal. "Seja", "Par" and "Shukla"
are these three Leshyas. "Tej" is a specific type of Leshya. Thirteen. Completed
and in this way. 13, 15-Teu [64-12] 26.35-2.7, 22-Ter (s) 11.50-Ti Teja
Trayodashan  **Karmagranth Bhag Char**  **Sthavar** 15.27.32-Yavar 15-Yo
"Sthavar" is a specific type of Jiva species. "Stro Ved" is a specific type of
Margana. Stri

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prA0 272 10,16,16.26/ _tiri |-y) (gii| 30,37 [51-17] 81,85-tivAgi 83-tivaggiya
71-tiviha 71-tihA 72,80,86-tu 66,76-turiya 41-tulla 50 teutiga saM0 tiryaJca
(-gati) tiryaggati' nAmaka gati-vizeSa  /  trimgituma tona dhAra varga karane ke
liye| trimigata tIna bAra vaga kiyA huA  /  vividha tIna prakAra vidhA tona
prkaar| to turIya tulya tejatrika cauthA  /  barAbara  /  "sejaH', 'para' aura
zukla' ye tIna leshyaaeN| 'teja' nAmaka lezyA-vizeSa  /  teraha  /  samApta
tathA isa prakAra  /  13,15-teU [64-12] 26.35-2.7,22-tera (sa) 11.50-ti tejaH
trayodazana karmagrantha bhAga cAra sthAvara 15.27.32-yAvara 15-yo 'sthAvara'
nAmaka jIyoM kI jAti vizeSa 'stro veda,nAmaka mArgaNA-vizeSa  /  strI

Page #344 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Ga.** 37, 38-2, 36-) 2.40, 41.42   Thova 43-3, 44-2.631 **STO** 16.36 - Dam 6,
16, 20, 31.6 - Das 54. 58611 65 - Daanailaddhi 74, 77- Dikshudahi 6-2.8 15-2.18)
16-2, 20, 21. 23-2 35-2, 37, | - Chu(na) 38, 42, 44, 47 | 62-2, 64, 82 ! 16.32 -
Duaanam **San.** Stoka Dak Dasha Da Sook hr Daana dilabbhi Dwipodhadhi Vijnana
Thoda 'Jalkaay' naamak sthavarajeev Vishesh | Dasha Daan aadi paanch labbhiyan |
Dweep aur samudra | Bo. 'Matyajnan' aur 'Taajnan' naamak vo ajnan | Kamgranth
Bhag Char 273

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gA0 37,38-2,36-) 2.40, 41.42 thova 43-3, 44-2.631 STO 16.36 - dama 6,16,20,31.6
- dasa 54. 58611 65 - dANAiladdhi 74,77- dIkSudahI 6-2.8 15-2.18) 16-2,20,21.
23-2 35-2,37,  /  - cu(nA) 38, 42, 44, 47  /  62-2,64,82 ! 16.32 - duanAma saM0
stoka daka daza da Su  hr dAnA dilabdhi dvIpodadhi vyajJAna thor3A 'jalakAya'
nAmaka sthAvarajIva vizeSa | dasa dAna Adi pAMca labdhiyAM  /  dvIpa aura
samudra  /  bo  /  'matyajJAna' aura 'tAjJAna' nAmaka vo ajJAna  /  kamagrantha
bhAga cAra 273

Page #345 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Go. 52 - Dupachcha 30 - Dukeval 54, 57 - Du (g) Bees - Ducchiy 56 – Dumihs 72-
45- Duvih 32,48 - Budans (-1) 37- Dev 86- Devadari 12,17,22.26 ॥ 33,42,46, 48,
6– Bes ( -Jay ) VC.E3 [61-23] San. Vipratyayak Dvikeval Dvaavinshati Dvaavev
Vishya Dvividh Dvidarsh (n) Dev Devendrasur Desh Hi. Two reasons for bondage
Special | 'Kevalgyan' and 'Kevsadarshan' Name of special use. Twenty-two. Two
only. 'Audarik Mishr' and Vaikriyamishr, Name of special yoga. Two ways.
'Chakshusdarshan' and 'Achakshusdarshan' name of special darshan. Bewagati.
Devendrasur (author of this text). 'Deshaviriti' the fifth gunasthan. 4
Karmagranth Part Four

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gaoN0 iato 52 - dupaccaa 30 - dukevala 54, 57 - du (ga) bIsa - ducciya 56 -
dumihasa 72- 45- duviha 32,48 - budaMsa (-1) 37- deva 86- devadari 12,17,22.26
//  33,42,46, 48, 6- besa ( -jaya ) VC.E3 [61-23] saM0 vipratyayaka dvikevala
dvAviMzati dvAveva vis'iaa dvividha dvidarza (na) deva devendrasUri deza hi0 do
kAraNoM se honevAlA bandha vizeSa | 'kevalajJAna' aura 'kevasadarzana' nAmaka
upayoga-vizeSa  /  baaiis| do hI  /  'audArika mizra' aura vaikriyamizra, nAmaka
yoga - vizeSa | do taraha se  /  'cakSurdarzana' aura 'acakSurdarzana'nAmaka
darzana- vizeSa 1 bevagati  /  devendrasUri ( isa grantha ke karttA )  /
dezavirati' nAmaka pA~cavA~ guNasthAna  /  4 karmagrantha bhAga cAra

Page #346 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga. Pra. 42 - Nay 21.35, 43-2, 62 - Dvi 6, 6, 30.34.48-2 - Das (G) 146-20] 32 -
Dasanag 33.48 - Das (-) Tig 81 - Dhammadeś 66 - Dhamma 47.46-2, 54.64 - Na 11,
16, 25 - Pu (Pu ṁ) (S) [53-16] Namiy Sa. Nayan Dvi Darśana 'Darśanadvik
Darśanatrik Gha Dharmades Dharmadi Na Na Napumsaka Nitvā Hi. 'Cakṣurdarśana'
nāmaka upayoga - viśeṣa. Do. 'Darśana' nāmaka upayoga-viśeṣa. Cakṣudamdarśana'
aura avakṣurdarśana' nāmaka darśana- viśeṣa. 'Cakṣurdarśana aura
'acakṣurdarśana' aura avadhidarśana' nāmaka darśanaviśeṣa | 'Dharma' nāmaka
dravya ke 'Dharma' nāmaka ajīva Nahīṁ. Napumsaka Namaskāra karake | Pradeś.
Dravya - viśeṣa. Karmagrastha bhāga cār 275

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gA0 prAo 42 - naya 21.35, 43-2,62- do 6,6, 30.34.48-2- dasa ( ga ) 146-20] 32-
dasaNaga 33.48 - dasa ( - ) tiga 81 - dhammadesa 66 - dhamma 47.46-2, 54.64 - na
11, 16, 25 - pu (pu N) (sa) [53-16] namiya saM0 nayana dvi darzana 'darzanadvika
darzanatrika gha dharmadeza dharmAdi na na napuMsaka nitvA hi0 'cakSurdarzana'
nAmaka upayoga - vizeSa  /  do  /  'darzana' nAmaka upayoga-vizeSa  /
cakSudaMrzana' aura avakSurdarzana'nAmaka darzana- vizeSa  /  'cakSurdarzana
aura 'acakSurdarzana' aura avadhidarzana' nAmaka darzanavizeSa | 'dharma' nAmaka
dravya ke 'dharma' nAmaka ajIva nahIM  /  napuMsaka namaskAra karake | pradeza
/  dravya - vizeSa  /  karmagrastha bhAga cAra 275

Page #347 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **San. Jio**  **Pra. 31 - Navanevar**  **Nayanatar**
**Nar**  11.15, 15, 16. ME) Nar[53-15]. Nar 25.31.37.68) 10, 25 - Nargai[51.15]
Naragati 'Yakshadarshan' and 'Achakshudarshan' - specific types of use.
'Purushaved' and 'ManushyaGati' - specific types of Margana, and Manushya.
'ManushyaGati' - specific type of Upmargana. 'NarakGati' - specific type of
Upmargana.  14.16, 26 - Naray Narak  20, 21, 26.30 33, 52, 54-2 - Nav 64) Nav
Nine.  6, 30.34 - Naan[46-16] Gyan Gyan and SamyagGyan.  2, 46)  33-48 -
NaanatiG Gyanadhik 'MatiGyan', 'KshaTGyan' and 'AvadhiGyan' - three specific
types of Gyan. 'Nigod' - specific type of Jiva.  65 - Nigoyajoy Nigodjiy
Karmagranth Bhag Bhar  74 Nittiy Nishthit To be complete.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saM0 Jio prA0 31-navaNevara nayanatara nara 11.15,15,16. ME) nara[53-15] . nara
25.31.37.68) 10,25-naragai[51.15] naragati 'yakSadarzana' aura
acakSurdarzana'nAmaka upayoga-vizeSa  /  'puruSaveda' aura 'manuSyagati'nAmaka
mArgaNA-vizeSa tathA manuSya  /  'manuSyagati' nAmaka upamArgaNAvizeSa  /
'narakagati' nAmaka upamArgaNAvizeSa  /  14.16,26-naraya naraka 20,21,26.30
33,52,54-2.-nava 64) nava nau  /  6,30.34-nANa[46-16] jJAna jJAna aura
samyagjJAna  /  2,46) 33-48-nANatiga jJAnadhika 'matijJAna', 'kSatajJAna' aura
'avadhijJAna' nAmaka tIna jJAna,vizeSa  /  nigoda' nAmaka jIva-vizeSa  /
65-nigoyajoya nigodajIya karmagrantha bhAga bhAra 74niTTiya niSThita pUrA ho
jAnA  /

Page #348 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ma. Nijdvik Ma. 33 Mijdugu 71-Nivpabay 10,30,36,35-Ni(na)ray(-gai) [51.18]
15-Nika [34-1] Nazarbhut Nirgati Sapne do. Apne paksh. 'Narakvi namak gati-
vishesh.' 'Bhima' namak leshya-vishesh. Karmnaay bhan paar Neela Paschat 79
Pachcha 43-Parpupubdhi 2,3,5-2,6,8, Pakha(j)(-1) Paschanupee Parvat Fir. Pike
kamse. 'Pat' namak jeev-vishesh. - 24 Paliyar Paryavar 'Paryat' aur 'Aparayapt'
namak Aap vishesh. 'Pravinaka' namak pallavishesh Pravimaaka 73  Pavislama
3,15,20, [212-16] 23.2,18,16, , Pratham Pehila ........

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mA. nijadvika mA. 33 mijaduga 71-nivapabAya 10,30,36,35-ni(nA)raya(-gai)
[51.18] 15-nIkA [34-1] najArabhuta niragati sapane do| apane pakSa  /  'narakavi
nAmaka gati-vizeSa  /  'bhImA' nAmaka leshyaa-vishess| karmanAya bhAna pAra nIlA
pazcAta 79pacchA 43-parapupubdhi 2,3,5-2,6,8, pakhA(ja)(-1) pazcAnupI parvAta
phir| pIke kmse| 'pata' nAmaka jIva-vizeSa  /  - 24paliyara paryAvara 'paryAta'
aura 'aparyApta' nAmaka Apa vishess| 'pravinAkA' nAmaka pallavizeSa pravimAkA 73
pavisalAmA 3,15,20, [212-16] 23.2,18,16, , prathama pahilA ........

Page #349 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Bha. Sa. 16,23 - In Padmatima, the first Vishya, the first three Chinas
(Krishna, Neel and Kapoot) Leshyas. 64 Padambhav Prabambhad, the first (Opaamik)
Bhash. 15,19,30,31 - Pan Panch. 2,68,500 53 - Pantis Patrinshat Paitiss. 54,55 -
Panpatra Pachpan. 10,18,19,25,31 Paniv [52-10] Pandriya Panch Indriyawala Jiva.
82 - Pattey Nigoyal Pratyekangovok 'Pratyaknimo' named Jiva-vishesh 52,68 Panar
Pandrah. Pachakshat Pachas. Pramch 'Pramatt' named sixth Gunasthan. 61 - Pam0
Pramachant 'Pram' named sixth Gunasthan tak. 85 Paman Paman Paman. 13,14 - Pamha
[64-10 'Paya' named Dava-vishesh. . outORE Karmagranth Bhag Char Pa :

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhA. saM. 16,23-paDhamatimA prathamavizyA pahilI cIna (kRSNa, nIla aura kApota)
leshyaaeN| 64paDhamabhAva prabamabhAda pahilA (opAmika) bhASa  /  15,19,30.31,
-paNa paaNc| 2,68,500 53-paNatIsa patriMzat paitiis| 54,55-paNapatra pcpn|
10,18,19,25,31paNivi [52-10] pandriya pA~ca indriyAvAlA jIva  /
82-patteyanigoyala pratyekAnagovaka 'pratyakanimo' nAmaka jIva-vizeSa
52,68panara pndrh| pacAkSat pacAsa  /  pramaca 'pramatta' nAmaka chaThA
guNasthAna  /  61-pama0 pramacAnta 'prama' nAmaka chaThe guNasthAna tk| 85pamANa
pramANa pramANa  /  13,14-pamhA [64-10 'payA' nAmaka dvaa-vishess|  /  outORE
karmagrantha bhAga cAra pA :

Page #350 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmapranya Mag Bar Ga. Pra. San. 45- Paramasankhin Paramasankhyeya
'Utkrishtasankhyav' - named number Vishesh. 64, 66, 67-2, 68- Parinam [197-3,
Parinam 'Parinamik' named bhav-vishesh. 205-2] 01.83- Parittapata Parittanand
'Parichanand' named number-vishesh. 41, 78 Parittasans Parichasanakhya
'Parichasanay' named number-vishesh [218-11] 12.21.29, 41- Parihar [19-7]
Parihar 'Pariharvishuddha' named sanayam Vishesh. 82- Padhibhag Parimag
Nirvimaghi Vansh. 72, 772- Pall Pally 'Pakshy' named praman-vishesh. 27, 36-
Pashan 'Vayukay' named jeev-vishesh. 69- Parinamyamav Parinamikamav 'Parinamik'
named may vishesh! 49, 71, 55- Pi Api Mi. 85- Puggach 'Pudram' named dravy-
vishesh! 5.7483, 84, 85 Pun Kir. 275

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmapranya mAga bAra gA. prA. saM. 45-paramasaMkhina paramasaMkhyeya
'utkRSTasaMkhyAva-nAmaka saMkhyA vishess| 64,66,67-2,68-pariNAma [197-3,
pariNAma 'pAriNAmika' nAmaka bhaav-vishess|| 205-2] 01.83- parittapata
parittAnanda 'paricAnanda' nAmaka sNkhyaa-vishess|| 41,78parittAsaMsa
paricAsaMkhyA 'paricAsaMya' nAmaka saMkhyA-vizeSa [218-11] 12.21.29,41- parihAra
[19-7] parihAra 'parihAravizuddha' nAmaka saMyama vishess| 82-paDhibhAga
parimAga nirvimAgI bNsh| 72,772-palla palya 'pakSya' nAmaka pramANa-vizeSa  /
27,36-paSaNa 'vAyukAya' nAmaka jIva-vizeSa  /  69-pAriNAmiyamAva pAriNAmikamAva
'pAriNAmika' nAmaka mAya vizeSa! 49,71,55-pi api mii| 85-puggacha 'pudrama'
nAmaka dravya-vizeSa! 5.7483,84,85puNa kir| 275

Page #351 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pa. 19 Purim 75-Pushe 58 Puch 8,27,61 Panch 49-Pancham Patram 2 Paripi[10.17]
Papendriya 'Purushaveda' namak Upamargna-vishesh pahilla. Pahile kaha ekha.
Panch. Pancha. Panch Indriyonbala aur. Spasht. R 18,59/ Pair [10.3] 5,15,20,30,
Bar(s) St aur Manishivar' namak nauka Gunasthan. Barah. Yo (Hindriya Jeep) aur
dusra. Karmagranth Bhag Char Dwadash Dwi, Dvitiya 2,10,32,05-Vis-Y)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pA. 19purima 75-puSi 58puca 8,27,61paMca 49-paMcama patrama 2paripi[10.17]
papendriya 'puruSaveda' nAmaka upamArgaNA-vizeSa philaa| pahile kahA ekhaa|
paaNc| paaNcaa| pA~ca indriyoMbAlA aur| spsstt| ra 18,59/ pAyara [10.3]
5,15,20,30, bAra(sa) sTa aura maniSivAra' nAmaka naukA guNasthAna  /  baarh| yo
(hIndriya jIpa) aura duusraa|| karmagranpa bhAga cAra dvAdaza dvi, dvitIya
2,10,32,05-visa-ya)

Page #352 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga. Sa. 56-Vikasaya Dvitiyakavaya 65,75,76-Piy(y) 28 .[.16 59 Par Dvitiya
'Thaprasvaspanavaran' namak k. Bap-vishesh. Dusra. Karmabandh. Popva hai.
Karmagranth-bhag char Masi Mar Pariksh 76-Masu 74-Mariy 9,25,74-Mab(b) [49-24]]
13,16- Bhavibier Bharo. Maraya. 'Bhavya' mamak jivonkawarg:vishesh RE Madhyavar
1,70-Bhash [7.5] 5-Mas 'Bhay aur Pamya' namak jivon Varg:piseh. Shridon ke
parinam. 'Asatya Mr'-mamak van-yog Bhash Vari. . . . . . . . . .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gA. saM0 56-vikasAya dvitIyakavAya 65,75,76-pIya(ya) 28 .[.16 59para dvitIya
'thaprasvAspAnAvaraNa'nAmakaka. baap-vishess| duusraa| karmabandha  /  paoNpavA
hai| karmagrantha-bhAga cAra mAsi mara parikSa 76-mAsu 74-mariya
9,25,74-maba(ba) [49-24]] 13,16- bhavibiyara bhro| mraayaa| 'bhavya' mAmaka
jIvoMkAvarga:vizeSa RE madhyavara 1,70-bhASa [7.5] 5-mAsa 'bhaya aura pAmya'
nAmaka jIvoM vrg:pisess| zrIdoM ke pariNAma  /  'asatyA mR'-mAmaka vana-yoga
bhASa varI . . . . . . . . .

Page #353 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
-   - Pra. 10,19,36,38-Bhu [52-14] 14,64,68-Mesh Pugdhikay. Prakar. Bhed
11,14,21, Ma(naan) Mati (maan) 'Masinamakahan-vishesh. - - 41-Manmaan Masyaan
'Maspahaan' namak saman vishesh.  Magganthaan 4-3] Marganasthaan
'Maagananasthaan'. 23-Bhagana Maagnyaa 'Marganasthaan'. 71,79,80,85-Mjh Madhyam
72-Mjzhim Madhyam 10,15,24,28.1 2,29,35,39, Man(jaag [52. Man:(-yog) 'Manoyog'
namak yog-vishesh. 46,47124,56.14,134.6] 51-Manakarananiyam Manahkarananiyam
'Man' aur 'Indriyon ko maryadake andar na rakhna. 11,6,17,21, Manojnaan
'Man:pary' namak shaan-vishesh. Karmagranth Bhag Par 177-8] 28,30,584-Mannaan

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - - prA. 10,19,36,38-bhU [52-14] 14,64,68-meSa pugdhiikaay| prkaar| bheda
11,14,21, mA(nANa) mati (mAna) 'msinaamkhaan-vishess| - - 41-manamANa masyajJAna
'maspahAna' nAmaka samAna vishess| maggaNaThANa 4-3] mArgaNAsthAna
'maagNnnaasthaan'| 23-bhagaNA mAgaNyA 'maargnnaasthaan'| 71,79,80,85-majha
madhyama 72-majhima madhyama 10,15,24,28.1 2,29,35,39, maNa(jAga [52.
mana:(-yoga) 'manoyoga' nAmaka yog-vishess| 46,47124,56.14,134.6]
51-maNakaraNAniyama manaHkaraNAniyama 'mana' aura 'indriyoM ko maryAdAke andara
na rkhnaa| 11,6,17,21, manojJAna 'mana:parya' nAmaka zAna-vizeSa  /
karmagrantha bhAga pAra 177-8] 28,30,584-maNanANa

Page #354 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A being with 'Manahparyavasana'. 'Manakshaya and accepted mother'.
'Mahashaakhaaka' named specific food. Karmagrabhhya Bhaga Char 40-Maananamin
Manomaanim 11,49-Bhay [55.3] Mad, Mat 73-Mahasalaaga Mahasakaaka [212-20] Mabin
10-Maanin Manin 11-Bhaga [56-1] Maya 44,45,50,51,  Micch [67.21] Midhyatva
Mashakashaya-wale Aav. Manakshavavale Ausha. 'Mayakashaya'. 'Midhyatva' named
first Gunasthan. 53-Micchviramapain Midhyatvaapirati- 'Midhyatva' and 'Avirati
Pratyak Utpann honevala Bandhanvishesh. 12,14-Mijadug Midhyatvadvik 'Midhyatva'
and 'Saaswain' named first and second Gunasthan. 12 Milig Micyasvatrik
'Midhyatva'vasvadan' and 'Mis Dahi' named third Gunasthan. M

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 manaHparyavasAna'vAlA jIva  /  'mAnakaSAya aura mAnI huI maat| 'mahAzakhAkA'
nAmaka ply-vishess| karmagrabhya bhAga cAra 40-mANanAmina manomAnim 11,49-bhaya
[55.3] mada, mata 73-mahAsaLAgA mahAsakAkA [212-20] mAbin 10-mANin mAnina
11-bhAga [56-1] mAyA 44,45,50,51, miccha [67.21] midhyAtva mASAkaSAyavAle aav|
mAnakaSAvavAle auss| 'maayaakssaay'| 'midhyAtva' nAmaka pahilA guNasthAna |
53-micchaviramapAina midhyAtvApirati- 'midhyAtva' aura 'aviratisa pratyayaka
utpanna honevAlA bandhanavizeSa  /  12,14-mijAduga mithyAtvadvika 'mithyAtva'
aura 'sAsvAina' nAmaka pahilA aura dUsarA guNasthAna  /  12miliga micyAsvatrika
mithyAtva'vAsvAdana' aura 'misa dahi' nAmaka vIna guNasthAna  /  ma

Page #355 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ma. 53 Misapachai-b Mithyatvam-aswayak 'Midhwab' se honevala bamb Vishesh.
55,57-Mistr(Mees)g Mishri 'Biparikamish aur Vaikumi-b' namak Yogamanch.
13,15,24-2, Meesg) [68, Mim(k) Beesra Gunasthan, Bog-Vishesh, 21,13.44,46,
90.20,91-22, Agyan, Samyaktva-Vishesh aur 18-2,55,59, 13.1.1955.5: Mak- Pika
61,63,64,65, 205-2) Chhodkar. 60,69-Moh 'Mohni-v-namak Karma-Vishesh. 69J
1,10,13,22|| Aur. Karmayamb Nag Bar 55 Din Radin.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mA. 53 misApacAiba mithyAtvamasvayaka 'midhvAba' se honevAlA bamba vishess|
55,57-mistra(mIsa)ga mizrI 'bIpArikamiza aura vaikiyamibha' nAmaka yogmNc|
13,15,24-2, mIsaga) [68, mima(ka) bIsarA guNasthAna, boga-vizeSa, 21,13.44,46,
90.20,91-22, ajJAna, samyaktva-vizeSa aura 18-2,55,59, 13.1.1955.5: mAk- pikA
61,63,64,65, 205-2) chodd'kr| 60,69-moha 'mohanIva-nAmaka krm-vishess| 69J
1,10,13,22 //  aur| karmayamba nAga bAra 55 dina rdin|

Page #356 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ma. 78, 83 - Rasi 77, 78, 79 - 2, } 78 - 2, 80, 83 2, 84 / Laddu 65  Bari (4)
[218-16] 72 - Ladusankhil 1, 9, 31, 36, 43, 66 86 - Vihiv  [209-24] [5-13,
49-22] Gagaperas 81 11, 20   Lobh [56-2] 40 - Domin Rasi Roop Chhandhi Khaghu
Laghusansthaya Chikit Keswa Dhokakashapradesh Lom Komin Samooh | Ek 1 Panch
Naya. Jaghanya. 'Adhanya Sankhyat' namak sankhya Vishesh | Likha Beshyaen.
Chhok-vakashake Pradesh | 'Lobhkashaya'. Lobh papa jeeva. Y Karmagramya Bhag
Bhar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mA0 78,83- rAsi 77, 78,79-2, } 78-2,80,83 2,84 / laDDu 65 bar3I (4) [218-16]
72- laDusaMkhila 1,9,31,36, 43, 66 86-vihiva [209-24] [5-13, 49-22] gAgAparasa
81 11, 20 lobha [56-2] 40 - Domin rAzi rUpa chandhi khaghu laghusaMstheya
cikhita kezvA DhokAkAzapradeza loma komina samUha | eka 1 pA~ca nayA~  /
jaghanya  /  'adhanya saMkhyAta' nAmaka saMkhyA vizeSa | likhA bezyAe~  /
choka-vAkAzake pradeza | 'lobhakaSAya'  /  lobha pApA jIva  /  Y karmagramya
bhAga bhAra

Page #357 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
17,65,74,55-4(va) Ba, Iv Athava aur jaise. 24,27,28.2, 1  Banam vargavasa vanit
varj 84. Sagar 80 Paggiya 34,53,55-yan 10,15,36,38pan [52-14 85 Banastha
10,10,15,39,40-yan [53-2, .. Varg karo. Berg kiya ja chhodkar. Vanaspatikaay.
Vanaspatikaay. Shabd. Ban Vanaspati Myavharati Api 86-Bahara 15,10,69,75,84 Vi
29,46,49 Viumba(-1) 5,25-2,29,46 Vidamb(ba)dug Kaha jata hai. Hi aur bho.
'Vaikriya' namak sharir vatha yogvishesh. 'Vaikiya aur Kriyamitra' namak yog-
vishesh Karmagranya bhag char : Kriyatik

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 17,65,74,55-4(vA) bA, iva athavA aura jaise| 24,27,28.2, 1 banam vargavAsa
vanita varja 84.sAgara 80paggiya 34,53,55-yana 10,15,36,38paNa [52-14 85baNasthA
10,10,15,39,40-yaNa [53-2, .. varga kro| barga kiyA jA chodd'kr| vanaspasikAya
/  vanaspatikAya  /  shbd| bana banaspati myavaharati api 86-baharA
15,10,69,75,84vi 29,46,49viumbA(-1) 5,25-2,29,46viDamba(ba)duga kahA jAtA hai|
hI aura bho| 'vaikriya' nAmaka zarIra vathA yogavizeSa  /  'vaikiyA aura
kriyamitra' nAmaka yoga-vizeSa karmagranya bhAga cAra : kriyatika

Page #358 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ma. Kriyamin Vakriyam' named Yoga-vishesh. 4,4-Vidhamm(b)mees [12-18
24-Vichhaviya 3,15,19,25,36 Bigad Karmagranch Bhag Char Pancriya 'Vaikriya'
named Yoga vishesh. Po, Seen and Par Indriyakaale Vima 6,18,55,58,65 Vina
28,30,33,40,1_n Vina 51,55,60/-nu 14,40 Vim()m 35 Viraag Vima Viravidik Sivaay.
Sipay. Miya Avadhimaan | 'Paishaanvarakshi' and 'Sarmvirati'. Maamak Panchve and
Chhath Gunasthan. Rahit Pees. Kanga. 'Ved' named Margana- Vidha 68-Bees Vishat
1,18-Sur 1,11,20,316 } () [49 10] Ghed

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mA. kriyAmina vakriyami' nAmaka yog-vishess| 4,4-vidhamma(ba)mIsa [12-18
24-vichaviya 3,15,19,25,36bigaDa karmagranca bhAga cAra paMkriya 'vaikriya'
nAmaka yoga vishess| po, sIna aura pAra indriyakAle vimA 6,18,55,58,65viNA
28,30,33,40,1_n vinA 51,55,60/-Nui 14,40vima()ma 35virAga vimA viraviDika sivAya
/  sipaay| miyA avadhimAna | 'paizAMvarakSi' aura 'sarmavirati'. mAmaka pA~cave
aura chaTha guNasthAna  /  rahita piis| kaaNgaa| 'veda' nAmaka mArgaNA- vidhA
68-bIsa vizAta 1,18-sura 1,11,20,316 }() [49 10] gheda

Page #359 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ma. Ga. Pa. 13, 22, 34, 44 Webag (66.10] 58 Vaiyavi Ayopashamasamyagdristi Jiva.
Sabed, Pururav and Napumsakaved. Devatri Sam Samapachasaav Sanmasalpam 21, 45,
58, 61-Mang 52 Sagavatra 79-Sagasanka 24-Sacheyar [90.14, 17, 91.16, 19] 22,
36-Sathav Saj. Sachapan. Sataba Asankhyata Satya and Asasya. Satyeta Swasthan
Apna-Apna Gunasthan. Saptam Sakha 59-2, 60.2, 59) Manavala Praani. 8, 9, 14, 17,
18, 19, 25, 51, 50.4] 45-2 5, 15, 45 Yabhig Karmapranya Bhag Char Paryapt and
Aparayapt Sahi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ma gA. pA0 13,22,34,44vebaga (66.10] 58vaiyavi ayopazamasamyagdRSTi jIva  /
sAbeda, pururava aura npuNskved| devatri sama samapacAsava sanamAsaMlpaM
21,45,58,61-maMga 52sagavatra 79-sagAsaMkha 24-saceyara [90.14, 17,91.16,19]
22,36-saThAva saaj| sacApana  /  sAtabA asaMkhyAtA satya aura asasya  /
satyetara svasthAna apanA-apanA gunnsthaan| saptam sAkhA 59-2,60.2,59) manavAlA
praannii| 8,9,14,17, 18,19,25,51, 50.4] 45-2 5,15,45yabhiga karmapranya bhAga
cAra paryApta aura aparyApta shii|

Page #360 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga.Ma. 13,45-Samier [65-16] Sanjeevar 64,68 Samiyay Sanipatik Karmagranth Bhag
Bar . 40,62,69,82-Sam 21,28,42-Sama(y) 82-Samay 58-Samaypariman
9,45,64,65.2,50samm [59-25] 14 Sammatsati Sam Samayik Samay Samaypariman Sabyag
Samyaktvanik Manavala aur ve Man Pranee. . 'Manipatik' namak ek Mak. Vishesh.
Barabar. 'Samayik' namak Sanayam-vishesh. Kaska Nirbibhagi Ansh. Samayonki
Mikdar. 'Samyagdarshan. 'Aupashamik', 'Shayik' aur 'Kshayopaashamik' namak Seen
Samm Basv Vishesh. Shayik' aur 'Mayopaamik'. 'Sayogi' namak Rahvan Gunasthan.
Sarson. 'Shakhaka' namak Pasy-vishesh. - - 25-Sammadug Samyakspatik
47,58Sayo(jo)gi Sayagin 74.75,77-Sarisav Sarshap 73,71,76-Sallag [212.12] Salaka
75 Sahagapch Mulakaapaly  - -   - -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gA0mA0 13,45-samiyara [65-16] saMjIvara 64,68samiyAiya sAnipAtika karmagrantha
bhAga bAra  /  40,62,69,82-sama 21,28,42-samA()ya 82-samaya 58-samayaparimANa
9,45,64,65.2,50samma [59-25] 14 sammatsatiga sama sAmAyika samaya samayaparimANa
sabhyag samyaktvanika mAnavAlA aura ve mana praannii|| 'mAnipAtika' nAmaka eka
mAka. vishess| braabr| 'sAmAyika' nAmaka sNym-vishess| kAsakA nirbibhAgI aMza  /
samayoMkI mikadAra  /  'smygdrshn| 'aupazAmika', 'zAyika' aura 'kSAyopazamika'
nAmaka sIna samma basva vishess| zAyika' aura 'mAyopAmika'  /  'sayogI' nAmaka
rahavA~ guNasthAna  /  srsoN| 'zakhAkA' nAmaka pasya-vizeSa  /  - - 25-sammaduga
samyakspatika 47,58sayo(jo)gi sayAgin 74.75,77-sarisava sarSapa 73,71,76-sallAga
[212.12] salAkA 75sahAgapacha muLAkApalya - - - -

Page #361 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga. 45, 50, 71, Savva 73 - Masimharriya Sasikhat 11 Samār [54.8] Sākār 52.
Samāiy [5520] Samāyik 5 Sāy Sāt 13, 18, 26, 43, Sāsā (Sog Sāsādan Shikhā - Apara
tak Bharā thā. Thākārwāle - Vishesh Upayog. 'Samāyik Nāmak Sanyam - Vishesh.
Sātvedaniy Karma. 'Sāsāpan' Nāmak Dusra Gunasthānā Sāsāvanbhāv 49 - Sāsambhāv
68, 85 Sib 11 - 2, 14, 21, } - Mub (y) [56-6] 'Samān ki Avashthā. Muru Jīv.
Siddh Shrut Kamgranth Nām Pār 13, 14, 22, 11, Sum [64-15] 9 . Shuklā Sūtrok
'Malā' Nāmak Kheshyā - Vishesh. Sūtronmen Rāhulā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gA0 45,50,71, savva 73-masihamariya sazikhata 11sAmAra [54.8] sAkAra 52.
sAmAiya[5520] sAmAyika 5sAya sAta 13,18,26,43, sAsA(soga sAsAdana zikhA- apara
taka bharA thaa| thAkAravALe-vizeSa upyog| 'sAmAyika nAmaka saMyama-vizeSa  /
sAtavedanIya karma  /  'sAsApana' nAmaka dUsarA guNasthAnA sAsAvanabhAva
49-sAsamabhAva 68,85siba 11-2,14,21, }-muba(ya)[56-6] 'sAmAna kI avasthA  /
muru jIva  /  siddha zruta kamagrantha nAma pAra 13,14,22, 11, suma [64-15] 9 .
zuklA sUtroka 'malA' nAmaka kheshyaa-vishess| sUtroMmeM raahulaa|

Page #362 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- - 41 Supatraman Bhutaman - 'Shrumajan - a specific type of false knowledge.
Devagati. Karmagranth Part Four -   10,14,18,26,30- Suragah [51.13] Suragati
2,5,12,18,22, 29,37,41,58,  Suham[9.18, Sukshma 59,61,62) 60.23]
86-Suhamtyavishar Sukshmarthavichar - 'Sukshma' a specific type of Aav-vishishta
in the Panaspatikaya. 'Sukshmarthavichar' is another name for this Masta.
3,7,37,45,53, Ses Shesh Baki. Padshah Sankhya 65,69,70 Sas 52.53,54,58-Sola-s)
41,42,43-2,54-Sans. 39,41,62,63-Sanvgun 1,1 Sansin 9,34-Manjam [49.18] 5-
Sanjalagati Sankhyagun Sankhyesh Solad. Sankhyatguna. Sankhyatguna. Sankhya.
'Sanyam'. Sanchalan Kosh, Man and Mava. Sanyam Sanjwalan Trik

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - - 41supatramANa bhuTAmAna - 'zrumAjhAna -nAmaka mithyaajnyaanvishess|
devagati  /  karmagrantha bhAga cAra - 10,14,18,26,30- suragAha [51.13] suragati
2,5,12,18,22, 29,37,41,58, suhama[9.18, sUkSma 59,61,62) 60.23]
86-suhamatyavizAra sUkSmArthavicAra - 'sUkSma' nAmaka panaspatikAyake aaNv-
vishess| 'sUkSmArthavidhAra' apara-nAmaka yaha masthA 3,7,37,45,53, sesa zeSa
bAkI  /  pADaza saMkhya 65,69,70 sasa 52.53,54,58-solA-sa) 41,42,43-2,54-sNs|
39,41,62,63-saMvaguNa 1,1saMsina 9,34-maMjama [49.18] 5- saMjAlagati saMkhyaguNa
saMkhyeSa soldd| sNkhyaatgunaa| sNkhyaatgunaa| saMkhyA  /  'sNym'| saMcalana
koSa, mAna aura mAvA  /  /  /  saMyama saMjvalanatrika

Page #363 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ga. Bha. Sa. 5,8,60-Sant [6.8] Sala 60-Santudaya Sancharab 51 Sansaiya [176.5]
Samyik Di 'Saja'. 'Sacha' and 'Uday'. 'Sanshayik' named Mithyarav. Visha.
Bhashati hota hai. 86 Ind 50,54- Head 80,84- Hoi Bhavati hota hai. Saman
Karmagranth Bhar Par

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
gA. bhA0 saM0 5,8,60-saMta [6.8] salA 60-saMtudaya saMcAraba 51saMsaiya [176.5]
samayika di 'sjaa'| 'sacA' aura 'udy'| 'sAMzayika' nAmaka mithyArava. viss|
bhaSati hotA hai| 86iMda 50,54- heDa 80,84-hoi bhavati hotA hai| samAna
karmagrantha bhAra pAra

