Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/090243/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Srimad Devendrasuri Virachit 2945 Shatak Namak Karma Granth [Pancham Bhag]
[Mool, Shabdarth, Gatharth, Vishesharth, Vivechan Evam Tippani Paribhashik
Shabdakosh Aadi Se Yukt Vyakhyakar Marudharakesari, Pravartak Sw. Muni Shri
Mishrimalji Maharaj Sampadak Shrichand Surama 'Saras' Devkumar Jain Prakashk
Shri Marudharakesari Sahitya Prakashan Samiti Jodhpur-Gyavar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrImad devendrasUri viracita 2945 zataka nAmaka karma grantha [paMcama bhAga]
[mUla, zabdArtha, gAthArtha, vizeSArtha,vivecana evaM TippaNa pAribhASika
zabdakoSa Adi se yukta vyAkhyAkAra marudharakesarI, pravartaka sva. muni zrI
mizrImalajI mahArAja sampAdaka zrIcanda surAmA 'sarasa' devakumAra jaina
prakAzaka zrI marudharakesarI sAhitya prakAzana samiti jodhapura-gyAvara

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Prakashkiya**  One of the major and creative objectives of the Marudhar Kesari
Sahitya Prakashan Samiti is to publish literature related to Jainism and
philosophy. The institution's guiding light, the revered founder, Late Shri
Marudhar Kesariji Maharaj, himself was a great scholar, poet, and a guide to the
right path of Agama Darshan. The institution's various philanthropic activities
are still ongoing under his guidance. Gurudev Shri was also a connoisseur of
literature and a devotee. Inspired by him, we have published numerous books on
discourses, biographies, poetry, Agamas, and profound critical analyses. Now, we
are presenting the second edition of the Karmagranth Part 5 to scholars and
inquisitive readers.  Karmagranth is a great text of Jain philosophy. It
contains a comprehensive discussion of the principles of Karma. Under the
guidance of the revered Gurudev Shri, renowned scholars of Jain philosophy and
literature, Editor Shri Shri Chandji Surana and his associate Shri Devkumarji
Jain, have jointly edited this profound text. Its first edition was published in
1976, which has been exhausted, and the demand from readers has been constant.
In response to the demand of the readers, the committee members sought
permission for its second edition from the founder Shri Rupchandji Maharaj and
the co-founder Shri Sukhanmuniji Maharaj. Accordingly, with the approval and
inspiration of Gurudev Shri, this second edition is now presented to the
readers. It is hoped that those who are curious about the Karma theory,
students, etc., will benefit from it.  **Vinit:** Minister, Marudhar Kesari
Sahitya Prakashan Samiti

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakIya thI marudhara kesarI sAhitya prakAzana samiti ke vibhinna uddezyoM
meM se eka pramukha evaM racanAtmaka uddezya hai-jainadharma evaM darzana se
sambandhita sAhitya kA prakAzana krnaa| saMsthA ke mArgadarzaka paramazraddhaya
pravartaka sva. zrI marudharakesarIjI mahArAja svayaM eka mahAna vidvAna,
Azukavi tathA : AgamA darzana ko garma aura sahI ke mArgadarzana meM saMsthA kI
vibhinna lokopakArI pravRttiyAM Aja bhI cala rahI haiM  /  gurudeva zrI sAhitya
ke marmajJa bhI the aura anurAgI bhI the| unakI preraNA se aba taka hamane
pravacana, jIvana caritra, kAvya, Agama tathA gambhIra vivecanAtmaka anekoM
granthoM kA prakAzana kiyA hai| aba vidvAnoM evaM tattvajijJAsu pAThakoM ke
sAmane hama karmagnantha bhAga 5 kA dvitIya saMskaraNa prastuta kara rahe haiM
/  karmagrantha jaina darzana kA eka mahAn grantha hai  /  isameM jana
tattvajJAna kA sarvAMga vivecana samAyA huA hai| . _ sva. pUjya gurudevazrI ke
nirdezana meM jaina darzana evaM sAhitya ke suprasiddha vidvAna sampAdaka
zrIyuta zrIcandajI surAnA evaM unake sahayogI zrI devakumArajI jaina ne milakara
isa gahana grantha kA sundara sampAdana diyA hai| isakA prathama saMskaraNa san
1976 meM prakAzita huA, jo kava kA samApta ho cukA, aura pAThakoM kI mAMga
nirantara Ado rhii| pAThakoM kI mAMga ke anusAra samiti ke kAryakartAoM ne
pravartaka zrI rUpacandajI mahArAja evaM upapravartaka zrI sukanamunijI mahArAja
se isake dvitIya saMskaraNa ke lie svIkRti mAMgI, tadanusAra gurudevazrI kI
svIkRti evaM preraNA se aba yaha dvitIya saMskaraNa pAThakoM ke hAthoM meM
prastuta hai  /  AzA hai, karma siddhAnta ke jijJAsu, vidyArthI Adi isase
lAbhAnvita hoNge| vinIta : mantrIzrI marudhara kesarI sAhitya prakAsana samiti

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The key to understanding Jain philosophy is the 'Karma Siddhanta'. It is certain
that it is the basis of the entire philosophy and metaphysics. It reveals the
mystery of the various states and forms of the soul and its transformations.
Therefore, to understand Jain philosophy, it is essential to understand 'Karma
Siddhanta'.   The 'Karma Granth' written by Shrimad Devendrasuri is of
particular importance among the major texts that discuss 'Karma Siddhanta'. They
hold a very important place in Jain literature. Those who are curious about
metaphysics also consider the 'Karma Granth' as scripture and study them daily.
The Sanskrit commentaries on the 'Karma Granth' are very important. There have
also been many Gujarati translations of them. The first commentary on the 'Karma
Granth' in Hindi was presented by the learned scholar, the great sage, Pandit
Sukhlalji. His style is comparative and evidence-based. Pandit Sukhlalji's
commentary is now almost inaccessible. For some time, there has been inspiration
from Ashukavi Ratna Gurudev Shri Marudhar Kesariji Maharaj to present a
commentary on the 'Karma Granth' in a modern style. This compilation began under
his inspiration and guidance. With the inspiration of Vidya Vinod Shri
Sukhanmuniji, this work progressed rapidly. The support of Shri Devkumarji Jan
was received and the work became ready to take shape in a short time.  In this
compilation work, the ancient text writers, commentators, commentators, and
especially the works of Pandit Shri Sukhlalji have been helpful.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 apanI bAta jaina darzana ko samajhane kI kujI hai-'karmasiddhAnta'  /  yaha
nizcita hai ki samagra darzana evaM tattvajJAna kA AdhAra hai AtmA kI vividha
dazAoM, svarUpoM kA vivecana evaM usake parivartanoM kA rahasya udghATita karatA
hai 'karmasiddhAnta'  /  isalie jainadarzana ko samajhane ke lie
'karmasiddhAnta' ko samajhanA anivArya hai  /  _ karmasiddhAnta kA vivecana
karane vAle pramukha granthoM meM zrImad devendrasUri racita karmagrantha apanA
viziSTa mahattva rakhate haiN| jaina sAhitya meM inakA atyanta mahattvapUrNa
sthAna hai  /  tattvajijJAsu bhI karmaanthoM ko Agama kI taraha pratidina
adhyayana evaM svAdhyAya ko vastu mAnate haiN| karmagranthoM kI saMskRta TIkAeM
bar3I mahatvapUrNa haiN| inake kaI gujarAtI anuvAda bhI ho cuke haiN| hindI meM
karmagranthoM kA sarvaprathama vivecana prastuta kiyA thA vidvadvareNya manISI
pravara mahAprAjJa paM0 sukhalAlajI ne  /  unakI zailI tulanAtmaka evaM vidastA
pradhAna hai| paM0 sukhalAlajI kA vivecana Aja prAyaH duSprApya sA hai| kucha
samaya se Azukaviratna gurudeva zrI marudhara kesarIjI mahArAja kI preraNA mila
rahI thI ki karmagranthoM kA Adhunika zailI meM vivecana prastuta karanA cAhie
/  unakI preraNA evaM nidezana se yaha sampAdana prArambha huA  /  vidyAvinodI
zrI sukanamunijI kI preraNA se yaha kArya bar3I gati ke sAtha Age bar3hatA gyaa|
zrI devakumArajI jana kA sahayoga milA aura kArya kucha samaya meM AkAra dhAraNa
karane yogya bana gayA  /  isa sampAdana kArya meM jina prAcIna grantha
lekhakoM, TIkAkAroM, . vivecanakartAoM sathA vizeSataH paM0 zrI sukhalAlajI ke
granthoM kA sahyoga  /  /

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(5) I am grateful to all the learned scholars who have made the study of this
profound text easily understandable. I am deeply indebted to the guidance of the
revered Shri Marudhar Kesariji Maharaj, the inspiration of Shri Rajtamuni ji and
Shri Suknamuni ji, and the cooperation of the officials of the Sahitya Samiti,
especially the heartfelt inspiration and cooperation of the Samiti's
administrator Shri Sujanmalji Sethia, which has brought dynamism to the editing
and publication of the book. It would be entirely appropriate for me to express
my heartfelt gratitude. If there are any errors, theoretical mistakes,
ambiguities, or printing errors in the discussion, I apologize and request the
kind readers to kindly inform me. Those who help in correcting errors and
avoiding mistakes are commendable. With this request, Second Edition This second
edition of "Karmagranth" Part 5 is being printed. Today, our Gurudev is not
among us, but the treasure of knowledge he bestowed upon us is still guiding us
all. The chief disciple of Gurudev, the Up-Pravartak Shri Suknamuni ji, is
keeping that light of knowledge alive and inspiring and encouraging us all
today. It is with his auspicious inspiration that this second edition of
"Karmagranth" is reaching the hands of the readers. Joy. Humble - Shri Chand
Surana 'Saras'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 5 ) prApta huA aura itane gahuma grantha kA vivecana sahajagamya bana sakA  /
maiM ukta sabhI vidvAnoM kA asIma kRtajJatA ke sAtha AbhAra mAnatA hU~  /
zraddheya zrI marudhara kesarIjI mahArAja kA samaya-samaya para mArga - darzana,
zrI rajatamunijI evaM zrI sukanamunijI kI preraNA evaM sAhitya samiti ke
adhikAriyoM kA sahayoga vizeSakara samiti ke vyavasthApaka zrI sujAnamalajI
seThiyA kI sahRdayatA pUrNa preraNA va sahakAra se grantha ke sampAdana -
prakAzana meM gatizIlatA AI hai, maiM hRdaya se AbhAra svIkAra karU - yaha
sarvathA yogya hI hogA  /  vivecana meM kahIM truTi, saiddhAntika bhUla,
aspaSTatA tathA mudraNa Adi meM azuddhi rahI ho to usake lie maiM kSamAprArthI
hai aura haMsabuddhi pAThakoM se apekSA hai ki ve snehapUrvaka sUcita kara
anugRhIta kreNge| bhUla sudhAraM evaM pramAda parihAra meM sahayogI banane vAle
abhinandanIya hote haiN| basa isI anurodha ke sAtha dvitIyAvRtti "karmagrantha "
bhAga 5 kA yaha dvitIya saMskaraNa chapa rahA hai| Aja sva. gurudeva hamAre bIca
vidyamAna nahIM haiM, kintu unake dvArA pradatta jJAna nidhi, Aja bhI hama
sabakA mArgadarzana kara rahI hai| gurudevadhI ke pradhAna ziSya upapravartaka
zrI sukanamunijI usI jJAna jyoti ko prajvalita rakhate hue Aja hama sabako
preraNA evaM protsAhana de rahe haiM, unhIM kI zubha preraNA se "karmagrantha "
kA yaha dvitIya saMskaraNa pAThakoM ke hAthoM meM pahu~ca rahA hai  /
prasannatA  /  vinIta - zrIcanda surAnA 'sarasa'

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Mouth of Inquiry  This is the basis of discussion.  The same is the cause
of our happiness and sorrow.  Jain philosophy is the complete thought,
contemplation and soul. The soul is an all-powerful, independent force, the
creator, and the one who experiences the fruits of its actions. The soul itself
is formless, perfectly pure, but it is embodied with the body, becoming impure
and wandering in the world. Despite being the very essence of bliss, it is being
ground in the mill of happiness and sorrow. Though immortal, it is caught in the
flow of birth and death. It is astonishing that the one who is supremely
powerful is also experiencing torment and suffering in the form of the lowly,
the sorrowful, the poor. What is the reason for this?  Jain philosophy, while
examining this reason, says that karma is the one that makes the soul wander in
the world. Karma is the root of birth and death. "Kammam cha ai maranassa mulan"
- this statement of Lord Mahavira is absolutely true, a fact. Due to karma, this
world is constantly changing in various strange events. While theistic
philosophies attribute this diversity of the world and happiness and sorrow to
God, Jain philosophy considers the soul and its main helper, karma, as the root
cause of all happiness and sorrow and the diversity of the world. Karma is not
an independent force, it is itself a pudgala, inert. But when performed by the
soul under the influence of attachment and aversion, they become so powerful and
potent that they bind the doer in their bondage. They make the master dance like
a servant. This is the strange power of karma. What is this karma, the main seed
of all changes in our life and the world, what is its nature? How do its various
results occur? This is a very serious subject. In Jain philosophy...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 A mukha vivecana kA AdhAra  /  apane sukha-duHkha kA vAlA bhI vahI hai  /
jaina darzana ke sampUrNa cintana, manana aura AtmA hai  /  AtmA sarvatantra
svatantra zakti hai nirmAtA bhI vahI hai aura usakA phala bhoga karane AtmA
svayaM meM amUrta hai, parama vizuddha hai, kintu vaha zarIra ke sAtha mUrtimAna
banakara azuddha dazA meM saMsAra meM paribhramaNa kara rahA hai| svayaM parama
AnandasvarUpa hone para bhI sukha-duHkha ke satra meM pisa rahA hai| ajara-amara
hokara bhI janma-mRtyu ke pravAha meM vaha rahA hai  /  Azcarya hai ki jo parama
zaktisammata hai vahI dIna-hIna, duHkhI, daridra ke rUpa meM yAtanA aura kaSTa
bhI bhoga rahA hai  /  isakA kAraNa kyA hai ? " jainadarzana isa kAraNa kI
vivecanA karate hue kahatA hai- AtmA ko saMsAra meM bhaTakAne vAlA karma hai  /
karma hI janma-maraNa kA mUla hai kammaM ca AI maraNassa mUlaM - bhagavAna zrI
mahAvIra kA yaha kathana akSaraza: satya hai, tathya hai| karma ke kAraNa ho
yaha vizva vividha vicitra ghaTanAtroM meM pratipala parivartita ho rahA hai|
IzvaravAdI darzanoM ne isa vizvavaicitrya evaM sukha-duHkha kA kAraNa jahAM
Izvara ko mAnA hai, vaha jainadarzana ne samasta sukha-duHkha evaM
vizvavaicitrya kA kAraNa mUlataH jIva evaM usakA mukhya sahAyaka karma mAnA hai
/  karma svatantra rUpa se koI zakti nahIM hai, vaha svayaM meM pudgala hai,
jar3a hai  /  kintu rAga-dveSa vazavartI AtmA ke dvArA karma kiye jAne para ve
itane balavAna aura zaktisampanna bana jAte haiM ki karttA ko bhI apane baMdhana
meM bAMdha lete haiM | mAlika ko bhI naukara ko taraha nacAte haiM  /  yaha
karma kI bar3I vicitra zakti hai  /  hamAre jIvana aura jagata ke samasta
parivartanoM kA yaha mukhya vIja karma kyA hai, isakA svarUpa kyA hai ? isake
vividha pariNAma kaise hote haiM ? yaha bar3A hI gambhIra viSaya hai|
jainadarzana meM

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma has been described in great detail. A very subtle and profound analysis of
karma is found in the Jain Agamas and subsequent texts. Being in Prakrit and
Sanskrit languages, it is indeed meant for scholars, but it is difficult to
understand for ordinary seekers. Ancient Acharyas have described the various
forms of karma theory in brief, which proves to be a good source of knowledge
for ordinary seekers of truth.  The Karmagranth holds an important place among
the ancient texts on karma theory. This book, written by Shrimad Devendrasur, is
a complete and comprehensive work. It presents a discussion of all aspects of
Jain philosophy, including karma, space, time, living beings, non-living beings,
and their various classifications. The book is written in complex Prakrit
language and has many famous commentaries in Sanskrit. Its discussion is also
quite famous in Gujarati. A famous scholar and sage, Pt. Shri Mukhlalji, had
prepared a commentary on it in Hindi about 40 years ago.  Currently, the Hindi
commentary on Karmagranth was becoming difficult to obtain, and the style of
commentary had also changed significantly by this time. Many seekers of truth,
monks, and devout lay followers had been requesting for many years from the
revered Gurudev Marudhar Kesariji Maharaj Saheb that a vast and profound text
like Karmagranth should be commented upon and published in a new way. Only a
capable scholar, learned, and great saint like you can accomplish this extremely
laborious and expensive task. Gurudevji also felt inclined towards this and
resolved to take this work forward. He started writing the commentary. The
responsibility of making the commentary beautiful and informative through
language, style, etc., and the work of footnotes, collection of quotes from
Agamas, introduction, writing, etc., was given to the famous scholar Shriyut
Shrichandji Surana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vArma kA bahuta hI vistAra ke sAtha varNana diyA gayA hai| karma kA
sUkSmAtisUkSma aura atyanta gahana vivecana jaina AgamoM meM aura uttaravartI
granthoM meM prApta hotA hai  /  vaha prAkRta evaM saMskRta bhASA meM hone ke
kAraNa vidvadbhogya to hai, para sAdhAraNa jijJAsu ke liye dubodha hai  /
thokar3oM meM karma siddhAnta ke vividha svarUpa kA varNana prAcIna AcAryoM ne
gaMthA hai, kaNhastha bArane para sAdhAraNa tattva-jijJAsu ke liye acchA
jJAnadAyaka siddha hotA hai  /  karmasiddhAnta ke prAcIna granthoM meM
karmagrantha kA mahatvapUrNa sthAna hai  /  zrImad devendrasUri racita isa
bAMdha bhAH apanA hI mahApUrNa haiN| inameM jainadarzanasammata samasta
karmavAda, sthAna, mArgaNA, jIva, ajIva ke bheda-prabheda Adi samasta
janadarzana kA vivecana prastuta kara diyA gayA hai  /  grantha jaTila prAkRta
bhASA meM hai aura isakI saMskRta meM aneka TIkAe~ bhI prasiddha haiN| gujarAtI
meM bhI isakA vivecana kAphI prasiddha hai| hindI bhASA meM isa para vivecana
prasiddha vidvAna manISI paM0 zrI mukhalAlajI ne lagabhaga 40 varSa pUrva
taiyAra kiyA thA  /  vartamAna meM karmagrantha kA hindI vivecana dupprApya ho
rahA thA, phira isa samaya taka vivecana kI zailI meM bhI kAphI parivartana A
gyaa| aneka tattva jijJAsu munivara evaM zraddhAlu zrAvaka parama zraddhaya
gurudeva marudhara kesarIjI mahArAja sAhaba se kaI varSoM se prArthanA kara rahe
the ki karmagrantha jaise vizAla aura gambhIra grantha yA naye DhaMga se
vivecana evaM prakAzana honA caahie| Apa jaise samartha zAstrajJa vidvAna evaM
mahAsthavira santa hI isa atyanta zramasAdhya eva vyaya sAdhya kArya ko sampanna
karA sakate haiM | gurudevadhI kA bhI isa ora AvArSaNa huA aura isa kArya ko Age
bar3hAne kA saMkalpa kiyaa| vivecana likhanA prArama kiyaa| vivecana ko bhASA-
zailI Adi hadiyoM se sundara evaM sUcikara banAne tathA phuTanoTa, AgamoM ke
uddharaNa saMkalana. bhUmikA, lekhana Adi kAryo kA dAyitva prasiddha vidvAna
zrIyuta zrIcandajI surAnA ko

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Handed over. Shri Suranaji Gurudev Shri has been in very close contact with the
literature and thoughts of Gurudev. Under the guidance of Gurudev, he has
prepared this scholarly and useful lin by working very hard. A long-standing
deficiency is being fulfilled. At the same time, the society is getting a
cultural and philosophical treasure in a new form, which is a matter of great
joy. I am particularly interested in this subject. I have been motivating
Gurudev and the editor friends from time to time for its completion. After four
parts, this fifth part is coming before the public today. I am very happy about
it. This fifth part is even more detailed than the previous four parts, the
subject is deep, for the clarity of the deep subject, expansion also becomes
necessary. The learned editor friends have done a deep analysis of the subject
with a lot of effort and review of many books. Hopefully, it will be the cause
of knowledge enhancement for the inquisitive readers. Second Edition Today,
after almost 13 years, this second edition of the fifth part of "Karmagranth" is
reaching the hands of the readers. It has been included in the curriculum of
many institutions. This is clear evidence of the usefulness of this book. The
book was unavailable for a long time, this year the decision to publish the
second edition was taken during the Chaturmas in Madras with the publisher Shri
Rupchandji Maharaj Saheb, accordingly the book is in the hands of the readers.
Today, revered Gurudev Shri is not present among us, but wherever he is, his
divine power will continue to inspire and guide us. With this auspicious
blessing, in the memory of revered Gurudev Shri, - Upravartka Sukhan Muni

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sauMpA gyaa| zrI surAnAjI gurudeva zrI ke sAhitya evaM vicAroM se atinikaTa
samparka meM rahe haiM  /  gurudeva ke nirdezana meM unhoMne atyadhika zrama
karake yaha vidvattApUrNa tathA sarvasAdhAraNa jana ke lie upayogI lina taiyAra
kiyA hai| eka dorghakAlIna abhAva kI pUrti ho rahI hai| sAtha hI samAja ko eka
sAMskRtika evaM dArzanika nidhi naye rUpa meM mila rahI hai, yaha atyadhika
prasannatA kI bAta hai  /  mujhe isa viSaya meM vizeSa ruci hai| maiM gurudeva
kI tathA saMpAdaka bandhuoM ko isakI mampUrti ke lie samaya-samaya para prerita
karatA rhaa| cAra bhAgoM ke pazcAt yaha pAMcavAM bhAga Aja janatA ke samakSa A
rahA hai| isakI mujhe hArdika prasannatA hai  /  yaha pAMcavA bhAga pahale ke
cAra bhAgoM se bhI adhika vistRta banA hai, viSaya gahana hai, gahana viSaya kI
spaSTatA ke lie vistAra bhI bhAvazyaka ho jAtA hai| vidvAna sampAdaka baMdhuoM
ne kAphI zrama aura aneka granthoM ke paryAlocana se viSaya kA talasparzI
vivecana kiyA hai| AzA hai, yaha jijJAsu pAThakoM kI jJAnavRddhi kA hetubhUta
banenA  /  dvitIya saMskaraNa Aja lagabhaga 13 varSa bAda "karmagrantha " ke
paMcama bhAga kA yaha dvitIya saMskaraNa pAThakoM ke hAthoM meM pahu~ca rahA
hai| ise aneka saMsthAoM ne apane pAThyakrama meM rakhA hai| yaha isa grantha kI
upayogitA kA spaSTa pramANa hai| kAphI samaya se grantha anupalabdha thA, isa
varSa pratrartaka zrI rUpacandajI mahArAja sAhaba ke sAtha madrAsa cAturmAsa meM
isake dvitIya saMskaraNa kA nizcaya huA, tadanusAra grantha pAThakoM ke hAthoM
meM hai  /  Aja pUjya gurudevazrI hamAre madhya vidyamAna nahIM haiM, kintu
jahA~ bho haiM, unakI divya zakti hameM preraNA va mArgadarzana detI rahegI  /
isa zubhAzApUrvaka pUjya gurudevazrI kI puNya smRti ke sAtha """" -
upapravartaka sukana muni

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- The Essence of Karma Theory  Karma theory is the bedrock of Indian thinkers
and sages. In reality, it is the foundation of the Astika (orthodox) schools of
thought. It can also be said that Karma theory is the foundation of Astika
philosophies. Although there may be differences in the definition of Karma, the
attainment of spiritual liberation is based on the liberation from Karma. There
is no difference in this. Every philosophy has examined Karma in some form or
another! Jain philosophy has examined it in great detail and with great
subtlety.   All living beings in the world exhibit many kinds of inequalities
and diversities. All the Atmavadin (soul-believing) philosophies have accepted
Karma theory as the reason for this. The Anatmavadin (non-soul believing)
Buddhist philosophy has clearly stated its acceptance of Karma theory:  _All
beings experience the fruits of their actions, all beings are the masters of
their own Karma, they are born in different species according to their Karma,
their Karma is their own bondage, their Karma is their own liberation, they are
elevated or degraded by their Karma. (Milinda Panha, p. 50.81)_

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - karma siddhAnta kA Azaya karmasiddhAnta bhAratIya cintakoM evaM RSiyoM ke
cintana kA nabanIta hai  /  yathArtha meM Astika dAI bhavya sAmayihAna gara
AdhArita hai  /  isako yoM bhI kaha sakate haiM ki Astika darzanoM kI nIMva hI
kAma siddhAnta hai  /  bhale hI kAma ke svarUpa-nirNaya meM matakya na ho, para
adhyAtmasiddhi karmamukti ke bindu para phalita hotI hai| isameM matabhinnatA
nahIM hai| pratyeka darzana meM kisI na kisI rUpa meM karma kI mImAMsA kI gayI
hai ! jainadarzana meM isakA cintana bahuta hI vistAra aura sUkSmatA se kiyA
gayA hai  /  _ saMsAra ke sabhI prANadhAriyoM meM aneka prakAra kI viSamatAyeM
aura vividhatAyeM dikhalAI detI haiM  /  isake kAraNa ke rUpa meM sabhI Atma
bAdI darzanoM ne karmasiddhAnta ko mAnA hai  /  anAtmavAdI bauddhadarzana meM  /
karmasiddhAnta ko mAnane ke sambandha meM spaSTa rUpa se kahA hai ki _ sabhI
jIva apane kamoM se hI phala kA bhoga karate haiM, sabhI jIva apane karmoM ke
Apa mAlika haiM, apana kamoM ke anusAra hI nAnA yoniyoM meM utpanna hote haiM,
apanA karma hI apanA bandhu hai, apanA karma hI apanA Azcaya hai, karma hI se
UMce aura nIce hue haiN| (milinda prapana pR. 50.81)

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Acharya Jayant has also stated the same thing:  "The diversity of the world,
from happiness to sorrow, is due to the difference in karma. Even in
agriculture, service, and other activities, there is a unique outcome. Some
people get unexpected wealth, while others are struck by lightning. Some achieve
success without effort, while others fail even after great effort. These things
are not due to any visible cause. Therefore, one should assume that there is
some invisible cause.  (Nyayamnjari, page 42, second part)  In other words, some
people are happy in the world, while others are unhappy. Even after doing things
like farming, working, etc., some people get special benefits, while others have
to suffer losses. Some people get sudden wealth, while others are struck by
lightning while sitting. Some people achieve success without effort, while
others do not get results even after great effort. All these things do not
happen due to any visible cause. Therefore, one should assume that there is some
invisible cause.  Similarly, theists generally agree on this point:  "Karma is
the main thing in the world. Whatever one does, one gets the fruit of it."  The
nature of karma  Although there is agreement between theists and atheists, soul
believers and non-soul believers about the theory of karma, there is a
fundamental difference of opinion regarding the nature of karma and its
relationship to its fruits.  In common language, whatever is done is called
karma. For example, eating, drinking, walking, talking, thinking, painting, etc.
But karma does not only mean this.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AcArya jayanta ne bhI yahI bAta batAI hai jagato yacca vaicitryaM sukhaduHzAvi
bhedataH  /  kRSisevAvisAmpe'pi vilakSaNaphalodayaH  //  aphasmAnidhilAmazca
vidyutpAtazca kasyacit  /  kacitphalamayatne'pi sne'pyaphalatA pavacit  /  /
tadetad durghaTaM dRSTAtkAraNAd tyabhicAriNaH  /  senAdRSTamupetavyamasya kicana
kAraNam  /  /  (nyAyamaMjarI pR. 42uttarabhAga) arthAt-saMsAra meM koI sukhI hai
to koI duHsI hai  /  khetI, naukarI bagairaha karane para bhI kisI ko vizeSa
lAbha hotA hai aura kisI ko nukasAna uThAnA par3atA hai  /  kisI ko akasmAta
sampatti mila jAtI hai aura kisI para baiThe-biThAye bijalI gira par3atI hai|
kisI ko binA prayatna ki ho tra-prApti ho jAtI hai gaura gilI kosA karane para
bhI phala-prApti nahIM hotI hai| ye saba bAteM kisI dRSTa kAraNa kI vajaha se
nahIM hotI  /  ataH inakA koI adRSTa kAraNa mAnanA cAhie | isI taraha IzvaravAdI
bhI prAyaH isa meM eka mata haiM ki karama pradhAna vizva kari rAkhA  /  jo jasa
karahi so sasa phala caakhaa| karma kA svarUpa uparyukta prakAra se
karmasiddhAnta ke bAre meM IzvaravAdiyoM aura anIzvaravAdiyoM, AtmavAdiyoM aura
anAtma vAdiyoM meM mataikya hone para bhI kama ke svarUpa aura usake phaladAna
ke sambandha meM maulika matabheda hai| laukika bhASA meM to sAdhAraNa taura se
jo kucha kiyA jAtA hai, use karma kahate haiM  /  jaise khAnA-pInA, calanA,
phiranA, heMsanA, bolanA, socanA, citrA ranA ityAdi  /  lekina kama kA sirpha
itanA hI artha nahoM

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Therefore, the philosophers of the afterlife have adopted a specific meaning of
karma. They believe that every good and bad deed of ours leaves behind a संस्कार
(sanskara), which is called नैयायिक (naiyayik) and बैशेषिक (vaisheshik)
धर्माधर्म (dharma-adharma). The Yogis refer to it as आशय (aashaya) and बौद्ध
अनुशय (bauddha anushaya). There is a difference in the names used to explain the
meaning of karma, but they all imply that beings trapped in the cycle of birth,
aging, and death are entangled in ignorance, delusion, and falsehood. Due to
this, they are unable to understand the true nature of the world. Therefore,
whatever they do is based on ignorance, and they are attached to it with passion
and aversion. Hence, every action of theirs becomes a cause of bondage for the
soul.  If we summarize the views of these philosophers, it becomes clear that
according to them, karma is a name for action or tendency, and at the root of
that tendency lies passion and aversion. Although this tendency is momentary,
its effect lasts until the time of its fruition. As a result, a tradition of
संस्कार (sanskara) leading to tendency and tendency leading to संस्कार
(sanskara) continues, and this is called the world. But according to Jain
philosophy, the nature of karma is different from these views in some respects.
In Jain philosophy, karma is not just a संस्कार (sanskara) but a material
substance that, attracted by the action of passion, aversion, and delusion,
merges with the soul in the same way that water mixes with milk. Although it is
a substance, it is not physical, but its name karma has become established
because it is attracted to the soul due to the soul's karma, i.e., निय (niya),
and becomes bound to it. This substance is taken in from all six directions, and
it is in the जीव प्रदेश (jiva pradesh), the region of the soul.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hai| isIliye paralokavAdI dArzanikoM ne karma kA viziSTa artha grahaNa kiyA hai
/  unakA mata hai ki hamArA pratyeka acchA aura burA kArya apanA eka saMskAra
chor3a jAtA hai| jise naiyAyika aura baizeSika dharmAdharma kahate haiM  /  yoga
use Azaya aura bauddha anuzaya nAma se sambodhita karate hai  /  karma ke artha
ko spaSTa karane vAle ukta nAmoM meM bhinnatA hai, lekina unakA tAtparya yaha
hai ki janma-jarA-maraNa rUpa saMsAra ke cakra meM par3e hue prANI ajJAna,
avicA, mithyAtva se Alipta haiM  /  jisake kAraNa ve saMsAra kA vAstavika
svarUpa samajhane meM asamartha rahate haiM  /  ataH unakA jo bhI kArya hotA hai
vaha ajJAnamUlaka hotA hai, usameM rAgaDheSa kA abhiniveza-durAgraha letA hai  /
isalie unakA pratyeka kArya AtmA ke bandhana kA kAraNa hotA hai  /  yadi una
dArzanikoM ke mantavyoM kA sArAMza nikAlA jAya to yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki
unake abhimatAnusAra karma nAma kriyA yA pravRtti kA hai aura usa pravRtti ke
mUla meM rAgadveSa rahate haiM  /  yadyapi yaha pravRtti kSaNika hotI hai kintu
usakA saMrakAra phala-kAla taka sthAyI rahatA hai  /  jisakA pariNAma yaha hotA
hai ki saMskAra se pravRtti aura prabatti se saMskAra kI paramparA calatI rahatI
hai aura isI kA nAma saMsAra hai| kintu jaina darzana ke matAnusAra karma kA
svarUpa kisI aMza meM ukta matoM se bhinna hai  /  jainadarzana meM karma kA
svarUpa jainadarzana meM karma kevala saMskAramAtra hI nahIM hai kintu eka
vastubhUta padArtha hai jo rAgI, haSI lIva kI kriyA se AkRSTa hokara jIva ke
sAtha usI taraha ghula-mila jAtA hai jaise dUdha meM pAnI  /  yadyapi vaha
padArtha hai to bhautika, kintu usakA kama nAma isaliye rUDha ho gayA hai ki
jIva ke karma arthAt niyA ke kAraNa AkRSTa hokara vaha jIva ke sAtha baMdha jAtA
hai  /  ye padArtha chaha dizAoM se gRhIta, jIva pradeza ke

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[14. The soul is made up of countless, subtle, karmic, and infinite atoms
located in the field. The soul attracts karma from all its regions, from its
subtle body. Each karma-skandha is bound to all the regions of the soul, and
these karma-skandhas are the cause of different types of knowledge-obscuration,
etc. Countless karma-pudgala-skandhas cling to each region of the soul. The
meaning of the above statement is that while other philosophies call every
action of a being afflicted by attachment and aversion as karma, and while they
consider the resulting impressions to be permanent even though the karma is
transient, Jain philosophy believes that with every action of a being afflicted
by attachment and aversion, a type of substance enters the soul, which becomes
bound to the soul after becoming the cause of its results in the form of
attachment and aversion. In due course, the same substance gives the soul good
or bad results. Jain philosophy has named the soul's transformation due to
attachment and aversion and the associated attracted and bound physical
substance as bhavakarma and dravyakarma respectively. Bhavakarma can be compared
to the vritti of Yoga philosophy and the pravritti of Nyaya philosophy, but
there is a difference in the nature of karma in Jain philosophy and the way
other philosophies consider the nature of karma. Jain philosophy believes that
everything we see around us with our dharma-chakshus is pudgala substance. This
pudgala substance is divided into twenty-three types of categories, and among
them is a karman category, which pervades the entire universe. This karman
category, when it becomes the cause of the soul's emotions, becomes transformed
into subtle matter. When the soul, filled with attachment and aversion, engages
in good or bad actions, it enters the karman category, causing knowledge-
obscuration, etc. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ 14  /  kSetra meM sthita, sUkSma, karmaprAyogya anantAnanta 'paramANuoM se
bane hote haiN| AtmA apane saba pradezoM, sauMga se karmoM ko AkRSTa karatI hai|
pratyeka karmaskandha vA sabhI AtmapradezoM ke sAtha bandhana hotA hai aura be
karmaskandha jJAnAvaraNa Adi bhinna-bhinna prakRtiyoM meM nimitta hote haiN|
pratyeka Atmapradeza para anantAnanta karma-pudgalaskandha cipake rahate haiN|
ukta kathana kA Azaya yaha hai ki jahA~ anya darzana gAga aura dveSa se AviSTa
jIva kI pratyeka kriyA ko karma kahate haiM aura usa karma ke kSaNika hone para
bhI tajjanya saMskAroM ko sthAyI mAnate haiM, vahA~ jainadarzana kA mantavya hai
ki rAga-drapa se AviSTa jIva kI pratyeka kriyA ke sAtha eka prakAra kA dravya'
AtmA meM AtA hai, jo usake rAgadeSa rUpa pariNAmoM kA nimitta pAkara AtmA ke
sAtha baMdha jAtA hai  /  kAlAntara meM vahI dravya AtmA ko zubha yA azubha
phala detA hai  /  jainadarzana ne rAgadveSamaya AtmapariNati aura usake
sambandha se AkRSTa saMzliSTa bhautika dravya ko kramazaH bhAvakarma aura
dravyakarma nAma diyA hai  /  inameM se bhAvakama kI tulanA yogadarzana kI vRtti
evaM nyAyadarzana kI pravRtti se kI jA sakatI hai parantu jainadarzana ke karma
svarUpa meM tathA anya darzanoM ke karma svarUpa mAnane meM antara hai  /
jainadarzana meM dravyakarma ke bAre meM mAnA hai ki apane cAroM ora jo kucha
bhI hama apane dharma-cakSuoM se dekhate haiM, vaha pudgala dravya hai  /  yaha
pudgala dravya teIsa prakAra kI vargaNAoM meM vibhAjita hai aura una vargaNAoM
meM eka kArmaNavargaNA hai, jo samasta saMsAra meM vyApta hai| yaha
kArmaNavargaNA hI jova ke bhAvoM kA nimitta pAkara narma mapa pariNata ho jAtI
hai pariNamadi jadA appA suhammi asuhammi rAgadosajudo | taM pavisadi kammarayaM
gANAvaraNAvibhAvehi  /  arthAt-jaba rAgadveSa se yukta AtmA acche yA bure kAmoM
meM  /

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[15] When karma, in the form of dust (raj), enters the soul, it does so through
the process of obscuring knowledge (jnanaavaran). The soul is formless (amurti)
and karma is formed (murtik). In such a state, their binding is not possible.
Because the binding of the formed with the formed is possible, but how is the
binding of the formless with the formed possible?  The solution is that, unlike
other philosophies, Jainism considers the soul and the flow of karma to be
beginningless (anadi). There is no belief that the soul was previously pure and
then became bound. Because this belief has many inconsistencies and raises
doubts. To clarify the beginningless relationship between the soul and karma,
the Acharyas have provided a logical solution, which is as follows:  "Those who
are in the chariot of the world, they have results (parinaama) of attachment and
aversion. From those results, new karma binds, and from the binding of those
karma, they take birth in the different realms (gati)."  This statement means
that every worldly soul has been filled with attachment and aversion since
beginningless time. Due to that attachment and aversion, karma binds. As a
result, there are repeated births and deaths in different realms, and from that
binding, birth and death, the cycle of the world continues uninterrupted.  When
a new realm is attained by taking birth, the Acharyas, guiding us through the
subsequent order, say that:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ 15 ] lagatI hai taba karma rUpI raja jJAnAvaraNAdi rUpa se usameM praveza
karatA hai  /  jo jIva ke sAtha yaMtra ko prApta ho jAtA hai ' amUrta kA mUrta
ke sAtha baMdha jIva amUrti hai aura karmadravya mUrtika hai  /  aisI dazA meM
una donoM kA bandha hI sambhava nahIM hai| kyoMki mUrtika ke sAtha mUrtika kA
bandha to ho sakatA hai, kintu amUrtika ke sAtha mUrtika kA bandha kaise
sambhava hai ? isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki anya darzanoM kI taraha jainadarzana
ne jIva aura karmapravAha ko anAdi mAnA hai  /  aisI mAnyatA nahIM hai ki jIva
pUrva meM sarvana zuddha thA aura meM badha huA | kyoMki isa mAnyatA meM aneka
prakAra kI visaMgatiyoM haiM aura zaMkAe~ paidA hotI haiN| jIva aura karma ke
anAdi sambandha ko spaSTa karate 'hue AcAryoM ne sayuktika samAdhAna kiyA hai jo
isa prakAra haijo khalu saMsArarathoM jIvo tatto va hoSi pariNAmo  /  pariNAmAko
dhammaM kammAvo hodi gadisu gadi || arthAt - jo jIva saMsAra meM sthita hai yAni
janma aura maraNa ke cakra meM par3A huA hai, usake rAga-dveSa rUpa pariNAma
hote haiM  /  una pariNAmoM se naye karma bandhate haiM aura una karmoM ke
baMdha se gatiyoM meM janma lenA par3atA hai  /  ukta kathana kA tAtparya yaha
huA ki pratyeka saMsArI jIva anAdi kAla se rAga-dveSayukta hai| usa rAga-
dveSayuktatA ke kAraNa karma baMdhate haiN| jisake phalasvarUpa vibhinna gatiyoM
meM punaH punaH janma-maraNa hote rahane se navIna karmoM kA bandha aura usa
baMdha se janma-maraNa, saMsAra kA cakra abAdhagati se calatA rahatA hai  /
jaba janma lene se navIna gati kI prApti hotI hai to usake bAda ke krama kA
digdarzana karAte hue AcArya kahate haiM ki-

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The body arises from the body, and the senses arise from the body. From the
senses, there is the grasping of objects, and from that, there arises attachment
and aversion. Thus, the state of the living being arises in this cycle of
existence.   As the Jina sages have said, the flow of karma is endless and
without beginning for the unenlightened being, and it is endless but has a
beginning for the enlightened being.  From the above statement, it becomes clear
that the worldly being is bound by karmic matter from time immemorial. When the
being is bound by karmic matter, the new karmas that bind it are bound along
with the karmic matter already present in the being. This is because karmic
matter combines with karmic matter, and karmic matter binds with karmic matter.
Therefore, new karmas are acquired along with the old karmas residing in the
soul. Thus, one should understand the relationship between the soul and the
karmic matter as being inseparable.  In essence, in Jain philosophy, the karmic
matter associated with the living being and the emotions of attachment and
aversion that arise from it are called karma. Karma is not merely the name for
good and bad actions performed by the living being, but also the subtle matter
that is attracted and bound to the being as a result of its actions. These
subtle matter particles are also called karma, and the emotions of lust, anger,
etc., that arise in the being as a result of the fruition of these subtle matter
particles are also called karma.   The relationship is not to be
misunderstood...   In Jain philosophy, the soul, like the Brahman principle in
Vedic philosophy, is pure, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gadimadhigadassa deho dehAdI indriyANi jAyante  /  tehiM bu bisayagahaNaM tatto
rAgo cha doso va  //  jAyadi jIvassevaM bhAvo saMsAracakkavAlammi  /  ipi
jiNavarehi bhaNido agAdiNidhaNo saNidhaNo dhA  /  /  janma lene para zarIra hotA
hai, zarIra meM indriyAM hotI haiM, indriyoM me viSaya grahaNa karatA hai|
viSayoM ke grahaNa karane se rAma vaSa rUpa pariNAma hote haiN| isa saMmAracakra
meM par3e hue jIva ke bhAvoM se karma aura karma se bhAva hote rahate haiN| yaha
pravAha abhavya jIva kI apekSA se anAdi-ananta aura bhavya jIva kI apekSA se
anAdi-sAnta hai  /  ukta kathana se yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki saMsArI jIva
anAdi kAla se mUrtika karmoM se baMdhA huA hai  /  jaba jIva mUrtika karmoM se
baMdhA hai taba usake jo navIna karma baMdhate haiM ve karma jIva meM sthita
mUrtika kamoM ke sAtha hI baMdhate haiM  /  kyoMki mUrtika kA mUrtika ke sAtha
saMyoga hotA hai aura mUrtika kA mUrtika ke sAtha hI baMdha hotA hai  /  isaliye
AtmA meM sthita purAtana karmoM ke sAtha hI naye karma vandha ko prApta hote
rahate haiN| isa prakAra kathaMcit mUrtika AtmA ke sAtha mUrtika karmadravya kA
sambandha jAnanA cAhiye  /  sArAMza yaha hai ki janadarzana meM jIva se
sambaddha mUrtika dravya aura usake nimitta se hone vAle rAgar3he ghampa bhAvoM
ko karma kahA gayA hai| karma kevala jIva dvArA kiye gaye acche bure karmoM kA
nAma nahIM hai kintu jIba ke karmoM ke nimitta se jo pudgala paramANu AkRSTa
hokara usake sAtha bandha ko prApta hote haiM. ve pudgala paramANu bhI karma
kahalAte haiM aura una pudgala paramANuoM ke phalonmukha hone para unake nimitta
se jIva meM jo kAmakrodhAdi bhAva hote haiM, ve bhI karma kahe jAte haiM  /
sambandha kI anAvitA jainadarzana meM vaidikadarzana ke brahmatattva ke samAna
AtmA ko nirmala,

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(17) The pure element is considered to be the soul (Jiva). While describing the
nature of the soul from the beginning of time, the Rasahis have described it as
being without form and possessing the quality of consciousness. Furthermore, the
Tattvartha Sutra describes the soul as having the characteristic of use, but
this supports the aforementioned statement. Because knowledge and perception are
aspects of consciousness. The word "use" refers to these.  Except for the soul,
other substances that do not possess knowledge and perception are called non-
soul (Ajeev). Inert, unconscious are synonyms for non-soul. Scientists have
described many such inert substances. But Jain philosophy classifies and
describes five such substances, namely: Dharma, Adharma, Akash, Kal, and Udgal.
All the substances described by scientists are included in these. Combining the
soul with the aforementioned five elements results in six elements. These six
elements are called six substances (Dravyas).  Out of the aforementioned six
substances, Dharma, Adharma, Akash, and Kal are considered to be eternally
unchanging. Their nature never undergoes transformation or change due to any
cause. But the soul and Pudgal are two substances that are both changeable and
unchanging. When they are associated with other substances, they are changeable,
and in their absence, they are unchanging. According to this, the soul and
Pudgal have two divisions each. The worldly and the liberated are the two
divisions of the soul, and the atom (Anu) and the aggregate (Skandha) are the
two divisions of Pudgal. The soul is unchanging in its liberated state and
changeable in its worldly state. Pudgal is unchanging in its atomic state and
changeable in its aggregate state. The implication is that as long as the soul
and Pudgal remain associated with other substances, their nature undergoes
transformation due to that association. This...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 17 ) ha vizuddha tatva mAnA hai  /  samayaprAbhRta meM AtmA (jIva ) ke
svarUpa kA nirdeza karate hue rasAhi paMvara avyakta aura cetanA guNa vAlA
batalAyA hai| vardhApi tasvArtha sUtra meM jIva ko upayoga lakSaNa bAlA likhA
hai parantu isase ukta kathana kA hI samarthana hotA hai| kyoMki jJAna aura
darzana ye cetanA ke bheda haiM  /  upayoga zabda se inhIM kA bodha hotA hai  /
jIva ke sivAya anya jo padArtha haiM, jinameM jJAna darzana nahIM pAyA jAtA,
unheM ajIba kahate haiN| jar3a, acetana yaha ajIva ke nAmAntara haiN|
vaijJAnikoM ne aise jar3a padArthoM kI saMkhyA aneka batalAI hai  /  parantu
jainadarzana meM vargIkaraNa karake aise padArtha pA~va batalAye haiN| jinake
nAma haiM- dharma, adharma, AkAza, kAla aura udgala  /  inameM vaijJAnikoM dvArA
batalAye gaye saba padArtho itvoM kA samAveza ho jAtA hai| ukta pA~ca tatvoM ke
sAtha jIva ko milAne se chaha tatva hote haiN| ina chaha tatvoM ko chaha dravya
kahate haiN| - ukta chaha dravyoM meM se dharma, adharma, AkAza aura kAla ye
cAra dravya sadA avikArI mAne gaye haiN| nimittavaza inake svabhAva meM kabhI
bhI vipariNAma -- vikAra nahIM hotA hai kintu jova aura pudgala ye do dravya
aise haiM jo vikAroM aura avikArI donoM prakAra ke hote haiM  /  jaba ye anya
dravya se saMzliSTa rahate haiM taba vikArI hote haiM aura isake abhAva meM
adhikArI hote haiN| isa hisAba se jIva aura pudgala ke dodo bheda ho jAte haiM
/  saMsArI aura mukta, ye jIva ke do bheda haiM tathA aNu aura skandha, ye
pudgala ke do bheda haiN| jIva mukta avasthA meM avikArI hai aura saMsArI
avasthA meM vikArI | pudgala aNu avasthA meM avikArI aura skandha avasthA meM
vikArI  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki jIva aura pudgala jaba taka anya dravya se
saMzliSTa rahate haiM taba taka usa saMzleSa ke kAraNa unake svabhAva meM
vipariNati huA karatI hai  /  isa

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They remain विकारी (changeable) at that time and become अविकारी (unchangeable)
as soon as the संश्लेष (combination) is removed.  The combination of जीव (soul)
and पुद्गल (matter) with other substances depends on their योग्यता (capacity).
Other substances do not have this capacity.  The जीव has मिथ्यात्व (falsehood),
अविरति (non-restraint), प्रमाद (carelessness), कापाय (trembling), and योग
(state) as its capacity, while the पुद्गल has स्निग्ध (smooth) and रूक्ष (rough)
गुण (qualities) as its capacity. The जीव is bound to other substances due to
मिथ्यात्व (falsehood), and the पुद्गल is bound to other substances due to its
स्निग्ध (smooth) and रूक्ष (rough) qualities.  The capacity of the जीव, such as
मिथ्यात्व (falsehood), etc., exists only before the संश्लेष (combination), and
through this, it becomes मलिन (impure) by accepting कर्मवर्गणा (karmic
particles). But when did it start accepting कर्मवर्गणा (karmic particles)? When
did the connection between the two begin? The answer to this can be found in the
word अनादि (beginningless). Because if we assume an आदि (beginning), many
inconsistencies arise. For example, if the connection has an आदि (beginning),
then which came first, the आत्मा (soul) or the कर्म (karma), or did they both
come into existence simultaneously? In the first case, the pure आत्मा (soul)
does not perform कर्म (karma). In the second case, कर्म (karma) cannot be
created without a कर्ता (doer). In the third case, two substances that come into
existence simultaneously cannot be कर्ता (doer) and कर्म (karma) of each other.
Therefore, it is logical to believe that the connection between कर्म (karma) and
आत्मा (soul) is अनादि (beginningless).  Haribhadrasuri, in his योगशतक (Yoga
Shataka) verse 55, gives a beautiful example to explain the अनादित्व
(beginninglessness) of आत्मा (soul) and कर्म (karma). We experience the present
moment, yet the present is अनादि (beginningless) because the past is infinite,
and no past can exist without a present. The flow of this present has been going
on since अनादि (beginningless). Similarly, कर्म (karma) and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 liye ve usa samaya vikArI rahate haiM aura saMzleSa ke haTate hI ve avikArI ho
jAte haiN| jIva aura pudgaloM kA anya dravya se saMzliSTa honA inakI yogyatA
para nirbhara hai  /  anya dravyoM meM yaha yogyatA nahIM hai  /  aisI yogyatA
kA nirdeza karate hue jIva meM mithyAtva, avirati, pramAda, kApAya aura yoga
rUpa tathA pudgala meM use snigdha aura rUkSa guNa rUpa batalAyA hai ! jIva
mithyAtva zAdi ke nimitta se anya dravya me dhata' hai aura pudgala snigdha aura
rUkSa guNa ke nimitta se anya dravya se baMdha ko prApta hotA hai  /  _ jIva meM
mithyAtvAdi rUpa yogyatA saMzleSapUrvaka hI hotI hai aura isase vaha
karmavargaNAoM ko grahaNa karake malina banatA hai  /  parantu vaha
karmavargaNAoM ko grahaNa kaba se kara rahA hai, ina donoM kA sambandha kabase
jur3A ? to isakA samAdhAna anAdi zabda ke dvArA kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  kyoMki
Adi mAnane para aneka visaMgatiyAM AtI haiM  /  jaise sambandha yadi sAdi hai to
pahale AtmA hai yA karma haiM yA yugapad donoM kA sambandha hai  /  pahale
prakAra meM zuddha AtmA karma karatI nahIM hai  /  dUgare bhaMga meM karma kartA
ke abhAva meM banate nahIM haiN| tIsare bhaMga meM yugapad janma lene vAle koI
bhI do padArtha paraspara kartA-karma nahIM bana sakate haiM  /  isaliye karma
aura AtmA kA anAdi sambandha mAnanA yuktisaMgata hai| haribhadrasUri ne
yogazataka zloka 55 meM AtmA aura karma ke anAditva ko samajhAne ke lie eka
bar3A hI sundara udAharaNa diyA hai ki anubhava to vartamAna samaya kA karate
haiM, phira bhI vartamAna anAdi hai kyoMki atIta ananta hai aura koI bhI atIta
vartagana ke binA nahIM banA  /  yaha vartamAna kA pravAha kaba se calA A rahA
hai, isa prazna kA uttara anAdi ke dvArA hI diyA jAtA hai  /  isI prakAra karma
aura

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The soul's connection is eternal from the perspective of flow. However, it is
important to understand that karma, like clay, is eternal and unchanging. Just
as fire can melt clay and purify gold, so too can auspicious rituals break the
eternal bond of karma and purify the soul.  The process of karma-binding with
the soul is of four types: 1) **Praकृतिबन्ध** (Nature-binding), 2)
**स्थितिबन्ध** (State-binding), 3) **अनुभागबन्ध** (Section-binding), and 4)
**प्रदेशबन्ध** (Region-binding).  At the time of reception, karma particles are
uniform. However, during the time of burning, they develop different natures to
obstruct the soul's knowledge, perception, etc. This is called **Praकृतिबन्ध**.
The determination of their time limit is **स्थितिबन्ध**. The presence of three
flavors (intense, moderate, and mild) in karma-binding, according to the
intensity and mildness of the soul's transformations, is called **अनुभागबन्ध**.
And the unification of karma particles with the soul's regions or the
determination of the number of karma regions is called **प्रदेशबन्ध**.  The
first karma text beautifully explains these four types of karma-binding using
the example of a sweetmeat (**मोदक**). Just as a sweetmeat is either bile-
reducing or phlegm-reducing, depending on its nature, the duration of its nature
is its state. Its sweetness or bitterness depends on its flavor, and its weight
depends on its atoms. Thus, this metaphor of the sweetmeat clearly indicates the
process of karma-binding.  Of the above four types of binding, **Praकृतिबन्ध**,
**योग शक्ति**, and **प्रदेशबन्ध** are caused by the soul, while **स्थितिबन्ध**
and **अनुभागबन्ध** are caused by the **काषायिक परिणाम** (results of passions).
Karma-binding is of two types:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AtmA kA sambandha pravAha kI dRSTi se anAdi hai| parantu yahA~ yaha jAnanA
mAhie ki ka ra mAramA ta rAmrAdha svargA mRttikA kI taraha anAdi-sAnta hai  /
jaise agni ke tApa se mRttikA ko galAkara svarNa ko vizuddha kiyA jA sakatA hai,
vaise hI zubha anuSThAnoM se karma ke anAdi sambandha ko tor3akara AtmA ko
zuddha kiyA jA sakatA hai| karmabandha kI prakriyA AtmA ke sAtha karmavandha kI
prakriyA cAra prakAra kI hai-1prakRti bandha, 2-sthitibandha, 3-anubhAgabandha,
4-pradezabandha  /  grahaNa ke samaya karmapudgala ekarUpa hote haiM  /  kintu
indhakAla meM unameM AtmA ke jJAna, darzana Adi bhinna-bhinna guNoM ko rokane kA
bhinnabhinna svabhAva ho jAtA hai  /  ise prakRtibandha phahate haiN| unameM
samaya kI maryAdA kA nirdhAraNa honA sthitibandha hai | AtmapariNAmoM kI tIvratA
aura maMdatA ke anurUpa karmabandhana meM tIna rasa aura maMda rasa kA honA
anubhAga bandha kahalAtA hai aura karma pudgaloM kA AtmapradezoM ke sAtha
ekIbhAva yA karmapradezoM kI saMkhyA kA nirdhAraNa honA pradezabandha hai  /
prathama karmagrantha meM modaka ke dRSTAnta dvArA karmabandha ke ina cAroM
prakAroM ko bahuta hI sundara rIti se spaSTa kiyA gayA hai  /  jaise modaka
pittanAzaka hai yA kaphanAzaka hai, yaha usake svabhAva para nirbhara hai, vaha
modaka kitane kAla taka apane svabhAva rUpa meM banA rahegA, yaha usakI sthiti
hai| usakI madhuratA yA kaTutA kA tAratamya rasa para avalambita hai aura modaka
kA vajana kitanA hai, yaha usake paramANuoM para nirbhara hai  /  isa prakAra
modaka kA yaha rUpaka karmabandhana kI prakriyA kA yayArtha nirdezana kara detA
hai| ukta prakRtibandha Adi bandha ke cAra prakAroM meM se AtmA ko yoga zakti
prakRti aura pradezabandha kI kAraNa hai aura sthiti evaM anubhAga bandha ke
kAraNa kASAyika pariNAma haiN| karmabandhana do taraha kA hotA

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are two types of bondage: 1) Saṃpārāyika and 2) Īpithika. The bondage of
the Akṣayī is Saṃpārāyika. It is the cause of the infinite cycle of existence.
The bondage of the Akṣayī is Īpithika, in which karma particles bind with the
soul for the first time and are destroyed in the second. This bondage does not
have any effect on the soul.  There are two perspectives in Jain philosophy for
the representation of reality, known as Niścayanaya and Vyavahāranaya.
Niścayanaya refers to the statement of the true nature of a thing without any
external influence, while Vyavahāranaya refers to the statement of a thing in
relation to external influences. In Jain philosophy, the concept of the soul's
agency and experience of karma is also considered from these two perspectives.
The nature of karma has been explained earlier, and it has also been indicated
that karma has an eternal relationship with the soul. When we consider the
agency and experience of karma from the perspective of Niścaya, the soul is
neither the doer of the material karma nor the experiencer of its fruits.
Because material karma is pāṅgalika, a modification of the pudgala substance, it
is therefore external. The doer of karma cannot be the conscious soul. The karma
of the conscious is in the form of consciousness, and the karma of the
unconscious is in the form of unconsciousness. If the karma of the conscious
were to become unconscious, the distinction between the conscious and the
unconscious would be destroyed, leading to the fault of mixture. This means that
every substance is the doer of its own nature, not the doer of external
influences. For example, water is naturally cool, but it becomes hot due to its
contact with fire. However, water cannot be said to be the doer of this heat,
because heat is the property of fire, and it has come to water due to its
contact with fire, and is therefore imposed. As soon as the contact with fire is
removed, the heat disappears. Similarly, the pudgala substance, which becomes
karma due to the influence of the soul's impure emotions,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hai-1-sAMparAyika, evaM 2- Ipithika bandha  /  sakaSAyI kA bandha sAMparAyika
hotA hai  /  yaha ananta saMsAra kA kAraNa hai aura akaSAyI kA bandha IpithikA
hotA hai, jisameM prathama samaya meM karma paramANu AtmA ke sAtha baMdhate haiM
aura dUsare samaya meM nirjIrNa ho jAte haiN| yaha bandha AtmA para apanA kucha
bhI prabhAva nahIM dikhalAtA hai| bara ke nirUpaNa kI janadarzana meM do
dRSTiyA~ haiM jinheM nizcayanaya aura vyavahAranaba kahate haiM  /  jo
paranimitta ke binA vastusvarUpa kA kathana karatA hai use nizcayanaya kahate
haiM aura paranimitta kI apekSA se jo vastu kA kathana karatA hai, vaha
vyavahAranaya hai  /  jainadarzana meM jIva ke karma ke kartRtva aura bhoktRtva
kA vicAra bhI ina donoM nayoM se kiyA gayA hai| karma kA svarUpa pahale batalAyA
jA cukA hai aura yaha bhI saMketa kiyA gayA hai ki karma kA jIba ke sAtha anAdi
sambandha hai  /  ina karmoM ke kartRtva aura bhovatRtva ke bAre meM jaba hama
nizcaya vRSTi se vicAra karate haiM to jIva na to dravya karmoM kA kartA hI
pramANita hotA hai aura na unake phala kA bhoktA hii| kyoMki dravyakarma
pAMgalika haiM, pudgala dravya ke vikAra haiM, isIlie para haiM  /  unakA kartA
cetana jIva nahIM ho sakatA hai  /  cetana kA karma caitanya rUpa hotA hai aura
acetana kA karma acetana rUpa | yadi cetana kA karma bhI acetana rUpa hone lage
to cetana aura acetana kA bheda naSTa hokara saMkara doSa upasthita ho jAyegA  /
isakA phalitArtha yaha huA ki pratyeka dravya svabhAva kA kartA hai, parabhAva
kA karttA nahIM hai  /  jaise jala kA svabhAva zItala hai kintu agni kA
sambandha hone se uSNa ho jAtA hai| kintu isa uSNatA kA kartA jala ko nahIM kahA
jA sakatA hai, kyoMki uSNatA to agni kA dharma hai aura vaha jala meM agni ke
sambandha se AI hai, ataH Aropita hai ! agni kA sambandha alaga hote hI calI
jAtI hai| isI prakAra jIva ke azuddha bhAvoM kA nimitta pAkara jo pudgaladravya
karma

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Forms are transformed, the doer of them is the pudgala itself, the jiva is the
doer of them. It cannot be, the jiva is the doer of its own perceptions. This
very thing is made clear in the time-honored gatha 86.8, the essence of which
is:  The jiva does its own raga-dvesha-adi forms of feelings, but by getting the
cause of those feelings, the pudgala, which is fit to become karma-rupa, becomes
transformed into karma-rupa, and when the pudgala dravya, which has become
transformed into karma-rupa, gives its fruit, then by getting the cause of it,
the jiva also undergoes transformation in the form of raga-adi. Although both
the jiva and the pudgalik karma undergo transformation by getting the cause of
each other, yet neither is the jiva the doer of the qualities of pudgala karma,
nor is the pudgala karma the doer of the qualities of the jiva, but both undergo
transformation by getting the cause of each other. Therefore, the soul is the
doer of its own feelings, not the doer of all the feelings created by pudgala
karma.  On the above statement, this doubt may arise that Jainism also considers
the soul to be completely inactive like the purusha of Samkhya philosophy, and
the pudgala to be the doer like prakriti. But this is not the case. The purusha
of Samkhya philosophy is completely inactive, but in Jainism, the soul is not
considered to be completely inactive. It is the doer of its own natural feelings
- knowledge, perception, happiness, etc., and also of its own feelings - raga-
dvesha, moha, etc., but it is not the doer of the transformation of karma-rupa
in the pudgalas due to the cause of those feelings. The essence of the above
statement is that in reality, only the proximate cause can be called the doer of
anything, and the doership that is attributed to the remote cause is done from a
practical, worldly point of view. What has been said about doership should also
be understood about enjoyership. The one who is the doer of something can be the
enjoyer of it, and the one who is the enjoyer of something can be the doer of
it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rUpa pariNata hote haiM, unakA kartA svayaM pudgala hai, jIva unakA krtaa|
nahIM ho sakatA hai, jIva to apane bhAnoM kA kartA hai  /  isI bAta ko
samayaprAbhUta gAthA 86.8 meM spaSTa kiyA hai, jisakA sArAMza hai jIva to apane
rAgadveSAdi rUpa bhAvoM ko karatA hai kintu una bhAvoM kA nimitta pAkara karma
rUpa hone ke yogya pudgala karma rUpa pariNata ho jAte haiM tathA karma rUpa
pariNata hue pudgala dravya jaba apanA phala dete haiM to unake nimitta ko
pAkara jIva bhI rAgAdi rUpa pariNamana karatA hai  /  yadyapi jIva aura
paudgalika kama donoM eka dUsare kA nimitta pAkara pariNamana karate haiM to bhI
na to jIva pudgala karmoM ke guNoM kA kartA hai aura na pudgala karma jIva ke
guNoM ke kA hai, kintu paraspara meM donoM eka dUsare kA nimitta pAkara
pariNamana karate haiM  /  ataH AtmA apane bhAvoM kA hI kartA hai,
pudgalakarmakRta samasta bhAvoM kA kartA nahIM hai| ukta vAthana para yaha zaMkA
ho sakatI hai ki jainadarzana bhI sAMkhyadarzana ke puruSa kI taraha yAtmA ko
sarvathA akartA aura prakRti kI taraha pudgala ko hI kartA mAnatA hai| kintu
aisI bAta nahIM hai  /  sAMtyadarzana kA puruSa to sarvathA akatA hai kintu
jainadarzana meM AtmA kAM sarvathA akartA nahIM mAnA hai  /  vaha apane
svAbhAvika bhAva-jJAna, darzana, sukha zAdi tathA vaibhAvika bhAva-rAgadveSa,
moha Adi kA kartA hai kintu unake nimitta se jo pudgaloM meM karma rUpa
pariNamana hotA hai| usakA vaha kartA nahIM hai  /  ukta kathana kA sArAMza yaha
hai ki vAstava meM napAdAna-kAraNa ko hI kisI vastu kA karttA kahA jA sakatA hai
tathA nimittakAraNa meM jo kartA kA vyavahAra kiyA jAtA hai, vaha vyAvahArika
laukika dRSTi se kiyA jAlA hai  /  kartRtva ke bAre meM jo bAta kahI gaI hai,
vahIM bhoktRtva ke bAre meM bhI jAnanI cAhie  /  jo jisakA kartA hotA hai vahI
usakA bhoktA ho sakatA hai aura jo

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(22) How can one be the enjoyer of that which has no doer? This is the two-fold
explanation of Jain philosophy regarding the difference of opinion about
doership and enjoyership. In reality, the soul is the doer and enjoyer of its
own natural and unnatural emotions, but in practice, it is considered the
enjoyer of the happiness, sorrow, etc. that it receives as a result of its own
actions. In this context, it should also be clearly understood that Jain
philosophy does not consider God to be the controller of creation, therefore, He
does not have a hand in giving the fruits of karma. Karma gives its fruits
itself. They do not need any other judges. Just as alcohol produces intoxication
and milk gives strength. The person who drinks alcohol becomes unconscious and
the person who drinks milk becomes strong. After drinking alcohol or milk, there
is no need for another regulatory power to give its fruit. Similarly, the karma
particles that are attracted towards the soul by every physical, verbal and
mental pulsation of the living being and get bound in it by getting the
opportunity of attachment and aversion, also have the power to do good or bad
like alcohol and milk, which is expressed in relation to consciousness and shows
its effect on it. The living being, fascinated by its effect, does such actions
which are pleasant and painful for it. If the emotions of the living being are
good at the time of doing karma, then the bound karma particles have a good
effect and in due course of time, good fruits are obtained from it, and if the
emotions are bad, then the effect is bad and in due course of time, the fruits
are also bad. If God is considered to be the giver of fruits, then where one
person kills another person, the killer should not be considered guilty, because
the death of the person being killed by God is

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 22 ) jisakA kartA hI nahIM vaha usakA bhoktA kaise do sAtA ' hA prakAra
kartRtva aura bhoktRtva ke bAre meM dRSTibheda se jainadarzana kI dvividha
vyAkhyA hai ki vAstava meM to AtmA apane hI svAbhAvika aura baibhAvika bhAvoM kA
kartA aura bhoktA hai lekina vyavahAra se use svakRta karmoM ke phalasvarUpa
milane vAle sukha-duHkhAdi kA bhoktA vAhA jAtA hai| _isI prasaMga meM yaha bhI
spaSTa samajha lenA cAhie ki jainadarzana Izvara ko sRSTi kA niyantA nahIM
mAnatA hai, ataH karmaphala dene meM bhI usakA hAtha nahIM hai, karma apanA
phala svayaM dete haiN| unake lie anya nyAyAdhIzoM kI AvazyakatA nahIM hai  /
jaise zarAba nazA paidA karatI hai aura dUdha tAkata detA hai  /  jo manuSya
zarAba pItA hai use behozI hotI hai aura jo dudha pItA hai usake zarIra meM
puSTatA AtI hai| zarAba yA dUdha pIne ke bAda yaha AvazyakatA nahIM rahatI hai
ki usakA phala dene ke lie dUsarI niyAmaka zakti ho  /  isI prakAra jIva ke
pratyeka kAyika, vAcika aura mAnasika parispanda ke dvArA jo karma paramANu
jIvAtmA kI ora AkRSTa hote haiM tathA rAgadveSa kA nimitta pAkara usameM baMdha
jAte haiM, una karma paramANuoM meM bhI zarAba aura dUdha kI taraha zubha yA
azubha karane kI zakti rahatI hai jo caitanya ke sambandha se vyakta hokara usa
para apanA prabhAva dikhalAtI hai aura usake prabhAva se mugdha huA jIva aise
kAma karatA hai jo use sukhadAyaka aura duHkhadAyaka hote haiM  /  yadi karma
karate samaya jIva ke bhAva acche hote haiM to baMdhane vAle karma-paramANuoM
para acchA prabhAva par3atA hai aura kAlAntara meM usase acchA phala milatA hai
tathA yadi bhAva bure hoM to burA asara par3atA hai aura kAlAntara meM phala bhI
burA hI milatA hai| yadi Izvara ko phaladAtA mAnA jAye to jahA~ eka manuSya
dusare manuSya kA ghAta karatA hai, vahA~ ghAtaka ko doSa kA bhAgI nahIM honA
cAhie, kyoMki usa manuSya ke dvArA Izvara bharane vAle ko mRtyu kA

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(23)  Punishes. Just as the king who punishes criminals through men, those men
are not called criminals because they are following the king's orders.
Similarly, the killer who kills someone is also causing them to experience the
fruits of their past karma, because God must have ordained this punishment for
their past karma, which is why they were killed. If it is said that man is free
to act, and therefore the killer's act is not God-inspired but the result of his
free will, then it must be said that in the state of the world, no being is
truly free, all are bound by their own karma - "Karmaṇā badhyate jantu"
(Mahabharata) and karma has an endless tradition. In such a situation, according
to the principle of "Buddhi karmānusārīṇī" - that is, the intellect is according
to karma, a person is not free to do or not do any work.  In this situation, it
may be said that in such a state, no one will be able to attain liberation
because the being is bound by karma and the being's intellect is according to
karma. But it is not right to say so, because karma is both good and bad,
therefore the intellect that follows good karma leads man towards the right path
and the intellect that follows bad karma leads man towards the wrong path.
Walking on the right path leads to liberation and walking on the wrong path
leads to karma-bondage. In such a situation, the fact that the intellect is
according to karma does not hinder liberation.  The freedom and dependence of
the soul  It is generally said that the soul is free during the time of action
and dependent during the time of experiencing the results. For example, if one
eats poison, then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 23 ) daNDa dilAtA hai  /  jaise rAjA jina puruSoM ke dvArA aparAdhiyoM ko
daNDa dilAtA hai, ve puruSa aparAdhI nahIM kahe jAte, kyoMki ve rAjA kI AjJA kA
pAlana karate haiN| isI taraha kisI kA ghAta karane vAlA ghAtaka bhI jisakA
ghAta karatA hai, usake pUrvakRta karmoM kA phala bhugatavAtA hai, kyoMki Izvara
ne usake pUrvakRta karmoM kI yahI sajA niyata kI hogI, tabhI to usakA vadha kiyA
gayA hai  /  yadi kahA jAya ki manuSya karma karane meM svatantra hai ataH
ghAtaka kA kArya Izvara prerita nahIM hai kintu usakI svatantra icchA kA
pariNAma hai to kahanA hogA ki saMsAra dazA meM koI bhI prANI vastutaH svatantra
nahIM, sabhI apaneapane karmoM se baMdhe hue haiM- "karmaNA badhyate jantu"
(mahAbhArata) aura karma kI anAdi paramparA hai| aisI paristhiti meM 'buddhi
karmAnusAriNI' arthAt karma ke anusAra prANI ko buddhi hotI hai, ke nyAyAnusAra
kisI bhI kAma ko karane yA na karane ke lie manuSya svatantra nahIM hai  /  isa
sthiti meM yaha kahA jAya ki aisI dazA meM to koI bhI vyakti mukti lAbha nahIM
kara sakegA kyoMki jIva karma se baMdhA huA hai aura karma ke anusAra jIva kI
buddhi hotI hai| kintu aisA kahanA ThIka nahIM hai, kyoMki karma acche bhI hote
haiM aura bure bhI hote haiM ataH acche karma kA anusaraNa karane vAlI buddhi
manuSya ko sanmArga kI ora aura bure karma kA anusaraNa karane vAlI buddhi
manuSya ko kumArga para le jAtI hai | sanmArga para calane se mukti lAbha aura
kumArga para calane se karmabaMdha hotA hai  /  aisI dazA meM buddhi ke
karmAnusAriNI hone se muktilAbha meM koI bAdhA nahIM AtI hai  /  AtmA kA
svAtantrya aura pArataMtrya sAdhAraNatayA kahA jAtA hai ki AtmA karmoM ke
kartRtva kAla meM svatantra hai aura bhoktRtva kAla meM paratantra  /  jaise ki
viSa khAne ke bAre

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(24 24) A human is free, they may eat or not eat, but after consuming poison, it
is not in their hands to escape death. This is a gross example, because even
after consuming poison, one can be cured and saved from death. Similarly, in the
soul, both freedom and dependence are manifested in the two occasions of the
agency and experience of karma. We explain this below.  The soul is free in the
act of doing karma. It can create its own destiny as it wishes. By achieving
complete victory over karma, it can become pure and liberated. But sometimes,
due to past karma and external circumstances, it becomes so dependent that it
can never do what it wants. For example, a soul may want to progress on the path
of righteousness, but due to the force of karma, it does not gain strength on
that path and slips. This is the freedom and dependence of the soul in the time
of its agency.  It is not that the soul becomes dependent on karma after doing
karma. Even in that situation, the soul's freedom is preserved. It can, if it
wishes, transform the inauspicious into the auspicious, change the situation and
taste, bring about the ripening of the fruits (vipak), and transform the
ripening of the fruits into another form. In this, the soul's freedom is
evident. Dependence is from this perspective, that the karma that has been taken
on cannot be escaped without experiencing it. Even if the karma that is to be
experienced for a long time is experienced in a short time, it must be
experienced by all.  Types of Karma Experience The experience of the fruits of
karma by the living being is called the state of ripening of karma. In the state
of ripening, the living being experiences the auspicious or inauspicious fruits
of karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 24 24 ) meM manuSya svatantra hai, vaha khAye yA na khAye, lekina viSa khA
lene ke bAda mRtyu se bacanA usake hAtha kI bAta nahIM hai| yaha eka rathUla
udAharaNa hai, kyoMki upacAra se nirviSa bhI huA jA sakatA hai, mRtyu se bacA jA
sakatA hai| AtmA meM bhI karma ke kartRtva aura bhoktRtva ina donoM avasaroM
para svAtaMtrya aura pArataMtrya phalita hote haiN| jinakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce
karate haiM hA AnA karma kara meM svatantra hai  /  vaha cAhe jaise bhAgya kA
nirmANa kara sakatI hai| karmoM para pUrNa vijaya prApta karake zuddha bana kara
mukta ho sakatI hai| kintu kabhI-kabhI pUrvajanita karma aura bAhya nimitta ko
pAkara aisI paratantra bana jAtI hai ki vaha jaisA cAhe vaisA kabhI bhI nahIM
kara sakatI hai| jaise koI AtmA sanmArga para bar3hanA cAhatI hai, kintu
karmodaya kI balavatA se usa mArga para bala nahIM pAtI hai, phisala jAtI hai|
yaha hai AtmA kA kartRtva kAla meM svAtaMtrya aura pArataMtrya | karma karane ne
vAda AtmA parAdhIna karmAdhIna ho vana jAtI hai, aisA nahIM hai| usa sthiti meM
bhI AtmA kA svAtaMtrya surakSita hai| vaha cAhe to azubha ko zubha meM
parivartita kara sakatI hai, sthiti aura rasa kA hAla kara sakatI hai, vipAka
(phalodaya) kA anudaya kara sakatI hai, phalodaya ko anya rUpa meM parivartita
kara sakatI hai| isameM AtmA kA svAtaMtrya mukhara hai| parataMtratA isa dRSTi
se hai ki jina karmoM ko grahaNa kiyA hai, unheM binA bhoge mukti nahIM hotI
hai| bhale hI sudIrgha kAla taka bhoge jAne vAle karma ghor3e samaya meM hI
bhoge jAyeM, kintu sabako bhoganA hI par3atA hai  /  karmabhoga ke prakAra jIva
dvArA karma phala ke bhoga ko karma kI udayAvasthA kahate haiM  /  udayAvasthA
meM karma ke zubha yA azubha phala kA jIva dvArA vedana kiyA

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
25) (It goes. This karma-udaya is of two types - (1) Pradesh-udaya and (2)
Vipaka-udaya. The karma whose fruition occurs only in the realms is called
Pradesh-udaya, and the karma which gets destroyed after giving auspicious-
inauspicious fruits is called Vipaka-udaya. The Vipaka-udaya of karma obstructs
the qualities of the soul and contributes to the new karma-bandha. Whereas
Pradesh-udaya does not have the capacity to bind new karma, nor does it cover
the soul's qualities. Even when the soul's qualities are covered by karma, some
parts of them always remain uncovered, which makes the soul's existence known.
Even when the karma-avarana become dense, they do not have the capacity to make
the soul non-soul, the conscious inert. The process of karma-kshaya The Jain
philosophy, like the binding and rising of karma, also has a process of karma-
kshaya, which is complex and serious. When the situation is ripe, karma falls
off after changing its form during the karma-udaya period. This is the natural
decay of karma. In this, the flow of the tradition of karma is not destroyed.
The previous karma is destroyed, but at the same time, the binding of new karma
continues. This is not the real process of karma-kshaya. To destroy karma
specifically, so that the soul can become free from karma, special efforts have
to be made. These efforts are made through means like restraint, penance,
renunciation, etc. Up to the seventh gunasthan called Aprammat-samyata, karma-
kshaya takes place specifically through the said means, and after the attainment
of the eighth Apurvakarana gunasthan, when the soul's power becomes mature, a
special process takes place to destroy karma specifically. It is as follows -
(1) Apurva-sthi-ghat (2) Apurva-rasa-dhat, (3) Guna-shreni, (4) Sankraman, (5)
Apurva-sthi-bandha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 25 ) ( jAtA hai  /  yaha karmodaya do prakAra kA hai - ( 1 ) pradezodaya aura (
2 ) vipAkodaya | jina karmoM kA bhoga sirpha pradezoM meM hotA hai, use
pradezodaya kahate haiM aura jo karma zubha-azubha phala dekara naSTa hote haiM,
vaha tripAkodaya hai  /  karmoM kA vipAkodaya hI AtmA ke guNoM ko rokatA hai
aura navIna karmabandha meM yoga detA hai| jabaki pradezodaya meM navIna karmoM
ke bandha karane kI kSamatA nahIM hai aura na vaha AtmaguNoM ko AvRta karatA hai
/  karmoM ke dvArA AtmaguNa prakaTa rUpa se AvRta hone para bhI kucha aMzoM meM
sadA anAvuta hI rahate haiM, jisase AtmA ke astitva kA bodha hotA rahatA hai  /
karmAvaraNoM ke saghana hone para bhI una AvaraNoM meM aisI kSamatA nahIM hai jo
AtmA ko anAtmA, cetana ko jar3a banA deN| karmakSaya kI prakriyA jainadarzana kI
karma ke bandha, udaya kI taraha karmakSaya kI prakriyA bhI sayuktika aura
gambhIratA lie hue hai| sthiti ke paripAka hone para karma udayakAla meM apanA
badana karAne ke bAda jhar3a jAte haiM  /  yaha to karmoM kA sahaja kSaya hai  /
isameM karmoM kI paramparA kA pravAha naSTa nahIM hotA hai| pUrva karma naSTa ho
jAte haiM lekina sAtha hI navIna karmoM kA kA bandha cAlU rahatA hai| yaha
karmoM ke kSaya kI yathArtha prakriyA nahIM hai  /  karmoM kA vizeSa rUpa se
kSaya karane ke lie jisase AtmA a-karma hokara mukta ho sake, vizeSa prayatna
karanA par3atA hai| yaha prayatna saMyama, tapa, tyAga Adi sAdhanoM dvArA kie
jAte haiN| apramattasaMyata nAmaka sAtaveM guNasthAna taka to ukta sAdhanoM
dvArA karmakSaya vizeSa rUpa se hotA rahatA hai aura sAtaveM guNasthAna meM
Atma-zakti meM praur3hatA Ane ke bAda jaba AThaveM apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna kI
prApti karatI hai to vizeSa rUpa se karmakSaya karane ke lie vizeSa prakAra kI
prakriyA hotI hai  /  vaha isa prakAra hai - ( 1 ) apUrva sthitighAta (2) apUrva
rasadhAta, (3) guNa zreNi, (4) saMkramaNa, (5) apUrva sthitibaMdha |

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The general discussion of the above five is as follows:  Firstly, the soul,
through the process of *apravartanakaran*, establishes the *karmas* within the
*antarmuhurt* and creates a *punashreni*. The establishment is as follows:
Taking the time of *udayakal* as the starting point, the *karmas* are
established in a sequential series within the *antarmuhurt*, excluding the
initial *udayakal* time. The number of *karmas* established in the first time
period is the least. The number of *karmas* established in the second time
period is countless times more than those established in the first time period.
The number of *karmas* established in the third time period is countless times
more than those established in the second time period. This sequence should be
understood until the final time period of the *antarmuhurt*. Since the number of
*karmas* established in each time period is countless times more than the
previous one, this is called *gunaveni*.  At this point, the soul binds very few
*karmas*, unlike anything it has done before. Therefore, this state of binding
is called *apuurva sthitibandh*. *Sthitighāt* and *rasghāt* are also *apuurva*
at this time. In *gun-sampraman*, the *ashubh karmas* gradually transform into
*shubh karmas*.  From the eighth *gunasthan* onwards, as the soul progresses,
the *karmas* decay in greater quantities within shorter time periods.  In this
state of *utkranti*, the progressing soul becomes ready to awaken the
*parmatmashakti*. When the lifespan is short and the number of *karmas* is high,
the *kevali samudhyāt* occurs to equalize the number of *karmas* with the
duration of the lifespan. During this period of *samudhyāt*, the soul, with its
own strength, defeats the more powerful *karmas* and weakens them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ukta pAMcoM kA sAmAnya vivecana isa taraha hai sarvaprathama AtmA
aparvatanaHkaraNa ke dvArA phArmoM ko antarmuharta meM sthApita kara puNazreNi
kA nirmANa karatI hai  /  sthApanA kA ama yaha hai ki-udayakAlIna samaya ko
lekara antarmuhUtaM paryanta prathama udayA. smaka samaya ko chor3akara
antarmuharta ke zeSa jitane samaya haiM, inameM karmadalikoM ko kramabaddha
zreNI rUpa se sthApita kiyA jAtA hai  /  prathama samaya meM sthApita
karmadalika sabase kama hote haiN| dUsare samaya meM sthApita karmadalika
prathama samaya meM sthApita karmadalikoM se asaMkhyAta guNe adhika, tIsare
samaya meM dvitIya samaya se bhI asaMkhyAta guNe adhika hote haiN| yaha krama
antarmuhurta ke carama samaya taka jAnanA cAhie  /  isa prakAra pratyeka samaya
karmadalikoM kI sthApanA asaMkhyAta guNI adhika hone ke kAraNa ise guNaveNi kahA
jAtA hai  /  isa avasara para AtmA atIva svalpa sthiti ke karmoM kA bandhana
karatI hai, jaisA usane pahale kabhI nahIM kiyA hai  /  ataH isa avasthA kA
baMdha apUrva sthitibaMdha kahalAtA hai  /  sthitighAta aura rasaghAta bhI isa
samaya meM apUrva hotA hai  /  guNa-saMprAmaNa meM azubha karmoM kI zubhakarma
rUpa pariNati hotI jAtI hai  /  aSTama guNasthAna se lekara Age ke guNasthAnoM
meM jyoM-jyoM AtmA var3hatI hai, tyoM-tyoM alpa samaya meM karmadalika adhika
mAtrA meM kSaya hote jAte haiN| isa utkrAnti kI sthiti meM bar3hatI huI AtmA
janna paramAtmazakti ko jAgRta karane ke lie sannaddha ho jAtI hai, Ayu alpa
rahatA hai evaM karmadalita adhika rahate haiM taba ina adhika sthiti aura
daliko bAle karmoM ko Ayu ke samaya ke barAbara karane ke lie kevalIsamudyAta
hotA hai  /  isa samudghAta kAla meM adhika zaktizAlI mAne jAne vAle karmoM ko
AtmA apane vIrya se parAjita kara durbala banA detI hai|

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(20) Their state and number remain the same as the number of Ayukarma. When this
happens, the remaining karmas are destroyed along with the time-state of
Ayukarma, and the soul becomes completely free from karma and attains Siddha-
Buddhahood. This is the goal of the soul, and the success of the soul's effort
in achieving it. In this way, the theory of karma in Jainism has been
scientifically explained. It has solved many tangled knots, revealed various
mysteries, and awakened the enthusiasm for attaining freedom in the soul. It
inspires faith in one's own efforts. **Introduction to the Text** The present
text, called Shataka, is a karma text written by Shri Devendrasuri. It is the
fifth karma text in the series of new karma texts. The previous four karma
texts, namely (1) Karma Vipak, (2) Karmastava, (3) Bandhaswamitva, (4)
Shadshasti, have already been published in this series. An introduction to them
has been given in the preface of those karma texts. Here, in the same order, a
brief introduction to this fifth karma text is being presented. This fifth karma
text explains which of the natures mentioned in the first karma text are
Dhruvabandhini, Adhruvabandhini, Ababandhini, Dhavodaya, Avodaya, Sattaka,
Adhrubasattaka, Sarvadeshghati, Aghati, Puny, Pap, Paravartaman, and
Aparavartaman. After that, it is explained which of those natures are
Kshetravipaki, Jivavipaki, Bhavavipaki, and Pudgalavipaki. Then, the nature of
the four types of bondage, namely Prakritibandha, Sthitibandha, Rasabandha, and
Pradeshbandha, is explained. In the context of the statement of Prakritibandha,
the nature of Bhul and Uttar in Bhuyaskaar,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 20 ) unakI sthiti aura saMkhyA, pradeza utane hI raha jAte haiM jitane ki
Ayukarma ke rahate haiN| aisA hone para zeSa rahe karmoM kA Ayukarma kI
samayasthiti ke sAtha hI kSaya ho jAne se AtmA pUrNa niSkarma hokara siddha-
buddha ho jAtI hai| yahI AtmA kA lakSya hai, jise prApta karane meM AtmA ke
puruSArtha kI saphalatA hai  /  isa prakAra se jainadarzana meM karmasiddhAnta
kA vaijJAnika rUpa se nirU paNa kiyA gayA hai| jisameM aneka ulajhI huI
gutthiyoM ko sulajhAyA hai  /  vibhinna rahasyoM ko udghATita kiyA hai aura AtmA
meM svatantratA prApti kA utsAha jagatA hai  /  svapuruSArtha para vizvAsa
karane kI preraNA milatI hai  /  grantha paricaya prastuta zataka nAmaka
karmagrantha zrI devendrasUri racita navIna karmagranthoM meM pA~cavA~
karmagrantha hai  /  isake pUrva ke cAra karmagrantha kramazaH (1) karma vipAka
( 2 ) karmastava, (3) baMdhasvAmitva ( 4 ) SaDazIti nAmaka isI granthamAlA meM
prakAzita ho cuke haiM  /  una karmagranthoM kI prastAvanA meM unake bAre meM
paricaya diyA gayA hai  /  yahA~ usI krama se isa paMcama karmagrantha kA
saMkSipta paricaya prastuta kiyA jA rahA hai| isa paMcama karmagrantha meM
prathama karmagrantha meM varNita prakRtiyoM meM se kauna-kauna prakRtiyA~
dhruvabandhinI, adhruvabandhinI, ababandhinI, dhavodayA, avodaya, sattAka, adhra
ubasattAka, sarvadezaghAtI, aghAtI, puNya, pApa, parAvartamAna, aparAvartamAna
haiM, yaha batalAyA hai  /  usake bAda unhIM prakRtiyoM meM kauna-kauna
kSetravipAko, jIvavipAkI, bhavavipAkI aura pudgalavipAkI haiM, yaha batAyA gayA
hai  /  anantara karma prakRtiyoM ke prakRtibandha, sthitibandha, rasabandha
aura pradezavandha, ina cAra prakAra ke bandhoM kA svarUpa batalAyA hai  /
prakRtibandha ke kathana ke prasaMga meM bhUla tathA uttara prakRtiyoM meM
bhUyaskAra,

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(8) The text enumerates the **alpatar**, **avasthit**, and **avaktvy** bonds. It
explains the **sthitibandha** by describing the inferior and superior states of
the **mula** and **uttara** natures, the method of deriving its evidence from
the one-sensed beings, etc., and the description of the owners of the superior
and inferior **sthitibandha**. It explains the **anubhag (ras) bandha** by
describing the cause of the intense and mild **ras** in the auspicious and
inauspicious natures, the special nature of the auspicious and inauspicious
**ras**, the owners of the superior and inferior **anubhag bandha**, etc. It
describes the **pradeshabandha** by explaining the nature of the **varganas**,
their **avagahana**, the division of the **bandhakarmadalies** into **mula** and
**uttara** natures, the eleven **gunashrenis** as the causes of
**karmakshapana**, the nature of the **gunashreni** formation, the
**gunasthanas**, and the superior interval. It also explains the nature of the
**palyopam**, **sagaropama**, and **pulparavarta** distinctions, the owners of
the superior and inferior **pradeshabandha**, the **yogasthanas**, etc., and the
nature of the **loka**, etc., in brief. Finally, it concludes the text by
mentioning the **upshamani** and **kshanakoni**.  The basis for the composition
of the fifth **karmagrantha** is, as mentioned earlier, that Shri Devendrasuri
named his new **karmagranthas** based on the ancient **karmagranthas** and
composed them based on them. Evidence for this is that at the beginning of the
commentary on the fifth **karmagrantha**, Shri Devendrasuri remembers Shri
Shivshamsuri, the author of the ancient **shataka**, and at the end, he writes
that he composed this **shataka** based on the **karmaprakriti panchasangraha**,
**vrihattaka**, etc. In addition, the main basis for its composition appears to
be the **karmaprakriti** and **panchasangraha**. Because in its commentary, in
many places, the **karmaprakriti chuni**, **karmaprakriti tika**,
**panchasangraha**, etc., are mentioned as reference texts.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (8) alpatara, avasthita aura avaktavya bandhoM ko ginAyA hai| sthitibandha ko
batalAte hue mUla tathA uttara prakRtiyoM kI jaghanya aura utkRSTa sthiti,
ekendriya Adi jIvoM ke usakA pramANa nikAlane kI rIti aura utkRSTa tathA
jaghanya sthitibandha ke svAmiyoM kA varNana kiyA hai | anubhAga (rasa) bandha
ko batalAte hue zubhAzubha prakRtiyoM meM tIvra thA manda rasa par3ane ke
kAraNa, zubhAzubha rasa kA vizeSa svarUpa, utkRSTa va jaghanya anubhAga baMdha
ke svAmI Adi kA varNana kiyA hai  /  pradezabaMdha kA varNana karate hue
vargaNAoM kA svarUpa, unakI avagAhanA, baddhakarmadaliyoM kA mUla evaM uttara
prakRtiyoM meM baMTavArA, karmakSapaNa kI kAraNa gyAraha guNazreNiyA~, guNazra
eNI racanA kA svarUpa guNasthAnoM kA aura utkRSTa antarAla, prasaMgavaza
palyopama sAgaropama aura pulaparAvarta ke bhedoM kA svarUpa, utkRSTa va
jaghanya pradezabaMdha ke svAmI, yogasthAna vagairaha kA alpabahutva aura
prasaMgavaza loka vagairaha kA svarUpa batalAyA hai  /  anta meM upazamaNi aura
kSaNakoNi kA kathana karate hue grantha ko samApta kiyA hai | paMcama
karmagrantha kI racanA kA AdhAra jaisA ki pahale batalAyA jA cukA hai ki zrI
devendrasUri ne apane ina navIna karmagranthoM ke nAma prAcIna karmagranthoM ke
AdhAra para hI rakhe haiM tathA unake AdhAra parI inakI racanA huI hai  /  isakA
pramANa yaha hai ki paMcama karmagrantha kI TIkA ke prArambha meM zrI
devendrasUri ne prAcIna zataka ke praNetA zrI zivazamaMsUri kA smaraNa kiyA hai
aura anta meM likhA hai ki karmaprakRti paMcasaMgraha, vRhattaka Adi granthoM ke
AdhAra para isa zataka kI racanA kI hai| isake atirikta isakI racanA ke mukhya
AdhAra karmaprakRti aura paMcasaMgraha pratIta hote haiN| kyoMki isakI TIkA meM
aneka sthAnoM meM saMdarbha granthoM ke rUpa meM karmaprakRti cUNi, karmaprakRti
TIkA, paMcasaMgraha

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(26) And the Panchasangraha tika has been mentioned. Apart from these texts, no
other texts have been mentioned specifically. The Panchasangraha has a clear
imprint on many of the verses of the Shataka, in some places only a slight
change is found. The author has first discussed the 36th verse of the Shataka
according to the opinion of the Panchasangraha and then according to the opinion
of the Karma Prakriti. There are some differences of opinion between the Karma
Prakriti and the Panchasangraha. The opinion of the Karma Prakriti seems to be
ancient, yet in some places the author of the Karmagrantha seems to be inclined
towards the opinion of the Panchasangraha. Although he has given both opinions
equal space in his text and has presented the Karma Prakriti as evidence in
places, he has not refrained from giving the opinion of the Panchasangraha
precedence in some places. Therefore, it must be said that he has composed the
Shataka based on these two texts in particular.  In this way, some aspects of
the Karma Siddhanta have been briefly illuminated in the form of a preface,
outlining the text. A special study of the Karma literature in the light of
these ideas can provide a good understanding of the Karma Siddhanta. Although
the Karma literature appears monotonous to practitioners due to its seriousness,
it is very easily understood if its study is gradually increased. For this, it
is necessary to have an inquisitive attitude and an indomitable enthusiasm to
keep practicing. It is hoped that the readers will study the Karmagrantha
keeping the above points in mind.  Editor Shrichand Surana Devkumar Jain

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 26 ) aura paMcasaMgraha TIkA kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai| ina granthoM ke alAvA
anya granthoM kA ullekha vizeSarUpa se nahIM huA hai  /  zataka kI aneka gAthAoM
para paMcasaMgraha kI spaSTa chApa hai, kahIM-kahIM to thor3A sA hI parivartana
pAyA jAtA hai  /  zataka kI 36 vIM gAthA kA vivecana granthakAra ne pahale
paMcasaMgraha ke abhiprAyAnusAra kiyA hai aura usake bAda karma prakRti ke
abhiprAyAnusAra karma prakRti aura paMcasaMgraha meM kucha bAtoM ko lekara
matabheda haiM  /  karmaprakRti kA mata prAcIna pratIta hotA hai phira bhI
kahIM-kahIM karmagranthakAra kA jhukAva paMcasaMgraha ke mata kI ora vizeSa jAna
par3atA hai  /  yadyapi unhoMne donoM maloM ko samAna bhAva se apane grantha meM
sthAna diyA hai aura karmaprakRti ko sthAna-sthAna para pramANa rUpa meM
upasthita kiyA hai to bhI paMcasaMgraha ke mata ko uddhRta karate hue kahIM-
kahIM use agrasthAna dene se bhI ve nahIM cuke haiN| ataeva yaha kahanA hogA ki
vizeSa inhIM donoM granthoM ke AdhAra para unhoMne zataka kI racanA kI hai  /
isa prakAra se prAkkathana ke rUpa meM karmasiddhAnta sambandhI kucha eka
pahaluoM para saMkSipta prakAza DAlane ke sAtha grantha kI rUparekhA vanalAI
hai| ina vicAroM ke prakAza meM karmasAhitya kA vizeSa adhyayana kiyA jAye to
karmasiddhAnta kA acchA jJAna ho sakatA hai  /  yadyapi karmasAhitya apanI
gaMbhIratA ke kAraNa abhyAsiyoM ko nIrasa pratIta hotA hai, lekina krama-krama
se isake adhyayana ko bar3hAyA jAye to bahuta hI saralatA se samajha meM A jAtA
hai| isake liye Avazyaka hai jijJAsAvRtti aura satata abhyAsa karate rahane kA
adamya utsAha | pAThakagaNa ukta saMketa ko dhyAna meM rakhakara karmagrantha kA
adhyayana kareMge, yahI AkAMkSA hai  /  sampAdaka zrIcanda surAnA devakumAra
jaina

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Index **Verse 1** Indication of the topics of the Mangalacharan Granth
**Verse 2** Definitions of some unknown topics **Verse 3** Names of
Dhruvabandhini Prakṛtis Classification of Dhruvabandhini Prakṛtis in relation to
Mulakarma Prakṛtis **Verse 4** Reason for the Dhruvabandhitva of Dhruvabandhini
Prakṛtis **Verse 5** Names of Adhravabandhini Prakṛtis Classification of
Adhravabandhini Prakṛtis in relation to Mulakarma Prakṛtis Reason for
considering Adhravabandhini Prakṛtis Cause of the breaks in Karmabandha and
Karmodaya states **Verse 6** Nature of the four breaks: Anadi, Ananta, Adi
**Verse 7** Description of the above breaks in Dhruvabandh and Adhravabandh,
Udaya Prakṛtis Comparison with the breaks shown in the Go Karmakanda **Verse 8**
Names of Dhruvodaya Prakṛtis Classification of Dhruvodaya Prakṛtis in relation
to Mulakarma Prakṛtis Reason for considering the above Prakṛtis as Dhruvodaya
**Verse 9** Explanation

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anukramaNikA gAthA 1 maMgalAcaraNa grantha ke varNa-viSayoM kA saMketa katipaya
agya-viSayoM kI paribhASAeM gAthA 2 dhra vabandhinI prakRtiyoM ke nAma mulakarma
prakRtiyoM kI apekSA dhra 2bandhiI prakRtiyoM kA vargIkaraNa dhruvabandhinI
prakRtiyoM ke dhra vabandhitva kA kAraNa gAthA 3, 4 14-22 adha vabandhinI
prakRtiyoM ke nAma adhra babandhinI prakRtiyoM kA mUla karmoM kI apekSA
vargIkaraNa adhra vavandhinI mAnane kA kAraNa karmabandha aura karmodaya dazA
meM hone vAle bhaMgoM kA kAraNa 20 anAdi, ananta Adi cAra bhaMgoM kA svarUpa
gAthA 5 22-26 dhra va aura adhra va baMdha, udaya prakRtiyoM meM ukta bhaMgoM ke
vidhAna kA sopapattika varNana go karmakANDa meM pradarzita bhaMgoM ke sAtha
tulanA gAthA 6 26-26 dhra vodaya prakRtiyoM ke nAma dhra vodaya prakRtiyoM kA
mUla karma prakRtiyoM kI apekSA vargI 21 karaNa ukta prakRtiyoM ko dhra vodayA
mAnane kA kAraNa  /  30 )

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(31) 31 Gaya 7 26-36 The names of the *A-Uday* (non-arising) *Prakritis* and the
reason for their non-arising, and the explanation of the infinite, eternal, and
destructible *Uday* (arising) *Prakritis* in *Gatha* 8, 36-41 The names of the
*Nav* (new) and *An* (non) *Satta* (existence) *Prakritis*, the description of
the terms used to describe the *Dhruva* (fixed) and *An-Satta* (non-existence)
*Prakritis*, the reason for the fewer number of *Dhruva* and *An-Satta*
*Prakritis*, the reason for the 130 *Prakritis* being *Dhruva* (fixed) *Satta*
(existence), 40 28 The explanation of the *An-Satta* (non-existence) of the
*Hati* (elephants) in *Gatha* 10, 11, 12, 42-51 The consideration of the
existence of *Mithyatva* (falsehood) and *Samyaktva* (right belief) *Prakriti*
in the *Gunasthanas* (stages of spiritual progress), the rule of the existence
of *Mithya* (false) *Mohaniya* (delusion) and *Ananta-Anubandhi* (infinitely
connected) *Kashayas* (passions), the rule of the existence of *Aharaka* (food)
*Saptaka* (seven) and *Tirthankara* (liberated soul) *Prakriti*, the reason for
considering the existence of *Mithyatva* (falsehood) and other 15 *Prakritis* in
the *Gunasthanas* (stages of spiritual progress) in *Gatha* 13, 14, 52-62
*Sarva-Ghatini* (all-destroying), *Desha-Ghatini* (country-destroying), and
*Adha-Ghatini* (half-destroying) *Prakritis*, the reason for considering
*Prakritis* as *Ghatini* (destroying) and *Adha-Ghatini* (half-destroying),
which *Prakritis* are *Sarva-Ghatini* (all-destroying) and why? Which
*Prakritis* are *Desha-Ghatini* (country-destroying) and why? The special
explanation of *Sarva-Ghatini* (all-destroying) and *Desha-Ghatini* (country-
destroying) *Prakritis* in *Gatha* 48.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 31 ) 31 gAyA 7 26-36 adha vodaya prakRtiyoM ke nAma ukta prakRtiyoM ke ana
vodaya hone kA kAraNa banna evaM udaya prakRtiyoM meM anAdi, ananta Adi bhaMgoM
kA spaSTIkaraNa gAthA 8, 36-41 nava aura ana va sattA vAlo prakRtiyoM ke nAma
dhrava aura anaba sattA prakRtiyoM ke kathana karane vAlI saMjJAoM kA vivaraNa
dhava aura adhra va sattA prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA alpAdhika hone kA kAraNa 130
prakRtiyoM ke dhra va sattA vAlI hone kA kAraNa 40 28 hatiyoM ke anasatA kAlI
hone kA spaSTIkaraNa 41 gAthA 10, 11, 12 42-51 guNasthAnoM meM mithyAtva aura
samyaktva prakRti kI sattA kA vicAra mitha mohanIya aura anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya
kI sattA kA niyama AhAraka saptaka aura tIrthaMkara prakRti kI sattA kA niyama
mithyAtva Adi pandraha prakRtiyoM kI sattA kA guNasthAnoM meM vicAra karane kA
kAraNa gAthA 13, 14 52-62 sarvaghAtinI, dezaghAtinI aura adhAtinI prakRtiyA~
prakRtiyoM ke ghAti aura adhAti mAnane kA kAraNa sarvaghAtinI prakRtiyAM kauna-
kaunasI aura kyoM ? dezaghAtinI prakRtiyAM kauna-kaunasI haiM aura kyoM ?
sarvapAti aura dezaghAti prakRtiyoM kA vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa 48

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(32) 7-69 What are the Adhyatma Prakṛtis? Gāthā 15, 16, 17 What are the Puṇya
and Pāpa Prakṛtis and why? Gāthā 18 What are the Aparāvartanam Prakṛtis?
Explanation of the word Aparāvartanam. Reason for considering Mithyātva Prakṛti
as Aparāvartanam. Gāthā 16 Explanation of Parāvartanam. Parāvartanam Prakṛtis.
Characteristics and types of Vipāka. Description of the types of Karma Prakṛtis
like Dhṛva, Bandhī, etc. Kṣetravipāki Prakṛtis. Reason for considering Anupūrvi
Nāmakarma as Kṣetravipāki. Gāthā 20 Jīvaviṣāki and Bhavavipāki Prakṛtis. Gāthā
21 What are the Pudgala Vipāki Prakṛtis and why? Explanation of the Vipāka
related to Rati, Arati, and Mohaniya. Why is Gati Nāmakarma not Bhavavipāki?
Explanation related to Anupūrvi Nāmakarma. The mechanism of the types of Karma
Prakṛtis like Kṣetravipāki, etc. Types of Yantra Bandha and their nature. Gāthā
22 Bandha sthāna of the Mūla Prakṛti Bandha and discussion of the Bandhas like
Bhūyaska, etc. Number of Bandha sthānas in the Mūla Prakṛtis. 74-76 7 88-64

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 32 ) 7-69 adhAti prakRtiyA~ kauna-kaunasI haiM gAthA 15, 16, 17 puNya aura
pApa prakRtiyA~ kauna-sI haiM aura kyoM ? gAthA 18 aparAvartamAna prakRtiyA~
aparAvartamAna zabda kI vyAkhyA mithyAlna prakRti ko aparAvartamAna mAnane kA
kAraNa gAthA 16 parAvartamAna kI vyAkhyA parAvartamAna prakRtiyA~ vipAka kA
lakSaNa aura bheda karma prakRtiyoM ke dhra vabaMdhI Adi bhedoM kA vivaraNa
kSetrAvapAkI prakRtiyAM AnupUrvI nAmavArma ko kSetravipAkI mAnane kA kAraNa
gAthA 20 jIvaviSAkI aura bhababipAko prakRtiyA~ gAthA 21 pudgalavipAkI
prakRtiyA~ kauna-kauna aura kyoM ? rati, arati mohanIya kA vipAka sambandhI
spaSTIkaraNa gati nAmakarma bhavavipAkI kyoM nahIM AnupUrvI nAmakarma viSayaka
spaSTIkaraNa karma prakRtiyoM ke kSetravipAkI Adi bhedoM kA yantra baMdha ke
bheda aura unakA svarUpa gAthA 22 mUla prakRtibaMdha ke baMdhasthAna aura unameM
bhUyaskara Adi baMdhoM kA vivecana mUla prakRtiyoM meM baMdhasthAnoM kI saMkhyA
74-76 7 88-64

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
U . . . . . RE-106 Discussion of the number of *bhuyaska* bonds in the *moola
prakritis* .... 60 The number of *alpanara* bonds in the *moola prakritis* The
number of bonds present in the *moola prakritis* . . The reason for the absence
of *avaktāvya* bonds in the *moola prakritis* Verse 23 14-66 Characteristics of
*bhuyaska* etc. bonds Special explanation regarding *bhuyaska* etc. bonds . . 66
Verse 24 The number of *bandhasthana* etc. of *darshanavaran* karma ... ... ...
.. The number of *bandhasthana* of *mohaniya* karma *Bhuyaska* etc. bonds of
*mohaniya* karma Verse 24 14-115 Discussion of the *bandhasthana* of *namakarma*
*Bhuyaska* etc. bonds in the *bandhasthana* of *namakarma* 111 Regarding the
seventh *bhuyaska* in the *bandhasthana* of *namakarma*: Explanation The
*bandhasthana* and *bhuyaska* etc. bonds of the *uttaraprakritis* of the eight
karmas  Verse 26, 27 . 115-122 The excellent state of the *moola karmas* The
inferior state of the *moola karmas* and its explanation . 117 Verse 28 ..
122-124 The excellent state of *jnanavaran*, *darshanavaran*, *antaraya* karma
in all *uttaraprakritis* The excellent state of *asata vedaniya* and *namakarma*
in some *uttaraprakritis* - . .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 U . . . . . RE-106 mUla prakRtiyoM meM bhUyaskara baMdha kI saMkhyA kA vivecana
....60 mUla prakRtiyoM meM alpanara baMdha kI saMkhyA mUla prakRtiyoM meM
avasthita baMdha kI saMkhyA . . mUla prakRtiyoM meM avaktavya baMdha na hone kA
kAraNa gAthA 23 14-66 bhuyaskAra Adi baMdhoM ke lakSaNa bhUyaskAra mAdi baMdhoM
viSayaka vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa . . 66 gAthA 24 darzanAvaraNa karma ke baMdhasthAna
Adi kI saMkhyAM ... ... ... .. mohanIya karma ke badhasthAna kI saMkhyA mohanIya
karma ke bhUyaskAra Adi vandha gAthA 24 14-115 nAmakarma ke bandhasthAnoM kA
vivecana nAmakarma ke bandhasthAnoM meM bhUyaskAra Adi bandha 111 nAmakarma ke
bandhasthAnoM meM sAtaveM bhUyaskAra ke sambandha meM: spaSTIkaraNa ATha karmoM
kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke bandhasthAma tathA bhUya-  /  skAra Adi baMdhoM kA
koSTaka gAthA 26, 27 . 115-122 mUla karmoM kI utkRSTa sthiti mUla karmoM kI
jaghanya sthiti va usakA spaSTIkaraNa . 117 gAthA 28 .. 122-124 jJAnAvaraNa,
darzanAvaraNa, antarAya karma ko sabhI uttara : prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti
asAtA vedanIya aura nAmakarma kI kUcha uttara prakRtiyoM - /  . kI utkRSTa
sthiti

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Gatha 26 The excellent state of Kshayas is the excellent state of the four
castes.  ## Gatha 30 (34) The names of the natures with the excellent state of
ten and fifteen Koḍa Koḍī Sagaropama. Names of the natures Proof of the
uninterrupted time in the excellent state bond.  ## Gatha 33 124 - 125 125 125
126-127 Gatha 31, 32 The excellent state of Baura Koḍa Sodhi Sagarod. 126
127-132 Thoughts related to the uninterrupted time of Ayukarma. 128 126 132-136
The excellent and inferior state of Aharakdvik and Tirthankara names and
uninterrupted time. Doubt-resolution regarding the state of Tirthankara name
karma. The excellent state of human and animal lifespan.  ## Gatha 34 Proof of
the excellent state bond of Ayukarma of Ekendriya, Vikalendriya and Asanjiva.
137-142 137 136 143-144 143 144-146 143  ## Gatha 35 The inferior state of
fifteen Ghati and three Aghati natures. Gatha 36 132 133 136 The inferior state
of Sanjwalan Trik and Purusha Veda. The general rule for finding the inferior
state of the remaining Uttar Natures. 146 146 - 154 Gatha 37, 38 The excellent
and inferior state of Uttar Natures of Ekendriya beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gApA 26 kaSAyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti varNacatuSka kI utkRSTa sthiti gApA 30 ( 34 )
dasa aura pandraha kor3A kor3I sAgaropama kI utkRSTa sthiti vAlI prakRtiyoM ke
nAma prakRtiyoM ke nAma utkRSTa sthitibandha meM abAdhAkAla kA pramANa gAyA 33
124 - 125 125 125 126-127 gAyA 31, 32 baurA kor3A sodhI sAgaroda kI utkRSTa
spiti vAlI 126 127-132 Ayukarma ke abAdhAkAla sambandhI vicAra 128 126 132-136
AhArakadvika aura tIrthakara nAma kI utkRSTa va jaghanya sthiti aura avAdhAkAla
torthaMkara nAmakarma kA sthiti sambandhI zaMkA-samAdhAna manuSya aura tiryanca
Ayu kI utkRSTa sthiti gAmA 34 ekendriya, vikalendriya aura asaMjJI jIva ke
Ayukarma ke utkRSTa sthitibandha kA pramANa 137-142 137 136 143-144 143 144-146
143 gAmA 35 pandraha ghAti aura tIna aghAti prakRtiyoM kI jaghanyasthiti gAyA 36
132 133 136 saMjvalanatrika va puruSaveda ko jaghanya sthiti zeSa uttara
prakRtiyoM kI jaghanya sthiti nikAlane ke liye sAmAnya niyama 146 146 - 154
gAthA 37, 38 ekendriya jIva ke uttara prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa aura jaghanya

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(35) Proof of *Sthitibandha* Proof of the superior and inferior *Sthitibandha*
of the two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed and non-cognizant five-sensed
living beings, the inferior state of the *Ayukarma* of the descending natures
Verse 36 Verse 40, Proof of *Jghantha Abhada* Difference of opinion regarding
the inferior state of *Tirthankara* and *Aharakadvaka* *namakarma* 41 Discussion
of the proof of *Kshullakbhava* 153 154 155 - 156 155 Verse 42 *Tirthankara*,
*Aharakadvaka* and *Devayu* - the owners of the superior *Sthitibandha* and the
related doubts and their solutions Owners of the superior *Sthitibandha* of the
remaining natures 156 157-160 158 160-168 Verse 43, 44, 45 Which natures are the
owners of the superior *Sthitibandha* of the *Mithyadristi* living beings of the
four realms? Statement of the owners of the inferior *Sthitibandha* Verse 48
Consideration of *Sthitibandha* in relation to *Gunasthanas* 150 161 166 168-176
Verse 46 Mistake Consideration of the *Sadi* etc. breaks in the superior etc.
differences of *Sthitibandha* of the *Karma* natures 16 174 176-150 Verse 47
Consideration of the *Sadi* etc. breaks in the superior etc. differences of
*Sthitibandha* of the *Uttara Karma* natures 177 180-183 181 164 - 187 184

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 35 ) sthitibandha kA pramANa dvIndriya, zrIndriya, caturindriya aura asaMjJI
paMcendriya jIva ke utkRSTa tathA jaghanya sthitibandha kA pramANa Ayukarma kI
utara prakRtiyoM kI jaghanya sthiti gAthA 36 gAthA 40, jaghantha abAdhA kA
pramANa tIrthaMkara aura AhArakAdveka nAmakarma kI jaghanya sthiti ke sambandha
meM matAntara 41 kSullakabhava ke pramANa kA vivecana 153 154 155 - 156 155
gAthA 42 tIrthaMkara AhArakadvika aura devAyu ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke svAmI
va tatsambandhI zaMkA-samAdhAna zeSa prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke svAmI
156 157-160 158 160-168 gAthA 43, 44, 45 cAroM gati ke mithyAdRSTi jIva kina-
kina prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke svAmI haiM ? jaghanya sthitibaMdha ke
svAmiyoM kA kathana gAthA 48 guNasthAnoM kI apekSA sthitibaMdha kA vicAra 150
161 166 168-176 gAthA 46 bhUla karma prakRtiyoM ke sthitibaMdha ke utkRSTa Adi
bhedoM meM sAdi vagairaha bhaMgoM kA vicAra 16 174 176-150 gAthA 47 uttara karma
prakRtiyoM ke sthitibaMdha ke utkRSTa Adi bhedoM meM sAdi vagairaha bhaMgoM kA
vicAra 177 180-183 181 164 - 187 184

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Gatha 46. 50, 51 **Consideration of the relative scarcity of *aspabahutva*
(non-plurality) in *sthiTibandha* (state-bond) in relation to *ekendriyadi*
(one-sense etc.) beings**  ## Gatha 52 **(36)** **Explanation of *sthiTibandha*
(state-bond) and *anubhaga bandha* (experience-bond) as the cause of the
auspiciousness and inauspiciousness of *sthiTibandha***  ## Gatha 53, 54
**Characteristics of *yoga* (union) and *sthiTisthana* (state-place)**  ## 187 -
165 ## 186 ## 166-166 ## 166 ## 167 ## 166 - 206 ## 200 **Consideration of the
relative scarcity of *yoga* (union) and *sthiTisthana* (state-place) in relation
to beings**  ## Proof **Proof of *adhyavasaya sthana* (determination-place) due
to *sthiTibandha* (state-bond)**  ## 202 ## 206-200  ## Gatha 55 **The increase
in *yoga* (union) that occurs at every moment for *aparyapta* (inadequate)
beings**  ## 206 ## 207 ## 208 - 213  ## Gatha 56, 57 **Description of the
*karma* (karmic) natures and their non-binding periods for the forty-one *karma*
natures of a *panchendriya* (five-sense) being, which do not bind for the
maximum amount of time**  ## Gatha 58 **Explanation of the highest non-binding
period of the aforementioned forty-one *karma* natures**  ## Gatha 59, 60, 61,
62 **Description of the continuous binding period of the seventy-three *karma*
natures that are *adha bandhini* (partially binding)**  ## 206 ## 214 - 215 ##
214 ## 216-224 ## 218 ## 224-233  ## Gatha 63, 64 **The cause of *sivra* (swift)
and *manda* (slow) *anubhaga bandha* (experience-bond) in auspicious and
inauspicious *karma* natures**  ## 224

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gAthA 46. 50, 51 ekendriyAdi jIvoM kI apekSA sthitibaMdha meM aspabahutva kA
vicAra gAthA 52 ( 36 ) sthitibaMdha ke zubhatva aura azubhatva kA kAraNa
sthitibaMdha aura anubhAgabaMdha sambandhI spaSTIkaraNa gAthA 53, 54 yoga aura
sthitisthAna kA lakSaNa 187 - 165 186 166-166 166 167 166 - 206 200 jIvoM kI
apekSA yoga ke alpabahutva aura sthitisthAna kA vicAra pramANa sthitibaMdha ke
kAraNa adhyavasAyasthAnoM kA pramANa 202 206-200 gAMvA 55. aparyApta jIvoM ke
pratisamaya hone vAlI yogavRddhi kA 206 207 208 - 213 gAthA 56, 57 paMcendriya
jIva ke jina ikatAlIsa karma prakRtiyoM kA baMdha adhika se adhika jitane kAla
taka nahIM hotA, una prakRtiyoM aura unake abandha kAla kA nirUpaNa mAthA 58
ukta ikatAlIsa prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa abandhakAla kA spaSTIkaraNa gAyA 56, 60,
61, 62 adha baMdhinI tihattara prakRtiyoM ke nirantarabaMdha kAla kA nirUpaNa
206 214 - 215. 214 216-224 218 224-233 gAthA 63, 64 zubha aura azubha prakRtiyoM
meM sIvra tathA manda anubhAga baMdha kA kAraNa 224

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Three and slow **Anum**. Five **Ke** (**Char** **Vida** the reason for their
being) 127 **Gatha** 65 233-236 Special form of auspicious and inauspicious
**Ras** 234 **Gatha** 66, 67, 68 236-243 Discussion of the masters of the
excellent **Anubhagbandh** of all **Karma** **Prakriti** 237 **Gatha** 66, 70,
71, 72, 73 243-258 Description of the masters of the inferior **Anubhagbandh**
of all **Karma** **Prakriti** 244 **Gatha** 74 258-265 Consideration of **Sadi**
etc. **Bhang** in the excellent, non-excellent, etc. options of **Anubhagbandh**
of the **Mula** and **Uttara** **Prakriti** 256 **Gatha** 75, 76, 77 266-278
Form of **Pradeshabandh**, characteristics of **Vargana** 267 Form of acceptable
and unacceptable **Vargana** 268 Evidence of **Vargana**'s **Avagahana**
**Gatha** 78, 6 278-285 Form of **Karmadalika** that can be accepted by the
**Jiva** 276 Form of **Paramanu** 276 **Gurulghu** and **Agurulghu** 281 Form of
**Rasan** Process of the **Jiva** accepting **Karmadalika** 284 **Gatha** 76, 80
25-286 **Mula** **Karma** **Prakriti** of the **Karmadalika** accepted by the
**Jiva** 277 282

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tIna tathA manda anumH| paMca ke ( caraH vidAH unake hone kA kAraNa 127 gAthA
65 233-236 zubha aura azubha rasa kA vizeSa svarUpa 234 gAthA 66, 67, 68 236-243
saba karma prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa anubhAgabaMdha ke svAmiyoM kA vivecana 237
gAthA 66, 70,71, 72, 73 243-258 saba karma prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya anubhAgabaMdha
ke svAmiyoM kA nirUpaNa 244 gAthA 74 258-265 mUla aura uttara prakRtiyoM ke
anubhAga baMdha ke utkRSTa, anutkRSTa Adi vikalpoM meM sAdi vagairaha bhaMgoM kA
vicAra 256 gAthA 75,76, 77 266-278 pradezabaMdha kA svarUpa vargaNA kA lakSaNa
267 grahaNayogya aura agrahaNayogya vargaNAoM kA svarUpa 268 vargaNAoM kI
avagAhanA kA pramANa gAthA 78, 6 278-285 jIva ke grahaNa karane yogya
karmadalikoM kA svarUpa 276 paramANu kA svarUpa 276 gurulaghu aura agurulaghu
281 rasANa kA svarUpa jIva kI karmadalikoM ko grahaNa karane kI prakriyA 284
gAthA 76, 80 25-286 jIva dvArA grahIta karmadalikoM kA mUla karmaprakRtiyoM meM
277 282

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Order of Divisions **Verse 81** The answer to the question of the
**Karmadalikas** divided into **Mula Karmas** and **Uttara Karmas** **Verse 82**
The number and description of the **Gunashrenis** **Verse 83** {38} The nature
of the **Gunashreni** The evidence of **Nirjara** in each **Gunashreni** **Verse
84** Description of the inferior and superior intervals of the **Gunasthanas**
**Verse 85** Discussion of the differences between **Palyopam** and
**Sagaropama** Explanation of the differences in **Anguli** **Verse 86, 87, 88**
**Verse 89** Differences in **Pudgala Paravarta** **Badar** and **Sukshma**
substances, **Kshetra**, **Kala** and **Bhaava** **Pudgala** The nature of
**Paravartas** The owners of the superior and inferior **Pradeshabanda** **Verse
90, 91, 92** Description of the owners of the superior **Pradeshabanda** in
relation to **Mula** and **Uttara Karmas** **Verse 93** Discussion of the owners
of the inferior **Pradeshabanda** in relation to **Mula** and **Uttara Karmas**
286 286 - 266 256 267-301 267 301-306 302 305 386-313 306 313-323 314 321
123-333 324 327 334-336 335 336-344 337 344-348 *

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vibhAga kA krama gAthA 81 mUla karmoM meM vibhakta karmadalikoM kA uttara
prakRtiyoM vibhAga kA krama gAthA 82 guNazreNiyoM kI saMkhyA aura unakA varNana
gAthA 83 ( 38 } guNazreNi kA svarUpa pratyeka guNazreNi meM hone vAlI nirjarA kA
pramANa grAthaNa 84 guNasthAnoM ke jaghanya aura utkRSTa antarAla kA varNana
gAthA 65 palyopama aura sAgaropama ke bhedoM kA vivecana aMgula ke bhedoM kI
vyAkhyA gAthA 86 87 88 gAthA 56 pudgala parAvarta ke bheda bAdara aura sUkSma
dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva pudgala parAvartoM kA svarUpa utkRSTa aura
jaghanya pradezabaMdha ke svAmI gAyA 60, 61, 62 mUla aura uttara prakRtiyoM kI
apekSA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha ke svAmiyoM kA nirUpaNa gAyA 63 mUla aura uttara
prakRtiyoM kI apekSA jaghanya pradezabaMdha ke svAmiyoM kA vivecana 286 286 -
266 256 267-301 267 301-306 302 305 386-313 306 313-323 314 321 123-333 324 327
334-336 335 336-344 337 344-348 *

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
368 Gatha 64 348-354  Bhang of Pradeshbandh, Sadi, etc. 346 Gatha 65, 66 354-362
Yogasthan, Prakruti, Sthitibandh, Sthitibandhadhyavsayasthan, Anubhag-
Dhandhadhyay Chal, Kaha and Ramchhed's mutual Alpabahutva 355 Prakruti, Pradesh,
Sthiti and Anubhag Bandh's cause Gatha 67 362-370 Lok's Swaroop 362 Lok's Aadhar
and Aakar 364 Adholoka's Samikaran, Urdhvaloka's Samikaran, Shreni and Pratar's
Swaroop 366 Matha 18 371-386 Upshamani's Varnan 371 Anantanu bandhi Kashay's
Upsham's Vidhi 372 Darshanadhik's Upsham 375 Charitram ohniya's Upsham 376
Upshamni se Pasit hone par Gunasthanon mein aane ka Kram, Upshamni se Girkar
Kshapakni par Chadne Vishayak Matbhinnta 382 Upsham and Kshayopshama mein Antar
385 Gatha 69, 100 387-367 Kshapakni's Swaroop, Anantanu bandhi Chatushk and
Darshan Trik's Kshapan Kram, Charitram ohniya's Kshapan Kram 361 382 386 386

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 368 gAthA 64 348-354 pradezabaMdha ke sAdi vagairaha bhaMga 346 gAthA 65, 66
354-362 yogasthAna, prakRti, sthitibaMdha, sthitibandhAdhyavasAyasthAna,
anubhAga-dhaMdhAdhyAya cAla, kahA aura ramaccheda kA paraspara meM alpabahutva
355 prakRti, pradeza, sthiti aura anubhAga baMdha ke kAraNa gAthA 67 362-370
loka kA svarUpa 362 loka kA AdhAra va AkAra 364 adholoka kA samIkaraNa
Urdhvaloka kA samIkaraNa zreNi aura pratara kA svarUpa 366 mAthA 18 371-386
upazamaNi kA varNana 371 anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya ke upazama kI vidhi rU72
darzanadhika kA upazama 375 cAritramohanIya kA upazama 376 upaza maNi se pasita
hone para guNasthAnoM meM Ane kA krama upazamaNi se girakara kSapakaNi para
car3hane viSayaka matabhinnatA 382 upazama aura kSayopazama meM antara 385 gAthA
69, 100 387-367 kSapakaNi kA svarUpa anantAnubaMdhI catuSka aura darzanatrika kA
kSapaNakrama cAritramohanIya kA kSapaNakrama 361 382 386 386

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(40) The Remaining Lethal Karmas' Exhaustion Order Conclusion of the Work
Treatise on the Yogic and Ayogic Kevali Places Appendix 1. The Original Verses
of the Fifth Karma Treatise 2. The Reason for the Difference in the Number of
Bandha, Udaya, and Satya Natures of Karmas 3. Bandha, etc., in the
Uttaraprakritis of Mohaniya Karma 4. The Lowest Position Bandha of Karma Natures
5. Clarification of the Unhindered Time of Ayukarma 6. Discussion of the
Yogasthana 7. The Method of Dividing the Taken Karma Skandhas into Karma Natures
8. Discussion of the Distribution and Inferiority of Pudgal Dravya in the
Uttaraprakritis 9. Statement of the Anuyoagdwar Sutra, etc., Regarding the
Balayas Taken to Fill the Palitha 10. Description of the Patyopama in Digambar
Literature 11. Description of Pudgal Paravartos in Digambar Treatises 12.
Description of the Masters of the Excellent and Lowest Pradesh Bandha as Found
in the Gommatasar Karmakanda 13. Clarification of the Creation of the Gunashreni
14. Clarification of the Provisions of the Kshapakshrini 15. Alphabetical Index
of the Verses of the Fifth Karma Treatise 0 22 360 367 366 401 406 411 417 4 42
425 428 438 436 449 444 446 451 455

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 40 ) zeSa ghAtika karmoM kA kSapaNakrama sayogi aura ayogikevalI sthAnoM meM
hone vAle kArya grantha kA upasaMhAra pariziSTa 1. paMcama karmagrantha kI
mUlagAthAyeM 2. karmoM kI bandha, udaya, sattA prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA meM
bhinnatA kA kAraNa 3. mohanIya karma kI uttara prakRtiyoM meM bhUyaskAra Adi
baMdha 4. karma prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya sthitibandha 5. Ayukarma ke abAdhAkAla kA
spaSTIkaraNa 6. yogasthAnoM kA vivecana 7. grahaNa kiye gaye, karmaskandhoM ko
karma prakRtiyoM meM vibhAjita karane kI rIti 5. uttara prakRtiyoM meM
pudgaladravya ke vitaraNa tathA hInAdhikatA kA vivecana 6. paltha ko bharane meM
liye jAne vAle bAlAyoM ke bAre meM anuyogadvAra sUtra Adi kA kathana 10.
digambara sAhitya meM patyopama kA varNana 11. digambara granthoM meM pudgala
parAvartoM kA varNana 12. utkRSTa aura jaghanya pradezabandha ke svAmiyoM kA
gommaTasAra karmakAMDa meM Agata varNana 13. guNazreNi kI racanA kA spaSTIkaraNa
14. kSapakazra Ni ke vidhAna kA spaSTIkaraNa 15. paMcama karmagrantha kI gAthAoM
kI akArAdyanu kramaNikA 0 22 360 367 366 401 406 411 417 4 42 425 428 438 436
449 444 446 451 45.5

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Salutations to Shri Parayan. This is the Fifth Shataka of the Karma Granth
composed by Shrimad Devendrasuri.**  **With salutations to the Ishta Deva, the
author points out the auspicious subject of the text.**  **Namiy Jinam
Avabandhokyasattadhaipunipariyasa. Seyar Barhashibhaga Bucch Bandhavih Sami Ya
||1||**  **Word Meaning:** Namiy - Salutations to, Jinam - Jinendra Deva,
Avabandhokyasattadhaipunipariyasa - Dhruvabandhi, Dhruv Udayi, Dhruv Satya,
Charghati (Sarvaghati, Deshghati), Pun - Puny Prakriti, Paripatta -
Paravartaman, Seyar - With the opposite, Pachha - Four types, Nivaagavipaak -
Showing the Vipaak, Duyi - I will tell, Bandhavih - Bandh's essence, Sami -
Swami (Master of Bandh), Upagam Shreni, Kshapak Shreni.  **Gathartha:** With
salutations to the Jineshwara Bhagwan, I will describe Dhruvabandhi, Dhruv
Udayi, Dhruv Satya, Ghati, Puny and Paravartaman, along with their opposite
natures, and the four types of natures that show Vipaak, Bandh Bhed, their Swami
and Upasham Shreni, Kshapak Shreni.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI pArAya namaH zrImad devendrasUri viracita zataka paMcama karmagrantha
iSTadeva ke namaskAra pUrvaka granthakAra grantha ke dhaNye viSaya kA nirdeza
karate haiM namiya jiNaM avbNdhokysttaadhaaipunpriysaa| seyara barahaSibAgA
buccha bandhaviha sAmI y||1|| zabdArtha-mamiya-namaskAra karake, jiNaM-jinendra
deva ko, ghuvabaMdha-pra.vabaMdhI, udaya-ghra va udhyo, sattA- puSa sattA,
cAraghAti (sarvaghAtI, dezaghAtI), puna-puNya prakRti, paripattA-parAvartamAna,
seyara- pratipakSa sahita, pacaha-cAra prakAra se, nivAgAvipAka nikhAne vAlI,
duI-kahU~gA, baMdhaviha-baMdha ke meva, sAmI- svAmI (maMdha ke svAmI) paupagama
zreNi, kSapaka zreNi  /  gAthArSa-jinezvara bhagavAna kA namaskAra karake
dhruvabandhI, dhruva udayI, dhruva sattA, ghAtI, puNya aura parAvartamAna tathA
inakI pratipakSI prakRtiyoM sahita tathA cAra prakAra se vipAka dikhAne vAlI
prakRtiyoM, baMdhabheda, unake svAmI aura upazama zreNi, kSapaka zroNi kA
varNana karUgA  /

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Matak  The **Vishesharya-Gatha** has three parts: 1. Salutation, 2.
Indication of the topics discussed in the text, and 3. Promise to discuss them.
In other words, the author has indicated the scope of the text by offering a
salutation and mentioning the topics to be discussed in this treatise on karma.
The phrase "**Namiy Jirna**" is a salutation to **Jineshwara Deva**. This is
because Jineshwara Deva has conquered all karmas, whose bondage, manifestation,
and existence remain in worldly beings until they attain liberation. This phrase
also clarifies that regardless of the nature of karma, or the form of their
fruition, their power is inferior to the power of the soul, the **Adhyatma**.
The **Deva Vikasounmuni** soul inevitably conquers them. These karmas exert
their influence only as long as the soul remains ignorant of its own power and
is not progressing towards the goal of self-realization. However, as soon as the
inner awakening, inspiration, enthusiasm, and self-perception arise, even the
powerful karmas become subservient to the stream of their complete annihilation.
**Jineshwara Deva**, the conqueror of karma, conquers karmas that have attained
the state of bondage, manifestation, and existence. However, due to the
diversity of the results experienced by the soul, the karmas take on various
forms like **Dhruva**, **Adhruva**, **Ghati**, **Aghati**, etc., which are
called their states. Among these states, the phrase
"**Dhuvabandhodayasattadhaipunnpariyatta**" mentions six states: **Dhruva
Bandha**, **Dhruva Udaya**, **Dhruva Satya**, **Ghati**, **Punnya**, and
**Paravartaman**. This is to understand the six opposing states by using the
principle of **Seir Seitar**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mataka vizeSArya-gAthA ke tIna bhAga haiM-1. namaskArAtmaka pada, 2. grantha ke
varNya viSayoM kA saMketa aura 3. unake kathana karane kI pratijJA  /  yAnI
gAthA meM granthakAra ne maMgalAcaraNa ke sAtha isa karmagrantha meM nirUpaNa
kiye jAne vAle viSayoM ke nAma nirdeza pUrvaka apane grantha ko sImA kA saMketa
kiyA hai| _ 'namiya jirNa' pada se jinezvara deva ko namaskAra kiyA hai  /
isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki jinezvara deva ne una samasta karmoM para vijaya prApta
kara lI hai jinakA baMdha, udaya aura sattA mukti prApta karane ke pUrva taka
saMsArI jIvoM meM vidyamAna rahatI hai| sAtha hI isa pada se yaha bhI spaSTa ho
jAtA hai ki karma prakRtiyA~ cAhe kaisI bhI sthiti vAlI hoM, cAhe unake
vipAkodaya kA kaisA bhI rUpa ho lekina unakI zakti jIva kI zakti, adhyAdamA ke
samakSa hIna hai, aura de vikAsonmunI AtmA ke dvArA avazya hI vijita hotI haiN|
ye prakRtiyA~ tabhI taka apane prabhAva ko pradarzita karatI haiM jaba taka jIva
Atmopalabdhi ke lakSya kI ora agrasara nahIM hotA hai aura apanI zakti se ajJAta
rahatA hai| lekina jaise hI antara meM unmeSa, sphUrti, utsAha aura svadarzana
kI vRtti jAgrata hotI hai vaise hI balavAna mAne jAne vAle karma niHzeSa hone kI
dhArA ke anugAmI bana jAte haiN| karmavijetA jinezvara deva baMdha, udaya aura
sattA sthiti ko prApta hue karmoM ko jItate haiM  /  lekina jIva ke pariNAmoM kI
vividhatA se karma prakRtiyoM ke baMdha Adi ke dhruva, adhruva, ghAtI, aghAtI
Adi aneka rUpa ho jAte haiM , jo unakI avasthAyeM kahalAtI haiM  /  ina hone
vAlI avasthAoM meM se 'dhuvabaMdhodayasattAdhAipunnapariyattA' pada dvArA
dhruvabaMdha, dhruva udaya, dhruva sattA, ghAti, puNya, parAvartamAna ina chaha
kA nAmollekha karake pratipakSI chaha nAmoM ko samajhane ke liye seyara setara'

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  The term "Chajah Vivaaga" indicates that karmas have
four types of vipaka states. This means that there are sixteen states of karma-
natures, which Jinendra Dev conquered and attained the state of Jin. These are:
(1) Dhruva Bandhini, (2) Adhruva Bandhini, (3) Dhruvodaya, (4) Adhruvodaya, (5)
Dhruva Sattak, (6) Adhruva Sattak, (7) Ghatini, (8) Adhatini, (9) Puny, (10)
Pap, (11) Paravartmana, (12) Aparavartmana, (13) Kshetra Vipaki, (14) Jeeva
Vidhaka, (15) Bhav Vipaki, (16) Pudgal Vipaki.  For these to have the state of
udya and satta, it is necessary for them to be bound with the jeeva. As long as
the jeeva is in the world, the connection of yoga and kshaya parinati remains,
and thus karma-bandh occurs. Through yoga, karma-varganas are absorbed, and the
nature of covering the atma-gunas is instilled in those karma-pudgalas. Through
kshaya, the time limit for the karma to remain connected with the atma and the
three aspects of phala-udaya, such as manda, are created. Thus, there are four
types of karma-bandh: (1) Prakriti Bandh, (2) Sthiti Bandh, (3) Anubhag Bandh,
(4) Pradesh Bandh.  The jeeva is the owner of these four types of vaidha bhedas.
The jeeva creates the four aspects of prakriti, sthiti, etc., in the karma-
varganas through its parinamas. Therefore, just as there are four types of
karma-bandh, such as prakriti, sthiti bandh, etc., there are also owners of
these, i.e., which jeeva is the owner of which prakriti, sthiti, anubhag, and
pradesh bandh.  Thus, through the verses from "Namiy Jinam" to "Sami," it is
clearly explained with reverence to the karma-vijeta Jinendra Dev.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha pada diyA hai tathA 'cajaha vivAgA' pada se karmoM ko cAra
prakAra se hone vAlI vipAka avasthAoM kA saMketa kiyA hai  /  arthAt karma
prakRtiyoM kI nimnalikhita solaha avasthAyeM hotI haiM, jinheM jinezvara deva ne
jIta kara jina pada kI prApti kI hai (1) dhruva baMdhinI, (2) adhruva bandhinI,
(3) dhruvodayA, (4) adhru. vodayA, (5) dhruva sattAka, (6) adhruva sattAka, (7)
ghAtinI, (8) adhAtinI, (6) puNya, (10) pApa, (11) parAvartamAnA, (12)
aparAvartamAnA, (13) kSetra vipAkI, (14) jIva vidhAkA, (15) bhava vipAkI, (16)
pudgala vipaakii| koM kI udaya aura sattA rUpa avasthA hone ke liye yaha
Avazyaka hai ki unakA jIva ke sAtha baMdha ho  /  jaba taka jIva saMsAra meM
sthita hai, yoga va kaSAya pariNati kA saMbandha jur3A huA hai taba taka karma
kA baMdha hotA hai | yoga ke dvArA karma vargaNAoM kA grahaNa hotA aura
AtmaguNoM ke AcchAdana karane kA una karma pudgaloM meM svabhAva par3atA hai
tathA kaSAya ke dvArA AtmA ke sAtha karmoM ke saMbaddha rahane kI samaya maryAdA
evaM unameM phalodaya ke tIna, maMda Adi rUpa aMgoM kA nirmANa hotA hai  /  isa
prakAra se karmabaMdha ke cAra rUpa hote haiM-(1) prakRti baMdha (2) sthiti
baMdha, (3) anubhAga bandha, (4) pradeza bandha  /  ukta cAra prakAra ke vaidha
bhedoM kA svAmI jIva hai  /  jIva apane pariNAmoM dvArA karma vargaNAoM meM
prakRti, sthiti Adi cAra aMzoM kA nirmANa karatA hai| ataeva prakRti, sthiti
baMdha Adi cAra rUpa jaise karmabaMSa ke haiM vaise hI unake svAmiyoM ke bhI ho
jAte haiM ki kauna jIva kisa prakRti, sthiti, anubhAga aura pradeza bandha kA
svAmI hai| isa prakAra se 'namiya jiNaM' se lekara 'sAmI' taka ke gAyAMza dvArA
karmavijetA jinezvara deva ke namaskAra pUrvaka yaha spaSTa kara diyA hai ki

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Century  As long as a living being is active and wandering in the world, it
is bound by karmas in states like Dhruva Bandha, Adhruva Bandha, etc. It is
called the owner of its mental, verbal, and physical tendencies and its passions
- meaning it remains entitled to acquire karma.  But when it is prepared to
eliminate karmas completely, it adopts one of two methods: either to suppress
the arising of the essence of karma-mala or to completely destroy the essence of
karma. Suppressing karma is called the Upshama श्रेणि (category), and destroying
it is called the Kshapaka श्रेणि (category). The word 'Ya' in the verse
indicates both these categories. Without ascending to the Upshama or Kshapaka
श्रेणि, a living being cannot observe its true nature. It is another matter that
a living being residing in the Upshama श्रेणि, upon the arising of karmas
inherent in its being, becomes corrupted by the path of self-realization and
returns to its previous state. But one who is in the Kshapaka श्रेणि, by
destroying all obstacles, attains liberation from the infinite world through
self-realization.  Thus, the verse indicates the karma-free soul, the path of
karma-liberation, and the states of karma-binding, arising, etc., that occur in
a worldly being. As long as a living being is in the world, it will be
associated with many states of karma-natures. The only cause for liberation from
these karmas is the self-transformation of the living being in the form of
Upshama or Kshaya, and after karma-liberation, the soul attains the status of
the Supreme Soul. Therefore, the topics discussed in the text are indicated in
the verse as follows:  (1) Dhruva Bandhini, (2) Adhruva Bandhini, (3) Dhruva
Udaya, (4) Adhruva...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka jaba taka jIva sakarmA hai, saMsAra meM paribhramaNa kara rahA hai taba
taka vaha dhruva bandha, aghuva baMdha Adi avasthA vAle karmoM se sahita hai|
apane mana, vacana, kAya pravRtti evaM kASAyika pariNAmoM se unakA svAmI
kahalAtA hai-yAnI karmagrahaNa karane kA adhikArI banA rahatA hai  /  lekina
jaba karmoM ko niHzeSa karane liye sannaddha hotA hai taba vaha karma mala kI
sattA ke udreka ko zAmita karane yA karmoM kI sattA ko niHzeSatayA kSaya karane
rUpa donoM upAyoM meM se kisI eka ko apanAtA hai  /  karmoM kA upazama karanA
upazama zreNi aura kSaya karanA  /  kSapaka zreNi kahalAtI hai  /  ina donoM
zreNiyoM kA saMketa gAthA meM 'ya' zabda se kiyA hai| upazama yA kSapaka zreNi
para ArohaNa kiye binA jIva apane AtmasvarUpa kA avalokana nahIM kara pAtA hai|
yaha bAta dUsarI hai ki upazama aMNi meM avasthita jIva sattAgata karmoM ke
udvelita hone para Atmadarzana ke mArga se bhraSTa hokara apanI pUrva dazA ko
prApta ho jAtA hai kintu kSapaka zreNi vAlA sabhI prakAra kI vighnabAdhAoM kA
kSaya karake Atmopalabdhi dvArA ananta saMsAra se mukta ho jAtA hai| isa prakAra
se gAthA meM karmamukta AtmA, karmamukti ke upAya-mArga  /  aura saMsArI jIva ke
hone vAlI karmoM kI baMdha, udaya Adi avasthAoM  /  kA saMketa kiyA gayA hai ki
jaba taka jIva saMsAra meM hai taba taka karma prakRtiyoM kI aneka avasthAoM se
saMyukta rhegaa| ina karmoM se mukti ke liye jIva ke upazama yA kSaya rUpa
AtmapariNAma hI kAraNa haiM aura karmamukti ke bAda AtmA paramAtmA pada prApta
kara letI hai  /  isIliye ina avasthAoM kA saMketa karane ke liye gAthA meM
grantha ke varNya viSaya nimna prakAra haiM (1) dhruvabaMdhinI, (2)
abruvabandhinI, (3) dhruvodayA, (4) adhru

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Five Karma Granthas:  (5) Dhruva Sattak, (6) Adhruva Sattak, (7) Dhatini,
(8) Aghatini, (9) Puny, (10) Pap, (11) Paravartamana, (12) Aparavartamana, (13)
Kshetravipaki, (14) Jeevavipaki, (15) Bhavavipaki, (16) Pudgalavipaki, (17)
Prakrutibandh, (18) Sthitibandh, (19) Anubhagbandh, (20) Pradeshbandh, (21)
Prakrutibandh Swami, (22) Sthitibandh Swami, (23) Anubhagbandh Swami, (24)
Pradeshbandh Swami, (25) Upsham Shreni, (26) Kshapak Shreni.  The definitions of
the six topics mentioned in the gatha are as follows:  (1) **Dhruva Bandhini
Prakruti:** The karma prakruti that is bound inevitably due to its cause is
called Dhruva Bandhini Prakruti. Such a prakruti binds every being at all times
until its binding is severed.  (2) **Adhruva Bandhini Prakruti:** The prakruti
that binds and also does not bind due to the causes of its binding is called
Adhruva Bandhini Prakruti. Such a prakruti binds and also does not bind until
its binding is severed.  **A similar instruction from the Karma Grantha is found
in the Panchamangrah as follows:**  "Dhruvodaya sambandhayi pariyattamana
asubhao. Pachvi savishkha pagai va vivaago chaha." (3.14)  This gatha indicates
the five opposites of Dhruva Bandhi, Dhruvodaya, Sarvaghati, Paravartamana, and
Mor Ashum, as well as the four types of vipaks.  In total, there are fourteen
names.  **From the Panchasangrah (3.35):**  "Niyaheusanbhavevi hu bhayanikho
jaan hoi paythiinam. Bacho ta adhuwao dhoosha abhanibandhaao."  This indicates
that the Adhruva Bandhini Prakruti is difficult to understand.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha vodayA (5) dhruva sattAka, (6) adhruva sattAka, (7)
dhAtinI, (8) aghAtinI, (E) puNya, (10) pApa,(11) parAvartamAnA, (12)
aparAvartamAnA (13) kSetravipAkI, (14) jIvavipAkI, (15) bhavavipAkI, (16)
pudgalavipAkI', (17) prakRtibaMdha (18) sthitibandha, (1) anubhAgabaMdha, (20)
pradezabaMdha, (21) prakRtibaMdha svAmI, (22) sthitibandha svAmI, (23)
anubhAgabaMdha svAmI, (24) pradezabaMdha svAmI, (25) upazama zreNi, (26) kSapaka
zroNi  /  gAthA meM nirdiSTa cha viSayoM kI paribhASAyeM nIce likhe anusAra hai
(1) Sa vagvinI prakRti-apane kAraNa ke hone para jisa karma prakRti kA baMdha
avazya hotA hai, use dhruvabandhinI prakRti kahate haiN| aisI prakRti apane
baMdhavizcheda paryanta pratyeka jIva ko pratisamaya baMdhatI hai|' (2)
bhabhUSa-vagvinI pratibaMdha ke kAraNoM ke hone para bhI jo prakRti baMdhatI bhI
hai aura nahIM bhI baMdhatI hai, use aghra va-bandhinI prakRti kahate haiN| aisI
prakRti apane bandha-viccheda paryanta baMdhatI bhI hai aura baMdhatI bhI nahIM
hai| 1 karmagrantha se milatA-julatA nirdeza paMcamaMgraha meM nimna prakAra hai
ghuvadhi dhruvodaya sambadhAi pariyattamANa asubhaaoN| pacavi saviskhA pagaI va
vivAgao cahA  /  /  3 / 14 gAthA meM dhra vabandhI, dhra vodayA, sarvaghAti,
parAvartamAna, mora azuma ina pAMca ke pratipakSI dvAroM tathA cAra prakAra ke
vipAkoM kA saMketa kiyA hai| kula milAkara caudaha nAma hote haiN| 2
niyaheusaMbhavevi hu bhayaNikho jANa hoi payaThINaM  /  baco tA adhuvAo dhUSA
abhaNibaMdhAo  /  -paMcasaMgraha 3.35

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Shataka**  The Dhruvabandhini nature remains bound to the
living being at all times until the time of its liberation, while the
Anubandhini nature is not bound at all times, even until the time of its
liberation. Here, the term "Dhruvabandhini" and "Anubandhini" refers to the
general cause of bondage, not the specific cause. Because, the specific causes
of bondage for each nature, when present, will inevitably lead to the bondage of
that nature, even if it is Adhruvabandhini. Therefore, the nature that is bound
or not bound despite the presence of its general cause of bondage is
Adhruvabandhini, and the nature that is inevitably bound is Dhruvabandhini.
**(3) Kosa Nature:** The nature whose emergence is continuous, meaning the
nature that continuously emerges without interruption for the living being until
the time of its emergence, is called Dhruvodaya.  **(4) Anuvoda Nature:** The
nature whose emergence is not continuous until the end of its emergence period,
sometimes emerges and sometimes does not, meaning the nature whose emergence
does not follow a rule even until the time of its liberation, is called
Anuvodaya nature.  The five causes of emergence for all Karma natures, from
general to specific, are: Dravya, Kshetra, Kala, Bhav, and Bhav. The emergence
of all Karma natures occurs due to the combination of these five. The same type
of Dravya, etc., does not cause the emergence of all Karma natures, but
different types of Dravya, etc., act as causes. Some Dravya, etc., material
causes the emergence of a particular nature, while others do not.   **Note:**
The text includes a quote from the Panchasangrah (3/37) which states: "The
continuous emergence is known as Dhruvodaya. The emergence that is not
continuous is known as Adhruvodaya."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka dhruvabandhinI prakRti kA bandhaviccheda kAla paryanta pratyeka samaya
harAeka jIva ko baMdha hotA rahatA hai aura anubandhinI prakRti kA
baMdhaviccheda kAla taka meM bhI sarvakAlAvasthAyI baMdha nahIM hotA hai  /
yahAM ghavabandhinI aura ababandhinI rUpatA meM sAmAnya baMdhahetu kI vivakSA
hai vizeSa baMdhahetu kI nhiiN| kyoMki jisa prakRti ke jo khAsa baMdhahetu haiM
ve hetu jaba jaba mileM taba taka usa prakRti kA baMdha avazya hotA hai, cAhe
vaha adhruvabandhinI bhI kyoM na ho| isaliye apane sAmAnya bandhahetu ke hone
para bhI jisa prakRti kA baMdha ho yA na ho vaha adhuvabandhinI hai aura avazya
baMdha ho vaha dhruvabandhinI hai  /  (3) koSA prakRti - jisa prakRti kA udaya
avicchinna ho arthAta apane udaya kAla paryanta pratyeka samaya jIva ko jisa
prakRti kA udaya barAbara binA ruke hotA rahatA hai, use dhruvodayA kahate haiM
/  (4) anuvodA prakRti -- apane udaya kAla ke aMta taka jisa prakRti kA udaya
barAbara nahIM rahatA hai, kabhI udaya hotA hai aura kabhI nahIM hotA hai, yAnI
udayaviccheda kAla taka meM bhI jisake udaya kA niyama na ho use anuvodayA
prakRti kahate haiM  /  " sAmAnya se saMpUrNa karma prakRtiyoM ke pAMca udaya
hetu haiM- dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhava aura bhAva aura pAMcoM ke samUha dvArA
samasta karma prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai  /  eka hI prakAra ke dravyAdi hetu
samasta karma prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM kAraNa rUpa nahIM hote haiM, kintu bhinna-
bhinna prakAra ke dravyAdi hetu kAraNa rUpa hote haiN| koI dravyAdi sAmagrI kisI
prakRti ke udaya 1 abcokinno udao jANaM pagaINa tA dhuvodazyA  /  vonivi
saMbhava jANa adhUvodayA mAo  /  /  - paMcasaMgraha 3/37

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **Cause and Effect:**  In the Fifth Karma Granth,
there is a cause and a material that acts as a catalyst for its emergence.
However, it is certain that wherever there is a single cause of emergence, all
other causes are present in a group form.  **(5) Dhruvasattaka Prakriti:** The
nature of the eternal, non-real (mithyatva) Jiva, which is constantly in
existence and always present, is called Dhruvasattaka Prakriti.  **(6)
Adhruvasattaka Prakriti:** The nature whose existence is not governed by any
rule, meaning it may exist at one time and not at another, is called
Adhruvasattaka Prakriti. Dhruvasattaka Prakritis are present in every Jiva at
all times until the time of liberation (vichched kal), while Adhruvasattaka
Prakritis do not have this rule.  **(7) Ghatiini Prakriti:** The Karma Prakriti
that destroys the spiritual qualities (Jnana, etc.) is called Ghatiini Prakriti.
It is of two types: Sarvaghatiini and Deshaghatiini. The Karma Prakriti that
completely destroys its object (Jnana, etc.) is called Sarvaghatiini, and the
one that destroys a part of its object is called Deshaghatiini.  Some Karma
Prakritis are Sarvaghatiini-participatory, meaning they do not have the power to
suppress Jnana, etc., within themselves, but they reveal their extremely
terrible consequences due to their association with Sarvaghatiini Prakritis.
They are experienced along with Sarvaghatiini Prakritis.  **(1) Dab, Khet, Kalo,
Bhavo, Ya Bhavo Ya Heyavo Pancha. Heu Samaseṇuudao Jayai Samvaṇ Pagaiṛṇ. **
**Panchasampada 236**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha meM kAraNa rUpa hotI hai aura koI sAmagrI kisI ke udaya
meM hetu rUpa hotI hai  /  lekina yaha nizcita hai ki jahAM eka bhI udaya hetu
hai, vahAM anya sabhI hetu samUha rUpa meM upasthita rahate haiN|' (5)
pravasattAka prakRti-anAdi mithyAtvI jIva ko jo prakRti niraMtara sattA meM hotI
hai, sarvadA vidyamAna rahatI hai, use dhruvasattAka kRti kahate haiM ! (6)
adhruvasattAka prakRtimithyAtva dazA meM jisa prakRti kI satA kA niyama nahIM
yAnI kisI samaya sattA meM ho aura kisI samaya sattA meM na bhI ho, use
adhruvasattAka prakRti kahate haiM  /  dhruvasattAka prakRtiyoM ko viccheda kAla
taka pratyeka samaya pratyeka jIva ko sasA hotI hai aura adhruvasattAka
prakRtiyoM ke liye yaha niyama nahIM hai ki viccheda kAla taka pratyeka samaya
unakI sattA ho  /  (7) dhAsinI prakRti-jo karma prakRti Atmika guNoM-jJAnAdi kA
ghAta karatI hai, use ghAtinI prakRti kahate haiN| yaha do prakAra kI hai
sarvaghAtinI aura deshghaatinii| jo karma prakRti jJAnAdi rUpa apane viSaya ko
sarvathA prakAra se ghAta kare use sarvaghAtinI aura jo prakRti apane viSaya ke
ekadeza kA ghAta kare use dezaghAtinI prakRti kahate haiM  /  karmoM kI kucha
prakRtiyAM sarvaghAti pratibhAga rUpa hotI haiM arthAt aghAtI hone se svayaM meM
to jAnAdi AtmaguNoM ko dabAne kI zakti nahIM hai kintu sarvaghAtI prakRtiyoM ke
saMsarga se apanA ati dAruNa vipAka batalAtI haiN| ve sarvaghAtI prakRtiyoM ke
sAtha vedana kiye jAne 1 daba kheta kAlo bhavo ya bhAvo ya heyavo paMca  /  heu
samAseNudao jAyai samvANa pagaIrNa  /  /  paMcasaMpAda 236

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(8) **Aghātini Prakṛti** - A nature that does not destroy spiritual qualities is
called Aghātini Prakṛti.  (6) **Puṣpa Prakṛti** - A nature whose result is
auspicious is called Puṇya Prakṛti. (10) **Pāpa Prakṛti** - A nature whose
result is inauspicious is called Pāpa Prakṛti. (11) **Pāravartmānā Prakṛti** - A
nature that binds, arises, or both, by stopping the binding, arising, or both of
another nature, is called Pāravartmānā Prakṛti. (12) **Aparāvartmānā Prakṛti** -
A nature that binds, arises, or both, without stopping the binding, arising, or
both of another nature, is called Aparāvartmānā Prakṛti. (13) **Kṣetravipāko
Prakṛti** - When a being leaves one body and takes on a new body in a new state
of existence, the karma nature that arises in the state of disintegration and
experiences its fruit is called Kṣetravipāko Prakṛti. This nature arises only
during the interval between leaving one state and entering another, not at other
times. Therefore, it is called Kṣetravipāko Prakṛti. (14) **Jīvaṣipāko Prakṛti**
- A nature that bears its fruit within the being itself is called Jīvaṣipāko
Prakṛti. The fruit of this nature...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAle dAruNa vipAka ko batalAne vAlI hone se unakI sadRzatA ko prApta karatI
haiM, ataH unako sarvaghAtI pratibhAga prakRtiyAM kahate haiM  /  (8) aghAtinI
prakRtijo prakRti Atmika guNoM kA dhAta nahIM karatI hai, use aghAtinI prakRti
kahate haiN| (6) puSpa prakRti--jisa prakRti kA vipAka-phala zubha hotA hai use
puNya prakRti kahate haiN| (10) pApa prakRti--jisakA phala azubha hotA hai vaha
pApa prakRti hai| (11) parAvartamAnA prakRti-kisI dUsarI prakRti ke bandha,
udaya athavA donoM ko rokakara jisa prakRti kA baMdha, udaya athavA donoM hote
haiM, use parAvartamAnA prakRti kahate haiN| (12) aparAvartamAnA prakRti-kisI
dUsarI prakRti ke baMdha, udaya athavA donoM ko roke binA jisa prakRti ke
baMdha, udaya athavA donoM hote haiM, use aparAvartamAnA prakRti kahate haiN|'
(13) kSetravipAko prakRti-eka gati kA zarIra chor3akara arthAt pUrva gati meM
maraNa hone ke kAraNa usake zarIra ko chor3akara naI gati kA zArIra dhAraNa
karane ke liye jaba jIva gamana karatA hai, usa samaya vigrahagati meM jo karma
prakRti udaya meM AtI hai, apane phala kA anubhava karAtI hai use kSetravipAkI
prakRti kahate haiM  /  isa prakRti kA udaya pUrva gati ko tyAgakara anya gati
meM jAte samaya antarAlavartI kAla meM hI hotA hai, anya samaya meM nhiiN|
isIliye isako kSetravipAkI prakRti kahate haiN| (14) jIvaSipAko prakRti-jo
prakRti jIva meM hI apanA phala detI hai, use jIvavipAkI prakRti kahate haiN|
isa prakRti kA vipAka jIva 1 viNivAriya jA garachA baMdha udayaM va anma pagae
/  sAhu pariyasamANI aNivAreMti apariyatA  /  /  -paMcamaha 43

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **Bam Kamenya**  The nature that causes the experience of its
fruits through the qualities of knowledge, etc., directly to the soul, whether
it has a body or not, and whatever the state or realm may be, is called **Jiva-
vipaki** nature.  **(15) Bhava-vipaki Nature:** The nature that bears fruit only
in the state of human, hell, etc., is called **Bhava-vipaki** nature. The reason
for this is that even after two parts of the present lifespan have passed, and
the soul is bound in the third or subsequent part, this nature does not manifest
until the previous state is destroyed and a suitable future state is attained.
Therefore, it is called **Bhava-vipaki** nature.  **(16) Pudgala-vipaki
Nature:** The karma nature that is about to bear fruit in the **pudgala**
(matter), i.e., the nature whose fruit is experienced by the soul through the
**pudgala**, is called **Pudgala-vipaki** nature. The karma nature that
manifests its power in the **pudgalas** taken up by the **audarika** (material)
etc., **namakarma** (name karma), is called **Pudgala-vipaki** nature. In other
words, the nature that bears its fruit in the **pudgala** atoms that have
transformed into the form of the body is called **Pudgala-vipaki** nature.
These are the definitions of the sixteen **prakriti** (natures) mentioned here.
The explanations of the remaining ten **prakriti** (natures), such as **sthiti**
(state), etc., are given in their respective places in the first and second
**karmagrantha** (karma texts). Therefore, we now begin the narration of the
topics of the text in order, starting with the following verses.  **Prabhandhi
Prakritiyaan**  First, we will list the number and names of the **dhruva-
bandhini** (fixed-binding) **prakriti** (natures) in order:
**Vannachauteyakammagurulahu Nimanoshghay Mayakuchcha. Micchakasaayavarana
Vigdha Shuvadi Samavatta. ||2||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bama kamenya ke nAnAdi svarUpa kA upaghAtAdi karate rUpa hotA hai  /  arthAt
cAhe zarIra ho yA na ho tathA bhava yA kSetra cAhe jo ho lekina jo prakRti apane
phala kA anubhava jJAnAdi guNoM ke upadhAtAdi karane ke dvArA sAkSAt jIva ko hI
karAtI hai, use jIvavipAkI prakRti kahate haiN| (15) maka-vipAkI prakRti-jo
prakRti nara nArakAdi bhava meM hI phala detI hai use bhavipAko prakRti kahate
haiN| isakA kAraNa hai vi vartamAna Ayu ke do bhAga vyatIta hone ke bAda tIsare
Adi bhAga meM Ayu kA bandha hone para bhI jaba taka pUrva bhava kA kSaya hone ke
dvArA uttara svayogya bhava prApta nahIM hotA hai, taba taka yaha prakRti udaya
meM nahIM AtI hai, isIliye isako bhavavipAkI prakRti kahate haiM  /  _ (16)
pudgalanipAko prakRti - jo karma prakRti pudgala meM phala pradAna karane ke
sanmukha ho arthAt jisa prakRti kA phala AtmA pudgala dvArA anubhava kare,
audArika Adi nAmakarma ke udaya se grahaNa kiye gaye pudgaloM meM jo
karmaprakRti apanI zakti ko dikhAve, use pudgalavipAkI prakRti kahate haiN| yAnI
jo prakRti zarIra rUpa pariNata hue pudgala paramANuoM meM apanA vipAka-phala
detI hai, vaha pudgala viSAkI prakRti hai| ina solaha prakRti dvAroM kI
paribhASAyeM yahAM batalAI haiN| zeSa prakRti, sthiti Adi dasa dvAroM kI vyAkhyA
prathama, dvitIya karmagrantha meM yathAsthAna kI gaI hai  /  ataH aba Age kI
gAthAoM meM grantha ke varNya viSayoM kA kramAnusAra kathana prArambha karate
haiM 1 prabandhI prakRtiyAM sarvaprathama kramAnusAra dhrubabandhinI prakRtiyoM
kI saMkhyA va nAma batalAte haiM vannacAuteyakammAgurulahu nimaNoSaghAya
mayakucchA  /  micchakasAyAvaraNA vigdhaM Suvadhi samavattA  // 2 //

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shataka  **Word Meaning:**  * **Vapaar-Vancha Chatushk:** The four types of
trade/business * **Tej Tejass Gariir:** The luminous body (karmic body) *
**Kamma Kamanna Shariir:** The body of action (karmic body) * **Agurulh
Agurulghu Naamakarma:** The name karma of heavy and light * **Nimig Nirman
Naamakarma:** The name karma of creation and destruction * **Uvadhay Upgahat
Naamakarma:** The name karma of hindrance and destruction * **Bhay Bhay
Mohaniya:** Fear, fear-inducing (karma) * **Kucchha Jugupsa Mohaniya:** Disgust,
disgust-inducing (karma) * **Miscch Mithyatva Mohaniya:** Falsehood, falsehood-
inducing (karma) * **Kasapa Kashay:** Passion, the eight passions * **Avarana
Avarana-Mana Avarana:** The five coverings (knowledge, perception, etc.) *
**Paach V Darshan Avarana:** The five knowledge coverings and nine perception
coverings * **Kul Chaudah:** Total fourteen (coverings) * **Vigch Panch Ant
Ray:** The five internal obstacles * **Dhuvbandi Dhruvbandi Prakrutiyaan:** The
forty-seven fixed karmic tendencies * **Sapchatta Santaliis:** Forty-seven
**Verse Meaning:**  * The four types of trade, the luminous karmic body, the
name karma of heavy and light, the name karma of creation and destruction, the
name karma of hindrance and destruction, fear-inducing karma, disgust-inducing
karma, falsehood-inducing karma, the sixteen passions, the five knowledge
coverings, the nine perception coverings, and the five internal obstacles -
these forty-seven karmic tendencies are fixed.  **Special Note:**  * The verse
mentions the names of the fixed karmic tendencies. * These are the karmic
tendencies that bind when their respective causes are present. * The eight
fundamental karmic tendencies are:     1. Knowledge covering     2. Perception
covering     3. Vedaniya (feeling)     4. Mohaniya (delusion)     5. Ayu (life
span)     6. Name     7. Gotra (family)     8. Antaray (internal obstacles) *
These have their respective binding tendencies, totaling 120. * Out of these
120, 47 are fixed, and their names are:     1. Knowledge covering: Mati,
Shrauta, Avadhi, Manaparyaya, and Kevala     2. Perception covering: Chakshu,
Achakshu, Avadhi, Kevala, Nidra, Nidra-Nidra, Prachala, Prachala-Prachala, and
Styanadhi     3. Delusion: Mithyatva, Anantanubandhi Kashay Chatushk,
Apratyakhyana Avarana Kashay Chatushk, Pratyakhyana Avarana Kashay Chatushk,
Sanjwalan Kashay Chatushk, Bhay, and Jugupsa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka zabdArtha-vApAra-vaNaMcatuSka, teyataijasa garIra, kammAkAmaMNa zarIra,
agurulaha agurulaghu nAmakarma, nimiganirmANa nAmakarma, uvadhAya upaghAta
nAmakarma, bhaya * bhaya mohanIya, kucchA-jugupsA mohanIya, misacha-mithyAtva'
mohanIya, kasApA kaSAya, AvaraNA AvaraNa-mAnAvaraNa pAca va darzanAvaraNa ko
kula caudaha, vigcha- pAMca anta rAya, dhuvabaMdhidhruvabaMdhI prakRtiyAM,
spcttaa-sNtaaliis| gAthArtha-varNacatuSka, taMjasa kArmaNa zarIra, agurulaghu
nAma, nirmANa nAma, upaghAta nAma, bhaya mohanIya, jugupsA mohanIya, mithyAtva,
solaha kaSAya, pAMca jJAnAvaraNa, nau darzanAvaraNa, aura pAMca antarAya the
saMtAlIsa prakRtiyA~ dhruvabandhinI haiN| vizeSArSa-gAthA meM dhruvabandhinI
prakRtiyoM ke nAmoM kA nirdeza kiyA hai  /  apane yogya sAmAnya kAraNoM ke hone
para jina prakRttiyoM kA | baMdha hotA hai ve dhruvabandhinI prakRtiyAM haiN|
karma kI mUla prakRtiyAM ATha haiM--(1) jJAnAvaraNa, (2) darzanAvaraNa, (3)
vedanIya, (4) mohanIya, (5) Ayu, (6) nAma, (7) gotra aura (8) antarAya  /  inakI
baMghayogya uttara prakRtiyA~ kramazaH 5++2+ 26+4+67+2+5=120 hotI haiM  /  ina
ekasau bIsa prakRtiyoM meM se saiMtAlIsa prakRtiyAM dhruvabandhinI haiM  /
jinake nAma isaprakAra haiM (1) pAnAbaraNa-mati, zrata, avadhi manaparyAya aura
kevala jnyaanaavrnn| (2) darzanAvaraNa-cakSu, acakSu, avadhi, kevala
darzanAvaraNa, nidrA, nidrA-nidrA, pracalA, pracalA-pracalA, styAnaddhi  /  (3)
mohanIya-mithyAtva, anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya catuSka, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya
catuSka, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka, saMjvalana kaSAya catuSka, bhaya,
jugupsaa|

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Karma-Prati (Karma-Types)  **(4) Maamakarma:**  Color, smell, taste,
touch, tejas (radiance) body, karman (action) body, aguru-laghu (heavy-light),
creation, and destruction.  **(5) Bhansaraaya:** Giving, receiving, enjoyment,
consumption, and obstruction of viriya (energy).  It is clear from the above
mentioned types that all the **uttar-prakritis** (consequences) of **jnana-
avaran** (knowledge-obscuring), **darshan-avaran** (perception-obscuring), and
**antaraya** (obstruction) karma, which have five, nine, and five consequences
respectively, are **dhruva-bandhini** (permanently binding).  The **mithya-tva**
(false belief) of **darshan-moha** (perception-delusion) and the eighteen
**prakritis** (consequences) of **charitra-moha** (conduct-delusion) and the
nine **prakritis** of **nama-karma** (name-karma) are **dhruva-bandhini**. Thus,
five **prakritis** of **jnana-avaran**, nine of **darshan-avaran**, sixteen of
**mohaniya** (delusive), nine of **nama**, and five of **antaraya**, totaling
forty-seven **prakritis** are **dhruva-bandhini**. The reason for these
**prakritis** being **dhruva-bandhini** is explained according to the order
mentioned in the verse.  The reason for considering the nine **prakritis** of
**nama-karma**, namely color, smell, taste, touch, tejas, karman, aguru-laghu,
creation, and destruction, as **dhruva-bandhini** is that the **tejas** and
**karman** bodies are present in all beings of the four **gatis** (states of
existence). They are connected from the beginning of time. Even during the **vi-
graha-gati** (interval motion) between leaving one gross body and taking another
in a different **bhaava** (existence), the **tejas** and **karman** bodies
remain. When either an **oudarik** (gross) or **vaikriya** (subtle) body is
bound, **nama-karma** like color, smell, taste, and touch are inevitably bound.
When an **oudarik** or **vaikriya** body is bound, it is created from
**pudgalas** (matter) suitable for it. Therefore, the binding of **nirman**
(creation) **nama-karma** is also inevitable. Due to the presence of these
**oudarik** and **vaikriya** bodies, **upghat** (destruction) occurs from other
gross substances. **Oudarik** or **vaikriya** bodies attract **varna** (color)
etc. suitable for them.  **1**  **Anaadi sambandhe** (connected from the
beginning of time) **pa** (all) **sarvasya** (of all beings).
**-Tattvaprasuutra 2.42-43**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmapranya (4) mAmakarma-varNa, gaMdha, rasa, sparza, tejasa zarIra,
kArmaNa zarIra, agurulaghu, nirmANa, upaghAta  /  ' (5) bhansarAya-dAna, lAbha,
bhoga, upabhoga, vIrya-aMtarAya  /  Upara batAyI gaI pratiyoM ke na yaha spaSTa
hotA hai ki jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa aura aMtarAya karma kI sabhI uttara
prakRtiyAM jinake kramazaH pAMca, nau aura pAMca uttara bheda haiM, dhra
vabaMdhinI haiN| mohanIya karma ke bheda darzatamoha kI eka mithyAkha tathA
cAritra moha kI aThAraha prakRtiyAM aura nAmakarma kI nau prakRtiyAM
dhruvabandhinI hai| isa prakAra jJAnAvaraNa kI 5, darzanAvaraNa kI , mohanIya ko
16, nAma kI aura aMtarAya kI 5, kula milAkara saiMtAlIsa prakRtiyAM
dhruvabandhinI haiN| ina prakRtiyoM ke dhruvabandhinI hone ke kAraNa ko gAthA
meM kahe gaye krama ke anusAra spaSTa karate haiN| varNa, gaMdha, rasa, sparza,
taMjasa, kArmaNa, agurulaghu, nirmANa, upaghAta, nAmakarma kI ina nau prakRtiyoM
ko dhruvabandhinI mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki tejasa aura kArmaNa zarIra to
cAroM gatiyoM ke jIvoM ke avazya hote haiM, inakA anAdi se sambandha hai  / '
eka bhava kA sthUla zarIra chor3akara bhavAMtara kA anya zarIra grahaNa karane
kI antarAla gati (vigraha gati) meM bhI taijasa aura kArmaNa zarIra sadaiva banA
rahatA hai| audArika yA vaikriya zarIroM meM se kisI eka kA baMdha hone para
varNa, gaMdha, rasa, sparza nAmakarmoM kA avazya baMdha hotA hai tathA audArika,
vaikriya pArIra kA baMdha hone para unake yogya pudgaloM se unakA nirmANa hotA
hai  /  ataH nirmANa nAmakarma kA baMdha bhI avazyaMbhAvI hai | ina audArika
aura vaitriya zarIra ke sthala hone se anya sthUla padArthoM se upaghAta hotA hI
hai  /  audArika yA vaikriya pArIra apanI yogya vargaNAoM ko adhika 1 anAdi
saMbaMdhe pa  /  sarvasya  /  -tatvApasUtra 2 / 42-43

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Shanak**  They also accept, but those who accept do not appear to be as heavy
as iron or as light as cotton wool. They always remain in a very small form.
Therefore, the nine natures of karma are called Dhruvabandhini because they are
bound to be bound when their causes are present. Their bondage occurs until the
end of the eighth Gunasthan, called Aapuurvakaran.  Fear and disgust are the
natures of Charitna Mohaniya. There is no opponent to their bondage. Therefore,
these two are considered Dhruvabandhini natures. These two natures remain bound
until the end of the eighth Gunasthan due to the presence of their binding
causes. Mithyatva is bound to be bound in the emergence of Mithyatva Mohaniya.
Since Mithyatva Mohaniya continuously emerges until the Gunasthan of Mithyatva,
Mithyatva is continuously bound. Mithyatva is not bound in the Gunasthan beyond
the Gunasthan of Mithyatva.  The sixteen Kashayas, namely Anantanubandhi Krodha,
Mana, Maya, Lobha, Apratyakhyanavaran, Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha,
Pratyakhyanavaran, Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha, and Sanjwalan Krodha, Mana, Maya,
Lobha, are bound to be bound until their respective causes of emergence are
present. Therefore, these sixteen Kashayas are considered Dhruvabandhini
natures.  The five natures of Jnanavaran, the nine natures of Darshanavaran, and
the five natures of Antaraya, these nineteen natures are bound to be bound until
their respective places of bondage and liberation. Since there are no other
opposing natures for them, they are considered Dhruvabandhini natures.  The
sixteen Kashayas of Anantanubandhi Krodha, Mana, etc., and the nineteen natures
of Jnanavaran, Darshanavaran, and Antaraya karma are Dhruvabandhini.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zanaka bhI grahaNa kareM lekina grahaNa karane vAloM ko na to vaha zarIra lohe
ke samAna bhArI aura na Aka kI ruI ke samAna halake pratIta hote haiM  /
sadaiba agarulaghu rUpa bane rahate haiM  /  isalie nAmakarma ko nau prakRtiyA~
apane kAraNoM ke hone para avazya hI baMdhane se dhruvabaMdhinI kahalAto haiM  /
inakA baMdha apUrvakaraNa nAmaka AThaveM guNasthAna ke carama samaya taka hotA
hai| bhaya aura jugupsA yaha cAritna mohanIya kI prakRtiyoM haiM  /  inake
baMdha kI koI viroSanI nahIM hai| isIlie ina donoM ko dhruvabandhinI prakRtiyoM
meM mAnA hai, ye donoM prakRtiyAM AThaveM muNasthAna ke aMta samaya taka apane
bandha kAraNoM ke rahane se baMdhatI hI rahatI haiM  /  mithyAtva, mithyAtva
mohanIya ke udaya meM avazya baMdhatI hai  /  mithyAtva guNasthAna taka
mithyAtva mohanIya kA niraMtara udaya hone se mithyAtva kA niraMtara baMdha hotA
rahatA hai| mithyAtva guNasthAna se Age ke guNasthAnoM meM baMdha nahIM hotA hai
/  anantAnubaMdhI nodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, mAna,
mAyA, lobha, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha aura saMjvalana
krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha ina solaha kaSAyoM kA apane-apane udaya rUpa kAraNa ke
hone taka avazya hI baMdha hotA hai  /  isIlie ina solaha kaSAyoM ko
dhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyoM meM ginA hai  /  jJAnAvaraNa kI pAMca, darzanAvaraNa
kI nau aura aMtarAya kI pAMca ye unnIsa prakRtiyAM apane apane baMdhaviccheda
hone ke sthAna taka avazya baMdhatI haiM tathA inako virodhinI anya koI
prakRtiyAM na hone se inako dhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyAM mAnA hai  /
anaMtAnubaMdhI krodha, mAna Adi solaha kaSAyoM aura zAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa va
antarAya karma kI unnIsa prakRtiyoM ke dhruvabaMdhinI

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Karma-Pratikraman  This is a detailed explanation of the special rules
for the binding of karma-pratikraman. The general rule for the binding of karma-
pratikraman is that, out of the four binding factors - Mithyatva, Adhirat,
Kshaya, and Yoga - whichever factor is present, and 'Je Bae'i Te Bandhai' -
whichever nature arises to that particular Gunasthan, the binding of that nature
is certain.  Therefore, the binding of the seven natures - the four Ananta-
Anubandhi Kshayas and the five Sthana-Naddhinik - is due to the Atma-Parinam
caused by the arising of the Ananta-Anubandhi Kshayas. These arise up to the
second Sasadan Gunasthan. Beyond that, the absence of Atma-Parinam caused by the
arising of Ananta-Anubandhi Kshayas prevents further binding.  Similarly, the
binding of the four Apratyakhyana-Avarana Kshayas occurs up to the fourth
Aviriti Samyagdrishti Gunasthan. Beyond that, the absence of any such Atma-
Parinam prevents further binding. The binding of the four Prayapika-Avarana
Kshayas occurs up to the fifth Deshaviriti Gunasthan. The binding of Nidra and
Prachala occurs up to the first moment of the eighth Apurvakaran Gunasthan.
Beyond that, the impossibility of further binding-worthy results prevents
further binding.  The binding of Sanjwalan Krodha, Mana, Maya, and Lobha occurs
up to the Badar Samparaya Gunasthan. This is because the arising of the Badar
Kshaya is the cause of their binding. This arises only up to the ninth
Gunasthan, not beyond.  The binding of the fourteen natures - five Jnana-
Avarana, four Darshan-Avarana, and five Antaraya - occurs up to the last moment
of the tenth Sukshma-Samparaya Gunasthan. This is because the Kshaya that is the
cause of their binding arises only up to this Gunasthan, not beyond.  In this
way, the forty-nine natures - five Jnana-Avarana, nine Darshan-Avarana, nineteen
Mohaniya, nine Nama-Karma, and five Antaraya - are bound...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcamaH karmapranya mAnane kA vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai ki karma
prakRtiyoM ke baMdha ke lie yaha sAmAnya niyama hai ki jahAM taka mithyAtva,
adhirata, kaSAya, yoga ina cAroM baMdhahetuoM meM se jisa kA sadbhAva hotA hai
tathA 'je beei te baMdhaI' jisa prakRti kA jisa guNasthAna taka udaya rahatA
hai, yahAM taka usa prakRti kA baMdha avazya hotA hai  /  isalie anaMtAnubaMdhI
kaSAya catuSka aura styAnaddhinika ina sAta prakRtiyoM ke baMdha meM
anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya ke udayajanya AtmapariNAma kAraNa haiM aura inakA udaya
dUsare sAsAdana guNasthAna taka hotA hai, usase Age ke guNasthAnoM meM
anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya ke udayajanya AtmapariNAmoM kA abhAva hone se baMdha nahIM
hotA hai  /  isI prakAra apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka kA cauthe avirati
samyagdRSTi guNasthAna paryanta baMdha hotA hai, Age ke guNasthAnoM meM
tathAvidha udayajanya AtmapariNAma nahIM hone se vaMdha nahIM hotA hai|
prayApakAnAvara kAya catuSka kA dezavirati--pAMcaveM guNasthAna paryanta baMdha
hotA hai| nidrA aura pracalA kA AThaveM apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ke prathama
samaya taka baMdha hotA hai  /  Age unake baMdhayogya pariNAma asaMbhava hone se
baMdha nahIM hotA hai| anivRttibAdara saMparAya guNasthAna taka saMjvalana
krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha kA baMdha hotA hai  /  kyoMki bAdara kaSAya kA udaya
unake baMdha kA hetu hai  /  jisakA udaya nauveM guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai,
Age ke guNasthAnoM meM nahIM  /  pAMca jJAnAvaraNa, cAra darzanAvaraNa tathA
pAMca aMtarAya ina caudaha prakRtiyoM kA baidha dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya
guNasthAna ke carama samaya taka hotA hai  /  isa guNasthAna taka hI inake
baMdha meM hetubhUta kaSAya kA udaya hotA hai, Age ke guNasthAnoM meM nahIM hotA
hai| isa prakAra se maiMtAlIsa prakRtiyAM jinameM jJAnAvaraNa kI pAMca,
darzanAvaraNa kI nau, mohanIya kI unnIsa, nAmakarma kI nau aura aMta

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **14** **Satak**  The five natures of the Rāya are
combined. Due to the presence of Mithyatva, Aviriti, Kṣaya, and other causes,
all beings are inevitably bound. Therefore, these are considered Dhruvabandhini
Natures.  In the next section, the Gamas and Madasiyas explain the nature of the
natures in terms of bondage and liberation. They also explain the nature of the
natures in terms of bondage and liberation.  **Tangu, Javanga, Magih, Sanghayan,
Ai, Gar, Agah, Pugvi, Jin, Usas, Umsoya, Ays, Partha, Tasabola, Goy, Paniyam.**
**Explanation of Terms:**  * **Tangu:** Body (Audarik, Vaikriya, Aharak) *
**Javanga:** Three limbs * **Magih:** Six institutions * **Sanghayan:** Six
consolidations * **Ai:** Five castes * **Gar:** Four Gasi * **Agah:** Two
Vihayogati * **Pugvi:** Four Anupurvi * **Jin:** Jin Karma * **Usas:**
Pravasocchvas Karma * **Umsoya:** Udyot Karma * **Ays:** Atap Karma *
**Partha:** Paradhat Karma * **Tasabola:** Twenty (Tras Dashak and Syavar Sagak)
* **Goy:** Two Gotras * **Paniyam:** Two Vedaniya  The Panchasangraha and Go
Karmakanda list the Pravadandhini Natures as follows:  **Nanantaraya, Dasan,
Dhruvanandh, Kasaya, Michhabhaya, Kuncha, Agurul, Dhunimin, Teyam, Ubpayam, Van,
Chaukamma.**  **Panchasangraha 35:**  **Dhavithi Mi Machkasaya
Bhayatejaguruddhaganimin Vannapao. Sattetala Vanam...**  **Go Karmakanda 124:**
...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14 sAtaka rAya ko pAMca prakRtiyAM sammilita hai, mithyAtva, avirati, kaSAya
Adi kAraNoM ke hone para sabhI jIvoM ko avazya baMdhatI haiM, isIliye inako
dhruvabandhinI prakRti mAnate haiN| Ara bhAgepI ko gamAgama maDAsiyoM ke nAma
aura bandha va udaya kI apekSA se prakRtiyoM ke bhaMga batalAte haiN| ababaMdhI
prakRtiyAM aura baMdha va svayaM ko apekSA se pratiyoM ke bhaga
taNavaMgAgiisaMghayaNa jAigaikhagaipusvijiNasAsa  /  ujjoyAyavaparacA tasavIsA
goya baNiya  //  hAsAijuyalAgavega Au tevasarI adhuvbNdhaa| maMgA aNAisAI
aNaMtasaMstutarA cauro  // 4 //  zabdArtha-tagu-zarIra, (audArika, vaikriya,
AhAraka), javaMgA-tIna aMgopAMga, mAgiha-chaha saMsthAna, saMghayaNa chaha
saMhanana, Ai-pAMca jAti, gara-cAra gasi, agaha-do vihAyogati, pugvi-cAra
AnupUrvI, jiNa -jina nAmakarma, usAsa - pravAsocchavAsa nAmakama, umsoya -udyota
nAmakarma, AyaSa-Atapa nAmakarma, parathA-parAdhAta nAmakarma, tasabolA-sAdi
bIsa (trasa dazaka aura syAvara sagaka), goya-do gotra, paNiyaM-do vedanIya  /
paMcasaMgraha aura go0 karmakAMDa meM pravadandhinI prakRtiyoM ko isa prakAra
ginAyA hainANaMtarAyadasaNa dhuvanaMdhi kasAyamichabhayakunchA  /
aguruladhunimiNateyaM ubapAyaM vana caukamma  /  - paMcasaMgraha 35 dhAviti mi
machakasAyA bhayatejaguruddhagaNimiNa vaNNapao  /  sattetAla vANaM............
-go0 karmakAMsa 124

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Five Karma-Paties  **The Five Karma-Paties** are:  * **Haataai:**
Laughter, etc. (two pairs) * **Juyalag:** Two pairs * **Vey:** Three Vedas *
**Aauchar Ayukarma:** Ritualistic and life-related karma * **Teshuutari:**
Seventy-three (73) * **Aghuvbandha:** Non-fixed * **Bhang:** Four types of
destruction * **Anaisaai:** Beginningless and ending * **Anantasant:** Infinite
and finite * **Taraanant:** Infinite and finite * **Usar:**  Finite
**Madarth:**  * **Three Pariir:** Three types of bodies * **Deen Ango-paang:**
Ten limbs * **Mahn Sansthan:** Six organs * **Chah Sanhanan:** Six types of
senses * **Paanch Jaati:** Five types of beings * **Chaar Gati:** Four types of
births * **Do Vihaayogati:** Two types of liberation * **Chaar Anupurvi:** Four
types of consequences * **Tirthankar Naamakarma:** Tirthankara-related karma *
**Shwaasochchwaas Naamakarma:** Breathing-related karma * **Udyot:** Brightness
* **Aatap:** Heat * **Paraaghaat:** External impact * **Nasadi Bees:** Twenty
types of nerves * **Do Gonn:** Two types of knowledge * **Do Vedaniy:** Two
types of feelings * **Haasyaadi Do Yugal:** Two pairs of laughter, etc. * **Teen
Ved:** Three Vedas * **Chaar Aayu:** Four types of lifespans  These seventy-
three (73) **Prakritis** are **Adhruvbandhini** (non-fixed). They are
**Anaisaai** (beginningless and ending) and **Anantasant** (infinite and
finite), resulting in **four types of Bhang** (destruction).  **Vishesharp:**  *
There are **122** **Prakritis** that are **Bandhyogya** (capable of binding). *
**Forty-seven (47)** of these are **Dhruvbandhini** (fixed). * The remaining
**seventy-three (73)** are **Adhruvbandhini** (non-fixed).  These two verses
describe the **seventy-three (73) Adhruvbandhini Prakritis** and their **Bhang**
(destruction).  **These Adhruvbandhini Prakritis** primarily include
**Naamakarma** (name-related karma), **Vedaniy** (feelings), **Aayu**
(lifespan), **Gov** (knowledge), and some **Mohaniy** (delusion-related karma).
**Details of these Prakritis, along with their corresponding root karma, are as
follows:**  **(1) Vedaniy:**  * **Saata Vedaniy:** Seven types of pleasant
feelings * **Asaata Vedaniy:** Seven types of unpleasant feelings  **(2)
Mohaniy:**  * **Haasya:** Laughter * **Rati:** Attachment * **Arati:** Aversion
* **Shok:** Sorrow * **Streeved:** Female-related karma * **Purushved:** Male-
related karma * **Napunsakved:** Neutral-related karma  **(3) Aayu:**  *
**Devaayu:** Divine lifespan * **Manushyaayu:** Human lifespan *
**Tiryancyayu:** Animal lifespan * **Narakaayu:** Hell lifespan  **(4) Naama:**
* **Teen Shareer:** Three types of bodies:     * **Audarik Kriya:** Action-
related body     * **Aaharak Shareer:** Food-related body * **Teen Ango-paang:**
Ten limbs:     * **Audarik:** Action-related limbs     * **Vaikriya:**
Transformation-related limbs     * **Aaharak Ango-paang:** Food-related limbs *
**Chah Sansthan:** Six organs:     * **...** (details of the six organs)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmapatya hAtAi- hAsyAdika, juyalaga-yo yugala, veya-tIna veda, AucAra
Ayukarma, teSuttarI-tihattara, aghuvabaMdhA-adha vabaMdhI, bhaMgA-maMga,
aNAisAI-anAdi aura sAdi, aNaMtasaMta tarAananta aura sAMta usara pada se sahita,
cauro - cAra bhaMga  /  mAdArtha-tIna pArIra, dIna aMgopAMga, manha saMsthAna,
chaha saMhanana, pAMca jAti, cAra gati, do vihAyogati, cAra AnupUrvI,
tIrthaMkara nAmakarma, zvAsocchvAsa nAmakarma, udyota, Atapa, parAghAta, nasAdi
bIsa, do gonna, do vedanIya, hAsyAdi do yugala, tIna veda, cAra Ayu, ye
tihattara prakRtiyAM adhruvabaMdhinI haiN| inake anAdi aura sAdi ananta aura
sAnta pada se sahita hone se cAra bhaMga hote haiN| vizeSArpa-bandhayogya 122
prakRtiyAM haiN| unameM se saiMtAlIsa prakRtiyAM dhruvabaMdhinI haiM aura zeSa
raho tihattara prakRtiyAM adhruvabaMdhinI haiN| ina do gAthAoM meM
adhruvabandhinI tihattara prakRtiyoM tathA inake banane vAloM bhaMgoM ke nAma
batAye haiN| _ ina adhruvabandhinI prakRtiyoM meM adhikatara nAmakarma kI tathA
vedanIya, Ayu, gova karma kI sabhI uttara prakRtiyoM va kucha mohanIya karma kI
uttara prakRtiyoM ke nAma haiM  /  jinakA apane-apane mUla karma ke nAma sahita
vivaraNa isa prakAra hai (1) dekhanIya-sAtA vedanIya, asAtA vedanIya  /  (2)
mohanIya hAsya, rati, arati, zoka, strIveda, puruSaveda, napuMsakaveda  /  {3)
Ayu-devAyu, manuSyAyu, tiryaMcAyu, narakAyu  /  (4) nAma-tIna zarIra-audArika
kriya, AhAraka zarIra, tIna aMgopAMgaaudArika, vaikriya, AhAraka aMgopAMga,
chaha saMsthAna

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sak**  Square, Nyagrodha (Banyan tree), Circle, Swati (a star), Kubjak (a type
of bird), Vaman (dwarf), Hundak (a type of bird), Six Sanhanan - Vanna
Rishabhanaracha, Rishabhanaracha, Naracha, Arbhanaracha, Kilika, Sewart, Five
Jati - Ekendriya, Dwiindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya, Panchendriya, Four Gati
- Dev, Manushya, Tiryanch, Narak, Two Vihayogati - Shubh Vihayogati, Abh
Vihayogati, Four Anupurvi - Devanupurvi, Manushyanupurvi, Tiryanchanupurvi,
Narakanupurvi, Tirthankara, Ucchvas, Udyot, Atap, Paratrat, Prasavoshak
(Basadpak, Stavardashak).  **(5) Gotra - Uchch Gotra, Nich Gotra. Upar
Adhruvbandhini**  Seventy-three Prakruti names are mentioned.  +1  **Tas Vapar
Pajjat Pasey Pirang Sumang Va Subhang Cha. Susaraim Jasang Tasadasang
Yavaranasang Tu Iman.**  **Thavar Muham Appajj Saharan Apir Asubh Dubhagani.
Dusasaranaijjajasamij...**  - Karmagranth Pratham Bhag, Ga. 26, 27. - Pras
Dashak - Pras, Badar, Paryapt, Prateyk, Sthir, Shubh, Subhag, Suswar, Aadey and
Yash Kirti. - Spavarvashak - Spavar, Sukshma, Aparyapt, Sadharan, Aspir, Ashubh,
Dur Bhag, Duhswara, Anadey and Ayash Kirti.  In Digambar literature, two types
of Adhruvbandhini Prakruti are mentioned - Sapratipakshi and Apratipakshi. The
names of the Prakruti included in these are as follows:  **Sese Tistaharang
Parghaadachoukk Sab Aani. Appati Dakkha Sesa Sappdibkya Hai Vasatthi.**  - Gor
Kamekar 125. Tirthankara, Aharakadvik, Paraghat, Atap, Udyot, Ucchvas, four Ayus
- these eleven Prakruti are Apratipakshi. This means they do not have any
Nirodhini Prakruti. However, their bandh occurs in some specific situations,
hence they are called Adhruvbandhini. The remaining sixty-two Prakruti are
considered Matra Madhini because they are Sapratipakshi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saka samacaturastra, nyagrodha, parimaMDala, svAti, kubjaka, vAmana, huNDaka,
chaha saMhanana-vannaRSabhanArAca, RSabhanArAca, nArAca, arbhanArAca, kIlikA,
sevArta, pAMca jAti - ekendriya, dvIndriya, lIndriya, caturindriya, paMcendriya,
cAra gati-deva, manuSya, tiryaca nAraka, do vihAyogati-zubha vihAyogati. aAbha
vihAyogati, cAra AnupUrvIdevAnupUrvI manuSyAnupUrvI tiryaMcAnupUrvI,
narakAnupUrvI, tIrthakara, ucchavAsa, udyota, Atapa, parAtrAta, prasavozaka
(basadapAka,sthAvaradazaka)  / ' (5) gotra - ucca gotra, nIca gotra  /  upara
adhruvabandhinI' tihattara prakRtiyoM ke nAma batalAye haiN| +1 tasa vApara
pajjata paseya piraM sumaM va subhagaM ca  /  susarAima jasaM tasadasagaM
yAvaraNasaM tu imaM  /  /  thAvara muhama apajja sAhAraNa apira asubha dubhagANi
/  dussaraNAijjAjasamiya .. -karmagrantha prathama bhAga, gA0 26, 27. -prasa
dazaka-prasa, bAdara, paryApta, pratyeka, sthira, zubha, subhaga, susvara, Adeya
aura yaza kIrti  /  -spAvaravazaka- spAvara, sUkSma, aparyApta, sAdhAraNa,
aspira, azubha, durbhaga, duHsvara, anAdeya aura ayazaHkIrti  /  digambara
sAhitya meM adha vadhinI prakRtiyoM ke do meMda kiye hai-sapratipakSI aura
aprtipkssii| inameM grahaNa kI gaI prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa prakAra hai sese
tisthAhAraM paraghAdacaukka saba ANi  /  appatidakkhA sesA sappaDibakyA hai
vAsaTThI  /  /  -gora kamekAra 125 tIrthakara, AhArakAdvika, parAghAta, Atapa,
udyota, ucchavAsa, cAra Ayu ye gyAraha prakRtiyAM apratipakSI haiM  /  arthAt
inakI koI nirodhinI prakRti nahIM hai  /  phira bhI inakA baMdha kucha vizeSa
avasthA meM hotA hai, ata: ana vayaMdhinI kahA jAtA hai aura zeSa bAsaTha
prakRtiyoM ko sapratipakSI hone ke kAraNa mAtra madhinI mAnA hai|

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Chapter of the Granth  The reason for considering these as
**Adhruvbandhini** (non-permanent binding) is that even though the general
causes of binding are present, their binding does not occur regularly. It means
sometimes they bind and sometimes they don't. The reason for these natures not
binding regularly is that some of these natures do not bind because their
opposing natures take their place, and some natures bind sometimes and sometimes
not due to their inherent characteristics. _Explain the reason for considering
these **Sihrar** (fluctuating) natures as **Sanvandin** (related) with reasons._
Among the five types of **Sharira** (body) **Namakarma** (karmic actions),
**Tanjas** and **Kaman** **Sharira** are considered **Dhruvbandhini** (permanent
binding) natures due to their eternal connection with **Samari** (sentient
beings). The remaining three **Sharira** - **Audarik**, **Bainkriya**, and
**Aharak** - and the three types of **Angopang** (limbs and organs)
**Namakarma** with the same names, only one **Sharira** and one **Angopang**
bind to a being at a time; not the other. Because they are mutually opposing,
the binding of one prevents the binding of the other. Therefore, these are
considered **Adhruvbandhini**.  The six **Sansthan** (abodes) like
**Samchaturasra** (square) are also mutually opposing in tradition. If the
**Sansthan** of the body - the shape - is square due to **Karma**, then the
binding of other **Sansthan** cannot arise in it. Therefore, they are also
included in the **Adhruvbandhini** natures.  The binding of **Manushya** (human)
and **Tiryanch** (animal) **Prayogya** (capable of experiencing) natures results
in the binding of only one of the six **Sanhanan** (combinations) at a time -
**Vajra**, **Rishabha**, **Nag**, **Cha** etc. However, when **Dev** (divine)
and **Narak** (hellish) **Prayogya** natures bind, none of the **Sanhanan**
bind. Therefore, **Sanhanan** **Namakarma** is **Adhruvbandhi** (non-permanently
binding).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama kama grantha inako adhruvabandhinI mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki baMdha
ke sAmAnya kAraNoM ke rahane para bhI inakA bandha niyamita rUpa se nahIM hotA
hai arthAt kabhI baMdha hotA hai aura kabhI nahIM hotA hai  /  ina prakRtiyoM ke
niyamita rUpa se bandha na hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki inameM se kucha prakRtiyoM
kA baMdha to isalie nahIM hotA hai ki unakI virodhinI prakRtiyAM unakA sthAna le
letI haiM aura kucha prakRtiyAM apanI svabhAvagata vizeSatA ke kAraNa kabhI
baMdhatI haiM aura kabhI nahIM baMdhatI haiN| _ ina siharAra prakRtiyoM kA
saMvandhinoM mAnane ko kAraNa sahita spaSTa karate haiN| zarIra nAmakarma ke
pA~ca bhedoM meM se taMjasa, kAmaNa zarIra kA saMmArI jIvoM ke sAtha anAdi
saMbandha hone se dhruvabandhinI prakRtiyoM meM ginA hai  /  zeSa audArika,
baiMkriya aura AhAraka ye tIna zarIra aura inhIM nAma vAle aMgopAMga nAmakarma
ke tIna bhedoM meM se eka jIva ko eka samaya meM eka zarIra aura eka aMgopAMga
kA hI baMdha hotA hai; dUsare kA nahIM  /  kyoMki paraspara virodhI hone se eka
ke baMdha ke samaya dUsare kA baMdha nahIM ho sakatA hai| imIlie inako
adhruvabaMdhinI mAnA hai| samacaturasra Adi chaha saMsthAna bhI parampara meM
virodhI haiN| samacaturasra saMsthAna karma se yadi zarIra kA saMsthAna--AkAra
samacaturasra rUpa hai to usameM anya saMsthAna kA baMdha, udaya nahIM ho sakatA
hai, ataH ve bhI adhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyoM meM garbhita kiye gaye haiN| manuSya
aura tiryaMca prAyogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hone para hI vajraRSabhanAgaca Adi
chaha saMhananoM meM se eka samaya meM eka hI kA baMdha hotA hai tathA deva va
nAraka prAyogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hone para eka bhI saMhanana kA baMdha nahIM
hotA hai  /  ataeva saMhanana nAmakarma adhruvabandhI hai|

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 100  The five **jati** (castes) from **ekendriya** (one-sense) to
**panchendriya** (five-sense), and the four **gati** (paths) from **devagati**
(heavenly path) to **narakagati** (hellish path), are called **adhruvabandhini**
(non-fixed) because only one **jati** and one **gati** are bound at a time.
Similarly, **gubha** (good) or **ashubha** (bad) **vihayogati** (path of
liberation) and the four **anupurvi** (consequences) from **devanupurvi**
(heavenly consequence) are also **adhruvabandhini** because only one of them is
bound at a time.  The thirty-three **prakriti** (natures) from **oudarik**
(generous) to **anupurvi** (consequence) are **adhruvabandhini** because they
are bound with their respective **pratipakshini** (opposite) and **virodhini**
(contradictory) **prakriti**.  The **tirthankara** (liberated soul)
**namakarma** (karma) is bound relative to **samyaktv** (right faith), but it is
not necessary that it is bound when **samyaktv** is present. It is bound for
some and not for others even when **samyaktv** is present. Therefore, it is
**adhruvabandhini**.  The **namakarma** of **uccvas** (exhalation) is bound when
**paryaptak** (sufficient) and **prayogya** (applicable) **prakriti** are bound,
but not when **aparyaptak** (insufficient) and **prayogya** **prakriti** are
bound. The **namakarma** of **udyot** (illumination) is bound for some and not
for others when **tiryanch** (animal) and **prayogya** **prakriti** are bound.
Therefore, **uccvas** and **udyot** **namakarma** are **adhruvabandhini**.  The
**namakarma** of **atap** (heat) is bound for some and not for others when
**prithvikaayik** (earthly) and **prayogya** **prakriti** are bound. Therefore,
it is **adhruvabandhini**. The **namakarma** of **paraghat** (destruction) is
bound for some when **paryaptak** and **prayogya** **prakriti** are bound, but
it is not bound for anyone when **aparyaptak** and **prayogya** **prakriti** are
bound. Therefore, it is **adhruvabandhini**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka ekendriyaAdi paMcendriya jAti paryanta pA~ca jAtiyoM meM se eka samaya
meM eka hI jAti kA, devagati Adi cAra gatiyoM meM se eka hI gati kA baMdha hone
se jAti ba gati nAmakarma ke bhedoM ko adhruvabaMdhinI kahA hai| isI prakAra
gubha yA azubha vihAyogati meM se eka samaya meM eka kA hI bandha hotA hai tathA
devAnupUrvI Adi cAra AnupUrviyoM meM se eka samaya meM eka kA hI bandha hotA hai
/  ataH inako adhruvabandhinI prakRti kahA hai| audArika Adi zarIra se lekara
AnupUrvI nAmakarma ke cAra bhedoM taka meM gabhita tetIsa prakRtiyAM apanI-apanI
pratipakSiNI-virodhinI prakRtiyoM sahita hone ke kAraNa adhruvabaMdhinI haiN|
tIrthakara nAmakarma kA vadha samyaktva sApekSa hai, lekina yaha Avazyaka nahIM
hai ki samyaktva ke hone para isakA baMdha ho hI jAye  /  samyaktva ke hone para
bhI kisI ke baMdha hotA hai aura kisI ke nahIM baMdhatA hai| isIliye
adhruvabaMdhI hai| paryAptaka-prAyogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hone para ucchvAsa
nAmakarma kA baMdha hotA hai, aparyAptakaprAyogya prakRtiyoM ke baMdha hone para
nahIM baMdhatA hai| tiryaMcaprAyogya prakRtiyoM ke baMdha hone para bhI udyota
nAmakarma kA baMdha kisI ko hotA hai aura kisI ko nahIM hotA hai, ataeva
ucchvAsa aura udyota nAmakarma adhruvabaMdhI haiN| pRthvIkAyika prAyogya
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hote rahate kisI ko . Atapa nAmakarma kA baMdha hotA hai
aura kisI ko nahIM hotA hai, ataH adhruvabandhI hai  /  parAghAta nAmakama
paryAptaprAyogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hone para kisI-kisI ko baMdhatA hai tathA
aparyAptaprAyogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hone para to kisI ko bhI nahIM baMdhatA
hai, ataH vaha adhruvabandhI hai| ..

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karmagrantha  The Basdashak and Stavardashak, totaling twenty
natures, are mutually antagonistic and bind themselves when their respective
eligible natures bind. Therefore, they are considered Adhruvbandhini natures.
High Gotra and Low Gotra are mutually antagonistic natures. When a High Gotra
binds, a Low Gotra does not bind, and vice versa. Therefore, both are called
Adhruvbandho. Similarly, Saata Vedaniya and Asaata Vedaniya are also mutually
antagonistic, making them Adhruvbandhini natures.  While considering Gotra Karma
and Vedaniya Karma as Adhruvbandhini natures, it is also important to understand
that Saata and Asaata Vedaniya are Adhruvbandhi only up to the sixth Gunasthan.
However, after the Asaata Vedaniya is liberated in the sixth Gunasthan, the
Saata Vedaniya Karma becomes Dhruvbandhi in the seventh and subsequent
Gunasthanas. Similarly, High Gotra and Low Gotra are Adhruvbandhi up to the
second Gunasthan. However, after the Low Gotra is liberated in the second
Gunasthan, the High Gotra becomes Dhruvbandhi in the subsequent Gunasthanas.
The two pairs of Mohaniya Karma, namely Haasya-Rati and Shoka-Arati, are
Adhruvbandhini. This is because these two pairs are mutually antagonistic. When
the Haasya-Rati pair binds, the Shoka-Arati pair does not bind, and vice versa.
**Note:** For the natures that are eligible to bind and liberate in each
Gunasthan, refer to the second Karmagrantha, verses 4 to 12.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama karmagrantha basadazaka aura sthAvaradazaka ko kula bIsa prakRtiyAM
paraspara virodhinI haiM tathA apane-apane prAyogya prakRtiyoM ke baMdha hone
para baMdhatI haiM  /  isaliye inako adhruvabandhinI prakRtiyoM meM ginA hai|
ucca gotra aura nIca gotra paraspara meM virodhinI prakRtiyAM haiN| ucca gotra
kA baMdha hote hue nIca gotra kA aura nIca gotra kA baMdha hote hue ucca gotra
kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai| ataeva ina donoM ko adhruvabaMdho kahA hai| sAtA
vedanIya aura asAtA vedanIya bhI paraspara meM eka dUsare kI virodhI haiM,
jisameM inakI adhruvabandhinI prakRti mAnA jAtA hai| gotra karma aura vedanIya
karma kI prakRtiyoM ko adhruvabandhinI mAnane ke sAtha-sAtha unake bAre meM yaha
vizeSatA bhI samajhanA cAhiye ki chaThe guNasthAna taka hI sAtA aura asAtA
vedanIya adhruvabaMdhI haiM, lekina chaThe guNasthAna meM asAtA vedanIya kA
baMdhaviccheda ho jAne para Age sAtaveM Adi guNasthAnoM meM sAtA vedanIya karma
dhruvabaMdhI ho jAtA hai| isI prakAra dUsare guNasthAna taka ucca gotra aura
nIca gotra adhruvabandhI haiM, kiMtu dUsare guNasthAna meM nIca gotra kA
baMdhaviccheda' ho jAne se Age ke guNasthAnoM meM ucca gotra dhruvabandhI ho
jAtA hai  /  mohanIya karma kI hAsAi juyaladuga' hAsyAdi do yumala arthAt hAsya-
rati tathA zoka-arati yaha cAra prakRtiyAM adhruvabaMdhinI haiN| kyoMki ye donoM
ghugala paraspara virodhI haiM  /  jaba hAsya-rati yugala kA baMdha hotA hai
taba zoka arati yugala kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai tathA zoka 1 pratyeka guNasthAna
meM baMdhayogya aura vicchinna hone vAlI prakRtiyoM ke liye dUsarA karmagrantha
gAthA 4 se 12 dekhiye  /

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shataka  At the time of the binding of the Arati couple, the binding of the
Hasya-Rati couple is not possible. These four natures have a separate binding.
However, it should be kept in mind that Hasya, Rati, Arati, and Shoka, these
four natures are only bound in the first five Ganasthana. In the sixth
Ganasthana, after the liberation of Shoka and Arati, the continuous binding of
Hasya and Rati occurs, making them Dhruvabandi.  Out of the three Vedas, Stri
Veda, Purusha Veda, and Napunsaka Veda, only one Veda is bound at a time.
Compared to Gunasthana, Napunsaka Veda is bound in the first Gunasthana, Stri
Veda is bound until the second Gunasthana. After that, Purusha Veda is bound in
the subsequent Gunasthana.  Out of the four types of Ayukarma, Devayau,
Manushayau, Tithanchayau, and Narakayau, only one Ayukarma is bound in one
Bhava. Therefore, they are called Adhruvabandi.  Thus, seventy-three natures
should be understood as Adhruvabandi. These include two Vedaniya, seven
Mohaniya, four Aamukarma, forty-eight Naam Karma, and two Golakarma natures. Out
of the 120 bindable natures, 47 are Dhruvabandi and 73 are Adhruvabandi. The
total of 47 and 73 is 120.  The binding, liberation of natures, their Anaavi-
Anant, etc. are explained in detail in the Granthalaghav.  From the perspective
of Granthalaghav, instead of mentioning the names of Dhruvodaya and Adhruvodaya
natures, we will explain the number of stages of Karmabandha and Karmaudaya. To
address this curiosity, we will first explain the Bhangas. The names of the
Bhangas of binding are the same as the Bhangas of liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka arati yugala ke baMdha ke samaya hAsya-rati ghugala kA baMdha saMbhava
nahIM hai| ina cAra prakRtiyoM kA sAntara baMdha hotA hai| lekina yaha bAta
dhyAna meM rakhanA cAhiye ki hAsya, rati, arati, zoka, yaha cAroM prakaTiyAM
paThe mRNasthAna nala hI avabandhinI haiN| chaThe gaNasthAna meM zoka aura arati
kA bandhaviccheda ho jAne para Age hAsya aura rati kA niraMtara baMdha hotA hai,
jisase ve dhruvabaMdhinI ho jAtI haiN| strI veda, puruSa beda aura napuMsaka
veda meM se eka samaya meM kisI eka veda kA baMdha hotA hai  /  guNasthAna kI
apekSA napusaka veda pahale guNasthAna meM, strI veda dUsare guNasthAna taka
baMdhatA hai  /  usake bAda Age ke guNasthAnoM meM puruSaveda kA baMdha hotA
hai| Ayukarma ke devAyu, manuSyAyu, tithaMcAyu aura narakAyu ina cAra bhedoM meM
se eka bhava meM eka hI Ayu kA baMdha hotA hai  /  isIliye inako adhruvabandhI
kahA hai| isa prakAra tihattara prakRtiyAM adhruvabandhinI samajhanA cAhiye  /
jinameM vedanIya kI do, mohanIya kI sAta, Amukarma kI cAra, nAma karma kI
aTThAvana aura golakarma kI do prakRtiyAM zAmila haiN| bandhayogya 120
prakRtiyoM meM se 47 dhruvavandhinI aura 73 abhUvabandhinI haiM  /  4773 kA kula
jor3a 120 hotA hai| baMdha, ucaya prakRtiyoM ke anAvi-ananta Adi bhaMga
granthalAghava kI dRSTi se kramaprApta dhruvodayA aura adhrubodayA prakRtiyoM ke
nAmoM ko na batAkara karmabaMdha aura karmodaya kI kitanI dazAyeM hotI haiM, isa
jijJAsA ke samAdhAna ke liye pahale bhaMgoM ko batalAte haiN| jo baMdha ke
bhaMgoM ke nAma haiM, vahI udaya ke bhaMgoM ke bhI

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 21: The Fifth Karma Text  The names of the four types of **bhang**
(breaking) will be given here. This is because, just as it is necessary to
explain the ten stages of **bandha** (binding) due to the **dhruvabandhini**
(fixed) nature of **karma** (actions), it is also necessary to explain the
stages of **udaya** (emergence) after mentioning the number of **dhruvodaya**
(fixed emergence) and **anuvodaya** (variable emergence) natures. Therefore,
according to the **Madhyamakaradipa** (middle path) logic, the names of the
**bhang** that occur in the **bandha** and **udaya** states are given here. That
is, the **bhang** mentioned here should be applied to both **bandha** and
**udaya**. The names of these **bhang** are:  1. **Anadi Anant** (infinite from
beginningless time) 2. **Anadi Sant** (finite from beginningless time) 3. **Sadi
Anant** (infinite from a beginning) 4. **Sadi Sant** (finite from a beginning)
These four **bhang** occur in both **bandha** and **udaya**.  The
characteristics of these **bhang** are as follows:  **(1) Anadi Anant:** The
**bandha** or **udaya** whose flow has been uninterrupted from beginningless
time, neither broken in the middle nor in the future, is called **Anadi Anant**.
Such **bandha** or **udaya** occurs in **abhavya** (non-liberated) beings.
**(2) Anadi Sant:** The **bandha** or **udaya** whose flow has been
uninterrupted from beginningless time, but will end in the future, is called
**Anadi Sant**. Such **bandha** or **udaya** occurs in **bhavya** (liberated)
beings.  **(3) Sadi Anant:** The **bandha** or **udaya** whose flow has begun at
a specific point in time and continues uninterruptedly, is called **Sadi
Anant**. Such **bandha** or **udaya** occurs in beings who have fallen from the
**upshanta moha** (calm passion) **gunasthan** (spiritual state).  **(4) Sadi
Sant:** The **bandha** or **udaya** whose flow has begun at a specific point in
time and will end in the future, is called **Sadi Sant**. Such **bandha** or
**udaya** occurs in beings who have fallen from the **upshanta moha** (calm
passion) **gunasthan** (spiritual state).  **Note:** The **Panchasangraha**
(Five Collections) mentions only three **bhang** because the **Sadi Anant**
**bhang** is not a possible alternative.   **The verse:**  "There are three
types of **bandha**: **Anadi Anant**, **Anadi Sant**, and **Sadi Sant**.
**Abhavya** beings have **Anadi Anant** **bandha**, **bhavya** beings have
**Anadi Sant** **bandha**, and beings who have fallen from the **upshanta moha**
**gunasthan** have **Sadi Sant** **bandha."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 21 paMcama karmagrantha nAma hoMge  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki karma
prakRtiyoM ke dhruvabaMdhinI adhinI hone ke kAraNa jaise baMdha kI dazAyeM
batAnA Avazyaka hai vaise hI Age dhruvodayA aura anuvodayA prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA
batalAne ke pazcAta unakI udaya dazAyeM bhI batalAnA hogii| ataeva
madhyamakAradIpaka nyAya ke anusAra baMdha aura udaya avasthA meM banane vAle
bhaMgoM ke yahAM nAma batalAte haiM  /  arthAt yahAM diye jAne vAle bhaMgoM ko
baMdha meM bhI lagA lenA cAhiye aura udaya meM bhI bhaMgoM ke nAma isa prakAra
haiM 1 anAdi anaMta 2 anAdi sAnta 3 sAdi-anaMta, 4 sAdi mAnna  / ' yaha cAroM
bhaMga baMdha meM bhI hote haiM aura udaya meM bhI ! na bhaMgoM ke lakSaNa
kramaza: isa prakAra haiM- (1) anAvi - ananta - jisa baMdha yA udaya kI
paramparA kA pravAha anAdi kAla se nirAbAdha gati se calA A rahA hai. madhya meM
na kabhI vicchinna huA hai aura na Age bho hogA, aise baMdha yA udaya ko anAdi
anaMta kahate haiN| aisA bandha yA udaya abhavya jIvoM ko hotA hai  /  (2) anAdi
sAnta - jisa baMdha yA udaya kI paramparA kA pravAha anAdi kAla se binA
vyavadhAna ke calA A rahA hai, lekina Age 1 sAdi-ananta bhaMga vikalpa saMbhava
nahIM hone se paMcasaMgraha meM tIna maMga mAne hoI anAiato aNA-saMtoMya sAitI
ya  /  baMdho abhavyabhabbo vasaMtajI besu iha tiviho || -baMdha tIna prakAra kA
hotA hai - anAdi-anata, anAdi sAnta aura sAdisAnta  /  abhavyoM meM canAdi-
ananta, bhavyoM meM anAdi- sAnta aura upazAntamoha guNasthAna se cyuta hue jIvoM
meM sAdinsAnta baMdha hotA hai  /

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
22 If it is interrupted, it is called Anadi Sant. This happens to the Bhavy. (3)
Sabit - Which is infinite with the beginning. But this break does not occur in
any bondage or arising nature. Because whatever bondage or arising is with the
beginning can never be infinite. Therefore, this option is not considered
acceptable. (4) Savi Sant - The bondage or arising which stops in the middle and
starts again and does not become continuous, that bondage or arising is called
Sadi Sant. This is found in the beings who have fallen from the Upaśānta Moh
Gunasthāna. Gatak Thus, after explaining the nature of the four breaks, in the
next verse, the said breaks are reduced in the bondage and arising natures.
Taiyajjabhangatigam. Pathamaviya Dhuvajvaisu Buvbandhisu Mishthammi Timmi
Bhangaa Duhaavi Aghuya Turiabhangaa ||15|| Shabdarth - Padamviya first and
second break, Dhubauvahasunavodayi natures in Dhuvbandhi - Dhruvbandhinam
natures, Tahaavjam - except the third break, Sangatigam - there are three
breaks, Micchhami - in Mithyatva, Timni - three, Manga - break Duhaavi - both
types of Adhwa Adhruvbandhini and Anushodya, Turiranga - fourth break. - - -
Gavaarth - In Dhruvodayi natures, there is the first and second break. In Dhruv-
bandhini natures, except for the third break

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 22 vyucchinna ho jAyegA, use anAdi sAnta kahate haiM  /  yaha bhavya ko hotA
hai  /  (3) sAbita- jo Adi sahita hokara anaMta ho| lekina yaha bhaMga kisI bhI
baMdha yA udaya prakRti meM ghaTita nahIM hotA hai  /  kyoMki jo baMdha yA udaya
Adi sahita hogA vaha kabhI bhI ananta nahIM ho sakatA hai  /  isIliye isa
vikalpa ko grAhya nahIM mAnA jAtA hai  /  (4) sAvi santa- jo baMdha yA udaya
bIca meM ruka kara punaH prArambha hotA hai aura santara na ho jAtA hai, usa
baMdha yA udaya ko sAdi sAnta kahate haiM  /  yaha upazAMta moha guNasthAna se
cyuta hue jIvoM meM pAyA jAtA hai  /  gataka isa prakAra se cAra bhaMgoM kA
svarUpa batalAkara aba Age kI gAthA meM bandha aura udaya prakRtiyoM meM ukta
bhaMgoM ko ghaTAte haiM  /  taiayajjabhaMgatigaM  /  paThamaviyA dhuvajavaisu
buvabaMdhisu miSThammi timmi bhaMgA duhAvi aghuyA turiabhaMgA  // 15 //
zabdArtha - padamaviyA pahalA aura dUsarA bhaMga, dhubauvahasunavodayI
prakRtiyoM meM dhuvabaMdhi- dhruvabandhinAM prakRtiyoM meM, tahaavajma- tIsare
maMga ke sivAya, saMgatigaM- tIna bhaMga hote haiM, micchami - mithyAtva meM,
timni-tIna, maMgA - maMga duhAvi--donoM prakAra kI adhvA adhruvabaMdhinI aura
anuSodaya meM, turiraMgA -- cauthA bhaMga | - - - gAvArtha - dhruvodayI
prakRtiyoM meM pahalA aura dUsarA bhaMga hotA hai  /  dhruva-bandhinI prakRtiyoM
meM tIsare bhaMga ke alAvA

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  This text discusses the three types of "bhang"
(divisions) within "mithyatva" (false belief) and the fourth "bhang" found in
both types of "adhruva" (non-permanent) natures.   Previously, the four "bhangs"
- "anadi-ananta" (beginningless-endless), "anadi-santa" (beginningless-limited),
"sadi-ananta" (beginningful-endless), and "sadi-santa" (beginningful-limited) -
were only mentioned by name. Here, we clarify which "bhang" applies to
"dhruvabandi" (permanent) and other natures.  These "bhangs" occur in "dhruva"
(permanent), "adhruva" (non-permanent) "bandha" (bondage), and "udaya" (arising)
natures. The names of "dhruvabandi" and "adhruvabandi" natures have already been
mentioned, and the names of "dhruvodayi" (permanent arising) and "adhruvodayi"
(non-permanent arising) natures will be explained in the following verses.
However, for the sake of brevity and to avoid repetition, we will mention the
"bhangs" occurring in both "bandha" and "udaya" natures together.  Firstly, the
verse "padhamavia dhruvudaimu pad" states that the first "bhang" in "dhruvodayi"
natures is "anadi-ananta" and the second is "anadi-santa." This is because
"abhavya" (non-liberated beings) never experience the arising of "dhruvodayi"
natures. Therefore, the first "bhang" is considered "anadi-ananta."  "Bhavya"
(liberated beings) experience arising from the beginningless, but their arising
ceases in the twelfth or thirteenth "gunasthan" (stages of spiritual progress).
This is why the second "bhang" in "dhruvodayi" natures is considered "anadi-
santa."  We have explained the first and second "bhangs" in "dhruvodayi"
natures. However, "mithyatva" (false belief), being a characteristic of
"mohaniya karma" (delusion-causing karma), has three "bhangs" - "anadi-ananta,"
"anadi-santa," and "sadi-santa." These "bhangs" occur as follows: "abhavya"
experience the arising of "mithyatva" from the beginningless, and it never
ceases. Therefore, it is considered "anadi-ananta."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha tIna bhaMga tathA mithyAtva meM bhI tIna bhaMga hote haiN|
donoM prakAra kI adhruva prakRtiyoM meM cauthA bhaMga hotA hai| vizeSArtha-
pUrva meM anAdi-ananta, anAdi-sAnta, sAdi-ananta aura sAdi-sAnta ina cAra
bhaMgoM kA sirpha nAma nirdeza kiyA hai| yahAM una bhaMgoM meM se kaunasA bhaMga
dhruvabaMdhinI Adi prakRtiyoM meM hotA hai, yaha spaSTa karate haiN| ye bhaMga
dhruva, adhruva baMdha aura udaya prakRtiyoM meM hote haiM  /  dhruvavandhinI
aura adhruvabandhino prakRtiyoM ke nAmoM kA nirdeza kiyA jA cukA hai aura
dhruvodayI aura adhruvodayI prakRtiyoM ke nAma Age kI gAthA meM batalAye jAyeMge
/  lekina yahAM sAmAnya se tathA punarAvRtti na hone dene kI dRSTi se baMdha
prakRtiyoM ke sAtha udaya prakRtiyo me bhAbhI ko hone ke bAre meM nirdeza kara
diyA hai  /  sarvaprathama 'par3hamaviyA dhruvaudaimu pada se batalAyA hai ki
dhruvodayI prakRtiyoM meM pahalA anAdi-ananta aura dUsarA anAdi-sAnta yaha do
bhaMga hote haiN| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki abhabyoM ke dhruvodayI prakRtiyoM kA
kabhI bhI anudaya nahIM hotA hai  /  ataeva pahalA anAdi-anaMta bhaMga mAnA gayA
hai  /  'bhavya ko udaya to anAdi se hotA hai, kintu bArahadeM, terahaveM
guNasthAna meM unakA udaya nahIM ho pAtA yAnI udayaviccheda ho jAtA hai  /  isI
kAraNa dhruvodayI prakRtiyoM meM dUsarA anAdi-sAMta bhaMga mAnA hai| dhruvodayI
prakRtiyoM meM pahalA aura dUsarA bhaMga batalAyA hai| lekina unameM se
mithyAtva mohanIya karma ko apanI vizeSatA hone se 'micchammi tinni
bhaMgA'-mithyAtva meM tIna bhaMga hote haiM anAdi-ananta, anAdi-sAnta, mAdi-
mAnta  /  ye bhaMga isa prakAra hote haiM ki abhabya ko mithyAtva kA udaya
anAdi-anaMta hai| usake na to kabhI mithyAtva kA

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sangha  The absence of Samyaktva (right belief) has occurred and will not occur
again. The second Anadisanta Bhanga (beginningless and endless destruction)
occurs with respect to the Bhavya Jiva (spiritual aspirant) who has
Anadimithyadrsti (beginningless false belief). Because, after the attainment of
Samyaktva, the rise of his Mithyatva (false belief) is absent. But when
Samyaktva is lost and Mithyatva arises again, and then Samyaktva is attained
again, the rise of Mithyatva ends. Thus, the rise of Mithyatva after the loss of
Samyaktva is Sadisanta (with a beginning and an end), and the cessation of that
Mithyatva due to the attainment of Samyaktva again is Sadisanta. In this
situation, the fourth Bhanga, Sadisanta Mithyatva, occurs.  However, in the
Dhruvabandhi (permanent bondage) Prakritis, except for the third Bhanga, the
remaining three Bhangas occur: "Dhruvabandhesu taiyadhaja bhangatiggam." That
is, in the Dhruvabandhi Prakritis, the first is Anadyananta (beginningless and
endless), the second is Anadisanta (beginningless and with an end), and the
fourth is Sadisanta (with a beginning and an end). These three Bhangas are as
follows: for the Abhavya (spiritually incapable), the bondage of Dhruvabandhi
Prakritis is beginningless and never becomes unbinding, hence the first
Anadyananta Bhanga occurs; and for the Bhavya (spiritual aspirant) too, although
the bondage of Dhruvabandhi Prakritis is beginningless, with the ascent of
Gunasthanas (stages of spiritual development), the dissociation of Prakritis
occurs, resulting in the second Anadisanta Bhanga; and in the subsequent
Gunasthanas, it becomes unbinding, and then again becomes binding, hence the
fourth Sadisanta Bhanga occurs.  'Duhavi aghuvva turiyabhanga' means that in
both types of Adhruva (non-permanent) Prakritis - Adhruvabandhi (non-permanently
bound) and Adhruvaudayi (non-permanently arising) - the fourth Bhanga occurs.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sngg abhAva haA hai aura na hona vAlA hai| dUsarA anAdi-sAnta bhaMga anAdi
mithyAdRSTi bhavya jIva kI apekSA ghaTita hotA hai| kyoMki pahale-pahale
samyaktva kI prApti hone para usake mithyAtva ke udaya kA abhAva ho jAtA hai  /
lekina samyaktva ke chUTa jAne va punaH mithyAtva kA udaya hone para aura usake
bAda punaH samyaktva kI prApti hone ke kAraNa mithyAtva ke udaya kA aMta hotA
hai| isa prakAra samyaktva ke chUTane ke bAda puna: mithyAtva kA udaya honA sAdi
hai aura punaH samyaktva kI prApti hone ke kAraNa usa mithyAtva kA udayaviccheda
honA sAnta hai| isa sthiti meM cauthA bhaMga sAdisAnta mithyAtva meM ghaTita
hotA hai| lekina dhruvabandhinI prakRtiyoM meM tIsare bhaMga ko chor3a zeSa tIna
bhaMga hote haiM"dhuvabaMdhisu taiadhaja bhaMgatigaM  / " yAnI dhruvabaMdhinI
prakRtiyoM meM pahalA - anAdi-ananta, dUsarA anAdi sAnta aura cauthA sAdi-sAnta
yaha tIna bhaMga hote haiM  /  ye tIna bhaMga isa prakAra haiMabhavya ko
dhruvabandhinI prakRtiyoM kA bandha anAdi kA hai aura kisI samaya bhI abandhaka
nahIM hotA hai, ataH pahalA anAdi-ananta bhaMga hotA hai tathA bhavya ko bhI
yadyapi dhruvabandhinI prakRtiyoM kA bandha anAdi kA hai, parantu guNasthAna
kramArohaNa ke sAtha-sAtha prakRtiyoM kA viccheda hotA jAtA hai jisase dUsarA
anAdi sAnta bhaMga hotA hai tathA usI guNasthAna se Age ke guNasthAna meM
ArohaNa karate samaya abandhaka hokara avarohaNa ke samaya punaH bandhaka ho
jAne se sAdibandha aura punaH kAlAntara meM guNasthAna kramArohaNa ke samaya
abandhaka hogA, isIliye usako cauthA sAdi-sAnta bhaMga hotA hai| 'duhAvi aghuvA
turiabhaMgA' yAnI donoM prakAra kI adhruva prakRtiyoM- adhruvabandhinI aura
adhruvodayI prakRtiyoM meM cauthA

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Samvarga Ty Sadi and Sant bhang occur. Because their bandha, uday are adhruva,
sometimes they occur and sometimes they don't. Due to adhruvata, their bandha
and uday have both an adi and an ant. 25 In Go. Karmakanda, while describing
prakritibandha, four types of bandha are mentioned. Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva and
Adhruva. Their characteristics are as follows: Saavi abandhabandhe se anavage
Anadi hu. 1 Abhayavasihi ghuso marvasa addha vo bandho || 122 || The bandha of a
karma which is absent and then binds again is called Sadi bandha. The anadi
bandha of the prakriti of a jiva who has not stepped on the 'shreni' is anadi
bandha. Abhavya jivas have dhruva bandha and bhavya jivas have adhruva bandha.
Here, the words dhruva and adhruva mean anant and sant respectively. Because the
bandha of an abhavya is anant and the bandha of a bhavya is sant. Dhruvabandhini
47 prakritis have the above mentioned types of bandha and the remaining 73
adhruvabandhini prakritis have sadi and anadi, these two bandhas. In
Karmagranth, three bhangs are mentioned for dhruvabandhini prakritis and in Go.
Karmakanda, four bhangs are mentioned. But there is no difference in opinion.
Because in Karmagranth, the statement is made about sangyogi bhangs and in Go.
Karmakanda, about each asangyogi bhang, like anadi, dhruva. Therefore, 1 1 The
gunaasthan beyond which the bandha of a karma occurs is called shreni here.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMvarga tya sAdi sAnta bhaMga hotA hai| kyoMki unakA bandha, udaya adhruva
hai, kabhI hotA hai aura kabhI nahIM hotA hai| adhruvatA ke kAraNa hI unake
baMdha aura udaya kI Adi bhI hai aura anta bhI hai  /  25 go0 karmakAMDa meM
prakRtibaMdha kA nirUpaNa karate hue baMdha ke cAra prakAra batalAye haiM  /
sAdi, anAdi, dhruva aura adhruva  /  jinake lakSaNa isa prakAra haiM sAvI
abandhabandhe se aiNAvage aNAdI hu  /  1 abhayvasihi ghuSo marvAsa addha vo
baMdho  //  122  //  jisa karma ke baMdha kA abhAva hokara punaH vahIM karma
baMdhe, use sAdi baMdha kahate haiM  /  zraNi' para jisane paira nahIM rakhA
hai, usa jIva ke usa prakRti kA anAdi baMdha hotA hai  /  abhavya jIvoM ko
dhruva baMdha aura bhavya jIvoM ko adhruva baMdha hotA hai  /  yahAM dhruva aura
adhruva zabda kA artha kramazaH anaMta aura sAnta grahaNa kiyA hai| kyoMki
abhavya kA baMdha anaMta aura bhavya kA baMdha sAnta hotA hai| dhruvabandhinI 47
prakRtiyoM meM ukta nAroM prakAra ke baMdha hote haiM tathA zeSa adhruvabaMdhinI
73 prakRtiyoM meM sAdi aura atra yaha do baMdha haiM | karmagrantha meM
dhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyoM meM tIna bhaMga aura go0 karmakAMDa meM ukta cAra
bhaMga batalAye haiM  /  lekina inameM matabhinnatA nahIM hai  /  kyoMki
karmagrantha meM saMyogI bhaMgoM ko lekara kathana kiyA gayA hai aura go0
karmakAMDa meM asaMyogI pratyeka bhaMga kA, jaise anAdi, dhutra  /  isIliye 1 1
jisa guNasthAna taka jisa karma kA bandha hotA hai, usa guNasthAna se Age ke
guNasthAna ko yahA~ zreNi kahA gayA hai|

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sataka (a Jain text) mentions three types of bhang (destruction) for sadi-
ananta (infinite) karma, while the Go-Karmakanda (another Jain text) mentions
four types of bhang for each. Similarly, the Sataka mentions one type of bhang
for adhruvabandhini (non-permanent) karma, while the Go-Karmakanda mentions two
types of bhang. However, there is no real difference. Combining sadi and adhruv
(or sant) results in the sadi-sant bhang, while counting them separately makes
them two. There is uniformity among the Karmagranthik (Jain scholars) regarding
the bhang of prakritibandh (nature-binding), but the difference in style of
expression creates an apparent difference.  Therefore, one should know the order
of bhang for anadi-ananta (infinite) karma in bandh (binding) and uday (arising)
prakritis. This is a general statement. The specific statement will be made in
its place after mentioning the names of dhruvodayi (permanent arising) and
adhruvodayi (non-permanent arising) prakritis.  Now, in the following verse, we
will mention the names of dhruvodayi prakritis. The dhruvodayi prakritis are:
Nimina (creation karma), Thira (stable karma), Athira (unstable karma), Aguruya
(heavy karma), Suha (auspicious karma), Asuha (inauspicious karma), Tey (tejas
body), Kamma (form body), Chavana (four types of varna), Nanantaram (knowledge-
obscuring karma), Dasan (four types of darsana-obscuring karma), Mischa (false
belief karma), Dhruvodaya (five types of nodani karma), Sagobisa (twenty-seven
types of karma).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sataka karmagrantha meM sAdi-ananta bhaMga na bana sakane ke kAraNa saMyogI
tIna bhaMga mAne haiM aura go0 karmakAMDa meM pratyeka bhaMga bana sakate se
cAra  /  isI prakAra karma grantha meM adhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyoM meM eka sAdi-
sAnta bhaMga batAyA hai aura go0 karmakAMDa meM sAdi aura adhruva-do bhaMga kahe
haiN| lekina isameM bhI antara nahIM hai| kyoMki sAdi aura adhruva yAni sAnta ko
milAne se saMyogI mAdisAnta bhaMga banatA hai aura donoM ko alaga-alaga ginane
se ve do ho jAte haiN| prakRtibaMdha ke bhaMgoM ke bAre meM kArmagranthikoM meM
ekarUpatA hai, lekina kathanazailI kI vividhatA se bhinnatA-sI pratIta hotI hai|
isa prakAra se baMdha aura udaya prakRtiyoM meM anAdi-ananta Adi bhaMgoM kA
krama jAnanA cAhiye  /  yaha sAmAnya se kathana kiyA hai  /  vizeSa kathana
dhruvodayI aura adhruvodayI prakRtiyoM kA nAma nirdeza karane ke anantara
yathAsthAna kiyA jA rahA hai| aba Age kI gAthA meM dhruvodaya prakRtiyoM ke
nAmoM ko| batalAte haiN| bhravodaya prakRtiyA~ nimiNa thira athira aguruya
suhAsuhaM teya kamma cvnnaa| nANaMtarAya desaNa miccha dhuva udaya sagosA  //
//  zabdArtha - nimiNa-nirmANa nAmakarma, thira sthira nAmakarma, athira
masthira nAmakarma; aguruya aguruladhu nAmakarma, suhazubha nAmakarma,
asuhaM-~-azubha nAmakarma, teya - tejasa zarIra, kamma - phArmaNa zarIra, ca
uvAnA-varNacatuSka, nANaMtarAma-jJAnAvaraNa aMtarAya karma ke meda, dasaNa *
cAra darganAvaraNa, mischa - mithyAtva mohanIya, dhuvaudaya-5 nodanI, sagabIsA
sattAIsa  /

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  "The five karma granths, namely, **Gayaarp-nirman**,
**sthira**, **asthira**, **agurulghu**, **shubha**, **ashubha**, **tanjas karman
sharira**, **varna chatushk**, **five jnana avaran**, **five antaraya**, **four
darshan avaran**, and **mithyatva mohaniya**, are the twenty-seven
**dhruvodaya** natures."  **Special Meaning:** This verse lists the twenty-seven
**dhruvodaya** natures. They are called **dhruvodaya** because their existence
remains constant until their time of rise and fall.  There are 122 **udayoyoga**
natures for the eight karmas, namely, **jnana avaran** (5), **darshan avaran**
(2), **vedaniya** (2), **mohaniya** (28), **ayu** (4), **nama** (67), **gotra**
(2), and **antaraya** (5). Thus, there are 5 + 2 + 2 + 4 + 67 + 2 + 5 = 122
natures. Out of these, 27 are **dhruvodaya**. Their details are as follows:  (1)
**Jnana Avaran:** **mati**, **shruta**, **avadhi**, **manparyaya**, **kevala
jnana avaran**. (2) **Darshan Avaran:** **chakshu**, **achakshu**, **avadhi**,
**kevala darshan avaran**. (3) **Mohaniya:** **mithyatva**.  (a)
"**Nimmanadhirapirateyakammaranar agurumahamumuham. Nanantarayadasagan sanchan
miccha nicchadaya.**" - Panchasangrah 3.16  (b) "In the **Karmakand** of the
**Go**, the **dhruvodaya** natures are described in the context of counting the
**udayashbandhini** natures... **Misal sahamass ghadiyo. Nejagam vanchaom
thinmrigajugalagurunimin dhuvudaya.**" - Go Karmakand, verses 402, 403.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha gAyArpa-nirmANa, sthira, asthira, agurulaghu, zubha,
azubha, taMjasa kArmaNa zarIra, varNacatuSka, pAMca jJAnAvaraNa, pAMca aMtarAya,
cAra darzanAvaraNa aura mithyAtva mohanIya, ye dhruvodayI sattAIsa prakRtiyAM
haiN|' vizeSArtha- isa gAthA meM dhrubodayI mattAIsa prakRtiyoM ke nAma batalAte
haiM  /  inako dhruvodayI kahane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki apane udayaviccheda kAla
taka inakA udaya banA rahatA hai| zAnAvaraNa Adi ATha karmoM kI udayayogya 122
prakRtiyAM haiM - jhAnAvaraNa 5, darzanAvaraNa, vedanIya 2, mohanIya 28, Ayu 4,
nAma 67, gotra 2, antarAya 5  /  isa prakAra me 5++2+2+4+6+2 +5=122 prakRtiyAM
hotI haiM  /  inameM se 27 prakRtiyAM dhruvodayI haiN| jinakA vivaraNa kramazaH
isa prakAra hai (1) sAmAvaraNa-mati, zruta, avadhi, manaparyAya, kevala
zAnAvaraNa  /  (2) vanAvaraNa-cakSa, acakSu, avadhi, kevala darzanAbaraNa  /
(3) mohanIya-mithyAtva | 1 (ka) nimmANadhirApirateyakammaraNAra agurumahamamuhaM
/  nANaMtarAyadasagaM saNacana miccha niccadayA  /  -paMkhasaMgraha 3 / 16 (kha)
go0 karmakAMDa meM strodayazbandhinI prakRtiyoM ko ginane ke saMdarbha meM pra
vodayI prakutiyoM kA nirdema ma prakAra kiyA hai .... misaLa sahamassa ghAdIyo
/  /  nejagaM vaNacaOM thinmRgajugalaguruNimiNa dhuvaudayA  /  /  - go0
karmakAMDa gA0 402, 403

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shataka (5)  **Name Karma:** Creation, Stable, Unstable, Heavy-Light,
Auspicious, Inauspicious, Tejas Body, Karman Body, Color, Smell, Taste, Touch.
**15) Obstacles:** Giving, Gain, Enjoyment, Consumption, Semen Obstacles.  These
are discussed in the order of the verses. The twelve aspects of Name Karma -
Creation, Stable, Unstable, Heavy-Light, Auspicious, Inauspicious, Tejas,
Karman, and the four aspects of Color - are considered **Dhruvodaka** (ever-
present) because their manifestation is always present in the beings bound by
the **Pasha** (bondage). As long as there is a body, their manifestation will
continue. At the end of the thirteenth **Munasthan** (stage of spiritual
progress), the manifestation of these twelve aspects ceases, but until then, all
beings experience their manifestation.  Although the four aspects of Stable,
Unstable, Auspicious, and Inauspicious are considered **opposite** to each
other, this opposition is in relation to **bondage**. Because, during the time
of Stable Name Karma, Unstable Name Karma cannot be bound, and during the time
of Auspicious Name Karma, Inauspicious Name Karma cannot be bound. However,
there is no opposition in relation to **manifestation**. Stable and Unstable can
manifest simultaneously. Because, due to the manifestation of Stable Name Karma,
bones, teeth, etc. become stable, and due to the manifestation of Unstable Name
Karma, blood, etc. become unstable. Similarly, due to the manifestation of
Auspicious Name Karma, the head, etc. become auspicious limbs, and due to the
manifestation of Inauspicious Name Karma, the feet, etc. become inauspicious
limbs. Therefore, although these four aspects are considered opposite in
relation to bondage, they are considered non-opposite in relation to
manifestation.  The five **Gnanavarana** (knowledge obscurations), five
**Antaraya** (obstacles), and four **Darshanavarana** (perception obscurations)
- these fourteen aspects continue to manifest until their destruction at their
respective **Gunasthan** (stage of spiritual progress). Their destruction occurs
at the culmination of the twelfth **Gunasthan**. Therefore, they are called
**Naanantarapa Dasan Chal O Sajogi Vayala** (the fourteen aspects that are not
destroyed until the twelfth Gunasthan). - **Second Karmagrantha, Verse 20**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka (5) nAmakarma nirmANa, sthira, asthira, agurulaghu, zubha, azubha
taijasa zarIra, kArmaNa zarIra, varNa, gaMdha, rasa, sparza  /  15) aMtarAya-
dAna, lAbha, bhoga, upabhoga, vIrya antarAya | inakA vivecana gAthAgata krama ke
anusAra karate haiN| nAmakarma kI nirmANa, sthira, asthira, agurulaghu, zubha,
azubha, tejasa, kArmaNa tathA varNacatuSka yaha bAraha pratiyAM dhruvodakA,
kyoMki pAze pati ke jIvoM meM inakA udaya sarvadA rahatA hai  /  jaba taka
zarIra hai taba taka inakA udaya avazya banA rhegaa| terahaveM muNasthAna ke
aMta meM ina vAraha prakRtiyoM kA udayaviccheda hotA hai kintu vahA~ taka sabhI
jIvoM ke ina bAraha prakRtiyoM kA udaya banA rahatA hai| _ yadyapi sthira,
asthira tathA zubha, azubha ye cAra prakRtiyA~ paraspara virodhinI kahalAtI haiM
/  lekina inakA virodhitva baMdha kI apekSA hai, kyoMki sthira nAmakarma ke
samaya asthira nAmakarma kA aura zubha nAma ke samaya azubha nAmakarma kA baMdha
nahIM ho sakatA hai, kintu udayApekSA inameM virodha nahIM hai  /  sthira aura
asthira kA udaya eka sAtha ho sakatA hai| kyoMki sthira nAmakarma ke udaya se
hAr3a, dAMta Adi sthira hote haiM aura asthira nAmakarma ke udaya se rudhira Adi
asthira hote haiM, isI prakAra zubha nAmakarma ke udaya se mastaka Adi zubha
aMga hote haiM aura azubha nAmakarma ke udaya se paira Adi azubha aMga  /
ataeva ye cAroM prakRtiyAM baMdha kI apekSA birodhinI hone para bhI udayApekSA
avirodhinI mAnI gaI haiN| pAMca jJAnAvaraNa, pAMca aMtarAya aura cAra
darzanAvaraNa ina caudaha prakRtiyoM kA udaya apane kSaya hone vAle guNasthAna
taka banA rahatA hai  /  inakA kSatra vArahave guNasthAna ke carama samaya meM
hotA hai  /  ataeva inheM 1 nANaMtarApa dasaNa cala o sajogi vAyAlA  /  -
dvitIya karmagrantha gA0 20

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fifth karma granth is called Dhruvodaya. The Mohaniya karma, with the
Mithyatva prakriti, arises and ceases at the end of the first Mithyatva
gunasthan. Therefore, the arising of Mithyatva is Dhruva until the first
Mithyatva gunasthan. This is why it is called Dhruvodaya prakriti.  Thus,
according to the order of the verses, there are 12 Dhruvodaya prakritis for
Namakarma, 5 for Jnanavarana, 5 for Antaraya, 4 for Darshanavarana, and 1 for
Mohaniya, totaling 27 Dhruvodaya prakritis. Now, in the next verse, the names of
the Adhruvodaya prakritis are mentioned:  **Verse 7:**  **Word Meaning:**  *
Ghir-Mubhier - Stable, auspicious, and those other than them * Shina - Without *
Adhubandhi - Adhuvabandhi prakriti * Mikchh Vinu - Besides Mithyatva *
Mohadhruvbandho - The remaining Dhruvabandhi prakritis of Mohaniya karma * Nida
- Sleep * Upghaay - Upghāt * Mosan - Mixed Mohaniya * Samm - Samyaktva Mohaniya
* Pananavad - Forty-nine * Madhuvridya - Adhruvodaya  **Meaning:**  * Stable,
auspicious, and those other than them (unstable and inauspicious) - 66
Adhruvabandhi prakritis * Besides Mithyatva, the Dhruvabandhi prakritis of
Mohaniya karma - 18 prakritis * Five sleep, Upghāt, mixed and Samyaktva Mohaniya
- 65 prakritis  **Total:** These 65 prakritis are Adhruvodaya.  **Special
Meaning:**  In the previous verse, 27 Dhruvodaya prakritis were mentioned.
Therefore, out of the 122 prakritis that are capable of arising, these 27
prakritis are subtracted.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karma grantha dhruvodaya kahA hai| mohanIya karma ko mithyAtva prakRti
kA udayaviccheda pahale mithyAtva guNasthAna ke aMta meM hotA hai| ataH pahale
mithyAtva guNasthAna taka mithyAtva kA udaya dhruva hotA hai| isIliye yaha
dhrubodaya prakRti hai| isa prakAra gAthA kramAnusAra nAmakarma kI 12,
jJAnAvaraNa ko 5. antarAya kI 5, darzanAvaraNa kI 4 aura mohanIya kI 1, kula
sattAIsa prakRtiyAM dhruvodaya haiN| aba Age kI gAthA meM adhruvodaya prakRtiyoM
ke nAma batalAte haiM  /  adhvocya pratiyAM thira-supriyara viNa adhuvabaMdhI
miccha biNu mohadhuvabaMdho  /  niddovaghAya mIsaM samma paNanavada adhuvukyA
// 7 //  zabdArtha-ghira-mubhiyara-sthira, zubha tathA unase itara nAmakAma,
SiNa-vinA, adhubabaMdhI-adha vabaMdhI prakRti, mikacha viNumithyAtva ke alAvA,
mohadhRvabaMdho- mohanIna pharma kI zeSa dhra vabaMdhinI prakRtiyAM, nidA pAtra
nidrAyeM. upaghAya upaprAta, mosaM - mizra mohanIya, samma- samyaktva mohanIya,
paNanaSada-paMcAnave, madhuvRdayAabhra vodyaa| gAyA--sthira, zubha aura unase
itara asthira aura azubha ke sivAya zeSa adhruvabandhinI (66) prakRtiyAM,
mithyAtva ke binA mohanIya karma kI dhruvabandhinI 18 prakRtiyAM, pAMca nidrA,
upaghAta, mizra va samyaktva mohanIya kula ye 65 prakRtiyAM adhruvodayA haiN|
vizeSArtha-pUrva gAthA meM 27 dhruvodayA prakRtiyoM ke nAma batalAye haiM ataH
udayayogya 122 prakRtiyoM meM se ukta 27 prakRtiyoM ko kama

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **Shataka**  After the karmas are shed, the remaining 65
**Prakritis** are **Adhruvodaya**. This is indicated in this verse. The general
reason for considering these 65 **Prakritis** as **Adhruvodaya** is that many
**Prakritis** are mutually contradictory. For example, **Tirthankara** and other
**Prakritis** do not always arise in every being. Also, until the **Gunasthan**
where the separation of **Prakritis** from **Gunapratyay** is not indicated,
even if those **Prakritis** remain in that **Gunasthan**, the **Prakriti** may
or may not arise in relation to **Dravy** etc. Therefore, they are considered
**Anuvodaya** in **Prakritis**. A detailed explanation of this is given below.
Previously, the names of 73 **Adhruvabandhini Prakritis** were mentioned. Out of
these, except for the four **Prakritis** of **Sthira**, **Asthira**, **Shubha**,
and **Ashubha**, the remaining 66 **Prakritis** are **Adhruvodaya**. Out of
these 73 **Prakritis**, the five **Prakritis** of **Tirthankara**, **Uchchvas**,
**Udyot**, **Atap**, and **Paraghat** arise in some beings but not in others.
The remaining 64 **Prakritis**, just as they are contradictory in the state of
**Bandha**, are also contradictory in the state of **Udaya**. Therefore, they
are called **Adhruvodaya**.  Out of the 19 **Dhruvabandhini Prakritis** of
**Mohaniya Karma**, except for **Mithyatva**, the remaining 16 **Kshayas**,
**Bhaya**, and **Jugupsa**, these 18 **Dhruvabandhini Prakritis** are
**Adhruvodaya**. This is because they are mutually contradictory in **Udaya**.
When **Krodha** arises, the other **Kshayas** like **Mana** etc. do not arise.
Similarly, when **Mana** etc. arise, one should know about **Krodha** etc.
Therefore, even though they are not contradictory in relation to **Bandha**,
**Kshayas** like **Krodha** etc. are contradictory in relation to **Udaya**. Due
to this contradictory nature, **Kshayas** are called **Adhruvodaya**. The
**Udaya** of **Bhava** and **Jugupsa** is also **Kadachitka**. They arise in
some beings at some time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka kara dene para zeSa 65 prakRtiyAM adhruvodayA haiN| jinakA saMketa isa
gAthA meM kiyA gayA hai  /  ina paMcAnaveM prakRtiyoM ko adhruvodayA mAnane kA
sAmAnya kAraNa to yaha hai ki bahuta sI prakRtiyAM paraspara virodhI haiM aura
tIrthakara Adi kitanIka prakRtiyoM kA sadaiva udaya hotA nahIM hai tathA jisa
guNasthAna taka jitanI prakRtiyoM kA guNapratyaya se viccheda nahIM batalAyA
hai, vahAM taka una prakRtiyoM ke rahane para bhI usI guNasthAna meM vaha
prakRti dravya Adi ko apekSA udaya meM Aye bhI aura na bhI Aye, isIliye unako
anuvodaya, prakRtiyoM meM mAnA hai  /  inakA vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa nIceM kiyA jA
rahA hai| pUrva meM adhruvabandhinI tihattara prakRtiyoM ke nAma batalAye jA
cuke haiN| unameM se sthira, asthira, zubha, azubha ina cAra prakRtiyoM ke
sivAya zeSa 66 prakRtiyAM adhruvodayA haiN| ina unahattara prakRtiyoM meM se
tIrthakara, ucchvAsa, udyota, Atapa aura parAghAta ina pAMca prakRtiyoM kA udaya
kisI jIva ko hotA hai aura kisI jIva ko nahIM hotA hai tathA zeSa 64 prakRtiyAM
jaise bandhAvasthA meM virodhinI haiM, vaise hI udaya dazA meM virodhanI haiN|
isIliye inako adhruvodayA kahA hai| mohanIya karma kI dhruvabaMdhinI unnIsa
prakRtiyoM meM se mithyAtva ko chor3akara zeSa solaha kaSAya, bhaya aura jugupsA
ye aThAraha dhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyAM adhruvodayA haiM | kyoMki ye udaya meM
paraspara virodhI haiM  /  krodha kA udaya hone para mAna Adi anya kaSAyoM kA
udaya nahIM hotA hai, isI prakAra mAna Adi ke udaya ke samaya krodha Adi ke bAre
meM bhI jAnanA cAhiye  /  isaliye baMdha kI apekSA virodhinI nahIM hone para bhI
udaya kI apekSA krodhAdi kaSAyeM virodhinI haiN| isI virodharUpatA ke kAraNa
kaSAyoM ko adhruvodayA kahA hai| bhava aura jugupsA kA udaya bhI kAdAcitka hai
/  kisI ke kisI samaya inakA udaya hotA hai aura

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **There is no fixed time for the arising of any of
these.** Therefore, both of these are considered to be **Adhruvodya**.  **The
five types of Nidra, such as Nidra, are considered Adhruvodya because their
arising happens sometimes and sometimes not, and they are mutually
contradictory.** This means that only one Nidra arises at a time.  **The arising
of the Upghāt Nāmakarma happens to a being sometimes.** Therefore, it is
Adhruvodya.  **The Mixed Nature is considered Adhruvodya because its arising is
opposed to Samyaktva and Mithyatva, which are Mohaniya.** During the time of
these, its arising does not happen. The arising of Samyaktva Mohaniya happens to
the Vedak (Kshayopaśamik) Samyagdṛṣṭi, and the time of the arising of Vedak
Samyaktva is from the lowest Antamuhurta to the highest 66 Sagara plus four
previous Kotis. Therefore, it is Adhruvodya.  **In this way, the Natures are
Adhruvodya.** Even if there is a break in their arising, they can arise again.
**The reason for not considering Mithyatva Mohaniya as an Adhruvodya Nature is
that the arising of Mithyatva continuously remains in the first Mithyatva
Gunasthan, not stopping even for a moment.** Whereas, the arising of Adhruvodya
Natures happens sometimes and sometimes not due to the cause of Dravya, Kshetra,
Kala, etc., until their arising ceases. Therefore, they are called Adhruvodya.
**Explanation of the Mangas like Anavi-Ananta in the Bandha and Savaya Natures**
**Out of the 120 Bandhyoga Natures, 47 are Dhruvabandhini and 73 are
Adhruvabandhini.** And **out of the 122 Udayayoga Natures, 27 are Dhruvodya and
55 are Adhruvodya.** In this way, the Bandha and Udaya Natures are of two types:
Dhruva and Adhruva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha . kisI ke kisI samaya nahIM bhI hotA hai  /  ataeva ina
donoM ko adhrubodayA mAnA hai| darzanAvaraNa karma ke bheda nidrA Adi pAMca
nidrAyeM adhravodayA isaliye mAnI jAtI haiM ki inakA udaya kabhI hotA hai aura
kabhI nahIM hotA hai tathA ye nidrAyeM paraspara meM virodhI haiN| yAnI eka
samaya meM eka hI nidrA kA udaya hotA hai| upaghAta nAmakarma kA udaya kisI jIva
ko kabhI-kabhI hotA hai  /  ataH vaha adhruvodayI hai 1 mizra prakRti ko
adhruvodayI isaliye mAnA jAtA hai ki isakI udayavirodhinI samyaktva aura
mithyAtva mohanIya hai, jinake kAla meM isakA udaya nahIM hotA hai  /  samyaktva
mohanIya kA udaya vedaka (kSAyopazamika) samyagdRSTi ko hotA hai aura vedaka
samyaktva kA udaya kAla jaghanya antamuhUrta aura utkRSTa 66 sAgara adhika cAra
pUrva koTi hai  /  ataH yaha adhruvodayA hai  /  isa prakAra hai| prakRtiyAM
adhruvodayA haiM  /  inake udaya kA viccheda hone para bhI punaH udaya ho sakatA
hai  /  mithyAtva mohanIya ko adhruvodayA prakRti na mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai
ki mithyAtva kA udaya pahale mithyAtva guNasthAna meM satata rahatA hai, eka
kSaNa ke liye bhI nahIM rukatA hai| jabaki adhruvodayA prakRtiyoM kA
udayaviccheda na hone taka davya, kSetra, kAla Adi ke nimitta se kabhI udaya
hotA hai aura kabhI nahIM hotA hai  /  isIliye unakI adhruvodayA saMjJA hai|
baMdha evaM savaya prakRtiyoM meM anAvi-ananta Adi maMgoM kA spaSTIkaraNa
baMdhayogya 120 prakRtiyoM meM se 47 dhruvabaMdhinI aura 73 adhruvabaMdhinI
tathA udayayogya 122 prakRtiyoM meM se 27 dhruvodayA tathA 55 adhuvodayA haiN|
isa prakAra se baMdha evaM udaya prakRtiyoM ke dhruva, adhruva do

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Kuku** **Shataka**  The question arises from the form that the **Dhruva**
(permanent) **Prakritis** (principles) are always bound and arise from the
beginningless (**Anadi**) to the endless (**Anant**) time, and the **Adhruva**
(impermanent) **Prakritis** are bound and arise from the beginning (**Sadi**) to
the end (**Sant**). Therefore, one should consider these two parts as **Anadi
Anant** and **Sadi Sant**.  The solution is that the worldly being (**Sansari
Jiva**) is the doer and the enjoyer of **Karmas** (actions). This process
continues from the beginningless to the endless time. But, those beings who are
**Bhavya** (worthy of liberation) and **Abhavya** (not worthy of liberation),
there are four types of **Bhang** (break) in relation to them: **Anadi Anant**,
**Anadi Sant**, **Sadi Anant**, and **Sadi Sant**. These are explained in the
**Prakritis** of **Karma**.  The names of the four **Bhang** that occur in the
**Karma Prakritis** have been mentioned earlier. Out of them, except for the
third **Bhang** in the **Dhruva Bandhini Prakritis**, the remaining three
**Bhang** are **Anadi Anant**, **Anadi Sant**, and **Sadi Sant**, which are as
follows:  The first **Bhang**, **Anadi Anant**, occurs in relation to
**Abhavya** beings. Because the **Dhruva Bandhini Prakritis** of **Abhavya**
beings are bound from the beginningless to the endless time. The second
**Bhang**, **Anadi Sant**, occurs in relation to **Bhavya** beings. Because when
the binding of the fourteen **Prakritis** - five **Jnana Avarana** (knowledge
obscurations), five **Antaraya** (hindrances), and four **Darshana Avarana**
(perception obscurations) - is broken in the tenth **Gunasthan** (stage of
spiritual progress), then the **Anadi Sant Bhang** occurs. And when a being dies
after binding the aforementioned fourteen **Prakritis** in the eleventh
**Gunasthan** (stage of spiritual progress) - **Upshant Moh** (stage of subdued
delusion) - or when the time of the eleventh **Gunasthan** is completed, and the
being falls from the eleventh **Gunasthan** and binds the aforementioned
fourteen **Prakritis** again, and then breaks their binding in the tenth
**Gunasthan**, then the fourth **Bhang**, **Sadi Sant**, occurs.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kuku zataka rUpa hone se prazna hotA hai ki dhruva prakRtiyoM kA sadaiva anAdi
se ananta kAla taka baMdha, udaya hotA rahegA aura adhruva prakRtiyoM kA
sAdisAnta baMdha, udaya hotA hai| isaliye anAdi anaMta aura sAdi sAnta yaha do
aMga mAnanA cAhiye  /  isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki saMsArI jIva karmoM kA kartA
aura bhoktA hai  /  anAdi se anantakAla taka yaha krama calatA hai  /  lekina jo
jIva bhavya haiM- muktiprApti kI yogyatA vAle haiM tathA abhavya -muktiprApti kI
yogyatA vAle nahIM haiM, unakI apekSA se anAdi anaMta Adi cAra bhaMga hote hai|
jinakA baMdha aura udaya prakRtiyoM meM spaSTIkaraNa kiyA jA rahA hai  /  karma
prakRtiyoM meM hone vAle cAra bhaMgoM ke nAma pUrva meM batalAye jA cuke haiN|
unameM se dhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyoM meM tIsare bhaMga ke sivAya zeSa anAdi
anaMta anAdi sAnta, sAdi-sAMta yaha tIna bhaMga hote haiM-jo isa prakAra haiM--
pahalA anAdi anaMta bhaMga abhavya jIvoM kI apekSA se hotA hai  /  kyoMki
abhavya jIvoM ke dhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha anAdi anaMta hotA hai  /
anAdi- sAnta dUsarA bhaMga bhavya jIvoM kI apekSA ghaTita hotA hai| kyoMki pAMca
jJAnAvaraNa, pAMca aMtarAya aura cAra darzanAvaraNa ina caudaha prakRtiyoM ke
baMdha kI anAdi santAna jaba dasaveM guNasthAna meM vicchinna ho jAtI hai taba
anAdi sAnta bhaMga hotA hai tathA gyArahaveM upazAntamoha guNasthAna meM ukta
caudaha prakRtiyoM kA baMdhana karake maraNa ho jAne athavA gyArahaveM
guNasthAna kA samaya pUrA ho jAne ke kAraNa koI jIva gyArahaveM guNasthAna se
cyuta hokara jaba punaH ukta caudaha prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA hai aura
dasaveM guNasthAna meM punaH unakA baidhaviccheda karatA hai taba sAdi sAnta
nAmaka caturtha bhaMga ghaTita hotA hai  /

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Pacyakarma Granth  **The cessation of the bondage of Sanchalan Kshaya
occurs when a being attains the ninth Gunasthan. This is the first Anadi-Sant
Bhang. When the same being falls from the ninth Gunasthan and again binds itself
with Sanchalan Kshaya, and then again attains the ninth Gunasthan and ceases the
bondage, this is the fourth Sadi-Sant Bhang.**  **The thirteen natures: Nidra,
Prachala, Tejam, Karman, Varnachatusk, Agurulaghu, Upghāt, Nirman, Bhay and
Jugupsa, are severed in the eighth Gunasthan. This is the first Anadi-Sant
Bhang. When they are bound again after falling from the eighth Gunasthan, this
is Sadi Bandh. When they are severed again upon attaining the eighth Gunasthan,
this is Bandh Sant. Thus, the fourth Sadi-Sant Bhang occurs in them.**  **The
bondage of the four Pratyakhyana Avaran Kshayas is Anadi until the fifth
Gunasthan. However, it ceases in the sixth Gunasthan, making it Mant. Therefore,
the first Anadi-Sant Bhang occurs. When the bondage begins again after falling
from the sixth Gunasthan, and it ceases upon attaining the sixth Gunasthan, the
fourth Sadi-Sant Bhang occurs.**  **The bondage of the four Apratyakhyana Avaran
Kshayas is Anadi until the fourth Gunasthan. However, it ends in the fifth
Gunasthan, making it the second Anadi-Sant Bhang. When the bondage begins again
after falling from the fifth Gunasthan, and it ceases upon attaining the fifth
Gunasthan, the fourth Sadi-Sant Bhang occurs.**  **The bondage of the four
Kshayas: Mithyatva, Styanadvitrik, and Anantanubandhi, is Anadi. When the being
attains Samyaktva, the bondage of these Kshayas ceases, making it the second
Anadi-Sant Bhang. When the being falls back into Mithyatva...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacaya karma grantha saMcalana kaSAya ke baMdha kA nirodha jaba koI jIva nauveM
guNasthAna meM karatA hai taba anAdi-sAnta bhaMga ghani hotA hai aura jaba vahI
jIva nauveM guNasthAna se cyuta hokara punaH saMjvalana kaSAya kA baMdha karatA
hai tathA punaH nauveM guNasthAna ko prApta karane para usakA nirodha karatA hai
taba sAdi-sAnta cauthA bhaMga hotA hai| nidrA, pracalA, tejama, kArmaNa,
varNacatuSka, agurulaghu, upaghAta, nirmANa, bhaya aura jugupsA ye teraha
prakRtiyAM AThaveM guNasthAna meM vicchinna ho jAtI haiM taba inakA anAdi-sAnta
bhaMga hotA hai aura AThaveM gUNasthAna se patana hone ke bAda jaba unakA baMdha
hotA hai to vaha sAdi baMdha hai tathA punaH AThace guNasthAna meM pahu~cane
para jaba unakA baMdhaviccheda ho jAtA hai to vaha baMdha sAnta kahalAtA hai  /
isa prakAra unameM sAdi sAnta yaha cauthA bhaMga ghaTita hotA hai  /
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka kA baMdha pAMcaveM guNasthAna taka anAdi hai
kintu chaThe guNasthAna meM usakA abhAva ho jAne se mAnta hotA hai| ataH anAdi-
sAnta bhaMga hotA hai  /  chaThe guNasthAna se girane para jaba punaH baMdha
hone lagatA hai aura chaThe guNasthAna ke prApta karane para usakA abhAva ho
jAtA hai taba cauthA sAdi-sAnta bhaMga ghaTita hotA hai  /  apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
kaSAya catuSka kA baMdha cauthe guNasthAna taka anAdi hai, lekina pAMcaveM
guNasthAna meM usakA anta ho jAtA hai ataH dUsarA anAdi-sAnta bhaMga vanatA hai
tathA pAMcaveM guNasthAna se girane para punaH bandha aura jaba pAMcaveM
gaNasthAna ke prApta hone para abaMdha karane lagatA hai nava sAdi-sAnta cauthA
bhaMga hotA hai  /  mithyAtva, styAnaddhitrika, anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya catuSka kA
anAdi baMdhaka mithyAdRSTi jaba samyaktva ko prApti hone para unakA baMdha nahIM
karatA hai taba dUsarA anAdi-sAnta bhaMga aura punaH mithyAtva meM gira

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fourth type of *sadi-sant* destruction occurs when the *karmas* of the
mentioned natures are bound and not bound again upon attaining *samyaktvam*.
Thus, in the *dhruvabandhini* natures, except for the third type of *sadi-anant*
destruction, there are three other types of destruction: *anadi-anant*, *anadi-
sant*, and *sadi-sant*.  Now, we discuss the destruction in the *dhruvodaya*
natures. In the *dhruvodaya* natures, there are two types of destruction: the
first is *anadi-anant* and the second is *anadi-sant*. The names of the 27
*dhruvodaya* natures have been mentioned in their respective places. Among them,
the *mithyatva* nature is special. Therefore, its *karmas* are discussed
separately, and we now explain the remaining 26 natures.  The first type of
*anadi-anant* destruction in the 26 *dhruvodaya* natures, namely *nirman*,
*sthira*, *asthira*, *agurulaghu*, *shubha*, *ashubha*, *tejas*, *karman*,
*varna-chaturshka*, five *jnana-avaranas*, five *antarayas*, and four *darshan-
avaranas*, occurs in relation to *abhavya* beings. Because the *dhruvodaya*
natures of *abhavya* beings have neither beginning nor end.  The second type of
*anadi-sant* destruction occurs in relation to *bhavya* beings. The five *jnana-
avaranas*, five *antarayas*, and four *darshan-avaranas*, these fourteen
natures, have been present in beings since *anadi* time until the twelfth
*gunasthan*. But when their destruction occurs at the end of the twelfth
*gunasthan*, that destruction is called *anadi-sant*. Similarly, the remaining
twelve natures, such as *nirman*, *sthira*, *asthira*, etc., have an *anadi*
origin, and when their destruction occurs at the end of the thirteenth
*sayogikevali* *gunasthan*, their destruction is called *anadi-sant*.  Thus,
except for *mithyatva*, only two types of destruction occur in the remaining
*dhruvodaya* natures: *anadi-anant* in relation to *abhavya* beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 khataka kara ukta prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane aura punaH samyaktva kI prApti
hone para baMdha nahIM karane para cauthA sAdi-sAnta bhaMga hotA hai| isa
prakAra dhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyoM meM tIsare sAdi-anaMta bhaMga ke sivAya zeSa
anAdianaMta, anAdi sAnta aura sAdi-sAnta ye tIna bhaMga hote haiN| _ ava
dhruvodayA prakRtiyoM meM bhaMgoM ko ghaTita karate haiN| dhruvodayA prakRtiyoM
meM pahalA anAdi-anaMta aura dUsarA anAdi-sAnta yaha do bhaMga hote haiN|
dhruvodayA 27 prakRtiyoM ke nAma yathAsthAna batalAye jA cuke haiN| unameM se
mithyAtva prakRti meM vizeSatA hai| isalie usake boM ke bAre meM alaga meM kATa
liye jAne se zeSa chabbIsa prakRtiyoM ke bAre meM spaSTIkaraNa karate haiN|
nirmANa, sthira, asthira, agurulaghu, zubha, azubha, tejasa, kArmaNa,
varNacatuSka, pAMca jJAnAvaraNa, pAMca aMtarAya aura cAra darzanAvaraNa ina
chabbIsa dhruvodayo prakRtiyoM meM pahalA anAdi-ananta bhaMga abhabdha jIvoM kI
apekSA ghaTita hotA hai  /  kyoMki abhavya jIvoM ke dhruvodyaa| prakRtiyoM ke
udaya kA na to Adi hai aura na aMta hI hotA hai| dUsarA anAdi-sAnta bhaMga
bhavya jIvoM kI upekSA ghaTita hotA haiN| . pAMca jJAnAvaraNa, pAMtra aMtarAya
aura cAra darzanAvaraNa ina caudaha  /  prakRtiyoM kA udaya bAraha guNasthAna
taka to jIvoM ko anAdi kAla se hai, lekina bArahaveM guNasthAna ke aMta meM jaba
inakA viccheda ho jAtA hai taba vaha udaya anAdi-sAnta kahA jAtA hai| isI
prakAra nirmANa, sthira, asthira Adi zeSa bacI huI bAraha prakRtiyoM kA anAdi
udaya terahaveM sayogikevalI guNasthAna ke aMta meM vicchinna ho jAtA hai taba
unakA udaya anAdi-sAMta kahalAtA hai| _ isa prakAra mithyAtva ke sivAya zeSa
dhruvodayA prakRtiyoM meM kevala do hI bhaMga ghaTita hote haiM abhavya jIvoM kI
apekSA anAdi-ananta

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Firm Granth  And for the Bhavyas, the Aanadi-Saant. The remaining
two, Bhang-Sadi-Anann and Sadi-Saant, do not occur. Because, if the arising of
any nature, after its cessation, arises again, then that arising is called Sadi.
But the arising and cessation of the aforementioned Dhruvodaya natures, after
the end of the twelfth and thirteenth Gunasthanas, do not occur again. And after
attaining those Gunasthanas, the Jiva does not return to the lower Gunasthanas,
but attains liberation. Therefore, the Sadi arising of the aforementioned
natures does not occur. Hence, the remaining two Bhangs also do not occur.  In
the twenty-six Dhruvodaya natures, there are two Bhangs at the beginning, but in
Mithyatva, there are three Bhangs: Aanadi-Anant, Aanadi-Saant, and Sadi-Saant.
The Aanadi-Anant Bhang occurs in relation to the Abhavyas, the Aanadi-Saant
Bhang occurs in relation to the Aanadi Mithyaishti Bhavyas. The Aanadi-Anant
Bhang is considered in relation to the Abhavyas because the absence of the
arising of their Mithyatva has never been and will never be. The Aanadi-Saant
Bhang is considered in relation to the Bhavyas because, upon attaining Samyaktva
for the first time, the absence of their Aanadikalin Mithyatva occurs. The
fourth, Sadi-Saant Bhang, also occurs in relation to the Bhavyas who, after
losing Samyaktva and attaining Mithyatva again, attain Samyaktva again and make
its absence. Thus, three Bhangs occur in the Dhruvodaya Mithyatva nature.  In
the Adhruvbandhini and Adhruvodaya natures, only the Sadi-Saant Bhang occurs.
Because their bondage and arising are Adhruv, sometimes they occur and sometimes
they do not. Thus, one should understand the order of Bhangs in the bondage and
arising natures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama pharmagrantha aura bhavya jIvoM ko apekSA anAdi-sAnta  /  zeSa do
bhaMga-sAdi-anaMna aura sAdi-sAnta ghaTita nahIM hote haiN| kyoMki kiso prakRti
ke udaya kA biccheda hone ke pazcAta punaH udaya hone lagatA ho to vaha udaya
sAdi kahalAtA hai  /  lekina ukta dhruvodayI prakRtiyoM kA udayaviccheda
bArahaveM, terahaveM guNasthAna ke aMta meM ho jAne para punaH unakA udaya nahIM
hotA hai aura una guNasthAnoM ke prApta ho jAne ke bAda jIva nIce ke guNasthAnoM
meM nahIM Akara mukti ko hI prApta karatA hai| ataH ukta prakRtiyoM kA sAdi
udaya nahIM hotA hai  /  isalie zeSa do bhaMga bhI nahIM hote haiN| chabbIsa
dhruvodayI prakRtiyoM meM Adi ke do bhaMga hote haiM, lekina mithyAtva meM
anAdi-ananta, anAdi sAnta aura sAdi-sAnta yaha tIna bhaMga hote haiM  /  anAdi-
anaMta bhaMga abhavya jIvoM kI apekSA se, anAdisAnta bhaMga anAdi mithyAiSTi
bhavya jIvoM kI apekSA se ghaTita hotA hai  /  anAdi anaMta bhaMga abhavya jIvoM
kI apekSA se mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki unake mithyAtva ke udaya kA abhAva na
to kabhI huA hai aura na hogA  /  bhavya jIvoM kI apekSA anAdi-sAMta bhaMga
isalie mAnA jAtA hai ki pahale pahala samyaktva kI prApti ho jAne para unake
anAdikAlIna mithyAtva kA abhAva ho jAtA hai  /  cauthA sAdi-sAnta bhaMga bhI usa
bhavya jIva kI apekSA ghaTita hotA hai jo samyaktva ke chuTa jAne ke pazcAta
punaH mithyAtva ko prApta karake bhI punaH samyaktva ko pAkara usakA abhAva kara
detA hai  /  isa prakAra dhruvodayA mithyAtva prakRti meM tIna bhaMga ghaTita
hote haiN| adhruvabandhinI aura adhruvodayI prakRtiyoM meM kevala sAdi-sAnta
bhaMga hI ghaTita hotA hai  /  kyoMki unakA baMdha aura udaya adhruva hai, kabhI
hotA hai aura kabhI nahIM hotA hai  /  isa prakAra baMdha aura udaya prakRtiyoM
meM bhaMgoM kA krama samajhanA cAhie  /

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shataka  This is a summary of the 35 types of Bandha and Upak (sub-species)
and how they manifest in the Meghas.    Except for Mithyatva, the remaining Uday
(arising) natures have two types of Bhang (destruction): Anadi-Anant
(beginningless-infinite) and Anadi-Sant (beginningless-finite). Mithyatva has
three types of Bhang: Anadi-Anant, Anadi-Sant, and Maadi-Sant (beginning-
finite).   Dhruva-Bandhini (fixed-binding) natures have three types of Bhang:
Anadi-Anant, Anadi-Sant, and Saadi-Sant (beginning-finite). Adhruva-Bandha
(unfixed-binding) and Uday natures have only one type of Bhang: Saadi-Sant.
These Bhangs arise due to the Pariṇāmik (consequential) state of the Bhavy
(blessed) and Abhavy (unblessed) souls. The author has already indicated the
Bhangs that occur in the natures in the form of a Sutra (aphorism) in verse 5:
**Padmabia Dhūvajavasu Dhavajandisū Taiyavaj Bhangalingam | Micchammī Tigni
Bhangā Dahavi Adhuvā Turis Bhangā ||**  This means: Padmabia (lotus-like),
Dhūvajavasu (flag-like), Dhavajandisū (flag-like), Taiyavaj (sun-like) have one
Bhang. Mithyatva has three Bhangs. Adhuvā (unfixed) has four Bhangs.  After
explaining the Dhruva-Adhruva Bandha, Uday natures, their names, and the number
of Bhangs that occur in them along with their causes, the author now lists the
Dhruva and Adhruva Satya (truth) natures in two verses:  **Tamabannavīs
Sagateya-Kamma Ghūyabandhi Ses Vetigam | Āmitim Veṇiyam Bujuyal Sagaural
Sāsachaū || 8 ||**  **Khagaitirim Nīyam Dhūvasantā Sammā Mos Manuyadugam |
Vivikkār Aṇāū Hārasaguccha Adhuvasantā || 9 ||**  **Meaning:**  * **Verse 8:**
Twenty-three (Tamabannavīs) natures, including Sagateya-Kamma (action-based),
Ghūyabandhi (binding), Ses (remaining), Vetigam (three Vedas), Āgitirigam (three
forms), and six others. * **Verse 9:** Khagaitirim (sky-like), Nīyam (ethical),
Dhūvasantā (fixed-truth), Sammā (right), Mos (liberation), Manuyadugam (human-
like), Vivikkār (differentiation), Aṇāū (non-existent), Hārasaguccha (chain of
bondage), Adhuvasantā (unfixed-truth).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka baMdha evaM upaka prajAtiyoM ke 35 cha, aba meghoM meM go ko ghaTita
karane kA sArAMza yaha hai ki mithyAtva ko chor3akara zeSa udaya prakRtiyoM meM
pahale do-anAdi-anaMta, anAdi-sAnta bhaMga tathA mithyAtva meM tIna-anAdi-
anaMta, anAdi-sAnta tathA mAdi-sAnta bhaMga hote hai| dhrubabandhinI prakRtiyoM
meM anAdi-ananta, anAdi-sAnta aura sAdisAnta yaha tIna bhaMga ghaTita hote haiN|
adhruva baMdha va udaya prakRtiyoM meM sirpha sAdi-sAntu yaha eka bhaMga hotA
hai| yaha bhaMga bhavya aura abhavya zrIvoM kI pAriNAmika sthiti ke kAraNa
banate haiN| granthakAra ne sUtra rupa meM prakRtiyoM meM ghaTita hone vAle
maMgoM kA saMketa gAthA 5 meM kara hI diyA hai ki padamabiyA dhUvajavasu
dhavajaMdhisu taiavaja bhaMgaligaM  /  micchammi tigni bhaMgA dahAvi adhuvA
turisa bhaMgA  /  /  isa prakAra se dhruva-adhUtra baMdha, udaya prakRtiyoM ke
nAma aura unameM ghaTita hone vAle bhaMgoM kI saMkhyA kA kAraNa sahita
spaSTIkaraNa karane ke pazcAta aba do gAthAoM meM dhra ba, adhruva sattA
prakRtiyoM ko ginAte haiN| dhruva-anuva sattA prakRtiyAM tamabannavIsa sagateya-
kamma ghuyabaMdhi sesa vetigaM  /  Amitima veNiyaM bujuyala sagaurala sAsacaU  /
/ 8 /  /  khagaitirima nIyaM dhuvasaMtA samma mosa maNuyadugaM  /  vivikakAra
aiNAU hArasaguccA adhuvasaMtA  // 6 /  zamnArtha-tasavAmapIsa- trasa Adi bIsa va
varNa Adi bIsa prakRtiyAM, sagaseyaphamma tajabha kAmaMNa saptaka, vadhi-dhra
vabaMdhinI, sesa-bAkI ko, yatigaM-vedatrika, Agiitiga- AkRtitrika-chaha

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fivefold Aggregate  **Institutions, six restraints and five castes,
Veṇiyaṁ - Vedaniya, Bujuyaldo Yugal, Sagaurla-Audarik-Saptak, Saschak
Pravaschanushk.**  **Khagaiitirig Khathik and Tiyanchdvik, Niyaṁ-Nich Gotra,
Dhruvasanta Bha Vrasatta Samm - Samyaktva Mohaniya, Mos - Mishra Mohaniya,
Manuyabugan Manusya Dvik, Vidhikkar - Vakiya Ekadasha. Jin - Jin Naamakarma,
Aau-Char Aayu, Harasag-Aharakasaptak, Ucha Uchha Gotra, Adhwa Santa-Abhra V
Sattaa.**  **Gaathayaṁ-Savishak and Varnavishak, Taijas Karman Saptak, Baki Ki
Dhruvandhini Prakritiyaṁ, Teen Ved, Aavritritrik, Vedaniya, Do Yugal, Audarik
Saptak, Uchchvas Chatushk Tatha**  **Bihayogati Dvik, Tiyanchdvik, Nich Gotra,
Ye Sab Dhruvasatta Prakritiyaṁ Hai. Samyaktva, Mishra, Manusya Dvik,
Vaikriyaekadasha, Tirthankara Naamakarma, Char Aayu, Aharak-Saptak Aur Uchha Gol
Ye Adhruva Sattaa Prakritiyaṁ Jaanna Chahiye.**  **Special Meaning:** After
classifying the bondage and liberation-worthy natures by the difference between
Dhruva and Adhruva, these two verses state the number of Dhruva Sattaa and
Adhruva Sattaa natures. Some natures are named, while others are indicated by
their designations.  **Bondage-worthy natures are 120 and liberation-worthy are
122, but the number of Sattaa natures is 158.** The reason for the difference
between the number of bondage, liberation, and Sattaa natures is explained in
the appendix.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama kamagrama saMsthAna, chaha saMhanana aura pAMca jAti, veNiyaM -
vedanIya, bujuyalado yugala, sagaurala-audArika-saptaka, sAsacaka pravAsacanuSka
/  khagaItiriga khatihika aura tiyaMcadvika, nIyaM-nIca gotra, dhRvasaMtAbhra
vasattA samma - samyaktva mohanIya, mosa - mizra mohanIya, maNuyabugaM manuSya
dvika, vidhikkAra - vakiya ekAdaza. jiNa - jina nAmakarma, AU-cAra Ayu,
hArasaga-AhArakasaptaka, ucA ucca gotra, adhva saMtA-abhra va sttaa| gAthAyaM-
savIzaka aura varNavIzaka, taijasa kArmaNa saptaka, bAkI kI dhruvandhinI
prakRtiyAM, tIna veda, AvRtitrika, vedanIya, do yugala, audArika saptaka,
ucchvAsa catuSka tathA bihAyogati dvika, tiryaMcadvika, nIca gotra, ye saba
dhruvasattA prakRtiyAM haiM  /  samyaktva, mizra, manuSyadvika, vaikriyaekAdaza,
tIrthakara nAmakarma, cAra Ayu, AhAraka-saptaka aura ucca gola ye adhruva sattA
prakRtiyAM jAnanA cAhiye  /  vizeSArtha-baMdha evaM udaya prakRtiyoM kA dhruva
va adhruva ke bheda se vargIkaraNa karane ke pazcAt ina donoM gAthAoM meM dhruva
sattA aura adhruva sattA bAlI prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA batalAI hai  /  kucha
prakRtiyoM ke to nAma batalAye haiM aura kucha prakRtiyoM kA saMjJAoM dvArA
nirdeza kiyA hai| baMdha-yogya prakRtiyAM 120 haiM aura udayogya 122 prakRtiyAM
haiM, lekina sattA prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA 158 hai  / ' jinake nAma prathama karma
1. badha kI apekSA udaya, sattA prakRtiyoM ke antara kA kAraNa pariziSTa meM
dekhiye|

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
36 The distinctions made in the text are as follows:  * **Jñānāvaraṇa** 5 *
**Darśanāvaraṇa** 2 * **Vedaniyā** 28 * **Mohaniya** 28 * **Āyu** 4 *
**Nāmakarma** 103 * **Gota** 2 * **Antarāya** 5  In total, there are
(5+2+28+4+103+2+5) 158 distinctions.  To describe these 158 **Prakṛtis** in
terms of their **Dhruva** and **Adhruva** existence, the following terms are
used. The names of the **Saṃjñās** and the **Prakṛtis** they encompass are as
follows:  * **Sabaka** - **Lasa**, **Bādar**, **Paryāpta**, **Pratyeka**,
**Sthira**, **Śubha**, **Subhaga**, **Susvara**, **Ādeya**, **Yaśaḥ**,
**Kīrti**, **Sthāvara**, **Sūkṣma**, **Aparyāpta**, **Sādhāraṇa**, **Asthira**,
**Aśubha**, **Dubhaga**, **Duḥsvara**, **Anādeya**, **Ayaśaḥkīrti** *
**Varṇadhoṣaka** - Five **Varṇas**, Five **Rasa**, Two **Gandha**, Eight
**Sparśa** * **Saṃjñā Karmaṇa Saptaka** - **Tejas** body, **Karmaṇa** body,
**Tejas-Tejas** bondage, **Tejas-Karmaṇa** bondage, **Karmaṇa-Karmaṇa** bondage,
**Tejas** **Saṃghātan**, **Karmaṇa** **Saṃghātan** * **Ākṛtitrika** - Six
**Saṃsthāna** - **Samacaturasra**, **Nyagrodhaparimandala**, **Sādi**,
**Bubja**, **Vāmana**, **Haṇḍa**. Six **Saṃhanana** - **Vajra**,
**Ṛṣabhanārāca**, **Ṛṣabhanārāca**, **Nārāca**, **Ardhanārāca**, **Kīlikā**,
**Sevārt**. Five **Jāti** (distinctions of **Jāti** **Nāmakarma**) -
**Ekaindriya**, **Dvīndriya**, **Trīndriya**, **Caturindriya**, **Pañcendriya**
* **Yugal Trika** - The pair of **Hāsya** and **Rati**, and the pair of **Śoka**
and **Arati** * **Audārika Saptaka** - **Audārika** body, **Audārika** limbs,
**Audārika**...  From **Lasa** to **Yaśaḥkīrti**, the **Prakṛtis** are called
**Sadāśaka**, and from **Sthāvara** to **Ayaśaḥkīrti**, the **Prakṛtis** are
called **Sthāpadeśaka**. The names in the **Catuṣka** are found in the first
**Karmagrantha**.  2. **Varṇa**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 36 Zuo  antha meM spaSTa kiye gaye hai aura saMkhyA isa prakAra hai--
jJAnAvaraNa 5, darzanAvaraNa, vedanIya 2, mohanIya 28, Ayu 4, nAmakarma 103,
gova 2, aMtarAya 5  /  kula milAkara (5+2+28 + 4 + 103 : 2 + 5) 158 bheda ho
jAte haiM  /  ina 158 prakRtiyoM kA dhruva aura adhruba sattA rUpa meM kathana
karane ke liye nimnalikhita saMjJAoM kA upayoga kiyA gayA hai| saMjJAnoM aura
unameM garbhita prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM sabaka - lasa, bAdara,
paryApta, pratyeka, sthira, zubha, subhaga, susvara, Adeya yazaH kIrti,
sthAvara, sUkSma, aparyApta, sAdhAraNa, asthira, azubha, dubhaMga, duHsvara,
anAdeya, ayazaHkIrti  /  " varNadhozaka- pAMca varNa, pAMca rasa, do gaMdha,
ATha sparza | saMjasa kArmaNa saptaka- tejasa zarIra, kArmaNa zarIra,
taijasataijasa baMdhana, taijasakArmaNa baMdhana, kArmaNa-kArmaNa bandhana,
tejasa saMghAtana, kArmaNa saMghAtana  /  AkRtitrika - chaha saMsthAna -
samacaturastra nyagrodhaparimaMDala, sAdi bubja, vAmana, haiMDa | chaha
saMhanana - vajraRSabhanArAca RSabhanArAca, nArAca, ardhanArAca kIlikA, sevArta
/  pAMca jAti - ( jAti nAmakarma ke bheda ) ekendriya dvIndriya vIndriya,
caturindriya, paMcendriya  /  yugala Trika - hAsya aura rati kA yugala tathA
zoka va arati kA yugala  /  audArikasaptaka audArika zarIra, audArika aMgopAMga,
audA : sa se lekara yazaH kIrti taka kI prakRtiyAM sadazaka aura sthAvara se
aza: kIrti taka kI prakRtiyAM sthApadezaka kahalAtI haiM  /  catuSka meM gamita
nAmoM ko prathama karmagrantha meM dekhiye  /  2. varNa ,

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Fifth Karma Granth  **16**  **Rik Sanghata**, Audarik Bandhan, Odaric-
Tejas Bandhan, Audarik-Karman Bandhan, Audarik-Tejas-Karman Bandhan.  **Uchchvas
Chatushk** - Uchchvas, Atap, Udyot, Paradhat. **Khagati Dwik** - Shubh
Vihayogati, Ashubh Vihayogati. **Tichhnik** - Tiryanch Gati, Tiryanch Anupurvi.
**Manushya Chik** - Manushya Gati, Manushya Anupurvi.  **Vaikriya Ekadasha** -
Dev Gati, Devan Anupurvi, Narak Gati, Narak Anupurvi, Kriya Sharir, Kriya Ango-
pang, Vaikriya Sanghata, Vaikriya-Vaikriya Bandhan, Vaikriya-Tejas Bandhan,
Vaikriya-Karman Bandhan, Vaikriya-Tejas-Karman Bandhan.  **Ahar Kasaptak** -
Aharak Sharir, Aharak Ango-pang, Aharak Sanghatan, Aharak-Aharak Bandhan,
Aharak-Tejas Bandhan, Aharak-Karman Bandhan, Aharak-Tejas-Karman Bandhan.  These
terms describe the number of different types of **Dhruva** and **Adhruva**
entities, along with the names of some of these entities. From **Tasvalavis** to
**Niyam Dhruva-Santa Pad**, the names of **Dhruva** entities are listed. From
**Sammimi-Manuyadugam** to **Harasguchcha Pad**, the names of **Adhruva**
entities are listed. In total, there are **158** such entities.  In **Bandha**
and **Uday**, the number of **Dhruva-Bandhini** and **Dhruva-Uday** entities is
less than **Anubandhini** and **Anuvodaya** entities. However, in **Satta**, the
number of **Dhruva-Satta** entities is more than **Adhruva-Satta** entities.
This is because it is not necessary for an entity to arise at the time of
**Bandha** or for an entity to be bound at the time of its **Uday**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 16 paMcama karmagrantha rika saMghAta, audArika baMdhana, odArika- tejasa
baMdhana, audArikakArmaNa baMdhana, audArika- tejasa - kArmaNa baMdhana  /
ucchvAsa catuSka-- ucchvAsa, Atapa, udyota, parAdhAta  /  khagatidvika- zubha
vihAyogati, azubha vihAyogati  /  ticahnika-tiryaMcagati tiryacAnupUrvI  /
manuSyazcika- manuSyagati, manuSyAnupUrvI  /  vaikriyaekAdaza - devagati,
devAnupUrvI, narakagati, narakAnupUrvI, kriya zarIra, kriya aMgopAMga, vaikriya
saMghAta, vaikriyavaikriya baMdhana, vaikriyatejasa baMdhana, vaikriyakArmaNa
baMdhana, vaikriya tejasa - kArmaNa baMdhana  /  AhAra kasaptaka-AhAraka zarIra,
AhAraka aMgopAMga, AhArakasaMghAtana, AhAraka AhAraka baMdhana, AhAraka- tejasa
baMdhana, AhArakakArmaNa baMdhana, AhAraka - taMjasa - kArmaNa baMdhana | ina
saMjJAoM meM gRhIta prakRtiyoM tathA kucha prakRtiyoM ke nAma nirdeza pUrvaka
dhruva adhruva sattA vAlI prakRtiyoM kI alaga alaga saMkhyA vatalAI hai  /
tasvalavIsa se lekara nIyaM dhruvasaMtA pada taka bhuna sattA vAlI prakRtiyoM ke
nAma haiM tathA sammamIsa maNuyadugaM se lekara hArasaguccA pada taka
adhruvasattA vAlI prakRtiyoM ke nAma haiM  /  kula milAkara ye 158 prakRtiyAM ho
jAtI haiM  /  baMdha aura udaya meM dhruvabaMdhinI aura dhruvodayA prakRtiyoM kI
saMkhyA anubaMdhinI aura anuvodayA kI apekSA kama hai, lekina isake viparIta
sattA meM dhruvasattA prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA adhika aura adhruvasanA prakRtiyoM
kI saMkhyA kama hai| isakA spaSTIkaraNa yaha hai ki baMdha ke samaya hI kisI
prakRti kA udaya ho jAye aura kisI prakRti ke udaya ke samaya hI usa prakRti kA
baMdha bhI ho jAye yaha Avazyaka nahIM

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Shataka**  It is true that the number of beings in the state
of bondage (bandha) and undergoing emergence (udaya) is vast. However, the
beings in this state undoubtedly possess a permanent existence (dhruva satta).
This is why the number of beings with fluctuating existence (adhruva satta) is
less than those with permanent existence.  The text explains the reason for
considering the twenty-two (vasadi) to the twenty-eight (meech gotra) natures as
possessing permanent existence.  The twenty-two (vasadi), twenty-four (varnadi),
and seven (tanjas-karman) natures all possess permanent existence in all worldly
beings. All the permanently bound (dhruva bandhini) natures possess permanent
existence. Because those who are constantly bound must possess permanent
existence. However, in the twenty-four (varnavishak), the four (varna chatushk)
and the seven (taijas-karman) natures, the taijas and karman bodies are
separately mentioned. Therefore, six natures are excluded from the forty-seven
permanently bound natures, leaving forty-one natures.  The three Vedas (tri
vedas) are described as having fluctuating bondage and emergence, but their
existence is permanent. Because the bondage of the Vedas occurs gradually, but
there is no conflict in their simultaneous presence.  The Vedaniya Dwik is
considered to have permanent existence, unlike the mutual transition of the two
parties.  The pairs of Hasyarati and Shokarati have permanent existence until
the ninth Gunasthan. Therefore, their existence is considered permanent.  The
seven (oudarik saptak) also have permanent existence. Because humans and animals
experience their emergence, while gods and hell beings experience their bondage.
Therefore, they are considered to have permanent existence.  Similarly, the four
(uchchvas chatushk), the pair of Vihayogati, the two (tiryanch dwik), and the
twenty-eight (neech gotra) also have permanent existence. These natures are
present in all beings before attaining perfect knowledge (samyaktva). Therefore,
they are called permanent existence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka hai| kintu jo baMdhadazA meM hai aura jisakA udaya ho rahA hai, usakI
sattA avazya hotI hai| isI kAraNa bhuvAdA vAlI darzakoM kI saMkhyA adhika aura
adhruba sattA vAlI prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA kama hai| basAdi bIsa se lekara mIca
gotra paryanta kI prakRtiyoM ko dhruvasattA vAlI mAnane ke kAraNa ko spaSTa
karate haiN| vasAdi bIsa, varNAdi bIsa aura taMjasa-kArmaNa saptaka kI sattA
sabhI saMsArI jIvoM ke rahatI hai  /  samasta dhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyAM dhruva
sattA vAlI hotI haiN| kyoMki jinakA baMdha sarvadA ho rahA hai unakI avazya hI
dhruva sattA hogii| lekina varNavIzaka meM varNacatuSka aura taijasakArmaNa
saptaka meM taijasa, kArmaNa zarIra kA alaga se nirdeza kara diye jAne se
saMtAlIsa dhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyoM meM se ina chaha prakRtiyoM ko kama karake
zeSa 41 prakRtiyoM kA saMketa kiyA hai| tInoM vedoM kA baMdha aura udaya adhruva
batalAyA hai kintu unakI sattA dhruva hai  /  kyoMki vedoM kA baMdha krama-krama
se hotA hai lekina unake eka sAtha rahane meM kisI prakAra kA virodha nahIM hai|
paraspara daloM kI saMkrAMti hone kI apekSA vedanIyadvika ko dhruvasattA mAnA
hai| hAsya-rati aura zokaarati ina donoM yugaloM kI sattA nauveM guNasthAna taka
sadaiva rahatI hai ataH inakI sattA ko dhruva mAnA hai| audArika saptaka kI sanA
bhI sadA rahatI hai| kyoMki manuSya va tiryaMca gati meM inakA udaya rahatA hai
tathA deva ba naraka gati meM inakA baMdha hotA hai| isIliye inako dhruvasattA
mAnA hai| isI prakAra ucchvAsa catuSka, vihAyogati yugala, tiryaMcadvika, nIca
gotra kI sattA bhI sadaiva rahatI hai  /  samyaktva kI prApti hone se pahale
sabhI jIvoM meM ye prakRtiyAM sadA rahatI haiM  /  isIlie inako dhruvasattA kahA
jAtA hai  /

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Karma Granth  After explaining the reason for considering the
Dhruvasatta (permanent existence) of the Dhruvasatta Prakṛtis, we now explain
the reason for considering the remaining Prakṛtis as Adhruvasatta (non-permanent
existence).  The existence of Samyaktva (right faith) and Misra Mohaniya (mixed
delusion) is not present in Abhavya (non-liberated beings), and even among
Bhavyas (liberated beings), it is not present in many. When the Tejaskaaya
(fire-bodied) and Vayukaaya (air-bodied) beings experience the Udvalana
(transformation) of Manushyadvik (human-like body), the existence of
Manushyadvik is not present. Therefore, Manushyadvik is considered Adhruvasatta.
The existence of the Vaikriya Ekadasha (eleventh Prakṛti) is not present in the
Anadi Nigodhya (eternal) beings, and it is not present in those who have not
attained the Trasa Paryaya (third stage of liberation). Due to the absence of
bondage in those who have not attained the Trasa Paryaya, or due to the
destruction of their state upon entering the Sthavara (stationary) realm, or due
to the absence of existence of the being who experiences Udvalana in the
Ekendriya (one-sense) realm, the Vaikriya Ekadasha is considered Adhruvasatta.
Even with the presence of Samyaktva, the Tirthakara Karma (karma of a
Tirthankara) is present in some and not in others. And due to the complete
absence of bondage in the case of the Devayau (divine body) and Narakayu
(hellish body) of the Sthavaras, the Tirthachayau (karma of a Tirthankara) of
the Ahmindras (nine Veiyaka and five Anuttara Devas), the Manushyayau (human
body) of the Tejaskaaya, Vayukaaya, and the Narakas (hell beings) of the seventh
hell, their existence is not present. Therefore, these Prakṛtis are considered
Adhruvasatta.  The existence of the Aharakasaptak (seven Aharaka Prakṛtis) is
present in some and not in others, even with the presence of Samyama (self-
control). It is not a rule that all Samyamadharis (those who practice self-
control) must have an Aharaka body. The Ucchha Gotra (high lineage) is also not
present in the Anadi Nigodhya beings, and it is not present in the Tejaskaaya
and Vayukaaya beings after experiencing Udvalana. Therefore, the twenty-eight
Prakṛtis are Adhruvasatta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMSama karmagranya dhruvasattA prakRtiyoM ke dhruvasattA vAlI mAnane ke kAraNa
ko spaSTa karane ke bAda aba zeSa prakRtiyoM ko adhruvasattA vAlI mAnane ke
kAraNa ko spaSTa karate haiN| samyaktva aura mizra mohanIya kI sattA abhavyoM ke
to hotI hI nahIM hai kintu bhavyoM meM bhI bahutoM ko nahIM hotI hai| tejaskAya
aura vAyukAya ke jIva jaba manuSya dvika kI udvalanA kara dete haiM taba
manuSyadvika kI sattA nahIM hotI hai, isIliye manuSyadvika ko adhruvasattA mAnA
hai  /  baiMkriya ekAdaza prakRtiyoM kI sattA anAdi nigodiyA jIva ke nahIM hotI
hai tathA jisane trasa paryAya prApta nahIM kI do, usake baMdha kA abhAba hone
se athavA baMdha karake sthAvara meM jAne para unakI sthiti kA kSaya hone se
tathA ekendriya meM jAkara unakI udbalanA karane vAle jIva ke bhI sattA nahIM
rahane se vaikriya' ekAdaza kI sattA adhruva mAnI hai| samyaktva ke hote hue bhI
tIrthakara nAmakarma kisI ko hotA hai| aura kisI ko nahIM hotA hai tathA
sthAvaroM ke devAyu aura narakAyu kA, ahamindroM (nava veyaka aura pAMca
anuttara ke deva) ke tirthacAyu kA, tejaskAya va vAyukAya aura saptama naraka ke
nArakoM ke manuSyAyu kA sarvathA baMdha na hone ke kAraNa unakI sattA nahIM
rahatI hai| isIlie ina prakRtiyoM kI gaNanA adhruva sattA vAlI prakRtiyoM meM kI
jAtI hai  /  AhArakasaptaka kI sattA saMyama ke hone para bhI kisI ke hotI hai
aura kisI ke nahIM hotI hai| sabhI saMyamadhAriyoM ko AhAraka zarIra honA hI
cAhie, aisA niyama nahIM hai| ucca gotra bhI anAdi nigodiyA jIvoM ke nahIM hotA
hai, udvalana ho jAne para tejaskAya aura vAyukAya ke jIvoM ke ucca gotra nahIM
hotA hai  /  isIliye aTThAIsa prakRtiyAM adhruvasattA haiN|

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Chapter**  Having stated how many and which of the 158 types
of Satta-Prakritis are Dhruva-Satta and Adhruva-Satta, we now describe the
Dhruva-Satta and Adhruva-Satta of some Prakṛtis in relation to their Gunasthanas
in the next three verses.  **Verses:**  10. In the first three Gunasthanas,
Mithyatva, Niyama, Ajaya, etc. are definitely present in the eight Gunasthanas
through Bhajana (choice). In the Sasadan Gunasthan, Samyak-tva is definitely
present in the Mithyatva, etc. ten Gunasthanas through choice.  11. In the
Sasadan and Misra Gunasthanas, Dhruva-Satta is present. In the Mithyatva, etc.
nine Gunasthanas, Mitra-Mohaniya is present through choice. In the first two
Gunasthanas, Anan-Anubandhi is definitely present through choice in the Misra,
etc. nine Gunasthanas.  12. The Aharak Matak is not present in all Gunasthanas,
in the second and third Gunasthanas, or in the Tirthankara Namkarma, without
choice.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pata isa prakAra se sattA prakRtiyoM ke 158 bhedoM meM se kitanI aura kauna
kauna sI prakRtiyAM dhruvasattA aura adhruvasattA haiM, isakA kathana karane ke
bAda aba Age kI tIna gAthAoM meM kucha prakRtiyoM kI guNasthAnoM kI apekSA
dhruvasattA aura adhruvasattA kA nirUpaNa karate haiN| paDhamatiguNesu micchaM
niyamA ajayAiaTTage bhajja  /  sAsANe khalu samma saMtaM micchAidasage vA  // 10
//  sAH gagIze dharma ra simAsu bhynnaae| Aiyuge aNa niyamA bhaiyA
mIsAinavamammi  // 11 //  AhArasatagaM vA saJcaguNe vitiguNe viNA tityaM  /
nobhayasate miccho aMtamuhattaM bhave titthe  // 12 //  zabdArtha-
paDhamatiguNesu- pahale tIna guNasthAnoM meM, micchemithyAtva, niyamA-nizcita
rUpa se. ajayAi.-avirati Adi, aThage-ATha guNasthAnoM meM, bhoM-bhajanA se
(vikalpa se, sAsANe-sAsAdana guNasthAna meM, sva-nizcaya se, sammaM samyaktva
modanIya, saMtaM . vidyamAna hotI hai, micchAivasage-mithyAtva Adi dasa
guNasthAnoM meM, vA-vikalpa se  /  sAsaNamosesu-mAsAdana aura mizra guNasthAna
meM, dhuvaMnitya, mIsaM-~-mitra mohanIya, micchAinavasu-mithyAtva Adi no
gaNarathAnoM meM, bhayaNAevikalpa se, Aiduge-Adi ke do guNasthAnoM meM, aga-
anaMnAnubaMdhI. niyamA-nizcaya se, mayA-civalpa se, mIsAinavagammi -mizrAdi nau
guNasthAnoM meM  /  AhArasatagaM--AhAraka mataka, samvaguNesabhI guNasthAnoM
meM, vAvikalpa meM, vitiguNe- dUsare tIsare guNasthAna meM, viNA - binA, tisthaM
- tIrthakara nAmakarma, na-nahIM hotA hai, umayasate

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth (Pancham)  The existence of both, Mithyatva-Mithyatvi, is certain until
the end of the moment (Antamuhurt) even when the Tirthankara Karma is present.
**Verse:**  In the first three Gunasthanas, the existence of Mithyatva Mohaniya
is certain, and in the eight Gunasthanas starting from Aviriti, it is optional.
In the Sasadan Gunasthan, the existence of Samyaktava Mohaniya is certain, and
in the ten Gunasthanas starting from Mithyatva, it is optional.  In the Sasadan
and Misra Gunasthanas, the existence of Misra Prakriti is certain, and in the
nine Gunasthanas starting from Mithyatva, it is optional. In the first two
Gunasthanas, the existence of Anantanubandhi Kashaya is certain, and in the nine
Gunasthanas starting from Misra, it is optional.  The Aharak Saptak is optional
in all Gunasthanas. Except for the second and third Gunasthanas, the Tirthankara
Karma is optional in the remaining Gunasthanas. The Mithyadristi Gunasthan does
not have the existence of both (Aharak Saptak and Tirthankara Karma). If a being
with the existence of Tirthankara Karma falls into Mithyatva, it is only for the
duration of Antamuhurt.  **Special Meaning:**  These three verses explain the
existence of certain Prakritis in the Gunasthanas, specifying which Prakriti is
certain and optional in which Gunasthan. The rule regarding the existence of
Mithyatva and Samyaktava Prakriti is explained. The verse states that "Pathmati
Gunesu Miccham Niyama" - Mithyatva Mohaniya is certain in the first three
Gunasthanas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama donoM kI sattA, miTho-mithyAtvI, aMtamutaM - antarmuhU paryanta bhave--
hotI hai, tithe tIrthaMkara nAmakarma ke hone para bhI  /  - gAthA - pahale tIna
guNasthAnoM meM midhyAtva mohanIya kI sattA avazya hotI hai aura avirati Adi
ATha guNasthAnoM meM bhajanIya hai, sAsAdana guNasthAna meM samyaktva mohanIya
kI sattA nizcita rUpa se hotI hai| aura mithyAtva Adi dasa guNasthAnoM meM
vikalpa se hotI hai  /  sAsAdana aura mizra guNasthAna meM mizra prakRti kI
sattA nizcita rUpa se rahatI hai| midhyAtva Adi nau guNasthAnoM meM bikalpa se
hai  /  pahale do guNasthAnoM meM anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya kI sattA avazya hotI hai
aura mizra Adi nau guNasthAnoM meM bhajanIya hai  /  AhAraka saptaka sabhI
guNasthAnoM meM vikalpa se hai  /  dUsare aura tIsare guNasthAna ke sivAya zeSa
guNasthAnoM meM tIrthaMkara nAmakarma vikalpa se hotA hai aura donoM (AhAraka
saptaka va tIrthaMkara nAmakarma) kI sattA vAlA mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM nahIM
AtA hai| yadi tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kI sattAvAlA koI jIva mithyAtva meM AtA hai
to sirpha antamuhUrta taka ke liye AtA hai  /  Y vizeSArtha -- ina tIna gAthAoM
dvArA guNasthAnoM meM kucha prakRtiyoM kI sattA viSayaka sthiti kA spaSTIkaraNa
kiyA gayA hai ki kauna-sI prakRti kisa guNasthAna taka nizcita va vikalpa hotI
hai  /  mithyAtva va samyaktva prakRti kI sattA kA niyama . mithyAtva prakRti kI
sattA ke bAre meM batalAyA hai ki 'paThamatiguNesu micchaM niyamA' pahale tIna
guNasthAnoM meM midhyAtva mohanIya

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Nature certainly has an existence. It is also said that 'Sasaane Khalu Sammam
Santan' - Samyaktva is a mohaniya (delusive) kriti (action) in the Sasadan
gunasthan (state of being). The definite existence of both Mithyatva Mohaniya
and Samyaktva Mohaniya has been stated. Thus, while stating the definite
existence of Mithyatva Mohaniya and Samyaktva Mohaniya in the gunasthanas, the
alternative existence of these two natures in the gunasthanas has been indicated
by the terms 'Ajayaiaṭṭhage Bhajj' and 'Micchaaidasage Ya' respectively. This
means that the nature of Mithyatva exists in the fourth Aviriti Samyagdristi and
the other eight gunasthanas, while the nature of Samyaktva exists in the first
ten gunasthanas, including Mithyatva, except for Sasadan. The reason for this is
explained below.  The existence of Mithyatva nature in the first, second, and
third gunasthanas is considered because Mithyatva exists in the Mithyatva
gunasthan. During the time of Upshama Samyaktva, some beings attain the Sasadan
gunasthan when at least one and at most six Avaliya periods remain. At that
time, these beings certainly have the existence of both Mithyatva and Samyaktva
nature. Therefore, along with stating the existence of Mithyatva in the second
gunasthan, the existence of Samyaktva has also been stated.  "Uvasamasammattaao
Chayao Miccham Apavamaanass. Saasayanasammattam Tayantarallammi Chaavaliy." -
Visheo Bhaay 534. During the time of Upshama Samyaktva, when at most 6 Avaliya
periods remain, the being, due to the arising of Anantanubandhi Kshaya, becomes
detached from Upshama Samyaktva and until the being does not come into
Mithyatva, it becomes Sasadan Samyagdristi for that period of time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakRti ko sattA avazya hotI hai| sAtha hI yaha bhI kahA hai ki 'sAsANe khalu
sammaM saMtaM' sAsAdana guNasthAna meM samyaktva mohanIya kRti nizcita rUpa se
/  bhAno simAtya mohAlI aura samyaktva mohanIya ke nizcita astitva kA kathana
kiyA gayA hai  /  _ isa prakAra se mithyAtva mohanIya aura samyaktva mohanIya kI
guNasthAnoM meM nizcita sattA batalAne ke sAtha-sAtha ina donoM prakRtiyoM kI
vikalpasattA vAle guNasthAnoM kA saMketa kramazaH 'ajayAiaTThage bhajja' va
'micchAidasage yA' padoM se kiyA hai ki mithyAtva prakRti kI sattA cauthe
avirati samyagdRSTi Adi ATha guNasthAnoM meM bhajanIya hai tathA samyaktva
prakRti sAsAdana ke sivAya pahale mithyAtva Adi dasa guNasthAnoM meM vikalpa se
hotI hai  /  isake kAraNa ko spaSTa karate hai| pahale, dUsare aura tIsare
guNasthAna meM mithyAtva prakRti kI sattA isaliye mAnI jAtI hai ki mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM to mithyAtva kI sattA rahatI hI hai  /  upazama samyaktva ke kAla
meM kama se kama eka samaya aura adhika se adhika chaha AvalikA kAla zeSa rahane
para koI koI jIva sAsAdana guNasthAna ko prApta karate haiM, usa samaya una
jIvoM ke mithyAtva aura samyaktva prakRti kI sattA avazya rahatI hai| isIliye
dUsare guNasthAna meM mithyAtva kI sattA batalAne ke sAtha samyaktva kI bhI
sattA batalAI hai| uvasamasammattAo cayao micchaM apAvamANassa  /
sAsAyaNasammattaM tayaMtarAlammi chAvaliya  /  /  -vize0 bhAya 534 upazama
samyaktva ke kAla meM adhika se adhika 6 AvalikA zeSa rahane para anaMtAnubaMdhI
kaSAya ke udaya se upadhAma sabhyaktva se cyuta hokara jaba taka jIva mithyAtva
meM nahIM AtA taba taka baha usa samayAvadhi ke liye sAsAdana' samyagdRSTi ho
jAtA hai|

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  When an anadi mithyatva jiva, for the first time, is
on the path to attaining samyaktva, due to the power of karana labdhi, at the
time of prathamopasham samyaktva, the three forms of mithyatva mohaniya dalakas
become: pure, semi-pure, and impure. Pure dalik is called samyaktva, semi-pure
is called mishra, and impure is called mithyatva mohaniya.  At the end of
upasham samyaktva, if mithyatva mohaniya arises from the three mentioned
bundles, then it becomes the first gunasthan. If mishra (samyaktva-mithyatva)
mohaniya arises, then it becomes the third mishra gunasthan. Thus, in the first
and third gunasthan, the existence of mithyatva remains. Therefore, the
existence of mithyatva is considered in the first, second, and third gunasthan.
Except for the fourth aviriti and the following eight gunasthan, the reason for
the existence or non-existence of mithyatva in these gunasthan is that if
mithyatva is destroyed in these gunasthan, meaning kshayik samyaktva is
attained, then the existence of mithyatva does not remain. And if mithyatva is
suppressed, then the existence of mithyatva definitely remains. Due to the
existence of mithyatva, the upasham श्रेणी वाला ( श्रेणी वाला meaning "belonging
to the श्रेणी") falls from the eleventh gunasthan.  Except for the second
sasadan gunasthan, the reason for the existence or non-existence of samyaktva
prakriti in the remaining ten gunasthan, including mithyatva, is due to vikalpa
(alternative). This means that it both exists and does not exist. In the
mithyatva gunasthan, the anadi mithyatva jiva who has never experienced the
pure, semi-pure, and impure bundles of mithyatva, and the anadi mithyatva jiva
who has abandoned samyaktva (pure bundle), does not have the existence of
samyaktva prakriti. The remaining mithyatva jivas have its existence. Similarly,
in the mithyatva gunasthan, the jiva who has abandoned samyaktva...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha jaba koI anAdi mithyAdRSTi jIva prathama bAra samyaktva
prApta karane ke abhimukha hotA hai taba karaNalabdhi ke bala se prathamopazama
samyaktva ke samaya mithyAtva mohanIya ke dAlako ke tIna rUpa ho jAte haiM-
zuddha, ardhazuddha aura azuddha  /  zuddha dalika samyaktva, ardhazuddha mizra
aura azuddha mithyAtva mohanIya kahalAte haiN| upazama samyaktva ke aMta meM
ukta tIna puMjoM meM se yadi mithyAtva mohanIya kA udaya ho jAtA hai to pahalA
guNasthAna, yadi mizra (samyaktva-mithyAtva) mohanIya kA udaya hotA hai to
tIsarA bhizra guNasthAna ho jAtA hai  /  isa prakAra pahale aura tIsare
guNasthAna meM mithyAtva kI sattA rahatI hai| isIliye pahale, dUsare aura tIsare
guNasthAna meM mithyAtva kI sattA mAnI gaI hai| pahale, dusare aura tIsare
guNasthAna ke sivAya cauthe avirati Adi ATha guNasthAnoM meM mithyAtva kI sattA
hone aura na hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki yadi una guNasthAnoM meM mithyAtva kA
kSaya kara diyA jAtA hai yAnI kSAyika samyaktva kI prApti ho jAtI hai to
mithyAtva kI sattA nahIM rahatI hai aura yadi mithyAtva kA upazama kiyA jAtA hai
to mithyAtva kI sattA avazya rahatI hai| mithyAtva kI sattA rahane ke kAraNa hI
upazama zreNi vAlA gyArahaveM guNasthAna se patita hotA hai| dusare sAsAdana
guNasthAna ke sivAya mithyAtva Adi dasa guNasthAnoM meM samyaktva prakRti kI
sattA vikalpa se mAnane yAnI hotI bhI hai aura nahIM bhI hotI hai, kA kAraNa
yaha hai ki mithyAtva guNasthAna meM anAdi mithyAiSTi jIva ke jisane kabhI bhI
mithyAtva ke zuddha, arghazuddha, azuddha yaha nIna puMja nahIM kiye tathA jisa
sAdi mithyAiSTi jIva ne samyaktva (zuddha puMja) kI uvalanA kara dI hai, usake
samyaktva prakRti kI sattA nahIM hotI hai, zeSa mithyAdRSTi jIvoM ke usakI sattA
hotI hai| isI taraha mithyAlva guNasthAna meM samyaktva kI ubalanA karake

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Shataka 46  In the mixed (Mishra) Gunasthan, the being's Samyaktva (right
faith) does not exist, but it does exist for other beings. From the fourth to
the eleventh Gunasthan, the Samyaktva of the Kshayik Samyamhasti (one who has
attained the highest state of liberation) is not susceptible to delusion (Moha),
but it does exist for the Kshayopashmik and Aupashmik Samyagdristi (those who
have attained the state of right faith). Thus, the nature of the Mohianiya Karma
(karma that causes delusion) and the existence of Mithyatva (false faith) and
Samyaktva are considered in the first eleven Gunasthanas. In the last three
Gunasthanas, the Mohianiya Karma is destroyed, so it does not exist. Now, let's
consider the existence of Mithya Mohianiya and Ananta Anubandhi Kashaya
(infinitely binding passions).  **The Rule of Existence of Mixed Mohianiya and
Ananta Anubandhi**  To determine the specific Gunasthan where the Mixed
Mohianiya exists, it is stated: "Sasanamose su Dhuruv Misan" - In the Sasanadan
and Mishra Gunasthan, the Mithya (Samyamihyatva) Mohianiya exists by rule. The
reason is that when the being attains the first stage of liberation
(Prathamopashma Samyaktva), three bundles of Mithyatva are formed. When at least
one and at most six Avaliya Kalas (periods of time) remain during that
Samyaktva, the Sasanadan Gunasthan is attained. At that time, the being's
results are neither completely Samyaktva nor Mithyatva, but contain both
Samyaktva and Mithyatva aspects. Therefore, the Mixed nature exists. This is why
the existence of the Mixed nature is established in the second Gunasthan.  The
third Mishra Gunasthan cannot occur without the arising of Mixed Mohianiya.
Therefore, the existence of the Mixed nature is certain in the third Gunasthan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka 46 mizra guNasthAna meM Ane vAle jIva ke samyaktva kI sattA nahIM rahatI
hai, zeSa jIboM ke rahatI hai| _cauthe guNasthAna se lekara gyArahaveM
guNasthAna taka kSAyika samyamahaSTi ke samyaktva mohanIya prakRti ko sattA
nahIM hotI hai kintu kSAyopazamika aura aupazamika samyagdaSTi ko usakI sattA
avazya rahatI hai| _isa prakAra mohanIya karma kI prakRti mithyAtva aura
samyaktva kI sattA kA vicAra Adi ke gyAraha guNasthAnoM meM kiyA gayA  /  anta
ke tIna guNasthAnoM meM mohanIya karma kA kSaya ho jAtA hai ataH inakI sattA
nahIM rahatI hai  /  aba Age mitha mohanIya aura anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya kI sattA
kA vicAra karate haiM  /  mizra mohanIya aura anantAnubaMdho kI sattA kA niyama
mizra mohanIya kI nizcita rUpa se kisa guNasthAna meM sattA hotI hai, isake liye
kahA hai-'sAsaNamosesu dhurva mIsaM-sAsAdana aura mizra guNasthAna meM midha
(samyamithyAtva) mohanIya kI sattA niyama se hotI hai  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai
ki 'prathamopazama samyaktva kI prApti ke samaya jo mithyAtva ke tIna puMja ho
jAte haiM aura usa samyaktva ke kAla meM jaba kama se kama eka samaya aura
adhika se adhika chaha AvalikA kAla zeSa raha jAtA hai taba sAsAdana guNasthAna
kI prApti hotI hai| usa samaya usa jIva ke pariNAma nizcita rUpa se na to
samyaktva rUpa hote haiM aura na mithyAtva rUpa kiMtu samyaktvAMza bhI hotA hai
aura mithyAtvAMza bhii| isIliye mizra prakRti kI sattA rahatI hai  /  isIliye
dUsare guNasthAna meM mizra prakRti kI sattA mAnane kA vidhAna kiyA hai| tIsarA
mizra guNasthAna mizra mohanIya ke udaya ke binA hotA nahIM hai| isIliye tIsare
guNasthAna meM mizna prakRti kI dhruvasattA kahIM

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fifth karmagranthi is about the gunasthanas obtained through choice. It is
said that 'michchainavasu bhayanae', meaning the first gunasthana except the
second and third. The fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, and
twelfth gunasthanas have an adhruvasatta. Because the mithyadristi jiva who has
experienced the udvalana of the mixed nature, does not have the satta of the
mixed nature of his anadi mithyatva. In the fourth to eighth gunasthanas, the
kshayik samyagdristi does not have the satta of the mixed nature, while the rest
of the jivas do.  After stating the satta of the mixed mohaniya nature, we now
explain the satta of the anantanubandhi.  It is said about the definite
gunasthanas of the anantanubandhi - 'Aidugae an niyama' etc., that the
anantanubandhi has a dhruvasatta in the first two gunasthanas. Because the
anantanubandhi is bound until the second gunasthana, its satta will definitely
remain. In the remaining third to ninth gunasthanas, its satta is adhruva -
'Bhaiya misainavgammi'. Because the anantanubandhi does not have satta for the
one who disconnects the anantanubandhi kshaya.  Regarding the adhruvasatta of
the anantanubandhi, the above kamgranthik mat has been mentioned that it has
satta through choice in the third to ninth gunasthanas. But karmaprakriti and
panch 1 Sanjoyan | U nimma dhusu panchasu hoi bhayadhwan. - Karmaprakriti
(satsadhikār) is in two gunasthanas by the anantanubandhi niyama and is
bhajanīya in five gunasthanas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagranya hai aura vikalpa se pAye jAne vAle guNasthAnoM ke bAre meM
kahA hai ki 'micchAinavasu bhayaNAe' yAnI dUsare aura tIsare guNasthAna ke
sivAya pahale gamArata. vauthe pAMco, sAnoAThaveM nau. damadhe, gyArahaveM, ina
nau guNasthAnoM meM adhruvasattA hai| kyoMki jisa mithyA dRSTi jIva ne mizra
prakRti kI udvalanA kI hai, usake va anAdi mithyAtvI ke mizra prakRti kI sattA
nahIM hai| cauthe Adi ATha guNasthAnoM meM kSAyika samyagdRSTi ke mizra prakRti
kI sattA nahIM hotI hai, zeSa jIvoM ke isakI sattA hotI hai| mizra mohanIya
prakRti kI sattA kA kathana karane ke pazcAta' aba anantAnubaMdhI kI sattA ke
bAre meM batalAte haiM  /  anantAnubaMdhI ke nizcita guNasthAnoM ke bAre meM
kahA hai-'Aiduge aNa niyamA' Adi ke do pahale, dUsare guNasthAnoM meM
anantAnubaMdhI kI dhruvasattA hai  /  kyoMki dUsare guNasthAna taka
anantAnubaMdhI kA baMdha hotA hai, isIliye usakI sattA avazya rhegii| zeSa
tIsare Adi nau guNasthAnoM meM usakI sattA adhruva hai-'bhaiyA mIsAinavagammi  /
' kyoMki anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya kA visaMyojana karane vAle ke anantAnubaMdhI ko
sattA nahIM hotI hai| anaMtAnubaMdhI kI adhruvasattA ke viSaya meM Upara
kAmagranthika,mata kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai ki tIsare Adi nau guNasthAnoM meM
vikalpa se sattA hai 1 lekina karmaprakRti' aura paMca 1 saMjoyaNa| u nimamA
dhusu paMcasu hoi bhaiyadhvaM  /  /  -karmaprakRti (satsAdhikAra) do guNasthAnoM
meM anantAnubaMdhI niyama se hotI hai aura pAMca guNasthAnoM meM bhajanIya hai|

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Shataka.**  In the five Gunasthanas from the third to the
seventh, the existence of Satta is considered in the Sangraha.  The reason for
the difference in considering the existence of Anantanubandhi Kshaya up to the
eleventh Gunasthana in the Karmagrantha and up to the seventh Gunasthana in the
Karmaprakriti and Panchasangraha is that the Karmaprakriti and Panchasangrahakar
do not accept the existence of Anandanubandhi in the Upshamashroni, while the
Gamgar accepts its existence. The essence of the Karmaprakritikar's view is that
one who strives to subdue the Charitra Mohaniya inevitably disconnects from the
Anantanubandhi. The rule of existence for the Aharak Saptak and Tirthankar
Prakriti  The Aharak Saptak has been said to exist in all Gunasthanas. This
means that the Aharak Saptak exists in all Gunasthanas by choice. There is no
Gunasthana where it can be said that the Aharak Saptak exists by rule, meaning
that its existence is not fixed in all Gunasthanas.  The reason for this is that
the Aharak Sharira is a Namkarma Prashasta Prakriti, and its bondage occurs to
some pure Charitradharak, Apramat Sanayami. When an Apramat Sanayami is bound by
the Aharak Sharira,  1.  "Sasyanant Niyama Pancha Su Bhajja Abhi Padham." -
Panchasangraha 342     Go. Karmakanda Gatha 391 mentions a difference of opinion
with the phrase "Tthi Anan Upsamge" and gives space to both opinions. 2.  (a)
"Shubham Vishuddham Avyaghati Chaharak Chaturdasha Bandh Rasya." - Tattvarth
Sutra 2.46     (b) The Panchasangraha hints at the reason for the bondage of the
Aharak Sharira and Tirthankar Prakriti.     "Tisthey Raharanam Bandhe Sammat
Sanjama Heu." Sangraha 204. Samyaktva is the reason for the bondage of the
Tirthankar Prakriti, and Sanjam is the reason for the bondage of the Aharak.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka. saMgraha meM tIsare se lekara sAtaveM taka pA~ca guNasthAnoM meM sattA
mAnI hai| karmagrantha meM gyArahaveM guNasthAna taka aura kamaprakRti va
paMcasaMgraha meM sAtaveM guNasthAna taka anaMtAnubaMdho kaSAya kI sattA mAnane
ke antara kA kAraNa yaha hai ki karmaprakRti va paMcasaMgrahakAra upazamazroNi
meM anaMdAnabaMdhI kA satva nahIM pAnate haiM aura gamagAra usakA satva svIkAra
karate haiM  /  karmaprakRtikAra ke maMtavya kA sArAMza yaha hai ki cAritra
mohanIya ke upazama kA prayAsa karane vAlA anaMtAnubaMdhI kA avazya visaMyojana
karatA hai| AhAraka saptaka aura tIrthakara prakRti ko sattA kA niyama AhAraka
saptaka kI guNasthAnoM meM sattA batalAne ke liye kahA haiAhArasattagaM vA
savvaguNe  /  yAnI AhAraka saptaka kI sattA vikalpa se sabhI guNasthAnoM meM hai
/  aisA koI guNasthAna nahIM ki jisake bAre meM AhAraka saptaka kI sattA niyama
se hone kA kathana kiyA jA sake arthAt sabhI guNasthAnoM meM isakI adhruva sattA
hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki AhAraka zarIra nAmakarma prazasta prakRti hai aura
isakA baMdha kisI-kisI vizuddha cAritradhAraka apramatta saMyamI ko hotA hai|
jaba koI apramatta saMyamI AhAraka zarIra kA baMdha 1 sAsAyaNaMta niyamA paMcasU
bhajjA abhI pddhmH| -paMcasaMgraha 342 go0 karmakAMDa gAthA 391 meM ekna
matabheda kA 'tthi aNaM upasamage' pada dvArA ullekha kiyA hai tathA dono matoM
ko sthAna diyA hai  /  2 (ka) zubhaM vizuddhamavyAghAti cAhAraka caturdazA
baMdha rasyava  /  -tattvArthasUtra 2 / 46 (cha) AhAraka zarIra aura tIrghakara
prakRti ke baMdha ke kAraNa kA saMketa paMcasaMgraha meM kiyA hai tisthaya
rAhArANaM baMdhe sammattasaMjamA heuu| saMgraha 204 tIrthakara prakRti ke bandha
meM samyaktva aura AhAraka ke baMdha meM saMyama kAraNa hai|

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  When a being, due to pure karmic results, ascends to
higher **Gunasthanas** (spiritual states), the **Ayantra** (the karmic influence
of the five senses) remains. However, when the being descends to lower
**Gunasthanas** due to impure karmic results, the **Aharak Saptak** (the
sevenfold karmic influence of food) remains.   But a **Samyami Muni** (a
perfected soul) who is free from distractions and does not bind the **Aharak
Saptak** while ascending or descending **Gunasthanas**, does not possess the
**Aharak Saptak** in those **Gunasthanas**. Due to this difference, the **Aharak
Saptak** is considered to be present in all **Gunasthanas** in a potential form.
Similar to the **Aharak Saptak**, the **Tirthankara Namkarma** (the karmic
influence of becoming a Tirthankara) is also of a **Prashasta** (refined)
nature. It occurs in accordance with time and is present in some **Vishuddha
Samyagdristi** (perfectly enlightened beings) from the fourth **Gunastana** to
the sixth part of the eighth **Gunastana**. However, regarding its presence in
the **Gunasthanas**, the **Gatha** (scripture) indicates that "**Vitigune Vina
Tittham**" - it is present in all **Gunasthanas** except the second and third,
in a potential form.  The reason for this is that when a being, from the fourth
to the sixth part of the eighth **Gunastana**, binds the **Tirthankara** nature,
and then ascends to higher **Gunasthanas** due to pure karmic results, the
**Tirthankara** nature is present in those **Gunasthanas**. However, if the same
being, having bound the **Tirthankara** nature, descends to lower
**Gunasthanas** due to impure karmic results, it will also reach the **Mithyatva
Gunastana** (the state of false belief), but not the second or third
**Gunastana**. Therefore, the **Tirthankara Namkarma** can be present in all
twelve **Gunasthanas** except the second and third.   However, even if a being
attains **Vishuddha Samyaktva** (perfect enlightenment), it does not bind the
**Tirthankara** nature...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha T karake zuddha pariNAmoM ke kAraNa Upara ke guNasthAnoM
meM jAtA hai taba ayaMtrA azuddha pariNAmoM ke kAraNa Upara ke guNasthAnoM se
nIce ke guNasthAnoM meM AtA hai taba usake AhAra saptaka kI sattA banI rahatI
hai| lekina jo apramatta saMyamI muni AhAraka saptaka kA baMdha kiye binA hI
Upara ke guNasthAnoM meM jAtA hai athavA nIce ke guNasthAnoM meM AtA hai, usake
una guNasthAnoM meM AhAraka saptaka kI sattA nahIM pAyI jAtI hai  /  usI
vibhinnatA ke kAraNa AhAraka saptaka kI sanA sabhI guNasthAnoM meM vikalpa se
mAnI gaI hai| AhAraka saptaka ke samAna hI tIrthaMkara nAmakarma bhI prazasta
prakRti hai| kyoMki usakA samaya ke sadbhAva meM hotA hai aura vaha bhI cauthe
guNasthAna se lekara AThaveM guNasthAna ke chaThe bhAga taka kisI-kisI vizuddha
samyagdRSTi ko hotA hai| lekina guNasthAnoM meM isakI sattA ke sambandha meM
gAthA meM saMketa kiyA hai ki 'vitiguNe viNA titthaM' - dUsare aura tIsare
guNasthAna ke sivAya zeSa guNasthAnoM meM sattA vikalpa se hotI hai| isakA
kAraNa yaha hai ki kisI jIva ke cauthe se lekara AThavaM guNasthAna ke chaThe
bhAga taka meM tIrthakara prakRti kA baMdha hone para jaba vaha zuddha pariNAmoM
ke kAraNa Upara ke guNasthAnoM meM jAnA hai to unameM tIrthaMkara prakRti kI
sattA pAI jAtI hai| lekina vaha jIva jisane tIrthaMkara prakRti kA baMdha kiyA
hai, azuddha pariNAmoM ke kAraNa Upara se nIce ke guNasthAnoM meM bhI AtA hai to
midhyAtva guNasthAna meM bhI AtA hai, lekina dUsare aura tIsare guNasthAna meM
nahIM ho AtA hai, isIliye dUsare aura tIsare guNasthAna ko chor3akara zeSa
bAraha guNasthAnoM meM tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kI sattA raha sakatI hai| kintu koI
jIva vizuddha samyaktva ke hone para bhI tIrthakara prakRti kA baMdha nahIM

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Panak**  If someone possesses the Panak, then the essence of the Tirthankara
nature is not found in all of their Gunasthanas.  The implication of this
statement is that the Tirthankara nature is not found in the second and third
Gunasthanas, and in the remaining Gunasthanas, it is possible for those who have
bound it, but for those who have not bound it, it does not exist. Therefore, the
essence of the Tirthankara nature is considered to be impermanent.  The reason
why a bound Tirthankara nature can enter the Mithyatva Mrunastana is that if a
being has previously bound itself to Naraka, and then attained Kshayopaashamak
Samyaktv, and as a result of the fruits of the Sayas, has bound the Tirthankara
nature, then at the end of its life, it vomits Samyaktv and attains the
Mithyatva Gunastana, taking birth in Naraka. This is why it is said that a bound
Tirthankara nature can attain the Mithyatva Gunastana.  Even if a being with the
Tirthankara nature attains the Mithyatva Gunastana, it only stays there for a
short time - Antamuhurta. The reason for this is that if a being has previously
bound itself to Naraka, and later becomes a Vedak Samyagdristi and binds the
Tirthankara nature, then when death approaches, the being becomes devoid of
Samyaktv and becomes a Mithyadristi, and in the Mithyatva state, it takes birth
in Naraka and becomes a Samyagdristi after Antamuhurta. This statement is based
on the expectation of the Nikachit Tirthankara Karma. Because a being with the
essence of the Nikachit Tirthankara Karma does not stay in the Mithyatva
Gunastana for more than Antamuhurta, and after becoming sufficient, it
immediately attains Samyaktv.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAnaka karatA hai to usake sabhI guNasthAnoM meM tIrthakara prakRti kI sattA
nahIM pAI jAtI hai| ukta kathana kA phalitArtha yaha hai ki dUsare aura tIsare
guNasthAna meM to tIrthakara prakRti ko sattA nahIM pAI jAtI hai aura zeSa
guNasthAnoM meM usakA baMdha karane vAloM ke saMbhava hai lekina jisane baMdha
hI nahIM kiyA usake sattA hotI hI nahIM  /  isIliye tIrthaMkara prakRti kI sattA
adhruva mAnI hai| nIce meM mithyAtva mRNasthAna meM tIrthakara prakRti ke
baMdhaka ko Ane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki kisI jIva ne pUrva meM narakAya bAMdhI ho
aura usake bAda kSAyopazAmaka samyaktva ko prApta kara tathAvidha adhyavaH sAyoM
ke phalasvarUpa tIrthaMkara prakRti kA banna kara liyA ho to aMta samaya meM
mamyaktva kA vamana karake mithyAtva guNasthAna ko prApta kara naraka meM janma
letA hai| ibhI kAraNa tIrthaMkara prakRti ke baMdhaka ko mithyAtva guNasthAna kI
prApti kA kathana kiyA jAtA hai| tIrthaMkara prakRti vAla ko mithyAtva
guNasthAna kI prApti hone para bhI vaha antamuhurta samaya taka hI vahAM
ThaharatA hai-aMtamuhutta bhane titthe  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki pahale jisa
jIva ne narakAyu kA vadha kiyA ho aura bAda meM vedaka samyagdRSTi hokara
tIrthakara prakRti kA baMdha kara le to vaha jIva maraNa kAla Ane para samyaktva
se cyuta hokara mithyAdRSTi ho jAtA hai aura mizyAtva dazA meM naraka meM janma
lekara annamuhUrta ke bAda samyagdRSTi ho jAtA hai| yaha kathana nikAcita
tIrthakara nAmakarma kI apekSA se hai| kyoMki nikAcita tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kI
sattA vAlA anta muharta se adhika mithyAtva guNasthAna meM nahIM ThaharatA hai
aura paryApta hokara turanta samyaktva ko prApta kara letA hai|

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Fivefold Karma-Generated  Thus, only the sevenfold Āhāraka or only the
Tīrthankara nature can attain the first Mithyātva Guṇasthāna. The Lokas, which
are the fortresses of the internal observance of the sevenfold Āhāraka, clearly
state that "the being who is both, does not have Mithyātva." That is, the being
who has both Āhāraka and Tīrthankara nature, does not fall, and therefore does
not enter the Mithyātva Guṇasthāna. _Thus, with the description of the
Dhruvasattāka and Adhruvasattāka natures, the consideration of the existence of
these fifteen natures - Mithyātva, Miśra, Samyaktva, Mohaniya, Anantānubandhī
Chatuṣka, and Tīrthankara and Āhāraka Saptaka - in the Guṇasthānas has been
done. Of these, the first is unrefined, and the remaining eight are refined, and
are the main ones._  The statement of the existence of these fifteen natures,
starting with Mithyātva, in the Guṇasthānas, has been made for a specific
reason. Because, the seven natures - Mithyātva, Miśra, Samyaktva, Mohaniya,
Anantānubandhī Chatuṣka - have a close relationship with the rise and fall of
the being. As long as these natures exist, the being cannot attain Samyaktva,
the goal of liberation. Due to their presence, the being does not understand the
true goal, and continues to wander in the world. But when these natures become
inactive, devoid of existence, then the being breaks free from the bonds of the
world and becomes established in its true nature for eternity. _Just as the
seven natures, starting with Mithyātva, are the main ones among the unrefined
natures, similarly, the Āhāraka Saptaka and the Tīrthankara Nāmakarma are the
main ones among the refined natures. Because, the bondage of the Āhāraka Saptaka
happens rarely to ascetics, and the Tīrthankara nature is even more rare than
that._

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmajanya isa prakAra sirpha AhAraka saptaka athavA sirpha tIrthakara
prakRti ko sattA vAlA pahale mithyAtva guNasthAna ko bhI prApta kara sakatA hai|
lokana jisake AhAraka saptaka aMtara pAlana kA hisAra hai, usake mithyAtva
guNasthAna kI prApti nahIM hona ko spaSTa karate haiM ki 'mobhayasaMte mi ubhaya
kI manA vAlA jIva mithyA dRSTi nahIM hotA hai| arthAt jisa jIva ke AhAraka va
tIrthaMkara donoM prakRti kI sattA hai, usakA patana nahIM hone se mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM nahIM AtA hai| _ isa prakAra dhruvasattAka aura adhruvasattAka
prakRtiyoM kA nirUpaNa karane ke sAtha mithyAtva, mizra, samyaktva mohanIya,
anantAnubaMdhI catuSka tathA tIrthakara va AhAraka saptaka ina pandraha
prakRtiyoM kI guNasthAnoM meM sattA kA vicAra kiyA gyaa| inameM se Adi kI mAta
aprazasta aura zeSa ATha prazasta prakRtiyoM meM pradhAna haiN| mithyAtva Adi
ukta pandraha prakRtiyoM kI guNasthAnoM meM sattA kA kathana vizeSa kAraNa se
kiyA gayA hai| kyoMki mithyAtva, mizra, samyaktva mohanIya, anantAnubaMdhI
catuSka ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA jIva ke utthAna-patana ke sAtha ghaniSTha
sambandha hai  /  jaba taka,ina prakRtiyAM ko sattA rahatI hai taba taka jIva
apane lakSyamokSa ke kAraNa samyaktva ko prApti nahIM kara sakatA hai  /  inake
sadbhAva meM jIva yathArtha lakSya ko nahIM samajhakara saMsAra meM paribhramaNa
karatA rahatA hai| lekina jaba ina prakRtiyoM ko niSkriya, nissatva banA DAlatA
hai to saMsAra ke baMdhanoM ko tor3akara ananta kAla ke liye AtmasvarUpa meM
sthita ho jAtA hai  /  _jaise mithyAtva Adi sAta prakRtiyoM aprazasta prakRtiyoM
meM mukhya haiM vaise hI AhAraka saptaka aura tIrthakara nAmakarma ye ATha
prakRtiyoM prazasta prakRtiyoM meM pradhAna haiM  /  kyoMki AhAraka saptaka kA
baMdha virale hI tapasviyoM ko hotA hai aura tIrthakara prakRti to unakI apekSA
bhI

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shataka  **Chapter**  **Krisa** - Someone is bound. Therefore, the qualities
of the primary natures in the unrefined and refined natures have been discussed.
Now, we will discuss the number of destructive and non-destructive natures.
**Destructive and Non-Destructive Natures**  **13.**  **Kevaljjuyal** (pure
knowledge), **Avarana** (coverings), **Pan** (five), **Niha** (sleep), **Baras**
(twelve), **Aimkasyaya** (root passions), **Micch** (falsehood), **Ti** (thus),
**Samvaghai** (all-destructive), **Chauna** (four), **Pan** (knowledge),
**Tivasan** (three), **Avarana** (coverings).  **14.** **Sanjalan** (agitation),
**Nokasaya** (nine passions), **Vigyam** (five obstacles), **Iy... Ya** (and),
**Desghaatn** (country-destructive), **Y** (and), **Aghai** (non-destructive),
**Patt** (each), **Yasanucha** (eight), **Sasayosa** (eight), **Go** (two),
**Yadug** (two), **Banna** (four).  **Word Meanings**  * **Kevaljjuyal** - Pure
knowledge, pure vision * **Avarana** - Coverings * **Pan** - Five * **Niha** -
Sleep * **Baras** - Twelve * **Aimkasyaya** - Root passions * **Micch** -
Falsehood * **Ti** - Thus * **Samvaghai** - All-destructive * **Chauna** - Four
* **Pan** (knowledge) - Knowledge * **Tivasan** - Three * **Avarana** -
Coverings * **Sanjalan** - Agitation * **Nokasaya** - Nine passions * **Vigyam**
- Five obstacles * **Iy... Ya** - And * **Desghaatn** - Country-destructive *
**Y** - And * **Aghai** - Non-destructive * **Patt** - Each * **Yasanucha** -
Eight * **Sasayosa** - Eight * **Go** - Two * **Yadug** - Two * **Banna** - Four
**Meaning**  The **Kevaljjuyal** (pure knowledge) coverings, five sleeps, twelve
root passions, and falsehood are all-destructive natures. Four knowledge
coverings, three vision coverings, agitation passions, nine passions, and five
obstacles are country-destructive natures. Each of the eight primary and eight
non-primary natures are to be known.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka kriso-kisI ko baMdhatI hai  /  isIliye aprazasta aura prazasta
prakRtiyoM meM pradhAna prakRtiyoM ke guNasthAnoM kA vivecana kiyA hai| aba Age
ghAti aura aghAti prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA batalAte haiN| ghAti-adhAti prakRtiyA~
kevalajuyalAbaraNA panihA bArasAimakasAyA  /  miccha ti samvaghAi.
cauNANativasaMNAvaraNA  // 13 /  /  sajalaNa nokasAyA bigdhaM iya vesaghAiya
aghaaii| pattaM yataNur3hAU sasayosA goyaduga banA  // 14 //  zabdArtha
kevalajjuyala- kevala dvika - phevalajJAna, kevaladarzana, AvaraNA - AvaraNa,
paNa - pAMca, nihA - nidrAya bArasa-bAraha, AimakasAyA- Adi kI kaSAyeM, miccha-
mithyAtva, ti--isa prakAra, sambaghA-sArvaghAti, cau- cAra, pANa-jJAna,
tivasaNatIna darzana, AvaraNA-AvaraNa  /  /  saMjAlaNa saMjvalana, nokasAyA-no
kaSAyeM, vigyaM - pAMca aMtarAya, iya .. ya, desaghATna dezavAti ya--aura, aghAi
adhAti patta yasaNucha- pratyeka Adi ATha va za gaira Adi ATha prakRti AU Ayu,
tasabIsA-jasapIzava, goyaduga go advika, vedanIyadvika, bannA - varNacatuka 1
gAdhArtha kevalahika AvaraNa, pAMca nidrAyeM, Adi kI bAraha kaSAya aura
mithyAtva ye sarvaghAti prakRtiyAM haiN| cAra jJAnAvaraNa, tIna darzanAvaraNa
tathA saMjvalana kaSAya catuSka, nau no kaSAyeM aura pAMca aMtarAya ye dezaghAtI
prakRtimA jAnanA cAhiye  /  ATha pratyeka

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Karma Group  The eight categories of nature, namely body (sharira),
etc., four lifespans (ayu), the two types of lust (lasavishaka), the two types
of karmic bondage (govaddhika), the two types of pain (vedaniyadvika), and the
four types of color (varnachatushk), are non-destructive (aghatini) in nature.
**Special Note:** These two verses classify the karmic natures as destructive
(ghati) and non-destructive (aghati) based on their number and types. They also
specify the number and types of non-destructive natures.  Although, generally,
all karmas are the cause of worldly existence, and as long as even a trace of
karma remains, the soul is not considered to be in its true nature. There is
always some deficiency in the completeness of self-development. However, some
karmas hinder the manifestation of the soul's qualities, while others do not
hinder manifestation but keep the soul bound to the world. From this
perspective, karmas are classified into two types: destructive (ghati) and non-
destructive (aghati).  Among the eight fundamental karmas, namely knowledge
obscuration (jnanaavaran), perception obscuration (darshanavaran), delusion
(mohaniya), and hindrance (antaraya), the first four are destructive, while pain
(vedaniya), lifespan (ayu), name (nama), and lineage (gotra) are non-
destructive.  The subsequent natures of the destructive karmas are also
destructive, while the subsequent natures of the non-destructive karmas are non-
destructive.  Those natures that destroy the soul's inherent qualities are
called destructive, and those that are unable to destroy them are called non-
destructive.  There are two types of destructive natures: all-destructive
(sarvaghatini) and partially destructive (deshaghatini). The all-destructive
natures completely destroy the soul's qualities, meaning that the soul's
inherent qualities cannot manifest in their true form as long as these natures
remain.  The partially destructive natures, although destructive to the soul's
qualities, allow for a limited manifestation of these qualities even in their
presence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMSama karma grampa prakRtiyAM, zArIrAdi aSTaka, cAra Ayu, lasavIzaka,
govaddhika, vedanIyadvika aura varNacatuSka ye prakRtiyA~ aghAtinI haiN|
vizeSArSa - ina do gAthAoM meM karma prakRtiyoM kA dhAti aura adhAti kI apekSA
vargIkaraNa kiyA gayA hai ki pAni patiyoM ko saMkhyA kitanI hai aura ve kauna-
kauna haiM aura aghAti prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA kitanI aura unameM kauna-kauna-sI
prakRtiyoM ko grahaNa kiyA gayA hai| _ yadyapi sAmAnya taura para to sabhI karma
saMsAra ke kAraNa haiM aura jaba taka karma kA lezamAtra hai taba taka AtmA sva-
svarUpa meM avasthita nahIM kahalAtI hai| AtmavikAsa kI pUrNatA meM kucha
nyUnatA banI rahatI hai  /  lekina unameM se kucha karma aise hote haiM jo
AtmaguNoM kI abhivyakti ko rokate haiM aura kucha aise hote haiM jo abhivyakti
meM vyavadhAna nahIM DAlakara saMsAra meM banAye rakhate haiM  /  isI dRSTi se
karmoM ke prati aura aghAti yaha do prakAra mAne jAte haiM  /  jJAnAvaraNa Adi
ATha mUla karmoM meM jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, mohanIya aura aMtarAya ye cAra
ghAtI aura vedanIya, Ayu, nAma, gotra ye cAra adhAtI haiN| prAtikarma kI uttara
prakRtiyAM ghAtinI aura aghAtikarma kI uttara prakRtiyAM aghAtinI kahalAtI haiN|
jo prakRtiyAM AtmA ke mUlaguNoM kA ghAta karatI haiM, ve ghAtinI kahalAtI haiM
aura jo unakA ghAta karane meM asamartha haiM, ve adhAtino haiM  /  ghAtti
prakRtiyoM meM bhI do prakAra hai-sarvaghAtinI, dezaghAtinI  /  jo sarvaghAninI
haiM ve AtmA ke guNoM ko pUrI taraha ghAtatI haiM arthAt jinake rahane para
yathArtha rUpa meM Atmika guNa prakaTa nahIM ho pAte haiM aura dezaghAtinI
pratiyAM yadyapi AtmaguNoM kI ghAtaka avazya haiM lekina unake astitva meM bhI
alpAdhika rUpa meM AtmaguNoM kA prakAzana

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It continues to be so. In the verses, while mentioning the names of the natures
as water and non-fatal, two sub-species of fatal karma natures, namely,
"deshghati" (treacherous) and "sarvaghati" (all-destructive), have been
specifically mentioned. This clarifies two things: how many and which are all
the fatal karma natures, and which of them are "sarvaghatini" (all-destructive)
and which are "deshghatini" (treacherous). Their names are as follows:
"Kevaljuyalavarna Pan Nida Barasaimkasaaya Miccham Ti Savvaghai." This verse
indicates the names and number of "sarvaghatini" natures:  (1) Gnanavarna -
Kevalgyanavarna. (2) Darshanavarna - Kevaldarshanavarna, five nidras - nidra,
nidranidra, prachala, prachala-prachala, styanaddhi. (3) Mohaniya -
Anantanubandhi krodh, man, maya, lobha, apratyakhyanadharan krodh, man, maya
lobha, pratyakhyanavarna krodh, man, maya, lobha and mithyatva.  In total, these
are 20. Among these, 1 Gnanavarna, 6 Darshanavarna, and 13 Mohaniya natures are
included, which are called "sarvaghatini" because they destroy the fundamental
qualities of the soul in all beings. The explanation is as follows:
Kevalgyanavarna covers the soul's Kevalgyan granth (the source of omniscience).
Until Kevalgyanavarna is removed, Kevalgyan (omniscience) does not arise.
Therefore, Kevalgyanavarna is called "sarvaghati" (all-destructive). However, it
should be kept in mind that:  1. Kevaliya Nan San Avaran Barmaimkasaaya.
Michhanam Nihao Iya Bim Samdhaio. Panchasangrah 3.17

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hotA rahatA hai| gAthAoM meM pAnI aura aghAtI ke rUpa meM prakRtiyoM ke nAma
batalAne ke sAtha-sAtha vizaSa rUpa se ghAti karma prakRtiyoM ke dezaghAtI aura
sarvaghAtI yaha do upabheda aura batalAye haiN| jisase do bAteM spaSTa ho jAtI
haiM ki samasta ghAtI karma prakRtiyAM kitanI aura kauna-kauna sI haiM tathA
unameM se amuka prakRtiyAM sarvaghAtinI aura amuka prakRtiyAM dezaghAtinI haiM |
unake nAma isa prakAra haiM_ 'kevalajuyalAvaraNA paNa nidA bArasAimakasAyA
micchaM ti savvaghAI' isa gAthAMza meM sarvaghAtinI prakRtiyoM ke nAma va
saMkhyA kA nirdeza kiyA gayA hai ki (1) jJAnAvaraNa-kevalajJAnAbaraNa  /  (2)
rarzanAvaraNa kebaladarzanAvaraNa, pAMca nidrAyeM-nidrA, nidrAnidrA, pracalA,
pracalA-pracalA, styAnaddhi  /  (3) mohanIya-anaMtAnubandhI krodha, mAna, mAyA,
lobha, apratyAkhyAnAdharaNa krodha, mAna, mAyA lobha, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha,
mAna, mAyA, lobha aura mithyAtva  / ' kula milAkara ye 20 haiN| inameM
jJAnAbaraNa kI 1, darzanAvaraNa kI 6 aura mohanIya kI 13 prakRtiyoM kA grahaNa
kiyA gayA hai jo jIba ke mula guNoM ko sarvAza meM ghAta karane se sarvaghAtinI
kahalAtI haiM | jisakA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai-kevalajJAnAvaraNa AtmA ke
kevala jJAna gRNa ko AvRta karatA hai  /  jaba taka kevalajJAnAvaraNa dUra na ho
taba taka kevalajAna utpanna nahIM hotA hai  /  isIliye kevalajJAnAvaraNa ko
sarvaghAtI kahA jAtA hai  /  lekina yaha dhyAna meM rakhanA cAhiye ki 1.
kevaliya nANa saNa AvaraNa baarmaaimksaayaa| michanaM nihAo iya bImaM sambadhAIo
11 paMcasaMgraha 3 / 17

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Just as even when the sun is completely covered by a cloud, a portion of its
light remains uncovered, allowing for the distinction between day and night, so
too does an infinite portion of the knowledge of all beings remain uncovered.
For if the veil of knowledge were to cover even that infinite portion, there
would be no difference between the living and the non-living. This implies that
as long as the veil of knowledge remains, perfect knowledge cannot arise, but
even then, an infinite portion of its essence remains uncovered. This is
something that even the veil of knowledge cannot cover. Because it covers all
aspects of perfect knowledge except for an infinite portion of it, the veil of
knowledge is called the "all-destroying" veil.  The veil of perfect perception
completely covers perfect perception. Yet, an infinite portion of it remains
uncovered. Perfect knowledge and perfect perception are co-existent, therefore,
the reason for the infinite portion of the soul's perception remaining uncovered
should be understood in the same way as the veil of knowledge.  The five types
of sleep also prevent the living being from having a general perception of
things. They obstruct the understanding of the senses. Therefore, they are
considered to be "all-destroying" in nature. Out of the twelve passions, the
infinite-binding passions destroy the very foundation of right knowledge, which
is right conduct, and without right conduct, it is impossible for a living being
to attain liberation. The passions of non-rejection and rejection destroy the
virtue of character, which is essential for the living being to attain its true
nature. The passion of non-rejection destroys the character of conduct in the
world, and the passion of rejection destroys the character of complete
renunciation. The existence of false belief...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha jaise meghapaTala ke dvArA sUrya ke pUrI taraha AcchAdita
hone para bhI usakI prabhA kA utanA aMza anAvRpta rahatA hai jisase dina-rAtri
kA aMtara jJAta ho, vaise hI saba jIvoM ke kevala jJAna kA anantavAM bhAga
anAvRta hI rahatA hai| kyoMki yadi kevalajJAnAbaraNa usa anaMta bhAga ko bhI
AvRta kara le to jIva aura ajIva meM koI aMtara hI nahIM raha skegaa| isakA
phalitArtha yaha huA ki kevalajJAnAvaraNa ke rahane taka kevalajJAna utpanna
nahIM hotA hai, lekina unake saragA bhI zAna kA anaMtavAM bhAga anAvRta rahatA
hai| jisako AcAdita karane kI zakti kevalajJAnAvaraNa taka meM bhI nahIM hai  /
jJAna ke anaMtaveM bhAga ke atirikta kevalajJAna kA sarvAtmanA Avaraka hone se
kevalajJAnAvaraNa ko sarvaghAtI kahA jAtA hai| kevaladarzanAvaraNa kevaladarzana
ko pUrI taraha AvRta karatA hai  /  phira bhI usakA anantavAM bhAga anAvRtta hI
rahatA hai| kevalajJAna aura kevaladarzana sahabhAvI haiM, ataH AtmA ke
darzanaguNa ke anaMta 'bhAga ke anAvRta rahane ke kAraNa ko kevalajJAnAvaraNa kI
taraha samajha lenA caahie| nidrA paMcaka bhI jIva ko vastuoM ke sAmAnya
pratibhAsa ko nahIM hone detI haiN| indriyoM ke avabodha meM rukAvaTa DAlatI
haiN| isIliye unako sarvaghAtinI prakRtiyoM meM grahaNa kiyA hai  /  bAraha
kaSAyoM meM se anantAnubandhI kaSAya jIva ke samyak jJAna prApti ke mula kAraNa
samyaktva kA hI ghAta karatI hai aura binA samyaktva ke jIva ko siddhi prApta
honA asaMbhava hai  /  apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAyeM jIva
ke svarUpalAbha ke hetu cAritra guNa kA ghAta karatI haiM  /
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya dezacAritra kA aura pratyAkhyAnA. baraNa kaSAya
sarvavirati cAritra kA prAna karatI hai| mithyAnva ke rahane

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is impossible for Samyaktva to arise in a Shataka (a period of 100 years),
because it destroys all other qualities. Therefore, it is considered a
"Sarvaghati" (destroyer of all).   After discussing the "Sarvadhatini" (all-
destroying) natures, we now mention the "Deshghatini" (country-destroying)
natures: "Chatnana, Tirdasana, Abarana, Manjalan, Noksaya, Vigdha, these are
Deshghatini." - These are the four Jnana Avaranas (knowledge obscurations),
three Darsana Avaranas (perception obscurations), Sanjaldana (entanglement)
Kashaya (passions) Chatushk (fourfold), No-No Kashaya (negative passions), and
five Antaraya Karmas (hindering karmas). Their names are as follows:  (1) Jnana
Avarana - Mati, Shruta, Avadhi, Manaparyaya Jnana Avarana. (2) Darsana Avarana -
Chakshu, Acha, Avadhi Darsana Avarana. (3) Mohaniya - Sanchalana, Krodha, Mana,
Maya, Lobha, Hasya, Rati, Arati, Shoka, Bhaya, Jugupsa, Stri-Purusha, Napumsaka,
Veda. (4) Antaraya - Dana, Labha, Bhoga, Upbhoga, Virya Antaraya.  There are 4
Jnana Avarana, 3 Darsana Avarana, 13 Mohaniya, and 5 Antaraya Karmas, totaling
25. These natures are called "Deshghatini" because they partially destroy the
qualities of the soul.   We clarify the reason for considering them "Deshghati"
as follows: The four Jnana Avaranas, starting with Mati Jnana Avarana, only
obscure those aspects of knowledge that are not already obscured by them. If
someone, due to ignorance, does not understand the meaning of the fourfold
knowledge (Mati, Shruta, Avadhi, Manaparyaya), then they should understand that
this is the emergence of the obscuration of Mati Jnana Avarana, etc. However,
the fourfold knowledge (Mati, Shruta, Avadhi, Manaparyaya) does not obscure the
object of Keval Jnana (omniscience).  "Nana Avarana Chakra Dasati, Noksaya
Vigdhapanam. Sanjaldana Deshghai, Taipavigappo Imo Anno." - Panchasangraha 3.16

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka para samyaktva kI utpatti asaMbhava hI hai, vaha samyaktva guNa kA
sarvAsmAnA dhAta karatI hai, isIliye use sarvaghAtI meM grahaNa kiyA hai| _
sarvadhAtinI prakRtiyoM kA kathana karane ke bAda aba dezaghAtinI prakRttiyoM ke
nAma batalAte haiM--'caTaNANatirdasaNAbaraNA maMjalaNa nokasAyA vigdhaM iya
desaghAiyaM'-cAra jJAnAvaraNa, tIna darzanAvaraNa, saMjadalana kaSAya catuSka,
no no kaSAya aura pAMca antarAya karma yaha . dezavAti prakRtiyAM haiM  /
jinake nAma kramazaH isa prakAra haiM (1 /  jJAnAvaraNa - mati, zruta, avadhi,
manaparyAya jJAnAvaraNa | (2) darzanAvaraNa cakSu, acA, avadhi darzanAvaraNa  /
(3 mohanI - saMcalana krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, hAsya, rati. arati, zoka,
bhaya, jugupsA, strI-puruSa napuMsaka veda  /  (4) aMtarAya--dAna, lAbha, bhoga,
upabhoga, vIrya antarAya  /  /  inameM jJAnAvaraNa kI 4. darzanAvaraNa kI 3,
mohanIya kI 13 aura antarAyakarma kI 5 prakRtiyAM haiN| jo kula milAkara 25 hotI
haiN| ye prakRtiyAM AtmA ke guNoM kA ekadeza ghAta karane se dezaghAtinI
kahalAtI haiN| inako dezaghAtI mAnane ke kAraNa ko spaSTa karate haiM ki
matijJAnAvaraNa Adi cAroM jJAnAvaraNa kevala jJAnAvaraNa dvArA AcchAdita nahIM
hue aise jJAnAMza kA AvaraNa karate haiM  /  yadi koI chadmastha joba matyAdi
jJAnacatuSka ke viSayabhUta artha ko na jAne to vahI matijJAnAdi ke AvaraNa kA
udaya samajhanA cAhie  /  kintu mati Adi cAroM jJAna ke aviSayabhUta
(kevalajJAna ke nANAvaraNa cakka dasatiga nokasAya vigdhapaNaM  /  saMjAlaNa
desaghAi, taipavigappo imo anno  /  /  -paMcasaMgraha 3 / 16

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma-Pratikraman  **Subject:** Understanding the infinite number
of **gunas** (qualities) is the **kevaldarshanavaran** (veil of omniscience).
The **chakshudarshanavaran** (veil of visual perception),
**achakshudarshanavaran** (veil of non-visual perception), and
**avdhidarshanavaran** (veil of clairvoyance) are all just partial unveilings of
the **kevaldarshan** (omniscience). When these veils arise, the individual
cannot fully perceive the **vishayabhoot** (objects of perception) of
**chakshudarshan** etc., but they are unable to perceive the infinite
**avishayabhoot** (non-objects of perception) **gunas** due to the presence of
the **kevaldarshanavaran**.  **Sanjwalan** (burning) **kashaya** (passion) and
the four **chatupka** (types of karma) and the **hasya** (laughter) etc.
**kashayas** are not capable of completely destroying the **charitra guna**
(virtue), but they do cause **atichaar** (transgression) in the **mool guna**
(root qualities) and **uttar guna** (secondary qualities). Therefore, they are
considered **deshadhatini** (destructive to the body). While the other
**kashayas** give rise to **anachar** (immorality).  **Antaray** (obstruction)
karma's **danantaray** (obstruction to giving) etc. five **prakriti** (types)
are considered **deshadhatini** because the **pudgal** (matter) that is suitable
for **dan** (giving), **labh** (gain), **bhog** (enjoyment), and **upbhog**
(consumption) are only an infinitesimal part of the infinite **pudgal dravya**
(matter). This means that not all **pudgal dravya** is suitable for giving,
taking, or enjoying. Only a very small amount of **pudgal** is suitable for
these actions. It is also important to understand that even among the **bhogya
pudgal** (enjoyable matter), a single **jiva** (soul) cannot give, gain, enjoy,
or consume all **pudgal**. Each **jiva** receives only the **pudgal** that is
suitable for them. Therefore, **danantaray**, **labhantaray**, **bhogantaray**,
and **upbhogantaray** are **deshadhatini**. **Veeryantaray** (obstruction to
energy) is also **deshadhatini**.  **Sanveya** (to be understood) **aiyara**
(this) **majalana** (to be known) **tu** (indeed) **jadayo** (when) **hoti**
(becomes). **Mool** (root) **chhejj** (to cut) **prith** (earth) **hoi**
(becomes) **bar** (twelve) **maah** (months) **kasaya** (passions).  -
**Pangasak 44**  The **sanjwalan kashaya** causes **atichaar** (transgression)
in all aspects, but the other twelve **kashayas** destroy the very root of
**bat** (existence).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmapranya viSayabhUta) ananta gaNoM ko jAnane meM jo jskii|
asamarthatA hai, use kevalaz2AnAvaraNa kA udaya samajhanA caahiye|
cakSudarzanAvaraNa, acakSudarzanAvaraNa, avadhidarzanAvaraNa bhI
kevaladarzanAvaraNa se anAvRta kevaladarzana ke ekadeza ko dhAtate haiN| inake
udaya meM jItra cakSudarzana Adi ke viSayabhUta viSayoM ko pUrI taraha nahIM
dekha sakatA hai, kintu unake aviSayabhUta anaMtaguNoM ko kevaladarzanAvaraNa ke
udaya hone ke kAraNa hI dekhane meM asamartha hotA hai| saMjvalana kaSAya
catupaka aura hAsyAdi nI no kaSAyeM cAritra guNa kA sarvAtmanA ghAta karane meM
to sakSama nahIM haiM kintu mUla guNoM aura uttara guNoM meM aticAra lagAtI hai
/  isIliye inako dezadhAtinI mAnA hai  /  jabaki anya kaSAyoM kA udaya anAcAra
kA janaka hai|' antarAya karma kI dAnAntarAya Adi pAMcoM prakRtiyAM dezaghAtinI
isaliye mAnI jAtI haiM ki dAna, lAbha, bhoga aura upabhoga ke yogya jo pudgala
haiM ve samasta pudgala dravya ke anaMtaveM bhAga haiN| yAnI sabhI pudgala
dravya isa yogya nahIM haiM ki unakA lena-dena Adi kiyA jA sake, lena-dena aura
bhogane meM Ane yogya pudgala bahuta thor3e haiN| sAtha hI yaha bhI jAnanA
cAhiye ki bhogya pudgaloM meM bhI eka jIva sabhI pudgaloM kA dAna, lAbha, bhoga,
upabhoga nahIM kara sakatA hai| sabhI jIva apane apane yogya pudagala aMza kA
grahaNa karate rahate haiN| ataH dAnAntarAya, lAbhAnta rAya, bhogAntarAya,
upabhogAntarAya dezaghAtI haiM  /  vIryAnta rAya sanveyi ya aiyArA majalaNANaM
tu jadayo hoti  /  mUlanchejja pRNa hoi bAramAhaM kasAyANaM  /  -paMgasaka 44
saMjvalana kaSAya ke udaya se samamta aticAra hote haiM, kintu zeSa bAraha
kaSAya ke udaya se bata ke mUla kA hI chedana ho jAtA hai  /

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
55 The reason for considering it a "deshghati" (country-destroying) is that even
with the rise of "biyantiray" (obstruction of semen), there is still a certain
amount of "kshayopasham" (diminution of the subtle "nigodya" (living being)
which allows for the intake of "aahar parinaman" (food transformation), "karma
nokarma vargana" (categories of karma and non-karma), "gatyanter gaman"
(movement in different directions), and "boryalabdhi" (attainment of "borya" (a
type of karma)). Due to the rapid "kshayopasham" of the "viriyantaray" karma,
there is a deficiency in "virya" (power, strength) from the subtle "nigodya" to
the twelfth "gunasthan" (stage of being). This is just a part of the "virya" of
a "kevali" (omniscient being). If the "viriyantaray" karma were "sarvaghati"
(all-destroying), it would cover up all the "virya" of the living being, making
it inert and inactive. Therefore, the "viriyantaray" karma is "deshghati".
Here, "sarvaghati" is described as having 20 and "deshghati" as having 25
"prakritis" (categories), totaling 45. This should be understood in relation to
"bandh" (bondage). When considering "uday" (arising), there are 47 "prakritis"
when "samyaktva" (right faith) and "misra mohaniya" (mixed delusion) are
combined. In these two, "samyaktva mohaniya" is included in "deshghati" and
"misra mohaniya" in "sarvaghati" "prakritis". Then there are 21 "sarvaghati" and
26 "deshghati" "prakritis".  1. In the "karmakand" (karma section), "sarvaghati"
and "deshghati" "prakritis" are counted in relation to "bandh" and "uday":
"Kevalaanavaranam damanchhatrakam Kamayay rasyam. Micchan mavadi sammamichche
abandhi ||36||"  "Kevalgyanavaran" (obstruction of omniscience), six
"darshanavaran" (obstruction of perception) (kevaldarshanavaran, panchanidra),
twelve "kashay" (passions) (anantaanubandhi apratyakhyanavaran,
pratyakhyanavaran krodh man, maya, lobha), "mithyatva mohaniya" (delusion of
falsehood) - these 20 "prakritis" are "madhati" (intermediate). "Savy" (right)
"mithyatva" is also related to "uday" and "satta" (existence) states. However,
this "dhatri" (category) is only "judi" (related to) "jati" (birth).
"Nanaacharanach ukkam tidansanam Sammarg me sanjalanam. Jav nokassay vigdham
chhanbisa desavadiyo ||40||"  "Gyanavaran chatushk" (fourfold obstruction of
knowledge), "darshanavaran trik" (threefold obstruction of perception),
"samyakl" (right conduct), "manjvalan" (obstruction of the "kosha" (sheaths)),
four "kosha" (sheaths), nine "kashay" (passions), five "antaray" (internal
obstructions) - these 36 are "deshghati".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 55 prati ko bhI dezaghAtI mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki bIyantirAya kA udaya
hote hue bhI sUkSma nigodiyA jIva ke itanA kSayopazama avazya rahatA hai jisase
AhAra pariNamana, karma nokarma vargaNAoM kA grahaNa, gatyantara gamana rUpa
boryalabdhi hotI hai  /  vIryAntarAya karma ke kSayopazama kI taratamatA ke
kAraNa hI sUkSma nigodiyA se lekara bArahaveM guNasthAna taka ke jIvoM ke vIrya
(zakti, sAmarthya) kI hInAdhikatA pAI jAtI hai  /  yaha saba kevalI ke vIrya kA
ekadeza hai  /  yadi vIryAntarAya karma sarvaghAtI hotA to jIva ke samasta vIrya
ko AvRta karake use jar3avat nizceSTa kara detaa| isIliye vIryAntarAya karma
dezaghAtI hai| yahA~ sarvaghAtI ko 20 aura dezaghAtI kI 25 prakRtiyA~ batalAI
haiM jo kula milAkara 45 haiM, so baMdha kI apekSA se samajhanA cAhiye  /  jaba
udaya kI apekSA vicAra karate haiM to samyaktva aura mizra mohanIya ko milAne
para 47 prakRtiyAM hotI haiN| ina donoM meM samyaktva mohanIya kA dezaghAtI meM
aura mizra mohanIya kA sarvaghAtI prakRtiyoM meM samAveza hotA hai| taba
sarvaghAtI 21 aura dezaghAtI 26 prakRtiyAM haiM  /  1 go" karmakAMDa meM baMdha
va udaya kI apekSA sarvaghAtI aura dezaghAtI prakRtiyoM ko ginAyA hai-
kevalANAvaraNaM damaNachatrakaM kamAyayA rasyaM  /  micchana mavAdI sammAmicche
abaMdhahi  // 36 //  kevalajJAnAvaraNa chaha darzanAvaraNa (kevaladarzanAvaraNa,
pAMcanidrA) bAraha kaSAya (anantAnubaMdhI apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa,
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha mAna, mAyA, lobha) mithyAtva mohanIya ye 20 prakRtiyAM
madhAtI haiN| sabhya midhyAtva prati bhI udaya va sattA avasthA meM sabaMdhAtI
hai| paraMtu yaha dhAtrI jUdI hI jAti kI hai| NANAcaraNaca ukkaM tidaMsaNaM
sammarga meM saMjalaNaM  /  java NokasAya vigdhaM chanbIsA desavAdIo ||40||
jJAnAvaraNa catuSka, darzanAvaraNatrika, samyakla, maMjvalana koSAdi cAra, nau
no kavAya, pAMca aMtarAya chatrIsa bheda dezaghAtI haiM  /

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Text  **A Detailed Explanation of the Nature of All-
Destroying and Country-Destroying Karmas**  Twenty karmas, namely,
**Kevalgyanavarana** (veil of omniscience) and others, are **all-destroying**
because they completely destroy **Samyaktv** (right faith), **Jnana**
(knowledge), **Darshan** (perception), and **Charitra** (conduct). The remaining
twenty-five karmas, including **Matijnanavarana** (veil of knowledge), are
**country-destroying** because they destroy only a part of these qualities.  The
twenty karmas, starting with **Kevalgyanavarana**, completely destroy **Jnana**,
**Darshan**, **Samyaktv**, and **Charitra**. The four **Kshayas** (passions) -
**Mithyatva** (false belief) and **Anantanubandhi** (infinitely connected) -
completely destroy **Samyaktv**. Because when they arise, no one can attain
**Samyaktv**. **Kevalgyanavarana** and **Kevaldarshanavarana** completely veil
**Kevalgyan** (omniscience) and **Kevaldarshan** (omniscient perception)
respectively. The five **Nidras** (sleeps) - **Nidra** (sleep), **Nidra-Nidra**
(deep sleep), and others - completely cover the **Darshan** (perception)
obtained through the destruction of the **Darshanavarana** karma. The four
**Kshayas** - **Apratyaakhyanadharana** (non-rejection) and
**Pratyaakhyanavarana** (rejection) - completely destroy **Deshacharitra**
(country conduct) and **Sakalcharitra** (all conduct) respectively.  Thus, all
these karmas are called **all-destroying** because they completely destroy
**Samyaktv** and other qualities. Except for these twenty **all-destroying**
karmas, the remaining twenty-five karmas, starting with **Matijnanavarana**, are
**country-destroying** because they destroy only a part of **Jnana** and other
qualities. This is explained here.  The **Kevalgyanavarana** karma, even though
it has the tendency to completely veil the **Atma** (soul) in its true form, it
does not completely cover the nature of the soul.  **Sammattatana Dambhana
Charitghaittana Ghaiyo. Naslem Demanainanar Purna Desghayo.** - **Panchasangrah
3.18**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha sarvaghAto aura dezaghAto prakRtiyoM kA vizeSa
spaSTIkaraNa samyaktva, jJAna, darzana aura cAritra kA sarvathA ghAta karane
vAlI hago se kevala vA svAda bIsa prakRtiyAM sarvaghAtI aura zeSa paccIsa
prakRti yA jJAnAdi guNoM kA dezadhAta karane vAlI hone se dezaghAtI haiN|
kevalajJAnAvaraNa Adi bIsa prakRtiyAM apane dvArA jJAna, darzana, samyaktva aura
cAritra gaNa kA sarvathA ghAta karatI haiN| mithyAtva aura anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya
catuSka samyaktva kA sarvathA ghAta karatI haiN| kyoMki unake udaya hone se koI
bhI samyaktva prApta nahIM hotA hai| kevalajJAnAvaraNa aura kevaladarzanAvaraNa
anukama se kevalajJAna aura kevaladarzana ko pUrNa rUpa se AvRta karate haiN|
nidrA, nidrA-nidrA Adi pAMca nidrAyeM darzanAvaraNa karma ke kSayopazama se
prApta darzanalabdhi ko sarvathA AcchAdita karatI haiM tathA
apratyAkhyAnAdharaNa evaM pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka anukrama se
dezacAritra aura sakalacAritra kA sarvathA ghAta karatI haiN| isa prakAra ukta
sabhI prakRtiyAM samyaktva Adi guNoM kA sarvathA ghAta karane vAlI hone se
sarvadhAtI kahalAtI haiM  /  ukta sarvadhAtI bIsa prakRtiyoM ke sivAya cAra
dhAti karmoM kI matijJAnAbaraNa Adi paccIsa prakRtiyAM jJAnAdi mRNoM ke ekadeza
kA ghAta karane vAlI hone se dezadhAtI haiM  /  jisakA spaSTIkaraNa yahAM kiyA
jAtA hai| kevalajJAnAvaraNa karma jJAnasvarUpa AtmagRNa ko pUrNa rUpa se AvRta
karane kI pravRtti kareM to bhI vaha jIva ke svabhAva ko sarvathA Dhakane meM
sammattatANadaMbhaNa caritaghAittaNA ghaaiio| naslema demanAinaNAra pUrNa
desaghAiyo  /  /  - paMcasaMgraha 3 / 18

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Shataka**  It is not possible for the **Shataka** to
completely cover the **Jiva**. If it were to do so, the **Jiva** would become
**Ajiva**, and the distinction between **Jada** and **Chetan** would cease to
exist. In other words, the **Jiva** would cease to exist. Just as the light of
the sun and moon is not completely extinguished even when covered by dense
clouds, the **Shataka** cannot completely cover their light. If it were to do
so, the distinction between night and day would also disappear. The scriptures
state that even when there is a dense cloud cover, the sun and moon still emit
some light. Similarly, even when **Kevalgyan** is completely covered by the
**Kevalgyanavaran Karma**, there is still some light, albeit faint, intense, or
very intense, which is called **Mati Gyana** etc. This **Mati Gyana** etc. is
covered by **Mati, Shruti, Avadhi, and Manparyan Gyanaavaran** in their
respective ways, and therefore they are called **Deshghati**.  Similarly, even
when **Kevaldarshan** is completely covered by the **Kevaldarshanavaran Karma**,
there is still some light, albeit faint, very faint, or specific, which is
called **Prabha** and is associated with **Chakshudarshan** etc. This **Prabha**
is covered by **Chakshu, Achakshu, or Avadhi Darshanavaran Karma** in their
respective ways. Therefore, they are also called **Deshghati** because they
cover a part of **Darshan**.  The five **Prakritis** (**Nidra** etc.) cover only
a part of the **Darshan** related to **Kevaldarshan** which is not covered by
**Kevaldarshanavaran**, but they are called **Sarvaghati** because they
completely cover the **Darshanalabdhi** that arises from the **Kshayopa-sham**
of **Darshanavaran Karma**.  The **Sanjwalan** and the four **Kshayas**
(**Kashaya Chatushk**) and the nine **Kshayas** (**Hasya** etc.) cover the
**Charitralabdhi** that arises from the **Kshayopa-sham** of the twelve
**Kshayas** because they only cause **Atichara**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka samartha nahIM hotA hai  /  yadi sarvathA sampUrNa rUpa meM Dhaka le to
jIva ajIva ho jAye aura usase jar3a aura cetana ke bIca rahane vAle bheda kA
abhAva ho jAyegA | yAnI jIva kA astitva hI samApta ho jaayegaa| jisa prakAra
saghana bAdaloM ke dvArA surya, candra kA prakAza AcchAdita kiye jAne para bhI
unake prakAza kA sarvathA abhAva nahIM ho jAtA hai| dhe unake prakAza ko
pUrNarUpa se AcchAdita nahIM kara pAte haiN| yadi sampUrNatayA AcchAdita kara le
to rAtri dina ke bheda kA bhI abhAva ho jAye  /  zAstroM meM kahA bhI hai ki
gAr3a megha kA udaya hone para bhI candra, sUrya kA kucha prakAza hotA hai,
vaise hI kevalajJAnAvaraNa karma ke dvArA pUrNatayA kevalajJAna ke AvRta hone
para bhI jo kucha bhI tatsaMbadhI maMda, tIvra yA ati tIvra prakAza rUpa jJAna
kA ekadeza jisako mati jJAnAdi kahA jAtA hai, usa ekadeza ko yathAyogya roti se
mati, zru ta, avadhi aura manapayAMya jJAnAvaraNa ke dvArA AcchAdita kiya jAne
se be dezaghAtI kahalAte haiN| isI prakAra kebaladarzanAvaraNa kama dvArA
sampUrNa rUpa se kevaladarzana ke AcchAdita kiye jAne para bhI tatsambandhI
maMda, ati maMda yA viziSTa Adi rUpa jo prabhA jisakI cakSudarzana Adi saMjJA
hai, usa prabhA ko yathAyogya rIti se cakSu, acakSu yA avadhi darzanAvaraNa
karma DhAMka lete haiN| ataeva ve bhI darzana ke ekadeza ko AvRta karane vAle
hone se dezaghAtI haiM tathA nidrA Adi pAMca prakRtiyA~ yadyapi kevala
darzanAvaraNa dvArA anAvRta kebaladarzana sambandhI prabhA rUpa darzana ke
sirpha ekadeza kA ghAna karatI haiM to bhI darzanAvaraNa karma ke kSayopazama se
utpanna hone vAlI darzanalabdhi kA sampUrNa rUpa se AcchAdana karane vAlI hone
se sarvaghAtI kahI jAtI haiN| saMjvalana kaSAya catuSka aura hAsyAdi no no
kaSAyeM Adi ko bAraha kaSAyoM ke kSayopazama se utpanna huI cAritralabdhi ko
deza se AcchAdita karane vAlI haiN| kyoMki ve sirpha aticAra lagAtI haiM  /  jo

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fivefold Kshaya  The fivefold Kshaya (Panchama Kshaya) are those which
destroy the virtues of Samyaktva, etc., and are called "Sarvaghati" (all-
destroying). Those which only cause excess are called "Deshghati" (country-
destroying).  The Sanjwalan Kshaya only cause excess, while the twelve primary
Kshaya destroy the root, meaning they cause a fall from the path of a Vrati (one
who has taken vows). However, the Sanjwalan Kshaya, while causing excess in
vows, do not completely destroy them, hence they are Deshghati.  The inability
to receive, hold, or enjoy a substance, etc., is the subject of Danaantaraaya,
etc., Karmas. These substances, which can be received, held, etc., are only a
fraction of the infinite number of substances in the world. Therefore, since
they destroy a part of Dana, etc., of all substances, Danaantaraaya, etc., are
Deshghati.  Just as Matijnanaavaran, etc., are Deshghati because they obstruct a
part of knowledge, similarly, Danaantaraaya, etc., are Deshghati because they
destroy a part of Dana, etc., related to all substances.  After mentioning the
number, names, etc., of the Ghati (destructive) natures, we now discuss the
Aghati (non-destructive) natures. Out of the 120 bandhyogya (capable of binding)
and 122 udayyogya (capable of arising) natures, 45 and 17, respectively, are
Ghati. The remaining 75 natures are Aghati. Their names are indicated in the
following verse:  "Aghai, Patan, Yatna, Udhau, Tasvisa, Goyadu, Vanna - eight
natures each, the eight Pind (body) natures, the three Tasvisa, Goyadvik,
Vedaniyavik, and the four Varna - all these are Aghati natures."  These are all
Uttaraprakriti (secondary natures) of name, lineage, Vedaniya (feeling), and
Ayukarma (life-span). They keep the Jiva (soul) bound to the cycle of existence,
but...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama kamagrancha kaSAmeM anAcAra sthiti kI janaka haiM yAnI jinake udaya se
samyaktva Adi guNoM kA vinAza hotA hai, ve sarvaghAtI kahalAtI haiM aura jo
kapAyeM mAtra aticAra utpanna karatI hai ve dezaghAtI kahalAtI haiN| maMjvalana
kaSAya ke radaya se sirpha aticAra lagate haiM aura Adi kI bAraha kaSAyoM ke
udaya se mUla kA nAza hotA hai arthAt vratI se patana honA hai  /  lekina
saMjvalana kaSAyoM ke rahane se vratoM meM aticAra to avazya laga jAte haiM,
kintu vratoM kA samUloccheda nahIM hone se dezaghAtI haiM  /  grahaNa, dhAraNa
yogya jisa vastu ko jIva de nahIM sake, prApta nahI kara sake athabA
bhogopabhoga nahIM kara sake Adi yaha saba dAnAntarAya Adi karmoM kA viSaya hai
aura grahaNa, dhAraNa Adi karane yogya vastuyeM jagata meM vidyamAna saba
dravyoM ke anantaveM bhAga pramANa hI haiN| isaliye tathArUpa sarvadravyoM ke
ekadeza ke dAnAdi kA vighAta karane vAlo hone se-dAnAntarAya Adi dezaghAtI haiM
/  jJAna ke eka deza ko AvANadina karane vAlI hone se jaise matijJAnAvaraNa Adi
dezaghAtI haiM, vaise hI sarva dravyoM ke kadeza viSayaka dAnAdi kA vighAta
karane vAlI hone meM dAnAntarAba Adi dazaghAtI haiN| ghAtI prakRtiyoM kI
saMkhyA, nAma Adi batalAne ke bAda aba aghAtI prakRtiyoM kA kathana karate haiN|
aghAtI prakRtiyA~ _ baMdhayogya 120 aura udayayogya 122 prakRtiyoM meM se
kramazaH 45 aura 17 ghAto prakRtimoM ko kama karane para zeSa 75 prakRtiyA~
aghAtI haiM  /  jinake nAmoM kA saMketa gAthA meM isa prakAra kiyA hai aghAi
pataM yataNuDhAU tasavIsA goyaduga vannA-ATha pratyeka prakRtiyAM, zarIra Adi
ATha piMDa prakRtiyoM ke bheda tathA trasavIzaka aura godvika, vedanIyavika,
varNacatuSka-ye saba adhAtI prakRtiyA~ haiN| ye sabhI nAma, gotra, vedanIya aura
Ayukarma ko uttaraprakRtiyAM haiN| ye apane astitva taka jIba ko saMsAra meM
TikAye rakhane ke sivAya

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  62 Those that are not capable of causing any harm are called *Aghāto*. Their
names are as follows:  (1) **Vedaniya Karma** - Sāta Vedanoaya, Āsāna Vedaniya |
(2) **Āyu Karma** - Naraka, Tiryan, Manusya, Deva Āyu | (6) **Nāma Karma** -
Parāghāta, Ucchvāsa, Ātapa, Udyota, Agurulaghu, Tīrthankara, Nirman, Upghāta,
Pācha Sharira Audārika, Vaikriya, Āhārak, Tejas, Kārman, Three Angopanga -
Audārika Angopanga, Vākraiya Angopanga, Āhārak Angopanga, Six Sansthāna -
Samachaturasra, Nyagrodhaparimandala, Svāti, Vāmana, Kubjaka, Huṇḍaṇḍu, Six
Sanhanan and Ṛṣabha Nārācha, Ṛṣabha Nārācha, Ardhanārān, Kīlikā, Seva Five Varga
- Ekendriya, Dvīndriya, Trīndriya, Chaturindriya, Panchendriya, Four Gati -
Naraka, Tiryanch, Manusya, Deva, Vihāyoga Gati - Dvik Shubha Vihāyoga Gati,
Ashubha Vihāyoga Gati, Anupūrvi Chatushk - Narakanupūrvi, Tiryanchanupūrvi,
Manusyanupūrvi, Devanupūrvi, Lasavīshak (Sa Dashak and Sthāvar Dashak), Varna,
Gandha, Rasa, Sparsha.  ## Shatak (4) **Gotr** - Uchcha Gol, Nīcha Gotr.  In the
above mentioned names, there are 2 *Vedaniya*, 4 *Āyu*, 67 *Nāma* and 2 *Gotr*
karmas. In total, there are 2+4+67+2=75.  After classifying the karmas into
*Ghāti* and *Adhāti*, we now divide them into *Puṇya* and *Pāpa* (Shubha,
Ashubha, Prashasta, Aprashasta).  ## Puṇya-Pāpa Prakritiyaan 1 Savangavarach
Urans | Suranaravigucc Saya Tasadas Paradhan Tiriya Bamnchar Panivi Subah ||15||
I 1 1 T

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 62 kisI guNa kA ghAta karane vAlI nahIM hone se aghAto kahalAtI haiM  /  inake
nAma kramazaH isa prakAra haiM (1) vedanIya karma - sAtA vedanoya, AsAnA
vedanIya | (2) Ayu karma-naraka, tiryana, manuSya, deva Ayu | (6) nAma karma -
parAghAta, ucchvAsa, Atapa, udyota, agurulaghu, tIrthaMkara, nirmANa, upaghAta,
pAca zarIra audArika, vaikriya, AhAraka, tejasa, kArmaNa, tIna aMgopAMga -
audArika aMgopAga, vAkraya aMgopAMga, AhAraka aMgopAMga, chaha saMsthAna -
samacaturasra, nyagrodhaparimaMDala, svAti, vAmana, kubjaka, huNDaRR, chaha
saMhanana va RSabha nArAca, RSabhanArAca, ardhanArAna, kIlikA, sevA pAMca
vargaekendriya dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya, paMcendriya, cAra gati
naraka, tiryaMca, manuSya, deva, vihAyogatidvika zubha vihAyogati, azubha
vihAyogati, AnupUrvI catuSka - narakAnupUrvI, tiryacAnupUrvI, manuSyAnupUrvI,
devAnupUrvI, lasavIzaka ( sa dazaka va sthAvara dazaka), varNa, gaMdha, rasa,
sparza  /  zataka (4) gotra - ucca gola, nIca gotra  /  ukta prakRtiyoM ke
nAmollekha meM vedanIya kI 2, Ayu kI 4, nAma kI 67 aura gotra karma kI 2
prakRtiyAM haiN| kula milAkara 2+4+ 67 +2=75 hotI haiM  /  isa prakAra se ghAti
aura adhAtI kI apekSA prakRtiyoM kA vargIkaraNa karane ke pazcAt aba puNya, pApa
(zubha, azubha, prazasta, aprazasta) ke rUpa meM unakA vibhAjana karate haiM  /
puNya-pApa prakRtiyAM 1 savaMgavaraca uraMsa | suranaravigucca sAya tasadasa
paradhAna tiriyA bamnacara panivi subaha  // 15 //  I 1 1 T

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **Verse 16:** Bayal (42) Punnapagai (meritorious
nature), Apam (excluding the first), Sankin (structure), Khagah Sanghayana
(union of birds and animals), Tiriyadu (animal realm), Asayani (unpleasant),
Oshadhay (medicines), Igvigal (one-sensed and multi-sensed), Nirayattig (hell).
**Verse 17:** Thayaravas (stationary), Bannaghoukk (fourfold caste), Ghaipana
(wounded), Alasahiy (lazy), Basoi (82), Patrapaditti (sinful nature), Dosuvi
(two types), Vannaigha (taking on the color), Suha (pleasant), Asuha
(unpleasant).  **Word Meanings:** Suranarati (divine beings), Devtrik (three
types of gods), Manusyatriva (three types of humans), Uchch (high), Uchch Gotra
(high lineage), Sayam (evening), Sata (hundred), Vedaniya (painful), Tasadash
(ten types of suffering), Tanu (body), Por (small), Uvang (three limbs), Pair
(forest, bull, and elephant), Chaurasan (four-sided structure), Parashasag
(seven types of external influences), Ptiriaou (animal realm), Janav (fourfold
caste), Panin (five-sensed), Sumakhagha (good dwelling).  **Explanation:** Bayal
(42), Punnapagai (meritorious nature), Apam (excluding the first), Sankin
(structure), Khagah Sanghayana (union of birds and animals), Tiriyadu (animal
realm), Asayani (unpleasant), Oshadhay (medicines), Igvigal (one-sensed and
multi-sensed), Nirayattig (hell).  Chavaradas (ten types of stationary beings),
Balay Upk (fourfold caste), Ghaidhati (wounded), Panayal (45), Sahiy (with),
Yukt (united), Basoi (82), Pavpati (sinful nature), Si (thus), Komushi (two
types), Vannaigha (taking on the color), Suha (pleasant), Asuha (unpleasant).
**Summary:** These are the 42 meritorious natures, excluding the first.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha bAyAlapunnapAI apahamasaThANakhagaisaMghapaNA  /
tiriyaduga asAyanIyoSadhAya igavigala nirayattiga  // 16 //  thAyaravasa
bannaghaukka ghAipaNa Alasahiya baasoii| pAtrapaDitti dosuvi. vannAigahA suhA
asuhA  // 17 //  zabdArtha-suranaratiga devatrika, manuSyatrivA, uccaucca gotra,
sAyaM sAtA vedanIya, tasadasa asaNa, taNu - pora zarIra, uvaMgatIna argapAMga,
paira-vanaRSabhanArAca sahanana, caurasaM-nama caturastra saMsthAna,
paraSAsagaparAdhAMta saptaka, ptiriAu-tiryaMcAya, jAnava-varNa catuka
paNina.-nendira jAzi, sumakhagaha-zubha vihAmogAte  /  bAyAla-bayAlIsa,
punnapagaI-puNya prakRti, apama - pahala ko chor3akara. saMkINa -saMsthAna,
khagaha saMghayaNA-vihAyogAta aura sahanana, tiriyaduga - tirya cadvikaM, asAya
asatA vedanIya, nIyanIca gotra, ubaghAyaH - upaghAta nAma, igavigata - ekendriya
aura vikalendriya, nirapatiga-narakanika | cAvaradasa -sthAvara dazaka, balaya
upaka - vaNaM catuSka ghAidhAtI, paNayAla - paiMtAlIsa; sAhiya - sahita, yukta,
bAsIIbiyAsI, pAvapati-pApa prakRtiyAM, si - isa prakAra, komuSidonoM meM,
vannAigahA-varNAdi kA grahaNa karane se, suhA- zuma, asuhaa-anubh| gAcArya-
devatrika, manuSyatrika, ucca gotra, sAtA dedanIya, trasadazaka, pA~ca zarIra,
tIna aMgopAMga, vana RSabhanArAca saMhanana, samacaturastra saMsthAna, parAghAta
saptaka, tiyaMcAyu, varNa catuSka, paMcendriya jAti, gubha vihAyogati ye
bayAlIsa puNya prakRtiyAM haiM  /  pahale chor3akara zeSa

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Pātaka**  The five institutions, the second state of hell,
the five Mahānana, the Tiryancha, the Amānavedaniya, the Nīcha Gotra, the
Upadhāta, the Ekendriya, Vikalendriya, Yantrika, Narakavik, and the sthāvara
dashak, the four varna, the forty-five ghāti prakṛtis, all together these are
eighty-two pāpa prakṛtis. The four varna are included in both punya and pāpa
prakṛtis. Therefore, in punya prakṛtis, they should be understood as auspicious,
and in pāpa prakṛtis, they should be understood as inauspicious.  **Special
Note:**  In these non-Gāthās, forty-two punya prakṛtis and eighty-two pāpa
prakṛtis are mentioned. This classification of punya and pāpa prakṛtis is of the
120 bandha prakṛtis. Although the sum of forty-two and eighty-two is 124, and
the bandha prakṛtis are 120, the author explains the reason by saying, "Dosuvi
bannāigahā suha asuha." The four varna, namely, varna, gandha, gnya, and sparsa
prakṛtis, are both auspicious and inauspicious. Therefore, these four prakṛtis
are included in the auspicious form of punya and the inauspicious form of pāpa
prakṛtis. This is why the number of punya and pāpa prakṛtis is mentioned as
forty-two and eighty-two respectively. If the four varna are not included in
both categories, then the number of punya and pāpa prakṛtis will be thirty-eight
and seventy-eight respectively. When the four varna prakṛtis are included in one
category, then it will be forty-two and seventy-eight or thirty-eight and
eighty-two. In this situation, the total will be 120, which is the number of
bandha prakṛtis.  After calculating the bandha prakṛtis based on their ghāti and
aghāti nature, the reason for calculating them as punya and pāpa is that the
prakṛti whose rasa, anubhāga, and vipāka are pleasurable is considered punya,
and the prakṛti whose rasa is painful is considered pāpa prakṛti.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAtaka pA~ca saMsthAna, dUsarI vihAyogati aura pAMca maMhanana,tiryacadvika,
amAnAvedanIya, nIca gotra, upadhAta, ekendriya vikalendriyantrika, narakavika
tathA sthAvara dazaka, varNa catuSka, paiMtAlIsa ghAti prakRtiyAM, kula milAkara
ye bavAsI pApa prakRtiyAM haiN| varNa catuSka ko puNya aura pApa prakRtiyoM
donoM meM grahaNa kiyA hai  /  ataH puNya prakRtiyoM meM zubha aura pApa
prakRtiyoM azubha samajhanA cAhiye  /  vizeSArtha-ina nona gAthAoM meM puNya
prakRtiyoM ke bayAlIsa tathA pApa prakRtiyoM ke bayAsI nAma batalAye haiN| puNya
aura pApa prakRtiyoM ke rUpa meM kiyA gayA yaha vargIkaraNa 120 baMdha
prakRtiyoM kA hai  /  yadyapi bayAlIsa aura kyAsI kA kula jor3a 124 hotA hai
aura jabaki baMdha prakRtiyAM 120 haiM to isakA kAraNa spaSTa karate hue
granthakAra ne kahA hai ki 'dosuvi bannAigahA suhA asuhA' varNa catuSka varNa,
gaMdha, gna, sparza prakRtiyAM zubha bhI haiM aura azubha rUpa bhI haiM, ataH ye
cAra prakRtiyAM zubha rUpa puNya aura azubha rUpa pApa prakRtiyoM meM grahaNa kI
jAtI haiM, isI kAraNa puNya aura pApa prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA kramazaH 42 aura 82
batalAI gaI haiN| yadi varNa catuSka ko donoM vargoM meM na gireM taba puNya
aura yAra prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA kramazaH 38 aura 78 hogI aura jaba varNa canuSka
prakRtiyoM ko kisI .eka varga meM milAyA jAyegA taba 42 aura 78 athavA 38 aura
82 hogI  /  isa sthiti meM kula jor3a 120 hogA jo baMdha prakRtiyoM kA hai|
baMdha prakRtiyoM ke ghAtI aura aghAtI ke bheda se gaNanA karane ke pazcAta
puNya aura 'pApa ke rUpa meM bheda gaNanA karane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki jisa
prakRti kA rasa- anubhAga, vipAka AnandadAyaka hotA hai, use puNya aura jisa
prakRti kA rasa dukhadAyaka hotA hai vaha pApa prakRti

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fifth Karma Granthya is the 'Karma Granthya' of the 'Punyakarma' and
'Papkarma'. The 'Punyakarma' is also called the 'Shubha' or 'Prashastha' nature
and the 'Papkarma' is also called the 'Ashubha' or 'Aprashasta' nature. The
'Karma' which binds, its 'Vipak' is not only 'Shubha' or 'Ashubha', but also the
'Jiva's' 'Adhyavasaya' form of 'Karana' is the cause of 'Shubha' and 'Ashubha'
both types of 'Vipak'. The 'Vipak' created by 'Shubha' 'Adhyavasaya' is 'Shubha'
and the 'Vipak' created by 'Ashubha' 'Adhyavasaya' is 'Ashubha'. The cause of
'Shubha' and 'Ashubha' of 'Adhyavasaya' is the 'Nyunata' of 'Sanklesha', i.e.
the 'Parinam' in which 'Sanklesha' is less, that 'Parinam' is more 'Shubha' and
the 'Parinam' in which 'Sanklesha' is more, that 'Parinam' is more 'Ashubha'.
There is no 'Parinam' which can be definitely called 'Shubha' or 'Ashubha'.
Still, the 'Vyavahar' of 'Shubha' and 'Ashubha' should be understood from the
perspective of 'Goun' and 'Mukhya' 'Bhaav'. Therefore, the 'Shubha' 'Parinam'
from which 'Shubha' 'Anubhag' binds in 'Punyakarma' nature, from the same
'Parinam' 'Ashubha' 'Anubhag' also binds in 'Papkarma' nature. Similarly, the
'Parinam' from which 'Ashubha' 'Anubhag' binds in 'Papkarma' nature, from the
same 'Parinam' 'Shubha' 'Anubhag' also binds in 'Punyakarma' nature.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama karmagranya hai  / ' puNya prakRti ko zubha yA prazasta prakRti tathA
pApa prakRti ko azubha yA aprazasta prakRti bhI kahate haiN| jina-jina karmoM kA
baMdha hotA hai, una sabhI kA vipAka kevala zubha yA azubha hI nahIM hotA hai,
lekina jIva ke adhyavasAya rUpa kAraNa ko zubhAzubhatA ke nimitta se zubha-
azubha donoM prakAra ke vipAka nirmita hote haiN| zubha adhyavasAya se nirmita
vipAka zubha aura azubha adhyavasAya se nirmita vipAka azubha hotA hai  /
adhyavasAyoM kI zubhAzubhatA kA kAraNa saMkleza kI nyUnAdhikatA hai arthAt jisa
pariNAma meM saMkleza jitanA kama hogA vaha pariNAma utanA adhika zubha aura
jisa pariNAma meM saMkleza jitanA adhika hogA vaha pariNAma utanA adhika azubha
hogaa| koI bhI eka pariNAma aisA nahIM jise nizcita rUpa se zubha yA azubha kahA
jA sake  /  phira bhI jo zubha aura azubha kA vyavahAra hotA hai, vaha gauNa
aura mukhya bhAva kI apekSA se samajhanA cAhiye  /  ataH jisa zubha pariNAma se
puNya prakRtiyoM meM zubha anubhAga baMdhatA hai, usI pariNAma se pApa
prakRtiyoM meM azubha anubhAga bhI baMdhatA hai| isI prakAra jisa pariNAma se
pApa prakRtiyoM meM azubha anubhAga baMdhatA hai, usI pariNAma 1 bauddhadarzana
meM bhI karma ke do meda kiye haiM.-kuzala athavA puNyakarma aura akuzala athavA
apuNyakarma  /  jisakA vipAka iSTa hotA hai, vaha kuzala karma aura jisakA
vipAka aniSTa hotA hai, vaha akuzala karma hai  /  sukha kA vedana karAne vAlA
puNya karma aura pApa kA vedana karAne vAlA apuNya karma hai-kuzala karma
kSemam, iSTa vipAkatvAt, akuzala karma akSemam, aniSTa vipAkarabApta  /  puNyaM
karma mukhavedanIyam, apuNyaM karma duHkhavedanIyam  /  -abhiSarma koSa
yogadarzana meM bhI puNya aura pApa bheda kiyA hai.-karmAzayaH
punnyaapussyruupaa|

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the hundred (Shatak) auspicious sections also bind in the virtuous natures.
But the point here is that the section arising from auspicious results is
excellent and the section arising from inauspicious results is inferior, and the
section arising from inauspicious results is excellent and the auspicious
section is inferior. This is the reason for the distinction between virtue and
vice in the lower natures.  There are both fatal (Ghati) and non-fatal (Aghati)
lower natures classified as virtue and vice. Of these, 45 fatal natures are only
vice natures because they damage the soul's original nature, but even among the
non-fatal natures, 33 natures are vice-like, and four natures like caste (varna)
are considered virtuous if they are good and vicious if they are bad. Therefore,
42 natures known as virtuous and 82 natures known as vicious are as follows:  42
Virtuous Natures:  * Suratrika (Devathi, Devanupurvi, Devayau), Manushyanthrika
(Manushya Gati, Manushyanupurvi, Manupyayu), High Lineage (Uchcha Gotra), Three
Decades (Nas, Yadar, Paryapt Pratyak, Sthir, Shubh, Mubhag, Susbar, Aday, Yash
Kini), Five Bodies (Audarik, etc.), Angopaangalik (Audarik Angopaang, Vaikriya
Angopaang, Aharak Angopaang), Vanapbhanaraach Sanhanan, Samachaturasra Sansthan,
Paraghāt Saptak (Paraghāt, Ucchvās, Ātap, Udyot, Agurulghu, Tirthankar, Nirman),
Tiryanchayu, Varnachatusk, Panchendriya Jati, Shubhavihayogati, Sata Vedaniya.
82 Vicious Natures:  * 45 Fatal Natures (Jnanavarana 5, Darshanavarana 6,
Mohaniya 26, Antaraya 5), Five Sanhanan except the first, Five Sanhanan, Ashubh
Vihayogati, Tiryanchagati, Tiryanchanupurvi, Asata Vedaniya, Neetra Gotra,
Upadhat, Ekendriya, Dwindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya, Narakgati, Narakanu...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka se puNya prakRtiyoM meM zubha anubhAga bhI baMdhatA hai| lekina isameM
annara yaha hai ki zubha pariNAma se hone vAlA anubhAga prakRSTa hotA hai aura
azubha anubhAga nikRSTa tathA azabha pariNAma se ba~dhane vAlA azA anubhAga
prakRSTa aura zubha anubhAga nikRSTa hotA hai  /  kama prakRtiyoM ke puNya aura
pApa rUpa bheda karane kA yahI kAraNa hai| pUNya aura pApa ke rUpa meM vargIkRta
prakRtiyoM meM ghAtI aura aghAtI donoM prakAra kI kama prakRtiyAM haiN| unameM
se 45 ghAto prakRtiyAM to AtmA ke mUla gRNA ko kSati pahuMcAne ke kAraNa pApa
prakRtiyoM hI haiM lekina aghAtI * prakRtiyoM meM se bhI tetIsa prakRtiyAM pApa
rUpa hai tathA varNAdi cAra prakRtiyAM acchI hone para puNya prakRtiyoM meM aura
burI hone para pApa prakRtiyoM meM grahaNa kI jAtI haiN| ataH puNya rUpa se
prasiddha 42 aura pApa rUpa se prasiddha 82 prakRtiyAM nimna prakAra haiM42
puNya prakRtiyA~. _ suratrika (devAti, devAnupUrvI, devAyu), manuSyantrika
(manuSyagati, manuSyAnupUrvI, manupyAyu), ucca gotra, trama dazaka (nasa,
yAdara, paryApta pratyaka, sthira, zubha, mubhaga, susbara, Adaya, yaza kIni),
audArika Adi pAMca zarIra, aMgopAMgalika (audArika aMgopAMga, vaikriya
aMgopAMga, AhAraka aMgopAMga), vanapabhanArAca saMhanana, samacaturasra
saMsthAna, parAghAta saptaka (parAghAta,ucchvAsa, Atapa,udyota, agurulaghu,
tIrthaMkara, nirmANa), tiryaMcAyu, varNacatuSka, paMcendriya jAti,
zubhavihAyogati, sAtA vedanIya  /  82 pApa prakRtiyAM 45 ghAjI prakRtiyAM
(jJAnAvaraNa 5, darzanAvaraNa 6, mohanIya 26, antarAya' 5), pahale ko chor3akara
pAMca saMsthAnana thA pAMca saMhanana, azubha vihAyogati, tiryaMcagati,
tiryacAnupUrvI, asAtAvedanIya, nItra gotra, upadhAta, ekendriya, dvIndriya,
vIndriya, caturindriya, narakagati, narakAnu

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fivefold Karma-Prati  Previously, the ten categories of Naraka (hell) and
Stavara (immovable beings) were described: Stavara, Sukshma, Apariapt, Sadharan,
Asthir, Ashubh, Dubhang, Duhswar, Anadeya, and Ayasha Kirti. These are the four
categories of beings.  1. After describing the nature of punya (merit) and papa
(demerit), we now discuss the Pravartan (active) and Apravartan (inactive)
karmas. However, due to the fewer number of Apravartan karmas, they are being
discussed first.  The Apravartan karmas are: Namdhuvabadhinavagan, Dansan,
Pannaan, Digdha, Parghayam, Bhayakuchch, Micchasan, Jin, Gunasisa, and
Avariyata. ||18||  6.7 1. In the Panchasangraha, instead of Gubhya (secret) and
Papa (demerit) karmas, they are categorized as Prashasta (excellent) and
Aprashasta (not excellent) karmas. Hemanumatigam, Devaligam, Tiriya, Usas,
Athatanubhagam, Vihagadd, Vannai, Subham, Tasai, Das, Titya, Niman,
Chauransausabha, Bhava, Parashaya, Panidi, Agurusha, Ucch, Ujjiya, Ri, Pasastha,
Sesa, Basi, and Apasatta. Panchasangraha 321, 22  LA 2. In the Karmaka Ga 41,
42, punya (merit) and papa (demerit) karmas are listed. The count in both texts
is the same.  There is a distinction in the number of punya and papa karmas
based on the intention of the classification. With a focus on distinction, there
are 68 punya karmas and 42 papa karmas, while with a focus on non-distinction,
there are 42 punya karmas and 52 papa karmas. In the state of Udaya (arising),
with the inclusion of Samyaktva (right faith) and Samyagumiddhyatva (wrong
faith), there are 100 karmas with a focus on distinction and 84 with a focus on
non-distinction. From the five types of Bandhan (bondage), five types of
Sanghata (accumulation), and the twenty categories of Varna (caste) etc., 16
karmas are counted as punya karmas with a focus on distinction and non-
distinction, and 16 karmas are counted as papa karmas with a focus on
distinction and non-distinction.  43, 44. In the Karmaka...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmapratya pUrvI, narakAlu, sthAvara dazaka (sthAvara, sUkSma,
aparyApta, sAdhAraNa, asthira, azubha, dubhaMga, duHsvara, anAdeya, ayazaHkIrti)
varNa catuSka  /  1 isa prakAra se puNya pApa prakRtiyoM kA kathana karane ke
bAda krama prApta parAvartamAna aura aparAvartamAna prakRtiyoM ko batalAte haiM
/  lekina aparAvartamAna prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA kama hone se pahale unakA
vivecana kiyA jA rahA hai| aparAvartamAna prakRtiyA~ namadhuvabadhinavagaM
daMsaNa paNanANadigdha paraghAyaM  /  bhayakuccha micchAsaM jiNa guNasIsA
avariyatA ||18|| 6.7 1 paMcasaMgraha meM gubhya aura pApa prakRtiyoM ke bajAya
prazasta aura aprazasta prakRtiyoM ke rUpa meM gaNanA kI haimaNumatigaM
devaligaM tiriyA UsAsa aThataNubhagaM  /  vihagadda vaNNAi subhaM tasAi dasa
titya nimANa cauraMsausabhabhAvava parASAya paNidi agurusA ucca | ujjIya R
pasasthA sesA bAsIi apasattA  /  paMcasaMgraha 321, 22 LA 2 gare0 karmakA gA0
41, 42 meM puNya prakRtiyAM aura prakRtiyAM ginAI haiN| donoM granthoM kI gaNanA
barAbara hai| meM itanI vizeSatA hai bheda vivakSA se 68 aura abheda vivakSA se
42 puNya prakRtiyoM tathA pApa prakRtiyA~ bandha dazA meM bheda vivakSA se 68
aura abheda vivakSA se 52 batalAI haiM  /  udaya dazA meM samyaktva aura samyagu
midhyAtva ko milAkara bheda vivakSA se 100 aura abheda vivakSA se 84 batAI haiM.
pAca baMdhana, pAMca saMghAta aura varNAdi 20 meM se 16 isa prakAra 26
prakRtiyoM ke bheda aura abheda se puNya prakRtiyoM meM tathA varNAdi 20 meM se
16 prakRtiyoM ke bheda aura abheda se pApa prakRtiyoM meM aMtara par3atA hai  /
43, 44 meM pApa lekina karmakAMDa

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shataka  **Word Meaning:**  * **Namakarma:** Karma related to name *
**Dhruvabandhimanag:** Nature of Dhruvabandhini * **Daman:** Darshanavaran
(obstruction of perception) * **Pan:** Five * **Mag:** Gyanavaran (obstruction
of knowledge) * **Vigdha:** Obstruction * **Paraya:** Paraghāt (external harm) *
**Bhayakumchhamicchha:** Fear, disgust, and false belief * **Sapt:** Seven *
**Uchchvas:** Uchchvasa karma (karma related to breathing) * **Jin Tirthankar:**
Tirthankara karma (karma related to becoming a Tirthankara) * **Gunatisa:**
Twenty-nine * **Apriyata:** Aparaavartaman (non-recurring)  **Verse Meaning:**
The verse lists twenty-nine karmas that are Aparaavartaman (non-recurring).
These twenty-nine karmas do not create their own bondage, liberation, or both,
but instead prevent the bondage, liberation, or both of other karmas. They are:
* **(1) Mamaran:** Mati (knowledge), Shrauta (scriptural knowledge), Avadhi
(clairvoyance), Manaparyaya (telepathy), and केवलज्ञानावरण (obstruction of
omniscience) * **(2) Kashannavarag:** Chakshu (eye), Achakshu (blindness),
Avadhi (clairvoyance), and केवल दर्शनावरण (obstruction of perception) * **(3)
Mohaniya:** Fear, disgust, and false belief * **(4) Namakarma:** Four types of
color, Tejas (radiance), Karman body, Agurulaghu (heavy and light), Nirman
(creation), Upadhat (support), Paraghāt (external harm), Uchchvas (breathing),
and Tirthankara * **(5) Antaraya:** Dan (charity), Labh (gain), Bhog
(enjoyment), Upbhog (consumption), and Veerya (energy)  **Special Meaning:**
The verse mentions twenty-nine karmas that are Aparaavartaman (non-recurring).
These twenty-nine karmas do not create their own bondage, liberation, or both,
but instead prevent the bondage, liberation, or both of other karmas.  A
question arises for the seeker: If false belief is considered an Aparaavartaman
karma, then how can it not arise during the liberation of Mohaniya (delusive)
and Mishra Mohaniya (mixed delusive) karmas? These two karmas are opposed to the
arising of false belief. Therefore, false belief should not be considered an
Aparaavartaman karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka zabdArtha-nAma- nAmakarma kI, dhruvabaMdhimanagaM- dhruvabaMdhinI no
prakRtimA, damaNa-darzanAvaraNa, paNa-pA~ca, mAga-jJAnAvaraNa, vigdha antarAya,
parayAya-parAghAta, bhayakumachamiccha--bhaya. bugupsA aura mithyAtva, sApta-
ucchvAsa nAmakarma, jiNa tIrthakara nAmakarma, guNatIsA unatIsa, apariyatA-
aparAvartamAna  /  _gApAya - nAmakarma ko bhuvasaMdhinI, kRtiyAM bAra
darzanAvaraNa, pAMca jJAnAvaraNa, pAMca aMtarAya, parAghAta, bhaya, jugupsA,
mithyAtva, ucchvAsa aura tIrthaMkara ye unatIsa prakRtiyAM aparAvartamAna
prakRtiyAM haiM  /  vizeSArtha- gAthA meM unatIsa prakRtiyoM ke nAma ginAye
haiM, jo aparAvartamAna hai  /  ye unatIsa prakRtiyAM kisI dUsarI prakRti ke
baMdha, udaya athavA baMdha-udaya donoM ko roka kara apanA bandha, udaya aura
baMdha-udaya ko nahIM karane ke kAraNa aparAvartamAna kahalAtI haiM, jinake nAma
isa prakAra haiM (1) mAmAraNa-mati, zrata, avadhi, manaparyAya,
kevalajJAnAvaraNa (2) kazaMnAvaraga-cakSu, acakSu, avadhi, kevala darzanAvaraNa
/  (3) mohanIya-bhaya, jugupsA, mithyAtva  /  (4) nAmakarma - varNaM catuSka,
tejasa, kArmaNa zarIra, agurulaghu, nirmANa, upadhAta, parAghAta, ucchvAsa,
tIrthakara  /  (5) antarAya dAna, lAbha, bhoga, upabhoga, vIrya antarAya  /
mithyAtva ko aparAvartamAna prakRti mAnane para jijJAsu kA prazna hai ki
samyaktva mohanIya aura mizra mohanIya ke udaya meM mithyAtva kA udaya nahIM
hotA hai  /  ye donoM hI mithyAtva ke udaya kI virodhinI prakRtiyAM haiM  /
ataH mithyAtva ko aparAvartamAna prakRti nahIM mAnanA cAhiye  /

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  The answer is that the bondage and arising of
Mithyatva occurs in the first Gunasthan of Mithyatva, but there is no arising or
bondage of Misra Mohaniya and Samyaktava Mohaniya. If these two natures were to
remain in the Mithyatva Gunasthan and prevent the arising of Mithyatva while
themselves arising, then they could certainly be called antagonistic. But their
place of arising is different, meaning Misra Mohaniya arises in the third
Gunasthan, Samyaktava Mohaniya arises in the fourth Gunasthan, and Mithyatva
arises in the first Gunasthan. Therefore, they do not oppose each other's
bondage or arising while residing in the same Gunasthan. This is why Mithyatva
is considered Aparaavartaman. Similarly, one should understand about other
natures that their bondage, place of arising, or place of bondage and arising is
different.  Now, in the following verse, we will explain the Paraavartaman and
Kshetravipako natures.  ## Paraavartaman and Kshetravipaki Natures  **Tanuattu
Bey Vujuyal Kasay Ujjoygoyduag Nidda. Tasakosaau Parisaa
Khitarsivaaga'anupuschoo.** ||16||  **Word Meaning:**  * Tanu Bhat - Thirty-
three natures of the eight bodies * Bey - Three Vedas * Vujuyal - Two Yugals *
Kaptaap - Sixteen Kapayas * Ujjoygoyduag - Udyotik, Gotravik, Vedaniya Dwik *
Miha - Five Nidrames * Tasbees - Tasveeshak * Pau - Four Ayus *
Parittaaparaavartaman - Paraavartaman * Khitarsivaaga - Kshetravipako *
Maanupushveeoo - Four Anupurchas

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha isakA uttara yaha hai ki mithyAtva kA dhaMdha aura udaya
pahale mithyAtva guNasthAna meM hotA hai, kintu vahAM mizra mohanIya va
sabhyaktva mohanIya kA udaya va baMdha nahIM hotA hai| yadi ye donoM prakRtiyAM
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM rahakara mithyAtva ke udaya ko rokatIM aura svayaM
udaya meM AtI to avazya hI virodhinI kahI jA sakatI thiiN| lekina inakA
udayasthAna alaga-alaga hai, yAnI mizra mohanIya kA udaya tIsare guNasthAna meM
aura samyaktva mohanIya kA udaya cauthe guNasthAna meM aura mithyAtva kA udaya
pahale guNasthAna meM hotA hai  /  ataH eka hI guNasthAna meM rahakara paraspara
meM eka dUsare ke baMdha athavA udaya kA virodha nahIM karatI haiM | isIliye
mithyAtva ko aparAvartamAna mAnA hai| isI prakAra anya prakRtiyoM ke bAre meM
samajhanA cAhiye ki unakA baMdha, udaya sthAna yA baMdhodayasthAna bhinna-bhinna
hai| aba Age kI gAthA meM parAvartamAna aura kSetravipAko prakRtiyAM batalAte
haiN| parAvartamAna va kSetravipAkI prakRtiyAM taNuaTu beya vujuyala kasAya
ujjoyagoyaduga niddA  /  tasakosAu parisA khitaSivAgA'NupuScoo  // 16 //
zabdArtha-taNabhaTa-zarIrAvi aSTaka kI tetIsa prakRtiyAM, vaMga - tIna veda,
upala-do yugala, kaptApa-solaha kapAya, ujjoyagoyaduga-udyotatika, gotravika,
vedanIyadvika, mihApAMca nidrAme, tasabIsa-tasavIzaka, pAu-cAra Ayu,
parittAparAvartamAna, khitarivAgA-kSetravipAko mANupuSvIo-cAra Anuparcha  /

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Century  **Meaning:** The eight categories of body, three Vedas, two pairs,
sixteen passions, Udyotdvikas, Govadvikas, Vedaniyatik, five types of sleep,
Usavishak and four lifespans are the pervading natures. The four lifespans are
the field-resultant natures.  **Specific Meaning:** The verse mentions the
pervading and field-resultant natures.  The pervading natures are called so
because they prevent the binding, arising, or both of other natures, and then
bind, arise, or both themselves. These include the majority of the natures of
Adhati-Vedaniya, lifespan, name, and lineage karmas, along with the natures of
Ghatikarma, Darshanavaran, and Mohaniya. Their names are as follows:  (1)
Darshanavaran: Nidra, Nidva-Nidra, Prachala, Prachala-Prachala, Syadhi.  (2)
Vedaniya: Sata Vedaniya, Asata Vedaniya.  (3) Mohaniya: Anantanubandhi Kashaya
Chatushk, Apratyakhyanavaran Kashaya Chatushk, Pratyakhyanavaran Kashaya
Chatushk, Sanjwalan Kashaya Chatushk, Hasya, Rati, Shok, Arati, Stri, Purush,
Napumsak Ved.  (4) Ayukarma: Narak, Tiryanch, Manusya, Dev Ayus.  (5) Namakarma:
33 natures of the eight categories of body (Audarik, Kriya, Aharak body, Audarik
Angopaang, etc., three Angopaang, six Sansthan, six Sanhanan, Ekendriya, etc.,
five Jati, Narakgati, etc., four Gati, Shubh-Ashubh Bihayogati, four Anupurvi),
Atap, Udyot, Vas Dashak, Sthavar Dashak.  (6) Gotrakarma: Uchch Gotra, Nitra
Gotra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 HD zataka gAyArtha - zarIrAdi aSTaka, tIna veda, do yugala, solaha kaSAya,
udyotadvika, govadvika, vedanIyaTika, pA~ca nidrAneM, usavIzaka aura cAra Ayu ye
parAvartamAna prakRtiyAM haiN| cAra AnupUrvI kSetravipAkI hai| vizeSArtha- gAthA
meM parAvartamAna aura kSetravipAkI prakRtiyoM kA kathana kiyA hai|
parAvartamAna prakRtiyA~ dUsarI prakRtiyoM ke baMdha, udaya athavA baMdhodaya
donoM ko roka kara apanA baMdha, udaya yA baMdhodaya karane ke kAraNa
parAvartamAna kahalAtI haiN| inameM adhAtI-vedanIya, Ayu, nAma, gotra karmoM kI
adhikAMza prakRtiyoM ke sAtha ghAtI karma darzanAvaraNa va mohanIya kI bhI
prakRtiyA~ haiM  /  jinake nAma kramazaH isa prakAra haiM - (1)
darzanAvaraNanidrA, nidvA-nidrA, pracalA, pracalA-pracalA, syAddhi  /  (2)
vedanIya-sAtA vedanIya, asAtA vedanIya  /  (3) mohanIya-anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya
catuSka, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kapAya catuSka, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka,
saMjvalana kaSAya catuSka, hAsya, rati,zoka, arati, strI, puruSa, napuMsaka veda
/  (4) Ayukarma-naraka, tiryaMca, manuSya, deva Ayu  /  (5) nAmakarma-
zarIrASTaka kI 33 prakRtiyAM (audArika, va kriya, AhAraka zarIra, audArika
aMgopAMga Adi tIna aMgopAMga, chaha saMsthAna, chaha saMhanana, ekendriya Adi
pAMca jAti, narakagati Adi cAra gati, zubha-azubha bihAyogati, cAra AnupUrvI),
Atapa, udyota, vasa dazaka, sthAvara dazaka  /  (6) gotrakarma-ucca gotra, nItra
gotra  /

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  Thus, 5+2+23+4+55+2-1 = 87  natures are
**paravartaman** (interacting). Among these, the four **kashayas** (passions) -
**anantaanubandhi** (infinitely binding) - and the sixteen **kashayas**
(passions) including the four **anantaanubandhi** (infinitely binding) and the
five **nidras** (sleeps) are **dhruvabandhini** (permanently binding).
Therefore, they do not obstruct other tendencies in the **bandha** (binding)
state, but they do obstruct the tendencies of their own kind in the **udaya**
(arising) state. This is because only one **kashaya** (passion) arises at a time
in a being, for example, only one of the four **kashayas** (passions) - anger,
pride, deceit, or greed - can arise at a time. Similarly, when one of the five
**nidras** (sleeps) arises, the other four do not arise. Therefore, they are
**paravartaman** (interacting).  The four natures - **sthira** (stable),
**shubha** (auspicious), **asthira** (unstable), and **ashubha** (inauspicious)
- are not **birodhini** (opposite) in the **udaya** (arising) state, but they
are **birodhini** (opposite) in the **bandha** (binding) state. This is because
**sthira** (stable) does not bind with **asthira** (unstable), and **shubha**
(auspicious) does not bind with **ashubha** (inauspicious). Therefore, these
four natures are **paravartaman** (interacting). The remaining 66 natures are
**paravartaman** (interacting) because they are **birodhini** (opposite) to each
other in both the **bandha** (binding) and **udaya** (arising) states.  Thus,
the description of the **paravartaman** (interacting) natures has been discussed
along with the twelve **dwaras** (gates) as described by the author of the text,
starting with **dhruvabandhi** (permanently binding) and ending with
**aparaavartaman** (non-interacting). Their details can be found in the table on
page 72.  Now, we will discuss the **karma** (action) natures in relation to
their **vipak** (result).  **Vipak** (result) refers to the **ramodaya**
(enjoyment of the fruits of karma). The power of a **karma** (action) nature to
produce specific or diverse fruits and the tendency to produce those fruits is
called **vipak** (result). For example, when fruits like mangoes ripen and
become ready to eat, they are said to have reached their **vipak** (result).
Similarly, when **karma** (action) natures become ready to produce their fruits,
it is called their **vipak** (result) state.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha _isa prakAra 5+2+23+4+55+2-1 prakRtiyAM parAvartamAna haiM
/  inameM se anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya catuSka Adi solaha kaSAya aura pAMca nidrAyeM
dhruvabaMdhinI hone se to baMdhadazA meM dUsarI pravRtiyoM kA uparodha nahIM
karato haiM lekina udayakAla meM sajAtIya prakRti ko roka kara pravRtta hotI
haiM, kyoMki krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha meM se eka jIba ko eka samaya meM eka
kaSAya kA udaya hotA hai  /  isI prakAra pAMca nidrAoM meM kisI eka kA udaya
hone para zeSa cAra nidrAoM kA udaya nahIM hotA hai  /  ataH parAvartamAna haiN|
sthira, zubha, asthira, azubha ye cAra prakRtiyAM udayadazA meM birodhinI nahIM
haiM kintu bandhadazA meM virodhinI haiN| kyoMki sthira ke sAtha asthira kA aura
zubha ke sAtha azubha kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai| isalie ye cAroM prakRtiyAM
parAvartamAna haiN| zeSa 66 prakRtiyAM baMdha aura udaya donoM sthitiyoM meM
paraspara virodhinI hone se parAvartamAna haiM  /  isa prakAra se parAvartamAna
kama prakRtiyoM kA varNana karane ke mAtha granthakAra dvArA nirdiSTa
dhruvabandhi Adi aparAvartamAna paryanta bAraha dvAroM kA vivecana kiyA jA cukA
hai| jinakA vivaraNa pR0 72 para diye gaye koSTaka meM dekhiye| aba karma
prakRtiyoM kA vipAka kI apekSA nirUpaNa karate haiM  /  vipAka me Azaya ramodaya
kA hai  /  karmaprakRti meM viziSTa athavA vividha prakAra ke phala dene kI
zakti ko aura phala dene ke abhimukha hone ko dipAka kahate haiN| jaise Ama Adi
phala jaba paka kara taiyAra hote haiM, taba unakA vipAka hotA hai| vaise hI
karma pratAniyAM bhI jatra apanA phala dene ke abhimukha hotI hai taba unakA
vipAkakAla kahalAtA hai|

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **karma prakritis** are **pravabandhi**, **avimeva**, **karma prakriti**,
**dh**, **y bandhi**, **adhra**, **v bandhi**, **dhra**, **vodaya**,
**adhayodaya**, **ch**, **v sattā**, **a**, **sattā**, **sarva prāti deśa ghā**.
**Aghatipara** and **apara mogh** are **mohaniya karma** with **samyaktva
deśaghani** and **miśra mohaniya sarvaghati**. Both are **paravartaman** and
**pap prakriti**. It is important to understand this distinction.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma prakRtiyoM ke pravabandhI Avimeva karma prakRti dha ya baMdhI adhra va
baMdhI dhra vodaya adhayodaya cha va sattA a0 sattaH sarva prAti deza ghA.
aghAtiparA va aparA mogha 15  /  20  /  25 | puNya pApa sAnA05 darzanA veda0 2
/  moha0 280 Ayu4 nAma 103 gotra 2 aMta05 mohanIya karma meM samyaktva dezaghAnI
aura mizra mohanIya sarvaghAtI haiM tathA ye donoM parAvartamAna aura pApa
prakRtiyAM haiM, itanA vizeSa samajhanA caahiye| SPh

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Karma Group  This *vipaka* is of two types - *hetuvipaka* and
*rasavipaka*. The nature of *vipaka* - the experience of the fruit - that occurs
due to the support of the *hetu* in the form of *pudgala* etc. is called
*hetuvipaki*, and the nature of *vipaka* that is manifested due to the support
of *rasa*, i.e. the predominance of *rasa*, is called *rasavipaki*.    Each of
these two types of *vipaka* has four sub-categories. Due to the difference in
the *hetu* in the form of *pudgala*, *kṣetra*, *bhava*, and *jīva*, there are
four sub-categories of *hetuvipaki*, namely *pudgalavipaki*, *kṣetravipaki*,
*bhaavipaki*, and *jīvavipaki*. Similarly, there are four sub-categories of
*rasavipaka* - *ekasthānak*, *dvisthānak*, *visthānak*, and *cārasthānak*.
Here, we describe the sub-categories of *pudgalavipaki*, *kṣetravipaki*,
*bhaavipaki*, and *jīvavipaki* based on the *hetu* - the location - of the
emergence of *rasa* in the karma-natures, i.e. which karma-natures are
*pudgalavipaki* etc.  ## *Kṣetravipaki* Natures  Of the above four types of
*vipaka*, we first describe the *kṣetravipaki* natures: ' *Khittavivagāṇupūvīo*
' - the *ānupūrvī* *nāmakarma* is *kṣetravipaki*. This means that the four
natures of *ānupūrvī* *nāmakarma* - *narakānupūrvī*, *tiryachānupūrvī*,
*manuṣyānupūrvī*, and *devānupūrvī* - are all *kṣetravipaki*.  **[Verse 1]**
*Duviha vivāgao puṇ he vivāgao rasavivāgao. Ekkekkaavi ya cauhā jao chasado
vigappenaṁ.*  **[Verse 2]** *Jā jaṁ samecca he vibhāga udayam uventi pagaiyo |
Tā tabbibāgasannā samsabihāṇāi mugamāi.*  **[Pancasangraha 3/44-45]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagramya * yaha vipAka do prakAra kA hai - hetuvipAka aura
rasavipAka  / ' pudgalAdi rUpa hetu ke Azraya se jisa prakRti kA vipAka -
phalAnubhava hotA hai, vaha prakRti hetuvipAkI kahalAtI hai tathA rasa ke Azraya
arthAt rasa kI mukhyatA se nidizyamAna vipAka jisa prakRti kA hotA hai, vaha
prakRti rasavipAkI kahalAtI hai| ina donoM prakAra ke vipAkoM meM se bhI
pratyeka ke punaH cAra-cAra bheda haiM  /  pudgala, kSetra, bhava aura jIva rUpa
hetu ke bheda se hetuvipAkI ke cAra bheda haiM yAnI pudgalavipAkI, kSetravipAkI,
bhavavipAkI aura jIvavipAkI  /  isI prakAra se rasavipAka ke bhI ekasthAnaka,
dvisthAnaka, vIsthAnaka aura cArasthAnaka ye cAra bheda haiN| yahA~ karma
prakRtiyoM ke rasodaya ke hetuoM' - sthAnoM ke AdhAra se hone vAle
pudgalavipAkI, kSetravipAkI, bhavavipAkI aura jIvavipAkI bhedoM kA varNana
karate haiM, yAnI kauna-sI karma prakRtiyAM pudgalavipAkI Adi haiN| kSetravipAkI
prakRtiyAM ukta cAra prakAra ke vipAkoM meM se yahAM pahale kSetravipAkI
prakRtiyoM ko batalAyA hai ki- 'khittavivAgA'NupuvIo' anupUrvI nAmakarma
kSetravipAkI hai  /  yAnI AnupUrvI nAmakarma kI narakAnupUrvI, tiryacAnupUrvI,
manuSyAnupUrvI aura devAnupUrvI ye cAroM prakRtiyAM kSetravipAkI haiN| 1 duvihA
vivAgao puNa he vivAgAo rsvivaagaao| ekkekkAvi ya cauhA jao casado vigappeNaM
//  2 jA jaM samecca he vibhAga udayaM uveMti pagaIo | tA tabbibAgasannA
saMsabhihANAI mugamAi  //  paMcasaMgraha 3/44 -- paMcasaMgraha 3245

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
74 Duck The sky is called a field. The natures that arise in the field are
called field-arising (kṣetravipakinī). Although all natures arise in relation to
substance, field, time, and emotion, the one that is primarily involved is named
after its primary role. The reason for considering the anupūrvīs as field-
arising is that they occur in the field. When a living being (jīva) moves for
rebirth, the anupūrvīs show their arising (vipaka) in the interval field of the
disintegration movement (vigraha-gati). They keep the living being facing its
place of origin.  After explaining the field-arising natures, we now discuss the
living being-arising (jīvavipaki) and the karma-arising (bhavitavipaki) natures.
The living being-arising and karma-arising natures...  ...20...  ...1 The
Digambara and Svetambara sects both consider the anupūrvīs as field-arising.
However, they differ in their views on their nature. In the Svetambara sect,
when a living being moves to take on a new body after abandoning one, the
anupūrvīs move according to the karma series and take the living being to its
place of origin in its respective series. The arising of the anupūrvīs is
described as "the arising of the tail in hell." (First Karma Text, verse 42)
However, in the Digambara sect, the anupūrvīs maintain the shape of the living
being in the disintegration movement, after abandoning the old body and before
taking on a new one, similar to the previous body. And its movement is either
straight, curved, or both.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 74 bataka AkAza ko kSetra kahate haiM  /  jina prakRtiyoM kA udaya kSetra meM
hI hotA hai, ve kSetravipAkinI kahI jAtI haiM  /  yoM to sabhI prakRtiyoM kA
udaya dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva kI apekSA ko lekara hotA hai| lekina
jisako mukhyatA hotI hai, vahAM usakI mukhyatA se usakA nAmakaraNa kiyA jAtA  /
AnupUbiyoM ko kSetravipAkI mAnane kA kAraNa hai ki ina khela meM hI hotA hai|
bho ijaba jIva parabhava *ke liye gamana karatA hai taba vigrahagati ke antarAla
kSetra meM AnupUrvo apanA vipAka-udaya dikhAtI haiM 11 use utpattisthAna ke
abhimukha rakhatI haiN| kSetravipAkI prakRtiyoM ko batalAne ke vAda aba jIva
aura bhatravipAko prakRtiyoM kA kathana karate haiM  /  jIvavipAko aura mavipAko
prakRtiyA ghaNaghAi dugoya jiNA tasiyarasiMga subhagadubharAu sAsaM | jAitiga
jivivAgA AU cauro bhavavidhAgA  // 20 //  ... .1 benAmbara aura vigAkara donoM
saMpradAyoM meM AnupUrvI ko kSetravipAkI mAnA hai  /  lekina svarUpa ko lekara
matabheda hai| evetAmbara saMpradAya meM eka zarIra ko chor3akara maga sArIra
dhAraNa karane ke liye jaba jIva jAtA hai taba AnupUrvI karma zreNi ke anusAra
gamana karate hAra usa jIva ko usake vizreNi meM sthita utapatimdhAna taka le
jAtA hai| AnupUrvI kA udaya jala pani ne mAnA hai 'puccI udao narake  / '
-prathama karmagrantha, gAthA 42 lekina digambara pradAya meM AnapUrvI kama evaM
zarIra ko chor3ane ke bAda aura nayA zarIra dhAraNa karane ke pahale arthAt
vigrahagati meM jIva kA AkAra pUrva nagara ke samAna banAye rakhatA hai aura
usakA padaya Rju gha yA donoM maniyoM meM hotA hai  /

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **Verse 75**  **Word Meanings:**  * **Ghanaghai:**
The natures of the karmas, destructive karmas. * **Dugouy:** Two types of Gotra
(family). * **Gobatik:** Two types of Vedaniya (painful). * **Jina:**
Tirthankara (liberated soul). * **Sasiarati:** Vasatrik (three types of Vasas).
* **Yamatrik:** Yamatrik (three types of Yam). * **Ithar-sthavaratri:**
Sthavaratri (three types of Sthavar). * **Subhag Bhagavau:** Subhag Chatushk
(four types of auspicious). * **Dur Bhag Bhagavau:** Dur Bhag Chatushk (four
types of inauspicious). * **Sas:** Ucchvas (breathing). * **Jaiitig:** Jatitrik
(three types of Jati). * **Jiyavivaaga:** Jivavipaki (fruit-bearing in this
life). * **Aau Chauro:** Four types of Ayu (lifespan). * **Bhavdihana:**
Bhavavipaki (fruit-bearing in future life).  **Verse Meaning:**  There are
forty-seven destructive karmas, two types of Gotra, two types of Vedaniya,
Tirthankara name karma, Vasatrik, Sthavaratri, Subhag Chatushk, Dur Bhag
Chatushk, Ucchvas, Jatitrik, these are Jivavipaki karmas, and four types of Ayu
are Bhavavipaki karmas.  **Special Meaning:**  The verse mentions the names and
types of Jivavipaki and Bhavavipaki karmas.  Jivavipaki karmas are those that
show their effects directly in the soul, affecting the soul's knowledge,
conduct, etc. Bhavavipaki karmas are those that bind in the present life but
show their effects in a future life, after the soul has left the present life
and attained a suitable future life.  The verse lists the names and number of
Jivavipaki karmas as follows:  * 47 destructive karmas (5 of knowledge and
conduct, 1 of darshanavarana, 28 of mohaniya, 5 of antaraya) * Two types of
Gotra * Two types of Vedaniya * Tirthankara name karma * Vasatrik (Tras, Badar,
Paryapt) * Sthavaratri (Sthavar, Sukshma, Aparyapt) * Subhag Chatushk (Subhag,
Muswar, Aadey, Yash Kirti) * Dur Bhag Chatushk (Dur Bhag, Duhswara, Anaadey,
Ayash Kirti) * Ucchvas name karma * Jatitrik (Ekendriya, etc.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagranya 75 zabdArtha-ghaNaghAi-ghAtikarmoM kI prakRtiyAM, dugoya
gobatika, vedanIya Thika, jiNA-tIrthakara nAmakarma, sasiyaratiga yamatrika aura
itara-sthAvaratrika, subhagabhagavau- subhaga catuSka, durbhaga catuSka, sAsa-
uccAvAsa, jAitiga - jAtitrika, jiyavivAgA-jIvipAvI, AU cauro- cAraH AyU,
bhvdhiyaanaabhvvipaakii| _gAdhAtha-saitAlIsa ghAti pratiyAM, gotra dvivA,
vedanIyadvika, tIrthakara nAmakarma, vasatrika,sthAvaralika, subhaga catuSka,
dubhaMga catuSka, ucchavAsa, jAtitrika, ye jIvavipAkI prakRtiyAM haiM aura cAra.
Ayu bhavavipAkI haiN| vizeSArtha-gAthA meM jIvavipAkI aura bhavavipAko
prakRtiyoM ke nAma batalAye haiN| jo prakRtiyAM jIva meM hI sAkSAt phala dikhAtI
haiM arthAt jIva ke jJAna Adi svarUpa kA ghAta Adi karatI haiM ve jIvavipAko
prakR. tiyAM kahalAtI haiM tathA bhavavipAkI prakRtiyAM ce haiM jinakA baMdha
vartamAna bhava meM ho jAne para bhI vartamAna bhava kA tyAga karane ke pazcAt
apane usa yogya bhava kI prApti hone para vipAka dikhalAtI haiM  /  gAthA meM
jIvavipAkI prakRtiyoM ke nAma aura saMkhyA isa prakAra yatalAI hai 47 ghAti
prakRtiyAM (jJAnAcaraNa 5, darzanAvaraNa , mohanIya 28, aMtarAya 5), do gona, do
vedanIya, nIrthakara nAmakarma, vamatrika (trasa, bAdara, paryApta),
sthAvaratrika (sthAvara, sUkSma, aparyApta), subhaga catuSka (subhaga, musvara,
Adeya, yazaHkIrti), durbhaga catuSka (durbhaga, duHsvara, anAdeya, ayaza kIrti),
ucchvAsa nAmakarma, jAtitrika (ekendriya Adi

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The 78 **Prakritis** are **Jiva-vipaki** (affecting the soul). This is because
they directly affect the soul's qualities like **Shān** (knowledge), **Darshan**
(perception), and **Indriya** (senses), even without the influence of external
factors like **Kshetra** (field of action). For example, the **Jñānāvaraṇa**
(veil of knowledge) **Prakriti** makes the soul ignorant, **Darshanāvaraṇa**
(veil of perception) **Prakriti** hinders the soul's perception, **Mohaniya
Karma** (delusive karma) **Prakriti** destroys the soul's **Samyaktva** (right
faith) and **Charitra** (conduct), and the **Five Antarayas** (hindrances)
prevent the soul from giving or receiving **Dāna** (charity). Similarly, the
**Sāta** (pleasant) and **Asāta** (unpleasant) **Vedaniya** (sensory
experiences) **Prakritis** cause the soul to experience happiness or suffering.
Therefore, the 78 **Prakritis** mentioned are **Jiva-vipaki**.  The four
**Bhavas** (existences) - **Naraka** (hell), **Tiryanch** (animal), **Manushya**
(human), and **Deva** (heaven) - are **Bha-vipaki** (affecting the existence).
This is because even after the **Bandha** (bond) of the next existence is
formed, the **Ayukarma** (karma affecting lifespan) **Prakriti** does not
manifest until the soul abandons the current existence and attains its destined
existence. Therefore, the **Ayukarma** **Prakritis** are **Bha-vipaki** because
they are destined to manifest in the next existence.  Having explained the
**Jiva-vipaki** and **Bha-vipaki** **Prakritis**, the next verse will describe
the **Pudgala-vipaki** (affecting matter) **Prakritis** and their **Bandha-
dvāra** (doors of bondage). To explain this, the different types of **Bandha**
(bondage) will be discussed. The **Pudgala-vipaki** **Prakritis** and the
different types of **Bandha** are explained in the following verse:
"**Namadhurogya Chautannu Baghayasahaaranier Joyatigam. Puggal Vivaagi Bandho
Pahiraspaesassi.**" (Verse 2)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 BE zataka pAMca jAti, naraka Adi cAra gati, zubha-azubha vihAyogati), kula
milAkara ye 78 prakRtiyAM jIvavipAkI haiN| inako jIvavipAkI mAnane kA kAraNa
yaha hai ki kSetra Adi kI apekSA ke binA hI jIva ko zAna, darzana Adi AtmaguNoM
tathA indriya, ucchvAsa Adi meM anugraha, upaghAta rUpa sAkSAta phala detI haiM
/  jaise ki jJAnAvaraNa kI prakRtiyoM ke udaya se jIva ajJAnI hotA hai,
darzanAvaraNa ke udaya se jIva ke darzanaguNa kA ghAta hotA hai, mohanIya karma
kI prakRtiyoM ke udaya se jIva ke samyaktva aura cAritraguNa kA ghAta hotA hai
tathA pAMca antarAyoM ke udaya se jIva dAna Adi de yA le nahIM sakatA hai  /
sAtA aura asAtA vedanIya ke udaya se jIva ho sukhI aura hI hotA hai ityAdi ! a:
mAmA balAI gaI 78 prakRtiyAM jIvavipAkI haiN| _"AU cauro bhavavivAgA' yAnI
narakAyu, tiryaMcAyu, manuSyAyu, devAyu ye cAroM Ayu bhavavipAkI haiN| kyoMki
parabhava kI Ayu kA baMdha ho jAne para bhI jaba taka jIva vartamAna bhava ko
tyAga kara apane yogya bhava ko prApta nahIM karatA hai, taba taka Ayu karma kA
udaya nahIM hotA hai| ataH parabhava meM udaya yogya hone se Ayukarma kI
prakRtiyAM bhavavipAkI haiN| isa prakAra se jIvavipAko aura bhavavipAkI
prakRtiyoM kA kathana karane ke bAda aba Age kI gAthA meM pudgalavipAkI
prakRtiyoM ke nAma va baMdhadvAra kA varNana karane ke liye baMdha ke bhedoM ko
batalAte haiM  /  pudagaladipAko prakRliyo aura baMdha ke bheva nAmadhurogya
cautaNu baghAyasAhAraNiyara joyatigaM  /  puggala vivAgi baMdho pahirasapaesasi
/  / 2 /  /

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth 7.  Mandā...Modan - Marakarmī Roy or Prakritis,
Chautan: Tanu Chatushk Upadhay-Upghāt, Sahāran Sādhāran, Imar-Ithar.. Each, Joy
Sigan- Udyotatrik, Pugal Vivāgi - Pudgal Vipāki, Bandho-Dhandh, Payavah -
Prakṛiti and Sthitibandh, Raspaes - Rasabandh and Pradesh Mantra, Si- In this
way.  Gādhārth - The twelve Prakritis of Nāmakarma's Dhruvodayī, the four
bodies, Upghāt, Sādhāran, Each, Udyotanik, these thirty-six Prakritis are Pudgal
Vipāki. Prakṛitibandh, Sthitibandh, Rasabandh and Pradeshbandh are the four
types of Bandh. Visheshāpan - In addition to mentioning the Pudgal Vipāki
Prakritis, the Gāthā also describes the four types of Bandh. Further Gāthās will
describe the characteristics of Bhuyasakar Bandh etc.  Firstly, the Pudgal
Vipāki Prakritis are listed: 'Nāmadhuvoday' 'Puggal Vivāgi' - the twelve
Dhruvabandhini Prakritis of Nāmakarma (Nirman, Sthir, Asthir, Agurulghu, Shubh,
Ashubh, Tejas, Karmān, Varnachatusk) and Tanu Chatushk (excluding Tejas, Karmān
bodies, the three bodies, three Angopāng, six Sansthān, six Sanhanan), Upghāt,
Sādhāran, Each, Udyotanik (Udyot, Ātap, Parāghāt) - these Prakritis are Pudgal
Vipāki. Their total number is thirty-six.  These Prakritis bear their fruit in
the Pudgal Paramanus that have transformed into the form of the body, hence they
are Pudgal Vipāki. For example, the rise of Nirman Nāmakarma regulates the Ang-
Upāng in the Pudgal Paramanus that have transformed into the form of the body.
The rise of Sthir Nāmakarma makes teeth etc. stable, and the rise of Asthir
Nāmakarma makes the tongue etc. unstable. Shubh...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 7 . mAndA...modana- mArakarmI roya vA prakRtiyA~, cautaNa
: tanucatuSka upadhAya-upaghAta, sAhAraNasAdhAraNa, imara-itara.. pratyeka, joya
sigaM- udyotatrika, pugalavivAgi-pudgala vipAkI, baMdho-dhaMdha, payAvaha -
prakRti aura sthitibaMdha, rasapaesa rasabaMdha aura pradezamaMtra, si- isa
prakAra  /  gAdhArtha-nAmakarma kI dhruvodayI bAraha prakRtiyAM, zarIra catuSka,
upaghAta, sAdhAraNa, pratyeka, udyotavika ye chattIsa prakRtiyAM pudgala vipAkI
haiN| prakRtibaMdha, sthitibaMdha, rasabaMdha aura pradezabaMdha ye baMgha ke
cAra bheda haiN| vizeSApaM - gAthA meM pudgala vipAkI prakRtiyoM ko batAne ke
alAvA baMdha ke cAra bhedoM ko batalAyA hai  /  jinameM Age kI gAthAoM meM
bhUyaskAra baMdha Adi vizeSatAoM kA varNana kiyA jAne vAlA hai| sarvaprathama
pudgalavipAkI prakRtiyoM ko ginAyA hai ki 'nAmadhuvodaya "puggala vivAgi'
nAmakarma kI bAraha dhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyAM (nirmANa, sthira, asthira,
agurulaghu, zubha, azubha, tejasa, kArmaNa, varNacatuSka) tathA tanucatuSka
(taMjasa, kArmaNa zarIra ko chor3a kara audArika Adi tIna zarIra, tIna
aMgopAMga, chaha saMsthAna, chaha saMhanana), upaghAta, sAdhAraNa, pratyeka,
udyotanika (udyota, Atapa, parAghAta) ye prakRtiyAM pudgalavipAkI haiM  /
jinakI kula saMkhyA chattIsa hai| ukta prakRtiyAM zarIra rUpa meM pariNata hue
pudgala paramANuoM meM hI apanA phala detI haiM, ataH pudgalavipAkI haiM  /
jaise ki nirmANa nAmakarma ke udaya se zarIra rUpa pariNata pudgala paramANuoM
meM aMga-upAMga kA niyamana hotA hai| sthira nAmakarma ke udaya se dAMta Adi
sthira tathA asthira nAmakarma ke udaya se jIbha Adi asthira hote haiM  /  zubha

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shataka** (hundred) refers to the various karmic influences that shape our
physical form and experiences.   * **Namakarma** (name-karma) at its inception
determines the auspicious or inauspicious nature of our head and other body
parts.  * **Namakarma** also governs the formation of our physical body from
**pudgala** (matter) and the division of our body into limbs and organs.  *
**Sansthana karma** (establishment karma) shapes the overall form of our body,
while **Sanhanana karma** (compaction karma) determines the specific binding of
our bones.  * Similarly, other karmic influences like **Upghāta** (destructive),
**Sādharana** (ordinary), and **Pratyeka** (individual) also contribute to the
manifestation of our physical form.   Therefore, the thirty-six karmic
influences, from **Nirmāṇa** (creation) to **Parāghāta** (destruction), are all
**pudgala-vipāki** (matter-resultant).  Having explained the **kṣetra** (field),
**jīva** (soul), **bhava** (existence), and **pudgala-vipāki** (matter-
resultant) karmas, we now delve into the specific distinctions of the **viṣaka**
(poisonous) aspects of certain karmas.  Although all karmic influences, due to
their inherent power of agency and experience, manifest their results in the
**jīva** (soul) in some form, **āyu karma** (life-span karma) specifically
results in the determination of **bhava** (existence). This is because the
**jīva** (soul) is compelled to take birth when **āyu karma** (life-span karma)
arises. Similarly, **kṣetra-vipāki** (field-resultant) **ānupūrvī karma**
(sequential karma) also guides the soul's journey through the realms of
existence, according to its specific nature.  It is important to note that the
number of **pudgala-vipāki** (matter-resultant) karmas differs in various texts.
The **Karmakāṇḍa** (karma section) lists 62, while the **Karmagrantha** (karma
text) lists 26. This discrepancy arises because the **Karmagrantha** excludes
**bandhana** (binding) and **saṁghāta** (aggregation) karmas and only considers
the four primary **veda** (color) categories, omitting the 20 subcategories.
This reduction of 10 + 16 = 26 karmas leaves 62 - 26 = 36 karmas remaining.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka nAmakarma ke udaya sa mastaka Adi zubha aura azubha nAmakarma ke udaya
se paira Adi azubha avayava kahalAte hai| zarIra nAmakarma ke udaya sa grahIta
pudgala zarIra rUpa banate haiM aura aMgopAMga nAma-karma ke dvArA zarIra meM
aMga-upAMga kA vibhAga hotA hai| saMsthAna nAmakarma ke udaya se zarIra kA AkAra
banatA hai aura saMhanana nAmakarma ke udaya se haDDiyoM kA bandhanavizeSa hotA
hai  /  isI prakAra upaghAta, sAdhAraNa, pratyeka Adi prakRtiyAM bhI zarIra rUpa
pariNata pudgaloM meM apanA phala detI haiN| isIliye nirmANa Adi parAghAta
paryanta chattIsa prakRtiyAM pudgala vipAkI haiN|' isa prakAra se kSetra, jIva,
bhava, pudgala vipAkI prakRtiyoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba kucha prakRtiyoM ke
viSAka bhedoM ke bAre meM vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa karate haiN| yadyapi sabhI
karmaprakRtiyAM jIva meM kartRtva aura bhoktRtva zakti hone ke kAraNa kisI na
kisI rUpa meM jIva meM hI apanA phala detI hai  /  jaise Ayukarma kA
bhavadhAraNa rUpa vipAka jIva meM ho hotA hai, kyoMki Ayukarma kA udaya hone
para jIva ko hI bhava dhAraNa karanA par3atA hai aura kSetravipAkI AnupUrvI
karma bhI zreNi ke anusAra gamana 6 go0 karmakA gA0 47-46 meM bhI vipAkI
prakRtiyoM ko ginAyA hai  /  donoM meM itanA aMtara hai ki karmakAMDa meM
pudgala vipAkI prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA 62 batalAI hai aura karmagrantha meM 26  /
isa aMtara kA kAraNa yaha hai ki karmagrantha meM baMdhana aura saMghAta
prakRtiyoM ko chor3a diyA hai aura varNacatuSka ke sirpha mUla 4 meda line haiM,
uttara 20 bheda nahIM liye haiN| isa prakAra 10+16 26 prakRtiyoM ko kama karane
se 6226-36 prakRtiyAM zeSa rahatI haiN|

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **The nature of the living being, in the form of
karma, remains stable.** The qualities of the pudgala create a power in the
living being, which causes it to absorb certain types of pudgalas. However,
qualities like **kshavipaki** and **adi** are called **kshetravipaki**,
**jivatripaki**, etc., due to their primary and special effects on **kshetra**
and **jiva**. But there are questions from the inquisitive about the
classification of some qualities, and their solutions are presented here.
**Clarification regarding Rati and Ati Mohaniya**  **Rati** and **arati**
mohaniya karma are **jivavipaki**. But the inquisitive person asks that since
the emergence of these two qualities is due to the influence of pudgalas, they
are **pudgalavipaki**. Contact with unpleasant pudgalas like thorns, etc., leads
to the emergence of **arati** karma, while contact with pleasant substances like
flower garlands, sandalwood, etc., leads to the emergence of **rati** mohaniya
karma. Thus, since both emerge due to the connection with pudgalas, they should
be considered **pudgalavipaki** and not **jivavipaki**.  **The solution to this
is that their emergence occurs even without the connection with pudgalas.**
Because even without contact with thorns, etc., the experience of the emergence
of **rati** and **arati** karma occurs through seeing, remembering, etc., of
pleasant and unpleasant objects. **Pudgalavipaki** is that which emerges only
due to the connection with pudgalas. But **rati** and **arati** emerge both due
to the contact with pudgalas and without their contact. Therefore, **rati** and
**ati** can emerge even without the connection with pudgalas.  **1. Sampatta
jiyakale uday kano na janti pagaiyo. Evaminamohahe bhasajja vimemavam nanthi. ||
Panchasangrah | 46**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama krarmagrantha karane rUpa jIva ke svabhAva ko sthira rakhatA hai|
pudgalaviyAko prakR. tiyAM jIva meM aisI zakti paidA karatI hai ki jisase jIva
amuka prakAra ke pudgaloM ko grahaNa karatA hai  /  tathApi kSavipAkI Adi
prakRtiyAM kSenna Adi kI mukhyatA, vizeSatA se apanA phala dene ke kAraNa
kSetravipAkI, jIvatripAkI Adi kahalAtI haiN| lekina kucha prakRtiyoM ke
vargIkaraNa ko lekara jijJAsu ke praznoM kA samAdhAna prastuta kiyA jAtA hai|
rati-ati mohanIya saMbadhI spaSTIkaraNa rati aura arati mohanIya karma
jIvavipAkI hai| lekina isa para jijJAsu prazna karatA hai ki u dono prakRtiyoM
kA udaya padgaloM ke Azraya se hone ke kAraNa pudgalavipAkI hai| kaMTakAdi
aniSTa pudgalA ke saMsarga se arati kA vipAkodaya aura puSpamAlA, candana Adi
iSTa padArthoM ke saMyoga sa rati mohanIya kA udaya hotA hai| isa prakAra
pudgala ke saMbadha se donoM kA udaya hone se unako pudagalavipAko mAnanA cAhiye
/  jIvavipAkI kahanA yogya nahIM hai  /  isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki pudgala ke
saMbaMdha ke binA bhI inakA udaya hotA hai| kyoMki kaMTakAdi ke saMbaMdha ke
binA bhI priya, apriya vastu ke darzana-smaraNa Adi ke dvArA rati-arati ke
vipAkodaya kA anubhava hotA hai| pudgalavipAkI to use kahate haiM jisakA udaya
pudgala ke saMbaMdha ke binA hotA hI nahIM hai| lekina rati aura arati kA udaya
jaise pudgaloM ke saMsarga se hotA hai, vaise hI unake saMsarga ke binA bhI hotA
hai  /  ataH rati aura ati ko pudgala ke saMyoga ke binA bhI 1 saMpappa jIyakAle
udaya kAno na jaMti pgiio| evamiNamohahe bhAsajja vimemavaM nanthi  /  /
paMcasaMgraha |46

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 80 ## Century  The arising of the **Jiva** is considered **Jiva-vipaki**, not
**Pudgala-vipaki**.  Similarly, **Kshayas** like anger, etc., should also be
understood as **Jiva-vipaki**. Just as anger, etc., arises upon hearing words of
contempt, which are **Pudgalik**, in the same way, they also arise through
**Smriti**, etc., without any connection to **Pudgalas**. Therefore, **Kshayas**
like anger, etc., are not **Pudgala-vipaki** but **Jiva-vipaki**.  ##
Explanation related to **Gati** Karma  **Gati** Karma is **Jiva-vipaki**. The
**Jijasa** asks: Just as **Ayukarma** binds the lifespan of a particular
**Bhava**, and arises only in that **Bhava**, not elsewhere, similarly, **Gati**
Karma also arises in its own **Bhava**. It does not arise in any other **Bhava**
besides its own. Therefore, it is reasonable to consider **Gati** Karma as
**Bhava-vipaki**, just like **Ayukarma**.  The answer is that there is a
difference in the **Vipaka** of **Ayukarma** and **Gati** Karma. Because
**Ayukarma**, except for the **Bhava** whose lifespan it binds, does not arise
in any other **Bhava** through **Vipaka-udaya**. It also does not arise through
**Sthibhuka-samkrama**. For example, the lifespan of a human arises only in the
human **Bhava**, not in any other **Bhava**. Therefore, **Ayukarma** is
considered **Bhava-vipaki** because it is inseparable from its own designated
**Bhava** for its arising. This means that after the binding of **Ayukarma**
suitable for any **Bhava**, the **Jiva** must be born in that **Bhava**.
However, this is not the case with the arising of **Gati** Karma. Because, even
without its own **Bhava**, it can arise in another **Bhava** through
**Sthibhuka-samkrama**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 80 zataka udaya meM Ane ke kAraNa jIvavipAkI mAnA gayA hai, na ki
pudagalavipAkI | isI prakAra krodha Adi kaSAyoM ko bhI jIvavipAkI samajhanA
cAhiye ki tiraskAra karane vAle zabdoM jo ki paudgalika haiM, ko sunakara jaise
krodha Adi kA udaya hotA hai vaise hI pudgaloM kA saMbaMdha hue binA smaraNa Adi
ke dvArA bhI unakA udaya hotA hai  /  ataH krodha Adi kaSAyeM pudgalavipAkI na
hokara jIvavipAkI haiN| gati nAmakarma saMbaMdhI spaSTokaraNa gati nAmakarma
jIva vipAkI hai| isa para jijAsa prazna karatA hai ki jaise Ayukarma jisa bhava
kI Ayu kA baMdha kiyA ho, usI bhava meM usakA udaya hotA hai anyatra nhiiN|
vaise hI gati nAmakarma kA bhI apane-apane bhaya meM udaya hotA hai| apane bhava
ke sivAya anya bhava meM usakA udaya nahIM hotA hai| ataH Ayukarma kI taraha
gati nAmakarma ko bhI bhAvavipAkI mAnanA yuktisaMgata hai  /  isakA uttara yaha
hai ki Ayukarma aura gati nAmakarma ke vipAka meM antara hai| kyoMki jisa bhava
kI Ayu kA baMdha kiyA ho, usake sivAya anya kisI bhI bhava meM vipAkodaya dvArA
usakA udaya nahIM hotA hai| stibukasaMkrama dvArA bhI udaya nahIM hotA hai|
jaise ki manuSyAyu kA udaya manuSya bhava meM hI hotA hai, itara bhava meM nahIM
/  ataH apane udaya ke liye sva-nizcita bhava ke sAtha avyabhicArI hone se
Ayukarma bhavavipAkI mAnA jAtA hai yAnI kisI bhI bhava ke yogya Ayukarma kA
baMdha ho jAne ke pazcAt jIva ko usI bhava meM avazya janma lenA par3atA hai  /
kintu gati nAmakarma ke udaya ke liye yaha bAta nahIM hai| kyoMki apane bhava ke
binA bhI anya bhava meM stibukasaMkrama

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  The **Pancham Karma Granth** states that the
**udaya** (manifestation) of **karma** occurs through various **parbhavas**
(existences). This means that the **karma** bound for different **parbhavas**
can manifest in the same **bhavas** through **sancram** (transfer) etc. For
example, the **karma** bound for the **parbhavas** of a **charam shariri jeev**
(final embodied being) is destroyed in the same **bhavas**. Therefore, **Gati
Namakarma** (karma of motion) is not a **bhavavipaki** (determinant of
existence) because it does not regulate the **bhavas**.  The implication is that
**Ayukarma** (karma of lifespan) is a **bhavavipaki** because it manifests in
its own **bhavas**. However, **Gati Namakarma** manifests in its own **bhavas**
through **vipako-udaya** (manifestation of the result) and in other **bhavas**
through **stibukasancram** (transfer of the residue). Thus, it manifests in both
its own and other **bhavas**, making it not a **bhavavipaki**.  **Explanation of
the Anupurvi Karma Sambandha**  **Anupurvi Karma** (karma of consequences) is
**kshetravipaki** (determinant of the field). However, a curious question
arises: since the **vipaka** (result) of **vigrahati** (karma of destruction)
manifests through **sancram** (transfer) of **anupurvi**, shouldn't it be
considered **jeevavipaki** (determinant of the being) like **Gati**, instead of
**kshetravipaki**?  The answer is that **anupurvi** manifests through
**sancram** in other places besides its own **kshetra** (field), but its
**vipaka** is primarily determined by the **kshetra**. This is not the case with
any other type of **karma**. Therefore, the **akash pradesh** (space region) as
the **kshetra** is an extraordinary factor in the **udaya** of **anupurvi**,
which is why it is considered **kshetravipaki**.  This instrument demonstrates
the **kshetravipaki** and other distinctions of **karma**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha dvArA udaya hotA hai  /  arthAt vibhinna parabhavoM ke
yogya bAMdhI huI gatiyoM kA usa hI bhava meM saMkramaNa Adi dvArA udaya ho
sakatA hai| jaise ki carama zarIrI jIva ke parabhava ke yogya bAMdhI huI gatiyAM
usI bhava meM kSaya ho jAtI haiM  /  ataH gati nAmakarma bhava kA niyAmaka nahIM
hone se bhavavipAkI nahIM hai  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki svabhaba meM hI udaya
hone se Ayukarma bhavavipAkI hai aura gati nAmakarma apane bhava meM vipAkodaya
dvArA aura parabhava meM stibukasaMkrama dvArA isa prakAra, sva aura para donoM
bhavoM meM udaya maMbhava hone se bhavavipAkI nahIM hai| AnupUrvo karmasambandho
spaSTIkaraNa _ AnupUrvI karma kSetravipAkI hai  /  lekina yahAM jijJAsu prazna
upasthita karatA hai ki vigrahAti ke vikA ko saMprama ke dvArA jAnupUrvI kA
udaya hotA hai ataH use kSetravipAkI na mAnakara gati kI taraha jIvavipAkI mAnA
jAnA cAhiye  /  isakA uttara yaha hai ki AnupUrthiyoM kA svayogya kSetra ke
sivAya anyantra bhI saMkramaNa dvArA udaya hone para bhI jaise usakA kSetra kI
pradhAnatA se bipAka hotA hai, vaisA anya kisI bhI prakRti kA nahIM hotA hai  /
isaliye AnupuviyoM ke rasodaya meM AkAza pradeza rUpa kSetra asAdhAraNa hetu hai
/  jisase usako kSetravipAkI mAnA gayA hai| prakRtiyoM ke kSetravipAkI Adi
bhedoM kA pradarzaka yaMtra isa prakAra

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Nature  **Mogh 122** **Jnana 5** **Darshana 6** **Vedaniya 2**
**Mohaniya 28** **Ayu 4** **Nama 67** **Gotra 2** **Antaraya 5**  **Karma
Nature's Fields of Results, etc.**  **Field Resultant** **Being Resultant**
**Living Being Resultant** **Pudgala Resultant**  **4** **0** **0** **\*** **•**
**O** **0** **o** **Q** **78** **5** **2** **ક્** **28** **ܘܐ** **2** **Shatak**
**'** **36** **ទេ** **0** **36**  **Types of Bond and their Characteristics**
Thus, after classifying the natures into sixteen categories, starting from
Dhruvabandi and ending with Pudgalavipāki, we now describe the nature of the
bond, etc. First, we explain the types of bond: "Bond is of four types: Nature,
State, Rasa, and Region." Their characteristics are as follows:  The specific
relationship between the soul and karma atoms, or the soul...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 R karma prakRti mogha 122 jJAnA0 5 darzanA0 6 vedanIya 2 mohanIya 28 Ayu 4 nAma
67 gotra 2 aMtarAya 5 karma prakRtiyoM ke kSetravipAko Adi meva kSetravipAkI
bhavavipAkI jIvavipAkI pudgala vipAkI 4 0 0 * * O 0 o Q 78 5 2 k 28 w' 2 zataka
' 36 de 0 36 baMdha ke bheda aura unake lakSaNa isa prakAra se dhruvabaMdhI Adi
pudgalavipAkI paryanta solaha vargI meM prakRtiyoM kA vargIkaraNa karane ke
pazcAta prakRtibaMdha Adi kA varNana karane ke liye sabase pahale baMdha ke
bheda batalAte hai ki 'baMdho paiyaThiirasapaesa ni' prakRti, sthiti, rasa aura
pradeza ye baMdha ke cAra bheda haiM  /  jinake lakSaNa nIce likhe anusAra haiM
AtmA aura karma paramANuoM ke saMbaMdhavizeSa ko athavA AtmA

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The act of becoming bound to the five karmic substances and the karmic fields is
called **bandha**. Due to the soul's actions driven by attachment and aversion,
the **karma particles**, which are unknown and exist in the **ākāśa** fields,
are attracted like magnets and become associated with the **ātma** fields. These
karma particles are **pudgalic** because they possess form, taste, smell, and
touch. The **pudgal** that transforms into form is extremely subtle, like fine
dust, which cannot be perceived by the senses. Only a **kevalajnani** or a
**param avadhijnani** can know them through their knowledge.   Just as a person
who applies oil to their body and then walks through dust will have the dust
stick to their entire body, similarly, due to the **spandan** (vibration),
**nāhlan** (movement), and **chalan** (motion) in the **ātma** fields during the
state of **samsara** (worldly existence), countless **karma-yogya** (karma-
worthy) **pudgal** particles become associated with the **ātma** fields. Just as
a red-hot iron ball constantly draws water from its surroundings, similarly, a
**samsari** (worldly being) constantly absorbs **karma-pudgal** through their
**yoga-pravṛtti** (yogic tendencies). The relationship between the **samsari**
and the **karma** particles is like that of fire and water, or a hot iron ball
and water. This type of association is called **bandha**.  When the **karma-
pudgal** are absorbed by the **jiva** (soul), i.e., when **bandha** occurs, four
aspects are created within them, which are called the types of **bandha**. Just
as the grass eaten by cows and buffaloes transforms into milk, which then
develops a sweet taste, a certain duration for that taste to remain in that
form, intensity and mildness in that sweetness, and a certain quantity (weight)
of that milk, similarly...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha aura karmapradezoM ke eka kSetrAvagAha hone ko baMdha
kahate haiN| AtmA kI rAga pAtmaka kriyA se AkAza pradezoM meM vidyamAna
anajAnanna karmaparamANu cumbaka kI taraha AkarSita hokara AtmapradezoM se
saMzliSTa ho jAte haiM  /  ye karma paramANu rUpa, rasa, gaMdha aura mparza muNa
vAle hone se paudgalika haiM  /  jo pudgala kama rUpa meM pariNata hote haiM, ve
atyanta sUkSma raja-dhUli ke samAna haiM, jinako indriyAM nahIM jAna sakatI
haiN| kintu kevalajJAnI athavA parama avadhijJAnI apane jJAna dvArA unako jAna
sakate haiN| _jaise koI vyakti zarIra meM tela lagAkara dhuli meM lauTe to baha
dhUli usake sarvAMga zarIra meM cipaTa jAtI hai, vaise hI saMsArAvasthApana
jItra ke AtmapradezoM meM parispandananhalanacalana hone se anantAnanta
karmayogya pudgala paramANuoM kA AtmapradezA ke sAtha saMbaMdha hone lagatA hai|
jisa prakAra agni se saMtapta lohe kA golA prati samaya apane savAMga se jala ko
khoMcatA hai, usI prakAra saMsArI jIva apanI yogapravRti dvArA pratikSaNa
karmapudgaloM ko grahaNa karatA rahatA hai aura dUdhapAnI ba agni tathA garma
lohe ke gole kA jaisA sambandha hotA hai, vaisA hI jIva aura kama paramANuoM kA
saMbaMdha ho jAtA hai| isa prakAra ke saMbaMdha ko hI baMdha kahate haiN| jIva
dvArA karmapudgaloM ke grahaNa kiye jAne para yAnI baMdha hone para unameM cAra
aMzoM kA nirmANa hotA hai, jo baMdha ke prakAra kahalAte haiM  /  jaise ki gAya-
bhaisa Adi dvArA khAI gaI ghAsa Adi dUdha rUpa meM pariNata hotA hai, taba
usameM madhuratA kA svabhAva nirmita hotA hai, usa strabhAva ke amuka samaya
taka usI rUpa meM bane rahane kI kAlamaryAdA AtI hai, usa madhuratA meM tIvratA-
maMdatA Adi vizeSatAyeM bho hotI hai aura usa dUdha kA kucha parimANa (vajana)
bhI hotA hai| isI prakAra

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The four aspects of karma pudgalas, which are taken in by the jiva and combined
with the atma-pradeshas, are called prakritibandha, sthitibandha, rasabandh, and
pradesabandh respectively. Their characteristics are as follows:  (1)
**Prakritibandha**: The emergence of different powers and natures in the karma
pudgalas taken in by the jiva is called prakritibandha. Here, the word
"prakriti" means nature. According to another definition, prakritibandha is the
collective term for sthitibandha, rasabandh, and pradesabandh. In other words,
prakritibandha is not an independent bond but simply the name for the collective
of the other three bonds.  (a) **Chadbhihe bandhe panṇate, tam jaha—pagabandhe,
thiivaghe, aṇubhāvabanne, paesabandhe.** - Samvāyarāga, Samvāya 4  (b)
**Prakriti sthitpanṛbhāgapradeśāstadvidhayaḥ.** - Tattvārthamūtrama 2. In
Digambara literature, the word "prakriti" is only considered to mean nature.
**Prakriti svabhāvaḥ, prakriti svabhāvaḥ ity anarthāntaram.** - Tattvārthasūtra
813 (Sarvārthasiddhi, Rājvārttika ṭīkā)  **Payḍī sīl sahāvo........** -
Gokarmakāra 3 3  **Thiibandho dalams sii paesabandho paesgahaṇam jam. Nāma raso
aṇubhāgo tassamudāo pagaibandho.** - Pañcasampah 432  It should be noted here
that in the sense of nature, the meaning of **anubhāga bandha** is only the
karma's fruit-producing power, its auspiciousness or inauspiciousness, and its
intensity or mildness. However, in the sense of the collective, **anubhāga
bandha** includes the karma's fruit-producing power, its auspiciousness or
inauspiciousness, and its intensity or mildness. In Vetambara literature, both
the meaning of nature and the meaning of the collective are accepted.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jIva dvArA grahaNa kiye gaye aura AtmapradezoM ke sAtha saMzliSTa karmapudgaloM
meM bhI cAra aMzoM kA nirmANa hotA hai, jinako kramazaH prakRtibaMdha,
sthitibandha, rasabandha aura pradezabaMdha kahate haiM  / ' unake lakSaNa
kramazaH isa prakAra haiM (1) prakRtimadha-jIva ke dvArA grahaNa kiye hue karma
pudgaloM meM bhinna-bhinna zaktiyoM svabhAvoM ke utpanna hone ko prakRtibaMdha
kahate haiM  /  yahAM prakRti zabda kA artha svabhAva hai  /  dUsarI paribhASA
ke anusAra sthitibaMdha, rasabaMdha aura pradezabaMdha ke samudAya ko
prakRtibaMdha kahate haiM  /  arthAt prakRtibaMdha koI svatantra baMdha nahIM
hai kintu zeSa tIna baMdhoM ke samudAya kA hI nAma hai| 1 (ka) caDabihe baMdhe
paNNate, taM jahA--pagabaMdhe, Thiivaghe, aNubhAvabanne, paesabaMdhe  /
-samavAyaryAga, samavAya 4 (kha) prakRti sthitpanRbhAgapradezAstadvidhayaH  /
-tatvArthamUtramA 2. digambara sAhitya meM prakRti zabda kA sirpha svabhAva
artha mAnA haiprakRti svabhAvaH, prakRti svabhAva ityanarthAntaram  /
tatvArthasUtra 813 (sarvArthasiddhi, rAjavArtika TIkA) payaDI sIla
sahAvo........ -gokarmakAra 3 3 ThiIbaMdho dalamsa sii paesabaMdho paesagahaNaM
jN| nAma raso aNubhAgo tassamudAo pagaibaMdho  /  paMcasaMpaha 432 yahA~ yaha
jJAtavya hai ki svabhAva artha meM anubhAga baMdha kA matalaba karma kI
phalajanaka zasti ko zubhAzubhatA sapA tIvratA-madatA se hI hai, parantu
mapudAya artha meM anubhAga baMdha se karma ko phalajanaka zakti aura usakI
zubhAzubhatA tathA tIvratA-madatA itanA avivakSita hai| vetAmbara sAhitya meM
prati para ke svapAva aura samudAya donoM artha grahaNa kiye gaye haiN|

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **11.  Sthitibandha:** The time limit for karma
pudgalas, taken by the soul through the senses, to remain with the soul without
abandoning their nature, is called Sthitibandha.  **(3) Rasaband:** The varying
potency of karma pudgalas, taken by the soul, to bear fruit is called Rasaband.
Rasaband is also called **Anubhagaband** or **Anubhavaband**.  **(4)
Pradeshband:** The connection of karma skandhas with the soul, with varying
numbers of atoms, is called Pradeshband.  **Summary:** When karma varganas, due
to the influence of the soul's yoga and kshaya emotions, transform into karma
form, they have four aspects:  1. Their nature,  2. Their duration,  3. Their
potency to bear fruit, and  4. Their connection with the soul in a specific
quantity.  These four aspects are called the four types of bandha: **Prakriti,
Sthiti, Ras, and Pradesh**.  Of these, **Prakritibandha** and **Pradeshbandha**
depend on the soul's yoga power, while **Sthiti** and the potency to bear fruit
depend on kshaya emotions.   **In other words:** If the yoga power is strong or
weak, the karma pudgalas obtained through bandha will have a corresponding
nature.   **Notes:** 1. **Anubhagaband** is particularly prevalent in Digambar
literature. 2. **Prakriti** is called nature, **Sthiti** is the time limit,
**Anubhag** is Ras, and the number of groups is called **Pradesh**. 3.
**Pradeshbandha** is earned through yoga.   - Panchasangrah 204

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 11 sthitimAna ... kIba ke dvArA mahala liye karma pudgaloM
meM apane svabhAva ko na tyAgakara jIva ke sAtha rahane ke kAla kI maryAdA ko
sthitibandha kahate hai  /  (3) rasabaMdha- jIva ke dvArA grahaNa kiye hue karma
pudgaloM meM phala dene kI nyUnAdhika zakti ke hone ko rasabaMdha kahate haiN|
rasabaMdha ko anubhAgabaMdha' yA anubhAvabaMdha bhI kahate haiN| (4)
pradezasaMgha-jIva ke sAtha nyUnAdhika paramANu vAle karmaskandhoM kA saMbandha
honA pradezabaMdha kahalAtA hai| sArAMza yaha hai ki jIva ke yoga aura kaSAya
rUpa bhAvoM kA nimitta pAkara jaba kArmaNa vargaNAyeM karmarUpa pariNata hotI
haiM to unameM cAra bAteM hotI haiM, eka unakA svabhAva, dUsarI sthiti, tIsarI
phala dene kI zakti aura cauthI amuka parimANa meM unakA jIva ke sAtha sambandha
honA | ina cAra bAtoM ko hI baMdha ke prakRti, sthiti, rasa, pradeza ye cAra
prakAra kahate hai| _ inameM se prakRtibaMdha aura pradeza baMdha jIva kI
yogazakti para tathA sthiti aura phala dene kI zakti kaSAya bhAvoM para nirbhara
hai|' arthAt yogazakti tIna yA manda jaisI hogI, baMdha ko prApta karma pudgaloM
kA 1 digambara sAhitya meM anubhAga baMdha ho vizeSatayA pracalita hai| 2
svabhAvaH prakRti proktaH sthitiH phAsAvadhAraNam  /  anubhAgo raso zeyaH
pradezo dalasaJcayaH  /  /  svabhAva ko prakRti, kAla kI maryAdA ko sthiti,
anubhAga ko rasa aura daloM kI saMkhyA ko pradeza kahate haiN| 3 paDipaesabaMdhA
jogehi kamAyao iyare  /  -paMcasaMgraha 204

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 86th Century  The nature and quantity of the *svabhava* and *parimana* will
also be as intense or as subtle as the *mantra*. Similarly, just as the *kṣaya*
emotions of the living being are intense or subtle, the state of the bound atoms
and the fruitful power will also be as intense or subtle. This is explained by
an example:  Let the *yogaśakti* of the living being be considered as wind, the
*kṣaya* as sticky glue, and the *karma* atoms as dust. Just as when the wind
blows, dust particles fly and settle on places where there is something sticky
like glue, in the same way, *karma* particles flow into the soul from every
physical, verbal, and mental action of the living being. These *karma*
particles, with the help of the *saṃkleśa* results of the living being, become
bound to the soul. Just as the wind is subtle or intense, the dust flies in the
same proportion, and the glue, etc., is as sticky as it is, the dust also stays
there with the same stability. Similarly, the more intense the *yogaśakti*, the
greater the number of incoming *karma* atoms, and the more intense the *kṣaya*,
the greater the state and the greater the binding of the *karma* atoms.  To
explain the nature of the four types of binding, *prākṛtibandha* etc., the first
*karmagrantha* gives the example of *modaka* (sweet balls). The essence of this
is as follows:  Just as *modaka* made from substances that destroy *vata* have
the nature of destroying *vata*, *modaka* made from substances that destroy
*pitta* have the nature of calming *pitta*, and *modaka* made from substances
that destroy *kapha* have the nature of destroying *kapha*.  1. *Paṭīrasa esa
taṃ cauhā moya-gastha ditā*. - First *karmagrantha*, verse 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 86 zataka svabhAva aura parimANa bhI vaisA hI tIvra yA maMtra hogaa| isI
prakAra jIva ke kaSAya bhAva jaise tIvra yA maMda hoMge, baMdha ko prApta
paramANuoM kI sthiti aura phaladAyaka zakti bhI vaisI hI tIvra yA maMda hogI  /
isako dRSTAnta dvArA spaSTa karate haiM jIva kI yogazakti ko havA, kaSAya ko
cipakane vAlI goMda aura karma paramANuoM ko dhUli mAna leN| jaise havA ke
calane para dhUli ke kaNa ur3a-ur3a kara una sthAnoM para jamA ho jAte haiM
jahA~ koI cipakane vAlI vastu goMda Adi lagI hotI hai| isa prakAra jIva ke
pratyeka zArIrika, vAcaka aura kriyA se karma pudgaloM kA AtmA meM Asrava hotA
hai jo jIva ke saMkleza pariNAmoM kI sahAyatA pAkara AtmA se baMdha jAte haiN|
havA maMda yA tIvra jaisI hotI hai, dhUli usI parimANa meM ur3atI hai aura goMda
vagairaha jitanI cipakAne vAlI hotI hai, dhuli bhI utanI hI sthiratA ke sAtha
vahA~ Thahara jAtI hai  /  isI taraha yogazakti jitanI tIvra hotI hai, Agata
karma paramANuoM kI saMkhyA bhI utanI hI adhika hotI hai tathA kaSAya kI tIvratA
ke anurUpa karma paramANuoM meM utanI hI adhika sthiti aura utanA hI adhika
anubhAga kA baMdha hotA hai  /  prakRtibaMdha Adi cAroM baMdhoM ke svarUpa ko
samajhAne ke liye prathama karmagrantha meM modaka (laDDuoM) kA dRSTAMta diyA
gayA hai  / " jisakA sArAMza isa prakAra hai jaise ki vAtanAzaka padArthoM se
bane hue laDDuoM kA svabhAva vAyu ko nAza karane kA hai, pittanAzaka padArthoM
se bane hue modaka kA svabhAva pitta ko zAnta karane kA aura kaphanAzaka
padArthoM se bane modaka kA 1 paTiirasa esA taM cauhA moyagastha ditA  /  -
prathama karmagrantha, gA0 2

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  The Fifth Karma Granth deals with the destruction of
the **Kaf** (phlegm) element. Similarly, the **Karma Pudgalas** (matter
particles) absorbed by the soul generate different powers. Some of these powers
hinder the soul's **Jnana Guna** (knowledge quality), some obscure the **Darshan
Guna** (perception quality), and some suppress the soul's infinite power. This
binding of different qualities, powers, and natures within different **Karma
Pudgalas** is called **Prakriti Bandh** (nature binding).  Some of these **Karma
Pudgalas** have a lifespan of a week, some fifteen days, and so on, during which
they retain their inherent nature. This lifespan is called **Sthiti**
(duration). Upon completion of **Sthiti**, the **Karma Pudgalas** lose their
inherent nature, becoming dull and lifeless. Similarly, some **Karma Dalikas**
(groups of Karma particles) remain with the soul for seventy **Koda Kodi
Sagaropama** (a unit of time), some for twenty **Koda Kodi Sagaropama**, and so
on. This binding of different lifespans, where **Karma Paramanus** (atomic
particles of Karma) remain with the soul without losing their inherent nature,
is called **Sthiti Bandh** (duration binding). Upon completion of **Sthiti**,
these **Karma Paramanus** abandon their inherent nature and separate from the
soul.  Just as some sweets have more sweetness, some less, some more bitterness,
and some less, similarly, some **Karma Paramanus** have more **Shubh**
(auspicious) or **Ashubh** (inauspicious) **Rasa** (flavor), some less. This
generation of different intensities of **Shubh** and **Ashubh Rasa** within
**Karma Pudgalas**, ranging from **Teer** (intense) to **Teertam** (most
intense) and **Mand** (mild) to **Mandtam** (least mild), is called **Rasa
Bandh** (flavor binding).  Some sweets weigh two **tola** (a unit of weight),
some a **chhatank** (a unit of weight), and so on. Similarly, some **Karma
Skandhas** (groups of Karma particles) have a greater number of **Karma
Paramanus**, and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha svabhAva kapha ko naSTa karane kA hai  /  vaise hI AtmA ke
dvArA grahaNa kiye gaye karma pudgaloM meM se kucha meM AtmA ke jJAna guNa ko
ghAta karane kI, kucha meM darzana guNa ko AcchAdita karane kI, kucha meM AtmA
ke ananta sAmarthya ko dabAne Adi kI zaktiyAM paidA hotI haiN| isa prakAra
bhinna-bhinna karma pudgaloM meM bhinna-bhinna prakAra kI prakRtiyoM ke,
zaktiyoM ke baMdha ko, svabhAvoM ke utpanna hone ko prakRtibaMdha kahate haiM  /
ukta laDDuoM meM se kucha kI eka saptAha, kucha ko pandraha dina Adi taka apanI
zakti svabhAva rUpa meM bane rahane kI kAlamaryAdA hotI hai  /  isa kAlamaryAdA
ko sthiti kahate haiN| sthiti ke pUrNa hone para laDDU apane svabhAva ko chor3a
dete haiM, arthAt bigar3a jAte haiM. nIrasa ho jAte haiM  /  isI prakAra koI
karmadalika AtmA ke sAtha sattara kor3Akor3I sAgaropama taka, koI bIsa koDAkor3I
sAgaropama taka Adi rahate haiM  /  isa prakAra bhinna-bhinna karma paramANuoM
meM pRthak-pRthak sthitiyoM kA yAnI apane svabhAva kA tyAga na kara AtmA ke
sAtha bane rahane kI kAla maryAdAoM kA bandha honA sthitibaMdha kahalAtA hai  /
sthiti ke pUrNa hone para ve karma apane svabhAva kA parityAga kara dete haiM,
yAnI AtmA se alaga ho jAte haiN| jaise kucha laDDuoM meM madhura rasa adhika,
kucha meM kama, kucha meM kaTuka rasa adhika, kucha meM kama Adi isa prakAra
madhura, kaTuka rasa Adi kI nyUnAdhikatA dekhI jAtI hai  /  isI prakAra kucha
karma paramANuoM meM zubha yA azubha rasa adhika, kucha meM kama, isa taraha
vividha prakAra ke tIvra, tIvratara, tIvatama, manda, mandatara, mandatama
zubha-azubha rasoM kA karmapudagaloM meM utpanna honA rasabaMdha hai| kucha
laDDuoM kA vajana do tolA, kucha kA chaTAMka Adi hotA hai  /  isI prakAra kinhI
karmaskaMdhoM ke paramANuoM kI saMkhyA adhika aura

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 66 The connection of the soul with karma-forces, which are composed of
different numbers of karma-atoms, is called *pradeshabandha*.   This is how one
should understand the nature of the four types of bonds, *prakritibandha* etc.
Now, in the following verse, we will describe the *ekatibandha* first,
explaining the place of the bond in the original natures and the *bhuyaskaara*,
*alpantara*, *avasthita*, and *avaktāvya* bonds within them.  **Bonds of the
Original Natures: *Bhuyaskaara* etc.**  **I**  *Mūlapraḍīṇa aṭṭasara ṅabandhansu
tithi bhūgārā. Adhyatarā tiya cajase avaṭṭiyā ṇa hū avattabbo.* ||22||  **Word
Meaning:**  *Mūlapraḍīṇa* - of the original natures, *aṭṭasara ṅabandhansu* - in
the bonds of eight, seven, six, and one, *tithi* - three, *bhūgārā* -
*bhuyaskaara* bond, *adhyatarā* - *alpantara* bond, *tiya* - three, *cajase* -
four, *avaṭṭiyā* - *avasthita* bond, *ṇa hū* - not, *avattabbo* - *avaktāvya*
bond.  **Verse Meaning:**  In the bond places of the original natures, eight,
seven, six, and one, there are three *bhuyaskaara* bonds. The *alpantara* bond
is three, and the *avasthita* bond is four. The *avaktāvya* bond does not exist.
**Detailed Meaning:**  The verse states the number of *bhuyaskaara* etc. bonds
along with the bond places of the original karma natures. The bond of karma
occurs, and the consideration of their bond place is considered original. There
are eight original divisions of karma, namely *jñānāvaraṇa*, *darśanāvaraṇa*,
etc., and their bond natures.   The group of beings that are bound to one bond
place at one time is called a *bandhasthāna*, and their subsequent natures are
both...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 66 kinhI kI kama hotI hai| isa prakAra ke bhinna-bhinna karma paramANuoM kI
saMkhyAoM se yukta karmadaloM kA AtmA ke sAtha sambandha honA pradezabandha hai
/  isa prakAra se prakRtibaMdha Adi cAroM baMdha prakAroM kA svarUpa samajhanA
cAhie  /  aba Age kI gAthA meM pahale ekatibaMdha kA varNana karate huye mUla
prakRtiyoM ke baMdha ke sthAna aura unameM sUyaskAra, alpatara, avasthita aura
avaktavya baMdhoM ko batalAte haiM  /  mUla prakRtiyoM ke bhUyaskAra Adi baMdha
I mUlapayaDINa aTTasasa MgabaMdhaMsu tithi bhUgArA  /  adhyatarA tiya cajaze
avaTTiyA Na hU avattabbo ||22|| zabdArtha - mUlapayaDhINa mUla prakRtiyoM ke
aTTasarAchega baMdhesu mATha, sAta, chaha aura eka ke baMdhasthAna meM, tini-
tIna, bhUgArAbhUyaskAra baMdha adhpatarA1- alpatara baMdha, lipa- tIna, cauro
cAra, aTTiyA - avasthita bagha, Na hu-nahIM, avattavyo - avaktavya badha  /
zataka - gAthArtha - mUla prakRtiyoM ke ATha prakRtika, sAta prakRtika, chaha
prakRtika aura eka prakRtika baMdha sthAnoM meM tIna bhUyaskAra baMdha hote haiM
/  alpatara baMdha tIna aura avasthita baMdha cAra hote haiM  /  avaktavya
baMdha nahIM hotA hai  /  vizevArtha - gAthA meM mUla karma prakRtiyoM ke
baMdhasthAnoM ko batalAne ke sAtha-sAtha unake bhUyaskAra Adi baMdhoM kI saMkhyA
kA kathana kiyA hai  /  karmoM kA baMdha hotA hai, unake baMghasthAna kA vicAra
mUla kiyA jAtA hai| karma ke jJAnA varaNa, darzanAvaraNa Adi ATha mUla bheda
haiM aura unakI baMdha prakRtiyA~ eka samaya meM eka jIva ke jitane samUha ko
eka baMghasthAna kahate haiM aura unakI uttara prakRtiyoM donoM meM  /

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Pancha Panchah Karma Granth  This text contains one hundred and twenty
verses. This verse only explains the binding places in the original natures.
Generally, every living being binds the remaining seven karmas at all times,
except for the Ayukarma. This is because the binding of Ayukarma does not happen
every moment, but at a fixed time. Therefore, apart from the fixed time of
binding of Ayukarma, the binding of the seven karmas continues. When a living
being also binds Ayukarma, then it binds eight karmas. In this way, one should
understand the two binding places of seven and eight.  Upon reaching the tenth
Gunasthan, only the remaining six karmas are bound, except for Ayukarma and
Mohaniya karma. This is because the binding of Ayukarma happens only up to the
seventh Gunasthan, and the binding of Mohaniya karma happens only up to the
ninth Gunasthan. From the tenth Gunasthan onwards, in the eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth Gunasthan, only one Vedaniya karma is bound. The binding of the
remaining karmas ceases in the tenth Gunasthan. This is an explanation of the
places of binding of six and one karma.  The essence of the above statement is
that there are four binding places of the original karma natures: eight natures,
seven natures, six natures, and one nature.  **Pancha Panchah 206:**  Until the
Aprammatta Gunasthan, seven or eight karmas are bound. In the Sumasampray
Gunasthan, six karmas are bound, and in the Upshantamoha, Kshinamaha, and Sayogi
Kevali Gunasthan, one Vedaniya karma is bound. In the Lisikaran, Mishra, and
Anivritikaran Gunasthan, only seven karmas are bound without Ayukarma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacapa karmagrantha eka sau bIsa hai| isa gAthA meM sirpha mUla prakRtiyoM meM
baMdhasthAna asalAye haiN| sAmAnya taura para pratyeka jIva Ayukarma ke sivAya
zeSa sAta karmoM kA pratyeka samaya baMdha karate haiN| kyoMki Ayukarma kA
baMdha pratisamaya na hokara niyata samaya para hotA hai  /  ataH Ayu karma ke
baMdha ke niyata samaya ke alAvA sAta karmoM kA baMdha hotA hI rahatA hai| jaba
koI jIva Ayukarma kA bhI baMdha karatA hai taba usake ATha karmoM kA baMdha hotA
hai  /  isa prakAra se sAta aura ATha do baMdhasthAnoM ko samajhanA caahiye|
dasabai guNasthAna meM pahu~cane para Ayu aura mohanIya karmoM ke sivAya zeSa
chaha kamoM kA hI baMdha hotA hai | kyoMki asyukarma kA baMdha sAtaveM
guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai aura mohanIya kA baMdha nauve guNasthAna taka hii|
dasaveM guNasthAna se Age gyArahaveM, bArahaveM aura terahaveM guNasthAna meM
sirpha eka sAtA vedanIya kA baMdha hotA hai  /  ' zeSa karmoM ke baMdha kA
nirodha dasaveM guNasthAna meM ho jAtA hai| yaha chaha aura eka karmabaMdha ke
sthAna ke bAre meM spaSTIkaraNa kiyA gayA hai| ukta kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai
ki mUla karma prakRtiyoM ke cAra baMdhasthAna haiM- ATha prakRti kA, sAta
prakRti kA, chaha prakRti kA, eka prakRti jA apamatto sattaTabaMdhagA suhama
chAhamegasta  /  uvasaMtakhINajogI sattaNha niyaTTI mosa aniyttttii| .-paMca
paMcaha 206 - apramatta guNasthAna taka sAta yA ATha karmoM kA bandha hotA hai
/  sUmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM chaha karmoM kA aura upazAntamoha, kSINamoha
evaM sayogi kevalI guNaspAna meM eka vedanIya karma kA baMdha hotA hai  /
lisikaraNa, mizra aura anivRttikaraNa guNasthAna meM Ayu ke binA sAta karmoM kA
hI baMgha hotA hai|

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **60**  That is, a living being at one time binds one of the
eight karmas, or seven karmas, or six karmas, and some living beings bind only
one karma at a time. There is no other situation where two or three or four or
five karmas are bound together.  **Shataka**  In these four binding places,
there are three "Tinni Bhuagara" (Bhuyaskara), three "Appatara Tiy" (Alpatara),
and four "Chauro Avattīya" (Avasthita) bindings, but there is no "Na Hu
Avattano" (Avaktāvya) binding. Their explanation is being given here.
**Bhuyaskara Agha**  Binding with fewer karmic natures in the first instance and
then binding with more karmic natures in the second instance is called
Bhuyaskara binding. There are three such bindings in the original natures, which
are as follows:  A living being binds one of the seven Vedaniya karmas in the
eleventh - Upshanta-moha Gunasthan, and then falls from there and binds six
karmas when it reaches the tenth Gunasthan. This is the first Bhuyaskara
binding. The same living being, when it falls from the tenth Gunasthan and
reaches the lower Gunasthanas, binds seven karmas. This is the second Bhuyaskara
binding.  **1** In the Go-Karmakanda, the binding places of the original natures
and the Bhuyaskara (which is called Bhujakara there), etc., are described as
follows: "Chalarī Niṇitiya Chaḍ Paryāḍidunaṇi Mūlapayḍīṇam. Bhṛjagārapāvarāṇi Ya
Avadvivāṇivi Kase Honti ||"  - Go-Karmakanda 453. There are four places, and in
these places, there are Bhujakara, Alpatara types of bindings. The word "Ya"
indicates the fourth, but this fourth binding is not in the original natures.  -
It should not be understood that there are three Avaktāvya bindings in the
original natures and the Avasthita.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 60 kA  /  arthAt koI jIva eka samaya meM AThoM karma kA koI sAta karmoM kA, koI
chaha karmoM kA aura koI jIva eka samaya meM eka prakRti kA hI baMdha karatA
hai| isake sivAya aisI koI sthiti nahIM jahAM eka sAtha do yA tIna yA cAra yA
pAMca karmoM kA baMdha hotA ho  /  zataka ina cAra baMdhasthAnoM meM 'tinni
bhUgArA' tIna bhUyaskAra, 'appatarA tiya' tIna alpatara aura 'cauro avaTTiyA'
cAra avasthita baMdha hote haiM kintu 'Na hu avattanvo' avaktavya baMdha nahIM
hotA hai  / " inakA spaSTIkaraNa yahAM kiyA jA rahA hai| bhUyaskAra agha pahale
samaya meM kama prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karake dUsare samaya meM usase adhika karma
prakRtiyoM ke bandha ko bhUyaskAra baMdha kahate haiN| mUla prakRtiyoM meM isa
prakAra ke baMdha tIna ho hote hai, jo isa prakAra haiM koI jIva gyArahaveM --
upazAntamoha guNasthAna meM eka sAtA vedanIya kA baMdha' karake vahAM se
girakara jaba dasaveM guNasthAna meM AtA hai taba vahAM chaha kamoM kA baMdha
karatA hai| yaha pahalA bhUyaskAra baMdha hai  /  vahI jIva dasaveM guNasthAna
se cyuta hokara jaba nIce ke guNasthAnoM meM AtA hai taba vahAM sAta karmoM kA
baMdha karatA hai  /  yaha dUsarA bhUyaskAra bandha 1 go0 karmakAMDa meM bhI
mUla prakRtiyoM ke baMdhasthAna aura unameM bhUyaskAra jise vahA bhujAkAra kahA
hai, Adi bandha isa prakAra batalAye haiM-calAri niNitiya caDa paryADiduNANi
mUlapayaDINaM  /  bhRjagArapavarANi ya avadvivANivi kase hoMti || -go0
karmakAMDa 453 sthAna cAra hai, ina sthAnoM meM bhujAkAra, alpatara prakAra ke
bandha hone haiM  /  'ya' zabda se cauthA kintu yaha cauthA bandha mUla
prakRtiyoM meM - mUla prakRtiyoM ke aura avasthita ye tIna avaktavya bandha
samajhanA cAhiye nahIM hotA hai 1

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Panchama Karma Granth states that when a soul binds eight karmas, it is the
third Bhuyaskaar Bandh. This happens when the time for binding Ayukarma arrives.
Thus, there are three Bhuyaskaar Bandhs in the four Bandha sthans due to the
binding of one to six, six to seven, and seven to eight karmas.  Apart from
these three Bhuyaskaar Bandhs in the four Bandha sthans, it is not possible to
imagine three other Bhuyaskaar Bandhs. These three Bhuyaskaar Bandhs are
imagined as follows: first, binding one and then binding seven karmas; second,
binding one and then binding eight karmas; third, binding six and then binding
eight karmas.  Of these three Bhuyaskaar Bandhs, the first two can occur in two
ways: 1. with respect to falling, 2. with respect to death. However, the first
two Bhuyaskaar Bandhs cannot occur with respect to falling because the fall from
the eleventh Gunasthan is gradual, not abrupt. This means that a soul falls from
the eleventh Gunasthan to the tenth, then from the tenth to the ninth, and so
on. If a soul could fall from the eleventh Gunasthan directly to the ninth or
seventh Gunasthan, then the first and second Bhuyaskaar Bandhs could occur by
binding one and then binding seven or eight karmas. However, since the fall is
gradual, these two Bhuyaskaar Bandhs cannot occur with respect to falling.
Similarly, the third Bhuyaskaar Bandh, which is binding six and then binding
eight karmas, also cannot occur. This is because the binding of six karmas
occurs in the tenth Gunasthan, and the binding of eight karmas occurs in the
seventh and lower Gunasthan. If a soul could fall directly from the tenth
Gunasthan to the seventh Gunasthan, then it could bind six and then bind eight
karmas. However, since the fall is gradual, this is not possible.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karma grantha hai| vahI jIva Ayukarma kA baMdha kAla Ane para jaba
AThoM karmoM kA baMdha karatA hai taba tIsarA bhUyaskAra baMdha hotA hai| isa
prakAra eka se chaha. chaha se sAta aura sAta se ATha karmoM kA baMdha hone ke
kAraNa cAra baMdhasthAnoM meM bhUyaskAra baMdha tIna hote haiN| ukta cAra
baMdhasthAnoM meM ina tIna bhUyaskAra baMdhoM ke sivAya vikalpa se anya tIna
bhUyaskara baMdhoM kI kalpanA kI jAye so ve saMbhava nahIM haiM  /  vikalpa se
anya tIna bhUyaskAra bandhoM kI kalpanA isa prakAra kI jAtI hai- pahalA eka ko
bAMdha kara sAta karmoM kA baMdha karanA, dUsarA-eka ko bAMdha kara ATha kamAM
kA baMdha karanA, tIsarA-chaha ko bAMdhakara ATha karmoM kA baMdha krnaa| ina
tIna bhUyaskAra baMdhoM ke vikalpoM meM se Adi ke do bhUyaskAra baMdha do taraha
se ho sakate haiM--1. girane kI apekSA se, 2. maraNa kI apekSA se| kintu girane
kI apekSA se Adi ke do bhUyaskAra baMdha isaliye nahIM ho sakate haiM ki
gyArahavaM guNasthAna se patana kramazaH hotA hai, akrama se nahIM hotA hai|
arthAt gyArahaveM guNasthAna se girakara jIva dasaveM guNasthAna meM AtA hai
aura dasaveM se nauveM meM AtA hai aadi| yadi jIva myArahaveM guNasthAna se
girakara sIdhA naurve meM yA sAta guNasthAna meM AtA hai to eka ko bAMdha kara
sAta kA yA ATha karmoM kA baMdha kara sakane se pahalA, dUsarA bhuyaskAra baMdha
bana sakatA thA  /  kintu patanaH kramazaH hotA hai ataH ye do bhUyaskAra baMdha
patana kI apekSA to bana nahIM sakate haiN| isI prakAra chaha ko bAMdhakara ATha
karmoM kA bandha rUpa tIsarA bhUyaskAra baMdha bhI nahIM banatA hai kyoMki chaha
karmoM kA baMdha dasaveM guNasthAna meM hotA hai aura ATha karmoM kA baMdha
sAtaveM aura usake nIce ke guNasthAna meM hotA hai  /  yadi jIva dasaveM
gaNasthAna se ekadama sAta guNasthAna meM A sakatA to vaha chaha ko bAMdha kara
ATha kA bandha kara sakatA thA, kintu patana kramazaH hotA hai arthAt

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The author states that a being falling from the tenth **guna-sthana** (state of
being) only reaches the ninth **guna-sthana**, and thus cannot create the third
**bhuyas-kar** (major) **bandha** (bond).  The essence of the statement is that
the fall from a higher **guna-sthana** is not immediate but gradual, occurring
through the eleventh, tenth, ninth, etc. Therefore, binding one and then seven
karmas, binding one and then eight karmas, and binding six and then eight
karmas, do not constitute **bhuyas-kar** **bandhas**.  Now, regarding the
possibility of the two **bhuyas-kar** **bandhas** related to death and
beginning, a being born in the middle of the eleventh **guna-sthana** only binds
seven karmas. This is because the **ayu** (life) **bandha** occurs only when six
months of **asu** (life span) remain in the **devagati** (heavenly realm).
Therefore, binding one and then eight karmas is not possible in relation to
death. Hence, this cannot be a **bhuyas-kar** **bandha**. However, binding one
and then seven karmas is possible, but it is important to note that the
**bandha-sthana** (place of binding) remains at seven, and therefore it is not
considered separate. If there were a difference in the **bandha-sthana**, then
it would be considered a **bhuyas-kar**.  If a bound being progresses through
the **upshama** (cessation) **shreni** (series) and dies in the middle of a
**guna-sthana** or in the eleventh **guna-sthana**, then according to the rule,
it is born as an **anuttaravasi** (highest) deva (god).  The author further
states that even if one binds seven karmas, the **bandha-sthana** remains the
same, and therefore it is not considered separate. If there were a difference in
the **bandha-sthana**, then it would be considered a **bhuyas-kar**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gAnaka dasaveM guNasthAna se girakara jIva nauveM guNasthAna meM hI AtA hai,
jisase tIsarA bhUyaskAra bandha bhI nahIM bana sakatA hai| ukta kathana kA
sArAMza yaha hai ki Upara ke guNasthAna se patana ekadama na hokara kramazaH
gyArahaveM, dasaveM, nauve Adi meM hotA hai, ataH patana kI apekSA eka ko
bAMdhakara sAta kA bandha karanA, eka ko bAMdha. kara ATha karmoM kA bandha
karanA, chaha ko bAMdhakara ATha karmoM kA bandha karanA yaha tInoM bhUyaskAra
baMdha nahIM banate haiN| aba rahA maraNa kI apekSA Adi ke do bhUyaskAra baMdhoM
kA ho sakanA  /  so gyAraha sthAna meM jA karake bIca gati meM hai janma letA
hai| aura vahAM baha sAta hI karmoM kA baMdha karatA hai, kyoMki devagati meM
chaha mAsa kI Asu zeSa rahane para hI Ayu kA bandha hotA hai| ataH maraNa kI
apekSA se eka kA bandha karake ATha kA bandha kara sakanA saMbhava nahIM hai|
isaliye yaha bhUyaskAra baMdha nahIM ho sakatA hai| kintu eka ko bAMdhakara sAta
kA baMdha rUpa bhUyaskAra saMbhava hai, lekina usake bAre meM yaha jJAtavya hai
ki jo eka ko bAMdhakara sAta karmI kA bandha karatA hai to bandhasthAna sAta kA
hI rahatA hai, isaliye usako judA nahIM ginA jAtA hai| yadi baMdhasthAna kA
bheda hotA to 1 badAU paDivAno seTiMgao va pasaMtamoho bA  /  jaha kuNai koi
kAlaM vaccai to'Nuttarasurasu  /  /  -vizeSAvazyaka bhASya 1311 yadi koI
baddhAsu jIva upazama zreNi bar3hatA hai aura zreNi ke madhya ke kisI guNasthAna
meM athavA gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM yadi maraNa karatA hai to niyama se
anuttaravAsI devoM meM utpanna hotA hai| 2 teno uttara kahe cha ke jo paNa eka
baMdha thrI sAtakarma baMdha kare to paNa baMdhasthAnaka sAsanu ekaja che te
maNI judo na leyo, bandhasthAmakano bheda hoya to juko bhUyaskAra mekhavAya  /
- paMcama karmaprabhya kA TamTA

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Section of the Granth  **Greater Bandha** is also considered
separately. This means that in the aforementioned three Greater Bandhas, by
binding six and then seven, a form of Bandha is shown as one Greater Bandha.
When one is bound, the form of Bandha of seven remains in the same place as
seven, therefore it is not separate. Thus, upon descending from the Upshama
श्रेणी, there are only three Greater Bandhas.  **Lesser Bandha** is completely
opposite to Greater Bandha. Binding fewer karmas after binding more karmas is
called Lesser Bandha. There are also three Lesser Bandhas, just like Greater
Bandhas. They are as follows:  When a being binds eight karmas during the time
of binding Ayukarma and then binds seven karmas, this is the first Lesser
Bandha. In the ninth Gunasthan, when a being binds seven karmas and then binds
the remaining six karmas without Mohaniya in the first time of the tenth
Gunasthan, this is the second Lesser Bandha. And in the tenth Gunasthan, when a
being binds six karmas and then binds one karma in the eleventh or twelfth
Gunasthan, this is the third Lesser Bandha. Here too, binding eight and then
binding six and one, and binding seven and then binding one, cannot be Lesser
Bandhas. Because a being cannot go directly to the eleventh Gunasthan from the
Apratmatta and Anivritikaran Gunasthan, nor can it go directly to the tenth
Gunasthan from Apratmatta. Therefore, there should be only three Lesser Bandhas.
The difference between Greater and Lesser Bandhas is that Greater Bandhas occur
during the fall in Gunasthan, and Lesser Bandhas occur during the ascent. But
the ascent and descent in Gunasthan are in order...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama pharmagrantha bhUyaskAra bhI alaga se mAnA jaataa| isakA Azaya yaha hai
ki ukta tIna bhUyaskAroM meM chaha ko bAMdhakara sAta kA baMgharUpa eka
bhUyaskAra batalA Aye haiM  /  eka ko baMdha kara sAta ke bandha rUpa sAta kA hI
sthAna hotA hai ataH use pRthaka nahIM isa prakAra upazama zreNi se utarane para
tIna hI bhUyaskAra bandha hote haiM  /  bhUyaskAra meM bhI ginAyA gayA hai  /
63 alpatara bandha bhUyaskAra bandha se nitAnta ulaTA alpatara baMdha hotA hai|
adhika karmoM kA baMdha karake kama karmoM ke baMdha karane ko alpatara baMdha
kahate haiM  /  alpatara baMdha bhI bhUyaskAra baMdha kI taraha tIna hI hote
haiN| ve isa prakAra haiM Ayu karma ke baMdha kAla meM ATha karmoM kA baMdha
karake jaba jIva sAta karmoM kA baMdha karatA hai taba pahalA alpatara baMdha
hotA hai| nauveM guNasthAna meM sAta karmoM kA baMdha karake dasaveM guNasthAna
ke prathama samaya meM jaba jIva mohanIya ke binA zeSa chaha karmoM kA baMdha
karatA hai taba dUsarA alpatara baMdha hotA hai tathA dasarve guNasthAna meM
chaha karmoM kA baMdha karake gyArahaveM yA bArahaveM guNasthAna meM eka karma
kA baMdha karatA hai taba tIsarA alpatara baMdha hotA hai  /  yahA~ bhI ATha kA
baMdha karake chaha tathA eka kA baMdha rUpa tathA sAta kA baMdha karake eka kA
baMdha rUpa alpatara baMdha nahIM ho sakate haiN| kyoMki apramatta aura
anivRttikaraNa guNasthAna se jIva ekadama gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM nahIM jA
sakatA hai aura na apramatta se ekadama dasaveM guNasthAna meM jAtA hai| ataH
alpatara baMdha bhI tIna hI jAnanA cAhie  /  bhUyaskAra aura alpatara baMdhoM
meM itanA antara hai ki guNasthAna meM patana ke samaya bhUyaskAra baMdha aura
ArohaNa ke samaya alpatara bandha hote haiM  /  lekina guNasthAnoM meM ArohaNa
aura avarohaNa krama-krama se

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Pātam**  It is not absolute, therefore there are three
divisions of both types of bonds. There is no defeat of other options:  After
stating the **bhūyas** and **alpatar** bonds in the **mūla karma**, now the
**avasthita bandha** is being explained. **Avasthita bandha** is the binding of
the same number of karmas in the second time as in the first time. In other
words, binding eight karmas and then binding eight again, binding seven and then
binding seven again, binding six and then binding six again, and binding one and
then binding one again is called **avasthita bandha**. There are four
**bandhasthāna**, therefore there are also four **avasthita bandha**.
**Avaktavya bandha** is the binding of no karma and then binding karma again.
This bond does not occur in the **bandhasthāna** of **mūla karma**. Because
until the thirteenth **guṇasthāna**, there is continuous karma binding, but in
the fourteenth **guṇasthāna**, there is no binding of any karma. And after
reaching the fourteenth **guṇasthāna**, the jīva does not return to the lower
**guṇasthāna**, so there is no opportunity to bind karma again by not binding
even a single karma. Therefore, **avaktavya bandha** also does not occur in the
**mūla karma** types.  In this way, after explaining the **bandhasthāna** and
their **bhūyas** etc. bonds in the **mūla karma** types, now the characteristics
of **bhūyas** etc. bonds are being explained in the next verse. The
characteristics of **bhūyas** etc. bonds:  **Egādhahige bhūo emāigeri
appataro:** **Tammattosvadvigao ahame samae abtako. ||26||** **1 Ambandhago na
bambai ii asvatto ao naditha.** **Pañcasangraha 220**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAtama . hotA hai, ekadama nahIM, ataH donoM baMdhoM ke tIna-tIna bheda hote
haiM  /  anya vikalpoM kI hAra nahIM hai : mUla karmoM meM bhUyaskAra aura
alpatara baMdhoM kA kathana karane ke pazcAta aba avasthita baMdha ko kahate
haiM  /  avasthita bandha pahale samaya meM jitane karmoM kA baMdha kiyA hai,
dUsare samaya meM bhI utane hI kamoM ke baMdha karane ko avasthita baMdha kahate
haiN| arthAt ATha ko bAMdha kara ATha kA, sAta ko bAMdha kara sAta kA, chaha ko
bAMdha kara chaha kA aura eka ko bAMdha kara eka kA baMdha karane ko avasthita
baMdha kahate haiM | baMdhasthAna cAra haiM, ataH avasthita baMdha bhI cAra hote
haiN| avaktavya bandha _ eka bhI karma ko na bAMdhakara punaH karma baMdha ko
avaktavya baMdha kahate haiM  /  yaha baMdha mUla karmoM ke baMdhasthAnoM meM
nahIM hotA hai  /  kyoMki terahaveM guNasthAna taka to barAbara karmabaMdha hotA
rahatA hai lekina caudahaveM guNasthAna meM hI kisI karma kA baMdha nahIM hotA
hai aura caudahaveM muNasthAna meM pahu~cane ke bAda jIva lauTakara nIce ke
guNasthAna meM nahIM AtA hai jisase eka bhI karma kA bandha nahIM karane se
punaH karmabaMdha karane kA abasara hI nahIM AtA hai  /  isIliye mUla kama
prakRtiyoM meM avaktavya baMdha bhI nahIM hotA hai|' isa prakAra se mUla karma
prakRtiyoM meM baMdhasthAnoM aura unake bhayaskAra Adi bandhoM ko batalAne ke
bAda aba Age kI gAthA meM bhUyaskAra Adi baMdhoM ke lakSaNoM ko kahate haiM  /
bhUyaskAra Adi baMdhoM ke lakSaNa egAdahige bhUo emAIgari appataro:
tammattozvadvigao ahame samae abatako  // 26 //  1 ambaMdhago na baMbaI ii
azvatto ao nadidha  /  paMcasaMgraha 220

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Chapter  **Word Meanings:**  * **Egaavalige** - Due to the bondage of
one or more karmas. * **Bhuyaskaar Bandh** - Bondage of more karmas. *
**Egaiuunammi** - Due to the bondage of fewer karmas. * **Appataro** - Less
bondage. * **Tammaso** - Bondage of the same number of karmas. * **Avatipao** -
Existing bondage. * **Padmesamae Abandhak** - After the destruction of karmas. *
**Avattayo Avaktvy Bandh** - Bondage that is not spoken of.  **Verse Meaning:**
* **Egaavalige** - Due to the bondage of one or more karmas, there is
**Bhuyaskaar Bandh**. * **Egaiuunammi** - Due to the bondage of fewer karmas,
there is **Appataro** bondage. * **Tammaso** - Due to the bondage of the same
number of karmas, there is **Avatipao** bondage. * **Padmesamae Abandhak** -
After the destruction of karmas, and before the re-bondage, there is **Avattayo
Avaktvy Bandh**.  **Special Explanation:**  The verse explains the
characteristics of **Bhuyaskaar, Appataro, Avatipao, and Avaktvy Bandh**.  *
**Bhuyaskaar Bandh** is explained as **Egaavalige Bhuyo** - bondage of one, two,
or more karmas. For example, binding six karmas after binding one, binding seven
after binding six, and binding eight after binding seven is **Bhuyaskaar
Bandh**.  * **Appataro Bandh** is the opposite of **Bhuyaskaar Bandh**. It is
explained as **Egaiuunammi Appataro** - bondage of one, two, or fewer karmas.
For example, binding seven after binding eight, binding six after binding seven,
and binding one after binding six is **Appataro Bandh**.  * **Avatipao Bandh**
is explained as **Tammato Bandhvaayo** - bondage of the same number of karmas in
each time period. For example, if someone binds a certain number of karmas in
the first time period, they bind the same number of karmas in the subsequent
time periods.  * **Avattayo Avaktvy Bandh** is the bondage that occurs after the
destruction of karmas and before the re-bondage.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama kramaprantha zabdArthaegAvalige - ekA di adhika prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
hone se, mo bhUpaskAra baMdha, egAIUNammi ekATi prakRla ke dvArA hIna badha hona
se, appataro- alpata dha, tammaso - utanI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hone se,
avaTipaoavasthita badha, paDhamesamaeabandhaka hone ke bAda punarbandha ke
pahale samaya meM, avattayoavaktavya bndh| gAthArtha-ekAdi adhika prakRtiyAM kA
bandha hone se bhUyaskAra bandha hotA hai  /  ekAdi prakRtiyo ke dvArA hIna
baMdha hone para alpatara bandha aura utanI hI prakRtiyoM kA bandha hoga se
avasthita bandha hotA hai tathA nAka hone ke yA punaH baMdha ke pahale samaya
meM bandha ho, use avaktavya baMdha kahate haiN| vizeSArga-gAthA meM bhayaskAra,
alpatara, avasthita aura avaktavya baMdha ke lakSaNa batalAye haiN| bhavaskAra
baMdha kA lakSaNa batalAte hue kahA hai kigAdahige bhUo'-eka, do Adi adhika
prakRtiyoM ke bAMdhane para bhUvaskAra baMdha hotA hai  /  arthAt jaise eka ko
vA~dhakara chaha ko bAMdhanA, chaha ko bAMdha. kara sAta ko bA~dhanA aura sAta
ko bAMdhakara ATha ko bAMdhanA bhUyaskAra baMdha hai| lekina alpatara baMdha
bhUvaskAra baMdha se ulaTA hai| yAnI 'egAIUNagammi appataro'-eka, do Adi hIna
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane para alpatara baMdha hotA hai  /  arthAt jaise ATha
ko bAMdhakara sAta ko bAMdhanA, sAta ko bAMdhakara chaha ko bAMdhanA aura chaha
ko bAMdhakara eka ko bAMdhanA alpatara vandha kahalAtA hai  /  avasthita baMdha
usa kahate hai .. tammato bAMdvayao jisama pratisamaya samAna prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha ho adhauta pahale samaya meM jinane kamI kA bandha kiyA ho, Age ke
samayoM meM bhI utane hI karmoM kA bandha

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Avashthit Bandha**  Binding the same number of karmas as
previously is called Avashthit Bandha. For example, binding eight karmas after
binding eight, seven after seven, six after six, and one after one is Avashthit
Bandha. Binding any karma after not binding any karma is called Avaktvy Bandha
in the first time period - "Padhame Samaye Avattvvo."  **Special Explanation
Regarding Bhuyaskaar and Bandhas**  Regarding the four types of Bandhas
mentioned above - Bhuyaskaar, Alpatar, and Avaktvy Bandha occur only in the
first time period, while Avashthit Bandha occurs in the second and subsequent
time periods. For example, if someone binds six karmas and then binds seven, it
is Bhuyaskaar Bandha. However, this cannot be Bhuyaskaar in the second time
period. Because if in the first time period, seven karmas are bound and in the
second time period, eight karmas are bound, then Bhuyaskaar changes. If six
karmas are bound, it becomes Alpatar, and if seven are bound, it becomes
Avashthit.  **Summary**  The essence of the above statement is that binding more
after binding less, binding less after binding more, and binding again after not
binding anything is only possible once. However, binding the same number of
karmas again as bound in the first time period is possible. Therefore, the same
Avashthit Bandha can occur continuously for many time periods, but this is not
possible for the other three Bandhas.  **Explanation**  This explanation
clarifies the four Bandhas - Bhuyaskaar, Alpatar, Avaktvy, and Avashthit - in
the context of Uttar Prakritis, before specifically mentioning their
characteristics and the number of times they occur in the root karmas.  There
are twenty-nine Bandha-sthans in Uttar Prakritis, which...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zavaka ** karanA avasthita bandha kahalAtA hai  /  jaise ATha karma ko
bAMdhakara ATha kA, sAta ko bAMdhakara sAta kA chaha ko bAMdhakara chaha kA, eka
ko bAMdhakara eka kA bandha karanA avasthita bandha hai aura kisI bhI karma kA
bandha na karake punaH karma bandha karane para pahale samaya meM avaktavya
bandha hotA hai- 'paDhame samae avattavvo  / ' bhUmaskAra ANi baMdhoM viSayaka
vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa bhUyaskAra Adi ukta cAra prakAra ke baMdhoM ke saMbandha meM
yaha vizeSa jAnanA cAhie ki bhuyaskAra, alpatara aura avaktavya bandha kevala
pahale samaya meM hI hote haiM aura avasthita baMdha dvitIya Adi samayoM meM
hotA hai  /  jaise koI chaha karmoM kA baMdha karake sAta kA baMdha karatA hai
to yaha bhUyaskAra baMdha hai lekina dUsare samaya meM yahI bhUmaskAra nahIM ho
sakatA hai kyoMki prathama samaya meM sAta kA baMdha karake yadi dUsare samaya
meM ATha kA baMdha karatA hai to bhUyaskAra badala jAtA hai aura chaha karma kA
baMdha karatA hai to alpatara ho jAtA hai tathA sAta kA karatA hai to avasthita
ho jAtA hai  /  - ukta kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai ki prakRtisaMkhyA meM
parivartana hue binA adhika bA~dhakara kama bAMdhanA, kama bAMdhakara adhika
bAMdhanA aura kucha bhI na bAMdhakara punaH bAMdhanA kevala eka bAra hI saMbhava
hai, jabaki pahalI bAra bAMdhe hue karmoM ke barAbara punaH utane hI karmoM ko
bAMdhanA punaH saMbhava hai  /  ataH eka hI avasthita bandha lagAtAra kaI samaya
taka ho sakatA hai, kintu zeSa tIna baMdhoM meM yaha saMbhava nahIM hai  /  isa
prakAra ke bhUyaskAra Adi baMdhoM ke lakSaNa aura mUla karmoM meM unakI hone
vAlI saMkhyA batalAkara uttara prakRtiyoM meM vizeSa rUpa se kathana karane ke
pUrva sAmAnya se uttara prakRtiyoM meM bhUyaskAra Adi cAroM baMdhoM ko spaSTa
karate haiM  /  sAmAnya se uttara prakRtiyoM ke unatIsa baMdhasthAna hote haiM
/  jo

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Fifth Karmagranthi  The 63 types are as follows: one, eighteen, nineteen,
twenty, twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-six, thirty-three, thirty-four, fifty-
two, fifty-six, fifty-seven, fifty-nine, sixty, sixty-one, sixty-three, sixty-
four, sixty-five, sixty-six, sixty-seven, sixty-eight, sixty-nine, seventy,
seventy-one, seventy-two, seventy-three, and seventy-four. These are the twenty-
nine bondage-states, in which the Bhuyaskara bondages are twenty-eight.  They
are as follows: In the Upashantamoha gunasthana, the binding of one Vedaniya
(feeling-producing) karma occurs. While falling to the tenth gunasthana, the
binding of Jnanavarana (knowledge-obscuring) five, Darshanavarana (perception-
obscuring) four, and the higher Antaraya (obstructive) and Yashahkirti (fame)
with Vedaniya karma results in the first Bhuyaskara (major) bondage in the first
moment due to the Sata (pleasant) prakrti (psychic state) bondage.  Falling from
the tenth gunasthana to the ninth, the binding of eighteen prakrtis along with
Sancalana Lobha (active greed) results in the second Bhuyaskara bondage. The
binding of nineteen prakrtis with Sanjvalana Maya (deluding attachment) results
in the third Bhuyaskara bondage, and the binding of twenty with Sanjvalana Mana
(pride) results in the fourth Bhuyaskara bondage. The binding of twenty-one with
Sanjvalana Krodha (anger) results in the fifth Bhuyaskara bondage, and the
binding of twenty-two with Purusha Veda (male sex) results in the sixth
Bhuyaskara. Along with it, the increased binding of Hrsya (joy), Rati
(attachment), Bhaya (fear), and Jugupsa (disgust) - the four prakrtis - in the
seventh part of Apurvakarana results in the seventh Bhuyaskara bondage.  In the
middle, in the sixth part of the eighth gunasthana, the binding of twenty-seven
Devaprayogya Namakarmans (divine-use name-determining) results in the thirteenth
Bhuyaskara bondage. Further, the binding of twenty-nine Devaprayogya prakrtis,
including the Tirthankara Namakarmans (Tirthankara name-determining), results in
the fourteenth Bhuyaskara bondage. The binding of thirty, including Aharakanika
(food-procuring), results in the fifteenth Bhuyaskara bondage. The binding of
these fifty-five, including the Tirthankara Namakarmans, results in the
sixteenth Bhuyaskara bondage.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagranya 63 isa prakAra haiM- eka, suvaha aThAraha unnIsa, bIsa,
ikkIsa, bAIna, chabbIsa, tirepana, cIna, patapana chappana sunAvana adAvana,
unasaTha. sATha, ikasaTha, tiresaTha, causaTha, paMsaTha, chiyAsaTha sar3asaTha,
ar3asaTha, unahattara, sattara, ikahattara, bahattara, tihattara aura cauhattara
/  ye unatIsa baMdhasthAna haiM, jinameM bhUskAra bandha aTThAIsa hote haiN| jo
isa prakAra haiM- upazAntamoha guNasthAna meM eka vedanIya kA baMdha kara girate
samaya dasaveM guNasthAna meM jJAnAvaraNa pAMca, darzanAvaraNa cAra, aMtarAya
yAMca ucca gola aura yazaH kIrti ke sAtha vedanIya kA bandha karane se sataha
prakRti ke baMdha se prathama samaya meM pahalA bhUyaskAra baMdha hotA hai  /
dasaveM guNasthAna se patita hone para nauveM guNasthAna meM saMJcAlana lobha ke
sAtha aThAraha prakRti kA baMdha karane para dUsarA bhUyaskAra baMdha hotA hai|
saMjvalana mAyA ke sAtha unnIsa prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhane se tIsarA bhUyaskAra
bandha aura saMjvalana mAna ke sAtha bIsa ko bAMdhane se cauthA bhUyaskAra
bandha, saMjvalana krodha ke sAtha ikkIsa kA baMdha karane se pAMcavAM
bhUyaskAra baMdha tathA puruSa veda ke sAtha bAIla kA baMdha karane se chaThA
bhUyamkAra aura usake sAtha hAmya, rati, bhaya aura jugupsA ina cAra prakRtiyoM
kA adhika bandha karane se apUrvakaraNa ke sAtaveM bhAga meM chabbIsa kA baMdha
karane se sAtavAM bhUyaskAra bandha hotA hai| usake madhya AThaveM guNasthAna ke
chaThe bhAga meM devaprAyogya nAmakarma kI sattAIsa prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane
se tirepana kA baMdha, yaha AThavAM bhUyaskAra, punaH tIrthaMkara nAmakarma
sahita devaprAyogya unatIsa prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhane para cauvana ke vaMdha kA
nauvAM bhUyaskAra bandha tathA AhArakanika sahita tIsa kA baMdha karane se
pacapana kA baMdha karane para dasavAM bhUyaskAra aura ina pacapana ko
tIrthaMkara nAmakarma sahita bAMdhane se chappana

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **One Hundred**  The eleventh *bhuyaskaar* (increase in karmic
bondage) occurs due to the bondage of eleven, the twelfth *bhuyaskaar* occurs
due to the bondage of fifty-seven with *jin* nameless and including sleep and
*prachala*, and the thirteenth *bhuyaskaar* occurs due to the bondage of fifty-
eight with *jin* name. In the *aprammat* (attentive) *gunasthan* (stage of
spiritual development), the fourteenth *bhuyaskaar* occurs due to the bondage of
fifty-nine with *devayu* (divine life force) added to the aforementioned fifty-
eight. In the *deshaviriti* (renunciation of worldly attachments) *gunasthan*,
the fifteenth *bhuyaskaar* occurs due to the bondage of sixty karmas, including
the twenty-eight *devaprayogya* (divine) karmas, five *gyanavaran* (veil of
knowledge), six *darshanavaran* (veil of perception), one *vedaniya*
(afflictive), thirteen *mohniya* (delusive), one *devayu*, twenty-eight
*namakarma* (name-karma), one *gotra* (lineage), and five *antaraya*
(obstructive). The sixteenth *bhuyaskaar* occurs due to the bondage of sixty-
one, including the aforementioned sixty and the *tirthankara* name. (Here, it is
not possible to bind sixty-two karmas at one time, therefore, it is not called a
*bhuyaskaar*.) In the fourth *gunasthan*, the seventeenth *bhuyaskaar* occurs
due to the bondage of sixty-three karmas, including five *gyanavaran*, six
*darshanavaran*, one *vedaniya*, seventeen *mohniya*, one *gotra*, twenty-eight
*namakarma*, and five *antaraya*, when the twenty-eight *devaprayogya*
*namakarma* are bound during the *abandhakal* (time of non-binding) of *ayu*
(life span). The eighteenth *bhuyaskaar* occurs due to the bondage of sixty-four
karmas, including *devayu*. The nineteenth *bhuyaskaar* occurs due to the
bondage of sixty-five with *jin* name-karma. In the fourth *gunasthan*, the
twentieth *bhuyaskaar* occurs due to the bondage of thirty *manushyaprayogya*
(human) karmas by a *dev* (divine being) and the bondage of *gyanamat*
(knowledge-based karma). In the *mithyatva* (falsehood) *gunasthan*, the twenty-
first *bhuyaskaar* occurs due to the bondage of sixty-six karmas, including five
*gyanavaran*, nine *darshanavaran*, one *vedaniya*, twenty-two *mohniya*, one
*ayu*, twenty-three *namakarma*, one *gotra*, and five *antaraya*. The twenty-
second *bhuyaskaar* occurs due to the bondage of sixty-eight, excluding twenty-
five *namakarma* and *ayu*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka kA baMdha hone se gyArahavAM bhUyaskAra, apUrvakaraNa ke prathama bhAga
meM chappana ko jina nAmakarma rahita tathA nidrA aura pracalA sahita bAMdhane
se sattAvana ke baMdha meM bArahavAM bhUyaskAra tathA jinanAma sahita aTThAvana
kA baMdha hone para terahavAM bhUyaskAra, apramatta guNasthAna meM ukta aTTAvana
ko davAyu sahita unasaTha kA baMdha karane para caudahavAM bhUyaskAra,
dezavirati guNasthAna meM devaprAyogya aTThAIsa prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane ke
sAtha jJAnAvaraNa pAMca, darzanAvaraNa chaha, vedanIya eka, mohanIya teraha,
devAyu eka, nAmakarma kI aTThAIsa prakRtiyAM, gonna kI eka aura aMtarAya kI
pAMca, isa prakAra sATha prakRtiyoM ke bAMdhane se pandrahavAM bhUyaskAra, ina
sATha ke sAtha tIrthakara, nAma kA bhI baMdha karane se ikasara ke baMdha kA
solahavAM bhUyaskAra, (yahAM kisI bhI taraha eka jotra ko eka samaya meM bAsaTha
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha saMbhava nahIM, ataH usakA bhUyaskAra bhI nahIM kahA hai |)
cauthe guNasthAna meM AyU ke abandhakAla meM devaprAyogya nAmakarma kI aTThAIsa
prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhane para jJAnAvaraNa kI pAMca, darzanAbaraNa kI chaha,
vedanIya kI eka, mohanIya kI satraha, gotra kI eka, nAmakarma kI aTThAIsa aura
aMtarAya kI pA~ca huna tiresaTha prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane se matrahavA~
bhUyaskAra, devAyu ke baMdha ke sAtha causaTha prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhane se
aThAharavAM bhUyaskAra, jina nAmakarma sahita peMsaTha ko bAMdhane para
unnIsavA~ bhUyaskAra, cauthe gRNasthAna meM deva ho aura usake dvArA
manuSyaprAyogya tIsa prakRtiyoM ke bAMdhane para ghyiAmaTha ke baMdha meM
bIsavAM bhUyaskAra. mithyAtva guNasthAna meM jJAnAvaraNa kI pAMca, darzanAvaraNa
kI nau, vedanIya kI eka, mohanIya kI bAIsa, Ayu kI eka, nAma kI teIsa, gotra kI
eka aura aMtarAva. kI pAMca, ina sar3asaTha prakRtiyoM kA vaidha karane para
ikkIsavAM bhayaskAra, inameM nAmakarma kI paccIsa aura Ayu rahita ar3asaTha ke
bAMdhane para

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pancham Karmapanya  The twenty-second **bhuyaskara** occurs when seventy-nine
**bandha** are made with **ayu** (life-span) included. The twenty-third
**bhuyaskara** occurs when seventy **bandha** are made with twenty-six
**prakritis** of **namakarma**. The twenty-fourth **bhuyaskara** occurs when
seventy-one **bandha** are made with twenty-eight **prakritis** of **namakarma**
without **ayu**. The twenty-fifth **bhuyaskara** occurs when seventy-two
**bandha** are made with twenty-nine **prakritis** of **namakarma**. The twenty-
sixth **bhuyaskara** occurs when seventy-three **bandha** are made with **ayu**
included. The twenty-seventh **bhuyaskara** occurs when seventy-four **bandha**
are made with thirty **prakritis** of **namakarma**, along with five
**prakritis** of **jnanaavaran**, nine **prakritis** of **darshanavaran**, one
**prakriti** of **vedaniya**, twenty-two **prakritis** of **mohaniya**, one
**prakriti** of **ayu**, thirty **prakritis** of **nama**, one **prakriti** of
**gona**, and five **prakritis** of **antaraya**.  Here, there are many possible
**bandha** locations, which should be considered individually. Similarly,
twenty-eight **alpatar bandha** occur in reverse order (ascending), and the
existing **bandha** should be considered as twenty-nine. **Avaktvy bandha** is
not possible. The **jiva** in the **ayogi gunasthan** is free from all
**bandha** of **uttar prakritis**. Since there is no possibility of falling from
this **gunasthan**, **avaktvy bandha** does not occur.  After describing the
**bhuyaskara** and other **bandha** in **uttar prakritis** in general, the
following verses will explain the **bandha** of each **karma** in **uttar
prakritis**.  **Bandha** of **bhuyaskara** and other **bandha** in **uttar
prakritis**:  Nine **prakritis** of **darshanavaran**, six **prakritis** of
**darshanavaran**, four **prakritis** of **darshanavaran** as **bandha**
locations, two **bhuyaskara bandha**, two **alpatar bandha**, three
**bandha**...  (The rest of the verse is incomplete and cannot be translated.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmapanya bAIsavAM bhUyaskAra, Ayu sahita unahattara kA baMdha karane
se teIsavAM bhayaskAra tathA nAmakarma kI chabbIsa prakRtiyoM ke mAtha sattara
prakRtiyoM ko bAMghane se caubIsavAM bhayaskAra tathA Ayu rahita aura nAmakarma
kI aTThAIsa prakRtiyoM ke sAtha ikahattara ko bAMdhane para paccIsavAM
bhUyaskAra, nAmakarma kI unatIsa prakRtiyoM ke sAtha bahattara ke baMdha meM
chabbIsavAM bhUyaskAra, Ayu sahita tihattara kA baMdha karane para satAIsavAM
bhUyaskAra aura nAmakarma kI tIsa bAMdhate jJAnAvaraNa kI pAMca, darzanAvaraNa
kI nau, bedanIya kI eka, mohanIya kI bAIsa, Ayu kI eka, nAma ko tIsa, gona kI
eka aura aMtarAya kI pAMca, isa prakAra cauhattara kA baMdha karane se
aTThAIsavAM bhUyaskAra hotA hai| yahAM prakArAntara se aneka baMdhasthAnaka
saMbhava haiM, jinakA svayaM vicAra kara lenA caahie| isI prakAra se aTThAIsa
alpatara baMdha bhI viparItapane (ArohaNa) se hote haiM aura avasthita baMdha
unatIsa samajhanA cAhie  /  avaktavya baMdha saMbhava nahIM hai| sarva uttara
prakRtiyoM kA abandhaka ayogi guNasthAna meM jIva hotA hai, usa guNasthAna se
patana nahIM hone ke kAraNa avaktavya baMdha nahIM hotA hai  /  sAmAnya se
uttara prakRtiyoM meM bhUyaskAra Adi baMdhoM kA kathana karane ke bAda aba Age
kI gAthAoM meM pratyeka karma ko uttara prakRtiyoM meM baMdhoM ko batalAte haiN|
uttara prakRtiyoM ke bhUyaskAra Adi baMdha nava chacar3a dase dudu tidu mohe du
igavIsa sattarasa  /  terasa nava paNa cau ti duiko nava aThTha dasa bunni  //
24 //  zabdArtha-nava-nau prakRti kA, cha-chaha prakRti kA, caucAra prakRti kA
baMdhasthAna, vaMse -darzanAvaraNa ko uttara prakRtiyoM kA, du-do bhUmaskAra
baMdha, ku-do alpatara baMdha, ti-tIna

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pataka  **Bound by Circumstances:** Two - two non-expressible bonds, in the
Mohaniya karma, twenty-two - twenty-one, twenty-one types of binding places,
seventeen - seventeen types of birth, six - six types of now, nine - nine types
of, five - five types of, four - four types of, three - three types of, two -
two types of, one - one type of binding place, nine - nine types of Bhūyaskaara
bonds, eight - eight types of Alpantara bonds, ten - ten types of Avashtita
bonds, two - two types of Avaktavya bonds.  **Gāthārtha:** There are three
binding places for the nine, six, and four types of Uttar Prakṛtis of the
Darshanāvaraṇa karma, and in them there are two Bhūyaskaara, two Alpantara,
three Avashtita, and two Avaktavya bonds. There are ten binding places for the
twenty-two, twenty-one, seventeen, six, nine, five, four, three, two, and one
types of Uttar Prakṛtis of the Mohaniya karma, and in them there are nine
Bhūyaskaara, eight Alpantara, ten Avashtita, and two Avaktavya bonds.
**Visheshāyaṁ:** After mentioning the binding places of the Mūla karma Prakṛtis
and the number of Bhūyaskaara etc. bonds in them, this Gāthā begins the
statement of the binding places and Bhūyaskaara etc. bonds of each karma in the
Uttar Prakṛtis.  First, the binding places of the Darshanāvaraṇa and Mohaniya
karma and the Bhūyaskaara etc. bonds in them have been counted.  The reason for
starting this topic with the Darshanāvaraṇa and Mohaniya karma instead of first
mentioning the binding places of the Jñānāvaraṇa karma and the Bhūyaskaara etc.
bonds in them, according to the course of the Mūla karma Prakṛtis, is that the
Bhūyaskaara etc. bonds are Darshanāvaraṇa, Mohaniya, and Nāma...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAtaka avasthita baMdha. du-do avaktavya baMdha, mohe..-mohanIya karma meM,
cuigavIsa-bAIsa, ikkIsa prakRtiyoM kA badhasthAna, sattarasa - ma vaha
prakRtiyoM kA janmalyA, serasa-nerada prakRtiyoM kA aba . no kA, paNa - pAMca
kA, ca3 - bAra kA, ti-tIna kA, du-do kA, iko - eka prakRti kA baMdhrasthAna,
nava no bhUyaskAra vadha, aTTha-ATha arana ra bandha, vapta - dasa avasthita
baMdha, budhi - do avaktavya baMna  /  gAthArtha - darzanAvaraNa karma kI uttara
prakRtiyoM ke nau, chaha aura cAra prakRtiyoM ke tIna baMdhasthAna haiM aura
unameM do bhUyaskAra, do alpatara, tIna avasthita aura do avaktavya baMdha hote
haiM  /  mohanIya karma kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke bAIsa, ikkIsa, satraha, taraha,
nau, pAMca, cAra, tIna, do aura eka prakRti rUpa dasa baMdhasthAna hote haiM
tathA unameM no bhUyaskAra, ATha alpatara, dasa avasthita aura do avaktavya
baMdha hote haiN| vizeSAyaM-mUla karmaprakRtiyoM ke baMdhasthAna aura unameM
bhUyaskAra Adi bandhoM kI saMkhyA batalAne ke bAda isa gAthA se pratyeka karma
ko uttara prakRtiyoM ke bandhasthAna aura bhUyaskAra Adi bandhoM kA kathana
prArambha kiyA gayA hai| sabase pahale darzanAvaraNa aura mohanIya karma ke
baMdhasthAnoM aura unameM 'bhUyaskAra Adi baMdhoM ko ginAyA hai| mUla
karmaprakRtiyoM ke pAThakrama ke anusAra sabase pahale jJAnAvaraNa karma ke
baMdhasthAnoM aura unameM bhUyaskAra Adi baMdhoM ko na batalAkara darzanAvaraNa
aura mohanIya karma se isa prakaraNa ko prArambha karane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki
bhUyaskAra Adi baMdha darzanAvaraNa, mohanIya aura nAma

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **101** These three karmas (Jnanaavarana, Antaray,
and Vedaniya) occur in all five natures, while the remaining five karmas do not
have the possibility of occurring in all five natures. This is because
Jnanaavarana and Antaray karmas bind and cease simultaneously in all five
natures. As a result, both karmas have the same binding location in all five
natures. When there is only one binding location, then there is no possibility
of further binding like Bhuyaskaar etc. In this situation, the binding remains
constant. Similarly, Vedaniya, Ayu, and Gotra karmas bind in only one nature at
a time. Therefore, there is no further binding like Bhuyaskaar etc. in these
karmas either.  The binding locations and the number of further bindings like
Bhuyaskaar etc. in Darshanavarana and Mohaniya karmas should be understood as
follows:  **Number of Binding Locations etc. in Darshanavarana Karma:**
Darshanavarana karma has nine natures, namely Chakshudarshanavarana etc.  **1.**
Jnanaavarana, Vedaniya, Ayu, Gotra, Antaray.  **2.** (a) **"Tigin dasa atth
thanaani sanavaranama hanamanaam. Esthav ya mujagara sesese ya have thana."** -
Go. Karmakar 458 - Darshanavarana, Mohaniya, and Nama karma have three, ten, and
eight binding locations respectively. Further binding like Bhuyaskaar etc. also
occurs in these karmas. The remaining karmas have only one binding location.
(b) **"Bandhatthaga tidastth sanavaranamaohanamanaam. Sesanegam ayattiyabandho
savatya thana samo."** - Panchasangrah 223 - Darshanavarana has three binding
locations, Mohaniya has ten binding locations, and Nama karma has eight binding
locations. The remaining karmas have only one binding location each. The number
of binding locations is equal to the number of constant bindings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 101 kama ina tona kamoM ko uttara prakRtiyoM meM hote hai,
zeSa pAMca mA~' meM unakI saMbhAvanA nahIM hai| kyoMki jJAnAvaraNa aura aMtarAga
karma kI pAMcoM prakRtibAM eka sAtha ho baMdhatI haiM aura eka sAtha rukatI hai|
jisase donoM karmoM kA paMca prakRti rUpa eka hI bandhasthAna hotA hai aura jaba
eka hI bedhasthAna hai to usameM bhUyaskAra Adi baMdha saMbhava nahIM haiM  /
isa dazA meM to sarvadA avasthita bandha rahatA hai  /  isI prakAra vedanIya,
Ayu aura gotrakarma kI eka samaya meM eka hI prakRti baMdhatI hai  /  ataH
inameM bhI bhUyaskAra Adi baMdha nahIM hote haiM  /  darzanAvaraNa aura.
mohanIya karma ke baMdhasthAnoM va unameM bhUyaskAra Adi baMdhoM kI saMkhyA nIce
likhe anusAra samajhanA cAhiye  /  varzanAvaraNa karma ke baMdhasthAna Adi kI
saMkhyA darzanAvaraNa karma kI cakSudarzanAvaraNa Adi nau prakRtiyAM haiM aura 1
jAnAvaraNa, ghedanIya, Aya, gotra, aMtarAya  /  2 (ka) tigiNa dasa aTTha ThANANi
saNAvaraNamA haNAmANaM  /  estheva ya mujagArA seseseya have ThANa 11 -go0
karmakAra 458 - darzanAvaraNa, mohanIya aura nAma karma meM kramazaH tIna, dasa
aura ATha bandhasthAna hote haiM aura inhIM meM bhujAkAra baMdha Adi bhI hote
haiN| zeSa karmoM meM kevala eka hI baMdhasthAna hotA hai| (kha) bandhaTThAgA
tidasaTTha saNAvaraNamohanAmANaM  /  sesANegamayaTTiyabandho savatya ThANa smo||
-paMcasaMgraha 223 -darzanAvaraNa ke tIna bandhasthAna haiM, mohanIya ke dasa
bandhasthAna aura nAmakarma ke ATha baMdhasthAna haiM tathA zeSa karmoM kA eka-
eka hI bandhasthAna hai  /  jisane bandhasthAna hote haiM, utane hI avasthita
bandha hote haiM  /

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Shataka**  There are three Bandhasthanas (places of bondage)
in Darshanavaran, consisting of nine, six, and four types of Prakritis
(substances) respectively, known as "Nav Cha Chav Danse". The reason for
considering three Bandhasthanas in Darshanavaran Karma is that all nine
Prakritis are bound until the second Masadan Gunasthan (state of qualities). At
the end of Sasadan Mugsyan, the bondage of Styaanantrik ends. Therefore, from
the third Mishr Gunasthan to the first part of the eighth Apoovarnakaran
Gunasthan, only the remaining six Prakritis are bound. At the end of the first
part of Apoovarnakaran, the bondage of Nidra (sleep) and Prachala (movement) is
stopped. Therefore, from the tenth Sookshm Samparay Gunasthan onwards, only the
remaining four Prakritis are bound. Thus, the three Bandhasthanas in
Darshanavaran are: nine Prakriti form, six Prakriti form, and four Prakriti
form.  In these, the Bandhas like Bhuyaskara etc. are in the order of "Dudu
Tiddu" - two, two, three, two. This means there are two Bhuyaskara, two Alpatar,
three Avashit, and two Avaktvy Bandhas. These are as follows:  When a being
binds four Prakritis in any one Gunasthan from the second part of the eighth
Apoovarnakaran Gunasthan to the tenth Sookshm Samparay Gunasthan, and then falls
down from the second part of Apoovarnakaran Gunasthan and binds six Prakritis,
then the first Bhuyaskara Bandha occurs. When it falls further from there and
binds nine Prakritis,   **Note:** The three Bandhasthanas of Darshanavaran are
also mentioned in the same way in the Sapta Tika Adhikar of Panchasangrah.
**Nav Swaha Bajai Gath Basmen Sanavaranam ||10**  There are three Bandhasthanas
in Darshanavaran. In the first and second Gunasthan, there is a bondage of nine
Prakritis. Further, from the eighth Gunasthan onwards, there is a bondage of six
Prakritis, and from the tenth Gunasthan onwards, there is a bondage of four
Prakritis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka unameM nau, chaha aura cAra prakRtiyoM ke isa prakAra se tIna
bandhasthAna hote haiM-nava cha cau daMse  /  darzanAvaraNa karma ke tIna
bandhasthAna mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki dUsare mAsAdana guNasthAna taka to
sabhI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hone se nau prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai  /
sAsAdana mugasyAna ke aMta meM styAnAMtrika ke baMdha kI samApti ho jAtI hai
ataH tIsare mizra guNasthAna se lekara AThaveM apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ke ke
prathama bhAga taka zeSa chaha prakRtiyoM kA hI vandhasthAna hai aura
apUrvakaraNa ke prathama bhAga ke anta meM nidrA aura pracalA ke baMdha kA
nirodha ho jAne se Age dasaveM sUzmasaMparAya guNasthAna taka zeSa cAra
prakRtiyoM kA hI bandhasthAna hotA hai| isa prakAra darzanAvaraNa ke nau prakRti
rUpa, chaha prakRti rUpa aura cAra prakRti rUpa ye tIna baMdhasthAna haiM  / '
inameM bhUyaskara Adi baMdha kramazaH 'dudu tidu' do, do, tIna, do haiM, yAnI do
bhUyaskara, do alpatara, tIna avasthita aura do avaktavya bandha hote haiM  /
jo isa prakAra haiM_ AThaveM apUrvakaraNa gaNasthAna ke dUsare bhAga se lekara
dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna taka meM se kisI eka guNasthAna meM cAra
prakRtiyoM kA bandha karake jaba koI jIva apurvakaraNa guNasthAna ke dvitIya
bhAga se nIce Akara chaha prakRtiyoM kA bandha karatA hai taba pahalA bhUyaskAra
bandha hotA hai aura vahAM se bhI girakara jaba nau prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA
1 paMcasaMgraha ke saptatikA adhikAra meM bhI darzanAvaraNa ke tIna baMdhasthAna
imI prakAra batalAye haiM navasvahA bajAI gaTha basameNa saNAvaraNaM  // 10
darzanAvaraNa ke tIna vanyasthAna hai| unameM se pahale, dUsare guNasthAna meM
nau kA, unameM Age AThaveM guNasthAna laka chaha prakRti kA aura Age dasaveM
guNasthAna taka cAra prakRti kA bandhasthAna hotA hai|

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  Then there is the second **bhuyaskaar bandh**. In
this way, two **bhuyaskaar bandh** should be understood in the **uttar
prakritis** of the **darshanavaran karma**.  Like the **bhuyaskaar bandh**, two
**alpatar bandh** should also be understood in the **uttar prakritis** of the
**darshanavaran karma**. Because **alpatar bandh** are opposite to **bhuyaskaar
bandh**. Therefore, when a being, after binding nine **prakritis** in the lower
**gunasthanas**, binds **paag** in the third **dimasthan**, then the first
**alpatar bandh** occurs. And when it binds six and then four, then the second
**alpatar bandh** occurs.  But there are three **avasthit bandh**. Because there
are only three **bandasthanas** for **darshanavaran karma**, and two **avaktavy
bandh** should be understood in this way: When a being, after completely binding
**darshanavaran** in the eleventh **gunasthan**, falls from there and binds four
**prakritis** in the tenth **gunasthan**, then the first **avaktavy bandh**
occurs. And when it dies in the eleventh **gunasthan** and is born as a **dev**
according to its **karma**, then it binds six **prakritis** of **darshanavaran
karma** in the first moment, which is the second **avaktavy bandh**.  After
explaining the **bandasthanas** of the **uttar prakritis** of **darshanavaran
karma** and the two **bhuyaskaar**, two **alpatar**, three **avasthit**, and two
**avaktavy bandh** in them, now we will explain the **bandasthanas** and
**bhuyaskaar** etc. **bandh** of the **uttar prakritis** of **mohaniya karma**.
The number of **bandasthanas** etc. of **mohaniya karma**... There are twenty-
eight **uttar prakritis** of **mohaniya karma**. But since **samyagmithyatva**
and **samyakta mohaniya** are not bound, there are twenty-six **prakritis** that
can be bound. In these, there are ten **bandasthanas** in total, with twenty-
two, twenty-one, seventeen, thirteen, nine, five, four, one, two, and one
**prakritis** respectively. They are as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha hai taba dUsarA bhUyaskAra baMdha hotA hai  /  isa prakAra
se darzanAvaraNa karma kI uttara prakRtiyoM meM do bhUyaskAra bandha samajhanA
cAhiye  /  bhUyaskAra baMdha kI taraha darzanAvaraNa karma kI unara prakRtiyoM
meM alpatara baMdha bhI do samajhanA cAhiye  /  kyoM alpatara baMdha bhUyaskAra
baMdha se viparIta hote haiM  /  isIliye jaba koI jIva noce ke gUNasthAnoM meM
nau prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karake tIsare dimAsthAna meM vaha pAgoM kA bandha
karatA hai taba pahalA alpatara bandha hotA hai aura jaba chaha kA bandha karake
cAra kA bandha karatA hai taba dUsarA alpatara baMdha hotA hai  /  lekina
avasthita bandha tIna hote haiN| kyoMki darzanAvaraNa karma ke bandhasthAna tIna
hI haiM aura do avaktadhya bandha isa prakAra samajhanA cAhiye ki gyArahaveM
guNasthAna meM darzanAvaraNa kA bilkula bandhana karake jaba koI jIva vahA~ se
girakara dasaveM guNasthAna meM cAra prakRtiyoM kA bandha karatA hai taba pahalA
avaktavya banca hotA hai aura jaba gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM maraNa karake
anusAra devoM meM utpanna hotA hai taba vahA~ prathama samaya meM darzanAvaraNa
kama kI chaha prakRtiyoM kA bandha karatA hai, jo dUsarA avaktavya bandha hai| _
isa prakAra se darzanAvaraNa karma kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke baMdhasthAnoM aura
unameM do bhUyaskAra, do alpatara, tIna avasthita aura do avaktavya baMdhoM kA
kathana karane ke bAda aba mohanIya karma kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke bandhasthAnoM
aura bhUyaskarAdi baMdhoM ko batalAte haiM  /  mohanIya karma ke baMdhasthAna
Adi kI saMkhyA _ mohanIya karma kI aTThAIsa uttara prakRtiyA~ haiM  /  lekina
unameM se samyagamithyAtva aura samyaktta mohanIya kA baMdha na hone se
baMdhayogya chabbIsa prakRtiyAM haiM  /  iname bAIsa, ikkIsa, satraha, teraha,
no, pA~ca, cAra, lona, do aura eka prakRti kA, isa prakAra se kula dasa
baMdhasthAna hote haiM  /  ve isa prakAra haiM

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **104** **Chapter**  Out of the three *vedas* (female, male,
and neuter), only one *veda* is bound at a time, and out of the two pairs of
*hasya-rati* and *shoka-arati*, only one pair is bound at a time. Therefore, out
of the twenty-eight types of *mohaniya karma*, by reducing two *vedas* from the
three *vedas* and one pair from the two pairs of *hasya-rati* and *shoka-arati*,
a total of six types are reduced, leaving twenty-two types that can be bound at
a time. This is the first *bandha-sthana* (place of bondage).  The twenty-two
types of this *bandha-sthana* are as follows:  * *Mithyatva* * *Ananta-
anubandhi* * *Kshaya* (four types) * *A-pratyakhyana-avaran* *Kshaya* (four
types) * *Pratyakhyana-avaran* *Kshaya* (four types) * *Sanjvalana* *Kshaya*
(four types) * One *veda* * One pair * *Bhaya* (fear) * *Jugupsa* (disgust)
This *bandha-sthana* of twenty-two types is bound only in the first *guna-
sthana* (state of being).  In the second *guna-sthana*, all twenty-one types
except *mithyatva* are bound. In the third and fourth *guna-sthana*, seventeen
types are bound, excluding *ananta-anubandhi* *krodha* (anger), *mana* (pride),
*maya* (delusion), and *lobha* (greed). In the fifth *guna-sthana*, thirteen
types are bound, excluding the four types of *a-pratyakhyana-avaran* *kshaya*.
These are the second, third, and fourth *bandha-sthana*, respectively.  After
this, in the sixth, seventh, and eighth *guna-sthana*, only nine types are bound
due to the absence of the four types of *pratyakhyana-avaran* *kshaya*. At the
end of the eighth *guna-sthana*, *hasya*, *rati*, *bhaya*, and *jugupsa* are
unbound, leaving only five types bound in the first part of the ninth *guna-
sthana*. In the second part, due to the absence of the *veda*, only four types
are bound. In the third part, due to the absence of the *sanjvalana* *krodha*,
only three types are bound. In the fourth part, due to the absence of the
*sanjvalana* *mana*, only two types are bound. In the fifth part, due to the
absence of the *sanjvalana* *maya*, only one type, *sanjvalana* *lobha*, is
bound.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 104 zataka strI, puruSa, napuMsaka ina tIna vedoM meM se eka samaya meM eka hI
veda kA tathA hAsya-rati va zoka arati meM se eka samaya meM eka hI yugala kA
baMdha hotA hai| ataH mohanIya karma kI aTThAIsa prakRtiyoM meM se
samyagmithyAtva samyaktva tathA tIna vedoM meM se koI do veda aura hAsya- rati,
arati zoka, ina donoM yugaloM meM se koI eka yugala ko kama karane se kula chaha
prakRtiyoM ko kama kara dene para zeSa bAIsa prakRtiyAM hI eka samaya meM bandha
ko prApta hotI haiN| yaha pahalA baMdhasthAna hai  /  isa baMdhasthAna kI bAIsa
prakRtiyA~ isa prakAra haiM mithyAtva anantAnubaMdhI kapAya catuSka,
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAva catuSka,
saMjbalana kaSAya catuSka, eka veda, eka yugala, bhaya aura jugupsA  /  isa
bAIsa prakRti rUpa baMdhasthAna kA bandha kevala pahale guNasthAna meM hotA hai
/  " dUsare guNasthAna meM mithyAtva ke sivAya zeSa ikkIsa prakRtiyoM kA,
tIsare, cauthe guNasthAna meM anantAnubaMdhI krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha ke sivAya
zeSa satraha kA pAMcaveM guNasthAna meM apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka kA
baMdha na hone se zeSa teraha prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai  /  ye kramazaH
dUsare, tIsare aura cauthe baMdhasthAna haiN| isake anantara chaThe, sAtaveM
aura AThaveM guNasthAna meM pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka kA bandha na hone
ke kAraNa zeSa nau prakRtiyoM kA hI bandha hotA hai| AThaveM guNasthAna ke anta
meM hAsya, rati, bhaya aura jugupsA kA bandhaviccheda ho jAne se nauveM
guNasthAna ke prathama bhAga meM pAMca prakRtiyoM kA hI baMdhasthAna hotA hai|
dUsare bhAga meM veda kA abhAva ho jAne se cAra kA, tIsare bhAga meM saMcalana
krodha ke baMdha kA abhAva ho jAne ke kAraNa tIna hI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA
hai| cauthe bhAga meM saMjvalana mAna kA bandha na hone se do prakRtiyoM kA
bandhasthAna hai | pAMcaveM bhAga meM saMjvalana mAyA kA bhI bandha na hone se
kevala eka saMjvalana lobha kA

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 105  This is the bond. Further, due to the absence
of the *badar* *kṣaya*, the bond of the *sanjvalana* *lobha* nature also does
not occur. Thus, one should know the ten bond-places of the *mohaniya* karma.
Among these ten bond-places, there are nine *bhūyas* bonds, eight *alpatar*
bonds, ten *avasthita* bonds, and two *avakatavya* bonds. Their explanation is
given below.  **The *bhūyas* etc. bonds of *mohaniya* karma:**  When one bond is
made, and then two bonds are made, the first *bhūyas* bond occurs. When two
bonds are made, and then three bonds are made, the second *bhūyas* bond occurs.
Similarly, when three bonds are made, and then four bonds are made, the third
*bhūyas* bond occurs. When four bonds are made, and then five bonds are made,
the fourth *bhūyas* bond occurs. When five bonds are made, and then nine bonds
are made, the fifth *bhūyas* bond occurs. When nine bonds are made, and then
thirteen bonds are made, the sixth *bhūyas* bond occurs. When thirteen bonds are
made, and then seventeen bonds are made, the seventh *bhūyas* bond occurs. When
seventeen bonds are made, and then twenty-one bonds are made, the eighth
*bhūyas* bond occurs. When twenty-one bonds are made, and then twenty-two bonds
are made, the ninth *bhūyas* bond occurs.  **The eight *alpatar* bonds are as
follows:**  When twenty-two bonds are made, and then twenty-three bonds are
made, the first *alpatar* bond occurs. When twenty-three bonds are made, and
then twenty-four bonds are made, the second *alpatar* bond occurs. When twenty-
four bonds are made, and then twenty-five bonds are made, the third *alpatar*
bond occurs. When twenty-five bonds are made, and then twenty-six bonds are
made, the fourth *alpatar* bond occurs. When twenty-six bonds are made, and then
twenty-seven bonds are made, the fifth *alpatar* bond occurs. When twenty-seven
bonds are made, and then twenty-eight bonds are made, the sixth *alpatar* bond
occurs. When twenty-eight bonds are made, and then twenty-nine bonds are made,
the seventh *alpatar* bond occurs. When twenty-nine bonds are made, and then
thirty bonds are made, the eighth *alpatar* bond occurs.  **Footnotes:**  1. In
the *Go karmakāṇḍa*, there is some difference in the *bhūyas* etc. bonds of
*mohaniya* karma. There are more bonds mentioned in it, whose details are given
in the appendix.  2. There are eight *alpatar* bonds of *mohaniya* karma. The
reason for not mentioning the bond of twenty-two bonds and then twenty-one bonds
as an *alpatar* bond is that the bond of twenty-two bonds occurs in the first
*guṇasthāna*, and the bond of twenty-one bonds occurs in the second
*guṇasthāna*. But the living being does not go from the first *guṇasthāna* to
the second *guṇasthāna*. The second *guṇasthāna* is with respect to *akrānti*,
not with respect to *utkrānti*. If the living being could go from the first
*guṇasthāna* to the second *guṇasthāna*, then the bond of twenty-one bonds could
have become an *alpatar* bond. But due to *mithyādṛṣṭi*, the living being...
(See next page)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 105 hI bandha hotA hai  /  isake Age bAdara kaSAya kA
abhAva ho jAne se saMjvalana lobha prakRti kA bhI baMdha nahIM hotA hai| isa
prakAra mohanIya karma ke dasa bandhasthAna jAnanA cAhiye  /  ina dasa
baMdhasthAnoM meM nI bhUyaskAra, borDa alpatara, dasa avasthita aura do
avakatavya baMdha hote haiN| jinakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA jAtA hai  /  mohanIya
karma ke bhUyaskAra Adi baMdha - eka ko bAMdha kara do kA baMdha karane para
pahalA bhUyaskAra baMdha aura do ko bAMdhakara tIna kA baMdha karane para dUsarA
bhUyaskAra baMdha hotA hai| isI prakAra tIna ko bAMdha kara cAra kA baMdha
karane para tIsarA, cAra ko bAMdhakara pAMca kA bandha karane para cauthA, pAMca
kA baMdha karake nau kA baMdha karane para pAMcavAM, nI kA baMdha karake teraha
kA bandha karane para chaThA, teraha kA baMdha karake sannaha kA baMdha karane
para sAtavAM satraha kA bandha karake ikkIsa kA bandha karane para AThavAM aura
ikkIsa kA bandha karake bAIsa kA bandha karane para nauvAM bhUyaskAra bandha
hotA hai  /  ATha alpatara baMdha isa prakAra haiM- bAIsa kA baMdha karake
sataha 1 go0 karmakAMDa meM mohanIya karma ke bhUjAkArAdi vaMdhoM meM kucha
antara hai, usameM adhika mAne gaye haiM, jinakA vivaraNa pariziSTa meM diyA
gayA hai| 2 mohanIya karma ke ATha alpatara bandha hote haiN| bAIma kA bandha
karake ikkIsa kA bandha rUpa alpatara bandha nahIM batAne kA kAraNa yaha hai ki
bAIsa kA bandha pahale guNasthAna meM hotA hai aura ikkIsa kA bandha dUsare
guNasthAna meM  /  lekina pahale guNasthAna se jIva dUsare guNasthAna meM nahIM
jAtA hai| dUsarA guNasthAna akrAnti kI apekSA se hai, utkrAnti kI apekSA se
nahIM  /  yadi jIva pahale guNasthAna se dUsare guNasthAna meM jA sakatA to
ikkIsa kA alpatara bandha bana sakatA thaa| lekina mithyAdRSTi sAsA ( agale
pRSTha para dekheM)

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **106**  When a bond of 100 is made, it is the first *alpantar*
(minor bond). When a bond of 17 is made after a bond of 100, it is the second
*alpantar*. Similarly, when a bond of 9 is made after a bond of 13, it is the
third *alpantar*. When a bond of 5 is made after a bond of 9, it is the fourth
*alpantar*. When a bond of 4 is made after a bond of 5, it is the fifth
*alpantar*. When a bond of 3 is made after a bond of 4, it is the sixth
*alpantar*. When a bond of 2 is made after a bond of 3, it is the seventh
*alpantar*. When a bond of 1 is made after a bond of 2, it is the eighth
*alpantar*.  There are ten *bandhasthana* (places of bondage) due to *dama*
(control). Therefore, there are also ten *avasthan* (states) of bondage.  There
are two types of *avaktavy* (unspeakable) bonds:  1. When a being, without
making a bond of *mohaniya karma* (karma that causes delusion) in the eleventh
*gunasthan* (stage of spiritual development), falls from there to the ninth
*gunasthan* and makes a bond of *sanjwalan lobha* (burning greed), it is the
first *avaktavy* bond.  2. When a being, due to the depletion of *ayu* (life
span) in the eleventh *gunasthan*, dies and takes birth in the *anuttaravasi
deva* (highest order of gods) and makes a bond of seventeen *prakritis* (types
of karma), it is the second *avaktavy* bond.  *Dan* (giving) cannot lead to
*samyagdristi* (right faith). Only *upasham samyagdristi* (right faith with
control) can attain the *sasadan gunasthan* (stage of spiritual development).
**23**  No one can attain *sasadan* (stage of spiritual development) by
*chaligeme* (wrong conduct). A person who is *samsammatta* (self-controlled) and
has *dhatu* (spiritual power) can attain *sasadan* by *chaligeme* only if they
are *samsammatta* (self-controlled) and have *dhatu* (spiritual power). If
someone attains *sasadan* by *chaligeme* without being *samsammatta* (self-
controlled) and having *dhatu* (spiritual power), they will not be able to
maintain it.  **-Karmaprakriti (Upasham)**  During the time of *upasham
samyaktva* (right faith with control), a person can attain *sasadan samyaktva*
(right faith with control and spiritual development) with a minimum of one and a
maximum of six *apali* (remaining karmas). Therefore, a bond of 21 after a bond
of 22 is a possible *alpantar* (minor bond).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 106 zataka kA baMdha karane para bahalA alpatara aura satraha kA bandha karake
teraha kA bandha karane para dusarA alpatara hotA hai  /  isI prakAra teraha kA
bandha karake nau kA indha karane para tIsarA, nau kA bandha karake pAMca kA
bandha karane para cauthA, pAMca kA bandha karake cAra kA baMdha karane para
pAMcavAM, cAra kA bandhra karake tIna kA bandha karane para phaTA, tIna kA
bandhra karake do kA bandha karane para sAtavAM aura do kA bandha karake eka kA
bandha karane para AThavAM alpatara bandha hotA hai|| baMdhasthAna dama hone se
avasthita baMzca bhI dasa hI hote haiM  /  do abaktavya bandha nimna prakAra
haiM-gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM mohanIya karma kA bandha na karake jaba koI jIva
vahAM se cyuta hokara nauveM guNasthAna meM AtA hai aura vahAM saMjvalana lobha
kA bandha karatA hai taba pahalA avaktavya bandha hotA hai aura yadi gyArahaveM
guNasthAna meM Ayu kA kSaya ho jAne ke kAraNa marakara ke koI jIva anuttaravAsI
devoM meM janma letA hai aura vahAM satraha prakRtiyoM kA bandha karatA hai to
dUsarA avaktavya banna hotA hai| dana samyandaSTi nahIM ho sakatA hai, upazama
samyaSTi hI sAsAdana guNasthAna ko prApta hotA hai chAligamesA para AmANaM koI
gacchajjA  / 23 //  svasaMmattaddhAto paDamANo chAvanigamesAe
uvasamasaMmattaddhAte parati ukosAte, jahannaNa ekasamayase sAe
unasamasaMmattaddhAe sAsApaNamammattaM koni gacchejjA, No samne gcchejaa|
-karmaprakRti (upazama kA) cUNi - upazama samyaktva ke kAla meM kama-se-kama eka
mamaya aura adhika-seadhika chaha ApalI zeSa rahane para koI-koI upazama
samyagdRSTi sAsAdana mamyakSa ko prApta hotA hai| ataH bAIsa kA bandha karake
ikkIsa kA bandha rUpa alpatara bandha saMbhava

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Fifth Karma Grantha 107 After explaining the ten bondage-sites and nine
super-bondages of the Mohaniya karma, as well as the eight less-extensive and
two inexpressible bondages, now they are describing the bondage-sites and super-
bondages etc. of the Namaka karma and Jnanavaranakarma etc.  The Namaka karma
has three, five, six, eight and nine more, twenty and thirty, thirty-one, one
type of bondage-sites. And in them, there are six super-bondages, seven less-
extensive bondages, eight subsistent bondages, and three inexpressible bondages.
In the remaining five karmas (other than Darshanavarana, Mohaniya and Namaka),
there is one bondage-site each.  The special meaning is that this gatha tells
the number of bondage-sites of the Namaka karma and the super-bondages etc. in
them, as well as the bondage-sites of the remaining five karmas.  The Namaka
karma has eight bondage-sites, and the number of some of them is indicated by
hints. For example, 'tippanchanavahiya vīsā' means three more than twenty, five
more than twenty, six more than twenty, eight more than twenty, nine more than
twenty, from which the number of the respective prakritis (types) are twenty-
three, twenty-five, twenty-six, etc. respectively.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 107 isa prakAra se mohanIya karma ke dasa bandhasthAna
aura nau bhUyaskAra, ATha alpatara dasa avasthita aura do avaktavya bandha
batalAne ke bAda aba nAmakarma tathA jJAnAvaraNa Adi karmoM ke bandhasthAna va
bhUyaskAra Adi bandhoM kA nirUpaNa karate haiM  /  tipaNachaanavahiyA vosA
tosegatIsa iga nAme | aTTatibandhA sesesu ya zabdArtha -lipaNachaanavahiyA tIna
pAMca chaha ATha aura no adhika, bIsA vIsa tIsa tIsa, ektIsa ikatIsa, iga eka
nAme - nAmakarma cha chaha bhUmaskAra baMdha, ssaga - sAta alpatara 7 bandha,
aTTha-ATha avasthita baMdha, tibaMdhA- tIna avaktavya bandha. sesesu - bAkI ke
jJAnAvaraNa Adi pAMca karmoM meM, ThANa-vanprasthAna ikvika eka-eka
ThANamikkavakaM  // 2 //  gAthArthanAmakarma meM tIna, pAMca chaha, bAU aura nau
adhika bIsa tathA tIsa, ikatIsa, eka prakRti rUpa baMdhasthAna hote haiM tathA
inameM chaha bhUyaskAra baMdha, sAta alpatara bandha, ATha avasthita bandha aura
tIna avaktavya bandha haiM  /  darzanAvaraNa, mohanIya aura nAmakarma ke sivAya
zeSa pAMca karmo meM ekaeka bandhasthAna hai  /  vizeSArtha - isa gAthA meM
nAmakarma ke bandhasthAnoM aura unameM bhUyaskAra Adi bandhoM kI saMkhyA tathA
zeSa pAMca karmoM ke bandhasthAnoM ko batalAyA hai  /  nAmakarma ke ATha
bandhasthAna hai, unameM se kucha kI saMkhyA saMketa dvArA batalAI hai  /  jaise
ki 'tipaNachaanavahiyA vIsA' tIna adhika bIsa, pAMca adhika bIsa, chaha adhika
bIsa, ATha adhika bIsa, nau adhika bIsa, jinase kramaza: teIsa prakRti rUpa,
paccIsa prakRti rUpa, chabbIsa prakRti

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 108 ## Shataka  **Form, 28 Nature Forms and 29 Nature Forms, these become
five locations and three bondage locations are respectively 30 Nature Forms, 31
Nature Forms and one Nature Form. Their explanation is as follows:**  There are
67 Nature Forms that are capable of being bound by Name Karma. At one time, not
all Nature Forms are bound to a single Jiva. Only 23, 25, etc. Nature Forms are
bound to a Jiva at one time. Therefore, eight bondage locations of Name Karma
are considered.  The bondage locations of Karma mentioned earlier are Jiva-
vipaki - they affect the spiritual qualities of the Jiva. But the majority of
Name Karma is Pudgala-vipaki and it is mostly used in the physical structure of
Jivas. Therefore, due to the difference in different Jivas, there is a
difference in the same bondage location in the Abantar Nature Forms.  **Varna
Chatushk, Tanjas, Karman, Agurulghu, Nirman and Upghāt, these nine Nature Forms
of Name Karma are Dhruva-bandhini.** These are bound to all Jivas of all four
Gatis until the sixth part of the eighth Gunasthan. Along with these,
**Tiryanch-gati, Tiryanch-anupurvi, Ekendriya jati, Audarik sharir, Hund
sansthan, Sthavar, Aparapt, Asthir, Ashubh, Durbhāg, Anadeya, Ayash-kirti,
Sukshma-badar, one from each of these fourteen Nature Forms, and one from each
of the ordinary Nature Forms, when combined with the nine Dhruva-bandhini Nature
Forms (14+6), result in the bondage location of 23 Nature Forms.** These 23
Nature Forms are Aparapt Ekendriya-prayogya, which are bound by Ekendriya,
Vikalendriya and Panchendriya Mithyatvi. That is, the Jiva bound to this
location is born as an Aparapt Ekendriya after death.  **From these 23 Nature
Forms, by reducing the Aparapt Nature Form to Paryapt, ...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 108 zataka rUpa, aTThAIsa prakRti rUpa aura unatIsa prakRti rUpa ye pAMca
sthAna bana jAte haiM aura tIna baMdhasthAna kramazaH tIsa prakRti rUpa, ikatIsa
prakRti rUpa aura eka prakRti rUpa haiM  /  jinakA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai
nAmakarma kI bandhayogya 67 prakRtiyAM haiN| eka mamaya meM eka jItra ko sabhI
prakRtiyoM kA bandha nahIM hotA hai| kinna unameM se eka samaya meM eka jIva ke
teIsa, paccIsa Adi prakRtiyAM hI bandha ko prApta hotI haiN| isIliye nAmakarma
ke ATha bandhasthAna mAne gaye haiN| pUrva meM jina karmoM ke bandhasthAnoM ko
batalAyA gayA hai ve karma jIvavipAko haiM--jIva ke Atmika guNA para hI unakA
asara par3atA hai| kiMtu nAmakarma kA bahubhAga pudgalavipAkI hai aura usakA
adhikatara upayoga jIvoM kI zArIrika racanA meM hI hotA hai| ataH bhinna-bhinna
jIvoM kI apekSA se eka hI baMdhasthAna ko abAntara prakRtiyoM meM antara par3a
jAtA hai| varNa catuSka, taMjasa, kArmaNa, agurulaghu, nirmANa aura upaghAta,
nAmakarma kI ye nau prakRtiyAM dhruvabandhinI hai| cAroM gati ke sabhI jIvoM ke
AThaveM guNasthAna ke chaThe bhAga taka inakA bandha avazya hotA hai  /  inake
sAtha tiryaMcagati, tiryaMcAnupUrvI, ekendriya jAti, audArika zarIra, huNDa
saMsthAna, sthAvara, aparyApta, asthira, azubha, durbhaga, anAdeya, ayazaHkIrti,
sUkSma-bAdara meM se koI eka, sAdhAraNa pratyeka meM se koI eka, ina caudaha
prakRtiyoM ko dhruvabandhinI nau prakRtiyoM ke sAtha milAne para (14+6) teIsa
prakRti kA bandhasthAna hotA hai  /  ye teIsa prakRtiyAM aparyApta
ekendriyaprayogya haiM, jinako ekendriya, vikalendriya aura paMcendriya
mithyAtvI bAMdhatA hai  /  arthAt isa sthAna kA bandhaka jIba marakara ekendriya
aparyApta meM hI janma letA hai| ina teIsa prakRtiyoM meM se aparyApta prakRti
ko kama karake paryApta,

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  By combining the Ucchvas and Paraghat natures with
the one-sensory sufficient, a twenty-five-fold bondage-place with one-sensory
sufficient is formed. By subtracting the stationary, sufficient one-sensory
species, Ucchvas and Paraghat from these, and adding the Vas, insufficient two-
sensory species, Sevat Sanhanan and Audarik Angopang, a twenty-five-fold place
with two-sensory insufficient is formed. Similarly, by adding the three-sensory
species in place of the two-sensory species, a twenty-five-fold place with
three-sensory insufficient is formed. By adding the four-sensory species in
place of the three-sensory species, a twenty-five-fold place with four-sensory
insufficient is formed. And by adding the five-sensory species in place of the
four-sensory species, a twenty-five-fold place with five-sensory insufficient is
formed. In this, by adding the human path in place of the Tiryanch path, a
twenty-five-fold place with human insufficient is formed.  Thus, the twenty-
five-natured bondage-place is of six types, and the beings bound by it can take
birth in all the insufficient Tiryanch and humans, starting from the one-sensory
sufficient and the two-sensory.  From the twenty-five-natured bondage-place with
human path, by subtracting the Vas, insufficient, human path, five-sensory
species, Sevat Sanhanan and Audarik Angopang, and adding one of the stationary,
sufficient, Tiryanch path, one-sensory species, Ucchvas, Paraghat, Atap and
Udyot, a twenty-six-fold bondage-place with one-sensory sufficient is formed.
The bound being of this place takes birth in the one-sensory sufficient.  _The
name-karma's nature is Dhruvbandhini, Vas, Vader, sufficient, each, stable and
unstable, one of auspicious and inauspicious, Subhag, Aadey, Yash Kirti and
Ayash Kirti, Devgati, five-sensory..._

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha ucchvAsa aura parAghAta prakRtiyoM ko milAne se ekendriya
paryApta sahita paccIsa kA bandhasthAna hotA hai| unameM se sthAvara, paryApta
ekendriya jAti, ucchvAsa aura parAghAta ko ghaTAkara basa, aparyApta dvIndriya
jAti, sevAta saMhanana aura audArika aMgopAMga ke milAne se dvIndriya aparyApta
sahita paccIsa kA sthAna hotA hai| isI prakAra dvIndriya jAti ke sthAna meM
trIndriya jAti ke milAne se vIndriya aparyApta sahita paccIsa kA sthAna,
nIndriya jAti ke sthAna meM caturindriya jAti ke milAne se caturindriya
aparyApta sahita paccIsa kA sthAna aura caturindriya jAti ke sthAna meM
paMcendriya jAti ke milAne se paMcendriya aparyApta sahita paccIsa kA sthAna
hotA hai  /  isameM tiryantramati ke sthAna meM manuSyagati ke milAne se manuSya
aparyApta sahita paccIsa kA sthAna hotA hai  /  isa prakAra se paccIsa prakRti
vAlA baMdhasthAna chaha prakAra kA hotA hai aura usako bAMdhane bAle jIva
ekendriya paryAptakoM meM tathA dvIndriya ko Adi lekara sabhI aparyApta tiryaMca
aura manuSyoM meM janma le sakate manuSyagati sahita paccIsa prakRtika
baMdhasthAna meM se vasa, aparyApta, manuSyagati, paMcendriya jAti, sevAtaM
saMhanana aura audArika aMgopAMga ko ghaTAkara sthAvara, paryApta, tiryancagati,
ekendriya jAti, ucchvAsa, parAghAta aura Atapa tathA udyota meM se kisI eka ko
milAne para ekendriya paryApta yukta chaccIsa kA bandhasthAna hotA hai| isa
sthAna kA bandhaka jIva ekendriya paryAptaka meM janma letA hai  /  _ nAmakarma
kI nI dhruvabandhinI, vasa, vAdara, paryApta, pratyeka, sthira aura asthira meM
se eka, zubha aura azubha meM se eka, subhaga, Adeya, yazaHkIrti aura ayaza kIti
meM se eka, devagati, paMcendriya

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
110 The bondage state (bandhasthana) consists of thirty-two prakritis (intrinsic
natures) including jati (species), vaikriya-sarira (transformable body),
prathama-sthana (first abode), devanupurvi (celestial birth-group), vaikriya-
angopanga (transformable limbs and organs), sushvara (melodious voice), shubha-
vihayogati (auspicious mode of movement), ucchvasa (respiration) and parighata
(impact). The being in this state becomes a deva (celestial being) after death.
In comparison to the nargati (hell-state), the bondage state of twenty-eight
prakritis includes nada (sound), vadara (coarse), paryapta (complete), pratyeka
(individual), asthira (unstable), ashubha (inauspicious), durbhaga
(unfortunate), anadeyya (unworthy of respect), ayashahkirti (ill-repute),
naragati (hell-state), panchendriya-jati (five-sensed species), vaikriya-sarira,
hunda-samsthana (womb-born abode), narakanuparvi (infernal birth-group),
vaikriya-angopanga, duhsvara (discordant voice), ashubha-vihayogati
(inauspicious mode of movement), ucchvasa and parighata.  1 1 Shatakas
(Hundreds) The bondage state consists of twenty-nine prakritis including no-
dhruva-bandhini (not firmly bound), tatha (thus), bhadara (coarse), paryapta
(complete), pratyeka (individual), sthira (stable) or asthira (unstable), shubha
(auspicious) or ashubha (inauspicious), durbhanga (unfortunate), anadeyya
(unworthy of respect), yashahkirti (fame) or ayashahkirti (ill-repute),
tiryancagati (animal-state), dvindirya-jati (two-sensed species), audārika-
śarīra (gross body), hunda-samsthana (womb-born abode), tiryancānupūrvī (animal
birth-group), sevā-saṃhanana (service-body), audārika-aṅgopāṅga (gross limbs and
organs), duhsvara (discordant voice), ashubha-vihāyogati (inauspicious mode of
movement), ucchvāsa (respiration), and parighāta (impact).  In this, by
replacing dvindirya (two-sensed) with trindirya (three-sensed), trindirya with
caturindriya (four-sensed), and caturindriya with panchendriya (five-sensed),
the bondage states of nindirya-yukta (devoid of senses), caturindriya, and
panchendriya-yukta (five-sensed) twenty-nine prakritis are obtained
respectively.  It should be understood that in this state, one prakrti each from
the pairs of subhaga (auspicious) and durabhanga (unfortunate), adeyya (worthy
of respect) and anadeyya (unworthy of respect), sushvara (melodious voice) and
duhsvara (discordant voice), prachasta (excellent) and aprachasta (inferior)
vihāyogati (mode of movement), as well as one samsthana (abode) out of the six
samsthanas and one samhanana (body-making) out of the six samhananas, is bound.
By excluding tiryancagati (animal-state) and tiryancānupūrvī (animal birth-
group) and including manushyagati (human-state) and manushyānupūrvī (human
birth-group), the bondage state of twenty-nine prakritis with paryapta manushya
(complete human) is obtained.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 110 jAti, vaikriya zarIra, pahalA saMsthAna, devAnupUrvI, vaikriya aMgopAMga,
susvara, zubha vihAyogati, ucchvAsa aura parAghAta ina prakRti rUpa devagati
sahita baTTAIsa kA vandhasthAna hotA hai  /  isa sthAna kA bandhaka marakara
deva hotA hai  /  narakagati kI apekSA lAI kA sthAnI nasa, vAdara, paryApta,
pratyeka, asthira, azubha, durbhaga, anAdeya, ayaza:kIrti, narakagati,
paMcendriya jAti, vaikriya zarIra huNDasaMsthAna, narakAnupUrvI, vaikriya
aMgopAMga, duHsvara, azubha vihAyogati, ucchvAsa aura parAghAta, ina prakRti
rUpa narakagatiyogya aTThAIsa kA bandhasthAna hotA hai  /  1 1 zataka no
dhruvabaMdhinI tathA basa, bAdara, paryApta pratyeka, sthira' yA asthira, zubha
athavA azubha, dubhaMga, anAdeya, yazaHkorti yA avazaH korti, tiryaMcagati,
dvIndriya jAti, audArika zarIra, huNDa saMsthAna, tiryacAnupUrvI, sevA
saMhanana, audArika aMgopAMga, duHsvara, azubha vihAyogati, uccha vAsa,
parAghAta, ina prakRti rUpa dvIndriya paryAptayuta unatIsa prakRti kA
baMdhasthAna hotA hai| isameM dvIndriya ke sthAna meM vIndriya, trIndriya ke
sthAna meM caturindriya, caturindriya ke sthAna meM paMcendriya ko milAne se
kramazaH nIndriyayukta, caturindriyata aura paMcendriyayuta unatIsa prakRti kA
bandhasthAna hotA hai  /  isa sthAna meM yaha vizeSatA samajhanA cAhiye ki
subhaga aura dubhaMga, Adeya aura anAdeya, susvara aura duHsvara, prazasta aura
aprazasta bihAyogati, ina yugaloM meM se eka-eka prakRti kA tathA chaha
saMsthAnoM aura chaha saMhananoM meM se kisI eka saMsthAna kA aura kisI eka
saMhanana kA baMdha hotA hai  /  isameM tiryaMcagati aura tiryacAnupUrvI ko
ghaTAkara manuSyagati, manuSyAnupUrvI ke milAne se paryApta manuSya sahita
unatIsa kA baMdhasthAna hotA hai|

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **111**  Nine Dhruvabandhini, Bas, Badar, Paryapt,
Pratiyaka, Sthira. These are unstable, auspicious or inauspicious, Adeya. Yash-
Kirti or Ayash Kirti, Devagati, Panchendriya jati, Vaikriya' Sharira, Pratham
Sansthan, Devanupurvi, Vaikriya Angopaang, Suswar, Prashast Bihayogati,
Uchchwas, Paraghāt, Tirthankar. These twenty-nine, including Devagati and
Tirthankar, are the Bandhastanas of these natural forms. Thus, there are six
Bandhastanas of twenty-nine natural forms. The bound being in these places is
born in the Dwindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya and Panchendriya Tyanchons, as
well as in the Manushya Gati and Devagati.  Dwindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya
and Panchendriya Paryaptayut twenty-nine have four Bandhastanas. By combining
them with the Udyot Prakriti, there are twelve Bandhastanas of thirty, with
Dwindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya and Panchendriya Paryaptayut. By combining
the Tirthankar jati with the twenty-nine Bandhastanas, including the Paryapt
Manushya, there is a Bandhastan of thirty, including the Manushya Gati. By
subtracting the Tirthankar Prakriti from the twenty-nine Bandhastanas, including
the Devagati, and adding the Aharakdwik, there is a Bandhastan of thirty,
including the Devagati. Thus, there are six Bandhastanas of thirty natural
forms.  By adding the Aharakdwik to the twenty-nine Bandhastanas, including the
Devagati, there is a Bandhastan of thirty-one, including the Devagati. In one
natural Bandhastan, only one Yashasiti is bound.  Thus, having explained the
eight Bandhastanas of the Namkarma, now we will explain the number of Bhuyasakar
Bandha etc. in them.  **Bhuyasakarādi Bandha**  There are eight Bandhastanas of
Namkarma, and to explain the number of Suchaksarādi Bandha in them, a hint is
given: 'Chalsagati Bandha' - there are six Bhuyasakar, Mat Alpatar, eight
Avasthit and three Abaktvy Bandha. Their description is as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 111 nau dhruvabaMdhinI, basa, bAdara, paryApta, pratyeka,
sthira. yA asthira, zubha yA azuma, Adeya. yaza-kIrti yA ayaza kIti, devagati,
paMcendriya jAti, vaikriya' zarIra, prathama saMsthAna, devAnupUrvI, vaikriya
aMgopAMga, susvara, prazasta bihAyogati, ucchvAsa, parAghAta, tIrthakara, ina
prakRti rUpa devagati aura tIrthaMkara sahita unatIsa kA baMdhasthAna hotA hai|
isa prakAra se unatIsa prakRtikA vadhasthAna chaha hote haiM  /  ina sthAnoM kA
bandhaka dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya aura paMcendriya tiyaMcoM meM tathA
manuSyagati aura devagati meM janma letA hai| dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya
aura paMcendriya paryAptayuta unatIsa ke cAra bandhasthAnoM meM udyota prakRti
ke milAne se dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya aura paMcendriya paryAptayuta
tIsa ke bAra baMdhasthAna hote haiM  /  paryApta manuSya sahita unatIsa ke
bandhasthAna meM tIrthaMkara prajAti ke milAne se manuSyagati sahita tIsa kA
baMdhasthAna hotA hai| devagati sahita unatIsa ke bandhasthAna meM se
tIrthaMkara prakRti ghaTAkara AhArakadvika ko milAne se devagatiyuta tIsa kA
vadhasthAna honA hai| isa prakAra tIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna chaha hote haiN|
devagati sahita unatIsa ke baMdhasthAna meM AhArakaddhika ke milAne se devagati
sahita ikatIsa kA vandhasthAna hotA hai| eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM kevala
eka yazaHIti kA hI bandha hotA hai| isa prakAra nAmakarma ke ATha baMdhasthAnoM
ko batalAkara aba inameM bhUyaskAra bandha Adi kI saMkhyA vatalAte haiN|
bhUyaskArAdi badha nAmakarma ke baMdhasthAna ATha haiM aura unameM sUcaskAra Adi
bandhoM kI saMkhyA batalAne ke liye saMketa diyA hai ki 'chalsagaati bandhA'
thAnI chaha bhUyaskAra, mAta alpatara, ATha avasthita aura tIna abaktavya bandha
hote haiM  /  jinakA vivaraNa isa prakAra hai

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 112th Century  Binding 23 and then binding 25 is the first *bhuyaskaar*
binding, binding 25 and then binding 26 is the second *bhuyaskaar*, binding 26
and then binding 28 is the third *bhuyaskaar*, binding 28 and then binding 29 is
the fourth *bhuyaskaar*, binding 29 and then binding 30 is the fifth
*bhuyaskaar*, binding 30 and then binding 31 with *aaharaka-dvik* is the sixth
*bhuyaskaar* binding. Thus, there are six *bhuyaskaar* bindings.  In the ninth
*gunasthan*, when a being, after being expelled from there by killing one, binds
30 or 31 in the eighth *gunasthan*, it is not considered a separate
*shrayaskara*. Because in that case also, it binds 30 or 31, and this same
binding occurs in the fifth and sixth *bhuyaskaar* bindings, therefore it is not
considered separate.  Although in the commentary of *Karma-prakriti*
*Satvaadhikara* verse 52, Upadhyay Yashovijayaji, while describing the binding
places of karmas and the *bhuyaskaar* etc. bindings in them, has mentioned one
opinion regarding the seventh *bhuyaskaar* in the binding places of
*naamakarma*, that binding 31 after binding one *prakriti* is the seventh
*bhuyaskaar* binding. As it is written in *Shataka Churni*, "One and thirty-one,
then *bhuyaskaar* seven" - binding one and then binding 31, therefore there are
seven *bhuyaskaar* bindings in the later *prakritis* of *naamakarma*.  The
answer to this is that while describing the *bhuyaskaars* of binding places like
28 etc., the *bhuyaskaar* in the form of binding 31 has already been included.
Therefore, it cannot be considered separate from the perspective of one.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 112 zataka teIsa kA bandha karake paccIsa kA bandha karanA pahalA bhUyaskAra
bandha, paccIsa kA bandha karake chabbIsa kA bandha karanA dUsarA bhUyaskAra,
chandasa kA bandha karake aTThAIsa kA baMdha karanA tIsarA bhUyaskAra, aTThAIsa
kA baMdha karake unatIsa kA baMdha karanA cauthA bhUyaskAra, unatIsa kA bandha
karake tIsa kA bandha karanA pAMcavA bhUyaskAra, AhArakadvika sahita tIsa kA
baMdha karake ikatIsa kA bandha karanA chaThA bhUyaskAra bandha hotA hai  /  isa
prakAra chaha bhUyaskAra bandha haiM  /  nauveM guNasthAna meM eka kA vadha
karake vahA~ se cyuta hokara AThaveM guNasthAna meM jaba koI jIva toma athavA
ikatIsa kA bandha karatA hai to vaha pRthak zrayaskAra nahIM ginA jAtA hai  /
kyoMki usameM bhI tIsa athavA ikatIsa kA hI bandha karatA hai aura yahI bandha
pAMcaveM aura chaThe bhUyaskAra bandhoM meM bhI hotA hai, ataH use pRthaka nahIM
ginA hai  /  yadyapi karmaprakRti ke satvAdhikAra gAthA 52 kI TIkA meM upAdhyAya
yazovijayajI ne karmoM ke bandhasthAnoM aura unameM bhUyaskAra Adi bandhoM ke
varNana ke prasaMga meM nAmakarma ke vandhasthAnoM meM chaha bhUyaskAra bandhoM
ko batalAkara sAtaveM bhUvaskAra ke saMbandha meM eka mata kA ullekha kiyA hai
ki eka prakRti kA bandha karake ikatIsa kA bandha karane para sAtavAM bhUyamkAra
bandha hotA hai| jaisA ki zataka cUrNi meM likhA hai ekkA va ekatIsaM jAi ti
bhuogArA satta-eka ko bAMdhakara ikatIsa kA bandha karatA hai, ataH nAmakarma kI
uttara prakRtiyoM meM sAta vaskAra bandha hote haiM  /  isakA uttara yaha hai ki
aTThAIsa Adi bansthAnoM ke bhUyaskAroM ko batalAte hue ikatosa ke vandha rUpa
bhUyaskAra kA pahale hI grahaNa kara liyA hai | ataH eka ko apekSA se use alaga
nahIM ginA jA sakatA 1 I

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  Here, the distinction of *bhuyaskaars* is not
explained in relation to different *bandha sthans*. If the distinction is
explained in relation to different *bandha sthans*, then there will be many
*bhuyaskaars*. For example, sometimes one binds 28 and then binds 31, sometimes
one binds 29 and then binds 31, sometimes one binds 1 and then binds 31,
sometimes one binds 23 and then binds 28, and sometimes one binds 25 and then
binds 28. In this way, there can be many *bhuyaskaars*, more than seven, which
are not desirable here. Therefore, the distinction of *bhuyaskaars* is not
explained in relation to different *bandha sthans*. In this way, there are six
*bhuyaskaars* and *bandha*.  Now, we will explain seven *alpatar bandhas*. When
a being, capable of attaining *devagati*, binds 28, 2, 30, or 31 in the
*gunasthan* of *apuurvakaran*, and then binds the first *prakritik bandha
sthan*, it is called the first *alpatar bandha*. When a being, including
*aaharaka* and *tirthankara*, binds 31 and is born in *devlok*, it binds 30
*prakritis* in the first instance, which is called the second *alpatar bandha*.
When the same being falls from heaven and takes birth in the human realm, and
then binds 29 *prakritis*, including *tirthankara*, capable of attaining
*devagati*, it is called the third *alpatar bandha*. When a *tithankara* or a
human being, capable of attaining *tithankaragati*, binds the aforementioned 29
*prakritis* and then binds 28 *prakritis* capable of attaining *devagati* due to
pure *parinaamas*, it is called the fourth *alpatar bandha*. When a being,
having bound 28 *prakritik bandha sthans*, binds 26 *prakritis* capable of
becoming *ekendriya* due to *sanklesha parinaamas*, it is called the fifth
*alpatar bandha*. When one binds 26 and then binds 25, it is called the sixth
*alpatar bandha*. And when one binds 25 and then binds 23, it is called the
seventh *alpatar bandha*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha hai  /  yahA~ bhinna bhinna bandhasthAnoM kI apekSA se
bhayaskAro ke bhedoM kI vivakSA nahIM kI hai, yadi vibhinna bandhasthAnoM kI
apekSA vivakSA kI jAye to bahuta se bhUskAra ho jaayeNge| jaise kabhI aTThAIsa
kA baMdha karake ikatIsa kA bandha karatA hai, kabhI unatIsa kA bandha karake
ika tIsa kA bandha karatA hai aura kabhI eka kA bandha karake ikatIsa kA bandha
karatA hai tathA kabhI teIsa kA bandha karake aTThAIsa kA bandha karatA hai aura
kabhI paccIsa kA bandha karake aTThAIsa kA bandha karatA hai  /  isa prakAra
sAta se bhI adhika bahuta se bhUyaskAra ho sakate haiM, jo yahA~ iSTa nahIM haiM
/  ataH bhinna-bhinna andhasthAnoM kI apekSA se bhUyaskAra ke bheda nahIM batAye
haiM  /  isa prakAra se bhamaskAra bandha chaha hote haiN| aba sAta alpatara
baMdha batalAte haiM  /  apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM deva - gati yogya 28, 2, 30
athavA 31 kA bandha karake 1 prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA bandha karane para pahalA
alpatara baMdha hotA hai  /  AhArakadvika aura tIrthaMkara sahita ikatIsa kA
baMdha karake jo jIva devaloka meM utpanna hotA hai, vaha prathama samaya meM hI
manuSyagatiyuta tIsa prakRtiyoM kA bandha karatA hai, yaha dUsarA alpatara
bandha hai  /  vahI jIva svarga se cyuta hokara manuSyagati meM janma lekara
devagati yogya tIrthaMkara sahita unatIsa prakRtiyoM kA bandha karatA hai taba
tIsarA alpavara baMdha hotA hai  /  jaba koI tithaMca yA manuSya, tiyaMcagati ke
yogya pUrvokta unatIsa prakRtiyoM kA bandha karake vizuddha pariNAmoM ke kAraNa
devagati yogya aTThAIsa prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA hai taba cauthA alpatara
baMdha, aTThAIsa prakRtika bandhasthAna kA bandha karake saMkleza pariNAmoM ke
kAraNa jaba koI jIva ekendriya ke yogya chabbIsa prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA hai
taba pA~cavAM alpatara bandha hotA hai  /  chabbIsa kA bandha karake paccIsa kA
bandha karane para chaThA alpatara bandha hotA hai tathA paccIsa kA bandha
karake teIsa kA bandha karane para sAtavAM alpatara bagha hotA hai  /

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 4  **Regarding the eight Bandha-sthānas, there are only eight Bandhas
present.**  When a Jīva, having shed all the Nāmakarma Prākrtis in the eleventh
Guṇasthāna, binds a single Prākriti, it is called the first Avaktavyabandh. When
a Jīva, having died in the eleventh Guṇasthāna and taken birth in the Anuttar
Devās, binds thirty Prākrtis suitable for the Manusshyagati, it is called the
second Avaktavyabandh. And when it binds twenty-nine Prākrtis suitable for the
Manusshyagati, it is called the third Avaktavyabandh. Thus, there are three
Avaktavyabandhas.  In the first three stanzas of this Gāthā, the Bandha-sthānas
of Nāmakarma and the Bhūyaskaara etc. Bandhas within them have been described.
In the fourth stanza, a hint is given to explain the Bandha-sthānas of the
remaining Karmas, by saying, "There is only one Bandha-sthāna for each of the
remaining five Karmas - Jñānāvaraṇa, Vedaniya, Āyu, Gotra, and Antarāya." This
is because the five Prākrtis of Jñānāvaraṇa and Antarāya are bound together and
cease together. Similarly, in the Uttar Prākrtis of Vedaniya, Āyu, and Gotra
Karmas, only one Prākriti is bound at a time. Therefore, there are no
Bhūyaskaara etc. Bandhas in these Karmas. Because where only one Prākriti is
bound, it is not possible to bind a few Prākrtis and then bind more, or to bind
more Prākrtis and then bind fewer.  ———.  **1** In the Karmakāṇḍa Gāthās 165 to
582, the Bhūyaskaara etc. Bandhas of Nāmakarma have been discussed in detail. In
these Gāthās, the Bhūyaskaara etc. Bandhas have been explained in relation to
the Guṇasthānas. The number of Prākrtis that can be bound, the number of
Prākrtis that can be released, and the number of Bhangas that can occur in each
of these Prākrtis, have all been explained in relation to the Bhūyaskaara etc.
Bandhas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 4 zataka ATha bandhasthAnoM kI apekSA se ATha hI avasthita bandha hote haiM  /
gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM nAmakarma kI eka bhI prakRti ko na bA~dhakara vahA~ se
cyuta hokara jaba koI jona eka prakRti kA baMdha karatA hai taba pahalA
avaktavya bandha hotA hai tathA gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM maraNa karake koI jIva
anuttara devoM meM janma lekara yadi manuSyagati yogya tIsa prakRti kA bandha
karatA hai taba dUsarA avaktavya bandha hotA hai aura manuSyagati yogya unatIsa
prakRti kA bandha karatA hai to tIsarA abaktavya bandha hotA hai  /  isa prakAra
tIna avaktavya bandha hote haiM  / " isa prakAra se gAyA ke tIna caraNoM meM
nAmakarma ke baMdhasthAnoM aura unameM bhUyaskara Adi baMdhoM kA nirdeza karake
zeSa karmoM ke baMdhasthAnoM ko batalAne hetu gAthA ke cauthe caraNa meM saMketa
diyA hai ki 'sesesu ya ThANamikkiM zeSa pAMca karmoM - jJAnAvaraNa, vedanIya,
Ayu, gotra, antarAya - meM eka-eka hI baMdhasthAna hotA hai| kyoMki zAnAvaraNa
aura aMtarAya kI pAMca-pAMca prakRtiyAM eka sAtha hI baMdhatI haiM aura eka
sAtha hI rukatI haiN| vedanIya, Ayu, gotra karma kI uttara prakRtiyoM meM bhI
eka samaya meM eka-eka prakRti kA hI baMdha hotA hai  /  jisase ina karmoM meM
bhUyaskAra Adi baMdha nahIM hote haiN| kyoMki jahAM eka hI prakRti kA baMdha
hotA hai, vahAM thor3I prakRtiyoM ko bAMdha kara adhika prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhanA
yA adhika prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhakara thor3I prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhanA saMbhava nahIM
hotA hai  /  ------. 1 go0 karmakAMDa gA0 165 se 582 taka nAnakarma ke
bhUvaskAra Adi bandhoM kI vistAra se carcA kI hai| usameM guNasthAnoM kI apekSA
se bhUsaskAra AdibaMdha batalAye haiM aura jitane prakRtika sthAna ko rodhakara
jitane prakRtika sthAnoM kI anya saMbhava hai aura una una sthAnoM meM jitane
bhaMga ho sakate haiM, una sabako apekSA se sUskAra Adi ko batalAyA hai  /  " "

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma  **115**  This is a general rule, but except for Vedaniya
karma, the remaining four karmas have both Avaktāvya and Avashthit Bandha.
Because when a being, without binding the karma of Jnanaavaran, Antaray, and
Gotra karma, falls from the eleventh Gunasthan and binds those karmas again in
the lower Gunasthan, then in the first instance, it is Avaktāvya Bandha, and in
the second and subsequent instances, it is Avashthit Bandha. Similarly, when
Ayush karma is bound in the Vibhaga, then in the first instance, it is Avaktāvya
Bandha, and in the second and subsequent instances, it is Avashthit Bandha.
However, in Vedaniya karma, only Avashthit Bandha occurs, not Avaktāvya Bandha.
Because the Abandha of Vedaniya karma occurs in the Aayogi Kevali Gunasthan, but
since the being does not fall from there to the lower Gunasthan, there is no re-
binding.  Thus, the binding places and their Bhuyaska, etc., bindings in the 120
Uttar Prakritis, which are eligible for binding of karma, have been explained.
Their table is given on page 116. After describing Prakriti Bandha, the next
verses describe Sthiti Bandha.  **The Excellent and Inferior Sthiti Bandha of
the Root Karmas**  **26**  Vīs-vīs, Ayarako Dikodī - Koda-Kodi like the ocean,
Name - of Name karma, Goe - of Gotra karma, Ya and Sattarī - seventy Koda-Kodi
like the ocean, Mohe - of Mohaniya karma,  **27**  Muttuṁ Afasayathiī Bār
Muhattaa Jaha Veyaniye. Aṭṭa Nāmagōesu Sēsaēsu Muhattatō.  **Word Meaning:**
Vīs-vīs - twenty-twenty, Ayarako Dikodī - Koda-Kodi like the ocean, Name - of
Name karma, Goe - of Gotra karma, Ya and Sattarī - seventy Koda-Kodi like the
ocean, Mohe - of Mohaniya karma,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmapanya 115 yaha eka sAmAnya niyama hai kintu vedanIya ke sivAya
zeSa cAra karmoM meM avaktavya aura avasthita baMdha hote haiN| kyoMki
gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM jJAnAvaraNa, aMtarAya aura gotra karma kA baMdha na
karake jaba koI jIva vahAM se cyuta hotA hai aura nIce ke muNasthAna meM Akara
punaH una karmoM kA baMdha karatA hai taba prathama samaya meM avaktavya baMdha
hotA hai aura dvitIya Adi samayoM meM avasthita baMdha hotA hai tathA vibhAga
meM jaba Ayu karma kA baMdha hotA hai taba prathama samaya meM avaktavya baMdha
hotA hai aura dvitIya Adi samayoM meM avasthita baMdha hotA hai| kintu vedanIya
karma meM kevala avasthita baMdha hI hotA hai, avaktavya baMdha nahIM  /  kyoMki
vedanIya karma kA abandha ayogi kevalI guNasthAna meM hotA hai, kintu vahAM se
girakara jIva ke nIce ke guNasthAna meM nahIM Ane ke kAraNa punaH vaMdha nahIM
hotA hai| isa prakAra se karmoM kI baMdha-yogya 120 uttara prakRtiyoM meM
baMdhasthAnoM aura unake bhUyaskara Adi baMdhoM ko batalAyA gayA hai  /  jinakA
koSTaka pRSTha 116 para diyA gayA hai| prakRtibaMdha kA varNana karane ke bAda
aba Age kI gAthAoM meM sthitibaMdha kA varNana karate haiN| mUla karmoM kA
utkRSTa, jaghanya sthitibaMdha vosayarakoDikoDI nAme goe ya sattarI mohe|
sosayara ghausu udahI nirayasurAu~mi tittIsA  // 26 //  muttuM aphasAyaThiI bAra
muhattA jahA veyaNie  /  aTTa nAmagoesu sesaesu muhattato  // 27 //  zabdArtha-
vIsa-bIsa, ayarako DikoDI-kor3A-kor3I sAgaropama, nAme-nAmakarma kI, goe-
gotrakarma kI, yaaura sattarI-sattara kor3A-bor3I sAgaropama, mohe-mohanIyakama
kI,

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Eight Karmas are the bondage places of the Uttar Prakritis, which are further
classified as:  **Bondage Places** * **Bhuyaskaara** * **Adi Bandha** (Initial
Bondage) * **Kosthaka** (Bracket) * **Bhaatha Karma** (Burning Karma) *
**Jnaanavaran** (Knowledge Obscuring Karma) * **Darshnaavaran** (Perception
Obscuring Karma) * **Vedaniya** (Painful Karma) * **Mohaniya** (Deluding Karma)
* **Aapuu** (Self-Bondage) * **Naam** (Name Karma) * **Gotra** (Lineage Karma) *
**Antaraaya** (Obstruction Karma) * **Uttar Prakriti** (Subsequent Nature)
**Questions:** * **Who** are the bondage places of? * **How many** Prakritis are
there?  **Bondage Places:** * **22, 21** * **17, 13, 6** * **23, 25, 26, 28, 26,
30**  **Types of Bondage:** * **Bhuyaskaara Bandha** (Major Bondage) * **Alpatar
Bandha** (Minor Bondage) * **Abasthita Bandha** (Existing Bondage) * **Avaktvy
Bandha** (Unmentionable Bondage) * **Shataka** (Hundred)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha karmoM ko uttara prakRtiyoM ke baMdhasthAna tarA bhUyaskAra Adi bandhoM kA
koSTaka bhATha karma jJAnAvaraNa | darzanAvaraNa vedanIya mohanIya Apu. nAma
gotr| aMtarAya uttara prakRti kisane baMdhasthAna . kitanI prakRtiyoM kA  /
baMdhasthAna 22,21 | 17, 13, 6. 23, 25, 26, 28, 26, 30, bhUyaskAra baMdha
alpatara baMdha abasthita baMdha avaktavya baMdha zataka

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **Verse 17**  Thirty Kodakodi Sagaropama for the
remaining four karmas, including the Sagaropama Nirpasurajanminaraka and the
lifespan of Devas.   Leaving out the Muttam, the Akashayi, the Akashayi's
Vedaniya karma has a Jghana state of twelve Muhurtas. The Nama and Gotra karma
have eight Muhurtas each, and the remaining five karmas have a Jghana state of
Antarmuhurta.  **Verse 117**  **Gathaarth:** The excellent state of Nama and
Gotra karma is twenty Kodakodi Sagaropama. The Mohaniya karma has seventy
Kodakodi Sagaropama, the remaining four karmas have thirty Kodakodi Sagaropama,
and the lifespan of Naraka and Devas is thirty-three Sagaropama.
**Vishesharth:** These two verses describe the excellent and Jghana states of
the eight fundamental karmas. Instead of listing the karmas in order, karmas
with similar states are grouped together and their state is described. For
example, since the state of Nama and Gotra karma is the same, they are grouped
together and it is said, "Veesyar Kodakodi Name 'Goe' - The excellent state of
Nama and Gotra karma is twenty Kodakodi Sagaropama." "Teesyar Chausu Udhi - The
state of the four karmas is thirty Kodakodi Sagaropama." However, the names of
these four karmas are not mentioned in the Gatha. This is because the state of
Nama and Gotra karma is mentioned separately.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha tosa tIsa kor3Aphor3I sAgaropama paracausu - zeSa cAra
karmoM kI, ubahI - sAgaropama nirapasurAjaMminAraka aura devoM kI Ayu, tittosA
tetIsa sAgara 17 muttaM chor3akara, akasAya - akaSAyI ko, Dii sthiti, bAra
muhattA - bAraha muhUrta, jahala - jaghanya, beyaNie -- vedanIya karma kI,
aDDaTTa - ATha-bATha muhUrta, nAmanoesunAma aura gotra karma kI, semaesa - zeSa
pAca karmoM kI, muhuttato - antarmuhUrta  /  - - gAthArtha - nAma aura gotra
karma kI utkRSTa sthiti bIsa koDAkor3I sAgaropama hotI hai| mohanIya karma kI
sattara kor3AkoDI sAgaropama, bAkI ke cAra karmoM kI tIsa kor3AkoDI sAgaropama
tathA nAraka aura devoM kI Ayu tetIsa sAgaropama hai  /  akaSAyI ko chor3akara (
sakaSAyI kI) vedanIya karma kI jaghanya sthiti bAraha muhUrta hai| nAma aura
gotra karma kI AThaATha muhUrta tathA zeSa pAMca karmoM kI jaghanya sthiti
antamuhUrta pramANa hotI hai  /  117 vizeSArtha - ina donoM gAthAoM meM ATha
mUla karmoM kI utkRSTa aura jaghanya sthiti batalAI hai  /  nAmakrama se karmoM
kI sthiti na batalAkara eka jaisI sthiti vAle karmoM ko eka sAtha lekara unakI
sthiti kA pramANa kahA hai| jaise ki nAma aura gotra karma kI sthiti barAbara
hai to unako eka sAtha lekara kahA hai ki 'vIsayarakoDikoDI nAme 'goe' nAma aura
gotra karma kI utkRSTa sthiti bIsa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama hai | 'tIsayara causu
udahI' cAra karmoM kI sthiti tIsa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama hai| lekina ina cAra
karmoM ke nAmoM kA gAyA meM saMketa nahIM hai  /  kyoMki nAma aura gotra kI
sthiti alaga se batalA dI

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A century has passed and the state of Mohaniya Karma has been described as
'Sattari Mohe' which means the highest state of Mohaniya Karma is seventy
Kodakodi Sagaropama. And 'Niryasuraunmi Tittisa' describes the highest state of
Ayukarma as thirty-three Sagaropama. Therefore, from these names, gotra,
Mohaniya and Ayukarma, the remaining four karmas, namely, Jnanavaran,
Darshanavaran, Vedaniya and Antaraya, should be understood to be in the state of
thirty Kodakodi Sagaropama.  After describing the highest state of the eight
karmas, including Jnanavaran, etc., it is said that 'Bar Muhutta Jahann Veyanie'
is the lowest state of Vedaniya Karma, which is twelve Muhurta. 'Att Nam Goesu'
is the lowest state of name and gotra karma, which is eight Muhurta. And from
these, the remaining five karmas, namely, Jnanavaran, Darshanavaran, Mohaniya,
Ayu and Antaraya, have the lowest state of Antamuhurta.  The essence of the
above statement is that the highest state of Dhaatikarma, Jnanavaran,
Darshanavaran, Antaraya is thirty Kodakodi Sagaropama, the highest state of
Mohaniya is seventy Kodakodi Sagaropama, and the highest state of Aghatikarma,
Vedaniya is thirty Kodakodi Sagaropama, Ayu is thirty-three Sagaropama, and name
and gotra is twenty Kodakodi Sagaropama. And the lowest state is as follows:  1
(a) Thirty Kodakodi Tighaditdiyesu Vis Namduge. Sattari Mohe Suddh' Uvahi Aouss
Tetisan. - Go. Karmakanda 127 (b) Aditastrisanamant Raysya Cha Trinshat
Sagaropama Ko Tikotyah Para Sthitih. Saptaatimohaniyasy. Namgotrayovinashti.
Trayastrishat Sagaropamanyayushkasy. - Tattvarthtantra 8. 15, 16, 17, 18

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka gaI hai aura mohanIya karma kI sthiti 'sattarI mohe' pada se ki mohanIya
karma kI utkRSTa sthiti sattara koDAkor3I sAgaropama kI hai tathA
'nirayasurAu~mi tittIsA pada dvArA Ayukarma kI utkRSTa sthiti tetIsa sAgaropama
batalA dI hai| ataH ina nAma, gotra, mohanIya aura Ayukarma se zeSa rahe
jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, vedanIya aura aMtarAya, ina cAra karmoM kI sthiti
tIsa koDAkor3I sAgaropama samajhanA cAhie  /  jJAnAvaraNa Adi ATha karmoM kI
utkRSTa sthiti batalAne ke bAda unakI jaghanya sthiti batalAne ke liye kahA hai
'bAra muhattA jahanna veyaNie' vedanIya karma kI jaghanya sthiti bAraha muhUrta
hai, 'aTTa nAma goesu' nAma aura gotra karma kI Asa-bhAra. muharta tathA ina
vetamIsa  /  nAma aura gotra karma se zeSa rahe jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa,
mohanIya, Ayu aura aMtarAya ina pAMca karmoM kI jaghanya sthiti antamuhUrta
pramANa haisesaesuM muhttNto| ukta kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai ki dhAtikarma
jJAnAvaraNa, darzanA- . varaNa, aMtarAya kI utkRSTa sthiti tIsa koDAkor3I
sAgaropama, mohanIya kI utkRSTa sthiti sattara koDAkor3I sAgaropama tathA
aghAtIkarma vedanIya kI utkRSTa sthiti tIsa koDAkor3I sAgaropama, Ayu kI tetIsa
sAgaropama aura nAma va gotra kI sthiti bosa koDAkor3I  /  sAgaropama hai 5
tathA jaghanya sthiti kramaza: isa prakAra hai ki 1 (ka) tIsa koTAkoDI
tighAditadiyesu vIsa NAmaduge  /  sattari mohe suddha' uvahI Aussa tetIsaM  /  /
-go0 karmakAMDa 127 (kha) AditastisaNAmanta rAyasya ca triMzatsAgaropama ko
TikoTyaH parA sthitiH  /  saptatirmohanIyasya  /  nAmagotrayoviMzatiH  /
trayastrizatsAgaropamANyAyuSkasya  /  -tatvArthatantra 8  /  15, 16, 17, 18

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  111  There are five Muhurtas for Jnanavarana,
Darshanavarana, Mohaniya and Antaray, twelve Muhurtas for Vedaniya, one Muhurta
for Ayus, and eight Muhurtas each for Name and Gotra.  The main cause of
Sthitibandha is Kshaya. When the intensity of the complex results arising from
Kshaya is high, there is a binding of the superior state, and when the Kshaya
results are weak, there is a binding of the inferior state, and when the results
are moderate, there is a binding of the moderate state.  Although it should have
been described after the Prakritibandha, the description of its owner in the
commentary on Vangaswamitva has been elaborated, so it is not repeated here and
Sthitibandha is explained.  The Karma that remains attached to the soul for a
certain period of time after it is bound is called Sthitibandha. After Karma is
bound, it does not immediately start giving its fruits, nor does it give its
full fruits all at once. But it starts giving fruits in due course and gradually
destroys its power. The statement of Sthitibandha is made to indicate the
maximum and minimum time limits for the Karma to remain connected with the soul
from the time of its binding to the time of its destruction. Maximum  1 (a)
Waras ya Veyaniye Name Gode ya Bhatta ya Muhutta. Bhinnamuhat tu Thidi Jahanayam
Se Panchanham. (b) Apra Dwadashmuhurta Vedaniyasy Mahurtam. - Go. Karmakanda
136. Namegotrayorashto 1 Seshanatarvarthasutra 8. 16, 20, 21

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 111 jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, mohanIya aura aMtarAya kI
aMtamuhUrta, vedanIya kI bAraha muhUrta, Ayu kI antarmuhUrta, nAma aura gotra kI
ATha-ATha muhUrta hai  / " sthitibandha kA mukhya kAraNa kaSAya hai  /
kaSAyodayajanya saMkliSTa pariNAmoM kI tIvratA hone para utkRSTa sthiti kA
bandha hotA hai aura kaSAya pariNAmoM ke maMda hone para jaghanya sthiti kA
bandha hotA hai tathA madhyama pariNAmoM dvArA ajaghanyotkRSTa ( madhyama )
sthiti kA bandha hotA hai  /  yadyapi prakRtibandha ke pazcAta usake svAmI kA
varNana karanA cAhiye thA lekina vaMghasvAmitva kI TIkA meM usakA vistAra se
varNana kiye jAne ke kAraNa punarAvRtti na karake yahAM sthitibandha ko batalAyA
hai  /  bandha ho jAne para jo karma jitane samaya taka AtmA ke sAtha ThaharA
rahatA hai, vaha usakA sthitibandha kahalAtA hai| karma baMdhane ke bAda hI
tatkAla apanA phala denA prArambha nahIM kara dete haiM aura na eka sAtha hI eka
samaya meM apanA pUrA phala de dete haiM  /  kintu yathAsamaya phala denA
prArambha karake apanI zakti ko krama se naSTa karate haiM  /  isa baMdhane ke
samaya se lekara nirjIrNa hone ke samaya taka karmoM kI AtmA ke sAtha saMbaddha
rahane kI adhikatama aura nyUnatama kAlamaryAdA ko batalAne ke lie sthitibandha
kA kathana kiyA jAtA hai| adhikatama 1 (ka) vArasa ya veyaNIye NAme gode ya
bhaTTa ya muhuttA  /  bhiNNamuhata tu ThidI jahaNNayaM se paMcanhaM  //  (kha)
aparA dvAdazamuhUrta vedanIyasya mahUrtam  /  - go0 karmakAMDa 136  /
nAmagotrayoraSTo 1 zeSANAtaravArthasUtra 8  /  16, 20, 21

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 120th Century  The highest state of the time-limit is called the excellent
state and the lowest state of the time-limit is called the despicable state. In
the above two verses, the eight karmas, starting with knowledge-obscuration,
have been described as excellent and despicable states. Between these excellent
and despicable states, there are many types of intermediate states due to the
ability of the living beings to strive. The excellent state of the eight karmas,
starting with knowledge-obscuration, is so high that it is impossible to
describe it by numerical evidence. Therefore, it has been described by a simile,
a type of evidence, called the "ocean simile". The amount that comes from
multiplying one crore by one crore is called "kodakodī". The excellent state of
the remaining seven karmas, except for the lifespan karma, has been described by
the "kodakodī ocean simile". Lifespan karma is the only karma whose state is
described not by the "kodakodī ocean simile" but by the "mif ocean simile".
Also, there is a special feature in describing the excellent state of lifespan
karma, that the excellent state of its two divisions, "narakāyu" and "devāyu",
has also been described. The reason for this is that the excellent state of the
original lifespan karma is the same as the excellent state of "narakāyu" and
"devāyu". Therefore, from the perspective of the "Granthaladhav", the excellent
state of the original lifespan karma has not been described separately, but it
has been described through two types of consequences, along with the excellent
state of those two consequences.  The emergence of passions occurs only up to
the tenth subtle-state of the "guṇasthāna". Therefore, there is a state of
bondage of karmas up to that point. Living beings up to the tenth "guṇasthāna"
are called "sakṣaya" (with passions) and living beings from the eleventh to the
fourteenth "guṇasthāna" - "upasāntamoha" (calm passion), "kṣīṇamoha" (diminished
passion), "saghomikevalī" (perfect being with a body), "ayogikevalī" (perfect
being without a body) - are called "akṣaya" (without passions). Out of the eight
karmas, only one karma, the "vedanīya" karma, is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 120 zataka kAlamaryAdA ko utkRSTa sthiti aura nyUnatama kAlamaryAdA ko jaghanya
sthiti kahate haiN| Upara kahI gaI donoM gAthAoM meM jJAnAvaraNa Adi ATha karmoM
ko utkRSTa aura jaghanya sthiti batalAI hai| isa utkRSTa aura jaghanya sthiti ke
bIca jIvoM kI adhyavasAyayogyatA se madhyama sthitiyoM ke aneka prakAra ho jAte
haiM  /  _jJAnAvaraNa Adi ATha karmoM kI jo utkuSTa sthiti batalAI hai, vaha
itanI adhika hai ki saMkhyA pramANa ke dvArA usakA batalAnA azakyasA hai, ataH
use upamA pramANa ke eka bheda sAgaropama dvArA batalAyA gayA hai tathA eka
karor3a ko eka karor3a se guNA karane para jo rAzi AtI hai use koDAkor3I kahate
haiM  /  Ayukarma ko chor3akara zeSa sAta karmoM kI kor3Akor3I sAgaropamoM ke
dvArA utkRSTa sthiti batalAI hai  /  Ayukama hI eka aisA karma hai jisakI sthiti
kor3Akor3I sAgarepama meM nahIM kintu mipha sAgaropama meM batAI hai  /  sAtha
hI Adhukarma kI utkRSTa sthiti batalAne ke bAre meM yaha bhI vizeSatA rakhI hai
ki usake do bhedoMnarakAya aura devAyu kI bhI utkaTa sthiti batalA dI gaI hai|
isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki mUla Ayukarma kI jo utkRSTa sthiti hai, vahI utkRSTa
sthiti narakAyu aura devAyu kI bhI hai  /  ataH granthalAdhava kI dRSTi se mUla
Ayukarma ko utkRSTa sthiti ko alaga se na batalAkara do uttara prakRtiyoM ke
dvArA usakI tathA usako do uttara prakRtiyoM kI bhI utkRSTa sthiti batalA dI
hai| _ kaSAyoM kA udaya dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai,
ataH vahA~ taka kamo ke sthitibandha kI sthiti hai aura dasaveM guNasthAna taka
ke jIva sakaSAya aura gyArahaveM se caudahave-upazAntamoha, kSINamoha,
saghomikevalI, ayogikevalI guNasthAna taka ke jIva akapAya kahe jAte haiM  /
ATha karmoM meM se eka vedanIya karma hI aisA hai jo

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Text  **121**  Akṣaya jivas are bound by Vedaniya karma,
while the remaining seven karmas bind only Sakṣaya jivas. Akṣaya jivas
experience Vedaniya karma in only two moments: first, the moment of binding, and
second, the moment of experiencing and shedding it. Therefore, when discussing
the severity of karmas, the twelve-muhūrta severity of Vedaniya karma should be
understood as applying to Sakṣaya jivas, excluding Akṣaya jivas. In other words,
the severity of Sakṣaya Vedaniya karma is twelve muhūrta, while that of Akṣaya
Vedaniya karma is two muhūrta.  Further, the duration of karmas (anudaya kāla)
will be discussed based on the substratum of the Uttarādhāyana. Therefore, the
duration of the root karmas should also be understood accordingly. The duration
of Vāni, Jñānāvaraṇa, Darśanāvaraṇa, Vedaniya, and Antarāya karma is three
thousand years, that of Mohaniya karma is seven thousand years, that of Nāma and
Gotra karma is two thousand years, and that of Āyu karma is one antamuhūrta and
one-third of a previous koṭi. The remaining time after subtracting the duration
from the total time of the state is known as niṣeka kāla (bhogya kāla).  Abadhā
kāla refers to the time devoid of the creation of dalikas. When a jiva binds a
karma with a certain state, the karma-vargaṇās (components of karma) create
themselves to produce the corresponding fruit for that duration. They do not
create themselves in the initial stages. This is called abadhā kāla. After
abadhā kāla, the creation of karma-dalikas for experiencing the fruit until the
end of the state is called niṣeka. The creation is more in the first stage, less
in the second, and even less in the third, and so on.  **1** The Uttarādhāyana
also mentions the antamuhūrta as evidence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 121 akaSAya jIvoM ko bhI baMdhatA hai aura zeSa sAta karma
kevala sakaSAya jIvoM ko baMdhate haiM  /  akapAya jIvoM ko jo vedanIya karma kA
bandha hotA hai, usakI kevala do samaya kI sthita hotI hai, pahale samaya meM
usakA bandha hotA hai aura dUsare samaya meM usakA vedana hokara nirjarA ho jAtI
hai  /  ataH karmoM kI jaghanya sthiti batalAne ke prasaMga meM vedanIya karma
kI jo bAraha muhUrta kI jaghanya sthiti batalAI vaha 'mutta aphasAyaThiI'
akaSAya jIvoM ko chor3akara sakaSAya jIvoM ko samajhanA cAhiye  /  arthAt
sakaSAya vedanIya karma kI jaghanya sthiti bAraha muharta' hai aura akaSAya
vedanIya kI do muMhata  /  Age uttara prakRtiyoM ke Azraya se karmoM ke
abAdhAkAla (anudayakAla) kA kathana kiyA jAyegA | ataH usake anusAra mUla
prakRtiyoM kA bhI abAdhAkAla samajhanA cAhiye  /  vAnI jJAnAvaraNa,
darzanAvaraNa, vedanIya aura antarAya kAmakA tIna hajAra varSa, mohanIya kA sAta
hajAra varSa, nAma tathA gotra karma kA do hajAra varSa evaM Ayu karma kA
antamuharta aura pUrva kor3I kA tIsarA bhAga  /  sthiti meM se abAdhAkAla ko
kama karane para jo kAla bAkI rahe use niSekAkAla (bhogyakAla) jAnanA cAhiye  /
abAdhAkAla yAnI dalikoM kI racanA se rahita kAla  /  jisa samaya jitanI sthiti
vAlA jo karma AtmA bAMdhatA hai aura usake bhAga meM jitanI karmavargaNAyeM AtI
haiM, ve vargaNAyeM utane samaya paryanta niyata phala de sakane ke liye apanI
racanA karatI haiN| prArambha ke kucha sthAnoM meM ve racanA nahIM karatI haiM |
isI ko abAdhAkAla kahate haiM  /  abAdhAkAla ke bAda ke pahale sthAna meM
adhika, dUsare meM usase kama, tIsare meM dUsare se kama, isa prakAra
sthitibandha ke carama samaya taka bhogane ke liye kI gaI karmadalikoM kI racanA
ko niSeka kahA jAtA hai| 1 uttarAdhyayana' meM antamuhUrta pramANa bhI kahI hai
/

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  122 Ghatak The rule of Abadhā Kāla is such that in the case of
the most severe state of bondage, the Abadhā Kāla of Antamuhurta is twice the
time of the most severe state of bondage, and from there, it increases to an
innumerable fraction of a Palyopama. The Abadhā Kāla of two Antamuhurtas is
twice the time of the previous one, and it continues to increase in this manner
until it reaches an innumerable fraction of a Palyopama. In this way, as the
bondage increases to an innumerable fraction of a Palyopama, the Abadhā Kāla
also increases, and finally, in the bondage of a Koda Koḍi Sagaropama, it
becomes a Mau Varsha. This means that for the duration of that time, there is no
creation of Dālakas in that many places.  Thus, after explaining the most severe
and the most subtle states of the root karmas, we now discuss the most subtle
states of the Uttar Prakritis. The most subtle state of bondage of Uttar
Prakritis is:  Vigyāvaraṇaprasāye tīsan aṭṭhāra suhrumvigalatige. Paṭhamāgi'i
saṁghayanē bas surime su dugavudho. ||28||  **Word Meaning:**  Vigdhāvaraṇasāye
- five Antarayas, five Jñānāvaraṇas, nine Darśanāvaraṇas, and Asātāvedaniya
karma. Tīsan - thirty Koda Koḍi Sagaropama. Aṭṭhāra - eighteen Koda Koḍi
Sagaropama. Sukhamvigalatige - subtle and Vikalātrika. Paramāgi'i saṁghayanē -
first Samsthāna and first Samhanana. Bas - ten Koda Koḍi Sagaropama. Kus - both.
Urimesu - Uttar Samsthāna and Samhananas. Bugḍḍho - an increase of two Koda Koḍi
Sagaropama.  **Meaning of the Verse:**  The most subtle state of the five
Antarayas, five Jñānāvaraṇas, nine Darśanāvaraṇas, and Asātāvedaniya karma is
thirty Koda Koḍi Sagaropama. The subtle and Vikalātrika aspects of Nāmakarma
are...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 122 ghAtaka abAdhAkAla kA aisA niyama hai ki jaghanya sthiti bandha meM
antamuhataM kA abAdhAkAla, samayAdhika jaghanya sthitibandha se lekara palyopama
ke asaMkhya bhAgAdhika sthiti bAMdhane ke samaya taka samayAdhika antama hUrta
tathA usakI apekSA samayAdhika bandha se lekara dUsare palyopama kA
asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga pUrNa hone taka do samaya adhika antamuhUrta kA abAdhAkAla
hotA hai| isa prakAra palyopama ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAgAdhika baMdha meM samaya-
samaya kA abAdhAkAla bar3hAte jAne para pUrNa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama ke baMdha
meM mau varSa kA abAdhAkAla hotA hai| yAnI utane kAla ke jitane samaya hote
haiM, utane sthAnoM meM dAlakoM kI racanA nahIM hotI hai| isa prakAra se mUla
karmoM kI utkRSTa aura jaghanya sthiti batalAne ke pazcAta aba uttara prakRtiyoM
kI utkRSTa spiti kA kathana karate haiN| uttara prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha vigyAvaraNaprasAe tIsaM aTThAra suhRmvigltige| paThamAgiisaMghayaNe
basa surimesu dugavuDho  // 28 //  zabdArtha-vigdhAvaraNaasAe-pAMca antarAya,
pAMca jJAnA. varaNa, nau darzanAvaraNa aura asAtAvedanIya karma kI, torsa - tIsa
koDAkor3I sAgaropama, aThAra - aThAraha kor3Akor3I sAgaropama,
sukhamavigalatige-sUkSmadhika aura vikalatrika meM, paramAgiisaMghayaNeprathama
saMsthAna aura prathama saMhanana meM, basa - dasa koDAkor3I sAgaropama, kusu-
donoM meM, urimesu - uttara ke saMsthAna aura saMhananoM meM, bugaDDho -do-do
koDAkor3I sAgaropama kI vRddhi  /  gAthArtha-pAMca antarAya, pAMca jJAnAvaraNa,
nau darzanA varaNa aura asAtA bedanIya ko utkRSTa sthiti tIsa kor3Akor3I
sAgaropama ko hai| nAmakarma ke bheda sUkSmatrika aura

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Section of the Dharma Grantha  **123**  The highest state of the
Vikalatraik is eighteen Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama. The first Sansthāna and the first
Sanhanana have ten Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama, and for each subsequent Sansthāna and
Sanhanana, there is an increase of two Sagaropama. In the Viśeṣārṣa-Gāthā, the
highest states of all the Uttaraprakṛtis of Jñānāvaraṇa, Darśanāvaraṇa, and
Antarāya karma, and some of the Uttaraprakṛtis of Asāta Vedaniya and Nāmakarma
are mentioned.  Regarding the highest states of the Uttaraprakṛtis of karma, it
should be understood that their states are not different from the states of the
Mūlaprakṛtis. However, the highest state among the Uttaraprakṛtis is considered
to be the highest state of the Mūlaprakṛti. Therefore, while mentioning the
highest states of the Uttaraprakṛtis, it is said:  "Vigdhāvaraṇasāe Tīs" - The
highest state of Jñānāvaraṇa, Darśanāvaraṇa, and Antarāya, which are five, nine,
and five respectively, and Asāta Vedaniya, which are twenty in total, is equal
to the highest state of the Mūlakarma Prakṛtis, which is thirty Koḍakoḍī
Sagaropama. However, the Uttaraprakṛtis of Nāmakarma have more variations in
their highest states, hence their highest states are mentioned separately along
with their names.  The highest state of the Nāmakarma, which is classified as
Sūkṣmatraik, Sūkṣma, Aparyāpta, Sādāraṇa, and Vikalatraik, and the two-sensory,
five-sensory, and four-sensory Jāti Nāmakarma, is eighteen Sagara - "Aṭṭhāra
Suhambimal Tige". Among the different types of Sansthāna and Sanhanana
Nāmakarma, the highest state of the first Sansthāna, which is Samacaturasra
Sansthāna, and the first Sanhanana, which is Vanṛṣabhanārāca Sanhanana, is ten
Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama.  **1** Duskhati Dhīṇoghan.  - Go. Karmakāṇḍa 128

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama pharmagrantha 123 vikalatrika kI utkRSTa sthiti aThAraha kor3Akor3I
sAgara pramANa hai  /  pahale saMsthAna aura pahale saMhanana kI dasa kor3Akor3I
sAgaropama aura Age ke pratyeka saMsthAna aura saMhanana kI sthiti meM do-do
sAgaropama kI vRddhi jAnanA cAhiye  /  vizeSArSa-gAthA meM jJAnAvaraNa,
darzanAvaraNa aura antarAya karma kI sabhI uttara prakRtiyoM kI evaM asAtA
vedanIya aura nAmakarma kI kucha uttara prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti batalAI
hai| karmoM kI uttara prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti ke sambandha meM yaha jAnanA
cAhiye ki unakI sthiti mUla prakRtiyoM kI sthiti se alaga nahIM hai kintu uttara
prakRtiyoM kI sthiti meM se jo sthiti sabase adhika hotI hai, vahI mUla prakRti
kI utkRSTa sthiti mAna lI gaI hai  /  isIliye uttara prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa
sthiti ko batalAte hue kahA hai ki 'vigdhAvaraNaasAe tIsa' jJAnAvaraNa,
darzanAvaraNa, aMtarAya kI kramazaH pAMca, nogaura pAMca tathA asAtA vedanIya,
ina bIsa prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti mUla karma prakRtiyoM ke barAbara tIsa
kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kI hai  /  lekina nAmakarma kI uttara prakRtiyoM ko
utkRSTa sthiti meM adhika viSamatA hai, ataH usakI uttara prakRtiyoM kI
nAmollekha sahita alaga-alaga sthiti batalAI hai| nAmakarma kI sUkSmatrika
sUkSma, aparyApta, sAdhAraNa tathA vikalatrikadvIndriya, slIndriya, caturindriya
jAti nAmakarma ko utkRSTa sthiti aThAraha sAgara hai-aTThAra suhamabimala tige
/  saMsthAna aura saMhanana nAmakarma ke bhedoM meM se prathama saMsthAna
samacaturasra saMsthAna aura prathama saMhanana-vanaRSabhanArAca saMhanana kI
utkRSTa sthiti dasa kor3A 1 duskhatidhAdINoghaM  /  -go0 karmakAMDa 128

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 124th Century  The Koḍa-koḍi Sagaropama for the first institution is
'Padmāgi-saṁghayanē dasa' (ten Koḍa-koḍi Sagaropama).  For the remaining
institutions, from the second to the sixth, and for the first six Sanhananas,
the excellent state is higher by two Koḍa-koḍi Sagaropama for each successive
institution or Sanhanana. This is called 'Dusuvari-mesu dugavuddhi' (double
increase).  Therefore, the excellent state of the second institution and the
second Sanhanana is twelve Koḍa-koḍi Sagaropama, the third institution and the
third Sanhanana is fourteen Koḍa-koḍi Sagaropama, the fourth is sixteen, the
fifth is eighteen, and the sixth is twenty Koḍa-koḍi Sagaropama. This is the
excellent state of the Nāmakarma.  The reason for this gradual increase in the
excellent state of the institutions and Sanhananas is the difference in the
level of Kṣaya. When the emotions of the Jiva are more complex, the state-bond
is also stronger. When the emotions are less complex, the state-bond is also
weaker. Therefore, the excellent states of the more refined natures are lower,
and the excellent states of the less refined natures are higher. This is because
their bond is with the Jivas who have more refined results.  **Verse 29:**
**Translation:** Forty Koḍa-koḍi Sagaropama for the Kṣayas, which are soft,
smooth, warm, fragrant, white in color, and sweet in taste. Ten Koḍa-koḍi
Sagaropama for each of these.  Two thousand Koḍa-koḍi Sagaropama more for those
(ten Koḍa-koḍi Sagaropama) which are yellow in color, sour in taste, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 124 zataka kor3I sAgaropama hai-'paDhamAgiisaMghayaNe dasa' tathA inake sivAya
dUsare se lekara chaThe saMsthAna aura dUsare se lekara chaThe saMhanana taka
pratyeka kI utkRSTa sthiti pahale se dUsare, dUsare se tIsare isa prakAra do-do
sAgaropama ko adhika hai-'dusuvarimesu dugavuDDhI' arthAt dUsare saMsthAna aura
dUsare saMhanana kI utkRSTa sthiti bAraha kor3A-kor3I sAgaropama, tIsare
saMsthAna aura tIsare saMhanana ko utkRSTa sthiti caudaha kor3A-kor3I
sAgaropama, isI prakAra cauthe kI molaha, pAMcaveM kI aThAraha aura chaThe kI
bIsa koDAkor3I sAgaropama utkRSTa thiti hai  /  jo nAmakarma kI utkRSTa sthiti
hai  /  saMsthAna aura saMhanana ke bhedoM ko utkRSTa sthiti kI isa prakAra kI
krama vRddhi hone kA kAraNa kaSAya kI hInAdhikatA hai| jaba jIva ke bhAva adhika
saMkliSTa hote haiM taba sthitibaMdha bhI adhika hotA hai aura jaba kama
maMkliSTa hote haiM taba sthitibaMdha bhI kama hotA hai isIliye prazasta
prakRtiyoM kI sthiti kama aura aprazasta prakRtiyoM kI sthiti adhika hotI hai  /
kyoMki unakA baMdha prazasta pariNAma vAle jIva ke hI hotA hai| cAlIsa kasAesu
miulahunicAhasurahisiyamahure  /  basa dosaddhasahiyA te hAlibilAINaM  // 29 /
/  zabdArtha-cAlIsa-cAlosa koDAkor3I sAgaropama, kasAesu-kapAyoM ko,
mijalahunikha-maTu, lagha, snigdha sparza, uSTa surahi - uSNa sparza,
surabhigaMdha ko, siyamahare * vena varNa aura madhura rasa kI, dasa-dasa
kosAkor3I sAgaropama, dosahasahiyA hAI kor3A-koDI sAgaropama adhika, teve (dasai
kor3Akor3I sAgaropama), hAlikhilAINaMpIta varNa, amla rasa Adi  /

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **125** The excellent state of the forty *kṣaya* is
forty *koḍakoḍī sāgaropam*. The excellent state of the ten *kṣaya* of soft
touch, light touch, smooth touch, warm touch, fragrant smell, white color, and
sweet taste is ten *koḍakoḍī sāgaropam*. And in these ten *jamādāḍī hār nagar*,
one should understand that the excellent state of many *koḍakoḍī sāgaropam* is
yellow color and sour taste, etc.  **Special Note:** In the *gāthā*, the sixteen
*kṣaya* of *cāritramohaniya* and the excellent state of some of the
*uttaraprakṛti* of *nāmakarma* are explained. It is as follows: 'Forty *kṣaya*'
means infinite *anubandhi* anger, pride, deceit, greed, *apratyākyānāvaraṇa*
anger, pride, deceit, greed, *pratyākyānāvaraṇa* anger, pride, deceit, greed,
*sanjvalana*, anger, pride, deceit, greed - these sixteen *kṣaya* are in the
excellent state of forty *koḍakoḍī sāgaropam*.  In the *uttaraprakṛti* of
*nāmakarma*, the excellent state of the seven *prakṛti* of soft touch, light
touch, smooth touch, warm touch, fragrant smell, white color, and sweet taste is
ten *koḍakoḍī sāgaropam*. And in the remaining four colors, the state of each
color and each taste is two and a half *koḍakoḍī sāgaropam* more than this ten
*koḍakoḍī sāgaropam*. That is, the excellent state of *nāmakarma* of yellow
color and sour taste is twelve and a half *koḍakoḍī sāgaropam*. The state of red
color and astringent taste is fifteen *koḍakoḍī sāgaropam*. The state of blue
color and bitter taste is...  **1** *Cārittamohe ya cattāla*. - *Go. Karmakau*
128

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 125 gAthA-kaSAyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti cAlIsa kor3Akor3I
sAgaropama hai| mRdu, laghu, snigdha, uSNa sparza, surabhi gaMdha, zveta varNa
aura madhura rasa kI dasa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kI hotI hai aura ina dasa
jamAdAr3I hAra nagara meM kaI kor3akor3I sAgaropama sAdhika sthiti pIta varNa
aura amla rasa Adi ko samajhanA cAhiye  /  vizeSArtha-gAthA meM cAritra mohanIya
ke bheda solaha kaSAyoM aura nAmakarma kI kucha uttara prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa
sthiti batalAI hai| jo isa prakAra hai ki 'cAlIsa kasAeK' yAnI anaMtAnubaMdhI
krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha,mAna, mAyA, lobha,
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, saMjvalana, krodha, mAna, mAyA,
lobha ina solaha kaSAyoM ko utkRSTa sthiti cAlIsa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama hai| _
nAmakarma kI uttara prakRtiyoM meM se mRdu sparza, laghu sparza. snindha sparza,
uSNa sparza, surabhi gaMdha, zveta varNa aura madhura rasa ina sAta prakRtiyoM
kI utkRSTa sthiti dasa koDAkor3I sAgaropama hai tathA zeSa rahe varNa catuSka ke
meMdoM meM se pratyeka varNa aura pratyeka rasa kI sthiti isa dasa kor3IkoDA
sAgaropama se DhAI kor3Akor3I sAgaropama adhika adhika hai  /  arthAt pota varNa
aura amla rasa nAmakarma kI utkRSTa sthiti sADhe vAraha koDAkor3I sAgaropama
hai| rakta varNa aura kaSAya rasa kii| sthiti pandraha kor3Akor3I sAgaropama,
nIla varNa aura kaTuka rasa kI 1 carittamohe ya cattAla  /  -go0 karmakAu 128

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 126 **Pātaka**  There are 17 and a half *koḍākoḍī sāgaropama* for green
color, bitter taste, and 20 *kāmakoḍī sāgama* for black color and bitter taste.
Ten *suhavihagay* (auspicious marriage), *ucce suradūg* (high caste), *thira
chakk* (stable six), *purisaraihale* (male Veda), *micche sattari* (false
seventy), *maṇuhugayitthosaesu* (human, female Veda, and *sātavādaniya*) are 15
*koḍākoḍī sāgaropama*. ||30||  **Word Meaning:**  * Ten - Ten *koḍākoḍī
sāgaropama* * *Suhavihagay* - Auspicious marriage and high caste * *Surachug* -
Divine couple * *Thirachakk* - Stable six * *Purisa* - Male Veda * *Rahahase* -
Love and laughter * *Micche* - Falsehood * *Attari* - Seventy *koḍākoḍī
sāgaropama* * *Maṇupugayitthīsaesu* - Human, female Veda, and *sātavādaniya* *
*Paras* - Fifteen *koḍākoḍī sāgaropama*  **Meaning of the Verse:**  The
excellent state of auspicious marriage, high caste, divine couple, stable six,
male Veda, love and laughter is ten *koḍākoḍī sāgaropama*. The excellent state
of falsehood, human, female Veda, and *sātavādaniya* is fifteen *koḍākoḍī
sāgaropama*.  **Special Meaning:**  The verse specifically mentions the
excellent state of ten *koḍākoḍī sāgaropama* and fifteen *koḍākoḍī sāgaropama*.
1. Although color, smell, taste, and touch are considered as four types of
color, they are considered in bondage without their distinctions. Therefore, the
excellent state of twenty *koḍākoḍī sāgaropama* for the four types of color is
mentioned in *karma-prakriti* etc. That is why the state of the sub-categories
of the four types of color is not mentioned in *karma-prakriti*, but it is
mentioned in *panchasangraha*.  * *Supikalasurabhimaraṇ dasa u tah subha chaunha
phasāṇ. Aḍḍā ijjapatrudḍhī ambilahalīhapūnvaṇ.* ||240||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 126 pAtaka sADhe satraha koDAkor3I sAgaropama tathA kRSNa varNa aura tikta rasa
kI bIsa kAmAkor3I sAgama hai| dasa suhavihagaI ucce suraduga thira chakka
purisaraihAle  /  micche sattari maNuhugaitthosAesu pannarasa  // 30 //
zabdArtha-dasa-dasa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama, suhavihagaiucce - zubha vihAyogati
aura uccago gra, suracuga - devadvika, thirachakka - sthiraSaTka, purisa
-purupaveda, rahahAse rani aura hAsya mohanIya, miccha - mithyAtva kI, attari
sattara koDAkor3I sAgaropama, maNapugaitthIsAesumanuSyatika, strIveda aura
sAtAvadanIya kI, parasapandraha koDAkor3I sAgaropama  /  gAbhArtha-zubha
vihAyogati, uccagotra, devadvika, sthiraSaTka, puruSaveda, rati aura hAsya
mohanIya kI utkRSTa sthiti dasa koDAkor3I sAgaropama kI hai| mithyAtva mohanIya
kI sattara koDAkor3I sAgaropama tathA manuSyahika, strIveda, sAtAvedanIya kI
utkRSTa sthiti pandraha koDAkor3I sAgaropama kI hai| vizeSArtha-gAthA meM
vizeSakara dasa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kI utkRSTa sthiti vAlI tathA pandraha
kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kI sthiti 1 yadyapi varNa, gadha, rasa aura sparza ima
varNacatuka ho usake bhedoM ke binA hI bandha meM grahaNa kiyA gayA hai, ataH
karmaprakRti Adi meM varNacatuSka kI bIsa koDAkoDI sAgaropaga utkRSTa sthiti
kahI hai| isIliye karmaprakRti meM varNacatuSka ke avAntara bhedoM kI sthiti
nahIM batalAI hai kintu paMcasaMgraha meM ktalAI hai supikalasurabhImarANa dasa
u taha subha cauNha phAsANa  /  aDDA ijjapatruDDhI aMbilahAlihapunvANa.  // 240
/  /

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **127**  This text explains the names of the
**karma** types along with the **utkrista** (highest) state of **mithyatva
mohaniya karma**.  The names of the **karma** types with **utkrista** state of
**ten kodakodi sagaropama** are as follows:  (1) **Mohaniya karma** -
**purushaved**, **rati mohaniya**, **hasya mohaniya**. (2) **Nama karma** -
**shubha vihayogati**, **devadvik** (**devagati**, **devanupurvi**),
**sthirapatka** (**sthira**, **shubha**, **subhaga**, **susvara**, **adev**,
**yasha kirti**). (3) **Gotra karma** - **uchchagotra**.  The names of the
**karma** types with **utkrista** state of **fifteen kodakodi sagaropama** are
as follows:  (1) **Vedaniya** - **sata vedaniya**. (2) **Mohaniya** - **stri
ved**. (3) **Nama karma** - **manushyadvik** (**manushya gati**,
**manushyanupurvi**).  The **utkrista** state of **mithyatva mohaniya karma**,
which is the **uttar prakriti** (opposite nature) of **mohaniya karma**, is
**seventy kodakodi sagaropama**.  **31** **Bhayakuchchh prareisoe viuvvti riural
niray yuganie. Teyapan athirachakka tasach thavarigarpana vi.**  **32**
**Napukula gai sas ugru karukkh siya gandhe vish kodakodi evaiya vaah
vasasaya.**  **Word meanings:**  **Mayakuchchh araisoe** - fear, disgust,
aversion, sorrow, **mohaniya** **Viuvvti riural niray yuganie** - **kriyadvik**,
**tichdvik**, **oudarikdvik**, **narakvik**, and **noch gotra** **Teyapan** - 1.
**Sadichchhi manuduge tadaddham tu**  **Karmakanda 128**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 127 bAlI karma prakRtiyoM ke nAma batalAne ke sAtha
mithyAtva mohanIya karma kI bhI utkRSTa sthiti batalAI hai| dasa koDAkoDI
sAgaropama kI utkRSTa sthiti vAlI karma prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM- (1)
mohanIyakarma - puruSaveda, rati mohanIya, hAsya mohanIya  /  (2) nAmakarma -
zubha vihAyogati, devadvika (devagati, devAnupUrvI) sthirapaTka (sthira, zubha,
subhaga, susvara, Adeva, yazaH kIrti  /  (3) gotrakarma-uccagotra | pandraha
kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kI utkRSTa sthiti vAlI karma prakRtiyoM ke nAma yaha haiM
(1) vedanIya - sAtA vedanIya  /  (2) mohanIya-strI veda  /  (3) nAmakarma -
manuSyadvika (manuSyagati, manuSyAnupUrvI )  /  ' mohanIya karma kI uttara
prakRti midhyAtva mohanIya kI utkRSTa sthiti sattara kor3AkoTI sAgaropama hai  /
bhayakuccha praraisoe viuvvitiriurala nirayayuganIe  /  teyapaNa athirachakke
tasacathAvaraigarpANavI  // 31 // 0 napukula gai sAsa ugurukarukkhasIya gAMdhe
vIsaM koDAkoDo evaiyAvAha vAsasayA  // 32 //  zavdArtha - mayakucchaaraisoe-
bhaya, jugupsA, arati bhara zoka mohanIca kI, biuvyitiriurala niraya duganIe -
kriyadvika, tica dvika, audArikadvika, narakavika aura noca gotra kI, teca paNa
- 1 sAdicchI maNuduge tadaddha N tu  /  - karmakAMDa 128

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  128 Century Of the *Tajas Panchak*, *Asthirshadk*,
*Sachatushk*, *Sthavar*, *Ekendriya* and *Panchendriya*, *Napu-Napusak Veda*,
*Phukhagha-Ashubha Vihayogati*, *Sasghaou-Uchchvas Chatushk*,
*Gurukashkhaddakshiya-Guru*, *Karkash*, *Rukhs* and *Sheet Sparsh*, *Durgadhe-
Durabhigandha*, *Bosan-Vees*, *Kodafodi...Jodakodhi Sagaropama*, *Evaiya-Itani*,
*Avah-Abadha*, *Vassasy-So Varsha*. _Gaatharya-Bhay, Jugupsa, Arati, Shok
Mohaniya_, *Vainiyadvik*, *Tiryanchdvik*, *Audarikdvik*, *Narakdvik* and *Neecha
Gotra* and *Tajas Panchak*, *Asthirshadk*, *Sachatushk*, *Sthavar*, *Ekendriya*
and *Panchendriya* jati, *Napunsak Veda*, *Ashubha Bihayogati*, *Uchchvas
Chatushk*, *Guru*, *Karkash*, *Rukhs* and *Sheet Sparsh* and *Durabhigandha*
have an excellent state of twenty *Koda-kodi Sagaropama*.  The excellent state
of any karma is as many hundred years as it is stated.  **Special Note:** These
two verses indicate the duration of the *Abadhakal* (uninterrupted period) of
forty-two types of *Prakritis* (states) by stating the excellent state of twenty
*Koda-kodi Sagaropama*. Most of the *Uttara Prakritis* (later states) of the
*Namakarma* (name-karma) have an excellent state of twenty *Koda-kodi
Sagaropama*.  The names of the *Uttara Prakritis* are as follows, along with the
names of the *Mool Karma* (original karma):  (1) *Mohaniya Karma* - *Bhay*,
*Jugupsa*, *Arati*, *Shok*, *Napunsak Veda*. (2) *Mama Karma* - *Vainiya
Sharira*, *Vaikiya Angopaang*, *Tithanchgati*,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 128 zataka taMjasa paMcakra kI, athirachakkeasthirapaTka kI, tasacaja-sacatuka
krI, thAvarahagaNivI sthAvara, ekendriya aura paMcendriya kI, napu-napusaka veda
kI, phukhagaha - azubha vihAyogati kI, sAsaghAu -ucchavAsa catuSka ko,
gurukaSakhaDakkhasIya-guru, karkaza, rUkSa aura zIta sparza kI, durgadhe -
durabhigaMdha kI, bosaM-vIsa, koDAphoDI ...joDAkoDI sAgaropama, evaiyA -itanI,
avAha abAdhA, vAsasayA-so varSa  /  _gAthArya - bhaya, jugupsA, arati, zoka
mohanIya kI, vainiyadvika, tiryancadvika, audArikadvika, narakadvika aura nIca
gotra kI tathA tajasa paMcaka, asthiraSadka, basacatuSka, sthAvara, ekendriya
aura paMcendriya jAti kI tathAnapuMsaka veda, azubha bihAyogati, ucchvAsa
catuSka, guru, karkaza, rUkSa aura zIta sparza kI aura durabhigadha kI utkRSTa
sthiti bIsa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama hai  /  jisa karma kI jitanI-jitanI utkRSTa
sthiti batalAI hai, usa karma kI utane hI sau varSa pramANa abAdhA jAnanA
caahiye| vizeSArthaina do gAthAoM meM bIma koDAkor3I sAgaropama kI utkRSTa
sthiti vAlI bayAlIsa kama prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA batalAte hue prakRtiyoM ke
abAdhAkAla kA saMketa kiyA hai  /  bIsa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kI utkRSTa sthiti
vAlI adhikatara nAmakarma kI uttara prakRtiyAM haiN| mUla karma ke nAma pUrvaka
una uttara prakRtiyoM ke nAma kramazaH isa prakAra haiM ((1) mohanIyakarma-
bhaya, jugupsA, arati, zoka, napuMsaka veda  /  (2) mAmakarma-vainiya zarIra,
vaikiya aMgopAMga, tithaMcagati,

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **Tiryanchanupurvi**, Audarik body, Audarik limbs,
Narakagati, Narakanupurvi, Tejas body, Karman body, Agurulghu, Nirman, Updhat,
Asthir, Ashubh, Dubhang, Duhswar, Anadeya, Ayash Kirti, Nam, Badar, Paryapt,
each sthavar ekendriya jati, panchendriya jati, Ashubh vihayogati, Ucchwas,
Udyot Anap, Paraghāt, Guru, Kathor Roo Sheet Sparsh Durgandh.  **(3) Gotrakarma
- Neecha Gotra**  **RE**  Except for Aharak Bandhan and Aharak Sanghatan, the
remaining Audarik Bandhan and Sanghatan, etc., are in the same state as their
respective bodies. Therefore, their state should also be understood as twenty
Kodakodhi Sagaropama.  Thus, out of the one hundred and twenty bindable natures,
four natures of Hak, Tirthankar, and Ayu Karma, totaling seven natures, are
excluded. The remaining one hundred and thirteen natures have been described as
having an excellent state. From the perspective of brevity of the text, a hint
has been given in the text about the Abadhkal of these one hundred and thirteen
natures. The Abadhkal of a particular karma is equal to the number of Kodakodhi
Sagaropama of its excellent state multiplied by one hundred years. For example,
the excellent state of the twenty natures of five Antaraya, five Gnanavaran,
nine Darshanavaran, and Asata Bedaniya is thirty Kodakodhi Sagaropama.
Therefore, their excellent Abadhkal should be understood as thirty hundred,
i.e., three thousand years.  The period from the time of binding until the karma
arises is called Abadhkal. Karma is compared to intoxicating substances. The
more the state of a karma that affects the soul like alcohol, the longer it
remains bound to the soul without yielding fruit after binding.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha tiryacAnupUrvI. audArika zarIra audArika aMgopAMga,
narakagati, narakAnupUrvI, tejasa zarIra, kArmaNa zarIra, agurulaghu, nirmANa,
upa dhAta, asthira, azubha, dubhaMga, duHsvara, anAdeya, ayazaH kIrti, nama.
bAdara, paryApta, pratyeka sthAvara ekendriya jAti paMcendriya jAti, azubha
vihAyogati, ucchvAsa, udyota Anapa, parAghAta, guru, kaThora rU zIta sparza
durgandha  /  (3) gotrakarma-nIca gotra | * RE AhAraka baMdhana aura AhAraka
saMghAtana ko choDakara zeSa audArika baMdhana aura saMghAtana Adi kI sthiti bho
apane-apane zarIra kI sthiti jitanI hotI hai| ataH unakI bhI sthiti bIsa
koDAphoDI sAgaropama kI samajhanA cAhie  /  isa prakAra se baMdhayogya eka sau
bIsa prakRtiyoM meM se hAka dvika, tIrthaMkara aura Ayu karma kI cAra
prakRtiyAM, kula sAta prakRtiyoM ko chor3akara eka sau teraha prakRtiyoM kI
utkRSTa sthiti batalAI gaI hai  /  granthalAghava kI dRSTi se gAyA meM eka so
teraha prakRtiyoM ke abAkAla kA bhI saMketa kiyA hai ki jisa karma kI jitane
kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kI utkRSTa sthiti hai, usa prakRti kA utane sau varSa kA
abAdhAkAla hotA hai| jaise ki pA~ca aMtarAya, pAMca jJAnAvaraNa, nau
darzanAvaraNa aura asAtA bedanIya ina bIsa prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha
tIsa koDAkor3I sAgaropama hai to unakA utkRSTa avAdhAkAla bhI tIsa sau arthAt
tIna hajAra varSa samajhanA cAhie  /  baMdhane ke bAda jaba taka karma udaya meM
nahIM AtA hai taba taka ke kAla ko abAdhAkAla kahate haiM  /  karmoM kI upamA
mAdaka dravya se dI jAtI hai  /  madirA ke samAna AtmA para asara DAlane vAle
karma kI jitanI adhika sthiti hotI hai, utane hI adhika samaya taka vaha karma
baMdhane ke bAda binA phala diye hI AtmA / sAtha saMbaddha rahatA hai,

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Century 130 Which is called its *Abadhakal*. In this *Abadhakal*, the karmic
consequence matures and after the *Abadhakal* passes, it starts to bear fruit
and continues to bear fruit until the bondage of its state is over. Therefore,
the *Panthakar* has explained the proportion of *Avadhakal* as follows: For a
karma with a certain *Kodakodī Sagaropama* state, one should consider that many
hundred years as the *Abadhakal* of that karma. The essence of this is that in
the state of one *Kodakodī Sagaropama*, there is an *Abadhakal* of one hundred
years. That is, if a being has bound a karma with the state of one *Kodakodī
Sagaropama* today, then it will arise after one hundred years from today and
will continue to arise until the *Kodakodī Sagaropama* period is over. So far,
the *utkṛṣṭa* state of the karmic natures has been explained, and the remaining
karmic natures whose states are to be explained further, also include *Akāla*.
Therefore, there are two divisions of the state - *Karmārūpatāvasthānalakṣaṇā*
and *Anubhavyogya*. The duration of time from the moment of binding until the
karma remains with the soul is called the *Karmārūpatāvasthānalakṣaṇā* state,
and the state without *Abadhakal* is called the *Anubhavyogya* state. The
*utkṛṣṭa* state of the karmas explained here is inclusive of the
*Karmārūpatāvasthānalakṣaṇā* state, and to know the *Anubhavyogya* state, one
should subtract the *Abadhakal* from the first *Karmārūpatāvasthānalakṣaṇā*
state, which is as follows: There 1 9 That is the two-fold state - *Sanrūpatā*
and *Sthānalakṣaṇā*, *Anubhavyogya*. Taking the *Karmārūpatāvasthānalakṣaṇā*
state as the basis, the *jghanya* and *utkṛṣṭa* proportions of *Abadhakal* are
as follows. To be continued. *Anubhavyogya* - *Karmaprākṛti* *Malayagiri Tokā*,
page 163

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka 130 jo usakA abAnAkAla kahalAtA hai  /  isa abAdhAkAla meM karma vipAka
ke unmukha hotA hai aura abAdhAkAla bItane para apanA phala denA prArambha kara
usa samaya taka phala detA rahatA hai jaba taka usakI sthiti kA bandha hai  /
isIliye panthakAra ne avadhAkAla kA anupAta vatalAyA hai ki jisa karma kI jitane
koDAkor3I sAgaropama kI utkRSTa sthiti hai. usa karma kI utane hI sau varSa
pramANa utkRSTa abAdhAkAla samajhanA cAhiye  /  isakA sArAMza yaha hai ki eka
kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kI sthiti meM sau varSa kA abAdhAkAla hotA hai  /  arthAt
Aja kisI jIva ne eka koTAkor3I sAgaropama kI sthiti vAlA karma bAMdhA hai to
vaha Aja se sau varSa bAda udaya meM AyegA aura taba taka udaya meM AtA rahegA
jaba taka eka kor3Aphor3I sAgaropama kAla samApta nahIM ho jAtA hai  /  abhI
taka jina karma prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti batalAI hai aura zeSa rahI jina
prakRtiyoM kI Age sthiti batalAne vAle hai, usameM akAla bhI sammilita hai|
isaliye sthiti ke do bheda ho jAte hai-- karmarUpatAvasthAnalakSaNA aura
anubhavayogyA  /  baMdhane ke bAda jaba taka karma AtmA ke sAtha ThaharatA hai,
utane kAla kA parimANa karmarUpatAvasthAnalakSaNA sthiti hai aura abAdhAkAla
rahita sthiti kA nAma anubhavayogyA sthiti kahalAtA hai  /  yahA~ jo karmoM kI
utkRSTa sthiti batalAI hai, vaha karmarUpatAvasthAnalakSaNA sthiti sahita hai
aura anubhavayogyA sthiti ko jAnane ke liye pahalI karmarUpatAvasthAnalakSaNA
sthiti meM se abAdhAkAla kama kara denA cAhiye, ' jo isa prakAra hai tatra 1 9
vaha dvidhA sthitiH - saMrUpatA va sthAna lakSaNA, anubhavayogyAce
karmarUpatAvasthAnalakSaNAmeva sthitimadhikRtya jaghanyotkRSTa
pramANamidamrAdhAkAla honA  /  agantavyam  /  anubhavayogyA - karmaprakRti
malayagiri TokA, pR0 163

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Firm Granth 121  It has been previously indicated that the highest
state of each of the five Antarayas, five Jnana Avaranas, and nine Darshan
Avaranas karmas is thirty Kodakodi Sagaropama, and the state of one Kodakodi
Sagaropama is one hundred years of uninterrupted time. Therefore, their
uninterrupted time is 30 x 100 = three hundred years. From this ratio, one
should understand the uninterrupted time of other types of karmas according to
their highest state.  The uninterrupted time of Sukshmatrik and Vikalnik is
eighteen hundred years. The uninterrupted time of Samachaturasra Sansthan and
Vajrarishbhanaraach Sanhanan is one thousand years. The uninterrupted time of
Nyagrodhaparimandal Sansthan and Rishbhanaraach Sanhanan is twelve hundred
years. The uninterrupted time of Swaati Sansthan and Naraach Sanhanan is
fourteen hundred years. The uninterrupted time of Kubj Sansthan and Ardhanaraach
Sanhanan is sixteen hundred years. The uninterrupted time of Vaman Sansthan and
Keelik Sanhanan is eighteen hundred years. The uninterrupted time of Hund
Sansthan and Sewart Sanhanan is two thousand years. The uninterrupted time of
Anantanubandhi Krodha, etc., sixteen Kapayas is four thousand years. The
uninterrupted time of Mridu, Laghu, Snigdha, Ushna Sparsha, Sugandha,
Shwetavarna, and Madhura Rasa is one thousand years. The uninterrupted time of
Pot Varna and Amla Rasa is twelve hundred and fifty years. The uninterrupted
time of Rakta Varna and Kashaya Rasa is fifteen hundred years. The uninterrupted
time of Neel Varna and Katuk Rasa is seventeen hundred and fifty years. The
uninterrupted time of Krishna Varna and Tikta Rasa is two thousand years. The
uninterrupted time of Shubha Vihayogati, Uchcha Gotra, Devadvik, Sthira Shatk,
Purusha Ved, Hasya, and Rati is one thousand years. The uninterrupted time of
Mithyatva is seven thousand years. The uninterrupted time of Manusyadvik,
Strived, Saata Vedaniya is fifteen hundred years. The uninterrupted time of
Bhaya, Jugupsa, Arati, Shoka, Vaikriya Dvik, Tiyan Dvik, Odarik Dvik, Narak
Dvik, Neecha Gotra, Taijas Panchak, Asthira Pak, Tas Chatushk, Sthavar,
Ekendriya, Panchendriya, Napumsak Ved, Ashubha Vihayogati, Uchchwas Chatushk,
Guru, Karkasha, Rooksha, Sheet Sparsha, and Durgandha is two thousand years.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama pharmagrantha 121 ! pAMca antarAya, pAMca jJAnAvaraNa aura no
darzanAvaraNa karmoM meM se pratyeka kI utkRSTa sthiti tIsa kor3Akor3I
sAgaropama kI tathA eka kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kI sthiti meM eka sau varSa kA
abAdhAkAla hone kA saMketa pahale kara Aye haiM  /  ataH unakA abAdhAkAla 30x100
tIna hara varSa hotA hai isakA anupAta se anya prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti ke
anusAra una-unakA utkRSTa abAdhAkAla samajhanA cAhiye ki sUkSmatrika aura
vikalanika kA abAdhAkAla aThAraha so varSa, samacaturasra saMsthAna aura
vajraRSabhanArAca saMhanana kA abAdhAkAla eka hajAra varSa nyagrodhaparimaMDala
saMsthAna aura RSabhanArAca saMhanana kA abAdhAkAla bAraha sau varSa, svAti
saMsthAna aura nArAca saMhanana kA abAdhAkAla caudaha sau varSa, kubja saMsthAna
aura ardhanArAca saMhanana kA abAdhAkAla solaha sau varSa, vAmana saMsthAna aura
kIlika saMhanana kA avAdhAkAla aThAraha sau varSa, huNDa saMsthAna aura sevArta
saMhanana kA abAdhAkAla do hajAra varSa, anaMtAnubandhI krodha Adi solaha
kapAyoM kA abAdhAkAla cAra hajAra varSa, mRdu, laghu, snigdha, uSNa sparza,
sugandha, zvetavarNa aura madhura rasa kA eka hajAra varSa, pota varNa aura amla
rasa kA abAdhAkAla sAr3he bAraha sau varSa, rakta varNa aura kaSAya rasa kA
pandraha sau varSa, nIla varNa aura kaTuka rasa kA sAr3he sataha sau varSa kRSNa
varNa aura tikta rasa kA do hajAra varSa, zubha vihAyogatiucca gotra, devadvika,
sthiraSaTka, puruSa veda, hAsya aura rati kA eka hajAra varSa, mithyAtva kA sAta
hajAra varSa, manuSyadvika, strIveda, sAtA vedanIya kA abAdhAkAla pandraha sau
varSa, bhaya, jugupsA, arati, zoka, vaikriyadvika, tiyaM dvika, odArikadvika,
narakadvika, nIca gotra, taijasapaMcaka, asthirapaka, tasacatuSka, sthAvara,
ekendriya, paMcendriya, napuMsaka veda, azubha vihAyogati, ucchvAsacatuSka,
guru, karkaza, rUkSa, zItasparza aura durgandha kA avAdhAkAla do hajAra varSa kA
jAnanA cAhie  /

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Matak**  _Having explained the excellent state of bondage and the duration of
its obstruction in relation to that state for one hundred and thirteen types of
karmas, we now proceed to describe the excellent state of bondage and the
duration of obstruction for the three types of karmas, namely, name karma,
aharakdvik, and tirthankara, as well as the excellent state of bondage for the
Uttar types of ayu karma._  **Guv Kosikod'ianso Tistaharana Mitramuh Baha.
Lahathi Santhgunaa Narasiriyaanau Pallatigan. ||33||**  **Word Meaning:**  * Guv
- Excellent state * Kodikod'ianso - Within Kodikod'i, like an ocean *
Tistaharana - Tirthankara and Aharakdvik name karma * Mitramuh - At the end,
Muhurta * Baha - Duration of obstruction * Lahathi - Many * Santhgunaa - Without
qualities * Narasiriyaanau - Humans and Tiryanch * Pallatigan - Three Palya,
like three moments  **Meaning of the Verse:**  The excellent state of bondage
for Tirthankara and Aharakdvik name karma is within Kodikod'i, like an ocean,
and the duration of obstruction is at the end of a Muhurta. The inferior state
of bondage is without qualities and within Kodikod'i, like an ocean. The
excellent state of bondage for human and Tiryanch ayu karma is three Palya, like
three moments.  **Special Meaning:**  This verse explains the excellent and
inferior states of bondage and the duration of obstruction for Tirthankara and
Aharakdvik, including the aharak body and aharak limbs. It also explains the
excellent state of bondage for the two types of ayu karma, human and Tiryanch.
The excellent and inferior states of bondage for Tirthankara and Aharakdvik are
described together for the sake of brevity. These three...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mataka _ isa prakAra se eka sau teraha prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha aura
usa sthiti ke anupAta se unakA avAdhAkAla batalAne ke pazcAta aba Age nAmakarma
kI AhArakadvika, tIrthakara ina tIna prakRtiyoM tathA Ayu karma kI uttara
prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa sthitibandha va abAdhAkAla kA kathana karate haiN| guva
koSikoDiaMso tisthAhArANa mitramuha bAhA  /  lahaThii saMkhaguNaNA narasiriyANAu
pallatigaM  // 33 //  zabdArtha-gutha-utkRSTa sthiti, koDikoDiaMto--aMtaH
koDa'kor3I sAgaropama, tisthAhArANa-nIrthakara aura AhAraka. dvika nAmakarma kI,
minnamuha-anta meM hUtaM, pAhA-abAdhAkAla, lahudina-manyammita. saMthagatA
-bigamuga hoga. -ratiriyANa-manuSya aura tiryama, bhAja- Abhu, palsatigaM-tIna
palyopama  /  _ gApArtha-tIrthakara aura AhArakadvika nAmakarma kI utkRSTa
sthiti antaHkoDAkor3I sAgaropama aura abAdhAkAla antamuhUrta hai  /  jaghanya
sthiti saMkhyAta guNahIna aMtaHkoDAkor3I sAgaropama hotI hai| manuSya aura
tiryaMca Ayu kI utkRSTa sthiti tIna palyopama hai| vizeSArtha-isa gAthA meM
tIrthakara aura AhArakadvika AhAraka zarIra aura AhAraka aMgopAMga kI utkRSTa va
jaghanya sthiti tathA abAdhAkAla batalAne ke sAtha Ayukarma ke manuSya va
tiryaMca Ayu ina do bhedoM kI utkRSTa sthiti batalAI hai| tIrthakara aura
AhArakaddhika kI utkRSTa aura jaghanya sthiti kA kayana granthalAghava kI dRSTi
meM eka sAtha kara diyA hai ki ina tInoM

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Karma Granth  The two states of the karmas, the excellent and the
inferior, are both like the ocean (Antahkodakodi Sagaropama). However, the
difference is that the magnitude of the inferior state compared to the excellent
state is numerically insignificant, meaning it is a fraction of the excellent
state. Similarly, their excellent and inferior durations (Abadhakal) are also
very different, and like the states, the inferior Abadhakal is numerically
insignificant compared to the excellent Abadhakal. Thus, one should understand
that the states (excellent and inferior) of these three karmas are Antahkodakodi
Sagaropama and their Abadhakal is Antamuhurta Pramana.  The excellent state of
the Tirthankara and Aharakdvig, which is described as Antahkodakodi Sagaropama,
refers to the state of the Nikachit Tirthankara and Aharakdvig. The state of the
Nikachit Tirthankara and Aharakdvig is from a fraction of the Antahkodakodi
Sagar to the state of the Tirthankara Namakarma, which is slightly less than two
previous koti and more than thirty-three Sagars, and for the Aharakdvig, it is
an innumerable fraction of the Paly.  When the inferior state of the Tirthankara
Namakarma is also described as Antahkodakodi Sagaropama, it raises a question
for the inquisitive mind. If the inferior state of the Tirthankara Namakarma is
also Antahkodakodi Sagaropama, then:  1.  Some consider slightly less than
Kodakodi as Antahkodakodi. This means that the excellent and inferior states of
all three karmas are slightly less than Kodakodi Sagaropama. 2.  Antahkodakodi
Titthayarahaar Tie Sakhao. Tetis Paliyan Sankhan Nikaiyanan Su Ukkossa -
Panchasangrah 5.42 3.  The commentary on Go Karmakand Gapa 157 explains the
proof of Antahkodakodi as follows: The Abadha of the state of one Kodakodi Sagar
is said to be one hundred years. In this hundred years, there are ten lakh
eighty...  (Continued on the next page)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMSama karmagrantha prakutiyoM kI donoM sthitiyAM sAmAnya se antaHkoDAkor3I'
mAgaropama haiN| lekina itanI vizeSatA hai ki utkRSTa sthiti se jaghanya sthiti
kA parimANa saMkhyAta guNahIna yAnI saMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa hai  /  isI
prakAra unakA utkRSTa aura jaghanya abAdhAkAla bhI anta huta hI hai aura sthiti
kI taraha utkRSTa abAdhA se jaghanya abAdhAkAla bhI saMkhyAta guNahIna hai| isa
prakAra ina tIna karmoM kI sthiti (utkRSTa va jaghanya) antaHkoDAkor3I
sAgaropama aura abAdhAkAla antamuhUrta pramANa samajhanA caahie| yahAM jo
tIrthakara aura AhArakadvika kI utkRSTa sthiti antaHkoDAkor3I sAgaropama
batalAI, vaha sthiti anikAcita tIrthakara aura AhArakadvika kI batalAI hai|
nikAcita tIrthakara nAma aura AhArakadvika kI sthiti antaHkor3Akor3I sAgara ke
saMkhyAtaveM bhAga se lekara tIrthakara nAmakarma kI sthiti to kucha kama do
pUrva koTi adhika tetIsa sAgara hai aura AhArakadvika kI palya ke asaMkhyAta
bhAga hai| tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kI jaghanya sthiti bhI antaHkor3Akor3I
sAgaropama batAye jAne para jijJAsu prazna prastuta karatA hai ki jaba
tIrthakara nAmakarma kI jaghanya sthiti bhI antaHkoDAkor3I sAgaropama 1 kucha
kama koDAkor3I ko antaHkor3Akor3I kahate haiN| jisakA artha yaha huA ki tIno
karmoM kI utkRSTa aura baghanya sthiti koDAkoDI sAgaro pama se kucha kama hai|
2. aMto koDAkoDI titthayarAhAra tIe sakhAo  /  tetIsa paliya saMkhaM nikAiyANaM
su ukkosA  /  -paMcasaMgraha 5 / 42 3. go karmakAMDa gApA 157 kI bhASA TIkA meM
antaHkor3AkoDI kA pramANa isa prakAra batAyA hai ki eka kor3Aphor3I sAgara kI
sthiti kI abAdhA sau varSa batAI hai| isa sau varSa ke syUla rUpa se dasa lAkha
assI (zeSa agase pRSTha para)

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A Jiva with the nature of a Tirthankara cannot remain in the state of a
Tirthankara without going through the cycle of transmigration (Tiyachgati). This
long state cannot be completed without traversing the Tiyachgati. Because the
time for the five-sense (Panchendriya) state is said to be slightly more than
one thousand Sagaras, and the time for the three-sense (Traskaya) state is said
to be slightly more than two thousand Sagaras. Therefore, no Jiva can
continuously take birth in the five-sense state for a longer period, nor in the
three-sense state. And finally, the Jiva cannot complete the long period of
bondage in the state of Koda-kodi Sagaras by taking birth only in the hell,
human, and god states. Therefore, it must go through the Tiyachgati.  Another
point is that the existence of the Tirthankara Karma in the Jivas of the
Tiyachgati is denied. Therefore, where will it complete this long period? And in
the third Bhantr before the birth of a Tirthankara, there is a bondage of the
Tirthankara nature for one thousand Muhurtas. When this one Muhurta is unbound,
how many states will it have? In this way, by dividing the one Koda-kodi into
ten lakh eighty thousand Muhurtas, the quotient obtained is 625623624. This is
the amount of states in one Muhurta. That is, one Muhurta is equal to this many
Sagaras. In the same way, the amount of states in the final Muhurta should be
known.  1. **Egi-dia-na-na-do-ni-sa-ha-sa-na-ta-sa-na-ka-ya-thi-i-1** **A-ya-ra-
na-i-ga-pa-ni-di-su-na-ra-ti-ri-ya-na-sa-ga-ttha-bha-va.** - Panchasangrah 2.46
2. **An-to-ko-da-ko-di-thi-i-e-vi-ka-ha-na-ho-i-ni-stha-pa-re.** **Na-ne-ki-li-
ya-ka-la-ni-ri-bha-o-a-pa-ho-i-ra-vi-ro-ho.** - Panchasangrah 1143

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jaar hai laba tIrthaMkara prakRti kI sattAvAlA jIva tiyaMcagati meM jAye binA
nahIM raha sakatA hai  /  tiyaMcagati meM bhramaNa kiye binA itanI lambI sthiti
pUrNa nahIM hotI hai| kyoMki paMcendriya paryAya kA kAla kucha adhika eka hajAra
sAgara aura vasakAya kA kAla kucha adhika do hajAra sAgara batalAyA hai  / '
ataH isase adhika samaya taka na koI jIva lagAtAra paMcendriya paryAya meM janma
le sakatA hai aura na trasakAya meM hI aura anta kor3Akor3I sAgaropama sthiti kA
baMdha karake jIva itane lambe kAla ko kevala nAraka, manuSya aura deva paryAya
meM janma lekara pUrA nahIM kara sakatA hai, isaliye use tiryaMcati meM avazya
jAnA pdd'egaa| dUsarI bAta yaha hai ki tiryacagati meM jIvoM ke tIrthakara
nAmakarma kI sattA kA niSedha kiyA hai, ataH itane kAla ko kahA~ pUrNa karegA
aura tIrthaMkara ke bhava se pUrva ke tIsare bhantra meM tIrthaMkara prakRti kA
baMdha hajAra muhUrta hote haiN| jaba isane muhUrta avAMdhA eka koDAphor3I
lAgara ko hai taba eka muhUrta abAdhA kitanI sthiti kI hogI? isa prakAra rAzika
karane para eka koDAkor3I meM dasa lAkha assI hajAra muhUrta kA bhAga dene para
625623624 labdha AtA he  /  itane sAgara pramANa sthiti kI eka mahataM abAdhA
hotI hai. yAnI eka muhUtaM abAdhA itane sAgara pramANa sthiti kI hai| isI hisAba
se antamuharta pramANa abAdhA dAle karma kI sthiti jAnanA cAhiye  /  1.
egidiyANa NatA doNi sahassA tasANa kAya ThiI 1 ayarANa iga paNidisU
naratiriyANaM sagaThTha bhavA  /  /  -paMcasaMgraha 2 / 46 2. aMto koDAkoDI
ThiIe vi kahaM na hoi nisthapare  /  nane kiliyakAla niribho Apa hoi ra viroho
/  /  -paMcasaMgraha 1143

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Panch Karma Pranya 135  It has been explained that the **Tīrthankara** name-
karma is not present in the **Tiryag-gati**. This statement is made in relation
to the **Nikaachit** **Tīrthankara** name-karma, meaning the **Tīrthankara**
name-karma that is experienced in the **Aghashya** state. However, the existence
of the **Tīrthankara** nature, which can undergo **Udvartan** and **Apvartan**,
is not denied in the **Tiryag-gati**.  Similarly, the statement about the
bondage of the **Tīrthankara** nature in the third **Bhava** before the **Bhad**
of the **Tīrthankara** is also made in relation to the **Nikaachit**
**Tīrthankara** nature. The **Tīrthankara** nature that is not **Nikaachit**,
meaning it can undergo **Udvartan** and **Apvartan**, can be bound even before
the three **Bhavas**.  The denial of the existence of the **Tīrthankara** name-
karma in the **Tiryag-gati** in the **Siddhant** refers to the **Sunikaachit**
**Tīrthankara** name-karma that occurs in the third **Bhava**.  1. **Jam, Bajmai
Tat Bhagawo Taiyabhavo Sakkaittanam.** - **Aavaayak Niyukti 180.2**     - **Amih
Nikaaiyatittham Tiryabhave San Nisehiyam Sate.**     - **Iyarami Natyi Dosho
Ubattanuvatunuasa.** - **Panchasangrah 144.3** 2. **Jam Vajmai Titi Mani Tattha
Nikaaija Itti Niyamo Yam.**     - **Nadabanjhafanam Nimama Bhayanna Anka
Imaavatyai.** - **Jinamdani Kshamasraman, Visheshnavati Teeka** 3. **Jim Karma
Ki Udirana, Sankraman, Udvartan, Apvartan, Ye Charo Ho**     - **Avasthayen Na
Ho Sakena, Use Nikaachit Kahate Hain.** 4. **Karmon Ki Sthiti Aur Anubhag Ke Vad
Jane Ko Udatan Kahate Hain.**     - **... Bad Ko Ki Sthiti Natha Anubhag Mein
Adhyanamaya Vishesh Mein Kami Ka**     - **Dena Apvartan Hai.**  **Note:** The
terms in bold are Jain terms.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcana karmapranya 135 honA batAyA hai| jisase antaHkor3Akor3I sAmaropama kI
sthiti meM yaha bhI kaise saMbhava hai ? ukta jijJAsA kA samAdhAna yaha hai ki
tiryaMcagati meM jo tIrthakara nAmakarma kA niSedha kiyA hai, vaha nikAcita
tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kI apekSA se kiyA hai arthAt jo tIrthaMkara nAmakama
aghazya anubhava meM AtA hai, usI kA tiyaMtragati meM abhAva batalAyA hai, kiMtu
jisameM udavartana, apavartana ho sakatA hai, usa tIrthaMkara prakRti ke astitva
kA niSedha tiyaMtragati meM nahIM kiyA hai| isI prakAra tIrthakara ke bhada se
pUrva ke tIsare bhava meM jo tIrthakara prakRti ke bandha kA kathana hai, vaha
bhI nikAcita tIrthaMkara prakRti kI apekSA se kiyA gayA hai| jo tIrthakara
prakRti nikAtrita nahIM hai yAnI udvartana apavartana ho sakatA hai, vaha tIna
bhava se bhI pahale bAMdhI jA sakatI hai| siddhAnta meM jo tIrthakara nAmakarma
kI sattA kA tiryaMcagati meM niSedha kiyA hai, vaha tIsare bhava meM hone vAlI
sunikAcita tIrthakara 1. jaM, bajmaI ta ta bhagavao taiyabhavosakkaittANaM  /  /
-AvAyaka niyukti 180 2, amiha nikAiyatitthaM tiriyabhave saM nisehiyaM ste|
iyarami natyi doso ubaTTaNuvaTuNAsa  /  -paMcasaMgraha 144 3. jaM vajmaiti
maNiya tattha nikAija itti NiyamoyaM 1 nadabaMjhaphanaM nimamA bhayaNA aNikA
imAvatyai  /  /  -jinamadaNi kSamAzramaNa, vizeSaNavatI TIkA 4. jima karma kI
udIraNA, saMkramaNa, udvartana, apavartana, ye cAroM ho avasthAyeM na ho sakeM,
use nikAcita kahate haiN| 5. karmoM kI sthiti aura anubhAga ke vada jAne ko
udatana kahate haiN| .. bar3a ko kI sthiti nathA anubhAga meM adhyanamAya vizeSa
meM kamI kA denA apavartana hai|

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Pātaka**  The term "Pātaka" is used in relation to the
existence of the karmic force (māmakarma), not in relation to its general
existence. Therefore, even if the karmic force of a non-liberated Tīrthankara
exists, the being's transmigration through the four states of existence is
considered a "mis-statement" like a cow being called a servant.  The essence of
the above statement is that the state of the Tīrthankara karmic force, which is
said to be bound in the third life before the Tīrthankara's life, should be
understood as follows: in the third life, the state is made suitable for the
three lives through upward and downward transmigration. Although the state of
"Koḍakoḍī Sāgaropam" cannot be fully achieved in the three lives, it is reduced
through the process of "Apvartaṇakaraṇ". The scriptures state that the binding
of the Tīrthankara nature in the third life should be understood for the non-
liberated Tīrthankara nature. This means that the non-liberated nature will
definitely bear its fruit, but there is no rule for the non-liberated
Tīrthankara nature. It can be bound even before the third life.  The excellent
states of Narakāyu and Devāyu have been explained earlier. Therefore, here the
excellent states of Manushyāyu and Tiryanchāyu are explained as "Naratiriyāṇau
Pallatiga" - human and animal life are of three "pallyas".  Regarding the state
of Āyukarma, it is important to know that the evidence of the excellent and
inferior lifespan is given in relation to the state of existence. This means
that any being, upon taking birth, can live for a shorter or longer duration in
that life.  - 1. "Nasthiti Parāpare Tripalyopamāntarmūhūrta. Tiryaṅgyonīnāṁ ca."
- Taravārṣasūtra 3.17.10

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAtaka mAmakarma kI sattA kI apekSA se kahA hai, na ki sAmAnya sattA kI apekSA
se  /  isalie anikAcita tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kI sattA rahane para bhI jIva kA
cAra mazinoM meM jAne se kisI gAya kA misevakahI hai| ukta kathana kA sArAMza
yaha hai ki tIthaMkara nAmakarma kI sthiti aMtaHkoDAkor3I sAgaropama aura
tIrthakara ke bhava sa pahale ke tIsare bhava meM jo usakA baMdha honA kahA hai,
vaha isa prakAra samajhanA cAhie ki tIsare bhava meM udvartana, apavartana ke
dvArA usa sthiti ko tIna bhavoM ke yogya kara liyA jAtA hai| yadyapi tIna bhavoM
meM to kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kI sthiti pUrNa nahIM ho sakatI hai ataH
apavartanakaraNa ke dvArA usa sthiti kA hAsa kara diyA jAtA hai  /  zAstroM meM
jo tIsare bhaya meM tIrthakara prakRti ke baMdha kA vidhAna kiyA hai, vaha
nikAcita tIrthakara prakRti ke liye samajhanA cAhiye yAnI nikAcita prakRti apanA
phala avazya de detI hai, kintu anikAcita tIrthaMkara prakRti ke liye koI niyama
nahI hai| vaha tIsare bhava se pahale bhI baMdha sakatI hai| narakAyu aura
devAyu kI utkRSTa sthiti pahale batalA Aye haiM, ataH yahAM manuSyAyu aura
tiryaMcAyu ko utkRSTa sthita batAI hai ki 'naratiriyANAu pallatiga' manuSya aura
tiryaMcAyu tIna palya kI hai|' Ayukarma kI sthiti ke bAre meM yaha vizeSa jAnanA
cAhiye ki bhavaH sthiti kI apekSA se utkRSTa aura jaghanya Ayu kA pramANa
batalAyA jAtA hai ki koI bhI jIva janma pAkara usameM jaghanya athavA utkRSTa
kitane kAla taka jI sakatA hai  /  - 1. nasthitI parApare
tripalyopamAntarmuhUrta  /  tiryagyonInAM ca  /  -taravArSasUtra 3 / 17.10

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 137  Now, while explaining the excellent state of
Ayukarma, we move on to the uninterrupted time (Abadhakal).  **Verse 34:**
**Iggavigalpuvyakodi paliyasankaas aauchou amnaa. Freekamaana hamasa abaaha
sesaana bhavaso ||34||**  **Word Meaning:**  * **Vigal:** One-sense and disabled
(Vikaleindriya) beings, their age is a koti (10 million) years. *
**Paliyasankaas:**  An innumerable part of a Palya (a unit of time). *
**Aauchou:** All four Ayus (life spans). * **Amnaa:**  Those with five senses
(Panchendriya) and sufficient (Paryapt). * **Freekamaana:** Those with
uninterrupted (Nirupkram) Ayus. * **Hamasa:** Six months. * **Abaaha:**
Uninterrupted time (Abadhakal). * **Sesaana:** The remaining (those with a
countable number of years and those with interrupted Ayus). * **Bhavaso:** One-
third of their Bhav (existence).  **Verse Meaning:**  The age of one-sense and
disabled beings, as well as those with five senses and sufficient, is an
innumerable part of a Palya. Those with uninterrupted Ayus have six months of
uninterrupted time, while the remaining beings (those with a countable number of
years and those with interrupted Ayus) have one-third of their existence as
uninterrupted time.  **Special Meaning:**  The excellent age of humans and
animals is generally said to be three Palyas, but the excellent age of some
animals and the uninterrupted time of Ayukarma is explained in the verse.  The
reason for separately mentioning the excellent age of one-sense, disabled, and
those with five senses and sufficient is that the aforementioned excellent state
can only be achieved by those with sufficient senses. Therefore, that state
should be understood in relation to those with sufficient senses. However, how
much of that excellent state is achieved by one-sense, disabled, and those with
five senses and sufficient...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 137 aba Ayukarma kI utkRSTa sthiti ke bAre meM kucha
vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa karate hue abAdhAkAla calate haiM  /  igavigalapuvyakoDi
paliyAsaMkhasa Aucau amanA  /  freekamANa hamAsA abAha sesANa bhavaso ||34||
zabdArtha - vigala - ekendriya aura vikalendriya puruSako DipUrva koDI varSa ko
Ayu. paliyAsakhaMsa - popa kA asakhyA mAga, Auca cAroM Ayu, amanA asazI
paMcendriya paryApta, freekamANa - nirupakrama Ayu vAle ke chamAsA chaha mAha
abAha - abAdhAkAla, sesANa bAkI ke ( saMkhyAta varSa kI tathA sopakrama Ayu vAle
ke) avataMso bhava kA tIsarA bhAga | * gAthA - ekendriya aura vikalendriya pUrva
koTi varSa kI Ayu aura asaMjJI paMcendriya paryApta cAroM AyuyoM ko palyopama ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga jitanI Ayu bAMdhate haiM  /  nirupakrama Ayu vAle ko chaha
mAha kA tathA zeSa jIvoM (saMkhyAta varSa kI va sopakrama Ayu vAle) ke bhava kA
tIsarA bhAga jitanA abAdhAkAla hotA hai  /  SLA - vizeSArtha- -manuSya aura
tiryaMcoM kI utkRSTa Ayu sAmAnya se tIna palya kI batalAI hai, lekina vizeSa kI
apekSA unameM se kucha tiryacagati ke jIvoM kI utkRSTa Ayu tathA Ayukarma kI
sthiti kA abAdhAkAla gAthA meM spaSTa kiyA gayA hai  /  ekendriya aura
vikalendriya aura asaMjJI paryAptaka jIvoM kA alaga se utkRSTa Ayu sthitibaMdha
batalAne kA kAraNa yaha hai ki pUrvokta utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kevala paryApta
saMjJI jIva hI kara sakate haiM, ataH vaha sthiti paryApta saMjJI jIvoM kI
apekSA se samajhanA cAhie  /  lekina ekendriya, vikalendriya aura asaMzI ukta
utkRSTa sthiti meM se kitanA

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shataka  The **bhaura sadha** (dawn) state is being explained here. It is
being clarified that the **igadhigalprithvakodi** (earth-based) one-sensed and
multi-sensed beings bind the **ekapurva** (one-previous) koti (category) of
**ayukarma** (life-span karma) as their highest state. The **asangya** (non-
conscious) **paryaptak** (fully developed) beings bind the highest state of all
four **ayukarma** (life-span karma) as **palyo** (life-span) **asankhyat**
(innumerable) **bhagapraman** (fractional measure) - **palyasankhya**
(innumerable life-spans) **auchou** (in the form of) **amana** (measure).  The
reason for the binding of the aforementioned highest state of **ayukarma**
(life-span karma) for one-sensed and multi-sensed beings is that they, upon
death, are born only in the **tiryanch** (animal) or **manushya** (human)
realms. They cannot be born as **deva** (gods) or **naraka** (hell beings) after
death. And even within the **tiryanch** (animal) and **manushya** (human)
realms, they are born only in **karmabhumij** (karma-based) realms, not in
**bhogabhumij** (enjoyment-based) realms. This is why they bind the **ekapurva**
(one-previous) koti (category) of **ayukarma** (life-span karma) as their
highest state.  The **asangya** (non-conscious) **panchendriya** (five-sensed)
beings, upon death, can be born in any of the four realms. This allows them to
bind any of the four **ayukarma** (life-span karma). However, the rule is that
the **karmabhumij** (karma-based) realm for humans is only humans, and for
animals, it is only animals. For gods, it is **bhavanavasi** (dwelling in
mansions) and **vyantar** (intermediate) gods, and for hell beings, it is only
the first three **pathar** (divisions) of hell. Therefore, only a fraction of
their **palyo** (life-span) - **asankhyat** (innumerable) **bhagapraman**
(fractional measure) - binds **ayukarma** (life-span karma).  **1. The measure
of one previous is explained as follows:**  > **Prithvasma u parimanam samari
khal hoti sayamahasasai. Ppanam cha sahasaa baudhadhava basakoti nam.**  > -
**Sarvarthasiddhi** (Complete Fulfillment) - **Manar Lal** (Manar Lal) - One
previous is equal to 56 billion years.  **2. In **Go. Karmakanda** (Karma
Section) **Ma. 538 to 543**, it is explained which beings, upon death, are born
in which realm...  (To be continued on the next page)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka sthiti meM haiM bhora sAdhA:]; kAliyA vakSA : ko yahA~ spaSTa kiyA jA
rahA hai ki "igadhigalapRthvakoDi' ekendriya aura vikalendriya jIva Ayukrama kI
utkRSTa sthiti eka pUrva' koTi pramANa bAMdhate hai tathA asaMjJo paryAptaka
jIva cAroM hI Ayu karmoM kI utkRSTa sthiti palya ke asaMkhyAta bhAgapramANa-
paliyAsaMkhsa Aucau amaNA  /  ekendriya Adi jIvoM ke Ayukarma ke ukta utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha hone kA kAraNa yaha ki ekendriya aura vikalendriya jItra maraNa
karake tiryaMcagati yA manuSyagati meM hI janma lete haiN| ve mara kara deva yA
nAraka nahIM ho sakate haiM tathA tiryaMca aura manuSyoM meM bhI karmabhUmijoM
meM hI janma lete haiM, bhogabhUmijoM meM nahIM  /  jisase ve Ayukarma kI
utkRSTa sthiti eka pUrva koTi pramANa vA~dhate haiN| asaMjJI paMcendriya jIva
maraNa karake cAroM hI gatiyoM meM utpanna ho sakatA hai, jisase vaha cAroM meM
se kisI bhI Ayu kA baMdha kara sakatA hai  /  lekina yaha niyama hai ki manuSyoM
meM karmabhUmija manuSya hI hotA hai, tiryaMcoM meM karmabhUmija tirvaca hI hotA
hai. devoM meM bhavanavAsI aura vyaMtara ho hotA hai tathA nArakoM meM pahale
naraka ke tIna pAthar3oM taka hI janma letA hai| ataH usake palyopama ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa hI Ayukarma kA baMdha hotA hai  /  1 pUrva kA
pramANa isa prakAra batalAyA hai pRthvasma u parimANaM samarI khala hoti
sayamahassAI  /  ppaNaM ca sahassA bauddhadhavA bAsakoTINaM  /  -
sarvArthasiddhi se uddhRta - manara lAla, chappana hajAra karor3a varSa kA eka
pUrva hotA hai  /  2 go0 karmakANDa mA0 538 se 543 taka meM kisa gati ke jIva
maraNa karake {agale pRSTha para dene)  /

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 136  The indication of the unimpeded state of the
remaining seven karmas, excluding the Astikarma, has been given earlier, stating
that in the state of a Koḍakoḍī ocean, there is an unimpeded period of one
hundred years. However, this ratio does not apply to the unimpeded state of
Ayukarma. The reason for this is that the binding of other karmas is continuous,
but the binding of Ayukarma occurs only at specific times. Therefore, the
unimpeded period of Ayukarma has been indicated separately as follows:
**Niruvakamaṇ ṣaṃmāsā - Nirupakrama āyu vāle** - that is, for those Devas,
Narakas, and Bhogabhūmi humans and Tiryanchas whose lifespan is not subject to
decay or destruction, the unimpeded period of Ayukarma is six months. And for
the remaining humans and Tiryanchas, the unimpeded period of Ayukarma is one-
third of their lifespan - **Abāha sesāṇa bhavatanso**.  |  According to the
Gati, the specific time periods for the binding of Ayukarma are as follows:  In
the human and Tiryancha Gatis, when two-thirds of the lifespan has passed, the
time for the binding of the Parbhavas' Ayukarma arrives.  The Gatis in which
they are born have been explained. Regarding the Tiryanchas, it is written:
**Tejadugaṃ tericche se apuṣyaviyalagāyatahā. Lilūṇagarivi taha'saṇṇī ghamme ya
devaduge || 549 ||**  Those with greater Tejas and Vayu, upon death, are born in
the Tiryancha Gati and the human Gati. However, they cannot become Tirthankaras,
etc. And the Asanji Panchendriya beings are born in the aforementioned Tiryancha
and human Gatis, as well as in the first Naraka called Dharma, and in the
Devadrik, that is, the Bhavanavāsī and Vyantar Devas.  **1 Āusa ya āvāhā ṇ
ḍipiḍimā** | —Go. Karmakāṇḍa 158  Just as the measure of unimpededness is
determined according to the proportion of the state in other karmas, it is not
determined in the Astikarma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama karmagrantha 136 Amukarma ke sivAya zeSa sAta karmoM kI abAdhA kA
saMketa pUrva meM kiyA jA cukA hai ki eka kor3Akor3I sAgara kI sthiti meM sau
varSa abAdhAkAla hotA hai| lekina yaha anupAta Ayukarma kI abAdhA sthiti para
lAgU nahIM hotA hai  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki anya karmoM kA baMdhato sadA
hotA rahatA hai| kintu Ayukarma kA baMdha amukaamuka kAla meM hI hotA hai|
isalie Ayukarma ke abAdhAkAla kA alaga se saMketa kiyA gayA hai ki -
niruvakamANa chamAsA - nirupakrama Ayu vAle arthAt jinakI Ayu kA apavartana,
ghAta nahIM hotA aise deva, nAraka aura bhogabhUmija manuSya, tiryaMcoM ke
Ayukarma kI abAdhA chaha mAsa hotI hai tathA zeSa manuSya aura tiryaMcoM ke
Ayukarma kI abAdhA apanI-apanI Ayu ke tIsare bhAga pramANa hai- abAha sesANa
bhavataMso  /  | gati ke anusAra AyubaMdha ke amuka-amuka kAla nimna prakAra
haiMmanuSyagati aura tiryaMcagati meM jaba bhujyamAna Ayu ke do bhAga bIta jAte
haiM taba parabhava kI AyubaMdha kA kAla upasthita hotA hai  /  kisa-kisa gati
meM janma lete haiM, kA spaSTIkaraNa kiyA gayA hai| tiyaMcoM ke sambandha meM
likhA hai tejadugaM tericche se apuSyaviyalagAyatahA  /  lilyUNagarIvi
tahA'saNNI ghamme ya devaduge || 549  /  /  tejaskAdhika aura vAyukAdhika jIva
maraNa karake niyaMca gati meM aura manuSya gati meM ho janma lete haiN| kintu
tIrthakara vagairaha nahIM ho sakate haiM tathA asaMjI paMcendriya jIva pUrvokna
tiryaSa aura manuSya gati meM tathA dharmA nAma ke pahale naraka meM aura
devadrika yAnI bhavanavAsI aura vyaMtara devoM meM utpanna hote haiM  /  1 Ausa
ya AvAhA Na DipiDimA | --go0 karmakAMDa 158 jaise anya karmoM meM sthiti ke
pratibhAga ke anusAra abAdhA kA pramANa nikAlA jAtA hai, vaise Asukarma meM
nahIM nikAlA jAtA hai  /

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shataka  As if a human being has a lifespan of 6 years, then after 66 years
have passed, he can bind the lifespan of the next birth. Before that, his
lifespan karma cannot be bound. Therefore, the unobstructed period of the bound
lifespan karma of humans and animals is said to be one-third of a previous koti,
because the lifespan of humans and animals in the karmabhoomi is one previous
koti, and the lifespan of the next birth is bound in its division.  This is the
arrangement of the unobstructed period of lifespan karma in relation to humans
and animals in the karmabhoomi, but humans and animals in the bhogabhoomi, as
well as gods and hell beings, bind the lifespan of the next birth when six
months remain of their respective lifespans. Because these are those with
unchangeable lifespans. They do not die prematurely. Therefore, the unobstructed
period of the bound lifespan of those with unchangeable lifespans is said to be
six months.  In relation to the unobstructed period of lifespan karma, one more
thing should be kept in mind: the unobstructed period is also included in the
seven karmas that were mentioned earlier. For example, the highest state of
mithyatva mohaniya is said to be seventy koḍakoḍi sagaropama, and its
unobstructed period is seven thousand years. So these seven thousand years are
included in that seventy koḍakoḍi sagaropama state. Therefore, when you want to
know the unobstructed state (anubhavayogya) of mithyatva mohaniya, you should
subtract seven thousand years from its unobstructed period. But  1. **Opapatik,
naraka, deva, nama-shariri, uttama purusha, and those with countless years of
lifespan, these are those with unchangeable lifespans.**  - Tattvartha Sutra
2052

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka jaise ki yadi kisI manuSya ko Ayu 6 varSa hai to usameM se 66 varSa
bItane para vaha manuSya parabhava kI Ayu bA~dha sakatA hai, usase pahale usake
Ayukarma kA baMdha nahIM ho sakatA hai| isaliye manuSyoM aura tiryacoM ke
badhyamAna Ayukarma kA abAdhAkAla eka pUrva koTi kA tIsarA bhAga batalAyA hai,
kyoMki karmabhUmija manuSya aura tiyaMtra kI utkRSTa Ayu eka pUrva koTi kI hotI
hai aura usake vibhAga meM parabhava kI Ayu baMdhatI hai| karmabhUmija manuSya
aura tithaMcoM kI apekSA se Ayukarma ko abAdhA kI ukta vyavasthA hai, lekina
bhogabhUmija manuSya aura tithaMcoM tathA deva aura nAraka apanI-apanI Ayu ke
chaha mAm zeSa rahane para parabhava kI Ayu bAMdhate haiM  /  kyoMki ye
anapavartya Ayu vAle hai. inakA akAla maraNa nahIM hotA hai|' isI se nirupakrama
Ayu vAloM ke vadhya mAna Ayu kA abAdhAkAla chaha mAsa batalAyA hai| Ayukarma kI
abAdhA ke saMbaMdha meM eka bAna aura dhyAna meM rakhane yogya hai ki pUrva meM
jo sAta karmoM kI sthiti batalAI hai usameM unakA abAdhAkAla bhI saMmilita hai|
jaise ki mithyAtva mohanIya kI utkRSTa sthiti sattara kor3Akor3I sAgaropama ko
batalAI hai aura usakA abAdhAkAla sAta hajAra varSa hai, to ye mAta hajAra varSa
usa sattara koDAkor3I sAgaropama kI sthiti meM saMmilita haiM  /  ataH jaba
mithyAtva mohanIya kI abAdhArahita sthiti (anubhavayogyA) ko jAnanA cAheM to
usakI abAdhA ke sAta hajAra varSa kama kara denA cAhie  /  kintu 1
opapAtikanaramadehottamapuruSA'saMkhyeyavarSAyuSo'napavAyuSaH  /  -
tasvArthasUtra 2052 aupapAtika (nAraka aura deva, nAma zarIrI, uttama puruSa
aura asaMkhyAta varSa jIvI, ye anapavartanIya Ayu vAle hote haiM  /

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Karma-Pratya 141  This is not the case with Ayukarma. The thirty-three
Sagars, three Palyas, and the countless parts of a Palyas, as described in the
state of Ayukarma, are pure states. They do not include the Adadhakal. The
reason for this difference is that the state of other Karmas is dependent on the
proportion of their unobstructed state, which makes it certain. However, the
unobstructed state of Ayukarma is not certain. Because even in the division of
lifespan, the binding of Ayukarma is not inevitable. Dividing the division again
and again, eight divisions arise. Even in those, if there is no binding of
lifespan, then death occurs, and the binding of lifespan happens in the very
last moment before death. Due to this uncertainty, the Adadhakal is not included
in the state of Ayukarma.  The Sangrahani Sutra also clarifies this point
regarding the lifespan binding related to the next birth:  "Devas, Narakas, and
humans with lifespans of countless years, and Tiryanchas with six months of
lifespan remaining, bind the lifespan of the next birth when they have a
remaining lifespan that is not subject to division. Those beings with a lifespan
subject to division bind the lifespan of the next birth when they have one-
third, one-ninth, or one-twenty-seventh of their lifespan remaining. If they are
unable to bind lifespan within these three divisions, then they bind it in the
final moment before death."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmapratya 141 Ayukarma kI sthiti meM yaha bAta nahIM hai  /  Ayukarma
kI tetIsa sAgara, tIna palya, palya kA asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga Adi jo sthiti batalAI
hai, vaha zuddha sthiti hai, usameM adAdhAkAla saMmilita nahIM hai  /  isa
antara kA kAraNa yaha hai ki anya karmoM kI abAdhA sthiti ke anu pAta para
avalaMbita hai jisase vaha sunizcita hai kintu Ayukarma kI abAdhA sunizcita
nahIM hai| kyoMki Ayu ke vibhAga meM bhI Ayukarma kA baMdha avazyaMbhAvI nahIM
hai| vibhAga ke bhI vibhAga karate karate ATha vibhAga par3ate haiM  /  unameM
bhI yadi Ayu kA baMdha na ho to maraNa me antarmuhUrta pahale avazya ho Ayu ko
baMdha ho jAtA hai| isI anizcitatA ke kAraNa Ayukarma kI sthiti meM usakA
abAdhAkAla saMmilita nahIM kiyA gayA hai  /  parabhava saMbaMdhI AyubaMdha ke
saMbaMdha meM saMgrahaNI sUtra meM bhI isI bAta ko spaSTa kiyA hai vardhati
devanArAya asaMkhanaratiri mAsa sAU  /  parabhaviyAMka sesA nizvarakama
vibhAgamesAU  //  301  //  sokhakamAyA puNe sesatimAge ava navamabhAge satAvIsa
imeSA aMtamuttatimevAdi  //  302  // 1 deva, nAraka aura asaMkhyAta varSa kI Ayu
vAle manuSya aura tiryaca chaha mAsa kI Ayu bAkI rahane para aura zeSa
nirupakrama Ayu vAle jova apanI Ayu kA vibhAga bAkI rahane para parabhava kI Ayu
bAMdhate haiM  /  sopakrama Ayu vAle jIva apanI Ayu ke tribhAga meM athavA
nauveM bhAga meM athavA sattAIsaveM bhAga meM parabhava kI Ayu bAMdhate haiN|
yadi ina tribhAgoM meM bhI Ayu baMdha nahIM kara pAte haiM to antima
antarmuhUrta meM

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 142nd Century  "They bind the lifespan of the next existence."  The **Gol
Karmakanda** also generally expresses the same view regarding the binding of
lifespan, but it is uncertain about the six-month period of Devas, Narakas, and
Bhogbhoomij, whether the lifespan is bound in the six months or in its division.
If the lifespan is not bound in the division, then it is bound in the ninth part
of the six months. The gist of this is that just as humans and Niyantras in the
lower realms bind the lifespan of the next existence in the division of their
entire lifespan, similarly, Devas, Narakas, and Bhogbhoomij humans, and
Tiryanchas bind the lifespan in the three divisions of their six months. There
is disagreement regarding Bhogbhoomij. Some believe that the lifespan of the
next existence is bound in the division when nine months of their lifespan
remain.   Besides this, there is another disagreement: if the lifespan is not
bound in the eight divisions, then the lifespan of the next existence is bound
by rule when a fraction of the experienced lifespan remains. This is generally
accepted, but some believe that the lifespan of the next existence is bound by
rule when an immeasurable fraction of the experienced lifespan remains, as small
as an Aavlika.  The **Gol Karmakanda** from verses 128 to 133 has the same
statements about the binding of the excellent state of the next existence as the
**Karmagrantha**. However, it is noteworthy that it mentions the state of the
four categories (varna, etc.) as "twenty Kodakodi Sagaropama," while the
**Karmagrantha** mentions ten Kodakodi Sagaropama to twenty Kodakodi Sagaropama
for their sub-categories. The reason for this difference is that the
**Karmagrantha** mentions the excellent state of the sub-categories of varna,
gandha, rasa, and roop based on the collection of these elements. However, there
are only four categories in terms of binding. The author himself has explained
this in the **Snopgyan Tika**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 142 zataka parabhava kI Ayu kA baMdha karate haiN|' 1 gola karmakAMDa meM bhI
AyubaMdha ke saMbaMdha meM sAmAnyatayA yahI vicAra pragaTa kiye haiM kintu deva
nAraka aura bhAgabhUmijoM kI chaha mAha pramANa abAdhA ko lekara usameM
matamaMda hai ki chaha mAsa ma Ayu kA baMdha nahI hotA kintu usake vibhAga meM
AyubaMdha hotA hai aura nata vibhAga meM bhI yadi Ayu na baMdhe to chaha mAsa ke
nauveM bhAga meM Aya baMdha hotA hai  /  isakA sArA yaha hai ki jaise
kamabhUmija manuSya aura niyaMtroM meM apanIapanI pUrI Ayu ke vibhAga meM
parabhava ko Ayu kA baMdha hotA hai, ye meM hI deva. nAraka aura bhogabhUmija
manuSya, tiryacoM ke chaha mAha ke tribhAga meM AyubaMdha hotA hai : digamdAra
meM nAmAbara nahIM * ta  /  bhogabhUmijjoM ko lekara matabheda hai  /  kinhIM kA
mata hai ki unameM no mAsa Ayu zeSa rahane para usake vibhAga meM parabhava kI
Ayu kA badha hotA hai  /  isake sivAya eka matabheda yaha bhI hai ki yadi AThoM
vibhAgoM meM Ayu baMdha na ho to anubhUyamAna Ayu kA eka antarmuhata kAla bAkI
raha jAne para rabhava kI AmU niyama se bana jAtI hai  /  yaha sarvamAnya mana
hai kintu kinhI-kinhI be. mana se anubhayamAna Ayu kA kAlA AvalikA ke asaMkhyAta
bhAga pramANa vAyI rahane para paramava kI Ayu kA nA niyama se hotA hai| go.
karmakAMDa meM gA0 128 se 133 taka karmagrantha ke samAna hI uttara prakRtiyoM
ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha cA kathana vidhA hai| lekina eka bAta ullekhanIya hai ki
usameM varNAdi catuSka kI sthiti bIsakoDAkor3I sAgaropama' kI batalAI hai aura
karmagraMtha meM usake avAnnara bhedoM ko lekara dasa koDAkor3I sAgaropama se
lekara bIsa kor3Ako DI mAmaroSama taka batAI hai  /  ima antara kA kAraNa yaha
hai ki karmagraMtha meM casaMgraha ke AdhAra se varNa, gaMdha, rasa, rUparza ke
avAntara medoM kI utkRSTa sthiti kA kathana kiyA hai  /  vaise to baMdha kI
apekSA se varNAdi cAra hI haiM  /  snopajJa TIkA meM graMthakAra ne svayaM isakA
spaSTIkaraNa kiyA hai|

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Fivefold Submergence  Thus, having explained the excellent state and
unimpeded time of the Uttar Prakritis, we now proceed to explain their inferior
state.  **Lahutibandha, Sanjalanloha, Panavigghana, Nagasesu, Bhinnamuhutasu.**
**Te Attha Asunche Baram Saaye.** || 35 ||  **Word Meanings:**  * Lahutibandha -
Inferior state bondage * Sanjalanloha - Mantra-induced greed * Panavigghana -
Five obstacles to liberation * Nagasesu - Knowledge-obscuring and vision-
obscuring karmas * Bhinnamuhutasu - Internal moments * Te - Those * Attha -
Eight Muhurtas * Jamuche - Of animals and high lineage * Parasa - Twelve
Muhurtas * Saaye - Seven Vedaniyas  **Meaning of the Verse:**  The inferior
state bondage of Sanjalanloha, the five obstacles, the five knowledge-obscuring
karmas, and the four vision-obscuring karmas is in the internal moments. The
inferior state bondage of Yashas Kirti name-karma, high lineage, and the seven
Vedaniyas is for eight Muhurtas, and for twelve Muhurtas for the seven
Vedaniyas.  **Special Meaning:**  Previously, the excellent state bondage of the
karma prakritis was explained. This verse begins the explanation of their
inferior state bondage. This verse refers to the inferior state bondage of
fifteen Dharmic karmas and three Adharmic karmas. According to their division,
their names are as follows:  * **Dharmic:** Five knowledge-obscuring karmas
(like Matijnanaavaran), four vision-obscuring karmas (like
Chakshudarshanavaran), Sanjalanloha, five obstacles (like Danaantaraaya). *
**Adharmic:** Yashas Kirti name-karma, high lineage, seven Vedaniyas.  Regarding
the inferior state bondage, the general rule is that it occurs at the time of
their respective bondage-dissociation. In other words, when those prakritis come
to an end, then the said inferior state bondage occurs.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama kamagnanya isa prakAra se uttara prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti aura
abAdhAkAla ko batalAkara aba Age unakI jaghanya sthiti batalAte haiM  /
lahuThibaMdha majalaNalohapavigghanANadaMsesu  /  minamuhutta te aTTa asucne
bArama | sAe  // 35 //  zabdArtha - lahaTiibaMdho-jaghanya sthitibandha,
saMjalaNaloha - maMtra - jana lobha, paNavigdha pAMca anna gaya, nAgasesu-
jJAnAvaraNa aura darzanAvaraNa kA, bhinnamuhusaM-antarmuhUtaM, te ... vaha,
aTTha-ATha guhUrta, jamumce-paza kI ti aura ucca gotra kA, pArasa -bAraha
muhUrta, yaaura, sAe-sAtA vedanIya kaa| gAthArya-saMjvalana lobha, pAMca
aMtarAya, pAMca jJAnAvaraNa aura cAra darzanAvaraNa kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha
antamuharta hai  /  yazaHkIrti nAmakarma aura ucca gotra kA ATha muhUrta tathA
sAtA vedanIya kA bAraha muhUrna jaghanya sthitibaMdha hai  /  vizeSArtha- pUrva
meM karma prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa sthitibandha batalAyA jA cukA hai  /  isa gAthA
se unake jaghanya sthitibaMdha kA kathana prAraMbha karate haiM  /  isa gAthA
meM jina prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya sthitibaMdha ke pramANa kA nirdeza kiyA hai,
unameM dhAtI karmoM kI pandraha aura aghAtI karmoM kI tIna prakRtiyAM haiM  /
vibhAgAnusAra unake nAma isa prakAra haighAtI--matijJAnAvaraNa Adi pAMca
jJAnAbaraNa, cakSudarzanAvaraNa Adi cAra darzanAvaraNa, saMjvalana lobha,
dAnAntarAya Adi pAMca antarAya  /  aghAptI-yazaHauti nAmakarma, uccagotra, sAtA
vedanIya  /  jaghanyasthitibaMdha ke sambandha meM yaha sAmAnya niyama hai ki
yaha sthitibaMdha apane-apane baMdhaviccheda ke samaya hotA hai  /  arthAt jaba
una prakR. tiyoM kA anta AtA hai, tabhI ukta jaghanya sthitibaMdha hotA hai|

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **144**  **Shataka**  The heinous state of binding of the
Sanjwalan Lobha is in the ninth Gunasthan, and the five Antarayas, five
Gnanavarans, and four Darshanavarans are unbound in the final moment of the
tenth Gunasthan. Similarly, the Yashakirti Karma and Unlon are also unbound in
the final moment of the tenth Gunasthan. Only then should their heinous state of
binding be understood. The heinous state of Gnanavaran, Darshanavaran, and
Antaray Karma is for the duration of the final moment, and the heinous state of
Name and Gotra is for the duration of eight moments. The heinous state of the
seven Vedaniyas, which is said to be for twelve moments, should be understood in
relation to the Akapyas. Because it has been previously stated that the heinous
state of the Akapyas is for two moments in the Upshantamoha and other
Gunasthanas. The heinous state of the seven Vedaniyas for twelve moments occurs
in the final moment of the tenth Gunasthan.  **Do Igmaso Pakkho Sanjalanatige
Ghumattuvarisaani. Sesanun Kosaao Micchattathii Jan Laddham. ||36||**  **Word
Meaning:**  * Yogamaso - Two months and one month. * Pakkho - Paksha
(fortnight). * Sanjalanatige - Sanjwalanadhik's Purushaved. * Attha - Eight. *
Parimani - Years. * Sesan - Nourishing Natures. * Ukkossabi - Their own
excellent state. * Micchattathii - The state of Mithyatva. * Jan - Which. * Sai
- Nandh. * Laddham - Obtained.  **Meaning:**  The heinous state of the
Sanjwalanadhik is two months, one month, and one fortnight respectively. The
heinous state of the Purushaved is eight years, and the heinous state of the
remaining Natures is equal to the quotient obtained by dividing their excellent
state by the excellent state of Mithyatva Mohaniya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 144 zataka saMjvalana lobha kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha nauveM guNasthAna meM aura
pAMca aMtarAya, pAMca jJAnAvaraNa aura cAra darzanAvaraNa kA baMdhaviccheda
dasarve guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM hotA hai tathA yazaHkIrti nAmakarma va
unlona kA bhI dAnitamona hArne guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM hotA hai| tabhI
unakA jaghanya sthitibaMdha samajhanA cAhiye  /  jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa aura
antarAya karma kI jaghanya sthiti antamuharta pramANa tathA nAma, gotra kA
jaghanyasthiti ATha muharna pramANa hai | sAtA vedanIya kI jaghanya sthiti jo
bAraha muhUtaM batAI hai baha jaghanya sthiti sakapAya jIvoM kI apekSA meM
samajhanA cAhie  /  kyoMki yaha pahale batalAyA jA cukA hai ki akapAya jIvoM ko
apekSA se to upazAntamoha Adi guNasthAnoM meM usako jaghanya sthiti do mamaya
hai| sAtA vedanIya kI bAraha muhUrta kI jaghanya sthiti dasa guNasthAna ke
aMtima samaya meM hotI hai| do igamAso pakkho saMjalaNatige ghumaTUvarisANi  /
sesANUnakosAo micachattaThiIi jaM laddhaM  // 36 //  zabdArthayogamAso - do mAsa
aura eka mAma. pakkho-pakSa (pakhavAr3A), saMjalaNatige sajvalanadhika kI pu-
purupaveda, aTTa-ATha, parimANi varSa, sesANa-poSa prakRtiyA kI, ukkosAbhI-apanI
utkRSTa sthiti paM, micchasaliIDa- mithyAtva kI sthiti kA bhAga dene se, jaM -
jo, saI-nandha prApta ho  /  gAyArtha--saMjvalanatrika kI jaghanya sthiti krama
se do mAsa, eka mAsa aura eka pakSa hai  /  puruSa veda kI ATha barSa tathA zeSa
prakRtiyoM kI jaghanya sthiti unako utkRSTa sthiti meM mithyAtva mohanIya kI
utkRSTa sthiti ke dvArA bhAga dene para prApta labdha ke barAbara hai|

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **Special Note:** This verse indicates the method to
know the lowest state of four natures and the lowest state of the remaining
natures.  The verse mentions the names of the four natures as follows: Sanjwalan
Krodha (burning anger), Sanchalana Mana (moving mind), Sanjwalan Maya (burning
delusion), and Purusha Veda (male knowledge). Their lowest state of bondage is
respectively two months, one month, fifteen days, and eight years. This lowest
state of bondage occurs during their respective periods of bondage and release,
and their release occurs in the lower Gunasthan.  To know the lowest state of
the remaining natures, the author has given a rule: Divide the highest state of
Mithyatva Mohaniya, which is seventy Koḍakoḍi Sagaropa, by the highest state of
each of those natures. The quotient obtained is their lowest state. This rule
applies to 85 natures. Because the lowest state of Tirthankara and Aharaka-dvik,
eighteen natures mentioned in the previous verse, four natures mentioned in this
verse, and four Ayus and Kriya-shatka are already mentioned. Therefore, after
subtracting 3, 18, 4, 4, 6, and 35 natures from the 120 bondable natures, 85
natures remain. Their lowest state is as follows:  The lowest state of Nidra-
panchaka and Asata-vedaniya is one Sagar, the lowest state of Mithyatva is one
Sagar, the lowest state of twelve Kashayas including Ananta-anubandhi Krodha is
one Sagar, the lowest state of Svi-veda and Manusya-dvik is 24 Sagars (divide
the upper and lower numbers by 5), the lowest state of Sukshma-trika and
Vikalnika is 2 Sagars (divide the upper and lower numbers by 2), the lowest
state of Sthira, Shubha, Subhaga, Susvara, Aadeya, Hasya, Rati, Shubha Vihayoga-
gati, Vajra-rishabha-naraacha-sanhanana, Sama-chaturasra-sansthana, Sugandha,
Shukla-varna, Madhura-rasa, Mridu, Laghu, Snigdha, and Ushna Sparsha is one
Sagar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha {t vizeSa - isa gAyA meM cAra prakRtiyoM kI to nizcita
jaghanya sthiti va zeSa kI jaghanya sthiti jAnane ke liye sUtra kA saMketa kiyA
hai| gAthA meM cAra prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa prakAra batAye haiM-saMjvalana
krodha, saMJcAlana mAna, saMjvalana mAyA aura puruSa veda, inakA jaghanya
sthitibaMdha kramazaH do mAsa eka mAsa, eka pakSa (pandraha dina) aura ATha
varSa hai| yaha jaghanya sthitibaMdha apanI-apanI baMdhavyucchitti ke kAla meM
hotA hai aura inakA baMdhaviccheda nIce guNasthAna meM hotA hai  /  zeSa
prakRtiyoM ko jaghanya sthiti jAnane ke liye granthakAra ne eka niyama batalAyA
hai ki una una prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa sthiti meM mithyAtva mohanIya kI utkRSTa
sthiti jo sattara kor3Akor3I sAgaropana hai, kA bhAga dene para prApta labdha
unako jaghanya sthiti hai  /  jaghanya sthiti ko batalAne vAlA yaha niyama 85
prakRtiyoM para lAgU hotA hai  /  kyoMki tIrthaMkara aura AhArakadvika tathA
pUrva gAthA meM nirdiSTa aThAraha prakRtiyoM va isa gAthA meM batAI cAra
prakRtiyoM kI jaghanya sthiti kA kathana kiyA jA cukA hai tathA cAra Ayu va
kriyaSaTka kI jaghanya sthiti kA kathana Age kiyA jA rahA hai  /  ataH
baMdhayogya 120 prakRtiyoM meM meM 3, 18, 4, 4, 6 35 prakRtiyoM ko kama karane
para 85 prakRtiyAM zeSa rahatI haiN| jinakI jadhanya sthiti isa prakAra hai C
nidrApaMcaka aura asAtAvedanIya kI jaghanya sthiti sAgara, mithyAtva kI eka
sAgara, anaMtAnubaMdhI krodha Adi bAraha kaSAyoM kI sAgara, svIveda aura manuSya
dvikakI 24 sAgara ( ke Upara nIce ke aMkoM ko 5 se kATane se ), sUkSmatrika,
vikalanikako 2 ke aMka se kATane se ), sthira, zubha, subhaga, susvara, Adeya,
hAsya, rati, zubha vihAyogati, vajraRSabhanArAca saMhanana, samacaturasra
saMsthAna, sugandha, zuklavarNa, madhurarasa, mRdu, laghu, snigdha aura uSNa
sparza kI sAgara tathA

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
One should understand the lowest state of the remaining auspicious and
inauspicious categories, the four categories, the second institution and its
collection, the third institution and its collection, the fourth institution and
its collection, the fifth institution and its collection, and the remaining
natures.  These 85 natures can only be bound in their lowest state by a single-
sensed being. In these lowest states, one should know the evidence of the
highest state of these natures in comparison to a single-sensed being, when an
innumerable part of the palya is increased.  The latter part of the verse -
"Memakkosaao" should not be taken as meaning that the attained state is taken,
but rather the highest state of the category should be taken. For example, the
collection of the natures like Matijnanaavaran etc. is called the Jnanavaran
category. The collection of the natures like Chakshudarshanaavaran etc. is
called the Darshanavaran category. The collection of the natures like Saata
Vedaniya etc. is called the Vedaniya category. The collection of the natures
after Darshanamohaniya is called the Darshanamohaniya category. The collection
of the natures of Kashaya Mohaniya is called the Kashaya Mohaniya category, and
the collection of the natures of Nokashay Mohaniya is called the Nokashay
Mohaniya category.  **Chapter 1**  In the state of death, the four categories
are taken, their medas are not, and their highest state is like a sea of kodi
kodi. It should be understood that the lowest state of all four is 3 seas lower
than the general state. The state of the sub-categories of the four categories
is explained according to the Panchasangrah.  **Chapter 2**  **Panchasangrah
5.54**  A collection of similar natures is called a category.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6 zeSa zubha aura azubha varNAdi catuSka kI De sAgara, dUsare saMsthAna aura
saMhatana kI sAgara, tIsare saMsthAna aura saMhanana kI sAgara, ate saMsthAna
aura saMhanana kI sAgara, pAMcaveM saMsthAna aura saMhanana kI sAgara aura zeSa
prakRtiyoM kI sAgara jaghanya sthiti samajhanA cAhiye | TY ina 85 prakRtiyoM kA
jaghanya sthitibaMdha bAdara paryApta ekendriya jIva hI kara sakate haiN| ina
jaghanya sthitiyoM meM palya kA asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga bar3hA dene para ekendriya
jIva kI apekSA se ina prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kA pramANa. jAnanA
cAhiye  / " gAthA ke uttarArdhaM - memAkkosAo mata liI jaM laddhaM kA ukta
vivecana paMcasaMgraha ke anusAra kiyA gayA haiM  /  lekina karmaprakRti grantha
ke anusAra isakA vivecana nimna prakAra se hogA 'ukkosAo' kA artha usa usa
prakRti kI utkRSTa sthiti na lekara varga' kI utkRSTa sthiti grahaNa karanA
caahiye| jaise matijJAnAvaraNa Adi prakRtiyoM kA samudAya jJAnAvaraNa varga kahA
jAtA hai| cakSudarzanAvaraNa Adi prakRtiyoM kA samudAya darzanAvaraNa varga hai|
sAtA vedanIya Adi prakRtiyoM kA varga bedanIya varga hai| darzanamohanIya kI
uttara prakRtiyoM kA samudAya darzanamohanIya varga hai  /  kaSAya mohanIya kI
prakRtiyoM kA samudAya kaSAya mohanIya varga, nokaSAya mohanIya zataka 1 vadha
avasthA meM varNAdi bAra liye jAte haiM, unake meda nahIM, tathA unakI utkRSTa
sthiti jIsa kor3A kor3I sAgaropama hotI hai  /  mata: cAroM kI jaghanya sthiti
sAmAnya se 3 sAgara ko samajhanA cAhiye  /  varNacatuSka ke avAntara bhedoM kI
sthiti paMcasaMgraha ke anusAra batAI hai| jA egidi jahannA pahalA saMsa saMjuyA
sA u  /  tesa jeTThA 2 LLANTI- | paMcasaMgraha 5 / 54 3 sajAtIya prakRtiyoM ke
samudAya ko varga kahate haiM  /  1 | *

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Five Categories of Karma  The aggregate of the **Nokaśaya** karmas is
called the **Nokaśaya** category, the aggregate of the **Nāmakarma** karmas is
called the **Nāmakarma** category, the aggregate of the **Gotrakarma** karmas is
called the **Gotrakarma** category, and the aggregate of the **Antarayakarma**
karmas is called the **Antarayakarma** category.  The highest state of each of
these categories is called the **highest state of the category**. The **highest
state of the category** is the **highest state of Mithyatva** multiplied by the
**highest state of the category**. The **lowest state of the category** is
obtained by subtracting an **innumerable** part of the **highest state of the
category** from the **highest state of the category**.  The reason for this is
that there is a great difference in the **highest state** of different karmas
within the same category. For example, the **highest state** of **Vedaniya
karma** is **thirty Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama**, but the **highest state** of
**Sātavedaniya karma**, a sub-category of **Vedaniya karma**, is half of that,
**fifteen Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama**. According to the **Pañcasamgraha**, to find the
**lowest state** of **Sātavedaniya karma**, we should divide its **highest
state** of **fifteen Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama** by the **highest state of
Mithyatva**. And according to the **Karmapratikrti**, to find the **lowest
state** of the **Sātavedaniya karma** category, we should divide its **highest
state** of **thirty Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama** by the **highest state of Mithyatva**
and then subtract an **innumerable** part of the result.  **1. Baggukkosaṭhiīṇ
Mittakosagaṇ Maṁ Lakha. Sesāṇaṁ Tu Jahannā Pallāsakhijjamāgaṇā.** -
**Karmapratikrti 79**  The **lowest state** of each category is obtained by
dividing the **highest state of the category** by the **highest state of
Mithyatva** and then subtracting an **innumerable** part of the result.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagranya 147 kI prakRttiyoM kA samudrAya nokaSAya mohanIya varga,
nAmakarma ko prakRtiyoM kA samudAya nAmakarma kA varga, gotrakarma ko prakRtiyoM
kA samRdrAya gotrakarma barga aura antarAyakarma kI prakRniyoM kA samudAya
antarAyakarma varga kahalAyegA ! isa prakAra ke pratyeka varga ko jo utkRSTa
sthiti hai, use varga kI utkRSTa sthiti kahate haiM aura usa sthiti meM
mithyAtva kI utkRSTa sthiAna sanara kor3A r3I bAromaga ru bhAga lekara jo labdha
AtA hai, usameM se palya kA asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga kama kara dene para usa varga ke
aMtargata Ane vAlI prakRtiyoM kI jaghanya sthiti jJAta ho jAtI hai  /  aisA
karane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki eka hI varga kI vibhinna prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa
sthiti meM bahuta antara dekhA jAtA hai  /  jaise ki vedanIya karma kI utkRSTa
sthiti tIsa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama hai lekina usake hI bheda sAtAvedanIya kI
utkRSTa sthiti usase AdhI arthAt pandraha koDAkor3I sAgaropama kI btaaii|
paMcasaMgraha ke vivecanAnusAra sAtA - vedanIya kI jaghanya sthiti mAlUma karane
ke liye usakI utkRSTa sthiti pandraha kor3Akor3I sAgaropama meM mithyAtva kI
utkRSTa sthiti kA bhAga denA cAhiye aura karmaprakRti ke anusAra sAtA vedanIya
ke varga kI utkRSTa sthiti tIsa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama meM mithyAtva kI utkRSTa
sthiti kA bhAga dekara labdha meM palya ke asaMkhyAta bhAga ko kama karanA
cAhiye  / ' 1. baggukkosaThiINa mittakosagaMNa maM lakha  /  sesANaM tu jahannA
pllaaskhijjmaagnnaa| -karmaprakRti 79 apane-apane varga kI utkRSTa sthiti meM
mithyAtva kI utkRSTa sthiti kA bhAga dene para jo labdha AtA hai, usameM palya
ke amarUmApta bhAga ko kama kara dene para zeSa prAtiyoM kI jaghanya sthiti
jJAta hotI hai|

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
148 Thus, according to this, the superior state of the Darshanavaraniya and
Vedaniya classes is obtained by dividing the superior state of Mithyatva by
thirty Koḍakoḍi Sagaras, and then subtracting an innumerable part of the Paly
from the resulting value. This gives the inferior state of Nidrapanchaka and
Asata Vedaniya. The superior state of the Darshanamohaniya class is obtained by
dividing the superior state of Mithyatva by seventy Koḍakoḍi Sagaras, and then
subtracting an innumerable part of the Paly from the resulting one Sagara. This
gives the inferior state of Mithyatva. The superior state of the Kshayamohaniya
class is obtained by dividing the superior state of Mithyatva by forty Koḍakoḍi
Sagaras, and then subtracting an innumerable part of the Paly from the resulting
Sagara. This gives the inferior state of the twelve Kshayas, including anger,
etc., which are Anantanubandhi. The superior state of the Nokshayamohaniya class
is obtained by dividing the superior state of Mithyatva by twenty Koḍakoḍi
Sagaras, and then subtracting an innumerable part of the Paly from the resulting
Sagara. This gives the inferior state of the eight Nokpayas, excluding the
Purusha Veda. The superior state of the Nama and Gova classes is obtained by
dividing the superior state of Mithyatva by twenty Koḍakoḍi Sagaras, and then
subtracting an innumerable part of the Paly from the resulting value. This gives
the inferior state of the remaining fifty-seven natures of Namakarma, excluding
Vaikriya Shatka, Aharaka Dvika, Tirthankara, and Yash:Kirti, as well as the
inferior state of the Nica Gothra. Here, in the inferior state of the 85 natures
mentioned, the indication of subtracting an innumerable part of the Paly, as per
the discussion of Karma-prakriti, is not given in this gatha, but in the next
gatha, "Paliyasanakha Sahiṇ Lahubandho" is given. This means that after
subtracting an innumerable part of the Paly, the one-indriya Jiva experiences
the inferior state of those respective natures. Therefore, according to Karma-
prakriti, Pancha Ka Ra Ka 1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 148 taka isake anusAra darzanAvaraNa aura vedanIya varga ko utkRSTa sthiti tIsa
kor3Akor3I sAgara meM mithyAtva kI utkRSTa sthiti sattara kor3a: kor3I sAgara kA
bhAga dene para jo labdha AtA hai usameM patya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga ko kama
kara dene para nidrApaMcaka aura asAtA vedanIya kI jaghanya sthiti jJAta hotI
hai| darzanamohanIya varga kI utkRSTa sthiti sattara kor3Akor3I sAgara meM
mithyAtva kI utkRSTa sthiti kA bhAga dene para prApta labdha eka sAgara meM
palya kA asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga kama karane para mithyAtva kI jaghanya sthiti hotI
hai| kaSAyamohanIya varga kI utkRSTa sthiti cAlIsa koDAkoDI sAgara meM mithyAtva
kI utkRSTa sthiti kA bhAga dekara labdha ke sAgara meM se palya kA asaMkhyAtavAM
bhAga kama karane para anantAnubaMdhI krodhAdi bAraha kaSAyoM kI jaghanya sthiti
jJAta hotI hai| nokaSAyamohanIya varga kI utkRSTa sthiti bIsa kor3Akor3I sAgara
meM mithyAtva kI utkRSTa sthiti kA bhAga dekara labdha sAgara meM se palya kA
asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga kama karane para puruSa veda ke sivAya zeSa ATha nokapAyoM
kI jaghanya sthiti AtI hai| nAmavarga aura govavarga kI utkRSTa sthiti bIsa
koDAkor3I sAgara meM mithyAtva kI utkRSTa sthiti kA bhAga dekara labdha meM se
palya kA asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga kama kara dene para vaikriyaSaTka, AhArakadvika,
tIrthaMkara, yaza:kIrti ko chor3akara nAmakarma kI zeSa sattAvana prakRtiyoM
aura nIcagotra kI jaghanya sthiti jJAta hotI hai| yahAM para jo 85 prakRtiyoM kI
javanya sthiti batalAI hai, usameM karmaprakRti kI vivecanA ke anurUpa palya ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga ko kama karane kA saMketa isa gAthA meM nahIM kiyA gayA hai,
lekina Age kI gAthA meM 'paliyAsaMkhaM sahINa lahubaMdhoM pada diyA hai| jisakA
artha hai palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga ko kama kara dene para ekendriya jIva ko
unauna prakRtiyoM kI aghanya sthiti hotI hai  /  ataH karmaprakRti ke anusAra
paMca ka ra kA 1

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Text (PFC)  **Concerning the Inferior State of Karma-
Natures**  There is no difference in the application of the above verse in the
examination of the inferior state of karma-natures. For it has already been
indicated that the inferior state of bondage is experienced by the one-sensed
beings.  Except for a few natures, having explained the inferior state of the
remaining natures in general, we now explain the superior and inferior states of
the natures suitable for one-sensed beings, etc., and the inferior state of the
subsequent natures of the lifespan karma.  **Verse 37:**  *This (as explained
before) is the superior state of bondage for the one-sensed beings, being an
infinitesimal part of the Palyopam. The inferior state of bondage is, in
sequence, multiplied by twenty-five thousand.*  **Verse 38:**  *For the
विकलेन्द्रिय (two-sensed) and असंज्ञी पंचेन्द्रिय (five-sensed without
consciousness), the superior state of bondage is the largest, and the inferior
state of bondage is the smallest, being an infinitesimal part of the Palyopam.
The lifespan of the gods and humans is a year, and the remaining lifespan is ten
thousand years, which is considered small.*  **Explanation of Terms:**  * अयं
(ayam): This * उनकोसो (unkosso): Superior state of bondage * गिबिसु (gibisu):
One-sensed * पलियासहीण (paliyasheen): Infinitesimal part of the Palyopam *
लघुबंधो (laghubandho): Inferior state of bondage * कमसो (kamso): In sequence *
पणवीसाए (panveesae): Twenty-five thousand * संगुणिओ (sangunio): Multiplied by *
विगलिसग्नि (vigalisagni): विकलेन्द्रिय (two-sensed) * जिडो (jido): Superior
state of bondage * कणिट्ठउ (kanitthau): Inferior state of bondage * पल्ल संभागो
(pall sambhago): Infinitesimal part of the Palyopam * सुरनरपाच (surnarpach):
Lifespan of gods and humans * समा वर्ष (sama varsh): Year * इससहस्स (issahass):
Ten thousand * सेसा (sesa): Remaining * खुट्टम (khuttam): Small  **Understanding
the Verses:**  These verses explain the superior and inferior states of bondage
for one-sensed beings, which are infinitesimal parts of the Palyopam.  **Note:**
For a detailed explanation of the inferior state of bondage, please refer to the
appendix.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karma grantha PFC karma prakRtiyoM kI jaghanya sthiti kI vivecanA
karane meM Age kI gAthA ke ukta pada kI anuvRtti kara lene para kisI prakAra kI
vibhinnatA nahIM rahatI hai| kyoMki yaha pahale saMketa kara Aye haiM ki
jaghanya sthiti ' kA baMdha ekendriya jIva karate haiN| kucha eka prakRtiyoM ko
chor3akara zeSa prakRtiyoM kI sAmAnya se jaghanya sthiti batalAkara aba
ekendriya Adi jIvoM ke yogya prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa aura jaghanya sthiti tathA
Ayu karma kI uttara prakRtiyoM kI jaghanya sthiti batalAte haiM  /  ayamukhoso
gidisu paliyAsaMkhasahoNa lahubaMdho  /  kamaso paNavIsAe
pannAsaprasahassasaMguNio ||37|| vigalisanvisu jiTTho kamija pallasaMkhabhAgUgo
/  suranarapAu samAvasa sahassa sesAu khuDDabhayaM  //  38  //  zabdArtha - ayaM
yaha (pUrvokta rIti meM banAyA gayA), unakoso - utkRSTa sthitibandha, gibisu
ekendriya kA, paliyAsahINa - palyogama ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga hona, laghubaMdho
jaghanyasthitivadha, kamaso - anukrama se, paNavIsAe hajAra se, saMguNio pascIsa
se pannA pacAsa guNA karane para - se, saba mau se, sahasa vigalisagni
vikalendriya aura asaMjJI paMcendriya kA jiDo- utkRSTa sthitibaMdha, kaNiTThau-
jaghanya sthitibaMdha, palla saMbhAgo palyopama ke saMkhyAtaveM bhAga ko kama
karane se, suranarapAca devAyu aura narakAyu kI, samA varSa, isasahassa- dasa
hajAra, sesA bAkI kI Ayu kI, khuTTama - kSudrabhava | gAthAyeM ekendriya jIvoM
ke pUrvokta sthitibaMdha utkRSTa aura jaghanya patyopama ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga
kama samajhanA 1. jaghanya sthitibaMdha ke saMbaMdha meM vizeSa spaSTokaraNa
pariziSTa meM dekhiye  /  - - - " --

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is required to multiply by twenty-five, fifty, one hundred, and one thousand
in sequence. - The superior state of bondage for the विकलेन्द्रियों and the
असंज्ञी पंचेन्द्रिय is उत्कृष्ट स्थिति बन्ध, and the inferior state of bondage
is the numerical part of the पल्योपम, which is less. The inferior state of
देवाबु and नरकायु is ten thousand years, and the क्षुद्रभव of the शे| आयु is the
proof. In the verses of विशेषाध-चूर्व, the superior and inferior states of the
उत्तर प्रकृतियों are described as being normal. But in these two verses, the
एकेन्द्रिय, द्वीन्द्रिय, नौन्द्रिय, चतुरिन्द्रिय, and असंज्ञी पंचेन्द्रिय are
described as having superior and inferior states that are different from the
उत्तर प्रकृतियों. Along with this, the inferior state of the four types of
आयुकर्म is also described. In the previous verse, to describe the inferior state
of bondage of the remaining 85 प्रकृतियों, the method of dividing the superior
state of those प्रकृतियों or the superior state of their वर्ग by the superior
state of मिथ्यात्व was used. The same method is used to calculate the superior
state of bondage of the उत्तर प्रकृतियों of the एकेन्द्रिय जीव. According to
this, the quotient obtained by dividing the previously mentioned superior states
of the desired प्रकृतियों by the superior state of मिथ्यात्व is the superior
state of bondage of that प्रकृति for the एकेन्द्रिय जीव. For example, the
superior state of the twenty प्रकृतियों, which are the five ज्ञानावरण, nine
दर्शनावरण, five अंतराय, and अमातावेदनीय, is thirty कोड़ाकोड़ी सागर प्रमाण. When
this is divided by the superior state of मिथ्यात्व मोहनीय, which is seventy
कोडाकोड़ी सागरोपम, the quotient obtained is सागर प्रमाण, which is the superior
state of bondage of the एकेन्द्रिय जीव. According to the view of कर्मप्रकृति,
the superior state of their वर्ग is मिथ्यास्त्र मोहनीय...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cAhie tathA anukrama se paccIsa, pacAsa, so, hajAra meM guNA karane para -
vikalendriyoM aura asaMjJI paMcendriya kA utkRSTa sthiti bandha hotA hai tathA
jaghanya sthitibaMdha palyopama kA saMkhyAtavAM bhAga nyUna hai| devAbu aura
narakAyu kI jaghanya sthiti dasa hajAra varSa tathA ze| AyuoM kI kSudrabhava
pramANa hai| vizeSAdha-cUrva kI gAthAoM meM uttara prakRtiyo ko utkRSTa aura
jadhanya sthiti sAmAnya se batalAI hai| lekina ina do gAthAoM meM ekendriya,
dvIndriya, naundriya, caturindriya aura asaMjJI paMcendriya ko apekSA uttara
prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa aura jaghanya sthiti batalAne ke  /  sAtha-sAtha Ayukarma
ke cAroM bhedoM kI jaghanya sthiti bhI batalAI hai|  /  pUrva gAthA meM zeSa 85
prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya sthitibaMdha ko batalAne ke liye una prakRtiyoM kI
utkRSTa sthiti yA unake varga kI utkRSTa  /  sthiti meM mithyAtva kI utkRSTa
sthiti se bhAga dene kA jo vidhAna kiyA gayA hai, usI ko ekendriya jIvoM ke
uttara prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ko nikAlane ke liye bhI kAma meM lAyA
jAtA hai| tadanusAra vivakSita prakRtiyoM kI pUrva meM batAI gaI utkRSTaH
sthitiyoM meM mithyAtva kI utkRSTa sthiti kA bhAga dene para jitanA labdha AtA
hai, utanA hI ekendriya jIva ke usa prakRti kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha hotA hai  /
jaise ki pAMca jJAnAvaraNa, nau darzanAvaraNa, pA~ca aMtarAya aura
amAtAvedanIya, ina bIsa prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti tIsa kor3Akor3I sAgara
pramANa hai to isako mithyAtva mohanIya kI utkRSTa sthiti sattara koDAkor3I
sAgaropama kA bhAga dene para prApta labdha , sAgara pramANa kA utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha ekendriya jIva kA hogaa| karmaprakRti ke maMtavyAnusAra inake
vargoM kI utkRSTa sthiti meM mithyAstra mohanIya

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  The excellent state of the **Pancham Karma Granth**
should be understood as equal to the gain obtained by dividing it. For example,
the excellent state of the five **Jnana Avaranas**, nine **Darshana Avaranas**,
two **Bedaniya**, and five **Antarayas** is **thirty Kodakodi Sagara** as per
the **Tees Koḍakoḍī Sāgara** proof. In that, the excellent state of **Mithyatva
Mohaniya** is **seventy Kodakodi Sagara** and the gain obtained by giving
**Bhaam** to it will be the proof of the excellent state bond of a **one-sense
being**. Thus, even though there is a difference in the style of statement of
both, the basic intention is the same.  In the same way, by calculating the
state of other natures, the **Mithyatva** is one **Sagara**, sixteen **Kshayas**
are **Sagara**, nine **Nokshayas** are **Sagara**, **Vakriya Shatk**, **Aharak
Dwik**, and **Tirthankara** names are excluded, **one-sense** 1. **One-sense**
etc. beings are **Kamia Patak** or... that c. The excellent state is not
mentioned, but the **five-sense** **Asanji** has its **bandh**. Therefore, in
comparison to it, the **Vakriya Shatk**'s lower and excellent state is mentioned
in **Panchasangrah** as follows:  **"Vashvikki tam sahasatahiyam jam agnino
tesi. Paliyasakhansunam thii abahooniani sego."** — **Panchasangrah 146**  The
excellent state of **Vakriya Shatk** is divided by the state of **Mithyatva**.
The quotient obtained is multiplied by a thousand. The **Asankhyat** part of the
**Palpopama** from the product is the lower state of **Vakriya Shatk**. Here,
**Adhakal** is the lower **Nisek** time. The excellent state of **Vakriya
Shatk** is **twenty Kodakodi Sagara**. Here, it is important to know that the
excellent state of **Narakdik**, **Kriyanik** is **twenty Kodakodi Sagara** and
the excellent state of **Devdik** is **ten Kodakodi Sagara**. However, **twenty
Kodakodi Sagara** is taken as the proof to mention its lower state. This
explanation is given in the **Tika**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha kI utkRSTa sthiti kA bhAga dene se prApta labdha ke
barAbara samajhanA cAhie ! jaise ki pAMca jJAnAvaraNa, nau darzanAvaraNa, do
bedanIya aura pA~ca aMtarAya ke vargoM kI utkRSTa sthiti tIsa kor3Akor3I sAgara
pramANa hai  /  usameM mithyAtva mohanIya kI utkRSTa sthiti sattara kor3Akor3I
sAgaropama kA bhAma dene para prApta labdha ekendriya jIva ke utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha kA pramANa hogA  /  isa prakAra se donoM kI kathana zailI meM
bhinnatA hone para bhI mUla Azaya samAna hai| isI krama se anya prakRtiyoM kI
sthiti nikAlane para mithyAtva kI eka sAgara, solaha kaSAyoM ko sAgara, nau
nokaSAyoM kI sAgara, vakriyaSaTka', AhArakadvika aura tIrthakara nAma ko
chor3akara ekendriya 1 ekendriyAdika jIda ke kAmiyapaTaka hoM yA . usa ca
utkRSTa sthiti nahIM batalAI hai kintu asaMjJI paMcendriya ko usakA badha hotA
hai  /  ataH usakI apekSA pacasagraha meM baiMkriyaSaTka kI nimna prakAra se
jaghanya va utkRSTa sthiti batalAI hai vazvikki taM sahasatAhiyaM jaM agniNo
tesi  /  paliyAsakhaMsUNaM ThiI abAhUNiyanisego  //  --paMcasaMgraha 146
vaikriyapadaka kI utkRSTa sthiti ko midhyAtva kI sthiti dvArA bhAga dene para.
jo labdha Aye usako hajAra se guNA karane para prApta guNanaphala meM se
palpopama kA asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga nyUna paMkriyaSaTka kI jaghanma sthiti hai|
atrAdhAkAla nyUna niSeka kAla hai| vaMkriyaSaTka kI utkRSTa sthiti vIsa
kor3Akor3I sAgara pramANa hai| yahAM sanA vizeSa jAnanA cAhiye ki narakadika,
kriyanika kI utkRSTa sthiti vIsa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kI aura devaddhika kI
utkRSTa sthiti dasa kor3AkoDI sAgaropama batta lAI hai, tathApi yaha usakI
jaghanya sthiti batalAne ke lie bIsa koDAkoDI mAgara pramANa liyA gayA hai  /
yaha spaSTIkaraNa TIkA meM kiyA gayA hai|

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  152  There are 58 types of karmas called "bandha yogya" (karma
that binds) and the excellent state of both the gotras (lineages) is described
as "sagar praman" (as vast as an ocean).  _ In this excellent state of binding
for the "ekendriya" (one-sensed) being, an innumerable part of "paly" (a unit of
measurement) is reduced. However, the "palyasankhasheen lahubandha" (very small
binding) will be the proof of the "jghanya sthitibandha" (inferior state of
binding) for the "ekendriya" being. This means that from the various types of
"sagar" etc. excellent states that have been described, if an innumerable part
of "paly" is reduced, then that very nature becomes the inferior state for the
"ekendriya" being. _ After explaining the magnitude of the "sthitibandha" (state
of binding) in relation to the "ekendriya" being, now we will explain its
magnitude for the "vikaleindriya" (two-sensed) and "asangya panchendriya" (five-
sensed, non-conscious) beings.  The "sagar" etc. excellent state of binding that
has been described for the "ekendriya" being, when multiplied by twenty-five,
becomes the "sthitibandha" for the "dwindriya" (two-sensed) being, when
multiplied by fifty, becomes the "sthitibandha" for the "triindriya" (three-
sensed) being, when multiplied by one hundred, becomes the "sthitibandha" for
the "chaturindriya" (four-sensed) being, and when multiplied by one thousand,
becomes the "sthitibandha" for the "asangya panchendriya" (five-sensed, non-
conscious) being. This means that the "sthitibandha" for the "dwindriya" etc.
beings is twenty-five, fifty times etc. more than the "sthitibandha" for the
"ekendriya" being. For example, if the excellent state of "mithyatva" (false
belief) for the "ekendriya" being is one "sagar", then the excellent state of
"mithyatva" for the "dwindriya" being is twenty-five "sagar" bound. The same
analogy should be understood for other types of karmas. Similarly, for the
"shriindriya" (six-sensed) being, it should be known that if the excellent state
of "mithyatva" for the "ekendriya" being is one "sagar", then it is bound fifty
times more, meaning fifty "sagar". The same rule should be applied for the
"sthitibandha" of other types of karmas. For the "chaturindriya" (four-sensed)
being, the excellent state of the "ekendriya" being is multiplied by one
hundred.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 152 ghAtaka ke baMdha yogya nAmakarma kI 58 prakRtiyoM aura donoM gotroM kI
sAgara pramANa utkRSTa sthiti AtI hai| _ ekendriya ke isa utkRSTa sthitibaMdha
meM se patya kA asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga kama kara dete. para ekendriya jova ke
jaghanya sthitibaMdha kA pramANa hogA paliyAsaMkhasahINa lhubNdho| arthAt jo
vibhinna prakR. tiyoM kI : sAgara Adi utkRSTa sthitiyAM batalAI haiM, unameM se
palya kA asaMkhyAtavA~ bhAga kama kara dene para ekendriya jIva ke lie vahI usa
prakRti ko jaghanya sthiti ho jAtI hai| _ isa prakAra se ekendriya kI apekSA se
sthitibaMdha kA parimANa batalAne ke pazcAta aba vikalendriya aura asaMjJI
paMcendriya jIvoM ke liye usakA parimANa batalAte haiN| ekendriya jIva ke jo
sAgara Adi utkRSTa sthitibaMdha batalAyA hai, usako paccIsa se guNA karane para
dvIndriya kA,pacAsa se guNA karane para trIndriya kA, sau se guNA karane para
caturindriya kA aura hajAra se guNA karane para asaMjJI paMcendriya jIvoM kA
utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kA parimANa hotA hai  /  isakA artha yaha hai ki dvIndriya
Adi jIvoM kA sthitibaMdha ekendriya jIva ke sthitibaMdha kI apekSA paccIsa,
pacAsa guNA Adi adhika hai  /  jaise ekendriya jIva ke mithyAtva kI utkRSTa
sthiti eka sAgara hai to hIndriya jIva ke usakI utkRSTa sthiti paccIsa sAgara
baMdhatI hai  /  anya prakRtiyoM ke liye bhI isI apekSA ko samajha lenA cAhiye
/  isI prakAra zrIndriya ke lie jAnanA cAhiye ki ekendriya jIva kI mithyAtva kI
utkRSTa sthiti eka sAgara pramANa hai to usase pacAsa guNI yAnI pacAsa sAgara
pramANa baMdhatI hai  /  anya prakRtiyoM ke sthitibaMdha ke bAre meM bhI isI
niyaya kA upayoga karanA caahie| caturindriya jIva ke lie ekendriya jIva kI
utkRSTa sthiti meM sau kA

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Form Granth 153  For the five senses (Panchendriya) and the non-
sentient (Asanshi), one should multiply by a thousand. The resulting product
will be the highest state of that particular nature for those beings.  From the
two-sensed (Dwiendriya) to the non-sentient five-sensed (Asanshi Panchendriya),
the highest state-bond (Sthitibandh) has been described. By subtracting the
numerical part of the 'Paly' from it, their respective lowest state-bond is
obtained. In this way, one should understand the measure of the state-bond of
beings from the one-sensed (Ekendriya) to the non-sentient five-sensed (Asanshi
Panchendriya).  1. Similar to the Karma Granth, the Go. Karmakand also describes
the measure of the state-bond of one-sensed (Ekendriya) and other beings. Its
statement system is as follows:  "Evam Pagdi Panam Sapam Sahassan Cha
Mimvaravandho. Igavigalanam Avaram Pallasanghanasanghan." (144)  The highest
state-bond of the one-sensed (Ekendriya) and the four types of deficient-sensed
(Vikalendriya) beings (two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, non-sentient five-
sensed) are respectively one ocean (Sagar), twenty-five oceans, fifty oceans,
one hundred oceans, and one thousand oceans. And their lowest state-bond is one
ocean without the innumerable part of the 'Paly' for the one-sensed (Ekendriya),
and their respective highest state-bond minus the numerical part of the 'Paly'
for the deficient-sensed (Vikalendriya) beings.  "Adi Saptariss Ettipamettam Ki
Hodi Tisiyabogam. Hari Sampaate Sesanan Igivigale Ubhayathini." (145)  If a one-
sensed (Ekendriya) being with a state of seventy kodi kodi oceans of false-self
(Mithyatma) karma binds one ocean, then how much can the remaining karmas with
states of sixty kodi kodi oceans and so on bind for the one-sensed (Ekendriya)
being? In this way, by applying the rule of proportion (Rasik Vidhi), the
highest state of the one-sensed (Ekendriya) being is one ocean. Thus, both
states are obtained through the rule of proportion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama phArmagranya 153 guNA tathA asaMzI paMcendriya ke liye hajAra kA guNA
karanA cAhie  /  isakA jo guNanaphala prApta ho vaha una-una jIvoM kI usa-usa
prakRti kI utkRSTa sthiti hogii| dvIndriya se lekara asaMzI paMcendriya paryanta
jo unakA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha batalAyA hai, usameM se palya' kA saMkhyAtavAM
bhAga kama kara dene para unakA apanA-apanA jaghanya sthitibaMdha hotA hai| isa
prakAra ekendriya se lekara asaMJI paMcendriya paryanta jIvoM ke sthitibaMdha kA
pramANa samajhanA caahiye| 1 karmagrantha kI taraha go0 karmakAMDa meM bhI
ekendriya Adi jIvoM ke sthitibaMdha kA pramANa batalAyA hai  /  usakI kathana
praNAlo isa prakAra hai evaM pagadi pANaM sapaM sahassaM ca mimvrvNdho|
igavigalANaM avaraM pallAsaMgNasaMkhaNa  // 144 //  ekendriya aura vikalendrima
catuSka (dvIndriya, zrIndriya, paturindriya, asaMgI pacendriya) jIvoM ke
mithyAtva kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kramazaH eka sAgara, paccIsa sAmara, pacAsa
sAgara, so mAgara aura eka hajAra sAgara pramANa hai tathA usakA jaghanya
sthitibaMdha ekendriya ke pasya ke asaMkhyAta bhAgahIna eka sAgara pramANa hai
tathA vikanendriya jIvoM ke palya ke saMkhyAtaveM bhAga hIna apanI-apanI utkRSTa
sthiti pramANa hotA hai| Adi saptarissa ettipametaM ki hodi tIsiyAbogaM  /  hari
saMpAte sesANaM igivigale ubhayaThinI  // 14 //  yadi sattara koDAkor3I sAgara
kI sthiti vAlA midhyAtma karma ekendriya jIva eka sAgara pramANa bAMdhatA hai to
sIsa koDAkor3I sAgara Adi kI sthiti vAle bAkI karmoM ko ekendriya jIva kisanI
sthiti pramANa bAMdha sakatA hai ? isa prakAra rAzika vidhi karane se kendriya
jIva kI utkRSTa sthiti va sAgara pramANa hotI hai, isa prakAra donoM sthitiyAM
rAzipha ke dvArA nikala AtI haiN|

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Lowest State of Existence  The lowest state of existence for the four
types of life (Deva-ayu, Nara-ayu, Tiryancha-ayu, and Manusya-ayu) should be
understood as follows:  The lowest state of existence for Deva-ayu and Nara-ayu
is ten thousand years. For the remaining two types of life, Tiryancha-ayu and
Manusya-ayu, the lowest state of existence is **Kshudra-bhava** (a very small
amount of time).  The **Anta-muhurt** (the final moment) mentioned in the
scriptures for the lowest state of existence of Manusya-ayu and Tiryancha-ayu
does not contradict the **Kshudra-bhava** mentioned here. This is because there
are many types of **Anta-muhurt**, and here we should consider **Kshudra-bhava**
as the **Anta-muhurt**. **Kshudra-bhava** is written after **Anta-muhurt** to
indicate its small duration and magnitude. The explanation of **Kshudra-bhava**
will be given later.  Having explained the lowest state of existence for the
four types of life, we now discuss the differences of opinion regarding the
lowest state of existence for **Jighnya-abadaha** (the state of being free from
obstacles) and the **Tirthankara** and **Aharaka** (two types of spiritual
beings).  **Verse 36:**  **Savaanavi lahubandhe bhinnamuhu avaah aujithhe thi.
Ke i . suraausamam jinamantmaur diti bhaharam.**  **Translation:**  The lowest
state of existence for all types of life has a **Anta-muhurt** (final moment)
that is free from obstacles. The lowest state of existence for the highest state
of existence of **Ayu-karma** (life-karma) is also **Anta-muhurt**. Some say
that the lowest state of existence for **Deva-ayu** is the same as the **Anta-
muhurt** for **Tirthankara** and **Aharaka**.  **Explanation:**  The lowest
state of existence for all types of life has a final moment that is free from
obstacles. The lowest state of existence for the highest state of existence of
life-karma is also the final moment. Some say that the lowest state of existence
for Deva-ayu is the same as the final moment for Tirthankara and Aharaka.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zamaka Ayukama kI uttara prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha isa prakAra
samajhanA cAhiye ki 'sUranarayAu samAdasasahassa' devAyu aura narakAyu kI
jaghanya sthiti dasa hajAra varSa hai tathA devAyu va narakAyu ke sivAya zeSa do
AyuoM -tiryaMcAyu, manuSyAyu kI jaghanya sthiti kSudrabhava pramANa hai  /
AgamoM meM jo manupyAyu aura tiryaMcAyu kI jaghanya sthiti antamu hurta pramANa
banalAI hai, usakA yahAM batalAye gaye bhudrabhava pramANa se koI virodha nahIM
hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki antamuhUrta ke bahuta se bheda hai, unameM se
yahAM kSudrabhava pramANa antamuhUrta lenA cAhiye  /  antamuha likhakara usake
dhokA auka parimAna kA mUnaka kSudrabhava likhA hai  /  kSudabhava kA nirUpaNa
Age kiyA jA rahA hai| ina prakAra se unara prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya sthitibaMdha
kA kathana karake aba jaghanya abAdhA tathA tIrthakara va AhArakadvika ke
jaghanya sthitibaMdha saMbaMdhI matAntara ko batalAte haiM  /  savANavi
lahubaMdhe bhinnamuhU avAha AujiThe thi  /  ke i . surAusamaM jiNamaMtamUra diti
bhAhAraM  // 36 //  zabdArtha-sanmANa- saba prakRtiyoM kI.vi-tathA, samaMdhe -
jayanya sthitibaMdha kI, bhinnamutra- antarmuhUrta, abAha abAdhAkAla, Aujinche
thi- Ayu ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kI bhI, ke-kucha eka, murAumAma devAyu ke
samAna, jiNaM tIryavara nAmakarma kI, aMtamuha .anta mahataM, viti - kahate
haiM, AhAraM AhAraddhika kro  /  _ gAdhArya-samasta prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya
sthitibaMdha kI antama hurna kI abAdhA hotI hai| Ayukarma ke utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha kI jaghanya abAdhA antamuhurta pramANa hai| kinhI

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **155**  According to the Acharyas, the **jghanya**
(lowest) state of the **Tīrthankara** **nāmakarma** is equivalent to ten
thousand years of the **jghanya** state of **devāyu**, and the **antya-muhūrta**
(last moment) is the proof for **āhārakadvik**.  The **gāthā** (verse) mentions
two things. The first part of the **gāthā** describes the **jghanya**
**avādhākāla** (unobstructed time) for all **uttara-prakr̥ti** (higher natures),
and the second part explains the difference of opinion regarding the **jghanya**
state of **Tīrthankara** and **āhārakadvik**.  The **avādhākāla** in the
**jghanya** state is called **jghanya avādhā**, and the **avādhākāla** in the
**utkṛṣṭa** (highest) state is called **utkṛṣṭa avādhā**. Therefore, the
**gāthā** states that the **avādhākāla** for the **jghanya** state of all
**uttara-prakr̥ti** is **antya-muhūrta** proof: "**Savvāṇavi lahubandhe
bhinnamūh abāh**." However, this rule applies to the **avādhākāla** of the
remaining seven **karmas** excluding **āyukarma**. This is because their
**avādhā** state depends on **pratibhāga** (participation). However, there is no
definite and decisive state of **pratibhāga** for **āyukarma**. Even in the
**utkṛṣṭa** state of **āyukarma**, there can be **jghanya avādhā**, and even in
the **jghanya** state, there can be **utkṛṣṭa avādhā**. Therefore, there are
four possibilities for the **avādhā** of **āyukarma**:  1. **Utkṛṣṭa avādhā** in
the **utkṛṣṭa** state. 2. **Jghanya avādhā** in the **utkṛṣṭa** state. 3.
**Utkṛṣṭa avādhā** in the **jghanya** state. 4. **Jghanya avādhā** in the
**jghanya** state.  Their explanation is as follows: When a person binds the
**āyu** (life span) of thirty-three **sāgara** (oceans) while one-third of their
previous **koṭi** (class) of **āyu** remains, then there is **utkṛṣṭa avādhā**
in the **utkṛṣṭa** state. And if they bind the **āyu** of thirty-three
**sāgara** while the **antya-muhūrta** proof of **āyu** remains, then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 155 AcAryoM ke mata se tIrthakara nAmakarma kI jaghanya
sthiti devAyu kI jaghanya sthiti ke mamAna dasa hajAra varSa kI hai aura
AhArakadvika kI antamuharta pramANa hai  /  zizeSArtha- gAthA meM do bAtoM kA
kathana kiyA gayA hai  /  gAthA ke pUrvArdha meM sabhI uttara prakRtiyoM kA
jaghanya abAdhAkAla aura uttarArdha meM tIrthaMkara va AhArakAdvika kI jaghanya
sthiti kA matAntara batalAyA jaghanya sthitibaMdha meM jo avAdhAkAla hotA hai,
use jaghanya abAdhA aura utkRSTa sthitibaMdha meM jo abAdhAkAla hotA hai use
utkRSTa abAdhA kahate haiN| ataH jaghanya sthitibaMdha meM sabhI uttara prakRti
ke jaghanya sthitibaMdha kA abAdhAkAla antamuhUrta pramANa batalAyA
hai-"savvANavi lahubaMdhe bhinnamUha abAha  / " lekina yaha niyama Ayukarma ko
chor3akara zeSa sAta karmoM ke avAdhAkAla ko batalAne ke lie lAgU hotA hai  /
kyoMki unakI abAdhA sthiti ke pratibhAga ke anusAra hotI hai| lekina Ayukarma ke
bAre meM pratibhAga kI nizcita nirNayAtmaka sthiti nahIM hai| Ayukarma kI to
utkRSTa sthiti meM bhI jaghanya abAdhA ho sakatI hai aura jaghanya sthiti meM
bhI utkRSTa abAdhA ho sakatI hai| imIliye Ayukarma kI abAdhA meM cAra vikalpa
mAne jAte haiM-(1) utkRSTa sthitibaMdha meM utkRSTa abAdhA, (2) utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha meM jaghanya abAdhA, (3) jaghanya sthitibaMdha meM utkRSTa abAdhA
aura (4) jaghanya sthitibaMdha meM jaghanya abAdhA  /  inakA spaSTIkaraNa nimna
prakAra hai ki jaba koI manuSya apanI pUrva koTi kI Ayu meM tIsarA bhAga zeSa
rahane para tetIsa sAgara kI Ayu bAMdhatA hai taba utkRSTa sthiti meM utkRSTa
avAdhA hotI hai aura yadi antamuhUrta pramANa Ayu zeSa rahane para tetIsa sAgara
kI Ayu bAMdhatA

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 156 ## Sataka  When there is a **jghanya** (inferior) obstacle in the
**utkrista** (superior) state, it means that a person has bound **parbhava**
(liberation) in the **jghanya** state while still having one-third of their
**purva koti** (previous life) remaining. This can be considered an
**antmuhurt** (momentary) evidence. When someone binds **parbhava** in the
**antmuhurt** state while still having some **antmuhurt** state remaining, it is
considered a **jghanya** obstacle in the **jghanya** state. Therefore, even in
the **utkrista** state of **ayukarbha** (life span), there can be a **jghanya**
obstacle, and even in the **jghanya** state, there can be an **utkrista**
obstacle. A detailed explanation is provided in the appendix.  This is how one
should understand the obstacles in the state of **karma**. Now, let's consider
the **jghanya** state binding of **tirthankara** (liberated soul) **namakarma**
(name karma) and **aaharaka** (food karma) according to different opinions.
**Andhakara** (a Jain scholar) has previously stated that **tirthankara**,
**aaharaka**, and these three **prakritis** (substances) are bound in the
**jghanya** state, which is like an **antakodi** (end of a kalpa) **sagara**
(ocean). However, some **acharyas** (teachers) state that these three are bound
in the **jghanya** state:  "**Muranaryaouyaanam rasavasasahas laghu
satittvaanam**." The **jghanya** state of **tirthankara** **namakarma** along
with **devayau** (divine life) and **narakayau** (hell life) is ten thousand
years. This means that the **jghanya** state of **tirthankara** **namakarma** is
ten thousand years in duration. And,  "**Saaye baras haragaviggyavarananam
kinvrina**." The **jghanya** state of **saata** (seven) **vedaniya** (painful)
is twelve **muhurtas** (moments), and **aaharaka**, **antaraya** (obstacle),
**gyanavaran** (veil of knowledge), and **darshanavaran** (veil of perception)
are slightly less than a **muhurt** in duration.  1. **Panchasangraha** 5.46 2.
**Panchasangraha** 5.47

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 156 sAtaka hai taba utkRSTa sthiti meM jaghanya abAdhA hotI hai| jaba koI
manuSya eka pUrva koTi kA tIsarA bhAga zeSa rahate parabhava ko jaghanya sthiti
bAMdhatA hai jo antamuhUrta pramANa ho sakatI hai, taba jaghanya sthiti meM
utkRSTa abAdhA hotI hai aura jaba koI antamuhUrta pramANa sthiti zeSa rahane
para parabhava kI antamuhUrta pramANa sthiti bAMdhatA hai taba jaghanya sthiti
meM jaghanya abAdhA hotI hai| ata: Ayukarbha kI utkRSTa sthiti meM bhI jaghanya
abAdhA ho sakatI hai aura jaghanya sthiti meM bhI utkRSTa abAdhA ho sakatI hai|
vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa pariziSTa meM kiyA gayA hai| isa prakAra se karmoM kI sthiti
kI abAdhA kA spaSTIkaraNa samajhanA cAhiye  /  aba dUsarI bAta tIrthaMkara
nAmakarma va AhArakadvika ko jaghanya sthitibaMdha ke matAntara para vicAra
karate haiN| andhakAra ne pUrva meM tIrthakara aura AhArakadvika ina tIna
prakRtiyoM ko jaghanya sthiti antaHkor3Akor3I sAgaropama batalAI hai| lekina
koI-koI AcArya ina tInoM kI jaghanya sthiti batalAte haiM muranArayAuyANaM
rasavAsasahassa laghu satittvANaM  / ' tIrthaMkara nAmakarma sahita devAyu,
narakAyu kI jaghanya sthiti dasa hajAra varSa hai  /  yAnI tIrthaMkara nAmakarma
kI jaghanya sthiti dasa hajAra varSa pramANa hai 1 tathA sAe bArasa
hAragavigyAvaraNANa kiMvRNa  / ' sAtA vedanIya kI bAraha muhUrta aura AhAraka,
aMtarAya, jJAnAvaraNa va darzanAvaraNa ko kucha kama muhUrta pramANa jaghanya
sthiti hai| 1. paMcasaMgraha 5 / 46 2. paMcasagraha 5147

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 157  The text does not provide an explanation by
mentioning alternative views. Perhaps due to the lack of such a tradition, a
specific explanation could not be provided.  Previously, the inferior state of
Tiryanchayu and Manushayau was described as equivalent to Ksudra Bhav.
Therefore, we now describe Ksudra Bhav in two verses.  **Igamuhurtaami ||40||**
Sattaras Samahiya Fir Iganupaami Ti Khaddangabha. Sagatis Sayatihattar Paanu Pun
Panasattasa Hastapanasay Chhattisa Abaliaanang Dhosay Chappanna Igamuttakhu
Bhava. Egkhuddabhave ||41||  **Word Meaning:**  Sattaras - Seventeen Samahiya
(slightly more), Kir -  Hriti in Pravasochchwas (breathing in and out)
Iganupaanu Mi - One, Khubhava - Ksullak Bhav (inferior state)
Sagalisasayatihattar - Thirty-seven hundred Tihattar, Paanu - Pran (breath),
Shwasochchwas (breathing in and out) Igamuttami - One Muhurta (moment) Pan
Sihassa Painsath Hazar, Panasay - Five hundred Chhattisa -  Khuda -  Chhattisa
Igamuhutta - One Muhurta (moment) in Drav Mavaliaanang - Aavlika, Dhosay - Two
hundred, Chappanna - Fifty-six, Emkhudave - One Ksudra Bhav (inferior state)
**Meaning:**  In one breath, there are definitely slightly more than seventeen
Ksudra Bhav, and in one Muhurta (moment), there are thirty-seven hundred and
seventy-three breaths. And,  1. In one Muhurta (moment), there are fifty-six
thousand breaths, five hundred and thirty-six Aavlika, and two hundred and
fifty-six Ksudra Bhav.  **Note:**  Even in the Panchasangrah, the commentary on
these verses does not provide a detailed discussion by mentioning alternative
views. The ten thousand years of Tirthankara's Namkarma is considered the
inferior state bond, which is less than the ten thousand years of life bond in
hell for a being who goes there.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 157 matAntara kA ullekha karake isakA spaSTIkaraNa nahIM
kiyA hai  /  saMbhavataH tathAvidha paraMparA kA abhAva ho jAne se vizeSa
spaSTIkaraNa nahIM kiyA jA sakA hai  / " pahale tiryacAyu aura manuSyAyu kI
jaghanya sthiti kSudrabhava ke barAbara batalAI hai, ataH aba do gAthAoM meM
kSudrabhava kA nirUpaNa karate haiM  /  igamuhurttAmi ||40|| sattarasasamahiyA
phira igAnupAmi ti khaDaGabhavA  /  sagatIsa sayatihattara pANU puNa
paNasaTThisa hastapaNasaya chattIsA AbaliyANaM Dhosaya chapannA igamuttakhu
bhavA  /  egakhuDDabhave  //  41  //  zabdArtha - sattarasa - satraha samahiyA
kucha adhika, kira-- pravAsocchvAsa meM hRtihote nizcaya se igANupANu mi - eka
haiM, khubhavA kSullaka bhava sagalIsasayatihattara - saMtIsa sau F tihattara,
pANu - prANa, zvAsocchvAsa igamuttami eka muhUrta meM  /  1 - -- paNa sihassa
paiMsaTha hajAra, paNasaya- pAMca sau chattIsa - 1 khuDA - - chattIsa igamuhutta
eka muhUrta meM drava mAvaliyANaM - AvalikA, dosaya-do sau, chappana chappana,
emakhuDave eka kSudrabhava meM  /  T Muda gAbhArya eka zvAsocchvAsa meM nizcita
rUpa se kucha adhika satraha kSudrabhava aura eka muhUrta meM saMtIsa sau
tihattara zvAsocchvAsa hote haiM  /  tathA 1. paMcasaMgraha meM bhI ukta gAthAoM
kI TIkA meM matAntara kA ullekha karake vizada vivecana nahIM kiyA hai|
tIrthakara nAmakarma kA dasa hajAra varSa pramANa jaghanya sthitibaMdha pahale
naraka meM dasa hajAra varSa kI AyubaMdha sahita jAne vAle jIva kI apekSA
ghaTatA hai  /

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 158  **A Muhurta consists of sixty-five thousand five hundred thirty-
six Kshudra Bhavas, and a Kshudra Bhava consists of two hundred fifty-six
Avalis.**  **Special Note:** The verse explains the nature of Kshudra (small)
Bhava. The smallest of all Bhavas is called 'Kshullaka Bhava'. This Bhava
belongs to the Nigodaya Jiva. Because the Nigodaya Jiva's state is the least
compared to all other Bhavas, and this Bhava occurs only in the Manushya and
Tithyachar Paryayas. Therefore, the lowest state of lifespan in Manushya and
Tithyachar is considered as evidence of Kshullaka Bhava. The magnitude of
Kshullaka Bhava should be understood as follows:  According to Jain time
calculation, there is one Avali of Asankhya time. One Ucchvasa-Nissvasa is one
Sankhya Avali. The time taken by a healthy, young, carefree man to inhale and
exhale once is called one Ucchvasa time or Shvasochchvasa time. Seven
Shvasochchvasa times make one Stoka. Seven Stokas make one Lava, and thirty-five
and a half Lava make one Nali or Ghatika. Two Ghatikas make one Muhurta.
**Verse 1**  "Time is the ultimate, indivisible, and eternal. It is known as
Samaya. Asankhya is the time of one Ucchvasa-Nissvasa. One Ucchvasa-Nissvasa is
when a being breathes in and out once. Seven such breaths are called one Stoka.
Seven Stokas make one Lava, and thirty-five and a half Lava make one Nali. Two
Nalis make one Muhurta."  **Jyotishkarandaka, 6, 10**  **Note:** The term
"Samaya" is used to refer to time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 158 zataka eka muhUrta meM paiMsaTha hajAra pAMca sau chattIsa kSudrabhava hote
haiM aura eka kSudrabhava meM do sau chappana AvalI hotI haiM  /  vizeSArtha -
gAthA meM kSudra ( kSullaka) bhava kA svarUpa batalAyA hai 1 sampUrNa bhavoM meM
saba se choTe bhava ko kSullaka bhava' kahate haiM  /  yaha bhava nigodiyA jIva
ke hotA hai| kyoMki nigodiyA jIva kI sthiti saba bhavoM kI apekSA alpa hotI hai
aura vaha bhava manuSya va tiyaMtra paryAya meM hI hotA hai| jisase manuSya aura
titheca Ayu kI jaghanya sthiti kSullaka bhava pramANa batalAI hai| kSullaka
bhava kA parimANa isa prakAra samajhanA cAhie ki jaina kAlagaNanA ke anusAra
asaMkhyAta samaya kI eka AvalI hotI hai  /  saMkhyAta AvalI kA eka ucchvAsa
nizvAsa hotA hai| eka niroga, svastha, nizcinta, taruNa puruSa ke eka bAra zvAsa
lene aura tyAgane ke kAla ko eka ucchvAsa kAla yA zvAsocchvAsa kAla kahate haiM
/  sAta zvAsocchvAsa kAla kA eka stoka hotA hai| sAta stoka kA eka laba tathA
sAr3he ar3atIsa lava kI eka nAlI yA ghaTikA hotI hai| do ghaTikA kA eka muhUrta
hotA hai  / " tu 1 1 kAlo paramaniruddho avibhAjjo laM tu jANa samayaM samayA va
asaMkhejjA havai hu ussAsanislAso  //  ussAso nissAso yado'vi pAtti bhannae ekko
/  pANA va satta yovA yovAviya matta jabamAhu || adbhuttamaM tu vA alavo deva
nAliyA ho  /  jyotiSkaraNDaka, 6, 10 samaya kahate hai  /  asaMgata kAla ke
atyanta sUkSma avibhAgI aza ko samaya kA eka ucchvAsa nivAsa hotA hai, use prANa
bhI kahate haiM  /  sAsa prANa kA eka stoka, sAta stoka kA eka laya, sAr3he
ar3atIsa lava kI eka nAlI hotI hai| do nAlI kA eka muhUrta hotA hai ye nAliyA
muhutto  /

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth 156  Therefore, to know the number of breaths in one
Muhurta, multiply 1 Muhurta x 2 Ghatika 4 37 Lav 7 Stoka 47 Ucchvas, which gives
us 3773. In one Muhurta, a Nigodaya being is born 65536 times. Dividing 65536 by
3773, we get 17.1 as the quotient. Therefore, one should know that the duration
of one Ksullak Bhav is slightly more than seventeen breaths. In other words, the
duration of one Ksullak Bhav is slightly more than one-seventeenth of a breath,
and in that same time, two hundred and fifty-six Avali occur.  According to
modern time calculation, the duration of a Ksullak Bhav can be calculated as
follows: one Muhurta has forty-eight minutes.  1. In Digambar literature, one
breath is considered to be equal to 18 Ksullak Bhav. This is explained as
follows:  "Tinisaaya Chattisa Chaavati Sahasgaani Maranaani. Anto Muhusakale
Taavdiya Chav Khudhbhava." - Go. Jeevakand 123  A Layaparyaptak being dies 66336
times in one Ant Muhurta, and it also experiences that many births. Therefore,
there are 66336 Ksullak Bhav in one Ant Muhurta. These Bhav are called Ksullak
Bhav because there is no other Bhav with a shorter duration. The duration of
each of these Bhav is one-eighteenth of a breath. Therefore, according to the
Triranik, the duration of 66336 Bhav is 36856 breaths. This number of breaths is
the duration of one Ant Muhurta for Layaparyaptak beings from the Earth-bodied
to the five-sensed. There are 66336 Ksullak Bhav in one Ant Muhurta, with 80 for
the two-sensed, 60 for the three-sensed, 40 for the four-sensed, 24 for the
five-sensed, and 66132 for the one-sensed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama karmagrantha 156 isIliye eka muhUrta meM zvAsocchvAsoM kI saMkhyA mAlUma
karane ke lie 1 muharta x 2 ghaTikA 4 37 lava 7 stoka 47 ucchvAsa, isa prakAra
sabako guNA karane para 3773 saMkhyA AtI hai tathA eka muhUrta meM eka nigodiyA
jIva 65536 vAra. janma letA hai, jisase 65536 meM 3773 se bhAga dene para
171labdha AtA hai, ataH eka zvAsocchvAsa kAla meM satraha se kucha adhika kSudra
bhavAM kA pramANa jAnanA cAhiye  / ' arthAt eka kSullaka bhava kA kAla eka
ucchvAsa-nizvAsa kAla ke kucha adhika satrahaveM bhAga pramANa hotA hai aura
utane hI samaya meM do sau chappana AvalI hotI haiN| Adhunika kAlagaNanA ke
anusAra kSullaka bhava ke samaya kA pramANa isa prakAra nikAlA jAyegA ki eka
muhUrta meM ar3atAlIsa minaTa hote haiM 1 digambara sAhitya meM eka
zvAsocchavAsa kAla meM 18 kSullaka matra mAne haiM  /  jisakA spaSTIkaraNa isa
prakAra hai tiNisayA chattIsA chAvaTi sahassagANi maraNANi  /  aMtomuhusakAle
tAvadiyA cava khudbhavA  /  -go0 jIvakAMDa 123 lamadhyaparyAptaka jova eka anta
muhUrta meM 66336 vAra maraNa kara usane hI bhavoM janmo ko bhI dhAraNa karatA
hai, ata: eka anta hUta meM utane hI arthAta 66336 kSudrabhAva hote haiM  /  ina
bhavoM ko kSudrabhava isalie kahate haiM ki isase alpasthiti vAlA anya koI bhI
bhava nahIM pAyA jAtA haiM  /  ina bhavoM meM se pratyeka kA kAlapramANa zvAsa
kA aThArahavAM bhAga hai| phalata: trairANika ke anusAra 66336 bhavoM ke
prayAsoM kA pramANa 36856 hotA hai  /  itane ucchvAsoM ke samUha pramANa
antarmuhUrta meM pRthvI. kAyika meM lekara paMcendriya taka layaparyAptaka jIvoM
ke kSudra bhava 66336 ho jAte haiM  /  3773 ucchvAsoM kA eka muhUrta hotA hai
tathA ina 66336 bhavoM meM se dvIndriya ke 80, zrIndriya ke 60 caturindriya ke
40, paMcendriya ke 24 aura ekendriya ke 66132 kSudrabhava hote hai|

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
160 This means that one Muhurta is equal to 48 minutes and there are 3773
breaths in one Muhurta. Therefore, dividing 3773 by 48, we get approximately 78
and a half breaths per minute, meaning that the duration of one breath is less
than a second. In that time, a Nigoda (a type of microscopic being) takes birth
more than seventeen times. From this, the smallness of the Ksullaka Bhav (the
realm of microscopic beings) can be easily understood. The subtlety of Ksullaka
Bhav is explained in the Gatha (a type of Jain scripture) as follows: the time
of Ksullaka Bhav is one part out of more than seventeen parts of a breath. Thus,
having described the situation-bond of the remaining creations and the inferior
situation-bond of all natures, we now proceed to explain the owners of their
superior situation-bond. Avirattam Titham Aharayugam Arau Ya Pamatto.
Micchaditthi Banghai Jitthathi Sesapghadinam. || 42 || Word Meaning - Arayasamma
Avirat - Do. - Samyasti Manushya, Aharagan Baharakadvik, Amarau - Devayu ko, Ya
- and Pamatto - Pramattavirati Micchadiddi - Mithyadristi, Badhadda Bandhata
hai, Nittaki - Utkrishta Sthiti, Ses Padhan - Dosha Prakritiyon ki. Titham
Tirthankar Namakarma Shatak   ' Gatha Meaning - Avirat Samyagdristi Manushya
Tirthankar Namakarma ke, Pramattavirati Aharakadvik and Devayu ke aur
Mithyadristi Dosha Prakritiyon ke Utkrishta Sthitibandh ko karta hai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 160 yAnI eka muhUrta 48 minaTa ke barAbara hotA hai aura eka muhUrta meM 3773
zvAsocchvAsa hote haiN| ataH 3773 meM 48 se bhAga dene para eka minaTa meM
sAr3he aThahattara ke lagabhaga zvAsocchvAsa Ate haiM, arthAt eka zvAsocchvAsa
kA kAla eka sekiNDa se bho kama hotA hai aura utane kAla meM nigodiyA jIva
satraha se bhI kucha adhika bAra janma dhAraNa karatA hai  /  isase kSullaka
bhaba kI kSudratA kA saralatA se anumAna kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  kSullaka bhava
kI isa sUkSmatA ko gAyA meM spaSTa kiyA gayA hai ki kSullaka bhava kA samaya eka
zvAsocchvAsa ke satraha se bhI kucha adhika aMzoM meM se eka aMza hai| isa
prakAra se ke sivAya zeSa kRtiyoM ke sthitibaMdha aura sabhI prakRtiyoM ke
jaghanya sthitibaMdha kA nirUpaNa karake aba Age unake utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke
svAmiyAM ko batalAte haiM  /  avirasamma tithaM AhArayugAmarAu ya pamatto  /
micchaddiTThI baMghai jiTThaThiI sesapaghaDINaM  //  42  //  zabdArtha --
ariyasamma avirata - kreN| - samyaSTi manuSya, AhAragaM bAhArakadvika, amarAu -
devAyu ko, ya-- aura pamatto - pramattavirati micchadiDDI - midhyAdRSTi,
badhadda bAMdhatA hai, niTTakiI--utkRSTa sthiti, sesa paDaNaM-doSa prakRtiyoM kI
/  tithaM tIrthaMkara nAmakarma zataka ' gAthArtha - avirata samyagdRSTi manuSya
tIrthaMkara nAmakarma ke, pramattavirati AhArakadvika aura devAyu ke aura
mithyAdRSTi doSa prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ko karatA hai  /

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **Special Meaning Verses** state that among the 120
bondable natures, which nature has which **utkrusht sthitibandh** (highest state
of bondage).  Firstly, indicating the **utkrusht sthitibandh** of the
**Tirthankara** nature, it is said: "**Aviryasammo Tittham**" - the **Avirat
Samyagdristi** (one with unwavering right faith) human is the owner of the
**utkrusht sthitibandh** of the **Tirthankara** nature.  Here's the explanation:
The owner of the **utkrusht sthitibandh** of the **Tirthankara** nature is a
human. This is because, although the **Tirthankara** nature's bondage occurs
from the fourth to the eighth **gunasthan** (spiritual state), the **utkrusht
sthiti** (highest state) is bound only by **utkrusht sanklesh** (highest
affliction). This **utkrusht sanklesh** belongs to the **Avirat Samyagdristi**
human who, before attaining **Samyaktva** (right conduct), binds the
**narakayu** (hellish body) in the **mithyatva** (false belief) **gunasthan**.
Later, they attain **kshayopashmik Samyaktva** (complete liberation) and bind
the **Tirthankara** nature. When the time comes for this human to go to hell,
they vomit **Samyaktva** and embrace **mithyatva**. Before this moment of
abandoning **Samyaktva** and embracing **mithyatva**, the **Avirat
Samyagdristi** human experiences the **utkrusht sthitibandh** of the
**Tirthankara** nature.  In **devagati** (heavenly realm) and **narakagati**
(hellish realm), the **Tirthankara** nature's bondage occurs, but the
**Tirthankara** nature's binder does not deviate from the fourth **gunasthan**
towards **mithyatva**. Without this deviation, **utkrusht sanklesh** cannot be
the cause of the **utkrusht sthitibandh** of the **Tirthankara** nature.
Therefore, the **utkrusht sthitibandh** of the **Tirthankara** nature...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha re vizeSArtha gAthA meM utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke svAmiyoM
kA kathana kiyA gayA hai ki baMdhayogya 120 prakRtiyoM meM se kisa prakRti kA
kauna utkRSTa sthitibaMdha karatA hai  /  sarvaprathama tIrthaMkara prakRti ke
utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke svAmI kA saMketa karate hue kahA hai ki- 'avirayasammo
titthaM' avirata samyagdRSTi manuSya tIrthaMkara prakRti ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha
kA svAmI hai  /  isakA spaSTIkaraNa nimna prakAra hai tIrthaMkara prakRti ke
utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kA svAmI manuSya hai  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai, ki yadyapi
tIrthaMkara prakRti kA baMdha cauthe guNasthAna se lekara AThaveM guNasthAna
taka hotA hai kintu utkRSTa sthiti utkRSTa saMkleza se hI baMdhatI hai aura vaha
utkRSTa saMkleza tIrthaMkara prakRti ke baMdhakoM meM se usa avirata sambanha
manuSya ke hotA hai jo avirata samyagdRSTi samyaktva grahaNa karane se pahale
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM narakAyu kA baMdha kara letA hai aura bAda meM
kSAyopazamika samyaktva grahaNa karake tIrthakara prakRti kA baMdha karatA hai,
vaha manuSya jaba naraka meM jAne kA samaya AtA hai to samyaktva kA vamana
karake mithyAtva ko aMgIkAra karatA hai  /  jisa samaya meM vaha samyaktva ko
tyAga kara mithyAtva ko aMgIkAra karatA hai, usase pahale samaya meM usa avirata
samyagdRSTi manuSya ke tIrthaMkara prakRti kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha hotA hai  /
devagati aura narakagati meM tIrthaMkara prakRti kA baMdha to hotA hai kintu
vahAM tIrthaMkara prakRti kA baMdhaka cauthe guNasthAna se cyuta hokara
mithyAtva ke abhimukha nahIM hotA hai aura aisA hue binA tIrthaMkara prakRti ke
utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kA kAraNa utkRSTa saMkleza nahIM sakatA  /  isIlie
tIrthaMkara prakRti ke utkRSTa sthitibandha 8 ko TokA

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Chapter**  A human who does not bind the hell-existence
before binding the Tirthankara nature is not born in hell after binding the
Tirthankara nature. Therefore, the human who is taken into consideration is the
one who binds the hell-existence before binding the Tirthankara nature. Some
(like Samik, Samati, Jid Rajaṇit etc.) may die in the state of Samyaktva and go
to hell, but due to pure results, those beings cannot bind the excellent state
of Tirthankara nature. Therefore, in the case of the excellent state-binding of
the Tirthankara nature, only the human who is constantly in the state of
Samyaiṣṭi towards Mithyatva is taken into consideration.  The essence of the
above statement in relation to the excellent state-binding of the Tirthankara
nature is that although the binding of the Tirthankara nature can happen from
the fourth to the eighth Gunasthanas, the excellent state-binding requires
excellent Sanklesha, and the human who binds the Tirthankara nature can have
excellent Sanklesha only when he is towards Mithyatva. Such a human is towards
Mithyatva only when he has bound the hell-existence before binding the
Tirthankara nature. When the bound-hell-existence human who is constantly in the
state of Samyagdṛṣṭi is towards Mithyatva, at that very moment, his excellent
state-binding of the Tirthankara nature happens. The one who goes to hell with
Kṣayika Samyaktva is purer than him, therefore he is not taken into
consideration here.  1. And it is said in Takacūrṇī - "The human who is in the
state of Tityayaranamas, who is in the state of Upakoṣaṭhi, who is in the state
of Araj, who is in the state of Veyagasammaddiṭhi, who is in the state of
Puccha, who is in the state of Naragabahānāgo, who is in the state of
Naragābhimukho, who is in the state of Micchattā, who is in the state of
Paśdhijjihi, who is in the state of Antime ṭhi, who is in the state of Bandhe,
who is in the state of Vaṭṭamāṇo, who is in the state of Badhai, who is in the
state of Tabandage, who is in the state of Aisakiliṭṭho, who is in the state of
Kauṁ... who is in the state of Sammatteṇam, who is in the state of Khāigeṇam,
who is in the state of Naragam, who is in the state of Bacchai, who is in the
state of So, who is in the state of Tao, who is in the state of Visuddhaparotti,
who is in the state of Kā, who is in the state of U, who is in the state of
Tammi, who is in the state of Prāṇakośo, who is in the state of Na Habai, who is
in the state of Ti." - Pañcasangraha Pra. Mag, Masthagiri Ṭīkā Ek Nā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka bhanuSya kA grahaNa kiyA tathA tIrthakara prakRti kA baMdha karane se
pahale jo manuSya narakAyu kA baMdha nahIM karatA hai vaha tIrthakara prakRti kA
baMdha karane ke vAda naraka meM utpanna nahIM hotA hai  /  ataH vaise manuSya
kA grahaNa kiyA gayA jo tIrthakara prakRti kA baMdha karane se pahale narakAyu
bAMdha letA hai| koI-koI samika samAti, jIda rAjANita jaise) samyaktva dazA meM
marakara naraka meM jA sakate haiM kintu vizuddha pariNAmoM ke kAraNa ve jIva
tIrthaMkara prakRti kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha nahIM kara sakate haiN| ataH
tIrthaMkara prakRti ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke prakaraNa meM mithyAtva ke
abhimukha avirata samyAiSTi manuSya kA hI grahaNa kiyA hai| tIrthakara prakRti
ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke saMbandha meM ukta kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai ki
yadyapi cauthe se lekara AThaveM guNasthAna taka tIrthaMkara prakRti kA baMdha
ho sakatA hai kintu utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke lie utkRSTa saMkleza kI AvazyakatA
hai aura tIrthakara prakRti ke baMdhaka manuSya ko utkRSTa saMkleza usI dazA meM
ho sakatA hai jaba vaha mithyAtva ke abhimukha ho aura aisA manuSya mithyAtva ke
abhimukha tabhI hotA hai jaba usane tIrthakara prakRti kA vaMdha karane ke
pahale narakAyu kA baMdha kara liyA hai| baddhanarakAyu avirata samyagdRSTi
manuSya jaba mithyAtva ke abhimukha hotA hai, usI samaya meM usake tIrthakara
prakRti kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha hotA hai  /  kSAyika samyaktva sahita jo naraka
meM jAtA hai vaha usase vizuddhatara hai ataH usakA yahAM grahaNa nahIM kiyA
gayA hai| 1 tathA coktaM takacUrNI - 'tityayaranAmassa upakosaThiI maNuko
ararAja bho veyagasammaddiThI puccaM naragabahAnago naragAbhimuho micchattaM
pazdhijjihI iti aMtime ThiI bandhe vaTTamANo badhai, tabaMdhagesu aisakiliTTho
tti kAuM  /  .. jo sammatteNaM khAigeNaM naragaM baccaI so tao visuddhaparotti
kA u' tammi prANakoso na habai ti  / ' -paMcasaMgraha pra. mAga, masathagiri
TIkA eka nA

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 163  After stating that the Tirthankara is the
master of the supreme state-bond of the nature, now we speak about the master of
the state-bond of Aharakdvig and Devayu. It is said, "Aharadugamaraou ya
pamatto" - the master of the supreme state-bond of Aharakdvig and Devayu is the
Pramattasanyata Muni. Here, the word Pramattasanyata is ambiguous. In the
context of the supreme state-bond of Aharakdvig, which is the Aharak body and
Aharak limbs, it means the Pramattasanyata Muni who has deviated from the
Aprammatta Gunasthan. Because, for the supreme state-bond of these two natures,
it is necessary to have supreme Sanklesha, and the Pramatt Muni, who is bound by
them, experiences supreme Sanklesha at the same time when he deviates from the
Aprammatta Gunasthan and enters the sixth Gunasthan. Therefore, one should know
that he is the one who has the supreme state-bond of these two natures.  For the
supreme state-bond of Devayu, the situation is opposite to that of Aharakdvig.
For the supreme state-bond of Aharakdvig, there is a need for supreme Sanklesha.
This supreme Sanklesha occurs in the Pramatt Muni at the same time when he
deviates from the Aprammatta Gunasthan.  1 (a) "Tayar Aharakdvig" Aharak body
Aharakanga, Gopa Lakshanan "Pamuttu" - it is clear that the Pramattasanyata is
the one who has deviated from the Aprammatta state, and he binds the supreme
state. This state is inauspicious, therefore, it is bound by the supreme
Sanklesha, and the one who binds it is the Pramattasanyata, who is the one who
has deviated from the Aprammatta state and has the supreme Sanklesha.  - Karma
Granth Tika  (b) The Aprammattasanyata of Aharakdvig is facing Prammatta.  -
Karma Prakriti Yashovijayaji Krit Tika  (c) The Aprammattasanyata of Aharakdvig,
who is facing Prammatta, is the one who is involved in all the bonds, and he
makes the supreme state-bond.  - Panchasangrah 5/64 Tika

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 163 tIrthaMkara prakRti ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke svAmI
kA kathana karane ke bAda aba AhArakadvika aura devAyu ke baMdhasvAmI ke bAre
meM kahate haiM ki- 'AhAradugAmarAu ya pamatto' - AhArakadvika aura devAyu ke
utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kA svAmI pramattasaMyata muni hai| yahAM pramattasaMyata
zabda dvyarthaka hai  /  AhArakadvika AhAraka zarIra aura AhAraka aMgopAMga ke
utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke prasaMga meM isakA artha yaha hai ki apramatta
guNasthAna se cyuta huA pramattasaMyata muni  /  kyoMki ina donoM prakRtiyoM ke
utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke lie utkRSTa saMkleza honA Avazyaka haiM aura unake
baMdhaka pramatta muni ke usI samaya utkRSTa saMkleza hotA hai jaba vaha
apramatta guNasthAna se cyuta hokara chaThe guNasthAna meM AtA hai  /  ataH
usake hI ina do prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha jAnanA cAhiye  /  " devAyu ke
utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke liye AhArakadvika ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha se viparIta
sthiti hai  /  AhArakadvika ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke liye utkRSTa saMkleza kI
AvazyakatA hai| yaha utkRSTa saMkleza pramatta muni ke usI samaya hotA hai jaba
vaha apramatta guNasthAna se cyuta 1 (ka) tayAra AhArakadvika' AhArakazarIra
AhArakAGa, gopA galakSaNaM 'pamuttu' tti pramattasaMyato
apramattabhAvAnnivartamAna iti vizeSo dRzyaH, utkRSTasthitikaM badhnAti  /
azubhA hIyaM sthitirityutkRSTasaM klezenaM vAtkuSTA badhyate tadbandhakAca
pramattayatirapramattabhAvAnnivartamAna evotkRSTasaMkleyukta labhyate itItthaM
viziSyate  /  * - karmagrantha TIkA - (kha) AhArakadvikasyApramattayatiH
pramattatAbhimukhaH  /  - karmaprakRti yazovijayajI kRta TIkA (ga)
AhArakahikasyApi yo'pramattasaMyataH pramattabhAvAbhimukhaH sa tabaMdhakeSu
sarva saMlipTaH ityutkRSTaM sthitibaMdhaM karoti  /  -paMcasaMgraha 5/64 ko TIkA

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixth Shataka (century) falls within the Pramatta Gunasthan (state of mind),
but the best situation-bond of Devayau (life-span) is with the Pramatta-Samyata
Muni (ascetic) who is facing the Apramatta-Samyata Gunasthan (state of mind).
This is because this situation is auspicious. Therefore, its bond is only in the
pure state, and this pure state is only with the Apramatta Muni who is in the
state of Abhibhu Pramassa-Sampat (supreme state of mind).  The summary of the
above statements about the best situation-bond of Aharak-Dwik (two types of
food) and Devayau is that the best situation-bond of the Aharak body and Aharak
limbs, these two natures, is with the Apramatta-Samyata who is facing the
Pramatta Gunasthan. The extremely complex results that are bondable to it occur
at that time, and the owner of the best situation-bond of Devayau is also in the
Apramatta Gunasthan, but with the special feature that he is ascending the
Apramatta-Samyata Gunasthan after starting the Ayubandh (life-span bond) in the
Pramatta Gunasthan. That is, the bond of Aharak-Dwik is with the Apramatta-
Samyata Muni who is descending from the seventh Gunasthan to the sixth
Gunasthan, and the bond of Devayau is with the Muni who is ascending from the
sixth Gunasthan to the seventh Gunasthan.  "All this is inauspicious, it is a
cause of suffering, it is a cause of bondage." This is what the wise ones say,
the gods and the humans.  ... Panchasangrah 55 5 2 (a) Aharak body and Aharak
limbs, these two natures, the best situation-bond is with the Apramatta Yati
(ascetic) who is facing the Pramatta Gunasthan. He is bound by the Apramatta
Gunasthan with the ultimate bond. These bonds are extremely complex. And the
owner of the best situation-bond of the life-span of the gods is in the
Apramatta Gunasthan, it should be known. But the special thing is that he is in
the state of Apramatta with the beginning of the Ayubandh in the Pramatta
Gunasthan. - Pancham Karmapray (see next page)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka hokara chaThe pramatta guNasthAna meM AtA hai,lekina devAyu kA utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha apramattasaMyata guNasthAna ke abhimukha pramattasaMyata muni ke hI
hotA hai  /  kyoMki yaha sthiti zubha hai  /  ataH isakA baMdha vizuddha dazA
meM hI hotA hai aura yaha vizuddha dazA apramatta bhAva ke Abhabhu
pramasasaMpata muni ke hI hotI hai| AhArakadvika aura devAyu ke utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha hone ke ukta kathanoM kA sArAMza yaha hai ki AhAraka zarIra aura
AhAraka aMgopAMga ina do prakutiyoM kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha pramatta guNasthAna
ke abhimukha hue apramattasaMyata ko hotA hai| isake baMdhayogya ati saMkliSTa
pariNAma usI samaya hote haiM tathA devAyu ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kA svAmI bhI
apramatta guNasthAnavartI hai kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki pramatta guNasthAna
meM AyubaMdha ko prAraMbha karake apramattasaMyata guNasthAna kA ArohaNa kara
rahA ho  /  yAnI AhArakadvika kA baMdha sAtaveM guNasthAna se chaThe guNasthAna
kI ora avarohaNa karane vAle apramattasaMyata muni ko aura devAyu kA baMgha
chaThe guNasthAna meM prArambha karake sAtaveM guNasthAna kI ora ArohaNa karane
vAle muni ko hotA hai| savvANa sii asubhA umkosukkosasaMphiseseNa  /  iyarA u
visohIe suranaratiriAue mottu| .. paMcasaMgraha 55 5 2 (ka) AhArakazarIra tathA
AhArakaraMgopAMga, e ve prakRtino utkRSTa sthitibaMdha pramasaguNaThANAne
sanmukha thayelo evo apramatta yati te apramana guNaThANAne caramabaMdhe bAMdhe
/  enA baMdhaka mAhe pahija ati makliSTa cha  /  tathA devatAnA Ayuno utkRSTa
sthitibaMdhasvAmI apramatta guNasthAnakavartI mAdhu jANavo  /  paNa eTalu vizeSa
je pramatta guNasthAnake AyubaMdha AraMbhIne apramatte bahato sAdhu bodhe  /
-paMcama karmaprAya rakhA (magale pRSTha para dekheM)

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karmagrantha ### 165  When the Devayuga's **utkrista sthitibandha**
(highest state of bondage) occurs due to pure emotions, a curious question
arises: Why does the **aprammat-samyata gunasthan** (state of non-distracted
restraint) indicate this highest state of bondage instead of the **pramat-
gunasthan** (state of distracted restraint)? After all, even though a **pramat-
samyata muni** (monk in the state of distracted restraint) may be inclined
towards **aprammat** (non-distracted) emotions, the emotions of an **aprammat
muni** (non-distracted monk) are pure.  The solution lies in understanding that
the Devayuga's bondage does not begin in the **aprammat-samyata gunasthan**, but
rather in the **pramat-gunasthan**. However, the Devayuga's bondage, which began
in the **pramat-gunasthan**, sometimes reaches its completion in the **aprammat-
samyata gunasthan**. Therefore, a muni who resides in the **pramat-samyata
gunasthan** but is inclined towards the **aprammat-samyata gunasthan** is
considered bound by the Devayuga.  This interpretation is further supported by
the number of **bandha prakritis** (bondage-creating tendencies) mentioned in
the sixth and seventh **gunasthanas** of the Second Karmagrantha. The verses
from the Second Karmagrantha that describe the number of **bandha prakritis** in
the sixth and seventh **gunasthanas** are as follows:  * **(a)** "Sixty-six are
the **pramat** (distracted) **sog** (sorrow), **arah** (arrogance), **apiryug**
(attachment to the world), **ajas** (laziness), and **massayam** (greed). Ask
the six **sarav** (types of knowledge), **rajpa** (royal power), and **nit**
(destruction)." (Verse 7) * **(b)** "Sixty **adhyamatte** (in the state of
distracted restraint) are the **surau-bandha** (bondage of the senses) and
**jad** (inertia). Eighteen are the **aahar-gadung** (bondage of food),
**annah** (bondage of food), and **bandha** (bondage)." (Verse 5) * **(c)** "The
**Devayuga** is bound by **pramat** (distracted) **aaharath** (food) and
**aprammat-virado** (non-distracted enemy). The **manuss** (human) is bound by
**tityaram** (attachment to the world) and **aviradasam** (non-distracted
enemy)." (Verse 136, Karmakanda)  The **Devayuga**'s **utkrista sthitibandha**
is achieved by a **pramat yati** (distracted monk) who is inclined towards
**aprammat** (non-distracted) emotions, while the **aahar-kaddvika**'s
**utkrista sthitibandha** is achieved by an **aprammat pati** (non-distracted
monk) who is inclined towards **pramat** (distracted) emotions.  * **(d)** The
**Karma-prakriti sthitibandha-adhikarya** (authority on the bondage of karma-
creating tendencies) in verse 102 of the commentary by Upadhyay Yashovijayaji
also indicates the same.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 165 devAyu kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha vizuddha bhAvoM se hone
para jijJAsu prazna karatA hai ki pramatta guNasthAna kI bajAya apramattasaMyata
guNasthAna ne hI usakA utkRSTa sthiti batalAe thaa| kyoMki pramattasaMyata muni
se, bhale hI vaha apramatta bhAva ke abhimukha ho, apramatta muni ke bhAva
vizuddha hote haiM  /  isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki apramattasyata guNasthAna meM
devAyu ke baMdha kA prArambha nahIM hotA hai kintu pramatta guNasthAna meM
prArambha huA devAyu kA baMdha kabhI-kabhI apramatta guNasthAna meM pUrNa hotA
hai  /  isIlie pramattasaMyata guNasthAnavartI kintu apramatta saMyata
guNasthAna kI ora abhimukha muni ko devAyu kA baMdhaka kahA hai| dvitIya
karmagrantha meM chaThe, sAtaveM guNasthAna meM jo baMdha prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA
batalAI hai, usase bhI yahI Azaya nikalatA hai| chaThe, sAtaveM guNasthAna kI
baMdha prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA batalAne vAlI dvitIya karmagrantha kI gAthAyeM isa
prakAra haiM  teSaTThi pamataM soga araha apirayuga ajasa massAyaM  /  bucchina
chamca sarAva ne rAjapA niT  // 7 //  guNasaTThi adhyamatte surAubaMdha su jada
ihAna  /  aTThAvaNNaH jaM AhAragaDuMga annaha baMdha ||5|| (kha) devAgaM pamato
AhArathamapamattavirado du  /  tityaraM ca maNusso aviradasamma samajje || na0
karmakAMDa 136 devAyu kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha apramata bhAva ke abhimukha
pramatta yati karatA hai aura AhArakadvikakA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha pramatta bhAva
ke abhimukha apramatta pati karatA hai  /  (ga) karmaprakRti sthitibaMdhAdhikAra
gA0 102, upAdhyAya yazovijayajI kRta TIkA meM bhI isI prakAra kA saMketa hai  /

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pasak** - The bondage of the remaining 63 Prakṛtis occurs in the Pramatta-
Samyata Gunasthan. The bondage of the six Prakṛtis - Shoka, Arati, Asthir-Dvik,
Ayasha-Kirti and Asatadaniya - is severed at the end of the sixth Gunasthan. Due
to the bondage of Aharak-Dvik, the bondage of 5 Prakṛtis occurs in the Pramatta-
Samyata Gunasthan. If a being starts the bondage of Devayu in the sixth
Gunasthan and completes it in the same Gunasthan, then the bondage of the six
Prakṛtis - Arati, etc. - and the bondage of Devayu, a total of seven Prakṛtis,
is considered to be severed, resulting in the bondage of 58 Prakṛtis.  Pramatta
Munis who start the bondage of Devayu have two states: 1- They start the bondage
of Devayu in the same Gunasthan and complete it in the same Gunasthan, 2- They
start the bondage of Devayu in the sixth Gunasthan and complete it in the
seventh Gunasthan. This implies that the bondage of Devayu can be completed in
the Pramatta state, but it cannot be initiated. Therefore, the owner of the
Utkrushta-Sthiti-Bandha of Devayu is not a Pramatta Muni, but a Pramatta-Samyami
who is facing the Pramatta state.  Except for Aharak-Dvik, Tirthankara and
Devayu, the Utkrushta-Sthiti-Bandha of the remaining 116 Prakṛtis is done by
Mithya-Drishti. - Micchattthi 6, Sarvarthasiddhi also mentions that the bondage
of Devayu starts in the sixth Gunasthan.  Devabandharambhasya pramado eva hetur,
apramādo'pi tatpatyāmantraḥ. 2 Mumbu kammatidīṇam micchattthi du bandhayo
bhaṇido. Aharam niththayaram devā vā vimottana.  Go. Karmakanda 135

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAsaka -zeSa 63 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha pramattasaMyatta guNasthAna meM hotA hai
/  zoka, arati, asthiradvika, ayazaHkIrti aura asAtAdanIya -ina chaha prakRtiyoM
kA baMdhaviccheda chaThe guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM ho jAne se aura
AhArakadvika kA baMdha hone se apramatta saMyata guNasthAna meM 5 prakRtiyoM kA
aura yadi koI jIva chaThe guNasthAna meM devAyu ke bandha kA prArambha karake
use usI guNasthAna meM pUrA kara letA hai to usakI apekSA arati Adi chaha
prakRtiyoM kA tathA devAyu kula sAta prakRtiyoM kA baMdhaviccheda kara dene se
58 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha mAnA jAtA hai| pramatta muni jo devAyu ke baMdha kA
prArambha karate haiM, unakI do avasthAyeM hotI haiM 1- usI guNasthAna meM
devAyu ke baMdha kA prArambha karake usI guNasthAna meM usakI samApti kara dete
haiM, 2- chaThe guNasthAna meM devAyu ke baMdha kA prArambha karake sAtaveM
muNasthAna meM usakI pUrti karate haiN| isakA. phalitArtha yaha nikalatA hai ki
apramatta avasthA meM devAyu ke baMdha kI samApti to ho sakatI hai, kintu usakA
prArambha nahIM hotI hai| isaliye devAyu ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kA svAmI
apramatta muni na hokara apramatta bhAva ke abhimukha pramasa saMyamI ko
batalAyA hai|' AhArakadvika, tIrthaMkara aura devAyu ke sivAya zeSa 116
prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha mithyA dRSTi hI karatA hai|-micchtttthiii 6
sarvArthasiddhi meM bhI devAyu ke zradha kA prAraMbha chaThe guNasthAna meM
batalAyA devA baMdhArambhasya pramAda eva heturapramAdo'pi tatpatyAmantraH  /  2
mumbu kammaTidINaM micchAiTTI du baMdhayo bhaNido  /  AhAraM nitthayaraM devA vA
vimottaNa  /  /  go0 karmakAMDa 135

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Karma-Pratha  The bondage of the remaining 116 Prakṛtis to Mithyādr̥ṣṭi
is due to the fact that the superior state bondage is usually caused by the
complex results, and the inferior state bondage is caused by the superior pure
results. And among all the bondages, Mithyādr̥ṣṭi has a special complex. But
here it is important to know that out of these 116 Prakṛtis, the superior state
bondage of Manushyāyu and Tiyanchāyu is caused by purity. Therefore, the bondage
of these two is not the complex result Mithyādr̥ṣṭi, but the pure result
Mithyādr̥ṣṭi Jīva.  **Question:** The bondage of Manushyāyu is up to the fourth
Guṇasthāna, and the bondage of Tiyanchāyu is up to the second Guṇasthāna.
Therefore, the superior state bondage of Manushyāyu should be Avirata
Samyagdṛṣṭi, and the superior state bondage of Tiyanchāyu should be Sāsādana
Samyagdṛṣṭi, because the results of Avirata Samyagdṛṣṭi and Sāsādana Samyagdṛṣṭi
are particularly pure compared to Mithyādr̥ṣṭi, and pure results are needed for
the superior state bondage of Tiyanchāyu and Manushyāyu.  **Answer:** The
results of Avirata Samyagdṛṣṭi are purer than Mithyādr̥ṣṭi, but they cannot
cause the superior state bondage of Manushyāyu. Because the superior state of
Manushyāyu and Tiyanchāyu is of three Palya-upam. This superior state is of the
Bhogabhūmi humans and Tiyanchas. But the Devas and Narakas residing in the
fourth Guṇasthāna, even after binding Manushyāyu, are born in the Karmabhūmi,
and the human...  ¹ Sacchaththīṇamukkassamo du umppasakleiseṇa. Bivari deṇa
jahṣṇo āunganniyabbjiyāṇam tu. || —Go Karmakāṇḍa 134

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmaprAtha baMdhai jiThiI sesapayaDINaM  /  ina zeSa 116 prakRtiyoM kA
baMdhaka mithyAdRSTi ko mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki utkRSTa sthitibaMdha prAyaH
saMkleza pariNAmoM se hI hotA hai tathA jaghanya sthitibaMdha utkRSTa vizuddha
pariNAmoM se' aura saba baMdhakoM meM mithyAvRSTi ke ho vizeSa saMkleza pAyA
jAtA hai| kintu yahAM itanA vizeSa jAnanA cAhie ki ina 116 prakRtiyoM meM se
manuSyAyu aura tiyaMcAyu kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha vizuddhi se hotA hai ataH ina
donoM kA baMdhaka saMkliSTa pariNAmI mithyA dRSTi na hokara vizuddha pariNAmI
mithyAdRSTi jIva hotA hai  /  praznamanuSyAyu kA baMdha cauthe guNasthAna taka
aura tithaMcAyu kA baMdha dUsare guNasthAna taka hotA hai  /  ataH manuSyAyu kA
utkRSTa sthitibaMdha avirata samyagdRSTi ko aura tithaMcAyu kA utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha sAsAdana samyagdRSTi ko honA cAhie, kyoMki mithyA dRSTi kI apekSA
avirata samyagdRSTi aura sAsAdana samyagdRSTi ke pariNAma vizeSa zuddha hote
haiM aura tiryaMcAyu ba manuSyAyu ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke liye vizuddha
pariNAmoM kI AvazyakatA hai  /  uttara-avirata samyA dRSTi ke pariNAma
mithyAdRSTi kI apekSA vizuddha hote haiM, kintu unase manuSyAyu kA utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha nahIM ho sakatA hai  /  kyoMki manuSyAyu aura tiryaMcAyu kI utkRSTa
sthiti tIna palyopama kI hai| yaha utkRSTa sthiti bhogabhUmija manuSyoM aura
tiryaMcoM kI hotI hai| lekina cauthe guNasthAnavartI deva aura nAraka manuSyAyu
kA baMdha karake bhI karmabhUmi meM hI janma lete haiM aura manuSya 1
saccaTThiINamukkasmao du umpasakleiseNa  /  bivarI deNa jahaSNo
AuMganiyabjiyANaM tu  /  /  /  --go karmakAMDa 134

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **168**  If a Tiryancha (animal) has unwavering
Samyagdristi (right faith), it binds the Devayau (divine life). This means that
the purity of the fourth Gunasthan (stage of spiritual progress) cannot be the
cause of binding to the excellent Manushayau (human life).  **Shatak**  Now,
let's consider the binding of the excellent state of Tiryanchayu (animal life)
in the second Sasadan Gunasthan (stage of spiritual progress). The second
Sasadan Gunasthan occurs when the soul, after vomiting Samyaktva (right faith),
turns towards Mithyatva (false faith). Therefore, compared to Mithyadristi
(false faith) which is directed towards the Samyaktva Gun (quality of right
faith), Sasadan Samyagdristi (right faith) which is turned away from the
Samyaktva Gun, does not have greater purity. This is why the excellent state of
Tiryanchayu cannot be bound to Sasadan Samyagdristi.  In this way, after
explaining in general terms how the Tirthankara, Aharak, and Devayau bind the
excellent state, and how Mithyadristi binds the remaining 116 types of excellent
states, the next verse will explain in detail which types of excellent states
are bound by Mithyadristi beings in the four gatis (paths of existence).
**Bigal Sukumau Gati Gam, Tirimnu Ya Sur Vijambimirayadu G. Egi Di Bhav Rayav
Aisaana Suru Ko ||43||**  **Word Meaning:**  * Bigal Samachapati Gam -
Vikalendriya (disabled), Sukhmatrik (subtle), and Ayunik (long-lived) Tiryancha,
and Manushya (human) * Sur Vijambimirayadu G - Devadvik (two divine beings),
Vaikriyadvik (two beings of action), and Narakatik (two beings of hell) *
Eviyavara Bhav - Ekendriya (one-sense) Sthavar (stationary) and Atap (heat)
Karma * Aisaana - The Ishana (highest) heaven * Sur - Dev (divine beings) * Unko
San - Excellent state binding  **Verse Meaning:**  Mithyadristi Tiryancha and
Manushya bind the excellent states of Vikalendriya, Sukhmatrik, Ayunik, and
Devadvik, Vaikriyadvik, and Narakatik. They also bind the Ishana heaven.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 168 tathA tiryaca yadi avirata samyagdRSTi hoM to devAyu kA baMdha karate haiM
/  jisase cauthe guNasthAna kI vizuddhi utkRSTa manuSyAyu ke baMdha kA kAraNa
nahIM ho sakatI hai  /  zataka aba dUsare sAsAdana guNasthAna meM tiryaMcAyu ke
utkRTa sthitibaMdha ke bAre meM vicAra karate haiN| dUsarA sAsAdana guNasthAna
usI samaya hotA hai jaba jIva samyaktva kA vamana karake mithyAtva ke abhimukha
hotA hai  /  ataH samyaktva guNa ke abhimukha mithyAdRSTi kI apekSA samyaktva
guNa se vimukha sAsAdana samyagdRSTi ke adhika vizuddhi nahIM hotI haiM, jisase
tiryaMcAyu kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha sAsAdana samyagdRSTi ko nahIM ho sakatA hai
/  isa prakAra se tIrthaMkara AhArakadvika, devAyu ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kA
tathA midhyAdRSTi ko zeSa 116 prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha hone kA sAmAnya
se spaSTIkaraNa karane ke bAda aba Age kI gAthA meM cAra gatiyoM ke mithyAdRSTi
jIva kina-kina prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha karate haiM, yaha vistAra se
batalAte haiM  /  bigalasukumAugatigaM tirimaNuyA suravijambimirayaduga  /
egidibhAva rAyava AIsANA suruko ||43|| zabdArtha - bigalasamAcapatigaM -
vikalanika, sUkSmatrika aura Amutrika tirimaNupAtiryaca aura manuSya
surakSiubvinirayadurga - devadvika, kriyadvika, narakaTika ko, eviyAvarAbhava
ekendriya sthAvara aura Atapa nAmakarma, AIsANA - IzAna taka ke, sura-deva,
unakosaM utkRSTa sthitibaMdha gAthArtha midhyAtvI tiryaMca aura manuSya
vikalendriyatrika, sUkSmatrika, Ayunika tathA devadvika, vaikriyadvika aura
narakadvika kI utkRSTa sthiti ko bAMdhate haiM  /  IzAna devaloka

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is. The Devas up to the 166th level of the Pancham Karmapray bind the
excellent state-bond of the Ekaliy jati, power and Aman name. Specifically, this
verse describes the excellent state-bond of fifteen prakritis for the
Mithyatdhi, Tiryancha and humans, and the excellent state-bond of three
prakritis for the Bhavanvasi, Vyantar, Jyotishk and Saudharma, Ishana heaven
Devas. The names of the fifteen prakritis that are bound by the Tiryancha and
humans for the excellent state are as follows: Vikalnik (Dwiindriya, Triindriya,
Chaturindriya jati), Sukshmatrik (Sukshma, Sadharan, Apariapt), Ayutrik
(Narakayu, Tithanchayu, Manushayagu), Devadhik (Devagati, Devanupurvi),
Vaikriyatrik (Van Kriyasharira, Vaikriyaangopang), Narakdvik (Narakgati,
Narakanupurvi). Out of the above fifteen prakritis, except for Tiryachayu and
Manushayagu, the remaining thirteen prakritis are not bound from birth in
Devagati and Narakgati, and the Manushayagu and Tiryachayu, which are of three
palyas, are of the Bhogbhumij, and the Narak, Deva cannot be born in the
Bhogbhumij after death. Therefore, the excellent state-bond of these fifteen
prakritis is described for humans and Tiryancha. The Devas up to the Ishana
heaven bind the following three prakritis for the excellent state-bond:
Ekendriya, Sthavar, Atap namekarma. Because the Devas above the Ishana heaven
are not born in the Ekendriya jati. Due to which the binding of the above three
prakritis suitable for Ekendriya does not happen to them. If humans and
Tiryancha have such complex results, then they bind the prakritis suitable for
Narakgati, due to which they bind the excellent state of the three prakritis of
Ekendriya jati etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hai  /  paMcama karmaprAya 166 taka ke deva ekAliya jAti, pAvara aura amAna
nAma kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha karate haiN| vizeSArtha-isa gAthA meM pandraha
prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha mithyAtdhI tiryacoM aura manuSyoM ko tathA
tIna prakRttiyoM kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha bhavanavAsI, vyaMtara, jyotiSka aura
saudharma, IzAna svarga ke devoM ko batalAyA hai| tiryaMca aura manuSyoM dvArA
utkRSTa sthiti kA baMdha kI jAne vAlI pandraha prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa prakAra
haiM_ vikalanika (dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya jAti), sUkSmatrika (sUkSma,
sAdhAraNa, aparyApta), Ayutrika (narakAyu, tithaMcAyu, manuSyAghu), devaddhika
(devagati, devAnupUrvI), vaikriyaTika (vaM kriyazarIra, vaikriyaaMgopAMga),
narakadvika (narakagati, nrkaanupuurvii)| ukta pandraha prakRtiyoM meM se
tiryaMcAyu aura manuSyAyu ke sivAya zeSa teraha prakRtiyoM kA baMdha devagati
aura narakagati meM janma se hI nahIM hotA hai tathA manuSyAyu aura tiryaMcAyu
ko utkRSTa sthiti jo tIna palya kI hai, vaha bhogabhUmijoM kI hotI hai aura
nAraka, deva marakara bhogabhUmijoM meM janma le nahIM sakate haiM  /  isIliye
ina pandraha prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha manuSya aura tiyacoM ko batalAyA
hai  /  IzAna svarga taka ke devoM dvArA nimnalikhita tIna prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha hotA hai-ekendriya, sthAvara, Atapa nAmakarma  /  kyoMki IzAna
svarga se Upara ke deva to ekendiya jAti meM janma hI nahIM lete haiN| jisase
ekendriya ke yogya ukta tIna prakRtiyoM kA baMdha unake nahIM hotA hai| manuSyoM
aura tiryaMcoM ke yadi isa prakAra ke saMkliSTa pariNAma hoM to ve narakagati ke
yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karate haiM, jisase unake ekendriya jAti Adi tIna
prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  170.  There cannot be a *sthitibandha* (state of bondage) for
the *bhavanapati*, *vyantar*, *jyotishka*, and *ishan* (types of celestial
beings). However, if these celestial beings experience such complex results,
they bind the *ekendriya* (one-sensed) natures. This is because the gods do not
die and take rebirth in hell.  Therefore, the *vikalatrik* (wavering) and other
*kriti* (actions) have been described as *krush* (inferior) for humans and
*niyantra* (controlled) for the *ekendriya* and other three natures, while the
*utkrusht sthitibandha* (superior state of bondage) for the *ishan* and other
celestial beings has been explained.   Except for these eighteen natures, the
*utkrusht sthitibandha* (superior state of bondage) of the remaining 68 natures
and the *jghanya sthitibandha* (inferior state of bondage) of all 120 bondable
natures will be discussed further.  **Tir-i-ural-du-guj-joy chitt sur-ni-ray ses
chag-ai-ya. Ahar-jin-am-purusho-an-it-thi san-jalan puris laham. ||45||**
**Say-aj sur-ucha-dhar-ana vigdh su-mo vi-uchi-chh as-an-ni. San-na-vi a-u ba-
yar-pa-j-je-gi-di-u san-am. ||45||**  **Word Meaning:**  * Tir-i-ural-yu-ga:
*tiryavadv* (animal) and *oudarik* (liberal) *dv* (two) * Umsho-gh-am: *udyot*
(shining) *namakarma* (karma) * Lit-se-va-rt: *seva* (service) *art* (meaning)
*sanhanan* (combination) * Sur-ni-ray: *dev* (god) and *narak* (hell) * Ses:
*vak* (speech) * Chag-ai-ya: *jar* (old) *gati* (motion) *mithyadristi* (false
view) * Ahar-jin-am: *aahar* (food) *dv* (two) and *tirthankar* (liberated soul)
*namakarma* (karma) * A-pu-thvi: *apurva* (unprecedented) *karan* (cause)
*gunasthan* (state of being) *varti* (existing) * An-i: *anivritti* (non-
cessation) * Badar: *sampe-ray* (collection) *chala* (movement) * San-jalan:
*sajvalan* (burning) *kashay* (passions) and *purush* (soul) * Lah-am: *jghanya
sthitibandha* (inferior state of bondage)  **Shatak:**  **Sayan-sukh:** *mata*
(mother) *vedaniya* (painful) *yasha-kiti* (fame and glory) *namakarma* (karma)
*uchch* (high) *gotra* (lineage) *ghav-aran-a* (covering) *vishyam* (object)
*gyan-a-baran* (knowledge-obstruction) *panch* (five) *darshan-a-varan*
(perception-obstruction) *char* (four) and *antaray* (hindrance) *panch* (five)
* Su-mo: *sutr* (thread) *am-para-y* (beyond) *gunasthan* (state of being)
*nala* (channel) * Vi-dhi-ki-yash-ak: *vidhi* (rule) *ki* (what) *yash* (fame)
*ak* (one) * As-an-ni: *asan-jhi* (unaware) *panch-endriya* (five senses)
*paryapt* (sufficient) *sabhi* (all) *san-shi* (aware) *vi* (and)  ---

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 170 sthitibaMdha nahIM ho sakatA hai| kintu bhavanapati, vyaMtara, jyotiSka
aura IzAna svarga taka ke vaimAnika devoM ke yadi isa prakAra ke saMkliSTa
pariNAma hote haiM to ve ekendriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karate haiM  /
kyoMki deva marakara naraka meM jansa nahIM lete haiM  /  isIliye vikalatrika
Adi kRtiyoM kA kRS dr manuSya aura niyaMtra gati meM tathA ekendriya Adi tIna
prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha IzAna svarga taka ke vaimAnika devoM ke
batalAyA hai| ina aThAraha prakRtiyoM ke sivAya zeSa 68 prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha ke svAmiyoM tathA sabhI baMdhayogya 120 prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya
sthitibaMdha ke svAmiyoM kA kathana Age kiyA jA rahA hai  /  tiriuraladugujjoya
chiTTha suraniraya sesa cajagaiyA  /  AhArajiNamapuruSo'niTThi saMjalaNa purisa
lahaM  // 45 //  sAyaja surucAdharaNA vigdha sumo viucicha asannI  /  sannAvi Au
bAyarapajjegidiu sANaM  //  45  //  zabdArtha - tiriuralayuga tiryavadvika aura
audArikadvika, umzoghaM udyota nAmakarma, liTa-sevArta saMhanana suraniraya-
deva aura nAraka, sesa-vAko kI cagaiyA -jAroM gati ke mithyAdRSTi, AhArajiNaM
AhArakadvika aura tIrthaMkara nAmakarma ko, aputhvI - apUrvakaraNa
guNasthAnavartI, ani anivRtti bAdara saMperAya cAlA saMjalaNa purisa sajvalana
kaSAya aura puruSa - -- veda kA lahaM-- jaghanya sthitibaMdha | - zataka
sAyanasukha - mAtA vedanIya, yazaHkIti nAmakarma, ucca gotra, ghAvaraNA vizyaM
jJAtAbaraNa pAMca darzanAvaraNa cAra aura aMtarAya pAMca sumo sutramaparAya
guNasthAna nAlA, vidhikiyaSaka, asannI asaMjhI paMcendriya paryApta sabhI-saMzI,
vi 7

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **Also, the four Ayus, the Pāpaparajēgidi-Bādar
sufficient Ekendriya, and the remaining tendencies.**  **Gāthārtha:** The
**Tiryanchdvik**, **Audārikdvik**, **Udyot Nāma**, and **Samvāt Sanhanan** have
their **utkṛṣṭa sthitibandha** (highest state of bondage) in **Mithyātva**
(false belief) for Devas, Narakas, and the remaining 62 Prakṛtis. The **utkṛṣṭa
sthitibandha** for all four gatis is done by **Mithyādṛṣṭi** (false vision)
Jivas.  The **jighanya sthitibandha** (lowest state of bondage) of
**Āhārakdvik** and **Tīrthankara Nāmakarma** is in the eighth **guṇasthāna**
(state of being) called **Apūrvakaraṇa**. The **jighanya sthitibandha** of
**Sanchalan Kaṣāya** and **Puruṣaved** is in the ninth **guṇasthāna** called
**Anivṛtti Bādar**.  The **jighanya sthitibandha** of **Sāta Vedaniya**,
**Yaśaḥkīrti**, **Uchcha Gotra**, **Five Jñānāvaraṇa**, **Four Darśanāvaraṇa**,
and **Five Antarāya** is at the end of the **Sūkṣmasampārāya** **guṇasthāna**.
The **jighanya sthitibandha** of **Vaikriyaṣaṭka** is done by the **Asanjnī
Panchendriya Tiryanch**. The **jighanya sthitibandha** of the four **Ayus** is
done by both **Sanjnī** and **Asanjnī**. The **jighanya sthitibandha** of the
remaining Prakṛtis is done by the **Bādar Paryāpta Ekendriya** Jiva.  **Special
Note:** The first half of **Viśeṣārthāthā 44** describes the **utkṛṣṭa
sthitibandha** of the Prakṛtis, while the second half and **Gāthā 15** describe
the **jighanya sthitibandha**.  The previous **Gāthā** explained the **utkṛṣṭa
sthitibandha** of 18 Prakṛtis. Now, explaining the **utkṛṣṭa sthitibandha** of
the remaining 8 Prakṛtis, it is said that the **utkṛṣṭa sthitibandha** of
**Tiryanchdvik** (Tiryanch Gati, Tiryanchānupūvī), **Audārikdvik** (Audārik
Śarīra, Audārik Angopāng), **Udyot Nāma**, and **Sevā Sanhanan** is done by
Devas and Narakas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha bhI, Au-cAra Ayu ko, pAparapajegidi-bAdara paryApta
ekendriya, .-aura, mesANaM--zeSa pravRtiyoM ko| gAthArtha-tiryaMcadvika,
audArikadvika, udyota nAma, saMvAta saMhanana kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha mithyAtvI
deva aura nAraka aura bAkI kI 62 prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha cAroM gati
vAle mithyAdRSTi jIva karate haiN| AhArakadvika aura tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kA
jaghanya sthitibaMdha apUrvakaraNa nAmaka AThaveM gaNasthAna meM tathA saMcalana
kaSAya aura puruSaveda kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha anivRtti bAdara nAmaka nauveM
guNasthAna meM hotA hai| sAtA vedanIya, yazaHkIrti, ucca gotra, pAMca
jJAnAvaraNa, cAra darzanAvaraNa, pAMca aMtarAya ina prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya
sthitibaMdha sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna ke aMta meM hotA hai| vaikriyaSaTka kA
jaghanya sthitibaMdha asaMjJI paMcendriya tiryaMca karatA hai , cAra AyuoM kA
jaghanya sthitibaMdha saMjhI aura asaMjhI donoM hI karate haiM tathA zeSa
prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha bAdara paryApta ekendriya jIva karatA hai|
vizeSArthAthA 44 ke pUrvArdha meM prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke svAmiyoM
kA tathA uttarArdha va gAthA 15 maiM jaghanya sthitibaMdha ke svAmiyoM kA
kathana kiyA gayA hai  /  pUrva gAthA meM 18 prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha
ke svAmiyoM ko batalAyA thA aura aba zeSa rahI 8 prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha ke svAmiyoM ko batalAte hue kahate haiM ki tiryaMcaddhika
(tiyaMcagati, tiryaMcAnupUvI), audArikadvika (audArika zarIra, audArika
aMgopAMga), udyota nAma aura sevA saMhanana, ina chaha prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha deva aura nAraka karate haiM  /

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 172nd Century  The reason for the excellent state-binding of the
aforementioned six natures of Devas and Narakas is that when the complex results
that are bindable to the aforementioned natures occur, humans and Tiryanchas
bind these six natures to a maximum of eighteen Sagara-measure of state. If
there are more complex results, then they transgress the binding of these
natures and bind the natures that are worthy of Naraka-gati. But Devas and
Narakas, even when there are excellent complex results, only bind the natures
that are worthy of Tiryancha-gati, they cannot bind the natures that are worthy
of Naraka-gati. Because Devas and Narakas are not born in Naraka. Therefore,
Devas and Narakas with excellent complex results bind these six natures to an
excellent state of twenty Kodakodi Sagara-measure.  In the context of the
excellent state-binding of the aforementioned six natures, it should be
understood that the Devas of the heavens above Ishan heaven, like Sanatkumar,
etc., bind the excellent state of Sewart Sanhanan and Audarik Angopang, but the
Devas of Ishan heaven do not. Because the Devas up to Ishan heaven, even when
there are complex results worthy of them, bind the middle state of both natures
to a maximum of eighteen Sagara-measure, and if they have excellent complex
results, they bind the natures worthy of Ekendriya. The Devas of Sanatkumar,
etc., even when they have excellent complex results, bind the natures worthy of
Panchendriya Tiryancha, but they do not bind the natures worthy of Ekendriya
because they are not born in Ekendriya. Therefore, the excellent state of twenty
Kodakodi Sagara-measure of these two natures, Sewart Sanhanan and Audarik
Angopang, is bound by the Devas of Sanatkumar, etc., who have excellent complex
results.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 172 zataka deva aura nArakoM ke ukta chaha prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha
hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki ukta prakRtiyoM ke baMdhayogya saMkliSTa pari NAma
hone para manuSya aura tica ina chaha prakRtiyoM ko adhika-seadhika aThAraha
sAgara pramANa hI sthiti kA baMdha karate haiN| yadi usase adhika saMkleza
pariNAma hote haiM to ina prakRtiyoM ke baMdha kA atikramaNa karake ve
narakagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karate haiM  /  kintu deva aura nAraka
to utkRSTa se utkRSTa saMkleza pariNAmoM ke hone para bhI tiyaMcagati ke yogya
hI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karate haiM, narakagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
nahIM kara sakate haiN| kyoMki deva aura nAraka bharakara naraka meM utpanna
nahIM hote haiM  /  isIlie utkRSTa saMkleza pariNAmoM se yukta deva aura nAraka
hI ina chaha prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti bIsa kor3Akor3I sAgara pramANa kA
baMdha karate haiM  /  ukta chaha prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke prasaMga
meM itanA vizeSa samajhanA cAhiye ki IzAna svarga se Upara ke sanatkumAra Adi
svargo ke deva hI sevArta saMhanana aura audArika aMgopAMga kA utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha karate haiM, IzAna svarga ke deva nahIM karate haiN| kyoMki IzAna
svarga taka ke deva unake yogya saMkleza pariNAmoM ke hone para bhI donoM
prakRtiyoM kI adhika se adhika aThAraha sAgara pramANa madhyama sthiti kA baMdha
karate haiM aura yadi unake utkRSTa saMkleza pariNAma hote haiM to ekendriya ke
yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karate haiM  /  sanatkumAra Adi ke deva' utkRSTa
saMkleza hone para bhI paMcendriya tiryaMca ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karate
haiM, ekendriya meM unakA janma nahIM hone se ekendriya yogya prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha nahIM karate haiM  /  ataH sevArta saMhanana aura odArika aMgopAMga ina
do prakRtiyoM kI bosa kor3Akor3I sAgara pramANa utkRSTa sthiti kA baMdha utkRSTa
saMkleza pariNAma vAle sanatkumAra Adi svargoM

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five-sense beings (Panchama-farmgranya) can perform the actions that the
gods can, but the lower gods cannot. This is because the one-sense beings
(Ekaindriya) do not have the capacity for aggregation (Sanhanan) or the
combination of parts (Angopaang), making them unsuitable for the two natures.
In essence, even with similar results, there is a difference in the actions due
to the distinction in motion (Gati) and other factors. For example, the gods
from Ishana to the highest heavens bind the natures suitable for one-sense
beings through certain results, while humans and animals bind the natures
suitable for hellish realms through similar results.  Thus, out of the 116
natures that can be bound by false vision (Mithyadristi), the remaining 62
natures, excluding the 24 natures from Vikalatrika to Seyat Sanhanan, are bound
in their highest state by beings of all four realms with false vision - "Ses
Chaugaiya".  The "Go Karmakand" also mentions the owners of the highest state
binding of the 116 natures, stating:  "Naratirya Mesau'
Vegubbiyachhakaviyalasutssmatiyam. Suranirya Oraliyatiriyadudujjovasampattam.
||137|| Deva Pun Indimaday Thaparan Cha Samanam. Upakassasanka Littha
Chaduragadaya Isimjhimaya. ||138||"  Except for the gods, the remaining three
lifespans (Ayu), Yakriya Shatka, Vikalatrika, and Mukshmatrika, are bound in
their highest state by humans and animals. The highest state binding of
Audarikadvika, Tiryanchadvika, Udy, Asampraptamrupa, and Taka (Seyat) Sanhanan
is performed by beings with false vision, gods, and hell beings. The highest
state binding of Ekaindriya, Atap, and Sthavar is performed by beings with false
vision and gods. The highest state binding of the remaining natures is performed
by beings with false vision who have attained the highest state of perfection
(Sampalesh) and beings with false vision who have attained the middle state of
perfection (Madhyam).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama pharmagranya ke deva hI kara sakate haiM, nIce ke deva nahIM karate
haiN| kyoMki ekendriya ke saMhanana aura aMgopAMga nahIM hone se ye do
prakRtiyAM ekendriya yogya nahIM haiN| sArAMza yaha hai ki eka sarIkhe pariNAma
hone para bhI gati Adi ke bheda se unameM bheda ho jAtA hai| jaise ki IzAna
svarga taka ke deva jina pariNAmoM se ekendriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
karate haiM, vaise hI pariNAma hone para manuSya aura tiryaMca narakagati ke
yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karate haiN| isa prakAra se mithyA dRSTi ke baMdhane
yogya 116 prakRtiyoM meM se pUrvokta vikalatrika Adi seyAta saMhanana paryanta
24 prakRti ke sivAya zeSa 62 prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha cAroM gatiyoM ke
mithyAdRSTi jIva karate haiM--sesa caugaiyA  / ' 1 go0 karmakAMDa meM bhI 116
prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke svAmiyoM ko batalAte hue likhA hai
NaratiriyA mesAu' vegubbiyachakkaviyalasuTsamatiyaM  /  suraNirayA
oraliyatiriyadugujjovasaMpattaM  /  / 137 /  /  devA puNa iMdimAdAya thAparaM ca
samANaM  /  upakassasaMki liTThA cadurgAdayA IsimajhimayA  /  / 138|| devAyu ke
vinA zeSa tIna Ayu, yakriyaSaTka, vikalatrika, mUkSmatrika kA utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha mi pATi manuSya, tiryaca karate haiM  /  audArikadvika,
tiryaMcadvika, udya:, asaMprAptAmRpA TakA (sevAta) saMhanana kA utkRSTa
sthitibadha mithyASTi, deva aura nAraka karate haiN| ekendriya, Atapa aura
sthAvara kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha midhyAhRSTi deva karate haiM  /  zeSa
prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa sthiti maMdha utkRSTa saMpaleza vAle mithyASTaSTi jIva
apadA ISat madhyama pariNAma vAle mithyA STi jIva karate haiN|

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Century  **Ownership of the Inferior Status-Bond**  Having explained the
ownership of the Superior Status-Bond, we now explain the ownership of the
Inferior Status-Bond. Before considering the ownership of the Inferior Status-
Bond, it is essential to know two things. First, just as Superior Status-Bond
requires Superior Affliction, similarly, Inferior Status-Bond requires Superior
Purity. Second, the Status-Bond of those Karma-Natures which are bound due to
the harmonious presence of the appropriate passions up to a particular
Gunasthan, and whose binding is completely severed in the next Gunasthan, so
that there is no possibility of binding, is called the Inferior Status-Bond in
that Gunasthan.  Therefore, beginning the explanation of the Inferior Status-
Bond, we first mention the Inferior Status-Bond of the Tirthankara Name and
Aharadvik. It is said that the Inferior Status-Bond of these Natures, namely
Aharakatik and Tirthankara Name Karma, occurs in the eighth Gunasthan called
A-purvakarana. This is because the beings in this Gunasthan are the most pure in
their results. And, the Inferior Status-Bond of the five Natures, namely
Sanjwalana Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha, and Purusha Veda, occurs up to the ninth
Gunasthan called Anivritibadar.  Regarding the ownership of the Inferior Status-
Bond of the eight Natures, from Aharadvik to Purusha Veda, it is important to
know that both the eighth and ninth Gunasthan should be considered as belonging
to the Kshapaka Shreni. This is because there is a special purity in the
Kshapaka Shreni compared to the Upshama Shreni.  1. For the names of the Natures
whose binding is severed in the eighth, ninth, and tenth Gunasthan, see the
second Karmagrantha, verses 6, 10, and 11.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka aghanya sthitibaMdha kA svAmitva utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke svAmiyoM ko
batalAkara aba jaghanya sthitibaMdha ke svAmiyoM ko batalAte haiN| jaghanya
sthitibaMdha ke svAmitva ke bAre meM vicAra karane se pUrva do bAtoM kA jAnanA
jarUrI hai  /  eka to jaise utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke lie utkRSTa saMkleza honA
Avazyaka hai, vaise hI jaghanya sthitibaMdha ke lie utkRSTa vizuddhi honA cAhiye
/  dUsarI yaha hai ki jisa guNasthAna taka yathAyogya kaSAyoM kA sadbhAva rahane
se jina-jina prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai aura usake Age ke guNasthAna meM
baMdhaviccheda ho jAne se baMdha kI saMbhAvanA hI nahIM hai, usa guNasthAna meM
una karma prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha hotA hai  /  ataeva jaghanya
sthitibaMdha kA kathana prAraMbha karate hue sarvaprathama tIrthakara nAma aura
AhAradvika ke jaghanya sthitibaMdha ke liye kahate haiM ki 'AhArajiNamapubyo'
AhArakaTika aura tIrthaMkara nAmakarma ina prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha
apUrvakaraNa nAmaka AThaveM gaNasthAna meM hotA hai| kyoMki inake baMdhakoM meM
ukta guNasthAna vAle jIva hI ati vizuddha pariNAma vAle hote haiM aura 'aniyadi
saMjalaNa purisa lahu' anivRttibAdara nAmaka nauveM guNasthAna taka saMjvalana
krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha aura puruSa veda ina pAMca prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya
sthitibaMdha hotA hai|' AhArakadvika Adi puruSa veda paryanta ATha prakRtiyoM ke
jaghanya sthitibaMdha ke svAmI ke saMbaMdha meM itanA vizeSa jAnanA cAhiye ki
AThavAM aura nauvAM yaha donoM guNasthAna kSapaka zroNi ke hI lenA cAhie, kyoMki
upazama zreNi se kSapaka zroNi meM vizeSa vizuddhi hotI hai  /  1 AThaveM,
nauveM, dasaveM guNasthAna meM badhavicchinna hone vAlI prakRtiyoM ke nAma
dvitIya karmagrantha gA.6,10,11 meM dekhiye  /

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  The five types of Jnanavaraniya karma, including the
seven Vedaniya, Yash, Kiti, Uchchgotra, and Matijnana Avarana, the four types of
Darshanavaraniya karma, including Chakshudarshana Avarana, and the five types of
Antaraya karma, including Dana Antaraya, totaling seventeen types, have their
lowest state of binding in the tenth Gunasthan, called Sukshmasampraya, which is
the destroyer of the subtle coverings. This is because, except for the seven
Vedaniya, the remaining sixteen types bind up to this Gunasthan, and therefore,
the beings who bind these karmas are particularly pure in this Gunasthan.
Although the binding of the seven Vedaniya continues until the thirteenth
Gunasthan, their lowest state of binding occurs only up to the tenth Gunasthan,
because the cause of binding is Kshaya. The arising of the Sanjwalan Lobha
Kshaya occurs up to the tenth Gunasthan, Sukshmasampraya, which is why the
lowest state of binding of the seven Vedaniya is also mentioned in the tenth
Gunasthan.  The lowest state of binding of the four types of Ayukarma is
experienced by both Asangi and Sanghi beings. Among them, the lowest state of
binding of Devayuk and Narakayuk is experienced by Panchendriya Tiryanch and
Manushya, while the lowest state of binding of Manushyayuk and Tirthchayuk is
experienced by Ekendriya beings and others.  In this way, after reducing the 35
types of karma included in Aharakdvik and other Ayuchatusk from the 120 types of
karma that can be bound, the remaining 85 types have their lowest state of
binding in the Ekendriya beings who are sufficient in the Badaar state. This is
because, in the context of explaining the binding of karma, it has been
indicated that the lowest state of binding of these types of karma occurs only
in the Ekendriya beings who are sufficient in the Badaar state. Among the beings
who bind these karmas, those who are sufficient in the Badaar state are
particularly pure, and other Ekendriya beings, due to their lack of such purity,
do not experience the binding of these karmas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha sAtA vedanIya, yaza kIti, uccagotra, matijJAnAvaraNa Adi
jJAnAvaraNa karma kI pAMca prakRtiyAM, cakSudarzanAvaraNa Adi cAra darzanAvaraNa
karma kI prakRtiyAM tathA dAnAntarAya Adi pAMca antarAya karma kI prakRtiyAM,
kula satraha prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya sthitibaMdha kA svAmI sUkSmasaMparAya nAmaka
dasaveM guNasthAnavartI kSapaka hai-sAyajasuccAvaraNA vigdhaM suhumo  /  kyoMki
sAtAvedanIya ke sivAya solaha prakRtiyAM isI guNasthAna taka baMdhatI haiM, ataH
unake baMdhakoM meM yahI guNasthAna vizeSa vizuddha hai  /  yadyapi sAtA
vedanIya kA baMdha terahaveM guNasthAna taka hotA hai, tathApi sthitibaMdha
dasaveM guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai, kyoMki sthiti baMdha kA kAraNa kaSAya hai|
saMjvalana lobha kaSAya kA udaya dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna taka rahatA
hai, jisase sAtA vedanIya kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha bhI dasaveM guNasthAna meM hI
batalAyA hai| _ Ayukarma kI cAroM prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha asaMjJI
jIva bhI karate haiM aura saMjJI jIva bhI karate haiM-sannI vi Au  /  unameM se
devAyu aura narakAyu kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha paMcendriya tiryaMca aura manuSya
karate haiM tathA manuSyAyu aura tirtha cAyu kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha ekendriya
Adi  /  isa prakAra se AhArakadvika Adi AyucatuSka taka meM antarbhUta 35
prakRtiyoM ko baMdhayogya 120 prakRtiyoM meM se kama kara dene para zeSa rahI 85
prakRtiyoM kA jaMghanya sthitibaMdha-bAyarapajjegidiu sesANaM bAdara paryApta
ekendriya jIva karate haiN| kyoMki prakRtiyoM ke sthitibaMdha ko batalAne ke
prasaMga meM yaha saMketa kara Aye haiM ki ina prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya
sthitibaMdha bAdara paryApta ekendriya jIva ko hI hotA hai| ina prakRtiyoM ke
baMdhakoM meM vahI vizeSa vizuddhi vAlA hotA hai aura anya ekendriya jIva utanI
vizuddhi na hone ke kAraNa ukta prakRtiyoM

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shataka** binds more to the higher state. Although **Ekandriya** beings
have greater purity in their **Vikasandris**, they inherently bind more to these
**Prakritis**, which is why the **Badar** has been declared as the master of the
**Jghanya** state binding of the remaining **Prakritis** for the **Ekendriya**
beings.  After stating the masters of the **Utkrushta** and **Jghanya** state
binding of the **Prakritis**, we now explain the distinctions of the
**Utkrushta**, **Anuskrushta**, etc. types of the **Prakritis** in the
**Sthitibandha**.  **Ukkosamahatnegarbhangasai Anai Dhusha Adhuva. Chauha Sag
Ajhanno Sesatige Aouchasu Duha. ||46||**  **Word Meaning:**  * **Ukkosajhanna**
- **Utkrushta** and **Janhya** binding * **Iyar** - Opposite (**Anuskrushta**,
**Anancha** binding) * **Maga** - Breaking * **Saisadi, Manai** - **Anadi** *
**Dhuv** - **Dhruva** * **Madhuva** - **Adhruva** * **Ghouha** - Four types *
**Mag** - Seven **Mula Prakritis** * **Ajhanno** - **Ajghanya** binding * **Ses
Sige** - Remaining three * **Aounjasu** - Four **Ayus** * **Buha** - Type
**Explanation:**  **Utkrushta**, **Jghanya**, **Anutkrushta**, **Ajghanya** are
the four types of binding, or in another way, **Sadi**, **Anadi**, **Dhruva**,
**Adhruva** are the four types of binding. The **Ajghanya** binding of the seven
**Karmas**:  1. (a) **Sattaraspanchatitthaharanam Suhummbadaraapunvo. Chhadhve
Guruvamasanni Ahannnaman Saranni Va.** - **Go. Karmakanda 151** (b)
**Karmaprakriti Bandhanakaran** and **Pantrasangraha Ma. 270** have explained
the masters of the **Jghanya** state binding.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka ko adhika sthiti bAMdhate hai  /  yacApa ekAndraya se vikAsandriyoM meM
adhikaM vizuddhi hotI hai kintu ve svabhAva se hI ina prakRtiyoM kI adhika
sthiti bAMdhate haiM, jisase zeSa prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya sthitibaMdha kA svAmI
bAdara paryApta ekendriya jIvoM ko hI batalAyA hai| prakRtiyoM ke utkuSTa aura
jaghanya sthitibaMdha ke svAmiyoM kA kathana karane ke pazcAt aba sthitibaMdha
meM mUla prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa, anuskRSTa Adi bhedoM ko batalAte haiN|
ukkosamahatnegarabhaMgA sAI aNAi dhuSa adhuvA  /  cauhA saga ajahano sesatige
AucAusu duhA  // 46 //  zabdArtha - ukkosajahanna - uskRSTa aura janya baMdha,
iyara - pratipakSI (anuskRSTa, anancha baMdha), magA - bhaMga, sAisAdi, maNAI-
anAdi, dhuva - dhruva, madhuvA - adhruva, ghauhA - pAra prakAra, maga -sAta mUla
prakRtiyoM ke, ajahanno ajadhanya baMdha, sesa sige - bAkI ke tIna, Aunajasu -
cAra Ayu meM, buhA..ho prakAra  /  gApArya-utkRSTa, jaghanya, anutkRSTa,
ajadhanya, yaha baMdha ke cAra bheda haiM athavA dUsarI prakAra se sAdi, anAdi,
dhruva, adhruva ye baMdha ke cAra bheda haiM | sAta karmoM kA ajaghanya baMdha 1
(ka) sattarasapaMcatitthAhArANaM suhumbaadraapunyvo|| chadhve guruvamasaNI
ahaNNamANa saraNI vA  /  /  -go0 karmakAMDa 151 (ba) karmaprakRti baMdhanakaraNa
tathA paMtrasaMgraha mA. 270 meM jaghanya sthiti baMdha ke svAmiyoM ko batalAyA
hai|

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Chapter  **177**  There are four types of **karma** (action). The
remaining three **bandhas** (bonds) and the four **bandhas** of **ayukarma**
(life-span karma) are **sadi** (with beginning) and **adhruva** (non-permanent),
thus there are only two types.  **Special Note:** The verse explains the
**utkrusht** (excellent), **anutkrusht** (not excellent), **jghanya**
(inferior), and **ajghanya** (not inferior) distinctions of **sthitibandha**
(state-bond) of the **mul prakritis** (fundamental natures). It also explains
the **sadi**, **anadi** (without beginning), etc. distinctions within them as
much as possible.  **Utkrusht bandha** is the **bandha** with the highest state,
meaning there can be no **bandha** with a higher state than it. **Jghanya
bandha** is the **bandha** with the lowest state. All **bandhas** from a
slightly less excellent state to the **jghanya** state are called **anutkrusht
bandhas**. This means all the remaining **bandhas** before the **amala** (pure)
state of the **sasastra sangha** (armed assembly) are called **anutkrusht
bandhas**. All **bandhas** from a slightly more inferior state to before the
**utkrusht bandha** are called **ajghanya bandhas**. In this way, all the
distinctions of state are included in the **utkrusht** and **anutkrusht**
distinctions, and all the distinctions of state are also implied in the
**jghanya** and **ajghanya** **bandha** distinctions.  These four **bandhas**
have **sadi**, **anadi**, **dhruva** (permanent), and **adhruva** distinctions
as appropriate. The **bandha** that stops and then starts again is called
**sadibandha**, and the **bandha** that has been continuous since the beginning
of time is **anadibandha**. This **bandha** does not stop even for a moment. The
**bandha** that has never been broken and will never be broken is
**dhruvabandha**, and the **bandha** that will be broken in the future is called
**adhruvabandha**.  **Jnanaavaran** (knowledge-obscuring), **darshanavaran**
(perception-obscuring), **vedaniya** (feeling), **mohaniya** (delusion), **ayu**
(life-span), **nama** (name), **gotra** (lineage), and **antaraya** (obstacle)
are the eight fundamental natures of **karma**. All four **bandhas** -
**utkrusht**, **anutkrusht**, **jghanya**, and **ajghanya** - exist in these.
Among these, **ayu**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama kamenya 177 cAra prakAra kA hotA hai| bAkI ke tIna baMdha aura Ayukarma
ke cAroM baMdha sAdi aura adhruva, isa taraha do hI prakAra ke hote haiN|
vizeSArtha-gAthA meM mula prakRtiyoM ke sthitibaMdha ke utkRSTa, anuskRSTa,
jaghanya, ajaghanya bheda batalAkara yathAsaMbhava unameM sAdi, anAdi Adi bheda
batalAye haiN| adhikatama sthitibaMdha hone ko utkRSTa baMdha kahate haiM arthAt
usase adhika sthiti vAlA baMdha ho hI nahIM sakatA, vaha utkRSTa baMdha hai|
sabase kama sthiti bAle baMdha ko jaghanya baMdha kahate haiM  /  eka samaya
kama utkRSTa sthitibaMdha se lekara jaghanya sthitibaMdha taka ke sabhI baMdha
anutkRSTa baMdha kahalAte haiN| yAnI sazastra saMgha ke amAlA se pUrva taka ke
zeSa baMdha anutkRSTa baMdha kahalAte haiN| eka samaya adhika jadhanya baMdha se
lekara utkRSTa baMdha se pUrva taka ke sabhI baMdha ajaghanya baMdha kahe jAte
haiM  /  isa prakAra se utkRSTa aura anutkRSTa bheda meM sthiti ke sabhI bhedoM
kA grahaNa ho jAtA hai aura jaghanya va ajaghanya baMdhabheda meM bhI sthiti ke
sabhI bheda garbhita ho jAte haiM  /  _ ina cAroM hI baMdha meM sAdi, anAdi,
dhruva, adhruva bhaMga yathAyogya hote haiM  /  jo baMdha ruka kara punaH hone
lagatA hai, vaha sAdibaMdha kahalAtA hai aura jo baMdha anAdikAla se satata ho
rahA hai, vaha anAdibaMdha hai | yaha baMdha bIca meM eka samaya ko bhI nahIM
rukatA hai| jo baMdha na kabhI vicchinna huA aura na hogA, vaha dhruvabaMdha hai
aura jo baMdha Age jAkara vicchinna ho jAtA hai, use adhruvabaMdha kahate haiN|
jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, vedanIya, mohanIya, Ayu, nAma, gotra aura antarAya,
karmoM kI ye ATha mUla prakRtiyAM haiM  /  inameM utkRSTa, anutkRSTa, jaghanya,
ajaghanya, yaha cAroM hI baMdha hote haiM  /  inameM se Ayu

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 178th Century  Except for Karma, the remaining seven Karmas have four types
of Ajghanya Bandha: Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva, and Adhruva. This is because the
Ajghanya Bandha of Mohaniya Karma occurs at the end of the ninth Gunasthan,
called Sampraaya, which is characterized by the non-cessation of Kshapakanaani.
The Ajghanya Bandha of the remaining six Karmas occurs at the end of the tenth
Gunasthan, called Sukshma Sampraaya, which is characterized by Kshapakshroni.
These seven Karmas also have Ajghanya Bandha in other Gunasthanas and Upshamni.
Therefore, the Ajghanya Bandha does not occur in the eleventh Gunasthan, but
rather the Jiva undergoes an Agladesha for seven years before it occurs. This is
called Sadi Bandha. The Ajghanya Bandha of the aforementioned seven Karmas that
occurs before entering the ninth, tenth, etc. Gunasthanas is called Anadi
because it continuously occurs from the beginning of time. The Ajghanya Bandha
of an Abhvy is called Dhruva because it does not have an end, while the Ajghanya
Bandha of a Bhavya is called Adhruva because it has an end. Thus, there are four
types of Ajghanya Bandha for the seven Karmas.  Except for Ajghanya Bandha, the
remaining three types of Bandha have two types: Sadi and Adhruva. This is
because the Ajghanya Bandha of Mohaniya Karma occurs at the end of the ninth
Gunasthan, and the Ajghanya Bandha of the remaining six Karmas occurs at the end
of the tenth Gunasthan. This Bandha is called Sadi because it does not occur
before these points. It is called Adhruva because it completely disappears in
the twelfth and subsequent Gunasthanas. Thus, there are only two options for
Ajghanya Bandha: Sadi and Adhruva.  The Utkrushta Bandha occurs for the
Sanklishta Pariṇāmi, who has the five senses, the ability to perceive, and the
wrong view. This Bandha occurs sometimes, not always, making it Sadi. It is also
Adhruva because it is replaced by an Anutkrushta Bandha after a short period of
time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 178 zataka karma ko chor3akara zeSa sAta karmoM kA ajaghanya baMdha sAdi,
anAdi, dhruva, adhruva ina cAroM prakAra kA hotA hai, kyoMki mohanIya karma kA
jaghanya baMdha kSapakanaNi ke anivRttibAdara saMparAya nAmaka nauveM guNasthAna
ke anta meM hotA hai aura zeSa chaha karmoM kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha
kSapakazroNi vAle dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya' guNasthAna ke anta meM hotA hai| _
anya guNasthAnoM va upazamaNi meM bhI ina sAtoM karmoM kA ajaghanya baMdha hotA
hai  /  ataH gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM ajaghanya baMdha na karake vahA~ se nA
hokara java jIva sAta varSoM kA agalAdeza karatA hai taba vaha baMdha sAdi kahA
jAtA hai  /  nauveM, dasarve Adi guNasthAnoM meM Ane se pahale ukta sAta karmoM
kA jo ajadhanya baMdha hotA hai, vaha anAdikAla se niraMtara hote rahane ke
kAraNa anAdi kahalAtA hai  /  abhavya ke baMdha kA aMta nahIM hotA hai, ataH
usako hone vAlA ajaghanya baMdha dhruva aura bhavya ke baMdha kA aMta hone se
usako hone vAlA ajaghanya baMdha adhruva kahalAtA hai  /  isa prakAra sAta
karmoM ke ajaghanya baMdha meM cAroM bhaMga hote haiN| _ ajaghanya baMdha ke
sibAya zeSa tIna baMdhabhedoM meM sAdi aura adhruva, yaha do prakAra hote haiM
/  kyoMki mohanIya karma kA nauveM guNasthAna ke aMta meM aura zeSa chaha karmoM
kA dasaveM guNasthAna ke aMta meM jaghanya sthitibaMdha hotA hai, usase pUrva
nahIM, ataH vaha baMdha sAdi hai aura bArahaveM Adi guNasthAnoM meM usakA
sarvathA abhAva ho jAtA hai ataH vaha adhruva hai| isa prakAra jaghanya baMdha
meM sAdi aura adhruva yaha do hI vikalpa hote haiN| utkRSTa sthitibaMdha
saMkliSTa pariNAmI saMjJI paMcendriya paryApta mithyA dRSTi ko hotA hai  /  vaha
baMdha kabhI-kabhI hotA hai, sarvadA nahIM, jisase vaha sAdi hai tathA
annamuhUrta ke bAda niyama se usakA sthAna badala jAne se anutkRSTabaMdha sthAna
le letA hai, ataH vaha adhruva

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Chapter of the Granth  **176.**  Even in the state of **utkrista
bandha** (highest bondage), there are two possibilities: **sadi** (continuous)
and **adhruva** (non-continuous).  After **utkrista bandha**, there is
**anutkrista bandha** (lowest bondage). Therefore, it is **sadi** because it
continues for at least one **antmuhurt** (a very short period of time) and at
most for an infinite **utsarpini** (ascending) and **avsarpiini** (descending)
time cycle. After this, **anutkrista bandha** stops, making it **adhruva**. This
means that **utkrista bandha**, if present, continues for a maximum of
**antmuhurt** and **anutkrista bandha** continues for a maximum of an infinite
**utsarpini** and **avsarpiini** time cycle. After this, they switch places,
making both **sadi** and **adhruva**.  Thus, in the **utkrista**,
**anutkrista**, and **jghanya** (lowest) **bandha** of the seven karmas, there
are only two possibilities: **sadi** and **adhruva**.  In the **utkrista**,
**anutkrista**, **jghanya**, and **ajghanya** (not lowest) **bandha** of
**ayukarma** (karma of lifespan), there are four possibilities. However, the
only two options are **sadi** and **adhruva**. This is because the **bandha** of
**ayukarma** is not continuous like the other seven karmas, but occurs at a
fixed time. This makes it **sadi**. Its **bandha** period is also measured in
**antmuhurt**. After **antmuhurt**, it stops according to the rule, making it
**adhruva**.  Therefore, one should understand the **sadi** and other
possibilities in the **utkrista** and other four **bandha** of all eight karmas.
**(a)**  "There are four **bandha** in the **mulapaga** (original state) of the
six **ajhan** (non-liberated). The rest are **sadi** and **adhruva**, and they
come in pairs." - **Panchasangrah 5.59**  **(b)** "There are four **bandha** in
the **mulapaga** of the seven **ajhan**. The rest are **sadi** and **adhruva**,
and they come in pairs." - **Go. Karmakanda 152**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama pharmagranpa 176 hai| jisase utkRSTa sthitibaMdha meM bhI sAdi aura
adhruva yaha do vikalpa hote haiN| utkRSTa baMdha ke bAda anutkRSTa baMdha hotA
hai  /  isIliye vaha sAdi hai aura kama se kama antamuhUrta ke bAda aura adhika
se adhika ananta utsarpiNI ba avasarpiNI kAla ke bAda utkRSTa baMdha hone se
anutkRSTa baMdha ruka jAtA hai, jisase use adhruva kahA jAtA hai| yAnI utkRSTa
baMdha yadi ho to lagAtAra adhika-se-adhika antamuharta taka hotA hai aura
anutkRSTa baMdha lagAtAra adhika-se-adhika ananta utsarpiNI aura avasarpiNI kAla
taka hotA hai aura usake bAda donoM eka dUsare kA sthAna le lete haiM, ataH
donoM sAdi aura adhruva haiM  /  isa prakAra sAta karmoM ke utkRSTa, anutkRSTa
aura jaghanya ina tInoM baMdhoM meM sAdi aura adhruva yaha do hI bhaMga hote
haiM  /  Ayukarma ke utkRSTa, anutkRSTa, jaghanya, ajaghanya me cAroM baMdha
hote haiN| lekina ina cAroM meM sAdi aura adhruva yahI do vikalpa haiMAucausu
duhA  /  kyoMki Ayukarma kA baMdha anya sAta karmoM kI taraha nirantara nahIM
hotA rahatA hai kintu niyata samaya para hotA hai  /  jisase vaha sAdi hai aura
usakA baMdhakAla bhI antamuhUrta pramANa hai, antamuhUrta ke bAda vaha niyama se
ruka jAtA hai, jisase vaha adhruva hai  /  isa prakAra se AThoM karmoM ke
utkRSTa Adi cAroM baMdhoM meM sAdi Adi vikalpa jAnanA caahie|' 1 (ka) sataNhaM
ajahanno cauhA ThibaMdha mUlapagaINaM  /  sesA u sAiadhruvA casAri vi Aue evaM
//  -paMcasaMgraha 5 / 59 (kha) ajahaNNa TThidibaMdho camviho sattamulapayaDINaM
/  sesatiye dubiyappo bhAuca uSake vi duviyappo  /  -go0 karmakAMDa 152

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
$50 Thus, excluding Ayukarma, there are 78 bhangas in total, which are as
follows:  There are 10 bhangas each for the remaining seven karmas, namely,
Jnanavaran, Darshanavaran, Vedaniya, Mohaniya, Nama, Gotra, and Antaraya.  There
are two options for each of the three types of Jnanavaran bandha, namely,
Utkrishta, Anutkrishta, and Jaghanya, namely, Sadi and Adhruva. Therefore, there
are six bhangas in total for these three. Since there are four options for the
Ajaganya bandha, namely, Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva, and Adhruva, there are a total of
ten bhangas when these four are combined with the previous six.  Similarly,
there are ten bhangas each for the bandha bhedas of Darshanavaran, Vedaniya,
Mohaniya, Nama, Gotra, and Antaraya.  There are four types of bandha for
Kamukarma, namely, Utkrishta, Anutkrishta, Jaghanya, and Ajaganya. However, each
of these four has two options, namely, Sadi and Adhruva. Therefore, there are
two bhangas for each, and a total of eight bhangas.  Thus,
10+10+10+10+10+10+10+8 = 78 bhangas are for the eight original karmas, namely,
Jnanavaran, etc.  Shatak After describing the bhangas of Sadi, etc., in the
Ajaganya, etc., bandhas of the Mula Karmas, we now describe them in the Uttar
Prakritis.  Labheo Ajahto Sanjalanavaran Navagavidhanam. Sesatigi Saiadhuvo Tah
Chauha Sespaydiran. ||47||  Shabdarth - Chaubhebo - four types, Ajashro -
Ajaganya bandha, Sanjalanavaran Navag Vidhanam - Sanjwalan, Kapaya, No Vavaran,
and Antaraya, Sesatimi - the remaining three bandhas, Saiamrusho - Sadi and
Adhruva, Tah - from the same, Chauha - four types of bandha, Sespaydiran - the
rest of the Prakritis.  P Al -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 $50 isa prakAra se Ayukarma ke sivAya zeSa jJAnAvaraNa Adi sAta kamI ke utkRSTa
Adi cAroM baMdhatrakAroM ke sAdi, anAdi Adi cAra baMdhabhedoM kI apekSA se
pratyeka ke dasa-dasa aura Ayukarma ke ATha bhaMga hone se kula 78 bhaMga hote
haiM, jo isa prakAra haiM jJAnAvaraNa ke utkRSTa, anutkRSTa aura jaghanya baMdha
meM se pratyeka ke sAdi aura adhruva yaha do vikalpa hote haiM, ataH tInoM ke
kula milAkara chaha bhaMga hue tathA ajaghanya baMdha ke sAdi, anAdi, dhruva,
adhruva ye cAroM vikalpa hone se pUrva ke chaha bhedoM ko ina cAra ke sAtha
milAne se kula dasa bhaMga ho jAte haiN| isI prakAra se darzanAvaraNa, vedanIya,
mohanIya, nAma, gotra aura aMtarAya ke baMdhabhedoM meM pratyeka ke dasa-dasa
bhaMga jAnanA caahiye| kAmukarma ke nI utkRSTa anutkRSTa, jaghanya aura
ajaghanya ye cAroM prakAra ke baMdha hote haiM, lekina ye cAroM pratyeka sAdi
aura adhruba vikalpa vAle hone se pratyeka ke do-do bhaMga haiM aura kula
milAkara ATha bhaMga hote haiN| isa prakAra 10+10+10+10+10 +10+10+8=78 bhaMga
jJAnAvaraNa Adi ATha mUla karmoM ke hote haiM  /  zataka mula karmoM ke
ajaghanya Adi baMdhoM meM sAdi Adi bhaMgoM kA nirUpaNa karane ke bAda aba uttara
prakRtiyoM meM unakA kathana karate haiM  /  labheo ajahato saMjalaNAvaraNa
navagavidhANaM  /  sesatigi sAiadhuvo taha cauhA sesapayaDIrNa  // 47 //
zabdArtha - caubhebho cAra bheda, ajasro- ajaghanya baMdha meM. saMjaNAvaraNa
navaga vigdhANaM saMjvalana kapAya, no vAvaraNa aura antarAya ke sesatimi zeSa
tIna baMdhoM meM, sAiamRSo sAdi aura aghuma, taha- se hI kahA-- cAroM baMdha
prakAroM meM, sesapayajINaM bAkI kI prakRtiyoM ke  /  P Al -

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  The four Kashayas (anger, pride, deceit, greed) of
the Sanjwalan Granth, the nine Avaranas (five Jnana Avaranas, four Darshan
Avaranas), and the five Antarayas, all have four types of Ajghanya Bandha. The
remaining three Bandhas have two options: Sadi and Adhruva. Similarly, the
remaining four Bandhas of the other Prakritis also have two options: Sadi and
Adhruva.  **Special Note:** This verse explains the Sadi and Adhruva types of
the excellent Adi Bandhas of the Uttar Prakritis. Just as the options for the
Ajghanya Bandha of the Mula Prakritis were discussed first, the options for the
Ajghanya Bandha of the Uttar Prakritis are being discussed here.  Out of the 120
Prakritis, only those with Ajghanya Bandha are significant. Their names are as
follows: Sanjwalan Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha, Mati Jnana Avarana, Shruta Jnana
Avarana, Avadhi Jnana Avarana, Manaparyaya Jnana Avarana, Kevala Jnana Avarana,
Chakshu Darshan Avarana, Achakshu Darshan Avarana, Avadhi Darshan Avarana,
Kevala Darshan Avarana, and Dan, Lobha, Bhog, Upayog, Veerya Antaraya. These
eighteen Prakritis begin their Ajghanya state with the one who falls from the
Upshama Shreni.  These eighteen Prakritis have four options for their Ajghanya
Bandha: Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva, and Adhruva. These should be understood in the same
way as the Ajghanya Bandha of the Mula Karmas. When these eighteen Prakritis,
after having their Bandha-vichched in the Upshama Shreni, fall from there and
again create their Ajghanya Bandha, that Bandha is Sadi. Before ascending to the
Upshama Shreni, that Bandha is Anadi. In relation to the Abhavy, that same
Bandha is Dhruva, and in relation to the Bhavy, it is Adhruva. Therefore, the
Ajghanya...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha gAthArtha saMjvalana kaSAya catuSka, nau AvaraNa (pAMca
jJAnAvaraNa, cAra darzanAvaraNa) aura pAMca aMtarAya ke ajaghanya baMdha meM
cAroM bheda hote haiN| zeSa tona baMdhoM ke sAdi aura adhruva yaha do vikalpa
tathA zeSa prakRtiyoM ke cAroM baMboM ke bhI sAdi aura adhruva ye do hI vikalpa
hote haiN| *** vizeSArya - isa gAthA meM uttara prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa Adi
baMdhoM ke sAdi Adi bheda batalAye haiM  /  jaisA mUla prakRtiyoM meM sabase
pahale ajaghanya baMdha ke vikalpoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai, vaise hI uttara
prakratiyoM bhI ajaghanya baMdha ke vikalpoM kA yahAM vivecana kiyA jA rahA hai
/  120 prakRtiyoM meM se ajadhanya baMdha vAlI pratiyAM sipha hai  /  jinake
nAma kramaza: isa prakAra haiM-- saMjvalana krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha,
matijJAnAvaraNa, zrutajJAnAvaraNa, avadhijJAnAvaraNa, manaparyAyajJAnAvaraNa,
kevalajJAnAvaraNa, cakSudarzanAvaraNa, acakSudarzanAvaraNa, avadhidarzanAvaraNa,
kevaladarzanAvaraNa tathA dAna, lobha, bhoga, upayoga, vIrya antarAya --
saMjalaNAvaraNanavagavindhANaM  /  ina aThAraha prakRtiyoM kI ajaghanya sthiti
kI zurUAta upazama zroNi se patita hone vAle ke hotI hai  /  ina aThAraha
prakRtiyoM ke ajaghanya baMdha ke sAdi, anAdi, dhruva, adhruva ye cAroM hI
vikalpa hote haiM, jo mUla karmoM ke ajayamya baMdha kI taraha hI jAnanA
caahiye| upazama zreNi meM ina aThAraha prakRtiyoM kA baMdhaviccheda karake jaba
vahAM se cyuta hokara punaH unakA ajaghanya baMdha karate haiM to vaha baMdha
sAdi aura upazama zra eNi meM ArohaNa karane se pahale vaha baMdha anAdi hotA
hai| abhavya kI apekSA vahI baMdha dhruva aura bhavya kI apekSA adhruva hai|
isIliye ina prakRtiyoM ke ajaghanya

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1=2 There are four types of bonds: Sadi, Adi, Adhruva, and Aghanya.  Of the
eighteen types of karmas, all except the Aghanya karma have two options: Sadi
and Adhruva. This is because during the time of liberation from the bond in the
ninth Gunasthan, the four types of Sanjwalana occur, and the remaining fourteen
types of karmas, including the five types of Kanaavaran, experience the Aghanya
karma in the tenth Gunasthan, which is the Kshapaka. This karma does not occur
before entering these Gunasthanas, hence it is Sadi, and it does not stop
completely in the subsequent Gunasthanas, hence it is Adhruva.  Similarly, the
Utkrishta and Anutkrishta karmas should also be understood in this way. Because
both of these karmas keep changing. The soul sometimes experiences Utkrishta
karma and sometimes Anutkrishta karma.  The remaining two hundred types of
karmas, including the Utkrishta karma, have two options: Sadi and Adhruva. This
is because the twenty-nine types of karmas, including the five types of Nidra,
Mithyatva, and the twelve types of Kashya, Bhaya, Jugupsa, Tejas, Karman, Varna
Chatushk, Aguru Laghu, Upghāt, and Nirman, experience the Aghanya karma in the
Badar Ekendriya Paryaptak, which is pure.  After that, when the same soul
becomes Sanklishta Parinaami, it experiences the Aghanya karma. After that, in
the same life or in another life, when the same soul becomes Vishuddha
Parinaami, it experiences the Aghanya karma again. In this way, because the
Aghanya and Aghanya karmas keep changing, both are Sadi and Adhruva.  1. The
eighteen types of karmas are considered to be Sadi and Adhruva. Sangrah 5/63

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1=2 baMdha ke sAdi Adi cAra vikalpa mAne haiN|' ukta aThAraha prakRtiyoM ke
ajaghanya baMdha ke sivAya zeSa tIna baMdhoM meM pratyeka ke sAdi aura adhruva
yaha do vikalpa hote haiN| kyoMki norve guNasthAna meM apanI-apanI
baMdhavyucchitti ke samaya saMjvalana - catuSyaH kAmaya hotA hai aura zeSa
kAnAvaraNapaMcaka Adi caudaha prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya baMdha dasaveM
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAnavartI kSapaka ko hotA hai  /  vaha baMdha ina
guNasthAnoM meM Ane se pUrva nahIM hotA hai, ataH sAdi hai aura Age ke
guNasthAnoM meM bilkula ruka jAne se adhruva hai  /  isI prakAra se utkRSTa va
anutkRSTa baMdha meM bhI samajhanA cAhie  /  kyoMki ye donoM baMdha parivartita
hote rahate haiN| jIva kabhI utkRSTa aura kabhI anutkRSTa baMdha karatA hai  /
zataka zeSa eka do sau prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa Adi cAroM hI prakAra ke baMdhoM meM
sAdi aura adhruva yaha do bhaMga hote haiN| kyoMki pAMca nidrA, mithyAtva Adi kI
bAraha kaSasya, bhaya, jugupsA, tejasa, kArmaNa, varNacatuSka, agurulaghu,
upaghAta aura nirmANa ina unatIsa prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha
vizuddhiyukta bAdara ekendriya paryAptaka karatA hai| > tamuhUrta ke bAda vahI
jIva saMkliSTa pariNAmI hone para unakA ajaghanya baMdha karatA hai| usake bAda
usI bhava meM athavA dUsare bhava meM vizuddha pariNAmI hone para vahI jIva
punaH unakA jaghanya baMdha karatA hai  /  isa prakAra se jaghanya aura
ajaghanya baMdha ke badalate rahane se donoM sAdi aura adhruva hote haiM  /  1
aTThArANajatro uvasamameThIe parivatasa | mAI se savigappA sugamA adhuvA vANaM
pi  //  saMgraha 5/63

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  183  In the same way, the five-sense beings, with
their complex and resultant nature, create a superior bond of these twenty-nine
natures. After a very short time, they create an inferior bond, and later again
a superior bond. Thus, due to their changing nature, these two bonds are also
both Sadi and Adhruva. The remaining 73 natures are Adhruvabandhini, and due to
their being Anuvabandhini, their four states of bond - Jghanya, Ajghanya,
Utkrishta, and Anutkrishta - are all Sadi and Adhruva.  From the eighteen
natures starting with Sanjwalan Chatushk, each has four options for its Ajghanya
bond - Sadi, Adhruva, etc. And for the remaining three states of bond -
Utkrishta bond, etc. - each has ten options for being Sadi and Adhruva, due to
the ten options for the nature of restraint. This results in 180 options for the
eighteen natures and 102 options for the remaining 102 natures. Each of the 102
natures has four states of bond - Utkrishta, etc. - and each of these four has
two options - Sadi and Adhruva. This results in eight options for each of the
102 natures. In total, these options amount to 10,244,840,842,816.  The total
options for the Uttar Natures are 10 + 16 = 6. Adding the 78 options for the
Mula Natures, the total number of options for the states of bond is 1074.
**Naanant Rayadasan Chakkasanjasan Thii Ajhanna. Chauha Mai Adhrusha Sesa
Iyarana Samvaao.**  - Panchasangrah Sha 60. This verse's commentary discusses
the options for the states of bond of the Uttar Natures. Similarly, Mo.
Karmakand Ma. 153 also mentions these options.  **Manjalan Suhumghos Ghinan
Baduvidho Du Ajhanno. Sematiya Pun Duviha Sesanan Ghavi Dhaavi Dudha.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 183 isI prakAra ina unatIsa prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa baMdha
saMkliSTa pariNAmI paMcendriya jIva karatA hai aura antarmuhUrta ke bAda
anutkRSTa baMdha karatA hai aura bAda meM punaH utkRSTa baMdha karatA hai  /
isa prakAra badalate rahane se ye donoM baMdha bhI sAdi aura ava hote haiN| zeSa
73 prakRtiyAM adhruvabaMdhinI haiM aura unake anuvabaMdhinI hone ke kAraNa hI
unake jaghanya, ajadhanya, utkRSTa, anutkRSTa ye cAroM hI sthitibaMdha sAdi aura
adhruva hote haiN|' saMjvalana catuSka Adi aThAraha prakRtiyoM meM se pratyeka
ke ajaghanya baMdha ke sAdi Adi cAra vikalpa tathA zeSa utkRSTa baMdha Adi tIna
sthitibaMdhoM meM se pratyeka ke zAti aura adhA gilA hone roka prakRti ke dasa-
dasa bhaMga hone se 180 tathA eka sau do prakRtiyoM meM se pratyeka ke utkRSTa
Adi cAra-cAra sthitibaMdha aura ina cAroM ke bhI sAdi va adhruva do-do vikalpa
hone se ATha-ATha bhaMga hote haiN| kula milAkara ye bhaMga 10244840842816 hote
haiM  /  uttara prakRtiyoM ke kUla milAkara 10+-16 =6 bhaMga hote haiM aura
inameM mUla prakRtiyoM ke 78 bhaMgoM ko milAne se saba milAkara 1074
sthitibaMdha ke bhaMga hote haiM  /  nANaMta rAyadasaNa cakkasaMjasaNa ThiI
ajahannA  /  cauhA mAI adhruSA sesA iyarANa samvAo  /  /  -paMcasaMgraha za60
isa gAthA kI TIkA meM uttara prakRtiyoM ke sthitibaMdha ke bhaMgoM kA vivecana
kiyA gayA hai  /  isI prakAra se mo0 karmakAMDa mA. 153 meM bhI bhaMgoM kA
kathana kiyA hai maMjalaNasUhumaghosa ghAINaM baduvidho du ajhnno| sematiyA puNa
duvihA sesANaM ghavidhAvi dudhA  /  /

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  In this way, after
describing the bondage (sthitibandha) of the mūla and uttara prakṛtis through
the various types of bhāṅgas (divisions), now the bondage in the guṇasthānas
(spiritual stages) is being described.  Sāṇāi'appuravate aparanto koḍikoḍino na
higo. Bandho na huhono na ya micche bhaviyarasannimī. (4)  Meaning:
Sāṇāi'appuravate - From the sāsādana (attainment) guṇasthāna up to the
apūrvakaraṇa (extraordinary transformation) guṇasthāna,  Aparanto koḍikoḍino -
Up to the antaḥkoḍākoḍī sāgaropama (innumerable oceans), Na higo - There is no
excessive (bondage), Bandho - The bondage, Na huhono - Does not occur, Na ya -
And also does not occur, Micche - For the mithyādṛṣṭi (wrong-believer),
Bhaviyarasannimī - The bhavya (capable of liberation) saṃjñī (cognizant) and the
abhavya (incapable of liberation) saṃjñī.  Gāthārtha (Meaning of the verse):
From the sāsādana guṇasthāna up to the apūrvakaraṇa guṇasthāna, the bondage does
not exceed the antaḥkoḍākoḍī sāgaropama, and there is no inferior (hīna)
bondage. The mithyādṛṣṭi, the bhavya saṃjñī, and the abhavya saṃjñī also do not
have any inferior bondage.  Viśeṣārtha (Special meaning): Earlier, the measure
of the sthitibandha (bondage duration) was described in general and in
comparison to the ekendriyas (one-sensed beings) etc. Now, in this gāthā, the
measure of the sthitibandha is being stated in relation to the guṇasthānas,
i.e., how much bondage occurs in each guṇasthāna.  Previously, the highest state
of the karmas was stated to be seventy, thirty, and twenty koḍākoḍī sāgaropama.
Out of that, sāṇāi'appuravate, i.e., from the second sāsādana guṇasthāna up to
the eighth apūrvakaraṇa guṇasthāna, the bondage does not exceed the
antaḥkoḍākoḍī sāgara. That is, the bondage occurring from the second to the
eighth guṇasthāna is up to the antaḥkoḍā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 184 zataka isa prakAra se mula evaM utara prakRtiyoM ke sthitibaMdha meM mAdi
Adi bhaMgoM kA nirUpaNa karane ke bAda aba guNasthAnoM meM sthitibaMdha kA
nirUpaNa karate haiN| guNasthAnoM meM sthitibaMdha sANAiapuravate aparato
koDikoDino na higo  /  baMdho na huhoNo na ya micche bhaviyarasannimi  // 4 //
zabdArtha-sApAiapurvate-sAsAdana se lekara apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna taka,
aparaMto koDikolio-aMta:koDAkor3I sAmaropama se, na hiMgo-adhika (baMdha) nahIM
hotA hai, baMdho - baMdha, na hUnahIM hotA hai, hIko-hIna, na ya-tathA nahIM
hotA hai, minchamithyASTi, bhazviyarasanimi-bhavya saMzI va itara amanya saMjI
meM  /  gAthAtha-sAsAdana se lekara apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna taka antaHkoDAkor3I
sAgaropama se adhika sthitibaMdha nahIM hotA hai aura na hIna baMdha hotA hai|
mithyAdRSTi bhavya saMjJI aura abhavya saMjJI ke bhI hIna baMdha nahIM hotA hai|
vizeSArtha-pahale sAmAnya se aura ekendriya Adi jIvoM kI apekSA se sthitibaMdha
kA pramANa batalAyA gayA hai| aba isa gAthA meM guNasthAnoM kI apekSA se usakA
pramANa kA kathana kiyA jA rahA hai ki kisa guNasthAna meM kitanA sthitibaMdha
hotA hai| pUrva meM karmoM kI sattara, tIsa, bIsa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kI
utkRSTa sthiti batalAI hai| usameM se sANAiapulaMto-yAnI dUsare sAsAdana
guNasthAna se lekara apUrvakaraNa nAmaka AThaveM guNasthAna taka antaHkor3Akor3I
sAgara se adhika sthitibaMdha nahIM hotA hai  /  yAnI dUsare se lekara AThaveM
guNasthAna taka hone vAlA baMdha antaHkor3A

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth 185  The Koḍī Sāgar is the measure of the situation-
bond, and the one who is described as having an excellent situation-bond of
seventy Koḍī Koḍī Sāgaras, etc., is in the Mithyātvā Guṇasthāna only. The reason
why the situation-bond from Sāsādana to Apūrvakaraṇa Guṇasthāna is within the
Koḍī Koḍī Sāgar measure is that the beings in these Guṇasthānas break the
Mithyātvā Granthi, due to which their situation-bond does not exceed the Koḍī
Koḍī Sāgar measure.  **Question:** The inquisitive person asks about the
statement that in the Karma-Prakṛti, etc., Granthas, those who break the
Mithyātvā Granthi are also described as having an excellent situation-bond of
seventy Koḍī Koḍī Sāgaras, etc. Therefore, how can it be considered that from
Sāsādana to Apūrvakaraṇa Guṇasthāna, beings break the Mithyātvā Granthi and
therefore do not have a situation-bond exceeding the Koḍī Koḍī Sāgar measure?
**Answer:** It is true that those who break the Granthi also have an excellent
situation-bond, but this excellent situation-bond is only for those who, after
suppressing Samyaktva, again come to the Mithyātvā Guṇasthāna. Here, the
excellent situation-bond of those who have broken the Granthi and are in the
Sāsādana, etc., Guṇasthānas is being denied. In the Āvashyaka, etc., the denial
of the excellent bond for the Mithyā-Iṣṭi who has broken the Granthi is
indicated by the theoretical view. According to the Karma-Granthika view, even
the Mithyā-Iṣṭi has an excellent situation-bond of Mithyātvā, but it does not
have strong experience power. Therefore, from Sāsādana,  5. Because of
insufficient Samyaktva, even after renunciation, the Granthi is not transcended,
and the excellent situation-bond binds according to Karma-Prakṛti, as the saying
goes, "The tiger does not speak kindly." This is the theoretical view. The
Karma-Granthikas, however, believe that there are excellent situation-bonds from
other Granthas.  - Bāpa. Ni. Dīkā p. 111

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 185 kor3I sAgara pramANa hotA hai aura jo sattara Adi
koDAkor3o sAgaropama uskRSTa sthitibaMdha batalAyA hai, vaha mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM hI hotA hai  /  sAsAdana se lekara apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna
paryanta antaHkor3Akor3I sAgara pramANa sthitibaMdha hona kA kAraNa yaha hai ki
ina guNasthAnoM vAle jIva mithyAtvagranthi kA bhedana kara dete haiM, jisase
unake antaHkor3Akor3I sAgara pramANa se adhika sthitibaMdha nahIM hotA hai|
prazna- ukta kathana para jijJAsu prazna karatA hai ki karmaprakRti Adi granthoM
meM mithyAtvagranthi kA bhedana karane vAloM ko bhI mithyAtva kA utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha sattara kor3Akor3I sAgaropama batalAyA hai  /  ataH yaha kaise mAnA
jAya ki sAsAdana se lekara apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna taka jIva mithyAtvagranthi kA
bhedana kara dete haiM, ataH antaHkoDAkor3I sAgara pramANa se adhika sthiti kA
baMdha nahIM karate haiN| uttara yaha ThIka hai ki granthi kA bhedana karane
vAloM ko bhI utkRSTa sthitibaMdha hotA hai, kintu samyaktva kA damana karake jo
punaH mithyAtva muNasthAna meM Ate haiM, unake hI yaha utkRSTa sthitibaMdha hotA
hai  /  yahAM to granthi kA bhedana kara dene vAle sAsAdana Adi guNasthAna vAloM
ke hI utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kA niSedha kiyA hai| Avazyaka Adi meM to saiddhAntika
mata kA saMketa karake pranthi kA bhedana kara dene vAle mithyAiSTi ko bhI
utkRSTa baMdha kA pratiSedha kiyA hai  / ' kArmapranthika mata se sAdi
mithyAiSTi ko bhI mithyAtva kI utkRSTa sthiti baMdhatI hai lekina usameM tIvra
anubhAga zakti nahIM hotI hai 1 ataH sAsAdana se 5 yato'yAptasamyaktvasta
parityAge'pi na bhUmo granthimullaGghamotkRSTa sthitI: karmaprakRtIbaMdhnAti,
'bagheNa na bolai kayAi' iti vacanAt  /  eSa: siddhAntikAbhiprAyaH  /
kArmagraMthikAstu bhinnagranthairapyuskRSTasthitibaMdhoM bhavatIti pratipatrAH
/  -bApa. ni. dIkA pR0 111

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **186** From the *Sāsādan* to the *Apūrvakaraṇa* *guṇasthāna*,
the bondage of a state less than the *Antahkoḍakoḍī Sāgara* does not occur, nor
does it occur more than that. In other words, from the second to the eighth
*guṇasthāna*, the *Antahkoḍakoḍī Sāgara* is the standard state of bondage,
neither less nor more.  **Commentator** There is a question here: When beings
like *Ekaindriya* are in the *Sāsādan* *guṇasthāna*, they have the bondage of a
state like *Sāgara* etc. Therefore, the statement that in the *Sāsādan* etc.
*guṇasthānas*, there is no bondage of a state less than the *Antahkoḍakoḍī
Sāgara*, does not seem appropriate.  **1** This doubt is not appropriate,
because such events are *kādaचित्क*, which are not being discussed here. Here,
*Ekaindriya* etc. are not being discussed, but rather the *saṁjñī pañcendriya*
(five-sensed beings with consciousness). Therefore, the *saṁjñī pañcendriya*
does not experience bondage of a state less than the *Antahkoḍakoḍī Sāgara* from
the *Sāsādan* to the *Apūrvakaraṇa*.  It has been stated that from the *Sāsādan*
to the *Apūrvakaraṇa* *guṇasthāna*, there is no bondage of a state less than the
*Antahkoḍakoḍī Sāgara*. There is a question here: Is there any *mithyādr̥ṣṭi*
(false-sighted) being who does not experience bondage of a state less than the
*Antahkoḍakoḍī Sāgara*? In response to this, the verse states that both the
*bhavya saṁjñī mithyādr̥ṣṭi* (noble conscious false-sighted) and the *abhavya
saṁjñī mithyādr̥ṣṭi* (ignoble conscious false-sighted) do not experience bondage
of a state less than the *Antahkoḍakoḍī Sāgara*. The qualifier *mithyādr̥ṣṭi*
with *bhavya saṁjñī* implies that the *bhavya saṁjñī* also experiences inferior
bondage in the *anivṛttibāda* etc. *guṇasthānas*. The qualifier *saṁjñī* implies
that the *bhavya asaṁjñī* (noble unconscious) experiences bondage of a state
less than the *Antahkoḍakoḍī Sāgara*. As for the *abhavya saṁjñī*,...
**Footnote:** 1. "This is true, but it is only *kādaचित्क*, not universal.
Therefore, it is not being discussed here." - *Pañcama Karmapraśtha Svopājña
Ṭīkā*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 186 apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna taka antaHkor3Akor3I sAgara se adhika sthiti kA
baMdha nahIM hotA hai aura na usase kama bhI hotA hai| yAnI dUsare se AThaveM
guNasthAna taka antaHkor3Akor3I sAgara pramANa sthiti baMdhatI hai, na kama aura
na adhika  /  zAsaka isa para punaH prazna hotA hai ki jaba ekendriya Adi jIca
sAsAdana guNasthAna meM hote haiM, usa samaya unako hai sAgara Adi kI sthiti
baMdhatI hai | ataH sAsAdana Adi guNasthAnoM meM antaH kor3Akor3o sAgara se kama
sthitibaMdha nahIM hotA, yaha kathana ucita pratIta nahIM hotA hai  /  1 yaha
AzaMkA upayukta nahIM hai, kyoMki isa prakAra kI ghaTanAyeM kAdAcitka haiM,
jinakI yahAM vivakSA nahIM kI gaI hai tathA yahAM ekendriya Adi kI vivakSA
nahIM, saMjJI paMcendriya kI vivakSA hai| isalie saMjJI paMcendriya sAsAdana se
apUrvakaraNa paryanta antaHkor3Akor3I sAgaropama se nyUna sthiti kA baMdha nahIM
karatA hai  /  sAsAdana se apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna taka antaH koDAkor3I sAgara
se kama sthitibaMdha kA bhI niSedha kiyA hai| isa para jijJAsA hotI hai ki kyA
koI aisA mithyAdRSTi jIva bhI hotA hai jise antaHkor3Akor3I sAgara se bhI kama
sthitibaMdha nahIM hotA hai| isakA samAdhAna karate hue gAthA meM kahA hai
bhavya saMjJI mithyAdRSTi ke aura abhavya saMjJI midhyAdRSTi ke bhI antaH
kor3Akor3I sAgara se kama sthitibaMdha nahIM hotA hai  /  bhavya saMjJI ke sAtha
mithyAdRSTi vizeSaNa lagAne se yaha Azaya nikalatA hai ki bhavya saMjJI ko
anivRttibAdara Adi guNasthAnoM meM hIna baMdha bhI hotA hai aura saMjJI vizeSaNa
se yaha artha nikalatA hai ki bhavya asaMjJI ke hona sthitibaMdha hotA hai|
amavya saMzI ke to 1 satyametat kebala, kAdAcitkojyau na sArvedika iti na tasya
vivakSA kRtA, iti sambhAvayAmi  /  - paMcama karmapraztha svopajJa TIkA

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  187 The fifth Karma Grantha, Antahkodakodri Sagar, does
not have a lower state of bondage, because it is only possible to have a lower
bondage after the breaking of the Granthi. However, an Abhavya Sanjee reaches
the Granthidesh but is unable to break it and falls back down.  _ From Sasadan
to Apurvakaran Grinthasthan, there is birth in the state of bondage. Kodakodri
Sagar, as evidence, states that there is no increase or decrease. The
inquisitive person asks, if there is no increase or decrease, then how can it be
accepted that in the slight difference in the state of bondage, the inferior
state of bondage of Deshaviriti is multiplied by the number of the superior
state of bondage of Virati, and the inferior state of bondage of Avirat
Samyagdristi, which is insufficient, is multiplied by the number of the superior
state of bondage? The answer is that just as there are countless divisions of
Antamuhurt from nine times to the time-less Muhurt, similarly, there are
countless divisions of the state of bondage from the superior state of bondage
of a Sadhu to the superior state of bondage of the time-abundant, sufficient,
Sanjee Panchendriya, which are the evidence of Antahkodakodri. Therefore, there
is no contradiction in accepting the numerical multiplication. _ In this way,
having described the state of bondage in the Gunasthanas, we now explain the
slight difference in the state of bondage in comparison to the one-sense etc.
beings in the following verses.  Jailahbandho Bayer Pajj Asankhgun Sutumapahigo.
Esin Apjaan La Suhamearapalpaj Gurru. ||4|| Lahuu Biy Pajjapane Apjeer Biy Gurru
Himo Evam. Ti Ghaj Asannisuu Navaram Sankhguno Biyapramanpanje. ||50|| To
Jaijittho Bandho Sankhguno Deshaviray Hassiyarro. Sammabau Sanichauro
Liishaanukam Sansaguna. ||4||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 187 paMcama karmagrantha antaHkoDAkor3I sAgara se hIna sthitibaMdha hotA hI
nahIM hai, kyoMki pranthibhedana karane para hI hIna baMdha honA saMbhava hai
lekina abhavya saMjI granthideza taka pahu~catA hai parantu usakA bhedana karane
meM asamartha hone se punaH nIce A jAtA hai| _ sAsAdana se apUrvakaraNa
gRNasthAna taka ke sthitibaMdha meM janma.koDAkor3o sAgara pramANa se
nyUnAdhikatA nahIM hone para jijJAsu prazna pUchatA hai ki yadi nyUnAdhikatA
nahIM hai to Age sthitibaMdha ke alpabahutva meM jo yaha kahA gayA ki virati ke
utkRSTa sthitibaMdha se dezavirati kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha saMkhyAta guNA,
usase avirata samyagdRSTi aparyApta kA jaghanya, utkRSTa sthitibaMdha saMkhyAta
guNA hotA hai, kaise mAnA jAyegA ?. isakA uttara yaha hai ki jaise nau samaya se
lekara samayanyUna muhUrta taka antamuhUrta ke asaMkhyAta bheda hote haiM vaise
hI sAdhu ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha se lekara samayAdhika paryApta saMjJI
paMcendriya ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha taka asaMkhyAta ke sthitibaMdha bheda hote
haiM jo antaHkoDAkor3I pramANa haiM  /  ataH saMkhyAtaguNe mAnane para kisI
prakAra kA virodha nahIM hai| _ isa prakAra se guNasthAnoM meM sthitibaMdha kA
nirUpaNa karake aba Age kI gAthAoM meM ekendriya Adi jIvoM kI apekSA se
sthitibandha kA alpabahutva batalAte haiN| jailahabaMdho bAyara pajja
asaMkhaguNa suTumapahigo  /  esiM apajANa lA suhamearaapalapajja gurU  // 4 //
lahU biya pajjaapane apajeyara biya gurU himo evaM  /  ti ghaja asannisu navaraM
saMkhaguNo biyapramaNapaNje  // 50 //  to jaijiTTho baMdho saMkhaguNo desaviraya
hssiyro| sammabau sanicauro liiSANukama saMsaguNA  // 4 //

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 156  **Yadar**  **Word Meaning** - Jahbandhi - The lowest state of bondage
for a Sadhu, Vayara - Sufficient one-sense, Asankhguṇa - countless qualities,
Sumapjja - subtle enough one-sense, Hingo - special, Asi - these (after subtle
one-sense), Ajaṇ - insufficient, Lahū - lowest state of bondage, Suhūme
Ashmapjpapj Gurū - subtle one-sense insufficient, Badar one-sense insufficient,
subtle one-sense sufficient and Badar one-sense sufficient, the highest state of
bondage is Andha.  Biyaindriya Pnjjanpajje - insufficient and other sufficient,
Biya Gurū - the highest of two-sense, Hingo - more, and in this way, Tich
Asanmitriindriya, Chaturindriya and Asanji Panchendriya, Navaran - so special,
Santguṇo - countless qualities, Viyakramanpajje - sufficient and Asanji -
sufficient.  Lahū - lowest state of bondage, sufficient insufficient in Apjeyar.
**1** **P** **1** **-** **To** - in comparison to that, Jadrajidvogo The highest
state of bondage for a Sadhu.  **1** **Desh Virati** - the lowest, four types of
Samyagdristi.  **Bandh Sankhguṇa** - countless qualities, Besabirmahal Iyar -
the highest state of bondage, Sampac - the state of bondage, Samnichauro - all
five-sense, Mithyadristi - four, Bandha - state of bondage, Anukam - in
sequence, Sanjguṇa - countless qualities.  **Shatak** **-** **Gābhārtha** - The
lowest state of bondage for a Sadhu is the least. The lowest state of bondage
for Badar one-sense sufficient is countless times more than that, and the lowest
state of bondage for subtle one-sense sufficient is even more special than that.
The lowest state of bondage for the insufficient of these (Badar, subtle one-
sense) is even more than that. In comparison to that, the highest state of
bondage for subtle one-sense insufficient, Badar one-sense insufficient, subtle
one-sense sufficient is more special in sequence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 156 yAdara zabdArtha -jahabaMdhI - sAdhu kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha, vAyara
paryApta ekendriya asaMkhaguNa - asaMkhyAta guNA, sumapajja- sUkSma paryApta
ekendriya kA, hiMgo - vizeSAdhika, esi - inake (bAdara sUkSma ekendriya ke),
ajANa - aparyApta kA lahU - jaghanya sthitibaMdha, suhUme azmapajapaja gurU --
sUkSma ekendriya aparyApta, bAdara ekendriya aparyApta sUkSma ekendriya paryApta
aura bAdara ekendriya paryApta kA utkRSTa sthiti aMdha  /  biyabIndriya
pajJjaapajjeaparyApta aura itara paryApta, biyagurU -- dvIndriya kA utkRSTa,
hiMgo adhika, evaM isa prakAra se, tica asanmitrIndriya, caturindriya aura
asaMjI paMcendriya meM, navaraM itanA vizeSa, saMtaguNo- sakhyAta guNA,
viyakramaNapajjeDIdriya paryApta aura asaMjI paryApta meM  /  lahU - jadhanya
sthitibandha, paryApta aparyApta meM apajeyara 1 P 1 - to - usako apekSA,
jadrajidvogho sAdhU kA utkRSTa sthiti 1 deza virati kA jaghanya, samyagdRSTi ke
cAra prakAra baMdha saMkhaguNa - saMkhyAta guNA besabiramahala iyaro utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha, sampaca ke sthitibaMdha, samnicauro sabhI paMcendriya mithyAdRSTi
ke cAra, baMdhA sthitibandha, aNukama anukrama se saMjaguNA saMkhyAta guNA  /
zataka -- gAbhArtha - sAdhu kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha sabase alpa hotA hai  /
bAdara ekendriya paryApta kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha usase asaMkhyAta guNA aura
sUkSma ekendriya paryApta kA usase vizeSAdhika hotA hai  /  inake (bAdara,
sUkSma ekendriya ke ) aparyApta kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha usase adhika hotA hai
/  usakI apekSA sUkSma ekendriya aparyApta, bAdara ekendriya aparyApta, sUkSma
ekendriya paryApta kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha anukrama se vizeSAdhika hotA hai  /

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **11.** The state of the eleven indriyas and the
apati (non-sentient) is multiplied by the number of their respective qualities
and special privileges. Compared to this, the state of the two indriyas, both
insufficient and sufficient, is superior in terms of special privileges.
Similarly, the state of the one indriya, the four indriyas, and the non-
cognizant five indriyas should be understood in the same way (as mentioned for
the two indriyas), but with this difference: the sufficient two indriyas and the
insufficient non-cognizant five indriyas should be understood as multiplied by
the number of their respective qualities.  **12.** Compared to this, the state
of the sadhu (saint) is superior in terms of the number of qualities, and
compared to this, the state of the deshavirati (one who has renounced the world)
is inferior and superior in terms of the number of qualities. The four states of
the samyagdristi (rightly seeing) and the four states of the cognizant five
indriyas of the mithyaishti (falsely believing) are multiplied by the number of
their respective qualities in sequence.  **13.** In these three verses, the
relative abundance and scarcity of the state of bondage has been explained,
indicating which being has more bondage and which being has less bondage. This
difference in the amount of bondage is called the relative abundance and
scarcity of the state of bondage.  **Explanation:**  Beginning the explanation
of the evidence for this relative abundance and scarcity of the state of
bondage, it is said that "jailhubandho" (the sadhu) has the least amount of
bondage, and that too in the tenth guna-sthana (stage of spiritual progress)
called sukshmasampray. The reason for this is that up to the tenth guna-sthana,
there is a harmonious state of subtle kshaya (passions), and it is through
kshaya that the state of bondage occurs. No being has a state of bondage lower
than the tenth guna-sthana. Although there is a state of bondage for a period of
time in the eleventh and subsequent guna-sthana, these guna-sthana are free from
kshaya, therefore, the state of bondage is not intended there. Therefore, the
state of bondage is least from the tenth guna-sthana onwards.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama karmagrantha 11 hIndriya yo aura apati kA jAya sthiti unako apekSA
saMkhyAta guNA aura vizeSAdhika aura usakI apekSA dvIndriya aparyApta aura
paryApta kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha vizeSAdhika, vIndriya, caturindriya aura
asaMjJI paMcendriya meM bhI isI prakAra (dvIndriya meM kahe gaye anusAra) jAnanA
cAhiye, kintu itanA vizeSa hai ki dvIndriya paryApta aura asaMtrI aparyApta meM
saMkhyAta guNA samajhanA caahie| usakI apekSA sAdhu. kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha
saMkhyAta guNA aura usakI apekSA dezavirati kA jaghanya aura utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha, samyagdRSTi ke cAroM sthitibaMdha aura saMjJI paMce. ndriya
mithyAiSTi ke cAroM sthitibandha anukrama se saMkhyAta guNa hote haiN|
vizeSArtha ina tIna gAthAoM meM sthitibaMdha kA alpabahutva batalAyA gayA hai ki
kisa jIva ko adhika sthitibaMdha hotA hai aura kisa jIva ko kama sthitibaMdha  /
baMdha kI isa hInAdhikatA ko sthitibaMdha kA alpabahutva kahate haiN|
sthitibaMdha ke isa alpabahutva ke pramANa kA kathana prAraMbha karate hue kahA
hai ki 'jailahubaMdho' yAnI sAghu ko sabase kama sthitibaMdha hotA hai aura vaha
bhI sUkSmasaMparAya nAmaka dasaveM guNasthAna meN| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki
dasaveM guNasthAna taka sUkSma kaSAya kA sadbhAva pAyA jAtA hai aura kaSAya ke
dvArA sthitibaMdha hotA hai| dasave guNasthAna se hIna sthitibaMdha kisI bhI
jIva ko nahIM hotA hai  /  yadyapi gyArahaveM Adi Age ke guNasthAnoM meM eka
samaya kA sthitibaMdha hotA hai, kintu ve guNasthAna kaSAyarahita haiM, ataH
vahAM sthitibaMdha kI vivakSA nahIM hai| isaliye dasaveM guNasthAna se hI
sthitibaMdha ke alpa

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
160 The statement of multiplicity begins and the *sanjñi* five-sense *paryāpta*
false-view is the most excellent *sthitibandha*. From this, the description of
slight multiplicity ends there. That is, in the context of explaining the slight
multiplicity of *sthitibandha*, the subtle *samprayoga* *guṇasthāna* is one end
and the *sanjñi* five-sense *paryāpta* false-view is the other end. The subtle
*samprayoga* *guṇasthāna* is the extreme point of the least *sthitibandha* and
the *sanjñi* five-sense *paryāpta* false-view is the extreme point of the most
excellent *sthitibandha*, and between these two, the statement of slight
multiplicity is made. The order of slight multiplicity from the extreme least
*sthitibandha* to the extreme most excellent *sthitibandha* is as follows: 1.
The least *sthitibandha* is that of the *sādhuvirati* residing in the subtle
*samprayoga* *guṇasthāna*. 2. The least *sthitibandha* of the *bādar* one-sense
*paryāpta* is countless times more than that, i.e., than the *sādhu* residing in
the subtle *samprayoga* *guṇasthāna*. 3. The least *sthitibandha* of the subtle
one-sense *paryāpta* is slightly more than that of the *bādar* one-sense
*paryāpta*. 4. The least *sthitibandha* of the *bādar* one-sense *aparyāpta* is
slightly more than that of the subtle one-sense *paryāpta*. 5. The least
*sthitibandha* of the subtle one-sense *aparyāpta* is slightly more than that of
the *bādar* one-sense *aparyāpta*. 6. The most excellent *sthitibandha* of the
subtle one-sense *aparyāpta* is slightly more than that. 7. The most excellent
*sthitibandha* of the *bādar* one-sense *aparyāpta* is slightly more than that.
8. The most excellent *sthitibandha* of the subtle one-sense *paryāpta* is
slightly more than that. etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 160 bahutva kA kathana prAraMbha hotA hai aura saMjJI paMcendriya paryApta
mithyAdRSTi ko sabase utkRSTa sthitibaMdha hotA hai| jisase alpabahutva kA
varNana vahAM Akara samApta ho jAtA hai  /  arthAt sthitibaMdha kA aspabahutva
batalAne ke prasaMga meM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna eka chora hai aura saMjJI
paMcendriya paryApta mithyAdRSTi dUsarA chora  /  sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna
jaghanya sthitibaMdha kA caramabindu hai aura saMjJI paMcendriya paryApta
mithyAdRSTi utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kA caramabindu aura ina donoM ke bIca
alpabahutva kA kathana kiyA jAtA hai  /  carama jaghanya sthitibaMdha se
prAraMbha hokara carama utkRSTa sthitibaMdha taka ke alpabahutva kA krama isa
prakAra hai 1. sabase jaghanya sthitibaMdha sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAnavartI
sAdhuvirati ko hotA hai  /  2. usase yAnI sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAnavartI sAdhu
se bAdara ekendriya paryApta kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha asaMkhyAta guNA hai  /  3.
bAdara ekendriya paryApta se sUkSma ekendriya paryApta ke hone vAlA jaghanya
sthitibaMdha kucha adhika hai  /  4. sUkSma ekendriya paryApta kI apekSA bAdara
ekendriya aparyApta ke honevAlA jaghanya sthitibaMdha kucha adhika hai  /  5.
bAdara ekendriya aparyApta se sUkSma ekendriya aparyApta ke hone vAlA jaghanya
sthitibaMdha kucha adhika hai  /  6. usase sUkSma ekendriya aparyApta kA utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha kucha adhika hai  /  7. usase bAdara ekendriya aparyApta kA utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha kucha adhika hai  /  8. usase sUkSma ekendriya paryApta kA utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha kucha adhika hai  /  aka

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Pachma Karmagranth  1.  From that, the **ekendriya** **paryāpta**'s
**utkṛṣṭa sthitibandha** is slightly more. 2.  From that, the **dvīndriya**
**paryāpta**'s **jaghanya sthitibandha** is numerically many. 3.  From that, the
**dvīndriya** **aparyāpta**'s **jaghanya sthitibandha** is slightly more. 4.
From that, the **dvīndriya** **aparyāpta**'s **utkṛṣṭa sthitibandha** is
slightly more. 5.  From that, the **trīndriya** **paryāpta**'s **utkṛṣṭa
sthitibandha** is slightly more. 6.  From that, the **trīndriya** **paryāpta**'s
**jaghanya sthitibandha** is slightly more. 7.  From that, the **trīndriya**
**aparyāpta**'s **jaghanya sthitibandha** is slightly more. 8.  From that, the
**trīndriya** **aparyāpta**'s **utkṛṣṭa sthitibandha** is slightly more. 9.
From that, the **caturindriya** **paryāpta**'s **utkṛṣṭa sthitibandha** is
slightly more. 10. From that, the **caturindriya** **paryāpta**'s **jaghanya
sthitibandha** is slightly more. 11. From that, the **caturindriya**
**aparyāpta**'s **jaghanya sthitibandha** is slightly more. 12. From that, the
**caturindriya** **aparyāpta**'s **utkṛṣṭa sthitibandha** is slightly more. 13.
From that, the **caturindriya** **paryāpta**'s **utkṛṣṭa sthitibandha** is
slightly more. 14. From that, the **asangñī pañcendriya** **paryāpta**'s
**jaghanya sthitibandha** is numerically many.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama karmagrantha #. usase bAdara ekendriya paryApta kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha
kucha adhika hai| 10. usase dvIndriya paryApta kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha
saMkhyAta guNA hai| 11. usase dvIndriya' aparyApta kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha
kucha adhika 12. usase dvIndriya aparyApta kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kucha adhika
hai| 13. usase tIndriya paryApta kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kucha adhika hai| 14.
usase trIndriya paryApta kA jAyansa sthitibaMdha kA adhika hai| 15. usase
vIndriya aparyApta kA javanya sthitibaMdha kucha adhika hai| 16. usase trondriya
aparyApta kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kucha adhika hai| 17. usase lIndriya paryApta
kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kucha adhika hai| 18. usase caturindriya paryApta kA
jaghanya sthitibaMdha kucha adhika hai| 16. usase caturindriya aparyApta kA
jaghanya sthitibaMdha kucha adhika hai| 20. usase caturindriya aparyApta kA
utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kucha adhika hai| 21. usase caturindriya paryApta kA
utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kucha adhika hai| 22. usase asaMjJI paMcendriya paryApta kA
jaghanya sthitibaMdha saMkhyAta gaNA hai|

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
192 Administrator 23. The inferior *sthitibandha* of the *asanjñī pañcendriya
aparyāpta* is slightly more than that. 24. The superior *sthitibandha* of the
*asanjñī pañcendriya aparyāpta* is slightly more than that. 25. The superior
*sthitibandha* of the *asanjñī pañcendriya paryāpta* is slightly more than that.
26. The superior *sthitibandha* of the *mayat* is multiplied by the number. 27.
The inferior *sthitibandha* of the *deśasamyata* is multiplied by the number.
28. The superior *sthitibandha* of the *deśasamyata* is multiplied by the
number. 29. The superior *sthitibandha* of the *paryāpta sampassi manya simga*
is multiplied by the number. 30. The inferior *sthitibandha* of the *aparyāpta
samyagdṛṣṭi* is multiplied by the number. 31. The superior *sthitibandha* of the
*aparyāpta samyagdṛṣṭi* is multiplied by the number. 32. The superior
*sthitibandha* of the *paryāpta samyagdṛṣṭi* is multiplied by the number. 33.
The superior *sthitibandha* of the *sanjñī pañcendriya aparyāpta mithyādṛṣṭi* is
multiplied by the number. 34. The inferior *sthitibandha* of the *sanjñī
pañcendriya paryāpta mithyādṛṣṭi* is multiplied by the number. 35. The superior
*sthitibandha* of the *sanjñī pañcendriya aparyāpta mithyādṛṣṭi* is multiplied
by the number. 36. The superior *sthitibandha* of the *sanjñī pañcendriya
paryāpta mithyādṛṣṭi* is multiplied by the number.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 192 prazAsaka 23. usase asaMjJI paMcendriya aparyApta kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha
kucha adhika hai| 24. usase asaMhI paMcendriya aparyApta kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha
kucha adhika hai| 25. usase asaMjI paMcendriya paryApta kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha
kucha adhika hai| 26. usase mayata kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha saMkhyAta guNA hai|
27. usase dezasaMyata kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha saMkhyAta guNA hai| 28. usase
dezasaMyata kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha saMkhyAta guNA hai  /  26. usase paryApta
sampaSi manya simaga saMkhyAta gRNA hai| 30. usase aparyApta samyagdRSTi kA
jaghanya sthitibaMdha saMkhyAta guNA hai| 31. usase aparyApta samyAdRSTi kA
utkRSTa sthitibaMdha saMkhyAta guNA hai| 32, usase paryApta samyagdRSTi kA
utkRSTa sthitibaMdha saMkhyAta guNA hai| 33. usase saMjJI paMcendriya aparyApta
mithyAiSTi kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha saMkhyAta guNA hai  /  34. usase saMjJI
paMcendriya paryApta mithyAdRSTi kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha saMkhyAta guNA hai|
35. usase saMzI paMcendriya aparyApta mithyAdRSTi kA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha
saMkhyAta guNA hai| 36. usase saMbhI paMcendriya paryApta mithyAdRSTi kA utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha saMkhyAta guNA hai|

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Text  **163** The number of these **sthitibandha** (states of
bondage) is 36. Although there are 14 types of **jivamaas** (life-spans) and two
states for each **jiva** (living being) due to the difference in **jayantar**
(birth) and **utkrista** (excellence) in the **loka** (world), which makes 28
states compared to **jivamaas**, but in the description of the **alp bahutva**
(fewness) of **sthitibandha**, there are four states of **avirata samyagdristi**
(uninterrupted right faith), two states of **deshavirati** (renunciation of the
world), one state of **sanyata** (self-control), and one state of
**sukshmasampray** (subtle perception), which when added together make a total
of 36 states.  In these 36 states, each subsequent state is either **gunita**
(multiplied) or **adhik** (more) than the previous state. If these
**sthitibandha** are viewed from top to bottom, the **sthiti** (state)
increases, and if viewed from bottom to top, the **sthiti** decreases. This
makes it easy to understand which **jiva** binds more **sthiti** and which binds
less. From **ekendriya** (one-sensed) to **dashaindriya** (ten-sensed), from
**dwindriya** (two-sensed) to **saptindriya** (seven-sensed), from
**triindriya** (three-sensed) to **chaturindriya** (four-sensed), from
**chaturindriya** (four-sensed) to **asanghi panchendriya** (uncontrolled five-
sensed), there is more **sthitibandha**, and from **asanghi panchendriya**
(uncontrolled five-sensed) to **sanyami** (self-controlled), from **sanyami**
(self-controlled) to **deshavirati** (renunciation of the world), from
**deshavirati** (renunciation of the world) to **avirata samyagdristi**
(uninterrupted right faith), and from **avirata samyagdristi** (uninterrupted
right faith) to **sanghi panchendriya mithyaishti** (controlled five-sensed
wrong faith), there is more **sthitibandha**. Among them, the **jghanya
sthitibandha** (lowest state of bondage) of **paryapta** (sufficient) is more
than the **jghanya sthitibandha** (lowest state of bondage) of **aparyapta**
(insufficient). Similarly, from **ekendriya** (one-sensed) to...  A quantity
obtained by multiplying a quantity is called **gunita** (multiplied), for
example, multiplying 4 by 2 gives 8, this 8 is twice its predecessor 4. But if 2
is divided into 4 and the quotient 2 is added to 4, the number will be 6. This
will be called **visheshadhik** (slightly more) or **kuchh adhik** (somewhat
more). Because this quantity is not **gunadhik** (multiplied more) but
**bhagaadhik** (divided more). This is the difference between **gunita** and
**visheshadhik**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karma grantha 163 sthinibaMdha ke alpabahutva darzaka ina sthAnoM kI
saMkhyA 36 hai| yadyapi jIvamamAsa ke 14 bheda haiM aura loka jIvasamAma kI
jayanTara aura utkRSTa ke bheda se do-do sthitiyAM hotI haiN| jisase jovasamAsoM
kI apekSA 28 sthAna hote haiM, kintu sthitibaMdha ke alpabahutva ke nirUpaNa meM
avirata samyagdRSTi ke cAra sthAna, dezabirati ke do sthAna, saMyata kA eka
sthAna aura sUkSmasaMparAya kA eka sthAna aura milAne se kula chattIsa sthAna ho
jAte haiM  /  ina chattIsa sthAnoM meM Age Age kA pratyeka sthAna pUrvavartI
sthAna se yA to guNita hai yA adhika hai|' ukta sthitisthAnoM ko yadi Upara se
nIce kI ora dekhA jAye to sthiti adhikAdhika hotI jAtI hai, aura nIce se Upara
kI ora dekhane para sthiti ghaTatI jAtI hai| isase yaha saralatA se samajha meM
A jAtA hai ki kauna-sA jIva adhika sthiti bAMdhatA hai aura kauna-sA kama  /
ekendriya se hondriya, dvIndriya satrIndriya, vIndriya se caturindriya,
caturindriya se asaMjhI paMcendriya beH adhika sthitibaMdha hotA hai aura asaMjI
paMcendriya se saMyamI ke, saMyamo se dezavirati ke, dezaviti se avirata
samyagdRSTi ke aura avirata sambagdRSTi se saMjJI paMcendriya mithyAiSTi ke
sthitibaMdha adhika hotA hai| unameM bhI paryApta ke jaghanya sthitibaMdha se
aparyApta kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha adhika hotA hai| isI prakAra ekendriya se
kisI rAzi meM guNA karane se utpanna hone vAlI rAzi guNita rAzi kahalAtI hai,
jaise 4 se 2 kA guNA karane para ATha labdha AtA hai, yaha ATha apane pUrvavartI
4 se do guNita hai| kintu 4 meM 2 kA bhAga dekara labdha 2 ko 4 meM jor3A jAye
to 6 saMkhyA hogI  /  use vizeSAdhika yA kucha adhika kahA jAyegA  /  kyoMki
yaha rAzi guNAdhika nahIM hai kintu bhAgAdhika hai  /  muNita aura vizeSAdhika
meM yahI antara hai|

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is clear from the increasing bondage of the state from the one-sense being to
the non-cognizant five-sense being and from the non-cognizant five-sense being
to the restrained being that with the development of the power of consciousness,
the possibility of afflictions also increases. From the one-sense being to the
non-cognizant five-sense being, all beings are generally of false vision, devoid
of the understanding of benefit and harm, and they do not have the power to use
their developed power of consciousness to prevent the consequences of
afflictions. Therefore, they experience increasing bondage of the state, but due
to being a cognizant five-sense being, the power of the restrained human being
develops. Due to being restrained, the bondage of the state of the cognizant
five-sense being is much less than that of the false vision, but it is still
more than that of the non-cognizant five-sense being.  **Shatak**  1. The **Go.
Karmakaad** does not describe the abundance of the bondage of the state, but it
does describe the bondage of the state in the sub-categories of the one-sense
being and other beings. This gives us a little knowledge of the abundance. The
description of the bondage of the state in the sub-categories of the one-sense
being and other beings is as follows:  **Vaasoop Baasoo Varattthidiao Subaa'a
Soobaap Jahanakaalo.** **Veevadhi Vijshnakaalo Seshaanamaev Vachaniyamdam.** ||
148 ||  **Baap** - **Vaadar** subtle sufficient and **Vaasootr** - **Vaadar**
subtle insufficient, both combined, are the eight categories of the karma state
of this type of being. **Muba** - subtle **Vaadar** insufficient, **Subaa** -
subtle **Vaadar** sufficient, the karma state of these beings is the lowest. In
this way, there are eight categories of the karma state of the one-sense being.
**Biibiber:** two-sense sufficient and two-sense insufficient, both have the
highest karma state, and two-sense insufficient and two-sense sufficient, both
have the lowest karma state. In this way, there are four categories of the state
of the two-sense being. (Rest on page 115)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 re lekara asaMjJI paMcendriya paryanta aura asaMjJI paMcendriya se saMyamI ke
hone vAle uttarottara adhika sthitibaMdha se yahI spaSTa hotA hai ki
caitanyazakti ke vikAsa ke sAtha maMkleza kI saMbhAvanA bhI adhika adhika hotI
hai  /  ekendriya se lekara amaMjJI paMcendriya paryanta sabhI jIva prAyaH
hitAhita ke viveka se rahita midhyAdRSTi hote haiM aura unameM itanI zakti nahIM
hotI ki ve apanI vikasita caitanya zakti kA upayoga saMkleza pariNAmoM ke rokane
meM kareM  /  isalie unako uttarottara adhika hI sthitibaMdha hotA hai, kintu
saMjJI paMcendriya hone ke kAraNa saMyamI manuSya kI zakti vikasita hotI hai|
jisase saMyamI hone ke kAraNa saMjJI paMcendriya mithyAdRSTi kI apekSA unakA
sthitibaMdha bahuta kama hotA hai kintu asaMjI paMcendriya kI apekSA se vaha
adhika hI hai  / " zataka 1 go0 karmakADa meM sthitibaMdha kA apabahutva to
nahIM batAyA hai kintu ekedriya Adi jIvoM ke avAntara bhedoM meM sthitibaMdha kA
nirUpaNa kiyA hai  /  jisase alpabahutva kA jJAna ho jAtA hai, ekendriya Adi
jIvoM ke avAntara bhedoM ke sthitibaMdha kA nirUpaNa nimna krama se kiyA hai
vAsUpa bAsU varaTThidIo subAa sUbApa jahaNakAlo  /  vIvadhI vijaSNakAlo
sesANameva vacaNIyamadaM  //  148  //  bApa - vAdara sUkSma paryApta aura
vAsUtra - vAdara sUkSma aparyApta donoM milAkara kAra taraha ke jIvoM ke karmoM
kI utkRSTa sthiti tathA mubA sUkSma bAdara aparyApta subA - sUkSma bAdara
paryApta jIvoM ke karmoM kI jaghanya sthiti, isa taraha ekendriya jIva kI
karmasthiti ke ATha bheda haiN| bIbIbara: hIndriya paryApta aura dvIndriya
aparyApta ina donoM kI utkRSTa karmasthiti tathA hIndriya aparyApta aura
dvIndriya paryApta dhana donoM kA jaghanya kAla, isa taraha dIndriya kI sthiti
ke cAra bheda haiM  /  (zeSa pRSTha 115 para)

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  Here, it is important to understand that the **Koda-
kodi Sagar** is the proof for all the **Sthitibandhas** mentioned, from the
**Utkrishta Sthitibandha** of a **Sanayata** to the **Utkrishta Sthitibandha**
of a **Sanjee Panchaindriya Apariapt**. In other words, the **Koda-kodi Sagar**
is the proof for all **Sthitibandhas**. The **Utkrishta Sthitibandha** of a
**Sanjee Panchaindriya Pariyaapt** should be understood as similar to the
**Utkrishta Sthitibandha** mentioned for the general case.  Similarly, one
should know the four types of **Sthiti** from **Adim** to **Sanjee
Panchaindriya**. These are:  * **Utkrishta Sthiti** of **Badar Pariyaapt** *
**Utkrishta Sthiti** of **Sukshma Pariyaapt** * **Utkrishta Sthiti** of **Badar
Apariapt** * **Utkrishta Sthiti** of **Sukshma Apariapt** * **Jghanya Sthiti**
of **Sukshma Apariapt** * **Jghanya Sthiti** of **Badar Apariapt** * **Jghanya
Sthiti** of **Sukshma Pariyaapt** * **Jghanya Sthiti** of **Badar Pariyaapt**
This is the order of **Ekendriya** types. Similarly, one should understand the
**Utkrishta Sthiti** of **Ekendriya Pariyaapt** and **Dwindriya Apariapt**, and
the **Jghanya Sthiti** of **Ekendriya Apariapt** and **Dwindriya Pariyaapt**.
The same applies to **Triendriya** and so on.  The **Sthiti** mentioned in these
sub-types of **Ekendriya**, **Dwindriya**, etc., is progressively decreasing.
When this order is followed from bottom to top, it aligns with the teachings of
the **Karma Granth**.   "**Oko-so Sanism Hoi Pajjanagarasev. Sa.**" "**Abhitara-
to 3 Koda-kodi E.**" "**Ti Evam Manjasamma Nakosato Adhattam Koda-kodi E
Amitara-to Bhavati.**"  ...The **Karma-prakriti** describes that all the
**Sthitibandhas** from the **Utkrishta Sthitibandha** of a **Sanayata** to the
**Utkrishta Sthitibandha** of an **Apariapt Sanjee Panchaindriya** should be
within the **Koda-kodi Sagar**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karma grantha yahAM yaha vizeSa samajhanA cAhiye ki saMyata ke utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha se lekara saMjJI paMcendriya aparyApta ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha taka
ke batAye po sthitibaMna sthAnoM kA pramANa ataHkoDAkor3I sAgara hI hai| arthAt
sabhI sthitibaMdhoM kA pramANa anta koDAkor3I sAgara pramANa hI hogA 1' saMjI
paMcendriya paryApta ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kA pramANa sAmAnya se batAye gaye
utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke pramANa ke samAna samajhanA cAhiye  /  isI tarasa Adima
se lekara sajI paMcendriya taka ko sthiti ke bhI cAracAra bheda jAnanA cAhie  /
arthAt bAdara paryApta kI utkRSTa sthiti, mukSma paryApta kI utkRSTa sthiti,
bAdara aparyApna kI utkRSTa sthiti, sUkSma aparyApta kI utkRSTa sthiti, sUkSma
aparyApta kI jaghanya sthiti, bAdara aparyApta kI jaghanya sthiti, mukSma
paryApta kI jaghanya sthiti, bAdara paryApta kI jaghanya sthiti, ye ekendriya ke
bhedoM kA krama hai  /  hIndriya paryApta aura dondriya aparyApta kI utkRSTa
sthiti, hIndriya aparyApta aura dvIndriya paryApta kI jaghanya sthiti, isI
prakAra zrIndriya Adi meM jAnanA cAhiye  /  ekendriya vIndriya Adi ke ina
abAntara meMdoM meM jo sthiti batalAI hai, vaha attarotara kama hai  /  unake
isa krama ko nIce se Upara kI ora pahane para karma grantha ke pratipAdana ke
anukUla ho jAtA hai  /  'okoso sanisma hoI pajjanagaraseva ||saa'  /
'abhitArato 3 koDAkoDI e' ti evaM maMjasamma nakosAto ADhattaM koDAkoDIe
amitarato bhavati  / ' .....karmaprakRti varNi saMyata ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha
se lekara aparyApta suMjI pacendriya ke utkRSTa piyatibadha taka jitanA bhI
dhiniyaMdha hai, vaha koDAkor3I sAgara ke andara hI AnanA cAhiye  /

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
166 Now, having explained the relative insignificance of this type of
*sthitibandha* to the owners of *jghanya sthitibandha*, we will now explain the
auspiciousness and inauspiciousness of the *sthiti* and its cause.
*Sthitibandha* is auspiciousness *savvaan vijitthithi asutra jan saikile se nan.
mutan naramaratiriya un. || 52 ||* *iyara visohio pun shabdarth savvaan vi
utkrisht sthiti asubha - ashubha, sthiti), aisafile sen iyara jghanya sthiti,
visoh* · *tivra* - *tar ka* - all *karma* natures *jitthithidd* · *an- inalie,
sa- vah (utkrisht sanklen (kathay) ke uday hone se,* *vishuddhi dvara, pun-
tatha,* · — *sutun   chhodkar naramaratiriya - manushya, dev aur tich ayu ko.*
**Gathaarth:** Except for human, divine, and *tiryanch* lifespans, all other
natures are considered inauspicious because they are bound by *utkrisht sthiti*
due to the very strong consequences of *mantra*. The binding of *jghanya sthiti*
occurs through *vishuddhi*.  **Vishesharth:** In the *gatha*, except for the
lifespans of gods, humans, and *tiryanch*, the *utkrisht sthiti* of all other
natures is declared inauspicious and the *jghanya sthiti* is declared
auspicious. This clarifies the misconception of the common people who consider
the *utkrisht sthiti* of auspicious natures to be good because it gives
auspicious results for a longer time, and the *utkrisht sthiti* of inauspicious
natures to be bad because it gives inauspicious results for a longer time.
However, the scholars say that the binding of *utkrisht sthiti* is not good.
Because the root cause of *sthitibandha* is *kapay*, and according to the order
of *kashay*, *sthitibandha* is also in the same order.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 166 isa prakAra ke sthitibaMdha ke alpabahutva ko apekSA se utkRSTa, jaghanya
sthitibaMdha ke svAmiyoM ko batalAkara aba sthiti ko zubhAzubhatA aura usake
kAraNa ko batalAte haiN| sthitibaMdha ko zubhAzubhatA savvANa vijiTThaThiI
asutrA jaM sAikile se NaM  /  mutaM naraamaratiriya uM  //  52  //  iyarA
visohio puNa zabdArtha savvANa vi utkRSTa sthiti asubhA - azubha, sthiti),
aisaphile seNa iyarA jaghanyasthiti, visohi * tIvra - tara ka - sabhI karma
prakRtiyoM kI jiTThaThidda * aM- inaliye, sA- vaha (utkRSTa saMkleNa (kathAya)
ke udaya hone se, vizuddhi dvArA, puNa-tathA, * -- sutuM chor3akara
naraamaratiriyA - manuSya, deva aura tica Ayu ko  /  gAthArtha manuSya, deva
aura niryaMca Ayu ke sivAya mabhI prakRtiyoM ko utkRSTa sthiti ati maMtrale
pariNAmoM se baMdhane ke kAraNa azubha kahI jAtI hai  /  jaghanya sthiti kA
baMdha vidyuddhi dvArA hotA hai| vizeSArtha gAthA meM devAvu manuSyAyu aura
niryatrAyu ko chor3akara zeSa sabhI prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti ko azubha aura
jaghanya sthiti ko zubha batalAyA hai  /  isakA kAraNa jana sAdhAraNa kI usa
bhrAMti kA nirAkaraNa karatA hai ki vaha zubha prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti ko
adhika samaya taka zubha phala dene ke kAraNa acchA aura azubha prakRtiyoM kI
utkRSTa sthiti ko adhika samaya taka azubha phala dene ke kAraNa burA mAnatA
hai| lekina zAstrakAroM kA kahanA hai ki adhika sthiti kA baMdhanA acchA nahIM
hai  /  kyoMki sthitibaMdha kA mUla kAraNa kapAya hai aura kaSAya kI zra eNI ke
anusAra sthitibaMdha bhI usI zra eNI

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Order of Karma  **167**  What is it? Excellent *sthitibandha*
arises from excellent *kṣaya*, therefore it is not considered good. Why is
excellent *anubhāgabandha* auspicious?  The reason why excellent *sthitibandha*
is considered inauspicious is because of excellent *kṣaya*. The inquisitive
person asks: "If *anubhāgabandha* also arises from *kṣaya* like *sthitibandha*,
then why is it considered auspicious?" This is because of the saying, "The
*anubhāga* is *kṣaya*." Therefore, excellent *anubhāgabandha* should also be
considered inauspicious like excellent *sthitibandha*, because both have *kṣaya*
as their cause. However, the scriptures declare that *anubhāga* of auspicious
natures is auspicious, and *anubhāga* of inauspicious natures is inauspicious.
The solution to this is that *kṣaya* is indeed the cause of both *sthitibandha*
and *anubhāgabandha*, but there is a significant difference between the two.
When *kṣaya* is intense, *anubhāgabandha* is greater in inauspicious natures and
less in auspicious natures. When *kṣaya* is mild, *anubhāgabandha* is greater in
auspicious natures and less in inauspicious natures. Thus, the intensity of
*anubhāgabandha* in each nature is not dependent on the intensity of *kṣaya*.
However, the intensity of *anubhāgabandha* in auspicious natures is dependent on
the intensity and mildness of *kṣaya*, and the intensity of *anubhāgabandha* in
inauspicious natures is dependent on the mildness and intensity of *kṣaya*.
This is not the case with *sthitibandha*. When *kṣaya* is intense,
*sthitibandha* is greater in both auspicious and inauspicious natures that are
bound. Therefore, the effect of the intensity and mildness of *kṣaya* is the
same on all natures compared to *sthitibandha*. However, this is not the case
with *anubhāgabandha*. *Kṣaya* has a different effect on auspicious and
inauspicious natures in *anubhāgabandha*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama kramagranya 167 kA hotA hai  /  utkRSTa sthitibaMdha utkRSTa kaSAya se
hotA hai isIliye use acchA nahIM kahA jAtA hai  /  utkRSTa anubhAgabaMdha zubha
kyoM ? utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ko jo azubha mAnA gayA hai, usakA kAraNa utkRSTa
kaSAya hai  /  isa para jijJAsU kA prazna hai ki sthitibaMdha kI taraha
anubhAgabaMdha bhI kaSAya se hotA hai--Thii aNubhAgaM kasAyao' iti bacanAt  /
ataH utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kI taraha utkRSTa anubhAga ko bhI azubha mAnanA cAhiye
/  kyoMki donoM kA kAraNa kapAya hai  /  kintu zAstroM meM zubha prakRtiyoM ke
anubhAga ko zubha aura azubha prakRtiyoM ke anubhAga ko azubha batalAyA hai|
isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki sthiti aura anubhAga baMdha kA kAraNa kapAya avazya
hai  /  kintu donoM meM bar3A antara hai| kyoMki kaSAya kI tInatA hone para
azubha prakRtiyoM meM anubhAga baMdha adhika hotA hai aura zubha prakRtiyoM meM
kama tathA kaSAya ko maMdatA hone para zubha prakRtiyoM ke anubhAga meM adhikatA
aura azubha prakRtiyoM ke anubhAga meM hInatA hotI hai  /  isa prakAra pratyeka
prakRti ke anubhAga baMdha kI honAdhikatA kapAya kI honAdhikatA para nirbhara
nahIM hai| kintu zubha prakRtiyoM ke anubhAga baMdha kI hInAdhikatA kaSAya kI
tIvratA aura maMdatA para avanaMbita hai aura azubha prakRtiyoM ke anubhAga
baMdha kI hInatA aura adhikatA kApAya kI maMdatA aura tIvratA pr| kintu
sthitibaMdha meM yaha bAta nahIM hai| kyoMki kaSAya kI tInatA ke samaya zubha
athavA azabha jo bhI prakRtiyAM baMdhatI haiM, una maba meM sthitibaMdha adhika
hotA hai  /  anaH sthitibaMdha kI apekSA se kapAya kI nIvratA aura maMdatA kA
prabhAva sabhI prakRtiyoM para eka-sA par3atA hai kintu anubhAga baMdha meM yaha
bAta nahIM hai  /  anubhAga meM zubha aura azubha prakRtiyoM para pAya kA alaga-
alaga prabhAva par3atA hai|

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This can also be said that whenever there is an excellent *anubhagabandh* in
auspicious natures, there is a low *sthiitibandh*, and whenever there is a low
*anubhagabandh* in them, there is an excellent *sthiitibandh* in them. Because
the cause of excellent *anubhagabandh* in auspicious natures is the dullness of
*kṣayās* and the cause of low *anubhagabandh* is the intensity of *kṣayās*! But
in *sthiitibandh*, the dullness of *kṣayās* is the cause of low *sthiitibandh*
and the intensity of *kṣayās* is the cause of excellent *sthiitibandh*. This is
the case with auspicious natures. In inauspicious natures, the more the
*anubhag* is, the more the *sthiiti* is, and the less the *anubhag* is, the less
the *sthiitibandh* is. Because the cause of both is the intensity of *kṣayās*.
Therefore, excellent *sthiitibandh* is inauspicious because its cause is the
intensity of *kṣayās*, and the excellent *anubhagabandh* of auspicious natures
is auspicious because its cause is the dullness of *kṣayās*. Therefore,
excellent *anubhagabandh* cannot be considered completely inauspicious like
excellent *sthiitibandh*.  Thus, excellent *sanklesha* leads to excellent
*sthiitibandh* and purity leads to low *sthiitibandh*, but this rule does not
apply to the three natures of *devāyu*, *manuṣyāyu*, and *tiryancayau*. Because
the excellent *sthiiti* of these three natures is considered auspicious and its
*bandh* is from purity, and the low *sthiiti* is inauspicious because its
*bandh* is from *sanklesha*. In summary, except for these natures, the excellent
*sthiiti* of the remaining natures is bound by intense *kṣayās* and the low
*sthiiti* by dull *kṣayās*. But the excellent *sthiiti* of these three natures
is bound by dull *kṣayās* and the low *sthiiti* by intense *kṣayās*. Therefore,
these three natures have not been accepted.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gata da isI bAta ko yoM bhI kaha sakate haiM ki jaba-jaba zubha prakRtiyoM meM
utkRSTa anubhAga hotA hai taba-taba jaghanya sthitibaMdha hotA hai aura jaba-
jaba unameM jadhanya anubhAgabaMdha hotA hai taba-taba unameM utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha hotA hai| kyoMki zubha prakRtiyoM meM utkRSTa anubhAgabaMdha kA
kAraNa kaSAya kI maMdatA aura jaghanya anubhAgabaMdha kA kAraNa kaSAya kI tIvra
hai! lekina sthitibaMdha meM kaSTAya kI maMdatA jaghanya sthitibaMdha kA kAraNa
aura kaSAya kI tIvratA utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kA kAraNa hai| yaha to huI zubha
prakRtiyoM kI bAta  /  azubha prakRtiyoM meM to anubhAga adhika hone para sthiti
bhI adhika hotI hai aura anubhAga kama hone para sthitibaMdha kama hotA hai|
kyoMki donoM kA kAraNa kapAya kI tIvratA hai  /  ataH utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ho
azubha hai kyoMki usakA kAraNa kaSAyoM kI tIvratA hai aura zubha prakRtiyoM kA
utkRSTa anubhAgabaMdha zubha hai, kyoMki usakA kAraNa kaSAyoM kI maMdatA hai  /
isIliye utkRSTa sthitibaMdha kI taraha utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha ko sarvathA
azubha nahIM mAnA jA makatA hai  /  isa prakAra utkRSTa saMkleza se utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha aura vizuddhi se jaghanya sthitibaMdha hotA hai, kintu devAyu,
manuSyAyu aura tiryaMcAyu ina tIna prakRtiyoM ke bAre meM yaha niyama lAgU nahIM
hotA hai  /  kyoMki ina tIna prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti zubha mAnI jAtI hai
aura usakA baMdha vizuddhi se hotA hai aura jaghanya sthiti azubha, kyoMki usakA
baMdha saMkleza se hotA hai  /  sArAMza yaha hai ki ina prakRtiyoM ke sivAya
zeSa prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti tIvra kaSAya se baMdhatI hai aura jaghanya
sthiti maMda kaSAya se  /  kintu ina tIna prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti maMda
kaSAya se aura jaghanya sthiti tIvra kaSAya se baMdhatI hai  /  isIliye ina tIna
prakRtiyoM ko grahaNa nahIM kiyA gayA hai  /

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Text **196**  Although the highest state of bondage is caused
by intense passions, the manifestation of passions occurs through karma.
Therefore, bondage does not occur solely due to passions, but also involves
karma. Hence, here we are considering the minimal presence of karma in all
beings and its state. The minimal presence of karma:  **53.** Suhamanigoy
(subtle nigoda), labhyaparyaptak, aipan... in the first time (of origin),
appajog (minimal karma), baire (one-sense), y (and), singalamanamaana
(victorious), asaji (five-sense), sanjnee (five-sense), apan (insufficient),
lahajghanya yog (inferior karma), padhamku (prayed, badar), mug (excellent
karma), pajassiyaro (sufficient), jghanya and utkrisht yog (inferior and
excellent karma), asankhguna (innumerable qualities).  **54.** Apjast
(insufficient), tas (of), ukkosso (excellent karma), parjajahan (sufficient or
inferior karma), par (and other), eva (thus), thithana (state of being), apjeer
(in comparison to insufficient), sankhguna (innumerable qualities), parantu
(but), apjabie (in insufficient duality), asankhgana (innumerable qualities).
**1.** Asamst (all) - this is a variant reading.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karma grantha 196 _ yadyapi utkRSTa sthitibaMdha tIvra kaSAya se hotA
hai, lekina kaSAya kI abhivyagni yoga dvArA hotI hai  /  anaH kevala kavAya se
hI sthitibaMdha nahIM hotA hai, kintu usake sAtha yoga bhI rahatA hai| isaliye
atra saba jIvoM meM yoga ke alpabahutva aura usakI sthiti para yahAM vicAra kiyA
jA rahA hai| yoga kA aspabahutva suhamanimobAikhaNapajoga bAyaraviAla prmnnmgaa|
apajja laha paDhamaduguru pajahaspiro asaMkhaguNo  // 53 //
apajatta'sasudhakosI pajjAhanniyara eva ThiThANA  /  apajevara saMkhaguNA
paramapajAbie asaMca guNA  // 54 //  zabdArtha-suhamanigoyasUkSma nigodiyA
labdhyaparyAptaka, AipaNa ... prathama samaya meM (utpatti ke), appajoga -
alpayoga, bAyara -vAdara ekendriya, ya-aura, siMgalaamaNamaNA vikatrika, asajI
paMcendriya, saMjJI paMcandriya, apana-aparyApta ke, lahajaghanya yoga,
paDhamaku-prayaTika (apayAta muzma, bAdara) kA, mugautkRSTa yoga, pajassiyaro-
paryApta kA jaghanya aura utkRSTa yoga, asaMkhaguNo - asaMkhyAta guNA  /
apajasta- aparyApta, tasa -prasa kA, ukkoso -. utkRSTa yoga, parajajahAna -
paryApta sa vA jaghanya yoga, para aura itara (utkRSTa yoga), eva .. isa
prakAra, ThiThANA -sthiti ke dhAna, apajeyara - aparyApta kI apekSA paryApta ke,
saMkhaguNA=sakhyAta guNA, paraM-. parantu. apajabie -aparyApta dvaundiya meM.
asaMkhagagA asaMdhyAna guNA  /  1 asamasta' iti pAThAntare  /

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **200** **Pātaka Gāthāyam** - In the subtle Nigodīya Lakshya-
paryāpta, the Jīva has a small amount of Yoga in the first moment. In
comparison, the Vādar Ekaindriya, Vikalatrik, Asanjnī and Sanjnī Panchendriya
Labdhya-paryāptik have an immeasurable amount of Yoga in their first moment,
respectively.   After that, the excellent Yoga of the first two Labdhya-
paryāptik, namely the Mūkshma and Vādar Ekaindriya, is immeasurable. From that,
the inferior and excellent Yoga of both Paryāptik is immeasurable in sequence.
In comparison, the excellent Yoga of the Aparyāpta As, the inferior and
excellent Yoga of the Paryāpta Tras, is immeasurable in sequence. Similarly, the
Sthiti-sthāna of the Aparyāpta and Paryāpta are also immeasurable, but the
Sthiti-sthāna of the Aparyāpta Dwīndriya is immeasurable.  **Special Note:** In
these two Gāthās, the statement of the small and large amount of Yoga has been
made. The meaning of Yoga is the special power of the Sakarma Jīva, which is the
cause of the acceptance of Karmas. Through Yoga, Karma-raja is brought to the
Ātmā. The definition of Yoga in Karma-prakriti (Bandhanakaraṇa) is as follows:
**"Parināma lambaṇa gahaṇa sāhaṇaṁ seṇa lavanama sigam."**  Meaning: The
transformation of Pudgalas, the support and the means of acceptance, i.e., the
cause, is called Yoga. The Ātmā has Vīrya-shakti and...  **1 Go. Jīvakāṇḍa Gā.
215** describes the nature of Yoga as follows:  **"Puggalavināidehodayeṇa
maṇamaṇakāyajutta-sma. Jīvarama jā hu mani kammaāgamākāraṇaṁ jogī."**  The Jīva,
who is united with mind, speech, and body due to the rise of the Pudgala Vipāki
Śarīra Nāmakarma, the movement that is the cause of the acceptance of Karmas, is
called Yoga.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 200 pAtaka gAthAyaM-sUkSma nigodiyA lakSyaparyApta jIva ko pahale mamaya meM
alpa yoga hotA hai, usakI apekSA bAdara ekendriya, vikalatrika, asaMjJI aura
saMjJI paMcendriya labdhyapaptika ke pahale samaya meM krama se asaMkhyAta guNA
hotA hai| usake anantara prAraMbha ke do labdhyaparyApta arthAt mUkSma aura
vAdara ekendriya kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai| usase donoM hI paryApta kA
jaghanya va utkRSTa yoga anukrama se asaMkhyAta guNA hai| usakI apekSA aparyApta
asa kA utkRSTa yoga, paryApta trasa kA jaghanya aura latkRSTa yoga anukrama se
asaMkhyAta guNA hai| isI prakAra sthitisthAna bhI aparyApta aura paryApta ke
saMkhyAta guNe hote haiM kintu aparyApta dvIndriya ke sthitisthAna asaMkhyAta
guNe haiN| vizeSAya ina do gAthAoM meM yoga ke alpabahutva kA kathana kiyA gayA
hai  /  yoga kA artha hai sakarmA jIva kI zaktivizeSa jo karmoM ke grahaNa
karane meM kAraNa hai | yoga ke dvArA karma raja ko AtmA taka lAyA jAtA hai|
karmaprakRti (baMdhanakaraNa) meM yoga kI paribhASA isa prakAra dI gaI hai
pariNAmA laMbaNa gahaNa sAhaNaM seNa lavanAmasigaM  /  /  arthAt pudgaloM kA
pariNamana, Alambana aura grahaNa ke sAdhana yAnI kAraNa ko yoga kahate haiN|'
AtmA meM vIrya-zakti hai aura 1 go. jIvakAMDa gA. 215 meM yoga kA svarUpa isa
prakAra batalAyA hai... puggalavinAidehodayeNa maNamaNakAyajuttasma  /  jIvarama
jA hu mani kammAgamakAraNaM jogI  /  /  pudgala vipAkI zarIra nAmakarma ke udaya
se mana, vacana aura kAya meM yukta jIva ko jo gati karmoM ke grahaNa karane meM
kAraNa hai, ume yoga kahate haiN|

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  In a worldly being, the power known as **Yoga**
manifests due to the destruction or cessation of the **Dhirāntarāya Karma**.
Through this power, the being first acquires **Pudgalas** suitable for
**Audārika** and other bodies. After acquiring them, it transforms them into
**Audārika** and other bodies, or acquires **Pudgalas** suitable for the mind
and transforms them into forms like **breath**. It then relies on these
transformed **Pudgalas** for support. This process continues constantly.  There
are three causes for acquiring **Pudgalas**: **mind**, **speech**, and **body**.
Therefore, **Yoga** also has three names: **Manoyoga**, **Vachanayoga**, and
**Kāyayoga**. The **Yoga** activity that occurs due to the reliance on the mind
is called **Manoyoga**, the **Yoga** activity that occurs due to the reliance on
speech is called **Vachanayoga**, and the **Yoga** activity that occurs due to
the reliance on breath and other bodily functions is called **Kāyayoga**.  In
essence, the being uses the power called **Yoga** to create the mind, speech,
and body, and these become reliant on its **Yoga** power. Thus, **Yoga** is the
means for acquiring **Pudgalas**, transforming the acquired **Pudgalas** into
bodily forms, and relying on them.  **Yoga**, **Vīrya**, **Sthāma**, **Utsāha**,
**Parākrama**, **Cheṣṭā**, **Shakti**, **Māmarthya** are other names for
**Yoga**.  1. **Kāyavāṅmana:** **Karmayoga**. 2. For a detailed explanation of
**Yoga** and its different types, refer to the **Fourth Karma Granth** on
**Yogamārgaṇā**. 3. **Joga ve vigyiṁ grāmōṁ kā pākamo taha bitṭā. Mani samattham
diya jogaram havanti pajāyā.** (From **Panchasangraha 366**) - This means, "The
**Yoga** power is the cause of the creation of the world, and it is the power of
the mind that makes the **Yoga** power manifest."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha saMsArI jIva meM vaha zakti dhIryAntarAya karma ke kSaya
yA kSayopazama se pragaTa hotI hai  /  usa vIrya ke dvArA jIva pahale audArika
Adi zarIroM ke yogya pudgaloM ko grahaNa karatA hai aura grahaNa karake unheM
audArika Adi zarIra 25 :riNamA : sabA bAvA, yA mana ke yogya pudgaloM ko grahaNa
karake unheM zvAsocchdAsa Adi rUpa pariNamAtA hai aura pariNamA kara unakA
avalaMbana yAnI sahAyatA letA hai  /  yaha krama satata calatA rahatA hai  /
padgaloM ko grahaNa karane ke tIna nimitta hai--mana, vacana aura kAya | isIliye
yoga ke bhI tIna nAma ho jAte haiM--manoyoga, vacanayoga, kAyayoga  / ' mana ke
avalaMbana se hone vAle yoga-vyApAra ko manoyoga, vacana ke avalaMbana se hone
vAle yoga vyApAra ko bacanayoga aura zvAsocchvAsa Adi ke avalambana se hone vAle
yoga vyApAra ko kAyayoga kahate haiM  /  sArAMza yaha hai ki jIva meM vidyamAna
yoga nAmaka zakti se vaha mana, vacana, kAya Adi kA nirmANa karatA hai aura ye
mana, vacana aura kAya usakI yoga nAmaka zakti ke avalaMbana hote haiN| isa
prakAra se yoga pudgaloM ko grahaNa karane kA, grahaNa kiye hae pudgaloM ko
zarIgAni rUpa pariNamAne kA aura unakA avalaMbana lene kA sAdhana hai| yoga,
vIrya, sthAma, utsAha, parAkrama, ceSTA, zakti, mAmarthya, ye yoga ke nAmAntara
haiN| 1 kAyavAGmana: karmayogaH  /  -satvAyatra 61 2 yogoM kI vizada vyAkhyA
aura bhedoM ke nAma prAdhi ke liye catartha karmagrantha meM yogamArgaNA ko
dekhiye  /  3 jogave vigyiM grAmoM kA pAkamo tahA biTTA  /  manI sAmatthaM diya
jogarama havanti pajAyA  /  /  - paMcasaMgraha 366

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 2.2 Century  This **yoga** is present in all beings, from **ekendriya** to
**panchendriya**, in accordance with their nature. It has two states:
**jghanya** and **utkrista**.    The question is: which being has the least
**yogashakti** and which being has the most **tama yogashakti**? These two
verses explain this.  1. The most **jghanya yoga** is experienced by the
**sukshma nigodaya labdhyaparyaptak** being in its first **samaya** - **muhum
nigodayaikhan**.  After this, the **yogashakti** of other beings gradually
increases.  2. The **yoga** experienced by the **badar nigodaya ekendriya
labdhyaparyaptak** being in its first **samaya** is **asankhya** times greater
than that of the **sukshma nigodaya labdhyaparyaptak** being.  3. The **jghanya
yoga** of the **dwindriya labdhyaparyaptak** being is **asankhya** times greater
than that of the **badar nigodaya ekendriya labdhyaparyaptak** being.  4. The
**jghanya yoga** of the **triendriya labdhyaparyaptak** being is **asankhya**
times greater than that of the **dwindriya labdhyaparyaptak** being.  5. The
**jghanya yoga** of the **chaturindriya labdhyaparyaptak** being is **asankhya**
times greater than that of the **triendriya labdhyaparyaptak** being.  6. The
**jghanya yoga** of the **asangya panchendriya labdhyaparyaptak** being is
**asankhya** times greater than that of the **chaturindriya labdhyaparyaptak**
being.  7. The **jghanya yoga** of the **sangya panchendriya labdhyaparyaptak**
being is **asankhya** times greater than that of the **asangya panchendriya
labdhyaparyaptak** being.  8. The **utkrista yoga** of the **sukshma nigodaya
labdhyaparyaptak** being is **asankhya** times greater than that of the **sangya
panchendriya labdhyaparyaptak** being.  9. The **utkrista yoga** of the **badar
ekendriya labdhyaparyaptak** being is **asankhya** times greater than that of
the **sukshma nigodaya labdhyaparyaptak** being.  10. The **jghanya yoga** of
the **sukshma nigodaya paryaptak** being is **asankhya** times greater than that
of the **badar ekendriya labdhyaparyaptak** being.  11. The **jghanya yoga** of
the **badar ekendriya paryaptak** being is **asankhya** times greater than that
of the **sukshma nigodaya paryaptak** being.  12. The **utkrista yoga** of the
**sukshma nigodaya paryaptak** being is **asankhya** times greater than that of
the **badar ekendriya paryaptak** being.  13. The **utkrista yoga** of the
**badar ekendriya paryaptak** being is **asankhya** times greater than that of
the **sukshma nigodaya paryaptak** being.  14. The **utkrista yoga** of the
**dwindriya labdhyaparyaptak** being is **asankhya** times greater than that of
the **badar ekendriya paryaptak** being.  15. The **utkrista yoga** of the
**triendriya labdhyaparyaptak** being is **asankhya** times greater than that of
the **dwindriya labdhyaparyaptak** being.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2.2 zataka yaha yoga ekendriya se lekara paMcendriya taka sabhI jIvoM meM
yathAyogya nAyA jAtA hai  /  isakI do avasthAyeM hai jaghanya aura utkRSTa  /
yAnoM sabase kama yogazakti kA dhAraka kauna-sA jIva hai aura adhika tama
yogazakti kA dhAraka koTamA joda  /  imIta ko upahAra ina do gAthAoM meM spaSTa
kiyA hai| jo isa prakAra hai1. sabase jaghanya yoga sUkSma nigodiyA
labdhyaparyAptaka jIva ko prathama samaya meM hotA hai-muhuma nigoyaaikhnn|
isake bAda anya jIvoM kI yogazakti meM kramazaH vRddhi hotI jAtI hai| 2. bAdara
nigodiyA ekendriya labdhyaparyAptaka jIva ke prathama samaya meM jo yoga hotA
hai, vaha usase asaMkhyAta guNA hai  /  3. usase dvIndriya labdhyaparyApta kA
jaghanya yoga asaMkhyAta gRNA hai  /  4. usase zrIndriya labdhyaparyApta kA
jaghanya yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai| 5. usase caturindriya labdhyaparyApta kA
jaghanya yoga asaMkhyAta gRNA hai  /  6. usase asaMjJI paMcendriya
labdhyaparyApta kA jaghanya yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai| 7. usase saMzI paMcendriya
labdhya kA jaghanya yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai| 8. usase sUkSma nigodiyA
labdhyaparyApta kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta gaNA hai| 6. usase bAdara ekendriya
labdhyaparyApta kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai| 10. usase sUkSma nigodiyA
paryApta kA jaghanyayoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai| 11, usase bAdara ekendriya
paryApta kA jaghanya yoga asaMkhyAta gRNA hai  /  12. usase sUkSma nigodiyA
paryApta kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai  /  13. usase bAdara ekendriya
paryApta kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai | 14. usase dvIndriya
labdhyaparyApta kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai  /  15. usase zrIndriya
labdhyaparyApta kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai  /

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pancham Karmagranth  16. From that, the excellent yoga of the four-sense
object is countless times. 17. From that, the excellent yoga of the non-
conscious five-sense attainable-sufficient is countless times. 18. From that,
the excellent yoga of the conscious five-sense attainable-sufficient is
countless times. 19. From that, the inferior yoga of the two-sense sufficient is
countless times. 20. From that, the inferior yoga of the three-sense sufficient
is countless times. 21. From that, the inferior yoga of the four-sense
sufficient is countless times. 22. From that, the inferior yoga of the non-
conscious five-sense sufficient is countless times. 23. From that, the inferior
yoga of the conscious five-sense sufficient is countless times. 24. From that,
the excellent yoga of the one-sense sufficient is countless times. 25. From
that, the excellent yoga of the three-sense sufficient is countless times. 26.
From that, the excellent yoga of the four-sense sufficient is countless times.
27. From that, the excellent yoga of the non-conscious five-sense sufficient is
countless times. 28. From that, the excellent yoga of the conscious five-sense
sufficient is countless times.  In this way, there are 28 places of yoga in the
fourteen Jidhasamasas, with the distinction of inferior and excellent. Some
other places in the conscious five-sense sufficient are mentioned in other
granths. They are as follows:  29. From the excellent yoga of the conscious
five-sense sufficient, the excellent yoga of the Anuttaravasi Devas is countless
times. 30. From that, the excellent yoga of the Aveyakavasi Devas is countless
times. 31. From that, the excellent yoga of the Bhogbhumij, Tiyach, and humans
is countless times. 32. From that, the excellent yoga of those with Aharak
bodies is countless times.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 16. usase caturindriya lakSya kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta
guNA hai| 17. usase asaMjJI paMcendriya labhyaparyApta kA utkRSTa yoga
asaMkhyAta guNA hai| 18. usase saMjJI paMcendriya labdhyaparyApta kA utkRSTa
yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai| 16, usase dvIndriya' paryApta kA jaghanya yoga
asaMkhyAta guNA hai  /  20. usase zrIndriya paryApta kA jaghanya yoga asaMkhyAta
guNA hai  /  21. usase caturindriya paryApta kA jaghanya yoga asaMkhyAta guNA
hai| 22. usase asaMjJI paMcendriya paryApta kA jaghanya yoga asaMkhyAta gaNA
hai| 23. usase saMjJI paMcendriya paryApta kA jaghanya yoga asaMkhyAta guNa hai
/  24. usase Tondriya paryApta kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta gRNA hai  /  25. usase
zrIndriya paryApta kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai| 26. usase caturindriya
paryApta kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai  /  27. usase asaMjJI paMce0
paryApta kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai| 28. usase saMzI paMcendriya
paryApta kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai| isa prakAra se caudaha
jIdhasamAsoM meM jaghanya aura utkRSTa ke bheda se yogoM ke 28 sthAna hote haiN|
saMjJI paMcendriya paryApta meM kucha aura sthAna dUsare granthoM meM kahe haiN|
jo isa prakAra haiM 26. saMjJI paMcendriya paryApta ke utkRSTa yoga se
anuttaravAsI devoM kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai  /  30. usase
aMveyakavAsI devoM kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai| 31. usase bhogabhUmija
tiyaMca aura manuSyoM kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai| 32. usase AhAraka
zarIra vAloM kA utkRSTa yoga asaMkhyAta guNA hai  /

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 204 ## Century ## 33. The superior yoga of the remaining gods, hell beings,
animals, and humans is innumerably multiplied progressively. Thus, one should
know the insignificance of the yoga of all beings. The measure of the multiplier
is the innumerably small part of a palya, i.e., multiplying the innumerably
small part of a palya in the first yoga-sthana, the measure of the next yoga-
sthana is obtained. This means that as the power of the being develops
progressively, so does the yoga-sthana increase. With inferior yoga, the being
binds to an inferior pradesha-bandha, and with superior yoga, it binds to a
superior pradesha-bandha. Thus, after stating the insignificance of the yoga-
sthana, now stating the sthiti-sthana - the number of sthiti-sthana from
insufficient to sufficient is innumerably multiplied, but in karma-prakriti
(bondage-making), the superior yoga of the amanya panchendriya paripta is
innumerably multiplied by the superior yoga of the anuttara-vami gods... ##
Amnana-uttara-gevin bhoga-bhumigayat-iyatanu-gesu. Phmaso asank-gunio sesemu ma
jog ukkoso. || 16 || When, after stating the superior yoga of the amanya
panchendriya paripta, we state the superior yoga of the anuttara-vami gods etc.,
the 28th sthana will be 27 times greater, and in total, there will be 32 sthana.
It is the same in karma-prakriti. The insignificance of the yoga of all beings
is stated in Bhagavati 25.1. In it, the superior yoga of the insufficient is
said to be greater than the inferior yoga of the paripta. There is also a back
and forth. The reason for this is multi-faceted. In Go. Karmakanda Na. 218, a
detailed description of the 242 yoga-sthana is given. For its use, see the
appendix.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 204 zataka 33. zeSa deva, nAraka, tiryaMca aura manuSyoM kA utkRSTa yoga
uttarottara asaMkhyAta guNA hai  /  isa prakAra meM saba jIvoM ke yoga kA
alyabahutva jAnanA cAhiye  / 2 mabatra guNAkAra kA pramANa palyopama ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga jAnanA arthAt pahale-pahale yogasthAna meM palya ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga kA guNA karane para Age ke yogasthAna kA pramANa AtA hai|
isakA yaha artha huA ki jyoM-jyoM uttarottara jIva ko zakti kA vikAsa hotA jAtA
hai, tyoM-tyoM yogasthAna meM bhI vRddhi hotI jAtI hai  /  jaghanya yoga se jIva
jaghanya pradezabaMdha aura utkRSTa yoga se utkRSTa pradezabaMdha karatA hai|
isa prakAra ma bogasthAnoM ke alpabadbhutva kA kathana karane ke pazcAt aba
sthitisthAnoM meM kathana karane meM - zikANA apajeyara saMkhaguNA- aparyApta se
paryApta ke sthitisyAna saMkhyAta guNe haiM kintu kapaMprakRti (baMdhanakaraNa)
meM amajI paMcendriya paripta ke utkRSTa yoga se anutaravAmI devoM kA utkRSTa
yoga asaMkhyAta guNA batalAyA hai ... amaNANuttaragevina
bhogabhUmigayataiyataNugesu  /  phamaso asaMkhaguNio sesemu ma joga ukkoso  /  /
16  //  jaba amaMjJo paMcendriya paryApta ke uskRSTa yoga ko kahane ke bAda
anuttaravAsI devoM Adi ke utkRSTa proga kA kathana kareMge to 28 vA sthAna 27
dhA hogA aura kula milAkara maba sthAna 32 hoMge  /  karmaprakRti meM isI
prakAra hai| saba jIvoM ke yoga kA alpayatva bhagavatI 25 / 1 meM batalAyA hai
/  usameM paryApla ke jaghanya yoga se aparyApta kA utkRSTa yoga adhika kahA hai
/  bola bhI Age pIche hai| isakA kAraNa to bahubhutagamya hai| 3 go. karmakAMDa
nA0 218 meM 242 naka yogasyAnoM kA vistRta varNana kiyA hai  /  isakA upayogI
aMdhA pariziSTa meM dekhiye  /

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 205  The 'Apjavie Asankhgana' (infinite number of
groups) of the Dwindriya Apariapt (two-sense deficient) have a unique
characteristic. Their 'Sthiti Sthan' (positions) are infinite in number. This is
explained below.  The different positions that a Karma Prakriti (nature of
karma) occupies, starting from the lowest position (Janaya Sthiti) and
progressing through each stage to the highest position (Utkrushta Sthiti), are
called 'Sthiti Sthan'. For example, if the lowest position of a Karma Prakriti
is 1 time and the highest position is 18 times, then there are nine positions
from 10 to 18, which are called 'Sthiti Sthan'. These 'Sthiti Sthan' are also in
increasing numerical order, but the 'Sthiti Sthan' of the Dwindriya Apariapt are
infinite in number. Their order is as follows:  1. The 'Sthiti Sthan' of the
Sukshma Ekendriya Labdhya Paryapt (subtle one-sense capable) are the fewest. 2.
After that, the 'Sthiti Sthan' of the Ekendriya Apariapt (one-sense deficient)
are in numerical order. 3. After that, the 'Sthiti Sthan' of the Sukshma
Ekendriya Paryapt (subtle one-sense capable) are in numerical order. 4. After
that, the 'Sthiti Sthan' of the Badar Ekendriya Paryast (gross one-sense
capable) are in numerical order. 5. After that, the 'Sthiti Sthan' of the
Dwindriya Apariapt (two-sense deficient) are infinite in number. 6. After that,
the 'Sthiti Sthan' of the Dwindriya Paryapt (two-sense capable) are in numerical
order. 7. After that, the 'Sthiti Sthan' of the Triindriya Apariapt (three-sense
deficient) are in numerical order. 8. After that, the 'Sthiti Sthan' of the
Triindriya Paryapt (three-sense capable) are in numerical order. 9. After that,
the 'Sthiti Sthan' of the Chaturindriya Apariapt (four-sense deficient) are in
numerical order. 10. After that, the 'Sthiti Sthan' of the Chaturindriya Paryapt
(four-sense capable) are in numerical order. 11. After that, the 'Sthiti Sthan'
of the Asanji Panchendriya Apariapt (uncontrolled five-sense deficient) are in
numerical order. 12. After that, the 'Sthiti Sthan' of the Amantri Panchendriya
Paryapt (controlled five-sense capable) are in numerical order.  **Therefore,
starting from the Janaya Sthiti (lowest position) and increasing by one time,
the positions that reach the Utkrushta Sthiti (highest position) are called
'Sthiti Sthan'.**  - Pancham Karma Pratyatika, Page 55

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama karma grantha 205 itanI vizeSatA hai ki 'apajavie asaMkhagaNA' dvondriya
aparyApta ke sthitisthAna anaMkhyAta gRNaM hai| isakA pATIkaraNa nIce kiyA jA
rahA hai| _ kisI karmaprakRti ko javanya sthiti se lekara eka-eka samaya
bar3hatebar3hate utkRSTa sthiti paryanta sthiti ke jo bheda hote haiM, ve
sthitisthAna' kahalAte haiN| jaise kisI karmaprakRti kI jaghanyasthiA 1 samaya
aura utkRSTa sthiti 18 samaya hai to dasa se lekara aThAraha taka sthiti ke nau
bheda hote haiM, jinheM sthitisthAna kahate haiM  /  ye sthitisthAna bhI
uttarottara saMkhyAta guNe haiM kintu dvIndriya aparyApta ke sthitisthAna
asaMkhyAta guNe hote haiM  /  unakA krama isa prakAra hai1 sUkSma ekendriya
labdhyaparyApta ke sthitisthAna sabase kama haiN| 2 usase bAdara ekendriya
aparyApta ke sthitisthAna saMkhyAtaguNe haiM  /  3 usase sUkSma ekendriya
paryApta ke sthitisthAna saMkhyAta guNe hai  /  4 usasa bAdara ekendriya
paryAsta ke sthitisthAna saMkhyAta guNe haiN| 5 usasa dvIndriya aparyApta ke
sthitisthAna asaMkhyAta guNe haiM  /  6 usase dvIndriya paryApta ke sthitisthAna
saMkhyAta guNe hai  /  7 usase trIndriya aparyApta ke sthitisthAna saMkhyAta
guNe haiN| - usase trIndriya paryApta ke sthitisthAna saMkhyAta puNe hai| meM
usase caturindriya aparyApta ke sthitisthAna saMkhyAta guNe haiN| 10 usase
caturindriya paryApta ke sthitisthAna saMkhyAta guNe haiN| 11 usase asaMjI
paMcendriya aparyApta ke sthitisthAna saMkhyAta gRNe haiM  /  12 usase amaMtrI
paMcendriya paryApta ke sthitisthAna saMkhyAta gaNe haiN| 1 tatra janya sthite
rArabhya ekasamayavRddha,gA garnotkRSTa nimthitiparyavasAnA ye sthitibhedAste
sthitisthAnAnyucyante  /  -paMcama karmapratya TIkA, pR0 55

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter** 13. The number of qualities in the state-places of the limited five-
sense beings is countless. 14. The number of qualities in the state-places of
the perfect five-sense beings is countless.  Thus, with the increase in the
measure of the state, the number of state-places also increases.  In the context
of yoga, after describing the state-places due to the fewness of yogas, we now
state the increase in the number of yogas with respect to time for the imperfect
beings.  **Verse 55** **Word Meaning:** * Paikhanam - Every moment * Asankhapuna
viriya - With countless qualities of strength * Apja - Imperfect beings *
Paithii - In every state-bond * Asankhalogasama - Equal to the measure of
countless loka-akasha regions * Amvasaya - Here, the determination * Ahiya -
More * Sattasu - In the seven karmas * Aajasu - In the ayu karma * Asankaguna -
Countless qualities  **Verse Meaning:** Imperfect beings have countless
qualities of strength every moment and have determination equal to the measure
of countless loka-akasha regions in every state-bond. In the seven karmas, the
determination of the state-bond is especially more, and in the ayu karma, there
are countless qualities.  **Special Meaning:** In the previous verse, the
measure of the state-places was explained. Now, here we explain that there is an
increase in the number of yogas of imperfect beings by countless qualities every
moment, but this does not happen in perfect beings. This increase in countless
qualities should be understood until the highest state.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka 13 usase saMjJI paMcendriya apayAMpta ke sthAtasthAna saMkhyAta guNe
haiN| 14 usase saMjI paMcendriya paryApta ke sthitisthAna saMkhyAta guNe haiN|
isa prakAra sthiti ke pramANa meM vRddhi ke sAtha sthitisthAnI kI bhI saMkhyA
bar3hatI jAtI hai  /  yoga ke prasaMga meM yogoM ke alpAbahutva, sthitisthAnoM
kA nirUpaNa karane ke bAda aba apamAna jovoM ke prati samaya jitane yoga kI
vRddhi hotI hai, usakA kathana karate haiN| par3AvaNa pasaMkha gaNaciriya apaja
paThihamasaMkhalogasamA  /  ajanasAyA ahiyA sattasu Ausu asaMkhaguNA  // 55 //
zabdArya - paikhaNaM- pratyeka samaya meM, asaMkhapuNaviriya - asaMnyAta guNA
vIrya vAle, apaja-aparyApta jIva, paiThiIpratyeka sthitibaMdha meM,
asaMkhalogasamA -asaMkhyAta lokAkAza ke pradeza pramANa, amavasAyA -adhyatra
sAya, ahiyA adhika, sattasu sAta karmoM meM, Ajasu -Aghukarma meM, asaMlaguNA -
asaMkhyAta guNA  /  _gAthArya-aparyApta jIva pratyeka samaya asaMkhyAta guNe
vIrya vAle hote haiM aura pratyeka sthitibaMdha meM asaMkhyAta lokAkAza ke
pradeza pramANa adhyavasAya hote haiM  /  sAta karmoM meM to sthitibaMdha ke
adhyavasAya vizeSAdhika aura Ayukarma meM asaMkhyAta guNa hote haiN| vizeSArtha
- pUrva gAthA meM sthitisthAnoM kA pramANa batalAyA hai  /  aba yahAM batalAte
haiM ki aparyApta jovoM ke yogamthAnoM meM prati samaya asaMkhyAta guNI vRddhi
hotI hai kintu paryApta jIvoM meM aisA nahIM hotA hai  /  yaha asaMkhyAta guNI
vRddhi utkRSTa sthiti paryanta samajhanA cAhie

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **All-pervading, non-perishable, and infinite in
number, the study of the bondage of karma is a great endeavor.**  Each
individual state of bondage gives rise to countless states of study.  **207**
The states of study are called "Aadhyavasaya Sthana" (states of study) due to
the bondage of karma.  The intensity of the passions (kṣayās) - intense, more
intense, most intense, mild, milder, mildest - gives rise to numerous variations
in the states of study.  A single state of bondage does not lead to a single
state of study, but rather to many.  In other words, a single state binds
different beings to different states of study.  For example, some individuals
may have bound themselves to a lifespan equivalent to two oceans, but it is not
necessary that they all have the same exact results.  Therefore, the states of
study are said to be countless, as vast as the universe, due to the individual
states of bondage.  Except for the karma of lifespan (āyu karma), the states of
study for the other seven karmas - knowledge obscuration (jñānāvaraṇa),
perception obscuration (darśanāvaraṇa), painful (vedanīya), delusion (mohaniya),
name (nāma), lineage (gotra), and hindrance (antarāya) - are particularly
numerous.  For example, the state of study for the lowest state of knowledge
obscuration is the least, the state of study for the second state is greater,
and the state of study for the third state is even greater.  This should be
understood similarly for the fourth, fifth, and so on, up to the highest state
of bondage.  However, the general number for all of these is still countless, as
vast as the universe.  Similarly, for perception obscuration, painful, delusion,
name, lineage, and hindrance karmas, the number of states of study increases
from the second state to their respective highest states of bondage.  However,
the states of study for the karma of lifespan are infinitely numerous in a
progressive manner.  In other words, the states of study for the lowest state of
bondage of all four lifespan karmas are countless, as vast as the universe, and
the states of study for the second state of bondage are infinitely more numerous
than that, and so on.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha sabvodi apajjatto paskhaNaM asaMkhaguNAe jogavuDkIe
baDDhaIti  /  eka-eka sthitisthAna ke kAraNa asaMkhyAta adhyavasAyasthAna hote
haiM  /  207 sthitibaMdha ke kAraNa kaSAyajanya AtmapariNAmoM ko adhyabasa
sthAna kahate haiN| kaSAyoM ke tIvra, tIvratara, tIvratama maMda, maMdatara,
maMdatama rUpa meM udaya hone se adhyavasAyasthAnoM ke aneka bheda ho jAte hai
/  eka sthitibaMdha kA kAraNa eka hI adhyavasAyasthAna nahIM hai kintu aneka
adhyavasAyasthAna haiM  /  arthAt eka hI sthiti nAnA jIvoM ko nAnA
adhyavasAyasthAnoM se baMdhatI hai| jaise kucha vyaktiyoM ne do sAgara pramANa
kI devAyu kA baMdha kiyA ho, lekina yaha Avazyaka nahIM ki una sabake sarvathA
eka jaise pariNAma hoM  /  isIlie eka-eka sthitisthAna ke kAraNa
adhyavasAyasthAna asaMkhyAta lokapramANa kahe jAte haiM  /  Ayukarma ke sivAya
jJAnAvaraNa Adi sAta karmoM ke adhyavasAyasthAna vizeSAdhika haiN| jaise
jJAnAvaraNa karma kI jaghanya sthiti ke kAraNa adhyavasAyasthAna sabase kama
haiM, usase dvitIya sthitisthAna ke kAraNa adhyavasAya adhika haiM, usase tRtIya
sthitisthAna ke kAraNa adhyavasAyasthAna adhika haiM  /  isI prakAra cauthe,
pAMcaveM yAvat utkRSTa sthitisthAna taka samajhanA caahie| lekina ina sabakA
sAmAnya se pramANa asaMkhyAta lokapramANa hI hai  /  jJAnAvaraNa kI taraha
darzanAvaraNa, bedanIya, mohanIya nAma, gotra aura aMtarAya karma kI dvitIya Adi
sthiti se lekara apane-apane utkRSTa sthitibaMdha paryanta adhyavasAyasthAnoM kI
saMkhyA adhika adhika jAnanA caahie| lekina Ayukarma ke adhyavasAyasthAna
uttarottara asaMkhyAta guNe haiM  /  arthAt cAroM ho AyukamoM ke jaghanya
sthitibaMdha ke kAraNa adhyavasAyasthAna asaMkhyAta loka pramANa haiM aura usake
bAda unake dUsare sthitibaMdha ke kAraNa adhyavasAyasthAna usase asaMkhyAta guNe
haiM,

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **208** **Century**  Due to the third type of *sthitibandha*,
the number of *adhyavasyasthanas* is countless. Thus, it should be understood
that the number of *adhyavasyasthanas* up to the *utkrista mitibandha* is
countless.  In this way, by explaining the *adhyavasyasthanas* of all karmas in
relation to *sthitibandha*, we now explain the names of those *prakritis* and
their *abandhakala* (time of non-binding), which are not bound by the five-sense
beings for the maximum amount of time.  **56** *Tirinara-tijo-yaṇam nara-bhava-
juya sacha: palla tesaḍha. Yavara-ghau-havi-galayave-su paṇasi-isay-amaya-ra.*
**5** *Apada-masangha-yaṇagi-ikhagav-ami-chcha-du-bhagath-iti-gam. Niya naṣu
ithi duto-sa paṇi-visu abandhaṇṭa parama.*  **Word Meanings:**  * *Tirinara-
tijo-yaṇam*:  *Tiryak* (animal) and *naraka* (hell) *trika* (three), *yaṇam*:
*yat* (which) named, *nara-bhava-juya*:  *manushya bhava* (human existence)
with, *sagu-palla*: *kara-yapa* (action) with, *tesaḍha*: *sata* (hundred) more
than nine *sagaman* (ocean-like), *thavara-chavu*: *sthavara* (stationary)
*chatush* (four). *Ivi-galayave*: *ekandriya* (one-sense), *vikendriya* (multi-
sense) and *atpa* (heat) named *karma*, *paṇasi-isay*: one hundred and eighty-
five, *amaya-ra*: *sagaropama* (ocean-like).  * *Apada-masangha-yaṇagi-ikhagav*:
Except the first, the remaining *saninana* (association) and *sansthana*
(establishment) and *vihayoga-gati* (path of liberation), *aṇa*: *ananta*
(infinite) *anubandhi* (binding) *kashaya* (passions), *michcha-mithyatva*:
*moha* (delusion) *ni-cha* (low), *bhagayo-na*: *tirga-du-bhangana* (long-
lasting) *sthanaditra* (three types of *sthana*), *niya*: *ni-cha* (low) *gotra*
(lineage), *napuththi*: *nasakaved* (male), *strived* (female), *buti*: *basima*
(limit) (with human existence one hundred and thirty-two *sagaropama*), *paṇi-
visu*: *panchendriya* (five-sense), *abandhanthi*: *avandha* (non-binding)
*sthiti* (state), *parama*: *utkrista* (highest).  **Meaning of the Verse:**  *
*Tiryak* (animal) *trika* (three), *naraka* (hell) *trika* (three) and *udyo-ta*
(shining) named *karma* with human existence are bound for four *palla* (ocean-
like) more than one hundred and ninety-six.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 208 zataka tRtIya sthitibaMdha ke kAraNa zyavasAyasthAna usase bhI asaMkhyAta
gRNe hai  /  isa prakAra utkRSTa mitibaMdha paryanta adhyavasAyasthAnoM kI
saMkhyA asaMkhyAta gRNI, asaMkhyAta gRNo samajhanA cAhiye  /  isa prakAra se
sthitibaMdha kI apekSA saba karmoM ke adhyavasAya sthAnoM ko batalAkara aba una
prakRtiyoM ke nAma aura unakA abandhakAla batalAte haiM, jinako paMcendriya jIva
adhika-se-adhika kitane kAla taka nahIM bAMdhate haiN| tirinaratijoyANaM
narabhavajuya saca : palla tesar3ha  /  yAvaraghauhavigalAyavesu
paNasIisayamayarA  /  / 56 //  apaDhamasaMghayaNAgidakhagaI
amicchadubhagathItigaM  /  niya naSu ithi dutosa paNivisu abadhAMTha paramA  //
5 //  _ zabdArtha tirinarayati tiryarkatraka aura narakanika, joyANaM yAta
nAmakama kA, narabhavajuya  /  manuSya bhava sahita, saghaupalla- kAra yApama
mahita tesa saTha (adhika nau sAgamana, thAvaracau - sthAvara catuSka.
ivigalAyace-ekAndraya, vikanendriya aura Atapa nAmakarma meM, paNasIisaye- eka
nau pacAsI, ayr| -sAgaropama  /  _ apadamasaMghayaNAgiikhagava--pahale ke sivAya
zeSa saMinana aura saMsthAna aura vihAyogati, aNaanaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya,
micchamithyAtva mohanIca, bhagayoNa tirga-dubhaMgaNika styAnaditrika, niya-nIca
gotra, naputthi = nasakaveda, strIveda, butI-basIma (narabhavasahita ekasau
battIsa sAgaropama), paNivisu-paMcendriya meM, abandhandhi-avandha sthiti,
paramAutkRSTa  /  _ gAyArtha -tiyaMtratrika, narakatrika aura udyota nAmakarma
kA manuSya bhava sahita cAra palyopama adhika ekasau nesaTha

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 201  The **Sagaropama** is the **utkrista
avandhakala** (highest state of non-attachment). A human being with **sthavar
chatushk**, **ekendriya jati**, **vikaleindriya**, and **athap** **namakarma**,
along with **bhav** (existence), should know that the **utkrista avandhakala**
is **145 Sagaropama** more than **four Palyopama**.  Firstly, except for
**sanhanan**, **sansthan**, and **vihayogati**, the remaining **five sanhanan**,
**five sansthan**, **vihayogati**, **anantaanubandhi kshaya**, **mithyatva
mohaniya**, **durbhagtrik**, **neech gotra**, **napuंसक ved**, and **stri ved**
have a state of non-attachment of **132 Sagaropama** along with **bhav**
(existence). One should know the state of non-attachment of these **prakritis**
in **panchendriya** (five senses).  **Special Note:** In these two **gamas**
(verses), the names of those **uttar kritis** (actions) are mentioned whose
**utkrista avandhakala** is in **panchendriya**. The total number of these
**prakritis** is **41**, which are capable of binding in the first and second
**gunasthan** (stages of spiritual progress). Sixteen **prakritis** are capable
of binding in the first **gunasthan**, and twenty-five in the second. In
summary, the binding of these **41 prakritis** occurs only in those beings who
are in the first or second **gunasthan**. Those beings who move beyond these
**gunasthan** do not experience the binding of these **41 prakritis** until they
return to those **gunasthan**. Only **panchendriya** beings progress beyond the
second **gunasthan**. **Ekendriya** and **vikaleindriya** beings do not have
**gunasthan** beyond the first and second. Therefore, the **avandhakala** of the
**41 prakritis** mentioned in the **gama** is explained in relation to
**panchendriya** beings.  However, it should be kept in mind that those
**panchendriya** beings who become **samyagdristi** (enlightened) do not
experience the binding of these **41 prakritis**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 201 sAgaropama utkRSTa abandhakAla hai  /
sthAvaracatuSka, ekendriya jAti, vikalendriya aura Atapa nAmakarma kA manuSya
bhatra sahita cAra palyopama adhika ekasau pacAsI sAgaropama utkRSTa avandhakAla
jAnanA caahie| pahale saMhanana aura saMsthAna va bihAyogati ke sivAya zeSa
pAMca saMhanana, pAMca saMsthAna, vihAyogati, anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya, mithyAtva
mohanIya, durbhagatrika, nIca gotra, napuMsaka veda aura strI veda kI
abaMdhasthiti manuSya bhava sahita ekaso battIsa sAgaropama hai| ina prakRtiyoM
kI abaMdhasthiti paMce. ndriya meM jAnanA caahiye| vizeSArtha-ina do gAmAoM meM
una utAra kRtiyoM ke nAma - lAye haiM jinakA utkRSTa abandhakAla paMcendriyoM
meM hai| ina prakRtiyoM kI kula saMkhyA 41 hai jo pahale aura dUsare guNasthAna
meM baMdhayogya hai  /  pahale guNasthAna meM baMdhayogya solaha aura dUsare
guNasthAna meM baMdhayogya paccIsa prakRtiyAM haiM  /  sArAMza yaha hai ki ina
ikatAlIsa prakRtiyoM kA baMdha unhIM jIvoM ko hotA hai jo pahale athavA dUsare
guNasthAna meM hote haiM  /  jo jIva ina guNasthAnoM ko chor3akara Age bar3ha
jAte haiM, unake ukta ikatAlIsa prakRtiyoM kA baMdha taba taka nahIM hotA hai
jaba taka ve punaH una guNasthAnoM meM nahIM Ate haiN| dUsare guNasthAna se Age
paMcendriya jIva hI bar3hate haiM  /  ekendriya aura vikalendriyoM ke pahale,
dUsare ke sivAya Age ke guNasthAna nahIM hote haiN| isIlie gAthA meM batAI gaI
ikatAlIsa prakRtiyoM ke abandhakAla ko paMcendriya jIvoM kI apekSA batalAyA hai|
lekina yaha dhyAna meM rakhanA cAhiye ki jo paMcendriya jIva samyagdRSTi ho jAte
haiM, unake to ukta ikatAlIsa prakRtiyoM kA baMdha

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shataka  It is not possible for the karmas to be shed unless the being falls
from Samyaktva and enters the first or second Gunasthan. However, even after
entering the first or second Gunasthan, sometimes these karmas do not bind.
Keeping all these points in mind, the excellent Abandhkal (time of non-binding)
of these karmas is explained in these two verses.  These forty-one karmas are
divided into three parts and their Abandhkal is explained. The first part
includes seven karmas, the second part includes nine karmas, and the third part
includes twenty-five karmas. The names of the seven karmas included in the first
part are: Tiryanchantik (Tiryanchati, Tiryanchanupurvi, Niyantrayu), Naraknik
(Narakgati, Narakanupurvi, Narakayu) and Udyotu.  The excellent Abandhkal of
these karmas is explained as follows: A being with a lifespan of three Palyas is
born in the Devakuru Bhogbhumi. There, these seven karmas do not bind to him.
Because these seven karmas are related to Narak, Tiryanch Gati, and Bhocch.
Therefore, these karmas bind only to those who can be born in Narakgati or
Tiryanch Gati. However, the beings in Bhogbhumi, after death, become Devas
according to their Karma. Therefore, these karmas related to Narak, Tiryanch
Gati do not bind to them.   After that, in Bhogbhumi, he attains Samyaktva and
is born as a Deva with a lifespan of one Palyas. Therefore, due to Samyaktva, he
does not bind these seven karmas there either. After that, he dies in Devagati
while being in Samyaktva and is born in Manushya Gati. He then takes Diksha and
becomes a Navam Veyak Deva with a lifespan of 31 Sagaraopam. At the end of his
birth, he loses Samyaktva and becomes a Mithyadristi. Even after becoming a
Mithyadristi, these seven karmas do not bind to him from birth because he is a
Navam Veyak Deva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka taba naka nahIM ho sakatA jaba taka ve samyaktva se cyuta hokara pahale
athavA dUsare guNasthAna meM nahIM Ate. kintu pahale athavA dUsare guNasthAna me
Ane para bhI kabhI-kabhI ukta prakRtiyAM nahIM baMdhatI haiM  /  ina saba bAtoM
ko dhyAna meM rakhakara ukta prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa abandhakAla ko ina do gAthAoM
meM batalAyA hai| ina ikatAlIsa prakRtiyoM ko tIna bhAgoM meM vibhAjita kara
abaMdhakAla batalAyA hai  /  pahale bhAga meM sAta, dUsare bhAga meM nau aura
tIsare bhAga meM paccIsa prakRtiyoM kA grahaNa kiyA hai  /  pahale bhAga meM
grahaNa kI gaI nAta prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM-tiryaMcantrika
(tiryaMcati, tiryaMcAnupUrvI niyaMtrAyu), narakanika (narakagati, narakAnupUrvI,
narakAyu) aura udyotu  /  TanakA utkRSTa abandhakAla-narabhavajuyaM sacauparala
tesajheMmanuSya bhava mahita cAra palya adhika eka sau besaTha sAgaropama
batalAyA hai  /  jimakA spaSTIkaraNa nimna prakAra hai - koI jIva tIna palya kI
Ayu bAMdhakara devakuru bhogabhUmi meM utpanna huaa| vahAM usake ukta sAta
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai| kyoMki ye sAta prakRtiyAM naraka, tiryaMca
gati bocca , ataH ina prakRtiyoM kA baMdha vahI karatA hai jo narakagati yA
tiyaMcagati meM janma le sakatA hai  /  kintu bhogabhUmija jIva marakara niyama
ma deva hI hote haiN| ataH ina naraka, tiryatra gati yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
nahIM karate haiN| isake bAda bhogabhUmi meM samyaktva ko prApta karake vaha
eka. palya kI sthiti vAle devoM meM utpana huA, ataH mamyaktva hone ke kAraNa
vahAM bhI usane ukta sAta prakRtiyoM kA baMdha nahIM kiyaa| isake bAda devagati
meM samyaktva mahita maraNa karake manupyati meM janma lekara aura dIkSA dhAraNa
kara nauveM gna veyaka meM 31 sAgarApama ko jiyota bAlA deva huA  /  utpanna
hone ke antamuhUrta ke yAda samyaktva kA vamana karake mithyA dRSTi ho gayA  /
mithyAiSTi ho jAne para bhI maveyaka devoM ke ukta sAta prakRtiyAM janma se ho
na baMdhane

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Panam Karmagranth  Because of this, his bondage did not occur. There, at the
time of death, he attained **Kshayopaśama Samyaktva** and was born in
**Manayagati**, where he took on the **Mahavana** and was born twice in
**Vijayādik**. He then became a human again. There, he deviated from
**Samyaktva** for the final moment and went to the **third mixed Gunasthāna**.
He again attained **Kshayopaśama Samyaktva** and was born three times in
**Achyuta Svarga**. Thus, there are 31 **Sāgara** of **Veyaka**, 66 **Māgara**
from being born twice in **Vijayādik**, and 66 **Sāgara** from being born three
times in **Achyuta Svarga**, totaling 163 **Sāgara**. To this, we should add the
lifespan of **Devakuru** and **Bhogabhūmija**, which is three **Palla**, and the
lifespan of **Devagati**, which is one **Palla**, making a total of four
**Palla**. We should also add the time spent in human births, making a total of
four **Palla** plus one hundred and sixty-three **Sāgara**, which is the
**Abandha Kāla** of the seven **Prakṛti**.  According to the **Prāthika** view,
a being can fall from the **fourth Gunasthāna** to the **third Gunasthāna**.
However, the **Maiddhanthika** view contradicts this. **Miśra Gunasthāna** is
not a place where a being can fall from **Samyaktva** into **Mithyātva**.
**Paliyāi tini bhogāṇimmi mama paccayam paliya megam. Sohamme mamman narabhave
sab viraiṇ.**  **Miśśī bhavapaccapano neviuje sāgarāiṁ igatoś. Aṁśamukhnunāi
sammattam tammi lihiṇam.**  **Virayanar apavanarimō aguttagamagae 7 aaya
chāuṭṭī. Miśa mahattamegam kāmiya maṇulo puṇo vigōṁ.**  **Chāuṭṭī ayaṇam
achyuaye virayan rabhavantaritō. Tirinaravatigujjoyāṇ es kālo abandhami.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 panama karmagrantha ke kAraNa unakA baMdha nahIM huA  /  vahAM marate samaya
kSayopazama samyaktva ko prApta karake manAyagati meM janma lekara mahAvana
dhAraNa karake do bAra vijayAdika meM janma lekara punaH manuSya huaa| vahAM
antamuhUrta ke liye samyakatva se cyuta hokara tIsare mizra guNasthAna' meM calA
gayA  /  punaH kSayopazama samyaktva ko prApta karake tIna bAra acyuta svarga
meM janma liyaa| isa prakAra veyaka ke 31 sAgara, bijayAdika meM do bAra janma
lene ke 66 mAgara aura tIna bAra acyuta svarga meM janma lene se vahAM ke 66
sAgara milAne se 163 sAgara hote haiN| isameM devakuru bhogabhumija kI Ayu tIna
palla, devagati ko Ayu eka palya isa prakAra cAra palya aura milA denA cAhie  /
bIca meM jo manuSyabhava dhAraNa kiye unheM bhI usameM jor3akara manuSyabhava
sahita cAra palpa adhika eka sau saTha sAgaropama ukta sAta prakRtiyoM kA
abaMdhakAla hotA hai  /  1 kA prathika mata se cautha guNasthAna se dhuta hokara
jIva tIsare guNasthAna meM pA sakatA hai  /  lekina maiddhAMtika mala isake
viruddha haimicchatA maMkatI aviruddhA hoI sammamI se mu  /  mIsAi vA do sammA
minchana uNa mIsa || -hatka- bhASya 114 - jIva mithyAtva guNasthAna me vIga aura
coye guNasthAna meM jA sakatA hai, isameM koI virodha nahIM haiM tathA mizra
gRNasthAna se bhI pahale aura cauthe guNasthAna meM jA sakatA hai, kiMtu
samyamAna ne cyusa hokara mithyAtva meM jA sakatA hai. mizra guNasthAna meM
nahIM jA sakatA hai| paliyAI tini bhogANimmi mamapaccayaM paliya megaM  /
sohamme mammaNa narabhave saba viraINa  //  micchI bhavapaccapano neviuje
sAgarAiM igatosa  /  aMzamukhnuNAI sammattaM tammi lihiNaM  //
virayanarapavanarimo aguttagmage 7 ayara chAtraTTI  /  misa mahattamegaM kAmiya
maNulo puNo vigoM  //  chAuTuI ayANaM accuyae virayana rabhavaMtarito  /
tirinaravatigujjoyANa esa kAlo abaMdhami  /  /

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 212 ## Matak  The statement in the Veyak that describes the fall from
Samyaktv during this Abandhkal is made because the peak time of Kshayopaśamika
Samyaktv is 66 Sagars. Similarly, the statement in Vijayādik that describes the
transition to the third Gunasthan for the final moment in the human realm after
66 Sagars is also made because of the completion of 66 Sagars of Samyaktv. The
peak state of Kshayopaśamika Samyaktv is 66 Sagars.  The second part includes
the four categories of stationary beings (sthāvar, sūkshma, aparyāpta, and
sādhāraṇa), the one-sensory, the impaired, the mind-like, the mother-like, and
the Ātap. These nine natures are either one-sensory or impaired. Their peak
Abandhkal is stated to be 185 Sagars plus four Palyas, including the human
realm. This is how it is: A being is born in the sixth hell with the state of 22
Sagars. There is no bondage of these natures there. Because after leaving hell,
the being becomes a five-sensory, sufficient, sentient being, not one-sensory or
impaired. At the time of death, it attains Samyaktv and is born in the human
realm. It dies as an Anuvrati and is born among the gods who have a lifespan of
four Palyas. From there, it is born in the human realm and, after attaining
Mahāvat, becomes a god in the ninth Veyak with the state of 31 Sagars. After the
final moment, it becomes Mithyāiṣṭi. At the end, it attains Samyādṛṣṭi and is
born in the human realm. It then attains Mahāvat and is born twice in Vijayādik,
thus completing 66 Sagars. As before, it becomes Sambhag-Mithyāiṣṭi for the
final moment in the human realm and then attains Samyaktv again. It is born
three times in the Achyut heaven, thus completing 66 Sagars for the second time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 212 mataka isa abandhakAla ko batalAne meM jo veyaka meM samyaktva se patana
batalAyA hai, vaha kSAyopamika samyaktvakA utkRSTa kAla 66 sAgara pUrA ho jAne
ke kAraNa batalAyA, hai  /  isI prakAra vijayAdika meM 66 sAgara pUrNa kara lene
ke bAda manuSya bhava meM jo antamuhUrta ke lie tIsare guNasthAna meM gamana
batalAyA hai, vaha bhI samyaktva ke 66 sAgara pUre ho jAne ke kAraNa hI batalAyA
hai| kSAyopazamika samyaktva kI utkRSTa sthiti 66 sAgara hai| dUsare bhAga meM
sthAvaracatuSka (sthAvara, sUkSma, aparyApta aura sAdhAraNa), ekendriya,
vikalatrika manonimA mAturingi) aura Atapa ina nau prakRtiyoM ko grahaNa kiyA
hai| ye nau prakRtiyAM ekendriya yA vikalendriya prAyogya haiN| inakA utkRSTa
abandhakAla manuSya bhava sahita cAra palya adhika eka sau pacAsI sAgara
batalAyA hai | jo isa prakAra hai-koI jIva 22 sAgara kI sthiti ko lekara chaThe
naraka meM utpanna huA  /  vahA~ ina prakRttiyoM kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai|
kyoMki naraka se nikalakara jIva saMzI paMcendriya paryAptaka hotA hai,
ekendriya yA vikalendriya nhiiN| vahAM marate samaya samyaktva ko prApta karake
manuSyagati meM janma huA aura aNuvratI hokara maraNa karake cAra palya kI Ayu
vAle devoM meM utpanna huaa| vahAM se cyuta hokara manuSya paryAya meM janma
lekara mahAvata dhAraNa karake nauveM maveyaka meM ikatIsa sAgara kI sthiti vAlA
deva huaa| vahAM antamuhUrta ke bAda mithyAiSTi ho gyaa| anta samaya meM
samyAdRSTi hokara manuSya paryAya meM janma lekara mahAbata pAlana karake do
bAra vijayAdika meM utpanna huA aura isa prakAra 66 sAgara pUre kiye | pahale kI
taraha manuSya paryAya meM antamuhUrta ke liye sambagmithyAiSTi hokara punaH
samyaktva ko prApta karake tIna bAra acyuta svarga meM utpanna huA aura isa
prakAra dUsarI bAra 66 sAgara pUrNa

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **"The total of all these periods, including the
human existence, is 185 Sagaras, which is the highest Abandhakal for the four
Palyas, plus 22 + 31 + 66 ÷ 66 = 185 Sagaras."**  The third section lists the
names of the 25 Prakṛtis that were taken: Ṛṣabhanārāca, Nārāca, Ardhanārāca,
Kīlikā, Sevārta, Sanhanana, Nyagrodha, Sādi, Vāmana, Kubja, Huṇḍa, Sansthāna,
Aśubha, Vihāyogati, Anantānubandhī, Krodha, Māna, Māyā, Lobha, Mithyātva,
Dubhang, Duḥsvara, Anādeya, Nidrānidrā, Pracala, Rahayānakī, Nīca, Napuṁ,
Strīveda.  **"The Abandhakal for these twenty-five Prakṛtis, including the human
existence, is 132 Sagaras. This should be understood as follows: A being, after
attaining Mahāvrat and dying, is born twice in Vijaya, etc., and thus completes
the highest period of Samyaktva, which is 66 Sagaras. Again, in the human
existence, it comes to the mixed Guṇasthāna for a moment and then attains
Samyaktva again, and is born three times in Acyuta heaven, completing the period
of Samyaktva for the second time, which is 66 Sagaras. Thus, 66 + 66 = 132.
Therefore, the highest Abandhakal for the said twenty-five Prakṛtis, including
the human existence, is 132 Sagaras."**  Having explained the highest Abandhakal
for the said forty-one Prakṛtis, we now explain the highest Abandhakal for the
said Prakṛtis.  **"The twenty-two: 1. The six Neraiyo Bhava-paccayo, the upper
defao, and the Bhavidam Paliyacakkam in the first Kalpa. The Pubbatakāla-joga is
Pancha-tiya, Samya, Sac-upalakṣa. Ayadathāvara-cau-vigalatīya, Gaye, Ginḍiya."**
**"2. The twenty-nine Abandha, the highest, is attained by the Sammasīsa-juē.
Basī, Sayamaya-rā, two Vijaya, and three Bhava."**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha kiye| ina saba kAloM ko jor3ane se manuSya bhava sahita
cAra palya adhika 22 + 31 +66/66= 185 sAgara utkRSTa abandhakAla hotA hai  / "
tIsare bhAga meM grahaNa kI gaI 25 prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM -
RSabhanArAca, nArAca, ardhanArAca kIlikA, sevArta saMhanana, nyagrodha, sAdi,
vAmana, kubja, huNDa saMsthAna, azubha vihAyogati, anaMtAnubaMdhI krodha, mAna,
mAyA, lobha, mithyAtva, dubhaMga, duHsvara, anAdeya, nidrAnidrA, pracala
rahayAnaki, nIca, napuM strIveda | ina paccIsa prakRtiyoM kA abandhakAla
manuSyabhava sahita 132 sAgara hai  /  jo isa prakAra jAnanA cAhie ki koI jIva
mahAvrata dhAraNa kara marakara do bAra vijayAdika meM utpanna huA aura isa
prakAra samyaktva kA utkRSTa kAla 66 sAgara pUrNa kiyA  /  punaH manuSyabhava
meM antarmuhUrta ke liye mizra guNasthAna meM Akara aura punaH samyaktva prApta
karake tIna bAra acyuta svarga meM janma lekara dUsarI bAra samyaktva kA kAla 66
sAgara pUrNa kiyA | isa prakAra 66 + 66 - 132 hue  /  isIliye ukta paccIsa
prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa abandhakAla manuSyabhava sahita 132 sAgara hotA hai  /
isa prakAra se ukta ikatAlIsa prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa abandhakAla batalAkara aba
Age yaha batalAte haiM ki ukta prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa bAvIsa | 1 chaTTIe neraio
bhavapaccayao u apara defao ya bhaviDaM paliyacakkaM paDhamakappe |
pubvatakAlajogo paMcAtIya sayaM sacaupalkSaM  /  AyadathAvaracauvigalatiya gae
giMdiya abaMdho 2 paNavIsAe abaMdho ukkoso hoi sammasIsajue  /  basI sayamayarA,
do vijae abue tibhavA  /  /

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 214  Why are there 193 Sagaras in the Abandhakal of the Sagara Adi? And what
is the most excellent and the most inferior proof of the continuous Abandhakal
of the Anubandhini Prakrutis?  **Verse 58:**  **Vijayadi Vijje Tamai Dahisay
Butos Tesaram. Panasi Sayaybandhi Pallatigam Suravidviduge.**  **Word Meaning:**
* **Vijayadi:**  The state of being victorious, like the Vijaya, Vaijayanta,
Jayanta, and Aparajita Vimanas. * **Tamai:**  The state of being in darkness,
like the Tamas Prabha Naraka. * **Dahisay:**  One hundred. * **Butos:**  Thirty-
two. * **Tesaram:**  Sixty-four. * **Panasi:**  One hundred and fifty. *
**Sayaybandhi:**  Continuous Abandhakal. * **Pallatigam:**  Three Palyas. *
**Suravidviduge:**  Devadvika and Vaikriyadvika.  **Verse Meaning:**  The most
excellent Abandhakal of a Jiva who has gone to the Vijayadi and the Tamas Prabha
and Graiveyaka is one hundred and thirty-two, one hundred and sixty-four, and
one hundred and fifty Sagaras respectively, including the Manushya Bhav. The
continuous Abandhakal of the Devadvika and Vaikriyadvika is three Palyas.
**Special Meaning:**  The previous two verses explained the most excellent
Abandhakal of the 41 Prakrutis. This verse indicates how that happens and also
mentions the continuous Abandhakal of some of the 73 Adhruvabandhini Prakrutis.
Although the explanation of Akal has been given in the meaning of the previous
two verses, it is repeated here for the sake of the context.  One hundred and
thirty-two Sagaras are like this: When a Jiva takes birth twice in one of the
Vijaya, Vaijayanta, Jayanta, and Aparajita Vimanas, then 66 Sagaras are
completed in one birth. Then, for the duration of an Antarmuhurta, the Jiva
comes to the third Gunasthan and then again takes birth three times in the
Achyuta Svarga.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 214 abandhakAla 193 sAgara Adi kyoM hai ? aura anubaMdhinI prakRtiyoM ke
nirantara baMdhakAla kA jaghanya aura utkRSTa pramANa kyA hai ? vijayAi vijje
tamAi dahisaya butosa tesaraM  /  paNasI sayayabaMdhI pallatigaM suravidviduge
//  58  //  zabdArtha bilama meM meM, namAI tamaHprabhA naraka meM dahisaya eka
sau sAgaropama dutIsa paNasI - pacAmI sAmanema, tIna palpa, suravivi P battIsa
tesa tresaTha sAgaropama, samayabaMdhI nirantara baMdha pallatigaM suradvika
aura vaikriyadvika meM | zatakra - 115 gAthArtha - vijayAdika meM bevaka aura
vijayAdika meM tathA tamaH prabhA aura graiveyaka meM gaye jIva kI utkRSTa
abandhasthiti anukrama se eka so battIsa, eka sau va saTha aura eka sau pacAsI
sAgaropama manuSyabhava sahita hotI hai| devadvika aura vaikriryAdaka kA
nirantara baMdhakAla tIna palya hai  /  vizeSArtha - isase pUrva kI do gAthAoM
meM jo 41 prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa abandhakAla batalAyA vaha kisa prakAra ghaTita
hotA hai, isakA.. saMketa yahAM kiyA gayA hai tathA adhruvabaMdhinI tihattara
prakRtiyoM meM se kucha prakRtiyoM ke nirantara baMdhakAla ko batalAyA hai  /
yadyapi akAla kA spaSTIkaraNa pUrva ko do gAthAoM ke bhAvArtha meM kara diyA
gayA hai, tathApi prasaMgavazAt punaH yahAM bhI karate haiM  /  eka sau battIsa
sAgara isa prakAra hote haiM ki vijaya, vaijayanta, jayanta aura aparAjita
vimAnoM meM se kisI eka vimAna meM do bAra janma lene para eka bAra ke 66 sAgara
pUrNa hote haiM  /  phira antarmuhUrta ke liye tIsare guNasthAna meM Akara punaH
acyuta svarga meM tIna bAra

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Text ### 215  Sixty-six Sagaras are completed when a being
takes birth for the second time. When a being is born in the Vijayadik category,
132 Sagaras are completed.  One hundred and sixty-six Sagaras are completed in
this way: A being, after experiencing thirty-one Sagaras in the ninth *Praveyak*
(realm of existence), is expelled from there and takes birth in the human realm.
Then, after going twice to the Vijayadik category and completing sixty-six
Sagaras twice, one hundred and sixty-six Sagaras are completed.  One hundred and
seventy-five Sagaras are completed in this way: A being, after completing
twenty-two Sagaras in the sixth hell called *Tamahprabha*, experiences thirty-
one Sagaras in the ninth *Praveyak*, and then completes sixty-six Sagaras twice
in the Vijayadik category, thus completing a period of one hundred and seventy-
five Sagaras.  In this way, the forty-one *Prakritis* (categories of karma) do
not bind the five-sensed being for more than this period.  Beginning the
discussion of the least and greatest duration of the continuous binding of the
*Adhruvabandhini* *Prakritis* (categories of karma), we first explain the
greatest duration of binding: The *Pallati* (a unit of time), *Survi* (a unit of
time), *Undhidu* (a unit of time), and *Ge* (a unit of time) - that is, the
*Devadvik* (heavenly realm and its precursor) and *Vaikriyadrik* (Vaikriya body
and its limbs) - these four *Prakritis* can be bound for a maximum of three
*Pallyas* if their binding remains constant. The reason for this is that the
*Bhogabhumij* (those who experience the fruits of their karma) beings, from
birth, bind these four *Prakritis* for a period of three *Pallyas*. Because the
*Bhogabhumij* beings do not bind the *Prakritis* of *Namakarma* (karma that
determines the nature of the soul) that are responsible for the hell, *Tiyantra*
(intermediate realm), and human realms, even if there is a difference in the
results, these four *Prakritis* are not bound by any opposing *Prakriti*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karma grantha 215 janma lene meM dUsarI bAra ke 66 sAgara pUrNa hote
haiN| hama prakAra vijayAdika meM janma lene se 132 sAgara pUrNa hote haiN| eka
sau saTha sAgara isa prakAra hote haiM ki nauveM graM vebaka meM ikatIsa sAgara
kI Ayu bhogakara vahAM se cyuta hokara manuSyagati meM janma lekara pUrva kI
taraha bijayAdika meM do bAra jAne se do bAra chiyAsaTha mAgara pUrNa karane
para eka sau vesaTha sAgara pUrNa hote haiN| eka sau pacAsI sAgara hone ke liye
isa prakAra samajhanA cAhie ki tamaHprabhA nAmaka chaThe naraka meM bAIsa sAgara
kI sthiti pUrNa kara usake bAda naubeM praveyaka meM ikatIsa sAgara kI Ayu
bhogakara usake bAda vijayAdika meM do bAra chiyAsaTha sAgara pUre karane se eka
mau pacAsI sAgara kA antarAla hotA hai  /  /  isa prakAra ikatAlIsa prakRtiyAM
adhika-se-adhika itane kAla taka paMcendriya jIva ke baMdha ko prApta nahIM hotI
haiN| adhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyoM ke nirantara baMdhakAla ke jaghanya va utkRSTa
pramANa kA vivecana prAraMbha karate hue sarvaprathama utkRSTa baMdhakAla
batalAte ki :-pallatigaM suraviundhiduge yAnI devadvika (devagati aura
devAnupUrvI) tathA vaikriyAdrika (vaikriya' zarIra, vaikriya aMgopAMga) ina cAra
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha yadi barAbara hotA rahe to adhika-se-adhika tIna palya'
taka ho sakatA hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki bhogabhUmija jIva janma se hI
devati ke yogya ina cAra prakRtiyoM ko tIna palyopama kAla taka barAbara
bAMdhate haiN| kyoMki bhogabhumija jIvoM ke narakA, tiyaMtra aura manavagati ke
yogya nAmakarma kI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai| isalie pariNAmoM meM
antara par3ane para bhI ina cAra prakRtiyoM kI kisI virodhinI prakRti kA baMdha
nahIM hotA hai|

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
216 The next four verses enumerate the remaining karmas and describe the
duration of their continuous bondage.  Samayādasamkhakāla tiriyuganoesa āu
antamūha. Uvali asamkhapariattā sāyaṭhī purusakkoṇā ||563|| From one moment to
countless time periods, the duration of bondage for the karmas of the three-gati
and lower-gati beings is up to the end of life.  Jalahalayaṃ paṇasīya paraghussa
se paṇivitasacca uge. Battīsa suvihagamasuhagāṃta guccacarase ||60|| The
duration of bondage for the karmas of one-sensed beings, fifty-five-bodied
beings, and the karmas that cause injury and breathing is up to thirty-two
auspicious celestial births.  Asukhagaijā āṇi saṃghayaṇāhāranassayoyagaṃ. Thira
subhajasthāvara dasara puhatthoiyalamāsāyaṃ ||61|| The duration of bondage for
the karmas leading to inauspicious gati, the karmas of five-sensed beings with
no samyaktva, and the karmas of immovable beings is up to ten auspicious births
in the Pṛthivīkāya.  Samayādatamuhusaṃ maṇudurga jiṇavahara uralavaṃgesu.
Tittosayarā paramā antamūha lahū vi āujine ||66|| From one moment to the end of
life, the duration of bondage for the karmas of human beings, celestial beings,
and Jina-abiding ascetics is up to the end of life, even if it is a short
lifespan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 216 aba Age kI cAra gAthAoM meM zeSa prakRtiyoM ke nAma ginAkara unake
nirantara baMdha ke samaya ko batalAte haiM  /  samayAdasaMkhakAla tiriduganIesu
Au aMtamuha  /  urali asaMkhaparaTTA sAryAThaI puruSa koNA  // 563 jalahilayaM
paNasIya paraghussA se paNivitasaca uge  /  battosa suvihagamasubhagAMta
guccacarase  // 60 //  asukhagaijA ANi saMghayaNAhAranazyaoyagaM  /  thira
subhajasthAvara dasara puhatthoyalamasAyaM  //  61 //  samayAdatamuhusaM
maNudurga jiNavahara uralavaMgesu  /  tittosayarA paramA aMtamUha lahU vi AujiNe
//  66  //  zabdArtha - samayAdasaMkhakAlaM - eka samaya se lekara asaMkhya kAla
taka, tiriyuganoesa tiyaMtradvika aura nIcagotra kA Aja Ayukarma kA aMtamuha-
mantarmuhUrta taka, uli - audArika zarIra kA asaMkha paraTTA - asaMkhyAta
pudgala parAvarta, sAyaThiI -- sAtAvedanIya kA baMdha, puruSakogA- pUrva koTi
varSa se nyUna | -- r jalahilayaM - eka sau sAgaroyama, paNasIyaM pacAsI
paraghussA se parAghAta aura ucchavAsa nAmakarma kA paNidi paMcendriya jAti kA,
tasaca camacatuSka kA battIsaM - battIsa, mu~havihagaDha zubha vihAyogati, puma-
puruSa veda, subhagaliMga - subhagatrika, ucca - uccagotra, cauraMse
samacaturasrasaMsthAna kA  /  - asukhagadda - azubha vihAyogati, jAi ekedriya
Adi caturindriya taka jAti, Agi saMghayaNa - pahale ke sivAya pAMca saMsthAna
aura pAMca maMhanana, AhAranarayajayadurga- AhArakadvika, narakaki, udyotaThika
thirasubhagasa sthira, zubha, yazaH kaurti nAma, zataka --

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **Thairaas** - Stationary Vanaak, **Napuththi** -
Neuter Veda, Female Veda, **Bujuyal** - Two Yugal, **Asap** - Asata Vedaniya.
**Samayaadatumuhsan** - From one moment to the end of the Muhurta, **Manukug** -
Manushya Tiff, **Jin** - Tirthankara Naamakarma. **Badar** - Inrishabhanaraach
Sanhanan, **Uraluvange** - Audarik Angopaang, **Tittsiysara** - Thirty-three
Sagaropama, **Paramo** - Excellent Bandh, **Antamuha** - Antamuhurta, **Lahu** -
Inferior Bandh. **Majine** - Ayukarma and Tirthankara Naamakarma.  **Gaaparth**
-  Tiyanchdvik and Neecha Gotra have continuous Bandh from one moment to
countless time. Ayukarma has continuous Bandh from the end of the Muhurta,
Audarik body has continuous Bandh for countless Pudgal Paravarta, and Saata
Vedaniya has continuous Bandh for a little less than the previous Koti.
**Paraghāt**, **Uchchvāsa**, **Panchendriya Jaati** and **Asachatuska** have
continuous Bandh for one hundred and forty-five Sagaropama. **Shubh
Vihayogati**, **Purush Veda**, **Subhagatrik**, **Uchch Gotra** and
**Samachaturasra Sansthan** have excellent continuous Bandh for one hundred and
thirty-two Sagaropama.  **Ashubh Vihayogati**, **Ekendiya** to **Chaturindriya**
Ashubh Jaatichatushka, five Sansthan except the previous ones, five Sanhanan,
**Aharakdvik**, **Narakdvik**, **Udyotdvik**, **Sthir**, **Shubh**, **Yash:Kirti
Naamakarma**, **Sthavar Dashak**, **Napunsakveda**, **Streeveda**, two Yugal and
**Asata Vedaniya** have continuous Bandh from one moment to the end of the
Muhurta. **Manushyadvik**, **Tirthankara Naamakarma**,
**Vachchrishabhanaraach...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha thAyarasa sthAvara vaNaka, naputthI - napuMsaka veda, strI
veda, bujuyala - do yugala, asApa asAtA vedanIya kaa| _ samayAdatamuhasaM-eka
samaya se lekara antarmuhUrta paryanta, maNukuga- manuSyatipha, jiNa-tIrthaMkara
nAmakarma. badara-inaRSabhanArAca saMhanana, uraluvaMge audArika aMgopAMga kA,
tittIsayarA-tetIsa sAgaropama, paramo-utkRSTa baMdha, aMtamuha antamuMhataM,
lahuHvi .. jaghanya baMdha bhI, mAjiNe-Ayukarma aura tIrthakara nAma kaa|
gApArtha--tiyaMcadvika aura nIca gotra kA eka samaya se lekara asaMkhyAta kAla
taka niraMtara baMdha hotA hai  /  Ayukarma kA antamuhUrta, audArika zarIra kA
asaMkhyAta pudgala parAvarta aura sAtA vedanIya kA kucha kama pUrva kor3I taka
niraMtara baMdha hotA hai| parAghAta, ucchvAsa, paMcendriya jAti aura asacatuSka
kA ekasau pacAsI sAgaropama niraMtara baMdha hotA hai  /  zubha vihAyogati,
puruSa veda, subhagatrika, ucca gotra aura samacaturasra saMsthAna kA utkRSTa
niraMtara baMdha eka sau battIsa sAgaropama hotA hai| azubha vihAyogati,
ekendriya se caturindriya taka azubha jAticatuSka, pahale ke sivAya pAMca
saMsthAna, pAMca saMhanana, AhArakadvika, narakadvika, udyotadvika, sthira,
zubha, yaza:kIrti nAmakarma, sthAbara dazaka, napuMsakaveda, strIveda, do yugala
aura asAtA vedanIya kA eka samaya se lekara antamuhRtaM paryanta niraMtara
baMdha hotA hai  /  manuSyadvika, tIrthakara nAmakarma, vaccaRSabhanArAca

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 21  There is a continuous, excellent binding of the thirty-three
Sagaropama, which are the **Sanhanan** and **Audarik Angopaanga**
**Naamakarma**. The **Chaar Aayu** and **Tirthankara Naamakarma** have a
continuous, inferior binding, which is also **Antamuhurta**.  **Special Note:**
These four verses explain the names of the **Adhruvbandhini** **Prakritis** and
the time of their continuous, excellent binding. The time of their continuous,
inferior binding is not mentioned because, being **Adhruvbandhini**, they can be
formed again after a certain time.  The continuous binding time of all
**Prakritis** is not the same. Therefore, they are classified into groups based
on their similar binding time, and their binding time is explained accordingly.
The binding time of **Tiryanchdrik** (**Tiryanchgati**, **TiryanchAnupurvi**)
and **Neecha Goon** can be from one time to countless times -
**Samayaadasankaalaan Tiriduniyaes**. This is because these three **Prakritis**
are bound for a short time from the inferior, as their opposite **Prakritis**
can be bound at other times. However, when a being is born in **Tejaskaay** and
**Vayukaay**, their **Tiryanchdrik** and **Neecha Goon** are continuously bound
as long as they remain in that state. Beings in **Tejaskaay** and **Vayukaay**
do not have any other **Gati** or **Anupurvi** binding except **Tiryanchdrik**,
nor do they have any **Uchcha Goon**. A being born in **Tejaskaay** and
**Vayukaay** traverses countless regions of **Lokakasha** and continues to be
born in **Tejaskaay** and **Vayukaay** for a very long time. Therefore, the
excellent continuous binding time of these three **Prakritis** is countless
times, i.e., ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 21 zataka saMhanana aura audArika aMgopAMga nAmakarma kA tetIsa sAgaropama
utkRSTa satata baMdha hotA hai  /  cAra Ayu aura tIrthakara nAmakarma kA
jaghanya niraMtara baMdha bhI antamuhUrta hotA hai  /  vizeSAdha- - ina cAra
gAthAoM meM adhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyoM ke nAma tathA unake niraMtara bandha hone
ke utkRSTa samaya ko batalAyA hai  /  ina prakRtiyoM ke niraMtara bandha hone ke
jaghanya samaya kA saMketa isaliye nahIM kiyA hai kyoMki adhruvabandhinI hone se
eka samaya ke bAda bhI inakA banA la mktaa| sabhI prakRtiyoM kA niraMtara
bandhakAla samAna nahIM hone se samAna samaya bAlI prakRtiyoM ke varga banAkara
una-una ke bandha kA samaya batalAyA hai  /  jinakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiye jA
rahA hai  /  tiryaMcadrika (tiryaMcagati, tiryaMcAnupUrvI) aura nIca gona kA
bandhakAla eka samaya se lekara asaMkhyAta kAla ho sakatA hai -
samayAdasaMkhakAlaM tiriduganIesa  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki ukta tIna prakRta
tiyAM jaghanya se eka samaya taka baMdhatI haiM, kyoMki dUsare samaya meM inakI
vipakSI prakutiyoM kA bandha ho sakatA hai  /  kintu jaba koI jIva tejaskAya
aura vAyukAva meM janma letA hai to usake tiyaMcadvika va nIca gotra kA
niraMtara bandha hotA rahatA hai,jaba taka vaha usa kArya meM banA rahatA hai  /
tejaskAya aura vAyukAya ke jIvoM meM tiryacadvika ke sivAya anya kisI gati aura
AnupUrvI kA bandha nahIM hotA aura na ucca gotra kA hI  /  tejaskAya ba vAyukAya
meM janma lene vAlA jIva lokAkAza ke asaMkhyAta pradeza hote haiM, adhika-se-
adhika ulane samaya taka barAbara tejasvAya va bAyukAya meM janma letA rahatA
hai | isIlie ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa nirantara bandhakAla asaMkhyAta
samaya arthAt

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Compendium ### 216  The countless ascending, descending, and
stationary souls are bound in the seven hells. These three natures are
continuously bound even in the seventh hell.  The four natures of Ayukarma -
hell, animal, human, and divine - have a very short and fleeting lifespan...
because Ayukarma is bound only once in a lifetime, and that too for a maximum of
a few moments.  The time of binding for the Audarik body, a type of Namkarma,
ranges from the lowest to the highest, and is countless Pugal Paravarta. This is
because a soul can bind the Audarik body for a period of time and then bind its
opposite, the Baakriya body, etc. The time of countless Pugal Paravarta is
considered because a soul born in a stationary body can remain in that body for
countless Pugal Paravarta. During this time, it does not bind any other body
except the Audarik.  The highest binding time for the seven Vedaniya is slightly
less than one Purva Koti. When a soul binds the seven Vedaniya for a period of
time and then binds its opposite, the Asata Vedaniya, for another period, then
its time is considered as one period. When a Karmabhoomi human, after the age of
eight, takes the Jain initiation and attains Kevalgyan, then for a period
slightly more than eight years and less than one Purva Koti, the seven Vedaniya
are continuously bound. This is because after the sixth Gunasthan, the opposite
nature of the seven Vedaniya, the Asata Vedaniya, is not bound. And the highest
lifespan of a Karmabhoomi human is one Purva Koti. Therefore...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama kamagrantha 216 arsakhyAta utsarpiNI, avasapiNI vatalAyA hai| sAtaveM
naraka meM bhI ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA nirantara bandha hotA rahatA hai| Ayukarma
kI cAroM prakRtiyoM- naraka, tiryaMca, manuSya aura devAyu kA jaghanya aura saTa
bAla tana hai... unAnhU  /  kyoMki Ayukarma kA eka bhava meM eka hI bAra baMdha
hotA hai aura vaha bhI adhika-se-adhika antarmuhUrta taka hotA rahatA hai  /
audArika zarIra nAmakarma kA eka samatra se lekara utkRSTa bandha kAla
asaMkhyAta pudgala parAvarta hai  /  kyoMki jIva eka samaya taka audA. rika
zarIra kA bandha karake dusare samaya meM usake vipakSI baikriya zarIra Adi kA
bhI bandha kara sakatA hai tathA asaMkhyAta pudagala parAvarta kA samaya isalie
mAnA jAtA hai ki sthAvarakAya meM janma lene vAlA jIva asaMkhyAta pudgala
parAvarta kAla taka sthAvarakAya meM par3A raha sakatA hai  /  taba usake
audArika ke sivAya anya kisI bhI zarIra kA bandha nahIM hotA hai| 'sAyaThiI
pubbakoDUNA' sAtA vedanIya kA utkRSTa bandhakAla kucha kama eka pUrva kodi hai|
jaba koI jIva eka samaya taka sAtA bedanIya kA bandha karake dUsare samaya meM
usakI pratipakSI asAtA bedanIya kA bandha karatA hai taba to usakA kAla eka
samaya ThaharatA hai aura jaba koI karmabhUmija manuSya ATha varSa kI umra ke
pazcAta jina dIkSA dhAraNa karake kevalajJAna prApta kara letA hai taba usake
kucha adhika ATha varSa kama eka pUrva koTi kAla taka nirantara sAtA bedanIya kA
baMdha hotA rahatA hai| kyoMki chaThe guNasthAna ke bAda sAtA vedanIya kI
virodhinI asAtA vedanIya prakRti kA bandha nahIM hotA hai tathA karmabhUmija
manuSya kI utkRSTa Ayu eka pUrva koTi ko hotI hai, ataH

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
220 Century The continuous excellent bondage period of the seven Vedaniya is
said to be one previous koti less than eight years more. The names of the
natures that bind continuously up to one hundred and fifty oceans are as follows
- 'Parghussase Panidi Tasachouge-Paraghate, Ucchvasa, Panchendriya jati and
Trasachatuska, Kul these seven natures are. Due to the Adhruvbandhini nature of
these natures, their continuous bondage period is at least one time. Because
after one time, their opposite natures take their place and the excellent
continuous bondage period is one hundred and fifty oceans. Although the verse
states that the excellent time of continuous bondage of the seven natures
mentioned is one hundred and fifty oceans and the Panchasangraha also says the
same. But four palyas should be added to it. Because the bondage period of these
is as much as the abanyakal of their opposite natures. In verse 56, the
excellent abandhakal of their opposite natures, the immovable chatushk etc., is
said to be four palyas more than one hundred and fifty sagaropama, therefore
their bondage  1 Deshotpurvakotibhavanaatvesha ih kil ko'pi purvakotiayuko
garbhastho. Na va maaman satirekan gamyayati, jato'pyashti varshaani pavat
deshaviriti parvavini va na pratipadyate, varshaashtakadho vartamansya
sarvasyaapi tathaasva. bhavyat deshatah marvato va viratipratipattabhavaat.
-Panchasangraha Malayagiridika, p. 76 2 In cha panchanu.patyam' iti anideshe'pi
'sachatulyaam' iti vyaakhyaanam kaaryam. Yato
yaavantehipaksasyabanthakaalastavaane yaasaam bandhakaal iti. Patrasangrahaadi
cha upalananadina kenachit kaaranena yannoptan tadabhipraaya na vim iti.
-Panchama Kampaspipa Teeka, p. 60

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 220 zataka sAtA vedanIya kA nirantara utkRSTa bandhakAla kucha adhika ATha
varSa kama eka pUrva koTi batalAyA hai|' eka sau pacAsI sAgara taka nirantara
bandhane vAlI prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM - 'paraghussAse paNidi
tasacauge-parAghAta, ucchvAsa, paMcendriya jAti aura trasacatuSka, kula ye sAta
prakRtiyAM haiM  /  ina prakRtiyoM ke adhruvabandhinI hone se kama-se-kama inakA
nirantara bandhakAla eka samaya hai  /  kyoMki eka samaya ke bAda inako vipakSI
prakRtiyAM inakA sthAna le letI haiM tathA utkRSTa nirantara bandhakAla ekasau
pacAsI sAgara hai| yadyapi gAthA meM ukta sAta prakRtiyoM ke nirantara bandha ke
utkRSTa samaya ko eka sau pacAsI sAgara batAyA hai aura paMcasaMgraha meM bhI
isI prakAra kahA hai  /  lekina isake sAtha cAra palya adhika aura jor3anA
cAhiye  /  kyoMki inakI pratipakSI prakRtiyoM kA jitanA abanyakAla hotA hai
utanA hI inakA bandhakAla hai| gAthA 56 meM inakI pratipakSI sthAvaracatuSka Adi
prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa abandhakAla cAra palya adhika ekasau pacAsI sAgaropama
batalAyA hai, ataH inakA bandha 1 dezotapUrvakoTibhAvanAtveSA iha kila ko'pi
pUrvakoTyAyuko garbhastho  /  na va mAmAna sAtirekAn gamayati, jAto'pyaSTI
varSANi pAvat dezavirati parvavini vA na pratipadyate, varSASTakAdadho
vartamAnasya sarvasyApi tathAsvA. bhAvyAt dezataH marvato vA
viratipratipattarabhAvAt  /  -paMcasaMgraha malayagiridhIkA, pR. 76 2 ina ca
pacanu.patyam' iti anideze'pi 'sacatulyam' iti byAkhyAnaM kAryam  /  yato
yAvAnatehipakSasyAbandhakAlastAvAne yAsAM bandhakAla iti  /  patrasaMgrahAdI ca
upalanaNAdinA kenacit kAraNena yannoptaM tadabhiprAya na vima iti  /  -paMcama
kampapa spIpA TIkA, pR060

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Compendium **221**  One should understand time in the same way.
Because it is only during their *avandha* period that their bondage can occur.
This measure of time should be understood as follows:  A being, bound by twenty-
two *sāgara* of *sthitibandha*, is born in the sixth hell. There, due to the
absence of bondage of the seven *prakṛtis* (parādhāt, etc.) and their opposing
*prakṛtis*, these seven *prakṛtis* remain continuously unbound. At the end of
their time, they attain *samyaktvā* and are born in the human realm. Here, by
observing *aṇuvrata*, they are born as a deity with four *palyas* of existence.
Dying with *samyaktvā*, they are reborn as a human. After attaining *mahāvat*
and dying, they become a deity in the ninth *veyaka*, living for thirty-one
*sāgara*. There, they die with *mithyāiṣṭi* and again attain *samyaktvā*, being
reborn as a human. From there, they die three times and are born in the
*achyuta* heaven. In this way, they complete sixty-six *sāgara*. For the final
moment, they come to the third *min* *guṇasthāna*. After that, they again attain
*samyaktvā* and are born twice in *vijayādi* realms, completing sixty-six
*sāgara*. In this way, while wandering in the sixth hell, etc., the being is
bound by the seven *prakṛtis* (parādhāt, etc.) sometimes due to *bhavasvabhāva*
and sometimes due to *samyaktvā*.  The continuous period of bondage of the seven
*prakṛtis* - *śubha vihāyogati*, *puruṣavedā*, *subhagatrika*, *ucchāgotra*, and
*samacaturastra samsthāna* - is one hundred and thirty-two *sāgara*.  **1** In
the commentary on the *Pañcasangraha*, the continuous period of bondage of these
*prakṛtis* is stated to be one hundred and thirty-two *sāgara* plus three
*palyas*. Here, it is said that a being with an existence of three *palyas*, who
is a *nirya* *aśaya* human, attains *samyaktvā* at the end of their human
existence. After that, they wander in the world for one hundred and thirty-two
*sāgara* in order.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama kamagrantha 221 kAla utanA hI samajhanA cAhiye  /  kyoMki unake
avandhakAla meM hI inakA bandha ho sakatA hai| isa samayapramANa ko isa prakAra
samajhanA cAhie ki koI jIva bAIsa sAgara pramANa sthitibaMdha karake chaThe
naraka meM utpanna huA. vahAM parAdhAta Adi ina sAta prakRtiyoM kI pratipakSI
prakRtiyoM kA bandha na hone se ina sA prakRtiyoM kA nirantara baca kiyA aura
aMtima samaya meM samyaktva ko prApta karake manuSyagati meM janma liyA  /
yahA~ aNuvratoM kA pAlana karake cAra palya kI sthiti vAle devoM meM janma liyA
aura samyaktva sahita maraNa karake punaH manuSya huA aura mahAvata dhAraNa
karake marakara nauveM veyaka meM ikatIsa sAgara kI Ayu vAlA deva huaa| vahAM
mithyAiSTi hokara marate samaya punaH samyaktva ko prApta karake manuSya huA  /
vahAM se tIna bAra maramarakara acyuta svarga meM janma liyA aura isa prakAra
chiyAsaTha sAgara pUrNa kiya  /  antamuhUrta ke lie tIsare mina guNasthAna meM
AyA aura usake bAda punaH samyaktva prApta kiyA aura do bAra vijayAdika meM
janma lekara chiyAsaTha sAgara pUrNa kiye  /  isa prakAra chaThe naraka
vagairaha meM bhramaNa karate hue jIva ko kahIM 'bhavasvabhAva se aura kahIM
samyaktva ke kAraNa parAdhAta Adi prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA rahatA hai| zubha
vihAyogati, puruSaveda, subhagatrika, uccagotra aura samacaturastra saMsthAna
ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa niraMtara bandhakAla ekasau balIsa' 1
paMcasaMgraha ko TIkA meM ina prakRtiyoM kA nirantara bandhakAla tIna palya
adhika eka sau battIsa sAgara batalAyA hai  /  yahAM kahA hai ki tIna patya kI
Ayu bAlA niryaca azayA manuSya bhava ke aMta meM samyaktva' ko prApta karake
pahale vatAra ne Rma se 132 sAgara taka saMsAra meM bhramaNa karatA hai|

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Shank** is a **Māgar**. Due to their **Anubandhini** natures,
their **Jghanya Bandhakal** is one **Samaya**, but their **Utkrisht Bandhakal**
is one hundred and thirty-two **Sāgar**. This is because in **Gāthā 57**, the
**Utkrisht Akāl** of their opposing natures is stated as one hundred and thirty-
two **Sāgar**. Therefore, their **Bandhakal** should be understood in the same
order.  The names of the forty-one **Prakritis** that bind from one **Samaya**
to **Antarmūhūrta** are as follows:  * **Ashubha Vihāyogati** * **Ashubha Jāti
Chatushk** (Ekeindriya, Dwiindriya, Bindriya, Chaturindriya) *
**Vajraṛṣabhanārāch** * **Sanhanan** (excluding the remaining five **Ashubha
Sanhanan** like **Ṛṣabhanārāva**) * **Nyagrodhaparimandala** (excluding the
remaining five **Ashubha Sansthān** like **Nyagrodhaparimandala**) *
**Āhārakalik** * **Narakadrik** * **Udyotvik** * **Sthira** * **Shubha** *
**Yasha Kirti** * **Sthāvar Dashak** * **Napumsakaved** * **Strived** *
**Yugaladvik** * **(Hāsya, Rati, and Shoka - Arati)** * **Asāta Vedaniya**  The
continuous **Bandhakal** of the above forty-one **Prakritis** is stated to be at
least one **Samaya** and at most **Antarmūhūrta**. These **Prakritis** are
**Adhṛuvabandhini**, therefore, when their opposing **Prakritis** have the
material for binding, their binding stops after **Antarmūhūrta**.  The reason
for considering the **Antarmūhūrta** as the **Utkrisht Kāla** for the continuous
binding of these forty-one **Prakritis** is that the opposing **Prakritis** of
**Sāta Vedaniya**, **Rati**, **Hāsya**, **Sthira**, **Shubha**, and **Yasha
Kirti** are **Asāta Vedaniya**, **Arati Shoka**, **Asthira**, **Ashubha**, and
**Ayasha Kirti**, and their binding occurs until the sixth **Gunasthan**.
Therefore, their continuous binding until **Antarmūhūrta** occurs until that
point. However, their **Bandhakal** is also **Antarmūhūrta** in the subsequent
**Gunasthanas**, because the time of those **Gunasthanas** is also
**Antarmūhūrta** in measure.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ddyr zanaka mAgara hai| anubandhino prakRtiyAM hone se unakA jaghanya
bandhakAla eka samaya hai lekina utkRSTa bandhakAla ekasau battIsa sAgara hone
kA kAraNa yaha hai ki gAthA 57 meM inakI vipakSI prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa akAla
ekasa battIsa sAgara bAlAyA hai, ataH inakA bandhakAla usI krama se utanA hI
samajhanA cAhiye 1 eka samaya se lekara antarmuhUrta taka bandhane vAlI
ikatAlIsa prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM azubha vihAyogati, azubha
jAticatuSka (ekendriya dvIndriya, bIndriya, caturindriya) vajraRSabhanArAca
saMhanana ko chor3akara zeSa RSabhanArAva Adi pAMca azubha saMhanana,
nyagrodhaparimaNDala Adi pAMca azubha saMsthAna, AhArakalika, narakadrika,
udyotavika, sthira, zubha, yazaH kIrti, sthAvara dazaka, napuMsakaveda,
strIveda, yugaladvika, (hAsya rati aura zoka - arati) aura asAtA vedanIya | ukta
ikatAlIsa prakRtiyoM kA nirantara vandhakAla kama-se-kama eka samaya aura adhika
se adhika antamuhUrta batalAyA hai| ye prakRtiyA~ adhdhruvabandhinI haiM ataH
apanI-apanI virodhI prakRtiyoM kI bandhayogya sAmagrI ke hone para inakA
antarmuhUrta ke pazcAt bandha ruka jAtA hai  /  ina ikatAlIsa prakRtiyoM ke
nirantara bandha hone ke utkRSTa kAla ko antarmuhUrta mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai
ki sAtA vedanIya, rati, hAsya, sthira, zubha aura yaza kIrti kI virodhinI
prakRtiyAM asAtA vedanIya, arati zoka, asthira, azubha aura ayazaH kIrti kA
bandha chaThe guNasthAna taka hotA hai, ataH vahA~ taka to inakA nirantara
bandha antamuhUrta taka hotA hai kintu usake bAda ke guNasthAnoM meM bhI inakA
bandhakAla antarmuhUrta hai, kyoMki una guNasthAnA kA kAla bhI antamuhUrta
pramANa hai  /

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **Human-like (Human Path, Human Precedence),
Tirthankara Name, Vanrishabhanaraaj Samhanan, the continuous time of the best
and the worst of the thirty-three Sagars is contained within the Gogank. This is
because the nature of the Anuttara Vasi Devas is bound to the Human Path. As a
result, from the time of their birth until the age of thirty-three Sagars, they
do not bind the five inauspicious Samhanan, Rishabhanaraach, etc., which are
opposite to the said natures, namely Narakdvick, Tiryanchdvick, Devdvick,
Vaikriyadvick.**  **There is no nature opposite to the Tirthankara nature,
therefore its binding also remains constant until the thirty-three Sagars.**
**Among the five aforementioned natures, the time of the worst binding of the
four natures excluding the Tirthankara nature is one time, because they have
opposite natures.**  **Generally, it has been stated that the time of the worst
binding of the Adhruvbandhini natures is one time. However, due to the special
nature of the time of the worst binding of some natures, the Granthakar has
indicated that 'Lahuu Vi Aau. Jine' the time of the worst binding of the four
Ayukarma and the Tirthankara name karma is also Antmuhurt. That is, the best and
worst binding time of the Tirthankara name karma and the four Ayus, namely
Narakayu, etc., is only Annamuhurt. It is not that the worst binding time is one
time and the best binding time is Antmuhurt.**  **Regarding the binding time of
Ayukarma, it has been previously stated that the binding of Ayus occurs only
once in a Bhava and that too only for Antmuhurt. The time of the worst binding
of the Tirthankara nature should be understood in this way: a being binds the
Tirthankara nature and ascends to the Upsham श्रेणि, from there until the
eleventh Gunasthan, the Tirthankara nature is not bound because the binding of
the Tirthankara nature is prohibited...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha _ manuSyaddhika (manuSyagati, manuSyAnupUrvI), tIrthakara
nAma, vanaRSabhanArAja saMhanana, A~tArita gogAMka mA nirantara kAla utkRSTa se
tetIsa sAgara hai| kyoMki anuttaravAsI devoM ke manuSyagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM
kA ho baMdha hotA hai| jisase ve apane janma-samaya se lekara tetIsa sAgara kI
Ayu taka ukta prakRttiyoM kI birodhinI narakadvika, tiryaMcadvika, deva dvika,
vaikriyadvika, pAMca azubha saMhanana RSabhanArAca Adi kA baMdha nahIM karate
haiN| tIrthaMkara prakRti kI koI virodhinI prakRti nahIM hai, ataH usakA bhI
tetIsa sAgara taka barAbara baMdha hotA hai| manuSyadrika Adi ukta pAMca
prakRtiyoM meM se tIrthakara prakRti ke sibAya cAra prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya
baMdhakAla eka samaya hai, kyoMki unakI virodhinI prakRtiyA~ haiN| sAmAnyataH
yaha batAyA gayA hai ki adhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyoM kA jadhanya baMdhakAla eka
samaya hai  /  lekina kucha prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya baMdhakAla meM vizeSatA hone
se granthakAra ne saMketa kiyA hai ki 'lahU vi Au. jiNe' cAra AyukarmoM aura
tIrthakara nAmakarma kA jaghanya baMdhakAla bhI antamuhUrta hai  /  arthAt
tIrthakara nAmakama aura narakAyu Adi cAra AyU, kula pAMca prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa
aura jaghanya baMdhakAla annamuhUrta hI hai| na ki jaghanya baMdhakAla eka
samaya aura utkRSTa baMdhakAla antamuhUta hai| Ayukarma ke baMdhakAna ke bAre
meM pahale batA cuke haiM ki eka bhava meM eka bAra hI Ayu kA baMdha hotA hai
aura vaha bho antamuharna ke liye hI hotA hai  /  tIrthakara prakRti kA jaghanya
baMdha antamuharta pramANa isa prakAra samajhanA cAhie ki koI jIva tIrtha kara
prakRti kA baMdha karake upazama zreNi car3hA, bahAM nIce se lekara gyArahaveM
guNasthAna taka tIrthakara prakRti kA baMdha nahIM kiyA kyoMki tIrthakara
prakRti ke baMdha kA nirodha

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shataka** (century) occurs in the sixth part of the eighth **Gunasthan**.
Again, falling from the **Upshama Shreni**, until the **Antamuhurta**, the
being, bound by the **Tirthankara** nature, ascends the **Upshama Shreni** and
becomes unbound there. At that time, the **Jghanya Andhakala** (dark period) of
the **Tirthankara** nature occurs at the **Antamuhurta**. Thus, with the
statement of the **Baishwakala** (universal time) of the **Adhruvabandhini**
(non-permanent) natures, the discussion of **Sthitibandha** (state-binding) is
complete. Now, we discuss **Rasabandh** (taste-binding) or **Anubhaga Bandh**
(experience-binding). **Rasabandh** is one of the four divisions of **Bandha**
(binding) - **Prakriti** (nature), **Pradesh** (region), **Sthiti** (state), and
**Ras** (taste). After describing **Prakritibandha** and **Sthitibandha**, we
now describe **Rasabandh** or **Anubhaga Bandh**. First, the author explains the
causes of **Tivra** (intense) and **Manda** (mild) **Anubhaga Bandh** for
**Shubha** (auspicious) and **Ashubha** (inauspicious) natures.  **Timro
Asuhasuhaanam Sanke Savilohio Vivjayau. Mabaraso
Girimhahirayajalarehasarisakasaehi. ||6|| Chauthaanaai Asuha Sunha Vigghade
Saghai Avarana. Pumsanjalani Gabuti Chauthaana Rasa Ses Dugamai. ||4||**  **Word
Meaning:** **Simbo** - intense, **Bhasuhasuhaanam** - auspicious and
inauspicious natures, **Sanke Savilohio** - by **Samklesha** (affliction) and
**Vishuddhi** (purification), **Vivjayau** - conquered.  **Mo:** In the
**Karmakanda**, only the **Jghanya Bandhakala** (minimum binding time) of the
**Adhruvabandhini** natures is mentioned.  **Avaro Bhisan Muhatto Tityaharaana
Satan Aaunam. Samao Chavatthiinam Bandho Tamha Drudha Sesaa. ||126||**  The
**Jghanya Kala** (minimum time) for the continuous binding of **Tirthankara**,
**Aharaknik** (food-taker), and the four **Ayus** (life spans) is the
**Antamuhurta**, and the **Jghanya Kala** for the continuous binding of the
remaining six **Prakrtis** (natures) is one **Samaya** (time).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka AThaveM guNasthAna ke chaThe bhAga meM hI ho jAtA hai| punaH upazama
zroNi se girakara antamuhUrta taka tIrthakara prakRti kA baMna karake baha jIva
upazama zrINi car3hA aura vahAM usakA abandhaka huaa| usa samaya tIrtha kara
prakRti kA jaghanya aMdhakAla antamuhUrta ghaTita hotA hai  /  _ isa prakAra se
adhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyoM ke nirantara' baizvakAla ke kathana ke sAtha
sthitibaMdha kA vivecana pUrNa hotA hai| aba Age rasabaMdha (anubhAga baMdha) kA
vivecana karate haiN| rasabaMdha _baMdha ke prakRti, pradeza, sthiti aura rasa
ina cAra bhedoM meM se prakRtibaMdha aura sthitibaMdha kA varNana karane ke bAda
aba rasabaMdha athavA anubhAga baMdha kA varNana karate haiM  /  sabase pahale
granthakAra zubha aura azubha prakRtiyoM ke tIbra aura maMda anubhAga baMdha ke
kAraNoM ko batalAte haiN| timro asuhasuhANaM saMkesavilohio vivajjayau  /
mabaraso girimahirayajalarehAsarisakasAehi  // 6 //  cauThANAI asuhA sunahA
vigghadesaghAiAvaraNA  /  pumasaMjalaNigabuticauThANarasA sesa dugamAI  // 4 //
zabdArtha-simbo-tIvarasa, bhasuhasuhANaM - azubha aura zubha prakRttiyoM kA,
saMkesavisohio-saMkleza aura vizuddhi dvArA, vibajma mo0 karmakAMDa meM
adhruvayaMninI prakRtiyoM kA sirpha jaghanya bandhakAla hI batalAyA hai avaro
bhiSaNa muhatto tityAhArANa saTanaAUNaM  /  samao chAvaTThINaM baMdho tamhA
dRdhA sesA  /  /  126 tIrthakara, aAhArakanika aura cAra AyuoM ke nirantara
badha hone kA jaghanya kAla anta muhUrta hai aura zeSa chiyAsaha prakRtiyoM ke
nirantara bandha kA jaghanya kAla eka samaya hai|

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **From the opposite of:**  * **Manderaso-Manderas**
(subtle-subtle) * **Girimahirpajalreha** (the line of mountain, earth, sand, and
water)  **By the Kshaya (passions):**  * **Chauthaanaai** (four-place) -
**Asuha** (inauspicious) * **Suha Maha** (auspicious) - **opposite** *
**Vindhavesdhaiavaranaantaraya** (five obstacles) * **Deshavaati Avarana**
(country-destroying covering) * **Prakritiya** (natures) * **Pumsanjalan**
(male-knowledge) * **Sanjwalan** (burning) * **Kshaya** (passions) * **Igadusi
Chauthaana Rasa** (one, two, three, four place-flavored) * **Sesa** (remaining)
* **Prakritiya** (natures) * **Sugamai** (two, etc.)  **I**  **Place-flavored**
**225**  **Meaning:**  The inauspicious and auspicious natures bind through the
intense flavor sequence by affliction and purification. Like the line drawn in
the mountain, earth, sand, and water, by the Kshaya (passions).  The
inauspicious natures have four-place, etc., flavors, and the auspicious natures
have four-place, etc., flavors by the opposite. The five obstacles, country-
destroying covering natures, male-knowledge and burning passions, these natures
bind as one-place, two-place, three-place, and four-place flavored, and the
remaining natures bind as two-place, etc., three types of flavored.  **Special
Meaning:**  In the world, Karma particles are widespread. These Karma particles
do not have any kind of flavor-fruit-producing power before binding with the
soul. But when they are taken by the soul, at the time of taking, they get
infinite flavor by getting the cause of the soul's Kshaya (passions) results,
which, in their ripening, give their own fruits in that form, destroying the
qualities of the soul.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha yaja viparItatA se, maMdaraso-maMdarasa
girimahirapajalarehA - parvata, pRthvI, retI aura jala kI rekhA ke sari-mamAna
kasAhi- kaSAya dvArA - cauThANAI -- catuH sthAnAdi, asuhA-- azubha prakRtiyoM
meM, suha mahA- zubha prakRtiyoM meM viparItatA se,
vindhavesadhAiAvaraNAantarAya aura dezavAtI AvaraNa prakatiyA pumasaMjalana -
puruSaveda aura saMjvalana kaSAya, igadusicauThANarasA eka, do, tIna, cAra
sthAnika rasayukta sesA - bAkI kI prakRtiyA, sugamAI-do Adi I sthAnika rasayukta
| - 225 gAvArtha - azubha aura zubha prakRtiyoM kA tIvra rasa anukrama se
saMkleza aura vizuddhi ke dvArA baMdhatA hai  /  parvata, pRthvI, retI aura pAnI
meM kI gaI rekhA ke samAna kaSAya dvArA azubha prakRtiyoM meM catuHsthAnika Adi
rasa hotA hai aura zubha prakRtiyoM meM viparItatA dvArA catuHsthAnika Adi rasa
hotA hai| pAMca antarAya, dezaghAtI AvaraNa karane vAlI prakRtiyAM, puruSaveda
aura saMjvalana kaSAya catuSka, ye prakRtiyAM ekasthAnika, dvisthAnika,
nisthAnaka aura cArasthAnika rasayukta aura bAkI kI prakRtiyAM dvisthAnika Adi
tIna prakAra ke rasayukta baMdhatI haiM  /  vizeSArtha - loka meM kArmaNa
vargaNAyeM vyApta haiN| ina karma paramANuoM meM jIva ke sAtha baMdhane se
pahale kisI prakAra kA rasa - phalajanana zakti nahIM rahatI haiM  /  kintu jaba
ve jIva ke dvArA grahaNa kiye jAte haiM taba grahaNa karane ke samaya meM hI
jIva ke kaSAya rUpa pariNAmoM kA nimitta pAkara unameM anaMtaguNA rasa par3a
jAtA hai jo apane vipAkodaya meM usausa rUpa meM apanA-apanA phala dekara jIva
ke guNoM kA ghAta karate haiM  /

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 226  Therefore, the power of karmic particles to bear fruit is called
**rasabandh** or **anubhag bandh**. This will now be explained with an example:
Just as dry grass is tasteless, but when it reaches the stomachs of a camel,
buffalo, cow, and goat, it transforms into milk, and different levels of
richness are seen in its taste. That is, by eating the same dry grass, the camel
gives very thick milk, and it also has a lot of creaminess. Buffalo milk has
less thickness and creaminess than that. Cow's milk has even less thickness and
creaminess, and goat's milk has less thickness and creaminess than cow's milk.
Just as the same grass transforms into different forms of milk in the stomachs
of different animals, similarly, the same type of karmic atoms, due to the
different karmic results of different beings, become different in taste. They
bear fruit in due time.  Just as camel's milk has more strength and goat's milk
has less, similarly, both auspicious and inauspicious natures have both intense
and mild **anubhag bandh**. That is, there are two types of **anubhag bandh**:
**intense anubhag bandh** and **mild anubhag bandh**. Both these types of
**anubhag bandh** occur in auspicious natures as well as in inauspicious
natures. Therefore, the author has begun the description of **anubhag bandh** by
explaining the causes of intense and mild **anubhag bandh** in auspicious and
inauspicious natures.  It has been said that intense **anubhag bandh** occurs in
inauspicious natures due to **samklesha** results, and auspicious natures due to
pure emotions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka 226 isIlie baMdha ko prApta karma pudgaloM meM phala dene kI jo zakti
hotI haiM, use rasabaMdha athavA anubhAga baMdha kahate haiN| isako aba
udAharaNa dvArA spaSTa karate haiM-- jaise sukhA ghAma nIrasa hotA hai, lekina
UMTanI, bhaiMsa, gAya aura bakarI ke peTa meM pahu~cakara vaha dUdha ke rUpa meM
pariNata hotA hai tathA usake rasa meM cikanAI kI hInAdhikatA dekhI jAtI hai|
arthAt usI sUkhe ghAsa ko khAkara UMTanI khUba gAr3hA dUdha detI hai aura usame
cikanAI bhI bahuta adhika hotI hai| bhaiMsa ke dUdha meM usase kama gAr3hApana
aura cikanAI rahatI hai| gAya ke dUdha meM usase bhI kama gAr3hApana aura
nikatAI hai tathA bakarI ke dUdha meM gAya ke dUdha se bhI kama gADhApana va
cikanAI hotI hai| jaise hI kAra bhinna-bhinna pazuoM ke peTa meM jAkara bhinna-
bhinna rasa rUpa pariNata hotA hai, usI prakAra eka hI prakAra ke karma paramANu
mitra- bhinna jIvoM ke bhinna-bhinna kapAya rUpa pariNAmoM kA nimita pAkara
bhinna-bhinna rasa vAle ho jAte haiM  /  jo yathAsamaya apanA phala dete haiM  /
!.. jaise UMTanI ke dUdha meM adhika zakti hotI hai aura bakarI ke dudha meM
kama 1 jaise hI zubha aura azubha donoM hI prakAra kI prakRtiyoM kA anubhAga
tIvra bhI hotA hai aura maMda bhI  /  arthAt anubhAga baMdha ke do prakAra haiM
--tIya anubhAga baMdha aura maMda anubhAga baMdha | ye donoM prakAra ke anubhAga
baMdha zubha prakRtiyoM meM bhI hote haiM aura azubha prakRtiyoM meM bhI  /
isIliye granthakAra te anubhAga baMdha kA varNana zubha aura azubha prakRtiyoM
ke tIvra aura maMda anubhAga baMdha ke kAraNoM ko batalAte hue prAraMbha kiyA
hai  /  azubha aura zubha prakRtiyoM ke tIvra aura maMda anubhAga baMdha hone ke
kAraNoM ko batalAte hue kahA hai ki saMkleza pariNAmoM se azubha prakRtiyoM meM
tIvra anubhAga baMdha hotA hai aura vizuddha bhAvoM se zubha

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Karma Granth  There are three sections of bondage in the *prakritis*
(natural tendencies), and conversely, there is a mild section of bondage from
opposite emotions. This means that there is a mild section of bondage in the
*ashubh prakritis* (inauspicious tendencies) from pure emotions, and a mild
section of bondage in the *shubh prakritis* (auspicious tendencies) from
*sanklesha* emotions (emotions that bind).  The section of the *ashubh
prakritis* is compared to the bitter juice of neem, while the section of the
*shubh prakritis* is compared to the juice of sugarcane. This is explained as
follows: just as the juice of neem is bitter, so too is the juice of the *ashubh
prakritis* considered bad because they yield inauspicious fruits. The juice of
sugarcane is sweet and delicious, just as the juice of the *shubh prakritis* is
pleasant.  Both *ashubh* and *shubh* *prakritis* have four stages each of
intense and mild juice. These were only hinted at in the explanation of verse 2
of the first *karma granth*. Here, we will state them in more detail.  The four
types of stages of the three and *sand* juices are as follows: 1. *Totra*, 2.
*Tivratar*, 3. *Tivratam*, 4. *Atyanta Tivra*, and 1. *Mand*, 2. *Mandatar*, 3.
*Mandatam*, and 4. *Atyanta Mand*. Although there are countless types of these,
one should know the countless types of each, but all of them are included in
these four stages. These four types are called *ekasthānik*, *dvisthānik*,
*tristhānik*, and *chatuḥsthānik* respectively. This means that *ekasthānik*
should be understood as *totra* or *mand*, *dvisthānik* as *tivratar* or
*mandatar*, *tristhānik* as *tivratam* or *mandatam*, and *chatuḥsthānik* as
*atyant tivra* or *atyant mand*.  These should be understood in this way: just
as the juice of neem that is extracted immediately is naturally bitter, which is
its three stages. When that juice...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama pharmagrantha prakRtiyoM meM tIna anubhAga baMdha hotA hai tathA isase
viparIta bhAvoM se maMda anubhAga baMna hotA hai arthAt vizuddha bhAvoM se
azubha prakRtiyoM meM maMda anubhAga baMdha tathA saMkleza bhAvoM se zubha
prakRtiyoM meM maMda anubhAga azubha prakRtiyoM ke anubhAga ko nIma vagairaha ke
kaGa ve rasa ko upamA aura zubha prakRtiyoM ke anubhAga ko Ikha ke rasa ko upamA
dI jAtI hai| isakA spaSTIkaraNa yaha hai ki jaise nIma kA rasa kaTuka hotA hai,
vaise hI azubha prakRtiyoM ko azubha phala dene ke kAraNa unakA rasa burA
samajhA jAtA hai  /  Ikha kA rasa moThA aura svAdiSTa hotA hai, vaise hI zubha
prakRtiyoM kA rasa sukhadAyaka hotA hai  /  azubha aura zubha donoM hI prakAra
kI prakRtiyoM ke tIva aura maMda rasa ko cAra-cAra avasthAyeM hotI haiN| jinakA
prathama karmagrantha kI gAthA 2 kI vyAkhyA meM saMketa mAtra kiyA gayA hai|
yahAM kucha vizeSa rUpa meM kathana karate haiN| tIna aura saMda rasa kI
avasthAoM ke cAracAra prakAra isa taraha haiM-1-totra, 2 tIvratara, 3 tIvratama,
4 atyanta tIvra aura 1 maMda, 2 maMdatara, 3 maMdatama aura atyanta maMda  /
yadyapi isake asaMkhya prakAra haiM vAnI eka-eka ke asaMkhya prakAra jAnanA
cAhiye lekina una sabakA samAveza ina cAra sthAnoM meM ho jAtA hai  /  ina cAra
prakAroM ko kramazaH ekasthAnika, dvisthAnika, tristhAnika aura catuHsthAnika
kahA jAtA hai  /  arthAt ekasthAnika se tIna yA maMda, dvisthAnika se tIvratara
yA maMdatara, tristhAnika se tIvatama yA maMdatama aura catuHsthAnika se atyanta
tIvra yA atyanta maMda kA grahaNa karanA caahiye| inako isa taraha samajhanA
cAhiye ki jaise nIma kA turanta nikalA huA rasa svabhAva se hI kATukra hotA hai
jo usakI tIna avasthA hai  /  jaba usa tasA

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 228  If a *sar* of something cooked on fire is reduced to half a
*sar*, it becomes more bitter. This is a more intense state. When it is reduced
to one-third of a *sar*, it becomes the most bitter. This is the most intense
state. And when it is reduced to a quarter of a *sar*, it becomes extremely
bitter. This is the extremely intense state. This is an illustration of the four
states of intense *rasa* (experience) of inauspicious natures.  The illustration
of the four states of intense *rasa* of auspicious natures is as follows: Just
as the natural juice that comes out when sugarcane is crushed is naturally
sweet, when that juice is cooked on fire and reduced to half a *sar*, it becomes
sweeter. When it is reduced to one-third of a *sar*, it becomes the sweetest.
And when it is reduced to a quarter of a *sar*, it becomes extremely sweet. In
this way, one should understand the four states of *totra rasa*.  Now, we will
clarify the four states of *manda rasa*. Just as the bitter *rasa* of *nom* or
the sweet *rasa* of sugarcane becomes mild when a spoonful of water is added to
it, it becomes milder when a glass of water is added, it becomes the mildest
when a pitcher of water is added, and it becomes extremely mild when a pot of
water is added. Similarly, one should understand the mild, milder, mildest, and
extremely mild states of *manda rasa* of inauspicious and auspicious natures.
The reason for this intensity and mildness is the intensity and mildness of
*kṣaya*. Intense *kṣaya* binds *totra* in inauspicious natures and *mantra*
experience in auspicious natures. And mild *kṣaya* binds *manda* in inauspicious
natures and intense experience in auspicious natures. In other words, the
increase of *saṃdeśa* results and the decrease of pure results bind the intense,
more intense, most intense, and extremely intense *anubhāga* of inauspicious
natures. And the increase of pure results and the decrease of *saṃkleśa* results
bind the mild, milder, mildest, and extremely mild *anubhāga* of auspicious
natures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka 228 ko agni para pakAne se sara kA AdhA sera raha jAtA hai to vaha
kaTukatara ho jAtA hai, yaha avasthA tIvratara hai| seMra kA tihAI rahane para
kaTukatama ho jAtA hai| yaha tIvratama avasthA hai aura jaba sara kA pAva bhara
raha jAtA hai jo atyanta kaTuka hai, yaha atyanta tIvra avasthA hotI hai  /
yaha azubha prakRtiyoM ke tIvra rasa (anubhAga ) ko cAra avasthAoM kA dRSTAnta
hai  /  zubha prakRtiyoM ke tIvra rata kI cAra avasthAoM kA hRSTAnta isa prakAra
hai-jaise Ikha ke perane para jo svAbhAvika rasa nikalatA hai, vaha svabhAva se
madhura hotA hai  /  usa rasa ko Aga para pakA kara sera kA AdhA sera kara liyA
jAtA hai to vaha madhuratara ho jAtA hai aura sera kA eka tihAI rahane para
madhuratama aura sera kA pAva bhara rahane para atyanta madhura ho jAtA hai  /
isa prakAra totra rasa ko cAra avasthAoM ko samajhanA cAhiye  /  aba maMda rasa
kI cAra avasthAoM ko spaSTa karate haiN| jaise noma ke kaTuka rasa yA Ikha ke
madhura rasa meM eka cullU pAnI DAla dene para baha maMda ho jAtA hai  /  eka
gilAsa pAnI DAlane para maMdatara, eka loTA pAnI DAlane para mandatama tathA eka
ghar3A pAnI DAlane para atyanta maMda ho jAtA hai| isI prakAra azubha aura zubha
prakRtiyoM ke maMda rasa kI maMda, maMdatara, mandatama aura atyanta maMda
avasthAyeM samajhanA cAhiye  /  isa tIvratA aura maMdatA kA kAraNa kaSAya kI
tIvratA aura maMdatA hai  /  tIvra kaSAya se azubha prakRtiyoM meM totra aura
zubha prakRtiyoM meM maMtra anubhAga baMdha hotA hai aura maMda kaSAya se azubha
prakRtiyoM meM maMda aura zubha prakRtiyoM meM tIvra anubhAga baMdha hotA hai|
arthAt saMdeza pari NAmoM kI vRddhi aura vizuddha pariNAmoM kI hAni se azubha
prakRtiyoM kA tIvra, tIvratara, tIvratama aura atyanta tIna tathA zubha
prakRtiyoM kA maMda, maMdatara, maMdatama aura atyanta maMda anubhAga baMdha
hotA hai aura vizuddha pariNAmoM kI vRddhi tathA sakleza pariNAmoM kI hAni se
zubha prakRtiyoM

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ## 226  There are three sections of bondage:
**Tivra**, **Tivratar**, **Tivratam**, and **Atyanta**.  And there are four
sections of bondage for the **Ashubha** (unfortunate) natures: **Mand**,
**Mandatar**, **Mandatam**, and **Atyanta-Mand**.  Now, we will explain the
causes of these four sections of bondage for the three **Mand** sections.  The
causes are: **Girimahir-Yajal-Reha-Saris-Kasahim** -  meaning, the bondage is
caused by the results of **Kashaya** (passions) that are like the line of a
mountain, the line of the earth, the line of a flower, and the line of water,
respectively.  These results cause the **Atyanta-Tivra** (Chatur-Sthanik),
**Tivratam** (Tristhanik), **Tivratar** (Dvisthanik), and **Tivra** (Ekasthanik)
sections of bondage.  This explanation is given with respect to the **Ashubha**
natures.  For the **Shubha** (fortunate) natures, the opposite should be
understood.  That is, the **Atyanta-Tivra** (Chatur-Sthanik) bondage is caused
by the results like the line of water and dust, the **Tivratam** (Tristhanik)
bondage is caused by the results like the line of the earth, and the
**Tivratar** (Dvisthanik) bondage is caused by the results like the line of a
mountain.  There is no **Tivra** (Ekasthanik) bondage for the **Shubha**
natures, which will be explained in detail later.  Previously, it was explained
that the cause of **Anubhag Bandha** (sectional bondage) is **Kashaya**.  The
four sections of **Tivra**, **Tivratar**, etc. and **Mand**, **Mandatar**, etc.
are all sections of **Anubhag Bandha**.  The cause of these sections is the
state of **Hetu Kashayik** (passion-related) results.  There are four types of
**Kashaya**: **Krodha** (anger), **Mana** (pride), **Maya** (deceit), and
**Lobha** (greed).  Each of these has four states.  That is, there are four
states of **Krodha Kashaya**.  Similarly, there are four states of **Mana**,
**Maya**, and **Lobha**.  These states are called: **Ananta-Anubandhi Kashaya**,
**Apratyakhyana-Avarana Kashaya**, **Pratyakhyana-Avarana Kashaya**, and
**Sanjwalana Kashaya**.  The **Shastrakaras** (scriptural scholars) have given
four metaphors for these four **Kashaya**, which are indicated in the **Gapa**.
**Ananta-Anubandhi Rushaya**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 226 kA tIvra, tItara, tIvatama aura atyanta tIna anubhAga
baMdha hotA hai tathA azubha prakRtiyoM kA maMda, maMdatara. maMdatama aura
atyanta-maMda anubhAga baMdha hotA hai| aba tIna aura maMda anubhAga vaMdha ke
ukta cAra-cAra bhedoM ke kAraNoM kA nirdeza karate haiM ki
'girimahirayaMjalarehAsarisakasAhiM'-parvata kI rekhA ke samAna, pRthvI kA rekhA
ke samAna, phule kI rekhA ke samAna aura jala kI rekhA ke samAna kapAya
pariNAmoM se kramazaH atyanta tIva (catuHsthAnika), tIvatama (visthAnika),
tIvratara (dvisthAnika) aura tIvra (ekasyAnika) anubhAga baMdha hotA hai  /
yaha saMketa azubha prakRtiyoM kI apekSA se kiyA gayA hai aura zubha prakRtiyoM
meM isake viparIta samajhanA cAhiye  /  arthAt jala va dhUli rekhA ke samAna
pariNAmoM se atyanta tIna (catuHsthAnika), pRthvI ko rekhA ke samAna pariNAmoM
se tIvratama (tristhAnika) aura parvata kI rekhA ke samAna pariNAmoM se
tIvratara (visthAnika) anubhAga baMdha hotA hai  /  zubha prakRtiyoM meM tIna
(ekasthAnika) rama baMdha nahIM hotA hai, jisakA vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA
jA rahA hai| pUrva meM yaha batAyA gayA hai ki anubhAga baMdha kA kAraNa kaSAya
hai aura tIvra, tIvratara Adi va maMda, maMdatara Adi cAra-cAra bheda anubhAga
vaMdha ke hI haiN| inakA kAraNa hetu kASAyika pariNAmoM kI avasthAyeM haiN|
kapAya ke cAra bheda haiM krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha aura inameM se pratyeka
kI cAra-cAra avasthAyeM hotI hai  /  arthAt krodha kapAya kI cAra avasthAyeM
hotI haiM  /  isI prakAra mAna kI, mAyA ko aura lobha kI cAra-cAra avasthAyeM
hotI haiM  /  jinake nAma kramazaH anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
kapAya, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya aura saMjvalana kaSAya haiM  /  zAstrakAroM ne
ina cAroM kaSAyoM ke liye cAra upamAyeM dI haiN| jinakA saMketa gApA meM kiyA
gayA hai| anantAnubaMdhI ruSAya

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **230**  **Matka** is compared to the line on a mountain. Just
as a crack in a mountain does not disappear even after hundreds of years,
similarly, the **Anantānubandhi Kṣaya** (infinitely connected passions) remains
for countless lifetimes.  **Inay** has said that the results of a living being
are extremely complex and the **Pāpa Prakṛtis** (negative tendencies) bind
through the **Chatur-sthānika Anubhāga** (four-fold division of experience).
However, the **Śubha Prakṛtis** (positive tendencies) only bind through the
**Dvi-sthānika Rasa** (two-fold division of experience), because there is no
**Eka-sthānika Rasa** (one-fold division of experience) in the **Śubha
Prakṛtis**.  **A-pratyākhyāna-āvaraṇa Kṣaya** is compared to the line on the
earth. Just as cracks appear in the ground when the water in a pond dries up and
these cracks are filled in with time, similarly, **A-pratyākhyāna-āvaraṇa
Kṣaya** is such that its **Vāsanā** (latent tendencies) also subsides in due
time. When this **Kṣaya** arises, there is **Vi-sthānika Rasa** (two-fold
division of experience) in both the **A-śubha Prakṛtis** (negative tendencies)
and the **Śubha Prakṛtis** (positive tendencies). This means that there is
**Katu-kṣama** (bitter) and **Madhura-tama** (sweetest) **Anubhāga** (division
of experience) binding.  **Pratyākhyāna-āvaraṇa Kṣaya** is compared to the line
on sand or dust. Just as a line drawn on sand is not permanent and is quickly
erased, similarly, the **Vāsanā** of **Pratyākhyāna-āvaraṇa Kṣaya** should be
understood as not lasting for a long time. When this **Kṣaya** arises, there is
**Dvi-sthānika** (two-fold division of experience) in the **Pāpa Prakṛtis**
(negative tendencies), meaning **Katu-kṣama** (bitter), and **Chatur-sthānika**
(four-fold division of experience) in the **Puṇya Prakṛtis** (positive
tendencies).  **Sanjvalana Kṣaya** is compared to the line on water. Just as a
line drawn on water disappears immediately after being drawn, similarly, the
**Vāsanā** of **Sanjvalana Kṣaya** is also destroyed in an instant. When this
**Kṣaya** arises, there is **Chatur-sthānika** (four-fold division of
experience) in the **Puṇya Prakṛtis** (positive tendencies).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 230 mataka kI upamA parvata kI rekhA se dI jAtI hai| jaise parvata meM par3I
darAra saikar3oM varSa bItane para bhI nahIM miTatI hai, vaise hI anantAnubaMdhI
kaSAya ko vAsanA bhI asaMkhya bhAgo taka banI rahatI hai  /  inAya ne sapA se
jIva ke pariNAma atyanta saMkliSTa hote haiM aura pApa prakRtiyoM kA atyanta
tIna rUpa catuHsthAnika anubhAga baMdha karatA hai  /  kintu zubha prakRtiyoM
meM kevala madhuratara rUpa dvisthAnika hI rasabaMdha karatA hai, kyoMki zubha
prakRtiyoM meM ekasthAnika rasabaMdha nahIM hotA hai  /  apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
kapAya ko pRthvI kI rekhA kI upamA dI jAtI hai  /  arthAt jaise tAlAba meM pAnI
sUkha jAne para jamIna meM darAreM par3a jAtI haiM aura ve darAreM samaya pAkara
pura jAtI haiM  /  isI prakAra apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya hotI hai ki isa kaSAya
ko vAsanA bhI apane samaya para zAMta ho jAtI hai| isa kaSAya kA udaya hone para
azubha prakRtiyoM meM bhI visthAnika rasabaMdha hotA hai aura zubha prakRtiyAM
meM bhI visthAnika rasabaMdha hotA hai  /  arthAt kaTukkatama aura madhuratama
anubhAga baMdha hotA hai| pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya ko bAlU yA dhUli kI rekhA kI
upamA dI jAtI hai | jaise bAlU meM khIMcI gaI rekhA sthAyI nahIM hotI hai, jaldI
hI pura jAtI hai| usI taraha pratyAsthAnAvaraNa kaSAya kI vAsanA ko samajhanA
cAhie ki vaha bhI adhika samaya taka nahIM rahatI hai| usa kaSAya kA udaya hone
para pApa prakRtiyoM meM dvisthAnika arthAt kaTukatara tathA puNya praRtiyoM se
catuHsthAnika rasabaMdha hotA hai| saMjvalana kaSAya kI upamA jala rekhA se dI
jAtI hai  /  jaise jala meM khIMcI gaI rekhA khIMcane ke sAtha hI tatkAla miTatI
jAtI hai, vaise hI saMjvalana kapAya kI vAsanA bhI antamuhUrta meM hI naSTa ho
jAtI hai  /  isa kaSAya kA udaya hone para puNya prakRtiyoM meM catuHsthAnika
rasabaMdha

Page #268 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fifth karma-pātya is 21 and in the pāpa-prakṛtis, only the ekasthānika,
i.e., the katuka form, is rasa-bandha. Thus, in the ashubha-prakṛtis, the
anantānubandhi, apratyākhyānāvaraṇa, pratyākhyānāvaraṇa, and sanjvalana kapāyas
have, respectively, chatusthānika, tristhānika, dvisthānika, and ekasthānika
rasa-bandha, and in the shubha-prakṛtis, they have dvisthānika, tristhānika, and
chatusthānika rasa-bandha.  By explaining the four kapāyas due to the four types
of anubhāga-bandha, it is now clarified how many types of rasa-bandha occur in
which prakṛti. There are 120 prakṛtis that are bandha-yogya, of which 82 are
ashubha-prakṛtis and 42 are shubha-prakṛtis. Of these 12 pāpa-prakṛtis, antarāya
karma has 5, jñānāvaraṇa has 4 except for the kevalajñānāvaraṇa, darśanāvaraṇa
has 3 except for the kevaladarśanāvaraṇa, chakshu darśanāvaraṇa, etc., the
sanjvalana kapāya chatushk, and purushaveda, these 17 prakṛtis have all four
types of rasa-bandha, i.e., ekasthānika, dvisthānika, tristhānika, and
chatusthānika. Because these 17 prakṛtis are deshaghātini. The ghātini prakṛtis,
which are sarvaghatini, have all their spardhakas as sarvaghatis, but the
deshaghātini prakṛtis have some spardhakas as sarvaghatis and some as
deshaghātis. The spardhakas that have tristhānika and chatusthānika rasa are
accepted in both punya and pāpa forms due to the punya and pāpa forms of the
vaṇachatushk. When they are accepted in the punya-prakṛtis, then they should not
be accepted in the punya-prakṛtis when they are accepted in the pāpa-prakṛtis.
āvaraṇadeshavādatarāyasajalaṇapurisa sattaram. ||
chaduvidhabhāvapariṇadātibidhābhāvatuse sāṇam. || -Go. Karmakāṇḍa 182

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama karmapatya 21 hotA hai aura pApa prakRtiyoM meM kevala ekasthAnika
arthAt kaTuka rUpa hI rasabaMdha hotA hai| _ isa prakAra anaMtAnubandhI,
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura saMjvalana kapAya se azubha
prakRtiyoM meM kramazaH catuHsthAnika, tristhAnika, dvisthAnika aura ekasthAnika
rasabaMdha hotA hai tathA zubha prakRtiyoM meM dvisthAnika, tristhAnika aura
catuHsthAnika rasabandha hotA hai| anubhAga baMdha ke cAroM prakAroM ke kAraNa
cAroM kapAyoM ko batalAkara aba kisa prakRti meM kitane prakAra kA rasabandha
hotA hai, yaha spaSTa karate haiN| _ baMdhayogya 120 prakRtiyoM meM 82 azubha
prakRtiyAM aura 42 zubha prakRtiyAM haiN|' ina 12 pApa prakRtiyoM meM se
antarAya karma ko 5. jJAnAvaraNa ko kevalajJAnAvaraNa ko chor3akara zeSa 4,
darzanAvaraNa kI kevaladarzanAvaraNa ko chor3akara cakSu darzanAvaraNa Adi 3,
saMjvalana kapAya catuSka aura puruSaveda ina satraha prakRtiyoM meM
ekasthAnika, dvisthAnika, visthAnika aura catuHsthAnika, isa prakAra cAroM ho
prakAra kA rasabaMdha hotA hai| kyoMki ye satraha prakRtiyAM dezaghAtinI haiN|
ghAti kau ko jo sarvaghAtinI prakRtiyAM haiM unake to sabhI spardhaka sarvaghAtI
hI hai kintu dezaghAti prakRtiyoM ke kucha spardhaka sarvaghAtI hote haiM aura
kucha spardhaka dezaghAtI  /  jo spardhaka tristhAnika aura catuHsthAnika rasa
vAle hote haiM 1 vaNacatuSka ko puSya aura pApa dono rUpa hona se donoM meM
brahaNa kiyA jAtA hai  /  jaba unheM pugna prakRtiyoM meM grahaNa kara taba para
prakRti yo meM aura pAga prakRtiyoM meM grahaNa kareM taba puNya prakRtiyoM meM
grahaNa nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  AvaraNadesavAdatarAyasaja laNapurisa sattaramaM
/  /  caduvidhabhAvapariNadA tibidhA bhAvA tu se sANaM  /  -go0 karmakAMDa 182

Page #269 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
232 > They are all destructive by rule, and those competitors who have a two-
place rasa are both traitors and destructive, but competitors who have a one-
place rasa are only traitors. Therefore, all these natures are considered to
have four types of rasa-bandha: one, two, three, and four-place. Their one-place
rasa-bandha binds after the numerical part of the ninth guna-sthana has passed,
and in the guna-sthana below the ninth anivritti-vadar guna-sthana, there is
two-place, three-place, and four-place rasa-bandha, but not one-place rasa-
bandha. Because there are 65 sinful natures in the remaining natures, and their
binding does not occur after the numerical part of the ninth guna-sthana has
passed. That is, the one-place rasa-bandha of the inauspicious natures occurs
only after the numerical part of the ninth anivritti-vadar guna-sthana has
passed, and there, except for the aforementioned 17 natures of antaray etc., the
remaining inauspicious natures do not bind at all. Therefore, the one-place
rasa-bandha of the remaining 65 natures does not occur. These 65 natures also
include only-knowledge-obscuration and only-vision-obscuration. But it should be
understood about these two natures that their binding occurs up to the tenth
guna-sthana, but because they are destructive, they do not have one-place rasa-
bandha. The remaining 42 virtuous natures also do not have one-place rasa-
bandha. The reason for this is that just as the number of steps that have to be
climbed to go up is the same as the number of steps that have to be descended to
go down, so also the complex resultant jiva climbs to as many places of
complexity 1 l itidvara savitrani hoti fadḍai dṛṭṭhāṇiyāṇimīsāṇi desadhāiṇi sāṇi
|| -Sangraha 146

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 232 > ve to niyama se sarvaghAtI hI hote haiM aura jo spardhaka dvisthAnika
rasa vAle hote haiM, ve dezaghAtI bhI hote haiM aura sarvaghAtI bhI, kintu
ekasthAnika rasa vAle spardhaka dezaghAtI hI hote haiM  /  isIliye ina sabaha
prakRtiyoM kA eka, Di vi aura catuHsthAnika, cAroM prakAra kA rasabaMdha mAnA
jAtA hai| inakA ekasthAnika rasabandha to nauveM guNasthAna ke saMkhyAta bhAga
bIta jAne para baMdhatA hai aura nauveM anivRttivAdara guNasthAna se nIce ke
guNasthAnoM meM dvisthAnika, tisthAnika aura catuHspanika rasabaMdha hotA hai
kintu ekasthAnika rasabandha nahIM hotA hai| kyoMki zeSa prakRtiyoM meM 65 pApa
prakRtiyA~ haiM aura nauveM guNasthAna ke saMkhyAta bhAga bIta jAne para unakA
bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  arthAt azubha prakRtiyoM kA ekasthAnika rasabandha
nauveM anivRttibAdara guNasthAna ke saMkhyAta bhAga ke bIta jAne ke bAda hI hotA
hai aura vahAM antarAya Adi kI ukta 17 prakRtiyoM ko chor3akara zeSa azubha
prakRtiyoM kA bandha hI nahIM hotA hai  /  isIliye zepa 65 prakRtiyoM kA
ekasthAnika rasabandha nahIM hotA hai  /  ina 65 prakRtiyoM meM
kevalajJAnAvaraNa aura kevaladarzanAvaraNa kA bhI samAveza hai  /  lekina ina
donoM prakRtiyoM ke bAre meM yaha samajhanA cAhiye ki inakA bandha dasave
guNasthAna taka hotA hai, kintu inake sarvaghAtinI hone se inameM ekasthAnika
rasabandha nahIM hotA hai  /  zepa 42 puNya prakRtiyoM meM bhI ekasthAnika
rasabaMdha nahIM hotA hai  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki jaise Upara car3hane ke
liye jitanI sIr3hiyA~ car3hanI par3atI haiM, utArane ke liye utanI hI sIDhiyAM
utaranI hotI haiN| vaise hI saMkliSTa pariNAmI jIva jitane saMkleza ke sthAnoM
para car3hatA 1 la itidvArA savitrANi hoti phaDDAI dRTThANiyANimIsANi desadhAINi
sANi || -saMgraha 146

Page #270 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Fifth Karma Granth  It is said that when pure emotions arise, the soul
ascends from the state of being bound to the state of liberation. And as it
ascends through the stages of purification, it descends through the same number
of stages of defilement when it falls back. Thus, there are as many stages of
defilement as there are stages of purification. However, when considering the
perspective of the क्षपक श्रेणि (Kshapaka Shreni), the stages of purification
are more numerous than the stages of entry. Because the soul, which is ascending
through the stages of purification, does not descend below those stages. If
there were an equal number of stages of defilement as stages of purification,
then the soul would inevitably fall back in the same way as it does in the उपशम
श्रेणि (Upshama Shreni). But this does not happen. Once the soul ascends through
the क्षपक श्रेणि (Kshapaka Shreni), it does not descend. This implies that the
number of stages of purification is greater than the number of stages of
defilement in the क्षपक श्रेणि (Kshapaka Shreni).  While there are stages of
purification, only the four-fold bond of auspicious natures occurs. And when
there are extreme stages of defilement, there is no bond of auspicious natures
at all. Some beings, at the time of extreme defilement, bind auspicious natures
like the body of a hell-bound being, etc. But due to their nature of existence,
they only have a two-fold bond at that time. And even those auspicious natures
that bind with medium results have a two-fold bond. Therefore, there is never a
one-fold bond of auspicious natures.  In this way, by explaining the stages of
the bond of the parts, their causes, the stages of karma, and how many natures
have a four-fold bond, etc., the special nature of auspicious and inauspicious
karma is explained.  "The subtle, natural, three-part, four-fold bond is
acquired. The bond of the body is inauspicious, while the bond of the mind is
auspicious." (15)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha hai, vizuddha bhAvoM ke hone para uttane ho sthAnA se
uttaratA hai tathA upazama zreNi bar3hate samaya jitane vizuddhisthAnoM para
car3hatA hai, girate samaya utane hI saMklezasthAnoM para utaratA hai| isa
prakAra se to jitane makleza ke sthAna, utane hI vizuddhi ke sthAna haiN| kintu
jaba kSapaka zreNi kI dRSTi se vicAra karate haiM to vizuddhi ke sthAna praveza
ke sthAnoM se adhika hai | kyoMki kSapaka dhaNi trane bAlA jIva jina
vizuddhisthAnoM para car3hatA hai, una se nIce nahIM utaratA hai, yadi una
vizuddhi ke sthAnoM ke barAbara saMklezasthAna bhI hote to upazama zreNi ke
samAna kSapaka thaNi meM jIva kA patana avazya hotA, kiMtu aisA hotA nahIM hai,
kSapaka zroNi para ArohaNa karane ke bAda jIva nIce nahIM AtA hai| isakA
phalitArtha yaha huA ki kSapaka zrINi meM vizuddhi ke sthAnoM kI saMkhyA adhika
hai aura saMklezasthAnoM kI saMkhyA vizuddhi ke sthAnoM kI apekSA kama  /
vizuddhisthAnoM ke rahate hue zubha prakRtiyoM kA kevala catuHsthAnika hI
rasabaMdha hotA hai tathA atyanta maMkleza sthAnoM ke rahane para zubha
praRtiyoM kA baMdha hI nahIM hotA hai| koI jIva atyanta saMklezA ke samaya
narakagati yogya vaikriya zarIra Adi zubha prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karate haiM,
kiMtu unake bhI bhavasvabhAva ke kAraNa usa samaya dvisthAnika hI ramabaMdha
hotA hai tathA madhyama pariNAmoM se baMdhane vAlI zubha prakRtiyoM meM bhI
visthAnika ramabaMdha hotA hai  /  ataeva zubha prakRtiyoM meM kahIM bhI
ekasthAnika rasabaMdha nahIM hotA hai| ima prakAra se anubhAga baMdha ke sthAnoM
aura unake kAraNa kapAyasthAnoM ko tathA kitanI prakRtiyoM kA cAroM sthAnika
vAlA baMdha hotA hai, Adi ko batalAkara punaH zubha aura azubha rasa kA vizeSa
svarUpa kahate haiN| nibuccharaso sahajo ticaubhAga phkkimaagto| gaThANA anuho
asuhAga muho suhANaM tu  // 15 //

Page #271 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Word Meanings:**  * **Mittarso:** Neem and sugarcane juice *
**Sahajowaswaabhavik Tiwa:** Natural juice * **-Do, Teen, Aur Chaar Bhag Mein
Uvaale Jaane Par:** When boiled in two, three, and four parts * **Ikkmaaganto:**
One part remaining * **Igathaani:** One-place * **Efasthanik Adi:** One-place,
etc. * **Anuho:** Unfavorable juice * **Asuhaan:** Unfavorable natures *
**Muho:** Favorable juice * **Suhaag:** Favorable natures * **Su Aur:** Good and
**Verse Meaning:**  Neem and sugarcane's natural juice, when boiled in two,
three, and four parts, leaving one part remaining, should be known as the
unfavorable juice of unfavorable natures, one-place, etc., and the favorable
juice of favorable natures.  **Special Meaning:**  The previous verse explained
the four types of *anubhag bandh* - one-place, two-place, etc. This verse
further clarifies them and also hints at the nature of favorable and unfavorable
natures.  Unfavorable natures are compared to neem and their juice to neem
juice, while favorable natures are compared to sugarcane and their juice to
sugarcane juice. Just as neem juice is naturally bitter and fills the mouth of
the drinker with bitterness, so too is the juice of unfavorable natures harmful
and painful. And just as sugarcane is naturally sweet and its juice is sweet and
joyful, so too is the juice of favorable natures joyful for living beings.  This
is generally explained that the natural juice extracted from neem and sugarcane
is naturally bitter and sweet. This bitterness and sweetness should be known as
one-place juice. The two-place, three-place, and four-place types of this
natural one-place juice should be understood as follows...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zabdArtha-miTTaraso-nIma aura Ikha kA rasa, sahajosvAbhAvika tivA '-do, tIna
aura cAra bhAga meM uvAla jAne para, ikkamAgaMto-eka bhAga zeSa rahe bala,
igaThANAI ephasthAnika Adi, anuho-azuma rasa, asuhANaM-azubha prakRtiyoM kA,
muho-zubha rasa, suhAga-zuma prakRtiyoM kA, suaura ! gAthArtha-nIma aura Ikha kA
svAbhAvika rasa tathA usako do. tIna, cAra bhAga meM ubAle jAne para eka bhAga
zepa rahe, use azubha prakRtiyoM kA ekasthAnika Adi azubha rasa aura zubha
prakRtiyoM kA zubha rasa jAnanA cAhiye  /  /  vizeSArtha-pUrva gAthA meM
anubhAga baMdha ke ekasthAnika, visthAnika Adi cAra bheda batalAye haiN| unakA
vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa karane ke sAthasAtha zubha aura azubha prakRtiyoM ke
svabhAva kA bhI saMketa yahAM kiyA gayA hai| azubha prakRtiyoM ko nIma aura
unake rasa ko noma ke rasa kI tathA zubha prakRtiyoM ko Ikha tathA unake rasa ko
Ikha ke rasa kI upamA do hai  /  jaise nIma kA rasa svabhAva se hI kaDa A hone
se pIne vAle ke mukha ko kar3avAhaTa se bhara detA hai, vaise hI azubha
prakRtiyoM kA rasa bhI aniSTakAraka aura duHkhadAyaka hai tathA jaise Ikha
svabhAvataH moThA aura usakA rasa madhura, AnandadAyaka hotA hai, vaise hI zubha
prakRtiyoM kA rasa bhI jIvoM ko AnandadAyaka hotA hai| _ yaha to sAmAnyatayA
batalAyA gayA hai ki nIma aura Ikha ke perane para unameM se nikalane vAlA
svAbhAvika rasa svabhAvataH kar3abA aura mIThA hotA hai| isa kaDa bepana aura
mIThepana ko ekasthAnika rasa jAnanA cAhie  /  isa svAbhAvika ekasthAnika rasa
ke dvisthAnika, nisthAnika aura catuHsthAnika prakAroM ko kramazaH isa prakAra
samajhanA

Page #272 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Five Karma Granth  It is said that if one takes one seer each of neem and
sugarcane juice and boils them until they are reduced to half a seer, then it is
called **Dwistahanik Rasa**, because the cooked juice has twice the bitterness
and twice the sweetness of the original natural juice. If the same juice is
boiled further until it is reduced to one seer, then it should be understood as
**Vistahanik Rasa**, because it has three times the bitterness or three times
the sweetness of the original natural juice. When the same juice is boiled
further and reduced to one-fourth of a seer, then it is called **Chatuhstahanik
Rasa**, because it has four times the bitterness and four times the sweetness of
the original natural juice.  Now, based on the above example, we can understand
the **Ekstahanik** etc. in the context of **Ashubh** (unfavorable) and **Shubh**
(favorable) natures. Just as the **Vistahanik Rasa** has twice the bitterness of
the **Ekstahanik Rasa** of neem, and the **Vistahanik Rasa** has three times the
bitterness, and the **Chatuhstahanik Rasa** has four times the bitterness,
similarly, the **Ashubh** natures that are the most competitive and have the
most **Jayanya Rasa** are called **Ekstahanik Rasa**. The **Vistahanik**
competitors have an infinite amount of **Rasa** compared to them, and the
**Vistahanik** competitors have an infinite amount of **Rasa** compared to them,
and the **Chatuhstahanik** competitors have an infinite amount of **Rasa**
compared to them. Similarly, in **Shubh** natures, it should be understood that
the **Dwitiya**, **Tritiya**, and **Chaturtha** places have an infinite amount
of **Shubh Rasa** compared to the **Ekstahanik**.  These four places are caused
by the increasing intensity of **Kshaya** (negative karma) in **Ashubh** natures
and the increasing **Kshaya** (negative karma) in **Shubh** natures. The
increasing intensity of **Kshaya** leads to **Rasa** from **Ekstahanik** to
**Chatuhstahanik** in **Ashubh** natures, and the increasing **Kshaya** leads to
**Rasa** from **Dwistahanik** to **Chatuhstahanik** in **Shubh** natures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcaya karmagrantha cAhiye ki nIma aura Ikha kA eka-eka sera rasa lekara unheM
bhAga para ubAlA jAye aura jalakara AdhA sera raha jAye to vaha dvisthAnika rasa
kahA jAyegA, kyoMki pahale ke svAbhAvika rasa se usa pake hue rasa meM dUnI
kar3avAhaTa aura dunI madhuratA A gii| vahI rasa ubalane para sera kA nihAI raha
jAtA hai to visthAnika rasa samajhanA cAhie, kyoMki usameM pahale ke svAbhAvika
rasa se tigunI kaDa bAhaTa yA tiganI madhuratA A gaI hai  /  vahI rasa jaba
ubalane para eka sera kA pAva bhara raha jAtA hai to vaha catuHsthAnika rasa
hai, kyoMki pahale ke svAbhAvika rasa se usameM caugunI kar3avAhaTa aura caugunA
mIThApana pAyA jAtA hai| aba ukta udAharaNa ke AdhAra se azubha aura zubha
prakRtiyoM meM ekasthAnika Adi ko ghaTAte haiM  /  jaise nIma ke ekasthAnika
rasa se visthAnika rasa meM duganI kar3avAhaTa hotI hai, visthAnika meM tigunI
kar3avAhaTa aura catuHsthAnika meM caugunI kar3avAhaTa hotI hai, vaise hI azubha
prakRtiyoM ke jo spardhaka sabase jayanya rasa vAle hote haiM, ve ekasthAnika
rasa bAle kahe jAte haiM, unase visthAnika spardhakoM meM anaMtaguNA rasa hotA
hai, unase visthAnika spardhakA meM anantaguNA rasa aura unase catuHsthAnika
spardhakoM meM anantaguNA rasa hotA hai  /  isI prakAra zubha prakRtiyoM meM bhI
samajha lenA cAhiye ki ekasthAnika se dvitIya, tRtIya aura caturtha sthAnoM meM
anantaguNA zubha rasa hotA hai| ukta cAroM sthAna azubha prakRtiyoM meM kaSAyoM
kI tIvratA bar3hane se aura zubha prakRtiyoM meM kapAyoM kI gaMdatA bar3hane se
hote haiM  /  kapAyoM kI tIvratA ke bar3hane se azubha prakRtiyoM meM
ekasthAnika se lekara catuHsthAnika paryanta rasa pAyA jAtA hai aura kaSAyoM kI
maMdatA ke bar3hane se zubha prakRtiyoM meM dvisthAnika se lekara catuHsthAnika
paryanta rasa pAyA

Page #273 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Sanka" goes. There is no one-place rasa-bandha in auspicious natures. Thus,
having described the nature, cause, and divisions of anubhaga-bandha, now we
will tell about the owners of anubhaga-bandha. First, we will state the owners
of excellent anubhaga-bandha. Timbhavigavavarayava sumichcha
vigalsuhamniryaatigam. Tirimanuyau tirinara tiridvugavatt ha suranirma. ||66||
Samarth - Ti - me mar ja, gaga stra - ekendriya jati, sthavar and aatap named
karma, surimichchamithyarashti dev, vigalsuhasmanirapatigam - vikalatrik,
sukshmasrim and narakatrik, tirimanuyau - tiyan chayu and manushyayu, tirinara -
tirmach and manushya, tirinugchchheshch - tiriyapathik and sevatam sanhanan,
muranirya .. dev and narak. - - - 1. In the Go karmakanda, the description of
anubhaga-bandha is similar to the description in the karmagrantha, but the
language is different. In it, the power of destructive karmas is divided into
four parts - lana, daah, asthi and patthar (Go - 180). Just as these four
substances are increasingly harder, so should the power of karmas be understood.
These four divisions can be given the names of one, two, three and four places
respectively. Of these, the lata part is deshghati and the baroo part's infinite
part is deshghati and the remaining bahbhaag is sarvghati. The asthi and
prasthar parts are only sarpaghati. By dividing the apatiks into two parts,
punya and paap, four parts have been made for punya prakritis - gud, khaand,
shakar and amrit, and four parts have been made for paap prakritis - neem,
kanjir, visha and halaahal (Go 184). These divisions can also be given the names
of one, two, three and four places respectively.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sanaka jAtA hai  /  zubha prakRtiyoM meM ekasthAnika rasabaMdha nahIM hotA
hai|' isa prakAra ne anubhAga baMdha kA svarUpa, usake kAraNa aura bhedoM kA
varNana karake aba anubhAga bandha ke svAmiyoM ko batalAte haiN| pahale utkRSTa
anubhAga baMdha ke svAmiyoM kA kathana karate haiN| timvabhigavAvarAyava
sumicchA viglsuhmnirytigN| tirimaNuyAu tirinarA tiridugavaTTha suraniramA  // 66
/  /  sAmArtha-ti mI mara jA, gAgA stra - ekendriya jAti, sthAvara aura Atapa
nAmakarma kA, suramicchAmithyAraSTi deva, vigalasusamanirapatigaM -vikalatrika,
sUkSmazrima aura narakatrika kA, tirimaNuyAu-tiyaM cAyu aura manuSyAyu kA,
tirinarAtirmaca aura manuSya, tirinugacheSacha -tiryapAtika aura sevAtaM
saMhanana kA, muraniriyA .. deva aura nAraka | .- ..- - 1 go0 karmakAMDa meM bhI
anubhASa baMdha kA varNana karmagrantha ke varNana se milanA julatA hai, lekina
kayana pAlI bhinna hai  /  umameM ghAtikarmoM kI zakti ke cAra vibhAga kiye
haiM-lAnA, dAha, asthi aura patthara (gA0-180)  /  jaise ye cAroM padArtha
uttarotara adhika kaThora hote haiM, usI prakAra karmoM kI zakti samajhanA
caahie| ina cAroM vibhAgoM ke kramazaH eka, dvi, tri aura catuH sthAnika nAma
diye jA sakate haiN| inameM latA bhAga dezaghAtI haiM aura bAru bhAga kA
anaMtavAM bhAga dezaghAtI aura zeSa bahabhAga sarvaghAtI hai  /  asthi aura
prasthara bhAga to sarpaghAtI hI haiM  /  apAtIkoM ke puNya aura pApa rUpa do
vibhAga karake puNya prakRtiyoM ke gur3a. khAMDa, zakara aura amRta rUpa cAra
vibhAga kiye haiM aura pApa prakRtiyoM meM nIma, kaMjIra, viSa aura halAhala isa
taraha cAra vibhAga kiye haiM (gA0 184) /  ina vibhAgoM ko bhI kramazaH eka, Di,
tri aura catuHsthAnika nAma diyA jA sakatA hai|

Page #274 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **Verse Meaning:**  The Ekendriya (one-sensed) jati,
Sthavar (stationary) and Atap (heat) karmas are bound by the Mithyadrishti Devas
(false-believing gods) in their **utkrusht anubhag bandh** (superior section
binding). The Vikalendriya (impaired-sensed) trik, Sukshma (subtle) trik, Narak
(hell) trik, Tiryanch (animal) ayu (life) and Manusya (human) ayu are bound by
the Mithyadrishti Tiryanch and Manusya in their **utkrusht anubhag bandh**. The
Tiryach (animal) dwik (two) and Sewart (service) Sanhanan (accumulation) are
bound by the Mithyadrishti Devas and Narakas in their **utkrusht anubhag
bandh**.  **Commentary:**  There are two types of **anubhag bandh**:
**utkrusht** (superior) and **jghanya** (inferior). This verse begins by
explaining the nature of **anubhag bandh** and then describes the beings who
experience **utkrusht anubhag bandh**. All beings in the four gatis (states of
existence) create the power to experience the fruits of their karmas according
to their **kapayik parinati** (individual destiny) along with their karma bandh.
This verse explains which beings in which gatis and gunasthans (levels of
purity) experience **utkrusht anubhag bandh**. It states that "the Ekendriya
jati, Sthavar and Atap, these three karmas are bound by the Mithyadrishti Devas
in their **utkrusht anubhag bandh**." The reason why Mithyadrishti Devas
experience **utkrusht anubhag bandh** of these three karmas is because Narakas
(hell beings) do not take birth in the Ekendriya paryay (one-sensed state) after
death, so they do not experience this bandh. And for the **utkrusht anubhag
bandh** of the Atap karma, the level of purity required is such that humans and
animals, if they achieve that level of purity, would be eligible to take birth
in the Panchendriya (five-sensed) Tiryanch (animal) state and would experience
the bandh of other auspicious karmas.  **Note:**  * The Devas mentioned here are
those from the Ishaan heaven to the highest heaven. This is because only these
Devas can take birth in the Ekendriya paryay after death. Devas above this level
do not experience the Ekendriya paryay.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha gAthArtha - ekendriya jAti, sthAvara aura Atapa nAmakarma
kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha midhyAdRSTi deva karate haiN| vikalendriyatrika,
sUkSmatrika, narakatrika, tiryacAyu aura manuSyAyu kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha
mithyAdRSTi tiryaca aura manuSya karate haiM aura tiyaMcadvika aura sevArta
saMhanana kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha mithyAdRSTi deva aura nAraka karate haiN|
237 - vizevArtha anubhAga baMdha ke do prakAra haiM- utkRSTa aura jaghanya !
anubhAga baMdha kA svarUpa samajhAkara isa gAthA se utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha ke
svAmiyoM kA kathana prArambha kiyA gayA hai| cAroM gati ke jIva karmabaMdha ke
sAtha hI apanI-apanI kApAyika pariNati ke anusAra karmoM meM yathAyogya
phaladAna zakti kA nirmANa karate haiN| baMdhayogya 120 prakRtiyoM meM se kisa
gati aura guNasthAna vAle jIva utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha karate haiM ko batalAte
hue sarvaprathama kahA hai ki 'tibvamigathAvarAyava suramicchA kendriya jAti,
sthAvara nAma aura Apa nAma ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA mithyAdRSTi deva' utkRSTa
anubhAga baMdha karate haiN| mithyAdRSTi devoM ko ukta tIna prakRtiyoM kA
utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki nAraka to marakara ekendriya
paryAya meM janma nahI lete haiM, ataH ukta prakRti kA baMdha hI nahIM hotA
tathA Atapa prakRti ke utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha ke liye jitanI vizuddhi kI
AvazyakatA hai, utanI vizuddhi ke hone para manuSya aura tiryaMca paMcendriya
tiryaMca meM janma lene ke yogya anya zubha prakRtiyoM kA baMdha - 1 IzAna
svarga taka ke devoM kA yahAM grahaNa karanA caahiye| kyoMki IzAna svarga taka
ke deva hI marakara ekendriya paryAya meM janma le sakate haiM usase Upara ke
deva ekendriya paryAya dhAraNa nahIM karate haiM  /

Page #275 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pancham Farm Prasth  The **Pancham Farm Prasth** states that beings with
**Ekaindriya** and **Sthavar** natures, who possess the necessary **Samklesha**
(afflictions) for **Utkrisht Anubhag Bandh** (superior binding of the soul),
destroy the **Ashubh Prakriti** (unfortunate natures) worthy of **Narak Gati**
(hellish realm). However, even with **Utkrisht Samklesha**, beings worthy of
**Narak Gati** do not experience **Bandh** (binding) due to their inherent
nature. Therefore, **Narak**, **Manam**, and **Nian** (three types of beings) do
not experience **Utkrisht Anubhag Bandh**, but only **Devas** (gods) from
**Ishan** to **Swarg** (heavenly realms) do.  **Vikalnik** (Heindriya, Bindriya,
Chaturindriya), **Sukshmatrik** (Sukshma, Sadharan, Apariapt), **Naraktrik**
(Narak Gati, Narakanupurvi, Narakayu), **Tithanchayu**, and **Manushyayu** -
these eleven **Prakriti** (natures) experience **Utkrisht Anubhag Bandh**
through **Mithyadristi** (false belief), **Tiryanch** (animals), and
**Manushya** (humans). This is because **Narak** and **Devas** do not bind the
remaining nine **Prakriti** from birth, and only those beings who die and are
reborn in **Bhog Bhoomi** (realm of enjoyment) experience **Utkrisht Anubhag
Bandh** of **Tiryanch** and **Manushya** lifespans. Consequently, **Devas** and
**Narak** cannot bind these two **Prakriti**. However, **Mithyadristi Manushya**
and **Tithancha** experience **Utkrisht Anubhag Bandh** of these **Prakriti**.
Similarly, other **Prakriti** experience **Utkrisht Anubhag Bandh** through
**Mithyadristi Manushya** and **Tiryanch**, who possess the corresponding
**Samklesha** (afflictions) and **Parinam** (results). Therefore, **Mithyadristi
Manushya** and **Tiryanch** experience **Utkrisht Anubhag Bandh** of these
eleven **Prakriti**.  **Tiryadugchhevat Suranirya-Tiryanchdwik** and **Sewat
Nahannan** - these three **Prakriti** experience **Utkrisht Anubhag Bandh**
through **Mithyadristi Devas** and **Narak**. If **Tiryanch** and **Manushya**
possess the same level of **Samklesha** (afflictions), they would experience
**Bandh** of **Narak Gati** worthy **Prakriti**. However, **Devas**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama pharmaprastha karate haiM aura ekendriya tathA sthAvara prakRti ke
utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha ke liye jitane saMkleza bhAvoM kI AvazyakatA hai, utanA
saMkleza hone para ve narakagati ke yogya azubha prakRtiyoM kA vadha karate haiM
/  kintu devagati meM utkRSTa saMkleza ke hone para bhI narakagati ke yogya
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha bhavasvabhAva se hI nahIM hotA hai  /  ataH nAraka. manAma
aura niyana ukta tIna prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha nahIM karate haiM,
lekina IzAna svarga taka ke deva hI unakA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha karate haiM  /
vikalanika (hIndriya, bIndriya, caturindriya), sukSmatrika (sUkSma, sAdhAraNa,
aparyApta), narakatrika (narakagati, narakAnupUrvI, narakAyu), tithaMcAyu aura
manuSyAyu ina gyAraha prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha mithyA dRSTi
tiryaMca aura manuSya karate haiM-bigalasahamanirayatigaM tirimaNuyAu tirinarA
/  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki tiryaMcAyu aura manupyAyu ke sivAya zeSa nau
prakRtiyoM ko nAraka aura deva janma se hI nahIM bAMdhate haiM tathA tiryaca
aura manujya Ayu kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha ve hI jIva karate haiM jo marakara
bhogabhUmi meM janma lete haiM, jisase deva aura nAraka ina do prakRtiyoM kA bhI
utkRSTa anubhAga bandha nahIM kara sakate haiN| kintu unakA utkRSTa anubhAga
baMdha mithyAdRSTi manuSya aura tithaMca hI karate haiM  /  isI prakAra zeSa
prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa anubhAga bhI apane-apane yogya saMkleza pariNAmoM ke
dhAraka mithyAdRSTi manuSya aura tiryaMna hI karate haiN| ataH ukta gyAraha
prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha mithyAiSTi manuSya aura tiyaMtroM ko hotA
hai  /  _'tiridugachevaTa suraniriyA-tiyaMcadvika aura sevAta nahanana ina tIna
prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha mithyA dRSTi deva aura nAraka karate haiN|
kyoMki yadi tiryaMca aura manuSyoM meM utane saMkliSTa pariNAma ho to unako
narakati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai kintu deva

Page #276 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **236**  And when the results of the Naraka are
extremely complex, they bind only those beings who are fit for the Tiryanch
(animal) realm. Therefore, the superior sections of the aforementioned three
natures are said to be the owners of the bondage of the Devas and Narakas.
Regarding the bondage of the superior sections of the aforementioned natures,
one should know this specifically: The superior section of the bondage of the
Seva-Sahanan (service-endurance) in the Deva realm is done by the Sanatkumar
etc., who are above the Ishana heaven. When the results of the De-di (two-fold)
are complex, they bind only the beings who are fit for the Ekendriya (one-sense)
realm. However, Seva-Sahanan is not fit for the Ekendriya, because the Ekendriya
do not have Sahanan.  **67**  **Translation:**  * Viu-bisura-haanu-gam - The
happiness of the Vikriya-dvi (two-fold Vikriya), Deva-nik (Deva-like), and
Aharaka-vi (food-like) * Sukha-gai - Auspicious liberation * Bann-cha-du-te-ya -
The four colors and the four Lejas (radiances) * Jin - The Tirthankara name-
karma * Sa-yam - The Sa-ta (six-fold) Vedaniya (feeling) * Samaj - The Sama-
chatur-asra (square) institution * Para-dha - Para-dhat (superior power) * Tas-
bas - The Sad-shak (six-fold) * Pani-visas-uch - The Panchendriya (five-sense)
beings, the Ucchvas (exhalation) name-karma, and those who are like them *
Khatra-gau - Those who are in the Pak (cooked) category  **68**
**Translation:**  * Tam-tam-ma-ga - The Narakas of the Tam-tam-ma (dark-dark) *
Uj-joy-yam - The Udyot (illumination) name-karma * Sam-su-ra - The Samyag-
drishti (right-seeing) Devas * Mamu-ya-ural-du-gad-hir-am - The Manushya-dvi
(two-fold human), Audarik-dvi (two-fold generous), and the Vajan-Vajra-Rishabha-
Narach Sahanan (endurance of the Vajan, Vajra, Rishabha, and Narach) * Ap-mato-
a-pra-mat - The restrained, the non-negligent * Am-ra-au - The Deva-ayu (Deva
lifespan) * Cha-jag-ai-mich-cha - The Mithyadrishti (wrong-seeing) beings of the
four realms * Ja - And * Ve-lan-am - The remaining natures  **---**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagranya 236 aura nAraka ati saMkliSTa pariNAma hone para
tiryaMcagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA hI baMdha karate haiM  /  isIliye ukta tIna
prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha kA svAmI devoM aura nArakoM ko batalAyA
hai  /  ukta prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha hone ke bAre meM itanA vizeSa
jAnanA cAhiye ki devagati meM sevArta saMhanana kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha IzAna
svarga se Upara ke sAnatkumAra Adi kI karate haiN| eka ke dedi saMkliSTa
pariNAmoM ke hone para ekendriya bhogya prakRtiyoM kA hI baMdha karate haiM,
kintu sevA saMhanana ekendriya yogya nahIM hai, kyoMki ekendriyoM ke saMhanana
nahIM hotA hai  /  biuvisurAhAradugaM sukhagaDa bannacauteya jiNasAyaM  /
samaca uparaghAtasa sa paNivisAsucca babagAu  // 67 //  tamatamagA ujjoyaM
sammasurA maNuyauraladugadhairaM  /  apamato amarAjaM caugaimichA u semANaM  //
68  //  zabdArtha - viubvisurAhAnugaM - vaikriyadvika devanika aura AhArakavi kA
sukhagaI- zubha vihAyogati bannacaDateya - varNacatuSka aura lejasacatuSka, jiNa
- tIrthaMkara nAmakarma, sAyaM-- sAtA vedanIya kA samAja - samacaturasra
saMsthAna, paradhA--parAdhAta, tasabasa - sadazaka, paNivisAsuca paMcendriya
jAti, ucchavAsa nAmakarma aura una yAM kA, khatragAu -paka zreNi vAle ko  /
tamatamagA - - tamatamamA ke nAraka, ujjoyaM-- udyota nAmakarma kA sammasurA -
samyagdRSTi deva, mamUya uralaDuga - manuSyadvika, audArikadvika, varaM
vajraRSabhanArAca saMhanana kA apamatoapramatta saMyata, amarAuM devAyu kA,
cajagaimicchA - cAroM gati ke mithyAdRSTi jIva, ja - aura, velAnaM zeSa
prakRtiyoM kA - - --

Page #277 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## R40  **Verse Meaning:**  The **Vaikriya-dvi**, **Dev-dvi**, **Aharak-dvi**,
**Shubh Vihayoga-gati**, **Varna-chaturshka**, **Taijasa-chaturshka**,
**Tirthankara Namakarma**, **Sata Vedaniya**, **Sama-chaturshra Sansthan**,
**Paraghāt**, **Sadagak**, **Panchendriya Jāti**, **Uchchhvās** and **Uchch
Gotr** are the excellent sections of **Bandha** (bondage) that are acquired by
those who ascend the **Kshapaka Shroṇi**.  The **Naraka** beings of **Tamātama-
prabhā** acquire the excellent section of **Bandha** of **Udyota Namakarma**,
while the **Dev-manushya-dvi**, **Audārika-dvi** and **Vajra-prabhanārāch
Sanhanan** are acquired by the **Sambagdṛṣṭi** Devas and humans. The excellent
section of **Bandha** of the **Dosha Prakṛtis** is acquired by the
**Mithyadṛṣṭi** beings of all four **Gatis**.  **Special Meaning:**  These two
verses mention the owners of the excellent sections of **Bandha** of the
remaining **Prakṛtis** (principles) besides the seventeen **Prakṛtis** mentioned
in the previous verse. Some **Prakṛtis** are named, and the owners of the
excellent sections of **Bandha** of the remaining **Prakṛtis** are declared to
be the **Mithyadṛṣṭi** beings of all four **Gatis**. This is explained below.
The phrase "**Viuvvīsura**" in the verse includes thirty-two **Prakṛtis** from
**Vaikriya-dvi** to **Uchchhvās** and **Uchch Gotr**. The excellent section of
**Bandha** of these **Prakṛtis** is acquired by humans who ascend the **Kshapaka
Shroṇi**. Among these, the **Sata Vedaniya**, **Uchch Gotr** and **Sadagak**
acquire the excellent section of **Bandha** of **Gabhit Yashas-kirti Namakarma**
at the end of the tenth **Sukshma-samparāya Gunasthān**. This is because the
**Bandha** of these three **Prakṛtis** is the most pure, and the excellent
section of **Bandha** of **Punya Prakṛtis** is acquired through pure
**Pariṇāmas** (results).  Except for these three **Prakṛtis**, the excellent
section of **Bandha** of the remaining twenty-nine **Prakṛtis** is acquired in
the sixth part of the eighth **Apūrva-karaṇa Gunasthān** in the **Dev-gati**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ra40 taka gAthArtha-vaikriyadvika, devadvika, AhArakadvika, zubha vihAyogati,
varNacatuSka, taijasacatuSka, tIrthaMkara nAmakarma, sAtA vedanIya,
samacaturasra saMsthAna, parAghAta, sadagaka, paMcendriya jAti, ucchvAsa aura
ucca gotra kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha kSapaka zrINi car3ane vAle karate haiM  /
tamAtamaprabhA ke nAraka jIva udyota nAmakarma kA utkRSTa anubhAga bAMdhate haiM
tathA sambagdRSTi deva manuSyadvika, audArikadvika aura vajrapabhanArAca
saMhanana kA utkRSTa anubhAga bAMdhate haiN| doSa prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa anubhAga
baMdha cAroM gati ke mithyAdRSTi jIva karate haiM  /  vizeSArtha ina do gAthAoM
meM pUrva gAthA meM batAI gaI satraha prakRAtiyoM ke alAvA zeSa rahI prakRtiyoM
ke utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha ke svAmiyoM kA kathana kiyA hai| jinameM kucha
prakRtiyoM kA nAmollekha karake zeSa prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha kA
svAmI cAroM gati ke mithyAdRSTi jIvoM ko batalAyA hai| jisakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce
kiyA jAtA hai| _'viuvvisurA"sAsucca' pada meM vaikriyaddhika se lekara ucchvAsa,
uccagola taka battIsa prakRtiyoM ko grahaNa kiyA gayA hai| jinakA utkRSTa
anubhAga baMdha kSapaka zroNi ArohaNa karane vAle manuSyoM ko batalAyA hai  /
unameM se sAtA vedanIya, ucca gotra aura sadazaka meM gabhita yazaHkIrti
nAmakarma kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha dasaveM sukSmasaMparAya guNasthAna ke anta
meM hotA hai| kyoMki ina tIna prakRtiyoM ke baMdhakoM meM bahI sabase vizuddha
hai aura puNya prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha vizuddha pariNAmoM se hotA
hai| ukta tIna prakRtiyoM ke sivAya zeSa unatIsa prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa anubhAga
baMdha AThaveM apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ke chaThe bhAga meM devagati ke

Page #278 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  241  The binding of the thirty-two eligible natures
occurs at the time of their liberation. Among these thirty-two bound natures,
the **Apuurvakaran Kshapak** is the most pure.  The names of these thirty-two
natures, in the order of their Gunasthanas, are as follows:  * **Baikriya
Dwika**, **Dev Dwika**, **Aaharaka Dwika**, **Shubha Viha Yogati**, **Varna
Chatushk**, **Tejam Chatushk** (Tanjas, Karmanagrihalagghu, Nirman),
**Tirthankara**, **Sama Chaturasra Sansthan**, **Paraghāt**, **Yash Kirti**
(excluding these from the Sadashka), **Ghabhit Pras**, **Badar**, **Paryapt**
and nine other natures, **Panchendriya Jati**, **Uchchvas**.  The binding of the
**utkrista anubhag** of these twenty-nine natures occurs in the sixth part of
the eighth **Apuurvakaran Ganasthan**, at the time of the liberation of the
**Devagati** eligible natures.  The **utkrista anubhag** binding of the three
natures **Sata Vedaniya**, **Yash Kirti Namakarma**, and **Uchch Gotr** occurs
at the end of the tenth **Mookshma Samparaya Gunasthan**.  Having discussed the
**utkrista anubhag** binding of these seventeen and thirty-two natures, we now
consider the remaining natures. The **utkrista anubhag** binding of the
**Tamtamga Ujjoyam** (**Tamtam Prabha Namakarma**) occurs in the seventh hell,
**Naraka Udyot Namakarma**.  The reason for this is that when the **Naraka** of
the seventh hell performs the three **Karana** (Yathapravritta, etc.) for
attaining **Samyaktva**, he experiences **Mithyatva** in **Anivrittikaran**.
This act of **Mithyatva** creates two states:  1. **Prathama Sthiti**: The state
below the **Antarakaran**, lasting only for **Annamuhurta** (a moment). 2.
**Dvitiya Sthiti**: The state above the **Antarakaran**.  At the end of the
**Annamuhurta** duration of the **Prathama Sthiti**, or the state below the
**Antarakaran**, the...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 241 yogya prakRtiyoM kI baMdhanyuchitti ke samaya hotA
hai| ina umatIsa prakRtiyoM ke baMdhakoM meM apUrvakaraNa kSapaka hI ati
vizuddha hotA hai| ukta vatIsa prakRtiyoM ke nAma guNasthAnoM ke krama se isa
prakAra haiM baikriyadvika, devadvika, AhArakadvika, zubha vihAyogati,
varNacatuSka, tejamacatuSka (taMjasa, kArmaNaagRhalaghu, nirmANa), tIrthaMkara,
samacaturasra saMsthAna, parAghAta, yaza kIrti nAmakarma ko chor3akara sadazaka
meM gabhita prasa, bAdara, paryApta Adi nau prakRtiyAM, paMcendriya jAti,
ucchvAsa, ina unatIsa prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa anubhAga kA baMdha AThaveM
apUrvakaraNa gaNasthAna ke chaThe bhAga meM devagati yogya prakRtiyoM ke
baMdhaviccheda ke samaya hotA hai| sAtA vedanIya, yazaHkIrti nAmakarma aura ucca
gotra ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha dasaveM mUkSmasaMparAya
guNasthAna ke aMta meM hotA hai| isa prakAra se abhI taka 17 aura 32 prakRtiyoM
ke utkRSTa anu. bhAga baMdha ke svAmiyoM kA kathana karane ke bAda aba zeSa
prakRtiyoM ke bAre meM vicAra karate haiM 'tamatamagA ujjoyaM' yAnI
tamatamaprabhA nAmaka sAtaveM naraka ke nAraka udyota nAmakarma kA utkRSTa
anubhAga baMdha karate haiN| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki sAtaveM naraka kA nAraka
samyaktvaprApti ke liye yathApravRtta Adi tIna karaNa karate samaya
anivRttikaraNa meM mithyAtva kA aMtarakaraNa karatA hai  /  usake karane para
mithyAtva kI sthiti ke do bhAga ho jAte haiM-eka antarakaraNa se nIce kI sthiti
kA, jise prathama sthiti kahate haiM aura isakA kAla annamuhUrta mAtra hai tathA
dUsarA usase Upara kI sthiti kA, jise dvitIya sthiti kahate haiM  /  mithyAtva
kI antamuharta pramANa nIce kI sthiti ke aMtima samaya meM yAnI jisase

Page #279 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 242  In the future, when a being attains **Samyaktva**, the
**utkrista anubhag bandh** of its **udyot prakriti** occurs. This is because the
**udyot prakriti** is auspicious and its **utkrista anubhag bandh** occurs only
from pure results. Among those who bind it, the **naraka** of the seventh hell
is the one with the most pure result. Because in other gatis, when there is such
purity, the **utkrista anubhag bandh** of **prakritis** suitable for the
**manushya gati** or **deva gati** occurs. The **udyot prakriti** is among the
**prakritis** suitable for the **tiryanch gati**, and the **naraka** of the
seventh hell, upon death, is born in the **tiryanch** according to the rules.
This is why the **naraka** of the seventh hell binds **karma** suitable for the
**tiryanch gati** in every moment of **mithyatva**.  The **utkrista anubhag
bandh** of the five **prakritis** - **manushyadvik**, **oudarikadvik**, and
**vajrishabhanaracha sanhanan** - is attributed to the **samyagdristi devas**.
Although these five **prakritis** can also have their **utkrista anubhag bandh**
from pure results, they do not attain such purity due to suffering in hell. They
also do not receive the materials that purify the results like the vision of the
**tirthankaras**' glory, listening to their teachings, and paying homage, which
are available to the **devas**. This is why the **narakas** are not considered.
The **tiryanch** and **manushya**, being of the most pure results, bind only the
**prakritis** suitable for the **deva gati**. This is why the **utkrista anubhag
bandh** of these **prakritis** is attributed to the **samyagdristi devas**.  The
**utkrista anubhag bandh** of the **devaayu** is attributed to the **aprammat
muni**. Since we are discussing the attribution of **utkrista anubhag bandh**,
those who bind the **devaayu** are the most pure, being **mithyadristi**,
**avirata samyagdristi**, **deshaviriti**, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka 242 Age ke samaya meM samyaktva kI prApti hotI hai, usa samaya meM usa
jIva ke udyota prakRti kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha hotA hai  /  kyoMki yaha
udyota prakRti zubha hai aura vizuddha pariNAmoM se hI usakA utkRSTa anubhAga
baMdha hotA hai tathA usake bAMdhane vAloM meM sAtaveM naraka kA ukA nAraka hI
ati vizuddha pariNAma vAlA hai  /  kyoMki anya gatiyoM meM itanI vizuddhi hone
para manuSyagati athavA devagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha
hotA hai | udyota prakRti tiryaMcagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM meM se hai aura
sAtaveM naraka kA nAraka marakara niyama se tiyaMca meM janma letA hai, jisase
sAtaveM naraka kA nAraka mithyAtva meM pratisamaya tiryaMcagati yogya karmoM kA
baMdha karatA hai| manuSyadvika, audArikadvika aura vajaRSabhanArAca saMhanana,
ina pAMca prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa anubhAga bandha kA svAmI samyagdRSTi devoM ko
batalAyA hai--sammasurA magu urldugdhaair| yadyapi ina pAMca prakatiyoM kA
utkRSTa anubhAgabaMdha vizuddha pariNAma vAle nAraka bhI kara sakate haiM,
lekina ve naraka ke duHkhoM se pIr3ita rahane ke kAraNa utanI vizuddhi prApta
nahIM kara pAte haiM tathA unako devoM kI taraha tIrthaMkaroM kI vibhUti ke
darzana, upadezazravaNa, vaMdana Adi pariNAmoM ko vizuddha karane vAlI sAmagrI
bhI nahIM milatI hai, jisase nArakoM kA grahaNa nahIM kiyA gayA hai  /  tiryaMca
aura manuSya to ati vizuddhi pariNAma vAle hone para devagati ke yogya
prakRtiyoM kA hI bandha karate haiM  /  isIliye ina prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa
anubhAga bandha kA svAmI samyagdRSTi devoM ko batalAyA hai| devAyu ke utkRSTa
anubhAga vaMdha kA svAmI apramatta muni ko batalAyA hai  /  kyoMki yahAM utkRSTa
anubhAga baMdha ke svAmiyoM ko batalAyA jA rahA hai, ataH devAyu kA bandha
karane vAle mithyA dRSTi, avirata samyagdRSTi, dezavirati Adi se vahI ati
vizuddha hote haiM  /

Page #280 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth 243  Thus, the masters of the superior section bondage
of 42 auspicious karmas and 14 inauspicious karmas have been separately
explained. The masters of the superior section bondage of the remaining 68
karmas have been explained for the composite resultant Mithyatva Jivas of all
four gatis - "Chaugayimiccha use saanam."  Having explained the masters of the
superior section bondage of all the bondable karmas, now we explain the masters
of their inferior section bondage.  "Thiti amichcha madarasam sanjamummuho
minchho. Vitiyakasay aviray ves pamalo araisoe." ||66||  Word meaning - Thitirg
- Sthyanaddhitrik, Amilch - Anantanuthrandhi Kashaya and Mithyatva Modaniya,
Pasar - Naghanya anubhag bandh, Sanjamummuho - Samyaktva Charitra ke abhimukh,
Michyo - Mithyadristi, Vipatiyakatay - Second and third Kashaya, Aviray - Avirat
Samyagdristi, Des - Deshaviriti, Pamato - Pramattavirat, Araisoe - Arati and
Shok Mohaniya.  1. Here, the superior section bondable of 68 karmas for the
three Kashayavant Mithyatva Jivas of all four gatis have been explained. It
should be understood that, except for Hasya, Rali, Strived, Purushved, the first
and the last, the remaining 56 karmas, except for Sanhanan and Sansthan, have
superior section bondage for the three Kashayee Mithyadristi of all four gatis.
And the said twelve karmas have superior section bondage for the Jivas present
in the respective Samvelesh of that particular karma. For example, intense
Samklesh is required for the Rasabandh of Napusakaved, less for Strived, and
even less for Purushved. It should be understood in the same way everywhere.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 243 isa prakAra se 42 puNya prakRtiyoM aura 14 pApa
prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha ke svAmiyoM ko to alaga-alaga battalA diyA
hai  /  inase zeSa rahI 68 prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha kA svAmI cAroM
gati ke saMzliSTa pariNAmI mithyASTi jIvoM ko batalAyA hai-caugaimicchA u
sesANaM  / ' samasta baMdhayogya prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa anubhAga baMzva ke
svAmiyoM ko batalAkara aba unake jaghanya anubhAga baMdha ke svAmiyoM ko
batalAte haiN| thIti amiccha madarasaM saMjamummuho mincho| vitiyakasAya aviraya
vesa pamalo araisoe  // 66 //  zabdArtha-thotirga-styAnaddhitrika, amilcha
-anaMtAnutraMdhI kaSAya aura mithyAtva modanIya kA, pasara-naghanya anubhAga
baMdha saMjabhummuho- samyaktva caritra ke abhimukha, micyomithyAdRSTi,
vipatiyakatAya-dUsarI aura tIsarI kapAya kA, aviraya - avirata samyagdRSTi,
desa-dezavirati, pamato-pramattavirata, araisoe-arati aura zoka mohanIya kaa| 1
yahA~ sAmAnya se 68 prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa anubhAga bandhaka yAroM gati ke tIna
kaSAyavaMta mithyAiSTi jIva batalAye haiN| isameM utanA vizeSa samajhanA cAhie
ki hAsya, rali, strIveda, puruSaveda, pahale aura antima ko chor3akara zeSa
saMhanana aura saMsthAna ke sivAya 56 prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa anubhAga bandha tIna
kaSAyI cAroM gati ke mithyA dRSTi karate haiM aura ukta bAraha prakRtiyoM kA
usa-usa prakRti ke bandha yogya saMvaleza meM vartamAna jIva utkRSTa
anubhAganandhra karate haiN| jaise ki napusakaveda ke rasabaMdha meM tIvra
saMkleza cAhie, usakI apekSA strIveda ko rasabaMdha meM kama aura usakI apekSA
bhI puruSaveda ke utkRSTa rasabaMdha meM hIna saMklega cAhiye  /  so prakAra
sarvatra samajhanA cAhie  /

Page #281 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 244  **Verse Meaning:**  The **Sthāna-dvitriya**, **Ananta-
anubandhi** **Kaṣāya** and **Mithyātva** along with **Samyaktva** (Right Faith)
lead to the attainment of **Cāritra** (Conduct).  The **Mithyādṛṣṭi** (False
Faith) binds **Jighanya-anubhāga-bandha** (Minor Karma-Bonding) towards
**Cāritra**.  The **Avirata-samyagdṛṣṭi** (Unwavering Right Faith) binds the
second **Kaṣāya** towards **Deśa-virati** (Non-attachment to the World)
**Cāritra**.  The **Deśa-virati** binds the third **Kaṣāya** towards **Sarva-
virati** (Non-attachment to Everything) **Cāritra**.  The **Pramatta-samyata**
(Careless Restraint) binds the **Arati** (Dislike) and **Śoka** (Sorrow)
**Mohaniya** (Attractive) **Jighanya-anubhāga-bandha**.  **Special Meaning:**
This verse begins by describing the **Jighanya-anubhāga-bandha** of those who
possess **Jighanya-anubhāga-bandha** by contrasting them with those who possess
**Utkṛṣṭa-anubhāga-bandha** (Superior Karma-Bonding).  Previously, it was
explained that **Jighanya-anubhāga-bandha** of **Aśubha-prakṛti** (Unwholesome
Nature) arises from **Viśuddha-pariṇāma** (Pure Results) and **Jighanya-
anubhāga-bandha** of **Śubha-prakṛti** (Wholesome Nature) arises from
**Saṁkleśa-pariṇāma** (Impure Results).  The **Prakṛti** mentioned in this verse
are all **Aśubha-prakṛti**.  Therefore, the verse uses the term "**Ho**"
(possessing) to describe those who bind these **Prakṛti**.  The term
"**Saṁjamummuh**" (one who is about to attain restraint) is applied to each
**Prakṛti**.  This means that the **Jīva** who is about to attain restraint in
the next moment, will bind the **Jighanya-anubhāga-bandha** of that **Prakṛti**
in the final moment of their **Guṇasthāna** (State of Being).  The term
"**Saṁjamummuh**" should be understood in conjunction with each **Guṇasthāna**.
This means that the **Mithyādṛṣṭi** **Jīva** who is about to attain
**Samyaktva** (Right Faith) will bind the **Jighanya-anubhāga-bandha** of
**Sthāna-dvitriya**, **Anubandhi** **Kaṣāya**, and **Mithyātva** **Mohaniya** in
the final moment of their **Guṇasthāna**.  **A-pratyākhyāna-āvaraṇa** (Non-
Rejection Covering)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 244 zataka gAthArtha - styAnaddhitrika, anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya aura mithyAtva
samaya kA samyaktva sahita cAritra prApta karane ke abhimukha mithyAdRSTi
jaghanya anubhAga baMdha karate haiN| dezavirati cAritra ke sammukha huA avirata
samyagdRSTi dUsarI kaSAya kA aura sarvavirati cAritra ke sanmukha hone vAlA deza
- virati tIsarI kaSAya kA aura pramattasaMyata arati va zoka mohanIya kA
jaghanya anubhAga baMdha karatA hai  /  vizeSArtha - utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha ke
svAmiyoM ko batalAkara isa gAthA se jaghanya anubhAga baMdha ke svAmiyoM kA
kathana prArambha karate haiM  /  pUrva meM yaha batalAyA gayA hai ki vizuddha
pariNAmoM se azubha prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha aura saMkleza
pariNAmoM se zubha prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha hotA hai| isa gAthA
meM jina prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha lAyA hai, ve saba azubha
prakRtiyAM hai| ataH unakA anubhAga baMdha karane vAle svAmiyoM ke liye vizeSaNa
diyA hai'ho' saMyama ke abhimukha manuSya, jo gAyA meM batAI gaI azubha
prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya anubhAga baMdha kA svAmI hai  /  gAthA meM Aye isa
'saMjamummuha' pada ko pratyeka ke sAtha lagAyA jAtA hai arthAt jo saMyama
dhAraNa karane ke abhimukha hai - jo jIva tatkAla dUsare samaya meM hI saMyama
dhAraNa kara legA, usake apane-apane usa guNasthAna ke aMtima samaya meM usa
prakRti kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha hotA hai| yahAM saMyama ke abhimukha pada ko
pratyeka guNasthAna ke sAtha jor3akara Azaya samajhanA caahiye| jo isa prakAra
hai - styAnaddhitrika, anubaMdhI kapAcaka aura mithyAtva mohanIya ina ATha
prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha samyaktva saMyama ke abhimukha
midhyAdRSTi jIva apane guNasthAna ke aMtima samaya meM karatA hai|
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa

Page #282 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Panchama Karma Grantha The least degree of bondage of the four passions
(kashaya) is undertaken by the non-celibate right-believer (avirati
samyagdristi) at the end of his gunasthana (spiritual stage), who is inclined
towards the vow of restraint (samyama-desasamyama). The least degree of bondage
of the four passions of deluding karma (pratyakhyanavarana) is undertaken by the
person with the gunasthana of partial restraint (desavirata), who is inclined
towards the vow of complete restraint (sarvavirata-mahavrata). The least degree
of bondage of aversion (arati) and grief (shoka) is undertaken by the careless
ascetic (pramatta muni) who is inclined towards the vow of non-negligent
restraint (apramatta samyama) at the end of his gunasthana.  The summary is that
the least degree of bondage of the eight karmas, such as sleep (styanaghrita),
is undertaken by the person in the first gunasthana when he proceeds towards the
fourth gunasthana by becoming inclined towards right belief. The least degree of
bondage of the four passions of non-renunciation (apratyakhyanavarana) is
undertaken by the person in the fifth gunasthana - devitisamyama, who is
inclined towards the partial restraint vow and the complete restraint vow. The
characteristic of the vow of partial restraint (desavirata) is "the partially
restrained right-believer, who is inclined towards the partial restraint vow and
the complete restraint vow, undertakes the least degree of bondage". Similarly,
the partial restraint of the third set of four passions (trtiyakasayacatustaya)
is "the one inclined towards the vow of restraint (samyamonnukha) undertakes the
least degree of bondage of the vow of complete restraint and the partial
restraint vow". And the careless ascetic (pramattamati) is inclined towards the
vow of non-negligent restraint (apramattasamyama).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karma grantha 245 kapAyacatuSka kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha saMyama-
dezasaMyama ke abhimukha avirata samyagdRSTi jIva apane guNasthAna ke anta
samaya meM karatA hai| pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAyacatuSka kA jaghanya anubhAga
baMdha saMyama arthAt sarvavirati-mahAvatoM ko dhAraNa karane ke sanmukha
dezavirati guNasthAna vAlA joba apane guNasthAna ke aMta samaya meM karatA hai
tathA arati va zoka kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha saMyama arthAt apramatta saMyama
ke abhibhukha pramatta muni apane guNasthAna ke anta meM karatA hai  /  '
sArAMza yaha hai ki styAnaddhitrika Adi ATha prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga
baMdha pahale guNasthAna vAlA jaba samyaktva ke abhimukha hokara cauthe
guNasthAna meM jAtA hai taba pahale guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM karatA hai
/  apratyAkhyAnAdharaNa kaSAyacatuSka kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha pAMcaveM
gaNasthAna-deviti 'sajamummuhati samma kasvasaMkamAmimukhaH samyaktvasAmAyika
pratipitsaH"  /  apratyAsthAnAvaraNa lakSaNastra " avirata sabhyamhaSTi
saMpagAmimukha:-dezaviratisAmAyika pratipitlumandarasaM vaghnAti  /  tathA
tRtIyakaSAyacatuSTayasya deza virati: " saMyamonmukhaH""sarvaviratisAmAyika
praninsuimandarasaM baghnAti  /  tathA pramattamatiH
saMyamonpuna:-apramattasaMyama prati pityH-| -paMcama karmagramya TIkA, pR071
lekina karmamakRti pR0 160 tathA paMcasaMgraha prathama bhAga meM mayama kA
artha saMyama hI kiyA gayA hai| yathA - aSTAnAM karmaNA samyaktvaM saMyamaM ca
yugapattipasukAmo mithyASTripacaramasamaya jaghanyAnubhAgabaMdhayAmI,
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNakaSAyANAmaviratasampaSTiH saMyamaM pratipattakAma:
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNAnAM deza virataH sarvaviratipratipizsRjaghanyAnubhAgabandhaM
karoti  /  go0 karmakAMDa gAthA 171 meM 'saMjamummuho' pada kA ApAya batalAne ke
liye 'saMjamaguNapacchide' para AyA hai| TIkAkAra ne saMyama kA artha - saMyama
hI kiyA hai|

Page #283 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A being in the fourth *guna-sthana* (stage of spiritual development), who is
headed towards the *shataka* (a state of liberation), experiences the binding of
the subtlest aspects of the four *kṣayās* (afflictions) at the end of the fourth
*guna-sthana*. This binding of the subtlest aspects of the four *kṣayās* leads
to the transition from the fifth *guna-sthana* to the sixth *guna-sthana*.
Similarly, at the end of the fifth *guna-sthana*, the binding of the subtlest
aspects of the two *prakṛtis* (natural tendencies) of *arati* (disgust) and
*śoka* (sorrow) leads to the transition from the sixth *guna-sthana* to the
seventh *guna-sthana*. In other words, before attaining the next *guna-sthana*,
the binding of the subtlest aspects of *sthāna-dṛṣṭi-vik* (attachment to the
body) and other *prakṛtis* occurs.  It is important to understand that even if a
being does not progress from the first *guna-sthana* to the fourth *guna-sthana*
but instead goes to the fifth, sixth, or seventh *guna-sthana*, or if they do
not progress from the fourth *guna-sthana* to the fifth but instead go to the
sixth or seventh *guna-sthana*, the binding of the subtlest aspects of these
*prakṛtis* will still occur. This is because the binding of the subtlest aspects
of these *prakṛtis* requires pure *parināmas* (transformations), and in such
cases, there are even more pure *parināmas* present. This is why the verse
mentions the term "**sanjamummuho**" (those who are inclined towards a
particular type of restraint). It means that if a being is inclined towards any
type of restraint associated with a particular *guna-sthana*, they will
experience the binding of the subtlest aspects of these *prakṛtis*.  Now, we
will discuss the binding of the subtlest aspects of other *prakṛtis* in those
who are subject to them:  **अपमाइ हारगदुगं दुनिअसुवमहासरहकुच्छा ।
भयमुवधायमपुस्खो अनियट्टी पुरिससंजलणे ॥७॥**  **Word meanings:**  * **अपमाइ** -
non-negligent monk * **हारगबुगं** - attachment to food * **दुनिए** - two types
of sleep * **असुघल** - improper *varna-caturṣka* (four types of food) * **हासरइ.
कुच्छा** - laughter, *rati* (attachment), and *jugupsā* (disgust) * **पय** -
fear * **उबघाय** - *upadhāt* (a type of mental affliction) * **अनियट्टी** -
unrestrained * **पुरिससंजलणे** - those who are engaged in worldly activities

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka kI ora unmukha cauthA guNasthAnavI jIva cauthe guNasthAna ke antima
samaya meM karatA hai  /  pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAyacatuSka kA jaghanya anubhAga
baMdha pAMcaveM guNasthAna se chaThe guNasthAna meM jAtA hai taba pAMcaveM
guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM tathA arati aura zoka ina do prakRtiyoM kA
jaghanya anubhAga baMdha chaThe guNasthAna se sAtaveM guNasthAna meM jAne dAlA
chaThe guNasthAna ke aMtima samaya meM karatA hai| yAnI Age-Age kA guNasthAna
prApta karane se pahale samaya meM styAnaddhivika Adi prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya
anubhAga baMdha hotA hai| ukta prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya anubhAga baMdha hone ke
prasaMga meM itanA aura samajha lenA cAhiye ki yadi pahale guNasthAna se cauthe
guNasthAna meM na jAkara pAMcaveM yA chaThe yA sAta guNasthAna meM jAye, isI
taraha cauthe guNasthAna se pAMcaveM meM na jAkara chaThe yA sAtaveM guNasthAna
meM jAye to bhI unakA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha hogaa| kyoMki ukta prakRtiyoM ke
jaghanya anubhAga baMdha ke liye vizuddha pariNAmoM kI AvazyakatA hai aura usa
dazA meM to pahale se bhI adhika vizuddha pariNAma hote haiN| isI se gAthA meM
'saMjamummuho' pada diyA gayA hai| jisakA yaha artha hai ki amukaamuka
guNasthAna vAle saMyama ke medoM meM se kisI bhI saMyama kI ora abhimukha hote
haiM to unako ukta prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha hotA hai| aba Age anya
prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya anubhAga baMdha ke svAmiyoM ko batalAte haiN| apamAi
hAragadugaM duniasuvamahAsarahakucchA  /  bhayamuvadhAyamapuskho aniyaTTI
purisasaMjalaNe  // 7 //  zabdArtha-apamAi-apramatta muni,
hAragabugaMAhArakadvika, dunie-do nidrA, asughala-aprazasta varNacasuSka,
hAsarai. kucchA-hAsya, rati aura jugupsA, payabhaya, ubaghAya-upadhAta

Page #284 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chamatkara Grantha 247 The one with the Apurvakarana Guna-sthana (stage of
spiritual development) of the Namakarmana (name-determining karmic) type, the
one with the Anivritibadara Guna-sthana, the Purisa (male) Veda, and the
Samjvalana (flaming) Kasaya (passions).  The Apramatta (vigilant) Muni (ascetic)
perform the Jighanya (minimum) Anubhaga (intensity) Bandha (bondage) of the
Aharakadrwika (food-body and food-organ). The one with the Apurvakarana Guna-
sthana performs the Jighanya Anubhaga Bandha of the two Nidra (sleep), the
Aprasasta (inauspicious) Varnacatushka (four inauspicious colors), Hasya
(laughter), Rati (attachment), Jugupsa (disgust), Bhaya (fear), and Upaghaata
(injury) Namakarmas (name-determining karmas). And the one in the Anivritibadara
Guna-sthana performs the Jighanya Anubhaga Bandha of the Purisa Veda and the
Samjvalana Kasaya.  Viseshartha (special meaning): This Gatha (verse) describes
the owners of the Jighanya Anubhaga Bandha of the Aharakadrwika, etc. prakrities
(karmic types).  First, it is said about the Aharakadrwika that the Apramatta
Muni (vigilant ascetic) in the seventh Apramatta Samyata (vigilant with
restraint) Guna-sthana perform its Jighanya Anubhaga Bandha. But when do they do
it? The explanation is that the Aharakadrwika are Prasasta (auspicious)
prakrities, so their Jighanya Anubhaga Bandha is done by the Apramatta Muni when
they are inclined towards the sixth Pramatta Samyata (restless with restraint)
Guna-sthana, i.e., when they are in the state of descending from the seventh
Guna-sthana to the sixth, their dispositions become Samklishta (afflicted), and
in that state, they perform the Jighanya Anubhaga Bandha of the Aharakadrwika.
The Nidradrwika (sleep and drowsiness), the Aprasasta Varnacatushka (four
inauspicious colors), Hasya, Rati, Jugupsa, Bhaya, and Upaghaata - the Jighanya
Anubhaga Bandha of these eleven prakrities is done by the one with the
Apurvakarana Guna-sthana and the one with the Anivritibadara Samparaya Guna-
sthana (stage of partial subsidence of passions).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cama karma grantha 247 nAmakarma kA, apuSyoapUrvakaraNa guNasthAna vAlA,
aniyaTTIanivRttivAdara guNasthAna bAlA, purisa .. puruSa veda,
saMjalaNesaMjvalana kaSAya kaa| gAyA -AhArakaddhika kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha
apramatta muni karate haiN| do nidrA, aprazasta varNacatuSka, hAsya, rati,
jugupsA, bhaya aura upaghAta nAmakarma kA apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna vAle jaghanya
anubhAga baMdha karate haiM aura anivRttibAdara guNasthAnavartI puruSa veda,
saMjvalana kaSAya kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha karate haiN| vizeSArtha - isa
gAthA meM AhArakadvika Adi prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya anubhAga baMdha ke svAmiyoM ko
batalAte haiN| sarvaprathama AhArakadvika ke bAre meM kahate haiM ki 'apamAi
hAragadurga' AhArakadvika (AhAraka zarIra aura AhAraka aMgopAMga) kA jaghanya
anubhAga baMdha apramatta muni-sAta apramatta saMyaMta guNasthAnavartI muni
karate haiM  /  lekina kaba karate haiM, isakA spaSTIkaraNa yaha hai ki
AhArakadvika yaha prazasta prakRtiyAM haiM ataH inakA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha
apramattamuni usa samaya karate haiM jaba ve chaThe pramatta saMyata guNasthAna
ke abhimukha hote haiM  /  yAni sAtaveM guNasthAna meM chaThe guNasthAna kI ora
avarohaNa karane kI sthiti meM hote haiM taba unake pariNAma saMkliSTa hote haiM
aura usa sthiti meM AhArakadvika kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha karate haiN|
nidrAdvika (nidrA aura pracalA), azubha varNacatuSka, (azubha varNa, azubha
gaMdha, azubha rasa, azubha sparsa) tathA hAsya, rati, jugupsA, bhaya aura
upaghAta, ina gyAraha prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha apUrvakaraNa
guNasthAnavAle tathA puruSa veda aura saMjvalana kaSAya kA jaghanya anubhAga
baMdha anivRttibAdarasaMparAya guNasthAna vAle karate haiN| yahA~ ye donoM

Page #285 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  248 One should take the **kshapaka** (destroyer) of the **guna-
sthana** (quality-state). Because **nidra** (sleep) etc. are **ashubha-
prakriti** (inauspicious natures) and the **jghanya-anubhaga-bandha** (grossest
binding) of **ashubha-prakriti** occurs from **vishuddha-parinama** (pure
results) and among their binders, the **kshapaka-apuurvakarana** (destroyer of
the non-originated) and **kshapaka-anivritti-badarasam-paraya-guna-sthana**
(destroyer of the non-reversal, non-obstruction, and non-attachment quality-
state) beings are especially pure. The **jghanya-anubhaga-bandha** of these
natures occurs at the time of their **vyuchchitti** (disintegration).
**Vigdhavarane sumo manutiriya sudumavilagatigaaoo. Vekkimamara tishya ujjoy
uraldugam.** || 71 ||  **Word meaning:** **Vigdhavarana** - five **antaraya**
(hindrances) and nine **avaran** (coverings) (of knowledge and perception),
**sumo** - subtle **samparaya** (association), **manutiriya** - human,
**tithech** - there, **suhamvilagati** - subtle **trik** (three),
**viphalatrik** - failed **trik**, **aala** - four **ayu** (lifetimes),
**begusvichhakka** - **kriyatk** (action-based), **amara** - god, **niraya** -
hell, **ujjiy** - **udyot** (illumination) **namakarma** (karmic action),
**uraldugam** - **oudarikadvik** (generous two).  ---  **Shakshak**  ---
**Gatha** (Verses): - The **jghanya-anubhaga-bandha** of five **antaraya** and
five **jnana-avaran** (knowledge coverings) and four **darshan-avaran**
(perception coverings) occurs in the **sukshma-samparaya** (subtle association)
**guna-sthana** (quality-state). The **jghanya-anubhaga-bandha** of humans and
**tithech** (there) **sukshma-trik**, **vikalatrik**, four **ayu** (lifetimes)
and **vaikriyashatk** (six types of actions) and the **jghanya-anubhaga-bandha**
of **udyot** (illumination) **namakarma** (karmic action) and **oudarikadvik**
(generous two) occurs in gods and hell beings.  **Vishesharth** (Special
meaning): **Vigdhavarane sumo** - the **jghanya-anubhaga-bandha** of five
natures of **antaraya-karma** (hindrance karma) (**dan**, **labh**, **bhog**,
**upbhog**, **virya antaraya**), five natures of **mati-jnana-avaran**
(knowledge covering) etc. and four natures of **chakshu-darshan-avaran**
(perception covering) etc. occurs in the **sukshma-samparaya** (subtle
association) called...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 248 guNasthAna kSapaka zroNi ke lenA caahiye| kyoMki nidrA Adi azubha
prakRtiyAM haiM aura azubha prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha vizuddha
pariNAmoM se hotA hai aura unake baMdhakoM meM kSapaka apUrvakaraNa tathA
kSapaka anivRttibAdarasaM parAya guNasthAna vAle jIva hI vizeSa vizuddha hote
haiN| ina prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha apanI-apanI vyucchitti ke
samaya hotA hai  /  vigdhAvaraNe sumo maNutiriyA suDumavigalatigaAU  /
vekkimamarA tizyA ujjoya uraladugaM  //  71  //  zabdArtha - vigghAvaraNa pAMca
aMtarAya aura nau AvaraNa ( jJAna darzana ke) kA sumo sUkSmasaMparAya vAlA,
maNutiriyA manuSya aura titheca suhamavigalatigasUkSmatrika, viphalatrika, ALa
cAra Ayu kA, begusvichakkaM kriyaTka kA amarA - deva, niraya - nAraka, ujjIya
udyota nAmakarma kA uraladurga - audArikadvikakA  /  - -- zakSaka -- gAthAyeM -
pAMca aMtarAya tathA pAMca jJAnAvaraNa aura cAra darzanAvaraNa kA jaghanya
anubhAga baMdha sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna vAlA karatA hai| manuSya aura
tithaMca sUkSmatrika, vikalatrika, cAra Ayu aura vaikriyaSaTka kA jadhanya
anubhAga baMdha tathA udyota nAmakarma evaM audArikadvika kA jaghanya anubhAga
baMdha deva tathA nAraka karate haiM  /  vizeSArthavigvAvaraNe suhamo' aMtarAya
karma kI pAMca prakRtiyoM (dAna, lAbha, bhoga, upabhoga, vIrya antarAya),
matijJAnAvaraNa Adi jJAnAvaraNa kI pAMca prakRtiyoM tathA cakSudarzanAvaraNa Adi
darzanAvaraNa ko cAra prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha sUkSmasaMparAya
nAmaka

Page #286 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ## 249  The क्षपक (Kshapaka) who resides in the tenth
गुणस्थान (Gunasthan) performs it at the culmination of that गुणस्थान. Because
among their binders, this is the most pure.  The मनुष्य (Manushya) and तिर्यंच
(Tiryanch) are the masters of the inferior portion of these sixteen प्रकृति
(Prakriti) - मूक्ष्मत्रिक (Mookshmatik), विकलत्रिक (Vikalatrik), four आयु (Ayu),
and वैक्रियषटक (Vaikriyashatak) (which includes बक्रिय शरीर (Bakriya Sharira),
त्रैकिय अंगोपांग (Traikiya Angopang), देवगति (Devagati), देवानुपूर्वी
(Devanupurvi), नरकगति (Narakagati), and नरकानुपूर्वी (Narakanupurvi)).  Out of
these sixteen प्रकृति, they do not bind fourteen of them from birth as देव (Dev)
or नारक (Narak). The inferior portion of मनुष्यायु (Manushyayu) and तिर्यंचायु
(Tiryancyayu) is bound along with the inferior स्थितिबंध (Sthitibandh). Because
these two are प्रशस्त प्रकृति (Prashasht Prakriti), their inferior portion is
bound by संक्लेश परिणाम (Sanklesh Parinam) but the inferior स्थितिबंध is also
bound by संक्लेश परिणाम.    The देव and नारक do not take birth as मनुष्य and
तिर्यंच with inferior स्थिति, therefore they do not bind their inferior portion.
In other words, the one who binds the inferior स्थितिबंध of these two प्रकृति,
also binds their inferior अनुभागबंध (Anubhagbandh). Therefore, the मनुष्य and
तिर्यंच are said to be the masters of the inferior अनुभागबंध of these sixteen
प्रकृति, including मूक्ष्मत्रिक etc.  The देव and नारक bind the inferior
अनुभागबंध of these three प्रकृति - उद्योत (Udyot), औदारिकट्टिक (Audarikatik). It
is important to understand that the inferior अनुभागबंध of औदारिक अंगोपांग
(Audarik Angopang) is bound by the वैमानिक देव (Vaimanik Dev) who reside above
ईशान स्वर्ग (Ishan Swarg). Because the देव who reside up to ईशान स्वर्ग bind the
एकेन्द्रिययोग्य (Ekendriyogy) प्रकृति due to उत्कृष्ट संक्लेश (Utkrisht
Sanklesh), and एकेन्द्रिय (Ekendriya) do not have अंगोपांग. Therefore, the देव
who reside up to ईशान स्वर्ग do not bind the inferior अनुभागबंध of औदारिक
अंगोपांग नामकर्म (Audarik Angopang Namakarma).  The मनुष्य and तिर्यंच bind the
inferior अनुभागबंध of the aforementioned three प्रकृति...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama karmagrantha 249 dasaveM guNasthAnavartI kSapaka usa guNasthAna ke
caramasamaya meM karatA hai| kyoMki inake baMdhakoM meM vahI sabase vizuddha
hai| mUkSmatrika (sUkSma, sAdhAraNa, aparyApta nAmakama), vikalatrika, cAra Ayu
aura vaikriyaSaTaka (bakriya zarIra, traikiya aMgopAMga, devagati, devAnupUrvI,
narakagati, narakAnupUrvI), ina solaha prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya anubhAga ke svAmI
manuSya aura tiryaMca haiM  /  ina solaha prakRtiyoM meM te manuSyAyu aura
tiryaMcAyu ke sivAya caudaha prakRtiyoM ko to deva va nAraka janma se hI nahIM
bAMdhate haiM tathA manuSya aura tiryaMca Ayu kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha
jaghanya sthitibaMdha ke sAtha hI hotA hai| kyoMki ye donoM prazasta prakRtiyAM
haiM ataH inakA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha to saMkleza pariNAmoM se hotA hI hai
kintu jaghanya sthitibaMdha bhI saMkleza pariNAmoM se hotA hai  /  deva aura
nAraka jaghanya sthiti vAle manuSya aura tiryacoM meM utpanna nahIM hote haiM,
ataH ve inakA jaghanya baMdha nahIM karate haiM  /  arthAt ina do prakRtiyoM kA
jo jaghanya sthitibaMdha karatA hai vahI unakA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha bhI
karatA hai| isaliye sUkSmatrika Adi solaha prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya anubhAga
baMdha kA svAmI manuSya aura tiryaMca ko batalAyA hai| udyota aura audArikaTTika
ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha deva aura nAraka karate haiN|
isameM itanA vizeSa samajhanA cAhiye ki audArika aMgopAMga kA jaghanya anubhAga
baMdha IzAna svarga se Upara ke vaimAnika deva karate haiM | kyoMki IzAna svarga
taka ke deva utkRSTa saMkleza ke hone para ekendriyayogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
karate haiM aura ekendriyoM ko aMgopAMga nahIM hote haiM  /  ataH IzAna svarga
taka ke devoM ke audArika aMgopAMga nAmakarma kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha nahIM
hotA hai| manuSya aura tiyaMcoM ke ukta tIna prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga

Page #287 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 250  **Shakshak**  The reason why there is no bondage of the lowest segment
of the three natures is that the beings who bind the natures suitable for the
Tiryanch (animal) also bind the lowest segment of these. But humans and Tiryanch
bind the natures suitable for hell, as many complex results are required for the
bondage of the lowest segment of these three natures. Therefore, humans and
Tiryanch are not said to bind the lowest segment of these natures.
**Tiryaduganiam tamtama jimviray nirayvinigathavarayam. Asuhamaayab sammo va
sathirasubhajasa siara. ||72||**  **Word Meaning:**  * Tiryadug - Tiryanch
(animal) * Niram - Low-born * Tamtama - The four charaks of Tamas-Tama-Prabha
(darkness-darkness-light) * Jinam - Tirthankara (liberated soul) * Aniray -
Avirat Samyagdristi (one with unwavering right faith) * Nirayvin - Three-gati
(three realms) except hell * Igavarayam - One-indriya (sense) Aati and Sthavar
(stationary) karmas * Amuhama - Saudharma (heaven) * Ayab - Ishaan (heaven) *
Sammo va - Samyagdristi (right faith) or Mithyadristi (wrong faith) *
Sayadhirsubhajasa - Saataveedniya (seven-fold knowledge), Sthir (stable), Shubh
(auspicious), and Yashakirti (fame) karmas * Siara - These, along with their
opposing natures.  **Verse Meaning:**  * The lowest segment of the Tiryanch and
low-born is bound by the seventh hell, the Tamas-Tama-Prabha karma. * The lowest
segment of the Tirthankara karma is bound by the Avirat Samyagdristi beings. *
The lowest segment of the one-indriya Aati and Sthavar karmas is bound by the
beings of the three realms except hell. * The lowest segment of the Aatpa karma
is bound by the Devas of Saudharma and Ishaan heavens. * The lowest segment of
the Saataveedniya, Sthir, Shubh, Yashakirti, and their opposing natures are
bound by the Samyagdristi or Mithyadristi beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 250 zakSaka vandha na hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki jo jIva tiryaMcati ke yogya
prakatiyoM kA bandha karatA hai, vahI inakA bhI jaghanya anubhAga bandha karatA
hai  /  kintu manuSya aura tiryaMcoM ke utane saMkliSTa pariNAma hoM jitane ki
ina tIna prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya anubhAgabaMdha ke liye Avazyaka haiM to be
narakagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA ho bandha karate haiM  /  isIliye manuSya aura
tiryaMcoM ko ina prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAgabaMdha nahIM batAyA hai  /
tiriduganiaM tamatamA jimaviraya nirayaviNigathAvarayaM  /  AsuhamAyaba sammo va
sAthirasubhajasA siarA  // 72 //  zabdArtha tiriduga-tiyaMcadvika,
niraMnIcagotra kA, tamatamA - tamaHtamaprabhA ke cAraka jiNaM-tIrthakara
nAmakarma kA, aniraya-avirata samyagdRSTi manuSya, niraviNa - naraka ke sivAya
tIna gati vAle jIva, igAvarayaM-ekendriya Ati aura sthAvara nAmakarma kA,
AmuhamA saudharma IzAna svarga taka ke deva, Ayava Atapa nAmakarma kA, sammo va-
samyagdRSTi athavA mithyASTi, sAyadhirasubhajasAmAnAvedanIya, sthira nAma, zubha
nAma aura zakIpti nAmakoM kA, siarA-inako pratipakSI prakRtiyoM sahita  /
gAthArtha - tiyaMcadvika aura nocagotra kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha
tamaHtamaprabhA nAmaka sAtaveM naraka ke nAraka karate haiM  /  tIrthakara
nAmakarma kA jaghanya anubhAgabandha avirata samyagdRSTi jIva karatA hai|
narakagati ke sivAya zeSa tIna gati vAle jIva ekendriya jAti aura sthAvara
nAmakarma kA jaghanya anubhAgabandha karate haiM  /  saudharma aura IzAna svarga
taka ke deva Atapa nAmakarma kA jaghanya anubhAgabaMdha karate haiM  /
sAtAvedanIya, sthira, zubha, yazaHkIrti aura ina cAroM ko pratipakSI prakRtiyoM
kA jaghanya anubhAgabaMdha samyagdRSTi athavA mithyAdRSTi jIva karate haiN|

Page #288 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth 251  **Special Meaning:** The term "tiriduganitamatma"
refers to the seven hells, which are the lowest sections of the three natures:
*tiryanch* (animal), *tiyanchan* (human), and *neech* (low caste). This is
explained as follows: When a being in the seventh hell, while performing the
three actions of *yathpravritti* (right action), *adi* (beginning), and *karan*
(cause), reaches the final stage of *anivrittikaran* (cessation), they
experience the lowest level of bondage of these three natures. These three
natures are inauspicious, and only the completely pure soul experiences their
lowest level of bondage. Therefore, among those bound by these natures, the
being in the seventh hell is considered particularly pure. Because, with such
purity, other beings would experience bondage in the human realm or higher
castes. This is why the being in the seventh hell is considered to have
experienced the lowest level of bondage of the three natures: *tiryanch*,
*tiyanchan*, and *neech*.  The lowest level of bondage of the *tirthankara*
(liberated soul) nature is experienced by the *avirata samyagdristi* (one who
has attained perfect knowledge) being, as described in the *Jinamvirya* text.
However, it is important to understand that this is an auspicious nature, and
the lowest level of bondage of auspicious natures occurs due to *sanklesha*
(attachment). Therefore, when an *avirata samyagdristi* being, who is bound to
hell, is about to experience *mithyatva* (false belief), they experience the
lowest level of bondage of the *tirthankara* karma. Although the bondage of the
*tirthankara* nature occurs from the fourth to the eighth *gunasthan* (stages of
spiritual development), the lowest level of bondage of auspicious natures occurs
due to *sanklesha*, and this *sanklesha* only occurs in the case of an *avirata
samyagdristi* being who is about to experience *mithyatva* while bound to the
*tirthankara* nature. This is why the *avirata samyagdristi* human being is
considered to experience the lowest level of bondage of the *tirthankara*
nature. The *tirthankara* nature does not experience bondage in the *tiryanch*
realm, which is why a human being is mentioned here. The human being who, before
experiencing the bondage of the *tirthankara* nature...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 251 vizeSArtha-'tiridugani tamatamA' tiryaMcagati,
tiyaMcAnapUrvI aura nIcagotra ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAgabaMdha
sAta naraka meM batalAyA hai  /  jisakA spaSTIkaraNa yaha hai ki sAtaveM naraka
kA koI nAraka samyaktva kI prApti ke liye jaba yathApravRtta Adi tIna karaNoM ko
karatA huA anta ke anivRtikaraNa ko karatA haiM taba vahAM anivRttikaraNa ke
antima samaya meM ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAgabaMdha hotA hai| ye
tInoM prakRtiyAM azubha haiM aura sarvavizuddha jIva hI unakA jaghanya
anubhAgabaMdha karatA hai  /  ataH inake baMdhakoM meM sAtave naraka kA ukta
nAraka hI vizeSa vizuddha hai  /  kyoMki isa sarIkhI vizuddhi hone para to
dUsare jIva manuSyadvika aura ucca gotra kA bandha karate haiM  /  jisase
tiyaMcadvika aura nIca gotra ina tIna prakRtiyoM ke liye sAtaveM naraka ke
nAraka kA grahaNa kiyA hai| tIrthakara prakRti kA jaghanya anubhAgabaMdha
sAmAnya se avirata samyagadRSTi jIva ko batalAyA hai-jiNamaviraya  /  lekina
yaha vizeSa samajhanA cAhiye ki yaha zubha prakRti hai aura zubha prakRtiyoM kA
jaghanya anubhAga bandha saMkleza se hotA hai ataH baddhanarakAyu avirata
samyagdRSTi manuSya naraka meM utpanna hone ke liye jaba mithyAtva ke abhimukha
hotA hai taba vaha tIrthakara nAmakarma kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha karatA hai
/  yadyapi tIrthakara prakRti kA bandha cauthe se lekara AThaveM guNasthAna taka
hotA hai lekina zubha prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha saMkleza se hotA
hai aura vaha saMkleza tIrthakara prakRti ke baMdhakoM meM mithyAtva ke
abhimukha avirata samyagdRSTi ke hI hotA hai | isIlie tIrthaMkara prakRti ke
jaghanya anubhAga baMdha ke liye avirata samyagdRSTi manuSya kA grahaNa kiyA hai
/  tiryaMcagati meM tIrthakara prakRti kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai jisase yahAM
manuSya ko batalAyA hai aura jisa manuSya ne tIrthakara prakRti kA bandha karane
se pahale

Page #289 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **25.2**  One who is not bound by the karma of hell does not
go to hell. Therefore, the karma of bound hell has been accepted. A soul with a
pure vision, even though it may be born in hell after death, cannot be bound by
the gross part of the Tirthankara nature due to its purity. Therefore, it has
not been accepted here.  The gross part of the karma of the one-sense being and
the stationary karma is bound by beings of the three paths: animal, human, and
god, except for the hell path. But in relation to these three paths, it is
important to know that beings with a medium result of the present and past lives
do this. Because both these natures are inauspicious, therefore, beings with a
very complex result bind the excellent part of them, and very pure beings bind
the five-sense being and the karma of the Tass. Therefore, the medium result has
been accepted.  In summary, when a being binds the karma of the one-sense being
and the stationary karma, and then binds the karma of the five-sense being and
the As karma, and then binds the karma of the one-sense being and the stationary
karma again, then this type of being, who binds by changing, is a medium result
of the present and past lives, and when it attains its appropriate purity, it
binds the gross part of the two natures.  The gross part of the karma of the
Attap nature is said to be bound by the gods up to the Ishaan Kalpa. Although
the word "Asoum" is used in the verse, which means "up to the Saudharma heaven,"
both Saudharma and Ishaan heavens exist in the same category, so both should be
accepted. This means that the Vaimanik gods of the Bhavnapatis, Vyantars,
Jyotishkas, Saudharma, and Ishaan heavens bind the gross part of the Attap
nature.  The same gods bind the gross part of the Attap nature...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zanaka 25.2 narakAyu nahIM bAMdhI hai vaha naraka meM nahIM jAtA hai, ataH
baddhanarakAyu kA grahaNa kiyA hai  /  kSAyika samyagdRSTi jIva samyaktva sahita
mara kara naraka meM utpanna ho sakate haiM, kintu unake vizuddha hone se ve
tIrthaMkara prakRti kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha nahIM kara sakate haiM  /
isIliye unakA yahAM grahaNa nahIM kiyA hai| ekendriya jAti aura sthAvara
nAmakarma kA jaghanya anubhAga bandha narakagati ke sivAya zeSa tiryaca, manuSya
aura deva ina tona gatiyoM ke jIva karate haiN| lekina ina tIna gatiyoM vAle
jIvoM ke saMbandha meM yaha vizeSa jAnanA ki parAvartamAna madhyama pariNAma
vAle jIva karate haiM  /  kyoMki ye donoM prakRtiyAM azubha haiM, ataH ati
saMkliSTa pariNAma vAle jIva unakA utkRSTa anubhAga bandha karate haiM aura ati
vizuddha jIva paMcendriya jAti aura tasa nAmakarma kA bandha karate haiN|
isIliye madhyama pariNAma kA grahaNa kiyA hai| sArAMza yaha hai ki jaba koI jIva
ekendriya jAti aura sthAvara nAmakarma kA bandha karake paMcendriya jAti aura
asa nAmakarma kA baMdha karatA hai aura unakA baMdha karake punaH ekendriya va
sthAvara nAmakarma kA baMdha karatA hai taba isa prakAra kA parivartana karake
baMdha karane vAlA parAvartamAna madhyama pariNAma vAlA apane yogya vizuddhi ke
hone para ukta do prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAgabaMdha karatA hai| Atapa
prakRti kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha IzAna kalpa taka ke detroM ko batalAyA hai
/  yadyapi gAthA meM 'Asuma' pada haiM, jisakA artha 'saudharma svarga taka'
hotA hai  /  lekina saudharma aura IzAna svarga eka hI zraMNI meM vidyamAna hone
se donoM ko grahaNa kara lenA cAhiye  /  isakA artha yaha huA ki bhavanapati,
vyaMtara, jyotiSka aura sodharma, IzAna svarga taka ke vaimAnika deva Apa
prakRti kA jaghanya anubhAMga baMdha karate haiM  /  ukta devoM ke hI Atapa
prakRti kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha karane kA

Page #290 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Text ### 253  The reason is that the Ātap nature is
auspicious, and the inferior section of auspicious natures is bound by the most
subtle results. Therefore, at the time of the binding of the natures suitable
for the one-sensed gods, the inferior section of the Ātap nature is bound. If
the results suitable for binding the inferior section of the Ātap nature are
those of humans and animals, then they bind only the natures suitable for hell,
and the gods of the Naraka and Sanatkumara kalpas do not bind this nature from
birth. Therefore, it is said that the gods up to the Ishana heaven are bound by
it.  The owners of the six sections of binding of the Ārāshis, namely
Lātavedaniya, Sthira, Shubha, Yashas-koti, and their opposites Asātavedaniya,
Asthira, Abha, and Ayashi, are Sambādha-shti or Mithyādṛishti. For these
binders, it should be understood that they have the middle results of
Parāvartanam. This is explained below.  The Pramatta Muni binds the inferior
state of Asātavedaniya, which is equal to the Koti-Koti-Sāgara, until the end of
the moment, and after the end of the moment, he binds Sātavedaniya, and again
binds Asātavedaniya. Similarly, the Deshavirata, Avirata Samyagdṛishti, Samyag-
Mithyādṛishti, Sāsādan Samyagdṛishti, and Mithyaiṣṭi beings bind Asāta after
Sāta, and Sātavedaniya after Asāta. Among these, the Mithyādṛishti being binds
Asāta after Sāta, and Sāta after Asāta, until the state of Sātavedaniya is equal
to fifteen Koti-Koti-Sāgaras. After that, if there are more subtle results, he
binds only Asāta until his superior state is equal to thirty Koti-Koti-Sāgaras.
From the Pramatta Samvat onwards, in the Gunasthānas of Apramāna, Nayata, etc.,
the being binds only Sātavedaniya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karma grantha 253 kAraNa yaha hai ki Atapa zubha prakRti hai aura zubha
prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha vizeSa makliSTa pariNAmoM se hotA hai  /
ataH una devoM ke ekendriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM ke baMdha ke samaya Atapa
prakRti kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha hotA hai  /  yadi Atapa prakRti ke jaghanya
anubhAga baMdha karane yogya saMklipTa pariNAma manuSya aura tiryaMcoM ke hoM to
ve narakagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA hI bandha karate haiM tathA nAraka aura
sAnatkumAra Adi kalpoM ke deva janma se hI isa prakRti kA bandha nahIM karate
haiN| isIliye IzAna svarga taka jo devoM ko hI isakA vandhaka batalAyA hai  /
lAtAvedanIya, sthira, zubha, yazaHkoti aura inakI pratipakSI asAtAvedanIya,
asthira, abha aura ayazI ina ArAziyoM ke cha anubhAga bandha ke svAmI
sambADhaSTi athavA mithyAdRSTi haiM  /  ina baMdhakoM ke liye yaha vizeSa
samajhanA cAhiye ki ve parAvartamAna madhyama pariNAma vAle hoM  /  isakA
spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA jAtA hai  /  pramatta muni antamuharta paryanta
asAtAvedanIya kI antaHkoTAkoTi sAgara pramANa jaghanya sthiti bAMdhatA hai aura
antamuhata ke bAda sAtAvedanIya kA bandha karatA hai, punaH asAtAvedanIya kA
bandha karatA hai  /  isI taraha dezavirata, avirata samyagdRSTi,
samyagamithyAdRSTi, sAsAdana samyagdRSTi aura mithyAiSTi jIva sAtA ke bAda asAtA
kA aura asAtA ke bAda sAtA vedanIya kA bandha karate haiN| inameM se mithyAdRSTi
jIva sAtA ke bAda asAtA kA aura amAtA ke bAda sAtA kA baMdha taba taka karatA
hai jaba taka sAtA vedanIya kI sthiti pandraha kor3Akor3I sAgaropamAdI hai  /
usake bAda aura saMkliSTa pariNAma hone para kebala amAtA kA hI taba taka bandha
karatA hai jaba taka usakI tIsa kor3Akor3I sAgara pramANa utkRSTa sthiti hotI
hai  /  pramatta saMvata se Age apramana naMyata Adi guNasthAnoM meM jIva kevala
sAtAvedanIya kA hI bandha karatA hai|

Page #291 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The essence is that the gross sections of the seven vedaniya, which are worthy
of bondage, are found in the fifteen kodakodī sāgara states of bondage of the
seven vedaniya, from the middle result of the paravarttamāna, to the gross
sthini-bandha of the antah-kodakodī sāgara pramaṇa of the asāta-vedaniya in the
sixth guna-sthāna. The paravarttamāna results can be obtained as long as there
is bondage of the opposing nature. That is, as long as there are paravarttamāna
results, bondage of the asāta-vedaniya along with the sāta is possible. But the
results that occur from the excellent sthiti-bandha of the sāta-vedaniya onwards
are so complex that only the asāta-vedaniya can be bound by them. Therefore, the
gross sections of the sāta and asāta-vedaniya are said to be the owners of the
paravarttamāna middle result, of the samyagdṛṣṭi and mithyaiṣṭi beings. The
excellent state of the twenty kodakodī sāgara of the unstable, inauspicious, and
infamous, and the excellent state of the ten kodakodī sāgara of the stable,
auspicious, and famous, are said to be. The pramatta muni binds the gross state
of the antah-kodakodī sāgara pramaṇa of the unstable, inauspicious, and
infamous, and due to purification, then binds their opposing stable, auspicious,
and famous. After that, he again binds the unstable, etc. Similarly, the
deśaviraṭi, aviraṭ samyagdṛṣṭi, minadṛṣṭi, sāsadana, mithyādṛṣṭi, etc., bind the
stable, etc., after the stable, etc., and the unstable, etc., after the
unstable, etc. Of these, the mithyādṛṣṭi binds these natures in the
aforementioned manner until the excellent sthiti-bandha of the stable, etc.,
occurs. In these sthiti-bandhas, which are worthy of the samyagdṛṣṭi and
mithyaiṣṭi, the gross section of the aforementioned natures is bound.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 isakA sArAMza yaha hai ki sAtA vedanIya ke jaghanya anubhAga bandha ke yogya
parAvartamAna madhyama pariNAma sAtA vedanIya kI pandraha koDAkor3I sAgara
sthitibaMdha se lekara chaThe guNasthAna meM asAtAvedanIya ke antaHkoDAkor3I
sAgara pramANa jaghanya sthinibaMdha taka pAye jAte haiM  /  parAvartamAna
pariNAma labhI taka ho sakate haiM jaba taka pratipakSI prakRti kA baMdha hotA
hai  /  yAnI taba taka sAtA ke sAtha asAtA vedanIya kA bhI baMdha saMbhava hai
jaba taka parAvartamAna pariNAma hote haiM  /  lekina sAtA vedanIya ke utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha se lekara Age jo pariNAma hote haiM ve itane saMkliSTa hote haiM ki
unase asAtA vedanIya kA hI baMdha ho sakatA hai  /  isIliye sAtA aura asAtA
vedanIya ke jaghanya anubhAgavata kA svAmI parAvartamAna madhyama pariNAma vAle
samyagdRSTi aura mithyAiSTi jIvoM ko batalAyA hai  /  _ asthira, azubha,
ayazaHkIti kI utkRSTa sthiti bIsa koDAkor3I sAgara aura sthira, zubha,
yazaHkorti kI utkRSTa sthiti dasa kor3Akor3I sAgara batalAI hai  /  pramatta
muni asthira, azubha, ayazaHkIti kI antAkor3Akor3I sAgara pramANa jaghanya
sthiti bAMdhatA hai aura vizuddhi ke kAraNa phira inakI pratipakSI sthira,
zubha, yazakIrti kA baMdha karatA hai, usake bAda punaH asthira Adika kA baMdha
karatA hai| isI prakAra dezavirati, avirata samyagdRSTi, minadRSTi, sAsAdana,
mithyAdRSTi sthirAdika ke bAda asthirAdika kA aura asthirAdika ke bAda
sthirAdika kA baMdha karate haiN| unameM se mithyAdRSTi ina prakRtiyoM kA ukta
prakAra se taba taka baMdha karatA hai jaba taka sthirAdika kA utkRSTa
sthitibaMdha nahIM hotA hai| samyagdRSTi aura mithyAiSTi ke yogya ina'
sthitibaMdhoM meM hI ukta prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha hotA hai  /
spoMki mithyAdRSTa guNasthAna meM sthirAvika ke utkRSTa sthitibaMdha ke

Page #292 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth **255**  After that, there is only the binding of the
unstable, etc., and in the qualities of non-distraction, etc., there is only the
binding of the stable, etc. In the wrong view, there is an abundance of the
results of the complexes, and in non-distraction, there is an abundance of pure
results. Therefore, in both, there is a large amount of section binding.
Therefore, except for these two, in the remaining places mentioned, there is a
minor section binding of the six natures, unstable, etc.  **Verse 5**  **Word
Meaning:**  * **Tasa-vanna-teya-ghau:** Four types of existence, four types of
color, four types of radiance, * **Manukh-gai-du-g:** Human beings, two types of
liberation, * **Pani-vis:** Five-sense beings, * **Sas-uchchvas:** Name of the
breath, * **Par-ghuchch:** Name of the blow and high lineage, * **Sangh-yan-
agi-h:** Six types of cohesion and six types of abode, * **Ma-putthi:** Eunuch,
female, * **Su-ma-gi-arati:** Auspicious triad and other inauspicious triad, *
**Min-t:** Wrong view, * **Ghaj-gai-ya:** Four types of beings.  **Commentary:**
Four types of existence, four types of color, four types of radiance, two types
of human beings, two types of liberation, five-sense beings, breath, blow, high
lineage, six types of cohesion, six types of abode, eunuch, female, auspicious
triad, inauspicious triad, and four types of beings with wrong view, all these
forty natures bind with minor section binding.  **Special Meaning:**  The verse
mentions forty natures and explains that they bind with minor section binding in
beings of all four types with wrong view. Some of these natures are auspicious
and some are inauspicious.  Four types of existence (existence, non-existence,
sufficient, each), four types of color (auspicious color, smell, taste, touch),
four types of radiance (radiance, karmic, heavy-light, creation), five-sense
beings, breath, and blow, these fifteen natures are auspicious, therefore...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 255 pazcAta to asthirAdika kA hI baMdha hotA hai aura
apramatta Adi guNasthAnoM meM sthirAdika kA hI  /  mithyA dRSTi meM saMkleza
pariNAmoM kI adhikatA hai aura apramatta meM vizuddha pariNAmoM ko adhikatA,
ataH donoM meM hI anubhAga baMdha adhika mAtrA meM hotA hai  /  isIlie ina donoM
ke sivAya zeSa batAye gaye sthAnoM meM hI asthira Adi chaha prakRtiyoM kA
jaghanya anubhAga baMdha hotA hai| tasabanna leyacaumaNukhagaiduga
paNivisAsaparaghuccaM  /  saMghayaNAgiinaputthIsabhAgArati micchA ugaigA  /  / 5
/  /  zabdArtha-tasavannateyaghau- savatuSka, varNacatuSka, taMjasacatuSka,
maNukhagaiduga--manuSya nika, vihAyogati dvika, paNivi-paMcendriya jAti, sAsa-
ucchvAsa nAmakamaM, paraghucca-parAghAta nAma aura ucca gotra kA,
saMghayaNAgiha-chaha saMhanana aura chaha esthAna, maputthI-napusakaveda,
strIveva, sumagiyarati-subhagatrika aura itara durmagatrika kA, minTa - mithyA
dRSTi, ghajagaiyA-cAroM gati vAle  /  gAcArya-vasacatuSka, varNacatuSka,
taMjasatratuSka, manuSyadvika, vihAyogatidvika, paMcendriya jAti, ucchvAsa,
parAghAta, unnagotra, chaha saMhanana, chaha saMsthAna, napuMsaka veda, strI
veda, subhagatrika, durbhagatrika kA cAroM gati vAle mithyA dRSTi jIva jaghanya
anubhAga baMdha karate haiN| vizeSArtha- gAthA meM cAlIsa prakRtiyoM kA
nAmollekha kara unake jaghanya anubhAga baMdha kA svAmI cAroM gatiyoM ke mithyA
dRSTi jIva ko batalAyA hai| inameM se kucha prazasta aura kucha aprazasta
prakRtiyAM haiN| sacatuSka (basa, bAdara, paryApta, pratyeka), varNacatuSka
(zubha varNa, gaMdha, rasa, sparza), tejasacatuSka (taMjasa,kArmaNa, aguruladhu,
nirmANa), paMce. ndriya jAti, ucchvAsa aura parAghAta ye pandraha prakRtiyAM
prazasta haiM ataH

Page #293 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 256  This section deals with the **Jghanya Anubhag Bandha** (binding
of the lowest aspect) of the **15 Karmas**.  **Mithyatva** (false belief) humans
and **Tiryancha** (animals) bind the lowest aspect of these 15 Karmas when they
bind the **Narkagati** (hell) worthy **Prakritis** (nature).  When **Devas**
(gods) above **Ishaan Svarga** (heaven) and **Naraka** (hell) beings bind the
**Panchendriya** (five senses) **Tiryancha** worthy **Prakritis**, they also
bind the lowest aspect of these 15 Karmas.  Similarly, when Devas up to Ishaan
Svarga bind the **Ekendriya** (one sense) worthy **Prakritis**, they bind the
lowest aspect of these 15 Karmas, except for the **Panchendriya Jati** (five
sense birth) and **Vas** (attachment) **Karmas**.  In summary, **Mithyatva**
humans and **Tiryancha** bind the lowest aspect of the 15 Karmas, including
**Asachatuska** (fourfold false belief), when they bind the **Narkagati** worthy
**Prakritis**. Devas above Ishaan Svarga and Naraka beings bind the lowest
aspect of these 15 Karmas when they bind the **Panchendriya Tiryancha** worthy
**Prakritis**. Devas up to Ishaan Svarga bind the lowest aspect of these 15
Karmas, except for **Panchendriya Jati** and **Vas**, when they bind the
**Ekendriya** worthy **Prakritis**.  The reason why Devas up to Ishaan Svarga do
not bind the lowest aspect of **Panchendriya Jati** and **As** (non-virtuous)
**Karma** is that these two **Karmas** are bound only in the **Vishuddha**
(pure) state. Therefore, the lowest aspect of these two **Prakritis** is not
bound.  **Stri Ved** (female karma) and **Napumsak Ved** (neuter karma) are both
**Aprashasht** (unrefined) **Prakritis**. The lowest aspect of these two
**Prakritis** is bound by **Mithyatva** beings who have **Vishuddha** (pure)
**Parinaama** (result).  **Manushyadhik** (human-like), **Bajra** (thunderbolt),
**Rishabhanaraaj** (king of the bulls), **Sanhanan** (accumulation), and other
six **Sanhanan** (accumulation) **Karmas**, **Samachaturasra** (square)
**Sansthan** (structure), and other six **Sansthan** (structure) **Karmas**,
**Shubha** (auspicious) and **Ashubha** (inauspicious) **Vihaayogati** (path of
liberation), **Subhagatrik** (auspicious, melodious, and desirable) and
**Durbhagatrik** (inauspicious, discordant, and undesirable) **Karmas** are all
bound by **Mithyatva** beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 256 ztaka inakA jaghanya anubhAga saMca mahASTa saMkagAotA hai| pidhyApiTa
manuSya aura tiyaMtra apane utkRSTa saMkleza pariNAmoM se jaba narakagati ke
yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karate haiM usa samaya ina pandraha prakRtiyoM kA
jaghanya anubhAga baMdha karate haiM tathA nAraka aura IzAna svarga meM Upara ke
deva saMkleza ke hone para paMcendriya nirgatra paryAya ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha karane ke samaya meM aura izAna svarga taka ke deva paMcendriya jAti aura
basa ko chor3akara zepa teraha prakRtiyoM ko ekendriya jIva ke yogya prakRtiyoM
ko bAMdhane samaya inakA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha karate haiM  /  ukta kathana
kA sArAMza yaha hai ki mithyASTi manuSya aura tircaca to asacatuSka Adi pandraha
prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha narakagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
karane ke mAtha karate haiM  /  IzAna svarga se Upara ke deva tathA nAraka
paMcendriya tiryaMcoM meM janma lene yogya prakR. tiyoM kA baMdha karate hue
tathA IzAna svarga taka ke deva ekendriya paryAya meM janma lene yogya
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karate hue paMcendriya jAti aura vasa ko chor3a usake yogya
ukta prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga bandha karate haiN| IzAna svarga taka ke
devoM meM paMcendriya jAti aura asa nAmakarma ko chor3ane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki
ina donoM kA baMdha IzAna svarga taka ke devoM ko vizuddha dazA meM hI hotA hai|
ataH inake ukta donoM prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha nahIM hotA hai  /
strI veda aura napuMsaka veda ye donoM prakRtiyAM aprazasta haiM, inakA jaghanya
anubhAMga baMdha vizuddha pariNAma bAle mithyADaSTi jIna karate haiM  /
manuSyaddhika, bajra RSabhanArAja saMhanana Adi chaha saMhanana aura
samacaturasra saMsthAna Adi chaha saMsthAna, zubha aura azubha vihAyogati,
subhagatrika (subhaga, musvara, Adeya) aura durbhagatrika (durbhaga, duHsvara,

Page #294 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 257  **The ignorant section of the lower category of the noble lineage, bound
by karma, are the beings of the four states with false vision, but they are of
medium results.**  This is because the beings with right vision bind the lower
category of the animal and human states, but not the lower category of the human
state. Among the institutions, they bind the square institution, but not the
cohesive institution. They bind the auspicious birth, good fortune, good voice,
wealth, and noble lineage, but they bind the inauspicious, broken, etc.  **The
beings with right vision, both gods and hell beings, bind the lower category of
the human state, but not the lower category of the animal state.** Among the
institutions, they bind the square institution, and among the circles, they bind
the Vajra-Rishabha-Naracha cohesive institution. They bind the auspicious birth,
good fortune, etc., but not their opposite natures. This prevents the binding of
their opposite natures, and the non-binding of these prevents the change in
results. The lack of change keeps the results pure, preventing the binding of
the lower category of the noble natures. This is why the ignorant section is
bound, not the section with right vision.  **The lower category of the human
state is compared to the excellent state of fifteen Koḍakoḍī oceans, and the
auspicious birth, good fortune, good voice, wealth, noble lineage, first
cohesive institution, and first institution are compared to the excellent state
of ten Koḍakoḍī oceans.** The binding of the lower category of these auspicious
natures begins from their respective excellent states and extends to the binding
of their lower states, which are compared to the state of the inner Koḍakoḍī
oceans, along with their opposite natures, through the medium results that are
reflected in between. This binding occurs through the reflection of the inner
moments. The binding of the lower category of the Vāmana institution and the
Kolika cohesive institution occurs in sequence with the Huṇḍa institution and
the Sewārt cohesive institution.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 257 manama karmagrabhya anAdeya) aura ucca gotra kA jadhanya anubhAga baMdha
cAroM gati ke mithyAdRSTi jIva karate haiM, lekina ve madhyama pariNAma vAle
hote haiN| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki samyagdRSTi tiryaMca aura samyagdRSTi
manuSya devahika kA ndha karate haiM, manuSyadvika kA nahIM  /  saMsthAnoM meM
se samacaturasra saMsthAna kA baMdha karate haiN| saMhanana kA baMdha nahIM
karate haiM  /  zubha vihAyogati, subhaga, susvara, Aya aura ucca gotra kA hI
bandha karate haiM aura mithyAdRSTi dubhaMga Adi kA baMdha karate haiM  /
samyagdRSTi deva aura samyagdRSTi nAraka manuSyadvika kA hI baMdha karate haiM -
tiryacadvika kA nhiiN| saMsthAnoM meM samacaturasra saMsthAna kA aura maMDaloM
meM bajraRSabhanArAca saMhanana kA baMdha karate haiN| zubha vihAyogati, subhaga
Adi ho bAMdhate haiM aura unakI pratipakSI prakRtiyoM ko nahIM bAMdhate haiN|
jisase unake pratipakSI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai aura unakA baMdha na
hone se pariNAmoM meM parivartana nahIM hotA hai tathA parivartana na hone se
pariNAma vizuddha bane rahate haiM jisase pramasta prakRtiyoM kA jadhanya
anubhAga baMdha nahIM hotA hai| isI kAraNa se samyagdRSTi kA grahaNa na karake
mithyAdRSTi kA grahaNa kiyA hai  /  manuSyadvika ko utkRSTa sthiti pandraha
kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kI hai aura zubha vihAyogati subhaga, susvara, Adeya, ucca
gotra, prathama saMhanana aura prathama saMsthAna kI utkRSTa sthiti dasa
koDAkor3I sAgarIyama kI hai 1 ina zubha prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha
apanI-apanI utkRSTa sthiti se prAraMbha hokara pratipakSI prakRtiyoM ke sAtha
unakI jaghanya sthiti antaHkor3Akor3I sAgaropama ke sthitibaMdha ke adhyavasAya
taka parAvartamAna madhyama pariNAmoM se hotA hai  /  vaha antarmuhUrta
antarmuhUrta ke parAvarta se baMdhatA hai  /  huNDa saMsthAna aura sevArta
saMhanana kI anukrama se vAmana saMsthAna aura kolikA saMhanana ke sAtha apanI-
apanI jaghanya 7

Page #295 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **258**  When there is a reflection up to the state of the
century. Similarly, one should know when there is a reflection up to the lowest
state of the remaining Sanhanan, the possible remaining Sanhanan of the
institution, and the institution itself. In these states, Mithyadrishti reflects
the lowest section of the bond from the medium result. Similarly, one should
understand for other natures. Thus, after stating the owners of the superior and
inferior sections of the bondable natures, we now consider the breaking of the
section bonds in the original and subsequent natures.  **74.**
**Chauteyavannaveyaniya namnukkos sesaghuvabandhi. Ghaiṇam ajahanno goe duviho
imo chajaha.**  **Word Meaning:**  * Chautekvān - fourfold of Sanjas and
fourfold of Varna * Yaniya - Vedaniya Karma * Nam - Nam Karma * Anukkos -
inferior section bond * Sesanbandhi - remaining Dhruva bandhini natures *
Ghaiṇam - Dhaati natures * Ajahanno - superior section bond * Goe - Gotra Karma
* Duviho - two types of section bond (inferior and superior bond) * Imo - these
* Chaha - four types (Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva, Adhruva)  **Sesami** - the remaining
three types of section bond, **Duha** - two types.  1. **Go** Karma - the owners
of the superior section bond are stated in **Ga** 165-166 and the owners of the
inferior section bond are stated in **Ga** 170-177. Both are similar to
Bhamagranya. For comparison, the above portion is given in the appendix.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 258 zataka sthiti taka parAvRtti hone para  /  isI prakAra zeSa saMhanana,
saMsthAna kI sambhavita zeSa saMhanana aura saMsthAna ke sAtha apanI-apanI
jaghanya sthiti taka parAvRtti ke hone para jAnanA cAhiye  /  ina sthitisthAnoM
meM mithyAdRSTi parAvartamAna madhyama pariNAma se jaghanya anubhAga baMdha ko
karatA hai  /  isI taraha anya prakRtiyoM ke lie bhI samajhanA caahiye| isa
prakAra se baMdhayogya prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa aura jaghanya anubhAga baMgha ke
svAmiyoM kA kathana karane ke pazcAt aba Age mUla aura uttara prakRtiyoM meM
anubhAga baMdha ke bhaMgoM kA vicAra karate haiM  /  cauteyavannaveyaNiya
nAmaNukkosa sesaghuvabaMdhI  /  ghAINaM ajahanno goe duviho imo cajahA  // 74 /
/  sesaMmi buhA'"" zabdArtha-cautekvAnasaMjasacatuSka aura varNacatuSka, yaNiya
- vedanIya karma, nAma-nAma karma kA, aNukkosa-anutkRSTa anubhAga baMdha,
sesanabaMdhI- bAkI kI ghra dhabaMdhinI prakRtiyoM kA, ghAigaM-dhAti prakRtiyoM
kA, ajahanno-ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha, goe-gotra karma kA, duviho-do prakAra ke
anubhAga bandha (anutkRSTa aura ajaghanya bandha) imo-ye, cahAcAra prakAra ke,
(sAdi, anAdi, dhava, adhruv)| sesamibAkI ke tIna prakAra ke anubhAga dhaMdha ke,
duhAdo prkaar| 1. go0 karnayAI gA0 165-166 taka meM utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha ke
aura gAthA 170-177 taka meM jaghanya anubhAga baMdha ke svAmiyoM kA kathana kiyA
gayA hai| donoM ko bhAmagranya se samAnatA hai  /  tulanA ke liye ukta aMza
pariziSTa meM diyA hai|

Page #296 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granthya  **256**  **Verse:** The four types of *Tanjas* are
*Chaturja*, *Chatushka*, *Deddi*, and *Kai Aur*. The *Namkarma* has the
*Anutkrusht* section of *Bandha*, and the rest of the *Dhruvbandhini* and
*Ghati* natures have the *Ajghanya* section of *Bandha*. The *Gotrakarma* has
both *Anutkrusht* and *Ajghanya* types of *Bandha*, making a total of four
types.  The remaining sections of *Bandha* for the aforementioned natures, and
all the *Bandha* for the rest of the remaining natures, are of two types.
**Explanation:** This verse discusses the divisions of *Bandha* in the *Mool*
and *Uttar* natures. There are four types of *Bandha*: *Utkrusht*, *Anutkrusht*,
*Jghanya*, and *Ajghanya*. Among these, the *Jghanya* refers to the least
section of *Karma* power, and the *Ajghanya* refers to the divisions from one
indivisible part above the *Jghanya* section power to the most *Utkrusht*
section. Within these *Jghanya* and *Ajghanya* divisions, there are infinite
divisions of the section.  The *Utkrusht* refers to the highest section power,
and the *Anutkrusht* refers to the divisions from one indivisible part less than
the *Utkrusht* power to the *Sarvajghanya* section. Thus, within the *Utkrusht*
and *Anutkrusht* divisions, all the divisions of section power are contained.
This can be understood with an example: Imagine the *Sarvajghanya* has a value
of 1 and the *Utkrusht* has a value of 16. Then, 8 would be considered
*Jghanya*, and the divisions from 9 to 16 would be considered *Ajghanya*. 16
would be considered *Utkrusht*, and the divisions from 15 to 8 would be
considered *Anutkrusht*. These divisions are considered in the *Mool* and
*Uttar* natures along with the *Sadi*, *Anadi*, *Dhruv*, and *Adhruv* divisions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagranya 256 gAthA-taMjasa catujA, catuSka, dedI: kAI aura.
nAmakarma kA anutkRSTa anubhAga baMdha tathA bAkI kI dhruvabaMdhinI aura ghAtI
prakRtiyoM kA ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha aura gotrakarma ke donoM bandha
(anuskRSTa aura ajaghanya) cAroM prakAra ke haiN| ukta prakRtiyoM ke zeSa
anubhAga bandha aura bAko kI anya zeSa prakRtiyoM ke sabhI baMdha do hI prakAra
ke haiN| vizeSArya-isa gAthA meM mUla aura uttara prakRtiyoM meM anubhAga baMdha
ke bhaMgoM kA vicAra kiyA gayA hai  /  _baMdha ke cAra prakAra haiM-utkRSTa,
anutkRSTa, jaghanya aura ajaghanya  /  inameM se karmoM kI sabase kama anubhAga
zakti ko jaghanya aura jaghanya anubhAga zakti se Upara ke eka avibhAgI aMza ko
Adi lekara sabase utkRSTa anubhAga taka ke bhedoM ko ajaghanya kahate haiN| ina
jaghanya aura ajaghanya bhedoM meM anubhAga ke ananta bheda gabhita ho jAte haiM
/  sabase adhika anubhAga zakti ko utkRSTa aura usameM se eka avibhAgI aMza kama
zakti se lekara sarvajaghanya anubhAga taka ke bhedoM ko anuskRSTa kahate haiN|
isa prakAra utkRSTa aura anutkRSTa bheda meM bhI anubhAga zakti ke samasta bheda
garbhita ho jAte haiM  /  isako udAharaNa se isa prakAra samajha sakate haiM ki
kalpanA se sarvajaghanya kA pramANa hai aura utkRSTa kA pramANa 16 | to isameM 8
ko jaghanya kaheMge aura ATha se Upara nau se lekara solaha taka ke bhedoM ko
ajaghanya tathA solaha ko utkRSTa aura solaha se eka kama pandraha se lekara
ATha taka ke medoM ko anutkRSTa kaheMge  /  mUla aura uttara prakRtiyoM meM ina
medoM kA vicAra sAdi, anAdi, dhruva aura adhruva bhaMgoM ke sAtha kiyA gayA hai|

Page #297 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The details of the sorrows mentioned in the previous verse are as follows: The
four Tejas (Tanjas, Karman, Agurulghu, Nirman) and the four Varna (color, smell,
taste, and touch - here, one should understand the auspicious Varna Chatushk),
the non-painful karma and the name karma, the inferior section of the bandh
(binding) is of four types: Saadi, Anaadi, Dhruva, and Adhruva.   Here's the
explanation: The superior section of the eight Prakruti (Tejas Chatushk and
auspicious Varna Chatushk) binds during the liberation of the thirty Prakruti,
which is capable of being understood in the Kshapak, Apurvakaran, Gunasthan.
Apart from this, the inferior binding of these Prakruti occurs in other places
like Upsham, Anni, etc. However, there is no binding at all in the eleventh
Gunasthan. When someone falls from the eleventh Gunasthan and again binds the
inferior section of these Prakruti, it is called Saadi. The binding before
attaining this state is called Anaadi, as it has been happening since time
immemorial. The binding of a Bhavy Jiva (soul destined for liberation) is
Adhruva (non-permanent), and the binding of an Abhavy Jiva (soul not destined
for liberation) is Dhruva (permanent). Thus, the inferior section of the eight
Prakruti binds in four ways: Saadi, Anaadi, Dhruva, and Adhruva.  However, the
remaining superior, inferior, and non-inferior sections of the bandh have only
two types of binding: Saadi and Adhruva. As mentioned earlier, the superior
section of the Tejas Chatushk and Varna Chatushk binds in the Kshapak,
Apurvakaran, Gunasthan, which does not happen before. Therefore, it is Saadi,
and since it happens only once and not again, it is Adhruva. These Prakruti are
auspicious, so their inferior section of the bandh is done by the Jiva who has
the superior Sanklesh (complexities), sufficient Sanshi (doubt), five senses,
Mithyadrishti (false perception), and Jeeva (soul). This Jiva binds in the non-
inferior section after a minimum of one time and a maximum of two times. Later,
when the superior Sanklesh arises...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gataka gAthA meM batAye gaye khedoM kA vivaraNa isa prakAra hai ki
tejasacatuSka (taMjasa, kArmaNa, agurulaghu, nirmANa) tathA varNacatuSka-varNa,
gaMdha, rasa aura sparza (yahAM zubha varNacatuSka samajhanA cAhiye), bedanIya
karma aura nAmakarma kA anutkRSTa anubhAga baMdha sAdi, anAdi, dhruva, adhruva
isa prakAra bAra naraha kA hotA hai  /  jo isa prakAra hai - tejasacatuSka aura
zubha varNacatuSka ina ATha prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha kSapaka
apUrvakaraNa guNasyAna meM avagati yogya tIsa prakR. tiyoM ke bandhaviccheda ke
samaya hotA hai  /  isake sivAya upazama aMNi Adi anya sthAnoM meM ukta
prakRtiyoM kA anutkRSTa badha ho hotA hai  /  kintu gyAraha gRNasthAna meM
bilkula baMdha nahIM hotA hai kora gyArahaveM guNasthAna se girakara koI jAMca
ukta prakRtiyoM kA punaH anutkRSTa anu. bhAga bandha karatA hai taba vaha sAdi
kahalAtA hai aura isa avasthA ko prApta hone se pahale unakA baMdha anAdi
kahalAtA hai, kyoMki usake vaha baidha anAdi se hotA calA A rahA hai  /  bhavya
jIva kA baMdha adhruva aura abhavya jIva kA baMdha dhruva hotA hai| isa prakAra
ukta ATha prakRtiyoM kA anutkRSTa anubhAga baMdha sAdi Adi cAra prakAra kA hotA
hai| kintu inake zeSa utkRSTa, jaghanya aura ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha ke sAdi
aura adhruva yaha do hI bhaMga hote haiN| kyoMki pUrva meM batAyA hai ki
tejasacatuSka aura varNacatuSka kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha kSapaka apUrvakaraNa
gRNasthAna vAlA karatA hai jo isase pahale nahIM hotA hai  /  isIliye sAdi hai
aura eka samaya taka hokara Age nahIM hotA hai, ataH adhruva hai  /  ye
prakRtiyAM zubha haiM jisase inakA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha utkRSTa saMklezabAlA
paryApta saMzI paMcendriya mithyAdRSTi jIda karatA hai aura kama-se-kama eka
samaya aura adhika se adhika do samaya ke bAda vahI jIva sanakA ajadhanya baMdha
karatA hai  /  kAlAntara meM utkRSTa saMkleza hone para

Page #298 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth 261  It again binds their inferior section. Thus, the
inferior and non-inferior section binding is both *sadi* and *adhruva*.  There
are four types of binding of the inferior section of *vedaniya* and *namakarma*,
namely *sadi*, *adi*, etc. Because, compared to *vedaniya* and *yashakoti*
*namakarma*, the superior section binding of *vedaniya* and *namakarma* occurs
only in the tenth *gunasthan* called *kshapka sukshmasampray*, and in the
remaining *gunasthanas*, the inferior binding occurs. In the eleventh
*gunasthan*, their binding does not occur. Therefore, the inferior section
binding that occurs after being expelled from the eleventh *gunasthan* is *sadi*
and the one before it is *anadi*. The binding of a *bhavya* being is *dhruva*
and that of an *abhavya* being is *adhruva*. Thus, there are four types of
inferior section binding of *vedaniya* and *namakarma*, namely *sadi*, *adi*,
etc.  Except for the inferior binding of *vedaniya* and *namakarma*, the
remaining superior, inferior, and non-inferior bindings are both *sadi* and
*adhruva*. The superior binding occurs only in the *kshapka sukshmasampray*
*gunasthan*, not in other *gunasthanas*, hence it is *sadi*, and since it does
not occur in the twelfth and subsequent *gunasthanas*, it is *adhruva*. The
inferior section binding is done by a *samyagdristi* or a *mithyadristi* being
with a medium result. This inferior section binding is *sadi* because it occurs
after the non-inferior section binding, and after the inferior binding occurs
for a minimum of one time and a maximum of four times, the non-inferior binding
occurs again, making the inferior binding *adhruva* and the non-inferior binding
*sadi*. After that, in the same *bhava* or in another *bhava*, if the inferior
binding occurs again, the non-inferior binding becomes *adhruva*. Thus, the
remaining superior, inferior, and non-inferior bindings are both *sadi* and
*adhruva*.  Now, about the bindings of *dhruvabandhini* and *adhruvabandhini*
natures...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 261 vaha punaH unakA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha karatA hai
/  isa prakAra jaghanya aura ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha sAtha aura adhruva hai
vedanIya aura nAmakarma kA bhI anutkRSTa anubhAga baMdha sAdi Adi cAra prakAra
kA hai| kyoMki sAtA vedanIya aura yazaHkoti nAmakarma kI apekSA bedanIya aura
nAmakarma kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha kSapaka sUkSmasaMparAya nAmaka dasaveM
guNasthAna meM hI hotA hai aura zeSa sthAnoM meM anutkRSTa baMdha hotA hai|
gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM unakA baMdha nahIM hotA hai  /  jisase gyArahaveM
guNasthAna se cyuta hokara jo anutkRSTa anubhAga baMdha hotA hai vaha sAdi aura
usase pahale anAdi  /  bhavya jIva kA baMdha dhruva aura abhavya kA adhruva hai|
isa prakAra vedanIya aura nAmakarma ke anutkRSTa anubhAga baMdha ke sAdi Adi
cAra bhaMga hote haiN| vedanIya aura nAmakarma ke anutkRSTa baMdha ke sivAya
zeSa utkRSTa, jaghanya aura ajaghanya baMdha ke sAdi aura adhruva bhaMga ho hote
haiM  /  utkRSTa baMdha to kSapaka sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM hI hotA hai,
anya guNasthAna meM nahIM, ataH sAdi hai aura bArahaveM Adi guNasthAnoM meM
nahIM hone se atra hai  /  jaghanya anubhAga baMdha madhyama pariNAma vAlA
samyagdRSTi athavA mithyAdRSTi jIva karatA hai| yaha jadhanya anubhAga baMdha
ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha ke bAda hone se sAdi hai aura kama se kama eka samaya
aura adhika se adhika cAra samaya taka jaghanya baMdha hone ke pazcAta punaH
ajaghanya baMdha hotA hai, jisase jaghanya baMdha adhruva aura ajaghanya baMdha
| sAdi hai  /  usake bAda usI bhava meM yA dUsare kisI bhava meM punaH jaghanya
baMdha ke hone para ajaghanya baMdha adhruva hotA hai| isa prakAra zeSa utkRSTa,
jaghanya aura ajaghanya baMdhU sAdi aura aghuva hote haiM  /  aba dhavabaMdhinI
aura adhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyoM ke baMdhoM ke bAre meM

Page #299 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **262**  **Shataka**  We consider. Except for the Tejas
Chatushk, the remaining Dhruvbandhini Prakṛtis have four types of Ajghanya
Bandha. The five Jñānavaranas, four Darśanavaranas, and five Antarāyas, these
fourteen Prakṛtis are Ashubha and their Ajghanya Bandha occurs at the end of the
Sūkṣmasamprayā Gunasthāna. Their Bandha does not occur in the eleventh
Gunasthāna. Therefore, the Bandha that occurs after being expelled from the
eleventh Gunasthāna is Sadi, and the Bandha before that is Anadi. The Bandha of
a Bhavy is Adhruva, and the Bandha of an Abhavy is Dhruva.  The Ajghanya Bandha
of the Sanjvalana Chatushk occurs at the time of their Bandhavicchedha in the
Kṣapaka Anivṛttibādar Gunasthāna. Except for this, Ajghanya Bandha occurs
everywhere else. Bandha does not occur in the eleventh Gunasthāna, therefore,
the Bandha that occurs after being expelled from there is Sadi, the one before
that is Anadi, the Bandha of a Bhavy is Adhruva, and the Bandha of an Abhavy is
Dhruva.  Nidrā, Prachalā, Ashubha Varṇachatushk, Upadhāt, Bhaya, and Jugupsā
have Ajghanya Bandha in all places except for the time of their Bandhavicchedha
in the Kṣapaka Apūrvakaraṇa, where they have Ajghanya Bandha for a short time.
When they fall into the Upashama श्रेणी, their Ajghanya Bandha occurs again,
which is Sadi. Their Bandha before Bandhavicchedha is Anadi, the Bandha of an
Abhavy is Dhruva, and the Bandha of a Bhavy is Adhruva.  The Ajghanya Bandha of
the Pratyākyānāvarana Kṣaya Chatushk occurs at the end of the Deśavirati
Gunasthāna, making it inclined towards Samyama. The Bandha that occurs before
that is Ajghanya Bandha. The Ajghanya Bandha of the Apratyākhyānāvarana Kṣaya
Chatushk occurs at the end of their Gunasthāna for a Samyagdṛṣṭi Jīva who is
desirous of obtaining Kṣayika Samyaktva and Samyama, and who is constantly
engaged in Samyagdṛṣṭi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 262 zataka vicAra karate haiM  /  tejasa catuSka ke sivAya zeSa dhruvabaMdhinI
prakRtiyoM kA ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha cAra prakAra kA hotA hai| pAMca
jJAnAvaraNa, cAra darzanAvaraNa aura pAMca aMtarAya, ye caudaha prakRtiyAM
azubha haiM aura inakA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna ke
aMta meM hotA hai aura gyArahaveM meM inakA baMdha nahIM hotA hai| ataH
gyArahaveM guNasthAna se cyuta hokara jo anubhAga baMdha hotA hai vaha sAdi hai
aura usase pahale kA baMdha anAdi hai| bhavya kA baMdha adhruva aura abhavya kA
baMdha dhruva hai| saMjvalana catuSka kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha kSapaka
anivRttibAdara guNasthAna meM apane baMdhaviccheda ke samaya meM hotA hai| isake
sivAya anya saba jagaha ajadhanya bandha hotA hai| gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM
baMdha nahIM hotA hai, ataH vahAM se cyuta hokara jo baMdha hotA hai vaha sAdi
hai, usase pahale kA anAdi, bhavya kA baMdha adhruva aura abhavya kA bandha
dhruva hai| _ nidrA, pracalA, azubha varNacatuSka, upadhAta, bhaya aura jugupsA
kA kSapaka apUrvakaraNa meM apane-apane baMdhaviccheda ke samaya meM eka samaya
taka jaghanya anubhAga baMdha aura anya saba sthAnoM para ajaghanya anubhAga
baMdha hotA hai | upazama zreNi meM girane para punaH unakA ajaghanyabaMdha hotA
hai jo sAdi hai  /  baMdhaviccheda se pahale unakA baMdha anAdi, abhavya kA
baMdha dhruva aura bhavya kA baMdha adhruva hai| pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya
catuSka kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha dezavirati guNasthAna ke aMta meM
saMyamAbhimukha karatA hai aura usase pahale hone vAlA baMdha ajaghanya baMdha
hai| apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha kSAyika
samyaktva aura saMyama prApta karane kA icchuka avirata samyagdRSTi jIva apane
guNasthAna ke aMta meM karatA hai|

Page #300 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granthya  263. Except for this, the *ajghanya* (least
intense) section of *bandha* (bondage) occurs everywhere. *Styanadhee*, *nidra-
nidra* and *pratraala-prachala*, *mithyatva* and *anantaanbandhee* *kashaya*
(passions) create the *jghanya* (most intense) section of *bandha* in the
*vishuddha parinaami* (purely transformed) *mithyadristi* (false perception) at
the end of its *gunasthan* (state of being), and the rest of the *bandha* is
*ajghanya* everywhere. After attaining *samyama* (self-control) etc., and
falling from there, the *ajghanya* section of *bandha* occurs again. This
*bandha* is *saadi* (eternal) for the *asadi* (non-eternal) and *anaadi*
(beginningless) and *abhavya* (non-liberated), and *adhruva* (non-eternal) for
the *bhavya* (liberated). Thus, the *ajghanya* section of *bandha* of 43 *dhruva
prakriti* (eternal substances) is of four types.  Now, we will explain the two
types of *jghanya*, *utkrista* (excellent) and *anutkrista* (inferior) sections
of *bandha*. The *jghanya* section of *bandha* of the aforementioned 43
*prakriti* occurs in the *sukshmasampraaya* (subtle state) etc. *gunasthan*,
which is *saadi* due to being the first time in those *gunasthan*. It is
*adhruva* because it does not occur in the 12th etc. higher *gunasthan*. The
*utkrista* section of *bandha* is done by the *paryaptasangni* (fully conscious)
*panchendriya* (five-sensed) *mithyadristi* (false perception) being with
*utkrista sanklesh* (excellent karmic afflictions), which lasts for one or two
times. After that, the *anutkrista* section of *bandha* occurs. Later, when
*utkrista sanklesh* occurs again, the *utkrista* section of *bandha* occurs
again. Thus, there are only two alternatives in the *utkrista* and *anutkrista*
sections of *bandha*: *saadi* and *adhruva*.  Now, we will explain the four
sections of *bandha* of the *adhruvabandhini* (non-eternal bondage) *prakriti*.
Due to being *adhruvabandhini*, these *prakriti* have two types of *utkrista*,
*anutkrista*, *jghanya* and *ajghanya* sections of *bandha*: *saadi* and
*adhruva*.  *Jnanaavaran*, *darshanavaran*, *mohniya* and *antaraaya* - these
four *ghati karma* (destructive karmas) are *ashubha* (unwholesome). Their
*ajghanya* section of *bandha* is of four types.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagranya 263 isake sivAya sarvatra usakA ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha
hotA hai| styAnaddhi, nidrA-nidrA aura pratralA-pracalA, mithyAtva aura
anantAnabaMdhI kaSAya kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha vizuddha pariNAmI mithyAdaSTi
apane guNasthAna ke aMtima samaya meM karatA hai aura zeSa sarvatra unakA
ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha hotA hai| usake bAda saMyama vagairaha ko prApta
karake vahAM se girakara punaH unakA ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha karatA hai to
vaha sAdi aura usake pahale kA anAdi, abhavya kA baMdha dhruva aura bhavya kA
baMdha adhruva hotA hai| isa prakAra 43 dhruvaprakRtiyoM kA ajaghanya anubhAga
baMdha cAra prakAra kA hotA hai| aba unake jaghanya, utkRSTa aura anutkRSTa
anubhAga baMdha ke do-do prakAroM ko spaSTa karate haiM  /  ukta 43 prakRtiyoM
kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha sUkSmasaMparAya Adi guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai jo una-
una guNasthAnoM meM pahalI bAra hone se sAdi hai| bArahaveM Adi Upara ke
guNasthAnoM meM nahIM hone se adhruva hai| utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha utkRSTa
saMkleza vAlA paryApta saMjJI paMcendriya mithyA dRSTi jIva karatA hai jo eka yA
do samaya taka hotA hai  /  usake bAda anutkRSTa anubhAga baMdha karatA hai|
kAlAntara meM utkRSTa saMkleza ke hone para punaH unakA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha
hotA hai| isa prakAra utkRSTa aura anutkRSTa anubhAga baMdha meM sAdi aura
adhruva do hI bikalpa hote haiN| aba adhruvabaMdhinI prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa Adi
cAroM anubhAga baMdhoM ko batalAte haiM  /  adhruvabaMdhinI hone se ina
prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa, anu skRSTa, jaghanya aura ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha ke
sAdi aura adhruva yaha do prakAra hote haiN| jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa,
mohanIya aura aMtarAya ye cAroM ghAti karma azubha haiM  /  inakA ajaghanya
anubhAga baMdha cAra prakAra kA hotA

Page #301 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  264 Century  It is the **jghanya** (inferior) section of
**ashubha** (inauspicious) karmas that binds and the **utkrusht** (superior)
section of **shubha** (auspicious) karmas that binds to **vishud parinaami**
(purely resultant) **bandhak** (bound). **Jnanavaran**, **darshanavaran**, and
**antaraya** are **ashubha** (inauspicious), therefore their **jghanya**
(inferior) section binding occurs at the end of **kshapik sukshmasampray**
**mrinaasthan** (subtle subtle-body, the state of death) and the binding of
**mohaniya** (obscuring) karma occurs until the ninth **gunasthan** (state of
being). Thus, its **jghanya** (inferior) section binding occurs at the end of
the ninth **gunasthan** (state of being). Except for these **gunasthanas**
(states of being), the **ajghanya** (non-inferior) section binding of all four
karmas occurs in the remaining **gunasthanas** (states of being). In the
eleventh and tenth **gunasthanas** (states of being), the binding of these four
karmas does not occur, but after falling from there, when their **ajghanya**
(non-inferior) section binding occurs again, it is **saadi** (beginningless).
And for those beings who have never come to the ninth, tenth, etc.
**gunasthanas** (states of being), this **ajghanya** (non-inferior) binding is
**anaadi** (beginningless). The binding of an **abhavya** (non-liberated being)
is **dhruva** (permanent) and the binding of a **bhavya** (liberated being) is
**adhruva** (impermanent).  Now, we will clarify the **saadi** (beginningless)
and **adhruva** (impermanent) types that occur in the remaining three
**jghanya** (inferior), **utkrusht** (superior), and **anutkrusht** (non-
superior) section bindings of **ghatikarma** (destructive karmas). The
**jghanya** (inferior) section binding of **mohaniya** (obscuring) karma occurs
at the end of **kshapik anivrittibhadar** (the state of death of a non-liberated
being) and the rest, **jnanavaran**, **darshanavaran**, and **antaraya**, occur
at the end of **kshapik sukshmasampray** **gunasthan** (subtle subtle-body, the
state of death). This binding occurs only once, therefore it is **saadi**
(beginningless) and does not occur when going to the twelfth **gunasthan**
(state of being), therefore it is **adhruva** (impermanent). It is not
**anaadi** (beginningless) because it never occurs before coming to the
aforementioned **gunasthanas** (states of being) and it is not **dhruva**
(permanent) because it is not for an **abhavya** (non-liberated being). After
the **anutkrusht** (non-superior) binding, the **utkrusht** (superior) binding
occurs, therefore it is **saadi** (beginningless) and after one or two times,
the **anutkrusht** (non-superior) binding occurs again, therefore the
**utkrusht** (superior) binding is **adhruva** (impermanent) and the
**anutkrusht** (non-superior) binding is **saadi** (beginningless). After a
minimum of **antmuhurt** (the last moment) and a maximum of **ananantanant**
(infinitely infinite) **utsarpini** (ascending) and **avsarpiini** (descending)
time, when **utkrusht** (superior) **sanklesh** (affliction) occurs, the
**utkrusht** (superior) binding occurs again.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 264 zataka hai  /  azubha prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha aura zubha
prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa anubhAga baMdha vizuda pariNAmI baMdhaka karanA hai  /
jAnAvaraNa. darzanAvaraNa aura aMtarAya azubha haiM ataH inakA jaghanya anubhAga
vaMtra apaka sUkSmasaMparAya' mRNasthAna ke aMta samaya meM hotA hai aura
mohanIya kA baMdha nauveM gaNasthAna taka hotA hai  /  jisase nauveM guNasthAna
ke aMta meM usakA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha hotA hai  /  ina guNasthAnoM ke
sivAya zeSa sabhI sthAnoM meM ukta cAroM karmoM kA ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha
hotA hai  /  gyArahaveM aura dasaveM guNasthAna meM ukta cAroM karmoM kA baMdha
na karake vahAM se girane ke bAda jaba punaH unakA ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha
hotA hai taba vaha sAdi hai aura jo jIva nauveM, dasaveM Adi guNasthAnoM meM
kabhI nahIM Aye, unako apekSA vaha ajaghanya baMdha anAdi hai  /  abhavya kA
baMdha dhruva hai aura bhavya kA baMdha adhruva hai  /  aba ghAtikarmoM ke zeSa
tona-jaghanya, utkRSTa aura anutkRSTa anubhAga baMdhoM meM hone vAle sAdi aura
adhruva prakAroM ko spaSTa karate haiN| mohanIya karma kA jaghanya anubhAga
baMdha kSapaka anivRttibAdara ke aMtima samaya meM aura zeSa jJAnAvaraNa,
darzanAvaraNa aura aMtarAya kA kSapaka sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna ke anta meM  /
yaha baMdha pahalI bAra hI hotA hai ataH sAdi hai aura bArahaveM guNasthAna meM
jAne para hotA hI nahIM ataH adhruva hai| yaha anAdi nahIM hai  /  kyoMki ukta
guNasthAnoM meM Ane se pahale kabhI nahIM hotA hai aura abhavya ke nahIM hone se
dhruva bhI nahIM hai  /  anutkRSTa ke bAda utkRSTa baMdha hotA hai ataH sAdi hai
aura usake eka yA do samaya bAda punaH anutkuSTa baMdha hotA hai ataH utkRSTa
baMdha adhruva hai aura anutkRSTa baMdha sAdi hai  /  kama-se-kama antamuhUrta
aura adhika-se-adhika anantAnanta utsarpiNI aura avasarpiNI kAla ke bAda utkRSTa
saMkleza hone para punaH utkRSTa baMdha hotA hai

Page #302 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 265  The **utkrusht** (excellent) and
**anutkrusht** (inferior) **bandh** (bond) are **madhyam** (intermediate) and
**adhruv** (impermanent) because they keep changing.  In **gotra karma** (family
karma), there are four types of **ajghannya** (non-inferior) and **anutkrusht**
(inferior) **bandh**, and two types of **jghannya** (inferior) and **utkrusht**
(excellent) **bandh**. The **salka** (shell) and **anutkrusht** (inferior)
**anubhag bandh** (section bond) should be understood as similar to **vedaniya**
(painful) and **naam** (name) **karma**.  Now, let's consider **jghannya**
(inferior) and **ajghannya** (non-inferior) **bandh**. When a being in the
seventh hell, facing **samyaktv** (right faith), performs the **yathpravritt**
(natural) **adi** (initial) three **karan** (causes), they experience
**mithyatva** (false belief) in **anivrittikaran** (cessation). This leads to
the **mithyatva** (false belief) state, which can be either **bha** (being) or
**bhaale** (becoming). One is the **antmuhurt** (last moment) **praman**
(evidence) state, and the other is the **shresh** (remaining) state.
Experiencing the lower state, at the end of the **antmuhurt** (last moment)
**praman** (evidence) state, a **jghannya** (inferior) **anubhag bandh**
(section bond) of **gotra karma** (family karma) occurs, compared to the **neech
gotra** (lower family). In another place, if there is such purity, then an
**ajghannya** (non-inferior) **anubhag bandh** (section bond) of a higher
**gotra** (family) occurs.  Since the **neech gotra** (lower family) **bandh**
occurs in the **mithyatva** (false belief) state in the seventh hell, it is
accepted. The **narak** (hell being) who is not facing **samyaktv** (right
faith) with **mithya drishti** (false vision) has an **ajghannya** (non-
inferior) **anubhag bandh** (section bond) of the **neech gotra** (lower
family), and upon attaining **samyaktv** (right faith), they have an
**ajghannya** (non-inferior) **anubhag bandh** (section bond) of the higher
**gotra** (family).  This **jghannya** (inferior) **anubhag bandh** (section
bond) of the **neech gotra** (lower family) is not possible elsewhere and is
**sadi** (beginningless) because it happens for the first time in that state.
Upon attaining **samyaktv** (right faith), the same being experiences an
**ajghannya** (non-inferior) **anubhag bandh** (section bond) of the **neech
gotra** (lower family) compared to the higher **gotra** (family). Therefore, the
**jghannya** (inferior) **anubhag bandh** (section bond) is **adhruv**
(impermanent), and the **ajghannya** (non-inferior) **anubhag bandh** (section
bond) is **sadi** (beginningless). The **ajghannya** (non-inferior) **anubhag
bandh** (section bond) that occurs before is **anadi** (beginningless).  The
**ajghannya** (non-inferior) **bandh** (bond) of an **abhavya** (non-liberated)
is **dhruv** (permanent), and that of a **bhavya** (liberated) is **adhruv**
(impermanent).  Thus, one should know the two options of **jghannya** (inferior)
**anubhag bandh** (section bond) and the four options of **ajghannya** (non-
inferior) **anubhag bandh** (section bond) in **gotra karma** (family karma).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 265 jisase anutkRSTa baMdha adhruva hai  /  isa prakAra
utkRSTa aura anutkRSTa baMdha badalate rahane ke kAraNa mAdi aura adhruva haiN|
gotra karma meM ajaghanya aura anutkRSTa baMdha cAra prakAra kA aura jaghanya
aura utkRSTa baMdha do prakAra kA hotA hai  /  salkA aura anutkRSTa anubhAga
baMdha ke prakAra vedanIya aura nAma kama ke samAna samajhanA cAhiye  /  aba
javanya aura ajaghanya baMdha ke bAre meM vicAra karate haiM ki sAtaveM naraka
kA nAraka samyaktva ke abhimukha hotA huA yathApravRtta Adi tIna karaNoM ko
karatA hai taba anivRttikaraNa meM mithyAtva kA antarakaraNa karatA hai, jisase
mithyAtva kI sthiti ke ho bhA ho bhAle  /  eka noje kI antamuhUrta pramANa
sthiti aura dUsaro zeSa para kI sthiti  /  nIce kI sthiti kA anubhava karate hae
antumuharta pramANa sthiti ke antima samaya meM nIca gotra kI apekSA se gotra
karma kA jaghanya anubhAga baMdha hotA hai| anya sthAna meM yadi itano vizuddhi
ho to usase ucca gotra kA ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha hotA hai  /  sAtaveM naraka
meM mithyAtva dazA meM nIca gotra kA hI baMdha hone se usakA grahaNa kiyA hai
tathA jo nAraka mithyA dRSTi samyaktva ke abhimukha nahI, usake noca gotra kA
ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha aura samyaktva prApti hone para ucca gotra kA
ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha hotA hai| nIca gotra kA yaha jaghanya anubhAga baMdha
anyatra sambhava nahIM hai aura usI avasthA meM pahalI bAra hone se sAdi hai  /
samyaktva kI prApti hone para bahI jova ucca gotra kI apekSA se nIca gotra kA
ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha karatA hai ataH jaghanya anubhAga baMdha adhruva hai
aura ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha sAdi hai  /  isase pahale honevAlA ajaghanya
anubhAga baMdha anAdi hai  /  abhavya kA ajaghanya baMdha dhruva aura bhavya kA
adhruva hai| isa prakAra gotra karma ke jaghanya anubhAga baMdha ke do aura
ajaghanya anubhAga baMdha ke cAra vikalpa jAnanA caahie|

Page #303 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  296 **Fatal** _In the heinous, extremely severe, and moderate sections of
the _āyukkarma_, there are only two options: _sādi_ and _adhruva_. Because the
binding of _āyukkarma_ occurs only in the division of the _bhupayamāna_
lifespan, its heinous, etc., forms are bound in the sections, etc., and after
the final moment, that binding necessarily ceases, making it _adhruva_. Thus,
one should understand the _sādi_ and _adhruva_ types of the heinous, etc.,
sections of _āyukkarma_ bindings.  In this way, one should know the _sādi_,
etc., types of the dissolution of the excellent, etc., section bindings in the
original and subsequent natures. After describing the section binding, we now
begin the discussion of the _pradeśabandh_. At the beginning of _pradeśabandh_,
we first describe the _vargaṇās_. _Praveśabandh_ ... _igaduganugaī jā
abhavaṇantaguṇiānū. khaṅghā uralodhiyavaggaṇā u tah aghaṇantarīyā. ||75||_
**Word meanings:** _igaduganugaī_ - one-atomic, two-atomic, etc., _jā yāvat_ -
up to, _gak anavaṇatāṇiā_ - having infinite atoms in the _abhadya_, _khaṅghā_ -
_f_, _uralodhiyavaggaṇā_ - _vargaṇā_ suitable for the generous, _tah_ - thus,
_aghaṇantarīyā_ - _vargaṇā_ unsuitable for the _praṇayoga_.  **Verse meaning:**
From one-atomic, two-atomic, etc., up to the _abhadya_ beings, only those
_skandhas_ having infinite atoms are suitable for the generous.  **Go.** In the
_karmakāṇḍa_, the _sādi_, etc., types of the heinous, non-heinous, etc.,
sections of _anubhāga bandh_ are discussed in two verses. One in relation to the
original natures, and the other in relation to the subsequent natures. This view
is similar to the _karmagrantha_. See the verses in the appendix.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 296 ghAtaka _ Ayukarma ke jaghanya, ulkaSTa aura anuhaTa anubhAga meM zAdi aura
adhruva ye do hI vikalpa hote haiM  /  kyoMki bhupayamAna Ayu ke vibhAga meM hI
Ayu karma kA baMdha hotA hai jisase usakA jaghanyAdi rUpa anubhAga baMdha sAdi
hai aura antamuharta ke bAda usa baMdha ke avazya ruka jAne se adhruva hai  /
isa prakAra Ayukarma ke jaghanya Adi anubhAga baMdhoM ke sAdi aura adhruva
prakAra samajhanA caahiye| isa prakAra se mUla evaM uttara prakRtiyoM meM
utkRSTa Adi anubhAga baMdhoM ke sAdi Adi bhaMgoM ko jAnanA cAhiye  / ' aba
anubhAga baMdha kA varNana karane ke pazcAta Age pradezabaMdha kA vivecana
prArambha karate haiN| pradezabaMdha ke prArambha meM sarvaprathama vargaNAoM kA
nirUpaNa karate haiM  /  pravezabaMdha ...igadugaNugAI jA abhavaNaMtaguNiyAnU  /
khaMghA uralodhiyavaggaNA u taha agahaNatariyA  // 75 //
zabdArthaigaDugaNugAha-ekANuka, hamaNuka nAdi, jAyAvat, gaka anavaNatANiyA -
abhadhya meM anaMta guNe paramANu vAlA khaMdhA-pha, urasAniyavaggaNA-audArika ke
yogya vargaNA, taha...-tathA, agahaNaMtariyA-praNayogya vargaNA ke bIca
agrahaNayogya vargaNA  /  gAthArSa- ekANuka, yaNaka Adi se lekara abhavya jIvoM
se bhI anantaguNe paramANu vAle skaMdhoM taka hI audArika kI go0 karmakAMDa meM
anubhAga baMdhna ke jaghanya, ajaghanya Avi prakAroM meM sAdi Adi kA vivAra do
gAthAoM meM kiyA gayA hai| eka meM mUla prakRtiyoM kI apekSA, dUsarI meM uttara
prakRtiyoM kI apekSA  /  ukta vicAra karmagraMtha ke samAna hai| gAthAyeM
pariziSTa meM dekhiye  /

Page #304 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Firm Text  **Grahanayogya (Acceptable) and Agrahanayogya
(Unacceptable) Varganas**  There are Grahanayogya Varganas which are acceptable,
and Agrahanayogya Varganas which are unacceptable, differing from the
Grahanayogya Varganas by the addition of one atom (F-atom).  **Explanation:**
This world is filled with Lokaparamanu (world atoms) and Skandha-shaped Pudgalas
(matter particles). The Pudgalakaya (matter body) is divided into many Varganas
(categories), including a Karma Varga (category of karma). These Varganas, due
to the influence of the Yoga (union) of Narmama (subtle body) and Kashaya
(passions), transform into Karma-rupa (karma form). The space occupied by one
atom of Pudgala is called a Pradesh (region). Therefore, the quantity of Pudgala
Skandhas transformed into Karma-rupa is measured by the number of atoms. This is
called Pradeshbandha (binding of regions). Therefore, to understand
Pradeshbandha, it is necessary to understand Karma Vargana. To understand Karma
Vargana, it is necessary to understand the previous Varganas like Audarik
(material) etc. Therefore, the nature of these Varganas should also be
understood. For this reason, the nature of Audarik etc. Varganas is explained
here.  These Audarik etc. Varganas are of two types: Grahanayogya (acceptable)
and Agrahanayogya (unacceptable). Starting with Agrahanayogya Vargana, the
nature of Varganas up to Karma Vargana is explained in the verse.  A group of
Pudgalas of the same type is called a Vargana. These Varganas are...  1. In the
commentary of the Karma Grantha (text on karma), a group of Skandhas of the same
type is called a Vargana.  However, in the commentary of Karma Prakriti (nature
of karma), Skandha and Vargana are considered synonymous. Because the space
occupied by Skandha-Vargana is an infinitesimal part of an angul (finger). If a
group of Skandhas of the same type is called a Vargana, then its world...
(Continued on the next page)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama pharma grantha grahaNayogya vargaNA hotI hai tathA epha-eka paramANu kI
vRddhi se grahaNayogya vargaNA se antarita agrahaNayogya vargaNA hotI hai|
vizeSArya-yaha loka paramANu aura skaMdha rUpa pudgaloM se ThasAThasa bharA huA
hai aura pudgalakAya aneka vargaNAoM meM vibhAjita hai, jinameM eka karmavarga
bhI hai| ye narmamA jIma ke yoga aura kaSAya kA nimitta pAkara karma rUpa
pariNata ho jAtI haiM  /  pudgala ke eka paramANu ke avagAhasthAna ko pradeza
kahate haiN| ataH karma rUpa pariNata hue pudgala skaMdhoM kA parimANa paramANu
dvArA AMkA jAtA hai ki amuka samaya meM itane paramANu vAle pudgalaskandha amuka
jIva ko karma rUpa meM pariNata hue haiM, isI ko pradezabaMdha kahate hai  /
ataH pradezabaMdha kA svarUpa samajhane ke pUrva karmavargaNA kA jJAna honA
jarUrI hai| karmavargaNA kA svarUpa samajhane ke lie bhI usake pUrva kI audArika
Adi vargaNAoM kA svarUpa jAna liyA jaaye| isIliye una-una vargaNAoM kA bhI
svarUpa samajhanA cAhiye  /  isa kAraNa audArika Adi vargaNAoM kA yahAM svarUpa
kahate haiN| ye audArika Adi vargaNAyeM do prakAra kI hotI haiM-grahaNayogya,
agrahaNayogya  /  agrahaNavargaNA ko Adi lekara karmavargaNA taka vargaNAoM kA
svarUpa gAthA meM spaSTa kiyA jA rahA hai| samAna jAtIya pudgaloM ke samUha ko
vargaNA' kahate haiM  /  ye vargaNArya 1 karmagrantha kI dIkA meM svajAtIya
skaMdhoM ke samUha kA nAma vargaNA kahA hai| jabaki karmaprakRti kI TokA meM
skaMdha aura vargaNA ko ekArthaka kahA hai| kyoMki skaMdha - vargaNA kI
avagAhanA aMgula ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga phahI hai  /  yadi jAtIya skaMdhoM ke
samUha ko vargaNA kahI jAye to usake loka (zeSa agale pRSTha para)

Page #305 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 26  The **Shataka** is infinite. Just as there are some **Samasloka**
atoms in a **Kapi** (a type of space), they are called the **first Vargana**.
The **Skandhas** formed by the combination of two **Pradeshas** are called the
**second Vargana**, and the **Skandhas** formed by the combination of three
**Pradeshas** are called the **third Vargana**. In the same way, the
**Skandhas** with a countable number of **Pradeshas** are called **Sankhyatana
Vargana**, the **Skandhas** with an uncountable number of **Pradeshas** are
called **Asankhyatana Vargana**, the **Skandhas** with an infinite number of
**Pradeshas** are called **Anantana Vargana**, and the **Skandhas** with an
infinite number of infinite **Pradeshas** are called **Anantanantana Vargana**.
These **Varganas** are of two types: **Agrahanayoga** (ungraspable) and
**Grahanayoga** (graspable). The **Varganas** that are not grasped by the
**Jiva** due to their small number of atoms are called **Agrahanavargana**. The
**Skandhas** made up of atoms equal to the **Abhyabhy** **Jivas** multiplied by
infinity and the **Skandhas** made up of atoms equal to the **Sidha** **Jivas**
divided by infinity are graspable by the **Jiva** and they result in the
**Audarik** body. Therefore, they are called **Audarik Vargana**. However, this
**Vargana** is the most insignificant among the graspable **Varganas** of the
**Audarik** body. Above it, the **Skandhas** with one more atom are called the
first, second, third, etc., infinite **Varganas** that are graspable by the
**Audarik** body. Thus, the graspable **Varganas** of the **Audarik** body are
infinite from the most insignificant **Vargana**.  If it is understood through
**Dhyana** (meditation), then its understanding will be according to the
**Loka** (world). Where **Vargana** and **Skandha** are used synonymously, there
is no objection regarding understanding. But where the group of **Skandhas** of
the same type is called **Vargana**, if the understanding is taken as
**Skandha**, then it becomes uniform. Therefore, according to the commentary on
the **Karmagrantha**, the understanding should be taken as **Skandha** but not
as **Vargana**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26 zatakaM anaMta hotI hai| jaise samasaloka kAmo kucha kApI paramANu pAye jAte
haiM, unheM pahalI vargaNA kahate haiN| do pradezoM ke mela se banane vAle
skaMdhoM ko dUsarI vargaNA, nIna pradezoM ke mela se banane vAle skaMdhoM kI
tIsarI vargaNA kahalAtI hai| isI prakAra eka-eka paramANu bar3hate. bar3hate
saMkhyAta pradezI skaMdhoM ko saMkhyAtANu vargaNA, asaMkhyAta pradezI skaMdhoM
ko asaMkhyAtANu vargaNA, anaMta pradezo skaMdhoM ko anantANu vargaNA aura
anaMtAnanta pradezI sradhA kI anantAnantANu vargaNA samajhanA caahiye| ye
vargaNAyeM agrahaNayogya aura grahaNayogya, do prakAra kI hai  /  jo vargaNAyeM
alpa paramANu bAlo hone ke kAraNa jIva dvArA grahaNa nahIM ko jAtI, unheM
agrahaNavargaNA kahate haiM  /  abhabya jIvoM ko rAzi se anaMtaguNe aura siddha
jIvoM kI rAzi ke anantaveM bhAga pramANa paramANuoM se bane skaMdha yAnI itane
paramANu vAle skaMdha joba ke dvArA grahaNa karane yogya hote haiM aura jIva
unheM grahaNa karake audArika zarIra rUpa pariNamAtA hai  /  isaliye unheM
audArika vargaNA kahate haiM  /  kintu audArika zarIra kI grahaNayogya vargaNAoM
meM yaha vagaMNA sabase jaghanya hoto hai, usake Upara eka-eka paramANu bar3hate
skaMdhoM ko pahalI, dUsarI, tIsarI Adi ananta vargaNAyeM audArika zarIra ke
grahaNa yogya hotI haiM  /  jisase audArika zarIra kI grahaNayogya jaghanya
vargaNA se annt| dhyApI hone se usakI avagAhanA lokapramANa hogI  /  vargaNA
aura skaMdha ko jahA~ ekArthaka kahA gayA ho vahA~ to avagahanA maMbadhI Apatti
nahIM  /  kintu jahAM svajAtIya skaMdhoM ke samUha kA nAma vargaNA kahA jAye
vahAM avagAinA skandha kI lI jAye to barAbara ekarUpalA vanatI hai  /  ataH
karmagrantha kI TIkA ke anusAra rakaMgha kI avamAhanA lenA cAhiye kintu vargaNA
ko nhiiN|

Page #306 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **266**  The finest gradation of the Audarik body,
which is capable of being grasped, is one that is a fraction of an infinite
number of atoms. In this infinite fraction, there are infinite atoms. Therefore,
one should know that there are infinite gradations from the coarsest to the
finest gradation of the Audarik body, which are capable of being grasped.  Above
the finest gradation of the Audarik body, there are gradations that are formed
by adding one atom at a time to the previous gradation. These gradations are
more extensive and subtle than the Audarik body, and therefore are not capable
of being grasped by the Audarik body. They are also less extensive and coarser
than the gradations that form the Vaikriya body, and therefore are not capable
of being grasped by the Vaikriya body. In this way, there are infinite
ungraspable gradations above the finest gradation of the Audarik body, which are
formed by adding one atom at a time to the previous gradation. Just as the
finest gradation of the Audarik body is an infinite fraction greater than the
coarsest gradation of the Audarik body, so too is the finest ungraspable
gradation an infinite fraction greater than the coarsest ungraspable gradation.
The measure of this multiplier is an infinite fraction of the Abhtrya quantity
and an infinite part of the Siddha quantity.  Above these ungraspable
gradations, there are again graspable gradations, and above the graspable
gradations, there are ungraspable gradations! In this way, these two types of
gradations are distinct from each other.  In this way, after describing the
graspable and ungraspable gradations of the Audarik body, the graspable and
ungraspable gradations of the Vaikriya, etc., are explained.  **76**  **Meaning
of the words:**  * **Emem:** As stated before *
**Viuyavyahaarteyabhasaanapaanamahanhamme:** Action, food, energy, flesh,
breath, mind

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 266 bhAga adhika paramANu bAlI audArika zarIra kI
grahaNayogya utkRSTa vargaNA hotI hai  /  isa anantaveM bhAga meM ananta
paramANu hote haiM  /  ataH jaghanya vargaNA se lekara utkRSTa vargaNA paryanta
ananta vargaNAyeM audArika zarIra kI grahaNayogya jAnanA cAhiye  /  audArika
zarIra kI utkRSTa vargaNA se Upara eka-eka paramANu barate skandhoM se banane
vAlI vargaNArye audArika kI apekSA se adhika pradeza vAlI aura sUkSma hotI haiM,
jisase audArika ke grahaNa-yogya nahIM hotI haiM aura jina skandhoM se vaikriya
zarIra banatA hai. unakI apekSA se alpa pradeza bAlI aura sthUla hotI haiM
jisase ve vaikriya zarIra ke grahaNayogya nahIM hotI haiM  /  isa prakAra
audArika zarIra kI utkRSTa vargaNA ke Upara eka-eka paramANu bar3hate skaMdhoM
kI ananta agrahaNayogya bargaNA hotI haiM  /  jaise audArika zarIra kI
grahaNayogya jaghanya vargaNA se usI kI utkRSTa vargaNA anaMta bhAga adhika hai,
vaise hI agrahaNayogya jatranya vargaNA se usako utkRSTa vargaNA anaMtagRNI hai
/  isa guNAkAra kA pramANa abhatrya rAzi se anaMtagaNA aura siddharAzi kA
anaMtavAM bhAga hai| isa agrahaNayogya vargaNA ke Upara punaH grahaNayogya
vargaNA AtI hai aura grahaNayogya vargaNA ke Upara agrahaNayogya vargaNA ! isa
prakAra ye donoM eka dUsare se antarita haiN| isa prakAra se audArika zarIra kI
prahaNayogya aura agrahaNayogya vargaNAoM kA kathana karane ke bAda baiMkriya
Adi kI mahaNayogya, agrahaNayogya vargaNAoM kA spaSTIkaraNa karate haiN| emeSa
vivAhArateyabhAsANupANamaNakamme  /  suhamA kamAvagAho UNUNaMgulaasaMkheso  /  /
76  //  zabdArtha-emeva-pUrvokta ke sarAna, viuvyAhArateyabhAsANapANamaNahamme-
kriya, AhAraka, tejasa, mASA, svAsocchvAsa, mana

Page #307 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sarada  The eight limbs of the body, the nine senses, the two pairs, the
sixteen actions, the Udyot, the Gotra, the Vedaniya, the five Nidra, the
Vamvishak and the four Aam are the **Pāravarttamāna** (transmigratory) natures.
The four Aam are **Kshetravipāki** (field-resultant). The **Gāthā** (verse)
specifically mentions the **Pāravarttamāna** and **Kshetravipāki** natures.  The
**Pāravarttamāna** natures are called so because they prevent the binding,
arising, or binding-arising of the **Dūmari** (transmigratory) natures, and
instead bind, arise, or bind-arise themselves. These include the **Aghati**
(non-fatal) **Vedaniya** (sensory), **Āyu** (life-span), **Nāma** (name), and
**Gona** (gender) karmas, along with the **Ghāti** (fatal) karmas
**Darshanāvarana** (obscuration of perception), and **Mohaniya** (delusive).
These are further categorized as follows:  (1) **Darshanāvarana**: **Nidrā**
(sleep), **Nidrā-Nidrā**, **Prachalā**, **Prachalā-Prachalā**, **Snyānaddhi**.
(2) **Varnoya**: **Sāta Vedaniya** (seven sensory), **Asāta Vedaniya** (non-
sensory).  (3) **Mohaniya**: **Anantānubandhi Kapāya Chatushk** (fourfold
attachment to the infinite), **Apratyaкhyānāvarana Kapāya Chatushk** (fourfold
attachment to the non-rejection of obscuration), **Pratyaкhyānāvarana Kapāya
Chatushk** (fourfold attachment to the rejection of obscuration), **Mangvalan
Kapāya Chatushk** (fourfold attachment to the auspicious), **Hāsya** (laughter),
**Rati** (love), **Shoka** (sorrow), **Arati** (disgust), **Strī** (female),
**Purusha** (male), **Napumsaka** (neuter) **Ved** (sense).  (4) **Āyakarma**:
**Naraka** (hell), **Tithanch** (animal), **Manushya** (human), **Dev** (god)
**Ādhū** (state).  (5) **Nāmakarma**: The 33 natures of the **Sharīragashtka**
(eight limbs of the body) (**Audārika** (physical), **Vaikriya** (mental),
**Āhārak** (food-consuming) body, **Audārika** (physical) **Angopānga** (limbs),
**Nīn** (nine) **Angopānga** (limbs), six **Sansthāna** (establishments), six
**Mahanan** (greatnesses), **Ekendiya** (one-sense) etc. **Racha** (form),
**Jāti** (birth), **Narakagani** (hell-group) etc. four **Gani** (groups),
**Shubha-Ashubha** (auspicious-inauspicious) **Bihayogati** (state of
separation), four **Ānupuर्वī** (preceding), **Ātap** (heat), **Udyon**
(effort), **Nama** (name) **Dashak** (ten), **Sthāvara** (stationary) **Dashak**
(ten).  (E) **Gotrakarma**: **Uchna Gotra** (high lineage), **Nīcha Gotra** (low
lineage).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saard pAyAcaM - zarIrAdi aSTaka, nIna veda, do yugala, solaha karAya,
udyotaddhika, govatika, vedanIyadvika, pA~ca nidrA, vamavIzaka aura cAra Ama ye
parAvartamAna prakRtiyA~ haiN| cAra AnupUrvI kSetravipAkI haiN| vizeSArtha-gAthA
meM parAvatamAna aura kSetravipAkI prakRtiyoM kA kathana kiyA hai|
_parAvartamAna prakRtiyAM dUmarI prakRtiyoM ke baMdha, udaya athavA baMdhodaya
donoM ko roka kara apanA baMgha, udaya yA baMdhodaya karane ke kAraNa
parAvartamAna kahalAtI haiN| inameM aghAtI- vedanIya, Ayu, nAma, gona kamoM kI
adhikAMza prakRtiyoM ke sAtha ghAtI karma darzanAvaraNa va mohanIya ko bhI
prakRtiyoM haiM  /  jinake nAma kramazaH isa prakAra haiM - (1) darzanAvaraNa-
nidrA, nidrA-nidrA, pracalA, pracalA-pracalA, snyAnaddhi  /  (2) varanoya-sAtA
vedanIya, asAtA vedanIya  /  (3) mohanIya-anantAnubaMdhI kapAya catuSka,
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kapAya catuSka, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kapAya catuSka,
maMgvalana kapAya catuSka, hAsya, rati, zoka, arati, strI, puruSa, napuMsaka
veda  /  (4) Ayakama-naraka, tithaMca, manuSya, deva Adhu  /  (5) nAmakarma-
zarIgaSTaka kI 33 prakRtiyAM (audArika, vaikriya, AhAraka zarIra, audArika
aMgopAMga Adi nIna aMgopAMga, chaha saMsthAna, chaha mahanana, ekendriya Adi
raca jAti, narakagani Adi cAra gani, zubha-azubha bihAyogati, cAra AnupUrvI),
Atapa, udyona, nama dazaka, sthAvara dazaka  /  ' (E) gotrakarma-ucna gotra,
nIca gotra  /

Page #308 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  Thus, 5+2+23+4+5+2-1  natures are pervading. Out of
these, the sixteen Kapāyas starting with Anantānubandhi Kapāya Chatushk and the
five Nidrāyas, being Dhruvabandhini, do not obstruct the two remaining natures
in the nine Bandhadashas, but they manifest in the Udayakāla by obstructing the
Majaniy nature. This is because in anger, pride, deceit, and greed, only one
Kapāya can manifest in a Jiva at a time. Similarly, when one of the five
Nidrāyas manifests, the other four Nidrāyas do not manifest.   The four natures
- Stable, Auspicious, Unstable, and Inauspicious - are not antagonistic in the
Udayadashā, but they are antagonistic in the Bandhadashā. This is because Stable
cannot bind with Unstable, and Auspicious cannot bind with Inauspicious.
Therefore, these four natures are pervading. The remaining 66 natures are
pervading because they are antagonistic in both the Bandhadashā and the
Udayadashā.  Thus, the description of the pervading Karma Natures, along with
the twelve categories starting with Dhruvabandhi and ending with Aparavartman,
as mentioned by the Granthakāra, has been discussed. Their details can be found
in the bracket on page 72.  Now, we will discuss the Karma Natures in relation
to Vipaka.  Vipaka refers to the manifestation of the result. The power of a
Karma Nature to produce specific or diverse types of fruits, and the state of
being ready to bear fruit, is called Vipaka. For example, when mangoes, etc.,
are ripe and ready to be eaten, they are said to be in Vipaka. Similarly, when
Karma Natures are ready to bear their fruits, they are said to be in Vipaka
Kāla.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha isa prakAra 5+2+23+4+5+2-1 prakRtiyAM parAvartamAna haiM
/  inameM se anaMtAnubaMdhI kapAya catuSka Adi solaha kapAya aura pAMca nidrAyeM
dhruvabaMdhinI hone se no baMdhadazA meM dumarI prakRniyoM kA uparodha nahIM
karatI haiM lekina udayakAla meM majAnIya prakRti ko roka kara pravRtta hotI
haiM, kyoMki krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha meM ma eka jIva ko eka mamaya meM eka
pAya kA udaya honA hai| isI prakAra pAMca nidrAoM meM kisI eka kA udaya hone
para doSa cAra nidrAoM kA udaya nahIM hotA hai. 1 anaH parAvarnamAna haiN|
sthira, zubha, agthira, azubha ye cAra prakRtiyAM udayadazA meM virodhinI nahIM
haiM kintu bananadazA meM virodhinI haiN| kyoMki sthira ke sAtha asthira kA aura
zubha ke sAtha azubha kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai| isalie ye cAroM prakRtiyAM
parAvatamAna haiN| zeSa 66 prakRtiyAM vaMgha aura udaya donoM sthiniyoM meM
parampara virodhinI hone meM parAvartamAna haiM  /  /  uma prakAra meM
parAvarnamAna karma prakRtiyoM kA varNana karane ke mAtha granthakAra dvArA
nirdiSTa dhutravandhri Adi aparAvartamAna paryanta bAraha hAroM kA vivecana kiyA
jA cukA hai| jinakA vivaraNa pR072 para diye gaya koSTaka meM dekhiye  /  aba
karma prakRtiyoM kA vipAka kI apekSA nirUpaNa karate haiN| vipAka meM Azaya
ramodaya kA hai| karmaprakRti meM viziSTa athavA vividha prakAra ke phAna dene
kI zakti ko aura phala dene ke abhimukha hone ko vipAka kahate haiM | jaise Ama
Adi phana jaba paka kara taiyAra hone haiM, natra unakA vipAka hotA hai| baime
hI kama prakRtiyAM bhI jaba apanA phala dene ke abhimukha honI haiM natra unakA
vipAkAkAla kahAlAnA hai|

Page #309 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shataka 22 manaus are born, and as they are, their subtle and subtler forms are
measured. The penetration of the audārika and other vargaṇās is such that it is
successively one-half, one-quarter, one-eighth, one-sixteenth, and so on, of an
angula. This should be understood. Due to this subtlety, even though the
physical body of the audārika has few atoms, its tejas and kārmaṇa bodies, which
are present within it, have many more atoms, and hence are not visible. After
mentioning the tejas vargaṇā, the text mentions language, respiration, and
manovargaṇā, and finally places the kārmaṇa vargaṇā at the end. The reason for
this is that the vargaṇās after the tejas vargaṇā are even more subtle. That is,
the vargaṇās that are transformed into speech are more subtle than the vargaṇās
that are transformed into respiration. The manovargaṇā, which forms the basis of
mental contemplation, is even more subtle than the respiratory vargaṇā. The
kārmaṇa vargaṇā is more subtle than the manovargaṇā. From this, one can infer
how much more subtle they are, but how much more numerous the atoms in them are.
The discussion of the grāhya (apprehensible) and agrāhya (unapprehensible)
vargaṇās of the audārika body has been done in the previous verse. Here, the
grāhya and agrāhya vargaṇās of the vaikriya, etc. are being explained. The
agrāhya, excellent vargaṇā of the audārika body is the group-form vargaṇā of the
skandhas in which there is one more atom than the skandhas in which the jighanya
(inferior) vargaṇā of the vaikriya body, which is grāhya, is found. The group-
form of the skandhas in which one more pradeśa than the pradeśas of the skandhas
of this jighanya vargaṇā is found, is the second...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka 22 mANuoM kA saMjAta hotA hai tyoM-tyoM unakA sUkSma, sUkSmatara rUpa
pari mANa hotA hai| audArika Adi bargaNAoM ko avagAhanA jo uttarottara hona-hona
aMgula ke asaMkhyAta bhAga pAho hai vaha purva ko apekSA krama se eka ke bAda
dumarI uttaronara asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga hona samajhanA cAhiye  /  isa nyulatara kI
vajaha se hI alpa paramANu vAle audArika zarIra ke dikhane para bhI usake mAtra
vidyamAna rahane vAle taijasa aura kAmaNa zarIra usase kaI gane paramANu vAle
hone para bhI dikhAI nahIM dete haiN| tejasa bargaNA ke bAda bhASA, zvAsozvAsa
aura manovargaNA kA ullekha karake manase aMta meM kArmaNa vargaNA ko rakhA hai,
isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki ta jamma vargaNA se bhI bhASA Adi vargaNAyeM adhika
sukSma haiM  /  athAt taijasa zarIra ko grahaNayogya vargaNAA se ve barmaNAyeM
adhika sUkSma haiM jo bAtacIta karate samaya zabda rUpa pariNata hotI haiM,
unase bhI ye vargaNAyeM sUkSma haiM jo zvAsocchvAsa rUpa pariNata hotI hai  /
zvAsocchabAsa vargaNA se bhI mAnasika cintana kA AdhAra banane vAlA
manovargaNAyeM aura adhika sUkSma haiN| karmavargaNA manovargaNA se bhI sUkSma
haiN| isase yaha anumAna ho jAe ki ve kitanI adhika sUkSma hai kintu unameM
paramANuoM kI saMkhyA kitanI adhika hotI hai| _ audArika zarIra kI grahaNayogya
aura agrahaNayogya vargaNAoM kA vivavecana pUrva gAthA meM kiyA jA cukA hai  /
zeSa rahI vaikriya Adi kI grahaNayogya aura agrahaNayogya vargaNAoM ko yahAM
spaSTa karate haiN| _audArika zarIra kI agrahaNayogya' utkRSTa bargaNA ke
skaMdhoM ke paramANuoM se eka adhika paramANu jina skaMdhoM meM pAye jAte haiM
una skaMdhoM kI samUha rUpa vargaNA vainiya zarIra ko grahaNayogya jaghanya
vargaNA hotI hai  /  isa jaghanya vargaNA ke skaMdha ke pradezoM se eka adhika
pradeza jisa-jisa skaMdha meM pAyA jAtA hai unakA samUha rUpa dUsarI

Page #310 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **param paramanu** is the smallest possible particle that can be perceived
by the **vaikriya** body. Similarly, an infinite number of **varganas**
(classifications) of **skandhas** (aggregates) are perceivable by the
**vaikriya** body, each one larger than the last. The **vaikriya** body can
perceive an infinite number of **varganas** of **skandhas**, starting from the
smallest possible **vargana** and going up to the largest possible **vargana**.
The **vargana** that is one **pradesh** (dimension) larger than the largest
**vargana** perceivable by the **vaikriya** body is too large for the
**vaikriya** body but too small for the **aaharaka** body. This **vargana** is
called the **agrahanavargna** (imperceptible **vargana**). This is the smallest
**agrahanavargna**. There are an infinite number of **agrahanavargna**
**varganas**, each one larger than the last.  The **vargana** that is one
**pradesh** larger than the largest **agrahanavargna** is the smallest
**vargana** perceivable by the **aaharaka** body. There are an infinite number
of **varganas** perceivable by the **aaharaka** body, each one larger than the
last. The **vargana** that is one **pradesh** larger than the largest
**vargana** perceivable by the **aaharaka** body is the smallest
**agrahanavargna** for the **aaharaka** body. There are an infinite number of
**agrahanavargna** **varganas** for the **aaharaka** body, each one larger than
the last. These **varganas** are too large for the **aaharaka** body but too
small for the **tejas** body.  The **vargana** that is one **pradesh** larger
than the largest **agrahanavargna** for the **aaharaka** body is the smallest
**vargana** perceivable by the **tejas** body.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 parama pAmagranya vargaNA vaikriya zarIra kI grahaNayogya vargaNA hotI hai| isI
prakAra eka-eka pradeza adhika skaMdhoM kI ananta vargaNAyeM vaikriya zarIra kI
grahaNayogya hotI haiM  /  baiMkriya zarIra kI grahaNayogya jaghanya vargaNA se
usake anantaveM bhAga adhika vaikriya zarIra ko grahaNayogya utkRSTa vargaNA
hotI hai| vakriya zarIra ko grahaNayogya utkRSTa vargaNA se eka pradeza adhika
skaMdhoM ko jo vargaNA hai vaha vaikriya zarIra kI apekSA sa bahuta pradeza bAlI
aura sUkSma hotI hai tathA AhAraka zarIra kI apekSA se kama pradeza bAlI aura
nthUla hotI hai  /  ataH baMkriya aura AhAraka zarIra ke lAyaka na hone se use
agrahaNavargaNA kahate haiN| yaha jaghanya agrahaNa vagaNA hai  /  usake Upara
eka-eka pradeza bar3ate skandhoM kI ananta vargaNAyeM agrahaNayogya haiN|
agrahaNayogya utkRSTa vargaNA se eka pradeza adhika skandhoM kI jo vargaNA hotI
hai vaha AhAraka zarIra kI grahaNayogya jaghanya bagaNA hotI hai aura isa
jaghanya vargaNA se anantaveM bhAga adhika pradeza vAle smAndhoM kI AhAraka
zarIra ko grahaNayogya utkRSTa vargaNA hotI hai| AhAraka zarIra kI isa
grahaNayogya utkRSTa vargaNA se eka pradeza adhika skandhoM ko agrahaNayogya
jaghanya vargaNA hotI hai aura usake Upara 7ka-eka pradeza bar3hate-bar3hate
jaghanya vargaNA se anantagRNe pradezoM kI vRddhi hone para agrahaNayogya
utkRSTa vargaNA hotI hai| ye vargaNAyeM AhAraka zarIra kI apekSA bahupradeza
vAlI aura sUkSma haiM aura taMjasa zarIra ko apekSA se alpa pradeza vAlI aura
sthUla haiM, ataH grahaNayogya nahIM haiN| ukta utkRSTa agrahaNayogya vargaNA se
eka pradeza adhika skandhoM kI vargaNA tejasa zarIra ko grahaNayogya jaghanya
vargaNA hotI hai|

Page #311 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 274 ## Shakṣaka  Above it, with each increasing province, the infinite number
of provinces with more provinces than the inferior classification, which is
almost suitable for the Tejas body, become the superior classification. From the
province of the superior classification, which is suitable for the Jam body, the
provinces with one more province become the inferior, unsuitable classification.
And above it, with each increasing province, the infinite number of provinces
with more provinces than the inferior, unsuitable classification become the
superior, unsuitable classification. These infinite unsuitable classifications
are unsuitable for the Tejas body because they are much larger in provinces and
more subtle than the language, and coarser and smaller in provinces than the
language.  The classification with one more province than the aforementioned
superior, unsuitable classification is the inferior classification suitable for
language. And above it, with each increasing province, the infinite number of
provinces with more provinces than the inferior classification become the
superior classification suitable for language. In this way, the infinite
classifications are suitable for language.  From the province of the superior
classification suitable for language, the provinces with one more province
become the inferior, unsuitable classification. And above it, with each
increasing province, the infinite number of provinces with more provinces than
the inferior classification become the superior, unsuitable classification.  In
this classification, the provinces with one more province become the inferior
classification suitable for breathing. And above it, with each increasing
province, the infinite number of provinces with more provinces than the inferior
classification become the superior classification suitable for breathing.  From
the province of the superior classification suitable for breathing, the
provinces with one more province become the inferior, unsuitable classification.
And...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 274 zakSaka usake Upara eka-eka pradeza bar3hate-bar3hate tejasazarIraprAyogya
jaghanya vargaNA ke anantaveM bhAga adhika pradeza vAle skandhoM ko utkRSTa
vargaNA hotI haiM  /  jama zarIra kI grahaNayogya utkRSTa vargaNA ke skandha se
eka pradeza adhika skandhoM ko jaghanya agrahaNayogya vargaNA hotI hai aura
usake Upara eka eka pradeza var3hate-banate jaghanya agrahaNa yogya vargaNA meM
anantagRNe adhika pradeza vAla skandhoM ko utkRSTa agrahaNayogya vargaNA hotI
hai| yaM ananta agrahaNayogya bargaNAyeM tejasa zarIra ko apekSA se bahuta
pradeza vAlo aura sUkSma hone nadhA bhASA kI apekSA sthUla aura alpa pradeza
vAlI hone se agrahaNayogya haiN| ukta utkRSTa agrahaNayogya vagaMNA se eka
pradeza adhika skandhoM kI jo vargaNA hotI hai vaha bhASAprAyogya jaghanya
vargaNA hai aura usake Upara eka-eka pradeza bar3hate bar3hate jaghanya vargaNA
ke anantaveM bhAga adhika pradeza vAle skandhoM kI bhASAprAyogya utkRSTa vargaNA
hotI hai  /  isa prakAra ananna vargaNAyeM bhASA kI grahaNayogya hotI haiM  /
bhASA kI grahaNayogya utkRSTa vagaNA ke skandhoM se eka pradeza adhika skandhoM
kI agrahaNayogya jaghanya vargaNA hotI hai aura usake Upara eka eka pradeza
bar3hate-bar3hane jaghanya vagaNA se anantagaNe pradeza vAle skandhoM kI
agrahaNayogya utkRSTa vagaNA hotI hai| isa vargaNA ke skandhroM meM eka pradeza
adhika skandhoM ko vargaNA zvAsocchvAma ko grahaNayogya jaghanya vargaNA hotI
hai aura usake Upara eka eka pradeza bar3hate bar3hata jaghanya vargaNA ke
skandhra pradezoM ke anannaveM bhAga adhika pradeza bAle skandhoM kI
zvAsocchvAsa ko brahaNayogya utkRSTa vargaNA hotI hai| zvAsocchvAga ko
grahaNayogya utkRSTa vargaNA ke skandhoM se eka pradeza adhika kaMdhoM kI
agrahaNayogya jaghanya vargaNA hotI hai aura

Page #312 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Compendium  **235**  Above the **utkṛṣṭa** (excellent)
**agrahaṇayoga** (non-grasping) **vargaṇā** (category) with an infinite number
of **pradeśa** (regions) in its **skandha** (section), there is a **jighnya**
(inferior) **vargaṇā** with one more **pradeśa** than the **skandha** of the
**utkṛṣṭa** **agrahaṇayoga** **vargaṇā**. Above this **jighnya** **vargaṇā**,
there is an **utkṛṣṭa** **vargaṇā** with an infinite number of **pradeśa** in
its **skandha**, which is **grahaṇayoga** (grasping) for **manodravya** (mental
matter). Above this **utkṛṣṭa** **grahaṇayoga** **vargaṇā** for **manodravya**,
there is a **jighnya** **vargaṇā** with one more **pradeśa** than the
**skandha** of the **utkṛṣṭa** **grahaṇayoga** **vargaṇā**, which is
**agrahaṇayoga** (non-grasping). Above this **jighnya** **vargaṇā**, there is an
**utkṛṣṭa** **vargaṇā** with an infinite number of **pradeśa** in its
**skandha**, which is **agrahaṇayoga** (non-grasping). Above this **utkṛṣṭa**
**vargaṇā**, there is a **jighnya** **vargaṇā** with one more **pradeśa** than
the **skandha** of the **utkṛṣṭa** **vargaṇā**, which is **grahaṇayoga**
(grasping) for **karma** (karmic matter). Above this **jighnya** **vargaṇā**,
there is an **utkṛṣṭa** **vargaṇā** with an infinite number of **pradeśa** in
its **skandha**, which is **grahaṇayoga** (grasping) for **karma** (karmic
matter).  In this way, there are eight **grahaṇayoga** (grasping) **vargaṇā**
and eight **agrahaṇayoga** (non-grasping) **vargaṇā**. The **agrahaṇayoga**
**vargaṇā** are situated between the **grahaṇayoga** **vargaṇā**. For example,
**agrahaṇayoga** **vargaṇā**, **audārika** **vargaṇā**, **agrahaṇayoga**
**vargaṇā**, **vakriya** **vargaṇā**, and so on.  The number of **paramāṇu**
(atoms) in one **skandha** of the **jighnya** **agrahaṇayoga** **vargaṇā** is an
infinite number of times less than the number of **paramāṇu** in one **skandha**
of the **utkṛṣṭa** **agrahaṇayoga** **vargaṇā**. The number of **paramāṇu** in
one **skandha** of the **jighnya** **grahaṇayoga** **vargaṇā** is an infinite
number of times less than the number of **paramāṇu** in one **skandha** of the
**utkṛṣṭa** **grahaṇayoga** **vargaṇā**.  The essence of this entire statement
is that as the number of **pradeśa** in the **skandha** of the **utkṛṣṭa**
**vargaṇā** increases, the **pradeśa** of the **jighnya** **vargaṇā** increases
accordingly. The **utkṛṣṭa** **vargaṇā** of the **agrahaṇayoga** **vargaṇā** is
its own...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama kamagrantha 235 usake Upara eka-eka pradeza bar3hate bar3hate anantaguNe
pradeza vAle kaMdhoM ko utkRSTa agrahaNayogya vargamA hotI hai  /  isa bagaNA ke
skaMdhoM se eka pradeza adhika skaMdhoM kI manodaya ko grahaNayogya jaghanya
vargaNA hoto hai  /  jaghanya vargaNA ke Upara eka-eka pradeza bar3hate-bar3hate
jaghanya vargaNA ke skaMdhoM ke pramo.he. anan gaganazibAle kI nodravya kI
grahaNayogya utkRSTa bargaNA hotI hai| manodravya kI grahaNayogya utkRSTa
vargaNA se eka pradeza adhika skaMdhoM kI agnAzayogya jaghanya vargaNA hotI hai|
usake Upara eka-eka pradeza bar3hate-bar3ate jaghanya vargaNA ke skaMdha
pradezoM se anantaguNe pradeza vAle skaMdhoM kI agrahaNayogya utkRSTa vargaNA
hotI hai  /  isa utkRSTa bargaNA ke skandha ke pradezoM se eka pradeza adhika
skandhoM kI vargaNA karma ko grahaNa yogya jaghanya vargaNA hotI hai aura usake
Upara eka-eka pradeza bar3hatebar3hate jaghanya vargaNA ke ananta bhAga adhika
pradeza bAle skandhoM kI karma kI yogya utkRSTa vargaNA hoto hai| isa prakAra se
ATha bargaNA grahaNayogya aura ATha vargaNA agrahaNayogya hotI haiM  /  agrahaNa
vargaNArya grahaNa vargaNAoM ke madhya meM hotI haiN| arthAt agrahaNa bargaNA,
audArika vargaNA, agrahaNa vargaNA, vakiya vargaNA ityAdi  /  jaghanya
agrahaNayogya dhargaNA ke eka skandha meM jitane paramANu hote haiM, unase
anantaguNe paramANu utkRSTa agrahaNayogya vargaNA ke ekA-eka skandhra meM hote
haiM aura jaghanya grahaNayogya vargaNA ke eka skandha meM jitane paramANu hote
haiM usake anantaveM bhAga adhika paramANu utkRSTa grahaNayogya vargaNA ke
skandhoM meM hote haiN| isa samasta kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai ki pUrva-pUrva
ko utkRSTa varmaNA ke skandhoM meM eka-eka pradeza bar3hane para Age-Age kI
jaghanya vargaNA kA pramANa AtA hai  /  agrAhya vargaNA kI utkRSTa vargaNA apanI

Page #313 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
276 The ultimate fraction of the ultimate fraction of the lowest class is
multiplied by the ultimate fraction of the ultimate fraction of the highest
class. The purpose of explaining and stating the sixteen types of
classifications here is to bring into view the outline of the nature of what is
transformed into the form of karma. Having explained the nature of the
acceptable classifications and the evidence of their understanding, we now state
the atoms of the unacceptable classifications in the next verse. Ekkikakhiya
Siddhanantsa Antaresu Ahana. Satya Jahannuchia Niyatan Pahya Jitta. ||77||
Shatak .. Shabdarth Isikakakhiya - one by one atom, more Siddhanantsa - friends,
Ananta Bhaga Antaretu - in the interval, Aggahanagrahanyogya Vargana -
acceptable classifications, Satvattha - in all classifications, Jahanachia -
lowest class, Niyatan - own, Sahiya - infinite, Bhaga Adhik - part more, Jida -
which, Utkrishta Vargana - highest class.   - · — 1 Panchasangraha also
describes the classifications in the same way as the Karmagrantha. The
classifications beyond the 16 classifications are described as follows: Kammar
Dhurerasunna Pattamvasrishnavamariya | Suna Sahama Sushna Mahabandhi
Sagunnabhao. — -Karan 16 Karmana He Kapar Vargana Abhootatrana Shunyavargana
Pratyekarishvargana, Shunyavargana, Badar Nigodavargana Shunyavargana,
Sukshmaniyodavargana Shunyana and Mahasvadha Vargana. F Karma Prakriti and Go.
Jeevakanda also mention these classifications with some minor differences in
names.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 276 jaghanya vargaNA se siddha rAzi ke anantaveM bhAga guNita hai aura grAhya
aNA kI utkRSTa vargaNA apanI jaghanya vargaNA se anantaveM bhAga adhika hai  /
yahAM para vargaNAoM ke solaha bheda' batAne aura unake kathana karane kA
uddezya yahI hai ki jo cIja karma rUpa pariNata hotI hai, usake svarUpa kI
rUparekhA dRSTi meM A jAye  /  grahaNayogya vargaNAoM kA svarUpa aura unakI
avagAhanA kA pramANa batalAkara aba Age kI gAthA meM agrahaNa varmaNAoM ke
paramANa kA kathana karate haiM  /  ikkikakahiyA siddhANaMtasA aMtaresu ahaNA  /
satya jahannuciyA niyataM pahiyA jiTTA  // 77 //  zataka .. zabdArtha
iSikapakahiyA eka eka paramANu dvArA adhika siddhANaMsA mitroM ke anaMta bhAga
aMtaretu - antarAla meM aggahaNAgrahaNayogya vargaNA satvattha sarva vargaNAoM
meM, jahAnaciyA jaghanya grahaNa carmaNA se niyaNasaM sAhiyA apane anantameM
bhAga adhika, jir3A utkRSTa vargaNA  /  - * -- 1 paMcasaMgraha meM bhI
karmagrantha ke samAna hI vargaNAoM kA nirUpaNa kiyA hai  /  16 vargaNAoM se Age
kI gaMNAoM ko isa prakAra batAyA haikammara dhuverasuNNa pattaMvasRSNavAmariyA |
suNA sahamA suSNA mahabaMdhI saguNanAbhAo  /  -- -karaNa 16 karmaNA he kapara
vargaNA abhUtatraNA zunyavargaNA pratyekaarIzvargaMNA, zunyatrargaNA, bAdara
nigodavargaNA zUnyavagaMNA sUkSmaniyodavarga zUnyaNA aura mahAsvadha vagaMNA
hotI haiM  /  F karma prakRti aura go0 jIvakAMDa meM bhI kucha sAmAnya se
nAmabheda ke sAtha yahI gaMNAyeM kahI haiN|

Page #314 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 277 **Verse Meaning:**  Between the Audarik
(generous) and other categories, there are countless, immeasurable categories of
Agahanayogya (unperceivable) categories, each containing one more atom than the
previous. The Audarik and other categories are infinitely greater than their
respective inferior categories.  **Explanation:** The previous two verses
explained the names of the Grahanayogya (perceivable) categories and their
characteristics. They also mentioned that the Vimaranayogya (imperceptible)
categories are differentiated within the Mahaayogya (great) categories. This
verse explains the characteristics of the Agahanayogya categories and the
difference between the inferior and superior Grahanayogya categories.  Although
we have hinted at the characteristics of the Agahanayogya categories while
discussing the Grahanayogya categories, we will clarify it again briefly here.
In each Skandha (group) of the superior Grahanayogya category, there is an
Agahanayogya inferior category consisting of groups of Skandhas with one more
atom. Subsequently, there is another Agahanayogya category consisting of groups
of Skandhas with two more atoms. Similarly, one should understand the third,
fourth, and subsequent Agahanayogya categories with three more, four more, and
so on.  The Agahanayogya superior category consists of groups of Skandhas
containing as many atoms as the number of atoms in one Skandha of the
Agahanayogya inferior category multiplied by an infinite fraction of the Siddha-
rashi (the number of atoms in the liberated soul). Therefore, each Agahanayogya
category is described as an infinite fraction of the Siddha-rashi. This is
because the number of atoms in one Skandha of the inferior Agahanayogya category
is obtained by multiplying the Siddha-rashi by an infinite fraction. Therefore,
from the inferior to the superior...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama karmagrantha 277 gAthArtha -audArika Adi vargaNAoM ke madhya meM eka-eka
paramANu dvArA adhika siddhoM ke anaMta bhAga parimANa vAlI agrahaNayogya
vargaNA hotI haiN| audArika Adi mabhI varga: NAoM kA utkRSTa apane-apane yogya
jaghanya se anaMtaveM bhAga adhika hotA hai| vizeSArtha pUrva kI do gAthAoM meM
graNahayogya vargaNAoM ke nAma aura unakI avagAhanA kA pramANa batalAyA hai aura
yaha bhI kahA hai vimaraNayogae nArINAamahAyomya bargaNAoM meM antarita hotI
haiM  /  isa gAthA meM agrahaNayogya vargaNAoM kA pramANa aura grahaNayogya
vargaNAoM ke jaghanya aura utkRSTa bhedoM kA annara batalAyA hai| yadyapi pUrva
meM grahaNayogya vargaNAoM kA vicAra karate samaya agrahaNayogya vargaNAoM ke
pramANa kA bhI saMketa kara Aye haiM, tathApi saMkSepa meM punaH yahAM spaSTa
kara dete haiM ki utkRSTa grahaNayogya vargaNA ke pratyeka skandha meM jitane
paramANu hote haiM, unameM eka adhika paramANu vAle skandhoM ke samUha kI
agrahaNayogya jaghanya vargaNA hotI hai  /  isake bAda do adhika paramANa vAle
skandhoM ke samUha kI dUsarI agrahaNayogya vargaNA jAnanA cAhie  /  isI prakAra
tIna adhika, cAra adhika, Adi nosarI, cauthI Adi agrahaNayogya vargaNAyeM
samajha nenA cAhie  /  agrahaNayogya jaghanya vargaNA ke eka skandha meM jitane
paramANu ho unako siddharAzi ke anantaveM bhAga se guNA karane para jo pramANa
AtA hai, utane paramANu vAle skandhoM ke samUha ko agrahaNayogya utkRSTa vargaNA
hotI hai  /  isIliye pratyeka agrahaNayogya vargaNA ko saMkhyA siddha rAzi ke
anantaveM bhAga batalAI hai| kyoMki jaghanya agrahaNa vargaNA ke eka skandha meM
jitane paramANu hote haiM ve siddharAzi ke anantaveM bhAga se guNA karane para
Ate haiN| isIliye jaghanya se lekara utkRSTa taka

Page #315 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Rogo**  There are as many variations of *agrahaṇa* *vargaṇā* as there are
variations of *agrahaṇa* *vargaṇā*, meaning that each *agrahaṇa* *vargaṇā*
should be known. It is not that the total number of *agrahaṇa* *vargaṇā* is
infinite like the number of seeds in a *simi*.  Another thing to know about
*agrahaṇa* *vargaṇā* is that they occur in the interval between *grahaṇa*
*vargaṇā*, with an *agrahaṇa* *vargaṇā* following a *grahaṇa* *vargaṇā* and a
*grahaṇa* *vargaṇā* following an *agrahaṇa* *vargaṇā*. It is not that some of
these *vargaṇā* occur before the *audārika* *vargaṇā* and some after. Similarly,
one should understand the *grahaṇa-yoga* *vargaṇā* of *vaikriya* etc.  The
*utkṛṣṭa* of *agrahaṇa* *vargaṇā* is multiplied by the infiniteth part of its
own *jghanya* from the *siddh* *rāśi*, and the *utkṛṣṭa* of *grahaṇa-yoga*
*vargaṇā* is more than its own *jghanya* by the infiniteth part. That is, there
are infinite parts more atoms in the *utkṛṣṭa* *grahaṇa-yoga* *skandha* than in
the *jghanya* *grahaṇa-yoga* *skandha*.  Thus, after considering the *vargaṇā*
in all ways, such as *grāhya-agrahya*, *utkṛṣṭa-jghanya*, etc., we will now
explain in the next verse the type of *karma-skandha* that the *jīva* takes on.
**Final verse:**  *Antīmcha uphāsa bugandha panchavanna rasa sambandha valam.
Samvajiyananta guna rasa majutta maṇataya paesa.* || 7 || *Egpaesogāvam
niyasambapaesaj gahed jīu.*  **Meaning:**  *Antīmcha uphāsa* - In the end, four
*sparna*, two *durgandha*, five *kalarasa*, and five *gāma* are obtained.
*Kammaṇadhavalankarma-skandha* - The *karma-skandha* of the *balika*.
*Samvajiyananta guna rasa* - In the *maya* *jīva* there are also infinite *guna*
and *rasa*. *Aṇuyukta* - Composed of atoms. *Amatapapaesam* - Infinite *pradeśa*
are obtained. *Egpaesogāvam* - In one *kṣetra* in the form of *abmāda*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Rogo zataka vargaNA ke utane hI vikalpa hote haiM yAnI agrahaNA vargaNA ke jo
ananta bheda hote haiM, ve bheda pratyeka agrahaNa vargaNA ke jAnanA cAhiye  /
na ki kula agrahaNa vargaNAyeM simI ke anantanAH prama:  /  agrahaNa vargaNAoM
ke bAre meM dUsarI bAta yaha bhI jAnanA cAhiye ki ye grahaNa vargaNAoM ke
antarAla meM grahaNa vargagA ke bAda agrahaNa vargaNA aura agrahaNa vargaNA ke
bAda grahaNa vargaNA, isa krama se hotI haiN| aisA nahIM hai ki unameM se kucha
vargaNAyeM audArika vargaNA se pahale hotI haiM aura kucha bAda meM  /  isI
prakAra vaikriya Adi kI grahaNayogya vargaNAoM ke bAre meM samajhanA cAhiye  /
agrahaNa vargaNAoM kA utkRSTa apane-apane jaghanya se siddha rAzi ke anantabai
bhAga guNita hai aura grahaNayogya bargaNAoM kA utkRSTa apaneapane jaghanya se
anantaveM bhAga adhika hai| yAnI jaghanya grahaNayogya skandha se ananta bhAga
adhika paramANu utkRSTa grahaNayogya skandha meM hote haiN| isa prakAra se
vargaNAoM kA grAhya-agrAhya, utkRSTa-jaghanya Adi sabhI prakAroM se vivecana
kiye jAne ke pazcAt aba Age kI gAthA meM jIba jisa prakAra ke karmaskandha ko
grahaNa karatA hai, use batalAte haiM  /  aMtimaca
uphAsabugaMdhapaMcavannarasammabaMdhavalaM  /
samvajiyaNaMtaguNarasamajuttamaNatayapaesa  // 7 //  egapaesogAvaM
niyasambapaesaja gaheDa jiU  /  zabdArtha antimaghauphAsa - anta meM cAra
sparNa, durgadha do gadha, paMcakalarasa pAMca varNa aura pAMca gma pAne,
kammarNadhavalaMkarmaskandha balikoM ko. samvajiyaNataguNarasaM- maya jIvoM meM
bhI ananta guNe rama vAle. aNuyukta-aNuoM se yukta. amaMtapapaesaMananta pradeza
bAne, egapaesogAvaM-eka kSetra meM abamAda rUpa me vidya

Page #316 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Panchama Karmgrantha 259 Pana, niyasavapaesu - by all its regions, gahecha - it
grasps, jiu-jiva. Gatha-artha - The jiva grasps the karmaskandhās (karmic
aggregates) that are present in one region, which are endowed with infinite
auspicious taste-bearing atoms and have infinite regions, and which possess the
four touch sensations, two smells, five colors, and one taste.  Vishesha-artha -
The gatha clarifies the nature of the karmaskandhās that are grasped by the
jiva, and explains the process by which the jiva grasps them. The karmaskandhās
grasped by the jiva are material (paudgalika), i.e., they are specific
aggregations of pudgala (material) atoms. Therefore, they possess the qualities
of pudgala such as touch, taste, smell, and color.  Each pudgala atom has one of
the five tastes, one of the five colors, one of the two smells, and two of the
eight touch sensations (heavy-light, soft-hard, cold-hot, oily and dry). 1. The
atom is itself the cause, not produced by anything else. It has one taste, one
color, and two touches, and is the substratum of the effect. - As quoted in the
Tattvartha-bhashya

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 259 pAna, niyasavapaesau - apane samasta pradezoM dvArA,
gahecha - grahaNa karatA hai, jiu-jIva  /  gAthArtha - anta ke cAra sparza, do
gaMdha, pAMca varNa aura pani rasa dAle mAnIko hebhI ananta puNe rasa vAle aNuoM
se yukta ananta pradeza vAle aura eka kSetra meM avagAr3a rUpa se vidyamAna
karmaskandhoM ko jIva apane sarva pradezoM dvArA grahaNa karatA hai| vizeSArtha
- gAthA meM jIva dvArA grahaNa kiye jAne vAle karmaskandhoM kA svarUpa vatalAte
hue yaha spaSTa kiyA hai ki jIva krisa kSetra meM rahane vAle karmaskandhoM ko
grahaNa karatA hai aura unake grahaNa kI kyA prakriyA hai| jIva dvArA jo
karmaskandha grahaNa kiye jAte haiM ve paudgalika hai arthAt pudgala paramANuoM
kA samUhavigeSa haiN| isIlie unameM bho pudagala ke guNa - sparza. rasa, gandha
aura varNa pAye jAte haiM  /  arthAt jaise pUdgala rUpa, rasa, gaMdha, sparza
vAlA hai vaise hI karmaskandha bhI rUpa Adi vAle hone se pudagala jAtIya haiN|
eka paramANu meM pAMca prakAra ke rasoM meM se koI eka rasa, pAMca prakAra ke
rUpoM meM sa koI eka rUpa, do prakAra kI gaMdhoM meM se koI eka gaMdha aura ATha
prakAra ke spo . guru-laghu, komala-kaThora, zIta-uSNa, snigdha aura rUkSa meM
se do aviruddha sparza hote haiN|' 1 kAraNameva tadananya sukSmI nityapanna
bhayati paramANaH  /  ekarasagazvarNI dvisparzaH kAryaniGgazca  /  /
-nattvArthabhASya meM uddhRta paramANu kisI se utpanna nahIM hotA hai kintu
dUsarI vastuoM ko (zeSa agale pRSTha para dekheM)

Page #317 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **280** **Shataka**  Thus, a single atom possesses two of the
four touch sensations: one form, one taste, one smell, and one touch. However,
the aggregates of these atoms, which form the karma-skandhas, can possess all
five colors, five tastes, two smells, and four touch sensations. This is because
the karma-skandha contains many atoms, and among these atoms, some possess a
particular form, some a particular taste, and some a particular smell.
Additionally, some atoms possess the touch sensation of smoothness and heat,
while others possess the touch sensation of roughness and coldness, from the
four touch sensations of coldness, heat, smoothness, and roughness. Therefore,
karma-skandhas are described as having five colors, five tastes, two smells, and
four touch sensations. For this reason, the author of the text has described the
karma-skandha as possessing four touch sensations, two smells, five colors, and
five tastes.  **1**  The reason why karma-skandhas are called "four-touched" is
that, out of the eight types of touch sensations described, the karma-skandhas
from the "grahana" (receiving) category up to the "varna" (color) category of
the "aaharaka" (nutritive) body possess all eight touch sensations. However, the
karma-skandha that is the "utpadaka" (producer) of these categories possesses
only four touch sensations. This is because it is the smallest entity, and
therefore the ultimate, subtle, and eternal. It possesses one taste, one smell,
one color, and two touch sensations. Its function can only be inferred, not
directly perceived.  An atom possesses one of the two touch sensations of
coldness and heat, and one of the two touch sensations of smoothness and
roughness, thus possessing two touch sensations.  **1**  The "Karmagrantha"
(text on karma) states in its "Svopja" (self-generated) commentary that the
commentary on the "Brihat Shataka" (Great Hundred Verses) states that the karma-
skandha definitely possesses the touch sensations of softness and lightness. In
addition to these, it also possesses two more touch sensations from the
following pairs: smoothness and heat, smoothness and coldness, roughness and
heat, or roughness and coldness. Therefore, a karma-skandha is described as
possessing four touch sensations.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 280 zataka isa prakAra se eka paramANu meM eka rUpa, eka rasa, eka gaMdha aura
aMta ke cAra sparzo meM se do sparza hote haiM kintu ina paramANuoM ke samUha se
jo skandha taiyAra hote haiM, pAMcoM gaMga aura cAra sparza ho sakate haiN|
kyoMki usa skandha meM bahuta se paramANu hote haiM aura una paramANuoM meM se
koI kisI rUpa vAlA, koI kiso rasa vAlA koI kisI gaMdha vAlA hotA hai tathA kisI
paramANu meM aMta ke cAra sparzo zIta-uSNa aura snigdha-rUkSa meM se snigdha
aura uSNa sparza pAyA jAtA hai aura kisI meM rUkSa aura zIta sparza pAyA jAtA
hai  /  isIliye karmaskandhoM ko paMca varNa, paMca rasa, do gaMdha aura cAra
sparzaM vAlA kahA jAtA hai| isI kAraNa granthakAra ne karmaskandha ko aMta ke
cAra sparza' do gaMdha, pAMca varNa aura pAMca rasa vAlA batalAyA hai| 1
karmaskandhoM ko catuHsparzI kahane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki sparza ke jo ATha
bheda batalAye gaye haiM unameM se AhAraka zarIra ke yogya grahaNa vargaNA taka
ke skandhoM meM to AThoM sparza pAye jAte haiM kintu usase utpanna karane vAlA
hone se kAraNa hai| usase choTI kumarI koI vastu nahIM hai, ata: vaha antya hai|
sUkSma hai. nitya hai tathA eka rasa, eka gaMdha, eka varNa aura do sparza vAlA
hai| usake kArya ko dekhakara usakA anumAna hI kiyA jA sakatA hai kintu
pratyakSa nahIM hotA hai  /  paramANu meM zIta aura uSNa meM se eka tathA
snigdha aura rUkSa meM se eka, isa prakAra do sparza hote haiM  /  1
karmagrantha ko svopaja TIkA meM likhA hai ki bRhatzataka kI TIkA meM batalAyA
hai ki karma skandha meM mRdu aura laghu sparza to avazya rahate haiM  /  inake
sivAya snigdha, uSNa athavA snigdha, zIta athacA rUkSa, uSNa athavA kSa, zIva
meM se do svarNa aura rahate haiN| isIliye eka karmaskandha meM cAra sparza
batalAye jAte haiM  /

Page #318 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma-Prastha  **281**  In the categories of the Taijas-sharira and
above, there are only four touches.  **"Pancharaspanchavanhi parinama atthaphass
vo gandha. Jiyahaarganogga chaufasthilesiya jari."**  This means that the
categories suitable for the soul, like Audarik, etc., have five tastes, five
colors, eight touches, and two smells. However, the categories suitable for the
Taijas-sharira and above have only four touches.  There are two types of
substances: Gurulghu and Agurulghu. The division of categories into these two
types is explained in the necessary instructions:  **"Oralayadamviyahaarayatem
gurulhuvarna. Kammagapanbhaasai eyaai agurulai."**  Audarik, Vaikriya, Aaharak,
and Taijas substances are Gurulghu, while Karman, Bhasha, and Manogavya are
Agurulghu.  To identify Gurulghu and Agurulghu, the Dravy-Lok-Prakash, Sarg 11,
Shlok 24 states that the substance with eight touches, like a cloud, is
Gurulghu. The substance with four touches, like subtle forms and the intangible
sky, etc., are Agurulghu.  Therefore, since the Taijas category is Gurulghu, it
has eight touches. The subsequent categories like Bhasha, Karma, etc., are
Agurulghu, and thus have four touches.  This explains a specific characteristic
of the Karma-skandha, which is taken in by the soul: "The final four touches..."
**"Panchasangrah 410"**  **"Dhadaramasthasparsh dravyam pyab bhavati
gurulghukan. Agurulghu chatuhsparsh sukshma viyadayamurtam api."**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmaprastha 281 Upara taijasazarIra Adi prAyogya vargaNAoM ke skandhoM
meM kevala cAra hI sparza hote haiM paJcarasapaJcavaNahi pariNamA aTThaphAsa vo
gaMdhA  /  jIyAhAraganoggA cauphAsathilesiyA jari  /  /  arthAt jIva ke grahaNa
yogya audArika Adi vargaNAyeM pAMca rasa, pAMca varNa. ATha sparza aura do
gaMdha vAlI hotI haiM, kintu Upara kI taMjasa zarIra Adi ke yogya grahaNa
vargaNAyeM cAra spaza vAlo hotI haiM  /  dravyoM ke do bheda haiM - guruladhuM
aura agurulghu| ina do bhedoM meM vargaNAoM kA baTavArA karate hA Avazyaka
niyukti meM likhA hai orAlayadamviyAhArayatema gurulahUvaranA  /
kammagapaNabhAsAI eyAI agurulAI  // 41 //  audArika, vaikriya, AhAraka aura
tejasa dravya gRhalaghu haiM aura kArmaNa, bhASA aura manogavya agrulaghu haiN|
ina gurulaghu aura agurulaghu kI pahicAna ke liye dradhyalokaprakAza sarga 11
zloka caubIsa' meM likhA hai ki ATha sparzavAlA bAdara rUpI dravya gRhalaghu
hotA hai aura cAra sparza vAle sUkSma rUpI dravya tathA amurta AkAzAdika bhI
agurulaghu hote haiN| isake anusAra taMjasa vagaMNA ke gurulaghu hone se usameM
to ATha sparza siddha hote haiM aura usake bAda kI bhApA, karma Adi vargaoM ke
agurulaghu hone se unameM cAra sparza mAne jAte haiM  /  isa prakAra se abhI
taka jIva dvArA grahaNa kiye jAne vAle karmaskandhoM ke svarUpa kI eka vizeSatA
batalAI hai ki 'antima cauphAsa - - - 1 paMcasaMgraha 410 2 dhAdaramaSThasparza
dravyaM pyaba bhavati gurulaghukan  /  agurulaghu catuHsparza sUkSma
viyadAyamUrtamapi  /  /

Page #319 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 282 **Matka**  The 'dugandhpalabannar amjhammandhadal' or karma-skandha have
four final touches, two gandhas, five varna and five rasa. Now, we will describe
their second vigapana, that they are the holders of rasa, which is infinite in
quantity, from the karma-skandha majijanantgunaranam matra jobarashi. Here, the
meaning of rasa is not the five types of rasa like sour, sweet, etc., but the
power to give auspicious and inauspicious fruits in those karma-skandha. This
rasa is found in every pudgala. Just as the smallest part of pudgala dravya is
called paramanu, similarly, the smallest part of shakti is called rasaanu. These
rasaanu are formed by the division of buddhi. Because, just as the pudgala
dvanda can be divided into pieces, the qualities residing inside it cannot be
divided. Still, we know the predominance of qualities in visible objects through
our senses. For example, if we see the milk of a buffalo, cow, and goat, we can
test and say that buffalo milk has more fat, cow milk has less fat, and goat
milk has no fat. In this way, although the quality of fat cannot be divided into
separate parts, its intensity can be known. This intensity proves that...  1.
Rasaanu are also called gunaanu or bhaavaanu, and they are formed by the
division of buddhi. As it is written in Panchmagraha...  "Panchanda sariraanam
paramananan maiye animago. Karishyamana ganso gunaanu bhaavaanu ya hani."
||417||  The indivisible part of the power of the paramanu, which is suitable
for the five bodies, that is divided by buddhi, is called gunaanu or bhaavaanu.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 282 mataka dugaMdhapalabannaramajhammanadhadalaM' ve karmaskandha antima cAra
sparza, do gaMdha, pAMca varNa aura pAMca rasa vAle hote hai| aba Age unakI
dUsarI vigapanA kA varNana karate haiM ki ve karmaskandha * majiyaNaMtaguNaranaM
matra jobarAzi se anantagRNe rasa ke dhAraka hote haiN| yahAM gsa kA artha
khaTTe, mIThe Adi pAMca prakAra ke rama nahIM kintu una karmaskandhoM meM
zubhAzubha phala dene ko zakti hai | yaha rasa pratyeka pudagala meM pAyA jAtA
hai  /  jisa taraha pudgala dravya ke sabase choTe aMza ko paramANu kahate haiM,
usI taraha zakti ke sabase choTe aMza ko rasANa kahate haiM  /  ye ramANa buddhi
ke dvArA khaNDa kiMtra jAne se banate haiN| kyoMki jaise pudgala dvandha ke
skanyA ke Tukar3e kiye jA sakate hai vaise usake andara rahane vAle guNoM ke
Tukar3e nahIM kiye jA sakate hai| phira bhI hama dRzyamAna bastuoM meM gaNo ko
honAdhikatA ko yuddha ke dvArA mahaja meM hI jAna lete haiM | jasa ki maiMsa,
gAya aura bakarI kA dudha hamAre sAmane rastrA jAye to usakI parIkSA kara kaha
dete haiM ki bhaisa ke dUdha meM cikrAlAI adhika hai aura gAya ke dUdha meM
usame kama tathA bakarI ke dUdha meM no cikanAI nahI-jaiso hai| isa prakAra se
badyapi cikanAI guNa hone se usake alaga-alaga khaNDa to nahIM kiye jA sakate
haiM kintu usakI taratamatA kA jJAna kiyA jAtA hai | yaha taratamatA hI isa bAta
ko siddha karatI 1 ramANu ko guNANa yA bhAvANu bhI kahate haiM aura ye buddhi ke
dvArA vaNDa kiye jAne para banate haiN| jamA ki pacamagraha meM likhA hai.....
pazcaNDa sarIrANaM paramANaNa maIe animaago| kariSyamANaM gaso guNANa bhAvANu yA
hAni  /  / 417 //  pAMca zarIroM ke yogya paramANuoM kI isa. zakti kA buddhi ke
hAga khaNDa karane para jo avibhAgI eka aMza hotA hai, use guNANu yA bhAvANu
kahate haiN|

Page #320 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  283  It is through intellect that the components of
the qualities can be understood, and their subtle nature is known. These
components of the qualities are called **rasaṇu**. These **rasaṇu** are also
infinite in number, even in the most gross **pudgala** substance, which is the
**dravya** with the lowest **rama**. Therefore, the **karma-skandha** is said to
be composed of an infinite number of **rasaṇu**, which are smaller than the
smallest **dravya** - **aṇujutta**. These **rasaṇu** themselves, upon becoming
the cause of the **bhāva** of the living being, bear fruit in the form of bitter
or sweet (inauspicious or auspicious).  The third characteristic of the **karma-
skandha** is that each **karma-skandha** is infinite in extent. It is not that
the number of regions of the **karma-skandha** is fixed. But each **karma-
skandha** has an infinite number of regions, meaning it is composed of an
infinite number of atoms.  The essence of the above statement is that the
**karma-skandha** taken in by the living being is **pudgalic**, and being
**pudgalic**, it possesses **pudgalic** qualities like **p**, **rasa**, etc. It
also has the power to bear fruit, which is infinite in number, even greater than
the number of all living beings, and it is infinite in extent. Thus, one should
know the nature of the **karma-skandha** taken in by the living being.  After
explaining the nature of the **karma-skandha** in this way,  **Jīvammā jvamāyā
mubhāmumāsa loyārimāṇā. Salvajīyāṇataguṇā ekatrako hoti māvāṇ. - Vachasaha 136**
Due to the **anubhāga**, the results of the living being in the form of
**kṣaya** arise in two ways - auspicious and inauspicious. The auspicious
results are equal to the regions of the **amanyata lokākāśa**, and the
inauspicious results are also equal to that. In the **karma-pudgala** taken in
by each result, there are infinite **bhāvaṇu** (**rasaṇu**) in all living
beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 283 hai ki buddhi dvArA guNA ke bhI aMga ho sakane aura
unake taratama bhAva kA jJAna kiyA jAtA hai| ina guNoM ke aMzoM ko ralANa kahate
hai| ye rasANu bhI sabase jaghanya rama vAle pudgala dravya meM marva jovarAzi
se anantagaNaM hota hai|' isIlie karmaskandha ko marva jotrarAzi se anantagRNaM
rasANuoM se yukta kahA hai-aNujutta'  /  ghe rasANu hI jIva ke 'bhAtroM kA
nimitta pAkara kaTuka yA madhura (azubha yA zubha) rUpa phala dete haiN| _
karmaskandhoM kI tIsarI vizeSatA hai ki arNatayapAsa eka-eka kramaskandha ananta
pradezI hotA hai| aisA nahIM hai ki karmaskandhoM ke pradezoM kI saMkhyA nizcita
ho  /  kintu pratyeka karmaskandha anannAnanta pradeza vAlA hai. yAnI vaha
ananna paramANu vAlA hotA hai  /  pUrvokta kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai ki jIva
dvArA grahaNa kiye jAne vAle kamaskandha paudgalika haiM aura paudagalika hone
se unameM pa, rasa Adi podgalika guNa pAye jAte haiN| unameM sarva jIvarAzi se
bhI anantagaNI phaladAna zakti hotI hai tathA ananta pradezI hai  /  isa prakAra
jIva dvArA grahaNa karake yogya karmaskandhoM kA svarUpa jAnanA caahie| isa
prakAra karmaskandhoM ke svarUpa kA spaSTIkaraNa karane ke bAda jIvammajvamAyA
mubhAmumAsa loyArimANA  /  salvajiyANataguNA ekatrako hoti mAvANa  /  / -
vacasAha 136 anubhAga ke kAraNa jIva ke kaSAyodaya rUpa pariNAma do taraha ke
hote haiM - zubha aura agRbha  /  zubha pariNAma amanyAta lokAkAza ke pradezoM
ke barAbara hote haiM aura azubha pariNAma bhI utane hI hote haiN| eka eka
pariNAma dvArA gahIta karma pudgaloM me sarva jIvoM meM ananta guNe bhAvANu {
rasANa) hote haiN|

Page #321 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter  Now we will explain which karmas are absorbed by the jivas in which
regions and what is the process of absorption.  It has been clarified earlier
that the entire universe is filled with pudgala dravya. This pudgala dravya is
divided into many categories like audarika, etc. and because of being
pudgalatmak, these are found in the entire universe. Among these categories,
karma-vargana is also one, therefore karma-vargana is also present everywhere in
the universe. Out of these universal karma-varganas, each jiva absorbs those
karma-varganas which are closest to it. **Ayakshetogadha** - meaning the karma-
varganas present in the region closest to the jiva are absorbed by the jiva.
Just like when a heated iron ball is dropped into water, it absorbs the water
closest to it but not the water far away, similarly, the jiva absorbs the karma-
varganas present in the same sky regions where it is situated. The process of
absorption of karmas by the jiva is like this: just as a heated iron ball, when
dropped into water, pulls water from all sides, similarly, the jiva also absorbs
karmas from all its regions.  1. (a) **Ayakshetogadha** sabya pade sehi kammani
jogga. Bandham maghehi ya anadiyam shadiy ubhvam || Go. Karmakand 185 A jiva
binds anadi, madi and ubhvam forms of dravya which are capable of becoming karma
in a single region, when it gets the cause in all regions.  (b) Ragpaesogavae
sabpaye mehi mano jogge. Jivo pomaladache gipahai mai anai da - panchamagraha
284 A jiva absorbs madi or anadi pudgala dravya which are capable of becoming
karma in a single region, from all its regions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka aba yaha batalAte haiM ki jIvoM dvArA kisa kSetra meM rahane vAle
karmaskandhoM ko grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai aura grahaNa karane kI prakriyA kyA hai|
prArambha meM yaha spaSTa kiyA jA cukA hai ki samasta loka pudgala. dravya se
ThasAThasa bharA huA hai aura vaha pudgala dravya audArika Adi aneka vargaNAoM
meM vibhAjita hai aura pudgalAtmaka hone se ye samasta loka meM pAI jAtI hai|
ukta vargaNAoM meM hI karmavargaNA bhI eka hai, ataH karmavargaNA bhI lokavyApI
hai  /  ina lokavyApI kamavargaNAoM meM se pratyeka jona unhoM karmavargaNAoM ko
grahaNa karatA hai jo usake atyanta nikaTa hotI haiM . egapaesogADhaM-yAnI jIva
ke atyanta nikaTatama pradeza meM vyApta karmabargaNAyeM jIva dvArA grahaNa kI
jAtI haiN| jaise Aga meM tapAye lohe ke gole ko pAnI meM DAla dene para vaha
apane nikaTastha jala ko grahaNa karatA hai kintu dUra ke jala ko grahaNa nahIM
karatA hai, vaise hI jIva bhI jina AkAza pradezoM meM sthita hotA haiM, unhIM
AkAza pradezoM meM rahane vAlI kamaMtragaMNAoM ko grahaNa karatA hai tathA jIva
dvArA karmoM ke grahaNa karane kI prakriyA yaha hai ki jaise tapAyA huA lohe kA
golA jala meM girane para cAroM ora se pAnI ko khIMcatA hai vaise hI jIva bhI
sarva AtmapradezoM se karmoM ko grahaNa karatA hai| 1 (ka) eyakhettogADha sabya
padesehi kammaNI jogga  /  baMdhAma magahehi ya aNAdiyaM zAdiya ubhaya 11 go0
karmakAMDa 185 eka abhinna kSetra meM sthina karmarUpa hone ke yogya anAdi, mAdi
aura ubhama rUpa dravya ko yaha jIva saba pradezo meM kAraNa milane para
bAMdhatA hai| (kha) rAgapaesogAve sabapae mehi maNo joge| jIvo pomAladace
gipahaI mAI aNAI dA -paMcamagraha 284 eka kSetra meM sthita kamarUpa hone ke
yogya mAdi athavA anAdi pudgala drazya ko gova apane samasta pradezoM se grahaNa
karatA hai  /

Page #322 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 285  It is not the case that karma is received by
a specific part of the soul. To explain this, the verse states:  **"Just as a
living being does not receive the karma-bundles situated in a specific area by a
specific part of itself, but receives karma by all parts of the soul."**  After
explaining the nature of the karma-bundles received by the living being and the
process of their reception, we now clarify how the received *atra* is divided.
**"The portion of *āyus* karma is the least, the portion of *nāma* karma is
equal to the portion of *gotra* karma. The portion of *antarāya*, *jñānāvaraṇa*,
and *darśanāvaraṇa* is greater than the portion of *nāma* and *gotra*. The
portion of *mohaniya* is greater than that, and the portion of *vedaniya* is the
greatest."**  **Word meanings:**  * ***āyus*:** lifespan karma * ***nāma*:**
name karma * ***gotra*:** lineage karma * ***antarāya*:** obstruction karma *
***jñānāvaraṇa*:** knowledge-obscuring karma * ***darśanāvaraṇa*:** perception-
obscuring karma * ***mohaniya*:** delusion karma * ***vedaniya*:** experience
karma  **Explanation:**  The portion of *āyus* karma is the smallest. The
portions of *nāma* and *gotra* karma are equal. The portions of *antarāya*,
*jñānāvaraṇa*, and *darśanāvaraṇa* are equal to each other, but greater than the
portions of *nāma* and *gotra*. The portion of *mohaniya* is greater than that,
and the portion of *vedaniya* is the greatest.  **In other words:**  * Lifespan
karma is the least significant. * Name and lineage karma are equally
significant. * Obstruction, knowledge-obscuring, and perception-obscuring karma
are equally significant, but more significant than name and lineage karma. *
Delusion karma is more significant than obstruction, knowledge-obscuring, and
perception-obscuring karma. * Experience karma is the most significant.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 285 aisA nahIM hotA hai ki AtmA ke amuka hisse se hI
karmoM kA grahaNa kiyA jAtA ho| isI bAta ko batalAne ke lie gAthA meM kahA
hainiyasa esa gai jiu-bAnI jIva apane amuka hisse dvArA hI kisI nizcita kSetra
meM sthiti karmaskandhoM kA grahaNa nahIM karake samasta Atma-pradezoM dvArA
karmoM kA grahaNa karatA hai  /  isa prakAra se jIva ke dvArA grahaNa kiye jAne
vAle karmaskandhoM kA svarUpa aura unake grahaNa karane kI prakriyA Adi kA
kathana karane ke pazcAta aba Age yaha spaSTa karate haiM ki jIva dvArA grahaNa
kiye gaye atra kA kisa krama se vibhAga hotA hai  /  thevo Aja tadaso nAme goe
samo ahiu  //  76  //  vigdhAvaraNaM mohe sadhvovari vevazodha jeNappe tassa
phuDanaM na hababa TiIbiseseNa sesANaM ||80|| zabdArtha... bebI - sabase Aja
Ayukarma kA alpa, 1 tadaso - usakA aMza nAme nAmakarma kA goe- gotrakarma kA so
samAna ahiu vizeSAdhika, bigyAvaraNa antarAyeM aura kA mohe moha kA sahayovari
sabase adhika, veya gauya vedanIya karma kA, jeNa jisa kAraNa me appe alpadalika
lassa hone para anubhatra laba naM. sANaM hoe - -- - usakA ( vedanIya kA)
phuData nahIM hotA hai, siviseseNa karmoM kA  /  - - - spaSTa rIti se sthiti kI
apekSA thor3A hai| nAma kintu Ayukarma Ayukarma kA hissA sabase aura gAMva karma
kA bhAga Apasa meM samAna hai ke bhAga se adhika hai, antarAya, jJAnAvaraNa aura
darzanAvaraNa kA hissA Apasa meM samAna hai kintu nAma aura gotra ke hisse se
adhika hai| mohanIya kA hissA usase adhika hai aura

Page #323 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  206  This is the part of the most painful karma. Because with a
small amount of substance, the experience of painful karma cannot be clearly
understood. Apart from the painful karma, the other karmas get their respective
parts according to their own nature. In this context, the *Visheshaarya*
explains the division of the karma-skandhas taken by the soul into *Jnanavaran*
etc. natures.  Just as food, after entering the stomach, gradually transforms
into different forms like *rasa*, *rudhira* etc., similarly, the karma-varganas
taken by the soul at every moment are also divided into as many parts as the
number of karmas bound by that soul at that moment.  It has been explained
earlier that the soul continuously takes in karma-skandhas at every moment, but
it has also been clarified that the binding of karma does not happen always, but
only in the divisions of the *bhunyaman* lifespan, and that too until the
*antmuhurt*. Even in these divisions, if the binding does not happen, then it
definitely happens in the *antmuhurt* lifespan, leading to the binding of the
lifespan of the next birth. Therefore, at the time when the soul binds the
*ayukarma*, the taken karma-skandhas are divided into eight karmas including
*ayukarma*, *jnanavaran* etc., meaning they are divided into eight parts. And at
the time when the binding of lifespan does not happen, the taken karma-skandhas
are divided into the remaining seven karmas, excluding *ayukarma*, like
*jnanavaran* etc.  This is a general rule. But during the ascent of the
*gunasthanas*, when the soul attains the tenth subtle *samparaya* *gunasthan*,
it binds the remaining six karmas except *ayukarma* and *mohniya* karma.
Therefore, at that time, the taken karma-skandhas are divided into only six
karmas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 206 sabase adhika vedanIya karma kA bhAga hai| kyoMki thor3e dravya ke hone
para vedanIya karma kA anubhava spaSTa rIti sa nahIM ho sakatA hai  /  vedIya kI
alAvA pa mAtA kamAM ko apanIapanI sthiti ke anusAra bhAga milatA hai| vizeSArya
isa nAyA meM jIva dvArA grahaNa kiye game kamaskandhoM kA jJAnAvaraNa Adi
prakRtiyoM meM vibhAjita hone ko batalAyA hai  /  jima prakAra bhojana ke peTa
meM jAne ke bAda kAlakrama se baha rasa, rudhira Adi rUpa ho jAtA hai, usI
prakAra jIva dvArA prati samaya grahaNa kI jA rahI karmavargaNAyeM bhI usI
samaya utane hissoM meM baMTa jAtI haiM jitane karmo kA baMdha uma mamaya usa
jova ne kiyA hai  /  pUrva meM yaha batalAyA jA cukA hai ki prati samaya jIva
dvArA karmaskandhoM kA grahaNa hotA rahatA hai, lekina yaha bhI spaSTa kiyA hai
ki AvRkama kA baMdha sarvadA na hokara bhunyamAna Ayu ke vibhAga meM hotA hai
tathA vaha bhI antamuhurta taka hotA hai  /  ina vibhAgoM meM bhI vaidha na ho
to antamuhUrta Ayu meSa rahane para avazya bhI para bhava kI Ayu kA baMdha ho
jAtA hai  /  ataH jisa samaya jIva Ayukarma kA baMdha karatA hai usa samaya to
grahaNa kiye jAne vAle karmaskandha Ayukarma sahita jJAnAvaraNa Adi AThoM karmoM
meM vibhAjita ho jAte haiM yAnI unake ATha bhAga ho jAte hai aura jisa samaya
Ayu kA vaidha nahIM hotA hai, usa samaya grahaNa kiye gaye kamara kandha
Ayukarma ko chor3akara zeSa jhAnAvaraNa Adi sAta karmoM meM vibhAjita hone hai
/  yaha to huA eka sAmAnya niyama  /  lekina guNasthAnakamArohaNa ke samaya jaba
jIva dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna ko prApta kara letA hai taba Ayu aura
mohanIya karma ke sivAya zeSa chaha karmoM kA baMdha karatA hai  /  ataH usa
samaya gRhIta karmamkandha sirpha chaha karmoM meM hI vibhAjita

Page #324 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Bheragrahnas  **287**  There are eleven Gunasthans, and from the
eleventh onwards, a bond of one Saatavedanoy Karma occurs. Therefore, the Karma-
skandha acquired at that time becomes one Karma form.  Thus, one should
understand the order of the acquired Karma-skandha being divided into eight
Karmas. Now, we will explain the share received by each Karma, clarifying that
each Karma receives a portion of the acquired Karma-skandha according to its own
time-position. This means that the Karma with a lower position will receive
less, and the Karma with a higher position will receive more. However, this
general rule applies to the remaining seven Karmas, excluding Vedaniya Karma.
The reason for Vedaniya Karma receiving a larger share will be explained later.
Since Ayukarma has the lowest position, we will first explain the division of
Karma-skandha from Ayukarma. The share of Ayukarma is the least. This is because
the position of Ayukarma is only thirty-three Sagars, while the remaining seven
Karmas, including Name, Gotra, etc., have a superior position of twenty Kodakodi
Sagars, some have half Kodakodi Sagars, and some have seventy Kodakodi Sagars.
Therefore, compared to the position of other Karmas, Ayukarma has the lowest
position, so it receives the least share of the acquired Karma-skandha.  The
share of Name and Gotra Karma is more than Ayukarma. This is because the
position of Ayukarma is only thirty-three Sagars, while the position of Name and
Gotra Karma is twenty Kodakodi Sagars. The position of Name and Gotra Karma is
the same, so they should receive an equal share - Name and Gotra are equal. The
Karmas of Antaray, Gnanavaran, and Darshanavaran receive a share...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama barmagransa 287 hote haiM aura gyArahaveM Adi guNasthAnoM se eka
sAtAvedanoya karma kA baMdha hotA hai  /  ataH usa samaya grahaNa kiye hae
karmaskandha usa eka karma rUpa hI ho jAte haiN| isa prakAra grahaNa kiye hue
karmaskandhoM kA AThoM karmoM meM vibhAjita hone kA krama samajhanA caahiye| aba
pratyeka karma ko milane vAle hisse kA spaSTokaraNa karate haiM ki apanI-apanI
kAlasthiti ke anusAra pratyeka karma ko grahaNa kiye hAe karmaskandhA kA hissA
minatA hai| yAnI jisa karma kI sthiti kama hai to use kama aura adhika sthiti
hai to use adhika himsA milegA  /  lakina yaha mAmAnya niyama vedanIya karma ko
chor3akara zeSa sAta karmoM para lAgU hotA hai| vedanIya karma ko adhika hissA
milane ke kAraNa ko Age spaSTa kiyA jA rahA hai| sabase kama sthiti Ayukarma kI
hone se sarvaprathama Ayukama se karmamkandhoM ke vibhAjana ko spaSTa kiyA jA
rahA hai ki 'thevo Au' Ayukarma kA bhAga sabasa thor3A hai| isakA kAraNa yaha
hai ki Ayukarma kI sthiti sirpha tetIsa sAgara hai jabaki nAma, gotra Adi zeSa
sAta karmoM meM se kisI kI bIsa kor3Akor3I sAgara, kisI ko nIma kor3Akor3I
sAgara aura kisI kI sattara kor3Akor3I sAgara kI utkRSTa sthiti hai  /  ataH
anya karmoM kI sthiti kI apekSA Ayukama kI sthiti sabase kama hone se Ayukarma
ko grahaNa kiye gaye karmaskandhoM kA sabasa kama bhAga milatA hai| Ayukrama se
nAma aura gotra karma kA hissA adhika hai| kyoMki Ayukarna kI sthiti to sirpha
tetIsa sAgara ho hai, jabaki nAma aura gotra karma kI sthiti bosa koDAkor3I
sAgara pramANa hai  /  nAma aura gotra karma kI sthiti samAna hai ataH unheM
hissA bhI barAbara-barAbara milanA hai-nAme goe smo| antarAya, jJAnAvaraNa,
darzanAvaraNa karmoM ko nAma

Page #325 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The share of the **chala** and **gotra** karmas is greater than that of the
**name** and **gotra** karmas. Because the state of the **name** and **gotra**
karmas is twenty-twenty **koda-kodi** sagaras, while the state of each of the
three karmas, **antaraya**, etc., is thirty-thirty **koda-kodi** sagaras. But
since the state of these three karmas is the same, their share is equal. Of
these three karmas, the share of the **mohaniya** karma is greater, because its
state is seventy **koda-kodi** sagaras.  Thus, except for the **vedaniya**
karma, the remaining seven karmas are shown to receive more **pudgala-skandhas**
in proportion to their state. Now, the reason for the **vedaniya** karma
receiving more matter is explained by the **Manvovar Veyaniya**. Because without
a lot of matter, the experience of pleasure, pain, etc., of the **vedaniya**
karma is not clear. With little matter, the **vedaniya** karma is not able to
perform its function of causing the experience of pleasure and pain - **Jenape
Tassa Phudatta Na Havayi**. But only with more matter is it able to perform its
function. The reason for the **vedaniya** karma receiving more matter is that
the **nirjara** of the **vedaniya** karma is greater due to the cause of
pleasure and pain. That is, every living being experiences pleasure and pain
every moment, so the **vedaniya** karma arises every moment, and its **nirjara**
is also greater. This 1. **Kramo Buddathi Nam Bhago Daligassa Hoda Sarviso.
Taiyamya Macchjattho Lasma Phudatam** || - **Panchasangraha 205** The share of
the karmas with a higher state is less than that of the **vedaniya** karma, but
the share of the **vedaniya** karma is the greatest because its distinct
experience cannot be had with little matter.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svaya chAla ke aura gotra karma se adhika hissA milatA hai | kyoMki nAma aura
gotra karma kI sthiti to bIsa-bIsa kor3Akor3I sAgara hai jabaki antarAya Adi
tIna karmoM meM se pratyeka kI sthiti tIsa-tIsa kor3Akor3I sAgara hai  /  lekina
ina tInoM karmoM kI sthiti samAna hone se unakA bhAga Apasa meM barAbara-
barAbara hai  /  ina tInoM karmoM se mohanIya karma kA bhAga adhika hai, kyoMki
usakI sthiti sattara kor3Akor3I sAgara kI haiM  /  . isa prakAra vedanIya karma
ke sivAya zeSa sAta karmoM ko unakI sthiti ke anusAra kramazaH adhika
pudgalaskandhoM ke prApta hone ko batalAyA | aba vedanIya karma ko adhika dravya
milane ke kAraNa ko spaSTa karate haiM manvovara veyaNIya  /  kyoMki bahuta
dravya ke binA vedanIya karma ke sukha-duHkha Adi kA anubhava spaSTa nahIM hotA
hai  /  alpa dravya milane para bedanIya karma apane sukha-duHkha kA vedana
karAne rUpa kArya karane meM samartha nahIM hotA hai-- jeNappe tassa phuDatta na
havaI  /  kintu adhika dravya milane para hI vaha apanA kArya karane meM
samartha hai|' bedanIya karma ko adhika dravya milane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki
sukha-duHkha ke nimitta se vedanIya karma kI nirjarA adhika hotI hai  /  arthAt
pratyeka jIva pratisamaya sukha-duHkha kA vedana karatA hai, jisase vedanIya
karma kA udaya pratikSaNa hone se usakI nirjarA bhI adhika hotI hai  /  isI 1
kramamo buDDhaThiNaM bhAgo daligassa hoDa sarviso  /  taiyamya maccajaTTo lasma
phuDataM  //  - paMcasaMgraha 205 adhika sthiti vAle karmo kA bhAga kama se
adhika hotA hai kintu vedanIya kA bhAga sabase jyeSTha hotA hai kyoMki alpa dasa
hone para usakA vyakta anubhava nahIM ho sakatA hai|

Page #326 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pachma Karbha. 286 The substance of it is the most. From this, even when the
state of Vedaniya Karma is twenty Koḍakoḍi Sagara, it gets the most part. In
this way, the division of Karma Skandha in the original natures is explained.
Now, in the next verse, its order in the subsequent natures is explained.
Niyajailalddavaliyagantaso hoi samvaghaiṇ. Bajmatiṇ vimjjai sesaṇ sesaṇ
paisamayaṃ. ||1|| Shabdarth Niyajailalbadaliy - obtained by its original nature
form caste, kam daliko, ashansanso - infinite part, hoi - is, savvaghai - all-
destroying natures, bajjhatiṇ - binding, vimān - divided. Ses - remaining part,
sesaṇ - in the remaining natures, paisamayaṃ - every time. Gathary - The
infinite part of the Karma Daliko obtained by their respective original natures
is obtained by the all-destroying natures and the remaining part is divided
among the binding natures every time. Special meaning - The verse states that
the Pudgal substance obtained by the original Karma Natures is divided and
obtained by the subsequent natures of those Karmas. Because the subsequent
natures 1 Sahakanimittado bahunijjar gotti dheraniyamm. Naveditto vahag dal
hoditti nishṭuiṃ. || Go. Karmakanda 163 3 The method of getting less and more
parts according to the state is explained in Karmakar. It is explained in the
appendix.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama krbhg| 286 lie usakA dravya sabase adhika hotA hai| isI se vedanIya
karma kI sthiti bIsa kor3Akor3I sAgara hone para bhI use sabase adhika bhAga
milatA hai| isa prakAra se mUla prakRtiyoM meM karmaskandhoM ke vibhAga ko
batalA. kara aba Age kI gAthA meM uttara prakRtiyoM meM usakA krama batalAte
haiM  /  niyajAiladdhavaliyAgaMtaso hoi samvaghAINa  /  bajmatINa vimajjaI sesaM
sesANa paisamayaM  // 1 //  zabdArtha niyajAilabadaliya apanI mUla prakRti rUpa
jAti dvArA prApta kiye gaye kama dalikoM kA, azaMsaMso-anantavA bhAga, hoI--honA
hai, savvaghAI-sarvaghAtI prakRtiyo kA, bajjhatINabaMdhane vAlA, vimAna-
vibhAjita hotA hai. sesa zeSa bhAga, sesANa- bAkI kI prakRtiyoM meM, paisamayaM-
pratyeka samaya meM  /  gAthAryaapanI-apanI mUla prakRti dvArA prApta kiye gaye
karmadalikoM kA anantavAM bhAga sarvaghAti prakRtiyoM ko prApta hotA hai aura
zeSa banA huA hissA pratisamaya baMdhane vAlI prakRtiyoM meM vibhAjita ho jAtA
hai| vizeSArtha-gAthA meM yaha batAyA gayA hai ki mUla karmaprakRtiyoM ko prApta
hone vAlA pudgala dravya hI una-una karmoM kI uttara prakRtiyoM meM vibhAjita
hokara unheM prApta hotA hai| kyoMki uttara prakRtiyoM ke 1 sahakaNimittAdo
bahuNijjara gotti dheraNIyamma  /  navedito vahaga dala hoditti NiSTuiM  /  /
go0 karmakAMDa 163 3 sthiti ke anumAra kanoM ko alpa va adhika bhAga milane kI
rIti ko gora karmakAra meM spaSTa kiyA gayA hai| umako jAnakArI pariziSTa meM do
gaI hai|

Page #327 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is no independent entity except the original nature. But it should be kept
in mind that just as the assumed pudgala dravya is divided into the same karmas
in which it is bound at that time, in the same way, the part that each original
nature gets, that part is also divided into the same Uttar Prakritis in which it
is bound at that time and the Prakritis which are not bound at that time, they
do not get any part at that time. Out of the eight original karmas like
Sanavarana etc., Panavarana, Darshanavarana, Mohaniya and Antaraya are the four
Dhatikarma and Vedaniya, Aayu, Naam and Gotra are the four Aghatikarma. Some
Uttar Prakritis are Sarvaghatini and some are Deshaghatini in Ghatikarma. In the
gatha, the obtained dravya's mind has been told keeping in mind the Sarvaghatini
and Deshadhatini Prakritis that - "Anantaso hoi savvaghainam - the part that the
Ghatikas get, its infinite part is in the Sarvaghatini Prakritis and the
remaining Bahubhav bandhne wali Deshavati Prakritis are divided. - "Bajanthin
vibhajji se san sesan paisa mayam. Ja samay mavasyaai kandhae taan eris bihiye.
Pattay patteyan bhaage nimbasae jivo. - Panchasangrah 286 2 (k) Jan sachghatipat
sa gakammapaseshanantmo bhago. Avaranaan chauchha. Tiha ya ah panchaha vigdhe. -
Karmaprakriti, Bandhanakaran, Pa. 25 The karmadalik Sarvaghatini Prakritis get,
it is the infinite part of the part that gets to its own original nature and the
remaining is divided among the Deshaghatini Prakritis. Therefore, the remaining
part of the knowledge is divided into four parts and its four countries  (See
next page)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sivAya mUla prakRti nAma kI koI svatantra vastu nahIM hai| lekina yaha dhyAna
meM rakhanA cAhiye ki jisa prakAra gRhIta pudgala dravya unhIM karmoM meM
vibhAjita hotA hai jina karmoM kA usa samaya baMdha hotA hai, usI prakAra
pratyeka mUla prakRti ko jo bhAga milatA hai, vaha bhAga bhI usako unhIM uttara
prakRtiyoM meM vibhAjita hotA hai, jinakA usa samaya baMdha hotA hai aura jo
prakRtiyAM usa samaya nahIM baMdhato haiM, unako usa samaya bhAga bhI nahIM
milatA hai| sAnAvaraNa Adi ATha mUla karmoM meM se pAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa,
mohanIya aura antarAya ye cAra dhAtikarma hai aura vedanIya, Ayu, nAma aura
gotra yaha cAra aghAtikarma haiM  /  ghAtikamoM ko kucha uttara prakRtiyAM
sarvaghAtinI hotI haiM aura kucha dezaghAtinI  /  gAthA meM sarvaghAtinI aura
dezadhAtinI prakRtiyoM ko lakSya meM rakhakara prApta dravya ke dimAga ko
batalAyA hai ki-aNaMtaso hoI savvaghAINaM-ghAtikoM ko jo bhAga prApta hotA hai,
usakA anantavAM bhAga sarvaghAtinI prakRtiyoM meM aura zeSa bahubhAva baMdhane
vAlI dezavAti prakRtiyoM meM vibhAjita ho jAtA hai'-bajhaMtINa vibhajjai sesaM
sesANa paisamayaM  /  ja samaya mAvazyAI kaMdhae tANa erisa bihiie| pattaya
patteyaM bhAge nimbasae jIvo  /  /  -paMcasaMgraha 286 2 (ka) jaM sacaghAtipatta
sagakammapaesaNaMtamo bhAgo  /  AvaraNANa cuch| tihA ya aha paMcahA vigdhe  /  /
-karmaprakRti, baMdhanakaraNa, pA0 25 jo karmadalika sarvaghAti prakRtiyoM ko
milatA hai, vaha apanIapanI mUla prakRti ko milane vAle bhAga kA anantanA bhAga
hotA hai aura zeSa inya kA baTavArA dezaghAtinI prakRtiyoM meM ho jAtA hai  /
ataH jJAnAva raNa kA zeSa dadhya cAra bhAgo meM vibhAjita hokara usakI bAra deza
(meSa agale pRSTha para dekheM)

Page #328 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 265  This is explained as follows: There are five
Uttar Prakritis of Jnanavarana. Among them, only the Jnanavarana Prakriti is
Sarvaghatini, and the remaining four are Deshaghatini. Therefore, the Pudgala
Dravya that transforms into the Jnanavarana form, its infinite part is
Sarvaghati, hence it gets the Jnanavarana, and the remaining Deshaghati Dravya
is divided into four Deshaghati Prakritis.  There are nine Uttar Prakritis of
Darshanavarana. Among them, only Darshanavarana and the five Nidras, from Nidra
to Styadi, are Sarvaghatini, and the remaining three Prakritis are Deshaghatini.
Therefore, the Dravya that transforms into the Darshanavarana form, its infinite
part being Sarvadhati, is divided into six Sarvaghatini Prakritis, and the
remaining Dravya is divided into three Deshaghatini Prakritis.  The part of the
Mohaniya Karma that is received, its infinite part is Sarvaghati, and the
remaining is Deshaghati Dravya. There are two types of Mohaniya Karma:
Darshanamohaniya and Charitramohaniya. Therefore, the received Sarvanati Dravya
is also divided into two parts. One part goes to Darshanamohaniya, and the
remaining part goes to Charitramohaniya.  The infinite part of the Dravya
received by the Darshanavarana goes to its six Sarvaghatini Prakritis, and the
remaining Dravya of the Darshanavarana is divided into three parts and goes to
its three Deshaghatini Prakritis. However, the part received by the Antaraya
Karma is completely divided into five parts and goes to its five Deshaghatini
Prakritis, because none of the Antaraya's Prakritis are Sarvaghatini.  (b)
**Sabukkosarato jo mulavibhagasasanam timo bhago. Sambadhaiin dija mo iyaro
desghanam.**  - Panchasangrah 434  The infinite part of the Dravya received by
the Prakriti, which is the best Rasa, Vasa, and Damya, goes to the Sarvashasini
Prakritis, and the remaining, which is Mayurakashta, Rasa, Vasa, and Samatini,
is given to the Mahatis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama karmagrantha 265 isakA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai ki jJAnAvaraNa ko
uttara prakRtiyAM pAMca haiM  /  unameM se kevalajJAnAvaraNa prakRti
sarvaghAtinI hai aura zeSa cAra dezaghAtinI haiM  /  ataH jo pudgala dravya
jJAnAvaraNa rUpa pariNata hotA hai| usakA anantavA bhAga sarvaghAtI hai ataH
vaha kevalajJAnAvaraNa ko milatA hai aura zeSa dezaghAtI dravya cAra dezaghAtI
prakRtiyoM meM vibhAjita ho jAtA hai  /  darzanAvaraNa kI uttara prakRtiyAM nau
haiN| unameM kevaladarzanAvaraNa aura nidrA Adi styAddhi paryanta pAMca nidrAyeM
sarvaghAtinI haiM aura zeSa tIna prakRtiyAM dezaghAtinI haiN| ataH jo dravya
darzanAvaraNa rUpa pariNata hotA hai usakA anantavAM bhAga sarvadhAti hone se
vaha chaha sarvaghAtinI prakRtiyoM meM baMTa jAtA hai aura zeSa dravya tIna
dezaghAtinI prakRtiyoM meM vibhAjita ho jAtA hai  /  _mohanIya karma ko jo bhAga
milatA hai, usameM anantavA bhAga sarvaghAtI hai aura zeSa dezaghAtI dravya hai|
mohanIya karma ke do bheda haiMdarzanamohanIya aura cAritramohanIya, ataH prApta
sarvanAtI dravya ke bhI do bhAga ho jAte haiM  /  usameM se eka bhAga
darzanamohanIya ko mila jAtA ghAtinI prakRtiyoM ko aura darzanAvaraNa kA zeSa
dravya tIna bhAgoM meM vibhAjita hokara usakI tIna dezathatinI prakRtiyoM ko
mila jAtA hai kintu antarAya pharma ko milane vAlA bhAga pUrA kA pUrA pAMca
bhAgoM meM vibhAjita hokara usakI pAMcoM dezaghAtinI prakRtiyoM ko milatA hai,
kyoMki antarAya kI koI bhI prakRti sarvaghAninI nahIM hai  /  (kha)
sabukkosarato jo mulavibhAgassaNaM timo bhAgo  /  sambadhAINa dijA mo iyaro
desaghANaM  /  /  -paMcasaMgraha 434 mla prakRti ko mile hue bhAga kA anantavA
bhAga pramANa jo utkRSTa rasa vAsA damya hai, vaha sarvazAsinI prakRtiyoM ko
milatA hai aura zeSa mayurakaSTa rasabAsA samAtinI mahatiyoM ko diyA jAtA hai|

Page #329 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **212**  **Century**  And the second part belongs to the
*Charitramohaniya*. The complete part obtained by the *Darshanmohaniya* is
received by its opposite nature, *Mithyatva*, because it is *Sarvaghatini*. But
the part obtained by the *Charitramohaniya* is divided into twelve parts,
becoming the *Anantanu bandhi* *Kashaya* quartet, the *Apratyakhyanaadharana*
*Kashaya* quartet, and the *Pratyakhyanaavaran* *Kashaya* quartet. There are two
parts of the *Deshghati* substance of the *Mohaniya* karma. One part is of the
*Kashaya Mohaniya* and the other is of the *Nokshaya Mohaniya*. The substance of
the *Kashaya Mohaniya* is divided into four parts, which are received by
*Sanchalan*, *Krodha*, *Mana*, *Maya*, and *Lobha*. The *Nokshaya Mohaniya* is
divided into five parts, which are received by one of the three *Vedas* (the
*Badyaman Veda*), the pair of *Hasya* and *Rati*, the pair of *Shoka* and
*Arati* (each pair receives one part), and *Bhaya* and *Jugupsa*.  **1 (a)**
*Ukkosa* *Rassad* *Mincha* *Addha* *Tu* *Iyargahigam*. *Sanjalan* *Nokshaya*
*Sesam* *Addha* *Dhyam* *Leti*.  - *Patrasangraha* 435: Half of the *Sarvaghati*
substance of the *Mohaniya* karma is received by *Misatya* and half is received
by the twelve *Kashaya*. Half of the remaining *Deshghati* substance is received
by the *Sanjwalan* *Kashaya* and half is received by the *Nokshaya*.  **(b)**
*Mohe* *Duha* *Chauddha* *Ya* *Panchaha* *Vavi* *Bajmmaaniyam*.  - *Karma
Prakriti*, *Bandhanakaran* 26: According to the proportion of the state, the
part received by the *Mohaniya* is divided into two parts of the *Sarvaghati*
substance. Half is received by the *Darshan Mohaniya* and half is received by
the *Charitra Mohaniya*. The remaining original part is also divided into two
parts. Of these, half is received by the *Kashaya*...  (See the next page)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 212 zataka aura dUsarA bhAga cAritramohanIya ko  /  darzanamohanIya ko prApta
pUrA bhAga usakI uttara prakRti mithyAtva ko ho milatA hai, kyoMki vaha
sarvaghAtinI hai| kintu cAritramohanIya ke prApta bhAga ke bAraha bheda hokara
anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya catuSka, apratyAkhyAnAdharaNa kaSAya catuSka aura
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catupka, ina bAraha bhAgoM meM baMTa jAtA hai  /
mohanIya karma ke dezaghAtI dravya ke do bhAga hote haiN| unameM se eka bhAga
kaSAyamohanIya kA aura dUsarA nokaSAya mohanIya kA hotA hai  /  kaSAyamohanIya
ke dravya ke cAra bhAga hokara saMcalana krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha ko mila
jAte haiM aura nokaSAya mohanIya ke pAMca bhAga hokara kramazaH tIna vedoM meM
se kisI eka badhyamAna veda ko, hAsya aura rati ke yugala tathA zoka aura arati
ke yugala meM se kisI eka yugala ko (yugala meM se pratyeka ko eka bhAga) tathA
bhaya aura jugupsA ko milate haiN|' 1 (ka) ukkosa rasassada mincha addha tu
iyaraghAIgaM  /  saMjalaNa nokasAyA sesaM adaddhayaM leti  /  /  -patrasaMgraha
435 mohanIya karma ke sarvaghAti dravya kA AdhA bhAga misAtya ko milatA hai aura
AdhA bhAga bAraha kaSAyoM ko| zeSa dezaghAti draSya kA AdhA bhAga saMjvalana
kaSAya ko aura mAdhA bhAga nokaSAya ko milatA hai| (kha) mohe duhA cauddhA ya
paMcahA vAvi bajmamANINaM  /  /  -karmaprakRti, baMdhanakaraNa 26 sthiti ke
pratibhAga ke anusAra mohanIya ko jo bhAga milatA hai usake anantaveM bhAga
sarvadhAti dravya ke do bhAga kriye Ate haiN| AdhA bhAga darzana mohanIya ko
aura AdhA bhAga cAritramohanIya ko milatA hai| zeSa mUla bhAga ke bhI do mAga
kiye jAte haiM, usameM se bhASA bhAga kaSAya (oSa magale pRSTha para dekheM)

Page #330 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Group: Antaray Karma  The portion of Antaray Karma received
is divided into five parts, and these five parts are distributed to its five
resultant natures: Dana, Antaray, etc. This is because Antaray Karma is a
traitor to the country and, being permanently bound, its five natures, Dana,
Antaray, etc., are always bound.  After explaining the division of the substance
received in the resultant natures of the Dharmic Karmas, we now clarify the
division of the portion received by the Vedaniya, Ayu, Nama, and Gotra Karmas.
Vedaniya Karma has two resultant natures, but only one of them is bound at a
time. Therefore, the substance received by Vedaniya Karma goes to the one nature
that is bound at that time. Similarly, one should understand that only one
resultant nature of Ayu Karma is bound at a time, and the portion received by
Ayu Karma goes to the one nature that is bound at that time.  The original
portion received by Nama Karma is divided among its binding resultant natures.
That is, the portion is distributed among the following: Gati, Jati, Sarira,
Upanga, Bandhana, Sanghata, Sanhanana, Sansthana Anupurvi, Varna Chatushk, Aguru
Laghu, Paraghata, Udyota, Upghata, Uchchvasa, Nirmana, Tirthankara, Atap,
Vihayogati, and Sadshak or Stavardashak.  The portion received by the Mohaniya
Karma is further divided into two parts: half goes to the Kshaya Mohaniya and
half goes to the Nokpaya Mohaniya. The portion received by the Kshaya Mohaniya
is further divided into four parts, and these four parts are given to Sanjwalana
Krodha, Mana, Maya, and Lobha. The Nokshaya Mohaniya has five parts, which are
given to one of the three Vedas, one of the pairs of Hasya-Rani and Shoka-Arati,
Praya, and Jugupsa. This is because all five Nokshaya Karmas are bound at the
same time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama karmagranya antarAya karma ko prApta bhAga pAMca vibhAgoM meM vibhAjita
hokara usakI dAna-antarAya Adi pAMcoM uttara prakRtiyoM ko milatA hai| kyoMki
antarAya karma dezaghAtI hai aura dhruvabaMdhI hone ke kAraNa dAnAntarAya Adi
pAMcoM prakRtiyAM sadA baMdhatI haiN| dhAtikarmoM kI uttara prakRtiyoM meM
prApta dravya ke vibhAjana ko batalAne ke pazcAta aba vedanIya, Ayu, nAma aura
gotra karmoM ko prApta bhAga ke vibhAga ko spaSTa karate haiN| vedanIya karma kI
do uttara prakRtiyAM haiM, kintu unameM se prati samaya eka hI gAdi mA baMdha
hotA hai, ataH vedageya karma ko jo davya milatA hai vaha usa samaya baMdhane
vAlI eka prakRti ko milatA hai| isI prakAra Ayukarma ke bAre meM bhI samajhanA
cAhie ki Ayukarma kI eka samaya meM eka hI uttara prakRti baMdhatI hai tathA
Ayukarma ko jo bhAga milatA hai vaha usa samaya baMdhane vAlI eka prakRti ko hI
mila jAtA hai| nAmakarma ko jo mUla bhAga milatA hai vaha usakI baMdhane vAlI
uttara prakRtiyoM meM vibhAjita ho jAtA hai  /  arthAt gati, jAti, zarIra,
upAMga, baMdhana, saMghAta, saMhanana, saMsthAna AnupUrvI, varNacatuSka,
agurulaghu, parAghAta, udyota, upaghAta, ucchvAsa, nirmANa, tIrthakara, Atapa,
vihAyogati aura sadazaka athavA sthAvaradazaka meM se jitanI prakR mohanIya ko
aura AdhA bhAga nokapAya mohanIya ko milatA hai| kaSAyamohanIya ko milane vAle
bhAga ke punaH cAra bhAga hote hai aura ve cAroM bhAga saMjvalana krodha, mAna,
mAyA aura lobha ko diye jAte haiM  /  nokaSAya mohanIya ke pAMca bhAga hote haiM
/  jo tIna vedoM meM se kisI eka veda ko, hAsya-rani aura zoka-arati ke yugaloM
meM se kisI eka yugala ko, praya aura jugupsA ko diye jAte haiN| kyoMki eka
samaya meM pAMcoM hI nokaSAya kAM badha hotA hai|

Page #331 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**224**  The substance obtained is divided into as many parts as there are bonds
at a time.  **Commentary**  A special feature of some of the aforementioned
natures is that the portion received by the fourfold classification is divided
among their sub-categories. For example, the portion received by the name
"color" is divided into five parts, becoming the sub-categories of white, etc.
Similarly, one should understand that the portion received by the sub-categories
of smell, taste, and touch is divided among their sub-categories. The portion
received by the karmas of "aggregate" and "body" is divided into three or four
parts, which are received by the three or four natures of "aggregate" and
"body." The reason for the division of "aggregate" and "body" karma into three
or four parts is that if the three bodies of "audaryika," "tejasa," and
"karmana," or the three aggregates of "vaikriya," "tejasa," and "karmana," are
bound together, then there are three parts. And if the four bodies of
"vaikriya," "aharaka," "tejasa," and "karmana," and the four aggregates are
bound together, then there are four divisions.  If the portion received by the
name "bond" is bound to three bodies, then there are seven parts. And if it is
bound to four bodies, then there are eleven parts. The seven and eleven parts
should be understood as follows: If there is a bond of the seven bonds of
"audaryika-audaryika," "audaryika-tejasa," "audaryika-karmana," "audaryika-
tejasa-karmana," "tejasa-tejasa," "tejasa-karmana," and "karmana-karmana," then
there are seven parts. Or if there is a bond of the seven bonds of "vaikriya-
vaikriya," "vaikriya-tejasa," "vaikriya-karmana," "vaikriya-tejasa-karmana,"
"tejasa-tejasa," "tejasa-karmana," and "karmana-karmana," then there are seven
parts. And if there is a bond of the eleven bonds of the fourfold "vaikriya,"
the fourfold "aharaka," and the three of "tejasa" and "karmana," then there are
eleven parts.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 * 224 tiyoM kA eka samaya meM baMdha hotA hai, utane bhAgoM meM vaha prApta
dravya baMTa jAtA hai  /  zata ukta prakRtiyoM meM se kucha eka ke bAre meM
vizeSatA yaha hai ki varNacatuSka ko jignA jitanA bhAga milatA hai vaha unake
avAntara bhedoM meM baMTa jAtA hai  /  jaise varNa nAma ko milane vAlA bhAga
usake pAMca bhAgoM meM vibhAjita hokara zukla Adi bhedoM meM baMTa jAtA hai| isI
taraha gaMdha, rasa aura sparza ke avAntara bhedoM ke bAre meM bhI samajhanA
cAhie ki una unako prApta bhAga unake avAntara bhedoM meM vibhAjita hotA hai  /
saMghAta aura zarIra nAmakarma ko jo bhAma milatA hai vaha tIna yA cAra bhAgoM
meM vibhAjita hokara saMghAta aura zarIra nAma kI tIna yA cAra prakRtiyoM ko
milatA hai  /  saMghAta aura zarIra nAma ke tIna yA cAra bhAgoM meM vibhAjita
hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki yadi saudArika, taijasa aura kArmaNa athavA vaikriya,
tejasa aura kArmaNa ina tIna zarIroM aura saMghAtoM kA eka sAtha baMdha hotA hai
to tIna bhAga hote haiM aura yadi vaikiya, AhAraka, taijasa aura kArmaNa zarIra
tathA saMghAta kA baMdha hotA hai to cAra vibhAga ho jAte haiM  /  baMdhana nAma
ko prApta hone vAle bhAga ke yadi tIna zarIroM kA baMdha ho to sAta bhAga hote
haiM aura yadi cAra zarIroM kA baMdha ho to gyAraha bhAga hote haiN| sAta aura
gyAraha bhAga isa prakAra jAnanA cAhie ki odArika audArika, audArika-taijasa,
audArikaM kArmaNa, audArikataijasa- kArmaNa, tejasa tejasa, taijasa- kArmaNa
aura kArmaNa-kArmaNa ina sAta baMdhanoM kA baMdha hone para sAta bhAga athavA
vaikriya- vaikriya, vaikriyatejasa, vaikriya - kArmaNa, vaikriya taijasa-
kArmaNa, tejasa tejasa, tejasa - kArmaNa aura kArmaNa kArmaNa, ina sAta
baMdhanoM kA baMdha hone para sAta bhAga hote haiM aura vaikriyacatuSka,
AhArakacatuSka tathA tejasa aura kArmaNa ke tIna isa prakAra gyAraha baMdhanoM
kA baMdha hone para vyAraha bhAga hote haiM  /

Page #332 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth 215  Except for the Name Karma, there are no further
divisions in the other Karma types. Therefore, the portion received is entirely
allocated to the single nature that binds. Because the other natures are
mutually contradictory, the binding of one prevents the binding of another. For
example, the binding of one type of motion prevents the binding of another type
of motion. Similarly, when one type of birth, status, and assembly, and one type
of Sadhaka binds, the binding of the Stavardashaka does not occur.  The portion
received by the Gotra Karma is entirely allocated to its single binding nature,
as only one nature of Gotra Karma binds at a time.  When the binding of a nature
is severed from its respective quality-place within the sequence of these
binding natures, its portion is divided among the similar natures. And if the
similar  1 1 The distribution of the substance of Vedaniya, Ayu, Gotra, and Name
Karma among their respective natures is described in the Karma nature as
follows: "Veṇimagotsu bajjhamaṇīṇa bhāgo si || Pipgatīsu bajjhatigāṇa
vanarasagandhaphāsāṇaṁ | Samvāsi saṁghāta tashummi ya tige caukke vā ||"
Bandhanakaraṇa G. 26, 27 The original portion received by Vedaniya, Ayu, and
Gotra Karma is allocated to their respective single binding natures, as only one
nature of these Karmas binds at a time. The portion received by Name Karma is
allocated to its various binding natures. The portion received by color, smell,
taste, and touch is allocated to all their sub-natures. The portion received by
assembly and body is divided into three or four parts.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 215 isake sivAya nAmakarma kI anya prakRtiyoM meM koI
avAntara vibhAga nahIM hone se jo bhAga milatA hai vaha pUrA baMdhane vAlI usa
eka prakRti ko hI mila jAtA hai| kyoMki anya prakRtiyAM Apasa meM virodhinI haiM
ataH eka kA baMdha hone para dUsarI kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai  /  jaise ki eka
gati kA baMdha hone para dUsarI gati kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai  /  isI taraha
jAti, saMsthAna aura saMha kI eka meM eka sI aura sadazaka kA baMgha hone para
sthAvaradazaka kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai| gotrakarma ko jo bhAga milatA hai, vaha
sabakA saba usakI baMdhane bAlI eka hI prakRti ko milatA hai, kyoMki gotrakarma
kI eka samaya meM eka hI prakRti baMdhatI hai  /  " ina baMdhane vAlI prakRtiyoM
ke vibhAga krama meM se jaba apane-apane guNasthAnoM meM kisI prakRti kA
baMdhaviccheda ho jAtA hai to usakA bhAga sajAtIya prakRtiyoM meM vibhAjita ho
jAtA hai aura yadi sajAtIya 1 1 vedanIya, Ayu, gotra aura nAma pharma ke dravya
kA baTavArA unakI utara prakRtiyoM meM karane kA krama karmaprakRti meM isa
prakAra batalAyA haiveNimagotsu bajjhamANINa bhAgo si || pipagatIsu bajjhatigANa
vanarasagaMdhaphAsANaM | samvAsi saMghAta tazummi ya tige caukke vA  //
baMdhanakaraNa ga0 26, 27 vedanIya, Ayu aura gotra karma ko jo mUla bhAga milatA
hai, vaha unakI baMdhane vAlI eka-eka prakRti ko hI mila jAtA hai, kyoMki ina
kama kI eka samaya meM eka hI prakRti baMdhatI hai| nAmakarma ko jo bhAga milatA
hai, vaha usakI banate bAlo prakRtiyoM kA hotA hai| varNa, gaMdha, rasa aura
spardhA ko jo bhAga milatA hai, vaha unako saba avAntara prakRtiyoM ko milatA
hai | saMghAsa aura zarIra ko jo bhAga milatA hai, vaha tIna mA cAra bAnoM meM
baMTa jAtA hai|

Page #333 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
195 If the bond of a hundredth nature is broken, the substance belonging to it
is received by the heterogeneous natures under its own root nature. If the bond
of those heterogeneous natures is also broken, then the substance is not
received by the root nature, but by other root natures. For example, when the
bond of the sthānāndhitrika is broken, the substance belonging to it is received
by its homogeneous nature, nidrā and prachala, and when the bond of nidrā and
prachala is also broken, their substance is received by the heterogeneous
natures like chakshudarshanaavaran, etc., under their own root nature. When
their bond is also broken, all the substance is received by the sātavedaniya in
the eleventh and subsequent gṛhasthānas. In the same way, one should understand
about other natures. In short, when the bond of a nature is broken, its part is
received by the homogeneous nature, and when the bond of that homogeneous nature
is also broken, it is received by the heterogeneous natures under the root
nature. If the bond of that root nature is broken, then this substance starts
being received by the other existing root natures.  According to the method
described above, the root and subsequent natures receive karmadalis, and the
jīva destroys a large part of those karmadalis through the process of guṇoṇi
creation. Therefore, now we will tell the nature, number, and names of the
guṇashreṇi. First, we will tell the number and names of the guṇashreṇi. 1 Go.
Karmakāṇḍa Ga. 196 to 206 describes the distribution of pudgala dravya in the
subsequent natures, and the karmaprakriti (Pradeshaban Ga 28) does not give a
complete description of the division of dālikas. However, it has been stated
that there is a predominance of kamalika in the subsequent natures. The meaning
of both these bonds is given in the appendix.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 195 zataka prakRti kA bhI baMdhaviccheda ho jAye to unake hisse kA dravya unakI
sUla prakRti ke antargata vijAtIya prakRtiyoM ko milatA hai  /  yadi una
vijAtIya prakRtiyoM kA bhI baMdha ruka jAtA hai to usa mUla prakRti ko dravya na
milakara anya mUla prakRtiyoM ko dravya mila jAtA hai  /  jaise ki
styAnaddhitrika kA baMdhaviccheda hone para unake hisse kA dravya unakI sajAtIya
prakRti nidrA aura pratralA ko milatA hai aura nidrA va pracalA kA bhI
baMdhaviccheda hone para unakA drazya apanI hI mUla prakRti ke antargata
cakSudarzanAvaraNa Adi vijAtIya prakRtiyoM ko milatA hai| unakA bhI
baMdhaviccheda hone para gyArahaveM Adi gRNasthAnoM meM saba dravya sAtAvedanIya
ko hI milatA hai  /  isI prakAra anya prakRtiyoM ke bAre meM bhI samajhanA cAhie
/  sArAMza yaha hai ki kisI prakRti kA baMdha. viccheda hone para usakA bhAga
samAna jAtIya prakRti ko mila jAtA hai aura usa samAna jAtIya prakRti kA bhI
baMdhaviccheda hone para mUla prakRti ke antargata sanakI vijAtIya prakRtiyoM kA
milatA hai| yadi usa mUla prakRti kA hI viccheda ho jAye to vidyamAna anya mUla
prakRtiyoM ko yaha dravya prApta hone lagatA hai| isa prakAra batAI gaI rIti ke
anusAra mUla aura uttara prakatiyoM ko karmalika milate haiM' aura guNoNi racanA
ke dvArA hI jIva una karmadalikoM ke bahubhAga kA kSapaNa karatA hai  /  ataH
aba Age guNazreNi kA svarUpa, usakI saMkhyA aura nAma batalAte haiM  /
sarvaprathama guNazroNi kI saMkhyA aura nAmoM ko kahate haiM ki 1 go. karmakAMDa
gA. 196 se 206 taka uttara prakRtiyoM meM pudgala dravya ke baTavAre kA varNana
kiyA hai tathA karmaprakRti (pradezabana gA 28) meM dalikoM ke vibhAga kA pUrA-
pUrA vivaraNa to nahI diyA hai| kintu uttara prakRtiyoM meM kamalikoM ke vibhAga
kI honAdhikatA batalAI hai| ukta donoM bandhoM kA maMtavya pariziSTa meM diyA
gayA hai  /

Page #334 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **Sammadarasaṃvavirayi avisajoyasakhavage hēṃ.
Mohasamasantkhabage khīṇasajogīyar guṇaseḍho 11**  **Word Meaning:**  *
**Sammadarasaṃvavirayi:** Samyaktva, Deśaviraṭi, Sarvaviraṭi, Avisajoy
(disconnection from infinite attachments), Dasakhayo (destruction of
Darshanamohiya), Mohasama (pacification of Charitramohiya), Santoupaśāmtmoha
(pacified moha), Kharage (death), Khīṇ (diminished moha), Sajogīyar
(Sayogikevali and Ayogikevali), Guṇaseṭhi (Guṇashreṇi).  **Verse Meaning:**
Samyaktva, Deśaviraṭi, Sarvaviraṭi, disconnection from infinite attachments,
destruction of Darshanamohiya, pacification of Charitramohiya, pacified moha,
destruction, diminished moha, Sayogikevali and Ayogikevali are the eleven
qualities.  **Special Meaning:**  Although the state and essence of bound karmas
can be destroyed by auspicious results without experiencing them, their
destruction requires experiencing them. In other words, the destruction of karma
particles cannot happen without experiencing them.   The living being
experiences karma particles every moment, leading to their destruction. This
destruction of karmas through experience is called **Aupakramika Nirjara** or
**Savipāka Nirjara**.   However, this type of destruction only affects a limited
number of karma particles. Moreover, the cycle of binding new karmas continues
alongside this experiential destruction. This means that new karmas are bound
through this experiential destruction, rendering it ineffective in truly
destroying karmas and freeing the being from karma bondage.  Therefore, to be
free from karma bondage, it is essential to destroy as many karma atoms as
possible in the shortest time, and their number should continuously increase.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha sammadarasamvaviraI avisaMjoyasakhavage haiN|
mohasamasaMtakhabage khINasajogiyara guNaseDho 11 zabdArtha -sammadarasamvaviraI
- samyaktva, dezavirati, sarvaviti, avisajoya anantAnubandhI kA visayojana,
dasakhayo.... darzanamohanIya kA kSapaNa, mohasama-mohanIya kA upazamana,
saMtaupazAmtamoha, kharage maraNa, khINa - kSINamoha sajogiyara sayogikevalI
aura ayogikevalI, guNaseThI guNazreNi  /  gAthArtha - samyaktva, dezavirati,
sarvavirati, anantAnubaMdhI kA visaMyojana, darzanamohanIya kA kSapaNa,
cAritramohanIya kA upazamana, upazAntamoha, kSapaNa, kSINamoha, sayogikevalI
aura ayogikevalI ye guNaneNiyAM haiN| vizeSArtha yadyapi baddha karmoM kI sthiti
aura rasa kA ghAta to binA vedana kiye hI zubha pariNAmoM ke dvArA kiyA jA
sakatA hai kintu nirjarA ke liye unakA bedana honA jarUrI hai yAnI karmoM ke
dalikoM kA vedana kiye binA unakI nirjarA nahIM ho sakatI hai| yoM to jIva
pratisamaya karmadalikoM kA anubhavana karatA rahatA hai aura usase nirjarA hotI
hai  /  karmoM kI isa bhogajanya nirjarA ko aupakramika nirjarA athavA savipAka
nirjarA kahate haiM  /  kintu isa taraha se eka to parimita karmadalikoM ko hI
nirjarA hotI hai aura dUsare isa bhogajanya nirjarA ke sAtha navIna karmoM ke
baMdha kA krama bhI calatA rahatA hai  /  arthAt isa bhogajanya nirjarA ke dvArA
navIna karmoM kA baMdha hotA rahatA hai, jisake karmanirjarA kA vAstavika rUpa
meM phala nahIM nikalatA hai, jova karmabandhana se mukta nahIM ho pAtA hai|
ataH karmabandhana se mukta hone ke lie kama-se-kama samaya meM adhika-se-adhika
karmaparamANuoM kA kSaya honA Avazyaka hai aura uttarottara unakI saMkhyA
bar3hatI hI

Page #335 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 26: Sins and the Concept of Gunadhonis  One should understand the
concept of sins. The rapid depletion of a large number of karma particles in a
short period of time is called **Gunadhonis**. This type of depletion can only
occur when there is a progressive increase in the purity of the soul's emotions.
Ascending to higher levels of purity leads to the depletion of a larger number
of karma particles.   The verse mentions the names of the purity levels in
order, where the depletion of karma particles increases progressively. These
levels are called **Gunadhonis** because they are the cause of **Gunadhonis**
depletion or creation. Their names are as follows:  1. **Samyaktva** (attainment
of right faith),  2. **Deshaviriti** (renunciation of worldly attachments),  3.
**Sarvaviriti** (renunciation of all attachments),  4. **Anantanubandhi Kashaya
Vinsanyojana** (dissociation of infinite attachments),  5. **Darshanamohaniya
Kshapana** (destruction of the veil of perception),  6. **Charitramoha
Upshamana** (subduing the delusion of conduct),  7. **Upshantamoha** (subdued
delusion),  8. **Kshapana** (destruction),  9. **Kshina Moha** (diminished
delusion),  10. **Sayogikevali** (liberated with subtle karmas),  11.
**Ayogikevali** (liberated without any karmas).  In brief, the meaning is that
when a being performs actions like **Apuvrakaran** (initial actions) to attain
**Samyaktva**, an innumerable number of **Gunadhonis** are created.   **The
verse:**  "**Sammatadesa Unnjahrirapati Man Ghisa Sanjoga. Dampan Khavane Moha
Sma Samane Upamant Khabage Ya.**  **Khinainige Asankh Gunia Gunase Dvidaliya
Jahamaso. Mamata Hanekkarasaha Kalo U Sambanse.**"  **Translation:**  "In the
creation of **Deshaviriti** and **Sarvaviriti**, in the dissociation of
**Anantanubandhi** attachments, in the destruction of **Darshanamohaniya**, in
the subduing of **Mohaniya**, in **Upshantamoha**, in the **Apak** series, and
in the three **Gunasthanas** of **Minakashaya** etc., an innumerable number of
**Gunadhonis** are created. An innumerable number of **Gunadhonis** create the
**Gunashreni** of **Dalikas**, and the time sequence of the twelve
**Gunashrenis** of **Maya** etc. is known as **Praghata Marg** (the path of
liberation)."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26 pAtaka jAnI cAhiye  /  alpasamaya meM uttarottara karmaparamANuoM kI
adhikase-adhika saMkhyA meM nirjarA hone ko guNadhoNi nirjarA kahate haiM  /
isa prakAra kI nirjarA tabhI ho sakatI hai jaba AtmA ke bhAvoM meM uttarottara
vizuddhi kI vRddhi hotI hai| uttarottara vizuddhi sthAnoM para ArohaNa karane se
hI adhika-se-adhika saMkhyA meM nirjarA hotI hai| _ gAthA meM vizuddhisthAnoM ke
krama se nAma kahe haiN| jinameM uttarottara adhika adhika nirjarA hotI hai| ye
sthAna guNaNi nirjarA athavA guNaNi racanA kA kAraNa hone se guNadhoNi kahe jAte
haiN| jinake nAma isa prakAra haiM 1 samyaktva (samyaktva kI prApti honA), 2
dezavirati, 3 sarvavirati, 4 anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya kA visaMyojana, 5
darzanamohanIya kA kSapaNa, 6 cAritramoha kA upazamana, 7 upazAMtamoha, 8
kSapaNa, kSINamoha, 10 sayogikevalI aura 11 ayogikevlii|' inakA saMkSepa meM
artha isa prakAra hai ki jIva prathama samyaktva kI prApti ke liye apUrvakaraNa
Adi karaNa karate samaya asaMkhyAtaguNo. saMmattadesa unnajhirapatimaNa
ghisaMjoge  /  daMpaNakhavaNe mohasma samaNe upamaMta khabage y|| khINAinige
asaMkhaguNiyaguNase dvidaliya jhmso| mamatAhaNekkArasaha kAlo u saMbaMse  /  /
-paMjasapAha 14,115 mamyasa dezavirati aura saMmpUrNa virati kI utpatti meM,
anantAnubandho ke visaMyojana meM, varzanamohanIya ke kSapaNa meM, mohanIya ke
upagamana meM, upazAntabhoha meM, Apaka zreNi meM aura mINakaSAya Adi tIna
guNasthAno meM asaMcyAta guNe. asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kI guNazreNi racanA hotI
hai tathA mAyA Adi myAraha guNazreNiyoM kA kAlakramaNa: prakhyAta mAga,salyAce

Page #336 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fivefold Path (Panchakarmapath)  The **Panchakarmapath** is a process
that eliminates an innumerable amount of karmas and continues even after
attaining **Samyaktva** (right faith). This is the first **guna-shreni**
(quality series) called **Samyaktva**. Compared to the other **guna-shreni**,
this series has a slower purification process at the time of attaining
**Samyaktva**. Therefore, it creates fewer **karma-dalikas** (karma particles)
than the other series, but the duration of their experience is longer. However,
it should be understood that the number of **karma-dalikas** is greater and the
time is shorter compared to the state before attaining **Samyaktva**. This first
**guna-shreni** called **Samyaktva** can be considered the seed of **karma-
nirjara** (karma elimination).  After attaining **Samyaktva**, when the soul
partially practices **virati** (restraint), the second **guna-shreni** called
**desha-virati** (partial restraint) arises. In this series, the number of
**karma-dalikas** created is innumerably greater than the first series, and the
time of experience is innumerably less.  When the soul practices complete
**virati**, the third **guna-shreni** arises. This series is infinitely purer
than **desha-virati**. Therefore, the number of **karma-dalikas** created in
this series is innumerably greater than the previous one, but the time of their
experience is innumerably less.  When the soul detaches from **ananta-anubandhi
kshaya** (infinitely connected passions), meaning all the **karma-dalikas** of
**ananta-anubandhi kshaya** are transformed into other forms of passions, the
fourth **guna-shreni** arises.  When the three natures of **darshan-mohaniya**
(knowledge-obscuring karma) - **Samyaktva**, **Samyag-mithyatva** (partially
right and partially wrong faith), and **mithyatva** (wrong faith) - are
destroyed, the fifth **guna-shreni** called **darshan-mohaniya kshapan**
(destruction of knowledge-obscuring karma) arises.  In the eighth, ninth, and
tenth **guna-sthana** (stages of spiritual progress), when **charitra-mohaniya**
(conduct-obscuring karma) is pacified, the sixth **guna-shreni** called
**charitra-mohaniya upashman** (pacification of conduct-obscuring karma) arises.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcakarmapatha REE asaMkhyAtaguNI nirjarA karatA hai tathA samyaktva prApti ke
bAda bhI usakA krama cAlU rahatA hai| yaha pahalI samyaktva nAma kI guNazreNi
hai| Age kI anya guNazra eNiyoM kI apekSA isa zra eNi meM samyaktvaprApti ke
samaya meM - maMda vizuddhi rahatI haiM ataH unakI apekSA se isameM kama
karmadalikoM kI guNazra eNi racanA hotI hai kintu unake vedana karane kA kAla
adhika hotA hai  /  parantu samyaktva prApti ke pUrva kI sthiti kI apekSA
karmadalikoM kI saMkhyA adhika aura samaya kama samajhanA cAhiye  /  isa
sabhyaktva nAma kI prathama guNazroNi ko karmanirjarA kA bIja kaha sakate haiM
/  samyaktva prApti ke pazcAt jIva jaba virati kA ekadeza pAlana karatA hai taba
dezavita nAma kI dUsarI guNa Ni hotI hai| isameM prathama zra eNi kI apekSA
asaMkhyAta guNe adhika karmadalikoM kI guNaNi racanA hotI hai aura vedana karane
kA samaya usase saMkhyAta guNA kama hotA hai  /  sampUrNa virati kA pAlana
karane para tIsarI guNazra eNi hotI hai  /  dezavirati se isameM ananta guNI
vizuddha hotI hai jisase  /  isameM pUrva kI apekSA asaMkhyAta guNe adhika
karmadazikoM kI guNazra eNi racanA hotI hai kintu usake vedana karane kA samaya
usase saMkhyAta guNA hIna hotA hai| jaba jIva anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya kA
visaMyojana karatA hai arthAt anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya ke samasta karmadalikoM ko
anya kaSAya rUpa pariNamAtA hai taba cauthI guNazreNi hotI hai| darzanamohanIya
kI tInoM prakRtiyoM - samyaktva, samyagmithyAtva aura mithyAtva - kA vinAza
karate samaya pAMcavI darzanamohanIya kA kSapaNa guNazreNi hotI hai| AThaveM
nauveM aura dasaveM guNasthAna meM cAritramohanIya kA upazamana karate samaya
cAritramohanIya kA upazamana nAmaka chaThI guNazra Ni

Page #337 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"There are eleven stages of the soul's progress, each marked by a specific level
of spiritual development. The first three stages, known as Darshanamoha,
Kshayapaka, and Upshantamoha, are characterized by the gradual elimination of
the karmic defilements of perception, knowledge, and attachment. The fourth
stage, Kshinamaha, marks the complete eradication of these defilements. The
fifth stage, Sayogikevali, represents the attainment of omniscience, while the
sixth stage, Ayogikevali, signifies the complete liberation from all karmic
bonds.  These eleven stages are further divided into eleven levels of spiritual
progress, known as Gunashreni. Each Gunashreni represents a specific level of
spiritual attainment, with the first Gunashreni being the lowest and the
eleventh being the highest.  The first Gunashreni is characterized by the
elimination of an infinite number of karmic defilements, while the second
Gunashreni eliminates an even greater number. This process continues until the
eleventh Gunashreni, where all karmic defilements are completely eradicated.
The time required to eliminate these karmic defilements decreases with each
Gunashreni. This means that the soul progresses more rapidly as it moves through
the higher stages of spiritual development.  The Gunashreni are therefore
considered to be the stages of spiritual progress, leading the soul towards
liberation."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 300 hotI hai| upazAntamoha nAmaka gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM sAtavIM guNazra eNi
aura kSapakazreNi meM cAritramohanIya kA kSapaNa karate hue AThavIM guNa Si hotI
hai| kSINamoha nAmaka bArahaveM guNasthAna meM nauvIM guNa Ni, sayogikevalI
nAmaka terahaveM guNasthAna meM dasavIM guNazreNi aura ayogikevalI nAmaka
caudahaveM guNasthAna meM gyArahavIM guNazra eNi hotI hai  / " zataka ina sabhI
guNadhaNiyoM meM krama se uttarottara asaMkhyAtaguNe, asaM khyAtaguNe karma
dalikoM kI guNazra eNi nirjarA hotI hai kintu usake bedana karane kA kAla
uttarotara maMtryAvaruNA saMga lagatA hai arthAt kama samaya meM adhika-adhika
karmadalikoM kA kSaya hotA hai  /  isIliye ina gyAraha sthAnoM kI guNa NisthAna
kahate haiM  /  1 * + 1 go0 jIvakAMDa meM bhI guNazreNiyoM kI gaNanA isa prakAra
kI hai-- sammattuSvatIya sAvayavira de anaMta kase ! daMsaNamohakkhavage
kaSAyajavasAmAge ma uyate  //  66  //  khavage ya khINamohe jiNesu daccA
asaMkhaguNidakramA  /  tavivarIyA kAlA sakhejjaguNakkamA hoti ||67 || samyaktva
kI utpatti hone para zrAvaka ke muni ke anantAnubandhI kaSAya kA visayojana
karane kI avasthA meM darzanamoha kA apaNa karane vAle ke kaSAya kA upazama
karane vAle ke, upazAnta moha ke, apaka zreNi ke tIna guNasthAnoM me, zrINamoha
guNasthAna meM tathA svasthAna kevaloM ke aura samudghAta karane vAle kevalI ke
guNazreNi nirjarA kA dravya uttarottara asakhyAtaguNA, asakhyAtaguNA hai aura
kAla usake viparIta hai arthAt utarotara saMkhyAtaguNA, saMkhyAtaguNA kAla
lagatA hai - kAla uttarottara sakhyAta guNahIna hai  /  . karmagraMtha se isameM
kevala itanA hI antara hai ki ayogikevalI ke sthAna para samudAta ke valI ko
ginAyA hai|

Page #338 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Param Karmanyan**  If these Gunashrenis are divided in the order of
Gunasthanas, then all the Gunasthanas from the fourth Gunasthan to the
fourteenth Gunasthan, including the Abhibhuka Mithyadristi of Samyaktva-prapti,
are included. The fourth, fifth, etc. Gunasthanas occur only when there is an
increase in purity. Therefore, it is natural that the Gunashrenis in the
subsequent Gunasthanas have more and more purity. _Thus, after explaining the
eleven places of Gunashrenis, we now describe the nature of Gunashreni and the
Nirjara that occurs in Gunashrenis._  **Gunasehi Balarayananu
Samayamushyarsankhgunanaae. Eyagruna Pun Kamaso Asankhgunanijara Jivaa. ||3||**
**Word Meaning:**  * Gunasehi - Creation of Gunakara-pradeshas * Balarapanau -
Creation of Pradeshagra, descending from the upper position * Agsamay - Every
moment, from the moment of Udaya * Asankhgunanaae - By countless multiplications
* Emguna - These aforementioned Gunas * Pun - Again * Kamaso - Gradually *
Asankhgunanijara - Countless Gunas Nirjara * Jivaa - Souls  **(a) In Tattvarth
Sutra 6.45, the names of Gunashrenis are mentioned as follows:**  * Sambahashti,
Navak, Virata, Ananta, Viyojak, Darshan, Mohan, Pakop, Shamak, Upashanta,
Modriksh, Pakkshin, Moh, Jina. These are countless Gunas in order.  In this, the
place of Mayogi, Ayogi, and Kevali is replaced by just 'Jina', and the Tika-karg
has counted it as one place.  **(b) In Swami Katikayanripreksha, Sayogi and
Ayogi are counted:**  * Avago, Y Khina-moho, Soinah, Taaha, Ajoiya. These are
countless Gunas Nirjara in the heart and body.  But in the Sanskrit Tika, Kevali
and Samridh-at-kevali are counted, and 'Asoiya' is omitted.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 parama karmaranya ina guNazreNiyoM' kA yadi guNasthAna ke krama se vibhAga kiyA
jAye to unameM cauthe guNasthAna se lekara caudahaveM guNasthAna taka ke sabhI
gRNasthAna tathA samyaktvaprApti ke abhibhukha mithyAdRSTi bhI saMmilita ho jAte
haiM  /  vizuddhi kI vRddhi hone para hI cauthe, pAMcaveM Adi guNasthAna hote
haiM  /  ataH Age-Age ke guNasthAnoM meM jo ukta guNazreNiyAM hotI haiM, unameM
adhika-adhika vizaddhi honA svAbhAvika hai  /  _isa prakAra guNazreNiyoM ke
gyAraha sthAnoM ko batalAkara aba Age kI mAthA meM guNazreNI kA svarUpa tathA
guNazraNiyoM meM hone vAlI nirjarA kA kathana karate haiN| guNasehI
blrynnaa'nnusmymushyaarsNkhgunnnnaae| eyagRNA puNa kamaso asaMkhaguNanijarA jIvA
/  / 3 /  /  zabdArtha-guNasetI-guNAkArapradezoM kI racanA, balarapaNAUpara kI
sthiti se utarate hue pradezAgra kI racanA, agasamaya.... pratyeka samaya kI,
udayAda-udama kSaNa se, asaMkhaguNaNAe-asakhya guNanA se, emaguNA--ye pUrvokta
guNa bAle, puNa-punaH, samaso 1 (ka) tatvArthasUtra 6 / 45 meM guNaNiyoM ke nAma
isa prakAra batalAye haiM sambAhaSTinAvakaviratAnantaviyojakadarzana
mohanapakopazamakopazAntamodRkSapakakSINamohajinAH kramazo'saMkhyeya guNanirAH
/  isameM mayogi. ayogi kevalI ke sthAna para sirpha 'jina' ko rakhA aura
TIkAkAgaM ne use eka hI sthAna ginA hai| (kha) svAmI kAtikeyAnRprekSA meM sayogi
aura aogiko ginAyA avago ya khINamoho soiNAho tahA ajoIyA | ede uri umari
asaMkhaguNakammaNijjarayA  /  / 10 /  /  kintu isako saMskRta TIkA meM kevalI
aura samRdghAta kevalo ko ginAmA hai aura 'aSoImA' ko unhoMne chor3a diyA hai|

Page #339 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In sequence, the countless-quality-possessing, countless-quality-possessing,
Jiva-beings. From the state of Gāpārṣa-above, from the moment of arising, to
every moment, the countless-quality, countless-quality, karma-dalis are called
Guṇaśroṇi, and the Jivas possessing the aforementioned qualities of Samyaktva,
Deśaviratī, Sarvaviratī, etc., in sequence, perform countless-quality,
countless-quality, Nirjarā. In particular, the first stanza of the Gāthā
describes the nature of Guṇaśroṇi, and the second stanza explains the proof of
karma-Nirjarā of the Jivas possessing the Guṇadhīṇi mentioned in the previous
Gāthā. The eleven names mentioned earlier, namely Samyaktva, Deśaviratī, etc.,
are not themselves Guṇṇi, but they are the cause of Guṇaśroṇi due to the
countless-quality, countless-quality, Nirjarā occurring in them in sequence.
Therefore, they are called Guṇṇi by treating the effect in the cause. Guṇaśroṇi
is a specific action, which is described in this Gāthā - "Guṇaseḍhī
Dalaryāṇā..." This action begins with the attainment of Samyaktva. Therefore, we
first consider the origin of Samyaktva. It has been previously explained that
the Jiva performs three actions for the attainment of Samyaktva, namely
Yathāpravṛttakarṇa, Apūrvakarṇa, and Anivṛttikarṇa. Upon entering Apūrvakarṇa,
the following four actions begin: First, Sthitighāta, second, Rasaghata, third,
Navīna Sthitibandha, and fourth, Guṇṇi. Through Sthitighāta, the state of the
previously bound karmas is reduced. That is, through Sthitighāta, the state of
those very dalis is reduced, whose state is one end...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anukrama se, asaMkhaguNanijamarA asaMkhyAta guNa nirA vAle, jIpA-jIva  /
gApArSa-Upara kI sthiti se udaya kSaNa se lekara pratisamaya asaMkhyAtaguNe,
asaMkhyAtaguNe karmadalikoM kI racanA ko guNazroNi kahate haiM tathA pUrvokta
samyaktva, dezavirati, sarvavirati Adi guNa vAle jIva anukama se asaMkhyAtaguNI,
asaMkhyAtaguNI nirjarA karate hai  /  vizeSArthagAthA ke pahale caraNa meM
guNazrINi kA svarUpa aura dUsare caraNa meM pUrva gAthA meM batalAye gaye
guNadhINi vAle jIvoM ke karmanirjarA kA pramANa batalAyA hai| pUrva meM jo
samyaktva, dezavirati Adi gyAraha nAma batalAye haiM ve  /  to svayaM guNaNi
nahIM haiM kintu una unameM krama se asaMkhyAtaguNI, asaMkhyAtaguNI nirjarA hone
se guNazroNi ke kAraNa haiM  /  ataH karaNa meM kArya kA upacAra karake unheM
guNaNi kahA jAtA hai| guNazroNi to eka kriyAvizeSa hai jo isa gAthA meM batalAI
gaI hai-guNaseDhI dalarayaNA .." /  _ isa kriyA kA prArambha samyaktva prApti se
hotA hai| ataH sarvaprathama samyaktva kI utpatti ke bAre meM vicAra karate
haiN| pahale yaha batAyA jA cukA hai ki samyaktva kI prApti ke lie jova
yathApravRttakaraNa apUrvakaraNa aura anivRttikaraNa nAmaka tIna karaNoM ko
karatA hai| apUrvakaraNa meM praveza karate hI nimnalikhita cAra kAma prArambha
ho jAte haiM eka sthitighAta, dUsarA rasaghAta, tIsarA navIna sthitibaMdha aura
cauthA guNaNi  /  sthitighAta ke dvArA pahale bAMdhe hue karmoM kI sthiti ko
kama kara diyA jAtA hai| arthAt sthitighAta ke dvArA unhIM dalikoM kI sthiti
kAmAta kiyA jAtA hai jinakI sthiti eka anta

Page #340 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Panchakarma Granth, Chapter 3  The duration of the *muhurt* is greater than
the duration of the *sthiti*. Therefore, by destroying the *sthiti*, the
*karmadalikas* which would have emerged after a long time, become ready to
emerge immediately. From those *karmadalikas* whose *sthiti* is reduced,
countless, countless *dalikas* are taken and established upwards from the time
of emergence. The order of deposition of *karmadalikas* is as follows:
*karmadalikas* are taken from the upper *sthiti* and a few *dalikas* are
deposited at the time of emergence, then countless, countless *dalikas* are
deposited at the next time. In this way, countless, countless *dalikas* are
deposited at every moment until the end of the *antarmuhurt* time. That is, the
*dalikas* which are taken at the first time...  **Footnotes:**  1. The 15th
verse of *Karma-prakriti* (Upashmanakaran) also describes the nature of the
*gunashreni* in the same way in its ancient *Churni* and *Panchasangrah*. It is
as follows:  > *Gunasethi nivakheva sameye mameye asankhgunanaaye.
Asadugaairisee sesa sese ya niklevo.* > > *Karma-prakriti Upashmanakaran, verse
15*  The deposition of countless, countless *dalikas* at every moment is called
*gunashreni*. Its duration is slightly longer than the duration of
*bapurvakaran* and *anivalikaran*. In this duration, as time passes, the
*dalikas* are deposited only in the remaining time above.  > *Uvarillao dvitiu
poggale ghesun udaysameye chova pachiti mitisameye asankhejjguna evam jav
antomuhrut.* > > *Karma-prakriti Churni*  > *Thai dalie ghettu ghettu asankhan
gunaaye. Sahiyadukaranka upma sya gunaseth.* > > *Panchasangrah 746*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcakarmagrantha bai03 muhUrta se adhika hotI hai| ataH sthiti kA ghAta kara
dene se jo karmadalika bahuta samaya bAda udaya meM Ate haiM ve turanta hI udaya
meM Ane yogya ho jAte haiN| jina karmadalikoM kI sthiti kama ho jAtI hai unameM
se prati samaya asaMkhyAtaguNe, asaMkhyAtaguNe dalika grahaNa karake udaya
samaya se lekara Upara kI ora sthApita kara diye jAte haiN| karmadalikoM ke
nikSepa karane kA krama isa prakAra hotA hai ki Upara kI sthiti se karmadalikoM
ko grahaNa karake unameM se udaya samaya meM thor3e dalikoM kA nikSepa hotA hai,
dUsare samaya meM usase asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kA dalikoM kA nikSepaNa hotA hai|
isI prakAra antarmuhUrta kAla ke antima samaya taka pratisamaya asaMkhyAtaguNe,
asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kA nikSepaNa kiyA jAtA hai|' arthAt pahale samaya meM jo
dalika grahaNa kiye jAte . 1 karmaprakRti ( upazamanAkaraNa) kI 15vIM gAthA,
usakI prAcIna cUrNa tathA paMcasaMgraha meM bhI isI prakAra guNazreNi kA svarUpa
Adi batalAyA hai| jo isa prakAra hai - guNaseThI nivakheva samaye mamaye
asaMkhaguNaNAe  /  asAdugAIrisI sesa sese ya niklevo  //  - karmaprakRti
upazamanAkaraNa, gA0 15 pratisamaya asaMkhyAtaguNe, asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM ke
nikSepaNa karane ko guNazreNi kahate haiN| usakA kAla bapUrvakaraNa aura
anivalikaraNa ke kAla se kucha adhika hai  /  isa kAla meM se jyoM-jyoM samaya
bItatA jAtA hai tyoM-tyoM Upara ke zeSa samayoM meM hI dalikoM kA nikSepaNa kiyA
jAtA hai  /  uvarillAo dvitiu poggale ghesUNa udayasamaye covA paciti mitisamaye
asaMkhejjaguNA evaM jAva antomuhRtta  /  - karmaprakRti cUrNi thAi daliye ghettu
ghettu asaMkhaNaguNAe  /  sAhiyadukaraNakA upamA sya guNaseTha | paMcasaMgraha
746

Page #341 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
304 A small number of *dalik* are placed in the first *udaya* time, an
innumerable number of times more *dalik* are placed in the second time above the
*udaya* time, an innumerable number of times more *dalik* are placed in the
third time, an innumerable number of times more *dalik* are placed in the
fourth, fifth, and subsequent times. In this way, an innumerable number of
times, an innumerable number of times, *dalik* are established until the last
time of the *antarmuhurt* time. This is the method of establishing the *dalik*
taken in the first time. Similarly, one should know the method of depositing the
*dalik* taken in the remaining second, third, fourth, and subsequent times. This
action continues until the times of the *antarmuhurt* time. Shatak The summary
is that the time of the *gunashreni* is *antarmuhurt*, therefore, *karmadalik*
are taken every time from the above situation until the *antarmuhurt*, and the
*karmadalik* that are taken every time are established from the *udaya* moment
to the last time of the *antarmuhurt* time in an innumerable multiplied order.
For example, if the measure of *antarmuhurt* is assumed to be 16 times by
imagination, then the *karmadalik* taken in the first time of the *gunashreni*
will be established in 16 times in the aforementioned manner. The *karmadalik*
taken in the second time will be established in the remaining 15 times only,
because the first moment's *vedana* has already happened. The *karmadalik* taken
in the third time will be established in the remaining fourteen times only.
Similarly, one should understand about the order of the fourth, fifth, and
subsequent times, but one should not understand that the *dalik* taken in each
time are established in sixteen times only, and in this way the time of the
*gunashreni* increases upwards. In this way, *antarmuhurt*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 304 haiM, unameM se thor3e dalika udaya samaya meM dAkhila kara diye jAte hai,
usase asaMkhyAtaguNe dalika udaya samaya se Upara ke dvitIya samaya meM dAkhila
kara diye jAte haiM, usase asaMkhyAtaguNe dalika tIsare samaya meM, usase
asaMkhyAtaguNe dalika kramazaH cauthe, pAMcaveM Adi samayoM meM dAkhila kara
diye jAte haiM  /  isI krama se antarmuhUrta kAla ke aMtima samaya taka
asaMkhyAtaguNe, asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kI sthApanA kI jAtI hai| yaha to huI
prathama samaya meM gRhIta dalikoM ke sthApana karane kI vidhi  /  isI prakAra
zeSa dUsare, tIsare, cauthe Adi samayoM meM gRhIta dalikoM ke nikSepaNa kI vidhi
jAnanA cAhiye  /  yaha kriyA antarmuhUrta kAla ke samayoM taka hI hotI rahatI
hai| zataka sArAMza yaha hai ki guNazra eNi kA kAla antarmuhUrta hai, ataH
antarmuhUrta taka Upara kI sthiti meM se karmadalikoM kA prati samaya grahaNa
kiyA jAtA hai aura prati samaya jo karmadalika grahaNa kiye jAte hai, unakA
sthApana asaMkhyAta guNita krama se udaya kSaNa se lekara antamuhUrta kAla ke
antima samaya taka meM kara diyA jAtA hai| jaise kalpanA se antarmuhUrta kA
pramANa 16 samaya mAna liyA jAye to guNazreNi ke prathama samaya meM jo
karmadalika grahaNa kiye gaye unakA sthApana pUrvokta prakAra se 16 samayoM meM
kiyA jaayegaa| dUsare samaya meM jo karmadalika grahaNa kiye gaye, unakA
sthApana bAkI ke 15 samayoM meM hI hogA, kyoMki pahale kSaNa kA vedana ho cukA
hai| tIsare samaya meM jo karmadalika grahaNa kiye gaye unakA sthApana zeSa
caudaha samayoM meM hI hogA | isI prakAra se cauthe, pA~caveM Adi samayoM ke
krama ke bAre meM samajhanA cAhiye, kintu aisA nahIM samajhanA cAhiye ki
pratyeka samaya meM grahIta dalikoM kA sthApana solaha hI samayoM meM hotA hai
aura isa taraha guNazra eNi kA kAla Upara kI ora bar3hatA jAtA hai  /  isa
prakAra antarmuhUrta

Page #342 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  301 The arrangement of countless multiplied Dalikas,
established until the time of the fifth Karmagranya, is called Gunashreni.  At
the time of attaining Samyaktva, the Jiva creates this kind of Gunani structure.
Gunani arises from the time of its emergence and countless multiplied Dalikas
are established one after another. Therefore, as the Jiva ascends, it
continuously sheds countless multiplied, countless multiplied Gunas. The reason
for this is that the Dalikas are established in a specific order and they emerge
in the same order. They are established in countless multiplied order and emerge
in the same order, leading to the shedding of countless multiplied Gunas in
Samyaktva.   After attaining Samyaktva, the Jiva only performs Yathapravritta
and Apurvakarana for attaining Deshpirati and Sarvavirati. It does not perform
the third, Anivrittikarana, and there is no Gunashreni creation in Apurvakarana.
Upon completion of the time of Apurvakarana, Deshvirati or Sarvavirati is
definitely attained. This eliminates the need for Anivrittikarana.  If both
these Karmas, Yathapravritta and Apurvakarana, are performed continuously, then
Deshvirati or Sarvavirati is attained. If they are performed in the state of
Deshvirati, then only Sarvavirati is attained. Upon attaining Deshvirati or
Sarvavirati, the Jiva creates Gunashreni above the Udayavali. The natures that
are Udayavati have Gunashreni from the moment of their emergence. However, in
Anudayavati natures, Gunashreni exists from the time after the Udayavali. In the
fifth Gunasthan, there is Apratyakhyamarana and in the sixth Gunasthan...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 301 paMcama karmagranya kAla taka asaMkhyAta guNita krama se jo dalikoM ko
sthApanA kI jAtI hai, use guNazroNi kahate haiM  /  samyaktva kI prApti ke
samaya jIva isa prakAra kI guNaNi racanA karatA hai  /  guNaNi udaya samaya se
hotI hai aura Upara-Upara asaMkhyAta guNaM dalikasthApita kiye jAte haiM  /
ataH guNaNi karane vAlA jIva jyoM-jyoM Upara kI ora car3hatA hai tyoM-tyoM prati
samaya asaMkhyAtaguNI, asaMkhyAtaguNI nijarA karatA jAtA hai  /  isakA kAraNa
yaha hai ki jisa kAma se dalika sthApita hote haiM usI krama se ve pratisamaya
udaya meM Ate haiM, ve asaMkhyAta guNita krama se sthApita kiye jAte haiM aura
usI krama se udaya meM Ate haiM, jisase samyaktva meM asaMkhyAtaguNo nirjarA
hotI hai  /  _ samyaktva kI prApti ke bAda dezapirati aura sarvavirati kI prApti
ke liye jIva yathApravRtta aura apUrvakaraNa hI karatA hai, tIsarA ani
vRttikaraNa nahIM karatA aura apUrvakaraNa meM yahAM guNazreNi racanA bhI nahIM
hotI hai aura apUrvakaraNa kA kAla samApta hone para nizcita hI dezavirati yA
sarvavirati kI prApti ho jAtI hai  /  jisase anivRttikaraNa kI AvazyakatA nahIM
rahatI hai| ukta donoM karaNa- yathApravRtta, apUrvakaraNa yadi avirata dazA meM
kiye jAte haiM taba to dezavirati yA sarvavirati kI prApti hotI hai aura yadi
dezavirati dazA meM kiye jAte haiM to sarvavirati hI prApta hotI hai  /
dezavirati athavA sarvavirati kI prApti hone para jIva udayAvali ke Upara
guNazvaNi kI racanA karatA hai  /  jo prakRtiyA~ udayavatI hotI haiM, unameM to
udaya kSaNa se lekara hI guNazreNi hotI hai kintu anudayavatI prakRtiyoM meM
udayAvalikA ke Upara ke samaya se lekara guNazroNi hotI hai  /  pA~caveM
guNasthAna meM apratyAkhyAmAraraNa aura chaThe guNa

Page #343 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 306  **In the case of renunciation of the body, the upward trend of
the qualities continues from the time of the previous birth, except for the time
of the last birth.**  After attaining liberation from the world and complete
liberation, the results of the soul remain increasing for a period of one
antarmukhurta, but after that, there is no fixed rule. Some souls continue to
have increasing results, some remain in the same state, and some have decreasing
results. As long as liberation from the world or complete liberation persists,
there is a continuous upward trend of qualities. However, there is a special
feature here: in the case of a person who has renounced the world or a person
who has renounced all actions, the period of fixed increase in results for one
antarmukhurta after the last birth, due to the infinite multiplication of the
qualities, creates an upward trend of qualities. After that, if the results
continue to increase, the upward trend of qualities sometimes increases by an
infinite number of times, sometimes by a finite number of times, sometimes by a
finite multiplier, and sometimes by an infinite multiplier. If the results
decrease, then the upward trend of qualities decreases in the same way. And in
the case of a stable state, the upward trend of qualities remains stable. This
means that in the case of increasing results, the number of dālikas increases,
in the case of decreasing results, it decreases, and in the case of a stable
state, it remains stable. Thus, in liberation from the world and complete
liberation, there is a continuous infinite multiplication of the qualities.
**3. The fourth upward trend of qualities is called the disassociation of the
infinite attachments.** The disassociation of the infinite attachments of the
passions is continuous, with right vision, liberation from the world, and the
last birth.  **1. The saints, due to the infinite multiplication of the
qualities, increase the time in the same way.** (Panchasangraha 793)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka 306 sthAna meM pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kavAya anudayavatI haiM ataH unameM
udayAvalikA ko chor3akara Upara ke samaya se guNazra eNi hotI hai  /  dezavirati
aura sarvavirati ko prApti ke pazcAta eka antarmuhUrta kAla taka jIva ke
pariNAma vardhamAna hI rahate haiM, lekina usake bAda koI niyama nahIM hai| kisI
ke pariNAma vardhamAna bhI rahate haiM, kisI ke tadavastha rahate haiM aura kisI
ke hIyamAna ho jAte haiM tathA jaba taka dezavirati yA sarvavirati rahatI hai
taba taka pratisamaya guNazreNi bhI hotI hai  /  hAM yahAM itanI vizeSatA jarUra
hai ki dezacAritra athavA sakalacArina ke sAtha udayAvali ke Upara eka
antarmuhUrta kAla taka pariNAmoM kI niyata vRddhi kA kAla utanA hI hone se
asaMkhyAta guNita krama se guNazroNi kI racanA karatA hai| usake bAda yadi
pariNAma vardhamAna rahate haiM to pariNAmoM ke anusAra kabhI asaMkhyAtaveM
bhAga adhika kabhI saMkhyAtaveM bhAga adhika aura kabhI saMkhyAta guNI aura
kabhI asaMkhyAta guNI guNazra eNi karatA hai| yadi hIyamAna pariNAma hue to usa
samaya ukta prakAra se hI hIyamAna guNa Ni karatA hai aura avasthita dazA meM
avasthita guNazreNi ko karatA hai  /  isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki vardhamAna
pariNAmoM kI dazA meM dalikoM kI saMkhyA bar3hatI huI hotI hai| hIyamAna dazA
meM ghaTatI huI hotI hai aura avasthita dazA meM avasthita rahatI hai  /  isa
prakAra deza virati aura sarvavirati meM pratisamaya asaMkhyAtaguNI nirjarA hotI
hai| 3 cauthI guNazreNi kA nAma hai anantAnubaMdhI kI bisaMyojanA |
anantAnuvandhI kaSAya kA visaMyojana avirataM samyagdRSTi, dezavizeta udyAvalie
upiM guNaseDhi kuNa saha cariteNa 1 saMto asaMkhaguNaNAe tasiyaM vaDDae kAlaM
//  paMcasaMgraha 793

Page #344 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **307**  And all-ceasing beings do. The non-ceasing
right-vision beings take all four types of motion, and the country-ceasing
beings are humans and animals, and the all-ceasing beings are only humans.  The
being who is striving to detach from the infinite-binding passions, performs the
three karmas, namely, the beginning, the middle, and the end. Here, there is a
special feature that from the very first moment of the beginning karma, the
quality-transfer also starts happening. That is, in the first moment of the
beginning karma, a small portion of the infinite-binding passions transfers to
the remaining passions. In the second moment, it transfers in an innumerable-
fold amount, and in the third moment, it transfers in an innumerable-fold amount
of that amount. This process continues until the last moment of the beginning
karma, and after that, in the non-beginning karma, the quality-transfer and the
boiling-transfer destroy the portions through their process. Thus, in the
detachment of the infinite-binding passions, one should know that there are
innumerable-fold depletions at every moment.  The destruction of the perception-
obscuring karma happens when the human being who is the holder of the eight-
year-old Vrishbhanaraach Samhanan, does it after the age of eight years (during
the time of the existence of the omniscient). That is, the time for the
destruction of the perception-obscuring karma is the existence of the omniscient
soul, and the human being who destroys it is the holder of the Vrishbhanaraach
Samhanan, and the minimum age is above eight years.  **Four types of motion,
three types of binding, and victory over them.**  **The karma-related
pacification karma**  **31**  The pacification karma is the last one after the
three karmas. The pacification karma is the one that destroys the perception-
obscuring karma. It is the one that is fast and quick, and it is the one that is
eight years old.  **-Karma-Nature Pacification Karma, 32**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagranya 307 aura sarvavirati jIva karate haiN|' avirata samyagdRSTi
joba lo cAroM gati ke lenA cAhiye aura dezavirati manuNya va tiryaca hote haiM
tathA sarvavirati manuSya hI hote haiN| jo jIva anantAnubandhI kaSAya kA
visayojana karane ke liye udyata hotA hai vaha yathApravRtta Adi tInoM karaNoM
ko karatA hai  /  yahAM itanI vizeSatA hai ki apUrvakaraNa ke prathama samaya se
hI guNasaMkramaNa bhI hone lagatA hai yAnI apUrvakaraNa ke prathama samaya meM
anantAnubandhI kaSAya ke thor3e dalikoM kA zeSa kaSAyoM meM saMkramaNa karatA
hai, dusare samaya meM usase asaMkhyAtaguNe, tIsare samaya meM usase
asaMkhyAtaraNe dalikoM kA para kaSAya rUpa saMkramaNa karatA hai| yaha kriyA
apUrvakaraNa ke aMtima samaya taka hotI hai aura usake bAda anivRttikaraNa meM
guNasaMkramaNa aura ubalana saMkramaNa ke dvArA dalikoM kA vinAza kara detA hai|
isa prakAra anantAnubandhI ke visaMyojana meM prati samaya asaMkhyAta. guNI
nirjarA jAnanI cAhiye  /  darzanamohanIya kA kSapaNa jina kAla meM (kevalajJAnI
ke vidyamAna rahane ke samaya meM) utpanna hone vAlA bacaSabhanArAca saMhanana
kA dhAraka manuSya ATha varSa kI umra ke bAda karatA hai| arthAt darzanamohanIya
kI kSapaNA ke liye samaya to kevalajJAna prApta AtmA kI vidyamAnatA kA hai aura
kSapaNA karane vAlA manuSya vana RSabhanArAca saMhanana kA dhAraka ho tathA
kama-se-kama avasthA ATha varSa se Upara caugaimA pajjatA tinnivi saMyoyaNA
vijoyati  /  karaNehiM tIhi sahiyA naMtarakaraNaM usamo vA  /  /  karmaprati
upazamanAkaraNa 31 daMsa Namohe di tahA krayakaraNaddhA ya pacchima hoi  /
jiNakAlago masso paTuvago aTThavAsupi  //  -karmaprakRti upanamanAkaraNa, 32

Page #345 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Mataka Yes. The process of the destruction of Darshanamohiya is similar to the
disconnection of the infinite Anubandhi Kashaya. Here too, there are three
Karana as before, and in the Apurva Karana, there are actions like Gunauni etc.
The being who ascends the Upshama Dheni also performs the three Karana,
Yathapravritta etc., but the difference is that it performs Yathapravritta
Karana in the seventh Gunasthan, Apurva Karana in the Gunasthan called Apurva
Karana, and Anivritti Karana in the Gunasthan called Anivritti Karana. Here too,
as before, there are actions like Sthitighata Gunashreni etc. Therefore, the
Upshamaka also destroys Asankhyataguṇi, Asankhyataguṇi in sequence. After
destroying Charitramohiya, the being reaches the eleventh Gunasthan called
Upshantamoha and creates Gunashreni. The time of Upshantamoha is Antamuhurta,
and in the numbered part of its time, Gunashreni is created, due to which the
being also destroys Asankhyataguṇi, Asankhyataguṇi every moment. When the being
falls from the eleventh Gunasthan and reaches the sixth Gunasthan and ascends
the Kshapaka Shreni, or if it ascends the Kshapaka Shreni directly without
ascending the Upshamani, it also performs the three Karana, Yathapravritta
Karana, Apurva Karana, and Anivritti Karana, and destroys Asankhyataguṇi from
the Upshamaka and Upshantamoha Gunasthan. Similarly, one should understand that
the Gunashreni called Kshina Moha, Sayogikevali, and Ayogikevali also destroy
Asankhyataguṇi, Asankhyataguṇi in succession.  Although the time of each of
these eleven Gunashreni is Antamuhurta-Antamuhurta, the time of Antamuhurta of
each is successively less, and the quantity of the destroyed Drasya is
Asankhyataguṇi, Asankhyataguṇi from the normal.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mAtaka ho| darzanamohanIya kI kSapaNA kA krama bhI anantAnubandhI kaSAya kI
visaMyojanA jaisA hai  /  yahAM bhI pUrvavat tIna karaNa hote haiM aura apUrva
karaNa meM guNauNi Adi kArya hote haiM  /  upazama dheNi kA ArohaNa karane vAlA
jIva bhI yathApravRtta Adi tIna karaNoM ko karatA hai, lekina itanA aMtara hai
ki yathApravRttakaraNa sAtaveM guNasthAna meM karatA hai, apUrvakaraNa-
apUrvakaraNa nAmaka guNasthAna meM aura anivRttikaraNa anivRttikaraNa nAmaka
guNasthAna meM karatA hai| yahAM bhI pUrvavat sthitighAta guNazreNi Adi kArya
hote haiM  /  ataH upazamaka bhI krama se asaMkhyAtaguNI, asaMkhyAtaguNI nirjarA
karatA hai| cAritramohanIya kA upazama karane ke bAda upazAMtamoha nAmaka
gyArahave guNasthAna meM pahu~cakara bhI jIva guNazreNi racanA karatA hai|
upazAntamoha kA kAla anta muhUrta hai, aura usake saMkhyAtaveM bhAga kAla meM
guNazreNi kI racanA hotI hai, jisase yahAM para bhI jIva pratisamaya
asaMkhyAtaguNI, asaMkhyAtagRNI nirjarA karatA hai  /  gyArahaveM gaNasthAna se
cyuta "hokara jaba jIva chaThe guNasthAna taka Akara kSapaka zreNi car3hatA hai
athavA upazamaNi para ArUr3ha hue binA hI sIdhA kSapaka zreNi para car3hanA hai
to vahAM bhI yathApravRttakaraNa, apUrvakaraNa aura anivRtikaraNa, ina tInoM
karaNoM ko karatA hai aura unameM upazamaka aura upazAntamoha guNasthAna se bhI
asaMkhyAptaguNI nirjarA karatA hai  /  isI prakAra kSINamoha, sayogikevalI aura
ayogikevalI nAmaka guNazreNiyoM bhI uttarottara asaMkhyAtaguNI, asaMkhyAtagaNI
nirjarA samajhanA caahie| _ ina gyAraha guNazreNiyoM meM se pratyeka kA kAla
antamuhata-antamuhUrta hone para bhI pratyeka ke antamuhUrta kA kAla uttarottara
hIna hotA hai tathA nirjarA draSya kA parimANa sAmAnya se asaMkhyAtaguNA,
asaMkhyAta

Page #346 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **The गुणश्रेणी (Gunashreni) increases progressively
even when the गुण (Gun) is present.** This means that as the results become
progressively purer, the destruction of matter occurs more and more rapidly in
progressively shorter periods of time.  This is how the **गुणोणि (Gunoni)** is
established. From the above discussion of the गुणश्रेणी, it becomes clear that
as the जीव (Jiva) progresses through the higher गुणस्थान (Gunasthan), countless
**गुणी (Guni)** are destroyed. The higher गुणस्थान are characterized by a
gradual decrease in संक्लेश (Sanklesh) and an increase in purity. Therefore, in
the following verse, we will explain the difference between the lowest and
highest गुणस्थान.  **पलियासंखसमूहू सासणइयरगुण अंतरं हस्त । गुरु मिचछो मे छसट्टी
इयरगुणे पुग्गलद्धंतो॥४॥**  **Word Meaning:**  * **पलियासंखसमूह (Paliyasanka
Samuh):** An innumerable part of a पल्य (Paly) and अन्तर्मुहूर्त (Antarmuhurt) *
**सासणइयरगुण (Sasana Iyar Gun):** The गुणस्थान of सासादन (Sasadan) and other
गुणस्थान * **अंतरं (Antaram):** Difference * **हसं (Hasaan):** Lowest * **गुरु
(Guru):** Highest * **मिन्छी (Minchhi):** Mithyatva * **छसट्टी (Chhasatti):**
Two times sixty-six सागर (Sagar) * **इपरगुणे (Ipar Gun):** Other गुणस्थान *
**पुग्गलबंतो (Puggala Banto):** Slightly less than half a पुद्गल (Pudgal)
**Verse Meaning:**  The lowest difference between the गुणस्थान of सासादन and
other गुणस्थान is an innumerable part of a पल्य and an अन्तर्मुहूर्त. The
highest difference in the गुणस्थान of मिथ्यात्व is two times sixty-six सागर,
i.e., 132 सागर. The highest difference in other गुणस्थान is slightly less than
half a पुद्गल.  **Special Meaning:**  It has already been explained that the
names like सम्यक्त्व (Samyaktava), देशविरति (Deshaviriti), etc., of the
गुणश्रेणी are essentially गुणस्थान. For example, the place where the सम्यक्त्व
गुण manifests is the सम्यक्त्व गुणस्थान, and the place where the देशविरति गुण is
strong is the देशविरति गुणस्थान.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha guNA hone para bhI uttarottara bar3hatA huA hotA hai  /
yAnI pariNAmoM ke uttarottara vizuddha hone se uttarottara kama-kama samaya meM
adhikaadhika dravya kI nirjarA hotI hai| isa prakAra guNoNi kA vidhAna jAnanA
cAhiye | guNazroNi ke ukta vivecana se yaha bAta spaSTa ho jAtI hai ki jIva
jyoM-jyoM Age ke guNasthAnoM meM bar3hatA jAtA hai, tyo tyoM usake
asaMkhyAtaguNI nirjarA hotI hai aura kramazaH :saMkleza kI hAni tathA vizuddhi
kA prakarSa hone para Age-Age ke guNasthAna kahalAte haiM  /  ataH aba Age kI
gAthA meM guNasthAnoM kA jaghanya aura utkRSTa antarAla batalAte haiM  /
paliyAsaMbaMsamuhU sAsaNaiyaraguNa aMtaraM hasta  /  guru micacho me chasaTTI
iyaraguNe pugglddhNto||4|| zabdArthapaliyAsaMkhasamUha-palya kA asaMkhyAtavAM
bhAga aura antarmuhUrta, sAsaNaiyaraguNa-sAsAdana aura dUsare guNasthAnoM kA,
aMtaraM antara. hasaM -jadhanya, guru -utkRSTa, minchImithyAtva meM, chasaTThI-
do chiyAsaTha sAgaropama, iparaguNe-dUsare guNasthAnoM meM, puggalabaMto - kucha
nyUna ardhapudgala parAvarta  /  /  gAcArSa-sAsAdana aura dUsare guNasthAnoM kA
jaghanya antara anukrama se palyopama kA asaMkhyAtavA bhAga aura antamuhUrta hai
/  mithyAtva guNasthAna kA utkRSTa antara do bAra ke chiyAsaTha sAgara arthAt
132 sAgara hai aura anya guNasthAnoM kA utkRSTa antara kucha kama ardhapudgala
parAkrta hai| vizeSArtha-pUrva kathana se yaha spaSTa ho cukA hai ki
guNazreNiyoM ke jo samyaktva, deza virati Adi nAma haiM, ve prAyaH guNasthAna hI
haiN| jaise ki samyaktva guNa kA jisa sthAna meM prAdurbhAva hotA hai vaha
samyaktva guNasthAna, jisa sthAna meM dezavirati guNa prakhara hotA hai vaha
dezavirati

Page #347 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **310**  The **Shataka** (century) is called the **Gunasthan**
(state of qualities) and so on. This should be understood in the same way for
the rest. Therefore, because the **Gunashranis** (series of qualities) are
related to the **Gunasthanas**, the **Gatha** (verse) has explained the lowest
and highest intervals of the **Gunasthanas**. The time it takes for a being to
fall from a **Gunasthan** and then regain it is called the **Antarakaal**
(interval time) of that **Gunasthan**.  Firstly, explaining the lowest interval
of the **Gunasthanas**, it is said that the lowest **Antarakaal** of the second
**Gunasthan** called **Sasaadan** is the **Asankhyat** (innumerable) part of a
**Paly** (a unit of time) and the interval of the remaining **Gunasthanas** is
**Antamuhurt** (a very short time). This is explained here.  The lowest
**Antarakaal** of the **Sasaadan Gunasthan** is the **Asankhyat** part of a
**Paly** and should be understood as follows: A being with **Mithyadrishti**
(false perception) from the beginning, or a being with **Mithyadrishti** from
the beginning who has **Udavalana** (overcoming) of **Samyaktvamohaniya**
(hindrance to right faith) and **Mithyatvamohaniya** (hindrance to false
perception), attains **Aupashmik Samyaktvam** (temporary right faith) and
becomes **Sasaadan Samyagdristi** (right faith with complete knowledge) due to
the arising of **Anantaanubandhi Kshaya** (infinitely binding passions). This
being then falls into the **Mithyatva Gunasthan** (state of false perception).
If the same being attains the **Sasaadan Gunasthan** again in the same sequence,
it will take at least the **Asankhyat** part of a **Paly** to do so. The reason
for this is that when a being falls from the **Sasaadan Gunasthan** into the
**Mithyatva Gunasthan**, the **Samyaktvamohaniya** and **Mithyatvamohaniya**
still exist. With these two natures present, **Aupashmik Samyaktvam** cannot be
attained again, and without attaining **Aupashmik Samyaktvam**, the **Sasaadan
Gunasthan** cannot be attained. Therefore, after falling into **Mithyatva**, the
being continuously experiences the natures of both **Samyaktvamohaniya** and
**Mithyatvamohaniya** karmas.  ..  1. **Udavalana** is said to be the overcoming
of a nature to transform it into another nature without the three **Karana**
(causes) of **Yathapravritti** (natural tendency), **Adi** (beginning), and
**Trikala** (three times).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 310 zataka guNasthAna kahA jAtA hai aadi| isI prakAra Age bhI samajhanA cAhiye
| ataH ukta guNazra NiyoM kA saMbaMdha guNasthAnoM ke sAtha hone ke kAraNa gAthA
meM guNasthAnoM kA jaghanya aura utkRSTa antarAla batalAyA hai  /  koI jIva kisI
guNasthAna se cyuta hokara punaH jitane samaya ke bAda usa guNasthAna ko prApta
karatA hai, vaha samaya usa guNasthAna kA antarakAla kahalAtA hai |
sarvaprathama guNasthAnoM kA jaghanya antarAla batalAte hue kahA
haipaliyAsaMkhasamuha sAsaNaiyaraguNa aMtaraM hassaM sAsAdanaM nAmaka dUsare
suNasthAna kA jaghanya antarakAla palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga aura zeSa
guNasthAnoM kA antara antamuhUrta haiM  /  jisako yahAM spaSTa karate haiM  /
sAsAdana guNasthAna ke jaghanya antarakAla ko palya ke asaMkhyAta bhAga isa
prakAra samajhanA cAhie ki koI anAdi mithyAdRSTi jIva athavA samyaktva mohanIya
aura mithyAtva mohanIya kI udavalanA kara dene vAlA sAdi mithyAdRSTi jIva
aupazamika samyaktva ko prApta karake anantAnubandhI kaSAya ke udaya se sAsAdana
samyagdRSTi hokara midhyAtva guNasthAna meM AtA hai| yadi vahI jIva usI krama se
punaH sAsAdana guNasthAna ko prApta kare to kama-se-kama palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM
bhAga kAla ke bAda hI prApta karatA hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki sAsAdana
guNasthAna se mithyAtva guNasthAna meM Ane para samyaktva mohanIya aura
mithyAtva mohanIya kI sattA avazya rahatI hai| ina donoM prakRtiyoM kI sattA
hote hue punaH aupazamika samyaktva prApta nahIM ho sakatA hai aura aupazamika
samyaktva prApta kiye binA sAsAdana guNasthAna nahIM ho sakatA  /  ataH
mithyAtva meM jAne ke bAda jIva samyaktva aura mithyAtva ina donoM mohanIya
karma kI prakRtiyoM kI pratisamaya .. 1 yathApravRtta Adi tIna karaNoM ke binA
hI kisI prakRti ko anya prakRti rUpa pariNamAne ko uvalana kahate haiN|

Page #348 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fifth Karma Granth, Ubalna, causes both types of Dalikas to continuously
transform into Mithyatva and Mohiya forms.   This continuous Udghaalan leads to
the absence of both these types of Prakruti after an immeasurable number of
Palyas. Once they are absent, the same Jiva again attains the Upshamia
Sampyattva and reaches the Samapan Gunasthan. Therefore, the interval time of
the Sasadan Gunasthan is considered to be an immeasurable number of Palyas.  The
reason for stating the insignificant interval of the Sasadan Gunasthan as an
immeasurable number of Palyas is that a Jiva can fall from the Upsham श्रेणी and
reach the Sasadan Gunasthan. After a very short time, it can again climb back to
the Upsham श्रेणी and then fall back to the Sasadan Gunasthan. From this
perspective, the insignificant interval of Sasadan is very small. However, the
attainment of Sasadan Samyattva after falling from the Upsham श्रेणी is only
possible in the Manushya Gati, and even there, such an event is very rare.
Therefore, it is not discussed here. However, the attainment of Sasadan after
falling from the Upsham Samyattva is possible in all four Gatis. Therefore, the
insignificant interval of Sasadan is stated as an immeasurable number of Palyas
in comparison to this. In other words, the insignificant interval of the Sasadan
Gunasthan is stated as an immeasurable number of Palyas, not in comparison to
the श्रेणी, but in comparison to falling from the Upsham Samyattva.  Except for
Sasadan, the other Gunasthanas, namely Ksheenamoha, Sayogikevali, and
Ayogikevali, do not have an interval time because these Gunasthanas are attained
once and are not attained again. Among the remaining Gunasthanas, Mithyadristi,
Mishradristi, Avirat Sabhyag...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha ubalanA karatA hai yAnI donoM prakRtiyoM ke dalikoM ko
mithyAtva mohanIya rUpa pariNamAtA rahatA hai  /  isa prakAra udghalana karate-
karate palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga kAla meM ukta donoM prakRtiyoM kA abhAva ho
jAtA hai aura abhAva hone para vahI jIva punaH aupazamiyA sampayatva ko prAza
kara samApana guNasthAna meM A jAtA hai| isIlie sAsAdana guNasthAna kA aMtarAla
kAla palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga mAnA gayA hai  /  _ sAsAdana guNasthAna kA
jaghanya antara patya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAma pramANa batalAne kA kAraNa yaha hai
ki koI jIva upazama zreNi se girakara sAsAdana guNasthAna meM Ate haiM aura
antamuhUrta ke bAda punaH upazama zreNi para car3hakara aura vahAM se girakara
punaH sAsAdana guNasthAna meM Ate haiM  /  isa dRSTi se to sAsAdana kA jaghanya
aMtara bahuta thor3A rahatA hai, kintu upazama zreNi se cyuta hokara jo sAsAdana
samyaktva kI prApti hotI hai, vaha kevala manuSyagati meM hI saMbhava hai aura
vahAM para bhI isa prakAra kI ghaTanA bahuta kama hotI hai, jisase yahAM usakI
vivakSA nahIM kI hai kintu upazama samyaktva se cyuta hokara jo sAsAdana kI
prApti batalAI hai, vaha cAroM matiyoM meM saMbhava hai  /  ataH usakI apekSA se
hI sAsAdana kA jaghanya antara palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga batalAyA hai 1 yAnI
zroNi kI apekSA nahIM kintu upazama samyaktva se cyuta hone kI apekSA se
sAsAdana guNasthAna kA jaghanya antara palya ke amakhyAtaveM bhAga batalAyA hai
/  sAsAdana ke sivAya bAkI ke guNasthAnoM meM se kSINamoha, sayogikevalI aura
ayogikevalI, ina tIna guNasthAnoM kA to aMtara kAla nahIM hotA, kyoMki ye
guNasthAna eka bAra prApta hokara punaH prApta nahIM hote haiM  /  zeSa rahe
guNasthAnoM meM se mithyAdRSTi, mizradRSTi, avirata sabhyag

Page #349 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
312 After an infinite number of births, a soul, having fallen from the subtle-
perception (Sookshma-Samparaya) and tranquil-delusion (Upashanta-Moha)
Gunasthanas of the A-Poorva-Karana, Anivriti-Karana, and Upashma श्रेणी ( श्रेणी
)  (categories) of Mataka-Drishti, Desh-Virati, Pramatta, Apramatta, and
Upashma, again experiences those deaths. Therefore, their minimum interval is
only one Anta-Muhurta. Because when a soul ascends the Upashma श्रेणी ( श्रेणी )
(category) and reaches the eleventh Gunasthana, and then falls from there and
descends gradually to the first Mithyatva Gunasthana, and then again reaches the
eleventh Gunasthana in one Anta-Muhurta. Because there is a provision for
ascending the Upashma श्रेणी ( श्रेणी )  (category) twice in one birth. At that
time, the minimum interval of each of the remaining Gunasthanas, except for the
mixed Gunasthana, is Anta-Muhurta. The reason for excluding the mixed Gunasthana
is that the soul does not go to the mixed Gunasthana after falling from the
श्रेणी ( श्रेणी )  (category). Therefore, when the soul does not ascend the
Auni, the minimum interval from Mithya-Drishti to Apramatta Gunasthana, except
for the mixed Gunasthana and Sasadan, is Anta-Muhurta. Because these Gunasthanas
can be regained after Anta-Muhurta. In this way, one should understand the
minimum interval of the Gunasthanas. Now, while telling the interval of the
Gunasthanas in relation to the excellent, first we will tell the interval of the
Mithyatva Gunasthana. It is said that Guru Mindi Be Chhasthi - that is, the
excellent interval of the Mithyatva Gunasthana is two Chhiya-Sagar, that is, 66
+ 66 = 132 Sagars. It is like this: a soul, due to pure results, leaves the
Mithyatva Gunasthana and attains Samyaktva. After completing the excellent time
of 66 Sagars of Kshayo-Upashma Samyaktva, the soul remains in Samya-Mithyatva
for Anta-Muhurta. 1.  "He who has attained the state of emptiness of delusion by
the means of Upashma, is free from the bondage of karma." - Karma Kasi Ga. 64

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 312 mAtaka dRSTi dezavirati, pramatta apramatta tathA upazama zreNi ke
apUrvakaraNa, anivRttikaraNa, sUkSmasaMparAya tathA upazAntamoha guNasthAna se
cyuta hokara jIva antAna ke bAda hI puna: una maraNAdoM ko pAna kara letA hai  /
ataH unakA jaghanya antarakAla eka antamuhurta hI hotA hai  /  kyoMki jaba koI
jIva upazama zreNi para car3hakara gyArahaveM guNasthAna taka pahu~catA hai aura
vahAM se girakara kramazaH utarate-utarate pahale mithyAtva' guNasthAna meM A
jAtA hai aura usake bAda punaH eka antamu hUrta meM gyArahaveM guNasthAna taka
jA pahu~catA hai  /  kyoMki eka bhava meM do bAra upazama zrINi para car3hane kA
vidhAna hai  / ' usa samaya mizra guNasthAna ke sivAya bAkI ke guNasthAnoM meM
se pratyeka kA jaghanya antarakAla antamuhUrta hotA hai| mizra guNasthAna ko
chor3ane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki zreNi se girakara jIva mizra guNasthAna meM nahIM
jAtA hai  /  ataH jaba jIva auNi para nahIM bar3hatA taba mizra guNasthAna tathA
sAsAdana ke sivAya mithyA dRSTi se lekara apramatta guNasthAna taka kA jaghanya
antara antamuhUrta hotA hai| kyoMki ye guNasthAna antamuhUrta ke bAda punaH
prApta ho sakate haiM  /  isa prakAra se guNasthAnoM kA jaghanya antarakAla
samajhanA cAhiye  /  aba utkRSTa kI apekSA guNasthAnoM kA antarakAla batalAte
hue sarvaprathama mithyAtva guNasthAna kA antarakAla kahate haiM ki guru minDI
be chasaThI-yAnI mithyAtva guNasthAna kA utkRSTa antarakAla do chiyAsaTha sAgara
arthAt 66+66-132 sAgara hai  /  vaha isa prakAra hai koI jIva vizuddha pariNAmoM
ke kAraNa mithyAtva guNasthAna ko chor3akara samyaktva ko prApta karatA hai  /
kSayopazama samyaktva ko utkRSTa kAla 66 sAgara samApta karake vaha jIva
antamuhUrta ke liye samyamithyAtva meM 1 emabhane duspatto rittamohaM uvasamenA
/  ...-karmakasi gA064

Page #350 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fifth karma granthi (bond) is called **Panchama Karma Granthi**. When a soul
departs from there, it attains **Kshayopa-shama** and **Samyak Darshan** (right
faith). If it does not attain liberation within 66 **Sagars** (oceans of time),
it inevitably falls back into **Mithyatva** (false belief). Thus, the difference
between the highest and lowest duration of the **Mithyatva** state is slightly
more than 66 Sagars, or 132 Sagars.  The difference between the highest and
lowest duration of the remaining **Gunasthanas** (states of being) from **Sasa-
dana** to **Upashanta-moha** is slightly less than half a **Pudal Paravarta** (a
unit of time). This is because a soul, after falling from these **Gunasthanas**,
wanders in the cycle of birth and death for a period slightly less than half a
**Pudal Paravarta**, and then again attains those **Gunasthanas**. Therefore,
the difference between the highest and lowest duration of these **Gunasthanas**
is considered to be slightly less than half a **Pudal Paravarta**.  The reason
why there is no difference between **Kshina-moha**, **Sayogika-kevali**, and
**Ayogika-kevali** **Gunasthanas** has been explained earlier. Once attained,
these **Gunasthanas** are not lost again. This means that once these
**Gunasthanas** are attained, they do not decay, eliminating the need to
consider the highest or lowest duration.  After explaining the highest and
lowest duration of **Gunasthanas**, the next verses will elaborate on the nature
of **Palyopam** and **Ardha-Pudal Paravarta** in the context of the duration of
time. First, the nature of **Palyopam** will be explained.  **Verse 8:**  >
**Uddharam-ashakhita-pali-ya tiha samaya-vasa-sayasam-aye.** > **Fesa-vaharo vi-
vo-hi-a-un-saha-pari-mana.**  This is also explained in the **Pancha-Sangraha**
(five collections) regarding the difference between **Gunasthanas**.  **Verse
5:**  > **Pali-ya-san-kho sa-sa-yana-tara-se-sa-yana-manta-muh.** > **Mis-sa be
chha-sat-ti i-para-na-po-ggasa-vato.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagranya calA jAtA hai  /  vahA~ se punaH kSayopazama samyakya ko
prApta karake 66 sAgara kI samApti taka yadi usane mukti prApta nahIM kI to vaha
jIva avazya mithyAtva meM calA jAtA hai| isa prakAra mithyAtva guNasthAna kA
utkRSTa aMtara do chiyAsaTha sAgara-ekasau battIsa sAgara se kucha adhika hotA
hai| sAsAdana se lekara upazAMtamoha guNasthAna taka ke zeSa guNasthAnoM kA
utkRSTa antara kucha kama ardhapudAla parAvarta hai - iyaraguNe puggala to  /
kyoMki ina guNasthAnoM se patita hokara jIva adhika se adhika kucha kama
ardhapudgala parAvarta kAla taka saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karatA rahatA hai aura
usake bAda punaH use ukta guNasthAnoM kI prApti hotI hai  /  isIliye ina
guNasthAnoM kA utkRSTa antara kucha kama ardhapudgala parAvarta mAnA gayA hai  /
kSINamoha, sayogikevalI aura ayogikevalI guNasthAnoM meM antara nahIM hone ke
kAraNa ko pUrva meM spaSTa kiyA jA cukA hai ki ye eka bAra prApta hokara punaH
prApta nahIM hote haiM  /  yAnI ina guNasthAnoM kI prApti hone ke bAda unakA
kSaya nahIM hotA hai  /  jisase jaghanya yA utkRSTa alarakAla kA vicAra karane
kI AvazyakatA nahIM rahatI hai| _isa prakAra se guNasthAnoM kA jaghanya aura
utkRSTa aMtarakAla battalAne ke bAda aba Age kI gAthAoM meM aMtarakAla ke
varNana meM Age palyopama, ardhapudgala parAvataM kA svarUpa vistAra se batalAte
haiM  /  pahale palyopama kA svarUpa spaSTa karate haiN| uddhAramazakhitaM
paliya tihA samayavAsasayasamae  /  phesavahAro vIvohiAunasAhaparimANa  /  / 8 /
/  1 paMcasaMgraha meM bhI guNasthAnoM kA anta ra isI prakAra kA batalAyA hai
paliyAsaMkho sAsAyaNataraM sesayANa maMtamuha  /  missa be chasaTTI iparANaM
poggsvto||5

Page #351 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Narada **Word Meaning:** Umaarakhita - liberation, Adda and Kshetra - half and
field, Palipalpalyopam - comparison with a moment, Tiha - three types.
Samayavasasayasa-mae - time, hundred years and in me, Kesavaharo - hair-tip,
Bichopahi - island and ocean, Aajatasaai - lifespan and Prasadhi Jivas.
Parimanam - quantity, calculation.  **Meaning:** Liberation, half and field,
thus there are three types of Palypalyopam. In them, in sequence, one moment, in
a hundred years and in one moment, a hair-tip is used as a comparison. By which,
in sequence, islands, oceans, lifespan and Prasadhi Jivas are calculated.
**Special Meaning:** In this verse, the types of Palypalyopam, their nature and
their use are briefly instructed. In the world, things that can be easily
counted and as far as the field of mathematics is concerned, it is easy to
calculate, but beyond that, the tendency is towards comparison. For example,
sesame seeds, mustard seeds, wheat etc. grains cannot be counted, so they are
measured by weight or measurement etc. Similarly, the period of time that can be
counted in terms of years is calculated and for that, in the scriptures,
Purvaang, Purva etc. are considered as names, but even after that, the period of
time is so long that it cannot be calculated in years. Therefore, the help of
comparison is taken. There are two types of comparison: Palypalyopam and
Samaropama. The long period of time is compared to a moment, the circular space
filled with one Anapa etc. is called a Palp.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 naard zabdArtha-umAraakhitaMuddhAra,adA aura kSetra, palipapalyopama, tihA-tIna
prakAra kA. samayavAsasayasamae-samaya, sau varSa aura mamama meM, kesavahAro-
bAlAna kA uddharaNa kareM, bIcopahi-dvIpa aura samudra, AjatasAi-Ayu aura
prasAdi jovoM kA. parimANaM - parimANa, gnnnaa| gAyA- uddhAra, addhA aura
kSetra, isa prakAra palyopama ke tIna bheda haiN| unameM anukrama se eka samaya
meM, sau varSa meM aura eka samaya meM bAlAgra kA uddharaNa kiyA jAtA hai|
jisase unake dvArA krama se dvIpa samudroM, Ayu aura prasAdi jIvoM kI gaNanA kI
jAtI hai| vizeSArtha-isa gAthA meM palyopama ke bheda, unakA svarUpa aura unake
upayoga karane kA saMkSepa meM nirdeza kiyA hai| _ loka meM jo vastuyeM saralatA
se ginI jA sakatI haiM aura jahA~ taka gaNita vidhi kA kSetra hai, vahAM taka to
gaNanA karanA sarala hotA lekina usake Age upamA pramANa ko pravRtti hotI hai|
jaise ki tila, sarasoM, gehU~ Adi dhAnya gine nahIM jA sakate, ataH unheM tola
yA mApa vagairaha se AMka lete haiN| isI prakAra samaya kI jo avadhi varSoM ke
rUpa meM ginI jA sakatI hai, usakI to gaNanA kI jAtI hai aura usake liye zAstroM
meM pUrvAMga, pUrva Adi kI saMjJArya mAnI haiM, kintu isake bAda bhI samaya kI
avadhi itanI lambI hai ki usakI gaNanA varSoM meM nahIM kI jA sakatI hai  /
ataH usake liye upamApramANa kA sahArA liyA jAtA hai| usa upamApramANa ke do
bheda haiMpalyopama' aura sAmaropama  /  samaya kI jima lambI avadhi ko palya kI
upamA dI jAtI hai, use 1 anApa vagairaha bharane ke golAkAra sthAna ko palpa
kahate haiM  /

Page #352 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fifth karma-pranya is called palyopama kala. There are three types of
palyopama: uddharaddhakhittan palya-uddhar palyopama, addha palyopama and
kshetra palyopama. Similarly, there are three types of sagaropama kala: uddhar
sagaropama, addha sagaropama and kshetra sagaropama. Each of these palyopama and
sagaropama is of two types: badar and sukshma. Their nature will be explained
further.  In verses 40 and 41, while explaining the evidence of kshudra bhava,
the ancient time calculation is briefly mentioned, mentioning the evidence of
time, avalika, sacchabas, pran, stoka, lava and muhurta. After that, one day and
night is 30 muhurta, one paksha is 15 days, one month is two paksha, one ritu is
two months, one ayan is three ritu, one year is two ayan, and certain numbers of
years are known as yuga, shatabdi, etc. The names given to them in ancient
times, according to the Anuogadwar Sutra, are as follows: 84 lakh years is one
purvaang, 84 lakh purvaang is one purva, 24 lakh purva is trutitang, 84 lakh
trutitang is one trutit, 84 lakh trutit is one addang, 84 lakh addang is one
addad. Similarly, in order, avang, avak, huh ang, huhu, utpalang, utpal,
padmang, patra, nalinaang, nalin, arthanimuraang, arthanimpur, ayutang, ayut,
prayutang, pramut, nayutang, nayut, chulikang, chulica, shirshaprahelikang,
shirshaprahe. lika, these are all multiplied by 84 lakh. By mentioning these
names,  1. Anuogadwar Sutra has made a distinction between sukshma and
vyavaharik. 2. These names are according to the Anuogadwar Sutra (verse 127,
mantra 138). According to Jyotishk Rand, their number is as follows: 84 lakh
(See next page for the rest)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmapranya palyopama kAla kahate haiM  /  palyopama ke tIna bheda
haiM- uddhAraaddhakhittaM paliya-uddhAra palyopama, addhA palyopama aura kSetra
palyopama  /  isI prakAra sAgaropama kAla ke bho tIna bheda haiM-uddhAra
sAgaropama, addhA sAgaropama aura kSetra sAgaropama  /  inameM se pratyeka
palyopama aura sapopama do-do prakAra kA hotA hai- bAdara aura dUsarA sUkSma  /
' inakA svarUpa kramazaH Age spaSTa kiyA jA rahA hai| gAthA 40, 41 meM
kSudrabhava kA pramANa batalAne ke prasaMga meM prAcIna kAlagaNanA kA saMkSepa
meM nirdeza karate hue samaya, AvalikA, saccabAsa, prANa, stoka, lava aura
muhUrta kA pramANa batalAyA hai  /  usake bAda 30 muhUrta kA eka dina-rAta,
pandraha dina kA eka pakSa, do pakSa kA eka mAsa, do mAsa kI eka Rtu, tIna Rtu
kA eka ayana, do ayana kA eka varSa prasiddha haiM aura varSoM kI amuka-amuka
saMkhyA ko lekara yuga, zatAbda Adi saMjJAyeM prasiddha haiN| unake Upara
prAcIna kAla meM jo saMjJAyeM nirdhArita kI gaI haiM, ve anuyogadvAra sUtra ke
anusAra isa prakAra hai- _84 lAkha varSa kA eka pUrvAMga, 84 lAkha pUrvAMga kA
eka pUrva, 24 lAkha pUrva kA truTitAMga, 84 lAkha truTitAMga kA eka truTita, 84
lAkha truTita kA eka aDaDAMga, 84 lAkha aDaDAMga kA eka aDaDa  /  isI prakAra
kramazaH avAMga, avaka, huha aMga, huhu, utpalAMga, utpala, padmAMga, patra,
nalinAMga, nalina, arthanimUrAMga, arthanipUra, ayutAMga, ayuta, prayutAMga,
pramuta, nayutAMga, nayuta, cUlikAMga, culikA, zIrSaprahelikAMga, zIrSaprahe.
likA, ye unarottara 84 lAkha guNe hote haiM  /  ina saMjJAoM ko batalAkara 1
anuyogadvAra sUtra meM sUkSma aura vyavahArika bheda kiye haiN| 2 ye saMjJAyeM
anuyogadvAra sUtra (gA0 127, mUtra 138) ke anusAra hI gaI haiM  /  jyotiSka
raNDa ke anusAra unakA kama isa prakAra hai 84 lAkha (zeSa agane pRSTha para
dekheM)

Page #353 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Past** 316 Further it is written - 'Eyaavaya cheva ganie eyaavaya cheva
ganiassa visaaye, etto'avaram ovamie pattai.'' That is, the amount of 194 digits
that is produced by multiplying the Shooshaprahelika, is the extent of the
mathematics, that much amount is the subject of mathematics. Beyond that, the
tendency of the Upamā Pramaana occurs.  To explain the Upamā Pramaana, the
example of the Balaga has been taken as the basis. The first name is
Uddharapalya, whose form is this: A Latag of the East, a Latā of 84 lakh Lasang,
a Mahalatang of 84 lakh Lasā, a Mahasatā of 84 lakh Mahalatang, in the same way,
further Malinaang, Nalin, Mahanalinaang, Mahanalin, Papang, Pap, Mahapaang,
Mahapam, Kamalaang, Kamal, Mahakamalaang, Mahakamal, Kumudaang, Kumud,
Mahakumudaang, Mahakumuva, Trutitaang, Tit, Mahatr Titog, Mahatru Rit,
Addadaang, Ad, Mahaaddadaang, Mahasarad, Ahaang, Kah, Mahamahaag, Mahauh,
Porshaprahelikaang and Shirshaprahelika. (Gatha 14-71)  The reason for the
difference in the names mentioned in the Anuyogadwarsutra and Jyotishkaranda has
been explained in the Kalalokaprakash as follows - 'Anuyogadwar,
Jambudvipapraapti etc. are followed by the Mathura recitation and Jyotishkaranda
etc. are followed by the Valmi recitation, hence the difference in both.  The
Digambar text Tattvarthrajavartika has given the names Purvaag, Purva,
Nayutaang, Nayut, Kumudaang, Kumud, Paang, Pan, Nalinaang, Nalin, Kamalaang,
Kamal, Tutyang Tutm, Attatang, Attat, Amamaang Amaam, Huhu Ang, Huhu, Latang,
Latā, Mahalatā etc. All these names are formed by multiplying 84 lakh by 84
lakh. In this method of multiplication, the Shwetambar and Digambar texts are of
one opinion. 1 Anuyogawar Sutra 137

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gataka 316 Age likhA hai-'eyAvayAceva gaNie eyAvayA ceva gaNiassa visae,
etto'varaM ovamie ptti|'' arthAt zoSaprahelikA taka guNA karane se 194 aMka
pramANa jo rAzi utpanna hotI hai, gaNita kI avadhi vahIM taka hai, utanI hI rAzi
gaNita kA viSaya hai| usake Age upamA pramANa kI pravRtti hotI hai| upamA
pramANa kA spaSTIkaraNa karane ke liye bAlAgoM ke uddharaNa ko AdhAra banAyA hai
| pahalA nAma hai uddhArapalya, jisakA svarUpa yaha pUrva kA eka latAga, 84
lAkha lasAMga kA eka latA, 84 lAkha lasA kA eka mahAlatAMga, 84 lAkha
mahAlatAMga kA eka mahAsatA, isI prakAra Age malinAMga, nalina, mahAnalinAMga,
mahAnalina, papAMga,papa, mahApAMga, mahApama, kamalAMga, kamala, mahAkamalAMga,
mahAkamala, kumudAMga, kumuda, mahAkumudAMga, mahAkumuva, truTitAMga, Tita,
mahAtra Titoga, mahAtru rita, aDaDAMga, aDa, mahAaDaDAMga, mahAsaraDa, ahAMga,
kaha, mahAmahAga, mahAUha, porSaprahelikAMga aura zIrSaprahelikA  /  (gAthA
14-71) anuyogabArasUtra aura jyotiSkaraNDa meM Agata nAmoM kI bhinnatA kA kAraNa
kAlalokaprakAza meM isa prakAra spaSTa kiyA hai-'anuyogadvAra, jambUdvIpaprApti
Adi mAthura vAcanA ke anugata hai aura jyotiSkaraMja Adi valmI vAcanA ke
anugata, isI se donoM meM aMtara hai| digambara grantha tattvArtharAjavArtika
meM pUrvAga, pUrva, nayutAMga, nayuta, kumudAMga, kumuda, pAMga, pana,
nalinAMga, nalina, kamalAMga, kamala, tuTyAMga tuTma, aTaTAMga, aTaTa, amamAMga
amama, hUhU aMga, hUhU, latAMga, latA, mahAlatA Adi sajJA dI hai| ye saba saMjJA
84 lAkha ko 84 lAkha se guNA karane para banatI haiN| isa guNana vidhi meM
zvetAmbara aura digambara grantha eka mata haiN| 1 anuyogavAra sUtra 137

Page #354 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Karma Granth  317  It is said that through the "Utsedha Angul" gate, one
should construct a circular "Palyagardha" (fortress) made of "Vishnan" (a type
of stone), one "Yojan" (unit of distance) wide and one "Yojan" deep, with a
circumference slightly less than 31 "Yojan". This "Paly" should be filled
tightly with hairs that have grown in a single day to seven days, so that
neither fire can burn them, nor wind can blow them away, nor water can enter it.
From this "Paly", one hair should be removed at a time. The time it takes for
this "Paly" to become empty is called "Badar Uddhar Paly".   Ten "Kotakoti" (ten
billion) "Badar Uddhar Palyopam" (a unit of time) make one "Badar Uddhar
Sagaropama" (another unit of time).  The purpose of these "Badar Uddhar
Palyopam" and "Badar Uddhar Sagaropama" is to make the understanding of the
subtle "Uddhar Palyopam" and "Uddhar Sagaropama" easier.  "Asmimmirupite
sukshmam subodham ayudharapi. Aso nirupitam nanyarikachidasy prayojanam." -
Dravyalokaprakash 1.86  There are three types of "Angul" (unit of measurement):
"Asmangul", "Utsedha Angul", and "Pramana Angul". Their explanation is given
further.   The "Anuyogadwar Sutra" and other texts related to filling the "Paly"
with hairs are discussed in the appendix.   The "Dravyalokaprakash" (a Jain
text) explains in detail in verse 1582 about filling the "Paly" tightly:  "Tatha
cha chakrisanyena tamakramya prasapta. Na manak kriyate nicharevam
nibhidatagam."  These hairs are so tightly packed that even if the army of a
Chakravarti (universal monarch) marches over them, they will not move even
slightly downwards.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kA karmagrantha 317 hai ki-utsedhAMgula' ke dvAra, viSNana eka golA mANa nayA,
eka yojana pramANa caur3A aura eka yojana pramANa gaharA eka gola palyagar3hA
banAnA cAhie, jisakI paridhi kucha kama 31 yojana hotI hai  /  eka dina se
lekara sAta dina taka ke uge hue bAlAyoM se usa palya ko itanA ThasAThasa bhara
denA cAhiye ki na Aga unheM jalA sake, na vAyu ur3A sake aura na jala kA hI
usameM praveza ho sake  /  isa palya se prati samaya eka-eka bAlAna nikAlA jAye
/  isa taraha karate-karate jitane samaya meM vaha palyakhAlI ho jAye, usa kAla
ko bAdara uddhArapalya' kahate haiN| dasa koTAkoTI bAdara uddhArapalyopama kA
eka bAdara uddhArasAgaropama hotA hai  /  ina bAdara uddhArapalyopama aura
bAdara uddhArasAgaropama kA itanA hI prayojana hai ki inake dvArA sUkSma
uddhArapalyopama aura sUkSma uddhArasAgaropama saralatA se samajha meM A jAye
asmimmirUpite sUkSmaM subodhamayudharapi  /  aso nirUpitaM nAnyarikaJcidasya
prayojanam  /  / - dravyalokaprakAza 1 / 86 aMgula ke tIna bheda haiM--
AsmAMgula, utsedhAMgula aura pramANAMguNa  /  inakI vyAkhyA Age kI gaI hai| 2
palma ko bAlAroM se bharane saMbandhI anuyogadvAra sUtra Adi kA vivecana
pariziSTa meM diyA gayA hai| 3 palya ko ThasAThasa bharane ke saMbandha meM
dravyalokaprakAza saga 1582 meM spaSTa kiyA hai tathA ca cakrisanyena tamAkramya
prsptaa| na manAka kriyate nIcarevaM nibir3atAgatAm  //  ve kezAna itane bane
bhare hue hoM ki yadi cakravartI kI senA una para se nikala jAye to ve jarA bhI
nIce na ho ske|

Page #355 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 310 ## Century  Now we will explain the nature of the subtle liberation-atom-
simile and the liberation-ocean-simile. To divide each hair-tip of the
liberation-atom into countless, countless pieces by one's own intellect. These
pieces are so subtle compared to a hair that they are countless times smaller
than the smallest particle of matter that a very pure-minded man can see with
his eyes. And compared to the area that the body of a subtle-perceiving living
being occupies, they are countless times smaller than the area that a subtle-
perceiving living being occupies. These hair-tips should be packed tightly into
the liberation-atom as before. As before, if one removes one piece of the hair-
tip at a time, it will take countless crores of years for the liberation-atom to
be emptied. Therefore, that period of time is called the subtle liberation-atom-
simile. Ten subtle liberation-atom-similes make one subtle liberation-ocean-
simile.  The islands and oceans are counted by these subtle liberation-atom-
similes and subtle liberation-ocean-similes. There are as many islands and
oceans as there are periods of time in two and a half subtle liberation-ocean-
similes, or twenty-five koṭakoṭi subtle liberation-atom-similes.  What is the
purpose of these subtle liberation-atom-similes and liberation-ocean-similes?
The liberation of islands and oceans takes place in these subtle liberation-
atom-similes and liberation-ocean-similes. How many, sir? The islands and
oceans... ... "As many as there are periods of time in two and a half
liberation-ocean-similes."  -Anuyogadār Sūtra 138  1. In the commentary of the
*Viśeṣāvaśyaka Bhāṣya* by Koṭyācārya (p. 210), the meaning of *parfa* is given
as "a particular plant". In the commentary of the *Pravachanasārōddhār*, it is
stated that its subtle perception is equal to the body of the earth-body of the
*bādar* *paryāptak*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 310 zataka aba sUkSma uddhAra palyopama va sAgaropama kA svarUpa samajhAte
haiN| bAdara uddhAraMpalya ke eka-eka kezAgra ke apanI buddhi ke dvArA
asaMkhyAta-asaMkhyAta Tukar3e karanA  /  ruya kI apekSA ye Tukar3e itane sUkSma
hote haiM ki atyanta vizuddha Akhne bAlA puruSa apanI AMkha se jitane sUkSma
pudgala dravya ko dekha sakatA hai, usake bhI asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga hote haiM
tathA kSetra kI apekSA sUkSma panaka' jIva kA zarIra jitane kSetra ko rokatA
hai, usase asaMkhyAta guNI avagAhanA vAle hote haiM, ina kezAgnoM ko bhI pahale
kI taraha palya meM ThasAThasa bhara denA cAhiye  /  pahale kI taraha hI prati
samaya kezAgra ke eka-eka khaNDa ko nikAlane para saMkhyAta karor3a varSa meM
vaha palya khAlI hotA hai  /  ataH usa kAla ko sUkSma uddhArapalyApama kahate
haiM  /  dasa kATAkATI sUkSma uddhArapalyopama kA eka sUkSma uddhArasAgaropama
hotA hai| ina sUkSma uddhArapatyopama aura sUkSma udghArasAgaropama se dvIpa
aura samudroM kI gaNanA kI jAtI hai| aDhAI sUkSma uddhArasAgaropama ke athavA
paccIsa koTAkoTi sUkSma uddhArapalyopama ke jitane samaya hote haiM, utane hI
dvIpa aura samudra haiM eehi suhamauddhArapaliovamasAgarovamehi ki paoaNaM ?
eehi suhumauddhArapaliobamasAgarovamehi dIvasamuddANaM uddhAro gheppii| kevaiyA
NaM bhaMte ! dIvasamuddA..... ....."" " jAvaiANaM aDDhAijANaM
uddhArasAgarovamANaM uddhArasamayA evaiyA NaM dIvasamuddA  /  -anuyogadAra sUba
138 1 vizeSAvazyaka bhASya kI koTyAcArya praNIta TIkA (pR. 210) meM parapha kA
artha 'banaspati vizeSa' kiyA hai  /  pravacanasAroddhAra kI TIkA (pR. 3.3) meM
usakI avagAhanA bAdara paryAptaka pRthvIkAya ke zarIra ke barAbara batalAI hai|

Page #356 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  ### 316  **Badar Adhapalyopama:**  The time taken for
a Badar Udgharpalya to become empty by removing one hair every hundred years is
called Badar Adhapalyopama Kala. Ten Koti Koti Badar Adhapalyopama Kala makes
one Badar Kala.  **Sookshma Udgharpalya:** The time taken for a Sookshma
Udgharpalya to become empty by removing one hair tip every hundred years is
called Sookshma Adhapalyopama Kala. Ten Koti Koti Sookshma Adhapalyopama Kala
makes one Sookshma Adhasagaropama Kala. Ten Koti Koti Sookshma Adhasagaropama
Kala makes one Avasarpini and one Utsarpini. Through these Sookshma
Adhapalyopama and Sookshma Adhasagaropama, the lifespan, karma, and other
details of Devas, humans, animals, Narakas, and Naras are known.  **What is the
significance of these Adhapalyopama and Adhasagaropama?** These Adhapalyopama
and Adhasagaropama are used to calculate the lifespan of humans, Devas, and
animals, as well as the duration of the Avasarpini and Utsarpini periods.
**Badar Kshetrapalyopama:** Fill a pit one Yojana long, wide, and deep with the
tips of hair that have grown for one to seven days. The time taken to remove all
the hair tips from the pit, one by one, is called Badar Kshetrapalyopama Kala.
This time is equal to countless Utsarpini and Avasarpini Kalas. Ten Koti Koti
Badar Kshetrapalyopama Kala makes one Badar Kshetrasagaropama Kala.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 "paMcama karmagrantha 316 addhApalyopama - pUrvokta bAdara udghArapalya se sau-
sau varSa ke bAda eka-eka kezAya nikAlane para jitane samaya meM vaha khAlI hotA
hai, utane samaya ko bAdara addhApalyopama kAla kahate haiN| dasa koTAkoTI
bAdara addhApalyopama kAla kI eka bAda kAla hotA hai  /  * sUkSma udghArapalya
meM se sau-sau varSa ke bAda kezAgra kA eka-eka khaNDa nikAlane para jitane
samaya meM vaha patya khAlI hotA hai, utane samaya ko sUkSma addhApalyopama kAla
kahate haiM  /  dasa koTAkoTi sUkSma addhApalyopama kA eka sUkSma
addhAsAgaropama kAla hotA hai| dasa koTAkoTI sUkSma addhAsAgaropama kI eka
avasarpiNI aura utane kI hI eka utsarpiNI hotI hai  /  ina sUkSma aApalyopama
aura sUkSma addhAsAgaropama ke dvArA deva, manuSya tiryaca, nAraka, nAroM gati
ke jIvoM kI Ayu karmoM kI sthiti Adi jAnI jAtI hai  /  0 eehi suhumehi aApa
sAgarovamehi kiM paoaNaM ? eehi suhamehi addhApa0 sAgaro0] neraiatirikkha
joNiamaNussadevANaM AuaM mavi - - anuyogadvAra sUtra 136 jjai  /  popa- pahale
kI taraha eka yojana laMbe-caur3e aura gahare gaDDe meM eka dina se lekara sAta
dina taka uge hue bAloM ke agrabhAga ko pUrva kI taraha ThasAThasa bhara do| ve
agrabhAga AkAza ke jina pradezoM ko sparza kareM unameM se prati samaya eka-eka
pradeza kA apaharaNa karatekarate jitane samaya meM samasta pradezoM kA
apaharaNa kiyA jA sake utane samaya ko bAdara kSetrapalyopama kAla kahate haiM
/  yaha kAla asaMkhyAta utsarpiNI aura asaMkhyAta avasarpiNI kAla ke barAbara
hotA hai| dasa koTAkoTI bAdara kSetrapalyopama kA eka bAdara kSetrasAgaropama
kAla hotA hai  /

Page #357 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Fill each of the countless fragments of the Badar Kshetrapaly's Balanas into the
same pulp as before. In that pulp, those fragments occupy regions of the sky,
and the Jina, the omniscient, takes away one region at a time, from birth. The
time it takes to take away all the regions, both manifest and unmanifest, is
called a **Sookshma Kshetrapalyopam Kala**. Ten Koti Koti **Sookshma
Kshetrapalyopam** make up one **Sookshma Kshetrasagropam**. Through these
**Sookshma Kshetrapalyopam** and **Sookshma Kshetrasagropam**, the concept of
the measure of substances in **Drishtivad** is considered, as well as the
measure of the six Kayas: Earth, Water, Fire, Air, Plants, and Trisas, in
**Drishtivad**.  What is the purpose of these **Kshetrapalyasagropam**? In
**Drishtivad**, substances do not exist in these **Kshetrapalyasagropam**.  ...
In the **Anuyogadwar Sutra 14**, the inquisitive asks about the nature of
**Sookshma Kshetrapalyopam Kala**. If all the manifest and unmanifest regions of
the sky are taken away by the Balanas, then what is the purpose of the Balanas?
Because in that case, the purpose is fulfilled by taking away all the regions
within the aforementioned pulp. The solution is that the **Kshetrapalyopam** is
used to consider the measure of substances in **Drishtivad**. The measure of
some substances is measured by the manifest regions of the sky through the
aforementioned Balanas, and the measure of some substances is measured by the
unmanifest regions of the sky. Therefore, the instruction of the Balanas is
purposeful, not purposeless, because they are useful in the measure of
substances described in **Drishtivad**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bAdara kSetrapalya ke bAlAnoM meM se pratyeka ke asaMkhyAta khaMDa karake unheM
isI palpa meM pahale kI taraha bhro| usa palya meM ve khaMDa AkAza ke jina
pradezoM kareM aura ji pro morza gavAre, janmeM se prati samaya eka-eka pradeza
kA apaharaNa karate-karate jitane samaya meM spRSTa aura aspRSTa sabhI pradezoM
kA apaharaNa kiyA jA sake, utane samaya ko eka sUkSma kSennapalmopama kAla
kahate haiM  /  dasa koTAkoTI sUkSma kSetrapalyopama kA eka sUkSma
kSetrasAgaropama hotA hai  /  ina sUkSma kSetrapalyopama aura sUkSma
kSetrasAgaropama ke dvArA dRSTivAda meM dravyoM ke pramANa kA vicAra tathA
dRSTivAda meM pRthvI, apa, teja, vAyu, pratyeka vanaspati aura trasa ina chaha
kAya ke jovoM ke pramANa kA vicAra kiyA jAtA hai eehiM suhumehi khetapa
sAgaroSamehi kiM paoaNaM ? eehi sahamapali0 mAga0 diTThivAe davvA mavijjati  /
... anuyogadvAra mUtra 14. sUkSma kSetrapalyopama kAla ke svarUpa ko byAkhyA ke
prasaMga meM jijJAsu kA prazna hai ki yadi bAlAnoM se AkAza ke spRSTa aura
aspRSTa sabhI pradeza grahaNa kiye jAte haiM to phira bAlAnoM kA koI prayojana
nahIM rahatA hai, kyoMki usa dazA meM pUrvokta palya ke andara jitane pradeza
hoM unake apaharaNa karane se hI prayojana siddha ho jAtA hai| isakA samAdhAna
yaha hai ki kSetrapalyopama ke dvArA dRSTibAda meM dravyoM ke pramANa kA vicAra
kiyA jAtA hai| unameM se kucha dravyoM kA pramANa to ukta bAlAnoM se spRSTa
AkAza ke pradezoM dvArA mApA jAtA hai aura kucha kA pramANa AkAza ke aspRSTa
pradezoM se mApA jAtA hai  /  ataH dRSTivAda meM varNita dravyoM ke mAna meM
upayogI hone ke kAraNa bAlApoM kA nirdeza karanA saprayojana hI hai,
niSprayojana nahIM hai

Page #358 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Bond of Karma  "The use of the substance mentioned in the
*Dristivada* is for the purpose of forming a shape like the tip of a finger, as
it is useful here." - *Anuyogadvara Tika*, page 163, Explanation of the
divisions of the Angula.  In the context of explaining the nature of the
*Uddharapalya* simile, the *Utsegha Angula* was used to indicate the creation of
a pit-like *palya* that is one *yojana* long, wide, and deep. In the
investigation of this, the *Atma Angula*, *Utsegha Angula*, and *Pramana Angula*
- these three divisions of the *Angula* have been explained. Here, their nature
is explained.  *Atma Angula* - ...one's own *Angura* is formed, or the height of
one's own body is 108 *Angula* in measure. That *Angula* is called the *Atma
Angula*. The measure of this *Angula* is not always the same, because the height
of human bodies increases and decreases due to differences in time.  *Utsegha
Angula* - The *Paramanu* is of two types - one is the *Nischya Paramanu* and the
other is the *Vyavahara Paramanu*. An infinite number of *Nischya Paramanu* make
up one *Vyavahara Paramanu*. Although that *Vyavahara Paramanu* is actually a
*Skandha*, it is called a *Paramanu* from a practical point of view, because it
is so subtle that even the sharpest weapon cannot pierce or break it. Still, it
has been considered the root cause for measurement. It is like this - an
infinite number of *Vyavahara Paramanu* make up one *Unashlakshna-Shlakshnika*,
and eight *Unashlakshna-Shlakshnika* make up one *Shlakshna-Shlakshnika*. Eight
*Shlakshna-Shlakshnika* make up one...  *Jivasamaas* - In urine, an infinite
number of *Janashala-Palakshnika* make up one *Shlakshna-Shlakshnika*.  It has
been established that one *Shlakshna-Shlakshnika* is made up of an infinite
number of *Janashala-Palakshnika*, but in the *Agamas*, it has been stated as
eightfold in many places. Therefore, here too, it has been accepted according to
the *Agamas*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrampa 'dRSTivAdoktadravyamAnopayogitvAd
bAlAgraprarUpaNA'traprayojanavatIti  / ' anuyoganAra TIkA pR0 163 aMgula ke
bhedoM kI vyAkhyA uddhArapalyopama kA svarUpa batalAne ke prasaMga meM
utseghAMgula ke dvArA niSpanna eka yojana lambe, caur3e, gahare gaDDhe-palya ko
banAne kA saMketa kiyA thA aura usI ke anusandhAna meM AtmAMgula, ulsedhAMgula
aura pramANAMgula yaha tIna aMgula ke bheda batalAye haiN| yahA~ unakA svarUpa
samajhAte haiN| AsgAMgula- ...pane aMgurA bane yA apane zarIra kI UMcAI 108
aMgula pramANa hotI hai| vaha aMgula usakA AtmAMgula kahalAtA hai| isa aMgula kA
pramANa sarvadA ekasA nahIM rahatA hai, kyoMki kAla bheda se manuSyoM ke zarIra
kI U~cAI ghaTatI-bar3hatI rahatI hai  /  utsedhAgula-paramANu do prakAra kA hotA
hai-eka nizcaya paramANu aura dUsarA vyavahAra paramANu  /  ananta nizcaya
paramANuoM kA eka dhyabahAra paramANu hotA hai| yadyapi vaha vyavahAra paramANu
vAstava meM skandha hai kintu vyAvahArika dRSTi se use paramANu kaha diyA jAtA
hai, kyoMki vaha itanA mUkSma hotA hai ki tIkSNa-se-tIkSNa zastra ke dvArA bhI
isakA chedana-bhedana nahIM ho sakatA hai, phira bhI mApa ke lie isako mUla
kAraNa mAnA gayA hai  /  jo isa prakAra hai - ananta vyavahAra paramANuoM kI eka
unzlakSNa-zlakSiNakA aura ATha utazlakSaNa-zlakSiNakA kI eka zlakSNa-zlakSNikA
hotI hai|' ATha zlakSNa-laviNakA kA eka 1 jIvasamAsa mUtra meM ananta
janazalAna-palakSiNakA ko eka zlakSNa-zlakSiNakA bana lAI hai, lekina AgamoM meM
aneka sthAnoM para aThagunI hI batalAI hai| ata: yahAM bhI Agama ke anRmAra
kapana kiyA hai|

Page #359 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
522 Century Eight *Urdhvareṇu* make one *Nasareṇu*, eight *Nasareṇu* make one
*Trasareṇu*, eight *Trasareṇu* make one *Rathreṇu*, eight *Rathreṇu* make one
*Keshagra* of a human in the *Devakuru* and *Uttarakuru* regions, eight
*Keshagra* make one *Harivarsha* and one *Keshagra* of a human in the *Ramyak*
region, eight *Keshagra* make one *Keshagra* of a human in *Purva-Apara Videha*,
eight *Keshagra* make one *Keshagra* of a human in *Bharat* and *Airavat*
regions, eight *Keshagra* make one *Likh* and one *Chuka* (J) of a *Hati*, eight
*Yuka* make one *Yava* (middle part), and eight *Yavamdhya* make one
*Utsedhangul*. Six *Utsedhangul* make one *Pada*, two *Pada* make one *Vitasti*,
two *Vitasti* make one *Hasta*, four *Hasta* make one *Dhanush*, two thousand
*Dhanush* make one *Gavyut*, and four *Gavyut* make one *Yojana*. *Pramanangul*
is two and a half times wider than *Utsedhangul* and four hundred times longer.
The *Atmangul* of Bharat Chakravarti at the beginning of the *Yuga* should be
known as *Pramanangul*. In Digambar literature, the measure of *Angul* is
described as follows: Infinitely small *Paramanu* make one *Utsanjnasanjna*,
eight *Utsanjnasanjna* make one *Sanjnasanjna*, eight *Sanjnasanjna* make one
*Luṭireṇu*, eight *Luṭireṇu* make one *Trasareṇu*, eight *Trasareṇu* make one
*Rathreṇu*, eight *Rathreṇu* make one *Balagra* of a human in *Uttarakuru* and
*Devakuru*, eight *Balagra* make one *Balagra* of a human in *Ramyak* and
*Harivarsha*, eight *Balagra* make one *Balagra* of a human in *Haimavat* and
*Hairanyavat*, eight *Balagra* make one *Balagra* of a human in *Bharat*,
*Airavat* and *Videha*, and then *Likh*, *Yuka*, etc. 1 *Anuyogadwar Sutra* pp.
156-172, *Pravachnasaroḍwar* pp. 405-8, *Dravyavyakhyaprakash* pp. 12.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 522 zataka UrdhvareNu, ATha UrdhvareNu kA eka nasareNu, ATha trasareNu kA eka
rathareNu, ATha rathareNu kA devakuru aura uttarakuru kSetra ke manuSya kA eka
kezAgra, una ATha kezAgroM kA eka harivarSa aura ramyaka kSetra ke manuSya kA
kezAna, una ATha kezAmroM kA eka pUrvApara videha ke manuSya kA kezAgra, una
ATha kezAgroM kA eka bharata aura airAvata kSetra ke manuSyoM kA kezAya una ATha
kenAyoM kI eka lIkha haTI kI eka cUkA (ja), ATha yUkA kA eka yava kA madhya
bhAga aura ATha yavamadhya kA eka utsedhAMgula hotA hai| chaha utsedhAMgula kA
eka pAda, do pAda kI eka vitasti, do vitasti kA eka hAtha, cAra hAtha kA eka
dhanuSa, do hajAra dhanuSa kA eka gavyuta aura cAra gavyUta kA eka yojana hotA
hai  /  pramANAMgula utsedhAMgula se ar3hAI guNA vistAra vAlA aura cAra sau guNA
lambA pramANAMgula hotA hai  /  yuga ke Adi meM bharata cakravartI kA jo
AtmAMgula thA usako pramANAMgula jAnanA cAhiye  / " digambara sAhitya meM
aMguloM kA pramANa isa prakAra batalAyA haianantAnaMta sUkSma paramANuoM kI
utsaMjJAsaMjJA, ATha utsaMjJAsaMjJA kI eka saMjJAsaMjJA, ATha saMjJAsaMjJA kA
eka luTireNu, ATha truTireNu kA eka trasareNu, ATha vasareNu kA eka rathareNu,
ATha rathareNu kA uttarakuru devakuru ke manuSya kA eka bAlAgra, una maTha
bAlAboM kA ramyaka aura harivarSa ke manuSya kA eka bAlAgra, una ATha bAlAnoM kA
haimavata aura hairaNyavata ke manuSya kA eka vAlAgra una ATha bAlAnoM kA
bharata, airAvata va videha ke manuSyoM kA eka bAlAgra tathA lIkha, yUkA Adi 1
anuyogadvAra sUtra pR0 156- 172, pravacanasArodvAra pR0 405-8, dravyalokaprakAza
pR0 1 2  /

Page #360 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Pancha Karma Grantha ### 325  The measure should be understood as before.
The measure of an angula is five hundred times the measure of an utsedha angula.
This is the atma angula of Bharat Chakravarti.  In this way, one should know the
differences and nature of the palya upamas. Earlier, the excellent difference
between the gunasthana like sasadan etc. was told to be slightly less than half
a pudgala paravarta. Therefore, now in the next three verses, we will clarify
the nature of pudgala paravarta.  **Verse 6:** > When a child is born, it is
like a small seed. It is like a small drop of ghee. The pudgala paravarta is
like the size of an ant.  **Verse 87:** > A single jiva, by its seven types of
karmas, leaves behind all the atoms it touches. The amount of pudgala paravarta
left behind is like a small amount of dust.  **Verse 88:** > The pudgala
paravarta left behind by a jiva is like a small part of a drop of ghee. It is
like a small amount of dust that is left behind when a pot is broken.  **Word
Meanings:**  * **Dabbe:** related to dravya * **Khite:** related to kshetra *
**Kale:** related to kala * **Bhaave:** related to bhava * **Vajah:** two types
* **Bayro:** badar * **Suomo:** subtle * **Hoi:** is *
**Anantussappiniparimaano:** the measure of the infinite utsarpini and
avasarpini * **Puggalparatttho:** pudgala paravarta * **Urlaaisattgeṇam:** by
the seven types of karmas like odarik * **Egajij:** one jiva * **Muyai:** leaves
behind * **Phusiy:** touching * **Sammannu:** all atoms * **Jatiyakali:** in the
time * **Sa:** that much * **Yulo:** gross, badar * **Badhye:** dravya pudgala
paravarta * **Suomo:** subtle dravya pudgala paravarta * **Samannara:** by one
of the seven types of karmas  **Footnotes:**  1. Tattvarth Rajayatik, page
147-148 2. For the description of the patyas done in Digambar literature, see
the appendix.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcakarmagrantha 325 kA pramANa pUrvavat samajhanA cAhiye  /  utsedhAMgula se
pAMca sau guNA pramANAMgula hotA hai  /  yahI bharata cakravartI kA AtmAMgula
hai  /  ' isa prakAra se palyopama ke bheda aura unakA svarUpa jAnanA caahiye|
pUrva meM sAsAdana Adi guNasthAnoM kA utkRSTa antara kucha kama ardhapudgala
parAvarta batalAyA gayA hai  /  ataH aba Age tIna gAthAoM meM pudgala parAvarta
kA svarUpa spaSTa karate haiM  /  bacce khile kAle bhAve cajaha vaha bAyaro
suhuSo  /  hoi aNaMzurasappiNiparimAno puggalavaraTTho || 6 || uralAi sattageNaM
emajiu muyai phuMsiya samdhayan  /  jattiyakAli sa dhUlo dabe sumo sagamnayarA
// 87 //  loga esosappiNisamayA aNubhAgabaMSaThANA ya  /  jaha taha
kamamaraNeNaM puTThA khittAi yUliyarA  // 88 //  1 zabdArtha - dabbe
dravyaviSayaka khite - kSetra viSayaka, kAle -kAla viSayaka, bhAve-bhAva
viSayaka, vajaha bAra prakAra kA ha - do prakAra kA bAyaro - bAdara, sumo -
sUkSma, hoi-- hotA hai, anaMtussappiNiparimANo anabhta utsarpiNI avasarpiNI
pramANa, puggalaparaTTho - pudgala parAvarta  /  uralAisattageNaM -- odArika Adi
sAta vargaNA rUpa se, egajija - eka jIva, muyai - chor3a de, phusiya--sparza
karake, pariNa mita karake, samba aNU- sabhI paramANuoM ko, jatiyakAli - jitane
samaya meM, sa - utanA phAla, yUlo-sthUla, bAdara, badhye dravyapudgala
parAvarta, sumo - sUkSma dravyapudgala parAvarta samannayarA - sAta meM se kisI
eka eka vargaNA ke dvArA  /  7 1 tattvArthaM rAjayAtika pR0 147-148 2 digambara
sAhitya meM kiye gaye patyoM ke varNana ke liye pariziSTa dekhiye  /

Page #361 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
324 And where - by whatever death, the gross (badar) and subtle pudgala
paravarta, of the realm of the lokapasa-loka, in the time of the utsarpini-
avsarpinis, the places of the anubhag bandha - the anubhag bandha, in a manner
of less - in sequence, touched, shifted - the realm etc., subtle pudgala
paravarta. -D Gatha-artha - There are two types of pudgala paravarta, gross and
subtle, due to the difference in dravya, kshetra, kala and bhava. This pudgala
paravarta is equal to the infinite utsarpini and infinite avsarpinis. The time
in which a jiva, in all the lokas, takes and leaves all the atoms in the form of
seven varganas, such as the audarik body, is called the badar dravya pudgala
paravarta, and the time in which it takes and leaves all the atoms in the form
of one vargana, such as the audarik body, is called the subtle dravya pudgala
paravarta. Shataka — A jiva, by its death, touches all the realms of the
lokakasha, in the time of the utsarpini avsarpinis, and the places of the
anubhag bandha, in any manner (without order) and in sequence, then there are
badar and subtle kshetra etc. pudgala paravarta respectively. Special Note: In
Jain literature, every topic is discussed in relation to dravya, kshetra, kala
and bhava. Here, the pudgala paravarta is being stated in relation to these four
aspects. Paravarta means change, alteration, reversal, etc. Here, dravya refers
to...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 324 aura jaha taha - jisa kisI maragaMgaM-maraNa ke dvArA, puTThA yUliyarA
sthUla (bAdara) aura logapaesA-loka ke pradeza, usapiNimA utsarpiNIavasarpiNI ke
samaya, anubhAgabaMdhaThANA - anubhAga baMdha ke sthAna bhI prakAra se kama -
anukrama se, sparza kiye hue, khisAi - kSetrAdika, sUkSma pudgala parAvarta  /
-D gAthArtha - dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva ke bheda se cAra prakAra vAle
pudgala parAvarta ke bAdara aura sUkSma, ye do-do bheda hote haiM  /  yaha
pudgala parAvarta ananta utsarpiNI aura ananta avasarpiNI kAla ke barAbara hotA
hai  /  jitane kAla meM eka jIva samasta loka meM rahane vAle samasta paramANuoM
ko audArika zarIra Adi sAta vargaNA rUpa se grahaNa karake chor3a detA hai,
utane kAla ko bAdara dravyapudgala parAvarta kahate haiM aura jitane kAla meM
samasta paramANuoM ko audArika zarIra Adi sAta varmaNAoM meM se kisI eka vargaNA
rUpa se grahaNa karake chor3a detA hai, utane kAla ko sUkSma dravyapudgala
parAvarta kahate haiM  /  zataka -- eka jIva apane maraNa ke dvArA lokAkAza ke
samasta pradezoM, utsarpiNI avasarpiNI kAla ke samaya tathA anubhAga baMdha ke
sthAnoM ko jisa kisI bhI prakAra ( binA krama ke ) se aura anukrama se sparza
kara letA hai taba kramazaH bAdara aura sUkSma kSetrAdi pudgala parAvarta hote
haiM  /  vizeSArtha jaina sAhitya meM pratyeka viSaya kI carcA dravya, kSetra,
kAla aura bhAva kI apekSA se kI jAtI hai  /  inhIM cAra apekSAoM ko lekara yahAM
pudgala parAvarta kA kathana kiyA jA rahA hai  /  parAvarta kA artha hai
parivartana, pherabadala, ulaTaphera ityAdi  /  dravya se yahAM

Page #362 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 325  The **pudgala** substance has been taken.
Because, firstly, the word **pudgala** is attached to every change, and its four
divisions, **dravya-pudgala**, **paravarta**, etc., have been explained.
Secondly, the **pudgala** substance is the cause of the soul's wandering in the
world. The soul cannot exist without it in the worldly state. Therefore, the
smallest atom-particle of **pudgala** is considered here as the **dravya**
element. The space in which that atom fits is called **kṣetra**, and that
**kṣetra** is a part of the **loka-ākāśa**, because the soul resides in the
**loka-ākāśa**. The time it takes for one atom of **pudgala** to travel from one
**kṣetra** to another adjacent **kṣetra** is called **kāla**. This is the
smallest part of time. Here, **bhāva** refers to the **kṣaya**-shaped **bhāva**
that is the cause of **anubhāga-bandha**. These changes in **dravya**,
**kṣetra**, **kāla**, and **bhāva** are considered as four changes.  Although,
except for **dravya-pudgala-paravarta**, there is no change in **pudgala** in
any other **paravarta**, because in **kṣetra-pudgala-paravarta** there is a
change in **kṣetra**, in **kāla-pudgala-paravarta** there is a change in
**kāla**, and in **bhāva-pudgala-paravarta** there is a change in **bhāva**, but
the time of **pudgala-paravarta** is said to be equal to the infinite
**utsarpini** and **avsarpiṇī** time, and the time of **kṣetra**, **kāla**, and
**bhāva-paravarta** is also infinite **utsarpini** and infinite **avsarpiṇī**,
therefore, these **paravartas** are named **pudgala-paravarta**.  The time taken
for the **pudgalas** (atoms) to change by way of **osarika** transformation, or
by way of the desired body form, or by way of their collective transformation,
is called **pudgala-paravarta**. This is the cause of the **śambha**'s origin,
and by this cause of origin,   (Continued on the next page)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 325 pudgala dravya kA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai  /  kyoMki eka
to pratyeka parivartana ke sAtha pudgala zabda lagA huA hai aura usake hI
dravyapudgala parAvarta Adi cAra bheda batalAye haiN| dUsare jIva ke saMsAra
bhramaNa kA kAraNa pudgala dravya hI hai, saMsAra avasthA meM jIva usake binA
raha hI nahIM sakatA hai  /  isIliye pudgala ke sabase choTe aNu-paramANu ko
yahAM dravya pada se mAnA hai| AkAza ke jitane bhAga meM vaha paramANu samAtA
hai, use pradeza kahate haiM aura vaha pradeza lokAkAza kA hI eka aMza hai,
kyoMki jIva lokAkAza meM hI rahatA hai  /  pudgala kA eka paramANu eka pradeza
se usI ke samIpavartI dUsare pradeza meM jitane samaya meM pahu~catA hai, use
samaya kahate haiM  /  yaha kAla kA sabase choTA hissA hai  /  bhAva se yahAM
anubhAga baMdha ke kAraNabhUta kaSAya rUpa bhAva liye gaye haiN| inhIM dravya,
kSetra, kAla aura bhAva ke parivartana ko lekara cAra parivartana mAne gaye
haiN| yadyapi dravyapudgala parAvarta ke sivAya anya kisI bhI parAvarta meM
pudgala kA parAvartana nahIM hotA hai, kyoMki kSetrapadagala parAvarta meM
kSetra kA, kAlapudgala parAvarta meM kAla kA aura bhAvapudgala parAvarta meM
bhAva kA parAvartana hotA hai, kintu pudgala parAvarta kA kAla ananta urpiNI
aura avasarpiNI kAla ke barAbara batalAyA hai aura kSetra, kAla aura bhAva
parAvarta kA kAla bhI ananta utsapiNI aura ananta avasarpiNI hotA hai, ataH ina
parAvoM kI pudgala parAvarta saMjJA rakhI pudgalAnAm-paramANUnAm
osArikAvirUpatayA vivakSitakazarIrarUpatayA vA sAmassyena parAvataH pariNamanaM
yAvati kAle sa tAvAn kAla: pudagalaparAvartaH  /  idaM ca zambasya
vyutpattinimita, anena ca vyutpattinimittena (zeSa agale pRSTha para de)

Page #363 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 326  When a living being, through repeated deaths, experiences all
the atoms of pudgala one by one, and through death in every region of space,
experiences all the regions of space, then it is called **Dravya Pudgala
Paravarta**. Similarly, one should understand the **Kala** and **Bhaava Pudgala
Paravarta**.  It is clear that since the living being has been wandering in this
world from time immemorial, there is not a single atom left that it has not
experienced, not a single region of space where it has not died, not a single
moment of the ascending and descending time remaining in which it has not died,
and not a single place of attachment left where it has not died. It has
experienced all those atoms, regions, times, and places of attachment many times
through its death. Keeping this in mind, the time has been divided into **Dravya
Pudgala Paravarta** etc. and the measure of time in which the **Pudgala
Paravarta** occurs is called by the name of that **Pudgala Paravarta**.
Therefore, the author has described here the four divisions of **Pudgala
Paravarta**: **Dravya**, **Kshetra**, **Kala**, and **Bhaava**.  The verse hints
at the knowledge of the time of **Pudgala Paravarta** by stating that it is
**"Ananta Utsarpini and Ananta Avasarpini Kala"**.  **"Swakartha Samavayi
Pravritti Nimitta Mananta Utsarpini Avasarpini Maanaswaroop Lakshyaate. Tena
Kshetra Pudgala Paravartiau Pudgala Paravartana Aabhave Api Pratinimitta
Sthananta Utsarpini Avasarpini Maanaswaroopasya Vidhyamanatvat Pudgala Paravarta
Sharadah Pravartmano Na Viruddha Yate."** (Pravachan Tee, Page 300)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 326 zataka jaba jIva maraNa kara-karake pudgala ke eka-eka paramANu ke dvArA
samasta paramANuoM ko bhoga letA hai to vaha dravyapudgala parAvarta aura AkAza
ke eka-eka pradeza meM maraNa karake samasta logakAza ke pradezoM ko sparza kara
cukatA hai taba vaha kSetrapudgala parAvarta kahalAtA hai  /  isI prakAra kAla
aura bhAva pudgala parAvartoM ke bAre meM jAnanA cAhiye  /  yaha to spaSTa hai
ki jaba jIva anAdi kAla se isa saMsAra meM paribhramaNa kara rahA hai taba abhI
taka eka bhI aisA paramANu nahIM bacA hai ki jisakA usane bhoga na kiyA ho,
AkAza kA eka bhI pradeza aisA nahIM bacA jahA~ vaha na marA ho aura utsarpiNI va
avasarpiNI kAla kA eka bhI samaya zeSa nahIM rahA jisameM vaha marA na ho aura
aisA eka bhI kaSAyasthAna bAkI nahIM rahA, jisameM vaha na marA ho  /  usane una
sabhI paramANu, pradeza, samaya aura kaSAyasthAnoM kA aneka bAra apane maraNa ke
dvArA bhoga kara liyA hai  /  isI ko dRSTi meM rakhakara dravyapudgala parAvarta
Adi nAmoM se kAla kA vibhAga kara diyA hai aura jo pudagala parAvarta jitane
kAla meM hotA hai, utane kAla ke pramANa ko usa pudgala parAvata ke nAma se kahA
jAtA hai| isIlie granthakAra ne pudgala parAvarta ke dravya, kSetra, kAla aura
bhAva, ina cAra bhedoM kA yahAM varNana kiyA hai| pudgala parAvarta ke kAla kA
jJAna karAne ke liye gAthA meM saMketa kiyA hai ki vaha ananta utsarpiNI aura
ananta avasarpiNI kAla ke
svakArthasamavAyipravRttinimittamanantotsapiNyavasapiNImAnasvarUpa lakSyate  /
tena kSetrapudgalaparAvadiau pudgalaparAvartanAbhAve'pi
pratinimittasthAnantotsapiNyavapiNImAnasvarUpasya vidyamAnatvAt
pudgalaparAvartazaradaH pravartamAno na viruddha yate  /  pravacana TI pR0 300
u0

Page #364 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 327  It is equal. That is, there is a **pudgala
paravarta** for both infinite **utsarpini** and infinite **avsarpiṇī** time.
There are four types of **pudgala paravarta**: **dravya pudgala paravarta**,
**kṣetra pudgala paravarta**, **kāla pudgala paravarta**, and **bhāva pudgala
paravarta**. Each of these four types has two sub-types: **bādar** and
**sūkṣma**. That is, the **pudgala paravarta** is infinite **utsarpini** and
infinite **avsarpiṇī** in duration, and **dravya**, **kṣetra**, **kāla**, and
**bhāva** are the four fundamental types. These fundamental types are also of
two types each, **bādar** and **sūkṣma**. Their characteristics are explained
below.  First, we will explain the nature of **bādar** and **sūkṣma dravya
pudgala paravarta**.  **Dravya Pudgala Paravarta** - It has been explained
earlier that the **lok** is filled with various types of **pudgala**
classifications, and out of these classifications, eight types are
**grahaṇayogya** (capable of being grasped) by the **jīva**. The **jīva** grasps
these classifications and uses them to create its body, mind, speech, etc. These
classifications are:  1. **Audārika grahaṇayogya** classification 2. **Vaikriya
grahaṇayogya** classification 3. **Āhārak grahaṇayogya** classification 4.
**Tejas grahaṇayogya** classification 5. **Bhāṣā grahaṇayogya** classification
6. **Śvāsochchvāsa grahaṇayogya** classification 7. **Mano grahaṇayogya**
classification 8. **Kārmaṇa grahaṇayogya** classification  In the time it takes
for a **jīva** to experience all the **paramāṇus** of the **audārika**,
**vaikriya**, **tejas**, **bhāṣā**, **ānāprāṇa**, **mano**, and **kārmaṇa**
classifications, except for the **āhārak grahaṇayogya** classification, and to
transform them into its body, mind, speech, etc., and then abandon them...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 327 barAbara hotA hai  /  arthAt ananta utsarpiNI aura
ananta avasarpiNI kAla kA eka pudgala parAvarta hotA hai  /  pudgala parAvarta
ke hai' ne bhAne taraha yAnI dravyapudgala parAvarta, kSetrapudgala parAvarta,
kAlapudgala parAvarta aura bhAvapudgala parAvarta  /  ina cAroM bhedoM meM se
pratyeka ke bAdara aura sUkSma yaha do bheda hote haiM duha bAyaro sumo  /
arthAt pudgalaparAvarta kA sAmAnya se kAla ananta utsarpiNI aura ananta
avasarpiNI pramANa hai aura dravya, kSetra, kAla bhAva ye cAra mUla bheda haiN|
ye mUla bheda bhI pratyeka sUkSma, bAdara ke bheda se do-do prakAra ke haiN|
jinake lakSaNa nIce spaSTa karate haiM  /  sarvaprathama bAdara aura sUkSma
dravyapudgala parAvarta kA svarUpa batalAte haiM  /  dravyapudgala parAvarta -
pUrva meM yaha spaSTa kiyA jA cukA hai ki aneka prakAra kI pudgala vargaNAoM se
loka bharA huA hai aura una vargaNAoM meM se ATha prakAra kI vargaNAyeM
grahaNayogya haiM yAnI jIva dvArA grahaNa kI jAtI haiM aura jIva unheM grahaNa
kara unase apane zarIra, mana, vacana Adi kI racanA karatA hai| ye vargaNAyeM
haiM 1 odArika grahaNayogya vargaNA, 2 vaikriya grahaNayogya vargaNA, 3 AhAraka
grahaNayogya vargaNA, 4 tejasa grahaNayogya vargaNA, 5 bhASA grahaNayogya
vargaNA, 6 zvAsocchvAsa grahaNayogya vargaNA, 7 mano grahaNayogya vargaNA,
kArmaNa grahaNayogya vargaNA  /  ina vargaNAoM meM se jitane samaya meM eka jIva
samasta paramANuoM ko AhAraka grahaNayogya vargaNA ko choDakara zeSa audArika,
vaikriya, tejasa, bhASA, AnaprANa, mana aura kArmaNa zarIra rUpa pariNamAkara
unheM bhogakara chor3a detA

Page #365 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A **Shataka** is the time taken for all the atoms to be consumed and discarded
by a living being in all seven forms except the Aharaka form. This is called
**Badar Dravyapudgala Paravarta**.   The time taken for all the atoms to be
consumed and discarded by a living being in only one form is called **Sookshma
Dravyapudgala Paravarta**.  In essence, **Badar Dravyapudgala Paravarta**
involves the consumption and discarding of all atoms in seven forms, excluding
the Aharaka form, while **Sookshma Dravyapudgala Paravarta** involves the
consumption and discarding of atoms in only one form.  It is important to note
that if, during the transformation of all atoms into an Audarika body, some
atoms are discarded in the form of a Vaikriya body, or if all atoms are
discarded in the form of a Vaikriya body, or if, during the transformation of
all atoms into a Vaikriya body, some atoms are discarded in the form of an
Audarika body, then these are not counted. Only the atoms that are consumed and
discarded in the form of the body that is currently undergoing transformation
are considered in **Sookshma Dravyapudgala Paravarta**.  The reason for
excluding the Aharaka body is that a living being can only have an Aharaka body
a maximum of four times. Therefore, it is not useful in **Pudgala Paravarta**.
**-Pravachan Deeka, p. 308, S. 2**  In this **Sookshma Dravyapudgala
Paravarta**, the atoms consumed and discarded in forms other than the intended
body are not counted. However, even after a long period of time, the atoms that
are transformed into the intended body form are counted.  **-Pravachan Toka, p.
300, U.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka hai, use bAdara dravyayugala parAvarta kahate haiN| aura jitane samaya
meM samasta paramANuoM ko audArika Adi sAta vargaNAoM meM se kisI eka vargaNA kA
pariNAmA kara rahe mahA nA chor3a detA hai, utane samaya ko sUkSma dravyapudgala
parAvarta kahate haiN| ukta kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai ki bAdara dravyapudgala
parAvarta meM to samasta paramANuoM ko AhAraka ko chor3akara sAta rUpa se
bhogakara chor3A jAtA hai aura sUkSma dravyapudgala parAvarta meM unheM kevala
kisI eka rUpa se grahaNa karake chor3A jAtA hai  /  yahAM yaha bhI dhyAna
rakhanA cAhie ki yadi samasta paramANuoM ko eka audArika zarIra rUpa pariNamAte
samaya madhya meM kucha paramANuoM ko vaikriya zarIra Adi rUpa grahaNa karake
chor3a diyA yA samasta paramANuoM ko vaikriya Adi zarIra rUpa grahaNa karake
chor3a diyA athavA samasta paramANuoM ko vaikriya zarIra rUpa pariNamAte samaya
bIca-bIca meM kucha paramANuoM ko audA. rika Adi rUpa se grahaNa karake chor3a
diyA to ve gaNanA meM nahIM liye jAte haiM  /  kintu jisa zarIra rUpa
parivartana cAlU hai, usI zarIra rUpa jo pudgala paramANu grahaNa karake chor3e
jAte haiM, unheM hI sUkSma dravyapud gala parAvarta meM grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai|
AhAraka zarIra ko chor3ane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki AhAraka zarIra eka jIva ko
adhika-se-adhika cAra bAra hI ho sakatA hai  /  ata: vaha pudgala parAvarta meM
upayogI nahIM haiAhArakazarIraM botkRSTato'pyekajIvasya vArapatuSTayameva
sambhavati, tatastasya pudgalaparAvarta pratyanupayomAnna grahaNaM kRtamiti  /
-pravacana dIkA, pR. 308 sa0 2 etasmin sUkSme dravyapudgalaparAvarte
vivakSitakazarIravyatirekeNAnya zarIratayA ye parimujya paribhujya parityaja-te
te na gaNyante, kintu prabhUte'pi kAle gate sati ye ca vivakSitakazArIrarUpatayA
pariNamyante ta eSa gaNyante  /  pravacana TokA pR0 300 u.

Page #366 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Karma Granth ### 323 ### Regarding the Matter-Pudgala Transformation
Some Acharyas hold the view that:  "**Av imo dadhyai orala vijayate kamme hi.
Nisesadavy gahanammi bayaro hoi paryo.**"  Other Acharyas explain the nature of
Matter-Pudgala transformation as follows:  "When a Jiva, through its Audarik,
Vaikriya, Tejas and Karman bodies, which are the four types of Asana bodies,
transforms and releases all the Pudgalas in the world, then it is called **Badar
Dravya-Pudgala Paravarti**. When a Jiva, through one of the four bodies,
transforms and releases all the Pudgalas, while the remaining Pudgalas are not
taken, then it is called **Sookshma Dravya-Pudgala Paravarti**."  - The time
taken to release all the Pudgala atoms by taking them in the form of Audarik,
Vaikriya, Tejas and Karman bodies is called **Badar Dravya-Pudgala Paravarti**.
The time taken to release all the Pudgala atoms by transforming them into one of
the four bodies is called **Sookshma Dravya-Pudgala Paravarti**.  After
explaining the nature of both Badar and Sookshma Dravya-Pudgala Paravarti, we
will now explain the nature of Kshetra, Kala and Bhava-Pudgala Paravarti. Like
Dravya-Pudgala Paravarti, there are two types of each: Sookshma and Badar.
Generally, the time taken by a Jiva to traverse all the regions of the Lokakasha
is...  **1. Pravachana 0, Ga 41** **1. Pancham Karma Granth, Svopgyna Teeka,
Page 103**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama karmagrantha 323 dravyapudgala parAvarta ke bAre meM kinhIM - kinhIM
AcAryoM kA mata hai ki ava imo dadhyAI orAla vijayate kamme hi  /  nIsesadavya
gahaNaMmi bAyaro hoi pariyo  // " eke tu AcAryA evaM vyapudgalaparAvarta svarUpa
pratipAdayanti tathAhi yako jIvo'nekarmavagraharaudArikazaroravaM kriyazarIra te
asaNarIrakArmaNazarIracatuSTayarUpatayA yathAsvaM sakalalokayatina sarzam
pudgalAn pariNamayya muJcati tadA vAda drazyapudagalaparAvartI bhavati  /  yathA
putraraudArikAvituSTayamadhyAdekena kena ciccharIreNa sarvapudgalAn pariNamasya
muzcati zeSazarIraparimitAstu puvagalA na gRhyante eva tadA sUkSmo
dravyapudgalaparAvartI bhavati  / " - samasta pudgala paramANuoM ko audArika,
vaikriya, tejasa aura kArmaNa ina cAra zarIra rUpa grahaNa karake chor3a dene
meM jitanA kAla lagatA hai, use bAdara dravyapudgala parAvarta kahate haiM aura
samasta pudgala paramANuoM ko ukta cAroM zarIroM meM se kisI eka zarIra rUpa
pariNamA kara chor3a dene meM jitanA kAla lagatA hai, utane kAla ko sUkSma
dravyapudgala parAvarta kahate haiM  /  isa prakAra se bAdara aura sUkSma donoM
prakAra ke dravyapudgala parAvarta ke svarUpa ko batalAne ke bAda aba kSetra,
kAla aura bhAvapudgala parAvartI kA svarUpa batalAte haiM  /  dravyapudgala
parAvarta ke samAna hI kSetra, kAla aura bhAva pudgala parAvartI meM se pratyeka
ke sUkSma aura bAdara yaha do-do prakAra haiM  /  sAmAnya taura para jIva dvArA
lokAkAza ke samasta pradezoM kA 1 pravacana0 gA0 41 1 paMcama karmagrantha
svopajJa TIkA, pR0 103

Page #367 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **330**  Touching the **kṣetra-pudgala** by death means the
death of a being in all the regions of space during the **utsarpini** and
**avsarpiṇī** periods. Touching all the **kṣaya-sthāna** (afflictions) that are
the cause of **anubhāga-bandha** (bond of experience) by death is called
**kāla** and **bhāva-pudgala-parāvṛtti** respectively. Their detailed
explanation is as follows:  **Mataka**  **Kṣetra-pudgala-parāvṛtti:** A being
travels and dies in one region of space, then dies in another region of space,
then in a third, fourth, and so on. When it dies in all the regions of space,
that period of time is called **bādar** or **kṣetra-pudgala-parāvṛtti**. In
**bādar** **kṣetra-pudgala-parāvṛtti**, it is sufficient to touch all the
regions of space in any order, whether sequential or not.  **Sūkṣma kṣetra-
pudgala-parāvṛtti:** In **sūkṣma kṣetra-pudgala-parāvṛtti**, the regions of
space are also touched, but its characteristic is that a being travels and dies
in one region of space, then dies in another region adjacent to it, then in a
third region adjacent to that one. In this way, it dies in each region in
succession until it has died in all the regions of space. This is called
**sūkṣma kṣetra-pudgala-parāvṛtti**.  The summary of the above statement and the
difference between **bādar** and **sūkṣma kṣetra-pudgala-parāvṛtti** is that in
**bādar**, the order is not considered. If a being dies in a region that has not
been touched before, it is considered to have been touched. In other words, it
is considered sufficient to die in all the regions, whether sequentially or not.
However, in **sūkṣma**, the being must die in all the regions sequentially.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 330 apane maraNa ke dvArA sparza karanA kSetrapudgala parAvarta kA artha hai
aura utsarpiNI avasarpiNI kAla ke sabhI samayoM kA apane maraNa dvArA sparza
karanA tathA anubhAga baMdha ke kAraNabhuta samasta kaSAyasthAnoM kA apane
maraNa dvArA sparza kara lenA krama se kAla aura bhAva pudgala parAvarta
kahalAte haiM  /  jinakA vizada spaSTIkaraNa nIce likhe anusAra hai  /  mataka
kSetrapudgala parAvarta - koI eka jIva bhramaNa karatA huA AkAza ke kisI eka
pradeza meM marA aura vahI jIva punaH AkAza ke kisI dUsare pradeza meM marA,
tIsare, cauthe Adi pradezoM meM mraa| isa prakAra jaba vaha lokAkAza ke samasta
pradezoM meM mara cukatA hai to utane kAla ko bAdara, kSetra pudgala parAvarta
kahate hai  /  vAdara kSetrapudgala parAvarta meM kramaakrama Adi kisI bhI
prakAra se samasta AkAza pradezoM ko sparza kara lenA hI paryApta mAnA jAtA hai
/  - sUkSma kSetrapudgala parAvarta meM bhI AkAza pradezoM ko sparza kiyA jAtA
hai, lekina usakI vizeSatA isa prakAra hai ki koI jIva bhramaNa karatA-karatA
AkAza ke kisI eka pradeza meM maraNa karake punaH usa pradeza ke samIpavartI
dUsare pradeza meM maraNa karatA hai, punaH usake nikaTavartI tIsare pradeza meM
maraNa karatA hai| isa prakAra anantara -anantara krama se pradeza meM maraNa
karate-karate jaba samasta lokAkAza ke pradezoM meM saraNa kara letA hai, taba
vaha sUkSma kSetrapudgala parAvarta kahalAtA hai  /  ukta kathana kA sArAMza
aura bAdara va sUkSma kSetra pudgala parAvarta meM antara yaha hai ki bAdara meM
to krama kA vicAra nahIM kiyA jAtA hai, usameM vyavahita pradeza meM maraNa
karane para yadi vaha pradeza pUrva spRSTa nahIM hai to usakA grahaNa hotA hai,
yAnI vahAM krama se yA binA krama se samasta pradezoM meM maraNa kara lenA ho
paryApta samajhA jAtA hai kintu sUkSma meM samasta pradezoM meM krama se hI
bharaNa karanA cAhiye aura akrama *

Page #368 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Karma-Bandha  The regions where death occurs or where rebirth occurs in
the previous place of death are not counted. This clarifies that the time taken
for the subtle field-pudgala transformation is more than that for the gross. The
time for the gross is less, and the time for the subtle is more.  Regarding the
subtle field-pudgala transformation, one should know that the lowest state of a
living being is said to be an immeasurable part of the Jghana Avagaha Lok.
Although a living being cannot stay in one region of the Lokakara, if the father
fills a Dasha, then one region of that country is considered as the base.
Therefore, if death occurs in any region far from that desired region, it is not
counted. However, after an infinite time, when death occurs in the region that
follows the desired region, it is counted.  Regarding the acceptance of regions,
some Acharyas believe that all the regions of the Lokakasha where death occurs
are accepted, and no intermediate desired region is accepted.  Others explain
that all the regions of the sky where the deep-rooted living being dies are
counted, not just one desired region of the sky in the middle.  - Pravachana
Teeka, page 30, Kaspurgal Paravarta - The time in which a living being dies in
all the times of the descending and ascending cycles, either in a lesser or non-
sequential manner, is called the gross time-pudgala transformation. And if a
living being dies in the first time of a desired descending cycle, then dies in
the second time near it, then dies in the third time, then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmaprandha se jina pradezoM meM maraNa kiyA jAtA hai athavA pUrva
maraNasthAna meM punaH janma lekara maraNa kiyA jAtA hai to unakI gaNanA nahIM
kI jAtI hai  /  isase yaha spasTa hai ki bAdara kI apekSA sUkSma kSetrapudgala
parAvarta meM samaya adhika lagatA hai ! bAdara kA samaya kama aura sUkSma kA
samaya adhika hai| sUkSma kSetrapudgala parAvarta ke saMbandha meM eka bAta aura
jAnanA cAhie ki eka jIva kI jaghanya avagAhanA loka ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga
batalAI hai, jisase eka jIva yadyapi lokAkAra ke eka pradeza meM nahIM raha
sakatA tathApi pitA eka daza meM bharaga karane para usa deza kA koI eka pradeza
AdhAra mAna liyA jAtA hai| jisase yadi usa vivakSita pradeza se dUravartI kinhIM
pradezoM meM maraNa hotA hai to ve gaNanA meM nahIM liye jAte haiM kintu
anantakAla bIta jAne para jaba kabhI vivakSita pradeza ke anantara kA jo pradeza
hai, usameM maraNa karatA hai to vaha gaNanA meM liyA jAtA hai| pradezoM ko
grahaNa karane ke bAre meM kinhI-kinhI AcAryoM kA mata hai ki lokAkAza ke jina
pradezoM meM maraNa karatA hai ve sabhI pradeza grahaNa kiye jAte haiM, unakA
madhyavartI koI vivakSita pradeza grahaNa nahIM kiyA jAtA hai anye tu vyAcakSate
--yeSvAkAzapradezeSvagADho jIvo mRtaste sarve'pi AkAzapradezAH gaNyante, na
punastanmadhyavartI vivakSitaH kazcideka evAkAzapradeza iti  /  -pravacana TIkA
pR0 30 u. kAsapuragala parAvarta-jitane samaya meM eka jIva avasarpiNI aura
utsarpiNI kAla ke saba samayoM meM kama se yA akrama se maraNa kara cukatA hai,
utane kAla ko bAdara kAlapudgala parAvarta kahate haiM aura koI eka jIva kisI
vivakSita avasarpiNI kAla ke pahale samaya meM marA, punaH usake nikaTavartI
dUsare samaya meM marA, punaH tIsare samaya meM marA, isa

Page #369 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **Fatal**  The term "**Sookshma Kalpudgal Paravart**" refers
to the time taken by a being to die in all the **Aavipini** and **Utsarpini**
**Kal** (time periods) within a **Mav** (cycle).  Just like in the case of
**Kshetra** (space), the calculation of time should be done sequentially, not
randomly. This means that if a being dies in the first **Kal** of **Avasarpini**
(descending time period), and then dies again in the second **Kal** of
**Avasarpini** after the completion of one **Kal** of **Bos Kodakodi Sagropam**
(a specific time period), then it is considered as the second **Kal** in the
calculation. Even if the being dies in the remaining **Kal** in between, it is
not considered. If the being does not die in the second **Kal** of the said
**Avasarpini** but dies in other **Kal**, then those are also not considered.
However, after the completion of infinite **Utsarpini** and **Avasarpini**, if
the being dies in the second **Kal** of **Avasarpini**, then that **Kal** is
considered. Similarly, one should understand the third, fourth, fifth, and so on
**Kal** in the same way. The time taken by a being to die sequentially in all
the **Kal** of **Utsarpini** and **Avasarpini** is called **Sookshma Kalpudgal
Paravart**.  **Mavpudgal Paravart** - The number of **Anubhagbandha Sthan**
(stages of bondage), **Kshaya Sthan** (stages of liberation), and **Tartam
Bhed** (subtle differences) are equal to the number of **Lokakasha** (space of
the universe), which is infinite. The time taken by a being to die in all the
**Anubhagbandha Sthan** sequentially, starting from the lowest or randomly, is
called **Badar Bhavpudgal Paravart**. If a being dies in the lowest
**Anubhagbandha Sthan**, then dies in the next **Anubhagbandha Sthan**, then in
the next one, and so on, and finally dies in all the **Anubhagbandha Sthan**
sequentially, then it is called **Sookshma Bhavpudgal Paravart**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ghAtaka prakAra kramavAra avapiNI aura utsarpiNI kAla ke mava samaya meM jaba
maraNa kara cukatA hai to use sUkSma kAlapudgala parAvarta kahate haiN| kSetra
kI tarahahI yahAM bhI samayoM kI gaNanA kramabAra karanA cAhiye, akramavArakI
gaNanA nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  isakA artha yaha huA ki koI jIva avasarpiNI ke
prathama samaya meM marA, usake bAda eka samaya kama bosa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama
ke bIta jAne ke bAda punaH avasarpiNI kAla ke prArambha hone para usake dusare
samaya meM mare to vaha dvitIya samaya gaNanA meM liyA jAtA hai  /  madhya ke
zeSa samayoM meM usakI mRtyu hone para bhI ve gaNanA meM nahIM liye jAte haiM  /
yadi vaha jIva ukta avasarpiNI ke dvitIya samaya meM maraNa ko prApta na ho
kintu anya samayoM meM maraNa kare to unakA bhI grahaNa nahIM kiyA jAtA hai
kintu ananta utsapiNI aura avasarpiNI ke bIta jAne para jaba bhI avasarpiNI ke
dUsare samaya meM hI maratA hai taba vaha kAla grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai  /  isI
prakAra tIsare, cauthe, pAMcaveM Adi samayoM ke bAre meM bhI samajhanA cAhiye ki
jitane samayoM meM utsarpiNI aura avasarpiNI kAla ke samasta samayoM meM krama
se maraNa kara cukatA hai, usa kAla ko sUkSma kAlapudgala parAvarta kahate haiM
/  mAvapudgala parAvarta-anubhAgabaMdhasthAna- kaSAyasthAna taratama bheda ko
liye asaMkhyAta lokAkAza ke pradezoM kI saMkhyA ke barAbara haiM arthAt unakI
saMkhyA asaMkhyAta hai| una anubhAgabaMdhasthAnoM meM se eka-eka
anubhAgabaMdhasthAna meM kama se yA akrama se maraNa karate-karate jIva jitane
samaya meM samasta anubhAgabaMdhasthAnoM meM maraNa kara cukatA hai, utane
samaya ko bAdara bhAvapudgala parAvarta kahate haiM aura sabase jaghanya
anubhAgabaMdhasthAna meM vartamAna koI jIva marA, usake bAda usa sthAna ke
anantaravartI dUsare anubhAgabaMdhasthAna meM marA, usake bAda usake
anantaravartI tIsare Adi anubhAgabaMdhasthAnoM meM marA Adi  /  isa prakAra
krama se jaba samasta anubhAgabaMdhasthAnoM meM maraNa kara letA hai to vaha
sUkSmabhAvapudgala parAvarta kahalAtA hai  /

Page #370 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Magraj**  _In the case of both **Bādar** and **Sūkṣma**
**Bhāvapudgala** **Pāravats**, just like other **Pāravats**, one should
understand this difference: When a being dies in the most despicable
**Anubhāgabandhasthāna** and after an infinite period of time, when it dies in
the second **Anubhāgabandhasthāna** following the first
**Anubhāgabandhasthāna**, then this death is counted in the **Sūkṣma**
**Bhāvapudgala** **Pāravart**, but the infinite infinite deaths that occur due
to **Akram** are not counted. Similarly, when it dies in the third
**Anubhāgabandhasthāna** following the second **Anubhāgabandhasthāna** after a
long time, then that death is counted. The same order should be understood for
the fourth, fifth, etc. places. That is, in **Bādar**, deaths occurring in any
way, whether **Kram** or **Akram**, are counted, while in **Sūkṣma**, only
deaths occurring in **Kram** are counted._  _In this way, the nature of
**Bādar** and **Sūkṣma** **Pudgala** **Pāravats** is explained. In the same way,
the nature, difference, etc. of the four **Pudgala** **Pāravats**, including
**Dravya**, are described in **Pañcasangraha** 2137-41. Those verses are as
follows:_  _**Poggala parithatto iha davai chaviho muṇeyacho. Ekkeko puṇ duviho
bāyaramuhammatabhēeṇam. Samsārami aḍato jāv ya kāleṇ phusiya sachvāṇ. Igu jo
muyai bāyar agnay ratanuṣṭiho suhumo. Logass paēsesu aṇantaraparampravībhattīhi.
Khettami bāyage so sahamo 3 aṇantaramayass. Umsappiniramgam aṇan
raparangravībhattīhi. Kālammi vāyaro mo muhumo u aṇanjaramayass. Aṇubhāgaṭhāṇemu
aṇantaraparampravībhattīhi. Bhāvammi bāyari so muhumo madhyemanukramaso.**_
_(In **Digambara** literature, the description of **Pāravartī** is different.
See the appendix for that description.)_

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mAgraja _ bAdara aura sUkSma bhAvapudgala parAvoM meM bhI anya parAvatoM kI
taraha yaha antara samajhanA cAhiye ki koI jIva sabase jaghanya
anubhAgabaMdhasthAna meM maraNa karake usake bAda anantakAla bIta jAne para bhI
jaba prathama anubhAgasthAna ke anantaravartI dUsare anubhAgabaMdhasthAna meM
maraNa karatA hai to sUkSma bhAvapudgala parAvarta meM vaha maraNa gaNanA meM
liyA jAtA hai kintu akrama se hone vAle ananta ananta maraNa gaNanA meM nahIM
liye jAte haiM | isI taraha kAlAntara meM dvitIya anubhAgabaMdhasthAna ke
anantaravartI tIsare anubhAgabaMdhasthAna meM jaba maraNa karatA hai to vaha
maraNa gaNanA meM liyA jAtA hai| cauthe, pAMcaveM Adi sthAnoM ke liye bhI yahI
krama samajhanA cAhiye  /  arthAt vAdara meM to krama-akrama kisI bhI prakArase
hone vAle maraNoM kI aura sUkSma meM sirpha krama se hone vAle maraNoM kI gaNanA
kI jAtI hai| isa prakAra se bAdara aura sUkSma pudagala parAvatoM' kA svarUpa
bata(ka) paMcasaMgraha 2137-41 taka meM bhI isI prakAra dravya Adi cAroM pudgala
parA. voM kA svarUpa, bheda AdikA varNana kiyA hai| ve gAthAyeM isa prakAra haiM
poggala parithaTTo iha davAi caviho muNeyaco  /  ekkeko puNa duviho
bAyaramuhamattabheeNaM  //  saMsArami aDato jAva ya kAleNa phusiya sacvANa  /
igu jo muyai bAyara agnaya rataNuSTio suhumo  /  logassa paesesu
aNaMtaraparaMparAvibhattIhi  /  khettami bAyage so sahamo 3 aNaMtaramayassa  //
umsappiNirAmagama aNaMna raparaMgarAvibhattIhi  /  kAlammi vAyaro mo muhumo u
aNaMjJaramayassa  /  /  aNubhAgaThANemu aNaMtaraparaMparAvibhattIhi  /  bhAvami
bAyarI so muhamo madhyemanukramaso  //  (j digambara sAhitya meM parAvartI kA
varNana bhinna rUpa se kiyA gayA hai  /  ukta varNana pariziSTa meM dekhiye  /
/

Page #371 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Satak Now, the masters of the Uttar and Jana Pradeshbandha explain the general
principle. Appayarapdiyango ukfa bogo ya sanipassatto. Kunai paesukkosan
mahalayam tassa bachase ||6|| Word Meaning- Appayarapashbindi- binder of lesser
natures, upakaranogi- possessor of excellent yoga, 4-and, sanipassaso-
sufficiently aware, kunah does, paesukkosan- excellent binding of regions, jahan
yam- inferior region binding, sassa- his, bacchale- by contrast. Gapaarsh- The
possessor of excellent yoga, who binds lesser natures, and the sufficiently
aware being, binds the excellent Pradeshbandha. And conversely, the possessor of
inferior yoga, who binds many natures, and the insufficiently aware being, binds
the inferior Pradeshbandha. In particular, this verse states the one who binds
the excellent Pradeshbandha and the one who binds the inferior Pradeshbandha.
The one who binds the lesser number of root and Uttar natures, binds the
excellent Pradeshbandha. Because, due to the lesser number of karma natures,
each nature gets more Pradesh. Therefore, the binder of lesser natures, the
possessor of excellent yoga, and the sufficiently aware being, binds the
excellent Pradeshbandha. And in the opposite situation, i.e., when the binders
of more natures have their karmadalikas divided into more parts (natures), each
gets less Pradesh. Therefore, the binder of more natures, the possessor of slow
yoga, and the insufficiently aware being, binds the inferior Pradeshbandha. This
is explained below.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sataka lAge tAda aba sAmanyale uttura aura janA pradezabaMdha ke svAmI batalAte
haiN| appayarapaDiyaMgho ukpha bogo ya snipjjtto| kuNai paesukkosaM mahalayaM
tassa bacAse  // 6 //  zabdArtha-appayarapazbiMdhI-alpatara prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
karane vAlA, upakaraNogI-utkRSTa yoga kA dhAraka, 4-aura, sanipazyaso- saMjhI
paryApta, kuNahakaratA hai, paesukkosaMpradezoM kA utkRSTa baMdha, jahana yaM
jaghanya pradezabaMdha, sassa-usakA, baccAle-viparItatA se  /  gApArSa-alpatara
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAlA utkRSTa yoga kA dhAraka aura paryApta saMjI
jIva utkRSTa pradezabaMdha karatA hai tathA isake viparIta arthAt bahuta
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAlA adhanya yoga kA dhAraka aparyApta asaMzI jIva
jaghanya pradezabaMdha karatA hai| vizeSArthaisa gAthA meM utkRSTa pradezabaMdha
aura jaghanya pradezabaMdha karane vAle kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| jo mUla aura
uttara prakRtiyAM alpa bAMdhe vaha utkRSTa pradezabaMzca karatA hai  /  kyoMki
karmaprakRtiyoM ke alpa hone se pratyeka prakRti ko adhika pradeza milate haiM
/  isIliye alpatara prakRti kA baMdhaka aura utkRSTa yoga kA dhAraka aisA saMjJI
paryApta jIva utkRSTa pradezabaMdha karatA hai aura isase viparIta sthiti meM
yAnI adhika prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhane vAloM ke karmadalikoM ko adhika bhAgoM meM
(prakRtiyoM meM) vibhAjita ho jAne se pratyeka ko alpa pradeza milate haiM  /
isIliye adhika prakRtiyoM kA baMdhaka aura maMda yoga vAlA asaMhI aparyApta jIva
jaghanya pradezabaMdha karatA hai| isakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce likhe anusAra hai  /

Page #372 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  * In the context of stating the characteristics of
those who possess excellent and inferior *pradeshabandha*, the following points
are highlighted:  1. Just as it is necessary to have fewer partners for
obtaining a larger share of wealth, similarly, the one who performs excellent
*pradeshabandha* should bind fewer *prakritis*. Because it has been explained in
the division of previous karmas that whatever *jikas* are present in a *raman*,
they are all divided into the *prakritis* that are bound at that time.
Therefore, if the number of *prakritis* to be bound is large, they will receive
small *pradeshas* during the division, and if the number of *prakritis* is
small, they will receive larger *dalikas* during the division.  2. Just as it is
necessary to have a high income for greater gains, similarly, the one who
performs excellent *pradeshabandha* should possess excellent *yoga*. Because the
cause of *pradeshabandha* is *yoga*, and if *yoga* is intense, there will be a
connection with a larger number of *karmadalikas* to the soul, and if *yoga* is
weak, there will also be a decrease in the number of *karmadalikas*. Therefore,
the presence of excellent *yoga* is stated for excellent *pradeshabandha* -
*ukkad jogi*.  3-4. The third requirement for the one who possesses excellent
*pradeshabandha* is that they should be a *sanjni* and *paryaptak*. Because an
*aparyaptak* being is one with a short lifespan and limited power, they cannot
perform excellent *pradeshabandha*. Along with being *paryaptak*, they should
also be *sanjni*. Because even if they are *paryaptak* but not *sanjni*, they
cannot perform excellent *pradeshabandha*. The power of an *asanjni* being is
also incomplete.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha * utkRSTa aura jaghanya pradezabaMdha ke svAmiyoM kA
kathana karane ke prasaMga meM nimnalikhita bAtoM para prakAza DAlA gayA hai| 1
- jaise adhika dravya kI prApti ke liye bhAgIdAroM kA kama honA Avazyaka hai,
vaise hI utkRSTa pradezabaMdha kA kartA thor3I prakRtiyoM kA bA~dhane vAlA honA
caahiye| kyoMki pahale karmoM ke baTavAre meM yaha batalAyA jA cukA hai ki eka
rAmaNa meM jikA hotA hai, ve saba una una prakRtiyoM meM vibhAjita ho jAte haiM
jinakA usa samaya baMdha hotA hai  /  isIliye yadi baMdhane vAlI prakRtiyoM kI
saMkhyA adhika hogI to baTavAre ke samaya unako thor3e-thor3e pradeza mileMge
aura yadi prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA kama hotI hai to baTavAre meM adhika adhika
dalika milate haiN| 2- adhika prApti ke liye jaise adhika Aya honA Avazyaka hai,
vaise hI utkRSTa pradezabaMdha karane vAlA utkRSTa yoga vAlA honA caahiye|
kyoMki pradezabaMdha kA kAraNa yoga hai aura yadi yoga tIvra hotA hai to adhika
saMkhyA meM karmadalikoM kA AtmA ke sAtha sambandha hogA tathA yoga maMda hai to
karmadalikoM kI saMkhyA meM bhI kamI rahatI hai  /  isIliye utkRSTa
pradezabaMdha ke liye utkRSTa yoga kA honA bata lAyA hai - ukkaDa jogI  /  - 3-4
- utkRSTa pradezaba'dha ke svAmI ke liye tIsarI bAta yaha Avazyaka hai ki -
sannipajjato vaha saMjJI paryAptaka honA caahiye| kyoMki aparyAptaka jIva alpa
Ayu aura zakti vAlA hotA hai, jisase vaha utkRSTa pradezabaMdha nahIM kara
sktaa| paryAptaka hone ke sAtha-sAtha saMjJI honA caahiye| kyoMki paryAptaka
hokara yadi vaha saMjJI nahIM huA to bhI utkRSTa pradezabaMdha nahIM kara sakatA
hai| asaMjJI jIva kI zakti bhI aparipUrNa rahatI hai  /

Page #373 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  336 Patak Therefore, in the context of stating the ownership of
the excellent Pradeshbandha, the three significant adjectives 'Ukkadjogee' and
'Sannipajjatto' are given in the verse to explain that excellent Pradeshbandha
occurs when there is excellent Yoga, and Sanjee Paryaptak is the excellent Yoga.
Although verses 53-54, while explaining the scarcity of Yogas, have stated that
the subtle Nigodhya Labdhya Paryaptak is the most inferior and Sanjee Paryaptak
is the most excellent Yoga. Therefore, by saying 'Ukkadjogee', the understanding
of Sanjee Paryaptak is already conveyed, but for more clarity, the two terms
'Sannipajjatto' are used. When there is excellent Yoga, many beings take on many
natures. However, it is necessary for a few natures to be blind along with
excellent Yoga.  Conversely, if someone binds many natures, the Yoga is also
slow and insufficient, and is not Sanjee, then he performs the inferior
Pradeshbandha. In this way, one should know about the ownership of the general,
excellent, and inferior Pradeshbandha. _Now, the owners of the excellent
Pradeshbandha are explained in relation to the original and the answering
natures.  Miccha Ajaychau Aau Bitigun Vinu Mohi Satt Micchai Chanhham Satras
Suhmo Ajayadesa Biliksae. ||6||  The same qualifications of the owner of the
excellent and inferior Pradeshbandha are explained in Panchasamyaha and Go.
Karmakanda as well. For example:  Appasarpagabandhe Uskadjogee U Sannipajjatto.
|| Kunai Paesukkosan Jahanayam Tassa Vacchaase. - Panchasangraha 268 Ukkadjogee
Sannipajjatto Payadib Dhammapadaro. Kunadi Paye Sukkasan Jpanae Jaan Divariyam.
|| Go. Karmakanda 210

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 336 pataka isIliye utkRSTa pradezabaMdha ke svAmitva ke kathana ke prasaMga
meM- utkRSTa yoga hone para utkRSTa pradezabaMdha hotA hai tathA saMjhI paryApta
ko hI utkRSTa yoga hotA hai, yaha batalAne ke liye gAthA meM 'ukkar3ajogI va
sanipajjatto' yaha tIna sArthaka vizeSaNa diye gaye haiM  /  yadyapi gAthA 53-54
meM yogoM kA alpabahutva batalAte hue sUkSma nigodiyA labdhyaparyAptaka ko
sabase jaghanya aura saMjJI paryApta ko sabase utkRSTa yoga batalAyA hai  /
ataH 'ukkaijogI' kaha dene se saMjJI paryAptaka kA bodha ho hI jAtA hai tathApi
adhika spaSTatA ke liye 'sannipajjatto' yaha do pada rakhe gaye haiM  /  utkRSTa
yoga hone para bahuta se jIva adhika prakRtiyoM kA saMbha karate haiM. kinta
utkRSTa yoga ke sAtha thor3I prakRtiyoM kA aMdha honA Avazyaka hai| isase
viparIta dazA meM arthAt yadi bahuta prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAlA ho, yoga
bhI maMda ho tathA aparyApta asaMzI ho to jaghanya pradezabaMdha karatA hai  /
isa prakAra sAmAnya se utkRSTa aura jaghanya pradezabaMdha ke svAmitva ke bAre
meM jAnanA cAhiye  /  _aba mUla aura uttara prakRtiyoM kI apekSA se utkRSTa
pradezabaMdha ke svAmI batalAte haiN| miccha ajayacau AU bitiguNa viNu mohi
satta micchAI chaNhaM satarasa suhamo ajayA desA bilikasAe  // 6 //
paMcasaMyaha aura go0 karmakAMDa meM bhI utkRSTa aura jaghanya pradezabaMdha ke
svAmI kI yahI yogyatAyeM batalAI haiN| yathA appasarapagaibaMdhe uskaDajogI u
snnipjjtto|| kuNAI paesukkosaM jahannayaM tassa vaccAse  /  -paMcasaMgraha 268
ukkar3ajogo saNNI pajjatto payaDiba dhmppdro| kuNadi paye sukkasaM japaNae jANa
divarIyaM  /  /  go0 karmakAMra 210

Page #374 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 37  **Word Meanings:**  * **Michch:**  Mithyatva
(false belief) * **Ajaychau:**  Avirat Samyak Darshan (uninterrupted right
faith) and the other four Gunasthanas (stages of spiritual progress) * **Aam:**
Aayu Karma (life-span karma) * **Vitigunavinnu:**  Without the second and third
Gunasthanas * **Mohi:**  Mohaniya Karma (attachment karma) * **Satt:**  Seven
Gunasthanas * **Milaai:**  Mithyatva (false belief) and other (five) * **Chhe:**
Six (original) natures * **Sataras:**  Seventeen (natures) * **Sahmi:**  Sukshma
Samparaya Gunasthana (the tenth Gunasthana) * **Amma:**  Avirat Sammasthrit
(uninterrupted right conduct) * **Sa-Gaviriti:**  With Deshavirati (freedom from
attachment to place) * **Ritikasay:**  The second and third Kashayas (passions)
**Verse Meaning:**  Those with Mithyatva (false belief) and the four Gunasthanas
of Avirat (uninterrupted) and others, perform the highest level of binding of
Aayu Karma (life-span karma).  Those with Mithyatva (false belief) and the other
six Gunasthanas, excluding the second and third, perform the highest level of
binding of Mohaniya Karma (attachment karma).  The highest level of binding of
the remaining six Karmas (actions) and their seventeen natures is performed by
those residing in the tenth Gunasthana, called Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthana.
The highest level of binding of the second Kashaya (passion) is performed by
those with Avirat Samyak Darshan (uninterrupted right faith), and the highest
level of binding of the third Kashaya (passion) is performed by those with
Deshavirati (freedom from attachment to place).  **Special Meaning:**  This
verse explains the performers of the highest level of binding of the original
nine natures.  First, it explains the highest level of binding of Aayu Karma
(life-span karma) among the original Karmas (actions), saying: "Michch Ajaychau
Aau" - those with Mithyatva (false belief) and the four Gunasthanas of Avirat
(uninterrupted) - the fourth Gunasthana of Avirat Samyak Darshan (uninterrupted
right faith), the fifth Gunasthana of Deshavirati (freedom from attachment to
place), the sixth Gunasthana of Prammatavirati (freedom from attachment to
delusion), and the seventh Gunasthana of Aprammatavirati (freedom from
attachment to non-delusion).  The reason for not explaining the highest level of
binding of Aayu Karma (life-span karma) in the remaining Gunasthanas is that
Aayu Karma (life-span karma) is not bound in the third and eighth Gunasthanas,
etc.  Although Aayu Karma (life-span karma) is bound in the second Gunasthana,
the highest level of binding...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 37 zabdArtha-micha- miyAdRSTi, ajayacau -avirata samyam
hadi Adi cAra guNasthAna vAle, Ama-Ayu karma kA, vitiguNaviNu - dUsare aura
tIsare guNasthAna ke binA, mohi-mohanIya karma kA, satta-sAta guNasthAna vAle,
milAI mithyAtvAdi, chaha-chaha mUla prakRtiyoM kA, satarasa satraha prakRtiyoM
kA sahamI - sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna bAlA, amamA virata sammAsTarita sA-
gavirati, ritikasAya--dUsarI aura nIro kaSAya kaa| gAthArtha-mithyA dRSTi aura
avirata Adi cAra guNasthAna bAle Ayukarma kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha karate haiM
/  dUsare aura tIsare guNasthAna ke sivAya mithyAtva Adi sAta guNasthAna vAle
mohanIya karma kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha tathA zeSa chaha kamoM aura unakI
satraha prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha sUkSma maMparAya guNasthAna nAmaka
dasaveM guNasthAna meM rahane vAle karate haiN| dvitIya kapAya kA utkRSTa
pradezabaMdha avirata samyagdRSTi jIva tathA tIsarI kaSAya kA utkRSTa
pradezabaMdha dezavirati vArate haiN| vizeSArtha-..isa gAthA meM mUla navA kucha
upara prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa pradezabaMdha ke gvAmiyoM ko batalAyA hai| marva
prathama mUla karmoM meM se Ayukarma kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha batalAte hue kahA
hai - miccha ajayatrau AU'- pahale mithyAtva muguNasthAna vAle aura avirata
catuSka arthAt cauthe avirata samyagdRSTi, pAMcaveM dezavirati, chaThe
pramattavirata aura sAtavaM apramatnAvirata, yaha pAMca guNasthAna vAle jIva
karate haiN| zeSa guNasthAnoM meM Ayukarma kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha na batalAne
kA kAraNa yaha hai ki tIsare aura AThaveM Adi guNasthAnoM meM to Ayukarma kA
baMdha hotA hI nahIM hai| yadyapi dUsare guNasthAna meM Ayukarma kA baMdha hotA
hai, kintu yahA~ utkRSTa

Page #375 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shataka  The reason for the **utkrista pradeshabandha** of **ayukarma** is
not **utkrista yoga**. Therefore, except for the first, fourth, and from the
fifth to the seventh **gunasthanas**, the **utkrista pradeshabandha** of
**ayukarma** is not mentioned in the remaining **gunasthanas**.  The **svopagna
tika** of the **gatha** clearly explains the reason for the absence of
**utkrista yoga** in the second **gunasthanas**, **sasadan**. It states that in
the future **mithyashti gunasthanas**, we will explain the two types of
**utkrista** and **anutkrista pradeshabandha** of **anantaanubandhi kshaya**,
namely **sadi** and **adhruva**. Since **anantaanubandhi** binding occurs in
**sasadan**, if there were **utkrista yoga** there, then just as in **avirata**
etc. **gunasthanas**, we would have mentioned the four options of **maadi** etc.
for the **anutkrista pradeshabandha** due to the **utkrista pradeshabandha** of
**apratyakhyanavaran** etc. **prakritis**. Similarly, due to the **utkrista
pradeshabandha** of **anantaanubandhi** in **sasadan**, we should have mentioned
the four options of **sadi** etc. for its **anutkrista pradeshabandha**.
However, they are not mentioned. Therefore, it is known that either the time of
**sasadan** is short, making such an effort impossible, or for some other
reason, there is no **utkrista yoga** in **sasadan**. Furthermore, we will
mention the **utkrista pradeshabandha** of **matijnanavaran** etc. **prakritis**
in the **sukshmasampraya gunasthanas** and the **utkrista pradeshabandha** of
the remaining **prakritis** in the **mithyadrishti gunasthanas**. This indicates
that there is no **utkrista yoga** in **sasadan**.  Thus, by stating the absence
of **utkrista yoga** in the **sasadan gunasthanas**, it is written that those
who consider **sasadan** as the owner of the **utkrista pradeshabandha** of
**ayukarma** have an opinion that is **upekshaniya** (negligible).  The
statement "**ato ye sasvadan mpyaayuṣ utkriṣṭa pradeśa svaminaminanti
janmanamupaskhaniyamaiti sthitam**" indicates that some **acharyas** believe in
the **utkrista pradeshabandha** of **ayukarma** in **sasadan**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka pradezabaMdha kA kAraNa utkRSTa yoga nahIM hotA hai| isIliye pahale aura
cauthe se lekara sAtaveM guNasthAna ke sivAya zeSa guNasthAnoM meM Ayukarma kA
utkRSTa pradezabaMdha nahIM batalAyA hai  /  dusare sAsAdana guNasthAna meM
utkRSTa yoga na hone kA kAraNa spaSTa kArate hue gAthA kI svopajJa TIkA meM
batAyA hai ki Age mithyASTi guNasthAna meM anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya ke utkRSTa aura
anutkRSTa pradezabaMdha ke sAdi aura adhruva do hI prakAra batalAyeMge tathA
sAsAdana meM anantAnubaMdhI kA baMdha to hotA hI hai ataH vahAM yadi utkRSTa
yoga hotA to jaise avirata Adi guNasthAnoM meM apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa Adi
prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa pradezavaMdha hone ke kAraNa vahAM unake anutkRSTa
pradezabaMdha ke bhI mAdi Adi cAroM vikalpa batalAyeMge vaise hI sAsAdana meM
anantAnubaMdhI kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha hone ke kAraNa usake anutkRSTa
pradezabaMdha ke sAdi Adi cAroM vikalpa bhI batalAne cAhiye the, kintu ve nahIM
batalAye haiN| ataH usase jJAta hotA hai ki yA to sAsAdana kA kAla thor3A hone
ke kAraNa vahA~ isa prakAra kA prayatna nahIM ho sakatA yA anya kisI kAraNa se
sAsAdana meM utkRSTa yoga nahIM hotA hai tathA Age matijJAnAvaraNa Adi
prakRtiyoM kA sukSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM utkRSTa pradezabaMdha batalA kara
zeSa prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha Adi mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM
batalAyeMge  /  jisase yaha jJAta hotA hai ki sAsAdana meM utkRSTa yoga nahIM
hotA hai| isa prakAra sAsAdana guNasthAna meM utkRSTa yoga kA abhAva batalAkara
likhA hai ki jo sAsAdana ko bhI Ayukarma ke utkRSTa pradezabaMdha kA svAmI
kahate haiM, unakA mata upekSaNIya hai  /  'ato ye sAsvAdana mapyAyuSa utkRSTa
pradeza svAminaminanti janmanamupakSaNIyamiti sthitam  / ' isa kAthana se yaha
jJAta hotA hai ki koI-koI AcArya sAsAdana meM Ayukarma ke utkRSTa pradezabaMdha
ko mAnate haiM  /

Page #376 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Panchap Karmagranth, Chapter 9  The verse hints at the **utkrista
pradeshabanda** (highest binding place) of **mohaniya karma** (karma of
delusion): "Bitiguna binu mohi sanna micchai" - except for the second and third
gunasthanas (states of being), the **utkrista pradeshabanda** of mohaniya karma
occurs in the remaining seven gunasthanas.   This means that the **utkrista
pradeshabanda** of mohaniya karma is found in the following seven gunasthanas:
Mithyatva (falsehood), Aviрата (uncontrolled), Deshavipati (misery due to wrong
place), Pramatta (inattentive), Apramatta (attentive), Apurvakarana
(unprepared), and Anivritikarana (unliberated).  **Sasa** (second) and **Dan**
(third) gunasthanas do not have **utkrista yoga** (highest state of binding),
hence they do not have **utkrista pradeshabanda** either.  The absence of
**utkrista yoga** in **Sasa** has been mentioned earlier. The reason for its
absence in **Dan** is that the **utkrista pradeshabanda** of the second kashaya
(passion) is found in **Aviрата** gunasthanas. If **Dan** had **utkrista yoga**,
the **utkrista pradeshabanda** of the second kashaya would have been found there
as well.  One might argue that **Aviрата** has fewer karmas binding than
**Dan**, hence it is considered the **utkrista pradeshabanda**. However, this
argument is not valid. In the ordinary state, both **Aviрата** and **Dan** bind
seven karmas. Additionally, both bind seventeen **prakritis** (substances) of
mohaniya karma. Therefore, the absence of **utkrista yoga** is the reason for
not considering **Dan** as the **utkrista pradeshabanda**.  Except for **Aayu**
(life span) and **Mohaniya**, the remaining six karmas - **Jnanavaran** (veil of
knowledge), **Darshanavaran** (veil of perception), **Vedaniya** (painful),
**Naam** (name), **Gotra** (lineage), and **Antaraya** (obstacles) - have their
**utkrista pradeshabanda** in the tenth gunasthanas called **Sukshmasampray**.
This is because **Sukshmasampray** has **utkrista yoga** and binds fewer karmas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcapa karmagrantha 9nyaa mohanIya karma ke utkRSTa pradezabaMdha hone ke bAre
meM gAthA meM saMketa diyA hai ki-bitiguNa biNu mohi sanna micchAI-dUsare aura
tIsare guNasthAna ko chor3akara mithyAtva Adi sAta guNasthAnoM meM mohanIya
karma kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha hotA hai| arthAt mithyAtva, avirata, dezavipati,
pramatta, apramatta, apUrvakaraNa aura anivRttikaraNa, ina sAta guNasthAnoM meM
mohanIya karma kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha batalAyA hai| sAsA. dana aura mizra
guNasthAna meM utkRSTa yoga nahIM hotA hai, jisase vahAM utkRSTa pradezabaMdha
bhI nahIM hotA hai| sAsAdana meM utkRSTa yoga na hone ke saMbaMdha meM Upara
saMketa kiyA jA cukA hai aura mizra guNasthAna meM bhI utkRSTa yoga na hone kA
kAraNa yaha batalAyA gayA hai ki dUsarI kaSAya kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha avirata
guNasthAna meM batalAyA gayA hai  /  yadi mizra meM bhI utkRSTa yoga hotA to
usameM bhI dusarI kaSAya kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha batalAyA jAtA  /  yadi yaha
kahA jAye ki avirata guNasthAna meM mizra guNasthAna se kama prakRtiyAM baMdhatI
haiM ataH avirata ko hI utkRSTa pradezabaMdha kA svAmI batalAyA hai, lekina yaha
yukti ThIka nahIM hai, kyoMki sAdhAraNa avasthA meM avirata meM bhI sAta hI
karmoM kA baMdha hotA hai aura mizra meM to sAta karmoM kA baMdha hotA hI hai
tathA avirata meM bhI mohanIya kI satraha prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai aura
mizra meM bhI usakI satraha prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai  /  ataH mizra meM
utkRSTa pradezabaMdha ko na batalAne meM utkRSTa yoga kA abhAva kAraNa hai  /  _
Ayu aura mohanIya ke sivAya zepa chaha karmoM jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa,
vedanIya, nAma, gotra aura aMtarAya kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha sUkSmasaMparAya
nAmaka dasaveM guNasthAna meM hotA hai| sUkSmasaMparAya meM utkRSTa yoga to hotA
hI hai tathA thor3e karmoM kA baMdha hone ke kAraNa usakA hI grahaNa kiyA hai|

Page #377 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **340**  While stating the **utkrista pradeshabandha** (highest
state of bondage) of the six **mula karma** (root karmas), the **utkrista
pradeshabandha** of their seventeen **uttar prakritis** (sub-karmas) is also
mentioned in the **sukshmasamprayagunasthan** (subtle state of the path) - **han
sataras suhumo**. These seventeen **prakritis** are as follows:
**matijnanavaran** (obscuration of knowledge) etc. five **jnanavaran**
(obscurations of knowledge), **chakshudarshanavaran** (obscuration of
perception) etc. four **darshanavaran** (obscurations of perception),
**satavedaniya** (painful), **yasha** (fame), **kirti** (reputation),
**uchchagotra** (high lineage), and **dana** (giving) **atraray** (hindrance)
etc. five **antaraya karma** (hindrance karmas).  Except for **mohaniya**
(delusion) and **ayu** (life span), the remaining six **mula karma** and their
**matijnanavaran** etc. seventeen **uttar prakritis** have their **utkrista
pradeshabandha** in the tenth **gunasthan** (state of the path). This is
because, due to the absence of bondage of **mohaniya** and **ayukarma**, their
share goes to the remaining six **karma** like **jnanavaran** etc.  The
**utkrista pradeshabandha** of the second **kashaya** (passion)
**apratyakhyanavaran** (non-rejection) is in the fourth **avirata samyagdasht**
(state of perfect knowledge) **gunasthan**, and the **utkrista pradeshabandha**
of the third **kashaya** **pratyakhyanavaran** (rejection) is in the fifth
**deshaviriti** (state of detachment) **gunasthan** - **ajaya desa vittikasae**.
This is because, in the **avirata samyagdristi** (state of perfect vision)
**gunasthan**, there is no bondage of **misyanta** (false belief) and
**anantaanubandhan** (infinite attachments), so their share goes to the
**apratyakhyanavaran** **kashaya**. Similarly, in the **deshaviriti**
**gunasthan**, there is no bondage of **apratyakhyanavaran** **kashaya**, so its
share goes to the **pratyakhyanavaran** **kashaya**. Therefore, the **utkrista
pradeshabandha** of **apratyakhyanavaran** **kashaya** is considered in the
fourth **gunasthan**, and the **utkrista pradeshabandha** of
**pratyakhyanavaran** **kashaya** is considered in the fifth **deshaviriti**
**gunasthan**.  Thus, after indicating the **utkrista pradeshabandha** of the
**mula karma** and some **uttar prakritis**, the following verses describe the
**utkrista pradeshabandha** of other **prakritis**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 340 chaha mUla karma prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa pradezabaMdha kA kathana karate hue
isI ke sAtha unakI satraha uttara prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha bhI
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM batalAyA hai-haM satarasa suhumo  /  ukta satraha
prakRtiyAM isa prakAra haiM-matijJAnAvaraNa Adi pAMca jJAnAvaraNa,
cakSudarzanAvaraNa Adi cAra darzanAvaraNa, sAtAvedanIya, yaza kIrti, uccagotra
aura dAnAta rAya Adi pAMca aMtarAya karma ke bheda  /  mohanIya aura Ayu ke
sivAya zeSa chaha mUla karma tathA unakI bhatijJAnAvaraNa Adi satraha uttara
prakRttiyoM kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha dasaveM gRNasthAna meM mAnane kA kAraNa
yaha hai ki mohanIya aura Ayukarma kA baMdha na hone ke kAraNa unakA bhAga
zAnAvaraNa Adi zeSa chaha karmoM ko mila jAtA hai| dvitIya kapAya
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha cauthe avirata samyaghASTa
sthAna meM aura tIsarI kaSAya pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha
pAMcaveM dezavirati guNasthAna meM hotA haiajayA desA vittikasAe  /  isakA
kAraNa yaha hai ki avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM mizyAntra aura
anantAnubaMdhana kA baMdha nahIM hone se unakA bhAga apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kapAtra
ko mila jAtA hai tathA dezavirati bhuNasthAna meM apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kapAya kA
bhI baMdha nahIM hone se usakA bhAga pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kayAya ko milatA hai|
isIlie cauthe guNasthAna meM apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa jhapAya kA utkRSTa
pradezabaMdha tathA pAMcaveM dezavirati gRNAsthAna meM pratyAgyAnAvaraNa kapAya
kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha mAnA hai| isa prakAra meM mUla karma prakRtiyoM aura
kucha unnara prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa pradezabaMdha ke svAmiyoM kA nirdeza karane
ke bAda Age kI gAthAoM meM anya prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa pradezabaMdha ke svAmiyoM
kA kathana karate haiN|

Page #378 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **But the non-returner (Anivrittibadar) with the five
(Purushaved and the four Sanchalana) qualities, has a superior region-bond. The
auspicious liberation, human life, the three heavens, the auspicious three
heavens, the Vaikriya, the square-shaped, the non-cognizable, the Vajra,
Rishabha, and Narach, these qualities have a superior region-bond, either by the
right faith (Samyagdrishti) or the wrong faith (Mithyadrishti).**  **Sleep,
movement, two pairs (laughter-love and sorrow-hate), fear, disgust, and the
Tirthankara, these qualities have a superior region-bond by the right faith
(Samyagdrishti). The food-related qualities have a superior...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha paNa aniyaTTI sukhAi narAusurasubhagativiviyuga  /  samaca
urasamasAya badaraM minacho cha sammo bA || niddApayalAdujuyalabhaya kucchAtitya
sAmago sujii| AhAradugaM sesA uskosapaesagA miccho  // 2 //  zabdArtha - paNa -
pAMca {purupaveda aura saMjvalana catuSpa.) bhaniyaTTI-anivRttibAdara guNasthAna
vAlA, suSagAzubha vihAyogani, narAu -manuSyAyu, surasumagatiga -devatrika aura
subhagatrika, vidhi. sugaM ..kriya dvika, samacaurasaM-samacaturasa saMsthAna,
asAyaM-. asAtAvedanIya, vAraM - dana RpabhanArAca saMhanana, micyo-mithyAdRSTi
va- athavA, sammo-samyagdRSTi, yA athavA  /  niddApayalA -nidrA aura pracalA,
dumuyala-do yugala, bhayakunchAtitya-bhaya, jugupsA aura tIrthakara nAmakarma,
sammagosamyagdRSTi, sujAI apramatta yani aura apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna vAlA,
AhArasugaMAhArakadika kA, sesA-bAkI kI prakRtiyoM kA, ukosapaesagA -utkRSTa
pradezabaMdha, micyo-mithyASTi (karatA hai)| _ gAthArtha-anivRttibAdara
guNasthAna meM pAMca (puruSaveda, saMJcalana catuSka) prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa
pradezabaMdha hotA hai  /  zubha vihAyogati, manuSyAyu, devatrika, subhagatrika,
vaikriyahika, samacaturasrasaMsthAna, asAtAvedanIya, vajaRSabhanArAca saMhanana,
ina prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha samyagdRSTi athavA mithyA dRSTi jIva
karate haiM  /  nidrA, pracalA, do yugala (hAsya-rati aura zoka-arati), bhaya,
jugupsA, tIrthakara, ina prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha samyagdRSTi jIva
karate haiM | AhArakadvika kA utkRSTa

Page #379 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 342:  The Realm of Binding  **The realm of binding for the non-
attentive and non-reverted, the ninth-stage-dwelling Muni and the remaining
natures is done by the deluded-view-holding living beings.**  **Explanation:**
In the previous verse, we discussed the realm of binding for the twenty-five
natures out of the one hundred and twenty bindable natures. In these two verses,
we will discuss the realm of binding for the remaining eighty-five natures.
These sixty-five natures are divided into five sections. The first section
includes five natures, the second thirteen, the third nine, the fourth two, and
the fifth includes the remaining sixty-six natures besides the aforementioned
ones.  The first section includes the five natures of **Purusha-veda** and the
**four burning passions** (anger, pride, deceit, and greed). It is said that the
ninth-stage-dwelling living being, known as **A-niyat-ti** (non-reverted), holds
the realm of binding for these five natures. This is because **Purusha-veda** is
a type of **no-kṣaya** (non-exhaustive) **mohaniya** (delusive), and since there
is no binding of the six **no-kṣaya** in the ninth stage, their portion goes to
**Purusha-veda**. After the binding of **Purusha-veda** is severed, the **four
burning passions** hold the realm of binding. This is because all the substance
of the twelve **kṣaya** (exhaustive) and **no-kṣaya** (non-exhaustive) -
**mithyātva** (false view), **ananta-anubandhi** (infinitely connected),
**apratyākhyāna-āvaraṇa** (non-rejected covering), and **pratyākhyāna-āvaraṇa**
(rejected covering) - goes to the **four burning passions**.  The second section
includes the thirteen natures of **shubha-viha-yoga-gati** (auspicious path of
liberation), **manushya-ayu** (human lifespan), **deva-trika** (divine path,
divine predecessors, and divine lifespan), **subhaga-trika** (auspicious,
melodious, and worthy), **vaikriya-dvika** (vaikriya body, vaikriya limbs),
**sama-chaturasra-samsthāna** (equally square-shaped body), **asāta-vedaniya**
(not-to-be-experienced), **vajra-ṛṣabha-nārācha** (diamond-bull-elephant).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 342 pAta pradezabaMdha apramatta aura apUrvakaraNa guNasthAnavartI muni aura
zeSa prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha midhyAdRSTi jIva karate haiM  /
vizeSArtha -- baMdhayogya ekasau bIsa prakRtiyoM meM se paccIsa prakRtiyoM ke
utkRSTa pradezabaMdha ke svAmiyoM kA kathana pUrva gAthA meM kiyA jA cukA hai|
unake sivAya zeSa bacI huI 85 prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa pradezabaMdha ke svAmiyoM ko
ina do gAthAoM meM batalAyA hai  /  ina 65 prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa pradezabaMdha
ke svAmitva ko pAMca khaMDoM meM vibhAjita kiyA hai| pahale khaMDa meM pAMca,
dUsare meM teraha, tIsare meM nau, cauthe meM do aura pAMcaveM meM ukta
prakRtiyoM ke alAvA zeSa rahI 66 prakRtiyoM ko grahaNa kiyA hai| pahale khaMDa
meM puruSaveda aura saMjvalana krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha, ina pA~ca
prakRtiyoM kA samAveza karate hue kahA hai- paNa aniyaTTI yAni anivRttibAdara
nAmaka nauveM guNasthAnavartI jIva puruSaveda aura saMjvalana catuSka, ina pAMca
prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha karate haiN| kyoMki puruSaveda nokaSAya
mohanIya kA bheda hai aura nauveM guNasthAna meM chaha nokaSAyoM kA baMdha na
hone ke kAraNa unakA bhAga puruSaveda ko mila jAtA hai tathA puruSaveda ke
baMdha kA viccheda hone ke bAda saMjvalana kaSAya catuSka kA utkRSTa
pradezabaMdha hotA hai  /  kyoMki mithyAtva tathA anantAnubaMdhI,
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa ina bAraha kaSAyoM va nokaSAyoM kA saba
dravya saMjvalana kaSAya catuSka ko milatA hai| dUsare khaMDa meM garbhita
teraha prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM- zubha vihAyogati, manuSyAyu,
devatrika (devagati, devAnupUrvI aura devAyu), subhagatrika (subhaga, susvara
aura Adeya), vaikriyadvika (vaikriyazarIra, vaikriya aMgopAMga), samacaturasra
saMsthAna, asAtAvedanIya, vajraRSabhanArAca

Page #380 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 343 **Samhanan:** These thirteen **Prakritis** are
bound by the **Utkrishta Pradeshbandh** of **Michcha Che** and **Sammo Gha** -
**Mithyatva Drishti** or **Samyag Drishti** Jivas. This is because they are
found due to their respective **Utkrishta Pradeshbandh**.  The third section
consists of **Nidra**, **Prachala**, **Hasya**, **Rati**, **Shok**, **Arati**,
**Bhay**, **Jugupsa**, and **Tirthankara** - these nine **Prakritis**. Their
**bandh** is done by **Samyag Drishti** Jivas. The specific explanation is as
follows: **Nidra** and **Prachala** have their **Utkrishta Pradeshbandh** done
by **Samyag Drishti** Jivas with **Utkrishta Yoga** from the fourth **Avirat
Samyag Drishti** to the eighth **Anoop Karan Gunasthan**. This is because
**Samyag Drishti** Jivas do not have the **bandh** of **Styaadhitrik**, so their
**bhag** also goes to **Nidra** and **Prachala**. Therefore, **Samyag Drishti**
is included in the **swami** of **Utkrishta Pradeshbandh** of **Nidra** and
**Prachala**. In the **Min Gunasthan**, the **bandh** of **Styaadhitrik** does
not occur, but due to the absence of **Utkrishta Yoga**, it is not included.
**Hasya**, **Rati**, **Shok**, **Arati**, **Bhay**, and **Jugupsa** have their
**bandh** in the **Gunasthan** from the fourth to the eighth **Gunasthan**.
**Samyag Drishti** Jivas with **Utkrishta Yoga** in those **Gunasthan** do their
**Pradeshbandh**. And the **bandh** of the **Tirthankara** **Prakriti** is done
only by **Samyag Drishti** Jivas. Therefore, **Samyag Drishti** Jivas are
described as the ones who do the **Utkrishta Pradeshbandh** of these nine
**Prakritis**.  The third section consists of **Aharak Sharira** and **Aharak
Angopaang**, these two **Prakritis**. Their **Utkrishta Pradeshbandh** is done
by **Suti**, meaning the seventh **Aparamat** **Samyat** and the eighth
**Apoovarnakaran** - these two **Gunasthan** residing **Muni**. Both these
**Gunasthan** are of **Samyag Drishti** and due to being free from **pramad**,
the word "**Muzai**" is used to include these two **Gunasthan**.  In this way,
the **swami** of the **Utkrishta Pradeshbandh** of 55 **Prakritis** are...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 343 saMhanana  /  ina teraha prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa
pradezabaMdha-'micchace va sammo ghA'-mithyA dRSTi athavA samyagdRSTi jIva
karate haiN| kyoMki unake yathAyogya utkRSTa pradezabaMdha ke kAraNa pAye jAte
haiN| tIsarA khaMDa nidrA, pracalA, hAsya, rati, zoka, arati, bhaya, jugupsA
aura tIrthakara ina nau prakRtiyoM kA hai| jinakA baMdha samyagdRSTi jIva karate
haiN| isakA vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai-nidrA aura pracalA kA utkRSTa
pradezabaMdha cauthe avirata samyagdRSTi se lekara ATha anUpa karaNa guNasthAna
taka ke utkRSTa yoga vAle samyagdRSTi jIva karate haiN| kyoMki samyagdRSTi ke
styAddhitrika kA baMdha na hone ke kAraNa unakA bhAga bhI nidrA aura pracalA ko
mila jAtA hai| isIliye nidrA aura pracalA ke utkRSTa pradezabaMdha ke svAmI meM
samyagdRSTi kA grahaNa kiyA hai  /  mina guNasthAna meM bhI styAnaddhitrika kA
baMdha nahIM hotA hai, kintu vahAM utkRSTa yoga nahIM hone se usakA grahaNa
nahIM kiyA hai  /  hAsya, rati, zoka, arati, bhaya aura jugupsA kA cauthe se
lekara AThaveM gaNasthAna taka jina-jina muNasthAnoM meM baMdha hotA hai, una
guNasthAnoM ke utkRSTa yoga vAle samyagdRSTi jIva unakA pradezabandha karate
haiM aura tIrthakara prakRti kA bandha to samyagdRSTi jIva hI karate haiN|
isIliye samyagdRSTi jIva ko nidrA Adi nau prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha
karane vAlA batalAyA hai  /  trIyA khaMDa AhAraka zArIra aura AhAraka aMgopAMga,
ina do praka. tiyoM kA hai  /  inakA utkRSTa pradezabaMdhaka suti yAnI sAta
apramatta saMyata aura AThaveM apUrvakaraNa ina do guNasthAnavartI muni ko
batalAyA hai  /  ye donoM guNasthAna samyagdRSTi ke hI hote haiM aura pramAda
rahita hone se 'mujaI' zabda se ina donoM guNasthAnoM kA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai|
isa prakAra 55 prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa pradezabaMdha ke svAmiyoM kA

Page #381 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
344 Shataka The statement has already explained the names of the natures and
their eligible recipients. In addition to these, the remaining 66 natures are
described in the verse as follows: - Sema Ukkosapesaaga Miccho - The remaining
natures are bound by the excellent Pradeshbandha by the Mithyadrishti Jiva. The
details of which are as follows: Manushyadvik, Panchendriya jati, Audarikatik,
Tejas, Karman, Varnachatusk, Agurulghu, Upghāt, Paradhat, Ucchvas, Tras, Badar,
Paryapt, Pratyek, Sthiradvik, Punitaayashakāni and Nirman. Except for these
twenty-five natures, the remaining 41 natures do not bind the Samyagdristi. Some
of these natures are bound in the Sasadan Gunasthan, but there is no excellent
yoga there, therefore the excellent Pradeshbandha of 41 natures is done only by
Mithyadrishti. Out of the above twenty-five natures, Audarik, Tejas, Karman,
Varnachatusk, Agurulghu, Upghāt, Badar, Pratyek, Asthir, Ashubh, Ayashkīti,
Nirman, these fifteen natures have their excellent Pradeshbandha in the twenty-
three nature bound state of the Mamakarma bound Jivas, and the remaining ten
natures have their excellent Pradeshbandha only in the twenty-five nature bound
state of the Namakarma bound Jivas, not in others, and the binding of twenty-
three and twenty-five is done only by Mithyadrishti. Therefore, the excellent
Pradeshbandha of the remaining twenty-five natures is done only by the
Mithyadrishti Jivas who have excellent yoga. After thus directing the owners of
the excellent Pradeshbandha of all the natures, the next verse tells about the
owners of the Jghanya Pradeshbandha. Sumuno Kunni Asanni
Nirayaligsuraausuravidhibugan. Sammo Jinam Jahannan Suhamanigoayaikhani Sesā.
||3||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 344 zataka kathana to prakRtiyoM ke nAma aura unake yogya pAtra ko batalAte hue
kara diyA hai| inake atirikta zeSa rahI 66 prakRtiyoM ke liye gAthA meM batAyA
hai ki - semA ukkosapaesagA miccho-zeSa rahI prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha
mithyAdRSTi jIva karatA hai  /  jisakA vivaraNa isa prakAra haimanuSyadvika,
paMcendriya jAti, audArikaTika, tejasa, kArmaNa, varNacatuSka, agurulaghu,
upaghAta, parAdhAta, ucchvAsa, trasa, bAdara, paryApta, pratyeka, sthiradvika,
punitaayazAkAni aura nirmANa ina paccIsa prakRtiyoM ke sivAya zeSa 41 prakRtiyAM
samyagdRSTi ko baMdhatI hI nahIM hai  /  unameM se kucha prakRtiyAM sAsAdana
guNasthAna meM baMdhatI haiM kintu vahAM utkRSTa yoga nahIM hotA hai, ataH 41
prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha mithyASTi hI karatA hai| ukta paccIsa
prakRtiyoM meM se audArika, tejasa, kArmaNa, varNacatuSka, agurulaghu, upaghAta,
bAdara, pratyeka, asthira, azubha, ayazaHkIti, nirmANa, ina pandraha prakRtiyoM
kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha mAmakarma ke teIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke baMdhaka
jIvoM ke hotA hai aura zeSa dasa prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha nAmakarma
ke paccIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke baMdhaka jIvoM ko hI hotA hai, anya ko
nahIM aura teIsa va paccIsa kA baMdha mithyAdRSTi ko hI hotA hai  /  isIliye
zeSa paccIsa akRtiyoM kA utkRSTa pradezabandha utkRSTa yoga vAle mithyA dRSTi
jIva hI karate haiN| isa prakAra se samasta prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa pradezabaMdha
ke svAmiyoM kA nirdeza karane ke bAda aba Age kI gAthA meM jaghanya
pradezabandha ke svAmiyoM ko batalAte haiN| sumuNo kunni asannI
nirayaligasurAusuravidhibugaM  /  sammo jiNaM jahannaM suhamanigoyAikhaNi sesA
// 3 //

Page #382 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Karma Bandha: 41  **Word Meanings:**  * **Sumuni:**  A non-negligent
ascetic (muni) * **Chumni:**  Two natures (Aharakatik) * **Asali Asangni:**  A
non-conscious being * **Niryatig:**  Hell-bound * **Suraddevayu:**  Deva-ayu
(divine beings) * **Suraviuvudurig:**  Deva-dvik and Vaikriya-dvik (divine
beings) * **Sammosampasti:**  The name-karma of a Jina (Tirthankara) *
**Jahannm:**  Inferior * **Suhamnigoy:**  Subtle Nimodaya beings * **Aikhni:**
At the time of birth * **Sesa:**  Remaining natures  **Verse Meaning:**  Non-
negligent munis bind the inferior regions of the Aharakatik. Non-conscious
beings bind the inferior regions of the Narakatik and Deva-ayu, while those with
right vision bind the inferior regions of the Deva-dvik, Vaikriya-dvik, and
Tirthankara natures.  Except for these, the subtle Nimodaya beings bind the
inferior regions of the remaining natures at the time of birth.  **Special
Meaning:**  This verse explains the owners of the inferior regions. It mentions
the owners of eleven natures by name, and states that the subtle Nimodaya beings
are the owners of the inferior regions of the remaining 101 natures. This will
be explained further below.  'Sumuni Dunni' means that the seventh guna-sthana
muni binds the inferior regions of the Aharakatik. This should be understood in
a general sense, but specifically, when a non-negligent ascetic (muni) with
paravartaman yoga binds eight karmas and binds the 31-nature bandha-sthana of
name-karma, and the yoga is also inferior, then they bind the inferior regions
of the Aharakatik. Although the Aharakatik are also included in the 30-nature
bandha-sthana, because there is one more nature in the 31-nature bandha-sthana,
they receive less substance during the division.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrandha :41 zabdArtha-sumuNI-apramatta yati, cumni-do prakRtiyoM
(AhArakaTika) kA, asalIasaMjJI, nirayatiga-narakazrika, surADadevAyu,
suraviuvidurgadevadvika aura vaikriyatika, sammosampaSTi , jirNatIrthakara
nAmakarma kA, jahannaM- jaghanya, suhamanigoya-sUkSma ni godiyA jIva, AikhaNi-
utpatti ke pahale samaya meM, sesA-zeSa rahI huI prakRtiyoM kaa| gAthArtha -
apramatta muni AhArakadvika kA jaghanya pradezabaMdha karate haiM  /  asaMjJI
jIva narakatrika aura devAyu kA tathA samyagdRSTi jIva deva dvika, vaikriyadvika
aura tIrthakara prakRti kA jaghanya pradezabandha karate haiN| inake sivAya zeSa
rahI huI prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya pradezabaMdha sUkSma nimodiyA jIva utpatti ke
prathama samaya meM karate haiN| vizeSArtha - isa gAthA meM jaghanya
pradezabaMdha ke svAmiyoM ko batalAyA hai  /  gyAraha prakRtiyoM kA to
nAmollekha karake unake svAmiyoM kA kathana kiyA hai aura zeSa rahI 101
prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya pradezabaMdha kA svAmI sUkSma nigodiyA jIva ko batalAyA
hai| jisakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA jA rahA hai| 'sumuNI dunni' yAnI AhArakahika
kA jaghanya pradezabandha sAtaveM guNasthAnavartI muni karate haiM  /  yaha
sAmAnya kI apekSA samajhanA cAhiye kintu vizeSa se jisa samaya parAvartamAna
yoga vAle apramatta yati (muni) ATha karmoM kA baMdha karate hue nAmakarma ke
ikatIsa prakRti vAle baMdhasthAna kA baMdha karate haiM aura yoga bhI jaghanya
hai, usa samaya hI ve AhArakadika kA jaghanya pradezabaMdha karate haiN| yadyapi
tosa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM bhI AhArakadvika kA samAveza hai, lekina ikatIsa
meM eka prakRti adhika hone ke kAraNa baTavAre ke samaya unako kama dravya

Page #383 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Passage It is obtained. Therefore, the instruction of thirty-one natural bond-
places is given. Similarly, the non-sentient being with the paravartaman yoga,
binds the inferior regions of narakatrik (narakagati, narakanupurvi and
narakayu) and devayu - asanni nirya timsuraou. The reason for considering the
non-sentient, sufficient being as the binder of the inferior regions of these
four natures is that the earth-bodied, water-bodied, fire-bodied, air-bodied,
plant-bodied, and two-sensed, three-sensed and four-sensed beings are not born
in narakagati and devagati, so they do not have the bond of these natures, and
the non-sentient, insufficient beings do not have such pure results that they
can bind the natures worthy of devagati, and neither are there such complex
results that they can bind the natures worthy of narakagati. The reason for
considering the non-sentient, sufficient being, the binder of the above four
natures, as having paravartaman yoga is that if one is taken to stay in the same
yoga for a long time, then he will become a strong yoga. Therefore, paravartaman
yoga has been accepted. Because there cannot be three yogas as there is change
in yoga. Therefore, the non-sentient being, the sufficient binder of eight
karmas, with the paravartaman yoga, binds the inferior regions of these four
natures, narakatrik and devayu, while remaining in his own inferior yoga. The
samyagdristi being binds the inferior regions of these five natures - devadvik
(devagati, devanaapurvi), vaikriyadvik (vaikriya sharira, vaikriya angopaang)
and tirthankara. The reason for this is explained below - a human being was born
in the heavens after binding the nature of tirthankara. There, in the first time
of his birth, he is worthy of the human path, tirthankara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAsaka milatA hai| isIliye ikatIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA nirdeza kiyA gayA
hai| isI taraha parAvartamAna yoga vAlA asaMjJo jIva narakatrika (narakagati,
narakAnupUrvI aura narakAyu) aura devAyu kA jaghanya pradezabandha karatA hai -
asannI nirayatimasurAu  /  ina cAra prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya pradezabaMdhaka
asaMjJI paryApta jIva ko mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki pRthvIkAyika, jalakAyika,
tejaskAyika, vAyukAyika, vanaspatikAyika tathA dvIndriya, trIndriya aura
caturindriya jIva to narakagati aura devagati meM utpanna hI nahIM hote haiM,
jisase unake ukta prakRtiyoM kA vandha hI nahI hotA hai aura asaMjJo aparyApta
ke bhI itane vizuddha pariNAma nahIM hote haiM jisase devargAta yogya prakRtiyoM
kA baMdha kara sake aura na itane saMkleza rUpa pariNAma ki narakagati yogya
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha ho ske| ukta cAra prakRtiyoM ke baMdhaka asaMjJI paryAptaka
ke parAvartamAna yoga bAlA mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki yadi eka hI yoga meM
cirakAla taka rahane vAlA liyA jAyegA to vaha tIvra yoga vAlA ho jAyegA  /
isIliye parAvartamAna yoga ko grahaNa kiyA hai  /  kyoMki yoga meM parivartana
hote rahate tIna yoga nahIM ho sakatA hai  /  ataH parAvartamAna yoga vAlA, ATha
karmoM kA bandhaka paryApta asaMjJI jIva apane yogya jaghanya yoga ke rahate hue
narakatrika aura devAyu ina cAra prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya pradezabaMdha karatA
hai| devadvika (devagati, devAnupUrvI), vaikriyadvika (vaM kriya zarIra,
vaikriya aMgopAMga) aura tIrthakara ina pAMca prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya
pradezabandha samyagdRSTi jIva karatA hai| isakA kAraNa nIce spaSTa kiyA jAtA
hai_ koI manuSya tIrthakara prakRti kA baMdha karake devoM meM utpanna huA  /
vahAM vaha utpatti ke prathama samaya meM ho manuSyagati ke yogya tIrthakara

Page #384 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Firm Granth ### 347  The **Tirthankara** nature binds the **thirty
natural places** of the **name-karma** along with **nature**. This is the
**inferior provincial binding** of the **Tirthankara** nature. Even in **hell**,
the **Tirthankara** nature is bound, but in **heaven**, it is accepted by the
**Anuttara** gods who have **inferior yoga**, because there is no such inferior
yoga in **hell**. Therefore, the **inferior provincial binding** of the
**Tirthankara** nature of the **right-seeing** being in **hell** is not
mentioned. In **animal life**, the **Tirthankara** nature is not bound at all,
and in **human life**, in the **first moment** of birth, the **two Tirthankara**
**Manimahit** **name-karma** binds the **thirty natural places**. Therefore, due
to the **lesser nature**, they get a **greater share**, and the **binding of the
thirty natural places** along with the **Tirthankara** is only for the
**restrained**, and there is also **greater yoga** there. Therefore, the
**inferior provincial binding** of the **Tirthankara** nature is mentioned only
for the gods who are bound by the **thirty natural places**.  The **inferior
provincial binding** of **Devadik** and **Vaikriyhik** occurs in the **human**
being born from **heaven** or **hell** at the time when they bind the **twenty-
nine natural places** of the **name-karma** suitable for **heaven**. Because
**gods** and **hell beings** do not bind these **natures** at all, and the
**enjoying** **animal** beings bind them in the **first moment** of taking
birth, but they bind only the **twenty-eight natural places** suitable for
**heaven**. This gives them a **greater share** at the time of **distribution**.
The same should be understood for the **human** being bound by the **twenty-
eight natural places**. Therefore, the **inferior provincial binding** of these
**four natures**, **Devadik** and **Vaikriyhik**, is mentioned for the **human**
being bound by the **twenty-nine natural places**.  Except for the above
**eleven natures**, the **inferior provincial binding** of the remaining **one
hundred and six natures**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama pharmagrantha 347 prakRti sahita nAmakarma ke tIsa prakRtika sthAna kA
baMdha karatA huA tIrthaMkara prakRti kA jaghanya pradezabaMdha karatA hai|
narakagati meM bhI tIrthaMkara prakRti kA baMdha hotA hai kintu devagati meM
jaghanya yoga bAle anuttaravAsI devoM kA grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai, kyoMki
narakagati meM itanA jaghanya yoga nahIM hotA hai| ataH narakagati ke
samyagdRSTi jIva ke tIrthakara prakRti kA jaghanya pradezabandha nahIM batalAyA
hai  /  tiryacati meM tIrthakara prakRti kA baMdha hI nahIM hotA hai aura
manuSyagati meM janma ke prathama samA' meM do tIrthakara mAni mAhita nAmakarma
ke natIsa prakR. tika bandhasthAna kA baMdha hotA hai, ataH prakRti kama hone se
vahAM adhika bhAga milatA hai tathA tIrthakara sahita ikatIma prakRtika
baMdhasthAna kA baMdha saMyamI ke hI hotA hai aura vahAM yoga bhI adhika hotA
hai  /  ataH tIsa prakRtika sthAna ke bandhaka devoM ke hI tIrthaMkara prakRti
kA jaghanya pradezabaMdha batalAyA hai| devaddhika aura vaikriyahika kA jaghanya
pradezabaMdha devagati yA narakagati se Akara utpanna hone vAle manuSya ke usa
samaya hotA hai jaba baha devagati ke yogya nAmakarma ke unatIsa prakRtika
baMdhasthAna kA baMdha karatA hai| kyoMki deva aura nAraka to ina prakRtiyoM kA
bandha hI nahIM karate haiM aura bhogabhUmiyA tiryaMca janma lene ke prathama
samaya meM inakA baMdha karate bhI haiM kintu ve devati yogya aTThAIsa prakRtika
bandhasthAna kA hI baMdha karate haiN| jisase unako baTavAre ke samaya adhika
dravya milatA hai| yahI vAta aTThAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke baMdhaka manuSya
ke liye bhI samajhanA cAhiye  /  ataH unatIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke baMdhaka
manuSya ke ho dedika aura vaikriyadvika ina cAra prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya
pradezabandha batalAyA hai| ukta 11 prakRtiyoM ke sivAya zeSa rahI 106
prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya

Page #385 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
348 Shataka The जीव, who is capable of attaining liberation, in the early stages
of his existence, is bound by the subtle Pradeshbandha. Because he is bound by
almost all the prakritis, and the most heinous yoga is also his. In this way,
one should know the owners of the excellent and heinous Pradeshbandha. Now, in
the next section, we will explain the various types of Pradeshbandha and their
dissolution. Darshanachhag, bhay, kumchha, aaviti, turiya, kshaya, vigghanana.
Mulachhage, anukkosso, chauh, duha, seshi, samvatha. ||64|| _ Word meaning -
Darshanachhag - six darshanavarana, mayakunchha - fear, sunu, diti, stimaasi,
jiti and gadhi kshaya, vigghanana - five antaraya, five jnanaavarana, mulachhage
- six original prakritis, anukkosso - anuskrushta Pradeshbandha, chauh - four
types, duha - two types, seshi - remaining three types of bandha, samvatha -
everywhere. _ Meaning - The darshanavarana karma is of six types, the second,
third and fourth kshaya are of six types, the five antaraya and five
jnanaavarana are of six types, the six original karmas are of four types. The
anuskrushta Pradeshbandha is of four types. The said prakritis and the remaining
prakritis are of two types. _ Special meaning - The gatha discusses the various
types of Pradeshbandha and their dissolution. 1 The Gola Kamakanda, verses 211
to 217, explains the owners of the excellent and heinous Pradeshbandha. Which is
similar to the Dharma Grantha and also explains some special features about the
heinous bandha of the 109 prakritis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 348 zataka pradezabaMdha sUkSma nigodiyA labdhyaparyAptaka jIva apane bhava ke
pahale samaya meM karatA hai| kyoMki usake prAyaH sabhI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
hotA hai aura sabase jaghanya yoga bhI usI ke hotA hai  /  isa prakAra se
utkRSTa aura jaghanya pradezabaMdha ke svAmiyoM ko jAnanA cAhiye  / ' aba Age kI
mAthA meM pradezabaMdha ke sAdi Adi bhaMgoM ko batalAte haiM  /
dhaMsaNachagabhayakumachAvitituriyakasAya vigghanANA  /  mUlachage'Nurukoso
ghauha buhA sesi samvattha  /  / 64 //  _ zabdArtha-dasaMNaga-
darzanAvaraNaSaTaka, mayakunchA - bhaya au. sunu, diti stimAsI , jItI aura gadhI
kaSAya, vigghanANANaM-pAMca aMtarAya, pAMca jJAnAvaraNa, mUlachage-mUla chaha
prakRtiyoM kA, aNukkoso- anuskRSTa pradezavadha, cauha -. cAra prakAra kA, duhA-
do prakAra kA, sesi-zeSa tIna prakAra ke baMghoM meM, savvatha-sarvatra hote
haiN| gApArtha-darzanAvaraNa karma ko chaha prakRtiyoM kA, dUsarI tIsarI aura
cauthI kaSAya kA, pAMca antarAya aura pAMca jJAnAvaraNa kA, chaha mUla karmoM kA
anutkRSTa pradezabaMdha cAroM prakAra kA hotA hai| ukta prakRtiyoM ke tathA
unake sivAya zeSa prakRtiyoM ke tIna baMdha do prakAra ke hote haiM  /
vizeSArtha-gAthA meM pradezabaMdha ke sAdi Adi bhaMgoM kA vivecana kiyA gayA
hai| 1 gola kAmakAMDa gA0 211 se 217 meM utkRSTa aura jaghanya pradeNabaMdha ke
svAmiyoM ko batalAyA hai| jo prAya: pharmagrantha ke samAna hai aura poSa 109
prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya baMdhaka ke bAre meM kucha vizeSatA bhI batalAI hai|

Page #386 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  242  The nature of the **utkrusht**, **anutkrusht**,
**jaghanya**, and **ajagghanya** bands, along with their **saadi**, **anaadi**,
**dhruva**, and **adhruva** bhangs, has been explained previously. The
consideration of their **mool** and **uttar** prakritis at the end of each band
has also been discussed. Now, we will consider them in the context of
**pradeshabandh**.  The act of acquiring the maximum number of **karma
skandhas** is called **utkrusht pradeshabandh**. The act of acquiring the
minimum number of **karma skandhas**, including the loss of one, two, or more
**skandhas** from the **utkrusht pradeshabandh**, is called **anutkrusht
pradeshabandh**. In this way, all the variations of **pradeshabandh** are
encompassed within the **utkrusht** and **anutkrusht** categories.  The act of
acquiring the minimum number of **skandhas** is called **jaghanya
pradeshabandh**. The act of acquiring more and more **karma skandhas**,
including the addition of one, two, or more **skandhas** to the **jaghanya
pradeshabandh**, is called **ajagghanya pradeshabandh**. In this way, all the
variations of **pradeshabandh** are encompassed within the **jaghanya** and
**ajagghanya** categories, similar to the **utkrusht** and **anutkrusht**
categories.  The **anutkrusht pradeshabandh** with its four variations of
**saadi** etc., as mentioned in the **gatha** concerning the **darshan shatka**
and other **prakritis**, is explained as follows:  In **darshan**, the six
**prakritis** of **chakshudarshanaavaran**, **achakshudarshanaavaran**,
**avhidarshanaavaran**, **kevaladarshanaavaran**, **nidra**, and **prachala**
are acquired. Of these, the **utkrusht pradeshabandh** of the remaining four
**darshanaavaran**, excluding **nidra** and **prachala**, occurs in the tenth
**gunasthan** called **sukshmasampray**. This is because the **mohaniya** and
**ayu karma** do not bind here, and the **nidra panchak** also does not bind.
This allows the **jiva** to acquire a lot of **dravya**. After achieving this
**utkrusht pradeshabandh**, when a **jiva** reaches the eleventh **gunasthan**
called **upshantamoh** and then falls back to the tenth **gunasthan**, the
**jiva** acquires the **anutkrusht** of the aforementioned **prakritis**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 242 utkRSTa, anutkRSTa, jaghanya aura ajaghanya baMdha
tathA unake sAdi, anAdi, dhruva aura adhruva bhaMgoM kA svarUpa pahale batalA
cuke haiM tathA pratyeka baMdha ke aMta meM mUla aura uttara prakRtiyoM meM
unakA vicAra kiyA gayA hai  /  aba pradezabandha meM bhI unakA vicAra karate
haiM  /  sabase adhika karmaskaMdhoM ke grahaNa karane ko utkRSTa pradezabaMdha
aura utkRSTa pradezabaMdha meM eka do vagairaha skandhoM kI hAni se lekara
sabase kama karmaskaMdhoM ke grahaNa karane ko anutkRSTa pradezabaMdha kahate
haiN| isa prakAra utkRSTa aura anutkRSTa bhedoM meM pradezabaMdha ke saba bhedoM
kA grahaNa ho jAtA hai  /  sabase kamoM ke prApya karate ho pradeza karate haiM
aura usameM eka do Adi skaMdhoM kI vRddhi se lekara adhika-se-adhika
karmaskaMdhoM ke grahaNa karane ko ajaghanya pradezabandha kahate haiM  /  isa
prakAra jaghanya aura ajaghanya bhedoM meM bhI utkRSTa aura anutkRSTa bhedoM kI
taraha pradezabaMdha ke saba bheda garbhita ho jAte haiM  /  gAthA meM jo
darzanaSaTka Adi prakRtiyoM meM anutkRSTa pradezabaMdha ke sAdi Adi cAroM bheda
batalAye haiM, unakA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra haidarzana meM cakSudarzanAvaraNa,
acakSudarzanAvaraNa, avadhidarzanAvaraNa, kevaladarzanAvaraNa, nidrA aura
pracalA ina chaha prakRtiyoM kA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai| unameM se nidrA aura
pracalA ina do ko chor3a kara zeSa cAra darzanAvaraNoM kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha
sUkSmasaMparAya nAmaka dasaveM guNasthAna meM hotA hai| kyoMki yahAM mohanIya
aura Ayu karma kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai tathA nidrApaMcaka kA bhI baMdha nahIM
hotA hai| jisase unheM bahuta dravya milatA hai  /  isa utkRSTa pradezabaMdha ko
karake jaba koI jIva gyArahaveM upazAMtamoha guNasthAna meM gayA aura vahAM se
girakara dasaveM guNasthAna meM Akara jaba vaha jIva ukta prakRtiyoM kA
anutkRSTa

Page #387 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 250 ## Century  If a being binds, then it is called *saadi*. Or, if a being,
after binding in the excellent region in the tenfold qualities, binds again in
the non-excellent region, then it is called *saadi*. Because the excellent state
does not last for more than one or two moments. The non-excellent region binding
that occurs before the excellent region binding is *anaadi*. The binding of an
*abhavya* being is *dhruva*, and the binding of a *bhavya* being is *adhruva*.
The binding of *samyagdristi* beings does not occur in the *styanaddhitrika*.
The excellent region binding of *nidra* and *prachala* occurs from the fourth to
the eighth *ganasthanas*. Therefore, they also receive the path of
*sapaladdhala*. When a being, after binding in the excellent region in any one
of the aforementioned *ganasthanas*, binds again in the non-excellent region, it
is called *saadi*. The non-excellent region binding that occurs before the
excellent binding is *anaadi*. The binding of an *abhavya* is *dhruva*, and the
binding of a *bhavya* is *adhruva*.  The excellent region binding of *bhaya* and
*jugupsa* also occurs from the fourth to the eighth *ganasthanas*. One should
know the four types of binding for their non-excellent region binding as well.
That is, when *avirata* etc. fall from the excellent state or bind in the non-
excellent region due to the cessation of binding, it is called *saadi*, and the
binding before that is *anaadi*. The binding of an *abhavya* is *dhruva*, and
the binding of a *bhavya* is *adhruva*.  Similarly, one should know the four
types of binding for the non-excellent region binding of the
*apratyakhyanavaran* *kashaya*, *pratyakhyanavaran* *kashaya*, *sanjwalan*
*kashaya*, five *jnanavaranas*, and five *antarayas*. That is, the non-excellent
region binding that occurs before the excellent region binding is *anaadi*, and
the non-excellent binding that occurs after the excellent region binding is
*saadi*. The binding of a *bhavya* being is *adhruva*, and the binding of an
*abhavya* is *dhruva*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 250 zataka baMdha karatA hai to vaha baMdha sAdi hotA hai  /  athavA dasadhai
guNasthAna meM hI utkRSTa pradezabaMdha karane ke bAda vaha jIva punaH anutkRSTa
pradezabaMdha karatA hai taba vaha baMdha sAdi hotA hai| kyoMki utkRSTa yoga eka
do samaya se adhika dera taka nahIM hotA hai  /  utkRSTa pradezabaMdha hone ke
pahale jo anutkRSTa pradezabaMdha hotA hai, vaha anAdi hai  /  abhavya jIva kA
vahI baMdha dhruva hai aura bhavya jIva kA baMdha adhruva hai| _samyagdRSTi jIva
ke styAnaddhitrika kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai aura nidrA va pracalA kA utkRSTa
pradezabaMdha cauthe se lekara AThaveM gaNasthAna  /  taka hotA hai, ataH
sapAlAddhAlA kA mAga bhI unako milatA hai  /  ukta guNasthAnoM meM se kisI eka
guNasthAna meM nidrA aura pracalA kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha karake jaba jIva
punaH anutkRSTa baMdha karatA hai to vaha sAdi kahA jAtA hai  /  utkRSTa baMdha
se pahale kA anutkRSTa pradezabandha anAdi hai  /  abhavya kA bandha dhruva hai
aura bhavya kA bandha adhruva hai| bhaya aura jugupsA kA utkRSTa pradezabandha
bho cauthe se lekara AThaveM  /  guNasthAna taka hotA hai  /  unake anutkRSTa
pradezabandha ke bhI pahale kI taraha hI cAra bhaMga jAnanA cAhiye  /  yAnI ye
aviratAdika jaba utkRSTa yoga se girakara athavA baMdhaccheda se anutkRSTa
pradezabandha karate haiM taba vaha sAdi aura usase pUrva kA anAdi tathA abhayya
ke dhruva va bhavya ke adhruva hotA hai| isI prakAra apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya,
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya aura saMjvalana kaSAya, pAMca jJAnAvaraNa, pAMca
aMtarAya ke anuskRSTa pradezabandha ke bhI cAra-cAra bhaMga jAnanA cAhiye  /
arthAt utkRSTa pradezabandha ke pahale jo anutkRSTa pradezabandha hotA hai, vaha
anAdi hai aura utkRSTa pradezabandha ke bAda jo anutkRSTa bandha hotA hai vaha
sAdi hai| bhavya jIva ko vahI bandha adhruva hotA hai aura abhavya kA baMdha
dhruva hotA hai|

Page #388 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Section of the Dharma Grantha  **351**  Thus, the four types of
**bhaṅga** (breakage) - **sādi** (beginning), **ādi** (beginning), **adhruba**
(unstable), and **adhruba** (unstable) - occur in the **anutkṛṣṭa** (inferior)
**pradeśabandhas** (regional bonds) of the thirty **prakr̥tis** (principles).
However, for the **utkṛṣṭa** (superior), **jighanya** (inferior), and
**ajighanya** (non-inferior) **pradeśabandhas**, only two options exist:
**sādi** and **adhruba**. These are as follows:  While explaining the
**bhaṅgas** of the **anutkṛṣṭa pradeśabandhas**, it has been clarified that a
particular **guṇasthāna** (quality-state) possesses an **utkṛṣṭa
pradeśabandhas**. This **utkṛṣṭa pradeśabandhas** occurs for the first time in
its respective **guṇasthāna**, making it **sādi**. After one or two occurrences,
either the bond completely disappears or the **anutkṛṣṭa pradeśabandhas**
reappears, making it **adhruba**.  The **jighanya pradeśabandhas** of the thirty
**prakr̥tis** occurs in the first **bhavas** (births) of the **sūkṣma nigodīya
labdhyaparyāptak** (subtle, small, and capable of attaining liberation) **jīva**
(living being). Subsequently, due to an increase in **yogaśakti** (yogic power),
their **ajighanya pradeśabandhas** occurs. After a countable or uncountable
period, when the **jīva** again attains that **bhavas**, the **jighanya
pradeśabandhas** reappears, followed by the **ajighanya pradeśabandhas**. Thus,
due to the occurrence of **jighanya** followed by **ajighanya**, and
**ajighanya** followed by **jighanya** **pradeśabandhas**, both bonds are
**sādi** and **adhruba**.  After considering the **bhaṅgas** of the thirty
**prakr̥tis**, we now consider the **bhaṅgas** of the remaining sixty
**prakr̥tis**. All four bonds in these are **sādi** and **adhruba**. Out of the
sixty **prakr̥tis**, seventy-three are **adhrubavandhini** (unstable bond-
possessing), hence all four bonds in them will be **sādi** and **adhruba**. Of
the remaining seventeen **dhruvavandhini** (stable bond-possessing)
**prakr̥tis**, the **utkṛṣṭa pradeśabandhas** of **styānaddhivik**,
**mithyātva**, and **anantaanubandho** is performed by the **mithyādṛṣṭi**
(false vision). The reason for the **utkṛṣṭa pradeśabandhas** is the **utkṛṣṭa
yoga** (superior yoga), which lasts for one or two occurrences. Consequently,
the **utkṛṣṭa bandhas** lasts for only one or two occurrences, and then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama pharmagrantha 351 isa prakAra se ukta tIsa prakRtiyoM ke anutkRSTa
pradezabandha ke sAdi Adi cAra bhaMga hote haiM  /  kintu bAkI ke utkRSTa,
jaghanya aura ajadhanya pradezabandha ke sAdi aura adhruba yaha do hI vikalpa
hote haiM  /  ve isa prakAra haiM anutkRSTa pradezabaMdha ke bhaMgoM ko batalAte
samaya yaha spaSTa kiyA gayA hai ki amuka guNasthAna meM utkRSTa pradezabaMdha
hotA hai  /  yaha utkRSTa pradezabandha apane-apane guNasthAnoM meM pahalI bAra
hotA hai, ataH vaha sAdi hai aura eka, do samaya hone ke bAda yA to usa bandha
kA bilkula abhAva ho jAtA hai yA punaH anutkRSTa pradezabandha hone lagatA hai,
jisase vaha adhruva hai tathA ukta tIsa prakrAMtayoM kA jaghanya pradezabandha
sUkSma nigodiyA labdhyaparyAptaka jIva ke bhava ke prathama samaya meM hotA hai
aura usake bAda yogazakti meM vRddhi hone ke kAraNa unakA ajaghanya
pradezabandha hotA hai  /  saMkhyAta yA asaMkhyAta kAla ke bAda jaba usa jIva ko
punaH usa bhava kI prApti hotI hai to punaH jaghanya pradezabandha hotA hai aura
usake bAda punaH ajaghanya pradezabandha hotA hai  /  isa prakAra jaghanya ke
bAda ajaghanya aura ajaghanya ke bAda jaghanya pradezabandha hone ke kAraNa
donoM hI bandha sAdi aura adhruva hote haiM  /  tIsa prakRtiyoM ke bhaMgoM kA
vicAra kara lene ke bAda aba zeSa rahI 60 prakRtiyoM ke bhaMgoM kA vicAra karate
haiN| inake cAroM bandha sAdi aura ava hote haiM  /  60 prakRtiyoM meM se 73
prakRtiyAM adhruvabandhinI haiM ataH unake to cAroM hI bandha sAdi aura adhruva
hoMge hI aura zeSa rahI satraha dhruvavandhinI prakRtiyoM meM se styAnaddhivika,
mithyAtva aura anantAnubandho kA utkRSTa pradezabandha mithyAdRSTi karatA hai  /
utkRSTa pradezabandha kA kAraNa utkRSTa yoga haiM jo eka do samaya taka
ThaharatA hai  /  jisase utkRSTa bandha eka do samaya taka hI hotA hai aura
usake

Page #389 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  352 Bhatak After the excellent (utkrusht) region-bond, the non-
excellent (anutkrusht) region-bond occurs. When there is an excellent yoga,
again an excellent bond occurs. In this way, the cycle of non-excellent region-
bond after excellent and excellent region-bond after non-excellent continues.
Due to this, both these bonds are Saadi and Adhruva. The inferior (jghanya)
region-bond of these natures is done by the subtle Nigodaya, Ladhyaparyaptak,
Jiva, in the first time of Bhava. In the second, third, and subsequent times,
the same Jiva does their non-inferior (ajghanya) region-bond. And in due course,
the same Jiva again does their non-inferior region-bond. In this way, both these
bonds are also Saadi and Adhruva.  The four types of Varna, Taijas, Karman,
Agurulaghu, Upghāt, and Nirman Prakriti, their excellent, non-excellent,
inferior, and non-inferior region-bonds should also be understood as Saadi and
Adhruva in the same way. The excellent bond of these nine Prakritis is done by
the Mithyatvi, excellent yoga, Bala Namkarma, which binds the twenty-three
Prakriti bond-places.  In this way, one should know the nature of Saadi, etc.,
in the four bonds of the Uttar Prakritis, starting with the excellent. Now,
let's consider the bonds of the Mula Prakritis.  Among the Mula Prakritis, the
non-excellent region-bond of Jnanaavaran, Darshanavaran, Vedaniya, Nama, Gotra,
and Antaraya has four options, namely Maadi, etc. These six have their excellent
region-bond in the tenth Gunasthan, which is called Kshapak or Upshamka, subtle
Paraya. Afterwards, when their non-excellent region-bond occurs again, that bond
is Saadi. Before the excellent region-bond, that bond is Anaadi. The bond of the
Bhavy is Adhruva, and the bond of the Abhavy is Dhruva. The remaining inferior,
non-inferior, and excellent region...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 352 bhAtaka bAda anutkRSTa pradezabandha hotA hai  /  utkRSTa yoga hone para
punaH utkRSTa bandha hotA hai| isa prakAra utkRSTa ke bAda anutkuSTa aura
anutkRSTa ke bAda utkRSTa pradezabandha hone kA krama calatA rahatA hai  /  isI
kAraNa yaha donoM bandha sAdi aura adhruva hote haiM tathA ina prakRtiyoM kA
jaghanya pradezabandha sUkSma nigodiyA ladhyaparyAptaka jIva bhava ke prathama
samaya meM karatA hai  /  dUsare, tIsare Adi samayoM meM vahI jIva unakA
ajaghanya pradezabandha karatA hai aura kAlAntara meM bahI jIva punaH unakA
aghanya pradezabandha karatA hai| isa prakAra ye donoM bandha bhI sAdi aura
adhruva hote haiN| varNacatuSka, taijasa, kArmaNa, agurulaghu, upaghAta aura
nirmANa prakRti ke utkRSTa, anutkRSTa, jaghanya aura ajaghanya pradezavandha bhI
isI prakAra sAdi aura aghuva samajhanA cAhiye  /  ina nau prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa
baMda mithyAtvI utkRSTa yoga bAlA nAmakarma ke teIsa prakRtika bandhasthAna kA
bandha karane vAlA karatA hai  /  isa prakAra uttara prakRniyoM ke utkRSTa Adi
cAra baMdhoM meM sAdi vagairaha bhaMgoM kA svarUpa jAnanA caahiye| aba mUla
prakRtiyoM ke bhaMgoM kA vicAra karate haiN| mula prakRtiyoM meM se jJAnAvaraNa,
darzanAvaraNa, vedanIya, nAma, gotra aura aMtarAya ke anutkRSTa pradezabaMdha ke
mAdi vagairaha cAroM vikalpa hote haiM  /  jo isa prakAra haiM ki ina chaha kA
utkRSTa pradezabaMdha kSapaka athavA upazamaka sUkSma parAya nAmaka dasaveM
guNasthAna meM karatA hai| anantara java punaH unakA anurASTa pradezabaMdha
karatA hai to vaha baMdha sAdi hai  /  utkRSTa pradezabaMdha se pahale vaha
baMdha anAdi hai, bhavya kA baMgha adhruva hai tathA abhavya kA baMdha dhruva
hai  /  zeSa jaghanya, ajaghanya aura utkRSTa pradeza

Page #390 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karmagrantha  There are two alternatives for the *saadi* and
*adhruva* of *bandha*. Because previously, while explaining the *anuttkrishta
pradeshabandha*, a hint was given about the existence of *utkrishta
pradeshabandha* in the *sukshmasampraaya gunasthan*. This *utkrishta
pradeshabandha* happens for the first time, hence it is *saadi*, and it does not
happen again when the *anuttkrishta bandha* occurs, hence it is *adhruva*. The
*jghanya pradeshabandha* of the aforementioned six karmas is done by the
*sukshma nigodhya aparyaaptaka jiva bhag* in the first instance, and after the
increase in *yoga*, the *ajghanya pradeshabandha* is done. Later, the *jghanya
bandha* is done again. Thus, both of these are also *saadi* and *adhruva*.  From
the six original *prakritis* like *jnanaavaran*, the remaining four *bandhas* of
*mohaniya* and *ayu karma* have only two alternatives: *saadi* and *adhruva*.
Since *ayu karma* is bound, its four *pradeshabandhas* are only *saadi* and
*adhruva*. The *utkrishta pradeshabandha* of *mohaniya karma* is done by the
*jiva* with *utkrishta yoga* up to the ninth *gunasthan*. After the *utkrishta*,
the *anuttkrishta* and after the *anuttkrishta*, the *utkrishta pradeshabandha*
happens. Therefore, both these *bandhas* are *saadi* and *adhruva*. Similarly,
the *jghanya bandha* of *mohaniya* is done by the *sukshma nigodhya jiva*. Due
to the *jghanya* being followed by *ajghanya* and *ajghanya* being followed by
*jghanya bandha*, both these *bandhas* are *saadi* and *adhruva*.  In this way,
one should know the order of *saadi* etc. of the *utkrishta* etc.
*pradeshabandhas* of the original and subsequent *prakritis*.  1. The *saadi*
etc. aspects of *pradeshabandha* in *Panchasangraha* and *Go. Karmakaanda* are
described in accordance with *Karmagrantha*. For comparison, these sections are
quoted here.  (Continued on the next page)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha Quan Jiu Yao  baMdha ke sAdi aura atra vikalpa hote haiN|
kyoMki pUrva meM anutkRSTa pradezabaMdha ko batalAte hue sUkSmasaMparAya
guNasthAna meM utkRSTa pradezabaMdha hone kA saMketa kara Aye haiN| vaha utkRSTa
pradezabaMdha pahale pahala hotA hai, ataH sAdi hai aura punaH anutkRSTa baMdha
ke hone para punaH nahIM hotA hai, ataH adhruva hai  /  ukta chaha karmoM kA
jaghanya pradezabaMdha sUkSma nigodiyA aparyAptaka jIva bhaga ke prathama samaya
meM karatA hai aura usake bAda yoga kI vRddhi ho jAne para ajaghanya
pradezabaMdha karatA hai, kAlAntara meM punaH jaghanya baMdha karatA hai  /  isa
prakAra ye donoM bhI sAdi aura adbhutra hote haiM  /  jJAnAvaraNa Adi chaha mUla
prakRtiyoM se zeSa rahe mohanIya aura Ayu karma ke cAroM baMdhoM ke sAdi aura
adhruva, do hI vikalpa hote haiM  /  Ayu karma to baMdhI hai ataH usake cAroM
pradezabaMdha sAdi aura atra hI hote haiN| mohanIya karma kA utkRSTa
pradezabaMdha nauveM guNasthAna taka ke utkRSTa yoga vAle jIva karate haiM aura
utkRSTa ke bAda anutkRSTa tathA anutkRSTa ke bAda utkRSTa pradezabaMdha hotA
hai| isIliye ye donoM baMdha sAdi aura ava haiN| isI prakAra mohanIya kA
jaghanya baMdha sUkSma nigodiyA jIva karatA hai| usake bhI jaghanya ke bAda
ajaghanya tathA ajaghanya ke bAda jaghanya baMdha karane ke kAraNa donoM baMdha
sAdi aura adhruva hote haiN| isa prakAra mUla aura uttara prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa
Adi pradezabaMdhoM ke sAdi vagairaha kA krama jAnanA cAhie  / " 1 paMcasaMgraha
aura go0 karmakAMDa meM pradezabaMdha ke sAdi vagairaha maMgoM kA karmagrantha
ke anurUpa varNana kiyA gayA hai  /  tulanA ke liye ukta aMgoM ko yahA~ uddhRta
karate haiM (zeSale pRSTha para )

Page #391 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Before discussing the Pradeshbandh, it is important to clarify that there are
numerous types of Prakritibandh and Pradeshbandh, which lead to Yogasthanas.
Similarly, numerous types of Sthitibandh lead to Sthitibandh-Adhyavasayasthanas,
and numerous types of Anubhagbandh lead to Manubhagantya-Dasasasthanas.
Therefore, we will now briefly explain the Yogasthanas and their functions.
There are countless Yogasthanas, categorized by Prakriti, Sthiti, and
Anubhagbandh. There are countless Sthitibandh-Adhyavasayasthanas, and countless
Anubhagbandh-Adhyavasayasthanas.  These are all influenced by Karma-Pradesha,
which has infinite qualities.  The term "Sediasankhijyanse" refers to the
countless parts of a series. "Jogadanaagi" refers to Yogasthanas.
"Paryadabhieya" refers to the different types of Prakriti, Sthiti, and
Anubhagbandh. "Sthitibandh-Adhyavasayasthanas" refers to the places of
contemplation related to Sthitibandh. "Anubhagbandh-Adhyavasayasthanas" refers
to the places of contemplation related to Anubhagbandh. "Asankhguna" refers to
countless qualities. "Kammapaesa" refers to the Karma-Pradesha, the sphere of
Karma. "Anantguna" refers to infinite qualities.  The term "Mohauyavajjanam"
refers to the state of delusion. "Nukkosao" refers to the analysis. "Saajhyaiyo"
refers to the shared. "Hoi" refers to "becomes". "Sai" refers to "that".
"Adhuva" refers to "further". "Sesaa" refers to "remaining". "Aaugamohaana"
refers to the delusion of attachment. "Savehi" refers to "all". "Naanataraayani"
refers to the obstacles to knowledge. "Niddha" refers to "sleep".
"Anavajjakasaya" refers to the state of being unattached. "Bhayadugukaana"
refers to the fear of suffering. "Dasanchaupayalana" refers to the ten types of
conduct. "Chaubbigapppo" refers to the four types of attachment. "Anukkosao"
refers to the analysis. "Samve" refers to "all". "Samvaana" refers to "all".
"Sesapayeena" refers to "remaining". "Panchasangraha" refers to the five
collections of scriptures. "Chanhpi" refers to "all six". "Anukkaso" refers to
the analysis. "Padesachandho" refers to the sphere of Karma. "Chaduviyapppo"
refers to the four types of attachment. "Sesatiye" refers to "remaining".
"Duviyapppo" refers to the two types of attachment. "Mohaaunam" refers to the
delusion of attachment. "Tissarahamanakkaso" refers to the third type of
analysis. "Uttarapayadisuu" refers to the remaining types of attachment.
"Chauviho" refers to the four types of attachment. "Bandho" refers to the bond.
"Sesachoukkevi" refers to the remaining types of attachment. "Karmkara" refers
to the Karma-Pradesha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pradezabaMdha kA vivecana pUrNa karane ke pahale yaha bhI spaSTa karate haiM ki
pUrvokta prakRtibaMdha, sthitibaMdha, anubhAgabaMdha aura pradezabaMdha meM se
aneka prakAra ke prakRtibaMdha aura pradezabaMdha ke kAraNa yogasthAna haiM  /
aneka prakAra ke sthitibaMdha ke kAraNa sthitibaMdha-adhyavasAyasthAna haiM
tathA aneka prakAra ke anubhAgaMdha ke kAraNa manubhAga antyadAsAsa sthAna haiN|
ataH aba yogasthAna aura unake kAryoM kA paraspara meM alpabahutva batalAte
haiN| seDiasaMkhijaMse jogaTTANANi pryaaddbhiyaa| ThibaMdhajyavasAyANabhAgaThANA
asaMkhagaNA  // 6 //  tatto kammapaesA aNaMtaguNiyA tao rasaccheyA  /  zabdArtha
seDiasaMNijyase-zreNi ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga, jogaDANAgi-yogasthAna,
paryADadiibheyA-prakRtibheda, sthitibheda, zibaMdhAvasAyAsthitibaMdha ke
adhyavasAyasthAna; agubhAgaThANA -anubhAga baMdha ke adhyabasAyasthAna,
asaMkhaguNAH asaMkhyAta guNe, . sattounase bhI, kammapaesA-karmapradeza, karma
ke skaMdha, aNaMtagu mohAuyavajjANaM Nukkoso sAjhyAio hoi  /  sAI adhuvA sesA
AugamohANa saveSi  /  /  nANatarAyaniddA aNavajjakasAya bhayadugukANa  /
dasaNacaupayalANaM caubbigappo aNukkoso  //  sesA sAI adhuvA samve samvANa
sesapayaINaM  /  -paMcasaMgraha 260, 265, 266 chaNhapi aNukkasso padesacaMdho du
caduviyappo du  /  sesatiye duviyappo mohAUNaM ca duvidhappo  /
tIsarAhamaNakkasso uttarapayaDIsu cauviho  /  bNdho| sesatiye duviyappo
sesacaukkevi duviyappo | -~o karmakAra 207, 206

Page #392 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **Nipa - Anantgune, Taksha Unse Bhi Raschcheya -
Raschched - Ras Avibhaag Pratichched.**  The Gathaarth Yogasthan Shroni has
countless parts. From these, the distinctions of natures, distinctions of
states, the study-places of state-bond, and the study-places of section-bond are
countless - gune, countless-gune. From these, the karmic skandhas are countless-
gune, and from the karmic skandhas, the Raschched are countless-gune.  **55**
**Special Meaning:** The Gatha has explained the distinctions of bond and their
causes in a brief manner. In this explanation, the following seven things have
been taken:  (1) Nature Distinction, (2) State Distinction, (3) Region
Distinction, (4) Raschched, meaning Section Distinction, (5) Yogasthan, (6)
Study-place of State-bond, and (7) Study-place of Section-bond.  In these seven
distinctions, there are four distinctions of bond and three distinctions of
their causes. There are four distinctions of bond, but the reason for
considering three distinctions of cause is that the cause of nature and region
bond is the same. Therefore, the distinctions of cause are reduced to three
instead of four. Here, the briefness of these seven is explained, which is less
and which is more. That is, which of the seven has a greater number and which
has a lesser number.  Starting with this statement of briefness, it is first
explained that the number of Yogasthanas is countless parts of the Shroni -
Sethi Asankhijjam Se Jogatthanani - meaning, in countless parts of the Shroni,
there are as many Yogasthanas as there are regions of space. It has been
explained earlier that the special power or strength is called Yoga, and the
most subtle Yoga, Nigodhiya Sandhyaparyaptak Aav, is the first of existence...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmegrantha NipA - anantaguNe, takSa unase bhI rasaccheyA--rasaccheda
- rasa avibhAga praticcheda  /  gAthArtha yogasthAna zroNi ke asaMkhyAtaveM
bhAga haiN| unase prakRtiyoM ke bheda, sthitibheda, sthitibaMdha ke
adhyavasAyasthAna aura anubhAga baMdha ke adhyavasAyasthAna anukrama se
asaMkhyAta - guNe, asaMkhyAtaguNe haiN| unase bhI karma ke skaMdha anaMtaguNe
haiM aura karma skaMdhoM se bhI rasaccheda anaMtaguNe haiM  /  55 - vizeSArtha
-- gAthA meM baMdha ke bhedoM aura unake kAraNoM kA alpabahutva batalAyA hai  /
isa nirUpaNa meM nimnalikhita sAta cIjoM kA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai (1)
prakRtibheda, (2) sthitibheda, (3) pradezabheda, (4) rasaccheda arthAt
anubhAgabheda, (5) yogasthAna, (6) sthitibaMdha -adhyavasAyasthAna aura (7)
anubhAgabaMdha- adhyavasAyasthAna  /  ina sAta bhedoM meM baMdha ke cAra bheda
aura tIna unake kAraNa bheda haiN| baMdha ke to cAra meda mAte haiM kintu kAraNa
ke tIna bheda mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki prakRti aura pradeza baMdha kA kAraNa
eka ho hai| isIliye kAraNa ke bheda cAra ke bajAya tIna hI kiye gaye haiN| yahAM
ina sAtoM kA alpabahutva batalAyA. hai ki kauna kisase kama aura kauna adhika
hai| yAnI sAtoM meM se kisakI saMkhyA adhika hai aura kisakI saMkhyA kama hai  /
isa alpabahutva kA kathana prAraMbha karate hue sarva prathama batAyA hai ki
yogasthAnoM kI saMkhyA zroNi ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga hai - seThi asaMkhijjaM se
jogaTThANANi - arthAt zreNi ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga meM AkAza ke jitane pradeza
haiM utane hI yogasthAna jAnanA caahiye| yaha pahale batalA Aye haiM, ki vIrya
yA zaktivizeSa ko yoga kahate haiM aura sabase yoga sUkSma nig2odiyA
sandhyaparyAptaka auva ko bhava ke prathama

Page #393 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
3565 This happens in time. That is, its potency is the least compared to other
living beings. But the holder of the least potency, some parts of that living
being have very little potency and some have even more potency than them. If one
part is seen by the knowledge of the omniscient from among the parts with the
least potency, then countless parts equal to the parts of the Lokakasha are
found in it. This is about the parts with less potency, but in the same way, if
the part with the most potency is observed, then countless times more parts are
found in it than the parts of that lowly potent part. Pasak The potency of
potency is called the indivisible intersection of the atomic or indivisible. The
parts of the living being where these indivisible intersections are found in the
least but equal number, they have one classification. The parts that hold more
indivisible intersections than them have a second classification. Similarly,
there is a separate classification for each part that holds one more indivisible
intersection. The group of classifications up to where the parts holding one
more indivisible intersection are found is called the first competitor. The
parts that are found beyond that, in them, the number of indivisible
intersections that are in the parts of the last classification of the first
competitor, the group of those parts in which the number of indivisible
intersections are found more than the number of indivisible intersections of the
parts of countless Lokakasha, should be known as the first classification of the
second competitor. The group of parts with one more indivisible intersection
above this first classification is the second classification. In this way, by
increasing one indivisible intersection at a time, the classifications

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 3565 samaya meM hotA hai  /  arthAt anya jIvoM kI apekSA usakI vIryazakti
sabase kama hai  /  kintu sabase kama zakti ke dhAraka usa jIva ke kucha pradeza
bahuta kama vIrya vAle haiM aura kucha unase bhI adhika bIrya vAle haiM  /  yadi
sabase kama vIrya vAle pradezoM meM se eka pradeza ko kevalajJAnI ke jJAna dvArA
dekhA jAya to usameM asaMkhyAta lokakAzoM ke pradeza ke barAbara bhAga pAye jAte
haiM  /  yaha bAta to huI kama vIrya vAle pradezoM kI, lekina isI prakAra
atyadhika vIrya vAle pradeza kA bhI avalokana kiyA jAye jo usameM una jaghanya
vIrya vAle pradeza ke bhAgoM se bhI asaMkhyAtaguNe bhAga pAye jAte haiM  /
pAsaka vIryazakti ke irinAmIko vIryamA bhAva - paramANu yA avibhAga praticcheda
kahate haiN| jIva ke jina pradezoM meM ye avibhAga praticcheda sabase kama
lekina samAna saMkhyA meM pAye jAte haiM, unakI eka vargaNA hotI hai| unase eka
adhika avibhAgI praticchedoM ke dhAraka pradezoM kI dUsarI vargaNA hotI hai| isI
prakAra eka-eka adhika avibhAgI praticchedoM ke dhAraka pradezoM kI eka-eka
alaga vargaNA hotI hai| jahAM taka eka-eka adhika avibhAgI praticchedoM ke
dhAraka pradeza pAye jAte haiM, vahAM taka kI vargaNAoM ke samUha ko prathama
spardhaka kahate haiN| usake Age jo pradeza milate haiM, unameM prathama
spardhaka kI aMtima vargaNA ke pradezoM meM jitane avibhAgI praticcheda hote
haiM, unase asaMkhyAta lokAkAza ke pradezoM ke jitane avibhAgI praticcheda
adhika hote haiM, utane avibhAgI praticcheda jina-jina pradezoM meM pAye jAte
haiM, unake samUha ko dUsare spardhaka kI prathama vargaNa jAnanA cAhiye  /  isa
prathama vargaNA ke Upara eka adhika avibhAgI : praticchedoM vAle pradezoM kA
samUha rUpaM dUsarI vargaNA hotI hai| isa prakAra eka-eka avibhAgI praticcheda
ko vRddhi karate-karate meM vargeNAyeM

Page #394 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  350 and an infinite number of parts equal to it, this
group is called the second competitor. After this, no more regions holding
indivisible intersections are found, but as many regions holding indivisible-
indivisible intersections as there are regions of infinite Lokakasha are found.
The third competitor begins according to the order mentioned before them.
Similarly, the fourth, fifth, etc. competitors should be known. The measure of
these competitors is also an infinite part of the series, and their group is
called a Yogasthan.  This Yogasthan occurs in the first time of the existence of
the most subtle Niodya Jiva with the least power. The second Yogasthan of a Jiva
with slightly more power occurs in the same order. Similarly, with increasing
power, there are third, fourth, fifth, etc. Yogasthanas. In this way, in the
same order, these Yogasthanas of various Jivas or of the same Jiva due to the
difference in time are as many as the regions of infinite space in the series.
_Even though there are infinite Jivas, the reason for considering Yogasthanas as
infinite is that the Yogasthan of the seven Jivas is not separate, but is the
same as that of infinite stationary Jivas, and is also the same as that of
infinite Trasas. Therefore, there is no change in the number, but the dissimilar
Yogasthanas are only an infinite part of the series. Therefore, they are
considered infinite._  Even from these Yogasthanas, the differences in the
natures of Gnanavarana, etc. are infinite. Although there are eight basic
natures of Karma, such as Gnanavarana, etc., and 158 subsequent natures are
mentioned, the peculiarity of bondage...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 350 aMNi ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga ke barAbara hotI haiM,
inake samaha ko dUsarA spardhaka kahate haiM  /  isake bAda eka adhika avibhAgI
praticchedoM ke dhAraka pradeza nahIM milate kiMtu asaMkhyAta lokAkAza ke
pradezoM ke jitane adhika avibhAgI-avibhAgo praticchedoM ke dhAraka pradeza hI
milate haiN| unase pahale kahe hue krama ke anusAra tIsarA spardhaka prArambha
hotA hai| isI taraha cauthA, pAMcavA~ Adi spardhaka jAnanA cAhiye  /  ina
spardhakoM kA pramANa bhI zreNi ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga hai aura unake samaha ko
eka yogasthAna kahate haiN| . yaha yogasthAna sabase jaghanya zakti vAle sUkSma
niyodiyA jIva ke bhava ke pahale samaya meM hotA hai | usase kucha adhika zakti
vAle jIca kA isI krama se dUsarA yogasthAna hotA hai  /  isI prakAra
adhikaadhika zakti kI vRddhi ke sAtha tIsarA, cauthA, pAMcavAM Adi yogasthAna
hote haiN| isa taraha isI krama se nAnA jIvoM ke athavA kAlabheda se eka hI jIva
ke ye yogasthAna zreNi ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga AkAza ke jitane pradeza hote haiM,
utane hote haiN| _jIvoM ke anaMta hone para bhI yogasthAnoM ko asaMkhyAta mAnane
kA kAraNa yaha hai ki satra jIvoM kA yogasthAna alaga-alaga hI nahIM hotA hai
kintu ananta sthAvara jIvoM ke samAna yogasthAna hotA hai tathA asaMkhyAta
trasoM ke bhI samAna yogasthAna hotA hai| jisase saMkhyA meM koI parivartana
nahIM AtA kintu visadRza yogasthAna zreNi ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga hI hote haiM  /
isIlie asaMkhyAta yogasthAna mAne haiN| _ ina yogasthAnoM se bhI jJAnAvaraNa Adi
prakRtiyoM ke bheda asaM. khyAtaguNe haiN| yadyapi karmoM kI jJAnAvaraNa Adi
ATha mUla prakRtiyAM haiM aura uttara prakRtiyAM 158 batalAI hai| kintu baMdha
kI vicitratA

Page #395 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
35. From a single satkara (cycle), there arise innumerable varieties of
prakritis (karmic matter). For example, the scriptures have described numerous
varieties of avadhijnana (clairvoyance), and accordingly, there are just as many
varieties of avadhijnanavarananiya (karmic veil obscuring clairvoyance) because
the diversity in bondage (bandha) leads to differences in ksayopaśama
(subsidence-cum-destruction) and the differences in ksayopaśama lead to numerous
varieties of jnana (knowledge). The explanation is that just as the minimum
extent of avagahana (pervasion) of a subtle panak (winged) jiva in its third
samaya (instant) is the minimum extent of the avadhijnana, and the maximum
extent is the entire loka (universe), similarly, due to the gradation in the
extent of the kshetra (spatial dimension), there arise innumerable varieties of
avadhijnana. Therefore, from the minimum kshetra to the maximum kshetra of the
uttishtha (developed) avadhijnana, there arise innumerable varieties of
avadhijnana due to the gradation in the kshetra.  Similarly, due to the
diversity in the bandha and udaya (rise) of the avadhijnanavarananiya karma,
there arise innumerable varieties of avadhijnana. Likewise, one should
understand that due to the diversity in the bandha and udaya of other uttara-
prakriti (consequential karmic matter) and mula-prakriti (primary karmic matter)
with respect to different jivas, there arise innumerable varieties.  One should
not have any doubt about the infinite varieties of prakriti, because even though
the bandha and udaya of different jivas may be the same, the diverse varieties
of prakriti are innumerable. This is because the prakriti are infinitely more
than the yogasthanas (spatial units), as each yogasthana, whether occupied by
different jivas or by a single jiva at different times, can lead to the bandha
of all these prakriti.  The varieties of sthiti (duration) are also innumerably
more than the varieties of prakriti, because each prakriti can be bound with
various durations, sometimes for a minimum of an antarmuhurta (48 minutes),
sometimes for a longer duration.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 35. zataka se eka-eka prakRti ke asaMkhyAta bheda ho jAte haiN| jaise ki
zAstroM meM bhavadhijJAna ke bahuta bheda batalAye haiM, jisase
avadhijJAnAvaraNa ke baMdha ke bhI utane hI bheda hote haiM, kyoMki baMdha kI
vicitratA se hI kSayopazrama meM antara par3atA hai aura kSayopazama meM antara
par3ane se hI jJAna ke aneka bheda hote haiM  /  isakA spaSTIkaraNa yaha hai ki
jaise sukSma panaka jIva ke tIsare samaya meM jitanI jaghanya avagAhanA hotI
hai, utanA hI jaghanya avadhijJAna kA kSetra hotA hai aura asaMkhyAta loka
pramANa utkRSTa kSetra hai  /  ataH jaghanya kSetra se lekara eka pradeza
bar3hate-bar3hate utkRSTa avadhijJAna ke kSetra taka kSetra kI hInAdhikatA ke
kAraNa avadhijJAna ke asaMkhyAta bheda ho jAte haiN| isIliye avadhijJAna ke
AvAraka avadhijJAnAvaraNa karma ke bhI baMdha aura udaya kI vicinnatA se
asaMkhyAta bheda ho jAte haiN| isI taraha nAnA jIvoM kI apekSA se karmoM kI anya
uttara prakRtiyoM va mUla prakRtiyoM ke bhI baMdha va udaya kI vicitratA se
asaMkhyAta bheda samajhanA cAhiye  /  jIvoM ke ananta hone ke kAraNa unake
baMdhoM aura udayoM kI vicitratA se prakRtiyoM ke ananta bheda mAnane kI AzaMkA
nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  kyoMki nAnA jIvoM ke bhI eka-sA baMdha va udaya hone se
vaha eka hI mAnA jAtA hai kintu prakRtiyoM ke visadRza bheda asaMkhyAta hI hote
haiM  /  ataH yomasthAnoM se prakRtiyAM asaMkhyAtaguNI haiM, kyoMki ekaeka
yogasthAna meM vartamAna nAnA jIva yA kAlakrama se eka hI jIva ina saba
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA hai| prakRtibhedoM se asaMkhyAtaguNe sthiti ke bheda
haiM, kyoMki eka-eka prakRti asaMkhyAta prakAroM kI sthiti ko lekara baMdhatI
hai  /  jaise ki eka jIva eka hI prakRti ko kabhI antamuhUrta kI sthiti ke sAtha
bAMdhatA hai, : kabhI eka samaya adhika antamuhUrta kI sthiti ke sAtha bAMdhatA
hai,

Page #396 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Text **249**  There are countless variations in the duration
of the *antarmuhūrta* (the time between two breaths), sometimes two breaths,
sometimes three breaths, and so on.  With each of these variations, there is a
corresponding *āndhatā* (blindness).  Thus, when there are countless variations
in the state of a single nature and a single living being, it is possible that
there are countless variations in the state of all natures and all living
beings.  Therefore, the variations in the state due to the variations in nature
are countless times greater.  From the variations in the state, the
*sthitibandha-adhyavasaya-sthāna* (the place of the determination of the bond of
the state) are countless times greater.  The results of the determination that
are the cause of each *sthitibandha* are numerous, because even the most
insignificant bond of the state is caused by countless *lokapramāṇa* (world-
sized) determinations.  That is, a single *sthitibandha* can be caused by a
particular result of a particular living being, and by a particular result of
another living being.  This should be understood in the same way for all other
cases.  Therefore, the *sthitibandha-adhyavasaya-sthāna* are considered to be
countless times greater than the variations in the state.  From the
*sthitibandha-adhyavasaya-sthāna*, the *anubhāgabandha-adhyavasaya-sthāna* (the
place of the determination of the bond of the part) are countless times greater.
That is, the results that are the cause of the *anubhāgabandha* are countless
times greater than the results that are the cause of the *sthitibandha*.  The
reason for this is that each *sthitibandha-adhyavasaya-sthāna* lasts until the
end of the *antarmuhūrta*, but each *anubhāgabandha-adhyavasaya-sthāna* lasts
for at least one breath and at most for *āha* (a period of time).  Therefore,
there are as many *anubhāgabandha-adhyavasaya-sthāna* as there are *loka-ākāśa*
(world-sized spaces) in each *sthitibandha-adhyavasaya-sthāna*.  1. The
particular results of a living being that arise from the *kaṣāya* (passions) and
cause the *sthitibandha* are called *sthitibandha-adhyavasaya*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karma grantha 249 kabhI do samaya adhika, kabhI tIna samaya adhika
yAvata antarmuhUrta ke samayoM ke jitane bheda hai, una-una samayoM ko lekara
AMdhatA hai| isa prakAra jaba eka prakRti aura eka jIva kI apekSA se hI sthiti
ke asaMkhyAta bheda ho jAte haiM taba saba prakRtiyoM aura saba jIvoM kI apekSA
se prakRti ke bhedoM se sthiti ke bhedoM kA asaMkhyAtamA honA sambhava hai| isI
kAraNa prakRti ke bhedoM se sthiti ke bheda asaMkhyAtaguNe hote haiN| sthiti ke
medoM se sthitibaMdha-adhyavasAyasthAna' asaMkhyAtaguNe haiM  /  eka-eka
sthitibaMdha ke kAraNabhUta adhyavasAya pariNAma aneka hote haiM, kyoMki sabase
jaghanya sthiti kA baMdha bhI asaMkhyAta lokapramANa adhyavasAyoM se hotA hai
arthAt eka hI sthitibaMdha kisI jIva ke kisI taraha ke pariNAma se hotA hai aura
kisI jIva ke kisI taraha ke pariNAma se hotA hai  /  isI prakAra Age bhI
samajhanA cAhiye  /  ataH sthiti ke bhedoM se sthitibandha-adhyavasAyasthAna
asaMkhyAtaguNe mAne gaye haiN| sthitibaMdha-adhyavasAyasthAna se anubhAgabaMdha-
adhyavasAyasthAna asaMkhyAtaguNe haiN| arthAt sthitibaMdha ke kAraNabhUta
pariNAmoM se anubhAgabaMdha ke kAraNabhUta pariNAma asaMkhyAtagRNe haiN| isakA
kAraNa yaha hai ki eka-eka sthitibaMdha-adhyavasAyasthAna to antamuhUrta taka
rahatA hai, kintu eka-eka anubhAgabaMdha-adhyavasAyasthAna kama se kama eka
samaya aura adhika-se-adhika Ahe samaya taka hI rahatA hai  /  ataH eka-eka
sthitibaMdha-adhyavasAyasthAna meM asaMkhyAta lokAkAza ke pradezoM ke barAbara
anubhAgabaMdha-adhyavasAyasthAna hote haiM  /  1 kaSAya meM udaya se hone vAle
jIva ke jina pariNAmavizeSoM se sthiti baMdha hotA hai, una pariNAmoM ko
sthitibandha-adhyavasAya kahate haiM  /

Page #397 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shataka  Thus, the Yogasthanas, Prakriti Bhedas, Sthiti Bhedas, Sthiti Bandha
Adhyavasayasthanas, and Anubhaga Bandha Adhyavasayasthanas are all countless in
number. And even beyond the Anubhaga Bandha Adhyavasayasthanas, the Karmapaesas
and Anantgunas of the Karmas kandhas are also countless. Because a single Jiva,
at one time, takes on an infinite number of Karma kandhas, which are greater
than the Abhyavya Rashi and smaller than the Siddha Rashi. Therefore, the Karma
kandhas are considered to be countless times greater than the Anubhaga Bandha
Adhyavasayasthanas.  Even beyond the Karma kandhas, the Rashaccheda (divisions
of Rasa) are also countless. This is because the Anubhaga Bandha
Adhyavasayasthanas create the power of Rasa Phaladan (fruit-bearing) in the
Karma Pudgals. If the Rasa or Anubhaga Shakti present in a single paramanu
(atom) is divided by knowledge, then it will be found that there are countless
divisions of Rasa within it, greater than the entire Jiva Rashi. In other words,
each paramanu of all Karma contains countless divisions of Rasa, greater than
the entire Jiva Rashi. However, each Karma kandha contains only an infinite
fraction of the Siddha Rashi of Karma paramanus. Therefore, the Rashaccheda from
the Karma kandhas are considered to be countless.  In this way, one should
understand the relative insignificance of Bandha and its causes. From
Yogasthanas to Anubhaga Bandha Adhyavasayasthanas, each is countless times
greater than the previous one. And beyond that, the Karma kandhas and
Rashaccheda are countless times greater, respectively.  1. The Panchasangraha
also describes the relative insignificance of Yogasthanas, etc., in a similar
way:  > "Countless are the Yogasthanas, and countless are the Prakriti Bhedas.
The Sthiti Bhedas are countless, and beyond them are the Sthiti Bandhas. Beyond
them are the Anubhaga Bandhas, and beyond them are the Karmapaesas and
Rashaccheda." (Panchasangraha, 262-263)  > "The Karma Kandas (in the Go. Karma
Kand, 258-260) only mention six types of relative insignificance, without
mentioning the Rashaccheda. This description is consistent with the Karma
Grantha."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka isa prakAra yogasthAna, prakRtibheda, sthitibheda, sthitibaMdha ke
adhyavasAyasthAna, anubhAgabaMdha ke adhyavasAyasthAna to kramazaH asaMkhyAta
haiM aura anubhAgabaMdha ke adhyavasAyasthAna se bhI- kammapaesA aNataguNiyA,
karmaskaMdha anaMtaguNe haiN| kyoMki eka jIva eka samaya meM abhavya rAzi se
anaMtaguNe aura siddha rAzi ke anaMta bhAga karmaskaMdhoM ko grahaNa karatA hai|
ataH anubhAgabaMdha-adhyavasAyasthAna se anaMtaguNe karmaskandha mAne haiN|
karmaskaMdhoM se bhI anaMtamuNe rasa ke adhibhAgI praticcheda haiM, kyoMki
anubhAgabaMdha-adhyavasAyasthAnoM ke dvArA karmapudgaloM meM rasa phaladAna
zakti paidA hotI hai, yadi eka paramANu meM vidyamAna rasa yA anubhAgazakti ko
kevalajJAna ke dvArA vibhAjita kiyA jAye-khaMDa-khaDa kiyA jAye to usameM
samasta jIvarAzi se anaMtaguNe adhibhAgI praticcheda pAye jArI hai arthAt
samasta kamAdhoM ke pratyeka paramANu meM samasta jIvarAzi se anaMtaguNe
rasaccheda hote haiM, kintu eka-eka karmaskandha meM karmaparamANu siddharAzi ke
anaMtaveM bhAga hI hote haiN| isIliye karmaskaMdhoM se rasaccheda anantaguNe
mAne jAte haiN| _ isa prakAra se bandha aura unake kAraNoM kA alpabahutva jAnanA
cAhiye ki yogasthAna se lekara anubhAgabandha-adhyavasAyasthAna taka to pratyeka
uttarottara asaMkhyAtaguNe, asaMkhyAtaguNe haiM aura usake anantara karmaskandha
aura rasaccheda kramazaH anaMtamuNe haiM  /  1 paMcasaMgraha meM bhI yogamthAna
Adi kA alpamahatva isI prakAra batalAyA hai roLiasaMkhejaso jogaTThANA tao
asaMkhejjA  /  payaDIbhA satto ThibheyA hoMti tattovi  // 262 TiibaMdhajmanasAyA
tatto aNabhAgabaMdhaLANANi  /  tatto kammapAesAptaguNA to rasacchayA  // 283 go0
karmakAMDa gA0 258-260 meM rasa cheda ko nahIM lephara sirpha chaha kA hI
paraspara meM alpabahusna basalAyA hai| yaha varNana karmagrantha se milatA hai|

Page #398 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  The description of Pradeshbandha has so far not
mentioned its cause. Therefore, we now point out the causes of Pradeshbandha
and, along with it, the previously mentioned Prakriti, Sthiti, and Anubhaga
Bandha.  **Meaning of the words:** * **Joga:** From Yoga * **Payapieasam:**
Prakritibandha and Pradeshbandha * **Thihagumagam:** Sthitibandha and Anubhaga
Bandha * **Kasaya:** Kashaya  **Explanation:** * Prakritibandha and
Pradeshbandha are caused by Yoga, while Sthitibandha and Anubhaga Bandha are
caused by Kashaya.  **Detailed Explanation:** * Previously, four types of Bandha
were mentioned: Prakritibandha, Pradeshbandha, Sthitibandha, and Anubhaga
Bandha. Here, we explain their causes. The cause of Prakritibandha and
Pradeshbandha is Yoga, while the cause of Sthitibandha and Anubhaga Bandha is
Kashaya. * The nature of Yoga and Kashaya has already been explained. Yoga is a
power that, when combined with the necessary causes, transforms Karma Varganas
into Karma Roop. The function of Yoga is to cause Karma Pudgalas to become Karma
Roop in a specific quantity and to impart the nature of covering the qualities
of knowledge, etc. * The connection of incoming Karma Pudgalas with the soul for
a specific period and the development of the power to produce intense, mild,
etc., fruits in them is done by Kashaya. Therefore, Yoga is considered the cause
of Prakritibandha and Pradeshbandha, while Kashaya is considered the cause of
Sthitibandha and Anubhaga Bandha. * As long as Kashaya remains, all four Bandhas
exist. When Kashaya is subdued or destroyed, only two Bandhas remain: Prakriti
and Pradesh Bandha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 * paMcama karmagrantha pradezabandha ke samapra varNana meM abhI taka usakA
kAraNa nahIM batAyA hai  /  ataH aba pradezabandha aura usake sAtha hI pUrvokta
prakRti, sthiti aura anubhAga bandha ke kAraNoM kA bhI nirdeza karate haiN| jogA
paDipaesaM ThiiaNumAgaM kasAyAu HEEn zabdArtha-jogA-yoga se, payapiesaM-
prakRtibaMdha aura pradezabaMdha, ThihaagumAgaM--sthitibaMdha aura
anubhAgabaMdha, kasAyAjakaSAya dvaaraa| gAcArya-prakRtibandha aura pradezabandha
yoga se hote haiM aura sthitibandha va anubhAgavandha kaSAya se hote haiN|
vizeSArtha pUrva meM baMdha ke prakRtibaMdha, pradezabaMdha, sthitibaMdha aura
anubhAgabaMdha, yaha cAra bheda batalA Aye haiM  /  yahAM unake kAraNoM ko
batalAte haiM ki prakRtibaMdha aura pradezabaMdha kA kAraNa yoga hai aura
sthitibaMdha va anubhAgabaMdha kA kAraNa kaSAya hai| yoga aura kaSAya kA svarUpa
bhI pahale batalAyA jA cukA hai ki yoga eka zakti kA nAma hai jo nimitta kAraNoM
ke milane para karma vargaNAoM ko karma rUpa pariNamAtI hai| yoga ke dvArA karma
pudgaloM kA amuka parimANa meM karma rUpa honA aura unameM jJAnAdi guNoM ko
Avarita karane kA svabhAva par3anA, yaha yoga kA kArya hai  /  Agata karma
pudgaloM kA amuka kAla taka AtmA ke sAtha sambandha rahanA aura unameM tIvra,
maMda Adi phala dene kI zakti kA par3anA kaSAya dvArA kiyA jAtA hai  /  isIliye
prakRtibaMdha aura pradezabaMdha kA kAraNa yoga aura sthitibaMdha va
anubhAgabaMdha kA kAraNa kaSAya ko mAnA hai  /  jaba taka kaSAya rahatI hai taba
taka to cAroM baMdha hote haiM aura kaSAya kA upazama yA kSAya ho jAne para
sirpha prakRti va pradeza baMdha, yaha do baMdha hote haiN|

Page #399 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
362 The subsidence and destruction of the kṣayās occur from the eleventh to the
thirteenth guṇasthānas, which results in the binding of nature and region in
those guṇasthānas. And in the fourteenth ayogikevalī guṇasthāna, due to the
absence of yoga, there is complete cessation of karma forever. The binding of
nature and region that occurs from the eleventh guṇasthāna onwards takes place
in one time period and is destroyed in another. This happens due to the power of
yoga, but since there is no gāy parivāma, it does not bear its fruit. The
measure of the earlier yogasthānas is said to be an innumerable part of the
śroṇi. Therefore, after stating the causes of binding, we now explain the nature
of the śroṇi. "Chaus rajjū logo buddhikao satrajjūmaṇaghaṇo. Tahogapaesa seḍhi
payaro ya tathago." ||67|| Word meaning - Chaus rajjū - fourteen rajjū measure,
logo - loka, buddhikao - done by mental calculation, satrajjūmaṇaghaṇo - seven
rajjū measure, tad - its (of the dense loka), dohegapaesa - long, one pradeśa's
seḍhi śreṇi, payaro - pratar, ya - and then its square. Śataka   Gāthārtha - The
loka is fourteen rajjū measure, when it is equated by mental calculation, it
becomes seven rajjū measure in volume. The śreṇi is the line of pradeśas that
are as long as the dense loka, and its square should be understood as the
pratar. Viśeṣārtha - This gāthā explains the nature of the loka, śreṇi, and
pratar. The gāthā only mentions "Chaus rajjū logo" while indicating the nature
of the loka, which means that the loka is fourteen rajjūs.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 362 kaSAya kA upazama va kSaya gyArahaveM se terahaveM guNasthAna taka meM
haiM, jisase una guNasthAnoM meM prakRti va pradeza baMdha hotA hai' aura
caudahaveM ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM yoga kA bhI abhAva ho jAne se sadA ke liye
karmoccheda ho jAtA hai| gyArahaveM guNasthAna se Age hone vAlA prakRti aura
pradeza baMdha pahale samaya meM hokara dUsare samaya meM nirjIrNa ho jAtA hai|
yogazakti hone se yaha jAtA hai, lekina gAya parivAma nahIM hone se apanA phala
nahIM dete haiM  /  pahale yogasthAnoM kA pramANa zroNi ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga
batAyA hai, ataH baMdha ke kAraNoM kA kathana karane se bAda aba zroNi ke
svarUpa ko batalAte haiM  /  causa rajjU logo buddhikao satarajjumaraNaghaNo  /
tahogapaesA seDhI payaro ya tathyago  // 67 //  zabdArtha - cauvasarajjU -
caudaha rAjU pramANa, logo - loka, buddhikao-mati kalpanA ke dvArA kiyA gayA,
sattarajjumANaSaNosAta rAjU pramANa kA tad - usakI (ghanIkRta loka kI dohega
paesA - laMbI eka pradeza kI seThI zreNi, payaro - pratara, ya-aura to usakA
varga I zataka gAthArtha - loka caudaha rAjU pramANa hai, usakA matikalpanA ke
dvArA samIkaraNa kiye jAne para vaha sAta rAjU ke ghanapramANa hotA hai  /  usa
ghanIkRta loka kI loka pramANa laMbI pradezoM kI paMkti ko zra eNi kahate haiM
aura usake varga ko pratara samajhanA cAhiye  /  vizeSArtha - isa gAthA meM
loka, zraNa aura pratara kA svarUpa batalAyA hai  /  gAthA meM loka ke svarUpa
kA saMketa dete hue sirpha yahI likhA hai 'caudasarajjU logo', jisakA Azaya hai
ki loka caudaha rAjUM

Page #400 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  This only explains the height of the universe. Here,
we will clarify the nature of the universe.  All types of substances - inert or
sentient, visible or invisible, subtle or gross, stationary or mobile, etc. -
wherever they are seen or where a living being experiences the fruits of their
karma, in the form of happiness, sorrow, virtue, and vice, is called the
universe. This universe is the basis for every action that takes place in these
substances or every action performed by these substances. Even though these
substances undergo transformations from one state to another, they do not
abandon their original qualities, nature, and essence. It never happens that the
inert becomes sentient or the sentient becomes inert, the concrete becomes
abstract or the abstract becomes concrete. All substances are the cause of their
own existence and manifestation, and they have their own unique functions.
Therefore, keeping all these perspectives in mind, the scriptures explain the
nature of the universe as follows: Dharma, Adharma, Akasha, Kala, Pudgala, and
Jiva, these six substances, wherever they are found, are called the universe. In
other words, the universe is the aggregate of these six substances. There is no
part of the universe where these six substances are not found.  Out of these six
substances, Akasha (space) is all-pervasive, while the other substances are
pervaded by it. This means that Akasha exists along with the other five
substances, Dharma, etc., and also exists outside of them. It is infinite,
meaning it has no end. Therefore, the part of Akasha where the six substances,
Dharma, etc., reside is called the universe, and the remaining infinite Akasha
beyond it is called Alok (non-universe). This universe is permanent, eternal,
indestructible, imperishable, and stable. It is neither destroyed nor newly
created.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagranpa hai, kintu yaha to kevala usakI UMcAI kA hI pramANa
batalAyA hai| ataH yahA~ loka kA svarUpa spaSTa karate haiM  /  sabhI prakAra ke
padArtha-jar3a yA cetana, dRzyamAna yA adRzyamAna, sUkSma yA sthUla, sthAvara yA
jaMgama Adi -jahAM dekhe jAte haiM athavA jIva jahAM apane sukha-duHkha rUpa
puNya-pApa ke phala kA vedana karate haiM, use loka kahate haiN| ina padArthoM
meM hone vAlI pratyeka kriyA athavA ina padArthoM dvArA kI jAne vAlI pratyeka
kriyA kA AdhAra yaha loka hI hai  /  ye sabhI padArtha avasthA se avasthAntara
hote hue bhI apane mUla guNa, dharma, svabhAva kA parityAga nahIM karate haiM  /
aisA kabhI nahIM hotA ki jar3a cetana ho gayA ho athavA cetana jar3a, mUrta
amurta ho gayA ho athavA amurta mUrta  /  sabhI padArtha apane astitva aura
abhivyakti ke svayaM kAraNa haiM aura unakA apanA-apanA kArya hai  /  isIliye
ina saba dRSTiyoM ko dhyAna meM rakhate hue - zAstroM meM loka kA svarUpa
batalAyA hai ki dharma, adharma, AkAza, kAla, pudgala aura jIva, yaha dravya
jahA~ pAye jAte haiM use loka kahate haiM  /  arthAt dharma Adi SaD dravyoM kA
samUha loka hai| loka kA aisA koI hissA nahIM, jahAM ye chaha dravya na pAye
jAte hoN| dharma Adi ukta nha dravyoM meM se AkAza sarvatra vyApaka hai, jabaki
anya dravya usake vyApya haiM  /  arthAt AkAza dharma Adi zeSa pAMca dravyoM ke
sAtha bhI rahatA hai aura unake sivAya unase bAhara bhI rahatA hai  /  vaha
ananta hai arthAt usakA anta nahIM hai  /  ataH AkAza ke jitane bhAga meM
dharmAdi chaha dravya rahate haiM, use loka kahate haiM aura usake atirikta zeSa
ananta AkAza aloka kahalAtA hai  /  yaha loka dhruva hai, nitya hai, akSaya,
avyaya evaM avasthita hai, na to isakA kabhI nAza hotA hai aura na kabhI nayA
utpanna hotA hai|

Page #401 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
364 After understanding the nature of the Shatak Lok, the curiosity arises as to
what is the basis of the state of this Lok? Present-day scientists have also
tried to know the basis of the Lok, but it is not possible to have a correct
understanding of the state of this infinite Lok through finite knowledge.
Spiritual vision is much more reliable and authentic than knowledge gained
through instruments. Therefore, here we explain the basis of Lokasthiti as
propounded by the omniscient Bhagwan Mahavira. He has propounded the state of
the Lok in eight ways: (1) Vata-Tanuvat is established in Akash, (2) Udhi-
Ghanodhi is established in Vata, (3) Prithvi-Udhi is established, (4) Vas and
Sthavar beings are established in Prithvi, (5) Ajiva is established in Jiva, (6)
Jov is established in Karma, (7) Ajava is collected from Jiva, (8) Jiva is
collected from Karma. The essence of the above statement is that the basis of
Vas, Sthavar, etc. beings is Prithvi, the basis of Prithvi is Udhi, the basis of
Udhi is Vayu, and the basis of Vayu is Akash. That is, Jiva, Ajiva, etc. all
substances reside on Prithvi, and Prithvi rests on the basis of Vayu, and Vayu
rests on the basis of Akash. The explanation of calling Prithvi Vatadharit is
that the foundation of Prithvi is based on Dhanodhi. Dhanodhi is aquatic and its
form is like solidified ghee. Its thickness is twenty thousand yojanas in the
middle below. Below Dhanodhi is the covering of Dhanavar, i.e. 1 Bhagavati Sha 6

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 364 zataka loka kA svarUpa samajhane ke pazcAta yaha jijJAsA hotI hai ki isa
loka kI sthiti kA AdhAra kyA hai ? vartamAna ke vaijJAnikoM ne bhI loka ke
AdhAra ko jAnane ke liye prayAsa kiyA hai, lekina sasIma jJAna ke dvArA isa
asIma loka kI sthiti kA samyag bodha honA sambhava nahIM hai  /  yantroM ke
dvArA hone vAle jJAna kI apekSA AdhyAtmika dRSTi atyanta vizvasanIya evaM
pramANika hotI hai  /  ataH yahAM sarvajJa bhagavAna mahAvIra dvArA pratipAdita
lokasthiti ke AdhAra ko batalAte haiN| unhoMne loka kI sthiti ATha prakAra se
pratipAdita kI hai (1) vAta- tanuvAta AkAza pratiSThita hai, (2) udadhi-
ghanodadhi vAta pratiSThita hai, (3) pRthvI-udadhi pratiSThita hai, (4) vasa
aura sthAvara prANI pRthvI pratiSThita haiM, (5) ajIva jIva pratiSThita hai, (6)
jova karma pratiSThita hai, (7) ajAva jIva se saMgRhIta hai, (8) jIva karma se
saMgRhIta hai  / ' ukta kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai ki basa, sthAvara Adi
prANiyoM kA AdhAra pRthvI hai, pRthvI kA AdhAra udadhi hai, udadhi kA AdhAra
vAyu hai aura vAyu kA AdhAra AkAza hai  /  yAnI jIva, ajIva Adi sabhI padArtha
pRthvI para rahate haiM aura pRthvI vAyu ke AdhAra para tathA vAyu AkAza ke
AdhAra para TikI huI hai  /  pRthvI ko vAtAdhArita kahane kA spaSTIkaraNa yaha
hai ki pRthvo kA pAyA anoMdadhi para AdhArita hai| dhanodadhi jalajAtIya hai
aura jame hue ghI ke samAna isakA rUpa hai| isakI moTAI nIce madhya meM bIsa
hajAra yojana kI hai  /  ghanodadhi ke nIce dhanavAra kA AvaraNa hai, yAnI 1
bhagavatI za6

Page #402 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Five Karmas: Chapter 365  The **Ghanodadhi** is enveloped by
**Ghanavat**, and its form resembles thin, melted ghee. Its length, width, and
circumference are countless yojanas. This **Ghanavat** is also enveloped by
**Tanuvat**. Its length, width, circumference, and middle thickness are
countless yojanas. Its form should be understood as resembling heated ghee.
Below the **Tanuvat** lies an expanse of space, countless yojanas in measure.
These **Ghanodadhi**, **Ghanavat**, and **Tanuvat** can be understood by analogy
as wooden vessels placed one inside the other. In the same way, these three
**Vatavalas** are situated within each other. That is, the **Ghanodadhi** is
like a small vessel, the **Ghanavat** like a medium vessel, and the **Tanuvat**
like a large vessel, followed by space. Just as an object is placed within the
smallest vessel, so too is the earth situated within the **Ghanodadhivala**.
The scriptures describe the shape of the **Lok** as **Supratishtha Sansthan**.
The form of **Supratishtha Sansthan** is as follows:  If a bowl is placed upside
down on the ground, another bowl is placed upright on top of it, and a third
bowl is placed upside down on top of that, the shape that is formed is called
**Supratishtha Sansthan**, and this is the shape of the **Lok**.  Many Acharyas
have explained the shape of the **Lok** through various metaphors. For example,
the shape of the **Lok** is like a man dancing with his hand on his waist and
his legs spread out. Therefore, the **Lok** is compared to the form of a man. In
some places, the shape of the **Lok** is described as being like a mridanga
placed on a **Benasan**. Similarly, other objects that are wide at the base,
narrow in the middle, wide at the top, and then narrow again, and whose shape is
formed by placing them one on top of the other, will form the shape of the
**Lok**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagratha 365 ghanodadhiM ghanavAta se AvRta hai aura isakA rUpa
kucha patale pighale hue ghI ke samAna hai  /  lambAI-cauDhAI aura paridhi
asaMkhyAta yojana kI hai| yaha ghanavAta bhI tanuvAta se AvRta hai| isakI
lambAI-caur3AI paridhi tathA madhya kI moTAI asaMkhyAta yojana kI hai| isakA
rUpa tape hue ghI ke samAna samajhanA cAhie  /  + . tanuvAta ke nIce asaMkhyAta
yojana pramANa AkAza hai| ina ghanodadhi, ghanavAta aura tanuvAta ko udAharaNa
dvArA isa prakAra samajhA jA sakatA hai ki eka dUsare ke andara rakhe hue
lakar3I ke pAtra hoM, usI prakAra ye tInoM vAtavalaya bhI eka dUsare meM
avasthita haiN| yAnI dhanodadhi choTe pAtra jaisA, ghanavAta madhyama pAtra
jaisA aura tanuvAta bar3e pAtra jaisA hai aura usake bAda AkAza hai| ina tIna
pAtroM meM se jaise sabase choTe pAtra meM koI padArtha rakhA jAye, vaise hI
ghanodadhivalaya ke bhItara yaha pRthvI avasthita hai  /  zAstra meM loka kA
AkAra 'supratiSTha saMsthAna' vAlA kahA hai  /  supratiSTha saMsthAna ke AkAra
kA rUpa isa prakAra hotA hai ki jamIna para eka sakorA ulaTA, usa para dUsarA
sakorA sodhA aura usa para tIsarA sakorA ulaTA rakhane se jo AkAra banatA hai,
bahu supratiSTha saMsthAna kahalAtA hai aura yahI AkAra loka kA hai  /  aneka
AcAryoM ne loka kA AkAra vibhinna rUpakoM dvArA bhI samajhAyA hai| jaise ki loka
kA AkAra kaTipradeza para hAtha rakhakara tathA pairoM ko pasAra kara nRtya
karane vAle purupa ke samAna hai  /  isIliye loka ko puruSAkAra kI upamA dI hai|
kahIM-kahIM benAsana para rakhe hue mRdaMga ke samAna loka kA AkAra batalAyA
hai, isI prakAra kI aura dUsarI vastuyeM jo jamIna meM caur3I, madhya meM sakarI
tathA Upara meM caur3I aura phira sakarI hoM aura eka dUsare para rakhA jAna
para jasA unakA AkAra bane, vaha loka kA AkAra banegA  /

Page #403 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The universe is divided into three realms: the lower realm (Adholōka), the
middle realm (Madhyalōka), and the upper realm (Urdhvalōka). The central point
of these realms is Mount Meru. Mount Meru is located in the middle realm
(Madhyalōka). Its base is one thousand yojanas wide and its height is sixty-six
thousand yojanas above the ground. Its length and width extend ten thousand
yojanas in all four directions on the flat surface of the earth.   The lower
realm (Adholōka) begins nine hundred yojanas below the base of Mount Meru and
extends eighteen hundred yojanas upwards. This means that the middle realm
(Madhyalōka) is eighteen hundred yojanas in height, nine hundred yojanas below
and nine hundred yojanas above the base of Mount Meru. The area above the middle
realm (Madhyalōka) is called the upper realm (Urdhvalōka).  The height of the
lower realm (Adholōka) and the upper realm (Urdhvalōka) is greater than their
width, while the middle realm (Madhyalōka) is wider and longer than its height.
The middle realm (Madhyalōka) is only eighteen hundred yojanas high, but its
length and width are one rāju.  The length and width of the lower realm
(Adholōka) and the upper realm (Urdhvalōka) are not uniform. The length and
width of the lower realm (Adholōka) is slightly less than seven rājus in the
seventh hell, while the first hell is one rāju long and wide, which is equal to
the length and width of the middle realm (Madhyalōka). The length and width of
the upper realm (Urdhvalōka) is five rājus in the fifth heaven, and then
decreases by one rāju for each subsequent heaven, until the topmost part of the
realm is one rāju long and wide. This means that the final part of the upper
realm (Urdhvalōka) is as long and wide as the middle realm (Madhyalōka). The
shape of the universe is depicted in the attached diagram.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka loka ke adhaH, madhya aura Urdhva yaha tIna vibhAga haiM aura ina
vibhAgoM ke hone kA madhyabiMdu meru parvata ye mUla meM hai  /  isa madhya loka
ke dIdolItra meru parvata hai. jimanA pAyA lagIna meM eka hajAra yojana aura
Upara jamIna para 66000 yojana hai| jamIna ke samatala bhAga para isakI lambAI-
caur3AI cAroM dizAoM meM dasa hajAra yojana kI hai  /  meru parvata ke pAye ke
eka hajAra meM se nau sau yojana ke nIce jAne para adholoka prArambha hotA hai
aura adholoka ke Upara 1800 yojana taka madhyaloka hai| arthAt nau sau yojana
nIce aura nau sau yojana Upara, kula milAkara 1800 yojana madhyaloka kI sImA hai
aura madhyaloka ke bAda Upara kA sabhI kSetra Urdhvaloka kahalAtA hai| ina tInoM
lokoM meM adholoka aura Urdhvaloka kI UMcAI, caur3AI se jyAdA aura madhyaloka
meM UMcAI kI apekSA lambAI. caur3AI adhika hai, kyoMki madhyaloka kI UMcAI to
sirpha 1800 yojana pramANa hai aura lambAI caur3AI eka rAjU pramANa  /  adholoka
aura Urdhvaloka kI laMbAIcaur3AI bhI eka-sI nahIM hai  /  adholoka kI laMbAI-
caur3AI sAtaveM naraka meM sAta rAjU se kucha kama hai aura pahalA naraka eka
rAjU laMbA-caur3A hai jo madhyaloka kI laMbAI. caur3AI ke barAbara hai  /
Urbaloka kI laMbAI-caur3AI pAMcaveM devaloka meM pAMca rAju aura usake bAda eka-
eka pradeza kI kamI karane para loka ke carama UparI bhAga para eka rAjU laMbAI-
caur3AI rahatI hai  /  - yAnI Urdhvaloka kA antima bhAga madhyaloka ke barAbara
laMbA-caur3A hai| loka ke AkAra kI jAnakArI saMlagna citra meM dI gaI hai|

Page #404 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karmagrantha  **367**  The summary of the aforementioned length,
width, etc. of the Lok is as follows: At the bottom, where the seventh Naraka
is, it is seven Rajus wide. From there, it gradually decreases, and by the time
it reaches the first Naraka at the top, it is one Raju wide. After that, it
gradually increases, reaching a width of five Rajus near the fifth Devalok.
Then, it gradually decreases again, reaching a width of one Raju at the final
part. The total length of the Lok is fourteen Rajus, and the maximum width is
Gal Raju Nasa Jay Chauhan El.  This Lok is packed with both moving and
stationary beings. Moving beings reside only in the Asnadi, but stationary
beings reside in both As and Stavar Nadi. The fourteen Rajus long and one Raju
wide space in the middle of the Lok, from top to bottom, is called Prasnadi, and
the rest of the Lok is called Stavarnadi.  If we imagine this fourteen Rajus
high and maximum seven Rajus and minimum one Raju long and wide Lok as a cube,
then it would have seven Rajus height, seven Rajus length, and seven Rajus
width. Because if we divide the entire Lok into pieces of one Raju each, there
would be 343 pieces. Out of these, 166 are Adholok and 147 are Urvalok
Dhanrajus. The cube root of these is 7. Therefore, the measure of the Panikrit
Lok is seven Rajus, and there are 343 Dhanrajus.  The method of calculating this
is as follows: The width of the Adholok at the bottom is seven Rajus, and it
gradually decreases on both sides, leaving one Raju at the middle Lok at a
height of seven Rajus. If we divide this Adholok into two equal parts and then
flip both parts and place them side by side, its width will extend downwards...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 367 loka kI ukta laMbAI-caur3AI Adi kA sArAMza yaha hai ki
nIce jahAM sAtavAM naraka hai vahAM sAta rAja caur3A hai aura vahAM se ghaTatA-
ghaTatA sAta rAjU Upara Ane para jahAM pahalA naraka hai, vahAM eka rAjU caur3AI
hai| usake bAda kramazaH bar3hate-bar3hate pAMcaveM devaloka ke pAsa caur3AI
pA~ca rAjU aura usake bAda kramazaH ghaTate-ghaTate aMtima bhAga meM eka rAjU
caur3AI hai| saMpUrNa loka kI laMbAI caudaha rAjU aura adhikatama cauDAI gAla
rAju nazA jaya cauhAI ela hai| yaha loka basa aura sthAvara jIvoM se khacAkhaca
bharA huA hai  /  basa jIva to asanAr3I meM hI rahate haiM lekina sthAvara jIva
asa aura sthAvara donoM hI nAr3iyoM meM rahate haiM  /  loka ke Upara se nIce
taka caudaha rAjU laMbe aura eka rAjU caur3e ThIka bIca ke AkAza pradezoM ko
prasanAr3I kahate haiM aura zeSa loka sthAvaranAr3I kahalAtA hai  /  isa caudaha
rAjU U~ce tathA adhikatama sAta rAjU aura nyUnatama eka rAju laMbe-caur3e loka
kI dhanAkAra kalpanA kI jAya to sAta rAz2a U~cAI, sAta rAjU laMbAI aura sAta
rAjU caur3AI hogii| kyoMki samasta loka ke eka-eka rAjU pramANa Tukar3e kiye
jAyeM to 343 Tukar3e hote haiN| unameM se adholoka ke 166 aura Urvaloka ke 147
dhanarAjU haiM aura inakA ghanamUla 7 hotA hai| ataH panIkRta loka kA pramANa
sAta rAjU hai aura ghanarAju 343 hote haiN| isake samIkaraNa karane kI rIti isa
prakAra hai-adholoka ke nIce kA vistAra sAta rAjU hai aura donoM ora se ghaTate-
ghaTate sAta rAja kI U~cAI para madhya loka ke pAsa vaha eka rAju zeSa rahatA
hai| isa adholoka ke bIca meM se do 'samAna bhAga karake yadi donoM bhAgoM ko
ulaTakara barAbara-barAbara rakhA jAye to usakA vistAra nIce kI ora

Page #405 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
368 And there are four *rajū* on each side going upwards, but the height remains
seven *rajū* everywhere. For example: 2/2 뻘 Partyk 7/2 1/2 From the middle of
this *adholoka*, there are two sections of this shape, and by reversing both
parts and digging, After equating the *adholoka*, now we equate the
*urdhvaloka*. The *urdhvaloka* is five *rajū* wide in the middle, east to west.
Leaving the middle three *rajū* area as it is, take two triangular sections, one
*rajū* wide on each side and three and a half *rajū* high. Dividing both
sections from the middle, there are four triangular sections. Each section has a
base of one *rajū* and a perpendicular of one and a quarter *rajū*. These four
sections should be reversed and placed, two sections on both sides of the lower
part of the *urdhvaloka* and two sections on both sides of its upper part. By
doing so, there is no difference in the height of the *urdhvaloka*, but its
width becomes three *rajū* everywhere. The form of the above statement will be
as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 368 tathA Upara kI ora cAra-cAra rAjU hotA hai kiMtu U~cAI sarvatra sAta rAjU
hI rahatI hai  /  jaise- 2/2 bbeol pArTIka 7/2 1/2 isa adholoka ke bIca se do
khaNDa yaha AkAra hotA hai karake donoM bhAgoM ko ulaTa kara khane para adholoka
kA samIkaraNa karane ke bAda aba Urdhvaloka kA samIkaraNa karate haiM  /
Urdhvaloka madhyabhAga meM pUrva pazcima 5 rAjU caur3A hai  /  usameM se madhya
ke tIna rAjU kSetra ko jyoM kA tyoM chor3akara donoM ora se eka-eka rAjU ke
caur3e aura sAr3he tIna sAr3he tInarAja ke UMce do trikoNa khaMDa leM  /  una
donoM khaMDoM ko madhya se vibhakta karane para cAra trikoNa khaMDa ho jAte haiM
/  jinameM se pratyeka khaMDa kI bhujA eka rAjU aura koTi paune do rAja hotI
hai| ina cAroM khaMDoM ko ulaTA sIdhA karake unameM se do khaMDa Urdhvaloka ke
adhobhAga meM donoM ora aura do khaMDa usake UrdhvabhAga ke donoM ora milA denA
cAhiye  /  aisA karane para Urdhva loka kI U~cAI meM to antara nahIM par3atA
kintu usakA vistAra sarvatra tIna rAja ho jAtA hai  /  ukta kathana kA rUpa isa
prakAra hogA

Page #406 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karmagrantha 7/ na The two corners in the middle of this Urdhvaloka
are separated upwards and downwards. 100 Seventeen Milanos Although the Lok is a
circle and it is a cube, therefore to make it a circle, it should be multiplied
by 16 and divided by 22. Then it is proven to be slightly less than seven Raju
long, wide, and round. But in practice 366 When the new shape of the Urdhvaloka
is combined with the new shape of the Adholoka, it becomes a square area of
seven Raju wide, seven Raju high, and seven Raju thick. Therefore, since the
height, width, and thickness are all seven Raju, the Lok is proven to be a cube
of seven Raju. Which is like this In practice, one should understand the Lok as
a cube of seven Raju. After explaining the nature of the Lok in this way, now
the श्रेणि and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 7/ n isa urdhvaloka ke madhya ke donoM konoM ko alaga ka
Upara aura nIce kI ora 100 sataraha milAno yadyapi loka vRtta hai aura yaha
ghana samacaturasra hotA hai  /  ataH isakA vRtta karane ke liye use 16 se guNA
karake 22 se bhAga denA cAhiye  /  taba vaha kucha kama sAta rAjU lambA, caur3A,
gola siddha hotA hai  /  lekina vyavahAra 366 Urdhvaloka ke ukta naye AkAra ko
adholoka ke naye AkAra ke sAtha milA dene para sAta rAjU caur3A, sAta rAjU UMcA
aura sAta rAju moTA caukora kSetra ho jAtA hai| ataH U~cAI, caur3AI aura moTAI
tInoM sAta-sAta rAjU hone ke kAraNa loka sAta rAjU kA ghanarUpa siddha hotA hai|
jo isa prakAra hai meM sAta rAjU kA samacaturasraghana loka samajhanA cAhiye |
isa prakAra se loka kA svarUpa batalAne ke bAda aba zreNi aura

Page #407 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Shataka**  This clarifies the nature of Pratara. A row of
one-one Pradesh (space) extending for seven Rajus is called a Shreni. Wherever
the non-overlapping part of the Shreni is mentioned, this same Shreni should be
taken.  The square of Shreni is called Pratara, meaning that the number of
Pradesh in Ani multiplied by the same number of Pradesh gives the measure of
Pratara. The amount produced by multiplying two equal numbers with each other is
called the square of that number. For example, multiplying 7 by 7 gives its
square, 49. Or, a row of one-one Pradesh extending for seven Rajus in length and
seven Rajus in width is called Pratara.  Multiplying Pratara (square) and Shreni
with each other gives the measure of Ghana. Meaning, multiplying three equal
numbers with each other gives Ghana. For example, 7 x 7 x 7... this is called
Ghana.  In this way, one should understand the measure of Shreni, Pratara, and
Ghana Lok.  The detailed description of Pradeshbandha, along with the topics
mentioned in the first verse by the author, "Namiy Jinam Dhubaandha", etc., has
already been described. Now, in the same verse, the words "Ya" (Cha) refer to
Upshamashreni and Kshapakani, which are now being described. First, the
description of Upshamashreni is being given.  In Triloksar Gatha 7, the measure
of Raju is stated as one-seventh of Shreni: "Nagasedisatbhagoo Rajju". And in
Dravyaloksaprakash, one Raju is stated as equal to countless koti-koti yojanas,
derived from the measure of Angula: "Pramanangulanishpannayोजनानां प्रमाणत: ।
असंख्यकोटीकोटीभिरेकारमुः प्रकीर्तिता ।।"  **Sarg Sha 641**  From Lokamajya to
Uramdhastyanka, the Shreni is measured as a continuous series of Akashdeshas.  -
Sapisiks

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka pratara kA svarUpa spaSTa karate haiM  /  sAta rAjU lambI AkAza ke eka-
eka pradeza kI paMkti ko zreNi' kahate haiN| jahAM kahIM bhI zreNi ke
asaMpAtaveM bhAga kA kathana kiyA jAye, vahAM isI zreNi ko lenA cAhiye  /  zreNi
ke varga ko pratara kahate haiM arthAt aNi meM jitane pradeza haiM, unako utane
hI pradezoM se guNA karane para pratara kA pramANa AtA hai  /  samAna do
saMkhyAoM kA Apasa meM guNA karane para jo rAzi utpanna hotI hai, vaha usa
saMkhyA kA varga kahalAtA hai  /  jaise 7 kA 7 se guNA karane para usakA varga
46 hotA hai  /  athavA sAta rAjU lambI aura sAta rAju caur3I eka-eka pradeza kI
paMkti ko pratara kahate haiM | pratara (varga) aura zreNi ko paraspara meM guNA
karane para ghana kA pramANa hotA hai  /  arthAt samAna tIna saMkhyAoM kA
paraspara guNA karane para ghana hotA hai| jaise 7474.. . yaha ka' ghana hotA
hai| isa prakAra zreNi, pratara aura dhana loka kA pramANa samajhanA caahiye|
pradezabaMdha kA savistAra varNana karane ke sAtha prathakAra dvArA 'namiya
jiNaM dhuvabaMdhA' Adi pahalI gAthA meM ullikhita viSayoM kA varNana kiyA jA
cukA hai  /  aba usI gAthA meM 'ya' (ca) zabda se jina upazamazroNi, kSapakaNi
kA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai, aba unakA varNana karate haiM  /  sarva prathama
upazamaNi kA kathana kiyA jA rahA hai| 1 trilokasAra gAyA 7 meM rAjU kA pramANa
zreNi ke sAtaveM bhAga batalAyA hai 'nagaseDhisattabhAgo rajju  / ' tathA
dravyalokaprakAza meM pramANAMgula se niSpanna asatyAta koTi-koTi yojana kA eka
rAz2a batalAyA hai-pramANAMgulaniSpannayojanAnAM pramANata:  /
asaMkhyakoTIkoTIbhirekAramuH prakIrtitA  /  /  sarga za641 2 lokamajyAdArabhya
UramadhastiyaMka ca AkAzadezAnAM kramasaniviSTAnA pamitaH zreNiH  /  -sapisika

Page #408 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 371 #### Upshamani **Anvassanpusitthiveychakkam
cha purisaveyam cha | Do vo egantare sarisa sarisan usame ||6||**  **Word
Meaning:** Anvassanpusitthivey - Infinitely connected kshaya, darshan mohaniya,
napunsak ved, stri ved, chhaya haspadi patak, cha - also, purisadeyam - purusha
ved, and, do do - two two, egantare - one one's interval, sarisa sarisan -
similar same, usame - subsides.  **Explanation:** (Upshamashroni doing) First
subsides the infinitely connected kshaya, then the darshan mohaniya, and after
that, in order, the napunsak ved, stri ved, hasyaadi shatk and purusha ved, and
after that, giving an interval of one one (sanjwalan) kshaya, subsides two two
similar kshayas together.  **Special:** From the eighth gunasthan, two
categories begin - Upshamani and Kshapkoani.  Nathkar has explained the nature
of Upshamani in the gatha, that how the nature is subsided by the ascender of
Upshamani. In short, the nature of Upshamani is that the stream of progressively
increasing results by which the soul subsides the mohaniya karma completely, is
called Upshamani. The beginning of this Upshamani is the aprammat samyat, and
the one who falls from Upshamani can be any of aprammat samyat, pramat samyat,
deshvirati or avirati. That is, the one who falls comes to the fourth gunasthan
in order.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 371 upazamaNi aNavaMsanapusitthIveyachakkaM ca purisaveyaM
ca  /  do vo egaMtarie sarise sarisaM usame  // 6 //  zabdArtha-
aNavasanapusisthoveya- anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya, darzanamohanIya, napusaka veda,
strIveda, chayAhAspAdi paTaka, ca-taSA, purisadeyaM puruSa veda, aura, do do-do
do, egarie -eka eka ke antara se, sarise sarisaM-sadRza eka jaisI, usameha-
upazamita karatA hai| gAyArya-(upazamazroNi karane vAlA) pahale anaMtAnubaMdho
kaSAya kA upazama karatA hai, anantara darzana mohanIya kA aura usake pazcAt
kramazaH napuMsaka veda, strIveda, hAsyAdi SaTka va puruSaveda aura usase bAda
eka-eka (saMjvalana) kaSAya kA antara dekara do-do sadRza kaSAyoM kA eka sAtha
upazama karatA hai| vizeSAyaM-AThaveM guNasthAna se do zreNiyAM prAraMbha hotI
haiupazamaNi aura kSapakoNi  /  nathakAra ne gAthA meM upazamaNi kA svarUpa
spaSTa kiyA hai ki upazamaNi ke Arohaka dvArA kisa prakAra prakRtiyoM kA upanama
kiyA jAtA hai| saMkSepa meM upazamaNi kA svarUpa isa prakAra hai ki jina
pariNAmoM ke dvArA AtmA mohanIya karma kA sarvazrA upazamana karatA hai, aise
uttarottara vRddhigata pariNAmoM kI dhArA ko upazamaNi kahate haiN| isa
upazamaNi kA prArambhaka apramatta saMyata hI hotA hai aura upazamaNi se girane
vAlA apramatta saMyata, pramatta saMyata, dezavirati yA avirati meM se bhI koI
ho sakatA hai| arthAt girane vAlA anukrama se cauthe guNasthAna taka AtA hai
aura

Page #409 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 372 ## Century  If one falls from there, they also attain the previous
Gunasthan.  There are two parts of Upshamni: (1) Samyakta of Upsham Bhava and
(2) Naritra of Upsham Bhava. Of these, Samyakta of Upsham Bhava, which pacifies
the Mohaniya of Maritra, is attained only in the seventh Gunasthan. Because all
seven Prakruti of Darshan Mohaniya are pacified in the seventh, the Prasthapika
of Upsham Shroni is only Apratiman Samyata. Some Acharyas believe that any
Avirat Samyagdristi, Deshavirat, Prammat or Apratmat Gunasthanvarti pacifies
Anantanu bandhi Kashaya, and only Apratmat, who is in Samyam, pacifies
Darshanvik etc. In this, Anantanu bandhi Kashaya is pacified first, and
Darshanvik is pacified only in the fifth. According to this opinion, the
beginning of Upsham Shroni can be considered from the fourth Gunasthan.  The
description of the pacification of Anantanu bandhi Kashaya is as follows: From
the fourth to the fifth Gunasthan, a Jiva in any one of these Gunasthanas
performs three Karana to pacify Anantanu bandhi Kashaya: Yathapravritta Karana,
Apurva Karana, and Aniyukta Karana. In Yathapravritta Karana, there is gradual,
infinite, pure progress in the last Maya. Due to this, there is an increase in
the Anubhag of auspicious Prakruti and a decrease in the Anubhag of inauspicious
Prakruti. But there is no Sthiti Ghat, Rasha Ghat, Guna Shreni, or Guna
Sankrama, because there are no pure results worthy of them here. The time of
Yathapravritta Karana is Antamuhurt.  After the end of the said Antamuhurt time,
the second Apurva Karana takes place. In this Karana, there is Sthiti Ghat,
Rasha Ghat, Guna Shreni, Guna Sankrama, and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 372 zataka vahAM se gire to isare aura usase pahale guNasthAna ko bhI prApta
karatA hai| upazamaNi ke do bhAga haiM-(1) upazama bhAva kA samyaktva aura (2)
upazama bhAva kA nAritra ! inameM se mAritra mohanIya kA upazamana karane ke
pahale upazama bhAva kA samyaktva sAtaveM guNasthAna meM hI prApta hotA hai|
kyoMki darzana mohanIya kI sAtoM prakutiyoM ko sAta meM hI upazamita kiyA jAtA
hai, jisase upazamazroNi kA prasthApaka apramAna saMyata hI hai| kinhIM-kinhIM
AcAryoM kA maMtavya hai ki avirata samyagdRSTi, dezavirata, pramatta yA
apramatta guNasthAnavartI koI bhI anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya kA upazamana karatA hai
aura darzanavika Adi ko to saMyama meM vartane vAlA apramatta hI upazamita
karatA hai  /  usameM sabase pahale anaMtAnubaMdhI kapAya ko upazAnta kiyA jAtA
hai aura darzanatrika kA upazamana to maMcamI hI karatA hai  /  isa abhiprAya ke
anusAra cauthe guNasthAna se upazama aMNi kA prArambha mAnA jA sakatA hai|
anaMtAnubaMdhI kapAya ke upazamana kA varNana isa prakAra hai ki cauthe se
lekara mAta rANamthAna taka meM se kisI eka guNasthAnavI jIva anaMtAnubaMdhI
kapAya kA upazamana karane ke liye yathApravRttakaraNa, apurvakaraNa aura
aniyuktikaraNa nAmaka tIna karaNa karatA hai | yathApravRttakaraNa meM pratima
maya uttarottara anaMtaguNI vizuddhi hotI hai| jisake kAraNa zubha prakRtiyoM
meM anubhAga ko vRddhi aura azubha prakRtiyoM meM anubhAga kI hAni hotI hai|
kintu sthitighAta, rasadhAta, - guNazreNi yA guNasaMkrama nahIM hotA hai, kyoMki
yahAM unake yogya vizuddha pariNAma nahIM hote haiN| yathApravRttakaraNa kA kAla
antamuhUrta hai  /  ukta antamuhUrta kAla samApta hone para dUsarA apUrvakaraNa
hotA hai| isa karaNa meM sthitighAta, rasaghAta, guNANi, guNasaMkrama aura

Page #410 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Chapter  **Apuurva Sthitibandh**  These five actions are performed.
In the first moment of Apuurvakaran, the number of Kones in the initial state is
reduced by an infinite factor in the final moment by Sthitighāt. By Rasghāt, the
essence of inauspicious natures is gradually destroyed. In Gunani Rachana,
except for the final moment's state, some Dalikas are taken from the upper state
Dalikas in each moment and deposited in the upper state Dalikas of the
Udayavali. The deposition of Dalikas is done in such a way that the least number
of Dalikas taken in the first moment are established in the first moment, an
infinite number of times more Dalikas in the second moment, an infinite number
of times more Dalikas in the third moment, and so on. In this way, an infinite
number of times more Dalikas are deposited until the final moment of the
Antamuhurt. The deposition of Dalikas taken in the second and subsequent moments
is also done in the same way.  The order of Gunani Rachana has been explained
earlier, that the Dalikas taken in the first moment are few, and after that, an
infinite number of times more Dalikas are taken in each subsequent moment. The
deposition of Dalikas happens in specific moments, not in the moments above
Antamuhurt. This same perspective and order should be understood here as well,
that the Dalikas taken in the first moment are few, and in the second and
subsequent moments, they are infinite, and the creation of all of them happens
in the moments equivalent to Antamuhurt. The measure of time does not extend
beyond Antamuhurt.  By Gunasankram, in the first moment of Apuurvakaran, a few
Dalikas of the infinite number of inauspicious natures are transferred to other
natures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama kameMprantha apUrva sthitibaMdha, ye pAMcoM kArya hote haiM  /
apUrvakaraNa ke prathama samaya meM koM kI jo sthiti hotI hai, sthitighAta ke
dvArA usake aMtima samaya meM vaha saMkhyAtaguNI kama kara dI jAtI hai|
rasaghAta ke dvArA azubha prakRtiyoM kA rasa kramazaH kSoNa kara diyA jAtA hai|
guNaNi racanA meM prakRtiyoM kI antamuharta pramANa sthiti ko chor3akara Upara
kI sthiti vAle dalikoM meM se prati samaya kucha dalika le-lekara udayAvalI ke
Upara kI sthiti vAle dalikoM meM unakA nikSepa kara diyA jAtA hai  /  dalikoM kA
nikSepa isa prakAra kiyA jAtA hai ki pahale samaya meM jo dalika liye jAte haiM,
unameM se sabase kama dalika prathama samaya meM sthApita kiye jAte haiM, usase
asaMkhyAtaguNe dalika dUsare samaya meM, usase asaMkhyAtaguNe dalika tIsare
samaya meM sthApita kiye jAte haiN| isa prakAra antamuhUrta ke aMtima samaya
paryanta asaMkhyAtaguNa, asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kA nikSepa kiyA jAtA hai  /
dUsare Adi samayoM meM bhI jo dalika grahaNa kiye jAte haiM, unakA nikSepa bho
isI prakAra kiyA jAtA hai  /  _ guNaNi kI racanA kA krama pUrva meM spaSTa kiyA
jA cukA hai ki pahale samaya meM grahaNa kiye jAne vAle dalika thor3e hote haiM
aura usake bAda pratyeka samaya meM uttarottara asaMkhyAtaguNe, asaMkhyAtaguNaM
dalikoM kA grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai tathA dalikoM kA nikSepa aviziSTa samayoM meM .
hA hotA hai, antamuhUrta kAla se Upara samayoM meM nikSepa nahIM kiyA jAtA hai|
isI dRSTi aura krama ko yahAM bhI samajhanA cAhiye ki pahale samaya meM grahIta
balika alpa haiM, anannara dUsare Adi samayoM meM ve asaMkhyAptaguNe haiM aura
una sabakI racanA antamuhUrta kAla pramANa samayoM meM hotI hai| kAla kA pramANa
antamuhUrta se Age nahIM bar3hatA hai  /  guNasaMkrama ke dvArA apUrvakaraNa ke
prathama samaya meM anaMtAnubaMdhI Adi azubha prakRtiyoM ke thor3e dalikoM kA
anya prakRtiyoM meM saMkramaNa hotA hai

Page #411 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **274**  **Century**  And after that, in every time period, an
innumerable number of souls transition to other natures. In the first time
period of *Apuurvakaran*, the *Sthitibandh* is also *Apuurva* (very little).
_When the time period of *Apuurvakaran* ends, the third *Anivritikaran* occurs.
In this also, from the first time period itself, the five actions mentioned
earlier, namely *Sthitighāt* etc., occur simultaneously until the *Apuurva
Sthitibandh*. Its time period is also *Antamuhurt* in measure. When a part of it
has passed and one part remains, then, leaving aside the lower *Nishakas*, the
remaining *Nikas* are also subjected to *Antarakaran* like the *Mithyatva*
*Antarakaran* mentioned earlier, in the measure of one *Aavali* of
*Anantānubandhi* *Kshaya*. The souls that are subjected to *Antarakaran* in the
measure of *Antamuhurt* are lifted from there and established in other natures
that are bound. When *Antarakaran* begins, in the second time period, the souls
that are bound above the *Anantānubandhi* *Kshaya* are pacified. This
pacification occurs for a few souls in the first time period, for an innumerable
number of souls in the second time period, and for an innumerable number of
souls in the third time period. In this way, until the *Antamuhurt* time period,
the pacification of an innumerable number of souls occurs in each time period.
The result of this is that in all these time periods, the entire
*Anantānubandhi* *Kshaya* is pacified, and this pacification is so strong that
it becomes incapable of the actions of *Uday*, *Udirana*, *Nidhati*, etc. This
is the pacification of *Anantānubandhi* *Kshaya*.  Some Acharyas believe that
*Anantānubandhi* *Kshaya* is not pacified but is disintegrated. This opinion is
mentioned in *Karma-prakriti* (pacification) verse 31.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 274 zataka aura usake bAda pratyeka samaya meM uttarottara asaMkhyAtaguNe
dalikoM kA anya prakRtiyoM meM saMkramaNa hotA hai| apUrvakaraNa ke prathama
samaya meM hI sthitibaMdha bhI apUrva arthAt bahuta thor3A hotA hai| _
apUrvakaraNa kA kAla samApta hone para tIsarA anivRttikaraNa hotA hai| isameM
bhI prathama samaya se hI sthitighAta Adi apUrva sthitibaMdha paryanta pUrvokta
pAMcoM kArya eka sAtha hone lagate haiM  /  isakA kAla bhI antamuhurta pramANa
hai| usameM se saMkhyAta bhAga bIta jAne para jaba eka bhAga zeSa rahatA hai
taba anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya ke eka AvalI pramANa nIce ke niSakoM ko chor3akara
zeSa nikoM kA bhI pUrva meM batAye mithyAtva ke antarakaraNa kI taraha inakA bhI
antarakaraNa kiyA jAtA hai  /  jina antamuhUrta pramANa dalikoM kA antarakaraNa
kiyA jAtA hai, unheM vahAM se uThAkara baMdhane vAlI anya prakRtiyoM meM
sthApita kara diyA jAtA hai  /  antarakaraNa ke prAraMbha hone para dUsare
samaya meM anantAnubandhI kaSAya ke Upara kI sthiti bAle balikoM kA upazama kiyA
jAtA hai  /  yaha upazama pahale samaya meM thor3e dalikoM kA hotA hai, dUsare
samaya meM usase asaMkhyAtaguNe, tIsare samaya meM usase asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM
kA upazama kiyA jAtA hai  /  isI prakAra antamuhUrta kAla taka kramazaH
asaMkhyAtaguNe, asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kA pratisamaya upazama kiyA jAtA hai  /
isakA pariNAma yaha hotA hai ki itane samayoM meM saMpUrNa anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya
kA upazama ho jAtA hai aura yaha upazama itanA sudRr3ha hotA hai ki udaya,
udIraNA, nidhati Adi karaNoM ke ayogya ho jAtA hai  /  yahI anaMtAnubaMdhI
kaSAya kA upazama hai| kinhIM-kinhIM AcAryoM kA mAnanA hai ki anaMtAnubaMdhI
kaSAya kA upazama nahIM hotA hai kiMtu visaMyojana hotA hai  /  isa mata kA
ullekha karmaprakRti (upazamakaraNa) gA0 31 meM kiyA gayA hai

Page #412 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **Chapter 4**  The fourth, fifth, and sixth
Gunasthana-dwelling beings, who are the appropriate living beings of the four
gatis, disassociate themselves from the infinite-bound kashayas through the
three karmas. However, here there is neither an antar-karana nor a suppression
of the infinite-bound.  After the suppression of the infinite-bound, the
suppression of the Darshan-mohaniya-trika-mithyatva, Samyag-mithyatva, and
Samyaktva natures occurs. Of these, Mithyatva is suppressed by the Mithyadrishti
and Vedak-Savyadrishti (Kshayopa-shamic Samyagdristi), but the suppression of
Samyag-mithyatva and Samyaktva is done only by the Vedak-Samyagdristi. When the
Mithyadrishti being first produces the Samyaktva, it suppresses the Mithyatva.
However, in the suppression series, this first Samyaktva is not useful, but the
second Samyaktva is useful. Because in this, the complete suppression of the
Darshan-antrika occurs. Therefore, here the Vedak-Samyagdristi is considered to
be the suppressor of the Darshan-trika.  **Regarding the suppression of Darshan-
moha, the Karma-prakriti says:**  "If the Vedak-Samyagdristi ascends the
suppression series, then first, according to the rule, it suppresses the
Darshan-mohaniya-trika. And it has this special quality that while doing the
antar-karana, it suppresses the first state of the Anudita-mithyatva and Samyag-
mithyatva, and the first state of Samyaktva, by the Avali-pramana and
Samyaktva."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha  /  caupaiyA paz2alA timiva sayAyaNA karaNeha tIhi sahiyA
naMtarakaraNaM uvasamo vA  /  375 cauthe, pAMcaveM tathA chaThe guNasthAnavartI
yathAyogya cAroM gati ke paryApta jIva tIna karaNoM ke dvArA anaMtAnubaMdhI
kaSAya kA visaMyojana karate haiM  /  kintu yahAM na to antarakaraNa hotA aura
na anantAnubaMdhI kA upazama hI hotA hai  /  anaMtAnubaMdhI kA upazama karane ke
bAda darzanamohanIyatrikamithyAtva, samyagmithyAtva aura samyaktva prakRti kA
upazama karatA hai| inameM se mithyAtva ko uparAma to mithyAdRSTi aura vedaka
sabhyadRSTi ( kSAyopazamika samyagdRSTi) karate haiM, kintu samyagmithyAtva aura
samyaktva kA upazama vedaka samyagdRSTi hI karatA hai| mithyAdRSTi jIva jaba
prathamopazama samyaktva ko utpanna karatA hai taba mithyAtva kA upazama karatA
hai| kintu upazama zreNi meM yaha prathamozama samyaktva upayogI nahIM hotA
lekina dvitIyopazama samyaktva upayogI hotA hai| kyoMki isameM darzanantrika kA
saMpUrNatayA upazama hotA hai  /  isIliye yahAM darzanatrika kA upazamaka vedaka
samyagdRSTi ko mAnA hai  / " 1 darzana moha ke upazama ke saMbaMdha meM
karmaprakRti kA maMtavya isa prakAra haiahvA daMsaNamohaM pubvaM uvasAmaddatu
sAmanne  /  mahimAvali karei donhaM aNudiyANaM ||33 addhAparivittAU pamatta mare
sahamsaso kivvA  /  karaNANi tinni kuNae taiyanasese ime suNasu  //  34 yadi
vedaka samyaramaSTi upazama zreNi caDhatA hai to pahale niyama se darzana-
mohanIyanika kA upazama karatA hai aura itanI vizeSatA hai ki antarakaraNa
karate hue anudita mithyAtva aura samya midhyAtva kI prathama sthiti ko AvalikA
pramANa aura samyaktva ko prathama sthiti ko anta(zeSa agale pRSTha para dekheM)

Page #413 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  376 ## Ghatak  After the mitigation of the infinite Kshaya and Darshan
Trika, the process of mitigating the Charitramohaniya begins.  To mitigate the
Charitramohaniya, one performs the three karmas of Vavritta, etc. However, there
is a difference: in the seventh Gunasthan, Yathapravrittakarana occurs; in the
eighth Gunasthan, called A-purvakarana, A-purvakarana occurs; and in the ninth
Gunasthan, called Anivrittikarana, Anivrittikarana occurs. Here too, actions
like Sthiti Ghat, etc., take place, but the special feature is that from the
fourth to the seventh Gunasthan, the Gunasankraman that occurs in the Anukaran
and Nivrittikaran is of the same nature as the one related to which these
results occur. However, in the A-purvakarana Gunasthan, the Gunasankraman of all
the Ashubha Prakruti takes place.  When a certain amount of time has passed
during the A-purvakarana, the Vaidhvichched of Nidra and Prachala, called
Nidradvik, occurs. After more time passes, the Vaidhvichched of the thirty
Prakruti, including Suradvik, Panchendriya Jati, etc., occurs. Finally, in the
last moments, the Vaidhvichched of Hasya, Rati, Bhaya, and Jugupsa occurs.  The
Muhurta testifies to this. After mitigating the Charitramohaniya, one performs
the three karmas of Yathapravritta, etc., for thousands of times, going back and
forth between the Pramatta and A-prayatta Gunasthan. The special feature of the
third, Anivrittikarana, is described in the following verses.  **1** The
Prakruti that become Vaidhvichched in the A-purvakarana Gunasthan are as
follows:  Adavan, A-puchvaimini, Niduganta, Chhappan Pan Bhage, Suradug, Panidi,
Sukhagayi, Tasanav, Uralvinu, Tavanga, Samachaur, Nimina, Jin, Varn,
Agurulhubau, Falans, Tisato, Charame, Chhavisbandh, Hasar, Kuchch, Bhayameo.  -
**Dvitiya Karmagranth, Gaatha 6010**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 376 ghAtaka isa prakAra se anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya aura darzanatrika kA upazamana
karane ke bAda vAritamohanIya ke upazama kA krama prAraMbha hotA hai  /
cAritramohanIya kA upazama karane ke liye punaH vAvRtta Adi tIna karaNa karatA
hai| lekina itanA aMtara hai ki sAtaveM guNasthAna meM yathApravRttakaraNa hotA
hai, apUrvakaraNa apUrvakaraNa nAmaka AThaveM guNasthAna meM tathA
anivRttikaraNa anivRttikaraNa nAmaka nauveM guNasthAna meM hotA hai  /  yahAM
bhI sthitighAta Adi kArya hote haiM, kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki cauthe se
sAtaveM guNasthAna taka jo anukaraNa aura nivRtikaraNa hote haiM, unameM usI
prakRti kA guNasaMkramaNa hotA hai jisake saMbandha meM ve pari NAma hote haiM
/  kintu apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM saMpUrNa azubha prakRtiyoM kA guNasaMkrama
hotA hai  /  * apUrvakaraNa ke kAla meM se saMkhyAtavAM bhAga bIta jAne para
nidrAdvika - nidrA aura pracalA kA vaidhaviccheda hotA hai| usake bAda aura kAla
bItane para suradvika, paMcendriyajAti Adi tIsa prakRtiyoM kA tathA aMtima
samaya meM hAsya, rati, bhaya aura jugupsA kA baMdhaviccheda hotA hai  / "
muhUrta pramANa karatA hai  /  upazamana karake pramatta tathA aprayatta
guNasthAna meM hajAroM bAra AvAgamana karake cAritramohanIya kI upazAmanA ke
liye yathApravRtta vyAdi tIna karaNa karatA hai| tIsare anivRttikaraNa ko
vizeSatA kA kathana Age kI gAthAoM meM kiyA gayA 1 apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM
baMdha vicchinna hone vAlI prakRtiyAM isa prakAra haiMaDavana apucvAiminidugaMto
chapanna paNa bhAge suraduga paNidi sukhagai tasanava uralaviNu tavaMgA ||
samacaura nimiNa jiNa vaNNa agurulahubau phalaMsi tIsato | carame chavIsabaMdha
hAsara kuccha bhayameo  /  - dvitIya karmagrantha gA0 60 10 T

Page #414 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 375  After this comes the **Anivrittikaran**
Gunasthan. In it, too, there are **Sthitighāt** etc. as before. After countless
parts of **Anivrittikaran** have passed, the **Antarakaran** of the twenty-one
types of **Charitramohaniya** takes place. The **Antarakaran** places the
**Dalikas** related to those **Karma** types that have both **Bandha** and
**Uday** at that time in the **Prathama Sthiti** and **Dvitiya Sthiti**. For
example, the **Purushaveda** that ascends to **Ani** due to the **Uday** of
**Purushaveda**. The **Antarakaran** places the **Dalikas** related to those
**Karmas** that only have **Uday** at that time and not **Bandha** only in the
**Prathama Sthiti**, not in the **Dvitiya Sthiti**. For example, the
**Striveda** that ascends to **Shreni** due to the **Uday** of **Striveda**. The
**Antarakaran** places the **Dalikas** related to those **Karmas** that do not
have **Uday** but only **Bandha** at that time in the **Dvitiya Sthiti**, not in
the **Prathama Sthiti**. For example, the remaining **Sanjwalan** **Kshayas**
that ascend to **Shroni** due to the **Uday** of **Sanjwalan** **Krodha**.
However, the **Antarakaran** places the **Dalikas** related to those **Karmas**
that have neither **Bandha** nor **Uday** in other types. For example, the
**Dvitiya** and **Tritiya** **Kshayas**.  The explanation of the above
**Chaturbhangi** is as follows:  1. The **Dalikas** of those **Karmas** that
have both **Bandha** and **Uday** at that time are placed in the **Prathama
Sthiti** and **Dvitiya Sthiti**. 2. Those **Karmas** that only have **Uday** at
that time are placed only in the **Prathama Sthiti**. 3. The **Dalikas** of
those **Karmas** that only have **Bandha** at that time are placed in the
**Dvitiya Sthiti**. 4. The **Dalikas** of those **Karmas** that have neither
**Uday** nor **Bandha** are placed in other types.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karma grantha 375 isake bAda anivRttikaraNa guNasthAna hotA hai  /
usameM bhI pUrvavat sthitighAta Adi bArya hote haiN| anivRttikaraNa ke
asaMkhyAta bhAga bIta jAne para cAritramohanIya kI ikkIsa prakRtiyoM kA
antarakaraNa karatA hai  /  jina karmaprakRtiyoM kA usa samaya baMdha aura udaya
hotA hai usake antarakaraNa saMbandhI dalikoM ko prathama sthiti aura dvitIya
sthiti meM kSepaNa karatA hai| jaise ki puruSaveda ke udaya se aNi car3hane vAlA
puruSaveda kA  /  jina karmoM kA usa samaya kevala udaya hI hotA hai aura baMdha
nahIM hotA hai, unake antarakaraNa saMbandhI dalikoM ko prathama sthiti meM hI
kSepaNa karatA hai, dvitIya sthiti meM nahIM  /  jaise ki strIveda ke udaya se
zreNi car3ane vAlA strIveda kA  /  jina karmoM kA udaya nahIM hotA kintu usa
samaya kevala baMdha hI hotA hai, unake antarakaraNa sambaMdhI dalikoM kA
dvitIya sthiti meM kSepaNa karatA hai, prathama sthiti meM nahIM | jaise ki
saMjvalana krodha ke udaya se zroNi car3hane vAlA zeSa saMjvalana kaSAyoM kA,
kintu jina kamoM kA na to baMdha hI hotA hai aura na udaya ho, unake
antarakaraNa maMcandhI dalikoM kA anya prakRtiyoM meM kSepaNa karatA hai| jaise
ki dvitIya aura tRtIya kaSAya kaa| ukta catubhaMgI kA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra
hai 1. jina karmoM kA usa samaya baMdha aura udaya hotA hai, unake dalikoM ko
prathama sthiti aura dvitIya sthiti meM kSepaNa kiyA jAtA hai| 2. jina karmoM kA
usa samaya udaya hI hotA hai, unako prathama sthiti meM hI kSepaNa kiyA jAtA
hai| 3. jina karmoM kA usa samaya baMdha hI hotA hai, unake dalikoM ko dvitIya
sthiti meM kSepaNa kiyA jAtA hai| 4. jina karmoM kA na to udaya aura na baMdha
hI hotA hai, unake dalikoM ko anya prakRtiyoM meM kSepaNa kiyA jAtA hai  /

Page #415 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A **Shataka** (century) by performing **Antar-Karana** (inner reflection) in a
single **Anta-Muhurta** (moment) subdues the **Mapunsaka Veda** (masculine-
feminine neutral Veda), then in another **Anta-Muhurta** subdues the **Stri-
Veda** (feminine Veda), and then after subduing the **Hasya-adi Shatka** (six
passions: laughter, anger, greed, delusion, pride, and jealousy), the **Purusha-
Veda** (masculine Veda) is freed from **Bandha** (bondage), **Udaya** (arising),
and **Udirana** (excitation).  After subduing the **Hasya-adi Shatka**, in less
than two **Avalika** (moments), the entire **Purusha-Veda** is subdued. At the
time when the **Hasya-adi Shatka** are pacified and the first state of the
**Purusha-Veda** weakens, **A-pratyakhyana-Avarana** (non-rejection covering),
**Pratyakhyana-Avarana** (rejection covering), and **Sanjwalana Krodha**
(burning anger) begin to be subdued simultaneously. When one **Avalika** remains
in the first state of **Sanjwalana Krodha**, the **Bandha**, **Udaya**, and
**Udirana** of **Sanjwalana Krodha** are severed, and the **A-pratyakhyana-
Avarana** and **Pratyakhyana-Avarana** Kosha (sheath) are subdued. At that time,
except for one **Avalika** in the first state of **Sanjwalana Krodha** and less
than two **Avalika** in the higher state, all other **Dalika** (particles) are
pacified. Then, in less than two **Avalika**, the **Sanjwalana Kosha** is
subdued.  From the time when the **Bandha**, **Udaya**, and **Udirana** of
**Sanjwalana Krodha** are severed, until the second state of **Sanjwalana Mana**
(burning mind), the **Dalika** are brought to the first state. From the time of
bringing them to the first state, **A-pratyakhyana-Avarana**, **Pratyakhyana-
Avarana**, and **Sanjwalana Mana** begin to be subdued simultaneously. When less
than three **Avalika** remain in the first state of **Sanjwalana Mana**, the
**Dalika** of **A-pratyakhyana-Avarana** and **Pratyakhyana-Avarana Mana** are
not projected into **Sanjwalana Mana**, but into **Sanjwalana Maya** (burning
illusion) etc. When one **Avalika** remains, the **Bandha**,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zataka antarakaraNa karake eka antamuhUrta meM mapuMsaka veda kA upazema karatA
hai, usake bAda eka antamuhUrta meM strIveda kA upazama aura usake bAda hAsyAdi
SaTka kA upazama hote hI puruSaveda ke baMdha,udaya aura udIraNA kA viccheda
hai| hAsyAdi SaTka kI upazamanA ke anantara samaya kama do AvalikA mAtra meM
sakala puruSaveda kA upazama karatA hai  /  jisa samaya meM hAsyAdi SaTka
upazAnta ho jAte haiM aura puruSaveda kI prathama sthiti kSINa ho jAtI hai,
usake anantara samaya meM apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, pratyAkhyAnAbaraNa aura
saMjvalana krodha kA eka sAtha upazama karanA prAraMbha karatA hai aura jaba
saMjvalana krodha kI prathama sthiti meM eka AvAlakA kAla zeSa raha jAtA hai
taba saMjvalana krodha ke bandha, udaya aura udIraNA kA viccheda ho jAtA hai
tathA apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa koSa kA upazama  /  usa samaya
saMjvalana krodha kI prathama sthitigata eka AvalikA ko aura Upara kI sthitigata
eka samaya kama do AvalikA meM baddha dalikoM ko chor3akara zeSa dalika upazAnta
ho jAte haiN| usake bAda samaya kama do AvalikA kAla meM saMjvalana koSa kA
upazama ho jAtA hai| jisa samaya meM saMjvalana krodha ke bandha, udaya aura
udIraNA kA viccheda hotA hai, usake anantara samaya se lekara saMjvalana mAna kI
dvitIya sthiti se dalikoM ko lekara prathama sthiti karatA hai| prathama sthiti
karane ke samaya se lekara apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura
saMjvalana mAna kA eka sAtha upazama karanA prAraMbha karatA hai  /  saMjvalana
mAna kI prathamasthiti meM samaya kama tIna AvalikA zeSa rahane para
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura pratyAkhyAnAdharaNa mAna ke dalikoM kA saMjvalana mAna
meM prakSepa nahIM kiyA jAtA kintu saMjvalana mAyA Adi meM kiyA jAtA hai  /  eka
AvalikA zeSa rahane para saMjvalana mAna ke baMdha,

Page #416 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Karma Granth  The **udaya** and **udirana** of **Avyakhyanavaran** and
**Pratyakhyanavaran** karma cease, and their **upshama** occurs. At that time,
except for the **karmadalikas** bound in the first state of **Sanjvalan** karma
in one **avali** and two **avalis** less than the time, the **upshama** of the
remaining **dalikas** occurs. After that, the **upshama** of **Sanjvalan** karma
occurs in two **avalis** less than the time.  From the time when the **bandha**,
**udaya**, and **udirana** of **Sanjvalan** karma cease, until the **dalikas**
of the second state of **Sanjvalan** karma, it progresses in the same way as the
first state. From that time, the **upshama** of all three **mays** begins
simultaneously. In the first state of **Sanjvalan** karma, when three **avalis**
less than the time remain, the **dalikas** of **Avyakhyanavaran** and
**Pratyakhyanavaran** karma are not projected into **Sanjvalan** karma, but are
projected into **Sanjvalan** **lobha**. When one **avali** remains, the
**bandha**, **udaya**, and **udirana** of **Sanjvalan** karma cease, and the
**upshama** of **Avyakhyanavaran** and **Pratyakhyanavaran** karma occurs. At
that time, except for the **dalikas** bound in the first state of **Sanjvalan**
karma in one **avali** and two **avalis** less than the time, the **upshama** of
the remaining **dalikas** occurs. After that, the **upshama** of **Sanjvalan**
karma occurs in two **avalis** less than the time.  When the **bandha**,
**udaya**, and **udirana** of **Sanjvalan** karma cease, from that time until
the **dalikas** of the second state of **Sanjvalan** **lobha**, it progresses in
the same way as the first state. The **vedana** time of **lobha** is divided
into three parts, and two parts...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagranpa udaya aura udIraNA kA viccheda ho jAtA hai aura
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa va pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAna kA upazama ho jAtA hai  /  usa
samaya meM saMjvalana mAna kI prathama sthitigata eka AvalikA aura eka samaya
kama do AvalikA meM bAMdhe gaye Upara kI sthitigata karmadalikoM ko chor3akara
zeSa dalikoM kA upazama ho jAtA hai| usake bAda samaya kama do AvalikA meM
saMjvalana mAna kA upazama karatA hai| jisa samaya meM saMjvalana mAna ke
baMdha, udaya aura udIraNA kA viccheda hotA hai, usake anantara samaya se lekara
saMJcalana mAyA kI dvitIya sthiti se dalikoM ko lekara pUrvokta prakAra se
prathama sthiti karatA hai aura usI samaya se lekara tInoM mAyA kA eka sAtha
upazama karanA prArambha karatA hai  /  saMjvalana mAyA kI prathama sthiti meM
samaya kama tIna AvalikA zeSa rahane para apratyAkhyA. nAvaraNa aura
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA ke dalikoM kA saMjvalana mAyA meM prakSepa nahIM karatA
kintu saMjvalana lobha meM prakSepa karatA hai aura eka AvalikA zeSa rahane para
saMjvalana mAyA ke bandha, udaya aura udIraNA kA viccheda ho jAtA hai tathA
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA kA upazama ho jAtA hai  /  usa
samaya meM saMjvalana mAyA kI prathama sthitigata eka AvalikA aura samaya kama
do AvalikA meM bAMdhe gaye Upara kI sthitigata dalikoM ko chor3akara zeSa kA
upazama ho jAtA hai| usake bAda samaya kama do AvalikA meM saMjvalana mAyA kA
upazama karatA hai| jaba saMjvalana mAyA ke baMdha, udaya aura udIraNA kA
viccheda hotA hai, usake anantara samaya se lekara saMjvalana lobha kI dvittIya
sthiti se dalikoM ko lekara pUrvokta prakAra se prathama sthiti karatA hai  /
lobha kA jitanA vedana kAla hotA hai, usake tIna bhAga karake unameM se do bhAga

Page #417 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  380 The first state of Atik Praman lasts for a period of time.
In the first division, it takes the Dalikas from the previous competitors and
makes them extremely tasteless, meaning it removes their taste completely. In
the second division, it takes the Dalikas from both the previous and the new
competitors and performs infinite cultivation, meaning it makes them infinitely
tasteless and establishes them in an interval. At the end of the period of
cultivation, it pacifies the greed of both A-pratyakhyana-avaran and
Pratyakhyana-avaran. At the same time, the bondage of Sanjwalan Lobha is broken.
With this, the ninth Gunasthan of Anivrittikaran comes to an end.  After this
comes the tenth Gunasthan of Sukshma-Samparaya. The duration of this Gunasthan
is an Antarmuhurt. Upon entering it, it takes some of the cultivations from the
previous state and applies them to the first state for a period equal to the
duration of Sukshma-Samparaya. It also pacifies the remaining Dalikas bound in
two Avaliks in a shorter period of time. At the end of Sukshma-Samparaya,
Sanjwalan Lobha is pacified. At the same time, the bondage of five types of
Jnana-avaran, twelve types of Darshan-avaran, five types of Antaraya, Yash-
Kirti, and Ucch-Gotra is broken. In the subsequent time, the eleventh Gunasthan
of Upashanta-Kshaya is attained, and in this Gunasthan, the pacification of
twenty types of Mohaniya takes place.  1. The description of pacification in
Labdhi-sar (Digambar Literature) verse 205, 361 is similar to this. However, it
does not mention the pacification of Ananta-Anubadhi but instead considers it as
Visan-yojan.  "Bariyah-imuh-a Ved-sammi Anan Viyojita" || 205  Meaning: "The
pacification is towards the direction of Charitra, the Vedak Samyag-drishti, and
the Visan-yojan of Ananta-Anubadhi."  This statement clearly shows that the
author is biased towards Visan-yojan.  11. ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 380 atika pramANa prathama sthiti kA kAla rahatA hai| prathama vibhAga meM
pUrva spardhakoM meM se balikoM ko lekara pUrvaspardhaka karatA hai arthAta
pahale ke spardhakoM meM se dalikoM ko le lekara unheM atyanta rasahIna kara
detA hai  /  dvitIya vibhAga meM pUrvaspardhakoM aura apUrvaspardhakoM se
dalikoM ko lekara ananta kRSTi karatA hai arthAt unameM anantaguNA hIna rasa
karake unheM aMtarAla se sthApita kara detA hai  /  kRSTikaraNa ke kAla ke anta
samaya meM apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa lobha kA upazama karatA
hai  /  usI samaya meM saMjvalana lobha ke baMdha kA viccheda hotA hai| isake
sAtha hI nauveM anivRttikaraNa guNasthAna kA aMta ho jAtA hai  /  isake bAda
dasavAM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna hotA hai  /  isa guNasthAna kA kAla
antarmuhUrta hai  /  usameM Ane para Upara kI sthiti se kucha kRSTiyoM ko lekara
sUkSmasaMparAya ke kAla ke barAbara prathama sthiti ko karatA hai aura eka
samaya kama do AvalikA meM baMdhe hue zeSa dalikoM kA upazama karatA hai  /
sUkSmasaMsarAya ke aMtima samaya meM saMjvalana lobha kA upazama ho jAtA hai|
usI samaya meM jJAnAvaraNa kI pAMca, darzanAvaraNa kI bAra, aMtarAya kI pAMca,
yazaHkIrti aura ucca gotra, ina prakRtiyoM ke bandha kA viccheda hotA hai  /
anantara samaya meM gyArahavAM guNasthAna upazAntakaSAya ho jAtA haiM aura isa
guNasthAna meM mohanIya kI 20 prakRtiyoM kA upazama rahatA hai|" 1 labdhisAra (
digambara sAhitya) gA0 205 361 meM ukta varNana se milatA julatA upazama kA
vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| kintu usameM anantAnubadhI ke upazama kA vidhAna na
karake visaMyojana ko mAnA hai bariyAhimuhA vedasammI aNaM viyojitA  //  205
arthAt upazama cAritra ke abhimukha vedaka samyadRSTi anantAnubaMdhI kA
visaMyojana karake " ukta kathana se spaSTa hai ki graMthakAra bisayojana kara
hI pakSapAtI hai| 11..

Page #418 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Karma Group  Although all the natures of mohaniya karma are completely
subsided in the upshama shreni, even after being subsided, the existence of that
karma remains. Just as when a filter is put in muddy water, the dirt settles
down and the water becomes clear, but the dirt remains below, similarly in the
upshama shreni, the mohaniya karma, which contaminates the feelings of the jiva,
is pacified. As the results like apurvakarana etc. ascend, the particles of the
remaining natures of mohaniya karma, like dust, are pacified one after another.
In this way, the natures that have gone into upshama cannot be reduced or
increased in their state and division. They cannot be awakened or stimulated,
nor can they be transformed into other natures. But this upshama is done for a
short period of time. Therefore, when the jiva reaches the eleventh gunasthan
after subsiding subtle greed in the tenth gunasthan, the subsided kshayas emerge
again after a minimum of one time and a maximum of an antamuhurta. The result of
this is that the ascending jiva of the upshama shreni starts to descend in the
same order in which it ascended, and its downfall begins. The downfall of a jiva
with pacified kshayas is inevitable. This fact is clearly stated in the
necessary appointment gatha 118:  -  1. "Uvasatam kammam ja na tao kadei na dei
udaye ni. Nay gamabai parpagay na cheva dhae tam tu." - Pancham Karmagrah,
Swopash Toka, page 131 -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagramya va yadyapi upazama zra eNi meM mohanIya karma kI samasta
prakRtiyoM kA pUrI taraha upazama kiyA jAtA hai, parantu upazama kara dene para
bhI usa karma kA astitva to banA hI rahatA hai| jaise ki gaMdale pAnI meM
phiTakaro yAdi DAlane se usane meM baiTha jAtI hai aura pAnI nirmala ho jAtA
hai, kintu usake nIce gandagI jyoM kI tyoM banI rahatI hU~ | vaise hI upazama
zra eNi meM jIva ke bhAvoM ko kaluSita karane vAlA pradhAna karma mohanIya zAMta
kara diyA jAtA hai| apUrvakaraNa Adi pariNAma jaise-jaise Upara car3hate jAte
haiM vaise-vaise mohanIya karma kI dhUli rUpI uttara prakRtiyoM ke kaNa eka ke
bAda eka uttarottara zAMta ho jAte haiM  /  isa prakAra se upazama ko gaI
prakRtiyoM meM na to sthiti aura anubhAgako kama kiyA jA sakatA hai aura na
bar3hAyA jA sakatA hai  /  na unakA udaya yA udIraNA ho sakatI haiM aura na
unheM anya prakRti rUpa hI kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  kintu yaha upazama to
antamuhUrta kAla ke liye kiyA jAtA hai | ataH dasaveM guNasthAna meM sUkSma
lobha kA upazama karake jaba jIva gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM pahu~catA hai to
kama-se-kama eka samaya aura adhika-seadhika antamuhUrta ke bAda upazama huI
kaSAyeM apattA udra eka kara baiThatI haiN| jisakA phala yaha hotA hai ki
upazama zra eNi kA Arohaka jIva jisa krama se Upara car3hA thA, usI krama se
nIce utaranA zurU kara detA hai aura usakA patana prArambha ho jAtA hai  /
upazAMta kaSAya vAle jIva kA patana avazyaMbhAvI hai| isI bAta ko Avazyaka
niyukti gAthA 118 meM spaSTa kiyA hai ki - 1 anyatrApyuktaM - 'uvasataM kammaM
ja na tao kaDei na dei udae ni  /  naya gamabai parapagai na ceva Dhae taM tu  /
/  - paMcama karmagratha svopaza TokA pR0 131 -

Page #419 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 282 **Shataka**  The passions calmed by a virtuous man can also cause the
downfall of a person with a character similar to a Jina, let alone other
passionate men?  Therefore, as one descends, the natures that were freed in each
of the Gunasthanas while reading, begin to bind again upon reaching those
Gunasthanas.  Descending, he stops at the seventh or Nth Gunasthana, and if he
does not control himself there, he reaches the fifth and fourth Gunasthanas. If
the Anantanubandhi arises, he becomes a Sasadan Samyagdarshi and again falls
into Mithyatva. And in this way, everything done is ruined.  But it should be
kept in mind that if the ascender of the Patan-oriented Upshama Shreni recovers
upon reaching the sixth Gunasthana, he can again ascend the Upshama Shreni.
Because the mention of ascending the Upshama Shreni twice in one Bhava is found.
But the being who twice  **Adhakhanye Pasto Adhapavattoti Padi Hu Kamen.
Sujjhato Arohadi Paddi So Sankilismato.** -Samdhisar Ga. 310  Falls to the
Adhakarana in the Upshama Shreni, if there are pure results afterwards, he
ascends again to the higher Gunasthanas, and if there are Sanklesha results, he
descends to the lower Gunasthanas.   **Ekamche Dukkhutto Charittamoham
Uvasamejja.** -Karmaprakriti Ga. 64  -Panchasangraha Ga. 63 (Pam)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 282 zataka upasAma uvaNIyA gugamahayA viNacarisasarisaMpi  /  pazivAyaMti
kasAyA ki puNa sese sAgasya  //  guNavAna puruSa ke dvArA upazAMta kI gaI
kaSAyeM jina bhamavAna sarIkhe cAritra vAle vyakti kA bhI patana karA detI haiM,
phira anya sarAgI puruSoM kA to kahanA hI kyA hai ? _ ataH jyoM-jyoM nIce
utaratA jAtA hai, vaise-vaise par3hate samaya jisajisa guNasthAna meM jina-jina
prakRtiyoM kA baMdhaviccheda kiyA thA, usausa guNasthAna meM Ane para ve
prakRtiyAM punaH baMdhane lagatI haiN| utarate-utarate vaha sAtaveM yA NThe
guNasthAna meM ThaharatA hai aura yadi vahAM bhI apane ko saMbhAla nahIM pAtA
hai to pAMcave aura cauthe guNasthAna meM pahuMcatA hai| yadi anaMtAnubaMdhI kA
udaya A jAtA hai to sAsAdana samyagdRSTi hokara punaH mithyAtva meM pahu~ca jAtA
hai| aura isa taraha saba kiyA karAyA caupaTa ho jAtA hai  /  lekina yaha bAta
dhyAna meM rakhanA cAhiye ki yadi patanonmukhI upazama zreNi kA Arohaka chaThe
guNasthAna meM Akara saMbhala jAtA hai to punaH upazama zroNi car3ha sakatA hai
/  kyoMki eka bhava meM do bAra upazama zreNi car3hane kA ullekha pAyA jAtA hai|
parantu jo jIva do bAra addhAkhaye pasto adhApavattotti padi hu kameNa  /
sujjhato Arohadi paDadi so saMkilismato  /  /  -samdhisAra gA0 310 jIva upazama
zregi meM adhaHkaraNa paryanta to kama se giratA hai  /  yadi usake bAda
vizuddha pariNAma hote haiM to puna: Upara ke guNasthAnoM meM car3hatA hai aura
saMkleza pariNAmoM ke hone para nIce ke guNasthAnoM meM AtA hai| 2 ekamace
dukkhutto carittamohaM uvasamejjA  /  -karmaprakRti gA064 -paMcasaMgraha gA0 63
(pAma)

Page #420 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **Upasham Shreni** ascends, that being cannot
experience **Kshapak Shreni** or **Arohan** in the same **Bhav**. One who
ascends **Upasham Shreni** once, according to the **Karm Granthik** view, can
also ascend **Kshapak Shreni** a second time. According to the **Sadhanthik**
view, a being ascends only one **Shreni** in a single **Bhav**.  This is the
general description of **Upasham Shreni**. Now, some specific clarifications are
given below.  The **Gatha** describes the order of ascension of **Upasham
Shreni** in relation to the being ascending **Shreni** from the rise of
**Purusha Ved**. If a being ascends **Shreni** from the rise of **Stri Ved**,
then it first performs **Upasham** of **Napunsak Ved**, and then in order,
**Purusha Ved**, **Hasya** etc. **Shatk** and **Stri Ved**. If a being ascends
**Shreni** from the rise of **Napunsak Ved**, then it first performs **Upasham**
of **Stri Ved**, then in order, **Purusha Ved**, **Hapalik** and **Napunsak
Ved**. In summary, the **Ved** from which the **Shreni** ascends, its
**Upasham** is performed last. This is also explained in the **Vishesh Avashyak
Bhashya** **Gatha** 1285:  ...  **"It is said that those who perform Upasham
twice, they are not bound by the rule of Kshapak Shreni in that Bhav. Those who
perform Upasham once, they are bound by the rule of Kshapak Shreni."**  -
**Pancham Karma Granth**, **Swopan Tika**, page 132  **"They do not attain
liberation in that Bhav, they are bound to Samsara. Some wander for a long time,
even for the duration of half a Pudgal Paravart."**  - **Vishesh Avashyak
Bhashya**, 1315  **Upasham Shreni** descends, and the being cannot attain
liberation from that **Bhav**. Some wander in **Samsara** for a long time, even
for the duration of half a **Pudgal Paravart**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha upazamana Ni car3hatA hai, vaha jIva usI bhava meM kSapaka
Ni vA ArohaNa nahIM kara sakatA  /  jo eka bAra upazama dhaNi car3hatA hai vaha
kArma. granthika matAnusAra dUsarI bAra kSapaka thaNi bhI bar3ha sakatA hai  / '
saddhAMtika matAnusAra to eka bhava meM eka jIva eka hI zroNi car3hatA hai  /
isa prakAra sAmAnya rUpa se upazama zroNi kA svarUpa batalAyA gayA hai| aba
tatsaMbaMdhI kucha vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA jAtA hai  /  gAthA meM
upazamaNi ke ArohaNa krama puruSaveda ke udaya se zreNi car3hane vAle jIva kI
apekSA se batalAyA gayA hai  /  yadi strIveda ke udaya se koI jIva zreNi
car3hatA hai to vaha pahale napuMsaka veda kA upazama karatA hai aura phira
krama se puruSaveda, hAsyAdi SaTka aura strIveda kA upazama karatA hai| yadi
napuMsaka veda ke udaya se koI jIva zreNi car3hatA hai to vaha pahale stroveda
kA upazama karatA hai, usake bAda kramamA paheda, hApAlika kA aura napuMsakA
bheda kA upazama karatA hai  /  sArAMza yaha hai ki jisa beda ke udaya se zroNi
car3hatA hai usa veda kA upazama sabase pIche karatA hai| isI bAta ko
vizeSAvazyaka bhASya gA0 1285 meM batAyA hai ki .... uktaM ca sapsatikAco-jo
duve vAre uvasamaseti paSTiyasjada, tassa niyamA tammi bhave khavagasetI natyi |
jo ikkasi ubasamase hiM paDivajjA tassa navagaseThI huja ti -paMcama
karmagrantha svopana TI0, pR0 132 tammi mave nivANaM na labhai ukkoso va saMsAra
/  poggalaparipaTTaddha desUNaM koi hiDejjA  /  /  -vizeSAvazyaka bhASya 1315
upazama zreNi se girakara manuSya usa bhava se mokSa nahIM jA sakatA aura koI-
koI to adhika se adhika kucha kama ardhapudagala parAvarta kAla taka saMsAra meM
paribhramaNa karate haiN|

Page #421 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
384 Until Then, the Darshanantaka is pacified, which is like a hot iron, burning
the body. Then, the seed is pacified, then the Veda which is inferior, then the
other Veda. Then, the Patka of laughter, etc., is pacified, and then the Veda
which arises is pacified. The order of pacification of Karma-prakriti is
explained in verse 65 as follows: Udayam Parijaya Ismi Iritham Samddha Arthaya
Pt. Tah Varisharo Barisavarishi Samgam Kamar. If the Stro is increasing on the
Upshamani, then first the Napumsaka-veda is pacified, then all the Dalikas of
the Stri-veda except the Udayasthiti, which is the last time. Then, when there
is Abe-Kaph, the seven Prakritis, including the Purusha-veda, are pacified. If
the Napumsaka is increasing on the Upshramani, then the remaining Napumsaka-
veda, except the Udayasthiti, and the Stri-veda are pacified together. Then,
when there is Aveda, the seven Prakritis, including the Purusha-veda, are
pacified. The beginning of the Upshamani is the Jiva who is in the seventh
Gunasthan, and when the Anantanubandhi, Apratyakhyanavaran, Pratyakhyanavaran,
Mithyatva, and Sabhyamithyatva are pacified, the seventh Gunasthan is attained.
Because, when these arise, Samyaktva, etc., cannot be attained. 1. In Labdhisar
also, the same rule is laid down according to the Karma-prakriti. See Verses
361, 362.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 384 taka tatto va daMsaNattigaM sare'NuSNaM jahannaraveyaM  /  tato bIyaM
dhakkaM tao ya veyaM samuSinnaM  //  arthAt anantAnubadhA ko upazamanA ke pazcAt
darzanAMtaka kA upazama karatA hai, usake bAda anudIrNaM do vedoM meM se jo veda
hIna hotA hai, usakA upazama karatA hai| usake bAda dUsare veda kA upazama
karatA hai  /  usake bAda hAsyAdi paTka kA upazama karatA hai aura tatpazcAta
jisa veda kA udaya hotA hai, usakA upazama karatA hai  /  karmaprakRti
upazamanAkaraNa gA0 65 meM isa krama ko isa prakAra batalAyA hai ki- udayaM
parijaya ismI irithaM samaddha arthayA pta  /  taha variSaro barisavaristhiM
samagaM kamAra  //  yadi stro upazamaNi para baDhatI hai to pahale napuMsakaveda
kA uparAma karatI hai, usake bAda carama samaya mAtra udaya sthiti ko chor3akara
strIveda ke zeSa sabhI dalikoM kA upazama karatI hai| usake bAda abe - kapha
hone para puruSaveda Adi sAta prakRtiyoM kA upazama karatI hai| yadi napuMsaka
upazrama ANi para car3hatA hai to eka udaya sthiti ko chor3akara zeSa napuMsaka
veda kA tathA stroveda kA eka sAtha upazama karatA hai  /  usake bAda avedaka
hone para puruSaveda Adi sAta prakRtiyoM kA upazama karatA hai  /  ' upazamaNi
kA AraMbhaka saptama guNasthAnavartI jIba hai aura anaMtAnubandhI,
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, mithyAtva aura sabhyamidhyAtva kA
upazama karane para sAtavAM guNasthAna hotA hai  /  kyoMki inake udaya hote hue
samyaktva Adi kI prApti nahIM ho sakatI hai| 1 labdhisAra meM bhI pharma prakRti
ke anurUpa hI vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| dekho gAthA 361, 362  /

Page #422 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma-Yanthra  **5**  In the Upashama Shreni, the Upashama of the
Ananta-anubandhi, etc., is also done. Therefore, in such a situation, the reason
for mentioning their Upashama again in the Upashama Shreni is that the
attainment of Vedak Samyaktv, Deshacharitra, and Sakalcharitra is achieved
through the Kshayopa-shama of the said natures. Therefore, before starting the
Upashama Shreni, it is necessary to understand the Yoga-gana of the Unma-tahiti.
That is why the Upashama of the Ananta-anubandhi, etc., is mentioned in the
Upashama Shreni.  **The difference between Upashama and Kshayopa-shama**  In
this context, one should also understand the nature of Upashama and Kshayopa-
shama. Because Kshayopa-shama occurs due to the fear of the Karma-dalikas that
have come into existence and the Upashama of the Karma that is present in the
being. But Kshayopa-shama has this special feature that it has Pradesh-odaya of
the Ghatak Karmas, and in Upashama, there is no Udaya of any kind, i.e., neither
Pradesh-odaya nor Rasa-odaya. Even though Pradesh-odaya occurs in Kshayopa-
shama, the reason why Samyaktv, etc., are not destroyed is that Udaya is of two
types - Phala-odaya and Pradesh-odaya. But Phala-odaya causes the destruction of
the Guna, and Pradesh-odaya, being very slow, does not cause the destruction of
the Guna. Therefore, in the Upashama Shreni, the Upashama of the Ananta-
anubandhi, etc., is considered to be of both types - Phala-odaya and Pradesh-
odaya.  **Difference of opinion regarding the beginning of the Upashama Shreni**
There is also a difference of opinion regarding the beginning of the Upashama
Shreni. Some Acharyas say that one of the four - Avirat, Deshavirat,
Pramattavirat, and Apramattavirat - ascends the Upashama Shreni, and some
consider the seventh Guna-sthana-vi Jeeva as the beginning.  The reason for this
difference of opinion is that the Acharyas who consider the Upashama of the
Darshan-mohaniya, i.e., the beginning of the second Upashama-Samyaktv, as the
beginning of the Upashama Shreni...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmayantha 5 upazama zrINi meM bhI anantAnubandhI Adi kA upazama kiyA
jAtA hai  /  ataH aisI dazA meM punaH upazama zraNi meM unakA upazama batalAne
kA kAraNa yaha hai ki vedaka samyaktva, dezacAritra aura sakalacAritra kI prApti
ukta prakRtiyoM ke kSayopazama se hotI hai  /  ataH upazama zreNi kA prAraMbha
karane se pahale unma tahatiyoM kA yogagana mAtA hai ki upazama  /  isIliye
upazama zreNi meM anantAnubandhI Adi ke upazama ko batalAyA hai| upazama aura
kSayopazama meM antara  /  isI prasaMga meM upazama aura kSayopazama kA svarUpa
bhI samajha lenA caahiye| kyoMki kSayopazama ukSya meM Aye hue karmadalikoM ke
bhaya aura sattA meM vidyamAna kamA~ ke upazama se hotA hai  /  parantu
kSayopazama kI itanI vizeSatA hai ki usameM ghAtaka kramoM kA pradeSodaya rahatA
hai aura upazama meM kisI bhI taraha kA udaya nahIM hotA hai arthAt na to
pradezodaya aura na rasodaya  /  kSayopazama meM pradezodaya hone para bhI
samyaktva Adi kA ghAta na hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki udaya do prakAra kA hai--
phalodaya aura pradezodaya  /  lekina phalodaya hone se guNa kA dhAta hotA hai
aura pradezodaya ke atyanta maMda hone se guNa kA dhAta nahIM hotA hai  /
isIliye upazama zroNi meM anantAnubandhI Adi kA phalodaya aura pradezodaya rUpa
donoM prakAra kA upazama mAnA jAtA hai  /  upazama zreNi kA prArambhaka mAne
jAne ke sambandha meM matAntara bhI hai  /  kaI AcAryoM kA kahanA hai ki
avirata, dezavirata, pramattavirata aura apramattavirata meM se koI eka upazama
zreNi car3hatA hai aura koI saptama guNasthAnavI jIva ko Arambhaka mAnate haiM
/  isa matabhinnatA kA kAraNa yaha hai ki jo AcArya darzanamohanIya _ ke upazama
se arthAt dvitIya upazamasamyaktva ke prArambha se hI upazama

Page #423 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **386**  **The Beginning of the Upshama Shreni**  Those who
consider the fourth and higher Gunasthanas as the beginning of the Upshama
Shreni, believe that the beings residing in these Gunasthanas are the initiators
of Upshama Shreni. This is because the attainment of Samyaktva, which is a part
of Upshama, is possible only in the fourth and higher Gunasthanas. However,
those Acharyas who consider the Upshama of Charitramohaniya, or the effort made
to attain the Uparama of Charitra, as the starting point, believe that the
beings residing in the seventh Gunasthan are the initiators of the Upshama
Shreni. This is because the Yathapravrittakarana (the state of being in
accordance with one's true nature) occurs only in the seventh Gunasthan.  **The
Ascent of the Upshama Shreni**  Refer to page 387 for the order of ascent of the
Upshama Shreni. This is how one should understand the nature of the Upshama
Shreni. Now, we will describe the Kshapaka Shreni, which is attained in a
sequential manner.  **Kshapaka Shreni**  **Anmichchhami Sammam Ti-Aau Ig-Vigala
Upati-Gujjovam**  **Tirin-Dhar-Paavara-Gam**  **Chhag-Pu Sanjala Ya Donidd-
Vigdha-Varan-Klay**  **Sahaaray Adan-Puriye ||66|| Naani.**  **Kshaya,**
**Michchha - Mithyatva**  **-**  **Sammam - Samyaktva Mohaniya,**  **Shabdarth -
An - Anant Nubandhi Mohaniya, Mees - Mishra Mohaniya, Tibhaj - Three Ayus, Ig-
Vigala - Ekendriya, Vikelendriya, Shrimati-G - Styanaddhitrik, Ujjiivam - Udyot
Nama, Tichhadvik, Narakdvik, Stavardvik, Atap Nama, Ad - Eight Kshaya,
Napusthiyee Ved.**  **Tirin-Narath-Thaavar Yugam -**  **-**  **Sahaarayav -
Sadharan Nama, Napunsak Ved and Stri**  **Chhag - Hasyaadi Shatka, Pu - Purusha
Ved, Sanjala - Sanjwalan Kshaya, Yoni-D - Donidra (Nidra and Prachala), Vigdha-
Varan-Klay -**  **1. The Digambar Sampradaya accepts only the second opinion.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 386 gataka zra eNi kA prArambha mAnate haiM ve cauthe Adi guNasthAnavartI jIvoM
ko upazamazraNa kA prArambhaka mAnate haiN| kyoMki upazama samyaktva cauthe Adi
cAra guNasthAnoM meM hI prApta kiyA jAtA hai| lekina jo AcArya cAritramohanIya
ke upazama se yAnI uparAma cAritra kI prApti ke liye kiye gaye prayatnI se upara
mAnate haiM, ve saptamaguNasthAnavartI jIva ko hI upazama zreNi kA prArambhaka
mAnate haiM, kyoMki sAtaveM guNasthAna meM hI yathApravRttakaraNa hotA hai  / "
upazama zroNi ke ArohaNa kA krama agale pRSTha 387 para dekhiye  /  isa prakAra
se upazama zra eNi kA svarUpa jAnanA cAhiye  /  anantara aba kramaprApta kSapaka
zra eNi kA varNana karate haiM  /  apaka zreNi aNamicchamIsasammaM tiAu
igavigalayopatigujjovaM tirinadharapAvaragaM chagapu saMjala yA doniddavigdhava
raNaklae sAhArAya aDanapurIe  // 66 //  nANI  /  kaSAya, mincha - mithyAtva -
sammaM samyaktva mohanIya, zabdArtha - aNa - anaMta nubaMdhI mohanIya, mIsa -
mizra mohanIya, tibhAja- tIna Ayu, igavigala - ekendriya, vikelendriya,
zrImatiga-styAnaddhitrika ujjIvaM-- udyota nAma, ticadvika, narakadvika,
sthAvaradvika Atapa nAma, aDa - ATha kapAya napusthIe veda  /
tirinarathathAvara yugaM - - sAhArAyava sAdhAraNa nAma, napuMsaka veda aura strI
chaga -- hAsyAdi SaTka, puM puruSa veda, saMjalA -saMjvalana kaSAya, yonida do
nidrA ( nidrA aura pracalA), vigdhavaraNavakhae- 1 digambara saMpradAya meM
dUsare mata ko hI svIkAra kiyA hai  /

Page #424 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Panchama Karmagrantha ### Upashamana #### Sanjwalana Lobha 28 ####
Apratyakhyanavaran Lobha 26 #### Pratyakhyanavaran Lobha 27 #### Sanjwalana Maya
25 #### Apratyakhyanavaran Maya 23 #### Sanjwalana Man 22 #### Pratyakhyanavaran
Maya 24 #### Apratyakhyanavaran Man 20 #### Pratyakhyanavaran Man 21 ####
Sanjwalana Krodha 16 #### Apratyakhyanavaran Krodha 17 #### Pratyakhyanavaran
Krodha 18 #### Purusha Veda 16 #### Hasyaadi Shatka 15 #### Stri Veda ####
Napumsaka Veda #### Misra 6 #### Samyaktva Mo 7 #### Mithyatva 5. Anantanubandhi
Krodha 1, Man 2, Maya 3, Lobha 4

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama karmagrantha upazamana saMjvalana lobha 28 apratyAkhyAtAvaraNa lobha
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa lobha 26 27 saMjvalana mAyA 25 apratyAkhyAnA0 mAyA 23
saMjvalana mAna 22 pratyAkhyAnA0 mAyA 24 apratyAkhyAnA0 mAna pratyAkhyAnA0 mAna
20 21 saMjvalana krodha 16 apratyAkhyAnA0 krodha 17 pratyAkhyAnA0 krodha 18
puruSa veda 16 hAsyAdi SaTka 15 strIveda napuMsaka veda mizra 6, samyaktva mo0 7
mithyAtva 5. anantAnubaMdhI krodha 1, mAna 2, mAyA 3 lobha 4 zng-

Page #425 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 36 ## Pātaka When the five antarayas, five jñānāvaranas and four
darśanāvaranas are destroyed, the being becomes a Kevala Jnani.  **Gāthārtha**
(Kṣapaka Śreṇi Bālā) The infinite anubandhi kaṣāyas, mithyātva mohaniya, mithya
mohaniya, samyaktva mohaniya, three āyus, ekaindriya, vikalaindriya,
styānaddhitrika, udyota nāma, tiryañcadvika, narakadvika, sthāvadvika, sādhāraṇa
nāma, ātapa nāma, eight (second and third) kaṣāyas, napuṣaka veda, strīveda and
-  hāsyādi ṣaṭka, puruṣa veda, sanjvalana kaṣāya, two nidrāyas, five antarayas,
five jñānāvaranas, four darśanāvaranas, by destroying these natures, the being
becomes a Kevala Jnani.  **Viśeṣārtha** - The names of the natures that the
ārohaka of the kṣapaka śreṇi destroys are mentioned in the gāthā. The difference
between the upasama śreṇi and the kṣapaka śreṇi is that the ārohakas of both
these śreṇis are progressing to subdue and destroy the mohaniya karma, but in
the upasama śreṇi, the arising of the natures is pacified, the essence of the
natures remains, and they cannot bear their fruit for the final moment, but in
the kṣapaka śreṇi, their very essence is destroyed, so there is no fear of their
arising again. For this reason, there is no fall in the kṣapaka śreṇi. The
essence of the above statement is that the central point of both the upasama
śreṇi and the kṣapaka śreṇi is mohaniya karma, and in the upasama śreṇi, the
pacification of mohaniya karma leads to its re-arising. This makes the parināmik
śuddhi done during the fall useless. But in the kṣapaka śreṇi, the complete
destruction of mohaniya karma prevents its re-arising, and the non-arising makes
the parināmik śuddhi complete.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 36 pAtaka pAMca aMtarAya, pAMva jJAnAvaraNa aura cAra varNanAvaraNa ke kSaya
hone para, nANI- kevalajJAnI  /  gAthArtha (kSapaka zreNi bAlA) anaMtAnubaMdhI
kaSAya, mithyAtva mohanIya, midha mohanIya, samyaktva mohanIya, tIna Ayu,
ekendriya, vikalendriya, styAnaddhitrika, udyota nAma, tiryacadvika,
narakadvika, sthAvadvika, sAdhAraNa nAma, Atapa nAma, ATha (dUsarI aura tIsarI)
kaSAya, napusaka veda, strIveda tathA- hAsyAdi SaTka, puruSa veda, saMjvalana
kaSAya, do nidrAyeM, pAMca aMtarAya,pAMca jJAnAvaraNa, cAra darzanAvaraNa, ina
prakRtiyoM kA kSaya karake jIva kevalajJAnI hotA hai| vizeSArtha-kSapaka zreNi
kA Arohaka jina prakRtiyoM ko kSaya karatA hai, unake nAma gAthA meM batalAye
haiM  /  upazama zroNi aura kSapaka zreNi meM yaha antara hai ki ina donoM
zreNiyoM ke Arohaka mohanIya karma ke upazama aura kSaya karane ke lie agrasara
hote haiM lekina upazama aNi meM to prakRtiyoM ke udaya ko zAMta kiyA jAtA hai,
prakRtiyoM kI mattA banI rahatI hai aura antamuhUrta ke liye apanA phala nahIM
de sakatI haiM, kintu kSapaka zreNi meM unakI sattA hI naSTa kara dI jAtI hai,
jisase unake punaH udaya hone kA bhaya nahIM rahatA hai  /  isI kAraNa kSapaka
zroNi meM patana nahIM hotA hai| ukta kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai ki upazama
zreNi aura rupaka zreNi donoM kA kendrabindu mohanIya karma hai aura upazama
zroNi meM mohanIya karma kA upazama hone se punaH udaya ho jAtA hai  /  jisase
patana hone para kI gaI pAriNAmika zuddhi vyartha ho jAtI hai| kintu kSapaka
zrINi meM mohanIya karma kA samUla kSaya hone se punaH udaya nahIM hotA hai aura
udaya na hone se pAriNAmika zuddhi pUrNa

Page #426 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 36  When the soul attains its pure form, it
becomes a Kevala-Jnani.  The second difference between the Upshama Shreni and
the Kshapaka Shreni is that in the Upshama Shreni, only the Mohaniya Karma is
pacified, but in the Kshapaka Shreni, along with the Mohaniya Karma, some of the
Nama Karma and the Karmas of Jnanavarana, Darshanavarana, and Antaray are also
destroyed.  The order of destruction of the Karmas in the Kshapaka Shreni is as
follows:  1. A person who is more than eight years old, possesses the highest
Samhanana, and is in the fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh Gunasthan, begins the
Kshapaka Shreni. First, they destroy the four Kashayas, which are Anantanu
bandhi, all at once. Then, they establish the remaining infinite part of the
Kashayas in Mithyatva and destroy both Mithyatva and that part together. After
that, they destroy the Samyagmithyatva and Samyaktva Karmas in this order.  When
only one Avali of Samyagmithyatva remains, the Samyaktva Mohaniya Karma remains
for eight years.  **Pavitti e annayaru padivajji suddha jmanova gayachitto ||**
**1**  - **Visheshavashak Bhashya 1321**  In the Digambar Sampradaya, the person
who ascends the Kshapaka Shreni is considered to be in the seventh Gunasthan,
like the person who ascends the Upshama Shreni. This is because they are
considered to be Pakani only after the destruction of the Charitramahima.
**Padhamsaaye samay khave**  **AntomuttamettaNam.**  **Tatto virya micchatam tak
ya me tao sabhya ||**  **Visheshavashak Bhashya 1322**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 36 hokara AtmA apane zuddha svarUpa ko prApta kara letI
hai aura kevala - jJAnI ho jAtI hai  /  upazama zratri aura kSapaka zrapi meM
dUsarA aha hai ki zamazraNa meM sirpha mohanIya karma ko prakRtiyoM kA hI
upazama hotA hai lekina kSapaka zroNi meM mohanIya karma kI prakRtiyoM ke sAtha
nAmakarma kI kucha prakRtiyoM va jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, aMtarAya karma kI
prakRtiyoM kA bhI kSaya hotA hai  /  kSapaka zreNi meM prakRtiyoM ke kSaya kA
krama isa prakAra hai 1 ATha varSa se adhika Ayu vAlA uttama saMhanana kA
dhAraka, cauthe, pAMcaveM, chaThe athavA sAtaveM guNasthAnavartI manuSya kSapaka
zra eNi prAraMbha karatA hai  / " sabase pahale vaha anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya
catuSka kA eka sAtha kSaya karatA hai aura usake zeSa anaMtaveM bhAga ko
mithyAtva meM sthApana karake mithyAtva aura usa aMza kA eka sAtha nAza karatA
hai  /  usake bAda isa prakAra kramazaH samyagmithyAtva aura samyaktva prakRti
kA kSaya karatA hai  /  * jaba samyagmithyAtva kI sthiti eka AvalikA mAtra bAkI
raha jAtI hai taba samyaktva mohanIya kI sthiti ATha varSa pramANa bAkI
abirayademapamattApamattavirayANaM  /  pabitI e annayaro paDivajjai
suddhajmANovagayacitto || 1 - vizeSAvazyaka bhASya 1321 digambara saMpradAya meM
upathama zreNi ke Arohaka kI taraha kSapaka zreNi ke Arohaka ko saptama
guNasthAnavatIM mAnA haiN| kyoMki cAritramAhIma ke kSapaNa se hI pakaNi mAnI hai
/  paDhamasAe samaya khave aMtomuttamettaNaM  /  tatto virya micchataM takha ya
mI tao sabhya || vizeSAvazyaka bhASya 1322

Page #427 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
31. It remains. It consumes the proof-moments one by one. When it consumes the
final state-moment, that consumption is called *kritakarna*. If a being dies
during this *kritakarna* time, it is born in any one of the four destinies. If
the consumption begins with a bound-life being and it dies after the destruction
of the *anantaanubandhi*, then in that state, upon the arising of *mithyatva*,
the being again binds the *anantaanubandhi*, because it binds by the rule of
*mithyatva*, but...  1. *Labdhisara* (in the Digambar Chandra, it is stated
about the consumption of *darshanamoha*)  *Darshanamohapakhavanapatubago
karmabhumijo manuso. Tisthayarapaadamule kevalisudakevalimule.* ||11|| *Ninago
tatthana vimana bhogavanimu dhambe a.* ||111|| *Kidkaranijjo chadusuvigadisuu
uppajade jamha.* ||111||  A *karmabhumij* human being begins the consumption of
*darshanamoha* at the feet of a *tirthankara*, a *kevali*, or a *shrutakevali*.
From the first moment of *adhakarana* until now, the *mithyatva* *mohaniya* and
*mithya* *mohaniya* substances undergo a transformation in their nature, and the
time of the *ansamuhurta* until then is called the initial time of the
consumption of *darshanamoha*. And from that initial time onwards, until the
first moment of the attainment of *shayik* *sampanattva*, the time is called
*nisthapaka*. *Nisthapaka* is where it began, here it is in its *vaimanika*
heaven, in its *bhogabhumi*, or in the first hell called *dharma*. Because a
bound-life *kritakritya* *vedaka* *sammasthi* can be born in any of the four
destinies after death.  *Badhau padivano padhamafasayakkhae ai marejja. To
mithattodayo vinij mujjo na khinamme.* ||111|| - *Visheshavashak Bhashya* 1323

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 31. rahatI hai  /  usake antamuhUrta pramANa khaNDa kara-karake khapAtA hai |
jaba usake aMtima sthitikhaNDa ko khapAtA hai taba usa kSapaka ko kRtakaraNa
kahate haiM  /  isa kRtakaraNa ke kAla meM yadi koI jIva maratA hai to vaha
cAroM gatiyoM meM se kisI bhI gAte meM utpanna ho sAtA hai|' yadi kSapaka zroNi
kA prAraMbha baddhAyu jIva karatA hai aura anaMtAnubaMdhI ke kSaya ke pazcAt
usakA maraNa ho to usa avasthA meM mithyAtva kA udaya hone para vaha jIva punaH
anaMtAnubaMdhI kA baMdha karatA hai, kyoMki mithyAtva ke udaya meM
anaMtAnubaMdhI niyama se baMdhatI hai, kintu . 1 labdhisAra (digambara candra
meM darzana mahanIya kI kSapaNA ke bAre meM nitA hai
daMsaNamohapakhavaNApaTubago kammabhUmijo maNuso  /  tisthayarapAdamUle
kevalisudakevalImUle  /  / 11 /  /  Ninago taTThANe vimANabhogAvaNImu dhambhe
a|| kidakaraNijjo cadusuvi gadIsu uppajade jamhA  /  / 111 //  karmabhUmija
manuSya tIrthakara, kevalI athavA zrutakevalI ke pAdamUla meM darzanamoha ke
kSapaNa kA prArambha karatA hai| adhaHkaraNa ke prathama samaya se lekara aba
taka mithyAtva mohanIya aura mitha mohanIya kA dravya sampakatva prakRti rUpa
saMkramaNa karatA hai taba taka ke ansamuhUrta kAla ko darNanamoha ke kSapaNa kA
prArambhika kAla kahA jAtA hai aura usa prArambha kAla ke anantara samaya se
lekara zAyika sampanatva kI prApti ke pahale samaya taka kA kAla niSThApaka
kahalAtA hai  /  niSThApaka to jahA~ prArambha kiyA thA yahAM hI apanA vaimAnika
devoM meM apanA mogabhUmi meM athavA dharmA nAma ke prathama naraka meM hotA
hai| kyoMki baddhAyu kRtakRtya vedaka sammaSTi maraNa karake cAroM gatiyoM meM
utpanna ho sakatA hai  /  baDhAu paDivano paDhamaphasAyakkhae ai mrejjaa| to
miThattodayo viNija mujjo na khINammi  /  /  -vizeSAvazyaka bhASya 1323

Page #428 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
361 When the fifth karma-grantha, Mithyatva, is destroyed, there is no further
binding of the Anantanubandhi. Even if a being is bound to a lifespan, if it
does not die at that time, after the destruction of the Anantanubandhi kshaya
and Darshanamoha, it remains there and does not attempt to destroy the Pariva-
mohaniya. If it is not bound to a lifespan, it attains Kevalgyan after ending
that category. Therefore, for a human being who is not bound to a lifespan and
who has ended all categories, the three lifespans - Deva-ayu, Naraka-ayu, and
Tiryancha-ayu - are naturally absent, and the Anantanubandhi Chatushk and
Darshan-trik are destroyed in the fourth and subsequent four Gृणस्थानs.  In this
way, after destroying the Darshanamoha-saptak, it performs the three Karans -
Yathapravritta, etc. - to destroy the Charitra-mohaniya. In the Apurva-karan,
through Sthiti-ghat, etc., the Apratyakhyana-avaran kshaya Chatushk and
Pratyakhyana-avaran kshaya Chatushk, a total of eight Prakṛtis, are destroyed in
such a way that at the first moment of Anivritti-karan, their state remains only
a fraction of an innumerable part of the Paly. After the innumerable parts of
Anivritti-karan have passed, the four categories - Sthaman-dvitrik, Naraka-gati,
Naraka-anupurvi, Tiryancha-gati, Tiryancha-anupurvi, Ekaindriya, Bikaleindriya-
trik - and the sixteen Prakṛtis - Sthavar, Atap, Udyot, Sukshma, and Sadharan -
are reduced to a fraction of an innumerable part of the Paly through Udvlana-
samkran, and then, through Guna-samkran, they are completely destroyed by being
projected into the bound Prakṛtis. Although the destruction of Apratyakhyana-
avaran and Pratyakhyana-avaran kshaya begins earlier, they are not yet
destroyed, and there is an interval...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 361 paMcama karmagrantha mithyAtva kA kSaya ho jAne para punaH anaMtAnubaMdhI
kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai| baddhAyu hone para bhI yadi koI jIva usa samaya maraNa
nahIM karatA hai to anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya aura darzanamoha kA kSapaNa karane ke
bAda vaha vahIM Thahara jAtA hai, pArivamohanIya ke kSapaNa karane kA prayatna
nahIM karatA hai  /  yadi abaddhAyu hotA hai to vaha usa zreNi ko samApta karake
kevalajJAna prApta karatA hai  /  ataH abaddhAyuSka sakala zreNi ko samApta
karane vAle manuSya ke tIna Ayu- devAyu, narakAyu aura tiryaMcAyu kA abhAva to
svataH hI ho jAtA hai tathA pUrvokta kama se anaMtAnubaMdhI catuSka aura
darzanatrika kA kSaya cauthe Adi cAra gRNasthAnoM meM kara detA hai| ima prakAra
darzanamohasaptaka kA kSaya karane ke pazcAta cAritramohanIya kA kSaya karane ke
liye yathApravRtta Adi tIna karaNoM ko karatA hai  /  apUrvakaraNa meM
sthitighAta Adi ke dvArA apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka aura
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka kula ATha prakRtiyoM kA isa prakAra kSaya kiyA
jAtA hai ki anivRttikaraNa ke prathama samaya meM unakI sthiti palya ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga mAtra raha jAtI hai  /  anivRttikaraNa ke saMkhyAta bhAga
bIta jAne para- stmAnadvitrika, narakagati, narakAnupUrvI, tiryaMcagati,
tiryaMcAnupUrvI, ekendriya, bikalendriyatrika ye cAra jAtiyAM, sthAvara, Atapa,
udyota, sUkSma aura sAdhAraNa, ina solaha prakRtiyoM kI sthiti udvalanA
saMkramaNa ke dvArA udvalanA hone para palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga mAtra raha
jAtI hai aura usake bAda guNasaMkramaNa ke dvArA badhyamAna prakRtiyoM meM unakA
prakSepa kara-karake unheM bilkula kSINa kara diyA jAtA hai  /  yadyapi
apratyAsyAnAvaraNa aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya ke kSaya kA prAraMbha pahale
hI kara diyA jAtA hai, kintu abhI taka ye kSINa nahIM hotI haiM ki aMtarAla

Page #429 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the 392nd century, the aforementioned sixteen *prakritis* are destroyed, and
after their destruction, the eight *kṣayās* are also destroyed in the same way.
After that, it differentiates between the nine *mokṣāyas* and the four
*sancalana kṣayās*. Then, it destroys the six *nokṣayās* in order:
*napumsakaved*, *strīved*, and *hāsyādi*. After that, it destroys two parts of
the *puruṣaved* together, and merges the third part with the *sanjvalana
krodha*. This sequence is described for someone who ascends the *puruṣaved*
*śreṇī*. If a woman ascends the *śreṇī*, she first destroys the *napumsakaved*,
then the *puruṣaved*, the six *nokṣayās*, and finally the *strīved*. If a
*napumsaka* ascends the *śreṇī*, he first destroys the *strīved*, then the
*puruṣaved*, the six *nokṣayās*, and finally the *napumsakaved*. In summary,
some believe that the destruction of the sixteen *prakritis* begins first, and
the destruction of the eight *kṣayās* occurs in the middle, followed by the
destruction of the sixteen *prakritis*. In the *Go. Karmakāṇḍa*, a different
opinion is mentioned in this regard:  "There is no *anantānubandhī* in the
*upaśama śreṇī*, and the *kṣapaka anivṛttikaraṇa* first destroys the eight
*kṣayās* and then destroys the sixteen *prakritis* and so on, some say."  "In
this way, the *napumsaka* arises, and in this way, the *strī* and the *sat*
arise. The *napumsaka* arises from the *apumoda*, and the *strī* arises from the
*napumsaka*." - *Paṇḍhasangraha* 346 (see next page)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 392 zataka meM pUrvokta solaha prakRtiyoM kA kSapaNa kiyA jAtA hai aura unake
kSaya ke pazcAta ATha kaSAyoM kA bhI antamu huna meM hI kSaya kara detA hai|'
usake pazcAta nau mokSAya aura cAra saMcalana kApAyoM meM antarakaraNa karatA
hai  /  phira kramazaH napuMsakaveda, strIveda aura hAsyAdi chaha nokaSAyoM kA
kSapaNa karatA hai aura usake bAda puruSaveda ke tIna khaMDa karake do khaNDoM
kA eka sAtha kSapaNa karatA hai aura tosare khaNddha ko saMjvalana krodha meM
milA detA hai| _ukta kkama puruSaveda ke udaya se zreNi car3hane vAle ke liye
batAyA hai  /  yadi strI ghoNi para ArohaNa karatI hai to pahale napuMsakaveda
kA kSapaNa karatI hai, usake bAda kramazaH puruSaveda, chaha nokapAya aura
strIveda kA kSapaNa karatI hai yadi napuMsaka zreNi ArohaNa karatA hai to vaha
pahale strIveda kA kSapaNa karatA hai, usake bAda kramazaH puruSaveda, chaha
nokaSAya aura napuMsaka veda kA kSapaNa karatA hai  /  sArAMza yaha hai ki kisI-
kisI kA mata hai ki pahale solaha prakRtiyoM ke hI kSaya kA prArambha pharatA
hai aura unake madhya meM ATha kaSAyoM kA kSaya karatA hai, pazcAt solaha
prakRtiyoM kA kSaya karatA hai  /  go. karmakAMDa meM isa sambandha meM
matAntara kA ullekha isa prakAra kiyA hai Narima aNaM ubasamage svavagAputvaM
zakttui aTThA ya  /  pacchA solAdINaM khavaNaM idi kei NiTThi  // 361 /  /
upazama zreNI meM anaMtAnubaMdhI kA satva nahIM hotA aura kSapaka anivRptikaraNa
pahale ATha kaSAyoM kA kSapaNa karake pazcAt solaha Adi prakRtiyoM kA kSapaNa
karatA hai, aisA koI kahate haiM  /  /  itthI udae napusaM itthIveyaM ca
sattagaM ca kamA  /  apumodayaMmi jugavaM napusaitthI puNo satta  /
-paMdhasaMgraha 346 (zeSa agale pRSTha para dekheM)

Page #430 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  513  The **veda** which arises with the ascent of
**śreṇi** is destroyed at the end.  After the destruction of the **veda**, the
**sanjvalana** destroys **krodha**, **mana**, **māyā**, and **lobha** in the
same way. That is, the **sanjvalana** destroys two of the three parts of
**krodha** together, and merges the third part into **mana**. Similarly, it
merges the third part of **mana** into **māyā**, and the third part of **māyā**
into **lobha**. The time for the destruction of each is **ant-muhūrta**, and the
time for the **śreṇi** is also **ant-muhūrta**, but it is a larger **ant-
muhūrta**.  The **sanjvalana** destroys two of the three parts of **lobha**
together, but it destroys the remaining parts of the third part, except for the
last part, at different times. Then, it destroys the countless parts of that
last part at different times in the tenth **guṇasthāna**. In this way, when the
**lobha** **kaṣāya** is completely destroyed, it becomes **kṣīṇa-kaṣāya** after
an infinite amount of time.  Until one part of the time of the **kṣīṇa-kaṣāya**
**guṇasthāna** remains, **sthitighāta** etc. occur as before in all **karmas**
except for **mohaniya**. In it, the **kṣīṇa-kaṣāya** makes the **five jñāna-
āvaraṇa**, **four darśana-āvaraṇa**, **five antarāya**, and **two nidrā**
(**nidrā** and **prachalā**) - these sixteen **prakṛti** - equal to the time of
**kṣīṇa-kaṣāya**, but it makes the **nidrā-dvaya** equal to one time.  When the
**aṇi** ascends with the arising of **strī-bandha**, first the **napumsaka
veda** is destroyed, then the **strī-veda**, and then the **puṣpa-veda** and the
**ṣaṭka** of **hāni** etc. are destroyed. When the **aṇi** ascends with the
arising of the **napumsaka veda**, the **napumsaka veda** and the **strī-
bandha** arise together. After that, the **puruṣa-veda** and the **ṣaṭka** of
**hāsa** are destroyed. This same order is also mentioned in **Go. Dharma-
kāṇḍa** **Gā. 388**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 513 jisa veda ke udaya se zrINi ArohaNa karatA hai, usakA
kSapaNa anta meM hotA hai| veda ke kSapaNa ke bAda saMjvalATa krodha, mAna, mAyA
aura lobha kA kSapaNa ukta prakAra se karatA hai| yAnI saMjvalana krodha ke tIna
khaNDa karake do khaMDoM kA to eka sAtha kSapaNa karatA hai aura tIsare khaMDa
ko saMjvalana mAna meM milA detA hai| isI prakAra mAna ke tIsare khaMDa ko mAyA
meM milAtA hai aura mAyA ke tIsare khaNDa ko lobha meM milAtA hai  /  pratyeka
ke kSapaNa karane kA kAla antamuharta hai aura zreNi kAla antamuhUrta hai kintu
vaha antamuhUrta bar3A hai| saMjvalana lobha ke tIna khaMDa karake do khaNDoM kA
to eka sAtha kSapaNa karatA hai kintu tIsare khaNDa ke saMkhyAta' khaNDa karake
carama khaMDa ke sivAya zeSa khaMDoM ko bhinna-bhinna samaya meM khapAtA hai
aura phira usa carama khaMDa ke bhI asaMkhyAta khaMDa karake unheM dasaveM
guNasthAna meM bhinnabhinna samaya meM khapatA hai  /  isa prakAra lobha kaSAya
kA pUrI taraha kSaya hone para anantara samaya meM kSINakaSAya ho jAtA hai  /
kSINakaSAya guNasthAna ke kAla ke saMkhyAta bhAgoM meM se eka bhAga kAla bAkI
rahane taka mohanIya ke sivAya zeSa karmoM meM sthitighAta Adi pUrvavat hote
haiN| usameM pAMca jJAnAbaraNa, cAra darzanAvaraNa, pAMca antarAya aura do nidrA
(nidrA aura pracalA) ina solaha prakRtiyoM kI sthiti ko kSINakaSAya ke kAla ke
barAbara karatA hai kintu nidrAdvika kI sthiti ko eka samaya strIvaMda ke udaya
me aNi car3hane para pahale napu maka veda kA kSaya hotA hai, phira stroveda kA
aura phira puSpaveda pa hAnyAdi SaTka kA kSaya hotA hai  /  napusaka veda ke
udaya se aNi caDhane para napusaka veda aura strIbaMda kA eka sAtha Aya hotA
hai. usake bAda puruSaveda aura hAsyaSaTka kA kSaya hotA hai| go0 pharmakAMDa
gA0 388 meM bhI yahI krama batAyA hai|

Page #431 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
364 It diminishes. When their state becomes equal to this, the functions like
*sthitighāt* etc. cease in them and the remaining *prakṛtis* continue. After the
*kṣīṇakṣaya*, it destroys *nidrādvaya* in time and *kṣetra* destroys the
fourteen *prakṛtis* in the final time and after that time, it becomes
*sayogakevalī*. Shataka That *sayogakevalī* state is of a previous *koṭi* time,
which is less than the last *hūrta* from the lowest and less than the best. In
this time, they preach, wander etc. for the awakening of the *bhāvya* beings. If
the state of their *vedanīya* etc. karmas is more than the *āyukarma*, then they
perform *samudghāt* for their equation, i.e. to make the state of *vedanīya*
etc. three *atrāti* karmas equal to the state of *āyukarma*. This is called
*kevalīsamudghāt* and after that, they undertake to stop *yoga*. If the state of
*vedanīya* etc. karmas is equal to *āyukarma*, then they do not perform
*samudghāt*. The undertaking to stop *yoga* is as follows: First, they stop
*bādar manoyoga* by *bādar kāyayoga*, then they stop *bādar vacanayoga* and
after that, they stop *bādar kāyayoga* by *sūkṣmakāya*, then *sūkṣma manoyoga*,
then they stop *sūkṣma vacanayoga*. In this way, after stopping *bādar*, *sūkṣma
manoyoga*, *vacanayoga* and *bādar kāyayoga*, they meditate on
*sūkṣmakriyāpratipātī dhyāna* to stop *sūkṣmakāyayoga*. In that meditation, they
perform *apavarṭana* of the remaining karmas except *āyukarma* till the final
time of the *sayogi* state by *sthitighāt* etc. By doing so, the state of all
karmas becomes equal to the time of the *ayogi* state in the final time. Here,
it should be understood that...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 364 kama karatA hai| inakI sthiti ke barAbara hote hI inameM sthitighAta
vagairaha kArya banda ho jAte haiM aura zeSa prakRtiyoM ke hote rahate haiN|
kSINakaSAya ke upAnta samaya meM nidrAdvika kA kSaya karatA hai aura kSetra
caudaha prakRtiyoM kA antima samaya meM kSaya karatA hai aura usake anantara
samaya meM vaha sayogakevalI ho jAtA hai  /  zataka vaha sayogakevalI avasthA
jaghanya se antama hUrta aura utkRSTa se kucha kama eka pUrva koTi kAla kI hotI
hai| isa kAla meM bhavya jIvoM ke pratibodhArtha dezanA, vihAra Adi karate haiN|
yadi unake vedanIya Adi karmoM kI sthiti Ayukarma se adhika hotI hai to unake
samIkaraNa ke liye yAnI Ayukarma kI sthiti ke barAbara vedanIya Adi tIna
atrAtiyA karmoM kI sthiti ko karane ke liye samudghAta karate haiM, jise
kebalIsamudghAta kahate haiM aura usake pazcAta yoga kA nirodha karane ke liye
upakrama karate haiN| yadi Ayukarma ke barAbara hI vedanIya Adi karmoM kI sthiti
ho to samudaghAta nahIM karate haiM  /  yoga ke nirodha kA upakrama isa prakAra
hai ki sabase pahale bAdara kAyayoga ke dvArA bAdara manoyoga ko rokate haiM,
usake pazcAta bAdara vacanayoga ko rokate haiM aura usake pazcAta sUkSmakAya ke
dvArA bAdara kAyayoga ko rokate haiM, usake bAda sUkSma manoyoga ko, usake
pazcAt sUkSma vacanayoga ko rokate haiN| isa prakAra bAdara, sUkSma manoyoga,
vacanayoga aura bAdara kAyayoga ko rokane ke pazcAt sUkSma kAyayoga ko rokane ke
liye sUkSmakriyApratipAtI dhyAna ko dhyAle haiM  /  usa dhyAna meM sthitighAta
Adi ke dvArA sayogi avasthA ke aMtima samaya paryanta Ayukarma ke sivAya zepa
karmoM kA apavartana karate haiM  /  aisA karane se antima samaya meM saba
karmoM kI sthiti ayogi avasthA ke kAla ke barAbara ho jAtI hai| yahAM itanA
vizeSa samajhanA cAhiye

Page #432 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pancham Karmagranth 365 The state of those karmas which do not arise in the
ayogi state, decreases at one time. In the final time of the Sayogkevali
Gunasthan, one of the seven vedaniyas, either Saata or Asata, Audarik, Tejas,
Karman, six institutions, first Sanhanan, Audarik Angopaang, Varnachatusk,
Agurulghu, Upghāt, Paradhat, Ucchvas, Shubh and Ashubh Vihayogati, each, stable,
unstable, Shubh, Ashubh, Suswar, Duswar and Nirman, the arising and udirana of
these thirty prakritis are severed and after that time they become Ayogkevali.
In this Ayogkevali state, they perform Byupert-kriya-pratipati dhyan. Here,
there is no Sthitighāt etc., therefore, the karmas which arise, they destroy
them by experiencing the decay of their state, but the prakritis which do not
arise, they are transferred to the existing prakritis by Stibuksankram and they
are experienced till the end time of the Ayogi state and at the end time, 72
prakritis are destroyed and at the end time, 13 prakritis are destroyed and they
become Nirakar, Niranjan and attain the eternal bliss of Moksha. This is how the
nature of the Kshapak Shreni should be understood. Its digdarshak description is
this 1 See the special description of the Sapak Shreni in the appendix.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 365 ki ayogi avasthA meM jina karmoM kA udaya nahIM hotA
hai, unakI sthiti eka samaya kama hotI hai| sayogakevalI guNasthAna ke antima
samaya meM sAtA yA asAtA vedanIya meM se koI eka bedanIya, audArika, tejasa,
kArmaNa, chaha saMsthAna, prathama saMhanana, audArika aMgopAMga, varNacatuSka,
agurulaghu, upaghAta, parAdhAta, ucchvAsa, zubha aura azubha vihAyogati,
pratyeka, sthira, asthira, zubha, azubha, susvara, duHsvara aura nirmANa, ina
tIsa prakRtiyoM ke udaya aura udIraNA kA viccheda ho jAtA hai aura usake
anantara samaya meM ayogakevalI ho jAte haiN| isa ayogakevalI avasthA meM
byuparatakriyApratipAtI dhyAna ko karate haiN| yahAM sthitighAta Adi nahIM hotA
hai, ataH jina karmoM kA udaya hotA hai, unako to sthiti kA kSaya hone se
anubhava karake naSTa kara dete haiM, kintu jina prakRtiyoM kA udaya nahIM hotA,
unakA stibukasaMkrama ke dvArA vedyamAna prakRtiyoM meM saMkrama karake ayogi
avasthA ke upAMta samaya taka vedana karate haiM aura upAMta samaya meM 72 kA
aura aMta samaya meM 13 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya karake nirAkara, niraMjana hokara
nitya sukha ke dhAma mokSa ko prApta karate haiN|' isa prakAra se kSapaka zraNi
kA svarUpa samajhanA cAhiye  /  usakA digdarzaka vivaraNa yaha hai 1 sapaka
zreNi kA vizeSa vivaraNa pariziSTa meM dekhiye  /

Page #433 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
366 Attainment of Siddha state: Destruction of 148 Prakṛtis Destruction of 12/13
Prakṛtis (in the 14th Guṇasthāna) Destruction of 72/73 Prakṛtis (in the 13th
Guṇasthāna) Jñānāvaraṇa 5, Darśanāvaraṇa 4, Antarāya 5 = 14 (in the 12th
Guṇasthāna) Two Nidrā 2 (in the time after the 12th Guṇasthāna) Sanjvalana Lobha
1 (in the 10th Guṇasthāna) Sanjvalana Māyā 1 Sanjvalana Mān 1 Sanjvalana Krodha
1 Puruṣaved 1 Hāsyādi Ṣaṭka 6 Strīved 1 In the 9th Guṇasthāna Napuṃsakaved 1
Ekaindriya ādi 16 Apratyākhyānāvaraṇa Krodha, Mān, Māyā, Lobha,
Pratyākhyānāvaraṇa Krodha, Mān, Māyā, Lobha ( Deva, Naraka, Tiryañc Āyu 3
Samyaktvamohaniya 3 Miśra Mohaniya 2 Mithyātva Mohaniya 1 Anantānubandhī Krodha,
Mān, Māyā, Lobha in the Guṇasthāna) Śataka (in the 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th
Guṇasthāna)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 366 siddha avasthA kI prApti 148 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya 12/13 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya
(14ve guNasthAna meM ) 72/73 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya (13veM guNasthAna meM )
jJAnAvaraNa 5, darzanAvaraNa 4, aMtarAya 5 = 14 (12 guNasthAna meM) do nidrAyeM
2 (12 guNasthAna ke uparAMta samaya meM ) saMjvalana lobha 1 (dasave guNasthAna
meM ) saMjvalana mAyA 1 saMjvalana mAna 1 saMjvalana krodha 1 purupaveda 1
hAsyAdi SaTka 6 strIveda 1 nauveM guNasthAna meM napuMsakaveda 1 ekendriya Adi
16 apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha,
mAna, mAyA, lobha ( deva, naraka, tiryaMca Ayu 3 samyaktvamohanIya 3 mizra
mohanIya 2 mithyAtva mohanIya 1 anaMtAnubaMdhI krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha
guNasthAna meM ) zataka (4, 5, 6, 7 veM guNasthAna meM )

Page #434 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Fifth Karma Granth**  367 _ After describing the topics that were promised to
be described in the first stanza, 'Namiy Jinam Ghuba Bandhodayasatta', etc., the
author concludes the text by mentioning his own name and the name of the text.
Devivarilihiyam Sayaminam Aysaranatta ||10||  Word Meaning- Devivid
Suri—Devendra Suri has, Lihiyam—written, Sayag—Shatak named, Ig—this text,
Aysaranatta—to remember, to attain knowledge.  Meaning- Devendra Suri has
composed this text named Shatak for the purpose of attaining knowledge of the
soul.  Special Meaning- As a conclusion, the author, demonstrating his humility,
says that this text is named 'Shatak' because it contains one hundred stanzas
and in them, the topics to be described, as promised in the beginning, have been
described and this text is made for self-realization.  Thus, the explanation of
the Fifth Karma Granth is complete.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama pharmagrantha 367 _ 'namiya jiNaM ghubabaMdhodayasattA' Adi pahalI gAthA
meM jina viSayoM ke varNana karane kI pratijJA kI gaI thI, unakA varNana karane
ke pazcAta granthakAra apanA aura gra'tha kA nAma batalAte hue gra'ya ko samApta
karate haiN| devivarilihiyaM sayamiNaM AyasaraNaTThA  // 10 //  zabdArtha-devida
sUri--devendrasUri ne, lihiya likhA, sayaga-zataka nAma kA, iga-yaha graya,
AyasaraNaTThA-AsmasmaraNa karane, bodha prApta karane ke liye| mArtha-dene te
AtmA kA bodha prApta karane ke lie isa zataka nAmaka grantha kI racanA kI hai|
vizeSArtha upasaMhAra ke rUpa meM granthakAra apanI laghutA pradarzita karate
huye kahate haiM ki isa gra'tha kA nAma 'zataka hai, kyoMki isameM sau gAthAyeM
haiM aura unameM prArambha meM kI gaI pratijJA ke anusAra varNya viSayoM kA
varNana kiyA gayA hai aura yaha grantha svasvarUpa bodha ke lie banAyA gayA hai|
isa prakAra paMcama karma grantha kI vyAkhyA samApta huI  /

Page #435 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 1. Original Verses of the Fifth Karmagrantha 2. Reason for the
Difference in the Number of Bandha, Udaya, and Satya Natures of Karmas 3. Bandha
of Bhuyaskara etc. in the Uttara Natures of Mohaniya Karma 4. Jghana
Sthitibandha of Karma Natures 5. Explanation of Abadhkal of Ayukarma 6.
Discussion of Yogasthana 7. Method of Dividing the Acquired Karma Skandha into
Karma Natures 8. Discussion of the Distribution of Pudgal Dravya and Honadhikta
in Uttara Natures 9. Statement of Anuyoagdwar Sutra etc. Regarding the Valagra
Used to Fill the Palya 10. Description of Palyopama in Digambar Literature 11.
Description of Pudgal Paravarati in Digambar Texts 12. Description of the Owners
of Utkrishta and Jghana Pradeshbandha in Go. Karmakanda 13. Explanation of the
Provisions of Gunashreni 14. Explanation of the Provisions of Kshapaka Shreni
15. Alphabetical Index of the Verses of the Fifth Karmagrantha

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 1. paMcama karmagrantha kI mUla gAthAyeM 2. karmoM kI bandha, udaya,
sattA prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA meM bhinnatA kA kAraNa 3. mohanIya karma kI uttara
prakRtiyoM meM bhUyaskAra Adi bandha 4. karma prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya
sthitibandha, 5. Ayukarma ke abAdhAkAla kA spaSTIkaraNa 6. yogasthAnoM kA
vivecana 7. grahaNa kiye gaye karmaskandhoM ko karma prakRtiyoM meM vibhAjita
karane kI rIti 8. uttara prakRtiyoM meM pudgaladravya ke vitaraNa tathA
honAdhikatA kA vivecana #. palyoM ko bharane meM lie jAne vAle vAlAgroM ke bAre
meM anuyogadvAra sUtra Adi kA kathana 10. digambara sAhitya meM palyopama kA
varNana 11. digambara granthoM meM pudgala parAvartI kA varNana 12. utkRSTa aura
jaghanya pradezabaMdha ke svAmiyoM kA go0 karmakAMDa meM Agata varNana 13.
guNazreNi ke vidhAna kA spaSTIkaraNa 14. kSapaka zreNi ke vidhAna kA
spaSTIkaraNa 15. paMcama karmagrantha kI gAthAoM kI akArAnukramaNikA

Page #436 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-1: The Original Verses of the Five Karma Granthys  **Salutation to the
Jina, the Lord of the Universe, who is the source of all knowledge and wisdom.**
**Verse 1:** The four divisions of the karma granthys are explained here, along
with their bondage and liberation.  **Verse 2:** The five types of karma are:
(1) Jñānāvaraṇīya (knowledge-obscuring), (2) Darśanāvaraṇīya (perception-
obscuring), (3) Mohaniya (delusion-producing), (4) Karma (action), and (5) Āyus
(life-span). These are classified as heavy, medium, and light, based on their
intensity.  **Verse 3:** The karma granthys are bound due to the actions of the
past, present, and future. They are also bound due to the actions of the gods,
humans, and animals.  **Verse 4:** The karma granthys are bound due to the
actions of the body, speech, and mind. They are also bound due to the actions of
the senses, the intellect, and the soul.  **Verse 5:** The karma granthys are
bound due to the actions of the body, speech, and mind. They are also bound due
to the actions of the senses, the intellect, and the soul.  **Verse 6:** The
karma granthys are bound due to the actions of the body, speech, and mind. They
are also bound due to the actions of the senses, the intellect, and the soul.
**Verse 7:** The karma granthys are bound due to the actions of the body,
speech, and mind. They are also bound due to the actions of the senses, the
intellect, and the soul.  **Verse 8:** The karma granthys are bound due to the
actions of the body, speech, and mind. They are also bound due to the actions of
the senses, the intellect, and the soul.  **Verse 9:** The karma granthys are
bound due to the actions of the body, speech, and mind. They are also bound due
to the actions of the senses, the intellect, and the soul.  **Verse 10:** The
karma granthys are bound due to the actions of the body, speech, and mind. They
are also bound due to the actions of the senses, the intellect, and the soul.
**Verse 11:** The karma granthys are bound due to the actions of the body,
speech, and mind. They are also bound due to the actions of the senses, the
intellect, and the soul.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-1 paMcama karmagranya kI mUla gAthAyeM namiya jiNaM
ghubbNdhodystaapaaipunpriyttaa| seyara cauhavivAgA vuccha bandhaviha sAmI ya  /
/ 1 /  /  vannacauteyakammAgurulahu nimaNobaghAya bhayakucchana  /
micchakasAyAvaraNA vipanna vargati sagacatA  /  / 2 /  /  taNuvaMgAgiisaMghayaNa
jAigaikhagaipubbijiNusAmaM  /  ujjoyAyavaparaghA tasavIsA goya beyaNiyaM  /  / 3
/  /  hAsAijuyaladugaveya Au tevuttarI adhuvbNdhaa| bhaMgA aNAisAI arNatasaMtta
ttarA cauro  /  / 4 /  /  paDhamabiyA dhuvaudaisa dhuvabaMdhisu
taiavabjabhaMgatigaM  /  micchammi tinni bhaMgA duhAvi adhuvA turiabhaMgA  /  /
5 /  /  nimiNa thira athira aguruya suhaasuhaM teya kamma caubannA  /
nANaMtarAya saNa miccha dhuvaudaya sagavIsA  /  / 6 /  /  thira-subhiyara viNu
adhuvabaMdhI miccha viNu mohadhuvabaMdhI  /  nidobaghAya' mIsaM mammaM paNanavai
adhruvudayA  /  / 7 /  /  tasavannavIsa sagateya-kamma dhuvabaMdhi sesa
veyatigaM  /  Agiitiga veyaNiyaM dujuyala sagaurala sAsacaU ||8|| khaigatiriduga
nIyaM dhuvasaMtA samma mIsa maNuyadugaM  /  /  viuvikkAra jiNAU hArasaguccA
adhuvasaMtA || par3hamatiguNasU miccha niyamA ajavAiaTTage bhajja  /  sAsANe
khalu samma saMtaM micchAidasage vA  /  / 10 /  /  sAsaNamIsesu dhurva mIrU
micchAinavasu bhayaNAe  /  Aiduge aNa niyamA bhaiyA mIsAinavagammi  // 11 //

Page #437 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Parisishta-1 The Tirtha (Jain spiritual teacher) is without the eight qualities
and the six qualities. It is not both (i.e., not having both the eight and six
qualities). The false Tirtha is at the end of the moment. 12.  The covering of
the Kevala (omniscience) and the twelve-fold passions. They destroy the right
faith, knowledge, and perception. 13.  The non-passions do not obstruct. The
destructive karmas of the region are two-fold. The subtle effort of the mobile
and immobile beings. The gods, humans, and animals cross over in the evening.
The subtle body of the mobile beings is four-cornered. The other-acquired is the
three-fold. 15.  The birth in the womb, the formless, the attainment of the
subtle body, and the connection. The two-fold animal, the inedible, and the
downfall to hell. 16.  The stationary, the two-fold, the four-fold, the
destructive, the attachment, and the dwelling. The merit and demerit, the
auspicious and inauspicious abodes. 17.  The nine-fold name-karma, the teaching,
the knowledge-obstruction, and the other-acquired. The fear, the delusion, the
wrong faith, the Jina's qualities, and the non-attachment. 18.  The eight
subtle, the two-fold passions, the illumination, the sleep, the subtle life-
span, the small, the scattered, and the continuous. 19.  The dense-destructive,
the two-fold Jinas, the auspicious, the beautiful, the four-fold life, the
birth-life, the conquered, the life-span, and the four-fold existence. 20.  The
name-steady, the four-fold, the binding, the general, the three-fold
illumination, the transformation of the matter, the standing, the taste, and the
touch. 21.  The three regions in the fundamental nature, the six-fold bondage.
The fewer are the three, the four are not to be spoken of. 22.  The one is more,
the one is less, in the same place, the fewer. That which is established in the
first moment is not to be spoken of. 23.  Nine, four in the faith, two in the
perception, three in the delusion, twenty-one, seventeen, thirteen, nine, five,
four, two, nine, six, ten, two. 24.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-1 AhArasattagaM vA savvaguNe vitiguNe biNA titthaM  /  nobhayasaMte
miccho aMtamuhuna' bhave titthe  // 12 /  /  kevalajuyalAvaraNA paNanidA
baarsaaimksaayaa| miLa ti sadhvaghAi caNANatidasaNAvaraNA  /  / 13 /  /
saMjalaNa nokasAyA vighaM iya desaghAiya adhAI  /  patte yataNuTThAU tasapIsa:
gorA jAnA  /  suranaratigacca sAyaM tasadasa taNuvaMgabaira caurasa  /
paraghAsaga tiriAU bannacau paNidi subhakhagai  /  / 15 /  /  bAyAlapunnapagaI
apadamasaMThANakhagaisaMdhayaNA  /  tiriyaduga asAyanIyobaghAya igavigala
nirayatigaM  /  / 16 /  /  thAvaradama bannacaukka ghAipaNayAlasahiya bAsII  /
pAvapaDitti dosuvi vannAigahA suhA asuhA  /  /  1714 nAmadhavabaMdhinavagaM
desaNa paNanANaviragha paraghArya  /  bhayakumicchasAsaM jiNa guNatIsA
apariyattA  /  / 18 /  /  taNuaTTha veya dujuyala kasAya ujoyagoyaduga niddA  /
tasavIsAu parittA khittavivAgA'Nuputhvoo ||1|| ghaNaghAi dugoya jiNA
tasiyaratiga subhagabhagacau sAsaM  /  jAitiga jiyavivAgA AU cauro bhavavivAgA
// 20 //  nAmadhuvodaya cauttaNu badhAyasAhAraNiyara joyatigaM  /
puragalavikAgi baMdho payaiThiirasapaesatti  /  / 21 /  /  mUlapayaDINa
asattachegabaMdhesu tinni bhUgArA  /  appatarA tiya cauro avaTTiyA Na hu
avattabyo  /  / 22 /  /  egAdahige bhUoM egAIUNagammi apptro| tammano'vaTThiyao
paDhame samae avattavo  /  / 23 /  /  nava cau daMse dudu, tidu mohe du igavIsa
sattarasa  /  terasa nava paNa cau ti du isako nava acha dasa dunni  /  / 24 /
/

Page #438 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Panchama Karmapratyasthanam ||25|| The twenty-two and thirty-three Tirthankara,
the six Adruta-bandhas, the remaining twenty Kodikoḍi names, the Nattari-moha,
the thirty-three Utkrṣṭa Caturvidha Naraka-asura-udayika, the thirty-three
Muhūrta Jāghanya-vedanīya. Thus, these are released.||26|| Eighteen Muhūrta
Avigalita-tīvra. Two Upabṛṃhaṇa-durgavṛddhi.||28|| Released from the eight and
eighty Nāma-gotra, the Avadhi-varaṇa-asāya. Then, in the first Aṃśapraṇa, the
ten and forty Kaṣāyas are destroyed, the Nidrā, Hāsa, Hṛṣita, Madhura. The ten
Doṣa-darśana-mahitā are eliminated.||29|| The ten Subha-vihāgati, the Ucca-sura-
durgati, the Sthira-pauruṣa. The Mithyā-sapta-rīti, the Vijṛmbhita-rīti, the
Naraka-durgati-nāma.||30|| Bhramakucchara-rīti, the Tejas-paryāpta-asthira-
ṣaṭka, the Trasa-sthāvara-aṃga-parṇa-dīrgha.||31|| The Napuṃsaka-indriya-
āsādana, the Caturgurukaḥ, the Kṣaraḥ, the Kṣayika, the Durgandha, the twenty
Koḍākoḍī Evam-āvāha-vāsasya.||32|| The Guru-koḍikoḍi-to-tīrthāhāra-bhinna-mukha-
bāhya, the Lahu-lābha-saṃkhya-guṇūna-nara-tiryag-āyu-paryāptika.||33|| The Eka-
vīgala-pūrva-koṭi-paryāsa-saṃkhyā-āyu-caturvidha-bhramaṇa, the Nirupakrama-
jyāsā-avāha-saṃsāra-bhavataṃsa.||34|| The Lahu-bandha, the Tāmra-jalaṇa-
lohapāṇa-vighaṭana-āgata-daṃśeṣu, the Sādhya.||35|| Bhinna-mukta, the Aṣṭa-
yaśaḥ-ucca, the Dvādaśa-dvimāsa-pakṣī-saṃjvalana-sākṣāt-kāra, the Ayam-ukta-
aṃśa-gṛdhra-paryāsa-saṃkhyā-sahīna-lahu-bandha, the Kramaśaḥ-pañcavīśatikā-
pañcāśat-sahasra-saṃguṇita.||37|| Mithyātva-lābha, the Jñāna.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmapratya ThANami ||25|| tipaNa chaJaTunabahiyA vIsA tIgatIsa isa
chasagaadrutibandhA sesesu ya vIsayarakoDikoDI nAme goe nAme goe ya nattarI mohe
| tIsavara causu udahI nirayasurAuMIma tittIsA  // 26 //  muhuttA jahanna
veyaNie  /  sasa esu mutta to  // 27 //  aTThAra muhumavigalatige  /
dusubarimesu dugavuDDhI ||28|| mutta akasAthaDiI bAra aTThaTTha nAmagoesa
vigdhAvaraNa asAe to paDhamAsiMghaNe dasa cAlIsa kasAesuM miulahu niddha hasura
hisiyamahure  /  dasa dosadddasamahiyA te hAlida bilAI ||23|| dasa suhavihagaI
ucce suraduga thirakka purimarahAse  /  micche saptari isa vijavvitiriurala
nirayaduganoe  /  pannarasa  //  30  //  bhamakucchaaraisoe I teyapaNa
athirachakke tasatrauthAvaraGgaparNadI ||31|| napukukhaga
isAsacauguruka+kharukhasI yadugaMdhe vIsaM koDAkoDI evaiyAvAha vAsasayA ||32||
guru koDikoDito titthAhArANa bhinnamuhu bAhuA  /  lahulii saMkhaguNUNA
naratiriyANAu pallattigaM ||33|| igavigalapubvakoTi paliyAsaMkhaMsa Aucau
bhramaNA  /  niruvakamANa jyAsA avAha saMsANa bhavataMso ||34|| lahubaMdho
taMjalaNalohapaNavigvanAgadaMsesu  /  ya sAe ||35|| bhinnamuta' te aTu jasucce
bArama do mAsa pakkhI saMjalagati sAkkosAo ayamukkoMso gidisu paliyAsaMkhasahINa
lahubaMdho  /  kamaso paNavIsAe pannAsayasa hassasaMguNio ||37|| micchatta liIDa
jaM , nAme | | pumaTTavarisANi 1 40 3 laGgha' ||36||

Page #439 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix - 1  38. The number of *jigala* *sanni* is equal to the number of
*pallasanka* multiplied by the number of *jigala*. The number of *sura* and
*nara* is equal to 10,000 *jigala*.  39. The number of *jigala* in a *lahu*
*bandha* is different in each *muhu* *abahu*. Some *sura* and *nara* have
*jigala* equal to the number of *muhu* *abahu* in their *aahar*.  40. The number
of *jigala* in a *khaddu* *bhaava* is equal to 17 *samahiya* *iga* *anusha*
*anu*. The number of *jigala* in a *paana* is equal to 3775.  41. The number of
*jigala* in a *khaddu* *bhaava* is equal to 136 *sakisi* *sapana* *saya*. The
number of *jigala* in a *dosa* of *aavaliya* is equal to 66 *jigala*.  42. The
*aahar* *duga* *mara* of a *tirtha* is equal to the number of *avira* *sammo*.
The *bandha* of a *michcha* *ditti* is equal to the number of *jidu* *thi*
*sesa* *payada*.  43. The *suhuma* *gati* of a *vigala* is equal to the *tir*
*imsha* *sura* *viubdhi* *niraya* *duga*. The *aisa* *ana* *su* *kosa* is equal
to the number of *egi* *ditha* *raya* *va*.  44. The *tir* *ural* *dujja* *yam*
is equal to the number of *sura* *niraya* *sesa* *chaugaiya*. The *aahar* *jina*
*maputra* is equal to the number of *nirvaditha* *sanjala* *purisa* *lahu*.  45.
The *sayaja* *suka* *vaarana* is equal to the number of *vigdha* *su* *mo*
*viuvichha* *asanni*. The number of *sanni* is equal to the number of *bayara*
*pajj* *egi* *diu* *sesa*.  46. The *ukko* *sa* *jahanne* *ya* *rabhanga* is
equal to the number of *sai* *aga* *ai* *dhruva* *adhruva*. The *uha* *sanga*
*ajahanno* is equal to the number of *samsati* *ge* *au* *chau* *nu* *duha*.
47. The number of *ubheo* *ajaharno* is equal to the number of *sanjala*
*vaarana* *avag* *vigdha* *ana*. The number of *seta* *ti* *gi* *sai* *adh* *u*
*vo* is equal to the number of *chauha* *sesa* *payada*.  48. The number of
*sana* *ayu* *vva* *te* *ayara* *nto* is equal to the number of *kodi* *kodi*
*o* *na* *higo*. The *bandha* is not equal to the number of *michche* *bha*
*vvi* *ya* *rasanni* *mi*.  49. The number of *jigala* in a *lahu* *bandha* is
equal to the number of *bayara* *pajj* multiplied by the number of *asanka*
*guna* *suhuma* *pajj* *hingo*. The number of *jigala* in a *lahu* *su* *me*
*ara* *pa* *pajj* *guru* is equal to the number of *esi* *apajj* *ana*.  50. The
number of *jigala* in a *lahu* *bi* *ya* *pajj* *apajj* *e* is equal to the
number of *apaj* *e* *ya* *bi* *ya* *guru* *higo*. The number of *jigala* in a
*cha* *u* *asanni* *su* *na* *va* *ra* is equal to the number of *sanka* *guna*
*bi* *ya* *ma* *na* *pajj* *e*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa- 1 bigaliasanni jilo kaNiu pallasaMkhabhAguNo  /  suranaramAu
samAdasasahassa sasAu khuDr3abhavaM ||38|| savvANavi lahubaMdhe bhinnamuhU abAha
Aujivi  /  kei surAusamaM jiNamaMtamuhU biti AhAraM ||36|| sattarasasamahiyA
kira igANuSANumi huti khaDuDabhavA  /  sagatIsasayattihattara pANa puNa
igamuhutta mi  // 40 //  sor paNa sakiisaha ssapaNasaya chattIsA
igamuhuttakhuDDabhavA  /  AvaliyANaM dosaya chappannA egakhuDDabhave  /  / 41 /
/  avirayasammo titthaM AhAradugAmarAu ya patto  /  micchaddiTTI baMdha jiduThiI
sesapayaDI ||42  //  vigalasuhumAugatigaM tirimazyA suraviubdhinirayadugaM  /
egidithAyarAyava AIsANA su+kosaM ||43|| tiriuraladujjayaM biTTu suraniraya sesa
caugaiyA | AhArajiNamaputro'nirvAdiTha saMjalaNa purisa lahu ||44 ||
sAyajasukavAvaraNA vigdhaM sumo viuvicha asannI  /  sannIvi bAyarapajjegidiu
sesA  /  /  45  /  ukkosa jahanneyarabhaMgA sAi agAi dhruva adhruvA  /  uhA
saMga ajahanno saMsatige Aucaunu duhA  //  46  //  ubheo ajaharano
saMjalaNAvaraNamavagavigdhANaM  /  setatigi sAiadhuvo taha cauhA sesapayaDIeM
// 47 // 2 sANA ayuvvate ayaraMto koDikoDio na higo  /  baMdho na hU hoNo na ya
micche bhavviya rasannimi ||48 || jailahubaMdhI vAyara pajja asaMkhaguNa
suhumapajjahiMgo  /  esi apajjANa lahU suhamearaapajapajja gurU ||43|| lahu biya
pajjaapajje apajeyara biya gurU higo evaM  /  ti cau asannisu navaraM saMkhaguNo
biyamamaNapajje  /  /  50  /  /  Au

Page #440 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Panchama Puruggrantha 405 To jaijiho bandho makhaguno desaviraya hassio.
Sammacau sannichuro thitibandhanukamma sankhaguna ||51|| Savvana vi jihanthait
asuba ja saikkilasena. Inara visohio puna muttu naramaratiriya ||52||
Suhamanigoyaikkhanappajoga bayarayavibhalamanana. Apaja lahu padhamaduguru
pajahassiyaro asankhaguna ||53|| Apajatta tasukkhoso pajjajjanniyar eva
thitithana. Apajeyar sankhaguna paramapajabiye asankhaguna ||54|| Paikhanamasan
khagunaviriya apaja paitthihamasankhalokasamā. Ajjhavāsāya ahiya sattasu āusu
asankhaguna ||55|| Tirinnarayatijoyānam narabhavojuya saccuppalla tesattha.
Thāvaracaugavigilāyavesu panasīisayamayarā ||56|| Appadhamasanghayanagiikkhaggai
anamicchubhagathīnatigan. Niya naye itthī dutīsam paniditisu abandhatthiti
paramā ||57|| Vijayāisu gevijje tamai dahisaya dutīsa tesatthe. Panasīi
sayabandho pallatigan muraviunaduge ||58|| Samayādasankhakālam tiriduganeesa āu
antamuhū. Urali asankhapattā sāthiti punakodanā ||59|| Jala hisayam panasoyam
paraghussa se paniditisaccuge. Battīsam suddavihagapumasubhagatigucca urasa
||60|| Asukhagatijāiāgiit sanghavanaharannarayajoyadura.
Thiramubjasathāvaradasanapuitthi dujuya lamasāyam ||61|| Samayādatamuhana
manudurgājanavairauralavangesu. Tittīsayarā paramā antamuhū lahu vi āujine
||62|| Tibbo asuhāsuhānam sankesavisohio vivajjayatu. Mandaraso
girimahirayajalarehāsarisakaṣāehi ||63||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama pharmagrantha 405 to jaijiho baMdho makhaguNo desaviraya hassiyo  /
sammacau sannicauro ThiibaMdhANukama saMkhaguNA  // 51 //  savvANa vi jihAMThaI
asubhA ja sAikilaseNa  /  inarA visohio puNa muttu naraamaratiriyA  // 52 //
suhamanigoyAikhaNappajoga bAyarayavibhalaamaNamaNA  /  apaja lahu paDhamaduguru
pajahassiyaro asaMkhaguNoM  /  / 3 /  /  apajatta tasukkoso pajjajanniyara eba
ThiiThANA  /  apajeyara saMkhaguNA paramapajabie asaMkhaguNA  // 54||
paikhaNamasaMkhaguNaviriya apaja paiThihamasaMkhalogasamA  /  ajjhavasAyA ahiyA
sattasu Ausu asaMkhaguNA  /  / '55 /  /  tirinarayatijoyANaM narabhavajuya
sacaupalla tesaTTha 1 thAvaracaugavigalAyavesu paNasIisayamayarA  /  / 56 /  /
apaDhamasaMghayaNAgiikhagaI aNamicdubhagathINatigaM  /  niya nae itthi dutIsaM
paNidisu abandhaThii paramA ||57 /  /  vijayAisu gevijje tamAi dahisaya dutIsa
tesaTeM  /  paNasIi sayayabaMdho pallatigaM muraviuviduge  // 58 /  /
samayAdasaMkhakAlaM tiriduganIesa Au aMtamuhU  /  urali asaMkhaparaTTA sAThiI
punakoDaNA  // 56|| jala hisayaM paNasoyaM paraghussAse paNiditasacauge  /
battIsaM suddavihagaipumasubhagatiguccaca urase  /  / 60 /  /  asukhagaijAiAgii
saMghavaNAhAranarayajoyadurga  /
thiramubhajasathAvaradasanapuitthIdujuyalamasAyaM  // 6 //  samayAdatamuhana
maNudurgAjaNavairauralavaMgesu  /  tittIsayarA paramA aMtamuha lahU vi AujiNe
// 62 /  /  tibbo asuhasuhANaM saMkesavisohio vivajayau  /  maMdaraso
girimahirayajalarehAsarisakasAehi  /  / 63 /  /

Page #441 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Parishistha-1 Buvvanai Asuhaa Suhanaha Vigadha-desaghaiyaavaranaah.
Pumasanjalaniniduttichatthaanasaa Sesa Dugamaa.  Nibuchaaso Mahajo
Duttichaubhaaga Kati Ikkabhaagamto. Igatthaanai Amuhoo Asuhaana Suho Muhaannam
Tu.  Tiddhamigatthaavaraaya Suramicchaa Vigalasuhuniraya-tigam. Tirimanuyaau
Tirinara Tiridugacchevatttha Suraniraya.  Visvamurahaaraduggam Sukhagai
Bannachauttejinasaayam. Samaajasandaraa Padiya Gubba Baama.  Tamatamaga Ujjoyam
Sammamsurah Manaya Uraladugavairam. Apamatto Abharaaum Ugaimicchaa U Sesaannam.
Yiinaamtanam Amiccha Mandarasam Sanjamummuhoo Micchoo. Biryaatayakasaaya Aviray
Desa Pamatto Araisoye.  Apamaa Haaragadurga Duniasubannabhaasaraikucchaa.
Bhayamubaghaayamapuvvo Aniyattii Purisasanjalaane.  Vigghaavarananam Suhumoo
Manuttiriya Suhumabigalattimaauu. Vegavicchakkamamaraa Nirayaa Ujjoyauraladugam.
Tiriduganiamtamatamaa Jinamavira Nirayavinigatthaavariyam. Aasuhumaaiya Sammoo
Va Saayatthirasub-hajasaa Simaraa.  Tasavannateya-chaumanukhameduggam
Panidhisaasaparadhucchaa. Samghayanaagitinapputthi-subhagiyarati Micchaa
Bajagaigaa.  Chauteyabannaveyaniya Naamanukkosamsamsa-dhuvabandhi. Ghaaiinnam
Ajahannoo Goye Duvihoo Imoo Chauha.  Semmi Duhaa Igadugganumaa Jaa
Abhavanantaguniyaannam. Khandhaa Uralociyavagganaau Taha Agahanattariya.  Emeva
Viubbaahaara-teyabhamaanushaanama-nakamme. Kamaavagaahoo Uunuungulasankheeso.
Suhamaa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Y. pariziSTa-1 bauThANAI asUhA suhAnahA vigdhadesaghAiAvaraNA  /
pumasaMjalaNigaduticalaThANarasA sesa dugamAI  /  / 64 /  /  nibucAraso mahajo
duticaubhAga kati ikkabhAgaMto  /  igaThANAI amuho asuhANa suho muhANaM tu ||65
/  /  tidhyamigathAvarAyava suramicchA vigalasuhunirayatigaM  /  tirimaNuyAu
tirinarA tiridugachevaTTha suranirayA  // 66 /  /  vizvamurAhAradugaM sukhagai
bannacAutejiNasAyaM  /  /  samAjasandarA padiya gubda bAma  /  / 7 /  /
tamatamagA ujjoyaM sammasurA maNaya uraladugavairaM  /  apamatto abharAuM
ugaimicchA u sesANaM  // 68 /  /  yINAMtanaM amiccha maMdarasaM saMjamummuho
miccho| biryAtayakasAya aviraya desa pamatto araisoe 6Ell apamAI hAragadurga
duniasubannahAsaraikucchA  /  bhayamubaghAyamapuvo aniyaTTI purisasaMjalaNe ||70
/  /  bigghAbaraNaM suhumo maNutiriyA suuhmbigltimaauu| vegavichakkamamarA
nirayA ujjoyauraladugaM  /  / 71t tiriduganiaMtamatamA jiNamaviraya
nirayaviNigathAvarayaM  /  AsuhumAyava sammo va sAyathirasubhajasA simarA  /  /
72 /  /  tasavannateyacaumaNukhamaiduga paNidisAsaparadhuccha  /
saMghayaNAgiinaputthIsubhagiyarati micchA bajagaigA  /  / 73||
cauteyabannaveyaNiya nAmaNukkosa saMsadhuvabaMdhI  /  ghAINaM ajahanno goe
duviho imo cauhA  // 74 /  /  semami duhA igadugaNumAi jA abhavaNaMtaguNiyANa  /
khaMdhA uralociyavaggaNA u taha agahaNatariyA  /  / 7 /  /  emeva
viubvAhArateyabhAmANuSANamaNakamme  /  kamAvagAho UNUNaMgulaasaMkheso 76||
suhamA

Page #442 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **407**  **7.**  Within the Ikkaikkhiya Siddhanta,
there is a great understanding.  All beings are bound by the laws of nature,
where they are born.  **7.**  The final four phases of the five types of karmic
matter, the five types of karmic matter, and the five types of karmic matter,
are all bound together.  The same is true for the five types of karmic matter,
the five types of karmic matter, and the five types of karmic matter.  **1941.**
The soul, bound by the laws of nature, experiences the world.  The soul and its
name are the same.  **20.**  The veil of ignorance, the delusion, and the
attachment to the world are all causes of suffering.  They do not disappear
easily, but only through special efforts.  **81.**  The knowledge of the laws of
nature, the understanding of the soul, and the practice of non-violence are all
essential for liberation.  The soul is divided into many parts, each with its
own karma.  **82.**  The soul is made up of an infinite number of atoms, each
with its own karma.  The soul is also made up of an infinite number of
qualities, each with its own karma.  **83.**  The soul is made up of an infinite
number of qualities, each with its own karma.  These qualities are constantly
changing, and the soul is constantly evolving.  **84.**  The soul is made up of
an infinite number of qualities, each with its own karma.  These qualities are
constantly changing, and the soul is constantly evolving.  **85.**  The soul is
made up of an infinite number of qualities, each with its own karma.  These
qualities are constantly changing, and the soul is constantly evolving.  **86.**
The soul is made up of an infinite number of qualities, each with its own karma.
These qualities are constantly changing, and the soul is constantly evolving.
**87.**  The soul is made up of an infinite number of qualities, each with its
own karma.  These qualities are constantly changing, and the soul is constantly
evolving.  **88.**  The soul is made up of an infinite number of qualities, each
with its own karma.  These qualities are constantly changing, and the soul is
constantly evolving.  **89.**  The soul is made up of an infinite number of
qualities, each with its own karma.  These qualities are constantly changing,
and the soul is constantly evolving.  **90.**  The soul is made up of an
infinite number of qualities, each with its own karma.  These qualities are
constantly changing, and the soul is constantly evolving.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 407 ikkikkahiyA siddhANaMtasA aMtaresu agghnnaa| sabvastha
jahannuciyA niyatasAhiyA jiTThA  /  / 7 //
aMtimacauphAmadugaMdhapaMcavannarasakammakhaMghadale  /  sajiyapaMtAgarasamAnatA
1941) emapaesogADhaM niyasabvapaesau gahei jiuu| thevo Au tadaso nAma goe samo
ahiu  /  / 7 /  /  vigdhAvaraNe mohai sanyovari veyaNIya jeNApe  /  tassa
phuDatta' na hadhai ThiIviseseNa sesANaM  // 20 //  niyajAiladdhadaliyANataMso
hoi sanvaghAINaM  /  bajhaMtINa vibhajjaI sesaM sesANa paisamayaM  /  /  811
sammadarasatvaviraI aNavisaMjoyadasakhavage ya  /  mohasamasatakhavage
khINasajogiyara guNaseDhI  // 2 //  guNaseDhI
dalarayaNA'NusamayamudayAvasaMkhaguNaNAe  /  eyaguNA puNa kamaso
asaMkhaguNanijjarA jIvA ||83 //  paliyAsaMkhasamUha sAsaNaiyaraguNa aMtaraM
hassaM  /  guru micchI be saTThI iyaraguNe puggaladdhato uddhAraaddhakhitta'
paliya tihA samayavAsasayasamAe  /  kesavahAro dIvodahiAutasAiparimANaM  /  / 5
/  /  dabve khita' kAle bhAve cauha duha bAyaro suhamo  /  hoi
aNaMtussappiNiparimANo puggalaparalo  /  / 86 /  /  uralAisattageNaM emajiu
mubai phusiya savaaNU  /  jattiyakAli sa thUlo dabve muhamo sagannayarA  /  / 8
/  /  logapaesosappiNisamayA aNubhAgabaMdhaThANA ya  /  jaha taha kamamaraNaNaM
puTThA khitAi dhUliyarA  // 8 //  appayarapayaDibaMdhI ukkaDajogI ya snnipjtto|
kuNai paesukkosaM jahannayaM tassa bancAse  //

Page #443 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Parisishta-1 Miccha ajaya chada aau bitiguṇa biṇu mohi santa micchāī. Chaha
satarasa sumo ajayā desā vitikasāe ||0|| Paṇa aniyaṭṭī sukhagai
narausurasubhagatigaviunchidugaṃ. Samacauraṃsamasāya varaṃ miccho varaṃ miccho
va sammō vā ||1|| Niddāpayalādujuyal bhayakucchātittva sammago sujāī. Āhāradurga
sesā uko pasagā micchī ||2|| Sumūṇī dunni asannī nirayatimāsuravivuddugaṃ. Sammō
jiṇaṃ jahannṃ suhamanigoyāikhani sesā ||3|| Daṃsaṇagabhaya
kucchāvitituriyakasāya vigghānāṇāṇaṃ. Mūlagē'ṇukkōsō cauha duhā sesi savvattha
||4|| Seviasamkhijjaise yogahāṇāṇi yati. Ṭhiibamdhayavasāyānubhāgaṭhāṇā
asamkhaguṇā ||5|| Rasaccheyā. Kasāyāu ||6|| Tattō kammapesā anantaguṇiyā tō yogā
payiḍipesa ṭhiianubhāgaṃ caudarajju logo buddhikao sattarajjumāṇaghaṇō. Tahī
hegapesā seḍhī payarō ya tavvaggo ||7|| Aṇadaṃsaṇapuṃsitthīvēya chakkhaṃ ca
purisavēyaṃ ca. Do do ēmantarīe sarise sarisaṃ uvasamēi ||8|| Aṇamicchamissammaṃ
tiu igavigaladhaūṇatigujottaraṃ. Tiriṇarayathāvadugaṃ sāhārāya aḍaṇaputthi'e
||9|| Nāṇī. Sayagamiṇa āyasaraṇaṭṭhā 1900l Chagapuṃsaṃjalṇādōnivigghavaraṇakhae
dēvindaśūrili hiyaṃ

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 You pariziSTa-1 miccha ajayacaDa AU bitiguNa biNu mohi santa micchAI  /  chaha
satarasa sumo ajayA desA vitikasAe  // 0 //  paNa aniyaTTI sukhagai
narAusurasubhagatigaviuncidugaM  /  samacauraMsamasAya varaM miccho varaM miccho
va sammo vA  // 81 ! | niddApayalAdujuyala bhayakucchAtittva sammago sujaI  /
AhAradurga sesA uko pasagA micchI ||2|| sumuNI dunni asannI
nirayatimasurAsuraviubvidugaM  /  sammo jiNaM jahannaM suhamanigoyAikhaNi sesA
//  63  //  daMsaNagabhaya kucchAvitituriyakaSAya vigghanANANaM | mUlage'Nukkoso
cauha duhA sesi savvattha ||4|| seviasaMkhijjaise jogahANANi yati  /
ThiibaMdhayavasAyANubhAgaThANA asaMkhaguNA ||5|| rasaccheyA  /  kasAyAu || 16 |
tatto kammapaesA anaMtaguNiyA to jogA payiDipaesa ThiiaNubhAgaM caudasarajju
logo buddhikao sattarajjumANaghaNo  /  tahI hegapaesA seDhI payaro ya tavvaggo
/  / 7 /  /  aNadaMsanapuMsitthIveya chakkaM ca purisaveyaM ca  /  do do
emaMtarie sarise sarisaM uvasamei ||8|| aNamicchamIsasammaM tiu
igavigaladhauNatigujotraM  /  tirinarayathAvadugaM sAhArAya aDanaputthIe  //  66
//  nANI  /  sayagamiNa AyasaraNaTTA 1900l chagapuMsaMjalaNAdonivigdhavaraNakhae
debindasUrili hiyaM

Page #444 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 The reason for the difference in the number of Karmas in their
binding, arising and existence states - There are 120 binding, 122 arising and
158 existing states of the 148 _Jñānāvaraṇa_ etc. root Karmas. That is, there
are 2 more arising states than binding states and 36 or 26 more existing states
than arising states. Here we explain the reason for this difference. Generally,
in relation to the binding, arising and existence of Karma states, the rule is
that the fewer the states that are bound, the fewer the states that arise and
exist in the arising and existence periods after binding. Without binding, the
number of arising and existing states should not be more. But due to an
exception to this general rule, the number of Karma states in arising and
existence is considered to be more. The reason for the two more arising states
than binding states is that there are three states of _varṣaṇ_ _mohaniya_ -
_samyaktv_ _mohaniya_, _mitra_ _mohaniya_ and _mithyātva_ _mohaniya_. Of these,
only _mithyātva_ _mohaniya_ is bound, and the remaining two states arise and
exist without binding. The reason for this is that just as ashes and a special
medicine are used to purify intoxicating grains (special grains), similarly,
intoxicating grains like _mithyātva_ _mohaniya_ Karma are purified by _samyaktv_
like medicine and divided into three parts - 1. pure, 2. partially pure and 3.
impure. Those that are completely purified, that is, those that have attained
the _samyaktv_ state, that is, those that do not hinder the attainment of
_samyaktv_, are called pure _pudgalas_ and their _samyaktv_ _mohaniya_ is called
by this name and they have attained arūpa purity. Those that are partially
purified are called _miśra_ _mohaniya_ and they have attained...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 karmoM kI baMdha, udaya, sattA prakRtiyoM ko saMkhyA meM bhinnatA
kA kAraNa _ jJAnAvaraNa Adi mUla karmoM kI baMdhayogya 120, udayayogya 122 tayA
sattAyogya 158 kA 148 prakRtiyA~ haiM  /  arthAt baMdhayogya kI apekSA udayogya
2 aura udayogya kI apekSA sattAyogya 36 yA 26 prakRtiyAM adhika haiN| yahA~ isa
bhinnatA ke kAraNa ko spaSTa karate haiN| sAmAnyatayA karma prakRtiyoM ke
baMdha, udaya aura sattA ke saMbandha meM yaha niyama hai ki jitanI kama
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai. baMdha hone ke pazcAta usanI hI prakRtiyoM kI
sattA aura udaya kAla meM utanI ho prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai  /  vinA baMdha
ke udaya aura sattA meM saMkhyA adhika honA bhI nahIM cAhie  /  lekina isa
sAmAnya niyama kA apavAda hone se udaya aura sattA meM karma prakR. tiyoM kI
saMkhyA adhika mAnI jAtI hai| baMdha kI apekSA udaya prakRtiyoM meM do ko
adhikatA kA kAraNa yaha hai ki varzana mohanIya ko tIna prakRtiyA hai- samyaktva
mohanIya, mitra mohanIma aura mithyAtva mohanIya  /  inameM se kevala mithyAtva
mohanIya kA baMdha hotA hai aura zeSa do prakRtiyA~ binA baMdha ke udaya meM AtI
haiM aura sattA meM rahatI haiM  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki jaise ki rAkha aura
auSadhi vizeSa ke dvArA mAdaka kodoM (dhAnya vizeSa) ko zuddha kiyA jAtA hai
vaise hI mAdaka kodoM jaise mithyAtva mohanIya karma ko auSadhi samAna
sammakatva ke dvArA zuddha karake tIna bhAgoM meM vibhAjita kara diyA jAtA hai 1
- zuddha, 2 bardha zuddha aura 3 azuddha  /  unameM aspanta zuddha kiye hue jo
ki sammasva svarUpa ko prApta hue haiM arthAt samyaktva prApti meM vidhAsapha
nahIM hote haiM, aise pudgala zuddha kahalAte haiM aura unakA samyakaca mohanIya
yaha nAma vyavahAra kiyA jAtA hai aura vo arUpa zuddhi ko prApta hue haiM pe
ardhavizuddha aura unako mizra mohanIya kahate haiM aura

Page #445 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix-2  Those who have not attained even a little bit of right faith, but
remain in the form of false faith and delusion, are called impure.  Thus, the
**Samyaktva** (right faith) and **Mithya** (false faith) **Mohaniya** (delusion)
karmas, being purified in their existence by the **Samyaktva** (right faith)
**guna** (quality), do not bind, but the **Mithya** (false faith) **Mohaniya**
(delusion) karma binds. Therefore, in the context of binding, twenty types of
**Mohaniya** (delusion) karma are considered, excluding the **Samyaktva** (right
faith) and **Mithya** (false faith) **Mohaniya** (delusion) karmas.  Similarly,
the five **Bandhan** (bondage) and five **Sanghatan** (aggregation) karmas,
being taken within their respective bodies, and the twenty divisions of
**varna** (color) etc., being taken within the four **varna** (color)
categories, are taken in the binding of the **Nama** (name) karma in its sixteen
types, excluding the **vina** (without) types. And since there is no decrease or
increase in the types of the remaining karmas, the total number of types in
binding is one hundred and twenty.  In the context of **udaya** (arising), the
**Samyaktva** (right faith) and **Mithya** (false faith) **Mohaniya** (delusion)
karmas also arise, and their increase is considered to be one hundred and
twenty-two types.  Although when considering binding and arising, the five types
of **Bandhan** (bondage) and **Sanghatan** (aggregation) **Nama** (name) karmas
are considered within their respective bodies, the five **Bandhan** (bondage)
and five **Sanghatan** (aggregation) karmas bind and arise along with their
respective **Nama** (name) karma bodies. Therefore, they are not considered
separately in binding and arising, but are described separately in existence,
and should be described. Because if they are not described in existence, the
essence of the object will be lost. There will be no **Bandhan** (bondage) and
**Sanghatan** (aggregation) karmas.  The five **Bandhan** (bondage) and five
**Sanghatan** (aggregation) **Nama** (name) karmas are considered in the five
types of **Nama** (name) karma bodies as follows: **Audarik Bandhan** (bondage
of the **Audarik** body) and **Audarik Sanghatan** (aggregation of the
**Audarik** body) are considered within the **Audarik** body, **Vaikriya
Bandhan** (bondage of the **Vaikriya** body) and **Kriya Sanghatan**
(aggregation of the **Kriya** body) are considered within the **Vaikriya** body,
**Aharak Bandhan** (bondage of the **Aharak** body) and **Aharak Sanghatan**
(aggregation of the **Aharak** body) are considered within the **Aharak** body,
**Tejas Bandhan** (bondage of the **Tejas** body) and **Tejas Sanghatan**
(aggregation of the **Tejas** body) are considered within the **Tejas** body,
and **Karma Bandhan** (bondage of the **Karma** body) and **Karma Sanghatan**
(aggregation of the **Karma** body) are considered within the **Karma** body.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 410 pariziSTa-2 jo kicinmAtra bhI zRddhi ko prApta nahIM hue haiM parantu
mithyAtva mohanIya rUpa hI rahate haiM, ve azuddha kahalAte haiN| isa prakAra
samyatva mohanIya aura mitra mohanIya samyaktva guNa dvArA sattA meM hI zuddha
hue mithyAtva mohanIya pharma ke pudgala hone se unakA baMdha nahIM hotA hai
kintu minyAtva mohanIya kAhI baMdha hotA hai, jisase baMdha ke vicAra-prasaMga
meM samyaktva mAhanIya aura mina mohatoya ke binA mohanIya karma kI prabbIsa
prakRtiyA~ mAno jAtI haiN| isI prakAra pA~ca vandhana, pAMca saMghAtana kA
apane-apane zarIra ke antargata grahaNa karane se aura varNAdika ke vIsa bhedoM
kA varNacatuSka meM grahaNa hone se unakI solaha prakRtiyoM ke vinA nAmakarma kI
sarasaTha prakRtiyAM baMdha meM grahaNa kI jAtI hai aura zeSa karmoM kI
prakRtiyoM meM nyUnAdhikatA nahIM hone se sampUrNa prakRtiyoM kA yoga karane
para baMdha meM eka so bIsa uttara prakRtiyA~ hotI haiN| udama ke vicAra ke
prasaMga meM samyaktva aura mizra mohanIya kA bhI udaya hone se unakI vRddhi
karane para eka sau bAIsa uttara prakRtiyAM mAnI jAtI haiN| yadyapi baMdha aura
udaya kA jaba vicAra kiyA jAtA hai taba baMdhana aura saMghAtana nAmakarma ke
pAMca-pAMca bhedoM kI una-una zarIroM ke antargata vivakSA kara lI jAtI hai|
kinsU pAMcoM bandhanoM aura pAMcoM saMghAtanoM kA baMdha hai aura udaya bhI hai
apane apane nAma vAle zarIra nAmakarma ke sAtha, isIliye unakI baMdha aura udaya
meM alaga se vivakSA nahIM kI hai kintu sattA meM alaga-alaga batAye haiM aura
batAnA hI caahie| kyoMki yadi sattA meM unako na batAyA jAye to mUla vastu kA hI
abhAva ho jaayegaa| bandhana aura saMghAtana nAmaka koI karma hI nahIM rheNge|
pAca bandhana aura pAMca saMghAtana nAmakarmoM kI zarIra nAmakarma ke pA~ca
bhedoM meM isa prakAra vivakSA kI jAtI hai.audArikabaMdhana aura audArika
saMghAtana kI audArika zarIra ke antargata, vaikrimabandhana aura kriya
saMghAtana kI baiMkriya zarIra ke antargata, AhArakabandhana aura AhAraka
saMghAtana kI AhAraka zarIra ke antargata, saMjasabandhana aura tejasa
saMghAtana kI taijasa zarIra ke antargata aura kArmamabandhana va karmamA

Page #446 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Five Karma Granthya  The Karma Granthya, within the framework of the
Sanghasana, has five, two, five, and eight sub-categories of the Karma body,
respectively, under the categories of color, smell, taste, and touch. Their
binding and arising are not specifically defined, but generally, only four
categories, starting with color, are considered. This is because all twenty of
these categories bind and arise together, with no single nature binding or
arising earlier or later than the others. Therefore, only the four categories,
starting with color, are considered in binding and arising.  Thus, in binding
and arising, the five binding, five obstructing, and sixteen natures, starting
with color, are considered to be present in existence, totaling forty-eight sub-
natures. When fifteen categories are considered instead of the three categories
of the binding Karma, then one hundred and forty-eight natures are considered to
be present in existence.  The difference in the number of natures in binding,
arising, and existence is based on the level of detail considered.  ## The
Mohaniya Karma in the Sub-Natures  The Karma Granthya mentions ten binding
places for the Mohaniya Karma, with nine Bhuyaska, eleven Alpatar, ten Avasthit,
and two Avaktvy binding categories. However, the Go. Karmakanda mentions twenty
Bhuyaska, eleven Alpatar, thirty-three Avasthit, and two Avaktvy binding
categories, which are explained in the following verse:  **Verse 468:**  "Ten,
eleven, thirty-three, are the binding places of the Mohaniya Karma. The
Bhuyaska, Alpatar, and Avasthit, and the two Avaktvy, are the categories."  The
difference in this explanation between the Karma Granthya and the Karmakanda
arises because the Karma Granthya focuses only on the ascent and descent of the
qualities in the quality places, while the Karmakanda considers this aspect
along with the possibility of the soul moving from one quality place to another
during ascent and descent.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagranya saMghAsana kI kArmaNa zarIra ke antargata varNa, gaMdha,
rasa aura sparza nAmakarma ke anukrama se pA~ca, do, pA~ca aura bATha uttara
bheda hote haiN| unakI baMdha aura ukSya meM vivakSA nahIM kI hai parantu
sAmAnya se varNAdi cAra hI mAne hai, kyoMki ina bIsa kA sAtha hI baMdha aura
udaya hotA hai, eka bhI prakRti pahale yA bAda meM baMdha yA udaya meM se kama
nahIM hotI hai| isIliye baMdha aura udaya meM varNAdi catuSka ko mAnA hai  /
isa prakAra baMdha aura udaya meM avivakSita pA~ca baMdhana, pA~ca saMghAtana
aura varNAdi solaha prakRtiyoM kA sattA meM grahaNa hone se kula milAkara ekasI
ar3atAlIsa uttara prakRti sattA meM mAnI jAtI haiM aura jaba baMdhana nAmakarma
ke pautra kI bajAya pandraha bheda karate haiM to mattA meM ekaso aTThAvana
prakRtiyA~ samajhanA cAhiye | saMkSepa aura vistAra kI apekSA baMdha, udaya aura
sattA meM prakRtiyoM kI bhinnatA mAnI jAtI hai  /  mohanIyakarma ko
uttaraprakRtiyoM meM bhUyaskAra Adi baMdha 1 karmagrantha meM mohanIyakarma ke
dasa baMdhasthAna tathA unameM no mUyaskAra, jhA alpatara dasa avasthita aura do
avaktavya baMdha mAne haiM  /  lekina go0 karmakAMDa meM bIsa bhujAkAra, gyAraha
malpatara, tetIsa avasthita aura do vaktavya baMdha batalAye hai, jo
nimnalikhita gAthA meM spaSTa kiye haiM dasa vosaM ekkArasa tetIsaM
mohabaMdhaThANANi  /  muagArappavANi ya avayavANithi ya sAmaNe  // 468 mohanIya
karma ke dasa baMdhasthAno meM bIsa bhujAkAra (bhUyaskAra), gyAraha alpatara,
tetIsa avasthita aura 'tha' se do avasthabaMdha sAmAnya se hote haiN|
karmagrantha aura karmakAMDa ke isa vivecana meM aMtara par3ane kA kAraNa yaha
hai ki karmagrantha meM bhUyaskAra Adi baMdhoM kA vizeSana kevala guNasthAnoM
meM utarane aura car3hane kI apekSA se kiyA gayA hai kintu karmakAMDa meM ukta
dRSTi ke sAthasAtha isa bAta kA bhI dhyAna rakhA gayA hai ki guNasthAna ArohaNa
ke samaya jIva kisa guNasthAna se kisa-kisa guNasthAna meM jA sakatA hai aura
avarohaNa ke

Page #447 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 Time can come from one Gunasthan to another Gunasthan. In addition to
the death-related bond, other bonds like Bhupaskara are also mentioned.  The
Karmagranth mentions the bond from one to two, two to three, three to four,
etc., and mentions nine Bhupaskara bonds in ten bond-places. However, in
Karmakanda, eleven more Bhupaskara bonds are mentioned besides these. They are
as follows:  - A being binds 17 bonds by binding one bond in relation to death,
17 bonds by binding three bonds, 17 bonds by binding four bonds, and 17 bonds by
binding five bonds. Therefore, these five Bhupaskara bonds are related to death.
- A being binds nine natures in the sixth Pramattasanyata Gunasthan and then
binds 13 bonds in the fifth Gunasthan, 17 bonds in the fourth Gunasthan, 18
bonds in the second Gunasthan, and 22 bonds in the first Gunasthan. This is
because a being can go to the lower Gunasthan from the sixth Pramattasanyata
Gunasthan. Therefore, there are four Bhupaskara bonds of nine.  - Similarly, a
being can bind 17, 21, and 22 bonds by binding 13 bonds in the fifth Gunasthan.
Therefore, there are three Bhupaskara bonds of 13. A being can bind 21 and 22
bonds by binding 17 bonds. Therefore, there are two Bhupaskara bonds of 17.  -
In this way, there are four Bhupaskara bonds of nine, three of 13, and two of
17. However, the Karmagranth mentions only one Bhupaskara bond for each bond-
place, making a total of three. Therefore, six remain, and five Bhupaskara bonds
related to death have already been mentioned. Thus, the Karmakanda mentions 5 +
6 = 11 more Bhupaskara bonds than the Karmagranth.  - The Karmagranth mentions
eight Alpatara bonds, but the Karmakanda mentions eleven. They are as follows:
- The Karmagranth mentions only one Alpatara bond of 17 by binding 22. However,
a being can go to all Gunasthan from the first to the seventh Gunasthan, except
for the second and sixth Gunasthan. Therefore, there are three Alpatara bonds of
22 because it can bind 17, 13, and nine bonds by binding 22 natures. And 17...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 samaya kisa guNasthAna se kisa-kisa guNasthAna meM A sakatA hai
ta.pA maraNa kI apekSA se bhI bhUyaskAra Adi baMdha ginAye haiN| karmagranmeM
eka se do, do se tIna, tIna se cAra Adi kA baMdha batalAkara dasa baMghasthAnoM
meM nau bhUpaskAra baMdha batalAye haiM, lekina karmakAMDa meM unake sivAya
gyAraha bhUyaskAra aura bhI batalAye haiM  /  ve isa prakAra haiM-maraNa kI
apekSA se jIva eka ko bAMdhakara satraha kA, tIna ko bAdhakara satraha kA, cAra
ko bAMdha kara satraha kA aura pAMca ko bAMdha kara satraha kA baMdha karatA
hai| ataH ye pAMca bhUyaskAra to maraNa kI apekSA se hote haiM tathA chaThe
pramatasaMyata guNasthAna meM nau prakRtiyoM kA bandha karake koI jIva pAMcave
guNasthAna meM Akara teraha kA baMdha karatA hai, koI jIva cauthe guNasthAna meM
Akara satraha kA baMdha karatA hai aura koI jIva dUsare guNasthAna meM Akara
isakIsa kA baMdha karatA hai aura koI jIva pahale guNasthAna meM Akara bAIsa kA
baMdha karatA hai| kyoMki chaThe pramatta. saMyata guNasthAna se yukta hokara
jIva nIce ke samI guNasthAnoM meM jA sakatA hai| ata: nau ke cAra bhUyaskAra
baMdha hote haiM  /  isI prakAra pAMcaveM gugasthAna meM teraha kA baMdha karake
satraha, ikkIsa aura bAIsa kA una kara sakatA hai, ata: teraha ke tIna
bhUyaskAra baMdha hote haiN| satraha ko bAMdhakara ikkIsa aura bAIsa kA baMdha
kara sakatA hai, ata: satraha ke do bhayaskAra hote haiN| isa prakAra nau ke
cAra, teraha ke tIna aura satraha ke do bhUyaskAra baMdha hote haiN| _lekina
kaMrmagrantha meM pratyeka baMdhasthAna kA eka-eka, isa prakAra tIna hI
bhUyaskAra batalAye haiM  /  ataH zeSa chaha raha jAte haiM tathA maraNa kI
apekSA se pAMca bhUyaskAra pahale batalA cuke haiN| isa prakAra go0 pharmakAMDa
meM 5-6 = 11 bhUpaskAra adhika batalAye haiN| _ karmagrantha meM alpatara baMdha
ATha batalAye haiM kintu karmakAMDa meM unakI saMkhyA gyAraha basalAI hai| ve
isa prakAra hai-.-karmagrantha meM bAIsa ko bAMdhakara satraha kA baMdha rUpa
kevala eka hI alpatara bana vata lAyA hai lekina pahale guNasthAna se sAtaveM
guNasthAna taka jIva dUsare aura chaThe guNasthAna ke sivAya sabhI guNasthAnoM
meM mA sakatA hai  /  ataH bAIsa ko bAMdhakara satraha, teraha aura no kA vadha
kara sakane ke kAraNa bAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke tIna alpatara hote haiM
tathA satraha kA

Page #448 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pancham Karmagranth  **413**  Due to the ability to bind thirteen and nine,
there are minor bonds in the bond-place of seventeen. Thus, in the twenty-two
bond-places, there are three minor bonds in twenty-two and two in seventeen.
However, Karmagranth mentions only one minor bond in Karmakaand. Therefore, the
remaining three are more in Karmakaand than in Karmagranth.  If the same number
of natures are bound in the second time of the **Bhuyaskaar**, **Alpatar**, and
**Avaktvy** bonds as in the first time, then it is called an **Avasthit** bond.
Therefore, Karmakaand mentions the number of **Avasthit** bonds equal to the
number of **Bhuyaskaar**, **Alpatar**, and **Avaktvy** bonds. If we remove the
**Bhuyaskaar**, **Alpatar**, or **Avaktvy** terms from the bonds that occur in
the second time and look at their actual state, then the original **Avasthit**
bonds can remain the same as the number of bond-places. For example, if a being
binds twenty-two after binding twenty-one in the first time and also binds
twenty-two in the second time, then this is a **Bhuyaskaar** bond of five times
and an **Avasthit** bond of the second time.  If the **Avasthit** bond is
described in the same way as the **Bhuyaskaar** etc. bonds, then binding twenty-
two after binding twenty-two, binding twenty-one after binding twenty-one,
binding seventeen after binding seventeen, etc. are all **Avasthit** bonds. The
essence of this is that the original **Avasthit** bonds are the same as the
number of bond-places. Therefore, Karmagranth mentions only ten **Avasthit**
bonds for **Mohaniya Karma**. However, in the second time of **Bhuyaskaar**,
**Alpatar**, and **Avaktvy** bonds, there is often an **Avasthit** bond.
Therefore, the **Avasthit** bonds that occur with these prefixes are also the
same as the number of these three bonds. This is why Karmakaand mentions the
number of **Avasthit** bonds equal to the number of these three types of bonds.
**Avaktvy** bonds are the same in Karmagranth and Go Karmakaand.  Go Karmakaand
specifically mentions **Bhuyaskaar** etc., whose number is as follows:  **Sasani
Sahiyasayam Panvaalam Panchhatarihiyasayam. Munagaarappa Daragi Ya Ashituvaanivi
Vishesena. ||1**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama krarmagranya 413 baMdha karake teraha aura nau kA baMdha kara sakane ke
kAraNa satraha ke baMdhasthAna ke ho alpaptara baMdha hote haiM  /  isa prakAra
dAIsa ke tIna aura satraha ke do alpatara baMdhoM meM se karmananya meM kevala
ekA-eka hI alpatara baMdha batalAyA hai  /  ataH zeSa tIna rahate haiM jo
karmagrantha se karmakAM meM adhika hai| bhUyaskAra, alpatara aura avaktavya
baMdha ke dvitIya samaya meM bhI yadi utanI hI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha holA hai
jitanI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha pahale samaya meM huA thA to use avasthita baMdha
kahate haiM  /  ataH karmakAMDa meM myaskAra, alpatara aura ava savya baMdhoM kI
saMkhyA ke barAbara hI avasthita baMdhoM kI saMkhyA batalAI hai  /  yadi dusare
samaya meM hone vAle badha ke Upara se bhUyaskAra, alpatara athavA avaktavya
padoM ko alaga karake unakI vAstavika sthiti ko dekheM to mUla avasthita baMdha
utane hI Thahara sakate haiM jitane baMdhasthAna hote haiM  /  jaise kisI jIva
ne ikkIsa kA badha karake prathama samaya meM bAIsa kA bandha kiyA aura dUsare
samaya meM bhI bAIsa kA hI badha kiyA to yahaH 5 samaya kA baMdha bhUskAra badha
hai aura dUsare samaya kA avasthita  /  jisa prakAra bhUyaskAra Adi baMdhoM kA
nirUpaNa hai, yadi usI prakAra anna sthita baMdha kA nirUpaNa kiyA jAye to dAIsa
kA baMdha karake bAIsa kA baMdha karanA, ikkIsa kA baMdha karake ikkIsa kA
baMdha karanA, satraha kA baMdha karake satraha kA baMdha karanA, Adi avasthita
baMdha hI hai| isakA sArAMza yaha hai ki mUla avasthita baMdha utane hI hote
haiM jitane ki baMdhasthAna hote haiM, isIliye karmagrantha meM dasa hI
avasthita baMdha mohanIya karma ke batalAye haiN| kiMtu bhayaskAra, alpatara
aura avaktavya baMdha ke dvitIya samaya meM prAyaH avasthita bandha hotA hai,
ataH ina upapada pUrvaka hone vAle avasthita baMdha bhI utane hI hote hai jitane
ki tInoM baMdhoM ke hote haiM  /  isI se karmakAMDa meM ukta tInoM prakAra ke
baMdhoM ke barAbara hI avasthita baMdha kA parimANa batalAyA hai| avaktavya
baMna karmagranya aura go karmakAMDa meM samAna haiM  /  go0 karmakAMDa meM
vizeSarUpa se bhI bhUyaskAra Adi ko ginAyA hai, jinakI saMkhyA nimna prakAra hai
sasAnIsahiyasayaM paNavAlaM paMSahatarihiyasayaM  /  munagArappadarAgi ya
aSiTuvANivi viseseNa  // 1

Page #449 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix-2  There are 127 *mujakar* bonds, 45 *alpatar* bonds, and 150
*pravaktvyabandh* bonds, specifically in comparison to *mangas*.  The variations
that occur due to the change in the nature of the *prakritis* in the same
*bandhasthan* are called *bhangas*. For example, in the 22 *prakritik*
*anghaस्थान*, there is a bond of one *veda* out of the three *vedas* and one
pair out of the pairs of *hasya-rati* and *shoka-arati*. Therefore, there are
343 = 6 *mangas*. That is, a being binds the 22 *prakritik* *bandhasthan* with
*hasya*, *rati*, and *purushaveda*, another binds it with *ghoka*, *arati*, and
*purushaveda*, another binds it with *hasya*, *rati*, and *striveda*, and
another binds it with *shoka*, *arati*, and *striveda*. Similarly, one should
understand it for *napunsakavedas*. In this way, the 22 *prakritik*
*bandhasthan* occurs in six ways for different beings. Similarly, there are four
*bhangas* in the 21 *prakritik* *bandhasthan*, because in it, a being at one
time binds one *veda* out of the two *vedas* and one pair out of the two pairs.
The summary of this is that in their respective *bandharayan*, the *sampatti*
*vedas* and pairs are multiplied with each other, resulting in the *bhangas* of
their respective *bandhasthan*. The number of these *bhangasthans* is as
follows:  *Ambapo se badu igio se vo ho havati chhato ti.* *Ekka mayo bhango
bandhattanesu mohasse.* (467)  There are six *bhangas* for the 22 *mohaniya
karma* *bandhasthans*, four for the 21, two for the *pramat* *gunasthan*
onwards, and one for the *sanbhavit* *bandhasthans* onwards. In comparison to
these *mangas*, the 127 *mujakar* are as follows:  *Nam chavisan baras bosan
bajratuvo se vo ho.* *Dhuli panagavona tipatiya micchadimujagara.* (472)  There
is not a single *mujakar* bond in the first *gunasthan* because there is no
*bandhasthan* with more *prakritis* than the 22 *prakritik* *bandhasthans*,
which would make a *mujakar* bond possible here. In the second *gunasthan*,
there are 24 *mujakars*, because when 21 is bound and 22 is bound, there are
four *bhangas* of 21...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 414 pariziSTa-2 vizeSapane se arthAt maMgoM kI apekSA meM ekaso sattAIsa
mujAkAra hote haiM, paMtAlIsa alpatara hote haiM aura ekasau pacahattara
pravaktavya baMdha hote haiM  /  eka hI baMdhasthAna meM prakRtiyoM ke
parivartana se jo vikalpa hote haiM, unheM bhaMga kahate haiN| jaise bAIsa
prakRtika aMghasthAnoM meM tIna vedoM meM se eka beda kA aura hAsya-rati aura
zoka-arati ke yugaloM meM se eka yugala kA baMdha hotA | hai  /  ataH usake
343=6maMga hote haiM  /  arthAt bAIsa prakRtika baMdhaspAna ko koI jIva hAsya,
rati aura puruSaveda ke sAtha bAMdhatA hai, koI goka, arati aura puruSaveda ke
sAtha bAMdhatA hai| koI hAsya, raji aura strIveda ke sAtha bAMdhatA hai, koI
zoka, arati aura strIveda ke sAtha bAMdhatA hai  /  isI taraha  /  napuMsaka
veda ke liye mI samajhanA cAhiye  /  isa prakAra bAIsa prakRtika baMdha. sthAna
bhinna-bhila jIvoM ke chaha prakAra se hotA hai| isI prakAra ikkIsa prakatika
baMdhasthAna meM cAra bhaMga hote haiM, kyoMki usame eka jIva ke eka samaya meM
/  do vedoM meM se kisI eka veda kA aura do yugaloM meM se kisI eka yugala kA
baMdha hotA hai| isakA sArAza vaha hai ki apane-apane baMdharayAna meM saMpakti
vedoM ko aura yugaloM ko paraspara meM guNA karane para apane-apane baMdhasthAna
ke bhaMga hote haiM  /  una bhaMgasthAnoM ko sakhyA isa prakAra hai- ambApoMse
badu igiyose vo ho havaMti chaTo ti  /  ekka mayo bhaMgo baMdhaTTANesu mohassa
/  / 467 mohanIya karma ke baMdhasthAnoM meM se bAIsa ke chaha, ikkIsa ke pAra,
isake , Age pramatta guNasthAna taka sabhavita baMdhasthAnoM ke do-do aura usake
Age saMbhabita baMdhasthAnoM ke eka-eka bhaMga hote haiN| ina maMgoM kI apekSA
se ekaso sattAIsa mujAkAra nimna prakAra haiM Nama cavIsaM bArasa bosaM
bajaraTuvosa vo ho  /  dhUle paNagAvoNaM tipatiya micchAdimujagArA  /  / 472
pahale guNasthAna meM eka bhI mujAkAra baMdha nahIM hotA hai kyoMki bAIsa
prakRtika baMdhasthAna se adhika prakRtiyoM vAlA koI baMghasthAna hI nahIM hai,
jisake bAMdhane se yahA~ bhujAkAra baMdha saMbhava ho| dUsare guNasthAna meM
cobIsa bhujAkAra hote haiM, kyoMki ikkIsa ko bAMdhakara bAIsa kA baMdha karane
para ikkIsa ke cAra

Page #450 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  Multiplying the six bhangas of the twenty-two with
the bhangas of the others, we get 445 = 24 mujakars. There are twelve mujakars
in the third gunasthan, because binding the seventeen and binding the twenty-two
results in 2 x 6 = 12 bhangas. In the fourth, there are twenty mujakars, because
binding the seventeen and binding the twenty-one results in 244 - and binding
the aim ma results in 2 x 6 = 12, thus 12 + 8 = 20 bhangas. In the fifth
gunasthan, there are twenty-four mujakars, because binding the thirteen and
binding the seventeen results in 242 = 4, binding the twenty-one results in 244
= 8, and binding the twenty-two results in 246 = 12, thus 4 + 8 + 12 = 24
bhangas. In the sixth, there are twenty-eight mujakars, because binding the nine
and binding the thirteen results in 2224, binding the seventeen results in 242 =
4, binding the twenty-one results in 244, and binding the twenty-two results in
246 = 12, thus 4 + 4 + 8 + 12 = 28 bhangas. In the seventh, there are two
mujakars, because in the seventh, binding the nine with one bhang and dying
results in binding the seventeen with two bhangas. In the eighth gunasthan,
there are also two mujakars, the same as in the seventh. In the ninth gunasthan,
there are three mujakars each in the five bandhastanas of five, four, etc.,
which are due to the falling of one and the dying of two. Thus, there are one
hundred and twenty-seven mujakar bandhas.  The forty-five alpatar bandhas are as
follows:  Appadara pun tisam nam pam chhatoni boni nam ev. Yule panagavone
ekavark antim sune. || 473  In the first gunasthan, there are thirty alpatar
bandhas. From the second gunasthan onwards, up to the apurvakaran gunasthan, the
alpatar bandhas are zero, zero, 6, 2, 2, zero, 1 in nature. In the ninth
gunasthan, there is one alpatar bandha of the nature of pan, etc., but in the
fifth part of the end, there is zero, i.e., no alpatar bandha. The explanation
is as follows:  In the first mithyatva gunasthan, there are thirty alpatar
bandhas, because binding the twenty-two and binding the seventeen results in 6 x
2 = 12, binding the thirteen results in 6 x 2...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha bhaMgoM ko aura bAIsa ke chaha bhaMgoM ko paraspara guNA
karane para 44 5 = 24 mujAkAra hote haiM  /  tIsare guNasthAna meM bAraha
bhujAkAra hote haiN| kyoMki satraha ko bAMdhakara bAIsa kA baMdha karane para
2x6=12 maMga hote haiM  /  cauthe meM bIsa bhujAkAra hote haiM, kyoMki satraha
kA baMdha karake ikkIsa kA bandha hone para 244 - aura AIma mA bandha hone para
2 x 6=12, isa prakAra 12+==20 bhaMga hote hai| pAMcaveM guNasthAna meM caubIsa
bhujAkAra hote hai, kyoMki teraha kA bandha karake satraha kA vadha hone para
242=4, ikkIsa kA baMdha hone para 244-8 aura bAIsa kA baMdha hone para 246=12
isa prakAra 4++12=24 maMga hote haiN| chaThe meM aTThAIsa mujAkAra hote haiM,
kyoki nau kA bandha karake taraha kA bandha karane para 2224, satraha kA vadha
karane para 242-4, ikkIsa kA baMdha karane para 244 aura bAIsa kA bandha karane
para 246-12, isa prakAra 4+4+ +12-28 bhaMga hote haiN| sAtaveM meM do bhujAkAra
hote haiM, kyoMki sAtaveM meM eka bhaMga sahita nau kA baMdha karake maraNa hone
para do bhaMga sahita satraha kA baMdha hotA hai  /  AThaveM guNasthAna meM bhI
sAtaveM ke samAna hI do bhujAkAra hote haiN| nauveM guNasthAna meM pAca, cAra
Adi pAMca baMdhasthAno meM se pratyeka ke tIna-tIna mujAkara hote haiM, jo eka-
eka girane kI apekSA se aura do-do marane kI apekSA se  /  isa prakAra eka sau
sattAIsa bhujAkAra baMdha hota hai| paMtAlIsa alpatara baMdha isa prakAra haiM
appadarA puNa tIsaM Nama pama chaToNi boNi Nama eva  /  yUle paNagAvoNe ekavarka
aMtime suNNa  //  473 pahale guNasthAna meM tIsa alpatara baMdha hote haiM,
usake Age dUsare guNasthAna se lekara apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna taka krama se
zUnya, zunya, 6, 2, 2, zUnya, 1 prakRti rUpa alpatara baMdha haiM | nauveM
guNasthAna meM pAna Adi prakRti rUpa kA eka, eka hI alpatara baMdha hotA hai
kintu aMta ke pAMcaveM bhAga meM zUnya arthAt alpatara baMdha nahIM hotA hai  /
isakA spaSTIkaraNa nimna prakAra hai pahale mithyAtva guNasthAna meM tIsa
alpatara baMdha hote haiM, kyoMki bAIsa ko bAMdhakara satraha kA baMdha karane
para 6x2=12, teraha kA baMdha karane para 6x2

Page #451 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 - When 12 and 2 are bound, 6x6, thus 12+1+6= 30 are destroyed. In the
second gunasthana, there is not a single alpantar bandha, because after the
second, the first gives gunaranan and in the ma bastha, it makes a bandha of
twenty-two by binding with prati, which is a bhujakar bandha. In the third
gunasthana also, there is no alpantar, because when it comes to the gunasthana
before the third, there is a bhujakar bandha and when it goes to the fourth,
there is an avasthit bandha. Because in the third, there is also a bandhasthana
of seventeen and in the fourth, there is also a bandha of seventeen. In the
fourth, there are six alpantar, because when it binds with seventeen and makes a
bandha of thirteen, 242-4 and when it binds with nine, 241-2, thus 4+2= 6
alpantar bandha. In the fifth gunasthana, when it binds with thirteen and goes
to the seventh, it makes a bandha of nine, therefore there are 241-2 alpantar
bandha. In the sixth gunasthana also, there are two alpantar, because when it
comes to the gunasthana below the sixth, there is only a bhujakar bandha, but
when it goes up to the seventh, there are two alpantar bandha. Although in the
sixth and seventh gunasthana, there is a bandha of nine-nine prakritis, but in
the bandhasthana of nine prakritis of the sixth, there are two bhangas, because
here both the mugal bandha are possible and in the bandhasthana of nine
prakritis of the seventh, there is only one bhang, because there is only one
yugal bandha. Due to which, even though the number of prakritis is equal, the
bhangas have been considered as 241-2 alpantar bandha due to the difference in
their number. In the seventh gunasthana, there is not a single alpantar bandha,
because when the jiva goes from the seventh to the eighth gunasthana, it also
makes a bandha of nine prakritis, not less. In the eighth, when it binds with
nine and makes a bandha of five in the ninth gunasthana, there is only 1x1=1
alpantar bandha. In the ninth gunasthana, when it binds with five and makes a
bandha of four, there is one, when it binds with four and makes a bandha of
three, there is one, when it binds with three and makes a bandha of two, there
is one and when it binds with two and makes a bandha of one, there is one, thus
there are four alpantar bandha. Thus, one should understand forty-five alpantar
bandha. The avaktva bandha is as follows: Meren avattva oparamanammi ekary
marage. Goev hoti elya vi visnech mathia anga. || 474

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 -12 aura nI kA baMdha karane para 6x6, isa prakAra 12+1+6= 30
bhaMga hote haiM  /  dUsare guNasthAna meM eka bhI alpatara baMdha nahIM hotA
hai, kyoMki dUsare ke bAda pahalA hI guNaraNAna detA hai aura mA basthA meM
prati kA baMdha karake bAIsa kA baMdha karatA hai jo ki bhujAkAra baMdha hai |
tIsare guNasthAna meM bhI koI alpatara nahIM hotA hai, kyoMki tIsare se pahale
guNasthAna meM Ane para bhujAkAra baMdha hotA hai aura cauthe meM jAne para
avasthita baMdha hotA hai  /  kyoMki tIsare meM bhI satraha kA badhasthAna hai
aura cauthe meM bhI satraha kA baMdha hotA hai  /  ghauthe meM chaha alpatara
hote haiM, kyoMki satraha kA baMdha karake teraha kA baMdha karane para 242-4
aura nau kA baMdha karane para 241-2, isa prakAra 4+2= 6 alpatara baMdha hote
haiN| pAMcaveM guNasthAna meM teraha kA baMdha karake sAtaveM meM 'jAne para nau
kA baMdha karatA hai ata: vahA~ 241-2 alpatarabaMdha hote haiN| chaThe
guNasthAna meM bhI do alpatara hote haiM, kyoMki chaThe se nIce ke guNasthAnoM
meM Ane para to mujAkAra baMdha hI hotA hai kintu Upara sAtave meM jAne para do
alpatara baMdha hote haiM  /  yadyapi chaTha aura sAtaveM guNasthAna meM nau-nau
prakRtiyoM kA hI baMdha hotA hai kintu chaOM ke nau prakRtiyoM vAle baMdhasthAna
meM do bhaMga hote haiM, kyoM yahA~ donoM mugala kA baMdha saMbhava hai aura
sAtaveM ke nau prakRtika baMdhaspAna kA eka hI maMga hotA hai, kyoMki vahA~ eka
hI yugala' kA baMdha hotA hai  /  jisase praka tiyoM kI saMkhyA barAbara hone
para bhI maMgoM ko nyUnAdhikatA ke kAraNa 241 -2 alpatara baMdha mAne gaye haiM
/  sAtaveM guNasthAna meM eka bhI allatara baMdha nahIM hotA hai, kyoMki jaba
jIva sAtaveM se AThaveM guNasthAna meM jAtA hai to vahAM bhI nau prakRtiyoM kA
hI baMdha karatA hai, kama kA nahIM karatA hai| AThaveM meM no kA baMdha karate
nauveM guNasthAna meM pAMca kA baMdha karane para 1x1=1 hI malpatara baMdha hotA
hai| nauveM guNasthAna meM pAMca kA baMdha karake cAra kA baMdha karane para
eka, cAra kA baMdha karake tIna kA baMdha karane para eka, tIna kA baMdha karake
do kA baMdha karane para eka aura do kA baMdha karake eka kA baMdha karane para
eka, isa prakAra cAra alpatara baMdha hote haiM  /  isa prakAra paitAlIsa
alpatara baMdha samajhanA cAhie  /  avaktavya baMdha isa prakAra hai mereNa
avattavA oparamANammi ekArya mrge| goveva hoti elyavi viSNeca maThiyA aMgA  /  /
474

Page #452 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **Regarding the specific details of the Mag's
Vivaksha, the subtle bondage of the Samprayaya Gunasthan is to be understood as
follows:**  There is one Avaktvyabandh when a being descends from the tenth
Gunasthan to the ninth Gunasthan. This means that when a being descends to the
ninth Gunasthan from the tenth Gunasthan and binds one nature, it is considered
one Avaktvyabandh. Similarly, when a being dies in the tenth Gunasthan and takes
birth in the Devagati, it binds the Sabha, resulting in two Avaktvyabandh.
Therefore, we should consider three Avaktvyabandh.  **Explanation:**  When a
being descends from the tenth Gunasthan to the ninth Gunasthan, it binds the
Sanjwalan Lobha, resulting in one Avaktvyabandh. If the same being dies in the
tenth Gunasthan and becomes a Dev Asanyata, then there are two Avaktvyabandh
because the Dev binds the 17 Prakruti in two ways. This makes a total of three
Avaktvyabandh.  **Summary:**  The 127 Bhujakar, 45 Alpatar, and 3 Avaktvyabandh
together make 175, which is the same number of Avashthitabandh. Therefore, we
should understand the Bhujakar and other types of bondage as the general and
specific forms of Mohaniya Karma.  **Regarding the Jghanya Sthitibandh of Karma
Prakruti:**  The Karma Granth, the Go Karmakand, and the Karma Granth all agree
on the Jghanya Sthitibandh of the Karma Prakruti mentioned by name. Regarding
the remaining 85 Prakruti, there are some points to consider.  **Go Karmakand
states:**  "Sesanan Parmato Badarai Diyo Vimukho Pa. Bandi Savajahmanam
Sagasamakasaspadhimage." (Verse 143)  This verse states that the Jghanya Sthiti
of the remaining Prakruti is bound by the Ekendriya Jiva in their respective
participation in the highly purified result of the Badara.  **Explanation:**
The participation mentioned in this verse is explained in verse 145. The Jghanya
and Utkrishta Sthiti of the mentioned Prakruti, in comparison to the Ekendriya
and other Jivas, is determined by the participation of the Ekendriya in the
Utkrishta Sthiti of Mithyatva. This participation is achieved by the Ekendriya's
Utkrishta Sthiti, and the Jghanya Sthiti is achieved by the Ekendriya's
participation in the countless parts of the Paly. Therefore, the Jghanya
Sthitibandh is not separately mentioned in the Karmakand because it is bound by
the Ekendriya Jiva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha maga kI vivakSA ke vizeSa se avaktabya baMdha sUkSma
saMparAya guNasthAna se utarane meM eka hotA hai  /  arthAt dasaveM guNasthAna
me utara kara jaba nau guNasthAna meM eka prakRti kA baMdha karatA hai taba eka
avaktavya hotA hai aura dasaveM meM maraNa karake devagati meM janma lekara jaba
sabaha kA baMdha karatA hai taba do avaktavya baMdha hote haiN| isa prakAra tIna
avaktavya baMgha mAnanA cAhie  /  arthAt dasaveM se uttara ke jaba naune meM AnA
hai taba saMjvalana lobha kA baMdha karatA hai, ataH eka avaktavya baMdha hA
tapA usI dasaveM meM maraNa kara deva asaMyata huA taba do avaktavya baMdha hote
haiM, kyoMki deva hokara 17 prakRtiyoM ko do prakAra meM bAMdhatA hai| isa
taraha tIna avaktavya baMdha hue| 127 bhujAkAra, 45 alpatara aura 3 avaktabya
baMdha milakara 175 hote haiM aura itane hI avasthita baMdha haiM  /  isa
prakAra mohanIya karma ke sAmAnya vizeSa rUpa se bhujAkAra Adi baMdha samajhanA
cAhie  /  karmaprakRtiyoM kA jaghanya sthitibaMdha karmagrantha meM
nAmollekhapUrvaka batAI gaI karma prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya sthitibaMdha ke bAre
meM karmaprakRti, go0 karmakAMDa aura karmagrantha ke maMtavya meM samAnatA hai
/  zeSa pacAsI prakRtiyoM ke sambandha meM kucha vicAraNIya yahA~ prastuta
karate haiN| go0 karmakAMDa meM unake bAre meM likhA hai ki.... sesANaM paramato
bAdarAI diyo vimukho p| baMdi savajahamNaM sagasamakassapadhimAge  // 143 zeSa
prakRtiyoM kI jaghanya sthitiyoM ko vAdara paryApta vizuddha pariNAma yAlA
ekendriya jIva apanI-apanI utkRSTa sthiti ke pratibhAga meM bAMdhatA hai| isa
gAthA meM jisa pratibhAga kA ullekha kiyA hai, usako gAthA 145 meM spaSTa kiyA
hai  /  ekendriyAdika jIvoM kI apekSA se ukta prakRtiyoM kI jaghanya aura
utkRSTa sthiti batalAne ke lie apanI apanI pUrvokta utkRSTa sthiti meM mithyAtva
kI utkRSTa sthiti kA bhAga dane se prApta landha ekendriya kI utkRSTa sthiti hai
aura usameM palya kA asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga nna karane se jaghanya sthiti hotI hai
/  ata: jaghanya sthiti baMdha ko ekendriya jIva ke karane se zeSa prakRtiyoM kA
jaghanya sthitibaMdha karmakAMDa meM alaga se nahIM batalAyA hai|

Page #453 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix-2  It was previously indicated that to determine the inferior state
of the remaining natures in the Karma-prakriti, a class should be created and a
portion of the superior state of Mithyatva should be given.  Further, while
explaining the magnitude of the state of the natures in comparison to the one-
sensed being, it is written:  "Asegi Diyahare Samvasi Unasanjuo Jatto." This
means that by dividing the superior state of each nature by the superior state
of Mithyatva and then subtracting an innumerable part of the Palya from the
quotient, the inferior state of each nature is obtained. This should be
understood as the measure of the inferior state of the one-sensed being. By
adding the innumerable part of the Palya that was subtracted to the inferior
state, the measure of the superior state is obtained.  In the Karma-grantha, the
inferior state of the eighty-five natures has been discussed according to both
the Pancha-sangraha and the Karma-prakriti. The difference between these two
discussions is that in the Pancha-sangraha, the inferior state is determined by
dividing the superior state of each nature by the superior state of Mithyatva.
However, in the Karma-prakriti, the inferior state is determined by dividing the
superior state of each nature by the superior state of Mithyatva and then
subtracting an innumerable part of the Palya from the quotient.  The Go. Karma-
kanda agrees with the Pancha-sangraha's view until the point of dividing the
state of the natures. However, it then agrees with the Karma-prakriti's view.
The Pancha-sangraha's view is that the quotient obtained by dividing the
superior state of the natures is the inferior state in comparison to the one-
sensed being. Adding an innumerable part of the Palya to this quotient results
in the superior state. However, according to the Go. Karma-kanda and the Karma-
prakriti, the quotient obtained by dividing the superior state of each nature by
the superior state of Mithyatva is the superior state. Subtracting an
innumerable part of the Palya from this quotient results in the inferior state.
In the Pancha-sangraha, the superior state of each class is not divided.
Instead, the quotient obtained by dividing the superior state of each nature by
the superior state of Mithyatva is the measure of the inferior state.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 18 pariziSTa-2 karmaprakRti meM zeSa prakRtiyoM kI jaghanya sthiti batalAne ke
lie varga banA kara mithyAtva kI utkRSTa sthiti kA bhAga dene kA pahale saMketa
kiyA gayA hai aura ekendriya jIva kI apekSA se prakRtiyoM kI sthiti kA parimANa
batalAte hue Age likhA hai esegidiyahare samvAsi UNasaMjuo jaTTho  /  arthAta
apane-a . utkRSTa gita . .... ati ! kA bhAga dekara labdha meM se palya ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga ko kama karane se jo apanI-apanI jaghanya sthiti AtI hai,
vahIM ekendriya yogya jaghanya sthiti kA pramANa jAnanA cAhie  /  kama kiye gaye
palya ke masaMkhyAta bhAga ko usa jaghanya  /  spipti meM jor3ane para utkRSTa
sthiti kA pramANa hotA hai| karmagrantha meM pacAsI prakRtiyoM kI jaghanya
sthiti kA vivecana paMcarsagraha aura karma prakRti donoM ke aminAyAnusAra kiyA
hai| ina donoM vivecana meM yaha aMtara hai ki paMcasaMgraha meM to apanI-apanI
prakRti kI utkRSTa sthiti meM mithyAzva kI utkRSTa sthiti kA bhAga dekara
jaghanya sthiti batalAI hai aura karma prakRti meM apane-apane gaM kI utkRSTa
sthiti meM mithyAtva kI utkRSTa sthiti kA bhAga dekara aura usake labdha meM se
palpa kA asaMkhyAtayAM bhAga kama karake jaghanya spiti vatalAI hai| go0
karmakAMDa prakRtiyoM kI sthiti meM bhAga dene taka to paMcasaMgraha ke mata se
sahamata hai lekina Age vaha karmaprakRti ke mata se sahamata ho jAtA hai|
paMcasaMgraha kA mata hai ki prakRtiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti meM bhAga dene para jo
landha mAtA hai, vaha to ekendriya kI apekSA se jaghanya sthiti hotI hai aura
usa meM palya kA asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga jor3ane se usakI utkRSTa sthiti ho jAtI
hai| lekina jI. karmakAMDa aura karmaprakRti ke matAnusAra midhvAtva kI utkRSTa
sthiti kA bhAga dene para jo labdha pAtA hai vahI utkRSTa sthiti hotI hai aura
usameM palya kA asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga kAma dene para jaghanya sthiti hotI hai  /
paMca- : saMgraha meM to apane-apane varga kI utkRSTa sthiti meM bhAga nahIM
diyA jAtA hai phintu apanI-apanI utkRSTa sthiti meM mithyAtva kI utkRSTa sthiti
se bhAga dene para prApta samdha jaghanya sthiti kA parimANa hai|

Page #454 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Chapter of the Karma Granth  **416. The difference between the five
aggregates and the nature of karma.**  **Explanation of the uninterrupted period
of the lifespan karma.**  When explaining the excellent state of lifespan (āyu)
for gods, hell beings, animals, and humans, the uninterrupted period
(abādhākāla) is said to be one-third of the previous lifespan. The reason for
this is that humans and animals with a lifespan of a previous kalpa (eon) can
bind the excellent lifespan of gods and hell beings, which is equivalent to
thirty-three oceans, at the beginning of the third part of their lifespan after
two-thirds of their lifespan has passed. Therefore, the indication is that the
uninterrupted period is one-third of the previous lifespan along with the
excellent state.  However, the state of lifespan karma is not explained by
adding the uninterrupted period, as it is with other karmas. This is because the
uninterrupted period of lifespan karma is not fixed. Humans and animals with a
lifespan of countless years, as well as gods and hell beings, bind the lifespan
of the next birth when six months of their lifespan remain. Those with a
lifespan of countless years, but without any merit (nirūpakramī), bind the
lifespan of the next birth at the beginning of the third part of their lifespan
after two-thirds of their lifespan has passed. Those with a lifespan of
countless years, but with merit (sopkramī), bind the lifespan of the next birth
at the beginning of the third part of their lifespan after two-thirds of their
lifespan has passed. If they do not bind the lifespan at that time, they bind it
at the beginning of the third part of the remaining lifespan.  This means that
they bind the lifespan of the next birth at the third part, ninth part, twenty-
seventh part, and so on, until the last moment of their lifespan remains. After
binding the lifespan of the next birth, the remaining lifespan is the
uninterrupted period.  The uninterrupted period can be inferior, and the
lifespan bound can be inferior, as in the case of someone with a lifespan of a
single moment binding a lifespan of a single moment. The uninterrupted period
can be inferior, and the lifespan bound can be excellent, as in the case of
someone with a lifespan of a single moment binding the lifespan of a hell being,
which is equivalent to thirty-three oceans, like a fish in the ocean. The
uninterrupted period can be excellent, and the lifespan bound can be inferior,
as in the case of someone with a lifespan of a previous kalpa binding a lifespan
of a single moment at the beginning of the third part of their lifespan. The
uninterrupted period can be excellent, and the lifespan bound can be excellent,
as in the case of someone with a lifespan of a previous kalpa binding the
lifespan of a god, which is equivalent to thirty-three oceans, at the beginning
of the third part of their lifespan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama pharmagrandha _ 416 isa prakAra se paMcasagraha aura karma prakRti ke
mata meM aMtara hai| Ayukarma ke abAdhAkAla kA spaSTIkaraNa deva, nAraka,
tiryaca, manuSya mAyu kI utkRSTa sthiti batalAte samaya abAdhAsAla pUrva koTi kA
tIsarA bhAga batalAyA hai  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki pUrva phoTi varSa kI Ayu
vAle manuSya aura tiyaM ca yathAyogya rIti se apanI Ayu ke do bhAga bItane ke
pazcAt tIsare bhAga ke prArambha meM deva, nAraka kA setosa sAgaropama pramANa
utkRSTa Ayu bAMdha sakate haiM. isalie utkRSTa sthiti ke sAtha abAdhA rUpa kAsa
pUrva koTi kA tIsarA bhAga lene kA saMketa kivA hai  /  jaise anya sabhI karmoM
ke sAtha abAdhAkAla joDakara sthiti kahI hai vaise AyukAma kI sthiti abAdhAkAla
jor3akara nahIM batAI hai  /  kyoMki usakA avAdhAkAla nizcita nahIM hai  /
asaMkhyAta varSa kI Ayu vAle manuSya aura tiryaMca evaM deva tathA mAraka apano
Ayu ke chaha mAha zeSa rahane para paramava kI Ayu bAMdhate haiM aura zeSa
saMkhyAta varSa kI nirupakramI Ayu vAle apanI Ayu ke do bhAga bItane ke pazcAta
tIsare bhAga kI zuruAta meM paramana ko Ayu kA baMdha karate haiM aura sopakramI
Ayu vAle kula Ayu ke do bhAga jAne ke pazcAta tIsare bhAga ke prArambha meM
bAMdhate haiM  /  yadi usa samaya Ayu kA badha na kareM to jitanI Ayu zeSa ho
usake tIsare mAga kI zurUAta meM bAMdhate haiM  /  isakA Azaya yaha hai ki
saMpUrNa Ayu ke tIsare bhAga, nauveM bhAga, mattAIsaveM bhAga, isa prakAra jaba
taka aMtima antarmuhUrta Ayu zeSa ho taba paramara kI Ayu kA baMdha karate haiN|
parabhava kI Ayu kA baMdha karane ke bAda jitanI Ayu meSa ho, vaha abAdhAkAla
hai tathA abAdhA jaghanya ho aura Ayu kA baMdha meM: jaghanya ho jaise anta
muMhataM kI Ayu vAlA antarmuhUrta prabhAga Ayu bAMdhe  /  abAdhA jaghanya ho
aura Ayu kA baMdha utkRSTa ho jaise anna muhUrta kI Ayu vAlA tetIsa sAgara
pramANa ta dula matsya kI taraha nAraka kA Ayu bAMdhe  /  utkRSTa abAdhA ho aura
Ayu kA jaghanya badha hA aMsa pUrva koTi varSa kI mAyu vAlA apanI Ayu ke tIsare
bhAga ke prArambha meM antarmuhUrna Ayu kA baMdha kare tathA uskRSTa avAdhA ho
aura Azru kA baMdha bhI utkRSTa ho jaise pUrva koTi varSa vAlA tIsare bhAga kI
zuruAta meM se tIsa sAgaropama pramANa deva,

Page #455 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 The bondage of the age of hell. In this way, there is a co-
destruction of the Ayukarma in the matter of unobstructedness. In this way,
since unobstructedness is uncertain, it is not associated with the age! And
other karmas strengthen the places of their own kind of karmas by their bondage,
and if they arise, then after the destruction of all the new karmas bound to
that caste, their destruction also takes place by excitation, but this rule does
not apply to Ayukarma. The age that is bound does not strengthen even one place
of the age that is to be enjoyed, and if a man binds the age of his own kind
while enjoying the age, then that bound age is enjoyed only by going to another
human birth. Here, even if there is no rise or excitation of any of its dalikas,
there is no association of unobstructedness with the age. Discussion of
Yogasthanas In the same way as the Kamangray, the Yogasthanas have been
discussed in terms of their nature, number and master in the Go: Karmakanda Ga.
218 to 242. Its useful part is presented here.  _ In the Golakarmakanda, there
are three types of Yogasthanas, and there are fourteen-fourteen types of these
three types in relation to the fourteen Jivasamasas, and these fourteen types
are also of three types in relation to the general, the inferior and the
excellent. Of these, there are 14 types in relation to the general, 28 types in
relation to the general and others, and 42 types in relation to the general, the
inferior and the excellent. In total, there are 84 types. Their names etc. are
as follows: Jogatthana tiviha upadeyansaddhiparinama. Meda ekkevaphi
ghodasabheva puno tiviha ||218 Upapada Yogasthan, Ekantadhi Yogasthan and
Parinama Yogasthan, in this way there are three types of Yogasthanas, and these
three types are also fourteen-fourteen types in relation to Jivasamas, and they
also have three-three types. The yoga that occurs in the movement of the body is
called 'Upapada Yogasthan'. The Yogasthan that occurs until the body is fully
fulfilled is called Ekantaanudhi and the body - - ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 nAraka kI Ayu kA baMdha kare  /  isa prakAra abAdhA ke viSaya meM
AyUkarma kI saha pobhaMgI hai  /  isa taraha abAdhA anizcita hone se gAyu ke
sAtha use jor3A ! nahIM hai tathA anya karma apane svajAtIya karmoM ke sthAnoM
ko apane baMdha ke dvArA puSTa karate hai aura yadi unakA udaya ho to usI jAti
ke baMdhe hue naye karmoM kI sabhI AdalikA jAne ke bAda udIraNA dvArA usakA
ubaya bhI hotA hai, lekina Ayukarma ke bAre meM yaha niyama nahIM hai| baMdhane
vAlI Ayu bhogI jAne vAlI Ayu ke eka bhI sthAna ko puSTa nahIM karatI hai tathA
manuSya Ayu  /  ko bhogate hue yadi svajAtIya manuSya Ayu kA baMdha kare to vaha
baMdhI huI Ayu anya manuSya janma meM jAkara hI bhogI jAtI hai 1 yahIM usake
kisI dalika kA udaya yA udIraNA nahIM hone se bhI Ayu ke sAtha abAdhA kAsa nahIM
hA hai| yogasthAnoM kA vivecana kamaMgrAya ko taraha goH karmakAMDa gA. 218 se
242 taka yogasyAnoM kA vivecana svarUpa, saMkhyA tathA svAmI kI apekSA se kiyA
gayA hai  /  usakA upayogI aMza yahAM prastuta karate haiN| _ gola karmakAMDa
meM yogamthAna ke tIna meda kiye hai aura ina tIna bhedoM phe bhI 14 jIvasamAsoM
kI apekSA caudaha-caudaha bheda haiM tayA ye 14 bheda bhI sAmAnya, jaghanya aura
utkRSTa kI apekSA tIna-tIna prakAra ke haiN| unameM se sAmAnya kI apekSA 14
bheda, sAmAnya aura anya kI apekSA 28 bheda tathA ! sAmAnya-jadhanya aura
utkuSTa kI apekSA 42 bheda hote haiM  /  kula milAkara ye 8Y bheda haiM  /
jinake nAma Adi isa prakAra haiM jogaTaThANA tivihA upAdeyaMsaddhipariNAmA  /
medA ekkevapi ghodasabhevA puNo tivihA  // 218 upapAda yogasthAna, ekAMtaddhi
yogasthAna aura pariNAma yogasthAna, isa | prakAra yogasthAna tIna prakAra ke
haiM aura ye tInoM bheda bhI jIvasamAsa kI apekSA caudaha-caudaha bheda vAle
haiM tathA unake bhI tIna-tIna bhaMda hote haiN| vigrahagati meM jo yoga hotA
hai use upapAda yogasthAna' kahate haiN| zarIra paryApti pUrNa hone taka jo
yogamthAna hotA hai use ekAMtAnuddhi aura zarIra - - ...

Page #456 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma:  **The state of the result (Parinaama Yogaasthaana)** is the
state that occurs from the time of attaining perfection until the end of life.
The state of the result can be both excellent and inferior. Both states of the
result are possible for the one who has attained perfection, in all the
variations of their state. Therefore, all these states of the result should be
understood as **Potmaan Yoga**, because they can decrease, increase, or remain
the same.  **The time of commencement of the states of the result (Parinaama
Yogaasthaana) and the state of continuous increase (Ekaantaanuvrudhi
Yogaasthaana)** is the same, whether it is inferior or excellent. Because the
state of the result occurs at the very first moment of birth, and the state of
continuous increase also occurs at different times, in the form of different
understandings. And the states of the result, which are different from these
two, have a continuous commencement time from two moments to eight moments. The
states that have a continuous commencement for eight moments are the fewest, and
those that have a commencement from seven to four moments are countless in both
directions, above and below. But the states that have a commencement for three
moments and two moments are only in the upward direction, and their number is
countless, countless times.  **All the states are as numerous as the countless
parts of the universe (Jagat Shreni).** Each state has five variations: 1.
**Aavibhaag Pratichhed**, 2. **Varg**, 3. **Vargana**, 4. **Swak**, 5.
**Gunahani**.  **Aavibhaag Pratichhed** is the part of the power that has no
second part. The collection of **Aavibhaag Pratichhed** is called **Varg**, the
collection of **Varg** is called **Vargana**, the collection of **Vargana** is
called **Spardhak**, and the collection of **Spardhak** is called **Gunahani**.
The collection of **Gunahani** is called **Sthaana**.  **In one state, the
number of Gunahani is as numerous as the countless parts of the universe
(Paly).** And in one **Gunahani**, the number of **Spardhak** is as numerous as
the countless parts of the universe (Jagat Shreni). In one **Spardhak**, the
number of **Vargana** is as numerous as the countless parts of the universe
(Jagat Shreni). And in one **Vargana**, there are countless **Varg** as numerous
as the universe (Jagat Prater). And in one **Varg**, there are countless
**Aavibhaag Pratichhed** as numerous as the universe (Lok).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmantha paryApti ke pUrNa hone ke samaya se lekara Ayu ke anta taka
hone vAle yoga ko pariNAma yogasthAna kahate haiM  /  pariNAma yogasthAna
utkRSTa bhI hote haiM aura jaghanya bhI  /  labdhyaparyAptaka ke bhI apanI
sthiti ke saba bhedoM meM donoM pariNAma yogazthAna sambhava haiN| so ye saba
pariNAma yogasthAna poTamAna yoga samajhanA  /  kyoMki ye ghaTate bhI hai,
bar3hate bhI hai aura jaise ke taise bhI rahate haiM  /  42 1 I upapAda
yogasthAna aura ekAntAnuvRddhi yogasthAnoM ke pravartana kA kAla jaghanya mIra
utkRSTa eka samaya ho hai  /  kyoMki upapAdasthAna janma ke prathama samaya meM
hI hotA hai aura ekAMtAnuvRddhi sthAna bhI samaya-samaya pratibuddhi rUpa judA-
judA hI hotA hai aura ina donoM se bhinna jo pariNAma yogasthAna haiM. unake
nirantara pravartane kA kAla do samaya se lekara ATha samaya taka hai  /  ATha
samaya nirantara pravartate vAle yogasthAna sabase thor3e haiM aura sAta ko Adi
lekara cAra samaya taka pravartane vAle Upara-nIce ke donoM jagaha sthAna
asaMkhyAta guNe haiM kintu tIna samaya aura do samaya taka pravartane vAle
yogasthAna eka jagahaUpara kI ora hI rahate haiM aura unakA pramANa krama se
asaMkhyAta asaMkhyAta guNA hai  /  saba yogasthAna jagat zroNi ke asaMkhyAta
bhAga pramANa haiM  /  inameM eka-eka sthAna ke 1. avibhAga praticcheda 2.
varga, 3. vargaNA, 4. svaka, 4. guNahAni, ye pAMca bheda hote haiM  /  jisakA
dUsarA bhAga na ho, aise zakti ke aMza ko avibhAga praticcheda kahate haiM |
avibhAga praticcheda kA samUha varga varga kA samUha vargaNA zrargaNA kA samUha
sparddhaka aura sparddhaka kA samUha guNahAni kahalAtA hai aura guNahAni samUha
ko sthAna kahate haiM  /  ke eka yogasthAna meM guNahAni kI saMkhyAe~ palya ke
asaMkhyAta bhAga prabhANa haiM aura eka guNahAni meM sparddhaka jagatzreNi ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa haiM  /  eka-eka sparddhaka meM vargaNAoM kI saMkhyA
jagat Ni ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa hai aura eka-eka vargaNA meM asaMkhyAta
jagatpratara pramANa varga haiM aura eka eka varga meM asaMkhyAta lokapramANa
avibhAga praticcheda hote haiM  /

Page #457 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 In one yogasthan, the number of all swadhanakas, all varganas, and
the extent (time) of guna-hani in countless regions is only a fraction of the
countless in the general jagatva. Because there are many types of countless. In
one yogasthan, there are countless lokapramanas of avibhag pratichhed. The
yogasthanas mentioned above, in terms of the lowest and highest of the fourteen
jivasamamas, and in terms of the nine types of yogas like uppapada, etc., are
now being explained in eighty-four places in terms of their relative importance.
Suhamagara sijahaṇam tishiṇasvarasijahanaym tatto. Lasiapupṣṇapakasssa
cādaralavissa agharamako. || 233 The lowest upamada-sthana of the sukshma
nigodhya labdhyagaryaptak jiva is the smallest. From that, the lowest uppapada-
sthana of the sukshma nigodhya nivrutyappaptik jiva is a fraction of the
countless. From that, the highest uppapada-yogasthan of the sukshma
layaparyaptak is greater, and from that, the lowest uppapada-yogasthan of the
vadar labdhyaparyaptak should be considered. Misṣyattisūhamajetuṁ
māvaraṇiyattipassa avaraṁ tu. Bādaralakhiṣṣa vara poi viyaladvigamahaṇam || 234
Then, from that, the highest uppapada-yogasthan of the sukshma nityaparyaptak
jiva is greater. From that, the lowest yogasthan of the badar nivrutyaparyaptak
is greater, from that, the highest yogasthan of the babar lanyaparyaptak is
greater, from that, the lowest yogasthan of the hindriya labdhyaparyaptak is
greater. Bāvaraṇiyattivaraṁ ṇitimi diyaṣṣa avaramayo. Evaṁ citivitītiścati ca
ghadhimaṇo hodi ghaudhimaṇo || 235 After that, from that, the highest yogasthan
of the badar ekendriya nityaparyapnak is greater, from that, the lowest
yogasthan of the hindriya nirvatyaparyaptak is greater, and in the same way, the
highest of the triendriya lakshyaparyaptak, the lowest of the triendriya
nabbyaparyaptak, the highest of the dwiendriya nityaparyaptak, the lowest of the
triendriya nivrutyaparyaptak, the highest of the triendriya labdhi-aparyaptak,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 eka yogasthAna meM saba svaddhaMkoM, saba vargaNAoM kI saMkhyA aura
asaMkhyAta pradezoM meM guNahAni kA AyAma (kAla) kA pramANa sAmAnya se jagatvaM
Ni ke asaMdhyAtameM bhAga mAtra hai  /  kyoMki asaMkhyAta ke bahuta bheda haiN|
eka yogasthAna meM avibhAga praticcheda asaMkhyAta lokapramANa hote haiN| Upara
jo yogasthAna kahe haiM, unameM caudaha jIvasamAmoM ke jaghanya aura utkRSTa kI
apekSA tathA upapAdAdika nIna prakAra ke yogoM kI apekSA caurAsI sthAnoM meM aba
alpabahatva batalAte haiM suhamagarala sijAhaNaM tiSiNasvarasIjahaNayaM tatto  /
lAsiapuSNapakassa cAdaralavissa agharamako  /  /  233 sUkSma nigodiyA
labdhyagaryAptaka jIva kA jaghanya upamAdasthAna sabase thoDA hai, usase sUkSma
nigodiyA nivR tyapaptika jIva kA jaghanya upapAdasthAna palpa ke asaMkhyAtaveM
bhAga guNA hai, usase adhika sUkSma layaparyApta kA utkRSTa upapAdayogasthAna
aura usase bhI adhika vAdara labdhyaparyAptaka kA jaghanya upapAdayogasthAna
mAnanA cAhiye  /  miSyattisuhamajeTuM mAvaraNiyattipassa avaraM tu  /
bAdaralakhissa vara poi viyaladvigamahaNaM  //  234 phira usase adhika sUkSma
nityaparyAptaka jIva kA utkRSTa upapAda yogasthAna hai| usase adhika bAdara
nivRtyaparyAptaka kA jaghanya yogasthAna hai, usase bAbara landhyaparyAptaka kA
utkRSTa yogasthAna adhika hai, usase adhika hIndriya labdhyaparyAptaka kA
jaghanya yogasthAna hai| bAvaraNiyattivaraM Nittimi diyassa avaramayo  /  evaM
citivititizcatica ghadhimaNo hodi ghaudhimaNo  //  235 usake bAda usase bhI
adhika bAdara ekendriya nityaparyApnaka kA utkRSTa yogasthAna hai, usame adhika
hIndriya nirvatyaparyAptaka kA jaghanya yogasthAna aura. isI taraha drIndriya
lakSyaparyAptaka kA utkRSTa nA trIndriya nabbyaparyAptaka kA jaghanya upapAda
sthAna, dvIndriya nityaparyAptaka kA utkRSTa, trIndriya nivR tya paryAptaka kA
jaghanya, trIndriya labdhi-aparyAptaka kA utkRSTa,

Page #458 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Form Granth  It is important to know the order of the **Upāpad
Yogasthāna** (stages of liberation) in increasing order of merit:  * **Tri-
Indriya Nitya Paryāptak** (three-sense, eternally perfect) is superior to
**Chatur-Indriya Labdhi-A-Paryāptak** (four-sense, imperfectly liberated). *
**Chatur-Indriya Nirvṛṣa-Paryāptak** (four-sense, perfectly liberated) is
inferior to **Chatur-Indriya Labdhi-Paryāptak** (four-sense, imperfectly
liberated). * **Asanji Pancha-Indriya Sadhya-Paryāptak** (non-conscious, five-
sense, conditionally perfect) is inferior to **Chatur-Indriya Nitya-Paryāptak**
(four-sense, eternally perfect). * **Asanji Pancha-Indriya Nitya-Paryāptak**
(non-conscious, five-sense, eternally perfect) is inferior to **Sanji Pancha-
Indriya Sadhya-Paryāptak** (conscious, five-sense, conditionally perfect).
Similarly, it is important to know the order of the **Upāpad Yogasthāna** in
increasing order of merit:  * **Sanji Labdhi-Paryāptak** (conscious, imperfectly
liberated) is inferior to **Asanji Sadhya-Paryāptak** (non-conscious,
conditionally perfect). * **Sanji Nitya-Paryāptak** (conscious, eternally
perfect) is inferior to **Asanji Nitya-Paryāptak** (non-conscious, eternally
perfect). * **Sanji Pancha-Indriya Sadhya-Paryāptak** (conscious, five-sense,
conditionally perfect) is inferior to **Asanji Nitya-Paryāptak** (non-conscious,
eternally perfect). * **Eka-Indriya Labdhi-Paryāptak** (one-sense, imperfectly
liberated) is inferior to **Asanji Pancha-Indriya Sadhya-Paryāptak** (non-
conscious, five-sense, conditionally perfect).  The **Eka-Indriya Labdhi-
Paryāptak** (one-sense, imperfectly liberated) is **infinitely** more subtle
than the **Asanji Pancha-Indriya Sadhya-Paryāptak** (non-conscious, five-sense,
conditionally perfect).  Similarly, it is important to know the order of the
**Upāpad Yogasthāna** in increasing order of merit:  * **Eka-Indriya Nitya-
Paryāptak** (one-sense, eternally perfect) is inferior to **Sanji Pancha-Indriya
Nitya-Paryāptak** (conscious, five-sense, eternally perfect). * **Bādar Eka-
Indriya Labdhi-Paryāptak** (gross one-sense, imperfectly liberated) is inferior
to **Eka-Indriya Nitya-Paryāptak** (one-sense, eternally perfect). * **Bādar
Eka-Indriya Nitya-Paryāptak** (gross one-sense, eternally perfect) is inferior
to **Eka-Indriya Labdhi-Paryāptak** (one-sense, imperfectly liberated).  The
**Bādar Eka-Indriya Nitya-Paryāptak** (gross one-sense, eternally perfect) is
**infinitely** more subtle than the **Eka-Indriya Labdhi-Paryāptak** (one-sense,
imperfectly liberated).  Similarly, it is important to know the order of the
**Upāpad Yogasthāna** in increasing order of merit:  * **Eka-Indriya Labdhi-
Paryāptak** (one-sense, imperfectly liberated) and **Eka-Indriya Nirvṛṣa-
Paryāptak** (one-sense, perfectly liberated) are inferior to **Sanji Pancha-
Indriya Nitya-Paryāptak** (conscious, five-sense, eternally perfect). * **Bādar
Eka-Indriya Labdhi-Paryāptak** (gross one-sense, imperfectly liberated) and
**Bādar Eka-Indriya Nitya-Paryāptak** (gross one-sense, eternally perfect) are
inferior to **Eka-Indriya Labdhi-Paryāptak** (one-sense, imperfectly liberated)
and **Eka-Indriya Nirvṛṣa-Paryāptak** (one-sense, perfectly liberated). *
**Bādar Eka-Indriya Nitya-Paryāptak** (gross one-sense, eternally perfect) is
superior to **Eka-Indriya Nirvṛṣa-Paryāptak** (one-sense, perfectly liberated).
The **Bādar Eka-Indriya Nitya-Paryāptak** (gross one-sense, eternally perfect)
is **infinitely** more subtle than the **Eka-Indriya Nirvṛṣa-Paryāptak** (one-
sense, perfectly liberated).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama pharmagrantha caturindriya labdhi-aparyAptaka kA jaghanya, trIndriya
nitya paryAptaka kA utkRSTa, caturindriya nirvRSaparyAptaka kA jaghanya,
caturindriya landhyaparyAptaka kA utkRSTa, asaMzI paMcendriya sadhyaparyAptaka
kA jaghanya, caturindriya nityaparyAptaka kA utkRSTa aura asaMjJI paMcendira
nityaparyAptaka kA jaghanya upapAda yogasthAna krama-krama se adhika-dhika
jAnanA  /  taha ya asaNIsANI asaNNisaEiR saNNiuvavAvaM  /  suhameha vipADagAvara
eyaMtArikhassa  /  /  236 isI prakAra usase adhika asaMjo sadhyaparyAptaka kA
utkRSTa sthAna aura saMjI labdhyaparyAptaka kA jaghanya sthAna, usase adhika
asaMjI nityaparyAptaka kA utkRSTa aura saMzI nityaparyAptaka kA jaghanya sthAna,
usase saMjI paMcendriya sandhyaparyAptaka kA utkRSTa upapAdayogasthAna palya ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga guNA hai aura usase adhika guNA sUkSma ekendriya
labdhyaparyAptaka kA jaghanya ekAtAnuvRddhi yogasthAna jAnanA cAhiye  /
samNisuSavAdaparaM niyattigavassa mumajIvassa  /  evaMtavAhitaavara adhirare
dhUlapale 5  //  237 usase adhika saMjhI paMcendriya nityaparyAptapha kA utkRSTa
upapAda yogasthAna, usase adhika sUkSma ephendriya nityaparyAptaka kA jaghanya
ekAMtAnuvRddhi yogasthAna hai, usase adhika bAdara ekendriya labsyaparyAptaka kA
aura vAvara (sthUla) ekendriya nityaparyAptaka kA jaghanya ekAntAnuvRddhi
yogasthAna kama se palya ke asaMkhyAta mAga kara guNA hai| taha
suhamamuhamajedraM so pAvarabAvare vara hodi  /  aMtaramavaraM
lavigasumiharavarapi pariNAme  /  /  238 isI prakAra usase sUkSma ekendriya
labghyaparyAptaka aura sUkSma ekendriya nivRtyaparyAptaka ina donoM ke utkRSTa
yogasthAna phrama se adhika hai  /  usase adhika bAdara ekendriya
lamdhyaparyAptaka aura bAdara ephendriya nityaparyApsaka ina donoM ke utkRSTa
ekAMtAnuSThi yogasthAna haiM, usake bAda aMsara hai| arthAt bAdara ekendriya
nityaparyAptaka kA utkRSTa ekAMtAnuvRddhi yogasthAna aura sukSma

Page #459 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 The first difference between the minimum result of the yoga-abode of
the one-sensed insentient and the yoga-abode is the infinitesimal part of the
universe. There is no owner of these places, as they do not belong to any living
being, and this difference arises. Excluding these places, the minimum and
maximum result yoga-abodes of the subtle one-sensed and the gross one-sensed
insentient should be known to be multiplied by the infinitesimal part of a
palya.  There is a second difference above it. That is, the yoga-abodes beyond
the maximum result yoga-abode of the gross one-sensed insentient are without an
owner. Excluding them, the minimum and maximum result yoga-abodes of the subtle
one-sensed and the gross one-sensed sentient should be known to be multiplied by
the infinitesimal part of a palya.  Then, there is a third difference before the
maximum yoga-abode of this gross sentient. Excluding that, the minimum and
maximum ekantanuvriddhi yoga-abodes of the five types of two-sensed insentient,
etc. five, should be known to be multiplied by the infinitesimal part of a
palya.  After this, there are yoga-abodes of the labhdhyaparyantas and
nishcayaparyantas of the five types of living beings, the ekantanuvriddhi yoga-
abodes, and the yoga-abodes, along with the intervening differences between
them. These three places, both minimum and maximum, should be known to be
multiplied by less than the infinitesimal part of a palya in the first manner.
In this way, there are 84 yoga-abodes. In these places, the divisions without
distinction follow one after the other, multiplied by the infinitesimal part of
a palya.  The Karmaprabandha does not make the three divisions of the yoga-
abodes, such as the upapada yoga-abode, etc. Therefore, taking the two divisions
of minimum and maximum, there are 28 types of places.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 ekendriya lanyaparyAptaka kA jaghanya pariNAma yogasthAna, ina
donoM ke bIca meM jagattreNI ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa sthAnoM kA pahalA
aMtara hai| isa aMtara ke sthAnoM kA koI syAmI nahIM hai| kyoMki ye sthAna kisI
jIva ke nahIM hote haiM, isI kAraNa yaha aMtara par3a jAtA hai  /  ina sthAnoM
ko chor3akara sUkSma ekendriya aura bAdara ekendriya lanthyaparyAptaka ina donoM
ke jaghanya aura utkRSTa pariNAmajogasthAna krama se palpa ke asaMkhyAtaveM
bhAga kara guNe jAnanA cAhiye  /  aMtaramuparovi puSNo tappuNyAgaM va uri
aMtariyaM  /  eyatAvaThANA tasapaNalAvasa avaravarA  //  236 isake Upara dUsarA
aMtara hai| arthAt bAdara ekendriya labdhyaparyAptaka ke utkRSTa pariNAma
mogasthAna ke Age jagatatheNI ke asakhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa yogasthAna
svAmIrahita haiN| inako chor3akara zUTama ekondriya aura bAdara ekendriya
paryAptaphoM ke jadhanya aura utkRSTa pariNAma yogasthAna krama se palpa ke
asakhyAtaveM bhAga se guNe hai  /  phira isa hAdara ephendriya paryApta ke
utkRSTa yogasthAna ke Age tIsarA aMtara hai| usako chor3akara pA~ca pramoM ke
ati dvIndriya labdhiaparyApsaka Adi pAMca ke jadhanya aura utkRSTa
ekAntAnuvRddhi yogasthAna krama se palpa ke asaMkhyAta bhAga se guNe haiM  /
soNibattIrNa prinnaamyNtrivtthaannaao| pariNAmaTThAgAo antaraantariya upasvari
/  /  240 isake Age cauthA antara hai  /  isake bAda labdhi-aparyAptaka aura
nisi aparyAptapha pA~ca prasajIvoM ke pariNAmayogasthAna, ekAntAnuvRddhi
yogasthAna aura pariNAmayogasthAna tathA inake Upara bIca-bIca meM antara sahita
sthAna haiM  /  ye tInoM sthAna utkRSTa aura javanya pane ko liye hue pahalI
rIti se kama pUrvaka patya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga se guNita jAnanA  /  isa
taraha 84 sthAna yogoM ke haiM  /  ina sthAnoM meM avibhAga praticheda eka ke
bAda dUsare meM Age-Age palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga guNe haiM  /  karmagrantha
meM yoga ke upapAda pogasthAna mAdi tIna bheda nahIM kiye haiM, isIliye jaghanya
aura utkRSTa, ina do bhedoM ko lekara bIvasthAnoM ke 28 bheda

Page #460 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Supreme Karmagrantha  **424**  The Supreme Karmagrantha has explained the
two granthas. There is also a difference in the order of the two granthas.
Inquisitive people should investigate the reasons for this difference. The
division of the acquired karma-skandhas into their fundamental natures is called
**rothi**.  The fifth **karmagrantha** (verse 76, 80) only explains the order of
the division of the acquired karma-skandhas, stating that **ayukarma** receives
the least share, **nama** and **gotra karma** receive more than that,
**antaraya**, **bhavana-avaran**, and **darshanavaran** receive more than that,
and **mohaniya** receives more than **antaraya** etc. And the share of
**vedaniya karma** is more than **mohaniya karma**. This way, it is only known
that a particular karma receives a larger share and another karma receives a
smaller share. But the **karmakanda** explains the method of division along with
this order. It is as follows:  Like the **karmagrantha**, the **gola
karmagrantha** also explains the order of the division of the acquired karma-
skandhas into their fundamental natures, stating that except for **vedaniya**,
the division of the substance of the other fundamental natures occurs according
to their position.  **164** Except for **vedaniya**, the substance of the
remaining fundamental natures is divided according to their position. The one
with a higher position receives more, the one with a lower position receives
less, and the one with an equal position receives an equal share of the
substance. And in dividing them, one should understand the **pratibhagahar**
rule as an innumerable number of parts of **avali**.  The order of division in
the remaining seven karmas, **ayu** etc., is as follows:  **162** In all the
fundamental natures, the share of **ayukarma** is small. The share of **nama**
and **gotra karma** is equal to each other, but it is more than the share of
**ayukarma**. **Antaraya**, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 parama karmagranya 424 batalAye haiN| donoM granyoM ke maidakrama meM bhI
antara hai  /  jijJAsu janoM ko isa antara ke kAraNoM kA anveSaNa karanA cAhie
/  grahaNa kiye gaye karmaskandhoM ko pharma prakRtiyoM meM vibhAjita karane ko
roti paMcama pharmagrantha gAthA 76, 80 meM sirpha grahaNa kiye gaye
karmaskandhoM ke vibhAga kA krama yasalAyA hai ki Ayukarma ko sabase kama, usase
nAma aura gotra karma ko adhika, usase aMtarAya, bhAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa ko
adhika tathA mohanIya ko aMtarAya Adi se bhI adhika bhAga milatA hai tathA
vedanIya karma kA bhAga mohanIya karma se bhI adhika hai  /  isa prakAra usase
itanA hI jJAta hotA hai ki amuka karma ko adhika bhAga milatA hai aura amupha
karma ko kama bhAga  /  kitu go karmakAMDa meM isa krama ke sAtha-hI-sAya
vibhAga karane kI rIti batalAyI hai  /  jo isa prakAra hai karmagrantha kI
taraha gola kamaMphrAMda meM bhI grahaNa kiye hue karmaskaMdhoM kA mUla pharma
prakRtiyoM meM baMTavAre kA krama batalAyA hai ki vedanIya ke sivAya bAko mUla
prakRtiyoM meM dravya kA sthiti ke anusAra vibhAga hotA hai  /  sesAgaM
payaDoNaM liviparibhAgeNa hori varSa tu| AvaliasaMkhabhAgo parimAgo hori
Niyamena  // 164 vedanIya ke sivAya zeSa mUla prakRttiyoM ke dravya kA sthiti ke
anusAra vibhAga hotA hai| jisakI sthiti adhika hai usako adhika, jhama ko kama
aura samAna sthiti vAle ko samAna dravya hisse meM AtA hai aura unake bhAga
karane meM pratibhAgahAra niyama se AvalI ke asaMkhyAta bhAga pramANa samajhanA
cAhiye  /  Ayu Adi zeSa sAta karmoM meM vibhAga kA krama isa prakAra hai ...
AugamAyo boyo NAmAgode samo tado ahio| ghAvitiyevi ya tatto mohe tatto tayo
tadiye  // 162 saba mUla prakRtiyoM meM Ayukarma kA hissA thor3A hai  /  nAma
aura gotra karma kA hissA Apasa meM samAna hai to bhI Ayukarma ke bhAga se
adhika hai  /  aMtarAya,  /

Page #461 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 । Bhaṇāvaraṇa, Darśanāvaraṇa, these three types of karma are similar
in their essence, but their names and gotra are different.  More than these,
there is the Mohaniya karma, and even more than that is the Vedaniya karma.
Wherever there is a bunch of karma, it should be divided into as many parts as
there are karmas.  The method of division is as follows: "Bahumāge samajhāgo
aham hovi eṣakamamhi. Uttakamo taravi bahu bhāgo a'jhuga'ssa vebho bu." (165)
The eight karmas should be given one part each by dividing the Bahumāga into
equal parts.  The remaining one part should be divided again into Bahumāga, and
that Bahumāga should be given to the karma with the most parts.  According to
this method, one should take the countless parts of the Āvali and divide the
number of pudgala dravya that binds at one time, keeping one part separate.
Then, the eight parts of the Bahumāga should be given to the eight karmas, one
part each.  The remaining one part should be divided again by the countless
parts of the Āvali, keeping one part separate, and that Bahumāga should be given
to the Vedaniya karma, as it is the owner of the largest part.  The remaining
part should be divided again by the countless parts of the Āvali, keeping one
part separate, and that Bahumāga should be given to the Mohaniya karma, as it
has a larger share.  The remaining one part should be divided again by the
countless parts of the Āvali, keeping one part separate, and that Bahumāga
should be divided into three equal parts, giving one part each to Bhaṇāvaraṇa,
Darśanāvaraṇa, and Aṃsarāya karma.  The remaining one part should be divided
again by the countless parts of the Āvali, keeping one part separate, and that
Bahumāga should be divided into two equal parts, giving one part each to Nāma
and Gotra karma.  The remaining one part should be given to Āyuka.  In this way,
by collecting the dravya obtained in the first and second divisions, the
quantity of each part is obtained.  That is, the number of atoms in the received
dravya is the form of that karma. The above statement is explained by an
example.  The quantity of pudgala dravya that binds at one time is 25600, and
the Āvali is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2  /  bhAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, ina tIna ghAtiyA kamo kA bhAga
Apasa meM samAna hai lekina nAma, gona ke bhAga se adhika hai| isase adhika
mohanIya karma kA bhAga hai tathA mohanIya se bhI adhika vedanIya karma kA bhAga
hai  /  jahAM jitane karmoM kA banca ho vahAM utane ho karmoM meM vibhAga kara
lenA cAhiye  /  vibhAga karane kI rIti yaha hai bahumAge samajhAgo ahaM hovi
eSakamAmhi  /  uttakamo taravi bahabhAgo ajhugassa vebho bu|| 165 bahubhAga ke
samAna bhAga karake AThoM karmoM ko eka-eka bhAga denA caahie| zeSa eka bhAga
meM puna: bahubhAga karanA cAhie aura vaha bahubhAga bahuta hisse vAle karma ko
denA caahie| _isa rIti ke anusAra eka samaya meM jitane pudagala dravya kA
baMdha hotA hai, usameM AvalI ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga se bhAga dekara eka bhAga
ko alaga rakhanA cAhie, aura bahubhAga ke ATha sabhAna bhAga pharake AThoM
karmoM ko eka-eka bhAga denA cAhie  /  zeSa eka bhAga meM punaH AvalI ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAva se bhAga dekara eka 'bhAga ko alaga rakhakara bahubhAga
vedanIya karma ko denA cAhie, kyoMki sabase adhika bhAga' kA svAmI vahI hai|
zeSa bhAga meM punaH AvalI ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga se bhAga dekara eka bhAga ko
judA rakhakara vahabhAga mohanIya karma ko usakI sthiti adhika hone se denA
caahie| zeSa eka bhAga meM puna: AvalI ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga se bhAga dekara
eka bhAga ko judA rakha bahubhAga ke tIna samAna bhAga karake jhAnAvaraNa,
darzanAvaraNa aura aMsarAya karma ko ekanAka bhAga denA cAhie  /  zeSa eka bhAga
meM puna: AvalI ke asaMkhpAta bhAga kA bhAga dekara eka bhAga ko judA rana
bahubhAga ke do samAna bhAga karake nAma aura gotra karma ko eka, eka bhAga denA
cAhie  /  zeSa eka bhAga Ayukau ko denA cAhie  /  isa prakAra pahale vaTabAre
meM aura dUmare baTavAre meM prApta apane-apane dravya kA saMkalana karane se
apane-apane bhAga kA parimANa AtA hai| yAnI grahaNa kiye hae dravya meM se utane
paramANa usa jama karma rUpa hote hai  /  pUrvokta kathana ko udAharaNa dvArA
spaSTa karate haiM ki eka samaya meM jitane pudgala davya kA baMdha hotA hai,
usakA parimANa 25600 hai aura AvasI ke

Page #462 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The proportion of the four **Panchama Karmas** is 4. Therefore, dividing 25600
by 4, we get 6400, which is one part. Subtracting this one part from 25600, we
get 19200, which is the **Bahubhag**. Dividing this **Bahubhag** into eight
equal parts, each part becomes 2400. Therefore, each **Karma** receives 2400
**dravya**. The remaining one part, 6400, is divided by 4, giving us 1600.
Subtracting this 1600 from 6400, we get 4800, which is the **Bahubhag** for
**Vedaniya Karma**. The remaining 1600 is divided by 4, giving us 400.
Subtracting this 400 from 1600, we get 1200, which is the **Bahubhag** for
**Mohaniya Karma**. The remaining one part, 400, is divided by 4, giving us 100.
Subtracting this 100 from 400, we get 300. This **Bahubhag** of 300 is divided
into three equal parts, giving 100 each to **Jnanacharan**, **Darshanavaran**,
and **Antaraya**. The remaining 100 is divided by 4, giving us 25. Subtracting
this 25 from 100, we get 75. This **Bahubhag** is divided into two equal parts,
giving **Nama** and **Gotra Karma** each 37.5. The remaining one part, 25, is
given to **Ayukarma**. Therefore, each **Karma** receives the following
**dravya**:  - **Vedaniya**: 2400 - **Mohaniya**: 2400 - **Jnanavaran**: 2400 -
**Ayukarma**: 2400 - **Darshanavaran**: 2400 - **Antaraya**: 2400 - **Nama**:
2400 - **Gotra**: 2400  Thus, 25600 is distributed among the **Karmas** in this
proportion. This example is only to explain the framework of division, but the
actual...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 F r ! paMcama karmanya asakhya tavaM bhAga kA pramANa 4 hai | ataH 25600 ko 4
se bhAga dene para labdha 6400 AtA hai, yaha eka bhAga hai isa prakAra eka bhAga
ko 25600 meM se ghaTAne para 16200 bahubhAga AtA hai| isa bahubhAga ke ATha
samAna bhAga karane para eka-eka bhAga kA pramANa 2400, 2400 hotA hai ataH
pratyeka karma ke hisse meM 2400, 2400 pramANa dravya AtA hai| zeSa eka bhAga
6400 ko 4 se bhAga dene para la 1600 AtA hai| isa 1600 ko 6400 meM se ghaTAne
para 4500 bahubhAga huA  /  yaha bahubhAga bedanIya karma kA hai| zeSa 1600 meM
4 kA bhaga dene para labdha 400 AtA hai  /  1600 meM se 400 ghaTAne para
bahubhAga 1200 huA, jo mohanIya karma kA huaa| zeSa eka bhAga 400 meM 4 kA bhAga
dene para - 100 AtA hai  /  400 meM se 100 ko ghaTAne para bahubhAga 300 AtA hai
/  isa bahubhAga 300 ke tIna samAna bhAga karake jJAtAcaraNa, darzanAvaraNa aura
antarAya ko 100 100 denA cAhie  /  zeSa 100 meM 4 kA bhAga dene se labdha 25 AyA
/  isa 25 ko 100 meM meM ghaTAne para bahubhAga 75 AtA hai  /  isa bahubhAga ke
do samAna bhAga kara nAma aura gotra karma ko bAMTa diyA aura zeSa eka bhAga 25
Ayukarma ko de denA cAhie  /  ataH pratyeka karma ke hisse meM nimna dravya AtA
hai -- - vedanIya '2407 4800 7200 nAma 2400 371 mohanIya 2400 1200 3600 gotra
2400 373 jAnAvaraNa 2400 100 2500 Ayu 24. /5 darzanAvaraNa 2400 100 2500
aMtarAya 2400 100 2500 427 24373 2437/ 2425. isa prakAra 25600 meM itanA itanA
bavya usa usa karma rUpa pariNata hotA hai  /  yaha udAharaNa kevala vibhAjana
kI rUparekhA samajhAne ke lie hai kintu vAsta

Page #463 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Appendix-2  **Vik should not be understood.** Water should not be understood
as being exactly twice the amount of Vedaniya, just as it is not actually twice
the amount.  This example makes it clear that there is similarity between the
Svetambara and Digambara karma literature in the division of karma-skandhas. The
method of dividing according to the perspective of Ladhava has not been
explained in the karma-grantha. The discussion of the distribution and
predominance of pudgala dravya in the Uttar-prakritis is as follows:  In the Go.
Karmakanda, from GAPA 166 to 206, the division of pudgala dravya in the Uttar-
prakritis is described. Similar to the karma-grantha, the portion that the
ghatikarma receives, out of that, the infinite portion is sarvaghati dravya and
the remaining majority portion is deshaghati dravya.  **Samvaavaranam navam
agantbhaago moolappadiinam. Sesaa asamagaa desaavaranam have ka. || 167 Go.
Karmakanda**  According to the Go. Karmakanda, sarvaghati dravya is received by
both sarvaghati and deshaghati prakritis.  **Samvaavaranam bachvam
vibhanjanijnan tu ubhappapayadisuu. Besaaharanama vanvam desaavaranesu vidare.
|| 166**  The division of sarvaghati dravya should be done in both types of
prakritis. However, the division of deshaghati dravya should be done only in
deshaghati prakritis. In other words, sarvaghati dravya is received by both
sarvaghati and deshaghati prakritis, but deshaghati dravya is only divided among
deshaghati prakritis.  A general rule for dividing the received dravya among the
Uttar-prakritis is:  **Uttarpayadosu puno mohaavaranaa havanti honakam.
Ahiyakaama pum naamaabhidhaa pa pa manjam selee 196**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 428 pariziSTa-2 vika nahIM samajha lenA cAhie  /  pAnI yaha nahIM samajha lenA
cAhie ki vedanIya kA prabdha mohanIya se ThIka duganA hai, vaise hI vAstava meM
bhI duganA evma hotA hai  /  ukta udAharaNa se yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki
karmaskandhoM ke vibhAjana meM zvetAmbara aura digambara karmasAhitya meM
samAnatA hai  /  karmagraMtha meM lAdhava kI dRSTi se hI vibhAga karane kI rIti
nahI batalAI jA sakI hai| uttara prakRtiyoM meM pudgala dravya ke vitaraNa va
honAdhikatA kA vivecana go0 karmakAMDa meM gApA 166 se 206 taka uttara
prakRtiyoM meM pudgala dravya ke vibhAjana kA varNana kiyA gayA hai  /
karmagrantha ke samAna hI ghAtikarmoM ko jo bhAga milatA hai, usameM se anantavA
bhAga sarvaghAtI dravya hotA hai aura zeSa bahubhAga dezaghAtI dravya hotA hai
samvAvaraNaM nAvaM agaMtabhAgo mUlapapaDINaM  /  sesA asamAgA desAvaraNaM have
kA  //  167 go0 karmakAMDa ke mata se sarvadhAtI dravya sarvaghAtI prakRtiyoM ko
bhI milatA hai aura dezaghAtI prakRtiyoM ko bhI milatA hai samvAvaraNaM bacvaM
vibhaMjaNijnaM tu ubhapapayaDIsu  /  besAharaNaM vanvaM desAvaraNesu vidare  //
166 sarvaghAtI dravma kA vibhAga donoM taraha kI prakRtiyoM meM karanA cAhie  /
kintu dezaghAtI dravya kA vibhAga dezaghAtI prakRtiyoM meM hI karanA caahie|
arthAt sarvavAtI dravya sarvadhAtI aura dezaghAtI donoM prakAra kI prakRtiyoM ko
milatA hai kintu dezaghAtI dravya sirpha dezaghAtI prakRtiyoM meM hI vibhAjita.
hotA hai| prApta dravya ko uttara prakRtiyoM meM vibhAjita karane ke lie eka
sAmAnya niyama yaha hai ki- uttarapayaDosu puNo mohAvaraNA havaMti honnkm||
ahiyakamA puma NAmAbhidhA pa pa maMjamaM sele 196

Page #464 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Karma Granthya  **426**  In the **Mohaniya** (Attractive)
**Prakritis**, the **Jnanabaran** (Knowledge-Obscuring), **Darshanabaran**
(Perception-Obscuring) have **no division** in their **Dravyas** (Substances) in
a sequential manner. However, in the **Nama** (Name), **Antaray** (Obstruction)
**Karmas**, the **Dravyas** are **more or less** in quantity. The remaining
**Vedaniya** (Painful), **Gotra** (Lineage), **Ayu** (Lifespan) **Karmas** have
**no division** in their **Dravyas**. This is because they are bound by **one
Prakruti** at **one time**. For example, in **Vedaniya**, either **Sata
Vedaniya** (True Painful) or **Asata Vedaniya** (False Painful) is bound, but
not both simultaneously. Therefore, the **Dravyas** of these three **Karmas**
should be understood based on the **Dravyas** of the **Mula-Prakruti** (Root-
Nature).  **The method of division is as follows:**  **Jnanabaran:** In the
**Sarvaghati** (All-Destroying) **Dravya**, divide the **Avali** (Infinite) into
**infinite parts**. Take one part and divide the remaining **Bahubhag**
(Majority) into **five equal parts**. Allocate one part to each of the **five
Prakrutis**. In the remaining one part, divide the **Avali** into **infinite
parts**. Take one part and allocate it to **Matijnanabaran**. In the remaining
one part, again divide the **Avali** into **infinite parts**. Take one part and
allocate it to **Shruta Jnanabaran**. In the remaining one part, again divide
the **Avali** into **infinite parts**. Take one part and allocate it to **Avadhi
Jnanabaran**. Similarly, allocate the fourth **Bahubhag** to **Manparyaya
Jnanabaran** and the remaining one part to **Keval Jnanabaran**. By combining
their respective **Bahubhags** with the initial part, the **Sarvaghati Dravyas**
of **Matijnanabaran** etc. are obtained.  Except for the **infiniteth part**,
the remaining **Bahubhag Dravyas** are **Deshghati** (Region-Destroying). This
**Deshghati Dravya** is allocated to the remaining four **Deshghati Prakrutis**
except **Keval Jnanabaran**. The method of division is the same as before. That
is, in the **Deshghati Dravya**, divide the **Avali** into **infinite parts**.
Keep one part separate and divide the remaining **Bahubhag** into **four equal
parts**. Allocate one part to each of the four **Prakrutis**. In the remaining
one part, divide the **Avali** into **infinite parts**. Take one part and
allocate it to **Matijnanabaran**. Similarly, allocate the remaining
**Bahubhags** to **Shruta Jnanabaran**, **Avadhi Jnanabaran**, and **Manparyaya
Jnanabaran** in sequence. By combining their respective **Sarvaghati** and
**Deshghati Dravyas**, the total quantity of their respective **Dravyas** is
obtained.  **Darshanabaran:** In the **Sarvaghati Dravya**, divide the **Avali**
into **infinite parts**. Keep one part separate and divide the remaining
**Bahubhag** into **nine parts**. Allocate these nine parts to
**Darshanabaran**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagranya 426 usara prakRtiyoM meM mohanIya, jJAnAbaraNa,
darzanAvaraNa ke bhedoM meM krama se hona-hIna dravya hai aura nAma, aMtarAya
karma ke bhedoM meM kama se adhika-adhika dravya hai tathA bAkI bace vedanIya,
gotra, Ayu karma, ina tInoM ke bhedoM meM baTavArA nahIM hotA hai  /  kyoMki
inakI eka hI prakRti eka kAla meM baMdhatI hai  /  jaise dedanIya meM sAtA
vedanIya kA baMdha ho yA asAtA vedanIya kA parantu donoM kA eka sAtha badha
nahIM hotA hai| isIlie mUla-prakRti ke dravya ke 'pramANa hI ina tInoM ke dravya
ko samajhanA cAhie  /  vibhAga kI rIti nimna prakAra hai zAmAvaraNa-sarvaghAtI
dvandha meM AvalI ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga kA bhAga dekara bahubhAga ke pAMca
samAna bhAga karake pAMca prakRtiyoM ko eka eka bhAga denA caahie| zeSa eka
bhAga meM AvalI ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga kA bhAga dekara bahabhAga matijJAnAvaraNa
kI, zeSa eka bhAga meM punaH mAvalI ke asaMkhyAta mAga kA prAga dekara dUsarA
savayAga zrutamAnAvaraNa ko poSa bhAga meM puna: AvalI ke asaMkhyAta bhAga kA
bhAga dekara tIsarA bahumAga avadhijJAnAvaraNa ko, isI taraha cauthA bahubhAga
manaparyAyajJAnAvaraNa ko aura zeSa eka bhAga kevalajJAnAvaraNa ko denA cAhie  /
pahale ke bhAga meM apane apane bahubhAga ko milAne se matijJAnAvaraNa Adi kA
sarvadhAtI dravya hotA hai| anantaveM bhAga ke sivAya zeSa bahabhAga dravya
dezaghAtI hotA hai  /  yaha dezaghAtI dradhya kevalajJAnAvaraNa ke sivAya zeSa
cAra dezaghAtI prakRtiyoM ko milatA hai| vibhAga kI rIti pUrva anusAra hai  /
arthAt dezaghAtI drabya meM AvalI ke asaMdhyAtaveM bhAga kA bhAga dekara eka
bhAga ko judA rakhakara zeSa bahubhAga ke cAra samAna bhAga karake cAroM
prakRtiyoM ko eka eka bhAga denA caahie| zeSa eka bhAga meM AvalI ke
asakhyAsaveM bhAga kA bhAga dekara bahubhAga nikAlate hue kramazaH vaha
bahubhAga matijJAnAvaraNa, yUta jJAnAvaraNa, avadhijJAnAcaraNa aura
manaparyAyajJAnAvaraNa ko nambara vAra denA caahie| apane-apane sarvadhAtI aura
dezaghAto dravya ko milAne se apane apane sarva dravya kA parimANa hotA hai  /
darzanAvaraNa sarvaghAtI dravya meM AvalI ke asaMkhyAta bhAma kA bhAga dekara
eka bhAga ko alaga rakhakara zeSa bahubhAga ke nau bhAma karake darzanAvaraNa kI
nau

Page #465 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2  The **Prakṛtis** should be given one part each. In the remaining one
part, the **Avali** should be divided into innumerable parts and the
**Bahubhāga** should be extracted by dividing it. The first **Bahubhāga** should
be given to **Styānadi**, the second to **Nidrā-Nidā**, the third to **Prachalā-
Prachalā**, the fourth to **Nidrā**, the fifth to **Prachalā**, the sixth to
**Chakshudānnāchāraṇa**, the seventh to **Achakshuparshnāvaraṇa**, the eighth to
**Avidhidarshnāvaraṇa**, and the remaining one part to **Kevaladarshnāvaraṇa**.
Similarly, in the **Deśapāti** substance, the **Avali** should be divided into
innumerable parts and one part should be kept separate. The **Bahubhāga** should
be divided into three equal parts and one part each should be given to
**Deśaghāti Chakshudarshnāvaraṇa**, **Achakshudarshnāvaraṇa**, and
**Avidhidarshnāvaraṇa**. In the remaining one part, the **Bahubhāga** should be
divided again and the **Chakshudarshnāvaraṇa** should be given this
**Bahubhāga**, the **Achakshudarshnāvaraṇa** should be given this **Bahubhāga**,
and the remaining one part should be given to **Avidhidarshnāvaraṇa**. By
collecting their respective parts, the amount of their respective substances is
obtained. The substance of **Chakshu**, **Achakshu**, and **Avidhi**
**Darshnāvaraṇa** is both **Sarvaghati** and **Deśaghāti**. Since the remaining
six **Prakṛtis** are **Sarvaghati**, their **Dṛśya** is also **Sarvaghati**.  In
the **Antarāya-prāpta** substance, the **Avali** should be divided into
innumerable parts (**Pratibhāga**) and one part should be kept separate. The
remaining **Bahubhāga** should be divided into five equal parts and one part
each should be given to the five **Prakṛtis**. Now, in the remaining one part,
the **Pratibhāga** should be divided and the **Bahubhāga** should be given to
**Bīryāntarāya**. In the remaining one part, the **Pratibhāga** should be
divided again and the **Bahubhāga** should be given to **Upbhogāntarāya**.
Similarly, in the remaining one part, the **Pratibhāga** should be divided and
the **Bahubhāga** should be given to **Bhogāntarāya** and **Lābharatarāya**
respectively. The remaining one part should be given to **Dānāntarāya**. By
adding their respective **Bahubhāga** to their respective equal parts, the
substance of each is obtained.  The **Mohaniya-Sarvaghati** substance should be
divided into innumerable parts of the **Pratibhāga** **Avali** and one part
should be kept separate. The remaining **Bahubhāga** should be divided into
seventeen equal parts and given to the seventeen **Prakṛtis**. In the remaining
one part, the **Pratibhāga** should be divided and the **Bahubhāga** should be
given to **Mithyātva**. In the remaining one part, the **Pratibhāga** should be
divided and the **Bahubhāga** should be given to **Anantānubandhi Lobha**. The
remaining one part should be divided into the **Pratibhāga**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 prakutiyoM ko epha eka bhAga denA cAhie  /  zeSa eka bhAga meM
AvalI ke asakhyAta bhAga kA bhAga dekara bahubhAga nikAlate jAnA cAhie aura
pahalA bahubhAga styAnadi ko, dUsarA nidrA-nidA kA. tIsarA pracalA-pracalA ko,
cauthA nidrA ko, pAMcavA pracalA ko, chaThA cakSudAMnAcaraNa ko, sAtavAM
acakSuparzanAvaraNa ko, mAThavA avadhidarzanAvaraNa kA aura zeSa eka bhAga
kevaladarzanAvaraNa ko denA cAhie  /  isI prakAra dezapAtI dravya meM zAvalI ke
asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga kA bhAga dekara eka bhAga ko judA rakha bahubhAga ke tIna
samAna bhAga karake dezaghAtI cakSudazanAvaraNa, acaza darzanAvaraNa aura
avadhidarzanAvaraNa ko eka-eka mAga denA cAhie  /  zeSa eka bhAga meM bhI bhAga
dekara bahubhAga cakSudarzanAvaraNa, isa bahabhAga acakSudarzanAvaraNa ko aura
zeSa eka bhAga avadhidarzanAvaraNa ko denA cAhie  /  apane-apane bhAgo kA
saMkalana karane se apane-apane dravya kA pramANa hotA hai  /  cakSu, avakSa
aura avadhi darzanAvaraNa kA dravya sarvaghAtI bhI hai aura dezaghAtI bhI  /
zeSa chaha prakRtiyoM ke sarvaghAtinI hone se unakA dRSya sarvaghAtI hI hotA
hai| amtarAya-prApta dravya meM AvalI ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga (pratibhAga) kA
bhAga dekara eka bhAga ke binA ghoSa bahumAga ke pAMca samAna bhAga karake
pAMcoM prakRtiyoM ko eka, eka bhAga denA cAhie  /  aba moSa eka bhAga meM
pratibhAga kA bhAga dekara bahubhAga bIryAntarAya ko denA caahie| zeSa eka bhAga
meM punaH pratibhAga kA bhAga dekara bahubhAga upabhogAnta rAya ko denA caahiye|
isI prakAra jo jo abazeSa eka bhAga rahe, usameM pratibhAga kA bhAga de-dekara
kramaza: bahubhAga bhogAntarAya aura lAbhAratarAya ko denA cAhie  /  zepa eka
bhAga dAnAnta rAya ko denA cAhie  /  apane-apane samAna bhAga meM apanA-apanA
bahabhAga milAne se pratyeka kA dravya hotA hai| mohanIya-sarvaghAnI dravya ko
pratibhAga AvalI ke asakhyAnaveM bhAga kA bhAga dekara eka bhAga ko alaga
rakhakara zeSa bahubhAga ke samAna matra bhAga yArake satraha prakRtiyoM ko denA
cAhiye  /  poSa eka bhAga meM pratibhAga kA bhAga dekara bahabhAga mithyAtva ko
denA cAhie  /  zeSa eka bhAga meM pratibhAga kA bhAga dekara bahabhAga
anantAnubandhI lobha ko deM, zeSa eka bhAga ko pratibhAga kA bhAga

Page #466 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  431  One should give the **bahubhag** (majority
portion) to **anantaanubandhi** (infinitely connected) **maya** (delusion).
Similarly, whatever portion remains, one should give the **pratibhag**
(counterpart portion) to the **bahubhag** (majority portion) of
**anantaanubandhi** (infinitely connected) **shodh** (search),
**anantaanubandhi** (infinitely connected) **maan** (pride), **sanjwalan**
(agitated) **lobh** (greed), **sanjwalan** (agitated) **maya** (delusion),
**sanjwalan** (agitated) **krodh** (anger), **sanjwalan** (agitated) **maan**
(pride), **pratyakhyanaavaran** (denial-covering) **lobh** (greed),
**pratyakhyanaavaran** (denial-covering) **maya** (delusion),
**pratyakhyanaavaran** (denial-covering) **krodh** (anger),
**pratyakhyanaavaran** (denial-covering) **maan** (pride),
**apratyakhyanaavaran** (non-denial-covering) **lobh** (greed),
**apratyakhyanaavaran** (non-denial-covering) **maya** (delusion),
**apratyakhyanaavaran** (non-denial-covering) **krodh** (anger), and
**apratyakhyanaavaran** (non-denial-covering) **maan** (pride). The remaining
one portion should be given to **apratyakhyanaavaran** (non-denial-covering)
**maan** (pride). By combining the **bahubhag** (majority portion) of each with
its own one portion, one obtains one's own **sarvaghati** (all-destroying)
**dravya** (substance).  One should give the **deshghati** (country-destroying)
**dravya** (substance) to the **asanikhyat** (innumerable) portions of **avali**
(series), keeping one portion separate. Then, one should give half of the
**bahubhag** (majority portion) to **nokashay** (non-virtuous passions) and the
other half of the **bahubhag** (majority portion) and the remaining one portion
to **sanjwalan** (agitated) **kashay** (passions). One should give the
**pratibhag** (counterpart portion) to the **deshghati** (country-destroying)
**dravya** (substance) of **sanjwalan** (agitated) **kashay** (passions),
keeping one portion separate. Then, one should divide the remaining **bahubhag**
(majority portion) into four equal parts and give one part each to the four
**kashay** (passions) - **krodh** (anger), etc. One should give the
**pratibhag** (counterpart portion) to the one portion to **sanjwalan**
(agitated) **lobh** (greed). One should give the **pratibhag** (counterpart
portion) to the remaining one portion to the **bahubhag** (majority portion) of
**sanjwalan** (agitated) **maya** (delusion). One should give the **pratibhag**
(counterpart portion) to the remaining one portion to the **bahubhag** (majority
portion) of **sanjwalan** (agitated) **krodh** (anger). And one should give the
remaining one portion to **sanjwalan** (agitated) **maan** (pride). By combining
the **bahubhag** (majority portion) of each with its own one portion, one
obtains one's own **deshghati** (country-destroying) **dravya** (substance). By
combining the **sarvaghati** (all-destroying) and **deshghati** (country-
destroying) **dravya** (substance) of the four **sanjwalan** (agitated)
**kashay** (passions), one obtains one's own **sarvadravya** (all-substance).
The **dravya** (substance) of **mithyatva** (false belief) and the twelve
**kashay** (passions) is all **sarvaghati** (all-destroying), and the **dravya**
(substance) of **nokashay** (non-virtuous passions) is all **deshghati**
(country-destroying). The division of **nokashay** (non-virtuous passions) is as
follows: One should give the **pratibhag** (counterpart portion) to the
**dravya** (substance) of **nokashay** (non-virtuous passions), keeping one
portion separate. Then, one should divide the **bahubhag** (majority portion)
into five equal parts and give one part each to the five **prakriti**
(elements). One should give the **pratibhag** (counterpart portion) to the
remaining one portion to the **bahubhag** (majority portion) of the **veda**
(scripture) to which the **bandh** (bond) is attached. One should give the
**pratibhag** (counterpart portion) to the remaining one portion to the
**bahubhag** (majority portion) of **rati** (attraction) or **arati**
(repulsion) to which the **bandh** (bond) is attached. The remaining one...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 431 dekara bahabhAga anantAnujandhI mAyA ko denA cAhiye  /
isI prakAra jo jo bhAga zeSa rahatA jAye usako pratibhAga kA bhAga de devAra
bahubhAga anaMtAnubaMdhI zodha ko, anaMtAnubaMdhI mAna ko, saMjvalana lobha ko,
saMjmalana mAyA ko, sajvalana krodha ko, saMjvalana mAna ko, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
lobha ko, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA ko, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha ko,
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAna ko, apratmAkhyAnAbaraNa lobha ko. apratyAkhyAnAcaraNA
mAyA kI, apratyAnyAnAvaraNa ko ko denA cAhie aura zeSa eka bhAga
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa' mAna ko denA cAhie  /  apane apane eka eka bhAga meM pIche
ke apane-apane bahabhAga ko milAne se apanA-apanA sarvaghAtI dravya hotA hai|
dezaghAtI dravya ko AvalI ke asaMkhyAta meM bhAga kA bhAga dekara eka bhAga ko
alaga rakhakara bahumAga kA AdhA nokaSAma ko aura bahubhAga kA AdhA aura zeSa
eka bhAga saMjvalana kaSAya ko denA cAhiye  /  saMjvalana kaSAya ke dezapAtI
dravya meM pratibhAga kA bhAga dekara eka bhAga ko judA rakhakara zeSa bahabhAga
ke cAra samAna bhAga karake cAroM krodhAdi kaSAyo ko eka-eka bhAga denA cAhiye
/  poSa eka bhAga meM pratibhAga kA bhAga dekara saMjvalana lobha ko denA cAhiye
/  zeSa eka bhAga meM pratibhAga kA bhAga dekara bahubhAga saMjvalana mAyA ko
denA caahiye| zeSa eka bhAga meM pratibhAna kA bhAga dekara bahubhAga saMjvalana
krodha ko denA cAhiye aura zeSa eka bhAga saMjvalana mAna ko denA cAhiye  /
pUrva ke apane-apane eka bhAga meM pIche kA bahubhAga milAne se apanA apanA
dezaghAsI dravya hotA hai| cAroM saMjvalana kaSayoM ko apanA-apanA sarvaghAtI
aura dezaghAtI dravya milAne se apanA-apanA sarvadravya hotA hai| mithyAtva aura
bAraha phaSAya kA saba dravya sarvaghAtI hI hai aura nokaSAya kA saba dravya
dezaghAtI hii| nokaSAya kA vibhAga isa prakAra hotA hai-nokaSAya ke draSya ko
pratibhAga kA bhAga dekara eka bhAga ko judA rakha, bahubhAga ke pA~va mabhAna
bhAga karake pAMcoM prakRtiyoM ko eka-eka bhAga denA cAhiye  /  zeSa eka bhAga
ko pratibhAga kA bhAga dekara bahubhAga tIna vedoM meM se jisa deda kA baMdha
ho, use denA cAhiye  /  zera eka bhAga ko pratibhAga kA bhAga dekara bahubhAga
rati aura arati meM se jisakA baMdha ho, use denA cAhiye  /  zeSa eka

Page #467 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Appendix-2:  **1432**  The portion of the participant should be divided into
the portion of the multi-portion and given to whichever of the two, **Hasy**
(laughter) and **Shok** (grief), is bound. The remaining one portion should be
divided into the portion of the participant and the multi-portion should be
given to **Bhay** (fear). The remaining one portion should be given to
**Jugupsa** (disgust). By adding the remaining multi-portion to their respective
one portion, their respective **Drsya** (visual) is obtained.  **Namakam-
Tiyangati**, **Ekendiryajati**, **Audarik**, **Tanjas**, **Kamga** (three
**Gari**), **Humb** (pride), **Samman** (respect), **Varnchatushk**,
**Tiryachanupurvi**, **Agurulghu**, **Upadhat**, **Mpavar**, **Sukshma**,
**Aparayapt**, **Sadharan**, **Asthir**, **Ashubh**, **Dubhang**, **Anadeya**,
**Ayashkoti** (terrible **Nirman**), these twenty-three **Prakritis** (natures)
are bound together, a human being performs **Apva** (false) **Tithi** (ceremony)
and **Mithyaishti** (false worship).  In the **Dramp** (substance) that
**Namakarma** (name karma) receives, one portion should be kept separate by
dividing the portion of the **Avali** (infinite) into its countless parts, and
the multi-portion should be divided into twenty-one equal portions, giving one
portion to each **Prakriti**. Because **Up!** (above) **Pee** (below)
**Prakritis**, **Naukar** (servant) **Va** (or) **Ko** (who), all three
**Prakritis** are just sub-divisions of the **Marir** (mortal) **Nama** (name)
**Pind** (body) **Prakriti**. Therefore, they do not receive separate **Davy**
(substance), but only one **Sharir** (body) **Namakarma** receives a share.
Therefore, only this **Iskrim** (ice cream) is divided into portions.  The
remaining one multi-portion should be divided into the countless parts of the
**Avali** and given to the multi-portion from the end to the beginning in order.
For example, in one portion, the portion of the **Avali** should be given to the
multi-portion of the **Nirman** **Prakriti** at the end. In the remaining
portion, the portion of the **Avali** should be given to the multi-portion of
**Ayash** **Kirti** (bad fame). In the remaining one portion, again the portion
of the **Avali** should be given to the multi-portion of **Janadeya** (worthy of
being known). In the same way, in each remaining one portion, the portion of the
participant should be given to the multi-portion of **Durbhang**, **Ashubh**
etc. in decreasing order. The remaining one portion at the end should be given
to **Tiyangati**.  By adding the remaining portion to their respective equal
portions, their respective **Davy** (substance) is obtained. Where twenty-five,
twenty-six, twenty-seven, twenty-nine, thirty, thirty-one **Prakritis** are
bound together, the order of distribution should be known in the same way. But
where only one **Mashikirti** is bound, all the **Davy** (substance) of
**Namakarma** is received by this one **Prakriti** alone.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1432 pariziSTa-2. bhAga ko pratibhAga kA bhAga dekara bahubhAga hAsya aura
zoka' meM se jisakA baMdha ho, use denA caahiye| zeSa eka bhAga meM pratibhAga
kA bhAga dekara bahubhAga bhaya ko denA cAhiye aura zeSa eka bhAga jugupsA ko
denA cAhiye  /  apane-apane paeka bhAga meM pIche kA mahabhAga milAne se apanA-
apanA dRSya hotA hai| nAmakama-tiyaMgati, ekendriyajAti, audArika, taMjasa,
kAmaga tIna garIra, huMba saMmAna, varNacatuSka, tirya cAnupUrvI, agurulaghu,
upadhAta, mpAvara, sUkSma, aparyApta, sAdhAraNa, asthira, azubha, dubhaMga,
anAdeya, ayazaHkoti ghora nirmANa, ina teIsa prakRtiyoM kA eka sAtha baMdha
manuSya apavA tithaMca mithyAiSTi karatA hai  /  nAmakarma ko jo drampa milatA
hai usameM AvalI ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga kA bhAga dekara eka bhAga ko alaga rakha
bahabhAga ke ikkIsa samAma bhAga karake eka-eka prakRti ko eka-eka bhAga denA
caahiye| kyoMki Upa! pIIsa pratiyoM meM naukArika vA aura ko tInoM prakRtiyAM
eka marIra nAma piMDa prakRti ke hI avAntara bheda hai| ataH inako pRthak-
pRthaka davya na milakara eka zarIra nAmakarma ko hI hissA milatA hai| isIliye
isakrIma hI bhAga kiye jAte hai| zeSa eka bahumAga meM AvalI ke asaMkhyAta bhAga
kA bhAga dekara aMta se  /  Adi ko ora ke krama ke anusAra bahubhAga ko denA
caahiye| jaise ki zoSa eka bhAga meM AmalI ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga kA zaga dekara
bahabhAga aMta kI 'nirmANa prakRti ko denA caahiye| zeSa bhAga meM AvanI H
asaMkhyAtave bhAga kA bhAga dekara bahubhAga ayaza kIrti ko denaa| zeSa eka
bhAga meM punaH ApalI ke asaMkhyAta bhAga kA bhAga dekara bahubhAga janAdeya ko
denA caahie| isI prakAra jo-jo eka bhAga zeSa rahe usameM pratibhAga kA bhAga
de-dekara bahubhAga durbhaga, azubha Adi ko kama se denA cAhiye  /  aMta meM jo
eka bhAga rahe, vaha tiyaMcagati ko denA caahiye| pahale ke apane-apane samAna
bhAga meM pIche kA bhAga milAne se apanAapanA dravya hotA hai| jahA~ paccIsa,
chabbIsa, adaThAIna, unatIsa, tIsa, ikatIsa prakRtiyoM kA eka sAtha badha hotA
hai, vahA~ bhI isI prakAra se baTavAre kA krama jAnanA caahiye| kintu jahA~
kevala eka mazaHkIti kA ho baMdha hotA hai, vahIM nAmakarma kA saba dravya isa
eka hI prakRti ko milatA hai|

Page #468 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Text  In the bond-places of **Name Karma**, which are **Pind
Prakritis**, the substance of these **Pind Prakritis** is distributed among
their **Avantaar Prakritis**. For example, in the upper bond-places, there are
three divisions of the **Pind Prakriti** called **Body**. Therefore, in the
distribution, the **Avy** that is received by the **Pariir Name Kram** should be
divided into three equal parts, giving one part to each of the three. The
remaining one part should be divided into two parts, giving the larger part to
the **Karman Body** and the smaller part to **Tajas**. The remaining one part
should be given to **Audarik**. The same understanding should be applied to
other **Pind Prakritis**. Where only one **Avantaar Prakriti** is bound among
the **Avantaar Prakritis** of a **Pind Prakriti**, the entire substance of the
**Pind Prakriti** should be given to that one **Prakriti**.  The reason for
giving progressively more and more substance to the **Antaram** and **Name
Karma** in their distribution has already been explained in the beginning. It
was stated that the **Avantaar Prakritis** of **Janaavaran**, **Darshaavaran**,
and **Mohaniya** are progressively given less and less substance, while the
**Antaram** and **Name Karma** Prakritis are progressively given more and more
substance.  **Vedaniya**, **Gayu**, and **Gotra Karma** bind only one **Avantaar
Prakriti** at a time. Therefore, the substance received by the **Mula Prakriti**
is given to that one **Prakriti** only. There is no distribution in this case.
Thus, according to **Go Karma**, the distribution of **Pudgal** substance among
the **Karma Prakritis** should be understood. Now, we will discuss the hierarchy
of **Karma Liks** in the **Avantaar Prakritis** as described in **Pradesh Bandh
(Ga 28)**. This will help us understand the order of distribution among the
**Avantaar Prakritis**, which **Prakriti** receives the most, and which
**Prakriti** receives the least.  First, we will consider the **Avantaar
Prakritis** in terms of their **Alpa Bahutva** (lesser abundance) compared to
the **Utkrishta Pad** (superior state):  1. **Shamaavaran**: The least. 2.
**Kevalgyanaavaran**: Infinitely more than **Shamaavaran**. 3. **Manparyaaya
Gyanaavaran**: Infinitely more than **Kevalgyanaavaran**. 4.
**Avadhimanaavaran**: Infinitely more than **Manparyaaya Gyanaavaran**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmaprantha nAmakarma ke usa baMdhasthAnoM meM jo piMDaprakRtiyAM
haiM, unake dravya kA baTavArA unakI avAntara prakutiyoM meM hotA hai| jaise
Upara ke baMdhasthAnoM meM zarIra nAma piDaprakRti ke tIna bheda haiM ataH
vaTavAre meM pArIra nAmakrama ko jo avya milatA hai, umameM pratibhAga kA bhAga
dekara, bahubhAga ke tIna samAna bhAga karake tInoM ko eka-eka bhAga denA
caahiye| zeSa eka bhAga meM pratibhAga kA bhAga dekara bahubhAga kArmaNa zarIra
ko denA caahiye| zeSa eka bhAga meM pratibhAga kA bhAga dekara bahubhAga tajasa
ko denA cAhiye aura zeSa eka bhAga audArika ko denA cAhiye  /  aise hI anya
piDaprakRtiyoM meM bhI samajhanA cAhiye  /  jahA~ piMDa prakRti kI avAla ra
prakRtiyoM meM se eka hI prakRti kA badha hotA ho, vahAM pikaprakRti kA saba na
usa eka hI prakRti ko denA cAhine  /  _ aMta rAma aura nAma karma ke baTavAre
meM uttarottara adhika-adhika dravya prakRtiyoM ko dene kA kAraNa prArambha meM
hI batalAyA jA cukA hai ki jAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa aura mohanIya kI uttara
prakRtiyoM meM krama se hIna-hIna dradhya bA~TA jAtA hai aura aMtarAma va nAma
karma kI prakRtiyoM meM krama se adhikaanika dravya  /  vedanIya, gAyu aura
gotra karma kI eka samaya meM eka hI uttara prakRti baMdhatI hai, ata: mUla
prakRti ko jo pravya milatA hai, vaha usa eka hI prakRti ko mila jAtA hai  /
usama baTavArA nahIM hotA hai| _ isa prakAra se go0 karmakA anusAra karma
prakRtiyoM meM pudgala dravya kA baTavAna yAnanA cAhiye  /  aba vAmaprakRti
(pradezabaMdha gA0 28) meM batAyI gaI uttara prakRtiyoM meM karmalikoM ke
vibhAga kI hInAdhikatA kA kathana karate haiM : umame yaha jAnA jA sakatA hai ki
uttara prakRtiyoM meM vibhAga kA kyA aura kasA krama hai naSA kima prakRti ko
adhika bhAga milatA hai aura krima prakRti ko kama  /  pahale utkRSTa pada kI
apekSA alpabahutva vAlAte haiN| zAmAvaraNa .. . 5. kevalajJAnAvaraNa | mama
sabase ' kama, 2. manaparyAya. jJAnAbaraNa kA usase anaMta guNA, 3.
avadhimAnAvaraNa kA manaparyAyajJAnA

Page #469 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Appendix-2  **Varna** has the least part, **Shruta-Shaanavaran** has more
than that, and **Mati-Jnanaavaran** has more than that.  **Darshanaavaran** - 1.
**Prachala** has the least part, 2. **Nidra** has more than that, 3. **Pravala-
Pratala** has more than that, 4. **Nidra-Nidra** has more than that, 5. **Styan-
Dhi** has more than that, 6. **Keval-Darshanaavaran** has more than that, 7.
**Avadhi-Jnanaavaran** has infinitely more than that, 8. **Achakshu-
Darshanaavaran** has more than that, and 9. **Chakshu-Darshanaavaran** has more
than that.  **Devniya-Asata Vedaniya** has the least part, and **Sata Vedaniya**
has more than that.  **Mohaniya** - 1. **A-Pratyakhyanaavaran** **Man** has the
least part, 2. **A-Pratyakhyanaavaran** **Krodh** has more than that, 3.
**A-Pratyakhyanaavaran** **Maya** has more than that, and 4.
**A-Pratyakhyanaavaran** **Lobh** has more than that. In this way...
**Pratyakhyanaavaran** **Chatushk** (Man, Krodh, Maya, and Lobh in order) has
progressively more parts. From that, 9-12. **Ananta-Anubandhi Chatushk** has
progressively more parts. From that, 13. **Mithyatva** has more parts. From
**Mithyatva**, 14. **Jugupsa** has infinitely more parts, from that, 15.
**Bhay** has more parts, 16, 17. **Hasp** and **Shok** have more parts than that
but are equal to each other, 18, 19. **Rati** and **Arati** have more parts than
that but are equal to each other, 20, 21. **Stri** and **Napunsakaved** have
more parts than that but are equal to each other, 22. **Sanjwalan Krodh** has
more parts than that, 23. **Sanjwalan Man** has more parts than that, 24.
**Purushved** has more parts than that, 25. **Sanjwalan Maya** has more parts
than that, and 26. **Sanjwalan Lobh** has an innumerable number of times more
parts.  **Ayukarma** - All four **Prakritis** have equal parts, because they
bind together.  **Maamakarma** - In **Pati Namakarma**, **Devgati** and
**Narakgati** have the least parts but are equal to each other, **Manushygati**
has more than that, and **Tiyachgati** has more than that.  **Jati Namakarma** -
**Dwi-Indriya** etc. four **Jatis** have the least parts but are equal to each
other, and **Ekeindriya Jati** has more parts than that.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 414 'pariziSTa-2 varaNa se adhika, 4. zrutazAnAvaraNa kA usase adhika aura 5.
matijJAnAvaraNa kA usase adhika bhAga hai| darzanAvaraNa-1, pracalA kA sabase
kama bhAga hai, 2. nidrA kA usase adhika, 3. pravalA-prathalA kA usase adhika,
4. nidrA-nidrA kA usase adhika, 5. styAnaddhi kA usase adhika, 6.
kevaladarzanAvaraNa kA usase adhika, 7. avadhijJAnAvaraNa kA usase anantaguNA,
8. acakSudarzanAvaraNa kA usase adhika aura 6. cakSudarzanAvaraNa kA usase
adhika bhAga hotA hai| devanIya-asAtA vedanIya kA sabase kama aura sAtA vedanIya
kA usase adhika dravya hotA hai| mohanIya1. apratyAkhyAnAvarapA mAna kA sabase
kama, 2. apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha kA usase adhika, 3. apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA
kA utsase adhika aura 4. apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa lobha kA usase adhika bhA hai| isa
prakAra... pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa catuSka kA (mAna, kodha, mAyA aura lobha ke krama
se) uttarottara bhAga adhika hai| usase 9-12. anantAnubaMdhI catUSka kA
uttarottara bhAga adhika hai  /  usase 13. mithyAtva kA mAga adhika hai|
mithyAtva se 14. jugupsA kA mAga anantaguNA hai, usase 15. bhaya kA bhAga adhika
hai, 16, 17. hAspa aura zoka kA usase adhika phintu Apasa meM barAbara, 18, 16.
rati aura arati kA usase adhika kintu Apasa meM barAbara, 20, 21. strI aura
napUsakabeda kA umase adhika kintu Apasa meM barAbara, 22, saMjvalana krodha kA
usase adhika 23. sajvalana mAna kA usase adhika, 24, puruSaveda kA usase adhika,
25. saMjvalana mAyA kA usase adhika ora 26. saMjvalana lobha kA usase asaMkhyAta
guNA bhAga hai| _ Ayukarma-cAroM prakRtiyoM kA samAna hI bhAga hotA hai, kyoMki
eka hI baMdhatI hai| mAmakarma-pati nAmakarma meM devagati aura narakagati kA
sabase kama kintu paraspara meM barAbara, manuSyagati kA usase adhika aura
tiyaMcagati kA usase adhika bhAga hai| jAti nAmakarma meM-dvIndriya Adi cAra
jAtiyoM kA sabase kama kintu Apasa meM barAbara aura ekendriya jAti kA usase
adhika mAga hai|

Page #470 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **In the body called "Sharira"**: The Aharak Sharira
has the least portion, followed by the Audarik Sharira, which has a larger
portion than the Aharak Sharira. The Karman Sharira has a larger portion than
the Audarik Sharira, and the Tejas Sharira has a larger portion than the Karman
Sharira.  **Similarly, the five Sanghatas should also be understood in this
way**: In the Agopaang Karma, the Aharak Agopaang has the least portion,
followed by the Audarik Agopaang, which has a larger portion than the Aharak
Agopaang.  **In the Sansthan called "Sansthan"**: The middle four have equal
portions, and the portion of the last one is progressively larger.  **In the
Bandhan called "Bandhan"**: The Aharak Bandhan has the least portion, followed
by the Aharak-Tejas Bandhan, which has a larger portion than the Aharak Bandhan.
The Aharak-Karman Bandhan has a larger portion than the Aharak-Tejas Bandhan,
the Tejas-Karman Bandhan has a larger portion than the Aharak-Karman Bandhan,
the Vaikriya-Sankriya Bandhan has a larger portion than the Tejas-Karman
Bandhan, the Vaikriya-Kaman Bandhan has a larger portion than the Vaikriya-
Sankriya Bandhan, the Vaikriya-Kaman Bandhan has a larger portion than the
Vaikriya-Kaman Bandhan, and the Kriya-Kaman Bandhan has a larger portion than
the Vaikriya-Kaman Bandhan. Similarly, the Audarik Bandhan, Audarik-Tejas
Bandhan, Audarik-Karman Bandhan, Audarik-Tejas-Karman Bandhan, Tejas-Tejas
Bandhan, Tejas-Karman Bandhan, and Karman-Karman Bandhan have progressively
larger portions, one from the other.  **In the Sanhanan called "Sanhanan"**: The
Vaikriya Sanhanan has the least portion, followed by the Seva Sanhanan, which
has a larger portion than the Vaikriya Sanhanan.  **In the Sansthans**: The
Vaikriya Sansthan has the least portion, but it is equal in all four directions.
The Indriya Sansthan has a larger portion than the Vaikriya Sansthan.  **In the
five Sanhanans**: The visual portion is equal, but the Vaikriya Sanhanan has the
least portion, followed by the Seva Sanhanan, which has a larger portion than
the Vaikriya Sanhanan.  **In the Varna**: The Krishna Varna has the least
portion, followed by the Neel, Lohit, Peet, and Shukla Varna, which have
progressively larger portions, one from the other.  **In the Gandha**: The
Sugandha has the least portion, followed by the Durgandha, which has a larger
portion than the Sugandha.  **In the Rasa**: The Katuk Rasa has the least
portion, followed by the Tikta, Kasaila, Khatta, and Madhur Rasa, which have
progressively larger portions, one from the other.  **In the Sparsha**: The
Karkasha and Guru Sparsha have the least portion, followed by the Mridu and
Laghu Sparsha, which have a larger portion than the Karkasha and Guru Sparsha.
The Sukshma and Phit Sparsha have a larger portion than the Mridu and Laghu
Sparsha, and the Snigdha and Ushna Sparsha have a larger portion than the
Sukshma and Phit Sparsha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha zarIra nAmaka meM - AhAraka zarIra kA sabase kama saMkriya
zarIra kA usase adhika, audArika zarIra kA usase adhika, adhika aura kArmaNa
zarIra kA usase adhika bhAga hai  /  tejasa zarIra kA usase isI taraha pAMca
saMghAtoM kA bhI samajhanA cAhiye  /  agopAMga nAmakarma meM - AhAraka aMgopAMga
kA sabase kama usase adhika, audArika kA usase adhika bhAga hai  /  saMsthAna
nAmaka meM-- madhya ke cAra meM barAbara-barAbara bhAga hotA hai| usase kA bhAga
uttarottara adhika hai  /  raka baMdhana nAmaka meM - AhAraka AhAraka baMdhana
kA sabase kama, AhArakatejasa baMdhana kA usase adhika AhAraka- kArmaNa badhana
kA usase adhika, thAhA * taijasa-kArmaNa baMdhana kA usase adhika, vaikriya-
saMkriya baMdhana kA usase adhika, yi - Fan bandhana kA usase adhika, vaikiya
kAmeNa bandhana kA usase adhika, krima jasa- kAmaM bandhana kA usase adhika, isI
prakAra bArika audArika baMdhana, audArika- nejasa badhana, audArika kArmaNa
bandhana, audArika taijasakArmaNa baMdhana, tejasa tejasa baMdhana, taijasa-
kArpaNa bandhana aura kAmaMNakArmaNa bana kA bhAga uttarAMtara eka se dUsare kA
adhikadhahA hai| 435 saMhanana nAmakarma meM sabase thor3A hai, usase sevA kA
adhika hai  /  - vaikriya kA saMsthAnoM kA sabase kama kintu Apasa samacaturasra
aura usase iMDa saMsthAna Adi ke pAMca saMhananoM kA drazya barAbara kintu
varNaM nAma meM kRSNa kA sabase kama aura nIla, lohita, pIta tathA zukla kA eka
se dUsare kA uttarottara adhika bhAga hai  /  gaMdha meM sugaMdha kA kama aura
durgandha kA usase adhika bhAga hai  /  rama meM - kaTuka rasa kA sabase kama
aura tikta, kasailA khaTTA rasa kA uttarottara eka se dUsare kA adhika adhika
bhAga hai  /  aura madhura sparza meM - karkaza aura guru sparza kA sabase kama,
mRdu aura laghu sparza kA usase adhika sUjha aura phIta kA usase adhika tathA
snigdha aura uSNa kA J

Page #471 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2  There is more of it. In all four pairs, the two-two touches have
equal parts. In Ānṛpūrva - Devānṛpūrva and Narakānṛpūrva have the least part,
but they are equal to each other. From that, Manuṣyānṛpūrva and Tiryacānṛpūrva
have more and more parts respectively. In Vihāyogati - Praṇast Vihāyogati has
less and Aprāśast Vihāyogati has more than that. _Asāvi Bīs in:- Pras has less,
Śāvar has more than that! Paryāpt has less, Aparyāpt has more than that. In the
same way, one should understand each-ordinary, stable-unstable, auspicious-
inauspicious, easy-difficult, Mujham-Dādar and Ādeya-Anādeya as well. And
Ayas:Kīrti has the least part and Yas:Kīrti has more than that. Ātap Udyot,
Praśast Aprāśast Vihāyogati, Musvar, Duḥsvar have equal parts among themselves.
Nirmāṇa, Ichaśvās, Parādhāt, Upadhāt, Anurulghu and Tīrṣkar Nāma do not have
Alpबहुत्व. Because the idea of Alpबहुत्व is considered only in homogeneous or
opposite natures. For example, Varṇanāmakarma is homogeneous for Kṛṣṇa Nāmakarma
and Subhag and Dur Bhag are opposite to each other. But the above natures are
neither homogeneous because they are not sub-natures of any one Piḍa nature, nor
are they opposite because their bondage can also happen together. Gotrakarma -
Nīc Gotra has less and Ucca Gotra has more. Antarāyakarma - Dānantarāya has the
least and Lābha, Bhoga, Upbhoga and Vīrya Antarāya have more and more parts
respectively. One should understand the above Alpबहुत्व in relation to the
excellent position and in relation to the inferior position - Janavarpa and
Vednīc have Alpबहुत्व as before. In Darśanābaraṇa, Nidrā has the least, Prachalā
has more than that, Nidā. Nidā

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 usase adhika bhAga hai| cAroM yugaloM meM jo do-vo sparza haiM,
unakA Apasa meM barAbara-barAbara bhAga hai| AnRpUrvI meM- devAnupUrvI aura
narakAnupUrvI kA bhAga sabase kama kintu Apasa meM barAbara hotA hai  /  usase
manuSyAnupUrvI aura tiryaMcAnupUrvI kA krama se adhika-adhika bhAga hai|
vihAyogati meM-praNasta vihAyogati kA kama aura aprazasta vihAyogati kA umase
adhik| _asAvi bIsa meM:-prasa kA kama, zAvara kA usase ati ! paryApta kA kama,
aparyApta kA usase adhika  /  isI taraha pratyeka-sAdhAraNa, sthira-asthira,
zubha-azubha, sugama-yubhaMga, mujhama-dAdara aura Adeya-anAdeya kA bhI
samajhanA cAhie tathA ayaza:kIrti kA sabase kama aura yazaHkIti kA usase adhika
bhAga hai| Atapa udyota, prazasta aprazasta vihAyogati, musvara, duHsvara kA
paraspara meM barAbara bhAga hai| nirmANa, icazvAsa, parAdhAta, upadhAta,
anurulaghu aura tIrSakara nAma kA alpabahutva nahIM hotA hai| kyoMki alpabahutva
kA vicAra sajAtIya athavA virodhI prakRtiyoM me hI kiyA jAtA hai  /  jaise kRSNa
nAmakarma ke lie varNanAmakarma ke zoSa bheda sajAtIya haiM tathA subhaga aura
durbhaga paraspara meM virodhI haiN| kintu ukta prakRtimA na to sajAtIya haiM
kyoMki kisI eka piDa prakRti kI avAntara prakRtimA nahIM haiM tathA virodhI bhI
nahIM haiM, kyoMki unakA baMdha eka sAtha bhI ho sakatA hai| gotrakarma - nIca
gotra kA kama aura ucca gotra kA adhika hai| antarAyakarma - dAnAntarAya kA
sabase kama aura lAbha, bhoga, upabhoga aura vIrya antarAya kA uttarottara
adhika bhAga hai  /  utkRSTa pada kI apekSA se ukta alpabahatva samajhanA cAhie
aura jaghanyapara kI apekSA se - jAnAvarapA aura vedanIca kA alpabahatva
pUrvavat hai| darzanAbaraNa meM nidrA kA sabase kama, pracalA kA usake adhika,
nidA. nidA

Page #472 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pancham Karma Granth**  The **Prachala-Prachala** is greater than **Usse**.
**Styanaddhi** is greater than **Prachala-Prachala**. The rest is the same as
before.  The only difference in **Mohaniya** is that the three Vedas are
mutually nullified and are **Rati-Ati** special. **Sanjwalan** is greater than
**Man**, **Krodha**, **Maya**, and **Lomas** in increasing order.  In **Ayu**,
**Tiryanchayu** and **Manushyau** are the least, and **Devau**, **Narakau** are
countless times greater.  In **Namakarma**, **Liyanchati** is the least,
**Manushya Gati** is greater, **Devagati** is countless times greater, and
**Narakagati** is countless times greater. **Jati** is the same as before.  In
**Sharir**, **Audarik** is the least, **Tejas** is greater, **Karman** is
greater, **Vakriya** is countless times greater, and **Aharak** is countless
times greater. The same order should be known for **Saghaas** and **Bandhan**.
In **Shango**, **Audarik** is the least, **Vakriya** is countless times greater,
and **Paharak** is countless times greater. **Anupurvi** is the same as before.
The rest of the **Prakritis** should also be known as before.  **Gotra** and
**Antaraya** are the same as before. That is, **Neecha Gotra** is less and
**Umman Gotra** is greater. **Danaant Ray** is less, **Labhant Ray** is greater,
**Bhogant Ray** is greater, **Upbhogant Ray** is greater, and **Viryaant Ray**
is greater.  In this way, according to the **Karmakand** and **Karma Prakriti**,
one should understand the division and the lesser and greater aspects of the
**Karma Prakritis** and **Karma Dalikas**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karma grantha kA usase adhika  /  pracalA-pracalA kA usame adhika,
styAnaddhi kA usase adhika hai  /  zeSa pUrvavat mAga hai| mohanIya meM kevala
itanA aMtara hai ki tInoM vedoM kA bhAga paraspara meM nulya hai aura rati-ati
se vizeSAdhika hai| usase saMjvalana mAna, krodha, mAyA aura loma kA uttarottara
adhika hai| Ayu meM tiryaMcAyu aura manuSyAyu kA sabase kama hai aura devAyu,
narakAyu kA usase asaMkhyAta guNA hai| nAmakarma meM liyaMcati kA sabase kama,
manuSyagati kA usase adhika, devagati kA usase asaMkhyApta guNA aura narakagati
kA usase asaMkhyAta guNA bhAga hai  /  jAti kA pUrvavat hai  /  zarIroM meM
audArika kA sabase kama, tejasa kA usase adhika, kArmaNa kA usase adhika,
vakriya kA usase asaMkhyAta guNA, AhAraka kA usase asalpAta guNA bhAga hai  /
saghAsa aura baMdhana meM bhI aisA hI krama jAnanA cAhie  /  zaMgo meM audArika
kA sabase kama vaikriya kA usase asakhyAta guNA, pAhAraka kA usase asakhyAta
guNA bhAga hai| AnupUrvI kA pUrvavat hai  /  zeSa prakRtiyoM kA bhI pUrvavat
jAnanA caahie| gotra aura aMtarAya pharma kA bhI pUrvavat hai  /  yAnI nIca
gotra kA kama aura ummana gotra kA usase adhika  /  dAnAnta rAya kA kama,
lAbhAnta rAya kA usase adhika, bhogAnta rAya kA usase adhika, upabhogAmtarAya kA
usase adhika aura vIryA. ntarAma kA usase adhika bhAga hai  /  isa prakAra go0
karmakAMDa aura karma prakRti ke anusAra karma prakRtiyoM meN| karmadalikoM ke
vibhAjana va alpabahutva ko samajhanA cAhiye  /

Page #473 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-3 Statement of the Anuyogadwar Sutra etc. regarding the hairs to be
used to fill the Palya To demonstrate the proof of the Palya-upam, a Palya-gaha
one yojana long, one yojana wide and one yojana deep has been ordained to be
filled with hairs from one to a year. The different perspectives in this regard
are clarified here. The Anuyogadwar Sutra states in the verse "Egahibim,
Dehinateyahim Jav Ukkoesenam Sas Rattarakan" Walaggodiin" and the Pravachansaro-
uddar also has a similar text. The commentary of both explains that the hairs
that fall out on the first day after shaving the head are called Ekahiky, the
hairs that fall out on the second day are called Vahilay, the hairs that fall
out on the third day are called Nyahithy, and so on, the hairs that grow out in
seven days should be taken. The Nacha-lokaprakash states that the hairs that
grow out from one to seven days after shaving the head of the people of Uttara
Kuru should be taken. It further states that "Kshetrasama-Vridhavasi-Jambudwip-
Prajnapti-tyabhi-prayo'yam. Pravachansaro-uddar-vatti-sangrahan-ivriha-krityo-
stu Mundite Girasi Efena-sa Dvabhyam-aho-bhyam Yavad-utkarshatah Saptabhir-aho-
bhih Prakalan-i Walagra-ni Ityadi Samanyalah Kathana-dut-tarakuna-ra-walagra-ni
Nokna Niti Jneyam. 'Viranjay Sehar' Kshetra-vivar Matkamvo-pajna-vrittau Tu
Deyakuru-uttara-kuru-prathamat-adina-jato-ranasya-utsegha-angala-pramanam Ropa
Sanakrityo'shta-skhandi-karanem Vishatilaksha-saptanavati-sahasra-kashatava-
panchashat-pramit-khan-dhabhavam Prapyate, Tadrushai Rom-khande Resha Palyo
Niyat Ityadi-rapansa-sampradayo Drishyate Iti Jayam."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-3 palya ko bharane meM liye jAne vAle bAlAnoM sambandhI anuyogadvAra-
sUtra Adi kA kathana palyopama kA pramANa batalAne ke lie eka yojana laMbe, eka
yojana caur3e aura eka yojana gahare palpa-gaha ko eka se lekara sAla dina taka
ke bAlAnoM me bharane kA vidhAna kiyA hai| isa saMbaMdhI vibhinna dRSTikoNoM ko
yahA~ spaSTa karate haiN| anuyogadvAra mUtra meM 'egAhiba, dehinateyAhima jAva
ukkoseNaM sasa rattarakANa"vAlaggakoDINa' likhA hai aura pravacanasArodAra meM
bhI isI se milatA-julatA pATha hai| donoM kI TIkA meM isakA artha kiyA gayA hai
ki sira ke mur3A dene para eka dina meM jitane bar3e bAla nikalate haiM, ve ekA
hikya kahalAte haiM, do dina ke nikale bAla vAhilaya, tIna dina ke nikale bAla
nyAhitya, isI taraha sAta dina ke uge hue bAla lenA cAhiye  /  nacyalokaprakAza
meM isake bAre meM likhA hai ki uta kuru ke manuSyoM kA sira mur3A dene para eka
se sAta dina taka ke andara jo kezAna zi utpanna ho, yaha lenA cAhiye  /  usake
Age likhA hai ki kSetrasamAsavRhadvasijambUdIpaprajJaptityabhiprAyo'yam .
pravacanasArodvAravattisaMgrahaNIvRhakRtyostu muNDite girasi ephenAsA
dvAbhyAmahobhyAM yAvadutkarSataH saptabhirahobhiH prakalAni vAlAgrANi ityAdi
sAmAnyalaH kathanAdutArakUnaravAlAgrANi nokna nIti jJeyam  /  'vIraJjaya sehara'
kSetravivAra matkamvopajJavRttau tu
deyakurUttarakurUprathamatadinajAtoraNasyotseghAGgalapramANaM ropa sanakRtyo'STa
skhaNDIkaraNema vizatilakSasaptanavatisahasra
kazatavApaJcAzatapramitakhaNDabhAvaM prApyate, tAdRzai romakhaNDe reSa palyo
niyata ityAdirapaMsaH saMpradAyo dRzyata iti jayam  /

Page #474 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth 436  This means that the **Vṛhadvṛtti** of
**Kṣetrasamāsa** and the **Vṛddhi** of **Jambudvīpaprajñapti** state that the
hair of the people of **Uttarakuru** should be taken. However, the **Vṛtti** of
**Pravacanasāroddhāra** and the **Vṛhadvṛtti** of **Sangrahaṇī** mention hair
that has grown for one to seven days after a general shave. They do not mention
the hair of the people of **Uttarakuru**. The **Svopājñavṛtti** of
**Kṣetravicāra** states that the hair of a seven-day-old **meṣa** (sheep) born
in **Devakuru** and **Uttarakuru**, measuring **utsedhāṅgula** (the length of a
raised finger), should be taken and divided into eight parts seven times. This
means that the hair should be divided into eight parts, and then each of those
parts should be divided into eight parts again. By doing this, the hair will be
divided into 2,067,152 parts. This number of parts should be used to fill the
**palsa**.  The **Jambudvīpaprajñapti** also has the verse "**eyahi cehi tehi'a
ukkosenaṁ satta rattaparūṭhāṇaṁ vālagga kodīja'**". The commentator has
interpreted this as "**vāleṣu prāṇi śreṣṭhāṇi vālagrāṇi kurutar romāṇi teṣāṁ
koṭayaḥ anekaḥ koṭi pramukhāḥ saṁkhyāḥ**", which means "among hairs, the best
hairs are the hairs of the **kuru** land (**Devakuru**, **Uttarakuru**), and
their number is in crores and crores". Thus, the commentator has taken the hair
of the people of the **kuru** land (**Devakuru**, **Uttarakuru**) as the general
hair.  **Digambara** literature mentions
"**ekādisaptāhoraatrajātavīvālagrāṇi**", taking only the hair tips of a **meṣa**
(sheep) born one to seven days old. The description of **palyopam** in
**Digambara** literature  The **palyopam** and **sāgaropam** are used in the
literature of both **Śvetāmbara** and **Digambara** sects to calculate time
using the **upamā** (analogy) method. However, their descriptions differ. The
nature and other aspects of **palyopam** found in **Śvetāmbara** literature have
been described in verse 65. However, the description of **palyopam** found in
**Digambara** literature is different from the aforementioned description. There
is no distinction called **kṣetrapalyopam** in it.  ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacama karmagrantha 436 arthAt kSetrasamAsa kI vRhadvRtti aura
jambUdvIpaprajJapti kI vRddhi kA yaha abhiprAya hai ki uttarakuru ke manuSya ke
kezAya lenA caahiye| kiMtu pravacanasAroddhAra kI vRti aura saMgrahaNI kI
vRhadvRtti meM sAmAnya se sira mur3A dene para eka se lekara sAta dina taka ke
uge hue bAloM kA ullekha kiyA hai. uttarakuru ke manuSya ke bAlAoM kA grahaNa
nahIM kiyA hai| kSetravicAra kI svopajJavRtti meM likhA hai ki devakuru-
uttarakuru meM janme sAta dina ke meSa ( meDa) ke utsedhAMgulapramANa roma ko
lekara usake sAta bAra ATha-ATha khaMDa karanA cAhiye  /  arthAt usa roma ke
ATha khaMDa karake punaH eka-eka khaMDa ke ATha-ATha khaMDa karanA caahie| aisA
karane para usa roma ke bIsa lAkha sattAnava hajAra ekasau bAvana 2067152 khaMDa
hote haiN| isa prakAra ke khaMDoM se usa palsa ko bharanA cAhie  /
jaMbUdvIpaprajJapti meM bhI eyAhi cehi tehia ukkoseNaM satta rattaparUThANaM
vAlaggakoDIja' hI pATha hai| jisakA TIkAkAra ne yaha artha kiyA hai| vAleSu
prANi zreSThANi vAlAgrANi kurutara romANi teSAM koTayaH anekara: koTI pramukhAH
saMkhyAH jisakA Azaya hai ki bAloM meM agna zreSTha jo uttarakuru deva kuru ke
manuSyoM ke bAla, unakI koTikoTi  /  isa prakAra TIkazkAra ne bAla sAmAnya se
kurubhUmi (devakuru, uttarakuru) ke manuSyoM ke bAloM kA grahaNa kiyA hai|
digambara sAhitya meM 'ekAdisaptAhorAtrijAtAvivAlAgrANi' likhakara eka dina se
sAta dina taka janme hue meSa (bher3a) ke bAlAgra hI grahaNa kiye haiN|
digambara sAhitya meM palyopama kA varNana upamA pramANa ke dvArA kAla kI gaNanA
karane ke lie palyoSama, sAgaropama kA upayoga zvetAmbara aura digambara donoM
saMpradAyoM ke sAhitya meM samAna rUpa se kiyA gayA hai| lekina unake varNana
meM bhinnatA hai| zvetAmbara sAhitya meM pAye jAne vAle pasyopama ke svarUpa Adi
kA varNana gA0 65 meM kiyA jA cukA hai, lekina digambara sAhitya meM patyoma kA
jo varNana milatA hai, vaha ukta varNana se bhinna hai  /  usameM
kSetrapalyopama nAma kA koI bheda nahIM hai kucha

Page #475 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix-3  Not every Palyopama, its divisions and subtle differences have
been explained. In brief, the description of Palyopama is as follows:  There are
three types of Palya: Vyavahar Palya, Uddhar Palya and Adha Palya. All three
names are meaningful. The first Palya is called Vyavahar Palya because it is the
basis of the behavior of Uddhar and Adha Palya. In other words, the only use of
Vyavahar Palya is that it forms the basis of Uddhar Palya and Adha Palya.
Nothing is measured by it.   Naramya is known by the number of sixteen,
therefore it is called Uddhar Palya. And Adha Palya is known by the lifespan of
beings, therefore it is called Adha Palya.  The proof of these three Palya is as
follows:  Create three pits, each one Yojana long, one Yojana wide and one
Yojana deep, using a Pramanangula. From one day to seven days, cut the front
parts of the hairs of a sheep and make them so small that they cannot be cut by
a comb. The first Palya should be filled tightly with these hair fragments. This
Palya is called Vyavahar Palya.  From that Vyavahar Palya, one hair fragment
should be removed every hundred years. The time it takes for this Palya to
become empty is called Vyavahar Palyopama.   By imagining one hair fragment of
Vyavahar Palya, create as many fragments as there are years in an innumerable
koti (a very large number). Fill the second Palya with all these hair fragments.
This is called Uddhar Palya.  From that Uddhar Palya, one fragment should be
removed every moment. The time it takes for this Palya to become empty is called
Uddhar Palyopama Kala. Ten Koti Koti Uddhar Palyopama makes one Uddhar
Sagaropama. There should be as many islands and oceans as there are hair
fragments in one Uddhar Sagaropama.  From the hair fragments of Uddhar Palya,
imagine as many hair fragments as there are years in a hundred years, and fill
the third Palya with them. This is called Adha Palya. From this, one hair
fragment should be removed every moment.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 440 pariziSTa-3 aura na pratyeka palyopama ke bAdara aura sUkSma bheda hI kiye
gaye hai| saMkSepa meM palyoema kA varNana isa prakAra hai palya ke tIna prakAra
hai vyavahArapalya, uddhArapalya aura adApalya  /  ye tInoM nAma sArthaka haiM
aura uddhAra va addhA palpoM ke vyavahAra kA mUla hone ke kAraNa pahale patya ko
vyavahArapalya kahate haiN| arthAt vyavahArapalya kA itanA hI upayoga hai ki
vaha uddhArapalya aura aDApalya kA AdhAra banatA hai  /  isake dvArA kucha mApA
nahIM jAtA hai  /  _nAramya se sammAna ro, dI. sorahoM kI saMkhyA jAnI jAtI hai,
isIliye use uddhArapatya kahate hai aura asApalya ke dvArA jIvoM kI Ayu Adi jAnI
jAto hai, isIliye use adApalpa kahate haiM  /  ina tInoM pasyoM kA pramANa nimna
prakAra hai pramANAMgula se niSpanna eka yojana lambe, eka yojana caur3e aura
eka yojana gahare tIna gar3ave bnaao| eka dina se lekara sAta dina taka ke bheDa
ke romoM ke agrabhAgoM ko kATakara unake itane choTe-choTe khaNDa karo ki phira
ve kaMghI se na kATe jA ske| isa prakAra ke romakhaNDoM se pahale palya ko khaba
ThasAThasa bhara denA cAhie  /  usa palma ko vyavahArapalya kahate haiN| usa
vyavahArapalya se so-so varSa ke bAda eka-eka romakhaNDa nikAlatenikAlate jitane
kAla meM kaha palma khAlI ho, use vyavahAra palyopama kahate haiM  /
vyavahArapasya ke eka-eka romakhaNDa ke kalpanA ke dvArA uttane khaNDa kage
jitane asaMkhyAta koTi varSa ke samaya hote haiM aura ve saba romantraNDa dUsare
palya maiM bhara dii| use udArapalya kahate haiM  /  usa uddhArapalya meM se
prati samaya eka khaNDa nikAlate-nikAlate jitane samaya meM vaha palya khAlI ho,
use uddhArapasyopama kAla kahate haiM  /  dasa koTAkoTI uddhArapalyopama kA eka
uddhAra-sAgaropama hotA hai| atAI uddhArasAgaropama meM jitane romakhaMDa hote
haiM, utane hI dvIpa, samudra jAnanA caahie| udArapalpa ke romakhaMDoM meM se
pratyeka romakhaMDa ke kalpanA ke dvArA punaH uttane ra karo jitane sau varSa ke
samaya ke hote haiM aura jana baMge ko sIsare palya meM mara do  /  use
akhApalya kahate hai| usameM se prati samaya eka-eka roma

Page #476 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth #### 441  The time taken for a *palya* to become empty
while removing its parts is called *addha-palyopama*. Ten *koṭakoṭi* *addha-
palya* make one *addha-sagar*.  One *utsarpini* and one *avsarpiṇī* exist for
each *addha-sagar*. The *addha-palyopama* helps understand the *karma-sthiti*,
*bhavaspiti*, and *kaya-sthiti* of *naraka*, *tiyanch*, *manushya*, and *deva*.
## Description of *Pudgal* *Paravati* in Digambar Granths  Digambar literature
describes five types of *pudgal* *paravarta*, known as *panch* *parivartan*.
These are: *dravya-parivartan*, *kshetra-parivartan*, *kal-parivartan*, *man-
parivartan*, and *bhad-parivartan*.  * **Dravya-parivartan** has two types:
*nokarma-dravya-parivartan* and *karma-dravya-parivartan*. Their nature is as
follows:  * **Nokarma-dravya-parivartan**: A being takes in *pudgal* suitable
for three bodies and six *paryapti* at one time and discards them at another
time. After that, it takes in *pudgal* that were not previously taken, then
takes in mixed *pudgal*, and finally takes in *pudgal* that were previously
taken. When the same *pudgal* that were taken in at one time are taken in again
by the same being in the form of *nokarma*, with the same qualities, shape,
taste, smell, and touch, the duration of that time is called *nokarma-dravya-
parivartan*.  * **Karma-dravya-parivartan**: Similarly, a being takes in some
*pudgal* suitable for eight types of *karma* at one time and discards them after
a certain time. When the same *pudgal* are taken in again by the same being in
the same way, the duration of that time is called *karma-dravya-parivartan*.  *
**Dravya-parivartan** or *pudgal-parivartan* is the combination of *nokarma-
dravya-parivartan* and *karma-dravya-parivartan*. Either one of them is called
*ardha-pudgal-parivartan*.  * **Parivartan** is the holder of the most subtle
*avagahana*, the *nigodīya* *piya*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 441 khaMDa nikAlate-nikAlate jitane kAla meM vaha palya
khAlI ho, use addhA-palyopama kahate haiM aura dasa koTAkoTI addhApalyoM kA eka
addhAsAgara hotA hai  /  saphoTi addhAsAgara kI eka utsarpiNI aura utane hI kI
eka avasarpiNI hotI hai  /  isa addhA-palyopama se nAraka, tiyaMca, manuSya aura
devoM kI karmasthiti, bhavaspiti aura kAya sthiti jAnI jAtI hai| digambara
granthoM meM pudagala paratavatI kA varNana digambara sAhitya meM pudgala
parAvartoM ke pAMca bheda haiM aura paMca parivartanoM ke nAma se prasiddha hai|
unake nAma kramazaH isa prakAra haiM-dravya-parivartana, kSetraparivartana,
kAla-parivartana, mana-parivartana aura bhAda-parivartana  /  dadhya-parivartana
ke do bheda hainokarmadravya-parivartana aura karmedravya-parivartana  /  inake
svarUpa nimna prakAra haiM_ nokaraNya-parivartana--eka jIva ne tIna zarIra aura
chaha paryAptiyoM ke yogya pudagaloM ko eka samaya meM prahaNa kiyA aura dUsare
Adi samaya meM unako nirjarA kara dI  /  usake bAda anaMtavAra agrahIta pudgaloM
ko yahaNa karava, agalavAra mizra pudgaloM ko grahaNa karake aura anantavAra
grahIta pudgaloM ko grahaNa karake chor3a diyaa| isa prakAra ve hI pudgala jo
eka samaya meM grahaNa kiye the, unhIM bhAvoM se utane hI rUpa, rasa, gaMdha
aura sArza ko lekara jaba usI jIva ke dvArA punaH nokarma rUpa se grahaNa kiye
jAte haiM to utane kAla ke parimANa ko nokarnadavya-parivartana kahate haiM  /
karmadravya-parivartama-isI prakAra eka jIva ne eka samaya meM ATha prakAra ke
karma rUpa hone ke yogya kucha pudgala grahaNa kiye aura eka samaya adhika eka
AvAlI ke bAda unakI nirjarA kara dii| pUrvokta krama se ve hI pudgala usI
prakAra se jaba usI jIva ke dvArA grahaNa kiye jAte haiM, to utane kAla ko
kamabravya-parivartana kahate haiN| nokamaMdravya-parivartana aura karmadravya-
parivartana ko milAkara eka dravyaparivartana yA pudgala parivartana hotA hai
aura donoM meM se eka ko ardhapudgalaparivartana kahate haiM  /
parivartanasabase japanya avagAhanA kA dhAraka sUkSma nigodiyA pIya

Page #477 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **42** **Appendix-3**  A being was born and died,
having made the eight Madhya Pradesh of the Sof its own Madhya Pradesh of the
body. The same being was born and died again, carrying the same Avagahana. In
this way, it was born and died countless times in the same Avagahana, as many
times as there are Pradesh in the countless parts of the Ghanangul. After that,
it made the entire Lokakasha its birthplace, increasing one Pradesh at a time,
and thus completed a Kal-Parivartan.  **Kal-Parivartan:** A being was born in
the first time of the Utsarpini Kal and died after completing its lifespan. The
same being was born in the second time of the Utsarpini and died after
completing its lifespan. The same being was born in the third time of the Nisari
Utsarpini and died in the same way. In this way, it was born in all the times of
the Utsarpini Kal and similarly in all the times of the Avasarpini Kal. It
completed the cycle of death as it did with birth. That is, it died in the first
time of the first Utsarpini, died in the second time of the second Utsarpini,
and similarly died in the first time of the first Avasarpini, died in the second
time of the second Avasarpini. The time taken to experience all the times of the
Utsarpini and Avasarpini Kal through its birth and death is called Kal-
Parivartan.  **Bhav-Parivartan:** The most severe lifespan in Narakgati is ten
thousand years. A being was born in Narak with that lifespan. After dying, it
was born again in Narak with the same lifespan, having emerged from Narak. In
this way, it was born in Narak countless times with the same lifespan, as many
times as there are ten thousand years. After that, it was born in Narak with a
lifespan of ten thousand years plus one. In this way, it was born in Narak with
increasing lifespans, one at a time, until it reached the highest lifespan of
Narakgati, which is thirty-three Magar Purna. After that, it took on the
Tiyachgati. It was born and died in Tiyachgati with a lifespan of Antarmuhurta.
After that, it was born again in Tiyachgati with the same lifespan. In this way,
it was born countless times with a lifespan of Antarmuhurta, as many times as
there are moments in Antarmuhurta. After that, it was born in Sirshachgati,
increasing one time at a time, as described earlier.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 42 pariziSTa-3 sopha ke ATha madhya pradezoM ko apane zarIra ke madhya pradeza
banAkara utpanna huA aura mara gayA  /  vahI jIva usI avagAhanA ko lekara vahAM
dubArA utpanna huA aura mara gayA  /  isa prakAra ghanAMgula ke asaMkhyAtaveM
bhAga kSetra meM jitane pradeza hote haiM, utanI bAra usI avagAhanA ko lekara
vahAM utpanna huA aura mara gayA  /  usake bAda eka-eka pradeza bar3hAte-
bar3hAte jaba samasta lokAkAza ke pradezoM ko apanA janmakSetra banA letA hai to
usane kAla ko eka kSetraparivartana karate haiN| kAla-parivartana-eka jIva
utsapiNI kAla ke prathama samaya meM utpanna huA aura Ayu pUrI karake mara gyaa|
vahI jIva dusarI utsarpiNI ke dUsare samaya meM utpanna hunA aura Ayu pUrI ho
jAne meM bAda mara gayA  /  vahI jIva nIsarI utsapiNI ke tIsare samaya meM
utpanna huA aura usI taraha mara gayA  /  isa prakAra yaha utsarpiNI kAla ke
samasta samayoM meM utpanna huA aura isI prakAra avasarpiNI kAla ke samasta
samayoM meM utpanna huaa| utpatti kI taraha mutyu kA bhI krama pUrA kiyaa|
arthAt pahalI utsapiNI ke pahale samaya meM marA, dUsarI utsapiNI ke dUsare
samaya meM marA, isI prakAra pahalI avasarpiNI ke pahale samaya meM marA, dUsarI
avasarpiNI ke dUsare samaya meM marA  /  isa prakAra jitane samaya meM utsarpiNI
aura avasapiNI kAla ke samasta samayoM ko apane janma aura mRtyu se spRSTa kara
letA hai, utane samaya kA nAma kAlaparivartana hai| bhavaparivartana -
narakagati meM sabase jaghanya Ayu dasa hajAra varSa kI hai  /  koI jIva utanI
Ayu lekara naraka meM utpanna huaa| marane ke bAda naraka se nikalakara punaH
usI Ayu ko lekara dubArA naraka meM utpanna huaa| isa prakAra dasa hajAra varSa
ke jitane samaya hote haiM, utanI bAra usI Ayu ko lekara naraka meM utpanna haa|
usake bAda eka samaya adhika dasa hajAra varSa kI Ayu lekara naraka meM utpanna
huaa| isa prakAra eka-eka samaya bar3hAte-bar3hAte narakagati kI utkRSTa Ayu
tetIsa mAgara pUrNa kI  /  usake bAda tiyaMcagati ko liyaa| niyaMcagati meM
antarmuhUrta kI Ayu lekara utpanna huA aura mara gayA  /  usake vAda usI Ayu ko
lekara punaH tiryacagati meM utpanna huaa| isa prakAra ansamaharta meM jitane
samaya hote haiM usanI bAra antamuharta kI Ayu lekara utpanna huaa| isake bAda
pUrvokta prakAra se eka-eka samaya bar3hAte-bar3hAte sirSacagati

Page #478 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Chapter: The Five Aggregates  **443**  One who has completed the
three stages of existence (**tirthankara**, **manushya**, and **deva**) has
completed the time of the **tirthankara** existence, just as one completes the
time of the **manushya** existence, and the time of the **deva** existence just
as one completes the time of the **naraka** existence. However, one must
understand that there is a difference in the **deva** existence. In the **deva**
existence, the **bhavachakram** is completed only after completing the lifespan
of 31 **sagaras**. Devas who have a lifespan of more than 31 **sagaras** are
called **sampatti** devas, and they attain **moksha** after experiencing one or
two **manushya** births. Thus, the time taken to experience all four existences
is called **bhavachakram**.  **Bhavachakram** - Due to the **sthitibandha** of
**karma**, there are countless **loka** (worlds) and countless **kṣaya**
(destruction) **adhyavasaya** (determination) **sthāna** (places). Due to each
**kṣaya** **sthāna**, there are countless **loka** and countless **anubhāga**
(part) **adhyavasaya** **sthāna**.  A **panchendriya** (five-sense) **saṁjñī**
(conscious) **paryāpsaka** (one who has attained **paryāpta** knowledge)
**mithyātvī** (one who holds false beliefs) **jīva** (soul) has performed
**jñānāvaraṇa** **karma** and has a **sthitibandha** of **antaḥkoṭakoṭi**
**sagara** (innumerable **sagara**s). At that time, he has the most **jghanya**
(inferior) **kṣaya** **sthāna**, the most **jghanya** **anubhāga** **sthāna**,
and the most **jghanya** **yoga** **sthāna**. At another time, the same
**sthitibandha**, the same **kṣaya** **sthāna**, and the same **anubhāga**
**sthāna** remain, but the **yoga** **sthāna** becomes the second most
**jghanya**. In this way, with the same **sthitibandha**, **kṣaya** **sthāna**,
and **anubhāga** **sthāna**, he completes all the **yoga** **sthāna**s in
countless parts of the **śreṇī** (series). After the completion of the **yoga**
**sthāna**s, the **sthitibandha** and **kṣaya** **sthāna** remain the same, but
the **anubhāga** **sthāna** changes. He then completes all the **yoga**
**sthāna**s for that **anubhāga** **sthāna** as well. In this way, after the
completion of all the **anubhāga** **adhyavasaya** **sthāna**s, he has a
different **kṣaya** **sthāna** with the same **sthitibandha**. He then completes
the **anubhāga** **sthāna**s and **yoga** **sthāna**s for that **kṣaya**
**sthāna** as well. Again, he has a third **kṣaya** **sthāna**, and he completes
the **anubhāga** **sthāna**s and **yoga** **sthāna**s for that **kṣaya**
**sthāna** as well. In this way, after the completion of all the **kṣaya**
**sthāna**s, the **jīva** has a **sthitibandha** of more **antaḥkoṭakoṭi**
**sagara**s. He then completes the **kṣaya** **sthāna**s, **anubhāga**
**sthāna**s, and **yoga** **sthāna**s for that **sthitibandha** as well. In this
way, he completes the **utkṛṣṭa** (superior) **sthiti** (state) of
**jñānāvaraṇa** **karma** of **tīsa** **koṭakoṭi** **sagara**s (thirty
**koṭakoṭi** **sagara**s) by increasing it one by one. In the same way, when the
**jīva** completes the **sthiti** (state) of all the **mūla** (root) **prakṛti**
(nature) and **uttara** (later) **prakṛti** (nature), then he has completed the
**bhavachakram**.  In all these changes, one must pay attention to the order.
That is, not in a disorderly manner...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama kamagranya 443 ko utkRSTa Ayu tIna palpa pUrI kii| tiryaghagati kI hI
taraha manuSyagati kA kAla pUrA kiyA aura naraphagati kI taraha devagali kA kAla
pUrA kiyA  /  lekina devagati meM itanA aMtara samajhanA cAhie ki devagati meM
31 sAgara kI Ayu pUrI karane para hI bhavaparivartana pUrA ho jAtA hai| pramoMki
31 sAgara se adhika Ayu vAle deva sampaSTi hI hote haiM aura ve eka yA do
manuSya bhava dhAraNa karake mokSa cale jAte haiN| isa prakAra cAroM gati kI Ayu
ko bhogane meM jitanA kAla lagatA hai, use bhavaparivartana kahate haiN|
bhAvaparivartana -kamoM ke eka sthinibaMdha ke kAraNa asaMkhyAta loka pramANa
kaSAya-adhyavasAyasthAna haiM aura eka-eka kaSAyasthAna ke kAraNa asaMsyAta
lokapramANa anubhAga adhyabasAyasthAna hai| kisI paMcendriya saMjJI paryApsaka
mithyASTi jIva ne jAnAvaraNa kama kA antaHkoTAkoTI sAgara pramANa jaghanya
sthitibaMdha kiyA, usake usa samaya sabase jaghanya kaSAyasthAna aura sabase
jaghanya anubhAgasthAna tathA sabase jaghanya yogasthAna thA  /  dUsare samaya
meM vahI sthitibaMdha, vahI kaSAyasthAna aura vahIM anubhAgasthAna rahA kintu
yogasthAna dUsare naMbara kA ho gyaa| isa prakAra usI sthitibaMdha ko
kaSAyasthAna aura anubhAgasthAna ke sAtha zreNi ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa
samasta yogasthAnoM ko pUrNa kiyA  /  yogasthAnoM kI samApti ke bAda
sthitibaMdha aura kaSAyasthAna to bahI rahA kintu anubhAgasthAna dUsarA badala
gayA  /  usake bhI pUrvavata samasta yogasthAna pUrNa kiye  /  isa prakAra
anubhAga-adhyavasAyasthAnoM ke samApta hone para usI sthitibaMdha ke mAtha
dUsarA kavAyasthAna huA 1 usake bhI anumAgasthAna aura yogasthAna bhI pUrvavat
samApta kiye  /  puna. tIsarA kaSAyasthAna huA, usake bhI anubhAgasthAna aura
yogasthAna pUrvavat samApta kiye  /  isa prakAra samasta kaSAyasthAnoM ke
samApta ho jAne para usa jIva ne epha samaya adhika antaHkoTAkoTi sAgara pramANa
sthitibaMdha kiyA  /  usake bhI kapAyamyAna, anubhAgasthAna aura yogamyAna
pUrvavat pUrNa kiye  /  isa prakAra eka-eka samaya vahAte bar3hAte jJAnAvaraNa
kI tIsa koTAkoTi sAgara pramANa utkRSTa sthiti pUrNa kI  /  isI taraha jaba vaha
jIva mabhI mUla prakRtiyoM aura uttara prakaniyoM kI sthiti pUrI kara letA hai,
taba usane kAla ko bhAvaparivartana kahate haiM  /  ina sabhI parivartanoM meM
krama kA dhyAna rakhanA cAhie  /  arthAt akrama se

Page #479 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix-3  The action, which is the subtle particle transformation, is not
considered in the calculation. The arrangement should be understood here as it
is. This is a description of the owners of the excellent and inferior regions,
as found in the Gommatasara Karmakanda.  The Digambara literature also describes
the owners of the region-bonds in the Karmakanda. This is generally similar to
the description of the Karmagranthi. The relevant portion is presented here for
use in comparative study.  This is the general rule regarding the owners of the
excellent and inferior region-bonds: A being with sufficient restraint and who
accumulates a lot of merit, including excellent people, makes an excellent
region-bond. A being who is unconscious, has many natures, and makes an inferior
region-bond, makes an inferior region-bond.  First, the ownership of the
excellent bond of the primary natures is stated in the Gunasthanas:  **211.
"The excellent region-bond of the Ayukarma is made by the one who resides in the
seventh Gunasthana after the six Gunasthanas. The excellent region-bond of the
Mohaniya is made by the one who resides in the ninth Gunasthana. And the
excellent region-bond of the remaining six, except for the Aama and Mohaniya, is
made by the being who resides in the tenth Gunasthana, the Sukhsamparaya, who is
the holder of the excellent Yoga."**  Here, it should be understood that all the
bonds are made by the excellent Yoga.  The ownership of the excellent region-
bond of the secondary natures is as follows:  **212. "The excellent region-bond
of the Sarva, Suhma, and Saraga is made by the one who resides in the fifth
Patti of the Vesa. The excellent region-bond of the Ayaya and Vivitprakasaya is
made by the one who resides in the Uktasadva. **  **213. "The excellent region-
bond of the Chhannokasaya, Niddapaya, and Lalita is made by the one who resides
in the Sammago. The excellent region-bond of the Sammo, Vamo, Tera, Parasura,
and Aau is made by the one who resides in the Bhasava. **  **214. "The excellent
region-bond of the Devacara, Makara, Samara, Sthama, and Manasu is made by the
one who resides in the Sugati. The excellent region-bond of the Aahara, Appama,
Sesapasu, and Bako is made by the one who resides in the Mindo."**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 444 pariziSTa-3 jo kriyA hotI hai, vaha gaNanA meM nahIM lI jAtI hai  /  sUkSma
pudgala parAvarto ko  /  jo vyavasthA hai, vahIM vyavasthA yahA~ samajhanA
caahiye| utkaSTa aura jaghanya pradezabaMdha ke svAmiyoM kA gommaTasAra
karmakAMDa meM Agata varNana digambara sAhitya go karmakAMDa meM bhI
pradezabaMdha ke svAmiyoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai  /  jo prAya: karmagranya ke
varNana se milatA-julatA hai  /  tulanAtmaka madhyayana meM upayogI hone se
saMbaMdhita aMza yahA~ prastuta kiyA jA rahA hai| utkRSTa aura jaghanya
pradezabaMdha ke svAmiyoM ke bAre meM yaha sAmAnya niyama hai ki utkRSTa logoM
sahita, saMjo paryApta aura prodI ekati mA aa karane vAlA jIva utkRSTa
pradezabaMdha tathA japanya goga vAlA asaMjJI aura adhika prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
karane vAlA jaghanya pradezAbaMdha karatA hai  /  sarvaprathama mUla prakRtiyoM
ke utkRSTa baMdha kA svAmitva guNasthAnoM meM kahate  /  Ajamakassa padesa
chakkaM mohasta Nava duThANApi  /  sesANa taNakasAo baMdi upakassanogeNa  //
211 Ayukarma kA utkRSTa pradezabadha chaha guNasthAnoM ke anantara sAtaveM
guNasthAna meM rahane vAlA karatA hai  /  mohanIya kA utkRSTa pradezabaMdha
nauveM guNasthAnabartI karatA hai aura Ama va mohanIya ke sivAya zeSa
jAnAdharaNa Adi chaha ko kA utkRSTa pradezabandha utkRSTa yoga kA dhAraka
dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAnabAlA jIva karatA hai  /  yahA~ sabhI sthAnoM
para utkRSTa yoga dvArA ho pandha jAnanA cAhie  /  uttara prakRtiyoM ke utkRSTa
pradezabana kA svAmitya isa prakAra hai sasara suhamasarAge paMcaNipaTTimhi
vesage sadiyaM  /  ayaye viviprakasAyaM hovi ha uktassadazvaM tu  // 212
chaNNokasAyaNiddApayalAtityaM ca sammago yjdii| sammo vAmo teraM parasuraAu
bhasAvaM tu  // 113 devacaramaka va samara sasthAmaNasubhagati  /
AhAramappamato sesapAsubako minDo  // 214

Page #480 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  **445**  The five *karma* of *matijnanaavaran* etc.,
the four of *darshanavaran*, the five of *antaraya*, the *pasha*, *kiti*,
*vachan* *gotra* and the seven *vedanodh*, these eight types of *prakriti* have
their *utkrusht* *pradeshabandha* in the tenth *sukshmas* *param* *gunasthan*.
The five of *purushatred* etc. in the ninth *anivrittivadar* *gunasthan*, the
four of *hosra* *pratyakhyanavaran* *kashay* in the fifth *gunasthan* called
*des* *virati*, and the four of *pama* *tushma* in the fourth *avirata*
*gunasthan* have their *utkrusht* *pradeshabandha*. The six *nokashay*, *nida*,
*prachala* and *tirthankara*, these nine *prakriti* have their *utkrusht*
*pradeshabandha* done by the *samyashti* *jiva*, and the *manushyar*, *devayu*,
*asata* *vedaniya*, *devati* etc. *devatashtka*, *vajragamanaraach* *sanhanan*,
*samchaturas* *sansthan*, *prashast* *vihamanagati*, *subhashik*, these thirteen
*prakriti* have their *utkrusht* *pradeshabandha* done by both *samyagdristi*
and *michyaishti*. The *aaharakathik* has its *utkrusht* *pradeshabandha* done
by the *aprammat* *gunasthan*. Except for these *jiva* *prakriti*, the remaining
sixty-six *prakriti* have their *utkrusht* *pradeshabandha* done by the
*midhyadristi* *jiva* through *utkrusht* *yoga*.  After mentioning the owners of
*utkrusht* *pradeshabandha*, now we will tell about the owners of *jghanya*
*pradeshabandha*. Regarding the *bandhak* of the *mul* *prakriti*, it is said:
**215**  *Sahamaniodapajjattayassa pahame jahaṇṇaye jōge. Sattamhaṁ tu jahaṇṁ
āugavardhesi āuss.*  Except for *ashu*, the seven *mul* *prakriti* have their
*jghanya* *pradeshabandha* through *jananya* *yoga* in the first time of the
*nigodaya* *labhyaparyapta* *jiva* in its *paryaya*. When the *ayu* of that
*jiva* is *van* (destroyed), then the *jghanya* *pradeshabandha* of its *ayu*
also happens. The *ayukarma* is not destroyed completely, therefore it is said
that the *ayukarma* is *alamb* (destroyed partially). That means the *jghanya*
*pradeshabandha* of the *pathi* *karma* is done by the *sukshmanigodaya*
*labhyaparyapta* *jiva*.  After mentioning the *jghanya* *pradeshabandha* of the
*mul* *prakriti*, we will tell about the *uttar* *prakriti*:  **216**
*Ghoḍaṇajōgōsaṇṇī pirayyusuraṇirayāujah. Apamatto yāhāram śrayayō tiramṁ ca
ṣaṣak.*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 445 matijJAnAvaraNa Adi pAMca, darzanAvaraNa cAra,
antarAya pAMca, pazaHkIti, vacana gotra aura sAtA vedanodha, ina rAtra
prakRtiyoM kA dasaveM sUkSmasa parAma guNasthAna meM utkRSTa pradezabandha hotA
hai| nauveM anivRttivAdara guNasthAna meM puruSatredAdi pAMca kA, hosarA
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka kA deza virati nAmaka pAMcaveM guNamA ga rI
mArA: pAma tuSmA kA cautha avirata guNasthAna meM utkRSTa pradezavandha hotA hai
/  chaha nokaSAya, nidA, pracalA aura tIrthakara, ina nau prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa
pradezabAgha samyASTi jIva karatA hai tathA manuSyAra, devAyu, asAtA vedanIya,
devati Adi devastaSka, vajragamanArAca saMhanana, samacaturasa saMsthAna,
prazasta vihAmAMgati, subhASika, ina teraha prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa pradezavAgha
samyagdRSTi athavA micyAiSTi donoM hI karate haiM  /  AhArakatika ko utkRSTa
pradezabandha apramatta guNasthAna vAlA karatA hai| ina cIvana prakRtiyoM ke
sivAya zeSa rahI chiyAsaTha prakRtiyoM kA utkRSTa pradezabandha midhyAdRSTi jIva
utkRSTa yogoM se karatA hai  /  utkRSTa pradezabagha ke svAmiyoM kA kathana
karane ke bAda aba jaghanya pravezabandha ke svAmiyoM ko batalAte haiN| mUla
prakRtiyoM ke bandhaka ke bAre meM batAyA hai ki sahamaNiyodaapajjattayassa
pahame jahaNNaye joge| sattamhaM tu jahaNaM AugarvadheSi Aussa  /  / 215 yuma
nigodiyA labyaparyAtaka jIva ke apane paryAma ke pahale samaya meM jananya yogo
se Azu ke sivAya sAta mUla prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya pradezabandha honA hai| nAyu
kA vanna hone para usI jIva ke Ayu kA bhI jaghanya pradezabandha hotA hai  /
Ayukarma kA vadha saba nahIM hotA rahatA hai isIliye Ayukarma kA alama se kAyana
kiyA hai| arthAt pAThI karmoM kA jaghanya pradezabanna. sUkSmanigodiyA
landhyaparyApnaka jIma karatA hai| mula prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya pradezabandha
batalAne ke bAda uttara prakRti ke liye karate haiM ki ghoDaNajogosaNNI
pirayayusuraNirayaAujaha  /  apamatto yAhAraM zrayayo tiramaM ca SaSaka  /  216

Page #481 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 2 The holder of the **Sriman Yogas** (**Paravartaman Boyas**) is
**Asanjo Jav** who binds the **Naraka** realm. He also binds the **Deva** and
**Naraka** realms. The holder of the **Aharaka** realm, who is **Aparamatta
Gunasthanavarti** and has the fourth **Avirat Gunasthan** (the holder of the
**Jghanya Uppaad Yoga** in the first time of **Paryaya**), binds the
**Tirthankara** nature and the **Dev Chatushk**, a total of five natures. The
characteristics of the **Jghanya Pradeshbandhak** of the remaining 103 natures,
excluding these eleven natures, are explained as follows: **Charampushnabhavtyo
Tivivahe Padhamavigahmmi Thik.** **446** **Sumabhigoddo Andhavi Seshanam
Arabandhu Su.** **217** The **Sukshma Nigodaya** being, which holds the last
**Bhav** out of the 6012 **Bhav** of the **Labdhyaparyaptak** and is situated in
the first turn out of the three turns of **Vigrahgati**, binds the remaining 106
natures. Both the **Karmagranth** and **Go. Karmakand** consider the **Sukshma
Nigodaya** **Labdhyaparyaptak** being as the **Jghanya Pradeshbandhak** of 106
natures. The **Karmagranth** states that it is the binder in the first time of
birth, but the **Go. Karmakand** states that it is the binder of the last
**Bhav** out of the 6012 **Bhav** of the **Labdhyaparyaptak**. **Explanation of
the structure of Gunashrabhi** The structure of **Kamandalikas** from
**Rikshan** to **Pratismmay Asankhyataguine Asankhyataguine** is called
**Gunashreni**. The nature of this **Gunashreni** is explained clearly in the
commentary of **Karmaprakriti Ga. 15** by **Upadhyay Yashovijayji** as follows:
**Adhuna Gunashva Niswaroopamaah Yatsthiti Kandakam Ghatayati Tanmadhyaddalikam
Nrihitva Udayasamayadarabhyantmuhurt Charamasamayam** **Yavat**
**Pratismmayaye** **Gunanaya Nikshepati.** **Uktam Cha -** **1** **Jayarilhitho
Ghanam Puggale U So Vidd | squeaufor Ghose Tattho V Asankhguinie U || Shriyam
Vivai Samaye Taiye Tattho Asalangie U. Evam Samaye Samaye Antamuttam Tu Ka
Punnam ||** **Evaha Prathamasamayagrihita Dalik Nikshepavidhi. Evameva
Dvitiyaadisamay**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 2 zrImAna yogoM (parAvartamAna boyoM) kA dhAraka asaMjo jAva
narakadvika.. devAyu tathA narakAyu kA javanya pradezabandha karatA hai  /
AhArakadvika kA apramatta guNasthAnavartI tathA cothe avirata guNasthAna vAlA (
paryAya ke prathama samaya meM jaghanya upapAda yoga kA dhAraka ) tIrthaMkara
prakRti aura devacatuSka, kula pA~ca prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya pradezabandha karatA
hai  /  ina gyAraha prakRtiyoM se zeSa bacI huI 103 prakRtiyoM ke jaghanya
pradezabandhaka kI vizeSatA ko batalAte haiMcaramapuSNabhavatyo tivivAhe
paDhamavigAhammi Thika  /  446 sumabhigodo aMdhavi sesANaM arabaMdha su  //  217
labdhyaparyAptaka ke 6012 bhoM meM se anta ke bhava ko dhAraNa karane vAlA aura
vigrahagati ke tIna mor3oM meM se pahale mor3a meM sthita sUkSma nigodiyA jIva
zeSa rahI 106 prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya pradezabandha karatA hai  /  karmagrantha
aura go0 karmakAMDa, donoM meM 106 prakRtiyoM kA jaghanya pradezabandhaka sUkSma
nigodiyA labdhyaparyAptaka jIva mAnA hai| karmagrantha meM janma ke prathama
samaya meM usako bandhaka batalAyA, lekina go0 karmakAMDa meM labdhyaparyAptaka
ke 6012 bhavoM meM se antima bhava ko dhAraNa karane vAle ko batalAyA hai|
guNazrabhi kI racanA kA spaSTIkaraNa RkSaNa se lekara pratisamaya asaMkhyAtaguNe
asaMkhyAtaguNe kamaMdalikoM kI racanA ko guNazreNi kahate haiM  /  isa guNazreNi
ke svarUpa ko spaSTa barase hue karmaprakRti gA0 15 kI TIkA meM upAdhyAya
yazovijayajI ne likhA haiadhunA guNazva NisvarUpamAha yatsthitikaNDakaM
ghAtayati tanmadhyAddalikaM nRhItvA udayasamayAdArabhyAntamuhUrta caramasamayaM
yAvat pratisamayamayeya guNanayA nikSipati  /  uktaM ca- 1 jayarilahito ghaNaM
puggale u so vidda | squeaufor ghoSe tatto va asaMkhaguNie u || zrIyam vivai
samae taie tatto asaMlagie u  /  evaM samae samae antamuttaM tu kA punnaM  //
evaH prathamasamayagRhItadalika nikSepavidhiH  /  evameva dvitIyAdisamaya

Page #482 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth ### 347  The method of depositing the collected
dalikas must be observed. Moreover, for the creation of the guna-shreni, the
dalika that is being collected should be seen as having an infinite number of
gunas, increasing with each subsequent time period. It is said:  **First Time
Period**  "In the case of dalikas, the tiṣmaṇa-upāpati is established in the
vyāma, and it is not multiplied by any guna. It is collected in the first time
period, and in the second time period, it is multiplied by an infinite number of
gunas. In this way, with each time period, it becomes infinitely large, until it
reaches the end of the antarmūhūrta."  **Time of Deposition**  Here, the measure
of the antarmūhūrta is from the cessation of the previous karma to the rising of
the sun. The dalika is deposited in the remaining time periods after the vedana
has subsided, but not in the time period of the rising of the sun.  The time
period for the creation of the guna-shreni, which is the form of the dalika,
should be considered slightly longer. During this time period, the guna-shreni
increases. It is said:  **The Ladder of Time**  "Know that the time period is
equal to the number of vrṣṇaya-karana. The dalika is deposited in the remaining
time period after the rising of the sun."  **Meaning**  Now, what is the nature
of the guna-shreni? It takes the dalikas from the previous state and deposits
them in each time period from the time of the rising of the sun to the end of
the antarmūhūrta, multiplying them by an infinite number of gunas in each time
period. It is also said:  "Taking the dalikas from the previous state, it
deposits a few in the first time period, an infinite number of times more in the
second time period, and an infinite number of times more in the third time
period. In this way, at the end of the antarmūhūrta time period, it deposits an
infinite number of times more dalikas."  This is the method of depositing the
dalikas that were collected in the first time period. In the same way, the
method of depositing the dalikas that were collected in the second and
subsequent time periods should be known. For the creation of the guna-shreni,
the dalikas are deposited in increasing numbers, multiplied by an infinite
number of gunas, from the first time period to the end of the guna-shreni. It is
also said:  "Taking the dalikas from the previous state, it deposits a few in
the first time period..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 347 gRhItAnAmapi dalikAnAM nikSepavidhidraSTavyaH  /
kiJca guNazreNiracanAya guNazreNicaramamamayaM yAvad gRhyamANaM dalikaM
yathottaramasaMkhyeya guNa draSTavyam  /  uktaM ca- prathama samaya vAramva
daliye tu tiSmaNopapati ucarilla vihito viyammi aguNiyaM tu  //  girahai samae
baliyaM sahae samae asaMkhaguNiyaM tu  /  evaM samae samae jA carimo
aMtasamabholi  /  /  nikSepakAlo, ihAntamuhUrta pramANo
pUrvakaraNAnivRttikaraNAddhAdvikAt cAghastanodayakSaNe vedanata kSINe
zeSakSaNeSu dalikaM racayati na punampari guNa
dalaracanArUpaguNazreNikAlazcAkiJcidadhiko draSTavyaH tAvatkAlamadhye zreNi
vardhayati  /  uktaM ca seDhoi kAlamANaM vRSNayakaraNANasamahiyaM jANa  /  jikva
sA udaeNaM jaM sesaM tammi nikleko  /  /  arthAt aba guNazreNi kA svarUpa kahate
haiM- jisa sthitikaNDaka kA ghAta karatA hai, usameM se dalikoM ko lekara
udayakAla se lekara antarmuhurta ke aMtima samaya taka ke pratyeka samaya meM
asaMkhyAtaguNe asaMkhyAtaguNe dalika sthApana karatA hai| kahA bhI hai Upara kI
sthiti se pudgaloM ko lekara udayakAla meM thor3e sthApana karatA hai, dUsare
samaya meM usase asakhyAtaguNe sthApana karatA hai, tIsare samaya meM usase
asaMkhyAtaguNe sthApana karatA hai| isa prakAra antarmuhUrta kAla kI samApti ke
samaya meM asaMkhyAtaguNe - asaMkhyAtaguNe dalika sthApana karatA hai  /  yaha
prathama samaya meM grahaNa kiye gaye dalikoM ke nikSepaNa kI vidhi hai  /  isI
taraha dUsare Adi samayoM meM grahaNa kiye gaye dalikoM ke nikSepaNa kI vidhi
jAnanI cAhie tathA guNazreNi racanA ke liye prathama samaya se lekara guNazreNi
ke antima samaya taka uttarottara asaMkhyAtaguNe asaMkhyAtaguNe dalika praga
kiye jAte haiN| kahA bhI hai - - Upara kI sthiti se dalikoM kA grahaNa karate
hue prathama samaya meM thor3e

Page #483 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
468 Appendix-3 It takes an innumerable number of Dalikas at one time, and at
another time it takes an innumerable number of times more Dalikas than that. In
this way, it takes an innumerable number of times more Dalikas than an
innumerable number of times until the end of the Antarmuhurta time. The time for
this deposition is Antarmuhurta, and the time for the creation of Dalikas, the
form, and the quality series should be known to be slightly more than the time
of the A-purvakarana and the time of the Anivrittikarana. Below this time, when
the experience of the Udayakshana is destroyed, it creates Dalikas in the
remaining moments, but the quality series does not fall to the other side. It is
said: "The time of the quality series should be known to be slightly more than
the time of both the Karana. Its time is diminished by the Uday, so the
remaining time is where the Dalikas are deposited." The nature of the quality
series is also explained in the Panchasangraha in the same way. The relevant
verse is as follows: "Padayathiyo Valiyam Ghettum Ghettum Asankhgunagaye.
Sahiyanukaran Kale Ukyai Rayaha Gugase Hi." (746, Labdhisar Digambar Granth)
According to the Labdhisar Digambar Granth, the nature of the quality series is
explained as follows: "Udamanasalihimhi Ya Ubhayanam Baharrammi Shivgarh.
Loyanam Asankhejjjo Kamaso Usakatuono Haro." (68) The substance of the Jinas
whose Uday is found is deposited in the Udayanali. For this, one should know the
division of the innumerable Lokas. And the substance of those whose Uday and
Anruday are both present is deposited in the external quality series or in the
upper position from the Udayavali. For this, one should know the Apकर्षण
division (the non-palpy part of the Palpy). "Upakathin Igimaage Pallasa Lena
Bhajide Tattha. Bahubhaganivam Dava Uthavarillvidisu Nikkhaydi." (66) When the
Apकर्षण division is divided, in one part there are innumerable...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 468 pariziSTa-3 dalikoM ko grahaNa karatA hai, dUsare samaya meM usase
asaMkhyAtagRNe valikoM kA grahaNa karatA hai  /  isa prakAra antamuharta kAla ke
antima samaya taka asaMkhyAtaguNe asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kA grahaNa karatA hai|
yaha nikSepaNa karane kA kAla antarmuhUrta hai aura dalikoM kI racanA rUpa
guNazcaNi kA kAla apUrvaka raNa aura anivRttikaraNa ke kAloM se kucha adhika
jAnanA cAhie  /  isa kAla se nIce-nIce ke udayakSaNa kA anubhava karane ke bAva
kSaya ho jAne para bAkI ke kSaNoM meM dalikoM kI racanA karatA hai, kintu
guNazreNi ko apara kI aura nahIM par3atA hai| kahA hai 'gaNazreNi kA kAla donoM
karaNoM ke kAla se phaicha adhika jAnanA cAhie  /  udaya ke dvArA usakA kAla
kSINa ho jAtA hai, asaH jo zeSa kAla rahatA hai, umo meM dalikoM kA nikSepaNa
kiyA jAtA hai  /  paMcasaMgraha meM bhI guNazreNi kA svarUpa upamukta prakAra
batalAyA hai| tatsaMbaMdhI gAthA isa prakAra hai pAdayaThiio valiyaM ghettuM
ghettu asaMkhaguNagAe  /  sAhiyanukaraNa kAle ukyAi rayaha gugase hi  /  / 746
ava labdhisAra digambara grantha) ke anusAra guNazreNi kA svarUpa matalAte haiM
udamANasAlimhi ya ubhayANaM bAharammi shivgddh'| loyANamasaMkhejjo kamaso
usakaTuNo hAro  // 68 jina kRtiyoM kA udaya pAyA jAtA hai, unhIM ke dravya kA
udayAnali meM nikSa paNa hotA hai  /  usake lie asaMkhyAta loka kA bhAgAhAra
jAnanA aura jinakA udaya aura anRdaya hai, una donoM ke dravya kA udayAvali se
bAhya guNazreNi meM athavA Upara kI sthiti meM nirbhapaNa hotA hai, usake lie
apakarSaNa bhAgAhAra (palya kA asaMpalyAnavAM bhAga) jAnanA cAhie 1 upakaThina
igimAge pallAsaleNa bhAjide tattha  /  bahubhAganivaM dava
uThavarillavidIsuNikkhayadi  //  66 apakarSaNa bhAgAhAra kA bhAga dene para eka
bhAga meM palpa ke asaMkhyAta

Page #484 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Panchat Karma Granth 446  **A portion of the portion is given, of which the
majority is deposited in the upper state.**  **The remaining portion, multiplied
by an innumerable number, is the essence of the majority.**  **The remaining
portion, given by the qualities, is the garment of the rising.**  **70. The
remaining one portion is given to the false world, that is the demand of 35...
The majority, which is on the left, should be given in the dimension of
multiplication, and the remaining one portion should be given in the rising.**
**71. The portion of the measure at the time of the influx in the substance
given in the rising, is the middle cube. And the portion of the half of the less
than the measure of the influx of one less than the middle cube, is the measure
of the age. By multiplying that age by the multiplier of the destruction (two
qualities of destruction), the measure of the first insemination of the blissful
one is obtained.**  **72. From that, in the subsequent inseminations, the
measure should be known to decrease by one age in order. There, the measure of
the substance given in the final insemination is obtained by decreasing the age
by one less than the influx.**  **73. The substance given for the
multiplication, which is reduced by the reduction, is one rod of the first time.
From that, the second time is innumerable times greater, and in this way, the
rod, which is innumerable times greater until the final time, is added. By
dividing the sum of those rods, the measure obtained is multiplied by its own
rods, and the substance given in the first niche of the dimension of the series
of qualities is the measure of the innumerable times established.**  **From
that, in the subsequent inseminations, the substance should be known to be
innumerable times greater until the final time. The substance given in the first
insemination is the measure of the innumerable parts of the substance given in
the final insemination. The substance given in the subsequent inseminations is
the decreasing age of the first destruction.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcata karma grantha 446 bhAga kA bhAga diyA, umameM se bahubhAga apara kI
sthiti meM nikSepaNa karatA sesagamAge manice asaMkhasogeNa tatva bahabhAga  /
guNase die siMvi sesegaM beSa udayAmhi  // 70 avazaSa eka bhAga ko asatyAta
lokaH sA mAMga 35... jo bahubhAga bAye, usako guNaNi AyAma meM aura zeSa eka
bhAga kA udayAji meM denA caahie| urayAvalisma bavyaM Avaniji hodi manAyamaM  /
kalamadANUmeNa - gisepa hArena  // 71 manimamaghagamavaharide pacayaM pacayaM
gimeya hAreNa  /  guNive Adi NiseyaM visesahINaM kama matto  // 72 udayAgha li
meM diye gaye dravya meM AvalI ke samaya pramANa kA bhAga me para madhyaghana
hotA hai aura usa madhyaghana kI eka kama AvalI pramANa gaccha ke Adhe kama
nipakahAra kA bhAga dene se vaya kA pramANa hotA hai| usa caya ko mirSakAhAra se
(do guNa hAni se) guNA karane para AnandI ke prathama niSeka ke dhya kA pramANa
AtA hai  /  usase dvitIyAdi niSekoM meM diye krama se eka-eka caya kara ghaTatA
pramANa liye jAnanA cAhiye  /  vahA~ eka kama AvalI mAtra caya ghaTane para
aMtaniSeka meM diye dravya kA pramANa hotA hai| ukkavimhi dehi hu
asaMkhasamayappaSamAvimha  /  saMkhAtIvaguNavakama masaMkhahINa visesahINakarma
//  73 guNaneNi ke liye apakarSaNa kiye dravya ko prathama samaya kI eka zalAkA,
usase dUsare samaya ko asaMkhyAta guNI, isa taraha aMta samaya taka
asaMkhyAtaguNA krama lie hae jo zalAkA, unako jor3a usakA bhAga dene se jo
pramANa Aye usako apanI-apanI zalAkAoM se guNA karane se guNazreNi AyAma ke
prathama nika meM diyA Travya asaMkhyAta samaya prabaddha pramANa AtA hai| usase
vitIyAdi niSekoM meM draSya krama se asaMkhyAtaguNA aMta samaya taka jAnanA 1
prathama niSeka meM dravya guNaNi ke aMta niSeka meM diye dravya ke asaMkhyAta
bhAga pramANa hai| prathama guNahAni kA dvitIyAdi niSekoM meM diyA dravya caya
ghaTatA brampa liye

Page #485 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
450 Appendix-3 In the times from the second to the end of the गुणश्रेणी, the
substance is continuously depleted by an infinite number of times, and it is
deposited in the stages, i.e., in the previously mentioned types of उदयानि, etc.
In this way, the गुणणि विधान of the seven forms of karma occurs in each time
period! The essence of this statement is that the गुणणि रचना occurs in both the
natures that are arising and those that are not arising. The only difference is
that the substance of the arising natures is deposited in all three: उदयावली,
गुणश्रेणी, and the upper state, but the substance of the natures that are not
arising is only deposited in the गुणणि and the upper state, not in the उदयावली.
The meaning is that the substance given to the निषेक that are eligible to arise
from the present time to the time of one आवली should be understood as the
substance given in the उदयावली. The substance given to the निषेक that are equal
to the times of the गुणश्रेणी above the उदयावली should be understood as the
substance given in the गुणणि. The substance given to the remaining कर्मनिषेक,
except for a few निषेक at the end above the गुणश्रेणी, should be understood as
the substance given in the upper state. This can be understood by the example of
मिथ्यात्व. By dividing the substance of मिथ्यात्व by the अपकर्षक भागाहार, one
part remains as it is, without the बहभाग प्रमाण substance, and the remaining one
part is deposited in the upper state by dividing it by the infinite parts of the
पल्य. One part is given in the गुणश्रेणी आयाम by dividing it by the infinite
parts of the लोक, and the remaining one part is given in the उदयावली. In this
way, for the गुणश्रेणी रचना, the substance is continuously depleted by an
infinite number of times, up to the last time of the गुणाकाल, and it is
deposited in the उदयावली, गुणणिआयाम, and the upper state, according to the
previously mentioned विधान. In this way, one should know the गुणणि विधान of the
remaining seven karmas, except for आयु. In the गुणणि, the number of times is
continuously decreasing in the successive times, with the number of times being
infinite.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 450 pariziSTa-3 guNazreNI karane dvitIyAda aMta paryanta samayoM meM samaya-
samaya ke prati asaMkhyAtaguNA krama liye dravya ko apakarSaNa karatA hai aura
maMcita arthAta purvokna prakAra udayAni Adi meM use nikSepaNa karatA hai  /
aise Ayu ke dinA sAta phArmoM kA gRNI Ni vidhAna samaya-samaya meM hotA hai !
vana kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai ki guNane Ni racanA jo prakRtiyo udaya meM A
rahI haiM unameM bhI hotI hai aura jo udaya meM nahIM A rahI hai unameM bhI hotI
hai| antara kevala itanA hI hai ki udayAgata prakutiyoM ke dravya kA nikSepaNa
to udayAvalI, guNazreNI aura Upara kI sthiti, ina tInoM meM hI hotA hai, phintu
jo prakRtiyA~ udaya meM nahIM hotI haiM unake dravya kA sthApana kevala guNaNi
aura Upara kI sthiti meM hI hotA hai, udayAyalI meM unakA sthApana nahIM hotA
hai| Azaya yaha hai ki vartamAna samaya se lekara eka AvalI taka ke samaya meM
jo niSeka udaya Ane ke yogya haiM, unameM bo dravya diyA jAtA hai, use
jadayAvalI meM diyA gayA davya samajhanA cAhiye  /  udayAvalI ke Upara guNazreNi
ke samayoM ke barAbara jo niSeka haiM, uname jo dRSya diyA jAtA hai, use gaNaNi
meM diyA gayA samajhanA cAhiye  /  guNazreNi se Upara ke aMta ke kucha nikoM ko
chor3akara zeSa karmaniSakoM meM jo pravya diyA jAtA hai, use Upara kI sthiti
meM diyA gayA dRzya samajhanA caahiye| isako mithyAtva ke udAharaNa dvArA yoM
samajhanA cAhiye mithyAtva ke dravya meM apakarSaka bhAgAhAra kA bhAga dekara,
eka mAga vinA bahabhAga pramANa dravya to jyoM kA tyoM rahatA hai, zeSa eka
bhAga ko palya ke asaMkhyAta bhAga kA bhAga dekara bahubhAga kA sthApana para kI
sthiti meM karatA hai| yoSa eka bhAga meM asaMkhyAta loka kA bhAga dekara
guNazreNi AyAma meM detA hai, zeSa eka bhAga udayAvalI meM detA hai  /  isa
prakAra guNazreNi racanA ke liye guNAkAla ke aMtima samaya paryanta asaMkhyAta
guNe asaMkhyAtaguNe dravya kA apakarpaNa karatA hai aura pUrvokta vidhAna ke
anusAra udayAvalI, guNaNiAyAma aura Upara kI sthiti meM usa dravya kI sthApanA
karatA hai  /  isa prakAra Ayu ke sivAya zeSa sAta karmoM kA guNaNi vidhAna
jAnanA cAhiye  /  muNaNi meM uttarottara saMkhyAtagaNa saMkhyAtaguNe hIna-hIna
samaya meM

Page #486 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  451  Due to the increasing purity of the successive
results, the exhaustion of karmas (nirjara) becomes increasingly numerous in the
form of infinite multiplications of non-contact qualities (asanspataguna). In
other words, as the morakarma (karma of attachment) is completely exhausted, the
nirjara also increases, and the quantity of the substance (dravya) becomes
infinitely multiplied, increasing further and further. As a result, the soul
(jiva) gets closer and closer to liberation (moksha).  Those places where the
substance of nirjara, multiplied by the factor of infinite multiplications, is
found in increasing amounts are called guna-ni (quality-places), and the nirjara
occurring in those places is called guna-uni nirjara.  The description of the
guna-shreni (quality series) is mentioned in Go. Jivakanda, Gatha 66-67, keeping
this view in mind. This description is similar to that found in Karma-prakriti,
Panchasangrah, and Karmagranth. However, there is a difference in that the
Karmagranth, etc., mentions eleven guna-ni places: Samyaktva (right faith),
Deshaviriti (right conduct), Sarvaviriti (right knowledge), Anantanubandhi
(infinitely connected), Darshanamoha (destruction of perception-delusion),
Chariyamoha (subduing of conduct-delusion), Upashantamoha (subdued delusion),
Lapka (grasping), Kshina-moha (diminished delusion), Sayogikevali (liberated
with attachments), and Ayogikevali (liberated without attachments). However, in
Go. Jivakanda, Tattvarthasutra, Sarvarthasiddhi, Tattvartharajavatika, etc., the
two, Sayogikevali and Ayogikevali, are not considered separately, but are
included under the term "Jin" (Jina).  The original verses of Go. Jivakanda
mention ten places of the guna-shreni, but the commentator, while mentioning
eleven places, clarifies that either Samyaktva-utpatti (arising of right faith)
can be considered as one place, including the two aspects of Sa-tishaya-miccha-
drishti (wrong faith with excess) and Asan-yat-samyaptti (right faith without
restraint), thus completing eleven places, or, without doing so, the term
Samyaktva-utpatti can be considered as one place, but the final term "Jin"
should be considered as including two places: Svasthanasthita-kevali (liberated
while remaining in their own place) and Samudayat-gata-kevali (liberated while
moving in the assembly). The quantity of nirjara-dravya (substance of
exhaustion) of Samudayat-gata-kevali is infinitely greater than that of
Svasthanasthita-kevali.  Thus, there is a difference of opinion in accepting
eleven or ten places of the guna-shreni.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha 451 uttarottara pariNAmoM kI vizuddhi kI adhikatA hote
jAne ke kAraNa karmoM kI nirjarA asaMspAtaguNo asaMkhyAtagRNI adhika-adhika hotI
hai, arthAt jaise-jaise morakarma niHzeSa hotA jAtA hai vaise-vaise nirjarA bhI
bar3hatI jAtI hai aura yakA dravya pramANa asaMkhyAtaguNA, asaMkhyAtaguNA
adhikAdhika hotA jAtA hai| phalataH vaha jIva mokSa ke adhika-dhaka nikaTa
pahuMcatA jAtA hai| jahA~ guNAkAra rUpa se guNita nirjarA kA dravya adhikAdhika
pAyA jAtA hai unako guNa Ni kahA jAtA hai aura una sthAnoM meM hone vAlI nirjarA
guNauNi nirjarA nahI jAtI hai| _ go0 jIvakAMDa gAra 66-67 meM ukta dRSTi ko
lakSya meM rakhakara guNa zreNi kA varNana kiyA hai| yaha varNana karmaprakRti,
paMcasaMgraha aura karmagrantha se milatA-julatA hai| lekina itanA aMtara hai ki
karmagrantha Adi meM samyaktva, dezavira ti, sarvavirati, anantAnubaMdhI kA
visaMyojana, darzanamoha kA kSapatrA, cAriyamoha kA upazamaka, upazAMtamoha,
lapaka, kSINamoha, sayoga kevalI aura ayoga kevalI, ye gyArahaguNaNi sthAna
batalAye hai  /  lekina go0 jIvakAMDa, tatvArthasUtra, sarvArthasiddhi,
tatvArtharAjavAtika Adi granthoM meM sayogikevalI aura ayogikavalI ina donoM ko
alaga-alaga na mAnakara jina pada se donoM kA grahaNa kara liyA hai| 'go.
jIvakArDa kI mUla gAthAoM meM guNazreNi nirA ke dasa sthAna ginAye haiM, lekina
TIkAkAra ne gyAraha sthAnoM kA ullekha karate huye spaSTa kiyA hai ki yA to
samyaktvotpatti isa eka nAma se sAtizaya micyAdRSTi aura asaMyata samyApTi, isa
taraha do medoM kA grahaNa karake gyAraha sthAnoM kI pUrti kI jA sakatI hai
athavA aisA na karake samyaktvotpatti zabda se to eka hI sthAna lenA kintu
antima jina zabda se svasthAnasthita kevalI aura samRdghAnagata kevalI, ina do
sthAnoM kA grahaNa kara lenA cAhiye aura svasthAnakevalI kI apekSA samUdayAta
gata kevalI ke nirjarA dravya kA pramANa asaMsthAnagugA hotA hai| isa prakAra
gyAraha aura dasa guNazreNi sthAna mAnane meM vivakSA bheda hai|

Page #487 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix ### Explanation of the Provisions of Kshapakaṇi  The names of the
natures that are subject to fear in the Shrapakaṇi are explained in accordance
with the Karmagrantha in verses 121-123. The provisions of the Shrapakaṇi in the
Gor Karmakāṇḍa are as follows:  **Nirya-tiriks-suragasate ṇ hi
vesasayalabavakhavagā. Ayadacchatakkam tu aṇam aṇiyatṭīkaraṇacarimamhi.** || 335
**Jugavam saṁjogisa puṇovi aṇiyatṭīkaraṇabahumāgam. Poliya kamaso miccha missam
samm khaveṣi phame.** || 366  **Meaning:** When there is the existence of
Narakāyu, Tiriyachāyu, and Devāyu, there is no Deshavat, Mahāvrata, and
Shrapakaṇi respectively. This means that Deshavat does not occur while Narakāyu
exists, Mahāvrata does not occur while Tiriyachāyu exists, and Shrapakaṇi does
not occur while Devāyu exists. Therefore, a person ascending the Shrapakaṇi does
not have the existence of Narakāyu, Tiriyachāyu, and Devāyu. And an unrestrained
person with a wrong perception, who is detached from the world, negligent and
restrained, or non-negligent and restrained, performs the three karmas of
Adhaḥkaraṇa, Apūrvakaraṇa, and Anivṛttikaraṇa as before. At the end of
Anivṛttikaraṇa, he simultaneously detaches himself from the infinite attachments
of anger, pride, deceit, and greed. These are transformed into the twelve
Kṣayās, including A-pratyākhyānāvaraṇa, and the nine non-Kṣayās. After that, he
rests for a moment and then performs Adhaḥkaraṇa, Apūrvakaraṇa, and
Anivṛttikaraṇa again to destroy the Darshanamoha. During the time of
Anivṛttikaraṇa, when one part of the time remains and the majority has passed,
he destroys the natures of Mithyātva, Miśra, and Samyaktva in order, and thus
becomes a person with a Kṣayika perception.  After this, he ascends the
Shrapakaṇi to destroy the Charitramōha. First, he performs Adhaḥkaraṇa in the
seventh Gunasthāna, and then, reaching the eighth Gunasthāna, he performs the
same actions as before, such as Sthiti-khaṇḍana, Anubhāga-khaṇḍana, etc. Then,
reaching the ninth Anivṛttikaraṇa Gunasthāna, he...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 452 pariziSTa kSapakaNi ke vidhAna kA spaSTIkaraNa zrapakatheNi meM bhaya hone
vAlI prakRtiyoM ke nAma karmagrantha ke anurUpa Avazyaka niyukti gA0 121-123 meM
batalAye haiM  /  gora karmakAMDa meM zapakazreNi kA vidhAna isa prakAra hai
NirayatiriksasurAgasate Na hi vesasayalabavakhavagA  /  ayadazcatakkaM tu aNaM
aNiyaTTIkaraNacarimamhi  //  335 jugavaM saMjogisA puNovi
aNiyaTTikaraNabahumAgaM  /  poliya kamaso miccha missaM samma khaveSi phame  /
/  366 arthAt-naraka, tithaMca aura devAyu ke sasva hone para krama se dezavata,
mahAzrata aura bhapaka theNi nahIM hotI, yAnI narakAsU kA satva rahate dezavata
nahI hote, timaMcAyu ke satva meM mahAvrata nahIM hote aura devAyu ke satva meM
kSapakaveNi nahIM hotI hai  /  ata: paka thaNi ke Arohaka manuSya ke narakAyu,
tiryacAyu aura devAyu kA sattva nahIM hotA hai tathA asaMyata sabhyagdRSTi,
dezavirata, pramatta saMyata athavA apramatta saMbata manuSya pahale kI taraha
adhaHkaraNa, apUrvakaraNa aura anivRttikaraNa nAmaka tIna karaNa karatA hai  /
anivRttikaraNa ke antima samaya meM anaMtAnubandhI krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha
kA eka sAtha visaMyojana karatA hai, unheM apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa Adi bAraha
kaSAyoM aura nau nokaSAya spa pariNamAtA hai aura usake bAda eka antarmuhUrta
taka vizrAma karake darzanamoha kA kSapaNa karane ke liye punaH adhaHkaraNa,
apUrvakaraNa aura anivRttikaraNa karatA hai  /  anivRttikaraNa ke kAla meM se
jaba eka bhAga kAla bAkI raha jAtA hai aura bahubhAga bIta jAtA hai, taba
kramazaH mithyAtva, mina aura samyaktva prakRti kA kSapaNa karatA hai aura isa
prakAra kSAyika sampadRSTi ho jAtA hai  /  isake bAda cAritramoha kA kSapaNa
karane ke liye lapaka zreNi 'para ArohaNa karatA hai| sabase pahale sAtaveM
guNasthAna meM adhaHkaraNa karatA hai aura usake bAda AThaveM guNasthAna meM
pahuMca kara pahale kI hI taraha sthiti khaMDana, anubhAgakhaMDana Adi kArya
karatA hai| usake bAda nauveM anivRsikaraNa guNasthAna meM pahu~ca kara

Page #488 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Karma Granth  The sixteen, eight, one, one, and six karmas are
destroyed in the first five parts of the ninth Gunasthan, respectively. Or, they
are severed from their existence. In the remaining four parts, one karma is
severed from its existence in each part. Subsequently, in the tenth Gunasthan,
the subtle Samprayaya Gunasthan, one karma is destroyed. In the eleventh
Gunasthan, there is no destruction of any karma due to the lack of
qualification. After that, in the twelfth Gunasthan, the Jina-moha Gunasthan, at
the end, the existence of sixteen karmas is severed. In the Samogi Kevali
Gunasthan, no karma is destroyed. In the fourteenth Gunasthan, the Ayogi Kevali
Gunasthan, at the end, seventy-two karmas are destroyed in the first time period
and thirteen karmas are destroyed in the second time period.  The explanation of
the destruction of karmas should be understood as follows: In the first part of
the ninth Gunasthan, thirteen karmas of the Nama karma, three karmas of the
Darshanavarana karma (namely, Sthyanadhitrika, Kul, and Darshanavarana), and
three karmas of the Ayogya karma (namely, Narakatik, Tiryanchatik, and
Vikalatraik) are destroyed, totaling sixteen karmas. In the second part, four
karmas of the Apratyakhyanavarana karma and four karmas of the
Pratyakhyanavarana karma are destroyed, totaling eight karmas. In the third
part, the Nupumsak Veda is destroyed. In the fourth part, the Stri Veda is
destroyed. In the fifth part, the six karmas of Hasyaadi are destroyed. In the
sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth parts, the Purusha Veda, Sanjwalan Krodha,
Mana, and Maya are destroyed, respectively. Thus, thirty-six karmas are
destroyed in the ninth Gunasthan. In the tenth Gunasthan, the subtle Samprayaya
Gunasthan, the Sanjwalan Lobha is destroyed. In the twelfth Gunasthan, the five
karmas of the Gyanadharana, the four karmas of the Darshanavarana, the five
karmas of the Ansaraya, and the two karmas of Nidra and Prachala are destroyed,
totaling sixteen karmas. Then, after becoming a Sayogi Kevali, the fourteenth
Gunasthan is attained. In the penultimate time period of the fourteenth
Gunasthan, seventy-two karmas of the Nama, Gotra, and Vedaniya are destroyed. In
the final time period, thirteen karmas are destroyed, and then liberation is
attained. This is the attainment of the Kshataka Shreni.  In the final time
period of the Ayogi Kevali Gunasthan, the opinions of some Acharyas...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama karmagrantha solachemikA chakka canusekka pAvare ado ekka  /  khoNe
sosasa'joge ghAyara tevata te  // 337 usake nau bhAgoM meM meM pAMca bhAgoM meM
krama se solaha, ATha, eka, eka, chaha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hotA hai athavA sattA
se vyucchinna hotI hai tathA zeSa cAra bhAgoM meM eka-eka hI kI sattA vyucchinna
hotI hai  /  anantara dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya guNamyAna meM eka prakRti kI
nyucchitti hotI hai  /  gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM yogyatA nahIM hone se kisI bhI
prakRti kA viccheda nahIM hotA hai aura usake bAda bArahaveM jINamoha guNasthAna
ke anta samaya meM solaha prakRtiyoM kI sattA myucinchanna hotI hai| samogI
kevalI guNasthAna meM kisI bhI prakRti kI vyUjitti nahIM hotI aura ayogI kevalI-
caudahaveM guNasthAna ke anta ke do samayoM meM se pahale samaya meM 72 tathA
dUsare samaya meM 13 prakRtiyoM kA viccheda hotA hai| prakRtiyoM ke viccheda
hone kA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra jAnanA cAhiye ki naurya guNasthAna ke nau
bhAgoM meM se pahale bhAga meM nAmakarma kI 13 prakRtiyAM | narakatika,
tiryacaTika, vikalatrika, Atapa, udyota, ekendriya, sAdhAraNa, sUkSma, sthAvara
tayA darzanAvaraNa kI 3 prakRtiyA~ styAnaddhitrika, kula 16 prakRtiyAM kSapaNa
hotI haiM  /  dUsare bhAga meM apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa catuSka, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
catuSka kula ATha prakRtiyoM kA, tIsare bhAga meM napuMsaka beda, cauthe bhAga
meM strIveda, pAMcaveM bhAga meM hAsyAdi SaTka tathA chaThe, sAtaveM, AThaveM
aura nau bhAga meM kramavAH puruSaveda, saMjvalana krodha, mAna, mAyA kA kSapaNa
hotA hai| isa prakAra nauveM guNasthAna meM 36 prakRtiyAM byurichanna hotI haiM
/  dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM saMjvalana lobha, bArahaveM guNasthAna
meM jJAnAdharaNa pAMca, darzanAvaraNa cAra, aMsarAya pAMca aura nidrA va
pracalA, isa prakAra solaha prakRtiyAM kSaya hotI haiM, phira sayogakepalI
hokara caudahA guNasthAna prApta hotA hai aura usake upAntya samaya meM nAma,
gotra, vedanIya kI 72 prakR. tiyoM kA bhaya hotA hai aura anta samaya meM 13
prakRsiyoM kA kSaya ho jAne para mukta tazA prApta ho jAtI hai  /  jo kSapaka
zreNi kA prAptavya hai  /  ayoga kevalI guNasthAna ke maMtra samaya meM kinhIM-
kinhIM prAcAryoM kA mata

Page #489 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-3  There is a difference of opinion regarding the number of
*prakritis* that are destroyed. Some believe that 13 *prakritis* are destroyed,
while others believe that 12 *prakritis* are destroyed. Those who believe in the
destruction of 13 *prakritis* explain their view as follows: At the time of
death of a *tad-bhav* *moksha-gami*, thirteen *prakritis* including *anupurvi*
remain in their *gatti* form, and except for the *tirthankara* *prakriti*, the
remaining twelve *prakritis* remain in their *sat* form. The reason for this is
that the thirteen *prakritis* that are obtained along with the *manushya-gati*
are: *udaya*, *vipaki*, *manushya-ayu*, *kshetra-vipaki*, *manushya-anupurvi*,
*jiva-dhipati*, the remaining nine *prakritis*, and one of the two *vedaniya*
(either *sukha* or *duhkha*), *uttama-gotra*. These thirteen *prakritis* are
obtained by the *samyav-moksha-gami* at the time of death and are not destroyed
at the time of death. Therefore, at the time of death of a *tad-bhav* *moksha-
gami*, thirteen *prakritis* remain in their *gatti* form and the other twelve
*prakritis* remain in their *sat* form.  However, those who believe in the
destruction of twelve *prakritis* at the time of death of a *kevali* in the
fourteenth *gunasthan* argue that *manushya-anupurvi* is destroyed at the time
of death because its function is to cause *udaya*. The *prakritis* that cause
*udaya* do not have *sthiti-bhuta-samkrame* (the ability to remain in their
*sthiti-bhuta* form), so at the time of death, they are found in their own form,
which means that their *sat* is destroyed at the time of death. But all four
*anupurvi* are *kshetra-vipaki*, so they arise only when the *mati* is made for
another *bhav*. Therefore, they cannot arise in the *bhav* of the *jiva*, and
since they cannot arise, *manushya-anupurvi* is destroyed at the time of death
of the *ayogi* *kevali*.  In this difference of opinion, most believe that 72
*prakritis* are destroyed at the time of death of an *ayogi* *kevali* in the
penultimate *gunasthan* and 13 *prakritis* are destroyed at the time of death.
The commentary on the *panchama-karma-grantha* also states the same: 72 + 13.
And in the *go-karma-kanda-gatha* 341, it is also written: " *udayagata-grahana-
teral-charimhi-vochchhinna* ", meaning that the twelve *prakritis* that cause
*udaya* and one *manushya-anupurvi*, a total of thirteen *prakritis*, are
destroyed at the time of death of an *ayogi* *kevali*.  In short, this is the
explanation of the *kshaya-shreni*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-3 hai ki 13 prakRtiyAM kSaya hotI haiM aura kinhIM kA mata hai ki 12
prakRtiyAM sA hotI haiN| 13 prakRtiyoM kA kSama mAnane vAle apane mata ko isa
prakAra spaSTa karate haiM ki tadbhavamokSagAmI ke aMtima samaya meM AnupUrvI
sahita teraha prakRtiyoM kI gattA utkRSTa rUpa se rahatI hai aura japAya se
tIrthakara prakRti ke sivAya zeSa bAraha prakuttiyoM kI satA rahatI hai| isakA
kAraNa yaha hai ki manuSyagati ke sAtha udA ko prApta hone vAlI mavipAnI
manuSyAyu kSetravipAkI manuSyAnapUrvI, jIvadhipAko zeSa nau prakRtiyAM tathA
sAtA yA amAtA meM se koI eka vedanIya', ucca gotra, ye teraha prakRtiyAM
samavamokSagAmI jIva ke aMtima samaya meM bhaya ko prApta hotI haiM, dvicarama
samaya meM naSTa nahIM hotI hai| ataH tadbhava mokSagAmI ke aMtima samaya meM
utkRSTa teraha prakRtiyoM kI aura anya bAraha prakRtiyoM kI mattA rahatI hai  /
lekina caudahave guNasthAna ke aMtima samaya meM bAraha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya
mAnane vAloM kA kahanA hai ki manuSyAnupUrvI kA kSaya vicarama samaya meM hI ho
jAtA hai, kyoMki usake udaya kA kAma hai| jina prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai,
unameM stibukasaMkrama na hone se aMta samaya meM apane-apane svarUpa se unake
dalika pAye jAte hai jisase unakA carama samaya meM sattAviccheda honA yukta
hai| kintu cAroM hI AnupUrvI kSe RvipAkI hone ke kAraNa dusare mava ke liye mati
karate samaya hI udaya meM AtI haiM ataH bhava meM jIva ko unakA udaya nahIM ho
sakatA hai aura udaya na ho sakane se ayogi avasthA ke dvicarama samaya meM hI
manuSyAnupUrvI phI sattA kA kSaya ho jAtA hai| isa prakAra ke matAntara meM
adhikatara ayogikavalI guNasthAna ke upAntya samaya meM 72 aura aMta samaya meM
13 prakRtiyoM ke kSaya ko pramukha mAnA hai  /  paMcama karmagranya kI TIkA meM
72 + 13 kA hI vidhAna kiyA hai aura go karmakAMDa gAta 341 meM bhI aisA hI likhA
hai-'udayagavAra garANU terala carimahi vocchiNNA' arthAt udayagata 12
prakRtiyAM aura eka manuSyAnRpUnI, isa prakAra teraha prakutiyA~ ayogI kevalI ke
aMta ke samaya meM apanI sattA se chUTatI hai| saMkSepa meM kSapaka zreNi kA
yaha vidhAna samajhanA caahiye|

Page #490 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sadha Mr own **Index of the verses of the Pancham Karmagranth in alphabetical
order** _ • Verse Page No. Anudansanapusitthi 371 Ghanghāi Duguoy Jinā
Amichchhamīsasam 366 Ghauṭhāṇā Asuhā 224 Aphamasamghayanāgi 20.
Chauteyavamnaveniya Apamāi Hāragadurg 246 Padasa Rajjū Loji Apjasaptasushakoso
166 Chaumeo Amahāno Appayarapya Dibandhi 334 Rālisa Phasāesu Bhaymukkosogidisu
146 Chhagpusanjalanādo Avirya Sammo Tittham 160 Pāilahubhadho Vayara 157
Asukhagaḍajāi Māgi 216 Jala Hisayam Paṇasiyam. 216 Āhāra Sattagam vā 42
Ṭanuvangāgi Sanghyaṇ Ikkilakahiya Siddha 276 Saṇ Aṭṭha Vey Bujuyal
Ingavigalapudhakod 137 Tato Kammapaesā Uffosa Jahanneyar 176 Tamtamaga Ujjoyam
Uddhāraakhitam 313 Tasadanateyacha Uralāisattagenaṁ 323 Tasavannavis Sangateya
Egapasao Gāi 278 Tipaṇ Chha Bhaṭṭa Nahiya Egādhigae Bhūo 14 Tiruural Dugujoyam
170 Emeva Viubhvāhāra 266 Tiriduniam Tamtama Antim Chaufās Dugandh 278
Tirinarayatijoyāṇam 208 Phevanājuyalāvarana 52 Tivamigathāvarāyava 236 Khagai
Tiridūg Niyam 36 Tishyo Asuhasuhāṇam Gunasaḍhi Dalarapaṇā 301 To Jajido Bandho
Guru Koḍikoḍi Anto 132 Thavardasavannaṣaukk 14 * * * 44 × = 214

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAdhA Mr own paMcama karmagrantha kI gAthAoM kI akArAdi-anukramaNikA _ * gAtI
pR0 saM0 aNadaMsanapusitthI 371 ghaNaghAi dugoya jiNA amicchamIsasamma 366
ghauThANA asuhA 224 apahamasaMghayaNAgii 20. cauteyavamnaveNiya apamAi
hAragadurga 246 padasa rajjU lojI apajasaptasuSakoso 166 caumeo amahAno
appayarapaya DibaMdhI 334 rAlIsa phasAesu bhayamukkoso gidisu 146
chagapusaMjalaNAdo aviraya sammo titthaM 160 pAilahubadho vAyara 157
asukhagaDajAi mAgii 216 jala hisayaM paNasIyaM. 216 AhAra sattagaM vA 42
taNuvaMgAgii saMghayaNa ikkilakahiyA siddhA 276 saNa aTTha veya bujuyala
iMgavigalapudhakoDi 137 tato kammapaesA uphphosa jahanneyara 176 tamatamagA
ujjoyaM uddhAraakhitaM 313 tasadannateyacA uralAisattageNaM 323 tasavannavIsa
saMgateya egapaeso gAI 278 tipaNa cha bhaTTa nahiyA egAdahige bhUo 14 tiriurala
dugujjoyaM 170 emeva viubhvAhAra 266 tiriduniaM tamatamA aMtima cauphAsa
dugaMdha 278 tirinarayatijoyANaM 208 phevAnAjuyalAvaraNA 52 tivamigathAvarAyava
236 khagaI tiriduga nIyaM 36 tiSyo asuhasuhANaM guNasaDhI dalarapaNA 301 to
jajiDo baMdho guru koDikoDi aMto 132 thAvaradasavannaSaukka 14 * * * 44 x = 214

Page #491 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-4 / 187 236 168 146 2 " 214  .:- ...... - Steady Sumer without Thoṇati-
gaṇ, Aṇamiccha Daśaṇchā Bhayakumchā Damche Khisē Kāle Daśa Śṛhavi-gai Ucche Do
Igamāso Pakkho Napukukh-gaisāsaṁgha-u Namiya Jiṇam Dhruvabandho Nā Chha Van Se
Nāmadhruvabandhinavagaṁ Nāma Dhūvodaya Chha Uṭaṇu Nivucchharaso Sahajo
Nidāpayala Dujayala Nimina Thira Ayira Aguruya Niyajāiladdadasiyā
Pahakhaṇamasaṁkhaguna Paḍhamaviyā Dhūvaudāi Pam Tiguneśa Miccha Paṇ Aniyaṭṭī
Subagaha Paṇasadviśahasasa Paṇasaya Paliyāpta-khaṁsamuhū Bāyālaghughna-pagai
Bhayakucchmara-i Soē Miccha Ajaychau Āj Muttu Akasaya Ṭhiī Mūlapamiṇ Aṭṭa ,
Laḍḍu Ṭhibandho Saṁjalaṇ 26 Lahū Biya Panj Apajjē 243 Logapāeso Saṁpiṇi 348 Van
Chalateyakammā :23 Viścimurāhāradurga 126 Vigalasuhāmāungatim 144 Vigaliasaṁnime
Jiṭṭo 127 Vigdhāvaraṇasaāē 1 Digdhāvaraṇe Suhamo 64 Vidhāparaṇe Mohe 67
Bijayāisu Vijjē 76 Bosayarakoḍikoḍī 233 Saṁjalaṇ Noksāyā 341 Mā Samajhima Gira
26 Samyādasaṁkhakālaṁ 286 Samyārdatamuhatta 206 Sammadaramasva Vira-i 22
Sabbāṇabi Lahubandhe 42 Saṁyāṇavi Jichhaṭhi-i 341 Saṇāi Apucchaṭe 157
Sāyajasucyāvaraṇā 306 Sāsaṇami Seśa Dhūvamisaṁ 63 Samuṇi Dunni Asannī 127
Suranarati-guccha Sāya 336 Suhamanigoyāikhaṇ 115 Sehiavijanse 88 Seśammi Duhā
143 Hāsāijuyala-dugaveya - .-...   ~ 196 184 170 344 193 365 .. 14

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pariziSTa-4 / 187 236 168 146 2 " 214 .:- ...... - thira sumiyara viNu
thoNatigaM aNamiccha dasaNachA bhayakumchA damce khise kAle dasa sRhavigai ucce
do igamAso pakkho napukukhagaisAsaMghau namiya jiNaM dhruvabaMdho nA cha vana se
nAmadhruvabaMdhinavagaM nAma dhuvodaya ca utaNu nivuccharaso sahajo nidApayalA
dujayala nimiNa thira ayira aguruya niyajAiladdhadasiyA pahakhaNamasaMkhaguNa
paDhamaviyA dhuvaudAi pama tiguNesa miccha paNa aniyaTTI subagaha
paNasadvisahassa paNasaya paliyAptakhaMsamuhU bAyAlaghughnapagaI
bhayakucchamarai soe miccha ajayacau Aja muttu akasAya ThiI mUlapamINa aTTa ,
laDDu ThibaMdho saMjalaNa 26 lahu biya panja apajje 243 logapaeso sampiNi 348
vana calateyakammA :23 vizcimurAhAradurga 126 vigalasuhamAuMgatima 144
vigaliasannima jiTTo 127 vigdhAvaraNaasAe 1 digdhAvaraNe suhamo 64 vidhAparaNe
mohe 67 bijayAisu vijje 76 bosayarakoDikoDI 233 saMjalaNa nokasAyA 341 mA
samajhima gira 26 samayAdasaMkhakAlaM 286 samayArdatamuhatta 206 sammadaramasva
viraI 22 sabbANabi lahubaMdhe 42 sanyANavi jichaThiI 341 sANAi apucchate 157
sAyajasucyAvaraNA 306 sAsaNamI sesa dhuvamIsaM 63 samuNI dunni asannI 127
suranaratigucca sAya 336 suhamanigoyAikhaNa 115 sehiavijaMse 88 sesammi duhA 143
hAsAijuyaladugaveya - .-... ~ 196 184 170 344 193 365 .. 14

