Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/090244/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Saptaatika Prakarana Namaka 215 Karma Granth [Sixth Part] Mula, Shabdarth,
Gatharth, Vishesharth, Vishechan and Tippani Paribhashik Shabdokos Aadi Se Pukta
Vyakhyakar Marudharakesari, Pravartak Swa, Muni Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj
Sampadak Shrichand Surama 'Saras' Devkumar Jain Prakashan Shri Marudharakesari
Sahitya Prakashan Samiti Jodhpur-Vyavar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa nAmaka 215 karma grantha [SaSTha bhAga] mUla, zabdArtha,
gAthArtha, vizeSArtha,viSecana evaM TippaNa pAribhASika zabdakoSa Adi se pukta
vyAkhyAkAra marudharakesarI, pravartaka sva, muni zrI mizrImalajI mahArAja
sampAdaka zrIcanda surAmA 'sarasa' devakumAra jaina prakAzaka zrI
marudharakesarI sAhitya prakAzana samiti jodhapura-vyAvara

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Illumination**  One of the primary and creative objectives of the Shri
Marudhar Kesari Sahitya Prakashan Samiti is to publish literature related to
Jainism and philosophy. The institution's guiding light, the revered founder,
Late Shri Marudhar Kesariji Maharaj, was himself a great scholar, impromptu
poet, and a propagator of the essence of Jainism and philosophy. Under his
guidance, the institution's various philanthropic activities continue to this
day. Gurudev Shri was both a connoisseur and a lover of literature. Inspired by
him, we have published numerous works including discourses, biographies, poetry,
Agamas, and profound critical analyses. Now, we are presenting the second
edition of the Karmagranth Part 6 to scholars and inquisitive readers.
Karmagranth is a great text of Jain philosophy. It encompasses a comprehensive
discussion of Jain metaphysics. ...  Under the guidance of the revered Late
Gurudev Shri, renowned scholars of Jain philosophy and literature, Editor Shri
Shri Chandji Surana and his associate Shri Devkumarji Jain, have collaboratively
edited this profound text. Its first edition was published in 1976, which has
long been exhausted, and the demand from readers has been constant. In response
to the readers' demand, the committee's workers sought permission for the second
edition from the founder Shri Rupchandji Maharaj and the co-founder Shri
Sukhanmuniji Maharaj. Accordingly, with the approval and inspiration of Gurudev
Shri, this second edition is now presented to the readers. It is hoped that
those who are curious about the theory of Karma, students, etc., will benefit
from it.  **Sincerely,**  **Minister, Shri Marudhar Kesari Sahitya Prakashan
Samiti**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakIya zrI marudhara kesarI sAhitya prakAzana samiti ke vibhinna uddezyoM
meM se eka pramukha evaM racanAtmaka uddezya hai-jainadharma evaM darzana se
sambandhita sAhitya kA prakAzana karanA  /  saMsthA ke mArgadarzaka
paramazraddhaya pravartaka sva. zrI marudharakesarIjI mahArAja svayaM eka mahAna
vidvAna, Azukavi tathA jana mAgama tathA darzana ke maMza aura unhIM ke
mArgadarzana meM saMsthA kI vibhinna lokopakArI pravRttiyAM Aja bhI cala rahI
hai  /  gurudeva zrI sAhitya ke marmajJa bhI the aura anurAmI bhI the  /  unako
preraNA se aba taka hamane pravacana, jIvana caritra, kAvya, Agama tathA
gambhIra vivecanAtmaka anekoM granthoM kA prakAzana kiyA hai| aba vidvAnoM evaM
tattvajijJAsu pAThakoM ke sAmane hama karmagrantha bhAga 6 kA dvitIya saMskaraNa
prastuta kara rahe haiN| karmagrantha jaina darzana kA eka mahAn grantha hai|
isameM jaina tattvajJAna kA sarvAMga vivecana samAyA huA hai  /  ... sva. pUjya
gurudevazrI ke nirdezana meM jaina darzana evaM sAhitya ke suprasiddha vidvAna
sampAdaka zrIyuta zrIcandajI surAnA evaM unake sahayogI zrI devakumArajI jaina
ne milakara isa gahana grantha kA sundara sampAdana kiyA hai| isakA prathama-
saMskaraNa san 1976 meM prakAzita huA, jo kaba kA samApta ho cukA, aura pAThakoM
kI mAMga nirantara Ato rahI  /  pAThakoM kI mAMga ke anusAra samiti ke
kAryakartAoM ne pravartaka zrI rUpacandajI mahArAja evaM upapravartaka zrI
sukanamunijI mahArAja se isake dvitIya saMskaraNa ke lie svIkRti mAMgI,
tadanusAra gurudevazrI kI svIkRti evaM preraNA se aba yaha dvitIya saMskaraNa
pAThakoM ke hAthoM meM prastuta hai  /  AzA hai, karma siddhAnta ke jijJAsu,
vidyArthI Adi isase lAbhAnvita hoNge| vinIta : mantrI zrI marudhara kasarI
sAhitya prakAzana samiti

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The key to understanding Jain philosophy is the 'Karma Siddhanta'. It is certain
that the basis of the entire philosophy and metaphysics is the 'Karma
Siddhanta', which reveals the mystery of the various states and forms of the
soul and its transformations. Therefore, to understand Jain philosophy, it is
essential to understand the 'Karma Siddhanta'.  The major texts that discuss the
'Karma Siddhanta' include the 'Karma Granth' written by Shrimad Devendrasuri,
which holds a special significance. They occupy a very important place in Jain
literature. Even those who are curious about metaphysics consider the 'Karma
Granth' as a subject for daily study and self-study, like the Agamas.  The
Sanskrit commentaries on the 'Karma Granth' are very important. There have also
been many Gujarati translations of them. The first commentary on the 'Karma
Granth' in Hindi was presented by the learned scholar, the wise and great Pandit
Sukhlalji. His style is comparative and scholarly. Pandit Sukhlalji's commentary
is now almost inaccessible. For some time, there has been inspiration from
Ashukatriratna Gurudev Shri Marudhar Kesariji Maharaj to present a commentary on
the 'Karma Granth' in a modern style. This compilation began under his
inspiration and guidance. With the inspiration of Vidya Vinod Shri Mukanmuniji,
this work progressed rapidly. The cooperation of Shri Devkumarji Jain was
received and the work became ready to take shape in a short time.  In this
compilation work, the ancient text writers, commentators, commentators, and
especially the works of Pandit Shri Sukhlalji, have contributed...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 apanI bAta _ jaina darzana ko samajhane kI kujI hai-'karmasiddhAnta'  /  yaha
nizcita hai ki samagra darzana evaM tattvajJAna kA AdhAra hai AtmA kI vividha
dazAoM, svarUpoM kA vivecana evaM usake parivartanoM kA rahasya udghATita karatA
hai 'karmasiddhAnta'  /  isalie jainadarzana ko samAptane ke lie
'karmasiddhAnta' ko samajhanA anivArya hai  /  karmasiddhAnta kA vivecana karane
vAle pramukha granthoM meM zrImada devendrasUri racita karmagrantha apanA
viziSTa mahatva rakhate haiN| jaina sAhitya meM inakA atyanta mahattvapUrNa
sthAna hai| tattvajijJAsu bhI karmagranthoM ko Agama kI taraha pratidina
adhyayana evaM svAdhyAya kI vastu mAnate haiN| karmagnanthoM kI saMskRta TIkAeM
bar3I mahatvapUrNa haiN| inake kaI gujarAtI anuvAda bhI ho cuke haiN| hindI meM
karmagranthoM kA sarvaprathama vivecana prastuta kiyA thA vidvadvareNya manISI
pravara mahAprAjJa paM0 sukhalAlajI ne  /  unakI zailI tulanAtmaka evaM vidvattA
pradhAna hai| paM0 sukhalAlajI kA vivecana Aja prAyaH duSprApya sA hai| kucha
samaya se Azukatriratna gurudeva zrI marudhara kesarIjI mahArAja kI preraNA mila
rahI thI ki karmagranthoM kA Adhunika zailI meM vivecana prastuta karanA cAhie
/  unakI preraNA evaM nidezana se yaha sampAdana prArambha huaa| vidyAvinodI zrI
mukanamunijI kI preraNA se yaha kArya bar3I gati ke sAtha Age bar3hatA gayA  /
zrI devakumArajI jaina kA sahayoga milA aura kArya kucha samaya meM AkAra
dhAraNa karane yogya bana gyaa| isa sampAdana kArya meM jina prAcIna grantha
lekhakoM, TIkAkAroM, vivecanakartAoM tathA vizeSataH paM0 zrI sukhalAlajI ke
granthoM kA sahayoga

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Received and the discussion of this profound text has become easily
understandable. I express my gratitude with infinite gratitude to all the
scholars. The guidance of revered Shri Marudharakesariji Maharaj from time to
time, the inspiration of Shri Rajtamuni ji and Shri Suknamuni ji and the
cooperation of the officials of the Sahitya Samiti, especially the heartfelt
inspiration and cooperation of Shri Sujanmalji Sethia, the administrator of the
Samiti, has brought dynamism to the editing and publication of the book, I will
accept it with gratitude from the heart - it will be entirely appropriate. _ If
there is any mistake, theoretical error, ambiguity, and error in printing etc.
in the discussion, then I apologize for it and I expect the readers with a wise
mind to kindly inform me. Those who help in correcting mistakes and avoiding
negligence are commendable. With this request only Second Edition This second
edition of "Karmagranth" Part 6 is being printed. Today, Gurudev is not among
us, but the treasure of knowledge given by him is still guiding us all.
Gurudevshri's chief disciple, Upravartka Shri Suknamuni ji, keeping that light
of knowledge burning, is inspiring and encouraging us all today. It is with his
auspicious inspiration that this second edition of "Karmagranth" is reaching the
hands of the readers. Happiness. Humble - Shri Chand Surana 'Saras'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prApta huA aura itane gahana grantha kA vivecana sahajagamya bana skaa| maiM
ukta sabhI vidvAnoM kA asIma kRtajJatA ke sAtha AbhAra mAnatA zraddheya zrI
marudharakesarIjI mahArAja kA samaya-samaya para mArgadarzana, zrI rajatamunijI
evaM zrI sukanamunijI kI preraNA evaM sAhitya samiti ke adhikAriyoM kA sahayoga
vizeSakara samiti ke vyavasthApaka zrI sujAnamalajI seThiyA kI mahRdayatA pUrNa
preraNA va sahakAra se grantha ke sampAdana-prakAzana meM gatizIlatA AI hai,
maiM hRdaya se AbhAra svIkAra karU-yaha sarvathA yogya hI hogaa| _ vivecana meM
kahIM aTi, saiddhAntika bhUla, aspaSTatA tathA mudraNa Adi meM azuddhi rahI ho
to usake lie maiM kSamAprArthI hU~ aura haMsabuddhi pAThakoM se apekSA hai ki ve
snehapUrvaka sUcita kara anugRhIta kreNge| bhUla sudhAra evaM pramAda parihAra
meM sahayogI banane vAle abhinandanIya hote haiN| basa isI anurodha ke sAtha
dvitIyAvRtti "karmagrantha" bhAga 6 kA yaha dvitIya saMskaraNa chapa rahA hai|
Aja sva. gurudeva hamAre bIca vidyamAna nahIM haiM, kintu unake dvArA, pradatta
jJAna nidhi, Aja bhI hama sabatrA mArgadarzana kara rahI hai  /  gurudevazrI ke
pradhAna ziSya upapravartaka zrI sukanamunijI usI jJAna jyoti ko prajvalita
rakhate hue Aja hama sabako preraNA evaM protsAhana de rahe haiM, unhIM kI zubha
preraNA se "karmagrantha' kA yaha dvitIya saMskaraNa pAThakoM ke hAthoM meM
pahuMca rahA hai  /  prsnntaa| vinIta -zrIcanda surAnA 'sarasa'

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The soul is the foundation of all the thinking, contemplation and deliberation
of Jain philosophy. The soul is an all-powerful, independent force. It is the
creator of its own happiness and sorrow, and it is also the one who experiences
the fruits of its actions. The soul itself is formless, perfectly pure, but it
is embodied with the body and wanders in the world in an impure state. Even
though it is itself the embodiment of supreme bliss, it is being ground in the
cycle of happiness and sorrow. Even though it is immortal, it is flowing in the
stream of birth and death. The soul, which is endowed with supreme power, is
also suffering in the form of the poor, the miserable, and the destitute. What
is the reason for this?  Jain philosophy, while examining this reason, says that
karma is what makes the soul wander in the world. Karma is the root of birth and
death - "Kammam cha jai maranassa mulaṃ" - this statement of Bhagwan Shri
Mahavira is literally true, a fact. Due to karma, this world is constantly
changing in its diverse and strange cycles of events. While theistic
philosophies have attributed this diversity of the world and happiness and
sorrow to God, Jain philosophy has attributed the cause of all happiness and
sorrow and the diversity of the world primarily to the soul and its main helper,
karma. Karma is not an independent force, it is itself pudgala, inert. But when
karma is performed by the soul, which is under the influence of attachment and
aversion, it becomes so powerful and potent that it binds the doer in its own
bondage. It makes the master dance like a servant. This is the strange power of
karma. What is karma, the main seed of all the changes in our life and the
world, what is its nature? How do its various results come about? This is a very
serious subject. In Jain philosophy,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 A mukha jaina darzana ke sampUrNa cintana, manana aura vivecana kA AdhAra AtmA
hai  /  AtmA sarvatantra svatantra zakti hai| apane sukha-duHkha kA nirmAtA bhI
vahI hai aura usakA phala bhoga karane vAlA bhI vahI haiM  /  AtmA svayaM meM
amUrta hai, parama vizuddha hai, kintu vaha zarIra ke sAtha mUrtimAna banakara
azuddha dazA meM saMsAra meM paribhramaNa kara rahA hai  /  svayaM parama
AnandasvarUpa hone para bhI sukha-duHkha ke cakra meM pisa rahA hai| ajara-amara
hokara bhI janma-mRtyu ke pravAha meM baha rahA hai  /  Arya hai ki jo AtmA
parama zakti sampanna hai, vahI dIna-hIna, duHkhI, daridra ke rUpa meM yAtanA
aura kaSTa bhI bhoga rahA hai| isakA kAraNa kyA hai ? jainadarzana isa kAraNa kI
vivecanA karate hue kahatA hai-AtmA ko saMsAra meM bhaTakAne vAlA karma hai  /
karma hI janma-maraNa kA mUla hai kammaM ca jAI maraNassa mUlaM - bhagavAna zrI
mahAvIra kA yaha kathana akSarazaH satya hai, tathya hai| karma ke kAraNa ho
yaha vizva vivizva vicitra ghaTanAcakroM meM pratipala parivartita ho rahA hai
/  IzvaravAdI darzanoM ne isa vizvavaicitrya evaM sukha-duHkha kA kAraNa jahAM
Izvara ko mAnA hai, vahA~ jainadarzana ne samasta sukha-duHkha evaM
vizvavaicitrya kA kAraNa mulataH jIva evaM usakA mukhya sahAyaka karma mAnA hai
/  karma svatantra rUpa se koI zakti nahIM hai, vaha svayaM meM pudgala hai,
jar3a hai| kintu rAga-dveSa vazavartI AtmA ke dvArA karma kiye jAne para ve
itane balavAna aura zaktisampanna bana jAte haiM ki kartA ko bhI apane baMdhana
meM bAMdha late haiN| mAlika ko bhI naukara ko taraha nacAte haiN| yaha karma kI
bar3I vicitra zakti hai  /  hamAre jIvana aura jagata ke samasta parivartanoM kA
yaha mukhya bIja karma kyA hai, isakA svarUpa kyA hai ? isake vividha pariNAma
kaise hote haiM ? yaha bar3A hI gambhIra viSaya hai| jainadarzana meM

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma has been described in great detail. A very subtle and profound analysis of
karma is found in the Jain Agamas and subsequent texts. Being in Prakrit and
Sanskrit languages, it is indeed for the learned, but it is difficult to
understand for the ordinary inquirer. Ancient Acharyas have woven together the
various forms of karma theory in chunks, which proves to be a good source of
knowledge for the ordinary seeker of truth when memorized. The Karmagranth holds
an important place in the ancient texts on karma theory. The five parts of this
work written by Shrimad Devendrasur are extremely voluminous. They present a
discussion of all the karmavada, gunasthan, margana, jiva, ajibh, etc. that are
in accordance with Jain philosophy. The text is in complex Prakrit language and
many commentaries on it in Sanskrit are also famous. Its discussion in Gujarati
is also quite famous. Pandit Shri Sukhlalji, a famous scholar and sage, had
prepared a discussion on it in Hindi language about 40 years ago. Currently, the
Hindi discussion of Karmagranth was becoming difficult to obtain, and by this
time, the style of discussion had also changed considerably. Many seeker of
truth Muni and devout Shravak had been requesting for many years from the most
revered Gurudev Marudhar Kesariji Maharaj Saheb that a new style discussion and
publication of such a vast and serious text like Karmagranth should be done.
Only a capable scholar, learned and great saint like you can accomplish this
extremely laborious and goal-oriented task. Gurudevshri was also attracted to
this and resolved to take this work forward. He started writing the discussion.
The responsibility of making the discussion beautiful and interesting from the
point of view of language, style, etc., and the tasks of footnotes, collection
of references from Agamas, introduction, writing, etc. was given to the famous
scholar Shriyut Shrichandji Surana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . karma kA bahuta hI vistAra ke sAtha varNana kiyA gayA hai| karma kA
sUkSmAtisUkSma aura atyanta gahana vivecana jaina AgamoM meM aura uttaravartI
granthoM meM prApta hotA hai  /  vaha prAkRta evaM saMskRta bhASA meM hone ke
kAraNa vidvadbhogya to hai, para sAdhAraNa jijJAsu ke liye durbodha hai|
thokar3oM meM karma siddhAnta ke vividha svarUpa kA varNana prAcIna AcAryoM ne
gUMthA hai, kaNThastha karane para sAdhAraNa tattva-jijJAsu ke liye acchA
jJAnadAyaka siddha hotA hai  /  karmasiddhAnta ke prAcIna granthoM meM
karmagrantha kA mahatvapUrNa sthAna hai| zrImad devendrasUri racita isake pAMca
bhAga atyanta dI pannAparNa hai| inameM jainadarzanasammata samasta karmavAda,
guNasthAna, mArgaNA, jIva, ajIba ke bheda-prabheda Adi samasta janadarzana kA
vivecana prastuta kara diyA gayA hai  /  grantha jaTila prAkRta bhASA meM hai
aura isakI saMskRta meM aneka TIkAe~ bhI prasiddha haiN| gujarAtI meM bhI isakA
vivecana kAphI prasiddha hai  /  hindI bhASA meM isa para vivecana prasiddha
vidvAna manISI paM0 zrI sukhalAlajo ne lagabhaga 40 varSa pUrva taiyAra kiyA
thaa| vartamAna meM karmagrantha kA hindI vivecana duSprApya ho rahA thA, phira
isa samaya taka vivecana kI zailI meM bhI kAphI parivartana A gayA  /  aneka
tattva jijJAsu munivara evaM zraddhAlu zrAvaka parama zraddhama gurudeva
marudhara kesarIjI mahArAja sAhaba se kaI varSoM se prArthanA kara rahe the ki
karmagrantha jaise vizAla aura gambhIra grantha kA naye DhaMga se vivecana evaM
prakAzana honA caahie| Apa jaise samartha zAstrajJa vidvAna evaM mahAsthavira
santa hI isa atyanta zramasAdhya evaM dhyaya-sAdhya kArya ko sampanna karA
sakate haiN| gurudevazrI kA bhI isa ora AkarSaNa huA aura isa kArya ko Age
bar3hAne kA saMkalpa kiyA  /  vivecana likhanA prAram kiyaa| vivecana ko bhASA-
zailI Adi dRSTiyoM se sundara evaM rucikara banAne tathA phuTanoTa, AgamoM ke
raddharaNa saMkalana, bhUmikA, lekhana Adi kAryoM kA dAyitva prasiddha vidvAna
zrIyuta zrIcandajI surAnA ko .. -... - ... -.-

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(=) This has been entrusted. Shri Suranaji has been in close contact with the
literature and thoughts of Gurudev Shri. Under the guidance of Gurudev, he has
worked very hard to prepare this scholarly and useful book for the common
people. It is fulfilling a long-standing need. At the same time, the society is
getting a cultural and philosophical treasure in a new form, which is a matter
of great joy. I have a special interest in this subject. I have been encouraging
Gurudev and the editors to complete it from time to time. After five parts, this
sixth part is coming before the public today. I am very happy about it. This
sixth part is even more detailed than the previous five parts, the subject is
deep, and for clarity of the deep subject, expansion is also necessary. The
learned editors have done a thorough examination of the subject with a lot of
effort and review of many books. Hopefully, it will be a source of knowledge for
inquisitive readers. Second Edition Today, after almost 13 years, this second
edition of the sixth part of "Karmagranth" is reaching the hands of the readers.
Many institutions have included it in their curriculum. This is clear evidence
of the usefulness of this book. The book was unavailable for a long time, this
year, during the Chaturmas in Madras, it was decided to publish the second
edition with the initiator Shri Rupchandji Maharaj Saheb, accordingly, the book
is in the hands of the readers. Our revered Gurudev Shri is not present among
us, but wherever he is, his divine power will continue to inspire and guide us.
With this auspicious blessing, in the memory of revered Gurudev Shri...... 1441
-Co-initiator Sukhanmuni

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (=) sauMpA gyaa| zrI surAnAjI gurudeva zrI ke sAhitya evaM vicAroM se atinikaTa
samparka meM rahe haiM  /  gurudeva ke nirdezana meM unhoMne atyadhika zrama
karake yaha vidvattApUrNa tathA sarvasAdhAraNa jana ke lie upayogI videna
taiyAra kiyA hai| ve eka dorghakAlIna abhAva kI pUrti ho rahI hai| sAtha hI
samAja ko eka sAMskRtika evaM dArzanika nidhi naye rUpa meM mila rahI hai, yaha
atyadhika prasannatA kI bAta hai  /  mujhe isa viSaya meM vizeSa ruci hai  /
maiM gurudeva ko tathA saMpAdaka bandhuoM ko isako sampUrti ke lie samaya-samaya
para prerita karatA rhaa| pAMca bhAgoM ke pazcAt yaha chaThA bhAga Aja janatA ke
samakSa A rahA hai| isakI mujhe hArdika prasannatA hai  /  yaha chaThA bhAga
pahale ke pAMca bhAgoM se bhI adhika vistRta banA hai, viSaya gahana hai, gahana
viSaya ko spaSTatA ke lie vistAra bhI bhavazyaka ho jAtA hai  /  vidvAna
sampAdaka baMdhuoM ne kAphI zrama aura aneka granthoM ke paryAlocana se viSaya
kA talasparzI vivecana kiyA hai| AzA hai, yaha jijJAsu pAThakoM kI jJAnavRddhi
kA hetubhUta banemA | dvitIya saMskaraNa Aja lagabhaga 13 varSa bAda
"karmagrantha " ke chaThe bhAga kA yaha dvitIya saMskaraNa pAThakoM ke hAthoM
meM pahu~ca rahA hai  /  ise aneka saMsthAoM ne apane pAThyakrama meM rakhA hai
/  yaha isa grantha kI upayogitA kA spaSTa pramANa hai| kAphI samaya se grantha
anupalabdha thA, isa varSa pravartaka zrI rUpacandajI mahArAja sAhaba ke sAtha
madrAsa cAturmAsa meM isake dvitIya saMskaraNa kA nizcaya huA, tadanusAra
grantha pAThakoM ke hAthoM meM hai  /  bAja pUjya gurudevazrI hamAre madhya
vidyamAna nahIM haiM, kintu jahA~ bhI haiM, unakI divya zakti hameM preraNA va
mArgadarzana detI rahegI  /  iso zubhAzApUrvaka pUjya gurudevazrI kI puNya smRti
ke sAtha ...... 1441 -upapravartaka sukanamuni

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  With the presentation of the sixth Kasangraha text, titled
'Saptattika Prakarana', to the readers, the effort of publishing the
Karmagranthas is being completed. For this, we congratulate the directors and
members of the 'Shri Marudhar Kesari Sahitya Prakashan Samiti' for their
commendable effort in publishing this glorious literature, which requires time,
labor, and expense, and thus enhancing the glory of Jain literature.  In the
introductions of the five previously published Karmagranthas, we have expressed
our views on the Karma Siddhanta as much as possible. Here, we present an
introduction to the Karmagranthas. The importance of Karmas.  It is sufficient
to indicate that the Karmagranthas hold a significant place in Jain literature,
as Jain philosophy, while accepting time, nature, etc., as the cause of
creation, lays special emphasis on Karmavada. Without understanding the Karma
Siddhanta, it is not possible to know the inner secrets of Jain philosophy, and
there is no other primary means of acquiring specific knowledge of the Karma
element than the Karmagranthas. To study serious texts on Karma literature such
as Karmaprakriti, Panchasangraha, etc., it is essential to study the
Karmagranthas. Therefore, the Karmagranthas hold a very prestigious place in
Jain literature.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ! prastAvanA 'saptatikA prakaraNa' nAmaka chaThA kasaMgrantha pAThakoM ke
samakSa prastuta karane ke sAtha karmagranthoM ke prakAzana kA prayatna pUrNa ho
rahA hai| etadarthaM 'zrI marudhara kesarI sAhitya prakAzana samiti' ke
saMcAlakoM-sadasyoM kA hama abhinandana karate haiM ki samaya, zrama aura
vyayasAdhya gauravazAlI sAhitya ko prakAzita kara jaina vAG maya kI zrIvRddhi kA
unhoMne stutya prayAsa kiyA hai  /  pUrvaprakAzita pA~ca karmagranthoM kI
prastAvanA meM karmasiddhAnta ke bAre meM yathAsambhava vicAra vyakta kiye haiM
/  yahA~ karmagranthoM kA paricaya prastuta hai  /  karmayoM kA mahatva jaina
sAhitya meM karmagranthoM kA mahatvapUrNa sthAna hone ke bAre meM itanA sA
saMketa kara denA paryApta hai ki jainadarzana meM sRSTi ke kAraNa ke rUpa meM
kAla, svabhAva Adi ko mAnya karane ke sAtha karmavAda para vizeSa jora diyA hai|
karma siddhAnta ko samajhe binA jainadarzana ke anta rahasya kA parijJAna
sambhava nahIM hai aura karmatatva kA viziSTa jJAna prApta karane ke lie
prArambhika mukhya sAdhana karmagranthoM ke sivAya anya koI nahIM hai  /
karmaprakRti, paMcasaMgraha Adi karmasAhitya viSayaka gaMbhIra graMthoM kA
abhyAsa karane ke lie karmagranthoM kA adhyayana karanA atyAvazyaka hai  /
isIlie jaina sAhitya meM karmagranthoM kA sthAna ati gaurava bharA hai  /  ( 11
)

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(12) Introduction to the Karma Granthas  This chapter of the Saptaatika is the
sixth in the order of Karma Granthas. The name of its author is unknown. This
text has seventy-two gathas, hence its name Saptaatika, based on the number of
gathas. Information about its author, etc., is being given as appropriate. But
before that, we present a brief introduction to the five Karma Granthas composed
by Shrimad Devendrasuri.  Shrimad Devendrasuri has composed five Karma Granthas
named Karmavipak, Karmastav, Bandhaswamitva, Shadshasti, and Shatak,
respectively. These five names have been given by the commentator keeping in
mind the subject matter of the text and the number of gathas in them. The names
of the first, second, and third Karma Granthas are based on their subject
matter, while the names of the fourth and fifth Karma Granthas, Shadshasti and
Shatak, are based on the number of gathas contained in them. Thus, even though
the Karma Granthas have different names, the general public knows them by the
names of the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth Karma Granthas.  The
Karmavipak, known as the first Karma Grantha, describes the karma of
Jnanavarana, Darshanavarana, etc., their distinctions, and their nature, i.e.,
their vipak or fruit, with illustrations.  The Karmastav, the second Karma
Grantha, describes the nature of the fourteen Gunasthanas through the praise of
Bhagwan Mahavira and the binding, arising, and existence of the karma-prakritis
mentioned in the first Karma Grantha in these Gunasthanas.  The third Karma
Grantha, Bandhaswamitva, describes the Bandhaswamitva of the karma-prakritis of
the jivas based on the support of the Gatyadis and Marganas. The second Karma
Grantha describes the binding based on the Gunasthanas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 12 } karmagraMthoM kA paricaya isa saptatikA prakaraNa kA karmagranthoM meM
krama chaThavAM hai  /  isake racayitA kA nAma ajJAta hai  /  isa grantha meM
bahattara gAthAeM hone se gAthAoM kI saMkhyA ke AdhAra se isakA nAma saptatikA
rakhA gayA hai| isake kartA Adi ke bAre meM yathAprasaMga vizeSa rUpa se
jAnakArI dI jA rahI hai| lekina isake pUrva zrImada devendrasUri viracita pA~ca
karmagranyoM kA saMkSipta paricaya prastuta karate haiN| _ zrImad devendrasUri
ne kramazaH karmavipAka, karmastava, baMdhasvAmitva, SaDazIti aura zataka nAmaka
pA~ca karmagranthoM kI racanA kI hai| ye pAMcoM nAma grantha ke viSaya aura
unako gAthA saMkhyA ko dhyAna meM rakha kara anyakAra ne diye haiN| prathama,
dvitIya aura tRtIya karmagraMtha ke nAma unake varNya viSaya ke AdhAra se tathA
caturtha aura paMcama karmagranya ke nAma SaDazIti aura zataka una-una meM Agata
gAthAoM kI saMkhyA ke AdhAra se rakha gaye haiN| isa prakAra se karmagranthoM ke
pRthaka-pRthaka nAma hone para bhI sAmAnya janatA ina karmagranthoM ko prathama,
dvitIya, tRtIya, caturtha aura paMcama karmagrantha ke nAma se jAnatI hai| _
prathama karmagrantha ke nAma se jJAta karmavipAka nAmaka karmagrantha meM
jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa Adi karmoM, unake bheda-prabheda aura unakA svarUpa
arthAta vipAka athavA phala kA varNana dRSTAntapUrvaka kiyA gayA hai| _
karmastava nAmaka dvitIya karmagrantha meM bhagavAna mahAvIra kI stuti ke dvArA
caudaha guNasthAnoM kA svarUpa aura ina guNasthAnoM meM prathama karmagrantha
meM varNita karmaprakRtiyoM ke bandha, udaya aura sattA kA varNana kiyA gayA
hai| tIsare baMdhasvAmitva nAmaka karmagrantha meM gatyAdi mArgaNAoM ke Azraya
se jovoM ke karmaprakRti-viSayaka bandhasvAmitva kA varNana kiyA gayA hai|
dUsare karmagrantha meM guNasthAnoM ke AdhAra se bandha kA varNana

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This has been done, while it has considered the idea of bondage ownership based
on the paths of motion, etc. The fourth karma granth called Shadshasti has
elaborated on five topics: jiva sthana, margana sthana, guna sthana, bhava and
sankhya. Out of these five divisions, the first three divisions describe other
related topics. The last two divisions, namely bhava and sankhya, are not mixed
with any other topic. Both topics are independent. The fifth karma granth called
Shatak, after classifying the natures described in the first karma granth in
many ways like dhrabaddhi, adhra baddhini, dhravodaya, adhra bodaya, etc., has
described them in relation to their vipak. After that, the nature, pradesh,
sthiti and anubhag bandha of the said natures and their owner have been
described. Finally, the special form of upshamani and kshapakneni has been
stated. The order of the basis and description Before the composition of the
five karma granths of Shrimad Devendrasuri, six chapters on karma had been
composed by different acharyas like Acharya Shivsharma, Chandrashi Mahttar, etc.
at different times. Shrimad Devendrasuri has composed his five karma granths
based on five of the said six chapters. Therefore, these karma granths are known
as 'Navin Karma Granths'. The ancient karma granth writers have described the
topics in their granths and the order of description, almost the same topics and
order of description has been kept by Shrimad Devendrasuri. In their
composition, only the ancient

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kiyA gayA hai, jabaki isameM gatyAdi mArgaNAsthAnoM ke AdhAra se bandha
svAmitva kA vicAra kiyA hai  /  SaDazIti nAmaka caturtha karmagrantha meM
jIvasthAna, mArgaNAsthAna, guNasthAna, bhAva aura saMkhyA-ina pAMca' viSayoM kA
vistAra se vivecana kiyA gayA hai| ina pAMca vibhAgoM meM se Adi ke tIna
vibhAgoM meM anya sambandhita viSayoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai  /  antima do
vibhAgoM arthAt bhAva aura saMkhyA kA varNana anya kisI viSaya se
mizritasambaddha nahIM haiN| donoM viSaya svatantra haiN| zataka nAmaka paMcama
karmagraMtha meM prathama karmagraMtha meM varNita prakRtiyoM kA dhra babandhI,
adhra babandhinI, dhra vodaya, adhra bodaya Adi aneka prakAra se vargIkaraNa
karane ke bAda unakA vipAka kI apekSA se varNana kiyA hai  /  usake bAda ukta
prakRtiyoM kA prakRti, pradeza, sthiti aura anubhAga bandha kA svarUpa aura
unake svAmI kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| anta meM upazamaNi aura kSapakaneNi kA
vizeSa rUpa meM kathana kiyA hai| AdhAra aura varNana kA krama zrImad
devendrasUri ke pAMca karmagranthoM kI racanA ke pahale AcArya zivazarma,
candraSi mahattara Adi bhinna-bhinna AcAryoM dvArA alagaalaga samaya meM karma-
viSayaka chaha prakaraNoM kI racanA kI jA cukI thI aura ukta chaha prakaraNoM
meM se pAMca ke AdhAra se zrImad devendrasUri ne apane pAMca karmagranthoM kI
racanA kI hai| isIlie ye karmagrantha 'navIna karmagrantha' ke nAma se jAne jAte
haiN| prAcIna karmagranthakAroM ne apane granthoM meM jina viSayoM kA varNana
kiyA hai aura varNana kA jo krama rakhA hai, prAyaH yahI viSaya aura varNana kA
krama zrImad devendrasUri ne rakhA hai  /  inakI racanA meM mAtra prAcIna

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Not only the essence of the Karmagranthas has been taken, but also the name,
subject, description style, etc. have been followed. The special feature of the
new Karmagranthas is that the ancient Karmagranthakara Acharyas have described
the same subjects in their respective granthas, which have been described by the
new Karmagranthakara Acharya Shreemad Devendra Suri in his granthas. But the
special feature of the Karmagranthas written by Shree Devendra Suri is that the
ancient Karmagranthakaras have described the subjects in detail, which may make
the practitioners who memorize them feel disinterested, Shree Devendra Suri has
presented them in a very concise way through a simple language method without
leaving out a single subject and including other subjects in his Karmagranthas.
This does not create indifference or disinterest in those who practice. The
number of verses in the ancient Karmagranthas is 168, 57, 54, 86 and 102
respectively, and the number of verses in the new Karmagranthas is 60, 34, 24,
86 and 100 respectively. Seeing the same number of verses in the fourth and
fifth Karmagranthas, one should not assume that there is nothing else in the new
fourth and fifth Karmagranthas except the verbal difference from the ancient
fourth and fifth Karmagranthas, but Shreemad Devendra Suri has made his ancient
Karmagranthas as concise as possible. After making them concise, he has
completed eighty-six and one hundred verses by including other subjects that are
helpful for those who practice Karmagranthas, keeping in mind the two ancient
names of Sadashiti and Shatak. The fourth Karmagrantha describes the nature of
six Bhavas with their differences and varieties, and the number, innumerable and
infinite, these three types of numbers, with their descriptions of differences
and varieties, and the fifth Karmagrantha

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagnanthoM ke Azaya ko hI nahIM liyA gayA hai, balki nAma, viSaya, varNana-
zailI Adi kA bhI anusaraNa kiyA hai  /  navIna karmagranthoM kI vizeSatA prAcIna
karmagranthakAra AcAryoM ne apane-apane granthoM meM jina-jina viSayoM kA
varNana kiyA hai, ve hI viSaya navIna karmagranthakAra AcArya zrImad devendra
sUri ne apane granthoM meM varNita kiye haiN| lekina zrI devendra sUri racita
karmagnanthoM kI yaha vizeSatA hai ki prAcIna karmagranthakAroM ne jina viSayoM
ko adhika vistAra se kahA hai, jisase kaNThastha vArane vAle abhyAsiyoM ko aruci
honA sambhava hai, unako zrI devendrasUri ne apane karmagranthoM meM eka bhI
viSaya ko na chor3ate hue aura sAtha meM anya viSayoM kA samAveza karake sarala
bhASA paddhati ke dvArA ati saMkSepa meM pratipAdana kiyA hai| isase abhyAsa
karane vAloM ko udAsInatA athavA aruci bhAva paidA nahIM hotA hai| prAcIna
karmagranthoM kI gAthA saMkhyA krama se 168, 57, 54, 86 aura 102 haiM aura
navIna karmagraMthoM kI kramazaH 60, 34, 24, 86 aura 100 hai| cauthe aura
pAMcaveM karmagranthoM kI gAthA saMkhyA prAcIna karmagranthoM jitanI dekhakara
kisI ko yaha nahIM samajha lenA cAhie ki prAcIna cauthe aura pAMcaveM
karmagrantha kI apekSA navIna caturtha aura paMcama karmagrantha meM zAbdika
antara ke atirikta anya kucha nahIM hai, kintu zrImad devendrasUri ne apane
prAcIna karmagranthoM ke viSayoM ko jitanA saMkSipta kiyA jA sakatA thA, utanA
saMkSipta karane ke bAda unakA SaDazIti aura zataka ye donoM prAcIna nAma
rakhane ke vicAra se karmagranthoM ke abhyAsa karane vAloM ko sahAyaka anya
viSayoM kA samAveza karake chiyAsI aura sau gAthAe~ pUrI kI haiM  /  caturtha
karmagrantha meM bheda-prabhedoM ke sAtha chaha bhAboM kA svarUpa aura bheda-
prabhedoM ke varNana ke sAtha saMkhyAta, asaMkhyAta aura ananta ina tIna prakAra
kI saMkhyAoM kA varNana kiyA hai tathA paMcama karmagrantha

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(15) This section includes the nature of the three types of *patyopama* -
*uddhar*, *addha*, and *kshetra* - as well as the nature of the four types of
subtle and gross *pudgala* - *dravya*, *kshetra*, *kala*, and *bhava* - and the
nature of the *upashamshreni* and *kshapkasreni*, among other new topics. Thus,
the main characteristic of the new *karmagranthas* written by Shri Devendrasuri,
compared to the ancient *karmagranthas*, is that they contain all the topics of
the ancient *karmagranthas* but are much shorter in length, and also include
many new topics.  **Comments on the New *Karmagranthas***  Shrimad Devendrasuri
wrote his own commentaries on his new *karmagranthas*, but the commentary on the
third *karmagrantha* was lost, and later another learned Acharya wrote a
commentary called *Avchuri*.  Shrimad Devendrasuri's commentary style is so
engaging that he has discussed every line or sentence of the original text. Not
only that, but he has also explained in detail the meaning of any line that
required it. In addition, it is also seen that to make the explanation more
clear, he has presented relevant evidence from the *Agamas*, *Niyukti*,
*Bhashya*, *Nrini*, *Tika*, and *Prakarana Granthas* of the previous Acharyas,
as well as quotations from other philosophies. Thus, the commentaries on the new
*karmagranthas* are so detailed, well-supported, and full of knowledge of
*karmatattva* that after seeing them, the curiosity to see the ancient
*karmagranthas* and their commentaries is often satisfied. The language of the
commentaries is simple, easy to understand, and clear.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - T ( 15 ) meM uddhAra, addhA aura kSetra ina tIna prakAra ke patyopamoM kA
svarUpa dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva- ye cAra prakAra ke sUkSma aura bAdara
pudgala parAvartI kA svarUpa evaM upazamazreNi tathA kSapakazreNi kA svarUpa Adi
navIna viSayoM kA samAveza kiyA hai| isa prakAra prAcIna karmagranthoM kI apekSA
zrI devendrasUri viracita navIna karmagranthoM kI mukhya vizeSatA yaha hai ki
ina karmagranthoM meM prAcIna karmagranthoM ke pratyeka avi viSaya kA samAveza
hone para bhI parimANa atyalpa hai aura usake sAtha aneka navIna viSayoM kA
saMgraha kiyA gayA hai  /  navIna karmagranthoM kI TokAeM zrImad devendrasUri ne
apane navIna karmagranthoM kI svopajJa TIkAe~ kI thIM, kintu unameM se tIsare
karmagrantha kI TIkA naSTa ho jAne se bAda meM anya kisI vidvAna AcArya ne
avacuri nAmaka TIkA kI racanA kI  /  zrImad devendrasUri kI TIkA-zailI itanI
manoraMjaka hai ki mUla gAthA ke pratyeka pada yA vAkya kA vivecana kiyA gayA
hai| itanA hI nahIM, balki jisa pada kA vistArapUrvaka artha samajhAne kI
AvazyakatA huI, usakA usI pramANa meM nirUpaNa kiyA hai| isake atirikta eka
vizeSatA yaha bhI dekhane meM AtI hai ki vyAkhyA ko adhika spaSTa karane ke lie
Agama, niyukti, bhASya, nRNi, TIkA aura pUrvAcAryoM ke prakaraNa granthoM meM se
sambandhita pramANoM tathA anyAnya darzanoM ke uddharaNoM ko prastuta kiyA hai
/  isa prakAra navIna karmagranthoM kI TIkAe~ itanI vizada, sapramANa aura
karmatatva ke jJAna se yukta haiM ki inako dekhane ke bAda prAcIna karmagranthoM
aura unakI TIkAoM Adi ko dekhane kI jijJAsA prAyaH zAnta ho jAtI hai  /  TIkAoM
kI bhASA sarala, subodha aura prAMjala hai  /

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(16) After briefly introducing the five Karmagranthas, we now present a special
introduction to the Sapttatika (sixth Karmagrantha).  **Introduction to
Sapttatika**  The first verse of the Sapttatika briefly hints at the subject
matter under consideration. It discusses the eight fundamental karmas and their
sub-categories, their effects on the soul, their relation to the Gunasthanas and
Marganasthanas, and finally, the methods of pacification (Upshamavidhi) and
destruction (Kshapanavidhi).  Karmas have ten possible states, of which three
are primary: Bandha (binding), Udaya (arising), and Satya (existence). The
remaining states are subsumed within these three. Therefore, it would not be an
exaggeration to say that the grantha comprehensively discusses the various
states of karmas and their sub-categories.  Considering the size of the grantha,
one can only praise the style of its description. The water of the ocean has
been filled into a small pitcher. To discuss such vast and profound subjects in
such a small grantha is not everyone's work. This proves the greatness of both
the author and the grantha.  The first and second verses provide information
about the subject matter. The third verse explains the sensory disruption caused
by the eight fundamental karmas. The fourth and fifth verses discuss these
karmas in relation to the soul and the Gunasthanas respectively. The sixth verse
explains the sensory disruption caused by the sub-categories of Jnanavarana and
Antarayakarma. The first half of the seventh to ninth verses (two and a half
verses) explain the sensory disruption caused by the sub-categories of
Darshanavarana. The latter half of the ninth verse explains the sensory
disruption caused by Vedaniya, Adhu, and Gotra karmas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 16 ) pA~ca kArmagranthoM kI saMkSepa meM jAnakArI dene ke bAda aba saptatikA
( SaSTha karmagrantha ) kA vizeSa paricaya dete haiM  /  saptatikA paricaya
saptatikA ke vicAraNIya viSaya kA saMkSepa meM saMketa usakI prathama gAthA meM
kiyA gayA hai| isameM ATha mUla karmoM va avAntara bhedoM ke kapanabAoM kA
svatantra rUpa se va jIvasamAsa, guNasthAnoM aura mArgaNAsthAnoM ke Azraya se
vivecana kiyA gayA hai aura anta meM upazamavidhi aura kSapaNavidhi batalAI hai
| karmoM kI yathAsambhava dasa avasthAe~ hotI haiM  /  unameM se tIna mukhya
haiM--bandha, udaya aura sattA  /  zeSa avasthAoM kA ina tIna meM antarbhAva ho
jAtA hai  /  isalie yadi yaha kahA jAye ki grantha meM karmoM kI vividha
avasthAoM, unake bhedoM kA isameM sAMgopAMga vivecana kiyA gayA hai to koI
atyukti nahIM hogI  /  grantha kA jitanA parimANa hai, usako dekhate hue varNana
karane kI zailI kI prazaMsA hI karanI par3atI hai  /  sAgara kA jala gAgara meM
bhara diyA gayA hai  /  itane laghukAya grantha meM vizAla aura gahana viSayoM
kA vivecana kara denA hara kisI kA kAma nahIM hai| isase granthakartA aura
grantha- donoM kI mahAnatA siddha hotI hai  /  pahalI aura dUsarI gAthA meM
viSaya kI sUcanA dI gaI hai  /  tIsarI gAthA meM ATha mUla karmoM ke saMvedha
bhaMga batalAkara cauthI aura pAMcavIM gAthA meM krama se jIvasamAsa aura
guNasthAnoM meM inakA vivecana kiyA gayA hai  /  chaThI gAthA meM jJAnAvaraNa
aura antarAyakarma ke avAntara bhedoM ke saMvedha bhaMga batalAye haiN| sAtavIM
se nauvIM gAthA ke pUrvArddha taka DhAI gAthA meM darzanAvaraNa ke uttarabhedoM
ke saMvedha bhaMga batalAye haiM aura nauvIM gAthA ke uttarArddha meM vedanIya,
Adhu aura gotra karma ke saMvedha

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(17) The text has promised to describe the destruction of the **mohaniya**
(delusive) karmas by simply mentioning their destruction. From the tenth to the
twenty-third verses, the destruction of **mohaniya karma** has been discussed,
and from the twenty-fourth to the thirty-second verses, the bondage and other
aspects of **nama karma** have been considered, along with their respective
sensory destructions. Subsequently, from the thirty-third to the eighty-ninth
verses, the aforementioned sensory destructions of the **avantar**
(intermediate) natures have been described as occurring in the **jiva** (soul)
aggregates and **guna sthana** (quality-places). In the eighty-ninth verse,
information has been provided about their occurrence in the eight **anuyaga
dvara** (paths of practice), including **gati** (motion) and other **margana**
(paths). After this, the order of the subject matter changes. In the ninety-
fourth verse, after explaining the characteristics of the **udaya** (arising)
and **udirana** (excitation) **svami** (lord), the ninety-fifth verse lists
forty-one **prakriti** (natures) that possess special characteristics.
Subsequently, from the ninety-sixth to the sixty-ninth verses, the number of
**bandha prakriti** (bondage natures) in each **guna sthana** is indicated. In
the sixty-first verse, it is stated that the **tirthankara** (liberated soul),
**deva** (celestial being), and **naraka** (hell being) exist only in three
**gati** (motions), while the remaining **prakriti** exist in all **gati**. The
next two verses provide guidance on the **upasaman** (subduing) and **kshapana**
(destruction) of the **ananta anubandhi** (infinitely connected) and **darshan
mohaniya** (delusion of perception) **prakriti**, and the sixty-fourth verse
describes the specific rules for the **kshapana** of **krodha** (anger) and
other **prakriti**. From the sixty-fifth to the seventy-ninth verses, after
discussing the **vedana** (feeling) and **udaya** (arising) of **prakriti** in
the fourteenth **ayogika kevali** (non-liberated) **guna sthana**, the
seventieth verse describes the happiness of the **siddha** (liberated souls).
Thus, after the statement of the subject matter of the text, the last two verses
conclude the text by expressing the summary and brevity.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 17 ) bhaMgoM ke kahane kI sUcanAmAtra karake mohanIya ke bhaMga kahane kI
pratijJA kI gaI hai dasavIM se lekara teIsavIM gAthA taka mohanIyakarma ke aura
caubIsavIM se lekara battIsavIM gAthA taka nAmakarma ke bandhAdi sthAnoM va
unake saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vicAra kiyA gayA hai| isake anantara tetIsavIM se
lekara bAcanavIM gAthA taka avAntara prakRtiyoM ke ukta saMvedha bhaMgoM ko
jIvasamAsoM aura guNasthAnoM meM ghaTita karake batAyA gayA hai| apanavIM gAthA
meM gati Adi mArgaNAoM ke sAtha sat Adi ATha anuyAgadvAroM meM unheM ghaTita
karane kI sUcanA dI gaI hai  /  isake anantara varNya viSaya kA krama badalatA
hai| cauvanavI gAthA meM udaya se udIraNA ke svAmI kI vizeSatA ko batalAne ke
bAda pacapanavIM gAthA meM 41 prakRtiyA~ batalAI haiM, jinameM vizeSatA hai|
pazcAt chappana se unasaThavIM gAthA taka pratyeka guNasthAna meM bandha
prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA kA saMketa kiyA hai| ikasaThavIM gAyA meM tIrthaMkara
nAma, devAyu aura narakAyu inakA satva tIna-tIna gatiyoM meM hI hotA hai, kintu
inake sivAya zeSa prakRtiyoM kI sattA saba gatiyoM meM pAI jAtI hai  /  isake
bAda kI do gAthAoM meM anantAnubandhI aura darzanamohanIya kI tIna prakRtiyoM ke
upazamana aura kSapaNa ke svAmI kA nirdezana karake cauMsaThavIM gAthA meM
krodhAdi ke kSapaNa ke vizeSa niyama kI sUcanA dI hai  /  isake bAda paiMsaTha
se lekara unahattaravIM gAthA taka caudahaveM ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM
prakRtiyoM ke vedana evaM udaya sambandhI vivecana karane ke anantara sattaravI
gAthA meM siddhoM ke sukha kA varNana kiyA hai  /  isa prakAra grantha ke vayaM
viSaya kA kathana ho jAne ke pazcAt do gAthAoM meM upasaMhAra aura laghutA
prakaTa karate hue grantha samApta kiyA gayA hai  /

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Place of Saptaatika in Karma Literature  Based on available evidence, it can
be said that the Karma literature available in the Svetambara and Digambara Jain
traditions was written based on the fourth Prabhrut of the fifth object of the
Agraniyapurva and the Gyanapravad and Karmapravad Purva. Based on the
Agraniyapurva, the Shatkhandagam, Karmaprakriti, Shatak and Saptaatika were
compiled, and based on the third Prabhrut of the tenth object of the Gyanapravad
Purva, the Kashayaprabhrut was compiled.  Of these texts, the Karmaprati text is
considered to be in the Svetambara tradition, and the Vashayaabhrut and
Shatkhandagam are considered to be in the Digambara tradition. The Shatak and
Saptaatika are considered to be in both traditions, with some variations in the
text.  The practice of naming a text based on the number of verses or shlokas
has been prevalent since ancient times. For example, Acharya Shivsharm's
'Shatak', Acharya Siddhasen's Dvatrishika Prakaran, Acharya Haribhadrasuri's
Panchashak Prakaran, Vishati-Vishatika Prakaran, Shodashak Prakaran, Ashtak
Prakaran, Acharya Jinchalabh's Padhashiti Prakaran, etc. can be cited as
examples. The name Saptaatika seems to have been given based on this principle.
It is also called the sixth Karma text because it comes sixth in the current
count of Karma texts.  Saptaatika is one of the five texts considered to be the
original literature on Karma. Saptaatika refers to differences of opinion in
many places. For example, one difference of opinion is in verses 16-20 and its
commentary, when mentioning the number of Udayavikalpa and Padavrindas, and
another difference of opinion is in the Aayogikevali Gunasthan, when mentioning
the name karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma sAhitya meM saptatikA kA sthAna aba taka ke prApta pramANoM se yaha kahA
jA sakatA hai ki zvetAmbara aura digambara jaina paramparAoM meM upalabdha
karma-sAhitya kA Alekhana agrAyaNIya pUrva kI pAMcavIM vastu ke cauthe prAbhRta
aura jJAnapravAda tathA karmapravAda pUrva ke AdhAra se huA hai| agrAyaNIya
pUrva ke AdhAra se SaTkhaMDAgama, karmaprakRti, zataka aura saptatikA-ina
granthoM kA saMkalana huA aura jJAnapravAda pUrva kI dasavIM bastu ke tIsare
prAbhata ke AdhAra se kaSAyaprAbhRta kA saMkalana kiyA gayA hai| ukta granthoM
meM se karmaprati grantha zvetAmbara paramparA meM tathA vaSAyAbhRta aura
SaTvaMDAgama digambara paramparA meM mAne jAte haiM tathA kucha pAThabheda ke
sAtha zataka aura saptatikA- ye donoM grantha donoM paramparAoM meM mAne jAte
haiN| gAthAoM yA zlokoM kI saMkhyA ke AdhAra se grantha kA nAma rAkhane kI
paripATI prAcInakAla se calI A rahI hai| jaise ki AcArya zivazarma kRta
'zataka'; AcArya siddhasena kRta dvAtrizikA prakaraNa; AcArya haribhadrasUri
kRta paMcAzaka prakaraNa, vizati-vizatikA prakaraNa, SoDazaka prakaraNa, aSTaka
prakaraNa, AcArya jinacallabha kRta paddhazIti prakaraNa Adi anekAneka racanAoM
ko udAharaNa ke rUpa meM prastuta kiyA jA sakatA hai| saptatikA kA nAma bho isI
AdhAra se rakhA jAna par3atA hai  /  ise SaSTha karma grantha bhI kahane kA
kAraNa yaha hai ki vartamAna meM karmagranthoM kI ginatI ke anusAra isakA krama
chaThA AtA hai| _karmaviSayaka mUla sAhitya ke rUpa meM mAne jAne vAle pAMca
granthoM meM se saptatikA bhI eka hai  /  saptatikA meM aneka sthaloM para mata-
bhinnatAoM kA nirdeza kiyA gayA hai| jaise ki eka matabheda gAthA 16-20 aura
usakI TIkA meM udayavikalpa aura padavRndoM kI saMkhyA batalAte samaya sathA
dUsarA matabheda ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM nAmakarma kI

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The text discusses the origin and number of verses in the "Sapttatika," a Jain
text. It suggests that the text was likely composed during a time when various
Jain doctrines were prevalent. While the first verse describes it as a "drop" of
the "Dristibad Anga," commentators attribute its origin to the fourth "Prabhat"
of the fifth "Vastu" of the "Agraniyya Purva." This suggests its inclusion in
the original literature.   The text further argues that the "Sapttatika"
encapsulates the essence of the "Karma Siddhanta" (theory of karma), making it a
fundamental text. However, there is disagreement regarding the number of verses
in the "Sapttatika." This particular edition contains 72 verses, but other
editions have varying counts.   The name "Sapttatika" (meaning "seven-seven") is
derived from the number of verses, but the final verses seem to indicate the
conclusion of the main topic, suggesting that they might not be included in the
original count.   Different editions have different numbers of verses: 61 in the
edition published by Shri Jan Shreyaskar Mandal, 64 in the edition published in
the fourth part of "Prakarana Ratnakar," and 72 in the edition published by Shri
Atmanand Jain Granthamala with Acharya Malayagiri's commentary. An edition with
"Chuni" (commentary) lists 71 verses.  The variation in verse count is
attributed to Gujarati commentators incorporating inter-textual verses into the
original text and including verses deemed useful for the topic.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakRttiyoM kI sattA ko lekara AyA hai (gAthA 66, 67, 68) /  isase yaha pratIta
hotA hai ki jaba kAma kiyA. aneka banAnAra pracalita ho gaye the, taba isakI
racanA huI hogii| lekina isakI prathama gAthA meM ise dRSTibAda aMga kI eka bUda
ke samAna batalAyA gayA hai tathA isako TIkA karate hue sabhI TIkAkAra
agrAyaNIya pUrva kI pAMcavIM vastu ke cauthe prAbhata se isakI utpatti mAnate
haiN| etadartha isakI mUla sAhitya meM gaNanA kI gaI hai| dUsarI bAta yaha hai
ki saptatikA kI gAthAoM meM karma siddhAnta kA samasta sAra saMkalita kara diyA
hai  /  isa para jaba vicAra karate haiM, taba ise mUla sAhitya mAnanA hI
par3atA hai  /  saptatikA kI gAthA saMkhyA yadyapi prastuta grantha kA nAma
'saptatikA' gAthAoM kI saMkhyA ke AdhAra se rakhA gayA hai, lekina isakI gAthAoM
kI saMkhyA ko lekara matabhinnatA hai| isa saMskaraNa meM '72 gAthAe~ haiN|
antima gAthAoM meM mUla prakaraNa ke viSaya kI samApti kA saMketa kiye jAne se
yadi unheM gaNanA meM na leM to isa prakaraNa kA 'saptatikA' yaha nAma susaMgata
aura sArthaka hai| kintu abhI taka isake jitane saMskaraNa dekhane meM Aye haiM,
una sabameM alaga-alaga saMkhyA dI gaI hai| zrI jana zreyaskara maMDala mahesAnA
kI ora se prakAzita saMskaraNa meM isakI saMkhyA 61 dI hai| prakaraNa ratnAkara
cauthe bhAga meM prakAzita saMskaraNa meM 64 hai tathA AcArya malayagiri kI TIkA
ke sAtha zrI AtmAnanda jaina granthamAlA bhAvanagara kI ora se prakAzita
saMskaraNa meM isakI saMsthA 72 dI hai  /  cUNi ke sAtha prakAzita saMskaraNa
meM 71 gAthAoM kA ullekha kiyA hai| isa prakAra gAthAoM kI saMkhyA meM bhinnatA
dekhane ko milatI hai| gAthA saMkhyA kI bhinnatA ke bAre meM vicAra karane para
isa niSkarSa para pahuMcate haiM ki gujarAtI TIkAkAroM dvArA antarbhASya gAthAoM
ko mUla gAthA ke rUpa meM svIkAra kara liyA hai tathA kucha gAthAe~ prakaraNa
upayogI hone se mulagAthA ke rUpa meM mAna lI gaI haiM |prntu hamane

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(20) The *Sapta-tika* with its commentary is considered to be a part of the *Sri
Atmanand Jain Granthamala*. The last two verses are added after the subject
matter is described, so if they are not counted, the name *Sapta-tika* becomes
meaningful. The detailed introduction of the author, Acharya Shrimad
Devendrasuri, the creator of the five new *Karmagranthas* and their self-
composed commentaries, has already been given in the preface of the *Prashram
Karmagrantha*. Therefore, we will only consider the author of the *Sapta-tika*.
There are no available resources to answer questions like who was the author of
the *Sapta-tika*, who were his parents, who were his *Deekshaguru* and *Vidya-
guru*, who did he purify by his presence, etc. The *Sapta-tika* and its
commentaries available today do not help in providing information about the
author's name, etc.  In the ancient palm leaf manuscript of the original *Sapta-
tika* chapter, the following verse is found, which is attributed to Chandri
Mahत्तर:  "Gahma sayariye Chandamahत्तरmayaanusariye. Tigei niyamianam eguṇa hoi
naui u."  However, this verse does not testify that Chandrashi Mahत्तर was the
author of the *Sapta-tika*. This verse only reveals that the verses of the
*Sapta-tika* (instead of 70, they have increased to) 89, based on the commentary
that follows the opinion of Chandrashi Mahत्तर. This verse only mentions the
reason for the increase in the number of verses in the *Sapta-tika*, but it does
not say anything about the author. Acharya Malayagiri has also not indicated
anything about this in the beginning and end of his commentary. Thus, nothing
can be said with certainty about the author of the *Sapta-tika*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 20 ) zrI AtmAnanda jaina granthamAlA ke TIkA sahita saptatikA ko pramANa mAnA
hai aura anta kI do gAthAe~ varNya viSaya ke bAda AI haiM, ataH unakI gaNanA
nahIM karane para grantha kA nAma saptatikA sArthaka siddha hotA hai  /
granthakartA navIna pAMca karmagrantha aura unakI svopajJa TIkA ke praNetA
AcArya zrImad devendrasUri kA vistRta paricaya prazrama karmagrantha kI
prastAvanA meM diyA jA cukA hai  /  ataH saptatikA ke kartA ke bAre meM hI
vicAra karate haiM  /  saptatikA ke racayitA kauna the, unake mAtA-pitA kauna
the, unake dIkSAguru aura vidyAguru kauna se apane se pidhUni ko pavitra banAyA
thA Adi praznoM kA uttara prApta karane ke koI sAdhana upalabdha nahIM haiM  /
isa samaya saptatikA aura usakI jo TIkAe~ prApta haiM, ve bhI kartA ke nAma Adi
kI jAnakArI karAne meM sahAyatA nahIM detI haiN| saptatikA prakaraNa mUla kI
prAcIna tADapatrIya prati meM candri mahattara nAma se garbhita nimnalikhita
gAthA dekhane ko milatI haigAhamA sayarIe caMdamahattaramayAnusArIe  /  TIgAi
niyamiyANaM eguNA hoi nauI u  //  lekina yaha gAthA bhI candraSi mahattara ko
saptatikA ke racayitA hone kI sAkSI nahIM detI hai| isa gAthA se itanA hI jJAta
hotA hai ki candraSi mahattara ke mata kA anusaraNa karane vAlI TIkA ke AdhAra
se saptatikA kI gAthAe~ (70 ke badale bar3hakara ) navAsI (89) huI haiN| isa
gAthA meM yahI ullekha kiyA gayA hai ki saptatikA meM gAthAoM kI vRddhi kA
kAraNa kyA hai ? kintu kartA ke bAre meM kucha bhI nahIM kahA gayA hai  /
AcArya malayagiri ne bhI apanI TIkA ke Adi aura anta meM isake bAre meM kucha
bhI saMketa nahIM kiyA hai  /  isa prakAra saptatikA ke kartA ke bAre meM
nizcaya rUpa se kucha bhI nahIM kahA jA sakatA hai  /

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chandrarsi Mahttar Acharya composed the Panchasangrah, which contains the
Shataka, Saptattika, Kashaya-Prabhrit, Satkarma, and Karma-Prakriti. These five
texts predate Chandrarsi Mahttar Acharya, making them ancient works. If, as is
commonly believed, the Saptattikakar and Panchasangrahakar were the same
Acharya, then the works of commentators and authors of chuni (commentaries)
would have mentioned the Panchasangrah as they do the Shataka, Saptattika, and
Karma-Prakriti. However, there is no such mention. Therefore, it can be
concluded that the author of the Saptattika is a different, unknown Acharya, who
is even more ancient than the Panchasangrahakar.  This conclusion is further
supported by the similarity between the last two verses (104-105) of the Shataka
and the concluding verse (72) of the Saptattika. This suggests that the
compilers of both texts may be the same Acharya. The verses from the Saptattika
and Shataka are as follows:  1) Vochchh Sun Sankhevam Nosandan Didvidhayass. 2)
Kammappavay Suyasagarass Nisandamettaao. 3) Jo Jaththa Apidipugno Aththo
Appagamen Bandho Ti. 4) Tam Khamiun Bahusuyya Pureun Parikahantu. 5) Bandhavihan
Samaso Raio Appa Suyamandamdainau. 6) Te Bandh Mokvaniuna Pureun Parikahenti.
As seen in the above excerpts, the introductory verse of the Saptattika mentions
the same subject matter as the concluding verse of the Shataka.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 candrarSi mahattara AcArya ne to paMcasaMgraha kI racanA kI hai aura usameM
saMgraha kiye gaye athavA garbhita zataka, saptatikA, kaSAya-prAbhRta, satkarma
aura karma prakRti-ye pAMcoM grantha candrarSi mahattara se pUrva ho gaye AcArya
kI kRti rUpa hone se prAcIna hI haiM  /  yadi vartamAna kI rUr3ha mAnyatA ke
anusAra saptatikAkAra aura paMcasaMgrahakAra AcArya eka hI hote to bhASya, cUNi
Adi ke praNetAoM ke granthoM meM jaise zataka, saptatikA aura karmaprakRti Adi
granthoM ke nAmoM kA sAkSI ke rUpa meM ullekha kiyA gayA hai, vaise hI
paMcasaMgraha ke nAma kA ullekha bhI avazya kiyA jAnA cAhie thaa| parantu aisA
ullekha kahIM bhI dekhane meM nahIM AyA hai| ataeva isase yaha niSkarSa nikalatA
hai ki saptatikA ke racayitA paMcasaMgrahakAra ke bajAya anya koI AcArya hI
haiM, jinakA nAma ajJAta hai aura ve prAcInatama AcArya haiN| aisI sthiti meM
jaba zataka kI antima do gAthAoM (104-105) se saptatikA kI galagAthA aura
lantima gAthA (72) kA milAna karate haiM to isa sambhAvanA ko bala milatA hai ki
ina donoM granthoM ke saMkaliyatA eka hI AcArya hoM  /  saptatikA aura zataka ko
gAthAe~ isa prakAra haiM(1) voccha suNa saMkhevaM nosaMdaM didvidhAyassa  /  /
2) kammappavAya suyasAgarassa nissNdmettaao| (3) jo jattha apaDipugno attho
appAgameNa baddho ti  /  taM khamiUNa bahusuyA pUreUNaM parikahaMtu 10 (4)
baMdhavihANa samAso raio appa suyamaMdamaiNAu  /  te baMdha mokvaNiuNA pUreUNaM
parikaheMti  /  /  /  ukta uddharaNoM meM se jaise saptatikA kI maMgalagAthA meM
isa prakaraNa 1 sapatikA, gAthA-saMsyA, 1 3 saptatikA, gAthA-saMkhyA, 72 2
zataka, gAthA-saMkhyA, 104 4 zataka, gAthA-saMkhyA 105

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Just as the *drishtivad* is described as a drop of water in an anga, similarly
in the 104th gatha of the Shataka, it is described as a single *re* of the
*karmapranad* *alaroopi*. Just as in the final gatha of the Saptaatika, the
author, while expressing his own insignificance, indicates that whatever I, the
one with little knowledge, have written as an error, let the one with much
knowledge complete and state it. Similarly, in the 105th gatha of the Shataka,
it is also directed that whatever I, the one with little knowledge, have said
about the essence of *bandhavidhan*, let the one skilled in the method of
*bandhamoksha* complete and state it.  In addition to this, in the above gathas,
the words *hissand*, *appagama*, *appasuyamandam*, *pureunam*, *parikahantu* are
also worth noting.  This similarity in both these texts is not accidental. Such
similarity is seen or can be seen only in those texts which are authored by one
person or are written based on each other. From this, it is inferred that it is
very likely that the Shataka and the Saptaatika are the works of the same
Acharya. In the *chuni* of the Shataka, Acharya Shivsharm is mentioned as its
author. This could be the same Acharya Shivsharm who is considered to be the
author of *Karmaprakriti*. Considering this, it is proven that *Karmaprakriti*,
*Shataka*, and *Saptaatika* are all the works of the same author.  But when
*Karmaprakriti* and *Saptaatika* are compared, it is not proven that both were
written by the same Acharya. Because in both these texts, two opposing views are
presented. For example, in the *Saptaatika*, the *anantaanubandhi chatushka* is
described as *upshama prakriti*, but in the *upshaman* section of
*Karmaprakriti*, the *upshama vidhi* and *antarakarna vidhi* of the
*anantaanubandhi chatushka* are prohibited. Therefore, it seems impossible to be
certain about the author of the *Saptaatika*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ko dRSTivAda aMga kI eka bUMda ke samAna batalAyA hai, vaise hI zataka kI gAthA
104 meM use karmapranAda alarUpI hI eka ra ke samAna batalAyA gayA hai, jaise
saptatikA kI antima gAthA meM granthakartA apanI laghutA ko pragaTa karate hue
saMketa karate haiM ki mujha alpajJa ne truTi rUpa meM jo kucha bhI nibaddha
kiyA hai. use bahuzruta jAnakara pUrA karake kathana kreN| vaise hI zataka kI
105boM gAthA meM bhI nirdezita karate haiM ki alpabhuta vAle alpajJa maiMne jo
kucha bhI bandhavidhAna kA sAra kahA hai, use bandhamokSa kI vidhi meM nipuNa
jana pUrA karake kathana kreN| isake atirikta ukta mAthAoM meM hissaMda,
appAgama, appasuyamaMdamai, pUreUNaM. parikahaMtu-ye pada bhI dhyAna dene yogya
haiM  /  ina donoM granthoM meM yaha samAnatA anAyAsa hI nahIM hai| aisI
samAnatA unhIM granthoM meM dekhane ko milatI hai yA mila sakatI hai, jo eka
kartRka hoM yA eka-dUsare ke AdhAra se likhe gaye hoM  /  isase yaha phalitArtha
nikalatA hai ki bahuta sambhava hai ki zataka aura saptatikA eka hI AcArya kI
kRti hoM  /  zataka kI cUNi meM AcArya zivazarma ko usakA kartA batalAyA hai  /
ye ve hI AcArya zivazarma ho sakate haiM, jo karmaprakRti, ke kartA mAne gaye
haiN| isa prakAra vicAra karane para karmaprakRti, zataka aura saptatikA-ina
tInoM granthoM ke eka hI kartA siddha hote haiN| lekina jaba karmaprakRti aura
saptatikA kA milAne karate haiM, taba donoM kI racanA eka AcArya ke dvArA kI gaI
ho, yaha pramANita nahIM hotA hai  /  kyoMki ina donoM granthoM meM viruddha do
matoM kA pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai  /  jaise ki saptatikA meM anantAnubandhI
catuSka ko upazama prakRti batalAyA hai, kintu karmaprakRti ke upazamanA
prakaraNa meM anantAbandhI catuSka kI upazama vidhi aura antarakaraNa vidhi kA
niSedha kiyA hai| ataeva saptatikA ke kartA ke bAre meM nizcaya karanA
asambhava-sA pratIta hotA hai  /

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is also possible that the compiler of these texts is the same Acharya and
that they were compiled on two different bases. Whatever the case may be, it
cannot be definitively said that the author of the Saptaatika is Acharya
Shivsharm. Thus, it is difficult to say for sure who the author of the
Saptaatika is, whether it is Acharya Shivsharm, Acharya Chandrashi Mahत्तर, or
some other great soul. However, it can be said that whoever the author may be,
it is important and for this reason many later Acharyas have attempted to
clarify the heart of the text by writing commentaries, sub-commentaries, churni,
tika, vritti, etc. on it. The reference to the dohas etc. of the Saptaatika is
being made further. Time of Composition The author and the time of composition
are both dependent on each other. Once one is decided, it becomes easier to
decide the other. Earlier, while referring to the author, the possibility was
definitely expressed that either Acharya Shivsharm Suri composed it or it was
written before him. Generally, the time of Acharya Shivsharm Suri is considered
to be the fifth century Vikram. Considering this, the time of its composition is
proved to be the fifth century Vikram or earlier. Shri
Jinbhadraganikshamaashraman has mentioned the Saptaatika in his Vishishtavati at
many places and the time of Shri Jinbhadraganikshamaashraman is definitely the
seventh century Vikram. Therefore, even if the aforementioned time is considered
to be only an estimate, it is certain that the Saptaatika was composed before
the seventh century. Apart from this, it is not possible to say anything
definitively about the time of composition. It can only be said that the Sapta.
6 .- - - - - -  -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yaha bhI sambhava hai ki inake saMkalanakartA eka hI AcArya hoM aura inakA
saMkalana vibhinna do AdhAroM se kiyA gayA ho  /  kucha bhI ho, kintu ukta
AdhAra se tatkAla hI saptatikA ke kartA zivazarma AcArya hoM, aisA nizcita rUpa
se nahIM kahA jA sakatA  /  isa prakAra saptatikA ke kartA kauna haiM, AcArya
zivazarma haiM yA AcArya candraSi mahattara haiM athavA anya koI mahAnubhAva
haiM-nizcayapUrvaka kahanA kaThina hai  /  parantu yaha abazya kahA jA sakatA
hai ki koI bhI isake kartA hoM, anya mahattvapUrNa hai aura isI kAraNa aneka
uttaravartI AcAryoM ne isa para bhASya, antarbhASya, cUrNi, TIkA, vRtti Adi
likhakara graMtha ke hArda ko spaSTa karane kA prayAsa kiyA hai  /  saptatikA kI
dokAoM Adi kA saMketa Age kiyA jA rahA hai| racanA kAla graMthakartA aura
racanAkAla-ye donoM eka dUsare para AdhArita haiN| eka kA nirNaya ho jAne para
dUsare ke nirNaya karane meM maralatA hotI hai| pUrva meM graMthakartA kA
nirdeza karate samaya yaha sambhAvanA avazya pragaTa kI gaI hai ki yA to AcArya
zivazarma sUri ne isakI racanA kI hai yA isake pahale likhA gayA ho|
sAdhAraNatayA AcArya zivazarma suri kA kAla vikrama kI pAMcavIM zatAbdi mAnA
gayA hai  /  isa hisAba se vicAra karane para isakA racanAkAla vikrama kI
pAMcavIM yA isase purvavartI kAla siddha hotA hai| zrI
jinabhadragaNikSamAzramaNa ne apanI vizeSaNavatI meM aneka sthAnoM para
saptatikA kA ullekha kiyA hai aura zrIjinabhadragaNikSamAzcamaNa kA samaya
vikrama kI sAtavIM zatAbdI nizcita hai| ataeva pUrvokta kAla yadi anumAnita hI
mAna liyA jAe to yaha nizcita hai ki saptatikA kI racanA sAtavIM zatAbdI se
pUrva ho gaI thii| isake alAvA racanAkAla ke bAre meM nizcayAtmaka rUpa se kucha
bhI kahanA sambhava nahIM hai  /  itanA hI kahA jA sakatA hai ki sapta. 6 .- - -
- - - -

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(24) The composition of the Sapta-tika took place before the 7th century and
there should be no doubt in accepting this. Let us examine the Sapta-tika.  It
has been indicated earlier that the Sapta-tika is considered one of the most
important texts in the Karma literature because it concisely explains the
various aspects of the Karma theory. Due to this, many later Acharyas have
attempted to clarify its inner meaning by writing commentaries, tikas, churni,
etc. on it. So far, the following tikas, commentaries, churni, etc. of the
Sapta-tika have been found:  | Name | Author | Composition Period | Type |
|---|---|---|---| | Antarbhashya Gatha Gatha 10 | Unknown | Unknown | Bhashya |
| Gatha 191 | Abhaydeva Suri | 12-13th Century | Dhuni | | Patra 132 | Unknown |
Unknown | Churni | | Pra-loka 2300 | Chandrashi Mahattar | 7th Century | Churni
| | Shloka 3780 | Malayagiri Suri | 12-13th Century | Bhashya-Vritti | | Shloka
4150 | Merutunga Suri | 1446 | Tippani | | Shloka 57 | Ramdeva Gani | 12th
Century | Avchuri | |  | Gunaratna Suri | 15th Century |  |  Out of these, the
Churni of Chandrashi Mahattar and the Vritti of Acharya Malayagiri have been
published. In this Hindi commentary, the Vritti of Acharya Malayagiri Suri has
been used.  The commentator Acharya Malayagiri, like the author of the Sapta-
tika, is also not known. His birthplace, parents, gachchha, initiation guru,
knowledge guru, etc. are unknown. Where were his centers of learning, writing,
and wandering? His...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 24 ) tikA kI racanA sAtavIM zatAbdI ke pUrva ho cukI thI aura isa prakAra
mAnane meM kisI bhI prakAra ko zaMkA nahIM karanI cAhie  /  saptatikA ko TokAeM
pUrva meM yaha saMketa kiyA gayA hai ki saMkSepa meM karma siddhAnta ke vibhinna
varNya-viSayoM kA kathana karane se saptatikA ko karma-sAhitya ke mUtrA mahoM
meM mAnA jAtA hai| ise lie isa para aneka uttaravartI AcAryoM ne bhASya, TIkA,
cUNi Adi likhakara isake antarjharda ko spaSTa karane kA prayatna kiyA hai| abhI
taka saptatikA kI nimnalikhita TIkAoM, bhASya, pUNi Adi kI jAnakArI prApta huI
hai kA nAma pAramANa katA racanAkAla vRtti antarbhASya gAthA gAthA 10 ajJAta
ajJAta bhASya gAthA 191 abhayadevasUri tri0 12-13vIM za. dhUNi patra 132 ajJAta
ajJAta cUrNi praloka 2300 candraSi mahatara anu. 7vIM za. zloka 3780
malayagirisUri vi0 12-13vIM za. bhASyavRtti zloka 4150 merutuga sUri vi0 saM0
1446 TippaNa' zloka 570 rAmadevagaNI vi0 12vI. za. avacuri guNaratna sUri vi0
15vIM zatA. inameM se candraSi mahattara kI cUNi aura AcArya malayagiri kI vRtti
prakAzita ho cukI hai| isa hindI vyAkhyA meM AcArya malayagiri sUri kI vRtti kA
upayoga kiyA gayA hai  /  TIkAkAra AcArya malayagiri saptatikA ke racayitA ke
samAna hI TIkAkAra AcArya malayagiri kA paricaya bhI upalabdha nahIM hotA hai ki
unakI janmabhUmi, mAtA-pitA, gaccha, dIkSA-guru, vidyA-guru Adi kauna the ?
unake vidyAbhyAsa, grantharacanA aura vihArabhUmi ke kendrasthAna kahA~ the ?
unakA

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(25) It cannot be said for certain whether there was a disciple-family or not.
However, based on the mention in the Kumarapala Prabandha, it can be inferred
that he was a contemporary of Acharya Hemchandra and Maharaj Kumarapala. Acharya
Malayagiri enriched the treasury of literature by writing commentaries on
numerous texts. The commentary published by Shri Jan Atmanand Granthamala,
Bhavnagar, provides information about approximately 25 commentary texts authored
by Acharya Malayagiri. Of these, 17 texts have been printed and six are
unavailable. Looking at these commentaries, it becomes clear that he presented
each subject with great success and wherever he hints at a new topic, he
provides evidence to support it. Therefore, it can be said that Acharya
Malayagiri Suri occupies the same position in Jain literature as Nirati does in
Vedic literature. Other Saptatikas Apart from the present Saptatika, one
Saptatika is included in the Panchasangraha by Acharya Chandrarsi Mahttar.
Panchasangraha is a collection of texts and is divided into five parts. The name
of its final chapter is Saptatika. Most of the verses of the Saptatika in
Panchasangraha resemble the present Saptatika, and the composition of
Panchasangraha took place much later than the present Saptatika. Despite being
named Saptatika, it contains 156 verses. This indicates that the Saptatika in
Panchasangraha is based on this Saptatika. Another Saptatika is also prevalent
in the Digambara tradition, which is found as a part of the Prakrit
Panchasangraha. Prakrit Panchasangraha

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 25 ) ziSya-parivAra thA yA nahIM ? Adi ke bAre meM kucha bhI nahIM kahA jA
sakatA hai  /  parantu kumArapAla prabandha meM Agata ullekha se unake AcArya
hemacandra aura mahArAja kumArapAla ke samakAlIna hone kA anumAna lagAyA jA
sakatA hai| AcArya malayagiri ne aneka graMthoM kI TIkAe~ likhakara sAhitya koSa
ko pallanita kiyA hai| zrI jana AtmAnanda graMthamAlA, bhAvanagara dvArA
prakAzita TIkA se AcArya malayagiri dvArA racita TIkAgraMthoM kI saMkhyA karIba
25 kI jAnakArI milatI hai| inameM se 17 graMtha to mudrita ho cuke haiM aura
chaha graMtha alabhya haiN| ukta TIkAoM ko dekhane se yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki
unhoMne pratyeka viSaya kA pratipAdana bar3I saphalatA se kiyA hai aura jahAM
bhI naye viSaya kA saMketa karate haiM, vahIM usakI puSTi ke pramANa avazya dete
haiN| isIlie yaha kahA jA sakatA hai ki vaidika sAhitya ke TIkAkAroM meM jo
sthAna nirati hai, jaina sAhitya meM vahI sthAna AcArya malayagiri sUri kA hai
/  anya saptatikAe~ prastuta saptatikA ke sivAya eka saptatikA AcArya candrarSi
mahattara kRta paMcasaMgraha meM saMkalita hai| paMcasaMgraha eka
saMgrahagrantha hai aura yaha pA~ca bhAgoM meM vibhakta hai  /  usake antima
prakaraNa kA nAma saptatikA paMcasaMgraha kI saptatikA kI adhikatara gAthAe~
prastuta saptatikA se milatA-julatI hai aura paMcasaMgraha kI racanA prastuta
saptatikA ke bahuta bAda huI hai tathA usakA nAma saptatikA hote hue bhI 156
gAthAe~ haiM  /  isase jJAta hotA hai ki paMcasaMgraha kI saptatikA kA . AdhAra
yahI saptatikA rahA hai  /  eka anya saptatikA digambara paramparA meM bhI
pracalita hai, jo prAkRta paMcasaMgraha meM usake aMgarUpa se pAyI jAtI hai|
prAkRta paMcasaMgraha

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(26) This is a collection of texts. The final chapter is the Saptaatika. Acharya
Amitagati composed the Sanskrit Panchasangraha based on this. It is a
combination of prose and poetry and contains over 1300 verses. In addition, two
chapters, Shataka and Saptaatika, are similar to the Shataka and Saptaatika
prevalent in the Svetambara tradition, with some variations in the text. The
present Saptaatika has 72 verses and the Digambara tradition's Saptaatika has 79
verses. About 40 verses are almost identical, 14-15 verses have some variations
in the text, and the remaining verses are different. The reason for this could
be differences in beliefs and style. However, these differences in beliefs are
not based on sectarian differences. Similarly, differences in the style of
narration have led to differences in the verses. This difference is seen in the
Upshamana and Kshapana chapters. Thus, although there is a difference between
these two Saptaatikas, they both originate from the same source and, after being
divided into two streams in between, finally become one. The essential points
about the Saptaatika have been highlighted, so there is no need to say more.
Thus, I have expressed my views on Karma Siddhanta and Karma Granthas in the
form of prefaces. I humbly request the learned community to kindly pay special
attention to the promotion, study, and teaching of Karma literature. — Shrichand
Surana - Devkumar Jain

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 26 ) eka saMgraha grantha hai  /  isameM antima prakaraNa saptasikA hai|
AcAryaM amitagati ne isI ke AdhAra se saMskRta paMcasaMgraha kI racanA kI hai.
jo gadya-padya kA ubhaya rUpa hai aura isameM 1300 se adhika gAthAe~ haiM  /
isake atirikta do prakaraNa zataka aura saptatikA kucha pATha-bheda ke sAtha
zvetAmbara paramparA meM pracalita zataka aura saptatikA se milate-julate haiM
/  prastuta saptatikA meM 72 aura digambara paramparA kI saptatikA meM 79 gAthAe
haiN| inameM se 40 gAthAoM ke karIba to eka jaisI haiM, 14-15 gAthAoM meM kucha
pAThAntara hai aura zeSa gAthAeM alagaalaga haiN| isakA kAraNa mAnyatA-bheda
aura zailI kA bheda ho sakatA hai| phira bhI ye mAnyatA-bheda sampradAya-bheda
para AdhArita nahIM haiM  /  isI prakAra kahIM kahIM varNana karane kI zailI meM
bheda hone se gAthAboM meM antara A gayA hai  /  yaha antara upazamanA aura
kSapaNa prakaraNa meM dekhane ko milatA hai  /  isa prakAra yadyapi ina donoM
saptatikAoM meM bheda par3a jAtA hai, to bhI ye donoM eka udgama sthAna se
nikala kara aura bIca-bIca meM do dhArAoM se vibhakta hotI huI anta meM eka rUpa
ho jAtI haiM  /  saptatikA ke bAre meM prAyaH Avazyaka bAtoM para prakAza DAlA
jA cukA hai, ataH aba aura adhika kahane kA prasaMga nahIM hai  /  isa prakAra
prAkkathanoM ke rUpa meM karmasiddhAnta aura karmagranthoM ke bAre meM apane
vicAra vyakta kie haiN| vidvadvarga se sAnurodha Agraha hai ki karmasAhitya kA
vizeSa pracAra evaM adhyayana adhyApana ke prati vizeSa lakSya dene kI kRpA
kreN| -- zrIcanda surAnA - devakumAra jaina

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction Table of Contents Importance of Karma Granthas Introduction to
Karma Granthas Order of Obstacles and Description Characteristics of New Karma
Granthas Commentaries on New Karma Granthas Introduction to Saptaatika Place of
Saptaatika in Karma Literature Number of Verses in Saptaatika Author Time of
Composition Commentaries on Saptaatika Commentator Acharya Malayagiri Other
Saptaatikas Sulgrantha Authenticity of the Text, Indication of the Subject
Matter Explanation of Siddha Pada Verse 1 Basis of the Composition of Saptaatika
Prakarana, Meaning of Mahartham Pada Form of Bandha, Udaya, Sattaa and Prakriti
Sthana, Meaning of the Verb 'Shrunu' Verse 2 Page No. k 12 13 24 15 Presentation
of Inquiry by the Disciple Promise of Sensory Obstacles in Bandha, Udaya and
Sattaa Prakritis 1 16 18 TE 20 23 24 24 25 1-5 1 5.-17 5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA anukramaNikA karmagranthoM kA mahatva karmagranthoM kA paricaya
bAdhAra aura varNana kA krama navIna karmagranthoM kI vizeSatA navIna
karmagranthoM kI TIkAe~ saptatikA paricaya karma sAhitya meM saptatikA kA sthAna
saptatikA kI gAthA saMkhyA granthakartA racanAkAla saptatikA kI TIkAe~ TIkAkAra
AcArya malayagiri anya saptatikAyeM sulagrantha grantha kI prAmANikatA, varNya
viSaya kA saMketa siddha pada kI vyAkhyA gAthA 1 saptatikA prakaraNa kI racanA
kA AdhAra, mahArthaM pada kI sArthakatA baMdha, udaya, sattA aura prakRti sthAna
kA svarUpa nirdeza 'zruNu' kriyApada kI sArthakatA gAthA 2 pR0 saM0 k 12 13 24
15 ziSya dvArA jijJAsA kA prastutIkaraNa baMdha, udaya aura sattA prakRtiyoM ke
saMvedha bhaMgoM kI pratijJA 1 16 18 TE 20 23 24 24 25 1-5 1 5.-17 5

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(28) **Directions for the Bandhasthana (Bonding Place), Swami (Owner), and Kala
(Time) of Mulakarmas (Root Karmas)** Description of the Bandhasthanas, etc. of
Mulakarmas **Directions for the Udayasthana (Arising Place), Swami (Owner), and
Kala (Time) of Mulakarmas** Description of the Udayasthana, etc. **Directions
for the Sattasthana (Existence Place), Swami (Owner), and Kala (Time) of
Mulakarmas** Description of the Sattasthana, etc. **Gatha 3** Directions for the
Sanvedha Bhangas (Sensory Obstructions) of the Bandha, Udaya, and Satta Sthanas
of Mulakarmas Description of the aforementioned Sanvedha Bhangas of Mulakarmas,
including their Swami (Owner) and Kala (Time) **Gatha 4** Sanvedha Bhangas in
the Jeevasthanas (Living Beings' Places) of Mulakarmas Description of the
Bhangas of the thirteen Jeevasthanas Description of the Sanvedha Bhangas of the
Sanjni Panchendriya Jeevasthana (Five-Sensory Being with Consciousness) and
their explanation Description of the Sanvedha Bhangas of the fourteen
Jeevasthanas **Gatha 5** Sanvedha Bhangas in the Gunasthana (Quality Places) of
Mulakarmas Description of the Bandha, Udaya, Satta, and Sanvedha Bhangas in the
Gunasthana of the Bhul Prakruti (Confused Nature) **Gatha 6** Sanvedha Bhangas
of the Uttar Prakruti (Higher Nature) of Jnanavaran (Knowledge-Obstruction) and
Antaraya (Hindrance) Karmas 10 12 s ક 17-22 18 20 22-27 22 24 25 26 27-30 28 28
30-34 32

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 28 ) mUla karmoM ke baMdhasthAna tathA unake svAmI aura kAla kA nirdeza
mulakamoM ke baMdhasthAnoM Adi kA vivaraNa mulakarmoM ke udayasthAna tathA unake
svAmI aura kAla kA nirdeza udayasthAna Adi kA vivaraNa mUlakarmoM ke sattAsthAna
tathA unake svAmI aura kAla kA nirdeza sattAsthAna Adi kA vivaraNa gAthA 3 mUla
karmoM ke baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM ke saMvedha maMgoM kA nirdeza mUla
karmoM ke ukta saMvedha bhaMgoM kA svAmI aura kAla sahita vivaraNa gAthA 4 mUla
karmo ke jIvasthAnoM meM saMvedha bhaMga Adi ke teraha jIvasthAnoM ke bhaMgoM kA
vivaraNa saMjJI paMcendriya jIvasthAna ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vivaraNa tathA
unakA spaSTIkaraNa caudaha jIvasthAnoM ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vivaraNa gAthA 5 W
mUla karmoM ke guNasthAnoM meM saMvedha bhaMga bhUla prakRtiyoM ke guNasthAnoM
meM baMdha udaya sattA saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vivaraNa gAthA 6 jJAnAvaraNa aura
antarAya karma kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke saMvedha bhaMga 10 12 s ka 17-22 18 20
22-27 22 24 25 26 27-30 28 28 30-34 32

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(26) Description of the destruction of the karmas of both types, including their
qualities, the state of the soul, and time. Verse 7 The place of bondage,
arising, and existence of the karma of Darshanavarana, according to its
different natures. Description of the place of bondage, arising, and existence
of the karma of Darshanavarana, as seen by the seer. Verse = 6 (First line) P
The karma of Darshanavarana, according to its different natures, the destruction
of the karma of Darshanavarana, the different opinions regarding the destruction
of the karma of Darshanavarana, the description of the destruction of the karma
of Darshanavarana as seen by the seer. (Second line) A promise to speak about
the destruction of the karmas of Vedaniya, Ayu, and Gotra, according to their
different natures. The preface to the statement about the destruction of the
karmas of Vedaniya, according to their different natures, the destruction of the
karmas of Ayu, according to their different natures. The destruction of the
karma of Narakayu. The special characteristics of the bondage of Ayu in the
Naraka (hell) realm. The description of the destruction of the karma of Ayu in
the Naraka realm, as seen by the seer. The destruction of the karma of Devayu.
The description of the destruction of the karma of Ayu in the Deva (heaven)
realm, as seen by the seer. The destruction of the karma of Tiryanchayu. The
description of the destruction of the karma of Ayu in the Tiryancha (animal)
realm, as seen by the seer. The destruction of the karma of Manushayau. The
special characteristics of the destruction of the bondage of Ayu in the Manushya
(human) realm. The description of the destruction of the karma of Ayu in the
Manushya realm, as seen by the seer. The rule for bringing about the destruction
of the karma of Ayu in each realm. 24 34-36 35 36 36-36 40 42 ** 46-64 4 46 50
51 52 52 R 5.3 53 55 55 4 58 56

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 26 ) ukta donoM karmoM ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA guNasthAna, jIvasthAna aura
kAla sahita vivaraNa gAthA 7 darzanAvaraNa karma kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke bandha,
udaya aura sattA sthAna darzanAvaraNa karma ke bandha, udaya aura sattAsthAna
darzaka vivaraNa gAthA = 6 ( prathama paMkti) P darzanAvaraNa karma ko uttara
prakRtiyoM ke saMvedha bhaMga darzanAvaraNa karma ke saMvaidha bhaMgoM sambandhI
matAntara darzanAvaraNa karma ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa gAthA
(dvitIya paMkti) vedanIya, Ayu aura gotrakarma kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke saMvedha
bhaMgoM ke kahane kI pratijJA vedanIyakarma kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke saMvedha
bhaMga Ayukarma kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke saMvedha bhaMgoM ke kathana kI pUrva
bhUmikA narakAyu ke saMvedha bhaMga narakagati kI Ayubandha sambandhI vizeSatA
narakagati meM Ayukarma ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa devAyu ke
saMvedha bhaMga devagati meM Ayukarma ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa
tiryacAyu ke saMvedha bhaMga tiryaMcagati meM Ayukarma ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA
darzaka vivaraNa manuSyAyu ke saMbaidha bhaMga manuSyagati ke uparatabandha ke
bhaMgoM kI vizeSatA manuSyagati meM Ayukarma ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA darzaka
vivaraNa pratyeka gati meM Ayukarma ke bhaMga lAne kA niyama 24 34-36 35 36
36-36 40 42 ** 46-64 4 46 50 51 52 52 R 5.3 53 55 55 4 58 56

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 10:** Description of the sensory perception of the destruction of the
*gotrakarma* (karmic actions related to lineage) and the destruction of the
sensory perception of the *gotrakarma*.  **Verse 11:** Description of the
*mohaniyakarma* (karmic actions related to delusion) and its binding places,
including the time and the lord of these binding places.  **Verse 12, 13:**
Description of the arising places of the *mohaniyakarma*, including the lord and
time of these arising places.  **74-87:** Description of the *mohaniyakarma* and
its arising places, lord, and time. The *anantaanubandhi* (infinitely connected)
quartet and its disassociation. *Jayadhavala* and the 28 *prakriti* (nature)
arising places. The best time for the arising places. Differences of opinion.
The Digambara literature on the lord and time of the arising places.  **Verse
14:** Description of the arising places of the *mohaniyakarma*, including the
lord and time.  **87-60:** Description of the destruction of the binding places
of the *mohaniyakarma*.  **Verse 15, 16, 17:** Description of the destruction of
the binding places of the *mohaniyakarma*.  **90-106:** Description of the
arising places within the binding places of the *mohaniyakarma*. The possibility
of an arising place without the *anantaanubandhi* arising in the *mithyadristi*
(false belief) *gunasthan* (quality place).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gotrakarma kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke saMvedha bhaMga gotrakarma ke saMvedha
bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa gAthA 10 mohanavikrama kI azA prakRtimA bAsasthAna
bandhasthAnoM ke samaya aura svAmI mohanIyakarma ke bandhasthAnoM kA svAmI aura
kAla sahita vivaraNa gAthA 11 mohanIyakarma kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke udayasthAna
svAmI aura kAla sahita ukta udayasthAnoM kA darzaka vivaraNa mAthA 12, 13 74-87
mohanIyakarma kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke sattAsthAna, svAmI aura kAla
anantAnubandhI catuSka kI visaMyojanA : jayadhavalA aTThAisa prakRtika
sattAsthAna kA utkRSTa kAla : matabhinnatA sattAsthAnoM ke svAmI aura kAla
sambandhI digambara sAhitya kA mata 77 svAmI aura kAla sahita mohanIyakarma ke
sattAsthAnoM kA darzaka vivaraNa gAthA 14 87-60 mohanIyakarma kI uttara
prakRtiyoM ke bandhasthAnoM ke bhaMga 87 gAthA 15, 16, 17 90-106 mohanIya karma
ke bandhasthAnoM meM udayasthAnoM kA nirdeza midhyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM
anantAnubandhI ke udaya se rahita udayasthAna kI sambhavatA kA nirdeza

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(31) Discussion on the absence of right faith in the श्रेणिगत and अश्रेणिगत
सासादन Difference of opinion on the destruction of the two natural उदयस्थानs
Gatha 16 Destruction of the उदयस्थानs of मोहनीयकर्म Description of the
destruction of the संवेध of the बंधस्थान, उदयस्थान Gatha 16 Number of total
destructions and पदवृन्दs of the उदयस्थानs Gatha 20 100 103 110-114 110 114 114-
117 115. 117- 122 117 120 Udayasthan and पदसंख्या Time of the उदयस्थानs
Description of the उदयविकल्पs and पदविकल्पs of मोहनीयकर्म 120 122-142 Gatha 21,
22 Description of the संवेध of the बंधस्थानs with the सतास्थानs of मोहनीयकर्म
Description of the destruction of the बंध, उदय and सत्ता स्थानs of मोहनीयकर्म
Gatha 24 123 Gatha 23 Concluding verse indicating the बंध etc. स्थानs of
मोहनीयकर्म 142 Promise to state the बंध etc. स्थानs of नामकर्म 142 142 - 155 142
बंधस्थानs of the उत्तर प्रकृतियों of नामकर्म Indication of the स्वामी and their
destructions of the बंधस्थानs of नामकर्म 140 142 144

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 31 ) zreNigata aura azreNigata sAsAdana samyagdRSTi kA na hone kA vivecana do
prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM bhaMgoM kI matabhinnatA gAthA 16 mohanIyakarma ke
udayasthAnoM ke bhaMga baMdhasthAna, udayasthAna ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA darzaka
vivaraNa gAthA 16 udayasthAnoM ke kula bhaMgoM evaM padavRndoM kI saMkhyA gAthA
20 100 103 110-114 110 114 114- 117 115. 117- 122 117 120 udayasthAna va
padasaMkhyA udayasthAnoM kA kAla mohanIya karma ke udayavikalpoM aura
padavikalpoM kA darzaka vivaraNa 120 122-142 gAthA 21, 22 mohanIyakarma ke
satAsthAnoM ke sAtha baMdhasthAnoM kA saMvedha nirUpaNa mohanIyakarma ke baMdha,
udaya aura sattA sthAnoM ke bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa gAthA 24 123 gAthA 23
mohanIyakarma ke baMdha Adi sthAnoM kA nirdeza karane vAlI upasaMhAra gAyA 142
nAmakarma ke bandha Adi sthAnoM kA kathana karane kI pratijJA 142 142 - 155 142
nAmakarma kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke bandhasthAna nAmakarma ke bandhas thAnoM ke
svAmI aura unake bhaMgoM kA nirdeza 140 142 144

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
180 Gābha 25 156-158 The breaking of each bandha-sthāna of nāmakarma 156 The
description of the breaking of the bandha-sthānas of nāmakarma 156 Gāṇā 26 The
udaya-sthāna of nāmakarma The owners of the udaya-sthānas of nāmakarma and the
description of their breaking Gāṇā 27, 28 176-184 The breaking of the udaya-
sthānas of nāmakarma The description of the breaking of the udaya-sthānas Gāthā
26 184-187 The sattā-sthāna of nāmakarma 184 The sattā-sthāna of nāmakarma and
the opinion of the Go. karmakāṇḍa 156 Gāthā 30 187-188 The promise of the
statement of the knowledge of the bandha etc. sthānas of nāmakarma 188 Gāgā 31,
32 155-206 The consideration of the samvaidha of nāmakarma from the ogha 160 The
description of the bandha etc. sthānas of nāmakarma and their breaking 205 Gāthā
33 2.6-210 The promise of beginning the consideration of the breaking of the
bandha etc. sthānas of the uttaraprakṛtis in the jīva-sthānas and guṇa-sthānas
210 Gāthā 34 210-213 The consideration of the breaking of the bandha etc.
sthānas of jñāna-āvaraṇa and antarāya-karma in the jīva-sthāna Gāthā 35 213 221
The consideration of the breaking of the bandha etc. sthānas of darśana-āvaraṇa
karma in the jīva-sthānas 213 211

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 180 gAbhA 25 156-158 nAmakarma ke pratyeka baMdhasthAna ke bhaMga 156 nAmakarma
ke bandhasthAnoM ke bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa 156 gANA 26 nAmakarma ke
udayasthAna nAmakarma ke udayasthAnoM ke svAmI aura unake bhaMgoM kA nirdeza
gANA 27, 28 176-184 nAmakarma ke udayasthAnoM ke bhaMga udayasthAnoM ke bhaMgoM
kA darzaka vivaraNa gAthA 26 184-187 nAmakarma ke sattAsthAna 184 nAmakarma ke
sattAsthAna aura go0 karmakANDa kA abhimata 156 gAthA 30 187-188 nAmakarma ke
bandha Adi sthAnoM ke saMvedha kathana kI pratijJA 188 gAgA 31, 32 155-206 ogha
se nAmakarma ke saMvaidha kA vicAra 160 nAmakarma ke baMdhAdi sthAna va unake
bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa 205 gAthA 33 2.6-210 jIvasthAnoM aura guNasthAnoM
meM uttaraprakRtiyoM ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM ke bhaMgoM kA vicAra prArambha karane
kI pratijJA 210 gAthA 34 210-213 jIvasthAna meM jJAnAvaraNa aura antarAyakamaM
ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vicAra gAthA 35 213221 jovasthAnoM
meM darzanAvaraNa karma ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vicAra 213
211

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(33) **Consideration of the Dissolution of the Binding, etc., Locations of
Vedaniya, Ayu, and Gotra Karmas in the Jiva Sthana**  214 A description of the
dissolution of the Jnanavaran, Darshanavaran, Vedaniya, Ayu, Gotra, and Antaraya
Karmas in the Jiva Sthana, a promise to state the parts of the Mohaniya Karma,
Gana 36 221 221 221-220 **Consideration of the Dissolution of the Binding, etc.,
Locations of Mohaniya Karma in the Jiva Sthana** 222 A description of the
dissolution of the Vedaniya in the Mohaniya Karma in the Jiva Sthana 227 228-254
Gana 37, 38 **Instruction on the Dissolution of the Binding, etc., Locations of
Nama Karma in the Jiva Sthana** A description of the binding locations and their
dissolution in the Jiva Sthana A description of the arising locations and their
dissolution in the Jiva Sthana A description of the dissolution of the binding,
arising, and existence locations of the natures of Nama Karma in the Jiva Sthana
Gatha 31 (first line) **Consideration of the Dissolution of the Binding, etc.,
Locations of Jnanavaran and Antaraya Karma in the Guna Sthana** Gatha 39 (second
line), 40, 41 (first line) 253 254-255 225 245 **Consideration of the
Dissolution of the Binding, etc., Locations of Darshanavaran Karma in the Guna
Sthana** Gana 41 (second line) 251 254 255-260 **Consideration of the
Dissolution of the Binding, etc., Locations of Vedaniya Karma in the Guna
Sthana** 257 260 - 266 261 **Consideration of the Dissolution of the Binding,
etc., Locations of Gotra Karma in the Guna Sthana** 262

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 33 ) jIvasthAnoM meM vedanIya, Ayu aura gotrakarma ke badhAdi sthAnoM ke
saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vicAra 214 jIvasthAnoM meM jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa,
vedanIya, Ayu, gotra aura antarAya karmoM ke bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa
mohanIya karma ke aMgoM kA kathana karane kI pratijJA gANA 36 221 221 221-220
jIvasthAnoM meM mohanIyakarma ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM ke saMvaidha bhaMgoM kA vicAra
222 jIvasthAnoM meM mohanIya karma meM saMvedha bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa 227
228-254 gAyA 37, 38 jIvasthAnoM meM nAmakarma ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM ke bhaMgoM kA
nirdeza jIvasthAnoM meM baMdhasthAna aura unake bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa
jIvasthAnoM meM udayasthAna aura unake bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa jIvasthAnoM
meM nAmakarma kI prakRtiyoM ke baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM ke bhaMgoM kA
darzaka vivaraNa gAthA 31 ( prathama paMkti) guNasthAnoM meM jJAnAvaraNa aura
antarAya karma ke baMdhAdisthAnoM ke bhaMgoM kA vicAra gAthA 39 (dvitIya
paMkti), 40, 41 ( prathama paMkti ) 253 254-255 225 245 guNasthAnoM meM
darzanAvaraNa karma ke baMdhAdisthAnoM ke bhaMgoM kA vicAra gANA 41 (dvitIya
paMkti) 251 254 255-260 guNasthAnoM meM bedanIyakarma ke baMdhAdisthAnoM ke
bhaMgoM kA vicAra 257 260 - 266 261 guNasthAnoM meM gotrakarma ke
baMdhAdisthAnoM ke bhaMgoM kA vicAra 262

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Consideration of the Dissolution of the Binding Stages of Ayukarma in the
Gunasthanas  **265**  A viewer's description of the dissolution of the binding
stages of the Pāyēṣa Karmas, except for the Mohaniya and Nāmakarma, in the 265
Gunasthanas.  **268**  Gāthā 42  **266-271**  Consideration of the binding
stages of the Mohaniya Karma in the Gunasthanas.  **270**  Gāthā 43, 44, 45
**272-276**  Consideration of the dissolution stages of the Mohaniya Karma in
the Gunasthanas.  **273**  Gāthā 46  **276-283**  Dissolution of the Udya Stages
in relation to the Gunasthanas.  **276**  A viewer's description of the Udya
Vikalpas and Padavṛndas in relation to the Gunasthanas.  **282**  Gāthā 47
**283-303**  Information about the dissolution of the Sanvedha in Yogas,
Upayogas, and Leṣyās.  **284**  Consideration of the Udya Vikalpas in the
Gunasthanas in relation to the Yogas.  **288**  A viewer's description of the
Udya Vikalpas in the Gunasthanas in relation to the Yogas.  **286**
Consideration of the Padavṛndas in the Gunasthanas in relation to the Yogas.
**286**  A viewer's description of the Padavṛndas in the Gunasthanas in relation
to the Yogas.  **295**  Consideration of the Udya Stages in the Gunasthanas in
relation to the Upayogas.  **295**  A viewer's description of the Udya Vikalpas
in the Gunasthanas in relation to the Upayogas.  **297**  Consideration of the
Padavṛndas in the Gunasthanas in relation to the Upayogas.  **297**  A viewer's
description of the Padavṛndas in the Gunasthanas in relation to the Upayogas.
**299**  Consideration of the Udya Stages in the Gunasthanas in relation to the
Leṣyās.  **299**  A viewer's description of the Udya Vikalpas in the Gunasthanas
in relation to the Leṣyās.  **301**  Consideration of the Padavṛndas in the
Gunasthanas in relation to the Leṣyās.  **301**  A viewer's description of the
Padavṛndas in the Gunasthanas in relation to the Leṣyās.  **302**  **260**
**264**  **200**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guNasthAnoM meM Ayukarma ke baMdhAdisthAnoM ke bhaMgoM kA vicAra 265
guNasthAnoM meM mohanIya aura nAmakarma ke sivAya pyeSa karmoM ke baMdhAdi
sthAnoM ke bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa 268 gAthA 42 266-271 guNasthAnoM meM
mohanIyakarma ke baMdhasthAnoM kA vicAra 270 gAthA 43, 44, 45 272-276
guNasthAnoM meM mahanIya meM kI usasthAnoM kA vicAra 73 gANA 46 276-283
guNasthAnoM kI apekSA udayasthAnoM ke bhaMga 276 guNasthAnoM kI apekSA
udayavikalpoM aura padavRndoM kA darzaka vivaraNa 282 gAthA 47 283-303 yoga,
upayoga aura lezyAoM meM saMvedha bhaMgoM kI sUcanA 284 yoga kI apekSA
guNasthAnoM meM udayavikalpoM kA vicAra 288 yoga kI apekSA udayavikalpoM kA
darzaka vivaraNa 286 yoga kI apekSA guNasthAnoM meM padavRndoM kA vicAra yoga kI
apekSA padavRndoM kA darzaka vivaraNa upayogoM kI apekSA guNasthAnoM meM
udayasthAnoM kA vicAra 295 upayogoM kI apekSA udayavikalpoM kA darzaka vivaraNa
upayogoM kI apekSA padavRndoM kA vicAra 267 upayogoM kI apekSA padavRndoM kA
darzaka vivaraNa 266 lezyAoM kI apekSA guNasthAnoM meM udayasthAnoM kA vicAra
266 lezyAoM kI apekSA udayavikalpoM kA darzaka vivaraNa lezyAoM kI apekSA
padavRndoM kA vicAra lezyAoM kI apekSA padavRndoM kA darzaka vivaraNa 302 260
264 200

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(35) Gatha 48 The relationship of the binding and other locations of the
Mohaniya Karma in the 303-307 Gunasthanas. The consideration of the breakages in
the binding and other locations of the Mohaniya Karma in the Gunasthanas is sung
in Gatha 46, 50. The consideration of the binding and other locations of the Nam
Karma in the 307-347 Gunasthanas. The consideration of the binding and other
locations of the Nam Karma in the Mithyatva Gunasthanas and the consideration of
the sensory breakages. The description of the sensory breakages of the Nam Karma
in the Mithyatva Gunasthanas. The consideration of the binding and other
locations of the Nam Karma in the Sasadan Gunasthanas and the consideration of
the sensory breakages. The description of the sensory breakages of the Nam Karma
in the Sasadan Gunasthanas. The consideration of the binding and other locations
of the Nam Karma in the Misra Gunasthanas and the consideration of the sensory
breakages. The description of the sensory breakages of the Nam Karma in the
Misra Gunasthanas. The consideration of the binding and other locations of the
Nam Karma in the Avirati Samyagdristi Gunasthanas and the consideration of the
sensory breakages. The description of the sensory breakages in the Avirati
Samyagdristi Gunasthanas. The consideration of the binding and other locations
of the Nam Karma in the Deshaviriti Gunasthanas and the consideration of the
sensory breakages. The description of the sensory breakages in the Deshaviriti
Gunasthanas. The consideration of the binding and other locations of the Nam
Karma in the Pramattabirati Gunasthanas and the consideration of the sensory
breakages. 336

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 35 ) gAthA 48 303-307 guNasthAnoM meM mohanIyakarma ke sattAsthAna
guNasthAnoM meM mohanIyakarma ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM ke saMbaMdha bhaMgoM kA vijAra
gAyA 46, 50 307-347 guNasthAnoM meM nAmakarma ke baMdhAdi sthAna kA vicAra
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM nAmakarma ke baMdhAdi sthAna va saMvedha maMgoM kA
vicAra mithyAtva guNasthAna meM nAmakarma ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA darzaka
vivaraNa 316 sAsAdana guNasthAna meM nAmakarma ke baMdhAdi sthAna va saMvedha
bhaMgoM kA vicAra sAsAdana guNasthAna meM nAmakarma ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA
darzaka vivaraNa mizra guNasthAna meM nAmakarma ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM va saMvedha
bhaMgoM kA vicAra 327 mizra guNasthAna meM nAmakarma ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA
darzaka vivaraNa 328 avirati samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM nAmakarma ke baMdhAdi
sthAnoM va saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vicAra 328 avirati samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM
saMvedha bhaMgoM kA darzaka dezavirati guNasthAna meM nAmakarma ke baMdhAdi
sthAnoM va saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vicAra dezavirati guNasthAna meM saMvedha maMgoM
kA darzaka vivaraNa pramattabirata guNasthAna meM nAmakarma ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM
aura saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vidhAra. 336

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the **Pramattavirata Gunasthan**, a description of the **name-karma**'s
sensory disruptions. In the **Aparamattatanyata Gunasthan**, a consideration of
the **name-karma**'s bondage, etc., and sensory disruptions. In the
**Aparamattasangat Gunasthan**, a description of the sensory disruptions. In the
**Apuurvakaran Gunasthan**, a consideration of the **name-karma**'s bondage,
etc., and sensory disruptions. In the **Apuurvakaran Gunasthan**, a description
of the sensory disruptions. In the **Anivritibhadar, Sukshmasampray
Gunasthanas**, a consideration of the **name-karma**'s bondage, etc., and
sensory disruptions. In the **Upshantamoha, Ksheenamoha Gunasthanas**, a
consideration of the **name-karma**'s bondage, etc., and sensory disruptions. In
the **Sayogi Kevali Gunasthan**, a consideration of the **name-karma**'s arising
and existence, and a description of their sensory disruptions. In the **Ayogi
Kevali Gunasthan**, a consideration of the **name-karma**'s arising and
existence, and a description of their sensory disruptions. **Gatha 51**. In the
**Gatimarg** (path of transmigration), a consideration of the **name-karma**'s
bondage, etc. In the **Naraka** (hell) and other **Gatis** (paths of
transmigration), a consideration of the bondage. In the **Naraka** (hell)
**Gati**, a consideration of the sensory disruptions. In the **Naraka** (hell)
**Gati**, a description of the sensory disruptions. In the **Tiryanch** (animal)
**Gati**, a consideration of the sensory disruptions. In the **Tiryanch**
(animal) **Gati**, a description of the sensory disruptions. In the **Manushya**
(human) **Gati**, a consideration of the sensory disruptions. In the
**Manushya** (human) **Gati**, a description of the sensory disruptions. In the
**Dev** (heavenly) **Gati**, a consideration of the sensory disruptions. In the
**Dev** (heavenly) **Gati**, a description of the sensory disruptions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pramattavirata guNasthAna meM nAmakarma ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa
apramattataMyata guNasthAna meM nAmakarma ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM aura saMvedha
bhaMgoM kA vicAra apramattasaMgata guNasthAna meM saMvaidha bhaMgoM kA darzaka
vivaraNa 340 apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM nAmakarma ke baMdhAdisthAnoM va
saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vicAra apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM saMvaidha bhaMgoM kA
darzaka vivaraNa 343 anivRttibAdara, sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAnoM meM nAmakarma
ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM va saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vicAra 343 upazAntamoha, kSINamoha
guNasthAnoM meM nAmakarma ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM va saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vicAra
sayogi kevalI guNasthAna meM nAmakarma ke udaya va sattA sthAnoM kA vicAra va
unake saMvaidha bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa 346 ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM
nAmakarma ke udaya va sattA sthAnoM ke saMvaidha kA vicAra va unakA darzaka
vivaraNa 347 gAthA 51 gatimArgaNA meM nAmakarma ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM kA vicAra
348 naraka Adi gatiyoM meM bandhasthAna 346 narakagati meM saMvedha bhaMgoM kA
vicAra 350 narakagati meM saMvaidha bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa 351 tiryaMcagati
meM saMvaidha bhaMgoM kA vicAra 352 tithaMcagati meM saMvedha bhaMgoM kA darzaka
vivaraNa 353 manuSyagati meM saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vicAra 356 manuSyagati meM
saMvedha bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa devagati meM saMvedha maMgoM kA vicAra 360
devagati meM saMvedha bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa 357

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
363 Gatha 52 361-3:70 In the Indriya Margana, the Bandhaadi Sthana of the Nama
Karma, the consideration of the Samvedha Bhangas in the Ekendriya Margana, the
viewer's description of the Samvedha Bhangas in the Ekendriya Margana, the
consideration of the Samvedha Bhangas in the Vikalatrayas 364 The viewer's
description of the Samvedha Bhangas in the Vikalatrayas, the consideration of
the Samvedha Bhangas in the Panchendriyas 266 The viewer's description of the
Samvedha Bhangas in the Panchendriyas 370-375 Information about stating the
Bandhaadi Sthana in the eight Anuyogadwaras 370 In the Marganas, the viewer's
description of the Bandhaadi Sthana of the Jnanaavaran, Darshanavaran, Vedaniya,
Ayu, Gotra and Antaraya Karmas 373 In the Marganas, the viewer's description of
the Bandha, Udaya, and Satya Sthana of the Mohaniya Karma and their Samvedha
Bhangas 375 In the Marganas, the viewer's description of the Bandha, Udaya, and
Satya Sthana of the Nama Karma and their Samvedha Bhangas 375 Gatha 54 375-178
Instruction of the speciality in the Udaya Udirana Gatha 55 378-61 41
Instructions of the names of the Prakrutis, which have speciality in their Udaya
and Udirana 378 Gatha 56 381-383 Information about the instruction of the Bandha
of the Prakrutis in the Gunasthana 381 The Bandha Yoga Prakrutis and their
causes in the Mithyatva and Sasadan Gunasthana 382 376

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 363 gAthA 52 361-3:70 indriya mArgaNA meM nAmakarma ke baMdhAdisthAna ekendriya
mArgaNA meM saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vicAra ekendriya mArgaNA meM saMvedha bhaMgoM kA
darzaka vivaraNa vikalatrayoM meM saMvaidha bhaMgoM kA vicAra 364 bikalatrayoM
meM saMvedha bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa paMcendriyoM meM saMvaidha bhaMgoM kA
vicAra 266 paMcendriyoM meM saMvedha bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa 370-375
baMdhAdi sthAnoM kI ATha anuyogadvAroM meM kathana karane kI sUcanA 370
mArgaNAoM meM jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, vedanIya, Ayu, gotra aura antarAya
karma ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM kA darzaka vivaraNa 373 mArgaNAoM meM mohanIyakama ke
bandha, udaya, sattA sthAnoM va unake saMvedha bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa 375
mArgaNAoM ke nAma karma ke baMdha, udaya, sattA sthAnoM aura unake saMvedha
bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa 375 gAthA 54 375-178 udaya udIraNA meM vizeSatA kA
nirdeza gAthA 55 378-61 41 prakRtiyoM ke nAmoM kA nirdeza, jinake udaya aura
udIraNA meM vizeSatA hai 378 gAthA 56 381-383 guNasthAnoM meM prakRtiyoM ke
baMdha ke nirdeza kI sUcanA 381 mithyAtva aura sAsAdana guNasthAna kI
baMdhayogya prakRtiyA~ aura kAraNa 382 376

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Gatha 57** (383-386) The number and cause of the bondable
natures of the four Gunasthanas, from Misra Adi to Pramatta Virata.  **Gatha
58** (386-388) The bondable natures of the Apratmatta Samyata Gunasthana and its
cause.  **Gatha 59** (388-392) The number of the bondable natures of the Ran
Gunavans and its cause.  **Gatha 60** (392-396) The information about knowing
the bondage ownership in the Marganas.  **Gatha 61** (396-404) The bondable
natures from Anivriti Vadar to Sayogikevali Gunasthana and their cause.  **Gatha
62** (404-408) The description of the bondable natures in the Gunasthanas.
**Gatha 63** (408-416) The consideration of the existence of natures in the
Gatis.  **Gatha 64** (416-420) The beginning of the consideration of the Upshama
श्रेणी, the Upshama method of the Ananta Anubandhi Chatushk, the Bisamyojana
method of the Ananta Anubandhi Chatushk, the Upshamana method of the Darshan
Mohaniya, the Upshamana method of the Charitra Mohaniya.  **Gatha 65** (420-424)
The consideration of which Gunasthana a Jiva attains after being expelled from
the Upshama श्रेणी.  **Gatha 66** (424-428) The consideration of how many times
a Jiva can ascend the Upshama श्रेणी in one Bhava.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gAyA 57 383-386 mizra Adi pramattavirata paryanta cAra guNasthAnoM kI
baMdhayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura kAraNa gAthA 58 apramattasaMyata
guNasthAna kI baMdhayogya prakRtiyA~ aura usakA kAraNa raNa guNavAna kI batayoM
kI saMkhyA ba kAraNa gAgA 56 ( 38 ) mArgaNAoM meM bandhasvAmitva ko jAnane kI
sUcanA gAyA 61 anivRttivAdara se lekara sayogikevalI guNasthAna taka kI
bandhayogya prakRtiyAM aura unakA kAraNa guNasthAnoM meM bandha prakRtiyoM kA
darzaka vivaraNa gAthA 60 384 386-388 gatiyoM meM prakRtiyoM kI sattA kA vicAra
380 388-362 356 386 361 362-363 362 363-365 363 335-420 365 366 404 gAyA 62
upazama zreNI ke vicAra kA prArambha anantAnubandhI catuSka kI upazama vidhi
anantAnubandhI catuSka kI bisaMyojanA vidhi darzanamohanIya kI upazamanA vidhi
cAritramohanIya kI upazamanA vidhi upazamazreNi se cyuta hokara jIva kisa-kisa
guNasthAna ko prApta hotA hai, isakA vicAra eka bhava meM kitanI bAra
upazamazreNi para ArohaNa ho sakatA hai 408 ve 416 420

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
425 Gatha 63 423-433 The beginning of the consideration of Kshapakaṇi, who is
the beginner of Kshapakeveṇi 427 In Kshapakroṇi, the indication of the natures
that are destroyed and the related differences of opinion, description of
Kshapakashreṇi based on Purushaveda 428 Gatha 64 Description of the order of
destruction of the four Sanjvalana 433 Explanation of Samudghāta and its
divisions, discussion of Kevali Samudghāta 436 The process of Yoga Nirodha, the
indication of the natures that attain cessation of existence at the end of the
Sayogikevali Gunasthan 438 Special work of the Ayogikevali Gunasthan, Gatha 65
438-440 Indication of the natures that are destroyed at the penultimate time of
the Ayogikevali Gunasthan, Gatha 66 440-442 Indication of the natures that arise
in the Ayogikevali Gunasthan, 441 Gatha 67 Nine natures of Nāmakarma that arise
in the Ayogikevali Gunasthan, Gatha 68 442-444 Indication of the difference of
opinion regarding the existence of Manusyanupūrvi, 443 438

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 425 gAthA 63 423-433 kSapakaNi ke vicAra kA prArambha kSapakaveNi kA Arambhaka
kauna hotA hai 427 kSapakroNi meM kSaya hone vAlI prakRtiyoM kA nirdeza va
tatsambandhI matAntara puruSaveda ke AdhAra se kSapakazreNi kA varNana 428 gAthA
64 saMjvalana cataSka ke kSaya ke krama kA varNana 433 samudghAta kI vyAkhyA
aura usake bheda kevalI samudghAta kA vivecana 436 yoga nirodha kI prakriyA
sayogikevalI guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM sattA-viccheda ko prApta hone vAlI
prakRtiyoM kA nirdeza 438 ayogikevalI guNasthAna ke kArya vizeSa gAthA 65
438-440 ayogikevalI guNasthAna ke upAntya samaya meM kSaya hone vAlI prakRtiyoM
kA nirdeza gAthA 66 440-442 ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM udayaprApta prakRtiyoM kA
nirdeza 441 gAthA 67 ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM udayaprApta nAmakarma kI nau
prakRtiyoM gAthA 68 442-444 manuSyAnupUrvI kI sattA sambandhI matabheda kA
nirdeza 443 438

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
450 Gatha 6 Why do other Acharyas who are not Aayogikavali believe in the
existence of the soul before human birth? 444 Gatha 70 446-450 Description of
the pure self-nature after the destruction of karma, which is free from karma.
447 Gatha 71 450-451 Conclusion of the text. Gatha 72 451-452 Conclusion of the
text, demonstrating brevity. Appendix Appendix 1 - Original Gathas of the Sixth
Karmagrantha. Appendix 2 - Glossary of technical terms found in the six
Karmagranthas. Appendix 3 - Glossary of words indicating Pindaprakriti found in
the Gathas and commentaries of the Karmagranthas. Appendix 4 - Alphabetical
order of the Gathas of the Saptathika chapter. Appendix 5 - List of auxiliary
texts used in the commentaries of the Karmagranthas. Tables Detailed description
of the binding, arising, existence places and their sensory breaks of Mohaniya
Karma in the Marganas. Detailed description of the binding, arising, existence
places and their sensory breaks of Nama Karma in the Marganas. 375

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 450 gAthA 6 anya AcArya ayogikevalI gumazAna ke nimaya manuSyAnupUrvI kI sattA
kyoM mAnate haiM ? 444 gAthA 70 446-450 karmakSaya ke anantara niSkarma zuddha
AtmasvarUpa kA varNana 447 gAthA 71 450-451 graMtha kA upasaMhAra gAmA 72
451-452 ladhutA pradarzita karate hue graMtha kI samApti pariziSTa pariziSTa
1-SaSTha karmagraMtha kI mUla gAthAyeM pariziSTa 2chaha karmagraMthoM meM Agata
pAribhASika zabdoM kA koSa pariziSTa 3-karmagraMthoM kI gAthAoM evaM vyAkhyA meM
Agata piNDaprakRti-sUcaka zabdoM kA koSa pariziSTa 4-saptatikA prakaraNa kI
gAdhAoM kA akA rAdi anukrama pariziSTa 5-karmagraMthoM kI vyAkhyA meM prayukta
sahAyaka graMthoM kI suucii| tAlikAeM mArgaNAoM meM mohanIyakarma ke bandha,
udaya, sattA sthAnoM va unake saMvaidha bhaMgoM kA darzaka vivaraNa mArgaNAoM
meM nAma karma ke baMdha, udaya sattA sthAnoM aura unake saMvedha bhaMgoM kA
darzaka vivaraNa 375

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmagrantha [Sapttatika Prakarana: Bhaga Chatha]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha [saptatikA prakaraNa : bhAga chaThA]

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Saptaatika chapter is unhindered. Scholars should study, contemplate and
reflect on such texts without any worry. Therefore, Acharya Malayagiri has given
the following two meanings of the 'Siddhpaeihi' Siddhapad in the form of a
verse:  Those texts whose all verses follow the meaning of the omniscient, which
are established, whose inherent meaning depth cannot be distorted in any way, or
doubt does not arise, those texts are called Siddhapad. Or, in the Jinaagama,
the terms Jeevasthan, Gunasyan, and Rupa are famous, therefore, the verse
'Siddhapad' is given to make known the Jeevasthans and Gunasthans.  According to
the first meaning, the word 'Siddhagad' is a hindrance to Karma-prakriti and
other Prabhuta, because the subject of this Saptaatika chapter is based on those
texts, which the author has compiled in a concise manner. To clarify this, the
fourth verse of the verse indicates 'Neesandan Dittivaayass' which is like a
drop of the great ocean of Dristivaad. The reason for mentioning it as a drop of
the great ocean of Dristivaad is that the Dristivaad, which is the twelfth Anga,
has five divisions: Parikrama, Sutra, Prathamanuyog, Purvagat, and Chulika. Of
these, Purvagat has fourteen divisions, including Utpada-purva. The second Purva
is called Agrayaaniy, and it has fourteen main Adhikars, which are called
Vastu...  1. Siddha - established, impossible to move, that is the meaning.
Therefore, those texts in which the verses are Siddha, they are Siddhapad. -
Saptaatika Prakaran Tika, page 136  2. Swasamaya Siddhani - famous, which are
Jeevasthan-Gunasyan-rupa, those are Siddhapad. Those are the subject matter,
relying on them, that is the meaning. - Saptaatika Prakaran Tika, page 136

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa abAdhita hotI hai| vidvAnoM ko nizcinta hokara aise
granthoM kA adhyayana, manana aura cintana karanA cAhiye  /  isIlie AcArya
malayagiri ne gAthAgata 'siddhapaehi' siddhapada ke nimnalikhita do artha kiye
haiM jina granthoM ke saba pada sarvajJokta artha kA anusaraNa karane vAle hone
se mupratiSThita haiM, jinameM nihita arthagAmbhIrya ko kisI bhI prakAra se
vikRta nahIM kiyA jA sakatA hai, athavA zaMkA paidA nahIM hotI hai, ve grantha
siddhapada kahe jAte haiM  /  /  athavA jinAgama meM jIvasthAna, guNasyAna rUpa
pada prasiddha haiM, ataeva jIvasthAnoM, guNasthAnoM kA bodha karAne ke liye
gAthA meM 'siddhapada' diyA gayA hai  /  ukta donoM arthoM meM se prathama artha
ke anusAra 'siddhagada' zabda karmaprakRti Adi prAbhutoM kA vAdhaka hai, kyoMki
isa saptatikA nAmaka prakaraNa kA viSaya una granthoM ke AdhAra se granthakAra
ne saMkSepa kA meM nibaddha kiyA hai  /  isa bAta ko spaSTa karane ke lie gAthA
ke cauthe caraNa meM saMketa diyA gayA hai'nIsaMdaM diTTivAyassa'dRSTivAdarUpI
mahArNava kI eka bUMda ke samAna hai  /  dRSTivAdarUpI mahArNava kI eka bUda
jaisA batalAne kA kAraNa yaha hai ki dRSTivAda nAmaka bArahaveM aMga ke
parikrama, sUtra, prathamAnuyoga, pUrvagata aura cUlikA yaha pAMca bheda haiN|
unameM se pUrvagata ke utpAdapUrva Adi caudaha bheda haiN| unameM dUsare pUrva
kA nAma agrAyaNIya hai aura usake mukhya caudaha adhikAra haiM, jinheM vastu -.
.-. 1. siddha-pratiSThita cAlAyitumazakyapitya ko'rthe:  /  tata: siddhAni
padAni yeSu grantheSu te siddhapadAH  /  saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 136 2.
svasamaya siddhAni-prasiddhAni yAni jIvasthAna-guNasyAnarUpANi padAni tAni
siddhapadAni. tebhyaH tAnyAzritya teSu viSaya ityarthaH  /  -saptatikA prakaraNa
TokA, pR0 136

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Salutations to the Supreme Being, the Lord of Purity.  **Chapter on the Sapta-
tika** [Sixth Karma Grantha] An anticipation of the basis, subject matter, and
profound meaning of the Chapter on the Sapta-tika.  **Verse 1:** From the
authoritative texts, the Siddha-paeya, I will explain in brief the locations of
the states of bondage, liberation, and existence. Listen attentively, this is a
concise explanation, a drop from the vast ocean of the doctrine of vision.
**Word Meaning:** Siddha-paeya - texts containing the words of the Siddhas,
Mahattham - great meaning, Bandhodaya-satta-paditthana - locations of the states
of bondage, liberation, and existence, Vochcham - I will say, Sun - listen,
Sankhevam - in brief, Nisanda - a drop, a point, Dihi-vayassa - the doctrine of
vision.  **Meaning:** Based on the authoritative texts containing the words of
the Siddhas, I will briefly explain the locations of the states of bondage,
liberation, and existence. Listen attentively. This concise explanation is like
a drop from the vast ocean of the doctrine of vision, containing great meaning.
**Special Note:** The verse indicates the authenticity of the text, the subject
matter, etc. First, to convey the authenticity of the text, the verse states
"Siddha-paeya," meaning this text is based on the words of the Siddhas. There is
no contradiction in the subject matter described in this text. Any text,
scripture, or chapter that is based on the words of the omniscient is considered
authoritative by scholars.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI vItarAgAya namaH saptatikA prakaraNa [SaSTha karmagrantha] saptatikA
prakaraNa ke AdhAra, abhidheya evaM arthagAMbhIrya ko pradazita karane vAlI
pratikSAmAzA-. siddhapaehi mahatthaM bndhodysntpdditthaannaannN| vocchaM suNa
saMkhevaM nosaMdaM diThivAyassa  // 1 //  zabdArtha-siddhaparahisiddhapada vAle
granthoM se, mahatthaMmahAna artha vAle, baMzotyasaMtapaDiThANANaM-baMdha, udaya
aura sattA prakRtiyoM ke sthAnoM ko, vonya-kahaMgA, muNa-muno, saMkheva-saMkSepa
meM, nIsada-nisyanda rUpa, bindu rUpa, vihivAyassa-dRSTivAda aMga kaa|
gAbhArtha-siddhapada bAle granthoM ke AdhAra se baMdha, udaya aura sattA
prakRtiyoM ke sthAnoM ko saMkSepa meM kahU~gA, jise suno | yaha saMkSepa kathana
mahAna artha vAlA aura dRSTibAda aMga rUpI mahArNava ke nisyanda rUpa-eka bindu
ke samAna hai  /  vizeSA-gAthA meM grantha kI prAmANikatA, varNya-viSaya Adi kA
saMketa kiyA hai| sarvaprathama grantha kI prAmANikatA kA bodha karAne ke lie
pada diyA hai 'siddhapaehi yAnI yaha grantha siddha artha ke AdhAra se racA gayA
hai| isa grantha meM varNita viSaya meM kisI prakAra se pUrvApara virodha nahIM
hai| _ jisa grantha, zAstra yA prakaraNa kA mUla AdhAra sarvajJa vANI hotI hai,
vahI grantha vidvAnoM ne lie AdaraNIya hai aura usakI prAmANikatA

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Granth:  It is said that there are twenty sub-authorities of the
fifth object, which are called Prama, and the fourth Prabhut among these is
called Karma-prakriti. This Karma-prakriti is the basis of this Sapta-tika
chapter.  From the above statement, it is clear that this chapter is authentic
because it follows the meaning spoken by Sarvjnadev. Because Sarvjnadev teaches
the meaning, then after understanding it, the Ganadharas bind it in twelve
Angas. Other Thacharyas create other compositions by reading those twelve Angas
directly or by knowing them through tradition. This chapter is also composed
based on the words of Sarvjnadev, which were bound by the Ganadharas. The second
meaning of 'Sidhpad' is Gunasthan, Jeevasthan. The implication is that without
taking them as the basis, the bondage, rise and existence of Karma-prakritis
cannot be described. Therefore, to make them aware of them and the bondage,
rise, existence places and their sensory disruptions in them, the meaning of
'Shinkpad' is also considered to be Jothasthan and Gunasthan.  From the above
discussion, although we know that this chapter called Sapta-tika summarizes the
subject of Karma-prakriti Prabhat etc., it does not mean that it does not have
depth of meaning. Although there are many such Akhyan, Alapka and Sangrahani
etc. texts which are concise but devoid of the weight of meaning, but this text
is not among them. That is, the text has been made concise, but this concise
form is full of depth of meaning. There has been no reduction in the special
features. To make this known, the author has given the epithet 'Mahathe Maharth'
in the verse.  After telling the features of the text, the author has described
the subject...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karma grantha : IE kahate haiM  /  unameM se pAMcavIM vastu ke bIsa upa-
adhikAra haiM jinheM prAmA kahate haiM aura inameM se cauthe prAbhUta kA nAma
karmaprakRti hai  /  isI karmaprakRti kA AdhAra lekara isa saptatikA prakaraNa
kI racanA huI hai| ukta kathana se yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki yaha prakaraNa
sarvajJadeva dvArA kahe gaye artha kA anusaraNa karane vAlA hone se prAmANika
hai| kyoMki sarvajJadeva artha kA upadeza dete haiM, tadanantara usakI
avadhAraNA karake gaNadharoM dvArA vaha dvAdaza aMgoM meM nibaddha kiyA jAtA hai
/  anya thAcArya una bAraha aMgoM ko sAkSAt par3hakara yA paramparA se jAnakara
anya racanA karate haiM  /  yaha prakaraNa bhI gaNadhara devoM dvArA nibaddha
sarvajJa deva kI vANI ke AdhAra se racA gayA hai  /  _ siddhapada' kA dUsarA
artha guNasthAna, jIvasthAna lene kA tAtparya yaha hai ki inakA AdhAra lie binA
karmaprakRtiyoM ke baMdha, udaya aura sattA kA varNana nahIM kiyA jA sakatA hai|
ataH unakA aura unameM baMdha, udaya, sattA sthAnoM evaM unake saMvedha bhaMgoM
kA bodha karAne ke lie 'ziGkapada' kA artha jotrasthAna aura guNasthAna bhI mAnA
jAtA hai  /  uparyukta vivecana se yadyapi hama yaha jAna lete haiM ki isa
saptatikA nAmaka prakaraNa meM karmaprakRti prAbhata Adi ke viSaya kA saMkSepa
kiyA gayA hai, lekina isakA yaha artha nahIM ki isameM arthagAmbhIrya nahIM hai
/  yadyapi aise bahuta se AkhyAna, AlApaka aura saMgrahaNI Adi graMtha haiM jo
saMkSipta hokara bhI arthagaurava se rahita hote haiM, kintu yaha grantha unameM
se nahIM hai  /  arthAt nantha ko saMkSipta avazya kiyA gayA hai lekina isa
saMkSepa rUpa meM arthagAMbhIrya pUrNa rUpa se bharA huA hai  /  vizeSatAoM meM
kisI prakAra ko nyUnatA nahIM AI hai  /  isI bAta kA jJAna karAne ke lie
granthakAra ne gAthA meM vizeSaNa rUpa se 'mahatthe mahArtha pada diyA hai|
granthakAra ne grantha kI vizeSatAoM ko batalAne ke bAda viSaya kA

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter on the Sevenfold Classification  The text states, "The binding,
arising, and existence of the nature-places are being explained." Their
characteristics are as follows:  "The mutual relationship between karma-atoms
and the soul-regions, like fire entering every particle of a piece of wood, is
called binding."  "The experience of karma-atoms that have attained the ripening
stage is called arising."  "From the time of blindness or transition until the
karma-atoms transition to another nature-form or until their exhaustion, their
abiding with the soul is called existence."  The word "place" is collective,
therefore, the term "nature-place" should be understood as a collection of two,
three, or more natures.  These nature-places are of three types, based on the
distinctions of binding, arising, and existence, which are being discussed in
this text.  The verb "listen" in the verse indicates that the author is
addressing and cautioning the disciples to listen attentively to the explanation
of the scriptures. Because without caution, study is futile.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa nirdeza karate hue kahA hai- 'bandhodayasaMtapaya
DiThANANaM voccha'-baMdha, udaya aura sattA prakRti sthAnoM kA kathana kiyA jA
rahA hai| jinake lakSaNa isa prakAra haiM- lopiMDa ke pratyeka kaNa meM jaise
agni praviSTa ho jAtI hai, vaise hI karma-paramANuoM kA AtmapradezoM ke sAtha
paraspara jo eka kSetrAvagAhI sambandha hotA hai, use baMdha kahate haiM  / "
vipAka avasthA ko prApta hue karma - paramANuoM ke bhoga ko udaya kahate haiM  /
" aMdha samaya se yA saMkramaNa samaya se lekara jaba taka una karma-paramANuoM
kA anya prakRtirUpa se saMkramaNa nahIM hotA yA jaba taka unakI nirjarA nahIM
hotI, taba taka unakA bAlA ke sAtha rahane kI sa kahate haiM  /  " sthAna zabda
samudAyavAcI hai, ataH prakRtisthAna pada se do, tIna, Adi prakRtiyoM ke
samudAya ko grahaNa karanA cAhie  / " ye prakRtisthAna saMdha, udaya aura sastra
ke bheda se tIna prakAra se haiM  /  jinakA isa grantha meM vivecana kiyA jA
rahA hai  /  gAthA meM Agata 'suNa' kriyApada dvArA granthakAra ne yaha dhvanila
kiyA hai ki AcArya ziSyoM ko sambodhita evaM sAvadhAna karake zAstra kA
vyAkhyAna kareM  /  kyoMki binA sAvadhAna kiye hI adhyayana 1. tatra baMdho nAma
karmaparamANUnAmAtmapradeza: saha vanyaHpiNDavadanyo'nyA- saptatikA prakaraNa
TIkA, pR0 140 nugamaH  /  2. karmaparamANUnAmeva
vipAkaprAptAnAmanubhavanamudayaH  /  - saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 140 3.
bandhamayAt saMkramegAtmalA pasanayAtrA Arabhya yAvat te karmaparamANava
nAnyatra saMkramyante yAvada yA na kSayamupagacchanti tAvat teSAM svasvarUpeNa
yaH sadbhAvaH sA sattA  /  - saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 140 4. prakRtInAM
sthAnAni samudAyA: prakRtisthAnAni hitryAdiprakRtisamudAyA ityarthaH,
sthAnazabdo'tra samudAyavAcI  /  - saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 140 --

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth: Verse 2  **Situation:** When a student is unable to
benefit from the teachings and the Acharya feels distressed. To prevent this
situation and ensure the student understands the Acharya's teachings properly,
the word "Suṇ" (listen) is used in the verse.  **Introduction:** After
explaining the subject matter of the Granth, we now begin the text. The subject
matter of the Granth is to briefly explain the Bandha, Udaya, and Satva Prakriti
Sthanas (states of nature). Therefore, the student asks the Acharya a question
to satisfy their curiosity:  **Verse:**  "Kai bandhato veyah kah kar vaa
bhangavigappa muluttarpagai Payadittaanaani. Bodhava." || 2 ||  **Word
Meaning:**  * Kai: How many * Bandhato: Bind * Veyah: Experience * Kah kar: How
many * Vaa: Or * Paryatithaanaani: States of nature * Salusaraai: Original and
subsequent natures * Bhangavigappa: Variations * U: And * Bodhava: Should know
**Verse Meaning:**  How many natures bind the living being, and how many natures
does it experience? How many natures bind and experience, and how many natures
are its Satva (state of being)? Therefore, one should know the many variations
in the original and subsequent natures.  **Special Meaning:**  The subject
matter of the Granth is to explain the Bandha (binding), Udaya (arising), and
Satva (state of being) Prakriti Sthanas (states of nature). Therefore, the
student raises a question about how many natures are bound, how many arise
during binding, etc. The Acharya answers the student's question by saying that
one should know the many variations in the original and subsequent natures. This
means that there are many variations in the original and subsequent natures of
Karma (actions).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karma grantha : gA0 2 paThana-pAThana kiye jAne kI sthiti meM usakA
lAbha ziSya na uThA sakeM aura svayaM AcArya khedakhinna ho jAyeM  /  ataH vaisI
sthiti na bane aura ziSya AcArya ke vyAkhyAna ko yathAvidhi hRdayaMgama kara
sakeM, isI bAta ko batalAne ke lie gAthA meM 'suNa' yaha kriyApada diyA gayA hai
/  isa prakAra se grantha ke varNya viSaya Adi kA bodha karAne ke pazcAt aba
grantha prArambha karate haiM  /  grantha kA varNya viSaya bandha, udaya aura
satva prakRtisthAnoM ke saMvedha rUpa saMkSepa meM kahanA hai| ataH ziSya AcArya
ke samakSa apanI jijJAsA pUrti ke liye prazna karate haiM ki kas baMdhato veyaha
kaha kara vA bhaMgavigappA muluttarapagaI payaDitaThANANi  /  bodhavvA  //  2 //
seo 5. 11 zabdArtha - kai kitanI prakRtiyoM kA baMdhato vadha karane vAnA, beyai
vedana karatA hai, kai kaha - kitanI- kitanI vAathavA paryAtiThANANi -
prakRtiyoM kA sattAsthAna, salusarAI - mUla aura uttara prakRtiyoM ke viSaya
meM, bhaMgavigappA bho ke vikalpa, u- aura, bodhavA-- jAnanA cAhiye  /  }
gAvArtha - kitanI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle jIva ke kitanI prakRtiyoM kA
vedana hotA hai tathA kitanI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha aura vedana karane vAle jIva
ke kitanI prakRtiyoM kA satva hotA hai ? to mUla aura uttara prakRtiyoM ke
viSaya meM aneka bhaMga-vikalpa jAnanA 'cAhie  /  vizeSArtha - grantha kA varNya
viSaya baMdha Adi prakRtisthAnoM kA kathana karanA hai  /  ataH ziSya zaMkA
prastuta karatA hai ki kitanI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hote samaya kitanI prakRtiyoM
kA udaya hotA hai Adi  /  ziSya kI ukta zaMkA kA samAdhAna karate hue AcArya
uttara dete haiM ki mUla aura uttara prakRtiyoM ke viSaya meM aneka bhaMga
jAnanA caahie| arthAt karmoM kI mUla aura uttara prakRtiyoM meM aneka prakAra ke
bhaMga

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seven Tika  Alternatives arise, but due to the limitations
of verbal capacity, it is not possible to fully describe them. Therefore, in the
original and subsequent natures, these alternatives are generally described in a
general way.  Thus, considering the meaning of this verse, two things are
revealed. Firstly, this chapter primarily discusses the bondage-nature
locations, arising-nature locations, and being-nature locations of the original
natures and subsequently the subsequent natures, along with their mutual
interaction and the resulting disruptions. Secondly, these disruptions and
alternatives are described as occurring in the respective living beings and
qualities.  Keeping this subject division in mind, the commentary first
describes the bondage-nature locations, arising-nature locations, and being-
nature locations of the original natures. Without describing these, the
interaction of these locations mentioned in the subsequent verses cannot be
easily understood. Additionally, the owners and time of these locations are
mentioned as per the context, which is being explained below.  **Bondage
Location, Owner, and Their Time:**  There are eight categories of the original
natures of karma: 1. Knowledge-obscuring, 2. Perception-obscuring, 3. Painful,
4. Deluding, 5. Life-span, 6. Name, 7. Lineage, and 8. Obstruction. Their nature
and characteristics have been explained. The original karma natures are of
eight, seven, six...  1. **"They interact with each other, and their mutual
opposition causes destruction."**  (Karma-prakriti Bandhodaya, p. 65)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa vikalpa banate haiM, kintu vAcAzakti kI maryAdA hone ke
kAraNa jinakA pUrNarUpeNa kathana kiyA jAnA sambhava nahIM hone se kramaza: mUla
aura uttara prakRtiyoM meM sAmAnyatayA una vikalpoM kA kathana karate haiM  /
ww isa prakAra isa gAthA ke vAcyArtha para vicAra karane para do bAtoM ko sUcanA
milatI hai| prathama yaha ki isa prakaraNa meM mukhyatayA pahale mUla prakRtiyoM
aura isake bAda uttara prakRtiyoM ke bandha-prakRti sthAnoM, udaya
prakRtisthAnoM aura satva - prakRtisthAnoM kA tathA unake paraspara saMvedha'
aura unase utpanna hue bhaMgoM kA vicAra kiyA gayA hai| dUsarI bAta yaha hai ki
una bhaMga-vikalpoM ko yathAsthAna jIvasthAnoM aura guNasthAnoM meM ghaTita
karake batalAyA gayA hai  /  isa viSaya vibhAga ko dhyAna meM rakhakara TIkA meM
sabase pahale bATha mUla prakRtiyoM ke baMdha - prakRtisthAnoM, udaya
prakRtisthAnoM aura satvaprakRtisthAnoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| kyoMki inakA
kathana kiye binA Age kI gAthA meM batalAye gaye ina sthAnoM ke saMbedha kA
saralatA se jJAna nahIM ho sakatA hai| sAtha hI prasaMgAnusAra ina sthAnoM ke
svAmI aura kAla kA nirdeza kiyA gayA hai, jinakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA jA rahA
hai  /  baMdhasthAna, svAmI aura unakA kAla : karmoM kI mUla prakRtiyoM ke
nimnalikhita ATha bheda haiM- 1. jJAnAvaraNa, 2. darzanAvaraNa, 3. vedanIya, 4.
mohanIya 5. Ayu, 6 nAma, 7. gotra aura 8. aMtarAya  /  inake svarUpa lakSaNa
batalAye jA cuke haiN| mUla karma prakRtiyoM ke ATha prakRtika, sAta prakRtika,
chaha 1. sayedhaH parasparamekakAlA mAgama virodhena molanam  /  1 karma prakRti
bandhodaya0, pR0 65.

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sixth Karma Granth: Ma 02**  There are a total of four Bandha sthana (bond
places) - eight, seven, six, and one. These are based on the number of Prakruti
(nature) involved.  * **Eight Prakruti Bandha sthana:**  All eight Prakruti are
bound. * **Seven Prakruti Bandha sthana:**  Seven Prakruti are bound, excluding
Ayukarma (life-span karma). * **Six Prakruti Bandha sthana:**  Six Prakruti are
bound, excluding Ayukarma and Mohaniya karma (delusion karma). * **One Prakruti
Bandha sthana:**  Only Vedaniya karma (pain karma) is bound.  This means that a
being who binds Ayukarma will have all eight karmas bound. A being who binds
Mohaniya karma will have all eight karmas bound, or seven without Ayukarma. A
being who binds Jnanavaran (knowledge obscuring karma), Darshanavaran
(perception obscuring karma), Nam (name karma), Gotra (lineage karma), and
Antaraya karma (hindrance karma) will have all eight, seven, or six karmas
bound. A being who binds only Vedaniya karma will have all eight, seven, six, or
one karma bound.  Now, we will discuss the beings who bind these Prakruti.
Ayukarma is bound up to the seventh Apramatta Samyata Gunasthana (state of non-
distracted equanimity). However, since there is a rule that Ayukarma is not
bound in the Misra Gunasthana (mixed state), beings who have the remaining six
Gunasthana without the Misra Gunasthana are the owners of the eight Prakruti
Bandha sthana.  Mohaniya karma is bound up to the ninth Gunasthana. Therefore,
beings from the first to the ninth Gunasthana are the owners of the seven
Prakruti Bandha sthana. However, those who also bind Ayukarma are not the owners
of the seven Prakruti Bandha sthana.  **1.  Tatra Mula Prakritinam
Muktaswarupananam Bandham Pratitiya Chatvari Prakruti Sthanani Saccha - Ashtau,
Sapta, Shad, Eka Cha.** **- Saptathika Prakaran Toka, P. 141**  **2.  Aumbhi Ach
Mohe'satta Ekkam Cha Chaai Va Taiye. Bajhantamsi Banati Sesae Mu Ch
Satthashta.** **- Panchasangraha Saptathika, Ga. 2**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha : mA02 prakRtika aura eka prakRtika isa prakAra kula cAra
baMdhasthAna hote inameM se ATha prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM saba mUla prakRtiyoM
kA, sapta prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM Ayukarma ke vinA sAta kA, chaha prakRtika
baMdhasthAna meM Ayu aura mohanIya kama ke binA chaha kA aura eka prakRtika
baMdhasthAna meM sirpha eka vedanIya karma kA grahaNa hotA hai  /  isakA
tAtparya yaha huA ki Ayukarma kA baMdha karane vAle jIva ke AThoM karmoM kA,
mohanIya karma ko bAMdhane vAle jIva ke AThoM kA yA Ayu ke binA sAta kA;
jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, nAma, gotra aura aMtarAya karma kA baMdha karane
vAle jIva ke ATha kA, sAta kA yA chaha kA tathA eka bedanIya karma kA baMdha
karane vAle jIva ke ATha kA, sAta kA chaha kA yA eka vedanIya karma kA baMdha
hotA hai  /  aba ukta prakRtika baMdha karane vAloM kA kathana karate haiN|
Ayukarma kA baMdha sAtaveM apramattasaMyata guNasthAna taka hotA hai kintu mizra
guNasthAna meM AyubaMdha nahIM hone kA niyama hone se mizra guNasthAna ke binA
zeSa chaha guNasthAna vAle AyubaMdha ke samaya ATha prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke
svAmI hone haiN| mohanIya karma kA baMdha nauveM guNasthAna taka hotA hai ataH
pahale se lekara nauveM guNasthAna taka ke jIva sAta prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke
svAmI haiM  /  kintu jinake Ayukarma kA bhI baMdha hotA ho ve sAta prakRtika
baMdhasthAna ke svAmI nahIM hote 1 tatra mUla prakRtInAmuktasvarUpANAM baMdhaM
pratItya catvAri prakRti sthAnAni saca thA-aSTau, sapta, SaD, ekA ca  /  -
saptatikA prakaraNa TokA, pR0 141 2 Aumbhi acha mohe'satta ekkaM ca chAi vA taie
/  bajhaMtamsi bAMti sesaemu cha sattaSTha  /  /  -paMcasaMgraha saptatikA, gA02

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter on Saptatikas The eight Prakrtic bondage-places are considered to be the
masters. Without the karmas of age and deluding, the remaining six karmas are
bound only in the Sukshmasa mparay gunasthana. Therefore, the Sukshmasa mparay
gunasthana is the one where the soul is the master of six Prakrtic bondage-
places. The bondage of the Vedaniya karma occurs in the eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth gunasthanas, so the beings with these three gunasthanas are
considered to have one Prakrtic measure. The duration of these bondage-places is
such that the eight Prakrtic bondage-places occur at the time of the bondage of
the Ayukarma, and the minimum and maximum bondage-period of the Ayukarma is an
antarmuhurta. Therefore, one should know that the minimum and maximum duration
of the eight Prakrtic bondage-places is an antarmuhurta. The minimum duration of
the seven Prakrtic bondage-places is an antarmuhurta. Because the Apramattasam
yata being who, after binding the eight fundamental Prakrtis, begins the bondage
of the seven Prakrtis, if he, by ascending the Upasamasreni, attains the
Sukshmasa mparay gunasthana within an antarmuhurta, then the minimum duration of
his seven Prakrtic bondage-places is an antarmuhurta. The reason for this is
that in the Sukshmasa mparay gunasthana, the bondage of the six Prakrtic places
begins, and the bondage of the seven Prakrtic bondage-places is destroyed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa haiM, ATha prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke svAmI mAne jAte haiN|
Ayu aura mohanIya karma ke binA zeSa chaha karmoM kA bandha kevala daza
guNasthAnasUkSmasaMparAya meM hotA hai | ataH sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna dAle
jIva chaha prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke svAmI haiN| vedanIya karma kA baMdha
gyArahaveM, bArahaveM aura terahaveM guNasthAna meM hotA hai, ataH ukta tIna
guNasthAna vAle jIva eka prakRtikA mAna ke sAga 1 ina baMdhasthAnoM kA kAla isa
prakAra hai ki ATha prakRtika baMdhasthAna Ayukarma ke baMdha ke samaya hotA hai
aura AyukAma kA jaghanya va utkRSTa baMdhakAla antarmuhUrta hai  /  ataH ATha
prakRtikA baMdhasthAna kA jaghanya va utkRSTa kAla antarmuhUrta pramANa jAnanA
cAhie  /  sAta prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA jaghanya kAla antarmuhUrta hai| kyoMki
jo apramattasaMyata jIva ATha mUla prakRtiyoM kA bandha karake sAta prakatiyoM
ke baMdha kA prArambha karatA hai, vaha yadi upazama zreNi para ArohaNa karake
antamuhUrta kAla meM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna ko prApta ho jAtA hai to usake
sAta prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA jaghanya kAla antarmahUrta hotA hai  /  isakA
kAraNa yaha hai ki sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM chaha prakRtika sthAna kA
baMdha hone lagatA hai tathA sAta prakRtika baMdhasthAna 1 chasu
sagavihamaThavihaM kamma baMdhati timu ya sattavihaM  /  chabihamekANe tisR
ekkamabaMdhago ekko ||-go karmakANDa 452 mizna guNasthAna ke binA apramatta
guNasthAna paryanta chaha guNasthAnoM meM jIva Aya ke binA sAta aura Ayu sahita
mATha prakAra ke karmoM ko bAMdhate haiM  /  mizra, apUrvavaraNa aura anivRtti
karaga ina tIna guNasthAnoM meM Ayu ke binA sAta prakAra ke hI karma bAMdhate
haiN| sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM Ayu moha ke binA chaha prakAra ke karmoM kA
bandha hotA hai ! ugaNAntakaSAya Adi tIna guNasthAnoM meM eka vedanIyakarma kA
hI bandha hotA hai aura ayogi guNasthAna bandharahita haiM arthAt usameM kisI
prakRti kA bandha nahIM hotA hai  /

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Excellent Duration of the Seven Natural Bonds:  The excellent duration of
the seven natural bonds is **one-third of a ** *tribhaga* ** more than thirty-
three *sagaras***, which is less than one *purva koti* year by an *antarmuhurt*.
This is because when a human or a *tithancha* with a lifespan of one *purva
koti* years has one division of their lifespan remaining, they experience a bond
related to the *parbhava* until the *antarmuhurt* time. After the lifespan is
exhausted, the being is reborn in the *dambas* or *narakas* with an excellent
lifespan of thirty-three *sagaras*. When six months of their lifespan remain,
they again experience a bond related to the *parbhava*. This is when they attain
the excellent duration of their seven natural bonds.  ## The Inferior and
Excellent Duration of the Six Natural Bonds:  The inferior duration of the six
natural bonds is **one *samaya***, and the excellent duration is **one
*antarmuhurt***. This is because the six natural bonds belong to the
*sukshmasampradha* *gunasthanavi* beings. Therefore, the *upshamaka* being with
the aforementioned *gunasthan* who resides in the *sukshmasampradha* *gunasthan*
for one *samaya* while ascending or descending the *upshama* *shreni* and dies
to become a *samyagdristi* deva in the next *samaya*, has an inferior duration
of one *samaya* for their six natural bonds. The excellent duration of the six
natural bonds is considered to be one *antarmuhurt* because the excellent
duration of the *sukshmasampradha* *gunasthan* is one *antarmuhurt*.  ## The
Inferior and Excellent Duration of the One Natural Bond:  The inferior duration
of the one natural bond is **one *samaya***, and the excellent duration is
**slightly less than one *purva koti* years**. This is because the being with
the *upshama* *shreni* who resides in the *upshantamoha* *gunasthan* for one
*samaya* and dies to become a deva in the next *samaya*, has an inferior
duration of one *samaya* for their one natural bond. The human with a lifespan
of one *purva koti* years who spends seven months in the womb and is born after
eight years,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paSTa karmagrandha : gA02 kA utkRSTa kAla chaha mAha aura antarmuhUrta kama eka
pUrva koTi varSa kA tribhAga adhika tetIsa sAgara hai| kyoMki jaba eka pUrva
koTi varSa pramANa Ayu vAle kisI manuSya yA tithaMca ke Ayu kA eka vibhAga zeSa
rahane para antarmuhUrta kAla taka parabhava sambandhI Ayu kA baMdha hotA hai,
anantara jagaNana Ayu ke samApta ho jAne para van jIva tetIsa sAgara pramANa
utkRSTa Ayu vAle daMvoM meM yA nArakoM meM utpanna hokara aura vahA~ Ayu ke
chaha mAha zeSa rahane para punaH parabhava sambandhI Ayu kA baMdha karatA hai,
taba usake sAta prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA utkaSTa kAla prApta hotA hai| chaha
prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA jaghanyakAla eka samaya aura utkRSTa kAla antarmuhUrta
hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki chaha prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA svAmI
sUkSmasamparAdha guNasthAnavI jIva hai  /  ataH ukta guNasthAna vAlA jo
upazAmaka jIba upazama zreNi para car3hate samaya yA utarate samaya eka samaya
taka mUkSmasamparAya guNasthAna meM rahatA hai aura mara kara dUsare samaya meM
avirata samyagdRSTi deva ho jAtA hai, usake chaha prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA
jaghanyakAla eka samaya hotA hai tathA chaha prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA
antarmuhUrta pramANa utkRSTa kAla sUkSmasamparAya guNasthAna ke utkRSTa kAla kI
apekSA batAyA hai| kyoMki sUkSmasamparAya guNasthAna kA utkRSTa kAla
antarmuhurta pramANa hai| eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA jaghanyakAla eka samaya
aura utkRSTa kAla kucha kama pUrva koTi varSa pramANa hai  /  jisakA
spaSTIkaraNa yaha hai ki jo upazama zreNi vAlA jIva upazAntamoha guNasthAna meM
eka samaya taka rahatA hai aura marakara dUsare samaya meM deva ho jAtA hai, usa
upazAntamoha vAle jIva ke eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA jaghanyakAla eka samaya
prApta hotA hai tathA eka pUrva koTi varSa kI Ayu vAlA jo manuSya sAta mAha
garbha meM rahakara aura tadanantara janma lekara ATha varSa pramANa

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Saptatikaprakarana 10 After the passage of time, by observing vows, within one
antarmuhurta, he becomes a sayogikevali after the diminution of delusion. The
maximum duration of one of his prakritic bondage-locations is eight years, seven
months, and less than one pūrvakoti year. The classification of bondage-
locations, their owners, and the duration are as follows:  Bondage-location
Bhāva-prakṛtic Sāta-prakṛtic Cañca-prakṛtic Ekaprakṛtikā Mūla-prakṛti Āyu
(without) Owner Jāghanya Utkriṣṭa Miśra-guṇa antarmuhūrta antarmuhūrta (without)
Anāmasa Guṇasthāna up to etc. antarmuhūrta one antarmuhūrta and | Guṇasthāna six
months less and pūrvakoti division more thirty-three sāgara Mohanīya and Āyuḥ
Sūkṣmasamparāya (without) Vedanīya 11th, 12th, 13th Guṇasthāna Duration one
samaya one samaya Antaḥ Deśīna pūrvakoti Udayasthāna, owner, and their duration
After describing the bondage-locations, now we describe the udaya (arising) in
relation to the prakṛtis: there are three udayasthānas, namely, eight prakṛtic,
seven prakṛtic, and four prakṛtic, thus in relation to the mūla-prakṛtis.  1
Udayaṃ prati trīṇi prakṛtisthānāni tad yathā aṣṭau sapta catasraḥ. -
Saptatikaprakaraṇa-ṭīkā, p. 142

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa 10 kAla vyatIta hone para saMyama dhAraNa karake eka
antarmuhUrta kAla ke bhItara kSINamoha hokara sayogikevalI ho jAtA hai, usake
eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA utkRSTa kAla ATha varSa sAta mAha aura
antarmuhUrta kama eka pUrva koTi varSa pramANa prApta hotA hai| baMdhasthAnoM ke
bheda, svAmI aura kAla pradarzaka vivaraNa isa prakAra haiM ' T baMdha sthAna
bhAU prakRtika sAta prakRtika cnyc prakRtika eka prakRtikA mUla prakRti sana Ayu
ke binA svAmI jaghanya utkRSTa mizra guNa ke antarmuhUrta antarmuhUrta binA
anamasa guNasthAna taka Adi ke antarmuhurta eka antarmuhUrta aura | guNasthAna
chaha mAha kama tathA pUrva koTi kA vibhAga adhika tetIsa sAgara moha va Ayu
sUkSmasampadAya ke binA vedanIya 11, 12, 13vAM guNasthAna kAla eka samaya eka
samaya anta ha dezIna pUrva koTi udayasthAna, svAmI aura unakA kAla baMdha
prakRtisthAnoM kA kathana karane ke pazcAt aba udaya kI apekSA se prakRtisthAnoM
kA nirUpaNa karate haiM ki ATha prakRtika, sAta prakRtika aura cAra prakRtika,
isa prakAra mUla prakRtiyoM ko apekSA tIna udayasthAna hote haiM  /  1 1 udayaM
prati trINi prakRtisthAnAni tadyathA aSTau sapta catasraH  /  J - saptatikA
prakaraNa TokA, pR0 142

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Text from Karb Granth: Verse 2**  In the eight natural stages of arising, all
eight karmas arise. In the seven natural stages of arising, seven karmas arise
without the mohaniya karma. In the four natural stages of arising, four aghati
karmas arise. From this, it can be concluded that the arising of all eight
karmas occurs when mohaniya is present. When mohaniya is absent, the remaining
three ghati karmas arise, resulting in the arising of eight or seven karmas. The
arising of eight karmas occurs up to the tenth gunasthan, called sukshmasampray.
The arising of seven karmas occurs in the upashantmoha or kshinamoha gunasthan.
The arising of four aghati karmas occurs when eight, seven, or four karmas
arise. Of these, eight arise up to the sukshmasampray gunasthan, seven arise in
the upashantmoha or kshinamoha gunasthan, and four arise in the sayogikevali and
ayogikevali gunasthan.  The lords of the aforementioned stages of arising should
be understood as follows: The mohaniya karma arises up to the tenth
sukshmasampray gunasthan. Therefore, the lords of the eight natural stages of
arising are the jivas from the beginning up to the tenth gunasthan. Except for
mohaniya, the remaining three ghati karmas arise up to the twelfth gunasthan.
Therefore, the lords of the seven natural stages of arising are:  1. (a) **Moha
sudaye att ha ki satta ya lamanti sesayanudaye.** **Santoinaani aghaiyaanam saha
satta chauro ya.** - Panchasangrah Saptathika, Verse 3 (b) **Tatra mohaniya
sthoudaye astanaam apyudayah, mohaniya barjanaam trayaanam ghatikarmaanam udaye
astanaam saptaanaam va.** **Tatra astanaam sukshmasampray gunasthanak yaavat,
saptaanaam upashantmohe kshinamohe va, vedaniya aayu naam gotranaam mrudaye
astanaam saptaanaam chatasnaam ba udayah.** **Tatra astanaam sukshmasampray
yaavat, saptaanaam upashantmohe kshona mohe va, chanamrinam atamaam av
vedaniyaadinaam sayogikevalini ayogikevalini cha.** - Sapatika Prakaran Teeka,
Page 143

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pATha karbha grantha : gA02 ATha prakRtika udayasthAna meM sava mUla prakRtiyoM
kA, sAta prakRtika udayasthAna meM mohanIya karma ke binA sAta mUla prakRttiyoM
kA aura cAra prakRtika udayasthAna meM cAra aghAtI karmoM kA grahaNa hotA hai|
isase yaha niSkarSa nikalatA hai ki mohanIya ke udaya rahate AThoM karmoM kA
udaya hotA hai| mohanIya ke vinA zeSa tIna pAtI karmoM kA udaya rahate ATha yA
sAta karmoM kA udaya hotA hai| ATha karmoM kA udaya sUkSmasaMparAya nAmaka
dasaveM guNasthAna taka hotA hai aura sAta kA udaya upazAntamoha yA kSINamoha
guNasthAna meM hotA hai  /  cAra aghAtI karmoM kA udaya rahate ATha, sAta yA
cAra kA udaya hotA hai  /  inameM se ATha kA udaya sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna
taka, sAta kA udaya upazAntamoha yA kSINamoha guNasthAna meM aura cAra kA udaya
sayogikevalI tathA ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM hotA hai| ukta udayasthAnoM ke
svAmI isa prakAra samajhanA cAhiye ki mohanIya karma kA udaya dasaveM
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna taka hotA hai anaH ATha prakRtika udayasthAna ke
svAmI prArambha se dasa guNasthAna taka ke jIva haiM  /  mohanIya ke sivAya zeSa
tIna ghAtI karmoM kA udaya bArahaveM guNasthAna taka hotA hai ataH sAta
prakRtika udayasthAna ke 1. (ka) mohassudae aTTha ki satta yA lamanti
sesayANudae  /  santoiNANi aghAiyANaM saha sattA cauro ya  /  /  -paMcasaMgraha
saptatikA, gA0 3 (kha) tatra mohanIyasthodaye'STAnAmapyudayaH, mohanIyabarjAnAM
trayANAM ghAtikarmaNAmudaye aSTAnAM saptAnAM vA  /  tatrASTAnAM
sUkSmasaMparAyaguNasthAnaka yAvat, saptAnAmupazAntamohe kSINamohe vA,
vedanIyA''yuHnAmagotrANAmRdaye'STAnAM saptAnAM catasaNAMbA udayaH  /
tatrASTAnAM sUkSmasaMparAya yAvat, saptAnAmupazAntamohe kSoNa mohe vA,
canamRNAmatAmAmava vedanIyAdInAM sayogikevalini ayogikevalini ca  /  -sapAtikA
prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 143

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sapttatika Chapter  **Swami** are the beings of the eleventh and twelfth
**guna-sthana**. The four **aghati** karmas arise until the thirteenth
**sayogikevali** and fourteenth **ayogikevali** guna-sthana. Therefore, the
**sayogikevali** and **ayogikevali** beings are the **swami** of the four
**prakritik** **udaya-sthana**.  There are three options for the time of the
eight **prakritik** **udaya-sthana** in these three **udaya-sthana**: 1.
**Anadi-ananta**, 2. **Anadi-santa**, and 3. **Sadi-santa**. Of these,
**abhavya** have **anadi-ananta**, **bhavya** have **anadi-santa**, and beings
who have fallen from the **upshamsamoha** guna-sthana have **sadi-santa** time.
Compared to the **sadi-santa** option, the **jghanya** time of the eight
**prakritik** **udaya-sthana** is **antarmuhurta**, and the **utkrista** time is
slightly less than **apardha-pudgala-paravarta** pramana. The being who falls
from **upshamni** and again becomes **upshamsamohi** in the **antarmuhurta**
time of **ga-upshamsa** has **antarmuhurta** as the **jghanya** time of the
eight **prakritik** **udaya-sthana**. And the being who is **upshamsamohi** at
the beginning and **kshinamohi** at the end of the **apardha-pudgala-paravarta**
time has **apardha-pudgala-paravarta** as the **utkrista** time of the eight
**prakritik** **udaya-sthana**.  1. **Adao sahumo ti ya moheṇ viṇā hu
santakhoṇesu. Ghadi-daraṇ ghaukkarasu-dao ali duge niyama.** - **Go. Karmakanda,
Ga. 454** - The **prakriti** arise until the **sukshma-samparaya** guna-sthana.
The **upapaanta-kshaya** and **kshinakshaya** have the seven **udaya** without
**mohaniya** in these two guna-sthana, and the four **aghati** karmas arise in
both **sayogi** and **ayogi** according to the rule.  2. **Tatra
sarvaprakritisamudayo'shti, tasam codayo: manyanadhikritya anadyaparyavasita:,
bhavyanadhikritya anadisaparyavasanah, upshamsamohagunasthanakat
pratipatitanadhikritya punah sadimaparyavasanah.** - **Sapttatika Prakaran Tika,
p. 142**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa svAmI gyArahaveM aura bArahaveM guNasthAna ke jIva haiN|
cAra aghAtI karmoM kA udaya terahaveM sayogikevalI aura caudahaveM ayogikevalI
guNasthAna taka hotA hai  /  ataeva cAra prakRtika udayasthAna ke svAmI
sayogikevalI aura ayogikevalI jIva haiM  /  ina tIna udayasthAnoM meM se ATha
prakRtika udayasthAna ke kAla ke tIna vikalpa haiM.-1. anAdi-ananta, 2. anAdi-
sAnta aura 3. sAdisAnta  /  inameM se abhavyoM ke anAdi-ananta, bhavyoM ke
anAdi-sAnta aura upazAnsamoha guNasthAna se gire hue jIvoM kI apekSA sAdi-sAMta
kAla hotA hai  /  sAdi-sAnna vikalpa kI apekSA ATha prakRtika udayasthAna kA
jaghanyakAla antarmuhUrta aura utkRSTa kAla kucha kama apArdhapudgala parAvarta
pramANa hai  /  jo jIva upazamaNi se girakara punaH antarmuhUrta kAla ke gA
upazamaza para nayA nazamamor3I ho jAtA hai| usa jIva ke ATha prakRtika
udayasthAna kA jaghanya kAla antarmuhUrta hotA hai aura jo jIva apArdha pudgala
parAvarta kAla ke prArambha meM upazAntamohI aura anta meM kSINamohI huA hai,
usake ATha prakRtika 1. adao sahumo ti ya moheNa viNA hu saMtakhoNesu  /
ghAdidarANa ghaukkarasudao ali duge niyamA  /  /  -go0 karmakAMDa, gA0 454
-sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna taka Ara prakRtiyoM kA udaya hai  /  upapAAntakaSAya
aura kSINakaSAya ina do guNasthAnoM meM mohanIya ke binA sAta kA udaya hai tathA
sayogi aura ayogi ina donoM meM cAra aghAtiyA karmoM kA udaya niyama se jAnanA
cAhie  /  2. tatra sarvaprakutisamudAyo'STI, tAsAM codayo: manyAnadhikRtya
anAdyaparyavasitaH, bhavyAnadhikRtyAnAdisaparyavasAnaH,
upazAnsamohaguNasthAnakAt pratipatitAnadhikRtya punaH saadimpryvsaanH|
-saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 142

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 13, Sixth Karma Granth, Verse 2  The **utkṛṣṭakāla** (peak time) of
the **udayastāna** (arising place) of the **saṁskāra** (karmic matter) is
slightly less than half a **pṛthvī** (earth).  **1.** The **jayakāla**
(conquering time) of the seven **mṛtikā** (earth) **sthāna** (places) is one
**samaya** (moment) and the **utkṛṣṭakāla** is **antarmuhūrta** (half a moment).
The arising of the seven **mūla prakṛti** (fundamental substances) occurs in the
**upaśānta moha** (subdued delusion) and **kṣīṇa moha** (diminished delusion)
**guṇasthāna** (quality places). However, in the **kṣīṇa moha** **guṇasthāna**,
there is neither death nor **patan** (fall) from it. And a **jīva** (soul)
residing in the **kṣīṇa moha** **guṇasthāna**, by the rule, destroys the three
**ghāti karma** (destructive karmas) and becomes a **sayogikevalī** (liberated
soul with subtle karmas). But in the **upaśānta moha** **guṇasthāna**, the
**jīva** experiences both death and **pratipāt** (fall). Therefore, a **jīva**
who resides in the **upaśānta moha** **guṇasthāna** for one **samaya** and then
dies, becoming a **samyagdṛṣṭi deva** (perfectly enlightened god) without
interruption, is considered to have a **jighanya kāla** (minimum time) of one
**samaya** for the arising place of the seven **prakṛti**. And the
**utkṛṣṭakāla** of the **upaśānta moha** or **kṣīṇa moha** **guṇasthāna** is
**antarmuhūrta**. Therefore, the **utkṛṣṭakāla** of the arising place of the
seven **prakṛti** is considered to be **antarmuhūrta**.  The **jighanya kāla**
of the arising place of the four **prakṛti** is **antarmuhūrta** and the
**utkṛṣṭakāla** is slightly less than one **pūrva koṭi** (previous aeon). A
**jīva** who becomes a **sayogikevalī** and attains **nirvāṇa** within an
**antarmuhūrta** is considered to have a **jighanya kāla** of **antarmuhūrta**
for the arising place of the four **prakṛti**. And the **utkṛṣṭakāla** should be
understood as being similar to the **desa** (region) of one **pūrva koṭi**
**pramaṇa** (measure) of the **bandhasthāna** (binding place) of one
**prakṛti**. That is, just as it is stated that the **utkṛṣṭakāla** of the
**bandhasthāna** of one **prakṛti** is the age of a human being who lives for
one **pūrva koṭi** years, stays in the womb for seven months, and then...  **1**
**dhātikarmavajachitasraḥ prakṛtayaḥ tāsamudayo jighanyenāntamoḥ tikah utkṛṣṭa
tu deśapūrva koṭi pramaṇa - Sapttatikā Prakaraṇa Ṭīkā, p. 142

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 13 SaSTha karmagrantha : gA0 2 udayasthAna kA utkRSTakAla kucha kama apArdha
pudgala parAvarta hotA hai  /  1 sAta maRtika sthAna ka jayakAla eka samaya aura
utkRSTa kAla antarmuhUrta hai  /  sAta mUla prakRtiyoM kA udaya upazAntamoha
aura kSINamoha ina do guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai  /  parantu kSINamoha guNasthAna
meM na to maraNa hotA hai aura na usase patana hotA hai aura kSINamoha
guNasthAnavartI jIva niyama se tIna ghAtI karmoM kA kSaya karake sayogakevalI ho
jAtA hai| lekina upazAntamoha guNasthAna meM jIva kA maraNa bhI hotA hai aura
usase pratipAta bhI hotA hai | ataH jo jIva eka samaya taka upazAntamoha
guNasthAna meM rahakara aura dUsare samaya meM marakara avirata samyagdRSTi deva
ho jAtA hai, usake sAta prakRtika udayasthAna kA jaghanyakAla eka samaya mAnA
jAtA hai tathA upazAntamoha yA kSINamoha guNasthAna kA utkRSTa kAla antarmuhUrta
hai, ataH sAta prakRtika udayasthAna kA utkRSTa kAla antarmuhUrta mAnA jAtA hai
/  cAra prakRtika udayasthAna kA jaghanyakAla antarmuhUrta aura utkRSTakAla
kucha kama eka pUrva koTi pramANa hai| jo jIva sayogikevalI hokara eka
antarmuharta kAla ke bhItara nirvANa ko prApta kara letA hai, usakI apekSA cAra
prakRtika udayasthAna kA jaghanyakAla antarmuhUrta kahA hai aura utkRSTakAla eka
prakRti baMdhasthAna kAla kI saraha dezona pUrva koTi pramANa samajhanA cAhie  /
arthAt jaise eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA utkRSTakAla batalAyA hai ki eka pUrva
koTi varSa kI Ayu vAlA manuSya sAta mAha garbha meM rahakara aura tadanantara 1
dhAtikarmavajazcitasraH prakRtayaH tAsAmudayo jaghanyenAntamoH tikaH utkaNa tu
dezapUrvakoTipramANa - saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 142

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Saptaatika Chapter  When a person attains restraint after eight years
from birth, and within a single antarmukhurta becomes kshina moha, sayog kevali,
then that should be considered as one purva koti year minus eight years and
seven months. Here, the special feature is that the kshina moha gunasthan has
the antarmukhurta navae.  The details of the udhayasthanas, their masters, and
time are as follows:  **Time** | **Udhayasthan** | **Master** | **Nature**
------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | All |  Ten gunasthanas of adi |  |
Eight nature |  |  Seven gunasthanas without moha |  |  Seven nature |  |  11th,
12th gunasthan |  |  Four nature |  |  13th gunasthan |  |  Four nature, four
aghati |  |  14th gunasthan |  |  Four nature, four aghati |  |  14th gunasthan
|  |  Four nature, four aghati |  |  I |  |  Aghatya, utkrisht antarmukhurta,
slightly less aparth |  |  One time |  |  Pudgal paravarta antarmukhurta |  |
Antarmukhurta |  |  Deshon purva koti  **Sattastana, Master, and Time**  After
explaining the bandha and udhayasthanas, now we explain the sattastanas. There
are three types of sattastanas: eight nature, seven nature, and four nature. In
the eight nature sattastan, all eight karmas, from jnanaavaran to antaray, are
accepted. In the seven nature sattastan, all seven karmas except mohaniya are
accepted. In the four nature sattastan, only the four aghati karmas are
accepted.  The specific explanation is that in the presence of mohaniya karma,
all eight karmas exist. In the presence of jnanaavaran, darshanavaran, and
antakaya, all eight karmas exist.  **1. Satta prati shrinni prakriti sthanaani.
Tadyatha - Ashtau, sapta, chatasrah. - Saptaatika Prakaran Teeka, p. 143**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa janma se lekara ATha varSa pramANa kAla ke vyatIta hone
para saMyama prApta karake eka antarmuhUrta kAla ke bhItara kSINamoha,
sayogakevalI ho jAtA hai to vaise hI ATha varSa, sAta mAha kama eka pUrva koTi
varSa pramANa samajhanA cAhie  /  yahA~ itanI vizeSatA hai ki isameM kSINamoha
guNasthAna kA phaarmuhuurtaanaavaae| udayasthAnoM ke svAmI, kAla Adi kA vivaraNa
isa prakAra hai kAla uvayasthAna | mUla prakRti : svAmI ATa prakRti sabhI Adi ke
dasa guNasthAna sAta prakRti moha ke binA, 11, 12vA~ guNa sthAna cAra prakRti
cAra aghAtI 14 13 guNasthAna 14auM I aghanya | utkRSTa antarmuhUrta | kucha kama
apArtha eka samaya pudgala parAvarta antarmuhUrta antarmuhUrta dezona pUrva koTi
sattAsthAna, svAmI aura kAla bandha aura udayasthAnoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba
sattAsthAnoM ko batalAte haiM  /  sattA prakRtika sthAna tIna haiMATha
prakRtika, sAta prakRtika aura cAra prakRtika | ATha prakRtika sattAsthAna meM
jJAnAvaraNa Adi antarAyaparyanta saba bhUla prakRtiyoM kA sAta prakRtika
sattAsthAna meM mohanIya ke sivAya zeSa sAta prakRtiyoM aura cAra prakRtika
sattAsthAna meM cAra aghAtI karmoM kA grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai| isakA vizeSa
spaSTIkaraNa yaha hai ki mohanIya karma ke sadbhAva meM AThoM karmoM kI,
jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa aura aMtakAya kI vidyamAnatA meM AThoM 1 sattA prati
zrINi prakRtisthAnAni  /  tadyathA- aSTau sapta, catasraH  /  - saptatikA
prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 143

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## From the Karma Granth: Chapter 2  **Regarding the seven karmas without the
mohaniya karma, and the four aghati karmas (vedaniya, ayu, nama, and gotra), the
existence of all eight, or the seven without the mohaniya, or the four aghati
karmas is found.**  **The owners of these places of existence are as follows:**
The four aghati karmas exist for both the sayogika and ayogika kevalis.
Therefore, the owners of the four natural places of existence are the sayogika
kevali and ayogika kevali gunasthanavarti. The existence of the remaining seven
karmas without the mohaniya is found in the 12th kshinamoha gunasthan.
Therefore, the owners of the seven natural places of existence are the jivas who
are in the kshinamoha gunasthan. The existence of all eight karmas is found from
the first to the 11th upshantamoha gunasthan. Therefore, the owners of the eight
natural places of existence are the jivas who are in the first to the 11th
gunasthan.  1. **The existence of the mohaniya karma is also found in the
existence of the jnana, aparanadarshana, and avarana antarayas. The existence of
all eight or seven is found in the existence of the vedaniya, ayu, nama, and
gotra.** - Sapttatika Prakaran Tika, page 143 2. **The existence of the four
(aghati karmas) is the existence of the vedaniya, etc. This is to be seen in the
sayogika kevali gunasthan and the ayogika kevali gunasthan.** - Sapttatika
Prakaran Tika, page 143 3. **(Or) The existence of the seven (karmas) without
the mohaniya is found up to the upshantamoha gunasthan, and the existence of the
four (aghati karmas) is found in the kshinamoha gunasthan.** - Sapttatika
Prakaran Tika, page 143 4. **(Or) The existence of the eight (karmas) is found
in the existence of the four (aghati karmas) in the sayogika and ayogika
kevalis.** - Go. Karmakand, Chapter 457  **The existence of all eight karmas is
found up to the upshantakashay gunasthan. In the kshinakashay gunasthan, only
the existence of the seven karmas without the mohaniya is found. And the
existence of the four aghati karmas is found in both the sayogika kevali and
ayogika kevali.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bATa karma grantha : gA02 karmoM kI yA mohanIya ke binA sAta karmoM kI tathA
vedanIya, Ayu, nAma aura gotra ina cAra aghAtI karmoM ke rahate hue AThoM ko,
mohanIya ke binA sAta kI yA cAra aghAtI karmoM kI sattA pAI jAtI hai  /  ina
sattAsthAnoM ke svAmI isa prakAra haiM cAra adhAtI karmoM ko sattA sayogi aura
ayogi kevaliyoM ke hotI hai ataH cAra prakRtika sattAsthAna ke svAmI
sayogikevalI aura ayogikevalI guNasthAnavartI hote haiM  /  mohanIya ke binA
zeSa sAta karmoM kI sattA bArahaveM kSINamoha muNasthAna meM pAI jAtI hai, ataH
sAta prakRtika sattAsthAna ke svAmI kSINamoha guNasthAna vAle jIva haiM  /  ATha
karmoM kI sattA pahale se lekara gyArahaveM upazAntamoha guNasthAna taka pAI
jAtI hai, ataH ATha prakRtika sattAsthAna ke svAmI Adi ke gyAraha guNasthAna
vAle jIva haiN| 1. mohanIye satyapTAnAmapi sattA,
jJAnAparaNadarzanAvaraNA'ntarAyANAM sattAyAM aSTAnAM saptAnAM va sattA |
vedanIyA yu nAmagotrANAM sattAyAmaSTAnAM saptAnAM cattasaNAM vA sttaa|
-saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 143 catasRNAM sattA vedanIyAdInAmeya sA, ca
sayogikevaliguNasthAnake ayogikeniguNasthAna ke ca draSTavyA  /  -saptatikA
prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 143 3. (vA) tApTAnAmupazAntamohaguNasthAnakaM yAvat
mor3anIya kSINe saptAnAM, mA ca bhINamohaguNasthAnake  /  -saptatikA prakaraNa
TokA, pR0 143 (kha) saMto ti aThThasattA jINe satteva hoti sattANi 1 jogimmi
ajogimmi ya cattAri havaMti rAttANi || -go0 pharmakAMDa, gA0457 upazAntakaSAya
guNasthAna paryanta AThoM prakRtiyoM kI sattA hai| kSINakaSAya guNasthAna meM
mohanIma ke vinA sApta kareM kI hI sattA hai aura sayogikevalI va ayogi kevalI
ina donoM meM cAra aghAtiyA karmoM kI sattA hai|

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Seventy-Three  **Of the eight natural states of existence, the time
period is beginningless and endless in relation to the Abhyavi, because the
Abhyavi only has the Mithyatva Gunasthan, and in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there
is no decay of any original nature. In relation to the Bhavya, the time period
of the eight natural states of existence is beginningless and finite, because
the Kshapaka, in the Sukhsma Samparaya Gunasthan, completely destroys the
Mohaniya Karma, and after that, in the Kshina Moh Gunasthan, the seven natural
states of existence are attained, and it does not happen from the Kshina Moh
Gunasthan. From this, it is proven that the eight natural states of existence
are beginningless and finite in relation to the Bhavya.**  **The seven natural
states of existence are in the twelfth Kshina Moh Gunasthan, and the time period
of the Kshina Moh Gunasthan, from the least to the greatest, is the measure of
an Antarmuhurt. Therefore, the time period of the seven natural states of
existence, from the least to the greatest, is also the measure of an
Antarmuhurt.**  **The four natural states of existence are found in the
Sayogikevali and Ayogikevali Gunasthanas, and the least time period of these
Gunasthanas is an Antarmuhurt, and the greatest time period is slightly less
than one Purva Koti years. Therefore, the least time period of the four natural
states of existence should be understood as an Antarmuhurt, and the greatest
time period as slightly less than one Purva Koti years.**  **1. In that, all the
natural states of existence are eight, and the existence of these eight, in
relation to the Abhyavi, is beginningless and endless, and in relation to the
Bhavya, it is beginningless and finite.**  **2. The existence of the seven
natural states of existence, which are destroyed by the Mohaniya Karma, and
their time period, from the least to the greatest, is the measure of an
Antarmuhurt, because it is in the Kshina Moh, and the Kshina Moh Gunasthan is
also the measure of an Antarmuhurt.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatibA prakaraNa ina tIna sattAsthAnoM meM se ATha prakRtika sattAsthAna kA
kAla abhavya kI apekSA anAdi ananta hai, kyoMki abhavya ke sirpha eka mithyAtva
guNasthAna hI hotA hai aura mithyAtva guNasthAna meM kisI bhI mUla prakRti kA
kSaya nahIM hotA hai| bhavya jIvoM kI apekSA ATha prakRtika sattAsthAna kA kAla
anAdi sAnta hai, kyoMki kSapaka sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM ho mohanIya karma
kA samUla uccheda kara detA hai aura usake bAda kSINamoha guNasthAna meM sAta
prakRtika sattAsthAna kI prApti hotI hai aura kSINamoha guNasthAna se nahIM hotA
hai  /  jisase yaha siddha huA ki bhavya jIvoM kI apekSA ATha prakRtika
sattAsthAna anAdi-sAMta hai 12 16 sAta prakRtika sattAsthAna bArahaveM kSINamoha
guNasthAna meM hotA hai aura kSINamoha guNasthAna kA jaghanya va utkRSTa kAla
antarmuhUrta pramANa hai  /  ataH sAta prakRtika sattAsthAna kA jaghanya va
utkRSTa kAla bhI antarmuhUrta pramANa hI hai  / " cAra prakRtika sattAsthAna
sayogikevalI aura ayogikevalI guNasthAnoM meM pAyA jAtA hai aura ina guNasthAnoM
kA jaghanyakAla antarmuhUrta aura utkRSTa kAla kucha kama eka pUrva koTiM varSa
pramANa hai | ataH vAra prakRtika sattAsthAna kA jaghanyakAla antarmuhUrta aura
utkRSTakAla kucha kama eka pUrvakoTi varSa pramANa samajhanA cAhie  /  1. tatra
sarva prakRtisamudAyo'STI etAsAM cASTAnAM sattA abhavyAnadhikRtya
anAdyaparyavasAnA, bhayyAmadhikRtya anAdisaparyavasAnA | 1 - saptatikA prakaraNa
TIkA, pR0 143 2. mohanIye kSINaM sagtAnAM sattA sA ca
jaghanyotkarSeNAntarmuhurta pramANA, sA hi kSINa mohe, kSoNamohaguNasthAnakaM
cAntarmuharta pramANamiti  /  saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 143

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth: Verse 3  Here, "some less" means eight years, seven
months, and the Antarmūhūrta measure. The description of the owners of the
Satta-sthānas, time, etc., is as follows:  **Satta-sthāna |  Mūla-prakriti |
Owner | Time | Offspring | Excellent | Eight Prakṛitis | All | Beginning |
Eleven | Anadi-sānta | Anadi-ananta** **Guṇa-sthāna | Seven Prakṛitis | Mohiṇīya
| Kṣīṇa-moha | Antarmūhūrta | Antarmūhūrta** **| Without Guṇa-sthāna | Four
Prakṛitis | Four | Aghati | 13th, 14th | Antarmūhūrta / Deśona Pūrva-koṭi**
Guṇa-sthāna: In this way, one should understand the separate bondage, arising,
and Satta-prakriti-sthānas of the Mūla-prakritis. Now, in the next verse, we
will discuss the various types of breaking of the Mūla-karmas.  **Breaking of
the Mūla-karmas**  **Aṭṭhavihasattacchbandageśu aṭṭheva uvamasantāi.** **Egavihe
tivigappō egavigappō abandhammī. ||3||**  1. In the case of the four types of
Ghātika-karma, there are four Satta-sthānas, and they are the lowest, with the
Antarmūhūrta measure. The highest is measured by the Deśona Pūrva-koṭi. - Sapta-
tika Prakaraṇa Ṭīkā, 143 2. Compare: **Aḍhavihasattacchbandageśu aṭṭheva
udayakammaṁsā.** **Eyavihe vidhiyappō epp viyappō abandhammī. || - Go.
Karmakāṇḍa, 628**  - In the Mūla-prakritis, there are eight types of arising and
Satta-sthānas for those beings who have bondage of the type of Shānāvaraṇa,
etc., or those who have seven types of bondage, or those who have six types of
bondage. For those who have bondage of only one type of Mūla-prakriti, there are
three types. For those who have no bondage of any Mūla-prakriti, there are four
types of arising and Satta-sthānas, making only one option.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha : gA03 yahA~ kucha kama kA matalaba ATha varSa, sAta mAsa
aura antamuhUtaM pramANa hai  /  sattAsthAnoM ke svAmI, kAla Adi kA vivaraNa isa
prakAra haisattAsthAna | mUlaprakRti , svAmI  /  kAla | apatya  /  utkRSTa ATha
prakRtika sabhI | Adi ke 11 | anAdi-sAnta | anAdi-ananta' guNa sthAna sAta
prakRtika mohanIya ke kSINamoha  /  antarmuhUrta  /  anta muhUrta | binA
guNasthAna cAra prakRtika 4 aghAti | 13vA, 14aaN | antarmuhUrta / dezona
pUrvakoTi guNasthAna  /  isa prakAra mUla prakRtiyoM ke pRthak-pRthak bandha,
udaya aura sattA prakRti sthAnoM ko samajhanA cAhie  /  aba Age kI gAthA meM
mUlako ke saMvaidha bhaMgoM kA kathana karate haiM  /  mUlakarmoM ke saMvaidha
bhaMga aTThavihasattachabaMdhagesu aTheva uvamasaMtAI  /  egavihe tivigappo
egavigappo abaMdhammi  // 3 //  1. ghAtikarmacatuSTayamaye ca catasRNAM sattA,
sA ca jaghanya nAntamuhUrtapramANA, utkarSaNa punardezonapUrvakoTimAnA  /
--saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, 143 2. tulanA kIjiye aDhavihasattacharbadha gesa
aTheva udayakammaMsA  /  eyavihe vidhiyApo epa viyappo abaMdhammi  /  /  -go0
pharmakANDa, 628 - mUla prakRtiyoM meM se zAnAvaraNa Adi bhAu prakAra ke bandha
vAle athavA sAta prakAra ke bandha vAle yA chaha prakAra ke bandha bAle jIvoM ke
udaya aura sattva ATha-ATha prakAra kA jAnanA  /  jisake eka prakAra mUla
prakRti kA bandha hai usake tIna bheda hote haiN| jisake eka prakRti kA bhI
bandha nahIM hotA usake udaya aura sattva cAra-cAra prakAra ke hone se. eka hI
vikalpa hai|

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of Sevenfold  **Word Meanings:**  * **Avisattadhanbandho:**  At
the time of eightfold, sevenfold, and sixfold bondage. * **Atheva:** All eight
karmas. * **Udayasansai:**  Uday (arising) and Satta (existence). * **Egabihe:**
Onefold bondage. * **Tivi-gapppo:** Three options. * **Egavi-gapppo:** One
option. * **Mbandhammi:** In the state of non-bondage. * **Bandha ne hone par:**
When bondage occurs.  **Verse Meaning:**  At the time of eightfold, sevenfold,
and sixfold bondage of karmas, there is uday and satta of all eight karmas. In
the case of onefold bondage, there are three options for uday and satta, while
in the state of non-bondage, there is only one option for uday and satta.
**Detailed Meaning:**  This verse discusses the relationship between the
bondage, uday, and satta of the fundamental natures. When there is eightfold,
sevenfold, or sixfold bondage, there is uday and satta of all eight karmas -
"Achetara Udayasansai". This means that until the seventh "Aparamatta-samyata"
Gunasthan, all beings can bind all eight karmas at the time of Ayubandha.
Therefore, they have eightfold bondage, eightfold uday, and eightfold satta.
Beings up to the "Anivriti-vadara-samparaya" Gunasthan bind all seven karmas
except Ayukarma, but their uday and satta can be of all eight karmas. Similarly,
beings in the "Sukshma-samparaya-samyata" Gunasthan bind only six karmas,
excluding Ayukarma and Mohaniya karma, but their uday and satta can still be of
all eight karmas.  The reason why uday and satta are considered the same despite
differences in the nature of karma bondage is that all these beings are "Saraga"
(attached). The cause of "Saragata" is the uday of Mohaniya karma. When Mohaniya
karma arises, its satta is inevitable.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa zabdArtha-avisattadhAJbaMdho-aSTavidha, saptavidha,
paDvidha baMdha ke samaya, aTheva-AThoM karma kI, udayasaMsAI-udaya aura salA,
egabihe-ekavidha baMdha ke samama, tivigappo-tIna vikalpa, egavigappoeka
vikalpa, mabaMdhammi-abandha dazA meM, baMdha ne hone pr| gAthArthaATha, sAta
aura chaha prakAra ke karmoM vA baMdha hone ke samaya udaya aura sattA AThoM
karma kI hotI hai  /  ekavidha (eka kA) baMdha hote samaya nadaya ba sattA kI
apekSA tIna vikalpa hote haiM tathA baMdha na hone para udaya aura sattA kI
apekSA eka hI vikalpa hotA hai| vizeSArthaisa gAthA meM mUla prakRtiyoM ke
baMdha, udaya aura sattA ke saMbaidha bhaMgoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai  /  _
ATha prakRtika, sAta prakRtika aura chaha prakRtika baMdha hone ke samaya AThoM
karmoM kA udaya aura AThoM karmoM kI sattA hotI hai-'achetra udayasaMtAI'  /
arthAt sAtaveM apramattasaMyata guNasthAna taka ke jItra mizra guNasthAna ko
chor3akara AyubaMdha ke samaya AThoM kamoM kA baMdha kara sakate haiM ataH unake
ATha prakRtika baMdha, ATha prakRtika udaya aura ATha prakRtika sattA hotI hai
/  anivRttivAdara saMparAya guNasthAna taka ke jIva Ayukarma ke binA zeSa sAta
karmoM kA baMdha karate haiM kintu unake udaya aura sattA ATha karmoM kI ho
sakatI hai aura sUkSmasaMparAya saMyata Ayu va mohanIya karma ke binA chaha
karmoM kA baMdha karate haiM lekina inake bhI ATha karmoM kA udaya aura sattA
hotI hai| isa prakAra se kamoM kI baMdha prakRtiyoM meM bhinnatA hone para udaya
aura sattA eka jaisI mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki uparyukta sabhI jIva sarAga
hote haiM aura sarAgatA kA kAraNa mohanIya karma kA udaya hai aura jaba mohanIya
karma kA udaya hai taba usakI sattA avazya hI

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Rajat Karmagranth; Chapter 3  It will be. Therefore, when there is a binding of
eight, seven, and six types of karmas, there is an arising and existence of all
eight karmas. From this statement, the following three interpretations are
obtained: 1. Eight types of karmas are present in the state of existence, eight
types of karmas are present in the state of arising, and eight types of karmas
are present in the state of binding. 2. Seven types of karmas are present in the
state of binding, eight types of karmas are present in the state of arising, and
eight types of karmas are present in the state of existence. 3. Six types of
karmas are present in the state of binding, eight types of karmas are present in
the state of arising, and eight types of karmas are present in the state of
existence. The explanation of these interpretations is as follows: The first
interpretation is found from the first Mithyatva Gunasthan to the seventh
Apramattasanyata Gunasthan at the time of binding of Ayukarma. It is not found
in the remaining Gunasthanas; because Ayukarma is not bound in other
Gunasthanas. But, since Ayukarma is not bound in the mixed Gunasthan, it should
not be considered here. That is, Ayukarma is not bound in the mixed Gunasthan,
therefore the first interpretation is not possible there. Its time is the
evidence of the inferior and superior Antarmukhurta. The second interpretation
occurs from the first Gunasthan to the ninth Anivritivadar Sampray Gunasthan.
Although the third Mishran, the eighth Apurvakaran, - - - -
Ihaashtavidhabandhaka Apramattalaha, Saptavidhabandhaka Aniyattiabadarasamprava
Paryavasanah Padhyighabandhakascha Sukshmasamprayayah, ete cha sarve api
muragah. Saragatvam cha Moniyodayad Upjayate, Udaye cha satyavashyam satta, tato
Mohaniya Udaye Sattasambhavadd Ashtavidha - Saptavidha-
Shavidhabhandhakeshvavashyam Udaye Sattayam chaashti prapyato. Etena cha Shrayo
Bhangah Darshitah: Tadyatha-Ashtavidho Bandha Ashtavin Sudayah Ashtavidham
Sattah. Esha Vikalpa Ayurbandhakale. Saptavidho Bandho Ashtavidha Udayo
Ashtavidha Sattah, Esha Vitralla Ayurvandhabhave. Tatha Shadavidho Vandho
Ashtavidha Udayo Ashtavidha Sattah, Esha Vikalpaha Sukshmasamprayaanam.
Saptathika Prakaran Teeka, Page 143

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAjTa karmagrantha ; gA03 hogii| isIliye ATha, sAta aura chaha prakAra ke
karmoM kA baMdha hote samaya AThoM karmoM kA udaya aura sattA hotI hai| isa
kathana se nimnalikhita tIna bhaMga prApta hote haiM1. ATha prakRtikA , Ara
pakratika radapa pATha prakRtika sattA  /  2. sAta prakRtika baMdha, ATha
prakRtika udaya, ATha prakRtika sattA  /  3. chaha prakRtika baMdha, ATha
prakRtika udaya, ATha prakRtika sttaa| ina bhaMgoM kA spaSTIkaraNa nimna prakAra
hai pahalA bhaMga Ayukarma ke baMdha ke samaya pahale mithyAtva guNasthAna se
lekara sAtaveM apramattasaMyata guNasthAna taka pAyA jAtA hai| zeSa guNasthAnoM
meM nahIM; kyoMki anya guNasthAnoM meM Ayukarma kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai| kintu
mizra guNasthAna meM Ayu kA baMdha nahIM hone se usako yahA~ nahaNa nahIM karanA
cAhiye  /  arthAt mizra guNasthAna meM Ayu kA baMdha nahIM hotA ataH vahA~
pahalA bhaMga sambhava nahIM hai  /  isakA kAla jaghanya aura utkRSTa
antarmuhUrta pramANa hai| dUsarA bhaMga pahale guNasthAna se lekara nauveM
anivRttivAdara saMparAya guNasthAna taka hotA hai  /  yadyapi tIsare mizna,
AThaveM apUrvakaraNa, - - - - ihASTavidhabandhakA apramattAlAH,
saptavidhabandhakA aniyattiAbAdarasaMparAvaparyavasAnA: paDyighabaMdhakAzca
sUkSmasaMparAyAH, ete ca sarve'pi murAgAH  /  sarAgatvaM ca monIyodayAd
upajAyate, udaye ca satyavazyaM sattA, tato mohanIyodaye sattAsambhavAd
aSTavidha - saptavidha-SavidhabandhakeSvavazyamudaye sattAyAM cASTI prApyato  /
etena ca zrayo bhaMgA darzitA: tadyathA-aSTavidho bandhA aSTavina sudayaH
aSTavidhAM sattA  /  eSa vikalpa AyurbandhakAle  /  saptavidho bandho'STavidha
udayo'STavidhA sattA, eSa vitrAlla AyurvandhAbhAve  /  tathA SaDavidho
vandho'STavidha udayo'STavidhA sattA, eSa vikalpaH sUkSmasaMparAyANAm  /
saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 143

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter of the Seven Tika ## 20  In the ninth **Anivrittibada** Gunasthan,
there is no binding of **Ayukarma**, therefore, there is only the second
**Bhang** (break). However, even in other Gunasthanas like **Mithyadristi**
etc., there is not always binding of **Ayukarma**. Therefore, when there is no
binding of **Ayukarma**, the second **Bhang** occurs. The duration of this
**Bhang** is from the least, **Jghanya**, being **Antarmuhurt** (a very short
time) to the most, **Utkrisht**, being thirty-three **Sagar** (oceans) which is
six months less than the **Antarmuhurt** of the **Purvakoti** (previous stage)
and one-third more.  The third **Bhang** occurs only in the **Sukshmasampray**
Gunasthan. This is because the beings in this Gunasthan experience binding of
only the remaining six karmas, excluding **Ayukarma** and **Mohaniya Karma**.
The duration of this **Bhang** is from the least, **Jghanya**, being one
**Samaya** (moment) to the most, **Utkrisht**, being **Antarmuhurt**.  These
three **Bhangs** are formed due to the dominance of the **Bandhastanas**
(binding places). Therefore, their least and most durations are explained in
accordance with the durations of the **Bandhastanas** mentioned earlier.  When
there is binding of one type of **Vedaniya Karma**, there are three
possibilities - **Egavihe Tivi Gappo**. The explanation is as follows:  Binding
of **Vedaniya Karma** occurs in the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth
Gunasthanas - **Upshantamoha**, **Kshinamoha**, and **Sayogikevali**,
respectively. However, in the **Upshantamoha** Gunasthan, there are seven
**Uday** (arising) and eight **Satta** (existence), in the **Kshinamoha**
Gunasthan, there are seven **Uday** and seven **Satta**, and in the
**Sayogikevali** Gunasthan, there is one **Bandha** (binding), four **Uday**,
and four **Satta**. Therefore, in the situation of binding of one **Vedaniya
Karma**, three **Bhangs** are obtained based on the **Uday** and **Satta** as
follows:  1. One **Prakrutik Bandha**, seven **Prakrutik Uday**, and eight
**Prakrutik Satta**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa 20 nauveM anivRttibAdara guNasthAna meM Ayukarma kA baMdha
nahIM hotA ataH vahA~ to yaha dUsarA bhaMga hI hotA hai kintu midhyAdRSTi Adi
anya guNasthAnavartI jIvoM ke bhI sarvadA Ayukarma kA baMdha nahIM hotA, ataH
vahA~ bhI jaba Ayukarma kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai taba dUsarA bhaMga bana jAtA
hai  /  isa bhaMga kA kAla jaghanya se antarmuhUrta aura utkRSTa chaha mAha aura
antarmuhUrta kama pUrvakoTi kA tribhAga adhika tetIsa sAgara hai| tIsarA bhaMga
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAnavartI jIva ko hI hotA hai  /  kyoMki inake Ayu aura
mohanIya karma ke binA zeSa chaha karmoM kA hI baMdha hotA hai  /  isakA kAla
jaghanya se eka samaya aura utkRSTa antamuhUrta pramANa hai  /  yaha tInoM
bhaMga baMdhasthAnoM kI pradhAnatA se banate haiM  /  ataH inakA jaghanya aura
utkRSTa kAla pUrva meM batAye baMdhasthAnoM ke kAla ke anurUpa batalAyA hai  /
eka prakAra ke arthAt eka vedanIya karma kA baMdha hone para tIna vikalpa hote
haiM- 'egavihe tivigappo' | jinakA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai vedanIya karma
kA baMdha gyArahaveM, bArahaveM aura terahaveM - upazAntamoha, kSINamoha aura
sayogikevalI, ina tIna guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai  /  kintu upazAntamoha
guNasthAna meM sAta kA udaya aura ATha kI sattA, kSINamoha guNasthAna meM sAta
kA udaya aura sAta kI sattA sayogikevalI guNasthAna meM eka kA bandha aura cAra
kA udaya, cAra kI sattA pAI jAtI hai  /  ataH eka vedanIya karma kA baMdha hone
kI sthiti meM udaya aura sattA kI apekSA tIna bhaMga isa prakAra prApta hote
haiM 1. eka prakRtika baMdha, sAta prakRtika udaya aura ATha prakRtika sattA  /

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Pashta Karmagrantha: Chapter 3  **2.** One natural bondage, seven natural
arisings, and seven natural existences. **3.** One natural bondage, four natural
arisings, and four natural existences.  The first of these is destroyed in the
*Upshanta-moha* Gunasthan, because there, the arising of the seven karmas occurs
without the *mohaniya* karma, but the existence is of all eight karmas. Its
duration is from a *jghan* (shortest) moment to an *antar-muhurt* (longest)
moment.  The second is destroyed in the *Kshina-moha* Gunasthan. Because the
complete destruction of the *mohaniya* karma occurs for the *kshapka*
(destroyer) *sukshma-samparaya* (subtle-body) *san-yata* (controlled). Due to
this, in the *Kshina-moha* Gunasthan, there is a decrease of seven in the
arising and existence. Its duration is from a *jghan* (shortest) moment to an
*antar-muhurt* (longest) moment.  The third is destroyed in the *Sayogika-
kevali* Gunasthan. Because there, the bondage is only of one *vedaniya* karma,
but the arising and existence of four *aghati* karmas are found. Its duration is
from an *antar-muhurt* (shortest) moment to a *deshon-purva-koti* (longest)
moment.  Thus, the above three destructions occur primarily in the eleventh,
twelfth, and thirteenth Gunasthan respectively.  "**_Egavigappo Abandhammi_**" -
meaning, in the state of *abandha* (non-bondage), there is only one alternative
destruction. It should be understood as follows: in the *Ayogika-kevali*
Gunasthan, there is no bondage of any karma, but the arising and existence of
four *aghati* karmas are found. Therefore, there, four natural arisings and four
natural existences, this is the only destruction.  **1.** "**_Abandhe_**" - in
the absence of bondage, there is only one alternative: that is, four types of
arising and four types of existence. This is attained in the *Ayogika-kevali*
Gunasthan, because due to the absence of yoga (union), there is no bondage, but
the arising and existence of the *aghati* karmas occur.  *Sapta-tika Prakarana
Teeka, page 14*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paSTha karmagrandha : gA03 2. eka prakRtika baMdha, sAta prakRtika udaya aura
sAta prakRtika sattA  /  3. eka prakRtika baMdha, cAra prakRtika udaya aura cAra
prakRtika sattA  /  inameM se pahalA bhaMga upazAntamoha guNasthAna meM hotA
hai, kyoMki vahA~ mohanIya karma ke binA sAta karmoM kA udaya hotA hai, kintu
sattA AThoM karmoM kI hotI hai| isakA kAla jaghanya eka samaya aura utkRSTa
antarmuhurta pramANa hai| dusarA bhaMga kSINamoha guNasthAna meM hotA hai  /
kyoMki mohanIya karma kA samUla kSaya kSapaka sUkSmasaMparAya saMyata ke ho jAtA
hai  /  jisase kSINamoha guNasthAna meM udaya aura lattA sAta kamI kI pAI jAtI
hai| isakA kAla jaghanya aura utkRSTa antarmuhUrta hai| tIsarA bhaMga
sayogikevalI guNasthAna meM hotA hai| kyoMki vahA~ baMdha to sirpha eka vedanIya
karma kA hI hotA hai kintu udaya aura sattA cAra aghAtI karmoM kI pAI jAtI hai
/  isakA kAla jaghanya antarmuhUrta aura utkRSTa dezona pUrvakoTi pramANa
samajhanA caahiye| isa prakAra ukta tIna bhaMga kramazaH gyArahaveM, bArahaveM
aura terahaveM guNasthAna kI pradhAnatA se hote haiM  /  _egavigappo abaMdhammi'
arthAt abandhadazA meM sirpha eka hI vikalpabhaMga hotA hai| vaha isa prakAra
samajhanA cAhie ki ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM kisI bhI karma kA bandha nahIM
hotA hai kintu vahA~ udaya aura sattA cAra aghAtI karmoM kI pAI jAtI hai|
isIliye vahAM cAra prakRtika udaya aura cAra prakRtika sattA, yaha eka hI bhaMga
hotA hai| 1 'abandhe' bandhAbhAve eka eka vikalpaH, tadyathAcaturvidha
udayazcatuvidhA sastA, eSa cAyogikevaliguNasthAnake prApyate, tatra hi
yogAbhAvAd bandho na bhavati, udaya-satte cAghAtikarmaNAM bhavata:  /  saptatikA
prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 14

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 22: Sevenfold Destruction  The duration of this destruction, both its
gross and subtle phases, should be understood as being equal to the time of an
antarmūhūrta, similar to the Aayogikevali Gunasthan.  Thus, there are seven
types of sensory destruction in relation to the Mula Prakritis, compared to the
Bandha, Udaya, and Satva Prakriti sthānas. Their details, including their Swāmi
and Kāla, are given in the table on page 23.  After explaining the mutual
sensory destructions of Bandha, Udaya, and Satva Prakriti sthānas in relation to
the Bhūla Prakritis, we now explain these alternatives in the Jīva sthānas.
**Sattatthabandhatthavayasant terassu jīvaṭhāṇesu | Egammi yantra ganga ko
bhanga hati ṇo || 4 ||**  **Meaning of the words:**  * Sattatthabandh - Bond of
seven and eight, * Atthavayasant - Eight Udaya, * Baṭha - Eight Satva, * Terassu
- In thirteen, * Jīvaṭhāṇesu - In Jīva sthānas, * Egammi - In one (Paryāpta
Saṃśī) Jīva sthāna, * Pañcabhangā - Five destructions, * Vare bhanga - Two
destructions, * Huti - Happen, * Kevaliṇo - Of the Kevali.  **Meaning of the
verse:**  In the thirteen Jīva sthānas, beginning with Ādi, there are two
destructions each in the bond of seven and eight Prakritis, eight Prakritis
Udaya, and eight Prakritis Satva. In the one-sense, five-sense, Paryāpta Jīva
sthāna, there are five destructions from the beginning and two destructions at
the end for the Kevalajnāni.  **Special meaning:**  The sensory destructions
have been explained in the Jīva sthānas. The nature and differences of Jīva
sthānas have been explained in the fourth Karmagrantha. Their brief summary is
that Jīvas are infinite and their species are numerous, but their common
equivalent form is called Jīva sthāna by collecting them through Dharmas, and
fourteen of its types have been made.  1.  Aaparyāpta Sūkṣma Ekendriya, 2.
Paryāpta Sūkṣma Ekendriya, 3.  Aaparyāpta Bādar Ekendriya, 4.  Paryāpta Bādar
Ekendriya, 5.  Aaparyāpta ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 22 saptatikA prakaraNa isa bhaMga kA jaghanya aura utkRSTa kAla ayogikevalI
guNasthAna ke samAna antarmuhUrta pramANa samajhanA cAhie  /  isa prakAra mula
prakRtiyoM ke bandha, udaya aura sattA prakRtisthAnoM kI apekSA saMvedha bhaMga
sAta hote haiM  /  svAmI, kAla, sahita unakA vivaraNa pRSTha 23 kI tAlikA meM
diyA gayA hai  /  bhUla prakRtiyoM kI apekSA bandha, udaya aura sattA
prakRtisthAnoM ke paraspara saMvedha bhaMgoM ko batalAne ke pazcAt aba ina
vikalpoM ko jIvasthAnoM meM batalAte haiM  /  sattaTThabaMdhaaTThavayasaMta
terasasu jIvaThANesu  /  egammi yaMtra gaMgA ko bhaMga hati No  //  4  //
zabbArtha sattaTThabaMdha - sAta aura ATha kA baMdha, aTThadayasaMtaATha kA
udaya, bATha kI sattA, terasasu teraha meM, jIvaThANesu--jIvasthAnoM meM, egammi
- eka ( paryApta saMzI) jIvasthAna meM, paMcabhaMgApA~ca bhaMga, vare bhaMgara-
do bhaMga, huti hote haiM, kevaliNo -- kevalI ke | -- gAthArtha Adi ke teraha
jIvasthAnoM meM sAta prakRtika aura ATha prakRtika baMdha meM ATha prakRtika
udaya aura ATha prakRtika satva yaha do-do bhaMga hote haiN| eka-saMjJI
paMcendriya paryApta jIvasthAna meM Adi ke pA~ca bhaMga tathA kevalajJAnI ke
anta ke do bhaMga hote haiM  /  -- vizeSArtha-saMvedha bhaMgoM ko jIvasthAnoM
meM batalAyA hai  /  jIvasthAna kA svarUpa aura bheda cauthe karmagrantha meM
batalAye jA cuke haiN| jinakA saMkSipta sArAMza yaha hai ki jIva ananta hai aura
unakI jAtiyA~ bahula hai, lekina unakA samAna paryAya rUpa dharmoM ke dvArA
saMgraha karane ko jIvasthAna kahate haiM aura usake caudaha bheda kiye haiM 1.
aparyApta sUkSma ekendriya, 2. paryApta sUkSma ekendriya, 3. aparyApta bAdara
ekendriya, 4. paryApta bAdara ekendriya, 5. aparyApta

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
57 Yam Pra. 5: 41.4 Time Sandhisthan " | Jai. Satta Sankhya Sthan Swami Jghanya
| Utkrushta । Aath Prak. | Aath | Aath. Mishn Ke. Antmuhurt | Antarmuhurt. Prak.
Prak. Siwaya Aapra. Gunasthan Tak 6 Gunasthan 2 | Saat Prak. | Aal Aar Prak. |
Prak. Adi Ne Gunasthan Antmahat | Chhe Mah Aur Ant Kam Purvakoti Ka Tribhaag
Adhik Tetim Sagar 3 | Chhe Prak. Aay | Aath Prak. | Prakru. Sookshm- 'Ek
Samparay. Samay 'Antam Turt Ek Prakru. Saat Aath Prak. Prakru. Samay Upshasht- |
Ek Antarmuhurt Moh Ksheenmoh Antmuhurt ' Antarmuhurt 5 | Ek Pra. Saat Saat Prak.
Prakru.: 6 | Ek Prak. | Chaar Chaar | Sayogi- Prak. | Prak. | Kevali Antarmuhurt
Deshon Purv Koti Chaar Chaar Prakar Ayogi- | Antarmuhurt Antarmuhurt Kevali

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 57 yAmapra.5: 41.4 kAla saMdhasthAna " | jaya  /  sattAsaMkhyA sthAna svAmI
jaghanya | utkRSTa  /  ATha praka0 | ATha | ATha  /  mizna ke  /  antamuhUrta |
antarmuhUrta  /  praka0 praka0 sivAya apra0 guNasthAna taka 6 guNasthAna 2 |
sAta praka0  /  Ala Ara praka0 | praka0 Adi ne guNasthAna antamahata | chaha
mAha aura anta kama pUrvakoTi kA tribhAga adhika tetIma sAgara 3  /  chaha
praka0 Aya | ATha praka0 | prakR0 sUkSma- 'eka samparAya  /  samaya 'antama
TUrta eka prakR0 sAta ATha praka0 prakR0 samaya upazAsta- | eka antarmuhUrta
moha kSINamoha antamuhUrta ' antarmuhUrta 5 | eka pra0 sAta sAta praka0 prakR0:
6  /  eka praka0 | cAra cAra | sayogi- praka0  /  praka0  /  kevalI antarmuhurta
dezona pUrva koTi cAra cAra prakara ayogi- | antarmuhurta antarmuhUrta kevalI

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Sevenfold  **The fourteen divisions of the Jiva-sthana:**
1. **Dvi-indriya** (two-sensed) 2. **Paryapta Dvi-indriya** (sufficient two-
sensed) 3. **Aparyapta Dvi-indriya** (insufficient two-sensed) 4. **Paryapta
Tri-indriya** (sufficient three-sensed) 5. **Aparyapta Chatur-indriya**
(insufficient four-sensed) 6. **Paryapta Chatur-indriya** (sufficient four-
sensed) 7. **Aparyapta Asanji Pancha-indriya** (insufficient non-conscious five-
sensed) 8. **Paryapta Asanji Pancha-indriya** (sufficient non-conscious five-
sensed) 9. **Aparyapta Sanji Pancha-indriya** (insufficient conscious five-
sensed) 10. **Paryapta Sanji Pancha-indriya** (sufficient conscious five-sensed)
**Two types of Bhang (division) in the first thirteen Jiva-sthana:**  1.
**Sevenfold Bandha (bond), eightfold Udaya (arising), and eightfold Satya
(existence)** 2. **Eightfold Bandha, eightfold Udaya, and Bhava-prakriti Satya
(existence)**  The verse states: "**Sattatthabandhatthadaya-santan terassu jiva-
thanesu**" (Sevenfold Bandha, eightfold Udaya, and eightfold Satya in the
thirteen Jiva-sthana).  **Characteristics of these Bhang:**  These two Bhang are
such that the Jivas in these thirteen Jiva-sthana do not possess the ability to
subdue or destroy Darshan-mohaniya (knowledge-obscuring) and Charitra-mohaniya
(conduct-obscuring) karmas. Therefore, the Mithyatva (false belief) guna-sthana
(state of being) is predominant. Although other guna-sthana may be present in
some of these Jiva-sthana, it does not affect the Bhang.  **Timing of the
Bhang:**  The first Bhang, with sevenfold Bandha, eightfold Udaya, and eightfold
Satya, occurs when there is no Bandha (bond) of Ayukarma (life-span karma). The
second Bhang, with eightfold Bandha, eightfold Udaya, and Bhava-prakriti Satya,
occurs during the Bandha of Ayukarma.  The duration of the first Bhang is equal
to the duration of each Jiva-sthana. The duration of the second Bhang is
Antarmukhurta (a very short time), which is the minimum and maximum duration of
Ayukarma Bandha.  **Summary:**  * **First Bhang:** Sevenfold Bandha, eightfold
Udaya, eightfold Satya, occurs when there is no Ayukarma Bandha. * **Second
Bhang:** Eightfold Bandha, eightfold Udaya, Bhava-prakriti Satya, occurs during
Ayukarma Bandha. * **Duration:** First Bhang - equal to Jiva-sthana duration,
Second Bhang - Antarmukhurta.  **Source:** Saptatika Prakarana Tika, page 144.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa dvIndriya, 6. paryApta dvIndriya, 7. aparyApta prIndriya,
8, paryApta zrIndriya, 6. aparyApta caturindriya, 10. paryApta caturindriya, 11.
aparyApta asaMjI paMcendriya, 12. paryApta asaMjJI paMcendriya, 13, aparyApta
saMjJI paMcendriya, 14. paryApta saMjJI paMcendriya  /  jIvasthAna ke ukta
caudaha bhedoM meM se Adi ke teraha jIvasthAnoM meM do-do bhaMga hote haiM-1.
sAta prakRtika baMdha, ATha prakRtika udaya aura ATha prakRtika sattA, 2. ATha
prakRtika baMdha, ATha prakRtika udaya aura bhAu prakRtika sattA  /  ina donoM
bhaMgoM ko batAne ke lie gAthA meM kahA hai-'sattaTThabaMdhaaThThadayasaMta
terasasu jiivtthaannesu'| dana teraha jIvasthAnoM meM do bhaMga isa prakAraNa
hote haiM ki ina jIvoM ke darzanamohanIya aura cAritramohanIya kI upazamanA
athavA kSapaNA kI yogyatA nahIM pAI jAtI hai aura adhikatara mithyAtva
guNasthAna hI sambhava hai  /  yadyapi inameM se kucha jIvasthAnoM meM dUsarA
guNasthAna bhI ho sakatA hai, lekina usase bhaMgoM meM antara nahIM par3atA hai
/  ukta do bhaMga-vikalpoM meM se sAta prakRtika baMdha, ATha prakRtika udaya
aura ATha prakRtika sattA bAlA pahalA bhaMga jaba Ayukarma kA bandha nahIM hotA
hai tava pAyA jAtA hai tathA ATha prakRtika bandha, ATha prakRtika udaya aura
ATha prakRtika sattA vAlA dUsarA bhaMga Ayukarma ke bandha ke samaya hotA hai|
inameM se pahale bhaMga kA kAla pratyeka jIvasthAna ke kAla ke barAbara
yathAyogya samajhanA cAhiye aura dUsare bhaMga kA jaghanya da utkRSTa kAla
antarmuhUrta pramANa hai, kyoMki AyukAma ke bandha kA jaghanya va utkRSTa kAla
antamuhUrta hai  /  1. saptavidho bandhaH aSTavidha udayaH aSTavidhA sattA, epa
vikalpa AzubandhakAle musvA zeSakAnaM sarvadeva labhyate, aSTavidho bandhaH
aSTavidha udamaH aSTavidhA saptA, eSa vikalpa AmubaMdhakAle, eSa cAntamautikaH,
AyurbandhakAlasya jaghanyenorakaNarSe cAntamuhUrtapramANatvAt  /  saptatikA
prakaraNa TIkA, pa.144

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sixth Karma Bandha: Verse 4**  The description of the two bhangas of the
thirteen jiva sthans (states of being) from the beginning should be understood
as follows:  **Jiva Sthan** | **Uday** | **Su.** | **A.** | **Ma.** | **A.** |
**Ap.** | **Ba.** | **A.** | **P.** | **Dwi.** | **A30** | **Da.** | **50** |
**Mo.** | **Sap.** | **Sri.** | **P.** | **Ch.** | **Ap.** | **Ch.** | **P.** |
**Asan.** | **0** | **Ap.** | **Asan.** | **0** | **P.** | **San.** | **0** |
**Ap.** ------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
-------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
-------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
-------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
-------- Mistina | म | ляти | ялллллля | 111111 | fina |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  **Egami Panchabhang** (Five
Bhangas of the Last Jiva Sthan):  The five bhangas in the fourteenth jiva sthan,
which remains after the aforementioned thirteen jiva sthans, are as follows:
These five bhangas include the aforementioned two bhangas:  1. Seven natural
bandha, eight natural uday and satta. 2. Eight natural bandha, eight natural
uday and eight natural satta.  Along with these, there are three more bhangas:
1. Six natural bandha, eight natural uday and eight natural satta. 2. One
natural bandha, seven natural uday and eight natural satta. 3. One natural
bandha, seven natural uday and seven natural satta.  Thus, the total five
bhangas of the **Paryapt Sanshi Panchaindriya** (Perfect Five-Senses Being)
should be understood.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karma gantha : gA. 4 Adi ke teraha jIvasthAnoM ke do-do bhaMgoM kA
vivaraNa isa prakAra samajhanA cAhiye jIvasthAna udaya sU0 a0 mA0 e0 apa0  /
bA0 e0pa0 dvI0 a30 dA0 50 mo0 sapa0 zrI0pa0 ca0 apa0 ca0 pa0 asaM0 0 apa0 asaM0
0 pa0  /  saM00 apa0 Mistina ma liati iallllllia 111111 fina 'egammi
paMcabhaMgA' arthAt pUrvokta teraha jIvasthAnoM se zeSa rahe eka caudahaveM
jIvasthAna meM pAMca bhaMga hote haiN| ina pA~ca bhaMgoM meM pUrvokta do
bhaMga-1. sAta prakRtika bandha, ATha prakRtika udaya va sattA, 2. ATha
prakRtika bandha, ATha prakRtika udaya aura ATha prakRtika sattA to hote hI
haiN| sAtha meM 1. chaha prakRtika bandha, ATha prakRtika udaya aura ATha
prakRtika sattA, 2. eka prakRtika vandha, sAta prakRtika udaya aura ATha
prakRtika sattA, 3. eka prakRtika bandha, sAta prakRtika udaya aura sAta
prakRtika sattA yaha tIna bhaMga aura hote haiM  /  isa prakAra paryApta saMzI
paMcendriya ke kula pAMca bhaMga samajhane cAhiye  /

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of Seven Tika  The five bhangas of the five senses of the
Paryapta Sanjni are as follows:  * Bandha (Bondage) * Udaya (Arising) * ...  The
first bhang occurs until the Anivritti Gunasthan, the second bhang until the
Aprammatta-Samyata Gunasthan, the third bhang in the Upshama Shreni or
Kshapakauni, where the Sukshma-Samparaya Samyata exists, the fourth bhang in the
Upshanta-Moha Gunasthan, and the fifth bhang in the Kshina-Moha Gunasthan.
Although Kevalis are also Paryapta Sanjni with five senses, and their five
bhangas should also be considered, the reason for explaining their bhangas
separately is that Kevali beings do not have the knowledge of Kshaya-Upshamika,
therefore they are not Sanjni. Therefore, to negate their Sanjnitva, their
bhangas are separately mentioned in the gatha: "There are two bhangas for
Kevalis. One is their natural Bandha, four natural Udayas, and four natural
Sattas - this is one bhang. And four natural Udayas and four natural Sattas, but
the Bandha is not of a single nature, this is the second bhang."  The first
bhang is found in Sayogika Kevalis, where there is only the bondage of one
Vedaniya Karma, but the Udaya and Satta of four Aghati Karmas remain. The second
bhang is of Ayogika Kevalis. Because they do not have the bondage of even one
Karma, but only the Udaya and Satta of four Aghati Karmas are found.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa paryApta saMjJI paMcendriyoM ke pA~ca bhaMga isa prakAra
hote haiM- bandha udaya  /  ina pAMca bhaMgoM meM se pahalA bhaMga anivRtti
guNasthAna taka, dusarA bhaMga apramattasaMyata guNasthAna taka, tIsarA bhaMga
upazamazreNi yA kSapakauNi meM vidyamAna sUkSmasaMparAya saMyata ke, cauthA
bhaMga upazAntamoha guNasthAna meM aura pAMcavAM bhaMga kSINamoha guNasthAna meM
hotA hai| yadyapi kevalI jina bhI paryApta saMjJI paMcendriya haiM aura unake
bhI pA~ca bhaMga mAnanA cAhiye  /  lekina unake bhaMga alaga se batAne kA kAraNa
yaha hai ki kevalI jIvoM ke kSAyopazamika jJAna nahIM rahate haiM ataH ve saMjJI
nahIM hote haiN| isIliye unake saMjJitva kA niSedha karane ke liye gAthA meM
unake bhaMgoM kA pRthaka se nirdeza kiyA hai--'do bhaMgA huMti kevlinnoN| unake
eka prakRtika bandha, cAra prakRtika udaya aura cAra prakRtika sattA-yaha eka
bhaMga tathA cAra prakRtika udaya va cAra prakRtika sattA, lekina baMdha eka bhI
prakRti kA nahIM, yaha dUsarA bhaMga hI hotA hai| pahalA bhaMga sayogikevalI ke
pAyA jAtA hai, vahA~ sirpha eka vedanIya karma kA hI baMdha hotA hai, kintu
udaya aura sattA cAra aghAti kArmoM kI rahatI hai| dUsarA bhaMga ayogikevalI ke
hotA hai| kyoMki inake eka bhI karma kA baMdha na hokara sirpha cAra adhAti
kamoM kA udaya va sanA pAI jAtI hai|

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sixth Karma Granth: Verse 5**  **27**  The details of the breaks in the Jiva-
sthana should be understood as follows:  * Bandha-prakriti, Udaya-prakriti,
Satya-prakriti, Jiva-sthana, Jghanya, Utkrishta * Bala, Antarmuhurta, Anta,
Mahat * Yathayogya, Samhi, Paryapta, Eka-samaya, Antata, Sanjo, Paryakta, Eka-
samaya, Matahata * Sayogi, Antamuhurta, Desha, Purva, Kevali * Koti, Ayogi,
Kevali, Pa, Chahrasva, Pachi, Hrasva  The pronunciation of the vowels, the
duration of the pronunciation, and the time measurement should be understood
accordingly.  **6 1 1 Hin**  **R**  In this way, the breaks in the perception of
the Mula-karmas in the Jiva-sthana should be understood. Now, we will explain
the breaks in perception in the Guna-sthana. The breaks in perception of the
Mula-karmas in the Guna-sthana are as follows:  **Atthasuu Egavigappu Chassu Vi
Gunasanniyesu Vuvigappu. Patteyan Patteyan Bandhodayasantakkamanam. || 5 ||**
**Word Meaning:**  * Atthasuu - Eight Guna-sthana * Egavigappu - One break *
Chassu - Six * Vi - And * Gunasanniyesu - Guna-sthana * Vuvigappu - Two breaks *
Patteyan - Each * Patteyan - Each * Bandhodayasantakkamanam - Bandha, Udaya, and
Satya-prakriti sthana  **Verse Meaning:**  In each of the eight Guna-sthana,
there is one break each for Bandha, Udaya, and Satya-prakriti karmas. And in
each of the six Guna-sthana, there are two breaks each.  **Special Meaning:**
The verse mentions the breaks in Bandha found in the fourteen Guna-sthana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha : gA05 ra7 jIvasthAnoM meM bhaMgoM kA vivaraNa isa prakAra
samajhanA cAhiebaMdha prakRti udaya prakRti | sattA prakRti . jIvasthAna  /
jaghanya utkRSTa bAla | antarmuhUrta anta mahata yathAyogya 'saMhI paryApta  /
eka samaya antata | saMjo paryAkta  /  eka samaya mAtahata sayogi  /  antamuhata
dezama pUrva kevalI | koTi ayogi kevalI | pA cahrasva paci hrasva svaroM ke
svaroM ke uccAraNa uccAraNa kAlapramANa kAlapramANa 6 1 1 Hin ra isa prakAra se
jIvasthAnoM meM mula karmoM ke saMvedha bhaMga samAnA cAhie  /  aba guNasthAnoM
meM saMvedha bhaMgoM ko batalAte haiM  /  guNasthAnoM meM mUlakarmoM ke saMvedha
bhaga aTThasu egavigappo chassu vi guNasaMniesu vuvigppo| patteyaM patteyaM
baMdhodayasaMtakammANaM  //   // 5 //  zabdArtha-amu-ATha guNasthAnoM meM,
egavigo-eka biphalpa, chassu-chaha meM, vi-aura, guNasaMniesu-guNasthAnoM meM,
mubigappo-do vikalpa, patta yaM-patteyaMpratyeka ke, baMdhovasaMtakammArNa
vaMdha, udaya aura sattA prakRti sthAnoM ke  /  gAthArtha-ATha guNasthAnoM meM
pratyeka kA baMdha, udaya aura sattA rUpa karmoM kA eka-eka bhaMga hotA hai aura
chaha guNasthAnoM meM pratyeka ke do-do bhaMga hote haiN| vizeSArtha-gAthA meM
caudaha guNasthAnoM meM pAye jAne vAle saMbaMdha bhaMgoM kA kathana kiyA hai|

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seven Tika  The specific state of the qualities of the
soul, namely knowledge, perception, and conduct, which arises due to attachment
and yoga, is called **Gunasthan**.  The word **Gunasthan** is derived from
**Gun** (quality) + **Sthan** (place). **Gun** refers to the qualities of the
soul like knowledge, perception, etc., and **Sthan** refers to the specific
states of these qualities, which arise due to the rise, subsidence, destruction,
and destruction-subsidence of attachment.  There are fourteen divisions of
**Gunasthan**, whose names are as follows:  1. **Mithyatva** 2. **Sasadan
Samyagdristi** 3. **Samy Mithyadristi** (mixed) 4. **Avirat Samyagdristi** 5.
**Deshaviret** 6. **Pramattavirat** 7. **Aparamattavirat** 8. **Apuurvakaran**
9. **Anivritibadar** 10. **Sukshmasampra** 11. **Upshantmoha** 12.
**Ksheenmoha** 13. **Sayogikevali** 14. **Ayogikevali**  The first twelve
divisions of these fourteen arise due to the rise, subsidence, destruction-
subsidence, etc., of the **mohaniya karma**. The thirteenth, **Sayogikevali**,
and the fourteenth, **Ayogikevali**, these two final **Gunasthanas** arise due
to **yoga**. **Sayogikevali Gunasthan** arises due to the presence of **yoga**,
and **Ayogikevali Gunasthan** arises due to the absence of **yoga**.  Out of the
aforementioned fourteen **Gunasthanas**, in eight **Gunasthanas**, there is a
single destruction of the **karma** in the form of bondage, rise, and existence
- **Al Eggvigapppo**. The explanation of this is as follows:  In the eight
**Gunasthanas** of **Samyagmithyadristi** (mixed), **Apuurvakaran**,
**Anivritibadar**, **Sukshmasampra**, **Upshantmoha**, **Ksheenmoha**,
**Sayogikevali**, and **Ayogikevali**, there is a single alternative of the
**karma** in the form of bondage, rise, and existence. The reason for this
single alternative is that in these three **Gunasthanas** of
**Samyagmithyadristi**, **Apuurvakaran**, and **Anivritibadar**, due to the
absence of the appropriate determination of the **ayukarma**, there is a single
destruction of the seven natural bondages, eight natural rises, and eight
natural existences.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa moha aura yoga ke nimitta se jJAna, darzana, cAritra rUpa
AtmA ke guNoM kI jo taratamarUpa avasthAvizeSa hotI hai, use guNasthAna kahate
haiM  /  arthAt guNa + sthAna se niSpanna zabda guNasthAna hai aura guNa kA
matalaba hai AtmA ke jJAna, darzana Adi guNa aura sthAna yAni una guNoM kI moha
ke udaya, upazama, kSaya aura kSayopazama ke kAraNa hone vAlI taratama rUpa
avasthAyeM vizeSa | 28 * } L P guNasthAna ke caudaha bheda hote haiM; jinake
nAma isa prakAra haiM1. mithyAtva 2. sAsAdana samyagdRSTi, 3. samya mithyAdRSTi
(mizra), 4. avirata samyagdRSTi, 5. dezavirata, 6. pramattavirata 7
apramattavirata 8. apUrvakaraNa, 6. anivRttibAdara 10. sUkSmasaMparA, 11
upazAntamoha, 12. kSINamoha, 13 sayogikevalI, 14. ayogikevalI  /  ina caudaha
bhedoM meM Adi ke bAraha bheda mohanIya karma ke udaya, upazamaH kSayopazama Adi
ke nimitta se hote haiM tathA terahavA~ sayogikevalI aura caudahavAM ayogikevalI
yaha do antima guNasthAna yoga ke nimitta se hote haiM  /  sayogikevalI
guNasthAna yoga ke sadbhAva kI apekSA se aura ayogikevalI guNasthAna yoga ke
abhAva kI apekSA se hotA hai  /  ukta caudaha guNasthAnoM meM se ATha
guNasthAnoM meM baMdha, udaya aura sattA rUpa karmoM kA alaga-alaga eka-eka
bhaMga hotA hai- 'ala egavigappo' | jisakA spaSTIkaraNa nimna prakAra hai
samyagmithyAdRSTi (mizra), apUrvakaraNa, anivRttivAdara, sUkSmasaMparAya,
upazAntamoha, kSINamoha, sayogikebalI, ayogikevalI, ina ATha guNasthAnoM meM
bandha, udaya aura sattA prakRtisthAnoM kA eka-eka vikalpa hotA hai| inameM eka-
eka vikalpa hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki samyagmidhyAdRSTi, apUrvakaraNa aura
anivRttibAdara ina tIna guNasthAnoM meM Ayukarma ke yogya adhyavasAya nahIM hone
ke kAraNa sAta prakRtika baMdha, ATha prakRtika udaya aura ATha prakRtika sattA
yaha eka hI bhaMga hotA hai  /

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Path Karma Granth: Chapter 5, Verse 26  **In the Sukshmasamprayaya Gunasthan,
there are six natural bonds, eight natural upadayas (arising) and eight natural
sattvas (existences). This is one bhang (state of being).** Because in this
Gunasthan, the Badar Kshaya (negative karma) does not arise, therefore the
Ayushya (life-span) and Mohaniya (delusion) karmas do not bind, but the
remaining karmas do bind.  **In the Upshantamoha Gunasthan, due to the cessation
of the Mohaniya karma, only seven karmas arise. There is one natural bond, seven
natural upadayas and eight natural sattvas, this is one bhang.**  **In the
Kshonamoha Gunasthan, there is one natural bond, seven natural upadayas and
seven natural sattvas. This is one bhang.** Because in the Sukshmasamprayaya
Gunasthan, the Mohaniya karma is completely eradicated, therefore it does not
arise or exist.  **In the Yogikevali Gunasthan, there is one natural bond, four
natural upadayas and four natural sattvas. This is one bhang.** Because in this
Gunasthan, the four Bhaatikarma (physical karmas) do not arise or exist.  **In
the Ayogikevali Gunasthan, due to the absence of Yoga (liberation), no karma
binds, but there is one bhang with four natural upadayas and four natural
sattvas.**  **After explaining the bhang-vikalpas (variations in states of
being) in the eight Gunasthanas, now we will explain the bhang-vikalpas in the
remaining six Gunasthanas.**  **There are two vikalpas in each of the six
Gunasthanas.** The names of those six Gunasthanas are: Mithyatva, Sasadan,
Avirat Samyagdristi, Deshaviret, Pramattaviret and Apramattaviret. The vikalpas
found in these are:  1. **Eight natural bonds, eight natural upadayas and eight
natural sattvas.** 2. **Seven natural bonds, eight natural upadayas and eight
natural sattvas.**  **In these two bhangs...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paTha karma grantha : gA0 5 26 sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM chaha prakRtika
baMdha, ATha prakRtika udaya aura ATha prakRtika sattA yaha eka bhaMga hotA hai|
kyoMki isa guNasthAna meM bAdara kaSAya kA udaya na hone se Ayu aura mohanIya
karma kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai kintu zeSa karmoM kA ho bandha hotA hai|
upazAntamoha guNasthAna meM mohanIya karma ke upazAnta hone se sAta karmoM kA hI
udaya hotA hai aura eka prakRtika bandha, sAta prakRtika udaya va ATha prakRtika
sattA, yaha eka bhaMga pAyA jAtA hai  /  kSoNamo guNasthAna meM eka prakRti ra
sAta prakRtika udaya aura sAta prakRtika sattA yaha eka hI bhaMga hotA hai|
kyoMki sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM hI mohanIya karma kA samUloccheda ho jAne
se isakA udaya aura satva nahIM hai  /  yogikevalI guNasthAna meM eka prakRtika
baMdha, cAra prakRtika udaya aura cAra prakRtika sattA, yaha eka bhaMga hotA
hai| kyoMki isa guNasthAna meM cAra bhAtikarmoM kA udaya va sattA nahIM rahatI
hai  /  ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM yoga kA abhAva ho jAne se kisI bhI karma kA
baMdha nahIM hotA hai, kintu cAra prakRtika udaya aura cAra prakRtika sattA rUpa
eka bhaMga hotA hai  /  isa prakAra se ATha guNasthAnoM meM bhaMga-vikalpoM ko
batalAne ke bAda aba zeSa rahe chaha guNasthAnoM ke bhaMga-vikalpoM ko kahate
haiM ki'chassuvi guNasaMnie duvigappo chaha guNasthAnoM meM do-do vikalpa hote
haiM  /  una chaha guNasthAnoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM- mithyAtva, sAsAdana,
avirata samyagdRSTi, dezavirata, pramattavirata aura apramatavirata  /  inameM
pAye jAne vAle vikalpa yaha haiM - 1. ATha prakRtika baMdha, ATha prakRtika
udaya aura ATha prakRtika sattA tathA 2. sAta prakRtika baMdha, ATha prakRtika
udaya aura ATha prakRtika sattA  /  ina donoM bhaMgoM meM se -

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first case of the Salatika occurs in the bondage period of the Ayukarma, and
the second alternative is always found in addition to the bondage period of the
Ayukarma. 11 The collective verses of the fourteen Gunasthanas are as follows,
and the details are taken from the Salatika on page 31: 'Miss Apushwa Bayer
Sapbandha Chchhn Bandhae Suhmo... ' Uvsantayi Egam Ambandago'jogie Egegam. ||
Michhasayanavirai Safmatt Apmattaya Chech. Sas'chh Bandhaga Pah, Udaya, Santa Ya
Pun Aae || Ja Suhmo Ta A U Udae Sante Ya Hoti Payadio. Sattadhasate Khini Satt
Chattari Sesesu || Thus, after stating the bondage, arising, and being nature-
places in relation to the original natures, and their owners, we now state the
bondage, arising, and being nature-places in relation to the subsequent natures.
First, we explain the bondage and arising of the Jnanavaran and Antaraya Karmas.
The bondage and arising of the subsequent natures are Jnanavaran, Antaraya Karma
Bandhoshayasantasana Nagavaranantaraiye Panch. Bandhovarme Vi Taha 'Upasanta
Huati Pancheva. ||6|| 1. Ashtavidho Bandha: Ashtavidho Udaya: Ashtavidha Sattaa,
Esh Vikalp Ayubandhakale, Etesham Hyaayurvandhyogyadhyavsayasthanasambhavaad
Ayurvandha Upapadyate. Tatha Saptavidho Bandha: Ashtavidho Udaya: Ashtavidha
Sattaa Ep Vikalp Ayubandha Kalm Muktva Seshakalm Sarvada Labhyate.  Saptathika
Prakaran Teeka, P. 145 2. Ramdevagani Rachit Saptathika Tippana, Sa. 8, 9, 10.
3. Susana Kijiye Bandhodayakammamsa Naanavaranantaraiye Panch. || Bandhoparmevi
Tah! Udayamsa Hoti Panchetra. || -Go. Karmakanda 630

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 salatikA prakaraNa pahalA bhaMga Ayukarma ke baMdhakAla meM hotA hai tathA
dUsarA vikalpa Ayukarma ke baMdhakAla ke atirikta sarvadA pAyA jAtA hai 11
caudaha guNasthAnoM ke bhaMgoM kI saMgrAhaka gAthAyeM nimna haiM evaM vivaraNa
pRSTha 31 kI sAlikA meM liyA: 'missa apuSvA bAyara sapabaMdhA chacna baMdhae
suhmo| . ' uvasaMtAI egaM aMbaMdhago'jogi egegaM  /  /  michAsAyaNaaviraya
saphmatta apamattayA ceca  /  sasa'cha baMdhagA paha, udayA, saMtA yA puNa ee||
jA suhamo tA a u udae saMte ya hoti pyddiiyo| sattAdhasate khINi satta cattAri
sesesu  //  isa prakAra mUla prakRtiyoM kI apekSA baMdha, udaya aura sattA
prakRtisthAnoM ke saMvaidha bhaMgoM aura unake svAmiyoM kA kathana karane ke
pazcAt aba uttara prakRtiyoM kI apekSA baMdha, udaya aura sattA prakRtisthAnoM
ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA kathana karate haiN| pahale jJAnAvaraNa aura aMtarAya
karma ke saMvaidha bhaMga batalAte haiN| uttara prakRtiyoM ke saMvedha bhaga
jJAnAvaraNa, antarAya karma baMdhoSayasaMtasA nAgAvaraNaMtarAie paMca  /
baMdhovarame vi tahA 'upasaMtA huti paMceva  /  / 6 /  /  1. aSTavidho baMdhaH
aSTavidha udayaH aSTavidhA sattA, eSa vikalpa AyubaMdhakAle, eteSAM
hyAyurvandhayogyAdhyavasAyasthAnasambhavAd Ayurvandha upapadyate  /  tathA
saptavidho baMdhaH aSTavidha udayaH aSTavidhA sattA epa vikalpa Ayubandha kAlaM
muktvA zeSakAlaM sarvadA labhyate  /  saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 145 2.
rAmadevagaNi racita saptatikA TippaNa, sA0 8, 9, 10  /  3. susanA kIjie
baMdhodayakammaMsA NANAvaraNaMtarAyie paMca  /  /  baMdhoparamevi taha! udayaMsA
hoti paMcetra  /  /  -go0 karmakAMDa 630

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Gunasthana:  **Mi | Sa | Mi | Adhi [Desha | Pramasa Apramatta Apurva | Anima
Upasha] Kshina Sake Pra Ke** 87, 7 9 ur **Bandha Udaya Satya Vikalpa |** 111 11"
is SS **Shashta Karmagrantha: Ga 6** M16 Is 885/5] 5  **Mula Prakrutiyon ke
Gunasthanon mein paye jane wale Bandha, Udaya, Satya Sanvedha Bhangon ka Gyapika
Varna is prakar hai**  **Mangkram** **Jghanya** or m **Gunasthan** **Kal**
**Utkrisht 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 | Antarmuhurt** **Antarmuhurt 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,6/
Antarmuhurt** **Chha Mah Kam Tetis Sagar Ant** **Mun | Nsun Purvakoti Tribhaga
Adhik Dasarva Ek Samay** **Antarmuhurt Gyarahava Ek Samay** **Antarmuhurt
Barahva Ansamuhurt** **Antarmuhurt Samogiyaali Antarmuhurt** **Navvarshan
Purvakoti | Ayogikechali** **| Panch Hrasva Svar Uccaran Praman Panv Hrasva Svar
Uccaran Praman** 1 đi 5 6 ore 4

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guNa0 mi0 | sA0 | mi0 | adhi [ deza0 | pramasa apramatta apUrva0 | ani0ma0
upazA0] kSINa sake pra0 ke0 87, 7 9 ur bandha udaya sattA vikalpa | 111 11" is
SS SaSTa karmagrantha : gA06 M16 Is 885/5] 5 mUla prakRtiyoM ke guNasthAnoM meM
pAye jAne vAle vandha, udaya, sattA saMvedha bhaMgoM kA jJApaka vivaraNa isa
prakAra hai maMgakrama jaghanya or m guNasthAna kAla utkRSTa 1,2,3,4,5,6,7  /
antarmuhUrta antarmuhUrta 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,6/ antarmuhUrta chaha mAha kama tetIsa
sAgara anta muM0 nsUna pUrvakoTi tribhAga adhika dasarvA eka samaya antarmuhUrta
gyArahavAM eka samaya antarmuhUrta bArahavAM ansamuhUrta antarmuhUrta samogiyalI
antamuhurta navavarSAna pUrvakoTi | ayogikecalI | paMca hrasva svara uccAraNa
pramANa paMva hrasva svara uccAraNa pramANa 1 di 5 6 ore 4

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Seven  **Meaning:**  The binding, arising, and existence aspects of
the **Bandhodaya** (binding and arising) are explained in terms of
**Maanavaran** (knowledge obscuration) and **Antaray** (hindrance) karmas.
There are five (**Panch**) aspects of each.  Even in the absence of binding
(**Bandhovarme**), the arising and existence of these five aspects remain the
same (**Tatha**).  **Verse Meaning:**  The binding, arising, and existence
aspects of **Maanavaran** and **Antaray** karmas are five each.  Even in the
absence of binding, the arising and existence of these five aspects remain the
same due to their inherent nature.  **Detailed Meaning:**  Previously, the
general nature of the fundamental karmas and their dissolution in relation to
the **Jiva** (soul) and **Gunasthan** (quality-places) were explained.  Now,
this verse begins the explanation of the dissolution of the secondary aspects of
these fundamental karmas.  There are eight fundamental karmas: **Maanavaran**,
**Darshanavaran**, **Vedaniya**, **Mohaniya**, **Aayu**, **Naam**, **Gotra**,
and **Antaray**.  These have five, nine, two, twenty-eight, four, forty-two,
two, and five secondary aspects respectively.  These secondary aspects are
called the **Uttar Prakriti** (secondary nature) of the fundamental karmas.
Their names and details are discussed in the first **Karmagranth** (text on
karma).  This verse explains the dissolution of the secondary aspects of
**Maanavaran** and **Antaray** karmas.  The five secondary aspects of
**Maanavaran** and the five secondary aspects of **Antaray**, totaling ten, bind
up to the tenth **Sukshmasampray** (subtle) **Gunasthan**.  Their binding is
dissolved at the end of the tenth **Gunasthan**, and their arising and existence
are dissolved at the end of the twelfth **Gunasthan**.  The five aspects of
**Maanavaran** and the five aspects of **Antaray** bind up to the
**Sukshmasampray** **Gunasthan**.  Even in the absence of binding, their arising
and existence remain the same in the **Upshantamoh** (subdued delusion) and
**Kshigamoha** (diminished delusion) states.  They remain five aspects each.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa zamvArtha-baMdhodayasaMsaMsA-baMdha, udaya aura sattA rUpa
aMza, mANAvaraNarAe-jJAnAvaraNa aura aMtarAya karma meM, paMca-pAMca,
baMdhovarame-baMdha ke abhAva meM, ghi-bhI, tahA-tathA, upasaMtAudaya aura
sattA, huti hotI hai, paMceva-pAMca kii| gAthArtha-jJAnAvaraNa aura antarAya
karma meM baMdha, udaya aura sattA rUpa aMza pA~ca ..tinoM ke hare haiM : bI
abhAva meM bhI udaya aura sattA pA~ca prakRtyAtmaka hI hotI hai| vizeSArtha-
pUrva meM mUla prakRtiyoM ke sAmAnya tathA jIvasthAna va guNasthAnoM kI apekSA
saMvaidha bhaMgoM ko batalAyA gayA hai  /  aba isa gAthA se una mUla karmoM kI
uttara prakRtiyoM ke saMvaidha bhaMgoM kA kathana prArambha karate haiN|
jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, vedanIya, mohanIya, Ayu, nAma, gotra aura antarAya
yaha ATha mUla karmaprakRtiyA~ haiM  /  inake kramazaH pA~ca nau, do, aTThAIsa,
cAra, vyAlIsa, do aura pAMca bheda hote haiM  /  jo una mUla karmaprakRtiyoM kI
uttara prakRtiyoM kahalAtI haiN| inake nAma Adi kA vivecana prathama
karmagrantha meM kiyA gayA hai| isa gAthA meM jJAnAvaraNa aura antarAya karma kI
uttara prakRtiyoM ke bhaMgoM ko batalAyA hai| _ jJAnAvaraNa kI pAMcoM uttara
prakRtiyA~ tathA antarAya kI pAMcoM uttara prakRtiyAM kula milAkara ina dasa
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna taka hotA hai tathA
inakA baMdha-viccheda dasaveM guNasthAna ke aMta meM tathA udaya va sattA kA
viccheda bArahavaM guNasthAna meM anta meM hotA hai  /  jJAnAvaraNa aura
aMtarAya karma kI pAMca pAMca prakRti rUpa baMdha, udaya aura satba
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna paryanta hai aura baMdha kA abhAva hone para bhI una
donoM kI upazAntamoha meM aura kSIgamoha meM udaya tathA satva rUpa prakRti
pAMca-pAMca hI haiM  /

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sixth Karma Granth: Chapter 6**  **33**  Therefore, in each of these two
karmas, from the tenth guna-sthana to the twelfth guna-sthana, there are five
natural bonds, five natural upadayas, and five natural sattvas. This is one
bhang.  Thus, there are a total of two sanved bhangs with respect to the five
jnana-avaranas and the five antarayas.  Of the above two bhangs, the five
natural bond-patra, five natural upadayas, and five natural sattvas, this bhang
has three options: anadi-ananta, anadi-santa, and sadi-santa.  Of these, the
anadi-ananta option is for those who have not attained the anadi mithyatva-
drishti or the upashanta-moha guna-sthana.  The sadi-mithyatva-drishti jivas
attain samyak-darshan and charitra, and by ascending the shravana, they become
upashanta-moha or kshina-moha. They have the anadi-santa option.  The sadi-santa
option is for those jivas who have fallen from the upashanta-moha guna-sthana.
The second option, the five natural upadayas and five natural sattvas, has a
minimum duration of one time and a maximum duration of antar-muhurta.  Since
this bhang occurs in the upashanta-moha guna-sthana, and the minimum duration of
the upashanta-moha guna-sthana is one time, therefore, the minimum duration of
this bhang is also considered to be one time.  The maximum duration of the
upashanta-moha and kshina-moha guna-sthana is antar-muhurta, therefore, the
maximum duration of this bhang is also considered to be antar-muhurta.  The
description of the sanved bhangs of jnana-avaran and antaraya karma, along with
the jiva-sthana, guna-sthana, and time, should be understood in this way.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha : gA0 6 33 ataH ina donoM karmoM meM se pratyeka kA dasaveM
guNasthAna taka pAMca prakRtika baMdha, pAMca prakRtika udaya aura pAMca
prakRtika sattA. yaha eka bhaMga hotA hai tathA gyArahaveM aura bArahaveM
guNasthAna meM pAMca prakRtika udaya, pAMca prakRtika sattA yaha eka bhaMga hotA
hai  /  isa prakAra pAMcoM jJAnAvaraNa, pAMcoM antarAya kI apekSA kula do
saMvedha bhaMga hote haiM  /  . ukta do bhaMgoM meM se pAMca prakRtika baMdha
patra prakRtika udaya aura pAMca prakRtika sattA isa bhaMga ke kAla ke anAdi-
ananta, anAdi- sAnta aura sAdi- sAnta ye tIna vikalpa prApta hote haiN| inameM
se anAdiananta trikalpa abhavyoM kI apekSA hai| jo anAdi mithyAdRSTi yA
upazAntamoha guNasthAna kI prApta nahIM huaa| sAdi mithyAdRSTi jIva
samyagdarzana aura cAritra ko prApta karake tathA zraNa para ArohaNa karake
upazAntamoha yA kSINamoha ho jAte haiM, unake anAdi-sAnta vikalpa hotA hai  /
upazAntamoha guNasthAna se patita jIvoM kI apekSA sAdi-sAnta vikalpa hai  /
pA~ca prakRtika udaya aura pA~ca prakRtika sattA, isa dUsare vikalpa kA jaghanya
kAla eka samaya aura utkRSTa kAla antarmuhUrta hai| kyoMki yaha bhaMga
upazAntamoha guNasthAna meM hotA hai aura upazAntamoha guNasthAna kA jaghanya
kAla eka samaya hai, ataH isa bhaMga kA bhI jaghanya kAla eka samaya mAnA hai  /
upazAntamoha aura kSINamoha guNasthAna kA utkRSTa kAla antarmuhUrta hai, ataH
isa bhaMga kA bhI utkRSTa kAla antamuhUrta mAnA gayA hai | jJAnAvaraNa aura
antarAya karma ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vivaraNa jIvasthAna aura guNasthAna va
kAla sahita isa prakAra samajhanA cAhiye i

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 34: The Sevenfold  **Time**  | **Sevenfold** | **Life** | |---|---| |
**Uday** | **Aghanya** | | **Gunasthan** | **Jaskruta** | | **14 Antarmuhurta**
| **Deshon** | | **Apath** | **1 to 10 Gunasthan** | | **Paravarta** | **5** | |
**11th** | **1 Sangni** | | **12th** | **1 Antarmuhurta** | | **13th** |
**Paryapta** | | **14th** | **Antarmuhurta** |  **Explanation:**  After
explaining the destruction of the **Jnanaavaran** and **Antaray** karmas, we now
explain the destruction of the **Darshanavaran** karma.  **Darshanavaran
Karma:**  > "The **bandha** (bondage) and **satta** (existence) have three
**prakriti** (nature) **sthana** (places), and two **uday** (arising) **sthana**
(places), four **cha** (four), five **panag** (five), and **sanavaran**
(Darshanavaran karma)." (7)  **Explanation of the verse:**  * **Bandha:**
Bondage * **Satta:** Existence * **Prakriti Sthana:** Nature places * **Tini:**
Three * **Tullai:** Equal * **Uday Sthana:** Arising places * **Duve:** Two *
**Cha:** Four * **Panag:** Five * **Sanavaran:** Darshanavaran karma
**Explanation of the first destruction:**  The **utkrista** (excellent) **kal**
(time) **deshon** (region) **apardh** (half) **pudgal** (matter) **paravarta**
(transformation) mentioned for the first destruction is in relation to the
**sadi-sant** (beginning-end) **vikalp** (alternative) of **kal** (time).  * A
**jiva** (soul) who falls from the **upshantmoha** (subdued delusion)
**gunasthan** (quality place) and becomes **upshantmoha** (subdued delusion) or
**kshinamoha** (diminished delusion) within the **antarmuhurta** (inner moment)
time, experiences the **jghanya** (inferior) **kal** (time) of **antarmuhurta**
(inner moment). * A **jiva** who attains **samyadrishti** (right vision) at the
beginning of the **apardh pudgal paravarta** (half matter transformation) time,
ascends to **upshamni** (subdued) and becomes **upshantmoha** (subdued
delusion). Later, when the remaining time to stay in the world is
**antarmuhurta** (inner moment), the **jiva** ascends to **kshapkasroni** (the
place of the destroyer of the body) and becomes **kshinamoha** (diminished
delusion). This **jiva** experiences the **utkrista** (excellent) **kal** (time)
**deshon** (region) **apardh pudgal paravarta** (half matter transformation)
time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34 saptatikA prakaraNa kAla | ughaya sattA guNasthAna jIvasthAna | aghanya
jaskRSTa 14 antamuharta | dezona apArtha 1 se 10 guNasthAna parAvarta 5 | 11 vA
/  1 saMjJI eka samaya | antamuharta 12 vI ' paryApta  /  jJAnAvaraNa aura
antarAya karma kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke saMvedha bhaMga batalAne ke bAda aba
darzanAvaraNa karma ke saMvaidha bhaMgoM ko batalAte haiM  /  darzanAvaraNa
karma baMdhassa ya saMtassa ya pagaiTThANAI tinni tullaaii| upayavANAI duve ghau
paNagaM dasagAvaraNaM  // 7 //  zabdArtha-baMdhassabaMdha ke, ya-aura, saMtassa-
sattA ke, ya-aura, pagaiTThANAI-prakRtisthAna, tini-tIna, tullAIsamAna,
udayaDhAgAI-udayasthAna, duve-do, cau-cAra, paNagaMpA~ca, saNAvaraNe-
darzanAvaraNa karma meN|| 1 pahale bhaMga kA jo utkRSTa kAla dezona apArdha
pudgala parAvarta batalAyA hai, vaha kAla ke sAdi-sAnta vikalpa kI apekSA batAyA
hai| kyoMki jo jIva upazAntamoha guNasthAna se cyuta hAkara antarmuhUrta kAla ke
bhItara upazAntamoha yA kSINamoha ho jAtA hai, usake ukta bhaga kA jaghanya kAla
antarmuhUrta prApta hotA hai tathA jo apArdha pudgala parAvata kAla ke prAraMbha
meM samyAdRSTi hokara aura upazamaNi car3akara upazAntamoha ho jAtA hai,
anantara jaba saMsAra meM rahane kA kAla antarmuhUrta zeSa rahatA hai tatha
kSapakazroNi para car3hakara kSINamoha ho jAtA hai, usake uA bhaMga kA utkRSTa
kAla dezona apAdhaM pudgala parAvarta pramANa prApta hotA hai  /

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Bandha: Verse 7  **Verse Meaning:** The binding and the nature of
the Darshanavarana karma are the same. The nature of the Nagarathan is of two
types: four and five.  **Explanation:** The verse describes the destruction of
the sensory organs due to the Darshanavarana karma. There are nine total natures
of the Darshanavarana karma. Their binding places are three: nine natures, six
natures, and four natures. Similarly, the nature of existence also has these
three types: nine natures, six natures, and four natures. This is explained
below.  In the nine-nature binding place, all the natures of the Darshanavarana
karma are bound. In the six-nature binding place, the remaining six natures
excluding the Styadhitrik are bound. In the four-nature binding place, the
remaining four natures, excluding the five Nidras, are bound, starting from
Chakshudarshanavarana and ending with केवलदर्शनवारण.  Out of these three binding
places, the nine-nature binding place occurs in the first and second Mithyatva,
Sasadan-Gunasthan. The six-nature binding place occurs from the third
Samyamithyadristi Gunasthan to the first part of the eighth Apurvakaran
Gunasthan. The four-nature binding place occurs from the second part of the
Apurvakaran Gunasthan to the tenth Sukshmasampray Gunasthan.  **From the
Sapttatika Prakaran, page 156:**  * There are nine natures in total, and six
excluding the Styadhitrik. * There are four excluding the Nidra-Prachala.
**From the Sapttatika Prakaran Commentary, page 156:**  * The nine-nature
binding place is in Mithyadristi and Sasadan. * The six-nature binding place is
from the Samyamithyadristi Gunasthan to the first part of the Apurvakaran. * The
four-nature binding place is from the second part of the Apurvakaran to the
Sukshmasampray.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrandha : gA07 gAthArtha-darzanAvaraNa karma ke baMdha aura sattA
ke prakRtisthAna nI eka samAna hote haiM  /  nagarathAna cAra tathA pAMca
prakRtika isa prakAra do hote haiM  /  vizeSArtha-gAthA meM darzanAvaraNa karma
kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke saMvedha bhaMga batalAye haiM  /  darzanAvaraNa karma kI
kula uttara prakRtiyA~ no haiM  /  jinake baMdhasthAna tIna hote haiM-nau
prakRtika, chaha prakRtika aura cAra prakRtika  /  isI prakAra sattAsthAna ke
bhI ukta tIna prakAra hote haiMnau prakRtika, chaha prakRtika, cAra prakRtika  /
jisakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA jAtA hai| nau prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM
darzanAvaraNa karma kI saba prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai  /  chaha prakRtika
baMdhasthAna meM styAddhitrika ko chor3akara zeSa chaha prakRtiyoM kA tathA cAra
prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM pAMca nidrAoM ko chor3akara zeSa cakSudarzanAvaraNa
Adi kevaladarzanAvaraNa paryanta cAra prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai| ukta tIna
baMdhasthAnoM meM se nau prakRtika baMdhasthAna pahale aura dusare-mithyAtva,
sAsAdana-guNasthAna meM hotA hai  /  chaha prakRtika baMdhasthAna tIsare
samyamithyAdRSTi guNasthAna se lekara AThaveM apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ke pahale
bhAga taka tathA cAra prakRtika baMghasthAna apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ke dUsare
bhAga se lekara dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna taka hotA hai  /  - - - - 1
tatra sarvaprakRtisamudAyo nava, tA evaM nava styAnaddhitrikahInAH SaTa, etAzca
nidrA-pracalAhInAzcatasraH  /  -saptatikA prakaraNa kA, pR0 156 tatra
navaprakRtyAtmakaM baMdhasthAna midhyAdRSTo sAsAdane vA  /  SaTprakRtyAtmaka
bandhasthAnaM samyagmithyASTiguNasthAnakAdArabhyApUrvakaraNasya prayamaM mAgaM
vAyat  /  catuSprakRtyAtmakaM tu baMdhasthAnamapUrvakaraNadvitIyabhAgAdArabhya
sUkSmasaMparAyaM yAvat  /  saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pu0 156

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Saptatikaprakarana  There are three alternatives with respect to the duration of
the nine prakritikas bandhasthana: anadi-ananta, anadi-santa, and sadi-santa.
The anadi-ananta alternative is found in the abhavyas, because the nine
prakritikas bandhasthana of the abhavyas are never severed. The anadi-santa
alternative is found in the bhavyas, because the nine prakritikas bandhasthana
of the bhavyas are severed in the course of time. The sadi-santa alternative is
found in the jivas who have fallen from samyaktva and attained mithyatva. The
minimum duration of this sadi-santa alternative is antarmuhurta, and the maximum
duration is deshonaparsva pudgala paravarta.  The minimum duration of the six
prakritikas bandhasthana is antarmuhurta, and the maximum duration is one
hundred and thirty-two sagaras. This is understood as follows: the jiva who
attains samyaktva along with complete samyama and within antarmuhurta ascends to
the upasama or ksapaka sreni and completes the first part of the apurvakarana,
and then starts binding four prakritikas, the minimum duration of its six
prakritikas bandhasthana is antarmuhurta. Or the jiva who remains in upasama
samyagdrsti for a short time and then falls back to mithyatva, even its minimum
duration of six prakritikas bandhasthana is antarmuhurta. The maximum duration
of one hundred and thirty-two sagaras is to be understood as...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa nau prakRtikA baMdhasthAna ke kAla kI apekSA tIna vikalpa
haiManAdi-ananta, anAdi-sAnta aura sAdi-sAnta  /  inameM anAdi-ananta vikalpa
abhabyoM meM hotA hai, kyoMki abhavyoM ke nau prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA kabhI
bhI viccheda nahIM pAyA jAtA hai| anAdi-sAnta vikalpa bhavyoM meM hotA hai,
kyoMki bhavyoM ke nau prAkRtika baMdhasthAna kA kAlAnara meM viccheda pAyA jAtA
hai tathA sAdi-sAnta vikalpa samyaktva se cyuta hokara mithyAtva ko prApta hue
jIvoM ke pAyA jAtA hai  /  isa sAdi-sAnta vikalpa kA jaghanyakAla antarmuhurta
aura utkRSTa kAla dezona apArzva pudgala parAvarta hai  /  jise isa prakAra
samajhanA cAhie ki samyaktva se cyuta hokara mithyAtva ko prApta huA jo jIva
antamuhUrta kAla ke pazcAt samyagdRSTi ho jAtA hai, usake nau prakRtika
baMdhasthAna kA jaghanya kAla antamuhUrta pAyA jAtA hai tathA jo jIva apArdha
pudgala parAvarta kAla ke prArambha meM samyamhaSTi hokara aura antarmuhUrta
kAla taka samyaktva ke sAtha rahakara mithyAtva ko prApta ho jAtA hai, anantara
apArdha pudgala parAvarta kAla meM antarmuhurta zeSa rahane para jo punaH
samyagdRSTi ho jAtA hai, usake utkRSTa kAla dezona apArdha pudgala parAvarta
pramANa prApta hotA hai  /  chaha prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA jadhanya kAla
antarmuhUrta aura utkRSTa kAla eka sau battIsa sAgara hai  /  vaha isa prakAra
hai ki jo jIva sakala saMyama ke sAtha samyaktva ko prApta kara antarmuhUrta
kAla ke bhItara upazama yA kSapaka zroNi para car3hakara apUrvakaraNa ke
prathama bhAga ko vyatIta karake cAra prakRtika baMdhana karane lagatA hai,
usake chaha prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA jaghanyakAla antarmuhUrta hotA hai, athavA
jo upazama samyagdRSTi svalpakAla taka upazama samyaktva meM rahakara punaH
mithyAtva meM calA jAtA hai, usake bhI jaghanyakAla antarmuhUrta dekhA jAtA hai
/  utkRSTa kAla eka sau battIsa sAgara isa prakAra samajhanA cAhie ki

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth: Verse 7  The peak duration of staying with Samyaktvā,
separated from Mithyātva in the middle, is only this much. Afterwards, the being
either attains Mithyātva or ascends the Kshapaka Shreni and becomes a
Sayogikevali, ultimately attaining Siddhatva.  ## 37  The minimum duration of
the four-natured bandha-sthāna is one time, and the maximum duration is antar-
muhūrta. A being who enters the second part of Apurvakarana, binds the four
natures for one time, dies, and becomes a deva in the next time, is seen to have
a minimum duration of one time for the four-natured bandha. The sum of the
entire duration of the Upshama Shreni or Kshapaka Shreni is antar-muhūrta,
therefore its maximum duration is also not more than antar-muhūrta.  After
explaining the three bandha-sthāna of Darshanāvarana, now we clarify the three
sattā-sthāna.  In the nine-natured sattā-sthāna, all the natures of
Darshanāvarana karma exist. This sthāna extends up to the Upshanta-moha guna-
sthāna. In the six-natured sattā-sthāna, the sattva of the remaining six natures
exists, excluding the three of Styāna, Naddhi, and Trika. This sattā-sthāna
extends from the second part of Kshapaka Anivritti-vadarasa-samprayaya to the
penultimate time of the Kshina-moha guna-sthāna. The four-natured sattā-sthāna
exists in the final time of the Kshina-moha guna-sthāna.  Regarding the duration
of the nine-natured sattā-sthāna, there are two possibilities: Anadi-ananta and
Anadi-sānta. The first possibility is with respect to Abhavya, and the second
possibility is seen in Bhavyas, because in the course of time, the said sthāna
is severed from them. The Sadi-sānta possibility is not possible here, because
the severance of the nine-natured sattā-sthāna...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karma grantha : gA0 7 madhya meM sabhya mithyAtva se antarita hokara
samyaktva ke sAtha rahane kA utkRSTakAla itanA hI hai, anantara vaha jIva yA to
mithyAtva ko prApta ho jAtA hai yA kSapakazreNi para ArohaNa kara sayogikevalI
hokara siddha ho jAtA hai| 37 cAra prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA jaghanya kAla eka
samaya aura utkRSTa kAla antarmuhUrta hai  /  jisa jIva ne apUrvakaraNa ke
dvitIya bhAga meM praviSTa hokara eka samaya taka cAra prakRtiyoM kA baMdha kiyA
aura marakara dUsare samaya meM deva ho gayA, usake cAra prakRtika baMdha kA
jaghanyakAla eka samaya dekhA jAtA hai  /  upazamazra Ni yA kSapakazreNi ke pUre
kAla kA yoga antarmuhUrta pramANa hai, ataH isakA bhI utkRSTa kAla antarmuhUrta
se adhika nahIM hotA hai  /  darzanAvaraNa ke tIna baMdhasthAnoM ko batalAne ke
bAda aba tIna sattAsthAnoM ko spaSTa karate haiM nau prakRtika sattAsthAna meM
darzanAvaraNa karma kI sabhI prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  yaha sthAna
upazAntamoha guNasthAna taka hotA hai| chaha prakRtika sattAsthAna meM
styAnaddhitrika ko chor3akara zeSa chaha prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| yaha
sattAsthAna kSapaka anivRttivAdarasaMparAya ke dUsare bhAga se lekara kSINamoha
guNasthAna ke upAntya samaya taka hotA hai  /  cAra prakRtika sattAsthAna
kSINamoha guNasthAna ke aMtima samaya meM hotA hai  /  no prakRtika sattAsthAna
ke kAla kI apekSA anAdi-ananta aura anAdi- sAnta, yaha do vikalpa haiN| inameM
pahalA vikalpa abhavyoM kI apekSA hai aura dUsarA vikalpa bhavyoM meM dekhA jAtA
hai, kyoMki kAlAntara meM inake ukta sthAna kA viccheda ho jAtA hai| sAdi sAnta
vikalpa yahA~ sambhava nahIM, kyoMki nau prakRtika sattAsthAna kA viccheda

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sapttatika Chapter  **The क्षपक (Kshapaka) are present, but there is no
destruction of the जीव (Jiva) from the क्षपकश्रेणि (Kshapaka Shreni).**  **The
lowest and highest time for the six natural states of existence is an
अन्तर्मुहूर्त (Antarmuhurta).** This is because this state exists from the
second part of the क्षपक अनिवृत्ति (Kshapaka Anivriti) until the penultimate
time of the क्षीणमोह गुणस्थान (Ksheenamoha Gunasthan), and its lowest and
highest time is an अन्तर्मुहूर्त (Antarmuhurta) as proof.  **The lowest and
highest time for the four natural states of existence is one time.** This is
because this state is found in the final time of the क्षीणमोह गुणस्थान
(Ksheenamoha Gunasthan).  **There are two उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) for the
दर्शनावरण कर्म (Darshanavaran Karma): four natural and five natural - 'उदयठाणाई
दुवे च पणगं' (Udaythanai Duve Cha Panagan).** The उदय (Uday) of the four natural
उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) - चक्षु (Chakshu), अत्रक्षु (Atrakshu), अवधि (Avadhi), and
केवल दर्शनावरण (Keval Darshanavaran) - is always found until the क्षीणमोह
गुणस्थान (Ksheenamoha Gunasthan). Therefore, the collective form of these four
is one उदयस्थान (Udayasthan). When one of the five natures - निद्रा (Nidra) etc.
- is added to these four, it becomes a five natural उदयस्थान (Udayasthan).
निद्रादिक (Nidradik) ध्रुवोदमा (Dhruvodama) are not natures, because their उदय
(Uday) occurs when the time for उदययोग्य (Udayyogya) is obtained. Therefore,
this five natural उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) is occasionally obtained.  **The reason
why there are only two उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) - four natural and five natural -
for the दर्शनावरण (Darshanavaran), and not six, seven, etc. natural उदयस्थान
(Udayasthan), is that two or more natures do not arise simultaneously in निद्रा
(Nidra), but only one nature arises at one time.**  **"For neither निद्रा
(Nidra) etc. nor two or more arise simultaneously, but only one at a time." -
Sapttatika Chapter Commentary, p. 157**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa kSapakANi meM hotA hai aura kSapakazreNi se jIva kA
pratipAta nahIM hotA hai  /  kudeu chaha prakRtika sattAsthAna kA jaghanya aura
utkRSTa kAla antarmuhurta hai  /  kyoMki yaha sthAna kSapaka anivRtti ke dUsare
bhAga se lekara kSINamoha guNasthAna ke upAntya samaya taka hotA hai aura usakA
jaghanya va utkRSTa kAla antarmuhUrtaM pramANa hai  /  cAra prakRtika
sattAsthAna kA jaghanya va utkRSTa kAla eka samaya hai  /  kyoMki yaha sthAna
kSINamoha guNasthAna ke aMtima samaya meM pAyA jAtA hai  /  darzanAvaraNa karma
ke udayasthAna do haiM-cAra prakRtika aura pA~ca prakRtika- 'udayaThANAI duve ca
paNagaM'  /  cAra prakRtika udayasthAna cakSu, atrakSu, avadhi aura kevala
darzanAvaraNa - kA udaya kSINamoha guNasthAna taka sadaiva pAyA jAtA hai| isIlie
ina cAroM kA samudAya rUpa eka udayasthAna hai  /  ina cAra meM nidrA Adi pAMcoM
meM se kisI eka prakRti ke milA dene para pAMca prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai|
nidrAdika dhruvodamA prakRtiyAM nahIM haiM, kyoMki udayayogya kAla ke prApta
hone para unakA udaya hotA hai  /  ataH yaha pA~ca prakRtika udayasthAna kadAcit
prApta hotA hai  /  darzanAvaraNa ke cAra aura pA~va prakRtika, yaha do hI
udayasthAna hone tathA chaha, sAta Adi prakRtika udayasthAna na hone kA kAraNa
yaha hai ki nidrAoM meM do yA do se adhika prakRtiyoM kA eka sAtha udaya nahIM
hotA hai, kintu eka kAla meM eka hI prakRti kA udaya hotA hai  /  1 na hi
nidrAdayo dvitrAdikA yugapadudayamAyAnti kigzvekasmin kAle ekavAnyatamA kAcit  /
- saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 157

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sixth Karma Granth: Verse 8**  The details of the binding, arising, and
existence locations of the Darshanavarana Karma should be understood as follows:
**Binding** **Arising** **Existence**  **Existence 6.64** Now, we will discuss
the destruction caused by the mutual interaction of the binding, arising, and
existence locations of the Darshanavarana Karma.  **Biyavarane Navabandhagesu
Chaupanch Uday Nav Santa. Chhachchaubandhe Chaivan Chaubandhude Chalsha Ya. ||
Uparayabandhe 'Bau Pan Navans Chauruvay Chhach Chausanta. ||**  **1.
Comparison:**  **Vidiavarane Navabandhagesu Chadupanch Uday Navsatta.
Chhabandhagesu Evam Tah Chadubandhe Chhadansa Ya. || Ubaradabandhe
Chadupanchoudya Nav Chhamm Satt Chadu Jugasan. ||**  **Go. Karmakanda Ga. 631,
632** The second covering (Darshanavarana) has six natures. The one who binds
these six natures has an arising of 5 or 4, and its existence is. Similarly, the
one who is bound by these six natures also has an arising and existence. The one
who binds four natures has an arising of 4 or 5, as mentioned earlier. Its
existence is 4, and it also has an existence of 6. The one who has no binding
has an arising of 4 or 5, and its existence is 9 or 6. It also has both arising
and existence of 4.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karma grantha : gA0 8 darzanAvaraNa karma ke bandha, udaya, sattA
sthAnoM kA vivaraNa isa prakAra samajhanA cAhiye-... baMdha udaya sattA sattA
6.64 aba darzanAvaraNa karma ke baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM ke paraspara
saMvedha se utpanna bhaMgoM kA kathana karate haiM bIyAvaraNe navabaMdhagesu cau
paMca udaya nava sNtaa| chaccaubaMdhe caivaM cau bandhudae chalasA y||  //
uparayabaMdhe 'bau paNa navaMsa cauruvaya chacca cusNtaa|| 1 tulanA kIjie -
vidiyAvaraNe NavabaMdhagesu cadupaMca udaya NavasattA  /  chabaMdhagesa evaM
taha cadubaMdhe chaDaMsA ya  /  /  ubaradabaMdhe cadupaMcaudaya Nava chamma
satta cadu jugasaM  /  go0 karmakAMDa gA0 631, 632 TUsare AvaraNa
(darzanAvaraNa) kI 6 prakRtiyoM ke baMdha karane vAle ke udaya 5 kA yA 4 kA aura
sattA kI hotI hai  /  isI prakAra 6 prakatiyoM ke bandhaka ke bhI udaya aura
satva jAnanA  /  cAra prakRtiyoM ke badha karane vAle ke pUrvokta' prakAra udaya
cAra mA pAMca kA, satva tau kA tathA chaha kA bhI satva pAyA jAtA hai  /  jisake
bandha kA abhAva hai, usake udaya to cAra va pAMca kA hai aura sasva nau kA va
chaha kA hai tathA udava-satva donoM hI cAra-cAra ke bhI haiN|

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on Seven Tika  **Word Meaning - Seed Covering - Second Covering -
Vision Covering:**  In the nine-fold bondage, four or five arise, nine exist. In
the six and four bondage, the arising and existence are as before. In the four
bondage and four arising, six exist. And when the bondage is broken, four or
five arise, nine exist. Four arising, six and four exist.  **Verse Meaning:**
When the nine-fold bondage of the Vision Covering occurs, four or five arise and
nine exist. When the six and four-fold bondage occurs, the arising and existence
are as before. When there is four-fold bondage and four-fold arising, six exist.
And when the bondage is broken, four or five arise and nine exist. When there is
four-fold arising, six and four exist.  **Special Meaning:**  The verse
discusses the various types of breaking of the Vision Covering karma.  The
bondage of the nine-fold Vision Covering occurs in the first and second stages
of false belief and the stage of destruction of the qualities. At that time,
four or five arise and nine exist - "In the seed covering, in the nine-fold
bondage, four or five arise, nine exist." In the four-fold arising stage, only
the four Dharmic arising qualities, such as the Vision Covering of the eye, are
taken into account. The five-fold arising stage is obtained by adding one of the
sleep qualities to the four Dharmic arising qualities. Thus, in the nine-fold
bondage of the Vision Covering karma, two types of breaking are obtained, with
nine-fold existence and arising.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa zabdArtha-bIyAvaraNe-dUsare AvaraNa-darzanAvaraNa meM,
navabaMdhagesu-nau ke baMdha ke samaya, ca upaMca-cAra yA pAMca kA, udaya udaya,
navasaMtA-nau prakRtiyoM kI sattA, chacca ubaMdhe-chaha aura cAra 1. baMdha meM,
cevaM-pUrvokta prakAra se udaya aura sattA, caubaMdhurae cAra ke baMdha aura
cAra ke udaya meM, chataMsA-chaha kI sattA, praaura, ubarayabaMdhe-baMdha kA
viccheda hone para, upaNa-cAra athavA pAMca kA udaya, navaMsa-noM kI sattA,
caurudaya-cAra kA udama, cha-chaha, ca-aura, causaMtA-cAra kI sattA  /
gAthArtha-darzanAvaraNa kI nau prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hote samaya cAra yA pA~ca
prakRtiyoM kA udaya tathA nau prakRtiyoM ko sattA hotI hai  /  chaha aura cAra
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hote samaya udaya aura sattA pUrvavat hotI hai| cAra
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha aura udaya rahate sattA chaha prakRtiyoM kI hotI hai evaM
baMdhaviccheda ho jAne para cAra yA pA~ca prakRtiyoM kA udaya rahate sattA jo kI
hotI hai| cAra prakRttiyoM kA udaya rahane para sattA chaha aura cAra kI hotI
hai| vizeSArtha-gAthA meM darzanAvaraNa karma ke saMvaidha bhaMgoM kA vivecana
kiyA gayA hai| darzanAvaraNa kI nI uttara prakRtiyoM kA baMdha pahale aura
dUsare mithyAtva va sAsAdana-guNasthAna meM hotA hai, tava cAra yA pA~ca
prakRtiyoM kA udaya tathA nI prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai-'bIyAvaraNe nava
baMdhagesu cau paMca udaya naba saMtA'  /  cAra prakRtika udayasthAna meM
cakSudarzanAvaraNa Adi kevaladarzanAbaraNa paryanta cAra dhruvodayI prakRtiyoM
kA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai tathA pA~ca prakRtika udayasthAna ukta cAra prakatiyoM
ke sAtha kisI eka nidrA ko milA dene meM prApta hotA hai  /  isa prakAra
darzanAvaraNa karma ke nau prakRtika baMdha, nau prakRtika satA rahate udaya kI
apekSA do bhaMga prApta hote haiM

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixfold Karma Granth: Chapter 8  1. Two-fold natural bondage, four-fold
natural arising, and nine-fold natural existence. This dissolution occurs
without the arising of any of the five sleep states. 41 2. Nine-fold natural
bondage, five-fold natural arising, and nine-fold natural existence. This
dissolution occurs with the harmonious arising of one of the sleep states,
beginning with the sleep state.  It should be understood that the arising and
existence are the same during the time of two-fold natural bondage and four-fold
natural bondage. That is, six-fold natural bondage, four or five-fold natural
arising, and nine-fold natural existence, and four-fold natural bondage, four or
five-fold natural arising, and nine-fold natural existence. Of these, six-fold
natural bondage, four or five-fold natural arising, and nine-fold natural
existence occur in beings from the third Samyakmithyadristi Gunasthan to the
first part of the Upshamaka A-purvakarana (eighth) Gunasthan. And the second,
four-fold natural bondage, four or five-fold natural arising, and nine-fold
natural existence occur in beings from the second part of the Upshamaka
A-purvakarana Gunasthan to the Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan.  In relation to
these two places, there are a total of four dissolutions as follows:  1. Six-
fold natural bondage, four-fold natural arising, and nine-fold natural
existence. 2. Six-fold natural bondage, five-fold natural arising, and nine-fold
natural existence. 3. Four-fold natural bondage, four-fold natural arising, and
nine-fold natural existence. 4. Four-fold natural bondage, five-fold natural
arising, and nine-fold natural existence.  Of the above four dissolutions, there
is a special characteristic in Kshapakaṇi. Because...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaNTha karmagrantha : grA8 1. dau prakRtika baMdha, cAra prakRtika udaya aura
nau prakRtika sattA 1 yaha bhaMga pAMca nidrAoM meM se kisI ke udaya ke binA
hotA hai| 41 2. nau prakRtika baMdha, pAMca prakRtika udaya aura nau prakRtika
sattA  /  yaha bhaMga nidrAdika meM se kisI eka nidrA ke udaya ke sadbhAva meM
hotA hai  /  yaha prakRtika baMdha aura cAra prakatika baMdha ke samaya bhI
udaya aura sattA pUrvavat samajhanA cAhie  /  arthAt chaha prakRtika baMdha,
cAra thA pAMca prakRtika udaya aura nau prakRtika sattA tathA cAra prakRtika
baMdha, cAra yA pAMca prakRtika udaya aura nau prakRtika sattA  /  inameM se
chaha prakRtika baMdha, cAra yA pAMca prakRtika udaya, nau prakRtika
sattAsthAna, tIsare samyagmithyAdRSTi guNasthAna se lekara upazAmaka
apUrvakaraNa (ATha) guNasthAna ke pahale bhAga taka ke jIvoM meM hotA hai aura
dUsarA cAra prakRtika baMdha, cAra yA pA~ca prakRtika udaya, no prakRtika
sattAsthAna upazAmaka apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ke dUsare bhAga se lekara
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna taka ke jIvoM ke hotA hai  /  ina donoM sthAnoM kI
apekSA kula cAra bhaMga isa prakAra hote haiM 1 - chaha prakRtika baMdha, cAra
prakRtika udaya aura no prakRtika sattA  /  2- chaha prakRtika baMdha, pAMca
prakRtika udaya aura nau prakRtika sattA  /  3- cAra prakRtika baMdha, cAra
prakRtika udaya aura nau prakRtika sattA  /  4- cAra prakRtika baMdha, pAMca
prakRtika udaya aura nau prakRtika sattA  /  ukta cAra bhaMgoM meM se kSapakaNi
meM kucha vizeSatA hai| kyoMki

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 42  The **Kshapaka Jiva** is extremely pure, therefore it does not
experience the arising of the nature of sleep and movement. This results in two
**Bhangas** (breaks) for it:  * **First Bhang:** This extends from the first
part of the **Apuvarkarana Gunasthan** (state of non-return) of the **Kshapaka
Jiva** up to six **Prakriti** (nature) **Bandha** (bond), four **Prakriti**
**Udaya** (arising), and nine **Prakriti** **Satta** (existence). * **Third
Bhang:** This extends from the numerical parts of the **Anivrittibadarasampray
Gunasthan** (state of non-return) of the **Kshapaka Jiva** up to four
**Prakriti** **Bandha**, four **Prakriti** **Udaya**, and nine **Prakriti**
**Satta**.  Another characteristic of the **Kshapaka Jiva** to understand is
that after the destruction of **Styanadhitrika** (a type of karma) in the
**Anivrittibadarasampray Gunasthan**, the nine **Prakritis** do not remain.
Therefore, from the numerical parts of the **Anivrittibadarasampray Gunasthan**
to the end of the **Sookshma Sampray Gunasthan** (state of subtle existence),
there is another **Bhang** with four **Prakriti** **Bandha**, four **Prakriti**
**Udaya**, and six **Prakriti** **Satta** - "**Chaubandhudae Chalsa Ya**". This
**Bhang** is distinct from the four **Bhangas** mentioned above.  Thus, we have
considered how many **Bhangas** are possible with the **Darshanavarana** (veil
of perception) remaining bound as much as possible. Now, considering the
possible **Bhangas** of the **Darshanavarana** karma in relation to **Udaya**
and **Satta**, we have: "**Uberpbandhe Cha Pan Navans**" - When the **Bandha**
is broken, there are two **Bhangas** with four or five **Udaya** and nine
**Satta** due to **Vikalpa** (choice). These two **Bhangas** are:  1. Four
**Prakriti** **Udaya** and nine **Prakriti** **Satta**. 2. Five **Prakriti**
**Udaya** and nine **Prakriti** **Satta**.  The reason for these two **Bhangas**
is that in the **Upshantamoha Gunasthan** (state of subdued delusion), all nine
**Prakritis** of the **Darshanavarana** exist. And due to **Vikalpa**, four or
five **Prakritis** arise.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 42 saptatikA prakaraNa kSapaka jIva atyanta vizuddha hotA hai, ataH usake nidrA
aura pracalA prakRti kA udaya nahIM hotA hai, jisase usameM pahalA aura tIsarA
yaha do bhaMga prApta hote haiN| pahalA bhaMga-chaha prakRtika baMdha, cAra
prakRtika udaya aura nau prakRtika sattA-kSapaka jIvoM ke apUrvakaraNa
guNasthAna ke prathama bhAga taka hotA hai tathA tIsarA bhaMga-cAra prakRtika
baMdha, cAra prakRtika udaya aura nau prakRtika sattA-kSapake jIvoM ke nauveM
anivRttibAdarasapArAya guNasthAna ke saMkhyAta bhAgoM taka hotA hai  /  kSapaka
jIvoM ke lie eka aura vizeSatA samajhanA cAhie ki anivRttibAdara saMparAya
guNasthAna meM styAnaddhitrika kA kSaya ho jAne se Age nau prakRtiyoM kA satva
nahIM rahatA hai| ataH lanivRttibAdarasaMparAya guNasthAna ke saMkhyAta bhAgoM
se lekara sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna ke antima samaya taka cAra prakRtika
baMdha, cAra prakRtika udaya aura chaha prakRtika sattA, yaha eka aura bhaMga
hotA hai-'caubaMdhudae chalasA ya'  /  yaha bhaMga uparyukta cAra bhaMgoM se
pRthak hai  /  isa prakAra darzanAvaraNa kI uttara prakRtiyoM kA yathAsaMbhava
baMdha rahate hue kitane bhaMga saMbhava haiM, isakA vicAra kiyaa| natra udaya
aura sattA kI apekSA darzannAvaraNa karma ke saMbhava bhaMgoM kA vicAra karate
haiN| _'ubarapabaMdhe ca paNa navaMsa'-baMdha kA viccheda ho Ane para vikalpa se
cAra yA pAMca kA udaya tathA nau kI sattA vAle do bhaMga hote haiM  /  ukta do
bhaMga isa prakAra haiM 1-cAra prakRtika udaya aura nau prakRtika sattA  /
2-pAMca prakRtika udaya aura nau prakRtika sattA  /  ina donoM bhaMgoM ke banane
kA kAraNa yaha hai ki upazAntamoha guNasthAna meM darzanAvaraNa kI sabhI nau
prakRtiyoM kI sattA pAI jAtI hai| aura udaya vikalpa se cAra yA pAMca prakRtiyoM
kA pAyA jAtA hai  /

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Post-Firm-Granth: Chapter K  However, in the Ksheena-moha Gunasthan, there
is an absence of Sthya-naddhitrika, as they are destroyed during the process of
Kshapak.  Furthermore, in the penultimate stage of the Ksheena-moha Gunasthan,
Nidra and Prachala also cease to exist, leaving only the four Prakritis in
existence at the final stage.  In the Kshapak-shreni, Nidra etc. do not arise.
Therefore, there are two following bhangs (divisions):  1. **Four Prakriti Uday
(arising) and Six Prakriti Satya (existence).** This bhang is found in the
penultimate stage of the Ksheena-moha Gunasthan. 2. **Four Prakriti Uday and
Four Prakriti Satya.** This bhang occurs in the final stage of the Ksheena-moha
Gunasthan.  To indicate these two bhangs, the Gatha says: "Bau-rudaya chhach
chasanta".  ##  Darshana-avaran Karma: Differences of Opinion Regarding its
Components  Here, eleven Sanved-mang (sensory objects) of the Uttar Prakritis of
Darshana-avaran Karma are mentioned.  Among them, the following three bhangs are
also included:  1. **Four Prakriti Bandh (binding), Four Prakriti Uday, and Six
Prakriti Satya.** 2. **Four Prakriti Uday and Six Prakriti Satya.** 3. **Four
Prakriti Uday and Four Prakriti Satya.**  Of these three bhangs, the first
occurs in the ninth and tenth stages of the Kshapak-shreni, in the Sukhsma-
samparaya Gunasthan, while the second and third bhangs occur in the Ksheena-moha
Gunasthan.  This suggests that the author of this Granth believed that Nidra and
Prachala do not arise in the Kshapak-shreni.  Acharya Malayagiri, in his
commentary on the Suptattika Prakaran, has quoted this Gatha from the Satkarma
Granth: "Niss ugawane parivar".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paSTha pharmagrantha : gA0 ka kintu kSINamoha guNasthAna meM styAnaddhitrika kA
abhAva hai, kyoMki inakA kSapakaraNa meM ho jAtA hai tathA kSoNamoha guNasthAna
ke upAntya samaya meM nidrA aura pracalA kA bhI kSaya ho jAtA hai, jisase antima
samaya meM cAra prakRtiyoM kI sattA rahatI hai| kSapakazra eNi meM nidrA Adi kA
udaya nahIM hotA hai  /  ataH yahA~ nimnalikhita do bhaMga hote haiN| 1 - cAra
prakRtika udaya aura chaha prakRtika sattA  /  yaha bhaMga kSINamoha guNasthAna
ke upAntya samaya meM pAyA jAtA hai  /  2 - cAra prakRtika udaya aura cAra
prakRtika sattA | yaha bhaMga kSINamoha guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM hotA hai
/  ina donoM bhaMgoM kA saMketa karane ke lie gAyA meM kahA hai--'baurudaya
chacca casaMtA'  /  darzanAvaraNa karma ke aMgoM sambandhI matAntara yahAM
darzanAvaraNa karma ke uttara prakRtiyoM ke gyAraha saMvedha maMga batalAye haiM
/  unameM nimnalikhita tIna bhaMga bhI sammilita haiM-- (1) cAra prakRtika
baMdha, cAra prakRtika udaya aura chaha prakRtika sattA  /  (2) cAra prakRtika
udaya aura chaha prakRtika sattA ! (3) cAra prakRtika udaya aura cAra prakRtika
sattA  /  ina tInoM bhaMgoM meM se pahalA bhaMga kSapaka Ni ke nauveM aura
dasave anivRttibAdara, sUkSmasaMparAya - guNasthAna meM hotA hai tathA dUsarA va
tIsarA bhaMga kSINamoha guNasthAna meM hotA hai| isase yaha pratIta hota hai -
isa grantha ke karttA kA yahI mata rahA hai ki kSapakazreNi meM nidra aura
pracalA kA udaya nahIM hotA hai| AcArya malayagiri ne suptatika prakaraNa kI
TIkA meM satkarma grantha kA yaha gAthAMza uddhRta kiyA hainissa ugavaNe
parivara

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter on the Seventh (Saptathika)  Triahhika does not occur in the
Kshapakauni and Ksheenamoha Gunasthanas. This is also the opinion of the authors
of Karma-prakriti and Panchasangraha. However, the authors of Panchasangraha
were aware of the fact that five prakritis also arise in the Kshapaka श्रेणि and
Ksheenamoha Gunasthanas. They have mentioned this in the verse "Panchavh vi keï
ichchasi". Acharya Malayagiri has attributed this opinion to the Karmastavakar.
Thus, it is known that except for the Karmastavakar, almost all the
Karmagranthikars have held the opinion that Nidradvik does not arise in the
Kshapakauni and Ksheenamoha Gunasthanas.  The Digambar tradition generally holds
the opinion of विकल्प (alternative). In the Kashayapahuḍ Chūṇi, it is indicated
that "the being who ascends the Kshapakauni, leaves behind the karma of Ayus and
Vedaniya, and experiences the awakening of all other karmas." Commenting on
this, Bīrasena Swami has written in the Jayadhavala Kshapanaadhikār that the
being in the Kshapa श्रेणि is the नियम वेदक of five Gnanavarana and four
Darshanavarana, but is the कदाचित् वेदक of Nidra and Prachala, because there is
no contradiction in their possible subtle awakening.  **Footnotes:**  1.
Nihapayalaash khonraaganavage paricchajj. - Karma Prakriti 30 Ga. 10 2.
Panchasangraha Saptathika Ga. 14 3. Karmastashakarmatean paschaanam apyudayo
bhavati. - Panchasangraha Saptathika Tika, Ga. 14 4. Aaugavedaniyavajjaanan
vedijjamananaakaman paveasago. - Kashayapahuḍ Chūṇi (Yativrishabha) 5.
Panchanhim naanavaraniyanam chaduhnhim dasanaabaranianam niyama vedago,
nihapayalaanm sia, taasim abattodayass kaddai sambhave virohaabhaavado. -
Jayadhavala (Kshapanaadhikār)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtatikA prakaraNa kSapakauNi aura kSINamoha guNarapAna meM TriAhika nahIM hotA
hai| karmaprakRti tathA paMcasaMgraha ke kartAoM kA bhI yahI mala hai| kiAtu
paMcasaMgraha ke kartA kSapaka zreNi aura kSINamoha muNasthAna meM pA~ca prakRti
kA bhI udaya hotA hai, isa mata se paricita the aura usanA ullekha unhoMne
'paMcavha vi kei icchasi'- isa pada se kiyA hai  /  AcArya malayagiri ne ise
karmastavakAra kA mata batAyA hai| isa prakAra yaha jJAta hotA hai ki
karmastavakAra ke sivAya prAyaH sabhI kArmagranthikoM kA ghahI mata rahA hai ki
kSapakaNi aura kSINamoha guNasthAna meM nidrAdvika kA udaya nahIM hotA hai| _
digambara paramparA meM sarvatra vikalpa vAlA mata pAyA jAtA hai  /
kaSAyapAhuDa cUNi meM itanA saMketa kiyA gayA hai ki 'kSapakauNi para car3hane
vAlA jIba Ayu aura vedanoya karma ko chor3akara udaya prApta zeSa saba karmoM kI
udIraNA karatA hai  /  isa para TIkA karate hue bIrasena svAmI ne jayadhavalA
kSapaNAdhikAra meM likhA hai ki kSapazreNi vAlA jIva pA~ca jJAnAvaraNa aura cAra
darzanAvaraNa kA niyama se vedaka hai kintu nidrA aura pracalA kA bAdAcit vedaka
hai, kyoMki inakA kadAcit avyakta udaya hone meM koI virodha nahIM AtA hai  /
amiti 1 nihApayalAza khoNarAganavage pariccajja  /  -karma prakRti 30 gA0 10 2
paMcasaMgraha saptatikA gA014 3 karmastaSakAramatena pazcAnAmapyudayo bhavati  /
-paMcasaMgraha saptatikA TIkA, gA0 14 8 AugavedaNIyavajjANaM
vedijjamANANakammANaM pavesago  /  -kaSAyapAhur3a cUNi (yativRSabha) 5 paMcaNiM
NANAvaraNIyANaM caduNhaM dasaNAbaraNIyANaM NiyamA vedago, NihApayalANaM siyA,
tAsimabattodayassa kadAI saMbhave virohAbhAvAdo  /  ayadhavalA (kSapaNAdhikAra)

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pat Karm Granth: Chapter 8  Gati Acharya has also accepted the same opinion in
his Panchasangrah that four or five instances of Darshanavaran arise in
Kshapakoni and Kshina Moh. This opinion is also accepted in the Go. Karmakand.
Thus, according to the Digambar tradition, there are four natural bonds, five
natural arisings, and six natural existences. This is one bhang in the ninth and
tenth Gunasthanas, and five natural arisings and six natural existences are one
bhang in the Kshina Moh Gunasthan. Therefore, in the context of explaining the
bhangs of the Darshanavaran karma, these two bhangs are combined, resulting in
thirteen bhangs being considered in the Digambar tradition. However, in the
Shwetambar tradition, there are eleven bhangs, and according to other opinions,
there are two options for thirteen bhangs.  The details of the eleven or
thirteen bhangs of the bond, arising, and existence of the Darshanavaran karma
should be understood as follows:  | Bond | Arising | Existence | Gunasthan |
|---|---|---|---| | - | - | - | - | | - | - | - | - | | - | - | - | - | | - | -
| - | - | | - | - | - | - | | - | - | - | - | | - | - | - | - | | - | - | - | -
| | - | - | - | - | | - | - | - | - | | - | - | - | - | | - | - | - | - | | - |
- | - | - |  1. Yonam Dvayo Shat Vapa Cha Chatustayam. Panch Panchasu Shunyani
Bhangah Santi Traipadasha. - Panchasangrah, Amiti Gati, Shlok 388 2. Go.
Karmakand, Chapter 631, 632, which is quoted on page 36. 3. The fifth bhang
occurs in both the Upshama and Kshapakoni categories, but with the distinction
that in Kshapakoni, it is only known up to the numerical parts of the ninth
Gunasthan. Further, in Kshapakoni, the seventh bhang begins.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pATa karma grantha : gA0 8 gati AcArya ne bhI apane paMcasaMgraha meM yahI mata
svIkAra kiyA hai ki kSapakauNi aura kSINamoha meM darganAvaraNa kI cAra yA pAMca
pratiyoM kA udaya hotA hai  /  /  go0 karmakAMDa meM bhI isI mata ko svIkAra
kiyA gayA hai| isa prakAra digambara paramparA kI mAnyatAnusAra cAra prakRtika
baMdha, pAMca prakRtika udaya aura inTa prakRtika sattA. yaha eka bhaMga nauveM,
dasaveM guNasthAna meM tathA pA~ca prakRtika udaya aura chaha prakRtika sattA
yaha eka bhaMga kSINamoha guNasthAna meM var3a jAtA hai| isalithe darzanAvaraNa
karma ke saMvedha bhaMga batalAne ke prasaMga meM ina donoM bhaMgoM ko milAne se
teraha bhaMga digambara paramparA meM mAne jAte haiM, lekina zvetAmbara
paramparA meM gyAraha tathA matAntara se teraha bhaMgoM ke do vikalpa haiN|
darzanAvaraNa karma ke baMdha, udaya, sattA ke saMvaidha 11 athavA 13 bhaMgoM kA
vivaraNa isa prakAra samajhanA cAhiye | baMdha | udaya  /  sattA guNasthAna - -
- | ww' meM dai U 1,2 ACKXK: 3,4,5,6,7,8 8,9,103 1. yonaMva dvayoH Sata vapa ca
catuSTayam  /  paJca paJcasu zUnyAni bhaGgAH santi trapadaza  /  /
-paMcasaMgraha, amitigati, zloka 388 2. go0 karmakAMDa gA0 631, 632, jo pR0 36
para uddhRta hai| 3. pAMcavAM bhaMga upazAma kSaeka donoM zreNi meM hotA hai,
lekina itanI vizeSatA hai ki sapakaNi meM ise nauveM guNasthAna ke saMkhyAta
bhAgoM taka hI jaannaa| Age kSapaka Ni meM sAtavAM bhaMga prArambha ho jAtA hai|

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 46 19 cu 11 12 13 5. 5. Usual retw Vedaniya, Ayu and Gotra Karma Sajatika
Prakaran 8, 6.10 Upshamani 6,10 Kshapaka 6,10 Matantar mein 1 11 Upagamika 11
Upsha 12 Dvicharam Samay Paryant Matantar se 12 Charam Samay mein After stating
the sensory interruptions of Darshanavaran Karma, now the sensory interruptions
of Vedaniya, Ayu and Gotra Karma are being explained - Veyaniya Jayagoe
Vibhajja: Moham Param Voccham || 6 || Among these interruptions, the eighth and
twelfth interruptions are explained according to the meaning of Karmastava, and
the remaining eleven interruptions should be understood according to this text.
2. Some scholars, in order to state the number of parts of Vedaniya, Ayu and
Gotra Karma, have inserted the following verse in the research of the original
chapter (a) Gomm Satt Manga Madya Ya Bhang Huvati Beyagie. Pan Nav Nav Pan Bhang
Aauunke Vikamso U || This verse is not in the original chapter. (b) Vemaniye
Adhbhang Gode Saseb Honti Bhang Hu. Pan Jav Jav Pan Bhang Aauch Ukkes Visariya
|| -Go. Karmakand 651 There are eight interruptions of Vedaniya and seven
interruptions of Gotra, and there are five, nine, nine and five interruptions
respectively for the four Ayus. 1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46 19 cu 11 12 13 5. 5. Usual retw vedanIya, Ayu aura gotra karma sajatikA
prakaraNa 8, 6.10 upazamaNi 6,10 kSapaka 6,10 matAntara meM 1 11 upagAmaka 11
upazA 12 dvicarama samaya paryanta matAntara se 12 carama samaya meM
darzanAvaraNa karma ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA kathana karane ke anantara aba
vedanIya, Ayu aura gotra karma ke saMvedha bhaMga batalAte haiM -
veyaNiyAjayagoe vibhajjaH mohaM paraM vocchaM  //  6  //  ina bhaMgoM meM
AThavIM aura bArahava bhaMga karmastava ke abhiprAya ke anusAra batalAyA hai
aura zeSa gyAraha bhaMga isa grantha ke anusAra samajhanA cAhie  /  2. kinhIM
vidvAna ne vedanIya, Ayu aura gotra karma ke aMgoM ko saMkhyA batalAne ke liye
mUla prakaraNa ke anusaMdhAna meM nimnalikhita gAthA prakSipta kI hai(ka) gomma
satta maMgA madya ya bhaMgA huvati beyagie  /  paNa nava nava paNa bhaMgA
Auunake vikamaso u  //  yaha gAMdhA mUla prakaraNa meM nahIM hai  /  (kha)
vemaNiye aDabhaMgA gode saseba hoMti bhaMgA hu  /  paNa java java paNa bhaMgA
Auca ukkesa visariyA  //  -go0 karmakAMDa 651 vedanIya ke ATha aura gotra ke
sAta bhaMga hote haiM tathA cAroM AyuoM ke krama se pA~ca, nau nau aura pAMca
bhaMga hote haiM  /  1

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Corrupted Karma Granth: Chapter G  **Word Meaning:**  - **Vey Kiya Uyagoe:**
Vedaniya, Ayu and Gotra Karmas (referring to the types of karmas). -
**Vibhajj:**  Bandha-adi-sthana (places of bondage) and their Sanvedha-bhang
(breaking of perception). - **Moham:**  Mohaniya Karma (karma that causes
delusion).  **Verse Meaning:**  - The verse discusses the Bandha-adi-sthana and
Sanvedha-bhang of Vedaniya, Ayu and Gotra Karmas. It then moves on to discuss
the Bandha-adi-sthana of Mohaniya Karma.  **Special Meaning:**  - The verse
mentions the division of Vedaniya, Ayu and Gotra Karmas, but it doesn't specify
how many Bandha-adi-sthana and Sanvedha-bhang occur for each karma in relation
to their respective Uttar-prakriti (subsequent nature). - However, the
commentator Acharya Malayagiri has elaborated on these aspects in his
commentary. - According to the commentary, the following are the Bhang
(breaking) of Vedaniya, Ayu and Gotra Karmas:  **Breaking of Vedaniya Karma:** -
There are two types of Vedaniya Karma: Sata (true) and Asata (false). - These
two natures are mutually contradictory. - Therefore, only one of them can be
bound or arise at a time. - It is not possible for both to be bound or arise
simultaneously. - However, both natures exist until one of them is destroyed. -
Once one nature is destroyed, only the other nature remains. - In other words,
in relation to the Uttar-prakriti of Vedaniya Karma:     - There is only one
Bandha-sthana (place of bondage), which can be either Sata or Asata, as both
cannot be bound simultaneously due to their contradictory nature.     - There is
also only one Udaya-sthana (place of arising), which can be either Sata or
Asata, as both cannot arise simultaneously due to their contradictory nature.
- There are two Satta-sthana (places of existence), one for each nature.     -
Both natures exist until one of them is destroyed.     - Once one nature is
destroyed, only the other nature remains.  **Footnotes:** - 1: This information
is taken from the commentary on the Saptatika Prakarana, page 156.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhraSTa karmagrantha : ga  zabdArtha - veya kiyA uyagoe -- vedanIya, Ayu aura
gotra karma ke, vibhajja - ghAdisthAna aura unake saMvedha bhaMga kahakara,
mohaM - mohanIya karma ke paraM pazcAt yo kathana kareMge  /  , gAthArtha -
vedanIya, Ayu aura gotra karma ke baMdhAdi sthAna aura unake saMbaMdha bhaMga
kahakara bAda meM mohanIya karma ke bandhAdi sthAnoM kA ka6 cle| - -- 457
vizeSArtha - gAthA meM vedanIya, Ayu aura gotra karma meM vibhAga karane kI
sUcanA dI hai, lekina kisa karma ke apanI uttara prakRtiyoM kI apekSA kitane
baMdhAdi sthAna aura unake kitane saMvedha bhaMga hote haiM, isako nahIM batAyA
hai  /  kintu TIkAkAra AcArya malayagiri ne apanI TIkA meM inake aMgoM kA
vistRta vicAra kiyA hai| ataH TIkA ke anusAra vedanIya, Ayu aura gotra ke
bhaMgoM ko yahA~ prastuta karate haiM  /  vedanIya karma ke saMvedha bhaMga
vedanIya karma ke do bheda haiM-sAtA aura asaataa| ye donoM prakRtiyA~ paraspara
virodhinI haiN| ataH inameM se eka kAla meM se kisI eka kA baMdha aura kisI eka
kA udaya hotA hai  /  eka sAtha donoM kA baMdha aura udaya saMbhava nahIM hai |
lekina kisI eka prakRti kI sattA kA biccheda hone taka sattA donoM prakRtiyoM kI
pAI jAtI hai tathA kisI eka prakRti kI sattA vyucchinna ho jAne para kisI eka hI
prakRti kI sattA pAI jAtI haiM | arthAt vedanIya karma kA uttara prakRtiyoM kI
apekSA 1 tatra vedanIyasya sAmAnyenakaM baMdhasthAnam, tadyathA sAtamasAtaM vA,
dvayo: paraspara viruddhatvena yugapadabandhAbhAvAt  /  udayasthAnamapi ekam,
tadyathA-sAtamasA vA dvayoryugapadudayAbhAvAt parasparaviruddhatvAt  /
sattAsthAne dve tathA -- eka ca  /  tatra yAvadekamanyatarad na kSIyate tAvad
api satI, anyatarasmizca kSINe ekamiti  /  2 - saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 156
F

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 4: Sapttatika  **Bandha-sthana and Udaya-sthana are always of one
nature, but Sattha-sthana is of two natures and one nature, thus there are
two.**  The breaking of the perception of non-painful karma is as follows:  1.
**Asaata Bandha, Asaata Udaya, and both Sattha** 2. **Asaata Bandha, Saata
Udaya, and both Sattha** 3. **Saata Bandha, Saata Udaya, and both Sattha** 4.
**Saata Bandha, Asaata Udaya, and both Sattha**  These four types of Bandha
remain. The first two types occur from the Mithyaishti Guna-sthana to the sixth,
Prammatta-samyata Guna-sthana. Because in the Prammatta-samyata Guna-sthana, the
Asaata Bandha is broken, and there is no further Bandha. Therefore, in the
seventh, Aprammatta-samyata, and subsequent Guna-sthana, there are only the
first two types of Bandha.  The remaining two types of Bandha, the third and
fourth, occur from the Mithya-drishti Guna-sthana to the Sayogikevali Guna-
sthana. Because the Bandha of Saata Vedaniya occurs only until the thirteenth,
Sayogikevali Guna-sthana.  In the absence of Bandha, there are four types of
breaking based on Udaya and Sattha:  1. **Asaata Udaya and both Sattha** 2.
**Saata Udaya and both Sattha** 3. **Asaata Udaya and Asaata Sattha** 4. **Saata
Udaya and Saata Sattha**  The first two types of breaking occur until the second
extreme time of the Ayogikevali Guna-sthana. Because both Sattha are found until
the second extreme time of the Ayogikevali. The last two types of breaking, the
third and fourth, occur in the extreme time.  In the second extreme time, when
Saata is destroyed, in the final time, the third type of breaking, Asaata Udaya
and Asaata Sattha, is found. And in the second extreme time, when Asaata is
destroyed, in the final time, the fourth type of breaking, Saata Udaya and Saata
Sattha, is found.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 4ma saptatikA prakaraNa baMdhasthAna aura udayasthAna sarvatra eka prakRtika
hotA hai kintu sattAsthAna do prakRtika aura eka prakRtikaH, isa prakAra do hote
haiM  /  bedanIya karma ke saMvedha bhaMga isa prakAra hai- 1. asAtA kA baMdha,
asAtA kA udaya aura donoM kI sattA, 2. asAtA kA baMdha, sAtA kA udaya aura donoM
kI sattA, 2. sAtA kA baMdha, sAtA kA udaya aura donoM kI sattA aura 4. sAtA kA
baMdha, asAtA kA udaya aura donoM kI sttaa| ukta cAra bhaga baMdha rahate hA
hote haiN| inameM se Adi ke do pahala mithyAiSTi guNasthAna se lekara chaThe
pramattasaMyata guNasthAna taka hote haiM  /  kyoMki pramattasaMyata guNasthAna
meM asAtA kA baMdhaviccheda ho jAna ke Age isakA baMdha nahIM hotA hai  /
jisase sAtaveM apramattasaMyata Adi guNarAmoM meM Adi ke yoga  /  /  6 hote
haiM, na ke do bhaMga arthAt tIsarA aura cauthA bhaMga mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna se
lebara mayogikevalI guNasthAna taka hote haiN| kyoMki sAtA vedanIya kA baMdha
terahavaM sayogikevalI guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai| baMdha kA abhAva hone para
udaya va sattA kI apekSA nimnalikhita cAra bhaMga hote haiM 1. asAtA kA udaya
aura donoM kI sattA  /  2. sAtA kA udaya aura donoM kI sattA  /  3. asAtA kA
udaya aura asAtA kI sattA ! 4. sAtA kA udaya aura mAtA kI sttaa| inameM se Adi
ke do bhaMga ayogikevalI guNasthAna ke dvitra rama samaya taka hote haiN| kyoMki
ayogikevalI ke dvicarama samaya taka donoM kI sattA pAI jAtI hai  /  anta ke do
bhaMga-tIsarA aura cauthA-carama mamaya meM hotA hai  /  jisake dvicarama samaya
meM sAtA kA kSaya hotA hai usake antima samaya meM tIsarA bhaMga-asAtA kA udalU,
asAtA kI sattA-pAyA jAtA hai tathA jisake dvicarama samaya meM asAtA kA kSaya

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter** **A.** **Sa.** **Sa.** **A.** The detailed text of karma has become
clear, in its final stage the emergence of the *sata*, the *sasa* of the *sata*
is the fourth *bhanga* found. Thus, there are a total of eight *bhanga* of
*vedaniya karma*. Let us understand their description as follows: *Mang* *Kram*
*Uday* *Satta* *Gunasthan* *Asa* 2 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 1 to 13
*Sa*. 1 to 13 *Sa*. 14 days *Samapas* | 14 *Dwi* *Charam* *Samaya* *Paryant* 14
*Charam* *Samaya* 14 *Charam* *Samaya* *Ayufarm* *Sanved* *Bhanga*  _ Now,
according to the order mentioned in the verse, we consider the *bandha* etc.
places of *ayukarma* and their *sanved* *bhanga*. In the four types of
*ayukarma*, there are five, nine, nine, and five *bhanga* respectively. That is,
for *narakayu* *Sa* . &nwr wala *Asa*. *Sa* *A* *Sa* *Sa* 1 (a)
*SerasamchhattaeK* *Sayasayaana* *Bandhayocchano*. *Sansauinnaai* *Pun*
*Sayasayaai* *Sabvesu*.  *Bana* *Uddannam* *Chi* *Ya* *Iyaram* *Wa* *Do* *Vi*
*Sant* *Chaumango*. *Sant* *Muinna* *Mbandhe* *Do* *Doni* *Dusant* *Ich* *Att* -
*Khasangrah* *Sapttatika* *Ga* 17, 10 (b) *Sadadasadekkadaram* *Bandhukya*
*Hoti* *Sanbhavatthana*. *Dosattam* *Jogitti* *Ya* *Parime* *Udayagard* *Sasan*.
*Chhatoti* *Chari* *Manga* *Do* *Mamma* *Hoti* *Jan* *Jogijine*. *Parabhangaa*
*Jogijine* *Thana* *Padi* *Yaniyassa*. - *Go* *Karmakar*, *Ga* 133, 634

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aM0 a. sA. sA. a. paSTa karmagrantha ho gayA hai, usake antima samaya meM sAtA
kA udaya, sAtA kI sasA yaha cauthA bhaMga pAyA jAtA hai  /  isa prakAra vedanIya
karma ke kula ATha bhaMga hote haiN|' jinakA vivaraNa isa prakAra samajhanA
cAhiyemaMga krama udaya sattA guNasthAna asA0 2 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 1 se 13 taka sA. 1 se 13 taka 14 dina samApasa | 14 dvi carama samayaparyanta
14 carama samaya meM 14 carama samaya meM Ayupharma ke saMvedha bhaMga _ aba
gAthA meM batAye gaye krama ke anusAra Ayukarma ke baMdhAdi sthAna aura unake
saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vicAra karate haiN| Ayukarma ke cAra bhedoM meM kama se
pAMca, nau, nau, pA~ca bhaMga hote haiN| arthAt narakAyu ke sA  /  &nwr wala
asA. sA0 a0 sA0 sA. 1 (ka) serasamachaTTaeeK sAyAsAyANa bNdhyocchno| saMsauiNNAi
puNo sAyAsAyAi sabvesu  /  /  banA uddaNNayaM ci ya iyaraM vA do vi saMta
cumNgo| saMta muiNNamabaMdhe do doNi dusaMta icha atttth| -khasaMgraha saptatikA
gA0 17, 10 (kha) sAdAsAdekkadaraM baMdhukyA hoti saMbhavaTThANe  /  dosattaM
jogitti ya parime udayAgarda sasaM  //  chaToti cAri maMgA do maMmA hoti jAna
jogijiNe  /  parabhaMgA'jogijiNe ThANaM paDi yaNIyassa  //  -go0 karmakAra, gA0
133, 634

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter Five of the Sapttatika, there are nine sensory interruptions in the
lifespan of a being in the state of a being in the state of a human, and five in
the lifespan of a god. Their explanation is as follows:  In one instance, the
arising of one (sensory interruption) is the binding of one lifespan, which is
capable of being bound in all (lifespans), not two or more. Therefore, in
relation to binding and arising, there is one natural binding place and one
natural arising place for lifespan, but there are two natural and one natural
places of existence. Because the one who has bound the lifespan of the previous
existence has two natural places of existence, and the one who has not bound the
lifespan of the previous existence has one natural place of existence.  Now, we
will explain the sensory interruptions of the lifespan karma. There are three
stages of lifespan karma:  1. The stage before the binding of lifespan karma
related to the previous existence. 2. The stage of binding of lifespan related
to the previous existence. 3. The stage after the binding of lifespan related to
the previous existence.  These three stages are called the unbound stage, the
bound stage, and the ceased stage, respectively. First, we will consider the
sensory interruptions of the lifespan of hell beings.  1. In lifespan, there is
generally one binding place, which is one of the four. Due to mutual opposition,
there is no binding of two lifespans simultaneously. There is one arising place,
which is also one of the four, due to the arising of two lifespans
simultaneously. There is one place of existence, which is one of the four. As
long as another lifespan of the previous existence is bound, and as long as it
is bound in the previous existence and does not arise in another previous
existence, it exists.  Sapttatika Commentary, page 156  2. There are three
stages of lifespan, namely: the stage before the binding of the lifespan of the
previous existence, the stage of the binding of the lifespan of the previous
existence, and the stage after the binding of the lifespan of the previous
existence.  Sapttatika Commentary, page 150

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa pA~ca, tithaMcAyu ke nau, manuSyAyu ke nau aura devAyu ke
pAMca saMvedha bhaMga hote haiM  /  jinakA spaSTIkaraNa nimna prakAra hai eka
paryAya meM kisI eka kA udaya gauH so saba meM baMdhane yogya kisI eka Ayu kA hI
baMdha hotA hai, do yA do se adhika kA nahIM  /  isaliye baMdha aura udaya kI
apekSA Ayu kA eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna aura eka prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai
kintu sattAsthAna do prakRtika aura eka prakRtika isa prakAra do hote haiN|
kyoMki jisane parabhava kI Ayu kA baMdha kara liyA hai, usake do prakRtika tathA
jisane parabhava kI Ayu kA baMdha nahIM kiyA hai, usake eka prakRtika
sattAsthAna hotA hai|' _ aba Ayukarma ke saMvaidha bhaMgoM ko batalAte haiN|
Ayukarma kI tIna avasthAeM hotI hai 1. parabhatra sambandhI Ayukarma ke
baMdhakAla se pUrva kI avasthA  /  2. parabhava sambandhI Ayu ke baMghakAla kI
avsthaa| 3. parabhava sambandhI AyubaMdha ke uttara-kAla kI avasthA  /  ina
tInoM avasthAoM ko kramaza: abandhakAla, baMdhakAla aura uparatakAla kahate
haiN| sarvaprathama narakAyu ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vicAra karate haiN| 1 AyuSi
sAmAnyenaika baMghasthAnaM caturNAmanyatamat, parasparaviruvatvena pugapada
dvivAyuSAM bandhAbhAvat  /  udayasthAnamanmekam, tadapi caturNAmanyatamata,
yugapada vitrAyuSAM udayAmAkSAt  /  de sattAsthAne, tadyathA-hai eka ca  /
tatraika catuminyatamat yAvadanyat parabhavAyunaM badhyate, paramavAyuSi ca
baddha yAvadanyatra parabhave notpadyate tAvada ve satI  /  saptatikA prakaraNa
TIkA, pR0 156 2 tatrAyuSastimo'vasthAH, tadyathA-parabhavAyubandhakAlAt
pUrvAvasthA parabhavAyurvandhakAlAvasthA parabhavApurbandhottarakAlAvasthA ca  /
-saptasikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 150

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **The emergence of Naraka-ayu (hell-life) during the
period of bondage of Naraka-ayu, and the attainment of Naraka-ayu, is a type of
"bhang" (break).**  There are four Gunasthanas (stages of spiritual progress) in
Narakas (hells), and since the remaining Gunasthanas are not present, this
"bhang" is possible only in the initial four Gunasthanas.  **In the period of
bondage, there are two types of "bhang":**  1. **The bondage of Tiryancha-ayu
(animal life), the emergence of Naraka-ayu, and the attainment of Tiryancha-
Naraka-ayu.** 2. **The bondage of Manushya-ayu (human life), the emergence of
Naraka-ayu, and the attainment of Manushya-Naraka-ayu.**  Since there is no rule
for the bondage of Deva-ayu (divine life) in Naraka-jivas (hell beings), only
these two options are possible. The first "bhang" occurs in the Mithyatva and
Sasadan Gunasthanas, because the bondage of Tiryancha-ayu only extends up to the
second Gunasthana. The second "bhang" occurs in the Mithyatva, Sasadan, and
Avirat Samyagdristi Gunasthanas, because there is no rule for the bondage of
Manushya-ayu in the Mithyatva Gunasthana. This is because the bondage of
Manushya-ayu is found in these three Gunasthanas of Narakas.  **In the period of
"Uparatbandha" (cessation of bondage), there are two types of "bhang":**  1.
**The emergence of Naraka-ayu and the attainment of Naraka-Tiryancha-ayu.** 2.
**The emergence of Naraka-ayu and the attainment of Naraka-Manushya-ayu.**
These two "bhangs" are possible in the initial four Gunasthanas of Narakas. This
is because after the period of bondage of Tiryancha-ayu, a Naraka-jiva can
become Avirat Samyagdristi (steadfastly right-seeing) or Samyamihyadristi
(partially right-seeing). Avirat Samyagdristi Narakas also experience the
bondage of Manushya-ayu, and after bondage, such a being can also attain the
Samyamihyadristi Gunasthana, making the second "bhang" possible in the initial
four Gunasthanas.  **1. Naraka-devas (hell-gods) and Naraka-ayus do not bind
themselves due to the belief in rebirth, because they are born there.**
**Sapttatika Prakarana Toka, page 156**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha narakAyu ke saMvaidha bhaMga-nArakiyoM ke abandhakAla meM
narakAyu kA udaya aura narakAyu kA sattva, yaha eka bhaMga hotA hai| nArakoM meM
pahale cAra guNasthAna hote haiM, zeSa guNasthAna nahIM hone se yaha bhaMga
prArambha ke cAra guNasthAnoM meM sambhava hai  /  baMdhanAla meM 1. liyaMcAyu
kA baMdha, garakAyu kA udaya tathA tiyaMcanarakAyu kA sattva evaM 2. manuSya-Ayu
kA baMdha, narakAyu kA udaya aura manuSya-narakAyu kA sattva, yaha do bhaMga
hote haiN| nAraka jIva ke deva Ayu ke baMdha kA niyama nahIM hone se ukta do
vikalpa hI sambhava haiN| inameM se pahalA bhaMga mithyAtva aura sAsAdana
guNasthAna meM hotA hai, kyoMki tiryacAya kA baMdha dUsare guNasthAna taka hI
hotA hai tathA dUsarA bhaMga mitha guNasthAna meM Ayu baMdha kA niyama na hone
se, usako chor3akara mithyAtva, sAsAdana aura avirata samyagdRSTi ina tIna
guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai| kyoMki nArakoM ke ukta tIna guNasthAnoM meM manuSyaAyu
kA baMdha pAyA jAtA hai  /  uparatabaMdhakAla meM 1. narakAyu kA udaya aura
naraka-tiyaMcAyu kA sattva tathA 2. narakAyu kA udaya, naraka-manuSyAyu kA
satva, yaha do bhaMga hote haiM  /  nArakoM ke yaha donoM bhaMga Adi ke cAra
guNasthAnoM meM sambhava hai  /  kyoMki tiyaMcAyu ke baMdhakAla ke pazcAt nAraka
avirata samyagadRSTi yA samyamithyAdRSTi ho sakatA hai| avirata samyagdRSTi
nAraka ke bhI manuSyAyu kA baMdha hotA hai aura baMdha ke pazcAta aisA jIva
samyamithyAdRSTi guNasthAna ko bhI prApta ho sakatA hai, jisase dUsarA bhaMga
bhI prArambha ke cAra guNasthAnoM meM sambhava hai| 1 iha nArakA devAyuH
nArakAyuzca bhavapratyayAdeva na badhnanti tatrotpattyamAbAt  /  saptatikA
prakaraNa TokA, pR0 156

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Saptaatika chapter states that in the hellish realm, there are five types of
lifespan-related breaks: one in the state of non-attachment (abandha), two in
the state of attachment (bandha), and two in the state of upper attachment
(uparabandh).    Regarding the lifespan-related characteristics of the hellish
realm, it is important to understand that hellish beings do not bind to the
lifespans of gods or hell beings by nature. This is because, according to the
rules, hell beings do not get reborn in the realms of gods or hell after death.
The implication is that beings in the animal and human realms can be reborn in
all four realms after death, but gods and hell beings are only reborn in the
animal and human realms.   Here is a description of the lifespan-related breaks
in the hellish realm:  | Break Time | Attachment | Quality Place | |---|---|---|
| Non-attachment Time | Non-attachment | Hell | | Attachment Time | Attachment |
Hell | | Upper Attachment Time | Upper Attachment | Hell |  Although it is
necessary to discuss the lifespan-related breaks in the animal realm after the
hellish realm, the five breaks and their quality places are described in the
same way for the god realm as they are for the hellish realm.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa isa prakAra narakagati meM Ayu ke abandha meM eka, baMdha
meM do aura uparatabaMdha meM do, kula milAkara pAMca bhaMga hote haiN|
maramagati ko AyubaMdha sambandhI vizeSatA nAraka jIvoM ke jana ca bhaMga hone
ke prama meM itanA vizeSa jAnanA cAhiye ki nAraka bhavasvabhAva se hI narakAyu
aura devAyu kA baMdha nahIM karate haiN| kyoMki nAraka mara kara naraka aura
deva paryAya meM utpanna nahIM hote haiM, aisA niyama hai|' Azaya yaha hai ki
tiryaMca aura manuSya gati ke jIva, to marakara cAroM galiyoM meM utpanna hote
hai kintu deva aura nAraka marakara puna: deva aura naraka gati meM utpanna
nahIM hote haiM, ve to kevala tiryaMca aura manuSya gati meM hI utpanna hote
haiM  /  narakagati ke Ayukarma ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vivaraNa isa prakAra hai-
bhaMga kAla | bNdh| guNasthAna 1 | abaMdhakAma naraka  /  naraka  /  |
baMdhakAla tibaMdha naraka na0 ti. 3 | vaMSakAla | na0 ma0 4 upa. baMdhakAla
naraka | na0 tiH 1, 2, 3, 4 5 upabaMdhakAla naraka | na0 ma0] 1, 2, 3, 4 vAyu ke
saMveSa bhaMga-padyapi narakagati ke pazcAta tiryaMcagati ke Ayukarma ke
saMvaidha bhaMgoM kA kathana karanA cAhiye thaa| lekina jisa prakAra narakagati
meM abandha, bandha aura uparatabaMdha kI apekSA pAMca bhaMga va unake
guNasthAna batalAye haiM, usI prakAra devagati meM bhI hote udaya  /  sattA AJ
manuSya naraka 1 "devA nAragA vA devesu nAragesu vina uvavajjati iti"| tato
nArakANAM paramavAyurvandhakAle bandhosarakAle ca devAyuH nArakAyuAm
vikalpAmAvAt sarvasaMkhyayA paMcava vikalpA bhavanti  /  saptatikA prakaraga
TIkA, 10 160

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
These are the karmic states. However, it is important to note that instead of
saying "narakayu" (hellish state), we should always say "devayu" (divine state).
For example, we should say "devayu's rise," "devayu's existence," etc.  The five
phases of devayu are as follows:  1. **Devayu's rise and devayu's existence
(abandhakal)** 2. **Tiryach's bondage, devayu's rise, and tiryach devayu's
existence (bandhakal)** 3. **Manushya's bondage, devayu's rise, and manushya
devayu's existence (bandhakal)** 4. **Devayu's rise and dev tiryach's existence
(uparatbandhakal)** 5. **Devayu's rise and dev manushya's existence
(uparatbandhakal)**  The details of these phases are as follows:  | Phase | Kal
| Tiryach | Manushya | Dev | Kshetra | Gunasthan | |---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| 1 | Abandhakal | 0 | 0 | Dev | Dev | 1, 2, 3, 4 | | 2 | Bandhakal | Tiryach |
0 | Dev | Tiryach, Dev | 1, 2 | | 3 | Bandhakal | 0 | Manushya | Dev | Tiryach,
Manushya | 1, 2, 4 | | 4 | Uparatbandhakal | Tiryach | 0 | Dev | Dev, Tiryach |
1, 2, 3, 4 | | 5 | Uparatbandhakal | 0 | Manushya | Dev | Dev, Manushya | 1, 2,
3, 4 |  **Tiryach's Relationship Phases:**  There are nine variations of the
ayukarma (life-span karma) in the tiryach (animal) realm. These are as follows:
In the abandhakal (state of no bondage), the rise of tiryach and the existence
of tiryach is one phase. This is because...  **Note:** The text provided is
incomplete and ends abruptly. The full explanation of the nine variations of
ayukarma in the tiryach realm is missing.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 va karmagramya 51 haiM  /  parantu itanI vizeSatA hai ki narakAyu ke sthAna meM
sarvatra devAyu kahanA caahiye| jaise devAyu kA udaya, devAyu kI sattA Adi  / '
devAyu ke pA~ca bhaMgoM kA kathana isa prakAra hogA - 1. devAyu kA udaya aura
devAyu kI sattA (abandhakAla) 1 2. ticAyukA baMdha, devAyu kA udaya aura
tiryaMca devAyu kI sattA (baMdhakAla) 1 3. manuSyAyu kA baMba, devAyu kA udaya
aura manuSya devAyu kI sattA ( baMdhakAla ) | 4. devAyu kA udaya aura deva
tiryaMcAyu kA satya ( uparatabaMdhakAla)  /  5. devAyu kA udaya aura deva
manuSyAyu kA satva ( uparatabaMdhakAla) ukta bhaMgoM kA vivaraNa isa prakAra hai
baMdha Wo Da Guo Zhi  1. 2 3 4 5. kAla avandhakAla baMdhakAla baMdhakAla upa0
baMdhakAla upa0 baMghakAla tiyaMca manuSya 0 D udaya deva deva deva kSetra 1 |
deva sasA deva ti0, deva beya, ma0 de0 ti0 de0 ma0 guNasthAna 1,2,3,4 1.2 1,2.4
1,2,3,4 1,2,3,4 ticAyu ke saMbaMdha bhaMga - tiyaMcagati meM Ayukarma ke
saMvedha bhaMgavikalpa nau hote haiM  /  jinakA kathana isa prakAra hai ki
abandhakAla meM ticAdhu kA udaya aura tiryaMcAyu kI sattA yaha eka bhaMga hotA
hai, jo 1 evaM devAnAmapi paMcavikalyA bhAvanIyAH 3 navaraM nArakAyuH syAne
devAriti vaktavyam  /  tadyathA-- devAyuSa jadayo devAyuSaH sattA ityAdi  /
saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 160

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sapta-Tika Chapter  This chapter is found in the first five **guna-
sthana** (stages of spiritual development). This is because the **tiryanch-
gati** (animal realm) only has the first five **guna-sthana**, and not the
remaining ones.  During the **bandha-kal** (period of bondage) in the
**tiryanch-gati**, there are four types of **bhang** (breakdowns):  1. **Naraka-
ayu** (hellish life) bondage, **tiryanch-ayu** (animal life) arising, and the
existence of **marak-tiryanch-ayu** (death-animal life). 2. **Tiryanch-ayu**
bondage, **tiryanch-ayu** arising, and the existence of **tiryanch-tiryanch-
ayu** (animal-animal life). 3. **Manushya-ayu** (human life) bondage,
**tiryanch-ayu** arising, and the existence of **manushya-tiryanch-ayu** (human-
animal life). 4. **Deva-ayu** (divine life) bondage, **tiryanch-ayu** arising,
and the existence of **deva-tiryanch-ayu** (divine-animal life).  The first
**bhang** occurs in the **mithya-drishti** (false belief) **guna-sthana**, as
**naraka-ayu** bondage does not occur in any other **guna-sthana**. The second
**bhang** occurs in the **mithya-drishti** and **sasa-dan** (doubtful) **guna-
sthana**, as **tiryanch-ayu** bondage only occurs up to the **sasa-dan** **guna-
sthana**. The third **bhang** also occurs in the first two **guna-sthana** -
**mithya-drishti** and **sasa-dan**, as **tiryanch** beings only bind
**manushya-ayu** in the **mithya-drishti** and **sasa-dan** **guna-sthana**, not
in the **avirata-samyak-drishti** (unwavering right belief) and **desh-virata**
(detached) **guna-sthana**. The fourth **bhang** occurs in four **guna-sthana**
- from the third **samyak-mithya-drishti** (mixed belief) **guna-sthana** to the
fourth **desh-virata** **guna-sthana**, excluding the third **samyak-mithya-
drishti** **guna-sthana**. The **samyak-mithya-drishti** **guna-sthana** does
not have **ayukarma** (karma related to lifespan) bondage, so it is not included
here.  Similarly, there are four **bhang** during the **uparat-bandha-kal**
(period of cessation of bondage):  1. **Tiryach-ayu** arising and the existence
of **narak-tiryanch-ayu**. 2. **Tiryach-ayu** arising and the existence of
**tiryanch-tiryanch-ayu**. 3. **Tiryach-ayu** arising and the existence of
**manushya-tiryanch-ayu**. 4. **Tiryach-ayu** arising and the existence of
**deva-tiryanch-ayu**.  These four **bhang** occur in the first five **guna-
sthana**, because any **tiryanch** that has bound **naraka-ayu**, **tiryanch-
ayu**, and **manushya-ayu**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa prAraMbha ke pA~ca guNasthAnoM meM pAyA jAtA hai| kyoMki
tiyaMcati meM Adi ke pA~ca guNasthAna hI hote haiM, zeSa guNasthAna nahIM hote
haiM  /  tiryaMcagati meM bandhakAla ke samaya nimnalikhita cAra bhaMga hote
haiM1. narakAyu kA baMdha, tiryaMcAyu kA udaya aura maraka-tiryaMcAyu kI sattA
/  2. tiryaMcAyu kA baMdha, tiryaMcAyu kA udaya aura tiryaca. tiryaMcAyu kI
sattA, 3. manuSyAyu kA bandha, tithaMcAyu kA udaya aura manuSya-tiyaMcAyu kI
sattA tathA-4 jAyu kA 53, linA udaya aura deva-tiyaMcAyu kI sttaa| inameM se
pahalA bhaMga mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM hotA hai, kyoMki mithyAiSTi guNasthAna
ke sivAya anyatra narakAyu kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai| dUsarA bhaMga mithyASTi
aura sAsAdana guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai, kyoMki tirya cAyu kA baMdha sAsAdana
guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai| tIsarA bhaMga bhI pahale aura dUsare guNasthAna-
mithyAtva aura sAsAdana taka hotA hai, kyoMki tiryaMca jIva manudhyAyu kA baMdha
mithyAdRSTi aura sAsAdana guNasthAna meM hI karate haiM, avirata samyagdRSTi
aura dezavirata guNasthAna meM nhiiN| cauthA bhaMga tIsare samyagamithyASTri
(mitha) guNasthAna ko chor3akara pautraveM dezavirata guNasthAna taka cAra
guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai| samyamithyA dRSTi guNasthAna meM Ayukarma kA baMdha na
hone se usakA yahAM grahaNa nahIM kiyA gayA hai  /  isI prakAra
uparatabaMdhakAla meM bhI cAra bhaMga hote haiN| jo isa prakAra haiM-1.
tiryaMcAyu kA udaya aura naraka-tiryaMcAyu kI sattA, 2. tiryaMcAyu kA udaya aura
tiryaca-tiyaMcAyu kI sattA, 3. tiryaMcAyu kA udaya aura manuSya-tiyaMcAyu kI
sattA aura 4. tiryaMcAyu kA udaya tathA deva-tiryaMcAyu kI sattA  /  /  ye cAroM
bhaMga prArambha ke pAMca guNasthAnoM meM hote haiM, kyoMki jisa tithaMca ne
narakAyu, tiryaMcAyu aura manuSyAyu kA baMdha kara liyA

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixth Karmagrantha is the one where the other Gunasthanas are found. Thus,
in the Tiryanch-gati, there are a total of nine bhangas, compared to the
Abandha, Bandha, and Uparatbandha. The details of the Ayukarma Sangas in the
Tiryanch-gati are as follows:  **Mang Kram**  **Bal** | **Bandha** | **Avandha**
| **Bandhakal** | **Narak Tiryanch** | **Manushya** | **Dev** | **Uday** |
**Satta** | **Gunasthan** | **Tiryanch** | **Tithanch** | **Tiryanch** |
**Manushya** | **Dev** ------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
-------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
-------- | -------- | -------- | | | | | | | | | | 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 | 30 | 1 | | |
| | | | | | | | | | | | 1, 2 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 1, 2 | | | | | | |
| | | | | | | | | 1, 2, 4, 5 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 | | |
| | | | | | | | | | | | | 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 1, 2, 3,
4, 5 | | | | | |  The bhangas of Narak, Dev, and Tiryanch-ayu in relation to
Manushya-ayu have already been discussed. Now, we will discuss the remaining
bhangas of Manushya-ayu. There are also nine bhangas in Manushya-ayu. They
should be understood as follows:  In the Avandhakal of Manushya-gati, there is
only one bhang - the uday of Manushya-ayu and the satta of Manushya-ayu. This
bhang occurs in all fourteen Gunasthanas, from the first to the fourteenth. This
is because all fourteen Gunasthanas are possible in Manushya-gati.  In the
Bandhakal:  1. The bandha of Narak-ayu, the uday of Manushya-ayu, and the satta
of Narak-Manushya-ayu. 2. The bandha of Tithanch-ayu, the uday of Manushya-ayu,
and the satta of Tiryanch-Manushya-ayu. 3. The bandha of Manushya-ayu, the uday
of Manushya-ayu, and the satta of Manushya-Manushya-ayu. 4. The bandha of Dev-
ayu, the uday of Manushya-ayu, and the satta of Dev-Manushya-ayu.  These four
bhangas occur.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha hai, usake anya guNasthAnoM kA pAyA jAnA sambhava hai  /
isa prakAra liyaMcagati meM abandha, vaMdha aura uparatabaMdha kI apekSA kula
nau bhaMga hote haiM  /  tiryaMcagati meM Ayukarma ke saMgoM kA vivaraNa isa
prakAra hai maMga krama bAla | baMdha avandha baMdhakAla naraka tiyaMca |
manuSya .. udaya sattA  /  guNasthAna tiryaMca tithaMca 1,2,3,4,5 tiyaM ca 30 ti
1 tirya ca tiraMca siH | 1.2 tirmaca  /  ma ti0 ! 1,2  /  tiryava | deva ti0 |
1,2,4,5 tiryatra | ti. na. 1,2,3,4,5 tiryaMca liyaMca ti0 1,2,3,4,5 ! tisaMca
ti0 ma0 1,2,3,4,5 tiryaMca ti0 de0  /  1,2,3,4,5 ' deva upa0 baMdha vi0 0 0
manuSyAyu ke saMbaMdha bhaMga-naraka, deva aura tiyaMcAyu ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA
kathana kiyA jA cukA hai| aba zeSa rahI manuSyAyu ke bhaMgoM ko batalAte haiM  /
manuSyAyu ke bhI nau bhaMga haiN| jo isa prakAra samajhanA cAhiye_ manuSyagati
meM avandhakAla meM eka hI bhaMga-manuSyAyu kA udaya aura manuSyAyu kI sattA
hotA hai  /  yaha bhaMga pahale se lekara caudahaveM guNasthAna taka sabhI
guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai| kyoMki manuSyagati meM yathAsambhava sabhI caudaha
guNasthAna hote haiM  /  baMdhakAla meM-1. marakAyu kA baMdha, manuSyAyu kA
udaya aura narakamanuSyAyu kI sattA  /  2. tithaMcAyu kA baMdha, manuSyAyu kA
udaya aura tiryaMca-manuSyAyu kI sattA 3. manuSyAya kA baMdha, manuNyAyu kA
udaya aura manuSya-manuSyAyu kI sattA tathA 4. devAyu kA baMdha, manuSyAya kA
udaya aura deva-manuSyAyu kI sattA, yaha cAra bhaMga hote haiM  /

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The chapter on Sapta-tika is the first among those that deal with the seven
stages of the soul's progress (guna-sthana). The first stage of bondage (bandha)
is to the hellish existence (naraka-ayu), which is possible only in the state of
false belief (mithya-drishti). The second stage of bondage is to the animal
existence (tiryancha-ayu), which extends up to the second guna-sthana.
Therefore, the second stage of bondage (bhang) occurs in the two guna-sthana of
false belief (mithya-drishti) and the state of being attached to worldly
pleasures (sasadan). The third stage of bondage also occurs in the guna-sthana
of false belief and the state of being attached to worldly pleasures, because
humans, like those in the animal realm, are bound to the human existence
(manushya-ayu) up to the second guna-sthana. The fourth stage of bondage occurs
in six guna-sthana, from the second guna-sthana to the seventh guna-sthana of
perfect restraint (aprammat-samyata), excluding the mixed guna-sthana. This is
because the bondage to the heavenly existence (deva-ayu) in the human realm is
found up to the guna-sthana of perfect restraint.  There are four stages of
bondage during the period of upward bondage (uparasambandha-kala): 1. The
emergence of the human existence and the presence of the hellish-human
existence, 2. The emergence of the human existence and the presence of the
animal-human existence, 3. The emergence of the human existence and the presence
of the human-human existence, and 4. The emergence of the human existence and
the presence of the heavenly-human existence. The first three stages of bondage
are found up to the seventh guna-sthana of perfect restraint. This is because,
although the bondage to the hellish existence occurs in the first guna-sthana,
the bondage to the animal existence occurs up to the second guna-sthana, and
similarly, the bondage to the human existence also occurs up to the second guna-
sthana, yet after being bound, such beings may adopt restraint (samyama), but
they do not ascend in the hierarchy (shreni-aroha). Therefore, in comparison to
upward bondage, the presence of the hellish, animal, and human existences is
indicated up to the guna-sthana of perfect restraint. The fourth stage of
bondage is possible up to the eleventh guna-sthana, because a human who has been
bound to the heavenly existence can ascend in the hierarchy of subduing passions
(upashama-shreni). Thus, in the human realm, there are a total of nine stages of
bondage in relation to non-bondage (abandha), bondage (bandha), and upward
bondage (uparasambandha), according to the karma of lifespan (ayukarma).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNaM inameM se pahalA saMga mipAdaSTi guNalAma meM hotA hai.
noki mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna ke sivAya anyatra narakAyu kA baMdha sambhava nahIM
hai| tiryaMcAyu kA baMdha dUsare guNasthAna taka hotA hai, ata: dUsarA bhaMga
mithyAtva, sAsAdana ina do guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai| tIsarA bhaMga bhI
mithyAdRSTi aura sAsAdana guNasthAnoM meM hI pAyA jAtA hai, kyoMki manuSya
niyaMcAyu ke samAna manuSyAyu kA bandha bhI dUsare guNasthAna taka hI karate
haiN| cauthA bhaMga mizra guNasthAna' ko chor3akara apramattasaMyata sAtaveM
guNasthAna taka chaha guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai| kyoMki manuSyagati meM devAyu kA
baMdha apramattasaMyata guNasthAna taka pAyA jAtA hai  /  uparasabaMdhakAla
meM1. manuSyAyu kA udaya aura narakamanuSyAyu kA sattva, 2. manuSyAyu kA udaya
aura tiryaca manuSyAyu kA . satva, 3. manuSyAyu kA udaya aura manuSya-manuSyAyu
kA sattva tathA 4. manuSyAyu kA udaya' aura deva-manuSyAyu kA satva, yaha cAra
bhaMga hote haiN| _ ukta pAra bhaMgoM meM se Adi ke tIna bhaMga sAtaveM
apramattasaMyata guNasthAna taka pAye jAte haiN| kyoMki yadyapi manuSyagati meM
narakAyu kA baMdha pahale guNasthAna meM, tithaMcAyu kA baMdha dUsare guNasthAna
taka tathA isI prakAra manuSyAyu kA baMdha bhI dUsare guNasthAna taka hI hotA
hai, tathApi baMdha karane ke bAda aise jIva saMyama ko to dhAraNa kara sakate
haiM, kintu zreNi-ArohaNa nahIM karate haiN| isaliye uparatabaMdha kI apekSA
naraka, tiryaMca aura manuSya Ayu ina tIna AyuyoM kA sattva apramatta guNasthAna
taka batalAyA hai  /  cauthA bhaMga prArambha ke gyAraha guNAsthAnoM taka pAyA
jAnA sambhava hai, kyoMki devAyu kA jisa manuSya ne baMdha kara liyA hai, usake
upazamazreNi para ArohaNa sambhava hai| isa prakAra manuSyagati meM abandha,
baMdha aura uparatabaMdha kI apekSA Ayukarma ke kula nau bhaMga hote haiM  /

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixth _karmagrantha_ (text on karma) discusses the characteristics of the
breaking of the _uparatbandha_ (upper bondage) in relation to human existence.
It states that in _tiyanchgaati_ (animal realm), the existence of _narakayu_
(hellish life), _tiryanchyaayu_ (animal life), and _manushyaayu_ (human life) is
possible up to the fifth _gunasthan_ (stage of spiritual progress), while in
human existence, the existence of these three is possible up to the seventh
_aprammat_ (non-distracted) _gunasthan_. There is a difference of opinion
regarding this.  Devendrasuri, in the second _karmagrantha_ called 'Karmastava',
in the section on 'Sattaadhikār' (right to existence), writes that from the
first to the eleventh _gunasthan_, the existence of 148 _prakritis_ (karmic
substances) is possible, except for the second and third _gunasthan_. Further,
in the same text, he writes that from the fourth to the seventh _gunasthan_,
there are 141 _prakritis_ possible due to the removal of the four
_anantaanubandhi_ (infinitely binding) _tuska_ (karmic particles) and the
destruction of _darshanamohatrik_ (karmic particles related to perception and
delusion). In the remaining four _gunasthan_ (first, second, third, and fourth),
there are 142 _prakritis_ possible without the six _prakritis_ of the four
_anantaanubandhi_ _tuska_, _narakayu_, and _tiryanchyaayu_.  The essence of the
above statement is that: 1. The existence of all four types of life is possible
up to the eleventh _gunasthan_ in relation to the _uparatbandha_. 2. The
existence of _narakayu_, _tiryanchyaayu_, and _manushyaayu_ is possible up to
the seventh _gunasthan_ in relation to the _uparatbandha_. Thus, two opinions
arise.  The second opinion is supported by the _Panchasangraha_ (Five
Collections) in the section called 'Saptaatika-Sangraha', verse 106, and the
commentary on the _Brihatkarmastava_. However, the sixth verse of the same
section in the _Panchasangraha_ presents a different opinion, stating that the
existence of _narakayu_ is possible up to the fourth _gunasthan_, and the
existence of _tiryanchyaayu_ is possible up to the fifth _gunasthan_.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha pharmagrantha manuSyagati ke uparatabaMdha bhaMgoM kI vizeSatA
_tiyaMcagati meM uparatabaMdha kI apekSA narakAyu, tiryaMcAyu .aura manuSyAyu kI
sattA pAMcaveM guNasthAna taka tathA manuSyagati meM uparatabaMdha kI apekSA
narakAyu, tiryaMcAyu aura manuSyAyu ko sattA sAtaveM apramatta guNasthAna taka
batalAI hai  /  isa sambandha meM matabhinnatA hai  /  devendrasuri ne dUsare
karmagrantha 'karmastava' ke sattAdhikAra meM likhA hai ki dUsare aura tIsare
guNasthAna ke sivAya pahale se lekara gyArahaveM guNasthAna taka 148 prakRtiyoM
kI sattA sambhava hai| tathA Age isI prantha meM yaha bhI likhA hai ki cauthe se
sAtaveM guNasthAna paryanta cAra guNasthAnoM meM anantAnubaMdhIca tuSkA kI
visaMyojanA aura darzanamohatrika kA kSaya ho jAne para 141 kI sattA hotI hai
aura apUrvakaraNa Adi cAra guNasthAnoM meM anantAnubaMdhIcatuSka, narakAyu aura
tiryaMcAyu ina chaha prakRtiyoM ke binA 142 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| ukta
kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai ki 1. uparatabaMdha kI apekSA cAroM AyuyoM kI sattA
gyArahaveM guNasthAna taka sambhava hai aura 2. uparatabaMdha kI apekSA
narakAyu, tiryaMcAyu aura manuSyAyu kI sattA sAtaveM guNasthAna taka pAI jAtI
hai  /  isa prakAra do mata phalita hote haiN| paMca saMgraha saptatikA-saMgraha
nAmaka prakaraNa kI gAthA 106 tathA bRhatkarmastava bhASya se dUsare mata kI
puSTi hotI hai, kintu paMcasaMgraha ke isI prakaraNa kI chaThI gAthA meM ina
donoM se bhinna eka anya mata bhI diyA hai ki narakAyu ko sattA cauthe
guNasthAna taka, tiryaMcAyu kI 1 gAbhA 25, dvitIya karma grantha  /  2 gAthA 26,
dvitIya karmagrantha  /

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sapta-Tika Chapter  The existence of a human lifespan (Manushya-ayu) is
found up to the fourteenth Gunasthan, the existence of a celestial lifespan
(Deva-ayu) up to the eleventh Gunasthan, and the existence of a lifespan of the
liberated soul (Deva-ayu) up to the fifth Gunasthan. This is the view found in
the Digambar texts as well as in the Karmakanda.  This is the only view found.
The description given here is according to the second view - Uparatbandha -
which states that the existence of a lifespan in hell (Naraka-ayu), animal
lifespan (Tiryancha-ayu), and human lifespan (Manushya-ayu) is found up to the
seventh Gunasthan. Acharya Malayagiri has discussed this view in the Sapta-Tika
commentary: "In the case of a bound being, the emergence of a human lifespan is
possible until the seventh Gunasthan, as the possibility of attaining restraint
(Samyama) exists even after being bound to a hellish lifespan. The emergence of
a human lifespan from an animal lifespan is also possible until the seventh
Gunasthan. The emergence of a human lifespan from a human lifespan is also
possible until the seventh Gunasthan. The emergence of a human lifespan from a
celestial lifespan is possible until the seventh Gunasthan, as the possibility
of ascending the ladder of liberation (Upashama) exists even when bound to a
celestial lifespan." Sapta-Tika Commentary, page 160.  This view is mainly found
in the Shvetambar Karma literature. The nine stages of the destruction of the
senses (Sanvedha-bhang) in the human path should be understood as follows:  |
Stage | Time | Bond | Unbound | Bond Time | Destruction | Birth | Existence |
Gunasthan | |---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---| | 1 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | All
fourteen Gunasthan | | 2 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Hell, Human | 1, 2 | | 3 |  |  |  |
|  |  | Human | 1, 2 | | 4 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Human | 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 | | 5 |
|  |  |  |  |  | Human | 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 | | 6 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Human |
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 | | 7 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Human | 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 | | 8
|  |  |  |  |  |  | Human | 1 to 11 Gunasthan | | 9 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Human |
|

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa sattA pA~cave guNasthAna taka, devAyu kI sattA gyArahaveM
guNasthAna taka aura manuSyAyu kI sattA caudahaveM guNasthAna taka pAI jAtI hai
/  go0 karmakAMDa meM bhI isase hai digambara granthoM meM bhI 1 * yahI eka mata
pAyA jAtA hai| yahA~ jo varNana kiyA gayA hai vaha dUsare mata - uparatabaMdha
kI apekSA narakAyu, tiryaMcAyu aura manuSyAyu kI sattA sAtaveM guNasthAna taka
pAI jAtI hai-- ke anusAra kiyA hai| AcArya malayagiri ne isI mata ke anusAra
saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA meM vivecana kiyA hai"bandhe tu vyavacchinne
manuSyAyuSa udayo nAraka- manuSyAyuSI satI, eSa vikalpo'pramattaguNasthAnakaM
yAvat, nArakAyubandhAnantaraM saMyamapratipatterapi sambhavAt  /  manuSyAyuSa
udayastiryaGa, manuSyAyuSI satI, eSo'pi vikalpo'pramattaguNasthAnakaM yAvat  /
manuSyAyuSa udayo manuSya manuSyAyuSI satI, eSo'pi vikalpaH prAgvat  /
manuSyAyuSa udayo deva manuSyAyuSI satI, eSa vikalpa upazAntamohaguNasthAnakaM
yAvat devAyuSi baddhe'pyupazamazreNyA roha sambhavAt  / " saptatikA prakaraNa
TokA, pR0 160 bo zvetAmbara karma sAhitya meM isI mata kI mukhyatA hai |
manuSyagati ke nau saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vivaraNa nimna prakAra samajhanA cAhiye-
bhaMga krama 1 116 lA da ra kAla abandha baMdhakAla 13 " " upa0 banna JP 21
baMdha 0 naraka tiryaca manuSya deva 000 udaya manuSya manuSya 13 gt rw y J7 " "
za sattA naraka, manuSya ma0 liye 0 ma0 ma0 ma0 de0 ma0 na0 ma0 ti0 guNasthAna
sabhI caudaha guNa 1 1,2 1,2 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 1,2,3,4,5,6,7
1,2,3,4,5,6,7 1 se 11 guNa0 taka ma0 ma0 | ma0 * *

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  Thus, there are 5+1+9+5 = 28 total bhangas of Ayukarma in
the four gatis. In each gati, there is a rule given in Go. Karmakanda Ga. 645
for bringing about the bhangas of Ayukarma:  "Ekkaus tibhang sambhavauhi tajie
gana. Jive ibhibhang gunamsarithe."  The essence of this is that in whatever
gati there is a bandha of a certain number of ayus, multiply that number by
three. Then, subtract one less than the number of ayus that can be bound. This
will give you the total bhangas in each gati, considering the bhangas of
Ayubandha, Bandha, and Uparatbandha. For example, in Deva and Naraka, there is a
possibility of bandha of two ayus each. Therefore, there are six bhangas in
each. Now, subtract one less than the number of ayus that can be bound, which is
one. This leaves us with five bhangas in Naraka gati and five bhangas in Deva
gati. In Manushya and Tiryanch gati, there is a bandha of four ayus. Multiplying
four by three gives us twelve. Now, subtract three, which is one less than the
number of ayus that can be bound. This leaves us with nine bhangas in Manushya
gati and nine bhangas in Tiryanch gati. Therefore, we should understand that
there are five bhangas in Deva and Naraka, and nine bhangas in Manushya and
Tiryanch.  These bhangas should be understood in the context of the four ayus in
Narakadi gati, in the order of Mithyadristi Gunasthan. In the second Gunasthan,
there are bhangas without the bandha of Narakayu. Therefore, there are 5, 8, 8,
and 5 bhangas there. The bhangas mentioned earlier, in relation to Ayubandha,
are all less than these.  1. Narayusuraudao va panchamam tiri manushla
chaudasamam. Santaa. Basantaa do bau bajdamaananam. Nav nav panch ii bhaeya 56
Asammade sa jogi abandhe igi santam do vi ekkasdalo pan - Panchasangrah
Sapttatika

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 -+ SaSTha karmagrantha isa prakAra cAroM gatiyoM ke 5+1+9+5 = 28, kula milAkara
Ayukarma ke aTThAIsa bhaMga hote haiM  / " pratyeka gati meM ke bhaMga Ayu lAne
ke liye go0 karmakAMDa gA0 645 meM eka niyama sUtra diyA haiekkAusa tibhaMgA
sambhavaAuhi tAjiye gAnA  /  jIve ibhivabhaMgA guNamasaritthe  //  isakA sArAMza
yaha hai ki jisa gati meM jitanI AyuyoM kA baMdha hotA hai, usa saMkhyA ko tIna
se guNa kara deM aura jahA~ jo labdha Aye usameM se eka kama baMdhane vAlI
AyuyoM kI saMkhyA ghaTA deM to pratyeka gati meM Ayu ke andha, baMdha aura
uparatabaMdha kI apekSA kula bhaMga prApta ho jAte haiN| jaise ki deva aura
nAraka meM do-do Ayu kA ho baMdha sambhava hai, ataH una donoM meM chaha-chaha
bhaMga hote haiN| aba inameM eka-eka kama baMdhane vAlI AyayoM ko saMkhyA ko
kama kara diyA to narakagati ke pA~ca bhaMga aura devagati ke pA~ca bhaMga A
jAte haiM  /  manuSya aura tiryaMcagati meM cAra AyuyoM kA baMdha hotA hai| ataH
cAra ko tIna se guNA karane para bAraha hote haiM  /  aba inameM se eka kama
baMdhane vAlI AyuyoM kI saMkhyA tIna ko ghaTA deM to manuSya aura tiryaMcagati
ke nau-nau bhaMga A jAte haiN| ataeva deva nAraka meM pA~capA~ca aura manuSya,
tiryaMca meM nau-nau bhaMga apunarukta samajhanA cAhiye  /  r ukta apunarukta
bhaMga narakAdi gati meM cAroM AyuyoM ke krama se midhyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM
samajhanA cAhiye  /  dUsare guNasthAna meM narakAyu ke binA baMdha rUpa bhaMga
hote haiM, ataH vahA~ 5, 8,8,5 bhaMga jAnanA  /  pUrva meM jo AyubaMdha kI
apekSA bhaMga kahe gaye haiM, ve saba kama 1 nArayasurAudao va paMcama tiri
maNusla coddasamaM  /  saMtA  //  basaMtA do bAu bajdAmANANaM  /  nava nava
paMca ii bhaiyA 56 Asammadesa jogI abaMdhe igi saMtaM do vi ekkasdalo paNa -
paMcasaMgraha saptatikA

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 70  **On the Dissolution of Karma**  In the mixed karma-state, there
are a minimum of 3, 5, 5, 3 dissolutions in the hell, etc. realms. In the fourth
karma-state, there are four dissolutions each in the deva and hell realms, as
the bondage of the tiryanchayu does not dissolve. In the human and tiryancha
realms, there are six dissolutions each, as the bondage of the ayu and mantra
does not dissolve. This is because the absence of their bondage occurs in the
sasadan karma-state. In the deshavirat karma-state, there are three dissolutions
each for the tiryancha and humans, in relation to the andha, abandha, and
uparatabandhas. In the sixth and seventh karma-states, there are three
dissolutions each in relation to the bondage of the human and deva ayu. Thus, in
the seven karma-states of mithyadrishti, etc., the total number of dissolutions
is a minimum of 28, 26, 16, 20, 6, 3, 3.  After considering the dissolutions of
vedaniya and ayu karma, we now consider the dissolutions of gotra karma.
**Dissolutions of Gotra Karma**  There are two types of gotra karma: uchchagotra
and nichagotra. In a single lifetime, a being experiences the bondage of one and
the arising of the other. This is because the bondage or arising of both is
mutually exclusive. When uchchagotra is bound, nichagotra is not bound, and vice
versa.  **Additional Dissolutions**  In addition to these dissolutions, the
gotra karma section mentions some additional dissolutions of ayu karma in the
human realm, in relation to upshamashrani and kshapakani. In upshamashrani,
there are two dissolutions each in relation to the abandha and uparatabandhas of
the deva ayu, as the deva ayu is not bound. In kshapakani, there is only one
dissolution in relation to the abandha, as the uparatabandhas are absent.
Therefore, in the four karma-states of upshamashrani, there are two dissolutions
each, and in kshapakani, there is one dissolution each from the apurvakarana to
the ayogikevali karma-state.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 60 saptatikA prakaraNa karane para mizra guNasthAna meM narakAdi gatiyoM meM
kama se 3, 5, 5,3, bhaMga hote haiM aura cauthe guNasthAna meM deva, naraka gati
meM to tiryaMcAyu kA baMdha rUpa bhaMga nahIM hone se cAra-cAra bhaMga haiM
tathA manuSya-tiryaMcagati meM Ayu maMtra jI apekSA, tika tIna bhaMga na hone se
chaha-chaha bhaMga haiM, kyoMki inake baMdha kA abhAva sAsAdana guNasthAna meM
ho jAtA hai| dezavirata guNasthAna meM tiryaMca aura manuSyoM ke aMdha, abaMdha
aura uparatabaMdha kI apekSA tIna-tIna bhaMga hote haiN| chaThaveM, sAtaveM
guNasthAna meM manuSya ke ho aura devAyu ke baMdha kI hI apekSA tIna-tIna bhaGga
hote haiN| isa prakAra mithyAdRSTi Adi sAta guNasthAnoM meM saba milAkara
apunarukta bhaGga kama se 28,26,16, 20,6,3,3 haiM  /  1 vedanIya aura Ayu karma
ke saMvedha bhaGgoM kA vicAra karane ke anantara aba gotrakarma ke bhaGgoM kA
vicAra karate haiM  /  gotrakarma ke saMbaMdha bhaMga gotra karma ke do bheda
haiM- uccagotra, niicgotr| inameM se eka jIva ke eka kAla meM kisI eka kA baMdha
aura kisI eka kA udaya hotA hai| kyoMki donoM kA baMdha yA udaya paraspara
viruddha hai| jaba ucca gotra kA baMdha hotA hai taba nIca gotra kA baMdha nahIM
aura nIca gotra ke baMdha ke samaya ucca gotra kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai  /  1
ina bhaMgoM ke atirikta go0 karmakAMDa meM upazamazra Ni aura kSapakANi kI
apekSA manuSyagati meM Ayukarma ke kucha aura maMga batalAye haiM ki upazamaNi
meM devAyu kA bhI baMdha na hone se devAyu ke abandha, uparatabaMdha kI apekSA
do-do bhaMga haiM tathA kSapakaNi meM uparatabaMdha ke bhI na hone se abandha kI
apekSA eka-eka hI bhaMga hai| ataH upazamaNi vAle cAra guNasthAnoM meM do-do
maMga aura usake bAda kSapaka Ni meM apUrvakaraNa se lekara
ayogikevalIguNasthAna taka eka-eka bhaMga kahA gayA hai  /

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sixth Karma Grantha should be understood in the same way regarding the
concept of 'udaya' (arising). The reason for the binding or arising of one at a
time is their mutually contradictory nature, but both natures can exist
simultaneously. There is no contradiction in the simultaneous existence of both.
However, there is a special feature that Agni Kayik and Vayu Kayik beings also
experience 'udvalana' (elevation) of the higher 'gotra' (lineage). Therefore,
these beings who experience 'udvalana', or when these beings are born in other
'ekendriya' (one-sense) etc., only the lower 'gotra' exists for some time. After
that, when the higher 'gotra' is bound, both exist. Even the 'ayogikevali' (non-
liberated) beings experience the decay of the lower 'gotra' in their final
moments, at which time only the higher 'gotra' exists.  The summary of the above
statement regarding the binding, arising, and existence of 'gotra karma' in
relation to the 'sthana' (place) is that the binding 'sthana' of 'gotra karma'
is also one 'prakriti' (nature), the arising 'sthana' is also one 'prakriti',
but the existence 'sthana' is both two 'prakriti' and one 'prakriti'.  1.
'Nīcuccāṇega daram bandhudaya hoti sambhavattāṇe | Bosattā jogitti ya carime
ucca have sattāṃ ||' (Go. Karmakar, Gāyā 135) 2. 'Uccuvellidateka vāummi
maṇīvameva sattāṃ tu | Sesigiviale sayale nīcaṃ ca dugaṃ ca sattāṃ tu ||' (Go.
Karmakar, Gāyā 336, 637, 3) 3. 'Ujy uvellidateka vāū sesey vaielasayalesu |
Sappannapadhamakale pīcaṃ evaṃ have sattāṃ ||' (Go. Karmakar, Gāyā 336, 637, 3)
Also, in general, the binding 'sthana' of 'gotra' is either the higher 'gotra'
or the lower 'gotra', ... because of the mutual contradiction of the two, they
cannot exist simultaneously. The arising 'sthana' is also one, and that too is
one of the two, because of the mutual contradiction of the two, they cannot
arise simultaneously.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha isI prakAra udaya ke bAre meM samajhanA cAhiye  /  donoM
meM se eka samaya meM eka kA baMdha yA udaya hone kA kAraNa inakA paraspara
virodhanI prakRtiyA~ honA hai, kintu sattA donoM prakRtiyoM kI eka sAtha pAI jA
sakatI hai| donoM kI eka sAtha sattA pAye jAne meM koI virodha nahIM hai| lekina
itanI vizeSatA hai ki agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIva uccagotra kI udvalanA bhI
karate haiM, ata: udvalanA karane vAle ina jIvoM ke athavA jaba ye jIva anya
ekendriya Adi meM utpanna ho jAte haiM taba unake bhI kucha kAla ke liye sirpha
eka nIcagotra kI hI sattA pAI jAtI hai| usake bAda uccagotra ko bAMdhane para
donoM kI sattA hotI hai| ayogikevalI bhI apane upAntya samaya meM nIcagotra kA
kSaya kara dete haiM, usa samaya unake sirpha eka uccagotra kI hI sattA pAI jAtI
hai| gotrakarma ke baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM ke sambandha meM ukta
kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai ki apekSA se motrakarma kA baMdhasthAna bhI eka
prakRtika hotA hai, udayasthAna bhI eka prakRtika hotA hai, kintu sattAsthAna do
prakRtika bhI hotA hai aura eka prakRtika bhI hotA hai|' 1 NIcuccANegadaraM
baMdhudayA hoti saMbhavaTThANe  /  bosattA jogitti ya carime ucca have sattaM
||go0 karmakAra, gAyA 135 2 uccuvellidateka vAummi ma NIvameva sattaM tu  /
sesigiviyale sayale NIcaM ca dugaM ca sattaM tu|| ujyuvellidateka vAU sese ya
vielasayalesu  /  sappaNNapaDhamakAle pIcaM evaM have sattaM  //  - 0 karmakAra
gA0 336, 637, 3 tathA gotre sAmAnyene kaM bandhasthAnam, tadyathAuccargotraM,
nIcargotraM vA, ...drayoH paraspara virukhavena yugapasandhAbhAvAt  /
udayasthAnamapyekam, tadapi dvayoranyatara, parasparavirukhasvena yugapada
yorudayAbhAvAt  /

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 7: The Sevenfold Breakage  After explaining the general breakage of
the lineage karma, we now explain the breakage of the senses in these places.
There are seven types of breakage of the senses in lineage karma:  1. **Bondage
of low lineage, arising of low lineage, and existence of low lineage.** 2.
**Bondage of low lineage, arising of low lineage, and existence of low-high
lineage.** 3. **Bondage of low lineage, arising of high lineage, and existence
of high-low lineage.** 4. **Bondage of high lineage, arising of low lineage, and
existence of high-low lineage.** 5. **Bondage of high lineage, arising of high
lineage, and existence of high-low lineage.** 6. **Arising of high lineage and
existence of high-low lineage.** 7. **Arising of high lineage and existence of
high lineage.**  The first breakage occurs in fire-bodied and air-bodied beings
who are capable of uplifting the high lineage. This breakage occurs in one-
sensed, two-sensed, and five-sensed animals until the end of their lifespan.
This is because after the end of their lifespan, the bondage of high lineage
occurs naturally for these one-sensed and other beings.  The second and third
breakage are found in the two gunasthana (stages of qualities) of
**mithyadrishti** (false belief) and **sasadan** (attachment). This is because
the bondage and liberation of low lineage are found in two states of existence:
* **One state:** When both high and low lineages are present, the high lineage
is uplifted in the fire-bodied and air-bodied state. * **Another state:** When
the low lineage is not suitable for the liberation of the soul and is weakened
at an inappropriate time.  - Commentary on the Sapttatika, page 151.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6 saptatikA prakaraNa gotrakarma ke sAmAnya se bhaMga batalAne ke pazcAt aba
ina sthAnoM ke saMvedha bhaGga batalAte haiN| gotrakarma ke sAta saMvedha bhaGga
isa prakAra haiM1. nIcagotra kA baMdha, nIcagotra kA udaya aura nIcagotra kI
sttaa| 2. nIcagotra kA baMdha, nIcagotra kA udaya aura nIca-ucca _ gotra kI
sattA  /  3. nIcagotra kA baMdha, uccagotra kA udaya aura ucca-nIca gotra kI
smaa| 4. uccagotra kA baMdha, nItragotra kA udaya aura ucca-nIca gotra kI sttaa|
5. ucca gotra kA baMdha, uccagotra kA udaya aura ucca-nIca gotra kI sttaa| 6.
uccagotra kA udaya aura ucca-nIca gotra kI sattA  /  57. uccagotra kA udaya aura
uccagotra kI sattA  /  inameM se pahalA bhaGga uccagotra kI udvalanA karane vAle
agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIvoM ke hotA hai tathA aise jIva ekendriya,
vikalatraya aura paMcendriya tiryaMcoM meM utpanna hote haiM to unake bhI
antarmuhUrta kAla taka ke liye hotA hai| kyoMki antarmuhUrta kAla ke pazcAt ina
ekendriya Adi jIvoM ke uccagotra kA baMdha niyama se ho jAtA hai  /  dUsarA aura
tIsarA bhaGga mithyA dRSTi aura sAsAdana ina do guNasthAnoM meM pAyA jAtA hai,
kyoMki nIcagotra kA baMdhaviccheda dve sattAsthAne, tadyathA- eka ca  /  tatra
uccAya-nIcairgotre samudite dve, tejaskAyika-vAyukApikAvasthAyAM uccairgotre
udvalite ekama, athavA nIcargotre'yogikevalivicaramasamaye kSINe ekam  /  /
-saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 151

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sixth Karma-grantha (chapter on karmic bondage) occurs in the second
Gunasthana (stage of spiritual development). The relationship between these two
types is due to the bondage of low Gotra (lineage). Therefore, their existence
is described in the first and second Gunasthanas, and later in the third Samyag-
mithyatva etc. Gunasthanas. The fourth Bhanga (type) and so on are possible in
the next five Gunasthanas, because the rise of low Gotra is possible up to the
fifth Gunasthana. Therefore, the absence of this is stated in the later
Gunasthanas like Pramatta-samyata etc. The bondage of high Gotra occurs up to
the tenth Moksha-sampraaya Gunasthana, so the fifth Bhanga and so on are
possible in the ten Gunasthanas, because the bondage of high Gotra is intended
in this Bhanga. Therefore, its prohibition is made in the later Gunasthanas. The
sixth Bhanga - the rise of high Gotra and the existence of high and low Gotra -
occurs from the Upashanta-moha Gunasthana up to the last moment of the Ayogi-
kevali Gunasthana, because the existence of low Gotra is found only up to here,
and in this Bhanga, the existence of low Gotra is implied. The seventh Bhanga
occurs in the last moment of the Ayogi-kevali Gunasthana, because the rise of
high Gotra and the existence of high Gotra are found in the last moment of the
Ayogi-kevali Gunasthana, and in this Bhanga, the rise and existence of high
Gotra are consolidated.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha dUsare guNasthAna meM ho jAtA hai  /  ina donoM bhaMgoM kA
sambandha nIca. gotra ke baMdha se hai, ataH inakA sadbhAva pahale aura dUsare
guNasthAna meM batAyA hai, Age tIsare samyagamiSyATi Adi gaNAsthAnoM meM hI
batAyA hai| cauthA bhaGga Adi ke pA~ca guNasthAnoM meM sambhava hai kyoMki
nIcagotra kA udaya pA~caveM guNasthAna taka sambhava hai, ata: pramattasaMyata
Adi Age ke guNasthAnoM meM isakA abhAva batalAyA hai| uccagotra kA baMdha
dasaveM mUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna taka hotA hai, ata: pA~cavAM bhaGga Adi ke
dasa guNasthAnoM meM sambhava hai, kyoMki isa bhaGga meM uccagotra kA baMdha
vivakSita hai  /  jisase Age ke guNasthAnoM meM isakA niSedha kiyA hai  /
chaThA bhaGga-uccagotra kA udaya aura ucca-nIca gotra kI sattA-upazAntamoha
muNasthAna se lekara ayogikevalI guNasthAna ke dvicarama samaya taka hotA hai|
kyoMki nIcagotra kI sattA yahIM taka pAI jAtI hai aura isa bhaGga meM nIcagotra
kI sattA gabhita hai  /  sAtavA bhaGga ayogikevalI guNasthAna ke aMtima samaya
meM hotA hai| kyoMki uccagotra kA udaya aura uccagotra kI sattA ayogikevalI
guNasthAna ke aMtima samaya meM pAI jAtI hai aura isa bhaGga meM ucca gotra kA
udaya aura sattA saMkalita hai  /  gotrakarma ke ukta sAta bhaMgoM kA vivaraNa
isa prakAra hai maMgakrama | baMdha guNasthAna nIca udaya  /  sattA nIca | nIca
1 nIca  /  nIca-una : 12 nIca nIca ucca ucca nIca ucca |  /  1,2,3,4,5 | 1 se 10
guNasthAna 11,12,13 va 14 dicarama samaya 14 veMkA carama samaya

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on Sapttatika  Regarding the Gotra Karma Bhang (breaking of Gotra
Karma) in relation to Gunasthanas (stages of spiritual progress), there are at
least five and four Bhangs in Mithyadristi and Sasadan Gunasthanas respectively.
In the three Gunasthanas of Misra, etc., there are two Bhangs each. In the eight
Gunasthanas of Prammatta, etc., there is one Bhang each for Gotra Karma, and in
the Agogidevali Gunasthan, there are two Bhangs.  After explaining the Bhangs of
Vedaniya, Ay, and Gotra Karma, as per the previous information, we now discuss
the Bandhastanas (places of bondage) of Mohaniya Karma, etc., as per the
statement "Moham Param Voccham" (Moha is the ultimate).  **Mohaniya Karma**
Twenty-two, twenty-one, seventeen, thirteen, nine, five, four, three, and one
are the Bandhastanas of Moha.  (a) There are two types of Bandha Karma, namely
Iyar and Do. There are two types of A-Bandha (non-bondage) in the three types of
Niyasa (deposits).  (b) The Bhangs of Mischadi, etc., are four, three, two, and
one in the eight Gunasthanas. Each Jogi (ascetic) has two types of Karma. This
is a rule.  **Comparison**  (a) Twenty-two, twenty-one, seventeen, thirteen,
nine, five, two, and one are the Bandhastanas of Moha.  (b) Twenty-two,
seventeen, thirteen, nine, five, four, three, and one are the Bandhastanas of
Moha. The bondage of these is in the four, three, two, and one types of Karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa guNasthAnoM kI apekSA gotrakarma ke bhaGga mithyA dRSTi
aura sAsAdana guNasthAna meM kama se pAMca aura cAra hote haiM  /  mizra Adi
tIna guNasthAnoM meM do-do bhaGga haiN| pramatta Adi ATha guNasthAnoM meM
gotrakarma kA eka-eka zaka hai aura agogidevalI guNasthAna meM do bhaGga hote
haiN| _isa prakAra se vedanIya, Aya aura gotra karma ke bhaMgoM ko batalAne ke
pazcAta aba pUrva sUcanAnusAra-mohaM paraM vocchaM-mohanIya karma ke
baMdhasthAnoM Adi kA kathana karate haiN| mohanIya karma bAvIsa ekkabIsA,
sattarasA teraseva natha paMca  /  ghau tiga dugaM ca ekkaM baMdhaDhANANi
mohassa  // 10 //  zambAryavAvIsa-bAIsa, ekkavausA-ikkIsa, satsarasAsatraha,
teraseva-teraha, nava-nI, paMca-pAMca, ghau-cAra, tiga.  /  (ka) baMdhA
kaiNNayaM ci ma iyaraM vA do vi saMta caka maMgA  /  nIesu tisu vi paramo
abaMdhage doNi uccudae  /  -paMcasaMgraha saptasikA, gA0 16 (kha) micchAdi
goyabhaMgA paNa cadu timu doNi aTThaThANesu  /  ekekkA jogijiNe do maMmA hoti.
NiyameNa  /  /  -go karmakAMDa, gA0 638 2 tulanA kIjiye(ka) bAvIsamekphabIsaM
sasArasa teraseva Nava paMca 1 patiyadugaM ca ekkaM baMdhaTThANANi mohassa  /  /
-go0 karmakAMDa 463 (kha) dugahagavIsA, sattara terasa nava paMca caura ti du
ego  /  baMdho igi duga cautzya paNauNavamesu mohassa  /  /  -paMcasaMgraha
saptatikA, gA0 16

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **Three, two, and one-one natural great city locations,
Mohass-Mohaniya Karma's**  Twenty-two natural, twenty-one natural, seventeen
natural, thirteen natural, nine natural, five natural, four natural, three
natural, two natural, and one natural, thus there are ten Bandha-sthana. In the
Visheva-Gatha, 'Mohass Bandhattanani' describes the Bandha-sthana of Mohaniya
Karma. These Bandha-sthana are twenty-two, twenty-one, etc., totaling ten in
number. Their explanation is given below.  _Mohaniya Karma has twenty-eight
Uttar Prakriti. Among these, there are three Prakriti of Darshan Mohaniya:
Samyaktva, Sambhamithyatva, and Mithyatva. Since Bandha does not occur in both
Sambhamithyatva and Samyamihyatva, there remain twenty-six Bandha-yoga Prakriti.
Due to the mutual opposition of some Prakriti during Bandha and the separation
in Gunasthana, there are ten Bandha-sthana of Mohaniya Karma, starting with
twenty-two Prakriti._  **The collection of Gatha for the Prakriti in the ten
Bandha-sthana of Mohaniya Karma are as follows:**  *Michcham Kamavasolas
Bhayakuchcha Tindaveyamanmaram. Hasarai Iyar Yala Pa Bandhapaydi Ya Bavisam.
Igavisa Michchavina Napubandhavina Ra Sasane Bandhe. Anarhiyaa Sattaras Nabandhi
Thii Turi Athanamami. Viyasamparayana Teras Tah Tasyauun Nav Bandhe. May-
Kuchcha-Jugal Paaye Pan Bandhe Bayare Thane! Tah Puris Koh Ahankara-Mayalomasa
Bandhavocchae. Chau-Ni-Dug Em Bandhe Kamen Mohassa Dasthana. - Sixth Karma
Granth Prakrit Tippana, Ramdevni Virachit, Gatha 22 to 25*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha tIna, yugaM -do, aura, eka-eka prakRtikA mahAnagara sthAna,
mohassa-mohanIya karma ke gAthArya-mohanIya karma ke bAIsa prakRtika, ikkIsa
prakRtika, satraha prakRtika, teraha prakRtika, nau prakRtika, pAMca prakRtika,
cAra prakRtika, tIna prakRtika, do prakRtika aura eka prakRtika, isa prakAra
dasa baMdhasthAna haiN| vizevA-gAthA meM 'mohassa baMdhaTTANANi' mohanIya karma
ke baMdhasthAnoM kA varNana kiyA jA rahA hai| ve baMdhasthAna bAIsa, ikkIsa Adi
prakRtika kula milAkara dasa haiM  /  jinakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA jA rahA hai|
_ mohanIya karma ko uttara prakRtimA aTThAIsa haiN| inameM darzana mohanIya kI
samyaktva, sambamithyAtva aura mithyAtva yaha tIna prakRtiyA~ haiN| inameM se
sambaktva aura samyamithyAtva ina donoM kA baMdha nahIM hone se kula baMdhayogya
chabbIsa prakRtiyAM rahatI haiM aura unameM se kucha prakRtiyoM kA baMdha ke
samaya paraspara virodhanI hone tathA guNasthAnoM meM viccheda hote jAne ke
kAraNa bAIsa prakRtika Adi dasa baMdhasthAma' mohanIya karma kI prakRtiyoM ke
hote haiN| 1 mohanIya karma ke bAIsa prakRtika Adi dasa baMdhasthAnoM meM
prakRtiyoM kI saMgrAhaka gAthAyeM isa prakAra haiM micchaM kamAvasolasa
bhayakucchA tiNDaveyamannamaraM  /  hAsarai iyara yala pa baMdhapayaDI ya
bAvIsaM  /  igavIsA micchaviNA napubaMdhaviNA ra sAsaNe bNdhe| aNarahiyA
sattarasa nabandhi thiI turi aThANammi || viyasaMparAyaNA terasa taha tazyaUNa
nava bandhe  /  maya-kuccha-jugala pAe paNa baMdhe bAyare ThANe ! taha purisa
koha'haMkAra-mAyAlomassa baMdhavoccae  /  cau-ni-duga ema baMdhe kameNa mohassa
dasaThANA  /  /  -SaSTha karmagrantha prAkRta TippaNa, rAmadevaNi viracita,
gAthA 22 se 25

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on the Seven Tika  The first of the ten bondage places of mohaniya
karma is the twenty-two prakritis. This is because the three vedas do not bind
together, but only one veda binds at a time. Whether it be the purushaveda,
striveda, or napumsakaved, and the hasya-rati pair and the arati-shok pair, only
one pair binds at a time. Both pairs do not bind together. Therefore, out of the
twenty-six prakritis, when two vedas and one pair from the two pairs are
reduced, twenty-two prakritis remain. The binding of these twenty-two prakritis
occurs in the mithyaishti gunasthan.  _When mithyatva is reduced from the
aforementioned twenty-two prakriti bondage place, there are twenty-one prakriti
bondage places. This place occurs in the sasadan gunasthan. Because the
severance of mithyatva occurs first in the mithyatva gunasthan. Although the
napumsakaved does not bind in the second sasadan gunasthan, its fulfillment by
the binding of the purushaveda or striveda keeps the number at twenty-one._  The
binding of the anantanubandhi kshaya chatushk occurs only up to the second
gunasthan. Therefore, when the anantanubandhi chatushk is removed from the
twenty-one prakritis, the mixed and avira samyagdristi - third and fourth
gunasthan - have seventeen prakriti bondage places. Although the striveda does
not bind in these gunasthanas, the binding of the purushaveda there makes it
seventeen prakriti bondage places.  The deshaviriti gunasthan has thirteen
prakriti bondage places. Because the apratyakhyanavaran kshaya chatushk binds
only up to the fourth avira samyagdristi gunasthan. Therefore, when the
apratyakhyanavaran chatushk is reduced from the seventeen prakriti bondage
places, the fifth deshaviriti gunasthan has thirteen prakriti bondage places.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa mohanIya karma ke dasa baMdhasthAnoM meM se pahalA sthAna
bAIsa prakRtika hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki tIna vedoM kA eka sAtha baMdha
nahIM hotA hai, kintu eka kAla meM eka hI veda kA baMdha hotA hai| cAhe vaha
puruSaveda kA ho, strIveda kA ho yA napuMsakaveda kA ho tathA hAsya-rati yugala
aura arati-zoka yugala, ina donoM yugaloM meM se eka samaya meM eka yugala kA
baMdha hogaa| donoM yagala eka sAtha baMdha ko prApta nahIM hote haiN| ata:
chubbIsa prakRtiyoM meM se do veda aura do yugaloM meM se kisI eka yugala ke
kama karane para bAIsa prakRtiyAM zeSa rahatI haiN| ina bAIsa prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha mithyAiSTi guNasthAna meM hotA hai| _ukta bAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna
meM se mithyAtva ko kama kara dene para ikkIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai|
yaha sthAna sAsAdana guNasthAna meM hotA hai| kyoMki mithyAtva kA viccheda
pahale mithyAtva guNasthAna meM ho jAtA hai  /  yadyapi dUsare sAsAdana
guNasthAna meM napuMsakaveda kA bhI baMdha nahIM hotA hai, lekina puruSaveda yA
strIveda ke baMdha se usakI pUrti ho jAne se saMkhyA ikkIsa hI rahatI hai  /  _
anantAnubandhI kaSAya catuSka kA bandha dUsare guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai  /
ataH ikkIsa prakRtiyoM meM se anantAnubandhI catuSka ko vAma kara dene se mizra
aura avirata samyagdRSTi-tIsare, cauthe--guNasthAna meM satraha prakRtika
baMdhasthAna prApta hotA hai  /  yadyapi ina guNasthAnoM meM strIveda kA baMdha
nahIM hotA hai, tathApi puruSaveda kA vahA~ baMdha hote rahane se satraha
prakRtika baMdhasthAna bana jAtA hai| dezavirati guNasthAna meM teraha prakRtika
baMdhasthAna hotA hai  /  kyoMki apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka kA bandha
cauthe avirata sabhyagdRSTi guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai  /  ataH satraha
prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM se apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa catuSka ko kama kara dene para
pAMcaveM dezavirata guNasthAna meM teraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna prApta hotA hai
/

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fourfold complex of *pratyakhyanavaran* and *kashaya* binds until the fifth
*guna-sthana*, *desh-virati*. Therefore, after reducing the fourfold complex of
*pratyakhyanavaran* and *kashaya* from the aforementioned thirteen *prakritis*,
there are nine *prakriti* binding places in the sixth, seventh, and eighth
*guna-sthana* - *pramatta-samyata*, *aprammatta-samyata*, and *apuurva-karan*.
Although the pair of *arati* and *shoka* binds only until the sixth *guna-
sthana*, due to the fulfillment of the seventh and the rest by *hasya* and
*rati*, there remains only nine *prakriti* binding places.  The binding of the
four *prakritis* - *hasya*, *rati*, *bhaya*, and *jugupsa* - occurs until the
last moment of the eighth *guna-sthana*. Therefore, after reducing these four
*prakritis* from the aforementioned nine *prakriti* binding places, there are
five *prakriti* binding places in the first part of the ninth *guna-sthana*,
*anivritti-badar-samparaya*. In the second part, there is no binding of
*purusha-veda*, therefore there are four *prakritis*. In the third part, there
is no binding of *sanjvalana-krodha*, therefore there are three *prakritis*. In
the fourth part, there is no binding of *sanjvalana-mana*, therefore there are
two *prakritis*. And in the fifth part, there is no binding of *sanjvalana-
maya*, therefore there is one *prakriti* binding place. Thus, in the five parts
of the ninth *guna-sthana*, *anivritti-badar-samparaya*, there are five
*prakriti*, four *prakriti*, three *prakriti*, two *prakriti*, and one
*prakriti* binding places.  Furthermore, in the tenth *guna-sthana*, *sukshma-
samparaya*, there is also an absence of one *prakriti* binding place. Because
there, the *badar* *kashaya*, which is the cause of the binding of *mohaniya-
karma*, is not found. Thus, there are a total of ten binding places for the
*uttar* *prakritis* of *mohaniya-karma*.  **Time and Owner of the Ten Binding
Places**  The owner of the twenty-two *prakriti* binding places is the
*mithyadrishti* *guna-sthana-varti*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paNTha karmagranya 67 7 pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka kA baMdha pA~caveM
dezavirati guNasthAna taka hotA hai  /  ataH pUrvokta teraha prakRtiyoM meM se
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka ko kama kara dene para chaThaveM sAtaveM aura
AThaveM - pramattasaMyata, apramattasaMyata aura apUrvakaraNa- guNasthAna meM no
prakRtika bandhasthAna hotA hai  /  yadyapi arati-zoka yugala kA baMdha chaThe
guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai, lekina sapta aura bAkI pUrti hAsya va rati se ho
jAne ke kAraNa nau prakRtika baMdhasthAna hI rahatA hai| hAsya, rati, bhaya aura
jugupsA ina cAra prakRtiyoM kA baMdha AThaveM guNasthAna ke aMtima samaya taka
hotA hai | ataH pUrvokta nau prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM se ina cAra prakRtiyoM
ko kama kara dene para nauveM anivRttibAdara saMparAya guNasthAna ke prathama
bhAga meM pAMca prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai| dUsare bhAga meM puruSaveda kA
bandha nahIM hotA, ataH vahA~ cAra prakRtika, tIsare bhAga meM saMjvalana krodha
kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai ataH vahA~ tIna prakRtika, cauthe bhAga meM saMjvalana
mAna kA baMdha nahIM hone se do prakRtika aura pA~caveM bhAga meM saMjvalana
mAyA kA baMdha nahIM hone se eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai| isa prakAra
nauveM anivRttibAdara saMparAya guNasthAna ke pAMca bhAgoM meM pA~ca prakRtika,
cAra prakRtika, tIna prakRtika, do prakRtika aura eka prakRtika, ye pA~ca
baMdhasthAna hote haiM  /  isake Age dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM eka
prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA bhI abhAva hai| kyoMki vahA~ mohanIya karma ke baMdha
ke kAraNabhUta bAdara kapAya nahIM pAyA jAtA hai| isa prakAra mohanIya karma kI
uttara prakRtiyoM ke kula dasa baMdhasthAna haiM  /  dasa baMdhasthAnoM kA
samaya va svAmI bAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA svAmI - mithyAdRSTi
guNasthAnavartI

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The seven categories of *tikā* are the *jīva*. There are three types of *bandha-
sthāna* in terms of time: *anādi-ananta*, *anādi-sānta*, and *sādi-sānta*. Of
these, the *anādi-ananta* option is with respect to *abhavya*s, because their
twenty-two natural *bandha-sthāna* are never absent. The *anādi-sānta* option is
with respect to *bhakshya*s, because in due course, the cessation of their
twenty-two natural *bandha-sthāna* is certain. Or, those who have deviated from
*samyaktva* due to *anyatva* and have attained *mithyātva*, and who in due
course attain *samyaktva* again, have the *sādi-sānta* option. Because this
option is *kāda-cittka*, therefore, it has a beginning and an end. With respect
to this *sādi-sānta* option, the minimum time for the twenty-two natural
*bandha-sthāna* is *antar-muhūrta* and the maximum time is *deśon-apādham-
pudgala-parāvṛtta* measure.  The *jīva* residing in the *sāsādana* *guṇa-sthāna*
is the owner of the twenty-one natural *bandha-sthāna*. The minimum time for the
*sāsādana* *guṇa-sthāna* is one *samaya* and the maximum time is six *āvala*s.
Therefore, the time measure for this *bandha-sthāna* should also be understood
as stated. The *jīva* residing in the third and fourth *guṇa-sthāna*s are the
owners of the seventeen natural *bandha-sthāna*. The minimum time for this
*sthāna* is *antar-muhūrta* and the maximum time is *sādhika-te-tīs-sāgara*. The
*jīva* residing in the *deśa-virata* *guṇa-sthāna* is the owner of the thirteen
natural *bandha-sthāna*. The minimum time for the *deśa-virata* *guṇa-sthāna* is
*antar-muhūrta* and the maximum time is *deśon-pūrva-koṭi-varṣa* measure.
Therefore, the minimum and maximum time for the thirteen natural *bandha-sthāna*
should be understood as such. The nine natural *bandha-sthāna* are found in the
sixth, seventh, and eighth *guṇa-sthāna*s. The minimum time for this *bandha-
sthāna* is *antar-muhūrta* and the maximum time is *deśon-pūrva-koṭi-varṣa*
measure. Although the maximum time for the sixth, seventh, and eighth *guṇa-
sthāna*s is not more than *antar-muhūrta*, yet the change is less than the sixth
and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa jIva hai  /  isa baMdhasthAna ke kAla kI apekSA tIna bhaGga
hai-anAdi. ananta, anAdi-sAnta aura sAdi-sAnta  /  inameM se anAdi-ananta
vikalpa abhavyoM kI apekSA hotA hai| kyoMki unake bAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna
kA kabhI abhAva nahIM pAyA jAtA hai  /  bhakSyoM kI apekSA anAdi-sAnta vikalpa
hai| kyoMki kAlAntara meM unake bAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA baMdhaviccheda
sammatra hai yA jo jotra anyatva se cyuta hokara mithyAtva ko prApta hue haiM
aura kAlAntara meM punaH samyaktva ko prApta ho jAte haiM, unake sAdi-sAnta
vikalpa pAyA jAtA hai| kyoMki yaha vikalpa kAdAcitka hai, ata: isakA Adi bhI
pAyA jAtA hai aura anta bhI  /  isa sAdi-sAnta vikalpa kI apekSA bAIsa prakRtika
baMdhasthAna kA jaghanya kAla antarmuhUrta aura utkRSTa kAla dezona apAdhaM
pudgala parAvarta pramANa hotA hai  /  ikkIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA svAmI
sAsAdana guNasthAnavartI jIva hai| sAsAdana guNasthAna kA jadhanyakAla eka
samaya aura utkRSTa kAla' chaha Avalo hai, ata: isa baMdhasthAna kA bhI ukta
kAlapramANa samajhanA cAhiye  /  satraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke svAmI tIsare
aura cauthe guNasthAnavI jIva haiM  /  isa sthAna kA jaghanyakAla antamuMhUrta
aura utkRSTakAla sAdhika tetIsa sAgara hai| teraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA
svAmI dezavirata guNasthAnavI jIva hai aura dezavirata guNasthAna kA
jaghanyakAla antarmuhUrta aura utkRSTakAla dezona pUrvakoTi varSa pramANa hone
se teraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA jaghanya va utkRSTa kAla utanA samajhanA
cAhiye  /  nau prakRtika baMdhasthAna chaThaveM, sAtaveM aura AThaveM guNasthAna
meM pAyA jAtA hai| isa baMdhasthAna kA jaghanyakAla antarmuhUrta aura utkRSTa
kAla dezona pUrvakoTi barSa pramANa hai| yadyapi chaTe, sAtaveM aura AThaveM
guNasthAna kA utkRSTakAla antarmuhUrta se adhika nahIM hai, phira bhI
parivartana kama se chaThe aura

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Bond of Karma (Vastu Karmagranth) **66**  A being can remain in the
seventh Gunasthan for a period of time equal to the Deshon Purvakoti. Therefore,
the highest duration of the natural bond is equal to the said measure. The five,
four, three, two, and one natural bonds are in the five parts of the ninth
Anivrittibadar Samparaya Gunasthan. The lowest duration of each of these bonds
is one time period, and the highest duration is one Antarmuhurt. Because the
lowest duration of each part of the ninth Gunasthan is one time period, and the
highest duration is one Antarmuhurt. The following is a description of the ten
bonds of Mohaniya Karma, along with their duration:  | Bond | Duration |
Gunasthan | |---|---|---| | First | 22 Pra | 1 | | Second | 21 Pra | 2 | | Third
| 17 Pra | 3, 4 | | Fourth | 13 Pra | 5 | | Fifth | 6 Pra | 6, 7, 8 | | Sixth |
Bhumi | 9th part 1 | | Seventh |  " | 9th part 2 | | Eighth |  " | 9th part 3 |
| Ninth |  " | 9th part 4 | | Tenth |  " | 9th part 5 |  **Duration:**  *
Antarmuhurt = One time period = Antarmuhurt * Lowest = One time period * Highest
= Deshon Apar = Six Avali Sadhik = 33 Sagar Deshon Purvakoti = Antarmuhurt
**Comparison:**  * Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, and
one. * Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, and one.  **Note:**
* The ten bonds of Mohaniya Karma are described above. Now, the description of
the Udayasthanas is given. * One, two, and four. These are the ten Udayasthanas.
* There are nine Udayasthanas for Mohaniya Karma.  **Source:**  * Go.
Dharmakaand, Ga. 475

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaSTha karmagranma 66 sAtaveM guNasthAna meM eka jIva dezona pUrvakoTi pramANa
raha sakatA hai  /  isIliye to prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA utkRSTakAla ukta
pramANa hai  /  pA~ca, cAra, tIna, do aura eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna nauveM
anivRttibAdara saMparAya guNasthAna ke pAMca bhAgoM meM hote haiM aura ina sabhI
pratyeka baMdhasthAna kA jaghanyakAla eka samaya aura utkRSTakAla' antarmuhUrta
hai| kyoMki nauveM guNasthAna ke pratyeka bhAga kA jadhanyakAla eka samaya aura
utkaSTa kAla antarma harta hai| mohanIya karma ke dasa baMdhasthAnoM kA svAmI va
kAla sahita vivaraNa isa prakAra hai kAla baMsthAna 22 pra0 21 pra0 17 pra0 13
pra0 6 pra0 bhU 4 3 2 21 " " " pahalA dusa kha 3, 4 thA 5 va 6, 7, 8 vaoN nauveM
kA pahalA bhAga dUsarA bhAga tIsarA bhAga cauthA bhAga pA~cavA~ bhAga r gn r
guNasthAna IP 1, J2 " . antarmuhUrta eka samaya antarmuhUrta 37 tulanA kIjiye -
dasa Nava aTTha ya sat ya udapaNA mohe Nava JP eka samaya 17 " jaghanya " ri --
utkRSTa dezona apara chaha AvalI sAdhika 33 sAgara dezona pUrvakoTi antarmuhUrta
15 paNa cattAri doNi eva ca  /  caiva ya hoMti niyameNa  //  12 " J " HOW
mohanIya karma ke dasa baMghasthAnoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba udayasthAnoM kA
kathana karate haiM  /  ekkaM va do va cauro esto ekkAhiyA dsukkosaa| oheNa
mohaNijje udayadvANA nava havaMti  //  11  //  | - go0 pharmakAMDa, gA0 475

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on Seven Tika  **Word Meanings:**  * Evi - one, Da - and, Do - two,
Va - and, Uro - four, Eso - further, Ekkahiya - one nature more, Is - till,
Chakkosa - excellent, Ohej - common, Mohanijje - in mohaniya karma, Udayadvaana
- place of origin, Nav - nine, Havanti - are.  **Verse Meaning:**  One, two and
four, and four plus one nature more till the tenth excellent nature, these nine
places of origin are common in mohaniya karma.  **Detailed Meaning:**  In the
Gan, it is mentioned that there are nine places of origin. The number of these
places of origin is one, two, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine and ten
natures.  **Explanation:**  These places of origin are mentioned in the reverse
order. There are three types of counting: 1. Purvanupurvi, 2. PaschadAnupurvi,
and 3. YatraTatranupurvi. The explanation is as follows: Counting in the order
in which the substance originated or was established by the Sutrakar is
Purvanupurvi. Counting from the end to the beginning is PaschadAnupurvi.
Counting from any desired point, considering the desired substance as the first,
is YatraTatranupurvi. Here, the author has counted the places of origin of
mohaniya karma in the reverse order, following the PaschadAnupurvi method.  The
origin of mohaniya karma occurs till the tenth subtle Sampraya Gunasthan.
Therefore, according to the reverse order of counting, the place of origin of
one nature is in the subtle Sampraya Gunasthan, because there is the origin of
Sanjwalan Lobha. It should be understood that the ninth Gunasthan has lost the
Vedas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa zabdArtha -- evaI - eka, da-aura, do-do, va aura, uro -
cAra, eso-- isase Age ekkAhiyA - eka eka prakRti adhika, isa - isa taka,
chakkosA - utkRSTa se, oheja-sAmAnya se, mohaNijje -- mohanIya karma meM,
udayadvANA - udayasthAna, nava-nau, havaMti hote haiM  /  gAthArtha eka, do aura
cAra aura cAra se Age eka-eka prakRti adhika utkRSTa dasa prakRti taka ke nau
udayasthAna mohanIya karma ke sAmAnya se hote haiM  /  vizeSArtha gaNa meM modI
yA batalAI haiM ki ve nau hote haiN| ina udayasthAnoM kI saMkhyA eka, do, cAra,
pA~ca, chaha, sAta, ATha, nau aura dasa prakRtika hai  /  1 ye udayasthAna
pazcAdAnupUrvI ke krama se batalAye haiM  /  gaNanAnupUrvI ke tIna prakAra haiM
1. pUrvAnupUrvI 2 pazcAdAnupUrvI aura 3 yatratatrAnupUrvI  /  inakI vyAkhyA isa
prakAra hai ki jo padArtha jisa krama se utpanna huA ho yA jisa krama se
sUtrakAra ke dvArA sthApita kiyA gayA ho, usakI usI krama se gaNanA karanA
pUrvAnupUrvI hai  /  vilomakama se arthAt anta se lekara Adi taka gaNanA karanA
pazcAdAnupUrvI hai aura apanI icchAnusAra jahA~ kahIM se apane icchita padArtha
ko prathama mAnakara gaNanA karanA yatratatrAnupUrvI kahalAtA hai| yahAM
granthakAra ne ukta tIna gaNanA kI AnupUdiyoM meM se pazcAdAnupUrvI ke krama se
mohanIya karma ke udayasthAna ginAye haiM  /  'mohanIya karma kA udaya dasaveM
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna taka hotA | ataH padacAdAnupUrvI gaNanA krama se eka
prakRtika udayasthAna sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM hotA hai kyoMki vahA~
saMjvalana lobha kA udaya hai  /  vaha isa prakAra samajhanA cAhiye ki nauveM
guNasthAna ke apagata veda 1 gaNaNANuputrI tithihA paSNasA taM jahA -
pugvANuputhvI, pANupuruSI, aNAputhvI  /  anuyogadvAra sUtra 116 70 ...

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the first moment of the sixth karma-anya to the last moment of the subtle-
samparaya guna-sthana, there is an arising of the sanjvalana lobha, which is
described as a natural arising in the subtle-samparaya guna-sthana.  When one of
the three Vedas is added to this one natural arising, there are two natural
arisings, which occur from the first moment of the ninth anivritti-badar
samparaya guna-sthana to the last moment of the sa-vedha-bhaga.  When one of the
pairs of hasya-rati or arati-shoka is added to these two natural arisings, there
are four natural arisings. There are not three natural arisings because the
addition (yoga) of one of the pairs of hasya-rati or arati-shoka to the two
natural arisings results in four. Therefore, four natural arisings are
described. When the bhaya-prakriti is added to these four natural arisings,
there are five natural arisings. When the jugupsa-prakriti is added to this,
there are six natural arisings. These three arisings occur in the sixth,
seventh, and eighth guna-sthana.  When one of the prakritis of the pratyakhyana-
avaran kshaya chatushk is added to these six natural arisings, there are seven
natural arisings. This occurs in the fifth guna-sthana. When one of the
prakritis of the apratyakhyana-avaran kshaya chatushk is added to this, there
are eight natural arisings. This arising occurs in the fourth and third guna-
sthana. When one of the prakritis of the ananta-anubandhi kshaya chatushk is
added to these eight natural arisings, there are nine natural arisings. This
occurs in the second guna-sthana, and this nine natural...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmaanya ke prathama samaya se lekara sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna ke
aMtima samaya taka saMjvalana lobha kA udaya pAyA jAtA hai, jisase
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM eka prakRtika udayasthAna batalAyA hai| ukta eka
prakRtika udayasthAna meM tIna vedoM meM se kisI eka veda ko milA dene para do
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai jo nauveM anivRttibAdara saMparAya guNasthAna ke
prathama samaya se lekara savedabhAga ke aMtima samaya taka hotA hai| isa do
prakRtika udayasthAna meM hAsya-rati yugala athavA arati-zoka yugala meM se kisI
eka yugala ko milAne se cAra prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| tIna prakRtika
udayasthAna isaliye nahIM hotA hai ki do prakRtika udayasthAna meM hAsya-rati yA
arati-zoka yugaloM meM se kisI eka yugala ke milAne se jor3a (yoga) cAra hotA
hai| ata: cAra prakRtika udayasthAna batAyA hai| isa cAra prakRtika udayasthAna
meM bhaya prakRti ko milAne se pAMca prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| isameM
jugupsA prakRti ke milAne se chaha prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| ye tInoM
udayasthAna chaThe, sAtaveM aura AThaveM guNasthAna meM hote haiM  /  isa chaha
prakRtika udayasthAna meM pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka kI kisI eka prakRti
ko milAne se sAta prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| jo pAMcaveM guNasthAna meM
hotA hai| isameM apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka kI kisI eka prakRti ko
milAne para ATha prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| yaha udayasthAna cauthe aura
tIsare guNasthAna meM hotA hai| isa ATha prakRtika udayasthAna meM
anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya catuSka ko kisI prakRti ko milAne se nau prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai| yaha sthAna dUsare guNasthAna meM hotA hai aura isa nau
prakRtika

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
72 There are ten natural *udayasthanas* when *mithyatva* is combined with the
*sapta tika* section. This *udayasthan* occurs in the *miyadristi* *gunasthan*.
The aforementioned nine *udayasthanas* of *mohaniya karma* have been explained
in general. Because in the third *misra gunasthan*, *misra mohaniya* arises, and
from the fourth to the seventh *gunasthan*, *vedak samyagdristi* arises.
Therefore, instead of explaining all the options, here it is considered as
information. A detailed description is being given further. The *jghanyakal* of
each *udayasthan* is one *samaya* and the *utkrushtkal* is *antarmuhurt*. The
details of the *udayasthanas* of *mohaniya karma* are as follows:  | Time |
*Udayasthan* | *Gunasthan* | |---|---|---| | *Jghany* | 10 | Ninth *aved* part
and tenth | One *samaya* | | *Utkrusht* |  |  | *Antarmuhurt* | |  | 9 | Ninth
*savad* part |  | |  | 6, 7, 8 | 6, 7, 5 |  | |  | 4, 3 | 4, 3 |  | |  | 1 |  |
|  The *sangrahaniya* verses of the nine *udayasthanas* of *mohaniya karma* are
as follows: (a) *Ega-yar samparayam veyajuyam doshni juyalajuy chauro.
Pakamkkhanegapare pridhe panv payavio.*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 72 saptatikA prakaraNa udayasthAna meM mithyAtva ko milAne para dasa prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yaha udayasthAna miyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM hotA hai| _
mohanIya karma ke ukta nau udayasthAna sAmAnya se batalAye haiM  /  kyoMki
tIsare mizra guNasthAna' meM mizra mohanIya kA aura cauthe se sAtaveM guNasthAna
taka vedaka samyagdRSTi ke samyaktva mohanIya kA udaya ho jAtA hai| isaliye
sabhI vikalpoM ko na batalAkara yahA~ to sUcanA mAna kI hai| vizeSa vistAra se
varNana Age kiyA jA rahA hai  /  pratyeka udayasthAna' kA jaghanyakAla' eka
samaya aura utkRSTakAla antarmuhUrta hai| mohanIya karma ke udayasthAnoM kA
vivaraNa isa prakAra hai kAla udayasthAna guNasthAna jaghanya uskRSTa 10 nauveM
kA aveda mAga va dasavAM eka samaya | antarmuhUrta nau kA saveda bhAga 6, 7, 8
6, 7, pAMcA 4, 3 1 mohanIya karma ke nau udayasthAnoM kI saMgrahaNIya gAthAyeM
isa prakAra haiM(ka) egayara saMparAyaM veyajuyaM doSNi juyalajuya cauro  /
pakamakkhANegapare pRDhe paMva payavIyo  /

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 73  **The Sixth Karma Granth**  After explaining the उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) of
मोहनीय कर्म (Mohaniya Karma), we now discuss the सत्तास्थान (Sattaasthan).
**Aṭṭhag-Sattaga-Gaccha-Utigabug-aega-hiyā-Bhawe-Bosa. Teras-Barik-Karas-Itto-
Panchai-Ekkūṇā. ||12||**  * Aṭṭhag-Sattaga-Gaccha-Utigabug-aega-hiyā - Eight,
seven, six, four, three, two, and one more. * Bhawe - Are. * Bosa - Twenty. *
Teras - Thirteen. * Barik-Karas - Twelve. * Itto - And. * Panchai - Five. *
Ekkūṇā - One less.  **Santass-Pagaiṭhāṇāi-Tāṇi-Mohass-Huti-Pannaras.
Bamdhodayasat-Puṇ-Magadhigadhyā-Bār-Jāṇ. ||13||**  * Santass - Of the लत्ता
(Latta). * Pagaiṭhāṇā - Nature's place. * Tāṇi - Those. * Mohass - Of the मोहनीय
कर्म (Mohaniya Karma). * Huti - Are. * Pannaras - Fifteen. * Bamdhodayasat -
Bond, उदय (Uday), and सत्ता (Satta) places. * Puṇ - And. * Magadhigadhyā - Many.
* Bār - Know.  **Gāyārth:**  After twenty मोहनीय कर्म (Mohaniya Karma), there
are eight, seven, six, four, three, two, and one more, and thirteen, twelve,
eleven, and then five to one less, thus there are fifteen places of सत्ता
प्रकृति (Satta Prakriti). There are many alternatives of भंग (Bhang) in relation
to these बंधस्थान (Bandhasthan), उदयस्थान (Udayasthan), and सत्तास्थान
(Sattaasthan).  **Ch-Vidhy-Egayareṇam-Jhūḍe-Satt-Ya-Dugu-Chhi-Bhay-Aṭṭh. Aṇi-
Nav-Micche-Dasagan-Samannenaṁ-Tu-Nav-Udayā.**  * Ch - Six. * Vidhy - Types. *
Egayareṇam - Eleven. * Jhūḍe - Less. * Satt - Seven. * Ya - And. * Dugu - Two. *
Chhi - Less. * Bhay - Eight. * Aṇi - And. * Nav - Nine. * Micche - Less. *
Dasagan - Ten. * Samannenaṁ - Together. * Tu - And. * Nav - Nine. * Udayā - उदय
(Uday).  **Rāmadeva-Gaṇikṛt-Shaṣṭh-Karma-Pranth-Prākṛt-Tippṇā, Ya. 26, 27, (Kha)
Igi-Dugu-Chaū-Egṛt-Tarā-Adasagan-Udayamāha-Moharas. Sanjanaṇay-Hāsar-Hamay-Dugu-
Vati-Kasāy-Di-Chhi-Ya.**  * Rāmadeva-Gaṇikṛt - Composed by Rāmadeva. * Shaṣṭh-
Karma-Pranth - Sixth Karma Granth. * Prākṛt-Tippṇā - Prakrit Commentary. * Ya.
26, 27 - Verses 26 and 27. * (Kha) - Section (Kha). * Igi - One. * Dugu - Two. *
Chaū - Four. * Egṛt-Tarā - One more. * Adasagan - Ten. * Udayamāha - Says उदय
(Uday). * Moharas - Of मोहनीय कर्म (Mohaniya Karma). * Sanjanaṇay - Together. *
Hāsar - Thousands. * Hamay - Of. * Dugu - Two. * Vati - Types. * Kasāy - Kasaya.
* Di - And. * Chhi - Less. * Ya - And.  **-Panchasangrah-Sapttatika-Gā. 23**  *
Panchasangrah - Panchasangrah. * Sapttatika - Seventh Chapter. * Gā. 23 - Verse
23.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 73 SaSTha karmagrantha _ mohanIya karma ke udayasthAnoM ko batalAne ke pazcAt
aba sattAsthAnoM kA kathana karate haiN| aTThagasattagacca utigabugaegAhiyA
bhave bosA  /  terasa bArikkArasa itto paMcAi ekkUNA  // 12 //  saMtassa
pagaiThANAI tANi mohassa huti pannarasa  /  bamdhodayasata puNa magadhigadhyA
bAra jANa  // 13 //  _ zabA-aTThaga-saptaga-chanvajaliMga-yuga-epAhiyA-ATha,
sAta, chaha, ghAra, tIna, do, aura eka adhika, bhave-hote haiM, bausAbIsa,
terasa-teraha, mArikakArasa-bAraha aura gyAraha prakRti kA, so-isake bAda,
paMcAipAMca prakRti se lekara, ekUSNAekaeka prakRti nyUna  /  saMtassa-lattA ke,
pagaThANA-prakRti sthAna, tANa-ve, bhohassa-mohanIya karma ke, huti-hote haiM,
parasa-pandraha, baMdhobaSasaMte-baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAna, puNa-tathA,
bhaMgavigappAmaMgavikalpa, mahU-aneka, aann-jaano| gAyArtha:-mohanIya karma ke
bIsa ke bAda kramazaH ATha, sAta, chaha, cAra, tIna, do aura eka adhika saMkhyA
vAle tathA teraha, bAraha, gyAraha aura isake bAda pA~ca se lekara eka-eka
prakRti ke kama, isa prakAra sattA prakRtiyoM ke pandraha sthAna hote haiN| ina
baMdhasthAnoM, udayasthAnoM aura sattAsthAnoM kI apekSA bhaMgoM ke aneka vikalpa
hote haiN| cha vidhya egayareNaM jhuDhe satta ya duguchi bhaya aTTha  /  aNi
nava micche dasagaM sAmanneNaM tu nava udayA  /  rAmadevagaNikRta SaSTha karma
prantha prAkRta TippaNa, yA0 26, 27, (kha) igi duga cau egRttaraAdasagaM
udayamAha moharasa  /  saMjanaNayahAsarahamayaduguvatikasAyadichI ya  /  /
-paMcasaMgraha saptatikA gA023

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seven Tika  **Special Meaning:** The two verses mentioned
above have explained the number of natures in the spheres of existence of the
mohaniya karma. It has been stated that a particular sphere of existence has a
certain number of natures. After indicating the differences in the spheres of
existence, information has been given about the multiplicity of the sensory
impairments in the spheres of bondage, arising, and existence. Their description
will be given further as the context arises.  Indicating the number of spheres
of existence of mohaniya karma, the sage has said, "Taani mohass huthi pataras"
- there are fifteen spheres of existence of mohaniya karma natures. The
explanation of how many natures are in each of these fifteen spheres of
existence is as follows: twenty-eight, twenty-seven, twenty-six, twenty-four,
twenty-three, twenty-two, twenty-one, thirteen, twelve, eleven, five, four,
three, two, and one nature. In total, there are fifteen spheres of existence.
**74**  **(a)** Bagasat Teras Barekkarasante Gach Uthi Madug Ekkama Kriya
**(b)** Atthayassattakay Teras 7 Bola. Panchah Ja Ekam || Bareyaram Panadhi -
Panchasangraha Saptatika 10 35 Chadutidurogaavigaani Bosani. Egunaman Sant || -
Go. Karmakanda Gra. 506  **2** The verses that collect the natures taken in each
of these fifteen spheres of existence are as follows:  Nav Nokasaya Solas Kasaya
Dansansigam Ti Adavisa. Sammattuvalanam Micche Mise Ya Samvisa || Chabbisa Pun
Duviha Misuvvalane Ana6 Micchate. Samma Anakkhae Hoi Visa || Micche Mose Samme
Khine Vindavisa Ekakavisa Ya. Adruksae Teras Nanu Kkhae Piveyi Khoni Garas Hasai
Panchakhaj Kohe Mane Maya Lobhe Khine M Tigu Dug Eg Asant Mohe Pannaaras Hoi
Barasgan || Purisakhine 1 Kamso U || Santthanani. - Shashta Karmapray Prakrit
Tippana, Ga. 28-32

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNaM vizeSArtha ukta do gAthAoM meM mohanIya karma kI
prakRtiyoM ke sattAsthAnoM meM prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA batalAI hai ki amuka
sattAsthAna itanI prakRtiyoM kA hotA hai  /  sattAsthAnoM ke bhedoM kA saMketa
karane ke bAda baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kI anekatA
kI sUcanA dI hai| jinakA varNana Age yathAprasaMga kiyA jA rahA hai| mohanIya
karma ke kitane sattAsthAna hote haiM, isakA saMketa karate hue kAra ne batAyA
ki tANi mohassa huti patarasa - mohanIya karma prakRtiyoM ke sattAsthAna
pandraha hote haiM  /  ye pandraha sattAsthAna kitanI kitanI prakRtiyoM ke haiM,
unakA spaSTIkaraNa kramaza: isa prakAra hai aTThAIsa sattAIsa, chabbIsa,
caubIsa, teIsa, bAIsa, ikkIsa, teraha, vAraha, gyAraha pA~ca, cAra, tIna, do
aura eka prakRtika  /  1 kula milAkara ye pandraha sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  74
1 (ka) bagasata terasa bArekkArasa saMte gaca uti maduga ekakamA kriyA (kha)
aTThayasattayakaya terasa 7 bolA  /  paMcAha jA ekaM  //  bAreyAraM paNAdi -
paMcasaMgraha saptatikA 10 35 cadutidurogAvigANi bosANi  /  eguNamaM santa  //
- go0 karmakAMDa grA0506 2 ina pandraha sattAsthAnoM meM se pratyeka sthAna meM
grahaNa kI gaI prakRtiyoM kI saMgraha gAthAyeM isa prakAra haiM nava nokasAya
solasa kasAya daMsaNasigaM ti aDavIsA  /  sammattuvalaNaM micche mIse ya
samavIsA  //  chabbIsA puNa duvihA mIsuvvalaNe aNA6 micchate  /  sammA aNakkhae
hoi vIsA || micche mose samme khINe vinduvIsa ekakavIsA ya  /  adrukasAe terasa
nanu kkhae pIveyi khoNigArasa hAsAi paMcakhaja kohe mANe mAyA lobhe khINe ma
tigu duga ega asaMta mohe pannarasa hoi bArasagaM || purisakhINe 1 kamaso u  //
saMtaThANANi  /  -SaSTha karmapraya prAkRta TippaNa, gA0 28-32

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  This section discusses the twenty-eight **prakriti**
states of existence, where all types of **mohaniya karma** are present. This
state exists from the **mithyatva** **guna-sthana** to the eleventh **upshanta-
moha** **guna-sthana**. The shortest duration of this state is **antar-
muhurta**, and the longest duration is **saadhik** one hundred and thirty-two
**sagars**.   Here's the explanation:  When a **mithyatva** being with twenty-
six **prakriti** states attains **upshama samyak-tva** and gains twenty-eight
**prakriti** states, and within **antar-muhurta** time, they achieve **vedak
samyak-tva** and disconnects from the **ananta-anubandhi chatushk**, becoming a
being with twenty-four **prakriti** states, then the shortest duration of the
twenty-eight **prakriti** state is **antar-muhurta**.   The longest duration,
**saadhik** one hundred and thirty-two **sagars**, is understood as follows:  A
**mithyatva** being attains **upshama samyak-tva** and becomes a being with
twenty-eight **prakriti** states. Subsequently, they attain **vedak samyak-tva**
and remain in **samyak-tva** for the first sixty-six **sagars**. Then, they
remain in **samy-mithyatva** for **antar-muhurta** time and again attain **vedak
samyak-tva**, remaining in **samyak-tva** for another sixty-six **sagars**.
Finally, they attain **mithyatva** and through the **udvalana** of **samyak-
tva** **prakriti** for a period equivalent to an immeasurable fraction of the
most excellent **paly** of **samyak-tva** **prakriti**, they become a being with
twenty-seven **prakriti** states. Thus, the longest duration of the twenty-eight
**prakriti** state is one hundred and thirty-two **sagars**, which is more than
an immeasurable fraction of **paly**.  Although such a being may ascend to the
**kshapka** category and attain other states of existence without falling into
**mithyatva**, they do not achieve the aforementioned longest duration.
Therefore, it is not mentioned here.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha inameM se aTThAIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna meM mohanIya karma
kI saba prakRtiyoM kA grahaNa kiyA gayA haiN| yaha sthAna mithyAdRSTi'
guNasthAna se lekara gyArahaveM upazAntamoha guNasthAna taka pAyA jAtA hai| isa
sthAna kA jaghanyakAla antarmuhUrta aura utkRSTakAla sAdhika ekasau battIsa
sAgara hai  /  jisakA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai chabbIsa prakRtiyoM kI sattA
vAlA koI eka mithyAdRSTi jIva jaba upazama samyaktva ko prApta karake aTThAIsa
prakRtiyoM kI sattA prApta kara letA hai aura antarmuhurtakAla ke bhItara vedaka
samyaktva pUrvaka anantAnubandhI catuSka kI visaMyojanA karake caubIsa prakRti
kI sattA vAlA ho jAtA hai, taba aTThAIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna kA jaghanya kAla
antarmuhUrta prApta hotA hai tathA utkRSTakAla sAdhika eka sau battIsa sAgara
isa prakAra samajhanA cAhiye ki koI mithyA dRSTi jIva upazama samyaktva ko
prApta karake aTThAIsa prakRti kI sattA vAlA huA, anantara vedaka samyaktva ko
prApta karake prathama chiyAsaTha sAgara kAla taka samyaktva ke sAtha
paribhramaNa kiyA aura phira antarmuharta kAla taka samyamithyAtva meM rahakara
phira vedaka samyaktva ko prApta karake dUsarI bAra chiyAsaTha sAgara samyaktva
ke sAtha paribhramaNa kiyA  /  anta meM mithyAtva ko prApta karake samyaktva
prakRti ke sabase utkRSTa palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa kAla ke dvArA
samyaktva prakRti kI udvalanA karake sattAIsa prakRtika sattA vAlA huaa| isa
prakAra aTThAIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna kA utkRSTakAla palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM
bhAga se adhika eka sau battIsa sAgara hotA hai  /  aisA jIva yadyapi mithyAtva
meM na jAkara kSapaka zreNi para bhI car3hatA hai aura anya sattAsthAnoM ko
prApta karatA hai| parantu isase ukta utkRSTa kAla prApta nahIM hotA hai, ata:
yahA~ usakA ullekha nahIM kiyA hai  /

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 18: The Infinitely Connected 'Har Ki Shika: Mala'  **The 28th Natural
State of Being** is attained when the four infinitely connected **Kashaya**
(passions) are disjoined from the **Atthais Prakritik Satta** (28th Natural
State of Being).   **Both the Svetambara and Digambara Acharyas** agree that the
**Samyagdarshi** (perfectly enlightened) being disjoins the four infinitely
connected **Kashaya**. However, the **Jayadvala Tika** mentions another opinion.
It states that there are two opinions regarding the **Upshama Samyagdarshi**
(partially enlightened) being disjoining the four infinitely connected
**Kashaya**.  **One opinion** believes that the duration of **Upshama
Samyaktva** (partial enlightenment) is short, and the duration of disjoining the
four infinitely connected **Kashaya** is long. Therefore, the **Upshama
Samyagdarshi** being does not disjoin the four infinitely connected **Kashaya**.
**The other opinion** believes that the duration of **Upshama Samyaktva** is
longer than the duration of disjoining the four infinitely connected
**Kashaya**. Therefore, the **Upshama Samyagdarshi** being also disjoins the
four infinitely connected **Kashaya**.  The **Jayadvala Tika**, based on the
**Uccarana Vrittis** (oral traditions), gives precedence to this second opinion.
**The Superior Duration of the 28th Natural State of Being: A Difference of
Opinion**  The **Panchasangraha**'s **Saptatika Sangraha** verse 45 and its
commentary state that the superior duration of the **28th Natural State of
Being** is **one hundred and thirty-two Sagaras** more than an **asankhyata**
(incalculable) part of a **Paly** (a unit of time). However, the **Digambara
tradition** states that its superior duration is **one hundred and thirty-two
Sagaras** more than **three asankhyata** parts of a **Paly**.  The explanation
for this difference is:  **Svetambara literature** states that a being with **26
Natural States of Being** who is **Mithyavritti** (falsely believing) becomes
**Upshama Samyagdarshi** (partially enlightened) by abandoning **Mithyatva**
(falsehood). Accordingly, in the final stage of the **Udvallana** (awakening) of
**Kshevala Samyaktva** (perfect enlightenment), the being...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 18 saptatikA prakaraNa anantAnubandhI 'hara kI zikA : malA aTThAIsa prakRtika
sattAsthAna kA jaghanyakAla' antarmuhUrta anantAnubandhI catuSka kI visaMyojanA
karane se jaba caubIsa prakRtika sattA vAlA hotA hai, taba prApta hotA hai|
bevaka samyagdRSTi jIva ke anantAnubandhI kaSAya catuSka kI bisaMyojanA karane
meM zvetAmbara aura digambara AcArya ekamata haiN| kintu isake atirikta
jayadhavalA TIkA meM eka mata kA ullekha aura kiyA gayA hai| vahAM batAyA gayA
hai ki upazama samyagdRSTi jIva anantAnubandhI catuSka kI visaMyojanA karate
haiM, isa viSaya meM do mata haiM  /  eka mata kA yaha mAnanA hai ki upazama
samyaktva kA kAla thor3A hai aura anantAnubandhI catuSka kI visaMyojanA kA kAla
bar3A hai, ata: upazama samgharadaSTi jIva anantAnubandhI catuSka kI visaMyojanA
nahIM karatA hai tathA dUsarA mata hai ki anantAnubandhI catuSka ke visaMyojanA
kAla se upazama samyaktva vA kAla bar3A hai isaliye upazama samyagdRSTi jIva bhI
anantAnubandhI catuSka kI visaMyojanA karatA hai| jina uccAraNA vRttiyoM ke
AdhAra se jayadhavalA TIkA likhI gaI hai, unameM isa dUsare mata ko pradhAnatA
dI hai| agAIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna kA utkRSTa kAla, matabhinnatA paMcasaMgraha
ke saptatikA saMgraha kI gAthA 45 va usakI TIkA meM aTThAIsa prakRtika
sattAsthAna kA utkRSTakAla palya kA asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga adhika eka sau battIsa
sAgara batalAyA hai| lekina digambara paramparA meM usakA utkRSTa kAla palya ke
tIna asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga adhika eka sau battIsa sAgara batalAyA hai  /  isa
matabheda kA spaSTIkaraNa yaha hai- zvetAmbara sAhitya meM batAyA hai ki
chabbIsa prakRtika sattA vAlA mithyAvRSTi hI mithyAtva kA upazama karake upazama
samyagdRSTi hotA hai  /  tadanusAra kSevala samyaktva kI udvalanA ke aMtima kAla
meM jItra

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **77** A being with 28 natural states of existence cannot
attain **Upshama Samyaktv**. The maximum duration of their existence is **132
Sagaras plus an innumerable fraction of a Paly**. This is because a being with
28 natural states of existence who remains in **Vedak Samyaktv** for 66 Sagaras
and then attains **Samyagdristi**, and subsequently remains in **Vedak
Samyaktv** for another 66 Sagaras, and finally becomes a **Mithyadristi** for a
period of an innumerable fraction of a Paly, cannot exist for a longer duration.
This is because after this period, they will inevitably become a being with 27
natural states of existence.  However, according to **Digambar literature**, a
**Mithyadristi** with 26 or 27 natural states of existence will inevitably
attain **Upshama Samyaktv**. But a being with 28 natural states of existence,
whose time for attaining **Vedak Samyaktv** has passed, will also attain
**Upshama Samyaktv**. Therefore, the maximum duration of a being with 28 natural
states of existence becomes **132 Sagaras plus three innumerable fractions of a
Paly**.  For example, a **Mithyadristi** being attains **Upshama Samyaktv** and
becomes a being with 20 natural states of existence. After attaining
**Mithyatva**, they would have become a being with 27 natural states of
existence after an innumerable fraction of a Paly, the maximum duration of
**Samyaktv**. However, instead of that, they attain **Upshama Samyaktv** again
at the end of this period. Subsequently, they wander in **Samyaktv** for the
first 66 Sagaras and then attain **Mithyatva**. Again, they attain **Upshama
Samyaktv** at the end of the maximum duration of **Samyaktv**, which is an
innumerable fraction of a Paly. After that, they wander in **Samyaktv** for
another 66 Sagaras and finally attain **Mithyatva**. They then exist for an
innumerable fraction of a Paly...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 77 upazama samyaktva ko prApta nahIM kara sakatA hai|
jisase 28 prakRtika sattAsthAna kA utkuSTakAla palya kA asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga
adhika 132 sAgara hI prApta hotA hai| kyoMki jo 28 prakutiyoM kI sattA vAlA 66
sAgara taka vedaka samyaktva ke sAtha rahA aura pazcAt samyagdRSTi huA,
tatpazcAt punaH 66 sAgara taka vedaka samyaktva ke sAtha rahA aura aMta meM
jisane mithyAdRSTi hokara palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga kAla taka samyaktva kI
ubalanA kI, usake 28 prakRtika sattAsthAna isase adhika kAla nahIM pAyA jAtA,
kyoMki isake bAda vaha niyama se 27 prakRtika mattAsthAna vAlA ho jAtA hai  /
lekina digambara sAhitya kI yaha mAnyatA hai ki 26 aura 27 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
vAlA midhyAdRSTi to niyama se upazama samyaktva ko hI utpanna karatA hai, kintu
28 prakRtiyoM kI sattA vAlA vaha jIva bhI upazama samyaktva ko hI utpanna karatA
hai jisake cedaka samyaktva ke yogya kAla samApta ho gayA hai  /  tadanusAra
yahA~ 28 prakRtika sattAsthAna kA utkRSTa kAla palpa ke tIna asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga
adhika 132 sAgara bana jAtA hai| yathAkoI eka mithyAdRSTi jIva upazama samyaktva
ko prApta karake 20 prakRtiyoM kI sattA vAlA huA  /  anantara mithyAtva ko
prApta hokara samyaktva ke sabase utkRSTa ubalanA kAla palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM
bhAga ke vyatIta hone para vaha 27 prakRtika sattA ghAlA hotA, para aisA na
hokara vaha ubalanA ke aMtima samaya meM puna: upazama samyaktva ko prApta huA
/  tadanantara prathama 66 sAgara kAla taka samyaktva ke sAtha paribhramaNa
karake aura mithyAtva ko prApta hokara punaH samyaktva ke sabase utkRSTa palya
ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa udyalanA kAla ke aMtima samaya meM 'upazama
samyaktva ko prApta huA, tadanantara dUsarI bAra 66 sAgara kAla taka samyaktva
ke sAtha paribhramaNa karake aura aMta meM mithyAtva ko prApta hokara palya ke
asaMkhyAtaveM

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Twenty-Seven Tika  By comparing the state of Samyaktvā
with the time factor, a being attains the state of twenty-seven Prakṛtis. Thus,
the duration of the twenty-eight Prakṛti state is three asamkhyeya parts of a
palya plus 132 sagaras.  In this way, some differences of opinion leave the
twenty-seven Prakṛtis as the beginning of the Mohaniya Karma.  **Indicating the
States of Being**  Out of the aforementioned twenty-eight Prakṛti states of
being, when the Prakṛti of Samyaktvā is removed, the state of twenty-seven
Prakṛtis remains. This state belongs to the Mithyādṛṣṭi and the Mithyādṛṣṭi, and
its duration is one asamkhyeya part of a palya. The reason for this is that
after the removal of the Samyaktvā Prakṛti, it takes one asamkhyeya part of a
palya for the Samyag-Mithyātva Prakṛti to be removed. As long as the Samyag-
Mithyātva Prakṛti is being removed, the being remains in the state of twenty-
seven Prakṛtis. Therefore, the duration of the twenty-seven Prakṛti state is
said to be one asamkhyeya part of a palya.  When the Samyag-Mithyātva Prakṛti is
removed from the twenty-seven Prakṛti state by the process of removal, the state
of twenty-six Prakṛtis remains. This state also belongs to the Mithyādṛṣṭi
being. From the perspective of time, there are three possibilities for this
state: 1. Anadi-Ananta, 2. Anadi-Santa, 3. Sadi-Santa. Out of these, the Anadi-
Ananta possibility is expected for Abhavya beings, because their thirty-six
Prakṛti state has no beginning or end. The Anadi-Santa possibility is found in
Bhavyas. Because the Anadi Mithyādṛṣṭi Bhavyas have a beginningless twenty-six
Prakṛti state, but when they attain Samyaktvā...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa bhAga kAla ke dvArA samyaktva kI ulanA karake 27 prakRtiyoM
kI sattA vAlA huaa| isa prakAra 28 prakRtika sattAsthAna kA utkRSTa kAla palya
ke tIna asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga adhika 132 sAgara prApta hotA hai| isa prakAra se
kucha matabhinnatAoM kA mohanIya karma ke sattAIsa prakRtikA Adi zeSa karate
haiM  /  194 saMketa karane ke bAda sattAsthAnoM ko spaSTa ukta aTThAIsa
prakRtika sattAsthAna meM se samyaktva prakRti kI uvalanA ho jAne para sattAIsa
prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai| yaha sthAna mithyAdRSTi aura midhyAdRSTi ko hotA
hai tathA isakA kAla palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa hai  /  isakA kAraNa
yaha hai ki samyaktva prakRti kI uvalanA ho jAne ke pazcAt samyagmithyAtva
prakRti kI udbalanA meM palya kA asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga kAla lagatA hai aura jaba
taka samya mithyAtva prakRti kI ubalanA hotI rahatI hai taba taka vaha jIva
sattAIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna vAlA rahatA hai  /  isIliye sattAIsa prakRtika
sattAsthAna kA kAla palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa batAyA hai  /  sattAIsa
prakRtika sattAsthAna meM se ubalanA dvArA samyam - mithyAtva prakRti ko ghaTA
dene para chabbIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai  /  yaha sthAna bhI
mithyAdRSTi jIva ko hotA hai  /  kAla kI dRSTi se isa sthAna ke tIna vikalpa
hai- 1. anAdi-ananta, 2 anAdi- sAnta, 3. sAdi sAnta  /  inameM se anAdi-ananta
vikalpa abhavyoM kI apekSA hai, kyoMki unake chatrIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna kA
Adi aura anta nahIM pAyA jAtA hai  /  anAdi-sAnta bikalpa bhavyoM ke pAyA jAtA
hai  /  kyoMki anAdi mithyAdRSTi bhavya jIva ke chabbIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna
Adi rahita avazya haiM, lekina jaba vaha samyaktva prApta kara letA hai

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixth karma-graya, then, is seen as the end of this state. The Sadi-Sant
alternative is the Sadi Mithyaishti of the Jiva. Because the Sadi Mithyaishti
Jiva, who has twenty-five natural states, has attained the twenty-six natural
states by the agitation of Samyaktv and Samyamithyatv, the destruction of this
twenty-six natural state is seen again.  Of the three alternatives of the
twenty-six natural states, the Sadi-Sant alternative has the shortest duration
of Antarmuhurt and the longest duration of Deshona Aparth Pudgal Paravart. This
is how it manifests: The Jiva who has attained the twenty-six natural states and
has attained Samyaktv by Vikaran in Antarmur, and has become twenty-eight
natural states again, attains the shortest duration of Antarmuhurt. And any
Anadi Mithyadrishti Jiva who has attained Upsham Samyaktv and has gone into
Mithyatv, has attained the twenty-six natural states by the agitation of
Samyaktv and Samyamithyatv through the time of an uncountable part of Paly. He
remains Mithyadrishti until the time of the remaining Aparth Pudgal Paravart,
but when the time remaining to stay in the world is Antarmuhurt, he becomes
Samyagdristi again. Thus, the longest duration of the twenty-six natural states
is an uncountable part of Paly, less than Aparth Pudgal Paravart.  When the four
Kashayas of Anantanubandhi are disjoined from the twenty-eight natural states of
Mohaniya Karma, the twenty-four natural states are attained. This state is found
from the third to the eleventh Gunasthan. Its shortest duration is Antarmuhurt
and its longest duration is one hundred and thirty-two Sagars. The shortest
duration is attained when the Jiva has disjoined the four Anantanubandhi
Kashayas and attained the twenty-four natural states.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrAya taba usake isa sthAna kA anta dekhA jAtA hai| sAdi-sAnta
vikalpa sAdi mithyAiSTi jIva ke hotA hai| kyoMki aDhAIsa prakRtika sattA vAle
jisa sAdi mithyASTi jIva ne sabhyaktva aura samyamithyAtva kI udvalanA karake
chabbIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna ko prApta kiyA hai, usake isa chabbIsa prakRtika
sattAsthAna kA puna: nAza dekhA jAtA hai  /  chabbIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna ke
kAla ke ukta tIna vikalpoM meM se sAdi-sAnta vikalpa kA jaghanyakAla
antarmuharta aura utkRSTakAla dezona apArtha pudgala parAvarta hai| jo isa
prakAra phalita hotA hai-jo chabbIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna ko prApta kara lene
ke bAda vikaraNa dvArA antarmurane meM samyaktva ko prApta karake puna: aTThAIsa
prakRtiyoM kI sattA vAlA ho gayA, usake ukta sthAna kA jaghanyakAla antarmuhUrta
prApta hotA hai tathA koI anAdi mithyAdRSTi jIva upazama samyaktva ko prApta huA
aura mithyAtva meM jAkara usane palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa kAla ke
dvArA samyaktva aura samyagamithyAtva kI udbalanA karake chabbIsa prakRtiyoM ke
sattva ko prApta kiyA, punaH vaha zeSa apArtha pugala parAvarta kAla taka
mithyAdRSTi rahA kintu jaba saMsAra meM rahane kA kAla antarmuhUrta zeSa rahA
taba puna: vaha samyagdRSTi ho gayA to isa prakAra chabbIsa prakRtika
sattAsthAna kA utkRSTakAla palya kA asaMkhyAtavAM bhAga kama apArSa pudgala
parAvarta pramANa prApta hotA hai| mohanIya karma kI aTThAIsa prakRtiyoM meM se
anantAnubandhI kaSAya catuSka kI visaMyojanA ho jAne para caubIsa prakRtika
sattAsthAna prApta hotA hai  /  yaha sthAna tIsare se lekara gyArahaveM
guNasthAna taka pAyA jAtA hai| isakA jaghanyakAla antarmuhUrta aura utkRSTakAla
eka sau battIsa sAgara hai| jadhanyakAla taba prApta hotA hai jaba jIva ne
anantAnubandhI catuSka kI visaMyojanA karake caubIsa prakRtika sattA

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If a being attains the **Saptaatika** stage and destroys **Mithyatva** within
the shortest possible time, which is an **Antarmuhurta**, then the shortest
duration of their **Twenty-four Natural States of Existence** is also
**Antarmuhurta**. After the **dissociation of the Infinitely Connected**
(Anantanubandhi), a **Vedak** with **Samyagdristi** remains in **Samyaktva** for
66 **Sagars** (oceans of time), then becomes **Samyamihyadristi** for an
**Antarmuhurta**, and then again remains in **Samyagdristi** for 66 **Sagars**.
Subsequently, **Mithyatva** is destroyed. Thus, the total time from the
**dissociation of the Infinitely Connected** to the destruction of **Mithyatva**
is 132 **Sagars**. Therefore, the longest duration of the **Twenty-four Natural
States of Existence** is said to be 132 **Sagars**.  After the destruction of
**Mithyatva**, there are **Twenty-three Natural States of Existence**, which are
found from the fourth to the seventh **Gunasthanas**. The shortest and longest
duration of this stage is **Antarmuhurta** because the destruction of
**Samyamihyadristi** takes place within **Antarmuhurta**.  After the destruction
of **Samyamihyadristi**, there are **Twenty-two Natural States of Existence**.
This stage is also found from the fourth to the seventh **Gunasthanas**. Its
shortest and longest duration is **Antarmuhurta** because the destruction of
**Samyaktva** takes this much time.  After the destruction of **Samyaktva** and
the **Mohaniya** nature, there are **Twenty-one Natural States of Existence**.
This stage is found from the fourth to the eleventh **Gunasthanas**. Its
shortest duration is **Antarmuhurta** and the longest duration is **Sadhik Tetis
Sagars**. The shortest duration is considered **Antarmuhurta** because a
**Kshayik Samyagdarshan** (one who has destroyed the karmas and attained
liberation) ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa sthAna prApta kiyA aura sabase jaghanya antarmuhUrta kAla
ke bhItara mithyAtva kA kSaya kara detA hai to usake caubIsa prakRtika
sattAsthAna kA jaghanyakAla antarmuhUrta dekhA jAtA hai tathA anantAnubaMdhI kI
visaMyojanA karane ke bAda jo vedaka samyagdRSTi 66 sAgara taka vedaka
(kSAyopazamika) samyaktva ke sAtha rahA, phira antarmuhUrta ke liye
samyamithyAdRSTi huA aura isake bAda puna: 66 sAgara kAla taka vedaka
samyagdRSTi rahA  /  anantara mithyAtva kI kSapaNA kI  /  isa prakAra
anantAnubandhI kI visaMyojanA hone ke samaya se lekara mithyAtva kI kSapaNA hone
taka ke kAla' kA yoga eka sau battIsa sAgara hotA hai| isIliye caubIsa prakRtika
sattAsthAna kA utkRSTakAla eka sau battIsa sAgara batAyA hai| caubIsa prakRtika
sattAsthAna meM se mithyAtva ke kSaya ho jAne para teIsa pratika satAsthAna hotA
hai aura yaha sthAna cauthe se lekara sAtaveM guNasthAna taka pAyA jAtA hai|
samyagamithyAtva kI kSapaNA kA jaghanya aura utkRSTa kAla antamahata hone se isa
sthAna kA jaghanya va utkRSTa kAla bhI antarmuhUrta pramANa hai| teIsa prakRtika
sattAsthAna meM se samyagamithyAtva ke kSaya ho jAne se bAIsa prakRtika
sattAsthAna hotA hai  /  yaha sthAna bhI cauthe se lekara sAtaveM guNasthAna
taka pAyA jAtA hai| isakA jaghanya aura utkRSTa kAla antarmuhUrta pramANa hai|
kyoMki samyaktva kI kSapaNA meM itanA kAla lagatA hai| bAIsa prakRtika
sattAsthAna meM se samyaktva mohanIya prakRti kA kSaya ho jAne para ikkIsa
prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai  /  yaha cauthe se lekara gyArahaveM guNasthAna
taka pAyA jAtA hai  /  isakA jaghanyakAla antarmuhUrta aura utkRSTakAla sAdhika
tetIsa sAgara pramANa hai  /  jaghanyakAla antarmuhUrta isaliye mAnA jAtA hai ki
kSAyika samyagdarzana ko

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  1.  I Sixth Karmagranth 81  It is possible to attain the क्षपक
श्रेणी and destroy the eight middle कषायों within the time of an अन्तर्मुहूर्त.
The उत्कृष्टकाल for this is thirty-three सागर because the जीव can remain in the
twenty-one प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान for that duration.  Of the twenty-one प्रकृतिक
सत्तास्थान, the four अप्रत्याख्यानावरण and four प्रत्याख्यानावरण, these eight
प्रकृति are destroyed, resulting in thirteen प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान. This is
attained in the ninth गुणस्थान of the क्षपक श्रेणी. Its जघन्य and उत्कृष्ट time
is an अन्तर्मुहूर्त. This is because it takes an अन्तर्मुहूर्त to attain twelve
प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान from thirteen प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान.  From these thirteen
प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान, when the नपुंसक वेद is destroyed, twelve प्रकृतिक
सत्तास्थान is attained. This is also attained in the ninth गुणस्थान and its
जघन्य and उत्कृष्ट time is an अन्तर्मुहूर्त. This is because it takes an
अन्तर्मुहूर्त to attain eleven प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान from twelve प्रकृतिक
सत्तास्थान.  A जीव who ascends to the क्षपक श्रेणी with the उदय of नपुंसक वेद,
experiences the क्षपणा of नपुंसक वेद along with the destruction of स्त्रीवेद.
Therefore, such a जीव does not attain twelve प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान. For a जीव who
has attained twelve प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान through the destruction of नपुंसक वेद,
the destruction of स्त्रीवेद results in eleven प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान. This is
attained in the ninth गुणस्थान. Its जघन्य and उत्कृष्ट time is an अन्तर्मुहूर्त.
This is because it takes an अन्तर्मुहूर्त for the destruction of the six
नोकषायों like हास्य.  From eleven प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान, the destruction of the
six नोकषायों results in five प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान. Its जघन्य and उत्कृष्ट time
is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 I SaSTha karmagranya 81 prApta karake antarmuhUrta kAla ke bhItara kSapaka
zreNI para car3hakara madhya kI ATha kaSAyoM kA kSaya honA sambhava hai  /
utkRSTakAla sAdhika tetIsa sAgara isaliye hai ki ukta samayapramANa taka jIva
ikkIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna ke sAtha raha sakatA hai  /  ikkIsa prakRtika
sattAsthAna meM se apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa catuSka aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa catuSka,
ina ATha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya ho jAne para teraha prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai
/  yaha sthAna kSapaka zreNI ke nauveM guNasthAna meM prApta hotA hai  /  isakA
jaghanya aura utkRSTa kAla antarmuhUrta pramANa hai  /  kyoMki teraha prakRtika
sattAsthAna se bAraha prakRtika sattAsthAna prApta karane meM antarmuhUrta kAla
lagatA hai  / . isa teraha prakRtika sattAsthAna meM se napuMsaka veda ke kSaya
ho jAne para bAraha prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai  /  yaha bhI nauveM
guNasthAna meM prApta hotA hai aura isakA jaghanya aura utkRSTa kAla
antarmuhUrta hai| kyoMki bAraha prakRtika sattAsthAna se gyAraha prakRtika
sattAsthAna ke prApta hone meM antarmuhUrta kAla lagatA hai| jo jIva napuMsaka
veda ke udaya ke sAtha kSapaka zreNI para car3hatA hai, usake napuMsaka veda kI
kSapaNA ke sAtha strIveda kA bhI kSaya hotA hai  /  ana. aise jIva ke bAraha
prakRtika sattAsthAna nahIM pAyA jAtA hai  /  jisane napuMsaka veda ke kSaya se
bAraha prakRtika sattAsthAna prApta kiyA, usake strIveda kA kSaya ho jAne para
gyAraha prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai| isakI prApti nauveM guNasthAna meM hotI
hai| isakA jaghanya va utkRSTa kAla antarmuhUrta pramANa hai| kyoMki hAsyAdi
chaha nokaSAyoM ke kSaya hone meM antarmuhUrta samaya lagatA hai  /  gyAraha
prakRtika sattAsthAna se chaha nokaSAyoM ke kSaya ho jAne para pAMca prakRtika
sattAsthAna hotA hai| isakA jaghanya aura utkRSTa kAla

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seventies ## 82  Two times less two Avali is the measure.
Because when six Nokshayas are destroyed, the Sattva of the Purushaveda is seen
for two times less two Avali time. After that, when the Purushaveda is
destroyed, there are four Prakrutis, and when the Sanjwalan Kosa is destroyed
from the four Prakrutis, there are three Prakrutis, and when the Sanjwalan Mana
is destroyed from the three Prakrutis, there are two Prakrutis, which is the
Sattaasthan. These are attained in the ninth Gunasthan. Their inferior and
superior time is Antarmuhurt.  From the two Prakrutis Sattaasthan, when the
Sanjwalan Maya is destroyed, there is one Prakruti Sattaasthan. This is attained
in the ninth and tenth Gunasthan, and its time is inferior and superior
Antarmuhurt.  The order of the aforementioned twenty-eight Prakrutis and fifteen
Sattaasthan of the Mohaniya Karma has been briefly explained by Acharya
Malayagiri. Due to its usefulness, the aforementioned portion is presented here
in its original form:  "Seventeen Eighty Twenty. Then, when Samyaksya is
ignited, ninety. Then, when Samyaksya is in the middle, eighty-six, when it is
destroyed, eighty-two. Twenty-eight, when the eight Karmas are destroyed,
twenty. Then, when Mithyatva is destroyed, twenty-three. Then, when
Samyagmithyatva is destroyed, twenty-two. Then, when Samyaksya is destroyed,
twenty-one. Then, in the eight Pratyakhyana, Pratyakhyana Avarana, and Sanjna,
in the stories, in the Shroṇa, thirteen. Then, when Napumsaka is destroyed,
twelve. Then, when Striveda is destroyed, eleven. Then, when six Nokshayas are
destroyed, five. Then, when Purushaveda is destroyed, four. Then, when Sankalan
Kosa is destroyed, three. Then, when Sanvalan Mana is destroyed, two. Then, when
Sanjwalan Maya is destroyed, one Prakruti remains."  The opinion of the
Digambara literature regarding the owner and time of the Sattaasthan is the same
as the opinion of the Shwetambara Karmagranthik literature. Digambara Karma
Sahithya 1, Sapttatika Prakaran Tika, page 163.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa 82 do samaya kama do AvalI pramANa hai  /  kyoMki chaha
nokaSAyoM ke kSaya hone para puruSaveda kA do samaya kama do AvalI kAla taka
sattva dekhA jAtA hai  /  isake bAda puruSaveda kA kSaya ho jAne se cAra
prakRtika, cAra prakRtika meM se saMjvalana koSa kA dAya hone para tIna
prakRtika aura tona prakRtika meM se saMjvalana mAna kA kSaya ho jAne para do
prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai| ye nauveM guNasthAna meM prApta hote haiM  /
inakA jaghanya aura utkRSTa kAla antarmuhUrta hai  /  do prakRtika sattAsthAna
meM se saMjvalana mAyA kA kSaya hone para eka prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai|
yaha nauveM aura dasaveM guNasthAna meM prApta hotA hai tathA isakA kAla
jaghanya va utkRSTa antarmuhUrta hai  /  mohanIya karma ke ukta aTThAIsa
prakRtika Adi pandraha sattAsthAnoM kA krama AcArya malayagiri ne saMkSepa meM
batalAyA hai| upayogI hone se ukta aMza yahA~ avikala rUpa meM prastuta karate
haiM 'satra epTe sarvaproiSTAviMzatiH  /  tataH samyakzve javalite zatiH  /
tato'pi sasyammadhyAtve udakhalite SaDvaMzatiH, anAvimiSyAvizatiH  /
aSTAviMzatisatkarmaNo'nantAnubandhicatuSTayakSa ye viMzatiH  /  tato'pi
midhyAtvaM kSapite trayoviMzatiH  /  tato'pi samyagmithyAtve apite dvAviMzatiH
/  tataH samyaksye kSapite ekavizatiH  /
tato'STasvapratyAkhyAnapratyAkhyAnAvaraNasaMjJeSu kathAyeSu zroNeSu tryodshH|
tato napuMsaka kSapite dvAdaza  /  tato'pi strIbede kSapite ekAdaza  /  tataH
SaTsu nokadAyeSu kSINeSu paJca  /  tato'pi puruSavede kSINaM catastraH  /
tato'pi saMkalanako kSapite titraH  /  tato'pi saMvalanamA kSapite  /  tato'pi
saMjvalana mAyAyaH kSapitAyAmekA prakRtiH satoti  /  ' satAsthAnoM ke svAmI aura
kAla sambandhI digambara sAhitya kA mata zvetAmbara kArmegranthika mata ke
samAna hI digambara karmasAhitya 1 saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 163

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Firm Granth  The Sixth Firm Granth also mentions fifteen Satta Sthana
(states of existence) of the Mohaniya Karma (karma that can be destroyed). Both
literatures are mostly similar regarding their owners and time. However, there
are different opinions in Digambar literature regarding some places, which are
being presented for the information of the readers. The opinion of Digambar
literature regarding the time of twenty-eight natural Satta Sthana has been
mentioned earlier. The remaining places are being explained here.  In Shwetambar
literature, the owner of twenty-seven natural Satta Sthana is mentioned as
Mithyadrishti (false-sighted) and Samyagmiyadrishti (right-sighted) Jiva (soul).
But according to the Digambar tradition, the owner of this place in the Chuni of
Kashayaprabhut is mentioned as only Mithyadrishti Jiva.  The question arises:
"How long do these twenty-seven states of existence last?" The commentary on the
45th chapter of the Sapta Tika Sangrah of Panchasangrah mentions the time of
twenty-seven natural Satta Sthana as an immeasurable part of a Paly (a very long
time). But there is an indication in Jayadhwala that the owner of twenty-seven
natural Satta Sthana can also be Upshama Samyagdrishti (a soul who has attained
the state of liberation). This is also confirmed by the Chuni of Kashayaprabhut.
Accordingly, the minimum time of twenty-seven natural Satta Sthana becomes one
time. Because, in the second time after attaining twenty-seven natural Satta
Sthana, the one who has attained Upshama Samyaktva (liberation) is seen to have
twenty-seven natural Satta Sthana for only one time.  In Shwetambar literature,
the minimum time of twenty-six natural Satta Sthana from Sadi to Sant is
mentioned as Antarmuhurt (a very short time). But in the Purna of
Kashayaprabhut, the minimum time of the said place is mentioned as one time.
"What is the relationship between the time of these states of existence?" The
answer is: "It is as mentioned above."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha pharmagrantha meM bhI mohanIya karma ke adrAIsa prakRtika Adi pandraha
sattAsthAna mAne haiN| unake svAmI aura kAla ke bAre meM bhI donoM sAhitya meM
adhikatara samAnatA hai| lekina kucha sthAnoM ke bAre meM digambara sAhitya meM
bhinna mata dekhane meM AtA hai  /  jisako pAThakoM kI jAnakArI ke lie prastuta
kiyA jA rahA hai  /  _aTThAIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna ke kAla ke bAre meM
digambara sAhitya ke mata kA pUrva meM ullekha kiyA gayA hai| zeSa sthAnoM ke
bAre meM yahA~ batalAte haiN| zvetAmbara sAhitya meM sattAIsa prakRtika
sattAsthAna kA svAmI mithyAdRSTi aura samyagmiyyAdRSTi jIva ko batalAyA hai|
lekina digambara paramparA ke anusAra kaSAyaprAbhUta kI cUNi meM isa sthAna kA
svAmI mithyAdRSTi jIva hI batalAyA hai sattAdhIsAe bihattio ko hovi ?
misaaittttii| paMcasaMgraha ke saptatikA saMgraha kI mAthA 45 kI TIkA meM
sattAIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna kA kAla palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa
batalAyA hai  /  lekina jayadhavalA meM saMketa hai ki sattAIsa prakutiyoM kI
sattAvAlA bhI upazama samyAdRSTi ho sakatA hai| kaSAyaprAbhUta kI cUNi se bhI
isakI puSTi hotI hai  /  tadanusAra sattAIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna kA jaghanya
kAla eka samaya bhI bana jAtA hai| kyoMki mattAIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna ke
prApta hone ke dUsare samaya meM hI jisane upazama samyaktva ko prApta kara
liyA, usake sattAIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna eka samaya taka hI dekhA jAtA hai|
zvetAmbara sAhitya meM sAdi-sAnta chabbIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna kA jaghanya
kAla antarmuhUrta batAyA hai| lekina kaSAyaprAbhRta kI pUrNi meM ukta sthAna kA
jaghanya kAla eka samaya batAyA hai 'panyAsavihatI saMbadhira kAlAyo ? jahaNa
esao  / '

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The term "Saptaatika Prakarana" signifies that when a being is about to be
reborn, and the remaining time is less than an "Antarmuhurta" (a very short
period), the process of "Trikarana Kriya" (threefold action) begins. After
rebirth, the being attains "Upshama Samyaktv" (state of perfect knowledge) after
a certain period of time. The "Jghanya Kala" (minimum time) for the 26
"Prakrutik Satasthan" (natural states of existence) is one "Samaya" (a unit of
time).  The "Karm Granth" (text on karma) states that the "Utkrisht Kala"
(maximum time) for the 24 "Pravrutik Satasthan" (states of existence due to
karma) is 132 "Sagars" (a unit of time). However, the "Kshaya Prabhruta Chuni"
(a commentary) mentions that the "Utkrisht Kala" for the same states is 132
"Sagars" plus a little more.  The explanation for this is given in the
"Jayadhwala Tika" (a commentary) as follows: A being who has attained "Upshama
Samyaktv" and has completed the "Bisayojana" (process of understanding the
world) of "Ananta Anubandhi" (infinite karmic influences) remains in "Vedak
Samyaktv" (state of perfect knowledge) for 66 "Sagars". Then, for the remaining
"Antarmuhurta", the being remains in "Samyagmidhyahristi" (state of right
faith). Finally, the being experiences "Mithyatva" (falsehood). Thus, the total
time from the completion of "Bisayojana" of "Ananta Anubandhi" to the experience
of "Mithyatva" is 132 "Sagars" plus a little more.  Both traditions agree that
the "Jghanya Kala" for the 21 "Prakrutik Satasthan" is "Antarmuhurta" and the
"Utkrisht Kala" is 33 "Sagars". The "Kshaya Prabhruta Chuni" states:  "Ekkaisaa
Bihatti Kevachir Kalaado? Jahanen Antomuhutan, Upakassen Tettisan Sagarovamani
Sadireyaani."  The "Jayadhwala" explains this "Utkrisht Kala" as follows: A
"Samyagdristi" (person with perfect knowledge) who is a "Dev" (god) or a "Narak"
(hell being) dies and is reborn as a human being with a lifespan of one "Purva
Koti" (a unit of time). After eight years, the being experiences "Ant..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki sabhyasya' kI uddhalanA meM
antarmuhUrta kAla zeSa rahane para jo trikaraNa kriyA kA prArambha kara detA
hai, aura udvalanA hone ke bAda eka samaya kA antarAla dekara jo upazama
samyaktva ko prApta ho jAtA hai, usake chabbIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna kA
jaghanya kAla eka samaya prApta hotA hai| karmagrantha meM caubIsa pravRtika
sattAsthAna kA utkRSTa kAla eka sau battIsa sAgara batAyA hai, jabaki
kaSAyaprAbhRta kI cUNi meM ukta sthAna kA utkRSTa kAla sAdhika eka sau battIsa
sAgara batAyA hai 'ubIsavihattI keciraM kAlAdo ? jahaNeNa aMtomuhattaM,
ukkasseNa ghe chAbahisAgaroSamANi sAvireyANi  / ' isakA spaSTIkaraNa jayadhavalA
TIkA meM kiyA gayA hai ki upazama samyaktva ko prApta karake jisane
anantAnuvandhI kI bisayojanA kI  /  anantara chiyAsaTha sAgara kAla taka vedaka
samyaktva ke sAtha rahA, phira antarmuharta taka samyagamidhyAhRSTi rahA  /
anantara mithyAtva kI kSapaNA kii| isa prakAra anantAnubandhI vI visayojanA ho
cukAne ke samaya se lekara mithyAla kI kSapaNA hone taka ke kAla kA yoga sAdhika
eka sau battIsa sAgara hotA hai  /  _ ikkIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna kA
jaghanyakAla antarmuhUrta aura utkRSTa kAla sAdhika tetIsa sAgara donoM
paramparAoM meM samAna rUpa se mAnA hai  /  kaSAyaprAbhUta cUNi meM likhA hai
'ekkasIsAe bihattI kevaciraM kAlAdo ? jahaNeNa aMtomuhataM, upakasseNa tettIsaM
sAgarovamANi sAdireyANi  / ' isa utkRSTa kAla kA jayadhavalA meM spaSTIkaraNa
karate hue likhA hai ki koI samyagdRSTi deva yA nAraka mara kara eka pUrvakoTi
kI Ayu vAle manudhyoM meM utpanna huaa| anantara ATha varSa ke bAda anta

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth 85  In the final moments of his life, he attained क्षायिक
सम्यग्दर्शन. After death, he was reborn as a god in the thirty-three heavens,
where he lived for an entire lifespan. Upon completion of that lifespan, he was
reborn as a human in the first koti, where he lived for an entire lifespan with
the twenty-one types of सत्ता. In the final moments of his life, he ascended to
the क्षपक श्रेणि and attained the thirteen आदि सत्तास्थान. He experienced these
twenty-one types of सत्तास्थान for eight years, minus the final moments, plus
two पूर्वकोटि years, and the lifespan of the thirty-three heavens.  This is how
the Digambara literature explains the highest lifespan of the Teliy Sagar.  The
Shvetambara literature states that the shortest and longest duration of the
twelve types of सत्तास्थान is the final moments. However, the Digambara
literature states that the shortest duration of the twelve types of सत्तास्थान
is one moment. As mentioned in the कषायप्राभृत चूर्णि:  "How long is the time
for the वरि वारस विहत्ती? It is just one moment."  The Jayaghavla commentary
explains this as follows:  When a जीव ascends to the क्षपक श्रेणि due to the
rise of the नपुंसक वेद, in the final moments, all the good deeds of the
स्त्रीवेद and नपुंसक वेद are transferred to the पुरुषवेद. Subsequently, for one
moment, the जीव experiences the twelve types of सत्तास्थान, because the नपुंसक
वेद has not yet been destroyed.  Therefore, one should be aware of the
differences in opinion regarding the owners of certain सत्तास्थान and the
duration of time. This is a subject of curiosity for those who engage in
comparative studies.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 : ! SaSTha karmagrantha 85 muhUrta meM usane kSAyika samyagdarzana ko utpanna
kiyaa| phira Ayu ke anta meM mara kara vaha tetIsa sAgara ko Ayu vAle devoM meM
utpanna huaa| isake bAda tetIsa sAgara Ayu ko pUrA karake eka pUrvakoTi kI Ayu
vAle manuSyoM meM utpanna huA aura vahAM jIvana bhara ikkIsa prakRtiyoM kI sattA
ke sAtha rahakara jaba jIvana meM antarmuhUrta kAla zeSa rahA taba kSaka zreNi
para car3hakara teraha Adi sattAsthAnoM ko prApta huA  /  usake ATha varSa aura
antarmuhUrta kama do pUrvakoTi varSa adhika tetIsa sAgara kAla taka ikkIsa
prakRtika sattAsthAna pAyA jAtA hai  /  isa prakAra digambara sAhitya meM
sarvAdhika telIya sAgara pramANa kA spaSTIkaraNa kiyA gayA hai  /  zvetAmbara
sAhitya meM bAraha prakRtika sattAsthAna kA jaghanya aura utkRSTa kAla
antarmuhUrta batalAyA hai| jabaki digambara sAhitya meM bAraha prakRtika
sattAsthAna kA jaghanya kAla eka samaya batAyA hai  /  jaisA ki kaSAyaprAbhRta
cUrNi meM ullekha kiyA gayA hai vari vArasa vihattI kevaciraM kAlAdo ? jahaNaMNa
egasamao  /  isakI vyAkhyA jayaghavalA TIkA meM isa prakAra kI gaI hai ki
napuMsaka veda ke udaya se kSapaka zreNi para car3hA huA jIva uAnta samaya meM
strIveda aura napuMsaka veda ke saba satkarma kA puruSaveda rUpa meM saMkramaNa
kara detA hai aura tadanantara eka samaya ke lie bAraha prakRtika sattAsthAna
bAlA ho jAtA hai, kyoMki isa samaya napuMsaka beda kI udaya sthiti kA vinAza
nahIM hotA hai  /  isa prakAra se kucha sattAsthAnoM ke svAmI tathA samaya ke
bAre meM matabhinnatA jAnanA caahie| tulanAtmaka adhyayana karane vAloM ke liye
yaha jijJAsA kA viSaya hai  /

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Saptaatika Prakaran  **Description of the fifteen Satta-sthana of Mohaniya
Karma, along with their Guna-sthana and Kala:**  **86**  | Satta-sthana | Guna-
sthana | Kala | |---|---|---| | 25 | 1 to 11 | Jghanya Kala | | 27 | First and
Third | Antarmuhurta | | 26 | 1 | Ham Ka Asankhya Bhaag | | 24 | 3 to 11 |
Antarmuhurta | | 23 | 4 to 7 | Antarmuhurta | | 12 | 4 to 17 | 23 | | 21 | 4 to
11 | 13 | | 13 | 9th | 20 | | 12 | 11th | 12 | | 11 | " | " | | 4 | " | " | | 3
| " | " | | 2 | " | " | | 1 | " | " |  **Note:**  * "Jghanya Kala" refers to the
lowest type of time. * "Antarmuhurta" is a very short period of time. * "Ham Ka
Asankhya Bhaag" means an immeasurable part of a moment. * "Saavik 132 Sagar"
refers to a specific time period. * "Paly Ka Asankhyaatvaan Maag" means an
immeasurable part of a Paly (a unit of time). * "Deshon Apath Pu. Paravart"
refers to a specific time period. * "Saavik 33 Samra" refers to a specific time
period. * "Utkrushta Kala" refers to the highest type of time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa mohanIya karma ke pandraha sattAsthAnoM kA guNasthAna, kAla
sahita vivaraNa isa prakAra hai 86 sattA sthAna 25 27 26 24 23 12 21 13 12 11 4
3 2 1 guNasthAna 1 se 11 pahalA va tIsarA 1 3 se 11 4 se 7 4 se 17 4 se 11 vA~ "
" " ,, nn 11 " nau va reat jaghanya kAla antarmuhUrta hama kA asaM0 bhAga
antarmuhurta antarmuhUrta 23 J3 ny 20 12 " Men  " | sAdhika 132 sAgara palya kA
asaMkhyAtavAM mAga dezona apArtha pu0 parAvarta | 132 sAgara antarmuhUrta sAvika
33 samra antarmuhUtaM "P dI samaya kama do AvalI yo samaya kama do AvalI
antarmuhUrta antarmuhUrta 12 utkRSTakAla JS " A KHv

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1 Sixth Karma Grantha After describing the bondage and sthiti (status) places as
well as the udaya (rise) places in the reverse order of the arising of the
mohaniya karma, now they are describing the bhanga (destruction) and avaantara
(subsidiary) vikalpa (alternatives) of these. First, they are describing the
bandhasthana (places of bondage).  Chhabbaayos cha iggavos sattarase do do,
navabandha vi donni u ekkesakamao param bhangaa. || 14 ||  Meaning of words -
Chha: six, Bhaavee: twenty-two bandhasthanas, Chachaara: four, Iggavee: twenty-
one bandhasthanas, Sattarase: seventeen, Terase: thirteen bandhasthanas, Vo bo:
two-two, Navabandha: nine bandhasthanas, Thimee, Dollit: two alternatives,
Ekkesakamao: one by one, Ao: from this, Param: further, Bhangaa: destruction.  —
87 Gatha - There are six bhangas (destructions) of the twenty-two prakruti
bandhasthanas, four bhangas of the twenty-one prakruti bandhasthanas, two-two
bhangas of the seventeen and thirteen prakruti bandhasthanas, and also two
bhangas of the nine prakruti bandhasthanas. Further, there is one bhanga each of
the five and other prakruti bandhasthanas.  Visheshaartha - This gatha indicates
the number of possible bhangas (destructions) in each of the bandhasthanas
(places of bondage) of the mohaniya karma.  Earlier, ten bandhasthanas of the
mohaniya karma were described - twenty-two, twenty-one, seventeen, thirteen,
nine, five, four, three, two, and one prakruti. Here, while describing the
bhanga-vikalpa (alternatives of destruction) of each of these places, first the
six bhangas of the twenty-two prakruti bandhasthana are stated - Chhabbaavise.
Subsequently, the four bhangas of the twenty-one prakruti bandhasthana, the two
bhangas of the seventeen prakruti bandhasthana, and the two bhangas of the
thirteen prakruti bandhasthana are described.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 SaSTha karma grantha isa prakAra mohanIya karma ke pazcAdAnupUrvI se bandha
aura sattA sthAnoM tathA pUrvAnupUrvI se udayasthAnoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba
inake bhaMga aura avAntara vikalpoM kA nirdeza karate haiN| sabase pahale
bandhasthAnoM kA nirUpaNa karate haiN| chabAyosa ca igavosa sattarasa tarase do
do  /  navabaMdha vi donni u ekkeSakamao paraM bhaMgA || 14 || zabdArtha -cha
chaha, bdhAvI bAIsa ke bandhasthAna ke, cacacAra, igavI se ikkIsa ke
bandhasthAna ke, lasarata - sabaha ke baMdhasthAna ke serale - teraha ke
baMghasthAna ke vo bo--do-do, navabaMdhaNenI ke bandhasthAna ke, thimI, dolita -
do vikalpa, ekkeSakaeka-eka, ao - isase, paraM- Age, bhaMgA-maMga  /  -- 87 gAyA
- bAIsa prakRtika bandhasthAna ke chaha, ikkIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke cAra,
satraha aura teraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke do-do, nau prakRtika baMdhasthAna
ke bhI do bhaMga haiM  /  isake Age pA~ca prakRtika Adi baMdhasthAnoM meM se
pratyeka kA eka-eka bhaMga hai  /  vizeSArtha - isa gAthA meM mohanIya karma ke
baMdhasthAnoM meM se pratyeka sthAna ke yathAsaMbhava banane vAle bhaMgoM kI
saMkhyA kA nirdeza kiyA hai| pUrva meM mohanIya karma ke bAIsa, ikkIsa, satraha,
teraha, nau, pA~ca, cAra, tIna, do aura eka prakRtika, isa prakAra se dasa
baMdhasthAna batalAye haiM  /  unameM se yahA~ pratyeka sthAna ke hone vAle
bhaMga-vikalpoM ko batalAte hue sarvaprathama bAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke
chaha bhaMga batalAye haiM - chabbAvIse  /  anantara kramazaH ikkIsa prakRtika
baMdhasthAna ke cAra bhaMga, saha prakRtika baMsthAna ke do bhaMga, teraha
prakRtika baMdhasthAna

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Saptatikaprakarana  There are two types of no-natural bondage-places, one type
of five natural bondage-places, one type of four natural bondage-places, one
type of three natural bondage-places, one type of two natural bondage-places,
and one type of one natural bondage-place. The explanation of this is given
below.  There are six types in the twenty-two natural bondage-places, which are:
Mithyatva, sixteen Kashayas, any one of the three Vedas, the pair of Hāsya-Rati
and the pair of Shoka-Arati, and any one of these two pairs. Here, the two types
are: one with the pair of Hāsya-Rati, and the other with the pair of Arati-
Shoka. These two types are also obtained by the options of the three Vedas, so
by multiplying 2 by 3, we get 6 types.  By removing Mithyatva from the said
twenty-two natural bondage-places, there are twenty-one natural bondage-places.
This is because the bondage of the Napuṃsaka Veda occurs during the rise of
Mithyatva, and the Sāsādana Right-Believer does not have the rise of Mithyatva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa ke do bhaMga, no prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke do bhaMga, pA~ca
prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA eka bhaMga, cAra prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA eka bhaGga,
tIna prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA eka bhaMga, do prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA eka
bhaMga aura eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA eka bhaMga hotA hai  /  jisakA
spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA jA rahA hai  /  56 bAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM
mithyAtva, solaha kaSAya, tIna vedoM meM se koI eka veda, hAsya-rati yugala aura
zoka arati yugala, ina do yugaloM meM se koI eka yugala aura kA, ina prakRtiyoM
kA grahaNa hotA hai  /  yahA~ chaha bhaMga hote haiM  /  jo isa prakAra haiM ki
hAsya- rati yugala aura zoka arati yugala, ina do yugaloM meM se kisI eka yugala
ko milAne se bAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai  /  ataH ye do bhaMga hue|
eka bhaMga hAsya- rati yugala sahita vAlA aura dUsarA bhaMga arati-zoka yugala
sahita vAlA ye donoM bhaMga bhI tInoM vedoM ke vikalpa se prApta hote haiM, ataH
do ko tIna se guNita kara dene para chaha bhaMga ho jAte haiN| ukta bAIsa
prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM se mithyAtva ko ghaTA dene para ikkIsa prakRtika
baMdhasthAna hotA hai  /  kyoMki napuMsaka veda kA baMtra mithyAtva ke udayakAla
meM hotA hai aura sAsAdana samyagdRSTi ko mithyAtva kA udaya nahIM hotA hai  /
strIveda aura puruSaveda, ina do 1 khambAdIse cadu igivIse do ho havaMti
chaTThotti ekkka padomaMgo baMdhaTThANesu mohassa || -go0 karmakANDa, gA0 467
hrAsaraiarailogANa baMdhayA ANavaM duhA sacce " beyavimajjatA puNa dugaGgavIsA
chahA cahA || paMcasaMgraha saptatikA, gA0 20

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  One should say one of the Vedas. Therefore, here,
multiplying two pairs by two Vedas results in four bhangas.  Out of twenty-one
natural bandha sthana, subtracting the Anantanubandhi Chatushk results in
seventeen prakrutik bandha sthana. The bound beings in this are the third and
fourth gunasthana beings. Since the Anantanubandhi kshaya does not arise, they
do not have the bandha of Striveda. Therefore, here, there are two bhangas from
the alternative of the Hasyarati Mugal and Shokarati pairs.  There are also two
bhangas in thirteen natural bandha sthana. This bandha sthana is obtained by
reducing the Apratyakhyanavaran kshaya Chatushk from seventeen natural bandha
sthana. Here, only the bandha of Puspalet occurs, therefore, two bhangas are
obtained due to the two pairs.  Reducing the Pratyakhyanavaran Chatushk from
thirteen natural bandha sthana results in nine natural bandha sthana. This place
is found in the sixth, seventh, and eighth - Pramattasanyata, Apramattasanayata,
and Apurvakaran gunasthana. Here, there is a special feature that the bandha of
Arati and Shoka occurs only up to the Pramattasanyata gunasthana, not beyond.
Therefore, in the Pramattasanyata gunasthana, there are two bhangas of this
place, which are mentioned earlier, and in the Apramattasanayata and
Apurvakaran, only one bhang of Hasyarati form is found.  Five natural bandha
sthana are obtained by reducing Hasy, Rati, Bhaya, Jugupsa, these four prakritis
from the aforementioned nine natural bandha sthana. Here, one should see two
bhangas for the Navabandhaka in Pramattasanyata, and only one bhang in
Apramattasanayata and Apurvakaran. This is because the bandha of Arati-Shoka
form Mugal is possible there.  - Saptaatika Prakaran Tika, Page 164

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha vedoM meM se koI eka veda kahanA cAhie  /  ataH yahA~ do
yugaloM ko do vedoM se guNita kara dene para cAra bhaMga hote haiN| ikkIsa
prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM se anantAnubaMdhI catuSka ko ghaTA dene para satraha
prakulika baMghasthAna hotA hai| isake bandhaka tIsare aura cauthe guNasthAnavI
jIva haiN| anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya kA udaya nahIM hone se inako strIveda kA baMdha
nahIM hotA hai| ataH yahA~ hAsya-rati mugala aura zoka-arati yugala, ina do
yugaloM ke vikalpa se do bhaMga hote haiN| teraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM bhI
do bhaMga hote haiN| yaha baMdhasthAna satraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM se
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka ke kama karane de pAta hotA hai  /  yahA~
puspaleTa kA hI baMdha hotA hai ata: do gugaloM ke nimitta se do hI bhaMga
prApta hote haiN| teraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM se pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
catuSka ke kama karane para nau prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai| yaha sthAna
chaThe, sAtaveM aura AThave-pramattasaMyata, apramattasaMyata aura apUrvakaraNa-
guNasthAna meM pAyA jAtA hai  /  yahA~ itanI vizeSatA hai ki arati aura zoka kA
baMdha pramattasaMyata guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai, Age nhiiN| ata:
pramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM isa sthAna ke do bhaMga hote haiM, jo pUrvokta
haiM tathA apramattasaMyata aura apUrvakaraNa meM hAsya-rati rUpa eka hI bhaMga
pAyA jAtA hai| pA~ca prakRtika baMdhasthAna ukta nau prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM
se hAsya, rati, bhaya, jugupsA, ina cAra prakRtiyoM ko kama karane se hotA hai
/  yahA~ 1 navabaMdhake vo bhaMgI tau ca pramatte dvApi dRSTavyo,
apramattApUrvakaraNayostveka eva maMga: tatrArati-zokarUpasya mugalasya
bandhAsammavAt  /  -saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 164

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Sevenfold  There is only one type of destruction (of
karma). This is because there are no alternatives for the natures that bind.
Similarly, due to the lack of alternatives for the binding natures, there is
only one type of destruction in the four, three, two, and one-natured binding
places - **ekkekkam-o par-am bhang-a**.  **60**  Thus, the total number of
destructions of the ten binding places of mohaniya karma is 6+4+2+2+2+1+1+1+1+1
= 21.  After explaining the ten binding places of mohaniya karma, the next three
verses describe the arising places (udayasthan) that are attained in each of
these binding places.  **Arising Places in the Binding Places of Mohaniya
Karma**  **115**  **Bas bavi-se nav ikkayo-s sattai upay-a-thanai. Chaai nav
sattare-se tere panchai atthav.**  **1**  **Vattari-ma nav-bandhage-su unko-s
satt uday-amsa. Panch-vi-bandhage pun ubo-o donh-am muney-abhyo.**  **17**
**It-to ubandhai is-ke-sh-kuvaya havati savye vi. Bandho-varame vi taha uday-a-
bha-ve vi ya hoj-ja.**  **Word Meanings:**  * **Sad-as** - up to seven * **Vagh-
ole** - in the twenty-two natural binding places * **Tav** - up to nine *
**Ikkavi-s** - in the twenty-one natural binding places * **Sasai** - from seven
* **Uday-a-thanai** - arising places * **Chaai nav** - from six to nine * **Sat-
tare-se** - in the seventeen natural binding places * **Tere** - in the thirteen
natural binding places * **Panchai** - from five * **Atthav** - up to eight
**-**  **-**  **Dhat-tari-ma-ah** - from four to nine natural binding places,
**uf-ko-s** - excellent, **satt** - up to seven, **uday-amsa** - arising places,
**panch-ni-bandh** - in the five natural binding places, **pun** - also, **udo**
- arising, **boh-am** - of two natures, **pun-e** - should be known.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa eka hI bhaMga hotA hai  /  kyoMki isameM baMdhane vAlI
prakRtiyoM ke vikalpa nahIM haiN| isI prakAra baMdhane vAlI prakRtiyoM ke
vikalpa nahIM hone se cAra, tIna, dI aura eka prakRtika baMdhasthAnoM meM bhI
eka-eka hI vikalpa hotA hai-- ekkekkamao paraM bhNgaa| 60 isa prakAra mohanIya
karma ke dasa baMdhasthAnoM ke kula bhaMga 6+4+ 2+2+2+1+1+1+1+1= 21 hote haiM  /
mohanIya karma ke dasa baMdhasthAnoM kA nirdeza karane ke bAda aba Age kI tIna
gAthAoM meM ina baMdhasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM prApta hone vAle udayasthAnoM
ko batalAte haiM  /  mohanIya karma ke baMdhasthAnoM meM udayasthAna basa bAvIse
nava ikkayosa sattAi upayaThANAI  /  chAI nava sattarase tere paMcAi aTThava  //
115  //  vattArimA navabaMdhagesu unakosa satta udayaMsA  /  paMcavihabaMdhage
puNa ubao donhaM muNeyabyo  // 1 //  itto ubaMdhAI iSakeSakuvayA havati savye vi
/  baMdhovarame vi tahA udayAbhAve vi yA hojjA  // 17 //  zabdArtha - sadasa
paryanta, vAghole- bAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM, tava nau taka, ikkavIsa -
ikkIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM, sasAi - sAta se lekara, udayaThANAI -
udayasthAna, chAI nava chaha se nau taka, satarase satraha prakRtika baMbasthAna
meM, tere teraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM paMcAi-- pAMca se lekara aTThava -
ATha taka  /  - - dhattArimAha cAra se lekara navayaMge nau prakRtika baMdha
sthAnoM meM, uphkosa - utkRSTa, satta-sAta taka, udayaMsAudayasthAna, paMca
nibaMdha- pA~ca prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM, puNa-- tathA, udo-udaya, bohaM do
prakRti kA, puNe - jAnanA cAhie  /  TTE

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Pratya  **Iso** - After this, in the four etc. (4, 3, 2, 1)
natural bondage places, **iccudiya** - with the arising of one by one nature,
**havanti** - there are, **sabjevi** - in the absence of all bondage, **vibhi**,
**sahar** in the same way, **uvayabhave** - in the absence of arising, **vi-
mi**, **wa** - alternative, **hojja** - there are.  **Gatha** - In twenty-two
natural bondage places, from seven to ten, in twenty-one natural bondage places,
from seven to nine, in seventeen natural bondage places, from six to nine, and
in thirteen natural bondage places, from five to eight -  In nine natural
bondage places, from four to the excellent seven natures, there are four arising
places, and in five natural bondage places, one should know the arising of two
natures.  After this (after five natural bondage places), in four etc. (4, 3, 2,
1) natural bondage places, there is the arising of one nature. In the absence of
bondage, in the same way, there is the arising of one nature. In the absence of
arising, the existence of the mohaniya is by alternative.  **Vishesharth** -
Previously, twenty-two, twenty-one etc. natural ten bondage places of mohaniya
karma have been explained. Here, in three gatha, it has been clarified how many
natures arise in each of the said places.  First, while stating the arising
places in twenty-two natural bondage places, it has been said - seven natural,
eight natural, nine natural, and ten natural, these are four arising places.
Their explanation is being done below.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 SaSTha karma pratya iso-- isake bAda cacayaMbAI-cAra Adi prakRtika
baMdhasthAnoM meM, ikkudayA - eka eka prakRti ke udaya vAle, havaMti - hote
haiM, sabjevi - sabhI aMdhovarame-baMdha ke abhAva meM, vibhI, sahara usI
prakAra, uvayAbhAve - - udaya ke abhAva meM, vi-mI, vA - vikalpa, hojjA -- hote
hai  /  " gAthA - bAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM sAta se lekara dasa taka
ikkIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM sAta se lekara no taka, satraha prakRtika
baMdhasthAna meM chaha se lekara nau taka aura teraha prakatika baMdhana meM
pA~ca se lekara ATha - nau prakRtika aMdhasthAna meM cAra se lekara utkRSTa sAta
prakRtiyoM taka ke cAra udayasthAna hote haiM tathA pA~ca prakRtika baMdhasthAna
meM do prakRtiyoM kA udaya jAnanA cAhiye  /  isake bAda ( pA~ca prakRtika
baMdhasthAna ke bAda ) cAra Adi ( 4,3,2.1 ) prakRtika baMdhasthAnoM meM eka
prakRti kA udaya hotA hai  /  baMdha ke abhAva meM bhI isI prakAra eka prakRti
kA udaya hotA hai| udaya ke abhAva meM bhI mohanIya kI sattA vikalpa se hotI
hai| vizeSArtha - - pUrva meM mohanIya karma ke bAIsa, ikkIsa Adi prakRtika dasa
baMdhasthAna batalAye haiN| yahAM tIna gAthAoM meM ukta sthAnoM meM se pratyeka
meM kitanI kitanI prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai, isako spaSTa kiyA hai|
sarvaprathama bAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM udayasthAnoM kA kathana karate
hue kahA hai-sAta prakRtika, ATha prakRtika, no prakRtika aura dasa prakRtika,
ye cAra udayasthAna haiN| jinakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA jA rahA hai  /

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sevenfold Nature of Arising  The sevenfold nature of arising is as
follows:  1. **Mithyatva** (False Belief) 2. **Apratyaakhyanavaran** (Non-
Rejection Covering) - One of the types of **Krodha** (Anger) 3.
**Pratyaakhyanavaran** (Rejection Covering) - One of the types of **Krodha**
(Anger) 4. **Sanjvalan** (Agitation) - One of the types of **Krodha** (Anger) 5.
**Rati** (Attachment) or **Hasya** (Laughter) 6. **Arati** (Aversion) or
**Shoka** (Grief) - In place of **Rati** (Attachment) 7. **One of the three
Vedas**  These seven natures arise in a **Mithyatvadrishti** (False Belief)
being, who is bound by twenty-two **Prakritis** (Natures), in a regular manner.
## Twenty-Four Types of Dissolution  There are twenty-four types of **Bhang**
(Dissolution). They are as follows:  **Krodha** (Anger), **Mana** (Pride),
**Maya** (Delusion), and **Lobha** (Greed) - These four **Prakritis** (Natures)
are mutually contradictory in terms of their arising. Therefore, they do not
arise simultaneously.  For example, when **Krodha** (Anger) arises, **Mana**
(Pride) etc. do not arise. However, when one type of **Krodha** (Anger) arises,
all other types of **Krodha** (Anger) beyond that type must arise.  For
instance, when **Anantanubandhi Krodha** (Anger with infinite attachments)
arises, all four types of **Krodha** (Anger) - **Apratyaakhyanavaran** (Non-
Rejection Covering), etc. - arise simultaneously.  When **Apratyaakhyanavaran
Krodha** (Non-Rejection Covering Anger) arises, all three types of **Krodha**
(Anger) - **Pratyaakhyanavaran** (Rejection Covering), etc. - arise.  When
**Pratyaakhyanavaran Krodha** (Rejection Covering Anger) arises, both types of
**Krodha** (Anger) arise simultaneously.  When **Sanjvalan Krodha** (Agitation
Anger) arises, only that type of **Krodha** (Anger) arises.  In this way, in the
sevenfold nature of arising, **Apratyaakhyanavaran Krodha** (Non-Rejection
Covering Anger) etc. arise.  Similarly, when **Apratyarupananavaran Mana** (Non-
Rejection Covering Pride) arises, three types of **Mana** (Pride) arise. When
**Apratyaakhyanavaran Maya** (Non-Rejection Covering Delusion) arises, three
types of **Maya** (Delusion) arise. And when **Apratyaakhyanavaran Lobha** (Non-
Rejection Covering Greed) arises, three types of **Lobha** (Greed) arise.  The
arising of these four **Bhang** (Dissolution) - **Krodha** (Anger), **Mana**
(Pride), **Maya** (Delusion), and **Lobha** (Greed) - occurs along with
**Striveda** (Female Veda). If **Striveda** (Female Veda) is replaced by
**Purushaveda** (Male Veda), then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa sAta prakRtika udayasthAna isa prakAra hai ki eka
midhyAtva, dUsarI apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha Adi meM se koI eka tIsarI
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha Adi meM se koI eka cauthI saMjvalana krodha Adi meM se
koI eka pA~cavIM chaThI rati athavA hAsya, rati ke sthAna para arati zoka aura
sAtavIM tInoM vedoM meM se koI eka veda, ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA udaya bAIsa
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle mithyAdRSTi jIva ko niyama se hotA hai| 1 62
yahA~ caubIsa bhaMga hote haiN| ve isa prakAra haiM- krodha, mAna, mAyA aura
lobha, ye cAroM prakRtiyA~ udaya kI apekSA paraspara virodhanI hone se inakA
udaya eka sAtha nahIM hotA hai  /  ataH krodhAdika ke udaya rahate mAnAdika kA
udaya nahIM hotA kintu kisI eka prakAra ke krodha kA udaya rahate, usase Age ke
dUsare prakAra ke sabhI krodhoM kA udaya avazya hotA hai  /  jaise ki
anantAnubaMdhI krodha kA udaya rahate apratyAkhyAnA varaNa Adi cAroM prakAra ke
krodhoM kA udaya eka sAtha hotA hai  /  apratyAkhyAtAvaraNa koSa ke udaya rahate
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa Adi tInoM prakAra ke krodhoM kA udaya rahatA hai  /
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha ke udaya rahate donoM prakAra ke krodhoM kA udaya eka
sAtha rahatA hai aura saMjvalana krodha kA udaya rahate hue eka hI krodha udaya
rahatA hai| isa taraha yahA~ sAta prakRtika udayasthAna meM apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
krodha Adi tInoM kovoM kA udaya hotA hai  /  isI prakAra apratyarUpAnAvaraNa
mAna kA udaya rahate tIna mAna kA udaya hotA hai, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA kA
udaya rahate tIna mAyA kA udaya hotA hai tathA apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa lobha kA
udaya rahate tIna lobha kA udaya hotA hai ukta krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha,
ina cAra bhaMgoM kA udaya strIveda ke sAtha hotA hai aura yadi strIveda ke
bajAya puruSaveda kA

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  - The **udaya** (arising) of a **purusha** (male)
**veda** (knowledge) occurs with the **udaya** of the **veda**, and if the
**udaya** is of a **napumsaka** (neuter) **veda**, then it is accompanied by
**intar** (a type of subtle matter). Thus, with the **udaya** of each **veda**,
four **bhang** (subtle bodies) are obtained, totaling twelve. These twelve
**bhang** also occur with the **udaya** of **hasya** (laughter) and **rati**
(attachment), and if **shoka** (sorrow) and **arati** (aversion) arise in place
of **hasya** and **rati**, they are also accompanied by them. Thus, multiplying
twelve by two results in twenty-four **bhang**.  - The twenty-four **bhang**
mentioned earlier can also be calculated as follows: with the **hasya-rati**
pair, there is one **bhang** of the **stri** (female) **veda**, and with the
**shoka-arati** pair, there is one **bhang** of the **stri** **veda**, thus two
**bhang** with the **stri** **veda**. Similarly, there will be two **bhang**
each with the **purusha** **veda** and the **napumsaka** **veda**. In total,
these are six **bhang**. These six **bhang** will occur with **krodha** (anger)
in the **udaya** of the **kosa** (sheath). If **mana** (pride) arises instead of
**krodha**, they will occur with **mana**. If **maya** (delusion) arises in
place of **mana**, they will also occur with **maya**, and if **lobha** (greed)
arises in place of **maya**, they will also occur with **lobha**. Thus,
multiplying the aforementioned six **bhang** by four, namely **krodha**,
**mana**, **maya**, and **lobha**, results in a total of twenty-four **bhang**.
That is, six **bhang** of **krodha**, six **bhang** of **mana**, six **bhang**
of **maya**, and six **bhang** of **lobha**. This is one **chaubisi** (set of
twenty-four).  - In the **udaya** of these seven **prakriti** (nature), one
**kashaya** (passion) from among **bhaya** (fear), **jugupsa** (disgust), and
the **anantaanubandhi** (infinitely connected) quartet arises. Thus, by
combining the **udaya** of one **prakriti** from these three **prakriti**
respectively, the **udaya** of eight **prakriti** is obtained in three ways.
Combining **bhaya** with the seven **prakriti** **udaya** results in the first
**udaya** of eight **prakriti**, combining **jugupsa** with the seven
**prakriti** **udaya** results in the second **udaya** of eight **prakriti**,
and the **anantaanubandhi** **krodha** (anger) etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - SaSTha karmagnantha - udaya ho to puruSa veda ke udaya ke sAtha hotA hai aura
yadi napuMsaka veda kA udaya hai to usake sAtha ina tAra kA banA hotA hai  /
isa prakAra pratyeka veda ke udaya ke sAtha cAra-cAra bhaMga prApta ho jAte
haiM, jo kula milAkara bAraha hote haiM  /  ye bAraha bhaMga hAsya aura rati ke
udaya ke sAtha bhI hote haiM aura yadi hAsya aura rati ke sthAna meM zoka aura
arati kA udaya huA to unake sAtha bhI hote haiM  /  isa prakAra bAraha ko do se
guNA karane para caubIsa bhaMga ho jAte haiN| pUrva meM batAI gaI cauvIsa
bhaMgoM kI gaNanA isa prakAra bhI kI jA sakatI hai vi hAsya-rati yugala ke sAtha
strI veda kA eka bhaMga tathA zoka-arati yugala ke sAtha strIveda kA eka bhaMga,
isa prakAra strIveda ke sAtha do bhaMga tathA isI prakAra puruSaveda aura
napuMsaka veda ke sAtha bhI do-do bhaMga hoNge| kula milAkara ye chaha bhaMga
hue| ye chahoM bhaMga, koSa ke udaya meM krodha ke sAtha hoNge| krodha ke bajAya
mAna kA udaya hone para mAna ke sAtha hoMge  /  mAna ke sthAna para mAyA kA
udaya hone para mAyA ke sAtha bhI hoMge aura mAyA ke sthAna para lobha kA udaya
hone para lobha ke sAtha bhI hoMge  /  isa prakAra se pUrvokta chahoM bhaMgoM ko
krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha ina cAra se guNita karane para kula caubIsa bhaMga
hue  /  arthAt krodha ke chaha bhaMga, mAna ke chaha bhaMga, mAyA ke chaha
bhaMga aura lobha ke chaha bhaMga  /  yaha eka caubIsI huii| ina sAta prakRtiyoM
ke udaya meM bhaya, jugupsA aura anantAnubaMdhI catuSka meM se koI eka kaSAya,
isa prakAra ina tIna prakRtiyoM meM se kramazaH eka-eka prakRti ke udaya ko
milAne para ATha prakRtika udaya tIna prakAra se prApta hotA hai  /  sAta
prakRtika udaya meM bhaya ko milAne se pahalA ATha prakRtiyoM kA udaya, sAta
prakRtika udaya meM jugupsA ko milAne se dUsarA ATha prakRtiyoM kA udaya aura
anantAnubaMdhI krodhAdi

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of Sevenfold Arising  Understanding the three types of eightfold
arising, which arise from the combination of one of the sevenfold arising with a
third, is essential. Therefore, there are three sets of twenty-four bhangas
(breaks). They are as follows:  The first set of twenty-four bhangas arises when
the arising of fear is combined with the arising of the eightfold arising from
the previously mentioned sevenfold arising. The second set of twenty-four
bhangas arises when the arising of disgust is combined with the arising of the
eightfold arising from the previously mentioned sevenfold arising. The third set
of twenty-four bhangas arises when the arising of any one of the four infinite-
binding passions (anger, pride, deceit, and greed) is combined with the arising
of the eightfold arising from the previously mentioned sevenfold arising. Thus,
there are three sets of twenty-four bhangas when the eightfold arising is
present.  This chapter addresses the doubts regarding the non-acceptance of the
four infinite-binding passions in the sevenfold arising and the eightfold
arising obtained from the arising of fear and disgust, and the acceptance of the
arising of the infinite-binding passions only after the binding-chain
(bandhavali). The excerpt from the commentary by Acharya Malayagiri on these
doubts is as follows:  "How is it possible that the arising of the infinite-
binding passions is inevitable in the case of false belief (mithyatva)? How is
it that false belief is mentioned here as being devoid of the arising of the
infinite-binding passions in the sevenfold arising or the eightfold arising? It
is said that in the case of a person with right belief (samyagdrishti), the
infinite-binding passions are initially disconnected by some means. This person,
being liberated, does not have the destruction of false belief. Due to the
absence of such a general condition, when a person later falls into false
belief, the false belief, being the root of the infinite-binding passions, binds
them. Therefore, as long as the binding-chain does not cross the threshold,
their arising does not occur. It occurs when the binding-chain crosses the
threshold."  (1) Commentary on the Chapter of Sevenfold Arising, p. 165.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ** saptatikA prakaraNa meM se kisI eka ko milAne se tIsarA ATha prakRtiyoM kA
udaya, isa taraha ATha prakRtika udayasthAna ke tIna prakAra samajhanA cAhie  /
ataH ina bhaMgoM kI tIna cauvosiyA~ hotI haiM  /  ve isa prakAra haiM pUrvokta
sAta prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM bhaya kA udaya milAne para ATha prakRtiyoM ke udaya
ke sAtha bhaMgoM kI pahalI cauvIsI huI  /  pUrvokta sAta prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM
jugupsA kA udaya milAne para ATha ke udaya ke sAtha bhaMgoM kI dUsarI caubIsI
tathA pUrvokta sAta prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM anantAnubaMdhI krodhAdi meM se kisI
eka prakRti ke udaya ko milAne para ATha ke udaya ke sAtha bhaMgoM kI tIsarI
caubIsI prApta hotI hai  /  isa prakAra ATha prakRtika udayasthAna ke rahate
bhaMgoM kI tIna caubIsI hotI haiN| sAta prakRtika udayasthAna meM aura bhaya va
jugupsA ke udaya se prApta hone vAle ATha prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM
anantAnuvandhI kaSAya catuSka ko grahaNa na karane tathA bandhAvali ke bAda hI
anantAnubandhI ke udaya ko mAnane ke sambandha meM jijJAsAoM kA samAdhAna karate
haiM  /  ukta jijJAsAoM sambandhI AcArya malayagiri kRta TIkA kA aMza isa
prakAra hai- "manu mithyAdRSTeravazyamanansAnubandhinAmudayaH sambhavati tat
kathamiha midhyAdRSTiH saptodaye aSTobaye vA kasmiridantAnubandhyudayarahitaH
proktaH ? ucyateiha samyagRSTinA satA kenacit prathamato'nantAnubandhino
visaMyojitAH, esA ca sa vizrAtto na midhyAtvAvikSayAtha udyuktavAm
tathAvidhasAmanyabhAvAt tataH kAlAntare mithyAtvaM gataH san midhyAtvaramayatI
sUyo'pyanasAnubandhino badhnAti tatobarapAlikA yAvat nAthApyatikrAmati tAvat
teSAmuvayo na bhavati, bandhAvalikAyAM sthatikrAntAyAM bhavediti  /  1 saptatikA
prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 165

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **Question:** While the four Anantanubandhis arise in the
Mithyadrishti Jiva according to the rule, why are they not mentioned in the
seven natural Udayasthanas and the eight natural Udayasthanas arising from fear
or disgust?  **Solution:** A Samyagdristi Jiva who has disjoined the four
Anantanubandhis, but has not destroyed Mithyatva etc. due to lack of material
for Kshapana, attains Mithyatva after a long time. Therefore, he again destroys
the four Anantanubandhis due to Mithyatva. Such a Jiva does not experience the
arising of Anantanubandhis for one Avaliika period, but they arise according to
the rule after the Avaliika has passed. Therefore, the Udayasthanas of the
Mithyadrishti Jiva become devoid of the arising of Anantanubandhis. This is why
the arising of Anantanubandhis is not mentioned in the seven natural
Udayasthanas and the eight natural Udayasthanas arising from fear or disgust.
**Note:** The arising of any Karma occurs when the Abadihakal (period of non-
obstruction) is destroyed. The minimum Abadihakal for the four Anantanubandhis
is Antarmuhurta (one-seventh of a Muhurta). The maximum Abadihakal is four
thousand years. The rest is explained as follows:  From the time of the
beginning of the Bagh Avaliika, their existence continues for that duration.
When destruction begins during their existence, their priority and their
corresponding Avaliika, along with the remaining similar-natured Avaliika,
become united and transform into a Padma-Prakriti form. After the Sankrama
Avaliika has passed, the arising occurs. After the Bagh Avaliika has passed, the
arising mentioned does not contradict.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha - prazna - jabaki mithyAdRSTi jIva ke anantAnuvandhI
catuSka kA udaya niyama se hotA hai, taba yahA~ sAta prakRtika udayasthAna meM
tathA bhaya yA jugupsA meM se kisI eka ke udaya se prApta hone vAle pUrvokta do
prakAra ke ATha prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM use anantAnubandhI ke udaya se rahita
kyoM batAyA hai ? 65 samAdhAna - jo samyagdRSTi jIva anantAnubandho catuSka kI
visaMyojanA karake raha gyaa| kSapaNA ke yogya sAmagrI na milane se usane
mithyAtva Adi kA kSaya nahIM kiyA  /  anantara kAlAntara meM vaha mithyAtva ko
prApta huA ataH vahA~ usane midhyAtva ke nimitta se punaH anantAnuarat catuSka
kA vadha kiyaa| aise jIva ke eka AvalikA pramANakAla taka anantAnubandho kA
udaya nahIM hotA kintu AvalikA ke vyatIta ho jAne para niyama se hotA hai  /
ata: mithyAdRSTi jIva ke anantAnubandhI ke udaya se rahita sthAna bana jAte
haiN| isI kAraNa se sAta prakRtika udayasthAna meM aura bhaya yA jugupsA ke
udaya se prApta hone vAle ATha prakRtika udayasthAna meM anantAnubandhI kA udaya
nahIM batAyA hai  /  "namu karya bandhAvalikAtikrame'pyudayaH saMbhavati ?
pato'bAdhA kAlakSaye satyudayaH, abAdhAkAlazcAnantAnubandhinAM
jaghanyenAntarmuhartam utkarSeNa tu catvAri varSa sahasrANIti, naMSa zeSaH, yato
bAghasamayAvArabhya teSAM tAvat sattA bhavati, sattAyAM ca satyAM badhe
pravartamAne tadagratA tadmatAyAM ca zeSa samAnajAtIyaprakRtivalika sahakAntiH
saMkamadhca dalikaM padmaprakRtirUpatayA pariNamate tataH
saMkramAlikAyAmatItAyAmunayaH, tato baghAvalikAyAmatItAyAmuyo'bhidhIyamAno na
virudhyate  /  1 prazna - kisI bhI karma kA udaya abAdhAkAla ke kSaya hone para
hotA hai aura anantAnubandhI catuSka kA jaghanya abAdhAkAla antarmuhUrta 1
saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 165

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of Seven Tika  Thus, the excellent uninterrupted time is four
thousand years. Therefore, is the Anantanubandhi possible only after the
Bandhavali?  The Anantanubandhi comes into existence from the time of Bandha
itself, and upon its existence, Patadgrahata arises in the present Bandha. Upon
attaining Patadgrahata, the remaining similar nature Dalikas undergo a
transition, which transforms into the Patadgraha nature. This arises after the
Sankramavali. Therefore, the Anantanubandhi begins to arise after the Avali, so
this statement does not contradict.  The meaning of this doubt resolution is
that the Anantanubandhi is a Chatushk Visanyojana nature. Although Visanyojana
is itself a Kshaya, the difference between Visanyojana and Kshaya is that upon
Visanyojana, the Visanyojita nature can come into existence again in the future
upon finding suitable material. However, the nature that has attained Kshaya
does not come into existence again.  Existence occurs in two ways: through
Bandha and through Sankrama. However, there is a mutual relationship between
Bandha and Sankrama. At the time of Bandha of a particular entity, there is a
Sankrama of another similar nature Dalika. Such a nature is called Patadgraha
nature. Patadgraha nature means the nature that receives the incoming Karmadal.
It is a rule that the Karmadal obtained through Sankrama arises after the
Sankramavali. Therefore, there is no objection in accepting the Anantanubandhi's
arising after one Avali.  Although there can be Apकर्षण within the uninterrupted
time after the new Bandhavali, and if such a nature has arisen, then the un-
imparted Karmadal can also be independent of the Udayasamaya. Therefore, the
newly bound Karmadal...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa tathA utkRSTa abAdhAkAla cAra hajAra varSa hai| ataH
baMdhAvali ke bAda hI anantAnubandhI kA dAra se sambhata hai? samASAma-baMdha
samaya se hI anantAnubandhI kI sattA ho jAtI hai aura sattA ke ho jAne para
pravartamAna bandha meM patadgrahatA A jAtI hai aura patadgrahAne ko prApta ho
jAne para zeSa samAna jAtIya prakRti dalikoM kA saMkramaNa hotA hai jo
patadgraha prakRti rUpa se pariNata ho jAtA hai jisakA saMkramAvali ke bAda
udaya hotA hai  /  ata: AvalikA ke bAda anantAnubandhI kA udaya hone lagatA hai,
ata: yaha kahanA birodha ko prApta nahIM hotA hai| _ ukta zaMkA samAdhAna kA
yaha tAtparya hai ki anantAnubandhI catuSka visaMyojanA prakRti hai aura vaise
to visaMyojanA kSaya hI hai, kintu visaMyojanA aura kSaya meM yaha antara hai ki
visaMyojanA ke ho jAne para kAlAntara meM yogya sAmagrI ke milane para
visaMyojita prakRti kI puna: sattA ho sakatI hai vinnu kSaya ko prApta prakRti
kI punaH sattA nahIM hotI hai| sattA do prakAra se hotI hai -baMdha se aura
saMkrama se, kintu baMdha aura saMkrama meM anyonya sambandha hai  /  jisa
samaya jisakA baMdha hotA hai, usa samaya usameM anya sajAtIya prakRti dalika kA
saMkramaNa hotA hai  /  aisI prakRti ko patadgraha prakRti kahate haiM  /
patadgraha prakRti kA artha hai Akara par3ane vAle karmadala ko grahaNa karane
vAlI prakRti  /  aisA niyama hai ki saMkrama se prApta hue karma-dala kA
maMkramAbali ke bAda udaya hotA hai| jisase anantAnuvandhI kA eka AvalI ke bAda
udaya mAnane meM koI Apatti nahIM hai  /  yadyapi navIna baMdhAvali ke bAda
abAdhAkAla ke bhItara bhI apakarSaNa ho sakatA hai aura yadi aisI prakRti udaya-
prApta huI ho to uma aMparpita karmadala kA udayasamaya se nirapekSa bhI ho
sakatA hai, ata: navIna baMdhe hue karmadala kA

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth, Chapter 67  **67**  Even within the time frame of
*Ababakal* (a specific time period), *Udiranodaya* (arising of karmic
influences) can occur due to specific actions. There is no obstacle to this.
The seven natural *Udayasthanas* (places of arising) mentioned earlier, when
combined with fear and aversion, or fear and *Anantanubandhi* (infinite
attachment), or aversion and *Anantanubandhi*, result in nine natural
*Udayasthanas* in three ways. In these three options, there are twenty-four
*Bhangas* (breakdowns) for each of the previous *Udayasthanas*. Thus, in the
nine natural *Udayasthanas*, there are three sets of twenty-four *Bhangas*.
**8**  When fear, aversion, and *Anantanubandhi* are combined together in the
previously mentioned seven natural *Udayasthanas*, it results in ten natural
*Udayasthanas*. Here too, there are twenty-four *Bhangas* as mentioned earlier.
Therefore, there are twenty-four *Bhangas* for the seven natural *Udayasthanas*,
three for the eight natural *Udayasthanas*, three for the nine natural
*Udayasthanas*, and twenty-four for the ten natural *Udayasthanas*. In total,
there are eight sets of twenty-four *Bhangas* in twenty-two natural
*Udayasthanas* - *Sarvansankhya Dvaavinshati Bandhe Ashtau Chaturvinshatayah*
(Total twenty-two *Bandhas* have eight sets of twenty-four).  **T**  After
describing the *Udayasthanas* in twenty-two natural *Bandhas* (karmic bonds), we
now explain the *Udayasthanas* in twenty-one natural *Bandhas*: *Nav Ekkavi
Sattai Udaythanai* - meaning, in twenty-one natural *Bandhas*, there are seven,
eight, and nine natural *Udayasthanas*. They are as follows:  In these twenty-
one natural *Bandhas*, the arising of seven natural *Udayasthanas* occurs
regularly, consisting of:  * One type of the four *Kshayas* (passions) -
*Anantanubandhi*, *Apratyaakhyanavaran* (non-rejection covering),
*Pratyaakhyanavaran* (rejection covering), and *Sanjwalan* (agitation). * One
out of the three *Vedas* (knowledge). * One out of the two *Yugalas* (pairs).
This continues...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 67 prayoga vizeSa se abAbAkAla ke bhItara bhI udIraNodaya
ho sakatA hai, isameM koI bAdhA nahIM AtI hai  /  pahale jo sAta prakRtika
udayasthAna batAyA hai, usameM bhaya aura jugupsA ke yA bhaya aura
anantAnubandhI ke athavA jugupsA aura anantAnubandha ke milAne para nau
prakRtika udayasthAna tIna prakAra se prApta hotA hai| ina tIna vikalpoM meM bhI
pUrvokta kama se bhaMgoM kI ekaeka caubIsI hotI hai| isa prakAra nau prakRtika
udayasthAna meM bhI bhaMgoM kI tIna caubIsI jAnanA caahie| 8 pUrvokta sAta
prakRtika udayasthAna meM eka sAtha bhaya, jugupsA aura anantAnubandha ke milAne
para dasa prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ bhI pUrvokta prakAra se
bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI hotI hai  /  isa prakAra sAta prakRtika udayasthAna kI
eka caubIsI, ATha prakRtika udayasthAna kI tIna, nau prakRtika upayasthAna kI
tIna aura dasa prakRtika udayasthAna kI eka caubIsI hotI hai| kula milAkara
bAIsa prakRtika baMsthAna meM ATha caubIsI hotI haiM- sarvasaMkhyA
dvAviMzatibaMdhe aSTau caturviMzatayaH T vAIsa prakRtika baMsthAna meM
udavasthAnoM kA nirdeza karane ke bAda aba ikkIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM
udayasthAna batalAte haiM ki'nava ikkavIsa sattAi udayaThANAI - arthAt ikkIsa
prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM sAta prakRtika, ATha prakRtika aura nau prakRtika ye
tIna udayasthAna haiN| ve isa prakAra haiinameM anantAnubandhI,
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura saMjvalana prakAra kI krodhAdi cAra
kaSAyoM meM se koI eka jAti kI cAra kaSAyeM, tIna vedoM meM se koI eka veda aura
do yugaloM meM se koI eka yugala, ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA udaya ikkIsa prakRtika
baMdhasthAna meM niyama se hotA hai| yahA~ bhI pUrvokta

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 70  A total of twenty-four **bhangas** are obtained for the seven
**prakritik** **udayasthanas**. When fear or disgust is added to these seven
**prakritik** **udayasthanas**, eight **prakritik** **udayasthanas** are
obtained in two ways. Thus, there are two options for the eight **prakritik**
**udayasthanas**. In one option, there are twenty-four **bhangas**, and in the
other option, there are twenty-four **bhangas**. Therefore, there are two sets
of twenty-four **bhangas** for the eight **prakritik** **udayasthanas**. The
ninth **prakritik** **udayasthanas** is obtained by combining fear and disgust
simultaneously with the aforementioned seven **prakritik** **udayasthanas**.
Since this is of a single type, it has twenty-four **bhangas**.  Thus, in the
twenty-one **prakritik** **bandhasthanas**, there are twenty-four **bhangas**
for the seven **prakritik** **udayasthanas**, forty-eight **bhangas** for the
eight **prakritik** **udayasthanas**, and twenty-four **bhangas** for the ninth
**prakritik** **udayasthanas**, totaling one hundred and twenty **bhangas**.
These twenty-one **prakritik** **bandhasthanas** are only for the **sasadan**
**samyagdristi** **jiva**, and there are two types of **sasadan**
**samyagdristi**: **shreṇigat** and **ashreṇigat**. A **jiva** who falls from
the **upsham** **guna** **sthana** and attains the **sasadan** **guna**
**sthana** is called a **shreṇigat** **sasadan** **samyagdristi**. And a
**jiva** who does not ascend the **upsham** **shreṇi** but attains the
**sasadan** state due to the arising of **anantaanubandhi** is called an
**ashreṇigat** **sasadan** **samyagdristi**. Here, the seven, eight, and nine
**prakritik** **udayasthanas** mentioned in the twenty-one **prakritik**
**bandhasthanas** should be understood in relation to the **ashreṇigat**
**sasadan** **samyagdristi** **jiva**.  1. This **pavishtabandha** is attained
in **sasadan**. **Sasadan** is of two types: **shreṇigat** and **ashreṇigat**.
Having attained **shreṇigat** **sasadan**, one must go through these seven and
other **udayasthanas**.  - **Sapttatika Prakarana** Commentary, Page 166

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 15 saptatikA prakaraNa krama se bhaMgoM ko eka caubIsI prApta hotI hai| isa
sAta prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaya ke yA jugupsA ke milA dene para ATha
prakRtika udayasthAna do prakAra se prApta hotA hai  /  isa prakAra ATha
prakRtika udayasthAna ke do vikalpa hote haiN| yahA~ eka vikalpa meM eka caubIsI
aura dUsare vikalpa meM eka caubIsI, isa prakAra ATha prakRtika udayasthAna meM
bhaMgoM kI do caubIsI hotI haiM  /  nau prakRtika udayasthAna pUrvokta sAta
prakRtika udayasthAna meM yugapada bhaya aura jugupsA ko milAne se prApta hotA
hai| yaha eka hI prakAra kA hone se isameM bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI prApta hotI
hai| isa prakAra ikkIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM sAta prakRtika udayasthAna kI
eka, ATha prakRtika udayasthAna kI do aura nau prakRtika udayasthAna kI eka,
kula milAkara bhaMgoM ko cAra caubIsI hotI haiN| yaha ikkIsa prakRtika
baMdhasthAna sAsAdana samyagdRSTi jIva ke hI hotA hai aura sAsAdana samyagdRSTi
ke do bheda haiM-zreNigata aura azreNigata  /  jo jIva upazamaNi se gira kara
sAsAdana guNasthAna ko prApta hotA hai, use zreNigata sAsAdana samyagdRSTi
kahate haiM tathA jo upazama samyagdRSTi jIva upazamazreNi car3hA hI nahIM kintu
anantAnubandhI ke udaya se sAsAdana bhAva ko prApta ho gayA, vaha azreNigata
sAsAdana samyagdRSTi kahalAtA hai  /  yahA~ jo ikkIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM
sAta, ATha aura nau prakRtika, yaha tIna udayasthAna batalAye haiM ke azreNigata
sAsAdana samyagdRSTi jIva kI apekSA samajhanA cAhiye  /  1 ayaM pavizatibaMdhaH
sAsAdane prApyate  /  sAsAdanazca dvidhA, theNigato 'nne Nigatazca  /
tapANigata sAsAdanamAzritmAmUni saptAdIni udayasthAnAnyava gantavyAni  /
-saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 166

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth, Chapter 16  There are two opinions regarding the
**Sāsādan Samyakdr̥ṣṭi** (perfectly-sighted being) who belongs to the **Śreṇi**
(category). Some Ācāryas believe that even a being with **Anantānubandhi**
(infinite karmic bonds) can attain **Upasamaṇi** (state of liberation). However,
according to the **Āmārga** (non-Jain) view, even those with Anantānubandhi can
attain Upasamaṇi. This is supported by the following verse:
**"Aṇadansan'asitpīveyachakkaṁ ca purisāveyam ca."**  This means that first, the
Anantānubandhi **Kṣaya** (passion) is subdued. Then, **Darśana Mohaniya**
(delusion of perception) is subdued. After that, **Napumsaka Veda** (masculine
knowledge), **Strī Veda** (feminine knowledge), **Six Nokṣaya** (six types of
passions), and **Puruṣa Veda** (masculine knowledge) are subdued in order.  Such
a being can fall from the Śreṇi and attain the **Sāsādan** state. Therefore, it
also has the three **Udayasthāna** (stages of existence) mentioned earlier.
However, other Ācāryas believe that only a being who has completely
**Vinsayojana** (disconnected) from Anantānubandhi can attain the **Upasama
Śreṇi** (category of liberation). According to them, such a being cannot fall
from the Upasama Śreṇi and attain the Sāsādan state because the Anantānubandhi
cannot arise in them, and the **Sāsādan Samyaktv** (perfect knowledge) ...  ...
- 1 (a) Some say that even a being with Anantānubandhi karmic bonds can attain
Upasamaṇi. According to them, even those with Anantānubandhi can attain
liberation.  **Sapttatikā Prakaraṇa Ṭīkā, p. 166** (b) The Digambara tradition
does not mention the opinion of Anantānubandhi attaining liberation in the
**Ṣaṭkhaṇḍāgama**, **Kṣayapramṛta**, and their commentaries. However, it is
mentioned in the **Go. Karmakāṇḍa**. There, it is stated that there are 28, 24,
and 21 **Prakṛtika** (natural) **Sattāsthāna** (states of existence) in the
Upasama Śreṇi.  **Āvśyak Niyukti, Gāthā 116**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 16 zreNigata sAsAdana samyagdRSTi jIva ke viSaya meM do
kathana pAye jAte haiM  /  kucha AcAryoM kA mata hai ki jisake anantAnubaMdhI kI
sattA hai, aisA jIva bhI apazamaNi ko prApta hotA hai| nana AmArgoM ke mata se
anantAnubandhI kI bhI upazamanA hotI hai| jisakI puSTi nimnalikhita gAthA se
hotI hai aNadaMsaNaeNsitpIveyachakkaM ca purisAveyaM ca  /  /  arthAt pahale
anantAnubandhI kaSAya kA upazama karatA hai  /  usake bAda darzana mohanIya kA
upazama karatA hai, phira kramaza: napuMsaka veda, strIveda, chaha nokaSAya aura
puruSaveda kA upazama karatA hai| aisA jIva zreNi se girakara sAsAdana bhAva ko
bhI prApta hotA hai, ata: isake bhI pUrvokta tIna udayasthAna hote haiN| kintu
anya AcAryoM kA mata hai ki jisane anantAnubaMdhI kI visaMyojanA kara dI, aisA
jIva hI upazamazreNi ko prApta hotA hai, anantAnubaMdhI kI sattA vAlA nhiiN|
inake mata se aisA jIva upazamazreNi se girakara sAsAdana bhAva ko prApta nahIM
hotA hai, kyoMki usake anantAnubaMdhI kA udaya saMbhava nahIM hai aura sAsAdana
samyaktva kI ... ...... - 1 (ka) ketridAhuH-
anantAnubadhisatkarmasahito'pyupazamaNi pratipadyate, teSAM
matenAnantAnubaMdhinAmapyupazamanA bhavati  /  saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR. 166
(kha) digambara paramparA meM anantAnubaMdhI kI upazamanA vAle mata kA SaT
khaMDAgama, kaSAyaprAmRta aura usakI TIkAoM meM ullekha nahIM milatA hai kintu
go0 karmakANDa meM isa mata kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai| vahAM upazamazraNa meM 28,
24 aura 21 prakRtika, tIna sattAsthAna batalAye hai-aucauremakAvIsa
upasamaseDimmi  // 511 //  2 Avazyaka niyukti, gA0 116

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 70  **Gain is achieved only through the arising of the infinite
bonds, not otherwise.** It is also said: "Without the arising of the infinite
bonds, the attainment of the state of Saasadan Samyaktv is not possible."  **The
inquirer asks:**  "Is it not appropriate to assume that when a being is facing
falsehood but has not attained falsehood, then according to those teachers, the
attainment of the Saasadan Gunasthan would occur even without the arising of
their infinite bonds? If this is the case, then their six-natured, seven-
natured, eight-natured, and nine-natured states would be attained. But this is
not the case, because it is not mentioned in the Agamas, and those teachers do
not believe it. Therefore, it is clear that the attainment of Saasadan Samyaktv
does not occur without the arising of the infinite bonds."  **Solution:**  This
assumption is not correct, because if it were true, then the being would attain
the four states of six-natured, seven-natured, eight-natured, and nine-natured.
However, this is not mentioned in the Agamas, and those teachers do not believe
it. This proves that the attainment of Saasadan Samyaktv does not occur without
the arising of the infinite bonds.  "The being who, by disconnecting the
infinite bonds, clings to the state of Upshamni, does not attain the Saasadan
Gunasthan." This statement is made according to the commentary of Acharya
Malayagiri. However, based on the lower evidence of Karma-prakriti, etc., it is
known that such a being does attain the Saasadan Gunasthan. As it is written in
the Purna of Karma-prakriti:  "The being who is a true monk, who has a desire
for liberation, and who is firmly established in the right path, will not be
bound by the infinite bonds." (Commentary on Chapter 70, page 166)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 100 saptatikA prakaraNa prApti to anantAnubaMdhA ke udaya se hotI hai, anyathA
nhiiN| kahA . bhI hai-zraNaMtaraNubaMSuSapahiyasama sAsaNabhAvo na saMbhavada  /
arthAt anantAnubaMdhI ke udaya ke binA sAsAdana samyaktva kI prApti honA
saMbhava nahIM hai| jijJAsu prazna karatA hai ki ayocyate-yA miSyAvaM
pratyabhimukho ma mAyApi mipyAstra pratipAti tavAnImanamtAnubadhyupamarahito'pi
sAsApanasteSAM matena bhaviSyatIti limanAyutam ? tarapustam, evaM sati tasya
pavAdIni navapalAni pavAyuzyatvAmAmi bhaveyuH na bhavanti, putra pratiSepAta,
tarAnabhyupagamAya, sasmAnamantAtu. bagyubamarahitaH sAsAyano ma bhavatItyavAyaM
pratyeyam  / ' _ prazna-jisa samaya koI eka jIva mithyAtva ke abhimukha to hotA
hai kintu mithyAtva ko prApta nahIM hotA hai, usa samaya una AcAryoM ke
matAnusAra usake anantAnubaMdhI ke udaya ke binA bhI sAsAdana guNasthAna kI
prApti ho jAyegI  /  aisA mAna liyA jAnA ucita hai  /  samAdhAna-yaha mAnanA
ThIka nahIM hai, kyoMki aisA mAnane para usake chaha prakRtika, sAta prakRtika,
ATha prakRtika aura nau prakRtika, ye cAra udayasthAna prApta hote haiM  /
kintu Agama meM aisA batAyA nahIM hai aura ve AcArya bhI aisA nahIM mAnate haiM
/  isase siddha hai ki anantAnubaMdhI ke udaya ke binA sAsAdana samyaksva kI
prApti nahIM hotI hai| "anantAnubaMdhI kI visaMyojanA karake jo jIva upazamaNi
para mar3hatA hai, vaha gira kara sAsAdana guNasthAna ko prApta nahIM hotaa|"
yaha kathana AcArya malayagiri kI TIkA ke anusAra kiyA gayA hai, tathApi
karmaprakRti Adi ke nimna pramANoM se aisA jJAta hotA hai ki aisA jIva bhI
sAsAdana guNasthAna ko prApta hotA hai  /  jaisA ki karmaprakRti kI pUrNi meM
likhA hai caritvasamaNaM kArDakAmo asi zreyagasammAviSTI to puSpaM
agaMtAgubaMdhiNo 1 saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 166

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **The text states that the one who is a bad,
Samyagdristi, Jiva, and who makes comparisons with the Mohaniya, detaches from
the fourfold An-Chatushk through the Niyama. Due to this, the detachment from
the infinite Ananta-Anubandhas of the Virat Jivas is said to occur. Further, in
the same source, it is written:**  **"Asaag va vi gacchenna"**  **Meaning:**
Such a Jiva descends from the Upshama Shreni and attains the Sasadan Gunasthan.
**From the above mentioned texts, it is known that the Karma-Prakriti's opinion
is that it is not possible to ascend the Upshama Shreni without detaching from
the Ananta-Anubandhis, and the Jiva who descends from there also attains the
Sasadan Gunasthan.**  **The Upshama-na Prakaran of the Pancha-Sangrah also
supports the opinion of the Karma-Prakriti. However, its Sankrama-Prakaran does
not support this. There, it is stated that only 21 out of 25 transmigrate to the
Sasadan Gunasthan.**  **While there are 17 Prakruti Bandha-sthans, the "Chhai
Nay Sattaar Se" - this:**  1. **Karma-Prakriti Shruti Upshama Gatha 30** 2.
**Karma-Prakriti Upshama Gatha 62** 3. **In the Digambar Sampradaya, there are
traditions of Shatkhandagam and Kashya-Prabhut. According to the tradition of
Shatkhandagam, a Jiva who falls from the Upshama-ni does not attain the Sasadan
Gunasthan. Veerasen Swami, in his Bavala Teeka, has mentioned the Upvesh of
Bhagwan Pushpadant Bhootbali in this way: "Bhood Bali bhayavantassushae sen
upshamsedhido modishno na sasapattam parivajjadi. 0 0 P. 131 - Shib 0"**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ' SaSTha karmagrantha niyamA visaMjoeti  /  eena. kAraNepya virayAgaM agaMtAna
adhinisaMjoyanA bhannati  /  1 101 arthAt jo badaka samyagdRSTi jIva cAritra
mohanIya kI upAmanA karatA hai, vaha niyama se ana catuSka kI visaMyojanA karatA
hai aura isI kAraNa se virata jIvoM ke anantAnubandhoM kI visaM yojanA kahI gaI
hai| Age usI ke mUla meM likhA hai AsAga vA vi gacchennA | arthAt - aisA jIva
upazamazreNi se utara kara sAsAdana guNasthAna ko bhI prApta hotA hai  /  ukta
ullekhoM se jJAta hotA hai ki karmaprakRti karttA kA yahI mata rahA hai ki
anantAnubaMdhI kI visaMyojanA kiye binA upazamazreNi para ArohaNa karanA
saMbhava nahIM hai aura vahA~ se utarane vAlA jIva sAsAdana guNasthAna ko bhI
prApta karatA hai | paMcasaMgraha ke upazamanA prakaraNa se bhI karmaprakRti ke
mata kI puSTi hotI hai| lekina usake saMkramaprakaraNa se isakA samarthana nahIM
hotA hai  /  vahA~ sAsAdana guNasthAna meM 21 meM 25 kA hI saMkramaNa batalAyA
hai  /  3 MA satraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke rahate 'chAI naya sattara se' -
yaha 1 karmaprakRti zrUNi upazama gAthA 30 2 karmaprakRti upazama gA0 62 3
digambara saMpradAya meM SaTkhaMDAgama aura kazayaprAbhUta kI paramparAyeM haiM
/  SaTkhaMDAgama kI paramparA ke anusAra upazamaNi se cyuta huA jIba sAsAdana
guNasthAna ko prApta nahIM hotA hai  /  vIrasena svAmI ne bavalA TIkA meM
bhagavAna puSpadanta bhUtabali ke upaveza kA isI rUpa se ullekha kiyA hai - "
bhUda bali bhayavaMtassuSae seNa upasamaser3hIdo modiSNo Na sAsapattaM
parivajjadi  /  0 0 pR0 131 - zIba 0

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Sevenfold  There are four stages of arising: the
sevenfold, the eightfold, the ninefold, and the tenfold.  The seventeenfold
bondage stage occurs in the third mixed and fourth uninterrupted right-faith
stages. Of these, the mixed stage has three stages of arising: the sevenfold,
the eightfold, and the ninefold.  **102**  In the sevenfold stage of arising,
excluding the infinite-bond, one of the fourfold passions of anger, etc., one of
the three Vedas, one of the two pairs, and right-wrong faith arise in a regular
manner. Here too, as before, there are twenty-four types of breaks. In this
sevenfold stage of arising, the addition of fear or disgust results in the
eightfold stage of arising. This stage is of two types...  However, according to
the tradition of the passion-purification, a being who has ascended to the stage
of pacification can also fall from it and attain the stage of the subtle.
However, in the powder of passion-purification, the infinite-bond pacification
nature is prohibited. Along with this, it is also written that a being with
right-faith knowledge does not pacify the passions without disintegrating the
fourfold infinite-bond. This opinion is also supported by the original passion-
purification.  **The Seventeenfold Bondage in Two**  1. Right-wrong faith and
uninterrupted right-faith are the two. Of these, there are three stages of
arising in right-wrong faith, namely: the sevenfold, the eightfold, and the
ninefold. - Commentary on the Chapter of the Sevenfold, page 166  2. There, the
infinite-bond, one of the three anger, etc., one of the three Vedas, one of the
two pairs, and right-wrong faith, these seven natures arise regularly in right-
wrong faith. - Commentary on the Chapter of the Sevenfold, page 166

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa prakRtika, sAta prakRtika, ATha prakRtika aura nau
prakRtika, ye cAra udayasthAna hote haiN| satraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna tIsare
mizra aura cauthe avirata samyakdRSTi ina do guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai| unameM se
mizra guNasthAna meM sAta prakRtika, ATha prakRtika, nau prakRtika, ye tIna
udayasthAna hote haiM  / " 102 sAta prakRtika udayasthAna meM anantAnubaMdhI ko
chor3akara apratyA khyAnAvaraNa Adi tIna prakAroM ke krodhAdi kaSAya catuSkoM
meM se koI eka krodhAdi, tIna vedoM meM se koI eka veda, do yugaloM meM se koI
eka yugala aura sabhya mithyAtva ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA niyama se udaya rahatA
hai| yahA~ bhI pahale ke samAna bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI prApta hotI hai  /  isa
sAta prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaya yA jugupsA ke milAne se ATha prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yaha sthAna do prakAra kintu kaSAyaprAmRta kI paramparA
ke anusAra jo jIva upazamaNi para car3hA hai, vaha usase cyuta hokara sAsAdana
guNasthAna ko bhI prApta ho sakatA hai  /  tathApi kaSAyaprAmRta kI cUrNi meM
anantAnubaMdhI upazamanA prakRti hai, isakA niSedha kiyA gayA hai aura sAtha meM
yaha bhI likhA hai ki vedaka samyagdRSTi jIva anantAnubaMdhI catuSka ko
visaMyojanA kiye binA kaSAyoM ko upazamAtA nahIM hai  /  mUla kaSAyaprAbhRta se
bhI isa mata kI puSTi hotI hai  /  saptadazabandhakA hi dvaye 1
samyagmithyAdRSTayo'viratasamyagdRSTyadaca  /  tatra samyagmithyAdRSTInAM trINi
udayasthAnAni tadyathA-- sapta, aSTa, nava  /  -saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0
166 2 tatrAntAnubandhiyaH trayo'nyatame krodhAdayaH trayANAM vedAnAmanyatamo
vaida:, trayoryugalayoranyatarad yugalam samyagmithyAtvaM ceti saptAnAM
prakRtInAbhudayaH samyagmithyAdRSTiSu dhruvaH  /  - saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA,
pR0 166 -

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  Therefore, two Chaubisi are obtained here. By combining
fear and disgust in the aforementioned seven natural उदयस्थान, nine natural
उदयस्थान are obtained. Since there is no alternative here, one Chaubisi is
obtained. Thus, in the mixed गुणस्थान, with seventeen natural बंधस्थान, one
Chaubisi of भंग in the seven natural उदयस्थान, two Chaubisi of भंग in the eight
natural उदयस्थान, and one Chaubisi of भंग in the nine natural उदयस्थान, a total
of four Chaubisi are obtained.  After explaining the alternatives of उदयस्थान in
the seventeen natural बंध in the mixed गुणस्थान, now we explain the उदयस्थान in
the fourth गुणस्थान. In the fourth अविरत सम्बष्टि गुणस्थान, with seventeen
natural बंध, there are six natural, वात प्रकृतिक, आर प्रकृतिक, and nine natural,
these four उदयस्थान. One should know that in the अविरत सम्यग्दृष्टि गुणस्थान,
the definite उदय of any one कषाय from the fourfold of कोषादि, any one वेद from
the three वेद, and any one युगल from the two युगल, of the three कषाय types
excluding अनन्तानुबंधी, results in six natural उदयस्थान. There is one Chaubisi
of भंग in this.  By adding fear or disgust or सम्यक्त्वमोहनीय to this six
natural उदयस्थान, seven natural उदयस्थान are obtained in three ways. There is
one Chaubisi in each of these distinctions, therefore, three Chaubisi of भंग are
obtained in the seven natural उदयस्थान.  The eight natural उदयस्थान are obtained
by adding fear and disgust or fear and सम्यक्त्वमोहनीय or disgust...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha se prApta hotA hai ata: yahAM do caubIsI prApta hotI haiM
/  ukta sAta prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaya aura jugupsA ko yugapad milAne se
nau prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ vikalpa na hone se eka caubIsI hotI
hai| isa prakAra mizra guNasthAna meM satraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke rahate
sAta prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI, ATha prakRtika
udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM ko do caubIsI aura nau prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM
kI eka caubIsI, kula milAkara cAra caubIsI prApta hotI haiN| mizra guNasthAna
meM satraha prakRtika baMdha meM udayasthAnoM ke vikalpa batalAne ke bAda aba
cauthe guNasthAna meM udayasthAna batalAte haiN| cauthe avirata sambaSTi
guNasthAna meM satraha prakRtika baMdha hote hue chaha prakRtika, vAta
prakRtika, Ara prakRtika aura nau prakRtika, ye cAra udayasthAna hote haiN| ve
isa prakAra jAnanA cAhie ki anantAnubaMdhI ko chor3akara zeSa tIna kaSAya
prakAroM ke koSAdi catuSka meM se koI eka kaSAya, tIna vedoM meM se koI eka
veda, do yugaloM meM se koI eka yugala, ina chaha prakRtiyoM kA avirata
samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM nizcita rUpa se udaya hone se chaha prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai  /  isameM bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI hotI hai| isa chaha
prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaya yA jugupsA yA samyaktvamohanIya ina tIna
prakRtiyoM meM se kisI eka prakRti ke milAne para sAta prakRtika udayasthAna
tIna prakAra se prApta hotA hai| yahA~ ekaeka bheda meM eka-eka cauvIsI hotI
hai, ataH sAta prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM kI tIna caubIsI prApta hotI
haiM  /  ATha prakRtika udayasthAna pUrvokta chaha prakRtika udayasthAna meM
bhaya aura jugupsA athavA bhaya aura samyaktvamohanIya athavA jugupsA .

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 104: The Sevenfold  Combining the two natures of
**Samyaktvamohaniya** and **Avirat Samyagdristi** results in a **sevenfold**
nature. This sevenfold nature can be attained in three ways, leading to twenty-
four **bhangas** (breakdowns) for each variation. This results in three sets of
twenty-four **bhangas** for the eightfold nature.  Combining the three natures
of **bhaya** (fear), **jagapsa** (desire), and **Samyaktvamohaniya** within the
sixfold nature results in a **ninefold** nature. This ninefold nature lacks
**yivarupa** (form), leading to a single set of twenty-four **bhangas**.
Therefore, in the fourth **Avirat Samyagdristi** **gunasthan** (stage of
virtue), there are seventeen **bandhastan** (bondage states) with sixfold nature
resulting in one set of twenty-four **bhangas**, sevenfold nature resulting in
three sets of twenty-four **bhangas**, eightfold nature resulting in three sets
of twenty-four **bhangas**, and ninefold nature resulting in one set of twenty-
four **bhangas**. This totals eight sets of twenty-four **bhangas**. Out of
these, four sets are without the **Samyaktvamohaniya** nature, and four sets are
with the **Samyaktvamohaniya** nature.  The four sets without the
**Samyaktvamohaniya** nature are to be known by **Upshama Samyagdristi**
(subdued omniscient) and **Kshayik Samyagdristi** (decaying omniscient) beings.
The four sets with the **Samyaktvamohaniya** nature are to be known by **Vedak
Samyagdristi** (knowing omniscient) beings.  Now, we will explain the
alternatives for the **udayasthan** (liberation states) of the thirteen
**bandhastan** (bondage states). These are: "**Tere Panchaai Athev**" - with
thirteen **bandhastan**, there are four **udayasthan**: fivefold, sixfold,
sevenfold, and eightfold.  The first, fivefold **udayasthan**, is as follows:
**pratyakhyanavaran** (denial-covering), **sanjwalan** (agitation) types of
**krodhadi kshaya chatushk** (fourfold passions of anger, etc.), one passion
from each of the three **vedas** (knowledge),

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 104 saptatikA prakaraNa aura samyaktvamohanIya ina do prakRtiyoM ke milAne se
prApta hotA hai  /  isa sthAna ke tIna prakAra se prApta hone ke kAraNa pratyeka
bheda meM maMgoM kI eka-eka caubIsI hotI hai| jisase ATha prakRtika udayasthAna
meM namI kI tIna colI huii| ukta chaha prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaya, jagapsA
aura samyaktvamohanIya, ina tInoM prakRtiyoM ko eka sAtha milAne para nau
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| isa sthAna meM yivArUpa na hone se bhaMgoM kI
eka caubIsI banatI hai| _ isa prakAra cauthe avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM
satraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM chaha prakRtika udayasthAna kI bhaMgoM kI eka
caubIsI, sAta prakRtika udayasthAna kI bhaMgoM kI tIna caubIsI, ATha prakRtika
udayasthAna kI bhaMgoM kI tIna caubIsI aura nau prakRtika udayasthAna kI bhaMgoM
kI eka caubosI, isa prakAra kula milAkara bhaMgoM kI ATha caubIsI prApta huii|
jisameM se cAra caubIsI samyaktvamohanIya ke udaya binA kI hotI haiM aura cAra
caubIsI samyaktvamohanIya ke udaya sAhita kI hotI haiN| inameM se jo
samyaktvamohanIya ke udaya binA kI hotI haiM, ve upazama samyagdRSTi aura
kSAyika samyagdRSTi jIvoM ke jAnanA cAhiye aura jo samyaktvamohanIya ke udaya
sahita kI hotI haiM, ve vedaka samyagdRSTi jIboM ke jAnanA caahiye| aba teraha
prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke udayasthAnoM ke vikalpoM ko batalAte haiM ki 'tere
paMcAi aTheva'teraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke rahate pAMca prakRtika, chaha
prakRtika, sAta prakRtika aura ATha prakRtika, ye cAra udayasthAna hote haiN|
unameM se pahalA pA~ca prakRtika udayasthAna isa prakAra hotA hai ki
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, saMjvalana prakAroM ke krodhAdi kaSAya catuSka meM se koI
eka-eka kaSAya, tIna vedoM meM se koI eka

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth, Chapter 105  In any one of the two pairs of Vedas, these
five natures are always arising! This place does not occur in Mrināla. It has
one BBC of bhangas. By combining one of the three natures - fear, disgust, or
right faith delusion - with the five-natured arising place, a six-natured
arising place is obtained. Due to this place occurring in three ways, there are
three Chaubīsīs.   Further, by combining two natures - fear and disgust, fear
and right faith delusion, or disgust and right faith delusion - with the five-
natured arising place, a seven-natured arising place is obtained. Due to this
arising place being obtained in three ways, three Chaubīsīs are obtained. An
eight-natured arising place is obtained by combining fear, disgust, and right
faith delusion simultaneously with the five-natured arising place. Since there
is no alternative in this place, there is one Chaubīsī of bhangas here.  Thus,
in the fifth Gunasthan, with thirteen-natured bondage places, there are a total
of eight Chaubīsīs of bhangas, with one, three, three, and one in relation to
the arising places. Of these, four Chaubīsīs belong to the Upshama Samyagdristi
and Kshayika Samyagdristi beings, and four Chaubīsīs belong to the Vedaka
Samyagdristi beings. The Vedaka Samyagdristi have four Chaubīsīs with the
arising of right faith delusion.  So far, we have discussed the arising places
in twenty-two, twenty-one, seventeen, and thirteen-natured bondage places. Now,
we will explain the arising places in the nine-natured and other bondage places.
"Chattarima Navabantragesu Ukkosa Sattam Udhayamsa" - meaning, in the nine-
natured bondage place, the arising places are from four to seven. That is, in
the nine-natured bondage place, there are four-natured, five-natured, six-
natured...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 105 veda, do yugaloM meM se koI eka yugala, ina pA~ca
prakRtiyoM kA sadaiva udaya rahatA hai ! yaha sthAna na mRNAla meM hotA hai|
isameM bhaMgoM kI eka bIbIsI hotI hai  /  pA~ca prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaya,
jugupsA va samyaktva mohanIya, ina tIna prakRtiyoM meM se koI eka prakRti ko
milAne se chaha prakRtika udayasthAna prApta hotA hai| tIna prakAra se isa
sthAna ke hone se tIna caubIsI hotI haiN| anantara pA~ca prakRtika udayasthAna
meM bhaya aura jugupsA yA bhaya aura samyaktvamohanIya yA jugupsA aura
samyaktvamohanIya, ina do prakRtiyoM ko milAne para sAta prakRtika udayasthAna
prApta hotA hai  /  isa udayasthAna ko tIna prakAra se prApta hone ke kAraNa
tIna caubIsI prApta ho jAtI haiN| ATha prakRtika udayasthAna pA~ca prakRtika
udayasthAna ke sAtha bhaya, jugupsA aura samyaktvamohanIya ko yugapada milAne se
hotA hai| isa sthAna meM vikalpa na hone se yahA~ bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI hotI
hai  /  isa prakAra pA~caveM guNasthAna meM teraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke
rahate udayasthAnoM kI apekSA eka, tIna, tIna, eka, kula milAkara bhaMgoM kI
ATha caubIsI hotI haiN| jinameM cAra caubIsI upazama samyagdRSTi aura kSAyika
samyagdRSTi jIvoM tathA cAra caubIsI vedaka samyagdRSTi jIvoM ke hotI haiM  /
vedaka samyagdRSTi ke samyaktvamohanIya ke udaya vAlI cAra cobIsI hotI haiN|
abhI taka bAIsa, ikkIsa, satraha aura teraha prakRtika baMdhasthAnoM meM
udayasthAnoM kA nirdeza kiyA hai| aba Age nau prakRtika Adi baMdhasthAnoM meM
udayasthAnoM kA spaSTIkaraNa karate haiM  /  'cattArimA navabaMtragesu ukkosa
satta udayaMsA' arthAt no prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM udayasthAna cAra se
prArambha hokara sAta taka hote haiM  /  yAni nau prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM
cAra prakRtika, pAMca prakRtika, chaha prakR

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 106: The Seven-Natured State  There are four types of arising states:
three-natured, four-natured, five-natured, and seven-natured. These arise in the
sixth, seventh, and eighth stages of the soul.  The four-natured arising state
is characterized by the following: one of the four passions (anger, pride,
deceit, and greed), one of the three Vedas (knowledge, conduct, and faith), one
of the two pairs (knowledge and conduct, faith and conduct), and one of the four
natures (fear, aversion, delusion, and right faith). This four-natured state
arises in the sixth and subsequent stages of the soul for both temporary and
permanent omniscients. Since there is no choice involved, there is one twenty-
fourfold classification.  By adding one of the three natures (fear, aversion, or
delusion) to the four-natured state, we get the five-natured arising state.
There are three choices here, and since each choice has twenty-fourfold
classifications, there are a total of three twenty-fourfold classifications.  By
combining two of the four natures (fear and aversion, fear and delusion, or
aversion and delusion) in the four-natured state, we get the six-natured arising
state. There are three choices here, and since each choice has twenty-fourfold
classifications, there are a total of three twenty-fourfold classifications.  By
combining all three natures (fear, aversion, and delusion) in the four-natured
state, we get the seven-natured arising state. This state is unique, so there is
only one twenty-fourfold classification.  Therefore, in the nine-natured state
of bondage, there are a total of eight twenty-fourfold classifications: one for
the four-natured state, three for the five-natured state, three for the six-
natured state, and one for the seven-natured state.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 106 saptanikA prakaraNa tika aura sAta prakRtika, ye cAra udayasthAna haiM  /
yaha baMdhasthAna chaThe, sAtaveM aura AThaveM guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai| cAra
prakRtika udayasthAna meM grahaNa kI gaI prakRtiyAM isa prakAra haiM ki
saMjvalana kaSAya catuSka meM se koI eka kaSAya, tIna vedoM meM se koI eka beda,
do yugaloM meM se koI eka yugala, ina cAra prakRtiyoM kA udaya kSAyika
samyagdRSTiyoM, aupazamika samyagdRSTiyoM ko chaThe Adi guNasthAnoM meM niyama
se hotA hai  /  vikalpa nahIM hone se isameM eka caubIsI hotI hai  /  isameM
bhaya, jugupsA, samyaktvamohanIya ina tIna prakRtiyoM meM se kisI eka prakRti ko
krama se milAne para pani prakRtika udayasthAna tIna prakAra se prApta hotA hai|
isameM tIna vikalpa haiM aura eka vikalpa kI bhaMgoM kI eka caubIso hone se
bhaMgoM kI tIna caubIsI prApta hotI haiM  /  pUrvokta cAra prakRtika udayasthAna
meM bhaya aura jugupsA, bhaya aura samyaktvamohanIya yA jugapsA aura
samyaktvamohanIya ina do-do prakRtiyoM ko kama se milAne para chaha prakRtika
udayasthAna tIna prakAra se prApta hotA hai aura tIna vikalpa hone se eka-eka
bheda meM bhaMgoM kI eka-eka cauvIsI prApta hotI hai, jisase chaha prakRtika
udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM kI kula tIna caubIsI prApta huii| phira cAra prakRtika
udayasthAna meM bhaya, jugupsA aura samyaktvamohanIya ina tInoM ko eka sAtha
milAne se sAta prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yaha sAta prakRtika
udayasthAna eka hI prakAra kA hai, ataH yahA~ bhaMgoM ko eka caubIsI prApta hotI
hai| isa prakAra nau prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM udayasthAnoM kI apekSA cAra
prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI, pA~ca prakRtika udayasthAnoM
meM bhaMgoM kI tIna caubIsI, chaha prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM bhaMgoM kI tIna
caubIsI aura sAta prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI hone se kula
milAkara ATha caubIsI prApta hotI haiN| inameM se cAra

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Karma Granth (Chapter 107)  There are 24 types of **Upasham
Samyagdrishti** and **Kshayik Samyagdrishti** Jivas, and 4 types of **Vedak
Samyagdrishti** Jivas.  In the five natural **Bandhastanas**, there is an
**Udayasthan** of two natures: one from the five **Sanjwalanas** (anger, pride,
deceit, and greed) and one from the three **Vedas**. This is stated as
"**Panchvibandhage Pun Udo Doham**". In this place, there are twelve **Bhangas**
formed by multiplying the four **Kshayas** with the three **Vedas**. These
twelve **Bhangas** occur in the first part of the ninth **Gunasthan**.  After
the five natural **Bandhastanas**, there are four, three, two, and one natural
**Bandhastanas**, each having an **Udayasthan** of one nature. This means that
each of these **Udayasthanas** has the rise of one nature. This is explained as
"**Itti Chaubandhai Ikkekkudiya Havanti Samve Vi**".  In the five natural
**Bandhastanas**, the **Bandhavichched** and **Udayavichched** of the
**Purushaveda** occur simultaneously. Therefore, during the four natural
**Bandhas**, the rise of one nature from the four **Sanjwalanas** occurs. This
results in four **Bhangas**. This is because a Jiva ascends the **Shreni** due
to the rise of anger, another due to the rise of pride, another due to the rise
of deceit, and another due to the rise of greed. Thus, there are four
**Bhangas**.  Some **Acharyas** believe that during the transition of the twelve
natural **Bandhas**, the rise of one **Veda** from the three **Vedas** occurs.
Therefore, according to them, in the first period of the four natural
**Bandhas**, there is a rise of two natures. This results in twelve **Bhangas**
by multiplying the four **Kshayas** with the three **Vedas**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaSTha karmagrantha 107 caubIsI upazama samyagdRSTi aura kSAyika samyagdRSTi
jIvoM ke aura cAra caubIsI vedaka samyagdRSTi jIvoM ke hotI haiM  /  pA~ca
prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM saMjvalana kodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha inameM se koI
eka tathA tIna vedoM meM se koI eka veda, isa prakAra do prakRtiyoM kA eka
udayasthAna hotA hai- paMcavibaMdhage puNa udao dohaM  / ' isa sthAna meM cAroM
kaSAyoM ko tInoM vedoM se guNita karane para bAraha bhaMga hote haiM  /  ye
bAraha bhaMga nauveM guNasthAna ke pAMca bhAgoM meM se pahale bhAga meM hote
haiM  /  pA~ca prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke bAda ke jo cAra, tIna, do aura eka
prakRtika baMsthAna haiM, unameM eka-eka prakRti vAlA udayasthAna hotA hai  /
arthAt ina udayasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM eka-eka prakRti kA udaya hotA hai'
ittI caubaMdhAI ikkekakudayA havaMti samve vi|' jisakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce karate
haiM  /  pA~ca prakRtika baMghasthAna meM se puruSaveda kA baMdhaviccheda aura
udayaviccheda eka sAtha hotA hai, ataH cAra prakRtika baMdha ke samaya cAra
saMjvalanoM meM se kisI eka prakRti kA udaya hotA hai  /  isa prakAra yahA~ cAra
bhaMga prApta hote haiN| kyoMki koI jIva saMjvalana krodha ke udaya se zreNi
ArohaNa karate haiM, koI saMjvalana mAna ke udaya se, koI saMjvalana mAyA ke
udaya se aura koI saMjvalana lobha ke udaya se zreNi car3hate haiN| isa prakAra
cAra bhaMga hote haiM  /  yahA~ para kitane ho AcArya yaha mAnate haiM ki bAra
prakRtika baMdha ke saMkrama ke samaya tIna vedoM meM se kisI eka veda kA udaya
hotA hai  /  ataH unake mata se cAra prakRtika baMdha ke prathama kAla meM do
prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai aura isa prakAra cAra kaSAyoM ko tona vedoM se
guNita

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sapttatika Chapter  There are twelve bhangas (breaks) when performing
(the ritual). This is also confirmed in the original commentary of the
Panchasangraha:  "In the section on the destruction of the six passions, some
Acharyas believe that the emergence of one of the three Vedas occurs in the
first part of the beings who bind four natures. Therefore, you should know that
there are twelve bhangas for the beings who bind four natures, due to the
emergence of two natures."  Thus, according to the opinion of those Acharyas,
there are twenty-four bhangas in the emergence of two natures. Twelve bhangas
are at the time of the five-natured bondage, and twelve bhangas are at the time
of the four-natured bondage.  When the bondage of the burning anger is broken,
there is a three-natured bondage and a one-natured emergence. Here, there are
three bhangas. However, the special feature here is that one should say that the
emergence of one of the remaining three natures, excluding the burning anger,
occurs. Because, in the emergence of burning anger, the bondage of burning anger
is definitely present. It is also said: "Ya te bandhai" - the being who
experiences pain, definitely binds that.  Therefore, when the bondage of burning
anger is broken, its emergence is also broken. Therefore, at the time of the
three-natured bondage:  1. "They desire the emergence of one of the three Vedas
at the time of the transition from the three-natured bondage. Therefore,
according to their opinion, there are twelve bhangas of emergence in the first
part of the beings who bind two natures."  - Sapttatika Chapter Commentary, Page
168

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa karane para bAraha bhaMga hote haiN| isI bAta kI puSTi
paMcasaMgraha kI mUla TIkA meM bhI kI gaI hai "paSadhaSakasyAtyAcanibhAge
trayANAM verAmAmadhyasamasya devasyogamaM keviSiSyanti, racaturviSabaMdhakasyApi
dvAdaza nikokyAn jAnIhi  /  _ arthAtkitane hI AcArya cAra prakRtiyoM kA bandha
karane vAle jIvoM ke pahale bhAga meM tIna vedoM meM se kisI eka veda kA udaya
mAnate haiM, ata: cAra prakRtiyoM kA bandha karane vAle jIva ke bhI do
prakRtiyoM ke udaya se bAraha bhaMga jAnanA cAhie  /  isa prakAra una AcAryoM ke
mata se do prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM caubIsa bhaMga hue| bAraha bhaMga to pAMca
prakRtika bandhasthAna ke samaya ke aura bAraha bhaMga cA padaka bandha sAya,
isa prakAra jamIna maMga hue| saMjvalana krodha ke bandhaviccheda ho jAne para
tIna prakRtika bandha aura eka prakRtika udaya hotA hai| yahA~ tIna bhaMga hote
haiM  /  kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki yahA~ saMjvalana krodha ko chor3akara zeSa
tIna prakRtiyoM meM se kisI eka prakRti kA udaya kahanA cAhie, kyoMki saMjvalana
krodha ke udaya meM saMjvalana krodha kA bandha avazya hotA hai| kahA bhI hai-
yA te baMdhaI.-jIva jisakA vedana karatA hai, usakA bandha avazya karatA hai|
isalie jaba saMjvalana kodha kA bandhaviccheda ho gayA to usakA udayaviccheda
bhI ho jAtA hai| isalie tIna prakRtika bandha ke samaya 1 iha
vijayatuviSabaMdhasaMkramakAle trayANAM bedAnAmanyatamasya vevasyodayamicchanti
tatastanmatena pasuvidhabaMdhakasyApi prathamakAle dvAdaza vikodayabhaMgA
labhyante  /  -saptatikA prakaraNa TokA, pR0 168

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth, Verse 106  It should be said that the emergence of any
one of the three natures, namely, Sanjwalan, Mana, and Maya, occurs.   When the
bondage of Sanjwalan Mana is broken, there is a bondage of two natures and an
emergence of one nature. However, that emergence is of one of Sanjwalan Maya or
Lobha, therefore, two breaks are obtained here.   When the bondage of Sanjwalan
Maya is broken, there is a bondage of Sanjwalan Lobha and its emergence. This is
a bondage of one nature and a place of emergence. Therefore, there is one break
here.   Although the emergence of Sanjwalan Krodha, etc., occurs in the four
places of bondage, etc., of four natures, therefore, no special distinction
arises in the breaks, yet due to the difference in the places of bondage, they
have been stated separately, considering them as different.  Similarly, in the
absence of bondage, in the subtle Sampraya Gunasthan, the emergence of one
nature of Mohaniya Karma should be understood - 'Bandhovareme Vi Taha',
therefore, this is one break.   Thus, in the four places of bondage, etc., of
four natures, the total breaks are 4+3+3+1+1=11.  Subsequently, at the end of
the subtle Sampraya Gunasthan, when the emergence and breaking of Mohlliya
occurs, its essence is found in the Upshanta Moha Gunasthan. Here, the
consideration of the mutual connection of the places of bondage and emergence is
being done, due to which there was no need to mention the place of essence in
the verse, yet it has been indicated here in passing - 'Udayabhave Vi Va Hojja'
- the existence of Mohaniya Karma is due to choice!  Now, in the following
verse, the breaks that are possible in the places of emergence from ten to one
are indicated.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 106 saMjvalana mAna Adi tInoM meM se kisI eka prakRti kA
udaya hotA hai, aisA kahanA caahie| saMjvalana mAna ke bandhaviccheda ho jAne
para do prakRtika bandha aura eka prakRtika udaya hotA hai  /  kintu vaha udaya
saMjvalana mAyA aura lobha meM se kisI eka kA hotA hai, ata: yahAM do bhaMga
prApta hote haiM  /  saMjvalana mAyA ke bandhaviccheda ho jAne para eka
saMjvalana lobha kA bandha hotA hai aura usI kA udaya  /  yaha eka prakRtika
bandha aura udayasthAna hai  /  ata: yahA~ usameM eka bhaMga hotA hai| _ yadyapi
cAra prakRtika bandhasthAna Adi meM saMjvalana krodha Adi kA udaya hotA hai,
ata: bhaMgoM meM koI vizeSatA utpanna nahIM hotI hai, phira bhI bandhasthAnoM ke
bheda se unameM bheda mAnakara pRthak-pRthaka kathana kiyA gayA hai| isI prakAra
se bandha ke abhAva meM bhI sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM mohanIya karma kI eka
prakRti kA udaya samajhanA cAhiye-'baMdhovarame vi tahA' isaliye eka bhaMga yaha
huA  /  isa prakAra cAra prakRtika bandhasthAna Adi meM kula bhaMga 4+3+3+1+1=11
hue| anantara sUkmasaMparAya guNasthAna ke anta meM mohallIya kA udayaviccheda
ho jAne para bhI upazAntamoha guNasthAna meM usakA satva pAyA jAtA hai| yahA~
bandhasthAna aura udayasthAnoM ke paraspara saMveSa kA vicAra kiyA jA rahA hai,
jisase gAthA meM satvasthAna ke ullekha kI AvazyakatA nahIM thI, phira bhI
prasaMgavaza yahA~ usakA bhI saMketa kiyA gayA hai-'udayAbhAve vi vA
hojjA'-mohanIya karma kI sattA vikalpa se hotI hai ! aba Age kI gAthA meM dasa
se lekara eka paryanta udayasthAnoM meM jitane bhaMga sambhava haiM, unakA
nirdeza karate haiN|

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 71  **110** **Verse 18** One, six, eleven, ten, seven, four, one,
these are twenty-four, twenty-four, two, eleven.  **Word Meaning:** One, six,
eleven, ten, seven, four, one, these, twenty-four, twenty-four, two, eleven.
**Meaning:** In the ten natural and other places of origin, there are twenty-
four variations, with one, six, eleven, ten, seven, four, and one. In the two
natural places of origin, there are twenty-four, and in the one natural place of
origin, there are eleven variations.  **Special Meaning:** The verse states the
number of twenty-four variations in each of the ten natural and other places of
origin. Although the number of variations in each of the first ten natural and
other places of origin has been mentioned earlier, their total number is
mentioned here to show the total number of variations in all the places of
origin of the mohaniya karma and the number of individual variations. The
twenty-four variations mentioned in the verse should be adjusted according to
the number of places of origin. For example, there is one twenty-four in the
place of origin of ten, six twenty-fours in the place of origin of nine, and so
on. This is explained below.  There is one twenty-four in the ten natural places
of origin, "Ekkag". This is because there are no variations in the nature of the
ten natural places of origin. Therefore, one twenty-four is mentioned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 110 saptatikA prakaraNa ekkaga chakkekkArasa vasa satta caukka ekkagA ceva  /
ee cauvIsagayA cauvIsa dugekkamikkArA  // 18 //  zabdArtha-ekkaga-eka,
chakphekkArasachaha, gyAraha, dasadala, sasa-sAta, caukka-cAra, ekakamAeka,
deva-nizcaya se, ee-ye maMga, ghajayIsagayA caubIsa kI saMkhyA vAle hote haiM,
cauvosa-caubIsa, duga-do ke udaya hone para, ikkamikkArA-eka ke udaya meM
gyAraha maMga  /  gAyArtha-dasa prakRtika Adi udayasthAnoM meM kama se eka,
chaha, gyAraha, dasa, sAta, cAra aura eka, itane caubIsa vikalpa rUpa bhaMga
hote haiM tathA do prakRtika udayasthAna meM caubIsa aura eka prakRtika
udayasthAna meM gyAraha bhaMga hote haiN| vizeSArtha-gAthA meM dasa prakRtika
Adi pratyeka udayasthAnoM meM caubIsa vikalpa rUpa bhaMgoM kI saMkhyA batalAI
hai| yadyapi pahale dasa prakRtika Adi udayasthAnoM meM kahA~ kitanI bhaMgoM ko
caubIsI hotI haiM, batalA Aye haiM, lekina yahAM unakI kula (sampUrNa) saMkhyA
isa kAraNa batalAI hai ki jisase yaha jJAta ho jAtA hai ki mohanIya karma ke
saba udayasthAnoM meM saba bhaMgoM kI caubIsI kitanI haiM aura phuTakara bhaMga
kitane hote haiN| _ gAthA meM batAI gaI bhaMgoM kI caubIsI ko saMkhyA kA
udayasthAnoM ke sAtha yathAsaMkhya samAyojana karanA caahiye| jaise dasa ke
udaya meM eka caubIsI, nau ke udaya meM chaha caubIsI Adi  /  isakA spaSTIkaraNa
nIce karate haiN| _ dasa prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI hotI
hai'ekkaga'  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki dasa prakRtika udayasthAna meM
prakRtivikalpa nahIM hote haiM  /  isIliye eka caubIsI batalAI hai  /

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth 111  **Nine Natural Arising Places**  There are a total of
six **Chaubisi** (sets of 24) of **Bhang** (breakdowns) in the nine natural
arising places. They are as follows:  * In the twenty-two natural binding
places, there are three **Chaubisi** in the nine natural arising places. * In
the twenty-one natural binding places, there is one **Chaubisi** in the nine
natural arising places. * In the **Mishra Guna** (mixed quality) place, there is
one **Chaubisi** in the seventeen natural binding places. * In the fourth
quality place, there is one **Chaubisi** in the seventeen natural binding
places.  Thus, there are a total of six **Chaubisi** of **Bhang** in the nine
natural arising places.  **Eight Natural Arising Places**  There are a total of
eleven **Chaubisi** of **Bhang** in the eight natural arising places, known as
**Ikkaral**. They are as follows:  * In the twenty-two natural binding places,
there are three **Chaubisi** in the eight natural arising places. * In the
twenty-one natural binding places, there are two **Chaubisi** in the eight
natural arising places. * In the **Mishra Guna** place, there are two
**Chaubisi** in the seventeen natural binding places. * In the fourth quality
place, there are three **Chaubisi** in the seventeen natural binding places. *
In the fifth quality place, there is one **Chaubisi** in the thirteen natural
binding places.  Thus, there are a total of eleven **Chaubisi** of **Bhang** in
the eight natural arising places.  **Seven Natural Arising Places**  There are a
total of ten **Chaubisi** of **Bhang** in the seven natural arising places. They
are as follows:  * In the twenty-two natural binding places, there is one
**Chaubisi** in the seven natural arising places. * In the twenty-one natural
binding places, there is one **Chaubisi** in the seven natural arising places. *
In the **Mishra Guna** place, there is one **Chaubisi** in the seventeen natural
binding places. * In the fourth quality place, there is one **Chaubisi** in the
seventeen natural binding places.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 111 nau prakRtika udayasthAna meM 'chatraka' - bhaMgoM kI
kula chaha caubIsI hotI haiN| ve isa prakAra haiM- bAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna
meM jo nau prakRtika udayasthAna hai, usakI tIna caubIsI hotI haiN| ikkIsa
prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke samaya jo no prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai, usakI eka
caubIsI mizra guNasthAna meM satraha prakRtika baMsthAna ke samaya jo mau
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai, usake bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI aura cauthe
guNasthAna meM satraha prakRtika baMdha ke samaya 'udayasthAna hotA hai, usake
bhagoM kI eka caubIsI  /  prakRtika udayasthAna ke bhago ko kula chaha bIsI
huii| , jo nau prakRtika isa prakAra nau ATha prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM
kI gyAraha caubIsI hotI hai-- 'ikkArala'  /  ve isa prakAra haiM- bAIsa
prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke samaya jo ATha prakRtika udayasthAna hote haiM, usake
bhaMgoM kI tIna caubIsI, ikkIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM jo ATha prakRtika
udayasthAna haiM usake bhaMgoM kI do caubIsI, mizra guNasthAna meM satraha
prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke samaya jo ATha prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai, usake
bhaMgoM kI do caubosI, cauthe guNasthAna meM jo satraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna
hai, usameM ATha prakRtika udayasthAna ke bhaMgoM kI kula tIna naubIsI aura
pAMcaveM guNasthAna meM teraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke samaya ATha prakRtika
udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI  /  isa prakAra ATha prakRtika
udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM kI kula gyAraha caubIsI huI  /  sAta prakRtika
udayasthAna meM maMgoM kI kula dasa caubIsI hotI haiN| ve isa prakAra haiM-
bAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke samaya jo sAta prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai
usakI eka caubIsI  /  ikkIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke samaya jo sAta prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai usake bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI, mizra guNasthAna meM satraha
prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke samaya hone vAle sAta prakRtika udayasthAna ke bhaMgoM
kI eka caubIsI, cauthe guNa

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 72  **P**  There are seventeen natural *bandha sthana* in the
*sthana*.  There are three *chaubisi* of the seven natural *udaya sthana* limbs
in the *sthana* with seventeen natural *bandha sthana*. There are three
*chaubisi* of the seven natural *udaya sthana* destructions in the *sthana* with
thirteen natural *bandha sthana*. There is one *chaubisi* of the seven natural
*udaya sthana* destructions in the *sthana* with nine natural *bandha sthana*.
Thus, there are a total of ten *chaubisi* of destructions in the seven natural
*udaya sthana*.  There are a total of seven *chaubisi* of destructions in the
six natural *udaya sthana*. They are as follows: There is one *chaubisi* of the
six natural *udaya sthana* destructions in the *sthana* with seventeen natural
*bandha sthana* during the time of uninterrupted *samyagdrishti*. There are
three *chaubisi* each of the six natural *udaya sthana* limbs in the *sthana*
with thirteen natural *bandha sthana* and nine natural *bandha sthana*. Thus,
there are a total of seven *chaubisi* of destructions in the natural *udaya
sthana*.  There are a total of four *chaubisi* of destructions in the five
natural *udaya sthana*. They are as follows: There is one *chaubisi* of the five
natural *udaya sthana* destructions in the *sthana* with thirteen natural
*bandha sthana*. There are a total of three *chaubisi* of the five natural
*udaya sthana* destructions in the *sthana* with nine natural *bandha sthana*.
Thus, there are a total of four *chaubisi* of destructions in the five natural
*udaya sthana*.  There is one *chaubisi* of the four natural *udaya*
destructions in the *sthana* with nine natural *bandha sthana*.  Thus, the total
number of *chaubisi* of destructions from ten to four *udaya sthana* is
1+6+11+10+...+4+1 = 40 *chaubisi*.  There are twelve destructions of the two
natural *udaya* in the *sthana* with five natural *bandha*. There are also two
natural *udaya* possible in the *sthana* with four natural *bandha*, according
to some *acharyas*. Thus, there are twelve destructions of the two natural
*udaya sthana*. This makes one *chaubisi* of destructions in the two natural
*udaya sthana*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 112 saptatikA prakaraNa P .. sthAna meM jo satraha prakRtika baMSasthAna haiM,
usake sAta prakRtika udayasthAna ke aMgoM kI tIna caubIsI, teraha prakRtika
baMdhasthAna ke samaya jo sAta prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai, usake bhaMgoM kI
tIna caubIsI aura . nau prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke samaya jo sAta prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai, usake bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI hotI hai| isa prakAra sAta
prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM kI kula dasa caubIsI hotI haiN| chaha
prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM kI kula sAta caubIsI isa prakAra hotI haiM-
avirata samyagdRSTi ke satraha prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke samaya jo chaha
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai, usake bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI, teraha prakRtika
aura nau prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM jo chaha prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai,
usake aMgoM ko tIna-tIna caubIsI hotI haiN| isa prakAra yaha prakRtika
udayasthAna ke bhaMgoM kI kula sAta caubIsI huii| pAMca prakRtika udayasthAna
meM bhaMgoM kI kula cAra caubIsI hotI haiN| ve isa prakAra haiM-teraha prakRtika
baMghasthAna meM jo pA~ca prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai, usake bhaMgoM kI eka
caubIsI aura nau prakRtika baMghasthAna meM jo pA~ca prakRtika udayasthAna haiM,
usake bhaGgoM kI kula tIna caubIsI hotI haiN| isa prakAra pA~ca prakRtika
udayasthAna meM bhaGgoM kI kula cAra caubIsI hotI haiM  /  nau prakRtika
baMdhasthAna ke samaya cAra prakRtika udaya ke bhaGgoM kI .. eka caubIsI hotI
hai| isa prakAra dasa se lekara cAra paryanta udayasthAnoM ke bhaMgoM kI kula
saMkhyA 1+6+11+10+-+4+1-40 caubIsI hotI haiN| pA~ca prakRtika baMdha ke samaya
do prakRtika udaya ke bAraha bhaMga hote haiM aura cAra prakRtika baMdha ke
samaya bhI do prakRtika udaya saMbhava hai, aisA kucha AcAryoM kA mata hai, ata:
isa prakAra do prakRtika udayasthAna ke bAraha bhaMga hue| jisase do prakRtika
udayasthAna ke bhegoM kI eka

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixth karmagrantha, Chaubisi, consists of four, three, two, and one natural
bandha sthana, and at the time of abandha, one natural udaya sthana,
respectively, with four, three, two, and one gangore. Their total number is
eleven. Therefore, there are a total of eleven bhangas for one natural udaya
sthana. Thus, the verse explains the chaubisi and the individual bhangas in all
the udaya sthanas of mohaniya karma.  The fourth verse of this gatha is
described in two ways in the tab of the sixth karmagrantha called Saptathika.
According to the svamata, it is described as "char gikimi iskara" and according
to the matantara, it is described as "babbis kugiskamikara". According to the
first reading, according to the svamata, there are twelve bhangas in two natural
udaya sthana, and according to the second reading, according to the matantara,
there are twenty-four bhangas in two natural udaya sthana. Acharya Malayagiri
has confirmed this meaning in his tika as follows: "Dwikodaye 'chaturvishatireka
bhangakanaam, etasch matantarenoktam, anyatha svamate praavasesha bhangaa
bevitaamyaah." That is, there are twenty-four bhangas in two natural udaya
sthana. This statement is made according to the opinion of other acharyas.
According to the svamata, there are only twelve bhangas in two natural udaya
sthana.  Here, in gatha 16, two natural udaya sthana are mentioned at the time
of five natural bandha sthana, and in gatha 17, one natural udaya sthana is
mentioned at the time of four natural bandha sthana. This confirms the
indication of twelve bhangas according to the svamata and twenty-four bhangas
according to the matantara. These differences of opinion are also mentioned in
the Panchasangraha Saptathika prakarana and Go. Karmakanda.  The details of the
valid bhangas of bandha sthana and udaya sthana should be known as follows.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha caubIsI hotI hai tathA cAra, tIna, do aura eka prakRtika
baMdhasthAna ke tathA abandha ke samaya eka prakRtika udayasthAna ke kramaza:
cAra, tIna, do, eka para eka gaMgore haiN| inakA hor3a gyAraha hai| ata: eka
prakRtika udayasthAna ke kula gyAraha bhaMga hote haiN| isa prakAra se gAthA meM
mohanIya karma ke saba udayasthAnoM meM bhaMgoM kI cauvIsI aura phuTakara maMgoM
ko spaSTa kiyA gayA hai| saptatikA nAmaka SaSTha karmagrantha ke Tabe meM isa
gAthA kA cauthA caraNa do prakAra se nirdiSTa kiyA gayA hai| svamata se 'cAra
gikimi iskArA' aura matAntara se 'babIsa kugiskamikArA' nirdiSTa kiyA hai|
prathama pATha ke anusAra svamata se do prakRtika udayasthAna meM bAraha bhaMga
aura dUsare pATha ke anusAra matAntara se do prakRtika udayasthAna meM caubIsa
bhaMga prApta hote haiN| AcArya malayagiri ne apanI TIkA meM isI abhiprAya kI
puSTi isa prakAra kI hai "dvikodaye 'caturvizatirekA bhaMgakAnAm, etazca
matAntareNoktam, anyathA svamate prAvazeSa bhaMgA bevitmyaaH|" arthAt do
prakRtika udayasthAna meM caubIsa bhaMga hote haiN| so yaha kathana anya AcAryoM
ke abhiprAyAnusAra kiyA gayA hai  /  svamata se to do prakRtika udayasthAna meM
bAraha hI bhaMga hote haiN| yahA~ gAthA 16 meM pAMca prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke
samaya do prakRtika udayasthAna aura gAthA 17 meM cAra prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke
samaya eka prakRtika udayasthAna batalAyA hai| isameM jo svamata se bAraha aura
matAntara se caubIsa bhaMgoM kA nirdeza kiyA hai, usakI puSTi hotI hai|
paMcasaMgraha saptatikA prakaraNa aura go0 karmakAMDa meM bhI ina matabhedoM kA
nirdeza kiyA gayA hai| baMdhasthAna udayasthAnoM ke saMvaidha bhaMgoM kA
vivaraNa isa prakAra jAnanA cAhiye

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sapttatika Chapter  **Gunasthan** **Bandhastan** **Udayasthan**  **Mang**
**First** 7, 8, 6, 108 Paubeesee **Second Third** Boudha Pancha 6 to 5 Ninth
**Tenth**  Now, in the following verses, we will explain the number of these
Bhangas and Padavrundas.  "**Navapanchaanauisehdayvigappehi Mohiya Jeeva.**'
**Aounattariyemusiripviksaehi Vinneya** ||16||  1. **Chaubandhage Vi Varas
Dugodayaa Jaan Tehi Poodhehin.** **Bandhagabheene Panchoonasahassamudayaanam.**
|| - Panchasangrah Sapttatika, Ga. 26  2. This verse, named "Sapttatika
Prakaran", is from the sixth Karmagranth, "Tane", and is placed after the verse
"**Navatesiysaehi**" etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa guNasthAna baMdhasthAna udayasthAna  /  maMga pahalA 7, 8,
6, 108 paubIsI dUsarA tIsarA baudhA pAMcA 6 se 5 nauvA dasavA aba Age kI gAthA
meM ina bhaMgoM kI evaM padavRndoM kI saMkhyA batalAte haiN|
navapaMcANauisaehadayavigappehi mohiyA jiivaa|' auNattariemusaripaviksaehi
vinneyA  // 16 //  1 caubaMdhage vi vArasa dugodayA jANa tehi pUDhehiM  /
bandhagabheeNe paMcUNAsahassamudayANaM  /  /  -paMcasaMgraha saptatikA, gA0 26 2
saptatikA prakaraNa nAmaka SaSTha karmagrantha ke Tane meM yaha gAthA
'navatesIyasaehi' ityAdi ke bAda dI gaI hai|

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth ― **Word Meaning:** Nine hundred forty-nine
*udayavikalpas* (arising conditions), nine hundred seventy-one *padavrindas*
(groups of words), bewildered by *unamvigahudayavikalpas* (arising conditions of
non-attachment), *jivajiva* (living beings), *aunsariegu* (unclear).
**Meaning:** With these groups of words, one should know that there are ninety-
seven thousand one hundred and seventy-one *vishelayas* (analyses).  **Verse:**
All worldly beings should be known to be bewildered by nine hundred forty-nine
*udayavikalpas* and ninety-seven thousand one hundred and seventy-one
*padavrindas*.  **Special Meaning:** Previously, the breaking of the
*udayasthanas* (arising places) of *mohaniya karma* (karma that causes delusion)
and the extent of their parts was explained. Now, in this verse, their total
number and their *padavrindas* are being clarified.  Each *chaubisi* (twenty-
four) has twenty-four *bhangas* (breakings). The total number of *chaubisis* of
*udayasthanas* mentioned earlier is forty-one. Therefore, multiplying forty-one
by twenty-four, the total number obtained is nine hundred eighty-four - 41 x 24
= 984. This number does not include the *bhangas* of one natural *udayasthan*.
Those *bhangas* are eleven. Therefore, adding those eleven *bhangas*, the total
number of *bhangas* becomes nine hundred forty-nine. Out of these *bhangas*, the
arising of at least one *bhang* occurs for beings up to the tenth *gunasthan*
(stage of spiritual development). The reason for considering only beings up to
the tenth *gunasthan* is that the arising of *mohaniya karma* is found only up
to that point. Although the being residing in the eleventh *gunasthan* (stage of
spiritual development), *upshantamoha* (completely pacified delusion),
experiences the arising of *mohaniya karma* when it falls from its own place,
but due to the arising of *mohaniya karma* for a minimum of one moment and a
maximum of *antarmuhurt* (a period of time between two *muhurtas*), it is not
considered, and only beings up to the tenth *gunasthan* are considered.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha -- zabdArtha -- nava paMdhANa uDalae nau sau paMcAnave,
unamavigahaudayavikalpoM se mohiyA - mohita hue, jIvAjIva, auNasariegu P
paryAvaksaehi padavRndoM sahita, tari -- unahattara sau ikahattara vizleyA
jAnanA cAhiye  /  115 gAthA - samasta saMsArI jIvoM ko nau sau paMcAnave
udayavikalpoM tathA unahattara sau ikahattara padavRndoM se mohita jAnanA cAhiye
/  vizeSArtha- pUrva meM mohanIya karma ke udayasthAnoM ke bhaMgoM aura una
udayasthAnoM ke aMgoM kI kahAM kitanI cauDI hotI haiM, yaha gayA hai  /  aba isa
gAyA meM unakI kula saMkhyA evaM unake padavRndoM ko spaSTa kiyA jA rahA hai  /
pratyeka caubIsI meM caubIsa bhaMga hote haiM aura pahale jo udayasthAnoM kI
caubIsI batalAI haiM, unakI kula saMkhyA ikatAlIsa hai  /  ata: ikatAlIsa ko
caubIsa meM guNita karane para kula saMkhyA nau sau caurAsI prApta hotI hai -
41424 - 184  /  isa saMkhyA meM eka prakRtika udayasthAna ke bhaMga sammilita
nahIM haiN| ve bhaMga gyAraha haiN| ataH una gyArah bhaMgoM ko milAne para
bhaMgoM kI kula saMkhyA nau sau paMcAnaveM hotI hai| ina bhaMgoM meM se kisI-na-
kisI eka bhaMga kA udaya dasaveM guNasthAna taka ke jIvoM ke avazya hotA hai|
yahA~ dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna taka ke jIvoM ko hI grahaNa karane kA
kAraNa yaha hai ki mohanIya karma kA udaya vahIM taka pAyA jAtA hai  /  yadyapi
gyArahaveM upazAntamoha guNasthAnavartI jIva kA jaba sva-sthAna se patana hotA
hai taba usako bhI mohanIya karma kA udaya ho jAtA hai, lekina kama-se-kama eka
samaya aura adhika se adhika antarmuhUrta ke liye mohanIya karma kA udaya na TE
rahane se usakA grahaNa nahIM karake dasaveM guNasthAna taka ke jIvoM ko

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seven Tika  It is said that out of the aforementioned 995
bhangas, one is attracted to at least one bhang, if not more. The false nature
of mohaniya karma, the infinite anubandhi kadha, the non-rejectable avarna
krodha, the rejectable avarna krodha, etc., each nature is called a pad, and
their collective name is padavrind. This is also called prakriti vikalp. In
other words, all the prakritis that are taken into account in the ten prakriti
udaysthanas are called pads, and the bhangas that arise from their differences
are called padavrind or prakriti vikalp. Here, their total number of differences
is stated as 6971. The explanation is as follows:  The ten prakriti udaysthan is
one, therefore it has ten prakritis. The nine prakriti udaysthan are six,
therefore they have 64654 prakritis. The eight prakriti udaysthan are eleven,
therefore they have 88 prakritis. The seven prakriti udaysthan are ten,
therefore they have 70 prakritis. The six prakriti udaysthan are seven,
therefore they have 42 prakritis. The five prakriti udaysthan are four,
therefore they have 20 prakritis. The four prakriti udaysthan is one, therefore
it has four prakritis. The two prakriti udaysthan is one, therefore it has two
prakritis. Adding all these prakritis together, 10 + 54 + 88 + 70 + 42 + 20 + 4
+ 2 = 290.  From these 290 prakritis, each has 24 bhangas. Therefore,
multiplying 290 by 24, we get 6960. This number does not include the eleven
bhangas of the one prakriti udaysthan. Therefore, adding those eleven bhangas,
the total number becomes 6971. Here, it is important to know that the four...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa ukta nausau paMcAnava bhaMgoM meM se yathAsaMbhava kisI na
kisI eka bhaMga se mohita honA kahA gayA hai| _ mohanIyakarma kI mithyAtva,
anantAnubandhI kAdha, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, pratyAsthAnAvaraNa krodha Adi
pratyeka prakRti ko pada kahate haiM aura unake samudAya kA nAma padavRnda hai|
isI kA dUsarA nAma prakRtivikalpa bhI hai  /  arthAt dasa prakRtika Adi
udayasthAnoM meM jitanI prakRtiyoM kA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai, ve saba pada haiM
aura unake bheda se jitane bhaMga hoMge, ve saba padavRnda yA prakRtivikalpa
kahalAte haiM  /  yahA~ unake kula bheda 6971 batalAye haiN| jisakA spaSTIkaraNa
isa prakAra hai dasa prakRtika udayasthAna eka hai, ataH usakI dasa prakRtiyAM
huii| nau prakRtika udayasthAna chaha haiM ata: unakI 64654 prakRtiyA~ huI 1
ATha prakRtika udayasthAna myAraha haiM ata: unakI aThAsI prakRtiyA~ huI  /
sAta prakRtika udayasthAna dasa haiM ata: unako sattara prakRtiyA~ huI  /  chaha
prakRtika udayasthAna sAta haiM ataH unakI bayAlIsa prakRtiyA~ huii| pAMca
prakRtika udayasthAna cAra haiM ata: unakI bIsa prakRtiyA~ huI  /  cAra
prakRtika udayasthAna ke eka hone se usakI cAra prakRttiyA~ huI aura do
prakRtika udayasthAna eka hai ata: usakI do prakRtiyA~ huiiN| ina saba
prakRtiyoM ko milAne para 10 54+88+70+42 +2+4+2=kula' jor3a 290 hotA hai| ukta
260 prakRtiyoM meM se pratyeka meM caubIsa-caubIsa bhaMga prApta hote haiM ata:
260 ko 24 se guNita karane para kula 6960 hote haiM  /  isa saMkhyA meM eka
prakRtika udayasthAna ke gyAraha bhaMga sammilita nahIM haiM  /  ataH una
gyAraha bhaMgoM ke milAne para kula saMkhyA 6971 ho jAtI hai  /  yahA~ yaha
vizeSa jAnanA cAhiye ki pahale jo matAntara se cAra

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth, Chapter 117  During the transition period of the four
karmic bonds, twelve variations were mentioned for the two-natured arising
places. By including these, the total number of arising places and positions is
explained.   This means that if the twelve variations from the alternative view
are removed from the arising places, there are 683 arising options. And if the
twelve variations of the two-natured arising places are removed, the total
number of positions is 6647.   Further clarification will be provided in the
following verse. Now, the number of arising places and positions, excluding the
twelve variations, is being indicated.  **Verse 20:**  "The living beings are
deluded by the 983 arising options and the 747 groups of positions."
**Explanation of the Verse:**  It should be understood that worldly beings are
deluded by 983 arising options and 747 groups of positions.  **Special
Meaning:**  The previous verse mentioned the number of arising options and
groups of positions based on the alternative view. This verse clarifies the
number of arising options and groups of positions based on the main view.  The
previous verse mentioned 665 arising options and 6671 groups of positions. This
verse mentions 153 arising options and 6947 groups of positions. The reason for
this difference is that during the transition of the four karmic bonds, there is
a two-natured arising place. If this alternative view is not considered as the
main view, and according to their view, the arising options and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 117 prakRtika baMdha ke saMkamakAla ke samaya do prakRtika
udayasthAna meM bAraha bhaMga batalAye the, unako sammilita karake yaha
udayasthAnoM kI saMkhyA aura padasaMkhyA batAI hai| arthAt udayasthAnoM meM se
matAntara vAle bAraha bhaMga kama kara diye jAyeM to 683 udayavikalpa hote haiM
aura dvi-prakRtika udayasthAna ke bAraha bAraha bhaMga kama kara diye jAyeM to
padoM kI kula saMkhyA 6647 hotI hai| vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa Age kI gAthA meM kiyA
jA rahA hai| aba bAraha bhaMgoM ko chor3akara udayasthAnoM kI saMkhyA aura
padasaMkhyA kA nirdeza karate haiN| navatesIyasahi udayavigappehi mohiyA jiivaa|
auNasarisIyAlA paryAvavasaehi vinnayA  // 20 //  zamA-navatesIyasahi-nau so
tirAsI, udayavieppaihiudayavikalpoM se. mohiyA-mohita hue, jovA-jIba,
avatarisIyAlA-unahattara sau saMtAlIsa, pavivasahi-padoM ke samUha, vileyA-
jAnanA cAhiye  /  gAthArya-saMsArI jIva nauso tirAsI udayavikalpoM se aura
unahattara sau saiMtAlIsa pada samudAyoM se mohita ho rahe haiM, aisA jAnanA
caahiye| vizeSArtha--pUrva gAthA meM matAntara kI apekSA udayavikalpoM aura
padavRndoM kI saMkhyA batalAI hai  /  isa gAthA meM vamata se udayavikalpoM aura
padavRndoM kI saMkhyA kA spaSTIkaraNa karate haiN| pichalI gAthA meM
udayavikalpa 665 aura padavRnda 6671 batalAye haiM aura isa gAthA meM
udayavikalpa 153 aura padavRnda 6947 kahe haiM  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai-cAra
prakRtika baMdha ke saMkrama ke samaya do prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai, yadi
isa matAntara ko mukhyatA na dI jAye aura unake mata se do prakRtika udayasthAna
ke udayavikalpa aura

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Saptalika Prakarana 118  If we exclude the Padavrandas, the number of
Mohaniya Karma Udayavikalpas are 683 and 6647 respectively.  Here, the Mohaniya
Karma Udayavikalpas are explained in two ways: one with 665 and the other with
683. In the 665 Udayavikalpas, 24 Bhangas are taken for two Prakritik
Udayasthanas, and in the 683 Udayavikalpas, 12 Bhangas are taken for two
Prakritik Udayasthanas. These Udayavikalpas are also mentioned in the
Panchasangraha Saptalika, but there they are explained in three ways. In the
first way, there is a slight difference from the 665 mentioned here, and in the
second way, there is a difference from the 683 mentioned here. The reason for
this is that here, 11 Bhangas are taken for one Prakritik Uday's Bandhabandha,
while in the Panchasangraha Saptalika, they are taken from the Prakritik Veda,
which reduces the total number of Udayavikalpas to 676 by subtracting 7 from 8.
In the third way, while counting the Udayavikalpas, their number is increased to
1265 due to the Gunasthanabheda.  The number of these is also mentioned in the
Karmakanda. But there, they are divided into two categories: Punarukta Bhang and
Apunarukta Bhang. The Punarukta Bhang are counted as 1283. Out of these, 1265
are the same as those counted in the Panchasangraha Saptalika, and 12 more
Bhangas are taken for two Prakritik Udayas in the four Prakritik Sangha. Also,
the five Bhangas taken for one Prakritik Uday in the Panchasangraha Saptalika
are increased to 11 here. In this way, the number in the Karmakanda becomes 1283
due to the increase of 18 Bhangas from the Panchasangraha Saptalika. And in the
Karmakanda, the Apunarukta Bhang are counted as 677. So, one Bhang is added due
to the Gunasthanabheda of one Prakritik Uday, which increases the number of
Bhangas from 976 to 977.  Similarly, here, the Padavrandas of Mohaniya are
explained in two ways:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptalikA prakaraNa 118 padavRndoM ko chor3a diyA jAye to kramazaH unakI
saMkhyA 683 aura 6647 hotI hai  /  yahA~ mohanIya karma ke udayavikalpa do
prakAra se batAye haiM, eka 65 aura dUsare 683  /  inameM se 665 udayavikalpoM
meM do prakRtika udayasthAna ke 24 bhaMga tathA 683 udayavikalpoM meM do
prakRtika udayasthAna ke 12 bhaMga liye haiN| paMcasaMgraha saptatikA meM bhI ye
udayavikalpa batalAye haiM, kintu vahA~ tIna prakAra se batalAye haiN| pahale
prakAra meM yahA~ vAle 665, dUsare meM yahA~ vAle 683 prakAra se kucha antara
par3a jAtA hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki yahA~ eka prakRtika udaya ke
bandhAbandha kI apekSA gyAraha bhaMga liye haiM aura paMcasaMgraha saptatikA meM
udaya kI apekSA prakRti veda se liye hai, jisase za se 7 ghaTA dene para kula
676 udaya-vikalpa raha jAte haiN| tIsare prakAra se udaya - vikalpa ginAte hue
guNasthAna bheda se unakI saMkhyA 1265 kara dI hai  /  go0 karmakANDa meM bhI
inakI saMkhyA batalAI hai| kintu vahA~ inake do bheda kara diye haiM- punarukta
bhaMga aura apunarukta bhaMga  /  punarukta bhaMga 1283 ginAye haiM  /  inameM
se 1265 to vahI haiM jo paMcasaMgraha saptatikA meM ginAye haiM aura cAra
prakRtika saMgha meM do prakRtika udaya kI apekSA 12 bhaMga aura liye haiM tathA
paMcasaMgraha saptatikA meM eka prakRtika udaya ke jo pA~ca bhaMga liye haiM, ve
yahA~ 11 kara diye gaye haiN| isa prakAra paMcasaMgraha saptatikA se 18 bhaMga
bar3ha jAne se karmakANDa meM unakI saMkhyA 1283 ho gaI tathA karmakANDa meM
apunarukka bhaMga 677 ginAye haiN| so eka prakRtika udaya kA guNasthAna bheda se
eka bhaMga adhika kara diyA gayA hai  /  jisase 976 ke sthAna para 977 bhaMga ho
jAte haiN| isI prakAra yahA~ mohanIya ke padavanda do prakAra se batalAye haiM "

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karmagrantha, Chapter 119  **6971 and 6947:** When two natural states
arise for some time during the four natural states of bondage, there are 6671
padavrindas if this view is accepted and 6947 padavrindas if this view is
rejected. These two numbers are mentioned in the Panchasangraha Saptathika.
However, in addition to these, four types of padavrindas are also mentioned. The
first type is 6640, in which, due to the difference in bandhabandha, instead of
11 bhangas of one natural state, a total of 4 bhangas are taken. Thus, 7 bhangas
are reduced from 6947, resulting in the number 6640. The remaining three types
of padavrindas are mentioned due to the difference in gunasthanas, which are
84778483 and 8507 respectively.  In the Go. Karmakanda, padavrindas are called
prakritivikalpas. Like udayavikalpas, these prakritivikalpas are also of two
types: punarukta and apunarukta. Their number is 8507 in comparison to punarukta
udayavikalpas and 6941 in comparison to apunarukta udayavikalpas. The 6640
padavrindas mentioned in the Panchasangraha Saptathika become 6941
prakritivikalpas when one bhang is added due to the difference in gunasthanas.
This is because in the Panchasangraha Saptathika, a total of four bhangas of one
natural state are taken, while in the Karmakanda, five are taken due to the
difference in gunasthanas. This increases the number of bhangas by one.  The
difference in numbers mentioned above is due to the difference in interpretation
(vivkshaabheda), not due to the difference in belief (manyaabheda).  In this
way, for information about the udayasthanas, their vikalpas and prakritivikalpas
of mohaniya karma, according to one's own view and the views of others, and
according to other karmagranthas, see Go. Karmakanda, verses 475 to 456.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 119 6971 aura 6947 | jaba cAra prakRtika bandha ke samaya
kucha kAla taka do prakRtika udaya hotA hai, taba isa mata ko svIkAra kara lene
para 6671 padavRnda hote haiM aura isa mata ko chor3ane para 6947 padavRnda hote
haiN| paMcasaMgraha saptatikA meM ye donoM saMkhyAyeM batAI haiM. kintu inake
atirikta sAtha hI cAra prakAra ke padavRnda aura batalAye haiN| unameM pahalA
prakAra 6640 kA hai, jisameM bandhAbandha ke bheda se eka prakRtika udaya ke 11
bhaMga na hokara kula 4 bhaMga liye jAte haiM  /  isa prakAra 6947 meM se 7
bhaMga kama hokara 6640 saMkhyA hotI hai| zeSa tIna prakAra ke padavRnda
guNasthAna bheda se batAye haiM jo kramazaH 84778483 aura 8507 hote haiM  /  go0
karmakANDa meM padavRnda ko prakRtivikalpa saMjJA dI hai| udayavikalpoM kI
taraha ye prakRtivikalpa bhI punarukta aura apunarukta do prakAra ke batAye
haiN| punarukta udayavikalpoM kI apekSA inakI saMkhyA 8507 aura apunarukta
udayavikalpoM kI apekSA inakI saMkhyA 6941 batAI hai| paMcasaMgraha saptatikA
meM jo 6640 padavRnda batalAye haiM, unameM guNasthAna bheda se 1 bhaMga aura
milA dene para 6941 prakRtivikalpa ho jAte haiM  /  kyoMki paMcasaMgraha
saptatikA meM eka prakRtika "udayasthAna ke kula cAra bhaMga liye gaye haiM aura
karmakANDa' meM guNasthAna bheda se pA~ca liye gaye haiN| jisase eka bhaMga
bar3ha jAtA hai  /  Upara jo kathana kiyA gayA hai usameM jo saMkhyAoM kA antara
dikhatA hai, vaha vivakSAbhedakRta hai, mAnyatAbheda nahIM hai  /  isa prakAra
se svamata aura matAntara tathA anya kArmagranthikoM ke 1 mohanIya karma ke
udayasthAnoM, unake vikalpoM aura prakRtivikalpoM kI jAnakArI ke lie go0
karmakAMDa gA0 475 se 456 taka dekhie  /

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter of the Sevenfold Text (Sapttatika Prakarana) 120  Having explained
the destruction of the Udayavikalpas and Prakritivikalpas through the various
opinions, we now discuss the time duration of the Udayasthanas.  The lowest
duration of the ten Udayasthanas and their destructions is one Samaya, and the
highest duration is Antarmuhurta.  From the fourth Prakritik Udayastana to the
tenth Prakritik Udayastana, the emergence of one Veda and one Yugal occurs in
each Udayastana. The Veda and Yugal inevitably change within one Muhurta. This
is also explained in the original commentary of the Panchasagraha:  "Ovem
Yugalen Va Avashyam Muhurtabaras: Paravartitavyaam."  This means that the change
of one Veda and one Yugal occurs within one Muhurta.  This confirms that the
highest duration of these four Prakritik Udayasthanas and their destructions,
which is stated as Antarmuhurta, is correct. The second and first Prakritik
Udayasthanas also exist for a maximum duration of Antarmuhurta. Therefore, their
highest duration is also Antarmuhurta.  The lowest duration of all these
Udayasthanas is one Samaya. This should be understood as follows: When a being
resides in a particular Udayastana or its specific destruction for one Samaya
and then dies or undergoes a change to another Gunastana, there is a difference
in its Gunastana. The Bandhastana also changes, and according to the Gunastana,
there is also a difference in its Udayastana and its destructions. Therefore,
the lowest duration of all Udayasthanas and their destructions is one Samaya.
1. "Iha Dashavaya Udayastabhangarach Javanayat Ekasamayikaa Utksharat
Antarmuhurtika." - Sapttatika Prakarana Commentary, page 170.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa 120 matoM se udayavikalpoM aura prakRtivikalpoM ke bhaMgoM
kA kathana karane ke bAda aba udayasthAnoM ke kAla kA nirdeza karate haiN| dasa
Adika jitane udayasthAna aura unake bhaMga batalAye haiM, unakA jaghanyakAla eka
samaya aura utkRSTakAla antarmuhUrta hai  / " cAra prakRtika udayasthAna se
lekara dasa prakRtika udayasthAna taka ke pratyeka udayasthAna meM kisI eka veda
aura kisI eka yugala kA udaya hotA hai aura veda tathA yugala kA eka muharta ke
bhItara avazya hI parivartana ho jAtA hai| isI bAta ko paMcasagraha kI mUla TIkA
meM bhI batalAyA hai "ovena yugalena vA avazyaM muhUrtAbArasaH parAvartitavyam
/ " arthAt eka muhUrta ke bhItara kisI eka veda aura kisI eka yugala kA avazya
parivartana hotA hai| isase nizcita hotA hai ki ina cAra prakRtika Adi
udayasthAnoM kA aura unake bhaMgoM kA jo utkRSTakAla antarmuhUrta kahA hai, vaha
ThIka hai  /  do aura eka prakRtika udayasthAna bhI adhika se adhika
antarmuhUrta kAla taka pAye jAte haiN| ata: unakA bhI utkRSTakAla antarmuhUrta
hI hai  /  ina saba udayasthAnoM kA jaghanyakAla eka samaya isa prakAra
samajhanA cAhiye ki jaba koI jIva kisI vivakSita udayasthAna meM yA usake kisI
eka vivakSita bhaMga meM eka samaya taka rahakara dUsare samaya meM mara kara yA
parivartana kama se kisI anya guNasthAna ko prApta hotA hai taba usake
guNasthAna meM bheda ho jAtA hai, bandhasthAna bhI badala jAtA hai aura
guNasthAna ke anusAra usake udayasthAna aura usake bhaMgoM meM bhI antara par3a
jAtA hai| ataH saba udayasthAnoM aura usake saba bhaMgoM kA jaghanyakAla eka
samaya prApta hotA hai  /  1 iha dazAvaya udayAstabhaMgAraca javanyata
ekasAmayikA utkarSata AntamIhUrtikaH  /  - saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 170

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth 121  Description of the Udayavikalpas and Padavikalpas of
Mohaniya Karma:  **Udayasthan**  **Ten** in Uday: Nine " " Kaath Seven " Six "
Five = Chaad " Two One JP Gan 27 23 = " " " +7 12 "P 38 23 """ Total From
Matantar: **Two** in Uday: Chaubisi Number 1 11 10 1 40 1 Chaubisi's Total
Mangas' Number 24. 41 44 264 240 168 66 24 Only 12 Mangas ,,, 11,, 683 24 (12
Mangas meet here, Upayapad Only 12 Angas to be taken here) 10 ** 56 70 42 20
6647 *= (24 Mangas for the previous ones, therefore 24 Mangas to be taken here)
665  **Padavikalpa** 285 240 1266 2112 1680 1008 480 66 24 11  Thus, the
Bandhasthanas are interconnected with the Udayasthans.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karma grantha 121 mohanIya karma ke udayavikalpoM aura padavikalpoM kA
vivaraNa isa prakAra hai udayasthAna dasa ke udaya meM nau "" " kATha sAta "
chaha " pA~ca = cAda " do eka JP gn 27 23 = " " " +7 12 "P 38 23 """ kula yoga
matAntara se do ke udaya meM caubIsI saMkhyA 1 11 10 1 40 1 caubIsI ke kula
maMgoM kI saMkhyA 24. 41 44 264 240 168 66 24 sirpha 12 maMga ,,, 11,, 683 24 (
12 maMga meM milane se, upayapada yahA~ sirpha 12 aMga lenA) 10 ** 56 70 42 20
6647 *= (24 maMga pahale ke lie ata: yahA~ 24 maMga lenA) 665 en 6es; isa
prakAra se bandhasthAnoM kA udayasthAnoM ke sAtha paraspara saMveSa 4 0
padavikalpa 285 240 1266 2112 1680 1008 480 66 24 11

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 72  After describing the types of *bhangas* (breakages), we now
describe the *satta-sthana* (places of existence) along with the *bandha-sthana*
(places of bondage).  There are **twenty-two** *bandha-sthana* with **three**
*satta-sthana*, **twenty-one** *bandha-sthana* with **twenty-eight** *satta-
sthana*, **eighteen** *bandha-sthana* with **six** *satta-sthana*, **seventeen**
*bandha-sthana* with **six** *satta-sthana*, **thirteen** and **nine** *bandha-
sthana* with **five** *satta-sthana* each.  In **five** *bandha-sthana*, there
are **six** *satta-sthana* each, in **four** *bandha-sthana*, there are **six**
*satta-sthana* each, and in the remaining *bandha-sthana*, there are **five**
*satta-sthana* each. Know that even after the *bandha* (bondage) is broken,
there are **four** *satta-sthana*.  **In summary:**  * There are three *satta-
sthana* in twenty-two *bandha-sthana*. * There are twenty-eight *satta-sthana*
in twenty-one *bandha-sthana*. * There are six *satta-sthana* in eighteen
*bandha-sthana*. * There are six *satta-sthana* in seventeen *bandha-sthana*. *
There are five *satta-sthana* each in thirteen and nine *bandha-sthana*. * There
are six *satta-sthana* each in five and four *bandha-sthana*. * There are five
*satta-sthana* each in the remaining *bandha-sthana*. * There are four *satta-
sthana* after the *bandha* is broken.  **Note:** In the previous verses (15, 16,
and 17), we discussed the relationship between the *bandha-sthana* and *udaya-
sthana* (places of arising) of *mohaniya karma* (karma that causes delusion).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 122 saptatikA prakaraNa bhaMgoM kA kathana karane ke anantara aba Age
sattAsthAnoM ke sAtha bandhasthAnoM kA kathana karate haiN| tinava ya bAbIse
imabIse aTavIsa satsarase  /  cha jveva teranavabaMdhagesu paMceva
tthaannaaii||21|| paMcavihavauvihesu cha chakka sesesu jANa paMceva  /  patteyaM
patteyaM cattAri ya baMdhavocchae  // 22 //  zamvArSa-tiSa-tIna sattAsthAna, ya-
aura, bAvIsebAIsa prakRtika bandhasthAna meM, igavIse-kIsa prakRtika
bandhasthAna meM, aTuvosa-aTThAIsa kA sattAsthAna, sasarase-satraha ke
bandhasthAna meM, chajyachaha kA, teranavabaMdhagesu-teraha aura nau prakRtika
bandhasthAna meM, paMtheva-pAca hI, ThANANi-sattAsthAna  /  paMcaSiha-pAMca
prakRtika bandhasyAna meM, babihesaM... pAra prakRtika bandhasthAna meM, chakka-
chaha-chaha, sesesa-bAkI ke bandhasthAnoM meM, jANa-jAno, paMceca-pAMca hI,
patteya-pattema-pratyeka meM, (eka-eka meM), pattAra-cAra, 4-aura,
saMbhavocchee-bandha kA viccheda hone para bhii| gAyAbAIsa prakRtika
bandhasthAna meM tIna, ikkIsa prakRtika bandhasthAna meM aTThAIsa prakRti vAlA
eka, satraha prakRtika bandhasthAna meM chaha, teraha prakRtika aura nau
prakRtika bandhasthAna meM pAMca-pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiM 1 pA~ca prakRtika
aura cAra prakRtika bandhasthAnoM meM chaha-chaha sattAsthAna tathA zeSa rahe
baMdhasthAnoM meM se pratyeka ke pAMcapAMca sattAsthAna jAnanA cAhiye aura
bandha kA viccheda ho jAne para cAra sattAsthAna hote haiN| vizeSArtha-pahale
15, 16 aura 17vIM gAthA maiM mohanIya karma ke bandhasthAnoM aura udayasthAnoM
ke paraspara saMveSa kA kathana kara Aye haiM  /

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  ### 123  Here, in two verses, the mutual connection
between the bondage places and the existence places of Mohaniya Karma is
explained.  Also, since it is necessary to state the mutual connection between
the bondage places, the arising places and the existence places, we will mention
the arising places that are obtained while explaining the mutual connection
between the bondage places and the existence places.  There are ten natural
bondage places of Mohaniya Karma: twenty-two, twenty-one, seventeen, thirteen,
nine, five, four, three, two, and one. We will explain the existence places
corresponding to each of them.  **"Tinn V Ya Baviise"** - There are three
existence places for the twenty-two natural bondage places: twenty-eight,
twenty-seven, and twenty-six natural. Their explanation is as follows:  The
bondage of twenty-two natures occurs to the Mithyatva-affected Jiva, and its
arising places are four: seven, eight, six, and ten natural. Of these, the
twenty-eight natural existence place corresponds to the seven natural arising
place. This is because the seven natural arising place occurs without the
arising of Anantanu-bandhi, and the absence of the arising of Anantanu-bandhi in
Mithyatva is only for the Jiva who, having previously attained Samyag-drishti,
had disassociated the Anantanu-bandhi Chatushk and later, due to the influence
of Pariṇāmayaśa Mithyatva, initiated the bondage of Anantanu-bandhi again due to
Mithyatva. For that Jiva, the arising of Anantanu-bandhi does not occur for a
period of one Avli-pramana. However, according to the rules, that Jiva possesses
the existence of thirty-five natures. Therefore, in the seven natural arising
place, there is only one twenty-eight natural existence place.  The eight
natural arising place also has the same three existence places. This is because
the eight natural arising place is of two types:  1. Anantanu...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 123 aba yahA~ do gAthAoM meM mohanIya karma ke bandhasthAna
aura sattAsthAnoM ke paraspara saMvedha kA nirdeza kiyA gayA hai| sAtha hI
bandhasthAna, udayasthAna aura sattAsthAnoM ke paraspara saMvedha kA kathana
karanA Avazyaka hone se bandhasthAna aura sattAsthAnoM ke paraspara saMvedha ko
batalAte hue prApta hone vAle udayasthAnoM kA bhI ullekha kreNge| _ mohanIya
karma ke vAIsa, ikkIsa, satraha, teraha, nau, pA~ca, cAra, tIna, do aura eka
prakRtika kula dasa bandhasthAna haiN| unameM kramaza: sattAsthAnoM kA
spaSTIkaraNa karate haiM  /  'tinna va ya bAvIse'-bAIsa prakRtika bandhasthAna
ke samaya tIna sattAsthAna hote haiM 28, 27 aura 26 prakRtika  /  jinakA
spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai-bAIsa prakRtiyoM kA bandha mithyASTi jIva ko hotA
hai aura usake udayasthAna cAra hote haiM-7, 8, 6 aura 10 prakRtika  /  inameM
se 7 prakRtika udayasthAna ke samaya 28 prakRtika satAsthAna hotA hai  /  kyoMki
sAta prakRtika udayasthAna anantAnubandhI ke udaya ke binA hI hotA hai aura
mithyAtva meM anantAnubandhI ke udaya kA abhAva usI jIva ke hotA hai, jisane
pahale samyagdRSTi rahate anantAnubandhI catuSka kI visaMyojanA kI aura
kAlAntara meM pariNAmayaza mithyAtva meM jAkara mithyAtva ke nimitta se puna:
anantAnubandhI ke bandha kA prArambha kiyA ho  /  usake eka AvalI pramANa kAla
taka anantAnubandhI kA udaya nahIM hotA hai| kintu aise jIva ke niyama se
bhaTThAIsa prakRtiyoM kI sattA pAI jAtI hai| jisase sAta prakRtika udayasthAna
meM eka aTThAIsa prakRtika udayasthAna hI hotA hai| ATha prakRtika udayasthAna
meM bhI ukta tInoM sattAsthAna hote haiN| kyoMki ATha prakRtika udayasthAna do
prakAra kA hotA hai-1. anantA

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on Sapta-tika  This chapter discusses two types of eight-fold natural
states of existence: one without the rise of infinite karmic bonds (ananta-
anubandhi) and the other with the rise of infinite karmic bonds.   The eight-
fold natural state of existence without the rise of infinite karmic bonds has
only one state of being, which is the 28th natural state of being. This has been
explained in the context of the seven-fold natural state of existence.   The
eight-fold natural state of existence with the rise of infinite karmic bonds has
three states of being:  1. **28th natural state of being:** This state exists
until the right faith (samyak-tva) is awakened. 2. **27th natural state of
being:** This state exists after the awakening of right faith. 3. **26th natural
state of being:** This state exists after the awakening of right faith and wrong
faith (samyak-mithyatva). This 26th natural state of being is also present in
the soul with eternal wrong faith (anadi-mithyadristi).  The nine-fold natural
state of existence is also divided into two types: one without the rise of
infinite karmic bonds and the other with the rise of infinite karmic bonds. The
nine-fold natural state of existence without the rise of infinite karmic bonds
has only one state of being, which is the 28th natural state of being. However,
the nine-fold natural state of existence with the rise of infinite karmic bonds
has three states of being, as explained above.  The ten-fold natural state of
existence only exists with the rise of infinite karmic bonds. Otherwise, the
ten-fold natural state of existence does not exist. Therefore, it has all three
states of being: 28th, 27th, and 26th.  At the time of the 21st natural state of
bondage, the state of being is only the 28th.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa nubandhI ke udaya se rahita aura 2 anantAnubandhI ke udaya
se sahita | 1 inameM se jo anantAnubandhI ke udaya se rahita vAlA ATha prakRtika
udayasthAna hai, usameM eka aTThAIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna hI prApta hotA hai  /
isakA spaSTIkaraNa sAta prakRtika udayasthAna ke prasaMga ne Upara kiyA gayA hai
tathA jo anantAnubandho ke udaya sahita ATha prakRtika udayasthAna hai, usameM
ukta tInoM hI sattAsthAna bana jAte haiN| ve isa prakAra haiM - 1. jaba taka
samyaktva ko uvalanA nahIM hotI taba taka aTThAIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA
hai  /  2. samyaktva kI uvalanA ho jAne para sattAIsa prakRtika aura 3.
samyagmithyAtva kI uvalanA ho jAne para chabbIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai
/  yaha chabbIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna anAdi mithyAdRSTi jIva ko bhI hotA hai|
124 nau prakRtika udayasthAna bhI anantAnubandho ke udaya se rahita aura
anantAnubandhI ke udaya se sahita hotA hai| anandAnubandho ke udaya se rahita
nau prakRtika udayasthAna meM to eka aTThAIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna hI hotA hai,
kintu jo nau prakRtika udayasthAna anantAnubandhI ke udaya sahita hai usameM
tInoM sattAsthAna pUrvokta prakAra se bana jAte haiM  /  dasa prakRtika
udayasthAna anantAnubandhI ke udaya vAle ko hI hotA hai | anyathA dasa prakRtika
udayasthAna hI nahIM banatA hai  /  ataH usameM 28, 27 aura 26 prakRtika tInoM
sattAsthAna prApta ho jAte haiM  /  ikkIsa prakRtika bandhasthAna ke samaya
sattAsthAna eka aTThAIsa 1 yato'STodayo dvidhA - anantAnubandhyudaya
rahito'nantAnubandhyudayasahitazca  /  saptatikA prakaraNa TokA, pR0 171 2 tatra
yAvada nAdyApi samyaktvamuvalayati tAvadaSTAviMzatiH, samyaktve uvalite
saptaviMzatiH samyagmithyAtve'pyuvalite SaDviMzatiH anAdimipyAdRSTervA dazatiH
/  saptatikA prakaraNa TokA, " pR0 171

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sixth Karma Granth, Chapter 125  **The Nature of the Twenty-Eight:**  The
twenty-eight are the nature of the *Sāsādan* *Samyagdṛṣṭi*. The *Sāsādan*
*Samyaktva* arises from the *Upaśama* *Samyaktva* of a being who has deviated
from it. However, such a being still possesses all three aspects of *Darśana*
*Moha* *nīya*, because due to the *Samyaktva* quality, *Mithyā* *tva* is divided
into three parts: *Mithyā* *tva*, *Samyag* *Mithyā* *tva*, and *Samyaktva*.
Therefore, the existence of all three aspects of *Darśana* *Moha* *nīya* is
established by rule.  Here, the *Udaya* *sthāna* of the seventh, eighth, and
ninth *Prakṛti* are the three. Therefore, with the existence of three *Udaya*
*sthāna* at the time of the twenty-one *Prakṛti* *Bandha* *sthāna*, there is one
*Sattā* *sthāna* of twenty-eight *Prakṛti*.  **The Seventeen *Prakṛti* *Bandha*
*sthāna* and Six *Sattā* *sthāna:**  The seventeen *Prakṛti* *Bandha* *sthāna*
have six *Sattā* *sthāna* - "from seventy to six" - which are the twenty-eighth,
twenty-seventh, twenty-sixth, twenty-fourth, twenty-third, twenty-second, and
twenty-first *Prakṛti*.  **The *Samyag* *Mithyā* *dṛṣṭi* and *Avirata* *Samyag*
*dṛṣṭi*:**  The *Samyag* *Mithyā* *dṛṣṭi* *Bandha* *sthāna* occurs in two *Guṇa*
*sthāna*: *Samyag* *Mithyā* *dṛṣṭi* and *Avirata* *Samyag* *dṛṣṭi*.  The
*Samyag* *Mithyā* *dṛṣṭi* beings have three *Udaya* *sthāna*: the seventh,
eighth, and ninth *Prakṛti*. The *Avirata* *Samyag* *dṛṣṭi* beings have four
*Udaya* *sthāna*: the sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth *Prakṛti*.  **The Sixth
*Prakṛti*:**  The twenty-first *Bandha* is the *Sāsādan* *Samyag* *dṛṣṭi*. The
*Sāsādan* *tva* arises from the *Upaśama* *Samyaktva* of a being who has
deviated from it. Due to the *Samyaktva* quality, *Mithyā* *tva* is divided into
three parts: *Mithyā* *tva*, *Samyag* *Mithyā* *tva*, and *Samyaktva*.
Therefore, the existence of all three aspects of *Darśana* *Moha* *nīya* is
established by rule. With the existence of three *Udaya* *sthāna* at the time of
the twenty-one *Bandha*, there is one *Sattā* *sthāna* of twenty-eight.  **The
Seventeen *Bandha*:**  The seventeen *Bandha* are for the *Samyag* *Mithyā*
*dṛṣṭi* and *Avirata* *Samyag* *dṛṣṭi*. The *Samyag* *Mithyā* *dṛṣṭi* have three
*Udaya* *sthāna*: the seventh, eighth, and ninth. The *Avirata* *Samyag* *dṛṣṭi*
have four *Udaya* *sthāna*: the sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 I SaSTha karmagrantha 125 prakRtika hI hotA hai - igavIse aTThavIsa | isakA
kAraNa yaha hai ki ikkIsa prakRtika bandhasthAna sAsAdana samyagdRSTi ko hI hotA
hai aura sAsAdana samyaktva upazama samyaktva se cyuta hue jIva ko hotA hai,
kintu aise jIva ke darzanamohanIya ke tInoM bhedoM kI sattA avazya pAI jAtI hai,
kyoMki yaha jIva samyaktva guNa ke nimitta se mithyAtva ke tIna bhAga kara detA
hai, jinheM kramaza: mithyAtva samyagmithyAtva aura samyaktva kahate haiM  /
ataH isake darzana mohanIya ke ukta tInoM bhedoM kI sattA niyama se pAI jAtI
hai| yahA~ udayasthAna sAta, ATha aura nau prakRtika, ye tIna hote haiN| ataH
ikkIsa prakRtika bandhasthAna ke samaya tIna udayasthAnoM ke rahate hue eka
aTThAIsa prakRtika ho sattAsthAna hotA hai  / " satraha prakRtika bansthAna ke
samaya chaha sattAsthAna hote hai - 'sattarase chacceva' jo 28,27,26,24,23, 22
aura 21 prakRtika hote haiM  /  saha prakRtika bandhasthAna samyagmithyAdRSTi
aura avirata samyagdRSTi, ina do guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai| inameM se
samyagmithyAdRSTi jIvoM ke 7 5 aura 6 prakRtika yaha tIna udayasthAna hote haiM
aura avirala samyagdRSTi jIvoM ke cAra udayasthAna hote haiM- 6, 7, 8 aura
prakRtika  /  inameM se chaha prakRtika 1 ekaviMzatibandho hi sAsAdana
samyagdRSTe bhaMvati, sAsAdanatvaM ca jIvasyopazamikasamyaktvAt
pracyavamAnasyopajAyate, samyaktvaguNena ca midhyAtvaM tridhAkRtam, tayA -
samyaktvaM mizraM mithyAtvaM ca tato darzanatrikasyApi satkarmatayA
prApyamANatvAd ekaviMzatibaMdhe triSvapyudayasthAneSvaSTAviMzatirekaM
sattAsthAnaM bhavati  /  - saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, 10 171 saptadazabandhI hi
iyAnAM bhavati, tadyathA-- samyagmithyAdRSTinAma viratasamyagdRSTInAM ca  /
tatra samyagmithyAdRSTInAM trIbhyudayasthAnAni tadyathAsapta aSTo naba
aviratasamyagdRSTinAM catvAri tadyathA SaTsapta aSTau nava  /  - saptatikA
prakaraNa TokA, pR0 171 ,

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Saptaatika chapter states that the state of Udyaasthan, Upsham, and
Samyagdristi is attained only by Kshayik Samyagdristi beings. A being with
Upsham Samyagdristi has two states of existence: 28 and 24 Prakrutis. The state
of 28 Prakrutis exists at the time of Prathamopahsam Samyaktva, while the state
of 24 Prakrutis exists for the being who has attained Avirat Samyagdristi after
the boiling up of Anantanubandhi. However, a Kshayik Samyagdristi being has only
21 Prakrutis. This is because the attainment of Kshayik Samyagdristi occurs only
after the destruction of seven Prakrutis: Anantanubandhi Chatushk and
Darshanmohatrik. Thus, there are three states of existence in the Udyaasthan of
six Prakrutis: 28, 24, and 21 Prakrutis.  For beings with Samyagmithyatva, there
are three states of existence: 28, 27, and 24 Prakrutis. A being with 28
Prakrutis who attains Samyagmithyatva has 28 Prakrutis. However, a Mithyadristi
who has attained 27 Prakrutis by boiling up Samyaktva but has not yet boiled up
Samyagmithyatva, if they attain the Samyagmithyatva Gunasthan by renouncing
Mithyatva and due to the cause of the consequences, then that Samyagmithyatva
being has 27 Prakrutis.   The Digambar tradition does not mention the existence
of 27 Prakrutis for Samyagmithyatva. The Go. Karmakanda mentions the Vedak
period, during which any Mithyadristi being could be Vedak Samyagdristi or
Samyagmithyatva. However, this period passes while the boiling up of Samyaktva
continues. Therefore, the attainment of Vedak Samyaktva or the Samyagmithyatva
Gunasthan is not mentioned for a being with 27 Prakrutis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa udayasthAna upazama samyagdRSTi yA kSAyika samyagdRSTi
jIvoM ko hI prApta hotA hai  /  upazama samyagdRSTi jIva ko aTThAIsa aura
caubIsa prakRtika ye do sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  aTThAIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna
prathamopazama samyaktva ke samaya hotA hai tathA jisane anantAnubaMdhI kI
ubalanA kI usa aupazamika avirata samyamhaSTi ke caubIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna
hotA hai kintu kSAyika samyagdRSTi jIva ke ikkIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna hI hotA
hai| kyoMki anantAnubaMdhI catuSka aura darzanamohatrika ina sAta prakRtiyoM ke
kSaya hone para hI usakI prApti hotI hai| isa prakAra chaha prakRtika
udayasthAna meM 28, 24 aura 21 prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna hote haiN|
samyagmidhyAiSTi jIvoM ke sAta prakRtika jagazAna ke rahane 28, 27 aura 24 ye
tIna sattAsthAna hote haiN| inameM se aTThAIsa prakRtiyoM kI sattA vAlA jo jIva
samyagmithyAtva ko prApta hotA hai, usake aTThAIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA
hai, kintu jisa mithyAdRSTi ne samyaktva kI udvalanA karake sattAIsa prakRtika
sattAsthAna ko prApta kara liyA kintu abhI sampagmithyAtva kI udvalanA nahIM kI,
vaha yadi mithyAtva se nivRtta hokara pariNAmoM ke nimitta se samyagmithyAtva
guNasthAna ko prApta hotA hai to usa samyagmithyAdRSTi jIva 1
kSAyikasamyagdRSTInAM tvekaviMzatireva, kSAyika hi samyaktvaM saptakakSaye
bhavati, saptakakSaye ca janturekaviMzatisatkarmeti  /  -saptatikA prakaraNa
TIkA, pR0 172 2 samyagmicyAdRSTi ke 27 prakRtika sattAsthAna hone ke mata kA
ullekha digambara paramparA meM dekhane meM nahIM AyA hai| go. karmakAMDa meM
vedakakAla kA nirdeza kiyA gayA hai, usa kAla meM koI bhI mithyAiSTi jIva vedaka
samyaghaSTi yA samyagmidhyAhRSTi ho sakatA hai, para yaha kAla samyaksya kI
udvalanA ke cAlU rahate hue nikala jAtA hai| ata: vahA~ 27 prakRtika sattA vAle
ko na to vedaka samyaktva kI prApti batalAI hai aura na samyagmithyAdRSTi
guNasthAna kii|

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Abhy  **If a being, who has achieved the state of complete
detachment from infinite karmic bonds while remaining in the collective
existence, attains the state of Samyag-Mithyatva due to the influence of karmic
results, then it is found to have twenty-four natural states of existence.**
Such a being is found in all four gatis (types of existence). This is because
beings in all four gatis who have attained Samyag-drishti (right faith) achieve
detachment from infinite karmic bonds.   **As stated in the Karma-prakriti:**
"Those who have attained the state of Paryapta (perfection) in all four gatis,
achieve victory by detaching themselves from infinite karmic bonds. However,
their Antarkarana (inner organ) and Upasama (subduing) of these infinite karmic
bonds do not cease."  **Here, the special point is that in the state of Avirata
Samyag-drishti (uninterrupted right faith), beings in all four gatis, Tiryanch
(animals) and Manusya (humans) in the state of Desha-virati (freedom from the
bondage of space), and only Manusya in the state of Sarva-virati (freedom from
all bondages), achieve detachment from the four types of infinite karmic
bonds.** After achieving detachment from infinite karmic bonds, many beings
attain the state of Samyag-Mithyatva due to the influence of karmic results.
This proves that Samyag-Mithyatva beings have twenty-four natural states of
existence.  **However, in the case of Avirata Samyag-drishti beings, there are
seven natural states of Udayasthan (states of arising), resulting in five states
of existence: 28, 24, 23, 22, and 21.** Out of these, twenty...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karma abhya ?* ke sattAisa ki sattA hotA hai tathA samaSTi rahate hue
jisane anantAnubandhI kI visaMyojanA kI hai, vaha yadi pariNAmavazAt
samyagmithyAdRSTi guNasthAna ko prApta karatA hai to usake caubIsa prakRtika
sattAsthAna pAyA jAtA hai| aisA jIva cAroM gatiyoM meM pAyA jAtA hai| kyoMki
cAroM gatiyoM kA samyagdRSTi jIva anantAnubandhI kI visaMyojanA karatA hai  /  1
karmaprakRti meM kahA bhI hai "bagayA pajjattA timdi vi saMjoyaNe vijayaMti  /
karaNehi tIhi sahiyA naMtarakaraNaM javasamo vA  //  2 arthAt cAroM gati ke
paryApta jIva tIna karaNoM ko prApta hokara anantAnubaMdha kI visaMyojanA karate
haiM, kintu inake anantAnubaMdhI kA antarakaraNa aura upazama nahIM hotA hai  /
yahA~ vizeSatA itanI hai ki avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM cAroM gati ke
jIva, dezavirati meM tiryaMca aura manuSya jIva tathA sarvavirati meM kevala
manuSya jIva anantAnubandhI catuSka ko visaMyojanA karate haiM  /
anantAnubaMdha kI bisaMyojanA karane ke bAda kitane hI jIva pariNAmoM ke vaMza
se samyagmithyAtva guNasthAna ko bhI prApta hote haiM  /  jisase
samyagmithyAdRSTi jIvoM ke caubIsa prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai, yaha siddha
huA  /  lekina avirata samyagdRSTi jIva ke sAta prakRtika udayasthAna rahate 28,
24, 23, 22 aura 21, ye pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiN| inameM se 20 1
yatazcatugaMtikA api samyadRSTayo'nantAnubaMdhino visaMyojayanti  /  - saptatikA
prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 172 2 karmaprakRti upa0 gA0 31 ph atra 'tinni vi' ti aviratA
dezaviratAH sarvaviratA vA yathAyogamati  /  - saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 172

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of Seven  There are 24 natural states for both the Upashma
Samyagdarshi and Vedak Samyagdarshi beings, but this is a special characteristic
that the 24 natural states are for the being who has disjoined the
Anantanubandhi Chatushk. The 23rd and 22nd natural states are only for the Vedak
Samyagdarshi beings. Because a Vedak Samyagdarshi being who is eight years old
or older and is striving for Kshapana, when his Anantanubandhi Chatushk and
Mithyatva are destroyed, he attains the 23rd natural state. And then, when his
Samyagmithyatva is destroyed, he attains the 22nd natural state. This being with
the 22nd natural state, when he is in the final stage of destroying the
Samyaktva nature and perhaps has already bound the previous life's lifespan, he
is born in one of the four gatis after death. It is also said:  "Paddhwago u
Manuso Nittho Ghausu Vi Gaisu." - This means that the beginning of the
destruction of Darshanmohaniya is only done by a human being, but its end is in
all four gatis.  Thus, the 22nd natural state is attained in all four gatis, but
the 21st natural state is attained only by the Kshayik Samyagdarshi being.
Because only after the destruction of the Anantanubandhi Chatushk and
Darshanmohatrik, these seven natures, does Kshayik Samyagdarshan occur.
Similarly, even while having the 8th natural state of Udayasthan,
Samyagmithya...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa aura 24 prakRtika to upazama samyagdRSTi aura vedaka
samyagdRSTi jIvoM ke hote haiM, kintu yaha vizeSatA hai ki 24 prakRtika
sattAsthAna, jisane anantAnubaMdhI catuSka kI visaMyojanA kara dI hai, usako
hotA hai|' 23 aura 22 prakRtika sattAsthAna vedaka samyagdRSTi jIvoM ke hI hote
haiN| kyoMki ATha varSa yA isase adhika Ayu vAlA jo vedaka samyagdRSTi jIva
kSapaNA ke liye udyata hotA hai, usake anantAnubaMdhI catuSka aura mithyAtva kA
kSaya ho jAne para 23 prakRtika satAsthAna hotA hai aura phira usI ke
samyagmithyAtva kA kSaya ho jAne para 22 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai  /  yaha
22 prakRtika sattA vAlA jIva samyaktva prakRti kA kSaya karate samaya jaba usake
antima bhAga meM rahatA hai aura kadAcit usane pahale parabhava sambandhI Ayu kA
baMdha kara liyA ho to mara kara cAroM gatiyoM meM utpanna hotA hai  /  kahA bhI
hai "paddhvago u maNUso niTTho ghausu vi gaIsu  /  _ arthAt darzanamohanIya kI
kSapaNA kA prArambha kevala manuSya hI karatA hai, kintu usakI samApti cAroM
gatiyoM meM hotI hai| isa prakAra 22 prakRtika sattAsthAna cAroM gatiyoM meM
prApta hotA hai kintu 21 prakRtika sattAsthAna kSAdhika samyagdRSTi jIva ko hI
prApta hotA hai| kyoMki anantAnubaMdhI catuSka aura darzanamohatrika, ina sAta
prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hone para hI kSAyika samyagdarzana hotA hai  /  isI prakAra
ATha prakRtika udayasthAna ke rahate hue bhI samyagmidhyA-.1
navaramanantAnubandhivisaMyojanAnantaraM sA avamantacyA  /  -saptatikA prakaraNa
TIkA, pR0 172 2 sa ca dvAviMzatisatkarmA samyaktvaM kSapayan taccaramagrAse
vartamAna: kazcit pUrvAyurukaH kAlamapi karoti, kAlaM ca kRtvA catasuNA
gatInAmanyatamasyAM gatAtpadyate  /  sapAtikA prakaraNa TokA, pRSTha 172

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Text Karmamanv  **126**  The three and five states of being, respectively, of
the *Dristi* and *Avirat* *Samyagdristi* beings have been described earlier.  It
should be understood in the same way for the nine natural *Udayasthanas*, but
with this distinction: the nine natural *Udayasthanas* of the *Avirat* are only
for the *Vedak* *Samyagdristi* beings, and the *Vedak* *Samyagdristi* beings
have four states of being: 28, 24, 23, and 22 natural *Sastasthanas*. Therefore,
here also, there are four states of being.  The summary of the aforementioned
statement regarding the seventeen natural *Bandhastanas* is this: the
*Samyagmithyadristi* has one *Bandhastan* of 17 natural *Prakritis*, three
*Udayasthanas* of 7, 8, and 9 *Prakritis*, and three *Sastasthanas* of 26, 27,
and 24 *Prakritis*. In the *Avirat* *Sambandhastara*, the *Upshama*
*Samvadristi* has one *Bandhastan* of 15 natural *Prakritis*, three
*Udayasthanas* of 6, 7, and 8 *Prakritis*, and two *Sastasthanas* of 28 and 24
*Prakritis*. The *Kshayik* *Samyagdristi* has one *Bandhastan* of 17 natural
*Prakritis*, three *Udayasthanas* of 6, 7, and 8 *Prakritis*, and one
*Sastasthan* of 21 *Prakritis*. The *Vedak* *Samyagdristi* has one *Bandhastan*
of 17 natural *Prakritis*, three *Udayasthanas* of 7, 8, and 9 *Prakritis*, and
four *Sastasthanas* of 28, 24, 23, and 22 *Prakritis*. The *Samvesha* *Bhangas*
have been previously described, therefore, here only the number of
*Bandhastanas* and other states of being are mentioned.  There are five states
of being for the thirteen and nine natural *Bandhastanas*: "There are five
states of being for the thirteen and nine *Bandhastanas*." These five
*Sastasthanas* are 28, 24, 23, 22, and 21 *Prakritis*. The first thirteen
natural *Bandhastanas* clarify the *Sastasthanas*.  The thirteen *Prakritis* are
the *Bandha* of the *Deshavirat* and the *Veshavirat* are of two types:
*Tithanch* and *Manushya*. "The *Tithanch* *Deshavirat*." There, the
*Deshavirat* have thirteen *Bandhas*, and they are of two types: *Tithanch* and
*Manushya*.  - *Sapatika Prakarnika*, page 15

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pATha karmamanva 126 dRSTi aura avirata samyagdaSTi jIvoM ke kramazaH pUrvokta
tIna aura pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiN| nau prakRtika udayasthAna ke rahate hue
bhI isI prakAra jAnanA cAhiye, lekina itanI vizeSatA hai ki aviratoM ke nau
prakRtika udayasthAna vedaka samyagdRSTi jIvoM ke hI hotA hai aura vedaka
samyagdRSTi jIvoM ke 28, 24, 23 aura 22 prakRtika, ye cAra sasAsthAna pAye jAte
haiM, ata: yahAM bhI ukta cAra sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  satraha prakRtika
baMdhasthAna sambandhI ukta kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai ki samyagmithyAdRSTi ke
17 prakRtika eka baMdhasthAna aura 7, 8, 9 prakRtika ye tIna udayasthAna tathA
26, 27 aura 24 prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  avirata sambandASTra
meM upazama samvAdRSTi ke 15 prakRtika eka baMdhasthAna aura 6, 7, 8 prakRtika
tIna uvayasthAna tathaH 28 aura 24 prakRtika do sattAsthAna hote haiN| kSAyika
samyagdRSTi ke eka 17 prakRtika baMdhasthAna tathA 6,7 aura 8 prakRtika, ye tIna
udaya sthAna tathA 21 prakRtika eka sattAsthAna hotA hai| vedaka samyagduSita ke
17 prakRtika eka baMdhasthAna tathA 7, 8 aura ha prakRtika tIna udaya rasthAna
tathA 28, 24, 23 aura 22 prakRtika cAra sattAsthAna hote haiM saMveSa bhaMgoM kA
pUrva meM nirdeza kiyA jA cukA hai, ata: yahAM kisa kitane baMdhAdi sthAna hote
haiM, isakA nirdeza mAtra kiyA hai| teraha aura nau prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke
rahate pAMca-pAMca sattAsthA hote haiM-'tera navagaMdhagesu paMceva taannaaii|
ve pAMca sattAsthAna 28, 2' 23, 22 aura 21 prakRtika hote haiN| pahale teraha
prakRtika baMdhasthAna sattAsthAnoM ko spaSTa karate haiN| teraha prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha dezAviratoM ko hotA hai aura vezavira do prakAra ke hote haiM-tiyaMca
aura manuSya  / ' tithaMca dezaviratoM  /  1 tatra trayodazabandhakA dezaviratA:
te ca vidhA-tiyaco manuSyAzca  /  -sapAtikA prakaraNIkA, pR015

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 130: The Seven Vikalpa  There are two states of being, 28 and 24 in
number, in all four of their places of arising. The 28 natural states of being
are for both types of Tiryanch, those with Upashma Samyagdrsti and those with
Vedak Samyagdrsti. Among them, the one who attains Deshavirat at the time of
attaining the first Samyaktva, has 25 natural states of being while remaining in
the state of Deshavirat. Because it is a rule that any Upashma Samyagdrsti Jiva
existing in the Antarkaran Kala attains Deshavirat, and some humans even attain
Sarvavirata. As it is said in Shatak Brihat Churni:  "Samasammadditti
Ansarkaranee Thio Koi Vesabir Koi Emattapamattabhavam Pi Gachch, Sasarvarna Pum
Na Kimvi Lahai."  Meaning, some Upashma Samyagdrsti Jivas residing in the
Antarkaran attain Deshavirat, and some even attain Pramatta Samyama and
Apramatta Bhava, but the Sasadan Samyagdrsti Jivas do not attain any of these.
This explains how the Upashma Samyagdrsti Jiva attains the Deshavirat Gunasthan.
However, there is no particular obstacle in attaining Deshavirat along with
Vedak Samyaktva. This leads to 28 natural states of being for Vedak Samyagdrsti
in the Deshavirat Gunasthan. But the 24 natural states of being are for those
Tiryanch who disengage from Anantanubandhi, and they are Vedak Samyagdrsti.
Because in the Tiryanch Gati, Upashma Samyagdrsti:  1. In the Jayaghavala Tika,
while instructing the Swami, the Jivas of all four Gatis are described as the
Swami of the 24 natural states of being. According to this, the Upashma
Samyagdrsti Jiva of each Gati can disengage from Anantanubandhi. This opinion is
also supported by the Karm Prakriti Upashmana Prakaran, verse 31, which
describes the Jivas of all four Gatis as capable of disengaging from
Anantanubandhi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 130 saptavikA prakaraNa unake cAroM hI udayasthAnoM meM 28 aura 24 prakRtika,
ye do sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  28 prakRtika sattAsthAna to upazama samyagdRSTi
aura bevaka samyagdRSTi, ina donoM prakAra ke hI tiryaca dezaviratoM ke hotA hai
/  usameM bhI jo prathama samyaktva ko utpanna karane ke samaya hI dezanirasa kI
jApta kara detA hai, basa dezavira ke samyaktva ke rahate hue 25 prakRtika
sattAsthAna hotA hai  /  kyoMki antarakaraNa kAla meM vidyamAna koI bhI
aupazamika samyagdRSTi jIva dezavirata ko prApta karatA hai aura koI manuSya
sarvavirata ko bhI prApta karatA hai, aisA niyama hai| jaisAki zataka bRhaccUrNi
meM kahA bhI hai samasammaddiTTI ansarakaraNe Thio koI vesabira koI
emattApamattabhAvaM pi gaccha, sAsaravarNA puma na kimavi lahaI  /  arthAt
antarakaraNa meM sthita koI upazama samyagdRSTi jIva dezavirati ko prApta hotA
hai aura koI pramattasaMyama aura apramattabhAva ko bhI prApta hotA hai, parantu
sAsAdana samyagdRSTi jIva inameM se kisI ko bhI prApta nahIM hotA hai| - isa
prakAra upazama samprahRSTi jIva ko dezavirati guNasthAna kI prApti ke bAre meM
batAyA ki vaha kaise prApta hotA hai  /  kintu vedaka samyaktva ke sAtha
dezavirati hone meM koI vizeSa bAdhA nahIM hai  /  jisase dezavirati guNasthAna
meM vedaka samyagdRSTi ke 28 prakRtika sattAsthAna bana hI jAtA hai  /  kintu 24
prakRtika sattAsthAna anantAnubaMdhI kI visaMyojanA karane vAle tiryaMcoM ke
hotA hai, aura ve vedaka samyagdRSTi hote haiN| kyoMki tiyaMcagati meM
aupazamika samyagdRSTi ke 1 jayaghavalA TIkA meM svAmI kA nirdeza karate samaya
cAroM gatiyoM ke jIvoM ko 24 prakRtika sattAsthAna kA svAmI batalAyA hai| isake
anusAra pratyeka gati kA upazama samyagdRSTi jIva anantAnubandhI kI visaMyojanA
kara sakatA hai| karmaprakRti ke upazamanA prakaraNa gA0 31 se bhI isI mata kI
puSTi hotI hai| yahA~ cAroM gati ke jIvoM ko anantAnubaMdhI kI visaMyojanA
karane vAlA batAyA hai|

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth, 131  **It is not possible to attain the 24th natural
state of existence.**  Besides these two states of existence, the remaining 23,
including the state of *Tich* and *Deshaviret*, do not exist. This is because
they are only attained by beings who generate *Kshayik Samyavash*, and *Tich*
does not generate *Kshayik Samyagdarshan*. Only humans can generate this.  **A
curious question arises regarding the non-acceptance of the 23 natural states of
existence in *Tiryach* beings.**  **Question:** It is true that *Tiryach* beings
do not have 23 natural states of existence. However, when humans, having
generated *Kshayik Samyagdarshan*, are reborn as *Tiryach*, they do attain the
21st and 22nd natural states of existence. Therefore, it is not logical to say
that *Tiryach* beings do not have the 23 natural states of existence.
**Answer:** While it is true that a being with 22 natural states of existence,
who has generated *Kshayik Samyaktva*, or a being with *Kshayik Samyagdristi*,
may be reborn as a *Tiryach* after death, this being is not reborn as a
*Tiryach* with a lifespan of a few years, but rather as a *Tiryach* with an
immeasurable lifespan.  **Note:** The remaining 23 natural states of existence,
including the 23rd, are not possible for *Tiryach* beings. These states are
attained by those who generate *Shramik Samyaktva*. *Tiryach* beings do not
generate *Kshayik Samyaktva*, only humans do.  **Source:** Saptaatika Prakaran
Teeka, page 173.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karma grantha 131 24 prakRtika sattAsthAna kI prApti saMbhava nahIM hai
/  ina do sattAsthAnoM ke atirikta tica dezavirata ke zeSa 23 Adi saba
sattAsthAna nahIM hote haiM, kyoMki ve kSAyika samyavazva ko utpanna karane vAle
jIvoM ke hI hote haiM aura tithaMca kSAyika samyagdarzana ko utpanna nahIM
karate haiN| ise to kevala manuSya ho utpanna karate haiM  / " teIsa prakRtika
Adi sattAsthAna tiryaMcoM ke nahIM mAnane ko lekara jijJAsu prazna pUchatA hai
MAR "jaya manuSyAH kSAyikasamyakramamutpAdya yathA sirdhapakhante tatharA
tiraracI:pyekaviMzatiH prApyata eva tat kathamucyate zeSANi trayovidArayAdIni
sarvANi na sambhavanti ? iti tad ayuktam, yataH kSAyikasamyaSTistirpazu na
saMpadevardhAmuSkeTa madhye samutpate ke na ca tatra dezaviratiH, tababhAvAcca
na trayozabandhakatvam atra trayodazbandhe sattAsthAnAni visyamAnAni tala eka
vidhAtirapi trayodazabaje tiryakSu na prApyate  /  prazna- yaha ThIka hai ki
tiryaMcoM ke 23 prakRtika sattAsthAna nahIM hotA hai, tathApi jaba manuSya
kSAyika samyagdarzana ko utpanna karate hue yA utpana karake tiyaMcoM meM
utpanna hote haiM taba ticoM ke bhI 22 aura 21 prakRtika sattAsthAna pAye jAte
haiN| ataH yaha kahanA yukta nahIM hai ki tiryaMcoM ke 23 Adi prakRtika
sattAsthAna nahIM hote haiN| uttara - yadyapi yaha ThIka hai ki kSAyika
samyaktva ko utpanna karane bAlA 22 prakRtika sattA vAlA jIva yA kSAyika
samyagdRSTi jIva mara kara tiryaMcoM meM utpala hotA hai, kintu yaha jIva
saMsthAta varSa kI Ayu vAle tiryacoM meM utpanna na hokara asaMkhyAta varSa kI
Ayu vAle tithaMcoM 1 zeSANi tu sarvApyapi trayoviMzatyAdIni sattAsthAnAni
tirazcAM na sambhavanti tAni hi zrAmikasamyaktvamutpAdayataH prApyante na ca
tiryacaH yAyika samyakasyamutpAdayati, kintu manuSyA eka | 3 - saptatikA
prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 173

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seven Tika  This arises only in the **Sapta Tika** and
their **Desha Virati** does not occur. Due to the absence of **Desha Virati**,
they do not attain the thirteen **Prakrutik Bandha Sthanas**. However, here, the
consideration is of the **Satta Sthanas** within the thirteen **Prakrutik Bandha
Sthanas**. Therefore, the statement above, that the twenty-three **Prakrutik
Satta Sthanas** do not occur in **Tiryachas**, is correct in relation to the
thirteen **Prakrutik Bandha Sthanas**.   It is also stated in **Churni**:
"Twenty-one **Prakrutik Satta Sthanas** are not possible in **Sanjata** and
**Asanjata Tiryachas**. Why? Because **Kshayik Samyagdrishti** beings are not
born in **Tiryachas** with a lifespan of a countable number of years. They are
born in **Tiryachas** with an uncountable number of years, but there is no
**Desha Virati** for them."  Thus, after considering the **Tiryachas**, we now
consider the **Manushyas**. Those **Manushyas** who have attained **Desha
Virati**, have three **Satta Sthanas** with five **Prakrutik Udaya Sthanas**:
twenty-eight, twenty-four, and twenty-one **Prakrutik Satta Sthanas**. With six
and seven **Prakrutik Udaya Sthanas**, there are five **Satta Sthanas** in each:
twenty-eight, twenty-four, twenty-three, twenty-two, and twenty-one **Prakrutik
Satta Sthanas**. With eight **Prakrutik Udaya Sthanas**, there are four **Satta
Sthanas**: twenty-eight, twenty-four, twenty-three, and twenty-two **Prakrutik
Satta Sthanas**.   By considering the **Prakrutis** in **Udaya Sthanas**, the
determination of their causes becomes easy. Just as it is stated in the **Avirat
Samyagdrishti Gunasthanas**, it should be understood here as well. Therefore,
instead of stating it separately, only a hint is given about how many **Satta
Sthanas** occur in each **Udaya Sthanas**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa meM hI utpanna hotA hai aura unake deza virati nahIM hotI
hai aura dezavirati ke na hone se unake teraha prakRtika baMSasthAna nahIM pAyA
jAtA hai  /  parantu yahA~ teraha prakRtika baMSasthAna meM sattAsthAnoM kA
vicAra kiyA jA rahA hai  /  ata: Upara jo yaha kahA gayA hai ki tiyaMtroM ke 23
Adi prakRtika sattAsthAna nahIM hote haiM, vaha 13 prakRtika baMdhasthAna kI
apekSA se ThIka hI kahA gayA hai  /  cUNi meM bhI kahA hai egavIsA tirisane
saMjayA'saMjaesu na saMbhavai  /  kahaM ?. bhaggA-saMjabAsA esu tiriksesu
lAgasammaTThiI ME asalenamAsAueSu umajeSamA, tassa resavira msthi| arthAt-
tiryaMca saMyatAsaMyatoM ke 21 prakRtika sattAsthAna nahIM hotA, kyoMki kSAyika
samyagdRSTi jIva saMkhyAta varSa kI Ayu vAle tiyaMcoM meM utpanna nahIM hotA hai
/  asaMkhyAta varSa kI Ayu vAle tiyaMcoM meM utpanna hotA hai, kintu vahA~ unake
dezavirati nahIM hotI hai  /  isa prakAra se tiryaMcoM kI apekSA vicAra karane
ke bAda aba manuSyoM ko apekSA vicAra karate haiN| _ jo dezavirata manuSya haiM,
unake pAMca prakRtika udayasthAna ke rahate 28, 24 aura 21 prakRtika, ye tIna
sattAsthAna hote haiN| chaha prakRtika aura sAta prakRtika udayasthAna ke rahate
pratyeka meM 28, 24, 23, 22 aura 21 prakRtika, ye pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiM  /
ATha prakRtika udayasthAna ke rahate 28, 24, 23 aura 22 prakRtika ye cAra
sattAsthAna hote haiN| udayasthAnagata prakRtiyoM ko dhyAna meM rakhane se inake
kAraNoM kA nizcaya sugamatApUrvaka ho jAtA hai| arthAt jaise avirata samya.
mhaSTi guNasthAna meM kathana kiyA gayA hai, vaise hI yahA~ bhI samajha lenA
cAhime  /  ata: alaga se kAthana na karake kisa udayasthAna meM kitane
sattAsthAna hote haiM, isakA sirpha saMketamAtra kiyA gayA hai  /

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **There are nine natural bondage states (bandha sthana)
for both the attentive (pramattasanyata) and inattentive (apramattasanyata)
beings. For these, there are four, five, six, and seven natural states
(prakriti), which are the four arising states (udayasthan).**  **With four
natural arising states, there are 28, 24, and 21 natural states (prakriti),
which are the three being states (sattaasthan). This is because this arising
state is only attained by the subdued (upshama) right-seeing (samyagdristi) and
the destructive (kshayika) right-seeing.**  **With five natural states and this
natural arising state, there are five being states each. This is because these
arising states are possible for all three types of right-seeing (samyasti) -
subdued, destructive, and omniscient (vedaka).**  **However, with seven natural
arising states, only four being states are possible, not 21, because the
omniscient right-seeing is possible here.**  **The 'Panchavah Uvihech' ...
states that there are six being states each in the five and four natural bondage
states. This means there are six being states for the five natural bondage
states and six being states for the four natural bondage states. However, there
is a difference in the number of natural states of both, which is explained
below.**  **First, we will explain the being states of the five natural bondage
states. The number of six being states of the five natural bondage states is as
follows: 28, 24, 21, 13, 12, and 11.**  **Their explanation is as follows:**
**1. For both the one and nine bondage states, for both the attentive and
inattentive, there are three being states each for every four arising states.
Thus, there are 28, 24, and 21. For every five arising states and six arising
states, there are five being states each. For seven arising states, there are
four being states remaining, excluding 21.**  **2. In the five types of bondage,
there are these: 28, 24, 21, 13, 12, and 11.**  **(From the Sapttatika Prakarana
Tisha, page 174) (From the Sapttatika Prakarana Toka, page 174)**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrampa _ nau prakRtika baMdhasthAna prabhattasaMyata aura
apramattasaMyata jIvoM ke hotA hai| inake 4, 5, 6 aura 7 prakRtika, ye cAra
udayasthAna hote haiN| cAra prakRtika udayasthAna ke rahate 28, 24 aura 21
prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna hote haiN| kyoMki yaha udayasthAna upazama
samyagdRSTi aura kSAyika samyagdRSTi ko hI prApta hotA hai  /  pA~ca prakRtika
aura yaha prakRtika udayasthAna ke rahate pAMca-pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiN|
kyoMki ye udayasthAna tInoM prakAra ke samyASTiyoM-aupazamika, mAyika aura
vedaka ko saMbhava hai| kintu sAta prakRtika udayasthAna vedaka samyagdRSTiyoM
ke saMbhava hone se yahA~ 21 prakRtika sattAsthAna saMbhava na hokara zeSa cAra
hI sattAsthAna hote haiN|' . _paMcAvaha uvihecha '-... tiSa aura cAra prakRtika
baMdhasthAna meM chaha-chaha sattAsthAna hote haiN| arthAt pA~ca pratika
baMdhasthAna ke chaha sattAsthAna haiM aura cAra prakRtika baMSasthAna ke bhI
chaha sattAsthAna haiN| lekina donoM ke sattAsthAnoM kI prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA
meM antara hai jinakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA jA rahA hai| sarvaprathama pA~ca
prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke sattAsthAnoM ko batalAte haiN| pAMca prakRtika
baMdhasthAna ke chaha sattAsthAnoM kI saMkhyA isa prakAra hai-28, 24, 21, 13, 12
aura 11  / ' inakA spaSTIkaraNa nimna prakAra hai 1 evaM navabaMdhakAnAmapi
pramattA'pramattAnAM pratyeka catuSkodaye trINi trINi sattAsthAnAni,
tadyayAaSTAviMzati: caturvizatiH ekavizatizca  /  paMcakodaye SaTkodaye ca
pratyeka paMca paMca sattAsthAnAni  /  saptodaye svekavizativarjAni zeSANi
catvAri sattAsthAnAni yAcyAni  /  saptatikA prakaraNa TIzA, pR0 174 2 tatra
paMcavidhe bandhe amUni, tabayA -aSTAviMzatiH caturvizati: ekaviMzatiH trayodaza
dvAdaza ekAdaza ca  /  saptatikA prakaraNa TokA, pR0 174

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **154**  The five natural bondage-places (**Pancha-Prakritik
Bandha-Sthan**) are present in the **Upashmani** and **Kshapakani** stages until
the bondage of the **Purusha-Veda** in the **Anivriti-vada** (non-returner)
souls.  And until the bondage of the **Purusha-Veda**, the six **No-Kshaya**
(non-destructive) states exist. Therefore, the five natural bondage-places do
not have the presence of **Papa** (sin) and other states.  Now, the remaining
states are present in the **Upashmani** stage. There are three natural states:
**28**, **24**, and **21**. The **21** and **24** natural states are found in
the **Upashma-Shreni** (stage of liberation) for the **Upashma Samyag-Drishti**
(liberated soul with perfect vision). The **21** natural state is found in the
**Upashma-Shreni** for the **Kshayik Samyag-Drishti** (liberated soul with
perfect vision, but still subject to subtle karmic influences).  In the
**Kshapakani** stage, the **21** natural state is present until the eight
**Kshaya** (destructive) states are destroyed.  Therefore, in comparison to the
**Upashmani** stage, there are three natural states: **28**, **24**, and **21**.
However, there is a special characteristic: the **28** and **24** natural states
are present only in the **Upashma-Shreni** for the **Upashma Samyag-Drishti**
soul. But the **21** natural state is present in the **Upashma-Shreni** for the
**Kshayik Samyag-Drishti** soul and also in the **Kshapakani** stage until the
eight **Kshaya** states are destroyed.  **Footnotes:**  1. The five states,
etc., are not found in the five-poison bondage, because the five-poison bondage
is bound in the **Purusha-Veda**. And since the bondage of the **Purusha-Veda**,
the six **No-Kshaya** states exist. - **Sapta-Tika Prakaran Tokar**, page 154
2. There are **28** and **24** for the **Upashma Samyag-Drishti** in the
**Upashmani** stage. **21** is present in the **Upashmani** stage for the
**Kshayik Samyag-Drishti**. - **Sapta-Tika Prakaran Teeka**, page 154  3. In the
**Kshapakani** stage, until the eight **Kshaya** states are destroyed, **21** is
present. - **Sapta-Tika Prakaran Teeka**, page 174

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 154 saptatikA prakaraNa pAMca prakRtika baMdhasthAna upazamaNi aura kSapakaNi
meM anivRttibAdara jIvoM ke puruSaveda ke baMdhakAla taka hotA hai aura
puruSaveda ke baMdha ke samaya taka yaha nokaSAyoM kI sattA pAI jAtI hai, ataH
pA~ca prakRtika baMghasthAna meM pApa Adi sattAsthAna nahIM pAye jAte haiN| aba
rahe zeSa sattAsthAna' so upazamaNi kI apekSA yahA~ 28, 24 aura 21 prakRtika, ye
tIna sattAsthAna pAye jAte haiN| 21 aura 24 prakRtika sattAsthAna to upazama
samyagdRSTi ko upazamazreNi meM aura 21 prakRtika sattAsthAna kSAyika
samyagdRSTi ko upazamapreNi meM pAyA jAtA hai| kSapakaNi meM bhI jaba taka ATha
kaSAyoM kA kSaya nahIM hotA taba taka 21 prakRtika sattAsthAna pAyA jAtA hai|
arthAt upazamaNi kI apekSA 28, 24 aura 21 prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna hote
haiM  /  kina itanI vizeSatA hai ki 28 aura 25 prakRtika sattAsthAna to upazama
samyagdRSTi jIva ko hI upazamazreNi meM hote haiM, kintu 21 prakRtika
sattAsthAna kSAyika samyagdRSTi jIva ko upazamazreNi meM bhI hotA hai aura
kSapakaNi meM bhI ATha kaSAyoM ke kSaya na hone taka pAyA jAtA hai|' 1 paMcAdIni
tu sattAsthAnAni paMcaviSavandhe na prApyante, yata: paMcaviSabandhaH puruSavede
badhyamAne mavati, sAyacca puruSavedasya baMghassAyat Sar3a nokaSAyAH santa
eveti  /  -saptatikA prakaraNa Tokara, pR0 154 2 tatrASTAviMzatiH
pravizatizcaupazamikasamyagraSTeruparAmaNyAm  /  ekavikSatirupazamaNyAM
shaayiksmpghnntteH| saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 154 3 sapakaNyA punaraSTo
kaSAyA pAvada na zrIyantra taavdekviNshtiH| -saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 174

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma-Praya  The **Kshapaka** श्रेणि (category) has 13, 12, and 11
natural **Satta-sthana** (states of being) and when 21 natural **Satta-sthana**
are added to them, the **Kshapaka-ming** (category) has 51, 13, 12, and **Par**
(transcendental) **Satta-sthana**.  There are 21 natural **Satta-sthana** until
the eight **Kshaya** (destructive forces) are destroyed, and 13 natural **Satta-
sthana** after the eight **Kshaya** are destroyed.  Of these, when **Nupusak-
veda** (the karma of being a eunuch) is destroyed, there are 12 natural **Satta-
sthana**, and when **Stri-veda** (the karma of being a woman) is destroyed from
the 12 natural **Satta-sthana**, there are 11 natural **Satta-sthana**.  Thus,
in the five natural **Bandha-sthana** (states of bondage), there are six
**Satta-sthana**: 28, 24, 21, 13, 12, and 11 natural **Satta-sthana**. Now, we
will clarify the six **Satta-sthana** of the four natural **Bandha-sthana**.  In
the four natural **Bandha-sthana**, there are six **Satta-sthana**: 28, 24, 21,
11, 5, and 4 natural **Satta-sthana**.  The four natural **Bandha-sthana** exist
in both the **Upshama-shreni** (category) and the **Kshapaka-vani** (category).
The explanation given earlier for the 28, 24, and 21 natural **Satta-sthana**
found in the **Upshama-shreni** should be understood here as well.  Now,
regarding the **Kshapaka-vani**, the rule is that a being who ascends to the
**Kshapaka-vani** with the arising of **Nupusak-veda** destroys **Nupusak-veda**
and **Stri-veda** simultaneously, and with this, the bondage of **Purusha-veda**
(the karma of being a man) is broken.  After that, its **Purusha-veda** and
**Hasya-adi Shatka** (six types of karma related to laughter, etc.) are
destroyed simultaneously.  If a being arises with **Stri-veda**,   1.  **Chatur-
vidha-bandhe punar-amuni shat satta-sthanaani, taptha-ashta-vimsha-ti, chatur-
vimsha-ti, eka-vimsha-ti, eka-dasha, pancha, chatasraha.**     - **Sapta-tika
Prakarana Teeka, Pra. 174**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmaprAya kSapaka zreNi meM 13, 12 aura 11 prakRtika sattAsthAna to
hote hI haiM aura unake sAtha 21 prakRtika sattAsthAna ko aura milA dene para
kSapakamiMga meM 51, 13, 12 aura pAra sattAsthAna hote haiN| ATha kaSAyoM ke
kSaya na hone taka 21 prakRtika sasAsthAna hotA hai aura ATha kaSAyoM ke kSaya
ho jAne para 13 prakRtika sattAsthAna  /  isameM se napu saka veda kA kSaya ho
jAne para 12 prakRtika tathA bAraha prakRtika sattAsthAna meM se strIveda kA
kSaya ho jAne para 11 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai| isa prakAra pAMca
prakRtika bandhasthAna meM 28, 24, 21, 13, 12 aura 11 prakRtika, ye chaha
sattAsthAna hote haiN| aba cAra prakRtika andhasthAna ke chaha sattAsthAnoM ko
spaSTa karate haiN| cAra prakRtika bandhasthAna meM 28, 24, 21, 11, 5 aura 4
prakRtika, ye chaha sattAsthAna hote haiN|' cAra prakRtika bandhasthAna bhI
upazamazreNi aura kSapakavaNi donoM meM hotA hai| upazamazceNi meM pAye jAne
vAle 28, 24 aura 21 prakRtika sattAsthAnoM kA pahale jo spaSTIkaraNa kiyA gayA,
vaisA yahA~ bhI samajha lenA cAhie  /  aba rahA kSapakaveNi kA vicAra, so usake
liye yaha niyama hai ki jo jIva napuMsakaveva ke udaya ke sAtha kSapakaNi para
car3hatA hai, vaha napusakaveda aura strIveda kA kSaya eka sAtha karatA hai aura
isake sAtha hI puruSaveda kA bandhaviccheda ho jAtA hai| tadanantara isake
puruSaveda aura hAsyAdi SaTka kA eka sAtha kSaya hotA hai  /  yadi koI jIva
strIveda ke udaya 1 caturvidhabandhe punaramuni SaT sattAsthAnAni, tapathA-
aSTAviMzatiH, caturviMzatiH ekaviMzatiH, ekAdaza, paMca, catasraH  /  -saptatikA
prakaraNa TIkA, pra. 174

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 73  When a being ascends the क्षपकश्रेणि with क्षपकणि, it first sheds
the नपुंसक वेद, then in the अन्तर्मुहूर्त time, it sheds the स्त्रोवेद. After
that, the पुरुषवेद and the six हास्यादि are shed together. However, even during
the shedding of स्त्रीवेद, the पुरुषवेद is stopped. Thus, with the rise of
स्त्रीवेद and नपुंसक वेद, the being ascending the क्षपकश्रेणि either at the end
of the shedding of स्त्रीवेद or at the end of the shedding of स्त्रीवेद and
नपुंसकवेद, experiences the अन्धविच्छेद of पुरुषवेद. This results in the being
attaining eleven प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान with only one प्रकृति remaining in its four
प्रकृतिक बंधस्थान without the rise of वेद. This being sheds the पुरुषवेद and the
six हास्यादि together. Therefore, it attains four प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान instead of
five. However, the being that ascends the क्षपकश्रेणि with the rise of पुरुषवेद,
experiences the बंधविच्छेद of पुरुषवेद only when its six नोकषायों are shed. This
results in the being attaining five प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान instead of eleven in its
four प्रकृतिक बंधस्थान. This सत्तास्थान remains for two times less than two आवली
काल, and then it attains four प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान for the अन्तर्मुहूर्त काल.
**1**  In the चूर्णि of कषायप्राभूत, the time for both the अभ्य and उत्कृष्ट
types of five प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान is stated as one time less than two आवली:
"What is the time for the five प्रकृतिक सत्तास्थान? It is two आवली times less
than one time."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 116 saptatikA prakaraNa ke sAtha kSapakaNi para car3hatA hai to vaha jIva
pahale napuMsaka veda kA kSaya karatA hai, tadanantara antarmuhUrta kAla meM
stroveda kA kSaya karatA hai, phira puruSaveda aura hAsyAdi SaTka kA eka sAtha
kSaya hotA hai  /  kintu isake bhI strIveda kI kSapaNA ke samaya puruSaveda kA
baMda ho jAtA hai| isa prakAra strIveda aura napuMsaka veda ke udaya se
kSapakazreNi para bar3he hue jIva ke yA to strIveda kI kSapayA ke antima samaya
meM yA strIveda aura napuMsakaveda kI kSapaNA ke aMtima samaya meM puruSaveda kA
andhaviccheda ho jAtA hai, jisase isa jIva ke cAra prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM
veda ke udaya ke binA eka prakRti kA udaya rahate gyAraha prakRtika sattAsthAna
prApta hotA hai tathA yaha jIva puruSaveda aura hAsyAdi SaTuka kA kSaya eka
sAtha karatA hai| ataH isake pA~ca prakRtika sattAsthAna prApta na hokara cAra
prakRtika sattAsthAna prApta hotA hai| kintu jo jIva puruSaveda ke udaya se
kSapakazreNi para car3hatA hai, usake chaha nokaSAyoM ke kSaya hone ke samaya hI
puruSaveda kA baMdhaviccheda hotA hai, jisase usake cAra prakRtika baMSasthAna
meM gyAraha prakRtika sasAsthAna nahIM hotA kintu pAMca prakRtikaM sattAsthAna
prApta hotA hai| isake yaha sattAsthAna do samaya kama do AvalI kAla taka
rahakara, anantara antarmuhUrta kAla taka cAra prakRtika sattAsthAna prApta hotA
hai  /  1 1 kaSAyaprAbhUta kI cUrNi meM pAMca prakRtika sattAsthAna kA jabhya
aura utkRSTa donoM prakAra kA kAla eka samaya kama vo Ayalo pramANa batalAyA hai
"paMca vittio ke viciraM kAlAdo ? jahaSNukkastreNa do mAvaliyAo samayugAo  /  /
"

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pashtha Karmagram  In this way, in the six substantive abodes (sattasthana) of
the four natural bondage-places (prakritika bandhasthana), there are 28, 24, 21,
11, 5, and 4 natural (prakritika) [substantive abodes], this has been
established.  In each of the three, two, and one natural bondage-places, there
are five substantive abodes (pancheva patteyam patteyam) - this is explained.
The five substantive abodes of the three natural bondage-places are: 28, 24, 21,
4, and 3 natural [substantive abodes]. It is certain everywhere that in each
bondage-place, according to the subsidence-cum-destruction (upasamashreni) [of
karmas], there are 28, 24, and 21 natural substantive abodes. Therefore, the
remaining 4 and 3 natural substantive abodes should be understood according to
the destruction (kshapakahreni) [of karmas].  Therefore, now the consideration
here is with respect to the destruction (kshapakahreni) [of karmas]. In this
regard, there is a rule that when there is one Avalika (unit) remaining in the
Samjvalana-kosha (the fiery body), the bondage, rise, and suppression of the
three [karmas] get severed simultaneously, and thereafter, three natural
bondages occur. But at that time, except for the Sthitigata-dalika of one
Avalika measure and the Samayaprabandha of two Avali less two time-units, the
destruction of all others takes place.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paSTha karmagrampa isa prakAra cAra prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM 28, 24, 21, 11,
5 aura 4 prakRtika, ye chaha sattAsthAna hote haiM, yaha siddha huA 1' tIna, do
aura eka prakRtika baMdhasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM pAMca-pAMca sattAsthAna
hote haiM-'sesesu jANa paMceva patteyaM patteyaM  /  jinakA spaSTIkaraNa karate
haiN| tIna prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke pAMca sattAsthAna isa prakAra hai-28, 24,
21, 4 aura 3 prkRtik| yaha to sarvatra sunizcita hai ki upazamazreNi kI apekSA
pratyeka baMdhasthAna meM 28, 24 aura 21 prakRtika sattAsthAna hote haiM, ataH
zeSa rahe 4 aura 3 prakRtika sattAsthAna kSapaka zreNi kI apekSA samajhanA
caahiye| ata: aba kSapakaNi kI apekSA yahA~ vicAra karanA hai| isa sambandha meM
aisA niyama hai ki saMjvalana koSa kI prathama sthiti eka AvalikA pramANa zeSa
rahane para baMgha, udaya aura udIraNA, ina tInoM kA eka sAtha viccheda ho jAtA
hai aura tadanantara tIna prakRtika baMdha hotA hai, kintu usa samaya saMjvalana
koSa ke eka AvalikA pramANa sthitigata dalika ko aura do samaya kama do AvalI
pramANa samayaprabana ko chor3akara anya sabakA kSaya ho jAtA hai  /  yadyapi
yaha bhI do samaya kama do AvalI pramANa kAla ke dvArA kSaya ko prApta 1 go0
karmakAMDa gA0 363 meM pAra prakRtika baMSasthAna meM do prakRtika maura eka
prakRtika ye do udayasthAna tathA 28, 24, 21, 13, 12, 11, 2 aura prakRtika, ye
pATha sattAsthAna batalAye hai  /  isakA kAraNa batAte hue gA0 484 meM likhA hai
ki jo jIva strIveva napusaphaveda ke sAya ANi para bar3hatA hai, usake strIveda
yA napuMsaka veda ke udaya ke viparama samaya meM puruSaveda kA paMdhaviccheda
ho jAtA hai  /  isI kAraNa karmakAra meM cAra prakRtika saMghasthAna ke samaya
13 aura 12 prakRtika, ye do sattAsmAna aura batAye haiN|

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 73  It is said that when there are three natural bondage-places,
there are four natural existence-places until the destruction of the karma, and
when it is destroyed, there are three natural existence-places in the three
natural bondage-places, which lasts until the end of the moment.  Thus, there
are five existence-places in the three natural bondage-places: 28, 24, 21, 4,
and 3 natural. In the two natural bondage-places, there are five existence-
places as follows: 28, 24, 21, 3, and 2 natural.  Similarly, when the first
state of the Sanjvalana Maya remains for one Avali Praman, the bondage, arising,
and excitation are all destroyed at the same time. At that time, two natural
bondage-places are obtained, but at that time, except for the first state Dalik
of the Sanjvalana Maya, which remains for one Avali Praman, and the two time-
bound Mavali Praman, the destruction of all others takes place. Although the
remaining good karma will be destroyed by two Avali Praman time less two times,
until its destruction, there are three natural existence-places in the two
natural bondage-places. After its destruction, there are two natural existence-
places in the two natural bondage-places. Its time is the end of the moment.
Thus, there are five existence-places in the two natural bondage-places: 28, 24,
21, 3, and 2 natural.  The five existence-places in the one natural bondage-
place are as follows: 28, 24, 21, 2, and 1 natural. Of these, the 28, 24, and 21
natural existence-places should be understood in relation to the Upshama. The
description of the remaining 2 and 1 natural existence-places is as follows: In
the same way, when the first state of the Sanjvalana Maya remains for one Avali
Praman, the bondage, arising, and excitation are all destroyed at the same time,
and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 138 saptatikA prakaraNa hogA kintu jaba taka kSaya nahIM huA taba taka tIna
prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM cAra prakRtika sattAsthAna pAyA jAtA hai aura isake
kSaya ho jAne para tIna prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM tIna prakRtika sattAsthAna
pAyA jAtA hai, o antarmuhUrta kAla taka rahatA hai| isa prakAra tIna prakRtika
baMdhasthAna meM 28, 24, 21, 4 aura 3 prakRtika, ye pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiN|
dviprakRtika baMdhasthAna meM pAMca sattAsthAna isa prakAra haiM-28, 24, 21, 3
aura 2 prakRtika  /  saMjvalana mAna ko bhI isI prakAra prathama sthiti eka
AvalI pramANa zeSa rahane para baMdha, udaya aura udIraNA, ina tInoM kA eka
sAtha viccheda ho mAtA hai, usa samaya do prakRtika baMdhasthAna prApta hotA
hai, para usa samaya saMjyalana mAna ke eka AvalI pramANa prathama sthitigata
dalika ko aura do samaya kama do mAvalI pramANa samayaprabaddha ko chor3akara
anya saba kA kSaya ho jAtA hai| yadyapi vaha zeSa satkarma do samaya kama do
AvalI pramANa kAla' ke dvArA kSaya ko prApta hogA kintu jaba taka isakA kSaya
nahIM huA, taba taka do prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM tIna prakRtika sattAsthAna
pAyA jAtA hai| pazcAt isake kSaya ho jAne para do prakatika baMdhasthAna meM do
prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai  /  isakA kAla antamuharta pramANa hai| isa
prakAra do prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM 28, 24, 21, 3 aura 2 prakRtika, ye pAMca
sasAsthAna hote haiN| eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM hone vAle pA~ca sattAsthAna
isa prakAra haiM-28, 24, 21, 2 aura 1 prakRtika  /  inameM se 28, 24 aura 21
prakRtika sattAsthAna to upazamaNi kI apekSA samajha lenA caahiye| zeSa 2 aura 1
prakRtika sattAsthAnoM kA vivaraNa isa prakAra hai ki isI taraha saMjvalana mAyA
kI prathama sthiti eka AvalI pramANa zeSa rahane para baMdha, udaya aura udIraNA
kA eka sAtha viccheda ho jAtA hai aura

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma-Pratikraman ### 136  After that, there is a natural bond, but at
that time, except for the first positional Dalik with one Avali Praman of
Sanjwalan Maya and the time-bound with two Avali Praman less than two times, the
rest of all are destroyed. Although this remaining Satkarma will also be
destroyed by two Avali Praman less than two times, until its destruction, two
natures are found in the natural bond-state. After its destruction, only the
Sanjwalan Lobha remains in the natural bond-state.  Thus, there are five states
of existence in the natural bond-state: 28, 24, 21, 2, and 1 Prakruti. Now, even
in the absence of bond, there is a Mithan of the existing states of existence.
Therefore, it is said in the Gana: 'Battaariy Bandhavocchae' - meaning, there
are four states of existence in the absence of bond. These four states of
existence are: 28, 24, 21, and 1 Prakruti. The absence of bond occurs in the
tenth subtle Sampraya Gunasthan. The one who ascends to the subtle Sampraya
Gunasthan by climbing the Upshama Shreni, although he does not have the bond of
Mohaniya Karma, but his 28, 24, and 21 Prakruti, these three states of existence
are possible. And the one who ascends to the subtle Sampraya Gunasthan by
climbing the Kshapaka Shreni, has the existence of Sanjwalan Lobha. Therefore,
in the absence of bond, 28, 24, 21, and 1 Prakruti, these four states of
existence are considered.  Thus, the bond, उदय (Uday), and states of existence
of Mohaniya Karma, and the destruction of their perceptions are indicated. Their
complete explanation is as follows:  1. In the subtle Sampraya Gunasthan, there
are four states of existence in the absence of bond: 28, 24, 21, and 1 Prakruti.
Of these, the first three are in the Upshama Shreni. The one with the nature of
Sanjwalan Lobha is in the Kshapaka Shreni.  Saptaatika Prakaran Tika, page 14

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmapranya 136 usake bAda eka prakRtika baMdha hotA hai, parantu usa
samaya saMjvalana mAyA ke eka AvalI pramANa prathama sthitigata dalika ko aura
do samaya kama do AvalI pramANa samayaprabaddha ko chor3akara zeSa sabakA kSaya
ho jAtA hai| yadyapi yaha zeSa satkarma bhI do samaya kama do AvalI pramANa kAla
ke dvArA kSaya ko prApta hogA, kintu jaba taka isakA kSaya nahIM huA taba taka
eka prakRtika baMSasthAna meM do prakRtiyoM kI sattA pAI jAtI hai| pazcAt isakA
kSaya ho jAne para eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM sirpha eka saMjvalana lobha kI
sattA rahatI hai| isa prakAra eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM 28, 24, 21, 2 aura
1 prakRtika, ye pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  aba baMdha ke abhAva meM bhI
vidyamAna sattAsthAnoM kA mithAna karate haiM  /  isa liye gAnA meM kahA gayA
hai...'battAriya baMdhavocchae'- arthAt baMdha ke abhAva meM cAra sattAsthAna
hote haiN| ve cAra sattAsthAna isa prakAra haiM-28, 24, 21 aura 1 prakRtika  /
baMdha kA abhAva dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM hotA hai  /  jo
upazamazreNi para car3hakara sUkSmasaMparAya muNasthAna ko prApta hotA hai,
yadyapi usako mohanIya karma kA baMdha to nahIM hotA, kintu usake 28, 24 aura 21
prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna saMbhava haiM tathA jo kSapakazreNi para ArohaNa
karake sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna ko prApta karatA hai, usake saMjvalana lobha
kI sattA pAI jAtI hai| isIliye baMdha ke abhAva meM 28, 24, 21 aura 1 prakRtika,
ye cAra sattAsthAna mAne jAte haiN|' isa prakAra se mohanIya karma ke baMdha,
udaya aura sattAsthAnoM ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA nirdeza kiyA gyaa| unake samasta
vivaraNa kA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai 1 bandhAmAbe sUkSmasamparAyaguNasthAne
catvAri sattAsthAnAni tadyapA-aSTAviMzatiH caturvizati; ekaviMzatiH ekA pa  /
tavAdyAni trINi prAgiyopazamazregyAm  /  ekA tu saMjvalanalomarUpA prakRti:
kSapAtha payAm  /  saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 14

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Munabhasthana Sthana** **Udayasyana** **Chauveesi** **Udayabhang** **Jod**
**Jod** **مع سمع م مدد ملی »** **3-4 17** **2** **. Udayapad 1 Udayapadavrunda
Sanstha** **Sattastana Jod! : Jod** **28** **28, 27, 26 648** **28, 27, 26 240
3** **. 28, 27, 26 | 165** **| 28 32 384 768** **. 28 | 3 | 28, 24, 21 6 28, 27,
24,** **23, 22, 21 1086 28.27,24,23,22,21 [ 5 28,27,24,23,22** **3** **. 28, 24,
21 431248 5 28,24,23,22,21** **5 28,24,23,22,21 | 28, 24, 23, 22** **28, 24, 21
6 5 28,24,23,22,21** **28,24,23,22,21 4 28, 24. 23, 22** **884** **48** **5**
**. 13** **و لم أعد** **2** **. Saptaatika Prakarana**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 muNabaSasthAna sthAna udayasyAna  /  cauvIsI udayabhaMga jor3a joDa m` sm` m
mdd mly >> 3-4 17  /  2 . udayapada 1 udaya padavRnda saMsthA sattAsthAna jor3a!
: jor3a 28 28, 27, 26 648 28, 27, 26 240 3  /  28, 27, 26 | 165 | 28 32 384 768
/  28 | 3 | 28, 24, 21 6 28, 27, 24, 23, 22, 21 1086 28.27,24,23,22,21 [ 5
28,27,24,23,22 3  /  28, 24, 21 431248 5 28,24,23,22,21 5 28,24,23,22,21 | 28,
24, 23, 22 28, 24, 21 6 5 28,24,23,22,21 28,24,23,22,21 4 28, 24. 23, 22 884 48
5 /  13  /  w lm '`d 2  /  saptatikA prakaraNa

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Gun-Dhasthan | Sthan** **Shashth Karmapapg** **Udaybhang** **Satta Sthan**
**Bhang Udayaspan |** **Chaubisi Jod | | Jod** " 24 .24 E-xxxx _xxxxx xxxxx 1
Uday Padudayapad Sankhya Jod. | Jod 6 |6 3 5 XXXXX XXXXX . Allah Le
28,24,21,13,12,11 28, 24, 21, 11, 5,4 28, 24, 21, 4,3 28, 24, 21, 3,2 1 28, 24,
21, 2,1 Meh .. YX x | 1 4 | 28, 24, 21, 1 x Xxx ix ! 3 | 28, 24, 21 25 | | 2ERE
Note—According to the opinion of Acharya Vin, there are two and one natural
Udayasthans in the four natural Bandhasthans. According to their opinion, the
number of 12 Udayapads and 24 Udayapadvrind increases to 165 and 6671
respectively.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guNa- dhasthAna| sthAna SaSTha karmapagpa udayabhaMga sattAsthAna bhaMga
udayaspAna | caubIsI jor3a| | jor3a " 24 .24 E-xxxx _xxxxx xxxxx 1 udaya
padaudayapada saMkhyA jodd'| | jor3a 6 |6 3 5 XXXXX XXXXX . llh lh
28,24,21,13,12,11 28, 24, 21, 11, 5,4 28, 24, 21, 4,3 28, 24, 21, 3,2 1 28, 24,
21, 2,1 mh .. YX x | 1 4  /  28, 24, 21, 1 x Xxx ix ! 3  /  28, 24, 21 25  /   /
2ERE noTa--vina AcAryoM kA mata hai ki cAra prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM do aura
eka prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai, unake mata se 12 udayapada aura 24
udayapadavRnda bar3hakara unakI saMkhyA krama se 165 aura 6671 ho jAtI hai|

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 7: Name Karma  Having concluded the discussion of Mohaniya Karma, we
now turn our attention to Name Karma.  **Verse 23:**  "**Dasanavapannarasai
bandhovasantpayarithaanaai. Bhaniai mohanijje itto naam par vochcham.**"
**Meaning:**  * **Dasanavapannarasai:** Ten, nine, and fifteen (referring to the
number of binding, arising, and existing states of Mohaniya Karma). *
**Bandhovasantpayarithaanaai:** The states of binding, arising, and existing. *
**Bhaniai:** It is said. * **Mohanijje:** Of Mohaniya Karma. * **Itto:** From
this. * **Naam:** Name Karma. * **Par vochcham:** We will speak further.
**Explanation:**  The binding, arising, and existing states of Mohaniya Karma
are ten, nine, and fifteen respectively. Now, we will discuss Name Karma.
**Verse 24:**  "**Tevis pannavosa chathvisa atthavisa gunatosa. Tise gatis
mekkam bandhvaanaani namassa.**"  **Meaning:**  * **Tevis pannavosa chathvisa
atthavisa gunatosa:** Twenty-three, nineteen, twenty-six, twenty-eight, and
twenty-five (referring to the number of binding states of Name Karma). * **Tise
gatis mekkam bandhvaanaani:** These are the binding states of Name Karma. *
**Namassa:** Of Name Karma.  **Explanation:**  The binding states of Name Karma
are twenty-three, nineteen, twenty-six, twenty-eight, and twenty-five.
**Comparison:**  * **Verse 2:** "**Vanavannarasai gandhoday
sattapayarithaanaani. Bhanidaani mohanijje eti paam par vochcham.**" (This verse
refers to the binding, arising, and existing states of Mohaniya Karma). *
**Gautama Karmakanda 518:** "**Jamat kammassa atth dvaanaani ekkasisaae tisaae
egunati saae atthavisaar chabbisaae panuvisaae tebisaae ekikasse dvaanam
chedi.**" (This verse refers to the binding states of Name Karma). * **Jiva
60:** (This verse also refers to the binding states of Name Karma).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 saptatikA prakaraNa aba mohanIya karma ke kathana kA upasaMhAra karake
nAmakarma ko kahane kI pratijJA karate haiM  /  dasanavapannarasAI
baMdhovasantapayariThANAI  /  bhaNiyAI mohaNijje itto nAmaM paraM vockhaM  //
23 // ' ghoya mANvArtha vasana vapaznarasAI- dasa, nau aura pandraha,
santapayaThANA, udaya aura sattA prakRtiyoM ke sthAna, bhaniyA kahe, mohaNije
mohanIya karma ke, iso - isase, nAma-nAmakarma ke paraM Age vocchaM kahate haiM
/  gArtha - mohanIya karma ke baMdha, udaya aura sattA prakRtiyoM ke sthAna
kramazaH dasa, nau aura pandraha khe| aba Age nAmakarma kA kathana karate haiN|
vivIdhArtha - mohanIya karma ke bandha, udaya aura sattAsthAnoM ke kathana kA
upasaMhAra karate hue gAthA meM saMketa kiyA gayA hai ki mohanIya karma ke
baMdhasthAnaM dasa, udayasthAna no aura sattAsthAna pandraha hote haiN| jinameM
aura jinake saMbaMdha bhaMgoM kA kathana kiyA jA cukA hai  /  aba Age kI gAthA
se nAmakarma ke baMdha, udaya aura sattA ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA kathana
prArambha karate haiM  /  gAmakarma sabase pahale nAmakarma ke baMdhasthAnoM kA
nirdeza karate haiM-tevIsa paNNavosA chaThavIsA aTTavIsa guNatosA  /  tIse
gatIsa mekkaM baMdhadvANANi nAmassa ||24|| tulanA kIjie-- vaNavaNNarasAI
gaMdhodaya sattapayaDiThANANi  /  bhaNidANi mohaNije etI pAmaM paraM vocchaM  //
2 tulanA kIjie gau0 karmakAMDa 518 (ka) jAmasta kammassa aTTha dvANANi ekkasIsAe
tIsAe eguNatI sAe aTTavIsAra chabbIsAe paNuvIsAe tebIsAe ekikasse dvANaM cedi  /
jIva0 0 0 0 60

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Granth . Shama-Sevis-Teis, Panavisa-Pacchis, Chabbisa - Chabbisa,
Matthabis-Atthais, Gugtisa- Unnis, Tisegatisanti, Ektis, Ek-Ek, Bambaanaani-
Bandasthan, Pamassnamakarm ke. Gayaarth -Namakarm k Teis, Pacchas, Chabbisa,
Atthais, Untis, Tis, Ektis and Ek Prakrutik, these eight Bandasthan are. In the
Vishesharsh-Gatha, it is indicated that there are eight Bandasthan of Namakarm,
as well as how many Prakrutik numbers are in those places, that they are
Bandasthan 1. Teis Prakrutik, 2. Pacchis Prakrutik, 3. Chabbisa Prakrutik, 4.
Atthais Prakrutik, 5. Untis Prakrutik, 6. Tis Prakrutik, 7. Ektis Prakrutik and
8. Ek Prakrutik. Although the Uttar Prakrutis of Namakarm are ninety-nine. But
all of them are not bound to any living being at the same time, therefore, the
consideration of how many Prakrutis are bound together at the same time has been
done through eight Bandasthan. Among these, some are Bandasthan suitable for
Tiryanch-Gati, some for Manushya-Gati, some for Dev-Gati and some for Narak-
Gati, and even in this, there are many Avantaar differences. Therefore, we
consider them here along with these Avantaar differences. In Tiryanch-Gati,
there are living beings from Ekendriya to Panchendriya. () Tevisa Pamushisa Visa
Attpis Guntisa. Tisegatis Eamo Ghatan Namaet || -Panch Sapttatika, na 55 (m)
Sevisan Panavisan Misan Attpisamugtisan. Tisekkasisamevam Erakho Bandho Duse
Himmi. -Pokarmkand Pa. 521

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha .zamA-sevIsa-teIsa, paNavIsA-paccIsa, chabbIsA- chabbIsa,
maTThabIsa-aTThAIsa, gugatIsA- unasIsa, tIsegatIsaMtIsa, ikatIsa, eka-eka,
baMbANANi-baMdhasthAna, pAmassanAmakarma ke| gAyArtha -nAmakarma ka teIsa,
paccAsa, chabbIsa, aTThAIsa, unatIsa, tIsa, ikatIsa aura eka prakRtika, ye ATha
baMdhasthAna hote haiN| vizeSArSa-gAthA meM nAmakarma ke ATha baMdhasthAna hone
ke sAtha-sAtha ve sthAna kitane prakRtika saMkhyA vAle haiM, isakA saMketa kiyA
gayA hai ki ve baMdhasthAna 1. teIsa prakRtika, 2. paccIsa prakRtika, 3.
chabbIsa prakRtika, 4. aTThAIsa prakRtika, 5. unatIsa prakRtika, 6. tIsa
prakatika, 7. ikatIsa prakRtika aura 8. eka prakRtika haiN| vaise to nAmakarma
kI uttara prakRtiyA~ tirAnave haiN| kintu ina sabakA eka sAtha kisI bhI jIva ko
baMdha nahIM hotA hai, ataeva unameM se kitanI prakRtiyoM kA eka sAtha baMdha
hotA hai, isakA vicAra ATha baMdhasthAnoM ke dvArA kiyA gayA hai| inameM bhI koI
tiryaMcagati ke, koI manuSyagati ke, koI devagati ke aura koI narakagati ke
yogya baMdhasthAna haiM aura isameM bhI inake aneka avAntara bheda ho jAte haiN|
jisase ina avAntara bhedoM ke sAtha unakA vicAra yahA~ karate haiN| tiyaMcagati
meM ekendriya se lekara paMcendriya taka ke jIva hote haiN| () tevIsA pamuSIsA
vIsA aTTapIsa guNatIsA  /  tIsegatIsa emo ghaTANA nAmeTa  //  -paMca saptatikA,
nA 55 (ma) sevIsaM paNavIsaM mIsaM aTTapIsamugatIsaM  /  tIsekkasIsamevaM erako
baMdho duse himmi  /  -pokarmakAMDa pA0 521

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sapta-trika Prakarana  There are five Bandha-sthana (bond-places) for the
beings eligible for Tiryancha-gati (animal realm) in general, namely: 23, 25,
26, 29, and 30. Among these, there are three Bandha-sthana for the beings
eligible for Eka-indriya (one-sense) nature, namely: 23, 25, and 26.  The 23rd
Bandha-sthana consists of the following 23 natures: Tiryancha-gati, Tithancha-
anupurvi, Eka-indriya jati, Audarik sharira, Tejas sharira, Karman sharira,
Hund-samsthana, Varna, Rasa, Gandha, Sparsha, Aguru-laghu, Upghāt nāma, Sthāvar
nāma, Sūkṣma and Bādar (one of these), Aparyāpta nāma, Pratyek and Sādhāraṇa
(one of these), Sthira, Ashubha, Subhang, Janādeya, Ayash-photi, and Nirman.
The collective of these 23 natures is called the 23rd Bandha-sthana. This
Bandha-sthana occurs for the Mithya-drishti (false-vision) Tiryancha and
Manushya (human) beings eligible for the Aparyāpta Eka-indriya nature.  Here,
four bhang (breakage) are obtained. It has been mentioned above that the bond
occurs for either Bādar or Sūkṣma, and either Pratyek or Sādhāraṇa. Therefore,
if someone has bonded with Pratyek along with Bādar once, and with Sādhāraṇa
along with Bādar another time, then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatrikA prakaraNa tiryaMcagati ke yogya baMdha karane vAle jIvoM ke sAmAnya
se 23, 25, 26, 29 aura 30 prakRtika pAMca baMdhasthAna hote haiN| unameM se bhI
ekendriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle jIvoM ke 23, 25 aura 26
prakRtika, ye tIna baMdhasthAna hote haiM  /   /  unameM se 23 prakRsika
baMdhasthAna meM tiryacagati, tithaMcAnupUrvI, ekendriya jAti, audArika zarIra,
tejasa' zarIra, kArmaNa zarIra, huMDasaMsthAna, varNa, rasa, gaMdha, sparza,
agurulaghu, upaghAta nAma, sthAvara nAma, sUkSma aura bAdara meM se koI eka,
aparyApta nAma, pratyeka aura sAdhAraNa inameM se koI eka, sthira, azubha,
subhaMga, janAdeya, ayaza.photi aura nirmANa, ina teIsa prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
hotA hai| ina teIsa prakRtiyoM ke samudAya ko teIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna
kahate haiM aura yaha baMdhasthAna aparyApta ekendriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha karane vAle mithyA dRSTi tiryaca aura manuSya ko hotA hai| yahA~ cAra
bhaMga prApta hote haiN| Upara batAyA hai ki bAdara aura mUkSma meM se kisI eka
kA tathA pratyeka aura sAdhAraNa meM se kisI eka kA baMdha hotA hai  /  ata:
yadi kisI ne eka bAra bAdara ke sAtha pratyeka kA aura dUsarI bAra bAdara ke
sAtha sAdhAraNa kA baMdha kiyaa| isI 1-(ka) tatra tiryaggatiprAyogya banataH
sAmAnyena paMca maSasthAnAni, tadyathA trayoviMzati: paMcavizati: pavizati:
ekonatrizat trizat  /  -saptatikA prasAraNa TIkA, pR0 155 (sa)tiriktagaviNAmAe
paMcAcANi sIsAe egUgatIsAe chavIsAe paNuvIsAe sevIsAe ThANaM cevi  /
-jI05,810.063 2 tatrApye kendriyaprAyogyaM banatastrINi bandhasmAnAni,
tadyathAprayovipatiH * paMcaviMzatiH patriSatiH  /  saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA,
pR0 175

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth: Birth  **Types:** If someone binds with the ordinary
through the subtle once, and another time binds with the subtle through the
each, then in this way, four breaks occur in the twenty-three natural binding
places.  **1**  **P**  In the twenty-five natural binding places, there is a
binding of the twenty-five natures: **Tiryanchgati**, **Tiryanch Anupurvi**,
**Ekaindriya Jati**, **Audarik Sharira**, **Tejas Sharira**, **Karman Sharira**,
**Ind Sansthan**, **Varna Chatushk**, **Aguru Laghu**, **Upghat**, **Paraghat**,
**Uchchhvas**, **Sthavar**, **Badar**, and **Sukshma** - any one of these from
the **Paryapt**, **Each**, and **Sadharan**; any one from **Sthir** and
**Asthir**; any one from **Shubh** and **Ashubh**; any one from **Yash: Kirti**
and **Ayash: Kirti**; **Dubhang**, **Anadeya**, and **Nirman**.  The collection
of these twenty-five natures is called a twenty-five natural binding place. This
binding place is for the **Mithyadrishti** **Tiryanch** human and god who binds
with the natures suitable for **Paryapt** **Ekaindriya**.  There are twenty
breaks in this binding place. They are as follows: When a being binds with
**Badar**, **Paryapt**, and **Each**, then due to the binding of any one from
**Sthir** and **Asthir**, any one from **Shubh** and **Ashubh**, and any one
from **Yash: Kirti** and **Ayash: Kirti**, eight breaks occur. And when a being
binds with **Badar**, **Paryapt**, and **Sadharan**, then instead of binding
with **Yash: Kirti**, it binds with **Ayash: Kirti**.  **No Sumati Gen Jasam**
And **Aparyapt** does not bind with **Yash: Kirti** in any of these three. Due
to the cause of **Ayash: Kirti**, even when binding with **Sukshma**,
**Sadharan** one, which leads to **Yash: Kirti** and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha janma prakAra kisI ne eka bAra sUkSma ke sAtha sAdhAraNa kA
baMdha kiyA aura dUsarI bAra sUkSma ke sAtha pratyeka kA baMdha kiyA to isa
prakAra teIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM cAra bhaMga ho jAte haiM  /  1 P
paccIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM tiyaMcagati tiryaMcAnupUrvI ekendriya jAti,
audArikazarIra, tejasazarIra, kArmaNazarIra, iMDasaMsthAna, varNacatuSka,
agurulaghu, upaghAta, parAghAta, ucchavAsa, sthAvara, bAdara aura sUkSma meM se
koI eka paryApta, pratyeka aura sAdhAraNa meM se koI eka sthira aura asthira meM
se koI eka zubha aura azubha meM se koI eka yatraHkIti aura agazaHkIti meM se
koI eka, dubhaMga, anAdeya aura nirmANa ina paccIsa prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA
hai  /  ina paccIsa prakRtiyoM ke samudAya ko eka paccIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna
kahate haiN| yaha baMdhasthAna paryApta ekendriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
karane vAle mithyAdRSTi tithaMca manuSya aura deva ke hotA hai| isa baMdhasthAna
meM bIsa bhaMga hote haiN| ve isa prakAra haiM-jaba koI jIva bAdara, paryApta
aura pratyeka kA baMdha karatA hai, taba usake sthira aura asthira meM se kisI
eka kA, zubha aura azubha meM se kisI eka kA tathA zakIrti aura ayaza: kIrti meM
se kisI eka kA baMdha hone ke kAraNa ATha bhaMga hote haiM tathA jaba koI jIva
vAdara, paryApta aura sAdhAraNa kA baMdha karatA hai, taba usake yazaHkIti kA
vaMdha na hokara ayazaHkIrti kAhI baMdha hotA hai no sumatigeNa jasaM aura
aparyApta ina tIna meM se kisI yazaHkIrti kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai  /
ayazaHkIrti ke nimitta se banane arthAt sUkSma, sAdhAraNa eka kA bhI baMdha hote
samaya jisase yahA~ yazaHkIrti aura

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seven Tika  The seven tika categories are not possible.
Now, the remaining are stable-unstable and auspicious-inauspicious, these two
pairs. So, their combination is possible, meaning with stable, once auspicious,
once inauspicious, and similarly with unstable, once auspicious and once
inauspicious, is possible. Therefore, here there are a total of four categories.
If someone does a bond of victory, defeat, and sufficient, then out of these,
one bond of inauspiciousness occurs, but because of the bond of one from each of
the ordinary, stable-unstable, and auspicious-inauspicious, there are eight
categories. Thus, in the twenty-five natural bond places, there are 8-4+8=20
categories.  The community of twenty-six natures is called the twenty-six
natural bond place. This bond place is for the natures suitable for sufficient
and the one-sense, which are bound with one nature from the heat and effort, for
the false-sighted, the non-controlling, the controlling, and the gods. The
categories taken in the twenty-six natural bond place are as follows: non-
controlling motion, transmigratory motion, one-sense motion, generous body,
radiance, karmic body, body-formation, color-form, non-home-dwelling, external-
injury, internal-injury, high-dwelling, stationary, heat, and effort, one from
each of these, sufficient, each, stable-unstable, auspicious-inauspicious, one
from each of these, two-categories, non-destroyable, auspiciousness, and
inauspiciousness, and creation.  There are sixteen categories in this bond
place. These categories are formed due to the bond of one nature from each of
heat-effort, stable-unstable, auspicious-inauspicious, and auspiciousness-
inauspiciousness. Heat and effort...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa vAle bhaMga saMbhava nahIM haiN| aba rahe sthira asthira
aura zubha-azubha, ye do yugala  /  so ina kA vikalpa se baMdha saMbhava hai
yAnI sthira ke sAtha eka bAra zubha kA, eka bAra azubha kA tathA isI prakAra
asthira ke sAtha bhI eka bAra zubha nA tathA eka bAra azubha kA dhaMdha saMbhava
hai, ata. yahA~ kula cAra bhaMga hote haiM  /  jana koI jItra jhA aura paryApta
kA baMdha karatA hai, laba upake yavaHvIti aura ayaza:oti inameM se eka
ayazaHkIta kAhI baMdha hotA hai kintu pratyeka aura sAdhAraNa meM se kisI eka
kA, sthira aura asthira meM se kisI eka kA tathA zubha aura azubha meM se kisI
eka kA baMdha hone ke kAraNa ATha bhaMga hote haiN| isa prakAra paccIsa
prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM 8-4+8=20 bhaMga hote haiN| chabbIsa prakRtiyoM ke
samudAya ko chabbIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna kahate haiN| yaha baMdhasthAna
paryApta aura bAdara ekendriya ke yogya prakR. tiyoM kA Atapa aura udyota meM se
kisI eka prakRti ke sAtha baMdha karane vAle mizyA dRSTi niryaca, ganapya aura
deva ko hotA hai  /  chabbIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM grahaNa kI gaI pratiyAM
isa prakAra haiM-niyaMcagati, tiryaMcAnupUrvI, ekendriya gAti, audArika zarIra,
tejasa, kArmaNa zarIra, huMDasaMsthAna, barNacanuNa., agRhaladha, parAghAta,
upaghAta, uncha - vAsa, sthAvara, AtApa aura udyAna meM se koI etrA, bAdara,
paryApta, pratyeka, sthira aura asthira meM meM koI eka, gRbha aura azubha meM
se koI eka, dubhaMga, anAdeya, yaza kIni aura ayAH kIti meM koI eka tathA
nirmANa  /  isa baMdhasthAna meM solaha bhaMga hote haiN| ye bhaMga Atapa aura
udyola meM se kisI eka prakRti kA, sthira aura asthira meM se kisI eka kA, zubha
aura azubha meM se kisI eka kA tathA yazaHkIti aura ayaza kIrti meM se kisI eka
kA baMdha hone ke kAraNa banate haiM  /  Atapa aura udyota

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Chapter ### 147  There is no binding of subtle and gross with the
sixth karma. Therefore, the destructions obtained from the subtle and gross are
not mentioned here.  Thus, there are 40 destructions of the three 'binding
places' of the one-sense-capable, namely 23, 25 and 26 natures. It is also said:
"Four, twenty, sixteen destructions of the one-sense-capable, totaling forty."
That is, there are four destructions of the binding place of the 23 natures
related to the one-sense-capable, twenty destructions of the binding place of
the 25 natures, and sixteen destructions of the binding place of the 26 natures.
All these together make forty.  After mentioning the binding places of the one-
sense-capable, the binding places of the two-sense-capable are explained.  The
three binding places of the being who binds the two-sense-capable natures are
25, 26 and 30 natures. Their description is as follows:  The binding place in
the form of the aggregate of twenty-five natures is called the twenty-five
nature binding place. The bound in this place are the two-sense-capable natures
of the insufficient, the false-belief human and the Tiryach. The names of the
natures of the twenty-five nature binding place are as follows:  * Tithanchgati
* Tithanchanumurti * Dwiindriya jati * Audarik sharira * Tejas sharira * Karman
sharira * Huinsthan * Sevatam sanhanan * Audarik angopam * Varnachatusk *
Agurulghu * Upadhat * Bas * Badar * Apariapt * Pratyek * Asthir * Ashubh *
Durbhg * Anadeya * Ayash:kauti * Nirman  Here, only the inauspicious natures
bind with the insufficient nature, not the auspicious natures, resulting in only
one destruction.  "There are three binding places of the two-sense-capable,
namely twenty-five, twenty-six and thirty."  – Saptatika Prakaran Tika, page 17

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmapanya 147 ke sAtha sukSma aura sAdhAraNa kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai
/  isaliye yahA~ sUkSma aura sAdhAraNa ke nimitta se prApta hone vAle bhaMga
nahIM kahe gaye haiN| isa prakAra ekendriya prAyogya 23, 25 aura 26 prakRtika,
ina tIna 'baMdhasthAnoM ke kunna bhaMga 4+20.16 =40 hote haiN| kahA bhI hai
cattAri bIsa solasa bhaMgA egidiyANa cattAlA  /  arthAt . ekendriya sambandhI 23
prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke cAra, 25 prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke bIsa aura 26
prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke solaha bhaMga hote haiM  /  ye saba milakara cAlIrA ho
jAte haiM  /  ekendriya prAyogya baMdhasthAnoM kA kathana karane ke anantara
hIndriyoM ke baMdhasthAnoM ko batalAte haiN| dvIndriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM ko
bAMdhane vAle jIva ke 25, 26 aura 30 prakRtika, ye tIna baMdhasthAna hote haiN|
jinakA vivaraNa isa prakAra hai-pacIsa prakRtiyoM ke samudAya rUpa baMdhasthAna
ko paccIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna kahate haiN| isa sthAna ke baMdhaka aparyApta
vIndriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM ko bA~dhane vAle mithyAvRSTi manuSya aura tiyaM ca
hote haiN| paccIsa prakRtiyoM ke baMdhasthAna kI prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa prakAra
haiM_ tithaMcagati, tithaMcAnumUrtI, dvIndriya jAti, audArika zarIra, tejasa
zarIra, kArmaNa zarIra, huMisaMsthAna, sevAtaM saMhanana, audArika aMgopAMma,
varNacatuSka, agurulaghu, upadhAta, basa, bAdara, aparyApta, pratyeka, asthira,
azubha, durbhaga, anAdeya, ayaza:kauti aura nirmANa  /  yahA~ aparyApta prakRti
ke sAtha kevala azubha prakRtiyoM kA hI baMdha hotA hai zubha prakRtiyoM kA
nahIM, jisase eka hI bhaMga hotA hai  /  1 dvIndriyaprAyogya baghnato
baMdhasthAnAni trINi, tadyathA-paMcaviMzatiH ekona trizana vizam  /  - saptatikA
prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 17

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **The Journey of the Soul**  From the twenty-five **Prakritis**
(fundamental principles), by combining the insufficient **Paradhat**,
**Uchchhvas**, **Aprashasht Vihayogati**, **Paryapt**, and **Dushwar**, we get
twenty-nine **Prakriti Bandhasthan** (bondage states). These twenty-nine
**Prakritis** are as follows:  * **Tiryachgati** (animal realm) *
**Tiryachanupurvi** (animal-like) * **Dwiindriya Jati** (two-sense beings) *
**Audarik Sharira** (gross body) * **Tejas Sharira** (fire body) * **Karman
Sharira** (karma body) * **Audarik Angopang** (gross limbs) * **Dandasanasthan**
(punishment state) * **Seva Sanhanan** (service and suffering) * **Varn
Chatushk** (four castes) * **Agurulghu** (heavy and light) * **Paradhat**
(external injury) * **Upadhat** (internal injury) * **Uchchhvas** (exhalation) *
**Aprashasht Vihayogati** (unsuitable death) * **Shras** (fatigue) * **Badar**
(obstruction) * **Paryapt** (sufficient) * **Pratyek** (individual) * **Sthir**
(stable) * **Asthir** (unstable) * **Shubh** (auspicious) * **Ashubh**
(inauspicious) * **Durmang** (evil thoughts) * **Dushwar** (bad speech) *
**Anadeya** (unworthy) * **Yasha Kirti** (fame) * **Ayasha Kirti** (infamy)
These twenty-nine **Prakritis** constitute the twenty-nine **Prakriti
Bandhasthan**. This **Bandhasthan** binds the **Mithyadrishti** (false-
believing) soul, who is worthy of the **Dwiindriya** (two-sense) **Prakritis**.
**145.2**  In this **Bandhasthan**, each **Prakriti** from the pairs of **Sthir-
Asthir**, **Shubh-Ashubh**, and **Yasha Kirti-Ayasha Kirti** is bound by choice,
resulting in eight **Bhang** (types of bondage).  By adding the **Uchchhon**
**Prakriti** to these twenty-nine, we get thirty **Prakriti Bandhasthan**. This
**Bandhasthan** is also bound by the **Mithyadrishti** soul, who is worthy of
the **Dwiindriya** **Prakritis**. Here too, there are eight **Bhang**. Thus,
there are 18 + 6 = 24 **Bhang**.  The **Mithyadrishti** soul, who is worthy of
the **Triindriya** (three-sense) and **Chaturindriya** (four-sense)
**Prakritis**, also has three **Bandhasthan** each, as described earlier.
However, it should be understood that in the **Triindriya** **Prakritis**, the
term **Chaturindriya Jati** should be used. The **Bhang** for each are
seventeen, meaning seventeen **Bhang** for **Triindriya** and seventeen for
**Chaturindriya**. Thus, there are a total of forty-one **Bhang** for the
**Vikalatrika** (those with limited senses). As it is said:  ... (The text
continues with a quote, which is not provided in the prompt)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yatikA saphara ukta paccIsa prakRtiyoM meM se aparyApta ko kama karake
parAdhAta, ucchavAsa, aprazasta vihAyogati, paryApta aura duHsvara, ina patra
prakRtiyAM ko milA dene para unatIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai  /  unatIsa
prakRtiyoM kA kathana isa prakAra karanA cAhiye-tiryacagati, tiyaMcAnupUrvI,
dvIndriya jAti, audArika zarIra, tejasa zarIra, kArmaNa zarIra, audArika
aMgopAMga, daMDasaMsthAna, sevA saMhanana, varNacatuSka, agurulaghu, parAghAta,
upaghAta, ucchavAsa, aprazarata bihAyogati, zrasa, bAdara, paryApta, pratyeka,
sthira aura asthira meM se koI eka zubha aura azubha meM se koI eka durmaMga,
duHsvara, anAdeya, yazaHkIrti aura ayazaHkIti meM se koI eka nirmANa  /  ye
unatIsa prakRtiyA~ unatIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM hotI haiN| yaha
baMdhasthAna paryApta dvIndriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM ko bA~dhane vAle mithyAdRSTi
jIva ko hotA hai  /  145. 2 isa baMdhasthAna meM sthira asthira zubha-azubha
aura yazaH kIrti ayaza:kIrti, ina tInoM yugaloM meM se pratyeka prakRti kA
vikalpa se baMdha hotA hai, ataH ATha bhaGga prApta hote haiN| ina unatIsa
prakRtiyoM meM ucona prakRti ko milA dene para tIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA
hai| isa sthAna ko bhI paryApta dvIndriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM ko bA~dhane vAlA
midhyAdRSTi ho bAMdhatA hai| yahA~ bhI ATha bhaGga hote haiM  /  isa prakAra
18+6= 17 bhaGga hote haiM  /  trIndriya aura caturindriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM ko
bA~dhane vAle mithyAdRSTi jIva ke bhI pUrvokta prakAra se tIna-tIna baMdhasthAna
hote haiN| lekina itanI vizeSatA samajhanA cAhie ki zrIndriya ke yogya
prakRtiyoM meM trIndriya aura caturindriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM meM canurindriya
jAti kahanA cAhie  /  bhaGga bhI pratyeka ke sabaha satraha haiM, arthAt
zrIdriya ke satraha aura caturindriya ke satraha bhaGga hote haiM  /  isa
prakAra se vikalatrika ke ikyAvana bhaGga hote haiN| kahA bhI hai

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **ve**  One, eight, and eight are the number of bhangas
in each of the 25, 21, and 30 natural bandha sthans respectively, which bind in
each of the three vikal trayas. In total, there are 51 bhangas in all three.
Until now, the bandha sthans of the Tiryanchgatis from Ekendriya to
Chaturindriya have been discussed. Now, we will discuss the bandha sthans
suitable for the Tiryanchgatis with Panchendriya.  There are three natural
bandha sthans that bind the Tiryanchgatis with Panchendriya, namely 25, 26, and
30. The 25 natural bandha sthans are the same as the 25 natural bandha sthans
mentioned for the Dwindriya, but instead of Dwindriya jati, it should be
Panchendriya jati. Here, there is one bhang.  The 29 natural bandha sthans
consist of 29 prakritis, namely: Tiryanchgat, Tich Anupurvi, Panchendriya Jati,
Audavisharira, Audarik Angopang, Taijas Sharira, Karman Sharira, one of the six
Sansthans, one of the six Sanhanans, Varnachaturk Agurulghu, Upghāt, Paraghat,
Ucchvas, Prashast and Aprashast Vihayogati, one of each, Bas, Badar, Paryapt,
one of each stable and unstable, one of each auspicious and inauspicious, one of
each Subhag and Dubhang, one of each Muswar and Duswar, one of each Aadey and
Anaadey, one of each Yash Kirti and Ayash Kirti, and finally, Nirman. This
bandha sthan is sufficient to bind the four gatis with Panchendriya.  **1**  The
three bandha sthans suitable for the Tiryanchgatis with Panchendriya are: 25,
29, and 30. - Saptaka Prakaran Toka, page 177.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha ve ega aTu DiladiyANa igavaNa tivhaM pi  /  arthAt -
vikalatrayoM meM se pratyeka meM baMdhane vAle jo 25, 21 aura 30 prakRtika
baMdhasthAna haiM, unameM se pratyeka meM kramaza: eka, ATha aura ATha bhaMga
hote haiM tathA tInoM ke milAkara kula ikyAvana bhaMga hote haiN| aba taka
ekendriya se lekara caturindriya taka ke tiryaMcagati ke baMdhasthAnoM kA
kathana kiyA gyaa| aba tiryaMcagati paMcendriya ke yogya baMdhasthAnoM ko
batalAte haiM  /  tiryacagati paMcendriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA bandha karane
vAle jIva ke 25, 26 aura 30 prakRtika, ye tIna baMdhasthAna hote haiM  /  inameM
se 25. prakRtika baMdhasthAna to vahI hai jo dvondriya ke yogya paccIsa
prakRtika baMdhasthAna batalA Aye haiN| kintu vahAM jo dvIndriyajAti kahI hai
usake sthAna para paMcendriya jAti kahanA cAhiye  /  yahA~ eka bhaMga hotA hai|
unatIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM unatIsa prakRtiyAM isa prakAra
haitiyaMcagati, ticAnupUrvI, paMcendriyajAti, audAvizarIra, audArika aMgopAMga,
taijasazarIra, kArmaNazarIra, chaha saMsthAnoM meM se koI eka saMsthAna, chaha
saMhananoM meM se koI eka saMhanana, varNacaturaka agurulaghu, upaghAta,
parAghAta, ucchvAsa, prazasta aura aprazasta vihAyogati meM se koI eka, basa,
bAdara, paryApta pratyeka sthira aura asthira meM se koI " t 1 eka zubha aura
azubha meM se koI eka subhaga aura dubhaMga meM se koI eka, musvara aura
duHsvara meM se koI eka, Adeya anAdeya meM se koI eka, yazaHkIrti-ayazaHkIti meM
se koI eka tathA nirmANa  /  yaha baMdhasthAna paryApta tica paMcendriya ke
yogya prakRtiyoM ko bAMghane vAle cAroM gati 1 tiryaggatipaMcendriyAyogya
bandhatastrINi baMdhasthAnAni tadyathA paMcavizani ekonatriMzat trizat  /  -
saptakA prakaraNa TokA, pu0 177

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 15: The Seven Tika  **Who is a Mithyadristi Jiva?**  If a bound state
is bound by a Sasadan Samyagdristi, then it is bound by one of the five
Sanhananas and one of the five Sansthanas of the beginning. Because the Sasadan
Samyagdristi Jiva is not bound by the Hund Sansthana and the Sebal Sanhanana.
**Hundam Asampatam Va Sasani Ma Bandhai.** This means that the Sasadan
Samyagdristi Jiva is not bound by the Hund Sansthana and the Asanshapta
Sanhanana.  In these 29 natural bound states, there is a binding of one of the
six Sansthanas, one of the six Sanhananas, one of the Prashastha and Aprashastha
Vihayogatis, one of the Sthira and Asthira, one of the Shubha and Ashubha, one
of the Subhaga and Durbhaga, one of the Susvara and Dusvara, one of the Aadeya
and Anaadeya, and one of the Yash:koti and Ayash:koti. Therefore, multiplying
all these numbers, we get 6 x 642424242 x 2 x 2 x 2 x 284605 bhangas.  This
state is also bound by the Sasadan Samyagdristi, but it is bound by five
Sanhananas and five Sansthanas, so it has 54542 x 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 x 24242 - 3200
bhangas. However, these are included in the previously mentioned bhangas, so
they are not counted separately.  Adding one Udyot Prakriti to the
aforementioned 29 natural bound states, we get 30 natural bound states. Just as
in the 29 natural bound states, there is a difference between Mithyadristi and
Sasadan Samyagdristi...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 15. saptatikA prakaraNa ke mithyAdRSTi jIva ko honA hai| yadi isa baMdhasthAna
kA baMdhaka sAsAdana samyagdRSTi hotA hai to usake Adi ke pA~ca saMhananoM meM
se kisI eka saMhanana kA tathA Adi ke pAMca saMsthAnoM meM se kisI eka saMsthAna
kA baMdha hotA hai| kyoMki huNDasaMsthAna aura sebAla saMhanana ko sAsAdana
samyagdRSTi jIva nahIM bAMdhatA hai huMDaM asaMpataM va sAsaNI ma baMdhai  /
arthAt- sAsAdana mamyagdRSTi jIva huMDasaMsthAna aura asaMzAptasaMhanana ko
nahIM bA~dhatA hai| _ isa unatIsa prakRtika dhasthAna meM sAmAnya se chaha
saMsthAnoM meM se kisI eka saMsthAna kA, chaha saMhananI meM se kisI eka
saMhanana kA, prazasta aura aprazasta vihAyogAMta meM se kisI eka vihAyogati kA,
sthira aura asthira meM se kisI eka kA, zubha aura azubha meM se kisI eka kA,
subhaga aura durbhaga meM se kisI eka kA, susvara aura duHsvara meM se kisI eka
kA, Adeya aura anAdeya meM se kisI eka kA, yaza:koti aura ayaza:kIti meM se kisI
eka kA baMdha hotA hai| ata: ina saba saMkhyAoM ko guNita kara dene
para6x642424242x2x2 X284605 bhaMga prApta hote haiN| isa sthAna kA baMdhaka
sAsAdana samyagdRSTi bhI hotA hai, kintu usake pA~ca saMhanana aura pA~ca
saMsthAna kA baMdha hotA hai, isaliye usake 54542x2x2x2x24242-3200 bhaMga prApta
hote haiM  /  kintu inakA antarbhAva pUrvokta bhaMgoM meM hI ho jAne se inheM
alaga se nahIM ginAyA hai| ukta unatIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM eka udyota
prakRti ko milA dene para tIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai| jisa prakAra
unatIsa prakatika baMdhasthAna meM mithyAdaSTi aura sAsAdana samyagdRSTi kI
apekSA

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karmagranthi 151 Just as there is a specialty there, the same specialty
should be understood here as well. Here also the general are divided into -
'Guptile ti biya mangā atthāhiyā chyālayā. Panchindiyatiriyoge patroṃse bandhi
bhaṃgako || That is, in the twenty-nine and thirty prakṛtic bondage places of
the pañcendriya tiryañca yoga, there is one bhanga (breakage). Thus, the total
bhanga (breakage) of the pañcendriya tiryañca yoga in all the three bondage
places is 16217. Out of the said 9213 bhangas of the pañcendriya tiryañca, by
adding the 40 bhangas of the places suitable for the ekendriyas, the 17 bhangas
of the places suitable for the hīndritas, the 17 bhangas of the places suitable
for the śrīs, and the 17 bhangas of the places suitable for the caturindriya,
the total bhangas of the tiryaggatirāmyaṇvī bondage places become 9348. After
explaining the bondage places suitable for the tiryañca and their bhangas, now
the statement of the bondage places and their bhangas of the manuṣyagati is
being made. The living beings who bind the prakṛtis suitable for the manuṣyagati
have 25, 26, and 30 prakṛtic bondage places."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 151 vizeSatA hai, usI prakAra vahA~ bhI vahI vizeSatA
samajhanA cAhiye  /  yahA~ bhI sAmAnya se gaMga hote haiM- 'gupatIle tI biya
maMgA aThThAhiyA chyAlayA  /  paMcidiyatirijoge patroMse baMdhi bhaMgako ||
arthAt - paMcendriya tiryatra ke yoga unatIsa aura tIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna
meM 4608 aura 4608 aura pIsa prakRtika baMsthAna meM eka bhaMga hotA hai| isa
prakAra paMcendriya niyaMtra ke yoga tInoM bandhasthAnoM ke kula bhaMga 4608 |
4608 - 16217 hote haiM  /  paMcendriya tirtha ke ukta 9213 bhaMgoM meM ekendriya
ke yogya yaMtrasthAnoM ke 40, hIndrita ke yogya thAnoM ke zrI ke yogya
baMdhasthAnoM ke 17 aura caturindriya ke loga baMdhasthAnoM ke 17 bhaMga milAne
para ticagati rAmyanvI baMdhasthAnoM ke kugna bhaMga 9217:40 +17/17+176348 hote
haiM  /  isa prakAra se cipati yogya baMdhasthAnoM aura unake bhaMgoM ko
batalAne ke bAda aba manuSyagati ke baMdhasthAnoM aura unake bhaMgoM kA kathana
karate haiM  /  manuSyagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM ko bA~dhane vAle jIvoM ke 25, 26
aura 30 prakRtika baMdhasthAna hote haiM  / " paccIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna
vahI hai jo aparyApta dvIndriya ke yogya baMdha karane vAle jIvoM ko batalAyA
hai  /  kintu itanI vizeSatA samajhanA 1 1 (ka) manuSyagati prAyogya
banatastrINi baMdasthAnAni tadyathA - pacavizatiH ekonatriMzat trizal -
saptatikA prakaraNa TokA, pR0 178 (kha) madAnAe tiSNi dvAgANi dIkhAe eguNatIsAra
paNuvInAe NaM cedi  /  -jo0 0 dvA0, sUtra 84

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 152: The Thirty Natural Bonds  It is necessary to say "human path,"
"human lineage," and "five-sensed" in place of "animal path," "animal lineage,"
and "two-sensed" here. The twenty-nine natural bonds are of three types: one
with respect to false vision, the second with respect to the temporary right
vision, and the third with respect to the right-false vision or uninterrupted
right vision. Of these, the twenty-nine natural bonds applicable to the animal
path have been explained with respect to false vision and temporary right
vision. Similarly, it should be understood here, but instead of the natural
bonds applicable to the animal path, the natural bonds applicable to the human
path should be considered.  In the third type of twenty-nine natural bonds,
there is a bond of these twenty-nine natural bonds: human path, human lineage,
five-sensed beings, generous body, generous limbs, fiery body, dark body,
square-shaped body, strong body, four-color, heavy-light, attack, counter-
attack, exhalation, good path of liberation, S, Badar, sufficient, each, stable
and unstable, one of auspicious and inauspicious, auspicious, melodious, worthy
of being given, fame and infamy, and creation.  There are 4608 breaks in these
three types of twenty-nine natural bonds. Although there is a difference in the
breaks due to the difference in the quality-places, the 4608 breaks are
mentioned here without considering the difference in the quality-places.  By
adding the name of the Tirthankara to the above twenty-nine natural bonds, there
are thirty natural bonds. In this bond, stable and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 152 satAMtakA prakaraNa cAhiye ki yahA~ tiryaMcati, liyaMcAnupUvIM aura
dvIndriya ke sthAna para manuSyagati, manuSyAnupUrvI aura paMcendriya kahanA
cAhiye  /  _ unatIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna tIna prakAra kA hai--eka mithyA
dRSTi kI apekSA se, dUsarA sAsAdana samyagdRSTi kI apekSA se aura tIsarA
samyamithyAdRSTi yA avirata samyagdaSTi kI apekSA se| inameM se mithyAdRSTi aura
sAsAdana samyagdRSTi ke tiyaMcaprAyogya unatIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna batAyA
gayA hai, usI prakAra yahA~ bhI samajha lenA cAhiye, kintu yahA~ tirya
cagatiprAyogya prakRtiyoM ke badale manuSya gati ke yogya prakRtiyoM ko milA
denA cAhiye  /  tIsare prakAra ke unatIsa praRtika baMdhasthAna meM manuSyagati,
manuSyAnupUrvI, pacendriya jAti, audArika zarIra, audArika aMgopAMga, taMjasa
zarIra, kAbhaNa zarIra, samacaturastra saMsthAna, bajraRSabhanArAca saMhanana,
varNacatuSka, aguruladhu, upaghAta, parAghAta', ucchavAsa, prazasta vihAyogati,
sa, bAdara, paryApta, pratyeka, sthira aura asthira meM se koI eka, zubha aura
azubha meM se koI eka, subhaga, susvara, Adeya, yazaHkIti aura ayazaHkIti meM se
koI eka tathA nirmANa, ina unatIsa prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai| ina tInoM
prakAra ke unatIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM sAmAnya se 4608 bhaMga hote haiN|
yadyapi guNasthAna ke bheda se yahA~ bhamoM meM bheda ho jAtA hai, kintu
guNasthAna bheda kI vivakSA na karake yahA~ 4608 bhaMga kahe gaye haiM  /  ukta
unatIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM tIrthaMkara nAma ko milA dene para tIsa
prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai| isa baMdhasthAna meM sthira aura 1 ekonatriMzat
tridhA-ekA mithyAdRSTIn baMdhakAnAzritya veditacyA, dvitIyA sAsAdanAn, tRtIyA
samyagmithyAdRSTIn aviratasamyagdRSTIn vA  /  saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0.178

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Bond of Karma: A Translation  **Chapter 153**  Multiplying the number of
possibilities for each of the following: one from the stable and unstable, one
from the auspicious and inauspicious, and one from the praiseworthy and
blameworthy, we get 2x2x2=8 types of bonds. This means there are eight types of
bonds for the thirty natural bond-places.  Thus, there are a total of
1+460884617 bonds in the twenty-five, twenty-six, and thirty natural bond-places
that are suitable for the human path.  **"One in the twenty-five, 4608 in the
twenty-nine, and eight in the thirty."**  This means that there is one bond in
the twenty-five natural bond-places suitable for the human path, 4608 in the
twenty-nine, and eight in the thirty. These total 4617 bonds.  Now we will
discuss the bond-places suitable for the divine path. There are four bond-places
for the beings bound by the natural qualities suitable for the divine path:
twenty-eight, twenty-six, thirty, and thirty-one.  **In the twenty-eight natural
bond-place:** There is a bond of the following twenty-eight qualities: divine
path, divine ancestry, five-sense beings, subtle body, subtle limbs, luminous
body, karmic body, square-shaped body, four colors, heavy-light, severe blow,
mild blow, exhalation, auspicious liberation, S, Badar, sufficient, one each
from the stable and unstable, one each from the auspicious and inauspicious,
auspicious, order, good voice, one each from the praiseworthy and blameworthy,
and creation. Therefore, this collection of qualities is called a bond-place.
This bond-place occurs for those beings who are bound by the natural qualities
suitable for the divine path, namely those who are of false vision, those who
are of partial right vision, those who are of complete false vision, those who
are of unwavering right vision, those who are of limited liberation, and those
who are of complete liberation.  **"There are four bond-places for those who are
bound by the divine path, namely: twenty-eight, twenty-nine, thirty, and thirty-
one."** - *Commentary on the Saptaatika Prakarana, page 176*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 T SaNya karma grantha 153 asthira meM se kisI eka kA zubha aura azubha meM se
kisI eka kA tathA yazaHkIrti aura ayazaH kIrti meM se kisI eka kA baMdha hone se
ina saba saMkhyAoM ko guNita karane para 2x2x2=8 bhaMga prApta hote haiM  /
arthAt tIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke ATha bhaMga hote haiM  /  isa prakAra
manuSyagati ke yogya 25 26 aura 30 prakRtika baMdhasthAnoM meM kula bhaMga
1+460884617 hote haiM vIsamma ekako chAyAlAyA aDasara gutI  /  maNUtIle u sabhye
chAyAlasamA u satarA  //  arthAta - manuSyagati ke yogya paccIsa prakRtika
baMdhasthAna meM eka, unatIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM 4608 aura tIsa
prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM 8 bhaMga hote haiN| ye kula bhaMga 4617 hote haiM  /
aba devagati yogya baMghasthAnoM kA kathana karate haiN| devagati ke yogya
prakRtiyoM ke baMdhaka jIvoM ke 28, 26, 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye cAra
baMdhasthAna hote haiM  /  " aTThAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM - devagati,
devAnupUrvI, paMcendriyajAti, vaikriya zarIra, vaikriya aMgopAMga, tejasa
zarIra, kArmaNa zarIra, samacaturasrasaMsthAna, varNacatuSka, agurulaghu,
parAghAta, upaghAta, ucchavAsa, prazasta vihAyogati, sa, bAdara, paryApta
pratyeka sthira aura asthira meM se koI eka zubha aura azubha meM se koI eka,
subhaga, Adeza, susvara, yazaH kIrti aura ayazaH koti meM se koI eka tathA
nirmANa, ina aTThAIsa prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai| isIliye inake samudAya ko
eka baMghasthAna kahate haiM  /  yaha baMdhasthAna devagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM
kA baMdha karane vAle mithyAdRSTi, sAsAdana samyagdRSTi, sambamidhyAdRSTi,
avirata samyagdRSTi, dezavirata aura sarvavirata jIvoM ko hotA hai| 1
devagatiprAyogyaM baghnatazcatvAri bandhasthAnAni tadyathA - aSTAviMzatiH
ekonatriMzat trizad ekatriMzat  /  - saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 176 P

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter of the Seventies  In this place, there is bondage of one of the
following: stable or unstable, auspicious or inauspicious, and fame or infamy.
Therefore, multiplying the above numbers, we get 22 x 2 = 44 Bhagas.  The above
28 natural bondage places, when combined with the Tirthankara nature, become 29
natural bondage places. The bondage of the Tirthankara nature occurs in the
states of uninterrupted right faith, etc. This bondage place is therefore only
for beings with uninterrupted right faith, etc. Here too, there are eight
Bhagas, similar to the 28 natural bondage places.  The community of thirty
natures is called the thirty natural bondage places. The natures taken in this
bondage place are as follows: Deva-Gati, Deva-Anupurvi Pancha-Indriya Jati,
Aharaka-Dvika Vaikriya Sharira, Vaikriya Ango-Upanga, Tejas Sharira, Karman
Sharira, Rama-Chaturasra Sansthan, Varna-Chatushk, Agugalabu Upadhat, Paradhat,
Ucchvas, Prashasta Vihayoga-Gati Tras, Badar, Paryapt, Pratyek, Shubh, Sthira,
Subhag, Suswar, Adeva, Yash-Kirti, and Nirman. The one who is bound by this
should be known as the one who is in the state of uninterrupted restraint or the
one who is in the state of the previous action. In this place, there is bondage
of all auspicious karmas, therefore there is only one Bhaga here.  When one
Tirthankara name is added to the thirty natural bondage places, it becomes
thirty-one natural bondage places. Here too, there is only one Bhaga. Thus,
there are 5 + 5 + 1 + 1 = 12 Bhagas in the bondage places suitable for Deva-
Gati. It is also said:  "Atuṭu eka ekkaga bhaṅga baṭṭhār deva-jogesu."  This is
the knowledge of the one who is bound by the Deva-Gati, the one who is in the
state of uninterrupted restraint, or the one who is in the state of the previous
action.  (Commentary on the Chapter of the Seventies, page 176)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 saptatikA prakaraNa isa sthAna meM sthira aura asthira meM se kisI eka kA,
zubha aura azubha meM se kisI eka kA tathA yazaHkIrti aura ayazaHkIrti meM se
kisI eka kA baMdha hotA hai  /  ataH ukta saMkhyAoM ko paraspara guNita karane
para 22x2 bhaga prApta hote hai  /  154 ukta aTThAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM
tIrthaMkara prakRti ko milAne para unatIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai|
tIrthaMkara prakRti kA baMdha avirata samyagdRSTi Adi guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai
/  jisase yaha baMdhasthAna avirata samyagdRSTi Adi jIvoM ke hI banatA hai|
yahA~ bhI 28 prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke samAna hI ATha bhaMga hote haiM  /  tIsa
prakRtiyoM ke samudAya ko tIsa prakRtika saMghasthAna kahate haiM  /  isa
baMdhasthAna meM grahaNa kI gaI prakRtiyA~ isa prakAra haiM - devagati,
devAnupUrvI paMcendriya jAti, AhArakadvika vaikriya zarIra, vaikriya aMgopAMga,
tejasa zarIra, kArmaNa zarIra, rAmacaturasra saMsthAna, varNacatuSka, agugalabu
upaghAta, parAdhAta, ucchavAsa, prazasta vihAyogati trasa, bAdara, paryApta,
pratyeka, zubha, sthira, subhaga, susvara, Adeva, yazaHkIti aura nirmANa | isakA
baMdhaka apramattasaMyata yA apUrvakaraNa guNasthAnavartI ko jAnanA cAhiye  / "
isa sthAna meM saba zubha karmoM kA baMdha hotA hai, ataH yahA~ eka hI bhaMga
hotA hai  /  tosa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM eka tIrthaMkara nAma ko milA dene
para ikatIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai| yahAM bhI eka hI bhaMga hotA hai|
isa prakAra devagati ke yogya baMdhasthAnoM meM 5+5+1+1= 18 bhaMga hote haiN|
kahA bhI hai aTuTu eka ekkaga bhaMgA baTThAra devajogesu  /  1 etacca
devagatiprAyogyaM baghnato'pramattasaMvasasthApUna karaNasya vA veditathyam  /
saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 176

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth, 155  **Meaning:** There are 18 bhangs in the 28, 29, 30,
and 31 natural bandha sthans, respectively, which are suitable for devagati.
These bhangs are eight, eight, one, and one, respectively.  **So far, the bandha
sthans and their bhangs suitable for tiyantra, manushya, and devagati have been
discussed. Here, we will discuss the bandha sthans and their bhangs for
narakagati.**  **There is one bandha sthans for beings who are bound by the
natural qualities suitable for narakagati. This bandha sthans has 28 natural
qualities, hence it is considered as one bandha sthans. This bandha sthans is
only for mithyadrishti. Since all the inauspicious qualities are bound here,
there is only one bhang.**  **The natural qualities that are taken in the 28
natural bandha sthans are as follows:**  * Narakati * Narakanugu * Panchendriya
jati * Vakriya sharir * Bainkriya angopang * Tejas sharir * Karman sharir * Hund
sansthan * Varnachatusk * Agurul chu * Upghāt * Parāghāt * Ucchvās * Aprashasht
vihayogati * Bas * Vādar * Paryāpt * Pratiyaka * Asthir * Ashubh * Durbhāg *
Duḥsvar * Anādeya * Ayashākiiti * Nirman  **In addition to these 23 bandha
sthans, there is one more bandha sthans which occurs in the three gunasthans,
Apurvakaran, etc., after the bandha vicched of the natural qualities suitable
for devagati. This one natural bandha sthans only has the bandha of Yashākiiti
namkarma.**  **Now, let's consider how many bhangs are there in total in each
bandha sthans.**  **One bandha sthans is characterized by Yashākoti. This bandha
sthans occurs in the three gunasthans, Apurvakaran, etc., after the bandha
vicched of the natural qualities suitable for devagati.**  - Sapta tika Prakaran
Tika, page 179

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 155 arthAt-devagati ke yogya 28, 29, 30 aura 31 prakRtika
baMdhasthAnoM meM kramaza: ATha, ATha, eka aura ekA, kula aThAraha bhaMga hote
hai| _ abhI taka tiyaMtra, manuSya aura deva gati yogya baMdhasthAnoM aura unake
bhaMgoM kA kathana kiyA gayA  /  atra narakagati ke baMdhasthAnoM va unake
bhaMgoM ko batAte haiN| narakagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle
jIvoM ke eka aTThAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai| isameM aTThAIsa
prakRtiyA~ hotI haiM, ata: unakA samudAya rUpa eka baMdhasthAna hai| yaha
bandhasthAna mithyAdRSTi ke hI hotA hai| isameM saba azubha prakRtiyoM kA hI
baMdha hone se yahA~ eka hI bhaMga hotA hai| aTThAIsa prakRtika prasthAna meM
grahaNa kI gaI prakRtiyA~ isa prakAra haiM-narakati, narakAnugu:, paMcendriya
jAti, vakriya zarIra, baiMkriya aMgopAMga, tejasa zarIra,kArmaNa zarIra, huMDa
saMsthAna, varNacatuSka, agurula cu, upaghAta, parAghAta, ucchavAsa, aprazasta
vihAyogati, basa, vAdara, paryApta, pratyeka, asthira, azubha, durbhaga,
duHsvara, anAdeya, ayazaHkIti aura nirmaann|| ina teIsa Adi uparyukta
baMdhasthAnoM ke atirikta eka aura baMdhasthAna hai jo devagati ke yogya
prakRtiyoM kA baMdhaviccheda ho jAne para apUrvakaraNa Adi tIna guNasthAnoM meM
hotA hai| isa eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM sirpha yazaHkIti nAmakarma kA
baMdha hotA hai|' _ aba kisa baMdhasthAna meM kula kitane bhaMga hote haiM,
isakA vicAra karate haiM eka tu baMdhasthAnaM yazaHkotilakSaNam taccha
devagatiprAyogya banthe vyacchinne apUrvakAraNAdInAM trayANAmavagantavyam  /
-saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 179

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
156 Samasatika Prakarana Chau pannabisa solasa nava bannavisaya ya addhayala.
Emalluttara chayalasaya ekkeya bandhavihi ||25||  Meaning: In the 23
(prakritis), 25, 16, 9, 92, and 42 (prakritis), there are the respective number
of types of bandhas (bondages). The total of these is 641 individual types of
bandhas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 156 samasatikA prakaraNa cau paNavIsA solasa naba bANauIsayA ya aDayAlA  /
eyAluttara chAyAlasayA ekkeSaka baMdhavihI  // 25 //  zabdArtha-cabAra,
paNavIsA-paccIsa, sosasa-solaha, nava-nau, mANauIsayA-bAnavasau, ga-aura,
ajayAlAatAlIsa, emAluttara chAyAlasayA-chiyAlIsa sau ekatAlIsa, ekakekaeka-eka,
aMdhaviho-baMdha ke prakAra, bhaMga  /  gAthArtha teIsa prakRtika Adi
baMdhasthAnoM meM krama meM cAra, paccIsa, solaha, nau, bAnavasau ar3atAlIsa,
chiyAlIrA sau ikatAlIsa, eka aura eka bhaMga hote haiM  /  vizeSAyaMpUrva gAthA
meM nAmakarma ke baMdhasthAnoM kA vivecana karake pratyeka ke bhaMgoM kA ullekha
kiyA hai| parantu unase pratyeka baMdhasthAna ke samuccaya rUpa se bhaMgoM kA
bodha nahIM hotA hai| ataH pratyeka baMdhasthAna ke samuccaya rUpa se bhaMgoM kA
bodha isa gAthA dvArA karAyA jA rahA hai| nAmakarma ke pUrva gAthA meM 23, 25,
26, 28, 29, 30, 31 aura 1 prakRtika, ye ATha baMdhasthAna batalAye gaye haiM
aura isa gAthA meM sAmAnya se pratyeka baMdhasthAna ke bhaMgoM kI alaga-alaga
saMkhyA batalA dI gaI hai ki kisa baMdhasthAna meM kitane bhaMga hote haiN|
kintu yaha spaSTa nahIM hotA hai ki ve kisa prakAra hote haiM  /  ata: una
bhaMgoM ke hone kA vicAra pUrva meM batAye gaye baMdhasthAnoM ke krama se karate
haiN| _pahalA baMdhasthAna teIsa prakRtika hai| isa sthAna meM cAra bhaMga hote
haiN| kyoMki yaha sthAna aparyApta ekendriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM ke bAMdhane
vAle jIva ke hI hotA hai, anyatra teIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna nahIM pAyA jAtA
hai| isake cAra bhaMga pahale batA Aye haiN| ata: teIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna
meM ve hI cAra bhaMga jAnanA cAhiye  /

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **Twenty-five Natural Bond-Places:** There are a total of
twenty-five bhangs in the twenty-five natural bond-places. This is because there
are twenty bhangs for a being who binds the twenty-five tendencies suitable for
an ekendriya (one-sensed being), and one bhang each for beings who bind the
twenty-five tendencies suitable for an aparyapt dwi-indriya (deficient two-
sensed being), shri-indriya (three-sensed being), chatur-indriya (four-sensed
being), tiryanch panch-indriya (animal five-sensed being), and manushya-gati
(human realm). Therefore, by adding these five bhangs to the aforementioned
twenty bhangs, there are a total of twenty-five bhangs in the twenty-five
natural bond-places.  **Twenty-six Natural Bond-Places:** There are a total of
sixteen bhangs in the twenty-six natural bond-places. This is because it only
occurs for beings who bind the tendencies suitable for an ekendriya, and the
first sixteen bhangs have already been mentioned for the twenty-six natural
bond-places suitable for an ekendriya. Therefore, these same sixteen bhangs
should be known for this twenty-six natural bond-place.  **Twenty-eight Natural
Bond-Places:** There are a total of nine bhangs in the twenty-eight natural
bond-places. This is because there are eight bhangs in the twenty-eight natural
bond-places for a being who binds the tendencies suitable for dev-gati (heavenly
realm), and one bhang in the twenty-eight natural bond-places for a being who
binds the tendencies suitable for narak-gati (hell realm). This place is not
attained by any other beings except for devas and narakas. Therefore, there are
a total of nine bhangs in this place.  **Twenty-nine Natural Bond-Places:**
There are 248 bhangs in the twenty-nine natural bond-places. This is because
there are 4608 bhangs in the twenty-nine natural bond-places suitable for
tiryanch panch-indriya, 4608 bhangs in the twenty-nine natural bond-places
suitable for manushya-gati, and eight bhangs each in the twenty-nine natural
bond-places suitable for dwi-indriya, shri-indriya, chatur-indriya, and dev-gati
(including those who attain the status of a Tirthankara). Thus, by adding all
these bhangs together, there are a total of 4608 + 4608 + 8 + 8 = 9232 bhangs in
the twenty-nine natural bond-places.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha paccIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM kula paccIsa bhaMga hote
haiN| kyoMki ekendriya ke yogya paccIsa pravRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle jIva ke
bIsa bhaMga hote haiM tathA aparyApta dvIndriya, zrIndriya, caturindriya,
tiryaca paMcendriya aura manuSyagati ke yogya paccIsa prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
karane bAle jIvoM ke eka-eka bhaMga hote haiN| ata: pUrvokta bIsa bhaMgoM meM
ina pAMca bhaMgoM ko milAne para paccIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM kula paccIsa
bhaMga hote haiN| chabbIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke kula solaha bhaMga haiN|
kyoMki yaha ekendriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle jIva ke hI hotA
hai aura ekendriyaprAyogya chabbIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM pahale solaha
bhaMga batA Aye haiM, ata: ve hI solaha bhaMga isa chabbIsa prakRtika
baMdhasthAna meM jAnanA caahiye| aTThAIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM kula nau
bhaMga hote haiN| kyoMki devagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM ko baMdha karane vAle jIva
ke 28 prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke ATha bhaMga hote haiM aura narakagati ke yogya
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle jIva ke aTThAIsa prakRtika prasthAna kA eka
bhNg| yaha sthAna deva aura nAraka ke sivAya anya jIvoM ko kisI bhI prakAra se
prApta nahIM hotA hai  /  ata: isake kula nau bhaMga hote haiN| unatIsa
prakRtika badhasthAna ke 248 bhaMga hote haiM  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki
tiryaMca paMcendriya ke yogya unatIsa prakRtika bandhasthAna ke 4608 bhaMga hote
haiM tathA manuSyagati ke yogya unatIsa prakRtika bandhasthAna ke 4608 bhaMga
haiM aura dvIndriya, zrIndriya, caturindriya ke yogya evaM tIrthakara nAma
sahita devagati ke yogya unatIsa prakRtika bandhasthAna ke ATha-ATha bhaMga hote
haiM  /  isa prakAra ukta saba bhaMgoM ko milAne para unatIsa prakRtika
bandhasthAna ke kula bhaMga 4608+4608++++ 8+8- 6248 hote haiN|

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **155**  Sati: M...  There are a total of 4641 destructions of
the thirty natural bondage places. Because there are 4608 destructions of the
thirty natural bondages for those who are fit for the animal realm, and there
are eight destructions each for those who are fit for the two-sense, three-
sense, four-sense, and human realms, and there is one destruction for those who
are fit for the god realm along with the food-taker. Thus, adding the said
destructions, the total destructions of the thirty natural bondage places are
4608 + 8 + 8 + 8 + 1 = 4641.  There is one destruction each for the thirty-one
natural and one unnatural bondage places.  Thus, the destructions of all these
bondage places are 13645. They should be understood in this way: 4 + 25 + 16 + 6
+ 6248 + 4641 + 1 + 1 = 13945.  See the table on page 156 for the description of
the bondage places of name-karma and their total destructions.  After stating
the bondage places of name-karma, now we will tell about the arising places.
**Twenty-two, twenty-four, twenty-eight, thirty-one. These are the arising
places, nine in number. ** ||26||  **1** Compare: (a) Twenty-two, twenty-four,
twenty-eight, thirty-one. These are the arising places, twelve in number. || -
Panchasangraha Saptaatika, verse 73 (b) Twenty, twenty-four, twenty-eight,
thirty-one. These are the arising places, nine in number. || - Karmakanda, 562

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 155 sAti: ma... tIsa prakRtika bandhasthAna ke kula bhaMga 4641 hote haiN|
kyoMki tiryaMcagati ke yogyaM tIsa prakRtika baMdha karane vAle ke 4608 bhaMga
hote haiM tathA dvIndriya, zrIndriya, caturindriya aura manuSyagati ke yogya
tIsa prakRti kA badha karane vAle jIvoM ke ATha-ATha bhaMga haiM aura AhAraka ke
sAtha devagati ke yogya tIsa prakRti kA bandha karane vAle ke eka bhaMga hotA
hai| isa prakAra ukta bhaMgoM ko milAne para tIsa prakRtika bandhasthAna ke kula
bhaMga 4608++8 |-+++1=4641 hote haiN| ikatIsa prakRtika aura eka praRtika
bandhrasthAna kA eka-eka bhaMga hotA hai| isa prakAra se ina saba bandhasthAnoM
ke bhaMga 13645 hote haiM  /  ve isa taraha samajhanA cAhiye-4-25+16+6+6248
-4641+1F 1-13945  /  nAmakarma ke bandhasthAna aura unake kuna bhaMgoM kA
vivaraNa pRSTha 156 kI tAlikA meM dekhiye| nAmakarma ke baMdhasthAnoM kA kathana
karane ke pazcAta aba udayasthAnoM ko batalAte haiN| vIsigavIsA cavIsagAi
egAhiyA u igtiisaa| udayaTThANANi bhave nava aTTa ya huMli nAmassa  // 26 //  1
tulanA kIjiye- (ka) ainavavImiyayIsA ca unIme gahina jAva igitiisaa| caugaiesaM
vArasa udayaTThANAI nAmassa || -paMcasaMgraha saptatikA, gA0 73 (ba) bIsa
igicauvIsaM tatto ikitIsao ti eyazriyaM  /  jadayaTThANA evaM Nava aTTa va hoti
grAmassa  /  /  - karmakAMDa, 562

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Kam | Bangasthan Mang 13945 Aagami Bhavaprayogya Bandhak hahah Aparyapt
Ekendriya Prayogya 4 Tiyanch, Manusya 4 Ekendriya 20, Dwiindriya 1, Triindriya
1, Chaturindriya 1, Tiyanch, Manusya 25, Dev 8 Panchendriya Tiryaach 1, Manusya
1 Paryapt Ekendriya Prayogya 16 Tiryaach, Manusya v Dev 16 | Devgati Prayogya 8,
Nar Kangati Prayogya 1 | Panchendriya Nirmach, Manusya Dwiindriv 8, Triindriya
8, Chaturindriya 8, Panch. Li. 4608, Manusya Tiryaach 1240, Manusya 6248, 4608,
Dev 8 Dev 6216, Na, 1216 Dwi. 6, Tri. 8, Chatur. 8, Panch. Ti. 4608. Manusya 8,
Dev 1 Tiryaach 4632, Manusya 4633 Dev 4616, Na, 4616 Dev Prayogya 1 Manusya ?
Aprayogya 1 Manusya 1 K 15

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kama | baMghasthAna maMga 13945 AgAmI bhavaprAyogya baMdhaka hahah aparyApta
ekendriya prAyogya 4 tiyaM ca, manuSya 4 ekendriya 20, dvIndriya 1, zrIndriya 1,
caturindriya 1, tiyaMca, manuSya 25, deva 8 paMcendriya tiryaca 1, manuSya 1
paryApta ekendriya prAyogya 16 tiryaca, manuSya va deva 16 | devagati prAyogya
8, nara kaMgati prAyogya 1  /  paMcendriya nirmaca, manuSya dvIndriva 8,
zrIndriya 8, ca. 8, paM0 li. 4608, manuSya tiryaca 1240, manuSya 6248, 4608,
deva 8 deva 6216, nA, 1216 dvI. 6, zrI. 8, ca, 8, paM. ti. 4608. manuSya 8, deva
1 tiryaca 4632, manuSya 4633 deva 4616, nA, 4616 deva prAyogya 1 manuSya ?
aprAyogya 1 manuSya 1 K 15

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on Sapta-Tika  **Word Meaning:**  * **Vising-Visa:** Twenty and
twenty-one * **Chavis-Gai:** From twenty-four * **Egalia:** One more than the
previous * **Igti-sa:** Up to thirty-one * **Udayatthanaani:** Places of arising
* **Bhave:** Become * **Nav Attham:** Nine and eight (referring to the nature of
the karma) * **Hanti:** Become * **Namassanama-karma:** Karma of name and form
**Verse Meaning:**  The twenty, twenty-one, and from twenty-four onwards, one
nature more than the previous, up to thirty-one, and eight and nine natures,
these twelve are the places of arising of the karma of name and form.
**Specific Meaning:**  After explaining the binding places of the karma of name
and form, this verse explains the places of arising. These places of arising are
twelve, whose natures are numbered as follows: 20, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31, 8, and 9. The explanation of these places of arising will be given below
based on the paths of the animals, humans, gods, and hell beings.
**Explanation:**  Out of the twelve places of arising of the karma of name and
form, the five places of arising for the one-sensed beings are 21, 24, 25, 26,
and 27 natures. Here, the twelve natures of Tejas, Karman, Agurul-ghu, Sthira,
Asthira, Shubha, Ashubha, Varna-chatuṣka, and Nirman are Dhruva (fixed) in
relation to arising. Because, up to the thirteenth, the Sāyogika-kevali
Gunasthāna, their arising happens for everyone according to the rule. In these
twelve Dhruva-udaya (fixed arising) natures, one each from the nine natures of
Tiryanch-gati, Tiryanch-anupūrvi, Sthāvara, Panchendriya jāti, Bādar-sūkṣma,
Paryāpta-aparyāpta, Durbhaga, Anādeya, and Yaśaḥ-kīti-ayaśaḥ-kīti, when
combined, result in the place of arising of twenty-one natures. This place of
arising is for the one-sensed being existing in the interval of fear. There are
five bhangas (breaks) in this place of arising, which are as follows: Yādar-
paryāpta, Bādar-aparyāpta, Sūkṣma-paryāpta, Sūkṣma-aparyāpta. These four...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa zabdArtha-vIsiMgavIsAbIsa aura ikkIsa kA, cavIsagAi-caubIsa
se lekara, egAliyA-eka-eka adhika, aura, igatIsA-ikatIsa taka, udayaTThANANi-
udayasthAna, bhave-hote haiM, nava aTThama -nau aura ATha prakRti kA, haMti hote
haiM, nAmassanAmakarma ke| gAthArya-nAmakarma ke bIsa, ikkIsa aura caubIsa se
lekara eka, eka prakRti adhika ikatIsa taka tathA ATha aura nau prakRtika, ye
bAraha udayasthAna hote haiN| vizeSArtha-nAmakarma ke baMdhasthAna batalAne ke
bAda isa gAthA meM udayasthAna batalAye haiN| ve udayasthAna bAraha haiN| jinakI
prakRtiyoM ko saMkhyA isa prakAra hai-20, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 8
aura h| ina udayasthAnoM kA spaSTIkaraNa tiryaMca, manuSya, deva aura narakagati
ke AdhAra se nIce kiyA jA rahA huuN| nAmakarma ke jo bAraha udayasthAna kahe
haiM, unameM se ekendriya jIva ke 21, 24, 25, 26 aura 27 prakRtika, ye pAMca
udayasthAna hote haiN| yahA~ tejasa, kArmaNa, agurula ghu, sthira, asthira,
zubha, azubha, varNacatuSka aura nirmANa ye bAraha prakRtiyA~ udaya kI apekSA
dhra ba haiN| kyoMki terahaveM sayogikevalI guNasthAna taka inakA udaya niyama
se sabako hotA hai  /  ina dhruvodayA bAraha pravatiyoM meM tiryaMcagati,
tiryacAnupUrvI, sthAvara, pavendriya jAti, bAdara-sUkSma meM se koI eka,
paryApta aparyApta meM se koI eka, durbhaga, anAdeya tathA yaza:kItiayazaHkIti
meM se koI eka, ina nau prakRtiyoM ke gilA dene para. ikkIsa prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yaha udayasthAna bhaya ke apAntarAla meM vidyamAna
ekendriya ke hotA hai| isa udagrasthAna meM pAMca bhaMga hote haiM, jo isa
prakAra haiM-yAdara paryApta, bAdara aparyApta, sUkSma paryApta, sukSma
aparyApta, ina cAroM

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth, Chapter 162  One should describe the **Mangas** with
**Ayesha Kirti** (negative fame), resulting in four **Bhangs** (divisions).
Similarly, describing the **Badar** with **Yasha Kirti** (positive fame) results
in one more **Bhang**. Thus, there are a total of five **Bhangs**.  Although
there are 222 **Bhangs** due to three **Ghugal** (variations) in the 21
**Prakritis** (categories), three **Bhangs** are reduced because **Yasha Kirti**
does not arise with **Sookshma** (subtle) and **Apayampta** (insufficient).
Even though **Paryaptis** (sufficient) do not begin in the **Apantral**
(interval between births), the **Paryapta** **Namkarma** (karma related to the
body) arises from the very beginning. Therefore, a being existing in the
**Apantral** is considered **Paryapta** due to its **Labdhi** (gain), as the
fulfillment of **Paryaptis** occurs according to the rules.  By combining one of
the four **Prakritis** - **Audarik** (generous) body, **Indrasthan** (heavenly
abode), **Upvaat** (wind), and **Prachaya** (common) - with the
**Tiryanchanupurvi** (animal) **Prakriti** and reducing it, the **Chaubis** (24)
**Prakriti** **Udayasthan** (place of origin) of a **Sharirastha** (body-bound)
**Ekendriya** (one-sense) being is formed.  Here, multiplying the aforementioned
five **Bhangs** with **Prachaya** results in ten **Bhangs**. When considering
the **Vaikriya** (transformed) body of a **Vayukaayik** (air-bodied) being, the
**Vaikriya** body arises in place of the **Audarik** body. Therefore, there are
also 24 **Prakritis** arising with its **Vaikriya** body.  One should describe
its **Kevand** (body), **Badar**, **Paryapta**, **Prachaya**, and **Ayesha
Kirti** **Prakritis**. Thus, there is one **Bhang** in comparison to this.  The
**Tejaskayik** (fire-bodied) and **Vayukaayik** beings do not have **Prachaya**
and **Yasha Kirti**. Therefore, **Vayukaayik** is not considered to have
**Bhangs** in comparison to these. Thus, there are a total of eleven **Bhangs**
in the **Chaubis** **Prakriti** **Udayasthan**.  After the body becomes
**Paryapta** due to **Paryapti**, by adding the **Paraghat** (destructive)
**Prakriti** to the **Chaubis** **Prakriti** **Udayasthan**, the **Panchavis**
(25) **Prakriti** **Udayasthan** is formed. Here, the **Badar** **Prachaya** and
**Yasha...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 r SaSTha karma grantha 162 maMgoM ko ayazaHkIrti ke sAtha kahanA cAhiye jisase
cAra bhaMga hote haiM tathA bAdara paryApta ko yazaH kIrti ke sAtha kahane para
eka bhaMga aura hotA hai  /  isa prakAra kula pAMca bhaMga hote haiN| yadyapi
uparyukta 21 prakRtiyoM meM vikalparUpa tIna ghugala hone ke kAraNa 222 - bhaMga
hote haiM  /  kintu sUkSma aura apayAMpta ke sAtha yazaHkIti kA udaya nahIM hotA
hai, jisase tIna bhaMga kama ho jAte haiM  /  bhava ke apAntarAla meM
paryAptiyoM kA prArambha hI nahIM hotA, phira bhI paryApta nAmakarma kA udaya
pahale samaya se hI ho jAtA hai aura isaliye apAntarAla meM vidyamAna aisA jIva
labdhi se paryAptaka hI hotA hai, kyoMki usake Age paryAptiyoM kI pUrti niyama
se hotI hai| ina ikkIsa prakRtiyoM meM audArika zarIra iMDasaMsthAna,
upavAtatathA pratyeka aura sAdhAraNa inameM se koI eka ina cAra prakRtiyoM ko
milAne para tathA tiryaMcAnupUrvI prakRti ko kama kara dene se zarIrastha
ekendriya jIva ke caubIsa prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| yahAM pUrvokta pAMca
bhaMgoM ko pratyeka aura sAdhAraNa se guNA kara dene para dasa bhaMga hote haiM
tathA vAyukAyika jIva ke vaikriya zarIra ko karate samaya audArika zarIra ke
sthAna para vaikriya zarIra kA udaya hotA hai, ataH isake vaikriya zarIra ke
sAtha bhI cauvIsa prakRtiyoM kA udaya aura isake kevanda bAdara, paryApta,
pratyeka aura ayazaH kIrti, ye prakRtiyAM hI kahanA cAhiye isaliye isakI apekSA
eka bhaMga huaa| tejaskAyika aura vAyukAyika jIva ke sAdhAraNa aura yazaHkIti kA
udaya nahIM hotA ata: vAyukAyika ko inakI apekSA bhaMga nahIM batAye haiM  /
isa prakAra caubIsa prakRtika udayasthAna meM kula gyAraha bhaMga hote haiN| 1
anantara zarIra paryApti se paryApta ho jAne ke bAda 24 prakRtika usmAna ke
sAtha parAghAta prakRti ko milA dene para 25 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai |
yahA~ bAdara ke pratyeka aura sAdhAraNa tathA yazaH

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 7: Seven Decades  There are four types of **bhang** (break) due to
**kiriti** (fame) and **ayash** (infamy), with two **bhang** for each
**sukshma** (subtle) and **sadharan** (ordinary) in relation to **ayash-
kiriti**. This makes a total of six **bhang**. When a **badar** (cloud)
**vayukayik** (air-bodied) being, who is performing **vaikriya**
(transformation) of the body, becomes **paryapt** (sufficient) in **sharira**
(body), then the **uday** (emergence) of twenty-five **prakriti** (principles)
occurs due to the addition of **paradhat** (secondary) to the twenty-four
**prakriti**. This constitutes one **bhang**. Thus, there are a total of seven
**bhang** in the **udayasthan** (place of emergence) of twenty-five
**prakriti**.  Subsequently, when a being becomes **paryapt** in **pranapan**
(inhalation-exhalation), the **udayasthan** of twenty-six **prakriti** occurs
due to the addition of **ucchavas** (exhalation) to the aforementioned twenty-
five **prakriti**. Here too, there are six **bhang** as before. Alternatively,
for a being who becomes **paryapt** in **sharira** but does not experience the
**uday** of **ucchavas**, but instead experiences the **uday** of either
**atap** (heat) or **udyot** (glow), the **udayasthan** of twenty-six
**prakriti** occurs. Here too, there are six **bhang**. These are as follows:
The **uday** of **atap** and **udyot** occurs only in **badar**, not in
**sukshma**. Therefore, there are four **bhang** for each **sadharan** and
**sukshma** in relation to **yash-kiriti** and **ayash-kiriti** along with
**udyot** and **badar**. There are two **bhang** for each **yash-kiriti** and
**ayash-kiriti** in relation to **atap** and each **badar**. This makes a total
of six **bhang**.  The **uday** of **atap** occurs only in **badar**
**prithvikayik** (earth-bodied) beings, but the **uday** of **udyot** occurs in
**vanaspatikayik** (plant-bodied) beings as well. When a **badar** **vayukayik**
being performs **vaikriya** of the body and becomes **paryapt** in **ucchavas**,
the **udayasthan** of twenty-six **prakriti** occurs due to the addition of
**ucchavas** to the twenty-five **prakriti**. This constitutes one **bhang**.
It is important to understand that **agnikayik** (fire-bodied) and **vayukayik**
beings do not experience the **uday** of **atap**, **udyot**, or **yash-
kiriti**. Thus, there are a total of thirteen **bhang** in the **udayasthan** of
twenty-six **prakriti**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 162 saptatikA prakaraNa kIti aura ayaza:koti ke nimitta se cAra bhaMga hote
haiM sathA sUkSma ke pratyeka aura sAdhAraNa kI apekSA ayazaHkIti ke sAtha do
bhaMga hote haiM  /  jisase chaha bhaMga to ye hue tathA vaikriya zarIra ko
karane vAlA bAdara vAyukAyika jIva jaba zarIra paryApti se paryApta ho jAtA hai,
taba usake 24 prakRtiyoM meM parAdhAta ke milAne para paccIsa prakRtiyoM kA
udaya hotA hai| isaliye ekA bhaMga isakA hotA hai| isa prakAra paccIsa prakRtika
udayasthAna meM sava milakara sAta bhaMga hote haiN| _ anantara prANApAna
paryApti se paryApta hue jIva ke pUrvokta 25 prakRtiyoM meM ucchavAsa ke milAne
para chabbIsa prakRtikA udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahAM bhI pUrva ke samAna chaha
bhaMga hote haiM  /  athavA zarIra paryApti se paryApta hue jisa jIva ke
ucchavAsa kA udaya na hokara Atapa aura udyola meM se kisI eka kA udaya hotA
hai, usake chabbIsa prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ bhI chaha bhaMga
hote haiN| ve isa prakAra haiM-Atapa aura udyona kA udaya bAdara ke hI hotA hai,
mUkSma ke nahIM, ata: inameM se udyona sahita bAdara ke pratyeka aura sAdhAraNa
tathA yaza kIrti aura ayaza:kIti, inakI apekSA cAra bhaMga hue tathA Atapa
sahita pratyeka ke yazaHkIti aura ayaza kIrti, inako apekSA do bhaMga hue| isa
prakAra kUla chaha bhaMga hue| Asapa kA udaya lAdara pRthvIkAyika ke hI hotA
hai, kintu udyota kA udaya vanaspatikAyika ke bhI hotA hai aura bAdara
vAyukAyika ke vaikiya zarIra ko karate samaya uccha vAsa paryApti se paryApta
hone para 25 prakRtiyoM meM ucch vAsa ko milAne para 26 prakRtika udayasthAna
hotA hai  /  ata: yaha eka bhaMga huaa| itanI vizeSatA samajhanA cAhiye ki agni
kAyika aura vAyukAyika jIvoM ke Atapa, udyota aura yazaHkrIti kA udaya nahIM
hotA hai  /  isa prakAra chabbIsa prakRtika udayasthAna meM kula 13 bhaMga hote
haiN|

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  The twenty-sixth natural उदयस्थान (state of existence)
arises when one of the natures of Ātap and Udyot is added to the twenty-five
natural उदयस्थान, which is achieved through the पर्याप्ति (sufficiency) of
Prāṇāpāna (life force). Here too, there are six भंग (divisions), which have been
explained in the twenty-fifth natural उदयस्थान in conjunction with one of the
natures of Ātap and Udyot.  Thus, the total number of भंग for the five उदयस्थान
of the एकेन्द्रिय (one-sensed) beings is 5 + 11 + 7 + 13 + 6 = 42. This is also
mentioned in the संग्नह गाथा (collected verse):  "एगिषयउवएस पंच य एक्कार सत्त
तेरस या। छपकं कमसो भंगा बायला हंति सम्घ वि।"  Meaning: The five उदयस्थान of the
एकेन्द्रिय, which are 21, 24, 25, 26, and 27 natural उदयस्थान, have 5, 11, 7,
13, and 6 भंग respectively, and their total sum is 42.  Having described the
उदयस्थान of the एकेन्द्रिय तिर्यंच (one-sensed animals), we now proceed to
describe the उदयस्थान of the विकलत्रिक (partially developed) and पंचेन्द्रिय
(five-sensed) तिर्यंच.  The द्वीन्द्रिय (two-sensed) beings have six उदयस्थान,
which are 21, 26, 28, 29, 30, and 31 natural उदयस्थान.  The twenty-first natural
उदयस्थान arises when one of the nine natures, namely तिर्य चगति (animal path),
तिर्यंचानुपूर्वी (animal-like past), द्वीन्द्रियजाति (two-sensed species), स
(being), बादर (stupid), पर्याप्त (sufficient), अपर्याप्त (insufficient), दुर्भग
(unfortunate), अनादेय (unworthy of respect), यक्ष:कीति (fame of a Yaksha), and
अयश कीति (infamy), is added to the twelve ध्रुवोदय (fixed) natures of नामकर्म
(karma of name), which were previously mentioned. This उदयस्थान belongs to the
जीव (soul) existing in the अपान्तराल (intermediate state) of भव (existence).
There are three भंग here, because अपर्याप्त  1. तेजस (energy), कार्मण (karmic),
अगुरुलघु (heavy-light), स्थिर (stable), अस्थिर (unstable), शुभ (auspicious),
अशुभ (inauspicious), वर्णचतुक (four colors), and 2. निर्माण (creation), these
twelve natures are ध्रुव (fixed) in relation to उदय (arising).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karma grantha ukta chabbIsa prakRtika udayasthAna meM prANApAna paryApti
se paryApta jIva ke Atapa aura udyota meM se kisI eka prakRti ke milA dene para
27 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ bhI chaha bhaMga hote haiM, jinakA
spaSTIkaraNa Atapa aura ucIta meM se kisI eka prakRti ke sAtha chalcIsa
prakRtika udayasthAna meM kiyA jA cukA hai| isa prakAra ekendriya ke pAMca
udayasthAnoM ke kula bhaMga 5+11+ 7+13+6. = 42 hote haiN| isako saMgnaha gAthA
meM kahA bhI hai egiSayauvaesa paMca ya ekkAra satta terasa yaa| chapakaM kamaso
bhaMgA bAyalA haMti samgha vi| arthAt ekendriya ke jo 21, 24, 25, 26 aura 27
prakRtika pA~ca udayasthAna batalAye haiM unameM kramazaH 5, 11, 7, 13 aura 6
bhaMga hote haiM aura unakA kula jor3a 42 hotA hai| isa prakAra se ekendriya
tiryaMcoM ke udayasthAnoM kA kathana karane ke bAda aba vikalatrika aura
paMcendriya tiryaMcoM ke udayasthAnoM ko batalAte haiN| dvIndriya jIvoM ke 21,
26, 28, 29, 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye chaha udayasthAna hote haiN| pahale jo
nAmakarma kI bAraha dhruvodaya' prakRtiyAM batalA Aye haiM, unameM tirya cagati,
tiryaMcAnupUrvI, dvIndriyajAti, sa, bAdara, paryApta aura aparyApta meM se koI
eka, durbhaga, anAdeya tathA yakSa:kIti aura ayaza kIti meM se koI eka, ina nau
prakRtiyoM ko milAne para ikkIsa prakRtika udazarathAna hotA hai| yaha
udayasthAna bhava ke apAntarAla meM vidyamAna jIva ke hotA hai| yahA~ tIna
bhaMga hote haiM, kyoMki aparyApta 1 tejasa, kArmaNa, agurulaghu, sthira,
asthira, zubha, azubha varNacatuka aura nirmANa, ye bAraha prakRtiyA~ udaya kI
apekSA dhruva hai|

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 71  When there is an emergence of **ayasha-kirti** (negative fame),
then there is a **bhang** (break) in the **yasha-kirti** (positive fame) and
**ayasha-kirti** (negative fame) which are **paryapt** (sufficient). Therefore,
there are two **bhang** (breaks) in these two. Thus, there are a total of three
**bhang** (breaks) in the twenty-one **prakritik** (natural) **udayasthan**
(stages of emergence).  In these twenty-one **prakritik** (natural)
**udayasthan** (stages of emergence), when **audarik** (material) **sharira**
(body), **audarik** (material) **angopang** (limbs), **indriyasansthan** (sense
organs), **sevartsanhanan** (service and support), **upghat** (destruction), and
each of these six **prakritis** (principles) are combined and
**tiryachanupurvi** (transmigration) is reduced, then there are twenty-six
**prakritik** (natural) **udayasthan** (stages of emergence) for the
**sharirastha** (body-bound) **hondriya** (having sense organs) **jiva**
(being). Here too, there are three **bhang** (breaks) similar to the **bhang**
(breaks) in the twenty-one **prakritik** (natural) **udayasthan** (stages of
emergence).  In the twenty-six **prakritik** (natural) **udayasthan** (stages of
emergence), when **sharira** (body) is **paryapt** (sufficient) and **paryapt**
(sufficient) for the **dwindriya** (two-sense organ) **jiva** (being), then by
adding the two **prakritis** (principles) of **aprashasht vihayogati**
(unpleasant path of liberation) and **paradhat** (external destruction), there
are twenty-eight **prakritik** (natural) **udayasthan** (stages of emergence).
Here, there are two **bhang** (breaks) in comparison to **yasha-kirti**
(positive fame) and **ayasha-kirti** (negative fame). Since there is no
emergence of **aparyapt** (insufficient) **nama** (name), there is no **bhang**
(break) in comparison to it.  After that, when **shwasocchvas** (breathing) is
**paryapt** (sufficient) and **paryapt** (sufficient), then by adding the
**prakriti** (principle) of **uchchvas** (exhalation) to the aforementioned
twenty-eight **prakritik** (natural) **udayasthan** (stages of emergence), there
are twenty-six **prakritik** (natural) **udayasthan** (stages of emergence).
Here too, there are two **bhang** (breaks) in comparison to **yasha-kirti**
(positive fame) and **ayasha-kirti** (negative fame). Or, when there is an
emergence of **udyot** (effort) for the **jiva** (being) whose **sharira**
(body) is **paryapt** (sufficient) and **paryapt** (sufficient), then there are
twenty-six **prakritik** (natural) **udayasthan** (stages of emergence) without
**uchchvas** (exhalation). Here too, there are two **bhang** (breaks) in
comparison to **yasha-kirti** (positive fame) and **ayasha-kirti** (negative
fame). Thus, there are a total of four **bhang** (breaks) in the twenty-six
**prakritik** (natural) **udayasthan** (stages of emergence).  When **bhasha**
(speech) is **paryapt** (sufficient) and **paryapt** (sufficient) for the
**jiva** (being) with **uchchvas** (exhalation) in the twenty-six **prakritis**
(principles), then by adding one of **suswar** (good voice) and **duhswar** (bad
voice), there are thirty **prakritik** (natural) **udayasthan** (stages of
emergence). Here, there are four **bhang** (breaks) due to the alternative of
**suswar** (good voice) and **duhswar** (bad voice) and **yasha-kirti**
(positive fame) and **ayasha-kirti** (negative fame). Or, when there is no
emergence of **swar** (voice) for the **jiva** (being) whose **pranapan**
(inhalation and exhalation) is **paryapt** (sufficient) and **paryapt**
(sufficient), then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 164 saptatikA prakaraNa ke eka ayazaH kIrti kA udaya hotA hai, ataH eka bhaMga
huA tathA paryApta ke yazaH kIrti aura ayazaHkIrti ke vikalpa se ina donoM kA
udaya hotA hai ataH dI bhaMga hue| isa prakAra ikkIsa prakRtika udayasthAna meM
kula tIna bhaMga hue  /  isa ikkIsa prakRtika udayasthAna meM audArika zarIra,
audArika aMgopAMga, iMDasaMsthAna sevArtasaMhanana, upaghAta aura pratyeka ina
chaha prakRtiyoM ko milAne aura tiryacAnupUrvI ko kama karane para zarIrastha
hondriya jIva ke chabbIsa prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| yahA~ bhI ikkIsa
prakRtika udayasthAna ke bhaMgoM ke samAna tIna bhaMga hote haiN| chabbIsa
prakRtika udayasthAna meM zarIra paryApti se paryApta hue dvIndriya jIva ke
aprazasta vihAyogati aura parAdhAta ina do prakRtiyoM ke milA dene para 28
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ yazaH kIrti aura ayazaH kIrti kI apekSA
do bhaMga hote haiN| isake aparyApta nAma kA udaya na hone se usakI apekSA
bhaMga nahIM kahe haiM  /  anantara zvAsocch vAsa paryApti se paryApta hone para
pUrvokta 28 prakRtika udayasthAna meM ucchavAsa prakRtika ke milAne para 26
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ bhI yazaHkIrti aura ayazaHkIti kI
apekSA do bhaMga hote haiM athavA zarIra paryApti se paryApta hue jIva ke udyota
kA udaya hone para ucchavAsa ke binA 26 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~
bhI yazaH kIrti aura ayazaHkoti kI apekSA do bhaMga ho jAte hai  /  isa prakAra
26 prakRtika udayasthAna meM kula cAra bhaMga hote haiM  /  bhASA paryApta se
paryApta hue jIva ke ucchavAsa sahita 26 prakRtiyoM meM susvara aura duHsvara
inameM se koI eka ke milA dene para 30 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~
para susvara aura duHsvara tathA yaza:kIrti aura ayaza: kIrti ke vikalpa se cAra
bhaMga hote haiM athavA prANApAna paryApta se paryApta hue jova ke svara kA
udaya na hokara yadi

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  If the **Udyot** arises in place of the **30th Prakrutik
Udayasthan**, there are still 30 **Prakrutik Udayasthan**. Here, there are two
**Bhang** due to the alternatives of **Yasha-niti** and **Ayasha-kirti**. Thus,
there are six **Bhang** in the 30 **Prakrutik Udayasthan**.  After that, when
**Udyot** is added to the 30 **Prakrutik Udayasthan** along with **Swar**, there
are 31 **Prakrutik Udayasthan**. Here, there are four **Bhang** due to the
alternatives of **Suswar** and **Dushwar**, and **Yasha-kirti** and **Ayasha-
kirti**.  Thus, in the six **Udayasthan** (21, 26, 28, 29, 30, and 31
**Prakrutik**) of **Dwi-indriya** beings, there are a total of 22 **Bhang**,
namely 3+3+2+4+6+4. Similarly, one should calculate the six **Udayasthan** and
their **Bhang** for each of the **Tri-indriya** and **Chatur-indriya** beings.
That is, just like **Dwi-indriya** beings, one should understand the **Prakrutik
Udayasthan** and their **Bhang** for **Tri-indriya** and **Chatur-indriya**
beings, but with the difference that instead of **Dwi-indriya** species, one
should mention **Tri-indriya** species for **Tri-indriya** beings and **Chatur-
indriya** species for **Chatur-indriya** beings.  In total, there are 66
**Bhang** for **Vikal-trika** beings. It is also said:  _Sing Tig Dug Bau Ch
Chaw Vigsaap Ashtti Hor Sihan Pi._  That is, there are six **Udayasthan** namely
21, 26, 28, 29, 30, and 31 **Prakrutik** for each of **Dwi-indriya** and so on,
and their **Bhang** are 3, 3, 2, 4, 6, and 4 respectively, which add up to 22,
and the total for all three is 2243 = 66 **Bhang**.  Now, we will explain the
**Udayasthan** of **Tiryach Pancha-indriya** beings. There are six
**Udayasthan** for **Tiryach Pancha-indriya** beings, namely 21, 26, 28, 29, 30,
and 31 **Prakrutik**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha usake sthAna para udyota kA udaya ho gayA to bhI 30
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| yahA~ yazaHnIti aura ayaza:kIrti ke vikalpa se
do hI bhaMga hote haiN| isa prakAra tIsa prakRtika udayasthAna meM chaha bhaMga
hote haiN| anantara svara sahita 30 prakRtika udayasthAna meM udyota ke milAne
para ikatIsa prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| yahA~ susvara aura duHsvara tathA
yazaHkIti aura ayaza kIrti ke vikalpa se cAra bhaMga hote haiN| isa prakAra
dvIndriya jIvoM ke chaha udayasthAnoM (21, 26, 28, 29, 30 aura 31 prakRtika) meM
kramazaH 3+3+2+4+6+4 kula 22 bhaMga hote haiM  /  isI prakAra se zrIndriya aura
caturindriya jIvoM meM se pratyeka ke chaha-chaha udayasthAna aura unake bhaMga
ghaTita kara lenA cAhiye  /  arthAt dvIndriya kI taraha hI trIndriya aura
caturindriya jIvoM ke bhI prakRtika udayasthAna tathA unameM se pratyeka ke
bhaMga samajhanA cAhiye, lekina itanI vizeSatA kara lenA cAhiye ki dvIndriya
jAti ke sthAna para trIndriya ke liye trIndriya jAti aura caturindriya ke liye
caturindriya jAti kA ullekha kara leveN| kula milAkara vikalatrikoM ke 66 bhaMga
hote haiM  /  kahA bhI hai _siMga tiga duga baU cha cau vigasApa asaSTi hora
sihaM pi  /  arthAt dvIndriya Adi meM se pratyeka ke 21, 26, 28, 29, 30 aura 31
prakRtika ye chaha udayasthAna haiM aura unake kramaza: 3, 3, 2, 4, 6 aura 4
bhaMga hote haiM, jo milakara 22 haiM aura tInoM ke milAkara kula 2243=66 bhaMga
hote haiM  /  aba tiryaca paMcendriyoM ke udayasthAnoM ko batalAte haiM  /
tiryaMca paMcendriyoM ke 21, 26, 28, 29, 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye chaha
udayasthAna hote haiN|

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From these six उदयस्थानs, 21 natural उदयस्थानs are formed by combining the
twelve ध्रुवोदया प्रकृतिs of नामकर्म with one of the following: तिर्यंचगति,
तिर्यचानुपूर्वी, पंचेन्द्रिय जाति, स, बादर, पर्याप्त and अपर्याप्त; one of सुभग
and दुभंग; one of आदेय and अनादेय; and one of यशःकीति and अयशः कीर्ति. This
उदयस्थान is of the तिर्यच पंचेन्द्रिय existing in अपान्तराल. It has nine भंगs.
Because in the उदय of पर्याप्त नामकर्म, there are 2x2x2=8 भंगs due to the उदय of
one of सुभग and दुभंग, one of आदेय and अनादेय, and one of यशः कीर्ति and
अयशःकीति. And in the उदय of अपर्याप्त नामकर्म, there is one भंग due to the उदय
of the three inauspicious प्रकृतिs: दुभंग, अनादेय, and अयशः कीर्ति.  Thus, there
are a total of nine भंगs in the 21 natural उदयस्थानs.  Some आचार्यs believe that
सुभग is always accompanied by आदेय and दुर्भग by अनादेय. In essence, there are
four भंगs in the उदय of पर्याप्त नामकर्म due to the combination of these two and
अयश कीर्ति, and one भंग for अपर्याप्त. Thus, there are a total of five भंगs in
the 21 natural उदयस्थानs. Similarly, one should understand the difference in
भंगs in the subsequent उदयस्थानs according to different opinions.  Therefore,
according to this opinion, the यशःकीर्ति...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rafat Ber J ina chaha udayasthAnoM meM se 21 prakRtika udayasthAna nAmakarma kI
bAraha dhruvodayA prakRtiyoM ke sAtha tiryaMcagati, tiryacAnupUrvI, paMcendriya
jAti, sa, bAdara, paryApta aura aparyApta meM se koI eka, subhaga aura dubhaMga
meM se koI eka, Adeya aura anAdeya meM se koI eka yazaHkIti aura ayazaH kIrti
meM se koI eka ina nau prakRtiyoM ko milAne se banatA hai  /  yaha udayasthAna
apAntarAla meM vidyamAna tiryaca paMcendriya ke hotA hai| isake nau bhaMga hote
haiN| kyoMki paryApta nAmakarma ke udaya meM subhaga aura dubhaMga meM se kisI
eka kA Adeya aura anAdeya meM se kisI eka kA tathA yazaH kIrti aura ayazaHkIti
meM se kisI eka kA udaya hone se 2x2x2= 8 bhaMga hue tathA aparyApta nAmakarma
ke udaya meM dubhaMga, anAdeya aura ayazaH kIrti, ina tIna azubha prakRtiyoM kA
hI udaya hone se eka bhaMga hotA hai  /  isa prakAra 21 prakRtika udayasthAna
meM kula nau bhaMga hote haiM  /  kinhIM AcAyoM kA yaha mata hai ki subhaga ke
sAtha Adeya kA aura durbhaga ke sAtha anAdeya kA hI udaya hotA hai| sAra
paryApta nAmakarma ke udaya meM ina donoM aura ayaza kIrti ina do prakRtiyoM se
guNita kara dene para cAra bhaMga hote haiM tathA aparyApta kA eka, isa prakAra
21 prakRtika udayasthAna meM kula pAMca maMga hote haiM  /  isI prakAra
matAntara se Age ke udayasthAnoM meM bhI gaMgoM kI viSamatA samajhanA cAhiye | 1
1 166 ataH isa mata ke anuyugaloM ko yazaHkIrti 1 apare punarAhaH - subhagAdeye
yugapadudayamAyAtaH durbhagAunAdeye ca tataH paryAptakasya subhagA''deya yugala
durma gADanAdeyayugalAbhyAM yazaH kIrti ayazaH kIrti bhyAM ca catvAro maMgA:
aparyAptakasya tveka iti, sarva saMkhyayA paMca  /  evamuttaratrApi matAntareNa
maMgavaiSamyaM svadhiyA paribhAvanIyam  /  - saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR. 183 -

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 6: Karma-Manas  **167**  There are 26 natural places of arising
(**prakritik udaysthan**) within the body, which are the five senses. These 26
natural places of arising are formed by combining six natures:  * **Audarik
Sharira** (physical body) * **Audarik Angopang** (physical limbs) * **One of the
six Sansthan** (places of attachment) * **One of the six Sanhanan** (places of
accumulation) * **Upghat** (obstacles) * **Pratyek** (individual)  These six
natures are combined, and the **Tiryanch-anupurvi** (animalistic tendencies) are
removed, resulting in 26 natural places of arising.  There are 286 **bhang**
(breakdowns) of these 26 natural places of arising. This is because the number
of **bhang** is calculated by multiplying the number of **Sansthan**,
**Sanhanan**, and the three pairs of **Subhag** (auspicious) and **Durbhag**
(inauspicious) together: 6 x 6 x 2 x 2 x 2 = 288. However, since the **Hund-
Sansthan** (inferior place of attachment), **Sevat Sanhanan** (inferior place of
accumulation), **Durbhag**, **Anadeya** (unavoidable), and **Ayash-Kirti** (bad
reputation) are not present, one **bhang** is removed. Therefore, there are a
total of 286 **bhang** for the 26 natural places of arising.  For a being who is
**paryapt** (sufficient) in **Sharira** (body), there are 28 natural places of
arising. This is because the 26 natural places of arising are combined with two
more natures: **Paraghat** (extreme obstacles) and **Prashasht** (auspicious) or
**A-prashasht** (inauspicious) **Vihayogati** (path of liberation). The number
of **bhang** for these 28 natural places of arising is 576. This is calculated
by multiplying the 288 **bhang** for the **paryapt** state with the two
**Vihayogati**: 288 x 2 = 576.  When **Uchch-vas** (high breath) is added to
these 28 natural places of arising, the total becomes 29. The number of
**bhang** remains the same, 576. Alternatively, for a being who is **paryapt**
in **Sharira**, **Uchch-vas** does not arise. Therefore, **Udyot**
(illumination) is added instead, resulting in 26 natural places of arising. The
number of **bhang** remains the same, 576. Therefore, the total number of
**bhang** for the 26 natural places of arising is 576 + 576 = 1152.  For a being
who is **paryapt** in **Bhasha** (speech), there are 29 natural places of
arising...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmamanya 167 zarIrastha niyaMca paMcendriya ke 26 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai| ukta 21 praka tika udayasthAna meM audArika zarIra,
audArika aMgopAMga, chaha saMsthAnoM meM se koI eka saMsthAna, chaha saMhananoM
meM se koI eka saMhanana, upaghAta aura pratyeka, ina chaha prakRtiyoM ko milAne
tathA tiryaMcAnupUrvI ke nikAla dene para yaha 26 prakRtika udayasthAna banatA
hai| isa 26 prakRtika udayasthAna ke bhaMga 286 hote haiM  /  kyoMki paryApta ke
pada saMsthAna, chaha saMhanana aura subhaga Adi tIna yugaloM kI saMkhyA ko
pararapara guNita karane para 6x6x2x2x2= 288 bhaMga hote haiM tathA aparyApta ke
huMDasaMsthAna, sevAta saMhanana, durbhaga, anAdeya aura ayaza-kIrti kA hI udaya
hotA hai ata: yaha eka bhaMga huaa| isa prakAra 26 prakRtika udayasthAna ke kula
286 bhaGga hote haiM  /  zarIra paryApti se paryApta hue jIva ke isa chabbIsa
prakRtika udayasthAna meM parAghAta aura prazasta va aprazasta vihAyogati meM se
koI eka isa prakAra ina do prakRtiyoM ke milAne para 28 prakRtika udayasthAna
hotA hai  /  isake bhaGga 576 hote haiN| kyoMki pUrva meM paryApta ke jo 288
bhaGga batalAye haiM unako prazasta aura aprazasta vihAyogati se guNita karane
para 28842=576 hote haiN| _ ukta 28 prakRtika udayasthAna meM uccha vAsa ko milA
dene para 26 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  isake bhI pahale ke samAna 576
bhaMga hote haiM  /  athavA zarIra paryApti se paryApta hue jItra ke uccha bAsa
kA udaya nahIM hotA hai. isalie usake sthAna para udyota ko milAne para bhI 26
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| isake bhI 5.76 bhaMga hole haiN| isa prakAra 26
prakRtika udayasthAna ke kula bhaMga 576 + 576=1152 hote haiN| ukta 29 prakRtika
udayasthAna meM bhASA paryApti se paryApta hue

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on Sapta-Tika  When one of the two, **su-svara** (good tone) or **du-
svara** (bad tone), is combined with the **Jiva**, there are 30 **prakritik**
(natural) **udayasthan** (stages of emergence). These have 1152 **bhang**
(divisions). Because 576 **bhang** are mentioned for the **uccha** (high) and
**vasa** (low) of the first 29 **prakritik** stages, multiplying them by
**svara-dvik** (two tones) gives 1152 **bhang**. Alternatively, when **udyot**
(effort) is added to the 26 **prakritik** **udayasthan** mentioned for the
**Jiva** who has attained **pranapan** (inhalation-exhalation) and **paryapti**
(fulfillment), it results in 30 **prakritik** **udayasthan**. This also has 576
**bhang** like before. Thus, the total **bhang** for 30 **prakritik**
**udayasthan** are 1728.  When **udyot** is added to the 30 **prakritik**
**udayasthan** including **svara**, it becomes 31 **prakritik** **udayasthan**.
This has a total of 1152 **bhang**. Because the 1152 **bhang** mentioned for the
30 **prakritik** **udayasthan** including **svara** are the same here.
Therefore, the total **udayasthan** and their **bhang** for the six
**udayasthan** of the ordinary **tiryanch** (animal) **panchendriya** (five
senses) are 286 + 576 + 1152 + 1728 + 1152 = 4606.  Now, we will discuss the
**bandha-sthan** (binding places) and their **bhang** for the **tiryanch**
**panchendriya** with **vaikriya** (changeable) body. The **tiryanch**
**panchendriya** with **vaikriya** body have five **udayasthan** of 25, 27, 28,
26, and 30 **prakritik**.  When **vaikriya** body, **vaikriya** **angopaang**
(changeable limbs), **sama-chatur-astra** (square) **sansthan** (structure),
**upghat** (injury), and each of these five **prakriti** are added to the 21
**prakritik** **udayasthan** mentioned for the ordinary **tiryanch**
**panchendriya** and the **tiryanch** **anupurvi** (animal lineage) is removed,
it results in 25 **prakritik** **udayasthan**. In this 25 **prakritik**
**udayasthan**, one of **su-bhang** (good division) or **du-bhang** (bad
division), one of **adeya** (worthy of being given) or **ana-adeya** (not worthy
of being given), and one of **yasha-kiriti** (fame and glory) or **ayasha-
kiriti** (infamy and disgrace) are added.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa jIva ke susvara aura du:svara meM se kisI eka ko milAne
para 30 prakatika udayasthAna hotA hai| isake 1152 bhaMga hote haiN| kyoMki
pahale 29 prakRtika sthAna ke uccha vAsa kI apekSA 576 bhaMga batalAye haiM,
unheM svaradvika se guNita karane para 1152 bhaMga hote haiM athavA prANApAna
paryApti se paryApta hue jIva ke jo 26 prakRtika udayasthAna batalAyA hai,
usameM udyota ko milAne para 30 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  isake pahale
kI taraha 576 bhaMga hote haiM  /  isa prakAra 30 prakRtika udayasthAna ke kula
maGga 1728 prApta hote haiN| _svara sahita 30 prakRtika udayasthAna meM udyota
nAma ko milA dene para 31 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  isake kula bhaMga
1152 hote haiM  /  kyoMki svara prakRti sahita 30 prakRtika udayasthAna ke jo
1152 bhaMga kahe haiM, ve hI yahA~ prApta hote haiN| isa prakAra sAmAnya tiyaMca
paMcendriya ke chaha udayasthAna aura unake kula' bhaGga 286+576+
1152+1728+1152= 4606 hote haiN| aba vaikriya zarIra karane vAle tiryaMca
paMcendriya kI apekSA baMdhasthAna aura unake bhaGgoM ko batalAte haiM  /
vaikriya zarIra karane vAle tiryaMca paMcendriyoM ke 25, 27, 28, 26 aura 30
prakRtikA, ye pAMca udayasthAna hote haiN| pahale jo tithaMca paMcendriya ke 21
prakRtika udayasthAna batalAyA hai, usameM vaikriya zarIra, baiMkriya aMgopAMga,
samacaturastra saMsthAna, upaghAta aura pratyeka ina pAMca prakRtiyoM ko milAne
tathA tiryaMcAnupUrvI ke nikAla dene para paccIsa prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai
/  isa 25 prakRtika udayasthAna meM subhaga aura dubhaMga meM se kisI eka kA,
Adeya aura anAdeya meM se kisI eka kA tathA yazaHkIti aura ayazaHkIti

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
166 Sixth Karma Granth Due to the arising of one of them, there are 2x22 = 8
bhangs. After that, when the two natures of the paragahat of the jiva who has
become sufficient by the body sufficiency and the prashastha vihayogati are
added to the 25 natural udaysthanas, there are 27 natural udayas. Here also,
there are 8 bhangs as before. When the ucchvasa nature of the jiva who has
become sufficient by the pranapan sufficiency is added to the above 27 natural
udayasthana, there are 28 natural udayasthana. Here also, there are eight bhangs
as before. Or if the udyot arises for the jiva who has become sufficient by the
body sufficiency, then also there are 28 natural udayasthana, here also there
are eight bhangs. Thus, there are sixteen bhangs of 28 natural udayasthana.
After that, when the susvara is added to the 28 natures including the ucchvasa
of the jiva who has become sufficient by the language sufficiency, there are 26
natural udayasthana. Here also, there are eight bhangs. Or when the udyot is
added to the 28 natures including the ucchvasa of the jiva who has become
sufficient by the pranapan sufficiency, there are also 26 natural udayasthana.
It also has eight bhangs. Thus, there are a total of sixteen bhangs of 21
natural udayasthana. After that, when the udyot is added to the 26 natural
udayasthana including the susvara, there are 30 natural udayasthana. It also has
eight bhangs. Thus, the total udayasthana of the panchendriya tiryanchas who do
the back body are 25, 27, 28, 26 and 30 natural and their total bhangs are
8+6+16+16+656. When these 56 bhangs are added to the 4606 bhangs of the general
panchendriya tiryancha, there are 4962 bhangs of the total udayasthana of all
the tiryanchas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 166 SaSTha karmagrantha meM se kisI eka kA udaya hone ke kAraNa 2x22 = 8 bhaGga
hote haiN| anantara zarIra paryApti se paryApta hue jIva ke parAghAta aura
prazasta vihAyogati ina do prakRtiyoM ko 25 prakRtika udayasthAna meM milA dene
para 27 prakRtika udaya hotA hai. yahA~ bhI pUrvavat ka bhaGga hote haiM  /
ukta 27 prakRtika udayasthAna meM prANApAna paryApti se paryApta hue jIva ke
ucchavAsa prakRti ko milA dene para 28 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~
bhI pahale ke samAna ATha bhaGga hote haiM  /  athavA zarIra paryApti se
paryApta hue jIva ke yadi udyota kA udaya ho to bhI 28 prakRtika udayasthAna
hotA hai, yahA~ bhI ATha bhaGga hote haiN| isa prakAra 28 prakRtika udayasthAna
ke solaha bhaGga hote haiM  /  anantara bhASA paryApta se paryApta hue jIva ke
ucchavAsa sahita 28 prakRtiyoM meM susvara ke milAne para 26 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai| yahA~ bhI ATha bha hote haiM  /  athavA prANApAna paryApta
se paryApta hue jIva ke ucchavAsa sahita 28 prakRtiyoM meM udyota ko milAne para
bhI 26 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| isake bhI ATha bhaGga hote haiM  /  isa
prakAra 21 prakRtika udayasthAna ke kula solaha bhaGga hote haiM  /  anantara
susvara sahita 26 prakRtika udayasthAna meM udyota ko milAne para 30 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai  /  isake bhI ATha bhaGga hote haiM  /  isa prakAra baikiya
zarIra ko karane vAle paMcendriya tiryaMcoM ke kula udayasthAna 25, 27, 28, 26
aura 30 prakRtika aura unake kula bhaGga 8+6+16+16+656 hote haiN| ina 56 bhaGgoM
ko pahale ke sAmAnya paMcendriya tiryaMca ke 4606 bhaGgoM meM milAne para saba
tima~coM ke kula udayasthAnoM ke 4962 bhaGga hote haiM  /

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 170: The Seventies  Having explained the different types of births
and their destructions for the one-sensed to the five-sensed beings, we now
discuss the births and destructions in relation to the human realm.  The births
of humans are categorized differently depending on whether they are ordinary
humans, those who have a **Vākriya** body, those who have an **Āhārika** body,
and those who are **Kevala-jñānī** (omniscient).  **Ordinary Humans:** Ordinary
humans have five types of births: 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30 **Prakṛtis**. These
births should be understood in the same way as the births of the one-sensed to
the five-sensed beings, with the following exceptions:  * Instead of **Tiryag-
gati** (animal realm) and **Tiryag-anupūrvi** (previous birth in the animal
realm), we should say **Manushya-gati** (human realm) and **Manushya-anupūrvi**
(previous birth in the human realm). * The 29th and 30th **Prakṛti** births
should be considered **Udyota-rahita** (without **Udyota**), as **Udyota** does
not arise in humans except for those who have **Vākriya** and **Āhārika**
bodies.  Therefore, instead of the 1152 destructions of the 26th **Prakṛti**
birth in the animal realm, humans have only 576 destructions. Similarly, instead
of the 1728 destructions of the 30th **Prakṛti** birth in the animal realm,
humans have only 1152 destructions.  In total, the five types of births for
ordinary humans have 2602 destructions: 576 + 576 + 576 + 1152 + 576 = 2602.
**Humans with a Vākriya Body:** Humans with a **Vākriya** body have five types
of births: 25, 27, 28, 29, and 30 **Prakṛtis**. Along with the twelve **Dhṛuva-
udaya** **Prakṛtis**, these births are further categorized based on:  *
**Manushya-gati** (human realm) * **Panchendriya-jāti** (five-sensed beings) *
**Vākriya-śarīra** (**Vākriya** body) * **Vākriya-angopānga** (**Vākriya**
limbs) * **Sama-chatur-astra** (four-sided) * **Sansthāna** (structure) *
**Upghāta** (injury) * **Tras** (fear) * **Bādar** (obstruction) * **Paryāpta**
(sufficient) * **Prati-ek** (each) * **Subhaga** (auspicious) * **Dubhaga**
(inauspicious) * **Ādeya** (worthy of respect) * **Anādeya** (unworthy of
respect) * **Yaśa-kīrti** (fame and glory) * **A-yaśa-kīrti** (infamy and
disgrace)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 170 saptatikA prakaraNa isa prakAra se tiryacoM ke ekendriya se lekara
paMcendriya taka ke bhedoM meM udayasthAna aura unake bhaGgoM ko batalAne ke
pazcAt aba manuSyagati kI apekSA udayasthAna va bhaGgoM kA kAthana karate haiN|
manuSyoM ke padAsthAnoM kA kathana sAmAnya, vakriyazarIra karane bAle, AhAraka
zarIra karane vAle aura kevalajJAnI kI apekSA alagaalaga kiyA jA rahA hai  /  /
sAmAnya manuSya-sAmAnya manuSyoM ke 25, 26, 28, 26 aura 30 prakRtika, ye pA~ca
udayasthAna hote haiN| ye saba udayamyAna tiyaM va paMcendriyoM ke pUrva meM
jisa prakAra kathana kara Aye haiM, usI prakAra manuSyoM ko bhI samajhanA
cAhiye, kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki manuSyoM ke niyaMcagati, tirya cAnupUrvI ke
sthAna para manuSyagati aura manuSyAnupUrvI kA udaya kahanA cAhiye aura 29 va 30
prakRtika udayasthAna udyota rahita kahanA cAhiye, kyoMki vaikriya aura AhAraka
saMyatoM ko chor3akara zeSa manuSyoM ke udyota kA udaya nahIM hotA hai| isaliya
tiyaMcoM ke jo 26 prakRtika udayasyAna meM 1152 bhaGga kahe unake sthAna para
manuSyoM ke kula 576 bhaGga hote haiN| isI prakAra tiryacoM ke jo 30 prakRtika
udayasthAna meM 1728 bhaGga kahe, unake sthAna para manuSyoM ke kula 1152 bhaGga
prApta hoNge| isa prakAra sAmAnya manuSyoM ke pUrvokta pA~ca udayasthAnoM ke
kula E+2 +576+576+ 1152= 2602 bhaGga hote haiN| paMkriya zarIra karane vAle
manuSya-vaikriya zarIra ko karane vAle manuSyoM ke 25, 27, 28, 26 aura 30
prakRtikA, ye pA~ca udayasthAna hote haiN| bAraha dhruvodaya prakRtiyoM ke sAtha
manuSyagati, paMcendriya jAti, vakriya zarIra, vakriya aMgopAMga,
samacaturastra, saMsthAna, upaghAta, trasa, bAdara, paryApta, pratyeka, subhaga
aura dubhaMga meM se koI eka, Adeya aura anAdeya meM se koI eka tathA yazaHkIti
aura ayaza kIti meM se koI

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granthya  One, when these thirteen natures are combined, there
arises the 25-natured state of existence. Here, the emergence of auspicious and
inauspicious, worthy and unworthy, and glorious and infamous occurs by choice.
Therefore, there are eight bhangas (divisions) - 24, 24, 28. For those who are
desavrata (free from worldly attachments) and restrained, the emergence of
auspicious natures occurs in their bhancriya (physical) body.  When the two
natures of paragahat (destruction) and prashasta vihayogati (liberation) are
combined with the 25-natured state of existence, which is attained through the
fulfillment of the body, there arises the 27-natured state of existence. Here
too, there are eight bhangas, just like the 25-natured state of existence.
Subsequently, when the uccahvas (exhalation) is combined with the 28-natured
state of existence, which is attained through the fulfillment of pranapan
(inhalation and exhalation), there arises the 28-natured state of existence.
Here too, there are eight bhangas. Alternatively, when the udyot (radiance) is
combined with the aforementioned 25-natured state of existence, which is
attained through the fulfillment of the body by restrained beings who have a
bhancriya body, there arises the 28-natured state of existence. Since restrained
beings do not experience the emergence of the three inauspicious natures -
inauspicious, unworthy, and infamous - there is only one bhang. Thus, there are
a total of nine bhangas in the 28-natured state of existence.  When the susvara
(good voice) is combined with the 28-natured state of existence, there arises
the 29-natured state of existence. Here too, there are eight bhangas.
Alternatively, when the udyot is combined with the 29-natured state of existence
in place of the susvara of restrained beings, there is only one bhang. Thus,
there are a total of six bhangas in the 29-natured state of existence.  When the
udyot karma (radiance karma) of restrained beings is combined with the
29-natured state of existence, which includes the susvara, there arises the
30-natured state of existence. There is only one bhang in this state.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagranya eka, ina teraha prakRtiyoM ko milAne para 25 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ subhaga aura durbhaga kA, Adeya aura anAdeya kA
tathA yaza:jIti aura ayazaHkIrti kA udaya vikalpa se hotA hai  /  ata: 24 2428
ATha bhaGga hote haiM  /  baiMkriya zarIra ko karane vAle dezavirata aura
saMyatoM ke zubha prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai| _ ukta 25 prakRtika udayasthAna
meM zarIra paryApti se paryApta hue jIva ke parAghAta aura prazasta vihAyogati,
ina do prakRtiyoM ko milAne para 27 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| yahA~ bhI 25
prakRtika upayasthAna kI taraha ATha mahote haiN| anantara prANApAna paryApti se
paryApta hue jIva ke uccha vAsa ke milAne para 28 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA
hai| yahAM bhI ATha bhaGga hote haiM  /  athavA uttara baMkriya zarIra ko karane
vAle saMyatoM ke zarIra paryApti se paryApta hone para pUrvokta 25 prakRtika
udayasthAna meM udyota ko milAne para 28 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| saMyata
jIvoM ke durbhaga, anAdeya aura ayazaHkIti, ina tIna azubha prakRtiyoM kA udaya
na hone se isakA eka hI bhaGga hotA hai  /  isa prakAra 28 prakRtika udayasthAna
ke kula nau bhaGga hote haiN| 28 prakRtika udayasthAna meM susvara ke milAne
para 26 prakRtika jdayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ bhI ATha bhaGga hote haiN|
athavA saMyatoM ke svara ke sthAna para udyota ko milAne para 26 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai| isakA eka hI bhaGga hotA hai| isa prakAra 29 prakRtika
udayasthAna ke kula 6 bhaGga hote haiN| susvara sahita 26 prakRtika udayasthAna
meM saMyatoM ke udyota nAmakarma ko milAne para 30 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA
hai  /  isakA sirpha eka bhaGga hotA hai|

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of Seven Tika  Thus, for humans who have a **vaikriya** body,
there are five **udayasthanas** with 25, 27, 28, 26, and 30 **prakritis**,
respectively. These **udayasthanas** have a total of 35 **bhangas**, calculated
as 8 + 8 + 6 + 6 + 1.  **172**  **Aharak** **samyats** have five
**udayasthanas** with 25, 27, 25, 26, and 30 **prakritis**, respectively.  The
21 **prakritis** eligible for **udaya** in the human realm were previously
mentioned. By combining these with the five **prakritis** of **aaharaka** body,
**aaharaka** limbs, **samachaturasra** **samsthana**, **upghata**, and
**pratyek**, and reducing the **manushyanupurvi**, we arrive at the
**udayastana** of 25 **prakritis**. During the **aaharaka** body, only
**prashasta** **prakritis** arise, as the **aprashasta** **prakritis** of
**duhbhang**, **dusvara**, and **ayashah** **kiriti** do not arise for
**aaharaka** **samyats**. Therefore, there is only one **bhang** here.
Subsequently, in the aforementioned **udayastana** of 25 **prakritis**, the body
is sufficient.  **1** In the **karmakanda**, the **vaikriya** body and
**vaikriya** limbs are mentioned for gods and hell beings, but not for humans
and animals. Therefore, here, the **udayasthanas** and their **bhangas** for
humans are not mentioned in relation to the **vaikriya** body. For the same
reason, the **udayasthanas** and their **bhangas** for **vayukaayika** and
**panchendriya** animals are not mentioned in relation to the **vaikriya** body.
Although the **udayaprayogya** **namakarma** **bandha** **prakritis** for one-
sense beings, etc., are not mentioned in this chapter of seven **tika**, the
commentary suggests that the **vaikriya** body and **vaikriya** limbs are
included in the **prakritis** eligible for **udaya** in the realm of gods and
hell beings. This indicates that the **vaikriya** body and **vaikriya** limbs
should not arise for animals and humans. However, the verse in the **udirana**
chapter of **karmaprakriti** supports the fact that these two **prakritis**
arise and are **udirana** for animals and humans as well, to the best of their
ability.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa isa prakAra baMkriya zarIra karane vAle manuSyoM ke 25, 27,
28, 26 aura 30 prakRtika, pA~ca upayasthAna hote haiM aura ina udayasthAnoM ke
kramazaH 8/8+6+6+1 = kula 35 bhaGga hote haiM  / " 172 AhAraka saMyata- AhAraka
saMyatoM ke 25, 27, 25, 26, aura 30 prakRtika, ye pAMca udayasthAna hote haiN|
pahale manuSyagati ke udayayogya 21 prakRtiyA~ batalAI gaI haiM, unameM AhAraka
zarIra, AhAraka aMgopAga, samacaturasra saMsthAna, upaghAta aura pratyeka, ina
pAMca prakRtiyoM ko milAne tathA manuSyAnupUrvI ko kama karane para 25 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai  /  AhAraka zarIra ke samaya prazastai prakRtiyoM kA hI
udaya hotA hai, kyoMki AhAraka saMyatoM ke aprazasta prakRtiyoM - dubhaMga
dusvara aura ayazaHkIti prakRti kA udaya nahIM hotA hai| isalie yahA~ eka hI
bhaja hotA hai  /  anantara ukta 25 prakRtika udayasthAna meM zarIra paryApta se
paryApta 1 go0 karmakAMDa meM vaipi vazarIra aura vaikriya aMgopAMga kA udaya
deva aura nArakoM ko batalAyA hai, manuSyoM aura tiryoM ko nahIM  /  ataeva
yahA~ baikriya zarIra kI apekSA se manuSyoM ke 25 Adi prakRtika udayasthAna aura
unake maMgoM kA nirdeza nahIM kiyA hai| isI kAraNa se vahA~ vAyukAyika aura
paMcendriya tiyaMca ke bhI vaikiya zarIra kI apekSA udayasthAnoM aura unake
maMgoM ko nahIM btaayaa| yadyapi isa saptatikA prakaraNa meM ekendriya Adi jIvoM
ke udayaprAyogya nAmakarma kI baMdha prakRtiyoM kA nirdeza nahIM kiyA hai
tathApi TIkA se aisA pratIta hotA hai ki vahA~ devagati aura narakagati kI
udayayogya prakRtiyoM meM hI vaikriya zarIra aura vaikriya aMgopAMga kA grahaNa
kiyA gayA hai| jisase aisA jJAta hotA hai ki tica aura manuSyoM ke vaikriya
zarIra aura vaikriya aMgopAMga kA udaya nahIM honA cAhie, tathApi karmaprakRti
ke udIraNA prakaraNa kI gAthA meM se isa bAta kA samarthana hotA hai ki
yathAsambhava tiyaMtra aura manuSyoM ke bhI ina do prakRtiyoM kA udaya va
udIraNA hotI hai  /

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
My Book 173 When the two natures of *parāghāt* (extreme suffering) and *praśasta
vihāyoga* (excellent liberation) of a living being are combined, there arises
the 27th *prakṛti* (nature) *udayasthan* (stage of development). Here also there
is only one *bhaṅga* (break). When the *śarīra* (body) *paryāpti* (perfection)
of a living being who has attained *paryāpta* (perfection) is combined with
*ucchvāsa nābha* (exhalation and navel), the 28th *prakṛti* *udayasthan* arises.
This also has only one *bhaṅga*. Or, when the *śarīra* *paryāpti* of a living
being who has attained *paryāpta* is combined with *udyota* (radiance) in the
aforementioned 27th *prakṛti* *udayasthan*, the 28th *prakṛti* *udayasthan*
arises. This also has one *bhaṅga*. Thus, there are two *bhaṅga*s of the 28th
*prakṛti* *udayasthan*. Thereafter, when the *bhāṣā* (speech) *paryāpti* of a
living being who has attained *paryāpta* is combined with *ucchvāsa*
(exhalation) along with the 28th *prakṛti* *udayasthan*, the 29th *prakṛti*
*udayasthan* arises. This has one *bhaṅga*. Or, when the *prāṇāpāna* (inhalation
and exhalation) *paryāpti* of a living being who has attained *paryāpta* is
combined with *udyota* in place of *susvara* (sweet voice), the 29th *prakṛti*
*udayasthan* arises. This also has one *bhaṅga*. Thus, there are two *bhaṅga*s
of the 29th *prakṛti* *udayasthan*. When the *bhāṣā* *paryāpti* of a living
being who has attained *paryāpta* is combined with *susvara* (sweet voice) along
with the 29th *prakṛti* *udayasthan*, the 30th *prakṛti* *udayasthan* arises.
This also has one *bhaṅga*. Thus, there are five *udayasthan*s of the *āhārak*
(food) *saṃyata* (restrained) - 25th, 27th, 28th, 29th, and 30th *prakṛti* - and
there are 1+1+2+2+1=7 *bhaṅga*s of these five *udayasthan*s respectively. 1. It
is known from the 267th verse of the *Karmakāṇḍa* (Karma section) that the
*udyota* *prakṛti* arises only for living beings up to the fifth *guṇasthāna*
(stage of virtue)... "Dase tadiyakasāya tiriyāvajjovāṇīcatiriyagadī." And it is
also known from the 286th verse that the *udyota* *prakṛti* arises only in the
*tirgach* (animal) *gati* (realm).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mamagrantha 173 hue jIva ke parAghAta aura prazasta vihAyogati, ina do
prakRtiyoM ke milA dene para 27 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahAM bhI eka
hI bhaGga hotA hai| 27 prakRtika udayasthAna meM zarIra paryApti se paryApta hue
jIva ke ucchvAsa nAbha ko milAne para 28 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /
isakA bhI eka hI bhaGga hotA hai  /  athavA zarIra paryApti se paryApta hue jIva
ke pUrvokta 27 prakRtika udagrasthAna meM udyota ko milAne para 28 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai| isakA bhI eka bhaGga hotA hai| isa prakAra 28 prakRtika
udayasthAna ke do bhaGga hue| anantara bhASA paryApti se paryApta hue jIva ke
uccha vAsa sahita 28 prakRtika udayasthAna meM susvara ke milAne para 26
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  isakA eka bhaGga hai  /  athavA prANApAna
paryApti se paryApta hue jIva ke susvara ke sthAna para udyota nAma ko milAne
para 26 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  isakA bhI eka bhaGga hai  /  isa
prakAra 26 prakRtika udayasthAna ke do bhaGga hote haiN| bhASA paryApti se
paryApta hue jIva ke svarasahita 26 prakRtika udayasthAna meM udyota ko milAne
para 30 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  isakA bhI eka bhaGga hotA hai| isa
prakAra AhAraka saMyatoM ke 25, 27, 28, 26 aura 30 prakRtika, ye pAMca
udayasthAna hote haiM aura ina pAMca udayasthAnoM ke kamazaH 1+1+2+2+1=7 bhaMga
hote haiN|' 1 go0 karmakAMDa kI gAthA 267 se jJAta hotA hai ki pAMcaveM
guNasthAna taka ke jIvoM ke hI udyota prakRti kA udaya hotA hai... "dase
tadiyakasAyA tiriyaavjjovnniictiriygdii|" tathA gAthA 286 se yaha bhI jJAta hotA
hai ki udyota prakRti kA udaya tirgacagati meM hI hotA hai

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of Seven  **Kevalajnani** - For Kevali beings, the ten
**udayasthanas** (stages of arising) are: 20, 21, 26, 27, 18, 29, 30, 31, 6, and
8 **prakritis** (natures).  The twelve **dhruvas** (poles) of **namakarma**
(karma of name) are combined with the eight **prakritis** of **manushya**
(human) **gati** (path), **panchendriya** (five senses) **jati** (birth),
**sa**, **badar**, **paryapt**, **subhag**, **adey**, and **yasha** (fame)
**kirti** (glory) in the **daya** (mercy) **prakritis** to form the
**udayasthan** of 20 **prakritis**. This has one **bhanga** (break). This
**udayasthan** occurs during the **kamayog** (karma of desire) of the
**atitharkar** (non-Tirthankara) **kevali**.  Adding the **tirthankara**
(Tirthankara) **prakriti** to the aforementioned **udayasthan** of 20
**prakritis** results in the **udayasthan** of 21 **prakritis**. This
**udayasthan** occurs during the **karmankayog** (karma of action) of the
**tirthankara** **kevali**. This also has one **bhanga**.  Adding the six
**prakritis** of **oudarik** (generous) **sharira** (body), one of the six
**sansthanas** (institutions), **oudarik** **angopang** (limbs and organs),
**vajrarishbhanaracha** (diamond bull) **sanhanan** (combination), **upghat**
(destruction), and **pratyek** (individual) to the **udayasthan** of 20
**prakritis** results in the **udayasthan** of 26 **prakritis**. This occurs
during the **oudarik mishra kayyog** (karma of mixed generosity) of the
**atitharkar** **kevali**. There are six **bhangas** corresponding to the six
**sansthanas**, but they are not counted separately as they are also possible in
the **udayasthanas** of ordinary humans.  **Teitigunatiritikhe sujjovo badare**
**Pune**  The **karmakanda** (karma ritual) mentions four **udayasthanas** of
25, 27, 20, and 26 **prakritis** for **aaharaka** (food-consuming) **sanyata**
(restrained). The **udayasthanas** of 24 and 27 **prakritis** should be
understood according to the **saptatika** (sevenfold) chapter. The remaining
**udayasthanas** of 28 and 26 **prakritis**, the **udayasthan** of 26
**prakritis** arises from the **uday** (arising) of the **uchchhvas**
(exhalation) **prakriti**, and the **udayasthan** of 26 **prakritis** arises
from the **uday** of the **suswar** (good voice) **prakriti**. In other words,
adding the **uchchhvas** **prakriti** to the **udayasthan** of 27 **prakritis**
results in the **udayasthan** of 28 **prakritis**, and adding the **suswar**
**prakriti** to this **udayasthan** of 28 **prakritis** results in the
**udayasthan** of 26 **prakritis**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa kevalajJAnI- kevalI jIvoM ke 20, 21, 26, 27, 18, 29, 30,
31, 6 aura 8 prakRtika ye dasa udayasthAna hote haiM  /  nAmakarma kI bAraha
dhruvo dayA prakRtiyoM meM manuSyagati, paMcendriya jAti, sa, bAdara, paryApta,
subhaga, Adeya, yazaH kIrti ina ATha prakRtiyoM ke milAne se 20 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai| isakA eka bhaGga hotA hai  /  yaha udayasthAna
samudghAtagata atIrthaM kevalI ke kAma kAya yoga ke samaya hotA hai  /  ukta 20
prakRtika udayasthAna meM tIrthakara prakRti ko milAne para 21 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yaha udayasthAna samudghAtagata tIrthakara kevalI ke
kArmaNakAyayoga ke samaya hotA hai| isakA bhI eka bhaGga hai| vr * 20 prakRtikA
udayasthAna meM audArika zarIra, chaha saMsthAnoM meM se koI eka saMsthAna,
audArika aMgopAMga, vajraRSabhanArAca saMhanana, upaghAta aura pratyeka ina
chaha prakRtiyoM ke milAne para 26 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| yaha
atIrthakara kevalI ke audArikamizra kAyayoga ke samaya hotA hai  /  isake chaha
saMsthAnoM kI apekSA chaha bhaGga hote haiM, kintu ve sAmAnya manuSyoM ke
udayasthAnoM meM bhI sambhava hone se unakI pRthaka se gaNanA nahIM kI hai  /
teitiguNatiritakhe sujjovo bAdare puNe | isI se karmakAMDa meM AhAraka saMyatoM
ke 25, 27, 20 aura 26 prakRtika cAra udayasthAna batalAye haiN| inameM 24 aura
27 prakRtika udayasthAna to saptatikA prakaraNa ke anusAra jAnanA caahiye| zeSa
rahe 28 aura 26 prakRtika udayasthAna, inameM se 26 prakRtika udayasthAna
ucchavAsa prakRti ke udaya se aura 26 prakRtika udayasthAna susvara prakRtika ke
udaya se hotA hai| arthAt 27 prakRtika udayasthAna meM ucchavAsa prakRti ke
milAne se 28 prakRtika udayasthAna aura isa 28 prakRtika udayasthAna meM susvara
prakRti ke milAne para 26 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Page Firmgranth 175 26. When the Tirthankara nature is added to the 26 natural
states of existence, it becomes 27 natural states of existence. This state
occurs during the time of the Tirthankara Kevali's Audarik Kayyoga. Since only
the Samchaturasra Sansthan arises in this state of existence, there is only one
Bhang. 27. When one of the four natures, namely Paradhat Ucchhvas, Prashast
Vihayogati, and Aprashast Vihayogati, and one of the two natures, namely Suswar
and Duswar, are added to the aforementioned 26 natural states of existence, it
becomes 30 natural states of existence. This state occurs during the time of the
Atirthankara Sayogi Kevali's Audarik Kayyoga. Here, there are 6 x 2 x 2 = 24
Bhangs due to the six Sansthans, Prashast and Aprashast Vihayogati, and Suswar
and Duswar. However, these are obtained in the states of existence of ordinary
humans, so they are not counted separately. 28. When the Tirthankara nature is
added to the 30 natural states of existence, it becomes 31 natural states of
existence. This occurs during the time of the Tirthankara Sayogikevali's Audarik
Kayyoga. When the Tirthankara Kevali suppresses Vakyog, their voice does not
arise, so removing one nature from the aforementioned 31 natural states of
existence results in 30 natural states of existence for the Tirthankara Kevali.
When they suppress Ucchhvas, Ucchhvas does not arise, so reducing Ucchhvas
results in 26 natural states of existence. However, the Atirthankara Kevali does
not experience the Tirthankara nature, so removing the Tirthankara nature from
the aforementioned 30 and 26 natural states of existence results in 26 natural
states of existence for the Atirthankara Kevali when they suppress Vachanyog and
28 natural states of existence when they suppress Ucchhvas. In these two states
of existence of the Atirthankara Kevali, there are six Sansthans and Prashast
and Aprashast Vihayogati, resulting in

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pRSTha pharmagrantha 175 26 prakRti udavasthAna meM tIrthakara prakRti ko
milAne para 27 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| yaha sthAna tIrthaMkara kevalI ke
audArika mizra kAyayoga ke samaya hotA hai  /  isa udayasthAna meM samacaturasra
saMsthAna kA hI udaya hone se eka hI bhaGga hotA hai| pUrvokta 26 prakRtika
udayasthAna meM parAdhAta uccha bAsa, prazasta vihAyogati aura aprazasta
vihAyogati meM se koI eka tathA susvara aura duHsvara meM se koI eka ina cAra
prakRtiyoM ke milAne se 30 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yaha sthAna
atIrthakara sayogi kevalI ke audArika kAyayoga ke samaya hotA hai  /  yahA~
chaha saMsthAna, prazasta aura aprazasta vihAyogati tathA susvara aura duHsvara
kI apekSA 6x2x2=24 bhaGga hote haiM  /  kintu ve sAmAnya manuSyoM ke
udayasthAnoM meM prApta hote haiM, ata: inakI pRthak se gaNanA nahIM kI gaI hai
/  30 prakRtika udayasthAna meM tIrthaMkara prakRtika ko milA dene para 31
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| yaha tIrthaMkara sayogikevalI ke audArika
kAyayoga ke samaya hotA hai tathA tIrthaMkara kevalI jaba vAkyoga kA nirodha
karate haiM taba unake svara kA udaya nahIM rahatA hai, jisase pUrvokta 31
prakRtika udayasthAna meM se eka prakRti ko nikAla dene para tIrthaMkara kevalI
ke 30 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  jaba ucchavAsa kA nirodha karate haiM
taba ucch vAsa kA udaya nahIM rahatA, ataH ucchavAsa ko ghaTA dene para 26
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  kintu atIrthaMkara kevalI ke tIrthaMkara
prakRtika kA udaya nahIM hotA hai ataH pUrvokta 30 aura 26 prakRtika
udayasthAnoM se tIrthakara prakRti ko kama kara dene para anIrthakara kevalI ke
vacanayoga kA virodha hone hone para 26 prakRtika aura ucchavAsa kA nirodha hone
para 28 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai | atIrthaMkara kevalI ke ina donoM
udayasthAnoM meM chaha saMsthAna aura prazasta va aprazasta vihAyogati, ina
donoM kI apekSA

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 70  There are 12,12 bhangas. However, they are not counted separately
because they are possible in the realms of ordinary humans.  In the natural
realm, there are nine types of births: human, five-sense beings, as, badar,
paryapta, subhaga, adeya, yasha-kirti, and tirthankara. These nine natural
realms are attained in the ayojika-kevali gunasthan of a tirthankara. If we
subtract the tirthankara nature from this realm, we are left with eight natural
realms. This is the realm of an atirthankara kevali in the ayojika-kevali
gunasthan.  Here, in the realms of the kevali, there is one special bhang in
each of these eight realms: 20, 21, 27, 26, 30, 31, 6, and 8. Therefore, there
are eight bhangas. Of these, two bhangas in the realms of 20 (prashika) and 21
(nik) are of the atirthankara kevali, while the remaining six bhangas are of the
tirthankara kevali.  Thus, the total number of bhangas related to the realms of
all humans is 2602 + 35 + 7 + 8 = 2652.  Now, we will discuss the realms of the
gods and their bhangas.  There are six natural realms of the gods: 21, 25, 27,
28, 26, and 30.  In the twelve types of dhruvodaya of name-karma, there is one
each from the following nine types: devagati, dev-anupurvi, five-sense beings,
as, badar, paryapta, subhaga, durbhaga, one each from adeya and anadeya, and one
each from yasha-kirti and ayasha-kirti. When these nine types are combined, we
get 21 types.   In the realm of the kevali, there is one special bhang in each
of the following eight realms: 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, and 28. These are
eight bhangas. Of these, two bhangas in the realms of 21 and 22 are of the
atirthankara kevali, while the remaining six bhangas are of the tirthankara
kevali.   (Commentary on Chapter 70, page 186)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 176 saptatikA prakaraNa 12,12 bhaGga hote haiN| kintu ve sAmAnya manuSyoM ke
udayasthAnoM meM sambhava hone se unakI alaga se ginatI nahIM kI hai| prakRtika
udayasthAna meM manuSyagati, paMcendriya jAti, asa, bAdara, paryApta, subhaga,
Adeya, yazaHkIti aura tIrthakara, ina nau prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai| yaha nau
prakRtika udayasthAna tIrthaMkara kevalI ke ayogikevatI guNasthAna meM prApta
hotA hai| isa udayasthAna meM se tIrthakara prakRti ko ghaTA dene para ATha
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yaha ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM atIrthaMkara
kevalI ke hotA hai| yahA~ kevalI ke udagrasthAnoM meM 20,21,27,26,30,31, 6 aura
8 ina ATha udayasthAnoM kA eka-eka vizeSa bhaGga hotA hai| ata: ATha bhaGga hue|
inameM se 20 prazika, aura nika, do udayasthAnoM ke do bhaGga atIrthaMkara
kevalI ke hote haiM tathA zeSa chaha bhaGga tIrthaMkara kevalI ke hote haiN|'
isa prakAra saba manuSyoM ke udarasthAna sambandhI kula bhaGga 2602+35+7+8= 2652
hote haiM  /  aba devoM ke udayasthAna aura unake bhaGgoM kA kathana karate haiM
/  devoM ke 21, 25, 27, 28, 26 aura 30 prakRtika, ce chaha udayasthAna hote
haiN| nAmakarma kI dhruvodayA bAraha prakRtiyoM meM devagati, devAnupUrvI,
paMcendriya jAti, asa, bAdara, paryApta, subhaga aura durbhaga meM se koI eka,
Adeya aura anAdeya meM se koI eka tathA yaza:kIti aura ayazaHkIrti meM se koI
eka, ina nau prakRtiyoM ke milA dene para 21 prakRtika 1 zaha
kevalyudayasthAnamadhye vizati ekaviMzati-rAptaviMzati,ekonavizat-prizad
ekatrizad-navA'STarUpaiyaSTasUdayasthAneSu pratyemekakako vizeSamaMgaH prApyate
imaSTo bhaMgAH  /  tatra vizatyaSTakayobhaMgAvatIrtha kRtaH zeSeSu SaTsu
udapasthAneSu tIrtha kRtaH SaD bhNgaaH| saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 186

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Pashta Karmagranthi** is the **Udayasthan** (place of arising). The
arising of **Durbhang**, **Anadeya**, and **Ayash:koti** (demerit) in the Devas
(gods) should be understood in relation to the **Pishacha** (ghosts) and other
Devas. Here, there are 24242 possibilities arising from the combination of one
each from **Subhag** (auspicious) and **Durbhag** (inauspicious), **Adeya**
(worthy of respect) and **Anadeya** (unworthy of respect), and **Yash:kiriti**
(fame) and **Ayash:kirti** (infamy).  In these 21 **Prakriti** (nature)
**Udayasthan**, by combining the five **Prakriti** of **Daikiya** (physical)
body, **Vaikriya** (mental) body, **Upghat** (injury), **Pratyek** (individual),
and **Samachaturasra** (square) and removing **Devgatyānupūrvi** (divine
progression), there are 25 **Prakriti** **Udayasthan** for the **Sharirastha
Deva** (body-dwelling god). Here, there are eight **Bhang** (types of arising)
as before.  Further, by combining the two **Prakriti** of **Paraghāt** (extreme
injury) and **Prashastha Vihayogati** (excellent liberation path) in the 25
**Prakriti** **Udayasthan**, there are 27 **Prakriti** **Udayasthan** for the
**Sharira Paryāpti** (body-fulfilled) Devas. Here, there are eight **Bhang** as
before. The **Aprashastha Vihayogati** (non-excellent liberation path) does not
arise in the Devas, so the **Tanniमित्तक Bhang** (arising due to that) is not
mentioned.  Further, by adding the **Uchchhvās** (exhalation) of the **Desha**
(country) to the 27 **Prakriti** **Udayasthan** of the **Prāṇāpāna Paryāpti**
(life-breath fulfilled) Devas, there are 28 **Prakriti** **Udayasthan**. Here,
there are eight **Bhang** as before. Alternatively, by adding **Udyot**
(illumination) to the 27 **Prakriti** **Udayasthan** of the **Sharira Paryāpti**
(body-fulfilled) Devas, there are 28 **Prakriti** **Udayasthan**. Here, there
are eight **Bhang**. Thus, there are a total of 16 **Bhang** in the 28
**Prakriti** **Udayasthan**.  By adding **Susvara** (good voice) to the 15
**Prakriti** **Udayasthan** of the **Bhāṣā Paryāpti** (speech-fulfilled) Jiva
(living being) along with **Uchchhvās** (exhalation), there are 26 **Prakriti**
**Udayasthan**. Here, there are eight **Bhang** as before. The **Dushthara
Prakriti** (difficult nature) does not arise in the Devas, so the **Tanniमित्तक
Bhang** (arising due to that) is not mentioned here. Alternatively, by adding
**Uchchhvās** (exhalation) to the **Prāṇāpāna Paryāpti** (life-breath fulfilled)
Jiva...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paSTha karmagranya tus udayasthAna hotA hai  /  devoM ke jo dubhaMga, anAdeya
aura ayaza:koti kA udaya kahA hai, vaha pizAca Adi devoM kI apekSA samajhanA
caahiye| yahA~ subhaga aura durbhaga meM se kisI eka, Adeya aura anAdeya meM se
eka aura yaza:kIti aura ayazaHkIrti meM se kisI eka kA udaya hone se, inakI
apekSA kula 24242 mA hote haiN| _ isa 21 prakRtika udayasthAna meM daikiya
zarIra, vaikriya aMgopAMga, upaghAta, pratyeka aura samacaturasra saMsthAna, ina
pA~ca prakRtiyoM ko milAne aura devagatyAnupUrvI ko nikAla dene para zarIrastha
deva ke 25. prakRtika upayasvAra hotA hai| yahAM meM pUrvavat Aja ma hote haiN|
anantara.25 prakRtika udayasthAna meM parAghAta aura prazasta vihAyogati, ina do
prakRtiyoM ko milAne para zarIra paryApti se paryApta hue devoM ke 27 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ bhI pUrvAnusAra ATha bhaGga hote haiN| devoM ke
aprazasta vihAyogati kA udaya nahIM hone se tanimittaka bhaGga nahIM kahe haiN|
_ anantara 27 prakRtika udayasthAna meM prANApAna paryApti se paryApta hue deza
ke ucchavAsa ko milA dene para 28 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ bhI
pUrvokta ATha bhaGga hote haiM  /  athavA zarIra paryApti se paryApta hue devoM
ke pUrvokta. 27 prakRtika udayasthAna meM udyota ko milA dene para 28 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahAM bhI ATha bhaGga hote haiN| isa prakAra 28
prakRtika udayasyAna meM kula 16 bhAga hote haiM  /  _ bhASA paryApti se
paryApta hue jIva ke ucchvAsa sahita 15 prakRtika udayasthAna meM susvara ko
milA dene para 26 prakRtika udayasyAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ bhI ATha bhaGga
pUrvavat jAnanA cAhiye  /  devoM ke duHsthara prakRti kA udaya nahIM hotA hai,
ataH tannimittaka bhaja yahAM nahIM kahai haiM  /  athavA prANApAna paryApti se
paryApta hue jIva ke uccha vAsa

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on Saptaatika  **26 Natural Udayasthanas:** When Udyot is added to
the 28 natural Udayasthanas, it becomes 26 natural Udayasthanas. The emergence
of this name occurs during the time of Uttarvikriya. Here too, there are eight
Bhangas as before. Thus, there are a total of 16 Bhangas in 26 natural
Udayasthanas.  **30 Natural Udayasthanas:** When Udyot is added to the 26
natural Udayasthanas, along with the sufficient language and melodious voices of
the Devas, it becomes 30 natural Udayasthanas. Here too, there are eight
Bhangas.  **Six Udayasthanas of Devas:** Thus, there are six Udayasthanas of
Devas: 21, 25, 27, 28, 26, and 30. They have 8+6+6+16+16+8 = 64 Bhangas
respectively.  **Udayasthanas of Narakas:** Now, we will discuss the
Udayasthanas of Narakas and their Bhangas.  **Five Udayasthanas of Narakas:**
There are five Udayasthanas of Narakas: 21, 25, 27, 28, and 26. Here, when the
nine natural qualities of Narakagati, Narakanupurvi, Panchendriya jati, Tras,
Badar, Paryapt, Dubhang, Anadeya, and Ayash Kirti are added to the 12 natural
qualities of Dhruvodaya, it becomes 21 natural Udayasthanas. All the unrefined
natural qualities of Narakas are present here, therefore there is only one
Bhang.  **25 Natural Udayasthanas:** After removing Narakanupurvi and adding the
five natural qualities of Vaikriya Sharira, Vaikriya Angopaang, Hundasanasthan,
Upghāt, and Pratyek, it becomes 25 natural Udayasthanas for the Narakas residing
in the body. Here too, there is only one Bhang.  **27 Natural Udayasthanas:**
When the two natural qualities of Parāghāt and Aprāśast Vihāyogati are added to
the 25 natural Udayasthanas of Narakas who have attained sufficient body, it
becomes 27 natural Udayasthanas. This also has only one Bhang.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ve saptatikA prakaraNa sahita 28 prakRtika udayasthAna meM udyota nAma ko milA
dene para 26 prakRtika upavana hotA hai. deza ke usa nAma kA udaya uttaravikriyA
karane ke samaya hotA hai| yahA~ bhI pUrvavat ATha bhaGga hote haiM  /  isa
prakAra 26 prakRtika udayasthAna ke kula bhaGga 16 haiM  /  bhASA paryApti se
paryApta hue devoM ke susvara sahita 26 prakRtika udayasthAna meM udyota ko milA
dene para 30 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| yahA~ bhI ATha bhaGga hote haiM  /
isa prakAra devoM ke 21, 25, 27, 28, 26 aura 30 prakRtika, ye chaha udayasthAna
hote haiM tathA unameM kramazaH 8+6+6+16+16+ 8= 64 bhaGga hote haiM  /  aba
nArakoM ke udayasthAnoM aura unake bhaGgoM kA kathana karate haiM  /  nArakoM ke
21, 25, 27, 28 aura 26 prakRtika, ye pA~ca udayasthAna hote haiM  /  yahA~
dhruvodayA bAraha prakRtiyoM ke sAtha narakagati, 'narakAnupUrvI, paMcendriya
jAti, trasa, bAdara, paryApta, dubhaMga, anAdeya aura ayazaH kIrti ina nau
prakRtiyoM ko milA dene para 21 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  nArakoM ke
saba aprazasta prakRtiyoM kA udaya hai, ataH yahA~ eka bhaGga hotA hai  /  *
anantara zarIrastha nAraka ke vaikriya zarIra, vaikriya aMgopAMga,
huMDasaMsthAna, upaghAta aura pratyeka ina pA~ca prakRtiyoM ko milAne aura
narakAnupUrvI ke nikAla dene para 25 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~
bhI eka bhaMga hotA hai| zarIra paryApti se paryApta hue nAraka ke 25 prakRtika
udayasthAna meM parAghAta aura aprazasta vihAyogati ina do prakRtiyoM ko milA
dene para 27 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| isakA bhI eka bhaGga hotA hai|

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  After the attainment of the sufficient number of breaths
(pranapana paryapti) in the 27 natural states of hell (narak), the addition of
exhalation (ucchavas) results in the 28th natural state. Here too, there is only
one break (bhang).  After the attainment of the sufficient number of breaths
(pranapana paryapti) in the 28 natural states of the living being (jiv), the
addition of a bad voice (duswar) results in the 29th natural state. This also
has one break.  In this way, there are five natural states for the hell beings
(narak): 21, 25, 27, 28, and 29. And with one break for each of these five,
there are a total of five breaks.  So far, the total number of breaks for the
states of existence (udayasthan) from the one-sense (ekendriya) of name karma to
the hell beings (narak) is 42 + 66 + 4962 ÷ 2652 + 64 + 5 = 7761.  After
describing the states of existence (udayasthan) and breaks (bhang) of name
karma, we now consider the breaks of each state of existence in two verses.
**Verse 27:**  * **Ega:** One * **Biyalekkaras:** Forty-one * **Tetisa:** Thirty
* **Chhatyagi:** Six hundred * **Tetisa:** Thirty-three *
**Barasaptarasasayahigani:** Twelve hundred and seventeen hundred more *
**Bivaseehi:** Two hundred and eighty * **Do:** And * **Panchasi:** Fifty
**Verse 28:**  * **Aunatti:** Nineteen * **Sevakar:** Eleven * **Sasyahiga:**
One thousand and one hundred more * **Sataraspanchasatthihi:** Seventeen and
sixty-five * **Iveksek:** One-one * **Gosavatesu:** From the twenty natural
states of existence to the eight natural states * **Vayavihi:** Breaks of
existence

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 f ! : SaSTha karmagrantha Re anantara prANApAna paryApti se paryApta hue nAraka
ke 27 prakRtika udayasthAna meM ucch vAsa ko milA dene para 28 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ bhI eka hI bhaGga hotA hai  /  bhASA paryApti se
paryApta hue jIva ke 28 prakRtika udayasthAna meM du:svara ko milA dene para 21
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  isakA bhI eka bhaMga hai  /  isa prakAra
nArakoM ke 21, 25, 27, 28 aura 26 prakRtika, ye pAMca udayasthAna hote haiM aura
ina pAMcoM kA eka-eka bhaMga hone se kula pA~ca bhaMga hote haiN| aba taka
nAmakarma ke ekendriya se lekara nArakoM taka ke jo udayasthAna batAye gaye haiM
unake kula bhaMga 42+66+4962/2652+ 64+5=7761 hote haiM | nAmakarma ke
udayasthAnoM va bhaMgoM kA nirdeza karane ke anantara aba do gAthAoM meM
pratyeka udayasthAna ke bhaMgoM kA vicAra karate haiM  /  ega biyAlekkArasa
tettIsA chassayANi tetIsA  /  vArasasattarasasayANahigANi bipaMcasIIhi  // 27 //
aNasI sekkAra sasyAhigA satarasapaMcasaTThIhi  /  secret ca sAvadayaMtesu
udayavihI  //  28  //  P zabdArtha - ega eka, biyAlekkArasa--dayAlIsa gyAraha,
tetIsA-tIsa chatyAgi chaha sau tettIsA - tetIsa, bArasasaptara sasayAhigANi -
bAraha sau aura satraha sau adhika, bivasIIhido aura pacAsI auNattI sevakAra
sasayA hiMgA - unatIsa sau aura gyAraha sau adhika starasapaMcasaTThIhi satraha
aura paiMsaTha ivakeSakaeka-eka, gosAvatesu - bIsa prakRti ke udayasthAna se
ATha prakRti ke sthAna taka, vayavihI- udaya ke maMga P 1

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on Sevenfold Divisions  **Summary:** From the origination of the 20th
nature to the origination of the 8th nature, there are 1, 42, 11, 33, 600, 33,
1202, 1785, 2617, 1165, 1, and 1 destructions respectively.   **Specific
Explanation:** Previously, 12 originations of nature were explained, namely the
20th, 21st, 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th, 28th, 29th, 30th, 31st, 6th, and 8th
natures, along with the number of originations and destructions in each state of
existence. Now, we will explain the number of destructions for each of these
originations.  The 20th nature has one destruction, which occurs for the Arhat
who is free from all karmas. The 21st nature has 42 destructions. These can be
understood as follows: 5 for the one-sensed beings, 6 for the two-sensed beings,
8 for the five-sensed beings, 8 for humans, 1 for Tirthankaras, 6 for gods, and
1 for hell beings. The total of these is 5 + 6 + 8 + 8 + 1 + 6 + 1 = 42.  The
24th nature occurs only for the one-sensed beings, not for others.  **Note:**
The *Karmakanda* verses 603-605 mention the destructions of these 20 natures as
1, 60, 27, 16, 620, 12, 1175, 1760, 2621, 1161, 1, and 1 respectively. The total
of these is 7758.  **Verse:** "The destructions of the twenty natures are as
follows: one, sixty, twenty-seven, sixteen, six hundred and twenty, twelve,
eleven hundred and seventy-five, seventeen hundred and sixty, twenty-six hundred
and twenty-one, eleven hundred and sixty-one, one, and one."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptavikA prakaraNa gApArtha - bIsa prakRti ke udayasthAna se lekara mATha
prakRti ke udayasthAna paryanta anukrama se 1, 42, 11,33,600, 33, 1202, 1785,
2617, 1165, 1, aura 1 bhaMga hote haiM  /  ' vizeSArtha pahale nAmakarma ke 20,
21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 26, 30, 31, 6 aura 8 prakRtika, isa prakAra 12
udayasthAna batalAye gaye haiM tathA inameM se kisa gati meM kitane udayasthAna
aura unake kitane bhaMga hote haiM, yaha bhI batalAyA jA cukA hai| aba yahA~
yaha atalAte haiM ki una meM se kisa udayasthAna ke kitane bhaMga hote haiM  /
// - ate prakRtika upasthAna kA eka bhaMga hai  /  vaha anIrthakara kevalI ke
hotA hai  /  21 prakRtika udayasthAna ke 42 bhaMga haiN| ve isa prakAra
samajhanA cAhiye - ekendriyoM kI apekSA 5, vikalendriyoM kI apekSA 6, siyaMca
paMcendriyoM kI apekSA hai, manuSyoM kI apekSA, tIrthaMkara kI apekSA 1 devoM kI
apekSA 8 aura nArakoM ko apekSA 1  /  ina saba kA jor3a 5+e+8+8+1+6+1-42 hotA
hai| 24 prakRtika udayasthAna ekendriyoM ko hotA hai, anya ko nahIM 1 yo0
karmakAMDa gAthA 603 - 605 taka meM ina 20 prakRtika Adi udayasthAnoM ke bhaMga
kramaza: 1, 60, 27 16, 620, 12, 1175, 1760, 2621, 1161, 1, 1 batalAye haiM  /
jinakA kula jor3a 7758 hotA hai "bIsAdInaM bhaMgA inivAlapade saMbhavA kamaso I
ekkaM saDDI caiva ya sattAvIsaM ca uguvIsaM  //  vIsuttaraccasayA bArasa paNa
tarIhi saMjuttA  /  ekkArasasayasaMkhA uttarasasyAhiyA saTTI  //
kapattIsAhiyaekkAvIsA tadovi ekaTThI ekkArasasayasahiyA ekkka visarisamA bhaMgA

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Book of Karma (Pashta Karmagrantha) ### Chapter 151  **24 Natural Stages
of Existence:**  There are 11 **bhanga** (types of karma) for each **ekendriya**
(one-sensed being) in the 24 natural stages of existence. Therefore, there are
11 **bhanga** in the 24 natural stages of existence.  **25 Natural Stages of
Existence:**  There are 7 **bhanga** for each **ekendriya** (one-sensed being),
8 **bhanga** for each **vaikriya** (non-natural) **tiryanch** (animal) with five
senses, 8 **bhanga** for each **vaikriya** (non-natural) human, 1 **bhanga** for
each **aaharaka** (those who control their diet), 8 **bhanga** for each **deva**
(god), and 1 **bhanga** for each **naraka** (hell being). The total sum of these
is 7 + 1 + 1 = 33. Therefore, there are 33 **bhanga** in the 25 natural stages
of existence.  **26 Natural Stages of Existence:**  There are 600 **bhanga** in
the 26 natural stages of existence. There are 13 **bhanga** for each
**ekendriya** (one-sensed being), 6 **bhanga** for each **vikalaindriya**
(impaired-sensed being), 288 **bhanga** for each **prakrut** (natural)
**tiryanch** (animal) with five senses, and 286 **bhanga** for each **prakrut**
(natural) human. The total sum of these is 13 + 6 + 286 + 289 = 600. These 600
**bhanga** belong to the 26 natural stages of existence.  **27 Natural Stages of
Existence:**  There are 6 **bhanga** for each **ekendriya** (one-sensed being),
8 **bhanga** for each **vaikriya** (non-natural) **tiryanch** (animal) with five
senses, 8 **bhanga** for each **vaikriya** (non-natural) human, 1 **bhanga** for
each **aaharaka** (those who control their diet), 1 **bhanga** for each
**kevali** (omniscient being), 8 **bhanga** for each **deva** (god), and 1
**bhanga** for each **naraka** (hell being). The total sum of these is 33.
Therefore, there are 33 **bhanga** in the 27 natural stages of existence.  **28
Natural Stages of Existence:**  There are 6 **bhanga** for each
**vikalaindriya** (impaired-sensed being), 576 **bhanga** for each **prakrut**
(natural) **tiryanch** (animal) with five senses, 16 **bhanga** for each
**vaikriya** (non-natural) **tiryanch** (animal) with five senses, 576
**bhanga** for each **prakrut** (natural) human, 6 **bhanga** for each
**vaikriya** (non-natural) human, 2 **bhanga** for each **aaharaka** (those who
control their diet), 16 **bhanga** for each **deva** (god), and 1 **bhanga** for
each **naraka** (hell being). The total sum of these is 6 + 576 + 16 + 576 + 6 +
2 + 16 + 1 = 1202. Therefore, there are 1202 **bhanga** in the 28 natural stages
of existence.  **29 Natural Stages of Existence:**  There are 1785 **bhanga** in
the 29 natural stages of existence. There are...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paSTha karmagrantha 151 aura 24 prakRtika udayasthAna meM ekendriya kI apekSA
11 bhaMga prApta hote haiM  /  ataH 24 prakRtika udayasthAna meM 11 bhaMga hote
haiN| 25 prakRtika udayasthAna ke ekendriyoM kI apekSA 7, baiMkriya zarIra
karane vAle tiryaMca paMcendriyoM kI apekSA 8, vaikriya zarIra karane vAle
manuSyoM kI apekSA 8, AhArako saMyatoM kI apekSA 1, devoM kI apekSA 8 aura
nArakoM kI apekSA 1 bhaMga batalA Aye haiN| ina sabakA jor3a 7+++1++1=33 hotA
hai| ata: 25 prakRtika udayasthAna ke 33 bhaMga hote haiN| 26 prakRtika
udayasthAna ke bhaMga 600 haiN| inameM ekendriya kI apekSA 13, vikalendriyoM kI
apekSA ha, prAkRta tiryaMca paMcendriyoM kI apekSA 288 aura prAkRta manuSyoM kI
apekSA 286 bhaGga hote haiM  /  ina sabakA jor3a 13+6+286+289 =600 hotA hai  /
ye 60 bhaGga 26 prakRtika udayasthAna ke haiN| 27 prakRtika udayasthAna ke
ekendriyoM kI apekSA 6, vaikriya tiryaca paMcendriyoM kI apekSA 8, vaikriya
manuSyoM kI apekSA 8, AhAraka saMyatoM kI apekSA 1, kevaliyoM kI apekSA 1, devoM
kI apekSA 8 aura nArakoM kI apekSA 1 bhaGga pahale batalA Aye haiM  /  inakA
kula jor3a 33 hotA hai  /  ataH 27 prakRtika udayasthAna ke 33 bhaGga hote haiN|
28 prakRtika udayasthAna ke vikalendriyoM kI apekSA 6, prAkRta tiyaM ca
paMcendriyoM kI apekSA 576, vaikriya tiryaca paMcendriyoM kI apekSA. 16, prAkRta
manuSyoM kI apekSA 576, vaikriya manuSyoM kI apekSA hai, AhArakoM kI apekSA 2,
devoM kI apekSA 16 aura nArakoM kI apekSA 1 bhaGga batalA Aye haiN| inakA kula
jor3a 6+576+16+576+ 6+2+16+1-1202 hotA hai  /  ata: 28 prakRtika udayasthAna ke
1202 bhaGga hote haiN| 26 prakRtika udayasthAna ke bhaGga 1785 haiN| isameM
vikalendriyoM

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on Sapta-tika  **In comparison to 12, there are 1152 **Vaikriya**
Tiryancha Panchendriya, 16 **Vaikriya** Manushya, 9 Aharak Samyata, 1
Tirthankara, 16 Deva, and ? Naraka. Their total is 12 + 1152 + 16 + 576 + 9 + 1
+ 1 + 16 + 1 = 1785. Therefore, there are 1785 **Bhang** in 26 **Prakrutik
Udayasthan**.  **In comparison to 30, there are 18 Vikalendriya, 1728 Tiryancha
Panchendriya, 8 **Vaikriya** Tiryancha Panchendriya, 1152 Manushya, 1
**Vaikriya** Manushya, 1 Aharak Samyata, 1 Kali, and 8 Deva. Their total is 18 +
1728 + 8 + 1152 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 8 = 2917. Therefore, there are 2917 **Bhang** in
30 **Prakrutik Udayasthan**.  **In comparison to 31, there are 12 Vikalendriya,
1152 Tiryancha Panchendriya, and 1 Tirthankara. Their total is 1165. Therefore,
there are 1165 **Bhang** in 31 **Prakrutik Udayasthan**.  **In comparison to 9,
there is 1 **Bhang** for Tirthankara. In comparison to 8, there is 1 **Bhang**
for Atirthankara. These have been explained previously. Therefore, there is 1
**Bhang** in 9 **Prakrutik Udayasthan** and 1 **Bhang** in 8 **Prakrutik
Udayasthan**.  **Therefore, there are 1 + 42 + 11 + 33 + 600 + 33 + 1202 + 1785
+ 2917 + 1165 + 1 + 1 = 7791 **Bhang** in 20 **Prakrutik Udayasthan** and the
following 12 **Udayasthan**.  **The details regarding the **Bhang** and other
characteristics of **Namakarma** **Udayasthan** should be understood as
follows.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 EX saptatikA prakaraNa kI apekSA 12, tithaMca paMcendriyoM kI apekSA 1152
vaikriya tiryaMca paMcendriyoM kI apekSA 16, manuSyoM kI apekSA 576, vaikiya
manuSyoM kI apekSA hai, AhAraka saMyatoM kI apekSA 2, tIrthaMkara kI apekSA 2,
devoM kI apekSA 16 aura nArakoM kI apekSA ? bhaGga hai  /  inakA jor3a
12+1152+16+576+9+1+1+16+1-1785 hotA hai  /  ataH 26 prakRtika udayasthAna ke
kula bhaGga 1785 prApta hote haiN| 30 prakRtika udayasthAna meM vikalendriyoM kI
apekSA 18 tiryaMca paMcendriyoM kI apekSA 1728, baikiya tiryaca paMcendriyoM kI
apekSA 8, manuSyoM kI apekSA 1152, vaikriya manuSyoM kI apekSA 1, AhAraka
saMyatoM kI apekSA 1, kaliyoM kI apekSA 1 aura devoM kI apekSA bhaGga pUrva meM
batalA Aye haiM  /  inakA jor3a 18+1728+6+1152+ 1+1+1+8=2617 hotA hai  /  ataH
30 prakRtika udayasthAna ke 2917 bhaGga hote haiM  /  31 prakRtika udayasthAna
meM vikalendriyoM kI apekSA 12, tiyaMca paMcendriyoM kI apekSA 1152, tIrthaMkara
kI apekSA 1 bhaGga pUrva meM batalAyA hai, aura inakA kula jor3a 1165 hai, ataH
31 prakRtika udayasthAna ke 1165 bhaGga kahe haiM  /  9. prakRtika udayasthAna
kA tIrthaMkara kI apekSA 1 bhaMga hotA hai aura 8 prakRtika udayasthAna kA
atIrthaMkara kI apekSA 1 bhaMga hotA hai| ina donoM ko pUrva meM batalAyA jA
cukA hai| ataH 9 prakRtika aura 8 prakRtika udayasthAna kA 1, 1 bhaMga hotA hai
/  isa prakAra 20 prakRtika Adi bAraha udayasthAnoM ke 1+42 + 11
+33+600+33+1202+1785+2617 + 1165+1+1= 7791 bhaMga hote haiN| nAmakarma ke
udayasthAnoM ke bhaMga va anya vizeSatAoM sambandhI vivaraNa isa prakAra
samajhanA cAhiye

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Udayasthan | 20 | 21 25 26. 8. 26. | Sankhya Kamagrantha 33 600. 202 TY 17 1
1761 D 3 .46.6 . . . . 9 WWW. .. . Sarva Bhang Ekendriya Vikalendriya Pan. Tish
Manushya Vakrim. Tiryaach Vaikriya Manushya Dev Tirthankar Kevali Bankriya Yati
Baharak Narak . 5 . urururtoo - and . . . Tax Yog 776." 1-Im Sabdudayavigappa
Ekagachya Sama U Sagasayari. Etto Santavaana Te Waras Hoti Namass. -Sapttatika
Namak Shastha Karmagrantha Prakrit Tippan

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 udayasthAna | 20 | 21 25 26  /  8. 26  /  | saMkhyA kamagrantha 33 600  /  202
TY 17 1 1761 D 3 .46.6 . . . . 9 WWW . .. . sarva bhaMga ekendriya vikalendriya
paM. tiSa manuSya vakrima. tiryaca vaikriya manuSya deva tIrthakara kevalI
baiMkriya yati bAhAraka nAraka . 5 . urururtoo - and . . . Tax yoga 776." 1-ima
sabdudayavigappA ekAgacyA samA u sagasayarI  /  etto saMtavANA te vArasa hoti
nAmassa  /  /  -saptatikA nAmaka SaSTha karmagrantha prAkRta TippaNa

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seven Tika  After stating the binding and arising places
of name-karma, we now state the places of existence.  **Verse 26:**  *
**Tibunui:** 103 * **Ugunui:** 102 * **Atthachchalasi:** 86 * **Asoai:** 84 *
**Ugusii:** 83 * **Ayappanasare:** 78 * **Nav:** 76 * **A:** 75 * **Y:** 6 *
**Namasantaani:** The places of existence of name-karma.  **Explanation:**  *
**Tibunui:** 103 * **Ugunui:** 102 * **Atthachchalasi:** 86 * **Asoai:** 84 *
**Ugusii:** 83 * **Ayappanasare:** 78 * **Nav:** 76 * **A:** 75 * **Y:** 6 *
**Namasantaani:** The places of existence of name-karma.  **Commentary:**  There
are 63, 62, 66, 86, 80, 76, 78, 76, 75, 6, and 8 natural places of existence of
name-karma. This verse mentions the number of natures contained within each
place of existence, indicating the number of natures each place of existence
possesses. This reveals that there are twelve places of existence of name-karma,
and they are of 63, 62, etc. natures. However, it does not clarify the names of
the natures included in each place of existence. Therefore, we will now explain
the number of natures in each place of existence, along with the names of the
natures included.  The first place of existence is said to have 63 natures.
Since all the subsequent natures of name-karma are 63, the place of existence
with 93 natures includes the 103, 102, 16, 6523, 60, 86, 84, 83, 26, and 6
natures of name-karma in the *Kammprakriti* and *Sangha Saptaatika*. These
twelve places of existence are mentioned here. There is a difference between
these places of existence and the places of existence with numbers like 103,
etc. These places are mentioned as 15 types of bondage. The place of existence
with 82 natures is mentioned in two ways. Detailed information should be
obtained from there.  The names of the 13 subsequent natures of name-karma are
given in the first *Karmagrantha*. They are not mentioned here due to
repetition.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa nAmakarma ke baMdhasthAnoM aura udayasthAnoM kA kathana
karane ke pazcAt aba sattAsthAnoM kA kathana karate haiN| -A tibunauI ugunauI
aTThacchalasI asoi ugusII  /  ayappaNasAre nava a ya nAmasaMtANi  //  26  //
zabdArtha zikuna uI terAnave, mAnave, ugumarAI - navAsI aTulasI-aThAsI chiyAsI,
masIha assI, usII- unyAsI, aTTayamrapaNasarI aThahattara kriyatara, pacahattara
tI bhaTTha ATha, ya- gaura, nAmasaMtApi nAmakarma ke sattAsthAna | -- 154 T -
nAthAnaM- nAmakarma ke 63,62,66,86,80,76, 78, 76, 75, 6 aura 8 prakRtika
sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  " vizeSArtha - isa gAthA meM nAmakarma ke sattAsthAnoM
ko batalAte hue unameM garbhita prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA batalAI hai ki pratyeka
sattAsthAna kitanI - kitanI prakRti kA hai| isase yaha to jJAta ho jAtA hai ki
nAmakarma ke sattAsthAna bAraha haiM aura ve 63, 62 Adi prakRtika haiM, lekina
yaha spaSTa nahIM hotA hai ki pratyeka sattAsthAna meM grahaNa kI gaI prakRtiyoM
ke nAma kyA haiM, ataH yahA~ pratyeka saptAsthAna meM grahaNa kI gaI prakRtiyoM
ke nAmollekhapUrvaka unakI sakhyA ko spaSTa karate haiM  /  pahalA sattAsthAna
63 prakRtiyoM kA batalAyA hai| kyoMki nAmakarma kI saba uttara prakRtiyAM 63
haiM, ataH 93 prakRtika sattAsthAna meM * kamaMprakRti aura saMgha saptatikA meM
nAmakarma ke 103, 102, 16, 6523,60,86,84,83,26aura prakRtika, ye 12 salAsthAna
batalAye haiM | yahA~ batAye gaye aura inaM 103 Adi saMkhyA ke sattAsthAnoM meM
itanA aMtara hai ki ye sthAna baMdhana ke 15 bheva karake batalAye ye haiM  /
82 prakRtika jo sattAsthAna batalAyA hai vaha do prakAra se batalAyA haiM  /
vizeSa jAnakArI vahA~ se kara lenA cAhiye  /  I 2 nAmakarma kI 13 uttara
prakRtiyoM ke nAma prathama karmagrantha meM diye haiM  /  akSaH punarAvRtti ke
kAraNa yahA~ unakA ullekha nahIM kiyA hai  /

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
+ Sixth Karma Granth 185 All the natures have been accepted. Out of these 63
natures, when the Tirthankara nature is reduced, there are 62 natures. Out of
the 63 natures, when the four natures of Aharak body, Aharak angopang, Aharak
sanghat and Aharak bandhan are reduced, there are 59 natures. Out of these 59
natures, when the Tirthankara nature is reduced, there are 58 natures. Out of
the above 88 natures, when the Narakgati and Narakanupurvi or the Devgati and
Devanupurvi are destroyed, there are 86 natures. Or, when the six natures of
Narakgati, Narakanupurvi, Vaikriya body, Vaikriya angopang, Vaikriya sanghat and
Vaikriya bandhan are bound to a being with 80 natures who is eligible for
Narakgati, there are 86 natures. Out of these 86 natures, when the six natures
of Narakgati, Narakanupurvi and Vaikriya Chatushk are destroyed, there are 80
natures. Or, when the six natures of Devgati, Devanupurvi and Vaikriya Chatushk
are destroyed, there are 80 natures. Out of these, when the Manushygati and
Manushyanupurvi are destroyed, there are 78 natures. The above seven natures are
said with respect to Akshapaks. Now, the natures with respect to Kshapaks are
being told. Now, the Kshapak beings destroy the thirteen natures of Narakgati,
Narakanupurvi, Tiryanch gati, Tich anupurvi, Jati Chatushk (Ekendriya jati,
Dwiindriya jati, Triindriya jati, Chaturindriya jati), Sthavar, Atap, Udyot,
Sukshma and Sadharan out of the 63 natures. Then, they have 80 natures.  1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 + SaSTha karma grantha 185 saba prakRtiyoM kI sattA svIkAra kI gaI hai| ina 63
prakRtiyoM meM se tIrthaMkara prakRti ko kama kara dene para 62 prakRtika
sattAsthAna hotA hai  /  63 prakRtika sattAsthAna meM se AhAraka zarIra AhAraka
aMgopAMga, AhAraka saMghAta aura AhAraka baMdhana, ina cAra prakRtiyoM ko kama
kara dene para prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai  /  isa 86 prakRtika sattAsthAna
maiM se tIrthaMkara prakRti ko kama kara dene para 8 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA
hai  /  ukta 88 prakRtika sattAsthAna meM se narakagati aura narakAnupUrvI kI
athavA devagati aura devAnupUrvI kI uvalanA ho jAne para 86 prakRtika
sattAsthAna hotA hai athavA narakagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle
80 prakRtika sattAsthAna vAle jIva ke narakagati, narakAnupUrvI, vaikiya zarIra,
vaikiya aMgopAMga, vaikiya saMghAta aura vaikriya baMdhana ina chaha prakRtiyoM
kA baMdha hone para 86 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai  /  isa 86 prakRtika
sattAsthAna meM se narakagati, narakAnupUrvI aura vaikriya catuSka, ina chaha
prakRtiyoM kI udbalanA ho jAne para 80 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai athavA
devagati, devAnupUrvI aura vaikriya catuSka ina chaha prakRtiyoM kI uvalanA ho
jAne para 80 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai| isameM se manuSyagati aura
manuSyAnupUrvI kI uddalanA hone para 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai  /  ukta
sAta sattAsthAna akSapakoM kI apekSA kahe haiN| aba kSapakoM kI apekSA
sattAsthAnoM ko batalAte haiM  /  aba kSapaka jIva 63 prakRtiyoM meM se
narakagati, narakAnupUrvI, tiryaMcagati, tacAnupUrvI, jAticatuSka (ekendriya
jAti, dvIndriya jAti, zrIndriya jAti, caturindriya jAti), sthAvara, Atapa,
udyota, sUkSma aura sAdhAraNa ina teraha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya kara dete haiM taba
unake 80 prakU 1

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1856 Sapttatika Prakarana There are three Sattastana. When thirteen of these
twenty-two Prakruti are destroyed, then there is a 76 Prakruti Sattastana. And
when thirteen of these eighty-six Prakruti are destroyed, then there is a 76
Prakruti Sattastana. And when thirteen of these eighty-five Prakruti are
destroyed, then there is a 75 Prakruti Sattastana. Now there are two more
Sattastana. These two are in the final time of the Ayogikevali Gunasthan. In the
nine Prakruti Sattastana, there are nine Prakruti: Manushya-Gati, Panchendriya-
Jati, Tras, Badar, Paryapt, Subhag, Adesh, Yash-Kirti, and Tirthankara. When the
Tirthankara Prakruti is reduced, then there is a Prakruti Sattastana. Go.
Karmakanda and Namakarm Sattastana Previously, twelve Sattastana were mentioned
according to the Gatha. But in Go. Karmakanda, 93, 62, 61, 60, 85, 84, 82, 80,
76, 78, 77, 10, and 1 Prakruti, a total of thirteen Sattastana are mentioned.
The explanation is as follows: Here, in the 63 Prakruti Sattastana, the
existence of all the Prakruti of Namakarm is considered. When the Tirthankara
Prakruti is reduced, then there is a 62 Prakruti Sattastana. When the two
Prakruti of Aharak-Sharira and Aharak-Angopanga are reduced, then there is a 61
Prakruti Sattastana. When the Tirthankara, Aharak-Sharira, and Aharak-Angopanga
are reduced, then there is a 10 Prakruti Sattastana. From this, when the
Devadvik's Uvalna Prakruti is reduced from the Sattastana, then there is a
Prakruti Sattastana. 1 This is the opinion of Go. Karmakanda from the
perspective of comparative study.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1856 saptattikA prakaraNa tika sattAsthAna hotA hai| jaba 22 prakRtiyoM meM se
ina teraha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya karate haiM, taba 76 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA
hai aura jaba 86 prakRtiyoM meM se ina teraha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya karate haiM
taba 76 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai tathA jaba 85 prakRtiyoM meM se ina
teraha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya kara dete haiM, taba 75 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA
hai  /  aba rahe aura 8 prakRtika sattAsthAna  /  so ye donoM ayogikevalI
guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM hote haiN| nau prakRtika sattAsthAna meM
manuSyagati, paMcendriya jAti, trasa, bAdara, paryApta, subhaga, Adeza,
yaza:kIrti aura tIrthaMkara, ye nau prakRtiyAM hai aura inameM se tIrthaMkara
prakRtika ko kama kara dene para prakRtika, satAsthAna hotA hai  /  go0
karmakAMDa aura nAmakarma ke sattAsthAna pUrva meM gAthA ke anusAra bAraha
sattAsthAnoM kA kathana kiyA gayA  /  lekina go0 karmakAMDa meM
93,62,61,608584828076 78, 77, 10 aura 1 prakRtika kula teraha sattAsthAna
batalAyeM haiMtithuNiudI NaudI arabo ahiyasIvi sIvI ya  /  UNAsIbaTThasari
sattasari yasa va jaba sattA  //  606  //  vivecana isa prakAra hai yahA~ 63
prakRtika sattAsthAna meM nAmakarma kI saba prakRtiyoM kI sattA mAnI hai| unameM
se tIrthaMkara prakRti ko ghaTAne para 62 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai  /
AhAraka zarIra aura AhAraka aMgopAMga, ina do prakRtiyoM ko kama kara dene para
61 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai | tIrthakara AhAraka zarIra aura AhAraka
aMgopAMga ko kama kara dene para 10 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai| isameM se
devadvika kI uvalanA prakRtika sattAsthAna meM se naraka karane para prakRtika
aura isa 1 tulanAtmaka adhyayana kI dRSTi se go0 karmakAMDa kA abhimata yahAM
diyA hai  /

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth ### 187  When the fourfold karma is agitated, there are 84
natural states of existence. When the human twofold karma is agitated, there are
82 natural states of existence.  When 13 of the 63 natural states of existence,
starting with the hell twofold karma, are destroyed, there are 80 natural states
of existence. When 13 of the 12 natural states of existence, starting with the
uttama, are destroyed, there are 76 natural states of existence. When these same
13 natural states are reduced from the 61 natural states of existence, there are
78 natural states of existence. When these same 13 natural states are reduced
from the 60 natural states of existence, there are 77 natural states of
existence. The Tirthankara Aayogikevali has 10 natural states of existence, and
the ordinary Kevali has 10 natural states of existence.  Thus, after explaining
the states of existence of the name karma, the next verse instructs us to
explain the mutual connection of the bondage, arising, and states of existence
of the name karma.  **Verse 30**  **Atu ya baras baras bandhokya
santpadithaanani. Ohe navase na ya jaththa jaha sambhava vibhaje.**
**Meaning:** There are eight, twelve, and twelve states of existence for the
bondage, arising, and states of existence of the name karma respectively. Their
flow, from the general to the specific, and where possible, should be
differentiated.  **Verse Meaning:** The bondage, arising, and states of
existence of the name karma are eight, twelve, and twelve respectively. Their
flow, from the general to the specific, and where possible, should be
differentiated.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 187 catuSka kI udvalanA karane para 84 prakRtika
sattAsthAna hotA hai  /  ina 84 prakRtiyoM meM se manuSyadvika kI ubalanA hone
para 82 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai| kSapaka anivRttikaraNa ke 63 prakRtiyoM
meM se narakadvika Adi teraha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hone para 80 prakRtika
sattAsthAna hotA hai tathA 12 prakRtiyoM meM se utta, 13 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya
hone para 76 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai tathA inhIM 13 prakRtiyoM ko 61
prakRtiyoM meM se kama karane para 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai| 60 meM se
inhIM 13 prakRtiyoM ko ghaTAne para 77 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai  /
tIrthakara ayogikevalI ke 10 prakRtika tathA sAmAnya kelI ke prakRtika
sattAsthAna hotA hai  /  isa prakAra se nAmakarma ke sattAsthAna ko batalAne ke
pazcAt aba Age kI gAthA meM nAmakarma ke baMdhasthAna Adi ke paraspara saMveSa
kA kathana karane kA nirdeza karate haiN| aTu ya bArasa bArasa
baMdhokyasaMtapaDiThANANi  /  oheNAveseNa ya jattha jahAsaMbhavaM vibhaje  // 30
//  zAvArtha-ahaATha, yaaura, pArasa jArasa-bAraha, bAraha,
baMdhokpasaMtapaDiThANAgi-baMdha, udaya aura sattA prakRtiyoM ke sthAna, pohega-
ogha, sAmAnya se, prAdeseNa-vizeSa se, ya-aura, jastha-jahA~, abhAsa-
yathAsaMbhava, vibhaje-vikalpa karanA caahie| _ gAthArSa-nAmakarma ke baMdha,
udaya aura sattA prakRti sthAna krama se ATha, bAraha aura bAraha hote haiM  /
unake ogha

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 166 It is necessary to consider both general and specific options. ##
Saptalika Prakaran - Here, in this specific section, the binding place, arising
place, and existence place of name-karma have already been explained in the
previous chapter of the text. It has been stated that there are eight binding
places, twelve arising places, and twelve existence places for name-karma.
However, this information is being reiterated here to explain the breaking of
these perceptions. There are two ways to understand these broken perceptions: 1.
**Ogh** and 2. **Aadesh**. **Ogh** is a synonym for general, and **Aadesh** is
for specific. Here, **Ogh** means that in a particular form, only the binding
place, arising place, and existence place of a living being who binds that
particular binding place are mentioned. This is called **Ogh** form. In the
**Aadesh** form, the binding place, arising place, and existence place are
considered in the context of **Mithyadrishti** (false vision) etc.
**Gunasthanas** (qualities) and **Gati** (motion) etc. **Marganas** (paths). The
author has clearly indicated through the terms **Ogh** and **Aadesh** that both
types of breaking of perceptions of binding place etc. will be explained here.
Now, let's first consider the breaking of perceptions through **Ogh**. Then,
**Panchodaya** (five arising places) **Santa** (existence places) **Tevise**
(twenty-three), **Pannavis** (twenty-two) **Chavose** (twenty-six), **Atth**
(eight) **Chauratu** (four) **Bhatthavise** (twenty-eight) in the binding place
of **Nav** (nine) **Satt** (seven) **Patis** (twenty-nine) **Sosamm** (thirty)
in the natural binding place.  ## 31 ##

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 166 sAmAnya aura haiM, utane vikalpa karanA cAhiye  /  saptalikA prakaraNa -
vizeSa se yahA~ jisa sthAna sambhava vizeSAyaM grantha meM padyapi nAmakarma ke
pahale baMdhasthAna, udayasthAna aura sattAsthAna batalAye jA cuke haiM ki
nAmakarma ke baMghasthAna ATha haiM, udayasthAna bAraha haiM aura sattAsthAna
bhI bAraha haiM  /  phira bhI yahA~ punaH sUcanA inake saMvedha bhaMgoM ko
batalAne ke liye kI gaI hai| ina saMvedha bhaMgoM ko jAnane ke do upAya haiM 1.
ogha aura 2. Adeza 1 ogha sAmAnya kA paryAyavAcI hai aura Adeza vizeSa kA  /
yahA~ ogha kA yaha artha huA ki jisa prarUpaNA meM kevala yaha batalAyA jAe kiM
amuka baMdhasthAna kA baMdha karane vAle jIva ke amuka udayasthAna aura amuka
sattAsthAna hote haiM, isako oghaprarUpaNa kahate haiM  /  Adeza prarUpaNa meM
mithyAdRSTi Adi guNasthAna aura gati Adi mArgaNAoM meM baMghasthAna, udayasthAna
aura sattAsthAnoM kA vicAra kiyA jAtA hai  /  granthakAra ne ogha aura Adeza ke
saMketa dvArA yaha spaSTa kiyA hai ki donoM prakAra se baMdhasthAna Adi ke
saMvedha bhaMgoM ko yahA~ batalAyA jAyegA | aba sabase pahale ogha se saMvedha
bhaGgoM kA vicAra karate haiN| taba paMcodaya saMtA tevIse paNNavIsa chavose  /
aTTha cauraTubose nava sattugatIsa tIsammi  //  31  //  zabdArtha paMca- nau
aura pAMca savayasaMttAudaya aura sattA sthAna, tebIse teIsa, paNNavIsa chabbIse
paccIsa aura chabbIsa ke baMdhasthAna meM aTTha-ATha, caura-cAra,
bhaTThavIseaTThAIsa ke baMghasthAna meM nabanau, satta--sAta, patIsa sosamma -
unatIsa aura tIsa prakRtika vaMSasthAna meM  /

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Post Karma Prabh 186  **Egegemegatise Ege Eguday Atu Santtammi. Ubaraybandhe
Vas Vas Beygasanttammi Thanani. ||32||**  In the 31st natural bondage-place,
there is one bondage-place, one arising-place, and eight being-places. In the
absence of bondage, there are ten arising-places and ten being-places.
**Explanation:**  * **Egegemegatise:** 31st * **Ege:** One * **Eguday:** One
arising-place * **Atu Santtammi:** Eight being-places * **Ubaraybandhe:** In the
absence of bondage * **Vas Vas:** Ten, ten * **Beygasanttammi:** Arising-places
and being-places * **Thanani:** Places  **Further Explanation:**  * In the 25th
and 26th natural bondage-places, there are nine arising-places and five being-
places each. * In the 28th natural bondage-place, there are eight arising-places
and four being-places. * In the 29th and 30th natural bondage-places, there are
nine arising-places and nine being-places. * In the 31st natural bondage-place,
there is one arising-place and one being-place. * In the first natural bondage-
place, there is one arising-place and eight being-places.  **Comparison:**  *
**Nav Panchidayassatta Tevise Pannavisavvise. Attha Chaurattuvise Naxantigati
Satise Ya. Eskep Igatise Eske Ekkuday Atu Santasa. Uparay Bandhe Das Das
Namodayasantthagaani.**  * **Navpechodayassatta Tevise, Panuvis Chhanvise. Attha
Chadurabise Gavassatuguti Satisemmmi. Egegam Igitise Ege Eguday Mattha Santtani.
Uparadbandhe Das Das 'Uvayamsa Hoti Niyamenam.**  **Translation:**  * **Nine
arising-places and five being-places in the 25th and 26th. Eight and four in the
28th. Nine and nine in the 29th and 30th. One arising-place and eight being-
places in the first. Ten arising-places and ten being-places in the absence of
bondage.**  **Note:** This is a translation of a section from the Jain text
"Post Karma Prabh". The terms used are specific to Jain philosophy and may not
have direct equivalents in English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paSTha karmapramba 186 egegamegatIse ege egRdaya aTU sNtmmi| ubarayabaMdhe vasa
vasa beyagasaMtammi ThANANi  // 32 //  zambArSa-egaina-eka, eka, egatIse-
ikatIsa prakRtika saMghasthAna meM, ege-eka ke baMdhasthAna meM, egudaya-eka
udayaspAna, bhaTTa saMtammi-ATha sattAsthAna, abaraba-baiSa ke abhAva meM, prasa
rasa-dasa-dasa, veyagaudaya meM, saMtammi-sattA meM, ThANANi sthAna  /  votoM
gApA- leIsa, paccIsa aura chabbIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAnoM meM nau-nau
udayasthAna aura pAMca-pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  aTThAIsa ke baMdhasthAna
meM ATha udayasthAna aura cAra sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  unatIsa evaM tIsa
prakRtika baMdhasthAnoM meM nau udayasthAna tathA sattAsthAna hote haiM  /
ikatIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM eka udayasthAna va eka sattAsthAna hotA hai
/  eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM eka udayasthAna aura ATha sattAsthAna hote
haiN| baMdha ke abhAva meM udaya aura sattA ke dasa-dasa sthAna jAnanA caahie| 1
tulanA kIjiye nava paMcIdayasattA tevIse paNNavIsavvIse  /  aTTha cauraTuvIse
naksantigatIsatIse y|| eskepa igatIse eSake ekkudaya aTu saMtasA  /  uparaya
baMdhe dasa dasa nAmodayasaMtaThAgANi  /  /  -yaha saptatikA, gA0 1,100
NavapecodayasattA tevIse, pANuvIsa chanvIse  /  aTTha cadurabIse
gavasattugutIsatIsammi  /  /  egegaM igitIse ege egudaya maThTha sattANi  /
uparadabaMdhe dasa dasa 'uvayaMsA hoti NiyameNaM  //  --go karmakAra, gA.
740,541

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 70  **Special Note:** In these two verses, it is explained how many
**Udayasthanas** (stages of arising) and **Sattaasthanas** (stages of existence)
are present in each **Bandhastan** (stage of bondage). However, it is not clear
what the nature of these Udayasthanas and Sattaasthanas are, and which ones are
present. Therefore, this will be clarified based on the commentary by Acharya
Malayagiri.  In each of the 23, 25, and 26 **Prakrutik Bandhaasthanas** (stages
of bondage based on nature), there are nine **Udayasthanas** and five
**Sattaasthanas** - "**Nav Pancha Uday Satta**...". Their explanation is as
follows:  In the 23 **Prakrutik Bandhastan**, bondage of **Apariapt**
(insufficient) **Ekendriya** (one-sense) **Yogya** (capable) **Prakrutis**
(natures) occurs, and this is bound by **Ekendriya**, **Dwiindriya**,
**Triindriya**, **Chaturindriya**, **Tiryanch Panchendriya**, and **Manushya**
(human). To save these 23 **Prakrutis**, the **Jivas** (souls) have nine
**Udayasthanas** of 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, and 31 **Prakrutis**, which
are common to all. These **Udayasthanas** should be understood as follows:  The
**Ekendriya**, **Dwiindriya**, **Triindriya**, **Chaturindriya**, **Tiryanch
Panchendriya**, and **Manushya** who are binding the 23 **Prakrutis** have a
**Udayasthan** of 21 **Prakrutis** in the **Bhavas** (cycles of birth and
death). This is because in the arising of 21 **Prakrutis**, the bondage of 23
**Prakrutis** is possible, which are **Apariapt** and **Yogya** for
**Ekendriya**.  The **Udayasthan** of 24 **Prakrutis** is for **Apariapt** and
**Paryapt** (sufficient) **Ekendriya**. This **Udayasthan** is not found
anywhere else except for **Ekendriya**.  The **Udayasthan** of 25 **Prakrutis**
is for **Paryapt** **Ekendriya** and **Vaikriya** (transformed) **Sharira**
(body) who have attained **Mithyadrishti** (false belief) **Tiryanch** (animal)
and **Manushya**.  The **Udayasthan** of 26 **Prakrutis** is for **Paryapt**
**Ekendriya** and **Paryapt** and **Apariapt** **Dwiindriya**, **Triindriya**,
**Chaturindriya**, **Tiryanch Panchendriya**, and **Manushya**.  The
**Udayasthan** of 27 **Prakrutis** is for **Paryapt** **Ekendriya** and those
who have **Vaikriya** **Sharira** and have become **Paryapt** in **Sharira**
(body) **Paryapti** (sufficiency), who are **Mithyadrishti** **Tiryanch** and
**Manushya**.  The three **Udayasthanas** of 28, 29, and 30 **Prakrutis** are...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . 190 saptatikA prakaraNa vizeSAdha-ina do gAthAoM meM yaha batalAyA gayA hai
ki kisa baMdhasthAna meM kitane udayasthAna aura kitane sattAsthAna hote haiN|
lekina yaha zAta nahIM hotA hai ki ve udaya aura sattAsthAna kitanI prakRti vAle
haiM aura kauna-kauna se haiN| ata: isa bAta ko AcArya malayagiri kRta TIkA ke
AdhAra se spaSTa kiyA jA rahA hai| teIsa, paccIsa aura chabbIsa prakRtika
baMdhasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM nau udayasthAna aura pAMca sattAsthAna
haiM-'nava paMcodaya sNttaa......| inakA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai- teIsa
prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM aparyApta ekendriya yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA
hai aura isako ekendriya, dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya, tiryaMca
paMcendriya aura manuSya bAMdhate haiN| ina teIsa prakRtiyoM ko bacAne vAle
jIvoM ke sAmAnya se 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye nau
udayasthAna hote haiM  /  ina udayasthAnoM ko isa prakAra ghaTita karanA cAhiye-
jo ekendriya, daundriya, trIndriya, caturindriya, tithaMca paMcendriya aura
manuSya teIsa prakRtiyoM kA baMdha kara rahA hai, usako bhava ke apAntarAla meM
to 21 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| kyoMki 21 prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM
aparyApta ekendriya ke yogya 23 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha sambhava hai| 24 prakRtika
udayasthAna aparyApta aura paryApta ekendriyoM ke hotA hai  /  kyoMki yaha
udayasthAna ekendriyoM ke sivAya anyatra nahIM pAyA jAtA hai| 25 prakRtika
udayasthAna paryApta ekendriyoM aura vaikriya zarIra ko prApta mithyAdRSTi
tiryaMca aura manuSyoM ke hotA hai| 26 prakRtika udayasthAna paryApta ekendriya
tathA paryApta aura aparyApta dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya, tiryaMca
paMcendriya aura manuSyoM ke hotA hai| 27 prakRtika udayasthAna paryApta
ekendriyoM aura vaikriya zarIra ko karane vAle tathA zarIra paryApti se paryApta
hue midhyAdRSTi tiryaca aura manuSyoM ke hotA hai| 28, 29, 30 prakRtikA, ye tIna
udayasthAna

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth ### 161  **Mithyadrishti** is present in **dvi-indriya**,
**tri-indriya**, **chatur-indriya**, **panch-indriya** humans and **31**
**prakriti** **udayasthan** in **vikala-indriya** and **tiryanch panch-indriya**
beings. Except for these beings, the remaining beings do not bind **23**
**prakriti**. Therefore, in the **23** **prakriti** **bandha-sthan**, there are
**9** **udayasthan** of the aforementioned **21** **prakriti**.  Beings who bind
**23** **prakriti** have **five** **satta-sthan**. The number of **prakriti**
they acquire in each is as follows: **62**, **88**, **86**, **80**, and **78**.
This is explained as follows: The aforementioned beings who have **21**
**prakriti** **udayasthan** have all **satta-sthan**, except for humans who do
not have **78** **prakriti** **satta-sthan**. This is because **78**
**prakriti** **satta-sthan** is present when comparing **manushya-gati** and
**manushya-nupurvi**. However, humans cannot **udbalana** these two
**prakriti**.  Even during **24** **prakriti** **udayasthan**, all five **satta-
sthan** are present. However, **vaikriya-sharira** **vayu-kayika** beings,
despite having **24** **prakriti** **udayasthan**, do not have **80** and **78**
**prakriti** **satta-sthan**. This is because their **vaikriya-shatk** and
**manushya-dvik** are present by rule. These beings are directly experiencing
the **vaikriya-sharira**. Therefore, they cannot **udbalana** their **vaikriya-
dvik**, and without it, they cannot **udbalana** **deva-dvik** and **naraka-
dvik**. This is because **vaikriya-shatk** **udbalana** happens simultaneously,
which is a natural rule. And **manushya-dvik** **udbalana** only happens after
**vaikriya-shatk** **udbalana**, not before. This is also mentioned in
**Churni**:  > **Janakam ubalay paccchha manuyagam javalay**  This means that
after **udbalana** of **vaikriya-shatk**, the being **udbalana** **manushya-
dvik**. This proves that...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 161 mithyAdRSTi paryApta dvIndriya, trIndriya,
caturindriya, tithaMca paMcendriya aura manuSyoM ke hote haiM tathA 31 prakRtika
udayasthAna mithyAdRSTi vikalendriya aura tiryaMca paMcendriya jIvoM ke hotA
hai| ukta udayasthAna vAle jIvoM ke sivAya zeSa jIva 23 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
nahIM karate haiN| ataH 23 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM ukta 21 Adi prakRtika 9
udayasthAna hote haiM  /  23 prakRtiyoM ko bA~dhane vAle jItroM ke pAMca
sattAsthAna haiM  /  unameM grahaNa kI gaI prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA isa prakAra hai
- 62,88,86, 80 aura 78  /  inakA spaSTIkaraNa yaha hai- 21 prakRtiyoM ke udaya
vAle ukta jIvoM ke to saba sattAsthAna pAye jAte haiM, kevala manuSyoM ke 78
prakRtika sattAsthAna nahIM hotA hai, kyoMki manuSyagati aura manuSyanupUrvI kI
ulanA karane para 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna hotA hai  /  kintu manuSyoM ke ina do
prakRtiyoM ko udbalanA sambhava nahIM hai| 24 prakRtika udayasthAna ke samaya
bhI pAMcoM sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  lekina vaikriya zarIra ko karane vAle
vAyukAyika jIvoM ke 24 prakRtika udayasthAna ke rahate hue 80 aura 78 prakRtika,
ye do sattAsthAna nahIM hote haiN| kyoMki inake vaikriyaSaTka aura manuSyadvika
kI sattA niyama se hai  /  ye jIva ba~kriya zarIra kA to sAkSAta hI anubhava
kara rahe haiM  /  ataH inake vaikriyadvika kI ubalanA sambhava nahIM hai aura
isake abhAva meM devadvika aura narakadvika kI bhI udbalanA sambhava nahIM hai,
kyoMki vaikiyaSaTka kI udbalanA eka sAtha hI hotI hai, yaha svAbhAvika niyama
hai aura vaikriyapaTka kI uvalanA ho jAne para hI manuSyadvika kI uvalanA hotI
hai, anyathA nahIM hotI hai  /  cUrNi meM bhI kahA hai janakaM ubale pacchA
maNuyagaM javale | arthAt vaikiyaSaTka kI udbalanA karane ke anantara hI yaha
jIva manuSyadvika kI ulanA karatA hai| isase yaha siddha huA ki

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on Saptaatika  **Regarding the 24 natural states of existence for
air-bodied beings who do not possess a Vaikriya body, there are 62, 88, and 56
natural states of existence, which are Soma, Saatapaama, and Ho respectively.
However, there are no states of existence with 80 and 78 natural qualities.**
**Even with 25 natural states of existence, the aforementioned five states of
existence are present. However, among them, the 78 natural states of existence
are only for air-bodied beings who do not possess a Vaikriya body and for fire-
bodied beings, not for others. This is because, except for fire-bodied and air-
bodied beings, all other beings bind themselves to the human path and the path
preceding it according to the rules of the Jiva.**  **According to the opinion
of the Churnikaar, except for fire-bodied and air-bodied beings, all other
beings bind themselves to the human path according to the rules of the Jiva.
This proves that the 78 natural states of existence are not attained by anyone
except fire-bodied beings and air-bodied beings who do not possess a Vaikriya
body.**  **Even with 26 natural states of existence, the aforementioned five
states of existence are present. However, it is special that the natural states
of existence are for air-bodied beings who do not possess a Vaikriya body and
for fire-bodied beings. Also, for those two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed,
and five-sensed beings, both sufficient and insufficient, in whom the
aforementioned fire-bodied and air-bodied beings are born, the 78 natural states
of existence are present until they are bound to the human path and the path
preceding it.**  **In the 27 natural states of existence, except for the 78
natural states of existence, the remaining four states of existence are present.
Because the 25 natural states of existence are for sufficient Baadar Ekendriya
and Vaikriya body-possessing Tithanch and humans, excluding fire-bodied and air-
bodied beings.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa vaikriya zarIra ko karane vAle vAyukAyika jIvoM ke 24
prakRtika udayasthAna rahate 62, 88 aura 56 prakRtika, soma satApAma ho hote
haiM kintu 80 aura 78 prakRti vAle sattAsthAna nahIM hote haiN| 25 prakRtika
udayasthAna ke hote hue bhI ukta pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiN| kintu unameM se 78
prakRtika sattAsthAna baiMkriya zarIra ko nahIM karane vAle vAyukAyika jIvoM ke
tathA agnikAyika jIvoM ke hI hote haiM, anya ko nahIM, kyoMki agnikAyika aura
vAyukAyika jIvoM ko chor3akara anya saba paryApta jIva niyama se manuSyagati
aura manuSyAnupUrvI kA baMdha karate haiM tevAUbamjo pagnattagI maNuyagaI niyamA
bNdhe| cUrNikAra kA mata hai ki agnikAyika, vAyukAyika jIvoM ko chor3akara anya
paryApta jIva manuSyagati kA niyama se baMdha karate haiN| isase siddha huA ki
78 prakRtika sattAsthAna agnikAyika jIvoM ko aura vaikriya zarIra ko nahIM
karane vAle vAyukAyika jIvoM ko chor3akara anyatra prApta nahIM hotA hai| 26
prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhI ukta pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiN| kintu yaha
vizeSa hai ki prakRtika sattAsthAna vaikriya zarIra ko nahIM karane vAle
vAyukAyika jIvoM ke tathA agnikAyika jIvoM ke hotA hai tathA jina paryApta aura
aparyApta dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya aura paMcendriya jIvoM meM ukta
agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIva utpanna hue haiM, unako bhI jaba taka
manuSyagati aura manuSyAnupUrvI kA baMdha nahIM huA hai, taba taka 78 prakRtika
sattAsthAna hotA hai| 27 prakRtika udayasthAna meM 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna ko
chor3akara zeSa cAra sattAsthAna hote haiN| kyoMki 25 prakRtika udayasthAna
agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIvoM ko chor3akara paryApta bAdara ekendriya aura
vaikriya zarIra karane vAle tithaMca aura manuSyoM ko

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma-pranya  163  It happens. But because of the existence of their
two human states, 78 natural states of existence are not found.   Here, the
inquisitive person asks: What is the reason for the 27 natural states of arising
not being found in the fire-bodied and air-bodied beings? The solution is that
the 27 natural states of arising for the one-sensed beings occur when one of the
natures of Attap and Udyot is combined, but the fire-bodied and air-bodied
beings do not have the arising of Attap and Udyot. Therefore, the 27 natural
states of arising do not occur.  The 28, 29, 30, and 35 natural states of
arising have four states of existence remaining, excluding the 78 natural states
of existence, according to the rule. Because the arising of the 28, 29, and 30
natures occurs for the sufficiently विकलेन्द्रिय, तिथंच पंचेन्द्रिय, and humans,
and the 31 natural state of arising occurs for the sufficiently विकलेन्द्रिय and
five-sensed तिर्यंच. But the existence of the human motion, human-like, in these
beings is found according to the rule. Therefore, the 78 natural states of
existence do not occur in those states of arising. In this way, there are forty
states of existence in comparison to the nine states of arising appropriate for
the beings who bind the 23 natures.  The states of arising and states of
existence for the beings who bind the 25 and 26 natures should also be known in
the same way. But there is this special feature: for the sufficiently one-sensed
beings, the 25 and 26 natures, the 21, 25, 27, 28, 29, and 30 natural states of
arising for the gods, only these two states of existence, 12 and 88 natural
states of existence, are obtained.   Insufficiently 1, or how come the 27
arising for the fire and air beings does not happen, by which that earning is
done?  It is said: The 27 arising is obtained for the one-sensed beings when
there is a projection of either Attap or Udyot, but the arising of Attap and
Udyot is not possible for the fire and air beings, therefore, that exclusion.  -
Sapta-tika Prakarana Deeka, page 160

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmapranya 163 hotA hai| parantu inake manuSyadvika kI sattA hone se 78
prakRtika sattAsthAna nahIM pAyA jAtA hai  /  . yahA~ jijJAsu kA prazna hai ki
agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIvoM ke 27 prakRtika udayasthAna na pAye jAne kA
kAraNa kyA hai ? to isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki ekendriyoM ke 27 prakRtika
udayasthAna Atapa.aura udyota meM se kisI eka prakRti ke milAne para hotA hai,
kintu agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIvoM ke Atapa aura udyota kA udaya hotA nahIM
hai  /  isIliye 27 prakRtika udayasthAna nahIM hotA hai|' 28, 29, 30 aura 35
prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna ko chor3akara zeSa cAra
sattAsthAna niyama se hote haiN| kyoMki 28, 26 aura 30 prakRtiyoM kA udaya
paryApta vikalendriyoM, tithaMca paMcendriya aura manuSyoM ko hotA hai aura 31
prakRtika udayasdhAna paryApta vikalendriyoM aura paMcendriya tiryaMcoM ko hotA
hai  /  parantu ina jIvoM ke manuSya gati, manuSyAnupUrvI kI sattA niyama se pAI
jAtI hai| ata: una udayasthAnoM meM 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna nahIM hotaa.| isa
prakAra 23 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle jIvoM ke yathAyogya nau udayasthAnoM
kI apekSA cAlIsa sattAsthAna hote haiN| 25 aura 26 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane
vAle jIvoM ke bhI udayasthAna aura sattAsthAna isI prakAra jAnane cAhiye  /
kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki paryApta ekendriya yogya 25, aura 26 prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha karane vAle devoM ke 21, 25, 27, 28, 26 aura 30 prakRtika udayasthAnoM
meM 12 aura 88 prakRtika ye do sattAsthAna hI prApta hote haiM  /  aparyApta 1
atha kathaM tejovAyUnAM saptaviMzatyudayo na bhavati yena tadarjanaM kriyate ?
ucyate- saptaviMzatyudaya ekendriyANAmAtapa-udyotAnyataraprakSepe sati prApyate,
na ca tejovAyuSvAtapa-udyotodayaH sambhavati, tatastadvarjanam  /  -saptatikA
prakaraNa dIkA, pR0 160

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 71  **164**  The seven-sense, five-sense, and human beings are not
bound by the 25 **Prakritis** suitable for them. Because, in the aforementioned
insufficient beings, **Devas** are not born. Therefore, there are 40 **Satta-
sthana** in each of these **Bandha-sthana**, 25 and 26 **Prakritis** from the
general.  After explaining the **Bandha-sthana** of the 23rd, 25th, and 26th
**Prakritis**, now we explain the **Udaya** and **Satta-sthana** of the 28th
**Prakriti** as "**Attha Chauratthavise**", meaning eight **Udaya-sthana** and
four **Satta-sthana**. The eight **Udaya-sthana** are as follows: 21st, 25th,
26th, 27th, 28th, 29th, 30th, and 31st **Prakritis**.  There are two types of
**Bandha-sthana** for the 28th **Prakriti**: 1. **Devagati-prayogya** (suitable
for **Deva** realm), 2. **Naraka-mati-prayogya** (suitable for **Naraka**
realm).  In the case of **Bandha** of the 28th **Prakriti** suitable for
**Deva** realm, there are eight **Udaya-sthana** as mentioned above, depending
on the different beings. In the case of **Bandha** of the **Prakritis** suitable
for **Naraka** realm, there are only two **Udaya-sthana**: 30th and 31st
**Prakritis**.  Among them, the **Bandha** of the 28th **Prakriti** suitable for
**Deva** realm occurs in the **Apanta-ral** (interval) of the existence of
**Kshayik Samyag-drsti** or **Vedak Samyag-drsti**, five-sense, seven-sense, and
humans, in the 21st **Prakriti** **Udaya-sthana**. The 25th **Prakriti**
**Udaya-sthana** occurs in **Aharak** restrained, **Samyag-drsti** or **Mithya-
drsti**, humans and **Tiryanch** who have **Vaikriya** body. The 26th
**Prakriti** **Udaya-sthana** occurs in **Kshayik Samyag-drsti** or **Vedak
Samyag-drsti**, five-sense, seven-sense, and humans who have **Sharir-sth**
(body-based) senses. The 27th **Prakriti** **Udaya-sthana** occurs in **Aharak**
restrained, **Samyag-drsti** or **Mithya-drsti**, **Tiryanch** and humans who
have **Vaikriya** body. The 28th and 29th **Prakriti** **Udaya-sthana** occurs
in **Kshayik Samyag-drsti** or **Vedak Samyag-drsti**, **Tiryanch** and humans
who have attained **Sharir-paryapti** (body-sufficiency) and **Pranapan-
paryapti** (breath-sufficiency), and in **Samyag-drsti** or **Mithya-drsti**,
**Tiryanch** and humans who are **Aharak** restrained, **Vaikriya** restrained,
and have **Dakriya** body.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 164 saptatikA prakaraNa vikalendriya, tithaMca paMcendriya aura manuSyoM ke
yogya 25 prakRtiyoM kA baMgha deva nahIM karate haiN| kyoMki ukta aparyApta
jIvoM meM deva utpanna nahIM hote haiM  /  ata: sAmAnya se 25 aura 26 prakRtika,
inameM se pratyeka baMghasthAna meM nau udayarathAnoM kI apekSA 40 sattAsthAna
hote haiN| 23, 25 aura. 26 prakRtika baMdhasthAnoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba 28
prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke udaya va sattAsthAna batalAte haiM ki "aTTa
cauraTThavIse" arthAt ATha udayasthAna aura cAra sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  ATha
udayasthAna isa prakAra kI saMkhyA vAle haiM-21,25,26,27,28,26,30 aura 31
prakRtika  /  28 prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke do bheda haiM-1. devagatiprAyogya, 2.
narakamati-prAyogya ! inameM se devagati ke yogya 28 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hote
samaya nAnA jIvoM kI apekSA uparyukta AThoM hI udayasthAna hote haiM aura
narakagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hote samaya 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye do
hI udayasthAna hote haiM  /  unameM se devagati ke yogya 28 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
karane vAle jIvoM ke 21 prakRtika udayasthAna kSAyika samyamhaSTi yA vedaka
samyagdRSTi pacendriya tiyaMca, manuSyoM ke bhava ke apAntarAla meM rahate
samaya hotA hai  /  25 prakRtika udayasthAna AhAraka saMyatoM ke aura vaikriya
zarIra ko karane vAle samyagdRSTi yA mizyAvRSTi manuSya aura tiryaMcoM ke hotA
hai  /  26 prakRtika udayasthAna kSAyika samyagdRSTi yA vedaka samyagdRSTi
zarIrastha paMcendriya tithaMca aura manuSyoM ke hotA hai  /  27 prakRtika
udayasthAna AhAraka saMyatoM ke, samyagdRSTi yA mithyA dRSTi vakriya zarIra
karane vAle tiryaMca aura manuSyoM ke hotA hai| 28 aura 26 prakRtika udayasthAna
kama se zarIra paryApti aura prANApAna paryApti se paryApta hue kSAyika
samyagdRSTi yA vedaka samyagdRSTi tiryaMca aura manuSyoM ke tathA AhAraka
saMyata, vaikriya saMyata aura dakriya zarIra ko karane vAle samyAdRSTi yA
mithyAdRSTi tiryaMca aura

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Last Karma Granth  This pertains to humans. There are 30 natural arising
places (udayasthan) for **Samyagdrishti**, **Mithyadrishti**, or
**Samyamihyadrishti**, for both humans and animals, as well as for **Aharak**
and **Vaikriya** restrained beings. There are 31 natural arising places for
**Samyagdrishti** or **Mithyadrishti** for five-sense animals.  For beings
destined for hell, there are 28 natural binding places (bandhastan) with 30
natural arising places for **Mithyadrishti** for five-sense animals and humans,
and 31 natural arising places for **Mithyadrishti** for five-sense animals.
Now, considering the existence places (sattastan) in the 28 natural binding
places, there are four existence places for beings who bind 28 natural places,
namely 62, 86, 88, and 86 natural places. However, for beings who have 21
natural arising places and bind 28 natural places destined for heaven, there are
only two existence places, 12 and 8. This is because the **Tirthankara** nature
does not exist here. If we consider the **Tirthankara** nature, then the 28
natural binding places destined for heaven would not be formed.  With 25 natural
arising places, the binding of 28 natural places occurs for animals and humans
who have **Aharak** and **Vaikriya** bodies. Therefore, there are only two
existence places here, 62 and 85 natural places. Out of these, the **Aharak**
fourfold (Aharakchatuṣka) exists by rule for **Aharak** restrained beings,
resulting in only 62 natural places for them. For the remaining beings, the
**Aharak** fourfold may or may not exist, leading to two existence places for
them.  With 26, 27, 28, and 26 natural arising places, there are also two
existence places, 62 and 86 natural places.  In the 30 natural arising places,
for beings who bind 28 natural places destined for heaven or hell, there are
four existence places, 62, 86, 88, and 86 natural places. Out of these, 12 and
88 natural places...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacha karmagrantha manuSyoM ke hote haiM  /  30 prakRtika udayasthAna
samyagdRSTi, mithyA dRSTi yA samyamithyAdRSTi tiryaca aura manuSyoM ke tathA
AhAraka saMyata aura vaikriya saMyatoM ke hotA hai| 31 prakRtika udayasthAna
samyagdRSTi yA mithyAdRSTi paMcendriya tiryaMcoM ke hotA hai| naraka gati ke
yogya 28 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hote samaya 30 prakRtika udayasthAna mithyA dRSTi
paMcendriya tiryaMca aura manuSyoM ke hotA hai tathA 31 prakRtika udayasthAna
mithyAdRSTi paMcendriya tiryacoM ko hotA hai| aba 28 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM
sattAsthAnoM kI apekSA vicAra karate haiM  /  28 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane
vAle jIvoM ke sAmAnya se 62, 86, 88 aura 86 prakRtika, ye cAra sattAsthAna haiN|
usameM bhI jisake 21 prakRtiyoM kA udaya ho aura devagati ke yogya 28 prakRtiyoM
kA baMdha hotA ho, usake 12 aura 8 ye do hI sattAsthAna hote haiN| kyoMki yahA~
tIrthakara prakRti kI sattA nahIM hotI hai  /  yadi tIrthakara prakRti kI sattA
mAneM to devagati ke yogya 28 prakRtika baMdhasthAna nahIM banatA hai| 25
prakRtiyoM kA udaya rahate hue 28 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha AhAraka saMyata aura
vaikriya zarIra ko karane vAle tiryaMca aura manuSyoM ke hotA hai| ata: yahA~
bhI sAmAnya se 62 aura 85 prakRtika, ye do hI sattAsthAna hote haiN| inameM se
AhAraka saMyatoM ke AhArakacatuSka kI sattA niyama se hotI hai, jisase inake 62
prakRtiyoM kI hI sattA hogii| zeSa jIvoM ke AhArakacatuSka kI sattA ho bhI aura
na bhI ho, jisase inake donoM sattAsthAna bana jAte haiN| 26, 27, 28 aura 26
prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM bhI ye do 62 aura ma prakRtika sattAsthAna hote haiN| 30
prakRtika udayasthAna meM devagati yA narakagati ke yogya 28 prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha karane vAle jIvoM ke sAmAnya se 62, 86, 88 aura 86 prakRtika, ye cAra
sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  inameM se 12 aura 88 prakRtika

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on the Seven Tika  The consideration of the seven states of existence
is as before. However, regarding the two states of existence, there is this
special characteristic: When a being, after binding the karma of hell, becomes a
Samyakdrishti (rightly-seeing) and binds the karma of a Tirthankara, and later,
at the end of the human existence, becomes a Mithyadrishti (wrongly-seeing) due
to the loss of Samyaktva (right faith), then in the final moment of his life, he
does not bind the karma of a Tirthankara, but only the karma of 28 natures. He
attains only 28 natures in his existence. Here, the existence of the natures is
explained.   Out of the 30 natures, excluding the Tirthankara, the four
Aharakchatushk, the Devagati, Devanupurvi, Narakagati, Narakanupurvi, and the
four Vaikriya, there are 80 natures in the state of existence.   Thus, a being
with 80 natures, whether a five-sensed animal, a human, or a Tiryanch (non-
human), attains the fullness of all perfections. If, later, he becomes a pure-
resultant being, he binds the karma of 28 natures, which are suitable for the
Devagati (heavenly realm), and thus attains the existence of the two Devadvik
and the four Vaikriya. Therefore, at the time of binding the karma of 28
natures, he has 86 natures in his existence.   If the being becomes a karmic-
resultant being, he binds the karma of 28 natures, which are suitable for the
Narakagati (hell realm), and thus attains the existence of the two Narakadvik
and the four Vaikriya. This also results in 86 natures in his state of
existence.   Therefore, in the 30-natured state of arising, when the karma of 28
natures is bound, there are 62 natures, and in the 6-natured state, there are
four states of existence.  In the 31-natured state of arising, there are three
states of existence: 12, 88, and 86 natures. Here, there is no state of
existence of 31 natures. Because the being who binds the karma of 28 natures and
arises with 31 natures will be a five-sensed animal. And the five-sensed animals
do not have the existence of the Tirthankara nature. Because the being with the
existence of the Tirthankara nature, who is a human, does not exist among the
five-sensed animals.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa , sattAsthAnoM kA vicAra to pUrvavat hai aura zepa do
sattAsthAnoM ke bAre meM yaha vizeSatA nAhie ki kisI eka samudaya ne narakAyu kA
baMdha karane ke bAda vedaka samyagdRSTi hokara tIrthaMkara prakRti kA baMdha
kiyA, anantara manuSya paryAya ke anta meM vaha samyaktva se cyuta hokara
mithyAdRSTi huA taba usake antima antarmuhurta meM tIrthaMkara prakRti kA baMdha
na hokara 28 prakRtiyoM kA hI baMdha hotA hai aura sattA meM ha prakRtiyA~ hI
prApta hotI hai, jisame yahA~ para prakRtiyoM kI sattA banalAI hai  /  3
prakRtiyoM meM se tIrthakara AhArakacatuSka, devagati, devAnupUrvI, narakagati,
narakAnupUrvI aura vaikriya catuSka ina 13 prakRtiyoM ke binA 80 prakRtika
sattAsthAna hotA hai  /  isa prakAra 80 prakRtiyoM kI sattA vAlA koI jIva
paMcendriya tiryaca yA manuSya hokara saba paryAptiyoM kI pUrNatA ko prApta huA
aura anamtara yadi vaha vizuddha pariNAma vAlA huA to usane devagati ke yogya 28
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha kiyA aura isa prakAra devadvika aura vaikriya catuSka kI
sattA prApta kI, ata: usake 28 prakRtiyoM ke baMdha ke samaya 86 prakRtiyoM kI
sattA hotI hai aura yadi vaha jIva saMkleza pariNAma vAlA huA to usake
narakagati yogya 28 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai aura isa prakAra narakadvika
aura vaikiyacatuSka kI sattA prApta ho jAne ke kAraNa bhI 86 prakRtika
sattAsthAna hotA hai| isa prakAra 30 prakRtika udayasthAna meM 28 prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha hote samaya 62, aura 6 prakRtika, ye cAra sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  116
31 prakRtika udayasthAna meM 12, 88 aura 86 prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna hote
haiN| yahA~ prakRtika sattAsthAna nahIM hotA hai  /  kyoMki jisake 28 prakRtiyoM
kA baMdha aura 31 prakRtiyoM kA udaya hai, vaha paMcendriya tiryaca hI hogA aura
tiryaMcoM ke tIrthaMkara prakrati kI sattA nahIM hai, kyoMki tIrthaMkara prakRti
kI sattA vAlA manuSya tithaMcoM meM

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I **Vashta Karmagramya** 127 It is not born. Therefore, the six natural states
of existence are prohibited here. 29 and 30 natural bondage states each have 6
arising states and 7 states of existence - "Navasanttugatisa Tisasmi". These are
discussed below. 7 r In the 26 natural bondage, 2124 25 26 27 2 26 30 and 31
natural, these are the arising states and 392680 and 78 natural, these are the 7
states of existence. Of these, the first arising states are explained as
follows: the arising of 21 natures is for the worthy of the Tiryanch and humans,
the bondage of 26 natures is for the sufficient and insufficient one-sensory,
disabled-sensory Tiryanch and humans, and for the gods and hell beings. The
arising of 24 natures is for the sufficient one-sensory gods and hell beings,
and for the false-sighted Tiryanch and humans who make the Vaikriya body. The
arising of 26 natures is for the sufficient one-sensory, and for the sufficient
and insufficient disabled-sensory Tiryanch five-sensory and humans. The arising
of 27 natures is for the sufficient one-sensory gods and hell beings, and for
the false-sighted Tiryanch and humans who make the Vaikriya body. The arising of
28 and 26 natures is for the disabled-sensory, Tiryanch five-sensory and humans,
and for the Tiryanch and humans who make the Vaikriya body, and for the gods and
hell beings. The arising of 30 natures is for the disabled-sensory, Tiryanch
five-sensory and humans, and for the gods who experience the Udyot. The arising
of 31 natures is for the sufficient disabled-sensory and Tiryanch five-sensory
who experience the Udyot, and for the unwavering right-sighted humans who are
worthy of the god-state and who bind the 26 natures. 21, 26, 28, 29 and 30
natural, these are the five arising states. 25, 27, 28, 26 and 30 for the food-
restrained and Vaikriya-restrained,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 I vaSTha karmagramya 127 utpanna nahIM hotA hai  /  isIliye yahA~ 6 prakRtika
sattAsthAna kA niSedha kiyA hai  /  29 aura 30 prakRtika baMdhasthAnoM meM se
pratyeka meM 6 udayasthAna aura 7 sattAsthAna hote haiM- "navasanttugatIsa
tiismmi"| inakA vivecana nIce kiyA jAtA hai| 7 r 26 prakRtika baMdhana meM 2124
25 26 27 2 26 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye hai udayasthAna haiM tathA 392680 aura 78
prakRtika, ye 7 sattAsthAna haiN| inameM se pahale udayasthAnoM kA spaSTIkaraNa
karate haiM ki 21 prakRtiyoM kA udaya tiryaMca aura manuSyoM ke yogya 26
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle paryApta aura aparyApta ekendriya, vikalendriya
tiryaca aura manuSyoM ke aura deva va nArakoM ke hotA hai  /  24 prakRtiyoM kA
udaya paryApta ekendriyoM ke deva aura nArakoM ke tathA vaikiya zarIra ko karane
vAle mithyAdRSTi tiyaMtra aura manuSyoM ke hotA hai  /  26 prakRtiyoM kA udaya
paryApta ekendriyoM ke tathA paryApta aura aparyApta vikalendriya tiryaMca
paMcendriya aura manuSyoM ke hotA hai| 27 prakRtiyoM kA udaya paryApta
ekendriyoM ke deva aura nArakoM tathA vaikiya zarIra ko karane vAle mithyAdRSTi
tiryaca aura manuSyoM ko hotA hai  /  28 aura 26 prakRtiyoM kA udaya
vikalendriya, tiyaMca paMcendriya aura manuSyoM ke tathA vaikriya zarIra ko
karane vAle tiryaMca aura manuSyoM ke tathA deva aura nArakoM ke hotA hai  /  30
prakRtiyoM kA udaya vikalendriya, tiryaca paMcendriya aura manuSyoM ke tathA
udyota kA vedana karane vAle devoM ke hotA hai aura 31 prakRtiyoM kA udaya
udyota kA vedana karane vAle paryApta vikalendriya aura tica paMcendriyoM ke
hotA hai tathA devagati ke yogya 26 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle avirata
samyagdRSTi manuSyoM ke 21, 26, 28, 29 aura 30 prakRtika, ye pAMca udayasthAna
hote haiN| AhAraka saMyatoM aura vaikriya saMyatoM ke 25, 27, 28, 26 aura 30 ,

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 73  There are five **udayasthanas** (stages of arising) in
**prakriti** (nature). These are the **udayasthanas** of the **asanyata**
(unrestrained) and **tasangan** (those who have not attained liberation) humans
who perform **vaikriya sharira** (transformation of the body). Except for the
**sanyata** (restrained) humans, if other humans perform **vaikriya sharira**,
their **udyota** (effort) does not arise. Therefore, there are not 30 **prakriti
udayasthanas** here. Thus, in the 26 **prakriti bandhastanas** (stages of
bondage), the **udayasthanas** are considered as follows: 21, 24, 25, 26, 27,
28, 29, 30, and 31 **prakriti** are the nine **udayasthanas**.  Now, let's
consider the **sattastanas** (stages of existence). It was previously mentioned
that there are seven **sattastanas** in the 26 **prakriti bandhastanas**, with
63, 92, 86, 88, 86, 80, and 78 **prakriti**. Their explanation is as follows:
If there are 21 **prakriti udayasthanas** for **ekendriya** (one-sensed),
**vikaleendriya** (imperfect-sensed), and **tiryanch panchendriya** (animal with
five senses) beings who bind 26 **prakriti** due to their **paryaapt**
(sufficient) and **aparyaapt** (insufficient) **karma** (actions), then there
are five **sattastanas**: 62, 88, 86, 80, and 78. Similarly, in the 24, 25, and
26 **prakriti udayasthanas**, one should know these five **sattastanas**. And in
the five **udayasthanas** of 27, 28, 29, 30, and 31 **prakriti**, there are four
**sattastanas** except for the 78 **prakriti sattastanas**. This should be
understood in the same way as it was explained for beings who bind 23
**prakriti**.  For **ekendriya**, **vikaleendriya**, and **tiryanch
panchendriya** beings who bind 26 **prakriti** suitable for **manushya gati**
(human existence), and for humans who bind 26 **prakriti** suitable for both
**manushya gati** and **tiryanch gati** (animal existence), there are four
**sattastanas** except for the 78 **prakriti sattastanas**, while remaining in
their respective **udayasthanas**. For **dev** (gods) and **narak** (hell
beings) who bind 29 **prakriti** suitable for **tiryanch panchendriya** and
**manushya gati**, there are two **sattastanas** in their respective
**udayasthanas**: 62 and 88 **prakriti**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 198 saptatikA prakaraNa prakRtika, ye pAMca udayasthAna hote haiN| vaikriya
zarIra ko karane vAle asaMyata aura tAsaMgana manuSyoM ke hilA dayasthAna hote
haiM  /  manuSyoM meM saMyatoM ko chor3akara yadi anya manuSya vaikriya zarIra
ko karate haiM to unake udyota kA udaya nahIM hotaa| ataH yahA~ 30 prakRtika
udayasthAna nahIM hotA hai  /  isa prakAra 26 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM
udayasthAnoM kA vicAra kiyA gayA ki 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 26, 30 aura 31
prakRtika, ye nau udayasthAna haiM  /  _aba sattAsthAnoM kA vicAra karate haiN|
pUrva meM saMketa kiyA gayA hai ki 26 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM 63, 92, 86, 88,
86, 80 aura 78 prakRti vAle sAta sattAsthAna haiM  /  jinakA spaSTIkaraNa isa
prakAra hai yadi vikalendriya aura tiryaMca paMcendriya ke yogya 26 prakRtiyoM
kA baMdha karane vAle paryApta aura aparyApta ekendriya aura vikalendriya tathA
tiyaMca paMcendriya jIvoM ke 21 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai to vahA~ 62, 88,
86, 80 aura 78, ye pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiN| isI prakAra 24, 25 aura 26
prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM ukta pA~ca sattAsthAna jAnanA cAhiye tathA 27, 28,
29, 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ina pA~ca udayasthAnoM meM 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna ko
chor3akara zeSa cAra sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  isakA vicAra jaisA 23 prakRtiyoM
kA baMdha karane vAle jIvoM ke kara Aye hai vaisA hI yahA~ bhI samajha lenA
caahie| manuSyagati ke yogya 26 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle ekendriya,
vikalendriya aura tiryaMca paMcendriya jIvoM ke tathA manuSya va tiryaMcagati ke
yogya 26 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle manuSyoM ke apaneapane yogya
udayasthAnoM meM rahate hue 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna ko chor3akara zeSa cAra ve
hI sattAsthAna hote haiN| tiryaMca paMcendriya aura manuSyagati ke yogya 29
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle deva aura nArakoM ke apane apane udayasthAnoM
meM 62 aura 88 prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **16E**  It is said that while a being bound by 26
**Prakritis** suitable for the human path, who is a **Mithyaishti** and a
**Naraka**, is tormented by the **Tirthankara** **Prakriti**, it has only one
**Satta Sthan** of 86 **Prakritis** in its five **Uday Sthanas**. This is
because if a being is associated with the **Tirthankara** **Prakriti**, it can
only be considered **Mithya** if it is devoid of the **Aharaka Chatushk**. This
is because the rule is that the **Tirthankara** and the **Aharaka Chatushk**
cannot coexist in the **Mithyaishti** **Gunasthan**. Therefore, when the
**Aharaka Chatushk** is removed from the 63 **Prakritis**, the being is found to
have only 86 **Prakritis**.  A being bound by 26 **Prakritis** suitable for the
**Devagati**, who is an **Avirat Samyagdristi** and a human, has 21
**Prakritis** in its **Uday**, resulting in two **Satta Sthanas** of 63 and 86
**Prakritis**. Similarly, in the six **Uday Sthanas** of 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, and
30 **Prakritis**, these two **Satta Sthanas** should be understood. However, in
the case of **Aharaka** **Samyatas**, it should be understood that they have
only one **Satta Sthan** of 63 **Prakritis** in their respective **Uday
Sthanas**.  Thus, in the general **Bandha Sthan** of 26 **Prakritis**, there are
7 **Prakritis** in the **Uday** of 21 **Prakritis**, 5 **Prakritis** in the
**Uday** of 24 **Prakritis**, 7 **Prakritis** in the **Uday** of 25
**Prakritis**, 7 **Prakritis** in the **Uday** of 26 **Prakritis**, and 7
**Prakritis** in the **Uday** of 27 **Prakritis**.  **Tithahara Jugavan Satvam
Tityam Na Micchhagadittie. Tassatkammiyanam Taggunthanam Na Samvadi.**  –
**Gokarmakand** **Ga. 333**  The above quote states that the **Tirthankara** and
the **Aharaka Chatushk** cannot coexist in a **Mithyaishti** being. However,
**Ga. 365, 366** of the **Gokarmakand** on **Satta Adhikar** suggests that there
has been an opinion that the **Tirthankara** and the **Aharaka Chatushk** can
coexist in a **Mithyadristi**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagranya 16E hote haiM kintu manuSyagati ke yogya 26 prakRtiyoM kA
bandha karane vAle mithyASTi nAraka ke tIrthaMkara prakRti ko satA rahate hue
apane pAMca udayasthAnoM meM eka 86 prakRtika sattAsthAna hI hotA hai| kyoMki jo
tIrthakara prakRti sahita ho vaha yadi AhArakacatuSka rahita hogA to hI usakA
mithyAtva meM jAnA saMbhava hai, kyoMki tIrthakara aura AhArakacatuSka ina donoM
kI eka sAtha sattA mithyAiSTi guNasthAna meM nahIM pAye jAne kA niyama hai|'
ataH 63 meM se AhArakacatuSka ko nikAla dene para usa nAraka ke 86 prakRtiyoM kI
hI sattA pAI jAtI hai| tIrthakara prakRti ke sAtha devagati ke yogya 26
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle avirata samyagdRSTi manuSya ke 21 prakRtiyoM kA
udaya rahate hue 63 aura 86 prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  isI
prakAra 25, 26, 27, 28, 26 aura 30 prakRtika, ina chaha udayasthAnoM meM bhI ye
hI do sattAsthAna jAnanA cAhiye  /  kintu AhAraka saMyatoM ke apane yogya
udayasthAnoM ke rahate hue 63 prakRtika sattAsthAna hI samajhanA cAhiye  /  isa
prakAra sAmAnya se 26 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM 21 prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 7,
caubIsa prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 5, paccIsa prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 7, chabbIsa
prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 7, sattAIsa prakRtiyoM ke titthAhArA jugavaM satvaM
tityaM Na micchagAditie  /  tassattakammiyANaM tagguNaThANaM Na saMmavadi  /  /
-gokarmakAMDa gA0 333 ukta uddharaNa meM yaha batAyA hai ki tIrthaMkara aura
AhArakacatuSka, inakA eka sAtha satya mithyAiSTi jIva ko nahIM pAyA jAtA hai  /
lekina go0 karmakAMDa ke sattA adhikAra kI gAthA 365, 366 se isa bAta kA mI patA
lagatA hai ki miyAdRSTi ke mI tIrthaMkara aura AhArakapatuSka ko sattA eka sAtha
pAI jA sakatI hai, aisA mI eka mata rahA hai  /

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of Seven Tika  There are 6 Sattastana in the case of 6 Udya, 6
Sattastana in the case of 28 Udya, 6 Sattastana in the case of 29 Udya, 6
Sattastana in the case of 30 Udya, and 4 Sattastana in the case of 31 Udya. The
total of all these is 7+5+7+7+6+9+6+454 = 200.  Now, let's consider the 30
Prakruti Bandha Sthana. Just as we considered the Udya Sthana of Ekendriya,
Vikalendriya, Tiyantra Panchendriya, Manushya, Deva, and Naraka, who bind 26
Prakruti suitable for Tiryanch Gati, in the same way, we should contemplate the
Udya Sthana and Sattastana of Ekendriya, etc., who bind 30 Prakruti suitable for
Tiryanch Gati, including Udyot. In this, there are two Sattastana, 63 and 66
Prakruti, in the 21 Prakruti Udya Sthana of Devas who bind 30 Prakruti. And
there is only one Sattastana, 63 Prakruti, in the case of Narakas who have 21
Prakruti Udya. There is no 63 Prakruti Sattastana. Because a being who has the
presence of Tirthankara and Aharaka Chatushk is not born in Naraka.  "Jass Lig
Ra-Aharagani Jugavam Santi So Neraiyesun Uvavakjai." The one who has the
simultaneous presence of Tirthankara and Aharaka Chatushk, does not get born in
Naraka. This view of Churnikar also supports this opinion.  Similarly, we should
understand this in the case of 25, 27, 28, 29, and 30 Prakruti Udya Sthana. But
there is a special feature that there is no 30 Prakruti Udya Sthana for Narakas.
Because 30 Prakruti Udya Sthana is found in the presence of Udyot Prakruti, but
Udyot does not arise in Narakas.  In this way, in general, the beings who bind
30 Prakruti...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa udaya meM 6, aTThAIsa prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 6, unatIsa
prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 6, tIsa prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 6 aura ikatIsa
prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 4 sattAsthAna hote haiN| ina saba kA kula jor3a 7+5+7+
7+6+:+9+6+454 hotA hai  /  200 aba tIsa prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA vicAra karate
haiN| jisa prakAra tiryaMcagati ke yogya 26 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle
ekendriya, vikalendriya, tiyaMtra paMcendriya, manuSya, deva aura nArakoM ke
udayasthAnoM kA vicAra kiyA usI prakAra udyota sahita tiyaMcagati ke yogya 30
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle ekendriyAdika ke udayasthAna aura sattAsthAnoM
kA cintana karanA caahiye| usameM 30 prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhane vAle devoM ke 21
prakRtika udayasthAna meM 63 aura 66 prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna hote haiM
tathA 21 prakRtiyoM ke udaya se yukta nArakoM ke prakRtika eka hI sattAsthAna
hotA hai, 63 prakRtika sattAsthAna nahIM hotA hai  /  kyoMki tIrthaMkara aura
AhAraka catuSka kI sattA vAlA jIva nArakoM meM utpanna nahIM hotA hai jassa liga
rA''hAragANi jugavaM saMti so neraiesuna uvavakjai  /  jisake tIrthaMkara aura
AhArakacatuSka, inakI eka sAtha sattA hai vaha nArakoM meM utpanna nahIM hotA
hai| yaha cUrNikAra kA mata bhI ukta maMtavya kA samarthana karatA hai  /  isI
prakAra 25, 27, 28, 26 aura 30 prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM bhI samajhanA caahie|
kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki nArakoM ke 30 prakRtika udayasthAna nahIM hai|
kyoMki 30 prakRtika udayasthAna udyota prakRti ke sadbhAva meM pAyA jAtA hai
parantu nArakoM ke udyota kA udaya nahIM pAyA jAtA hai| isa prakAra sAmAnya se
30 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle jIvoM

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth ### 2.1  There are 7 **satta-sthana** (states of
existence) in the emergence of 21 **prakritis** (principles), 5 in the emergence
of 24 **prakritis**, 7 in the emergence of 25 **prakritis**, 5 in the emergence
of 26 **prakritis**, 6 in the emergence of 27 **prakritis**, 6 in the emergence
of 28 **prakritis**, 6 in the emergence of 29 **prakritis**, 6 in the emergence
of 30 **prakritis**, and 4 in the emergence of 37 **prakritis**. The total
number of **satta-sthana** is 7+5+7+5+6+6+6+6+4 = 52.  Now, let's consider the
**udaya-sthana** (state of emergence) and **satta-sthana** in the 31
**prakriti** **bandha-sthana** (state of bondage). In the 31 **prakriti**
**bandha-sthana**, there is one **udaya-sthana** and one **satta-sthana** -
'**ege-gme-gati-se**'. The **udaya-sthana** is 30 **prakritis** and the **satta-
sthana** is 63 **prakritis**. It should be understood that the bondage of 31
**prakritis**, including **tirthankara** and **aahara** (those who are eligible
for **devagati** - the path of gods), occurs in two **guna-sthana** (states of
qualities) - **aprammatta-samyata** (unwavering restraint) and **apuurva-karan**
(unprecedented cause). However, neither **vikriya** (transformation) nor
**aahara** **samudghata** (destruction of the **aahara** principle) occurs in
these. Therefore, instead of 25 **prakritis** etc. being the **udaya-sthana**,
there is only one **udaya-sthana** of 30 **prakritis**. Since the bondage of
**aahara** and **tirthankara** **prakritis** occurs here, there is only one
**satta-sthana** of 63 **prakritis**. Thus, in the 31 **prakriti** **bandha-
sthana**, 30 **prakritis** are considered as **udaya-sthana** and 63
**prakritis** as **satta-sthana**.  Now, let's consider the **udaya-sthana** and
**satta-sthana** in the one **prakriti** **bandha-sthana**. The **gatha**
(verse) provides a clue to the number of **udaya-sthana** and **satta-sthana**
in the one **prakriti** **bandha-sthana**: "**Ege Agu-daya Attha-santammi**" -
meaning, there is one **udaya-sthana** and eight **satta-sthana**. The **udaya-
sthana** is 30 **prakritis**, and the eight **satta-sthana** are 63, 62, 86, 88,
80, 76, 76, and 75 **prakritis**. Their explanation is as follows: In the one
**prakriti** **bandha-sthana**, there is a bondage of one **yasha-kirti**
**prakriti** (principle of fame and glory).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 2.1 ke 21 prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 7, caubIsa prakRtiyoM ke
udaya meM 5, paccIsa prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 7, chabbIsa prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM
5, sattAIsa prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 6, aTThAIsa prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 6,
unatIsa prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 6, tAsa prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 6 aura sAttIsa
prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 4 sattAsthAna hote haiN| jinakA kula jor3a +
5+7+5+6+6+6+6+4=52 hotA hai| aba 31 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM udayasthAna aura
sattAsthAna kA vicAra karate haiM  /  31 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM
'egegamegatIse'-eka udayasthAna aura eka sattAsthAna hotA hai  /  udayasthAna 30
prakRtika aura sattAsthAna 63 prakRtika hai| vaha isa prakAra samajhanA cAhie ki
tIrthakara aura AhAraka sahita devagati yogya 31 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
apramattasaMyata aura apUrvakaraNa, ina do guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai| parantu
inake na to vikriya hotI hai aura na AhAraka samudghAta hI hotA hai| isaliye
yahA~ 25 prakRtika Adi udayasthAna na hokara eka 30 prakRtika udayasthAna hI
hotA hai| cUMki inake AhAraka aura tIrthakara prakRti kA baMdha hotA hai,
isaliye yahAM eka 63 prakRtika hI saptAsthAna hotA hai  /  isa prakAra 31
prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM 30 prakRtika udayasthAna aura 13 prakRtika
sattAsthAna mAnA gayA hai| aba eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM udayasthAna aura
sattAsthAnoM kA vicAra karate haiM  /  eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke udayasthAna
aura sattAsthAnoM kI saMkhyA batalAne ke liye gAthA meM saMketa hai ki "ege
egudaya aTThasaMtammi" arthAt-udayasthAna eka hai aura sattAsthAna ATha haiN|
udayasthAna 30 prakRtika hai aura ATha sattAsthAna 63, 62, 86, 88, 80, 76, 76
aura 75 prakRtika haiN| jinakA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai-eka prakRtika
baMdhasthAna meM eka yaza kIrti prakRti kA baMdha hotA

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 202: Sapttatika  This chapter deals with the seventh to tenth **guna-
sthana** (stages of spiritual progress) of **apuurvakarana** (the process of
purification). Due to the extreme purity of the soul at this stage, it does not
experience **vaikriya** (physical transformations) or **aaharaka** (nutritive)
**samudghata** (agitation), resulting in only one **30-prakritik** (30-natured)
**udayasthan** (state of arising) instead of the usual 25 **prakritik**
**udayasthan**.  Within the **one-prakritik** **bandha-sthan** (state of
bondage), there are eight **satta-sthan** (states of existence). The first four,
**63**, **92**, and the **prakritikasthana** (natural state), are considered
**upshama-shreni** (ascending series) while the last four, **80**, **76**,
**76**, and **75**, are considered **kshapka-shreni** (descending series).
However, until the first stage of **anivrittikarana** (cessation of karmic
bondage) is complete, the **13 prakritis** (natures) of **sthavar**
(stationary), **sukshma** (subtle), **tiryach-dwik** (two-way moving), **naraka-
dwik** (two-way moving in hell), **jati-chatuksh** (four-fold birth),
**sadharan** (ordinary), **athap** (heat), and **udyol** (effort) are not
destroyed, and the first four **satta-sthan** of **63** etc. are still found in
the **kshapka-shreni**.  Therefore, in the **one-prakritik** **bandha-sthan**,
there is one **30-prakritik** **udayasthan** and eight **satta-sthan** of
**63**, **62**, **86**, **88**, **80**, **76**, **76**, and **75**.  Now, let's
consider the **udayasthan** and **satta-sthan** of the **uparat-bandha** (state
of cessation of bondage). Even though there is no bondage, we still consider
**udayasthan** and **satta-sthan** because **namakarma** (karma related to name
and form) binds until the tenth **guna-sthan**, not beyond. However, **uday**
(arising) and **satta** (existence) continue until the fourteenth **guna-
sthan**. Despite this, there are various **udayasthan** and **satta-sthan**
depending on the different conditions and types of souls. The verse states:
**Varche bas bas beyerasanttammi thanani.**  Meaning: Even in the absence of
bondage, there are ten **udayasthan** and ten **satta-sthan**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 202 saptatikA prakaraNa hai jo apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ke sAtaveM bhAga se
lekara dasaveM guNasthAna taka hotA hai| yaha jIva atyanta vizuddha hone ke
kAraNa vaikriya aura AhAraka samudghAta ko nahIM karatA hai, jisase isake 25 Adi
prakRtika udayasthAna nahIM hote kintu eka 30 prakRtika hI udayasthAna hotA hai|
eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM jo ATha sattAsthAna batAye haiM, unameM se Adi ke
cAra 63, 92, aura prakRtikAsthAna upazamazreNi kI apekSA aura aMtima cAra 80,76,
76 aura 75 prakRtika sattAsthAna kSapakazreNi kI apekSA kahe haiM  /  parantu
jaba taka anivRttikaraNa ke prathama bhAga meM sthAvara, sUkSma tiryacadvika,
narakadvika, jAticatuSka, sAdhAraNa, Atapa aura udyola, ina teraha prakRtiyoM kA
kSaya nahIM hotA taba taka 63 Adi prakRtika, prArambha ke cAra sattAsthAna bhI
kSapakazreNi meM pAye jAte haiN| isa prakAra eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM eka
30 prakRtika udayasthAna tathA 63,62,86,88,80,76,76 aura 75 prakRtika, ye ATha
sattAsthAna samajhanA cAhiye  /  aba uparatabaMdha kI sthiti ke udayasthAnoM
aura sattAsthAnoM kA vicAra karate haiN| baMdha ke abhAva meM bhI udaya evaM
sattA sthAnoM kA vicAra karane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki nAmakarma kA baMdha dasaveM
guNasthAna taka hotA hai, Age ke cAra guNasthAnoM meM nahIM, kintu udaya aura
sattA 14veM guNasthAna taka hotI haiN| phira bhI usameM vividha dazAoM aura
jIvoM kI apekSA aneka udayasthAna aura sattAsthAna pAye jAte haiM  /  inake liye
gAthA meM kahA hai varace basa basa beyarasaMtammi ThANANi  /  arthAt - baMdha
ke abhAva meM bhI dasa udayasthAna aura dasa sattAsthAna

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth, Chapter 203  There are ten **Udayasthanas** with
**Prakriti** numbers 20, 21, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 6, and 8. And there are two
**Sattaasthanas** with **Prakriti** numbers 93, 62, 86, 88, 80, 76, 76, 75, 6,
and 6. Here is their explanation:  A **Kevali** takes eight **Samayas** to reach
**Kevali Samudghat**. During the third, fourth, and fifth **Samayas**, **Karman
Kayayog** occurs. This includes twelve **Prakritis**: **Panchendriya Jati**,
**Asatrik**, **Subhag**, **Aadey**, **Yash Kirti**, **Manushya Gati**, and
**Dhruvodaya**. In total, this results in 20 **Prakriti** **Udayasthanas**.
Without a **Tirthankara**, there are 76 **Prakriti** **Sattaasthanas**. And
without a **Tirthankara** and the **Aharak Chatushk** (four types of food),
there are 75 **Prakriti** **Sattaasthanas**. If a **Tirthankara** is present in
this state, their **Tirthankara Prakriti** will add one **Prakriti** to the
**Udayasthanas**, resulting in 21 **Prakriti** **Udayasthanas** and 80 and 76
**Prakriti** **Sattaasthanas**.  When a **Kevali** is in **Audarik Mishr
Kayayog** during **Kevali Samudghat**, they have six **Prakritis**:
**Audarikatik**, **Vachrishbhanaraach Sanhanan**, one of the six **Sansthanas**,
**Upghat**, and **Pratyek**. Adding these six **Prakritis** to the previous 20
**Prakritis** results in 26 **Prakriti** **Udayasthanas** and two
**Sattaasthanas** with 76 and 75 **Prakritis**.  If a **Tirthankara** is in
**Audarik Mishr Kayayog**, their **Tirthankara Prakriti** will add one
**Prakriti** to the **Udayasthanas**, resulting in 27 **Prakriti**
**Udayasthanas** and two **Sattaasthanas** with 80 and 76 **Prakritis**.  Adding
four **Prakritis** to the 26 **Prakritis**: **Paraghat**, **Uchch Vash**, one of
**Shubh** and **Ashubh Vihayogati**, and one of **Suswar** and **Dushwar**,
results in 30 **Prakriti** **Udayasthanas**. This occurs for a general
**Kevali** in **Audarik Kayayog** and for those who have attained the eleventh
and twelfth **Gunasthanas**. Therefore, 30 **Prakriti** **Udayasthanas...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ' SaSTha karma grantha 203 haiM  /  dasa udayasthAna 20,21,26,27,28,29,30,31, 6
aura 8 prakRtika saMkhyA vAle haiM tathA sattAsthAna 93,62,86,88,80,76,76,75, 6
aura 6 prakRtika saMkhyA vAle haiM  /  inakA spaSTIkaraNa yaha hai ki kevalI ko
kevalI samudghAta meM 8 samaya lagate haiN| inameM se tIsare, cauthe aura
pAMcaveM samaya meM kArmaNa kAyayoga hotA hai jisameM paMcendriya jAti,
asatrika, subhaga, Adeya, yaza kIrti, manuSyagati aura dhruvodayA 12 prakRtiyAM,
isa prakAra kula milAkara 20 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai aura tIrthaMkara ke
binA 76 tathA tIrthaMkara aura AhArakacatuSka ina pA~ca ke binA 75 prakRtika, ye
do sattAsthAna hote haiN| yadi isa avasthA meM vidyamAna tIrthakara hue to unake
eka tIrthakara prakRti kA udaya aura sattA hone se 21 prakRtika udayasthAna
tathA 80 tathA 76 prakRtika saMsAsthAna ho  /  jaba kevalI samudghAta ke samaya
audArikamizna kAyayoga meM rahate haiM taba unake audArikatika, vacaRSabhanArAca
saMhanana, chaha saMsthAnoM meM se koI eka saMsthAna, upaghAta aura pratyeka,
ina chaha prakRtiyoM ko pUrvokta 20 prakRtiyoM meM milAne para 26 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai tathA 76 aura 75 prakRtika ye do sattAsthAna hote haiN|
yadi tIrthaMkara audArikamizra kAyayoga meM hue to unake tIrthakara prakRti
udaya va sattA meM mila jAne para 27 prakRtika udayasthAna tathA 80 aura 76
prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna hote haiN| 26 prakRtiyoM meM parAghAta, uccha vAsa,
zubha aura azubha vihAyogati meM se koI eka tathA susvara aura duHsvara meM se
koI eka, ina cAra prakRtiyoM ke milA dene para 30 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai
jo audArika kAyayoga meM vidyamAna sAmAnya kevalI tathA gyArahaveM aura
bArahaveM guNasthAna meM prApta hotA hai  /  ataeva 30 prakRtika udayasthAna

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 73  **I**  There are six states of being: 63, 62, 86, 86, 76, and 75
*prakritis*. The first four states of being are in relation to the
*upashantamoha* *gunasthan*, and the last two states of being are in relation to
the *kshinamoha* and *sayogikevali*. If we remove the *svara* *prakriti* from
the 30 *prakritis* of the *udayasthan* and add the *tirthankara* *prakriti*, we
still get the same *udayasthan*, which occurs when the *tirthankara* *kevali*
stops the *vakyayoga*. However, in this case, there are two states of being: 80
and 76 *prakritis*. This is because when the *tirthankara* *prakriti* is added
to the 76 and 75 *prakritis* of the *samanakevali*, we get the states of being
of 80 and 76 *prakritis*.  When the *tirthankara* *prakriti* is added to the 30
*prakritis* of the *udayasthan* of the *samanakevali*, we get the 31 *prakritis*
of the *udayasthan* of the *tirthankara* *kevali*. Similarly, there are two
states of being: 80 and 76 *prakritis*. This is because when the *tirthankara*
*prakriti* is added to the 75 and 79 *prakritis* of the *samanakevali*, we get
the numbers 76 and 80.  When the *vakyayoga* is stopped in the 30 *prakritis* of
the *udayasthan* of the *samanakevali*, the *svara* *prakriti* is removed,
resulting in 26 *prakritis* of the *udayasthan*. Alternatively, when the
*shvasochchhvas* is stopped in the 30 *prakritis* of the *udayasthan* of the
*tirthankara* *kevali*, the *uchchhvas* *prakriti* is removed, resulting in 26
*prakritis* of the *udayasthan*. The first *udayasthan* is of the
*samanakevali*, and the second *udayasthan* is of the *tirthankara* *kevali*.
Therefore, in the first 26 *prakritis* of the *udayasthan*, there are two states
of being: 76 and 75 *prakritis*. In the second 26 *prakritis* of the
*udayasthan*, there are two states of being: 80 and 76 *prakritis*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 204 saptatikA prakaraNa I meM 63,62868676 aura 75 prakRtika, ye chaha
sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  inameM se Adi ke cAra sattAsthAna upazAntamoha
guNasthAna kI apekSA aura aMta ke do sattAsthAna kSINamoha aura sayogikevalI kI
apekSA batAye haiM  /  yadi isa 30 prakRtika udayasthAna meM se svara prakRti ko
nikAlakara tIrthaMkara prakRti ko milAyeM to bhI ukta udayasthAna prApta hotA
hai jo tIrthaMkara kevalI ke vacanayoga ke nirodha karane para hotA hai  /
kintu isameM sattAsthAna 80 aura 76 prakRtika, ye do hote haiN| kyoMki sAmAnya
kevalI ke jo 76 aura 75 prakRtika sattAsthAna kaha Aye haiM unameM tIrthaMkara
prakRti ke mila jAne se 80 aura 76 prakRtika ho sattAsthAna prApta hote haiN|
sAmAnya kevalI ke jo 30 prakRtika udayasthAna batalAyA gayA hai, usameM
tIrthaMkara prakRti ke milAne para tIrthaMkara kevalI ke 31 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai aura usI prakAra 80 va 76 prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna hote
haiN| kyoMki sAmAnya kevalI ke 75 aura 79 prakRtika, the do sattAsthAna batalAye
haiM, unameM tIrthaMkara prakRti ke milAne se 76 aura 80 kI saMkhyA hotI hai  /
sAmAnya kevalI ke jo 30 prakRtika udayasthAna batalA Aye haiM, usameM se
vazvanayoga ke nirodha karane para svara prakRti nikala jAtI hai, jisase 26
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai athavA tIrthaMkara kevalI ke jo 30 prakRtika
udayasthAna batalAyA hai usameM se zvAsocch vAsa ke nirodha karane para
ucchavAsa prakRti ke nikala jAne se 26 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| inameM se
pahalA udayasthAna sAmAnya kevalI ke aura dUsarA udayasthAna tIrthaMkara kevalI
ke hotA hai  /  ataH pahale 26 prakRtika udayasthAna meM 76 aura 75 prakRtika
aura dUsare 26 prakRtika udayasthAna meM 80 aura 76 prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna
hote haiM  /

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth 205  For a common Kevali, 26 natural उदयस्थान are
mentioned for the cessation of Vachan Yoga. Out of these, 28 natural उदयस्थान
occur due to the decrease in Ucchvasa Prakriti when Vassochchvasa is ceased.
This happens for a common Kevali, therefore here there are two Satta Sthan: 76
and 75 natural.  For an Aayogik Kevali in the Gujस्थान, natural उदयस्थान occurs
and there are three Satta Sthan: 80 and 76 until the penultimate time, and
natural in the final time. However, compared to a common Kevali, natural
उदयस्थान occurs in the Aayogik Gunस्थान, and there are three Satta Sthan: 76 and
75 until the penultimate time, and natural in the final time.  In this way, one
should understand the statement of ten उदयस्थान and ten Satta Sthan in the
absence of bondage.  The description of the relationship between the bondage,
उदय, and Satta Sthan of Name Karma is as follows:  | Gun Sthan | Bandha Sthan |
Mang | उदयस्थान | उदय Mang | Satta Sthan | |---|---|---|---|---|---| | 1 | 5 |
23 | 12, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27 | 5 | 12, 86, 86, 80, 78 | | | | | | | 11, 12, 88,
86, 80, 78 | | | | 23 | | 5 | 60, 88, 86, 80 | | | | | | | 27 | | | | | | | 62,
88, 86, 80 | | | | | | | 11 | | | 4 | | | | 4 | | | | | | | |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karma grantha 205 sAmAnya kevalI ke vacanayoga ke nirodha karane para 26
prakRtika udayasthAna batAyA gayA hai, usameM se vAsocch vAsa kA nirodha karane
para ucchavAsa prakRti ke kama ho jAne se 28 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /
yaha sAmAnya kevalI ke hotA hai ataH yahA~ sattAsthAna 76 aura 75 prakRtika, ye
do hote haiM  /  kara ketalI ke ayogikevalI gujasthAna meM prakRtika udayasthAna
hotA hai aura upAntya samaya taka 80 aura 76 tathA antima samaya meM prakRtika,
ye tIna sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  kintu sAmAnya kevalI kI apekSA ayogi
guNasthAna meM prakRtika udagrasthAna hotA hai tathA upAntya samaya taka 76 va
75 aura antima samaya meM prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  isa
prakAra se baMdha ke abhAva meM dasa udayasthAna aura dasa sattAsthAna hone kA
kathana samajhanA cAhie  /  nAmakarma ke baMdha, udaya aura sattAsthAnoM ke
saMbaMdha bhaMgoM kA vivaraNa isa prakAra hai- guNa sthAna | 1 baMdha sthAna
maMga 5 23 I. udayasthAna 12 21 24 25 26 27 25 EUR udaya maMga " sattAsthAna 12
32 12,86,86,80, 78 5 11 12,88,86,80, 78 nis 23 5 600 5 22 1182 " " " . KHn
62,88,86,80 27 bha " saMveSamaMga 11 4 | 4

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Saptaatika Chapter  **Udayasthana** | **Mangala** **Udayabhang** |
**Sattastana 12** | **Samveshabhang** **Sthana** 1764 1.62,88,86,80 2606
62,88,86,80,78 "MR Mat " " " 62,98,6,80 168 1780 4. 62,88,86,80,78 30 |
62,88,86,40 4 1780 ,, , , | "

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa udayasthAna sthAna| mNg| udayabhaMga | sattAsthAna 12 |
saMveSabhaMga sthAna 1764 1.62,88,86,80 2606 62,88,86,80,78 "MR mata " " "
62,98,6,80 168 1780 4. 62,88,86,80,78 30 | 62,88,86,40 4 1780 ,, , , | "

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Granth 207 Gun | Bandha Udayasthan Udayabhang Sattaasthan 12
Samvadharma | Sthan | Sthanam Mang 2614 62, 88, 86, 80 R 1sem | 28 || - S :: ::
1176 1755 2010 1152 12, 86, 886 62, 88, 16 1se8 266248 - - 41 '63, 62.86, 88,
86, 80, 787 11 12, 88, 66, 80, 78 5 33 63, 62, 81, 88, 86, 80, 78 7 0 || . . , ,
, , 7 32 | 63, 62, 86, 88, 86, 80 6 1202 , - 2616 1164 | 62, 88, 86,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 207 guNa  /  baMdha udayasthAna udayabhaMga sattAsthAna 12
saMvadharmaga | sthAna | sthAnaM maMga 2614 62,88,86,80 ra 1sema| 28 || - sa ::
:: 1176 1755 2010 1152 12,86,886 62,88,16 1se8 266248 - - 41
'63,62.86,88,86,80,787 11 12,88,66,80,78 5 33 63,62,81,88,86,80,78 7 0  //  . .
, , , , 7 32 | 63,62,86,88,86,80 6 1202 , - 2616 1164 | 62,88,86,

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 206 ## Chapter of the Seven Tika ## Location, Mangal.  ## Udya-Sthan ##
Location ## 14641/21  - ## Udya Mangal Satta-Sthan 12 41 | 13, 62, 81, 88, 86,
80, 787 62, 88, 86, 80, 785 32 | 63, 62, 81, 88, 86, 80, 787 _12, 88, 86, 80,
785 63, 62, 81, 88, 86, 806 63, 62, 86, 88, 86, 806 - - - 62, 88, 86, 804 718 |
31 72 13, 62, 86, 88, 80, 76, 768 76, 752 80, 762 76, 752 80, 762 76, 752 80,
76, 76, 754

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 206 saptatikA prakaraNa sthAna, maMga  / " .udayasthAna sthAna 14641/ 21 -
udaya maMga sattAsthAna 12 41 | 13,62,81,88,86,80,787 62,88'86,80,785 32 |
63,62,81,88,86,80,787 _12,88,86,80,785 63,62,81,88,86,806 63,62,86,88,86,806 - -
- 62,88,86,804 718 | 31 72 13,62,86,88,80,76,768 76,752 80,762 76,752 80,762
76,752 80,76,76,754

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **Quality | Bond | Location | Location |** **Mang
Udayasthan** **Udaybhang |** **Sattaasthan** **Samvegbhang |**
**33.62.86.8.80.76,76,'** **75 18076** **I.** **13145/** **1 76,558 65j 46724.**
Thus, the statement of the bond location, udayasthan, and sattaasthan of the
eight karmas and their mutual samvegbhangs is complete. Now, in the same order,
we will state the bhang in relation to their jeevasthan and gunasthan.
**"Tivigapppapagavaanehi jeevagunasannieesu thaanesu. Bhangaa pajijavyaa jaththa
jahaa sambhavo bhava." ||33||**  **Translation:**  By the three alternative
prakriti sthans (bond, uday, and satta), in the jeevagunasannieesu (places with
jeeva and guna), thaanesu (locations), bhangaa (bhang) should be performed,
jaththa (where), jahaa sambhavo (as much as possible), bhava (happens).
**Gavaarth:**  By the three alternative prakriti sthans (bond, uday, and satta),
in the locations with jeeva and guna (jeevasthan, gunasthan), as many bhangs as
possible should be performed.  **Vishesharth:**  Until now, the granth has
explained the bond location, udayasthan, and sattaasthan of the mula and uttar
prakritis and their samvegbhangs. Along with this, it has also explained these
locations of the mula prakritis and their samvegbhangs.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha guNa | baMdha  /  sthAna sthAna | maMga udayasthAna
udayabhaMga | sattAsthAna saMveghabhaMga | 3 3.62.86.8.80.76,76,' 75 18076 I.
13145/ 1 76,558 65j 46724  /  isa prakAra AThoM karmoM kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke
baMdhasthAna, udaya. sthAna aura sattAsthAnoM aura unake paraspara saMvedha
bhaMgoM kA kathana samApta huaa| aba isI krama meM unake jIvasthAnoM aura
guNasthAnoM kI apekSA bhaMga kA kathana karate haiN| tivigappapagaivANehiM
jIvaguNasanniesu ThANesu  /  bhaMgA pajiyavyA jattha jahA saMbhavo bhava  // 33
//  vArSa-tivigappapagAtAhi-tIna vikalpoM ke prakRtisthAnoM ke dvArA,
jIvagugasamiesu-zrIva aura guNa saMjJA pAle, ThANesu-sthAnoM meM, bhaMgAbhaMga,
ujiyavA-ghaTita karanA cAhie, jattha.... jahA~, jahA saMbhayo-jitane samaya,
bhavAha-hote haiN| gAvArtha-tIna vikalpoM (baMdha, udaya aura sattA) ke
prakRtisthAnoM ke dvArA jIva aura guNa saMjJA vAle sthAnoM (jIvasthAta,
guNasthAnoM) meM jahA~ jitane bhaMga saMbhava hoM vahAM uttane bhaMga ghaTita
kara lenA caahie| vizeSArtha-abhI taka grantha meM mula aura uttara prakRtiyoM
ke badhasthAna, udayasthAna aura sattAsthAnoM va unake saMvedha bhaMga batalAye
haiM tathA sAtha hI mula prakRtiyoM ke ina sthAnoM aura unake saMbaidha bhaMgoM

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seven Tika  The Lord has instructed regarding the Jiva-
sthana (states of the soul) and Guna-sthana (states of qualities). However, He
has not instructed regarding the Bandha-sthana (states of bondage), Udaya-sthana
(states of arising), and their related Bhangas (destructions) in relation to the
Uttar-Prakriti (later nature). This promise to instruct about them is made in
this gatha, stating that all the Bhangas of the three types of Prakriti-sthana
(states of nature) will be explained by relating them to the Jiva-sthana and
Guna-sthana.  First, we will explain the Bhangas of the three types of Prakriti-
sthana in the Jiva-sthana. Among the Jiva-sthana, we will first explain the
Bhangas of the Sanvesha (accumulation) of the Avasthana (states).  **Gatha 34:**
**Terasamu jivasankhevaesu naanansaray tivigappo | Ekkammi tivigappo karanam pai
etya avigappo ||**  **Word Meaning:**  * Terasamu - thirteen * Jivasankhevae -
regarding the summary (states) of the soul * Naanansaray - of the Jnanavarana
(veil of knowledge) and Antaraya Karma (hindering karma) * Tivigappo - three
alternatives * Ekkammi - in one Jiva-sthana * Sivinappo - three or two
alternatives * Karanam pai - in relation to the Karan (substance) * Etya - here
* Avigappo - absence of alternatives  **Gatha Meaning:**  In the first thirteen
Jiva-sthana, there are three alternatives for the Jnanavarana and Antaraya
Karma. In one Jiva-sthana (Paryapta Sanjee Panchaendriya), there are three and
two alternatives. In relation to the Karan (substance), there are no
alternatives.  **Special Meaning:**  This gatha begins the explanation of the
related Bhangas in the Jiva-sthana. First, we will explain the Bhangas of the
Jnanavarana and Antaraya Karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa ke jIvasthAnoM aura guNasthAnoM kI apekSA svAmI kA nirdeza
kiyA hai  /  kintu uttara prakRtiyoM kI apekSA baMdhasthAna, udayasthAna aura
unake saMbaidha bhaMgoM ke svAmI kA nirdeza nahIM kiyA hai| inake nirdeza karane
ko pratijJA isa gAthA meM kI gaI hai ki tInoM prakAra ke prakRtisthAnoM ke sava
bhaMga jIvasthAnoM aura guNasthAnoM meM ghaTita karake batalAye jaayeNge|
jIvasthAnoM aura guNasthAnoM meM se pahale yahA~ jIvasthAnoM meM tInoM prakAra
ke prakRtisthAnoM ke saba bhaMga ghaTita karate haiN| auvasthAnoM ke saMveSa
bhaMga pahale aba jJAnAvaraNa aura aMtarAya karma ke bhaMga batalAte haiM  /
terasasu jIvasaMkhevaesu nANaMsarAya tivigappo  /  ekkamima tivigappo karaNaM
pai etya avigappo  // 34 //  zabdArtha-terasamu-teraha, jIvasaMkhevae-jIva ke
saMkSepa (sthAnoM) ke viSaya meM, nANaMtarAya-jJAgAvaraNa aura aMtarAya karya
ke, tivigappo-. tIna vikalpa, ekkammi-eka jIvasthAna meM, sivinappo-tIna athavA
do vikalpa, karaNapa-karaNa (dravyamana ke Azraya se) kI apekSA, esya-yahA~,
avigappo-vikalpa kA abhAva hai| _ gAthArtha-Adi ke teraha jIvasthAnoM meM
jJAnAvaraNa aura antarAya karma ke tIna vikalpa hote haiM tathA eka jIvasthAna
(paryApta saMjI paMcendriya) meM tIna aura do vikalpa hote haiN| dravyamana kI
apekSA inake koI vikalpa nahIM haiN| vizeSArtha-isa gAthA se jIvasthAnoM meM
saMbaMdha bhaMgoM kA kAthana prArambha karate haiN| sarvaprathama jJAnAvaraNa
aura antarAya karma ke bhaMga batalAte haiN|

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth 211  The author has used the term "Jivasankhevaesu" in the
verse to explain the meaning of the term "Jivasthan". This means that the Jivas
are collected or gathered by the insufficient one-sense faculty and other
Dharmas. This collection of Jivas is called "Jivasankhepa" and is referred to as
"Jivasthan". Thus, the term "Jivasankhepa" is accepted as synonymous with
"Jivasthan". The fourteen types of Jivasthan, including the one-sense faculty,
subtle, insufficient, etc., have been explained in the Fourth Karma Granth.  Out
of these fourteen Jivasthan, the first thirteen have three options for the
Gnanavaran and Antaraya Karma: "Natara Mini!". This will be explained below.
Gnanavaran and Antaraya Karma have five Uttar-Prakritis each, and all these
Prakritis are Dhruvbandhini, Dhruvodaya, and Dhruvsattaka. This is because the
Uttar-Prakritis of these two Karmas remain bound, arising, and existing
continuously until their final detachment. Therefore, in the first thirteen
Jivasthan, the Uttar-Prakritis of Gnanavaran and Antaraya Karma have five-
Prakriti binding, five-Prakriti arising, and five-Prakriti existence, which are
found in three alternative forms. This is because in none of these Jivasthan is
there any detachment of their binding, arising, and existence.  In the final
fourteenth Jivasthan, the sufficient five-sense faculty, the detachment of
Gnanavaran and Antaraya Karma happens first, followed by the detachment of
arising and existence. Therefore, here, five-Prakriti binding,  1. Sanksipyante
- Sangrihyante Jivaa Ebhiriti Sanksepa: -  Insufficient one-sense faculty and
other inter-species differences, the collection of Jivas is Jivasankhepa,
meaning Jivasthan. - Saptaatika Prakaran, page 165

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 211 granthakAra ne jIvasthAna pada ke artha kA bodha karAne
ke liye gAthA meM 'jIvasaMkhevaesu' pada diyA hai arthAt jina aparyApta
ekendriyatva Adi dharmoM ke dvArA jIva saMkSipta yAnI saMgRhIta kiye jAte haiM,
unakI jIvasaMkSepa saMjJA hai-- unheM jIvasthAna kahate haiM  /  isa prakAra
jIvasaMkSepa pada ko jIvasthAna pada ke artha meM svIkAra kiyA gayA hai  /
ekendriya sUkSma aparyApta Adi jIvasthAnoM ke caudaha bheda caturthaM
karmagrantha meM batalAye jA cuke haiN| ukta caudaha jIvasthAnoM meM se Adi ke
teraha jIvasthAnoM meM jJAnAvaraNa aura aMtarAya karma ke tIna vikalpa
haiM'nAtarA mini ! isakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA jA rahA hai| zAnAvaraNa aura
aMtarAya karma kI pAMca-pAMca uttara prakRtiyAM haiM aura ve saba prakRtiyAM
dhruvabaMdhinI, dhrubodayA aura dhruvasattAka hai  /  kyoMki ina donoM kamoM kI
uttara prakRtiyoM kA apane-apane viccheda ke antima samaya taka baMdha, udaya
aura sattva nirantara banA rahatA hai| ata: Adi ke teraha jIvasthAnoM meM
jJAnAvaraNa aura antarAya karma kI uttara prakRtiyoM kA pAMca prakRtika baMdha,
pAMca prakRtika udaya aura pAMca prakRtika sattA, ina tIna vikalpa rUpa eka
bhaMga pAyA jAtA hai| kyoMki ina jIvasthAnoM meM se kisI bhI jIvasthAna meM
inake baMdha, udaya aura mattA kA viccheda nahIM pAyA jAtA hai  /  antima
naudahaveM paryApta saMjI paMcendriya jIvasthAna meM jJAnAvaraNa aura antarAya
karma kA baMdhaviccheda pahale hotA hai aura usake bAda udaya tathA sattA kA
biccheda hotA hai| ataH yahAM pAMca prakRtika baMdha, 1 saMkSipyante-saMgRhyante
jIvA ebhiriti saMkSepA: aparyAptakakenTiyatvAdayovAntarajAtibhedAH, jIvAnAM
saMkSepA jIvasaMkSepAH jIvasthAnAnItyarthaH  /  - saptatikA prakaraNa kA, pR0
165

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The chapter on the seven categories (Sapttatika) discusses the five natural
states of arising (udaya) and the five natural states of existence (satta). This
results in three alternative forms (vikalapa) of a single entity (bhang). After
the cessation of bondage (bandha), the five natural states of arising and the
five natural states of existence result in two alternative forms of a single
entity - 'Ekkammi Tiduvigappho'. The five natural states of bondage, arising,
and existence are found in the subtle (sukshma) sampraya gunasthanas. After the
cessation of bondage, the states of subdued delusion (upshanta moha) and
diminished delusion (kshinamoha) in the gunasthanas have only two alternative
forms (vikalapa) - 'Shik: Ta. Gahelo'. This is because the simultaneous
cessation of arising and existence makes other forms of bhang impossible.  The
पर्याप्त संज्ञी पंचेन्द्रिय जीवस्थान (Paryapta Sanjni Panchendriya Jeevasthan)
has another characteristic: 'Karanam Pai Eththa Avigappho'. This means that
after attaining omniscience (kevalgyan), the being does not have a mental body
(bhavamana) but only a physical body (dravya mana). This is why they are still
called पर्याप्त संज्ञी पंचेन्द्रिय. The Churni also states:  "Manakaranam
Kevalino Vi Asthi Sen Sanino Vuchchati. Manovinaanm Pay Hai Samino Na Hathi."
This means that even the omniscient being has a mental organ (manakaran), which
is why they are called संजी (Sanji). However, they are not संझी (Sanjhi) in
terms of mental knowledge (manovinaan).  Such संयोगि (Sayogi) and अयोगि (Ayogi)
मेयली (Meyali) beings, who are पर्याप्त संज्ञी पंचेन्द्रिय due to their
association with the dravyagana, do not experience the three alternative forms
or the two alternative forms of bhang. This means that the beings who are called
पर्याप्त संज्ञी पंचेन्द्रिय due to their physical body (dravya mana) do not
experience any bhang in terms of the bondage, arising, and existence of the
knowledge-obscuring (gyanavaran) and obstructing (antaraya) karmas. This is
because the cessation of bondage, arising, and existence of these karmas occurs
before they become omniscient (kevali).  Thus, in the जीवस्थान (Jeevasthan), the
knowledge-obscuring (gyanavaran) and obstructing (antaraya) karmas...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa pAMca prakRtika udaya aura pAMca prakRtika sattA, isa
prakAra tIna vikalpa rUpa eka bhaMga hotA hai| anantara baMdhaviccheda ho jAne
para pAMca prakRtika udaya aura pA~ca prakRtika sattA, isa prakAra do vikalpa
rUpa eka bhaMga hotA hai-'ekkammi tiduvigppo|' pA~ca prakRtika vaMdha, udaya
aura sattA, yaha tIna vikalpa sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna taka pAye jAte haiM
tathA usake bAda baMdha kA viccheda ho jAne para upazAnta moha aura kSINamoha
guNasthAna meM kRtikAra zika: tA. gahalo vikalpa hote haiN| kyoMki udaya aura
sattA kA yugapad viccheda ho jAne se anya bhaMga sambhava nahIM haiN| paryApta
saMjJI paMcendriya jIvasthAna kI eka aura vizeSatA batalAte haiM ki 'karaNaM pai
ettha avigappo' arthAt kevalajJAna ke prApta ho jAne ke bAda isa jIva ko
bhAvamana to nahIM rahatA kintu dravyamana hI rahatA hai aura isa apekSA se use
bhI paryApta saMjJI paMcendriya kahate haiN| cUNi meM bhI kahA hai maNakaraNaM
kevaliNo vi asthi seNa saniNo vuccati  /  maNoviNNANaM pAya hai samiNo na hti| '
arthAta-mana nAmaka karaNa kevalI ke bhI hai, isaliye ve saMjI kahalAte haiM
kintu ve mAnasika jJAna kI apekSA saMjhI nahIM hote haiM  /  aise sayogi aura
ayogi meyalI jo dravyagana ke saMyoga se paryApta saMjhI paMcendriya haiM, unake
tIna vikalpa rUpa aura do vikalpa rUpa bhaMga nahIM hote haiN| arthAta kevala
dravyamana kI apekSA jo jIva paryApta saMjI paMcendriya kahalAte haiM, unake
jJAnAvaraNa aura antarAya krama ke baMdha, udaya aura satva kI apekSA koI bhaMga
nahIM hai kyoMki ina karmoM ke baMdha, udaya aura sattA kA viccheda kevalI hone
se pahale hI ho jAtA hai| isa prakAra se jIvasthAnoM meM jJAnAvaraNa aura
antarAya karma ke

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 21  After explaining the six types of karma-grantha bhangas, we now
discuss the components of the binding and other locations of Darshanavaran,
Vedaniya, Ayu and Gotra karmas.  **Verse 35:**  **General Meaning:** In the
thirteen locations of the soul, there are nine types of natural binding, four or
five types of natural arising, and nine types of natural existence. In one
location of the soul, there are eleven types of bhangas. In Vedaniya, Ayu and
Gotra karmas, we will discuss the different types of Mohaniya karma.  **Specific
Meaning:** The verse indicates that we will first discuss the binding and other
locations of Darshanavaran, Vedaniya, Ayu and Gotra karmas, and then later
discuss the different types of Mohaniya karma.  The binding and other locations
of Darshanavaran karma are as follows: In the initial thirteen locations of the
soul, there are nine types of natural binding, four or five types of natural
arising, and nine types of natural existence. These constitute two types of
bhangas. That is, nine types of natural binding, four types of natural arising,
and nine types of natural existence constitute one type of bhangas, and nine
types of natural binding, five types of natural arising, and nine types of
natural existence constitute the second type of bhangas. Thus, there are two
types of bhangas in the initial thirteen locations of the soul. The reason for
this is that in the initial thirteen locations of the soul, there is neither a
breaking of the binding nor a breaking of the arising of any of the subsequent
natures of Darshanavaran karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 21 //  SaSTha karmagrantha bhaMgoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba darzanAvaraNa,
vedanIya, tyAyu aura gotra kArma ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM ke aMgoM ko batalAte haiN|
tere natha caja paNagaM na saMtegammi bhaMgameSakArA  /  beyaNiyAuyagoe vibhajja
mohaM paraM zocchaM  // 35 /  /  zamvArtha-tara-taraha jojasthAnoM me, nava-nAM
prakRtika baMdha, ghAu paNagaM-cAra athavA pAMca prakRtika udaya, manasaMta-nau
kI sattA, egambhi-eka jIvasthAna meM, bhaMgakArA-gyAraha maMga hote haiM,
veNiyAuyagoe-vedanIyA, AyU aura goza karma meM, vibhajjavikalpa karake, mohaM-
mohanIya karma ke, paraM-Age, vocchaM mheNge| gAyA-teraha jIvasthAnoM meM nau
prakRtika baMdha, cAra yA pAMca prakRtika udaya aura nau prakRtika sattA hotI
hai| eka jIbasthAna meM gyAraha bhaMga hote haiM  /  vadanIya, Ayu aura gotra
karma meM baMdhAdi sthAnoM kA vibhAga karake mohanIya karma ke bAre meM Age
kheNge| vizeSArtha-gAthA meM darzanAvaraNa, vedanIya, Ayu aura gotra karma ke
baMdhAdi sthAnoM ko batalA kara bAda meM mohanIya karma ke vikalpa batalAne kA
saMketa kiyA hai| darzanAvaraNa karma ke baMdhAdi vikalpa isa prakAra haiM ki
Adi ke teraha jIvasthAnoM meM nau prakRtika baMdha, cAra yA pA~ca prakRtika
udaya tathA nau prakRtika sattA, ye do bhaMga hote haiN| arthAt nau prakRtika
baMdha, cAra prakRtika udaya aura nau prakRtika sattA yaha eka bhaMga aura nau
prakRtika baMdha, pAMca prakRtika udaya tathA nau prakRtika sattA yaha dUsarA
bhaMga, isa prakAra Adi ke teraha jIvasthAnoM meM do bhaMga hote haiM  /  isakA
kAraNa yaha hai ki prArambha ke teraha jIvasthAnoM meM darzanAvaraNa karma kI
kisI bhI uttara prakRti kA na to baMdhaviccheda hotA hai, na udayaviccheda

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
214 Chapter on the Seven Tika Neither is there a state of being nor a state of
non-being. Among the five states of sleep, namely sleep, dreamless sleep, etc.,
one may or may not arise at a particular time. Therefore, two types of bhang are
mentioned for the thirteen states of being of a jiva, depending on whether one
of these five states of sleep arises or not. However, in the state of a fully
conscious five-sense jiva, there are eleven bhangs, "Egambhi Bhangmekara".
Because in the state of a fully conscious five-sense jiva, all nine types of
Darshanavaran karma, from the lowest to the highest, can be bound, arise, exist,
and be destroyed. Therefore, in this state of being, twenty-one angas are
indicated in relation to the binding, arising, and existence of the higher types
of Darshanavaran karma. The consideration of these eleven bhangs has been done
earlier in the context of the general bhangs of Darshanavaran. Therefore, they
are not explained again here. Those who are curious should learn about them from
there. P After mentioning the bhangs of Darshanavaran karma, they mention the
bhangs of Vedaniya, Ayu, and Gotra karma. But the author himself has not
mentioned the bhangs of these three karmas, nor has he mentioned how many bhangs
are there in which state of being. But since their discussion is necessary, they
are explained from other sources. There is a verse in the Bhagya, which
discusses the bhangs of Vedaniya and Gotra karma in relation to the fourteen
states of being. The verse is as follows: "Pajatasaniare Attha Chakkam Cha
Vaiyanibhanga. Sakshama Lingam Cha Goe Palayam Jivatha."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 214 saptatikA prakaraNa hotA hai aura na sattAviccheda hI hotA hai  /  nidrA,
nidrAnidrA Adi pAMca nidrAoM meM se eka kAla meM kisI eka kA udaya hotA bhI hai
aura nahIM bhI hotA hai  /  isIliye ina pA~ca nidrAoM meM se kisI eka kA udaya
hone yA na hone kI apekSA se Adi ke teraha jIvasthAnoM ke do bhaMga batalAye
haiM  /  parantu eka jo paryApta saMjJI paMcendriya jIvasthAna hai usameM
gyAraha maMga hote haiM egambhi bhaMgamekkArA'  /  kyoMki paryApta saMjJI
paMcendriya jIvasthAna meM guNasthAnoM ke krama se darzanAvaraNa karma kI nau
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha, udaya aura sattA tathA inakI vyucchitti saba kucha
sambhava hai  /  isIliye isa jIvasthAna meM darzanAvaraNa karma kI uttara
prakRtiyoM ke bagha udaya aura sattA kI apekSA 21 aMga hone kA saMketa kiyA gayA
hai  /  ina gyAraha bhaMgoM kA vicAra pUrva meM darzanAvaraNa ke sAmAnya
saMvaidha bhaMgoM ke prasaMga meM kiyA jA cukA hai| ataH punaH yahA~ unakA
spaSTIkaraNa nahIM kiyA gayA hai| jijJAsu-jana vahAM se inakI jAnakArI kara
leveM  /  P isa prakAra se darzanAvaraNa karma ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA kathana
karane ke bAda vedanIya, Ayu aura gotra karma ke bhaMga batalAte haiM  /  lekina
granthakarttA ne svayaM ukta tIna karmoM ke bhaMgoM kA nirdeza nahIM kiyA aura
na hI yaha batAyA ki kisa jIvasthAna meM kitane bhaMga hote haiM  /  kintu inakA
vivecana Avazyaka hone se anya AdhAra se inakA spaSTIkaraNa karate haiM  /
bhAgya meM eka gAthA AI hai, jisameM bedanIya aura gotra karma ke bhaMgoM kA
vivecana caudaha jIvasthAnoM kI apekSA kiyA gayA hai| ukta bhASA isa prakAra hai
pajjatasaniyare aTTha cakkaM ca vaiyaNiyabhaMgA  /  sakSama ligaM ca goe paleyaM
jIvaThA ||

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Text  **215.** _That is, in the five-sense beings with sufficient
knowledge, there are eight divisions of Vedaniya karma, and in the remaining
thirteen types of beings, there are four divisions. Similarly, in the five-sense
beings with sufficient knowledge, there are seven divisions of Gotra karma, and
in each of the remaining thirteen types of beings, there are three divisions._
The detailed explanation of the above statement is as follows:  In the five-
sense beings with sufficient knowledge, there are twelve possible combinations
of qualities for Vedaniya karma. Therefore, there are eight divisions:  1.
Binding of Asata, arising of Asata, and existence of both Asata and Sata. 2.
Binding of Asata, arising of Sata, and existence of both Asata and Sata. 3.
Binding of Sata, arising of Asata, and existence of both Asata and Sata. 4.
Binding of Sata, arising of Sata, and existence of both Asata and Sata. 5.
Arising of Asata and existence of both Asata and Sata. 6. Arising of Sata and
existence of both Asata and Sata. 7. Arising of Asata and existence of Asata. 8.
Arising of Sata and existence of Sata.  However, in each of the first thirteen
types of beings, only the first four of these eight divisions are found. This is
because in these beings, the binding, arising, and existence of both Sata and
Asata Vedaniya are possible in all cases. In the Imoleena Bhashya Gatha, it is
said: "In the beings with sufficient knowledge, there are four divisions of
Vedaniya karma."  These eight divisions of Vedaniya karma should be categorized
in relation to the Gunasthanas in the five-sense beings with sufficient
knowledge as follows:  The first division, binding of Asata, arising of Asata,
and existence of both Asata and Sata, and the second division, binding of Asata,
arising of Sata, and existence of both Asata and Sata, are found from the first
Mithyadristi Gunasthana to the sixth Pramatta-Samyata Gunasthana. This is
because in the subsequent Gunasthanas, there is no binding of Asata Vedaniya.
The third division...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karma grantha 215 _arthAt-paryApta saMjJI paMcendriya jIvasthAna meM
vedanIya karma ke ATha bhaMga aura zeSa teraha jIvasthAnoM meM cAra bhaMga hote
haiM tathA gotra karma ke paryApta saMjJI paMcendriya jIvasthAna meM sAta bhaMga
aura zeSa teraha jIvasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM tIna bhaMga hote haiN| ukta
kathana kA vizada vivecana nimna prakAra hai-vedanIya karma ke pani saMjhI
ganendriya jIjasthAna meM daulaha guNa thAna sambhava haiM ata: usameM, 1. asAtA
kA bandha, asAtA kA udaya aura sAtA-asAtA donoM kI sattA, 2. asAtA kA baMdha,
sAtA kA udaya aura sAtA-asAtA donoM kI sattA, 3. sAtA kA bandha, asAtA kA udaya
aura sAtA-asAtA kI satA, 4. sAtA kA bandha, sAtA kA udaya aura sAtA-asAtA donoM
ko sattA, 5. asAtA kA udaya aura sAtA-asAtA donoM kI sattA, i. sAtA kA udaya
aura sAtA-asAtA donoM kI sattA, 7. asAtA kA udaya aura asAtA kI sattA aura 8.
sAtA kA udaya tathA sAtA kI sattA, ye ATha bhaMga hote haiN| kintu prArambha ke
teraha jIvasthAnoM meM se pratyeka ke ukta ATha bhaMgoM meM se Adi ke cAra
bhaMga hI prApta hote haiN| kyoMki inameM sAtA aura asAtA vedanIya ina donoM kA
yathAsambhava bandha, udaya aura sattA sarvatra sambhava hai  /  imoline bhASya
gAthA meM kahA gayA hai ki 'pajjattagasanniyare acha caukkaM ca veynniybhNgaa|'
_ vedanIya karma ke ukta ATha bhaMgoM ko paryApta saMjJI paMcendriya jIvasthAna
meM guNasthAnoM kI apekSA isa prakAra ghaTita karanA cAhiye pahalA bhaMga asAtA
kA baMdha, asAtA kA udaya aura sAtA-asAtA ko sattA tathA dUsarA bhaMga-asAtA kA
baMdha, sAtA kA udaya aura sAtA-asAtA kI sattA, yaha do bhaMga pahale
mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna se lekara chaThe pramattasaMyata guNasthAna taka pAye
jAte haiN| kyoMki Age ke guNasthAnoM meM asAtA vedanIya ke baMdha kA abhAva hai|
tIsarA bhaMga

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Sevenfold  The sevenfold bondage, the sevenfold arising,
and the existence of both the sevenfold and the non-sevenfold - these four
divisions are found from the first Mithya Drishti Gunasthan to the thirteenth
Sayogikevali Gunasthan. After that, due to the absence of bondage, the fifth
division - the arising of the non-sevenfold and the existence of both the
sevenfold and the non-sevenfold, and the sixth division - the arising of the
sevenfold and the existence of both the sevenfold and the non-sevenfold, these
two divisions are attained in the Ayogikevali Gunasthan until the penultimate
time. And at the ultimate time, the seventh division - the arising of the non-
sevenfold and the existence of the non-sevenfold, and the eighth division - the
arising of the sevenfold and the existence of the sevenfold, these two divisions
are found.  Sayogikevali and Ayogikevali are called Sanji in relation to the
Dravyaman, therefore, there is no contradiction in accepting the eight divisions
of Vedaniya Karma in the Sanji Panchendriya Paryapt Jeevasthan.  Thus, having
explained the divisions of Vedaniya Karma, we now explain the aspects of Motr
Karma: "Sattga Tigam Cha Goe" - they are as follows: In the Sanji Panchendriya
Paryapt Jeevasthan of Gotr Karma, seven divisions are attained. These seven
divisions are as follows: 1. The bondage of the low, the arising of the low, and
the existence of the low, 2. The bondage of the low, the arising of the low, and
the existence of both the low and the high, 3. The bondage of the low, the
arising of the high, and the existence of both the low and the high, 4. The
bondage of the high, the arising of the low, and the existence of both the low
and the high, 5. The bondage of the high, the arising of the high, and the
existence of both the low and the high, 6. The arising of the high and the
existence of both the low and the high, and 7. The arising of the high and the
existence of the high.  Of these seven divisions, the first division occurs to
those Sanjis who...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa sAtA kA baMdha, asAtA kA udaya aura sAtA-asAtA kI sattA
cauthA bhaMga-sAtA kA baMdha, sAtA kA udaya aura sAtA-asAtA kI sattA, yaha do
bikalpa pahale mithyA dRSTi guNasthAna se lekara terahaveM sayogikevalI
guNasthAna taka pAye jAte haiN| isake bAda baMdha kA abhAva ho jAne se pA~cA
bhaMga-asAtA kA udaya aura sAtA-asAtA kI sattA tathA chaThA bhaMgasAtA kA udaya
aura sAtA-asAtA donoM kI sattA, yaha do bhaMga ayogi kevalI guNasthAna meM
dvicarama samaya taka prApta hote haiM aura carama samaya meM sAtavA bhaMga-
asAtA kA udaya aura asAtA kI sattA tathA AThavAM bhaMga-sAtA kA udaya aura sAtA
kI sattA, yaha do bhaMga pAye jAte haiN| sayogikevalI aura ayogikevalI
dravyamana ke sambandha se saMjI kahe jAte haiM, ata: saMjJI paMcendriya
paryApta jIvasthAna meM vedanIya karma ke ATha bhaMga mAnane meM kisI prakAra kA
virodha nahIM hai| isa prakAra se vedanIya karma ke bhaMgoM kA kathana karake
aba motra karma ke aMgoM ko batalAte haiM ki 'sattaga tigaM ca goe'-ve isa
prakAra haiM gotrakarma ke paryApta saMjJI paMcendriya jIvasthAna meM sAta
bhaMga prApta hote haiM  /  ve sAta bhaMga isa prakAra haiM1. nIca kA baMdha,
nIca kA udaya aura nIca kI sattA, 2. nIca kA baMdha, nIca kA udaya aura ucca-
nIca donoM kI sattA, 3. nIca kA baMdha, ucca kA udaya aura ucca-nIca donoM kI
sattA, 4. ucca kA baMdha, nIca kA udaya aura ucca-nIca donoM kI sattA, 5. ucca
kA baMdha, ucca kA udaya aura ucca-nIca kI sattA, 6. unAca kA udaya aura ucca-
nIca donoM kI sattA tathA 5. ucca kA udaya aura ucca kI sattA  /  ikta sAta
bhaMgoM meM se pahalA bhaMga una saMjJiyoM ko hotA hai jo

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth 217  The first, second, and fourth of the seven bhangas
are found in the remaining thirteen jiva sthans. The first bhang, which is the
binding of the lower gotra, the arising of the lower gotra, and the existence of
the lower gotra, occurs always in the agnikayik and vayukayik jivas after the
uvalna of the higher gotra, but in the rest, it occurs for some time. The second
bhang, which is the binding of the lower gotra, the arising of the lower gotra,
and the existence of the higher and lower gotra, and the fourth bhang, which is
the binding of the higher gotra, the arising of the lower gotra, and the
existence of the higher and lower gotra, both these bhangas are also found in
the thirteen jiva sthans due to the arising of the lower gotra. Other
alternatives are not possible, because in the lower gotras, the arising of the
higher gotra does not occur.  Thus, according to the Bhashya's verse, after
explaining the bhangas of vedaniya and gotra karmas in the jiva sthans, now to
explain the bhangas of ayu karma in the jiva sthans, the Bhashya's verse is
quoted.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 i SaSTha karmagrantha 217 agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika paryAya se Akara saMjJiyoM
meM utpanna hote haiM, kyoMki agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIvoM ke ucca gotra kI
uvalanA dekhI jAtI hai  /  phira bhI yaha bhaMga saMjJI jIvoM ke kucha samaya
taka hI pAyA jAtA hai| saMjJI paMcendriya paryApta jIvasthAna meM dUsarA aura
tIsarA bhaMga prArambha ke do guNasthAna mithyAtva sAsAdana kI apekSA batAyA
hai| cauthA saMga prArambha ke pAMca guNasthAnoM kI apekSA se kahA hai| pAMcavAM
bhaMga prArambha ke dasa guNasthAnoM kI apekSA se kahA hai| chaThA bhaMga
upazAntamoha guNasthAna se lekara ayogikevalI guNasthAna ke upAntya samaya taka
hone kI apekSA se kahA hai  /  aura sAtavAM bhaMga ayogikevalI guNasthAna ke
antima samaya kI apekSA se kahA hai  /  1 1 lekina zeSa teraha jIvasthAnoM meM
ukta sAta bhaMgoM meM se pahalA, dUsarA aura cauthA ye tIna bhaMga prApta hote
haiN| pahalA bhaMga nIca gotra kA baMdha, nIca gotra kA udaya aura nIca gotra kI
sattA agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIvoM meM ucca gotra kI uvalanA ke anantara
sarvadA hotA hai kintu zeSa meM se unake bhI kucha kAla taka hotA hai jo
agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika paryAya se Akara anya pRthvIkAyika, dvIndriya Adi meM
utpanna hue haiN| dUsarA bhaMga - totra gotra kA baMdha, nIca gotra kA udaya
aura ucca-nIca gotra kI sattA tathA cauthA bhaMga - ucca gotra kA baMdha, nIca
gotra kA udaya aura ucca-nIca gotra kI sattA, yaha donoM bhaMga bhI teraha
jIvasthAnoM meM nIca gotra kA ho udaya hone se pAye jAte haiM  /  anya vikalpa
sambhava nahIM haiM, kyoMki ticoM meM ucca gotra kA udaya nahIM hotA hai  /  isa
prakAra se bhASya kI gAthA ke anusAra jIvasthAnoM meM vedanIya aura gotra karmoM
ke bhaMgoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba jIvasthAnoM meM Ayu karma ke bhaMgoM ko
batalAne ke liye bhApya kI gAthA ko uddhRta karate haiM

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Saptatikaprakarana Panjittapajjasaga Samane Pajjatta Abhana Seshesu. Atthavisam
Dasamgam Navangam Panangam cha Ayussah. That is, the Paryapta Sanjni
Pancendriya, Aparyapta Sanjni Pancendriya, Paryapta Asanjni Pancendriya, and the
remaining eleven Jivasthanaka have 28, 10, 9, and 5 Bhangas respectively. The
meaning is that the Paryapta Sanjni Pancendriya Jivasthanaka has 28 Bhangas of
Ayukarma, the Aparyapta Sanjni Pancendriya Jivasthanaka has 10 Bhangas, and the
Paryapta Asanjni Pancendriya Jivasthanaka has 9 Bhangas. The remaining eleven
Jivasthanaka have 5 Bhangas each. The 28 Bhangas of the Paryapta Sanjni
Pancendriya Jivasthanaka should be understood as follows: the first 5 are of the
Nāraka beings, the next 6 are of the Tiryañca beings, the following 12 are of
the Manuṣya beings, and the last 5 are of the Deva beings, making a total of 28
Bhangas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 218 saptatikA prakaraNa panjattApajjasaga samaNe pajjata abhaNa sesesu  /
aTThAvIsaM dasagaM navagaM paNagaM ca Aussa  //  arthAt-paryApta saMtrI
paMcendriya, aparyApta saMjI paMcendriya, paryApta asaMzI paMcendriA aura koSa
gyAraha jIsasthAnaka maza: 28, 10, 6 aura 5 bhaMga hote haiN| Azaya yaha hai ki
paryApta saMjJI paMcendriya jIvasthAna meM Adhukama ke 28 bhaMga hote haiN|
aparyApta saMjJI paMcendriya jIvasthAna meM 10 tathA paryApta asaMjJI
paMcendriya jIvasthAna meM ha bhaMga hote haiN| ina tIna jIvasthAnoM se zeSa
rahe gyAraha jIvasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM pAMca-pAMca bhaMga hote haiN|
paryApta saMjJI paMcendriya jIvasthAna meM Ayukarma ke aTThAIsa bhaMga isa
prakAra samajhanA cAhiye ki pahale nArakoM ke 5, tiryaMcoM ke 6, manuSyoM ke hai
aura devoM ke 5 bhaMga batalA Aye haiM, jo kula milAkara 28 bhaMga hote haiM, ve
hI yahAM paryApta saMjI paMcendriya ke 28 bhaMga kahe gaye haiN| vizeSa vivecana
isa prakAra hai nAraka jIva ke 1. parabhava kI Ayu ke baMdhakAla ke pUrva
narakAyu kA udaya, narakAyu kI sattA, 2. parabhava kI Ayu baMdha hone ke samaya
tiyaMcAyu kA baMdha, naramAyu kA udaya, naraka-tiryaMcAyu kI sattA athavA 3.
manuSyAyu kA baMdha, narakAyu kA udaya, naraka-manuSyAyu kI sattA, 4. parabhava
kI AyubaMdha ke uttarakAla meM narakAyu kA udaya aura narakaliyaMcAyu kI sattA
athavA 5. narakAyu kA udaya aura manuSya-marakAyu kI sattA, yaha pAMca bhaMga
hote haiM  /  nAraka jIva bhavapratyaya se hI deva aura narakAyu baMdha nahIM
karate haiM ata: parabhava kI Ayu baMdhakAla meM aura baMdhottara kAla meM deva
aura narakAyu kA vikalpa sambhava nahIM hone se nAraka jIvoM meM Ayukarma ke
pAMca vikalpa hI hote haiN|

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 216  **Sixth Karma Granth**  _In the same way, one should understand the five
alternatives of Ayukarma in Devas. However, the only difference is that instead
of Narakayu, one should say Devayu. For example, the rise of Devayu and the
existence of Devayu, etc._  _The nine alternatives for Tiryanchas are as
follows:_  1. _The rise of Tiryanchayu, the existence of Tiryanchayu, this
alternative is the age of Parbhavu before the time of bondage._ 2. _The bondage
of Narakayu in the time of bondage of Parbhavu, the rise of Tiryanchayu, the
existence of Narak-Tiryanchayu, or_ 3. _The bondage of Tiryanchayu, the rise of
Tiryanchayu, and the existence of Tiryancha-Tiryanchayu, or_ 4. _The bondage of
Manushayau, the rise of Tiryanchayu, and the existence of Manusya-Tiryanchayu,
or_ 5. _The bondage of Devayu, the rise of Tiryanchayu, and the existence of
Deva-Tiryanchayu._ 6. _After the bondage of Parbhavu, the rise of Tiryanchayu,
the existence of Narak-Tiryanchayu, or_ 7. _The rise of Tiryanchayu, the
existence of Tiryancha-Tiryanchayu, or_ 8. _The rise of Tiryanchayu, the
existence of Manusya-Tiryanchayu, or_ 9. _The rise of Tiryanchayu, the existence
of Deva-Tiryanchayu._  _In this way, there are nine alternatives of Ayukarma for
the Sanjeevi Panchendriya Tiryanchas._  _Similarly, one should understand the
nine alternatives for Manusyas, but with the difference that instead of
Tiryanchayu, one should consider Manushayau. For example, the rise of Manushayau
and the existence of Manushayau, etc._  _In this way, the total number of
alternatives for Narakas (5), Devas (5), Tiryanchas (9), and Manusyas (9) is 5 +
5 + 9 + 9 = 28._  _Therefore, there are 28 alternatives of Ayukarma for the
Sanjeevi Panchendriya Jeevas._  _There are ten alternatives for the Sanjeevi
Panchendriya Aparayapt Jeevas. The Sanjeevi Panchendriya Aparayapt Jeevas are
only Manusyas and Tiryanchas, because Devas and Narakas..._

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 216 SaSTha karmagrantha _isI prakAra devoM meM Ayakarma ke pAMca bikalpa
samajhanA caahiye| kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki narakAyu ke sthAna para devAyu
kahanA cAhiye  /  jaise ki devAyu kA udaya aura devAyu kI sattA ityAdi  /
tiryaMcoM ke nau vikalpa isa prakAra haiM ki 1. tiryaMcAyu kA udaya, tirya cAyu
kI sattA, yaha vikala parabhava kI Ayu baMdhakAla ke pUrva hotA hai  /  2.
parabhava kI Ayu baMdhakAla meM narakAya kA baMdha, tiyaMcAyu kA udaya, naraka-
tiryaMca Ayu kI sattA athavA 3. tithaM vAyu kA baMdha, tiryacAyu kA udaya aura
tiryaMca-tiyaM cAya kI sattA athavA 4. manuSyAyu kA baMdha, tiryaMcAyu kA udaya
aura manuSya-tiyaMcAyu kI sattA athabA 5. devAyu kA baMdha, tiryaMcAyu kA udaya
aura deva-tiryaMcAyu kI sattA  /  parabhatrAyu ke baMdhottara kAla meM 6.
tiryaMcAyu kA udaya, naraka-tiryaMcAyu kI sattA athavA 7. tiryaMcAyu kA sadarA,
tiryaca-niyaMca Ayu kI sattA athavA 8. tithaM cAyu kA udaya, manupya tiryaMcAyu
kI sattA athavA ha. tiyaMtrAyu kA udaya, deva-tiryaMcAyu kI sattA  /  isa
prakAra saMjJI paMcendriya paryApta tiryaMca ke Ayukarma ke ha bhaMga hote haiN|
_ isI prakAra manuSyoM ke bhI no bhaMga samajhanA cAhiye, lekina itanI vizeSatA
hai ki tiryaMcAyu ke sthAna para manuSyAyu kA vidhAna kara leveM  /  jaise ki
manuSyAyu kA udaya aura manuSyAyu kI sattA ityAdi  /  _ isa prakAra nAraka ke 5,
deva ke 5, tiryaMca ke hai aura manuSya ke vikalpoM kA kula jor3a 5-|-5-+E+9=28
hotA hai| isIliye paryApta saMjJI paMcendriya jIvasthAna meM Ayukarma ke 28
bhaMga mAne jAte haiN| saMjJI paMcendriya aparyApta jIba ke dasa bhaMga haiN|
saMjJI paMcendriya aparyApta jIva manuSya aura tiryaca hI hote haiM, kyoMki deva
aura nArakoM

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on the Seven Tika ## 220  The karma of insufficient name does not
arise, and only the bondage of human and animal life occurs in relation to their
past lives. Therefore, there are five destructions in relation to human life and
five in relation to animal life, making a total of ten destructions. For
example, in relation to animal life:  1. The arising of animal life before the
bondage of life. 2. The bondage of animal life during the bondage of life. 3.
The bondage of animal life and human life during the bondage of life. 4. The
arising of animal life after the cessation of bondage. 5. The arising of animal
life and the existence of human-animal life.  These are a total of five
destructions.  Similarly, one should understand five destructions in relation to
human life, but replace animal life with human life. For example, the arising of
human life before the bondage of life and the existence of human life, etc.  The
sufficient, non-conscious, five-sensed being is only an animal, and the bondage
of its four abhus is possible. Therefore, there are the same nine destructions
of life here as those explained for ordinary animals.  After explaining the
destructions of the life karma in the three states of being, it is said that
there are five destructions in each of the remaining eleven states of being.
Because the beings in the remaining eleven states of being are only animals, and
they do not have the bondage of divine life or hell life, therefore, one should
know that there are five destructions for the conscious, five-sensed,
insufficient animals: one destruction before the time of bondage, two
destructions during the time of bondage, and two destructions after the
cessation of bondage. Thus, there are five destructions in the remaining eleven
states of being.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa 220 meM aparyApta nAma karma kA udaya nahIM hotA hai tathA
inake parabhava saMbaMdhI manuSyAyu tathA tiryaMcAyu kA hI bandha hotA hai, ataH
inake manuSyagati kI apekSA 5 aura tiryaMcagati kI apekSA 5 bhaMga, isa prakAra
kula dasa bhaMga hote haiN| jaise ki tiryaMcagati kI apekSA 1- AyubaMdha ke
pahale tiryacAyu kA udaya aura tiyaMcAyu kI sattA 2 AyubaMdha ke samaya
tiyaMcAya kA baMdha, tiryaMcA kA aura nitidAyu kI manuSyAyu kA baMdha, ticAyu kA
udaya aura manuSya tiryacAyu kI sattA, 4. baMdha kI uparati hone para tiyaMcAyu
kA udaya aura tiryaca tiryaMcAyu kI sattA athavA 5 tiryatrAyu kA udaya aura
manuSya-tiyaM cAya kI sattA  /  kula milAkara ye pA~ca bhaMga hue  /  isI
prakAra manuSyagati kI apekSA bhI pA~ca bhaMga samajhanA cAhiye, lekina tiryaMcA
ke sthAna para manuSyAyu ko rkheN| jaise ki Ayu baMdha ke pahale manuSyAyu kA
udaya aura manuSyAyu kI sattA Adi  /  paryApta asaMjJI paMcendriya jIva tiryaMca
hI hotA hai aura usake cAroM AbuoM kA baMdha sambhava hai, ataH yahA~ Ayu ke ve
hI nau bhaMga hote haiM jo sAmAnya tiryaMcoM ke batalAye haiM  /  isa prakAra se
tIna jIvasthAnoM meM Ayukarma ke bhaMgoM ko batalAne ke bAda zeSa rahe gyAraha
jIvasthAnoM ke bhaMgoM ke bAre meM kahate haiM ki unameM se pratyeka meM pA~ca-
pA~ca bhaMga hote haiN| kyoMki zeSa gyAraha jIvasthAnoM ke jIva tiryaMca hI hote
haiM aura unake devAyu va narakAyu kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai, ataH saMjJI
paMcendriya aparyApta tiryaMcoM ke jo pA~ca bhaMga batalAye haiM, ve hI yaha
jAnanA cAhiye ki baMdhakAla se pUrva kA eka bhaMga, baMdhakAla ke samaya ke do
bhaMga aura uparata baMdhakAla ke do bhaMga  /  isa prakAra zeSa gyAraha
jIvasthAnoM meM pAMca bhaMga hote haiM  /

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Jiva Sthana Jñana-darsana. Karma x | Ayu x x x x Shaṣṭha Karma-patya The
details of the destruction of these six karmas, namely Jñana-avaraṇa, Darśana-
avaraṇa, Vedaniya, Ayu, Gotra, and Antaraya, in the fourteen Jiva Sthānas are as
follows: | Gotra | Antaraya Varṇa-varṇa | E F | Gana Ekaindriya Sūkṣma Aparyāpta
| 1 | 2 . 4 2 : Ekaindriya Mūkṣma Paryāpta 3 | Ekaindriya Vādar Aparyāpta
Ekaindriya Vādar Paryāpta 1 | 2 Hindriya Aparyāpta Dīndriya Paryāpta Śrīndriya
Aparyāpta 8 | Śrīndriya Paryāpta 9 | Chaturindriya Aparyāpta Chaturindriya
Paryāpta Asanjnī Pañcendriya Aparyāpta Asanjnī Pañcendriya Paryāpta 13 | Sanjnī
Pañcendriya Aparyāpta 14 | Sanjnī Pañcendriya Paryāpta | 2 11 / 4 After
explaining the destruction of the six karmas in the Jiva Sthānas, now we will
explain the destruction of the Mohaniya karma - 'Moham Paraṁ Voccham'. Adṛśu
Pañcasu Ege Ega Dugam Das Ya Mohbandhagaye. Tig Cha Nava Udayagaye Tim Tig
Pannaṛas Santammi ||36||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jIvasthAna jnyaanaa-drshnaa| kama x | Ayu x x x x SaSTha karmapatya caudaha
jIvasthAnoM meM jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, vedanIya, AyU, gotra aura aMtarAya,
ina chaha kamoM ke bhaMgoM kA vivaraNa isa prakAra hai  /  gotra | aMtarAya
varaNavaraNa | E F | gAna ekendriya sUkSma aparyApta | 1 | 2 . 4 2 : ekendriya
mUkSma paryApta 3 | ekendriya vAdara aparyApta ekendriya bAdara paryApta 1  /  2
hIndriya aparyApta dIndriya paryApta zrIndriya aparyApta 8 | zrIndriya paryApta
hai | caturindriya aparyApta caturindriya paryApta asaMjJI paMcendriya aparyApta
asaMjI paMcendriya paryApta 13 | saMzI paMcendriya aparyApta 14 | saMjI
paMcendriya paryApta  /  2 11 / 4 chaha karmoM ke jIvasthAnoM meM bhaMgoM ko
batalAne ke bAda aba 'mohaM paraM vocchaM'-mohanIya karma ke bhaMgoM ko batalAte
haiM  /  adRsu paMcasu ege ega dugaM dasa ya mohbNdhge| tiga cA nava udayagae
tima tiga pannarasa saMtammi  // 36 //

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 77  **Word Meaning:**  * **Anusu:** Eight *jīva-sthāna* (life-states)
in five *jīva-sthāna*, one *jīva-sthāna*, one, two, *dal-das* and *moh-bandh* -
in the places bound by *mohniya* karma, three times and nine, *udaya* - places
of *udaya* (arising), *ling* three, fifteen - places of *samī-satā* (being).
**Meaning of the Verse:**  In eight, five and one *jīva-sthāna*, there are one,
two and ten *bandha-sthāna* (places of bondage) respectively, due to the
sequence of *mohniya* karma. There are three, four and nine *udaya-sthāna*
(places of arising) and three, three and fifteen *satā-sthāna* (places of
being).  **Special Meaning:**  This verse explains the *bandha*, *udaya* and
*satā* places in the *jīva-sthāna* bound by *mohniya* karma. It also indicates
the number of *jīva-sthāna*, *bandha-sthāna*, *udaya-sthāna* and *satā-sthāna*,
i.e., how many *bandha-sthāna* are there in how many *jīva-sthāna*, how many
*udaya-sthāna* are there, and how many *satā-sthāna* are there. However, it does
not specify which ones they are. Therefore, its explanation is given below.
There are one, two and ten *bandha-sthāna* in eight, five and one *jīva-sthāna*
respectively. This means that there is one *bandha-sthāna* in eight *jīva-
sthāna*, two *bandha-sthāna* in five *jīva-sthāna* and ten *bandha-sthāna* in
one *jīva-sthāna*. Of these, the fact that there is one *bandha-sthāna* in the
first eight *jīva-sthāna* is explained as follows:  * *Paryāpta-sukshma-
ekendriya* (sufficiently subtle one-sensed), *aparyāpta-sukshma-ekendriya*
(insufficiently subtle one-sensed), *aparyāpta-bādar-ekendriya* (insufficiently
coarse one-sensed), *aparyāpta-dvīndriya* (insufficiently two-sensed),
*aparyāpta-trīndriya* (insufficiently three-sensed), *aparyāpta-chaturindriya*
(insufficiently four-sensed), *aparyāpta-asanjñī-panchendriya* (insufficiently
non-conscious five-sensed) and *aparyāpta-sanjñī-panchendriya* (insufficiently
conscious five-sensed) - these eight *jīva-sthāna* have the first *mithyā-dṛṣṭi*
(false belief) *guṇa-sthāna* (quality-state). Therefore, they have twenty-two
*prakṛti* (natural) *bandha-sthāna*. These twenty-two *prakṛti* are as follows:
*mithyātv* (false belief), *ananta-anubandhī-kaṣāya-chatuṣka* (four *kaṣāya*
(passions) that are not bound by *anubandha* (attachment)), etc., sixteen
*kaṣāya*, one of the three *veda* (scripture), *hāsa-rati* (joy of laughter) and
*śoka-arati* (sorrow of desire) - one of each pair.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 222 saptatikA prakaraNa zabdArtha - anusu - ATha jIvasthAnoM ne paMcasu-pA~ca
jIvasthAnoM meM, ege eka jIvasthAna meM, ega - eka, durgA-do, daladasa aura
mohabaMdha gae - mohanIya karma ke baMdhagata sthAnoM meM, tiga una-tIna bAra
aura nau, udaya gae - udayagata sthAna, liMga tiga pannarasa tIna tIna aura
pandraha sami-satA ke sthAna | - * L gAvArtha- ATha, pA~ca aura eka jIvasthAna
meM mohanIya karma ke anukrama se eka, do aura dasa baMdhasthAna, tIna, cAra
aura mau udayasthAna tathA tIna tIna aura pandraha sattAsthAna hote haiM  /
vizeSArtha - isa gAthA meM mohanIya karma ke jIvasthAnoM meM baMdha, udaya aura
sattA sthAna batalAye haiM aura jIvasthAnoM tathA baMdhasthAnoM, udayasthAnoM
tathA sattAsthAnoM kI saMkhyA kA saMketa kiyA hai ki kitane jIvasthAnoM meM
mohanIya karma ke kitane baMdhasthAna haiM, kitane udayasthAna haiM aura kitane
sattAsthAna haiN| parantu yaha nahIM batAyA hai ki ve kauna-kauna hote haiN|
ataH isakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA jA rahA hai| ATha, pA~ca aura eka jIvasthAna
meM yathAkrama se eka, do aura dasa baMdhasthAna haiM  /  arthAt ATha
jIvasthAnoM meM eka baMdhasthAna hai, pA~ca jIvasthAnoM meM do baMdhasthAna haiM
aura eka jIvasthAna meM dasa baMdhasthAna haiN| inameM se pahale ATha
jIvasthAnoM meM eka baMdhasthAna hone ko spaSTa karate haiM ki paryApta sukSma
ekendriya, aparyApta sukSA ekendriya, aparyApta bAdara ekendriya, aparyApta
dvIndriya, aparyApta zrIndriya, aparyApta caturindriya, aparyApta asaMjJI
paMcendriya aura aparyApta saMjJI paMcendriya, ina ATha jIvasthAnoM meM pahalA
midhyAdRSTi guNasthAna hI hotA hai ataH inake eka 22 prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA
hai  /  ve 22 prakRtiyA~ isa prakAra haiM - midhyAtva, anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya
catuSka Adi solaha kaSAya, tIna vedoM meM se koI eka veda, hAsya rati aura zoka
arati yugala meM se koI

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  223. A pair, fear and disgust. In this bondage, there are
six breaks in comparison to three Vedas and two pairs.  In the five living
states, two bondage states should be known as follows: sufficient badar one-
sensory, sufficient two-sensory, sufficient three-sensory, sufficient four-
sensory, and sufficient non-sentient five-sensory. In these five living states,
there are 22 natural and 21 natural, these are the two bondage states. The names
of the twenty-two natures have been mentioned earlier, and by reducing Mithyatva
from them, there becomes a 21 natural bondage state. Their Mithyatva is the
quality state, therefore, they are called 22 natural bondage states. And since
the Saasadan Samyagdristi beings are born in these living states after death,
therefore, their 21 natural bondage states are explained.  Of these, there are 6
breaks in the 22 natural bondage states, which have been explained earlier, and
there are 4 breaks in the 21 natural bondage states. Because the bondage of the
neuter Veda is due to Mithyalbodaya, and since Mithyatva does not arise here,
the bondage of the neuter Veda also does not occur. Therefore, only four breaks
are possible in comparison to the remaining two Vedas - male and female, and two
pairs.  Bhab is a sentient five-sensory sufficient living state, so there are
ten bondage states of the 22 natural, etc., mohaniya in it. The nature and
number of the aforementioned ten bondage states have been explained in the
context of the bondage states of mohaniya karma, which should be understood from
there. Now, the arising states of mohaniya karma in the living states are
explained as follows: 'Tig Chav Nav Udaygae' - there are three arising states in
eight living states, four in five living states, and nine in one living state.
In the eight living states of sufficient subtle one-sensory, etc., there are
eight, nine, and ten natural, this...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 223 eka yugala, bhaya aura jugupsaa| isa baMdhasthAna meM
tIna veda aura do yugaloM kI apekSA chaha bhaMga hote haiN| pA~ca jIvasthAnoM
meM do baMdhasthAna isa prakAra jAnanA cAhiye ki paryApta bAdara ekendriya,
paryApta dvIndriya, paryApta trIndriya, paryApta caturindriya aura paryApta
asaMzI paMcendriya, ina pAMca jIvasthAnoM meM 22 prakRtika aura 21 prakRtika,
yaha do baMdhasthAna hote haiN| bAIsa prakRtiyoM kA nAmollekha pUrva meM kiyA jA
cukA hai aura usameM se mithyAtva ko kama kara dene para 21 prakRtika
baMdhasthAna ho jAtA hai| inake mithyAvRSTi guNasthAna hotA hai isaliye to inake
22 prakRtika baMdhasthAna kahA gayA hai tathA sAsAdana samyagdRSTi jIva mara
kara ina jIvasthAnoM meM bhI utpanna hote haiM, isaliye inake 21 prakRtika
baMdhasthAna batalAyA hai| inameM se 22 prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke 6 bhaMga haiM
jo pahale batalAye jA cuke haiM aura 21 prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke 4 bhaMga hote
haiN| kyoMki napuMsakaveda kA baMdha mithyAlbodaya nimittika hai aura yahA~
mithyAtva kA udaya na hone se napuMsaka veda kA bhI baMdha na hone se. zeSa do
veda-puruSa aura strI tathA do yumaloM kI apekSA cAra bhaMga hI saMbhava haiN|
bhaba rahA eka saMjJI paMcendriya paryApta jIvasthAna, so isameM 22 prakRtika
Adi mohanIya ke dasa baMdhasthAna hote haiN| ukta dasa baMdhasthAnoM kI prakRti
saMkhyA mohanIya karma ke baMdhasthAnoM ke prasaMga meM batalAI jA cukI hai, jo
vahA~ se samajha lenA cAhiye  /  aba jIvasthAnoM meM mohanIya karma ke
udayasthAna batalAte haiM ki 'tiga cau nava udayagae'-ATha jIvasthAnoM meM tIna,
pA~ca jIvasthAnoM meM cAra aura eka jIvasthAna meM nau udayasthAna haiN|
paryApta sUkSma ekendriya Adi ATha jIvasthAnoM meM ATha, nau aura dasa
prakRtika, yaha

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 73  There are three types of *udayasthanas* (stages of arising). It
should be known that although there are seven natural *udayasthanas* without the
arising of any of the four *anantanubandhi* (infinitely connected) in the
*mithyadrishti* (false belief) *gunasthan* (quality stage), they are not found
in these eight *jivasthanas* (stages of life). Because the being who becomes
*mithyadrishti* after falling from the *upshamshreni* (stage of pacification)
gradually, does not have a decrease of one *avali* (cycle) in the
*mithyadrishti* *gunasthan*. But the beings who have these *jivasthanas* do not
ascend to the *upshamshreni*, therefore, seven natural *udayasthanas* are not
possible for them.  In the aforementioned eight *jivasthanas*, there are eight
natural *udayasthanas* due to the combination of *napuṁsaka* (neuter) *veda*
(knowledge), *mithyatva* (false belief) *kṣaya* (passion) quartet, and one of
the two pairs. In this *udayasthan*, there are eight *bhanga* (divisions)
because in these *jivasthanas*, only *napuṁsaka* *veda* arises, not *puruṣaved*
(male knowledge) and *strīved* (female knowledge). Therefore, there is no
possibility of an alternative *veda* here, but there are alternatives in the
four *kṣayas* like anger, etc., and the two pairs. So, there are eight *bhanga*
due to their alternatives.  In this eight natural *udayasthan*, if fear and
disgust are combined with alternatives, then there is a natural *udayasthan*.
Here, there are eight *bhanga* for each alternative, so multiplying eight by
two, there are sixteen *bhanga*. That is, there are sixteen *bhanga* of nine
natural *udayasthanas*. In the eight natural *udayasthanas*, if fear and disgust
are combined simultaneously, then there is a tenth natural *udayasthan*. This is
of only one type, therefore, there are the aforementioned eight *bhanga*. Thus,
there are a total of 32 *bhanga* of all three *udayasthanas*, which are obtained
separately in each *jivasthan*.  It has been said that in each of the five
*jivasthanas* of *paryāpta* (sufficient) *bādar* (blind), *ekendriya* (one-
sensed), etc., there are four *udayasthanas* - seven, eight, nine, and ten
natural. So...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 924 saptatikA prakaraNa tIna udayasthAna haiN| ve isa prakAra jAnanA cAhiye ki
yadyapi mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM anantAnubaMdhI catuSka meM se kisI eka ke
udaya ke binA 7 prakRtika udayasthAna bhI hotA hai, parantu vaha ina ATha
jIvasthAnoM meM nahIM pAyA jAtA hai| kyoMki jo jIva upazamazreNi se cyuta hokara
kramaza: mithyAdRSTi hotA hai usI ke mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM eka AvalI kA
kama nahIM honA. parantu ina jIvasthAna vAle jIva to upazamazreNi para car3hate
hI nahIM haiM, ataH inako sAta prakRtika udayasthAna saMbhava nahIM hai  /  t
ukta ATha jIvasthAnoM meM napuMsaka veda, midhyAtva kaSAya catuSka aura do
yugaloM meM se koI eka yugala, isa taraha ATha prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai|
isa udayasthAna meM ATha bhaMga hote haiM, kyoMki ina jIvasthAnoM meM eka
napuMsaka veda kA hI udaya hotA hai, puruSaveda aura strIveda kA nahIM, ataH
yahA~ veda kA vikalpa to saMbhava nahIM kintu yahA~ vikalpa vAlI prakRtiyA~
krodha Adi cAra kaSAya aura do yugala haiM, so unake vikalpa se ATha bhaMga hote
haiN| isa ATha prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaya aura jugupsA ko vikalpa se milAne
para to prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ eka -eka vikalpa ke ATha-ATha
bhaMga hote haiM ataH ATha ko do se guNita karane para solaha bhaMga hote haiM
/  arthAt no prakRtika udayasthAna ke solaha bhaMga haiN| ATha prakRtika
udayasthAna meM bhaya aura jugupsA ko yugapat milAne se dasa prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yaha eka hI prakAra kA hai, ataH pUrvokta ATha bhaMga
hI hote haiN| isa prakAra tInoM udayasthAnoM ke kula 32 bhaMga jo pratyeka
jIvasthAna meM alaga-alaga prApta hote haiM  /  hue, paryApta bAdara ekendriya
Adi pAMca jIvasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM cAra-cAra udayasthAna haiM- sAta,
ATha, nau aura dasa prakRtika  /  so

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth, Chapter 8  In the case of the *Sāsādan* state, there are
21 natural *bandhasthāna* and 10, 3, and 3 *udayastāna*. In the case of 22
natural *bandhasthāna*, there are 8, 6, and 10 *udayastāna*. In these
*jīvasthāna*, only a *napumsakaved* arises. Therefore, here also, there are 7,
8, and 10 natural *udayastāna* with 8, 16, and *bhang* respectively. Similarly,
there will be 8, 6, and 10 natural *udayastāna* with 8, 16, and *bhang*
respectively. However, according to the *Cūrṇikāra*, in the case of *asangñī
labdhi paryāpta*, one of the three *vedas* arises according to its suitability.
Therefore, according to this view, in the seven initial *udayastāna* of *asangñī
labdhi paryāpta*, there are *g* instead of *rang*.  ## Chapter 8, Verse 225  In
the *paryāpta saññī pañcendriya jīvasthāna*, there are *udayastāna* which have
been mentioned in the context of *mohaniya karma* *udayastāna*. Therefore, they
should be understood from there.  In the *jīvasthāna*, the *sattāsthāna* of
*mohaniya karma* should be understood as follows: "Three in eight, three in
five, and fifteen in one." This means that there are three *sattāsthāna* in each
of the eight *jīvasthāna*, three in each of the five *jīvasthāna*, and fifteen
in one *jīvasthāna*. In each of the aforementioned eight *jīvasthāna*, there are
25, 27, and 26 natural *sattāsthāna*. This is because no other *sattāsthāna* are
found in the *mithyādr̥ṣṭi guṇasthāna* besides these three. Similarly, in the
*paryāpta bādar ekendriya* and other five *jīvasthāna*, 28, 27, and 26 natural
*sattāsthāna* should be understood. And in one *paryāpta saññī pañcendriya*,
there are all fifteen *sattāsthāna*. This is because all *guṇasthāna* are
present in this *jīvasthāna*.  **Note:** The text includes a Sanskrit phrase:
"एक्केककमि उदयम्मि नपुंसगवेदेणं चेच अदु-अष्टु मंगा सेसा न संभवति....।
असन्निपज्जतगस्त तिहि वि वेदेहि उष्ठावेयज्जा ।" This phrase is not fully
translated as it requires further context and interpretation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 8 inameM se sAsAdana bhAva ke kAla meM 21 prakRtika
baMdhasthAna meM aura 10, ye tIna-tIna udayasthAna hote haiM tathA 22 prakRtika
baMdhasthAna meM 8, 6 aura 10 ye tIna tIna udayasthAna hote haiN| ina
jIvasthAnoM meM bhI eka napuMsakaveda kA hI udaya hotA hai ataH yahA~ bhI 7, 8
aura ha aura 10 prakRtika udayasthAna ke kramazaH 8 16 aura bhaMga hote haiM
tathA isI prakAra 86 aura 10 prakRtika udayasthAna ke kramazaH 8, 16 aura bhaMga
hoMge, kintu cUrNikAra kA mata hai ki asaMjJI labdhiparyApta ke yathAyogya tIna
vedoM meM se kisI eka veda kA udaya hotA hai| ataH isa mata ke anusAra asaMjJI
labdhi paryApta ke sAta Adi udayasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM raMga na hokara ga
hote haiN| 8 225 paryApta saMjJI paMcendriya jIvasthAna meM udayasthAna haiM,
jinakA ullekha mohanIya karma ke udayasthAnoM ke prasaMga meM kiyA jA cukA hai|
ataH unako vahA~ se jAna leveM  /  jIvasthAnoM meM mohanIya karma ke sattAsthAna
isa prakAra jAnanA cAhiye ki 'tima tiga pannarasa saMtammi' arthAt ATha
jIvasthAnoM meM tIna, pAMca jIvasthAnoM meM tIna aura eka jIvasthAna meM 15 hote
haiM  /  pUrvokta ATha jIvasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM 25, 27 aura 26 prakRtika,
ye tIna sattAsthAna hote haiN| kyoMki mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM ina tIna ke
alAvA aura sattAsthAna nahIM pAye jAte haiN| isI prakAra se paryApta bAdara
ekendriya Adi pAMca jIvasthAnoM meM bhI 28, 27 aura 26 prakratika sattAsthAna
samajhanA cAhiye aura eka paryApta saMjJI paMcendriya meM sabhI 15 sattAsthAna
haiN| kyoMki isa jIvasthAna meM sabhI guNasthAna hote haiN| 1 ekkekakami
udayammi napuMsagavedeNaM ceca adu-aSTu maMgA sesA na sNbhvti....|
asannipajjatagasta tihi vi vedehi uSThAveyajjA  /

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **226**  After stating the separate arising and being-states in
the seven realms of existence, we now state their consciousness. In the eight
realms of existence, there is one 22-natured bondage-state, and within it there
are 8, 9, and 10-natured arising-states, and in each arising-state there are 28,
27, and 26-natured being-states. Thus, there are a total of nine destructions in
each of the eight realms of existence. In the five realms of existence, there
are two bondage-states: 22-natured and 21-natured. In the 22-natured bondage-
state, there are three arising-states: 8, 9, and 10-natured, and in each
arising-state there are three being-states: 28, 27, and 26-natured. Thus, there
are a total of nine destructions. In the 21-natured bondage-state, there are
three arising-states: 7, 8, and 6-natured, and in each arising-state there is
one 28-natured being-state. Thus, in the 21-natured bondage-state, there are
three being-states in relation to three arising-states. In relation to both
bondage-states, there are 12 destructions in each realm of existence.  The
reason for considering one 28-natured being-state in the 21-natured bondage-
state is that the 21-natured bondage-state occurs in the Sasadan guna-sthana,
and the Sasadan guna-sthana is only for the being with 28-natured being-state,
because the being of the Sasadan Samyagdrsti has the being of the
Darshanamohatrika. Therefore, the 28-natured being-state is considered in the
21-natured bondage-state.  The consciousness of the bondage-states, beginning
with the bondage of the Mohaniya karma in the one-sense-faculty realm, should be
understood as stated earlier.  **One-twenty-one bondage is obtained by those who
attain the Sasadin state, and the Sasadan must have twenty-eight karmas. Because
of the destruction of their Darshanayika, their being-state is also twenty-
eight.** - Sapttatika Prakarana Tika, p. 200

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 226 saptatikA prakaraNa isa prakAra se jIvasthAnoM meM pRthaka-pRthaka udaya
aura sattAsthAnoM kA kathana karane ke anantara aba inake saMvedha kA kathana
karate haiM--ATha jIvasthAnoM meM eka 22 pravRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai aura
usameM 8, E zora 1, prakRtika, gai nIla radayasthAna hote haiM tathA pratyeka
udayasthAna meM 28, 27 aura 26 prakRtika sattAsthAna haiN| isa prakAra Aya
jIvasthAnoM meM se pratyeka ke kula nau bhaMga hue| pAMca jIvasthAnoM meM 22
prakR. tika aura 21 prakRtika, ye do baMdhasthAna haiM aura inameM se 22
prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM 8, 9 aura 10 prakRtika tIna udaya sthAna hote haiM
aura pratyeka udayasthAna meM 28, 27 aura 26 prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna
haiN| isa prakAra kula nau maMga hue  /  21 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM 7, 8 aura
6 prakRtika, tIna udayasthAna haiM aura pratyeka udayasthAna meM 28 prakRtika
eka sattAsthAna hotA hai| isa prakAra 21 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM tIna
udayasthAnoM kI apekSA tIna sattAsthAna haiN| donoM badhasthAnoM kI apekSA yahA~
pratyeka jIvasthAna meM 12 bhaMga haiN| 21 prakRtika baMghasthAna meM 28
prakRtika eka sattAsthAna mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki 21 prakRtika baMdhasthAna
sAsAdana guNasthAna meM hotA hai aura sAsAdana guNasthAna 28 prakRtika sattA
vAle jIva ko hI hotA hai, kyoMki sAsAdana samyagdRSTiyoM ke darzanamohatrika kI
sattA pAI jAtI hai| isIliye 21 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM prakRtika sattAsthAna
mAnA jAtA hai| _ eka saMjhI paryApta paMcendriya jIvasthAna meM mohanIya karma
ke baMdha Adi sthAnoM ke saMvedha kA kathana jaisA pahale kiyA gayA hai, vaisA
hI yahA~ jAnanA caahiye| 1 ekaviMzatibandho hi sArAdinabhAvamupAgateSu prApyate,
sAsAdanAzcAvazya maSTAviMzatisatkarmANaH, teSAM darzanayikasya nimabhato mAvAt,
tattasteSu sattAsthAnamaSTAviMzatireva  /  -saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 200

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granthya  **Description of the sensory disruptions of the
Mohaniya Karma in 225 Jeevasthanas:**  **Low Jeevasthanas**  | Mang | Udayasthan
Mang | Udayan | Padavrund | Sattaasthan Pad | |---|---|---|---|---| | 8, 6, 10 |
36 | 268 | 28, 27, 26 | 8, 9, 10 | | 28, 27, 26 | 28, 27, 26 | 28, 27, 26 | 28 |
28, 27, 26 | | Ba. A.P. | 28, 27, 26 | 8, 9, 10 | 7, 8, 6 | 8, 9, 10 | | 32 | 8,
9, 10 | 7, 8, 6 | 28, 27, 26 | 28, 27, 26 | | 28, 27, 26 | 28, 27, 26 | 28, 27,
26 | 28, 27, 26 | 28, 27, 26 | | 6 | Chatu. Ap. | 8, 9, 10 | Chatu. Pan. | 22 |
| 28 | Asan. Pan. A. | 22 | 8, 6, 10 | Asan. Pan. P. | | 22 | 28, 27, 26 | 28,
27, 26 | 28 | 28, 27, 26 | | 288 | 6647 | Sab | 13 | San. P. Ap. | 22 | | 14 |
San. M. Pary. | Sab |  |  |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagranya 225 jIvasthAnoM meM mohanIya karma ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA
vivaraNa isa prakAra jAnanA cAhiye kama jIvasthAna | maMga |udayasthAna maMga
udayana padavRnda | sattAsthAna pada | 8,6,10 | 36 | 268 28,27,26 8,9,10 |
28,27,26 28,27,26 28,27,26 | bA. e.pa. 28 | 28,27,26 28,27,26 8,9,10 7.8,6]
8,9,10 32 8,9.10 7,8,6 | 28,27,26 28,27,26 28,27.26 28,27,26 28,27,26 6 'catu.
apa. 8,9.10 | catu.pAM. 22 . 28 asaM.paM.a. 22 8.6,10 | asaM.paM.pa. 22 28,27,26
28,27,26 28 28,27,26 288 | 6647 | saba 13 | saM.pa.apa, 22 14 | saM.ma.paryA.
saba :

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 226  After explaining the bondage, arising, and existence states of
the Mohaniya Karma in the seven categories of living beings, we now explain the
destruction of the Name Karma.  **Verse 37:**  * **Pan Dug Panag** - Five, two,
five * **Pan Chav Panag** - Five, four, five * **Panag Havanti** - Five, five,
five, are * **Tinneva** - All three (bondage, arising, and existence states) *
**Pan Chhappanag** - Five, six, five * **Chham Chhappanag** - Six, six, five *
**Adrutth Dasag** - Eight, eight, ten, thus  **Verse 38:**  * **Satteva** - All
seven * **Apjjasā** - Insufficient * **Sāmi** - Owner * **Tāha** - Thus *
**Suham** - Subtle one-sense-endowed sufficient * **Bāyarā** - Coarse one-sense-
endowed sufficient * **Cheva** - And * **Viliviyā** - Disturbed many-sense-
endowed sufficient * **Timni** - Immersed * **Tāha** - Thus * **Ya** - And *
**Asammi** - Non-conscious five-sense-endowed sufficient * **Sanni** - Conscious
five-sense-endowed sufficient  **Commentary:**  * Five, two, five; five, four,
five; five, five, five; five, six, five; six, six, five; and eight, eight, ten;
these are the bondage, arising, and existence states. * In order, the owner
should know the seven insufficient, subtle one-sense-endowed sufficient, coarse
one-sense-endowed sufficient, disturbed many-sense-endowed sufficient, non-
conscious five-sense-endowed sufficient, and conscious five-sense-endowed
sufficient living beings.  **Special Note:**  These two verses discuss the
destruction of Name Karma in the living beings. The first verse takes a group of
three numbers, where the first number represents the bondage state, the
second...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 226 saptatikA prakaraNa jIvasthAnoM meM mohanIya karma ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM va
saMvaidha bhaMgoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba nAmakarma ke bhaMgoM ko batalAte haiM
paNa duga paNagaM paNa cau paNagaM paNagA havaMti tinneva  /  paNa chappaNagaM
chamachappaNagaM adRTTha dasagaM ti  // 37 //  satteva apajjasA sAmI taha suhama
bAyarA ceva  /  viliviyA u tinni u taha ya asamnI ya sannI y||38|| bhAvArya-paNa
duga paNarga-pAMca, do, pA~ca, paNa cau pagagaMpAca, cAra, pAMca, pagagA-pAMca-
pAMca, havaMti-hote haiM, tinmeSa-tInoM hI (baMdha, udaya aura sattAsthAna),
paNa chappaNa-pAMca, chaha, pAca, chappaNagaM-chaha, chaha, pAca, aTuTa-ATha,
ATha, basagaM- dasa, ti-isa prakAra  /  satteba-sAtoM hI, apajjatA aparyApta,
sAmI-svAmI, tahatathA, suhama-sUkSma ekendriya paryApta, pAparA-bAdara ekendriya
paryApta, gheva-aura, vigalikSyiA-vikalendriya paryApta, timi-lIna, tahavaise
hI, pa-aura, asammI-asaMjI paMcendriya paryApta, sannI-saMjI paMcendriya
paryApta  /  gApArSa-pAMca, do, pA~ca; pA~ca, cAra, pA~ca; pA~ca, pA~ca, pA~ca
pAMca, chaha, pAMca chaha, chaha, pA~ca aura ATha, ATha, dasa; ye baMdha, udaya
aura sattAsthAna haiN| . inake krama se sAtoM aparyApta, sUkSma ekendriya
paryApta, bAdara ekendriya paryApta, vikalatrika paryApta, asaMjJI paMcendriya
paryApta aura saMjJI paMcendriya paryApta jIva svAmI jAnanA cAhie  /  vizeSA-ina
do gAthAoM meM jIvasthAnoM meM nAmakarma ke bhaMgoM kA vicAra kiyA gayA hai|
pahalI gAthA meM tIna-tIna saMkhyAoM kA. eka puMja liyA gayA hai, jisameM se
pahalI saMkhyA baMdhasthAna kI, dUsarI

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Six Karma Categories and Their Distribution in the Fourteen Realms  The
third number in the verse represents the number of **udayasthanas**, and the
third number represents the number of **sattastahnas**. There are a total of six
such groups of numbers in the verse. The second verse divides the fourteen
realms of existence into six parts. This implies that the realms of the first
part belong to the first group, the realms of the second part belong to the
second group, and so on.  Although the verses indicate the number of
**bandhastahnas**, **udayastahnas**, and **sattastahnas** in each realm, they do
not specify which ones they are or how many of each type are present. Therefore,
we will discuss this in detail here, following the commentary of Acharya
Malayagiri.  By combining the verses "**Paṇ duṛgā paṇagaṁ satteva apjjaṭṭā**" in
the appropriate order, we arrive at one conclusion. This means that each of the
seven **aparāpta** realms has five **bandhastahnas**, two **udayastahnas**, and
five **sattastahnas**. This is explained as follows: the seven types of
**aparāpta** beings bind the **prakrtis** that are suitable for the human and
animal realms, but not the **prakrtis** that are suitable for the heavenly and
hellish realms. Therefore, these seven **aparāpta** realms do not have 28, 31,
and 1 **prakrtik bandhastahnas**, but rather 23, 25, 26, 26, and 30 **prakrtik
bandhastahnas**. These five **bandhastahnas** also bind only the **prakrtis**
suitable for the human and animal realms. A detailed discussion of these
**bandhastahnas** will be provided when we discuss the **bandhastahnas** of
**nāmakarma**. Therefore, you should understand it from there. Here, considering
all the **bandhastahnas** together, each realm has 13947 **bhangas**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaNTha karma praya 221 saMkhyA udayasthAna kI aura tIsarI saMkhyA sattAsthAna
kI dyotaka hai  /  gAthA meM saMkhyA ke aise kula chaha puMja haiN| dUsarI gAthA
meM caudaha jIvasthAnoM ko chaha bhAgoM meM vibhAjita kiyA gayA hai| jisakA yaha
tAtparya huA ki pahale bhAga ke jIvasthAna pahale puMja ke svAmI dUsare bhAga ke
jIvasthAna dUsare puMja ke svAmI haiM ityAdi  /  yadyapi gAthAgata saMketa se
itanA to jAna liyA jAtA hai ki amuka jIvasthAna meM itane baMdhasthAna, itane
udayasthAna aura itane sattAsthAna haiM, kintu ve kauna-kauna se haiM aura
unameM kitanI kitanI prakRtiyoM kA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai, yaha jJAta nahIM hotA
hai| ataH yahA~ unhIM kA bhaMgoM ke sAtha AcArya malayagiri kRta TIkA ke anusAra
vistAra se vivecana kiyA jAtA hai| 'paNa durgA paNagaM satteva apajjattA' donoM
gAthAoM ke padoM ko yathAkrama se jor3ane para yaha eka pakSa huaa| jisakA yaha
artha huA ki caudaha jIvasthAnoM meM se sAta aparyApta jIvasthAnoM meM se
pratyeka meM pA~ca baMdhasthAna, do udayasthAna aura pA~ca sattAsthAna haiM  /
jinakA spaSTIkaraNa yaha hai ki sAta prakAra ke aparyApta jIva manuSyagati aura
tiryaMcagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karate haiM, devagati aura narakagati
ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA nahIM, ataH ina sAta aparyApta jIvasthAnoM meM 28, 31
aura 1 prakRtika baMdhasthAna na hokara 23, 25, 26, 26 aura 30 prakRtika, ye
pAMca baMdhasthAna hote haiM aura inameM bhI manuSyagati tathA tithaMcagati ke
yogya prakRtiyoM kA hI baMdha hotA hai  /  ina baMghasthAnoM kA vizeSa vivecana
nAmakarma ke baMghasthAna batalAne ke avasara para kiyA gayA hai, ataH vahA~ se
samajha lenA caahiye| yahA~ saba baMsthAnoM ke milAkara pratyeka jIvasthAna meM
13947 bhaMga hote haiM  /

Page #268 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 7: Seven Living States  There are two types of arising states within
these seven living states: 21-natured and 24-natured. The 21-natured arising
state is found in the **aparyapt** (inadequate) **badar** (gross) **ekendriya**
(one-sensed) living state. It includes the following 21 natures: **tiryanch-
gati** (transmigration), **tiryanch-anupurvi** (transmigratory lineage),
**tejas** (fire element), **karman** (karma), **aguru-laghu** (heavy-light),
**varna-chaturshka** (four colors), **ekendriya-jati** (one-sensed species),
**sthavar** (stationary), **badar** (gross), **aparyapt** (inadequate),
**sthira** (stable), **asthira** (unstable), **shubha** (auspicious),
**ashubha** (inauspicious), **durbhag** (misfortune), **anadeya** (unworthy),
**ayash-kirti** (bad reputation), and **nirman** (creation). This arising state
is found in the **apantaral** (intermediate) motion. Here, there is one
**bhang** (break) because the **paravartaman** (present) **shubha** (auspicious)
natures do not arise.  The same applies to the **aparyapt** (inadequate)
**sukshma** (subtle) **ekendriya** (one-sensed) living state. However, the
difference is that in the **badar** (gross) state, the **sukshma** (subtle)
nature should be considered to arise. Here too, there is one **bhang** (break).
In the 21-natured arising state, by adding the four natures of **oudarik-
sharira** (spiritual body), **hund-sansthan** (body structure), **upghat**
(injury), and one of **pratyek** (individual) or **sadharan** (common), and
subtracting the **tiryanch-anupurvi** (transmigratory lineage) nature, we get
the 24-natured arising state. This is possible in both the **sukshma** (subtle)
and **badar** (gross) **ekendriya** (one-sensed) **aparyapt** (inadequate)
living states. Here, there are two **bhang** (breaks) each for the **sadharan**
(common) and **pratyek** (individual) **namakarma** (name-karma) in both the
**sukshma** (subtle) **aparyapt** (inadequate) and **badar** (gross)
**aparyapt** (inadequate) living states. Thus, there are three **bhang**
(breaks) each in both living states, making a total of six **bhang** (breaks)
for the two arising states.  The five living states of **vikaleindriya-trik**
(three-sensed with impairment), **asanhi** (non-sentient) **aparyapt**
(inadequate), and **sanjni** (sentient) **aparyapt** (inadequate) have two
arising states: 21-natured and 26-natured. The 21-natured arising state in the
**aparyapt** (inadequate) **dwindriya** (two-sensed) living state includes the
following 21 natures: **tiryanch-gati** (transmigration), **tiryanch-anupurvi**
(transmigratory lineage), **tejas** (fire element), **karman** (karma), **aguru-
laghu** (heavy-light), **varna-chaturshka** (four colors), **dwindriya-jati**
(two-sensed species), **bas** (dwelling), **badar** (gross), **aparyapt**
(inadequate), **sthira** (stable), **asthira** (unstable), **shubha**
(auspicious), **ashubha** (inauspicious), **durbhag** (misfortune), **anadeya**
(unworthy), **ayash-kirti** (bad reputation), and **nirman** (creation). This
arising state is found in the **apantaral** (intermediate) motion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 230 saptatikA prakaraNa ina sAta jIvasthAnoM meM do udayasthAna haiM-21 aura 24
prakRtika  /  so inameM se 21 prakRtika udayasthAna meM aparyApta bAdara
ekendriya ke tithaMcagati, tiryaMcAnupUrvI, taMjasazarIra, kArmaNazarIra,
agurulaghu, varNacatuSka, ekendriya jAti, sthAvara, bAdara, aparyApta, sthira,
asthira, zubha, azubha, durbhaga, anAdeya, ayaza:kIrti aura nirmANa ina 21
prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai  /  yaha udayasthAna apAntarAla gati meM pAyA jAtA
hai  /  yahA~ bhaMga eka hotA hai kyoMki yahA~ parAvartamAna zubha prakRtiyoM kA
udaya nahIM hotA hai  /  aparyApta sUkSma ekendriya sI ko bhI yahI zyAta ho  /
kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki usake bAdara ke sthAna meM sUkSma prakRti kA udaya
kahanA cAhie  /  yahA~ bhI eka bhaMga hotA hai| isa 21 prakRtika udayasthAna meM
audArikazarIra, huMDasaMsthAna, upaghAta aura pratyeka va sAdhAraNa meM se koI
eka, ina cAra prakRtiyoM ko milAne aura tiryaMcAnupUrvI isa prakRti ko ghaTA
dene para 24 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  jo donoM sUkSma va bAdara
ekendriya aparyApta jIvasthAnoM meM samAna rUpa se sambhava hai| yahA~ sUkSma
aparyApta aura bAdara aparyApta meM se pratyeka ke sAdhAraNa aura pratyeka
nAmakarma kI apekSA do-do bhaMga hote haiM  /  isa prakAra do udayasthAnoM kI
apekSA donoM jIvasthAnoM meM se pratyeka ke tIna-tIna bhaMga hote haiN|
vikalendriyatrika aparyApta, asaMhI aparyApta aura saMjJI aparyApta, ina pAMca
jIvasthAnoM meM 21 aura 26 prakRtika, yaha do udayasthAna hote haiN| inameM se
aparyApta dvIndriya ke tiryaMcagati, tiryaMcAnupUrvI, tejasa, kArmaNa,
aguruladhu, varNacatuSka, dvIndriya jAti, basa, bAdara, aparyApta, sthira,
asthira, zubha, azubha, durbhaga, anAdeya, ayazaHkIrti aura nirmANa yaha 21
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  jo apAntarAla gati meM

Page #269 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Six Karma Granth  The six karma granth exist only for the living being, not
for others. Here, all the natures are unrefined, therefore, one should know only
one bhang.  Similarly, in the tri-indriya and other living beings, one should
know these 21 natural udya-sthana and 1 bhang. However, the special feature is
that in each living being, instead of saying dvi-indriya jati, one should say
shri-indriya jati, etc., according to their own jati.  After that, in the 21
natural udya-sthana, when the audarik body, audarik limbs, hunda-samsthana,
seva-sanhanan, upadhat, and each of these six natures are combined and the
tiryanch and anupurvi are removed, there are 26 natural udya-sthana. Here too,
there is only one bhang. In this way, in the insufficient dvi-indriya and other
living beings, there are two bhangs for each of the two udya-sthana.  However,
the insufficient sanjni panch-indriya living being is an exception. Because the
insufficient sanjni living being exists in both the tiryanch-gati and the
manushya-gati. Therefore, here, four bhangs are obtained from this expectation.
In each of these seven living beings, there are five satta-sthana of 62, 58, 16,
80, and 78 natural. In the insufficient state, the satta of the tirthankara
nature is not possible, therefore, in these seven living beings, 63 and 86
natural, these two satta-sthana do not exist, but since the remaining satta-
sthana related to the mithya-drishti guna-sthana is possible, the aforementioned
five satta-sthana are mentioned. In this way, in the seven insufficient living
beings, one should know the bandha-sthana, udya-sthana, and satta-sthana of the
name karma. Now, after this,   1. Only the insufficient sanjni has four, because
two bhangs of the insufficient sanjni are tiryanch, and two are of the
insufficient sanjni manushya.  Sapta-tika Prakaran Toka, Page 201

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Sada karmagrantha vidyamAna jIva ke hI hotA hai, anya ke nhiiN| yahA~ sabhI
prakRtiyA~ aprazasta haiM, ata: eka hI bhaMga jAnanA caahiye| isI prakAra
trIndriya Adi jIvasthAnoM meM bhI yaha 21 prakRtika udayasthAna aura 1 bhaMga
jAnanA cAhiye 1 kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki pratyeka jIvasthAna meM dvIndriya
jAti na kahakara zrIndriya jAti Adi apanI-apanI jAti kA udaya kahanA caahiye|
anantara 21 prakRtika udayasthAna meM zarIrastha jIva ke audArika zarIra,
audArika aMgopAMga, huMDasaMsthAna, sevAta saMhanana, upadhAta aura pratyeka ina
chaha prakRtiyoM ke milAne aura tirya cAnupUrvI ke nikAla dene para 26 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ bhI eka hI bhaMga hotA hai| isa prakAra aparyApta
dvIndriya Adi pratyeka jIvasthAna meM do-do udayasthAnoM kI apekSA do-do bhaMga
hote haiM  /  lekina aparyApta saMjJI paMcendriya jIvasthAna isakA apavAda hai|
kyoMki aparyApta saMjJo jIvasthAna tiryaMcagati aura manuSyagati donoM meM hotA
hai  /  ata: yahA~ isa apekSA se cAra bhaMga prApta hote haiN|' ina sAta
jIvasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM 62, 58, 16, 80 aura 78 prakRtika pA~ca-pA~ca
sattAsthAna haiM  /  aparyApta avasthA meM tIrthakara prakRti kI sattA sambhava
nahIM hai ata: ina sAtoM jIvasthAnoM meM 63 aura 86 prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna
nahIM hote haiM kintu mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna sambandhI zeSa sattAsthAna sambhava
hone se ukta pA~ca sattAsthAna kahe haiN| _ isa prakAra se sAta aparyApta
jIvasthAnoM meM nAmakarma ke baMdhasthAna, udayasthAna aura sattAsthAna jAnanA
caahiye| aba isake anantara paNa 1 kevalamaparyAptasaMjJinazcatvAraH, yato dvau
maMgAvaparyAptasaMjJinastirazcaH prAdhyete, dvau vAparyAptamaM jino manuSyasyeti
/  saptatikA prakaraNa TokA, pR0 201

Page #270 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 73  This chapter discusses the relationship between the terms "Pau
Panag" and "Suham Pad," which refer to the five bondage-places, four arising-
places, and five being-places of the subtle, one-sense, sufficient living being.
**Bondage-Places:**  The subtle, one-sense, sufficient living being, upon death,
is reborn in the human or animal realm, leading to the bondage of karmas that
qualify it for these realms. Therefore, its five bondage-places are considered
to be 23, 25, 26, 26, and 30 naturalities. The reasons for considering these
five bondage-places have been explained previously. The total number of
combinations for these five places is 13617.  **Arising-Places:**  The four
arising-places of the subtle, one-sense, sufficient living being are 21, 24, 25,
and 26 naturalities. This is because these subtle beings do not experience the
arising of the karmas called "Atap" and "Udyot." Therefore, the 27th naturality
arising-place is excluded.  The 21 naturality arising-place includes the same
naturalities as those experienced by the subtle, one-sense, insufficient living
being. However, since the subtle, one-sense, sufficient living being is the
focus here, the term "sufficient" should be used instead of "insufficient" when
referring to the arising. This 21 naturality arising-place occurs in the
"Apantaral" realm. Due to the absence of opposing naturalities, there is only
one combination.  By combining the four naturalities of "Audarik" body, "Hund-
Sansthan," "Upghat," and one naturality each from "Sadharan" and "Pratiyaka,"
and reducing the "Tiryanchanupurvi" naturality, the 24 naturality arising-place
is achieved. This arising-place occurs for the living being residing in the
body. There are two combinations due to the alternatives of "Pratiyaka" and
"Sadharan."  **Being-Places:**  The 24 naturality being-place...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 232 saptatikA prakaraNa pau paNagaM' aura 'suhama pada kA sambandha karate
haiN| jisakA artha yaha hai ki sUkSma ekendriya paryApta jIvasthAna meM pAMca
baMdhasthAna haiM, cAra udayasthAna haiM aura pAMca sattAsthAna haiN| jinakA
spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra haisUkSma ekendriya paryApta jIva bhI marakara manuSya
aura tiryaMcagati meM hI utpanna hotA hai, jisase usake una gatiyoM ke yogya
karmoM kA baMdha hotA hai| isIlie isake bhI 23, 25, 26, 26 aura 30 prakRtika, ye
pAMca baMdhasthAna mAne gaye haiN| ina pAMca baMdhasthAnoM ke mAnane ke kAraNoM
ko pUrva meM spaSTa kiyA jA cukA hai| yahA~ bhI ina pA~coM sthAnoM ke kula
bhaMga 13617 hote haiN| sUkSma ekendriya paryApta jIvoM ke 21, 24, 25 aura 26
prakRtika, ye cAra udayasthAna hote haiN| kyoMki ina sUkSma jIvoM ke Atapa aura
udyota nAmakarma kA udaya nahIM hotA hai| isIliye 27 prakRtika udayasthAna
chor3a diyA gayA hai| 21 prakRtika udayasthAna meM ve hI prakRtiyA~ lenI cAhiye,
jo sUkSma ekendriya aparyApta jIvoM ko basalA Aye haiN| lekina itanI vizeSatA
hai ki yahA~ sUkSma ekendriya paryApta jIvasthAna vivakSita hone se aparyApta ke
sthAna para paryApta kA udaya kahanA caahiye| yaha 21 prakRtika udayasthAna,
apAntarAla gati meM hotA hai| pratipakSI prakRtiyAM na hone se isameM eka hI
bhaMga hotA hai| ukta 21 prakRtika udayasthAna meM audArika zarIra, huMDa-
saMsthAna, upaghAta tathA sAdhAraNa aura pratyeka meM se koI eka prakRti, ina
cAra prakRtiyoM ko milAne tathA tiryaMcAnupUrvI ko kama karane para 24 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai| yaha udayasthAna zarIrastha jIva ko hotA hai  /  yahA~
pratyeka aura sAdhAraNa ke vikalpa se do bhaMga hote haiM  /  anantara zarIra
paryApti se paryApta hue jIva kI apekSA 24 prakRtika

Page #271 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth, Chapter 233  When the paraghāt is added to the
udayasthān, there are 25 natural udayasthāns. Here too, like the 24 pratik
udayasthāns, there are two bhangas.  Adding the ucchvāsa prakriti to the
udayasthān of a jīva who has become sufficient through prāṇāpāna paryāpti, there
are 26 natural udayasthāns. Here too, there are the aforementioned two bhangas.
Thus, in the sūkshma ekaindriya paryāpta jīvasthān, there are four udayasthāns
and their seven bhangas.  Now, we will explain the sattasthāns in the sūkshma
ekaindriya paryāpta jīvasthān. There are five sattasthāns in this jīvasthān.
These five sattasthāns are 62, 88, 86, 80, and 78 natural. In the tiryanchgaati,
there is no sattā of the tīrthankara prakriti. Therefore, the two sattasthāns,
63 and 86 natural, are not possible. Hence, there are five sattasthāns: 12, 18,
86, 80, and 78 natural.  However, when the 25 and 26 natural udayasthāns are
taken along with the uday of the sādhāraṇa prakriti, the 78 natural sattasthān
is not possible in this bhang. Because, except for the agnikāyik and vāyukāyik
jīvas, all other jīvas bind themselves to the manushya gati and manushyanupūrvi
according to the rules when they become sufficient through sharīra paryāpti. And
the 25 and 26 natural udayasthāns are only for those jīvas who have become
sufficient through sharīra paryāpti. Therefore, in the sādhāraṇa sūkshma
ekaindriya paryāpta jīvas, the 78 natural sattasthān does not exist while the 25
and 26 udayasthāns remain.  The remaining four sattasthāns are 62, 88, 86, and
80 natural. But when the 25 and 26 natural udayasthāns are taken along with each
prakriti, then the 78 natural sattasthān also becomes possible in the 25 and 26
natural udayasthāns because the agnikāyik and vāyukāyik jīvas are also included
in each.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 233 udayasthAna meM parAghAta ko milA dene para 25
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ bhI 24 pratika udayasthA kI taraha ve
hI do bhaMga hote haiN| _ ukta 25 prakRtika udayasthAna meM prANApAna paryApti
se paryApta hue jIva kI apekSA ucchvAsa prakRti ko milAne se 26 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ bhI pUrvokta do bhaMga hote haiN| isa prakAra
sUkSma ekendriya paryApta jIvasthAna meM cAra udayasthAna aura unake sAta bhaMga
hote haiN| aba sUkSma ekendriya paryApta jIvasthAna meM sattAsthAna batalAte
haiN| isa jIvasthAna meM pA~ca sattAsthAna batalAye haiN| ve pA~ca sattAsthAna
62, 88, 86, 80 aura 78 prakRtika haiM  /  tiryaMcagati meM tIrthakara prakRti kI
sattA nahI hotI haiN| isalie 63 aura 86 prakRtika ye do satA. sthAna saMbhava
nahIM hone se 12, 18, 86, 80 aura 78 prakRtika pA~ca sattAsthAna pAye jAte haiN|
phira bhI jaba sAdhAraNa prakRti ke udaya ke sAtha 25 aura 26 prakRtika
udayasthAna liye jAte haiM taba isa bhaMga meM 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna sambhava
nahIM hai  /  kyoMki agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIvoM ko chor3akara zeSa saba
jIva zarIra paryApti se paryApta hone para manuSyagati aura manuSyAnupUrvI kA
niyama se bandha karate haiM aura 25 va 26 prakRtika udayasthAna zarIra paryApti
se paryApta hue jIvoM ke hI hote haiN| ata: sAdhAraNa sUkSma ekendriya paryApta
jIvoM ke 25 aura 26 udayasthAna rahate 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna nahIM hotA hai|
zeSa cAra sattAsthAna 62, 88, 86 aura 80 prakRtika hote haiM  /  lekina jaba
pratyeka prakRti ke sAtha 25 aura 26 prakRtika ukyasthAna liye jAte haiM taba
pratyeka meM agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIva bhI zAmila ho jAne se 25. aura 26
prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna bhI bana jAtA hai  /

Page #272 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on Saptaatika  Thus, the summary of the aforementioned statement is
that in each of the 21st and 24th Prakriti Udayasthanas, there are five
Sattaasthanas each. And in each of the 25th and 26th Prakriti Udayasthanas,
there are four Sattaasthanas in one respect and five in another. The reason for
this difference is the ordinary and individual Prakriti, which has been
explained above.  Now, following the order specified in the verse, we will
explain the Bandhaadi Sthana in the Badar Ekendriya Paryapt Jeevasthana,
connecting the phrase "Panaga Havanti Tinneva" with "Bayara". This means that in
the Badar Ekendriya Paryapt Jeevasthana, there are five Bandhaasthanas, five
Udayasthanas, and five Sattaasthanas. Their details are as follows:  The Badar
Ekendriya Paryapt being in the Ni, Manumati, and Hinati, binds with the
appropriate Prakritis. Therefore, it has five Bandhaasthanas, namely the 23rd,
25th, 26th, 26th, and 30th Prakritis. Accordingly, the total number of their
Bhangas is 13617.  Considering the Udayasthanas, here too, there are five
Udayasthanas related to Ekendriya, namely the 21st, 24th, 25th, 26th, and 27th
Prakritis. Because, from the general to the Apantaral motion, the 21st Prakriti
is expected, from being in the body, the 24th Prakriti is expected, from the
body Paryapti to Paryapti, the 25th Prakriti is expected, and from the Pranapan
Paryapti to Paryapti, the 26th Prakriti is expected. These four Udayasthanas are
naturally present for the Paryapt Ekendriya. However, since this is Badar
Ekendriya, the Udayasthana of either Atap or Udyot is also possible, making the
27th Prakriti Udayasthana as well. Therefore, in the Badar Ekendriya Paryapt
Jeevasthana, the 21st, 24th, 25th, 26th, and 27th Prakritis are considered as
the five Udayasthanas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAptatikA prakaraNa isa prakAra ukta kathana kA sArAMza yaha huA ki 21 aura 24
prakRtika meM se pratyeka udayasthAna meM to pAMca-pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiM
aura 25 va 26 prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM eka apekSA se cAra-cAra
aura eka apekSA se pAMca-pA~ca sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  apekSA kA kAraNa
sAdhAraNa va pratyeka prakRti hai| jisakA spaSTIkaraNa Upara kiyA gayA hai| aba
gAthA meM nirdiSTa kramAnusAra bAdara ekendriya paryApta jIvasthAna meM baMdhAdi
sthAnoM ko batalAte haiM ki 'paNagA havaMti tinneva' kA sambandha "bAyarA" se
jor3eM  /  jisakA artha yaha huA ki bAdara endriya paryApta jIvasthAna meM pA~ca
baMdhasthAna, pA~ca udayasthAna aura pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  jinakA
vivaraNa nIce ligne anusAra hai bAdara ekendriya paryApta nI bhI manumati aura
hinAti meM yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA hai| isalie usane bhI 23, 25, 26,
26 aura 30 prakRtika, ye pA~ca baMdhasthAna hote haiM aura tadanusAra inake kula
bhaMga 13617 hote haiN| udayasthAnoM kI apekSA vicAra karane para yahA~ para bhI
ekendriya sambandhI pA~ca udayasthAna 21, 24, 25, 26 aura 27 prakRtika hote haiM
/  kyoMki sAmAnya se apAntarAla gati kI apekSA 21 prakRtika, zarIrastha hone kI
apekSA 24 prakRtika, zarIra paryApti se paryApta hone kI apekSA 25 prakRtika
aura prANApAna paryApti se paryApta hone kI apekSA 26 prakRtika, ye cAra
udayasthAna to paryApta ekendriya ko niyama se hote hI haiN| kintu yaha bAdara
ekendriya hai ata: yahA~ Atapa aura udyota nAma meM se kisI eka kA udayasthAna
aura saMbhava hai, jisase 27 prakRtika udayasthAna bhI bana jAtA hai| isIliye
bAdara ekendriya paryApta jIvasthAna meM 21, 24, 25, 26 aura 27 prakRtika, ye
pA~ca udayasthAna mAne gaye haiN|

Page #273 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Back Karma Granth ### Chapter 235: The 21 Natural Arising Places of the
Badar Ekaindriya Paryapt Jiva  There are 61 natures in the 21 natural arising
places of the Badar Ekaindriya Paryapt Jiva: Tiryanch-Gati, Tiryanch-Anupurvi,
Ekaindriya Jati, Sthavar, Badar, Paryapt, Tejas, Karman, Agurulghu, Sthir,
Asthir, Shubh, Ashubh, Varna-Chatushk, Nirman, Dubhang, Anadeya, Yash:Kiti and
Ayash:Kirti. In this arising place, Yash:Kiti and Ayash:Kirti arise
alternatively. Therefore, there are two bhangs in this arising place.  In the
above 21 natures, when we add the four natures of Audarik Sharira, Hund-
Sansthan, Upghāt and Pratyek-Sadharan, and subtract Tiryanch-Anupurvi, we get 24
natural arising places. Here, there are four bhangs due to the alternative
arising of Pratyek-Sadharan and Yash:Kiti-Ayash:Kirti. However, there is a
special feature that the Badar Vayukayik Jivas, who perform actions in the body,
do not have the arising of Sadharan and Yash:Kiti karmas. Therefore, there is
only one bhang there. Another special feature is that these Jivas do not have
the arising of Audarik Sharira, but instead have the arising of Vaikriya
Sharira. Therefore, instead of Audarik Sharira, we should say Vaikriya Sharira.
Thus, there are a total of five bhangs in the 24 natural arising places.  After
that, by adding the Paraghāt nature to the 24 natural arising places, we get 25
natural arising places. This arising place is from the Sharira Paryapti.  1. The
Vayukayik Jivas who perform actions in the body do not have the arising of
Sadharan and Yash:Kirti. 2. Instead of Audarik Sharira, we should say Vaikriya
Sharira for the Vaikriya Vayukayik Jivas.  -~-~Sapta-Tika Prakaran Tika, Page
202

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paSTha karmagrantha 235 bAdara ekendriya paryApta jIvasthAna ke 21 prakRtika
udayasthAna meM 61 prakRtiyA~ isa prakAra haiM-tiryaMcagati, tirya cAnupUrvI,
ekendriya jAti, sthAvara, bAdara, paryApta, tejasa, kArmaNa, agurulaghu, sthira,
asthira, zubha, azubha, varNacatuSka, nirmANa, dubhaMga, anAdeya, yazaHkIti aura
ayaza:kIrti meM se koI eka  /  isa udayasthAna meM yaza:kIti aura ayazaHkIrti kA
udaya vikalpa se hotA hai| ata: isa apekSA se yahA~ 21 prakRtika udayasthAna ke
do bhaMga hote haiN| ukta 21 prakRtikA upacana meM zarIrasya jIva kI apekSA
audArika zarIra, huMDasaMsthAna, upaghAta tathA pratyeka aura sAdhAraNa meM se
koI eka, ina cAra prakRtiyoM ko milAne tathA tiryaMcAnupUrvI ko kama karane para
24 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| yahA~ pratyeka-sAdhAraNa aura yaza kIti-
ayazaHkIti kA vikalpa se udaya hone ke kAraNa cAra bhaMga hote haiN| kintu itanI
vizeSatA hai ki zarIrastha vikriyA karane vAle bAdara vAyukAyika jIvoM ke
sAdhAraNa aura yazaHkIti nAmakarma kA udaya nahIM hotA hai, isaliye vahA~ eka hI
bhaMga hotA hai| dUsarI vizeSatA yaha hai ki aise jIvoM ke audArika zarIra kA
udaya na hokara vaikiya zarIra kA udaya hotA hai, ataH inake audArika zarIra ke
sthAna para baiMkriya zarIra kahanA caahie|' isa prakAra 24 prakRtika
udayasthAna meM kula pAMca bhaMga hue| anantara 24 prakRtika udayasthAna meM
parAghAta prakRti ko milAne se 25 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yaha
udayasthAna zarIra paryApti se 1 vakkiyaM kurvata: puna daravAyukAyikasyakaH,
pasastasya sAdhAraNa-yazaHkIrtI udayaM nAgacchataH, anyacca
vaikiyavAyukAyikacatuciyAtAyaudArikazarIrasthAne daikriyazarIramiti vaktavyam  /
-~-~saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 202

Page #274 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 7: The Seven Decades  **The Perfect Being**  Here, as with the 24
natural states of existence, there are five categories.  If, in the case of a
perfect being, the body is perfected, and either the state of suffering (ātapa)
or the state of joy (udyota) arises, then by adding either of these to the 25
natural states of existence, we get 26 natural states of existence. However, the
state of suffering does not arise in the ordinary, so in this case, there are
two categories with respect to fame and infamy. But the state of joy arises in
both the ordinary and the universal, so in this case, there are four categories
with respect to the alternatives of ordinary and universal, and fame and infamy.
Thus, there are a total of 5 + 2 + 4 = 11 categories for the 26 natural states
of existence.  **The Perfect Being with Breath**  Next, with respect to a
perfect being with perfected breath and exhalation, by adding either the state
of suffering or the state of joy to the 26 natural states of existence, we get
27 natural states of existence. Here too, as before, there are two categories
with suffering and four categories with joy, for a total of six categories.
**Total Categories**  Adding the categories of these five states of existence,
the total number of categories for the perfect being with one sense is 26.
**The Perfect Being with One Sense**  There are five states of existence for the
perfect being with one sense: 2680 and 78 natural states. In this state of
existence, the 26 categories of the five states of existence mentioned above are
as follows: two categories for the 21 natural states of existence, four
categories for the 24 natural states of existence except for the one category of
the vacuous, badara, airy body, and one category each for the 25th and 26th
natural states of existence with respect to fame and infamy.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 236 saptatikA prakaraNa paryApta hue jIva ko hotA hai| yahA~ bhI 24 prakRtika
udayasthAna kI taraha pA~ca bhaGga hote haiM  /  yadi zarIra paryApti se
paryApta hue jova ke Atapa aura udyota meM se kisI eka kA udaya ho jAve to 25
prakRtika udayasthAna meM Atapa aura udyota meM se kisI eka ko milAne para 26
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  kintu Atapa kA udaya sAdhAraNa ko nahIM hotA
hai, ataH isa pakSa meM 26 prakRtika udayasthAna ke yazaHkIrti aura ayaza:kIrti
kI apekSA do bhaMga hote haiN| lekina udyota kA udaya sAdhAraNa aura pratyeka,
inameM se kisI ke bhI hotA hai ataH isa pakSa meM sAdhAraNa aura pratyeka tathA
yazaH kIrti aura ayazaH kIrti, inake vikalpa se cAra bhaMga hote haiN| isa
prakAra 26 prakRtika udayasthAna ke kula 5+2+4= 11 bhaMga hue  /  anantara
prANApAna paryApti se paryApta hue jIva kI apekSA ucchvAsa sahita 26 prakRtika
udayasthAna meM Atapa aura udyota meM se kisI eka prakRti ke milA dene para 27
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| yahA~ bhI pahale ke samAna Atapa ke sAtha do
bhaGga aura udyota ke sAtha cAra bhaGga, isa prakAra kula chaha bhaGga hue| ina
pA~coM udayasthAnoM ke bhaGga jor3ane para bAdara ekendriya paryApta jIvasthAna
ke kula bhaGga 26 hote haiM  /  bAdara ekendriya paryApta jIvoM ke 2680 aura 78
prakRtika, ye pA~ca sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  isa jIvasthAna meM jo pA~coM
udayasthAnoM ke 26 bhaGga batalAye haiM, unameM se ikkIsa prakRtika udayasthAna
ke do bhaGga, 24 prakRtika udayasthAna meM vaikriya bAdara vAyukAyika ke eka
bhaGga ko chor3akara zeSa cAra bhaGga tathA 25 aura 26 prakRtika udayasthAnoM
meM pratyeka nAma aura ayazaHkIrti nAma ke sAtha prApta hone

Page #275 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Karma Granth (Chapter 237)  Each of the eight bhangas (categories of
karma) contains the five sattvasthana (states of being), but each of the
remaining 21 bhangas contains only four sattvasthana, excluding the 78 natural
sattvasthana.  Now, following the instructions given in the gatha (verse), we
will explain the bandha (bondage) and other states, and their respective
bhangas, for the vikalendriya (limited sensory) beings. The gatha instructs:
"Pan panagam vigalindiya u tini u". This means that the vikalendriya beings -
the dwindriya (two-sensed), trindriya (three-sensed), and chaturindriya (four-
sensed) - have five bandha sthana (places of bondage), six udaya sthana (places
of arising), and five sattva sthana.  Here is the explanation:  Vikalendriya
beings also experience bondage of the same natural qualities that lead to the
tiryanch (animal) and manushya (human) realms. Therefore, they also have five
bandha sthana: 23, 25, 26, 26, and 30 natural qualities. Accordingly, they have
a total of 13917 bhangas.  Considering the udaya sthana, there are six: 21, 26,
28, 26, 30, and 31 natural qualities. The 21 natural udaya sthana include: tejas
(fire), karman (karma), agurulghu (heavy-light), sthira (stable), asthira
(unstable), shubha (auspicious), ashubha (inauspicious), varn chatushk (four
colors), nirman (creation), tiryanch gati (animal realm), tiryanch anupurvi
(animal lineage), dwindriya jati (two-sensed species), sabadar (sound), paryapta
(sufficient), durbhag (misfortune), anadeya (unworthy), and yasha kirti (fame)
and ayasha kirti (infamy). These 21 qualities arise in the apantaral
(intermediate) realm. There are two bhangas due to the alternative of yasha
kirti and ayasha kirti.  Next, considering the jiva (soul) residing in the body,
the 21 natural udaya sthana include: audarik sharir (physical body), audarik
angopang (physical limbs), indrasansthan (sense organs), sevarta sanhanan
(service-oriented aggregation), upghat (injury), and each of these six qualities
combined, minus tiryanch anupurvi, resulting in 26 natural udaya sthana. Here
too, like the 21 natural udaya sthana, there are two bhangas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaSTha karmagrantha 237 vAlA eka-eka bhaGga, isa prakAra ina ATha bhaGgoM meM
se pratyeka meM uparyukta pAMcoM sattAsthAna hote haiM kintu zeSa 21 meM se
pratyeka bhaGga meM 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna ko chor3akara zeSa cAra-cAra
sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  aba gAthA meM kiye gaye nirdezAnusAra paryApta
vikalendriyoM meM baMdhAdi sthAnoM aura unake yathAsambhava bhaGgoM ko batalAte
haiN| gAthAoM meM nirdeza hai 'paNa paNagaM vigaliMdiyA u tini u'  /  arthAt
vikalatrika - - dvIndriya, zrIndriya aura caturindriya paryAptoM meM pA~ca
baMdhasthAna, chaha udayasthAna aura pA~ca sattAsthAna haiN| jinakA spaSTIkaraNa
isa prakAra hai ki - vikalendriya paryApta jIva bhI tiryaMcagati aura
manuSyagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA hI baMdha karate haiN| ataH inake bhI 23, 25,
26, 26 aura 30 prakRtika, ye pA~ca baMdhasthAna hote haiM aura tadanusAra inake
kula bhaGga 13917 hote haiN| udayasthAnoM kI apekSA vicAra karane para yahA~ 21,
26, 28,26, 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye chaha udayasthAna hote haiN| inameM se 21
prakRtika udayasthAna meM - tejasa, kArmaNa, agurulaghu, sthira, asthira, zubha,
azubha, varNacatuSka, nirmANa, tiryaMcagati, tiryaMcAnupUrvI, dvIndriya jAti, sa
bAdara, paryApta, durbhaga, anAdeya aura yazaH kIrti va ayaza: kIrti meM se koI
eka - isa prakAra 21 prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai jo apAntarAla gati meM pAyA
jAtA hai| isake yazaHkIrti aura ayazaHkIrti ke vikalpa se do bhajja hote haiM  /
anantara zarIrastha jIva kI apekSA 21 prakRtika udayasthAna meM audArika zarIra,
audArika aMgopAMga, iMDasaMsthAna, sevArta saMhanana, upaghAta aura pratyeka ina
chaha prakRtiyoM ko milAne tathA tiryacAnupUrvI ko kama karane se 26 prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai| yahA~ bhI 21 prakRtika udayasthAna kI taraha do bhaGga
jAnanA cAhiye  /

Page #276 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Saptaatika Chapter  This chapter discusses the 28-natured state of being,
which arises from the combination of the 26-natured state of being with the two
natures of *parāghāta* (external harm) and *apraśasta vihāyoga* (unfavorable
death).  Here too, there are two *bhaṅga* (divisions).  Following the 28-natured
state of being, comes the 26-natured state of being. This 26-natured state of
being arises in two ways:   1. When someone who has attained *prāṇāpāna-
paryāpti* (perfection of breath) experiences only *uccvāsa* (exhalation) without
*udyota* (effort). 2. When someone who has attained *śarīra-paryāpti*
(perfection of body) experiences *udyota* (effort).  In each of these cases,
there are two *bhaṅga* (divisions) as mentioned earlier. Thus, there are a total
of four *bhaṅga* (divisions) in the 20-natured state of being.  Similarly, the
30-natured state of being also arises in two ways:  1. When someone who has
attained *bhāṣā-paryāpti* (perfection of speech) experiences either *susvara*
(good voice) or *duḥsvara* (bad voice) without *udyota* (effort). 2. When
someone who has attained *śvāsochchvāsa-paryāpti* (perfection of breathing) but
not yet *bhāṣā-paryāpti* (perfection of speech) experiences *udyota* (effort).
In the first type of 30-natured state of being, there are four *bhaṅga*
(divisions) due to the alternatives of *yaśaḥ-kīrti* (fame) and *ayaśaḥ-kīrti*
(infamy), and *susvara* (good voice) and *duḥsvara* (bad voice). However, in the
second type of 30-natured state of being, there are only two *bhaṅga*
(divisions) due to the alternatives of *yaśaḥ-kīrti* (fame) and *ayaśaḥ-kīrti*
(infamy). Thus, there are a total of six *bhaṅga* (divisions) in the 30-natured
state of being.  Therefore, when *uccvāsa* (exhalation) occurs in someone who
has attained *prāṇāpāna-paryāpti* (perfection of breath), it leads to the
29-natured state of being. There are two *bhaṅga* (divisions) in this state.
Alternatively, when *udyota* (effort) occurs in the 28-natured state of being
without *uccvāsa* (exhalation), it leads to the 29-natured state of being.   -
Commentary on the Saptaatika Chapter, Page 203.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa isa 26 prakRtika udayasthAna meM zarIra paryApti se
paryApta hue jIva kI apekSA parAghAta aura aprazasta vihAyogati, ina do
prakRtiyoM ko milAne para 28 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahAM bhI
pUrvavat do bhaGga hote haiN| 28 prakRtika udayasthAna ke anantara 26 prakRtika
udayasthAna kA krama hai  /  yaha 26 prakutika udayasthAna do prakAra se hotA
hai - eka to jisane prANApAna paryApti ko prApta kara liyA hai, usake udyota ke
binA kevala ucchvAsa kA udaya hone para aura dUsarA zarIra paryApti kI prApti
hone ke pazcAt udyola kA udaya hone pr| ina donoM meM se pratyeka sthAna meM
pUrvokta do-do bhaGga prApta hote haiM  /  isa prakAra 20 prakRtika udayasthAna
ke kula cAra bhaGga hue| isI prakAra 30 prakRtika udayasthAna bhI do prakAra se
prApta hotA hai| eka to jisane bhASA paryApti ko prApta kara liyA hai, usake
udyota kA udaya na hokara susvara aura duHsbara ina do prakRtiyoM meM se kisI
eka kA udaya hone para hotA hai aura dUsarA jisane zvAsocchvAsa paryApti ko
prApta kiyA aura abhI bhASA paryApti kI prApti nahIM huI kintu isI bIca meM
usake udyota prakRti kA udaya ho gayA to bhI 30 prakRtika udayasthAna ho jAtA
hai| inameM se pahale prakAra ke 30 prakRtika udayasthAna meM yaza:kIrti aura
ayaza:kIti tathA susvara aura duHsvara ke vikalpa se cAra bhaGga prApta hote
haiN| kintu dUsare prakAra ke 30 prakRtika udayasthAna meM yazaHkIti aura ayaza
kIrti ke vikalpa se do hI bhaGga hote haiN| isa prakAra 30 prakRtika udayasthAna
meM chaha bhaGga prApta hue| 1 tataH prANApAnaparyApyA paryAptasyocchavAse
kSipte ekotrizat, atrASi tAvena dvau maGgI; athavA tasyAmevASTA vizatI
ucchvAse'nudite udyotanAmni tUdite ekonatriMzat  /  -saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA,
pR. 203

Page #277 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth ### 236  The two types of 30 natural उदयस्थान (stages of
arising) mentioned above, if one has attained language पर्याप्ति (perfection)
and also has the arising of उयोत (a type of karma), then they have 31 natural
उदयस्थान. Here, there are four भङ्ग (divisions) due to the alternatives of
यशःकीति (fame) and अयशःकीति (infamy) and both the sounds. Thus, the total भङ्ग
of all उदयस्थान of पर्याप्त द्वीन्द्रिय (two-sensed) are 20.  In the पर्याप्त
द्वीन्द्रिय जीवस्थान (state of being) also, there are five सत्तास्थान (states of
existence) like the एकेन्द्रिय (one-sensed), which are 62, 88, 86, 80, and 78
natural. Out of the 20 भङ्ग mentioned earlier for the six उदयस्थान, there are
two भङ्ग for 21 natural उदयस्थान and two भङ्ग for 26 natural उदयस्थान. In each
of these four भङ्ग, there are five सत्तास्थान because the अग्निकायिक (fire-
bodied) and वायुकायिक (air-bodied) जीव who are पर्याप्त द्वीन्द्रिय and have 78
natural सत्ता, they can have 78 natural सत्ता for some time, and during this
time, they have 21 and 26 natural उदयस्थान respectively. Therefore, in each of
these four भङ्ग of these two उदयस्थान, there are five सत्तास्थान mentioned. And
apart from these four भङ्ग, the remaining 16 भङ्ग do not have 78 natural
सत्तास्थान, so each of them has four सत्तास्थान. Because, except for the
अग्निकायिक and वायुकायिक जीव, the rest of the जीव, after becoming पर्याप्त from
शरीर पर्याप्ति (perfection of body), bind according to the rule, मनुष्यगति
(human path) and मनुष्यानुपूर्वी (human-like), due to which they do not attain
78 natural सत्तास्थान.  Like पर्याप्त द्वीन्द्रिय जीव, one should also know the
बंधादि स्थान (places of bondage etc.) and their भङ्ग for पर्याप्त त्रीन्द्रिय
(three-sensed) and पर्याप्त चतुरिन्द्रिय (four-sensed) जीव. One should know this
particularity that in the उदयस्थान, instead of द्वीन्द्रिय, त्रीन्द्रिय and
चतुरिन्द्रिय should be mentioned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagranya 236 Upara jo 30 prakRtika udayasthAna ke do prakAra batalAye
haiM usameM se yadi jisane bhASA paryApti ko bhI prApta kara liyA aura uyota kA
bhI udaya hai, usako 31 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| yahA~ yaza:kIti aura
ayazaHkIti tathA donoM svaroM ke vikalpa se cAra bhaGga hote haiN| isa prakAra
paryApta dvIndriya ke saba udayasthAnoM ke kula bhaGga 20 hote haiN| dvIndriya
paryApta jIvasthAna meM bhI ekendriya ke samAna 62, 88, 86, 80 aura 78
prakRtika, ye pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiN| pahale jo chaha udayasthAnoM ke 20
bhaGga batalAye haiM unameM se 21 prakRtika udayasthAna ke do bhaGga tathA 26
prakRtika udayasthAna ke do bhaGga, ina cAra bhaGgoM meM se pratyeka bhaGga meM
pAMca-pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiM kyoMki 78 prakRtiyoM kI sattA vAle jo
agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIva paryApta dvIndriyoM meM utpanna hote haiM, unake
kucha kAla taka 78 prakRtiyoM kI sattA saMbhava hai tathA isa kAla meM
dvIndriyoM ke kramaza: 21 aura 26 prakRtika udayasthAna hI hote haiN| isIliye
ina do udayasthAnoM ke cAra bhaGgoM meM se pratyeka bhaGga meM ukta pAMca
sattAsthAna ka.he haiM tathA ina cAra bhaGgoM ke atirikta jo zeSa 16 bhaGga raha
jAte haiM, unameM se kisI meM bhI 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna na hone se pratyeka
meM cAra-cAra sattAsthAna hote haiN| kyoMki agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIvoM ke
sivAya zeSa jIva zarIra paryApti se paryApta hone ke pazcAt niyama se
manuSyagati aura manuSyAnupUrvI kA baMdha karate haiM, jisase unake 789
prakRtika sattAsthAna nahIM pAyA jAtA hai| paryApta dvIndriya jIvoM kI taraha
trIndriya aura caturindriya paryApta jIvoM ko bhI baMdhAdi sthAnoM aura unake
bhaGgoM ko jAnanA cAhiye  /  itanI vizeSatA jAnanA cAhiye ki udayasthAnoM meM
dvIndriya ke sthAna para trIndriya aura caturindriya kA ullekha kara diyA jaaye|

Page #278 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter of Seven Tika  This section now discusses the various states of
existence of the limited soul (Paryāpta Jīva) and their respective bonds
(Bandha) and their breaking (Bhang). The verses state: "Lachappana" and "Asanni
Ya" - meaning that there are six bond-states, six arising-states, and five
states of existence for the non-conscious five-sense limited soul.   This means
that the non-conscious five-sense limited soul, upon binding, is capable of
attaining the human (Manushya) and animal (Tiryanch) realms. However, it can
also bind to the states of hell (Naraka) and heaven (Deva). Therefore, there are
six bond-states with 23, 25, 26, 28, 26, and 30 karmic influences, resulting in
13626 possible breakings.  Considering the arising-states, there are six with
21, 26, 28, 29, 30, and 31 karmic influences. The arising-state with 21 karmic
influences includes one each from the following:   * **Tejas:** (Brightness) *
**Karmāṇa:** (Karma) * **Agurulaghu:** (Heavy and Light) * **Sthira:** (Stable)
* **Asthira:** (Unstable) * **Shubha:** (Auspicious) * **Ashubha:**
(Inauspicious) * **Varna Chatushk:** (Four Castes) * **Nirmana:** (Creation) *
**Tiryanchgati:** (Animal Realm) * **Tiryanchānupūrvi:** (Animal Ancestry) *
**Panchendriya Jāti:** (Five-sense Being) * **Pras:** (Praise) * **Bādar:**
(Blame) * **Paryāpta:** (Limited) * **Subhaga:** (Fortunate) * **Durbhaga:**
(Unfortunate) * **Ādeya:** (Worthy of Respect) * **Anādeya:** (Unworthy of
Respect) * **Yashaḥkīti:** (Fame and Glory) * **Ayashaḥkīti:** (Shame and
Disgrace)  This arising-state with 21 karmic influences is found only in the
Apāntarāla realm. Each of the three pairs (Subhaga, etc.) has eight possible
breakings based on the variations of each influence.  After the soul takes on a
body, it experiences the arising of one each from the following:  * **Audārika
Shārīra:** (Physical Body) * **Audārika Angopānga:** (Physical Limbs) *
**Sansthāna:** (State of Existence) * **Sanhanana:** (Six Types of Binding) *
**Upadhāta:** (Supporting Influence)  However, the influence of
"Tiryanchānupūrvi" (Animal Ancestry) does not arise here. Therefore, by adding
these six influences to the previous 21 and removing "Tiryanchānupūrvi," we get
an arising-state with 26 karmic influences. There are also six states of
existence and six types of binding...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sapta tikA prakaraNa aba kramaprApta aMsajI paryApta jIvasthAna meM aMdhAdi
sthAnoM aura unake bhaGgoM kA nirdeza karate haiN| isake liye gAthAoM meM
nirdeza kiyA hai--'lacchappaNa' 'asannI ya' arthAt asaMjJI paMcendriya paryApta
jIvasthAna ke chaha baMghasthAna haiM, chaha udayasthAna hai aura pA~ca
sattAsthAna haiN| jinakA vivecana yaha hai ki asaMjJI paMcendriya paryApta jIva
manuSyagati. aura tiryaMcagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karate hI haiM,
kintu narakagati aura devagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA bhI baMdha kara sakate
haiN| isaliye inake 23, 25, 26, 28, 26 aura 30 prakRtika ye chaha baMdhasthAna
hote haiM aura tadanusAra 13626 bhaGga hote haiN| udayasthAnoM kI apekSA vicAra
karane para yahA~ 21, 26, 28, 29, 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye chaha udayasthAna
haiN| inameM se 21 prakRtika udayasthAna meM tejasa, kArmaNa, agurulaghu,
sthira, asthira, zubha, azubha, varNacatuSka, nirmANa, tiryaMcagati,
tiryaMcAnupUrvI, paMcendriya jAti, prasa, bAdara, paryApta, subhaga aura
durbhaga meM se koI eka, Adeya aura anAdeya meM se koI eka tathA yazaHkIti aura
ayaza:kIti meM se eka, ina 21 prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai| yaha 21 prakRtika
udayasthAna apAntarAlagati meM hI pAyA jAtA hai tathA subhaga Adi tIna yugaloM
meM se pratyeka prakRti ke vikalpa se 8 bhaGga prApta hote haiN| anantara jaba
yaha jIva zarIra ko grahaNa kara letA hai taba audArika zarIra, audArika
aMgopAMga, yaha saMsthAnoM meM se koI eka saMsthAna, chaha saMhananoM meM se koI
eka saMhanana, upadhAta aura pratyeka ina chaha prakRtiyoM kA udaya hone lagatA
hai| kintu yahA~ AnupUrvI nAmakarma kA udaya nahIM hotA hai| ataeva ukta 21
prakRtika udayasthAna meM chaha prakRtiyoM ko milAne aura tiryaMcAnupUrvI ko
kama karane para 26 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ chaha saMsthAna
aura chaha saMhananoM

Page #279 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **In comparison to the 241 Su-bhag-trika, the
aforementioned 8 bhangas, when multiplied by six twice, result in 6x6x8 = 288
bhangas.**  **Subsequently, upon the body's attainment of paryaapti, either
para-ghat or prashasta viha-yogati or aprashasta viha-yogati arises. Therefore,
adding these two prakritis to the 26 natural udya-sthana, we get 28 natural
udya-sthana.**  **Here, considering the alternative of both viha-yogatis, the
aforementioned 288 bhangas, when multiplied by two, become 288x2 = 576.**  **The
26 natural udya-sthana occur in two ways: one, obtained solely from the rise of
ucchvasa without udya-ot, for one who has completed the an-pran paryaapti; and
two, obtained from the rise of udya-ot prakriti upon the completion of the
body's paryaapti.**  **In each of these two sthana, there are 576 bhangas.
Therefore, the total bhangas for the 26 natural udya-sthana are 576x26 = 1152.**
**The 30 natural udya-sthana is also obtained in two ways: one, obtained from
the rise of either su-svara or du-svara prakriti without udya-ot, for one who
has completed the bhasha paryaapti; and two, obtained upon the rise of udya-ot,
for one who has completed the shvas-occhvas paryaapti.**  **In the first type of
sthana, the aforementioned 576 bhangas, when multiplied by svara-dvik, result in
1152 bhangas. And in the second type of sthana, there are 576 bhangas.**
**Thus, the total bhangas for the 30 natural udya-sthana are 1152+576 = 1728.**
**Subsequently, for one who has completed the bhasha paryaapti and also has the
rise of udya-ot prakriti, there is the 31st natural udya-sthana.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 241 kI apekSA subhagatrika kI apekSA se pUrvokta 8 bhaGgoM
meM do bAra chaha se guNita kara dene para X6x6:288 bhaGga prApta hote haiN|
anaMtara isake zarIra paryApti se paryApta ho jAne para parAghAta tathA prazasta
vihAyogati aura aprazasta bihAyogati meM se kisI eka kA udaya aura hone lagatA
hai| ata: 26 prakRtika udayasthAna meM ina do prakRtiyoM ko aura milA dene para
28 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| yahA~ donoM vihAyogatiyoM ke vikalpa kI
apekSA bhaGgoM ke vikalpa pUrvokta 288 ko do se guNA kara dene para 28842-576 ho
jAte haiM  /  26 prakRtika udayasthAna do prakAra se hotA hai-eka to jisane Ana-
prANa paryApti ko pUrNa kara liyA hai usake udyota ke binA kevala ucchvAsa ke
udaya se prApta hotA hai aura dUsarA zarIra paryApti ke pUrNa hone para udyota
prakRti ke udaya se prApta hotA hai  /  ina donoM sthAnoM meM se pratyeka sthAna
meM 576 bhaGga hote haiM  /  ata: 26 prakRtika udayasthAna yo kula 576 42=1152
bhaGga hue| 30 prakRtika udayasthAna bhI do prakAra se prApta hotA hai  /  eka
to jisane bhASA paryApti ko pUrNa kara liyA usake udyota ke binA susvara aura
duHsvara prakRtiyoM meM se kisI eka prakRti ke udaya se prApta hotA hai aura
dUsarA jisane zvAsocchvAsa paryApti ko pUrNa kara liyA, usake udyota kA udaya ho
jAne para hotA hai| inameM se pahale prakAra ke sthAna ke pUrvokta 576 bhaGgoM
ko svaradvika se guNita karane para 1152 bhaGga prApta hote haiM tathA dUsare
prakAra ke sthAna meM 576 bhaMga hI hote haiM  /  isa prakAra 30 prakRtika
udayasthAna ke kula bhaMga 1152+576 = 1728 hote haiN| anantara jisane bhASA
paryApti ko bhI pUrNa kara liyA aura udyota prakRti kA bhI udaya hai usake 31
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /   /

Page #280 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of Saratta  Here, there are a total of 1152 bhangas. Thus, there
are a total of 4604 bhangas in all the udayasthanas of the Asanji Panchendriya
Paryapta Jeevasthana. _The Asanji Panchendriya Paryapta Jeevasthana has five
sattasthanas of 62, 88, 86, 80, and 78 prakrutis. Out of these, there are 8
bhangas for the 21 prakrutik udayasthanas and 288 bhangas for the 26 prakrutik
udayasthanas. Each of these bhangas has the aforementioned five sattasthanas.
Because the Agnicayik and Vayukayik Jeevas, who have 78 prakrutis of sattva, if
they are born in the Asanji Panchendriya Paryaptakas, then it is possible for
them to have 78 prakrutik sattasthanas while having 21 and 26 prakrutik
udayasthanas. But, apart from these, the remaining udayasthanas and their
bhangas have only four sattasthanas, excluding 78._  Thus, the consideration of
the bandhadi sthana and their bhangas of the thirteen Jeevasthanas, named by
karma, has been done. Now, we will point out the bandhadi sthana and bhangas of
the fourteenth, Sanji Panchendriya Paryapta Jeevasthana. The gatha has indicated
the bandhadi sthana for this Jeevasthana - 'Atthaththadasagan ti sanni ya',
meaning that the Sanji Panchendriya Paryapta Jeevasthana has eight bandhasthana,
one aalan udayasthana, and ten sattasthanas. Their explanation is given below.
The eight bandhasthana are mentioned as 23, 25, 26, 28, 26, 30, 31, and 1
prakrutik. These eight bandhasthana belong to the Sanji Panchendriya Paryapta
Jeevas and there are 13645 possible bhangas for them. Because the bandha of
their four gati-related prakrutis is possible, therefore, 23 prakrutik, etc.,
bandhasthana are mentioned for them. The bandha of Tirthankara name and Aharak
Chatushk also occurs for them, therefore, 31 prakrutik bandhasthana is
mentioned. Both Upshama and Kshapak categories are found in this Jeevasthana,
therefore, 1 prakrutik bandhasthana is also mentioned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saratatikA prakaraNa yahA~ kula bhaMga 1152 hote haiM  /  isa prakAra asaMjJI
paMcendriya paryApta jIvasthAna ke saba udayasthAnoM ke kula 4604 bhaGga hote
haiN| _asaMjI paMcendriya paryApta jIvasthAna meM 62. 88, 86, 80 aura 78
prakRtika ye pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiN| inameM se 21 prakRtika udayasthAna ke
8 bhaGga tathA 26 prakRtika udayasthAna ke 288 bhaGga, inameM se pratyeka bhaGga
meM pUrvokta pA~ca-pA~ca sattAsthAna hote haiN| kyoMki 78 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
vAle jo agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIva haiM ve yadi asaMjhI paMcendriya
paryAptakoM meM utpanna hote haiM to unake 21 aura 26 prakRtika udayasthAna
rahate hue 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna pAyA jAnA saMbhava hai| kintu inake atirikta
zeSa udayasthAnoM aura unake bhaGgoM meM 78 ke binA zeSa cAra-cAra sattAsthAna
hI hote haiN| isa prakAra se abhI taka teraha jIvasthAnoM ke nAmakarma ke
baMdhAdi sthAnoM aura unake maGgoM kA vicAra kiyA gyaa| aba zeSa rahe caudahaveM
saMjJI paMcendriya paryApta jIvasthAna ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM va bhaGgoM kA nirdeza
karate haiM  /  isa jIvasthAna ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM ke liye gAthA meM saMketa
kiyA gayA hai.-'aTTaThThadasagaM ti sannI ya' arthAt saMjJI paMcendriya paryApta
jIvasthAna meM ATha baMdhasthAna, ALaM udayasthAna aura dasa sattAsthAna hai  /
jinakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA jAtA hai| nAma karma ke 23, 25 26, 28 26, 30, 31
aura 1 prakRtika, ye ATha baMdhasthAna batalAye haiN| ye AThoM baMdhasthAna
saMjJI paMcendriya paryApta jIvoM ke hote haiM aura unake 13645 bhaGga saMbhava
haiN| kyoMki inake cAroM gati sambandhI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha sambhava hai,
isIliye 23 prakRtika Adi baMdhasthAna inake kahe haiN| tIrthaMkara nAma aura
AhArakacatuSka kA bhI inake baMdha hotA hai isIliye 31 prakRtika baMdhasthAna
kahA hai| isa jIvasthAna meM upazama aura kSapaka donoM zreNiyA~ pAI jAtI haiM
isIliye 1 prakRtika baMdhasthAna bhI kahA hai  /

Page #281 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **Regarding the consideration of the 243 Udayasthanas,
the 20, H, and 8 Prakruti are related to the Kevali, and the 24 Prakruti
Udayasthanas are of the Ekendriya. Therefore, in this Jiva-sthana, except for
these four Udayasthanas of 20, 24, 6, and 8 Prakruti, the remaining Jiva-sthana
is found only up to the 12th Gunasthana. The 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, and 31
Prakruti, these eight Udayasthanas are found. The total Bhang of these eight
Udayasthanas is 7671. Because the total Bhang of the 12 Udayasthanas is 7761,
120 Bhang are reduced from them, because those Bhang are not related to the
Sanni Panchaindriya Paryapta Jiva.**  **The Satta-sthana of Namakarma are 12,
out of which the H and 8 Prakruti Satta-sthana are found in the Kevali,
therefore, they are not possible in the Sanni Panchaindriya Jiva-sthana, so in
addition to them, the 63, 62, 61, 88, 86, 80, 76, 78, 75, and 74 Prakruti, these
ten Satta-sthana are found. Out of the 8 and 288 Bhang of the 21 and 26 Prakruti
Udayasthanas respectively, in each Bhang, the 12, 88, 86, 80, and 76 Prakruti,
these five Satta-sthana are found.**  **In Go. Karmakanda Gatha 676, the 63, 62,
61, 60, 59, 54, 52, 51, 76, 78, 77, 10, and 9 Prakruti, these 13 Satta-sthana
are mentioned. Out of these, except for the 10 and 9 Prakruti Satta-sthana, the
remaining 11 Satta-sthana are mentioned in the Sanni Panchaindriya Jiva-sthana -
Dasanavaparihina Sanvyam Mattam. ||706||**  **In the Shwetambar and Digambar
Karmagyas, the following Satta-sthana of Namakarma are of the same Prakruti, 63,
62, 88, 80, 76, 78, and 61 Prakruti, and the number of Prakruti in the remaining
Satta-sthana is different. In the Shwetambar Karmagranths, the 86, 85, 75, and
74 Prakruti, and in the Digambar literature, the 61, 60, 84, 82, 77, and 10
Prakruti Satta-sthana are mentioned.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 243 udayasthAnoM kI apekSA vicAra karane para aura 20, ha
aura 8 prakatika ye tIna udayasthAna kevalI sambandhI haiM aura 24 prakRtika
udayasthAna ekendriyoM kA hotA hai ataH isa jIvasthAna meM 20, 24, 6 aura 8
prakRtika, ina cAra udayasthAnoM ko chor3akara zeSa yaha jIvasthAna bArahaveM
guNasthAna taka hI pAyA jAtA hai  /  21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 26 30, 31 prakRtika ye
ATha udayasthAna pAye jAte haiN| ina ATha udayasthAnoM ke kula bhaMga 7671 hote
haiN| kyoMki 12 udayasthAnoM ke kula bhaMga 7761 haiM so unameM se 120 bhaMga
kama ho jAte haiM, kyoMki una bhaMgoM kA saMbaMdha saMnI paMcendriya paryApta
jIva se nahIM hai|| nAmakarma ke sattAsthAna 12 haiM, unameM se hai aura 8
prakRtika sattAsthAna kevalI ke pAye jAte haiM, ata: ve donoM saMjI paMcendriya
jIvasthAna meM saMbhava nahIM hone se unake atirikta 63, 62, 6, 88, 86, 80, 76
78, 76 aura 75 prakRtika, ye dasa sattAsthAna pAye jAte haiM  /  21 aura 26
prakRtika udayasthAnoM ke kramaza: 8 aura 288 bhaMgoM meM se to pratyeka bhaMga
meM 12, 88, 86, 80 aura 76 prakRtika, ye pAMca-pAMca sattAsthAna hI pAye jAte
haiN| 1 go0 karmakAMDa gAthA 676 meM nAmakarma ke 63, 62, 61, 60, 8, 54, 82, 5,
76, 78, 77, 10 aura prakRtika ye 13 sattAsthAna batalAye haiN| inameM se saMjJo
paMcendriya jIvasthAna meM 10 aura 1 prakRtika satAsthAna ko chor3akara zeSa 11
mattAsthAna batalAye haiM-dasaNavaparihINasanvayaM mattaM  /  / 706 //
zvetAmbara aura digambara karmanagyoM meM nAmakarma ke nimnalikhita sattAsthAna
samAna prakRtika haiM, 63, 62, 88, 80, 76, 78 aura 6 prakRtika aura bAkI ke
sattAsthAnoM meM prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA meM bhinnatA hai| zvetAmbara
karmagranthoM meM 86, 86, 76, 75 prakRtika tathA digambara sAhitya meM 61, 60,
84, 82, 77, 10 prakRtika sattAsthAna batalAye haiN|

Page #282 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 244  The consideration of the fourteen states of existence of living
beings, including the states of bondage and their dissolution, has been
discussed. Now, let's consider their interrelationship.  For subtle one-sensed
insufficient living beings, there are 23 natural states of bondage and 21
natural states of liberation. Within these, there are five states of existence:
62, 88, 86, 60, and 78. Similarly, there are five states of existence within the
24 natural states of liberation. In total, there are ten states of existence for
both liberation states. Likewise, for those living beings who bind 25, 26, 26,
and 30 natural qualities, there are ten states of existence for each of their
two liberation states, totaling 50. Similarly, for the remaining one-sensed
insufficient beings, such as the dull one-sensed insufficient, it is important
to know their 50 states of existence, but it should be understood that they have
two liberation states each.  For subtle one-sensed sufficient living beings,
there are five states of bondage: 23, 25, 26, 26, and 30 natural qualities. Each
state of bondage has four states of liberation: 21, 24, 25, and 26 natural
qualities. Therefore, multiplying five by four gives us 20. Each liberation
state has five states of existence, so multiplying 20 by five gives us 100
states of existence for subtle one-sensed sufficient living beings.  For dull
one-sensed sufficient living beings, there are also five states of bondage: 23,
25, 26, 27, and 30 natural qualities. Each state of bondage has five states of
liberation: 21, 24, 25, 26, and 27 natural qualities. Therefore, multiplying
five by five gives us 25. Of these, the last five liberation states have four
states of existence each, totaling 20. The remaining 20 liberation states have
five states of existence each, totaling 100. Thus, there are a total of 120
states of existence here.  For two-sensed sufficient living beings, there are
five states of bondage: 23, 25, 26, 27, and 30 natural qualities.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 244 maptatikA prakaraNa isa prakAra caudaha jIvasthAnoM meM baMdhAdi sthAnoM
aura unake bhaMgoM kA vicAra kiyA gyaa| aba unake paraspara saMbaMdha kA vicAra
karate haiN| sUkSma ekendriya aparyApta jIvoM ke 23 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM
21 prakRtika udayasthAna ke rahate 62, 88, 86, 60 aura 78 prakRtika, ye pAMca
sattAsthAna hote haiN| isI prakAra 24 prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhI pAMca
sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  kula milAkara donoM udayasthAnoM ke 10 sattAsthAna hue
/  isI prakAra 25, 26, 26 aura 30 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle ukta jIvoM ke
do-do udayasthAnoM kI apekSA dasa-dasa sattAsthAna hote haiN| jo kula milAkara
50 hue| isI prakAra bAdara ekendriya aparyApta Adi bhA cha aparyAptoM ke 50-:
manAsthAna jAnanA kintu sarvatra apane-apane do-do udayasthAna kahanA caahiye|
sUkSma ekendriya paryApta ke 23, 25, 26, 26 aura 30 prakRtika, ye pAMca
baMdhasthAna hote haiM aura eka-eka baMdhasthAna meM 21, 24, 25 aura 26
prakRtika, ye cAra udayasthAna hote haiM  /  ata: pAMca ko cAra se guNita karane
para 20 hue tathA pratyeka udayasthAna meM pAMca-pAMca sattAsthAna hote hai ata:
20 ko 5 se guNA karane para 100 sattAsthAna mUkSma ekendriya paryApta jIvasthAna
meM hote haiN| bAdara ekendriya paryApta ke bhI pUrvokta 23, 25, 26, 21 aura 30
prakRtika, pAMca baMdhasthAna hote haiM aura eka-eka baMdhasthAna meM 21, 24,
25, 26 aura 27 prakRtika, ye pAMca-pAMca udayasthAna hote haiM, ata: 5 ko 5 se
guNA karane para 25 hue| inameM se antima pAMca udayasthAnoM meM - ke binA cAra-
cAra sattAsthAna hote haiM, jinake kula bhaMga 20 hue aura zeSa 20 udayasthAnoM
meM pAMca-pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiM, jinake kula bhaMga 100 hue  /  isa
prakAra yahA~ kula bhaMga 120 hote haiN| dvIndriya paryApta ke 23, 25, 26, 27
aura 30 prakRtika, ye pAMca

Page #283 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth 245  There are five Bandha-sthana (bond-places) and each
Bandha-sthana has six Udaya-sthana (arising-places) namely 21, 26, 28, 29, 30
and 31 Prakruti (nature). Out of these, the Udaya-sthana of 21 and 26 Prakruti
have five Satya-sthana (being-places) each, while the remaining four Udaya-
sthana have four Satya-sthana each, except for 78 Prakruti Satya-sthana. In
total, there are 26 Satya-sthana. Thus, there are 130 Bhang (breakings) for five
Bandha-sthana.  One should know the Bandha-sthana etc. of Tri-Indriya (three-
sense) and Chatur-Indriya (four-sense) Paryapta (sufficient) like Dwi-Indriya
(two-sense) Paryapta, and they also have 130, 130 Bhang.  In the Asanjni (non-
conscious) Pancha-Indriya (five-sense) Paryapta Jiva-sthana (living being
place), there are five Bandha-sthana namely 23, 25, 26, 26 and 30 Prakruti. Each
Bandha-sthana has long Bhang like Vikleindriya (disabled sense) which totals
130. However, in the 28 Prakruti Bandha-sthana, there are only two Udaya-sthana
namely 30 and 31 Prakruti. Therefore, each Udaya-sthana has three Satya-sthana
namely 62, 88 and 86 Prakruti. There are a total of six Bhang here. The reason
for having three Satya-sthana here is that the 28 Prakruti Bandha-sthana is only
for the binding of Prakruti suitable for Devagati (heavenly path) and Narakagati
(hellish path) Paryapta. Similarly, in the Asanjni Pancha-Indriya Paryapta Jiva-
sthana, there are 130 + 6 = 136 Bhang.  In the 23 Prakruti Bandha-sthana of
Sanjni (conscious) Pancha-Indriya Paryapta, one should know like the 26 Satya-
sthana of Asanjni Pancha-Indriya Paryapta.  1.  Aṣṭāviḍhātibaddhakānāṁ
punastēṣāṁ dvaī ēvōdayasthānē, tadyathā - viśadēkatriśacca. Tatra pratyēkam
trīṇi trīṇi sattāsthānāni tadyathā - vinavatiḥ aṣṭāśītiḥ ṣaḍaśītiśca.
Aṣṭāviṁśatihiṁ dēvagatiprāyogyā narakagatiprāyogyā vā, tatas tasyāṁ
badhyamānāyāṁ avaṣayaṁ vaikriyacatuṣṭayādi badhyatē ity aśīti- aṣṭasapvatī na
prāpyētē. - Saptaṭikā Prakaraṇa Ṭīkā, p. 205

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 245 baMdhasthAna hote haiM aura pratyeka baMdhasthAna meM
21, 26, 28, 29, 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye chaha udayasthAna hote haiN| inameM se
21 aura 26 prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM pAMca-pAMca sattAsthAna haiM tathA zeSa
cAra udayasthAnoM meM 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna ke sivAya cAracAra sattAsthAna
hai| ye kula milAkara 26 sattAsthAna hue| isa prakAra pAMca baMdhasthAnoM ke 130
bhaMga hue  /  dvIndriya paryApta kI taraha zrIndriya aura caturindriya paryApta
ke baMdha sthAna Adi jAnanA cAhiye tathA unake bhI 130, 130 bhaGga hote haiM  /
, asaMjJI paMcendriya paryApta jIvasthAna meM bhI 23, 25, 26, 26 aura 30
prakRtika ina pAMca baMdhasthAnoM meM se pratyeka baMdhasthAna meM vikalendriyoM
kI taraha lambIsa bhaGga hote haiM jinakA yoga 130 hai  /  parantu 28 prakRtika
baMdhasthAna meM 30 aura 31 prakRtika ye do udayasthAna hI hote haiM  /  ataH
yahAM pratyeka udayasthAna meM 62, 88 aura 86 prakRtika ye tIna-tIna sattAsthAna
hote haiN| inake kula 6 bhaGga hue| yahAM tIna sattAsthAna hone kA kAraNa yaha
hai ki 28 prakRtika baMdhasthAna devagati aura narakagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha paryApta ke hI hotA hai  / " isI prakAra asaMjJI paMcendriya paryApta
jIvasthAna meM 130 + 6 = 136 bhaGga hote haiM  /  saMzI paMcendriya paryApta ke
23 prakRtika badhasthAna meM jaise asaMjJI paMcendriya paryApta ke 26
sattAsthAna batalAye, vaise yahAM bhI jAnanA 1 aSTAvidhAtibaMdhakAnA punasteSAM
dvai evodayasthAne, tadyathA-vizadekatrizacca  /  tatra pratyekaM trINi trINi
sattAsthAnAni tadyathA - vinavatiH aSTAzItiH SaDazItizca  /  aSTAviMzatihiM
devagatiprAyogyA narakagatiprAyogyA vA, tatastasyAM badhyamAnAyAmavaSayaM
vaikriyacatuSTayAdi badhyate ityazIti- aSTasapvatI na prApyete  /  - saptatikA
prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 205

Page #284 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 7:   **246**  In the 25 **Prakruti** **Bandha** **Sthana**, there are
8 **Udaya** **Sthana** which are: 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, and 31
**Prakruti**. Out of these, **Prakruti** 21 and 26 have 5 **Satta** **Sthana**
each, while **Prakruti** 25 and 27 are only for **Devas**, hence they have 2
**Satta** **Sthana** each, totaling 62 and 85 **Prakruti** respectively. The
remaining 4 **Udaya** **Sthana** have 4 **Satta** **Sthana** each, with 78
**Prakruti** in each. Thus, there are a total of 30 **Satta** **Sthana** here.
Similarly, there are 30 **Satta** **Sthana** in the 26 **Prakruti** **Bandha**
**Sthana**.  In the 28 **Prakruti** **Bandha** **Sthana**, there are 8 **Udaya**
**Sthana**. Out of these, 6 **Udaya** **Sthana** (21, 25, 26, 27, 28, and 29
**Prakruti**) have 2 **Satta** **Sthana** each, totaling 62 and 85 **Prakruti**.
The 30 **Prakruti** **Udaya** **Sthana** has 4 **Satta** **Sthana** with 12, 18,
16, and 80 **Prakruti**. The 31 **Prakruti** **Udaya** **Sthana** has 3
**Satta** **Sthana** with 32, 88, and 86 **Prakruti**. Thus, there are a total
of 16 **Satta** **Sthana** here.  The 26 **Prakruti** **Bandha** **Sthana** has
30 **Prakruti** **Satta** **Sthana**, similar to those who bind 25 **Prakruti**.
However, there is a difference. When a **Samyagdrishti** human, who is
constantly on the path of **Deva** **Gati**, binds 26 **Prakruti**, they have 5
**Udaya** **Sthana** (21, 26, 28, 29, and 30 **Prakruti**), and each **Udaya**
**Sthana** has 2 **Satta** **Sthana** with 63 and 86 **Prakruti**, totaling 10.
Similarly, **Samyata** and **Samyata** **Samyata** beings, when they bind 26
**Prakruti**, have 2 **Satta** **Sthana** (25 and 27 **Prakruti**), and each
**Udaya** **Sthana** has 2 **Satta** **Sthana** with 93 and 86 **Prakruti**,
totaling 4. Alternatively, **Aharaka** **Samyata** also have 93 **Prakruti**
**Satta** in these two **Udaya** **Sthana**, while **Mithyadrishti** with
**Tirthankara** **Prakruti** **Satta** have 86 **Satta**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 246 saptatikA prakaraNa cAhiye  /  25 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM 21, 25, 26,
27, 28, 29, 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye ATha udayasthAna batalAye haiM so inameM se
21 aura 26 prakRtika udayasthAnI meM to pAca-pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiM tathA
25 aura 27 prakRtika udayasthAna devoM ke hI hote haiM, ata: inameM 62 aura 85
prakRtika, ye do-do sattAsthAna hote haiN| zeSa rahe cAra udayasthAnoM meM se
pratyekA meM 78 prakRtika ke binA cAra-cAra sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  isa
prakAra yahA~ kula 30 sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  26 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM
bhI isI prakAra 30 sattAsthAna hote haiN| 28 prakulika baMdhasthAna meM ATha
udayasthAna hote haiN| inameM se 21 25, 26, 27, 28 aura 26 prakRtika ina chaha
udayasthAnoM meM 62 aura ma prakRtika, ye do-do sattAsthAna hote haiN| 30
praRtika udayasthAna meM 12, 18, 16 aura 80 prakRtika, ye cAra sattAsthAna hote
haiM tathA 31 prakRtika udayasthAna meM 32, 88 aura 86 prakRtika, ye tIna
sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  isa prakAra yahAM kula 16 sattAsthAna hote haiN| 26
prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM 30 prakRtika sattAsthAna to 25 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
karane vAle ke samAna jAnanA kintu yahA~ kucha vizeSatA hai ki jaba avirata
samyagdRSTi manuSya devagati ke yogya 26 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA hai taba
usake 21, 26, 28, 29 aura 30 prakRtika ye pA~ca udayasthAna tathA pratyeka
udayasthAna meM 63 aura 86 prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna hote haiM jinakA jor3a
10 huaa| isI prakAra vikriyA karane vAle saMyata aura saMyatAsaMyata jIvoM ke
bhI 26 prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke samaya 25 aura 27 prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna
tathA pratyeka udayasthAna meM 93 aura 86 prakRtika ye do udayasthAna hote haiN|
jinakA jor3a 4 hotA hai athavA AhAraka saMyata ke bhI ina do udayasthAnoM meM 93
prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai aura tIrthakara prakRti kI sattA bAle mithyAdRSTi
ko apekSA 86 kI sattA hotI hai| isa

Page #285 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Back Karma Granth  **Chapter 1:**  When the 14 **Sattastahan** (states of
existence) of the **Pashth** (back) are added to the previous 30
**Sattastahan**, there are a total of 44 **Sattastahan** in the 26 **Prakrutik
Bandhastan** (natural bondage states).  Similarly, in the 30 **Prakrutik
Bandhastan**, 30 **Sattastahan** should be included, as in the 25 **Prakrutik
Bandhastan**. However, there is a special feature here: when the 30
**Prakrutis** (natures) suitable for the human realm are bound with the
**Tirthankara** and **Prakruti**, there are six **Udayasthan** (arising states)
- 21, 25, 27, 28, 26, and 31 **Prakrutis**. Each **Udayasthan** has two
**Sattastahan** - 63 and 86 **Prakrutis**. The total of these is 12. When these
are added to the aforementioned 30, there are a total of 42 **Sattastahan** in
the 30 **Prakrutik Bandhastan**.  In the 31 **Prakrutik Bandhastan**, the
**Tirthankara** and **Aharakadvik** (those who consume food) have **Dharma**
(righteousness). Therefore, there are 63 **Pravrittis** (tendencies) here, and
there are 8 **Sattastahan** when one **Prakrutik Bandha** occurs. Of these, four
**Sattastahan** - 13, 62, 89, and 6 **Prakrutis** - are in **Upshamni**
(subduing), and four **Sattastahan** - 80, 76, 76, and 75 **Prakrutis** - are in
**Kshapakni** (destroying).  Even in the absence of **Bandha** (bondage), the
**Sanjni Panchendriya** (conscious five-sensed) **Paryapt** (sufficient) has the
aforementioned eight **Sattastahan**. Of these, the first four **Sattastahan**
are attained in the eleventh **Gunasthan** (state of virtue) - **Upshantamoha**
(subdued delusion), and the last four **Sattastahan** are attained in the
twelfth **Gunasthan** - **Kshina Moha** (diminished delusion). Thus, the
**Sanjni Panchendriya Paryapt** being has a total of 208 **Sattastahan**.  Due
to the association with **Dravyaman** (substance-mind), even the **Kevali**
(omniscient) is considered **Sanjni**. Therefore, they also have 26
**Sattastahan**. Because the **Kevali** has ten **Udayasthan** - 20, 21, 26, 27,
28, 29, 30, 31, 6, and 8 **Prakrutis**. Of these, the **Udayasthan** of 20
**Prakrutis** has two **Sattastahan** - 76 and 75 **Prakrutis**, and the
**Udayasthan** of 26 and 28 **Prakrutis** also have the same...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paSTha karmagrantha prakAra ina 14 sattAsthAnoM ko pahale ke 30 sattAsthAnoM
meM milA dene para 26 prakRtika baMghasthAna meM kula 44 sattAsthAna hote haiN|
isI prakAra 30 prakRtika bandhasthAna meM bhI 25 prakRtika bandhasthAna ke
samAna 30 sattAsthAnoM ko grahaNa karanA cAhie  /  kintu yahA~ bhI kucha
vizeSatA hai ki tIrthaka ra prakRti ke sAtha manuSyagati ke yogya 30 prakRtiyoM
kA baMdha hote samaya 21, 25, 27, 28, 26 aura 31 prakRtika, ye chaha udayasthAna
tathA pratyeka udayasthAna meM 63 aura 86 prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna hote haiM
/  jinakA kula jor3a 12 hotA hai  /  inheM pUrvokta 30 meM milA dene para 30
prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM kula 42 sattAsthAna hote haiN| 31 prakRtika
bandhasthAna meM tIrthaMkara aura AhArakadvika kA dha avazya hotA hai  /  ataH
yahA~ bhI 63 pravRttiyoM kI sattA hai tathA 1 prakRtika baMdha ke samaya 8
sattAsthAna hote haiN| inameM se 13, 62, 89 aura 6 prakRtika, ye cAra
sattAsthAna upazamaNi meM hote haiM aura 80, 76, 76 aura 75 prakRtika, ye cAra
sattAsthAna kSapakaNi meM hote haiN| baMdha ke abhAva meM bhI saMjJI paMcendriya
paryApta ke pUrvokta ATha sattAsthAna hote haiN| jinameM se prArambha ke 4
sattAsthAna upazAMtamoha gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM prApta hote haiM aura antima
4 sattAsthAna bArahaveM kSINamoha guNasthAna meM prApta hote haiN| isa prakAra
saMjhI pacendriya paryApta jIva ke saba milAkara 208 sattAsthAna hote haiN|
dravyamana ke saMyoga se kevalI ko bhI saMjo mAnA jAtA hai| so unake bhI 26
sattAsthAna prApta hote haiN| kyoMki kevalI ke 20, 21, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 6
aura 8 prakRtika, ye dasa udayasthAna hote haiN| inameM se 20 prakRtika
udayasthAna meM 76 aura 75 prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna hote haiM tathA 26 aura
28 prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM bhI yahI

Page #286 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seven Tika  Two **satta-sthana** (states of being) should
be known. In the **udaya-sthana** (state of arising) of 21 and 27 **prakriti**
(natural qualities), there are 80 and 76 **prakriti**, these are two **satta-
sthana**. In the **udaya-sthana** of 26 **prakriti**, there are 80, 76, 76 and
75 **prakriti**, these are four **satta-sthana**. Because the **udaya-sthana**
of 26 **prakriti** is attained by both **tirthankara** (liberated soul) and
**samanya kevali** (ordinary liberated soul). Among them, if a **tirthankara**
has 29 **prakriti** **udaya-sthana**, then there will be 80 and 76 **prakriti**,
these are two **satta-sthana**. And if an **ordinary kevali** has 26
**prakriti** **udaya-sthana**, then there will be 76 and 75 **prakriti**, these
are two **satta-sthana**. Similarly, four **satta-sthana** are attained in the
**udaya-sthana** of 30 **prakriti**. In the **udaya-sthana** of 31 **prakriti**,
there are 80 and 76 **prakriti**, these are two **satta-sthana**, because this
**udaya-sthana** is only for **tirthankara kevali**. In the **udaya-sthana** of
6 **prakriti**, there are 80, 76 and 6 **prakriti**, these are three **satta-
sthana**. Among these, the first two **satta-sthana** occur until the end of the
**ayogika-kevali** (non-perfected liberated soul) **guna-sthana** (state of
qualities) for a **tirthankara**, and the last 6 **prakriti** **satta-sthana**
occur at the end of the **ayogika-kevali** **guna-sthana**. In the **udaya-
sthana** of 5 **prakriti**, there are 76, 75 and 8 **prakriti**, these are three
**satta-sthana**. Among these, the first two **satta-sthana** (76, 75) are
attained by an **ordinary kevali** until the end of the **ayogika-kevali**
**guna-sthana**, and the last 8 **prakriti** **satta-sthana** is attained at the
end. In this way, there are 26 **satta-sthana**.  Now, if these are included in
the aforementioned 200 **satta-sthana**, then there are a total of 234 **satta-
sthana** in the **sanjnee panchendriya paryaapt jeeva-sthana** (state of being
of a sentient five-sensed being with sufficient karma).  The description of the
**nama-karma** (karma of name) **bandha-sthana** (state of bondage), **udaya-
sthana** and their **bhang** (destruction) in the fourteen **jeeva-sthana**
(states of being) is as follows. First, we will explain the **bandha-sthana**
and their **bhang**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa do sattAsthAna jAnanA caahie| 21 tathA 27 prakRtika
udayasthAna meM 80 aura 76 prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna hose haiM  /  26
prakRtika udayasthAna meM 80, 76, 76 aura 75 prakRtika ye cAra sattAsthAna hote
haiN| kyoMki 26 prakRtika udayasthAna tIrthakara aura sAmAnya kevalI donoM ko
prApta hotA hai| unameM se cAMda tIrthaMkAra ko 29 pratika udayasthAna hogA to
80 aura 76 prakRtika ye do sattAsthAna hoMge aura yadi sAmAnya kevalI ke 26
prakRtika udayasthAna hogA to 76 aura 75 prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna hoNge| isI
prakAra 30 prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhI cAra sattAsthAna prApta hote haiM  /
31 prakRtika udayasthAna meM ma0 aura 76 prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna hote haiM,
kyoMki yaha udayasthAna tIrthakara kevalI ke hI hotA hai  /  6 prakRtika
udayasthAna meM 80, 76 aura 6 prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna hote haiN| inameM
se prArambha ke do sattAsthAna tIrthaMkara ke ayogikevalI guNasthAna ke upAntya
samaya taka hotA hai aura antima 6 prakRtika sattAsthAna ayogikevalI guNasthAna
ke aMta samaya meM hotA hai| 5 prakRtika udayasthAna meM 76, 75 aura prakRtika,
ye tIna satsAsthAna hote haiN| inameM se Adi ke do sattAsthAna (76, 75) sAmAnya
kevalI ke ayogikevalI guNasthAna ke upAntya samaya taka prApta hote haiM aura
antima 8 prakRtika sasAsthAna antima samaya meM prApta hotA hai  /  isa prakAra
ye 26 sattAsthAna hote haiN| aba yadi inheM pUrvokta 200 sattAsthAnoM meM zAmila
kara diyA jAye to saMjJI paMcendriya paryApta jIvasthAna meM kula 234
sattAsthAna hote haiN| caudaha jIvasthAnoM meM nAmakarma ke baMSasthAnoM,
udayasthAnoM aura unake bhaMgoM kA vivaraNa nIce likhe anusAra hai  /  pahale
baMdhasthAnoM aura unake bhaMgoM ko batalAte haiN|

Page #287 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Granth 246  - Sookshma Eke. Pa. | Badar Ekai. Apa. Badar Eke. 10 -
Sookshma Eke. Apa. |  . . .  1240 26 30 240 4632 13617.5 | | 5 . 53617
Dwiindriya Apariapt Dwiindriya Pariyaapt Shrigdriya Apariapt | Shrigdriya
Pariyaapt | 25 | 25 9240 240 24 26 | 6240 | 30 4632 4632 3. : 4632 5 | 13617
13617 | 5.13917

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 246 - sUkSma eke0 pa0  /  bAdara ekai. apa0 bAdara eke010 -
sUkSma eke0 apa0  /  . . . 1240 26 30 240 4632 13617 / 5  /  | 5 . 53617
dvIndriya aparyApta dvIndriya paryApta zrIgdriya aparyApta | zrIndriya paryApta
| 25  /  25 9240 240 24 26 | 6240 | 30 4632 4632 3. : 4632 5  /  13617 13617 |
5.13917

Page #288 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
250 Sapta-tika Prakarana Chaturindriya A-par 12 Asan- 5 Par. A-par Asan- 50
Paryapt 6240 6240 6240 4632 13617 13617 13617 13 Sanji Panchendriya A-paryapt
Sanji Panchendriya Paryapt 6240 6248 4641 13645

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 250 saptatikA prakaraNa caturindriya apa0 12 asaM0 paMce. apa0 asaM050 paryApta
6240 6240 6240 4632 13617 13617 13617 13 saMjI paMcendriya aparyApta saMjhI
paMcendriya paryApta 6240 6248 4641 13645

Page #289 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I Shaṣṭa Karmagrantha tells. Sūkṣma Eke. Apo. Sūkṣma Eke. Paryāpta 21 24 After
telling the bhangas of the sthānas, now the bhangas of the udayasthānas 21 26 2
1 - 5 Dvīndriya Apratyāpta 3 1 1 2 21 24 25 26 4 21 26 28 26 Dvīndriya Paryāpta
30 31 6 2 1 7 2 2 4 6 4 20 3 Bādar Eke. Apo. 21 24 2 21 26 I 2 7 Śrīndriya
Apratyāpta 1 1 1 2 4 Bādar Eke. Paryāpta 21 25 26 27 X 8 28 26 20 31 R 6 ??
Śrīndriya Paryāpta 26 21 2 26 2 Kya 4 20

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 I SaSTa karmagrantha ko batalAte haiN| sUkSma eke0 apa0 sUkSma eke0 paryApta 21
24 sthAnoM ke bhaMgoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba udayasthAnoM ke bhaMgoM 21 26 2 1
- 5 dvIndriya aparyApta 3 1 1 2 21 24 25 26 4 21 26 28 26 dvIndriya paryApta 30
31 6 2 1 7 2 2 4 6 4 20 3 bAdara eke0 apa0 21 24 2 21 26 I 2 7 zrIndriya
aparyApta 1 1 1 2 4 bAdara eke0 paryApta 21 25 26 27 X 8 28 26 20 31 ra 6 ??
zrIndriya paryApta 26 21 2 26 2 khy 4 20

Page #290 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Saptaatika Prakarana  **Chaturi. Apo** **Chaturi. Paryapta** | **Asan.
Panche. Paryapta** 28. . **Asanhi** 576 **Mamushya** 1152      .. 1728
**Tiryach** **Sanshi Panchendriya Aparyapta** **Sanjhi Panchendriya Paryapta**
25 26 1772 2868 4 7676

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa caturi. apa0 caturi0 paryApta | asaM0 paMce0 paryApta 28. .
asaMhI 576 mamuSya 1152 .. 1728 tiryaca saMzI paMcendriya aparyApta saMjJI
paMcandriya paryApta 25 26 1772 2868 4 7676

Page #291 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Order | **Jiva-sthana** | **Bava-sthana** | **Description** | |---|---|---| |
1. Su-eka-apa-5 | 23, 25, 26, 26, 10 | 2. Su-eka-parya-23, 25, 26, 26, 30 | | 3.
Va-a-apa-65/23, 25, 26, 26, 30 | 4. Ba-eka-parya-5 | 23, 25, 26, 26, 30 | | Dvi-
indriya-apar-5 | 23, 25, 26, 26, 30 |  | |  |  | Description of the nature of
karma in Jiva-sthana, its bondage, its rise, and the destruction of its abode |
|  |  |  | | 5. Ho-indriya-parya-5 | 22, 25, 26, 26, 30 | 6. Tri-indriya-apar-5
| 23, 25, 26, 26, 30 | | 7. Tri-indriya-parya-5 | 23, 25, 26, 26, 30 | 8. Chatu-
apar-10 | 23, 25, 26, 26, 30 | | 9. Chatu-parya-5 | 23, 25, 26, 26, 30 | 10.
Asan-panche-apa-14 | 23, 25, 26, 26, 30 | | 11. Asan-panche-parya-6 | 23, 24,
26, 28, 26, 30 | 12. San-panche-apa-14 | 23, 25, 26, 26, 20 | | 13. San-panche-
parya-5 | 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30 |  | |  |  |  | | **Mang** | **Uday-sthana** |
**Mang** | **Satta-sthana** | | 13645 | 12 | 7761 | 12 | | 13617 | 13617 | 3262,
88, 86, 8078 | 75628, 868078 | | 13917 | 13917 | 35/2288680, 78 | 26512, 88, 86,
8078 | | 13917 | 221, 24 | 2512, 88, 86, 80, 78 | 2015:12, 88, 86, 80, 76 | |
13617 | 5.21, 24, 25.26, 27 | 2562, 86, 66, 80, 76 | 20562, 88, 86, 8078 | |
13617 | 221, 26 | 25/2, 88, 86, 80, 78 | 20512, 88, 86, 8075 | | 13617 | 6.21,
26, 28 | 452, 88, 86, 8078 | 452, 88, 86, 8078 | | 13917 | 221, 26 | 126176 |
21, 26, 28, 26, 30, 31 | | 13617 | 6, 21, 26, 28.26, 30, 316 | 13617 | 2:21, 26
| | 13117 | 221, 26 | 139266 | 21, 26, 28.26, 30, 31, 460456 | | 2:21, 24 |
13917 | 2 / 21, 26 | 62, 88, 86, 80, 78 | | 421, 24, 25, 26 | 13945, 11 | 45.62,
88, 86, 80, 78 | 1121, 25, 26, 27, 28, 267676 | |  |  | 130, 31, ke 20, 68 |
12/13, 92, 86, 88, 86, 80 | |  |  |  | 76, 78, 76, 75068 | |  |  |  |  |
**Paashta Karmagrantha**  **AM!**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 krama jIvasthAna bavasthAna 1 su0 eke0 apa0 5 | 23,25,26,26,10 2 su0 eke0 paryA
23,25,26,26,30 3. vA0 e0 apa065/23,25,26,26,30 4 bA0 eka0 paryA0 5
23,25,26,26,30 dvIndriya aparyApta 5 23,25,26,26,30 jIvasthAnoM meM nAmakarma kI
prakRtiyoM ke baMdha, udaya, sasAsthAnoM ke bhaMgoM kA vivaraNa sa0 hondriya
paryApta 522,25.26,26,30 7 trIndriya aparyApta5 23,25,26,26,30 zrIndriya
paryApta 5 / 23,25,26,26,30 523,25,26,26,30 5,23,25,26,26,30 6 catu0 aparyApta
10 catu0 paryApta 11] asaM0 paMce0 apa 01 4 23, 25, 26,26,30 12 asaM0 paMce0
paryA0 6 23, 24, 26, 28,26,30 13 saMjJI paMce0 apa0 14 saMjJI paMce0 paryA0 5 8
23, 25, 26,26, 20 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30 31, 1 maMga 13645 udayasthAna 12 13617
13917 13917 221,24 13617 5.21,24,25.26, 27 221,26 13617 13617 6.21,26, 28 13917
221, 26 136176,21,26,28.26, 30, 316 13117 221,26 2:21,24 421,24,25,26 maMga 7761
sattAsthAna 12 3262,88,86,8078 75628,868078 35/2288680,78 26 5 12,88,86,8078 25
12,88,86,80,78 2015:12,88,86,80, 76 2562,86,66,80, 76 20562,88,86,8078
25/2,88,86,80,78 20512,88,86,8075 452,88,86,8078 126176 21,26,28,26,30,31 13617
2:21, 26 13926621, 26, 28.26,30,31,4604562,88,86,80,78 139172 / 21,26
45.62,88,86,80, 78 13945, 1121, 25, 26, 27, 28,26767612/13,92,86,88,86,80
130,31, ke0 20,68 76,78,76,75068 pASTha karmagrantha AM!

Page #292 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 254: The Seven Tika  Having described the binding, arising, and
existence locations of the eight karmas in the fourteen living states, and their
dissolution, we now discuss the dissolution of karmas in the ten qualities.
**Dissolution of Karmas in the Ten Qualities**  First, we discuss the binding,
arising, and existence locations of the knowledge-obscuring and obstructing
karmas in the ten qualities.  **Naanantray Tivimiy Dasu Vo Honti Dosu Thaanesu**
**Meaning:** Naanantray - knowledge-obscuring and obstructing karmas, Tivimiy -
in three ways (with respect to binding, arising, and existence), Dasu - in the
ten qualities, Dosu - two (arising and existence), Honti - exists, Dosu - two
(in Upshantamoha and Ksheenamoha), Thaanesu - in the qualities.  **Verse
Meaning:** In the first ten qualities, the knowledge-obscuring and obstructing
karmas are of three types with respect to binding, arising, and existence, and
are of two types with respect to arising and existence in two qualities
(Upshantamoha and Ksheenamoha).  **Detailed Meaning:** Previously, the binding,
arising, and existence locations of the eight karmas in the fourteen living
states, and their dissolution were discussed. Now, we discuss them in the ten
qualities.  The rule regarding the knowledge-obscuring and obstructing karmas is
that the binding of all five types of knowledge-obscuring and five types of
obstructing karmas is dissolved at the end of the tenth subtle-perception
quality, and their arising and existence are dissolved at the end of the twelfth
Ksheenamoha quality. Therefore, it is established that from the first
Mithyadrishti quality to the tenth quality, the knowledge-obscuring and
obstructing karmas are present in all ten qualities.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 254 saptatikA prakaraNa isa prakAra se jIvasthAnoM meM ATha karmoM kI uttara
prakRtiyoM ke baMdha, udaya va sattA sthAna tathA unake bhaMgoM kA kathana
karane ke bAda aba guNasthAnoM meM bhaMgoM kA kathana karate haiM  /
guNasthAnoM meM saMvedha bhaMga sarvaprathama guNasthAnoM meM jJAnAvaraNa aura
antarAya karma ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM kA kathana karate haiM nANaMtarAya tivimayi
dasasu vo hoMti dosu ThANesuM  /  zabdArtha - nANaMta rAya - jJAnAvaraNa aura
antarAdha karma, siMhimavi-tIna prakAra se (baMdha, udaya aura sattA kI apekSA
), basasu Adi ke dasa guNasthAnoM meM do-do (udaya aura sattA ), hoMtihotA hai,
do-do (upazAMtamoha aura kSINamoha meM ), ThANesuM-- guNasthAnoM meM  /  -
gAthArtha - prArambha ke dasa guNasthAnoM meM jJAnAvaraNa aura antarAya karma
bandha, udaya aura sattA kI apekSA tIna prakAra kA hai aura do guNasthAnoM
(upazAMtamoha, kSINamoha) meM udaya aura sattA kI apekSA do prakAra kA hai  /
vizeSArtha - pUrva meM caudaha jIvasthAnoM meM ATha karmoM ke baMdha, udaya aura
sattA sthAna tathA unake saMvedha bhaMgoM kA kathana kiyA gyaa| aba guNasthAnoM
meM unakA kathana karate haiM  /  jJAnAvaraNa aura antarAya karma ke bAre meM
yaha niyama hai ki jJAnAvaraNa kI pAMcoM aura antarAya kI pA~coM prakRtiyoM kA
bandhaviccheda dasaveM sUkSma saMparAya guNasthAna ke anta meM tathA udaya aura
sattA kA viccheda bArahaveM kSINamoha guNasthAna ke anta meM hotA hai  /  ataeva
isase yaha siddha ho jAtA hai ki pahale mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna se lekara dasaveM
guNasthAna taka dasa guNasthAnoM meM jJAnAvaraNa aura antarAya karma ke pA~ca

Page #293 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Karma Granth, Page 255  **Bondage, Arising, and Existence of the Five
Karmas**  These three - bondage, arising, and existence of the five karmas - are
present in the first ten *gunasthānas* (stages of spiritual development).
However, in the tenth *gunasthāna*, the bondage of both *jñānāvaraṇa*
(knowledge-obscuring karma) and *antarāya* (hindrance karma) is severed.
Consequently, in the eleventh and twelfth *gunasthānas*, only the arising and
existence of the five karmas remain, as *upashāntamoh* (subdued delusion) and
*kṣīṇamoh* (diminished delusion) are present.   Beyond the twelfth *gunasthāna*,
in the thirteenth and fourteenth *gunasthānas*, the bondage, arising, and
existence of these two karmas are absent. Therefore, none of these three aspects
of karma are found.  After explaining the bondage, etc., of *jñānāvaraṇa* and
*antarāya* karma, we now discuss the destruction of *darśanāvaraṇa* karma.
**Verse 36:**  "In *mithyātva* (false belief) and *sāmāna* (common)
*gunasthānas*, there are four or five *navanau* (types of *darśanāvaraṇa* karma)
and their existence."  **Verse 40:**  "From the *miśra* (mixed) *gunasthāna* to
the *apūrvakaraṇa* (unprepared) *gunasthāna*, there are four or five *navanau*
and their existence, as well as the bondage of four *navanau*."  **Explanation
of Terms:**  * *Miśśāsaṇe* - In *mithyātva* and *sāmāna* *gunasthānas*. * *Bīe*
- Of the other karma. * *Nabanau* - Four or five *navanau*. * *Y* - And. *
*Sansā* - Existence. * *Miśśai* - From the *miśra* *gunasthāna*. * *Niyaṭṭo* -
To the *apūrvakaraṇa* *gunasthāna*. * *Chapaṇ* - Six. * *Chha* - Four or five. *
*Nava* - Nine. * *Y* - And. * *Santakammānsā* - Existence of *darśanāvaraṇa*
karma. * *Chajbandh* - Bondage of four *navanau*. * *Tige* - Four.
**Footnotes:**  1. In the first ten *gunasthānas*, there are five types of
bondage, five types of arising, and five types of existence for both
*jñānāvaraṇa* and *antarāya* karma. - *Sapttatikā Prakaraṇa Ṭīkā*, p. 207 - In
the absence of bondage, in *upashāntamoh* and *kṣīṇamoh*, there are five types
of arising and five types of existence for both *jñānāvaraṇa* and *antarāya*
karma. Subsequently, there is also an absence of arising and existence. -
*Sapttatikā Prakaraṇa Ṭīkā*, p. 207

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ! paSTha karma grantha 255 prakRtika bandha, pAMca prakRtika udaya aura pAMca
prakRtika sattA, ye tInoM prApta hote haiM 11 lekina dasaveM guNasthAna meM ina
donoM kA bandhaviccheda ho jAne se upazAMtamoha aura kSINamoha- gyArahaveM aura
bArahaveM guNasthAna meM pAMca prakRtika udaya aura pA~ca prakRtika sattA ye do
hI prApta hote haiM  /  bArahaveM guNasthAna se Age terahave, caudahaveM
guNasthAna meM ina donoM karmoM ke bandha, udaya aura sattA kA abhAva ho jAne se
baMdha, udaya aura sattA meM se koI bhI nahIM pAI jAtI hai| jJAnAvaraNa aura
aMtarAya karma ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM ko batalAne ke bAda atra darzanAvaraNa karma
ke bhaMgoM kA kathana karate haiM  /  micchAsANe briie nava cau paNa nava ya
saMtasA  // 36 //  missAe niyaTTIo va caca paNa nava ya saMtaka maMsA  /
ubaMdha tige ca paNa navaMsa vusu juyala cha ssaMtA  // 40 //  jayasaM ghaDa
paNa nava khoNaM cajazvaya chakaca ca saMtaM  /  zabdArtha -micchAsANe -
mithyAtva aura sAmAna guNasthAna meM, bie - dUsare karma ke, nabanau ca paNa
cAra yA pAMca navanau ya-aura saMsAsattA  /  * - missAi mizra guNasthAna se
lekara, niyaTToo apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna taka chapaNa-chaha cAra yA pAMca nava
nau, yaaura saMtakammaMsA sattA prakRti, cajabaMdha - cAra kA baMdha, tige
FWTBL. 1 mithyAdRSTyAdiSu dazasu guNasthAnakeSu jJAnAvaraNasyAntarAyasya ca
paMcavidho baMdha: paMcaviSa udayaH paMcavidhA sattA ityarthaH  /  - saptatikA
prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 207 ra bandhAbhAve upazAntamohe kSINamohe ca
jJAnAvaraNIyA'ntarAyayoH pratyekaM paMcavidha udayaH paMtravidyA ca sattA
bhavatIti parata udaya sattayorapyabhAvaH  /  - saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0
207

Page #294 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **256** **The प्रकरण**  In the three गुणस्थान of अपूर्वकरण,
etc., there are four or five उपण, nine नवंस, two बुधु in the two गुणस्थान
(अनिवृत्तिबावर and सुक्ष्मसंपराय), two जुपल - बंध and उदय, and six छस्संता.  In
the उपशांतमोह गुणस्थान, there are four or five चउ पण, nine नव, and in the
क्षीणमोह गुणस्थान, there are four घसरूम, six and four छनच उछह, and four संतं.
_According to the गाणार्य, in the second दर्शनावरण कर्म, there are nine प्रकृति
बंध, four or five प्रकृति उदय, and nine प्रकृति सत्ता in the सासादन गुणस्थान.
From the मिश्र गुणस्थान to the first part of the अपूर्वकरण गुणस्थान, there are
six बंध, four or five उदय, and nine सत्ता. In the three गुणस्थान of अपूर्वकरण,
etc., there are four बंध, four or five उदय, and nine सत्ता. In the two गुणस्थान
of क्षपक, nine and ten, there are four बंध, four उदय, and six सत्ता.  In the
उपशांतमोह गुणस्थान, there are four or five उदय and nine सत्ता. In the क्षीणभोह
गुणस्थान, there are four उदय and six and four सत्ता._  **(a)** In the मिच्छा
सासयणेसु, there are nine बंध, two वलविस्त्रया, and two मंगा.  In the मीसाओ,
there are two लियट्टी, six छब्बंधेण, two दो उ, and two उबंधे. In the नवसंते,
there are six छोगिण, अपुरबाउ, सुहमरागो, and जा. In the अब्बंधे, there are nine
संते, वयसते, हुति, and हो मंगा.  In the चउबंधे, there are six छस्ससे, बायर,
सुहुमाणमेगुषस्व, and वयाणं. In the छसु च उमु व संतेसु, there are two दोणि,
अबधंमि, and ख़ीणरस.  **(b)** In the णव सासणोत्ति, there are six बंध, and in the
अपुरवपढमभागोति, there are four.  In the तत्तो, there are four सुखमकसायस्स, and
in the चरमोसि, there are four.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 256 THE prakaraNa apUrvakaraNa Adi tIna guNasthAnoM meM, upaNa--cAra athavA
pA~ca, navaMsa-nau ko satA, budhu do guNasthAnoM (anivRttibAvara aura
sukSmasaMparAya) meM, jupala-baMdha aura udaya, chassaMtA-chaha kI sttaa|
unasate-upazAMtamoha guNasthAna meM, cau paNa-cAra athavA pAMca, nava-nI, khoNe-
kSINamoha guNasthAna meM, ghasarUma-cAra kA udaya, chanaca uchaha aura cAra kI,
saMtaM- sattA  /  _ gANArya-dUsare darzanAvaraNa karma kA mithyAtva aura
sAsAdana guNasthAna meM nau prakRtiyoM kA baMdha, cAra yA pAMca prakRtiyoM kA
udaya tathA nau prakRti kI sattA hotI hai| mizra guNasthAna se lekara
apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ke pahale saMkhyAtaveM bhAga taka chaha kA baMdha, cAra
thA pA~ca kA udraya aura nau kI sattA hotI hai| apUrvakaraNa Adi tIna
guNasthAnoM meM cAra kA baMdha, cAra thA pani kA udaya aura nau kI sattA hotI
hai| kSapaka ke nau aura dasa ina do guNasthAnoM meM cAra kA baMdha, cAra kA
udaya aura chaha kI sattA hotI hai| upazAMtamoha guNasthAna meM cAra yA pAMca kA
udaya aura nau kI sattA hotI hai  /  kSINabhoha guNasthAna meM cAra kA udaya
tathA chaha aura cAra kI sattA hotI hai|' 1 (ka) micchA sAsayaNesu naba baMdha
valavistrayA meM do maMgA  /  mIsAo ya liyaTTI jA chabbaMdheNa do do u|| ca
ubaMdhe navasaMte chogiNa apurabAu suhamarAgo jA  /  abbaMdhe Nava saMte
vayasate huti ho maMgA  /  /  caubaMdhe chassase bAyara suhumANameguSasva
vayANaM  /  chasu ca umu va saMtesu doNi abadhaMmi qhINarasa  /  /
paMcasaMgraha saptatikA gA0 102-104 (kha) Nava sAsaNotti baMdho chacceva
apuravapaDhamabhAgoti  /  cattAri hoti tatto sukhamakasAyassa caramosi  /  /

Page #295 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Clear Karma Text **257**  **Special Meaning:** These verses indicate the
binding, arising, and existence locations of the Darshanavarana karma in
relation to the Gunasthanas.  The Darshanavarana karma has different types. The
binding of the Satyadhitrik occurs only up to the Sasadan Gunasthana, while the
four types like Chakshus Darshanavarana, etc., arise continuously until their
destruction, but the five types like Nidra, etc., may or may not arise, and even
then, only one arises at a time, not two or more simultaneously. Therefore, in
the two Gunasthanas of Mithyatva and Sasadan, there are no 4 types of binding, 4
types of arising, and 6 types of existence, nor 6 types of binding, 5 types of
arising, and 9 types of existence. - "**_Micchasane Biie Nav Chav Pan Nav Ya
Santasa_**" - In these two Gunasthanas of Mithyatva and Sasadan, there are no 9
types of binding, 4 types of arising, and 9 types of existence.  From the third
Misra Gunasthana onwards, up to the first part of the eighth Apurvakarana
Gunasthana, there are 6 types of binding, 4 or 5 types of arising, and 9 types
of existence - "**_Bhissai Niyattio Chchchau Pan Nab Ya Santakammasa_**". This
is because the binding of Satyadhitrik occurs only up to the Sasadan Gunasthana,
resulting in 6 types of binding. However, there is no difference in the types of
arising and existence. Therefore, in these Gunasthanas, there are 6 types of
binding, 4 types of arising, and 9 types of existence.  **_Khinot ti Chari
Ukshya Panchasu Giddasu Dosu Nihasu. Ekke Udayam Patte Khinaduchari Moti
Panchudaya. || Micchaduvasanto Ti Ya Aniyattio Khaga Pathamamagoti. Pavasatta
Vinass Ducharimossi Ya Chchchadduvarime. ||_** - Go. Karmakar 460-452

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paSTa karmagrantha 257 vizeSArtha- ina gAthAoM meM guNasthAnoM kI apekSA
darzanAvaraNa karma kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM kA
nirdeza kiyA pAyA hai| darzanAvaraNa karma kI uttara prakRtiyA~ haiM haiN|
inameM se satyAddhitrika kA baMdha sAsAdana guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai tathA
cakSurdarzanAvaraNa Adi cAra kA udaya apane udayaviccheda hone taka niraMtara
banA rahatA hai kintu nidrA Adi pAMca kA udaya kadAcita hotA hai aura kadAcita
nahIM hotA hai tathA usameM bhI eka samaya meM eka kA hI udaya hotA hai, eka
sAtha do kA yA do se adhika kA nahIM hotA hai| isIliye mithyAtva aura sAsAdana
ina do guNasthAnoM meM prakRtika baMdha, 4 prakRtika udaya aura 6 prakRtika
sattA tathA 6 prakRtika baMdha, 5 prakRtika udaya aura prakRtika rAnA, no aMga
na hote haiM .-'micchAsANe biie nava cau paNa nava ya saMtasA  / ' _ ina do-
mithyAtna aura sAsAdana guNasthAnoM ke Age tIsare mizra guNasthAna se lekara
AThaveM apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ke prathama bhAga taka'bhissAi niyaTTIo chacau
paNa naba ya saMtakammaMsA'-chaha kA baMdha, cAra yA pAMca kA udaya aura nau kI
sattA hotI hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki styAddhitrika kA baMdha sAsAdana
guNasthAna taka hone se chaha prazika baMdha hotA hai  /  kintu udaya aura sattA
prakRtiyoM meM koI aMtara nahIM par3atA hai  /  ataH ina guNasthAnoM meM chaha
prakRtika baMdha, cAra prakRtika khINo tti cAri ukSyA paMcasu giddAsu dosu
NihAsu  /  ekke udayaM patte khINaducarimoti paMcudayA  /  /  micyAduvasaMto ti
ya aNiyaTTI khaga paThamamAgotti  /  pavasattA vINassa ducarimosi ya
chaccadUvarime  /  /  _-go. karmakAra 460-452

Page #296 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 72  **Seven Types of Bandha**  **Uday** (arising) and **Satta**
(existence) are both nine-natured, while **Bandha** (bondage) is six-natured.
There are two types of **Bhang** (destruction): one with five-natured **Uday**
and nine-natured **Satta**, and another with four-natured **Bandha** and nine-
natured **Satta**.   Although **Styanaddhitrika** (a type of bondage) can arise
only until the end of the **Pramattasangat** (a state of mind) **Gunasthan**
(stage of spiritual progress), it does not affect the statement of five-natured
**Udayasthan** (stage of arising). The difference lies only in the **Prakriti**
(nature) of the **Vikalpa** (alternative).   Up to the sixth **Gunasthan**, the
five **Prakriti** (nature) of **Nidra** (sleep), **Prachala** (agitation), etc.,
are obtained through **Vikala** (disturbance). Beyond that, only **Nidra** and
**Prachala** are obtained through **Vikalpa**.  In the first part of the
**Apuvarkaran** (a stage of spiritual progress) **Gunasthan**, **Nidra** and
**Prabala** (strong) are also destroyed, leaving only four **Prakriti** of
**Bandha** in the next three **Gunasthan** up to **Sukshmasampray** (a stage of
spiritual progress). However, **Uday** and **Satta** remain as before.
Therefore, from the second part of **Apuvarkaran** to **Sukshmasampray**
**Gunasthan**, there are two types of **Bhang**:   * **Four-natured Bandha,
four-natured Uday, and nine-natured Satta** * **Four-natured Bandha, five-
natured Uday, and nine-natured Satta**  This is known as "**Chaubandha Tige
Chaupana Navans**".  However, this statement should be understood in relation to
the **Upshamshreni** (a category of spiritual progress), because it is a rule
that **Nidra** or **Prachala** arises only in **Upshamshreni**, not in
**Kshapakashreni** (another category of spiritual progress). Therefore, in
**Kshapakashreni**, the **Bhang** of five-natured **Uday** does not occur in the
three **Gunasthan** of **Apuvarkaran**, etc. After some parts of
**Anivrittikaran** (a stage of spiritual progress) have passed, the **Satta** of
**Styanaddhitrika** is destroyed, leaving only six **Prakriti** of **Satta**.
Therefore, in the last part of **Anivrittikaran** and **Sukshmasampray**, there
is one type of **Bhang**:  * **Four-natured Bandha, four-natured Uday, and six-
natured Satta**  This is known as "**Dus Juyal Darsanta**".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 258 saptatikA prakaraga udaya aura nau prakRtika sattA tathA chaha prakatika
baMdha. pAMca prakRtika udaya aura nau prakRtika sattA, ye do bhaMga prApta hote
haiN| yadyapi styAnaddhitrikA kA udaya pramattasaMgata guNasthAna ke aMtima
samaya taka hI ho sakatA hai, phira bhI isase pA~ca prakRtika udayasthAna ke
kathana meM koI aMtara nahIM AtA hai, sirpha vikalpa rUpa prakRtiyoM meM hI
aMtara par3atA hai  /  chaThe guNasthAna taka nidrA Adi pAMcoM prakRtiyAM vikalA
se prApta hotI haiM, Age nidrA aura pracalA ye do prakRtiyA~ hI vikalpa se
prApta hotI haiN| _ apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ke prathama bhAga meM nidrA aura
prabalA kI bhI baMdhayucchitti ho jAne se Age sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna
paryanta tIna guNasthAnoM meM baMdha meM cAra prakRtiyA~ raha jAtI haiM, kintu
udaya aura sattA pUrvavat prakRtiyoM kI rahatI hai| ataH apUrvakaraNa ke dUsare
bhAga se lekara sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna taka tIna guNasthAnoM meM cAra
prakRtika baMdha, cAra prakRtika udaya aura nau prakRtika satA tathA cAra
prakRtika baMdha, pA~ca prakRtika udaya aura nau prakRtika sattA, yaha do bhaMga
prApta hote haiM'caubaMdha tige cau paNa navaMsa'  /  lekina ukta kathana
upazamazreNi kI apekSA samajhanA cAhiye, kyoMki aisA niyama hai ki nidrA yA
pracalA kA udaya upazamazreNi meM hI hotA hai, kSapakaveNi meM nahIM hotA hai  /
ataH kSapaka zreNi meM apUrvakaraNa Adi tIna guNasthAnoM meM pAMca prakRtika
udaya rUpa bhaGga prApta nahIM hotA hai tathA anivattikaraNa ke kucha bhAgoM ke
vyatIta hone para styAnaddhitrika kI sattA kA kSaya ho jAtA hai| jisase chaha
prakRtiyoM kI hI sattA rahatI hai| ata: anivRttikaraNa ke aMtima saMkhyAta bhAga
aura sukSamasapagaya ina do kSapaka guNasthAnoM meM cAra prakRtika baMdha, cAra
prakRtika udaya aura chaha prakRtika sattA, yaha eka bhaGga prApta hotA
hai-'dusa juyala drsNtaa'|

Page #297 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth, 256  In the tenth subtle-stage (**sukshmasampray**),
which is the last stage of the **kshapka** series, the **darshanavaran** (veil
of perception) is completely destroyed. Therefore, in the subsequent stages,
from the eleventh onwards, there is no destruction of the **darshanavaran** in
addition to the destruction of **bandha** (bondage).  Therefore, in the
**upshantamoha** stage, which is the stage of the **upshama** series, the
**udaya** (arising) and **satta** (existence) remain the same as in the tenth
stage, but due to the absence of **bandha**, there are two **bhang**
(destruction):  * **Uvasante Chaupan Nav** - four **prakriti** (natural
elements) of **udaya** and nine **prakriti** of **satta**. * **Panch Prakriti
Udaya** and **Nav Prakriti Satta** - five **prakriti** of **udaya** and nine
**prakriti** of **satta**.  In the **kshinamoha** stage, there are **Khinne
Urudaya Chhach Chausant** - four **prakriti** of **udaya** and six or four
**prakriti** of **satta**. This is because the twelfth stage, **kshinamoha**,
belongs to the **kshayaka** series, and in the **apak** series, there is no
**udaya** of **nidra** (sleep) or **prachala** (agitation). Therefore, there are
four **prakriti** of **udaya** and six or four **prakriti** of **satta**.  Since
there is no **udaya** of **nidra** and **prachala** in the **kshinamoha** stage,
their **satta** cannot be present at the end of this stage. According to the
rule, the **anudaya** (non-arising) **prakriti** are transformed into their
corresponding **udaya** **prakriti** through **nisheka** (infusion) and
**stibuka** (subtle) **sanक्रमण** (transition). Therefore, at the end of the
**kshinamoha** stage, **nidra** and **prachala** will not exist, and only
**chakshudarshanavaran** (veil of perception of the eye) and other **dharmas**
(qualities) will remain.  This means that in the **kshinamoha** stage, the first
**bhang** of four **prakriti** of **udaya** and six **prakriti** of **satta**
should be understood until the penultimate moment of the **kshinamoha** stage,
and the second **bhang** of four **prakriti** of **udaya** and four **prakriti**
of **satta** should be understood at the final moment.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 256 upazamazreNi yA kSapaka zreNi vAle ke dasaveM
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna ke aMta meM darzanAvaraNa kama kA baMdhaviccheda ho
jAtA hai| isaliye Age gyArahaveM Adi guNasthAnoM meM baMdha kI apekSA
darzanAvaraNa ke bhaMga prApta nahIM hote haiM  /  ataH upazAMtamoha guNasthAna
meM jo upazamazreNi kA guNasthAna hai, udaya aura sattA to dasaveM guNasthAna ke
samAna banI rahatI hai kintu baMdha nahIM hone se-'uvasaMte caupaNa nava'-cAra
prakRtika udaya aura nau prakRtika sattA tathA pAMca prakRtika udaya aura nau
prakRtika sattA, yaha do bhaGga prApta hote haiN| kSINamoha guNasthAna
meM-'khINe urudaya chacca causaMta'-cAra kA udaya' aura chaha yA cAra kI sattA
hotI hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki bArahavAM kSINamoha guNasthAna kSayakazreNi
kA hai aura Apaka zreNi meM nidrA yA pracalA kA udaya nahIM hone se cAra
prakRtika udayasthAna prApta hotA hai tathA chaha yA cAra prakRtika sattAsthAna
hote haiM  /  kyoMki jaba kSINamoha guNasthAna meM nidrA aura pracalA kA udaya
hI nahIM hotA hai taba kSINamoha guNasthAna ke aMtima samaya meM inakI sattA bhI
prApta nahIM ho sakatI hai aura niyamAnusAra anudaya prakRtiyA~ jo hotI haiM,
unakA pratyeka niSeka stibukAsaMkramaNa ke dvArA sajAtIya udayavatI prakRtiyoM
meM pariNama jAtA hai, jisase kSINamoha guNasthAna ke aMtima samaya meM nidrA
aura pracalA kI sattA na rahakara kevala cakSudaMrzanAvaraNa Adi dhAra ko hI
sattA rhegii| isakA tAtparya yaha huA ki kSINamoha guNasthAna meM jo cAra
prakRtika udaya aura chaha prakRtika sattA tathA cAra prakRtika udaya aura cAra
prakRtika sattA, ina do bhaGgoM meM se pahalA bhaGga cAra prakRtika udaya aura
chaha prakRtika sattA kA kSINamoha guNasthAna ke upAntya samaya taka jAnanA
cAhiye aura aMtima samaya meM cAra prakRtika udaya aura cAra prakRtika sattA

Page #298 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
26. The Chapter of the Seven Tika The second bhang is obtained. In this way, two
bhangs are obtained in the Ksheena-moha Gunasthan as well. In this way, after
explaining the Bandha, Udaya and Satya places in the Gunasthanas of the Uttar
Prakritis of Jnana-avaran, Antaray and Darshan-avaran karmas, now the bhangs of
Vedaniya, Ayu and Gotra karmas are explained. Beyaniya-uyagoe vibhajj moham par
bochch ||41|| Word meaning- Beyaniya-uyagoe- Vedaniya, Ayu and Gotra karmas,
vibhajj- dividing, mojh- mohaniya karma, par- after this, bodh- will say. Gatha-
After explaining the bhangs of Vedaniya, Ayu and Gotra karmas, we will explain
the bhangs of mohaniya karma. Viva- The gatha has informed about the division of
the bhangs of Vedaniya, Ayu and Gotra karmas, but it has not explained how many
bhangs are there. Therefore, the bhang-vikalpas of Vedaniya, Ayu and Gotra
karmas, as explained by Acharya Prayalgiri in his tika based on the gatha of the
bhashya, are explained here. The bhangs of Vedaniya and Gotra karmas are
indicated in the gatha of the bhashya as follows: Par ghassu voni satsu ege ghau
gugisu shreniyabhang. Goe pan ghau thi timu emjyu voni ekasmi. || That is, there
are four bhangs in the sixth Gunasthan of Vedaniya karma, two in the seventh and
four in the first, and there is one bhang in the first of Gotra karma, four in
the second, two in the third and so on, one in the sixth and so on, and one in
the eighth, which is explained below.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26. saptatikA prakaraNa kA dUsarA bhaGga prApta hotA hai  /  isa prakAra
kSINamoha guNasthAna meM bhI do bhaMga prApta hote haiN| isa prakAra se
jJAnAvaraNa, aMtarAya aura darzanAvaraNa karma kI uttara prakRtiyoM ke
guNasthAnoM meM baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba
vedanIya, Ayu aura gotra karmoM ke bhaMgoM ko batalAte haiN| beyaNiyAuyagoe
vibhajja mohaM para boccha  // 41 //  zabdArtha-veNiyAuyagoe-vedanIya, Ayu aura
gotra karma ke, vibhAja-vibhAga karake, mojhamohanIya karma ke, para- isake
bAda, bodh-kheNge| gAthA-bedanIya, Ayu aura gotra karma ke bhaMgoM kA kathana
karane ke bAda mohanIya karma ke bhaMgoM kA kathana kareMge  /  oivA-gAthA meM
vedanIya, Ayu aura gotra karma ke bhaMgoM ke vibhAga karane kI sUcanA dI hai
kintu unake kitane-kitama bhaMga hote haiM yaha nahIM batalAyA hai  /  ata:
AcArya pralayagiri kI TIkA meM bhASya kI gAthAoM ke AdhAra para vedanIya, Ayu
aura gotra karma ke jo bhaMgavikalpa batalAye haiM, unako yahA~ spaSTa karate
haiN| bhASya kI gAthA meM vedanIya aura gotra karma ke bhaGgoM kA nirdeza isa
prakAra kiyA gayA hai para ghassu voNi sattasu ege ghau gugisu shrenniybhNgaa|
goe paNa ghau thI timu emajyU boNi ekasmi  /  /  arthAt vedanIya karma ke chaha
guNasthAnoM meM cAra, sAta meM do aura eka meM cAra bhaGga hote haiM tathA
gotrakarma ke pahale meM pA~ca, dUsare meM cAra, tIsare Adi tIna meM do, chaThe
Adi ATha meM eka aura eka meM eka bhaGga hotA hai jinakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA
jAtA hai  /

Page #299 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Paksha Karma Granth** instructs on the alternatives of Vedaniya Karma in
the first verse. From the first Mithyatva Gunasthan to the sixth Pramatta-
Samyata Gunasthan, there are six Gunasthanas with "Chau Chassu" - four bhangas.
Because, in comparison to Bandha and Uday, Saata and Asata-Vedaniya are two
opposing natures. That is, in one time, either one's Bandha or one's Uday
occurs, but there is no contradiction in both existing together. And Asata-
Vedaniya's Bandha, etc., occurs only in the six Gunasthanas, not beyond.
Therefore, in the initial six Gunasthanas, the following four bhangas of
Vedaniya Karma are obtained:  1. Asata's Bandha, Asata's Uday, and Saata-Asata's
existence. 2. Asata's Bandha, Saata's Uday, and Saata-Asata's existence. 3.
Saata's Bandha, Asata's Uday, and Saata-Asata's existence. 4. Saata's Bandha,
Saata's Uday, and Saata-Asata's existence.  "Donni Sattasu" - from the seventh
Gunasthan to the thirteenth Gunasthan, there are two bhangas in seven
Gunasthanas. Because, with the cessation of Asata-Vedaniya's Bandha in the sixth
Gunasthan, from the seventh to the thirteenth Gunasthan, only Saata-Vedaniya's
Bandha occurs, but both Uday and existence are found. Therefore, in these seven
Gunasthanas, the following two bhangas are obtained:  1. Saata's Bandha, Saata's
Uday, and Saata-Asata's existence. 2. Saata's Bandha, Asata's Uday, and Saata-
Asata's existence.  In this way, up to the thirteenth Gunasthan, the Bandha,
etc., of Vedaniya Karma...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pakSa karma grantha pahale gAthA meM vedanIya karma ke vikalpoM kA nirdeza kiyA
hai| pahale mithyAtva guNasthAna se lekara chaThe pramattasaMyata guNasthAna
taka chaha guNasthAnoM meM 'cau chassu'-cAra bhaGga hote haiN| kyoMki baMdha
aura udaya kI apekSA sAtA aura asAtAvedanIya, ye donoM prakRtiyA~ pratipakSI
haiN| arthAt donoM meM se eka kAla meM kisI eka kA baMdha aura kisI eka kA hI
udaya hotA hai kintu donoM kI eka sAtha sattA pAye jAne meM koI virodha nahIM
hai tathA asAtA vedanIya kA baMdha Adi ke chaha guNasthAnoM meM hI hotA hai, Age
nhiiN| isaliye prAraMbha ke chaha guNasthAnoM meM badanIya karma ke nimnalikhita
cAra bhaMga prApta hote haiM 1. asAtA kA baMdha asAtA kA udaya aura sAtA-asAtA
kI sattA  /  2. asAtA kA baMdha, sAtA kA udaya aura sAtA-asAtA kI sattA  /  3.
sAtA kA baMdha, asAtA kA udaya aura sAtA-asAtA kI sattA  /  4. sAtA kA baMdha,
sAtA kA udaya aura sAtA-asAtA kI sattA  /  'doNNi sattasu"- sAtaveM guNasthAna
se lekara terahaveM guNasthAna taka sAta guNasthAnoM meM do bhaGga hote haiN|
kyoMki chaThe guNasthAna meM asAtAvedanIya kA baMdhaviccheda ho jAne se sAtaveM
se lekara terahaveM guNasthAna taka sirpha sAtAvedanIya kA baMdha hotA hai,
kintu udaya aura sattA donoM kI pAI jAtI hai, jisase ina sAta guNasthAnoM meM-1.
sAtA kA baMdha, sAtA kA udaya aura sAtA-asAtA kI sattA tathA 2. sAtA kA baMdha,
asAtA kA udaya aura sAtA-asAtA kI sattA, yaha do bhaGga prApta hote haiN| isa
prakAra se terahaveM guNasthAna taka vedanIya karma ke baMdhAdi

Page #300 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
After explaining the alternatives of the Sapttatika Prakarana Sthanas, now we
discuss the bhangas of the fourteenth Gunasthan. It is said that 'Ege Chau' -
that is, one Gunasthan - the fourteenth Aayogikevali Gunasthan has four bhangas.
Because in the Aayogikevali Gunasthan, even the Saata Vedaniya does not bind,
therefore, no bhangas are obtained with respect to binding, but they are formed
with respect to Uday and Sattaa. Still, in this Gunasthan, for one who has the
Uday of Asata, the destruction of the Sattaa of Saata occurs in the
Upaantyasamaya, and for one who has the Uday of Saata, the destruction of the
Sattaa of Asata occurs in the Upaantyasamaya, therefore, until the
Upaantyasamaya, 1. The Uday of Saata and the Kasagi of Saata-Asasa, 2. The Uday
of Asata and the Sattaa of Saata-Asata, these two bhangas are obtained. And in
the final moment, 3. The Uday of Saata and the Sattaa of Saata, and 4. The Uday
of Asata and the Sattaa of Asata, these two bhangas are obtained. In this way,
four bhangas of Vedaniya Karma are formed in the Aayogikevali Gunasthan.  Now,
we discuss the bhangas of Gotra Karma in the Gunasthanas.  Regarding Gotra
Karma, just like Vedaniya Karma, there is a special characteristic that, similar
to Saata and Asata Vedaniya, there are opposing natures with respect to the
binding and Uday of higher and lower Gotra, in one time period, the binding of
one of these two and the Uday of only one can occur, but 1. 'Ekasmin'
Aayogikevalini Chatvaro Bhangaa, Se Cheme - Asatasya Udayah: Saata Saate Sati,
Ashava Saatasya Udayah: Saata Saate Sati, Eti, Dvau Vikalava Aayogikevalini
Vicharmasamayam Yaavat Praapyete, Gharmasamaye Tu Asatasya Udayah Asatasya
Sattaa Yasya Dvidharmasamaye Saatam Ksheenam, Yasya Shvasata Dvicharmasamaye
Bheenam Tasyayam Vikalpah - Sasasya Udayah Satasya Sattaa. -~-Sapttatika
Prakarana Teeka, P. 209

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa sthAnoM ke vikalpoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba caudahaveM
guNasthAna ke bhaGgoM ko batalAne ke liye kahate haiM ki 'ege cau' arthAt eka
guNasthAna-.-caudahaveM ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM cAra bhaGga hote haiN| kyoMki
ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM sAtA vedanIya kA bhI baMdha nahIM hotA hai, ataH
vahAM baMdha kI apekSA to koI bhaGga prApta nahIM hotA hai kintu udaya aura
sattA kI apekSA bhaGga banate haiN| phira bhI jisake isa guNasthAna meM asAtA kA
udaya hai, usake upAntya samaya meM sAtA kI sattA kA nAza ho jAne se tathA
jisake sAtA kA udaya hai usake upAntya samaya meM asAtA kI sattA kA nAza ho jAne
se upAntya samaya taka-1. sAtA kA udaya aura sAtA-asAsA kAsagI, 2. ataataa| kA
udaya aura sAtA-asAtA kI sattA, ye do bhaGga prApta hote haiN| tathA aMtima
samaya meM, 3. sAtA kA udaya aura sAtA kI sattA tathA 4. asAtA kA udaya aura
asAtA kI sattA, yaha do bhaGga prApta hote haiN| isa prakAra ayogikevalI
guNasthAna meM vedanIya karma ke cAra bhaMga banate haiN| aba gotrakarma ke
bhaMgoM ko guNasthAnoM meM batalAte haiN| gotrakarma ke bAre meM bhI vedanIya
karma kI taraha eka vizeSatA to yaha hai ki sAtA aura asAtA vedanIya ke samAna
ucca aura nIca gotra baMdha aura udaya kI apekSA pratipakSI prakRtiyA~ haiM, eka
kAla meM ina donoM meM se kisI eka kA baMdha aura eka kA hI udaya ho sakatA hai,
lekina 1 'ekasmin' ayogikevalini catvAro bhaMgA, se ceme-asAtasyodaya: sAtAsAte
satI, aSavA sAtaspodaya: sAtAsAte satI, etI, dvau vikalpAvayogikevalini
vicaramasamayaM yAvatprApyete, gharamasamaye tu asAtasyodayaH asAtasya sattA
yasya dvidharama-samaye sAtaM kSINam, yasya zvasAtaM dvicarama samaye bhINaM
tasyAyaM vikalpaH-sAsasyodayaH sAtasya sttaa| -~-saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pa0
209

Page #301 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixth karma granth has two aspects. The first is that the bondage, arising,
and existence of the lower gotra occur when the higher gotra of the agnikayik
and vayukayik beings are compared. The second is that the bondage, arising, and
existence of the lower gotra also occur for some time in those beings who are
born from the agnikayik and vayukayik beings. Keeping these two aspects in mind,
when we consider the limbs of gotra karma in the mithyatva gunasthan, we get
five bhangs - 'goe pan'. These five bhangs are as follows:  1. Bondage of the
lower gotra, arising of the lower gotra, and existence of both the lower and
higher gotra. 2. Bondage of the lower gotra, arising of the higher or lower
gotra, and existence of both the lower and higher gotra. 3. Bondage of the
higher gotra, arising of the higher or lower gotra, and existence of both the
higher and lower gotra. 4. Bondage of the higher gotra, arising of the lower
gotra, and existence of both the higher and lower gotra. 5. Bondage of the lower
gotra, arising of the lower gotra, and existence of the lower gotra.  Out of
these five bhangs, the fifth bhang - bondage, arising, and existence of the
lower gotra - is obtained by the agnikayik and vayukayik beings, and also for
some time by those beings who are born from the agnikayik and vayukayik beings.
The remaining four options are obtained by the beings in the mithyatva
gunasthan.  In the sasadan gunasthan, four bhangs are obtained. Because the
bondage of the lower gotra occurs only up to the sasadan gunasthan, and the
mixed... - 1 The arising of the lower gotra from another lower gotra, the
existence of the lower gotra, this option is obtained by the tejas kayik and
vayukayik beings. For some time, it is also obtained by the remaining beings in
the amvasas.  - Sapta tika prakarana tika, page 209

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha sattA donoM kI hotI hai aura dUsarI vizeSatA yaha hai ki
agnikAyika aura bAyukAyika jIvoM ke uccagotra kI udvalanA hone para baMgha,
udaya aura sattA nIca gotra kI hI hotI hai, tathA jinameM aise agnikAyika aura
vAyukAdhika jIba utpanna hote haiM, unake bhI kucha kAla taka baMdha, udaya aura
sattA nIca gotra kI hotI hai| ina donoM vizeSatAoM ko dhyAna meM rakhakara
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM gotrakarma ke aMgoM kA vicAra karate haiM to pAMca
bhaMga prApta hote haiM-'goe paNa'  /  ve pAMca bhaMga isa prakAra haiM 5. nIca
kA baMdha, nIca kA udaya tathA nIca aura ucca gotra kI sattA 2. nIca kA baMdha,
ucca vA udara tathA nIca aura ucca kI sattA  /  3. ucca kA baMdha, ucca vA udaya
aura ucca va nIca kI slaa| 4. ucca kA baMdha, nIca kA udaya tathA ucca va nIca
kI sttaa| 5. nIca kA baMdha, nIca kA udaya aura nIca kI sttaa| ukta pA~ca
bhaMgoM meM se pAMcavAM bhaMga-nIca gotra kA baMdha, udaya aura sattA-agnikAyika
aura vAyukAyika jIvoM tathA una jIvoM meM bhI kucha kAla ke lie prApta hotA hai
jo agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIvoM meM se Akara janma lete haiN| zeSa mithyAtva
guNasthAnavI jIvoM ke pahale cAra vikalpa prApta hote haiM  /  _ sAsAdana
guNasthAna meM cAra bhaMga prApta hote haiN| kyoMki nIca gotra kA baMdha
sAsAdana guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai aura mizra Adi .. - 1 nIcargAtrasya anyaH
nIcargotrasyodayaH nIcargotra mat, eSa vikalpastejaskAyika-vAyukAyikeSu
labhyate. tadamavAsaSu yA zeSa jIveSu kiyatkAlan  /  -saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA,
pR0 209

Page #302 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **264**  In the *guna sthana* (stages of spiritual progress) of
*maptatika* (those who have attained the knowledge of the self), the bondage is
of a high *gotra* (spiritual lineage) only. This means that just as in the
*shudha sthana* (stage of purity), in the *sarvadan* (stage of complete
renunciation) and *muni sthana* (stage of liberation), the bondage of one, the
arising of one, and the existence of both become one. According to this, four
*bhang* (divisions) are found here, and those four divisions are the same as
those mentioned in the *mithyatva* (false belief) *guna sthana* *bhang* 1, 2, 2,
and 4.  "**Do Tisu**" - meaning the third, fourth, and fifth *mithyatva*,
*avirata samyagdristi* (uninterrupted right faith), and *deshaviriti* (freedom
from attachment to the world) *guna sthana* - have two *bhang*. Because from the
*gotra* of *go* (animal) up to the *sarvanchava* (all-pervading) *guna sthana*,
the bondage is of a high *gotra* only, but both arising and existence are found.
Therefore, in these three *guna sthana*, there are two *bhang*: 1. High bondage,
high arising, and high-low existence, and 2. Low bondage, low arising, and low-
high existence. Here, many *acharyas* (teachers) also agree that in the fifth
*guna sthana*, high bondage, high arising, and high-low existence is the only
*anga* (part). Regarding this, there is an *agga vachan* (scriptural statement):
"**Sammammenam ayajaiye upchagopaassa ubalo hoi**" - meaning that the arising of
a high *gotra* occurs for those beings who are restrained by the common and
restrained by the restrained *jati* (birth).  "**Egavasu**" - meaning from the
sixth *pramatasanyata* (restrained by delusion) *guna sthana* up to the *mar*
(liberated) *guna sthana*, one *bhang* is found in each *guna sthana*. Because
from the sixth to the tenth *sukshmasampraaya* (subtle body) *guna sthana*, the
bondage is of a high *gotra* only. Therefore, in the sixth, seventh, eighth,
ninth, and tenth *pramatasanyata*, *apramatasanyata* (unrestrained by delusion),
*apuurvakaran* (unprecedented action), *anivrittibadar* (uninterrupted
liberation), and *sukshmasampraaya* *guna sthana*, each has high bondage, high
arising, and high...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 264 mAptatikA prakaraNa guNasthAnoM meM eka uccagotra kA hI baMdha hotA hai|
isakA yaha artha huA ki mithyAtva zudhasthAna ke samAna sArAAdana muNasthAna meM
bhI kisI eka kA baMdha kisI eka kA udaya aura donoM kI sattA bana jAtI hai| isa
hisAba se yahA~ cAra bhaMga pAye jAte haiM aura ve cAra bhAga vahI haiM jinakA
mithyAtva guNasthAna ke bhaMga 1, 2, 2 aura 4 meM ullekha triyA gayA hai| "do
tisu' arthAta tIsare, cauthe, pAMcave-mitha, avirata samyagdRSTi aura dezavirati
guNasthAnoM meM do mA hote haiN| goMki go ge lekara sarAMcaveM guNasthAna taka
baMdha eka ucca gotra kA hI hotA hai kintu udaya aura sattA donoM kI pAI jAtI
hai  /  isaliye ina tIna guNasthAnoM meM 1. ucca kA badha, uttaca kA udaya aura
ucca-nIca kI sattA, tathA 2 lalaca kA baMdha, nIca kA udaya aura nIca-ucca kI
sattA, yaha do bhaMga pAye jAte haiN| yahAM kitane hI AcAryoM kA yaha bhI
abhigata hai ki pAMcaveM guNasthAna meM ucca kA baMdha, uca kA udaya aura raca-
nIca kI sanA yahI eka aMga hotA hai| isa viSaya meM Agaga bacana hai ki-
sAmammeNaM ayajAIe upacAgopassa ubalo hoi  /  arthAtsAmAnya se saMyata aura
saMyatAsaMgrata jAti vAle jIvoM ke ucca' gotra kA udaya hotA hai  /
'ega'vasu'-yAnI chaThe pramatasaMyata gupArathAna se lekara mAra guNasthAnoM meM
se pratyeka guNasthAna meM eka bhaMga prApta hotA hai  /  kyoMki chaThe se
lekara dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna taka hI ucca gotra kA baMdha hotA hai
/  ataH chaThe, sAtaveM, AThane, nau, dasaveMpramatasaMyata, apramattasaMyata,
apUrvaka raNa, anivRtti bAdara aura mukSmasaMparAya guNasthAnoM meM se pratyeka
meM ucca kA baMdha, ucca kA udaya aura ucca

Page #303 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## From the Karma Granth  **Chapter 265: The Essence of the Lower and Higher
Castes**  The essence of the lower and higher castes undergoes a transformation
in the tenth **Ganasthana** (stage of spiritual development) when the bond of
the higher caste is broken. This transformation continues in the eleventh,
twelfth, **Tare-Upashanta-Moha** (stage of subdued delusion), **Kshina-Moha**
(stage of diminished delusion), and **Sayogikevali** (stage of liberated being)
**Ganasthanas**, where the higher caste emerges and the essence of the higher
and lower castes undergoes a transformation. Thus, from the sixth to the
thirteenth **Ganasthana**, each **Ganasthana** experiences a transformation.
This is proven.  **Two Transformations in the Fourteenth Ganasthana**  In the
fourteenth **Ganasthana**, the **Ayogikevali** (stage of liberated being), there
are two transformations. This is because the essence of the lower caste exists
only until the penultimate moment in the **Ayogikevali Ganasthana**. Since the
fourteenth **Ganasthana** does not have the nature of emergence, the essence of
the lower caste transforms into the essence of the higher caste through the
transition of **Sthibhuk** (the subtle body) in the penultimate moment.
Therefore, until the penultimate moment of this **Ganasthana**, the emergence of
the higher caste and the essence of the higher and lower castes undergo one
transformation. And in the final moment, the emergence of the higher caste and
the essence of the higher caste undergo the second transformation. Thus, one
should understand that there are two transformations in the fourteenth
**Ganasthana**.  **Transformations of Vedaniya and Gotra Karmas**  After
discussing the transformations of **Vedaniya** (karmas related to experiences)
and **Gotra** (karmas related to caste) in the **Ganasthanas**, we will now
discuss the transformations of **Ayukarma** (karmas related to lifespan) based
on the **Bhashya** (commentary) verses. The relevant verse is as follows:
**"Achahi Avisa Solas Chisan Cha Bar Gh Doshu. Vo Chausu Titu Ekkam Minchai Su
Bauge Bhang."**  This means that in the **Mithyatva** (stage of false belief)
**Ganasthana**, there are 28 transformations of **Ayukarma**. In **Sasadan**
(stage of attachment), there are 26. In **Mishra** (stage of mixed belief),
there are 16. In **Avirat Samyagdristi** (stage of unwavering right faith),
there are 20. In **Deshavirat** (stage of detachment from the world), there are
12. In **Pramat** (stage of distraction) and **A-Pramat** (stage of non-
distraction), there are 6. In **A-Purvakaran** (stage of non-accumulation of
karmas) and other four stages, there are 2. And in **Kshina-Moha** (stage of
diminished delusion) and other stages, there is 1. Thus, one should understand
the transformations of **Ayukarma** in the **Ganasthanas** from **Mithyatva** to
**Kshina-Moha**. The detailed explanation is as follows...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bATa karmagrandha 265 nIva kI sattA yaha eka bhaMga prApta hotA hai tathA
dasaveM gaNasthAna meM ucca gotra kA baMdhaviccheda ho jAne se gyArahavaM.
bArahavaM, tarahaupazAntamoha, kSINamoha aura sayogikevalI guNasthAna meM
uccagotra kA udaya aura ucca-nIca kI sattA, yaha eka bhaMga prApta hotA hai| isa
prakAra chaThe se lekara terahaveM guNasthAna taka pratyeka guNasthAna meM eka
bhaMga prApta hotA hai, yaha siddha huA  /  'doNi ekkammi'-zeSa rahe eka
caudahaveM ayogikevalI muNasthAna bhe do bhaMga hote haiM  /  isakA kAraNa yaha
hai ki ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM nIca gotra kI sattA upAntya samaya taka hI
hotI hai kyoMki caudahave guguNasthAna meM yaha udayarUpa prakRti na hone se
upAntya samaya meM hI isakA stibuka saMkramaNa ke dvArA ucca gotra rUpa se
pariNamana ho jAtA hai, ata: isa guNasthAna ke upAntya samaya taka ucca kA udaya
aura uccanIva kI sattA, yaha eka bhaMga tathA anta samaya meM ucca kA udaya aura
ucca kI sattA, yaha dUsarA bhaMga hotA hai| isa prakAra caudahaveM guNasthAna
meM do bhaMgoM kA vidhAna jAnanA caahie| guNasthAnoM meM vedanIya aura gotra
karmoM ke bhaMgoM kA vivacana karane ke bAda aba Ayukarma ke bhaMgoM kA vicAra
bhASya gAthA ke AdhAra se karate haiN| isa sambandhI gAthA nimna prakAra hai
acchAhiAvIsA solasa cIsaM ca bAra gha doSu  /  vo causu tItu ekkaM minchAisu
bAuge bhaMgA arthAt mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 28, sAsAdana meM 26, mizra meM 16,
avirata samyagdRSTi meM 20, dezavirata meM 12, pramatta aura apramatta meM 6,
apUrvakaraNa Adi cAra meM 2 aura kSINamoha Adi meM 1, isa prakAra mithyAdRSTi
Adi guNasthAnoM meM Ayukarma ke bhaMga jAnanA caahie| jinakA vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa
nimna prakAra hai-..

Page #304 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sapttatika Chapter  **The Mithyatva Gunasthan** has 28 bhangs of
Ayukarma. This is because beings in all four gatis are Mithyatva, and there are
5 bhangs for Narakas, 9 for Tiryanchas, 9 for Manusyas, and 5 for Devas. Thus,
the 28 bhangs of Ayukarma are mentioned earlier. Therefore, since all these
bhangs are possible in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, they are said to be 28 bhangs in
the Mithyatva Gunasthan.  **The Sasadan Gunasthan** has 26 bhangs. Since the
bondage of Narakayu occurs only in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, Sasadan Samyagdrsti,
Tiryanchas, and Manusyas do not bind Narakayu. Therefore, out of the above 28
bhangs, the existence of Bhujyaman Tiryanchayu, Badyaman Narakayu, and Tiryancha
Narakayu, and the existence of Bhujyaman Manushayau, Badyaman Narakayu, and
Manusya-Narakayu, these two bhangs are reduced, resulting in 26 bhangs in the
Sasadan Gunasthan.  **The Third Misra Gunasthan** has a rule that there is no
bondage of Ayukarma related to Parbhavatra. Therefore, there is no bondage of
any Ayukarma related to Parbhavatra. Therefore, out of the aforementioned 28
bhangs, the two bhangs of Narakas, four bhangs of Tiryanchas, four bhangs of
Manusyas, and two bhangs of Devas, obtained during the bondage period, are
reduced, resulting in 16 bhangs (2+4+4+2 = 12).  **The Fourth Avirat Samyagdrsti
Gunasthan** has 20 bhangs. Because in the Avirat Samyagdrsti Gunasthan, there is
no bondage of Narak, Tiryancha, and Manusya Ayukarma for both Tiryanchas and
Manusyas, three bhangs are reduced for each.   **Note:** The footnote mentions
that since Tiryanchas and Manusyas do not bind Narakayu while being in the
Sasadan state, one bhang is not obtained for each of them during the bondage
period of Parmayu, resulting in a total of 26 bhangs.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM Ayukarma ke 28 bhaMga hote haiN|
kyoMki cAroM gatiyoM ke jIva midhyAdRSTi bhI hote haiM aura nArakoM ke pA~ca,
tiyaMcoM ke nau, manuSyoM ke nau aura devoM ke pAMca, isa prakAra Ayukarma ke 28
bhaMga pahale batalAye gaye haiN| ataH ve saba bhaMga mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM
saMbhava hone se 28 bhaMga mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM kahe haiM  /  266 sAsAdana
guNasthAna meM 26 bhaMga hote haiN| kyoMki narakAyu kA baMdha mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM hI hone se sAsAdana samyagdRSTi tiryaMca aura manuSya narakAvu kA
baMdha nahIM karate haiN| ataH uparyukta 28 bhaMgoM meM se1 bhujyamAna
tiryaMcAyu, badhyamAna narakAyu aura tirthaMca narakAyu kI sattA, tathA
bhujyamAna manuSyAyu badhyamAna narakAyu aura manuSya- narakAyu kI sattA, ye do
bhaMga kama hone jAne se sAsAdana guNasthAna meM 26 bhaMga prApta hote haiN|"
tIsare mizra guNasthAna meM parabhatra saMbaMdhI Ayu ke baMdha na hone kA niyama
hone se parabhava saMbaMdhI kisI bhI Ayu kA bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  ataH
pUrvokta 28 bhaMgoM meM se baMdhakAla meM prApta hone vAle nArakoM ke do,
tiyaMtroM ke cAra, manuSyoM ke cAra aura devoM ke do, isa prakAra 2+4+4+2=-12
bhaMgoM ko kama kara dene para 16 bhaMga prApta hote haiN| cauthe avirata
samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM 20 bhaMga hote haiN| kyoMki avirata samyagdRSTi
guNasthAna meM tiryaMcoM aura manuSyoM meM se pratyeka ke naraka, tiryaMca aura
manuSya Ayu kA bandha nahIM hone se tIna-tIna bhaMga 1 yatastiryaMco manuSyA vA
sAsAdanamAce vartamAnA narakAyunaM braghnanti, tataH pratyekaM tirazcA
manuSyANAM ca paramAyurba ndhakAle ekaiko maMgo na prApyata iti SaDviMzatiH  /
-saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 210

Page #305 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixth karma granth and the non-binding of the tiyanchayu in both gods and
narakas results in one bhang each, making a total of eight bhangs. When these
are subtracted from the aforementioned 28 bhangs, 20 bhangs remain.  In the
Deshaviraat Gunasthan, there are 12 bhangs. This is because Deshaviraat occurs
in both Tiryanch and humans, and if they bind the lifespan related to the
Parbhaav, they only bind the Devaaayu, not any other lifespan. Deshaviraat
lifespan binders bind only the Devaaayu, not the remaining lifespans. Therefore,
there is one bhang each before their lifespan binding and one bhang each during
the time of lifespan binding. This makes a total of four bhangs for both
Tiryanch and humans combined. Additionally, there are four bhangs for Tiryanch
and four bhangs for humans in relation to the aforementioned binding. This is
because there is no obstacle in attaining the Deshaviraat Gunasthan for both
Tiryanch and humans after binding the lifespan related to all four gatis. Thus,
there are four bhangs for Tiryanch and four bhangs for humans in relation to the
aforementioned binding, making a total of eight bhangs. Adding these to the
aforementioned four bhangs, the total number of bhangs in the Deshaviraat
Gunasthan becomes twelve.  'Chh Hosu', meaning the fifth Gunasthan, followed by
the Prammatasanyat and Aprammatasanyat Gunasthan, have six bhangs. This is
because both these Gunasthan are only for humans and they bind only the
Devaaayu. Therefore, there is one bhang before their lifespan binding and one
bhang during the time of lifespan binding. However, there are four bhangs in
relation to the aforementioned binding because there is no obstacle in attaining
the Prammatasanyat and Aprammatasanyat Gunasthan after binding the lifespan
related to all four gatis. Thus, combining the one bhang before lifespan
binding, one bhang during lifespan binding, and four bhangs in relation to the
aforementioned binding, there are six bhangs in both the Prammatasanyat and
Aprammatasanyat Gunasthan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karma grantha tathA deva aura nArakoM meM pratyeka ke tiyaMcAyu kA
bandha nahIM hone se eka-eka bhaMga, isa prakAra kula ATha bheda hue  /  jinako
pUrvokta 28 bhaMgoM meM se kama karane para 20 bhaMga hote haiN| dezavirata
guNasthAna meM 12 bhaMga hote hai  /  kyoMki dezavirati tiryaMca aura manuSyoM
ke hotI hai aura yadi ve parabhava sambandhI Ayu kA bandha karate haiM to devAyu
kA hI bandha karate haiM anya Ayu kA nhiiN| dezaviratA Ayurvapnanto devAyureya
badhnanti na zeSamAyuH  /  ata: inake Ayubandha ke pahale eka-eka hI bhaMga hotA
hai aura Ajubandha ke kAla meM bhI eka-eka bhaMga hI hotA hai| isa prakAra
tiyaca aura manuSyoM, donoM ko milAkara kula cAra bhaMga hue tathA uparata
baMdha kI apekSA tiryaMcoM ke bhI cAra bhaMga hote haiM aura manuSyoM ke bhI
cAra bhaMga  /  kyoMki cAroM gati sambandhI Ayu kA vadha karane ke pazcAta
tiryaMca aura manuSyoM ke dezavirati guNasthAna ke prApta hone meM kisI prakAra
kA virodha nahIM hai| isa prakAra uparata baMdha kI apekSA tithaMcoM ke cAra
aura manuSyoM ke cAra, jo kula milAkara ATha bhaGga haiN| inameM pUrvokta cAra
bhaGgoM ko milAne para dezavirata guNasthAna meM kula bAraha bhaGga ho jAte haiM
/  'cha hosu' arthAt pAMcaveM guNasthAna ke bAda ke pramattasaMyata aura
apramattasaMyata, ina do guNasthAnoM meM chaha bhaGga hote haiM  /  isakA kAraNa
yaha hai ki ye donoM guNasthAna manuSyoM ke hI hote haiM  /  aura ye devAyu ko
hI bAMdhate haiM  /  ata: inake Ayu bandha ke pahale eka bhaGga aura Ayubandha
kAla meM bhI eka bhaGga hotA hai| kintu uparata bandha ko apekSA yahA~ cAra
bhaGga hote haiM, kyoMki cAroM gati sambandhI Ayubandha ke pazcAta pramatta aura
apramatta saMyata guNasthAna prApta hone meM koI bAdhA nahIM hai| isa prakAra
Ayubandha ke pUrva kA eka, Ayu bandha ke samaya kA eka aura uparata bandha kAla
ke cAra bhaGgoM ko milAne se pramattasaMyata aura apramattasaMyata, ina donoM
guMNasthAnoM meM chaha bhaGga prApta hote haiN|

Page #306 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seven Tika  The bondage of Ayukarma (life-span karma)
occurs only up to the seventh Gunasthan (stage of spiritual progress). It does
not occur in the remaining Gunasthanas, starting from the eighth, A-purvakarana
(the stage of purification), and onwards. However, there is a special
characteristic: a person who has bound the Devayau (divine life-span) can ascend
to the Upshama Shreni (stage of spiritual progress), while one who has bound
other Ayus (life-spans) excluding Devayau, does not ascend to the Upshama
Shreni.  "Tisu Madagesu Babesu Men Sethi Na Avahan" - A being who has bound
three Ayus (excluding Devayau) does not ascend to the Shreni. Therefore, in
comparison to Upshama Shreni, two Bhangas (breaks) are obtained in each of the
four Gunasthanas: A-purvakarana, Upshantamoha, and the ninth and tenth
Gunasthanas, making a total of "Do Chausu" (two fours). These two Bhangas are:
1. The arising of Manushyayu (human life-span) and the existence of Manushyayu.
2. The arising of Manushyayu and the existence of Manushya-Devayau (human-divine
life-span).  The first Bhang occurs before the binding period of Ayukarma
related to the previous birth, while the second Bhang occurs during the period
of cessation of binding.  However, in comparison to the Kshapaka Shreni (stage
of spiritual progress), only one Bhang occurs in the three Gunasthanas:
A-purvakarana and the following two, which is the arising of Manushyayu and the
existence of Manushyayu.  Similarly, in the three Gunasthanas: Kshina Moha
(stage of minimal delusion), Sayogikevali (liberated with attachments), and
Ayogikevali (liberated without attachments), only one Bhang occurs, which is the
arising of Manushyayu and the existence of Manushyayu, making a total of "Tisu
Ekk" (three ones).  In this way, the possible Bhangas of Ayukarma in each
Gunasthan have been considered, determining the number of Bhangas in each stage.
The description of the six Karmas (actions): Jnana Avarana (knowledge
obscuration), Darshan Avarana (perception obscuration), Vedaniya (sensory
karma), Ayu (life-span karma), Gotra (family karma), and Antaray (obstacle
karma) in the 14 Gunasthanas is as follows:  1. Karma Prakriti Gatha 375.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa _ Ayukarma kA bandha sAtaveM guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai  /
Age AThaveM apUrvaka raNa Adi zeSa guNasthAnoM meM nahIM hotA hai  /  kintu eka
vizeSatA hai ki jisane devAyu kA bandha kara liyA, aisA manuSya upazamazreNi
para ArohaNa kara sakatA hai aura jisane devAyu ko chor3akara anya Ayu kA bandha
kiyA hai, vaha, upazamaNi para ArohaNa nahIM karatA hai tisu mADagesu babesu
meNa seti na Avahana  / ' tIna Ayu kA bandha vArane vAlA (devAyu ko chor3akara)
jIva zreNi para ArohaNa nahIM karatA hai| ata: upazamaNi ko apekSA apUrvakaraNa
Adi upazAMtamoha guNasthAna paryanta ATha, nau, dasa aura gyAraha, ina cAra
guNasthAnoM meM do-do bhaGga prApta hote haiM'do causu'  /  ve do bhaGga isa
prakAra haiM-1 manuSyAyu kA udaya, manuSyAyu kI sattA, 2 manuSyAyu kA udaya
manuSya-devAyu kI sattA  /  inameM se pahalA bhaGga parabhava saMbaMdhI Ayu
banSakAla ke pUrva meM hotA aura dUsarA bhaGga uparata bandhakAla meM hotA hai|
lekina kSapakazreNi kI apekSA apUrvakaraNa Adi tIna guNasthAnoM meM manuSyAya kA
udaya aura manuSyAyu kI sattA, yahI evaH bhaGga hotA hai| kSINamoha,
sayogikevalI, ayogikevalI ina tIna guNasthAnoM meM bhI manuSyAyu kA udaya aura
manuSyAyu kI sattA, yahI eka bhaGga hotA hai'tIsu ekk'| _ isa prakAra pratyeka
guNasthAna meM Ayakarma ke sambhava bhaGgoM kA vicAra kiyA gayA ki pratyeka
guNasthAna meM kitane-kitane bhaGga hote haiN| 14 guNasthAnoM meM jJAnAvaraNa,
darzanAvaraNa, vedanIya, Ayu, gotra aura aMtarAya, ina chaha karmoM kA vivaraNa
isa prakAra hai 1 karma prakRti gAthA 375  /

Page #307 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Pashta Karmagrantha ## 266 ## Dana ## Gunasthan ## Jnanabaran ## Taniya Ayu
| Gotra | Antray ## Varan ## 1 Mithyatva ## 2 Sasadan 3 Mishn 4 Avirat 5
Deshavirat . 6 Pramalvirat 7 Apamattvirat ## Apurvakaran Anivrittikaran
Sukshmasampram ## Upshantamoha 12 | Kshina Moha ## 3 | Mayogikevali 14 |
Ayogikevali  ---  Now, according to the instructions of the Gatha, we consider
the breaking of Mohaniya Karma. Among them, we first explain the breaking of
Bandhastanas.  **"In the Gunasthanas, one by one, in the Mohabandhastanas, the
bondage is overcome by the five Niyattasthanas."** (42)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paSTa karmagrantha 266 dAnA guNasthAna jJAnAbaraNa TanIya Ayu | gotra | aMta
rAya varaNa 1 mithyAtva 2 sAsAdana 3 mizna 4 avirata 5 dezavirata . 6
pramalavirata 7 apamattavirata apurvakaraNa anivRttikaraNa sUkSmasaMparAma
upazAMtamoha 12  /  kSINamoha 3 | mayogikevalI 14 | ayogikevalI - - - - aba
gAthA ke nirdezAnusAra mohanIya karma ke bhaMgoM kA vicAra karate haiM  /
unameM se bhI pahale baMdhasthAnoM ke bhaMgoM ko batalAte haiN| guNaThANagesu
asu ekkekkaM mohabaMdhaThANesu  /  paMcAniyaTTiThANe baMdhovaramo paraM tatto
// 42 //

Page #308 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on the Seven Tika  **Word Meaning:** In the eight **guna sthana**
(states of being), there is one **mohaniya karma** (bond of delusion) **bandha
sthana** (place of bondage) in each. In the **abhipatta sthana** (state of non-
obstruction), there are five, and in the **bandhovarbha** (state beyond
bondage), there is no bondage. However, from the **abhipatta sthana** onwards,
there is no bondage.  **Meaning:** In the eight **guna sthana** (states of
being), from **mithyatva** (false belief) to **apuurvakarana** (state of non-
creation), there is one **mohaniya karma** (bond of delusion) **bandha sthana**
(place of bondage) in each. In the **abhipatta sthana** (state of non-
obstruction), there are five, and in the **bandhovarbha** (state beyond
bondage), there is no bondage.  **Specific Meaning:** This verse explains the
**bandha sthana** (place of bondage) for **mohaniya karma** (bond of delusion).
The general **bandha sthana** for **mohaniya karma** (bond of delusion) have
already been explained, which are 22, 21, 17, 13, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1
**prakriti** (natural states). These ten places are subtracted from the **guna
sthana** (states of being).  "**Guṇasthānage aṭṭasu ekkekkam**" means that from
the first **guna sthana** (state of being) of **mithyatva** (false belief) to
the eighth **guna sthana** (state of being) of **apuurvakarana** (state of non-
creation), there is one **mohaniya karma** (bond of delusion) **bandha sthana**
(place of bondage) in each **guna sthana** (state of being). It should be
understood that in the **mithyatva** (false belief) **guna sthana** (state of
being), there is one **bandha sthana** (place of bondage) of 22 **prakriti**
(natural states), in the **sāsādana** (state of self-control) **guna sthana**
(state of being), there is one **bandha sthana** (place of bondage) of 21
**prakriti** (natural states), in the **miśra** (mixed) **guna sthana** (state
of being) and the **avirata samyagdṛṣṭi** (unwavering right faith) **guna
sthana** (state of being), there is one **bandha sthana** (place of bondage) of
17 **prakriti** (natural states), in **deśaviraṭi** (state of detachment from
the world), there is one **bandha sthana** (place of bondage) of 13 **prakriti**
(natural states), and in **pramattasamyata** (state of controlled mind),
**apramattasamyata** (state of uncontrolled mind), and **apuurvakarana** (state
of non-creation), there is one **bandha sthana** (place of bondage) of 2
**prakriti** (natural states). The details of their breaking should be
understood as explained in the chapter on **mohaniya karma** (bond of delusion)
**bandha sthana** (place of bondage). However, here is a special point: the
breaking of **arati** (distress) and **śoka** (sorrow) happens in the
**pramattasamyata** (state of controlled mind) **guna sthana** (state of being).
Therefore, in the **apramattasamyata** (state of uncontrolled mind) and
**apuurvakarana** (state of non-creation) **guna sthana** (state of being), only
one breaking is obtained in each of the nine **prakriti** (natural states)
**bandha sthana** (place of bondage). The previous nine **prakriti** (natural
states) ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa zabdArthaguNa ThANagesu - guNasthAnoM meM aTThasu-ATha meM,
3 ekkekkaM eka- eka mohabaMdhaThANesu - mohanIya karma ke baMghasthAnoM meM se,
paMca-pA~ca, abhipaTTaThANe - anivRtibAdhara guNasthAna meM, baMdhovarabho -
baMdha kA abhAva hai, paraM- Age tatto-- usase (anivRtti bAdara guNasthAna se )
| J 270 gAvArtha - mithyAtva Adi ATha guNaradhAnoM meM mohanIya karma ke sthAnoM
meM se eka eka baMdhasthAna hotA hai tathA anivRttivAdara guNasthAna meM pAMca
aura anantara Age ke guNasthAnoM meM baMdha kA abhAva hai  /  vizeSArtha - isa
gAthA meM mohanIya karma ke baMjara sthAnoM meM se baMdhasthAnoM ko batalAyA
hai| sAmAnya se mohanIya karma ke baMdhasthAna pahale batAye jA cuke haiM, jo
22, 21, 17, 13, 6, 5, 4, 3, 21 prakRtika haiN| ina dasa sthAnoM ko guNasthAnoM
meM ghaTAte haiM  /  'guNaThANage aTTasu ekkekkaM' arthAt pahale mithyAtva
guNasthAna se lekara AThaveM apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna paryanta pratyeka
guNasthAna meM mohanIya karma kA eka-eka baMdhasthAna hotA hai  /  vaha isa
prakAra jAnanA cAhie ki mithyAdRSTi guNasthAnoM meM eka 22 prakRtika, sAsAdAna
guNasthAna meM 21 prakRtika, mizra guNasthAna aura avirata samyagdRSTi
guNasthAna meM 17 prakRtika, dezavirati meM 13 prakRtika tathA pramattasaMyata,
apramattasaMyata aura apUrvaka raNa meM 2 prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai| inake
bhaMgoM kA vivaraNa mohanIya karma ke baMdhasthAnoM ke prakaraNa geM kahe gaye
anusAra jAnanA cAhie, lekina yahA~ itanI vizeSatA hai ki arati aura zoka kA
baMdhaviccheda pramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM ho jAtA hai ata: apramattasaMyata
aura apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM no prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM eka-eka hI bhaMga
prApta hotA hai| pahale jo nau prakRtika

Page #309 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Post Karma Granth  **271** Two **bhang** are mentioned in the **bandha
sthana**. These are said in relation to the **pramatta** and **samyata** **guna
sthana**.  **Panchaniyattithana** - In the ninth **guna sthana**, called
**anivrittibada**, there are five **bandha sthana**: 5, 4, 3, 2, and
**prakritik**. This is because the ninth **guna sthana** has five parts, and in
each part, there is a **bandha vicched** of one **mohaniya karma**
**prakritik**. Therefore, in the first part, there are 5 **bandha sthana**, in
the second part, 4, in the third part, 3, in the fourth part, 2, and in the
fifth part, 1 **prakritik bandha sthana**. After this, in the **sukshama
sampraaya** and subsequent **guna sthana**, there is no **bandha**, so **bandha
sthana** is prohibited.  The essence of the above statement is that in the first
eight **guna sthana**, there is one **bandha sthana** in each. In the ninth
**guna sthana**, there are five **bandha sthana**, and after that, in the tenth,
eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth **guna sthana**, there is no
**bandha** of **mohaniya karma**, so there is no **bandha sthana**.  After
describing the **bandha sthana** of **mohaniya karma** in the **guna sthana**,
we now describe the **udaya sthana** in the next three verses.  ... ... 1.
**Kevalam pramatta purvakaran yo bhang ekak eva vaktavya, atishokayobanyasya
pramatta guna sthana ke eva vyachchedat. Prak cha pramatta apekshya navaka
bandha sthane dro bhago dasito.**  **Sapttatika Prakaran Teeka**, page 211. 2.
Compare - (a) **Micche sagai chauro sasanamaise magaitishnu daya. Chah panch
bajar punna tia chauro aviramainam.**  **Panchasangraha Sapttatika**, verse 26.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paSTha karmagrantha 271 baMdhasthAna meM do bhaMga batalAye haiM ve
pramattasaMyata guNasthAna kI apekSA kahe gaye haiN|' 'paMcAniyaTTiThANe'
AThaveM guNasthAna ke anantara nauveM anivRttibAdara nAmaka gaNasthAna meM 5, 4.
3, 2 aura prakRtika ye pAMca baMdhasthAna hote haiM  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki
nauveM guNasthAna ke pAMca bhAga haiM aura pratyeka bhAga meM kama se mohanIya
karma kI eka-eka prakRti kA baMdhaviccheda hone se pahale bhAga meM 5, dUsare
bhAga meM 4, tIsare bhAga meM 3, cauthe bhAga meM 2 aura pA~caveM bhAga meM 1
prakRtika baMdhasthAna hone se nauveM guNasthAna meM pAMca baMdhasthAna mAne
haiN| isake bAda sUkSamasaMparAya Adi Age ke guNasthAnoM meM baMdha kA abhAva ho
jAne se baMdhasthAna kA niSedha kiyA hai| ukta kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai ki
Adi ke ATha guNasthAnoM meM ro pratyeka meM eka-eka baMdhasthAna hai| nauveM
guNasthAna meM pAMca baMdhasthAna haiM tathA usake bAda dasaveM, gyArahaveM,
bArahaveM, terahaveM, caudahaveM guNasthAna meM mohanIya karma ke baMdha kA
abhAva hone se koI bhI baMdhasthAna nahIM hai  /  isa prakAra se guNasthAnoM meM
mohanIya karma ke baMdhasthAnoM kA nirdeza karane ke bAda aba Age tIna gAthAoM
meM udayasthAnoM kA kathana karate haiM  /  - .. . . 1
kevalamapramattApUrvakaraNa yobhaMga ekaka e vaktavyaH, atizokayobaMnyasya
pramattaguNasthAnake eva vya-cchedAt  /  prAk ca pramattApekSayA
navakabaMdhasthAne dro bhago dshito| _ saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA pR0, 211 2
tulanA kIjie- (ka) micche sagAicauro sAsaNamIse magAi tiSNudayA  /  chaHpaMca
bajarapunnA tia cauro aviramAINaM  /  /  -paMcasaMgraha saptatikA gA0 26

Page #310 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **272** **Seven-Decade Propagation**  From seven to ten
natures, in the *Miच्छे* (false) *गुणस्थान* (quality-state), *सासायणमीसए*
(Sāsāyana and Miśna), from seven to nine natures, from six to nine, in the
*अविरए* (Avirata) *गुणस्थान*, in the *वेसे* (Cēśavirati) *गुणस्थान*, from five
to eight natures.  In the *विरए खओक्समिए* (Promatt and Apramatt) *गुणस्थान*,
from four to seven natures, from four to six, in the *अपुष्यम्मि* (Apūrva-
karaṇa) *गुणस्थान*, in the *अनियट्टियागरे* (Anivṛtti-bādar) *गुणस्थान*, and
also, one, or two, or *उवयंसा* (Udayasthāna).  One, *मुहमसरागो* (Sūkṣma-
sangrāya) *गुणस्थान* *बाला* (child), *घेएइ* (experiences), *अवेयगा* (Avedaka),
*भवे* (become), those with the remaining *गुणस्थान*, *भंगाणं* (breakage) and,
*पमाणं* (measure), according to what was said before, one should know.  **(b)**
*दसणवणवादि* (Daśanavaṇavādi), *चउतिपतिद्वाण* (Catur-ti-pati-dvāṇa), *वसगसगादि*
(Vasaga-sagādi), *चक* (Caka). *ठाणा* (Thāna), from six, three, and four,
*अपुधवो* (Apudhava). *उदयटाणं* (Udayatāna), two, but bondage occurs for one.
*चबिहबंधठाणे* (Cabi-bandha-thāṇe), in the remaining *ठाणं* (Thāna).  - *गो०
कर्मकांड गा० ४०० व ४६२* (Go. Karmakāṇḍa Gā. 400 and 462)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 272 saptatikA prazAraNa sattAi dasa minche sAsAyaNamIsae nvsskosaa| chAI nava u
avirae dese paMcAi aTThava  /  / 43 //  virae khaovasamie, caurAI satta
chaccAyuzcammi  /  aniyaTTinAyare puNa ikko va duve va udayaMsA  // 44 //  66
suhAgarago e3 aveyagA bhave sesA  /  bhaMgANaM ca pamANaM pubuddiTheNa nAyadhvaM
// 45 //  zamdArmasasAda pasau- sAta se lekara dasa prakRti saka, micche-
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM, sAsAyaNa mausAe-sAsAdana aura mizna meM, navakkosA-
sAta se lekara nau prakRti taka, chAnivauchaha se lekara nau taka, avirae-
avirata sampaSTi guNasthAna meM, vese-cezavirati guNasthAna meM, paMcAiaba-
pAMca se lekara ATha prakRti taka, virae khaoksamie-pramatta aura apramatta
guNasthAna meM, caurAIsatta-cAra se sAta prakRti taka, chAtraaura chaha taka,
apuSyammi -apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM, aniyaTTiyAgare anivRtti bAdara
guNasthAna meM, puNatathA, iphko-eka, 4-athavA duI-do, uvayaMsAudayasthAna  /
egaeka, muhamasarAgo-sUkSmasaMgarAya guNasthAna bAlA, gheei-vedana karatA hai,
aveyagAavedaka, bhave-hote haiM, sesAbAkI ke guNasthAna vAle, bhaMgANaMbhaMgoM
kA, caaura, pamANaMpramANa, puvudileNa-pahale kahe anusAra, nAyavaM-jAnanA
caahie| (kha) dasaNavaNavAdi cautipatidvANa vasagasagAdi caka | ThANA chAdi
tiyaM ca ya cadudhIsagadA apudhavo ti  /  /  udayaTANaM doNhaM paNa baMdhe hodi
dopahamekassa  /  cabihabaMdhaThANe seseseyaM have ThANaM  /  /  -go0 karmakAMDa
gA0 400 va 462

Page #311 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Granth 273 Patharth - In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, from the seventh
to the tenth excellent nature, in Sasadan and Mishtra, from the seventh to the
ninth, in Avirat Samyagdristi Gunasthan, from the sixth to the ninth, in
Deshavirat, from the fifth to the eighth, and in the Prammat and Aprammat Samyat
Gunasthan, from the fourth to the seventh, in Apurvakaran, from the fourth to
the sixth, and in the Anivriti Ghadar Gunasthan, there are one or two Udayasthan
Mohaniyakam. The one with the Sukshmasampray Gunasthan experiences one nature,
and the rest with the subsequent Gunasthan are Avedak. The proof of their
bhangas should be known as mentioned earlier. Special Note - In these three
verses, the Udayasthan in the Gunasthan of Mohaniyakarma are mentioned,
indicating how many natures, at most and at least, arise together in which
Gunasthan. There are a total of 28 Uttar Prakritis of Mohaniyakarma. Out of
them, a maximum of ten natures and a minimum of one nature arise together in one
time period. Thus, there should be ten Udayasthan from one to ten, but the rise
of three Prakritis is not found anywhere because when either of the two pairs of
Hasya-Rati or Arati-Shok is combined in the two Prakriti Udayasthan, only four
Prakriti Udayasthan are obtained. Therefore, instead of mentioning three
Prakriti Udayasthan, the remaining nine Udayasthan of 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
and 10 Prakritis are mentioned for Mohaniyakarma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 273 pAthArtha-~-mithyAtva guNasthAna meM sAta se lekara
utkRSTa dasa prakRti paryanta, sAsAdana aura miztra meM sAta se nau paryanta,
avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM chaha se nau taka, dezavirata meM pAMca se
ATha paryanta tathA pramatta aura apramatta saMyata guNasthAna meM cAra se
lekara sAta taka, apUrvakaraNa meM cAra se chaha taka aura anivRttighAdara
guNasthAna meM eka athavA do udayasthAna mohanIyakama ke hote haiN|
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna vAlA eka prakRti kA vedana karatA hai aura isake Age
ke zeSa guNasthAna vAle avedaka hote haiM, inake bhaMgoM kA pramANa pahale kahe
anusAra jAnanA caahie| vizeSArtha-ina tIna gAthAoM meM mohanIyakarma ke
guNasthAnoM meM udayasthAna batalAye haiM ki kisa guNasthAna meM eka sAtha
adhika se adhika kitanI prakRtiyoM kA aura kama se kama kitanI prakRtiyoM kA
udaya hotA hai| mohanIyakarma kI kula uttara prakRtiyA~ 28 haiN| unameM se eka
sAtha adhika se adhika dasa prakRtiyoM kA aura kama se kama eka prakRti kA eka
kAla meM udaya hotA hai| isa prakAra se eka se lekara dasa taka, dasa
udayasthAna honA cAhiye kiMtu tIna prakutiyoM kA udaya kahIM prApta nahIM hotA
hai kyoMki do prakRtika udayasthAna meM hAsya-rati yugala yA arati-zoka yugala
ina donoM yugaloM meM se kisI eka yugala ke milAne para cAra prakRtika
udayasthAna hI prApta hotA hai  /  ataH tIna prakR. tika udayasthAna nahIM
batalAkara zeSa 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, aura 10 prakRtika ye kula nau
udayasthAna mohanIyakarma ke batalAye haiN|

Page #312 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 274: The Sevenfold  Although the general discussion of the sources of
mohaniya karma has been explained in detail in verse 11, we will discuss it here
according to the verses, in relation to the gunasthana.  **'Sanad Daman Minte'**
- In the first gunasthana, Misyaishti, there are four natural sources: 7, 8, 6,
and 10. The seven natural sources arise from the firm emergence of these seven
natures: Mithyatva, Apraatyakhyanavaran, Pratyakhyanavaran, Sanjwalan, any one
of the three from Krodhadi, any one of the three Vedas, and any one of the two
pairs, Hasya-Rati and Shoka-Rati.   When fear, disgust, or any one of the four
Anantanubandhi kshayas is added to these seven natures, it becomes eight natural
sources. When any two of fear, disgust, or fear and Anantanubandhi, or disgust
and Anantanubandhi are added to these seven natures, it becomes nine natural
sources. When fear, disgust, and any one of the Anantanubandhi kshayas are added
together to these seven natures, it becomes ten natural sources.  In these four
sources, there are eight combinations: one with seven, three with eight, three
with nine, and one with ten. Thus, there are eight sets of 24 bhangas.  In the
Sasadan and Mishra gunasthana, there are three sources each: seven, eight, and
nine natural sources.  In the Sasadan gunasthana, the seven natural sources
arise from the firm emergence of these seven natures: Anantanubandhi,
Apraatyakhyanavaran, Pratyakhyanavaran, Sanjwalan, any one of the four from
Krodhadi, any one of the three Vedas, and any one of the two pairs.   When fear
or disgust is added to this, it becomes eight natural sources. When both fear
and disgust are added together, it becomes nine natural sources.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 274 saptatikA prakaraNa yadyapi gAthA 11 meM mohanIyakarma ke udayasthAnoM kI
sAmAnya vivecanA ke prasaMga meM vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa kiyA jA cukA hai, phira bhI
guNasthAnoM kI apekSA unakA kathana karane ke lie gAthAnusAra yahA~ vivecana
karate haiN| 'sanAda damana minTe' arthAt pahale mizyAiSTi guNasthAna meM 7, 8,
6 aura 10 prakRtika, ye cAra udayasthAna hote haiN| mithyAtva,
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, saMjvalana, krodhAdi meM se anyatama
tIna krodhAdi, tIna vedoM meM se koI eka veda, hAsya-rati yugala, zokaarati
yugala meM se koI eka yugala, ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA dhruva rUpa se udaya hone
se sAta prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  ina dhruvodayA sAta prakRtiyoM meM
bhaya athavA jugupsA athavA anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya catuSka meM se kisI eka kaSAya
ko milAne para ATha prakRtika tathA una sAta prakRtiyoM meM bhaya, jugupsA
athavA bhaya, anantAnubaMdhI athavA jugupsA, anantAnubaMdhI meM se kinhIM do ko
milAne se nau prakRtika aura ukta sAta prakRtiyoM meM bhaya, jugupsA aura
anantAnubandhI anyatama eka kaSAya ko eka sAtha milAne para dasa prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai| ina cAra udayasthAnoM meM sAta kI eka, ATha kI tIna, nau
kI tIna aura dasa kI eka, isa prakAra bhaMgoM kI ATha caubIsI prApta hotI haiN|
sAsAdana aura mizra guNasthAna meM sAta, ATha aura nau prakRtika, ye tIna-tIna
udayasthAna hote haiN| sAsAdana guNasthAna meM anantAnubandhI,
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, saMjvalana krodhAdi meM se anyatama
krodhAdi koI cAra, tIna dedoM meM koI eka veda, do yugaloM meM se koI eka yugala
ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA dhruvodaya hone se sAta prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai|
isa sthAna meM bhaya yA jugupsA meM se kisI eka ko milAne para ATha prakRtika
tathA bhaya aura jugupsA ko eka sAtha milAne para nau prakRtika udayasthAna

Page #313 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixth karma granth is called "Mishra Gunasthan". It has 24 bhangas. These
bhangas are divided into three groups: one group of seven, two groups of eight,
and one group of nine.  In Mishra Gunasthan, the seven-natured udaysthan is
obtained due to the regular arising of seven natures: three of the three kshayas
(excluding anantanubandhi), one of the three vedas, one of the two yugals, and
the mixed mohaniya. This udaysthan has one group of 24 bhangas.  The eight-
natured udaysthan is obtained when fear is added to the seven natures. This
udaysthan has two groups of 24 bhangas.  The nine-natured udaysthan is obtained
when fear and disgust are combined with the seven natures. This udaysthan has
one group of 24 bhangas.  Therefore, in Mishra Gunasthan, there are 7, 8, and
9-natured udaysthans, with a total of four groups of 24 bhangas.  In the Avirat
Samyagdristi Gunasthan, there are four udaysthans from six to nine natures:
"Chhai Nav U AvirAe". This means there are six-natured, seven-natured, eight-
natured, and nine-natured udaysthans.  The six-natured udaysthan arises from the
six natures: three of the three kshayas, one of the three vedas, and one of the
two yugals. This udaysthan has one group of 24 bhangas.  The seven-natured
udaysthan is obtained when fear, disgust, or vedak samyaktva is added to the six
natures. This udaysthan has three groups of 24 bhangas due to the three
alternative combinations.  The eight-natured udaysthan is obtained when two
natures are combined in sequence: fear and disgust, fear and vedak samyaktva, or
disgust and vedak samyaktva. This udaysthan has three groups of 24 bhangas due
to the three alternative combinations.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karma granya hotA hai  /  isameM bhaMgoM kI caubIsI cAra haiN| ve isa
prakAra haiM ki sAta kI eka, ATha kI do aura nau kI ek| mizna guNasthAna meM
anantAnubaMdhI ko chor3akara zeSa apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa Adi tIna kaSAyoM meM se
anyatama tIna krodhAdi, tIna vedoM meM se koI eka veda, do yugaloM meM se koI
eka yugala aura mizra mohanIya, ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA niyama se udaya hone ke
kAraNa sAta prakRtika udayasthAna prApta hotA hai  /  isameM bhaMgoM kI eka
caubIsI hotI hai  /  sAta prakRtika sanamaHyA meM bhaya kA jugama po lAmo pala
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahAM bhaMgoM kI do caubIsI hotI haiM tathA
sAta prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaya, jugupsA ko yugapat milAne se nau prakRtika
udayasthAna banatA hai aura bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI hotI hai  /  isa prakAra
mizra guNasthAna meM 7, 8 aura 6 prakRtika udayasthAna tathA bhaMgoM kI cAra
caubIsI jAnanA caahiye| avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM chaha se lekara nau
prakRtika cAra udayasthAna haiM--'chAI nava u avirae  /  arthAt 6 prakRtika, 7
prakRtika, 8 prakRtika aura prakRtika, ye cAra udayasthAna haiN| chaha prakRtika
udayasthAna meM apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa Adi tIna kaSAyoM meM se anyatama tIna
koSAdi, tIna vedoM meM se koI eka veda, do yugaloM meM se koI eka yugala, ina
chaha prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai| isa sthAna meM bhaMgoM ko eka caubIsI hotI
hai  /  isa chaha prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaya yA jugupsA yA vedaka samyaktva
ko milAne se sAta prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ vikalpa se tIna
prakRtiyoM ke milAne ke kAraNa bhaMgoM kI tIna caubIsI hotI haiN| ukta chaha
prakRtiyoM meM bhaya, jugupsA athavA bhaya, vedaka samyaktva athavA jugupsA,
vedaka samyaktva, isa prakAra ina do prakRtiyoM ko anukrama se milAne para ATha
prakRtika udayasthAna haiN| yaha sthAna tIna vikalpoM se banane ke kAraNa
bhaMgoM kI tIna caubIsiyAM hotI haiN|

Page #314 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Six of the Sapttatika: The Sixfold Nature of the Udyaasthan  In the
sixth nature of the Udyaasthan, fear, disgust, or Vedak Samyaktva are added to
the five natures, resulting in a total of six natures. This leads to three
possibilities, resulting in three sets of 24 Bhangas.  In the seventh nature of
the Udyaasthan, fear, disgust, or fear and Vedak Samyaktva, or disgust and Vedak
Samyaktva are added to the five natures. This also leads to three possibilities,
resulting in three sets of 24 Bhangas.  In the eighth nature of the Udyaasthan,
fear, disgust, and Vedak Samyaktva are added to the five natures. This results
in only one possibility, leading to one set of 24 Bhangas.  In total, there are
eight sets of 24 Bhangas in the fourth Gunasthan.  The fifth Gunasthan,
Desavirat, has four Udyaasthan, from the fifth to the eighth nature.  The fifth
Udyaasthan consists of five natures: Pratyakhyana Avarana, two of the three
passions (anger, pride, deceit), one of the three Vedas, and one of the two
pairs. This results in one set of 24 Bhangas.  The sixth Udyaasthan is formed by
adding fear, disgust, or Vedak Samyaktva to the five natures of the fifth
Udyaasthan.  The seventh Udyaasthan is formed by adding fear, disgust, or fear
and Vedak Samyaktva, or disgust and Vedak Samyaktva to the five natures of the
fifth Udyaasthan.  The eighth Udyaasthan is formed by adding fear, disgust, and
Vedak Samyaktva to the five natures of the fifth Udyaasthan.  The term "Virae
Khaovsamie" in the verse refers to the sixth and seventh Gunasthan, which are
known as Kshayopa-shamic Virat. This term is specific to these two Gunasthan.
The subsequent Gunasthan are referred to as either Upshamik or Kshapak. Those
who ascend the Upshamik श्रेणी are called Upshamik, and those who ascend the
Kshapak श्रेणी are called Kshapak.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 276 saptatikA prakaraNa chaha prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaya, jugupsA aura
vedaka samyaktva ko eka sabamilAne para bhI nau prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai
aura vikalpa nahIM hone se bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI prApta hotI hai  /  cauthe
guNasthAna meM kula milAkara ATha caubIsI hotI haiN| _'dese paMcAi
a8va'-dezavirata guNasthAna meM pAMca se lekara ATha prakRti paryanta cAra
udayasthAna hai.-pAMca, chaha, sAta aura ATha prakRtika  /  pA~ca prakRtika
udayasthAna meM pAMca prakRtiyA~ isa prakAra haiM-pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, sajvalana
krodhAdi me se anyatama do krodhAdi, tIna vedoM meM se koI eka veda, do yugaloM
meM se koI eka yugala  /  yahAM bhaGgoM kI eka caubIsI hotI hai  /  chaha
prakRtika udayasthAna ukta pA~ca prakRtiyoM meM bhaya yA jugupsA yA vedaka
samyaktva meM se kisI eka ko milAne se banatA hai| isa sthAna meM prakRtiyoM ke
tIna vikalpa. hone se tIna caubIsI hotI haiN| sAta prakRtika udayasthAna ke liye
pAMca prakRtiyoM ke sAtha bhaya, jugupsA yA bhaya, vedaka samyaktva yA jugupsA,
vedaka samyaktva ko eka sAtha milAyA jAtA hai  /  yahA~ bhI tIna vikalpoM ke
kAraNa bhaGgoM kI tIna caubIsI jAnanA cAhiye  /  pUrvokta pA~ca prakRtiyoM ke
sAtha bhaya, jugupsA aura bedaka samyaktva ko yugapat milAne se ATha prakRtika
udayasthAna hotA hai  /  prakRtiyoM kA vikalpa na hone se bhaGgoM kI eka caubIsI
hotI hai| pAMcaveM dezavirata guNasthAna ke anantara chaThe, sAta pramattavirata
aura apramattavirata guNasthAnoM kA saMketa karane ke liye gAthA meM "virae
khaovasamie' pada diyA haijisakA artha kSAyopazamika virata hotA hai  /  kyoMki
kSAyopazamika virata, yaha saMjJA ina do guNasthAnoM kI hI hotI hai| isake Age
ke gRNasthAnoM ke jIvoM ko yA to upazamaka saMjJA dI jAtI hai yA kSapaka  /
upazamazreNi car3hane vAle ko upazamaka aura kSapaka zreNi car3hane vAle ko
kSapaka kahate haiM  /  ata:

Page #315 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma-nagyi  **277**  The verse instructs on the **udayasthanas**
(arising places) in the two **gunasthanas** (states of qualities) of
**pramatta** (distracted) and **aprammatta** (undistracted) **virata** (freed
from attachment) - "**Chauraai Satt**" (four to seven). This means that the
**udayasthanas** from the fourth to the seventh **prakriti** (nature) - four,
five, six, and seven **prakritis**.  For both these **gunasthanavi** (belonging
to the **gunasthanas**) beings, the **sanjwalan** (agitation) **chatuṣka**
(fourfold) consists of one of the four **kṣayās** (passions) like anger, one of
the three **vedas** (knowledge), and one of the two **yugalas** (pairs). This
constitutes the four **prakriti** **udayastana**. Here, there are twenty-four
**bhanga** (breaks).  When one of the **bhanga** like **bhaya** (fear),
**jugupsa** (aversion), or **vedaka samyaktv** (right knowledge) is added to the
four **prakritis**, it becomes the five **prakriti** **udayastana**. There are
three **vikalpa prakritis** (alternative natures), so there are three sets of
twenty-four **bhanga** here.  When **bhaya**, **jugupsa**, or **bhaya**,
**vedaka samyaktv**, or **jugupsa**, **vedaka samyaktv** are combined with the
four **prakritis**, it becomes the six **prakriti** **udayastana**. Here too,
there are three sets of twenty-four **bhanga**.  When **bhaya**, **jugupsa**,
and **vedaka samyaktv** are combined with the four **prakriti** **udayastana**,
it becomes the seven **prakriti** **udayastana**. Since there are no **vikalpa
prakritis** here, there is only one set of twenty-four **bhanga**.  In total,
there are eight sets of twenty-four **bhanga** each in the sixth and seventh
**gunasthanas**.  **In the eighth **apuurvakarana** (non-retrogression)
**gunastana**, there are three **udayasthanas** - four, five, and six
**prakritis**.  When one of the **kṣayās** from the **sanjwalan** **kṣaya**
**chatuṣka**, one of the three **vedas**, and one of the two **yugalas** are
combined, it becomes the four **prakriti** **udayastana** and there is one set
of twenty-four **bhanga**.  When one of **bhaya** or **jugupsa** is added to the
four **prakritis**, it becomes the five **prakriti** **udayastana**. Since there
are two **vikalpa prakritis** here, there are two sets of twenty-four
**bhanga**.  When **bhaya** and **jugupsa** are combined with the four
**prakritis**, it becomes the six **prakriti**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmanagya 277 pramatta aura apramatta virata ina do guNasthAnoM meM
udayasthAnoM ko batalAne ke liye gAthA meM nirdeza kiyA hai-'caurAI satta'  /
arthAt cAra se lekara sAta prakRti taka ke dAra udayasthAna -cAra pA~ca chaha
aura sAta prakRtika  /  ina donoM guNasthAnavI jIvoM ke saMjvalana catuSka meM
se krodhAdi koI eka, tIna vedoM meM se koI eka beda, do yugaloM meM se koI eka
yugala, yaha cAra prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| yahA~ bhaGgoM kI eka caubIsI
hotI hai| bhaya yA jugupsA yA vedaka samyaktva meM se kisI eka ko cAra prakRtika
meM milAne para pAMca prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  vikalpa prakRtiyAM tIna
haiM ata: yahA~ bhaGgoM kI tIna caubIsI banatI haiM  /  ukta cAra prakRtiyoM ke
sAtha bhaya, jugupsA athavA bhaya, vedaka samyaktva athavA jugupsA, vedaka
samyaktva ko eka sAtha milAne para chaha prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| yahA~
bhI bhaGgoM ko tIna caubIsI hotI hai  /  bhaya, jugupsA aura vedaka samyaktva,
ina tInoM prakRtiyoM ko cAra prakRtika udayasthAna meM milAne para sAta
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  yahA~ para vikalpa prakRtiyoM na hone se
bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI hotI hai| kula milAkara chaThe aura sAtaveM guNasthAna
meM se pratyeka meM bhaGgoM kI ATha-ATha caubIsI hotI haiN| _ AThaveM
apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM cAra, pA~ca aura chaha prakRtika, yaha tIna
udayasthAna haiN| saMjvalana kaSAya catuSka meM se koI eka kaSAya, tIna vedoM
meM se koI eka veda aura do yugaloM meM se koI eka yugala ke milAne se cAra
prakRtika udayasthAna banatA hai tathA bhaGgoM kI eka caubIsI hotI hai  /
bhaya, jugupsA meM se kisI eka ko ukta cAra prakRtiyoM meM milAne para pAMca
prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai| vikalpa prakRtiyA~ do hone se yahAM bhaGgoM kI
do caubIsI prApta hotI haiN| bhaya jugupsA ko yugapat cAra prakRtiyoM meM milAne
para chaha prakRtika

Page #316 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on Sapta-tika  One should know the **udayasthan** (arising place) and
there are twenty-four **bhangas** (breakings). In this way, in the eighth
**gunasthan** (stage of merit), there are four sets of twenty-four **bhangas**.
**278**  **7**  "**Anivritibare purna ikko va duve va**" - meaning, in the ninth
**anivrittikadar gunasthan**, there are two **prakritik** (natural) and one
**prakritik**. Here, in the **udayasthan** of two **prakritik**, there is the
arising of one **kashaya** (passion) from the four **kashaya** and one **veda**
(knowledge) from the three **vedas**. Here, multiplying the four **kashaya** by
the three **vedas**, we get twelve **bhangas**. After the **veda** is broken,
there is one **prakritik** **udayasthan**, which occurs at the time of four,
three, two, and one **prakritik** **bandha** (bond). That is, one should
understand that there are two **prakritik** **udayasthan** until the **sveda**
(knowledge) part and one **prakritik** in the **aved** (ignorance) part.
Although ten **bhangas** are mentioned, with four **prakritik** **bandha** in
one **prakritik** **udayasthan**, three **prakritik** **bandha** in three, two
**prakritik** **bandha** in two, and one **prakritik** **bandha** in one, here,
instead of considering the difference in **bandhastan** (place of bond), four
**bhangas** are intended in general.  In the tenth **sukshmasampray gunasthan**,
there is one **bhang** due to the arising of one subtle **lobha** (greed) -
"**Egan suhumararaago veei**". In this way, one should know that there are a
total of five **bhangas** in one **prakritik** **udayasthan**.  After the tenth
**gunasthan**, in the subsequent **gunasthan** like **upshantamoha** etc., there
is no arising of **mohaniyakarma** (karma that binds to the mind), so there is
not even one **bhang** in those **gunasthan** in relation to **uday** (arising).
In this way, according to the instructions of the verses, the **udayasthan** of
**mohaniyakarma** in the **gunasthan** and their **bhangas** have been stated,
and at the end of the verse, the evidence of the **bhangas** is to be known from
the previously mentioned...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa udayasthAna jAnanA cAhiye tathA bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI hotI
hai| isa prakAra AThave 'guNasthAna meM bhaMgoM kI cAra caubIsI hotI haiM  /
278 7 'aniyafbAre purNa ikko vA duve va' - arthAt nauveM anivRttikAdara
guNasthAna meM se do prakRtika aura eka prakRtika  /  yahA~ do prakRtika
udayasthAna meM saMjvalana kaSAya catuSka maiM se kisI eka kaSAya aura tIna
vedoM meM se kisI eka veda kA udaya hotA hai| yahAM tIna bedoM se saMjvalana
kaSAya catuSka ko guNita karane para 12 bhaMga prApta hote haiM  /  anantara
veda kA viccheda ho jAne para eka prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai, jo cAra, tIna,
do aura eka prakRtika baMdha ke samaya hotA hai  /  arthAt saveda bhAga taka do
prakRtika aura aveda bhAga meM eka prakRtika udayasthAna samajhanA cAhiye  /
yadyapi eka prakRtika udaya meM cAra prakRtika baMdha kI apekSA cAra, tIna
prakRtika baMdha kI apekSA tIna, do prakRtika baMdha kI apekSA do, aura eka
prakRtika baMdha kI apekSA eka, isa prakAra kula dasa bhaMga batalAye haiM kintu
yahA~ baMdhasthAnoM ke bheda kI apekSA na karake sAmAnya se kula cAra bhaMga
vivakSita haiM  /  dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM eka sUkSma lobha kA
udaya hone se vahA~ eka hI bhaMga hotA hai - egaM suhumarArAgo veei'  /  isa
prakAra eka prakRtika udayasthAna meM kula pA~ca bhaMga jAnanA cAhiye  /
dasaveM guNasthAna ke bAda Age ke upazAntamoha Adi guNasthAnoM meM mohanIyakarma
kA udaya na hone se una guNasthAnoM meM udaya kI apekSA eka bhI bhaMga nahIM
hotA hai  /  isa prakAra yahA~ gAthAoM ke nirdezAnusAra guNasthAnoM meM mohanIya
karma ke udayasthAnoM aura unake bhaMgoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai aura gAthA ke
aMta meM jo bhaMgoM kA pramANa pUrvoddiSTa kama se jAnane kA

Page #317 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixty Karmas Text ## 276  The indication given here means that just as the
destruction of the arising places of the Mohaniya Karma was explained earlier
while discussing the general arising places, the same should be understood here
as well. For clarity, the destruction of the arising places is indicated here
again. But this indication should not be understood as different from the
previous one.  Now, with respect to the Mithyatva-drishti and other Gunasthanas,
the number of destructions of the arising places from ten to one is explained:
**Ekk chhadekkarekarasev ekkarsev nav tinni. Aa charbees gaya bar duge panch
ekkammi ||46||**  **Word Meaning:**  * **Ekk** - One * **Chhadekkarekarasev** -
Six, eleven * **Ekkarsev** - Eleven * **Nav** - Nine * **Tinni** - Three *
**Aa** - This * **Charbees gaya** - Twenty-four * **Bar** - Twelve * **Duge** -
In the arising of two * **Panch** - Five * **Ekkammi** - In the arising of one
**Meaning of the Verse:**  Except for the arising places of two and one, there
are one, six, eleven, eleven, nine, and three twenty-fours of destruction in the
arising places of ten and so on. And there are twelve destructions in the
arising of two and five destructions in the arising of one.  **Special
Meaning:**  The nine arising places of Mohaniya Karma have been explained
earlier. In this verse, instead of mentioning the arising place of the natural
number, the number of destructions of that place is mentioned. It should be
understood in this order:  * In the tenth natural arising place, there are
twenty-four destructions. * In the ninth natural arising place, there are six
twenty-fours of destructions. * In the eighth natural arising place, there are
eleven twenty-fours of destructions. * In the seventh natural arising place,
there are eleven twenty-fours of destructions. * In the sixth natural arising
place, there are eleven twenty-fours of destructions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTa karma grantha 276 saMketa diyA hai so usakA tAtparya yaha hai ki jisa
prakAra pahale sAmAnya se mohanIyakarma ke udayasthAnoM kA kathana karate samaya
bhaMga batalA Aye haiM, usI prakAra yahA~ bhI unakA pramANa samajha lenA cAhiye
/  spaSTatA ke liye puna: yahAM bhI udayasthAnoM kA nirdeza karate samaya
bhaMgoM kA saMketa diyA hai| lekina isa nirdeza meM pUrvollekha se kisI prakAra
kA aMtara nahIM samajhanA cAhiye  /  aba mithyAdRSTi Adi guNasthAnoM kI apekSA
dasa se lekara eka paryanta udayasthAnoM ke bhaMgoM kI saMkhyA batalAte haiM
ekka chaDekkArekAraseva ekkAraseva nava tinni  /  ee carabIsagayA bAra duge
paMca ekkammi ||46  //  zabdArtha -ekka--eka chaDekAra chaha, gyAraha
ikkAraseva- gyAraha, nava-no, tinni tIna, ee - yaha bacavIsa gayA-- caubIsI
maMga, bAra-bAraha maMga, duge- do ke udaya meM paMca-pAMca ekkasi - eka ke
udaya meM  /  A gAthArtha - do aura eka udayasthAnoM ko chor3akara dasa Adi
udayasthAnoM meM anukrama se eka. chaha gyAraha, gyAraha nau aura tIna caubIsI
bhaMga hote haiM tathA do ke udaya meM bAraha aura eka ke udaya meM pA~ca bhaMga
hote haiM  /  vizeSArtha - mohanIyakarma ke nau udayasthAnoM ko pahale batalAyA
jA cukA hai| isa gAthA meM prakRti saMkhyA ke udayasthAna kA ullekha na karake
usa sthAna ke bhaMgoM kI saMkhyA ko batalAyA hai| vaha anukrama se isa prakAra
samajhanA cAhiye ki dasa prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI, nau
prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM kI chaha caubIsI, ATha prakRtika udayasthAna
meM gyAraha caubIsI, sAta prakRtika udayasthAna meM gyAraha caubIsI, chaha
prakRtika udayasthAna meM gyAraha 2

Page #318 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 280:   There are 9 *Chaubisi* (sets of 24) in the five-natured
*Udayasthan* (state of arising), 3 *Chaubisi* in the four-natured *Udayasthan*,
12 *Bhang* (divisions) in the two-natured *Udayasthan*, and 5 *Bhang* in the
one-natured *Udayasthan*. Their detailed explanation is given below.  The ten-
natured *Udayasthan* is one, hence it has one *Chaubisi* of *Bhang*. This
*Udayasthan* is found in the *Mithyatva* (false belief) *Gunasthan* (state of
qualities).  The nine-natured *Udayasthan* has six *Chaubisi* of *Bhang* because
this *Udayasthan* is found in the *Mithyatva*, *Sasadan*, *Mishra*, and *Avirat
Samyagdristi* *Gunasthan* (states of qualities). In the *Priyatva* *Gunasthan*,
there are three *Prakriti Vikalp* (nature variations), hence it has three
*Chaubisi* of *Bhang*. In the remaining three *Gunasthan*, there is no *Prakriti
Vikalp*, hence each has one *Chaubisi* of *Bhang*.  The eight-natured
*Udayasthan* has eleven *Chaubisi* of *Bhang*. This eight-natured *Udayasthan*
exists from the first to the fifth *Gunasthan* and is formed by three variations
of *Prakriti* in *Mithyatva* and *Avirat Samyagdristi* *Gunasthan*, two
variations in *Sasadan* and *Mishra*, and no variation in *Deshavirat*
*Gunasthan*. Therefore, there are three *Chaubisi* of *Bhang* in *Mithyatva* and
*Avirat*, two in *Sasadan* and *Mishra*, and one in *Deshavirat*. The total is
3+3+2+2+1=11.  Similarly, the seven-natured *Udayasthan* also has eleven
*Chaubisi* of *Bhang*. This *Udayasthan* is found from the first to the seventh
*Gunasthan*. In the fourth and fifth *Gunasthan*, there are three variations of
*Prakriti*, hence it is formed in three ways. Therefore, each of these two
*Gunasthan* has three *Chaubisi* of *Bhang*. In the remaining five *Gunasthan*
(first, second, third, sixth, and seventh), there is no *Prakriti Vikalp*, hence
each has one *Chaubisi* of *Bhang*. The total is eleven.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 280 saptatikA prakaraNa caubIsI, pA~ca prakRtika udayasthAna meM nau caubIsI,
cAra prakRtika udayasthAna meM tIna caubIsI hotI haiM tathA do prakRtika
udayasthAna ke bAraha bhaMga evaM eka prakRtika udasthAna ke pAMca bhaMga haiN|
inakA vizeSa vivecana nIce kiyA jAtA hai| _ dasa prakRtika udayasthAna eka hai
ataH usameM bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI kahI hai  /  yaha udayasthAna mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM pAyA jAtA hai  /  nau prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM kI chaha
caubIsI hotI haiM kyoMki yaha udayasthAna mithyAtva, sAsAdana, mizra aura
avirata samyagdRSTi ina mAra guNasthAnoM meM pAyA jAtA hai aura priyAtva
guNasthAna meM prakRtivikalpa tIna hone se tIna prakAra se hotA hai, ata: vahA~
bhaMgoM kI tIna caubIsI aura zeSa tIna guNasthAnoM meM prakRtivikalpa na hone se
pratyeka meM bhaMgoM kI eka caubIsI hotI hai| ATha prakRtika udayasthAna meM
bhaMgoM kI gyAraha caubIsI hotI haiM  /  yaha ATha prakRtika udayasthAna pahale
se sekara pAMcaveM guNasthAna taka hotA hai aura mithyAtva va avirata
samyagdRSTi guNasthAnoM meM prakRtiyoM ke sIna-tIna vikalpoM se tathA sAsAdana
va mizra meM do-do vikalpoM se banatA hai aura dezavirata guNasthAna meM
prakRtiyoM kA vikalpa nahIM hai  /  ataH mithyAtva aura avirata meM tIna-tIna,
sAsAdana aura mizra meM do-do aura dezavirata meM eka, bhaMgoM kI caubIsI hotI
hai| inakA kula jor3a 3+3+2+2 +1=11 hotA hai  /  isI prakAra sAta prakRtika
udayasthAna meM bhI bhaMgoM kI gyAraha caubIsI haiM  /  yaha udayasthAna pahale
se sAtaveM guNasthAna taka pAyA jAtA hai tathA cauthe aura pAMcaveM guNasthAna
meM prakRtiyoM ke tIna-tIna vikalpa hone se tIna prakAra se banatA hai| ata: ina
do guNasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM tIna-tIna aura zeSa pahale, dUsare, tIsare,
chaThe aura sAtaveM, ina pAMca guNasthAnoM meM prakRtivikalpa nahIM hone se
aMgoM kI eka-eka caubIsI hotI hai jinakA kula jor3a gyAraha hai|

Page #319 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Eleven Twenty-Fours of the Six Natural Arising Places  The eleven
twenty-fours of the six natural arising places are as follows: one each in the
uninterrupted right faith and the non-return, and three each in the worldly-
unbound, the heedless unbound, and the heedful unbound, totaling eleven.  ## The
Nine Twenty-Fours of the Five Natural Arising Places  There are nine twenty-
fours in the five natural arising places. Of these, one is in the worldly-
unbound, three each in the heedless and heedful unbound qualities, and two in
the non-return.  ## The Three Twenty-Fours of the Four Natural Arising Places
In the four natural arising places, there is one twenty-four each in the
heedless unbound, the heedful unbound, and the non-return qualities, totaling
three twenty-fours.  ## The Purity of the Twenty-Fours  All these have purity,
and there are twelve in the two natural arising places and five in the one
natural arising place - "Twelve are the obstacles, five are the single" - the
explanation of which has been given in the context of the previous verse.  ##
The Total Number of Twenty-Fours and Obstacles  Thus, from ten to one natural
arising places, a total of 52 twenty-fours and 17 obstacles are obtained. Their
discussion in relation to the qualities is as follows in the inner commentary
verse:  "Eight, four, four, eight, eight, eight, eight, and four twenty-fours
are there, and twelve obstacles and five are in the non-return."  ## The Number
of Arising Choices  From the wrong view to the non-return, there are eight,
four, four, eight, eight, eight, eight, and four twenty-fours in the eight
qualities, and twelve obstacles and five in the non-return quality.  Thus, with
the obtaining of the obstacles, there are a total of 1265 arising choices. They
should be understood as follows: the total number of 52 twenty-fours is 5248 (52
x 24 = 1248), and adding the 17 obstacles of the non-return quality to this, the
number becomes 1248 + 17 = 1265. And all the steps from ten to four natural
arising places are 352, so multiplying them by 24 gives 8448.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 i : baSTha karmagrantha 281 chaha prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhI bhaMgoM kI
gyAraha caubIsI isa prakAra hai- avirata samyagdRSTi aura apUrvakaraNa meM eka-
eka tathA dezavirata, pramattavirata, apramattavirata meM tIna-tIna inakA jor3a
kula gyAraha hotA hai  /  pA~ca prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhaMgoM kI no caubIsI
haiN| unameM se dezabirata meM eka, pramatta aura apramatta virata guNasthAnoM
meM se pratyeka meM tIna-tIna aura apUrvakaraNa meM do caubIsI hotI haiN| cAra
prakRtika udayasthAna meM pramattavirata, apramattavirata aura apUrvakaraNa
guNasthAna meM bhaMgoM kI eka-eka caubIsI hone se kula tIna caubIsI hotI haiM  /
ina saboM kI zuci hotI haiM tathA do prakRtika udayasthAna ke bAraha aura eka
prakRtika udayasthAna ke pA~ca bhaMga haiM-- 'bAra durge paMca ekkammi' jinakA
spaSTIkaraNa pUrva gAthA ke saMdarbha meM kiyA jA cukA hai| isa prakAra dasa se
lekara eka prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM kula milAkara 52 caubIsI aura 17 bhaMga
prApta hote haiN| jinakA guNasthAnoM kI apekSA antarbhASya gAthA meM nimna
prakAra se vivecana kiyA gayA haiaTTaga ca ca cauraTThagA ya cauro ya hoMti
ghaDavIsA  /  apuSavaMtA vArasa paNa ca aniyaTTe  //  micchA arthAt mithyAdRSTi
se lekara apUrvakaraNa taka ATha guNasthAnoM meM bhaMgoM kI krama se ATha, cAra,
cAra, ATha, ATha ATha, ATha, aura cAra cauvIsI hotI haiM tathA anivRttibAdara
guNasthAna meM bAraha aura pA~ca bhaMga hote haiM  /  isa prakAra bhaMgoM ke
prApta hone para kula milAkara 1265 udaya vikalpa hote haiM, ve isa prakAra
samajhanA cAhiye ki 52 caubIsiyoM kI kula saMkhyA 5248 (52 x 24 = 1248 ) aura
isameM anivRttibAdara guNasthAna ke 17 maMgoM ko milA dene para 1248 + 17= 1265
saMkhyA hotI hai tathA 10 se lekara 4 prakRtika udayasthAnoM taka ke saba pada
352 hote haiM, ata: inheM 24 se guNita karane dene para 8448 prApta hote

Page #320 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
282 Saptativika Prakarana  There are 2412 = 24 natural manifestation stations
and 5 modes of a single natural manifestation station. Adding these, the total
number of modes becomes 26. When these are added to the 8477 substantives, the
total number of substantives is obtained. All the transmigratory beings are
deluded by them, as it is said:  "The transmigratory beings are deluded by the
1265 modes of natural manifestation and 8477 substantives."  The description of
the modes of natural manifestation and substantives should be known with
reference to the stages of spiritual development as follows:  S.No. Natural
Manifestation Station Stage of Spiritual Development Modes Multiplier Product
(Substantives) Multiplier (Substantives) 1632 1968 1440 1248 Mithyatva 7,8,9,10
24 685 Sāsādana 7,8,9,10 4 24 32 Avirati 6,7,8,9 24 Deśavirati 5,6,7,8 4 24
Pramattavirata 4,5,6,7 24 44 Apramattavirata 8 24 Anupūrvakaran̩a 4,5,6,7 4
Anirvṛtti 2 16 Modes of Sūkṣma  2414 1 The explanation of the 6 substantives
(qualities) in the initial stages of spiritual development is provided in the
following verses.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 282 saptatikA prakaraNa haiM jo padavRnda mahAse haiN| sara meM kI prakRtika
udayasthAga ke 2412 =24 aura eka prakRtika udayasthAna ke 5 bhaMga isa prakAra
26 maMgoM ko aura milA dene para padavRndoM kI kula saMkhyA 8477 prApta hotI hai
/  jisase saba saMsArI jIva mohita ho rahe haiM kahA bhI hai pArasapagasaDhasayA
upaviga phehi mohipA joyA  /  ghulasoIsattattaripaviSasahi vineyA  /  /  arthAta
ye saMsArI jIva 1265 udayavikalpoM aura 8477 padavRndoM se mohita ho rahe haiN|
guNasthAnoM kI apekSA udayavikalpoM aura padavRndoM kA vivaraNa isa prakAra
jAnanA cAhiye- krama saM0 udayasthAna guNasthAna _ bhaMga guNanaphala guNya
(padaH)| guNakAra (padavRnda) 1632 1968 1440 1248 mithyAtva 7,8,9,108 caubIsI|
685 | sAsAdana 7,8,9,10|| 4 caubIsI| 32 mitha 7,8, 6 4 caubIsI avirata' |
6,7,8,9, 8 caubIsI dezavirata | 5,6,7,8 | 4 caudhosI pramattavirata ] 4,5,67 | 8
caubIsI  /  44 apramattavika | 8 caubIsI apUrvakaraNa 4,5,6,7 | 4 caubIsI & |
anivRtti. | 2, 1 16 bhaMga sUkSma 2414 1 mithyAtva Abi guNasthAnoM meM 6 Adi
pada (guNya) hone kA spaSTIkaraNa Age kI gAthAoM meM kiyA jA rahA hai|

Page #321 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
On the other hand, 283 After stating the arising places of the mohaniya karma
and their destructions in relation to the guna sthana, now in the next verse, we
point out the destructions in relation to yoga, upayoga, and leshya etc.
Destruction in Yoga, Upayoga and Leshya Joga-upayoga-leshya-a-hi-hi-guna-a-ha-
va-ti-kaya-sva. Je-jasth-guna-ha-ne-ha-va-ti-te-tasy-guna-kara. ||47|| Sampay-
joga-upayoga-leshya-a-hi-hi-yoga, upayoga and leshya etc., guna-a-guna, ha-ti-
become, ka-pa-va-karna-chahiye, je-jo-moga-adi, jasth-guna-ta-ne-in which guna
sthana, ha-va-ti-are, te-utane, tasy-in that, guna-kara-guna-kara number. Verse
meaning- The aforementioned arising destructions should be multiplied by yoga,
upayoga and leshya etc. For this, in whichever guna sthana there are as many
yoga etc., there is that many guna-kara number. Special meaning- The arising
alternatives and pada-vrinda of mohaniya karma in the guna sthana have been
stated earlier. Now in this verse, we state the number of yoga, upayoga and
leshya in relation to them, how many they are. 1 Compare (a) and ogu-va-o-ma-
leshya-bheya-o-bah-bheya. Ja-jass-ban-mi-u-guna-san-kha-sa-tan-mi-guna-garo.
-Panchasangraha Sapta-tika Ga. 117 (b) Udaya-ttha-nam-padhi-sagas-sag-u-bajoga-
joga-a-di-hi. Guna-yipta-mela-vide-pada-san-kha-parisan-kha-ya. -Gokarmakara Ga.
490

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 para pAya 283 isa prakAra guNasthAnoM kI apekSA mohanIyakarma ke udayasthAnoM
va unake bhaGgoM kA kathana karane ke bAda aba Age kI gAthA meM upayoga Adi kI
apekSA bhaGgoM kA nirdeza karate haiMyoga, upayoga aura lezyAoM meM bhaMga
jogovaogalesAiehiM guNiyA' havaMti kAyasvA  /  je jastha guNahANe havaM ti te
tasya guNakArA  // 47 //  zampAyajogoSaogalesAiehi-yoga, upayoga aura lezyAdika
se, guNiyA-guNA, hati-hote haiM, kApavA karanA cAhiye, je-jo mogAdi, jastha
guNaTANe-jisa guNasthAna meM, havaMti-hote hai, te--utane, tastha--usameM,
guNakArA-guNakAra saMkhyA  /  gAthArtha-pUrvokta udayabhaGgoM ko, yoga, upayoga
aura lezyA Adi se guNA karanA caahiye| isake liye jisa guNasthAna meM jitane
yogAdi hoM vahA~ utane guNakAra saMkhyA hotI hai| vizeSArtha-guNasthAna meM
mohanIyakarma ke udayavikalpoM aura padavRndoM kA nirdeza pUrva meM kiyA jA cukA
hai| aba isa gAthA meM yoga, upayoga aura lezyAoM kI apekSA unakI saMkhyA kA
kathana karate haiM ki vaha saMkhyA kitanI-kitanI hotI hai| 1 tulanA kIjiye(ka)
evaM oguvaomA lesAI bheya o bahabheyA  /  jA jassa baMmi u guNe saMkhA sA taMmi
guNagAro  /  -paMcasaMgraha saptatikA gA0 117 (kha) udayaTThANaM paDhi
sagasagaubajogajogaAdIhi  /  guNa yiptA mela vide padasaMkhA parisaMkhA ya  /
-gokarmakAra gA0 490

Page #322 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 284: The Seven Tika  **Regarding the number of Udayavikalpas and
Padavrindas in relation to Yoga, Upayoga, and Leshya in the Gunasthanas:**  A
general rule is that the number of Udayavikalpas and Padavrindas in each
Gunasthana is obtained by multiplying the number of Yoga, Upayoga, and Leshya in
that Gunasthana. Therefore, it is essential to know the number of Yoga, Upayoga,
and Leshya in each Gunasthana. However, it is impossible to state them all at
once, so we will consider them sequentially in relation to Yoga, Upayoga, and
Leshya.  **Regarding the Bhangas in relation to Yoga:**  In the Mithyatva
Gunasthana, there are 13 Yogas and 8 Chaubisi of Bhangas. Out of these, there
are 8 Chaubisi of Bhangas in each of the four Manoyoga, four Vachanayoga,
Audarik Kayayoga, and Vaikriya Kayayoga, totaling 80 Chaubisi (10 x 8). However,
in the three Yogas - Audarik Mishra Kayayoga, Vaiyamishra Kayayoga, and Karman
Kayayoga - there are four Chaubisi each, including the Uday of Anantanubandhi.
This is because when the Anantanubandhi Chatushk is disjoined, the Jiva goes to
the Mithyatva Gunasthana, and death does not occur until the Uday of
Anantanubandhi. Therefore, in these three Yogas, four Chaubisi without the Uday
of Anantanubandhi are not possible.  **Specific Explanation:**  A Jiva who has
disjoined the Anantanubandhi, upon attaining Mithyatva, experiences the Uday of
Anantanubandhi after one Avli Kala. Such a Jiva dies only when the Uday of
Anantanubandhi occurs, not before. Therefore, the four Chaubisi without the Uday
of Anantanubandhi are not found in these three Yogas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 284 saptatikA prakaraNa guNasthAnoM meM yoga Adi kI apekSA udayavikalpoM aura
padavRndoM kI saMkhyA jAnane ke sambandha meM sAmAnya niyama yaha hai ki jisa
guNasthAna meM yogAdika kI jitanI saMkhyA hai usameM usa guNasthAna ke
udayavikalpa aura padavRndoM ko guNita kara dene para yogAdi kI apekSA pratyeka
guNasthAna meM udayavikalpa aura padavRnda kI saMkhyA jJAta ho jAtI hai  /  ataH
yaha jAnanA jarUrI hai ki kisa guNasthAna meM kitane yoga Adi haiN| parantu
inakA eka sAtha kathana karanA azakya hone se kramazaH yoga, upayoga aura lezyA
kI apekSA vicAra karate haiN| _yoga kI apekSA bhaMgoM kA vicAra isa prakAra hai-
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 13 yoga aura bhaMgoM kI ATha caubIsI hotI haiN| inameM
se cAra manoyoga, cAra vacanayoga, audArika aura vaikriya kAyayoga ina dasa
yogoM meM se pratyeka meM bhaMgoM kI ATha-ATha caubIsI hotI haiM, jisase 10 ko 8
se guNita kara dene para 80 cautrIsI huI  /  kintu audArika mizra kAyayoga,
vaiyamizra kAyayoga aura kArmaNa kAyayoga ina tIna yogoM meM se pratyeka meM
anantAnubandhI ke udaya sahita vAlI cAra-cAra caubIsI hotI haiN| isakA kAraNa
yaha hai ki anantAnu. baMdhI catuSka kI visaMyojanA karane para jIva mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM jAtA hai, usako jaba taka anantAnubaMdhI kA udaya nahIM hotA
tatra taka maraNa nahIM hotA  /  ataH ina tIna yogoM meM anantAnubandhI ke udaya
se rahita cAra caubIsI sambhava nahIM haiM  /  vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra
hai ki jisane anantAnubaMdhI kI visaMyojanA kI hai, aisA jIva jaba mithyAtva ko
prApta hotA hai taba usake anantAnubaMdhI kA udaya ekA AvalI kAla ke bAda hotA
hai, aise jIva kA anantAnubandhI kA udaya hone para hI maraNa hotA hai, pahale
nhiiN| jisase ukta tInoM yogoM meM anantAnubandhI ke udaya se rahita cAra
caubIsI nahIM pAI jAtI haiN|

Page #323 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Text on Karma Granth  **285** Therefore, in these three yogas, there are a
total of twelve Chaubisi of bhangas. Adding these to the previously mentioned 80
Chaubisi (80+12-12), the total becomes 62 Chaubisi. Multiplying this by 54, the
total becomes 2208.  In the second Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 13 yogas, and
each yoga has four Chaubisi, making a total of 52 Chaubisi of bhangas. However,
in Sasadan Gunasthan, Napunsakaved does not arise. Therefore, there are 48
Chaubisi for twelve yogas, and four Shodashak for Vaikriyamishra Kayayoga.
Multiplying 48 by 24, we get 1152 bhangas. Adding 64 bhangas of four Shodashak
to this number, the total bhangas in Sasadan Gunasthan become 1216.  In
Samyagmithyadristi Gunasthan, there are four Manoyoga, four Vachanayoga, and two
Kayayoga (Audarik and Vaikriya), making a total of ten yogas. Each yoga has four
Chaubisi of bhangas. Therefore, multiplying 10 by four Chaubisi, we get 2444 =
66410 = 660 total bhangas.  In Avirat Samyagdristi Gunasthan, there should be 13
yogas, and each yoga should have eight Chaubisi of bhangas. However, there is a
rule that in the fourth Gunasthan, Vaikriyamishra Kayayoga and Karman Kayayoga
do not have Strived. This is because Avirat Samyagdristi Jiva does not get
reborn in Strivedis after death. Therefore, instead of eight Chaubisi of bhangas
in these two yogas, eight Shodashak are obtained. Explaining this reason,
Acharya Malayagiri said: "Strivedi Samyaishti Jiva is not Vaikriyamishra
Kayayogi or Karman Kayayogi." This statement is made from the perspective of
abundance. Perhaps, even in these...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pATha karmagrantha 285 isIlie ina tIna yogoM meM bhaMgoM kI kula bAraha caubIsI
mAnI haiN| inako pUrvokta 80 caubIsI meM milA dene para (80+12-12) kula' 62
caubIsI hotI hai aura inake kula mA 54 guNA karale para 2208 hote haiN| dUsare
sAsAdana guNasthAna meM bhI yoga 13 hote haiM aura pratyeka yoga kI cAra-cAra
caubIsI hone se kula bhaMgoM kI 52 caubIsI honI cAhie thI kintu sAsAdana
guNasthAna meM napuMsakaveda kA udaya nahIM hotA hai, ata: bAraha yogoM kI to 48
caubIsI huI aura vaikriyamizra kAyayoga ke 4 SoDazava hue| isa prakAra 48 ko 24
se guNA karane para 1152 bhaMga hue tathA isa saMkhyA meM cAra SoDakaza ke 64
bhaMga milA dene para sAsAdana guNasthAna meM saba bhaMga 1216 hote haiM  /
samyagamithyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM cAra manoyoga, cAra vacanayoga aura audArika
va vaikriya ye do kAyayoga kula dasa yoga haiM aura pratyeka yoga meM bhaMgoM kI
4 caubIsI  /  ataH 10 ko cAra caubIsiyoM se guNA kArane para 2444 = 66 4 10 =
660 kula bhaMga hote haiM  /  avirata samyagdRSTi muNasthAna meM 13 yoga aura
pratyeka yoga meM bhaMgoM kI 8 caubIsI honI cAhiye thIM  /  kintu aisA niyama
hai ki cauthe guNasthAna ke baiMkriyamizra kAyayoga aura kArmaNa kAyayoga meM
strIveda nahIM hotA hai, kyoMki avirata samyagdRSTi jIva marakara strI vediyoM
meM utpanna nahIM hotA hai  /  isalie ina do yogoM meM bhaMgoM kI 8 caubIsI
prApta na hokara 8 SoDazaka prApta hote haiM  /  isake kAraNa ko spaSTa karate
hue AcArya malayagiri ne kahA hai ki-strIvedI samyAiSTi jIva vaikriyamidha
kAyayogI aura kArmaNa kAyayogI nahIM hotA hai| yaha kathana bahulatA kI apekSA
se kiyA gayA hai, vaise kadAcita inameM bhI

Page #324 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 72  The production of Right-Faithful souls is seen with female-bodied
beings. This is also clarified in the Bruṇi.  **Oh, Hariyavi!**  That is to say,
perhaps a Right-Faithful soul is born even among female-bodied beings. And in
the fourth Gunasthāna, the Audārika-miśra Kāyayoga, there is no female-bodied or
neuter-bodied being. Because female-bodied and neuter-bodied beings do not
continuously produce Right-Faithful souls among the animals and humans,
therefore, in the Audārika-miśra Kāyayoga, they do not obtain the twenty-four
Bhanga, but obtain eight Ashṭaka. A female-bodied or neuter-bodied Right-
Faithful soul is not an Audārika-miśra Kāyayogi. This should be understood from
the perspective of abundance.  Thus, in the Avirata Samyagdṛṣṭi Gunasthāna,
there are eighty twenty-fours of ten Yogas, the Vaikriya-miśra Kāyayoga and the
Kārmeṇa Kāyayoga, each having eight sixteen-fold divisions, and the Audārika-
miśra Kāyayoga having eight Ashṭaka. Their Bhanga are 80 x 24 = 1620 and 16 x 8
= 128, again 16 x 8 = 128 and 8 x 8 = 64. Their total sum is...  1 (a) These
Avirata Samyagdṛṣṭi and Kriya-miśra Kārmeṇa Kāyayoga, each having eight Ashṭaka,
in these Udayasthāna Vikalpa, the female-bodied being is not found. In the
Vaikriya Kāyayogi, among the female-bodied beings, there is no production of
Avirata Samyagdṛṣṭi. This is said based on the prevalence, otherwise, perhaps,
even among the female-bodied beings, there is such a birth. - Sapttatika
Prakaraṇa Tīkā, p. 217  (b) In the Digambara tradition, there is only one
opinion that a Right-Faithful soul does not arise after death among female-
bodied beings.  2 In the Avirata Samyagdṛṣṭi, the Audārika-miśra Kāyayoga, these
eight-fold Udayasthāna Vikalpa are obtained with the Vedas, not with the female-
bodied or neuter-bodied Vedas. Among the animals and humans, there is no
production of Avirata Samyagdṛṣṭi among the female-bodied and neuter-bodied
beings. This is said based on the abundance. - Sapttatika Prakaraṇa Tīkā, p. 217

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 286 saptatikA prakaraNa strIveda ke sAtha samyagdRSTiyoM kA utpAda dekhA jAtA
hai  /  isI bAta ko brUNi meM bhI spaSTa kiyA hai vAha ho hariyavi  /  arthAt --
kadAcit samyagdRSTi jIva strIvediyoM meM bhI utpanna hotA hai  /  tathA cauthe
guNasthAna ke audArikamizra kAyayoga meM strIveda aura napuMsaka veda nahIM hotA
hai| kyoMki strIvedI aura napuMsakavedI tithaMca aura manuSyoM meM avirata
samyagdRSTi jIva utpanna nahIM hote haiM, ata: audArika mizra kAyayoga meM
bhaMgoM kI caubIsI prApta na hokara ATha aSTaka prApta hote haiN| strIvedI aura
napuMsakavedI samyagdRSTi jIva audArikamizra kAyayogI nahIM hotA hai| yaha
bahulatA kI apekSA se samajhanA cAhie | isa prakAra avirata samyagdRSTi
guNasthAna meM dasa yogoM kI 80 cobIsI, vaikriyamizra kAyayoga aura kArmeNa
kAyayoga, ina donoM meM pratyeka ke ATha-ATha SoDazaka aura audArika mizra
kAyayoga ke ATha aSTaka hote haiN| jinake bhaMga 80 X 24 = 1620 tathA 16x8= 128
puna: 168 = 128 aura 8 8 64 hote haiM, inakA kula jor3a -.. 1 (ka) ye
cAviratasamyagdRSTe va kriyamizra kArmaNakAyayoge ca pratyeka maSTA - vaSTI
udayasthAnavikalpA eSu strIvedo na labhyate, vaikriya kAyayogiSu strIvediSu
madhye'viratasamyakRSTe rutpAdAbhAvat  /  etacca prAyovRttimAzrityoktam, anyathA
kadAcit strIbediSvapi madhye tadutyAdo bhavati  /  saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0
217 (kha) digambara paramparA meM yahI eka mata milatA hai ki strIvediyoM meM
samyagdRSTi jIva marakara utpanna nahIM hotA hai  /  2 avirata samyagdaSTe
raudArika mizrakAmayoge ye'STAdayasthAna vikalpAste vedasahitA evaM prApyante na
strIveda napuMsaka vedasahitAH tiryag-manuSyeSu strIvedanapuMsakavediSu
madhye'virata samyagdRSTe rutpAdAbhAvat etacca prAcuryamAtrityoktam  /  -
saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 217 *

Page #325 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth ### 287  1120 + 128 + 128 = 642240.  Compared to Shri G,
2240 bhang are attained in the fourth Avirat Samyagdrishti Gunasthan.  In the
fifth Deshaviriti Gunasthan, there are 11 yogas without Audarik Mishra, Karman
Kayayog, and Aharakdvik. Here, there are 24 possibilities of bhang in each yoga,
so the total bhang here is (114888 x 242112) 2112.  In the sixth Pramattasanyat
Gunasthan, there are 13 yogas without Audarik Mishra and Karman Kayayog, and
there should be 24 possibilities of bhang in each yoga. However, there is a rule
that Aharak Kayayog and Aharakmitra Kayayog do not occur in Strived. This is
because Aharak Samudghāt is only performed by the fourteen Purvadhari. However,
the knowledge of the fourteen Purvo of women is not found. Explaining the reason
for this, it is also said that:  "**Tuchcha Garavbahula Chalidia Bukla V Ghiiye.
Iy Bhaise Samapana Bhumaashaao Y No Yogam.**"  Meaning, Strivedi Jivas are
insignificant, full of gravity, have fickle senses and weak intellect.
Therefore, they are not capable of much study and they do not have knowledge of
the Drishtivad Anga.  Therefore, in eleven yogas, there are eight sets of 24
bhang, but in Aharak and Aharak Mishra Kayayog, there are eight sets of 16
bhang. Thus, here there are 11 x 6424 = 2112 and 1648 x 126 and 1648 = 128
bhang. The sum of all these is 2112 + 128128 = 2368. Therefore, the total bhang
in Pramattasanyat Gunasthan is 2368.  1. Brihatkalpa Bhashya Ga. 146

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . SaSTha karmagrantha 287 1120+128+128 642240 hai  /  zrIga ko apekSA 2240
bhaMga cauthe avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM prApta hote haiN| pAMcaveM
dezaviirati guNasthAna meM audArikamizra, kArmaNa kAyayoga aura AhArakadvika ke
binA 11 yoga hote haiN| yahA~ pratyeka yoga meM bhaMgoM kI caubIsI saMbhava haiM
ataH yahA~ kula bhaMga (114888 X 242112) 2112 hote haiN| chaThe pramattasaMyata
guNarathAna meM audArikamizra aura kArmaNa kAyayoga ke binA 13 yoga aura
pratyeka yoga meM bhaMgoM kI caubIsI honI caahie| kintu aisA niyama hai ki
strIveda meM AhAraka kAyayoga aura AhArakamitra kAyayoga nahIM hotA hai| kyoMki
AhAraka samudghAta caudaha pUrvadhArI hI karate haiM  /  kintu striyoM ke
caudaha pUrvo kA jJAna nahIM pAyA jAtA hai  /  isake kAraNa ko spaSTa karate hue
batAyA bhI hai ki- I tucchA gAravabahulA calidiyA bukalA va ghIIe  /  iya
bhaisesamapaNA bhUmASAo ya no yogaM  /  /  " arthAt strIdedI jIva tuccha,
gAravabahula, caMcala indriya aura buddhi se durbala hote haiM  /  ata: ve
bahuta adhyayana karane meM samartha nahIM haiM aura unameM dRSTivAda aMga kA
bhI jJAna nahIM pAyA jAtA hai  /  isaliye gyAraha yogoM meM to bhaMgoM kI ATha-
ATha caubIsI prApta hotI haiM kintu AhAraka aura AhArakamizra kAyayogoM meM
bhaMgoM ke ATha-ATha SoDazaka prApta hote haiM  /  isa prakAra yahA~ 11x6 424 =
2112 tathA 1648 126 aura 1648 = 128 bhaMga haiM  /  ina sabakA jor3a 2112+128128
- 2368 hotA hai  /  ataH pramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM kula bhaMga 2368 hote
haiM  /  1 bRhatkalpa bhASya gA0 146

Page #326 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seventieth  A being who attains the **Vairyaka Kayayoga**
and **Aharaka Kayayoga** in the **Pramatta-Samyata Gunasthan** becomes
**A-Pramatta-Samyata**. While in this **A-Pramatta-Samyata** state, these two
yogas remain. Such an **A-Pramatta-Samyata** being does not initiate
**Vairyaka** and **Aharaka** **Samudghata**, therefore, **Vairyaka-Mishra
Kayayoga** and **Aharaka-Mishra Kayayoga** are not considered in this
**Gunasthan**. Due to this, in the seventh **A-Pramatta-Samyata Gunasthan**,
there are eleven yogas: four **Manoyoga**, four **Vachanayoga**, and
**Audarika**, **Vairyaka**, and **Aharaka Kayayoga**.  These yogas should have
24 **Bhangas** each, totaling 84 **Bhangas**. However, since **Aharaka
Kayayoga** does not have **Striveda**, there are 24 **Bhangas** in ten yogas and
16 **Bhangas** in **Aharaka Kayayoga**. The total number of **Bhangas** is 2048,
which is more than the yogas in the **A-Pramatta-Samyata Gunasthan**.  In the
eighth **A-Purva-Karana Gunasthan**, there are nine yogas, each with 24
**Bhangas**. Therefore, there are a total of 864 **Bhangas** here. In the ninth
**Anivriti-Vadara Gunasthan**, there is one yoga and 16 **Bhangas**. Multiplying
16 by 6, we get a total of 144 **Bhangas**. In the tenth **Sukshma-Samparaya
Gunasthan**, there is one yoga and one **Bhang**. Therefore, there are a total
of 6 **Bhangas** here.  Adding the total **Bhangas** of these ten
**Gunasthanas**, we get 2208 + 1216 + 660 + 2240 + 2112 + 2366 + 2046 + 664 +
144 + 6 = 14169. It is also said:  "**Chataks Ya Sahasra Samyam Va Gunahitaram
Udayamanam**"  This means that the total number of **Udaya-Vikalpas** of
**Mohaniya Karma** is 14166, which is more than the yogas.  (Panchasangraha,
Sapta-Tika, Chapter 120)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa jo jIva pramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM vaikriya kAyayoga
aura AhAraka kAyayoga ko prApta karake apramattasaMyata ho jAtA hai, usake
apramattasaMyata avasthA meM rahate hue ye do yoga hote haiN| vaise
apramattasaMyata jIva vaikriya aura AhAraka samudghAta kA prArambha nahIM karatA
hai, ata: isa guNasthAna meM vaikriyamizra kAyayoga aura AhArakamizra kAyayoga
nahIM mAnA hai| isI kAraNa sAtaveM apramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM cAra
manoyoga, cAra vacanayoga aura audArika, vaikiya va AhAraka kAyayoga, ye gyAraha
yoga hote haiN| ina yogoM meM bhaMgoM kI ATha-ATha caubIsI honI cAhiye thiiN|
kintu AhAraka kAyayoga meM strIveda nahIM hone se dasa yogoM meM to bhaMgoM kI
ATha caubIsI aura AhAraka kAyayoga meM ATha SoDazaka prApta hote haiN| ina saba
bhaMgoM kA jor3a 2048 hotA hai jo apramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM yogApekSA hote
haiM  /  285 AThaveM apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM nau yoga aura pratyeka yoga meM
bhaMgoM kI cAra caubIsI hotI haiN| ataH yahA~ kula bhaMga 864 hote haiN| nauveM
anivRttivAdara guNasthAna meM yoga hai aura bhaMga 16 hote haiM ataH 16 ko se
guNita karane para yahAM kula bhaMga 144 prApta hote haiM tathA dasaveM
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM yoga aura bhaMga 1 hai  /  ataH yahAM 6 kula 6
bhaMga prApta hote haiM  /  uparyukta dasoM guNasthAnoM ke kula bhaMgoM ko
jor3ane para 2208 - 1216+660 + 2240 + 2112 + 2366 + 2046+664+144+6 = 14169
pramANa hotA hai| kahA bhI hai caTaksa ya sahassA sayaM va guNahataraM
udayamANaM  /  1 arthAt yogoM kI apekSA mohanIyakarma ke kula udayavikalpoM kA
pramANa 14166 hotA hai  /  1 paMcasaMgraha saptatikA gA0 120

Page #327 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Granth The description of the arising alternatives in the
Gunasthanas in relation to the 289 Yogas should be known as follows: Gunastana |
Yoga | Gunakara | Sasadan | Misra | Mithyatva | 13 | 10 8424 = 162 | 192410 -
19202206 3 4424816 / 663-228 | 4424 =66. | 16x22 =1152 1216 4416=64 6441-64
442466 66410-160 Avirat | 13 8424 = 162 | 192410 = 16202240 84168128 | 128x2=256
Ex-64 6441-64 Deshavirat | 11 8424 = 162 162411=21122112 Pramattasanyata | 13
8424= 162 162411=2112/2368 8416=128 12842256 8x24 = 162 192410=19202048 8x16-128
| 128x1 =128 Apurva0 4424=16 66X1664 864 Anivriti: | 16x6 = 144 : Sukshma EX 16
Apramatas . Total 14166

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 289 yogoM kI apekSA guNasthAnoM meM udayavikalpoM kA
vivaraNa isa prakAra jAnanA cAhiye guNasthAna | yoga guNakAra sAsAdana mizra
mithyAtva  /  13 ! 10 8424 = 162 | 192410 - 19202206 3 4424816 / 663-228 | 4424
=66. | 16x22 =1152 1216 4416=64 6441-64 442466 66410-160 avirata | 13 8424 = 162
| 192410 = 16202240 84168128 | 128x2=256 Ex-64 6441-64 dezavirata | 11 8424 =
162 162411=21122112 pramattasaMyata | 13 8424= 162 162411=2112/2368 8416=128
12842256 8x24 = 162 192410=19202048 8x16-128 | 128x1 =128 apUrva0 4424=16
66X1664 864 anivRttiH | 16x6 = 144 : sUkSma EX 16 apramatasa . kula jor3a 14166

Page #328 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The chapter on Sapta-tika discusses the number of Udayavikalpas in the
Gunasthanas, and then proceeds to consider the number of Padavrindas. The
following verse from the Annabhashya is quoted:  "Atthi pati-san batti-san
sastu-meva bavan-na. Choyalan dhoya bhisha vi me misch-ma-isu."  This means that
there are 68, 32, 32, 60, 52, 14, 44, and 20 Udayapadas in the Gunasthanas of
Mithya-ishti, etc.  Here, Udayapada refers to the nature of the Udayasthanas.
For example, in the Mithyatva Gunasthana, there are four Udayasthanas: 10, 6, 8,
and 7 Prakrutis. The Udayasthana with 10 Prakrutis is one, so it has ten
Prakrutis. The Udayasthana with 6 Prakrutis is formed by three alternative
Prakrutis, so it has three, resulting in 27 Prakrutis. Similarly, the
Udayasthana with 8 Prakrutis has 24 Prakrutis, and the one with 7 Prakrutis has
7. Thus, the Mithyatva Gunasthana has a total of 10 + 27 + 24 + 7 = 68
Prakrutis. The 32, etc., Udayapadas mentioned for the other Gunasthanas like
Sasadan, etc., should be understood in the same way.  If we add all the
Udayapadas of these eight Gunasthanas (from 68 to 27), the total number is 352.
However, each Udayapada has 24 Bhangas. Therefore, multiplying 352 by 24 gives
us 8448. These Padavrindas should be known up to the A-purvakarana Gunasthana.
Adding the 28 Bhangas of the Anivrittikarana Gunasthana and the 1 Bhangas of the
Sushama-Samparaya Gunasthana, we get 8448 + 29 = 8477. These are the total
number of Padavrindas from the Mithyatva Gunasthana to the Sukshma-Samparaya
Gunasthana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa yogoM kI apekSA guNasthAnoM meM udayavikalpoM kA vicAra
karane ke anantara aba krama prApta padavRndoM kA vicAra karane ke liye
annarbhASya gAthA uddhRta karate haiM aTThI patIsaM battIsaM saSTuimeva bAvannA
/  coyAlaM dhoyA bhIsA vi meM mizcamAIsu  //  arthAt - mithyAiSTi Adi
guNasthAnoM meM kama se 68, 32, 32, 60, 52, 14, 44 aura 20 udayapada hote haiN|
yahA~ udayapada se udayasthAnoM kI prakRtiyAM lI gaI haiN| jaise ki mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM 10, 6, 8 aura 7 prakRtika, ye cAra udayasthAna haiM aura inameM
se 10 prakRtika udayasthAna eka hai ata: usakI dasa prakRtiyA~ huI  /  6
prakRtika udaya sthAna tIna prakRtiyoM ke vikalpa se banane ke kAraNa tIna haiM
ata: usakI 27 prakRtiyAM huI  /  ATha prakRtika udayasthAna bhI tIna prakRtiyoM
ke vikalpa se banatA hai ata: usako 24 prakRtiyAM huI aura sAta prakRtika
udayasthAna eka hai ata: usakI 7 prakRtiyA~ huI  /  isa prakAra mithyAtva meM
cAroM udayasthAnoM kI 10+ 27+24+7=68 prakRtiyAM hotI haiM  /  sAsAdana Adi
guNasthAnoM meM jo 32 Adi udayapada batalAye haiM, unako bhI isI prakAra
samajhanA caahiye| _ aba yadi ina ATha guNasthAnoM ke saba udayapada {68 se
lekara 27 taka) jor3a diye jAyeM to inakA kula pramANa 352 hotA hai  /  kintu
inameM se pratyeka udayapada meM caubIsa-caubIsa bhaGga hote haiM, ata: 352 ko
24 se guNita karane para 8448 prApta hote haiN| ye padavRnda apUrvakaraNa
guNasthAna taka ke jAnanA cAhiye  /  inameM anivRttikaraNa ke 28 aura
suSamasaMparAya guNasthAna kA 1. kula 29 bhaGga milA dene para 8440+26 =8477
prApta hote haiM  /  ye mithyAtva guNasthAna se lekara sUkSmasaMparAya
guNasthAna taka ke sAmAnya se padavRnda hue  /

Page #329 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth ### 261  Now, if we want to bring the number of पदवृन्द in
the ten गुणस्थान in relation to the Yogas, we need to pay attention to two
things: 1. How many पदवृन्द and Yogas are there in each गुणस्थान, and 2. How
many पदवृन्द are possible in each Yoga. Keeping these two things in mind, we
will now explain the पदवृन्द of the गुणस्थान in relation to the Yogas.  It has
been clarified earlier that there are 4 उदयस्थान in the मिथ्यात्व गुणस्थान, and
their total पद are 68. Out of these, one सात प्रकृतिक उदयस्थान, two आठ प्रकृतिक
उदयस्थान, and one नौ प्रकृतिक उदयस्थान are devoid of the उदय of अनन्तानुबंधी,
whose total उदयपद are 32. And one आठ प्रकृतिक उदयस्थान, two नौ प्रकृतिक
उदयस्थान, and one दस प्रकृतिक उदयस्थान, these four उदयस्थान are with the उदय of
अनन्तानुबंधी, whose total उदयपद are 36. Out of these, the first 32 उदयपद are
found with these ten Yogas: 4 मनोयोग, 4 वचनयोग, औदारिक काययोग, and वैकिय काययोग.
Since other Yogas are not possible here, multiplying these 32 by 10 gives us
320. And the 36 उदयपद are found with the aforementioned ten Yogas, and also with
औदारिकमिश्र, वैक्रियमिश्र, and कार्मणयोग, these 13 Yogas. Since these पद are
possible in both पर्याप्त and अपर्याप्त states, multiplying 36 by 13 gives us
468.  1. The method to obtain the total पदवृन्द of the मिथ्यात्व गुणस्थान is to
add 320 and 468 and then multiply them by 24. This gives us the total पदवृन्द of
the मिथ्यात्व गुणस्थान, which is 320 + 468 = 788 X 24 = 18612.  In the सासादन
गुणस्थान, there are 13 Yogas and 32 उदयपद. All these उदयपद are possible in 12
Yogas, but in the सासादन सम्यग्दृष्टि, the उदय of नपुंसकवेद does not occur in
क्रियमिश्र. Therefore, here, नपुंसकवेद...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 261 aba yadi yogoM kI apekSA dasoM guNasthAnoM ke padavRnda
lAnA cAheM to do bAtoM para dhyAna denA hogA - 1. kisa guNasthAna meM padavRnda
aura yogoM kI saMkhyA kitanI hai aura 2 una yogoM meM se kisa yoga meM kitane
padavRnda sambhava hai| inhIM do bAtoM ko dhyAna meM rakhakara aba yogApekSA
guNasthAnoM ke padavRnda batalAte haiM  /  yaha pUrva meM spaSTa kiyA jA cukA
hai ki mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 4 udayasthAna aura unake kula pada 68 haiM  /
inameM se eka sAta prakRtika udayasthAna, do ATha prakRtika udayasthAna aura eka
nau prakRtika udayasthAna anaMtAnubaMdhI ke udaya se rahita hai jinake kula
udayapada 32 hote haiM aura eka ATha prakRtika udayasthAna do nau prakRtika
udayasthAna aura eka dasa prakRtika udayasthAna, ye cAra udayasthAna
anantAnubaMdhI ke udaya sahita haiM jinake kula udayapada 36 hote haiM  /
inameM se pahale ke 32 udayapada, 4 manoyoga, 4 vacanayoga, audArika kAyayoga
aura vaikiya kAyayoga, ina dasa yogoM ke sAtha pAye jAte haiN| kyoMki yahA~ anya
yoga saMbhava nahIM hai, ata: ina 32 ko 10 se guNita karane para 320 hote haiM
aura 36 udayapada pUrvokta dasa tathA audArikamizra, vaikriyamizra aura
kArmaNayoga ina 13 yogoM ke sAtha pAye jAte haiN| kyoMki ye pada paryApta aura
aparyApta donoM avasthAoM meM saMbhava haiM, ata: 36 ko 13 se guNita karane para
460 prApta hote haiM  /  1 mithyAtva guNasthAna ke kula padavRnda prApta karane
kI rIti yaha hai ki 320 aura 468 ko jor3akara inako 24 se guNita karadeM to
mithyAtva guNasthAna ke kula padavRnda A jAte haiM, jo 320 + 468 = 788 X 24 =
18612 hote haiM  /  sAsAdana guNasthAna meM yoga 13 aura udayapada 32 hai  /  so
12 yogoM meM to ye saba udayapada saMbhava haiM kintu sAsAdana samyagdRSTi ko
kriyamizra meM napuMsakaveda kA udaya nahIM hotA hai, ataH yahA~ napuMsakaveda

Page #330 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 262: Saptaatika  **It is necessary to reduce the number of bhangas.**
This means that instead of multiplying 13 yogas by 32, we should multiply 12 by
32 and then by 24. And instead of multiplying 32 by 16 for Vaikriyamishra, we
should multiply 32 by 16. In this way, we get 12432 = 354424, 6216, and for
Naikiyamishra, 32416 = 512. The total of these two, 6216 and 512, is 1728. These
1728 are the padavrindas in the Sasadan Gunasthan.  In the Mith Gunasthan, there
are 10 yogas and 32 udayapadas. Here, all the udayapadas and their bhangas are
possible in all the yogas. Therefore, multiplying 10 by 32 and then by 24, we
get 7680 padavrindas (324108 - 320 x 24 = 7680).  In the Avirat Samyagdristi
Gunasthan, there are 13 yogas and 60 udayapadas. Here, all the udayapadas and
their bhangas are possible in 10 yogas. Therefore, multiplying 10 by 60 and then
by 24, we get 14400 bhangas related to 10 yogas. However, in Vaikriyamishra
Kayayoga and Karman Kayayoga, Strived does not arise, so the bhangas related to
Strived are not obtained. Therefore, multiplying 2 by 60 and then by 16, we get
1920 bhangas related to these two yogas. And in Audarikamishra Kayayoga, Strived
and Napumsakaved do not arise, so the bhangas related to these two yogas are not
obtained. Therefore, multiplying 60 by 8, we get 480 bhangas related to
Audarikamishra Kayayoga. In this way, in the fourth Avirat Samyagdristi
Gunasthan, there are 14400 + 1620 + 480 = 16800 padavrindas related to 13 yogas.
In the Deshavirat Gunasthan, there are 11 yogas and 52 udayapadas. Here, all the
udayapadas and their bhangas are possible in all the yogas. Therefore,
multiplying 11 by 52 and then by 24, we get 13728 bhangas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 262 saptatikA prakaraNa ke bhaGga kama kara denA cAhiye  /  isakA tAtparya yaha
huA ki 13 yogoM kI apekSA 12 se 32 ko guNita karake 24 se guNita kareM aura
vaikriyamizra kI apekSA 32 ko 16 se guNita kreN| isa prakAra 12432 = 354424 6216
tathA naikiyamizra ke 324 16 512 hue aura ina 6216 aura 512 kA kula jor3a 1728
hotA hai  /  yahI 1728 padavRnda sAsAdana guNasthAna meM hote haiN| mitha
guNasthAna meM dasa yoga aura udayapada 32 haiN| yahA~ saba yogoM meM saba
udayapada aura unake kula bhaGga saMbhava haiM, ata: 10 ko 32 se guNita karake
24 se gaNita karane para (324 108-320 x 24 =7680) 7680 padavRnda prApta hote
haiN| avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM yoga 13 aura udayapada 60 hote haiM  /
so yahA~ 10 yogoM meM to saba udayapada aura unake kula bhaGga saMbhava hone se
10 se 60 ko guNita karake 24 se guNita kara dene para 10 yogoM saMbaMdhI kula
bhaGga 14400 prApta hote haiM  /  kintu vaikriyamizra kAyayoga aura kArmaNa
kAyayoga meM strIveda kA udaya nahIM hone se strIveda saMbaMdhI bhaGga prApta
nahIM hote haiM, isaliye yahAM 2 ko 60 se guNita karake 16 se guNita karane para
ukta donoM yogoM sambandhI kula bhaGga 1920 prApta hote haiM tathA audArikamizna
kAyayoga meM strIveda aura napuMsakaveda kA udaya nahIM hone se do yogoM
saMbaMdhI bhaGga prApta nahIM hote haiM  /  ata: yahA~ 60 ko 8 se guNita karane
para audArikamizra kAyayoga kI apekSA 480 bhaGga prApta hote haiN| isa prakAra
cauthe avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM 13 yoga saMbaMdhI kula padavanda
14400+1620+40 = 16800 hote haiN| dezavirata guNasthAna meM yoga 11 aura pada 52
haiM aura yahA~ saba yogoM meM saba udayapada aura unake bhaGga sambhava hai
ata: yahA~ 11 se 52 ko guNita karake 24 se guNita karane para kula bhaGga 13728
hote haiM  /

Page #331 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Lost Firm Granth  **263** In the **Pramatta Samyata Gunasthan**, there are 13
**Yogas** and 44 **Padas**, but the **Strived** does not arise in the **Aharak
Dwik**. Therefore, considering 11 **Yogas**, multiply 11 by 44 and then by 24,
which gives 11444 x 24 = 484424 = 11616. And considering the **Aharak Dwik**,
multiply 44 by 2 and then by 16, which gives 2444 = 88416 - 1408. Then, adding
11616 + 1408, we get a total of 13024 **Padavrund** in the **Pramatta Samyata
Gunasthan**.  In the **Aparamatta Samyata Gunasthan**, there are also 11
**Yogas** and 44 **Padas**, but the **Strived** does not arise in the **Aharak
Kayayog**. Therefore, considering 10 **Yogas**, multiply 10 by 44 and then by
24. And considering the **Aharak Kayayog**, multiply 44 by 16. Doing this, we
get a total of 11264 **Padavrund** in the **Aparamatta Samyata Gunasthan**.  In
the **Apuurvakaran**, there are 20 **Yogas** and **Padas**. Multiplying 20 by
itself and then by 24, we get a total of 4320 **Padavrund** here.  In the
**Anivritibadar Gunasthan**, there are 28 **Yogas** and **Bhang**. Here, there
are no **Padas**, so instead of **Padas**, we call them **Bhang**. Multiplying 6
by 28, we get 252 **Padavrund** in the **Anivritibadar**. And in the **Sookshma
Samparaya**, there are **Yogas** and **Bhang**. Therefore, multiplying 6 by 1,
we get the **Bhang**.  Adding the **Padavrund** from the first to the tenth
**Gunasthan**, we get a total of 95717 **Padavrund**. It is also said:
"**Sarsasa Sal Saya Pananousahass Payasanka**"  Meaning, considering the
**Yogas**, the total **Padavrund** of the **Mohaniyakarma** are 95717.  1.
**Panchasangrah Saptathika** verse 120 2. **Go. Karmakanda** verse 468 and 500
Considering the **Yogas**, the **Udayasthan** is 12653 and the **Padavrund** is
85645.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 NSTa pharmagrantha 263 pramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM yoga 13 aura pada 44 haiM
kintu AhArakadvika meM strIveda kA udaya nahIM hotA hai, isaliye 11 yogoM kI
apekSA to 11 ko 44 se guNita karake 24 se guNita karane se 11444 484424=11616
hue aura AhArakadvika kI apekSA 2 se 44 ko guNita karake 16 se guNita kareM to
2444 =88416-1408 hue  /  taba 11616+ 1408 ko jor3ane para kula 13024 padavRnda
pramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM prApta hote haiM  /  apramattasaMyata guNasthAna
meM bhI yoga 11 aura pada 44 haiM, kintu AhAraka kAyayoga meM strIveda kA udaya
nahIM hotA hai| isaliye 10 yogoM kI apekSA 10 se 44 ko guNita karake 24 se
guNita kareM aura AhAraka kAyayoga kI apekSA 44 se 16 ko guNita kreN| isa
prakAra karane para apramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM kula padavRnda 11264 hote
haiN| apUrvakaraNa meM yoga aura pada 20 hota haiM  /  20 ko saNita karake 24 se
guNita karane para yahA~ kula padavRnda 4320 prApta hote haiN| anivRttibAdara
guNasthAna meM yoga aura bhaGga 28 haiN| yahA~ yoga pada nahIM hai ataH pada na
kahakara bhaGga kahe haiN| so ina 6 ko 28 se guNita kara dene para
anivRttibAdara meM 252 padavRnda hote haiM tathA sUkSmasaMparAya meM yoga haiM
aura bhaGga hai, ataH 6 se 1 ko muNita karane para bhaGga hote haiN| isa prakAra
pahale se lekara dasaveM guNasthAna taka ke padavRndoM ko jor3a dene para saba
padavRndoM kI kula saMkhyA 95717 hotI hai  /  kahA bhI hai sasarasA sala sayA
paNanausahassa pysNkhaa|' arthAt yogoM kI apekSA mohanIyakarma ke saba padavanda
paMcAnave hajAra sAtasau satraha 65717 hote haiM  /  1 paMcasaMgraha saptatikA
gA0 120 2 go. karmakAMDa gA0 468 aura 500 meM yogoM kI apekSA udayasthAna 12653
aura padabanda 85645 batalAye haiN|

Page #332 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
264 The description of the above groups of terms should be known as follows:
Gunasthan Yoga Udayapad Gunakar Mithyatva Sasadan Mishra Avirat Samyagdristi
Beshi Virat Pramattasanyata Apramattasanyata Apuurva Karan Anivriti Badar
Sukshmasampray 13 10 12 1 10 10 2 1 11 11 2 10 1 E 36 32 32 32 32 ܪ 60 60 52 44
૪૪ 44 ૪૪ 20 2 1 1 ૨૪ ૨૪ 24 16 24 24 16 G 24 24 16 24 16 24 12 4 DVT Sapttatika
Prakaran 1 Gunanafal (Padavrund) 11232 87680 6216 512 7680 | 7680 14400 16800
1620 480 13728 11616 1408 10560 704 4320 216 36 6 18612 6728 13728 13024 11264
4320 252 £ 65717 Padavrund

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 264 ukta padavRndoM kA vivaraNa isa prakAra jAnanA cAhiye guNasthAna yoga
udayapada guNakAra mithyAtva sAsAdana mizra avirata samyagdRSTi beza virata
pramattasaMyata apramattasaMyata apUrva karaNa anivRtti bAdara sUkSmasaMparAya
13 10 12 1 10 10 2 1 11 11 2 10 1 E 36 32 32 32 32 r 60 60 52 44 44 44 44 20 2 1
1 24 24 24 16 24 24 16 G 24 24 16 24 16 24 12 4 DVT saptatikA prakaraNa 1
guNanaphala (padavRnda ) 11232 87680 6216 512 7680 | 7680 14400 16800 1620 480
13728 11616 1408 10560 704 4320 216 36 6 18612 6728 13728 13024 11264 4320 252
PS 65717 padavRnda

Page #333 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- - **Text on Karma Granth**  After considering the **udayasthanas**,
**bhangas** and **padavrindas** in the **mohaniyak** in the context of
**sunavons**, we now consider the **udayasthanas** etc. in the context of
**upayogas**.  In the two **gunasthanas** of **mithyatva** and **sasadan**,
there are five **upayogas**: **matiagyan**, **shrutagnyan**, **vibhangan**
**chakshudarshan** and **achakshudarshan**. In **misra**, there are three
**misragyan** and **chakshu** and **achakshu** **darshan**, thus five
**upayogas**. In **avirata samyagdristi** and **deshavirata**, there are three
**samyagnyan** and three **darshan** at the beginning, thus six **upayogas**.
From the sixth **gunasthan** of **pramattasanyata** to the tenth **gunasthan**
of **sukshmasampraya**, there are seven **upayogas** in five **gunasthanas**,
including the **manparyayagnyan**, in addition to the aforementioned six. The
**bhangas** of the **udayasthanas** of each **gunasthan** have been mentioned
earlier in the **antarbhashya matha** "**atthag chau chau chauratuga ya**".
Therefore, by multiplying the **udayasthanas** of each **gunasthan** by the
number of **upayogas** in that **gunasthan** and then dividing by the
**bhangas**, the total **bhangas** of that **gunasthan** in relation to
**upayogas** can be found. For example, in **mithyatva** and **sasadan**, there
are 8 and 4 **chaubisis** respectively, and 5 **upayogas**. Therefore, 8+4=12
multiplied by 5 equals 60. In **mith**, there are 4 **chaubisis** and 5
**upayogas**. Therefore, 4 multiplied by 5 equals 20. In **avirata
samyagdristi** and **deshavirata** **gunasthanas**, there are 8 and 8
**chaubisis** respectively, and 6 **upayogas**. Therefore, 8+8=16 multiplied by
6 equals 96. In the **gunasthanas** of **pramat**, **apramattasanyata** and
**apuurvakaran**, there are 8, 8 and 4 **chaubisis** respectively, and 7
**upayogas**. Therefore, 8+8+4=20 multiplied by 7 equals 140. The sum of all
these is 60+20+96+140 = 316. Each **chaubisi** has 24 **bhangas**. Therefore,
multiplying 316 by 24 gives a total of 316 x 24 = 7584. And two **prakritik
udayasthanas**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - - pATha karmagrantha 265 isa prakAra se kI apekSA sunAvoM meM mohanIyaka ke
udayasthAnoM, bhaMgoM aura padavRndoM kA vicAra karane ke bAda aba Age upayogoM
kI apekSA udayasthAnoM Adi kA vicAra karate haiM  /  mithyAtva aura sAsAdana ina
do guNasthAnoM meM matiajJAna, zrutaajJAna, vibhaMgajJAna, cakSudarzana aura
acakSudarzana, ye pAMca upayoga hote haiN| mizra meM tIna mizra jJAna aura cakSu
va acakSu darzana, isa prakAra ye pAMca upayoga haiN| avirata samyagdRSTi aura
dezavirata meM Arambha ke tIna samyagjJAna aura tIna darzana, ye chaha upayoga
hote haiM tathA chaThe pramattasaMyata guNasthAna se lekara dasaveM
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna taka pAMca guNasthAnoM meM pUrvokta chaha tathA
manaparyAyajJAna sahita sAta upayoga hote haiM tathA pratyeka guNasthAna ke
udayasthAna ke bhaMgoM kA kathana pUrva meM antarbhASya mAthA 'aTThaga cau cau
cauraTugA ya' ke saMdarbha meM kiyA jA cukA hai| ata: jisa guNasthAna meM jitane
upayoga hoM, unase usa guNasthAna ke udayasthAnoM ko guNita karake anantara
bhaMgoM se muNita kara dene para upayogoM kI apekSA usa guNasthAna ke kula
bhaMga jJAta ho jAte hai| jaise ki mithyAtva aura sAsAdana meM kama se 8 aura 4
caubIsI tathA 5 upayoga haiM ataH 8+4=12 ko 5 se guNita kara dene para 60 hue  /
mitha meM 4 caubIsI aura 5 upayoga haiM ataH 4 ko 5 se guNita karane para 20 hue
/  avirata samyagdRSTi aura dezavirata guNasthAna meM ATha-ATha caubIsI aura 6
upayoga haiM ata: +8= 16 ko 6 se guNita kara dene para 66 hue| pramatta,
apramatta saMyata aura apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM ATha, ATha aura cAra caubIsI
tathA 7 upayoga haiM, ataH 8++4=20 ko sAta se guNA kara dene para 140 hue tathA
ina sabakA jor3a 60+20+66+140 =316 huaa| inameM se pratyeka caubIsI meM 24, 24
bhaMga hote haiM ata: ina 316 ko 24 se guNita kara dene para kula 316 424 =7584
hote haiM tathA do prakRtika udayasthAna

Page #334 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
266 In the Saptaatika chapter, there are 12 bhangas and in one Prakrutik
Udayasthan, there are 5 bhangas, totaling 17. When these are multiplied by the
number of possible uses, which is 7, the result is 119. Adding this to the
previous amount, the total number of bhangas becomes 7703. It is also said:
"Jappāgunogēsa sagsarismā tikttaṛ hoti." Meaning: When the Udayasthan
alternatives of the Mohaniya are multiplied by the possible uses, their total
number is 7703. However, there is also an opinion regarding the uses in the
Misra Gunasthan that in the Samyagmidhyadristi Gunasthan, instead of five, six
uses are found, including Aavdhi Darshan. Therefore, accepting this opinion,
multiplying the 4 Chaubisi of the Min Gunasthan by 6, we get 24, and multiplying
these 24 by 24, we get 576. This means that in this Gunasthan, 66 bhangas are
added to the previous 480. Therefore, adding 66 to the previously mentioned 7703
bhangas, the total number of bhangas becomes 7766. Thus, these Udayasthan
bhangas multiplied by the uses should be known. The description of Udayavikalpas
in relation to uses is as follows: Gunasthan Uses Multiplier | Product
(Udayavikalpas) Mithyatva 5424 660 4424 Sasadan Mitra 1 Pansasangrah Saptaatika,
Ga. 118. 2 Gol Karmakaand Ga. 462 and 463 mention Udayasthan 7766, and Padavrund
51083 in relation to uses.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 266 saptatikA prakaraNa meM 12 bhaMga aura eka prakRtika udayasthAna meM 5
bhaMga hote haiM, jinakA kula jor3a 17 huaa| inheM vahA~ saMbhava upayogoM kI
saMkhyA 7 se guNita kara dene para 119 hote haiN| jinako pUrva rAzi meM milA
dene para kula bhaMga 7703 hote haiM  /  kahA bhI hai- japapAgunogesa
sagasarisamA tikttara hoti  /  /  arthAt-mohanIya ke udayasthAna vikalpoM ko
vahAM saMbhava upayogoM se guNita karane para unakA kula pramANa 7703 hotA hai|
kintu mizra guNasthAna meM upayogoM ke bAre meM eka mata yaha bhI hai ki
samyagmidhyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM pAMca ke bajAya avadhi darzana sahita chaha
upayoga pAye jAte haiN| ata: isa mata ko svIkAra karane para mina guNasthAna kI
4 caubIsI ko 6 se guNita karane se 24 hote haiM aura ina 24 ko 24 se guNita
karane para 576 hote haiM arthAt isa guNasthAna meM 480 kI bajAya 66 bhaMga aura
bar3ha jAte haiM  /  ata: pUrva batAye gaye 19903 bhaMgoM meM 66 ko jor3ane para
kula bhaMgoM kI saMkhyA 7766 prApta hotI hai| isa prakAra ye upayoga-guNita
udayasthAna bhaMga jAnanA caahiye| upayogoM kI apekSA udayavikalpoM kA vivaraNa
isa prakAra hai guNaspAna upayoga guNakAra | guNanaphala (udayavikalpa)
mithyAtva 5424 660 4424 sAsAdana mitra 1 paMsasaMgraha saptatikA, gA0 118  /  2
gola karmakAMDa gA0 462 aura 463 meM upayogoM kI apekSA udayasthAna 7766, aura
padavRnda 51083 batalAye haiN|'

Page #335 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Granth EX24 1152 1152 x24 8424 1344 Avirat Deshavirat Pramattavirat
Apramattavirat Apurvakaran Anivriti Vadar 1344 8424 4424 Sookshma Samparaya 7703
Udayavikalpa Special - When according to other views, there are six uses in
Mithya Gunasthan with Abhidarshan, then in comparison to this, when the 66
bhangas obtained are added to the 7703 bhangas, the total Udayavikalpa becomes
7766. Thus, after explaining the Udayavikalpas in comparison to the uses, now
the proof of the Padavrindas obtained by multiplying them with the uses is being
explained. Previously in the Bhashya Gatha 'Atthi Battisam ......' the
indication of Udayasthan Pada in Gunasthanas has been given. Accordingly, there
are 68 Udayasthan Pada in Mithyatva, 32 in Sasadan and 32 in Misra Gunasthan,
which add up to 132. Multiplying these by the 5 possible uses in these
Gunasthanas, we get 132 x 5 = 660. In Avirat Samyagdristi, there are 60
Udayasthan Pada and in Deshavirat, there are 52 Udayasthan Pada. Their sum is
112, which when multiplied by the 6 possible uses here, becomes 672.
Pramattasanyata

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha EX24 1152 1152 x24 8424 1344 avirata dezavirata
pramattavirata apramattavirata apUrvakaraNa anivRtivAdara 1344 8424 4424 sUkSma
saMparAya 7703 udayavikalpa vizeSa-jaba dUsare mata ke anusAra mitha guNasthAna
meM abadhidarzana sahita chaha upayoga hote haiM taba isakI apekSA prApta hue 66
bhaMgoM ko 7703 bhaMgoM meM milA dene para kula udayavikalpa 7766 hote haiM  /
isa prakAra se upayogoM kI apekSA udayavikalpoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba upayogoM
se guNita karane para prApta padavRndoM ke pramANa ko batalAte haiN| pUrva meM
bhASya gAthA 'aTThI battIsaM ......' meM guNasthAnoM meM udayasthAna padoM kA
saMketa kiyA jA cukA hai| tadanusAra mithyAtva meM 68, sAsAdana meM 32 aura
mizra guNasthAna meM 32 udayasthAna pada haiM, jinakA jor3a 132 hotA hai| inheM
ina guNasthAnoM meM sambhava 5 upayogoM se guNita karane para 13245=660 hue|
avirata samyagdRSTi meM 60 aura dezavirata meM 52 udayasthAna pada haiM  /
jinakA jor3a 112 hotA hai, inheM yahAM saMbhava 6 upayogoM se muNita karane para
672 hue  /  pramattasaMyata

Page #336 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on Sapta-Tika **268**  There are 44 **Udayasthan** positions in
**Sapta-Tika**, 44 in **A-prammatta-samyata**, and 20 in **A-purva-karana**.
Their total sum is 44 + 44 + 20 = 108. Multiplying this by the 7 possible uses,
we get 756. Thus, the sum of all **Udayasthan** positions from the first to the
eighth **Gunasthan** is 660 + 672 + 756 = 2088. Multiplying this by 24, the
number of **Bhangas**, we get the total number of **Padavandas** for the eight
**Gunasthanas** as 2088 x 24 = 50112.   Next, the **Padavandas** of the two
**Prakrutik Udayasthanas** are 24, and the **Padavanda** of one **Prakrutik
Udayasthan** is 5, totaling 26. Multiplying these 26 by the 7 possible uses, we
get 182. Adding this to the previously mentioned 50112 **Padavandas**, the total
number of **Padavandas** becomes 50315. It is also said:  **"Pashnasam cha
sahasam timti satha cheva pannara"**  Meaning: When the **Padavandas** of
**Mohaniya** are multiplied by the possible uses, their total number becomes
50315.  It is important to note that this number of **Padavandas** is based on
the assumption of five uses in **Mishra Gunasthan**. However, when six uses are
accepted instead of five, as per a different view, the number of **Padavandas**
increases by 132424 = 768 **Bhangas**, and the total number of **Padavandas**
becomes 51083 instead of 50315.  The details of **Padavandas** in relation to
uses should be understood as follows:  1. **Pancha-sangraha Sapta-Tika Gra.
115**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa 268 meM 44, apramattasaMyata meM 44 aura apUrvakaraNa meM
20 udayasthAna pada haiN| inakA kula jor3a 44+44 + 20 = 108 hotA hai| inheM
yahA~ saMbhava 7 upayogoM se guNita karane para 756 hue| isa prakAra pahale se
lekara AThave guNasthAna taka ke saba udayasthAna padoM kA jor3a 660 + 672 + 756
= 2008 huA  /  inheM bhaMgoM kI apekSA 24 se guNita kara dene para ATha
guNasthAnoM ke kula padavandoM kA pramANa 2088x24 = 50112 hotA hai  /  anantara
do prakRtika udayasthAna ke padavRnda 24 aura eka prakRtika udayasthAna ke pada
5, inakA jor3a 26 huA  /  so ina 26 ko yahA~ saMbhava 7 upayogoM ke dukti karake
1203 aura prApta hue| jinheM pUrvokta 50112 padavRndoM meM milA dene para kula
padavRndoM kA pramANa 50315 hotA hai kahA bhI hai paznAsaM ca sahassA timti
sathA ceva pannArA arthAt - mohanIya ke padavRndoM ko yahA~ saMbhava upayogoM se
guNita karane para unakA kula pramANa pacAsa hajAra tInasau pandraha 50315 hotA
hai| ukta padavRndoM kI saMkhyA mizra guNasthAna meM pAMca upayoga mAnane kI
apekSA jAnanA caahiye| lekina jaba matAntara se pAMca kI bajAya 6 upayoga
svIkAra kiye jAte haiM taba ina padavRndoM meM eka adhika upayoga ke padavRnda
132424 = 768 bhaMga aura bar3ha jAte haiM aura kula padavRndoM kI saMkhyA 50315
kI bajAya 51083 ho jAtI hai  /  upayogoM kI apekSA padavRndoM kA vivaraNa isa
prakAra jAnanA cAhiye 1 paMcasaMgraha saptatikA grA0 115  /  My

Page #337 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Granthya Gunasthan | Usage Udayapad Gunakar | Gunanphal (Padavrind)
Mithyatva 8160 Sasadan Mith 3840 Adhirat Deshavirat Pramassavirata
Apramassavirata Apurvakaran Anivritibada 3360 Sukshmasampray 50315 Padavrind If
we add the 768 bhangas of the mixed Gunasthan related to Aavdisharan, then the
total Padavrind would be 51083. Thus, after describing the Udayasthan Padavrind
in relation to Usages, now we consider the Udayasthan alternatives and Padavrind
in relation to Leshyas. First, we explain the Udayasthan alternatives. From
Mithyatva to Avirat Samyagdristi, in each of these four Gunasthan, there are six
Leshyas. Deshavirat, Pramattasanyata and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagranya guNasthAna | upayoga udayapada guNakAra | guNanaphala
(padavRnda) mithyAtva 8160 sAsAdana mitha 3840 adhirata dezavirata pramasavirata
apramasavirata apUrvakaraNa anivRttibAdara 3360 sUkSmasaMparAya 50315 padavRnda
isameM mizra muNasthAna saMbaMdhI avadhidarzana ke 768 bhaMgoM ko aura milA diyA
jAye to usa apekSA se kula padavRnda 51083 hote hai| isa prakAra se upayogoM kI
apekSA udayasthAna padavRndoM kA varNana karane ke bAda aba lezyAoM kI apekSA
udayasthAna vikalpoM aura padavRndoM kA vicAra karate haiN| pahale udayasthAna
vikalpoM ko batalAte haiN| mithyAtva se lekara avirata samyagdRSTi, ina cAra
guNasthAnoM taka pratyeka sthAna meM chahoM lezyAyeM hotI haiM  /  dezavirata,
pramattasaMyata aura

Page #338 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 700  **Aparammatasanyata** (Non-Negligent Restraint), **In** (within)
these three **Gunasthanas** (Stages of Conduct), there are three **Shubh
Leshyas** (Auspicious Influences) such as **Tejoleshya** (Influence of
Radiance), etc. And in the **Gunasthanas** that follow, such as **Apuvarkarana**
(Stage of Non-Retrogression), there is one **Shuklaleshya** (White Influence).
The **Chaubasis** (24) for each of the **Ganasthanas** (Stages of Knowledge)
such as **Mithyatva** (False Belief), etc., have been explained earlier.
Therefore, according to that, there are 8 **Chaubasis** in **Mithyatva**, 4 in
**Sasadan** (Stage of Doubt), 4 in **Mitra** (Stage of Friendship), and 4 in
**Avirat Sambandhaat** (Stage of Uninterrupted Connection). The total of these
is 24. Multiplying this by 6, we get 24 x 6 = 144. There are 8 **Chaubasis** in
**Deshavirat** (Stage of Non-Attachment to Place), 8 in **Pramattavirat** (Stage
of Negligent Restraint), and 8 in **Aparammattavirat**. The total of these is
24. Since there are three **Shubh Leshyas** in these three **Ganasthanas**, we
get 24 x 3 = 72. There are 4 **Chaubasis** in the **Apuvarkarana**
**Gunasthan**, but since there is only one **Shuklaleshya** here, we get only 4.
The total number of **Chaubasis** in the aforementioned eight **Gunasthanas** is
144 + 72 + 4 = 220. Multiplying this by 24, we get the total number of
**Udayasthan Vikalpas** (Options for Arising) in the eight **Gunasthanas** as
220 x 24 = 5280. Subsequently, adding 12 for two **Prakrutik Udayasthanas**
(Natural Options for Arising) and 5 for one **Prakrutik Udayasthan**, we get a
total of 17 **Mangas** (Options). Adding these to the total **Udayasthan
Vikalpas**, we get 5280 + 17 = 5297. These 5297 are the **Udayasthan Vikalpas**
that should be known in relation to the **Leshyas**.  The details of these
**Udayasthan Vikalpas** are as follows:  | **Gunasthan** | **Leshya** |
**Gunakar** (Multiplier) | **Gunanphal** (Product) (Udayavikalpa) |
|---|---|---|---| | Mithyatva | 24 | 48 | 1152 | | Sasadan | 24 | 184 | 4424 | |
Mitra | 24 | 48 | 1152 | | Avirat | 24 | 48 | 1152 |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 300 saptatikA prakaraNa apramattasaMyata, ina tIna guNasthAnoM meM tejolezyA
Adi tIna zubha lezyA haiM aura apUrvakaraNa Adi Age ke guNasthAnoM meM eka
zuklalezyA hotI hai| mithyAtva Adi gaNasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM prApta
caubIsI pahale batalAI jA cukI hai| isaliye tadanusAra mithyAtva meM 8, sAsAdana
meM 4 aura mitra meM 4 tathA avirata sambanhATa meM 4 caubAsI huI  /  inakA kula
jor3a 24 huaa| inheM 6 se guNita kara dene para 2446=144 hue| dezavirata meM 8,
pramattavirata meM 8 aura apramattavirata meM 8 caubIsI haiN| jinakA kula jor3a
24 huA  /  ina tIna gaNasthAnoM meM tIna zubha lezyAyeM hone ke kAraNa 244 3=72
hote haiN| apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM 4 caubIsI haiM, lekina yahA~ sirpha eka
zukla lezyA hone se sirpha 4 hI prApta hote haiM  /  ukta ATha guNasthAnoM kI
kula saMkhyA kA jor3a 144-1-72-|-4 =220 huaa| inheM 24 se guNita kara dene para
ATha guNasthAnoM ke kula udayasthAna vikalpa 220424 = 5280 hote haiM  /
anantara inameM do prakRtika udayasthAna ke 12 aura eka prakRtika udayasthAna ke
5 isa prakAra 17 maMgoM ko aura milA dene para kula udayasthAna vikalpa 5280
+17=5267 hote haiN| ye 5267 lezyAoM kI apekSA udayasthAna vikalpa jAnanA cAhiye
/  ina udayasthAna vikalpoM kA vivaraNa kramazaH isa prakAra hai guNasthAna
lezyA guNakAra guNanaphala (udayavikalpa) mithyAtva EX24 1152 sAsAdana 4424 4424
mina 576 1152 avirata EX24

Page #339 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Granth 301 Deshavira 8424 576 8424 576 8x24 Pramattasanyata
Apramattasanyata Apurvakaran Anivritikaran 4x24 Sukshmasampray Now, with respect
to Leshyas, we will explain the Padavand: 68 for Mithyatva, 32 for Sasadan, 32
for Mith, and 60 for Avira Samyagdristi, totaling 68+32+32+60 = 162. Multiplying
these by the possible 6 Leshyas, we get 1152. Then, for Deshavira, 52, for
Pramattavira, 44, and for Apramattavira, 44, totaling 140. Multiplying these by
the possible 3 Leshyas in these three Gunasthanas, we get 420. And for
Apurvakaran, there are 20, but only one Leshya, so its count is 20. Adding all
these, we get 1152+420+20 = 1562. Multiplying these 1562 by 24 with respect to
Bhangas, we get a total of 38208 Padavand for the eight Gunasthanas. Finally,
adding the two Prakrutik and one Prakrutik Padavand, 26, we get a total of 38237
Padavand. It is also said: "When the three are absent, the remaining one arises,
becoming the Leshya. There are 1000 Padavand, and two Sangatis." 1 Panchasangrah
Saptaatika Ga. 117

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 301 dezavirata 8424 576 8424 576 8x24 pramattasaMyata
apramattasaMyata apUrvakaraNa anivRttikaraNa 4X24 sUkSmasaMparAya aba lezyAoM kI
apekSA padavanda batalAte haiM :mithyAtva ke 68, sAsAdana ke 32, mitha ke 32
aura avirata samyagdRSTi ke 60 padoM kA jor3a 68+32+32+60 = 162 huA  /  inheM
yahA~ saMbhava 6 lezyAoM se guNita kara dene para 1152 hote haiN| so dezavirata
ke 52, pramattavirata ke 44 aura apramattavirata ke 44 padoM kA jor3a 140 huaa|
inheM ina tIna guNasthAnoM meM saMbhava 3 leNyAoM se guNita kara dene para 420
hote haiM tathA apUrvakaraNa meM pada 20 haiM, kintu yahA~ eka hI lezyA hai ataH
isakA pramANa 20 huA  /  ina sabakA jor3a 1152+420+2081562 huA  /  ina 1562 ko
bhaMgoM kI apekSA 24 se guNita kara dene para ATha guNasthAnoM ke kula padavRnda
38208 hote haiM  /  anantara inameM do prakRtika aura eka prakRtika padavRnda 26
aura milA dene para kula padavRnda 38237 hote haiM  /  kahA bhI hai tigahINA
seSagnA sapA ya udayANa hoti lesANaM  /  astIsa sAhassAI papANa saya do
sNgtiisaa|| 1 paMcasaMgraha saptatikA gA0 117

Page #340 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Saptatikaprakarana That is, when the udayasthaana and padavṛndas of the mohanīya
karma are multiplied by the leśyās, their total count becomes less than 5267 and
382371. The description of the padavṛndas in relation to the leśyās should be
known as follows: 302 Guṇasthāna Mithyātva Sāsādana Miśra Avirata Deśavirata
Pramattasaṃyata Apramattasaṃyata Apūrvakaraṇa Anivṛttibādara Sūkṣmasaṃparāya
Leśyā Udayapada 6 6 6 6 3 3 1 1 1 1 6kṣ 4 32 32 60 52 44 44 20 1 1 Guṇakāra 24
24 14 24 24 24 4 24 12 4 1. 1 Go. Karmakāṇḍa Gā. 504 and Vikalpa 5267 and
Padavṛnda 382371 are stated. Guṇanaphala (Padavṛnda) 6792 4608 4608 640 3744
3168 3168 450 4 382371 Padavṛnda Leśyās are also mentioned in 505 in relation to
udaya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa arthAt - mohanIya karma ke udayasthAna aura padavRndoM ko
lezyAoM se guNita karane para unakA kula pramANa kama se 5267 aura 382371 hotA
hai| lezyAoM kI apekSA padavRndoM kA vivaraNa isa prakAra jAnanA cAhiye 302
guNasthAna mithyAtva sAsAdana mizra avirata dezavirata pramattasaMyata
apramattasaMyata apUrvakaraNa anivRttivAdara sUkSmasaMparAya lezyA udayapada 6 6
6 6 3 3 1 1 1 1 6kSa 4 32 32 60 52 44 44 20 1 1 guNakAra 24 24 14 24 24 24 4 24
12 4 1. 1 go0 karmakAMDa gA0 504 aura vikalpa 5267 aura padavRnda 38237 batalAye
haiM  /  guNanaphala ( padavRnda) 6792 4608 4608 640 3744 3168 3168 450 4 38237
padavRnda 505 meM bhI lezyAoM ko apekSA udama

Page #341 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  ### 303  After explaining the evidence obtained by
multiplying the possible yogas, uses, and leshyas with the alternatives and
groups of the उदयस्थान (arising place) related to each गुणस्थान (quality place)
of the मोहनीयकर्म (delusion-causing karma), we now consider the सत्तास्थान
(existence places) to explain the संवेध भङ्ग (breaking of perception) of the
संवेध भक् (perception-possessing beings).  **Breaking of Perception of the
Delusion-Causing Karma in the Quality Places**  **तिण्णेगे एगेगं तिग मोसे पंच
चउसु नियट्टिए' तिनि । एक्कार बायरम्मी सुहमे चउ तिनि उवसंते ॥ ४८ ॥**  **Word
Meaning:**  * **सिण:** Three सत्तास्थान (existence places) * **एगे:** One in the
मिथ्यादृष्टि गुणस्थान (false-view quality place) * **एगे:** One in the सासादन
(coarseness) * **तिग:** Three in the मिश्र (mixed) * **मोसे:** Five in each of
the four गुणस्थान (quality places) starting with the अविरत सम्यग्दृष्टि
(uninterrupted right view) * **चउसु:** Four * **नियट्टिए:** Five in the अपूर्व
(unprecedented) * **तिन्नि:** Three in the एवकार (eleven) * **बायरम्मी:** Eleven
in the अनिलवादर (wind-like) * **सुहमे:** Four in the सूक्ष्मसपराय (subtle-
minded) * **चच:** Four * **तिग्नि:** Three * **उबसंते:** Three in the उपशान्त
मोह (calm delusion)  **Verse Meaning:**  There are three सत्तास्थान (existence
places) in the मिथ्यात्व गुणस्थान (false-view quality place), one in the सासादन
(coarseness), three in the मिश्र (mixed), and five in each of the four गुणस्थान
(quality places) starting with the अविरत सम्यग्दृष्टि (uninterrupted right
view). There are three in the अपूर्वकरण (unprecedented action), eleven in the
अनिवृत्तिवादर (non-reversal-like), four in the सूक्ष्मसंपराय (subtle-minded),
and three in the उपशान्तमोह (calm delusion).  **Special Meaning:**  The verse
describes the सत्तास्थान (existence places) in the गुणस्थान (quality places) of
the मोहनीयकर्म (delusion-causing karma). The number of सत्तास्थान (existence
places) in each गुणस्थान (quality place) of the मोहनीयकर्म (delusion-causing
karma) is:  * **Other versions:** The text 'चउसु तिगःपुब्वै' is found in other
versions. This text seems appropriate, but the commentator has followed the text
'नियट्टिए तिशि' and commented accordingly. Therefore, the text 'नियट्टिए तिनि'
is retained here.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 303 isa prakAra mohanIyakarma ke pratyeka guNasthAna
sambandhI udayasthAna vikalpa aura padavRndoM tathA vahA~ sambhava yoga, upayoga
aura lezyAoM se guNita karane para unake prApta pramANa ko batalAne ke bAda aba
saMvedha bhakoM kA kathana karane ke liye sattAsthAnoM kA vicAra karate haiM  /
guNasthAnoM meM mohanIyakarma ke saMvedha bhaGga tiNNege egegaM tiga mose paMca
causu niyaTTie' tini  /  ekkAra bAyarammI suhame cau tini uvasaMte  //  48  //
* I zabdArtha- siNa- tIna sattAsthAna ege - eka mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM ege
eka meM ( sAsAdana meM ), evaM eka, tiga-tIna, mose mizra meM paMca-pAMca, causu
-- avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna Adi cAra meM nipaTTae- apUrva 5. raNa meM
tinni-tIna evakAra-gyAraha, bAyarammI - anilavAdara meM susUkSmasaparAya meM,
caca-cAra, tigni tIna, ubasaMte, upazAnta moha meM  /  . - gAthArtha mohanIyaka
maM ke mithyAtva guNasthAna meM tIna, sAsAdana meM eka, mizra meM tIna, avirata
samyagdRSTi Adi cAra guNasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM pAMca-pAMca, apUrvakaraNa
meM tIna, anivRttivAdara meM gyAraha sUkSmasaMparAya meM cAra aura upazAntamoha
meM tIna sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  vizeSArtha - - gAthA meM mohanIya karma ke
guNasthAnoM meM sattAsthAna vatalAye haiM  /  pratyeka guNasthAna meM
mohanIyAmaM ke mattAsthAnoM ke 1 anya pratiyoM meM, 'causu tigaHpubvai' yaha
pATha dekhane meM AtA hai| ukta pATha samIcIna pratIta hotA hai, kintu TIkAkAra
ne 'niyaTTie tizi' isa pATha kA anusaraNa karake TIkA kI hai, ataH yahA~ bhI
yahI 'niyaTTie tini' pATha rakhA hai |

Page #342 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 304: The Seven Tika  The cause of being has already been discussed.
Therefore, we will only provide a brief summary here:  * **'Tinnege'**: In the
first Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are three Sattastahans: 28, 27, and 26
Prakrutik. * **'Egegam'**: In the second Sasadan Gunasthan, there is only one
Sattastahan: 28 Prakrutik. * **'Lig Mise'**: In the mixed Gunasthan, there are
three Sattastahans: 28, 27, and 24 Prakrutik. * **'Charguga'**: From the fourth
Avira Samyagdristi Gunasthan to the seventh Apmanagan Gunasthan, there are five
Sattastahans in each: 28, 24, 23, 22, and 21 Prakrutik. * **'Apuvrakaran'**: In
the eighth Apuvrakaran Gunasthan, there are three Sattastahans: 28, 24, and 21
Prakrutik. * **'Ekkar Bay Rammi'**: In the ninth Gunasthan - Anivritibadar,
there are eleven Sattastahans: 28, 24, 21, 13, 12, 11, 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1
Prakrutik. * **'Sukshmasampray'**: In the Sukshmasampray Gunasthan, there are
four Sattastahans: 28, 24, 21, and 1 Prakrutik. * **'Tigni Upasante'**: In the
Upshantamoh Gunasthan, there are three Sattastahans: 28, 24, and 21 Prakrutik.
After explaining the Sattastahans of Mohaniyakam in the Gunasthanas, we will now
discuss the Samvedh Bhangas as per the context.  **Verse 1:**  * **'Tinnege
Egegam Do Missee Chadu Su Pan Niyattie. Tini Pa Thuleyar Suhame Basari Tishni
Uvasate.'**  **Explanation:**  * In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 3
Sattastahans, in Sasachan there is 1, in Misra there are 2, and in the four
Gunasthanas starting from Avira Samyagdristi, there are 5 each. In Apuvrakaran
there are 3, in Anivritibadar there are 11, in Sukshmasampray there are 4, and
in Upshantamoh there are 3 Sattastahans.  **Note:**  * The Karmagranth mentions
3 Sattastahans for the Misra Gunasthan, while the Go Karmakand mentions 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 304 saptatikA prakaraNa hone ke kAraNa kA vicAra pahale kiyA jA cukA hai| ata:
yahA~ saMketa mAtra karate haiM ki-'tiNNege'- arthAta pahale mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM 28, 27 aura 26 prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna haiM tathA 'egegaM'
dUsare sAsAdana guNasthAna meM sirpha eka 28 prakRtika sattAsthAna hI hotA hai|
mizra guNasthAna meM 28, 27 aura 24 prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna haiM-'liga
miise'| isake bAda cauthe avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna se lekara sAtaveM
apamanagana guNasthAna tala caragugasthAnoM meM se roka meM 28, 24, 23, 22 aura
21 prakRtika, ye pAMca-pAMca sattAsthAna haiN| AThaveM apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna
meM 28, 24 aura 21 prakRtika ye tIna sattAsthAna haiN| nauveM guNasthAna-
anivRttibAdara meM 28, 24, 21, 13, 12, 11, 5, 4,3,2 aura 1 prakRtika, ye gyAraha
sattAsthAna haiM'ekkAra bAya rammI'  /  sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM 28, 24,
21 aura 1 prakRtika, ye cAra sattAsthAna haiM tathA "tigni upasaMte'
upazAMtamoha guNAsthAna meM 28, 24 aura 21 prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna hote
haiN|' isa prakAra se guNasthAnoM meM mohanIyakama ke sattAsthAnoM ko batalAne
ke bAda aba prasaMgAnusAra saMvedha bhaGgoM kA vicAra karate haiM 1 tiNege
egegaM do misse cadusu paNa NiyaTTIe  /  tiNi pa thUleyAra suhame basAri tiSNi
uvasate  /  /  go0 karmakAMDa gA0 506 mohanIyakama ke mithyASTi guNasthAna meM
3, sAsAcana' meM 1, mizra meM 2, avirata samyagdRSTi Adi cAra guNasthAnoM meM
pAMca-pAMca, apUrvakaraNa meM 3, ani vRtivAdara meM 11, sUkSmasaMpAgaya meM 4
aura upazAmtamoha meM 3 sattAsthAna hai| vizeSa-karmagrantha meM mizca
guNasthAna ke 3 aura go0 karmakAMDa meM 2 sattAsthAna batalAye haiN|

Page #343 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **Mithyatva Gunasthan:**  * 22 Prakruti Bandhastan and 7,
8, 9, and 10 Prakruti are the four Udayasthan.  * Of these, the 7 Prakruti
Udayasthan has only one 28 Prakruti Sattasthan, but the remaining three, 8, 9,
and 10 Prakruti Udayasthan have three Sattasthan: 28, 27, and 26 Prakruti.  *
Thus, the total Sattasthan in Mithyatva Gunasthan are 10 (1 + 343 - 10).
**Sasadan Gunasthan:** * 21 Prakruti Bandhastan and 7, 8, and 9 Prakruti are the
three Udayasthan, each having 28 Prakruti Sattasthan.  * Therefore, there are
three Sattasthan here.  **Mishra Gunasthan:** * 17 Prakruti Bandhastan and 7, 8,
and 9 Prakruti are the three Udayasthan, each having three Sattasthan: 28, 27,
and 24 Prakruti.  * Thus, there are a total of six Sattasthan here.  **Avirat
Samyagdristi Gunasthan:** * 17 Prakruti Bandhastan and 6, 7, 8, and 9 Prakruti
are the four Udayasthan.  * The 6 Prakruti Udayasthan has three Sattasthan: 28,
24, and 21 Prakruti.  * Each of the 7 and 8 Prakruti Udayasthan has five
Sattasthan: 28, 24, 23, 22, and 21 Prakruti.  * The 9 Prakruti Udayasthan has
four Sattasthan: 28, 24, 23, and 22 Prakruti.  * Thus, there are a total of 17
Sattasthan here.  **Deshavirat Gunasthan:** * 13 Prakruti Bandhastan and 5, 6,
7, and 8 Prakruti are the four Udayasthan.  * The 5 Prakruti Udayasthan has
three Sattasthan: 28, 24, and 21 Prakruti.  * Each of the 6 and 7 Prakruti
Udayasthan has five Sattasthan: 28, 24, 23, 22, and 21 Prakruti.  * The 8
Prakruti Udayasthan...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 305 mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 22 prakRtika baMdhasthAna aura
7,8,9 aura aura 10 prakRtika, ye cAra udayasthAna hote haiM  /  inameM se 7
prakRtika udayasthAna meM eka 28 prakRtika sattAsthAna hI hotA hai kintu zeSa
tIna , hai aura 10 prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM 28, 27 aura 26 prakRtika, ye tIna
sattAsthAna saMbhava haiN| isa prakAra mithyAiSTi guNasthAna meM kula
sattAsthAna 10 hue1+343-10  /  sAsAdana guNasthAna meM 21 prakRtika baMdhasthAna
aura 7, 8, 9 prakRtika, ye tIna udayasthAna rahate hue pratyeka meM 28 prakRtika
sattAsthAna haiM  /  isa prakAra yahA~ tIna sattAsthAna hue| mizra guNasthAna
meM 17 prakRtika baMdhasthAna tathA 7, 8 aura hai prakRtika, ina tIna
udayasthAnoM ke rahate hue pratyeka meM 28, 27 aura 24 prakRtika, ye tIna
sattAsthAna hote haiN| ata: yahA~ kula 6 sattAsthAna hue| avirata samyagdRSTi
guNasthAna meM eka 17 prakRtika baMdhasthAna tathA 6, 7, 8 aura 1 prakRtika, ye
cAra udayasthAna hote haiM aura inameM se 6 prakRtika udayasthAna meM to 28, 24
aura 21 prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna hote haiM tathA 7 aura 5 meM se pratyeka
udayasthAna meM 28,24, 23. 22 aura 21 prakRtika, ye pAMca-pAMca sattAsthAna
haiN| prakRtika udayasthAna meM 28, 24, 23 aura 22 prakRtika, ye cAra
sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  isa prakAra yahA~ kula 17 sattAsthAna hue| dezavirata
guNasthAna meM 13 prakRtika baMdhasthAna tathA 5, 6, 7 aura 6 prakRtika, ye cAra
udayasthAna haiN| inameM se 5 prakRtika udayasthAna meM to 28, 24 aura 21
prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna tathA 6 aura 7 prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM se
pratyeka meM 28, 24, 23, 22 aura 21 prakRtika, ye pAMca-pAMca sattAsthAna hote
haiM tathA 8 prakRtika udayasthAna

Page #344 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 7: Sapta-Tika  **Section 306**  In the **Pramat Virat Guna-sthana**,
there are four **Satta-sthana** (states of being) in the **Prakruti Bandha-
sthana** (state of bondage): 25, 24, 23, and 22. Similarly, there are four
**Satta-sthana** in the **Prakruti Udaya-sthana** (state of liberation): 4, 5,
6, and 7.  * In the **Prakruti Udaya-sthana** of 4, there are three **Satta-
sthana**: 28, 24, and 21. * In the **Prakruti Udaya-sthana** of 5 and 6, there
are five **Satta-sthana** each: 25, 24, 23, 22, and 21. * In the **Prakruti
Udaya-sthana** of 7, there are four **Satta-sthana**: 28, 24, 23, and 22.
Therefore, there are a total of 17 **Satta-sthana** in the **Pramat Virat Guna-
sthana**.  In the **A-pramat Samyata Guna-sthana**, one should know the same 17
**Satta-sthana** as in the **Pramat Samyata Guna-sthana**.  In the **A-purva
Karana Guna-sthana**, there are 8 **Prakruti** in the **Bandha-sthana** and 4,
5, and 6 **Prakruti** in the **Udaya-sthana**. Each of these three **Udaya-
sthana** has three **Satta-sthana**: 25, 24, and 21. Therefore, there are a
total of 6 **Satta-sthana** in this **Guna-sthana**.  In the **A-nivritti Bhadar
Guna-sthana**, there are five **Bandha-sthana**: 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1 **Prakruti**.
There are also two **Udaya-sthana**: 2 and 1 **Prakruti**.  * When there are 3
**Prakruti** in the **Bandha-sthana** and 2 **Prakruti** in the **Udaya-
sthana**, there are six **Satta-sthana**: 28, 24, 21, 13, 12, and 11. * When
there are 4 **Prakruti** in the **Bandha-sthana** and 1 **Prakruti** in the
**Udaya-sthana**, there are six **Satta-sthana**: 28, 24, 21, 11, and 4. * When
there are 3 **Prakruti** in the **Bandha-sthana** and 1 **Prakruti** in the
**Udaya-sthana**, there are five **Satta-sthana**: 28, 24, 21, 4, and 3. * When
there are 2 **Prakruti** in the **Bandha-sthana** and 1 **Prakruti** in the
**Udaya-sthana**, there are five **Satta-sthana**: 25, 24, 21, 3, and 2. * When
there is 1 **Prakruti** in the **Bandha-sthana** and 1 **Prakruti** in the
**Udaya-sthana**, there are 28, 24...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 306 saptatikA prakaraNa meM 25, 24 23 aura 22 prakRtika, ye cAra sattAsthAna
hai| isa prakAra yahA~ kula 17 sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  C pramatta virata
guNasthAna meM prakRtika baMdhasthAna tathA 4, 5, 6 aura 7 prakRtika, ye cAra
udayasthAna haiN| inameM se 4 prakRtika udayasthAna meM 28, 24 aura 21
prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  5 aura 6 prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM
se pratyeka meM 25, 24, 23. 22 aura 21 prakR tika ye pAMca-pAMca sattAsthAna
haiM tathA 7 prakRtika udayasthAna meM 28, 24, 23 aura 22 prakRtika, ye cAra
sattAsthAna haiN| isa prakAra yahA~ kula 17 sattAsthAna hote haiM  /
apramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM pUrvokta pramattasaMyata guNasthAna kI taraha 17
sattAsthAna jAnanA cAhiye  /  apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM & prakRtika
baMdhasthAna aura 4, 5 tathA 6 prakRtika udayasthAna tathA ina tIna udavasthAnoM
meM se pratyeka meM 25, 24 aura 21 prakRtika ye tIna-tIna sattAsthAna hote haiN|
isa prakAra yahA~ kula 6 sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  5 anivRttibAdara guNasthAna
meM 5, 4, 3, 2 aura 1 prakRtika, ye pA~ca baMdhasthAna tathA 2 aura 1 prakRtika,
ye do udayasthAna haiN| inameM se pra prakRtika baMdhasthAna aura 2 prakRtika
udavasthAna ke rahate hue 28, 24, 21, 13, 12 aura 11 prakRtika, ye chaha
sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  4 prakRtika baMsthAna aura 1 prakRtika udayasthAna ke
rahate 28, 24, 21. 11, aura 4 prakRtika, ye chaha sattAsthAna haiM  /  3
prakRtika baMdhasthAna aura prakRtika udayasthAna ke rahate 28, 24, 21, 4 aura 3
prakRtika, ye pAMca sattAsthAna haiM  /  2 prakRtika baMdhasthAna aura 1
prakRtika udayasthAna ke rahate 25, 24, 21, 3 aura 2 prakRtika, ye pAMca
sattAsthAna hote haiM aura 1 prakRtika baMdhasthAna va 1 prakRtika udayasthAna
ke rahate hue 28 24,

Page #345 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Granth 307 21. 2 and 1 Prakruti, these are five Satta Sthana. Thus,
there are a total of 27 Satta Sthana here. In the Sukhma Sampraya Gunasthan, in
the absence of bondage, there is one Prakruti Udayasthan and 28, 24, 21 and 1
Prakruti, these are twelve Satta Sthana, and in the Upshanta Moh Gunasthan,
without bondage and Uday, there are 28, 24 and 21 Prakruti, these are three
Satta Sthana. The specific discussion of how many Satta Sthana there are while
having which bondage and Udayasthan has been done in the context of Ogh
Prarupana, so it should be known from there. In this way, so far, the bondage,
etc., places of the remaining seven karmas except for Namakarma have been
indicated in the Gunasthanas. Now consider the Sanvedha Bhangas of Namakarma.
Namakarma's relation in Gunasthanas gora aai tig satt dugam durga tig durga
liyattu chakra | dug ch chau dug pan chau dau dug chau panam eg chau || 46
egegam egegamatt chau matthakevalijinanam. eg chau eg chakra ashtu chaj du
chakkamudayamsa || 50 || 1 Compare ma chhannavattiyasagagi durga tig dug tini
avtar dug dug chad dug van chad chad ureya chad parna ya chad || egegam bhatte
egegam matta eg chad urega vadu ro dosha ghatu bhatte kevalijinanam. daas usa ||
-Go. Karmakot Bha. 663. 664

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 307 21. 2 aura 1 prakRtika, ye pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiN|
isa prakAra yahA~ kula 27 sattAsthAna hue| sUkSma saMpa rAya guNasthAna meM
baMdha ke abhAva meM eka prakRtika udayasthAna tathA 28, 24, 21 aura 1
prakRtika, ye bAra sattAsthAna hote haiM tathA upazAntamoha guNasthAna meM baMca
aura udaya ke binA 28 24 aura 21 prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna hote haiM  /
kisa baMdhasthAna aura udayasthAna ke rahate hue kitane sattAsthAna hote haiM,
isakA vizeSa vivecana ogha prarUpaNA ke prasaMga meM kiyA jA cukA hai, ataH
vahAM se jAnanA cAhiye  /  isa prakAra se aba taka nAmakarma ke sivAya zeSa sAta
karmoM ke baMdha Adi sthAnoM kA guNasthAnoM meM nirdeza kiyA jA cukA hai| aba
nAmakarma ke saMvedha bhaMgoM kA vicAra karate haiM  /  guNasthAnoM meM
nAmakarma ke saMbaMdha maMga gora aai tiga satta dugaM durgA tiga durgA liyaTTu
cakra | duga cha ccau duga paNa cau dau duga cau paNama ega caU  //  46 egegama
egegamaTTa chaumatthakevalijiNANaM  /  ega caU ega cakra aSTu caja du
chakkamudayaMsA  //  50  //  1 tulanA kIjiye ma chaNNavattiyasagagi
durgAtigaduga tiNiavatAra dugadugacadu dugavaNacadu cadureyacadU parNayacadR ||
egegabhaTTa egena maTTa egacaduregavadUro doSa ghaTubhaTTa kevalijiNaM  /  daaas
usA || -go0 karmakoTa bhA0 663. 664

Page #346 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sapta-Tika Chapter  **Sam-bharth:** 6, 9, and 6; 7 and 2; 2, 3, and 2; 3, 8,
and 4; 2, 6, and 4; 2, 5, and 4; 2 and 4; 5, 1, and 4; and 1, 1, and 8; 1, 1,
and 8. Thus, in sequence, they are in the ten Gunasthanas of Uday and Sat-ta-
sthana, and in the Chhadma-sthana Jinas (11th and 12th Gunasthanas), and in the
Kevali Jinas (13th, 14th Gunasthanas), in sequence, 1, 4, and 1, 4, and 8, and
4; 2 and 6 are Uday and Sat-ta-sthana. Their description is as follows:  (From
page 307 of the text)  In the Karma-grantha, in the Go-karma-kanda, there are
different accounts of these Gunasthanas. In Sasadan, it is 3-7-6; in Desha-
birat, it is 2-2-4; in Aprammat-virat, it is 4-1-4; in Sayogi Kevali, it is 2-4.
In the Karma-grantha, the Mang of these Gunasthanas are as follows: In Sasadan,
it is 3-7-2; in Desha-virat, it is 2-6-4; in Aprammat-virat, it is 4-2-4; in
Sayogi Kevali, it is 2-4.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa zambArtha-chaNNava chavakaM-chaha, nau aura chaha, siMga
satta sugaMsona, sAta aura do, duga tiga dhugaM-do, tIna aura do, tigar3ha
sakatIna, ATha aura cAra, duga cha uca-do, chaha aura cAra, duga paNa -do, pAMva
aura cAra, NPA para.-nAra, ko aura cAra, paNaga ega ca-pAMca, eka aura cAra  /
egegama-eka, eka aura ATha, egegamaTTa-eka, eka aura ATha, umasya-chamastha
(upazAntamoha, kSINamoha) kevalijimANakevali bina (sayogi aura ayogi kevalI) ko
anukama se, ega ghaU.. eka aura cAra, ega pakaeka aura cAra, aTTa cau-ATha aura
cAra, chakka-do aura chaha, udayaMsAudaya aura sattA sthAna  /  gAthA-chaha,
nau, chaha; tIna, sAta aura do; do, tIna aura do; tIna, ATha aura cAra; do,
chaha aura cAra; do, pAMca aura cAracAra, do aura cAra: pAMca, eka aura cAra;
tathA eka, eka aura ATha; eka, eka aura ATha; isa prakAra anukrama se baMdha,
udaya aura sattAsthAna Adi ke dasa guNasthAnoM meM hote haiM tathA chadmastha
jina (11 aura 12 guNasthAna) meM tathA kevalI jina (13, 14, guNasthAna) meM
anukrama se eka, cAra aura eka, cAra tathA ATha aura cAra; do aura chaha udaya
va sattAsthAna hote haiN| jinakA vivaraNa isa prakAra hai (oSa pR0 307 kA)
karmagrantha se go0 karmakAMDa meM ina guNasthAnoM ke bhaMga bhinna batalAve
haiN| sAsAdana meM 3-7-6, dezabirata meM 2-2-4 apramattavirata meM 4-1-4 sayogi
phebalI meM 2-4  /  karmagrantha meM ukta guNasthAnoM ke maMga isa prakAra haiM-
sAsAdana meM 3-72, dezavirata meM 2-6-4, apramattavirata meM 4-2-4, sayogikevalI
meM -4  /

Page #347 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Granth Ganasthan Bandhasthan Udayasthan | Sattasthan 1. Mithyatva 2.
Sasadan 3. Mishch 4. Avirat Deshavirat Pramattavirat 7. Apramattavirat
Apuurvakaran 6. Anivrittikaran 17. Sukshmasampray 11. Upashantamoha 12.
Kshinamaha 13. Sayogikevani 14. Ayogikevali  Special Meaning - These two stanzas
explain the Bandha, Udaya and Sattha places of the Name Karma in the Gunasthans.
(1) Mithyashti Gunasthan In the first Mithyashti Gunasthan, the Bandhasthan,
Udayasthan and Sattasthan of the Name Karma are six, nine and six respectively -
'Chhannav Chakkam'. Their explanation is as follows

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha gaNasthAna bandhasthAna udayasthAna | sattAsthAna 1.
mithyAtva 2.. sAsAdana 3. mizca 4. avirata dezavirata pramattavirata 7.
apramattavirata apUrvakaraNa 6. anivRttikaraNa 17. sUkSmasaMparAya 11
upazAntamoha 12. kSINamoha 13. sayogikevAnI 14. ayogikevalI vizeSArtha-ina do
gAthAoM meM guNasthAnoM meM nAmakarma ke baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM ko
batalAyA hai  /  (1) miSyASTi guNasthAna pahale mithyASTi guNasthAna meM
nAmakarma ke baMdhasthAna, udayasthAna aura sattAsthAna krama se chaha, nau aura
chaha haiM-'chaNNava chakkaM' | jinakA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai

Page #348 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 71  **23. 25, 26, 26, 26, and 30 Prakṛtis are the six **Aṇḍha-
sthānas**. Of these, 23 Prakṛtis are **Bandha-sthānas** for the beings who are
capable of binding the **Prakṛtis** of **A-paryāpta Eka-indriya**. After this,
there are four **Bhangas** due to the **Bādar** and **Sūkṣma** and the
alternatives of each and ordinary.   **25 Prakṛtis** are **Bandha-sthānas** for
the beings who are capable of binding the **Prakṛtis** of **Paryāpta Eka-
indriya**, **A-paryāpta Dvī-indriya**, **Trī-indriya**, **Catur-indriya**,
**Tiryāñc Pañc-indriya**, and **Manuṣya** **Gati**. Of these, there are 20
**Bhangas** for the **Paryāpta Eka-indriya**, and for the rest, **A-paryāpta
Dvī-indriya** etc., there is one **Bhang** each. Thus, there are a total of 25
**Bhangas** for the **25 Prakṛtis** **Bandha-sthānas**.  **26 Prakṛtis** are
**Bandha-sthānas** for the beings who are capable of binding the **Prakṛtis** of
**Paryāpta Eka-indriya**. There are 16 **Bhangas** for this. And **28 Prakṛtis**
are **Bandha-sthānas** for the beings who are capable of binding the
**Prakṛtis** of **Devagati** or **Naraka-gati**. Of these, there are 28
**Bhangas** when the **Prakṛtis** of **Devagati** are bound, and there is 1
**Bhang** when the **Prakṛtis** of **Naraka-gati** are bound. Thus, there are 29
**Bhangas** for the **28 Prakṛtis** **Bandha-sthānas**.  **26 Prakṛtis** are
**Bandha-sthānas** for the beings who are capable of binding the **Prakṛtis** of
**Paryāpta Dvī-indriya**, **Trī-indriya**, **Catur-indriya**, **Tiryāñc Pañc-
indriya**, and **Manuṣya** **Gati**. Of these, there are eight **Bhangas** each
for the **26 Prakṛtis** when the **Prakṛtis** of **Paryāpta Dvī-indriya**,
**Trī-indriya**, and **Catur-indriya** are bound. There are 4608 **Bhangas** for
the **26 Prakṛtis** when the **Prakṛtis** of **Tiryāñc Pañc-indriya** are bound,
and there are also 4608 **Bhangas** for the **26 Prakṛtis** when the
**Prakṛtis** of **Manuṣya** **Gati** are bound. Thus, there are a total of 40
**Bhangas** for the **26 Prakṛtis** **Bandha-sthānas**.  **26 Prakṛtis**
**Bandha-sthānas** do not occur with **Mithyā-dṛṣṭi** for the **Tīrthankara**
**Prakṛti** along with **Devagati**, because the binding of the **Tīrthankara**
**Prakṛti** is **Samyak-tvā**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 310 saptatikA prakaraNa 23. 25, 26, 26, 26 aura 30 prakRtika, ye chaha
aMdhasthAna haiN| inameM se 23 prakRtikaH baMdhasthAna aparyApta ekendriya ke
yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle jIva ko hotA hai| isake bAdara aura
sUkSma tathA pratyeka aura sAdhAraNa ke vikalpa se cAra bhaMga hote haiN| 25
prakRtika baMdhasthAna paryApta ekandriya tathA apayAMpta handriya, zrIndriya,
caturindriya, tiryaMca paMcendriya aura manusya gati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha karane bAle jIvoM ke hotA hai| inameM se paryApta ekandriya ke yogya
baMdha hote bhaya 20 bhaMga hote haiM tathA zeSa aparyApta dvIndriya Adi kI
apekSA eka-eka aMga hotA hai| isa prakAra 25 prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke kula
bhaMga 25 hue| 26 prakRtika baMdhasthAna paryApta ekendriya ke yogya baMdha
karane vAle jIva ke hotA hai| isake 16 bhaMga hote haiM tathA 28 prakRtika
baMdhasthAna devagati yA narakagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle
jIva ke hotA hai| inameM se devamati ke yogya 28 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hote
samaya to bhaMga hote haiM aura naraka gati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hote
samaya 1 bhaMga hotA hai  /  isa prakAra 28 prakratika baMdhasthAna ke ha bhaMga
haiN| 26 prakRtika baMdhasthAna paryApta dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya
tiryaMca paMcendriya aura manuSya gati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle
jIvoM ke hotA hai| inameM se paryApta dvIndriya, trIndriya aura jaturindriya ke
yogya 26 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hote samaya pratyeka ke ATha ATha bhaMga hote haiM
/  tiryaMca paMcendriya ke yogya 26 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hote samaya 4608 bhaMga
tathA manuSya gati ke yogya 26 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hote samaya bhI 4605 bhaMga
hote haiN| isa prakAra 26 prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke kula 40 maMgA hote haiN|
tIrthakara prakRti ke sAtha devagati ke yogya 26 prakRtika baMdhasthAna mithyA
dRSTi ke nahIM hotA hai, kyoMki tIrthakara prakRti kA baMdha samyaktva

Page #349 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 6 Karma Granth  **311**  It is said that the 30 natural bondage places are
not suitable for the path of gods because they are caused by the wrong view.
**30**  Each bondage place is suitable for the four-sense, five-sense, and the
wandering five-sense beings.  There are 8 breaks for each of the 30 natural
tendencies suitable for the two-sense, three-sense, and four-sense beings.
There are 46.08 breaks for the 30 natural tendencies suitable for the wandering
five-sense beings.  Therefore, there are a total of 4632 breaks for the 30
natural bondage places.  Although the 30 natural tendencies suitable for the
human path are bound with the Tirthankara nature and the 30 natural tendencies
suitable for the path of gods are bound with the Aharakdvik nature, both of
these places are not possible with the wrong view.  This is because the
Tirthankara nature is bound due to Samyaktva (right faith) and the Aharakdvik
nature is bound due to Samyama (self-control).  It is also said:
**Sammattagunanimittam Tityayar Sanjamen Aharam**  Meaning: The Tirthankara is
bound due to Samyaktva and the Aharakdvik is bound due to Samyama.  Therefore,
the 30 natural bondage places suitable for the human path and the path of gods
are not mentioned here.  In the same way, the breaks of the 23 natural bondage
places, etc., caused by the wrong view are also mentioned in the Antarbhashya
Matha.  The verse of the Bhashya is as follows:  **Chan Panavisa Solas Nav
Pattala Saya Ya Vanauya. Battis Uttarchayaalasapa Micchass Bamdhaviho.**  **1**
The 29 natural tendencies, including the Tirthankara, are bound by the wrong
view.  The Tirthankara is bound due to the lack of faith in Samyaktva and the
wrong view is bound due to the lack of self-control.  - Saptaatika Prakarana
Teeka, Page 223

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SA karmagrantha 311 ke nimitta se hotA hai ataH yahA~ devagati ke yogya 26
prakRtika baMdhasthAna nahIM kahA hai| _ 30 prati baMdhasthA 1 mi micie,
cAridiya aura tiryaMca paMcendriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle
jIvoM ke hotA hai| inameM se paryApta dvIndriya, zrIndriya aura caturindriya ke
yogya 30 pravRttiyoM kA baMdha hote samaya pratyeka ke ATha-ATha bhaMga hote
haiM tathA tiryaMca paMcendriya ke yogya 30 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hote samaya
46.08 bhaMga hote haiM  /  isa prakAra 30 pravRtika baMdhasthAna ke kula bhaMga
4632 hote haiM  /  yadyapi tIrthakara prakRti ke sAtha manuSyagati ke yogya aura
AhArakadvika ke sAtha devagati ke yogya 30 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai kintu
ye donoM hI sthAna mithyA dRSTi ke sambhava nahIM hote haiM, kyoMki tIrthaka ra
prakRti kA baMdha samyaktva ke nimitta se aura AhArakadvika kA baMdha saMyama ke
nimitta se hotA hai| kahA bhI hai sammattaguNanimitta tityayara saMjameNa AhAraM
/  arthAt-tIrthaMkara kA baMdha samyaktva ke nimitta se aura AhArakadvika kA
baMdha saMyama ke nimitta se hotA hai  /  isIliye yahA~ manuSyagati aura
devagati ke yogya 30 prakRtika baMdhasthAna nahIM kahA hai| pUrvokta prakAra se
antarbhASya mAthA meM bhI mithyAdRSTi ke 23 prakRtika Adi baMdhasthAnoM ke
bhaMga batalAye haiN| bhASya ko gAthA isa prakAra hai cana paNavIsA solasa nava
pattAlA sayA ya vANauyA  /  battIsuttarachAyAlasapA micchassa bamdhaviho  //  1
yA tu devagatiprAyogyA tIrthakaranAmasahitA ekonatrizata sA mithyAdRSTenaM
bandhamAyAti, tIrthakaranAmnaH samyaktyapratyayavAda mithyAraNTezca sadamAvAt  /
-saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 223

Page #350 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 73: Mithyaashti  **Meaning:** Mithyaashti. The 21, 5.26, 4, and 3
natural bandhasthanas of the Jiva have 4, 25, 16, 6, 6240, and 4632 bhangas
respectively.  The 31 and 1 natural bandhasthanas of the Jiva are not possible,
hence they are not considered here.  Thus, the six bandhasthanas of the
Mithyaadrishti gunasthana have been stated. Now, the udayasthana are described:
21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, and 31 natural, these are the nine udayasthana.
Their detailed description has been given earlier in relation to different
Jivas, hence they should be understood in the same way here.  The only
difference is that here, the bhangas related to Aharak-samyata, Vaikriya-
samyata, and Kevali should not be mentioned, because these are not Mithyaashti
Jivas.  In the Mithyaashti gunasthana, the total bhangas of these udayasthana
are 7773. They are as follows:  The 21 natural udayasthana has 41 bhangas. 5 for
Ekendriya, 6 for Vikalendriya, 6 for Tiryanch Panchendriya, 6 for Manushya, 8
for Deva, and 1 for Naraka. Their total is 41.  The 24 natural udayasthana has
11 bhangas, which are found in Ekendriya. The 24 natural udayasthana is not
possible elsewhere.  The 25 natural udayasthana has 32 bhangas: 7 for Ekendriya,
6 for Vaikriya Tiryanch Panchendriya, 8 for Vaikriya Manushya, 5 for Deva, and 1
for Naraka. Their total is 7 + 6 + 8 + 5 + 1 = 32.  The 26 natural udayasthana
has 600 bhangas: 13 for Ekendriya, 6 for Vikalendriya, 286 for Tiryanch
Panchendriya, and 286 for Manushya. Their total is 13 + 6 + 286 + 286 = 600.
The 27 natural udayasthana has 31 bhangas: 6 for Ekendriya, 8 for Vaikriya
Tiryanch Panchendriya, 8 for Vaikriya Manushya, 8 for Deva, and 1 for Naraka.
The 28 natural udayasthana has 1196 bhangas...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 312 saptatikA prakaraNa arthAt mithyASTi . jIma ke jo 21, 5.26, 4 . aura 3:
prakRtika baMghasthAna haiM, unake kramazaH 4, 25, 16, 6, 6240 aura 4632 bhaMga
hote haiN| mithyAvRSTi jIva ke 31 aura 1 prakRtika baMghasthAna sambhava nahIM
hone se unakA yahA~ vicAra nahIM kiyA gayA hai| isa prakAra se mithyAdRSTi
guNasthAna ke chaha baMdhasthAnoM kA kathana kiyA gyaa| aba udayasthAnoM kA
nirdeza karate haiM ki 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye nau
udayasthAna haiM  /  nAnA jIvoM kI apekSA inakA pahale vistAra se varNana kiyA
jA cukA hai, ataH usI prakAra yahA~ bhI samajhanA cAhiye  /  itanI vizeSatA hai
ki yahA~ AhArakasaMyata, vaikriyasaMyata aura kebalI saMbaMdhI bhaMga nahIM
kahanA cAhiye, kyoMki ye mithyAiSTi jIva nahIM hote haiM  /  mithyAhRSTi
guNasthAna meM ina udayasthAnoM ke saba bhaMga 7773 haiN| ve isa prakAra haiM ki
21 prakRtika udayasthAna ke 41 bhaMga hote haiN| ekendriyoM ke 5, vikalendriyoM
ke 6, tiryaMca paMcendriyoM ke 6. manuSyoM ke 6, devoM ke 8 aura nArakoM kA 1  /
inakA kula jor3a 41 hotA hai| 24 prakRtika udayasthAna ke 11 bhaMga haiM jo
ekendriyoM meM pAye jAte haiM, anyatra 24 prakRtika udayasthAna saMbhava nahIM
haiN| 25 prakRtika udayasthAna ke 32 bhaMga hote haiM-ekendriya ke 7, vaikriya
tithaMca paMcendriyoM ke , vaikriya manuSyoM ke 8, devoM ke 5 aura nArakoM kA 1
/  inakA kula jor3a 7+++++1=32 hotA hai  /  26 prakRtika udayasthAna ke 600
bhaMga hote hai-eke ndriyoM ke 13, vikalendriyoM ke ra, tiryaMca paMcendriyoM ke
286 aura manuSyoM ke bhI 286  /  inakA jor3a 13+6+286+ 289= 600 hai  /  27
prakRtika udayasthAna ke 31 bhaMga haiMekendriyoM ke 6, vaikriya tiyaMca
paMcendriya ke 8, vaikriya manuSyoM ke 8, devoM ke 8 aura nArakoM kA 1  /  28
prakRtika udayasthAna ke 1196 bhaMga haiM

Page #351 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth (Chapter)  **313**  | | |---| | **Vikaleendri**
(Defective-sense) - 6 | | **Tiyach Panchendri** (Five-sensed animals) - 576 | |
**Vaikriya Tiyach Panchendri** (Transformed Five-sensed animals) - 16 | |
**Manushya** (Humans) - 576 | | **Vaikriya Manushya** (Transformed Humans) - 8 |
| **Deva** (Gods) - 16 | | **Naraka** (Hell beings) - 1 |  **Total:** 6 + 576 +
16 + 576 + 8 + 16 + 1 = **1166**  **26th Prakrutik Udayasthan** (Natural Arising
Place) has **1781** Bhang (Bonds):  | | |---| | **Vikaleendri** - 12 | |
**Tiyach Panchendri** - 1152 | | **Vaikriya Tiyach Panchendri** - 16 | |
**Manushya** - 576 | | **Vaikriya Manushya** - 0 | | **Deva** - 16 | |
**Naraka** - 1 |  **Total:** 12 + 1152 + 16 + 576 + 0 + 16 + 1 = **1781**
**30th Prakrutik Udayasthan** has **2614** Bhang:  | | |---| | **Vikaleendri** -
18 | | **Tiyach Panchendri** - 1728 | | **Vaikriya Tiyach Panchendri** - 0 | |
**Manushya** - 1152 | | **Deva** - 8 |  **Total:** 18 + 1728 + 0 + 1152 + 8 =
**2614**  **31st Prakrutik Udayasthan** has **1964** Bhang:  | | |---| |
**Vikaleendri** - 12 | | **Tiyach Panchendri** - 1152 |  **Total:** 12 + 1152 =
**1164**  Therefore, in the Mithyadrishti Gunasthan (State of False Belief),
there are nine Udayasthan: 21st, 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th, 28th, 29th, 30th, and
31st. They have 41, 11, 32, 600, 31, 1166, 1781, 2614, and 1164 Bhang
respectively. The total number of Bhang in these Udayasthan is **7773**.
Although the total number of Bhang in these Udayasthan is 7761, we subtract 7
Bhang for the Kevali (Omniscient) and Aharak Sadhu (Ascetic with food
restriction) and 3 Bhang for the Vaikriya Manushya with Udyot (Effort),
resulting in **7773** Bhang.  In the Mithyadrishti Gunasthan, there are six
Sattasthan (States of Being): 62nd, 81st, 86th, 86th, 80th, and 78th Prakrutik.
The 93rd Prakrutik Sattasthan, which is the state of Aharak Chatushk (Fourfold
Aharak) and Tirthankara, is not mentioned because they cannot coexist.  The 62nd
Prakrutik Sattasthan is possible for all four Gati (States of Existence) of
Mithyadrishti Jivas (Beings with False Belief) because the Aharak Chatushk can
be born in any Gati. The 81st Prakrutik Sattasthan is not possible for everyone,
but it is possible for those who, after binding the Naraka (Hell) Karma, become
Vedak (Knowers).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 | | SaSTha karmagrantha 313 - vikalendriyoM ke 6, tiyaMca paMcendriyoM ke 576,
vekriya tiryaMca paMcendriya ke 16, manuSyoM ke 576, vaikriya manuSyoM ke 8,
devoM ke 16 aura nArakoM kA 1  /  kula milAkara ye bhaMga 6 + 576+16+476+8+16+1=
1166 hote haiM  /  26 prakRtika udayasthAna ke 1781 bhaMga haiMvikalendriyoM ke
12 tiryaMca paMcendriyoM ke 1152, vaikriya tiyaMca paMcendriyoM ke 16, manuSyoM
ke 576, vaikriya manuSyoM ke ma, devoM ke 16, aura nArakoM kA 1  /  kula
milAkara ye saba bhaMga 1781 hote haiM  /  30 prakRtika udayasthAna ke 2614
bhaMga hai vikalendriyoM ke 18 tiryaMca paMcendriyoM ke 1728, vaikiya tiryaMca
paMcendriya ke manuSyoM ke 1152, devoM ke 8 /  inakA jor3a 18 - 1728+8+1152 + 8
2614 hotA hai  /  31 prakRtika udayasthAna ke bhaMga 1964 hote haiM -
vikalendriyoM ke 12. tiryaca paMcendriyoM ke 1152 jo kula milAkara 1164 hote
haiM  /  isa prakAra mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 26, 30
aura 31 prakRtika, yaha nau udayasthAna haiM aura unake kramazaH 41, 11,32,600,
31. 1166, 1781 2614 aura 1164 bhaMga haiM  /  ina bhaMgoM kA kula jor3a 7773 hai
/  vaise to ina udayasthAnoM ke kula bhaMga 7761 hote haiM lekina inameM se
kevalI ke pa AhAraka sAdhu ke 7, aura udyota sahita vaikiya manuSya ke 3 ina 18
bhaMgoM ko kama kara dene para 7773 bhaMga hI prApta hote haiN| midhyAdRSTi
guNasthAna meM chaha sattAsthAna haiN| jo 62, 86 86, 80 aura 78 prakRtika haiM
/  mithyAtva guNasthAna meM AhAraka-catuSka aura tIrthaMkara nAma kI sattA eka
sAtha nahIM hotI hai, jisase 93 prakRtika sattAsthAna yaha nahIM batAyA hai  /
62 prakRtika sattAsthAna cAroM gati ke midhyAdRSTi jIvoM ke saMbhava hai, kyoMki
AhArakacatuSka kI sattA vAlA kisI bhI gati meM utpanna hotA hai  /  81 prakRtika
sattAsthAna sabake nahIM hotA hai kintu jo narakAyu kA baMdha karane ke pazcAt
vedaka

Page #352 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 73  A being with right faith (Samyakdrishti) who binds the nature of
a Tirthankara, and at the end of time attains false faith (Mithyatva) and goes
to hell, has the existence of 89 natures until the moment of death
(Antarmuhurta) in that false faith. The existence of 88 natures is possible for
beings of false faith in all four paths, as there is no obstacle in the
existence of natures for beings of false faith in the lower realms. The
existence of 86 and 80 natures is for those one-sensed beings who have attained
the natures suitable for the divine path (Devagati) and the hell path
(Narakagati) respectively. When these beings, after leaving the one-sensed
state, are born as two-sensed, multi-sensed, five-sensed animals, and humans,
they also have the existence of 86 and 80 natures until the moment of death,
after all their karmas have matured. However, after this, due to the binding of
the body, etc., the existence of these natures does not remain. The existence of
78 natures is for those beings with fire-like bodies (Agnikayik) and air-like
bodies (Vayukayik) who have attained the natures suitable for the human path
(Manushya Gati) and the path preceding the human path (Manushyanupurvi). When
these beings die and are reborn as two-sensed and multi-sensed animals, they
also have the existence of 78 natures until the moment of death. Thus, in the
state of false faith (Mithyatva Gunasthan), one should know these six states of
existence: 12, 86, 88, 86, 80, and 78 natures.  Now, after discussing the
binding, arising, and existence states in the state of false faith (Mithyatva
Gunasthan) in general, we consider their influence (Sanvegh).  A being of false
faith who binds 23 natures has the possibility of the nine arising states
mentioned earlier. However, the six arising states of 21, 25, 27, 28, 29, and 30
natures do not have the destruction related to the divine and hell realms. This
is because in the binding state of 23 natures, the binding of natures suitable
for imperfect one-sensed beings occurs, but not for imperfect one-sensed beings
who are destined for the divine realms.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 316 saptatikA prakaraNa samyagdRSTi hokara tIrthakara prakRti kA baMdha karatA
hai aura aMta samaya meM mithyAtva ko prApta hokara naraka meM jAtA hai usI
mithyAtvI ke antarmuharta kAla taka mithyAtva meM 89 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI
hai| 88 prakRtiyoM kI sattA cAroM gatiyoM ke mithyASTi jIvoM ke saMbhava hai
goMki bAta misaSTi nIdoM ke prakRtiyoM kI sattA hone meM koI bAdhA nahIM hai| 86
aura 80 prakRtiyoM kI sattA una ekendriya jIvoM ke hotI hai jinhoMne yathAyogya
devagati mA narakagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kI udvalanA kI hai tathA ye jIva jaba
ekendriya paryAya se nikalakara vikalendriya, tiryaMca paMcendriya aura manuSyoM
meM utpanna hote haiM taba inake bhI saba paryAptiyoM ke paryApta hone ke
anantara aMtarmahurta vAla taka 86 aura 20 prakRtiyoM kI sattA pAI jAtI hai  /
kintu isake Age vaikriya zarIra Adi kA baMdha hone ke kAraNa ina sthAnoM kI
sattA nahIM rahatI hai| 78 prakRtiyoM kI sattA una agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika
jIvoM ke hotI hai jinhoMne manuSyagati aura manuSyAnupUrvI kI ubalanA karadI hai
tathA jaba ye jIva marakara vikalendriya aura tiyaMca paMcendriya jIvoM meM
utpanna hote haiM taba inake bhI antarmuhUrta kAla taka 78 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
pAI jAtI hai  /  isa prakAra mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 12, 86, 88, 86, 80 aura 78
prakRtika, ye chaha sattAsthAna jAnanA caahiye| aba sAmAnya se mithyA dRSTi
guNasthAna meM baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM kA kathana karane ke bAda unake
saMvegha kA vicAra karate haiN| 23 prakRttiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle mithyASTi
jIva ke pUrvokta nau udayasthAna saMbhava haiN| kintu 21, 25, 27, 28, 29 aura 30
prakRtika, ina 6 udayasthAnoM meM deva aura nArakA saMbaMdhI jo bhaMga haiM, ve
yahA~ nahIM pAye jAte haiM  /  kyoMki 23 prakRtika badhasthAna meM aparyApta
ekendriyoM ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai parantu deva aparyApta
ekendriyoM ke

Page #353 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter of the Varmagrantha  - **Suitable** **karmas** do not bind
**Devas** (gods), because they are not born in **apeksha** (limited)
**ekendriya** (single-sensed) beings. Similarly, **Narakas** (hell beings) do
not bind **23 karmas**, because **Narakas** do not bind **karmas** suitable for
**ekendriya** beings, even in their **samanya** (general) state. This proves
that **Devas** and **Narakas** do not have **bhang** (destruction) related to
their **udayasthan** (birthplace) in the **23 karma bandha** (binding) state.
Here, there are five **sattaasthan** (states of existence): **62, 68, 86, 80,
and 7 karmas**.  - In the four **udayasthan** of **21, 24, 25, and 26 karmas**,
there are all five **sattaasthan** mentioned above. In the five **udayasthan**
of **27, 28, 29, 30, and 31 karmas**, there are four **sattaasthan** each,
excluding **78 karmas**. Thus, there are a total of **40 sattasthan** in all
**udayasthan**. However, there is a special feature: in the **25 karma
udayasthan**, the **78 karma sattasthan** are only for **agnikayik** (fire-
bodied) and **vayukayik** (air-bodied) beings. Similarly, in the **26 karma
udayasthan**, the **78 karma sattasthan** are also for **agnikayik** and
**vayukayik** beings. And, for those **agnikayik** and **vayukayik** beings who
die and are reborn as **vikaleindriya** (disabled) and **tiryanch** (animal)
**panchendriya** (five-sensed) beings, there is a certain period of **tava**
(suffering).  - The same explanation should be applied to the **25** and **26
karma bandha** states. However, there is a special feature: even while residing
in all their **udayasthan**, **Devas** bind **25** and **26 karmas** suitable
for **paryapt** (sufficient) **ekendriya** beings. But, after the **25 karma
bandha**, only **eight bhang** (destruction) occur for **paryapt** and
**praayogya** (suitable) **karmas**, while the remaining **12 bhang** do not
occur. This is because **Devas** are not born in **sukshma** (subtle),
**sadharan** (ordinary), and **apeksha** (limited) beings. Therefore, they do
not bind **karmas** suitable for these beings. Similarly, there are **40
sattasthan** here as well.  - Those who bind **28 karmas** and have **mithya
drishti** (false belief) have two **udayasthan**: **30** and **31 karmas**. Of
these, the **30 karma udayasthan**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha varmagrantha - yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha nahIM karate haiM, kyoMki deva
aparyApta ekendriyoM meM utpanna nahIM hote haiN| isI prakAra nAraka bhI 23
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha nahIM karate haiM, kyoMki nArakoM ke sAmAnya se hI
ekendriyoM ke yogya pravRttiyoM kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai  /  isase yaha siddha
huA ki 23 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM deva aura nArakoM ke udayasthAna saMbaMdhI
bhaMga prApta nahIM hote haiM tathA yahA~ 62, 68, 86, 80 aura 7 prakRtika ye
pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  21, 24, 25 aura 26 prakRtika ina cAra
udayasthAnoM maiM uktA pA~coM hI sattAsthAna hote haiM tathA 27, 28, 29. 37 aura
31 prakRtika, ina pAMca udayasthAnoM meM 78 ke binA purvokta cAra-cAra
sattAsthAna hote haiN| isa prakAra yahA~ saba dayasthAnoM kI apekSA kula 40
sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki 25 prakrAtika udayasthAna
meM 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna agnikAyika aura vAyu kAyika jIvoM ke hI hote haiM
tathA 26 prakRtika udayasthAna meM 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna agnikAyika aura
vAyukAyika jIvoM ke bhI hotA hai aura jo agnikAyika tathA vAyukAyika jIva
marakara vikalendriya aura tiryaMca paMcendriyoM meM utpanna hote haiM, inake
bhI kucha kAla tavA hotA hai  /  25 aura 26 prakRtika baMdhasthAnoM meM bhI
pUrvokta prakAra kathana karanA cAhiye  /  kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki deva bhI
apane saba udayasthAnoM meM rahate hue paryApta ekendriya ke yogya 25 aura 26
prakRtika sthAnoM kA baMdha karatA hai| parantu isake 25 prakRtika baMdhasthAna
ke bAdara, paryApta aura pratyeka prAyogya ATha hI bhaMga hote haiM, zeSa 12
bhaMga nahIM hote haiN| kyoMki deva sukSma, sAdhAraNa aura aparyAptakoM meM
utpanna nahIM hote haiN| isase usake inake yogya prakutiyoM kA baMdha bhI nahIM
hotA hai| pUrvokta prakAra se yahA~ bhI cAlIsa-cAlIsa sattAsthAna hote haiM  /
28 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle mithyA dRSTi ke 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye do
udayasthAna hote haiM  /  inameM se 30 prakRtika udayasthAna

Page #354 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 316: The Seven Tika  This chapter discusses the five senses and the
natural states of existence for both the Tiryanch (animals) and humans.
**Natural States of Existence:**  * **Tiryanch (animals) and humans both have
natural states of existence.** * **Tiryanch (animals) have five natural states
of existence:** 62, 86, 88, and 86. * **30 natural states of existence include
all four states.** * **Within these 30, 6 natural states are specific to those
who have the Tirthankara nature and who, after falling into Mithyatva (false
belief), bind 28 natures, making them eligible for Naraka (hell).** * **The
remaining three natural states are common to most Tiryanch (animals) and
humans.** * **31 natural states of existence include all three states except for
86.** * **The 86 natural state of existence is associated with the Tirthankara
nature, but Tiryanch (animals) cannot attain the Tirthankara nature. Therefore,
the 86 natural state of existence is excluded from the 31 natural states.** *
**In the 28 natural states of bondage, there are 7 states of existence compared
to the 30 and 31 natural states of existence.**  **States of Existence for
Mithyatva (False Belief) Bound Beings:**  * **Except for the 29 natural states
of bondage that are eligible for Devagati (heavenly realm), the remaining 26
natures that bind beings with impaired senses, Tiryanch (animals) with five
senses, and humans, are associated with six states of existence for Mithyatva
(false belief) bound beings.** * **These six states are: 1 (common to all), 62,
86, 88, 86, 80, and 78.** * **21 natural states of existence include all six
states.** * **The 86 natural state of existence is specific to beings who, after
binding the Naraka (hell) nature, attain Vedaka Samyaktv (perfect knowledge) and
bind the Tirthankara nature.** * **Subsequently, those who fall into Mithyatva
(false belief) and die, are reborn in Naraka (hell). The 62 and 88 natural
states of existence are specific to Devas (gods), Narakas (hell beings), humans,
beings with impaired senses, Tiryanch (animals) with five senses, and beings
with one sense.** * **The 86 and 80 natural states of existence are specific to
beings with impaired senses, Tiryanch (animals) with five senses, humans, and
beings with one sense.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 316 saptatikA prakaraNa tiryaMca paMcendriya aura manuSyoM. donoM ke hotA hai
aura prakRtika udayasthAna tithaMca paMcendriya jIvoM ke hI hotA hai| isake 62,
86, 88 aura 86 prakRtika, ye cAra sattAsthAna hote haiN| inameM se 30 prakRtika
udayasthAna meM cAroM sattAsthAna hote haiN| usameM bhI 6 prakRtika sattAsthAna
usI ke jAnanA cAhiye jisake tIrthakara prakRti ko sattA hai aura jo mithyAtva
meM Akara narakagati ke yogya 28 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA hai  /  zeSa tIna
sattAsthAna prAyaH saba tiryaMca aura manuSyoM ke saMbhava haiM  /  31 prakRtika
udayasthAna meM 86 prakRtika ko chor3akara zeSa tIna sattAsthAna pAye jAte haiN|
86 prakRtika sattAsthAna tIrthaMkara prakRti sahita hotA hai, parantu tiryaMcoM
meM tIrthaMkara prakRti kI sattA saMbhava nahIM, isIliye 31 prakRtika
udayasthAna meM 86 prakRtika sattAsthAna kA niSedha kiyA hai| isa prakAra 28
prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM 30 aura 31 prakRtika, do udayasthAnoM kI apekSA 7
sattAsthAna hote haiN| devagatiprAyogya 29 prakRtika baMdhasthAna ko chor3akara
zeSa vikalendriya, tithaMca paMcendriya aura manuSya gati ke yogya 26 prakRtiyoM
kA baMdha karane vAle mithyAdRSTi jIba ke sAmAnya se pUrvokta 1 udayasthAna aura
62, 86, 88, 86, 80 aura 78 prakRtika, ve chaha sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  inameM
se 21 prakRtika udayasthAna meM sabhI sattAsthAna prApta haiM  /  usameM bhI 86
prakRtika sattAsthAna usI jIva ke hotA hai jisane narakAyu kA baMdha karane ke
pazcAt vedakaH samyaktva ko prApta karake tIrthakara prakRti kA baMdha kara liyA
hai| anantara jo mithyAtva meM jAkara aura marakara nArakoM meM utpanna huA hai
tathA 62 aura 88 prakRtika sattAsthAna deva, nAraka, manuSya, vikalendriya,
tiryaMca paMcendriya aura ekendriyoM kI apekSA jAnanA caahiye| 86 aura 80
prakRtika sattAsthAna vikalendriya, tiryaMca paMcendriya, manuSya aura
ekendriyoM kI

Page #355 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth, Chapter 317  One should know the **Sattastana** (state of
being) in relation to the 78 **Prakrutis** (natural tendencies). These
**Sattastana** are for **Ekendriya** (one-sensed), **Vikalendriya** (imperfect-
sensed), and **Tiryanch Panchendriya** (five-sensed animals).   In the 24
**Prakrutik Udayastana** (stages of development), there are 5 **Sattastana**
excluding the 86 **Prakrutis**. These 5 **Sattastana** should be known in
relation to all **Ekendriya** beings, as the other beings do not have 24
**Prakrutik Udayastana** except for the **Ekendriya**.  In the 25 **Prakrutik
Udayastana**, there are all six **Sattastana** mentioned earlier. Their specific
consideration should be known similar to the 21 **Prakrutik Udayastana**.  In
the 26 **Prakrutik Udayastana**, there are five **Sattastana** excluding the 8
**Prakrutis**. The reason for the absence of these 8 **Prakrutis** is that the
**Sattastana** of the being who is born in **Naraka** (hell) exists in the
**Mithyatva Gunasthan** (state of false belief), but **Naraka** does not have 26
**Prakrutik Udayastana**.  In the 27 **Prakrutik Udayastana**, there are five
**Sattastana** excluding the 78 **Prakrutis**. The discussion regarding the 86
**Prakrutik Sattastana** should be known as before, and the 62 **Prakrutik
Sattastana** should be known in relation to **Deva** (gods), **Naraka**,
**Manushya** (humans), **Vikalendriya**, **Tiryanch Panchendriya**, and
**Ekendriya**.  The 56 and 80 **Prakrutik Sattastana** should be known in
relation to **Ekendriya**, **Vikalendriya**, **Tiryanch Panchendriya**, and
**Manushya**. The reason for not mentioning the 78 **Prakrutik Sattastana** here
is that the 27 **Prakrutik Udayastana** exist for **Agnikaayik** (fire-bodied)
and **Vayukaayik** (air-bodied) beings, except for **Atap** (sun) or **Udyot**
(moon) along with other **Ekendriya**, or for **Naraka**. However, these beings
do not possess the 78 **Prakrutis**.  In the 28 **Prakrutik Udayastana**, these
same five **Sattastana** exist. Therefore, the discussion regarding the 2, 86,
and **Prakrutik Sattastana** is as before, and the 56 and **M** **Prakrutik**
(the specific number is missing in the text) **Sattastana** should be known in
relation to **Vikalendriya**, **Tiryanch Panchendriya**, and **Manushya**.
Similarly, in the 29 **Prakrutik Udayastana**, these five **Sattastana** should
be known. In the 30 **Prakrutik...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 d SaSTha karma grantha 317 apekSA jAnanA cAhiye  /  78 prakRtika sattAsthAna
ekendriya, vikalendriya aura tiryaMca paMcendriyoM kI apekSA jAnanA cAhiye  /
24 prakRtika udayasthAna meM 86 prakRtika ko chor3akara zeSa 5 sattAsthAna haiN|
jo saba ekendriyoM kI apekSA jAnanA cAhiye, kyoMki ekendriyoM ko choDakara zeSa
jIvoM ke 24 prakRtika udayasthAna nahIM hotA hai  /  25 prakRtika udayasthAna
meM pUrvokta chahoM sattAsthAna hote haiN| inakA vizeSa vicAra 21 prakRtika
udayasthAna ke samAna jAnanA cAhiye  /  26 prakRtika udayasthAna meM 8 ko
chor3akara zeSa pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  yahA~ 8 prakRtika sattAsthAna
nahIM hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki mithyAtva guNasthAna meM usa jIva ke yaha
sattAsthAna hotA hai jo nArakoM meM utpanna hone vAlA hai kintu nArakoM ke 26
prakRtika udayasthAna nahIM hotA hai  /  27 prakRtika udayasthAna meM 78 ke vinA
zeSa pA~ca sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  86 prakRtika sattAsthAna hone sambandhI
vivecana to pUrvavat jAnanA cAhiye tathA 62 aura prakRtika sattAsthAna deva
nAraka, manuSya, vikalendriya tiryaMca paMcendriya aura ekendriyoM kI apekSA
jAnanA cAhiye  /  56 aura 80 prakRtika sattAsthAna ekendriya vikalendriya,
tiryaMca paMcendriya aura manuSyoM kI apekSA jAnanA cAhiye  /  yahA~ jo 78
prakRtika sattAsthAna nahIM batAyA hai, usakA kAraNa yaha hai ki 27 prakRtika
udayasthAna agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIvoM ko chor3akara Atapa yA udyota ke
sAtha anya ekendriyoM ke hotA hai yA nArakoM ke hotA hai kintu unameM 78
prakRtiyoM kI sattA nahIM pAI jAtI hai  /  28 prakRtika udayasthAna meM ye hI
pA~ca sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  so inameM 2, 86 aura prakRtika sattAsthAnoM kA
vivecana pUrvavat hai tathA 56 aura ma0 prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna
vikalendriyoM, tiryaMca paMcendriyoM aura manuSyoM ke jAnanA cAhiye  /  26
prakRtika udayasthAna meM bhI isI prakAra pA~ca sattAsthAna jAnanA cAhiye  /  30
prakRtika "

Page #356 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of Seven Tika  In the **Udayasthan** (state of arising), there
are four **Sattastahan** (states of existence) for the **62, 88, 86, and 80
Prakruti** (types of beings): these are to be known in relation to
**Vikalendriya** (disabled senses), **Tiyanch Panchendriya** (animals with five
senses), and **humans**. **Narakas** (hells) do not have 30 **Prakruti**
**Udayasthan**, therefore, the 86 **Prakruti** is not mentioned here. In each
**Udayasthan**, these same four **Sattastahan** exist, which are to be known in
relation to **Vikalendriya** and **Tiyanch Panchendriya**. Thus, a
**Mithyadristi** (false-sighted) being who binds 26 **Prakruti** has 45
**Sattastahan**.  For beings eligible for **Manushya** (human) and **Devagati**
(heavenly) realms, the 30 **Prakruti** **Bandhastan** (states of bondage) are
excluded. The remaining **Vikalendriya** and **Tiyanch Panchendriya** beings,
who bind 30 **Prakruti**, have six **Udayasthan** as mentioned earlier,
excluding the 86, and the remaining five **Sattastahan**. Here, the 89
**Prakruti** **Sattastahan** is not possible because a being with 89
**Prakruti** **Sattastahan** does not bind **Tiyanch** (animal) **Gati** (realm)
**Prakruti**. In these four **Udayasthan** of **21, 24, 25, and 26 Prakruti**,
the five **Sattastahan** are to be known as before. The remaining **Udayasthan**
of **27, 28, 29, 30, and 31 Prakruti** have four **Sattastahan** each, excluding
the 78 **Prakruti**. Thus, a **Mithyadristi** being who binds 30 **Prakruti**
has a total of 40 **Sattastahan**.  The description of the **Bandha** (bondage),
**Udaya** (arising), and **Sattastahan** (states of existence) of a
**Mithyadristi** being, and their **Samvedha** (perception), is complete. This
is how it should be understood.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa udayasthAna meM 62, 88, 86, aura 80 prakRtika, ye cAra
sattAsthAna haiN| jinako vikalendriya, liyaMca paMcendriya aura manuSyoM kI
apekSA jAnanA cAhiye  /  nArakoM ke 30 prakRtika udayasthAna nahIM hotA hai ataH
yahA~ 86 prakRtika smaraNAna nahIM kahA gayA pratika udayasthAna meM bhI ye hI
cAroM sattAsthAna hote haiM jo vikalendriya aura tiyaMca paMcendriyoM kI apekSA
jAnanA cAhiyo  /  isa prakAra 26 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle mithyAdRSTi
jIva ke 45 sattAsthAna hote haiN| manuSya aura devagati ke yogya 30 prakRtika
baMdhasthAna kI chor3aphara zeSa vikalendriya aura tiryaMca paMcendriya ke yogya
30 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle mithyAdRSTi jIva ke sAmAnya se pUrvokta 6
udayasthAna aura 86 ko chor3akara zeSa pA~ca-pAMtra sattAsthAna hote haiM  /
yahA~ 89 prakRtika sattAsthAna saMbhava nahIM hone kA kAraNa yaha hai 89
prakRtika saptAsthAna vAle jIva ke tirya cagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
nahIM hotA hai  /  yahA~ 21, 24, 25, 26 prakRtika ina cAra udayasthAnoM meM una
pA~ca satAsthAnoM kA kathana to pahale ke samAna jAnanA cAhiye tathA zeSa rahe
27, 28, 29, 30 aura 31 prakRtika udayasthAna, so inameM se pratyeka meM 78
prakRlika ke sivAya zeSa cAra sattAsthAna hote haiN| isa prakAra 30 prakRtiyoM
kA baMdha karane vAle mithyA dRSTi jIva ke kula 40 sattAsthAna hote haiN|
mithyAiSTi jIva ke baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM aura unake saMvedha kA
kathana samApta huA  /  jinakA vivaraNa isa prakAra jAnanA cAhiye

Page #357 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Vashta Karmagranth  **Bandhastan**  * 23 Prakrutiks * 25 Prakrutiks *
Prakrutiks * Mang * 4 * 25 * 66  **Udayasthan**  * 21 * 24 * 25 * 26 * DIY * 27
* 28 * 26 * Uw f *  * 31 * or irror * 21 * 24 * 25 * 26 * 27 * m * 28 *  * உபு *
26 * woa * 31 * 21 * 24 * 25 * 26 * 27 *  * 26 * 30 * 31 * Bhang * 32 * 11 * 23
* 600 * 22 * 1182 * 1764 * 2606 1164 * 40 * 11 * 31 * 600 * 30 * 1168 * 1780 *
2614 * 1164 * 40 * ?? * 31 * 607 * 30 * 1168 * 1780 * 2614 * 1664  **Sattastan**
* 1268078 62,66, 80, 78 6285 86 80, 78 62,88,86,80, 78 2,586 80 * £3, 5, 5, Co *
62,88,86,80 * 2056, 80 2806,80 * 62,88,86,8070 2866,8078 * 62.8868078 62. 85 86
80,78 * 3, 55, 55, 5 * 62,88,86,80 12,88,86,80 62.8866,50 £3, 55, c, co * 319 *
62,88,86,8078 £2, 5, 50, 95 62.85 86 8078 ER, 5, 58, 50, 195 62,88,86,80 *
6,88,86,50 * 6.2666,80 * 6.2,88,86,80 * 6.28860

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaSTha karmagrantha baMdhasthAna 23 prakRtika 25 prakRtika prakRtika maMga 4 25
66 udayasthAna 21 24 25 26 DIY 27 28 26 Uw f wd 31 or irror 21 24 25 26 27 m 28
// upu 26 woa 31 21 24 25 26 27 '' 26 30 31 bhaMga 32 11 23 600 22 1182 1764
2606 1164 40 11 31 600 30 1168 1780 2614 1164 40 ?? 31 607 30 1168 1780 2614
1664 sattAsthAna 1268078 62,66, 80, 78 6285 86 80, 78 62,88,86,80, 78 2,586 80
PS3, 5, 5, Co 62,88,86,80 2056, 80 2806,80 62,88,86,8070 2866,8078 62.8868078
62. 85 86 80,78 3, 55, 55, 5 62,88,86,80 12,88,86,80 62.8866,50 PS3, 55, c, co
319 62,88,86,8078 PS2, 5, 50, 95 62.85 86 8078 ER, 5, 58, 50, 195 62,88,86,80
6,88,86,50 6.2666,80 6.2,88,86,80 6.28860

Page #358 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 320 ## Chapter of the Seventies ## Bandha-sthāna, ## Mang ## Udaya-sthāna ##
Mang ## Satta-sthāna ## 28 Prakṛtik ## 62, 80 62, 88 12, 88 ## E2, EF 1976 62,
88 ## 12, 88 286. 62, 86, 88, 86 1152 | 12, 88, 86 ## 1247 ## Prakṛtik ## | 62,
86, 8, 96. 87, 78 ## 62, 8, 86, 80, 78 62, 86, 88, 86, 80, 78 62, 86, 8, 86, 80,
78 12, 86, 45, 86, . 62, 86, 88, 86, 80 ## 1761 ## 2614 ## 1164 ## 62, 86, 88,
86, 87 62, 6, 8, 6 ## Prakṛtik ## 6.2, 86, 8, 86, 80, 78 62, 88, 86, 80, 78 62,
89, 88, 6, 80, 78 62, 88, 86, 80, 78 12, 86, E8, 86, 80 ## 62, 86, 88, 86, 50
781 12, 86, 8, 86, 50 ## 12, 26, 8, 6, 80 1164 | 62, 88, 86, 80 ## | 13626 | 53
|

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 320 saptatikA prakaraNa baMghasthAna, maMga udayasthAna maMga sattAsthAna 28
prakRtika 62. 80 62, 88 12, 88 E2, EF 1976 62,88 12, 88 286. 62,86, 88, 86 1152
| 12,88, 86 1247 prakRtika |62, 86, 8, 96.87, 78 62, 8,86, 80, 78 62, 86, 88,
86, 80,78 62, 86, 8,86,80,78 12, 86, 45, 86, . 62, 86, 88, 86, 80 1761 2614 1164
62, 86, 88, 86, 87 62, 6, 8, 6 prakRtika 6.2, 86, 8,86, 80, 78 62, 88, 86, 80,
78 62, 89,88, 6, 80, 78 62, 88, 86, 80, 78 12, 86, E8, 86, 80 62, 86, 88, 86, 50
781 12, 86, 8, 86, 50 12, 26, 8, 6, 80 1164 | 62,88, 86, 80 | 13626 | 53 |

Page #359 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Grantha (2) Sāsādana Guṇasthāna  After describing the bondage
(bandha) and other states of the first guṇasthāna, now the bondage and other
states of the second guṇasthāna are being described as 'tiga satta duṃga'. This
means that there are 3 bondage-states (bandhasthāna), 7 rise-states
(udayasthāna), and 2 existence-states (sattāsthāna). Their explanation is as
follows:  In the Sāsādana guṇasthāna, the 28th, 29th, and 30th prakṛtis are
impure (maliṃ), which are called mānāmāna. Out of these, the 28 prakṛtic
bondage-states (prakṛtika-bandhasthāna) are of two types - hell-gati-prāyogya
and deva-gati-prāyogya. For the Sāsādana samyagdṛṣṭi jīvas, the bondage of hell-
gati-prāyogya does not occur, but the bondage of deva-gati-prāyogya does occur.
Its binders (bandhaka) are the adequate (paryāpta) infernal five-sensed beings
(tiryañca-pañcendriya) and humans. Its āyu (lifespan) gets destroyed (bhanga).
Out of the 26 prakṛtic bondage-states, there are many sub-types, but out of
them, the two sub-types that are bondable for the Sāsādana are - tiryañca-gati-
prāyogya and manuṣya-gati-prāyogya. These two are bound by the one-sensed
(ekendirya), defective-sensed (vikala-indriya), infernal five-sensed (tiryañca-
pañcendriya), human, divine, and murderous (māraka) beings. Here, its total
modifications (bheda) are 6400, because although the Sāsādana binds the 26
prakṛtis of tiryañca-gati-prāyogya or manuṣya-gati-prāyogya, they do not bind
the prakṛtis of hunda-saṃsthāna and sevārtha-yojanam, as the bondage of these
two prakṛtis occurs only in the mithyātva guṇasthāna. Thus, here the
permutations and combinations of 5 saṃhanana, 5 saṃsthāna, auspicious and
inauspicious vihāyogati-dvandva, stable-unstable dvandva, auspicious-
inauspicious dvandva, handsome-ugly dvandva, melodious-discordant dvandva,
respectable-disrespectable dvandva, and fame-infamy dvandva result in 3200
modifications. These 3200 modifications are both tiryañca-gati-prāyogya and
manuṣya-gati-prāyogya. Thus, the total of both is 6400.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha (2) sAsAdama guNasthAma pahale guNasthAna ke baMdha Adi
sthAnoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba dUsare guNasthAna ke baMdha Adi sthAnoM kA
nirdeza karate haiM ki-'tiga satta dugaM'  /  arthAt 3 baMdhasthAna haiM, 7
udayasthAna haiM aura 2 sattAsthAna haiM  /  jinakA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai
sAsAdana guNamA meM 28, 29 ra 20 maSita, kIna mAmAna haiN| inameM se 28
prakRtika baMdhasthAna do prakAra kA hai-jarakagatiprAyogya aura
devagatiprAyogya | sAsAdana samyagdRSTi jIvoM ke narakagatiprAyogya kA to baMdha
nahIM hotA kintu devagatiprAyogya kA hotA hai| usake baMdhaka paryApta tiryaMca
paMcendriya aura manuSya hote haiM  /  isake Aya bhaMga hote haiN| 26 prakRtika
baMbhasthAna ke aneka bheda hai kintu unameM se sAsAdana ke baMdhane yogya do
bheda haiM-tiryaMcagatiprAyogya aura manuSya gatiprAyogya  /  ina donoM ko
sAsAdana ekendriya, vikalendriya, tiryaca paMSendriya, manuSya, deva aura mAraka
jIva bAMdhate haiN| yahA~ usake phUla bhaMga 6400 hote haiN| kyoMki yadyapi
sAsAdana tiryacatiprAyogya yA manuSyagatiprAyogya 26 prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhate haiM
to bhI ve huMDasaMsthAna aura sevArta yahanana kA baMdha nahIM karate haiM,
kyoMki ina donoM prakRtiyoM kA baMdha mithyAtva guNasthAna meM hI hotA hai|
jisase yahA~ pA~ca saMhanana, pAMca saMsthAna, prazasta aura aprazasta
vihAyogati yugala, sthira-asthira yugala, zubha-azubha yugala, subhaga-durbhaga
yugala, susvara-duHsvara yugala, AdeyaanAdeya yugala aura yaza:kIti-ayaza:koti
yugala, isa prakAra inake paraspara guNita karane para 3200 bhaMga hote haiN| ye
3200 bhaMga tiyaMcagatizAyogya bhI hote haiM aura manuSyagatiprAyogya bhI hote
haiN| isa prakAra donoM kA joDa 6400 hotA hai|

Page #360 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  322 Paravis Sa J 7 30 Although there are many varieties of the 30 natural
bondage places, only one with a single effort is suitable for binding in the
Sasadan and is applicable to the Tiryanch. This is bound by the Sasadan, the
one-sensed, the multi-sensed, the Tiryanch, the five-sensed, the human, the
divine, and the hellish beings. It has a total of 3200 breaks. Thus, in the
Sasadan Gunasthan, there are three bondage places and their 8 + 6400 + 3200 -
608 breaks. The same is said in the commentary verse. A Say Poosh Battis Saya Ya
Sasane Meya. ager Sambaan'avahin Chhan Uyi.  Meaning, in the Sasadan, there are
6400 and 3200 varieties of the 28 initial bondage places in order, and all of
them together are 6608. Thus, three bondage places are mentioned in the Sasadan
Gunasthan. Now, the direction of the Udayasthan is given, that 21, 24, 25, 26,
29, 30, and 31 natural, these are the seven Udayasthan. . Of these, the 21
natural Udayasthan are of the one-sensed, the multi-sensed, the controlled, the
five-sensed, the human, and the divine. In the hellish beings, the Sasadan
Samyakdrishti beings are not born, so the 21 natural Udayasthan of the hellish
beings are not mentioned in the Sasadan. While the one-sensed have 21 natural
Udayasthan, with the Badar and the Paryapt, there are two possible breaks due to
the alternative of Yash-Kirti, because the Sasadan Jina is not born in the
subtle and the insufficient, so the one-one break that occurs with each and the
insufficient in the multi-sensed, the Tiryanch, the five-sensed, and the humans
is not possible here. The remaining breaks are possible, which are two-two for
the multi-sensed, thus six, and for the Tiryanch, the five-sensed, the humans,
and the divine. Thus, the total number of breaks for the 21 natural Udayasthan
is 32 (2 + 6 + 6 + 6 + 832). ,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 322 paarvis saa J 7 30 prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke bhI yadyapi aneka bheda haiM
kintu sAsAdana meM ba~dhane yogya eka udyota sahita tiryaMcagatiprAyogya hI hai|
jise sAsAdana ekendriya vikalendriya tiryaMca paMcendriya manuSya deva aura
nAraka jIva bA~dhate haiN| isake kula 3200 bhaMga hote haiN| isa prakAra
sAsAdana guNasthAna meM tIna baMdhasthAna aura unake 8+6400 + 3200 - 608 bhaMga
hote haiN| bhASya gAthA meM bhI isI prakAra kahA gayA hai  /  a ya saya poSa
battIsa sayA ya sAsaNe meyA  /  ager sambANa'vahina chaNNa uI  //  arthAt
sAsAdana meM 28 Adi baMdhasthAnoM ke krama se pa 6400 aura 3200 bheda hote haiM
aura ye saba milakara 6608 hote haiM  /  isa prakAra se sAsAdana guNasthAna meM
tIna baMdhasthAna batalAye | aba udayasthAnoM kA nirdeza karate haiM ki 21, 24,
25, 26, 29, 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye sAta udayasthAna hote haiM  /  . inameM se
21 prakRtika udayasthAna ekendriya vikalendriya niyaMtra paMcendriya manuSya
aura devoM ke hotA hai| nArakoM meM sAsAdana samyakdRSTi jIva utpanna nahIM hote
haiM jisase sAsAdana meM nArakoM ke 21 prakRtika udayasthAna nahIM kahA hai|
ekendriyoM ke 21 prakRtika udayasthAna ke rahate hue bAdara aura paryApta ke
sAtha yazaHkIrti ke vikalpa se do bhaMga saMbhava haiM, kyoMki sUkSma aura
aparyAptoM meM sAsAdana jIna utpanna nahIM hotA hai, jisase vikalendriya tiryaca
paMcendriya aura manuSyoM ke pratyeka aura aparyApta ke sAtha jo eka-eka bhaMga
hotA hai vaha yahA~ saMbhava nahIM hai  /  zeSa bhaMga saMbhava haiM jo
vikalendriyoM ke do-do, isa prakAra se chaha hue tathA tiryaMca paMcendriyoM ke
manuSyoM ke aura devoM ke hote haiN| isa prakAra 21 prakRtika udayasthAna ke
kula 32 bhaMga (2+6+6+6+832) hue| ,

Page #361 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth, 323  **24.** The 24th natural उदयस्थान (state of arising)
occurs only in those beings who are born as one-sensed beings. Here, there are
only two types of भंग (breakage) due to the alternatives of sufficient and
insufficient केकीति (knowledge) and यशःकीर्ति (fame) and अयशःकीर्ति (infamy).
The remaining भंग do not occur because in the case of subtle, ordinary,
agnikayik (fire-bodied) and vayukayik (air-bodied) beings, the सासादन (state of
being a Samyagdrishti) does not arise.  **25.** In the सासादन गुणस्थान (state of
being a Samyagdrishti), the 25th natural उदयस्थान is attained by those who are
born as gods. Its भंग occur due to the alternatives of stable, unstable,
auspicious, inauspicious, यशःकीर्ति (fame) and अयशःकीर्ति (infamy).  **26.** The
26th natural उदयस्थान occurs only in those who are born as विकलेन्द्रिय
(disabled), तिर्यंच (animal), पंचेन्द्रिय (five-sensed) and humans. In the case
of insufficient beings, the सासादन (state of being a Samyagdrishti) does not
arise. Therefore, in this state, the one भंग that is found with the insufficient
is not possible here, but the remaining भंग are possible. There are two भंग for
each विकलेन्द्रिय, thus six in total, 288 for तिर्यंच पंचेन्द्रिय, and 288 for
humans. Thus, the 26th natural उदयस्थान has a total of 582 भंग.  **27 & 28.**
The reason why the 27th and 28th natural उदयस्थान do not occur in the सासादन
गुणस्थान (state of being a Samyagdrishti) is that they occur after the passage
of one अन्तर्मुहूर्त (a very short period of time) of the new birth, but the
सासादन भाव (state of being a Samyagdrishti) is attained for a maximum of six
आवली काल (a very long period of time) after its origin. Therefore, the said 27th
and 28th natural उदयस्थान are not considered to be सासादन सम्यग्दृष्टि (a
Samyagdrishti who has attained the सासादन state).  **29.** The 26th natural
उदयस्थान occurs for the पर्याप्त (sufficient) देव (gods) and नारक (hell beings)
who have fallen from their first सम्यक्त्व (right knowledge). In the 26th
natural उदयस्थान, there is one भंग for gods and one for hell beings, thus a
total of two भंग here.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 323 24 prakRtika udayasthAna unhIM jIvoM ke hotA hai jo
ekendriyoM meM utpanna hote haiN| yahA~ isake bAra aura paryApta kekIti aura
ayazaH kIrti ke vikalpa se do hI bhaMga hote haiM, zeSa bhaMga nahIM hote haiM,
kyoMki sUkSma, sAdhAraNa, agnikAyika aura vAyukAyika jIvoM meM sAsAdana
samyagdRSTi jIva utpanna nahIM hotA hai  /  sAsAdana guNasthAna meM 25 prakRtika
udayasthAna usI ko prApta hotA hai jo devoM meM utpanna hotA hai| isake sthira
asthira, zubha -azubha aura yazaH kIrti ayazaHkIrti ke vikalpa se bhaMga hote
haiN| 8 26 prakRtika udayasthAna unhIM ke hotA hai jo vikalendriya tiryaMca
paMcendriya aura manuSyoM meM utpanna hote haiN| aparyApta jIvoM meM sAsAdana
samyagdRSTi jIva utpanna nahIM hote haiN| ataH isa sthAna meM aparyApta ke sAtha
jo eka bhaMga pAyA jAtA hai, vaha yahA~ saMbhava nahIM kintu zeSa bhaMga
saMbhava haiN| vikalendriyoM ke do-do, isa prakAra chaha, tithaMca paMcendriyoM
ke 288 aura manuSyoM ke 288 hote haiN| isa prakAra 26 prakRtika udayasthAna kula
milAkara 582 bhaMga hote haiM  /  meM sAsAdana guNasthAna meM 27 aura 28
prakRtika udayasthAna na hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki ve navIna bhava grahaNa ke
eka antarmuhUrta ke kAla ke jAne para hote haiM kintu sAsAdana bhAva utpatti ke
bAda adhika se adhika kucha kama 6 AvalI kAla taka hI prApta hotA hai  /
isIliye ukta 27 aura 28 prakRtika udayasthAna sAsAdana samyagdRSTi ko nahIM mAne
jAte haiM  /  I 26 prakRtika udayasthAna prathama samyaktva se cyuta hone vAle
paryApta svasthAna gata devoM aura nArakoM ko hotA hai| 26 prakRtika udayasthAna
meM devoM ke aura nArakoM ke 1 isa prakAra isake yahA~ kula bhaMga hote haiM  /

Page #362 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **324** **Chapter on the Seven Tika**  **30** The first
*udayasthan* (stage of arising) from the state of *samyaktv* (perfect knowledge)
is for *tiryanch* (non-human beings) and humans, and for the gods who exist in
response to them. There are 1152 *udayasthan* for each of the *tiryanch* and
humans, and 6 for the gods. Thus, there are 1152 + 1152 + 6 = 2312 *bhang*
(destructions).  **31** The first *udayasthan* from the state of *samyaktv* is
for *tiryanch*. Here, there are a total of 1152 *bhang*. Thus, there are 7
*udayasthan* and their *bhang* in the *sasadan* (state of existence) *gunasthan*
(stage of qualities). These *bhang* are also counted in the *bhashya*
(commentary) *gatha* (verse) as follows:  *Basīs bonni aṭṭa ya bāsīpa saya ya
pancha nava udaya. Pāhiga vīsa pāpagnēkāras saya.*  This means that the 21st,
24th, 25th, 26th, 27th, 30th, and 31st *prakritik* (natural) *udayasthan* of the
*sasadan* *gunasthan* have 32, 2, 8, 582, 6, 2312, and 1152 *bhang*
respectively.  After explaining the seven *udayasthan* of the *sasadan*
*gunasthan*, we now need to explain the *sattaasthan* (stages of existence).
There are two *sattaasthan*, the 62nd and 88th *prakritik*. The 62nd *satta* is
attained by those who, having bound the *aharaka chatushk* (fourfold food) and
become free from *upshamni* (hindrance), attain the *sasadan* state. The 88th
*satta* is attained by the *sasadan* beings of all four *gati* (paths).  Thus,
one should understand the *bandh* (bondage), *uday*, and *sattaasthan* of the
*sasadan* *gunasthan*. Now, let us consider their *sanvedh* (perception).  The
*sasadan* *savyagdristi* (those who have clear vision) who bind the 20th
*prakritik* have 30...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 324 saptatikA prakaraNa 30 prakRtika udayasthAna prathama samyaktva se cyuta
hone vAle paryApta tiyaMca aura manuSyoM ke yA uttara dikriyA meM vidyamAna
devoM ke hotA hai| 30 prakRtika udayasthAna meM tithaMca aura manuSyoM meM se
pratyeka ke 1152 aura devoM ke 6. isa prakAra 1152+-1152++=2312 bhaMga hote
haiN| 31 prakRtika udayasthAna prathama samyaktva se cyuta hone vAle paryApta
tiryacoM ke hotA hai| yahA~ isake kula 1152 bhaMga hote haiM  /  isa prakAra
sAsAdana guNasthAna meM 7 udayasthAna aura unake bhaMga hote haiN| bhASya gAthA
meM bhI inake bhaMga nimna prakAra se ginAye haiM basIsa bonni aTTa ya bAsIpa
sayA ya paMca nava udyaa| pAhigA vIsA pApagnekArasa sayA  //  arthAt sAsAdana
guNasthAna ke jo 21, 24, 25, 26, 26, 30 aura 31 prakRtika, sAta udayasthAna
haiM; unake kramazaH 32, 2, 8, 582, 6, 2312 aura 1152 bhaMga hote haiM  /
sAsAdana guNasthAna ke sAta udayasthAnoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba sattAsthAnoM ko
batalAse hai ki yahA~ 62 aura 88 prakRtika, ye do sattA. sthAna haiN| inameM se
jo AhAraka catuSka kA baMdha karake upazamaNi se nyuta hokara sAsAdana bhAva ko
prApta hotA hai, usake 62 kI sattA pAI AtI hai, anya ke nahIM aura 88 prakRtiyoM
kI sattA cAroM gatiyoM ke sAsAdana jIvoM ke pAI jAtI hai  /  isa prakAra se
sAsAdana guNasthAna ke baMdha, udaya aura sattAsthAnoM ko jAnanA cAhiye  /  aba
inake saMvedha kA vicAra karate haiN| 20 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle
sAsAdana sabhyagdRSTi ko 30 aura

Page #363 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma-Manas  **325**  **31** There are two **Udayasthanas** (places of
arising): **30** and **31** **Prakritis**. While discussing **Bandhastanas**
(places of bondage) earlier, it was mentioned that **Sāsādan** beings, who are
capable of attaining **Devagati** (heavenly state), bind **26** **Prakritis**,
while **Namātrātrākor** beings bind **18** **Prakritis**. However, even among
**Sāsādan** beings, only those who are **Karana-paryāpta** (sufficient in their
karmic causes) are capable of binding **Devagati**. Therefore, apart from these
two **Udayasthanas** (**30** and **31** **Prakritis**), no other
**Udayasthanas** are possible.  Now, if we consider the **Udayasthanas** of
**30** **Prakritis** in relation to humans, then two **Sattasthanas** (places of
existence) are possible: **62** and **88** **Prakritis**. However, if we
consider the **Udayasthanas** of **30** **Prakritis** in relation to **Tiryach**
(non-human) beings with five senses, then only one **Sattasthan** is possible:
**88** **Prakritis**. This is because the **Sattasthan** of **62** **Prakritis**
is only attained by those who have fallen from the **Upasama-śreṇi** (state of
calmness) and have attained the **Sāsādan** state. However, the **Upasama-
śreṇi** is not possible for **Tiryach** beings. Therefore, the **Sattasthan** of
**62** **Prakritis** is excluded here.  For **Sāsādan** beings who bind **26**
**Prakritis**, which is possible for both **Tiryach** beings with five senses
and humans, all seven previously mentioned **Udayasthanas** are possible. Among
these, all **Udayasthanas** except for the **Udayasthan** of **30**
**Prakritis** result in the **Sattasthan** of **88** **Prakritis**. However, in
the **Udayasthan** of **30** **Prakritis**, both **Sattasthanas** are possible
for humans: **62** and **88** **Prakritis**. The **Bandhastan** of **30**
**Prakritis** should be mentioned as equal to the **Bandhastan** of **26**
**Prakritis**.  In the **Udayasthan** of **31** **Prakritis**, only the
**Sattasthan** of **31** **Prakritis** is attained. This is because the
**Udayasthan** of **31** **Prakritis** is only attained by **Tiryach** beings.
Thus, there are a total of **8** **Sattasthanas** in the **Sāsādan**
**Gunasthan** (state of karmic qualities). The details of **Bandhastanas**,
**Udayasthanas**, **Sattasthanas**, and their relationships in the **Sāsādan**
**Gunasthan** should be understood in this way.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmamanya 325 31 prakRtika, ye do udayasthAna hote haiN| pUrva meM
baMdhasthAnoM kA vicAra karate samaya yaha batAyA jA cukA hai ki sAsAdana jIva
devagatiprAyogya hI 26 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA hai, namAtitrAkora 18 prakRti
kA. nhiiN| usameM bhI karaNaparyApta sAsAdana jIva hI devagatiprAyogya ko
bAMdhatA hai| isaliye yahA~ 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ina do udayasthAnoM ke alAvA
anya zeSa udayasthAna saMbhava nahIM haiN| aba yadi manuSyoM kI apekSA 30
prakRtika udayasthAna kA vicAra karate haiM to vahA~ 62 aura 88 prakRtika, ye do
sattAsthAna saMbhava haiM aura yadi tiryaMca paMcendriyoM kI apekSA 30 prakRtika
udayasthAna kA vicAra karate haiM to vahA~ 88 prakRtika, yaha eka hI sattAsthAna
saMbhava haiM kyoMki 62 prakRtiyoM ko sattA usI ko prApta hotI hai jo
upazamazreNi se cyuta hokara sAsAdana bhAva ko prApta hotA hai kintu tiryacoM
meM upazamatheNi saMbhava nahIM hai| ata: yahA~ 62 prakRtika sattAsthAna kA
niSedha kiyA hai| tiryaca paMcendriya aura manuSyoM ke yogya 26 prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha karane vAle sAsAdana jIvoM ke pUrvokta sAtoM hI udayasthAna saMbhava hai,
inameM se aura saba udayasthAnoM meM to eka 88 prakRtiyoM kI hI sattA prApta
hotI hai kintu 30 ke udaya meM manuSyoM ke 62 aura 88 prakRtika, ye donoM hI
sattAsthAna saMbhava hai| 26 ke samAna 30 prakRtika baMdhasthAna kA bhI kathana
karanA caahiye| 31 prakRtika udayasthAna meM prakRtiyoM kI hI sattA prApta hotI
hai| kyoMki 31 prakRtika udayasthAna tiryaMcoM ke hI prApta hotA hai| isa
prakAra sAsAdana guNasthAna meM kula 8 sattAsthAna hote haiN| sAsAdana
guNasthAna ke baMdha, udaya aura sattAsthAnoM aura saMbaMdha kA vivaraNa isa
prakAra jAnanA cAhiye

Page #364 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
326 Sapta-tika Prakarana Bansa-sthana Mang Udaya-sthana Bhang Satta-sthana 2312
| 62,88 Prakrutik CE 26 Prakrutik 2312 1152 3Rad Prakrutik

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 326 saptatikA prakaraNa baMSasthAna maMga udayasthAna bhaMga sattAsthAna 2312 |
62,88 prakRtika CE 26 prakRtika 2312 1152 3Rad prakRtika

Page #365 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth (3) Mixed Gunasthan  After explaining the Bandha (bond)
etc. locations of the second Sasadan Gunasthan, we now discuss the five etc.
locations of the third Mixed Gunasthan. In the Mixed Gunasthan, there are two
Bandha (bond) locations, three Udaya (arising) locations, and two Satya
(existence) locations. Their details are as follows:  28 and 26 Prakruti
(natural) are the Bandha (bond) locations. Of these, 28 Prakruti Bandha (bond)
locations are for Tiryanch (animals) and humans, as they bind the Prakruti
(natural) suitable for Dev (heavenly) state in the Mixed Gunasthan. There are 8
Bhang (divisions) here.  26 Prakruti Bandha (bond) locations are for Dev
(heavenly) and Narak (hell) beings. This is because they bind the Prakruti
(natural) suitable for human state in the Mixed Gunasthan. There are also 8
Bhang (divisions) here.  In both locations, these Bhang (divisions) are obtained
from the alternatives of stable-unstable, auspicious-inauspicious, and fame-
infamy. 24242, the remaining Bhang (divisions) are not obtained because only the
remaining auspicious Paravartaman (transmigrating) Prakruti (natural) are bound
by Samyak (right) and Mithyadristi (wrong) vision beings.  After mentioning the
Bandha (bond) locations, we now explain the Udaya (arising) locations. 26, 30,
and 31 Prakruti are these three Udaya (arising) locations. 29 Prakruti Udaya
(arising) location is for Dev (heavenly) and Narak (hell) beings. This location
has 8 Bhang (divisions) for Dev (heavenly) and 1 for Narak (hell), totaling 6
Bhang (divisions). 30 Prakruti Udaya (arising) location is for Tiryanch
(animals) and humans. It has 1152 Bhang (divisions) for Tiryanch (animals) and
1152 for humans, totaling 2304. 31 Prakruti Udaya (arising) location is only for
Tiryanch (animals) with five senses. It has a total of 1152 Bhang (divisions).
Thus, in the Mixed Gunasthan, the three Udaya (arising) locations have 6 + 2304
+ 1152 = 3465 Bhang (divisions).  In the Mixed Gunasthan, there are two Satya
(existence) locations - 62 and 88 Prakruti. Thus, the Bandha (bond), Udaya
(arising), and Satya (existence) locations of the Mixed Gunasthan should be
understood as 2, 3, and 2 respectively.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha (3) mizra guNasthAna dUsare sAsAdana guNasthAna ke baMdha
Adi sthAnoM kA nirdeza karane ke bAda aba tIsare mizra guNasthAna ke paMca Adi
sthAnoM kI keyana karate haiM  /  midha guNasthAna meM-'duga tiga durga'-do
baMdhasthAna, tIna udayasthAna aura do sattAsthAna haiN| jinakA vivaraNa isa
prakAra hai ki 28 aura 26 prakRtika, ye baMghasthAna hote haiN| inameM se 28
prakRtika baMdhasthAna tiryaMca aura manuSyoM ke hotA hai, kyoMki ye mizra
guNasthAna meM devagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karate haiN| isake yahA~ 8
bhaMga hote haiN| 26 prakRtika baMdhasthAna deva aura nArakoM ke hotA hai|
kyoMki ve mizra guNasthAna meM manuSyagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karate
haiM  /  isake bhI 8 bhaMga hote haiM  /  donoM sthAnoM meM ye bhaMga sthira-
asthira, zubhaazubha aura yazaHkIti-ayazaHkIti ke vikalpa se prApta hote haiN|
24242, zeSa bhaMga prApta nahIM hote haiM kyoMki zeSa zubha parAvartamAna
prakRtiyA~ hI samyaga mithyAdRSTi jIva bAMdhate haiN| yahA~ baMdhasthAnoM kA
kathana karane ke bAda aba udayasthAna batalAte haiM ki 26, 30 aura 31 prakRtika
ye tIna udayasthAna haiM  /  29 prakRtika udayasthAna deva aura nArakoM ke hotA
hai  /  isa sthAna ke devoM ke 8 aura nArakoM ke 1 isa prakAra 6 bhaMga hote
haiN| 30 prakRtika udayasthAna tiryaMca va manuSyoM ke hotA hai| isameM
tithaMcoM ke 1152 aura manuSyoM ke 1152 bhaMga hote haiM jo kula milAkara 2304
haiN| 31 prakRtika udayarathAna tiryaMca paMcendriyoM ke hI hotA hai  /  isake
yahA~ kula milAkara 1152 bhaMga hote haiN| isa prakAra mizra guNasthAna meM
tInoM udayasthAnoM ke 6+2304-+ 1152= 3465 bhaMga hote haiN| mizra guNasthAna meM
do sattAsthAna haiM-62 aura 88 prakRtika  /  isa prakAra mizra guNasthAna ke
baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAna kramazaH 2, 3 aura 2 samajhanA caahiye|

Page #366 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seven Tika  The bondage of the substances (Prakṛtis) and
the arising of the substances (Prakṛtis), these are the two arisings.  The
thirty and thirty-one stages of the Right-seeing (Samyakdṛṣṭi) and the Wrong-
seeing (Mithyā-dṛṣṭi) and the sixty-two and the seven stages in each arising
stage are considered by those who contemplate this.  There are twenty-six stages
of arising of the substances (Prakṛtis) for one who is bound by twenty-six
substances (Prakṛtis) and sixty-two and the seven stages of existence.  In the
mixed quality stage (Miśra Guṇasthāna), there are six stages of existence for
three stages of arising.   The details of the bondage, arising, and existence
stages of the mixed quality stage should be known as follows:  | Bondage Stage |
Substances (Prakṛtis) | Arising Stage | Substances (Prakṛtis) | Existence Stage
| |---|---|---|---|---| | 25 | 26 | 20 | 31 | 62.85 | | 2 | 8 | 26 | 3 | 62.88 |
| Mang | 15 | - | - | 62.88 | | - | 16 | - | - | 6 |  **(4) The Uninterrupted
Right-seeing Quality Stage (Avirata Samyakdṛṣṭi Guṇasthāna)**  After explaining
the bondage, etc., stages in the mixed quality stage, now we explain the
bondage, etc., stages in the fourth Uninterrupted Right-seeing Quality Stage. In
this quality stage, there are three bondage stages, eight arising stages, and
four existence stages - 'Tigatthacaca!' They should be known as follows: 25,
26...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa prakRtiyoM kA baMdha prakRtika, ye do udaya isake saMkA
vicAra karate haiM karane vAle samyagmithyAdRSTi ke 30 aura 31 sthAna tathA
pratyeka udayasthAna meM 62 aura sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  26 prakRtiyoM ke
baMdhaka ke eka 26 prakRtikA udayasthAna tathA 62 aura prakRtika, ye do
sattAsthAna hote haiN| isa prakRtika, ye do-do 326 prakAra mizra guNasthAna meM
tIna udayasthAnoM kI apekSA chaha sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  mizra guNasthAna ke
baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAna ke saMvedha kA vivaraNa isa prakAra jAnanA
cAhiye baMbasthAna 25 prakRtika 26 prakRtika 2 maMga 8 15 16 - udayasthAna 20 31
26 3 bhaMga 2304 1152 st 3465 sattAsthAna 62.85 62,88 62,88 6 (4) avirata
samyaSTi guNasthAna mizra guNasthAna meM baMdha Adi sthAnoM ko batalAne ke bAda
aba cauthe avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna ke baMdha Adi sthAnoM ko batalAteM
haiM ki isa guNasthAna meM tIna baMghasthAna, ATha udayasthAna aura cAra
sattAsthAna haiM- 'tigaTThacaca !' ve isa prakAra jAnanA cAhiye ki 25, 26

Page #367 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **329 and 30 Prakruti are the three Bandha Sthana. Of
these, the 28 Prakruti Bandha Sthana of Avirat Samyagdrishti Tiryanch and
humans, who bind the Prakruti suitable for Devagati, are present. Avirat
Samyagdrishti Tiryanch and humans do not bind the Prakruti suitable for the
remaining Gati, therefore, the 28 Prakruti Bandha Sthana suitable for Narakagati
is not present here.**  **26 Prakruti Bandha Sthana is obtained in two ways. One
is for humans who bind with the Tirthankara Prakruti along with the Prakruti
suitable for Devagati. It has 8 Bhang. The second is for Devas and Narakas who
bind with the Prakruti suitable for Manushya Gati. Here also, there are 8 Bhang.
The 30 Prakruti Bandha Sthana of Devas and Narakas who bind with the Tirthankara
Prakruti along with the Prakruti suitable for Manushya Gati is present. It also
has 8 Bhang.**  **Now, we will explain the 8 Udaya Sthana. In the Avirat
Samyagdrishti Gunasthan, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 and 31 Prakruti are the 8
Udaya Sthana. Of these, the 21 Prakruti Udaya Sthana should be known for
Narakas, Tiryanch Panchendriya, humans and Devas. Because, for one who has
attained Kshayik Samyagdarshan after the binding of Ayukarma, the 21 Prakruti
Udaya Sthana is possible in all four Gati. But, Avirat Samyagdrishti does not
arise in Apariapta, therefore, excluding the Bhang related to Apariapta, the
remaining Bhang...**  **...1. For humans, 31 Prakruti is bound along with the
Tirthankara, suitable for Devagati. Here also, there are 8 Bhang. For Devas and
Narakas, 31 Prakruti is bound, suitable for Manushya Gati. Here also, there are
8 Bhang. For them, 30 Prakruti is bound along with the Tirthankara, suitable for
Manushya Gati. Here also, there are 8 Bhang.**  **- Sapttatika Prakaran Toka,
Page 230**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 329 aura 30 prakRtika, ye tIna baMdhasthAna haiN| inameM se
devagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle avirata samyagdRSTi tiryaMca
aura manuSyoM ke 28 prakRtika baMghasthAna hotA hai  /  avirata samyagdRSTi
tiryaMca aura manuSya zeSa gatiyoM ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha nahIM karate,
isaliye yahA~ narakagati ke yogya 28 prakRtika baMthasthAna nahIM hotA hai| _ 26
prakRtika baMdhasthAna do prakAra se prApta hotA hai| eka to tIrthakara prakati
ke sAtha devagAMta ke yogya pratiyoM kA saMcakArane vAle manuSyoM ke hotA hai  /
isake 8 bhaMga hote haiN| dUsarA manuSyagati ke yogyA prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
karane vAle deva aura nArakoM ke hotA hai| yahAM bhI ATha bhaMga hote haiN|
tIrthakara prakRti ke sAtha manuSyagati ke yogya prakR. tiyoM kA baMdha karane
vAle deva aura nArakoM ke 30 prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai  /  isake bhI ATha
bhaMga hote haiM  /  _ aba ATha udayasthAnoM ko batalAte haiM ki avirata
samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye 8
udayasthAna haiN| inameM se 21 prakRtika udayasthAna nAraka, tiryaMca
paMcendriya, manuSya aura devoM ke jAnanA caahiye| kyoMki jisane Ayukarma ke
baMdha ke pazcAt kSAyika samyagdarzana ko prApta kiyA hai, usake cAroM gatiyoM
meM 21 prakRtika udayasthAna saMbhava hai| kintu avirata samyagdRSTi aparyAptoM
meM utpanna nahIM hotA ata: yahA~ aparyApta saMbaMdhI bhaMgoM ko chor3akara zeSa
bhaMga ====-.... 1 manuSyANAM devagatiprAyobhyaM tIrthaMkarasahitaM
baghnatAmekonatrizat, atrApyaSTo bhaMgAH  /  deba-narayikANAM manurAgatiprAyogya
banatAmekonatriMzat, atrApi ta evASTo maMgAH  /  veSAmeva manuSyagatiprAyogya
tIrthakarasahitaM banatA priMzat, atrApi ta evASTo maMgAH  /  - saptatikA
prakaraNa TokA, pR. 230

Page #368 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
330 Chapter of the Seventies , There are 25 total, which are the 6+6+8-1 of the
gods, hell beings, and humans of the five-sensed beings.  One should know the 25
and 27 natural arising places of the gods and hell beings, and the reacting
animals and humans. Here, the 25 and 27 natural places of the hell beings and
gods are said to be the owner of the hell beings, the omniscient with
destruction, or the omniscient with destruction. The god is one with any of the
three omnisciences. In the Churni, it is said in the same way: "Twenty-five -
two hundred and seventy - in the world of the non-liberated, the liberated, and
the humans, it is said. Hell beings - the omniscient with destruction, the god -
the omniscient with three." That is, in the state of the uninterrupted
omniscience, there are 25 and 27 natural arising places of the gods, hell
beings, and reacting animals and humans. So, of these, the hell being is either
the omniscient with destruction or the omniscient with destruction, but the god
is one of the three omnisciences. The 26 natural arising places are of the
omniscient with destruction or the omniscient with destruction, and of the
humans. The omniscient with destruction being does not arise in the animals and
humans. Therefore, the three types of omniscient beings are not mentioned here.
Even in that, one should know the omniscience with destruction in relation to
the existence of the 22 natures of the delusion of the animals. 1 Twenty-five,
twenty-seven arising places, gods, hell beings, reacting animals, and humans,
are to be understood by the authority. There, the hell being is the omniscient
with destruction, the omniscient with destruction, the god is also the
omniscient with three. - Commentary on the Chapter of the Seventies, p. 230

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 330 saptatikA prakaraNa , pAye jAte haiM jo tiyaMca paMcendriya ke manuSyoM ke
devoM ke da aura nArakoM kA 1 hai  /  isa prakAra kula milAkara 6+6+8-|-1=25
haiM  /  25 aura 27 prakRtika udayasthAna deva aura nArakoM tathA vikriyA karane
vAle tiryaMca aura manuSyoM ke jAnanA cAhiye  /  yahA~ jo 25 aura 27 prakRtika
sthAnoM kA nAraka aura devoM ko svAmI batalAyA hai so yaha nAraka vedaka
samyagdRSTi yA kSAyika samyagdRSTi hI hotA hai aura deva tInoM meM se kisI bhI
samyagdarzana vAlA hotA hai| cUrNi meM bhI isI prakAra kahA hai paNavIsa -
satabIsobayA bebaneraie viubbiyatiritha mathue ya paDucca  /  nerago - vegasamma
hiTThI devo tivihasammaddiSTTI vi  //  arthAt avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM
25 aura 27 prakRtika udayasthAna deva, nAraka aura vikriyA karane vAle tiyaMtra
aura manuSyoM ke hotA hai| so inameM se aisA nAraka yA to kSAyika samyagdRSTi
hotA hai yA vedaka samyaSTi, kintu deva ke tInoM samyagdarzanoM meM se koI eka
hotA hai| 26 prakRtika udayasthAna kSAyika samyagdRSTi yA vedaka samyagdRSTi
titheca aura manuSyoM ke hotA hai  /  aupazamika samyagdRSTi jIva tiryaca aura
manuSyoM meM utpanna nahIM hotA hai| ataH yahA~ tInoM prakAra ke samyagdRSTi
jIvoM ko nahIM kahA hai  /  usameM bhI tiyaMcoM ke mohanIya kI 22 prakRtiyoM kI
sattA kI apekSA hI yahA~ vedaka samyaktva jAnanA cAhiye  /  1 paMcavizati
saptaviMzatyudayau deva- naravikAn vaikriya tiryaG manuSyAzcAdhikRtyAvaseyau  /
tatra nairayikaH kSAyikasamyagdRSTidaka samyagdRSTiva, devastrividhasamyaSTirapi
/  - saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 230

Page #369 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **331**  The 28 and 26 natural upadayas (arising) occur
for the uninterrupted Samyagdarshi (right-seeing) beings in all four gatis
(states of existence). **30** The natural upadaya occurs for the Panchendriya
(five-sensed), humans, and Devas (gods), and **31** the natural upadaya occurs
only for the Panchendriya. In this way, one should know that there are 8 upadaya
sthana (places of arising) in the uninterrupted Samyagdarshi gunasthana (state
of qualities).  Now, we will discuss the satta sthana (places of existence).  In
the uninterrupted Samyagdarshi gunasthana, there are four satta sthana: 63, 92,
86, and 8 natural. Of these, the one who has bound 31 prakritis (natural
tendencies) with the Tirthankara and Aharaka (food-giver) in the Aprammatta-
samyata (unwavering restraint) and Apurvakarana (unprecedented action)
gunasthana, and after death became an uninterrupted Samyagdarshi, has 63
prakritis in his satta. The one who first bound the Aharaka Chatushk (four food-
givers) and then, due to a change in the parinam (transformation), went into
Mithyatva (false belief) and was born in one of the four gatis, upon attaining
Samyagdarshan (right-seeing) again in that gati, has 62 natural satta sthana in
all four gatis. However, for Devas and humans, the 62 natural satta sthana is
formed in this uninterrupted Samyagdarshi gunasthana without attaining
Mithyatva. The 86 natural satta sthana occurs for the uninterrupted Samyagdarshi
Devas, Narakas (hell beings), and humans. Because in these three gatis, the
Tirthankara prakriti is constantly being assimilated. However, a being with the
Tirthankara prakriti in his satta is not born in the Tiryancha (animal) gati,
therefore, the Tiryancha are not included here. The 88 natural satta sthana
occurs for the uninterrupted Samyagdarshi beings in all four gatis. In this way,
one should know the bandha (binding), upadaya, and satta sthana in the
uninterrupted Samyagdarshi gunasthana.  Now, we will consider their samvaidha
(relationship) - that of the uninterrupted Samyagdarshi being who has bound 28
prakritis, in comparison to the Tiryancha and humans...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 331 28 aura 26 prakRtika udaya cAroM gatiyoM ke avirata
samyagdRSTi jIvoM ke hotA hai| 30 prakRtika udayasthAna tithaMca paMcendriya,
manuSya aura devoM ke hotA hai tathA 31 prakRtika udayasthAna tithaMca
paMcendriyoM ke hI hotA hai| isa prakAra se avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM 8
udayasthAna jAnanA cAhiye  /  aba sattAsthAnoM kA nirdeza karate haiM avirata
samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM 63, 92, 86 aura 8 prakRtika, ye cAra sattAsthAna
haiN| inameM se jisa apramattasaMyata aura apUrvakaraNa guNasthAnavI jIya ne
tIrthakara aura AhAraka ke sAtha 31 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha kiyA aura pazcAt
marakara avirata samyagdRSTi ho gayA to usake 63 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai|
jisane pahale AhAraka catuSka kA baMdha kiyA aura usake bAda pariNAma badala
jAne se mithyAtva meM jAkara jo cAroM gatiyoM meM se kisI eka gati meM utpanna
huA usake usa gati meM punaH samyagdarzana ke prApta ho jAne para. 62 prakRtika
sattAsthAna cAroM gatiyoM meM bana jAtA hai  /  kintu deva aura manuSyoM ke
mithyAtva ko prApta kiye binA hI isa avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM 62
prakRtiyoM kI sattA bana jAtI hai  /  86 prakRtika sattAsthAna avirata
samyagdRSTi deva, nAraka aura manuSyoM ke hotA hai  /  kyoMki ina tInoM gatiyoM
meM tIrthakara prakRti kA samArjana hotA rahatA hai| kintu tIrthakara prakRti kI
sattA vAlA jIva tiryaMcoM meM utpanna nahIM hotA hai ata: yahA~ tiryaMcoM kA
grahaNa nahIM kiyA hai, aura 88 prakRtika sattAsthAna cAroM gatiyoM ke avirata
samyagdRSTi jIvoM ke hotA hai  /  isa prakAra avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM
baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM ko jAnanA cAhiye  /  aba inake saMvaidha kA
vicAra karate haiM ki 28 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle avirata samyagdRSTi
jIva ke tiryaMca aura manuSyoM kI apekSA

Page #370 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 73  There are 8 **Udayasthanas**. Out of these, 25 and 27 are
**Prakrutik Udayasthanas** for **Tiryanch** and **Manushya** respectively, while
the remaining six are **common**. Each of these **Udayasthanas** has two
**Sattaasthanas**, 62 and 86 **Prakrutik**.  The **Prakrutik Bandhasthanas** are
of two types, **Devagatiprayogya** and **ManushyaGatiprayogya**, with 26
**Prakrutik**. The **Devagatiprayogya** includes **Tirthankara** nature, and
only **Manushya** bind to it. However, **Manushya** have seven **Prakrutik
Udayasthanas**: 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, and 30. **Manushya** do not have a 31st
**Prakrutik Udayasthanas**. Each of these **Udayasthanas** also has two
**Sattaasthanas**, 63 and 86 **Prakrutik**. The **ManushyaGatiprayogya** 26
**Prakrutik** are bound by **Devas** and **Narakas**.  Out of these, **Narakas**
have five **Udayasthanas**: 21, 25, 27, 28, and 26 **Prakrutik**. **Devas** have
six **Udayasthanas**: the aforementioned five and 30 **Prakrutik**. Each of
these **Udayasthanas** has two **Sattaasthanas**, 12 and 88 **Prakrutik**. The
**ManushyaGatiyogya** 30 **Prakrutik** are bound by **Devas** and **Narakas**.
Out of these, **Devas** have the aforementioned six **Udayasthanas**, each with
two **Sattaasthanas**, 13 and **Prakrutik**. **Narakas** have only the
aforementioned five **Udayasthanas**, but they have only one **Prakrutik** per
**Sattaasthanas** because **Jivas** with simultaneous existence of
**Tirthankara** and **Aharaka Chatushk** are not born in **Narakas**.
Therefore, each of the **Udayasthanas** from 21 to 30 **Prakrutik** has four
**Sattaasthanas**: 63, 12, 86, and 88 **Prakrutik**. The 31st **Prakrutik
Udayasthanas** has two **Sattaasthanas**: 62 and 88 **Prakrutik**. Thus, in the
**Avirat Samyagdristi Gunasthanas**, there are a total of 30 **Sattaasthanas**
in common. The details of these are as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 332 saptatikA prakaraNa 8 udaya sthAna hote haiN| usameM se 25 aura 27
prakRtika udayasthAna vikriyA karane vAle tiryaMca aura manuSyoM ke hI hote haiM
aura zeSa chaha sAmAnya ke hote haiN| ina udayasthAnoM meM se pratyeka
udayasthAna meM 62 aura 86 prakRtika ye do-do sattAsthAna haiM  /  26 prakRtika
baMdhasthAna devagatiprAyogya va manuSyagatiprAyogya hone kI apekSA se do
prakAra kA hai  /  inameM se devagatiprAyogya tIrthakara prakRti sahita hai
jisase isakA baMdha manuSya hI karate haiN| kintu manuSyoM ke udayasthAna 21,
25, 26, 27, 28, 29 aura 30 prakRtika, ye sAta haiM; kyoMki manuSyoM ke 31
prakRtika udayasthAna nahIM hotA hai| yahA~ bhI pratyeka udayasthAna meM 63 aura
86 prakRtika, ye do-do sattAsthAna hote haiM tathA manuSyagatiprAyogya 26
prakRtiyoM ko deva aura nAraka hI bAMdhate haiN| so inameM se nArakoM ke 21. 25,
27, 28 aura 26 prakRtika, ye pAMca udayasthAna hote haiM tathA devoM ke pUrvokta
pA~ca aura 30 prakRtika, ye chaha udayasthAna hote haiN| ina saba udayasthAnoM
meM 12 aura 88 prakRtika, ye do-do sattAsthAna hote haiM tathA manuSyagati yogya
30 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha deva aura nAraka karate hai so inameM se devoM ke
pUrvokta 6 udayasthAna hote haiM aura unameM se pratyeka meM 13 aura prakRtika,
ye do-do sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  nArakoM ke udayasthAna to pUrvokta pAMca hI
hote haiM kintu inameM sattAsthAna para prakRtika eka-eka hI hotA hai kyoMki
tIrthakara aura AhAraka catuSka kI yugapat sattA vAle jIva nArakoM meM utpanna
nahIM hote haiN| isa prakAra 21 se lekara 30 prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM se
pratyeka meM sAmAnya se 63. 12, 86 aura 88 prakRtika, ye cAra-cAra sattAsthAna
hote haiM aura 31 prakRtika udayasthAna meM 62 aura 88 prakRtika ye do
sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  isa prakAra avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM sAmAnya
se kula 30 sattAsthAna hue  /  jinakA vivaraNa nimna prakAra se jAnanA cAhiye

Page #371 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karmagrantha 333 Namyan. Sasthan Mang Sattaasthan Prakrutik 2, 88 6.2,88
62,8 1176 1752 2888 1152 12, 18 62, 88 12.88 Prakrutik 17 Na 63.62, 6, 8 63, 62,
86, 8 13, M 63, 62, 86, 88 6.3, 62, 86, 88 63, 62, 86, 8 13, 2, 86, 8 601 1160
Prakrutik 32

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 333 naMmyAna  /  sAsthAna maMga sattAsthAna prakRtika 2, 88
6.2,88 62,8 1176 1752 2888 1152 12, 18 62, 88 12.88 prakRtika 17 nA 63.62, 6, 8
63, 62, 86, 8 13, ma 63, 62, 86, 88 6.3, 62, 86, 88 63, 62, 86, 8 13, 2, 86, 8
601 1160 prakRtika 32

Page #372 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seven Tika (5) The Desavirat Gunasthan  Now, we consider
the Bandha (bond) and other locations of the fifth Desavirat Gunasthan. In the
Desavirat Gunasthan, the Bandha and other locations are respectively 'Dug Ch
Cha' - two, six, and four. That is, there are two Bandha locations, six Uday
locations, and four Sattha locations. Of these, the two Bandha locations are 28
and 29 in nature. The 28th natural Bandha location is for the Tiryanch
Panchendriya (five-sensed beings) and humans. It is noteworthy that in this
Gunasthan, only the natures capable of attaining Devatva (divine state) are
bound, and this location has eight Bhang (divisions). When the Tirthakar nature
is included in the aforementioned 28 natures, it becomes the 26th natural Bandha
location. This location is for humans because Tiryanch do not have the Tirthakar
nature bound. This location also has eight Bhang.  In this Gunasthan, the 25th,
27th, 28th, 29th, 30th, and 31st natural locations are the Uday locations. Of
these, the first four Uday locations are for the Tiryanch and humans who are
undergoing Vikriya (transformation), and these four Uday locations have one
Bhang each for humans. However, the first two Uday locations for Tiryanch have
one Bhang each, and the last two Uday locations have two Bhang each.  The 30th
natural Uday location is for the Swabhavath (inherent) Tiryanch and humans, as
well as the Tiryanch undergoing Vikriya. Here, each of the first two has 144-144
Bhang, which are obtained from the six Sanhanan (compressions), six Sansthan
(establishments), Suswar-Duswar (good and bad sounds), and Prashast-Aprashast
Vihayogati (good and bad liberation paths) alternatives. The last one has one
Bhang. Thus, the 30th natural Uday location has a total of 286 Bhang. Dubhang
(double Bhang), Anadeya (unworthy of respect), and Ayash-Kirti (bad reputation)
...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa (5) dezavirata guNasthAna _ aba pAMcaveM dezavirata
guNasthAna ke baMdha Adi sthAnoM kA vicAra karate haiM  /  dezavirata guNasthAna
meM baMdha Adi sthAna kramaza: 'duga cha cau' do, chaha aura cAra haiM  /
arthAt do baMdhasthAna, chaha udayasthAna aura cAra sattAsthAna haiN| unameM se
do baMdhasthAna kramazaH 28 aura 29 prakRtika haiN| jinameM se 28 prakRtika
baMdhasthAna tiryaMca paMcendiya aura manuSyoM ke hotA hai| itanA vizeSa hai ki
isa guNasthAna meM devagatiprAyogya prakRtiyoM kA hI baMdha hotA hai aura isa
sthAna ke 8 bhaMga hote haiN| ukta 28 prakRtiyoM meM tIrthaka ra prakRti ko milA
dene para 26 prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai| yaha sthAna manuSyoM ko hotA hai
kyoMki tiryacoM ke tIrthakara prakRti kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai| isa sthAna ke
bhI ATha bhaMga hote haiN| isa guNasthAna meM 25, 27, 28, 29, 30 aura 31
prakRtika, yaha yaha udayasthAna hote haiN| inameM se Adi ke cAra udayasthAna
vikriyA karane vAle tiryaMca aura manuSyoM ke hote haiM tathA ina cAroM
udayasthAnoM meM manuSyoM ke eka-eka bhaMga hotA hai kintu tiryaMcoM ke
prArambha ke do udayasthAnoM kA eka-eka bhaMga hotA hai aura antima do
udayasthAnoM ke do-da bhaMga hote haiN| _30 prakRtika udayasthAna svabhAvastha
tiryaMca aura manuSyoM ke tathA vikriyA karane vAle tiryaMcoM ke hotA hai| to
yahA~ prArambha ke do meM se pratyeka ke 144-144 bhaMga hote haiM, jo chaha
saMhanana, chaha saMsthAna, susvaradusvara aura prazasta-aprazasta vihAyogati ke
vikalpa se prApta hote haiM tathA aMtima kA eka bhaMga hotA hai  /  isa prakAra
30 prakRtika udayasthAna ke kula 286 bhaMga hote haiM  /  dubhaMga, anAdeya aura
ayazaHkIrti kA

Page #373 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karmagramya  ### 335  Uday is not caused by guna-pratyaya alone,
therefore the related alternatives are not mentioned here.  ### 31  The natural
udayasthan is only for the tiryanchas. Here also there are 144 bhangas. Thus, in
deshavirat, the total bhangas of all udayasthanas are 10 + 144 + 144 + 144 /
1443 bhangas.  ### P  Here there are four sattasthanas which are 93, 92, 86 and
natural. Those who become deshavirat by binding the four of tirthankara and
aharaka, they have 63 sattas of the natural, and the rest is easy to understand.
Thus, in deshavirat, the binding, uday and sattasthanas are explained. There is
a debate about the avadha:  If a deshavirat man binds 28 natural, then he has
25, 27, 28, 26 and 30 natural, these five udayasthanas, and in each of them
there are 62 and 18 natural, these two sattasthanas. But if a viyancha binds 28
natural, then along with the aforementioned five udayasthanas, there is also a
31 natural udayasthan, making it six udayasthanas, and in each of them there are
62 and natural, these two sattasthanas. 26 natural bandhastan is of a deshavirat
man. Therefore, he has the aforementioned 25, 27, 28, 26 and 30 natural, these
five udayasthanas, and in each udayasthan there are 63 and 66 natural, these two
sattasthanas. Thus, in the deshavirat gunasthan, from the general, there are
four sattasthanas in the first five udayasthanas and two in the last udayasthan,
making a total of 22 sattasthanas.  The details of the bandha etc. places of the
deshavirat gunasthan should be known as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagramya 335 udaya guNapratyaya se hI nahIM hotA hai ataH
tatsaMbaMdhI vikalpoM ko yahA~ nahIM kahA hai  /  31 prakRtika udayasthAna
tiryacoM ke hI hotA hai| yahA~ bhI 144 bhaMga hote haiN| isa prakAra dezavirata
meM saba udayasthAnoM ke kula bhaMga 10+ 144+144+144 / 1443 bhaMga hote haiM  /
P yahA~ sattAsthAna cAra hote haiM jo 93 92 86 aura prakRtika haiN| jo
tIrthaMkara aura AhAraka catuSka kA baMdha karake dezavirata ho jAtA hai, unake
63 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai tathA zeSa kA vicAra sugama hai  /  isa prakAra
dezavirata meM baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM kA kapa kiyaa| avadha kA vivAda
karate haiM ki yadi dezavirata manuSya 28 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA hai to
usake 25, 27, 28, 26 aura 30 prakRtika, ye pAMca udayasthAna aura inameM se
pratyeka meM 62 aura 18 prakRtika ye do sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  kintu yadi
viyaMca 28 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA hai to usake ukta pA~ca udayasthAnoM ke
sAtha 31 prakRtika udayasthAna bhI hone se chaha udayasthAna tathA pratyeka meM
62 aura prakRtika, ye do-do sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  26 prakRtika baMdhasthAna
dezavirata manuSya ke hotA hai  /  ataH isake pUrvokta 25 27 28 26 aura 30
prakRtika, ye pA~ca udayasthAna aura pratyeka udayasthAna meM 63 aura 66
prakRtika, ye do-do sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  isa prakAra dezavirata
guNanasthAna meM sAmAnya se prArambha ke pA~ca udayasthAnoM meM cAra-cAra aura
antima udayasthAna meM do, isa prakAra kula milAkara 22 sattAsthAna hote haiM  /
dezavirata guNasthAna ke baMdha Adi sthAnoM kA vivaraNa isa prakAra jAnanA
cAhie--

Page #374 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
336 Bandha Sthana 28 Prakrutik 26 Prakrutik 2 Ganga 8 5 16 Udaya Sthana 25 27 28
26 Sh 31 25 27 28 26 30 ' Munga 2 286 144 1 1 1 1 144 56 Sapta Tika Prakaran
Satta Sthana 62,88 2,88 02. Ek 62, 6 62,88 62, 88 63, 86 63, 89 £3,5€ Hamen kai
63,86 22 (6) Pramvirat Guna Sthana Ab chhathe Prammatta Samyata Guna Sthana ke
bandh adi sthano ko batlate hain ki- 'Dug pan chau' - do Bandha Sthana panch
Udaya Sthana aur char Satta Sthana hain. Do Bandha Sthana 20 aur 23 Prakrutik
hain. Inka vishesh spashtikaran desh virat Guna Sthana ke saman janna chahiye.
Panch Udaya Sthana 25, 27, 28, 29 aur 30 Prakrutik hote hain. Ye

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 336 baMSasthAna 28 prakRtika 26 prakRtika 2 gaMga 8 5 16 udayasthAna 25 27 28
26 z 31 25 27 28 26 30 ' maMga 2 286 144 1 1 1 1 144 56 saptatikA prakaraNa
sattAsthAna 62,88 2,88 02. eka 62, 6 62,88 62, 88 63, 86 63, 89 PS3,5EUR hameM
kaI 63,86 22 (6) pramavirata guNasthAna aba chaThe pramattasaMyata guNasthAna ke
baMdha Adi sthAnoM ko batalAte haiM ki- 'duga paNa cau' - do baMdhasthAna pA~ca
udayasthAna aura cAra sattAsthAna haiN| do baMdhasthAna 20 aura 23 prakRtika
haiN| inakA vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa deza virata guNasthAna ke samAna jAnanA cAhiye
/  pAMca udayasthAna 25 27, 28, 29 aura 30 prakRtika hote haiM  /  ye

Page #375 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  It should be known that all the **Udayasthanas** are
present in **Aharakasyata** and **Vaikriyasanyata** beings. However, there is a
special feature that 30 **Prakrutik Udayasthanas** are also present in
**Svabhavastha** beings. Out of these, there are 25 and 27 **Prakrutik
Udayasthanas** for **Vaikriyasanyata** and **Aharakasyata** respectively. Each
of these has one **Bhang** and 28 and 26 **Prakrutik Udayasthanas** have two
**Bhangs** each. The 30 **Prakrutik Udayasthanas** have one **Bhang** each.
Thus, there are a total of 14 **Bhangs** for **Vaikriyasanyata** and
**Aharakasyata**.  The 30 **Prakrutik Udayasthanas** of **Svabhavastha** beings
also have 144 **Bhangs**. Therefore, the total **Bhangs** for all the
**Udayasthanas** of the **Pramattasanyata** **Gunasthanas** are 158.  Here,
there are four **Sattaasthanas** - 63, 12, 86, and 88 **Prakrutik**.  After
discussing **Bandha**, **Udaya**, and **Sattaasthanas** in the
**Pramattasanyata** **Gunasthanas**, we now consider their **Sanvedha**.  In
each of the five **Udayasthanas** that bind 28 **Prakrutis**, there are two
**Sattaasthanas** - 92 and 88 **Prakrutik**. However, only 62 **Prakrutik
Sattaasthanas** are present in **Aharakasyata**, because without the existence
of **Aharakachatushk**, **Aharak Samudghata** cannot arise. But, the existence
of 62 and 88 **Prakrutis** is possible in **Vaikriyasanyata**. The
**Pramattasanyata** who has the existence of **Tirthankara** **Prakruti** does
not bind 28 **Prakrutis**. Therefore, the existence of 13 and 89 **Prakrutis**
is not present. The five **Udayasthanas** of **Pramattasanyata** who bind 26
**Prakrutis** are possible, and each of them has two **Sattaasthanas** - 63 and
86 **Prakrutik**. Notably, both **Aharakasyata** and **Vaikriyasanyata** have
the existence of 63 **Prakrutis**.  Thus, in all the **Udayasthanas** of
**Pramattasanyata**, four distinct **Sattaasthanas** are obtained, totaling 20.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 337 saba udayasthAna AhArakasayata' aura vaikriyasaMyata
jIvoM ke jAnanA cAhie, kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki 30 prakRtika udayasthAna
svabhAvastha saMyatoM ke bhI hotA hai  /  inameM se vaikriyasaMyata aura
AhArakasaMyatoM ke alaga-alaga 25 aura 27 prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM se pratyeka
ke eka-eka tathA 28 aura 26 prakRtika udayasthAnoM ke do-do aura 30 prakRtika
udayasthAna kA eka-eka, isa prakAra kula 14 bhaMga hote haiM tathA 30 prakRtika
udayasthAna svabhAvastha jIvoM ke bhI hotA hai so isake 144 bhaMga aura hote
haiM, isa prakAra pramattasaMyata guNasthAna ke saba udayasthAnoM ke kula bhaMga
158 hote haiN| yahA~ sattAsthAna yAra hote haiM-63, 12, 86 aura 88 prakRtika  /
isa prakAra pramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM baMdha, udaya aura sattAsthAnoM kA
nirdeza karane ke bAda aba inake saMvedha kA vicAra karate haiM 28 prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha karane vAle pUrvokta pAMcoM udayasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM 92 aura 88
prakRtika, ye do-do sattAsthAna hote haiN| usameM bhI AhArakasaMgata ke 62
prakRtika sattAsthAna hI hotA hai, kyoMki AhArakacatuSka kI sattA ke binA
AhAraka samudghAta kI utpatti nahIM ho sakatI hai kintu vaikriyasaMyata ke 62
aura 88 prakRttiyoM kI satA saMbhava hai| jisa pramattasaMyata ke tIrthakara
prakRti kI sattA hai vaha 28 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha nahIM karatA hai  /  ataH
yahA~ 13 aura 89 prakRtiyoM kI sattA nahIM hotI hai tathA 26 prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha karane vAle pramattasaMyata ke pA~coM udayasthAna saMbhava haiM aura
inameM se pratyeka meM 63 aura 86 prakRtika, ye do-do sattAsthAna hote haiM  /
vizeSa itanA hai ki AhAraka ke 63 kI aura vaikriyasaMyata ke donoM kI sattA hotI
hai| isa prakAra pramattasaMyata ke saba udayasthAnoM meM pRthaka-pRthaka
cAracAra sasAsthAna prApta hote haiM, jinakA kula pramANa 20 hotA hai|

Page #376 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Saptatikaprakarana Pramattas'amvara ke bandha, udaya and satta-sthanas va
samvaidha ka vivara.a nima.nanusara jananaa caahiye - Bandhasthaana | Maṃga
Udayasthaana Mattāsthaana 28 LF Prakr.tika F v0 0 4d S 15 W 29 Prakr.tika 20 (7)
Apramattas'amyata gu.nasthaana   Pramattas'amyata gu.nasthana ke bandha, udaya
and sattāsthanas ko batalanē ke bāda ab Apramattas'amyata gu.nasthana ke bandha
ādi sthānon ko batalatē haiṃ ki 'Cauduga Cau'-cāra bandhasthaana, do udayasthāna
and cāra sattāsthāna hai. Cāra bandhasthaana isa prakāra haiṃ- 28, 29, 30 and 31
Prakr.tika. Inameṃ se Tīrthaṃkara and āhārakadika ke binā 28 Prakr.tika bandha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa pramattasaMvata ke baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM va
saMvaidha kA vivaraNa nimnAnusAra jAnanA cAhiye- baMdhasthAna | maMga
udayasthAna mattAsthAna 28 LF prakRtika F v0 0 4d S 15 W 29 prakRtika 20 (7)
apramattasaMyata guNaspAma pramattasaMyata guNasthAna ke baMdha, udaya aura
sattAsthAnoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba apramattasaMyata guNasthAna ke baMdha Adi
sthAnoM ko batalAte haiM ki 'cauduga cau'-cAra baMdhasthAna, do udayasthAna aura
cAra sattAsthAna hai| cAra baMdhasthAna isa prakAra haiM- 28, 29, 30 aura 31
prakatika  /  inameM se tIrthakara aura AhArakadika ke binA 28 prakRtika baMdha

Page #377 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixth karmagranthya sthana is a place where there are 26 prakritis when the
Tirthankara prakriti is included, 30 prakritis when the Tirthankara prakriti is
excluded and the Aharakdvig is included, and 31 prakritis when the Tirthavar and
Aharakdvig are combined. All these bandha sthana have only one bhang. This is
because there is no bandha of asthir, ashubh, and ayash:kiriti for the
apramattasanyat.  In the seventh gunasthana, there are two udayasthana, which
are 26 and 30 prakritis. The one who has attained the apramattasanyat gunasthana
after performing Aharak or Vaikriya samudghata in the previous pramattasanyat
state has 26 prakriti udayasthana. Here, there are two bhang, one with respect
to Vaikriya and the other with respect to Aharak. There are also two bhang in
the 30 prakriti udayasthana, and the 30 prakriti udayasthana is also present in
the svabhavath apramattatapat jiva, so there are 144 more bhang with respect to
it, making a total of 146. Thus, there are a total of 148 bhang in the two
udayasthana of the apramattasanyat gunasthana.  In the Digambar tradition, only
one udayasthana of 30 prakritis is mentioned for the apramattasanyat. The reason
for this is that there is a consensus in the Digambar tradition that a jiva who
performs Aharak samudghata does not attain the seventh gunasthana even after the
completion of his svayogya paryapti. Similarly, according to the Digambar
tradition, a jiva who performs Vaikriya samudghata does not attain the
apramattasanyat gunasthana. Therefore, in Go. Kamankad Ma 501, only one
udayasthana of 30 prakritis is established for the apramattasanyat gunasthana.
- "Two Sayonnishad Yo Naam Purva Pramattasanyat: San Aharak Vaikriyaan Va
Nirvartya Paunadpramattamaavan Gachhani Lasma Prapya." - Saptathika Prakaran
Tika, p. 233

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagranya sthAna hotA hai| isameM tIrthaMkara prakRti ko milAne para
26 prakRtika tathA tIrthaMkara prakRti ko alaga karake AhArakadvika ko milAne se
30 prakRtika tathA tIrdhavAra aura AhArakaddhika kI yuganata milAne para 31
prakRtika baMdhasthAna hotA hai| ina saba baMdhasthAnoM kA eka-eka hI bhaMga
hotA hai  /  kyoMki apramattasaMyata ke asthira, azubha aura ayaza:kIti kA
baMdha nahIM hotA hai| sAtaveM guNasthAna meM do udayasthAna hote haiM jo 26
aura 30 prakRtika haiN| jisane pahale pramattasaMyata avasthA meM AhAraka yA
vaikriya samudghAta ko karane ke bAda apramattasaMyata guNasthAna ko prApta kiyA
hai usake 26 prakRtika udayasthAna hotA hai  /  isake yahA~ do bhaMga hote haiM
jo eka vaikriya kI apekSA aura dUsarA AhAraka kI apekSA  /  30 prakRtika
udayasthAna meM bhI do bhaMga hote haiM tathA 30 prakRtika udayasthAna
svabhAvastha apramattatapata jIva ke bhI hotA hai ata: usakI apekSA yahA~ 144
bhaMga aura hote haiM jinakA kula jor3a 146 hai| isa prakAra apramattasaMyata
guNasthAna ke do udayasthAnoM ke kula 148 bhaMga hote haiM  /  vigambara
paramparA meM apramatta saMyata ke 30 prakRtika, eka hI udayasthAna batalAyA
hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki digambara paramparA meM yahI ekamata pAyA jAtA hai
ki AhAraka samudghAta ko karane vAle jIva ko svayogya paryAptiyoM ke pUrNa ho
jAne para bhI sAtavAM guNasthAna prApta nahIM hotA hai tathA isI prabAra
digambara paramparA ke anusAra baiMkriya samRdghAta ko karane vAlA jIva mI
apramattasaMyata guNasthAna ko prApta nahIM karatA hai  /  isIliye go. kamaMkADa
mA 501 meM apramattasaMyata guNasthAna eka 30 prakRtika udayasthAna hI basAyA
hai| 2 sayonanizad yo nAma pUrva pramattasaMyata: san AhArapha baiMkriyaM vA
nirvartya paunAdapramattamAvaM gacchani lasma prApya  /  - saptatikA prakaraNa
TIkara, pR. 233

Page #378 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
340 One should know the four, four Satta-sthana of the six, sixty-three, sixty-
two, eighty-eight types of Janasansanyat Gujasthana. Now we do The Udayasthana
of the binder of twenty-eight Prakruti is both, but the Satta-sthana is only one
Prakruti. The Udayasthana of the binder of twenty-six Prakruti is both, but the
Satta-sthana is only one Prakruti. The Udayasthana of the binder of thirty
Prakruti is also both, but the Satta-sthana is only one ninety-two Prakruti for
both, and the Udayasthana of the binder of thirty-one Prakruti is both, but the
Satta-sthana is only one ninety-three Prakruti. Here, the Tirthankara or
Aharakadvik, whichever has the Satta, binds according to the rule. Therefore,
one Satta-sthana is said for each Bandhasthana. Here, there are total Satta-
sthana. Thus, the consideration of the Sanvedha of the Bandha, Udaya and Satta-
sthana of the Aprammatasanyat Gunasthana has been done, the description of which
is as follows: Bandhasthana Twenty-eight Prakruti Twenty-six Prakruti Mang 1 1
Sapta-tika Prakarana Prakruti, these four are. The consideration of this place,
Upasthana and their Santha Udayasthana Twenty-six Thirty Twenty-six Thirty Mang
2 146 2 146 Satta-sthana Eighty-five Sixty-six Eighty-six Six

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 340 sattAsthAna 63, 62, 88 aura prakAra janasaMsaMyata gujasthAna ke cAra cAra
sattAsthAna jAnanA caahiye| aba karate haiM 28 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle
ke udayasthAna donoM hote haiM, kintu sattAsthAna eka prakRtika hI hotA hai  /
26 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle ke udayasthAna donoM hI hote haiM kintu
sattAsthAna eka pa prakRtika hotA hai  /  30 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle ke
bhI udayasthAna donoM hI hote haiM kintu sattAsthAna donoM ke eka 92 prakRtika
hI hotA hai tathA 31 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle ke udayasthAna donoM hote
haiM kintu sattAsthAna eka 93 prakRtika hI hotA hai| yahA~ tIrthaMkara yA
AhArakadvika inameM se jisake jisakI sattA hotI hai, yaha niyama se usakA baMdha
karatA hai  /  isIliye eka-eka baMghasthAna meM eka - eka sattAsthAna kahA hai
/  yahA~ kula sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  isa prakAra apramattasaMyata guNasthAna
ke baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM ke saMvedha kA vicAra kiyA gayA, jisakA
vivaraNa isa prakAra hai baMdhasthAna 28 prakRtika 26 prakRtika maMga 1 1
saptatikA prakaraNa prakRtika, ye cAra hote haiM  /  isa sthAna ko upasthAna
aura inake saMdha kA vicAra udayasthAna 26 30 26 30 maMga 2 146 2 146
sattAsthAna 85 66 86 chaha

Page #379 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Granth 341 Bandha Sthan Mang Udaya Sthan Satta Sthan Prakrutik U 4
Prakrutik - 22 (4) Apurvakaran Guna Sthan In the eighth Apurvakaran Guna Sthan,
the Bandha etc. Sthan are as follows: 'Punageg Pau', that is, five Bandha Sthan,
one Udaya Sthan and four Satta Sthan. Of these, the five Bandha Sthan are 28,
29, 30, 31 and 1 Prakrutik. Of these, the first four Bandha Sthan should be
known as the same as the seventh Aprammatasanyata Guna Sthan, but when the
Bandha-Vicched of the Devagati-Prayogya Prakrutis takes place, then only one
Yash:ki Ti named Bandha occurs, from which there is also 1 Prakrutik Bandha
Sthan here. Here, the Udaya Sthan is only one 30 Prakrutik. From which there are
24 Bhang due to the alternatives of Vanrishabhanaracha Sanhanan, six Sansthan,
Suswar-Duswar and two Vihayogati. But according to some Acharyas, in
Apurvakaran, only Vajrarishabhanaracha Sanhanan does not arise in comparison to
Upshamani, but one of the first three Sanhanans arises. Therefore, according to
them, there are 72 Bhang here. Similarly,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 341 baMdhasthAna maMga udayasthAna sattAsthAna prakRtika U
4 prakRtika - 22 (4) apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna AThaveM apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM
baMdha Adi sthAna isa prakAra haiM'puNagega pau' arthAta pAMca baMdhasthAna, eka
udayasthAna aura cAra sattAsthAnaH  /  inameM se pAMca baMdhasthAna 28, 29, 30,
31 aura 1 prakRtika hai  /  inameM se prArambha ke cAra baMSasthAna to sAtaveM
apramattasaMyata guNasthAna ke samAna jAnanA cAhiye, kintu jaba devagatiprAyogya
prakRtiyoM kA baMdhaviccheda ho jAtA hai taba sirpha eka yaza:kI ti nAma kA hI
badha hotA hai, jisase yahA~ 1 prakRtika baMdhasthAna bhI hotA hai| yahA~
udayasthAna eka 30 prakRtika hI hotA hai| jisake vanaRSabhanArAca saMhanana,
chaha saMsthAna, susvara-dusvara aura do vihAyogati ke vikalpa se 24 bhaMga hote
haiM | kintu kucha AcAryoM ke mata se upazamaNi kI apekSA apUrvakaraNa meM
kevala vajraRSabhanArAca saMhanana kA udaya na hokara prArambha ke tIna
saMhananoM meM se kisI eka kA udaya hotA hai| ataH unake mata se yahA~ para 72
bhaMga hote haiN| isI prakAra

Page #380 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of Seventy  This should also be understood in the context of
Anivrittibada, Sukshmasamparaya, and Upashantamoha Gunasthanas.  Here, the
Sattastahans 63, 62, 86, and 88 are the four natural ones. Thus, the binding,
arising, and Sattastahans are indicated in Apoovarnakaran. Now, let's consider
the Sanvedha.  For beings who bind 28, 29, 30, and 31 Prakrutis, there are 30
Prakrutis of arising, while their Sattastahans are at least 88, 86, 12, and 63
respectively. For a being who binds one Prakruti, there are 30 Prakrutis of
arising, and all four Sattastahans are present. This is because, for a being who
previously bound 28, 29, 30, or 31 Prakrutis, when the binding and unbinding of
Prakrutis worthy of Devagati occurs, there is a binding of one Prakruti.
However, the Sattastahans remain in the same order as they were previously
bound. In other words, for one who previously bound 20 Prakrutis, the
Sattastahan is 88, for one who bound 26, it is 86, for one who bound 30, it is
62, and for one who bound 31, it is 63.  1. Some other Acharyas say that in the
Upashma Shreni, there is an arising of one of the three initial Sanhananas.
According to their view, the number of Mangas is seventy-two. This should also
be understood in the context of Anivrittibada, Sukshmasamparaya, and
Upashantamoha.  - Sapttatika Prakaran Tika, p. 233. In the Digambar tradition,
this is the only view found. For confirmation, see Go. Karmakanda, verse 269.
"He who is angry, knows only the illusion of Maya, he is happy. Happiness is
like iron, it is the cause of destruction."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAptatikA prakaraNa anivRttibAdara, sUkSmasaMparAya aura upazAMtamoha
guNasthAna meM bhI jAnanA caahiye| yahA~ sattAsthAna 63, 62, 86 aura 88
prakRtika, ye cAra haiM  /  isa prakAra apUrvakaraNa meM baMdha, udaya aura
sattAsthAnoM kA nirdeza kiyA  /  aba saMvedha kA vicAra karate haiM 28, 29, 30
aura 31 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle jIvoM ke 30 prakRtika udaya rahate hue
kama se 88, 86, 12 aura 63 prakRtiyoM kI sattA rahatI hai| eka prakRti kA baMdha
karane vAle ke 30 prakRtiyoM kA udaya rahate hue cAroM sattAsthAna hote haiN|
kyoMki jo pahale 28, 29, 30 yA 31 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha kara rahA thA, usake
devagati ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA baMdha-viccheda hone para 1 prakRtika baMgha
hotA hai, kintu sattAsthAna usI krama se rahe Ate haiM, jisa krama se yaha
pahale bAMdhatA thaa| arthAt jo pahale 20 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA thA, usake
88 kI, jo 26 kA baMdha karatA thA usake 86 kI, jo 30 kA baMdha karatA thA usake
62 kI aura jo 31 kA baMdha karatA thA usake 63 kI sattA rahI 1 anye tvAcAryA
vateAdhasaMhananatrayAnyatamasaMhananayuktA apyupazamazreNI pratipayante
tanmatena maMgA dvisaptatiH  /  evamanivRttibAdara-sUkSmasaMparAya-
upanAntamoheSvapi draSTavyam  /  -saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR. 233 digambara
paramparA meM yahI eka mata pAyA jAtA hai ki upazamazreNi meM prArambha ke tIna
saMhananoM meM se kisI eka saMhanana kA udaya hotA hai  /  isakI puSTi ke liye
dekhiye go0 karmakAMDa gAthA 269 vedatiya kohamANaM mAyAsaMjalaNameva suhamaMte
/  suhamo loho sate vajjaNArAyaNArAya  /  /

Page #381 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth ### 343  ...Therefore, in a natural bondage state, all
four states of existence are obtained.'  The description of the bondage,
arising, and state of existence of the sensory in the Apurvakarana Gunasthan is
as follows:  **Bondage State** * 28 Natural * 26 Natural * 30 Natural * 31
Natural * 1 Natural  **Arising State** * 1 * 1 * 1 * 1 * 1  **State of
Existence** * 5 * 30 * 30 * 30 * 30 * 5  **Mang** * 24 or 72 * 24 or 72 * 24 or
72 * 24 or 72 * 24 or 72 * 120 or 360  **State of Existence** * 86 * 6.3 * 55,
58, 61, 63  **(1-10) Anivritti Vavar, Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan**  In the
ninth and tenth Anivritti Vavar and Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan, there are 28,
29, 30, and 31 bondage states respectively. Each of these is a single type of
bondage state in the context of the Devagati Prayogya Bandha. With 28 days,
there are 80 states of existence, and so on. With a single type of bondage, all
four are obtained.  **Saptaatika Prakaran Toka, 10.233**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 343 AtI hai  /  isIliye eka prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM
cAroM sattAsthAna prApta hote haiN|' apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM baMdha, udaya
aura sattAsthAnoM ke saMvedha kA vivaraNa isa prakAra hai- baMdhasthAna 28
prakRtika 26 prakRtika 30 prakRtika 31 prakRtika 1 prakRtika 5 maMga udayasthAna
1 1 1 d 1 5. r 30 30 30 30 5 maMga 24 yA 72 24 yA 72 24 yA 72 24 yA 72 24 yA 72
120 yA 360 sattAsthAna EG 86 dar 6. 3 55, 58, ER, EUR3 ma (1-10) anivRttivAvara,
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna nauveM aura dasaveM anivRttivAdara aura
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM 1 ihASTAviMzati ekonatriMzat trizad-
ekatriMzadabaMdhakAH pratyekaM devagati prAyogyabaMdha vyavacchede satyeka
vidhabandhakA bhavanti, aSTAviMzatyA divasakAnAM ca yathAkramamaSTAzItyAdIni
sattAsthAnAni tata ekavidhabandhe catvApi prApyante  /  saptatikA prakaraNa
TokA, 10 233

Page #382 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 4. Pran  There are one Bandha-sthana, one Udaya-sthana, and eight Satta-
sthana, as per the 'Aagam Mattha'. Their explanation is as follows:  In the
Anivriti-badar Guna-sthana, there is one Bandha-sthana of one Prakriti of Yash-
Kirti nature, and one Udaya-sthana of thirty Prakritis. The eight Satta-sthana
are of thirteen, ninety-two, eighty-six, fifty-eight, eighty, seventy-six,
seventy-six, and seventy-five Prakritis. Out of these, the first four Satta-
sthana are in the Upshama श्रेणी, and they remain in the Kshapaka श्रेणी until
the thirteen Prakritis of Nama-karma are destroyed. When the thirteen Prakritis
of the beings with the above four Satta-sthana are destroyed, they attain the
Satta of eighty, seventy-six, seventy-six, and seventy-five Prakritis
respectively. This means that when the thirteen Prakritis of the being with
thirteen Satta are destroyed, they attain eighty Satta. Similarly, when the
thirteen Prakritis of the being with sixty-two Satta are destroyed, they attain
seventy-six Satta. When the thirteen Prakritis of the being with seventy-six
Satta are destroyed, they attain seventy-six Satta. And when the thirteen
Prakritis of the being with seventy-six Satta are destroyed, they attain
seventy-five Satta. Thus, one should know these eight Satta-sthana. Here, since
there is no difference between Bandha-sthana and Udaya-sthana, meaning both are
one, there is no possibility of Samvedha. This means that even though there are
eight Satta-sthana, there is no need to mention the relationship separately due
to the Bandha-sthana and Udaya-sthana being one.  Similarly, in the Sukshma-
Samparaya Guna-sthana, there is one Bandha-sthana of one Prakriti of Kirti form,
one Udaya-sthana of thirty Prakritis, and eight Satta-sthana of sixty-three etc.
Prakritis as mentioned earlier. Out of these eight Satta-sthana, the first four
are in the Upshama श्रेणी, and the remaining four, starting from eighty etc.
Prakritis, are in the Kshapaka श्रेणी. The rest should be understood as in the
Anivriti-badar Guna-sthana.  Now, we will discuss the Bhangas of the eleven to
fourteen Guna-sthana, starting from Upshama-moha, as per
'Chhoumatthakevalijina'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 4 praNa kramaza: eka baMdhasthAna, eka udayasthAna aura ATha sattAsthAna haiM-
egema maTTha' | jinakA spaSTIkaraNa nimnAnusAra hai anivRttibAdara guNasthAna
meM eka yazaHkIrti prakRti kA baMdha hone se eka prakRtika baMsthAna hai tathA
udayasthAna bhI eka 30 prakRtika hai aura sattAsthAna 13, 92, 86, 5 80 76 76
aura 75 prakRtika, ye ATha haiN| inameM se prAraMbha ke cAra sattAsthAna upazama
zreNi meM hote haiM aura jaba taka nAmakarma kI teraha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya nahIM
hotA taba taka kSapakazreNi meM bhI hote haiM  /  ukta cAroM sthAnoM kI sattA
vAle jIvoM ke 13 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hone para krama se 80, 76, 76 aura 75
prakRtiyoM kI sattA prApta hotI hai| arthAta 13 kI sattA vAle ke 13 ke kSaya
hone para 80 kI, 62 kI sattA vAle ke 13 kA kSaya hone para 76 kI, kI sattA vAle
ke 13 kA kSaya hone para 76 kI aura kI sattA vAle ke 13 kA kSaya hone para 75 kI
sattA zeSa rahatI hai  /  isa prakAra yahA~ ATha sattAsthAna jAnanA cAhiye  /
yahA~ baMghasthAna aura udayasthAna meM bheda na hone se arthAt donoM ke eka-eka
hone se saMvedha sambhava nahIM hai  /  yAnI yahAM yadyapi sattAsthAna ATha hone
para bhI baMdhasthAna aura udayasthAna ke eka-eka hone se saMbaMdha ko pRthaka
se kahane kI AvazyakatA nahIM hai  /  anivRttibAdara guNasthAna kI taraha
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM bhI yathA: kIrti rUpa eka prakRtika eka
baMdhasthAna hai, 30 prakRtika udayasthAna hai tathA pUrvokta 63 Adi prakRtika,
ATha sattAsthAna haiN| ukta ATha sattAsmAnoM meM se Adi ke cAra upazamazreNi meM
hote haiM aura zeSa 80 Adi prakRtika, aMta ke cAra kSapakazreNi meM hote haiN|
zeSa kathana anivRttibAdara guNasthAna kI taraha jAnanA cAhiye  /  aba
upazAMtamoha Adi gyAraha se lekara caudaha guNasthAna taka ke bhaMgoM kA kathana
karate haiM- 'chaumatthakevalijiNA'  /

Page #383 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pure Forgiveness ### 345 **(11-12)** In the _Upashantamooh_ and _Bhigamoha_
_Gunasthanas_, there is no _Bandhastan_, but only _Udayasthan_ and _Sattastan_.
Therefore, in the _Upashantamooh_ _Gunasthan_, there is one _Udayasthan_ of 30
_Prakrutis_ - 'Eg Chauu' - and four _Sattastans_ of 13, 62, 86, and 88
_Prakrutis_.  In the _Ksheenamoha_ _Gunasthan_, there is also one _Udayasthan_
of 30 _Prakrutis_ and four _Sattastans_ of 80, 79, 76, and 75 _Prakrutis_ - 'Eg
Chauu'. Here, there is a special feature in the _Udayasthan_ that if a common
being ascends to the _Kshapak_ श्रेणि, then instead of the 72 _Bhangas_
mentioned in other interpretations, only 24 are obtained! Because only one
_Vanrishabhanaraach_ संहनन arises. This same thing should be understood in the
other previous _Gunasthanas_ of the _Kshapak_. And if a being has the _Satta_ of
a _Tirthankar_ प्रकृति, then only his _Prashasht_ _Prakrutis_ arise everywhere,
hence only one _Bhang_ is mentioned.  Similarly, there is also some special
feature in the _Sattastans_. If a being has the _Satta_ of a _Tirthankar_
प्रकृति, then he has the _Satta_ of 80 and 76, and if another (without the
_Satta_ of a _Tirthankar_ प्रकृति) then he has the _Satta_ of 76 and 75
_Prakrutis_. This same thing should be understood everywhere as much as
possible.  1.  ..."Only twenty-four _Bhangas_ are possible because of the
_Kshapak_ श्रेणि starting with the _Vanrishabhanaraach_ संहनन. 2.  Eighty-one to
seventy-five are for the _Atirthankar_ _Satkarma_, and eighty to seventy-six are
for the _Tirthankar_ _Satkarma_.  _Saptalika Prakaran Teeka_, page 234 _Splalika
Prakaran Teeka_, page 234

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sbcch kssmaa 345 (11-12) upazAMtamoha bhIgamoha gumAsthAna _ upazAntamoha Adi
guNasthAnoM meM baMdhasthAna nahIM hai, kintu udayasthAna aura sattAsthAna hI
haiN| ataeva upazAntamoha guNasthAna meM'ega caU' arthAt eka 30 prakRtika
udayasthAna hai aura 13, 62, 86 aura 88 prakRtika, ye cAra sattAsthAna haiN|
kSINamoha guNasthAna meM bhI eka 30 prakRtika udayasthAna aura 80,79, 76 aura 75
prakRtika, ye cAra sattAsthAna hote haiM-'ega cuu'| yahA~ udayasthAna meM itanI
vizeSatA hai ki yadi sAmAnya jIva kSapakazreNi. para ArohaNa karatA hai to usake
matAntara se jo 72 bhaMga batalAye haiM ve prApta na hokara 24 hI prApta hote
haiM ! kyoMki usake eka vanaRSabhanArAca saMhanana kA hI udaya hotA hai|' yahI
bAta kSapakaNi ke pichale anya guNasthAnoM meM bhI jAnanA cAhiye tathA yadi
tIrthaka ra prakRti kI sattA vAlA hotA hai to usake prazasta prakRtiyoM kA hI
sarvatra udaya rahatA hai, isIliye eka bhaMga batalAyA hai| isI prakAra
sattAsthAnoM meM bhI kucha vizeSatA hai| yadi tIrthakara prakRti kI sattA bAlA
jIva hotA hai to usake 80 aura 76 kI sattA rahatI hai aura dUsarA (tIrthakara
prakRti kI sattA rahita) hotA hai to usake 76 aura 75 prakRtiyoM ko satA rahatI
hai| yahI bAta yathAsambhava sarvatra jAnanA cAhiye  /  1 ......"anna
bhaMgAzcaturvizatireva varSabhanArAcasahananayuktasyaiva kSapaka.
zreNyArammasambhavAt  /  saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 234 2 ekonAzIti-
paMcasaptatI atIrthakara satkarmaNo vevitavye  /  azIti-SaTsapsatI tu
tiirthkrstkrmnnH| saplalikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR. 234

Page #384 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Saptaatika Prakarana  **(13) Soyogikevali Gunasthan**  Soyogikevali Gunasthan
has eight Udayasthan and four Sattasthan - 'Attchaou'. The eight Udayasthan are
of the 20th, 21st, 26th, 27th, 28th, 29th, 30th, and 31st Prakruti, while the
four Sattasthan are of the 80th, 6th, 76th, and 75th Prakruti. Their perception
has been discussed earlier, so they should be understood accordingly. For
general knowledge, their description is as follows:  **Bandhastan** | **Mang** |
**Udayasthan** | **Mang** | **Sattasthan** ------- | -------- | -------- |
-------- | -------- |  |  |  |  | 80, 76, 76, 75 |  |  |  |  | 50, 76, 76, 75 |
|  |  |  | 80, 76 |  |  |  |  | 60 |  |  |  |  | 20  **(14) Ayogikevali
Gunasthan**  Ayogikevali Gunasthan has two Udayasthan and six Sattasthan - 'Du
Chakk', meaning two Udayasthan and six Sattasthan. Of these, two Udayasthan and
eight Sattasthan are of the 9th Prakruti. The emergence of the nine Prakruti is
of the Tirthankara...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa (13) sogikevalI guNasthAna sayogikevalI guNasthAna meM ATha
udayasthAna aura cAra sattAsthAna haiM-'aTTacAu'  /  ATha udayasthAna 20, 21,
26, 27, 28, 29, 30 aura 31 prakRtika haiM tathA cAra sattAsthAna 80, 6, 76 aura
75 prakRtika haiM 1 inake saMvedha kA vicAra pahale kara Aye haiM ata:
tadanusAra jAnanA cAhiye  /  sAmAnya jAnakArI ke liye unakA vivaraNa isa prakAra
hai baMdhasthAna  /  maMga udamasthAna | maMga sattAsthAna 80, 76, 76, 75 50,
76, 76, 75 80,76 60  /  20 (14) ayogikevalI guNaspAna _ ayogikevalI guNasthAna
meM udayasthAna aura sattAsthAna kramaza:'du chakka' arthAta do udayasthAna aura
chaha sattAsthAna haiN| inameM se do udayasthAna aura 8 prakRtika haiN| nau
prakRtiyoM kA udaya tIrthakara

Page #385 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- - **Pashta Karmagrantha** 347 -1 The **udaya** of the **Kevali** and the eight
**prakritis** is that of the **samanya Kevali**. The six **satta-sthana** are
80, 76, 76, 75, 6, and 8 **prakritis**. Thus, one should know the two **udaya-
sthana** and six **satta-sthana** of the **ayogika Kevali** **guna-sthana**.
Their **samvedha** are as follows: in the **udaya** of 8 **prakritis**, there
are three **satta-sthana**: 76, 75, and 8 **prakritis**. Of these, the 76 and 75
**prakritis** **satta-sthana** are until the **upanta-samaya**, and the 8
**prakritis** **satta-sthana** is in the **anta-samaya**. And in the **udaya**
of 6 **prakritis**, there are three **satta-sthana**: 80, 76, and 6
**prakritis**. Of these, the first two (80, 76) are until the **upanta-samaya**,
and the 6 **prakritis** **satta-sthana** is in the **anta-samaya**. The
description of the **samvedha** of the **udaya** **satta-sthana** of the
**ayogika Kevali** **guna-sthana** is as follows: **Bandha-sthana** **Bhang**
**Sadaya-sthana** **Mang** . **Satta-sthana** 80, 76, 6 | 76, 75, 8 Thus, after
considering the **bandha**, **udaya**, and **satta-sthana** in the **guna-
sthana**, we now consider the **bandha**, **udaya**, and **satta-sthana** in the
**gati** etc. **margana**. 1. **Tashto-udayoni-arthakara-ayogika-kevalinah**,
**navo-udayasti-tiryakara-ayogika-kevalinah**. - **Sapta-tika Prakarana Tika**,
p. 234

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - - paSTha karmagrantha 347 -1 kevalI ke aura ATha prakRtiyoM kA udaya sAmAnya
kevalI ke hotA hai  /  chaha sattAsthAna 80, 76, 76, 75, 6 aura 8 prakRtika
haiN| isa prakAra ayogi kevalI guNasthAna ke do udayasthAna va chaha sattAsthAna
jAnanA caahiye| inake saMvedha isa prakAra haiM ki 8 prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 76,
75 aura - prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna hote haiN| inameM se 76 aura 75
prakRtika sattAsthAna upAntya samaya taka hote haiM aura 8 prakRtika sattAsthAna
antima samaya meM hotA hai tathA 6 prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 80, 76 aura prakRtika
ye tIna sattAsthAna hote haiM jinameM se Adi ke do (80, 76) upAntya samaya taka
hote haiM aura prakRtika sattAsthAna antima samaya meM hotA hai| ayogikevalI
guNasthAna ke udaya sattAsthAnoM ke saMvedha kA vivaraNa isa prakAra hai
baMdhasthAna bhaMga sadayasthAna maMga  /  sattAsthAna 80,76,6 | 76, 75, 8 isa
prakAra se guNasthAnoM meM baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM kA vicAra karane ke
bAda aba gati Adi mArgaNAoM meM baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM kA vicAra
karate haiN| 1 tathASTodayonIrthakarAyogikevalinaH,
navodayastIryakarAyogikevalinaH  /  -saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 234

Page #386 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 348: The Seventies  **The Locations of Bondage, etc., in the Paths**
Two, six, eight, and four are the locations of bondage. Five, nine, eleven, and
six are the locations of arising. Three, five, eleven, and four are the
locations of existence. _[51]_  **Explanation:** Two, six, eight, and four are
the locations of bondage in the paths of hell, animal, human, and god,
respectively. Five, nine, eleven, and six are the locations of arising, and
three, five, eleven, and four are the locations of existence.  **Special
Meaning:** This verse indicates the number of locations of bondage, arising, and
existence in each path. There are four paths: hell, animal, human, and god. The
verse first mentions the number of locations of bondage in each path, following
this order: "Two, six, eight, and four." This means that there are two locations
of bondage in hell, six in the animal path, eight in the human path, and four in
the god path. Then, it mentions the locations of arising: "Five, nine, eleven,
and six." This means that there are five locations of arising in hell, nine in
the animal path, eleven in the human path, and six in the god path. Finally, it
mentions the locations of existence: "Three, five, eleven, and four." This means
that there are three locations of existence in hell, five in the animal path,
eleven in the human path, and four in the god path.  **Comparison:**  * In the
_Karmakanda_ of the _Gommatasara_, there are eleven locations of existence in
the human path, while in the _Gommatasara_ _Karmakanda_, there are twelve
locations of existence. * In the _Karmagrantha_, there are six locations of
arising in the god path, while in the _Gommatasara_ _Karmakanda_, there are
five.  There are some differences between these two texts.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 348 saptatikA prakaraNa. mArgaNAoM meM bandhAdisthAna do chakkaTu caupakaM paNa
nava ekkAra chakkagaM udyaa| nerahaAisu saMtA ti paMca ekkArasa caupakaM  // 51
//  _ zahArSa-do kada dhaunaka-do, chaha, ATha aura cAra, paNa nava ekkAra
chakkagaM-pAMca, no, gyAraha aura cha, ukyAudayasthAna, merAisu-narakaM Adi
gatiyoM meM, saMtAsattA, ti paMca ekkArasa ghama-tIna, pAMca, gyAraha aura caar|
gAthAgha-nArakI Adi (nAraka, tiryaMca, manuSya aura deva) ke krama se do, chaha,
ATha aura cAra bandhasthAna, pA~ca, nau, gyAraha aura chaha udayasthAna tathA
tIna, pAMca, gyAraha aura cAra sattAsthAna hote haiN| vizeSArtha-isa gAthA meM
kisa gati meM kitane bandha, udaya aura sattAsthAna hote haiM, isakA nirdeza
kiyA gyaa| naraka, tiryaca, manuSya aura deva ye cAra matiyAM haiM aura isI
krama kA anusaraNa karake gAthA meM pahale bandhasthAnoM kI saMkhyA batalAI
hai-'do chakka'ThTha caunako'arthAt narakagati meM do, tiyaMcagati meM cha,
manuSyagati meM ATha aura devagati meM cAra bandhasthAna haiM  /  udayasthAnoM
kA nirdeza karate hue kahA hai.-'paNa nava ekkAra chakkagaM udayA' | yAnI
pUrvokta anukrama se pAMca, no. gyAraha aura chaha udayasthAna haiM tathA-'ti
paMca ekkArasa caukka' 1 tulanA kIjiye : dopakkacaupaka girayAdimu
gAmabaMghaThANANi  /  paNaNayaegArapaNayaM tipaMcavArasacaurpha bh|| -go0
karmakAra, mA0 710 karmagranya meM manuSyagati meM gyAraha sattAsthAna haiM aura
go0 karmakAMDa meM 12 sattAsthAna tathA devagati meM pharmagrantha meM 6 aura
go0 karmakAMsa meM 5 udayasthAna batalAye haiM  /  itanA donoM meM aMtara haiN|

Page #387 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Grantha 346 There are three, five, eleven, and four satthasthana
(abodes). Their specific explanation is given below.  In the hellish alleys,
there is the andhasthaana (abode of blindness).  In the Nargati (hell realm),
there are two bandhasthaana (abodes of bondage) - the 26th and 30th Prakritika.
Out of these, the 26th Prakritika bandhasthaana is applicable to both
Tiryancagati (animal realm) and Manushyagati (human realm), and the 30th
Prakritika bandhasthaana with Udyota (illumination) is applicable to
Tiryancagati, and the 30th Prakritika bandhasthaana with Tirthankaras is
applicable to Manushyagati.  In Tiryancagati, there are six bandhaman (abodes of
bondage) - 23, 25, 26, 28, 26, and 30 Prakritika. Their explanation should be
done here as well, similar to the previous ones, but with the specific
difference that here, the 26th Prakritika bandhasthaana should not be said to be
with Tirthankaras, and the 30th Prakritika bandhasthaana should not be said to
be with Aharakadvika, because Tiryancas (animals) do not have the bondage of
Tirthankaras and Aharakadvika.  The abodes in Manushyagati are - 23, 25, 26, 28,
26, 30, 31, and 1 Prakritika. Their explanation should also be done here similar
to the previous ones.  In Devagati (celestial realm), there are four
bandhasthaana - 25, 26, 26, and 30 Prakritika. Out of these, the 25 Prakritika
bandhasthaana should be known for the devas who can bind the Prakritis suitable
for Paryapta (developed), Badara (gross), and Pratyeka (individual) along with
Ekendriya (one-sensed beings). Here, there are 8 bhangas (divisions) due to the
alternatives of Sthira (stable), Asthira (unstable), Shubha (auspicious),
Ashubha (inauspicious), Yashah-Kirti (fame), and Ayashah-Kirti (infamy). By
adding the Atapa (radiance) or Udyota Prakriti to the said 25 Prakritika
bandhasthaana, the 26 Prakritika bandhasthaana is formed. The 26 Prakritika
bandhasthaana has 16 bhangas. The 26 Prakritika bandhasthaana can be of both
Manushyagati-prayogya (applicable to human realm) and Tiryancagati-prayogya
(applicable to animal realm) types.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karma grantha 346 tIna, pAMca gyAraha aura cAra sattAsthAna haiN| jinakA
vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA jAtA hai  /  narakAdi galiyoM meM andhasthAna
narakagati meM do bandhasthAna haiM- 26 aura 30 prakRtika  /  inameM se 26
prakRtika bandhasthAna tiryaMcagati aura manuSyagati prAyogya donoM prakAra kA
hai tathA udyota sahita 30 prakRtika bandhasthAna tiryaMcagatiprAyogya haiM aura
tIrthaMkara sahita 30 prakRtika bandhasthAna manuSyagati prAyogya hai  /
tiryaMcagati meM chaha bandhamna haiM- 23 25 26 28, 26 aura 30 prakRtika | inakA
spaSTIkaraNa pahale ke samAna yahA~ bhI karanA cAhiye, lekina itanI vizeSatA hai
ki yahA~ para 26 prakRtika bandhasthAna tIrthaMkara sahita aura 30 prakRtika
bandhasthAna AhArakadvika sahita nahIM kahanA caahiye| kyoMki tiryacoM ke
tIrthaMkara aura AhArakaDhika kA bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  manuSyagati ke sthAna
haiM-- 23, 25, 26, 28, 26,30, 31 aura 1 prakRtika | inakA bhI spaSTIkaraNa pUrva
ke samAna yahA~ bhI kara lenA cAhiye  /  devagati meM cAra bandhasthAna haiM- 25
26 26 aura 30 prakRtika | inameM se 25 prakRtika vandhasthAna paryApta, bAdara
aura pratyeka ke sAtha ekendriya ke yogya prakRtiyoM kA bandha karane vAle devoM
ke jAnanA cAhiye  /  yahA~ sthira asthira zubha-azubha aura yaza: kIrti ayazaH
kIrti ke vikalpa se 8 bhaMga hote haiM  /  ukta 25 prakRtika bandhasthAna meM
Atapa yA udyota prakRti ke milA dene para 26 prakRtika bandhasthAna hotA hai  /
26 prakRtika bandhasthAna ke 16 bhaMga hote haiM  /  26 prakRtika bandhasthAna
manuSyagatiprAyogya yA tiyaMcagatiprAyogya donoM prakAra kA hotA hai

Page #388 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
350 The 30 natural Bandha-sthana (bondage-places) along with the Sapta-tika
(seven-fold) chapter and Udyota (illumination) are applicable to the Tiryancha-
gati (animal realm). Their dissolution is 4608, and the 30 natural Bandha-sthana
along with the Tirthankara name are applicable to the Manushya-gati (human
realm). Their dissolution occurs due to the alternatives of stable-unstable,
auspicious-inauspicious, fame-infamy.  Now, let us consider the Udaya-sthana
(places of arising) in the Naraka (hell) and other realms in sequence. In the
Naraka-gati, there are five Udaya-sthana: 21, 25, 27, 28, and 26 natural. In the
Tiryancha-gati, there are nine Udaya-sthana: 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, and
31 natural. In the Manushya-gati, there are eleven Udaya-sthana: 20, 21, 25, 26,
27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 8, and 6 natural. In the Deva-gati (heavenly realm), there
are six Udaya-sthana: 21, 25, 27, 28, 26, and 30 natural. Thus, in the four
realms of Naraka, Tiryancha, Manushya, and Deva, one should know the five, nine,
eleven, and six Udaya-sthana respectively - "Pan nava ekkara chakkaganga udaya".
The Satya-sthana (places of truth) are described in the Naraka and other realms
as follows: "Santa ti rancha ekkara chauk". This means that in the Naraka-gati,
there are three Satya-sthana: 12, 86, and 18 natural. In the Tiryancha-gati,
there are five Satya-sthana: 62, 88, 86, 80, and 78 natural. In the Manushya-
gati, there are eleven Satya-sthana: 63, 12, 86, 88, 86, 80, 76, 76, 75, 6, and
8 natural. In the Deva-gati, there are four Satya-sthana: 63, 62, 81, and 88
natural.  Having described the Bandha-sthana, Udaya-sthana, and Satya-sthana of
the Naraka, Tiryancha, Manushya, and Deva realms, let us now consider their
Samvedha (consciousness) in the sequence of Naraka, Tiryancha, Manushya, and
Deva realms.  In the Naraka-gati, those who have bound the 26 natural, which are
applicable to the Panchendriya (five-sense) Tiryancha-gati, have five Udaya-
sthana: 21, 25, 27, 28, and 26 natural. And in each of these Udaya-sthana, there
are two Satya-sthana: 62 and 88 natural. Those who have bound the natural
applicable to the Tiryancha-gati do not have the Tirthankara nature bound.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 350 saptatikA prakaraNa tathA udyota sahita 30 prakRtika bandhasthAna
tiryaMcagatiprAyogya hai| isake bhaMga 4608 hote haiM tathA tIrthakara nAma
sahita 30 prakRtika bandhasthAna manuSyagatiprAyogya hai  /  jisake sthira-
asthira, zubha-azubha, yaza kIti-ayazaHkIrti ke vikalpa se - bhaMga hote haiN|
aba naraka Adi gatiyoM meM anukrama se udayasthAnoM kA vicAra karate haiM ki
narakagati meM 21, 25, 27, 28 aura 26 prakRtika, ye pAMca udayasthAna haiN|
tirya cagati meM nau udayasthAna hai--21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 aura 31
prakRtika, manuSyagati meM gyAraha udayasthAna haiM -20, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31, 8 aura 6 prakRtika  /  devagati meM chaha udayamthAna hai-21, 25, 27,
28. 26 aura 30 prakRtika  /  isa prakAra naraka Adi cAroM gatiyoM meM pAMca,
nau, gyAraha aura chaha udayasthAna jAnanA cAhiye- 'paNa nava ekkAra chakkagaM
udayA' 1 sattAsthAnoM ko naraka Adi matiyoM meM batalAte haiM ki-'saMtA ti raMca
ekkArasa cauka'  /  arthAta narakagati meM 12, 86 aura 18 prakRtika, ye tIna
sattAsthAna haiM  /  tiryaMcagati meM pAMca sattAsthAna 62, 88, 86, 80, aura 78
prakRtikA haiM  /  manuSyagati meM gyAraha sattAsthAna haiM.-63, 12, 86, 88, 86,
80, 76, 76, 75, 6 aura 8 prakRtika  /  devamati meM cAra sattAsthAna hai - 63,
62, 81 aura 88 prakRtika  /  isa prakAra naraka, tiryaMca, manuSya aura devagati
ke bandhasthAna, udayasthAna aura sattAsthAnoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba unake
saMvedha kA vicAra naraka, tithaMca, manuSya aura devagati ke anukrama se karate
haiN| maraka gati meM saMkSeSa-paMcendriya tiryaMcagati ke yogya 26 prakRtiyoM
kA bandha karane vAle nArakoM ke pUrvokta 21, 25, 27, 28 aura 26 prakRtika,
pA~ca udayasthAna hote haiM aura inameM se pratyeka udayasthAna meM 62 aura 88
prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  tiryaMcagatiprAyogya prakRtiyoM kA
bandha karane vAle jIva ke tIrthakara prakRti kA bandha nahIM

Page #389 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma-Sanya  Here, 86 natural Satta-sthana are not mentioned. The five
aforementioned Udaya-sthana of the Narakas, who bind the 26 Prakruti applicable
to the human path, and in each Udaya-sthana, there are three Satta-sthana: 62,
86, and Prakruti. A human with the Satta of Tirthankara Prakruti, born in
Naraka, as long as he remains in Mithyadrishti, due to the binding of 26
Prakruti without his Tirthankara, his Satta becomes a Prakruti Satta-sthana in
the 26 Prakruti Bandha-sthana.  In Naraka-gati, 30 Prakruti Bandha-sthana are
obtained in two ways: one with Udyotana and the other with Tirthankara Prakruti.
The one with 30 Prakruti Bandha-sthana including Udyotana has the same five
aforementioned Udaya-sthana, but two Satta-sthana in each Udaya-sthana: 62 and
Prakruti. The one with 30 Prakruti Bandha-sthana including Tirthankara Prakruti
has only one Prakruti Satta-sthana in each of the five Udaya-sthana.  Thus, in
Naraka-gati, there are 40 Satta-sthana in relation to all Bandha-sthana and
Udaya-sthana, whose details are as follows:  | Bandha-sthana | Udaya-sthana |
Satta-sthana | |---|---|---| | 26 Prakruti | 21 | 62, 86, Prakruti | | Bhang |
27 | 62, 86, Prakruti | | Mang | 18 | 62, 86, Prakruti | | Ced | 1 | 62, 86,
Prakruti | | Mang | 1 | 62, 86, Prakruti | | Total | 351 | 1 | |  |  | 1 | |  |
| 1 | |  |  | 62, 86, Prakruti | |  |  | 62, 86, Prakruti | |  |  | 62, 86,
Prakruti | |  |  | 62, 86, Prakruti | |  |  | 62, 86, Prakruti | |  |  | 62, 86,
Prakruti |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmasanya hone se yahA~ 86 prakRtika sattAsthAna nahIM kahA hai|
manuSyagatiprAyogya 26 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karane vAle nArakoM ke pUrvokta
pAMcoM udayasthAna aura pratyeka udayasthAna meM 62, 86 aura prakRtika, ye tIna-
tIna sattAsthAna hote hai| tIrthaMkara prakRti kI sattAvAlA manuSya naraka meM
utpanna hokara jaba taka mithyAdRSTi rahatA hai usakI apekSA taba taka usake
tIrthaMkara ke binA 26 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hone se 26 prakRtika bandhasthAna
meM prakRti kA sattAsthAna bana jAtA hai  /  | narakagati meM 30 prakRtika
bandhasthAna do prakAra se prApta hotA hai - eka udyotanAma sahita aura dUsarA
tIrthaMkara prakRti sahita jisake udyota sahita 30 prakRtika bandhasthAna hotA
hai usake udayasthAna to pUrvokta pAMcoM hI hote haiM kiMtu sattAsthAna pratyeka
udayasthAna meM do-do hote haiM-62 aura prakRtika tathA jisake tIrthaMkara
sahita 30 prakRtika bandhasthAna hotA hai, usake pA~coM udayasthAnoM meM se
pratyeka udayasthAna meM prakRtika eka-eka sattAsthAna hI hotA hai  /  isa
prakAra narakagati meM saba bandhasthAna aura udayasthAnoM kI apekSA 40
sattAsthAna hote haiM, jinakA vivaraNa nimna prakAra hai baMdhasthAna 26
prakRtika bhaMga 216 udaya sthAna 21 d 27 18 r ced maMga 1 1 351 1 1 1
sattAsthAna ER, e, 55 62, 86, 68 PS3, 58, 55 62, 66, 66 ER, E, 55

Page #390 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 352 **Sapta-sika Prakarga** **Bandha-sthana** **Mang** **Ugama-sthana**
**Bhang** **Satta-sthana** **30 Prakruti** 62, 86, 45 | 62, 86, 88 | 12, 6, 88 |
62, 61, 88 12, 86, 88  In the **tiryach-gati**, out of the six **bandha-
sthana**, 23 **prakruti** are **bandha-sthana**. Although the aforementioned 21,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, and 31 **prakruti** are **udaya-sthana**, each of
the first four **udaya-sthana** (21, 24, 25, and 26 **prakruti**) has five
**satta-sthana** each: 62, 6, 86, 80, and 78 **prakruti**. However, each of the
last five **udaya-sthana** has only four **satta-sthana** without 78
**prakruti**. This is because, according to the rule, the existence of
**manushya-dvik** is possible in **udaya-sthana** starting from 27 **prakruti**.
Therefore, 78 **prakruti** **satta-sthana** is not found in them.  Similarly,
one should also know about the beings with 25, 26, 27, and 30 **prakruti**
**bandha-sthana**. However, there is a special feature that for beings who have
**bandha** of 26 **prakruti**, which is suitable for **manushya-gati**, all
their **udaya-sthana** have only four **satta-sthana** without 78 **prakruti**.
This is because, for beings who have **bandha** of **manushya-dvik**, 78
**prakruti** **satta-sthana** is not possible.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 352 saptasikA prakaraga baMdhasthAna maMga ugamasthAna bhaMga sattAsthAna 30
prakRtika 62, 86, 45 62, 86, 88 | 12, 6, 88 |62, 61,88 12, 86, 88 tiryacagati
meM saMveSa-chaha baMdhasthAnoM meM se 23 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM yadyapi
pUrvokta 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye nau hI udayasthAna
hote haiN| lekina inameM se prArambha ke 21, 24, 25 aura 26 prakRtika, ina cAra
udayasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM 62, 6, 86, 80 aura 78 prakRtika, ye pAMca-pAMca
sattAsthAna hote haiM aura anta ke pAMca udayasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM 78
prakRtika ke binA cAra-cAra sattAsthAna hote haiN| kyoMki 27 prakRtika Adi
udayasthAnoM meM niyama se manuSyadvika kI sattA sambhava hai| ata: inameM 78
prakRtika sattAsthAna nahIM pAyA jAtA hai| isI prakAra 25, 26, 26 aura 30
prakRtika baMdhasthAna vAle jIvoM ke bAre meM bhI jAnanA cAhiye  /  kintu itanI
vizeSatA hai ki manuSyagatiprAyogya 26 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle jIva ke
saba udayasthAnoM meM 7 ke binA cAra-cAra sattAsthAna hI sambhava haiN| kyoMki
manuSyadvika kA baMdha karane vAle ke 78 prakRtika sattAsthAna sambhava nahIM
hai|

Page #391 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granthya (35.3)  **The eight Udayasthanas of a being with 28
Prakruti Bandhastanas are:** 21, 25, 26, 27, 25, 26, 30, and 31 Prakruti.
**The reason why it does not have 24 Prakruti Udayasthanas is because it is only
for Ekeendriya beings, and Ekeendriya beings do not have 28 Prakruti
Bandhastanas.**  **Of these Udayasthanas:**  * 21, 26, 28, 29, and 30 Prakruti
are the five Udayasthanas of Vedak Samyagdrstis with 22 Prakruti of Kshayik
Samyagdrsti or Mohaniya. Each of these Udayasthanas has two Sattasthanas, each
with 2 Prakruti. * 25 and 27 Prakruti are the two Udayasthanas of Tiryanch who
are capable of Vikriya. Each of these Udayasthanas has two Sattasthanas, each
with 62 Prakruti. * 30 and 31 Prakruti are the two Udayasthanas of Samyagdrsti
or Mithyadrsti Tiryanch who have attained all Paryaptis. Each of these
Udayasthanas has three Sattasthanas, with 6288 and 6 Prakruti respectively.
**It is important to note that the 86 Prakruti Sattasthanas are only for
Mithyadrstis, not Samyagdrstis, because the Bandha of Devadvik is possible for
Samyagdrsti Tiryanch according to their rules.**  **Therefore, there are 218
Sattasthanas in total, considering all Bandhastanas and Udayasthanas.**  * Each
of the five Bandhastanas (23, 25, 26, 26, and 30 Prakruti) has forty
Sattasthanas. * The 28 Prakruti Bandhastanas have eighteen Sattasthanas.
**Therefore, the total is 40 x 5 + 18 = 218.**  **The details of the
relationship between Bandha, Uday, and Sattasthanas of the Karma called
"Namakarma" related to Tiryanchgati are as follows:**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagramya 35.3 28 prakRtika saMghasthAna vAle jIva ke 21, 25, 26, 27,
25, 26, 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye ATha udayasthAna hote haiN| isake 24 prakRtika
udayasthAna na hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki yaha ekendriyoM ke hI hotA hai aura
ekendriyoM ke 28 prakRtika baMdhasthAna nahIM hotA hai| ina udayasthAnoM meM se
21, 26, 28, 29 ra 30 prakRtika ye pAMca udayasthAna kSAyika samyagdRSTi yA
mohanIya kI 22 prakRtiyoM kI sattA vAle vedaka samyagdRSTiyoM ke hote haiM tathA
inameM se pratyeka udayasthAna meM 2 aura prakRtika, ye do-do sattAsthAna hote
haiM  /  25 aura 27 prakRtika, ye do udayasthAna vikriyA karane vAle tiyaMcoM ke
hote haiN| yahI bhI pratyeka udayasthAna meM 62 aura prakRtika, ye do-do
sattAsthAna hote haiM tathA 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye do udayasthAna saba
paryAptiyoM se paryApta hue samyagdRSTi yA mithyAdRSTi tiyaMcoM ke hote haiN|
inameM se pratyeka udayasthAna meM 6288 aura 6 prakRtika, ye tIna sattAsthAna
hote haiN| lekina yaha vizeSa jAnanA cAhiye ki 86 prakRtika sattAsthAna
mithyAdRSTiyoM ke hI hotA hai, samyagdRSTiyoM ke nahIM, kyoMki samyagdRSTi
tiryaMcoM ke niyama se devadvika kA baMdha sambhava haiM  /  isa prakAra yahA~
saba baMdhasthAnoM aura saba udayasthAnoM kI apekSA 218 sattAsthAna hote haiN|
kyoMki 23, 25, 26, 26 aura 30 prakRtika ina pAMca baMdhasthAnoM meM se pratyeka
meM se cAlIsa-cAlIsa aura 28 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM aThAraha sattAsthAna
hote haiM  /  ata: 405 + 15 = 218 ina saba kA jor3a hotA hai  /  1 tiryaMcagati
sambandhI nAmakarma ke baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM ke saMbaMdha kA vivaraNa
nimna anusAra jAnanA cAhiye -

Page #392 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Saptaatika Prakaran **Bansasthan** | Mang | Udayasthan | |---|---| **Mang** |
Sasasthan | **Prakrutik** | 62, 88, 66, 80, 78 | 62, 68, 86, 80, 78 | 62, 18,
66, 80, 78 | 62, 8, 6, 80, 78 | 62, 88, 86, 80 | 12, 88, 86, 80 | 12, 88, 6, 80
| 92, 88, 86, 80 | 92, 8, 86, 80 | | 1180 | 1754 | **Prakrutik** | 62, 88, 66,
60, 78 | 62, 88, 86, 80, 75 | 12, 88, 86, 80, 78 | 62, 88, 86, F0, 78 | 12, 88,
86, 80 | 62, 88, 86, 80 | 12, 18, 86, 80 | 12, 88, 86, 80 | 62, 88, 86, 80 | |
1180 | 1754 | **Prakrutik** | 12, 8, 86, 80, 78 | 6.2, 88, 86, 60, 75 | 12, 88,
86, 60, 78 | 62, 88, 6, 10, 78 | 62, 8, 86, 80 | 62, 88, 86, 10 | 6.2, 88, 86,
50 | 62, 88, 86, 10 | 12, 18, 16, 80 | | 568 | 1180 | 1754 |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa baMSasthAna | maMga udayasthAna | maMga sasAsthAna
prakRtika 62,88,66, 80, 78 62,68, 86, 80, 78 62,18, 66,80,78 62, 8, 6, 80, 78
62, 88, 86, 80 12. 88, 86, 80 12, 88, 6, 80 92, 88, 86, 80 | 92, 8, 86, 80 1180
1754 prakRtika 311 62, 88, 66, 60, 78 62, 88, 86, 80, 75 12, 88, 86, 80, 78
62,88, 86, F0, 78 12, 88, 86, 80 62, 88, 86, 80 12, 18,86, 80 12, 88, 86, 80 62,
88, 86, 80 1180 1754 prakRtika 12, 8, 86,80, 78 6.2, 88, 86, 60, 75 12, 88,
86,60, 78 62,88, 6, 10, 78 62, 8, 86, 80 62, 88, 86, 10 6.2, 88, 86, 50
62,88,86, 10 12, 18, 16, 80 568 1180 1754

Page #393 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Granth Bandha Sthan | Mangal Udaya Sthan Mangal Satta Sthan 8 62, 88
Prakrutik 12, 88 28 562 1168 1736 1152 6.2, 8 62, 68 62, 62. M8 62, 88, 86 62,
88, 86  _ 6240 23 Prakrutik 15 14 2, 88, 86, 80 62, 88, 86, 8 62,88, 86, 80
12,88,86, 5. 62, 5, 86, 8. 62, 88, 86, ka 62, 88, 86, 80 62,88,86, 62,88,86, 8
56E 1180 1754 1168 Prakrutika 15 311 | 62, 88, 86, ra 62,88, 86, 12, 15, 16, 8.
62, 58, 16, 62, 88, 86, 8। 12, 88, 26, 8। 62, 18, 16, 12, 88, 86, 6.2, 58, 66,
8। 518 1180 1754

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha baMdhasthAna | maMga udayasthAna maMga sattAsthAna 8 62, 88
prakRtika 12, 88 28 562 1168 1736 1152 6.2, 8 62, 68 62, 62. ma8 62, 88, 86 62,
88, 86 _ 6240 23 prakRtika 15 14 2, 88, 86, 80 62, 88, 86, 8 62,88, 86, 80
12,88,86, 5. 62, 5, 86, 8. 62, 88, 86, kA 62, 88, 86, 80 62,88,86, 62,88,86, 8
56E 1180 1754 1168 prakRtikA 15 311 | 62, 88, 86, ra 62,88, 86, 12, 15, 16, 8.
62, 58, 16, 62, 88, 86, 8 /  12, 88, 26, 8 /  62, 18, 16, 12, 88, 86, 6.2, 58,
66, 8 /  518 1180 1754

Page #394 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 356: The Connection of the Seven Tika to Human Destiny  In human
destiny, there are 23 **Prakritis** that bind. The **Prakritis** 21, 22, 26, 27,
28, 29, and 30 are the seven **Udayasthanas** for a human being. Of these,
**Prakritis** 25 and 27 are the two **Udayasthanas** for a **Vikriya** human
being. However, the **Aharak** human being does not experience the binding of
the 23 **Prakritis**, so they should not be considered here. In these two
**Udayasthanas**, there are two **Sattaasthanas** each, with 12 and 88
**Prakritis**. In the remaining five **Udayasthanas**, there are four
**Sattaasthanas** each, with 62, 88, 86, and 80 **Prakritis**. Thus, there are
24 **Sattaasthanas** in the 23 **Prakritis** binding place.  Similarly, there
should be 24 **Sattaasthanas** each in the 25 and 26 **Prakritis** binding
places.  There are also 24 **Sattaasthanas** each in the two **Prakritis**
binding places that are applicable to both human and animal destinies.  In the
28 **Prakritis** binding place, there are seven **Udayasthanas**: 21, 25, 26,
27, 28, 29, and 30. Of these, **Prakritis** 21 and 26 are the two
**Udayasthanas** for a **Samyagdristi** in the state of **Karan-Aparayapta**.
**Prakritis** 25 and 27 are the two **Udayasthanas** for a **Vaikriya** or
**Aharavasanayat**, and **Prakritis** 28 and 29 are the two **Udayasthanas** for
a **Vikriya** who is a **Samyagdristi** without interruption and an **Aharak-
Sanayat**. **Prakritis** 30 is the **Udayasthanas** for a **Samyagdristi** or a
**Mithyadristi**. In all these **Udayasthanas**, there are two **Sattaasthanas**
each, with 12 and 88 **Prakritis**. There is also one **Sattaasthanas** with 62
**Prakritis** for an **Aharak-Sanayat**. However, in the 30 **Prakritis**
**Udayasthanas** for the one who binds the 28 **Prakritis** applicable to
hellish destiny, there are four **Sattaasthanas** with 12, 86, 88, and 86
**Prakritis**. Thus, there are 16 **Sattaasthanas** in the 28 **Prakritis**
binding place.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 356 saptatikA prakaraNa manuSyagati meM saMbaidha manuSyagati meM 23 prakRtiyoM
kA baMdha karane vAle manuSya ke 21, 22, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 prakRtika, ye sAta
udayasthAna hote haiN| inameM se 25 aura 27 prakRtika, ye do udayasthAna vikriyA
karane vAle manuSya ke hote haiM kintu AhAraka manuSya ke 23 prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha nahIM hotA hai, ata: yahA~ AhAraka ke nahIM lenA cAhiye  /  ina do
udayasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM 12 aura 88 prakRtika, ye do-do sattAsthAna hote
haiM tathA zeSa pAMca udayasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM 62, 88, 86 aura 80
prakRtika, ye cAra-cAra sattAsthAna hote haiN| isa prakAra 23 prakRtika
baMdhasthAna meM 24 sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  isI prakAra 25 aura 26 prakRtika
baMdhasthAnoM meM bhI caubIsacaubIsa sattAsthAna jAnanA cAhiye  /
manuSyagatiprAyogya aura tiryaMcagatiprAyogya 2 prakRtika baMdhasthAnoM meM bhI
isI prakAra caubIsa-caubIsa sattAsthAna hote haiN| 28 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM
21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 26 aura 30 prakRtika, ye sAta udayasthAna hote haiN| inameM
se 21 aura 26 prakRtika ye do udayasthAna samyagdRSTi ke karaNa-aparyApta
avasthA meM hote haiN| 25 aura 27, ye do udayasthAna vaikriya yA AhAravAsaMyata
ke tathA 28 aura 26, ye do udayasthAna vikriyA karane vAle, avirata samyagdRSTi
aura AhArakasaMyata ke hote haiN| 30 prakRtika udayasthAna samyagdRSTi yA mithyA
dRSTiyoM ke hotA hai| ina saba udayasthAnoM meM 12 aura mama prakRtika, ye do-do
sattAsthAna hote haiN| isameM bhI AhArakasaMyata ke eka 62 prakRtika sattAsthAna
hI hotA hai| kintu narakagatiprAyogya 28 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle ke 30
prakRtika udayasthAna meM 12, 86, 88 aura 86 prakRtika, ye cAra sattAsthAna hote
haiN| isa prakAra 28 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM 16 sattAsthAna hote haiM  /

Page #395 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **357** There are seven **Udayasthanas** (stages of
arising) similar to the 28 **Prakriti** (nature) **Bandhastanas** (stages of
bondage) of the one who binds 26 **Prakritis** along with the **Tirthankara**
**Prakriti** (nature of a Tirthankara), but with this difference: the 30
**Prakriti** **Udayasthanas** should be said to belong to **Samyagdrstis**
(those who have right faith) only, because the 26 **Prakriti** **Bandhastanas**
include the **Tirthankara** **Prakriti**, and the bondage of the **Tirthankara**
**Prakriti** occurs only for a **Samyagdrsti**. In each of these
**Udayasthanas**, there are two **Sattastanas** (stages of existence) of 63 and
89 **Prakritis**. In this, the **Aharak** (food-consuming) **Samyakt** (rightly-
conducted) has the existence of 63 **Pravrittis** (tendencies) only. Thus, there
are fourteen **Sattastanas** in the 26 **Prakriti** **Bandhastanas** including
the **Tirthankara** **Prakriti**.  When the bondage of 30 **Prakritis** occurs,
including the **Aharak** **Dwik** (two-fold food-consuming), there are two
**Udayasthanas** of 26 and 30 **Prakritis**. Of these, the **Aharak**
**Samyakt** who becomes **Aparamatta** **Samyakt** (perfectly-conducted) in the
final time after fulfilling his **Swayogya** (self-worthy) **Sarva**
**Paryapti** (complete attainment), should be considered to have the arising of
26. Because, elsewhere, in the arising of 26, the specific **Samyama**
(restraint) that is the cause of the bondage of the **Aharak** **Dwik** is not
found. Therefore, elsewhere, the arising of 30 occurs. So, in each of these
**Udayasthanas**, there are 12 **Sattastanas**.  At the time of the 31
**Prakriti** **Bandhastanas**, there is the arising of 30 and the existence of
63. And at the time of the 1 **Prakriti** **Bandhastanas**, there is the arising
of 30 and eight **Sattastanas** of 63, 62, 66, 88, 80, 76, 76, and 75
**Prakritis**.  Thus, at the time of the bondage of 23, 25, and 26, there are
twenty-four **Sattastanas** each, at the time of the bondage of 28, there are
sixteen **Sattastanas**, in the bondage of 26 and 30, which are eligible for
**Manushya** **Gati** (human realm) and **Liyach** **Gati** (animal realm),
there are twenty-four **Sattastanas** each, in the bondage of 26 along with the
**Tirthankara** **Prakriti**, which is eligible for **Dev** **Gati** (heavenly
realm), there are fourteen **Sattastanas**, in the bondage of 31, there is one
**Sattastanas**, and in the bondage of 1 **Prakriti**, there are eight
**Sattastanas**. In this way, there are a total of 156 **Sattastanas** in the
**Manushya** **Gati**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 357 tIrthakara prakRti ke sAtha devagatiprAyogya 26
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle ke 28 prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke samAna sAta
udayasthAna hote haiM, kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki 30 prakRtika udayasthAna
samyagdRSTiyoM ke hI kahanA cAhiye, kyoMki 26 prakRtika baMdhasthAna tIrthaMkara
prakRti sahita hai aura tIrthaMkara prakRti kA baMdha samyagdRSTi ke hI hotA hai
/  ina saba udayasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM 63 aura 89 prakRtika, ye do-do
sattAsthAna hote haiN| isameM AhArakasaMyata ke 63 pravRttiyoM kI hI sattA hotI
hai| isa prakAra tIrthaMkara prakRti sahita 26 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM
caudaha sattAsthAna hote haiN| AhArakadvika sahita 30 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hone
para 26 aura 30 prakRtika do udayasthAna hote haiN| isameM se jo AhArakasaMyata
svayogya sarva paryApti pUrNa karane ke bAda aMtima kAla meM apramattasaMyata
hotA hai. usakI apekSA 26 kA udaya lenA cAhiye  /  kyoMki anyatra 26 ke udaya
meM AhArakadika ke baMdha kA kAraNabhUta viziSTa saMyama nahIM pAyA jAtA hai|
isase anyatra 30 kA udaya hotA hai  /  so inameM se pratyeka udayasthAna meM 12
kI sattA hotI hai| 31 prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke samaya 30 kA udaya aura 63 kI
sattA hotI hai tathA 1 prakRtika baMdhasthAna ke samaya 30 kA udaya aura 63, 62,
66, 88, 80, 76, 76 aura 75 prakRtika, ye ATha sattAsthAna hote haiN| isa prakAra
23, 25 aura 26 ke baMdha ke samaya caubIsa-caubIsa sattAsthAna, 28 ke baMdha ke
samaya solaha satAsthAna, manuSyagati aura liyaMcagati prAyogya 26 aura 30 ke
baMdha meM caubIsa-caubIsa sattAsthAna, devagatiprAyogya tIrthakara prakRti ke
sAtha 26 ke baMdha meM caudaha sattAsthAna, 31 ke baMdha meM eka sattAsthAna
aura 1 prakRtika baMdha meM ATha sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  isa taraha manuSya
gati meM kula 156 sattAsthAna hote haiM  /

Page #396 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Saptaatika Prakarana ## Sansthana Jadprastana | ! ## Sattastana 86, 53 ##
Prakrutik 6.2, 88 | 62, 88, 86, 80 62, 68 62, 8, 86, 50 | 62, 8, 16, 50 | 63, 8,
6, 8.8 ## Prakrutik | 62, 88, 86, 80 | 82, 88 | 12, 25, 26, 65 | 12, 88 | 63,
68, 16, 20 66, 58, 86, 87 | 6.2, 88, 86, 80 " 584 1152 62, 58, 6, 80 ## Rakrutik
29 584 1 62, 88, 86, 50 62, 88 62, 88, 86, 80 65, 81, 86, 80 62.85, 6, 60 584

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa saMsthAna jadaprasthAna | ! sattAsthAna 86,53 prakRtika
6.2, 88 | 62, 88, 86, 80 62, 68 62, 8, 86, 50  /  62, 8, 16, 50 | 63, 8, 6, 8.8
prakRtika |62,88, 86, 80 | 82, 88 | 12, 25, 26, 65 | 12, 88 | 63, 68, 16, 20 66,
58, 86, 87 | 6.2, 88, 86, 80 " 584 1152 62, 58, 6, 80 rAkRtika 29 584 1 62, 88,
86, 50 62, 88 62,88, 86,80 65, 81, 86, 80 62.85, 6, 60 584

Page #397 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth **Bandha Sthan** **Udara Sthan** **Satta Sthan** 28
**Prakrutik** 288 62, 8 62, 88 62, 88 62, 8 62, 88 62, 8 62, 86, 85, 16 584 1152
**Prakrutik** 6 | 63, 62, 86, 88, 86, 80 93, 62, 86. 289 63, 62, 86, 88, 86, 80
62, 62, 66, 8 587 63, 62, 86, 8, 86, 80 587 163, 92, 86, 88, 86, 80 1154 63, 62,
86, 88, 86, 80 **Prakrutik** 256 26 584 | 62, 85, 6, 80 62, 88 62, 5, 6, 80 62,
86 62, 88, 86, 80 12, 88, 86, 80 12. 88, 86, 80 31 **Prakrutik** 1 **Prakrutik**
62, 62. 86, 88, 80, 76, 76, 75

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha baMdhasthAna udarasthAna sattAsthAna 28 prakRtika 288 62, 8
62, 88 62, 88 62, 8 62, 88 62, 8 62, 86, 85, 16 584 1152 prakRtika 6 | 63, 62,
86, 88, 86, 80 93,62, 86. 28963, 62, 86, 88, 86, 80 62,62, 66, 8 587 63, 62, 86,
8, 86, 80 587 163, 92, 86, 88, 86, 80 1154 63, 62, 86, 88, 86, 80 prakRtika 256
26 584 | 62, 85, 6, 80 62, 88 62, 5, 6, 80 62, 86 62, 88, 86, 80 12, 88, 86, 80
12.88, 86, 80 31 prakRtika 1 prakRtika 62,62.86,88,80,76,76,75

Page #398 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seven Tika  **Deva-Gati (Heavenly Realm):** There are six
Udayasthanas (stages of ascent) for the Devas (gods) who bind 25 Prakṛtis (types
of karma). Each Udayasthana has two Sattastahanas (states of existence), one
with 12 Prakṛtis and the other with 88 Prakṛtis. Similarly, one should know the
Udayasthanas for the Devas who bind 26 and 26 Prakṛtis.  **Tiryancha-Gati
(Animal Realm):**  There are six Udayasthanas for the Devas who bind 30
Prakṛtis, including those eligible for Tiryancha-Gati, with each Udayasthana
having two Sattastahanas, one with 12 Prakṛtis and the other with 88 Prakṛtis.
**Tīrthankara-Gati (Liberated Realm):**  For the Devas who bind 60 Prakṛtis,
including the Tīrthankara Prakṛti, there are six Udayasthanas, each with two
Sattastahanas, one with 13 Prakṛtis and the other with 16 Prakṛtis.  **Total:**
There are a total of 60 Sattastahanas.  **Table:**  | **Bandhasthana (Place of
Binding)** | **Mang (Auspicious)** | **Udayasthana (Stage of Ascent)** |
**Sattastahanas (States of Existence)** | **Prakṛtis (Types of Karma)** |
|---|---|---|---|---| |  | 62, 55 | 62, 8 | 12, 88 | 62, 88 | |  |  | 62, 8 |
62, 8 | 62, 88 | |  |  |  | 62, 68 | 62, 68 | |  |  |  | 62, 88 | 62, 88 | |  |
|  |  | 12 |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa devagati meM saMvedha-devagati meM 25 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
karane vAle devoM ke deva sambandhI chahoM udayasthAna hote haiM  /  jinameM se
pratyeka meM hara aura 88 prakRtika ye do-do sattAsthAna hote haiN| isI prakAra
26 aura 26 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle devoM ke bhI jAnanA caahie| udyota
sahita tiryaMcagati ke yogya 30 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle devoM ke bhI
isI prakAra chaha udayasthAna aura pratyeka udayasthAna meM 12 aura 88
prakRtika, ye do-do sattAsthAna hote haiM parantu tIrthaMkara prakRti sahita 60
prakRttiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle devA ke chaha udayasthAnoM meM se pratyeka
udayasthAna meM 13 aura 16 prakRtika, ye do-do sattAsthAna hote haiN| isa
prakAra yahA~ kula 60 sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  baMdhasthAna maMga udayasthAna
sattAsthAna prakRtika Hin 62, 55 62, 8 12, 88 62,88 62,8 62, 88 prakRtika 62, 88
62, 88 62, 68 62,68 62, 88 62, 88 12

Page #399 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Granth Bandha Sthan Udaya Sthan Mang 216 Prakrutik rman. Satta Sthan
62, 65 62, 88 62, 88 62, 88 12, 88 12, 88 Prakrutik an a 63, 62, 86, 88 63, 62,
86, 88 63, 62, 86, 8 13, 62, 86, 88 63, 62, 86, 88 | 63, 62, 16, 8 After stating
the Bandha, Udaya and Satta Sthan and their sensations in the Gati Margna, the
following verse now points out the Bandha etc. Sthan in the Indriya Margna. "Igi
vilidi sagale pan panch ya att andhathanaani. Pan chakkekkarkya pan pan baras ya
santani" ||52|| 1. Compare (a) "Igi vigale pan bandho ahvisuna u att iyarami.
Panch ch ekkarudaya pan pan baras u santani" || -Panchasangraha Sapttatika Ga.
130 (b) "Ege viyale sayale pan pan aj panch chakkegar parna. Panteeran bandhadi
sesadeshavi idi geyam." || -Go. Karmakanda Ga. 711 The Karma Granth mentions 12
Satta Sthan for the five senses and Go. Karmakanda mentions 13 Satta Sthan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha baMdhasthAna udayasthAna maMga 216 prakRtika rman.
sattAsthAna 62, 65 62,88 62, 88 62, 88 12, 88 12, 88 prakRtika an a 63, 62, 86,
88 63, 62, 86, 88 63, 62, 86, 8 13, 62, 86, 88 63,62, 86, 88 | 63, 62, 16, 8 isa
prakAra se gatimArgaNA meM baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAna tathA unake saMvedha
kA kathana karane ke bAda aba Age kI gAthA meM indriyamArgaNA meM baMdha Adi
sthAnoM kA nirdeza karate haiM iga vilidiya sagale paNa paMca ya aTTa
aMdhaThANANi  /  paNa chakkekkArakyA paNa paNa bArasa ya saMtANi'  // 52 //  1
tulanA kIjiye(ka) igi vigale paNa baMdho ahavIsUNA u aTTha iyaraMmi  /  paMca
cha ekkArudayA paNa paNa bArasa u saMtANi  //  -paMcasaMgraha saptatikA gA0 130
(kha) ege viyale sayale paNa paNa aja paMca chakkegAra parNa  /  paNateraM
baMdhAdI sesAdesevi idi geyaM  /  /  -go0 karmakAMDa gA0 711 karbha graMtha meM
paMcendriyoM ke 12 sattAsthAna aura go0 karmakAMca meM 13 sattAsthAna batalAye
haiN|

Page #400 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 362: The Sevenfold  **Samvarsha:** In this context of non-motion, all
beings are classified as one-sensory, multi-sensory, and five-sensory
(panchendriya). However, within the five-sensory beings, the **bandhastana**
(binding places) are eight, five, and five, while the **chhamkekar** (arising
places) are five, six, and eleven, and the **saky** (existence places) are
twelve, five, and five.  **Gathartha:** In one-sensory, multi-sensory, and five-
sensory beings, the binding places are five, five, and eight respectively. The
arising places are five, six, and eleven respectively, and the existence places
are five, five, and twelve respectively.  **Explanation:** In the previous
verse, the binding places, etc., of **namakarma** (name karma) and their
corresponding sensations were discussed for the four types of **gatimagna**
(those who move). This verse, while discussing the binding places, etc., for the
five types of **indriyamargna** (those who move through the senses), explains
that the binding places for one-sensory beings are five, for multi-sensory
beings are five, and for five-sensory beings are eight. Similarly, the arising
places are five for one-sensory beings, six for multi-sensory beings, and eleven
for five-sensory beings. The existence places are five for one-sensory beings,
five for multi-sensory beings, and twelve for five-sensory beings.  **Detailed
Explanation:** There are eight binding places in total. Of these, the binding
places for one-sensory beings are 26, 25, 26, 26, and 31, which are five in
number. Each of the multi-sensory beings has the same five binding places as the
one-sensory beings. The binding places for five-sensory beings are 23, etc.,
which are eight in number.  There are twelve arising places. Of these, the
arising places for one-sensory beings are 21, 24, 25, 26, and 27, which are five
in number. The arising places for each of the multi-sensory beings are 21, 26,
28, 26, 30, and 31, which are six in number.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 362 saptatikA prakaraNa zamvArSa--ima vigativiya sagale-ekendriya, vikalendriya
aura sakalendriya (paMcendriya) meM, paNa paMca meM aTa-pAMca, pAMca aura ATha,
saMghaThANANi-baMdhasthAna, paNa chamakerakAra-pAMca, chaha aura gyAraha, sakyA-
udayasthAna, paNa-paNa bArasa-pA~ca, pA~ca aura bAraha, ya-aura, saMtANi-
sattAsthAna  /  gAthArtha-ekendriya, vikalendriya aura paMcendriya meM anukrama
se pAMca, pAMca aura ATha baMdhasthAna; pAMca, chaha aura gyAraha udayasthAna
tathA pAMca, pAMca aura bAraha sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  vizeSAya pUrva gAthA
meM gatimAgaNA ke cAroM bhedoM meM nAmakarma ke baMdha Adi sthAnoM aura unake
saMvedha kA kathana kiyA gayA thaa| isa gAthA meM indriyamArgaNA ke ekendriya
Adi pAMca bhedoM meM baMdhAdi sthAnoM kA nirdeza karate hue anukrama se batAyA
hai ki 'paNa paMca ya aTTha baMdhaThANANi' ekendriya ke pAMca, vikalendriya
(dvIndriya, zrIndriya aura caturindriya) ke pAMca tathA paMcendriya ke ATha
baMdhasthAna hai| isI prakAra anukrama se udayasthAnoM kA nirdeza karane ke liye
kahA hai ki-'paNa chakkekkArudayA'- ekendriya ke pAMca. vikalendriyoM ke chaha
aura paMcendriyoM ke myAraha udayasthAna hote haiM tathA 'paNa paNa vArasa ya
saMtANi'-ekendriya ke pAMca, vikalendriyoM ke pAMca aura paMcendriyoM ke bAraha
sattAsthAna haiM  /  ina saba baMdha Adi sthAnoM kA spaSTIkaraNa nIce kiyA jA
rahA hai| _kula baMdhasthAna ATha haiM, unameM se ekendriyoM ke 26, 25, 26, 26
aura 31 prakRtika, ye pAMca baMdhasthAna haiN| vikalendriyoM meM se pratyeka ke
bhI ekendriya ke liye batAye gaye anusAra hI pAMca-pAMca baMdhasthAna haiM tathA
paMcendriyoM ke 23 Adi prakRtika AThoM baMdhasthAna haiN| udayasthAna bAraha
hai| unameM se ekendriyoM ke 21. 24, 25, 26 aura 27 prakRtika, ye pAMca
udayasthAna hote haiN| vikalendriyoM meM se pratyeka ke 21, 26, 28, 26.30 aura
31 prakRtika, ye chaha-chaha udaya

Page #401 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sixth Karma Granth  There are 363 **Bandha** (bond) places and eleven
**Udaya** (arising) places: 20, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 6, and 5
**Prakruti** (nature) for the five senses. There are twelve **Satta**
(existence) places in total, of which there are five **Satta** places each for
the **Ekendriya** (one-sense) and **Vikalendriya** (impaired-sense) with 12, 88,
86, 80, and 78 **Prakruti** respectively. The five senses have twelve **Satta**
places each.  Now, we will discuss the **Sanvedha** (perception) of each
**Ekendriya** etc. by explaining their **Bandha**, **Udaya**, and **Satta**
places.  The **Ekendriya** with 23 **Prakruti** **Bandha** has five **Satta**
places in each of the first four **Udaya** places. The **Udaya** place with 27
**Prakruti** has four **Satta** places except for 78. Similarly, one should know
the **Satta** places in relation to the **Udaya** places for the **Bandha**
places with 25, 26, 26, and 30 **Prakruti**.  For the **Bandha** place with 23
**Prakruti**, there are 24 **Satta** places in each of the five **Udaya**
places, totaling 120. All these **Satta** places belong to the **Ekendriya**.
**Bandha** Place | **Udaya** Place | **Satta** Place ------- | -------- |
-------- **Prakruti** | **Prakruti** | **Prakruti** 62, 8, 96, 80, 78 | 62, 88,
86, 80, 70 | 62, 55, 86, 80, 75 62, 88, 86, 80, 78 | 62, 88, 86, 80, 78 | 62,
88, 86, 80 62, 8, 86, 80, 78 | 62, 88, 86, 80, 78 | 62, 88, 86, 80, 78 62, 18,
86, 80, 78 | 92, 88, 86, 80 | ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paSaTha karmagrantha 363 sthAna hote haiM tathA paMcendriyoM ke 20, 21, 25, 26,
27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 6 aura 5 prakRtika, ye gyAraha udayasthAna hote haiN|
sattAsthAna kula bAraha haiM, jinameM se ekendriyoM aura vikalendriyoM meM se
pratyeka ke 12, 88, 86, 80 aura 78 prakRtika, ye pAMca-pAMca sattAsthAna haiM
tathA paMcendriyoM ke bArahoM hI sattAsthAna hote haiN| isa prakAra ekendriya
Adi meM se pratyeka ke baMdha, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM ko batalAkara aba inake
saMvedha kA vicAra karate haiN| ekendriya-23 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karane vAle
ekendriyoM ke prArambha ke cAra udayasthAnoM meM se pratyeka udayasthAna meM
pAMca-pAMca sattAsthAna hote haiM tathA 27 prakRtika udayasthAna meM 78 ko
chor3akara zeSa cAra sattAsthAna hote haiN| isI prakAra 25, 26, 26 aura 30
prakRtika baMdhasthAnoM ke bhI udayasthAnoM kI apekSA sattAsthAna jAnanA cAhiye
/  isa prakAra 23 prakRtika baMdhasthAna meM pAMca udayasthAnoM kI apekSA
pratyeka meM 24 sattAsthAna hote haiM, jinakA kula jor3a 120 hai| ye saba
sattAsthAna ekendriya ke haiN| baMdhasthAna ] maMga udayasthAna | maMga
sattAsthAna . -... prakRtika 62, 8, 96,80, 78 62,88, 86,80, 70 62, 55, 86, 80,
75 62, 88, 86, 80, 78 62, 88, 86, 80 prakRtika 62, 8, 86, 80, 78 62, 88, 86, 80,
78 62, 88, 86, 80,78 62, 18, 86, 80, 78 92, 88, 86, 80

Page #402 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 364 **Sapta-tika Prakaran** **Bandha-sthan** **Mang** **Ukha-sthan** **Mang**
**Satta-sthan** **Prakruti** 62, 18, 86, 80, 78 32, 58, 2, 78 62, Dam, 86, 80,
78 62, 88, 86, 80, 58 62, 8, 66, 80 ## 240 **Prakruti** | 62, 88, 6, 80, 78 12,
8, 86, 80, 78 62, 88, 86, 80, 70 62, 88, 86, 80, 58 12, 88, 86, 80 ## 30
**Prakruti** 62, 88, 86, 80, 76 62, 88, 86, 80, 58 62, 88, 86, 60, 7%D 62, 88,
86, 7, 77 62, 88, 86, 80  **In the Vikalendriya-Vikalendriyas, for the beings
bound by 23, there are five Udaya-sthans each for the 21st and 26th Prakrutis,
and in the remaining four Udaya-sthans, there are four Satta-sthans each,
excluding 78. Thus, there are 26 Satta-sthans in the 23 Prakruti Bandha-sthans.
Similarly, there are 26 Satta-sthans each in the 25th, 26th, 26th, and 30th
Prakruti Bandha-sthans, respectively, in relation to their respective Udaya-
sthans. Thus, there are a total of 130 Satta-sthans in the five Bandha-sthans
with six Udaya-sthans in the Vikalendriyas.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 364 saptatikA prakaraNa baMdhasthAna maMga ukhamasthAna maMga sattAsthAna
prakRtika 62, 18, 86,80, 78 32, 58, 2, 78 62, dama, 86, 80, 78 62, 88, 86, 80,
58 62, 8, 66, 80 240 prakRtika | 62, 88, 6, 80, 78 12, 8, 86, 80,78 62, 88,
86,80, 70 62,88,86, 80, 58 12,88,86, 80 30 prakRtikA 62,88, 86, 80, 76 62,88,
86, 80, 58 62, 88, 86, 60, 7%D 62, 88, 86, 7,77 62, 88, 86, 80 vikalendriya-
vikalendriyoM meM 23 kA bandha karane vAle jIvoM meM 21 aura 26 prakRtiyoM ke
udaya meM pAMca-pAMca udayasthAna hote haiM tathA zeSa cAra udayasthAnoM meM se
pratyeka meM 78 ke binA cAra-cAra sattAsthAna hote haiN| isa prakAra 23
prakRtika bandhasthAna meM 26 sattAsthAna hue| isI prakAra 25, 26, 26. aura 30
prakRtika bandhasthAnoM meM bhI apane-apane udayasthAnoM kI apekSA 26-26
sattAsthAna hote haiN| isa prakAra vikalendriyoM meM pAMca bandhasthAna meM
chaha udayasthAnoM ke kula milAkara 130 sattAsthAna hote haiM  /

Page #403 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Bandha Bandha Sthana Mang Udayasthana Bhang Satta Sthana Prati
Prakrutik 62, 88, 86, 50, 78 | 12, 6, 86, 80, 75 62, 88, 86, 10 62, 5, 6, 80 62,
8, 86, 80 62, 88, 86, 10 62, 5, 86, 80, 78 62, 88, 86, 80, 78 62, 88, 86, 80 12,
16, 86, 80 62, , 86, 80 62, 88, 86, 80 12, 88, 86, 80, 78 12, 88, 86, 80, 78 62,
8, 86, 50 12, 88, 86.80 62, 88, 6, 80 62, 8, 86,  Prakrutik 240 Prakrutik 62,
88, 86, 80, 78 | 12, 88, 86, 80, 70 12, 88, 86, 80 62, 88, 86, 80 62, 58, 6, 80
62, 88, 86.80 10 PPY Trm m Prakrutik 62, 88, 86, 80, 78 62, 88, 66, 80, 78 12,
88, 86, 80 62, 88, 86, 80 12, 8, 86, 80 | 62, 88, 86, 80

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrandha baMdhasthAna maMga udayasthAna bhaMga sattAsthAna prati
prakRtika 62,88, 86, 50, 78 | 12, 6, 86, 80, 75 62, 88, 86, 10 62, 5, 6, 80 62,
8, 86, 80 62, 88, 86, 10 62, 5, 86, 80, 78 62, 88, 86, 80, 78 62, 88, 86, 80 12,
16, 86, 80 62, , 86, 80 62, 88, 86, 80 12, 88, 86, 80, 78 12,88, 86, 80, 78
62,8,86,50 12, 88, 86.80 62,88,6,80 62, 8,86, prakRtika 240 prakRtika 62, 88,86,
80, 78 | 12,88,86, 80, 70 12, 88, 86, 80 62,88,86, 80 62, 58, 6, 80 62, 88,
86.80 10 PPY Trm m prakRtika 62, 88, 86, 80,78 62,88,66,80,78 12,88, 86, 80
62,88, 86, 80 12, 8,86, 80  /  62,88,86, 80

Page #404 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 7:  The Case of the Seventies  **In the five-sensed and five-indriyal
beings, there are six stages of arising (udayasthan) for the 21st, 26th, 28th,
29th, 30th, and 31st natures that bind the 23 natures.**  **These six stages of
arising have a total of 26 states of being (sattaasthan).**  The 21st and 26th
natures have five states of being each, as previously mentioned. The remaining
four stages of arising have four states of being each, excluding the 78th
nature.  **For the 25th and 26th natures that bind, there are eight stages of
arising for the 21st, 25th, 26th, 27th, 28th, 29th, 30th, and 31st natures.**
**Each of the 21st and 26th natures has five states of being, as previously
mentioned.** The 25th and 27th natures have two states of being each, the 62nd
and 18th. The remaining four stages of arising, the 28th and onwards, have four
states of being each, excluding the 78th nature. Thus, each of the 25th and 26th
natures has 30 states of being.  **For the 28th nature that binds, there are
eight stages of arising for the 21st, 25th, 26th, 27th, 28th, 29th, 30th, and
31st natures.**  **These stages of arising should be understood in relation to
the five-sensed and human beings, as the 28th nature binds only them.** Each of
the six stages of arising from the 21st to the 26th has two states of being, the
12th and 88th natures. The 30th stage of arising has four states of being, the
62nd, 86th, 88th, and 86th natures. The 86th nature should be understood as the
state of being of a human who, with a false view (mithyadristi) and the nature
of a Tirthankara, binds the 28th nature, making them eligible for hell. The 31st
stage of arising has three states of being, the 92nd, 18th, and 86th natures.
These three states of being should be understood in relation to the five-sensed
non-human beings (tiryanch), as the 31st stage of arising does not occur in
other five-sensed beings. The 86th nature is the state of being of a five-sensed
non-human with a false view, not a five-sensed non-human with a right view
(samyagdristi). This is because, according to the rules for five-sensed non-
humans, the binding of the Devadvikas begins.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 366 saptatikA prakaraNa paMceviya-paMcendriyoM meM 23 prakRtiyoM kA bandha
karane vAle ke 21, 26, 28, 29, 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye chaha udayasthAna hote
haiM  /  inameM se 21 aura 26 prakRtika udayasthAnoM meM pUrvokta pAMca-pAMca
aura zeSa cAra udayasthAnoM meM 78 ke binA cAra cAra sattAsthAna hote haiM  /
kula milAkara yahA~ 26 sattAsthAna hai| 25 aura 26 kA bandha karane vAle ke 21,
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 aura 31 prakRttika, ye ATha-ATha udayasthAna hote haiN|
inameM se 21 aura 26 prakRtika, ina do udayasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM pAMca-
pAMca sattAsthAna pahale batAye gaye anusAra hI hote haiM  /  25 aura 27 ina do
meM 62 aura 18 ye do-do sattAsthAna tathA zeSa 28 Adi cAra udayasthAnoM meM 78
ke binA cAra-cAra sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  isa prakAra 25 aura prakRtika
bandhasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM 30-30 sattAsthAna hote haiN| 28 prakRtiyoM kA
bandha karane vAle ke 21. 25, 26, 27, 28, 26 30 aura 31 prakRtika, ye ATha
udayasthAna hote haiN| ye saba udayasthAna liyaMca paMcendriya aura manuSyoM
saMbaMdhI lenA cAhiye  /  kyoMki 28 kA bandha inhIM ke hotA hai| yahA~ 21 se
lekara 26 taka chaha udayasthAnoM meM se pratyeka meM 12 aura 88 prakRtika ye
do-do sattAsthAna hote haiN| 30 ke udaya meM 62, 86, 88 aura 86 prakRtika, ye
cAra sattAsthAna hote haiN| jinameM se 86 kI sattA usa manuSya ke jAnanA cAhiye
jo tIrthakara prakRti kI sattA ke sAtha mithyA dRSTi hote hue narakagati ke
yogya 28 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karatA hai tathA 31 ke udaya meM 92, 18 aura 86,
ye tIna sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  ye tInoM sattAsthAna tiryaMca paMcendriya kI
apekSA samajhanA cAhiye, kyoMki anyatra paMcendriya ke 31 kA udaya nahIM hotA
hai  /  usameM bhI 86 prakRtika sattAsthAna mithyASTi tiryaMca paMcendriyoM ke
hotA hai, samyagdRSTi tithaMca paMcendriya ke nahIM, kyoMki samyagdRSTi
tiryaMcoM ke niyama se devadvika kA bandha hone lagatA

Page #405 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **367** Therefore, the existence of their 86 natures is
not possible. Thus, in the 28 nature bondage place, there are 16 existence
places.  **29** These are the aforementioned eight arising places of those who
bind the 29 natures. Among these, in the arising of 21 and 26 natures, there are
seven-seven existence places of 12, 88, 16, 80, 78, 63, and 86 natures. Here,
the initial two existence places are for those who bind the 26, which are
eligible for the animal realm, the initial three for those who bind the 29,
which are eligible for the human realm, and the final two for those who bind the
26, which are eligible for the celestial realm. In the arising of 28, 26, and
30, there are six-six existence places without 78. In the arising of 31, there
are four initial existence places, and in the arising of 25 and 27, there are
four-four existence places of 13, 62, 86, and 88 natures. Thus, in the 26 nature
bondage place, there are a total of 44 existence places.  **30** Those who bind
the 30 natures have the same eight arising places as those who bind the 26, and
the same existence places in each arising place. However, there is this special
feature: in the arising of 21, the first five existence places are for those who
bind the 30, which are eligible for the animal realm, and the final two
existence places are for those who bind the 30, which are eligible for the human
realm, and are celestial beings. And in the arising of 26, there are no two
existence places of 63 and 86 natures, because the arising of 26 occurs in the
insufficient state of animals and humans, but at that time, the binding of the
30, which are eligible for the celestial realm or the human realm, does not
occur, so the existence of 63 and 86 is not obtained here. Thus, in the 30
nature bondage place, a total of 42 existence places are obtained.  **31** The
arising places and existence places of those who bind the 31 and 1 natures
should be known to be the same as those of the human realm.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 367 hai ata: unake 86 prakRtiyoM kI sattA sambhava nahIM
hai| isa prakAra 28 prakRtika bandhasthAna meM kala 16 sattAsthAna hote haiN| 29
prakRtiyoM kA bandha karane vAle ke ye pUrvokta ATha udayasthAna hote haiN|
inameM se 21 aura 26 prakRtiyoM ke udaya meM 12, 88,16, 80, 78, 63 aura 86
prakRtika ye sAta-sAta sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  yahA~ tiryaMcagatiprAyogya 26
kA bandha karane vAloM ke prArambha ke pAtra, manuSyagatiprAyogya 29 kA bandha
karane vAloM ke prArambha ke bAra aura devagatiprAyogya 26 kA bandha karane
vAloM ke aMtima do sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  28, 26 aura 30 ke udaya meM 78 ke
binA pUrvokta chaha-chaha sattAsthAna hote haiN| 31 ke udaya meM prArambha ke
cAra aura 25 tathA 27 ke udaya meM 13, 62, 86 aura 88 prakRtika, ye cAra-cAra
sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  isa prakAra 26 prakRtika bandhasthAna meM kula 44
sattAsthAna hote haiN| 30 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karane vAle ke 26 ke bandha ke
samAna ve hI ATha udayasthAna aura pratyeka udayasthAna meM usI prakAra
sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  kintu yahA~ itanI vizeSatA hai ki 21 ke udaya meM
pahale pA~ca sattAsthAna tiyaMcagatiprAyogya 30 kA bancha karane vAle ke hote
haiM aura aMtima do sattAsthAna manuSyagatiprAyogya 30 kA bandha karane vAle
devoM ke hote haiM tathA 26 ke udaya meM 63 aura 89 prakRtika, ye do sattAsthAna
nahIM hote haiM, kyoMki 26 kA udaya tiyaMca aura manuSyoM ke aparyApta avasthA
meM hotA hai parantu usa samaya devagatiprAyogya yA manuSyagatiprAyogya 30 kA
bandha nahIM hotA hai, jisase yahA~ 63 aura 86 kI sattA prApta nahIM hotI hai  /
isa prakAra 3. prakRtika bandhasthAna meM kula 42 sattAsthAna prApta hote haiN|
31 aura 1 prakRti kA bandha karane vAle ke udayasthAnoM aura sattAsthAnoM kA
saMvaidha manuSyagati ke samAna jAnanA caahiye|

Page #406 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
368 Bandha Sthana 23 Prakruti 25 Prakruti 26 Prakruti Mang 4 25 16 Udaya Sthana
21 18 26 518 28 1152 26 1728 : 1880 31 1152 קו Mang 21 25 26 27 28 26 30 31 26 5
578 5 1168 1744 2885 1152 21 25 26 ૭ 28 1168 26 1744 30 31 26 578 Է 2886 1156
12,88,86,8078 62,88, 6, 80, 78 62,68,66, 80 62,88,86,80 R. 5.3.5.3 62, 6, 80
62,88 62,66,56,8078 Sapta-tika Prakarana Sapta-sthana 22,88 8 62, 86
62,88,86,8078 12,86,80, 78 62,86,66,50,78 12,88,86,505 62,88,86,80, 78
62,88,86,8078 62,88 2,86,8078 12,88,86,80 2,88,86,80 2, 860 62,86,50

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 368 baMdha sthAna 23 prakRtika 25 prakRtika 26 prakRtika maMga 4 25 16 udaya
sthAna 21 18 26 518 28 1152 26 1728 : 1880 31 1152 kv maMga 21 25 26 27 28 26 30
31 26 5 578 5 1168 1744 2885 1152 21 25 26 7 28 1168 26 1744 30 31 26 578 E 2886
1156 12,88,86,8078 62,88, 6, 80, 78 62,68,66, 80 62,88,86,80 R. 5.3.5.3 62, 6,
80 62,88 62,66,56,8078 saptatikA prakaraNa saptAsthAna 22,88 8 62, 86
62,88,86,8078 12,86,80, 78 62,86,66,50,78 12,88,86,505 62,88,86,80, 78
62,88,86,8078 62,88 2,86,8078 12,88,86,80 2,88,86,80 2, 860 62,86,50

Page #407 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Granth Bandha Sthana Mang 28 Prakrutiks 26 6248 Prakrutiks 30
Prakrutiks 31 Prakrutiks E 1 Prakrutiks 4641 Uvayasthan 1 21 25 26 27 28 26 30
31 M 21 25 26 27 28 E 30 Saṁjñā 31 mnz 30 31 1 30 Bhang 30 16 62,88 A 6288 62,88
573 8 1156 1728 2880 1156 21 25 26 27 28 1166 26 1745 2866 1156 17 578 H. 1166
1745 2885 1156 27 £ 576 6 144 144 Satta Sthana ER, 55 92 8 12, 85 62, 8605 86
62, 86 62,88,86,8078 93, 86 3,62,86,86 62,88,86,807863, 86 13 12 P 63, 62, 86,
86, 86, 50 63, 62, 86, 85 86 80 63, 12, 6, 8, 1680 £3, 55, 56, 50 366 63, 62,
86, 68 66,8078 Gê, ER, E, 55 62,88,86,8078 63, 62, 6, 88 2, 3, 5, 55, 5, 50 63,
12, 86, 86, 86, 60 63,62,68,86,80 63, 12,86,55, 50 3 13,62,81,88,80,76,76,75

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha baMdha sthAna maMga 28 prakRtika 26 6248 prakRtika 30
prakRtika 31 prakRtika E 1 prakRtika 4641 uvayasthAna 1 21 25 26 27 28 26 30 31
ma 21 25 26 27 28 E 30 saengjang 31 mnz 30 31 1 30 bhaMga 30 16 62,88 A 6288
62,88 573 8 1156 1728 2880 1156 21 25 26 27 28 1166 26 1745 2866 1156 17 578 ha.
1166 1745 2885 1156 27 PS 576 6 144 144 sattAsthAna ER, 55 92 8 12, 85 62, 8605
86 62, 86 62,88,86,8078 93, 86 3,62,86,86 62,88,86,807863, 86 13 12 pa 63, 62,
86, 86, 86, 50 63, 62, 86, 85 86 80 63, 12, 6, 8, 1680 PS3, 55, 56, 50 366 63,
62, 86, 68 66,8078 Ge, ER, E, 55 62,88,86,8078 63, 62, 6, 88 2, 3, 5, 55, 5, 50
63, 12, 86, 86, 86, 60 63,62,68,86,80 63, 12,86,55, 50 3 13,62,81,88,80,76,76,75

Page #408 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seven Tika  Thus, one should know the statement of the
binding, arising, and being places of name-karma, as well as their stimulations,
in relation to the sensory path.  _Now, in the following section, there is an
indication of stating the binding, etc., places in the eight _anuyogadwaras_..._
**Verse 53:**  "In the same way as mentioned before, the _kammapagaṭhāṇāī_
(places of the karmic natures) should be known, _suṭhu_ (very well),
_bandhuppapasanta_ (with the binding, etc., karmas), through the _gahiāīehi_
(paths of motion, etc., places of destruction), in the _aṭu_ (eight)
_anuyogadwaras_ (gates of the _anuyoga_), in _cauppagareṇa_ (four ways).
_Nevāṇi_ (one should know)."  **Meaning:**  These previously mentioned places of
the karmic natures related to binding, arising, and being, should be known very
well, along with the paths of motion, etc., places of destruction, in the eight
_anuyogadwaras_, in four ways.  **Special Note:**  Up to this point in the text,
the binding, arising, and being places of the eight _vārmas_ (obscurations),
including knowledge-obscuration, have been generally described in terms of the
place of the living being, the place of qualities, the path of motion, and the
sensory path. However, this verse indicates something specific: just as the
paths of motion, etc., have been described previously, they should be understood
in relation to the eight _anuyogadwaras_. It also indicates that not only the
nature-binding form, but also the "four ways" of knowing, should be understood
in relation to the nature-binding, including the form of the state, the section,
and the region. This is because binding, arising, and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa isa prakAra indriya mArgaNA kI apekSA nAmakarma ke baMdha,
udara aura sattA sthAnoM tathA unake saMveghoM kA kathana jAnanA cAhiye  /  _
aba Age kI mAthA meM baMdha Adi sthAnoM ke ATha anuyogadvAroM meM kathana karane
kA saMketa karate haiM... iya kambhapagaiThANAI suThu baMdhukyasaMtammANaM  /
gaiAiehi asu cauSpagAreNa naiyANi  // 53 //  zavArya-ya-pUrvokta prakAra se,
kammapagAThANAIkarma prakRtiyoM ke sthAnoM ko, suku atyanta upayogapUrvaka,
baMdhupapasaMta -baMdha, ra  /  papI karma na pRziyoM ke, gahaAiehi-gati Adi
mArgaNAsthAnoM ke dvArA, aTusu-ATha anuyogahAroM meM, upapagAreNacAra prakAra
se. nevANi-jAnanA caahiye| _lAcArtha ye pUrvokta baMdha, udaya aura sattA
sambandhI karma prakRtiyoM ke sthAnoM ko atyanta upayogapUrvaka gati Adi
mArgaNAsthAnoM ke sAtha ATha anuyogadvAroM meM cAra prakAra se jAnanA caahiye|
vizeSArSa-~isa mAthA se pUrva taka jJAnAvaraNa Adi ATha vArmoM kI mUla aura
uttara prakRtiyoM ke baMtra, udaya aura sattA sthAnoM kA sAmAnya rUpa se tathA
jIvasthAna, guNasthAna, gatimArgaNA aura indriyamArgaNA meM nirdeza kiyA hai|
lekina isa gAthA meM kucha vizeSa saMketa karate haiM ki jaisA pUrva meM gati
Adi mArgaNAoM meM kathana kiyA gayA hai, usake sAtha unako ATha anuyogadvAroM
meM ghaTita kara lenA caahiye| isake sAtha yaha bhI saMketa kiyA hai ki sirpha
prakRtibaMdha rUpa nahIM kintu 'cauppagAreNa neyANi' prakRtibaMdha ke sAtha
sthiti, anubhAga aura pradeza rUpa se bhI ghaTita karanA cAhiye  /  kyoMki ye
baMdha, udaya aura

Page #409 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth ### 371  All karmas are of seven types, classified into
four categories based on their nature, state, section, and region.  The text
hints at how these four types of karmas are performed and by whom, through the
eight *anuyogadwaras* (gates of knowledge) using the *bhasad, gaddha, gati,
adhi, ghodah, margana* (means of investigation). The word *margana* means "to
investigate." Therefore, *bhargana* refers to those through whom or in whom the
investigation of the soul takes place. There are fourteen types of *margana*:  *
*Gaviye, pakaye, joaye, veaye, kasaye, mage, sanjam, bansan, leta, bhag, samme,
sammi, mamhare* (1. *Gati*, 2. *Indriya*, 3. *Kaya*, 4. *Yoga*, 5. *Ved*, 6.
*Kasaya*, 7. *Jnana*, 8. *Sanjam*, 9. *Darshan*, 10. *Leshya*, 11. *Bhavya*, 12.
*Samyak*, 13. *Sanjni*, 14. *Ahar*)  These fourteen *margana* have 62 sub-
categories.  The tradition of description is to first describe the state of the
soul in general and then delve into its specific aspects through the fourteen
*margana* within the eight *anuyogadwaras*. *Anuyogadwaras* are synonymous with
authority and can be further divided based on the subject matter. However, the
detailed discussion of *margana* is primarily found in the eight authorities,
hence they are considered the main ones. These eight authorities are:  * *Sant,
payaparuvaya, bambammanam, cha, hitasana, ya, kalo, me, antar, bhag, bhav, appa,
hun, dhen'* (1. *Aavashyak*, 2. *Niyukti*, 3. *Gatha*, 4. *13*)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karma grantha 371 sattA rUpa saba karma prakRti, sthiti, anubhAga aura
pradeza ke bheda se cAra-bAra prakAra ke haiN| ina cAroM prakAra rUpa karmoM ko
kina meM aura kisake dvArA ghaTita karane ke lie gAthA meM saMketa kiyA hai ki
bhAsada gaddhA gati Adi ghaudaha mArgaNAoM ke dvArA ATha anuyogadvAroM meM inayA
cintana karanA hai| _mArgaNA zabda kA artha anveSaNa karanA hai  /  ata:
bhArgaNA kA yaha artha huA ki jinake dvArA yA jinameM jIvoM kA anveSaNa kiyA
jAtA hai, unheM mArgaNA kahate haiM  /  mArgaNA ke caudaha bheda isa prakAra
haiM gAvie pakAe joe vee kasAya mAge  /  saMjama baMsaNa letA bhaga samme sammi
mAmhAre  /  1 gati, 2 indriya, 3 kAya, 4 yoga, 5 veda, 6 kaSAya, 7 jJAna, 8
saMyama, darzana, 10 lezyA, 11 bhavyatva, 12 samyaktva, 13 saMjJI aura 14 AhAra
/  inake 14 bhedoM ke uttara bheda 62 hote haiN| varNana kI yaha paramparA hai
ki jIva sambandhI jisa kisI bhI avasthA kA varNana karanA hai, usakA pahale
sAmAnya rUpa se varNana kiyA jAtA hai aura usake bAda usakA vizeSa cintana
caudaha mArgaNAoM dvArA ATha anuyogadvAroM meM kiyA jAtA hai| anuyogaddAra yaha
adhikAra kA paryAyavAcI nAma hai aura viSaya-vibhAga kI dRSTi se ye adhikAra
honAdhika bhI kiye jA sakate haiN| parantu mArgaNAoM kA vistRta vivecana mukhya
rUpa se ATha adhikAroM meM hI pAyA jAtA hai, ata: mukhya rUpa se ATha hI liye
jAte haiN| ina ATha adhikAroM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM.. saMta payaparUvAyA
bambamamANaM ca hitAsaNA yA kAlo meM aMtara bhAga bhAva appA huM dhena'  /  /  1
Avazyaka niyukti gA0 13 *

Page #410 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 372: The Seven Tika  **1. Sat:** This refers to the existence of the
desired Dharma (virtue) in different paths (marganas).  **2. Sankhya:** This
refers to the number of beings possessing the desired Dharma.  **3. Kshetra:**
This refers to the current dwelling place of beings possessing the desired
Dharma.  **4. Sparshan:** This refers to the totality of all the realms that
beings possessing the desired Dharma have touched, are touching, and will touch.
**5. Kal:** This refers to the lowest and highest states of beings possessing
the desired Dharma.  **6. Antar:** This refers to the interruption or hindrance
of the desired Dharma. It explains how long the interruption lasts in different
paths or generally.  **7. Bhava:** This refers to the nature of the desired
Dharma.  **8. Alpbahutva:** This refers to the degree of the desired Dharma.
_Although the verse only mentions that the eight types of karma (Bandha, Uday,
Satya, and their sub-categories) should be discussed in the eight Anuyo-gadwaras
through the paths of Prakriti, Sthiti, Anubhag, and Pradesh, as explained
earlier, the commentator Acharya Malayagiri states that the Sat Anuyo-gadwara of
the eight karmas has already been discussed generally in the Gunasthanas. The
remaining seven Anuyo-gadwaras (Sankhya, etc.) should be explained by referring
to the texts on Karma-Prakriti and Prabhutva. However, these texts are not
available in the present time, so the explanation of these Anuyo-gadwaras..._

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 372 saptatikA prakaraNa 1 sat, saMkhyA, 3 kSetra, 4 sparzana, 5 kAla, 6 antara,
7 bhAda aura 8 alpabahutva  /  ina adhikAroM kA artha inake nAmoM se hI spaSTa
ho jAtA hai  /  arthAt sat anuyogadvAra meM yaha batAyA jAtA hai ki vivakSita
dharma kina mArgaNAoM meM hai aura kina meM nahIM hai| saMkhyA anuyogadvAra meM
usa vivakSita dharma vAle jIvoM kI saMkhyA batalAI jAtI hai  /  kSetra
anuyogadvAra meM vivakSita dharma bAle jIvoM kA vartamAna nivAsa sthAna batalAyA
jAtA hai| sparzana anuyogadvAra meM una vivakSita dharma vAle jIvoM ne jitane
kSetra kA pahale sparza kiyA ho, aba kara rahe haiM aura Age kareMge usa sabakA
samuccaya rUpa se nirdeza kiyA jAtA hai | kAla anuyogadvAra meM vivakSita dharma
pAle jIvoM kI jaghanya va utkRSTa sthiti kA vicAra kiyA jAtA hai  /  antara
zabda kA artha vigraha yA vyavadhAna hai ata: antara anuyogahAra meM yaha batAyA
jAtA hai ki vivakSita dharma kA sAmAnya rUpa se yA kisa mArgaNA meM kitane kAla
taka antara rahatA hai yA nahIM rahatA hai| bhAva anuyogadvAra meM usa vivakSita
dharma ke bhAva kA tathA alpabahutva anuyogadvAra meM usake alpabahutva kA
vicAra triyA jAtA hai  /  _yadyapi gAthA meM sirpha itanA saMketa kiyA gayA hai
ki isI prakAra baMdha, udaya aura sattA rUpa karmoM kA tathA unake avAntara
bheda-prabhedoM kA prakRti, sthiti, anubhAga aura pradeza rUpa se gati Adi
mArgaNAoM ke dvArA ATha anuyogadvAroM meM vivecana kara lenA cAhiye jaisA ki
pahale varNana kiyA gayA hai| lekina isa viSaya meM TIkAkAra AcArya malayagiri
kA vaktavya hai ki 'yadyapi AThoM karmoM ke sat anuyogadvAra kA varNana
guNasthAnoM meM sAmAnya rUpa se pahale kiyA hI gayA hai aura saMkhyA Adi sAta
anuyogadvAroM kA vyAkhyAna karmaprakRti prAbhuta graMthoM ko dekhakara karanA
caahiye| kintu karmaprakRti prAbhRta Adi graMtha vartamAna kAla meM upalabdha
nahIM haiM, isaliye ina saMkhyAdi anuyoga

Page #411 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karmagranthi 373 Explaining the doors is difficult. However, those who are
learned in the present context should explain them by seeing the previous and
subsequent relationship.  From the above statement of the commentator Acharya,
it is clear that the subject matter mentioned in the verse is not available in
the present existing texts. However, with the help of various texts, one should
know the details of the bondage, rise, and dominance of the eight karmas's mūla
and uttara prakṛtis in the mārganās, as described below.  First, the details of
the bondage, etc. of the six karmas - jñānāvaraṇa, darśanāvaraṇa, vedanīya, āyu,
gotra, and antarāya - will be described. Then, the details of the bondage, etc.
of mohanīya and nāma karma will be explained.  The details of the bondage, etc.
of the six karmas - jñānāvaraṇa, etc. - in the mārganās are as follows:
Sequence Mārganā Name 7 Mūla Prakṛti Bandha 2 Darśanā° Bhanga 11 Vedanīya 4s xl
vẻ Naraka-gati, Tiryañc-gati, Manuṣya-gati, Deva-gati, Ekendṛya, Dvīndṛya,
Śrīndṛya, Caturindṛya, Pañcendṛya 10 Pṛthivī-kāya 11 / Ap-kāya 12 | Tejas-kāya
13 | Vāyu-kāya 7 Āyu° Gotra | Antarāya | aun xxx xxx mm x Bhanga 28 2.00 Galan
... KM G 4 NANGaladal G...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagranya 373 dvAroM kA vyAkhyAna karanA kaThina hai| phira bhI jo
pratyutpannamati vidvAna haiM ve pUrvApara sambandha ko dekhakara unakA
vyAkhyAna kreN| TIkAkAra AcAryazrI ke ukta kathana se yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki
gAthA meM jisa viSaya kI sUcanA dI gaI hai usa viSaya kA pratipAdana karane vAle
graMtha vartamAna meM nahIM pAye jAte haiN| phira bhI vibhinna granthoM kI
sahAyatA se mArgaNAoM meM ATha karmoM kI mUla aura uttara prakRtiyoM ke baMdha,
udaya aura sattA sthAnoM ke saMvedha kA vivaraNa nIce likhe anusAra jAnanA
cAhiye  /  pahale jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, vedanIya, Ayu, gotra aura aMtarAya
ina chaha karmoM ke baMdha Adi sthAnoM kA nirdeza karane ke bAda mohanIya va
nAma karma ke baMdhAdi sthAnoM ko btlaayeNge| mArgaNAoM meM jJAnAvaraNa Adi
chaha karmoM ke baMdha Adi sthAnoM kA vivaraNa isa prakAra hai krama mArgaNA
nAma 7 mUla prakRti bAnI maMra 2 darzanA0 ma | bhaMga 11 | vedanIya & 4s xl ve |
narakagati tiryacagati manuSyagati devagati ekendriya dvIndriya zrIndriya
caturindriya | paMcendriya 10 | pRthvIkAya 11 / apkAya 12 | sejaHkAya 13  /
vAyukAya 7 Ayu0 gotra | aMtarAya | aun xxx xxx mm x bhaMga 28 2.00 Galan ... KM
G 4 NANGaladal G... |

Page #412 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 7: Sapta-Sika  **374**  **You**  **Sanskrit**  **4**  **15.
Shraddha-Vyay**  **Mano-Yoga**  **16**  **17. Vachan-Yoga**  **18**  **Kaya-
Yoga**  **23**  **Margana-Nama**  **16. Stri-Ved**  **20**  **21**  **22**
**24**  **Vanaspati-Kaya**  **25**  **26**  **27**  **28**  **26**  **You**
**Purusha-Ved**  **Napumsaka-Ved**  **Krosh**  **Man**  **Maya-Loka**
**Pratijna**  **Shruta-Jnana**  **Artha-Jnana**  **Manah-Paryaya-Jnana**
**Kevala-Jnana**  **31**  **Matyashana**  **Nain**  **Shruta-Ajnana**  **Vimang-
Jnana**  **33**  **34. Samayik**  **15**  **Areerea**  **36. Parihar-Vishuddhi**
**37. Sukshma-Paraya**  **3.8**  **38**  **Yatha-Khyat**  **Ved-Avirat**  **•
Avirat**  **41. Chakshu-Darshan**  **42. A-Chakshu-Darshan**  **43**  **A-Shid-
Darshan**  **Kevala-Darshan**  **44**  **Mula-Prakriti**  **Mang 7**  **19**
**W**  **~**  **t Y**  **AAAAM**  **4**  **2**  **2**  **5**  **Jnana-o**
**Mang 2**  **1**  **2**  **2**  ** ि**  **1**  **Mr**  **4**  **1**  **1**
**1**  **શ્**  **1**  **1**  **2**  **1**  **2**  **0**  **Darshana-o**  **Bhang
11**  **Vedaniya**  **Sang**  **2**  **YAM**  **Roy**  **11**  **11**  **11**
**11**  **وا**  **7**  **17**  **7**  **7**  **7**  **alor Xটি**  **0**  **11**
**11**  **6**  **0**  **X**  **8**  **4**  **Y**  *** **  **4**  **4**  **4**
**4**  **4**  **Xxx mu**  **4**  *** **  **4**  **2**  **4**  **4**  **Sapta-
Sika Prakaran**  **Bhang 25**  **Aayu**  **ሂ**  **2145**  **28**  **28**  **28**
**26**  **28**  **28**  **28**  **20**  **20**  **20**  **25**  **23**  **23 5**
**1**  **25**  **28**  **28**  **6**  **6**  **6**  **2**  **2**  **12**  **Gana
Mang 7**  **26**  **3**  **98**  **5**  **Xx**  **ን**  **1**  **1**  **1**
**1**  **3**  **Antara-Ash Mang 2**  **1**  **Prov**  **1**  **1**  **1**  **MP
Prov**  **1**  **1**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 374 Ni  saM0 4 15. zrasaphAya manoyoga 16 17 vacanayoga 18 kAyayoga 23 mArgaNA
nAma 16 strIvedha 20 21 22 24 vanaspatikAya 25 26 27 28 26 ta puruSaveda
napuMsaka veda kroSa mAna mAyA loma pratijJAna zrutajJAna artha vijJAna
manaHparyAyajJAna kevalajJAna 31 matyazAna naina zrutaajJAna vimaMgajJAna 3 3 34
sAmAyika 15 areerea 36 parihAravizuddhi 37 sUkSma parAya 3.8 38 yathAkhyAta
vedAvirata * avirata 41 cakSudarzana 42 acakSudarzana 43 aSidarzana kevala
darzana 44 mUla prakRti maMga 7 19 W ~ t Y AAAAM 4 2 2 5 jJAnA0 maMga 2 1 2 2 i
1 Mr 4 1 1 1 z 1 1 2 1 2 0 darzanA0 bhaMga 11 vedanIya saMga 2 YAM Roy 1 1 11 11
11 w 7 17 7 7 7 alor Xtti 0 11 11 6 0 X 8 4 Y * 4 4 4 4 4 Xxx mu 4 * 4 2 4 4
saptasikA prakaraNa bhaMga 25 Ayu hi 2145 28 28 28 26 28 28 28 20 20 20 25 23 23
5 1 25 28 28 6 6 6 2 2 12 gAna maMga 7 26 3 98 5 Xx ne 1 1 1 1 3 aMtarASa maMga
2 1 Prov 1 1 1 MP Prov 1 1

Page #413 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma-Manas 375 Kama Margana Nama | Ayu. | | Manga 28 Gotra Antaraya 45 |
..ammar 46

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmamanya 375 kAma mArgaNA nAma | Ayu0  /   /  maMga 28 gotra aMtarAya
45  /  ..ammar 46

Page #414 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 70: Word Meanings  **Bayassa:** Age, **Udaya:** Arising,
**Udorana:**  Stimulation, **Samisao:** Ownership, **Ma:** There is not,
**Viseto:**  Speciality, **Soon:**  Horse, **4:** And, **Pal:** Forty-one,
**Prakriti:**  Natures, **Sesarva:**  Remaining, **Sambapai:**  All Natures.
**Gatha:**  Except for the forty-one natures, there is no speciality in the
ownership of the arising and stimulation of the remaining natures.  **Kosa:**
In the G section, the perception of all these with the Udayan and Sapta-sthana
has been considered. But due to the similarity in arising and stimulation, the
reason for not considering it has been explained in this Gatha. It states that
although there is no difference in arising and stimulation, there is a
speciality in that the arising and stimulation of the forty-one Karma Natures
are different. Therefore, out of the 122 natures that are capable of arising,
one should know that the arising and stimulation of the remaining 81 natures,
excluding the 41 natures, are the same.  **Explanation:** The characteristics of
arising and stimulation are as follows: The experience of the Karma atoms that
have been obtained in this time is called arising. And bringing the Karma atoms
that are situated outside the arising stream, with or without the Kshaya, by the
special power of the Yoga-sanjna, into the arising stream and experiencing them
with the Karma atoms that have been obtained in the arising is called
stimulation. In this way, the experience of the Karma atoms...  **1.**  The
experience of the atoms obtained in this time is called arising. The experience
of the atoms not obtained in this time, situated outside the arising stream,
with or without Kshaya, by the special power of the Yoga-sanjna, brought into
the arising stream, along with the Karma atoms obtained in the arising, is
called stimulation.  **Chapter 70 Commentary, Page 242**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 376 . . saptatikA prakaraNa . zabdArtha-bayassa-udaya ke, udoraNAe-dIraNA ke,
sAmisAo-svAmitva meM, ma vijAnahIM hai, viseto-vizeSatA, sUNa-ghor3akara,
4-aura, pAla-ikatAlIsa prakRtiyoM ko, sesArva-bAkI kI, sambapAI-sabhI prakRtiyoM
ke  /  gAthArSaikatAlIsa prakRtiyoM ke sivAya zeSa saba prakRtiyoM ke udaya aura
udIraNA ke svAmitva meM koI vizeSatA nahIM hai| koSA-ga meM mAmAna, udayana aura
saptAsthAnoM ke sAtha ina sabake saMvedha kA vicAra kiyA gyaa| lekina udaya va
udIraNA meM yathAsambhava samAnatA hone se usakA vicAra nahIM kiye jAne ke
kAraNa ko spaSTa karane ke liye isa gAthA meM batAyA gayA hai ki udaya aura
udIraNA meM yadyapi antara nahIM hai, lekina itanI vizeSatA hai ki ikatAlIsa
karma prakRtiyoM ke ucaya aura udIraNA meM bhinnatA hai| isaliye udayayogya 122
prakRtiyoM meM se 41 prakRtiyoM ko chor3akara zeSa 81 prakRtiyoM ke udaya aura
udIraNA meM samAnatA jAnanI caahiye| udaya aura udIraNA ke lakSaNa kramaza: isa
prakAra haiM ki kAlaprApta karma paramANuoM ke anubhava karane ko udaya kahate
haiM aura udayAvali ke bAhara sthita karma paramANuoM ko kaSAya sahita yA kaSAya
rahita yoga saMjJA bAle vIrya vizeSa ke dvArA udayAvali meM lAkara unakA
udayaprApta karma paramANuoM ke sAtha anubhava karanA udIraNA kahalAtA hai  /
isa prakAra karma paramANuoM kA anubhavana 1 iha kAla prAptAnAM paramANU
nAmanumacanamudayaH, akAlaprAptAnAmudayAvali kAbahi:sthitAnAM
kaSAyasahitenAsahitena bA yogasaMjJakena dhImavizeSaNa samAkRSyodayaprApta:
karmaparamANubhi: shaanubhvnmudiirnnaa|| saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA pR0, 242

Page #415 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  377. Uday and Udirana are similar. However, there is a
difference in the experience of Kalaprapta and Akalaprapta karma particles. That
is, in Uday, Kalaprapta karma particles remain, and in Udirana, Akalaprapta
karma particles remain. Still, the general rule is that where there is Uday of a
karma, there is definitely Udirana of that karma.  But there are seven
exceptions to this. These exceptions should be known:  1. Those whose Uday leads
to the destruction of their Satva, their Udirana-vichched happens one Avali-kal
earlier, and their Uday-vichched happens one Avali-kal later. 2. The Udirana of
Vedaniya and Manushyayu happens only until the sixth Prabhat-samyata Gunasthan,
while their Uday happens until the Ayogikevali Gunasthan. 3. Those whose nature
has Uday in the Ayogikevali Gunasthan, their Udirana happens only until the
Sayogikevali Gunasthan. 4. The four Ayukamas have only Uday in the last Avali of
their respective Bhava, not Udirana. 5. The five, Nidraadi, have only Uday after
Sharira-paryapti until Indriya-paryapti is complete, not Udirana. 6. After
Antar-karan, when one Avali-kal remains in the Prathama-sthiiti, there is only
Uday of Mithyatva, of Samyaktva for one who attains Kshayik Samyaktva, and of
the Veda whose Uday caused the ascent to the Upshama-shreni, not Udirana.  -  -
1. Just as there is Uday, there is Udirana, and just as there is Udirana, there
is Uday.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . . -. - .... SaSTha karmagrantha 377 udaya aura udIraNA meM samAna hai| phira
bhI donoM meM kAlaprApta aura akAlaprApta karma paramANuoM ke anubhavana kA
aMtara hai| arthAt udaya meM kAlaprApta karma paramANu rahate haiM tathA udIraNA
meM akAla prApta karma paramANu rahate haiN| to bhI sAmAnya niyama yaha hai ki
jahA~ jisa karma kA udaya rahatA hai vahAM usakI udIraNA avazya hotI hai|'
lekina isake sAta apavAda haiN| ve apavAda isa prakAra jAnane cAhiye1. jinakA
svodaya se satvanAza hotA hai unakA udIraNA-viccheda eka AvalikAla pahale hI ho
jAtA hai aura udaya-viccheda eka AvalikAla bAda hotA hai| 2. vedanIya aura
manuSyAyu kI udIraNA chaThe prabhattasaMyata guNasthAna taka hI hotI hai| jabaki
inakA udaya ayogikevalI guNasthAna taka hotA hai| 3. jina prakRtiyoM kA
ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM udaya hai. unakI udIraNA sayogikevalI guNasthAna taka
hI hotI hai| 4. cAroM AyukamoM kA apane-apane bhava kI aMtima Avali meM udaya hI
hotA hai, udIraNA nahIM hotI hai| 5. nidrAdi pAMca kA zarIraparyApti ke bAda
indriyaparyApti pUrNa hone taka udaya hI hotA hai, udIraNA nahIM hotI hai| 6.
aMtarakaraNa karane ke bAda prathamasthiti meM eka AvalI kAla zeSa rahane para
mithyAtva kA, kSAyika samyaktva ko prApta karane vAle ke samyaktva kA aura
upazamazreNi meM jo jisa veda ke udaya se upazamazreNi para car3hA hai usake usa
veda kA udaya hI hotA hai, udIraNA nahIM hotI hai| - - 1 jatya udao satya
udoraNA, jaspa udIraNA tarapa udao  /

Page #416 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 37:   **Verse 7:** Even in the subtle realm of the *Upashamashreni*
(stage of diminishing karma), where the *Gunasthanas* (stages of spiritual
progress) are subtle, the subtle greed arises only when there is a residue of
*Aavalikala* (past karma). It does not arise due to *Udirana* (external
stimulation).   There are 41 such *Prakritis* (karmic tendencies) with the
aforementioned seven exceptions. The text does not mention any specific
characteristics regarding the *Swamitva* (ownership) of the remaining
*Prakritis* (excluding these 41) in their arising and *Udirana*.  The following
verse describes these 41 *Prakritis* that have specific characteristics in their
arising and *Udirana*.  **Verse 5:**  *Naanataraayavasagam basananav beyanija
miichhat, sammat lobha veyaa'aaugaani navaanaam us cha.*  **Meaning:**
*Naanataraayavasagam* - Ten *Prakritis* of *Jnanaavaran* (knowledge obscuring
karma) and *Antaraay* (hindrance karma),  *Basananav* - Nine *Prakritis* of
*Darshanaavaran* (perception obscuring karma),  *Beyanija* - Two *Prakritis* of
*Vedaniya* (karmic fruits),  *Miichhat* - *Mithyatva* (false belief),  *Sammat*
- *Samyaktava* (right belief),  *Lobha* - *Sanjvalana Lobha* (burning greed),
*Veyaa'aaugaani* - Three *Vedas* (knowledge) and four *Aayu* (life spans),
*Navaanaam* - Nine *Prakritis* of *Namakarma* (name karma),  *Us cha* - And
*Uchcha* (high) *Upgotr* (sub-caste).  **Verse:**  *Jnanaavaran* and *Antaraay*
karma, totaling ten, nine *Darshanaavaran*, two *Vedaniya*, *Mithyatva*,
*Samyaktava*, *Sanjvalana Lobha*, three *Vedas*, four *Aayu*, nine *Namakarma*,
and *Uchcha* *Upgotr* - these are the forty-one *Prakritis* that have specific
characteristics in their arising and *Udirana*.  **Explanation:**  The text
mentions that there are forty-one *Prakritis* that have specific characteristics
regarding *Swamitva* in their arising and *Udirana*. These forty-one *Prakritis*
are as follows:  * Five *Jnanaavaran* starting with *Matijnanaavaran*,  * Five
*Antaraay* starting with *Daanaantaray*, and  * Nine *Darshanaavaran* starting
with...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 37 chapta prakaraNa 7. upazamazreNi ke sUkSamasaMparAya guNasthAna meM bhI eka
AvalikAla zeSa rahane para sUkSma lobha kA udaya hI hotA hai udIraNA nahIM hotI
hai| ukta sAta apavAdoM vAlI 41 prakRtiyAM haiM, jisase graMthakAra ke 41
prakRtiyoM ko chor3akara zeSa saba prakRtiyoM ke udaya aura udIra meM svAmitva
kI apekSA koI vizeSatA nahIM batalAI hai| aba Age kI gAthA meM una 41 prakRtiyoM
ko basalAte haiM jinake udaya aura udIraNA meM vizeSatA hai| nANatarAyavasagaM
basaNanava beyaNijja micchata  /  sammata lobha veyA''ugANi navanAma usa ca  //
5 //  zabdArtha - mAgaMtarAyavatama-zAnAvaraNa aura aMsarAya kI dasa, samAnava-
darSanAvaraNa kI nau, yaNikA -vanIya kI do, misvataM-mithyAtva, sammata-
samyakrava mohanIya, lobhasaMjvalana soma, peyA''jagANi-tIna veda aura cAra Ayu,
nayanAma-nAma kama kI mo prakRti, ucca-upagotra, ba-aura  /  gAthA-jAnAvaraNa
aura aMtarAya karma kI kula milAkara dasa, darzanAvaraNa kI nau, vedanIya kI do,
mithyAtva mohanIya, samyaktva mohanIya, saMjvalana lobha, tIna veda, cAra Ayu,
nAmakarma kI nau, aura ucca gotra, ye ikatAlIsa prakRtiyA~ haiM, jinake udaya
aura udIraNA meM svAmitva kI apekSA vizeSatA hai| vizekApa-nAthA meM udaya aura
udIraNA meM svAmitva kI apekSA vizeSatA vAlI ikatAlIsa prakRtiyoM ke nAma
batalAye haiM  /  ve ikatAlIsa prakRtiyAM isa prakAra haiM-jJAnAvaraNa kI
matijJAnAvaraNa Adi pAMca, aMtarAya kI dAnAnta rAya Adi pA~ca tathA
darzanAvaraNa kI

Page #417 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Karma Granth (Chapter)  **376** The four karmas, Darshanavarana, etc.,
totaling fourteen in number, experience both *udaya* (arising) and *udirana*
(manifestation) equally until one *avali* (unit of time) remains in the twelfth
*kshinamoha* (diminished delusion) *gunasthan* (spiritual stage). However, when
one *avali* remains, only *udaya* occurs for these fourteen karmas, but their
*udirana* does not occur due to the unsuitability of all the causes related to
the *karmadalik* (karma-related) *udaya* (arising).  After the completion of
*shariraparayapti* (physical perfection) for those beings who have attained
*parayapti* (perfection), from the time of the completion of *shariraparayapti*
until the completion of *indriyaparayapti* (perfection of senses), only *udaya*
occurs for the five karmas, *nidra* (sleep), etc., remaining from
*darshanavarana*, but not *udirana*. Additionally, during the remaining time,
their *udaya* and *udirana* occur simultaneously, and their *vichched*
(disintegration) also occurs simultaneously.  The *udaya* and *udirana* of
*sata* (pleasant) and *asata* (unpleasant) *vedaniya* (karmas) occur
simultaneously until the *pramattasanyata* (delusion-bound) *gunasthan*, but in
the subsequent *gunasthanas*, only their *udaya* occurs, not *udirana*.  After
the *antarakaran* (inner transformation) of the being who first generates
*samyaktv* (right faith), when one *avali* remains in the *prathama sthiti*
(first state), only *udaya* occurs for *mithyatva* (false belief), not
*udirana*. The *vedak* (knower) *samyagdristi* (right-seeing) being who
generates *kshayik* (destructive) *samyaktv* has destroyed *mithyatva* and
*samyagmithyatva* (mixed belief) and, through the complete destruction of
*samyaktv*, has attained *apardhatana* (partial liberation) and maintained the
*antarmuhurt* (momentary) state for the remaining time. After that, *udaya* and
**(1)** In the Digambara tradition, *nidra* (sleep) and *prachala*
(restlessness) are said to experience both *udaya* and *vichched* simultaneously
in the *kshinamoha* *gunasthan*. Therefore, in this context, the *uvamgat*
(subordinate) karma whose *upayamyunchhiti* (subordinate manifestation) and
*satyavyujiyakti* (true manifestation) occur simultaneously will experience
*udiranavyuchchhiti* (manifestation of manifestation) one *avali* before
*udayavyuchchhiti* (manifestation of arising).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paSTha karmagrantha 376 cakSudarzanAvaraNa Adi cAra, kula milAkara ina caudaha
prakRtiyoM kI bArahaveM kSINamoha guNasthAna meM eka Avali kAla zeSa rahane taka
udaya aura udIraNA barAbara hotI rahatI hai  /  parantu eka Avali kAla kI zeSa
raha jAne para usake bAda ukta caudaha prakRtiyoM kA udaya hI hotA hai kintu
udayAvAlagata karmadalika saba kAraNoM ke ayogya hote haiM, isa niyama ke
anusAra unakI udIraNA nahIM hotI hai| zarIraparyApti se paryApta hue jIyoM ke
zarIrayApti ke samApta hone ke anantara samaya se lekara jaba taka
indriyaparyApti pUrNa nahIM hotI taba taka darzanAvaraNa kI zeSa nidrA Adi pAMca
prakRtiyoM kA udaya hI hotA hai udIraNA nahIM hotI hai  /  isake atirikta zeSa
kAla meM unakA udaya aura udIraNA eka sAtha hotI hai aura unakA viccheda' bhI
eka sAtha hotA hai| sAtA aura asAtA vedanIya kA udaya aura udIraNA
pramattasaMyata guNasthAna taka eka sAtha hotI hai, kintu agale guNasthAnoM meM
inakA udaya hI hotA hai, udIraNA nahIM hotI hai| prathama samyaktva ko utpanna
karane vAle jIva ke antarakaraNa karane ke pazcAta prathamasthiti meM eka Avali
pramANa kAla ke zeSa rahane para mithyAtva kA udaya hI hotA hai, udIraNA nahIM
hotI hai tathA kSAyika samyaktva ko utpanna karane vAle jisa vedaka samyagdRSTi
jIva ne mithyAtva aura samyagamithyAtva kA kSaya karake samyaktva kI
sarvaapavartanA ke dvArA apardhatanA karake antarmuhUrta pramANa sthiti zeSa
rakhI hai aura usake bAda udaya tathA 1 digambara paraMparA meM nidrA aura
pracalA kA udaya aura savaviccheda bhINamoha guNasthAna meM eka sAtha batalAyA
hai| isaliye isa apekSA se inameM se jisa uvamagata prakRti kI upayamyuJchiti
aura satyavyujiyakti eka sAtha hogI, usako udayavyuchitti ke eka AvalikAla pUrva
hI udIragA jyucchisi ho jaayegii|

Page #418 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  380 Chapter of the Seven  When a single *avali* remains, the
arising of *samyaktvam* occurs due to *udirana*, but *udirana* itself does not
occur. The arising of *sajvalan* and *lobha* occur simultaneously with
*udirana*. When the time of *sukshmasampray* remains for one *avani*, the
arising of *lobha* occurs only in the time of *avali*, not *udirana*.  _From the
three Vedas, the one by which the being ascends the *jīva* ladder, after its
*antarakaran*, the arising occurs when one *avali* measure of time remains in
the first state of that Veda, but *udirana* does not occur. In all four *āyus*,
the arising occurs when one *avali* measure of time remains in the final *avali*
of their respective births, but *udirana* does not occur. However, the human
*āyu* has a special characteristic: the arising occurs after the
*pramattasanyata* *gunasthan*, but *udirana* does not occur._  _The human path,
the five-sense beings, *bas*, *badar*, *paryāpta*, *subhaga*, *ādeya*,
*yashkīti*, and *tīrthankara* are the nine natures of *nāmakarma*, and the
*uchchagotra*. These ten natures are capable of both arising and *udirana* up to
the *sayogikebali* *gunasthan*, but in the *ayogikebali* *gunasthan*, only
arising occurs, not *udirana*.  1. Moreover, in the human *āyu*, from the
*pramattagunasthan* onwards, *udirana* does not occur, but only arising. -
Commentary on the Chapter of the Seven, pp. 242-243 2. Human path, five-sense
beings, *bas*, *badar*, *paryāpta*, *subhaga*, *ādeya*, *yashkīti*, and
*tīrthankara* - these are the nine natures of *nāmakarma*. 3. ... "Up to the
*sayogikebali* *gunasthan*, both arising and *udirana* occur, but in the
*ayogikebali* state, only arising occurs, not *udirana*. - Commentary on the
Chapter of the Seven, p. 243

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 380 saptatikA prakaraNa udIraNA ke dvArA usakA anubhava karate hue jaba ekaH
Avali sthiti zeSa raha jAtI hai taba samyaktva kA udaya hI hotA hai udIraNA
nahIM hotI hai  /  sajvalana lobha kA udaya aura udIraNA eka sAtha hotI hai|
jaba sUkSmasaMparAya kA samaya eka Avani zeSa rahatA taba Avali mAtra kAla meM
lobha kA udaya hI hotA hai, udIraNA nahIM hotI hai| _ tIna vedoM meM se jisa
veda se jIva zreNi para car3hatA hai, usake antarakaraNa karane ke bAda usa veda
kI prathama sthiti meM eka Avali pramANa kAla ke zeSa rahane para udaya hI hotA
hai, udIraNA nahIM hotI hai| cAroM hI AyuoM kA apane-apane bhava kI antima Avali
pramANa kAla ke zeSa rahane para udaya hI hotA hai, udIraNA nahIM hotI  /
lekina manuSyAyu meM itanI vizeSatA hai ki isakA pramattasaMyata guNasthAna ke
bAda udaya hI hotA hai, udIraNA nahIM hotI hai| _ manuSyagati, paMcendriya jAti,
basa, bAdara, paryApta, subhaga, Adeya, yazakIti aura tIrthaMkara ye nAmakarma
kI nau prakRtiyAM haiM aura uccagotra. ina dasa prakRtiyoM kA sayogikebalI
guNasthAna taka udaya aura udIraNA donoM hI sambhava haiM kintu ayogikevalI
guNasthAna meM inakA udaya hI hotA hai, udIraNA nahIM hotI hai|' 1 anyacca
manuSyAyuSaH pramattaguNasthAnakAdyamudIraNA na mayati kintudayaeva kevalaH  /
- saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR. 242-243 2 maNuyagaijAitasabAdaraM ca
pajjattasubhagamAijja  /  jasakittI tityaparaM nAmassa havaMti nava eyA  //  3
...."sayogikeliguNasthAnakaM yAvada pugapada udaya-udIraNe-ayogyavasthAyAM
tUdaya eva nodIraNA  /  -saptatikA prakaraNa TokA, pR. 243

Page #419 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 381 **Sixth Karma Granthya**  In the previous verse, the characteristics of
the forty-one natures were described in relation to their arising and
stimulation. In this verse, the names of those forty-one natures are explained
along with the reason why they do not experience stimulation. In the following
verses, the binding of the natures in the Gunasthanas will be explained.
**Binding of Natures in Gunasthanas**  **Verse 56:**
**Tiththagaraaharagavirahiyao ajjeï savvapgaïyo. Micchhataveyago sasano vi
iguvhiseseo.**  **Meaning:**  **Tiththagaraaharag:** Tirthankara name and
Aharakaddvik, **virahiyao:** without, **ajjeï:** acquired, binds,
**savvapgaïyo:** all natures. **Micchhataveyago:** Mithyatva, **sasano:**
Sasadan Gunasthana, **vi:** without, **iguvhiseseo:** nineteen, remaining.
**Verse Meaning:**  Mithyatva binds all natures except the Tirthankara name and
Aharakaddvik. The Sasadan Gunasthana binds all natures except nineteen.
**Detailed Meaning:**  There are fourteen Gunasthanas: Mithyatva, Sasadan, etc.
and 148 natures of the eight root karmas: Jnanavarana, etc. Out of these, 120
natures are considered bindable. The consideration of 120 bindable natures does
not mean that the remaining 28 natures are disregarded. The reason is that the
five Bandhanas and five Sanghatanas, these ten natures are inseparable from the
body. Therefore, wherever there is binding of the body, there is also binding of
these Bandhanas and Sanghatanas. Hence, these ten natures are not counted
separately.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 381 SaSTha karmagranthya isa prakAra pichalI gAthA meM udaya aura udIraNA meM
svAmitva kI apekSA jina ikatAlIsa prakRtiyoM kI vizeSatA kA nirdeza kiyA thaa|
una ikatAlIsa prakRtiyoM ke nAma kAraNa sahita isa gAthA meM batalAye haiM ki
inakI udI ra NA kyoM nahIM hotI hai  /  aba Age kI gAthAoM meM guNasthAnoM meM
prakRtiyoM ke baMdha ko batalAte haiN| guNasthAnoM meM prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
titthagarAhAragavirahiyAo ajjei svvpgiio| micchataveyago sAsaNo vi igudhIsasesAo
// 56 //  zAmdArtha tityArAhAraga-tIrthakara nAma aura AhArakaDika, virahiyAo-
binA, aleha-upArjita, baMdha karatA hai, samvapagaIyosabhI prakRtiyoM kA.
mihattaveyago-mithyASTi, sAsaNo-sAsAdana guNasthAna yAlA, vi-mI,
iguvosa:-unnIsa, sesAo-zeSa, bAkI kii| gAthArya-mithyAdRSTi jIvaM tIrthaMkara
nAma aura AhArakadvika ke binA zeSa saba prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA hai tathA
sAsAdana guNasthAna bAlA unnIsa prakRtiyoM ke binA zeSa prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhatA
hai| vizeSArtha-guNasthAna mithyAtva, sAsAdana Adi caudaha haiM aura jJAnAvaraNa
Adi ATha mUla karmoM kI uttara prakRtiyA~ 148 haiN| unameM se baMdhayogya
prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA 120 mAnI gaI hai  /  baMdha kI apekSA 120 prakRtiyoM ke
mAnane kA matalaba yaha nahIM hai ki zeSa 28 prakRtiyA~ chor3a dI jAtI haiM  /
lekina isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki pAMca baMdhana aura pA~ca saMghAtana, ye dasa
prakRtiyAM zarIra kI avinAbhAvI haiM, ataH jahA~ jisa zarIra kA baMdha hotA hai,
vahA~ usa baMdhana aura saMghAtana kA baMdha avazya hotA hai  /  jisase ina dasa
prakRtiyoM ko alaga se nahIM ginAyA

Page #420 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 32: The Bond of the False  It is said that there are 148
**Prakritis** (fundamental principles). Out of these, 10 **Prakritis** are
excluded, leaving 138 **Prakritis**. There are 20 sub-categories within the four
**Varna** (colors), but for the purpose of understanding **Bandha** (bondage),
we consider only the four fundamental **Prakritis** of **Varna**, **Gandha**
(smell), **Rasa** (taste), and **Sparsha** (touch). Therefore, subtracting
20-4=16 from 130, we are left with 122 **Prakritis**.  **Darshan** (perception)
is categorized into three **Prakritis**: **Samyak** (right), **Samyagmithyatva**
(partially right), and **Mithyatva** (false). Out of these, **Samyak** and
**Samyagmithyatva** are not **Bandha** **Prakritis**. This is because **Bandha**
occurs due to the **Mithyatva** **Prakriti**, and the **Jiva** (soul) through
its **Samyak** quality divides the **Mithyatva** into three parts. The most pure
part is called **Samyak**, the less pure part is called **Samyagmithyatva**, and
the remaining impure part is called **Mithyatva**. Therefore, subtracting
**Samyak** and **Samyagmithyatva** from 122, we are left with 120 **Prakritis**
that are considered **Bandhayoga** (capable of being bound).  This verse begins
the discussion of how many **Prakritis** are bound in each **Gunasthan** (stage
of virtue).  To explain the **Bandhayoga** **Prakritis** in the first
**Mithyatva** **Gunasthan**, the verse states that except for the three
**Prakritis** of **Tirthankaranam** (the name of the Tirthankara),
**Aharakdvig** (the two-fold food), and **Aharak** **Sharir** (the body that
consumes food) and **Aharak** **Angopanga** (the limbs and organs that consume
food), the remaining 117 **Prakritis** are bound. The reason for these three
**Prakritis** not being bound is that **Tirthankaranam** is bound in the
presence of **Samyak** quality, and **Aharakdvig** is bound in the presence of
**Samyama** (self-control). However, in the first **Mithyatva** **Gunasthan**,
there is neither **Samyak** nor **Samyama**. Therefore, in the **Mithyatva**
**Gunasthan**, these three **Prakritis** are not bound, and the remaining 117
**Prakritis** are bound.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 32 daabi sndhaa jAtA hai  /  isa prakAra 148 meM se dasa prakRtiyoM ko kama
kara dene para 138 prakRttiyA~ raha jAtI haiM tathA varNacatuSka ke avAntara
bheda 20 haiM kintu baMdha meM avAntara bhedoM kI vivakSA na karake mUla meM
varNa, gandha, rasa aura sparza, ye cAra prakRtiyAM grahaNa kI jAtI haiM  /
ataeva 130 meM se 20-4=16 ghaTA dene para 122 prakRtiyA~ zeSa raha jAtI haiN|
darzana mohanIya kI samyaktva, samyagamithyAsva aura mithyAtva, ye tIna
prakRtiyA~ haiN| unameM se samyaktva aura samyamithyAtva ye do prakRtiyA~ baMdha
prakRtiyAM nahIM haiN| kyoMki baMdha mithyAtva prakRti kA hotA hai aura jIva
apane samyaktva guNa ke dvArA hI mithyAtva ke dalikoM ke tIna bhAga banA detA
hai| inameM se jo atyanta vizuddha hotA hai use samyaktva aura jo kama vizuddha
hotA hai use samyagamithyAtva saMjJA prApta hotI hai aura ina donoM ke atirikta
zeSa azuddha bhAga mithyAtva kahalAtA hai  /  ataH 122 meM se samyaktva va
samyagamithyAtva ina do prakRtiyoM ko ghaTA dene para zeSa 120 prakRtiyA~
baMdhayogya mAnI jAtI haiM  /  ina 120 prakRtiyoM meM se kisa guNasthAna meM
kitanI-kitanI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai, isakA vivecana isa gAthA se
prArambha kiyA gayA hai| pahale mithyAtya muNasthAna meM baMdhayogya prakRtiyoM
ko batalAne ke liye gAthA meM kahA hai ki tIrthakaranAma aura
AhArakadvikaAhAraka zarIra aura AhAraka aMgopAMga-ina tIna prakRtiyoM ke sivAya
zeSa 117 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai| ina tIna prakRtiyoM ke baMdha na hone kA
kAraNa yaha hai ki tIrthakaranAma kA baMdha samyaktva guNa ke sadbhAva meM aura
AhArakaddhika kA baMdha saMyama ke sadbhAva meM hotA hai| kintu pahale mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM na samyaktva hai aura na saMyama  /  isIliye mithyAtva guNasthAna
meM ukta tIna prakRtiyoM kA baMdha na hokara zeSa 117 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA
hai  /

Page #421 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sixty Karmas Text  **Sāsadan Guṇasthān:** In the Sāsadan Guṇasthān, there
is bondage of 101 Prakṛtis, excluding the 19 Prakṛtis that are 'Sāsano Vi Iguvīs
Sesāo'. This means that the 16 Prakṛtis that are bound due to the Mithyātvā Guṇa
are not bound in the Sāsadan Guṇasthān because Mithyātvā is absent there. The
names of these 16 Prakṛtis bound due to Mithyātvā are:  1. Mithyātvā 2.
Napuṃsakaved 3. Narakagati 4. Narakānupūrvī 5. Narakāyu 6. Ekeṇdriya Jāti 7.
Dvīndriya Jāti 8. Trīndriya Jāti 9. Caturindriya Jāti 10. Huṇḍasamsthān 11.
Sevāt Sanhanan 12. Ātap 13. Sthāvar 14. Sūkṣma 15. Sādharan 16. Aparyāpt  Out of
the 117 Prakṛtis bound by Mithyātvā, when these 16 Prakṛtis are subtracted,
there are 101 Prakṛtis bound in the Sāsadan Guṇasthān.  Thus, after explaining
the Prakṛtis that are subject to bondage in the first and second Guṇasthāns -
Mithyātvā and Sāsadan - the following verse explains the number of Prakṛtis that
are subject to bondage in the third, fourth, and subsequent Guṇasthāns.  **Verse
57:**  "Chāyālases Mosō Aviryāsammo Tiyālapariseṣā | Sevṇṇ Desaviro Viro
Sagvaṇṇaseṣāo ||57||"  **Explanation:**  * In the Gāpā-miśra Guṇasthān, there
are remaining Prakṛtis excluding 36 (Chāyālases). * In the Avirat Samyagdṛṣṭi
Guṇasthān, there are remaining Prakṛtis excluding 43 (Tiyālapariseṣā). * In the
Deśavirat Guṇasthān, there are remaining Prakṛtis excluding 45 (Sevṇṇ). * In the
Viro Guṇasthān, there are remaining Prakṛtis excluding 49 (Sagvaṇṇaseṣāo).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTa karmagrantha sAsAdana guNasthAna meM-'sAsaNo vi iguvIsa sesAoM' unnIsa
prakRtiyoM ke binA zeSa 101 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai| arthAta mithyAtva
guNa ke nimitta se jina solaha prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai, unakA sAsAdana
guNasthAna meM mithyAtva kA abhAva hone se baMdha nahIM hotA hai| mithyAtva ke
nimitta se baMdhane vAlI solaha prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM: 1
mithyAtva, 2 napuMsakaveda, 3 narakagati, 4 narakAnupUrvI, 5 narakAyu, 6
ekendriya jAti,7dvIndriya jAti, 8 zrIndriya jAti, caturindriya jAti, 10
huMDasaMsthAna, 11 sevAta saMhanana, 12 Atapa, 13 sthAvara, 14 sUkSma, 15
sAdhAraNa aura 16 aparyApta  /  mithyAtva se baMdhane vAlI 117 prakRtiyoM meM se
ukta 16 prakRtiyoM ko ghaTA dene para sAsAdana guNasthAna meM 101 prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha hotA hai  /  isa prakAra se pahale, dUsare-mithyAtva, sAsAdana-guNasthAna
meM baMdhayogya prakRttiyoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba Age kI gAthA meM tIsare,
cauthe Adi guNasthAnoM kI baMdhayogya : kRtiyoM kI saMkhyA batalAte haiN|
chAyAlasesa moso avirayasammo tiyAlaparisesA  /  sevaNa desavirao viro
sagavaNNasesAo  // 57 //  zamdA-chApAlasesa-chiyAlIsa ke binA, moso-mizra
guNasthAna meM, maviramasammo-avirati samyagdRSTi meM, tiyAsaparikSesa -
tetAlIsa ke binA, sevaNNa-apana, vesavirao-dezavirata, viro-pramattavirata,
sagamaNNase sAmo- saptAvana ke sivAya zeSa  /  gApA-mizra guNasthAna meM
chiyAlIsa ke binA zeSa prakRttiyoM kA, avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM
tetAlIsa ke binA zeSa prakRtiyoM kA, dezavirata meM tirepana ke binA aura

Page #422 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter of the Seven Tika  In the state of **Pramattavirata**, the remaining
**Prakritis** (principles) bind without the **Sattavan** (seven).
**Explanation:**  The previous verse explained the **Prakritis** that are
capable of binding in the first and second **Gunasthanas** (states of
qualities). This verse describes the binding process of the **Prakritis** in the
remaining four **Gunasthanas** - **Misra**, **Sadharana**, **Uddharana**, and
**Uddharana**. The details of **Shiva** are as follows:  In the third **Misra
Gunasthan**, out of the 120 **Prakritis** capable of binding, 46 are subtracted,
leaving 74 **Prakritis** that bind. This is because the **Anantanubandhi**
(infinitely connected) arises until the second **Sasadan Gunasthan**. However,
the **Anantanubandhi** does not arise in the third **Misra Gunasthan**.
Therefore, the 25 **Prakritis** that bind due to the arising of the
**Anantanubandhi** do not bind here. In other words, in the third **Misra
Gunasthan**, 25 **Prakritis** are further subtracted from the 101 **Prakritis**
capable of binding in the **Sasadan Gunasthan**. These 25 **Prakritis** are:  *
**Styanaddhitrik** (three types of dullness) * **Anantanubandhi Chatushk** (four
types of infinitely connected) * **Strived** (female knowledge) *
**Tiyanchgaati** (animal path) * **Tichannupurvi** (previous animal path) *
**Tiyanchaayu** (animal lifespan) * Four **Sansthanas** (abodes) in the middle,
excluding the first and last * Four **Sanhananas** (concentrations) in the
middle, excluding the first and last * **Udyot** (brightness) * **Aprashasht
Vihayogati** (unrefined liberation path) * **Dubhang** (deformed) * **Duhswar**
(harsh voice) * **Anadeya** (unworthy of respect) * **Nich Gotra** (low lineage)
Additionally, there is a rule that no lifespan binds in the **Misra Gunasthan**.
Therefore, **Manushyaayu** (human lifespan) and **Devaayu** (divine lifespan),
these two lifespans are also reduced. The reason for reducing these two
lifespans is that the binding-release of **Narakaayu** (hell lifespan) occurs in
the first **Gunasthan**, and the binding-release of **Ticha** (animal lifespan)
occurs in the second **Gunasthan**. Therefore, out of the four types of lifespan
karma, the remaining two **Prakritis**, **Manushyaayu** and **Devaayu**, are
reduced here. Thus, **Sasa** -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa pramattavirata meM sattAvana ke binA zeSa prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha hotA hai  /  384 vizeSArtha - - pahale aura dUsare guNasthAna meM
baMghayogya prakRtiyoM ko pUrva gAthA meM batalAyA hai| isa gAthA meM mizra Adi
cAra guNasthAnoM kI baMdha prakiyoM kA nirdeza karate haiN| zivakA vivaraNa
likhe nIce anusAra hai  /  tIsare mizra guNasthAna meM 'chAyAlasesa mIso'
baMdhayogya 120 prakRtiyoM meM se chiyAlIsa prakRtiyoM ko ghaTAne para zeSa
rahIM 120 - 46 = 74 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki
dUsare sAsAdana guNasthAna taka anantAnubaMdhI kA udaya hotA hai. lekina tIsare
mizra guNasthAna meM anantAnubaMdhI kA udaya nahIM hotA hai  /  ataH
anantAnubandhI ke udaya se jina 25 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai, unakA yahA~
baMdha nahIM hai| arthAt tIsare mizra guNasthAna meM sAsAdana guNasthAna kI
baMghayogya 101 prakRtiyoM se 25 prakRtiyA~ aura ghaTa jAtI haiN| ve 25
prakRtiyA~ ye haiM styAnaddhitrika, anantAnubaMdhIcatuSka, strIveda,
tiyaMcagati, ticAnupUrvI, tiryaMcAyu, prathama aura antima ko chor3akara madhya
ke cAra saMsthAna, prathama aura antima ko chor3akara madhya ke cAra saMhanana,
udyota, aprazasta vihAyogati, dubhaMga, duHsvara, anAdeya aura nIca gotra  /
isake atirikta yaha niyama hai ki mizra guNasthAna meM kisI bhI Ayu kA baMdha
nahIM hotA hai ataH yahA~ manuSyAyu aura devAyu, ye do Ayu aura kama ho jAtI
haiN| manuSyAyu aura devAyu, ina do AyuyoM ko ghaTAne kA kAraNa yaha hai ki
narakAyu kA baMdhaviccheda pahale aura ticA kA baMdhaviccheda dUsare guNasthAna
meM ho jAtA hai| ataH Ayu karma ke cAroM bhedoM meM se zeSa rahI manuSyAyu aura
devAyu, ina do prakRtiyoM ko hI yahA~ kama kiyA jAtA hai| isa prakAra sAsA -

Page #423 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Prabhtha  In the second Gunasthan, there are 19 non-binding
Prakruti. When we add these 19 to the 25+2=27 Prakruti, we get 46 Prakruti that
are not bound in the mixed Gunasthan. However, out of the 120 Prakruti, 74
Prakruti are bound, excluding the 46.  In the fourth Aviral Samyagdrishti
Gunasthan, 77 Prakruti are bound, excluding 43 Prakruti - "Aviryasammo
Tialparisa". This is because the Aviral Samyagdrishti Jiva can be bound by the
three Prakruti of Manushyayu, Vayu, and Tirthankar name. Therefore, instead of
subtracting 46 Prakruti from the 120 bound Prakruti, only 43 are subtracted.
Thus, 77 Prakruti are bound in the Aviral Samyagdrishti Gunasthan.  In the fifth
Deshavirat Gunasthan, 67 Prakruti are bound, excluding 53 - "Tevaran Deshaviro".
This means that the ten Prakruti that are bound in the Aviral Samyagdrishti Jiva
due to the rise of Apratyasthanaavaran Kshaya are not bound here because the
Apratyasthanaavaran Kshaya does not arise. Therefore, adding the 10 Prakruti to
the 43 Prakruti subtracted in the previous Gunasthan, we get 53 Prakruti that
are not bound in the Deshavirat Gunasthan. The remaining 67 Prakruti are bound.
The names of the 10 Prakruti that are bound due to the rise of
Apratyakhyanaavaran Kshaya are: Apratyakhyanaavaran Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha,
Manushygati, Manushyanupurvi Manushyayu, Audarik Sharira, Mauvarik Angopaang,
and Banaraach Sanhanan.  In the Shramatavirata Gunasthan, 63 Prakruti are bound,
excluding 57. This means that...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 SaSTha karmaprabhtha tak dana guNasthAna meM nahIM ba~dhane vAlI 19
prakRtiyoM meM ina 25+2=27 prakRtiyoM ko milA dene para 46 prakRtiyAM hotI haiM
jinakA mizra guNasthAna meM baMdha nahIM hotA hai| kintu 120 prakRtiyoM meM se
46 prakRtiyoM ke sivAya zeSa rahI 74 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai  /  cauthe
avirala samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM 43 prakRtiyoM ke binA zeSa 77 prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha hotA hai- 'avirayasammo tiyAlaparisA  / ' isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki
aviratasamyagdRSTi jIva ke manuSyAyu, vAyu aura tIrthaMkara nAma, ina tIna
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha sambhava hai| ataH yahA~ baMdhayogya 120 prakRtiyoM meM se
46 na ghaTAkara 43 prakRtiyA~ hI baTAI haiN| isa prakAra aviratisamyagdRSTi
guNasthAna meM 77 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha batalAyA hai  /  dezavirata nAmaka
pA~caveM guNasthAna meM 53 ke binA 67 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha batalAyA hai-
'tevaraNa desviro'| isakA artha yaha hai ki apratyAsthAnAvaraNa kaSAya ke udaya
se jina dasa prakRtiyoM kA gaMja aviratasamyagdRSTi jIva ke hotA hai,
apratyAsthAnAvaraNa kavAya kA udaya na hone se unakA yahA~ baMdha nahIM hotA
hai| ataH cIce guNasthAna meM kama kI gaI 43 prakRtiyoM meM 10 prakRtiyoM ko
aura or3a dene para dezavirata guNasthAna meM baMdha ke ayogya 53 prakRtiyAM ho
jAtI haiM aura inake atirikta zeSa rahIM 67 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai|
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya ke udaya se baMdhane vAlI 10 prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa
prakAra haiM- apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, manuSyagati,
manuSyAnupUrvI manuSyAyu, audArika zarIra, mauvArika aMgopAMga aura banArAca
saMhanana  /  zramatavirata guNasthAna meM 57 ke binA 63 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
hotA hai| isakA Azaya yaha hai ki pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa ke udaya se jina

Page #424 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Chapter 386**  The fourfold aversion (anger, pride, deceit,
greed) binds up to the *Dehavirat* (body-free) *Gunasthan* (state of being).
They do not bind in the *Pramattavirat* (distracted-free) *Gunasthan*.
Therefore, the 53 *Prakritis* (principles) that are declared unfit to bind in
the *Deshavirat* (territory-free) *Gunasthan*, when added to these four
*Prakritis*, become 57 *Prakritis* unfit to bind in the *Pramattavirat*
*Gunasthan* - "Vir-o Sagvannasesa-o". Therefore, 63 *Prakritis* bind in the
*Pramattavirat* *Gunasthan*.  Now, the following verse indicates the number of
*Prakritis* that bind in the seventh and eighth *Gunasthan*.  **Verse 5:**
"Igusditham-appamaso bandhai devajyass iyar-o vi. Atthavannam-purukho
chhappannam va chi chhavi-san."  **Meaning:**  *Igusditham* - 69 *Prakritis*,
*Appamatto* - non-distracted, *Sampat* - wealth, *Dhar* - religion, *Bansh* -
lineage, *Vauyass* - Devayus, *Iyar-o vi* - also non-distracted, *Atthavannam* -
48, *Apughdo* - *Apuvrakaran* *Gunasthan*, *Chhappannam* - 56, *Ka vi* - or
also, *Chhavi-san* - 36.  **Verse Meaning:**  The being residing in the
*Aparamattasanyat* (non-distracted-controlled) *Gunasthan* binds 69 *Prakritis*.
This also binds Devayus. The being residing in the *Apuvrakaran* *Gunasthan*
binds 48, 56, or 36 *Prakritis*.  **Special Meaning:**  This verse indicates the
number of *Prakritis* that can bind in the seventh (*Aparamattasanyat*) and
eighth (*Apuvrakaran*) *Gunasthan*. However, the style of this verse is
different from the previous verses. In the previous verses, the main focus was
on how many *Prakritis* do not bind in a particular *Gunasthan*, and the binding
*Prakritis* were mentioned accordingly. But, from this verse onwards, the order
is changed, and it is mentioned how many *Prakritis* bind in a particular
*Gunasthan*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 386 saptatikA prakaraNa pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa catuSka (krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha)
kA baMdha dehAvirata guNasthAna taka hotA thA, unakA pramattavirata guNasthAna
meM baMdha nahIM hotA hai| ata: jina 53 prakRtiyoM ko dezavirata guNasthAna meM
baMdhane ke ayogya batalAyA hai, unameM ina cAra prakRtiyoM ke aura milA dene
para pramattavirata guNasthAna meM 57 prakRtiyoM baMdha ke ayogya hotI
haiM-'virao sgvnnnnsesaao|' isaliye pramattavirata guNasthAna meM 63 prakRtiyoM
kA baMdha hotA hai  /  aba Age kI gAthA meM sAtaveM aura AThaveM gaNasthAna meM
baMdha prakatiyoM kI saMkhyA kA nirdeza karate haiN| igusadiThamappamaso baMdhai
devAjyassa iyaro vi  /  aTThAvaNNamapurakho chappaNNaM vA ci chavIsaM  // 5 //
zAvArtha-iguSTiunasaTha prakRtiyoM ke, appamato-apramatta. saMpata, dhara-baMSa
karatA hai, vAuyassa-devAyu kA baMdhaka, isarotri - apramala bhI, aTThASaNa
aTThAvana, apugdho apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ghAlA, chappaNNaM appana, kA vi-
ayavA bhI, ayvIsaM-~~chatrIsa  /  gAthArSa-apramattasaMyata guNasthAnavartI jIva
unasaTha prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA hai| yaha devAyu kA bhI baMdha karatA hai|
apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna vAlA aTThAvana, chappana athavA chabbIsa prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha karatA hai| vizeSArtha- isa gAthA meM sAtaveM apramattasaMyata aura
AThaveM apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM baMdhayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA kA nirdeza
kiyA hai| lekina yahAM kathana zailI kI yaha vizeSatA hai ki pichalI gAthAoM meM
to kisa guNasthAna meM kitanI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai-isako mukhya
mAnakara baMdha prakRtiyAM batalAI thIM kintu isa gAthA se usa krama ko badala
kara yaha batalAyA hai ki kisa guNasthAna meM kitanI prakRtiyoM

Page #425 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
K! It is a part. Therefore, now, according to Papa's indication, the number of
Akalis bound in Gunadanas is directed. _ In the seventh Lapanavirat Gunasthan,
there are sixty-nine Prakruti bound - 'Marisaramanalo'. It has been told before
that in the Pramattachintat Gunasthan, sixty-three Prakrutis are bound, out of
which Asalavedaniya, Arati, Shok, Asthir, Ashubh and Ayash-Kiti, these six
Prakrutis are not bound in the seventh Gunasthan, they are bound till the sixth
Gunasthan. Therefore, after reducing these six Prakrutis from the aforementioned
sixty-three Prakrutis, fifty-seven Prakrutis remain, but in this Gunasthan,
Aharakaddhik is bound, due to which two Prakrutis are added to fifty-seven,
making it fifty-six Prakrutis of Apratmatasanyat bound. In the said Prakrutis,
Devayu is also included, but in the darkness, Apratmatasangat Devayu is also
bound... 'Bandhai Devalayass Ithar Ni-Ra' is indicated by the type of Shaka. Its
meaning is that the beginning of the association of Devayu with Kadayu is only
Samatapat, yet it also becomes Apratmatasanyat while taking the blessing of
Laya, and in this way, Asamatapat also becomes the bound of Devayu. But from
this, it should not be understood that Apratmatasanyat is also the beginning of
the binding of Devayu. Apratmatasampat is the beginning of the binding of
Devayu. If this meaning is taken, then it is not appropriate to think so. To
clarify this point, the author has indicated 'Apratmatasanyat also binds
Devayu'. - . .-.- -. .. . १ Tenaitat Sucyate Pramattasanyat Shavayurvandham
Pradhabat Sarabhase, Aaraby Va Korikhadpramanatham Api Hathi, Tapta Evam
Apratmatasansapto'shi Devayusho Bandhako Ati, Na Pugarapattaasanyat Ev San
Ayarat Ayubandham Aramat Iti.  -Saptathika Prakaran Teeka, p. 244

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ka! aMza hotA hai| ataH aba pApA ke saMketAnusAra guNadAnoM meM baMdha akAliyoM
kI saMkhyA kA nirdeza karate haiN| _ sAtada lApAnavirata guNasthAna meM unasaTha
prakRtigoM kA baMdha malA hai- 'marisaramANalo'  /  yaha to pahale batalAyA jA
jhukA hai ki pramattacintata guNasthAna meM 63 prakRttiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai,
unameM se asAlAvedanIya, arati, zoka, asthira, azubha aura ayaza-kIti, ina chaha
prakaliyoM kA sAtave guNasthAna meM baMdha nahIM hotA hai, chaThe guNasthAna
taka baMdha hotA hai| ata: pUrvokta 63 prakRtiyoM meM se ina 6 prakRtiyoM ko
kama kara dene para. 57 prabhAtiyoM zeSa rahatI haiM, lekina isa guNasthAna meM
AhArakaddhika kA baMdha hotA hai jisase 57 meM 2 prakRtiyoM ko laura milA dene
para apramattasaMyata ke 56 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha kahA gayA hai| ukta pratiyoM
meM detAyu bhI sammilita hai lekina andhakAra meM apamatasaMgata devAyu kA bhI
baMdha karatA hai... 'baMdhai devAlayassa idhara ni-rA prakAra zaka se nirdeza
kiyA hai| usakA abhiprAya yaha hai kaDAyu ke saMga kA prArambha samatasaMpata hI
karatA hai phira bhI yaha lAyu kA vara karate hue apramattasaMyata bhI ho jAtA
hai aura isa prakAra asamatapata bhI devAyu kA baMdhaka hotA hai| parantu isase
baha na samajhaM ki anamatasaMyata bhI devAyu ke baMdha kA prArambha rahA hai|
apramatasaMpata devAyu ke baMdha kA prArambha karatA hai| yadi yaha abhiprAya
liyA jAtA hai to aisA socanA ucita nahIM hai| isI bAta ko spaSTa karane ke liye
graMthakAra ne 'apramattasaMyata bhI devAyu kA baMdha karatA hai' yaha nirdeza
kiyA hai|' - . .-.- -. .. . 1 tenaitat sUcyate pramattasaMyata zavAyurvandhaM
pradhabhata sArabhase, Arabhya va korikhadapramAnAthamapi hAti, tapta
evamapramattasaMsapto'Si devAyuSo bandhako ati, na pugarapAttasaMyata eva san
ayarata AyubandhamAramata iti  /  -saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 244

Page #426 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The chapter on Sapta-tika, named A-purva-karan, has 88, 44 and 21 types of
prati-kriyas in the Puny-sthana. The prati-kriyas are differentiated in the
institution due to the loss of the power of the Roman in the Mahat-purn-kanig.
The A-purva-karan guna-sthana bala-jipa first binds 5 prati-kriyas in the first
part of the institution. Subsequently, due to the increase of Nima and Praghala,
it binds 56 prati-kriyas until the remaining part of the institution is left.
After that, it binds 21 prati-kriyas in the final part, after the binding of
these 30 prati-kriyas: Dev-gati, Deva-anupurvi, Papani-jati, Kriya-karira, Hiya-
ango-pang, Aharak-sharira, Baharak-ango-pang, Tejas-sharira, Karman-sharira,
Sama-chatur-sra-sansthan, Pane-pasushk, Aguru-la, Upamat, Para-pat, Upvas,
Prashast-biha-yogati, Bas, Paver, Paryapt, Pratyek, Hiper, Shubh, Subhag,
Susbar, A-dey, Nirman and Siker. This is indicated in the Gatha by the
instruction: "Adva-balam-pumuyo chhappannam par vi ghanise."  Thus, the number
of Medha-prati-kriyas up to the eighth Puny-sthana has been stated. Now, in the
next Gatha, the number of Medha-prati-kriyas in the remaining six guna-sthana is
explained.  "Babisa a-purna bandha adar-sant-mani-yat-ti. Sattar mutu-masara-go
sabam-moho sabogi ti ||6||"  Mala-bama-mat-mai-s, purva-ek ek kam, par-par-sa
hai, maharat-asha pant, anivdi-nimu-hi-var du-masthan bala, satar sabak misra-yo
bhu-kam-sam-paray pug-asm bala, sath-sata ver-mi-ya ko, abo-ho-mohi (upasamoha
bhisha moha) sam-o-miti-sho-shi-kesi sthan tak.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa apUrvakaraNa nAmaka bhAu puNasthAna meM aTThAvana, appana
aura jambIsa pratiyoM kA hotA hai| prahatiyoM ko saMsthA meM bhinnatA kA kAraNa
mahata pUrNakAniga meM romezana ke hAra kA vindhera ho jAne para apUrNakaraNa
guNasthAna bAlA jIpa pahale saMsthAtaveM bhAga meM 5 kRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA
hai| anantara nimA aura praghalA kA adhika ho jAne para saMzyAta bhAga ke zeSa
rahane taka 56 prahatiyoM kAma karatA hai aura usake bAda devagati, devAnupUrvI,
papaNiya jAti, kriya karIra, hiya aMgopAMga, AhAraka zarIra, bhAhAraka
aMgopAMga, tejasazarIra, kArmaNazarIra, samacaturasra saMsthAna, paNe pasuSka,
agurulA, upamAta, parApAta, upavAsa, prazasta bihAyogati, basa, pAvara,
paryApta, pratyeka, hipara, zubha, subhaga, susbara, Adeya, nirmANa aura sIkara,
ina tIsa pratiyoM kA baMdhavinoda ho jAne para aMtima bhAga meM 21 prakRtiyoM kA
karatA hai| isI kA saMketa karane liye gAyA meM nirdeza hai ki-advAbalamapumyo
chappaNNaM para vi ghniise| isa prakAra se ATha puNasthAna taka kI medha
prakRtiyoM kA kathana kiyA jA cukA hai| aba Age kI gAthA meM zeSa rahe chaha
guNasthAnoM kI bedha prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA ko patalAte hai| bAbIsA epUrNa baMdhA
addaarsNtmniyttttii| sattara muTumasarAgo sAbamamoho sabogi ti  // 6 //  malA-
bAmAta-mAIsa, pUrva-eka eka kama, paraparasA hai, mahArata-azA panta, anivaDI-
nimuhivAra dumasthAna bAlA, satarasabaka misarAyo bhUkamasaMparAya pugasma bAlA,
sAtha-sAtA veramIya ko, aboho-mohI (upAsamoha bhISa moha) samomiti-zoSikesI
sthAna taka  /

Page #427 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **Verse:**  The **Anivritti** stage binds eighteen
**Prakritis** (principles), starting with twenty-two and decreasing one by one.
The **Sukshmarupa** stage binds all the **Prakritis** together. The
**Upshanshi** and **Kevali** stages, with their **Gunasthanas**, bind only seven
**Prakritis**.  **Commentary:**  The first part of the **Anivritti** stage binds
twenty-two **Prakritis**. This is because, although the eighth **Apuurvakarana
Gunasthan** binds twenty-six **Prakritis**, the last moment of this stage sees
the detachment of four **Prakritis** - **Hasya** (laughter), **Rati** (love),
**Bharat** (attachment), and **Jugupsa** (aversion). Therefore, the first moment
of the ninth **Gunasthan** binds twenty-two **Prakritis**.  Subsequently, at the
end of the first part, **Purushamev** detaches, followed by **Sanjwalan Krodha**
at the end of the second part, **Sanjwalan Mana** at the end of the third part,
and **Sanchalan Maya** at the end of the fourth part. This leads to the binding
of eighteen **Prakritis** in the fifth part.  Therefore, the **Anivritti** stage
has five parts, with twenty-two **Prakritis** bound initially. Then, at the end
of each part, one **Prakriti** detaches, resulting in the binding of twenty-one,
twenty, nineteen, and eighteen **Prakritis** respectively. The verse highlights
this: "Twenty-two, one less, binding eighteen, the remaining."  However, when
**Sanjwalan Lobha** detaches at the end of the fifth part of the **Anivritti**
stage, the tenth **Sukshmasampray Gunasthan** binds seventeen **Prakritis**:
"Seventeen, the **Sukshmasampray**."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Ima - gAthArtha - anivRttivAvara guNasthAna bAlA bAIsa kA aura usake bAda eka-
eka prakRti kama karate hue aThAraha pra tiyoM kA baMdha karatA hai|
sUkSmarUparAma bAlA samaha prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhatA hU~ upazAMzI koNI upa kevalI
guNasthAna vAle sirpha eka sAtAvedamIya prakRti kA baMdha karate haiN| SaSTha
karmagrantha vizeSArtha - maudheM anivRttimAvara guNasthAna ke pahale bhAga meM
bAIsa prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki yadyapi AThaveM
apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM 26 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai, phira bhI usake
aMtima samaya meM hAsya, rati, bharata aura jugupsA, ina cAra prakRtiyoM kA
baMdhaviccheda ho jAne se nauveM guNasthAna ke pahale samaya meM 22 prakRtiyoM
kA baMdha batalAyA hai  /  isake bAda pahale bhAga ke aMta meM puruSameva kA
dUsare bhAga ke aMta meM saMjvalana krodha kA tIsare bhAga ke aMta meM
saMjjalana mAna kA, cauthe bhAga ke aMta meM saMcalana mAyA kA biccheda ho jAne
se pAMcaveM bhAga meM 18 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai, arthAt mau
anivRttibAdara guNasthAna ke baMdha kI apekSA pAMca bhAga haiM mataH prAraMbha
meM to 22 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai aura usake bAda pahale, dUsare, sosare,
cauthe bhAga ke aMta meM kramaza: eka-eka prakRti kA baMdhaviccheda hote jAne se
21, 20, 19 aura 18 prakRtiyoM kA maMca hotA hai| isI Azaya ko spaSTa karane ke
liye gAthA meM saMketa kiyA hai- bAbIsA eguNaM baMdha aTThArasaMtamaniyaTTI  / '
J lekina jaba anivRttibAvara guNasthAna ke pAMcaveM bhAga ke aMta meM saMjvalana
lobha kA baMdhaviccheda hotA hai taba dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM 17
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha batalAyA hai- 'satara sumasarAgI'  /

Page #428 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on the Sevenfold (Sapta-tika)  At the end of the tenth **guna-
sthana**, the following sixteen **prakritis** are liberated: five **jnana-
avaranas**, four **darsana-avaranas**, five **antarayas**, **yasha-kiriti**, and
**uchcha-gotra**. This means that by the tenth **guna-sthana**, the **mohaniya-
karma** is either subdued or destroyed, leading to the state of **amoha**.
Therefore, beings in the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth **guna-sthana** -
**upshanta-moha**, **kshina-moha**, and **sayogi-kevali** - are free from
**mohaniya-karma** and only experience the binding of one **satavedaniya-
karma**: "**sayam-moho sogi ni**".  At the end of the **sayogi-kevali** **guna-
sthana**, the binding of **satavedaniya-karma** is also liberated.  Therefore,
in the fourteenth **ayogi-kevali** **guna-sthana**, there are no causes for
binding, and thus no binding occurs.  In other words, the fourteenth **guna-
sthana** is free from **karma-bandha**.  Although the verse does not explicitly
mention the **ayogi-kevali** **guna-sthana**, it states that the binding of one
**satavedaniya-karma** occurs for **moha-free** and **sayogi-kevali** beings.
From this, we can infer that in the **ayogi-kevali** **guna-sthana**, the main
causes of binding - **kashya** and **yoga** - are absent.  Since the cause is
absent, the effect cannot occur.  Therefore, in the **ayogi-kevali** **guna-
sthana**, there is no binding of **karma**, even in the slightest amount.  In
this way, we have considered which **prakritis** are bound and which are not
bound in each **guna-sthana** across four verses.  A brief summary of this is as
follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa dasaveM guNasthAna ke aMta meM jJAnAvaraNa kI pAMca,
darzagAvaraNa kI cAra, aMtarAya kI pAMca, yazaHkIti aura ucca gotra, ina solaha
prakRtiyoM kA baMdhaviccheda hotA hai| arthAt dasadhai guNasthAna taka
mohanIyakarma kA upazama yA kSaya ho jAne se amoha dazA prApta ho jAtI hai
jisase mohanIyakarma se vihIna jo upazAMtamoha, kSINamoha aura sayogi kevalI-
gyArahaveM, bArahaveM aura terahaveM guNasthAna meM sirpha eka sAtAvedanIyakarma
kA baMdha hotA hai-'sAyamamoho sogi ni|' se rahaveM sayogikevali guNasthAna ke
aMta meM sAtAvedalIya kA bhI baMdhaviccheda ho jAne se caudahaveM ayomikevalI
guNasthAna meM baMdha ke kAraNoM kA abhAva ho jAne se kisI bhI maiM kA baMdha
nahIM hotA hai : arthAt caudahavAM guNasthAna karmabaMdha se rahita hai| yadyapi
gAthA meM ayogikevalI guNasthAna kA nirdeza nahIM kiyA hai tathApi gAthA meM jo
yaha nirdeza kiyA hai ki eka sAtAvedanIya kA badha moharahita aura sayogikevalI
jIva kArale haiM, usase paha phalitArtha nikalatA hai ki ayogiphevalI guNasthAna
meM baMdha ke mukhya kAraNa kaSAya aura yoga kA abhAva ho jAtA hai aura kAraNa
ke abhAva meM kArya nahIM hotA hai| ataH ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM karma kA
lezamAtra bhI baMdha nahIM hotA hai| isa prakAra cAra gAthAoM meM kisa
guNasthAna meM kitanI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai aura kitanI prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha nahIM hotA hai isakA vicAra kiyA gyaa| jinakA saMkSepa meM vivaraNa isa
prakAra jAnanA cAhiye

Page #429 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Karma Granthya Order Number 1 Mithyatva 2 Bhasadan 3 Mishra Avirat
Samyagrusti Deshavirat 6 Pramattavirat 4 5 19 8 Gunasthan ܀ Aparamattavirat
Apuurvakaran Pratham Man Apuurvakaran Dvitiya Mag Apuurvakaran Tritiya Bhag
Anivrittikaran Pratham Bhag Anivrittikaran Dvitiya Bhag Anivrittikaran Tritiya
Bhag Anivrittikaran Chaturth Bhag Anivrittikaran Pancham Bhag Sukshma Paraya 11
Upashantamooh 12 Ksheenamooh 13 14 Yogikevali Amogikevali Bandh 11.7 101 74 77
67 63 56 58 56 26 22 21 20 16 ܀ 17 1 1 ? 0 Abandh 3 16 46 43 보쿠 57 61 62 64 64
68 £2 100 101 102 103 116 116 116 120 Bandhavicched 361 16 25 6 50 6 1 ક્ 30 '6'
1 1 1 1 13 O い 1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagranya krama saMkhyA 1 mithyAtva 2 bhAsAdana 3 mizra avirata
samyagRSTi dezavirata 6 pramattavirata 4 5 19 8 guNasthAna // apramattavirata
apUrvakaraNa prathama mAna apUrvakaraNa dvitIya mAga apUrvakaraNa tRtIya bhAga
anivRttikaraNa prathama bhAga anivRtikaraNa dvitIya bhAga anivRttikaraNa tRtIya
bhAga anivRttikaraNa caturtha bhAga anivRttikaraNa paMcama bhAga sUkSma parAya
11 upazAMtamoha 12 kSINamoha 13 14 yogikevalI amogikevalI baMdha 11.7 101 74 77
67 63 56 58 56 26 22 21 20 16 // 17 1 1 ? 0 abaMdha 3 16 46 43 boku 57 61 62 64
64 68 PS2 100 101 102 103 116 116 116 120 baMdhaviccheda 361 16 25 6 50 6 1 k 30
'6' 1 1 1 1 13 O i 1

Page #430 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The chapter on Sapta-tika explains the number of natures that are bound and
unbound in each Gunasthana, along with their names. This information is
specifically mentioned in the second Karmagrantha. Therefore, inquisitive
individuals should refer to it.  While concluding the discussion on Apaswamitva
in Gunasthanas, the text also mentions the concept of Bandhaswamitva in Margans,
stating: "As the binding of the Moksha is described, so too is the binding of
the Swamitva." (60)  This refers to the binding and unbinding of the
aforementioned Gunasthanas, and the knowledge of Swamitva. In Margans like Gati,
etc., the binding of various tendencies occurs. Therefore, one should understand
the concept of Bandhaswamitva in Margans in the same way as Moksha.
**Explanation:**  The previous verses discussed the binding and unbinding of
natures in each Gunasthana. This establishes the concept of Samampasama
Swamisam. However, it remains unclear how many natures are bound and unbound in
Margans like Gati, etc. This verse clarifies that one should consider the number
of natures bound in each Margan and apply the same understanding of Swamitva as
in Moksha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa pratyeka guNasthAna meM kitanI prakRtiyoM kA baMdha aura
vicacheda hotA hai aura unake nAma mAvi kA ullekha ditIya karmagraMtha meM
vizeSa rUpa se kiyA gayA hai| ataH jijJAsu jana usako dekha leveN|| _
guNasthAnoM meM apasvAmitva kA upasaMhAra karate hue mArgaNAoM meM bhI sAmAnya
se baSasvAmitva ko batalAne ke liye kahate haiM kieso ubaMdhasAmittamoSo gAyAesu
vi saheva  /  mohAmo sAhiejA japa mahA parisambhASo  // 60 //  pA-elopa pUpoMkta
guNasthAna kA babhava, - bhora, pitApita- pAmitva kA, bhaugo-koSa (sAmAgya) se,
nAmAAe-gati mAvi mArgaNAmoM meM, vi-bhI, sahaba-vaise hI, isI prakAra, kopa
magere, hamA pAhiye, nava-jisa mArgaNAsthAna meM, mahA-jisa prakAra se,
pagacitAmApI-mahati kA sammAna  /  mAnArtha-yaha pUrvokta guNasthAnoM kA
baMdhabheda, svAmitva kA zrISa kamana jAnanA caahiye| gati Adi mArgaNAoM meM bhI
isI prakAra (sAmAnya se) jahA~ jitanI pravRttiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai, tabanusAra
yahA~ bhI moSa ke samAna baMdhasvAmitva . kA kapata karanA caahiye|| vivA-
pichalI bAra gAthAoM meM pratyeka guNasthAna meM prakRttiyoM saMbha kara aura
dhanahIM karane kA kathana kiyA gayA hai  /  jisase sAmAmpasamA svAmisma kA kAma
ho jAtA hai| tathApi gati Adi mAraNAmoM meM kitanI-timI pratiyoM kA vadha hotA
hai aura kitanIkitanI prAtiyoM kA nahIM hotA hai, isako jAnanA zeSa raha jAtA
hai| isakA lima gAthA meM sanI pUSanA dI gaI hai ki jahAM jitanI prAtiyoM kA
hotA ho isakA vicAra karake oSa ke samAna mAgaNAsthAnoM meM bhI svAmitva kA
kaSama kara lenA caahiye|

Page #431 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth ### 363  Although it is necessary to consider the concept
of *bandhasvamitva* (ownership of karma) in the context of *marganas* (paths)
according to the aforementioned indication, it has been discussed in detail in
the third Karma Granth. Therefore, the inquisitive should refer to it.   Now,
the following verse describes the presence of different *prakritis* (natures) in
different *gatis* (paths):  **"Tistagardevanaaryayugam cha tisuthisu gaisu
badhgawam | Avsesa payadio havanti samasu vi gaisu ||61||"**  **Explanation:**
* **Tistagardevanaaryayugam:**  This refers to the *Tithankar* (liberated soul),
*Devaayu* (divine beings), and *Naraayu* (human beings). * **Tisuthisu gaisu:**
These three *prakritis* exist in three *gatis* each. * **Badhgawam:**  It is
understood that they are bound by karma. * **Avsesa payadio:**  The remaining
*prakritis* (other than the three mentioned above). * **Havanti samasu vi
gaisu:**  They exist in all *gatis*.  **Meaning:**  The *Tithankar*, *Devaayu*,
and *Naraayu* exist in three *gatis* each. All other *prakritis* exist in all
*gatis*.  **Detailed Explanation:**  This verse indicates that the *Tithankar*,
*Devaayu*, and *Naraayu* exist in three *gatis* each. For example, the
*Tithankar* *namakarma* (karma of name) exists in the *naraka* (hell), *deva*
(heaven), and *manushya* (human) *gatis*. However, it does not exist in the
*tiryanch* (animal) *gati*. This is because the *Tithankar* *namakarma* is not
born in the *tiryanch* *gati*, and there is no binding of the *Tithankar*
*namakarma* in the *tiryanch* *gati*. Therefore, the *Tithankar* *prakriti*
exists only in the *naraka*, *deva*, and *manushya* *gatis*.  Similarly, the
*Devaayu* exists in the *tiryanch*, *manushya*, and *deva* *gatis*. This is
because there is no rule for the binding of *Devaayu* karma in the *naraka*
*gati*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 363 yadyapi ukta saMketa ke anusAra yaha Avazyaka ho jAtA
hai ki yahA~ mArgaNAoM meM baMdhasvAmitva kA vicAra kiyA jAye lekina tIsare
karmagraMtha meM isakA vistAra se vicAra kiyA jA cukA hai ata: jijJAsu jana
vahA~ se jAna leve| _ aba kisa gati meM kitanI prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai,
isakA kathana Age kI gAthA meM karate haiN| tisthagaradevAnarayAugaM ca tisu
tisu gaIsu bAddhagvaM  /  avasesA payaDIo havaMti samAsu vi giisu||61|| zagArma-
tispagaravAniravADA....tIrthakara, devAyu aura narakAyu, 1-aura, titutitIna-
tIna, gaImu-gatiyoM meM, bovazva -mAnanA cAhiye, bhavaseptA-kSeSa, bAkI kI,
papaDIo-prakRtiyA~, haratihotI haiM, sambarasu-samI, vi-mI, gaImugatiyoM meM  /
bhAvArtha-tIrthakara nAma, devAyu aura narakAyuinakI sattA tIna-tIna matiyoM meM
hotI hai aura inake sivAya zeSa prakRtiyoM kI sattA sabhI gatiyoM meM hotI hai|
vizeSArSa-aba jisa gati meM jitanI prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai, usakA nirdeza
karate haiM ki tIrthaMkara nAma, devAyu aura narakAyu, ina tIna prakRtiyoM kI
sattA sIna-tIna gatiyoM meM pAI jAtI hai| arthAta sIrthakara nAmakarma kI
naraka, deva aura manuSya ina tIna gatiyoM meM sattA pAI jAtI hai, kintu
tiyaMcagati meM nhiiN| kyoMki tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kI sattA bAlA tithaMcagati
meM utpanna nahIM hotA hai, tathA tiyaMcagati meM tIrthakara nAmakarma kA baMdha
nahIM hotA hai  /  ataH naraka, deva aura manuSya, ina tIna gatiyoM meM hI
tIrthakara prakRti kI sattA vatalAI hai| tiryaca, manuSya aura deva gati meM hI
devAyu kI sattA pAI jAtI hai, kyoMki narakagati meM nArakoM ke devAyu ke baMdha
na hone kA niyama hai|

Page #432 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter of the Seven Tika ### 364  In the same way, the Tiryanch, human, and
hell realms have the existence of the hell-life, but not the heaven realm,
because the binding of the hell-life for the gods is not possible.  Except for
the above mentioned natures, the existence of all other natures is found in all
four realms. The meaning is that the binding of the heaven-life occurs both
before and after the binding of the Tirthankara nature, but regarding the hell-
life, the rule is that a human who has bound the hell-life can also bind the
Tirthankara nature after becoming a Samyagdarshi. Similarly, a being with the
existence of the Tirthankara nature - both god and hell - only binds the human
life, not the Tiryanch life. This is the rule. Therefore, the existence of the
Tirthankara nature is found in the remaining three realms, excluding the
Tiryanch realm.  Similarly, there is a rule that the hell being does not bind
the heaven-life, and the god does not bind the hell-life. Therefore, the
existence of the heaven-life is found in the remaining three realms, excluding
the hell realm, and the existence of the hell-life is found in the remaining
three realms, excluding the heaven realm.  The conclusion of the above meaning
is that except for the Tirthankara, heaven-life, and hell-life, the existence of
all other natures is found in all realms. This means that in the hell realm,
there are 147 natures existing without the heaven-life, in the Tiryanch realm,
there are 147 natures existing without the Tirthankara nature, and in the heaven
realm, there are 147 natures existing without the hell-life. But in the human
realm, only 145 natures exist.  Previously, the binding, arising, and existence
places of the karma natures were mentioned in the Gunasthanas, and the
Gunasthanas are generally the Upshama Shreni, Kshapaka Shreni...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa 364 isI prakAra tiyaMca, manuSya aura naraka gati meM hI
narakAyu kI sattA hotI hai, devagati meM nahIM kyoMki devoM ke narakAyu kA
baMdha sambhava nahIM hai  /  ukta prakRtiyoM ke sivAya zeSa sabhI prakRtiyoM kI
sattA cAroM gatiyoM meM pAI jAtI hai| Azaya yaha hai ki devAyu kA baMdha to
tIrthaMkara prakRti ke baMdha ke pahale bhI hotA hai aura pIche bhI hotA hai,
kintu narakAyu ke saMbaMdha meM yaha niyama hai ki jisa manuSya ne narakAyu kA
baMdha kara liyA hai, vaha samyagdRSTi hokara tIrthaMkara prakRti kA bhI baMdha
kara sakatA hai| isI prakAra tIrthaMkara prakRti kI sattA vAlA jIva - deva aura
nAraka - manuSyAyu kA hI baMdha karate haiM tiryaMcAyu kA nahIM. yaha niyama hai
/  ataH tIrthaMkara prakRti kI sattA tiyaMcagati ko chor3akara zeSa tIna gatiyoM
meM pAI jAtI hai| isI prakAra nAraka ke devAyu kA deva ke narakAyu kA baMdha
nahIM karane kA niyama hai, ataH devAyu kI sattA narakagati ko chor3akara zeSa
tIna galiyoM meM aura narakA kI sattA devagati ko chor3akara doSa tIna gatiyoM
meM pAI jAtI hai  /  ukta Azaya kA yaha niSkarSa huA ki tIrthaMkara, devAyu aura
narakAyu ina tIna prakRtiyoM ke sivAya zeSa saba prakRtiyoM kI sattA saba
gatiyoM meM hotI hai| yAnI nAnA jIvoM kI apekSA narakagati meM devAyu ke binA
147 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai, tiyaMcagati meM tIrthaMkara prakRti ke binA
147 prakRtiyoM kI aura devagati meM narakAyu ke binA 147 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
hotI hai| lekina manuSyagati meM 145 prakRtiyoM ko hI sattA hotI hai| pUrva meM
guNasthAnoM meM karma prakRtiyoM ke baMdha, udaya, sattA sthAnoM kA kathana kiyA
gayA hai tathA guNasthAna prAya: upazamazreNi, kSapakazreNi

Page #433 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is a text from a Jain scripture, likely discussing the concept of
"Upashamani" and "Kshapakani". Here's a translation:  **The text deals with the
"Karma Granth" (text on Karma). Therefore, it is necessary to explain the nature
of "Upashamani" and "Kshapakani". This first explains the nature of
"Upashamani".**  **"Padmaphasaayachama, Vasatig, Sasaga, Visato, Upasanta,
Avirat Sammatta, Aav Niyatthi, Naaycha." (Verse 62)**  **Word Meaning:**  *
**Padmaphasaayachama:** The four "Kshaya" (passions) - Anantanubandhi Kshaya
Chatushk. * **Vasatig:** The three "Darshanmohaniya" (obscurations of
perception). * **Sasaga Visato:** The seven "Prakriti" (natures). *
**Upasanta:** Subdued, pacified. * **Avirat Sammatta:** The state of "Avirat
Samyagdristi" (uninterrupted right faith) - from the "Gunasthan" (spiritual
stages) of "Avirat Samyagdristi" to "Apuvrakaran". * **Aav Niyatthi:** The
"Gunasthan" of "Apuvrakaran". * **Naaycha:** One should know.  **Meaning of the
Verse:**  One should know that the four "Kshaya" (passions) - Anantanubandhi
Kshaya Chatushk, and the three "Darshanmohaniya" (obscurations of perception),
these seven "Prakriti" (natures) are systematically pacified from the
"Gunasthan" (spiritual stages) of "Avirat Samyagdristi" to "Apuvrakaran".
**Special Note:**  This verse explains the beginning of "Upashamani" by stating
how it starts.  **Explanation:**  There are two categories for making the power
of "Karma" inactive: "Upashamani" and "Kshapakani". The main goal of both
categories is to make "Mohaniya Karma" (obscuring karma) inactive. In
"Upashamani", the soul pacifies "Charitra Mohaniya Karma" (obscuring karma
related to conduct), while in "Kshapakani", the soul destroys "Charitra Mohaniya
Karma" and other karmas as much as possible. When the soul attains "Upashamani",
it first pacifies the four "Anantanubandhi Kshaya" (passions), and then pacifies
the three "Darshanmohaniya" (obscurations of perception), becoming eligible for
"Upashamani". The pacification of these seven "Prakriti" (natures) begins in one
of the "Gunasthan" (spiritual stages) of "Avirat Samyagdristi", "Deshavirat",
"Pramattasanyat", "Aparamattasanyat", and "Apuvrakaran".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paSTha karmagrantha vAle haiM  /  ata: upazamaNi aura kSapakaNi kA svarUpa
batalAnA jarUrI hai  /  yaha pahale upazamaNi kA svarUpa kathana karate haiN|
pakSamaphasAyacaurpha baMsatiga sattagA vi uvasaMtA  /  /  adhiratasammattAmo
jAva niyaTTi ti nAyacyA  /  / 62 /  /  zabdArtha-padamaphasAyacamaka-prathama.
kaSAya catuSka (anaMtAnubaMdhIkaSAyacatuSka), vasatiga-darzanamohanIyatrika,
sasagA visAtoM prakRtiyA~, upasaMtA-upazAnta huI, aviratasammatAo avirata
samyagara STi guNasthAna se lekara, Ava niyaTTi li-apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna taka,
nAyabvA jAnanA caahiye| gAthArya-prathama kaSAya catuSka (anaMtAnubaMdhI vASAya
catuSka) darzanamohanika, ye sAta prakRtiyAM avirata samyagdRSTi se lekara
apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna taka niyama se upazAMta ho jAtI haiM, aisA jAnanA cAhiye
/  vizeSArSa-upazamaNi kA svarUpa batalAne ke liye gAthA meM yaha batalAyA hai
ki upazamaNi kA prArambha kisa prakAra hotA hai| karma zakti ko niSkriya banAne
ke liye do zreNi haiMupazamazreNi aura kSapakazreNi  /  ina donoM zreNiyoM kA
mukhya lakSya mohanIyakarma ko niSkriya banAne kA hai| usameM se upazamaNi meM
jIva cAritra mohanIyakarma kA upazama karatA hai aura kSapazreNi meM jIva
cAritramohanIya aura yathAsaMbhava anya karmoM kA kSaya karatA hai| inameM se
jaba jIva upazamaNi ko prApta karatA hai taba pahale anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya
catuSka kA upazama karatA hai, tadanantara darzanamohanIya kI tIna prakRtiyoM kA
upazama karake upazamaNi ke yogya hotA hai  /  ina sAta prakRtiyoM ke upazama kA
prAraMbha to avirata samyAdRSTi, dezavirata, pramattasaMyata, apramattasaMyata
aura apUrvakaraNa guNasthAnoM meM se kisI

Page #434 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  366  The seven *tikas* can be discussed in the context of *gunasthanas*, but
according to the rules, they are pacified in the *apuurvakarana gunasthanas*.
The *gatha* instructs on the pacification of the seven *prakritis*, starting
with the *anantaanubandhi chatushk*. Therefore, we will first discuss this.
**Pacification of *Anantaanubandhi*:**  Regarding the pacification of the
*anantaanubandhi chatushk*, the text states that a being who is:  1. **Avirat
Samyagdrishti, Deshavirat, Virat (both *pramat* and *apramat*)**, and present in
any of the *yogas*. 2. **Possessing any one of the four *manoyogas*, four
*vachanayogas*, and *oudarik kayayogas*.** 3. **Having one of the three
auspicious *leshyas* - *peet*, *padma*, and *shukla*.** 4. **Possessing *sakar
upayog* (knowledge-based use).** 5. **Whose remaining seven *karmas* (excluding
*ayukarma*) are situated within the *antar koda-kodi sagar*.** 6. **Whose
*chittavritti* (mental activity) is progressively purified from the previous
*antarmuhurt*.** 7. **Who has stopped binding with the *paravartaman* (past)
inauspicious *prakritis* and started binding only with the auspicious
*prakritis*.** 8. **Who has transformed the four-fold *anubhaga* (experience) of
the inauspicious *prakritis* into two-fold, and the two-fold *anubhaga* of the
auspicious *prakritis* into four-fold.** 9. **Who, upon the completion of one
*sthitilbandh* (state of binding), starts binding with the next *sthitilbandh*
with progressively fewer *palyas* (units of binding) compared to the previous
*sthitilbandh*.**  Such a being is the one who pacifies the *anantaanubandhi
chatushk*.  **1. Avirat Samyagdrishti, Deshavirat, Virat (both *pramat* and
*apramat*)**, and present in any of the *yogas*.  **Tej:-Pam-Shukla* *leshyas*
and possessing *sakar upayog*. The remaining seven *karmas* (excluding
*ayukarma*) are situated within the *antar koda-kodi sagar*. The *chittavritti*
(mental activity) is progressively purified from the previous *antarmuhurt*.
Such a being has stopped binding with the *paravartaman* (past) inauspicious
*prakritis* and started binding only with the auspicious *prakritis*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 366 saptatikA prakaraNa bhI guNasthAna meM kiyA jA sakatA hai kintu
apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM to niyama se inakA upazamana ho hI jAtA hai| gAthA
meM anaMtAnubaMdhI catuSka Adi sAta prakRttiyoM ke upazama karane kA nirdeza
karate hue pahale anaMtAnubaMdhI catuSka ko upakSama karane kI sUcanA dI hai
ata: pahale isI kA vivecana kiyA jAtA hai  /  anaMtAnubaMdhI kI upazamanA
anaMtAnubaMdhI catuSka kI upazamanA karane vAle svAmI ke prasaMga meM batalAte
haiM ki avirata samyagdRSTi, dezavirata, virata (pramatta aura apramatta)
guNasthAnavI jIvoM meM se koI bhI jIva kisI bhI yoga meM vartamAna ho athAt
jisake cAra manoyoga, cAra vacanayoga aura audArika kAyayoga, inameM se koI eka
yoga ho, jo pIta, padma aura zukla, ina tIna zubha lezyAoM meM se kisI eka lezyA
vAlA ho, jo sAkAra upayoga vAlA (jJAnopayoga vAlA) ho, jisake Ayukarma ke binA
sattA meM sthita zeSa sAta karmoM kI sthiti antaHkor3A-kor3I sAgara ke bhItara
ho, jisakI cittavRtti antarmuhUrta pahale se uttarottara nirmala ho, jo
parAvartamAna azubha prakRtiyoM ko chor3akara zubha prakRtiyoM kA hI baMdha
karane lagA ho, jisane azubha prakRtiyoM ke sattA meM sthita catu:sthAnI
anubhAga ko dvisthAnI kara liyA ho aura zubha prakRtiyoM ke sattA meM sthita
dvisthAnI anubhAga ko catu:sthAnI kara liyA ho aura jo eka sthitibaMdha ke pUrNa
hone para anya sthitibaMdha ko pUrva-pUrva sthitibaMdha kI apekSA uttarottara
palya ke saMkhyAtarphe bhAga kama bAMdhane lagA ho-aisA jIva hI
anaMtAnubaMdhIcatuSka ko upazamAtA hai  /  1 aviratasamyASTi-dezavirata-
viratAnAmanyatamo'nyatamasmin yoge vartamAna steja:-pama-
zuklAzyAijyatamorayAyukta:
sAkAropayogopayuktosta:sAgagepamakoTAkoTIsthitisaskarmA pharaNakAmAt pUrvamapi
ansamuhUrta kAmaM yAvadevadAyamAnacittasantatiravatiSThate  /
tathA'vatiSThamAnazca parAvartamAnAH prakRtI:

Page #435 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  For the subsidence of the four infinite bonds, the soul
performs three actions: Yathapravrittakaran, Apurvakaran, and Anivrittikaran. In
Yathapravrittakaran, the state remains the same as before the action. In
Apurvakaran, many actions like Sthitibandha etc. start happening, hence it is
called Apurvakaran. In Anivrittikaran, the purity of the soul is the same as
that of a child of the same age, hence it is called Anivrittikaran.  Now, let's
explain the above topic in detail. In Yathapravrittakaran, there is an infinite
increase in purity at every moment, and the mechanism of auspicious natures like
Yantra etc. continues as before. However, Sthitighāt, Rasaghat, Gunashreni, and
Gunasankram do not occur because the required purity is not found here. And
compared to other souls, in this action, there are countless Lok Praman
Parinamas at every moment, which fall into six categories.  These six categories
are of two types, with respect to loss and gain: 1. Infinite part loss, 2.
Innumerable part loss, 3. Numbered part loss, 4. Numbered quality loss, 5.
Innumerable quality loss, and 6. Infinite quality loss.  Auspicious actions
bind, and inauspicious actions do not bind. It makes the inauspicious natures
four-fold, with two stages, and the auspicious natures two-fold, with four
stages. Even in the state of Sthiti, it makes the merit complete and prevents
any further Sthitibandha, making it less than the previous Sthitibandha in terms
of number.  - Sahatika Prakaran Tika, page 246  1. Yathapravrittakaran is also
known as Purvapravrittakaran. In the Digambar tradition, Yathapravrittakaran is
called Adhapravrittakaran.  2. It does not cause Sthitighāt, Rasaghat,
Gunashreni, or Gunasankram, due to the absence of the required purity.  -
Saptaatika Prakaran Tika, page 246

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha E anaMtAnubaMdhIcatuSka kI upazamanA ke lie vaha jIva
yathApravRttakaraNa, apUrvakaraNa aura anivRttikaraNa nAma ke tIna karaNa karatA
/  yathAprakaraNa meM to karaNa ke pahale ke samAna avasthA banI rahatI hai  /
apUrvakaraNa meM sthitibaMdha Adi bahuta-sI kiyAyeM hone lagatI haiM, isaliye
ise apUrvakaraNa kahate haiM aura anivRtikaraNa meM samAna kAla bAloM kI
vizuddhi samAna hotI hai isIliye ise anivRttikaraNa kahate haiM  /  aba ukta
viSaya ko vizeSa spaSTa karate haiM ki yathApravRttakaraNa meM pratyeka samaya
uttarotara anaMtaguNI vizuddhi hotI hai aura zubha prakRtiyoM kA yaMtra Adi
pUrvavat cAlU rahatA hai  /  kintu sthitighAta, rasaghAta, guNazreNi aura
guNasaMkama nahIM hotA hai, kyoMki yahA~ inake yogya vizuddhi nahIM pAI jAtI hai
aura nAnA jIvoM kI apekSA isa karaNa meM prati samaya asaMkhyAta loka pramANa
pariNAma hote haiM jo chaha sthAna patita hote haiM  /  hAni aura vRddhi kI
apekSA ye chaha sthAna do prakAra ke hote haiM1 anaMta bhAgahAni, 2 asaMkhyAta
bhAgahAni, 3 . saMkhyAta bhAgahAni 4. saMkhyAta guNahAni, 5. asaMkhyAta
guNahAni, aura 6- anaMta guNahAni zubhA evaM badhnAti naashubhaaH| azubhAnAM ca
prakRtInAmanumAgaM catuHsthAnakaM santaM dvisvAnakaM karoti, zubhaznAM ca
dvisthAnakaM santaM catuHsthAnakam  /  sthitimadhepi puNaM pUrNa rAti anya
sthitibandhaM pUrvapUrvasthitibAyApekSayA pomasaMkhyevamAgahInaM karoti  /
-sahatikA prakaraNa TokA, pR0 246 1 yathApravRttakaraNa kara dUsarA nAma pUrva
pravRttakaraNa bhI hai, digambara paramparA meM maya pravRttakaraNa ko
adhaHpravRttakaraNa kahA gayA hai| 2 nava sthitighAta rasaghAtaM punarvoni
guNasaMkramaM vA karoti, tadyombavizuddha bhAvAt  /  saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA,
pR0 246

Page #436 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 70  There are six stages of loss. The six stages of growth are as
follows: 1. Infinite part-growth, 2. Innumerable part-growth, 3. Numbered part-
growth, 4. Numbered multiple-growth, 5. Innumerable multiple-growth, and 6.
Final multiple-growth.  The meaning of these six stages is that when we consider
a single being, the results of the second time are obtained with infinite purity
compared to the results of the first time. And when we consider multiple beings,
the results of multiple beings at the same time are obtained in six stages of
degeneration. And the results of the second time are more special than the
results of the first time in the first time of the process of becoming, the
results of the third time are more special than the results of the second time,
and the results of the fourth time are more special than the results of the
third time. In this way, there are more and more special results until the final
time of the process of becoming.  In this, the lowest purity in the first time
is the least, the lowest purity in the second time is infinitely greater than
that, and the lowest purity in the third time is infinitely greater than that.
This process continues until the numbered part of the process of becoming is
obtained. But the lowest purity obtained here is infinitely greater than the
highest purity of the first time.  After that, the lowest purity of the next
time of the numbered part of the process of becoming is infinitely greater than
the highest purity of the first time. Again, the highest purity of the second
time is infinitely greater than that. Again, the lowest purity of the second
time after the numbered part of the process of becoming is infinitely greater
than that.  In this way, one should know that each purity stage is multiplied
infinitely upwards and downwards until the lowest purity stage is obtained in
the final time of the process of becoming. But beyond this, the number of purity
stages...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 398 saptatikA prakaraNa ye hAni rUpa chaha sthAna haiM  /  vRddhi kI apekSA
chaha sthAna isa prakAra haiM--1. anaMta bhAgavRddhiH 2. asaMkhyAta bhAgavRddhi,
3. saMkhyAta bhAgati 4. saMkhyAta guNavRdhi, 5. asaMkhmAsa guNavRddhi aura 6.
anta guNavRddhi  /  _ina SasthAnoM kA Azaya yaha hai ki jaba hama eka jIva kI
apekSA vicAra karate haiM taba pahale samaya ke pariNAmoM se dUsare samaya ke
pariNAma anantaguNI vizuddhi ko liye hue prApta hote haiM aura jaba nAnA jIvoM
kI apekSA se vicAra karate haiM taba eka samayavartI nAnA jIvoM ke pariNAma
chaha sthAna patita prApta hote haiM tathA yathApravRttakaraNa ke pahale samaya
meM mAnA jIvoM kI apekSA jitane pariNAma hote haiM, usase dUsare samaya ke
pariNAma vizeSAdhika hote haiM, dUsare samaya se tIsare samaya meM aura tIsare
samaya se cauthe samaya meM isI prakAra yathApravRttakaraNa ke carama samaya
taka vizeSAdhika-vizeSAdhika pariNAma hote haiM  /  isameM bhI pahale samaya me
jaghanya vizuddhi sabase thor3I hotI hai, usase dUsare samaya meM jaghanya
vizuddhi abhaMtaguNI hotI hai, usase tIsare sAra meM jaghanya vizuddhi
anaMtaguNI hotI hai  /  isa prakAra yazApravRttakaraNa ke saMkhyAtave bhAga ke
prApta hone taka yahI krama calatA rahatA hai  /  para yahA~ jo jaghanya
vizuddhi prApta hotI hai, usase pahale samaya kI utkRSTa vizuddhi anaMtaguNI
hotI hai| _ tadanantara pahale samaya kI utkRSTa vizuddhi se yathApravRttakaraNa
ke saMkhyAta bhAga ke agale samaya kI jaghanya vizuddhi anaMtaguNI hotI hai|
punaH isase dUsare samaya kI utkRSTa vizuddhi anaMta guNI hotI hai  /  punaH
usase yathApravRttakaraNa ke saMkhyAtaveM bhAga ke Age dUsare samaya kI jaghanya
vizuddhi anaMtaguNI hotI hai| isa prakAra yathApravRttakaraNa ke antima samaya
meM jaghanya vizuddhisthAna ke prApta hone taka Upara aura nIce eka-eka
vizuddhisthAna ko anaMtaguNA karate jAnanA cAhiye, para isake Age jitane
vizuddhisthAna

Page #437 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma-dravya ### 366  The remaining ones should be multiplied by an
infinite number, one after another. The time for Yathapravritta-karana is the
measure of an Antarmuhurta.  In this way, after the Yathapravritta-karana ends
in the Antarmuhurta time, another A-purva-karana occurs. Its explanation is as
follows: In this, there are countless Lok-pramana results every moment, which
are degraded in six places every moment. In this, the Jghana Vishuddhi is the
least at the time of living, which is infinitely multiplied by the excellent
Vishuddhi mentioned at the end of the Yathapravritta-karana. Again, the
excellent Vishuddhi is infinitely multiplied in the time before that. After
that, the Jghana Vishuddhi is infinitely multiplied in the second time from
that. In this way, one should state in the same way every moment until the final
time of A-purva-karana is reached.  At the first moment of A-purva-karana, the
five actions of Sthiti-ghata, Rasa-ghata, Guna-shreni, Guna-samkrama, and Purva-
sthiti-bandha begin simultaneously. Their meaning is as follows:  In Sthiti-
ghata, the Sthiti-khanda, which is from the front part of the Sthiti existing in
the Satya, is destroyed by the Antamhata time, which is at least as large as
hundreds of Sagara-pramana and at least as small as the number of Palyas. And
here, in the Sthiti which will not be discussed further, the Dalikas are
deposited every moment, and in this way, the Sthiti-khanda is destroyed within
an Antarmuhurta time. After that, the Sthiti-khanda, which is as large as the
number of the second Palyas below it, is destroyed in the same way. In this way,
thousands of Sthiti-khandas are destroyed in the time of A-purva-karana in the
said order. Due to which, the Sthiti at the end of the time remains less than
the Sthiti at the beginning of the time by a number of times.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagravya 366 zeSa raha gaye haiM, kevala unheM uttarottara anaMtaguNa
karanA cAhiye  /  yathApravRttakaraNa kA samaya antarmuhUrta pramANa hai| isa
taraha antarmuhUrta kAla meM yathApravRttakAraNa samApta hone ke bAda dUsarA
apUrvakaraNa hotA hai  /  jisakA vivecana isa prakAra hai ki isameM pratisamaya
asaMkhyAta loka pramANa pariNAma hote haiM jo prati samaya chahasthAna patita
hote haiN| isameM jI rahI samaya meM jaghaya vizulisabase thor3I hotI hai jo
yathApravRttakaraNa ke antima samaya meM kahI gaI utkRSTa vizuddhi se anantaguNI
hotI hai  /  puna: isase pahale samaya meM hI utkRSTa vizuji anantaguNI hotI hai
/  tadanantara isase dUsare samaya meM jaghanya vizuddhi anantaguNI hotI hai  /
isa prakAra apUrvakaraNa kA antima samaya prApta hone taka pratyeka samaya meM
uttarottara isI prakAra kathana karanA caahiye| apUrvaka raNa ke pahale samaya
meM hI sthitighAta, rasaghAta, guNazreNi, guNasaMkrama aura pUrva sthitibandha,
ye pA~ca kArya eka sAtha prArambha ho jAte haiM  /  jinakA Azaya nimnAnusAra hai
sthitighAta meM sattA meM sthita sthiti ke agrabhAga se adhika se adhika
saikar3oM sAgara pramANa aura kama se kama palya ke saMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa
sthitikhaNDa kA antamahataM kAla ke dvArA ghAta kiyA jAtA hai tathA yahAM jisa
sthiti kA Age calakara bAta nahIM hogA, usameM prati samaya dalikoM kA nikSepa
kiyA jAtA hai aura isa prakAra eka antamuhUrta kAla ke bhItara usa sthiti khaNDa
kA ghAta ho jAtA hai  /  anantara isake nIce ke dUsare patya ke saMkhyAtaveM
bhAga pramANa sthitikhaNDa kA ukta prakAra ghAta kiyA jAtA hai| isa prakAra
apUrvakaraNa ke kAla meM ukta krama se hajAroM sthitikhaNDoM kA ghAta hotA hai|
jisase pahale , samaya kI sthiti se anta ke samaya kI sthiti saMkhyAtaguNI hIna
raha jAtI hai  /

Page #438 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of Sapta-Tika  After explaining the meaning of *Sthiti-Ghat*, we
now discuss *Rasa-Ghat*.  In *Rasa-Ghat*, the portion of the *ashubha*
(unfavorable) nature that exists in the *satta* (being) is destroyed by the
*antar-muhurt* (instantaneous) time, except for the infinite portion called
*praman* (measure). Then, the remaining infinite portion, except for its
infinite part, is destroyed by the *antar-muhurt* time. In this way, thousands
of *anubhag* (parts) are consumed within the time of the emergence of each
*sthiti-khand* (state-segment).  The form of the *guna-shreni* (series of
qualities) is such that, except for the *antar-muhurt* *praman* state of the
infinite *anubandhi* (connected) *chaturshka* (group of four), some *dalika*
(particles) are taken from the *dalika*s of the higher state at each moment and
deposited in the *antar-muhurt* *praman* state above the *udaya-avali*
(ascending series). The process is as follows:  In the first moment, the least
number of *dalika*s are established above the *udaya-avali* in the first moment,
from those that are taken. In the second moment, an innumerable number of
*dalika*s are established from these. In the third moment, an innumerable number
of *dalika*s are established from these. In this way, an innumerable number of
*dalika*s are deposited in increasing numbers until the end of the *antar-
muhurt* time. This is the method of depositing the *dalika*s taken in the first
moment. The *dalika*s taken in the second and subsequent moments are also
deposited in the same way, but with this difference:  The *dalika*s taken in the
first moment of the creation of the *guna-shreni* are the fewest. The *dalika*s
taken in the second moment are innumerable times more than these. In the same
way, the *dalika*s taken in the third and subsequent moments until the end of
the *guna-shreni* creation are innumerable times more than the previous ones.
There is another peculiarity here: *Apuurvakaran*...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa sthitighAta ke Azaya ko spaSTa karane ke bAda aba rasadhAta
kA vivecana karate haiM  /  rasaghAta meM azubha prakRtiyoM kA sattA meM sthita
jo anubhAga hai, usake anaMtaveM bhAga pramANa anubhAga ko chor3akara zeSa kA
antarmuhUrta kAla ke dvArA ghAta kiyA jAtA hai  /  anantara jo anaMta bhAga
anubhAga zeSa rahA thA usake anaMtaveM bhAga ko chor3akara zeSa kA antarmuhUrta
kAla ke dvArA ghAta kiyA jAtA hai  /  isa prakAra eka-eka sthitikhaNDa ke
utkIraNa kAla ke bhItara hajAroM anubhAga khaNDa khapA diye jAte haiM  /
guNazreNi kA rUpa yaha hotA hai ki guNazreNi meM anaMtAnubaMdhI catuSka kI
antarmuhUrta pramANa sthiti ko chor3akara Upara kI sthiti vAle dalikoM meM se
prati samaya kucha dalika lekara udayAvali ke Upara kI antarmuhUrta pramANa
sthiti meM unakA nikSepa kiyA jAtA hai| jisakA kama isa prakAra hai ki pahale
samaya meM jo ki grahaNa gi unameM se sabase kama dalika udayAvali ke Upara
pahale samaya meM sthApita kiye jAte haiN| inase asaMkhyAtaguNe dalika dUsare
samaya meM sthApita kiye jAte haiN| inase asaMkhyAtamuNe damika tIsare samaya
meM sthApita kiye jAte haiN| isa prakAra antarmuhUrta kAla ke antima samaya taka
uttarotara asaMkhyAtaguNe asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kA nikSepa kiyA jAtA hai  /
yaha prathama samaya meM grahaNa kiye gaye dalikoM kI nikSepa vidhi hai  /
dUsare Adi samayoM meM jo dalika grahaNa kiye jAte haiM, unakA nikSepa bhI isI
prakAra hotA hai, kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki suzreNi kI racanA ke pahale samaya
meM jo dalika grahaNa kiye jAte haiM ve sabase thor3e hote haiN| dUsare samaya
meM jo dalika grahaNa kiye jAte haiM ve inase asaMkhyAtaguNe hote haiN| isI
prakAra guNazreNikaraNa ke antima samaya ke prApta hone taka tRtIyAdi samayoM
meM jo dalika grahaNa kiye jAte haiM ve uttarotara asaMkhyAta yuge hote haiM  /
yahA~ itanI vizeSatA aura hai ki apUrvakaraNa 400

Page #439 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth 4.1  As the time of **anivrittikaran** passes
progressively, the deposition of **dalikas** of the **guna-shreni** occurs in
the remaining time of **antar-muhurt** progressively, not in the time above
**antar-muhurt**. For example, let's say the measure of **antar-muhurt** of
**guna-shreni** is fifty time units, and the measure of time for both
**apuurvakaran** and **anivrittikaran** is forty time units. Now, the living
being who creates **guna-shreni** in the first time unit of **apuurvakaran**
deposits **dalikas** in all the time units of **guna-shreni**, and in the second
time unit, deposits **dalikas** in the remaining thirty-nine time units. In this
way, as the time of **apuurvakaran** passes, the deposition of **dalikas**
occurs in fewer and fewer time units.  **Guna-samkram** is the transfer of
**dalikas** of **karma-prakritis**. Therefore, **guna-samkram** is a type of
**pradesha-samkram**. In this, from the first time unit of **apuurvakaran**,
there is a transfer of **karma-dalikas** of **adi-ashubha karma-prakritis**,
which are bound infinitely, in an immeasurable, multiplied order, to the
**prakritis** of the same type that are being bound at that time. This process
begins from the first time unit of **apuurvakaran**.  The form of **sthiti-
bandha** is such that the **sthiti-bandha** that occurs from the first time unit
of **apuurvakaran** is very slightly less than the **sthiti-bandha** that
occurred before it, i.e., **apuurva**. The rule regarding this is that both
**sthiti-bandha** and **sthiti-ghat** begin together and end together. In this
way, all five actions begin together in **apuurvakaran**.  When **apuurvakaran**
ends, **anivrittikaran** occurs. In this, there is uniformity in the results of
the living beings who enter it, i.e., this...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 4.1 aura anivRttikaraNa kA kAla jisa prakAra uttarottara
vyatIta hotA jAtA hai, tadanusAra guNazreNi ke dalikoM kA nikSepa antarmuhUrta
ke uttarotara zeSa bace hue samayoM meM hotA hai, antarmuhUrta se Upara ke
samayoM meM nahIM hotA hai| jaise ki mAna lo guNadheNi ke antarmuhurta kA
pramANa pacAsa samaya hai aura apUrvakaraNa tathA anivRttikaraNa ina donoM ke
kAla kA pramANa cAlIsa samaya hai| aba jo jIva apUrvakaraNa ke pahale samaya meM
guNazreNi kI racanA karatA hai vaha guNazreNi ke saba samayoM meM dalikoM kA
nikSepa karatA hai tathA dUsare samaya meM zeSa unacAsa samayoM meM dalikoM kA
nikSepa karatA hai| isa prakAra jaise-jaise apUrvakaraNa kA kAla vyatIta hotA
jAtA hai vaise-vaise dalikoM kA nikSepa kama-kama samayoM meM hotA jAtA hai| _
guNasaMkrama meM karma prakRtiyoM ke dalikoM kA saMkrama hotA hai| ata:
guNasaMkrama pradezasaMkrama kA eka bheda hai| isameM pratisamaya uttarottara
asaMkhyAta guNita krama se abadhyamAna anaMtAnubaMdhI Adi azubha karma
prakRtiyoM ke karma dalikoM kA usa samaya baMdhane vAlI sajAtIya prakRtiyoM meM
saMkramaNa hotA hai  /  yaha kriyA apUrvakaraNa ke pahale samaya se hI prArambha
ho jAtI hai| sthitibaMdha kA rUpa isa prakAra hotA hai ki apUrvakaraNa ke pahale
samaya se hI jo sthitibaMdha' hotA hai, vaha apUrva arthAt isake pahale hone
vAle sthitibaMdha se bahuta thor3A hotA hai| isake sambandha meM yaha niyama hai
ki sthitibaMdha aura sthitighAta ina donoM kA prArambha eka sAtha hotA hai aura
inakI samApti bhI eka sAtha hotI hai| isa prakAra ina pAMcoM kAryoM kA prArambha
apUrvakaraNa meM eka sAtha hotA hai  /  /  apUrvakaraNa samApta hone para
anivattikaraNa hotA hai| isameM praviSTa hue jIvoM ke pariNAmoM meM ekarUpatA
hotI hai arthAt isa

Page #440 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of Sapta-tika  The way in which living beings entering into the
karmic process differ in their physical characteristics, such as size, does not
result in a difference in their karmic results. This means that the karmic
results of beings existing simultaneously are the same, while the karmic results
of beings existing at different times are entirely different.  The implication
is that all beings who exist, existed, and will exist in the first time period
of A-nivrttikarana have the same karmic results. Similarly, all beings who
exist, existed, and will exist in the second time period have the same karmic
results. The same understanding should be applied to the third and subsequent
time periods. Therefore, there are as many karmic results as there are time
periods of A-nivrttikarana, neither more nor less.  However, there is a special
feature: the purity that occurs in the first and subsequent time periods
increases infinitely in the second and subsequent time periods.  The five
functions of A-purvakarana, namely Sthiti-dhatu, etc., continue to operate in
A-nivrttikarana as well. When a portion of the Antarmukhurta time period remains
after a number of portions have passed, the A-nanta-anubandhi Chatushva,
excluding the lower Nishekas, are interchanged with the Antarmukhurta-pramana
Nivekas. This process takes a time equal to the minimum Sthiti-bandha time
period. If the interchange is done with the Udayavali Prakrutis, their position
is considered Antarmukhurta-pramana, and if the interchange is done with the An-
udayavali Prakrutis, their lower position is considered Avali-pramana.  1. The
description of the karmic functions of Sthiti-dhatu, etc., has been explained in
the context of A-purvakarana. The same understanding should be applied here.  2.
The process of taking the Antarmukhurta-pramana Dalikas from the middle,
excluding the lower and upper positions, and transferring them to other
homogeneous Prakrutis that bind them is called Antar-karana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa karaNa meM praviSTa hue jIvoM ke jisa prakAra zarIra ke
AkAra Adi meM pharaka dikhAI detA hai, usa prakAra unake pariNAmoM meM pharaka
nahIM hotA hai, yAnI sama : dAle la. sAtha meM par3e hue jIyoM ke pariNAma
samAna hI hote haiM aura bhinna samaya vAle jIvoM ke pariNAma sarvathA bhinna hI
hote haiN| tAtparya yaha hai ki anivRttikaraNa ke pahale samaya meM jo jIva
haiM, the aura hoMge, una sabake pariNAma eka se hI hote haiN| dUsare samaya meM
jo jIva haiM, the aura hoMge, unake bhI pariNAma ekase hI hote haiN| isI prakAra
tRtIya Adi samayoM meM bhI samajhanA cAhiye  /  isaliye anivattikaraNa ke jitane
samaya hai, utane hI isake pariNAma hote haiM, nyUnAdhika nahIM  /  kintu itanI
vizeSatA hai ki isake prathama Adi samayoM meM jo vizuddhi hotI hai, dvitIya Adi
samayoM meM vaha uttarottara anaMtaguNI hotI hai| _apUrvakaraNa ke sthitighAta
Adi pAMcoM kArya anivRttikaraNa meM bhI cAlU rahate haiN| isake antarmuhUrta
kAla meM se saMkhyAta bhAgoM ke bIta jAne para jaba eka bhAga zeSa rahatA hai
taba anaMtAnubaMdhI catuSva ke eka Avali pramANa nIce ke niSekoM ko chor3akara
antarmuharta pramANa nivekoM kA antarakaraNa kiyA jAtA hai  /  isa kriyA ko
karane meM nyUnatama sthitibaMdha ke kAla ke barAbara samaya lagatA hai| yadi
udayavAlI prakRtiyoM kA antaraka raNa kiyA jAtA hai to unakI sthiti antarmuhUrta
pramANa aura yadi anudayavAlI prakRtiyoM kA antaraka raNa kiyA jAtA hai to unakI
nIce kI sthiti Avali' pramANa chor3a dI jAtI hai  /  1 sthitidhAta Adi pApoM
kAryoM kA vivaraNa apUrvakaraNa ke prasaMga meM batAyA jA cukA hai, tadanurUpa
yahA~ bhI samajhanA cAhiye  /  /  2 eka Avali yA antarmuhUrta pramANa nIce kI
aura Upara kI sthiti ko chor3a kara madhya meM se antarmuhUrta pramANa dalikoM
ko uThAkara unakA baMdhane vAlI anya sajAtIya prakRtiyoM meM prakSepa karane kA
nAma antarakaraNa hai  /

Page #441 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixth karma grantha, since it has to be intercalated here with the infinite-
bound quartet, but does not arise in the fourth and higher guna sthana,
therefore, its intercalation is done with the internal-momentary evidence
dalikas above, leaving out the lower avli evidence dalikas.  Intercalation means
interruption and karana means action. Accordingly, the row of dalikas of the
natures whose intercalation is done is removed from the middle. This results in
three states of dalikas - the first state, the intermediate state, and the upper
or second state. The evidence of the first state is one avli or one internal-
moment. After this, the intermediate state is obtained. This is the zero state
from the dalikas. Its time evidence is also internal-moment. After this, the
second state is obtained. Its evidence is the remaining state of the dalikas.
Before intercalation, the row of dalikas 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ... remains
uninterrupted, but after intercalation, its state becomes 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.
The empty space that appears in the middle, some of the dalikas there are merged
as much as possible into other homogeneous natures that are bound. The state
below (before) this space of difference is called the first state and the state
above (after) is called the second state. The time of intercalation of the
arising natures and the evidence of the first state are the same, but the time
of intercalation of the non-arising natures is much larger than the evidence of
the first state. While the intercalation process is ongoing, one by one dalika
of the arising natures comes into existence and becomes extinguished, and the
first state of the non-arising natures...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha cUMki yahA~ anaMtAnubaMdhI catuSka kA antarakaraNa karanA
hai kintu usakA cauthe Adi guNasthAnoM meM udaya nahIM hotA hai isaliye isake
nIce ke Avali pramANa dalikoM ko chor3akara Upara ke antarmuhurta pramANa
dalikoM kA antarakaraNa kiyA jAtA hai| aMtarakaraNa meM antara kA artha
vyavadhAna aura karaNa kA artha kriyA hai  /  tadanusAra jina prakRtiyoM kA
antarakaraNa kiyA jAtA hai, unake dalikoM kI paMkti ko madhya se maMga kara diyA
jAtA hai| isase dalikoM kI tIna avasthAyeM ho jAtI haiM--prathama sthiti,
sAntarasthiti aura uparitama yA dvitIyasthiti  /  prathama sthiti kA pramANa eka
Avali yA eka antarmuhurta hotA hai| isake bAda sAnta rasthiti prApta hotI hai  /
yaha dalikoM se zUnya avasthA hai  /  isakA bhI samaya pramANa antarmuhUrta hai
/  isake bAda dvittIyasthiti prApta hotI hai| isakA pramANa dalikoM kI
zeSasthiti hai| antarakaraNa karane se pahale dalikoM kI paMkti0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
... isa prakAra avicchinna rahatI hai kintu antarakara kara lene para usakI
avasthA 00000000000 isa prakAra ho jAtI hai| yahA~ madhya meM jo riktasthAna
dikhatA hai, vahA~ ke kucha dalikoM ko yathAsaMbhava baMdhane vAlI anya sajAtIya
prakRtiyoM meM milA diyA jAtA hai| isa aMtara sthAna se nIce (pahale) kI sthiti
ko prathamasthiti aura Upara (bAda) kI sthiti ko dvitIya sthiti kahate haiM  /
udayabAlI prakRtiyoM ke antarakaraNa karane kA kAla aura prathamasthiti kA
pramANa samAna hotA hai kintu anudayavAlI prakRtiyoM kI prathamasthiti ke
pramANa se antarakaraNa karane kA kAla bahuta bar3A hotA hai  /  antarakaraNa
kriyA ke cAlu rahate hue udayabAlI prakRtiyoM kI prathama sthiti kA eka-eka
dalika udaya meM Akara nirjIrNa hotA jAtA hai aura anudayavAlI prakRtiyoM kI
prathama

Page #442 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **404**  The seven-fold categories of the *sthiti* (state) of
each individual *dalik* (atom) are constantly being infected by the *stibuk*
(subtle) transmission of similar natures arising in the *udaya* (manifestation).
Here, we are discussing the *upasama* (submergence) of the *ananta-anubandhi*
(infinitely connected) [karma], but its *udaya* (manifestation) does not cease.
Therefore, the *stibuk* (subtle) transmission of each *dalik* (atom) that is
initially postponed also continues to infect other natures. In this way, when
*antar-karana* (internalization) occurs, the *dalik* (atoms) of the second
*sthiti* (state) of the *ananta-anubandhi* (infinitely connected) [karma] are
submerged at a later time. In the first instance, the *dalik* (atoms) of the
horse are submerged. In the second instance, an innumerable number of *dalik*
(atoms) are submerged, and in the third instance, an even greater innumerable
number of *dalik* (atoms) are submerged. In this way, until the *antar-muhata*
(internalized) time, an innumerable number of *dalik* (atoms) are submerged at
each instance. Within this time, the entire *ananta-anubandhi* (infinitely
connected) [karma] is submerged.  Just as dust, when sprinkled and soaked with
water and pounded with a pestle, becomes solidified, similarly, *karma* (action)
dust, when sprinkled and soaked with the water of *vishuddhi* (purity) and
pounded with the pestle of *anivritti-karan* (non-return), becomes incapable of
*san-krama* (infection), *udaya* (manifestation), *udirana* (excitation),
*nitti* (continuity), and *nika-chana* (extraction). This is called the
*upasama* (submergence) of the *ananta-anubandhi* (infinitely connected)
[karma].  However, other *acharyas* (teachers) believe that the *ananta-
anubandhi* (infinitely connected) [karma] is *visan-yojama* (disassociated)
after being submerged. *Visan-yojana* (disassociation) is the *kshapana*
(destruction) of...  1. The *karma-prakriti* (karma-nature) text explicitly
prohibits the *upasama* (submergence) of the *ananta-anubandhi* (infinitely
connected) [karma]. It states that the beings of the fourth, fifth, and sixth
*guna-sthana* (stages of spiritual development) in all four *gati* (paths)
disassociate the *ananta-anubandhi* (infinitely connected) [karma] through the
three *karana* (causes). However, during disassociation, neither *antar-karana*
(internalization) nor the *upasama* (submergence) of the *ananta-anubandhi*
(infinitely connected) [karma] occurs.  **"Four, five, and three disassociate
through *visan-yojana* (disassociation). Through the *karana* (causes), neither
*antar-karana* (internalization) nor *upasama* (submergence) occurs."**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 404 saptatikA prakaraNa sthiti ke eka-eka dalika kA udaya meM Ane vAlI sajAtIya
prakRtiyoM meM stibuka saMkramaNa ke dvArA saMkrama hotA rahatA hai  /  yahA~
anaMtAnubaMdhI ke upazama kA kathana kara rahe haiM kintu usakA udaya yahI nahIM
hai, ata: isake prathama sthagita pratyeka dalika kA bhI stibukasaMkramaNa dvArA
para-prakRtiyoM meM saMkramaNa hotA rahatA hai| isa prakAra antarakaraNa ke ho
jAne para dUsare samaya meM anaMtAnubaMdhI catuSka kI dvitIyasthiti vAle dalikoM
kA upazama kiyA jAtA hai  /  pahale samaya meM ghor3e dalikoM kA upazama kiyA
jAtA hai| dUsare samaya meM usase asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kA, tIsare samaya meM
usase bhI asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kA upazama kiyA jAtA hai| isI prakAra
antarmuhataM kAla taka asaMkhyAtaguNe-asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kA pratisamaya
upazama kiyA jAtA hai| itane samaya meM samasta anaMtAnubaMdhI catuSka kA
upazama ho jAtA hai  /  jisa prakAra dhUli ko pAnI se sIMca-sauMce kara duramuTa
se kUTa dene para vaha jama jAtI hai, usI prakAra karma raja bhI vizuddhi rUpI
jala se sIMca-soMca kara anivRttikaraNa rUpI duramuTa ke dvArA kUTa diye jAne
para saMkramaNa, udaya, udIraNA, nitti aura nikAcanA ke ayogya ho jAtI hai  /
isI ko anaMtAnubaMdhI kA upazama kahate haiN| lekina anya AcAryoM kA mata hai ki
anantAnubaMdhI catuSka kA upazamana hokara visaMyojamA hI hotI hai| visaMyojanA
kSapaNA kA 1 karmaprakRti grantha meM anaMtAnubaMdhI kI upazamanA kA spaSTa
niSedha kiyA hai vahA~ batAyA hai ki cauthe, pAMcaveM aura chaThe
guNasthAnavartI yathAyogya cAroM gati ke paryApta jIva tIna karaNoM ke dvArA
anaMtAnubaMdhI catuSka kA visaMyojana karate haiM  /  kintu visaMyojana karate
samaya na to antarakaraNa hotA hai aura na anaMtAnubaMdhI catuSka kA upazama hI
hotA hai caugaiyA pajatA tini vi saMyojaNe viyojati  /  karaNeti tIhi sahiyA
naMtarakaraNaM usamo vA  //

Page #443 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Firm Text 405 This is another name, but the only difference between
disassociation and destruction is that the natures that are disassociated regain
their existence, but the natures that are destroyed do not regain their
existence. The disassociation of the infinite-bound occurs in any one of the
qualities from the uninterrupted samyadrishti quality-place to the unattentive-
restrained quality-place. In the fourth quality-place, the beings of all four
motions disassociate the infinite-bound. In the fifth quality-place, the
Tithancha and humans disassociate the infinite-bound, and in the sixth and
seventh quality-places, only humans disassociate the infinite-bound. For this
also, as before, there are three times the Yashattkarana. But the special
feature is that there is no need for introspection for disassociation, but
except for the Avali Praman Dalikas, all the above Dalikas naturally transition
to other homogeneous natures, and the Avali Praman Dalikas transition to the
existing natures and destroy them. Thus, the consideration of the suppression
and disassociation of the infinite-bound has been considered. Now, consider the
suppression of the three natures of the darshanamohi. Mother Ha In the Digambar
tradition, the Kashayapahuḍ, its Chūṇi, Pakhaṇḍāgam, and Lakṣisār also mention
the view of disassociation of the infinite-bound. Similar to the karma-nature,
the Chūṇi of the Kāmapāhuḍ also clearly prohibits the upkāma of the infinite-
bound, but in the Digambar tradition, the prevalent Saptaṭika also contains the
view of suppression, and it is clear from the Go. Karmakāṇḍa that they were
familiar with the view of suppression of the infinite-bound.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha pharma grantha 405 hI dUsarA nAma hai, kintu visaMyojanA aura kSapaNA
meM sirpha itanA aMtara hai ki jina prakRtiyoM kI visaMyojanA hotI hai, unakI
puna: sattA prApta ho jAtI hai, kintu jina prakRtiyoM kI kSapaNA hotI hai, unakI
puna: sattA prApta nahIM hotI hai  /  anantAnubaMdhI kI visaMyojanA avirata
samyAdRSTi guNasthAna se lekara apramattasaMyata guNasthAna taka kisI eka
guNasthAna meM hotI hai  /  cauthe guNasthAna meM cAroM gati ke jIva
anantAnubandhI kI visaMyojanA karate haiN| pAMcaveM guNasthAna meM tithaMca aura
manuSya anantAnubandhI kI visaMyojanA karate haiM aura chaThe va sAtaveM
guNasthAna meM manuSya hI anantAnubaMdhI kI visaMyojanA karate haiN| isake liye
bhI pahale ke samAna yazAttakaraNa bAda tIna bAra kire jo haiN| lekina itanI
vizeSatA hai ki visaMyojanA ke liye antarakaraNa kI AvazyakatA nahIM hotI hai
kintu Avali pramANa dalikoM ko chor3akara Upara ke saba dalikoM kA anya sajAtIya
prakRti rUpa se saMkramaNa karane aura Avali pramANa dalikoM kA vedyamAna
prakRtiyoM meM saMkramaNa karake unakA vinAza kara diyA jAtA hai| isa prakAra
anantAnubandhI kI upazamanA aura visaMyojanA kA vicAra kiyA gayA aba
darzanamohanIya kI tIna prakRtiyoM kI upazamanA kA vicAra karate haiN| mAtA hA
digambara paramparA meM kaSAyapAhuDa, usakI cUNi, pakhaMDAgama aura lakSisAra
meM bhI anantAnubaMdhI ke visayojana vAle mata kA hI ullekha milatA hai|
karmaprakRti ke samAna kAmapAhura kI pUNi meM bhI anantAnubaMdhI ke upakAma kA
spaSTa niSedha kiyA hai, lekina digambara paramparA meM pracalita saptatikA meM
upazama yAlA mata bhI pAyA jAtA hai aura go0 karmakAMDa se isa bAta kA avazya
patA lagatA hai ki ve anaMtAnubaMdhI ke upazama vAle mata se paricita the  /

Page #444 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 406: The Chapter of the Seventies  **On the Submergence of the
Movable**  This rule is about the submergence of the three natures of the
Darshanamohiya: Mithyatva, Samyagmithyatva, and Samyaktava. These three are the
three stages of the Darshan Bhahanocha. Of these, Mithyatva is submerged by the
Mithyashti and the Vedak Samyagdristi Jiva, but Samyaktava and Samyagmithyatva,
these two natures, are submerged only by the Vedak Samyagdristi Jiva. Even in
this, the Mithyadristi Jiva of all four gatis first generates Samyaktava and
then submerges Mithyatva. The method of submerging Mithyatva should be known to
be the same as the submergence of the Anantanubandhi Chatushka, which was
explained earlier, but with this difference: in its A-purvakaran, there is no
Gunasamkram, but there are four actions: Sthitighāt, Rasaghat, Sthitibandh, and
Gunashreni.  1. In the Digambar Karbha Granthas, the instruction on this subject
is this: the Mithyadristi submerges one Mithyatva, or both Mithyatva and
Samyagmithyatva, or all three: Mithyatva, Samyagmithyatva, and Samyaktava. And
the Samyagdristi, at the time of attaining the second submergence of Samyaktava,
submerges all three. The Jiva who, having fallen from Samyavasa, goes into
Mithyatva and violates the Vedak time, if he attains the submergence of
Samyaktava at the time of the Udvalana of Samyaktava, then he submerges all
three. The Jiva who, after the Udvalana of Samyaktava, attains the submergence
of Samyaktava at the time of the Udvalana of Samyagmithyatva, submerges these
two: Mithyatva and Samyagmithyatva. And the Mithyadristi who has the existence
of all twenty-two natures of the Mohiya, submerges only one Mithyatva.  2.
There, the submergence of Mithyatva is by the Mithyadristi and the Vedak
Samyagdristi. But the submergence of Samyaktava and Samyagmithyatva is only by
the Vedak Samyagdristi.  - Sapttatika Prakaran Tika, page 246

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 406 saptatikA prakaraNa varzanamohanIya kI upazamanA _darzanamohanIya kI tIna
prakRtiyoM kI upazamanA ke viSaya meM yaha niyama hai ki mithyAtva,
rAmyagmidhyAtva aura samyaktva yaha darzana bhAhanoca kI tIna prakAlaya hai|
unameM se mithyAtva kA upazama to mithyASTi aura vedaka samyagdRSTi jIva karate
haiM, kintu samyaktva aura samyagamithyAtva ina do prakRtiyoM kA upazama vedaka
samyagdRSTi jIva hI karate haiM  /  isameM bhI cAroM gati kA mithyAdRSTi jIva
jAnna prathama samyaktva ko utpanna karatA hai taba mithyAla kA upazama karatA
hai| mithyAtva ke upazama karane kI vidhi pUrva meM batAI gaI anantAnubaMdhI
catuSkA ke upazama ke samAna jAnanA cAhiye kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki isake
apUrvakaraNa meM guNasaMkrama nahIM hotA kintu sthitighAta, rasaghAta,
sthitibaMdha aura guNazreNi, ye pyAra kArya hote haiN| 1 digambara
karbhagranthoM meM isa viSaya ke nirdeza mAca yaha hai ki mithyAdRSTi eka
mithyAtva kA, mithyAtva aura samyamithyAtva ina donoM kA yA mithyAtva,
sampamithyAtva aura samyaktva, ina tInoM kA tathA sammAdRSTi dvitIyopazama
samyaktva kI prApti ke samaya tInoM kA upazAma karatA hai| jo jIva sampavasva se
cyuta hokara mithyAtva meM jAkara vedakakAla kA ullaMghana kara AtA hai, yaha
madi samyaktva kI udavalanA hone ke kAla meM hI upazama sambakAva ko prApta hotA
hai to usake tInoM kA upazama hotA hai | jo jIva samyaktva kI ubalanA ke bAda
samyagamithyAtva kI udalanA hote samaya yadi upazamasamyaktva ko prApta karatA
hai to usake mithyAba aura samyagamithyAtva ina do kA upazama hotA hai aura jo
mohanIya kI sabbIsa prakRtiyoM kI sattA vAlA mizyAdRSTi hotA hai, usake eka
mizyAtva kA hI upazama hotA hai| 2 tatra mithyAtvasyopazamanA mithyAdRS
vedakasamyagdRSTezca  /  samyaktva sampagmithyAtvayostu vedakasamyAhATereva  /
-saptatikA prakaraNa TIkA, pR0 246

Page #445 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **407** The false view arises from the rule of false
view. Therefore, the creation of its quality-potency occurs from the time of its
arising. After the non-creation, it should be known in the same way in the non-
obstruction. But when one part remains after the number of its parts has passed,
then the internal moment of false view, leaving the lower inhibitors, is done at
the end of the niryanas on the higher annalla proof. This action takes the same
internal moment time as the new position bond. Here, some of the dalikas that
are ended are placed in the first position and some in the second position,
because the false view of false view does not have a transition of the other-
nature form. In its first position, the dalikas of the first position are
aroused until the time of the avali proof remains, but the dalikas of the second
position are aroused only until two avali proof times remain in the first
position. Here, the arousal of the dalikas of the second position is called
agal.  In this way, when this being, experiencing the first position,
experiences the dalika located at the last place of the first position, then it
divides the dalikas of false view located in the second position above the
internal moment, according to the section, into three parts. Of these, the pure
part is called right view, the semi-pure part is called semi-false view, and the
most impure part is called false view. It is also said in the Karma-prakriti
Churni:  "From the extreme samyamadi to the extreme sammasammi, it becomes the
viyithi, it does the three parts, sanjaha - sammatam sammammitatam micchattam
bha."  In this way, when the first position ends, the dalika of false view does
not arise, and thus the temporary right view is obtained. This...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 407 mithyA dRSTi ke niyama se mithyAtva kA udaya hotA hai|
isaliye isake guNadheNi kI racanA udaya samaya se lekara hotI hai  /
apUrvakaraNa ke bAda anivRttikaraNa meM bhI isI prakAra jAnanA cAhiye  /  kintu
isake saMkhyAta bhAgoM ke bIta jAne para jaba eka bhAga zeSa raha jAtA hai taba
mithyAtva ke antarma harta pramANa nIce ke niSekoM ko chor3akara, isase kucha
adhika annAlA pramANa para ke nirenoM kA anta kA kiyA jAtA hai| isa kriyA meM
nUtana sthitibaMdha ke samAna antarmuhUrta kAla lagatA hai| yahAM jina dalikoM
kA anta rakaraNa kiyA jAtA hai, unameM se kucha ko prathama sthiti meM aura
kucha ko dvitIya sthiti meM DAla diyA jAtA hai, kyoMki mithyAiSTi ke mithyAtva
kA para-prakRti rUpa saMkramaNa nahIM hotA hai| isake prathamAsthiti meM Avali
pramANa kAla zeSa rahane taka prathamasthiti ke dalikoM kI udIraNA hotI hai
kintu dvitIya sthiti ke dalikoM kI udIraNA prathama sthiti meM do Avali
pramANakAla zeSa rahane taka hI hotI hai| yahA~ dvitIya sthiti ke dalikoM kI
udIraNA ko AgAla kahate haiN| isa prakAra yaha jIva prathamasthiti kA vedana
karatA huA jaba prathamasthiti ke antima sthAna sthita dalika kA bedana karatA
hai, taba vaha antarakaraNa ke Upara dvitIya sthiti meM sthita mithyAtva ke
dalikoM ko anubhAga ke anusAra tIna bhAgoM meM vibhakta kara detA hai| inameM se
vizuddha bhAga ko samyaktva, ardhavizuddha bhAga ko sampamithyAtva aura sabase
avizuddha bhAga ko mithyAtva kahate haiM  /  karmaprakRti cUrNi meM kahA bhI hai
caramasamamamiyAdiGI sekAse upasamasammaviTThI hohiha tAhe viyiThiI tihAnubhAgaM
karei, saMjahA.-sammataM sammAmiTataM micchattaM bha  /  isa taraha
prathamasthiti ke samApta hone para mithyAtva ke dalika kA udaya nahIM hone se
aupazamika samyaktva prApta hotA hai  /  isa

Page #446 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 408: The Sevenfold Chapter  **The attainment of the previously
unattainable self-benefit occurs upon the attainment of Right Faith.**  "When
Right Faith is attained, the previous self-benefit, which was unattainable,
becomes attainable."  This first attainment of Right Faith is achieved through
the complete cessation of False Faith. Those who attain it may be either
"country-renouncing" or "all-renouncing." This means that after attaining Right
Faith, efforts are made to attain Restraint.  However, the being does not ascend
to the state of "Cessation-Right Faith" from this first cessation of False
Faith, but rather from the second cessation of False Faith. Therefore, we will
explain that the being who is a "knower" and has Right Vision, who has ceased
the four passions and the three types of "perception-delusion," and has attained
"Cessation-Right Faith," is called one who has attained the second cessation of
False Faith. The cessation of the "infinitely-connected" passions has already
been discussed. Now, we will briefly explain the method of cessation of the
"perception-delusion."  The "knower" who has Right Vision and is established in
Restraint, ceases the three natures of "perception-delusion." The three causes
of their "proper functioning" should be understood as before, but with this
difference: when the numbered parts of "non-functioning" have passed, and the
"inner-reflection" is done, the first state of Right Faith is established as
"internal-momentary" evidence, because this is the "knowable" nature. The first
state of "Right-False Faith" and False Faith is established as "obstructive"
evidence, because these two do not arise in the "knower" who has Right Vision.
The "deposits" of these three natures, which are "inner-reflected" upon, are in
the first state of Right Faith.  **1. Sequential Nature, Ma. 330**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 408 saptatikA prakaraNa samyaktva ke prApta hone para alabdha pUrva Atmahita kI
upalabdhi hotI hai minabae prope lahae sammattamogasamiyaM so| labhega bassa
lambhara ApahiyamalayapuvaM jaM  //  yaha prathama samyaktva kA lAbha mithyAtva
ke pUrNa rUpeNa upazama se prApta hotA hai aura isake prApta karane vAloM meM se
koI dezavirata aura koI sarvavirata hotA hai| arthAt samyaktva prApti ke pazcAt
saMyama lAbha ke lie prayAsa kiyA jAtA hai| kintu isa prathamopazama samyaktva
se jIva upazamaNi para na car3hakara dvitIyopazama samyaktva se car3hatA hai|
ata: usake bAre meM batAte haiM ki jo vedaka samyagdRSTi jIva anantAnubandhI
kaSAya catuSka aura darzanamohatrika kA upazama karake upazamasamyaktva ko
prApta hotA hai, use dvitIyopazama samyaktva kahate haiM  /  inameM se
anantAnubandhI ke upazama hone kA kathana to pahale kara Aye haiM  /  aba yahA~
darzanamohanIya ke upazama hone kI vidhi ko saMkSepa meM batalAte haiN| _ jo
vedaka samyagdRSTi jIva saMyama meM vidyamAna hai, vaha darzanamohanIya kI tIna
prakRtiyoM kA upazama karatA hai| isake yathApravRttakaraNa Adi tIna karaNa
pahale ke samAna jAnanA cAhiye kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki anivRttikaraNa ke
saMkhyAta bhAgoM ke bIta jAne para antarakaraNa karate samaya samyaktva kI
prathama sthiti antarmahurta pramANa sthApita kI jAtI hai, kyoMki yaha vedyamAna
prakRti hai tathA samyagmithyAtva aura mithyAtva kI prathama sthiti Abali
pramANa sthApita kI jAtI hai kyoMki vedaka samyagdRSTi ke ina donoM kA udaya
nahIM hotA hai  /  yahA~ ina tInoM prakRtiyoM ke jina dalikoM kA aMtarakaraNa
kiyA jAtA hai, unakA nikSepa samyaktva kI prathamasthiti meM hotA hai  /  1
kramaprakRti, mA0 330

Page #447 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bandha Karma Granth 406  In the same way, the **dalikas** (sub-categories) of
the first state of **mithyatva** (false belief) and **samyag mithyatva**
(partially true belief) of this being continue to transition into the
**dalikas** of the first state of **samyaktvam** (right belief) through
**stikasamkram** (transition of states). Each **dalik** of the first state of
**samyaktvam** arises and is destroyed. In this way, when the first state of
**samyaktvam** weakens, the attainment of **dvitiyopasham samyaktvam** (second
stage of right belief) occurs.  After attaining **dvitiyopasham samyaktvam**,
the process of **upashamna** (subduing) of **charitra mohaniya** (karma that
hinders conduct) begins. Therefore, we will now explain the process of
**upashamna** of **charitra mohaniya**.  ## Upashamna of Charitra Mohaniya  To
subdue **charitra mohaniya**, three **karans** (actions) are performed:
**yathpravrittakaran**, **apuurvakaran**, and **anivrittikaran**. The nature of
these **karans** is the same as before, but with this difference:
**yathpravrittakaran** occurs in the seventh **gunasthan** (stage of spiritual
development) of **aprammatasanyata** (unwavering restraint), **apuurvakaran**
occurs in the eighth **gunasthan** of **apuurvakaran**, and **anivrittikaran**
occurs in the ninth **gunasthan** of **anivrittikaran**. Here too, in
**apuurvakaran** and **anivrittikaran**, **sthitighāt** (destruction of states)
and other aspects are the same as before. However, there is this difference:
from the fourth to the seventh **gunasthan**, the **gunasamkram** (transition of
qualities) that occurs in **apuurvakaran** and **abhivritikaran** is of the same
nature as the **parinam** (results) related to them. But in **apuurvakaran**,
the **gunasamkram** of all the **ashubh** (unwholesome) qualities that do not
bind occurs. When a certain amount of time has passed during **apuurvakaran**,
the binding of the two qualities of **nidra** (sleep) and **prachala**
(restlessness) is broken. After this, when thousands of **sthitikhāṇḍas**
(states) are destroyed, a large part of the time of **apuurvakaran** passes,
leaving only a small part remaining. During this time, the binding of the
following 30 qualities of **namakarma** (karma that affects the name and form)
is broken:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 baNTha karmagrantha 406 isI prakAra isa jIva ke mithyAtva aura samyaga
mithyAtva kI prathama sthiti ke dalikoM kA samyaktva kI prathama sthiti ke
dalika meM stikasaMkrama ke dvArA saMkramaNa hotA rahatA hai aura samyaktva kI
prathama sthiti kA pratyeka dalika udaya meM A-Akara nirjIrNa hotA rahatA hai|
isa prakAra isake samyaktva kI prathamasthiti ke kSINa ho jAne para
dvitIyopazama samyaktva kI prApti hotI hai  /  dvitIyopazama samyaktva ke prApta
hone ke bAda cAritra mohanIya kI upazamanA kA krama prArambha hotA hai  /  ataH
aba cAritra mohanIya ke upazama ke krama ko batalAte haiM  /  cAritra mohanIya
kI upazamanA cAritra mohanIya kA upazama karane ke liye punaH
yathApravRttakaraNa Adi tIna karaNa kiye jAte haiN| karaNoM kA svarUpa to
pUrvavat hai lekina itanI vizeSatA hai ki yathApravRttakaraNa sAtaveM
apramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM hotA hai, apUrvakaraNa AThaveM apUrvakaraNa
guNasthAna meM aura anivRttikaraNa nauveM anivRttikaraNa guNasthAna meM hotA hai
/  yahA~ bhI apUrvakaraNa aura anivRttikaraNa meM sthitighAta Adi pahale ke
samAna hote haiM  /  kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki cauthe se lekara sAtaveM
guNasthAna taka jo apUrvakaraNa aura abhivRttikaraNa hote haiM, unameM usI
prakRti kA guNasaMkrama hotA hai, jisake sambandha meM ve pariNAma hote haiM  /
kintu apUrvakaraNa meM nahIM baMdhane vAlI sampUrNa azubha prakRtiyoM kA
guNasaMkrama hotA hai| apUrvakaraNa ke kAla meM se saMkhyAtavA~ bhAga bIta jAne
para nidrA aura pracalA ina do prakRtiyoM kA baMdhaviccheda hotA hai| isake bAda
jaba hajAroM sthitikhaMDoM kA ghAta ho letA hai, taba apUrvakaraNa kA saMkhyAta
bahubhAga kAla vyatIta hotA hai aura eka bhAga zeSa rahatA hai| isI bIca
nAmakarma kI nimnalikhita 30 prakRtiyoM kA baMdhaviccheda hotA hai *

Page #448 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
410 Chapter on the Seven Tika Deva-Gati, Devanupurvi, Panchendriya Jati,
Vaikriya Sarira, Aharak Sarira, Tejas Sarira, Karman Sarira, Samachaturstra
Sansthan, Vaikriya Angopang, Aharak Angopang, Varna Chatushk, Agurulghu,
Upadhat, Paraghāt, Ucchvas, S, Badar, Paryāpt, Pratiyaka, Prashast Vihayogati,
Sthira, Shubh, Subhag, Suswar, Aadey, Nirman and Tirthankara. After that, when
the state of separation (Sthiti-Khand-Prithaktva) occurs, the final time of
A-purva-karan is attained. In this, the bondage-severance of Hasy, Rati, Bhay
and Jugupsa, the rise-severance of six No-Kshayas, and the destruction,
annihilation and removal of all karmas, the mucchitti of the karmas of Desho-
pashamana, Nidhatti and Nikachana occur. After this, entry into the Gunasthan of
Anivrittikaran occurs. In the Gunasthan of Anivrittikaran also, the actions like
Sthiti-ghat etc. are the same as before. When the knowledge of the Paasha of
Anivritti is attained, the differentiation of the 21 types of Charitra-mohaniya
is done. At the time of differentiation, the first state of the Sanjwalan
Kshaya, which arises from the four Sanjwalan Kshayas, and the first state of the
Veda, which arises from the three Vedas, is established according to their
respective time of arising. The first state of the other nineteen types is
established as one Avali. The time of arising of Stri-veda and Napunsak-veda is
the least. The time of arising of Purusha-veda is numerically multiplied by
this. The time of arising of Sanjwalan Krodha is more than this. The time of
arising of Sanjwalan Mana is more than this. The time of arising of Sanjwalan
Maya is more than this and the time of arising of Sanjwalan Lobha is more than
this. In Panchasangraha also, it is said in the same way: "Tho-apumoraya-kala
sangj-guno ra puriso-yaras. Tatto vi vise-sa-hi-o kohe tatto vi mahak-maso." 1
Panchasangraha, 796

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 410 saptatikA prakaraNa devagati, devAnupUrvI, paMcendriya jAti, vaikriya
zarIra, AhAraka zarIra, tejasa zarIra, kArmaNa zarIra, samacaturastra saMsthAna,
baiMkriya aMgopAMga, AhAraka aMgopAMga, varNa catuSka, agurulaghu, upadhAta,
parAghAta, ucchavAsa, sa, bAdara, paryApta, pratyeka, prazasta vihAyogati,
sthira, zubha, subhaga, susvara, Adeya, nirmANa aura tiirthkr|| tadanantara
sthitikhaMDa-pRthaktva ho jAne para apUrvakaraNa kA aMtima samaya prApta hotA
hai| isameM hAsya, rati, bhaya aura jugupsA kA baMdhaviccheda, chaha nokaSAyoM
kA udayaviccheda tathA saba karmoM kI dezopazamanA, nidhatti aura nikAcanA
karaNoM kI mucchitti hotI hai  /  isake bAda anivRttikaraNa guNasthAna meM
praveza hotA hai  /  anivRttikaraNa guNasthAna meM bhI sthitighAta Adi kArya
pahale ke samAna hote haiN| anivRtti ke saMhAsa bahubhAga pAza ke hoza jAne para
cAritramohanIya kI 21 prakRtiyoM kA aMtarakaraNa kiyA jAtA hai| anta'rakaraNa
karate samaya cAra saMjvalana kaSAyoM meM se jisa saMjvalana kaSAya kA aura tIna
vedoM meM se jisa veda kA udaya hotA hai, . unakI prathamasthiti ko apane-apane
udayakAla pramANa sthApita kiyA jAtA hai anya unnIsa prakRtiyoM kI
prathamasthiti ko eka Avali , pramANa sthApita kiyA jAtA hai| strIveda aura
napuMsakaveda kA udayakAla sabase thor3A hai| puruSaveda kA udayakAla isase
saMkhyAtaguNA hai| saMjvalana krodha kA udayakAla isase vizeSa adhika hai|
saMjvalana mAna kA udayakAla isase vizeSa adhika hai| saMjvalana mAyA kA
udayakAla isase vizeSa adhika hai aura saMjvalana lobha kA udayakAla isase
vizeSa adhika hai  /  paMcasaMgraha meM bhI isI prakAra kahA hai
thoapumorayakAlA saMgjaguNo ra purisoyarasa  /  tatto vi visesaahio kohe tatto
vi mhkmso|' 1 paMcasaMgraha, 796

Page #449 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth 411  Sad-vid Har Nazar, D. ke Galo Mareer ka Kaal
Sankhyatguna hai. Isse Krosh ka Kaal Vishesh Adhik hai. Aage bhi isi prakar
yathakrama se Vishesh Adhik Kaal jaanna chahiye.  Jo Sanjwalan Krodh ke Uday se
Upshamshreni ka Arohan karta hai, uske jab tak Apratyakhyanavaran Krodh aur
Pratyakhyanavaran Kosh ka Upsham nahin hota tab tak Sanjwalan Krodh ka Uday
rehta hai. Jo Sanjwalan Man ke Uday se Upshamshreni par chadhta hai uske jab tak
Apratyakhyanavaran Man aur Pratyakhyanavaran Man ka Upsham nahin hota, tab tak
Sanjwalan Man ka Uday rehta hai. Jo Sanjwalan Maya ke Uday se Upshamveni par
chadhta hai, uske jab tak Apratyakhyanavaran Maya ka aur Pratyakhyanavaran Maya
ka Upsham nahin hota tab tak Sanjwalan Maya ka Uday rehta hai tatha jo Sanjwalan
Lobh ke Uday se Upshamni par chadhta hai, uske jab tak Apratyakhyanavaran Lobh
aur Pratyashyanavaran Lobh ka Upsham nahin hota tab tak Sanjwalan Lobh ka Uday
rehta hai.  Jitne Kaal ke dwara Sthitikhund ka Ghat karta hai ya anya Sthiti ka
Bandh karta hai, utne hi Kaal ke dwara Antarakaran karta hai, kyonki in tinon ka
Aarambh aur Samapti ek saath hoti hai. Tatparya yah hai ki jis samay Antarakaran
Kriya ka Aarambh hota hai, usi samay anya Sthitikhund ke Ghat ka aur anya
Sthitibandh ka bhi Aarambh hota hai aur Antarakaran Kriya ke Samapt hone ke
samay hi inki Samapti bhi hoti hai. Is prakar Antarakaran ke dwara jo Antar
sthapit kiya jata hai, uska praman Pratham Sthiti se Sankhyat guna hai.
Antarakaran karte samay jin Karmon ka Bandh aur Uday hota hai unke Antarakaran
sambandhi Dalikon ko Pratham Sthiti aur Dvitiyastithi mein Kshepan karta hai,
jaise ki Purushaved ke Uday se...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 411 sada-vida hara najara, da. ke gAlo mArera kA kAla
saMkhyAtaguNA hai| isase kroSa kA kAla vizeSa adhika hai  /  Age bhI isI prakAra
yathAkrama se vizeSa adhika kAla jAnanA cAhiye  /  jo saMjvalana krodha ke udaya
se upazamazreNi kA ArohaNa karatA hai, usake jaba taka apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
krodha aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa koSa kA upazama nahIM hotA taba taka saMjvalana
krodha kA udaya rahatA hai  /  jo saMjvalana mAna ke udaya se upazamazreNi para
car3hatA hai usake jaba taka apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAna aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
mAna kA upazama nahIM hotA, taba taka saMjvalana mAna kA udaya rahatA hai| jo
saMjvalana mAyA ke udaya se upazamaveNi para car3hatA hai, usake jaba taka
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA kA aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA kA upazama nahIM hotA
taba taka saMjvalana mAyA kA udaya rahatA hai tathA jo saMjvalana lobha ke udaya
se upazamaNi para car3hatA hai, usake jaba taka apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa lobha aura
pratyAzyAnAvaraNa lobha kA upazama nahIM hotA taba taka saMjvalana lobha kA
udaya rahatA hai| _ jitane kAla ke dvArA sthitikhaMDa kA ghAta karatA hai yA
anya sthiti kA baMdha karatA hai, utane hI kAla ke dvArA antarakaraNa karatA
hai, kyoMki ina tInoM kA prAraMbha aura samApti eka sAtha hotI hai| tAtparya
yaha hai ki jisa samaya aMtarakaraNa kriyA kA AraMbha hotA hai, usI samaya anya
sthitikhaMDa ke ghAta kA aura anya sthitibaMdha kA bhI prAraMbha hotA hai aura
antarakaraNa kriyA ke samApta hone ke samaya hI inakI samApti bhI hotI hai  /
isa prakAra antarakaraNa ke dvArA jo antara sthApita kiyA jAtA hai, usakA
pramANa prathama sthiti se saMkhyAta guNA hai  /  antarakaraNa karate samaya
jina karmoM kA baMdha aura udaya hotA hai unake antarakaraNa saMbaMdhI dalikoM
ko prathama sthiti aura dvitIyasthiti meM kSepaNa karatA hai, jaise ki
puruSaveda ke udaya se

Page #450 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on the Sevenfold Classification  **4.12**  When a man, climbing the
ladder of virtue, experiences the **Jina** knowledge, the **dalikas** (minute
particles) related to his inner consciousness are thrown into the first state,
not the second, during the time of their arising, not their binding. This is
similar to the **dalikas** related to the female knowledge, which are thrown
into the first state during the arising of the female knowledge, not the second.
When a man, climbing the ladder of virtue, experiences the **karma** that binds
but does not arise, the **dalikas** related to his inner consciousness are
thrown into the second state, not the first. This is similar to the **dalikas**
related to the remaining **sanjvalana** (passion), which are thrown into the
second state during the arising of the **sanjvalana** of anger, not the first.
However, when a man, climbing the ladder of virtue, experiences the **karma**
that neither binds nor arises, the **dalikas** related to his inner
consciousness are thrown into other similar binding natures. This is similar to
the **dalikas** related to the second and third **kṣayās** (passions).  Now, we
will indicate the work done by the inner consciousness.  By inner consciousness,
the **neuter knowledge** is pacified. In the first stage, the least number of
**dalikas** are pacified. In the second stage, an innumerable number of
**dalikas** are pacified. In this way, until the final stage is reached, an
innumerable number of **dalikas** are pacified at each stage. At the same time,
an innumerable number of **dalikas** are thrown into other natures. This process
continues until the penultimate stage. In the final stage, an innumerable number
of **dalikas** are pacified, more than the number that are thrown into other
natures. After this, in one **antarmuhūrta** (a very short period of time), the
**female knowledge** is pacified. After this, in one **antarmuhūrta**, the six
**hāsyādi** (laughter, etc.) are pacified. The six **hāsyādi**...  **1**  For
detailed knowledge in this regard, one should refer to the **Karmapratikrama
Tika**. Here, only a brief explanation is given.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa 4 12 zreNi para car3hane vAlA puruSaveda kA jina kamI kA
antarakaraNa karate samaya udaya hI hotA hai, baMdha nahIM hotA unake
antarakaraNa saMbaMdhI dalikoM ko prathamasthiti meM hI kSepaNa karatA hai,
dvitIyasthiti meM nahIM, jaise strIveda ke udaya se zreNi para car3hane vAlA
strIveda kA  /  antara karane ke samaya jina karmoM kA udaya na hokara kevala
baMdha hI hotA hai, usake aMtarakaraNa saMbaMdhI dalika ko dvitIya sthiti meM hI
kSepaNa karatA hai, prathama sthiti meM nahIM; jaise saMjvalana krodha ke udaya
se zreNi para car3hane vAlA zeSa saMjvalanoM kaa| kintu antarakaraNa karane ke
samaya jina karmoM kA na to baMdha hI hotA hai aura na udaya hI, unake
antarakaraNa sambandhI dalikoM kA anya sajAtIya baMdhane vAlI prakRtiyoM meM
kSepaNa karatA hai; jaise dUsarI aura tIsarI kaSAyoM kaa| aba aMtarakaraNa dvArA
kiye jAne vAle kArya kA saMketa karate haiM  /  aMtarakaraNa karake
napuMsakaveda kA upazama karatA hai  /  pahale samaya meM sabase thor3e dalikoM
kA upazama karatA hai, dUsare samaya meM asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kA upazama
karatA hai| isa prakAra aMtima samaya prApta hone taka prati samaya
asaMkhyAtaguNe, asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kA upazama karatA hai tathA jisa samaya
jitane dalikoM kA upazama karatA hai, usa samaya dUsare asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM
kA para-prakRtiyoM meM kSepaNa karatA hai, kintu yaha krama upAntya samaya taka
hI cAlU rahatA hai| aMtima samaya meM to jitane dalikoM kA para prakRtiyoM meM
saMkramaNa hotA hai, usase asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kA upazama karatA hai  /
isake bAda eka antarmuhUrta meM strIveda kA upazama karatA hai| isake bAda eka
antamuhUrta meM hAsyAdi chaha kA upazama karatA hai  /  hAsyAdiSaTka kA 1 isa
saMbaMdhI vizeSa jJAna ke lie karmaprakRti TIkA dekhanA cAhiye  /  yahA~ to
saMkSepa meM prakAza DAlA hai  /

Page #451 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Pashta Karmagrantha  **413** Upon the subsidence of the six passions
(**upashama**), the bondage, arising, and excitation of the **purushaveda** and
the first state (**prathamasthiti**) are severed. However, this severance occurs
only until two **avali** remain in the first state. From this point onwards, the
**dalikas** of the six **nokashayas** are not thrown into the **purushaveda**,
but are thrown into **sanjwalan** (burning), anger, etc.  After the subsidence
of the six passions (laughter, etc.), the **purushaveda** subsides completely in
a period of two **avali** less than two **avali**. In the first period, the
subsidence of the fewest **dalikas** occurs. In the second period, the
subsidence of an innumerable number of **dalikas** occurs. In the third period,
the subsidence of an innumerable number of **dalikas** greater than the previous
period occurs. This subsidence continues in this manner until the end of the
period of two **avali** less than two **avali**. And until the period of two
**avali** less than two **avali**, the **dalikas** are deposited into the other
natures (**paraprakritis**) through the **sakrama** (action) that is occurring
at that time. In the first period, the deposition of many **dalikas** occurs. In
the second period, the deposition of particularly fewer **dalikas** occurs. In
the third period, the deposition of even fewer **dalikas** than the previous
period occurs. This should be understood in the same way until the final period.
When the six passions (laughter, etc.) subside and the first state of the
**purushaveda** weakens, the subsidence of **apratyakhyanavaran** anger,
**pratyakhyanavaran** anger, and **sanjwalan** anger begins simultaneously. When
one **avali** less than three **avali** remain in the first state of
**sanjwalan** anger, the **dalikas** of **apratyakhyanavaran** anger and
**pratyakhyanavaran** anger are not deposited into **sanjwalan** anger, but are
deposited into **sanjwalan** pride, etc.  **1**  In the two **avali**, the first
state is left behind. **Karmaprakriti** Chapter 107

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paSTha karmagrantha 413 upazama hote hI puruSaveda ke baMdha, udaya aura
udIraNA kA tathA prathamasthiti kA viccheda ho jAtA hai| kintu AgAla prathama
sthiti meM do AvalikA zeSa rahane taka hI hotA hai tathA isI samaya se chaha
nokaSAyoM ke dalikoM kA puruSaveda meM kSepaNa na karake saMjvalana krodha Adi
meM kSepaNa karatA hai  /  hAsyAdi chaha kA upazama ho jAne ke bAda eka samaya
kama do AvalikA kAla meM sakala puruSaveda kA upazama karatA hai  /  pahale
samaya meM sabase thor3e dalikoM kA upazama karatA hai| dUsare samaya meM
asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kA, tIsare samaya meM isase asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kA
upazama karatA hai| do samaya kama do AliyoM ke aMtima samaya taka isI prakAra
upazama karatA hai tathA do samaya kama do Avali kAla taka prati samaya
yathApravRtta sakrama ke dvArA paraprakRtiyoM meM dalikoM kA nikSepa karatA hai|
pahale samaya meM bahuta dalikoM kA nikSepa karatA hai, dUsare samaya meM vizeSa
hIna dalikoM kA nikSepa karatA hai, tIsare samaya meM isase vizeSa hIna dalakoM
kA nikSepa karatA hai  /  aMtima samaya taka isI prakAra jAnanA caahiye| jisa
samaya hAsyAdiSaTka kA upazama ho jAtA hai aura puruSaveda kI pradhama sthiti
kSINa ho jAtI hai, usake anantara samaya se apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha,
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kroSa aura saMjvalana krodha ke upazama karane kA eka sAtha
prAraMbha karatA hai tathA saMjvalana krodha kI prathama sthiti meM eka samaya
kama tIna AvalikA zeSa raha jAne para apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha aura
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha ke dalikoM kA saMjvalana krodha meM nikSepa na karake
saMjvalana mAnAdika meM nikSepa karatA 1 dusu mAvaliyAsu paDhamaThiIe sesAsu vi
ya bejho  /  karmaprakRti gA0 107

Page #452 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seven Tika  When two *avali* periods remain, there is no
*agala* (intense burning), but only *udirana* (arising). When one *avali* period
remains, the *bandha* (bond), *udaya* (arising), and *udirana* of *sanjvalana
krodha* (burning anger) are severed, and *apratyakhyanavaran krodha*
(unconcealed anger) and *pratyakhyanavaran krodha* (concealed anger) are
pacified. At that time, except for the *dalikas* (particles) bound by one
*avali* period in the first state and those bound by two *avali* periods minus
one *samaya* (moment) in the higher state, the remaining *dalikas* are pacified.
Then, the *dalikas* bound by one *avali* period in the first state are deposited
in the *sanjvalana mana* (burning mind) in sequence through *stibukasamkram* (a
process of gradual transfer), and the *dalikas* bound by two *avali* periods
minus one *samaya* are treated like *purushaveda* (a type of knowledge) and are
*manrita* (absorbed) by the *prakriti* (nature). In this way, after the
pacification of *apratyakhyanavaran krodha* and *pratyakhyanavaran krodha*, the
*sanjvalana krodha* is pacified in two *avali* periods minus one *samaya*.  From
the time the *bandha*, *udaya*, and *udirana* of *sanjvalana krodha* are
severed, until the second state of the *sanjvalana mana*, the *dalikas* are
brought back to their first state and *vedana* (feeling) occurs. When bringing
them back to the first state, in the first *samaya*, the fewest *dalikas* are
deposited. In the second *samaya*, an innumerable number of *dalikas* are
deposited. In the third *samaya*, an innumerable number of times more *dalikas*
are deposited. In this way, until the final *samaya* of the first state, an
innumerable number of times more *dalikas* are deposited.  **First State**  1.
In three *avali* periods, *apratyakhyanavaran* is *sanjalana* (burning). -
*Karma Prakriti* Chapter 107

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa hai tathA do Avali kAla zeSa rahane para AgAla nahIM hotA
hai kintu kevala udIraNA hI hotI hai aura eka AvalikA kAla ke zeSa raha jAne
para saMjvalana krodha ke baMdha, udaya aura udIraNA kA vicchoMda ho jAtA hai
aura apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha tathA pratyAsyAnAvaraNa krodha kA upazama ho
jAtA hai usa samaya saMjvalana krodha kI prathama sthitigata eka AvalikA pramANa
dalikoM ko aura uparitana sthitigata eka samaya kama do AvalikA kAla ke dvArA
baddha dalikoM ko chor3akara zeSa dalika upazAMta ho jAte haiM  /  /
tadanantara prathama sthitigata eka AvalikA pramANa dalikoM kA stibukasaMkrama
ke dvArA krama se saMjvalana mAna meM nikSepa karatA hai aura eka samaya kama do
AvalikA kAla meM baddha dalikoM kA puruSaveda ke samAna upAma karatA hai aura
para prakRti kA se maMRANa karatA hai| isa prakAra apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha ke upazama hone ke bAda eka samaya kama do AvalikA
kAla meM saMjvalana krodha kA upavAma ho jAtA hai  /  jisa samaya saMjvalana
krodha ke baMdha, udaya aura udIraNA ko viccheda hotA hai, usake anantara samaya
se lekara saMjvalana mAna kI dvitIya sthiti se dalikoM ko lekara unakI prathama
sthiti karake vedana karatA hai| prathama sthiti karate samaya prathama samaya
meM sabase thor3e dalikoM kA nikSepa karatA hai| dUsare samaya asaMkhyAtaguNe
dalikoM kA, tIsare samaya meM isase asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kA nikSepa karatA
hai| isa prakAra prathamasthiti ke aMtima samaya taka uttarottara asaMkhyAtaguNe
dalikoM kA nikSepa karatA hai| prathamasthiti 1 tisu AvalimAsu samaUNiyAsu
apaDiggahA u saMjalaNA  /  -karmaprakRti gA0 107

Page #453 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Group  From the first moment of its creation, it simultaneously
begins to subside along with the A-pratyakhyanavaran and Pratyakhyanavaran
Manas. When one time less than three Avaliya Kalas remain in the first state of
the Sanjvalan Mana, it does not project the A-pratyakhyanavaran and
Pratyakhyanavaran Manas's Dalikas into the Sanjvalan Mana, but instead projects
them into the Sanjvalan Maya Gati. With two remaining, there is no Agala, but
only Udirana. When one Avaliya Kala remains, the binding, arising, and Udirana
of the Sanjvalan Mana cease, and the A-pratyakhyanavaran and Pratyakhyanavaran
Manas subside. At that time, all Dalikas except for the one Avaliya Praman
Dalikas in the first state of the Sanjvalan Mana and the Dalikas bound in the
one time less than two Avaliya Kalas in the higher state subside.  **415**
Thereafter, it deposits the one Avaliya Praman Sanjvalan Mana Dalikas into the
Sanjvalan Maya through Titbuksankrama, and subsides the Dalikas bound in one
time less than two Avaliya Kalas like the Guru-Shveda, and transitions
naturally. In this way, after the A-pratyakhyanavaran and Pratyakhyanavaran
Manas subside, the Sanjvalan Mana subsides in one time less than two Avaliya
Kalas. From the time the binding, arising, and Udirana of the Sanjvalan Mana
cease, it takes the Dalikas from the second state of the Sanjvalan Maya and
brings them to their first state, causing them to experience Vedana. From that
same time, it simultaneously begins to subside the A-pratyakhyanavaran Maya,
Pratyakhyanavaran Maya, and Sanjvalan Maya. In the first state of the Sanjvalan
Maya, one time less than three...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 I SaSTha karmagramya karane ke prathama samaya se lekara apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
mAna, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAna aura saMjvalana mAna ke upazama karane kA eka
sAtha prAraMbha karatA hai| saMjvalana mAna kI prathamasthiti meM eka samaya
kama tIna AvalikA kAla ke zeSa rahane para apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAna aura
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAna ke dalikoM kA saMjvalana mAna meM prakSepa na karake
saMjvalana mAyA gAti meM pakSepa karatA hai do ke zeSa para AgAla nahIM hotA
kintu kevala udIraNA hI hotI hai| eka AvalikA kAla ke zeSa rahane para
saMjvalana mAna ke baMdha, udaya aura udIraNA kA viccheda ho jAtA hai tathA
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAna aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAna kA upazama ho jAtA hai  /
usa samaya saMjvalana mAna kI prathamasthitigata eka AvalikA pramANa dalikoM ko
aura uparitana sthitigata eka samaya kama do AvalikA kAla meM baddha dalikoM ko
chor3akara zeSa dalika upazAnta ho jAte haiM | 415 tadanantara prathama
sthitigata eka AvalikA pramANa saMjvalana mAna ke dalikoM kA titabukasaMkrama ke
dvArA kama se saMjvalana mAyA meM nikSepa karatA hai aura eka samaya kama do
AvalikA kAla meM baddha dalikoM kA guruSaveda ke samAna upazama karatA hai aura
para prakRti rUpa se saMkramaNa karatA hai| isa prakAra apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAna
aura pratyAkhyAtAvaraNa mAna ke upazama hone ke bAda eka samaya kama do AvalikA
kAla meM saMjvalana mAna kA upazama ho jAtA hai  /  jisa samaya saMjvalana mAna
ke baMdha, udaya aura udIraNA kA viccheda ho jAtA hai, usake anantara samaya se
lekara saMjvalana mAyA kI dvitIya sthiti se dalikoM ko lekara unakI prathama
sthiti karake vedana karatA hai tathA usI samaya se lekara apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
mAyA, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA aura saMjvalana mAyA ke upazama karane kA eka
sAtha prAraMbha karatA hai  /  saMjvalana mAyA kI prathamasthiti meM eka samaya
kama tIna

Page #454 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 416: The Seven-Fold Cycle  When seven *avali* cycles remain, the
*sanjvalana* *maya* does not project the *dalikas* of *apratyakhyanavaran*
*maya* and *pratyakhyanavaran* *maya* into *maya*, but projects them into
*lobha*. When two *avali* cycles remain, there is no *agala*, only *udirana*.
When one *avali* cycle remains, the *sanjvalana* *maya* is severed from its
bondage, arising, and *udirana*, and the *apratyakhyanavaran* and
*pratyakhyanavaran* *maya* subside. At that time, all *dalikas* except those
bound in the first position for one *avali* cycle and those bound in the higher
position for two *avali* cycles minus one time period, subside.  Then, the
*dalikas* bound in the first position for one *avali* cycle are deposited into
*sanjvalana* *maya* in sequence through the *stibukasakrama*, and the *dalikas*
bound for two *avali* cycles minus one time period subside like *purushaveda*
and transition naturally. In this way, after the *apratyakhyanavaran* *maya* and
*pratyakhyanavaran* *maya* subside, the *sanjvalana* *maya* subsides after two
*avali* cycles minus one time period.  From the time the *sanjvalana* *maya* is
severed from its bondage, arising, and *udirana*, the *dalikas* are taken from
the second position of *sanjvalana* *lobha* and are experienced for two-thirds
of their *lobha* *vedaka* time period, establishing the first position. The
first third is called the *ashvakarnakarana* time period, and the second third
is called the *kittikaranakala*. In the first *ashvakarnakarana* time period,
the *dalikas* are taken from the previous competitors and become new
competitors.  **Explanation of Competitor:**  A living being is constantly made
up of an infinite number of atoms in the form of *skandhas*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 416 saptasikA prakaraNa AlikA kAla ke zeSa rahane para apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA
aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA ke dalikoM kA saMjvalana mAyA meM prakSepa na
karake saMjvalana lobha meM prakSepa karatA hai| do Avali kAla ke zeSa rahane
para AgAla nahIM hotA kintu kevala udIraNA hI hotI hai| eka AvalikA kAla zeSa
rahane para saMjvalana mAyA ke baMdha, udaya aura udIraNA kA viccheda ho jAtA
hai tathA apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA kA upazama ho jAtA
hai  /  usa samaya saMjvalana mAyA kI prathama sthitigata eka AvalikA pramANa
dalikoM ko aura uparitana sthitigata eka samaya kama do AvalikA kAla meM baddha
dalikoM ko chor3akara zeSa dalika upazAnta ho jAte haiN| anantara
prathamasthitigata eka AvalikA pramANa dalikoM kA stibukasakrama ke dvArA krama
se saMjvalana mAyA meM nikSepa karatA hai aura eka samaya kama do AvalikA kAla
meM baddha dalikoM kA puruSaveda ke samAna upazama karatA hai aura para-prakRti
rUpa se saMkramaNa karatA hai  /  isa prakAra apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA aura
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA ke upazama hone ke bAda eka samaya kama do AvalikA kAla
meM saMjvalana mAyA kA upazama ho jAtA hai  /  jisa samaya saMjvalana mAyA ke
baMdha, udaya aura udIraNA kA viccheda hotA hai, usake anantara samaya se lekara
saMjvalana lobha kI dvitIyasthiti se dalikoM ko lekara unakI lobha vedaka kAla
ke tIna bhAgoM meM se do bhAga pramANa prathama sthiti karake vedana karatA hai
/  inameM se pahale tribhAga kA nAma azvakarNakaraNa kAla hai aura dUsare
vibhAga kA nAma kiTTIkaraNakAla hai| prathama azvakarNakaraNa kAla meM pUrva
spardhakoM se dalikoM ko lekara apUrva spardhaka karatA hai  /  spardhaka kI
vyAkhyA jIva prati samaya anantAnanta paramANuoM se bane hue skaMdhoM ko 6 3

Page #455 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixth karma grantha receives karma in its form. In each of these skandhas,
the most subtle rasa-filled atom, when pierced by the intellect, obtains
infinite times more indivisible intersections than all beings. Other atoms
obtain one more indivisible intersection. Thus, one should increase the
indivisible intersections of rasa in each atom by one, until the infinite part
of the Siddhas obtains more of its indivisible intersections. Here, the
community of as many atoms as there are with the most subtle rasa is called a
vargana. The community of atoms with one more rasa is called the second vargana.
The community of atoms with two more rasa is called the tatri vargana. Thus, the
total number of varganas is obtained from the infinite part of the Siddhas or
from the infinite times more than the abhanyas. The community of all these
varganas is called a spardhak.  Other adi spardhaks are also obtained in the
same way, but with this special feature: in each varga of the last vargana of
the first adi spardhak, there are infinite times more indivisible intersections
of rasa than all beings in each varga of the first vargana of the second adi
spardhak, and then the indivisible intersections of rasa increase by one until
the last vargana of their respective spardhaks. All these spardhaks are
appropriate from the beginning of the worldly beings. Therefore, they are called
purva spardhaks. But here, the dalikas are taken from them and their rasa is
made extremely low, therefore they are called apurva spardhaks.  This means that
in the state of the world, this being had never made such spardhaks in relation
to bondage, but now it does so due to the intensity of purification, therefore
they are called apurva spardhaks.  This action is performed in the first
division. In the second division, the purva...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha karma rUpa se grahaNa karatA hai| inameM se pratyeka
skaMdha meM jo sabase jaghanya rasa ghAlA paramANu hai, usake buddhi se cheda
karane para saba jIvoM se anaMtaguNe avibhAga praticcheda prApta hote haiN| anya
paramANuoM meM eka adhika avibhAga praticcheda prApta hote haiN| isa prakAra
siddhoM ke anaMtaveM bhAga adhika isake avibhAga praticcheda prApta hone taka
pratyeka paramANu meM rasa kA eka-eka avibhAga praticcheda bar3hAte jAnA cAhiye
/  yahAM jaghanya rasa vAle jitane paramANu hote haiM, unake samudAya ko eka
vargaNA kahate haiN| eka adhika rasavAle paramANuoM ke samudAya ko dUsarI
vargaNA kahate haiM  /  do adhika rasa vAle paramANuoM ke samudAya ko tatirI
vargaNA kahate haiN| isa prakAra kula bagaMjAyeM siddhoM ke anaMtaH bhAga
pramANa yA abhanyoM se anaMtaguNI prApta hotI hai| ina saba vargaNAoM ke
samudAya ko eka spardhaka kahate haiN| dUsare Adi spardhaka bhI isI prakAra
prApta hote haiM kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki prathama Adi spardhakoM kI aMtima
vargaNA ke pratyeka varga meM jitane avibhAga praticcheda hote haiM, dUsare Adi
spardhaka kI prathama vargaNA ke pratyeka varga meM saba jIvoM se anantaguNe
rasa ke avibhAga praticcheda hote haiM aura phira apane-apane spardhaka kI
aMtima vargaNA taka rasa kA eka-eka avibhAga praticcheda bar3hatA jAtA hai  /
ye saba spardhaka saMsArI jIvoM ke prAraMbha se hI yathAyogya hote haiN| isaliye
inheM pUrva spardhaka kahate haiN| kintu yahA~ para unameM se dalikoM ko le-
lekara unake rasa ko atyanta hIna kara diyA jAtA hai, isaliye unako apUrva
spardhaka kahate haiM  /  isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki saMsAra avasthA meM isa
jIva ne baMdha kI apekSA kabhI bhI aise spardhaka nahIM kiye the, kintu vizuddhi
ke prakarSa se isa samaya karatA hai, isaliye inako apUrva spardhaka kahA jAtA
hai| yaha kriyA pahale vibhAga meM kI jAtI hai| dUsare vibhAga meM pUrva

Page #456 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 418: The Sapta-Tika  Taking the Dalikas from among the competitors
and the unprecedented competitors, it makes infinite Kittis at every moment,
that is, by taking the classifications from the previous competitors and the
unprecedented competitors and reducing their essence by an infinite factor, it
creates intervals in the indivisible segments of Rasa. For example, let's say
the indivisible segments of Rasa were one hundred and one and one hundred and
two, they are reduced to five, fifteen, and twenty-five. This is called
Kittikaran.  At the end of the Kittikaran period, the A-pratyakhyanavaran Lobha
subdues the Pratyakhyanavaran Lobha, and at the same time, the Sanjvalan Lobha
is unbound. With the rise of the Badar Sanjvalan and the cessation of Udirana,
the ninth Gunasthan ends. Up to this point, twenty-five natures of Mohaniya are
subdued. With the subduing of A-pratyakhyanavaran-Pratyakhyanavaran Lobha,
twenty-seven natures are subdued. After this comes the Sukhmasampray Gunasthan.
Its duration is an Antarmuhurta. In the beginning of this period, it takes some
Kittis from the higher state and makes them return to their original state for
the duration of the Sukhmasampray period, and it subdues the remaining Dalikas,
which are bound in two Avaliks and have attained the subtle state, in one less
period.  Then, at the end of the Sukhmasampray Gunasthan, the Sanjvalan Lobha is
subdued. In this way, twenty-eight natures of Mohaniya are subdued. At the same
time, the Jnanavaran is subdued by five,  1. The number of subdued natures up to
the Anivriti-Badar Gunasthan is as follows:     * Twenty-two, sixteen, eighteen,
twenty, twenty-two, twenty-five, twenty-six, and then twenty-eight.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 418 saptatikA prakaraNa spardhakoM aura apUrva spardhAkoM meM se dalikoM ko le-
lekara prati samaya ananta kiTTiyAM karatA arthAt pUrva spardhakoM aura apUrva
spardhakoM se vargaNAoM ko grahaNa karake aura unake rasa ko anantaguNA hIna
karake rasa ke avibhAga praticchedoM meM aMtarAla kara detA hai| jaise, mAnalo
rasa ke avibhAga praticcheda, so, eka sau eka aura eka sau do the, unheM ghaTA
kara kama se pAMca, paMdraha aura paccIsa kara diyA, isI kA nAma kiTTIkaraNa
hai| kiTTIkaraNa kAla ke antima samaya meM apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa lobha,
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa lobha kA upazama karatA hai tathA usI samaya saMjvalana lobha
kA baMdhaviccheda hotA hai aura bAdara saMjvalana ke udaya tathA udIraNA ke
viccheda ke sAtha nauveM guNasthAna kA aMta ho jAtA hai| yahAM taka mohanIya kI
paccIsa prakRtiyA~ upazAMta ho jAtI haiN|' apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa-
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa lobha ke upazAnta ho jAne para sattAIsa prakRtiyA~ upazAnta
ho jAtI haiN| isake bAda sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna hotA hai| isakA kAla
antarmuhUrta hai  /  isake pahale samaya meM uparitana sthiti meM se kucha
kiTTiyoM ko lekara sUkSmasaMparAya kAla ke barAbara unakI prathamasthiti karake
vedana karatA hai aura eka samaya kama do AvalikA meM baMdhe hue sUkSma avasthA
ko prApta zeSa dalikoM kA upazama karatA hai| tadanantara sUkSmasaMparAya
guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM saMjvalana lobha kA upazama ho jAtA hai| isa
prakAra mohanIya kI aTThAIsa prakRtiyAM upazAnta ho jAtI haiM aura usI samaya
jJAnAvaraNa ko pAMca, 1 anivRttibAdara guNasthAna taka upazAMta prakRtiyoM kI
saMkhyA isa prakAra hai sasaddha naya ya panarasa solasa aTThAraseva igubIsA  /
egAhi du pacavIsA paNIsA bAyare jANa  /  /

Page #457 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Group  - There are sixteen natures: four of Darshanavarana, five
of Antaray, and Yash:Kiti and high lineage. These sixteen natures experience
bondage and liberation.  - After this, in the next time period, the eleventh
Gunasthan, Upshantakashaya, occurs. In this, all the natures of Mohaniya are
quieted. The minimum time period of Upshantakashaya Gunasthan is one time
period, and the maximum is the time period of Usmsrushta Karma Antarmui. - When
the Arohak of Upshamani reaches the eleventh Upshantamoha Gunasthan, it then
falls according to the rules. This fall happens in two ways: Bhavakshaya and
Adhakshaya. The fall that happens when the lifespan ends is called Bhavakshaya.
Bhava means Paryaya (cycle) and Kshaya means destruction. The fall that happens
when the time period of Upshantakashaya Gunasthan ends is called Adhakshaya. -
The one who falls due to Bhavakshaya, in the next time period, attains the
Aviraat Samyagdristi Gunasthan. Before that time period, the beginning of all
Karmas, including Bandha, occurs. But the one who falls due to Adhakshaya, i.e.,
the fall that happens after the time period of Upshantamoha Gunasthan ends,
falls in the same order as it ascended. When it reaches the point where the
destruction of a particular Karma occurred, the beginning of that Karma starts
again, and the Jiva stops at the Prammat Sanyat Gunasthan. Some attain the
Deshavirat and Aviraat Samyagdristi Gunasthan, and some attain the Sasadan
Bhava. - Generally, one attains Upshamani once in a Bhava. Sometimes, a Jiva may
attain Upshamani twice... - - - - 27th Suhme, 28th Mi, Mohapedeyo. -
Upsantbiyarage Uvsanta Hoti Nayana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrAma - - darzanAvaraNa kI cAra, aMtarAya kI pAMca, yaza:kIti aura
ucca gotra, ina solaha prakRtiyoM kA baMdhaviccheda hotA hai  /  isake bAda
dUsare samaya meM gyArahavA guNasthAna upazAntakaSAya hotA hai| isameM mohanIya
kI saba prakRtiyA~ upazAMta rahatI haiN|' upazAMtakaSAya guNasthAna kA jaghanya
kAla eka samaya aura usmRSTa kAma antarmuI hai| upazamaNi ke Arohaka ke
gyArahaveM upazAMtamoha guNasthAna meM pahu~cane para, isake bAda niyama se
usakA patana hotA hai| patana do prakAra se hotA hai-bhavakSaya se aura
addhAkSaya se  /  Ayu ke samApta ho jAne para jo patana hotA hai vaha bhavakSaya
se hone vAlA patana hai  /  bhava arthAt paryAya aura kSaya arthAt vinAza tathA
upazAMtakaSAya guNasthAna ke kAla ke samApta ho jAne para jo patana hotA hai
vaha addhAkSaya se hone vAlA patana hai| jisakA bhavakSaya se patana hotA hai,
usake anantara samaya meM avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna hotA hai aura usake
pahale samaya meM hI bandha Adi saba karaNoM kA prArambha ho jAtA hai  /  kintu
jisakA addhAkSaya se patana hotA hai arthAt upazAMtamoha guNasthAna kA kAla
samApta hone ke anantara jo patana hotA hai, vaha jisa krama se car3hatA hai,
usI krama se giratA hai| isake jahAM jisa karaNa kI vyucchitti huI, vahA~
pahuMcane para usa karaNa kA prArambha hotA hai aura yaha jIva pramatta saMyata
guNasthAna meM jAkara ruka jAtA hai| koI-koI dezavirata aura avirata samyagdRSTi
guNasthAna ko bhI prApta hotA hai tathA koI sAsAdana bhAva ko bhI prApta hotA
hai| _sAdhAraNata: eka bhava meM eka bAra upazamaNi ko prApta hotA hai| kadAcit
koI jIva do bAra bhI upazamaNi ko prApta hotA hai, ...- -. . .- 1 sattAvIsaM
suhume aTThAvIsa mi mohpyddiiyo| upasaMtabIyarAge uvasaMtA hoti nAyanA  /  /

Page #458 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **420**  The chapter on the seven types of *upashamana* does
not occur more than this. The one who attains *upashamana* twice does not have
*kshapikani* in that existence, but the one who attains *upashamana* once, may
have *kshapikani*.  Although the *gatha* mentions the *sanat* qualities,
*gunadhi*, *yamuna*, and *mohak* as *upashamana* of the seven types and
indicates their order, the commentator Acharya Malayagiri, in this context, has
also discussed the *visanyojana* of *anantaanubandhi* and the *upashamana* of
*charitra mohaniya*.  After stating *upashamana*, the desire to state
*kshapikashreni* arises. Before that, it is indicated where and in what order
the attainment of *kshayika samyaktv* occurs.  **"Padhamakasayachaupkham etto
micchassameesassammatam. Avirya dese virae pamatti apamatti khoyanthi." (63)**
**Word Meaning:**  * *Padhamakasayachakkam* - The first four *kashayas* (the
four *kashayas* of *anantaanubandhi*) * *Etto* - Thereafter, after this *
*Micchassameesassammat* - Falsehood, mixed, and *ramyaktv* *mohaniya* * *Avirya*
- Uninterrupted *samyagdristi* * *Vese* - Country-renounced * *Virae* -
Renounced * *Pamatti* - Mindful * *Apamatti* - Unmindful * *Khoyanthi* - Decay,
destruction  **Meaning of the *gatha*:**  In the four *gunasthanas* of
uninterrupted *samyagdristi*, country-renounced, mindful-renounced, and
unmindful-renounced, the destruction of falsehood, mixed, and *ramyaktv*
*mohaniya* occurs.  **"Jo duve vare javsamsevin padivajji tassa niyama tammi
bhave khavgashedi natthi, jo ekkaasi unsamsehi padivajji tassa svavagaseti hojji
va."**  - **Complete:** But according to the meaning of the *agama*, it occurs
once in one existence.  **"Mohopashama ekasmin bhave dwi: smadasantatah. Yasmin
bhave tupashamah kshayo mohasya satra na."**  - **Complete:** The destruction of
*moha* occurs twice in one existence. In that existence, the destruction of
*moha* is not *kshayika*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 420 saptatikA prakaraNa isase adhika bAra nhiiN| jo do bAra upazamaNi ko prApta
hotA hai, usake usa bhava meM kSapakaNi nahIM hotI hai lekina jo eka vAra
upazamazreNi ko prApta hotA hai, usake kSapakaNi hotI bhI hai| gAthA meM yadyapi
sanAta guNAdhI yamunA aura mohaki isa sAta prakRtiyoM kA upazama kahA hai aura
usakA krama nirdeza kiyA hai. parantu prasaMga se yahAM TIkAkAra AcArya
malayagiri ne anantAnubandhI kI visaMyojanA aura cAritra mohanIya kI upazamanA
kA bhI vivecana kiyA hai| isa prakAra upazamaNi kA kathana karane ke bAda aba
kSapakazreNi ke kathana karane kI icchA se pahale kSAyika samyaktva kI prApti
kahAM aura kisa krama se hotI hai, usakA nirdeza karate haiN|
paDhamakasAyacaupakaM etto micchatsamIsasammattaM  /  aviraya dese virae pamatti
apamatti khoyaMti  // 63 //  zabdArtha-pasamakasAyacajakkaM-prathama kaSAya
catuSka (anattAnu. bandhI kaSAya catuSka) etto-tadanantara, isake bAda,
micchasamIsasammata-mithyAtva, mizra aura rAmyakatva mohanIya kA, avirayaavirata
samyagdRSTi, vese- dezavirata, virae-virata, pati apatti pramatta aura
apramatta, khoyaMti-kSaya hotA hai| gAthArtha- avirata samyagdRSTi, dezavirata,
pramattavirata aura apramattavirata, ina cAra guNasthAnoM meM se kisI eka 1 jo
duve vAre javasamaseviM paDivajjai tassa niyamA tammi bhave khavagaseDhI natthi,
jo ekkAsi unasamasehi paDivajjai tassa svavagasetI hojja vA  /  /  -pUrNi lekina
Agama ke abhiprAyAnusAra eka mava meM eka bAra hotI hai mohopazama ekasmin bhaye
dvi: smAdasantataH  /  yasmin mave tUpazamaH kSayo mohasya satra na  /  /

Page #459 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Karma Granth of the Vashta  **Chapter 421**  The fourfold *kṣaya*
(destruction) of the *ananta-anubandhi* (infinitely connected) *kaṣāya*
(passions) in the *guṇasthāna* (stages of spiritual development), followed by
the destruction of *mithyātva* (false belief), *miśra* (mixed), and *samyaktva-
mohaniya* (delusion of right belief), occurs in a specific order.
**Explanation:**  After discussing the *upaśama-śreṇī* (stages of pacification)
in the previous verse, this verse introduces the *kṣapaka-śreṇī* (stages of
destruction) as the initial preparation for the *kṣapaka-śreṇī*.  In the
*upaśama-śreṇī*, the nature of the *mohaniya* (delusive) karmas is pacified. In
the *kṣapaka-śreṇī*, they are destroyed. This means that in the *upaśama-śreṇī*,
the nature of the karmas remains, but the *dalika* (individual soul) experiences
an internal transformation for a brief moment, becoming incapable of
experiencing the effects of the karmas. However, in the *kṣapaka-śreṇī*, the
karmas are completely destroyed.  One might argue that the karmas could be
reborn through *bandha* (binding). However, this is not possible because it is a
rule that the karmas of a *samyagdṛṣṭi* (rightly seeing) individual are
completely destroyed, and they are not subject to *bandha* or the transformation
into other karmas. Therefore, the rebirth of such karmas is impossible.
However, the fourfold *ananta-anubandhi* karmas are an exception to this rule.
Their destruction is described using the term "tri-saṁyoga" (threefold union).
After this discussion, we will now examine the *kṣapaka-śreṇī*. First, we will
discuss the qualifications of the individual who can experience it.  **The
Beginning of the *Kṣapaka-śreṇī***  The *kṣapaka-śreṇī* begins only for those
who are over eight years old, possess *uttama-saṁhanana* (excellent
concentration), are in the fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh *guṇasthāna*, and
are *jīnakālika* (living in the time of a Tirthankara). It does not begin for
anyone else.  First, the *ananta...*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaSTha karmagrantha guNasthAna meM anantAnubandhI kaSAya catuSka kA aura
tadanantara mithyAtva mizra aura samyaktva mohanIya kA krama se kSaya 421 P hotA
hai  /  vizeSa - pUrvagAthA meM upazamazreNi kA kathana karane ke bAda isa gAthA
meM kSapakazreNi kI prArambhika taiyArI ke rUpa meM kSapaka zreNi kI bhUmikA kA
nirdeza kiyA gayA hai| upazamazreNi meM mohanIya karma kI prakRtiyoM kA upazama
kiyA jAtA hai aura kSapakazreNi meM unakA kSaya arthAt upazamazreNi meM
prakRtiyoM kI sattA to banI rahatI hai kintu antarmuhUrta pramANa dalikoM kA
antarakaraNa ho jAtA hai aura dvitIyasthiti meM sthita dalika saMkramaNa Adi ke
ayogya ho jAte haiM, jisase antarmuhUrta kAla taka unakA phala prApta nahIM hotA
hai| kintu kSapakazreNi meM unakA samUla nAza ho jAtA hai| kadAcita yaha mAnA
jAye ki baMdhAdi ke dvArA unakI puna: sattA prApta ho jAyegI so bhI bAta nahIM
kyoMki aisA niyama hai ki samyagdRSTi ke jina prakRtiyoM kA samUla kSaya ho jAtA
hai, unakA na to baMdha hI hotA hai aura na tadrUpa anya prakRtiyoM kA saMkrama
hI  /  isalie aisI sthiti meM punaH aisI prakRtiyoM kI sattA sambhava nahIM hai|
hAM, anantAnubandhI catuSka isa niyama kA apavAda hai, isaliye usakA kSaya
trisaMyojanA zabda ke dvArA kahA jAtA hai| isa prAsaMgika carcA ke pazcAt aba
kSapakazreNi kA vivecana karate haiN| sarvaprathama usake kartA kI yogyatA Adi
ko batalAte haiM  /  kSapakabheNa kA AraMbhaka pakazreNi kA Arambha ATha varSa
se adhika Ayu vAle uttama saMhanana ke dhAraka, cauthe, pAMcaveM, chaThe yA
sAtaveM guNasthAnavartI jinakAlika manuSya ke hI hotA hai, anya ke nhiiN| sabase
pahale vaha anaMtA

Page #460 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter of the Seven Tika #### 422  This section deals with the
disassociation of the fourfold bond. Subsequently, it initiates the simultaneous
destruction of false belief, right-false belief, and right belief. For this,
there are three causes, namely, the "Yathapravritta" and the other two. The
description of these causes has already been given, and it should be understood
in the same way here. However, there is a special feature: in the initial stage
of the "Apuurvakaran," the "Dalikas" of false belief and right-false belief are
deposited into right belief through "Gunasanakrama." Also, in the
"Apuurvakaran," there is a "Uvalana Sanakrama" of both. In this, first, the
"Uvalana" of the largest "Sthitikhanda" is done. Subsequently, the "Uvalana" of
each individual smaller "Sthitikhanda" is done. This process continues until the
end of the "Apuurvakaran." Due to this, the number of "Sthitikhandas" at the end
of the "Apuurvakaran" becomes infinitely smaller than the number at the
beginning.  After this, it enters the "Anivritikaran." Here also, the functions
like "Sthitighāt" continue as before. In the initial stage of the
"Anivritikaran," the "Deshopaśamana," "Nirdhātti," and "Nikachana" of the
"Darsanatrika" are severed. From the initial stage of the "Anivritikaran"
onwards, after the destruction of thousands of "Sthitikhandas," the "Sthiti-
satta" of the "Darsanatrika" remains suitable for the "Asangni." After this,
after the destruction of a thousand "Prithaktva-pramāna" "Sthitikhandas," the
"Sthiti-satta" remains suitable for the four-sensory being. After this, after
the destruction of the aforementioned "Pramāna" "Sthitikhandas," the "Sthiti-
satta" remains suitable for the three-sensory being. After this, after the
destruction of the aforementioned "Pramāna" "Sthitikhandas," the "Sthiti-satta"
remains suitable for the two-sensory being. After this, after the destruction of
the aforementioned "Pramāna" "Sthitikhandas," the "Sthiti-satta" remains
suitable for the one-sensory being.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa 422 nubaMdhI catuSka kA visaMyojana karatA hai| tadanantara
mithyAtva, samyag - mithyAtva aura samyaktva kI eka sAtha kSapaNA kA prArambha
karatA hai  /  isake liye yathApravRtta Adi tIna karaNa hote haiN| ina kAraNoM
kA kathana pahale kiyA jA cukA hai, usI prakAra yahA~ bhI jAnanA caahiye| kintu
itanI vizeSatA hai ki apUrvakaraNa ke pahale samaya meM anudayarUpa mithyAtva
aura samya midhyAtva ke dalikoM kA guNasaMkrama ke dvArA samyaktva meM nikSepa
kiyA jAtA hai tathA apUrvakaraNa meM ina donoM kA uvalanA saMkrama bhI hotA hai|
isameM sarvaprathama sabase bar3e sthitikhaNDa kI udbalanA kI jAtI hai|
tadanantara eka-eka vizeSa kama sthitikhaNDoM kI uvalanA kI jAtI hai| yaha krama
apUrvakaraNa ke antima samaya taka cAlU rahatA hai| isase apUrvakaraNa ke pahale
samaya meM jitanI sthiti hotI hai, usase antima samaya meM saMkhyAtaguNahIna
yAni saMkhyA. tavAM bhAga sthiti raha jAtI hai| isake bAda anivRttikaraNa meM
praveza kara jAtA hai| yahAM bhI sthitighAta Adi kArya pahale ke samAna cAlU
rahate haiN| anivRttikaraNa ke pahale samaya meM darzanatrika kI dezopazamanA,
nirdhAtti aura nikAcanA kA viccheda ho jAtA hai  /  anivRttikaraNa ke pahale
samaya se lekara hajAroM sthitikhaNDoM kA ghAta ho jAne para darzanatrika kI
sthitisattA asaMjJI ke yogya zeSa raha jAtI hai| isake bAda hajAra pRthaktva
pramANa sthitikhaNDoM kA ghAta ho jAne para caturindriya jIva ke yogya
sthitisattA zeSa rahatI haiN| isake bAda ukta pramANa sthitikhaNDoM kA ghAta ho
jAne para zrIndriya jIva ke yogya sthitisattA zeSa rahatI hai| isake bAda punaH
ukta pramANa sthitikhaNDoM kA ghAta ho jAne para dvIndriya jIva ke yogya
sthitisattA zeSa rahatI hai| isake bAda punaH ukta pramANa sthitikhaNDoM kA
ghAta ho jAne para ekendriya jIva ke yogya sthitisattA zeSa rahatI hai|

Page #461 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  After that, it destroys a large portion of the three
natures, leaving only a small part. Then, it destroys a large portion of the
remaining part, leaving only a small part. In this way, it destroys thousands of
*sthiti-khandas* in this sequence. After that, it destroys countless parts of
the *mithyatva* state and a countable number of parts of the *samyamithyatva*
and *samyaktava* states.   As a result of the passing of these numerous *sthiti-
khandas*, only a *dalik* of *mithyatva* remains, and an immeasurable fraction of
*dalik* of *samyamithyatva* and *samyaktava* remains.   While destroying these
*sthiti-khandas*, the *dalik* related to *mithyatva* is considered as
*sayamithyatva*. The *dalik* related to *samyamithyatva* is deposited in
*samyaktava*, and the *dalik* related to *samyaktava* is deposited in the
*dalik* of a lower state.   In this way, when only one *dalik* of *mithyatva*
remains, it is also deposited in *samyaktava* through *stibhuka-samkrama*. After
that, it destroys countless parts of *samyamithyatva* and *samyaktava*, leaving
only one part. Then, it destroys countless parts of that remaining part, leaving
only one part. In this way, after the passing of many *sthiti-khandas* in this
sequence, only one *dalik* of *samyamithyatva* and eight *varsha* of
*samyaktava* remain.  At this time, this being is considered a destroyer of
*darshan-mohaniya* from the perspective of *nishchayanya*. After this, it
initiates the *utkirana* of the *antar-mahurta* of *samyaktava*. While
initiating *utkirana*, it deposits the *dalik* from the time of its emergence.
It deposits the fewest *dalik* at the first time, countless times more *dalik*
at the second time, and countless times more *dalik* at the third time. In this
way, it...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 423 tadanantara tInoM prakRtiyoM kI sthiti ke eka bhAga ko
chor3akara zeSa bahubhAga kA ghAta karatA hai. tathA usake bAda puna: eka bhAga
ko chor3akara zeSa bahubhAga kA ghAta karatA hai| isa prakAra isa krama se bhI
hajAroM sthitikhaMkhoM kA ghAta karatA hai  /  tadanantara mithyAtva kI sthiti
ke asaMkhyAta bhAgoM kA tathA samyamithyAtva aura samyaktva ke saMkhyAta bhAgoM
kA ghAta karatA hai| isa prakAra prabhUta sthitikhaMDoM ke vyatIta ho jAne para
mithyAtva ke dalika AbalipramANa zeSa rahate haiM tathA samyamithyAtva aura
samyaktva ke dalika palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa zeSa rahate haiN|
uparyukta ina sthitikhaMDoM kA ghAta karate samaya mithyAtva sambandhI palikoM
kA sAyamithyAlA mAnyatA hai. samyamithyAtva sambandhI dalikoM kA samyaktva meM
aura samyavatva sambandhI dalikoM kA apane se kama sthiti vAle dalikoM meM
nikSepa kiyA jAtA hai| isa prakAra jaba mithyAtva ke eka Avali pramANa dalika
zeSa rahate haiM taba unakA bhI stibukasaMkrama ke dvArA samyaktva meM nikSepa
kiyA jAtA hai| tadanantara samyamithyAtva aura samyaktva ke asaMkhyAta bhAgoM kA
ghAta karatA hai aura eka bhAga zeSa rahatA hai| tadanantara jo eka bhAga bacatA
hai, usake asaMkhyAta bhAgoM kA ghAta karatA hai aura eka bhAga zeSa rahatA hai|
isa prakAra isa krama se kitane hI sthitikhaMDoM ke vyatIta ho jAne para
samyagamithyAtva kI bhI eka Avali pramANa aura samyaktva kI ATha varSe pramANa
sthiti zeSa rahatI hai| isI samaya yaha jIva nizcayanaya kI dRSTi se darzana-
mohanIya kA kSapaka mAnA jAtA hai| isake bAda samyaktva ke antarmahurta pramANa
sthiti khaMDa kI utkIraNA karatA hai  /  utkIraNA karate samaya dalika kA udaya
samaya se lekara nikSepa karatA hai| udaya samaya meM sabase thor3e dalikoM kA
nikSepa karatA hai  /  dUsare samaya meM asaMkhyAta guNe dalikoM kA, tIsare
samaya meM asaMkhyAtaguNe dalikoM kA nikSepa karatA hai| isa prakAra yaha

Page #462 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Seven Tika  The **guna-shreni** continues until the end.
After that, it deposits fewer and fewer **dalikas** until the final state is
reached.  This process continues until the **dvi-charam sthiti-khand** is
attained. However, the **dvi-charam sthiti-khand** is numerically larger than
the final **sthiti-khand**. When the being has completely eradicated the final
**sthiti-khand** of **samyak-tva**, it is called **krit-karan**. If a being dies
during this **krit-karan** period, it is born in any of the four **gatis**
according to its **par-bhav** related lifespan. At this time, it also attains
other **leshyas** except for the **shukla leshya**. Thus, the destruction of
**darshan-mohaniya** begins in the human **gati**, but its completion occurs in
all four **gatis**. As it is said:  **"Patthavago umanusso, nitthavago vigai."**
The destruction of **darshan-mohaniya** begins in the human **gati**, but its
completion occurs in all four **gatis**.  If a **bandha-ayushk** being begins
the **kshapka-shreni**, then after the destruction of the **ananta-anubandhi
chatushk**, it is possible for it to be nourished. In that situation, due to the
rise of **mithyatva**, this being again accumulates **ananta-anubandhi** through
**bandha** and **samkrama**, because in the rise of **mithyatva**, the **ananta-
anubandhi** exists by rule. But the one who has destroyed **mithyatva** does not
accumulate the **ananta-anubandhi chatushk** again. After the destruction of the
seven **prakritis**, the one whose **parinam** does not change, dies and is born
in the **deva** **gati** by rule.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa guNazreNi ke anta taka cAlU rahatA hai| isake Age antima
sthiti prApta hone taka uttarottara kama kama dalikoM kA nikSepa karatA hai  /
424 yaha krama dvicarama sthitikhaMDa ke prApta hone taka cAlU rahatA hai  /
kintu dvicarama sthitikhaMDa se antima sthitikhaMDa saMkhyAtaguNA bar3A hotA hai
/  jaba yaha jIva samyaktva ke antima sthitikhaMDa kI utkIraNA kara cukatA hai
taba use kRtakaraNa kahate haiN| isa kRtakaraNa ke kAla meM yadi koI jIva maratA
hai to vaha cAroM gatiyoM meM se parabhava sambandhI Ayu ke anusAra kisI bhI
gati meM utpanna hotA hai ! isa samaya yaha zukla lezyA ko chor3akara anya
lezyAoM ko bhI prApta hotA hai| isa prakAra darzanamohanIya kI kSapaNA kA
prArambha manuSya hI karatA hai| kintu usakI samApti cAroM gatiyoM meM hotI hai|
kahA bhI hai paTThavago umaNUso, niTThavago vigii| darzanamohanIya kI kSapaNA kA
prArambha manuSya hI karatA hai kintu usakI samApti cAroM gatiyoM meM hotI hai
/  yadi baddhAyuSka jIva kSapakazreNi kA prArambha karatA hai to anantAnubaMdhI
catuSka kA kSaya ho jAne ke pazcAt usakA bharaNa honA bhI sambhava hai  /  usa
sthiti meM mithyAtva kA udaya ho jAne se yaha jIva punaH anantAnubaMdhI kA
baMdha aura saMkrama dvArA saMcaya karatA hai, kyoMki mithyAtva ke udaya meM
anantAnubaMdhI kI niyama se sattA pAI jAtI hai  /  kintu jisane mithyAtva kA
kSaya kara diyA hai, vaha punaH anantAnubaMdhI catuSka kA saMcaya nahIM karatA
hai| sAta prakRtiyoM kA kSaya ho jAne para jisake pariNAma nahIM badale vaha
marakara niyama se devoM meM utpanna hotA

Page #463 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
425 The sixth karma is called *karma*, but it is also born in other destinies
according to the results that change. Even if a bound-life being does not die at
that time, it remains there when the seven *prakritis* are destroyed, it does
not strive to destroy the *charitra mohaniya*. *Yaau padivanno, niyama khommi
sattae thaga.* But a bound-life being who becomes a god or a hell being after
destroying the seven *prakritis* attains liberation in the third *paryaya*
according to the rule, and the one who becomes a human or an animal is born only
among humans and animals with an immeasurable lifespan, therefore he attains
liberation in the fourth *bhava* according to the rule. If an unbound-life being
begins the *kshapka shreni*, then it strives to destroy the *charitra mohaniya*
karma after the seven *prakritis* are destroyed. Because a human who destroys
*charitra mohaniya* is *abjnayu*, therefore his hell-life, god-life and animal-
life do not exist naturally, and the four *ananta anubandhi* and *darshan
mohaniya* are destroyed in the aforementioned order. *Baddhau pahishano
padhamsayaklae jai marija. To micchattodayaao chinijja bhuyo na seepammi.*
*Tammi mabho jaach divan tapparinamo ya sattae lone. Uvaramparinama poon paccha
nanam aigaiyo.* - *Vishesha* 1316-17 2 *Vishesha* 1325 3 *Taiya cha utthe tammi
va bhavammi sijhti dasane khine. Jam devanirya'sankhaucharimdehesu te hoti.* -
*Panchasangraha* 775 4 *Iyaroo anuvaaroo chiya, sayalam sadhi samaneiya.* -
*Vishesha* 1325

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 425 SaSTha karmanagya hai, kintu jisake pariNAma badala jAte haiM vaha
pariNAmAnusAra anya gatiyoM meM bhI utpanna hotA hai| baddhAyu hone para bhI
yadi koI jIva usa samaya maraNa nahIM karatA to sAta prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hone
para vaha vahIM Thahara jAtA hai, cAritra mohanIya ke kSaya kA yatna nahIM
karatA hai yAU paDivanno, niyamA khommi sattae ThagA  /  lekina jo banAyu jIva
sAta prakRtiyoM kA kSaya karake deva yA nAraka hotA hai, vaha niyama se tIsarI
paryAya meM mokSa ko prApta karatA hai aura jo manuSya yA tiryaca hotA hai, vaha
asaMkhyAta varSa kI Ayu vAle manuSyoM aura tiryaMcoM meM hI utpanna hotA hai,
isIliye vaha niyama se cauthe bhava meM mokSa ko prApta hotA hai| yadi
abaddhAyuSka jIva kSapakazreNi prArambha karatA hai to vaha sAta prakRtiyoM kA
kSaya ho jAne para cAritramohanIya karma ke kSaya karane kA yatna karatA hai|
kyoMki cAritramohanIya kI kSapaNA karane vAlA manuSya abajJAyu hI hotA hai,
isaliye usake narakAyu, devAyu aura tiryaMcAyu kI sattA to svabhAvata: hI nahIM
pAI jAtI hai tathA anantAnubaMdhI catuSka aura darzanamohanika kA kSaya pUrvokta
krama se ho jAtA baddhAU pahiSano paDhamasAyaklae jai marijA  /  to
micchattodayao ciNijja bhUyo na sIpammi  /  /  tammi mabho jAca divaM
tappariNAmo ya sattae loNe  /  uvaramapariNAmo pUNa pacchA nANAmaIgaIo  /  /
-vizeSA0 gA0 1316-17 2 vizeSA0 gA0 1325 3 taiya ca utthe tammi va bhavammi
sijhati dasaNe khINe  /  jaM devaniraya'saMkhAucarimadehesu te hoti  /  /
-paMcasaMgraha gA0 775 4 iyaro aNuvarao ciya, sayalaM saDhi smaannei| -vizeSA0
gA0 1325

Page #464 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter on the Seven Tika  This is why, for a being who destroys the four
types of *charitramohaniya*, the ten natures do not exist according to the
rules.  A being who destroys *charitramohaniya* also has the three karmas of
*yathapravritta*, *apuurvakarana*, and *anivrittikarana*. Here, *yathapravritta*
occurs in the seventh *gunasthan*, while *apuurvakarana* is in the eighth
*gunasthan* and *anivrittikarana* is in the ninth *gunasthan*. The nature of
these three karmas has been explained before, so you should understand them
accordingly.  Here, in *apuurvakarana*, the being destroys the eight natures of
*apratyakhyanavaran* and *pratyakhyanavaran* kshaya through *sthitighat* etc.,
so that in the first moment of the ninth *gunasthan*, their existence remains
only as an infinitesimal part of a *palya*. After the passage of countless
*sankaat* of *anivrittikarana*, the sixteen natures of *styanadvinik*,
*haapani*, *narakanupurti*, *tiryanchgaati*, *liyanchanupurvi*, *ekendriya* etc.
(the four types of *jaati*), *sthavar*, *aatap*, *udyot*, *sukshma*, and
*saadharan* are destroyed through the transition of their existence, leaving
only an infinitesimal part of a *palya* remaining. Then, through the transition
of *gunas*, they are completely destroyed by being projected into the
*bandhyaman* natures every moment.  Although the destruction of the eight
natures of *apratyakhyanavaran* and *pratyakhyanavaran* kshaya begins earlier,
the destruction of the sixteen natures of *styanadvinik* etc. occurs in the
middle of their destruction. After their destruction, the destruction of the
eight natures occurs in the next moment.  1. *Aniyattibayaare
peenigiddhitiniryaatiriyanaamaao. Sankhejj ime sesse tappaao gao khiyanthi. Etto
hanai phasayattganga pi...*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa hai, ataH cAritramohanIya kI kSapaNA karane vAle jIva ke
ukta dasa prakRtiyoM kI sattA niyama se nahIM hotI hai| jo jIva cAritramohanIya
kI kSapaNA karatA hai, usake bhI yathApravRtta Adi tIna karaNa hote haiN| yahA~
yathApravRttakaraNa sAtaveM guNasthAna meM hotA hai aura AThaveM guNasthAna kI
apUrvakaraNa aura nauveM guNasthAna kI anivRttikaraNa saMjJA hai hii| ina tIna
karaNoM kA svarUpa pahale batalAyA jA cukA hai, tadanusAra yahA~ bhI samajha
lenA cAhiye  /  yahA~ apUrvakaraNa meM yaha jIba sthitighAta Adi ke dvArA
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya kI ATha prakutiyoM kA isa
prakAra kSaya karatA hai, jisase nauveM guNasthAna ke pahale samaya meM inakI
sthiti palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga zeSa rahatI hai tathA anivRttikaraNa ke
saMkhyAta bahubhAgoM ke bIta jAne para-styAnadvinika, hAphapani narakAnupartI,
tiryaMcagati, liyaMcAnupUrvI, ekendriya Adi jAticatuSka, sthAvara, Atapa,
udyota, sUkSma aura sAdhAraNa, ina solaha prakRtiyoM kI sthiti kI saMkrama ke
dvArA udvalanA hone para baha palya ke asaMkhyAtave bhAma mAtra zeSa raha jAtI
hai| tadanantara guNasaMkrama ke dvArA unakA prati samaya badhyamAna prakRtiyoM
meM prakSepa karake unheM pUrI taraha se kSINa kara diyA jAtA hai| yadyapi
apratyAkhyAnAbaraNa aura pratyAkhyAnAbaraNa kaSAya kI ATha prakRtiyoM ke kSaya
kA prArambha pahale hI kara diyA jAtA hai to bhI inakA kSaya hone ke pahale
madhya meM hI ukta styAnaddhitrika Adi solaha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya ho jAtA hai
aura inake kSaya ho jAne ke pazcAt antarmuhUrta meM ukta ATha prakutiyoM kA
kSaya hotA hai|' 1 aniyaTTibAyare pINagiddhitinirayatiriyanAmAo  /  saMkhejja
ime sese tappAogAo khIyaMti  //  etto haNai phasAyaTThagaM pi"....

Page #465 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth 427 Mentioning Different Opinions  However, some Acharyas
hold the view that although the destruction of the sixteen Kashayas begins
earlier, the destruction of the sixteen substances like Sthyanaddhitrika etc.
occurs only after the destruction of the eight Kashayas. After this, the nine
Nokashayas and four Sanjwalanas, these thirteen substances, are destroyed by the
Antarkaran. After Antarkaran, the upper situated Dalikas of the Napumsakaved are
destroyed by the Udvalana method, and in this way, in an Antarmuhurt, its Paly
remains in the state of an innumerable part. After that, its (Napumsakaved's)
Dalikas are deposited in other substances that bind through Gunasamkram. In this
way, its complete destruction occurs in an Antarmuhurt. Here, it is important to
know that the Jiva who ascends to the Kshapakani with the rise of the
Napumsakaved, destroys its lower Dalikas while experiencing Vedana. In this way,
after the destruction of the Napumsakaved, the destruction of the Strived occurs
in the same order in an Antarmuhurt! After that, the destruction of the six
Nokashayas begins simultaneously. After the beginning of the destruction of the
six Nokashayas, their transition does not occur in the Purushaved, but in the
Sanjwalana Krodha, and in this way, their destruction is done. The Sutra also
says, "... 'Pachcha Napumsagam Sthi. To Nokasayachhakke Chumma
Sanjwalagakohhammi.' At the time when the six Nokashayas are destroyed, the
Vyuchchitti of the Bandha, Udaya, and Udirana of the Purushaved occurs, and
leaving aside the Prabddha of two Avali time units less than one time unit, the
remaining Dalikas of the Purushaved...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 427 matAntara kA ullekha kintu isa viSaya meM kinhIM
AcAryoM kA aisA bhI mata hai ki yadyapi solaha kaSAyoM ke kSaya kA prArambha
pahale kara diyA jAtA hai, to bhI ATha kaSAyoM ke kSaya ho jAne para hI ukta
styAnaddhitrika Adi solaha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hotA hai| isake pazcAt nau
nokaSAyoM aura cAra saMjvalana, ina teraha prakRtiyoM kA antarakaraNa karatA
hai| antarakaraNa karane ke bAda napuMsakaveda ke uparitana sthitigata dalikoM
kA udvalanA vidhi se kSaya karatA hai aura isa prakAra antarmuharta meM usakI
palya ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa sthiti zeSa raha jAtI hai| tatpazcAt isake
(napuMsakaveda ke) dalikoM kA guNasaMkrama ke dvArA baMdhane vAlI anya
prakRtiyoM meM nikSepa karatA hai| isa prakAra antarmuhUrta meM isakA samUla
nAza ho jAtA hai| yahA~ itanA vizeSa jAnanA cAhiye ki jo jIva napuMsakaveda ke
udaya ke sAtha kSapakaNi para car3hatA hai vaha usake adhastana dalikoM kA
vedana karate hue kSaya karatA hai  /  isa prakAra napuMsaka veda kA kSaya ho
jAne para antarmuhUrta meM isI krama se strIveda kA kSaya kiyA jAtA hai !
tadanantara chaha nokaSAyoM ke kSaya kA eka sAtha prArambha kiyA jAtA hai  /
chaha nokaSAyoM ke kSaya kA Arambha kara lene ke pazcAt inakA saMkramaNa
puruSaveda meM na hokara saMjvalana krodha meM hotA hai aura isa prakAra inakA
kSaya kara diyA jAtA hai| sUtra meM bhI kahA hai ...''pacchA napuMsagaM sthii|
to nokasAyachakke chummA saMjalagakohammi  /  jisa samaya chaha nokaSAyoM kA
kSaya hotA hai, usI samaya puruSaveda ke baMdha, udaya aura udIraNA kI
vyucchitti hotI hai tathA eka samaya kama do Avali pramANa samaya prabaddha ko
chor3akara puruSaveda ke zeSa dalikoM

Page #466 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 428: The Seven Tika  **What is destroyed?** Here, the **purushaveda**
has already ceased to arise and be stimulated, therefore it becomes
**apgatavedi**.  This statement should be understood in relation to a being who
ascends the **kshapka** श्रेणी (category) due to the arising of **purushaveda**.
However, a being who ascends the **kshapka** श्रेणी due to the arising of
**napumsakaved** destroys **sap** and **sandhed** simultaneously. At the time
when **striveda** and **napumsakaved** are destroyed, **purushaveda** is
liberated from bondage. Afterwards, it becomes **apgatavedi** and destroys
**purushaveda** and the six **nokashayas** simultaneously.  If a being ascends
the **kshapka** श्रेणी due to the arising of **striveda**, it destroys
**napumsakaved** first and then **striveda**. However, even in this case,
**purushaveda** is liberated from bondage at the time of **striveda**'s
destruction. Afterwards, it becomes **apgatavedi** and destroys **purushaveda**
and the six **nokashayas** simultaneously.  **Description of the kshapka श्रेणी
based on purushaveda**  A being who ascends the **kshapka** श्रेणी due to the
arising of **purushaveda** and is experiencing the **krodha** कषाय (passion),
after the cessation of **purushaveda**, the duration of **krodha** कषाय is
divided into three parts: **ashvakarnakarana** काल, **kittikarana** काल, and
**kittivedana** काल.  1. **Ashvakarnakarana** काल: **Ashvakarna** refers to the
ear of a horse. It is large at the base and gradually narrows towards the top.
Similarly, the **karana** (cause) in which the four **sanjvalanas** (agitations)
from **krodha** (anger) to **loma** (hair) gradually become infinitely smaller,
is called **ashvakarnakarana**. It is also known as **aavolkarana** and
**uvarthanapvarthanakarana**.  2. **Kittikarana**: **Kitti** means to make thin.
Therefore, the **karana** in which the previous...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 428 saptatikA prakaraNa kA kSaya ho jAtA hai| yahAM puruSaveda ke udaya aura
udIraNA kA viccheda ho cukA hai, isaliye yaha apagatavedI ho jAtA hai| ukta
kathana puruSaveda ke udaya se kSapakaNi kA ArohaNa karane vAle jIva kI apekSA
jAnanA cAhiye  /  kintu jo jIva napuMsakaveda ke udaya se kSapakazreNi para
calatA hai, jaha sapA aura sAMdheda kA eka sAtha kSaya karatA hai tathA isake
jisa samaya strIveda aura napuMsakaveda kA kSaya hotA hai, usI samaya puruSaveda
kA baMdhaviccheda hotA hai aura isake bAda vaha apagatavedI hokara puruSaveda
aura chaha nokaSAyoM kA eka sAtha kSaya karatA hai| yadi koI jIva strIveda ke
udaya se kSapakavegi para car3hatA hai to vaha napuMsaka veda kA kSaya ho jAne
ke pazcAt strIveda kA kSaya karatA hai, kintu isake bhI strIveda ke kSaya hone
ke samaya hI puruSaveda kA baMdhaviccheda hotA hai aura isake bAda apagatavedI
hokara puruSaveda aura chaha nokaSAyoM kA eka sAtha kSaya karatA hai| puruSaveva
ke AdhAra se kSapakaNi kA varNana jo jIva puruSaveda ke udaya se kSapakazreNi
para ArohaNa kara krodha kaSAya kA vedana kara rahA hai to usake puruSaveda kA
udayaviccheda hone ke bAda krodha kaSAya kA kAla tIna bhAgoM meM ba~Ta jAtA
haiazvakarNakaraNakAla', kiTTIkaraNakAla' aura kiTTIvedana 1 azvakargakaraNa
kAla-ghor3e ke kAna ko azvakaNaM kahate haiN| yaha mUla meM bar3A aura Upara kI
ora krama se pastA huA hotA hai| isI prakAra jisa karaNa meM krodha se lekara
loma taka cAroM saMjvalanoM kA anumAga uttarottara anaMtanaguNahIna ho jAtA hai,
usa karaNa ko azvakarNakaraNa kahate haiN| isake AolakaraNa aura
uvartanApavartanakaraNa, me do nAma aura dekhane ko milate haiN| 2 kiTTIkaraNa-
kiTTI kA artha kRza karanA hai  /  ata: jisa karaNa meM pUrva

Page #467 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth ## 426  **Time** | When this being exists in the time of
*Ashvakarnakarana*, it constantly performs infinite *Apuurva* *Spardhakas* above
the *Antar Karana* of the four *Sanjwalanas*. And in one time less than two
*Avalika* *Pramanakalas*, it destroys the *Dalikas* of the *Purusha Veda* bound
in that time, by transferring them to the *Sanjwalana* of *Krodha*. Here, first
*Guna Sanakrama* occurs, and at the last moment, *Sarva Sanakrama* occurs.  Upon
the completion of the *Ashvakarnakarana* time, it enters the *Kittikarana* time.
Although *Kittis* are infinite, they are twelve in gross form, three each in
every *Kashay*. But the being that ascends to the *Kshapakani* from the rise of
*Mana*, destroys *Krodha* through the method of *Udbhalana*, and *Kittis* the
remaining three *Kashayas* nine times! If the being ascends to the
*Adhyakshapakani* from the rise of *Bhasha*, it destroys *Krodha* and *Mana*
through the method of *Udbhalana*, and *Kittis* the remaining two *Kashayas* six
times. And if the being ascends to the *Kshapakani* from the rise of *Lobha*, it
destroys *Kosa*, *Mana*, and *Maya* through the method of *Udbhalana*, and
*Kittis* the three *Kittis* of *Lobha*.  Thus, upon the completion of the
*Kittikarana* time, the being that has ascended to the *Kshapak* *Shreni* from
the rise of *Krodha*, by repelling the *Dalika* situated in the second state of
the first *Kitti*, brings it to the first state and experiences its *Vedan*
until one time more than one *Avalika* *Pramanakala* remains. Afterwards, it
repels the *Dalika* situated in the second state of the second *Kitti*, bringing
it to the first state.  From the *Spardhakas* and *Apuurva Spardhakas*, the
*Dalikas* are taken and their sections are made infinitely *Gunahina* and
established by intervals. This is called *Kittikarana*. One *Kitti* *Vanakala* -
the time of experiencing and accepting the *Kittis* is called *Kittivedanakala*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 426 kAla' | inameM se jaba yaha jIva azvakarNakaraNa ke
kAla meM vidyamAna rahatA hai taba cAroM saMjvalanoM kI antarakaraNa se Upara kI
sthiti meM pratisamaya ananta apUrva spardhaka karatA hai tathA eka samaya kama
do AvalikA pramANakAla meM baddha puruSaveda ke dalikoM ko itane hI kAla meM
saMjvalana krodha meM saMkramaNa kara naSTa karatA hai| yahAM pahale
guNasaMkrama hotA hai aura aMtima samaya meM sarvasaMkrama hotA hai  /
azvakarNakaraNa kAla ke samApta ho jAne para kiTTIkaraNakAla meM praveza karatA
hai  /  yadyapi kiTTiyA~ ananta haiM para sthUla rUpa se ve bAraha haiM, jo
pratyeka kaSAya meM tIna-tIna prApta hotI haiN| kintu jo jIva mAna ke udaya se
kSapakaNi para car3hatA hai vaha ubalanA vidhi se krodha kA kSaya karake zeSa
tIna kaSAyoM ko nau kiTTa karatA hai ! yadi bhASA adhyakSapakaNi para car3hatA
hai to krodha aura mAna kA udvalanA vidhi se kSaya karake zeSa do kaSAyoM kI
chaha kiTTiyAM karatA hai aura yadi lobha ke udaya se kSapakaNi car3hatA hai to
udvalanA vidhi se koSa, mAna aura mAyA ina tIna kA kSaya karake lobha kI tIna
kiTTiyAM karatA hai  /  _isa prakAra kiTTIkaraNa ke kAla ke samApta ho jAne para
krodha ke udaya se kSapaka zreNi para car3hA huA jIva koSa kI prathama kiTTI kI
dvitIya sthiti meM sthita dalika kA apakarSaNa karake prathama sthiti karatA hai
aura eka samaya adhika eka AvalikA pramANakAla ke zeSa rahane taka usakA vedana
karatA hai  /  anantara dUsarI kiTTI kI dUsarI sthiti meM sthita dalika kA
apakarSaNa karake prathama sthiti karatA hai sparghakoM aura apUrva spardhakoM
meM se dalikoM ko le-lekara unake anubhAga ko ananta guNahIna karake aMtarAla se
sthApita kiyA jAtA hai, usako kiTTIkaraNa kahate haiN| 1 kiTTI vanakAla-kiTTiyoM
ke vedana karane, anumava karane ke kAna ko kiTTIvedanakAla kahate haiN|

Page #468 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
430 The chapter of the seven. And for one time more than one *āvalikā*
*pramāṇakāla* remaining, it torments it. After that, it draws down the *dalika*
situated in the second position of the third *kitti* and makes it first position
and torments it for one time more than one *āvalikā* *pramāṇakāla* remaining.
And during the time of torment of these three *kittis*, it deposits the *dalika*
situated in the upper position by means of *guṇasamkrame* in the *sanjvalana*
*māna* every time. And when the final time of torment of the third *kitti* is
attained, the *sanjvalana* *krodha* *bandha*, *udaya* and *udīraṇā* are all
severed together. At this time, except for the *dalikas* bound by two *āvalikā*
*pramāṇakāla* less than one time, the rest are absent. Thereafter, it draws down
the *dalika* situated in the second position of the first *kitti* of *māna* and
makes it first position and torments it for one *antarmuhurta* time. And it also
makes the *sanjvalana* *krodha* *bandhakāla* *pramāṇakrama* of *māna* within the
time of torment of the first *kitti* by two *āvalikā* *pramāṇakāla* less than
one time. Here, *guṇasamkrame* takes place for two times less than two *āvalikā*
time and in the final time, there is *sarva-samkrame*. In this way, it torments
the first *kitti* of *māna* for one time more than one *āvalikā* remaining. And
thereafter, it draws down the *dalika* situated in the second position of the
second *kitti* of *māna* and makes it first position and torments it for one
time more than one *āvalikā* time remaining. Thereafter, it draws down the
*dalika* situated in the second position of the third *kitti* and makes it first
position and torments it for one time more than one *āvalikā* time remaining. At
the same time, the *bandha*, *udaya* and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 430 saptatikA prakaraNa. aura eka samaya adhika eka AvalikA pramANakAla ke zeSa
rahane taka usakA vedana karatA hai  /  usake bAda tIsarI kiTTI kI dUsarI sthiti
meM sthita dalika kA apakarSaNa karake prathamasthili karatA hai aura eka samaya
adhika eka AvalikA pramANakAla ke zeSa rahane taka usakA vedana karatA hai tathA
ina tInoM kiTTiyoM ke vedana kAla ke samaya uparitana sthitigata dalika kA
guNasaMkrama ke dvArA prati samaya saMjvalana mAna meM nikSepa karatA hai aura
jaba tIsarI kiTTI ke vevana kA aMtima samaya prApta hotA hai taba saMjvalana
kodha ke baMgha, udaya aura udIraNA kA eka sAtha viccheda ho jAtA hai| isa
samaya isake eka samaya kama do AvalikA pramANakAla ke dvArA baMdhe hue dalikoM
ko chor3akara zeSa kA abhAva ho jAtA hai| tatpazcAt mAna kI prathama miTTI kI
dUsarIsthiti meM sthita dalika kA apakarSaNa karake prathamasthiti karatA hai
aura eka antarmuharta kAla taka usakA bedana karatA hai tathA mAna ko prathama
kiTTI ke vedanakAla ke bhItara hI eka samaya kama do AvalikA pramANakAla ke
dvArA saMjvalana krodha ke baMdhakkAla pramANa kramaNa bhI karatA hai  /  yahAM
do samaya kama do AvalikA kAla taka guNasaMkrama hotA hai aura aMtima samaya meM
sarva saMkrama hotA hai| isa prakAra mAna kI prathama kiTTI kA eka samaya adhika
eka AvalikA zeSa rahane taka vedana karatA hai aura tatpazcAt mAna kI dUsarI
kiTTI kI dUsarI sthiti meM sthita dalika kA apakarSaNa karake prathamasthiti
karatA hai aura eka samaya adhika taka AvalikA kAla ke zeSa rahane taka usakA
vedana karatA hai  /  tatpazcAt tIsarI kiTTI kI dUsarIsthiti meM sthita dalika
kA apakarSaNa karake prathamasthiti karatA hai aura eka samaya adhika eka
AvalikA kAla ke zeSa rahane taka usakA vedana karatA hai| isI samaya mAna ke
baMdha, udaya aura

Page #469 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  The Udirana is severed, and in the being, only the Dalik
bound by two Avaliks less than one time remain, and the rest are absent.  Then,
by drawing down the Dalik situated in the second state of the first Kitty of
Maya, it makes it the first state and experiences it for one Antarmuhurt time.
And when the bonds of Maya, etc., are severed, it deposits its Dalik in Maya
through Gunasankrama for two Avaliks less than one time. It experiences it until
one Avaliks more than one time of the first Kitty of Maya remains.  Then, by
drawing down the Dalik situated in the second state of the second Kitty of Maya,
it makes it the first state and experiences it until one Avaliks more than one
time remains. After that, by drawing down the Dalik situated in the second state
of the third Kitty of Maya, it makes it the first state and experiences it until
one Avaliks more than one time remains. At this time, the bonds of Maya, Uday,
and Udirana are severed together, and in the being, only the Dalik bound by two
Avaliks less than one time remain, the rest are absent.  Then, by drawing down
the Dalik situated in the second state of the first Kitty of Lobha, it makes it
the first state and experiences it for one Antarmuhurt time. And when the bonds
of Maya, etc., are severed, it deposits its newly bound Dalik in Lobha through
Gunasankrama for two Avaliks less than one time. It experiences it until one
Avaliks more than one time of the first Kitty of Maya remains.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha udIraNA kA viccheda ho jAtA hai tathA sattA meM kevala eka
samaya kama do AvalikA ke dvArA baMdhe hue dalika zeSa rahate haiM aura bAkI
sabakA abhAva ho jAtA hai| tatpazcAt mAyA kI prathama kiTTI kI dUsarIsthiti meM
sthita dalika kA apakarSaNa karake prathamasthiti karatA hai aura eka
antarmuhUrta kAla taka usakA vedana karatA hai tathA mAna ke baMdha Adika ke
vicchinna ho jAne para usake dalika kA eka samaya kama do AvalikA kAla meM
guNasaMkrama ke dvArA mAyA meM karatA hai  /  mAyA kI prathama kiTTI kA eka
samaya adhika eka AvalikA kAla zeSa rahane taka vedana karatA hai| tatpazcAt
mAyA kI dUsarI kiTTI kI dUsarI sthiti meM sthita dalika kA apakarSaNa karake
prathamasthiti karatA hai aura eka samaya adhika eka AvalikA pramANa kAla ke
zeSa rahane taka usakA bedana karatA hai  /  usake bAda mAyA kI tIsarI kiTTI kI
dUsarI sthiti meM sthita dalika kA apakarSaNa karake prathamasthiti karatA hai
aura usakA eka samaya adhika ekaM AvalikA kAla ke zeSa rahane taka vedana karatA
hai  /  isI samaya mAyA ke baMdha, udaya aura udIraNA kA eka sAtha viccheda ho
jAtA hai tathA sattA meM kevala eka samaya kama do AvalikA ke dvArA baMdhe hue
dalika zeSa rahate haiM, zeSa kA abhAva ho jAtA hai| tatpazcAt lobha kI prathama
kiTTI kI dUsarIsthiti meM sthita dalika kA apakarSaNa karake prathama sthiti
karatA hai aura eka antarmuhUrta kAla taka usakA vedana karatA hai tathA mAyA ke
baMdha Adika ke vicchinna ho jAne para usake navIna baMdhe hue dalika kA eka
samaya kama do AvalikA kAla meM guNasaMkA ke dvArA lobha meM nikSepa karatA hai
tathA mAyA kI prathama kiTTI kA eka samaya adhika AvalikA kAla ke zeSa rahane
taka hI vedana karatA hai  /

Page #470 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 432: The Sevenfold Chapter  Afterward, in the second state of the
subtle kitti, the dalik is drawn back to the first state and tormented for a
period of time equal to one avalika kal less than one time. When this being
torments the second kitti, it then creates a subtle kitti of the dalik of the
third kitti. This action also continues for a period of time equal to one
avalika kal less than one time, the same as the time of tormenting the second
kitti. At the time when the act of creating the subtle kitti ends, the bond of
sanjwalan lobha is broken, the badarakshaya arises, the udirana is severed, and
the time of the anivrittibadar sampray gunasthan is severed.  Thereafter, the
dalik situated in the second state of the subtle kitti is drawn back to the
first state and tormented. From this time, this being is called a sukshmasaray.
For a period of time equal to one part remaining of the sukshmasampray
gunasthan, this being, through the position-destruction, etc., of the subtle
kitti-bound dalik, also decays every moment by two avalikas less than one time.
Afterward, the remaining one part is equalized to the time of the sukshmasampray
gunasthan by the conversion of sanjwalan lobha through sarvapravartana. The time
of the sukshmasampray gunasthan is only an antarmuhurta. From here onwards, the
position-destruction, etc., of sanjwalan lobha cease, but the position-
destruction, etc., of the remaining karmas continue. This state, converted
through sarvapravartana, is tormented by the arising and udirana for a period of
time equal to one avalika kal less than one time. Afterward, the udirana is
severed, and only the arising of subtle lobha remains until the final time of
the sukshmasampray gunasthan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 432 saptatikA prakaraNa anantara lobha kI dUsarI kiTTI kI dUsarI sthiti meM
dalika kA apakarSaNa karake prathamasthiti karatA hai aura eka samaya adhika eka
AvalikA kAla ke zeSa rahane taka usakA vedana karatA hai  /  jaba yaha jIva
dUsarI kiTTI kA vedana karatA hai taba tIsarI kiTTI ke dalika kI sUkSma kiTTI
karatA hai  /  yaha kriyA bhI dUsarI kiTTI ke vedanakAla ke samAna eka samaya
adhika eka AvalikA kAla ke zeSa rahane taka cAlU rahatI hai  /  jisa samaya
sUkSma kiTTI karane kA kArya samApta hotA hai, usI samaya saMjvalana lobha kA
baMdhaviccheda, bAdarakaSAya ke udaya aura udIraNA kA viccheda tathA
anivRttibAdara saMparAya guNasthAna ke kAla kA viccheda hotA hai  /  tadanantara
sUkSma kiTTI kI dUsarI sthiti meM sthita dalika kA apakarSaNa karake prathama
sthiti karatA hai aura usakA bedana karatA hai| isI samaya se yaha jIva
sUkSmasarAya kahalAtA hai| sUkSamasaMparAya guNasthAna ke kAla meM eka bhAga ke
zeSa rahane taka yaha jIva eka samaya kama do AvalikA ke dvArA baMdhe hue mUkSma
kiTTIgata dalika kA sthitighAta Adi ke dvArA pratyeka samaya meM kSaya bhI
karatA hai| tadanantara jo eka bhAga zeSa rahatA hai, usameM sarvApavartanA ke
dvArA saMjvalana lobha kA apavartana karake use sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna kAla
ke barAbara karatA hai| sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna kA kAla antarmuhurta hI hai
/  yahA~ se Age saMjvalana lobha ke sthitighAta Adi kArya honA banda ho jAte
haiM kintu zeSa kamoM ke sthitighAta Adi kArya barAbara hote rahate haiN|
sarvApavartanA ke dvArA apavartita kI gaI isa sthiti kA udaya aura udIraNA ke
dvArA eka samaya adhika eka AvalikA kAla ke zeSa rahane taka vedana karatA hai
/  tatpazcAt udIraNA kA viccheda ho jAtA hai aura sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna ke
antima samaya taka sUkSmalobha kA kevala udaya hI rahatA hai|

Page #471 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karmapratyaya  At the final stage of the subtle sampraya gunasthan, the
five types of knowledge-obscuring, the stream of darshan-obscuring, the five
types of obstacles, fame and glory, and high lineage, these sixteen natures
experience the severance of bondage and the arising and severance of the
mohaniya.   Thus, after explaining the order of the destruction of the mohaniya,
the following verse is spoken to summarize the aforementioned meaning:  **Verse
64:**  "The purusha-ved is consumed by anger, anger by pride, pride by maya,
maya by greed, and then even subtle greed is destroyed by its own arising."
**Explanation:**  The verse explains that the purusha-ved is consumed by anger,
anger by pride, pride by maya, and maya by greed. Then, even subtle greed is
destroyed by its own arising. This verse specifically highlights the order of
destruction of the fourfold karma of anger, pride, maya, and greed.
**Comparison:**  "Anger, pride, maya, and greed are consumed by their own
nature. Greed is consumed by subtle greed, which is consumed by its own nature."
- Kashaya Paham, Sapna Adhikar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmapratya sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM jJAnAvaraNa
kI pAMca, darzanAvaraNa kI dhAra, antarAya kI pAMca, yaza:kIrti aura uccagotra,
ina solaha prakRtiyoM kA baMdhaviccheda tathA mohanIya kA udaya aura sattA
viccheda ho jAtA hai  /  /  isa prakAra se mohanIya kI kSapaNA kA krama batalAne
ke bAda aba pUrvokta artha kA saMkalana karane ke liye Age kI gAthA kahate haiM
purisaM kohe kohaM mANe mANaM ca chaha i mAyAe  /  mAyaM ca chuhaI lohe lohaM
suhama pi to haNaI  // 64 //  zamdA-purisaM-puruSaveda ko, kohe-saMdhyAlana
krodha meM, kohaM-krodha ko, mAge-saMghalana mAna meM, mANaMmAna ko, aura,
chuhara-saMkramita karatA hai, mAyAe-saMjvalana mAyA meM, mAyaM-mAyA ko, ba-
aura, ghujhA-saMkramita karatA hai, lohesaMjvalana loma meM, loha-loma ko,
suhama- sUkSma, pi--mI, to-usake bAda, haNaikSaya karatA hai| _gAmA-puruSaveda
ko saMjvalana krodha meM, krodha ko saMjvalana mAna meM, mAna ko saMjvalana mAyA
meM, mAyA ko saMjvalana lobha meM saMkramita karatA hai, usake bAda sUkSma lobha
kA bhI svodaya se kSaya karatA hai| vizeSArthagAyA meM saMjvalana krodha Adi
catuSka ke kSaya kA kama batalAyA hai| isake liye sarvaprathama batalAte haiM ki
puruSaveda ke baMdha Adi kA 1 tulanA kIjiye kohaM , chuhai mANe mANaM mAyAe
NiyamasA zuharU  /  mAyaM gha zuii lohe paMDiloyo saMkiyo Nasthi  /  /  -kaSAya
pAhama, sapaNAdhikAra

Page #472 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
434 When the bond etc. of the *samjvalana* *krodha* (anger) is broken, it
transmigrates into the *samjvalana* *krodha* by means of *guna-samkramana*
(transmigration of qualities). When the bond etc. of the *samjvalana* *kosa*
(storehouse) is broken, it transmigrates into the *samjvalana* *mana* (mind).
When the bond etc. of the *samjvalana* *mana* is broken, it transmigrates into
the *samjvalana* *maya* (illusion). When the bond etc. of the *samjvalana*
*maya* is broken, it transmigrates into the *samjvalana* *lobha* (greed). And
when the bond etc. of the *samjvalana* *lobha* is broken, it destroys the subtle
*kittigata* (minute) greed.  In this way, after the state of *samjvalana*
*krodha* etc. *kashayas* (passions) is attained, the further state is explained
as follows: When *lobha* is completely destroyed, then in the subsequent time,
there is *kshinakashaya* (diminished passions). In the time of *kshinakashaya*,
the majority of the *bhagas* (parts) of the *madhyasat* (middle seven) and the
remaining *karma* (actions) continue to function as before. But when one *bhaga*
remains, then the five *jnana-avaranas* (knowledge-obscurations), the *darshan-
avaranas* (perception-obscurations), the five *antarayas* (hindrances), and the
*nidra-dvig* (sleep-doubts), these sixteen *prakritis* (natures) are *apvartita*
(refracted) by means of *sapi-vartana* (refraction) and made equal to the
remaining time of *kshinakashaya*. Only the *nidra-dvig* remains for one less
time than its own nature. Compared to ordinary *karma*, their state remains the
same as the remaining *karma*. Although this time is a part of the entire time
of *kshinakashaya*, its measure is *antar-muhurta* (a very short time). When
their state becomes equal to the time of *kshinakashaya*, they do not have
*sthiti-ghata* etc. functions, but the remaining *karma* do. Without the *nidra-
dvig*, the remaining fourteen *prakritis* have both *udaya* (arising) and
*udirana* (excitation) until one *avali-kala* (a very short time) remains.
Afterwards, only *udaya* occurs for one *avali-kala*. *Kshinakashaya*...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 434 saptatikA prakaraNa vimAcheda ho jAne para usakA guNasaMkramaNa ke dvArA
saMjvalana krodha meM  /  saMkramaNa karatA hai  /  saMjvalana koSa ke baMdha
Adi kA viccheda ho jAne para usakA saMjvalana mAna meM saMkramaNa karatA hai|
saMjvalana mAna ke baMdha Adi kA viccheda ho jAne para usakA saMjvalana mAyA meM
saMkramaNa karatA hai  /  saMjvalana mAyA ke bhI baMdha Adi kA viccheda ho jAne
para usakA saMjvalana lobha meM saMkramaNa karatA hai tathA saMjvalana lobha ke
baMdha Adi kA viccheda ho jAne para sUkSma kiTTIgata lobha kA vinAza karatA hai|
isa prakAra se saMzvalana krodha Adi kaSAyoM kI sthiti ho jAne ke bAda Age kI
sthiti batalAte haiM ki lobha kA pUrI taraha se kSaya ho jAne para usake bAda ke
samaya meM kSINakaSAya hotA hai kSINakaSAya ke kAla ke bahubhAga madhyasAta hone
saka zeSa kamAM ka saMpatidhAta Apa kArya pahale ke samAna cAlU rahate hai kintu
jaba eka bhAga zeSa raha jAtA hai taba jJAnAvaraNa kI pAMca, darzanAvaraNa kI
dhAra, antarAya kI pAMca aura nidrAdvika, ina solaha prakRtiyoM kI sthiti kA
ghAta sapivartanA ke dvArA apavartana karake use kSINakaSAya ke zeSa rahe hae
kAla ke barAbara karatA hai| kevala nidrAvika kI sthiti svarUpa kI apekSA eka
samaya kama rahatI hai| sAmAnya karma kI apekSA to inakI sthiti zeSa karmoM ke
samAna hI rahatI hai| sINakaSAya ke sampUrNa kAla kI apekSA yaha kAla yadyapi
usakA eka bhAga hai to bhI usakA pramANa antarmuhUrta hotA hai| inakI sthiti
kSINakaSAya ke kAla ke barAbara hote hI inameM sthitighAta Adi kArya nahIM hote
kintu zeSa karmoM ke hote haiN| nidrAdvika ke binA zeSa caudaha prakRtiyoM kA
eka samaya adhika eka Avali kAla ke zeSa rahane taka udaya aura udIraNA donoM
hote haiN| anantara eka bAvali kAla taka kevala udapa hI hotA hai| kSINakaSAya
ke

Page #473 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Group  **435**  In the penultimate moment, the essence of
Nidravak decays in relation to the essence of the self, and in the final moment,
the remaining four natures decay.  **Sri Naka Saya Charim Niha Pathla Pa Haga
Baram Spo.** **Bhavaranam Ansarae Param Spo Paribhasammi.**  After this, in the
subsequent time, this being becomes a Sayogika Kevali, also known as a Jin, a
Kevalajnani. Upon becoming a Sayogika Kevali, they become the complete knower
and seer of the Lokaloka. There is no object in the universe, that has been, is,
or will be, that the Jindev does not know. That is, they know and see
everything.  **Sabhian Pasato Mogamalog Cha Sambho Sarth.** **Masmin Pasa Bhuyan
Bho Bhavis Cha.**  Thus, the Sayogika Kevali dwells for a period ranging from
the shortest moment to a time slightly less than the previous koti, depending on
their level of excellence.  Upon attaining the Sayogika Kevali state, the four
Ghasikam - Jnana Avarana, Darsana Avarana, Mohaniya, and Antaraya - are
completely destroyed. However, the remaining four Aghatik - Vedaniya, Ayu, Nama,
and Gotra - remain.  Therefore, if the state of the remaining three karmas -
Vedaniya, Nama, and Gotra - is greater than the state of the Ayu karma, then a
Samudghat is performed at the end to bring their state equal to the state of the
Ayu karma. If the state of the aforementioned three karmas is equal to the state
of the Ayu karma, then no Samudghat is performed.  The Prajnapana Sutra states:
**Samve Vi Pan Bhanta! Kevali Samugdha Gati? Gorma! Modanastu Sam.** **Jasaouam
Tullai Bahin Hi Ya. Bhagoshaghamman Samugdhapan Sa Cha.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrampa 435 upAntya samaya meM nidrAvika kA svarUpasattA kI apekSA
kSaya karatA hai aura antima samaya meM zeSa cauvaha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya karatA
hai zrINakasAyAcarima nihA pathalA pa hagA baramaspo  /  bhAvaraNamaMsarAe
paramaspo paribhasamammi  /  isake anantara samaya meM yaha jIva sayogikevalI
hotA hai| jise jina, kevalajJAnI bhI kahate haiN| sayogikevalI ho jAne para vaha
lokAloka kA pUrI taraha jJAtA-draSTA hotA hai  /  saMsAra meM aisA koI padArtha
na hai, na huA aura na hogA jise jinadeva nahIM jAnate haiN| arthAt ve sabako
jAnate aura dekhate haiM sabhiAna pAsato mogamaloga ca sambo sArtha  /  masmina
pAsA bhUyaM bho bhavissa ca  //  isa prakAra sayogikevalI jaghanya se
antarmuhUrta taka aura uskRSTa se kucha kama pUrvakoTi kAla taka bihAra karate
haiN| sayogikevalI avasthA prApta hone taka cAra ghAsIkama-jJAnAvaraNa,
darzanAvaraNa, mohanIya aura antarAya-ni:zeSa rUpa se kSaya ho jAte hai, kintu
zeSa vedanIya, Ayu, nAma aura gotra ye cAra aghAtika zeSa raha jAte haiN| ata:
yadi Ayukarma ko chor3akara zeSa vedanIya, nAma, gotra, ina tIna karmoM kI
sthiti Ayukarma kI sthiti se adhika hotI hai to unakI sthiti ko Ayukarma kI
sthiti ke barAbara karane ke liye anta meM samudghAta karate haiM aura yadi ukta
zeSa tIna karmoM kI sthiti Ayukarma ke barAbara hotI hai to samuddhAta nahIM
karate haiM  /  prajJApanA sUtra meM kahA samve vi paM bhaMte ! kebalI samugdhA
gati ? goramA ! modaNaSTuM sm| jAsAuema tullAI bahiM hi ya  /  bhagoSAgahammAna
samugdhApaM sa ca  //

Page #474 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 436: The Sevenfold Emanation  **The Emanation of the Perfect Jina**
The emanation of the soul-regions from the body without abandoning the physical
body is called **Samudghāt**. This emanation is of seven types:
**Vedanasamudghāt**, **Kṣayāsamudghāt**, **Māraṇāntika Samudghāt**,
**Tejasasamudghāt**, **Vakriya Samudghāt**, **Āhārakasamudghāt**, and
**Kevalisamudghāt**.  Here are the brief characteristics of these seven types:
* **Vedanasamudghāt** is the emanation caused by intense pain. *
**Kṣayāsamudghāt** is the emanation caused by passions like anger. *
**Māraṇāntika Samudghāt** is the emanation that occurs before death. *
**Tejasasamudghāt** is the emanation that occurs for the creation of the
**Tejas** body, which is capable of benefiting or destroying beings. * **Vakriya
Samudghāt** is the emanation that occurs for the creation of the **Vakriya**
body. * **Āhārakasamudghāt** is the emanation that occurs for the creation of
the **Āhārak** body. * **Kevalisamudghāt** is the emanation that occurs for the
**Kevalajnani** (Perfect Knower) to equalize the state of the three non-
destructive karmas (**Vedaniya**, **Āyaka**, and **Āyus** karmas) with the state
of the **Āyaka** karma.  **Kevalisamudghāt** has eight stages:  * In the first
stage, the soul-regions are spread out to the limits of the upper and lower
realms, as large as the **Rava** body. This is called **Daṇḍasamudghāt**. * In
the second stage, the soul-regions are spread out in the east and west or south
and north directions, like a **Kapāta** (door). * In the third stage, the soul-
regions are spread out in all eight directions, like a **Mathani** (churning
stick).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 436 saptatikA prakaraNa agaMpUrNa samugdhAyamaNaMtA kevalI jiNA  /
aramaraNaviSpamukkA siddhi varagaI gayA  /  samudghAta kI vyAkhyA mUla zarIra ko
na chor3akara Atma-pradezoM kA zarIra se bAhara nikalanA samudghAta kahalAtA hai
/  isake sAta bheda haiM-vedanAsamudghAta, kaSAyasamudghAta,
mAraNAntikasamudghAta, tejasasamudghAta, vakriya samudghAta, AhArakasamudghAta
aura kevalisamudghAta  /  ina sAta bhedoM ke saMkSepa meM lakSaNa isa prakAra
haiM_ tIvra vedanA ke kAraNa jo samudghAta hotA hai, usako vedanA samudghAta
kahate haiM  /  krodha Adi ke nimitta se jo samudghAta hotA hai use
kaSAyasamudghAta kahate haiM  /  maraNa ke pahale usa nimitta se jo samudghAta
hotA hai use mAraNAntika samudghAta kahate haiN| jIvoM ke anugraha yA vinAza
karane meM samartha taijasa garIra kI racanA ke liye jo samudghAta hotA hai use
taijasasamudghAta kahate haiM  /  vaikriyazarIra ke nimitta se jo samuddhAta
hotA hai use vaikriyasamudghAta kahate haiM, AhArakazarIra ke nimitta se jo
samudghAta hotA hai use AhAraka samudghAta kahate haiM tathA vedanIya Adi tIna
aghAti karmoM kI sthiti Ayakarma kI sthiti ke barAbara karane ke liye jina
(kevalajJAnI) jo samudghAta karate haiM, use kevalisamudghAta kahate haiN|
kevalisamudghAta kA kAla ATha samaya hai| pahale samaya meM ravazarIra kA jitanA
AkAra hai tatpramANa Atma-pradezoM ko Upara aura nIce loka ke antaparyanta
racate haiM, use daNDasamudghAta kahate haiN| dUsare samaya meM pUrva aura
pazcima yA dakSiNa aura uttara dizA meM kapATarUpa se Atma-pradezoM ko phailAte
haiN| tIsare samaya meM mathAnasamudghAta karate haiM arthAt mathAnI ke AkAra
meM AThoM dizAoM meM Atma-pradezoM kA phailAva  /

Page #475 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  It happens. In the fourth time, they fill the remaining
space in the Lok. This is called the Lok-Puran state. After this Lok-Puran state
is formed, in the fifth time, they contract and transform the Atma-Pradeshas
into the form of a churn. In the sixth time, they contract the churn form state.
In the seventh time, they contract the Kapata state again, and in the eighth
time, they become situated in their own body.  This is the process of Kevali
Samudghat. The process of Yoga-Nirodha Those who attain Kevali Samudghat, after
attaining Samudghat, and those who do not attain Samudghat, begin Yoga-Nirodha
when the time for Yoga-Nirodha remains.  In this, first, they stop Badar Manoyog
by Chadar Kayayog. Then, they stop Sadar Vachanayog. After this, they stop Badar
Kayayog by Sukshma Kayayog. Then, they stop Sukshma Manoyog. Then, they stop
Sukshma Vachanayog. Then, they stop Sukshma Kayayog and attain Sukshma Kriya-
Pratipat Dhyan. By the power of this Dhyan, the Atma-Pradeshas contract and
become without holes. In this Dhyan, they avert all the remaining Karmas that
benefit Bhava except Ayukarma, until the last time of the Sayogik state, due to
the Dwag Sayogik state, etc. As a result, at the last time of the Sayogik
Kevali, the state of all Karmas becomes equal to the time of the Aayogik Kevali
Gunasthan. Here, there is a special feature that the state of those Karmas which
do not arise in the Aayogik Kevali becomes one time less than the state of the
small, but less than the general...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha hotA hai  /  cauthe samaya meM loka meM jo abakAza zeSa
rahatA hai use bhara dete hai| ise lokapUraNa avasthA kahate haiN| isa prakAra
se loka-pUrita sthiti bana jAne ke pazcAt pA~caveM samaya meM saMkoca karate
haiM aura Atma-pradezoM ko mathAna ke rUpa meM pariNata kara lete haiN| chaThe
samaya meM maMthAna rUpa avasthA kA saMkoca karate haiN| sAtaveM samaya meM
puna: kapATa avasthA ko saMkocate haiM aura AThaveM samaya meM svazarIrastha ho
jAte haiN| isa prakAra yaha kevalisamudghAta kI prakriyA hai  /  yoga-nirodha kI
prakriyA jo kevalI samudghAta ko prApta hote haiM ve samudghAta ke pazcAt aura
jo samudghAta ko prApta nahIM hote haiM ve yoga-nirodha ke yogya kAla ke zeSa
rahane para yoga-nirodha kA prArambha karate haiN| isameM sabase pahale cAdara
kAyayoga ke dvArA bAdara manoyoga ko rokate haiN| tatpazcAta sadara vacanayoga
ko rokate haiN| isake bAda sUkSma kAyayoga ke dvArA bAdara kAyayoga ko rokate
haiN| tatpazcAt sUkSma manoyoga ko rokate haiN| tatpazcAt sUkSma bacanayoga ko
rokate haiM  /  tatpazcAt sUkSma kAyayoga ko rokate hue sUkSma kriyApratipAta
dhyAna ko prApta hote haiN| isa dhyAna kI sAmarthya se Atmapradeza saMkucita
hokara nizchidra ho jAte haiN| isa dhyAna meM sthitighAta Adi ke dvAga sayogi
avasthA ke antima samaya taka Ayukarma ke sivAya bhava kA upakAra karane vAle
zeSa saba karmoM kA apavartana karate haiM, jisase sayogikevalI ke antima samaya
meM saba karmoM kI sthiti ayogivalI guNasthAna ke kAla ke barAbara ho jAtI hai|
yahA~ itanI vizeSatA hai ki jina karmoM kA ayogikevalI ke udaya nahIM hotA unakI
sthiti svalpa kI apekSA eka samaya kama ho jAtI hai kintu kama sAmAnya kI

Page #476 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  438 The duration of the Aayogikevali Gunasthan is equal to the
duration of the Sayogikevali Gunasthan. At the end of the Sayogikevali
Gunasthan, the following thirty types of Prakruti are destroyed: One of the two,
Saata or Asaata, Vedaniya, Audarikasharira, Tanjasasharira, Karmanasharira, six
Sthana, the first Sanhan, Audarikangopang, Varnachatusk, Agurulghu, Upghāt,
Parāghāt, Ucchvās, Shubhashubh Vihayogati, Pratiyaka, Sthira, Asthira, Shubh,
Ashubh, Suswar, Duswar, and Nirman. At the end of the Sayogikevali Gunasthan, by
destroying the arising and stimulation of these thirty Prakruti, they become
Aayogikevali in the subsequent time. The duration of the Aayogikevali Gunasthan
is Antamuhurt. In this state, they practice Vyupratkriya-pratipadi Dhyana to
destroy the Karmas that contribute to Bhava. There are no actions like
Sthitighāt etc. But the Karmas that arise are destroyed by experiencing their
full duration, and the Prakruti that do not arise are transferred to the
existing Prakruti through Stibuksankrama, and they are experienced as existing
Prakruti until the end of the Aayogikevali Gunasthan. Now, in the next verse, we
will explain the Prakruti that are destroyed at the end of the Aayogikevali
Gunasthan. Devgaisahgayao ducharam samaya bhaniya mmi khiyan ti. Savivaageyar
nama niyago yam pi tatheva ||6|| Shamba-Devgaasahgayamo - those who are bound
with Devagati, Buparam samaya bhashiya mmi ko - the last time,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 438 saptatikA prakaraNa apekSA unakI bhI sthiti ayogikevalI guNasthAna ke kAla
ke barAbara rahatI hai| sayogikevalI guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM
nimnalikhita tIsa prakRtiyoM kA viccheda hotA hai sAtA yA asAtA meM se koI eka
vedanIya, audArikazarIra, taMjasazarIra, kArmaNazarIra, chaha sasthAna, pahalA
saMhAna, audArikaaMgopAMga, varNacatuSka, agurulaghu, upaghAta, parAghAta,
ucchvAsa, zubhaazubha vihAyogati, pratyeka, sthira, asthira, zubha, azubha,
susvara, dusvara aura nirmANa  /  sayogikevalI guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM
ukta tIsa prakRtiyoM ke udaya aura udIraNA kA viccheda karake usake anantara
samaya meM ve ayogikevalI ho jAte haiN| ayogikevalI guNasthAna kA kAla
antamuhUrta hai  /  isa avasthA meM bhava kA upakAra karane vAle karmoM kA kSaya
karane ke liye vyuparatakriyApratipAdi dhyAna karate haiN| vahA~ sthitighAta Adi
kArya nahIM hote haiN| kintu jina karmoM kA udaya hotA hai, unako to apanI
sthiti pUrI hone se anubhava karake naSTa kara dete haiM tathA jina prakRtiyoM
kA udaya nahIM hotA unakA stibukasaMkrama ke dvArA prati samaya vedyamAna
prakRtiyoM meM saMkrama karate hue ayogikavalI guNasthAna ke upAntya samaya taka
vedyamAna prakRti rUpa se vedana karate haiN| aba Age kI gAthA meM ayogiovalI ke
upAntya samaya meM kSaya hone vAlI prakRtiyoM ko batalAte haiN| devagaisahagayAo
ducarama samayabhaniyammi khIyaMti  /  savivAgeyaranAmA nIyAgoyaM pi tattheva
// 6 //  zambA-devagAsahagayAmo-devagati ke sAtha jinakA baMdha hotA hai aisI,
buparamasamayabhASiyammiko antima samaya jisake

Page #477 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Kar 6th Karma-prapa  436  **For a being who is about to attain the state of
Aayogikevali, with only two lifetimes remaining, the following karmas are
destroyed:**  * **Deva-gati:** The karmas that bind the being to the Deva-gati
(heavenly realm). * **Name-karma:** The karmas that are devoid of Vipaka (fruit)
and are of the nature of Ni-cha-gotra (low birth) and one Vedaniya (pain).
**The **Vishesharm-gatha** mentions the karmas that are destroyed in the
penultimate lifetime of the Aayogikevali state.**  **As previously explained,
the karmas that do not arise in the Aayogikevali state are one lifetime less
than the duration of the Aayogikevali state. Therefore, they are destroyed in
the penultimate lifetime.**  **The karmas that are destroyed in the penultimate
lifetime were not mentioned before, so this gatha clarifies that the karmas that
bind to Deva-gati, the Name-karma that does not arise in the Aayogikevali state,
and the Ni-cha-gotra and one Vedaniya are all destroyed in the penultimate
lifetime.**  **The karmas that bind to Deva-gati are as follows:**  * Deva-gati
* Devanupurvi * Vaifiya-sharira * Vakiya-bandhan * Vaikriya-sanghata * Vaikriya-
angopaang * Aharak-sharira * Aharak-bandhan * Aharak-sanghata * Aharak-angopaang
**These are the ten karmas.**  **The gatha also mentions the 45 Name-karma that
do not arise in the Aayogikevali state:**  * Audarik-sharira * Audarik-bandhan *
Audarik-sanghata * Tejas-sharira * Tejas-bandhan * Tejas-sanghata * Karman-
sharira * Karman-

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kara SaSTha karmaprapa 436 mAphI haiM, aise jova ke, sIyaMti-kSaya hotI hai,
savinAgeyaramAmAvipAkarahita mAmakarma kI prakRtiyA~, pIyAgo-nIca gotra aura eka
vedanIya, pi-bhI, tasva-vahIM para  /  gApArSa-ayogikevalI avasthA meM do aMtima
samaya jisake bAkI haiM aise jIva ke devagati ke sAtha baMdhane vAlI prakRtiyoM
kA kSaya hotA hai tathA vipAkarahita jo nAmakarma kI prakRtiyA~ haiM tathA nIca
gotra aura kisI eka bedanIya kA bhI vahIM kSaya hotA hai| vizeSArma-gAthA meM
ayogikevalI guNasthAna ke upAntya samaya meM kSaya hone vAlI prakRtiyoM kA
nirdeza kiyA hai| jaisA ki pahale batA Aye haiM ki ayogikevalI avasthA meM jina
prakRtiyoM kA udaya nahIM hotA hai, unakI sthiti ayogikevalI guNasthAna ke kAla
se eka samaya kama hotI hai| isIliye unakA upAntya samaya meM kSaya ho jAtA hai
/  upAntya samaya meM kSaya hone vAlI prakRtiyoM kA kathana pahale nahIM kiyA
gayA hai, ata: isa gAthA meM nirdeza kiyA hai ki jina prakRtiyoM kA devagati ke
sAtha baMdha hotA hai unakI tathA nAmakarma kI jina prakRtiyoM kA ayogiavasthA
meM udaya nahIM hotA unakI aura nIca gotra va kisI eka vedanIya kI upAntya
samaya meM sattA kA viccheda ho jAtA hai| devagati ke sAtha baMdhane vAlI
prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa prakAra haidevagati, devAnupUrvI, vaiphiya zarIra, vakiya
baMdhana, vaikriya saMghAta, vaikriya aMgopAMga, AhAraka zarIra, AhAraka
baMdhana, AhAraka saMghAta, AhAraka aMgopAMga, yaha dasa prakRtiyAM haiN| gAthA
meM anudaya rUpa se saMketa kI gaI nAmakarma kI paiMtAlIsa prakRtiyAM yaha hai-
audArika zarIra, audArika baMdhana, audArika saMghAta, tejasa zarIra, tejasa
bandhana, tejasa saMghAta, kArmaNa zarIra, kArmaNa

Page #478 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 440: The Sevenfold  **Bondage, Karma Aggregates, Six Institutions,
Six Consolidations, Generous Limbs, Four Castes, Pre-Human Existence, Severe
Injury, Minor Injury, Gross and Subtle, Auspicious and Inauspicious Paths of
Liberation, Each, Insufficient, Exhalation, Stable, Unstable, Auspicious,
Inauspicious, Good Voice, Bad Voice, Unfortunate, Unworthy, Bad Reputation, and
Creation.**  In addition to these, there is one of the two Vedaniya Karmas,
namely, the lower caste and the Saata and Asaata Vedaniya. In total, these are
10 + 45 + 2 = 57. These are destroyed in the penultimate time of the
Aayogikevali state - *Ducharam Samaya Bhaviyammi Kheerhi*.  In the
aforementioned 57 types, the four basic distinctions of color, smell, taste, and
touch are considered in the four castes. There are no further distinctions
within these. If, instead of these four basic distinctions of color, etc., their
further distinctions are considered, then the number of types destroyed in the
penultimate time becomes 73. Although the verse does not mention any Vedaniya
Karma by name, the word "Pi" in the verse implies one of the two types of
Vedaniya Karma.  Thus, after mentioning the types destroyed in the penultimate
time of the Aayogikevali Gunasthan, the following verse describes the types that
remain active until the final time.  **Annayara Veyaniyam Manuyauy Upchagoy Nav
Name. Thae Aogijino Ukkoss Jahann Eshkaram. ||66||**  **Shabaap:** Annayara
Veyaniyam - one of the two Vedaniya Karmas, Manuyauy - Manushyaayu, Andhagore -
Uchchagotra, Nav Name - nine types of Naam Karma, declare this. Aogijino -
Aayogi...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 440 saptatikA prakaraNa baMdhana, kArmaNa saMghAta, chaha saMsthAna, chaha
saMhanana, audArika aMgopAMga, varNacatuSka, manuSyAnupUrvI, parAghAta,
upaghAta, agurulaghu, prazasta aura aprazasta vihAyogati, pratyeka, aparyApta,
ucchvAsa, sthira, asthira, zubha, azubha, susvara, duHsvara, durbhaga, anAdeya,
ayaza kIrti aura  /  /  nirmANa  /  inake atirikta nIca gotra aura sAtA va asAtA
vedanIya meM se koI eka vedanIya krm| kula milAkara ye saba 10+45+2=57  /  hotI
hai| jinakA ayogikevalI avasthA ke upAntya samaya meM kSaya ho jAtA hai-
ducaramasamayabhaviyammi khIrahi  /  'ukta sattAvana prakRtiyoM meM varNacatuSka
meM varNa, gaMdha, rasa aura sparza, yaha cAra mUla bheda grahaNa kiye haiM,
inake avAntara bheda nhiiN| yadi ina mUla varNAdi cAra ke sthAna para unake
avAntara bheda grahaNa kiye jAyeM to upAntya samaya meM kSaya hone vAlI
prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA tihattara ho jAtI hai| yadyapi gAthA meM kisI bhI vedanIya
kA nAmollekha nahIM kiyA kintu gAthA meM jo 'pi'-zabda AyA hai usake dvArA
vedanIya karma ke donoM bhedoM meM se kisI eka vedanIya karma kA grahaNa ho jAtA
hai| isa prakAra se ayogikevalI guNasthAna ke upAntya samaya meM kSaya hone vAlI
prakRtiyoM kA ullekha karane ke bAda aba Age kI gAthA meM anta samaya taka udaya
rahane vAlI prakRtiyoM ko batalAte haiN| annayaraveyaNIyaM maNuyAuya upacagoya
nava nAme  /  thaeajogijiNo ukkosa jahanna eSakAraM  // 66 //  zabApa
annayarayaNIyaM-do meM se koI eka vedanIya karma, magupAuya-manuSyAyu,
andhagora-uccagotra, nava nAme-nAmakarma kI nau prakRtiyA~, eivedana karate
haiM. aogijiNo-ayogi

Page #479 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **Kevali Jin**, from the **Urkos-Uskrisht** (most
excellent) to the **Jahan-Jaghanya** (most inferior), **Apakara**... eleven.
**Gathaarth:** The **Ayogik Jin**, in the most excellent form, experiences the
**vedaniya** (afflictions) of one of the two **vedaniya**, **Manushyayu** (human
lifespan), **Uchch Gotra** (high lineage), and the nine **prakritis** (natures)
of **Namakarma** (name karma), thus experiencing twelve **prakritis** of
**vedaniya**. In the most inferior form, they experience eleven **prakritis** of
**vedaniya**.  **Visheshary:** In the **Ayogik Kevali** state, all **prakritis**
of **karma** except a few are destroyed by the end of the **Gunasthan** (state
of merit). The **prakritis** that are destroyed at the end are mentioned in this
**Gatha** as one **vedaniya karma**, **Manushyayu**, **Uchch Gotra**, and nine
**prakritis** of **Namakarma**.  Here (in the **Ayogik Kevali** state), the
reason for the destruction of one **vedaniya** is that at the end of the
thirteenth **Sayogik Kevali Gunasthan**, one of the two **vedaniya**, **Sata**
(pleasant) and **Asata** (unpleasant), is destroyed. If **Sata** is destroyed,
then the **Asata vedaniya** remains, and if **Asata** is destroyed, then the
**Sata vedaniya** remains. This is indicated in the **Gatha** by the term
"**Annyaraveyaniya**" - other **vedaniya**.  Furthermore, the reason for
mentioning twelve **prakritis** in the most excellent form and eleven in the
most inferior form is that not all beings experience the **Tirthankara** nature.
Only those who have bound it experience the **Tirthankara** nature. Therefore,
in the **Ayogik Kevali** state, a maximum of twelve **prakritis** and a minimum
of eleven **prakritis** are considered to be experienced.  The twelve
**prakritis** include the nine **prakritis** of **Namakarma**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha kevalI jina, urakosa-uskRSTa se, jahanna-jaghanya se,
epakAra.... gyAraha  /  gAthArtha--ayogijina utkRSTa rUpa se donoM vedanIya meM
se kisI eka vedanIya, manuSyAyu, uccagotra aura nAmakarma kI nau prakRtiyA~, isa
prakAra bAraha prakRtiyoM kA vedana karate haiM tathA jaghanya rUpa se gyAraha
prakRtiyoM kA bedana karate haiN| vizeSAryaayogikevalI guNasthAna meM upAntya
samaya taka karmoM kI kucha eka prakRtiyoM ko chor3akara zeSa prakRtiyoM kA
kSaya ho jAtA hai  /  lekina jo prakRtiyAM antima samaya meM kSaya hotI haiM
unake nAma isa gAthA meM batalAte haiM ki kisI eka vedanIya karma, manuSyAyu,
ucca gotra aura nAmakarma kI nau prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hotA hai| yahA~
(ayogikevalI avasthA meM) kisI eka vedanIya ke kSaya hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki
terahaveM sayogikevalI guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM sAtA aura asAtA vedanIya
meM se kisI eka vedanIya kA udayaviccheda ho jAtA hai| yadi sAtA kA biccheda
hotA hai to asAtA vedanIya kA aura asAtA kA viccheda hotA hai to sAtA vedanIya
kA udaya zeSa rahatA hai| isI bAta ko batalAne ke liye mAthA meM
'annayaraveyaNIya'-anyatara vedanIya pada diyA hai  /  isake alAvA gAthA meM
utkRSTa rUpa se bAraha aura jaghanya rUpa se gyAraha prakRtiyoM ke udaya ko
batalAne kA kAraNa yaha hai ki sabhI jIvoM ko tIrthaMkara prakRti kA udaya nahIM
hotA hai| tIrthakara prakRti kA udaya unhIM ko hotA hai jinhoMne usakA baMdha
kiyA ho| isaliye ayogikevalI avasthA meM adhika se adhika bAraha prakRtiyoM kA
aura kama se kama gyAraha prakRtiyoM kA udaya mAnA gayA hai  /  bAraha
prakRtiyoM ke nAmollekha meM nAmakarma kI nau prakRtiyAM haiM

Page #480 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The chapter on the seven categories, therefore, now in the next section, we will
tell the names of the nine types of name-karma that are eligible to arise in the
ineligible state. Manuyaga-human birth, vaad-five sense organs, tasbaapar-pras
badar, cha-and, parmatt-sufficient, subhagasumag, ai-adey, jasvitti-yaka koti,
sitpary-tirthankar, namass-name-karma, harshati-are, mav-nine, epa-these.    The
verse states that human birth, five sense organs, pras badar, sufficient,
auspicious, adey, fame, and tirthankar are the nine types of name-karma. Special
meaning- In the previous verse, it was indicated that the nine types of name-
karma arise until the last moment of the ineligible kevali guna-sthana, but
their names were not mentioned. Therefore, in this verse, the names of the
aforementioned nine types of name-karma are mentioned as follows: 1. Human
birth, 2. Five sense organs, 3. Ara, 4. Badar, 5. Sufficient, 6. Auspicious, 7.
Adeg, 8. Fame, 9. Tirthankar. After mentioning the nine types of name-karma, the
next verse discusses the difference of opinion regarding the arising of
manushyanupurvi. That (human) birth along with thirteen, the last moment of the
tamov moksha-gami jiva, the existence of the karma types,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa ataeva aba agalI mAthA meM ayogi avasthA meM udayayogya
nAmakarma kI mI prakRtiyoM ke nAma batalAte haiN| maNuyagai jAe tasa bAyaraM ca
pajjattasabhagamAhajaM  /  jasa kittI tisthayara nAmassa havaMti nava eyA  // 67
//  zambArtha - maNuyagA- manuSyagati, vAda-paMcendriya jAti, tasabApara-prasa
bAdara, caaura, paramatta-paryApta, subhagaMsumaga, Ai -Adeya, jasavittI--
yakAkoti, sitpayara-tIrthakara, nAmassa-nAmakarma kI, harSati haiM, mava-nau,
epaa-ye| gAthAmanuSyagati, paMcendriya jAti, sa, bAdara, paryApta, subhaga,
Adeya, yaza:kIti aura tIrthaMkara ye nAmakarma nau prakRtiyAM haiN| vizeSArtha-
pUrva gAthA meM saMketa kiyA gayA thA ki nAmakarma kI nau prakRttiyoM kA udaya
ayogikevalI guNasthAna ke aMtima samaya taka rahatA hai kintu unake nAma kA
nirdeza nahIM kiyA thaa| ata: isa gAthA meM nAmakarma kI ukta nau prakRtiyoM ke
nAma isa prakAra basalAye haiM.-1. manuSyagati, 2. paMcendriya jAti, 3. arA, 4.
bAdara, 5. paryApta, 6. subhaga, 7. Adega, 8. yazaHvIti, 6. tIrthakara  /
nAmakarma kI nau prakRtiyoM ko batalAne ke bAda aba Age kI gAthA meM
manuSyAnupUrvI ke udaya ko lekara pAye jAne vAle matAntara kA vAthana karate
haiN| taccAdhvisahiyA terasa bharyAsaddhiyarasa rimammi  /  saMtaMsagamukkosaM
jahannayaM bArasa havaMti  // 6 //  zabdArtha-taccAgupuzyisahiyA-usa (manuSya
kI) jAnupUrthI sahita, terasa-teraha, bhavasiddhiyamsa-tamava mokSagAmI jIva ke,
carimammi carama samaya meM, saMtasagekarma prakRtiyoM kI sattA,

Page #481 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixty Karmas Text - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Kosam - In the most
excellent way, in the victorious way, the Parsva Jinarah rejoices. Gapaary - In
the ultimate time of the liberated soul, there are thirteen natures in the most
excellent way, including the human-like, and twelve natures in the most inferior
way. Special Meaning - This verse mentions a difference of opinion. Some
Acharyas believe that the human-like nature also arises in the ultimate time of
the Aayogi Kevali Gunasthan. Therefore, according to their opinion, there are
thirteen natures in the ultimate time and twelve natures in the most inferior
way. It has been previously indicated that the natures which do not arise in the
Aayogi state, their existence is severed in the penultimate time. The human-like
nature arises only in the first, second, and fourth Gunasthanas, therefore it
cannot arise in the Aayogi state. For this reason, its existence is said to be
severed in the penultimate time of the Aayogi Kevali state. However, some other
Acharyas believe that the human-like nature's existence is severed in the final
time of the Aayogi state. Due to this difference of opinion, it is believed that
there are thirteen natures in the ultimate time of the Aayogi state in the most
excellent way, and twelve natures in the most inferior way. This difference of
opinion is being explained in the following verse. The summary of the above
statement is that according to the opinion of the author of the Saptaatika, the
human-like nature is destroyed in the penultimate time, resulting in the
existence of twelve or eleven natures arising in the final time. However,
according to the opinion of some Acharyas, the human-like nature still exists in
the final time, therefore there are thirteen or twelve natures in the final
time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTa karmagrantha - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - kosaM--utkRSTa rUpa se,
sahanamaM-jayanya rUpa se, pArasajhAraha, harSati hotI hai  /  gApArya-tadbhava
mokSagAmI jIva ke carama samaya meM utkRSTa rUpa se manuSyAnupUrvI sahita teraha
prakRtiyoM kI aura jaghanya rUpa se bAraha prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /
vizeSArtha- isa gAthA meM matAntara kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai ki kucha AcArya
ayogikevalI guNasthAna ke carama samaya meM manuSyAnupUrvI kA bhI udaya mAnate
haiM, isaliye unake mata se carama samaya meM teraha prakRtiyoM kI aura jaghanya
rUpa se bAraha prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| pahale yaha saMketa kiyA jA cukA
hai ki jina prakRtiyoM kA udaya ayogi avasthA meM nahIM hotA hai, unakI sattA kA
viccheda upAntya samaya meM ho jAtA hai| manuSyAnupUrvI kA udaya pahale, dUsare
aura cauthe guNasthAna meM hI hotA hai, isaliye isakA udaya ayogi avasthA meM
nahIM ho sakatA hai| isI kAraNa isakI sattA kA viccheda ayogikevalI avasthA ke
upAntya samaya meM batalAyA hai| lekina anya kucha AcAryoM kA mata hai ki
manuSyAnupUrvI kI sattva-nyucchitti ayogi avasthA ke aMtima samaya meM hotI hai|
isa matAntara ke kAraNa ayogi avasthA ke carama samaya meM utkRSTa rUpa se
teraha prakRtiyoM kI aura jaghanya rUpa se bAraha prakRtiyoM kI sattA mAnI jAtI
hai  /  isa matAntara kA spaSTIkaraNa Age kI gAthA meM kiyA jA rahA hai|
pUrvokta kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai ki saptatikA ke kartA ke matAnusAra
manuSyAnupUrvI kA upAntya samaya meM kSaya ho jAtA hai, jisase aMtima samaya meM
udayagata bAraha prakRtiyoM yA gyAraha prakRtiyoM kI sattA pAI jAtI hai  /
lekina kucha AcAryoM ke matAnusAra aMtima samaya meM manuSyAnupUrvI kI sattA
aura rahatI hai ata: aMtima samaya meM teraha yA bAraha prakRtiyoM kI sattA pAI
jAtI hai|

Page #482 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Seven  Now, in the next verse, we clarify the reason why other
Acharyas believe in the existence of the Manushyanupurvi until the final moment.
**Verse 6:**  *Manuyagaisahgayao bhavakhittavidhagajeevavaag ti.
Beyagiyannarupace cha charim bhavisyas khiti.*  **Translation:**  The
*Manuyagaisahgayao* - the *bhavalittavivag* (karma that ripens in the realm of
existence), *kṣetravipaki* (karma that ripens in the realm of the body), and
*jīvavaag* (karma that ripens in the soul) - are obtained along with the human
birth. The *beyagiyannarupace* (one of the five vedaniya karmas) and the *uchva*
(high gotra) are also obtained. These karmas are destroyed in the final moment
of the *bhavyajīva* (a soul destined for liberation).  **Explanation:**  This
verse states that the *Manuyagaisahgayao* - all the *bhavalittavipaki*,
*kṣetravipaki*, and *jīvavaag* karmas, along with one of the five *vedaniya*
karmas and a high *gotra*, are destroyed in the final moment of the
*ayogikevali* (a soul who has attained liberation without any effort).  *
**Bhavalittavipaki:** These karmas ripen in the realm of existence, such as the
four *āyu* (life spans). * **Kṣetravipaki:** These karmas ripen in the realm of
the body, such as the four *ānupūrvi* (previous births). * **Jīvavaag:** These
karmas ripen in the soul, such as the five *jñānāvarana* (knowledge
obscurations).  Here, the human lifespan is *bhavalittavipaki*, the
*Manushyanupurvi* is *kṣetravipaki*, and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chcha saptatikA prakaraNa aba anya AcAryoM dvArA manuSyAnupUrvI kI sattA aMtima
samaya taka mAne jAne ke kAraNa ko agalI gAthA meM spaSTa karate haiN|
maNuyagaisahagayAo bhavakhittavidhAgajIvavAga ti  /  beyagiyannayarupace ca
carima bhavisyasa khIti  // 6 //  zavAyaMmagupagaisahagayAo-manuSyagati ke sAtha
udaya , ko prApta hone vAlI, bhavalittavivAga-maba aura kSetra vipAkI, jIvavAga
si-jIvavipAkI, yaNiyannayara-anyatara vedanIya (koI eka vedanIya karma), ucvaM-
ucca gotra, tra-aura, carima bhaviyassaparama samaya meM bhavya jIva ke,
khIyaMtiAya hotI hai| gAmAI.. manuSyagati ke sAtha udaya ko prApta hone vAlI
bhavavipAkI, kSetravipAkI aura jIvavipAkI prakRtiyoM kA tathA kisI eka vedanIya
aura ucca gotra kA tadbhava mokSagAmI bhavya jIva ke carama samaya meM kSaya
hotA hai| vizeSArtha-isa gAthA meM batalAyA gayA hai ki-'maNuyagaisahagayAo'
manuSyagati ke sAtha udaya ko prApta hone vAlI jitanI bhI bhavavipAkI,
kSetravipAkI aura jIvavipAkI prakRtiyAM haiM tathA koI eka vedanIya aura ucca
gotra, inakA ayogikevalI guNasthAna ke aMtima samaya meM kSaya hotA hai|
bhavavipAkI, kSetravipAkI aura jIvavipAkI kA artha yaha hai ki jo prakRtiyAM
naraka Adi bhava kI pradhAnatA se apanA phala detI haiM, ghe bhavavipAkI kahI
jAtI haiM, jaise cAroM Ayu  /  jo prakRtiyAM kSetra kI pradhAnatA se apanA phala
detI haiM ve kSetratripAkI kahalAtI haiM, jaise cAroM aanupuurvii| jo prakRtiyAM
apanA phala jIva meM detI haiM unheM jIva vipAkI kahate haiM, jaise pAMca
jJAnAvaraNa Adi  /  yahA~ manuSyAyu bhavavipAkI hai, manuSyAnupUrvI kSetravipAkI
aura

Page #483 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth, 445  The nine types of **Nama Karma** mentioned earlier
are **Jiva-vipaki** (affecting the soul). In addition to these, there are two
more types: **Vedaniya** (painful) and **Uchcha-gotra** (high lineage).
Combining these two with the previous nine, we get a total of thirteen types of
**Karma**. These thirteen types are destroyed at the final moment of the
**Aghogikevali** (highest state of liberation) of a **Bhavasiddhik** (soul
destined for liberation).  **Alternative View:**  The essence of the above
statement, including the alternative view, is that **Manushyanupurvi** (karma
related to human birth) arises only when the soul enters the **Manushya-Gati**
(human realm). According to this rule, at the final moment of a **Bhavasiddhik**
soul, twelve types of **Karma** are destroyed, excluding the **Manushyanupurvi**
or the **Tirthankara** (liberated soul) type. However, according to this view,
**Manushyanupurvi** is destroyed at the penultimate moment of the
**Ayogikevali** (state of liberation) because it does not arise in the
**Ayogikevali** state.  **Karma with Arising:**  The types of **Karma** that
arise do not undergo **Stibukasankrama** (transition from one state to another).
Therefore, their **Dalik** (subtle form) is visible at the final moment of their
arising. This leads to their **Sattavichched** (cessation of existence) at the
final moment.  **Four Anupurvi:**  The four **Anupurvi** (karma related to
birth) are **Kshetravipaki** (affecting the body). They arise only in the
**Apantaral** (intermediate) state. Therefore, they cannot arise in the
**Bhavasiddhik** state. This is why **Manushyanupurvi** does not cease to exist
at the final moment of the **Ayogikevali** state, but rather at the
**Dvicharam** (second last) moment.  **Conclusion:**  The earlier statement
about the cessation of existence of **Sattavan** (seven) types of **Karma** at
the **Dvicharam** moment and the cessation of eleven types of **Karma** at the
final moment, excluding the **Manushyanupurvi** or the **Tirthankara** type, is
based on this view.  **Digambara Literature:**  The **Digambara** literature on
**Karmakanda** (karma theory) also mentions a similar view, stating that
**Manushyanupurvi** ceases to exist at the final moment of the **Maudahav**
(state of liberation).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 445 pUrvokta nAmakarma kI nau prakRtiyAM jIvavipAkI haiM
tathA inake atirikta koI eka vedanIya tathA uccagotra, ina do prakRtiyoM ko aura
milAne se kula teraha prakRtiyAM ho jAtI haiM jinakA kSaya bhava siddhika jIva
ke aghogikevalI guNasthAna ke aMtima samaya meM hotA hai  /  _ matAntara sahita
pUrvokta kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai ki manuSyAnupUrvI kA jaba bhI udaya hotA
hai taba usakA udaya manuSyagati ke sAtha hI hotA hai| isa niyama ke anusAra
bhavasiddhika jIva ke aMtima samaya meM teraha yA tIthaMkara prakRti ke binA
bAraha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hotA hai| kintu manuSyAnupUrvI prakRti ayogikevalI
guNasthAna ke upAntya samaya meM laya ho jAtI hai isa matAnusAra manuSyAnupUrvI
kA ayogikevalI avasthA meM udaya nahIM hotA hai ata: usakA ayogi avasthA ke
upAntya samaya meM kSaya ho jAtA hai| jo prakRtiyAM udaya vAlI hotI haiM unakA
stibUkasaMkrama nahIM hotA hai jisase unake dalika mva-svarUpa se apane-apane
udaya ke aMtima samaya meM dikhAI dete haiM aura isaliye unakA aMtima samaya meM
sattAviccheda hotA hai 1 cAroM AnupUrvI kSetravipAkI prakRtiyAM haiM, unakA
udaya kevala apAntarAla gati meM hI hotA hai| isaliye bhavastha jIva ke unakA
udaya saMbhava nahIM hai aura isIliye manuSyAnupUrvI kA ayomi avasthA ke aMtima
samaya meM sattAviccheda na hokara dvicarama samaya meM hI usakA sanA viccheda
ho jAtA hai| pahale jo dvidharama samaya meM sastAvana prakRtiyoM kA
sattAviccheda aura aMtima samaya meM bAraha yA tIrthakara prakRti ke binA
gyAraha prakRtiyoM kA sattAviccheda batalAyA hai, vaha isI mata ke anusAra
batalAyA hai| 1 digambara sAhitya go0 karmakAMDa meM eka isI mata kA ullekha hai
ki manuSyAnupUrvI ko maudahaveM guNasthAna ke aMtima samaya meM satvayyucchitti
hotI hai

Page #484 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **446**  After the complete destruction of karmas in the
Sapta-tika stage, the soul attains the Siddha-sthana (state of liberation)
through righteous conduct and upward movement in a single moment. As stated in
the necessary commentary:  "Just as a boat is used to cross a river, so too is
the soul used to attain liberation."  After mentioning the different views on
the separation of the natures in the A-yogi state in the previous verse, the
following verse explains the state of the pure soul free from karmas at the end
of the A-yogi state.  **70**  "They experience the essence of the Triratna
(three jewels), which is free from suffering, infinite, unobstructed, and the
peak of happiness in the world, pure, all-pervading, free from disease,
incomparable, natural, and eternal."  **Explanation:**  After the destruction of
karmas, the soul experiences the essence of the Triratna, which is the peak of
happiness in the world, pure, all-pervading, free from disease, incomparable,
natural, and eternal.  **Special Note:**  The verse describes the state of the
soul after the destruction of karmas, stating that it experiences happiness.
**Udayagabar Granth, verse 34:**  "But in the first book of the Pavala, both
views are mentioned, similar to the Sapta-tika. See Dhavala, first book, page
224."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 446 saptatikA prakaraNa ni:zeSa rUpa se karmoM kA kSaya ho jAne ke bAda jIva
eka samaya meM hI Rjugati se Urdhvagamana karake siddhi sthAna ko prApta kara
letA hai  /  Avazyaka cUNi meM kahA hai. jasie nIvo'vagAkho sAvaiyAe ogAhaNAe uI
muga R . 4 samaya meM saha ayogi avasthA meM prakRtiyoM ke viccheda ke matAntara
kA ullekha karane ke bAda aba Age kI gAthA meM yaha batalAte haiM ki ayogi
avasthA ke aMtima samaya meM kamoM kA samUla nAza ho jAne ke bAda niSkarmA
zuddha AtmA kI avasthA kaisI hotI hai| aha
suiyasayalajagasiharamatyanisvamasahAyasivisuhaM  /  anihaNamavAbAhaM
tirayaNasAraM aNuhavaMti  // 70 //  zAyA-graha-isake bAda (karma maya hone ke
bAva), suiya-.. ekAMta zuddha', sayala samasta, jagasihara jagata ke sukha ke
zikhara tulpa, azya-roga rahita, niyama-nirupama, upamArahita, sahAvasvAbhAvika,
. sivisura-mokSa sukha ko, amiharga-nAza rahita, ananta, abbAbAI-avyAbAgha,
lirayaNasAra-ratna traya ke sAra rUpa, aNuhati-anubhava karate haiN| gAthArSa-
karma kSaya hone ke bAda jIva ekAMta zuddha, samasta jagata ke saba sukhoM se
bhI bar3hakara, rogarahita, upamA rahita, svAbhAvika, nAzarahita, bAdhArahita,
ratnatraya ke sAra rUpa mokSa sukha kA anubhava karate haiN| vizeSA-gAthA meM
karmakSaya ho jAne ke bAda jIva kI sthiti kA varNana kiyA hai ki vaha sukha kA
anubhava karatA hai| udayagabAra garANa serasa carimamhi vocchiNNA ||34 /  /
kintu pavalA prathama pustaka meM saptatikA ke samAna donoM hI matoM kA sallekha
kiyA hai  /  dekho dhayalA, prathama pustaka, pR. 224  /

Page #485 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  Nine special qualities of the happiness attained after
achieving the state of being beyond karma are given. The first quality is 'Su-
iyam', which means pure. The commentator Acharya Malayagiri has defined
'Shuchik' as pure solitude. This means that the happiness attained by worldly
beings is mixed with attachment and aversion, but the happiness attained by
Siddha beings is completely devoid of attachment and aversion. Therefore, the
happiness they experience arises from the pure soul, and it is not caused by
external objects, their association or separation, or by desires and aversions.
The second quality is 'Sayal' - Sakal, which means complete. The reason why
Moksha happiness is called complete is that in the worldly state, the beings
remain connected to their karmas, which prevents them from attaining spiritual
happiness. Even if they do attain spiritual happiness due to right faith, right
knowledge, etc., it is limited and incomplete due to the presence of anxiety.
However, since all obstacles are removed for Siddhas, they attain complete
happiness arising from perfect liberation. This is why the quality 'Sayal' is
used.  The third quality is 'Jag Sih' - Jag Shikhar, which means that the
happiness of Siddha beings is the highest among all happiness in the world.
Because happiness is one of the infinite inherent qualities of the soul. As long
as this being remains in the world, this quality remains suppressed. Even if it
manifests, it manifests only partially. But when the obstacles for Siddha beings
are removed, the quality of happiness manifests in its full form. Therefore, the
happiness of Siddha beings is the highest among all types of happiness in the
world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagranma karmAtIta avasthA prApti ke bAda prApta hone vAle sukha ke
kramazaH nau vizeSaNa diye haiM  /  unameM pahalA vizeSaNa hai-- 'suiyaM' jisakA
artha hotA hai zucika TIkAkAra AcArya malayagiri ne zucika kA artha ekAnta
zuddha kiyA hai| isakA yaha bhAva hai ki saMsArI jIvoM ko prApta hone vAlA sukha
rAgadveSa se milA huA hotA hai, kintu siddha jIvoM ko prApta hone vAle sukha meM
rAgadveSa kA sarvathA abhAva hotA hai, isaliye unako jo sukha hotA hai vaha
zuddha AtmA se utpanna hotA hai, usameM bAharI vastu kA saMyoga aura viyoga
tathA iSTAniSTa kalpanA kAraNa nahIM hai  /  dUsarA vizeSaNa hai- 'sayala' -
sakala  /  jisakA artha sampUrNa hotA hai  /  mokSa sukha ko sampUrNa kahane kA
kAraNa yaha hai ki saMsAra avasthA meM jIvoM ke karmoM kA saMbaMdha banA rahatA
hai, jisase eka to Atmika sukha kI prApti hotI ho nahIM aura kadAcit
samyagdarzana Adi ke nimitta se Atmika sukha kI prApti hotI bhI hai to usameM
vyAkulatA kA abhAva na hone se vaha kicinmAtrA meM sImita mAtrA meM prApta hotA
hai  /  kintu siddhoM ke saba bAdhaka kAraNoM kA abhAva ho jAne se pUrNa siddhi
janya sukha prApta hotA hai| isI bhAva ko batalAne ke liye 'sayala' vizeSaNa
diyA gayA hai  /  447 tIsarA vizeSaNa 'jaga siha' - jaga zikhara hai jisakA
artha hai ki jagata meM jitane bhI sukha haiM, siddha jIvoM kA sukha una saba
meM pradhAna hai  /  kyoMki AtmA ke ananta anujIvI guNoM meM sukha bhI eka guNa
hai| ata: jaba taka yaha jIva saMsAra meM banA rahatA hai, vAsa karatA hai taba
taka usakA yaha guNa ghAtita rahatA hai| kadAcit pragaTa bhI hotA hai, to
svarUpa mAtrA meM pragaTa hotA hai| kintu siddha jIvoM ke pratibandhaka kAraNoM
ke dUra ho jAne se sukha guNa apane pUrNa rUpa meM pragaTa ho jAtA hai, isaliye
jagata meM jitane bhI prakAra ke sukha haiM, unameM siddha jIvoM

Page #486 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
44% The chapter of the Sapttatika is primarily about happiness, and this is made
clear by the Jagashikhar epithet. The fourth epithet is 'Aruy' - free from
disease. This means that there is not even a trace of disease in that happiness.
Because the origin of diseases and other defects comes from the body, and where
there is a body, there is bound to be the origin of disease, 'Shariram
Vyadhimndiram'. But Siddha Jivas are without bodies, their karma that caused
them to obtain a body has also been removed, therefore the happiness of Siddha
Jivas is free from diseases and other defects.  The fifth epithet for the
happiness of Siddha Jivas is 'Nirukm' - without comparison. The reason for this
is that 'Up' - from above or from nearness, the process of measuring is called
'Upma'. The meaning of this is that the qualities, dharma and synonyms of each
thing are different from the qualities, dharma and synonyms of another thing,
therefore the process of making its knowledge known through an example by
looking at a little similarity is called 'Upma'. But this process can only
happen in things that are perceivable by the senses, and the happiness of the
Siddha Parameshti is beyond the senses, therefore it cannot be explained through
'Upma'. There is no such thing in the world that can be compared to it,
therefore the happiness of the Siddha Parameshti is called 'Anupam'. The sixth
epithet is 'Svaabhavbhoot Sahaav'. The meaning of this is that worldly happiness
is produced by the means of soft touch, delicious food, the fragrance of various
types of flowers, perfumes, oils etc. that make the atmosphere fragrant, the
sight of beautiful forms, sweet music etc., but this is not the case with Siddha
happiness, it is the nature of the soul, it is not produced by the combination
of external desirable and pleasing things.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44% saptatikA prakaraNa kA sukha pradhAnabhUta hai aura isI bAta ko jagazikhara
vizeSaNa dvArA spaSTa kiyA gayA hai| _ cauthA vizeSaNa 'aruya'-roga rahita hai|
arthAt usa sukha meM leza mAtra bhI vyAdhi-roga nahIM hai| kyoMki rogAdi doSoM
kI utpatti zarIra ke nimitta se hotI hai aura jahA~ zarIra hai vahA~ roga kI
utpatti avazya hotI hai'zarIraM vyAdhimaMdiram'  /  lekina siddha jIva zarIra
rahita haiM, unake zarIra prApti kA nimittakaraNa karma bhI dUra ho gayA hai,
isIliye siddha jIvoM kA sukha rogAdi doSoM se rahita hai| _siddha jIvoM ke
sustra ke liye pAMcavA vizeSaNa nirukma' diyA hai pAnI upamA rahita hai| isakA
kAraNa yaha hai ki upa arthAt upara se yA nikaTatA se jo mApa karane kI prakriyA
hai, use upamA kahate haiN| isakA bhAva yaha hai pratyeka vastu ke guNa, dharma
aura usakI paryAya dUsarI vastu ke guNa, dharma aura paryAya se bhinna haiM,
ata: thor3I-bahuta samAnatA ko dekhakara dRSTAMta dvArA usakA parijJAna karAne
kI prakriyA ko upamA kahate haiN| parantu yaha prakriyA indriyagocara padArthoM
meM hI ghaTita ho sakatI hai aura siddha parameSThI kA sukha to atIndriya hai,
isaliye upamA dvArA usakA parizAna nahIM karAyA jA sakatA hai| saMsAra meM
tatsadRza aisA koI padArtha nahIM jisakI use upamA dI jA sake, isaliye siddha
parameSThi ke sukha ko anupama kahA hai| chaThA vizeSaNa svabhAvabhUta sahAva'
hai| isakA Azaya yaha hai ki saMsArI sukha to komala sparza, susvAdu bhojana,
vAyumaNDala ko surabhita karane vAle aneka prakAra ke puSpa, itra, tela Adi ke
gaMdha, ramaNIya rUpa ke avalokana, madhura saMgIta Adi ke nimitta se utpanna
hotA hai, lekina siddha sukha kI yaha bAta nahIM hai, vaha to AtmA kA svabhAva
hai, vaha bAhya iSTa manojJa padArthoM ke saMyoga se utpanna nahIM hotA hai  /

Page #487 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth  **446. Seventh Adjective: 'Anihanam' - Undying**  This
means that after attaining the state of Siddha, it never perishes. Its inherent
infinite qualities remain eternally stable by nature. Happiness is also one of
these qualities, therefore it never perishes.  **Eighth Adjective: 'Adhabaah' -
Uninterrupted**  This means that it is free from obstacles, there is no gap or
interruption from any source. Obstacles arise in that which is caused by others
or is temporary. However, the happiness of Siddha beings is neither caused by
others nor is it temporary. It is the inherent nature of the soul and an
eternal, ever-present Dharma. Therefore, it is called uninterrupted.  **Final -
Ninth Adjective: 'Tirmanasar' - Essence of the Three Jewels**  This means that
Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct are the three jewels, known as
the Triratna. The happiness attained by Siddhas is their essence. Because Right
Faith, etc., are the cause of karma destruction, and after karma destruction,
Siddha happiness is attained. Therefore, Siddha happiness is called the essence
of the Triratna.  Samsaric beings worship the Triratna, which is in the form of
Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct, so that they can attain the
state of freedom from suffering. The expression of happiness lies in freedom
from suffering. Therefore, the happiness attained by Siddhas is described as the
essence of the Triratna.  Attaining the true nature of the soul is the goal of
all living beings, and karma is the obstacle to attaining that nature. After the
destruction of karma, there is nothing else left to attain. The text describes
the various states of karma, the means of its destruction, and after karma
destruction...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 446 sAtavAM vizeSaNa 'anihaNaM'-anidhana hai  /  isakA
bhAva yaha hai ki siddha avasthA prApta ho jAne ke bAda usakA kabhI nAza nahIM
hotA hai  /  usake svAbhAvika anaMtaguNa sadA svabhAva rUpa se sthira rahate
haiM, unameM sukha bhI eka guNa hai, ataH usakA bhI kabhI nAza nahIM hotA hai  /
AThavAM vizeSaNa hai-'adhAbAha'-avyAbAdha  /  arthAta bAdhArahita hai usameM
kisI prakAra kA antarAla nahIM aura na kisI ke dvArA usameM rukAvaTa AtI hai| jo
anya ke nimitta se hotA hai yA asthAyI hotA hai, usI meM bAdhA utpanna hotI hai|
parantu siddha jIvoM kA sukha na to anya ke nimitta se hI utpanna hotA hai aura
na koI kAla ke ho Tikane vAlA hai| vaha to AtmA kA apanA hI hai aura sadA-
sarvadA vyakta rahane vAlA dharma hai  /  isIliye use avyAbAdha kahA hai| _
antima-novAM vizeSaNa triratnasAra 'tiramaNasAraM' hai| yAnI samyagdarzana,
samyamzAna aura samyakcAritra yaha tIna ratna haiM, jinheM ratnatraya kahate
haiM  /  siddhoM ko prApta hone vAlA sukha unakA sAraphala hai  /  kyoMki
samyagdarzana Adi ratnatraya karmakSaya kA kAraNa hai aura karmakSaya ke bAda
siddha sukha kI prApti hotI hai| isIliye siddhi sukha ko ratnatraya kA sAra kahA
gayA hai| saMsArI jIva samyagdarzana, samyagjJAna aura samyakcAritra rUpa
ratnatraya kI ArAdhanA isIliye karatA hai ki use nirAkula avasthA kI prApti ho|
sukha kI abhivyakti nirAkulatA meM hI hai| isI kAraNa se siddhoM ko prApta hone
vAle sukha ko ratnatraya kA sAra batAyA hai| AtmasvarUpa kI prApti karanA
jIvamAtra kA lakSya hai aura usa svarUpa prApti meM bAghaka kAraNa karma hai|
karmoM kA kSaya ho jAne ke anantara anya kucha prApta karanA zeSa nahIM rahatA
hai| graMtha meM karma kI vibhinna sthitiyoM, unake kSaya ke upAya aura karma
kSaya ke pazcAt

Page #488 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
450 The complete discussion of the self-realization obtained from the Saptaatika
chapter has been done. Therefore, now the author says a verse to conclude the
book:  **Verse 71:** Difficult to comprehend, subtle, with the ultimate meaning,
four-fold, delightful, with many divisions, and with the perspective of the eye,
this is the meaning of the verse.  The meaning of the verse is that the
perspective of the eye is difficult to comprehend, subtle, with the ultimate
meaning, delightful, and with many divisions. Those who want to know the special
meaning of the bonds, arising, and existence of karma should know all this from
it.  **Special meaning:** The verse concludes the book by stating that this
Saptaatika book is written based on the perspective of the eye. Thus, after
indicating the authenticity of the book, it is stated that the perspective of
the eye is difficult to comprehend, not everyone can understand it easily. But
those who have a subtle intellect, who are curious to know subtle things, are
the only ones who can enter it. The reason for calling the perspective of the
eye difficult to comprehend is that although it presents the true meaning
beautifully and logically, there are many divisions and subdivisions, which is
why it is difficult to understand. Based on what can be known by churning it
with one's own intellect,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 450 saptatikA prakaraNa prApta hone vAlI Atmasthiti kA pUrNarUpeNa vivecana
kiyA jA cukA hai| ata: aba graMthakAra graMtha kA upasaMhAra karane ke lie gAthA
kahate haiM ki-. durahigama-niuNa-paramattha-ruira-bahubhaMgadiSTivAyAo  /
atthA aNusariyacyA baMdhoSayasaMtakammANaM  // 71 /  /  _zamA-rahigama-atizrama
se jAnane yogya, miNasUkSma buddhigamya, paramastha-yayApasthita arthavAlA,
cAra-rucikara, AhlAdakArI, bahubhaMgA-bahuta maMgavAsA, biTTinAyAyo-dRSTibAda
aMga, AsthA-vizeSa artha vAlA, anusariyaNyA-jAnane ke liye, . pAnAtikammA...
zAma pada kii| yArSa-dRSTivAda aMga atizrama se jAnane yogya, sUkSmabuddhigamya,
yathAvasthita artha kA pratipAdaka, AhlAdakArI, bahuta bhaMga vAlA hai  /  jo
baMdha, udaya aura sattA rUpa kamoM ko vizeSa rUpa se jAnanA cAhate haiM, unheM
yaha saba isase jAnanA caahiye| vizeSArtha- gAthA meM graMtha kA upasaMhAra
karate hue batalAyA hai ki yaha saptatikA graMtha dRSTivAda aMga ke AdhAra para
likhA gayA hai| isa prakAra se graMtha kI prAmANikatA kA saMketa karane ke bAda
batalAyA hai ki dRSTivAda aMga durabhigamya hai, saba isako saralatA se nahIM
samajha sakate haiN| lekina jinakI buddhi sUkSma hai, sUkSma padArtha ko jAnane
ke liye jijJAsu haiM, ve hI isameM praveza kara pAte haiN| dRSTivAda aMga ko
durabhigamya batAne kA kAraNa yaha hai ki yadyapi isameM yathAvasthita artha kA
sundaratA se yuktipUrvaka pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai lekina aneka bhedaprabheda
haiM, isIliye isako kaThinatA se jAnA jAtA hai| isakA apanI buddhi se maMthana
karake jo kucha bhI jJAta kiyA jA sakA usake AdhAra

Page #489 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Karma Granth 451  This Granth has been composed, but those who are
particularly inquisitive should study the Dristivad Anga, and from it,
understand the distinctions of karma in terms of bondage, arising, and
existence. The Granth called Graha Saptathika is like a guide for them.  Now,
after directing towards the authenticity, basis, etc. of the Granth, the author,
acknowledging his limitations, concludes the Granth with a gatha:  **"Jo jasma
aparaipuno attho appagameṇa baddo ti. Tam khamiūṇ bahusuyā pūreūrg parikahantu."
(72)**  **Explanation:**  * **Jo:** Where * **Jasma:** In which *
**Aparaipuno:** Incomplete * **Attho:** Meaning * **Appagameṇa:** By the limited
knowledge of the Agamas * **Baddo ti:** Has been bound * **Tam:** That *
**Khamiūṇ:** By forgiving * **Bahusuyā:** The learned * **Pūreūrg:** Should
complete * **Parikahantu:** The explanation  **Gatha:**  I am a limited knower
of the Agamas, therefore, whatever incomplete meaning I have bound in this
chapter, is my fault, my oversight. Therefore, the learned should forgive my
fault and oversight, and complete the meaning while explaining it.
**Commentary:**  In this gatha, the author, acknowledging his limitations,
states that he is neither a scholar nor a learned person, but a limited knower.
Therefore, he does not claim that the Granth has been able to fully express the
specific meaning. It is possible that due to his limited knowledge, he may not
have been able to fully fulfill the intention of presenting the subject matter
in this Granth. For this, he apologizes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha 451 se isa graMtha kI racanA kI hai, lekina vizeSa
jijJAsujana dRSTivAda aMga kA adhyayana kareM, aura usase baMdha, udaya aura
sattA rUpa karmoM ke bhedaprabhedoM ko smjheN| graha saptatikA nAmaka grantha to
unake liye mArgadarzaka ke samAna haiN| aba graMtha kI prAmANikatA, AdhAra Adi
kA nirdeza karane ke bAda aMdhakAra apanI laghutA pradarzita karate hue graMtha
kI samApti ke lie gAthA kahate haiM jo jasma apaDipuno attho appAgameNa baddho
ti| taM khamiUNa bahusuyA pUreUrga parikahaMtu  // 72 //  zavAryo-jisa, jattha-
jahAM, apariyo- apUrNa, astho- artha, appAgameNa-apazrata, Agama ke malpa zAtA-
maiMne, bayoti-nibaddha kiyA hai, usake liye. amijhaNa- kSamA karake, bahasupA-
bahuzruta, pareUNaM--paripUrNa karaphe, parikahatu-malI prakAra se pratipAdana
kreN| gApA-maiM to Agama kA alpa jJAtA hai, isalie maiMne jisa prakaraNa meM
jitanA aparipUrNa artha nibaddha kiyA hai, vaha merA doSa-pramAda hai| ataH
bahuzruta jana mere usa doSa-pramAda ko kSamA karake usa artha kI pUrti karane
ke sAtha kathana kreN| viSAeM-gAthA meM apanI laghutA pragaTa karate hue
graMthakAra likhate haiM ki maiM na to vidvAna hai aura na bahabhUta, kintu
alpajJa hai| isaliye yaha dAvA nahIM karatA hU~ ki graMtha sarvAMgINa rUpa se
vizeSa artha ko pragaTa karane vAlA bana sakA hai| isa graMtha meM jisa viSaya
ko pratipAdana karane kI dhAraNA kI huI thI, sambhava hai apanI alpajJatA ke
kAraNa usako pUrI taraha se na nibhA pAyA hoUM to isake liye merA pramAda

Page #490 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
452 This chapter on the seven categories is the cause, and there may be some
errors here and there. But those who are learned should forgive my faults and,
while filling in any gaps, should continue to speak in this way. This is my
humble request. The cause of literature in the ITAFF is now complete.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 452 saptatikA prakaraNa hI kAraNa hai aura yatra-tatra skhalita bhI ho gayA hoU
kintu jo bahuzruta jana haiM, ve mere isa doSa ko bhUla jAyeM aura jisa
prakaraNa meM jo kamI raha gaI ho, usakI pUrti karate hue kathana karane kA
vyAna rakheM, yahI vinamra nivedana hai| iTAFF hinda mA sAhitikA kAraNa samApta
huaa|

Page #491 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 1. Original Verses of the Sixth Karmagrantha D Glossary of Technical
Terms in Six Karmagranthas [Glossary of Terms Indicating Pind-Prakriti in Verses
and Explanations - Alphabetical Order of Verses. Index for the Explanation of
Karmagranthas

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 1 SaSTha karmagrantha kI mUla gAthAe~ D chaha karmagranyoM meM Agata
pAribhASika zabdoM kA koSa [ karmagrampoM ko gAthAoM evaM vyAkhyA meM Agata
piNDa-prakRti sUcaka zabdoM kA koSa - gAthAoM kA akArAvi anukrama  /
karmagranpoM kI vyAkhyA meM sahAyaka andha-sUcI

Page #492 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix: 1 Eighteen One Vimappi Original Verses of the Sixth Karma Granth The
Siddhas are the great ones, the source of liberation, the perfect ones. Listen
carefully to this summary, which is free from doubt. || 1 || How many are the
bonds, how many are the liberation states? It is necessary to understand the
destruction of the eight types of karma, the destruction of the two types of
karma, and the destruction of the one type of karma. || 2 || There are six types
of bonds, and there are three types of destruction of karma. The destruction of
the eight types of karma is the destruction of the five types of karma, the
destruction of the two types of karma, and the destruction of the one type of
karma. The destruction of the six types of karma is the destruction of the two
types of karma. || 3 || The destruction of the bonds is the destruction of the
three types of karma. The destruction of the three types of karma is the
destruction of the one type of karma. || 4 || The destruction of the bonds is
the destruction of the three types of karma. The destruction of the three types
of karma is the destruction of the one type of karma. || 5 || There are five
types of karma, and there are five types of liberation states. || 6 || There are
three types of karma, and there are two types of liberation states. There are
four types of karma, and there are ten types of liberation states. || 7 || There
are four types of karma, and there are five types of liberation states. There
are nine types of karma, and there are nine types of liberation states. There
are six types of karma, and there are six types of liberation states. || 8 ||
There are nine types of karma, and there are four types of liberation states.
There are six types of karma, and there are four types of liberation states. ||
9 || There are twenty-two types of karma, twenty-one types of karma, seventeen
types of karma, thirteen types of karma, and five types of karma. There are four
types of karma, three types of karma, two types of karma, and one type of karma.
|| 10 || There are one, two, and four types of karma. There are ten types of
karma. There are nine types of liberation states. || 11 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa : 1 aTTheva ega vimappI SaSTha karmagrantha kI mUla gAthAeM siddhapae
hiM mahatthaM banSodaya santa paryAvaThANANaM  /  cocche suNa saMkhevaM nIsaMda
divasa || 1|| kai baMdhato veyas kai kai vA paryADasaMtaThANANi  /  mulutta
rapagaIsuM bhaMgavigappA u bodhavvA ||2|| avihasatta chanbaMdha gesu emavide
tivigappo sattaTThabaMSaadbhudaya saMta egammi paMca bhaMgA do bhaMgA huti
aTThasu egavigappo chassu vi guNasaMniesa duvigappo  /  baMdhodayasaMtakammANaM
//  5  //  terasasu kevaliNI  // 4 //  patteyaM patteyaM udayasaMtAI  /
abaMdhammi ||3|| jIvaThANesu  /  nANAvaraNaMtarAie  //  star saMsA paMca |
baMdhovara me vi tahA udasaMtA huMti paMcaiva  //  6  //  baMdhassa ya saMtassa
ya pagaiTThANAI tinnitullAI  /  udayaTThANAI dube cau paNa daMsaNAvaraNe  // 7
//  jIyAvaraNe navabaMdhagesu cau paMca udaya nava saMtA  /  chaccaubaMdhe ceyaM
cala bandhudae chalaMsA ya  // 8 //  uvarayabaMdhe ca paNa navaMsa carudaya
chacca causaMtA  /  veyaNiyAuyagoe vibhajja mohaM paraM vocchaM  // 6 //  bAvIsa
ekkabIsA, sattarasA teraseva natra paMca  /  cau tiga dugaM ca ekkaM
baMdhaTTANANi mohassa  // 10 //  ekke va do va cauro etto ekkAhiyA dasukkosA  /
oheNa mohaNijje udayaTThANA nava havati  // 11 //

Page #493 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fundamental Verses of the Sixth Karma-Grahya  **Twenty** | **Total
||12||** **Fifteen** | **Become** **Awake 19** **Eighteen ||15||** Udyaṃsā.
**Mune ||16||** All. **Eight-seven-five and also the Utigadūga, the Gāhiya, the
Thirteen, the Bārik, the Karas, the Itto, the Five, the Saint's Footprints,
those are the destroyers of delusion, the bondage-arising, and also the limbs or
the house, twenty-six, twenty-two, seventeen, thirteen, two, two. In the nine-
bondage, two, and also one, one, the Karma is the ultimate destruction. ||14||**
Ten, twenty-two, nine, twenty-one, twenty-seven, the Udthāṇāi. | Six, nine,
seventy-seven, thirteen, five, four, in the nine-bondage, the Ukkosa, seven,
five, in the five-poison, and also the Udya, the midday, the Itto, the four-
bondage, one, one, the Kudma, they are the bondage-overcoming, and also in that
way, in the absence of arising, they also become. ||17||** One, six, eleven,
ten, seven, four, one, one. These twenty-four, gone, twenty-four, two, two, the
Karma. ||18||** Nine, five, nineteen, this heart-detachment, with the
Aṇuttarīya-Gusrī-Payavidasa, with the nine-Tīya, this arising-detachment, with
the Mohiya, the Aṇusarī-Tīya, the Paryāvadasa, with the three, and also twenty-
two, twenty-two, twenty-eight, seventy-seven. Six, Dev, thirteen, in the nine-
bondage, five, five, in the five-poison, six, six, in the remaining, know, five,
five. The Patteya, the Pateya, four, and also the bondage-destruction. ||22||**
Ten, nine, fifteen, the bondage-arising, the Saint's Footprints. The Mohaṇīja,
from here, the name, the ultimate, is spoken. ||23||** Twenty, nineteen, twenty-
six, twenty-eight, thirty-two. Thirty-three, one, the bondage-destruction, the
name. ||24|| **Delusion** **Jīva. Know. ||16||** **Jīva.** **Know. ||20||**
**Footprints. ||21||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrabhya kI mUla gAthAe~ vIsA | ekUNA ||12|| panarasa  /  bhave jAga
19 aTThevaM  //  15  //  udayaMsA  /  muNeo  //  16  //  savve vi  /
aTTagasattagadyacca utigadUgae gAhiyA terasa bArikkArasa itto paMcAi saMtassa
pagaiThANAI tANi mohassa haMti bandhodaya puNa aMga vA gRha chabbAvIse cala
igavIse sattarasa terase do do  /  navabaMdhage vi doni u ekkekakamao paraM
bhaMgA || 14 || dasa bAvIse nava ikkbIsa sattAi udaThANAI | chAI nava sattarase
tere paMcAi cattArimA navabaMdhagesu ukkosa satta paMcavihabaMbage puNa udao
dopaha itto caubaMdhAI ikkevakudamA havaMti baMdhovarame vi tahA udayAbhAve vi
vA hojjA  /  /  17 /  /  ekkaga chakkekkArasa dasa satta caukka ekkA ceka  /  ee
cavIsa gayA cauvIsa dugekkamikkArA ||18|| navapaMcANauisa ehRdayavigamehi
auNattariegusaripayavidasahi navatesIyasa ehi udayavigamehiM mohiyA
auNasaritIyAlA paryAvadasahi tinneva ya bAvIse igavIse aTThavIsa sattarase  /
cha deva teranavagaMdhagesu paMceva paMcaviSavisuM cha chakka sesesu jANa
paMceva | patteyaM pateya cattAri ya baMghavocche ||22|| dasanavapannarasAI
baMdhodaya santapayaDiThANAI  /  bhaNiyAI mohaNije ito nAmaM paraM vocchaM
||23|| tevIsa paNNavIsA chavIsA aTThavIsa guNatIsA | tIsetIsamekaM
baMdhaTThANANi nAmassa ||24|| mohiyA jIvA  /  vinneyA ||16|| jIvA  /  vineyA
||20|| ThANAI ||21||

Page #494 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-1 Twenty-five sixteen nine arrows, these are the adyalas.  The shadow
of these is bound by one one. ||25|| Twenty twenty-four, these are the emahaya,
the eighteen.  The rising of these is nine eight, these are the names. ||26||
One, eleven, thirty-three, these are the chassayas, thirty-three.  Twelve,
seventy-seven, these are the higanis, the bipacasees. ||27|| Twenty-nine,
eleven, these are the angis, seventeen, sixty-five.  One one, these are the
udya, twenty, the dhatu. ||28|| Thirteen, nineteen, these are the achchalasees,
eighty, these are the ugusees.  Eight, forty-six, nine, eight, these are the
names. ||29|| One, twelve, twelve, these are the bandhodaya, the santapa, the
dithanas.  By this method, wherever possible, divide. ||30|| Nine, five, these
are the udya, twenty, twenty, twenty-six.  Eight, twenty-eight, nine, twenty-
seven, thirty. ||31|| One one, twenty-seven, one one, one udya, eight, these are
the santhas.  The remaining bands, ten ten, these are the veyaga santhas, the
thanas. ||32|| Three, three, these are the pagithanas, the jiva guna sanniyasa
thanas.  The bhangas, the paungiyas, wherever possible, they become. ||33||
Thirteen, these are the jiva sankhyas, the nanantara, the trigappas.  One, one,
the trigappas, the karana, the pad, the atya, the avigappa. ||34|| Thirteen,
nine, these are the chal panagas, nine, these are the santhas, the bhangas, one
one.  The veniyauyagoe, divide, the moha, the param, the voccha. ||35|| Eight,
five, one one, two, ten, these are the moha bandhagas.  Three, nine, these are
the udya gas, three, three, fifteen, these are the santhas. ||36|| One, two,
one, four, one, these are the panagas, three, these are the chchas.  One, six,
one, six, one, eight, six, ten, these are the sarga. ||37||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-1 cau paNavIsA solasa nava bANauIsayA ya aDayAlA  /  eyAluttara
chAyAlasayA ekkakka baMdhavihIM  /  / 25 /  /  vIsimavIsA caubIsamAi emAhiyA u
igtiisaa| udayaTThANANi bhave nava aTTha ya huMti nAmassa  // 26 //  ega
biyAlekkArasa tettIsA chassayANi tettIsA  /  bArasasattarasasayANahigANi
bipacasIIhi  // 27 /  /  auNattIsekkArasasayAGgiA satarasapaMcasaTThIhi  /
ikkekkagaM ca vIsAdaThudayaMtes udayavihI  // 28 /  /  tidunauI ugunauI
acchalasI asIi ugusiiii| aThThayachappaNattari nava aTTha ya nAmasaMtANi  /  /
29 /  /  aha ya bArasa bArasa baMdhodayasaMtapayaDiThANANi  /  oheNAdeseNa ya
jastha jahAsaMbhavaM vibhaje  // 30 //  nava paMcodaya saMtA tevIse pANavIsa
chabbIse  /  aTTha ca uraTThavIse nava sattugatIsa tIsammi  // 31 //
egegamegatIse ege egudaya aTTha saMtammi  /  ubarayabaMdhe dasa dasa
veyagasaMtammi ThANAgi  // 32 /  /  tivigappapagaiThANehiM jIvaguNasanniesa
ThANesu  /  bhaMgA pauMjiyavyA jattha jahA saMbhavo bhavai  // 33 //  terasasu
jIvasaMkhevaesu nANaMtarAya tivigppo|| ekkammi tivigappo karaNaM par3a etya
avigappo  // 34 /  /  tere nava cala paNagaM nava saMtegammi bhaMgamekkArA  /
veNiyAuyagoe vibhajja mohaM paraM vocchaM  /  / 3 /  /  aTThasu paMcasu ege ega
dugaM dasa ya mohbNdhge| tiga caGa nava udayagae tiga tiga pannarasa saMtammi
// 36 /  /  paNa duga paNagaM paNa cau paNagaM paNagA havaMti tinnecha  /  paNa
cha paNaga cha ccha paNagaM aTThacha dasarga ti  // 37 /  /

Page #495 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fundamental verses of the Sixth Karmagranthi:  The six types of Aprajnata
(non-knowledge), Asami (non-self), Taha (such), Suhama (subtle), Bayara
(external), and Cheva (and) are described. The three types of Vigalita
(destroyed), Tinna (three), Asanni (non-knowledge), Sanni (knowledge), and
Asanni-Sanni (non-knowledge and knowledge) are also mentioned. ॥38॥  The three
types of Nananataraiya (obstructive knowledge) are described, and the ten types
of Dosa (faults) are present in two places. The nine types of Micchattana (wrong
belief), the four types of Panna (wisdom), and the nine types of Santamsa
(auspicious) are also mentioned. ॥39॥  The six types of Missaiya (mixed), the
four types of Niyattio (determined), the nine types of Santakamma (auspicious
karma), the four types of Ghatabandha (body-binding), the three types of Tiga
(three), the four types of Panna (wisdom), and the nine types of Dusa (faults)
are described. ॥40॥  The four types of Upasanta (subsided), the nine types of
Khina (destroyed), the four types of Udaya (rise), and the six types of Santha
(auspicious) are mentioned. The Veyanniya (feeling) Ayu (lifespan) Goe (gati) is
divided, and the Moha (delusion) is described further. ॥41॥  In the eight
Gunathana (stages of spiritual development), each one has a Mohabandha
(delusion-binding) place. The five Aniyatti (non-determination) places are the
highest bondage, and beyond that is the ultimate. ॥42॥  The seventeen types of
Micchatta (wrong belief), the ten types of Asaya (dispositions), the nine types
of Avirati (non-abstinence), the five types of Panchaii (five senses), and the
eight types of Attheva (eight) are described. ॥43॥  The Virata (abstinent),
Kshayopasamika (subsided-destroyed), the four types of Sasta (pure), the six
types of Apubba (unprecedented), and the one or two types of Udayamsa (rise-
portion) are mentioned. ॥44॥  The one type of Suhama (subtle) Raga (attachment)
is described, and the remaining ones are Aveyaga (non-attachment) in the Bhava
(existence). The measure of the Bhanga (destruction) should be known from the
Purvabhuddhi (previous knowledge). ॥45॥  These are the one, two, three, and nine
types, totaling twenty-four. These are divided into two, five, and one,
respectively. ॥46॥  The Yoga (activities), Upayoga (modes of consciousness), and
Lesa (subtle dispositions) should be multiplied by the Guna (qualities). Where
the Gunasthana (stages of spiritual development) are present, there the Gunakara
(qualities) are present. ॥47॥  The three, one, one, three, five, and four types
are present in the Niyatti (determination). The one type is in the Bayara
(external), and the four and three types are in the Upasanta (subsided). ॥48॥
The six, nine, six, seven, four, two, three, two, three, and four types are
described. The two, six, four, four, two, four, and one types are also
mentioned. ॥49॥  Each one has six, each one has eight, and the Kevali Jnana
(omniscience) has the ultimate. The one has four, the one has four, the six has
two, and the Udayamsa (rise-portion) has the six types. ॥50॥

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha kI mUla gAthAe~ saseSa apajjatA sAmI taha suhama bAyarA
ceva  /  vigalidiyA u tinni u taha ya asannI ya sannI ya  // 38 /  /
nANaMtarAya tivihahmAvi dasasu do hoti dosu tthaannesuN| micchAsANe biie nava
cau paNa nava ya saMtaMsA  // 3 //  missAi niyaTTIo cha ccau paNa nava ya
saMtakammaMsA  /  ghaubaMdha tige cau paNa narvasa dusu juyala cha ssaMtA  // 40
//  upasaMte cau paNa nava khINe caurudaya chacca cava saMtaM  /  veyaNiyAuyagoe
vibhajja mohaM paraM vocche  /  / 4 /  /  guNaThANagesu aTThasu ekkeyakaM
mohabaMdhaThANesu  /  paMcAniyaTTiThANe baMdhovaramo paraM tatto  // 42 //
sattAi dasa u micche sAsAyaNamIsae navukkosA  /  chAI nava u avirae dese paMcAI
aTUTheva  // 43 //  virae khaovasamie, caurAI sasta chacca'pubammi  /
aniyaTTibAyare puNa ikko va duve va udayaMsA  // 44 /  /  ega suhamasa rAgo
vaiei aveyagA bhave sesA  /  bhaMgANaM ca pamANaM pubuddidruNa nAyavvaM  // 45
//  eparka TuDekkArekkAraseva ekkAraseva nava tinni  /  ee cauvIsagayA bAra duge
paMca ekkammi  /  / 4 /  /  jogovaogalesAipahiM guNiyA havaMti kAyabbA  /  je
jattha guNachANe havaMti se tattha guNakArA  // 47 //  tipaNege egegaM tima mIse
paMca causu niyaTTie tinni  /  ekkAra bAyarammI suhume cau tinni uvasaMte  /  /
4 /  /  chaNNava chakka tiga satta kurga duga tiga dugaM tigaha caU  /  duga cha
cau duga paNa cau cau duga cau paNaga ega caka  /  / 4 /  /  egegamacha
egegamaTTha chaumatthakevalijiNANaM  /  ega caU ega caU acha ghau du
chakkamudayaMsA  // 50 //

Page #496 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-1 Two Chhakkas, eight Chaukas, five Ekkaras, and one Chhakkaga Udaya.
The five Ekkaras and four Chaukas are the Niraiya-aisu Santha. ॥51॥ One
Vigalidiiya, all the five, and eight Bampathanas. And the Chhakkekkaraudaya, and
twelve Santanas. ॥52॥ These are the Kamma-paraithanas, the good
Bandhudayasantakammas. They are to be led by the Gaiiaiehi in four ways. ॥53॥
For the Uvayassudiirana, there is no distinction from Samittao. Leaving aside
the Seva, the Sammattnanantaraiyadasaga, the Dassananavaeiyanijja, the
Micchatte, the Sammatta, the Lobha, the Beiiauga, and the nine Nama are to be
understood. ॥54॥ The Titthagaraharavirahiiaio, the Ajjeiia Savvapagatiio, the
Micchattaveiiago, the Sasano vi, the Iguvisesaio. ॥55॥ The Chhaialasesa, the
Miiso, the Aviraysammao, the Tiyalapariisesa, the Tevanna Desa Viirao, the
Viirao Sagavannasesaio. ॥57॥ The Igusaditthamappamatto binds the Devaauiassa,
the other also the Atthavannamapputto, the Chappannna va vi Chhabbiisa. ॥58॥ The
Bavisaa Eganna binds the Attharasantamanitthi, the Sattara Suhumasaramao, the
Saiamamoho, the Sajogi ti. ॥59॥ This is the Bandhhasamittaioigho in the
Gaiiaiesu vi taheva. The Bhohaio Sahija, wherever the Pagadisambhavo. ॥60॥ The
Titthagaradevaniraiauga, and the three Gaiisu, are to be understood. The
remaining Pagadio, become in all the Gaiisu. ॥61॥ In the Padamakasaiiachukkhe,
the Dansanatiga vi Uvasanta, from the Avirathasammattaio, the Niaittiti Naiamva.
॥62॥ The Padamakasaiiachukkha, from here, the Micchattamiissammatta, the Avirai
se Virae, the Pramatti, the Apramatti, they lose. ॥63॥

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-1 do chakka 'Tha caukkaM paNa nava ekkAra chakkaga udyaa| neraiAisu
saMtA ti paMca ekkArasa caukkaM  // 51 //  iga vigalidiya sagale paNa paMca ya
aTTha baMpaThANANi  /  paNa chakkekkArudayA paNa paNa bArasa ya saMtANi  // 52 /
/  iya kamma parAi ThANAI suThu baMdhudayasaMtakammANaM  /  gaiAiehiM asu
cauppagAreNa neyANi  // 53 /  /  uvayassudIraNAe sAmittAo na bijjai viseso|
mottUNa ya ra sevA samma 4i nANaMtarAyadasagaM dasaNanaka veyaNijja micchte|
sammatta lobha beyA''ugANi nava nAma ucvaM ca  /  / 5 /  /
tisthagarAhAragabirahiyAoM ajjei snvpgiio| micchattaveyago sAsaNo vi
iguvIsasesAo  // 56 //  chAyAlasesa' mIso avirayasammo tiyAlaparisesA  /
tevaNNa desa virao virao sagavaNNasesAo  /  / 57 //  igusadiThamappamatto
baMdhai devAuyassa iyaro vi| aTThAvaNNamaputro chappaNNaM vA vi chabbIsaM  // 58
//  bAbIsA egaNaM baMdhai atthaarsNtmniyttttii| sattara suhumasarAmo sAyamamoho
sajogi ti  // 56 //  eso u baMdhasAmittaogho gaiyAiesu vi taheva  /  bhohAo
sAhijA jattha jahA pagaDisambhAbo  // 60 /  /  titthagaradevanirayAugaM ca tisu
tisu gaIsu boddhavvaM  /  avasesA payaDIo havaMti sabyAsu vi gaIsu  // 61 /  /
patamakasAyacaukke daMsaNatiga sattagA vi uvsNtaa|| aviratasammattAo jAya
niyaTTi ti nAyamvA  /  / 6 /  /  paDamakasAyacaupakaM etto
micchattamIsasammattaM  /  aviraya se virae pamatti apamatti khoyaMti  // 63 /
/

Page #497 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Original Verses of the Sixth Karma Granth Kheyanti. Satyev Name | Ekkaran ||
66 || Purisaṁ kohe kohaṁ māṇe māṇaṁ ca huī māyāe. Māyaṁ va bṛhadd lohe lohaṁ
suhumṁ pito haṇai ||64|| Devagaisahagayaō ducaramasamaya bhaviyammi
savivāyaranama niyāgoyaṁ pi annayarayaniyaṁ maṇuyājya uccagoya nava ars
ajīgijiṇō ukkōsa jahann maṇuyangaī jāī tas bāyarṁ ca pajjattasubhagāmāijjaṁ.
Asakittī tilthayaraṁ namass havanti nava eyā ||67|| Taccaṇupubbisahiyā terasa
bhavasiddhiyasssa carimmmī. Santanga mukkō jahannāyaṁ bārassa hati || 68 || Maga
sahagayaō bhavakhitavibāgajīvadāga tti. Veyaniyannāyarucvaṁ ca carim bhavierasa
svīyanti ||66|| Aha suiyasayalajaṁ siha maruyani ruvamasahaya siddhisuhaṁ.
Aniṇamavvābāha tirayanasāraṁ aṇuhati ||70|| Durahigama - niuṇa paramattha- ruī
ra bahubhangaditṭivāyāō. Aththa aṇusariyanvā bandhōdayasantkammāṇaṁ || 71 || Jō
atya apaḍipuṇṇō atyō appagameṇa bahōti. Taṁ khamiūṇa bahusuyā. Parikahaṁtu
||72|| - Pūreūṇaṁ - ||65||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha karmagrantha kI mUla gAthAe~ khIyaMti  /  satyeva nAme | ekkAraM  //  66
//  purisaM kohe kohaM mANe mANaM ca huI mAyAe  /  mAyaM va bRhadda lohe lohaM
suhumaM pito haNai ||64|| devagaisahagayAo ducaramasamaya bhaviyammi
savivAyaranAmA nIyAgoyaM pi annayarayaNIyaM maNuyAjya uccagoya nava ars
ajIgijiNo ukkosa jahanna maNuyaMgai jAi tasa bAyaraM ca pajjattasubhagamAijjaM
/  asakittI tilthayaraM nAmassa havaMti nava eyA  // 67 //  taccANupubbisahiyA
terasa bhavasiddhiyassa carimammi  /  saMtaMga mukko jahannayaM bArasa hati  //
68  //  maga sahagayAo bhavakhitavibAgajIvadAga tti  /  veyaNiyannayarucvaM ca
carima bhaviyarasa svIyaMti ||66  //  aha suiyasayalajama siha maruyani
ruvamasahAya siddhisuhaM  /  aniNamavvAbAha tirayaNasAraM aNuhati  // 70 //
durahigama - niuNa paramattha- rui ra bahubhaMgadiTTivAyAo  /  atthA
aNusariyanvA baMdhodayasaMtakammANaM  //  71  //  jo atya apaDipunno atyo
appAgameNa bahoti  /  taM khamiUNa bahusuyA. parikahaMtu  // 72 //  - pUreUNaM -
// 65 //

Page #498 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix: 2 Glossary of Technical Terms Found in the Six Karma Granthas
**Angapravesht Ast** - Scriptures composed by the Ganadharas according to the
teachings of the Tirthankaras.  **Angopaang Naamakarma** - Karma that results in
the shedding of pudgalas that are taken in the form of limbs and appendages of
the being.  **Angabahmbhut** - Scriptures composed by the Sthaviras based on the
Angas and other scriptures.  **Amaran** - The name of a letter, and since Shana
is the nature of the being, Shruta knowledge is itself called a letter.
**Akshar Pus** - Knowledge of a single letter from the group of letters starting
with A.  **Ajarasamas Bhat** - The value of the community of true letters.
**Akaam Mirjara** - Karma nirjara that happens naturally without any effort,
even though there is no Iya.  **Akushal Karma** - Karma whose result is
undesirable.  **Bhagamik Shat** - Where the text is not consistent.  **Aguhalghu
Pray** - Subtle forms of matter with four touches, and intangible space, etc.
**Apuclghu Naamakarma** - Karma that results in the being's body becoming light
in weight and not feeling heavy, but rather feeling light and airy.  **Agnikam**
- Body made of fire atoms.  **Agrahanvargana** - Those that are not taken in by
the being due to their small number of atoms.  **Aghaaso Karma** - Karma that
destroys the qualities of the being's counter-being. Due to them, the soul has
to remain imprisoned in the cycle of birth and death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa : 2 chaha karmagranthoM meM Agata pAribhASika zabdoM kA koSa
aMgapraviSTa asta-jina zAstroM kI racanA tIrthaMkaroM ke upadezAnusAra gaNaghara
svayaM karate haiN| aMgopAMga nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ke aMga aura
upAMga Adi rUpa meM gRhIta pudgaloM kA parihA hai| aMgabAhmabhuta-gaNaparoM ke
atirikta aMgoM kA AdhAra lekara sthaviroM dvArA praNIta zAstra  /  amarAna kA
nAma akSara hai aura zAna jIva kA svabhAva hone ke kAraNa zruta jJAna svayaM
akSara kahalAtA hai  /  akSara pusa-akArAdi labdhyAroM meM se kisI eka akSara kA
jJAna | ajarasamAsa bhata-satyakSaroM ke samUdAya kA mAna  /  akAma mirjarAiyA
ke na hote hue bhI anAyAsa hI hone vAlI karma nirjraa| akuzala karma-jisakA
vipAka aniSTa hotA hai| bhagamika Sata-jisameM eka sarIkhe pATha na Ate ho  /
aguhalaghu praya-cAra sparza vAle sUkSma rUpI avya tathA amUrta AkAza Adi  /
apuklaghu nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko svayaM kA zarIra vajana meM
halkA aura mArI pratIsa na hokara agurulaSu pariNAma vAsA pratIta hotA hai|
agnikAma- teja paramANuoM se nirmita shriir| agrahaNavargaNA-jo alpa paramANu
vAlI hone ke kAraNa jIva dvArA grahaNa nahIM kI jAtI hai| aghAso karma-jIva ke
pratijIvI guNoM ke ghAta karane vAle karma  /  unake kAraNa AtmA ko pArIra kI
kaida meM rahanA par3atA hai|

Page #499 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **Amasini Prakriti:** A nature that does not destroy the
karmic qualities.  **Apakṣa Varga:** The perception of the common objects of the
senses (except for the eye) and mind, through the respective senses like touch,
etc.  **Acakṣudarśanāvaraṇa Karma:** Karma that covers the perception of the
unseen.  **Apāmāsthika:** Those whose karmas (Pārapātika karmas) have been
completely destroyed.  **Acamāmāsthika Yamāsyāt Samyama:** The state of perfect
knowledge attained by the Kevalajnani.  **Annadhāma Bandha:** All the bonds from
the most inferior to the most superior.  **Ajīva:** That which is devoid of
consciousness, i.e., inert.  **Ajñāna Miṣyāsv:** Not understanding the nature of
the soul and other substances as they truly are.  **Arabaurasī Lākha:** One
Arabaurasī Lākha is equal to 84,000,000 Bhaḍhāṅga.  **Agga:** One Agga is equal
to 84,000,000 Vati.  **Māpalyopama:** The time taken for the destruction of one
hair-like particle of the Uddhāra-palya is called Māpalyopama.  **Aṣāpalpa:**
The time taken for the destruction of all the hair-like particles of the
Uddhāra-palya is called Aṣāpalpa.  **Avāsāgara:** One Avāsāgara is equal to
10,000,000,000 Aṣāpalpa.  **Anuvadha:** A bond that becomes specific in the
future.  **Āvaśrvaḍhini Prakriti:** A nature that binds and also does not bind,
even when the causes of binding are present.  **Mānuṣasattā Prakriti:** A nature
that does not have a definite existence, i.e., it exists at one time and does
not exist at another time.  **Aghoṣyā Prakriti:** A nature that does not have a
continuous existence from the beginning to the end of its manifestation.
**Manakṣara Bhūta:** A state where words are not used intentionally for
description but for conveying meaning through sounds or gestures like sneezing,
snapping fingers, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabda-koSa amAsinI prakRtijo prakRti Asmika guNoM kA ghAta nahIM
karatI hai| apakSa vargama cakSurindriya ko chor3akara zeSa sparzana Adi
indriyoM aura mana ke dvArA hone vAle apane-apane viSayabhUsa sAmAnya boM kA
pratibhAsa | adhakSuvarzanAvaraNa karma-acakSudarzana ko AvaraNa karane vAlA
karma  /  apAmasthika-jinake chabhoM (pAra pAti karmoM) kA sarvazrA kSaya ho
gayA ho  /  achAmamasthika yamAsyAta saMyama kevalajJAniyoM kA saMpama  /
annadhAma maMdha-eka samaya adhika jaghanya baMdha se lekara utkRSTa baMdha se
pUrva taka ke sabhI baMdha  /  ajIva-jisameM cetanA na ho arthAt jar3a ho  /
ajJAna miSyAsva-jIvAdi padArthoM ko 'yahI hai 'isI prakAra hai' isa taraha
vizeSa rUpa se na smjhnaa| arabaurAsI lAkha bhaDahAMga kA eka aiDa kahalAtA hai|
agga -caurAsI lAkha vaTita ke samaya ko eka akhaDAMga kahate haiN| mApalyopama-
uddhArapalya ke romatrahoM meM se pratyeka ropakhaMDa ke kalpanA ke dvArA utane
saMDa kare jitane so varSa ke samaya hote haiM aura unako pasya meM marane ko
ajJApalma kahate haiN| aApalma meM se prati samaya romakhaMDoM ko nikAlate-
nikAlate jitane kAla meM vaha palya lAlI ho, use asA palpopama kAla kahate haiN|
avAsAgara-dasa koTIkoTI addhApalpopamoM kA eka adbhAgAgara hotA hai  /
anuvadha-Age jAkara vizichaSa ho jAne vAlA bNdh| AvazrvadhinI prakRti-baMdha ke
kAraNoM ke hone para bhI jo prakRti ba~dhatI bhI hai aura nahIM bhI baMdhatI hai
/  mAnuSasattA prakRti- mithyAtva Adi dazA meM jisa prakRti ko sattA kA nimama
na ho yAnI kisI samaya sattA meM ho aura kisI samaya sattA meM na ho| aghoSayA
prakRti-use kahate haiM, jisakA apane udayakAla ke anta taka udaya magAsAra
nahIM rahatA hai  /  kamI udaya hotA hai aura kabhI nahI hotA hai yAnI udaya-
viccheda kAla taka mI jisake udaya kA niyama na ho  /  manakSara bhUta-jI zabda
abhiprAyapUrvaka varNanAtmaka nahIM balki dhvanyAtmaka kiyA jAtA hai athavA
chIMkanA, cuTakI bajAnA Adi saMketoM ke dvArA dUsaroM ke abhiprAya ko jAnanA
anakSara zruta hai|

Page #500 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 Avyayugami Avavijnan - The knowledge of the Paryaya in the place of
origin, but not knowing it after leaving the place of origin. Anamnsanmataagu
Varga- Classification of the Ananta Ananta Pradeshi Skandhas. Anansanu Vargana -
Classification of the Ananta Pradeshi Skandhas. Abhataanubandhi Kashaya - The
intense Kashaya that destroys the Sammatva Guna and causes the Jiva to wander in
the world for an infinite time. Anpavarsaniya Aayu - The Aayu that cannot be
reduced by any cause. It is enjoyed for as long as it is bound. Anabhigrihit
Mipasva - The unreal and unauthentic nature of substances that occur due to the
nature of being independent of Paropadesha. Amavasthit Avashishan - That which,
like a wave of water, sometimes spreads, sometimes increases, sometimes appears
and sometimes disappears. Anavasthit Pay - The nature of the Pay that is
constantly moving forward and does not have a fixed form. Anakaropयोग - The
result of the Jiva's fall due to the understanding of the general Dharma of a
general and specific object. Anadi-Anans - The bond or rise whose tradition
flows uninterruptedly from the beginning of time, neither diminished nor
interrupted in the middle, nor will it be diminished in the future, such bond or
rise is called Anadi Ananta. Anadi Bandha - The bond that has been happening
since the beginning of time. Anadi Bhat - The Shruta that has no beginning is
called Anadi Shruta. Anadi-Sant - The tradition of the bond or rise that has
been flowing uninterruptedly from the beginning of time but will be interrupted
in the future, is Anadi-Sant. Anavey Namafarm - The order of rise from which the
Jiva's reasonable good speech is also considered and understood to be
disrespectful and unacceptable. Anabhihik Mithyatva - Understanding all sides
equally without examining the truth and falsehood. Anabhog Mithyatva -
Ignorance-born aversion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 agAyugAmI avavijJAna- utpatti sthAna meM yata hokAra pArya ko
jAnane vAlA kintu utpatti sthAna ko chor3a dene para na jAnane vAlA avadhijJAna
/  anamsAnamtAgu vargagA- anamtAnanta pradezI skandhoM kI vargaNA  /  anansANu
vargaNA ananta pradezI skandhoM kI vargaNA  /  abhAtAnubaMdhI kaSAya- sammamatva
guNa kA ghAta karake jIva ko anaMta kAla taka saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karAne
vAlI utkaTa kaSAya  /  /  anapavarsanIya Ayu-jo Ayu kisI bhI kAraNa se kama na
ho  /  jitane kAla taka ke lie bAMdhI gaI ho, utane kAla taka bhogI jaaye|
anabhigRhIta mipAsva-paropadeza nirapekSa-svabhAva se hone vAlA padArthoM kA
ayathArtha asaan| amavasthita avaSizAna-jo jala kI taraMga ke samAna kabhI
baTatA hai, kabhI bar3hatA hai, kabhI AvirbhUta ho jAtA hai aura kabhI tirohita
ho jAtA hai| anavasthita pAyaAge-Age bar3hate jAne vAlA hone se nimata svarUpa
ke abhAva pAlA ply| anAkAropayoga-sAmAnya vizeSAtmaka vastu ke sAmAnya dharma kA
avabodha karane vAle jIva kA patanyAnuvidhAyI pariNAma  /  anAdi-anansa-jisa
baMdha yA udaya kI paramparA kA pravAha anAdi kAla se nirAbAdha gati se calA A
rahA hai, madhya meM na kamI vicchinna huA hai aura na Age kamI hogA, aise
baMdha yA udaya ko anAdi anaMta kahate hai  /  anAdi baMdha-jo baMdha anAdi kAla
se satasa ho rahA hai| anAdi bhata--jisa zruta kI Adi na ho, use anAdi zruta
kahate haiM  /  anAdi-sAnta-jisa baMdha yA udaya kI paramparA kA prabAha
anAdikAla se ninA vyavadhAna ke calA A rahA hai lekina Age jyucchinna ho jAyegA,
vaha anAdi-sAnta hai| anAveya nAmapharma-jisa krama ke udaya se jIva kA
yuktiyukta acchA vacana bhI anAdaraNIya-agrAhya mAnA aura samajhA jAtA hai|
anabhihika mithyAtva-satyAsatya kI parIkSA kiye binA hI saba pakSoM ko gharAbara
smjhnaa| anAbhoga mithyAtva-ajJAnajanya avasva ruci  /

Page #501 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **Anaharaka:** A being that does not consume any type of
food, including Oja, Soma, and Kavala.  **Anivrittikaran:** The result that
inevitably leads to the attainment of Samyaktv.  **Amivritti Bavarasampray
Gugasthan:** A state where the Badar (gross) Sampray (affliction) is in its
rising stage and the results of the being are similar at the same time.
**Samutkrista Shat-Bandha:** All the bonds from the least excellent state of
bondage to the most inferior state of bondage.  **Anugaami Avadhisham:** The
knowledge of the Avadhi that remains even when it moves from its origin to
another place.  **Anubhavya Yogya Sthiti:** A state of uninterrupted time and
space.  **Anubhag Bandha:** The power of the Karma-rupa-grihit Pudgala atoms to
bear fruit and the determination of its intensity and density.  **Abhyoga Shruta
Sat Adi Anuyogamar:** Knowing the beings and other entities through one of the
Anuyogamaras like Abhyoga, Shruta, Sat, etc.  **Anuyoga Samas:** The knowledge
of more than one Anuyogamar, like two, three, etc.  **Antar Karan:** The act of
taking the Antamuhurta Praman Dalifas from the middle, leaving the upper and
lower positions of an Avli or Anta Mahat Praman, and projecting them into other
similar natures that bind them. The action performed for this Antar Karan and
the time taken for it are also called Antar Karan by Upwar.  **Antaraya:**
Obstructing the means of knowledge, preventing students from obtaining the means
of practice, etc.  **Amsaray Karma:** The Karma that destroys the powers of Asma
in the form of Dan, Lam, Mog, Upbhog, and Bhir. Or, the Karma that has the form
of Antaraya in Dan, etc.  **Mas: Kodakodo:** Slightly less than one Kodakod.
**Aparpavasit Bhut:** The Shruta that has no end.  **Aparayapt:** A being whose
name-form is in the rising stage.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabdakoSa amAhAraka-oja, soma aura kavala inameM se kisI bhI
prakAra ke AhAra ko na karane vAle jIva anAhAraka hote haiN| anivRttikaraNa-
vaha pariNAma jisake prApta hone para jIpa avazyameva samyakrava prApta karatA
hai  /  amivRttibAvarasaMparAya gugasthAna- vaha hai jisameM bAdara (sthUla)
saMparAya (kaSAya) udaya meM ho tathA samasamaya batA jI ke pariNAmoM meM
samAnatA ho| samutkRSTa 6Sa-eka samaya kama utkRSTa sthiti baMdha se lekara
jaghanya sthiti baMdha taka ke sabhI bNdh| anugAmI avadhizAma-jo avadhijJAna
apane utpatti kSetra ko chor3akara dUsare sthAna para cale jAne para bhI
vidyamAna rahatA hai| anubhavayogyA sthiti-abAdhA kAla rahila sthiti| anubhAga
paMpa-karmarUpa gRhIta pudgala paramANuoM kI phala dene kI zakti va usakI
tIvratA, maMTatA kA nizcaya karanA anubhAga baMdha kahalAtA hai| abhyoga
zrutasat Adi anuyogamAroM meM se kisI eka ke dvArA jIvAdi padAyoM ko jAnanA  /
/  anuyogasamAsa ata-eka se adhika do, tIna Adi anuyogadAroM kA jJAna |
antarakaraNa-eka AvalI yA anta mahataM pramANa nIce aura Upara kI sthiti ko
chor3akara madhya meM se antamuharta pramANa daliphoM ko uThAkara unakA baMdhane
vAlI anya sajAtIya prakRtiyoM meM prakSepa karane kA nAma antarakaraNa hai| isa
antarakaraNa ke liye jo kriyA kI jAtI hai aura usameM jo kAla lagatA hai use bhI
upavAra se antarakaraNa kahate haiN| antarAya-jJAnAmpAsa ke mAdhanoM meM vighna
DAlanA, vidyArthiyoM ke liye prApta hone vAle abhyAsa ke sAdhanoM kI prApti na
hone denA Adi antarAma kahalAtA hai| amsarAya karma-jo karma AsmA kI dAna, lAma,
moga, upabhoga, bhIrya rUpa zaktiyoM kA ghAta karatA hai  /  athavA dAnAdi meM
anta rAya rUpa ho use antarAma karma kahate haiM  /  mAsa:koDAkor3o kucha kama
eka koddaakodd'ii| aparpavasita bhUta-vaha zruta jisakA anta na ho  /
aparyApta- aparyApta nAmapharma ke udaya bAle jIva  /

Page #502 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 **Aparampt Mamakarma** - Karma whose fruition does not enable the
soul to achieve its full potential. **Aparavartaman Prakriti** - A nature whose
bondage, fruition, or both occur without the bondage, fruition, or both of
another nature. **Apvartaana** - To reduce the intensity of the bondage and
fruition of the bad karmas through special effort. **Apvartaanaakaran** - The
special effort through which the intensity of the bondage and fruition of
previously bound karmas is reduced. **Apvartaaniya Vayu** - The reduction in
lifespan due to the pressure of the wind. This reduction in lifespan is also
called untimely death. **Apunya Karma** - Karma that causes suffering.
**Apuurvakaran** - The result by which the soul breaks free from the bondage of
attachment and aversion. **Apuurvasmitibandh** - The bondage of a very subtle
state of existence compared to the previous one. **Apratipaati** - One whose
self-nature is not prone to downfall. **Apratyarapaanaavaran Kashaya** - A
kashaya whose fruition does not lead to even a slight degree of renunciation
(deshaviriti - partial renunciation). A kashaya that destroys the soul's quality
of renunciation (thavakaachar). **Aparamattasanghat Gunasthan** - Those who are
restrained (muni) and do not indulge in idle talk, kashayas, or other
distractions are called aparamattasanyat. Their special nature is called
aparamattasanyat gunasthan. **Aaprapya Kaari** - To know the nature of an object
without coming into contact with it. **Abandh Prakriti** - A karma that does not
manifest in the intended gunasthan but binds in a future gunasthan. **Abandh
Kaal** - The period before the bondage of the ayukarma related to the next
birth. **Amadha Kaal** - The period during which the bound karma does not cause
the soul to experience its fruits, whether auspicious or inauspicious.
**Abhigreehit Mithyaatva** - The perception of an object as non-existent due to
a cause, such as a wrong perception or a misunderstanding. **Abhinay
Karmagrahan** - The soul's experience of karma in the same space where its body
resides.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 aparyApta mAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva svayogya paryApti
pUrNa na kare  /  aparAvartamAna prakRtikisI dUsarI prakRti ke baMdha, udaya
athavA donoM ke binA jisa prakRti ke baMdha, udaya athavA donoM hote haiN|
apavartanA-baDa karmoM kI sthiti tathA anubhAga meM adhyavasAya vizeSa se kamI
kara denaa| apavartanAkaraNa-jisa dhIrya vizeSa se pahale baMdhe hue kama kI
sthiti tathA rasa ghaTa jAte haiM, use apavartanAkaraNa kahate haiM  /
apavartanIya vAyu-cApa nimitta se jo Ayu kama ho jAtI hai use apavartanIya
(apavayaM ) kahate haiN| isa Ayuccheda ko akAlamaraNa bhI kahA jAtA hai  /
apuNyakarma-o duHkha kA vedana karAtA hai. use apuNyakarma kahate haiM  /
apUrvakaraNa-vaha pariNAma jisake dvArA jIva rAga-neSa kI durbhadhasandhi ko
tor3a kara sAMpa jAtA hai| apUrvasmitibaMdha-pahale kI apekSA atyanta aspa
sthiti ke ko ko bAdhanA  /  apratipAtI --ijisakA svamAtra patanazIla nahIM hai|
apratyArapAnAvaraNa kaSAya-jisa kaSAya ke udaya se dezavirati-AMzika tyAga rUpa
alpa pratyAsyAna na ho ske| jo kaSAya AtmA ke dezavirata guNa (thAvakAcAra) kA
ghAta kare  /  apramattasaMghata guNasthAna-jo saMyata (muni) vikathA, kaSAya
Adi pramAdoM kA setana nahIM karate haiM ve apramattasaMyata haiM aura unake
svarUpa vizeSa ko apramatta saMyata guNasthAna vAhate hai| aprApyakArIpadArthoM
ke sAtha binA saMyoga kiye hI padArtha kA jJAna krnaa| abaMSa prakRti-vivakSita
guNasthAna meM vaha karma pravRti na bane kintu Age ke sthAna meM usa karma kA
baMdha ho, use abaMdha prakRti kahate haiM  /  abaMdhakAla-para-bhava sambandhI
Ayukarma ke baMdhakAla se pahale kI avasthA  /  amAdhAkAla-badhe hue karma kA
jitane samaya taka AtmA ko zubhAzubha phala kA vedana nahIM hotaa| abhigRhIta
mithyAtva-kAraNavaza, ekAntima kadAgraha se hone vAle padArtha ke _ apaghArtha
zravAna ko kahate haiM  /  abhinaya karmagrahaNajisa AkAza kSetra meM AtmA ke
pradeza haiM usI kSetra meM ava

Page #503 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **Karma Grahan:** The act of a living being accepting
karma particles, which have the potential to become bound karma, into their
karma-body.  **Amasya:** A living being who, due to their infinite and
continuous karmic consequences, is incapable of attaining liberation at any
time.  **Amla Rasa Karma:** Karma that, upon its fruition, causes the living
being's body to have a sour taste, similar to lemon, tamarind, etc.  **Mayut:**
One ayutaanga is equal to eighty-four lakh ayutas.  **Bhayulanga:** One
ayutaanga is equal to the time it takes for eighty-four lakh arthanipuras to
pass.  **Ayogikevali:** A liberated being who is devoid of yogas. They are
called Ayogikevali when they have overcome the yogas of mind, speech, and body,
become free from karma, and attained pure consciousness.  **Agivali:** The
restraint of an Ayogikevali.  **Ayesha:** A type of karma that causes fear and
shame to spread.  **Adhyavasaya:** The karmic consequence of the past, caused by
the binding of the kshayas, which manifests as a change in the self.
**Adhyavasaya Sthana:** The intensity of kshaya, which can be very intense,
intense, moderately intense, mild, less mild, and very mild.  **Mini:** Karma
that, upon its fruition, causes attachment and aversion to objects without any
reason.  **Arthanir:** One arthanipura is equal to eighty-four lakh
arthanipuraangas.  **Bhavtra Ranga:** The time it takes for eighty-four lakh
nalins to pass is called an arthanipuraanga.  **Amin:** When the connection
between the senses and their objects becomes strong, the general understanding
of the object as "this is something" is called arthaavagraha.
**Arthaavigraha:** The unconscious knowledge of an undigested object.
**Marthanarrasanhanan Gamakarma:** Karma that, upon its fruition, causes the
bones to be structured with one side being like a bone and the other side being
like a nail.  **Antar Bandha:** The binding of more karmic substances, which
then binds fewer karmic substances, is called alpasara bandha.  **Arupa:** The
relative increase or decrease of non-material substances.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabda koSa sthita karma rUpa meM pariNata hone kI yogyatA rakhane
vAle pudgala skandhoM kIpaNAoM ko karma rUpa meM pariNata kara jIva dvArA unakA
grahaNa honA karma grahaNa hai  /  amaSya ke jIva jo anAdi tathAvidha pAriNAmika
bhAva ke kAraNa kisI bhI samaya mokSa prApta karane kI yogyatA hI nahIM rakhate
/  amlarasa mama karma -- jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra rasa nIMbU,
imalI Adi khaTTe padArthoM jaisA ho  /  mayuta-caurAsI lAkha ayutAMga kA eka
ayuta hotA hai  /  14 bhayulaoNga- caurAsI lAkha arthenipUra ke samaya ko eka
ayutAMga kahate haiM  /  ayogikevalI - jo kevalI bhagavAna yogoM se rahita haiM,
arthAt jaba sayogikevalI mana, vacana aura kAyA ke yogoM kA mirodha kara, karma-
rahita hokara zuddha bhAramasvarUpa ko prApta kara lete haiM, taba ve
ayogikevalI kahalAte haiM  /  agivalI yAta saMyama ayogikevalI kA saMyama  /
jisameM vaza aura ayazaH phonija apakIti phaile  /  adhyavasAya -- sthitibaMdha
ke kAraNa bhUta kaSAyajamya Atma-pariNAma | adhyavasAya sthAna kaSAya ke tIvra
tIvratara tIvratama tathA manda mandatara aura J mansama udaya-vizeSa | minI -
jisa karma ke udaya se kAraNavaza mA binA kAraNa ke padArthoM - se prIti dveSa
ho  /  arthanira caurAsI lAkha arthaniyUrAMga kA eka ardhanipUra hotA hai  /
bharvatra raMga- caurAsI lAkha nalina ke samaya ko arthanipurAMga kahA jAtA hai
/  amina - viSaya aura indriyoM kA saMyoga puSTa ho jAne para 'yaha kucha haiM'
aisA so viSaya kA sAmAnya boSa hotA hai use arthAvagraha kahate haiM apacA
padArtha ke avyakta jJAna ko arthAvigraha kahate haiM  /  marthanArarasaMhanana
gamakarma jisa karma ke udaya se haDDiyoM kI racanA meM eka - aura markaTa aMdha
aura dUsarI ora kIlI ho  /  anatara baMdha-adhika karma prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
karake kama prakRtiyoM ke baMdha karane arUpa ko alpasara baMdha kahate haiM  /
- - padArthoM kA paraspara nyUnAdhika arupAdhika mAya  /

Page #504 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 15 After the Amavasya of the Bhava-Vaisha, the Karma-Bandha is again
called Avatavya Bandha, which is generally done without any desire for Mang.
Knowledge of the general existence only, without any special conception of
Avarah-name, Pati, etc. Bhava-Bhimam-Mithyakha is the opposite of the opposite
of the substances that are born from the rise of Mithyakha. Its other name is
Vimang-Jnan. Avadhi-Jnan is the knowledge of the substance, field, time, and
measure of the original substance, which is obtained by the soul itself without
the help of the senses and mind. Or, the knowledge that has the power to know
the nature of the object that is spread below and above, or the knowledge that
has the power to directly perceive only the substantial objects, or the activity
of the soul to directly perceive the external meaning, is called Avadhi-Jnan.
Avadhi-Manavaran Karma is the karma that covers the knowledge of Abhijnan.
Avashirsan is the reflection of the general nature of the substantial objects by
the soul itself without the help of the senses and mind. Avarpriyarsha-Avaran
Karma is the karma that covers Avashi-darshan. Avak is a period of eighty-four
lakh years. Bhavang is a period of eighty-four lakh years. Avasthit Avashi-Jnan
and Avadhi-Jnan remain in the soul even after birth, or until the birth of
Faval-Jnan, or until the end of time. Avasthit Bandha is the binding of the same
number of karmas in the second time as in the first time. Avasapini-Kal is a
period of time that is as small as a grain of sand. During this time, the power,
happiness, and understanding of the living beings gradually decrease. Avay is
the knowledge of the object that is taken by the Iha, which is more certain.
Avipak Mirjara is the experience of the karma that is outside the Udayavali, by
entering it into the Udayavali by the special action of Tapas, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 15 bhavaktavya baMSa-vaiSa ke amAva ke bAda punaH karma baMgha
aSavA sAmAnyapane se maMga vivakSA ko kiye binA avaktavya baMdha hai| avapraha-
nAma, pAti Adi kI vizeSa kalpanA se rahita sAmAgya sattA mAtra kA jJAna  /
bhavabhimAma-mithyAkha ke udaya se lapI padArthoM kA viparIta avaSimAna  /
isakA dUsarA nAma vimaMgajhAna bhI hai| avadhimAla-indriya aura mana kI sahAyatA
kI apekSA na kara sAkSAt AtmA ke dvArA dravya, kSetra, kAla, mAva kI
maryAdApUrvaka rUpI arthAta mUla dravya kA jJAna avadhijJAna kahalAtA hai|
athavA jo zAna adhotaghovistRta bastu ke svarUpa ko jAnane kI zakti rakhatA hai
athavA jisa jJAna meM sirpha rUpI padArthoM ko pratyakSa karane kI zakti ho
athavA bAhya artha ko sAkSAt karane ke liye jo AtmA kA vyApAra hotA hai, use
avavijJAna kahate haiN| avadhimAnAvaraNa karma-abhijJAna kA AvaraNa karane vAlA
karma  /  avaSirzana-indriyoM aura mana kI sahAyatA ke binA hI AtmA ko rUpI
dravyoM ke sAmAnya dharma kA pratimAsa  /  avapriyarzanAvaraNa karmaavaSidarzana
ko AvRtta karane vAlA karma  /  avaka-caurAsI lAkha athavAMga ke kAla ko eka
avaya kahate haiM  /  bhavAMga-paurAsI lAkha asara kA eka avayoga hotA hai|
avasthita avaSizAnao avadhijJAna janmAmsara hone para bhI AtmA meM avasthita
rahatA hai athavA phevalajJAna kI utpatti paryanta yA Ajamma ThaharatA hai|
avasthita baMdha-pahale samaya meM jitane karmoM kA baMdha kiyA, dUsare samaya
meM bhI utane hI karmoM kA baMdha karamA  /  mavalapinI kAla-vasa koTAkorI
sUkSma azAsAgaropama ke samaya ko eka aba sapiNI kAla kahate haiN| isa samaya
meM jIvoM kI zakti, sukha, avagAhanA Adi kA uttarottara hrAsa hotA jAtA hai|
avAya-IhA ke dvArA grahaNa kiye gaye padArtha ke viSaya meM kucha adhika nizcayA
smaka jJAna honA  /  avipAka mirjarA- udayAvalI ke bAhara sthita karma ko tapa
Adi kriyAvizeSa kI sAmayaM se udayAvalI meM praviSTa karAke anubhava kiyA jAnA
/

Page #505 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **Bha विभाग प्रतिच्छेद-वीर्य-वामित:** The initial portion
or tail of the *vibhāga* (division) *pratiच्छेद* (intersection) *vīrya* (power)
*vāmit* (ejected). It is also known as *dhīrya* (patience) *paramāṇu* (atom) or
*bhāva* (feeling) *paramāṇu* (atom).  **Abirata-bhoṣa:** Not being detached from
the *bhoṣa* (objects of sense). This is a result of the soul that hinders the
attainment of *charitra* (conduct).  **Avirata samyagdṛṣṭi:** A being who,
despite possessing the qualities of *sampatti* (wealth), *guṇasthāna* (state of
qualities), and *sampamhaṣṭi* (perfection), cannot attain any kind of *prata*
(merit). The specific nature of this being is called *avirata samyagdṛṣṭi
guṇasthāna*.  **Madhubha nāmakarma:** The karma (action) whose emergence causes
the organs below the navel to be inauspicious.  **Manubha vihāyoga-ti
nāmakarma:** The karma whose emergence causes the soul's gait to be
inauspicious, like that of a camel.  **Ayonigata sāsayana samvāda:** A being who
has not ascended the *śreṇi* (ladder) of *uṣmāṇa* (heat) but has attained only
*sāsādana* (sustenance) due to the emergence of *anatanubandhī* (unconnected)
karma.  **Asangī:** Those who have not attained *mano-labdhi* (mental
attainment) or whose *prati* (merit) does not lead to *pravṛtti* (inclination)
and *nivṛtti* (disinclination) towards *iṣṭa* (desirable) and *amiṣṭa*
(undesirable) objects.  **Asangī bhūta:** The knowledge of *asangī* beings.
**Asankhyātāgu vargamā:** The classification of *asambhapāta* (non-coincidence)
*pradeśī* (spatial) *skandha* (aggregates).  **Asatyamano-yoga:** The *manoyoga*
(mental application) that leads to the opposite thinking of the true nature of
things or the *manoyoga* that is opposite to *satyamano-yoga* (true mental
application).  **Asatyavacanyoga:** The *yoga* (union) that arises from the
classification of *asatyavacana* (false speech) or the *vacanyoga* (speech
application) that proves something falsely.  **Asatyāmṛṣā manoyoga:** The
*manoyoga* whose *citta* (mind) is neither true nor false. It is also called
*asatyāmṛṣā mana* (false mind). The *yoga* that arises from this is called
*asatyāmṛṣā manoyoga*. Alternatively, the *manoyoga* whose *citta* is devoid of
*vidhi* (prescriptions) and *niṣedha* (prohibitions), which neither establishes
nor negates anything, is called *asatyāmṛṣā manoyoga*.  **Asatyāmṛṣā
vacanyoga:** The *vacanyoga* that is neither true nor false. Alternatively, the
*vacanyoga* that is not inclined towards the establishment or negation of
anything is called *asatyāmṛṣā vacanyoga*.  **Asātā bāṇīṣa karma:** The karma
whose emergence causes the soul to be attracted to favorable sensory objects.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabda-koSa bhavibhAga praticcheda-vIrya-vAmita ke adimAgI aMza yA
maag| dhIrya paramANu, bhAva paramANu isake dUsare nAma hai  /  abirasa-boSoM se
virata na honA  /  yaha AtmA kA vaha pariNAma hai jo cAritra grahaNa karane meM
vighna DAlatA hai| zavirata sampaSTi guNasthAna-sampamhaSTi hokara bhI jo jIva
kisI prakAra ke prata ko dhAraNa nahIM kara sakatA vaha avirata samyagdRSTi hai
aura usake svarUpa vizeSa ko avirata samyAdRSTi guNasthAna kahate haiM  /
madhubha nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se nAbhi ke nIce ke avayava azubha hoN|
manubha vihAyogati nAmakarmajisa karma ke udaya se jIva kI cAsa U~Ta Adi _ kI
cAla kI bhAMti azubha ho  /  ayonigata sasAyana samvAda..-ko para: Ti gIra umANa
zreNi para to car3hA nahIM kiMtu anatAnubaMdhI ke udaya se sAsAdana mAtra ko
prApta ho gayA use aNigata sAsAdana samyagdRSTi kahate haiM  /  asaMgI-jinheM
manolabdhi prApta nahIM hai athavA jina jIvoM ke adhipUrvaka iSTa amiSTa meM
pravRtti-nivRtti nahIM hotI hai, ve asaMzI haiM  /  asaMhI bhuta-asaMzI jIvoM kA
ata jJAna  /  asaMkhyAtAgu vargamA-asaMbhapAta pradezI skandhoM kI vrgnnaa|
asatya manoyoga-jisa manoyoga ke dvArA vastu svarUpa kA viparIta cintana ho
athavA satya manoyoga se viparIta manoyoga  /  asatya vacanayogaasatya pacana
vargaNA ke nimitta se hone vAle yoga athavA kisI vastu ko ayathArtha siddha
karane vAle vacanayoga ko kahate haiM  /  asasthAmRSA manoyoga-jo mana na to
satya ho aura na mRSA ho use asatyA maSA mana kahate haiM aura usake dvArA hone
vAlA yoga asatyAbhUSA manoyoga kahalAtA hai 1 athavA jisa manoyoga kA citama
vidhi-niSedha zUnya ho, jo ciMtana na to kisI vastu kI sthApanA karatA ho ora na
niSedha, use asatyAmRSA manoyoga kahate haiM  /  asarayAmRSA vacanayoga:-o
bacanayoga na to satya rUpa ho aura na mRSA rUpa hI ho  /  athavA jo vacanayoga
kisI vastu ke sthApana-utyApana ke lie pravRtta nahIM hotA use asatyAmRSA
bacanayoga kahate haiN| asAtA banISa kArmajisa pharma ke udaya se AtmA ko
anukUla indriya viSayoM

Page #506 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 The non-attainment of desirable objects and the attainment of
unfavorable sensory objects causes suffering. Asthira Mamakarma - The karma
whose rise makes the nose, skin, etc. organs unstable, i.e., fickle. (Ma) Bhagal
- The second state of the Balikas is found in the Dasikas of the first state due
to repulsion. Bhatap Mamakarma - The karma whose rise makes the body of the
living being not hot itself but emits hot light. Madeya Mamakarma - The karma
whose rise makes the speech of the living being universally accepted. Manupurvi
Namakarma - Due to its rise, the living being who has been in Viprhagathi
travels according to the category of the sky regions and reaches the place of
origin. Abhiphik - Examining the elements of the Mishyaran without testing them
and taking sides with one doctrine while rejecting the other. Mabhiniveshik - To
have a strong attachment (puragraha) to one's own side even knowing it to be
false, in order to establish it. Bhabyantar Nivritti - The internal-inner form
of the senses. Armaangul - Each person has their own angul. By this, the height
of one's body is measured. Mapu-karma - The karma whose rise makes the living
being live in the form of a god, human, Tiryanch, and Narak, and upon its
destruction, he abandons those forms, i.e., dies. Mavil - In which only one meal
is taken in a day, leaving behind the juices like Nigay-Dush, Pee, etc., and hot
(prasook) water is drunk. Mavali - There is a practice of the Asansthata Sashay.
Aavashyak - It is necessary to control the soul by the qualities, such a
description is called Aavashyak Shruti. Aapatma - To speak good things about the
Shanis, their karma, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 kI aprApti ho aura pratikUla indriya viSayoM kI prApti ke kAraNa
dukhakA anubhava ho  /  asthira mAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se nAka-mI, jilhA
Adi avayava asthira arthAt capala hote haiN| (mA) bhAgAla-dvitIya sthiti ke
balikoM ko apakarSaNa dvArA prathama spiti ke dasikoM meM paaiivaanaa| bhAtapa
mAmakarma-lisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra svayaM uSNa na hokara mI uSNa
prakAza karatA hai| mAdeya mAmakarma-jisa karma ke upaya se jIva kA vacana
sarvamAnya ho  /  mAnupUrvI nAmakarma-isake udaya se viprahagati meM rahA habA
jIva bhAkAza pradezoM kI zreNI ke anusAra gamana kara utpatti-sthAna para
pahuMcatA hai| Abhipahika miSyAraNa tatva kI parIkSA kiye binA hI kisI eka
siddhAMta kA pakSapAta karake anya pakSa kA snAna krnaa| mAbhinivezika minyAtva-
apane pakSa ko asatya jAnakara bhI usakI sthApanA karane ke liye durabhiniveza
(purAgraha) karanA  /  bhAbhyantara nivRttiindriyoM kA AMtarika-bhItarI AkAra  /
AramAMgula-pratyeka vyakti kA apanA-apanA bhaMgula  /  isake dvArA apane pArIra
kI U~cAI nApI jAtI hai| mApu-karma-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva-deva, manuSya,
tithaMca aura nAraka ke ma meM jItA hai aura usake kSaya hone para una-una rUpoM
kA tyAga karatA hai, yAnI mara jAtA hai| mAvila-jisameM nigaya-dUSa, pI Adi rasa
chor3abAra kevala dina meM eka bAra anna vAyA jAtA hai tathA garama (prAsuka)
jama piyA jAtA hai| mAvalI-asaMsthAta saSaya kI eka prAvalI hotI hai| mAvazyaka
bataguNoM ke dvArA AtmA ko vaza meM karanA AvazyakIya hai, aisA varNana jisameM
ho use Avazyaka zruta kahate haiM  /  ApAtamA-zAniyoM kI miyA karamA, unake bAre
meM sUThI bAteM kahanA, mamI

Page #507 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **Spreading rumors, creating a web of deceit that causes
deep pain to others is called Shasana.**  **Asambhavya:** A being who is about
to attain liberation in the near future.  **Aalav:** The gateway to the arrival
of auspicious and inauspicious karmas.  **Aahar:** The intake of food, which is
the reception of the nok vargana (the smallest particles of matter) that are
capable of becoming the body, speech, and mind. Or, it is the intake of the six
paryaaptis (completions) that are necessary for the three pariras (bodies).
**Aahar Paryapti:** The completion of the special power of the soul, which is
the ability to transform external food pudgals (particles of matter) into
khalabhag (gross) and rasabhag (subtle) forms.  **Vyaahar Sansha:** The desire
for food, a special result of the soul caused by the arising of the shuva
(auspicious) and bedaniya (painful) karmas.  **Aaharaka:** A being who consumes
food of any kind, including oja (vital energy), lom (hair), and kavala (saliva).
A being who consumes food at the appropriate time is also called an aaharaka.
**Aaharaka Angopaang Maamakarma:** The karma that arises and causes the
formation of the limbs and organs from the pudgals that have transformed into
the aaharaka body.  **Maharat Kayayog:** The activity of the vital force, which
is aided by the aaharaka body and the aaharaka body.  **Aaharaka Karmanbandhan
Namak:** The karma that arises and causes the aaharaka body pudgals to be
connected with the karman pudgals.  **Aaharaka Kartajaskaramanbandhan Namak:**
The karma that arises and causes the aaharaka body pudgals to be connected with
the tejas karman pudgals.  **Aaharaka Kartajasanbandhan Namak:** The karma that
arises and causes the aaharaka body pudgals to be connected with the tejas
pudgals.  **Maharakamishra Kayayog:** From the beginning of the formation of the
aaharaka body until the completion of the body paryaapti, the incomplete body in
the middle is called the aaharaka mishra kay (mixed body), and the yoga produced
by it is called the aaharaka mishra kayayog.  **Apacha Aaharaka and Audar:**
(These terms are not fully defined in the provided text, but they likely refer
to different types of aaharakas or states related to food consumption.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabda - koSa bAteM loka meM phailAnA, unheM mArmika pIr3A ho aisA
kapaTa- jAla phailAnA zAsanA hai  /  asamma bhavya - nikaTa kAla meM hI mokSa ko
prApta karane vAlA jIva Alava - zubhAzubha karmoM ke Agamana kA dvAra  /  15
AhAra - zarIra nAmakarma ke udaya se deha, vacana aura bhraSya mana rUpa banane
yogya noka vargaNA kA jo grahaNa hotA hai| usako AhAra kahate haiM  /  athavA
tIna pArIra aura chaha paryAptiyoM ke yogya padmaloM ke grahaNa ko AhAra kahate
haiM  /  AhAra paryApti - bAhya AhAra pudgaloM ko grahaNa karake khalabhAga
rasabhAga meM pariNAmAne ko jIva kI zakti vizeSa kI pUrNatA  /  byAhAra saMza:-
AhAra kI abhilASA, zuvA, bedanIya karma ke udaya se hone vAle AtmA kA pariNAma
vizeSa  /  AhAraka - oja, loma aura kavala inameM se kisI bhI prakAra ke jAhAra
ko grahaNa karane vAle jIva ko AhAraka kahate haiN| apanA samaya-samaya jo AhAra
kare use AhAraka kahate haiN| hAraka aMgopAMga mAmakarma jisa karma ke udaya se
AhAraka zarIra rUpa pariNata pudgaloM se aMgopAMga rUpa avayavoM kA nirmANa ho
/  mahArata kAyayoga -- bAhAraka zarIra aura AhAraka zarIra kI sahAyatA se hone
vAlA vIrya-zakti kA vyApAra  /  - AhAraka kArmaNabaMdhana nAmaka - jisa karma ke
udaya se AhAraka pazarIra pudumaloM kA kArmaNa dugaloM ke sAtha sambandha ho  /
AhArakartajasakArmaNabaMdhana nAmakarma -- jisa karma ke udama se AhAraka zarIra
pudgaloM kA taijasa-kArmaNa mugaloM ke sAtha sambandha hotA hai  /
AhArakartajasabaMdhana nAmakarma-jisake udaya se AhAraka zarIra pudgaloM kA
tejasa pugaloM ke sAtha sambandha ho  /  mahArakamizra kAmayoga AhAraka zarIra
kI utpatti prArambha hone ke prathama samaya se lagAkara zarIra paryApti pUrNa
hone taka antarmuhUrta ke madhyavartI aparipUrNa zarIra ko AhAraka mizrakAya
kahate haiM aura usake dvArA utpanna yoga ko AhArakamizra kAyayoga kahate haiM
/  apacA AhAraka aura audara -

Page #508 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix 2  **Aharakamisra Kayayog:** The interaction of the potency of semen
due to the mixture of the two bodies is called Aharakamisra Kayayog.  **Aharak
Yogya Utkrishta Vargana:** The category of skandhas with an infinite number of
bhamas more than the Aharak Yogya Jagnya Vargana is the Aharak Yogya Utkrishta
Vargana, which is acceptable for the Aharak body.  **Aharak Yogya Jagnya
Vargana:** The category of skandhas with one bhama more than the Aharak Yogya
Utkrishta Vargana, which is the member of the Vaikriya Sharira Yogya Utkrishta
Vargana, is called the Aharak Yogya Jagnya Vargana.  **Aharak Vargana:** The
categories from which the Aharak body is formed.  **Aharak Sharira Namakarma:**
For a specific purpose, such as doubt arising in a subject matter or a desire to
see the Riddhi of a Tirthankara, the Aharak Vargana creates a self-made puppet
body, which is called the Aharak Sharira. The karma that causes the being to
obtain the Aharak Sharira is called the Aharak Sharira Namakarma.  **Aharak
Sharira Bandhan Namakarma:** The karma that causes the previously acquired
Aharak Sharira puppets to merge with the newly acquired Aharak Sharira puppets.
**Aharak Sanghatan Namakarma:** The karma that causes the Aharak Sharira form to
come into close proximity with each other.  **Aharak Samudghas:** The Samudghas
that occurs due to the Aharak Sharira.  **(e)**  **Ishvar Samayik:** The
practice that is given to the student disciples to achieve stability. Its
duration is considered to be six months until the time of the Upasthan [until
taking a big vow].  **Indriya:** When the Avarana karma is destroyed, the soul,
which is in the form of Jnasvabhav, is unable to know the object itself. The
cause that enables the soul to know the object, or through which the soul can be
known, or which is capable of knowing its own touch, etc., without relying on
another (like the tongue, etc.) like the Indriya, is called the Indriya.
**Indriya Paryapti:** The power of the being through which the food, transformed
into the form of dhatu, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 2 ' rika ina do zarIroM ke mizratva dvArA hone vAle vIrya-zakti ke
vyApAra ko AhArakamizra kAyayoga kahate haiM  /  AhAraka yogya utkRSTa vargaNA -
AhArakayogya jadhanya vargaNA se ananta bhAma adhika pradeza vAle skandhoM kI
AhAraka zarIra ke grahaNayogya utkRSTa vagaMNA hotI hai  /  AhArakayogya
jagramya vargaNA vaikriya zarIrayogya utkRSTa vagaMgA ke manambara kI
agraNayogya utkRSTa vargaNA se eka pradeza adhika skalpoM kI jo vargaNA hotI
hai, yaha AhArakayogya jaganya vargagA kahalAtI hai  /  AhAraka varSaNA - jina
vagaMNAoM se AhAraka zarIra banatA hai  /  AhArakazarIra nAmakarma - catuvaMza
pUrvaghara muni viziSTa kArya hetu, jaise ki.mI viSaya meM sandeha utpanna ho
jAye athavA tIrthaMkara ko Rddhi darzana kI icchA ho jAye, AhAraka vargaNA dvArA
jo sva-hasta pramANa putalA zarIra banAte haiM, use AhArakazarIra kahate haiM
aura jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko AhArakazarIra kI prApti hotI hai va AhAraka
zarIra nAmakarma hai| AhArakazarIrabaMdhana nAmakarma -- jisa karma ke udaya se
pUrvagrahIta AhAraka zarIra putaloM ke sAtha gRhyamANa AhArakazarIra puloM kA
Apasa meM mela ho  /  19 ---- AhArakasaMghAtana nAmakarma jisa karma ke udaya se
AhArakazarIra rUpa pariNala mugaloM kA paraspara sAnidhya ho  /  AhAraka
samudghAta - AhArakazarIra ke nimitta se hone vAlA samuddhAsa  /  (i) -
izvarasAmAyika jo abhyAsArthI ziSyoM ko sthiratA prApta karane ke lie pahale
pahala diyA jAtA hai| isakI kAlamaryAdA upasthAna paryanta [ bar3I bImA lene
taka) chaha mAsa taka mAnI jAtI hai  /  igriya- AvaraNaM karma kA kSayopazama
hone para svayaM padArtha kA jJAna karane meM asamartha -- jJasvabhAva rUpa AtmA
ko padArtha kA jJAna karAne meM nimittabhUta kAraNa, athavA jisake dvArA AtmA
jAnA jAye athavA apane-apane sparzAdika viSayoM meM dUsare ko (rasanA Adi ko )
apekSA na rakhakara indra ke samAna jo samartha evaM svatantra hoM unheM idriya
kahate haiM  /  indriya paryApti- jIva kI vaha zakti jisake dvArA dhAtu rUpa meM
pariNata AhAra

Page #509 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **Pudgala:**  A fundamental category in Jain philosophy,
referring to the material particles that make up the universe.  **Indriya:**
Senses, including the five physical senses (sight, smell, taste, touch, and
hearing) and the internal senses (mind, intellect, and faith).  **Yoga:**  A
state of spiritual union or liberation, achieved through various practices and
disciplines.  **Aahar:**  Food or nourishment, both physical and spiritual.
**Bhod:**  Knowledge or understanding.  **Samādhyam:**  A state of deep
concentration or meditation.  **Iha Avagraha:**  A type of knowledge or
understanding that is based on direct experience.  **Dharma:**  The principles
of right conduct and ethical living.  **Kula:**  A lineage or family, especially
one known for its adherence to Dharma and ethical principles.  **Up Gotr
Karma:**  A type of karma that leads to birth in a noble or high-ranking family.
**Uchchvasa:**  A breath or inhalation.  **Uchchvasa Kal:**  A period of time
during which a healthy and virtuous person takes a single breath.  **Uchchvasa
Vishvas:**  A specific type of breath or inhalation that is counted in a
particular way.  **Uchchvasa Nam Karma:**  A type of karma that leads to the
experience of pleasure or happiness.  **Atkrushta Asankhyata Sankhyata:**  A
specific mathematical calculation involving the number of "Asankhyata" (an
immeasurable number).  **Utkrisht Paritamas:**  A specific mathematical
calculation involving the number of "Paritamas" (a specific type of number).
**Utkrisht Yuktan:**  A specific mathematical calculation involving the number
of "Yuktan" (a specific type of number).  **Utkrisht Paritayat:**  A specific
mathematical calculation involving the number of "Paritayat" (a specific type of
number).  **Utkrisht Yukta Sankhyata:**  A specific mathematical calculation
involving the number of "Yukta Sankhyata" (a specific type of number).
**Utkrisht Sampat:**  A specific mathematical calculation involving the number
of "Sampat" (a specific type of number).  **Utkrisht Garam Adhiktam Sthiti
Bandh:**  A specific type of karmic bondage that is associated with intense heat
or passion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabda koSa pudgalo meM se yogya pudgala indriya rUpa se pariNata
kiye jAte haiN| athavA jIva kI vaha zakti hai jisake dvArA yogya AhAra pugaloM
ko indriya rUpa pariNata karake indriyajanya bodha kA sAmadhyaM prApta kiyA jAtA
hai| (f) IhA avagraha ke dvArA jAne hue padArtha ke viSaya meM dharma viSayaka
vicAraNA 20 kula - dharma aura nIti kI rakSA ke saMbaMdha meM jisa kula ne
cirakAla se prasiddhi prApta kI hai  /  upa gotrakarma - jisa karma ke udaya se
jIva ucca kula meM janma letA hai  /  ucchvAsa kAla -- niroga, svastha,
nizcinta, varuNa puruSa ke eka bAra davAsa lene aura tyAgane kA kAma  /  (u)
ucchavAsa vizvAsa - saMkhyAta AvalI kA eka ucchavAsa nizvAsa hotA hai  /
ucchvAsa nAmakarma-jisake udaya se vyavAyapha hotA hai| atkRSTa asaMkhyAta
saMkhyAta javanya asaMkhyAtAsaMsthAta kI rAzi kA anyonyAbhyAsa karane se prApta
hone vAlI rAzi meM se eka ko kama karane para prApta rAzi | utkRSTa parItAmagsa
- jayanya parItAnAmsa kI saMkhyA kA abhyonyAbhyAsa karane para prApta saMkhyA
meM se eka ko kama kara dene para prApta saMkhyA  /  utkRSTa yuktAna-jayanya
yuktAnanta kI saMkhyA kA paraspara guNA karane para prApta saMkhyA meM se eka
kama kara dene para utkRSTa yuktAnanta hotA hai  /  utkRSTa parItAyAta acanya
parItAsaMkhyAta kI rAzi kA anyonyAbhyAsa pharake usameM se eka ko kama karane
para prApta saMkhyA  /  -- utkRSTa yukta saMkhyAta - adhabhya yuktAsaMsthAna kI
rAzi kA paraspara guNA karane paramApta rAzi meM se eka ko kama kara dene para
prApta rAzi | utkRSTa saMpAta - anavasthita, zalAkA, pratipAlAkA aura mahAzalAkA
patyoM ko vidhipUrvaka sarasoM ke dAnoM se paripUrNa bharakara unake dAnoM ke
jor3a meM se eka dAnA kama kara lie jAne paraM prApta saMkhyA  /  utkRSTa garama
adhikatama sthiti bandha  /

Page #510 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 Main divisions of the nature of karma and their sub-divisions.
**Utspalang:** One Utspalang is equal to eighty-four lakh (8,400,000) Utpala.
**Utspal:** Eighty-four lakh Utpala is called one Utspal in the time of 'Hu Hu'.
**Utshalakshna:** This is the time of an infinite number of Vyavahar Paramanu.
**Utsapigi Kal:** This is the time of countless subtle Ahata Sagara. In this
time, the power, intelligence, and understanding of beings gradually increase.
**Utsesha Gul:** One Utsesha Gul is equal to eight Yava Madhyas. **Uday:** The
state of karma dalikas providing their own fruits, or the experience of karma
paramanu that have been obtained, is called Uday. **Udayakal:** The time when
the fruit of karma is experienced after the Abhasa Kal has passed is called
Udayakal. Or, the time of the fruit of karma according to the Niyasa Shastra is
called Udayakal. **Udayavikalpa:** The parts of the Udayasthanas are called
Udayavikalpa. **Udayasthan:** The community of those natures whose Uday is
experienced together is called Udayasthan. **Varana:** To bring forth the karma
that has not yet obtained Uday, before the appointed time, by the special effort
of the soul, into the Udayavali, or to bring forth the karma before the
appointed time, is called Varana. **Udiranasthan:** The community of those
natures whose Udirana is experienced together is called Udiranasthan. **Chahar
Palp:** The time of countless koti years, divided into as many parts as there
are pores in the Vyavahar Palya, by the imagination of each pore, is called
Chahar Palp. **Ugrota Namakarma:** The karma whose Uday causes the Sriva to
spread its cold light. **Savamana:** The increase in the state and experience of
karma due to special circumstances, emotions, and efforts. **Upayasan:** The
transformation of a nature into another form without the three causes of Papa,
Pravritti, and Madhyama.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 uttara prakRti-karmoM ke mukhya bhedoM ke avAntara bheda  /  /
uspAla-aurAsI lAkha utpalAMga kA ekA alpala hotA hai| utpalAMga-caurAsI lAkha
'hu hu ke samaya ko eka utpAga kahate haiM  /  utazlakSNa-zlagikA yaha ananta
vyavahAra paramANu kI hotI hai  /  utsapigI kAlaisa koTA-koTI sUkSma aDhA
sAgaropama kA kAla  /  isameM jIvoM kI zakti, buddhi, avagAhanA Adi kI
uttarottara vRddhi hotI jAtI hai  /  useSa gulaATha yava madhya kA eka
utseSAgula hotA hai| uvaya-vaidhe hue karma dalikoM kI svaphala pradAna karane
kI avasthA athavA kAma prApta karma paramANuoM ke anubhava karane ko udaya
kahate haiM  /  utyakAlaga-abASA kAla vyatIta ho cukane para jisa samaya karma
ke phala kA anubhava hotA hai, usa samaya ko udayakAla kahate haiM  /  athavA
karma ke phala noga ke niyasa kAstra ko upayakAla kahA jAtA hai|
udayavikalpaudayasthAnoM ke aMgoM ko upayavikalpa kahate haiN| sayapAna-jina
prakRtiyoM kA upama eka sAtha pAyA jAme; unake samudAya ko upayasthAna kahate
haiN| vAraNA-uvayaphAla ko prApta nahIM hue karmoM kA AtmA ke adhyavasAya-vizeSa
-~prayatna-vizeSa se niyata samaya se pUrva udayahetu udayAyali meM praviSTa
karanA, avasthita karanA yA niyata samaya se pUrva karma kA udaya meM mAnA
athavA anuSayakAla ko prApta karmoM ko phalodaya kI sthiti meM lA denaa| gvIragA
sthAna-jina praphuttiyoM kI udIraNA eka sAtha pAI jAye unake samu vAya ko
udIraNAsthAna kahate haiM  /  cahAra pAlpa- vyavahAra palya ke eka-eka
romakhaMra ke kalpanA ke dvArA asaMkhyAta koTi varSa ke samaya jitane khaMDa
karake una saba khaMgoM ko palya meM maranA udAra palpa kahalAtA hai| ugrota
nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se zrIva kA pArIra zIta prakAza phailAtA hai|
savamanA- karmoM kI sthiti aura anubhAga meM sthitivizeSa, bhAvaviASa aura
adhyabasAyavizeSa ke kAraNa vRddhi ho pAnA  /  upayasana-papApravRtta mAdi tIna
karaNoM ke binA hI kisI prakRti ko anya prati rUpa prinnmaanaa|

Page #511 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **Uṇmārga Deśa:** The path of liberation, the path that
leads to the cessation of suffering.  **Upadeśa:** Teaching, instruction,
especially regarding the nature of the world and its causes and effects.
**Dharma-viparīta Śikṣā:** Teaching that contradicts the true nature of Dharma
(righteousness).  **Upakaraṇa Dravyeṇdriya:** The sense organ that is
instrumental in the destruction of the power of the karmic particles (karma)
that bind the soul to the cycle of birth and death.  **Paravāta-śānīya:** The
destruction of the instruments of knowledge and liberation.  **Sapnāta
Nāmakarma:** The karma that causes the soul to experience dreams, visions, and
other mental phenomena.  **Upaghāta Nāmakarma:** The karma that causes the soul
to experience pain, suffering, and other negative experiences.  **Upapāta
Janma:** The initial formation of the body from the karmic particles (karma)
that are present at the time of birth.  **Upabhogātarāya Karma:** The karma that
prevents the soul from enjoying the fruits of its actions, even though it has
the potential to do so.  **Upayoga:** The soul's ability to perceive and
interact with the world.  **Upayoga Bhāveṇdriya:** The sense organ that is
responsible for the soul's perception of the world.  **Gparasṣakāla:** The
period of time between the death of one body and the birth of another.
**Savareṇu:** A unit of measurement equal to eight maṇ-lahiṇka.  **Rājya-spardhā
Nāmakarma:** The karma that causes the soul to experience intense heat and
burning sensations.  **Apaśama:** The state of karma in which it is not
manifested in the present life.  **Upāśama:** The state of karma in which it is
not capable of being manifested in the future.  **Upāśamani:** The category of
karma that is destroyed by the practice of non-violence, truthfulness, and other
virtues.  **Upāśāntakavāya Dhītarāga Chhadmastha Gugalyāna:** The state of the
soul in which the passions (kṣayās) have been subdued, the attachment to the
world has been eradicated, and the soul is free from the veils of ignorance.
**Upāśāntārā:** The state of perfect liberation, the ultimate goal of Jainism.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabda-koSa unmArga dezamA-saMsAra ke kAraNoM aura kAryoM kA moka ke
kAraNoM ke rUpa meM upadeza denA; dharma-viparIta zikSA ! upakaraNa.mpenima
Abhyansara nivRtti kI viSama-grahaNa kI zakti ko athavA jo miti kA upakAra
karatI hai, use upakaraNa dravyendriya kahate haiM  /  paravAta-zAniyoM aura
jJAna ke sAdhanoM kA nAza kara denA  /  sapanAta nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya
se jIma apane zarIra ke avayavoM jaise pratijillA, cora damsa Adi se baleza pAtA
hai| yaha upaghAta nAmakarma kahalAtA hai| spapAta mamma-utpattisthAna meM
sthita baiMkriya pudgaloM ko pahale-pahala zarIra rUpa meM pariNata karanA
upapAta janma kahA jAtA hai| upabhogAtarAya karma-upabhoga kI sAmagrI hote hue
bhI jIva jisa karma ke udaya se usa sAmagrI kA upabhoga na kara ske| upayoga-
jIva kA boSa rUpa vyApAra athavA jIva kA jo bhAva vastu ke grahaNa karane ke lie
pravRtta hotA hai, jisake dvArA vastu kA sAmAnya va vizeSa svarUpa jAnA jAtA
hai; athavA AtmA ke catanyAnuvidhAyI pariNAra ko upayoga kahate haiN| upayoga
bhAvemiya-samdhi rUpa bhAvendriya ke anusAra AtmA kI viSaya -mahaNa meM hone
vAlI pravRti  /  gaparasaSakAla-para-bhava sambandhI Ayubandha se usarakAra kI
avsthaa| savarenu-ATha maNa-lahiNakA kA eka vareNa hotA hai| rAjyaspardhA
nAmakarma-jisa karma ke capaya se jIva kA zarIra Aga jaisA uSNa ho  /  apazama-
bAramA meM karma kI nina pakti kA kAraNavaza pragaTa na honA athavA pradeza aura
vipAka donoM prakAra ke karmodaya kA eka jAnA japapAma hai| upAsamama-karma kI
jisa avasthA meM udaya athavA jadIraNA saMbhava nahIM hotI hai| upazamaNi-jisa
zreNI meM mohanIya karma kI uttara prakRtiyoM kA upazama kiyA jAtA hai|
upazAmtakavAya dhItarAga chadamastha gugalyAna-jana jIvoM ke svarUpa vizeSa ko
kAhase haiM jinake kaSAya upazAnta hue haiM, rAga kA mI sarvathA udaya nahIM hai
aura chadama (AvaraNa bhUta ghAtikama) lage hue haiM 1 upazAntArA-aupazabhika
samyaktva ke kAma ko upazAlA kahA jAtA hai  /

Page #512 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 Uha - There are eighty-four lakh Uhangs in one Kaha. Kaha - Eighty-
four lakh Maha Ava time. (A) 23 ← Natural inference of one-place karma nature -
Fruitful power: One-sided Mithyatva - To consider many Dharmic substances as one
Dharmic is one-sided Mithyatva. One-sensory being - Those who have the rise of
one-sensory jati karma and only one touch sense is found in them. One-sensory
jati karma - The karma whose rise gives the being only one sense-touch indriya.
(O) Mind-learned. Angry Without intending to, all beings who are called bound
are called Oghbandh or general bond. Oghsanjna - Unmanifest consciousness is
called Oghsanjna. www Bhojahar - The food that is taken by the karmic body in
the form of Shukra-absorbed at the time of birth in the womb. (Au) " Andpatki
buddhi - The buddhi by which the pure meaning, the intention of the objects is
immediately understood without hearing, without knowing. Auyik bhav - The bhav
that arises from the rise of karmas. - Okarik Angopang karma - The karma whose
rise creates the limbs in the form of Audarik body from the transformed pugals.
Ausarik Audarikbandhan karma - The karma whose rise creates the relationship of
Audarik body pugals with Audarik pugals. Auvaric Kayyog - The effort that is the
cause of the pulsation in the realms of the being due to the power generated by
the Audarik body, or the activity of the Audarik body's sperm-power is called
Auvaric Kayyog.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 Uha- -- caurAsI lAkha uhAMga kA eka kaha hotA hai  /  kahAMga-
caurAsI lAkha mahA ava kA samaya  /  (e) 23 - ekasthAnika karma prakRti kA
svAbhAvika anumAna - phalajanaka zakti : ekAnta midhyAtva -- aneka dharmAtmaka
padArthoM ko kisI eka dharmAtmaka hI mAnanA ekAnta mithyAtva hai  /  ekendriya
jIva - jinake ekendriya jAti nAmakarma kA udaya hotA hai aura sirpha eka
sparzana indriya hI jinameM pAI jAtI hai  /  ekendriya jAti nAmakarma -- jisa
karma ke udaya se jIva ko sirpha eka indriyasparzana indrama prApta ho  /  (o)
mn-siikhaa| gussAe kI vivakSA kiye binA hI saba jIvoM ko jo baMdha kahA jAtA
hai, use oghabaMdha yA sAmAnya baMdha kahate haiM  /  oghasaMjJA - avyakta
cetanA ko oSasaMjJA kahA jAtA hai| www bhojAhAra - garbha meM utpana hone ke
samaya jo zukravazoSita rUpa AhAra kArmaNazarIra ke dvArA liyA jAtA hai  /  (
au) " aurapatikI buddhi jisa buddhi ke dvArA pahale binA sune binA jAne hue
padArthoM ke vizuddha artha, abhiprAya ko tatkAla praNa kara liyA jAtA hai  /
auyika bhAva -- karmoM ke udaya se hone vAlA bhAva  /  - okArika aMgopAMga
nAmakarma jisa karma ke udaya se audArika zarIra rUpa meM pariNata pugaloM se
aMgopAMga rUpa avayaSa banate haiM  /  auSArika audArikabaMdhana nAmakarma jisa
karma ke udama se maudArika zarIra pudagaloM kA audArika pudgaloM ke sAtha
sambandha ho  /  auvArika kApayoga audArika zarIra dvArA utpanna huI zakti se
jIva ke pradezoM meM parispanda ke kAraNabhUta prayatna kA honA athavA audArika
zarIra ke vIrya-zakti ke vyApAra ko audArika kAyayoga kahate haiM  /

Page #513 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **Audārika Karmabandhana Nāmakarma:** The karma that binds
the audārika body with the karmaṇīya pudgalas.  **Audārika Bandhana Nāmakarma:**
The karma that binds the audārika body with the karmaṇīya pudgalas.  **Audārita
Bandhana Nāmakarma:** The karma that binds the audārika body with the tejas
pudgalas.  **Bhavarika Miśra Kāya:** The intermediate body that exists from the
beginning of the formation of the audārika body until the moment of death.
**Audārika Miśra Kāya Yoga:** The union of the audārika and karmaṇīya bodies, or
the effort made through the audārika miśra kāya.  **Audārika Śarīra:** The body
that is possessed by the Tīrthankaras and other great beings, which allows for
the attainment of liberation. It is made up of the audārika pudgalas, and is
composed of flesh, bones, etc.  **Śarīra Nāmakarma:** The karma that leads to
the attainment of an audārika body.  **Audārika Śarīra Bhara Nāmakarma:** The
karma that causes the previously acquired audārika pudgalas to merge with the
newly acquired audārika pudgalas.  **Audārika Vājim Pudgala:** The pudgalas that
form the audārika body.  **Audārika Saṃcālana Nāmakarma:** The karma that causes
the audārika body to be formed from the rūpa parisa pudgalas.  **Papātika Kriya
Śarīra:** The body that is obtained at birth by the gods and the Māras who are
born from the uppapāta.  **Apaśamika Bhāva:** The state of mind that arises from
the apaśama of the mohaniya karma.  **Apaśamika Dhāritra Cāritra:** The stable
state of mind that arises from the apaśama of the twenty-five types of mohaniya
karma.  **Aupaśamika Sammavastha:** The state of mind that arises from the
apaśama of the four ananta-anubandhi kṣayās and the varṣāṇamotrīka kula.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabda koSa auvArika kArmaNabandhana nAmakarma jisa karma ke udama
se audArika zarIra mugaloM kA kAmaMNa pudgaloM ke sAtha ho  /  bhAratajasakA
baMdhana nAmakarma jisa karma ke udaya se auaudArikavArIra pudgaloM kA jisa
kAmaMNa pugaloM ke sAtha sambandha ho  /  auvAritaM asa baMdhana nAmakarma jisa
karma ke udaya se audArikazarIra pugaloM kA tejasa vugaloM ke sAtha sambamdha ho
/  bhavArika miSa kAya - modArikapArIra kI utpatti prArambha hone ke prathama
samaya se lagAkara antarmuhUrsa taka madhyavartI kAla meM vartamAna aparipUrNa
zarIra ko kahate haiM  /  24 -- audArikamizra zAmayoga -- audArika aura kArmaNa
ina donoM zarIroM kI sahAyatA se hone vAle vIrya-zakti ke vyApAra ko athavA
audArika mizra kAma dvArA hone vAle prayatnoM ko bhavArika mizra kAyayoga kahA
jAtA hai| auvArika zArIra-jisa zarIra ko tIrthaMkara Adi mahApuruSa dhAraNa
karate haiM, jisase mokSa prApta kiyA jA sakatA hai, jo audArika vargAoM se
niSpakSa mAMsa, haDDI Adi bhavayavoM se banA hotA hai, sthUla hai Adi vaha
auvArika * zarIra kahalAtA hai  /  starfrezarIra nAmakarma jisa karma ke udaya
se audArikazarIra prApta ho  /  auvArikazarIrabhara nAmakarma -- jisa karma ke
udaya se pUrvagrahIta audArika puloM ke sAtha vartamAna meM grahaNa kiye jAne
vAle audArika pugaloM kA Apasa meM mela hotA hai  /  zrIvArika vAjima pugala
vargaNAoM se audArika zarIra banatA hai  /  zrIvArikasaMcAlana nAmakarma-jisa
karma ke udaya se audArika zarIra rUpa parisa pugaloM kA paraspara sAnnidhya ho
/  papAtika kriya zarIra -- upapAla janma lene vAle deva aura mArakoM ko jo
zarIra janma samaya se hI prApta hotA hai  /  apazamika bhAva - mohanIyakarma ke
upapAma se hone vAlA mAya  /  - pazamika dhAritra cAritra mohanIya kI paccIsa
prakRtiyoM ke upazama se vyakta hone vAlA sthirAtmaka Atma-pariNAma | aupazamika
sammavastha - anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya catuSka aura varSAMnamotrika - kula

Page #514 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 25 The element that manifests as the result of the pacification of
the seven natures, which is expressive of interest, is called Aupashmik
Samyaktva. Katurus Karma - The karma whose arising causes the body fluids of the
living being to become thick, like neem etc. Kamala - Eighty-four lakh Kamalang
is the time period of a Kamalang. Kamalang - Eighty-four lakh Mahapan is one
Kamalang. Karan-Paryapt - Those who have attained full sensory fulfillment or
have fulfilled their respective fulfillments. Karan-Aaparyapt - When the karma
called Paryapt or Aaparyapt arises, until the living beings attain the fullness
of their Karans - body, senses, etc. - they are called Karan-Aaparyapt.
Karanlakshi - The attainment of results or power capable of breaking the
Mithyatva-Pranthi, which is eternal. Kavlahar - Food items like grains, etc.,
which are taken through the mouth. Karma - The Tatvagya Pudgal atoms attracted
and bound by the tendency of the living being due to Mithyatva, Aviraat, Pramad,
Kashay and Yoga. Karmaja Buddhi - The intelligence obtained by thinking,
contemplating and practicing in a purposeful manner. Karmayogya Utkrisht Vargana
- The skandhas with an infinite number of parts more than the Karmayogya
Jaghanya Varganas are called Karmayogya Utkrisht Vargana. Karmayogya Jaghanya
Vargana - The skandhas with one part more than the skandhas of the Utkrisht
Vargana, which is not capable of being taken, after the Utkrisht Manoyogya
Vargana, are called Karmayogya Jaghanya Vargana. Karmrupa Parinaman - The
ability of the Karma Pudgalas to cover the natural qualities of the living
being, such as knowledge, perception, etc. Karma Spataavasthanalaksanaa Sthiti -
The time period during which the Karma stays with the soul after being bound.
Karma Vargana - The group of Karma particles.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 25 sAta prakRtiyoM ke upazama se jo tatva ruci vyaMjaka Arama-
pariNAma pragaTa hotA hai, vaha aupazamika samyaktva hai| kaTurasa nAmakarma-
jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra-rasa ghirAyate, nIma Adi jaisA Tu ho|
kamala-caurAsI lAkha kamalAMga ke kAla ko kahate haiM  /  kamalAMga-caurAsI lAna
mahApAna kA eka kamalAMga hotA hai  /  karaNa-paryApta-le jISa jinhoMne indriya
paryApti pUrNa kara lI hai athavA apanI yogya paryAptiyA~ pUrNa kara lI haiN|
karaNa-aparyAptaparyApta yA aparyApta nAmakarma kA udaya hone para mI jaba taka
karaNoM-zarIra, indriya Adi paryAptiyoM kI pUrNatA na ho taba taka ve jIva
karaNa-aparyApta kahalAte haiN| karaNalakSi-anAdikAlIna mithyAtva-pranthi ko
bhedane meM samartha pariNAmoM yA zakti kA prApta honaa| kavalAhAra-anna Adi
khAdya padArtha jo mukha dvArA grahaNa kiye jAte haiN| karma-mithyAtva, avirata,
pramAda, kaSAya aura yoga ke nimitta se huI jIva kI pravRtti dvArA AkRSTa evaM
sambaddha tatyogya pudagala paramANu  /  karmajA dhuddhi-upayogapUrvaka cintana,
manana aura abhyAsa karate-karate prApta hone vAlI buddhi  /  karmayogya uskRSTa
vargaNAkarmayogya jaghanya vargaNAoM ke anantaveM bhAga adhika pradeza vAle
skandhoM ko karma grahaNa ke yogya utkRSTa vargaNA hotI hai| karmayogya jaghanya
vargaNA-utkRSTa manoyogya bargaNA ke anantara kI agrahaNa yogya utkRSTa vargaNA
ke skandha ke pradezoM se eka pradeza adhika skandhoM ko vargaNaH karmagrahaNa
ke yogya jaghanya vargaNA hotI hai  /  karmarUpa pariNamanapharma pudgaloM meM
jIba ke jJAna, darzana Adi svAbhAvika guNoM ko AvaraNa karane kI zakti kA ho
jAnA  /  karmaspatAvasthAnalakSaNA sthiti baMdhane ke bAda jaba taka pharbha
AtmA ke sAtha ThaharatA hai, utanA kAla  /  pharmavagaNA-karma kampoM kA samUha
/

Page #515 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Parimaasik Shabd-Kosh (Glossary of Terms)  **Karmavaan** - One who has karma.
**Karmavidhaan** - The relationship of karma-bands (bonds of karma) to the soul,
which are caused by karma-vishaan (poison of karma), mithyatva (false belief),
etc.  **Karmashayor** - The suffering caused by karma.  **Kashaya** - The mental
afflictions that destroy the virtues of the soul, leading to the cycle of birth
and death (samsara). They prevent the attainment of samyaktva (right faith),
deshaacharitra (right conduct), saksacharitra (right knowledge), and yamasyaas
charitra (right penance). Kashaya are the mental afflictions that arise from the
manifestation of mohaniya karma (karma that causes delusion), and are the cause
of the growth of samsara.  **Kashaya** - Breaking the limits of samभाव
(equanimity), the non-manifestation or limited manifestation of virtues like
kshama (forgiveness), vinaya (humility), and santosh (contentment) due to the
manifestation of charitra mohaniya karma (karma that causes delusion in
conduct).  **Kashayaras Namakarma** - The karma that causes the body fluids of
the soul to become bitter like abila (a type of fruit) or baheda (a type of
fruit).  **Kashaya Vijay** - To not succumb to the kashayas even when they are
present due to the influence of krodha (anger) and other kashayas.  **Kashaya
Samuddhāt** - The agitation that arises due to krodha (anger) and other
kashayas.  **Kapoteléshya** - The state of the soul where the mind, digestion,
and body are distorted due to the influence of leshya (subtle matter) that is
like the dust of a blackbird, resulting in a tendency to cause harm to others,
disbelief, and other negative qualities.  **Kaap** - The body, which is formed
and grows from the pudgal skandha (matter particles) like audarik (earth),
bainkriya (water), etc. It is produced by the manifestation of paririmaama karma
(karma that causes the body). It is also the synonym for the body that is formed
by the manifestation of jaati nama karma (karma that determines the species) and
sthavar nama karma (karma that determines the state of being immobile).  **Kaay
Yoga** - The specific activity of the soul in relation to the body. It is also
the state of contraction and expansion of the soul's senses, and the yoga that
arises from this state.  **Audā...** (The text is incomplete)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pArimASika zabda-koSa karmavANa - jo tumAla sa ma tote haiM: karmaviSAna-
mithyAtva Adi kAraNoM ke dvArA bhAsmA ke sApa hone vAle karmabaMdha ke sambandha
ko karmavidhAna kahate haiN| karmazarora-karmoM kA pidd| kaSAya-mAtmaguNoM ko
kaSe, naSTa kare, aSayA jisake dvArA jamma-maraNa rUpa saMsAra kI prApti ho
athavA jo samyaktva, dezAcAritra, sakasa cAritra aura yamAsyAsa cAritra ko na
hone de, vaha kaSAya kahalAtI hai| kaSAya mohanIyakarma ke udayajanya, saMsAra-
vRddhi ke kAraNarUpa mAnasika vikAroM ko kaSAma kahate hai| samabhAva kI maryAdA
ko tor3anA, cAritra mohanIya ke udaya se kSamA, vinaya, saMtoSa Ava Atmika guNoM
kA pragaTa na honA yA alpamAtrA meM pramaTa honA kaSAya hai| kaSAyarasa
nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra-rasa abilA, baher3A Adi jaisA
kasailA ho  /  kavAya vijaya-koSAdi kaSAmoM ke kAraNa upasthita hone para bhI
unheM nahIM hone denaa| kaSAya samudadhAta-krodhAdi ke nimitta se hone vAlA
samuddhAta kApotalezyA-kasara ke male ke samAna rakta tathA kRSNa varNa ke
lezyANAtIma puragaloM ke sambandha se AtmA ke aise pariNAmoM kA honA ki jisase
mana, pacana, kAyA kI pravRtti meM vakratA ho vakratA rahe, maralatA na rahe  /
dUsaroM ko kaSTa pahuMce aise bhASaNa karane kI pravRti, nAstikatA rahe  /  ina
pari gAmoM ko kApotaneNyA kahA jAtA hai| . kApa-jisakI racanA aura vRddhi
audArika, baiMkriya Adi pudgala skandhoM se hotI hai tathA jo pArIra mAmakarma
ke udaya se niSpanna hotA hai; athavA jAti nAmakarma ke adhimAbhAvI asa aura
sthAvara nAmakarma ke udaya se hone vAlI bhAramA kI paryAya ko kAya kahate haiN|
kAyayogapArIradhArI bhAsmA kI zANita ke vyApAra-vizeSa ko kAyayoga kahate haiM;
athavA jisameM Atma-pradezoM kA saMkoca-dhikoca ho use kAya kahate haiM aura
usake dvArA hone vAlA yoga kAyayoga kahalAtA hai  /  athavA audA

Page #516 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 27 The body which remains in the form of भावय in actions like
breathing, etc., is generally called काय, and the योग which happens due to the
वीर्य (power) of आत्म-प्रदेश-परिस्पन्द लक्षण, which is born from that काय, is
called काययोग. To perform the actions mentioned by the Jinas like सामायिक,
अति-श्रवण, गुरु-चंदन, etc., which are the actions of the कारक सम्पवस्व. The body
which is born from the उदय of the group of actions of the कामगार-कम or the
कार्मणशरीर मामकर्म is called कार्मणकाय. The effort in the form of
आत्म-प्रदेश-परिस्पन्दन, which happens only due to the वीर्य (power) born from
the कम, without any other मौदारिक, etc., शरीर वर्गणा, is called कार्मणकाययोग.
The tendency of the बास्म शक्ति which happens with the help of the कार्मणशरीर is
called कार्मणकाययोग. The body which is made up of कम like कार्मणशरीर-शानावरण,
etc. कार्मणशरीर नामकर्म - the कर्म whose उदय causes the जीव to obtain the
कार्मण-पारीर. कार्मणकामणवंधम नामकर्म - the कर्म whose उदय causes the कार्मणशरीर
पुद्गलों to be connected with the कार्मणशारीर पुरुगलों. कार्मणशारीरबंधम मामकर्म
- the कर्म whose उदय causes the समाज काशशरीर पुनसों to merge with the previously
obtained कार्मणशरीर युगलों. कार्मणसंघातम नामकर्म - the कर्म whose उदय causes the
पुद्गलों which have transformed into कार्मणवीर to be in close proximity to each
other. काल-अनुयोग - in which the जीव with the desired धर्म are considered in
terms of their inferior and superior positions. कोलिकासंगमम नामकर्म - the कर्म
whose उदय causes the creation of the एडियों in such a way that there is no मर्कट
बंष and बेठन, but the हटियां are connected to the कोली. जसंस्थान नामकर्म - the
कर्म whose उदय causes the body to be कुबड़ा. हुमुप चौरासी लाल कुमुवांग के काल को
कुमुद कहते है. कुसुबांग-चौरासी लाख महाकमल का एक कुमुदाग होता है. कुशल कर्म -
whose विपाक is इष्ट.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 27 rika Adi sAsa prakAra ke kAmoM meM jo bhAvaya rUpa se rahatA
hai, use sAmAnyata: kAya kahate haiM aura usa kAya se utpanna hue Atma-pradeza
pari spanda lakSaNa vIrya (pAkti) ke dvArA jo yoga hotA hai. yaha kAyayoga hai|
kAraka sampavasvajinokta kriyAoM-sAmAyika, ati-zravaNa, guru-caMdana Adi ko
karanA  /  kAmagAra-kamoM ke samUha athavA kArmaNazarIra mAmakarma ke udaya se
utpanna hone vAle kAya ko kArmaNakAya kahate hai| nAmayogakA ke zAhale nAga yoga
arthAt anya maudArika Adi zarIra vargaNAoM ke binA sirpha kama se utpanna hae
vIrya (zakti) ke nimitta se Atma-pradeza-parispandana rUpa prayatna honA
kArmaNakAyayoga kahalAtA hai| kArmaNazarIra kI sahAyatA se hone vAlI bAsma zAkti
kI pravRtti ko kArmaNakAyayoga kahate haiM  /  kArmaNazarIra-zAnAvaraNa Adi kamo
se banA huA zarIra  /  kArmaNazarIra nAmakarma--jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko
kArmaNa-pArIra kI prApti ho  /  kArmaNakAmaNavaMdhama nAmakarmajisa karma ke
udaya se kArmaNazarIra pudgaloM kA kArmaNazArIra purugaloM ke sAtha sambandha
ho| kArmaNazArIrabaMdhama mAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se pUrva gRhIta
kArmaNazarIra yugaloM ke sAtha samAja kAzazarIra punasoM kA Apasa meM mel|
kArmaNasaMghAtama nAmakarmajisa karma ke udaya se kArmaNavIra rUpa meM pariNata
pudgaloM kA paraspara sAnidhya ho| kAla-anuyoga hara-jisameM vivakSita dharma
vAle jIvoM ko jaghanya va uskRSTa sthiti kA vicAra kiyA jAtA hai|
kolikAsaMgamama nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se eDiyoM kI racanA meM markaTa
baMSa aura beThana na ho kintu kolI se haTiyAM jur3I huI hoN| jasaMsthAna
nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se zarIra kubar3A ho  /  humupacaurAsI lAla
kumuvAMga ke kAla ko kumuda kahate hai| kusubAMga-caurAsI lAkha mahAkamala kA
eka kumudAga hotA hai| kuzala karmajisakA vipAka iSTa hotA hai|

Page #517 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **Kritkarana Samyakshva Mohaniya** - The destroyer
(kshapka) that consumes the final state segment of the Mohaniya karma.
**Krishna Leshma** - The occurrence of such results in the soul due to the
association of the Leshya caste of Mughals, who are black like kajal, that leads
to a tendency towards the five asravas (violence, etc.) - lack of restraint in
mind, speech, and body, the habit of acting without examining the merits and
demerits, the development of cruelty, etc.  **Krishnavarna Karma** - The karma
whose emergence causes the body of the living being to become black like coal.
**Kevalgyan** - The knowledge by which all objects and categories of the past,
present, and future are known, when the knowledge-obscuring karma (gyanavaran
karma) is completely destroyed. Kevalgyan is the knowledge of conquering all
conquerable objects without any assistance.  **Kevalavaran Karma** - The karma
that obscures Kevalgyan.  **Kevaldarshan** - The manifestation of the common
dharma present in all substances.  **Kevaldarshanavaran Karma** - The karma that
obscures Kevaldarshan.  **Kevli Samudrat** - The samudrat performed by the
Kevali-Jina to equate the three non-fatal karmas (vedaniya, etc.) with the
state-determining karma (ayukarma).  **Kesha** - A unit of measurement for the
hair of humans in the eight Rathareṇuka, Devakuru, and Uttar Kuru regions. Eight
Keshas of these regions equal one Kesha of the Harivarsha and Ramyakavarsha
regions. Eight Keshas of these regions equal one Kesha of the Hemvat and
Hairanyavat regions. Eight Keshas of these regions equal one Kesha of the Purva-
Apara Videha regions. Eight Keshas of these regions equal one Kesha of the Marut
and Airavat regions.  **Kodakoti** - The amount obtained by multiplying one
crore by one crore.  **Krodha** - Krodha is anger, the loss of equanimity and
the immersion in rage, the feeling of resentment towards others. It is the
disturbance in the soul, which is the ultimate state of peace and has infinite
qualities, and the generation of cruel and aggressive thoughts due to the
association with external objects and other substances. Alternatively, it is the
cruel result that causes harm or benefit to oneself and others.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabda-koSa kRtakaraNa samyakzva mohanIya ke antima sthiti khaNDa ko
khapAne vAle kSapaka ko kahate haiM  /  silh kRSNalezmA - kAjala ke samAna kRSNa
varNa ke lezyA jAtIya mugaloM ke sambandha se AtmA meM aise pariNAmoM kA honA,
jisase hiMsA Adi pA~coM AsravoM meM pravRtti ho - mana, vacana, kAya kA saMyama
na rahanA, guNa-doSa kI parIkSA kiye binA hI kArya karane kI Adata bana jAnA,
krUratA A jAnA Adi  /  kRSNavarNa nAmakarma - jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA
zarIra koyale jaisA kAlA ho  /  kevalajJAna jJAnAvaraNa karma kA niHzeSa rUpa se
kSaya ho jAne para jisake dvArA bhUta, vartamAna aura bhAvI kAlika saba drathya
aura paryAyeM jAnI jAtI haiM. use kevalajJAna kahate haiN| kisI ko sahAyatA ke
binA sampUrNa jeya padArthoM kA viSaya karane kA jJAna kevalajJAna hai  /
kevalAvaraNa karma - kevalajJAna kA AvaraNa karane vAlA karma  /  kevalarzana-
sampUrNa dravyoM meM vidyamAna sAmAnya dharma kA pratibhAsu  /
kevaladarzanAvaraNa karma - kevaladarzana kA AvaraNa karane vAlA karma  /
kevalI samudrAta vedanIya Adi tIna aghAtI kamoM ko sthiti Ayukarma ke barAbara
karane ke lie kebalI-jina dvArA kiyA jAne vAlA samudhAta kezA- ATha rathareNukA
devakuru aura uttarakuru kSetra ke manuSya kA eka pAna hotA hai  /  unake ATha
kezAoM kA harivarSa aura ramyakavarSa ke manuSya kA eka kezAya hotA hai tathA
unake mATha kezAoM kA hemavata aura hairaNyavata kSetra ke manuSya kA eka kezAya
hotA hai, unake ATha ke zAtroM kA pUrvApara videha ke manuSya kA eka kezAma hotA
hai aura unake ATha kezAgroM kA marata, airAvata kSetra ke manuSya kA eka
kezAgra hotA hai  /  kor3AkoTI - eka karor3a ko eka karor3a se guNA karane para
prApta rAzi  /  krodha - samabhAva ko bhUlakara Akroza meM mara jAnA, dUsaroM
para roSa karanA krodha hai| aMtaraMga meM parama upazama rUpa ananta guNa vAlI
AtmA meM kSobha tathA bAhya viSayoM meM anya padArthoM ke sambandha se krUratA,
Aveza rUpa vicAra utpanna hone ko krodha kahate hai  /  athavA apanA aura para
kA upaghAta yA anupakAra Adi karane vAlA krUra pariNAma kroSa kahalAtA hai  /

Page #518 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2. 26 In Sajati-Vikarna, the name of the Shins of the Bholi-dak is
derived from the root. Forgiveness - the ability to take revenge, yet to endure
the offenses of those who treat you badly. Even when anger arises due to anger,
do not let anger arise. Say-disconnection - there is no possibility of re-
binding after disconnection. Kshayopa-sham - the absence of the emergence of
all-destroying competitors in the present time and the expectation of their
healthy form in the future, and the emergence of biased competitors is called
Kshayopa-sham. That is, the fear of the slow-moving competitor entering the use
of karma and the suppression of the poisonous power of the non-existent
competitor in the form of a deadly poison, the transformation of the power in
the form of a slow power (suppression) is Kshayopa-sham. Sayikaman - the
knowledge that arises from completely abandoning one's own covering karma. Sayik
Bhaav - the feeling that manifests from the ultimate end of karma. Sayik
Samyaktva - the result that manifests in the soul in the form of true interest
from the destruction of the fourfold Kshaya-chaturshka and the non-moha-dhik-un-
mat-prakritis. Sayik Sampadristi - those beings who have attained Samyaktva by
completely destroying the obstacles of Samyamsva, the mohaniya karma. Kshamopa-
shamik Gyan - the knowledge that arises from the Kshayopa-sham of one's own
covering karma. Bhayopa-shamik Bhaash - the feeling that manifests from the
Kshayopa-sham of karma. Sayopa-shamik Sampatti - the destruction of the sixfold
Kshaya-chaturshka, Mipav and Samyam Mishastra, the suppression of their healthy
form, and the emergence of the Samyaktva nature with the biased competitor, the
result that manifests in the soul in the form of Tatvarth Shraman is called
Sayopa-shamik Samyaktva. Mithya-ash - the result that occurs in the soul from
the destruction and suppression of mohaniya karma and the emergence of Samyaktva
mohaniya is called Kshaaropa-shamik Samyaktva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 . 26 sajAti-vikaNa meM bholIdaka kI zinoM kA mUla se nAma kiyA jAtA
hai| kSamAzIlatA-badalA lene kI zakti hote hue bhI apane sAtha burA bartAva
karane vAloM ke aparAdhoM ko sahana karanA  /  krodha ke kAraNa upasthita hone
para bhI krodhamAtra paidA na hone denA  /  saya-viccheda hone para puna: baMdha
kI sambhAvanA na homA  /  kSayopazama-dartamAna kAla meM sarvaghAtI sparthakoM
kA udayAbhAvI saMpa aura AgAmI kAla kI apezA unhIM kA sasvasthArUpa upazAma
tathA pakSapAtI spardhakoM kA udaya kSayopazama kahalAtA hai| arthAt karma ke
upayoti meM praviSTa mandarasa spardhaka kA bhaya aura amRdayamAna sAspardhaka
kI sarvaghAtinI viSAkazakti kA nirodha mA devApAtI rUpa meM parimana patISa
zakti kA maMdazakti rUpa meM pariNamana (upazamana) kSayopAma hai| sAyikamAna-
apane AvaraNa karma kA pUrNa rUpa se apa kara dene se utpanna ne vAnA jJAna  /
sAyika bhAva-kama ke Atyantika sama se pragaTa hone vAlA bhAva  /  sAyika
samyaktva-anantAnubaMdhI kaSAyacatuSka aura nimohadhika una mAta prakRtiyoM ke
kSaya se AramA meM tasva ruci rUpa pragaTa hone vAlA pariNAma  /  sAyika
sampadRSTi-samyamasva kI bAdhA mohanIya kama kI mAso pratiyoM ko pUrNatazA kSama
karake samyaktva prApta karane vAle jIva  /  kSAmopazamika jJAna apane-apane
AvaraNa karma ke kSayopazama se utpanna hone vAlA jhAna  /  bhAyopazAmika bhASa-
karmoM ke kSayopazAma se pragaTa hone vAlA bhAva  /  sAyopAmika sampatya-
anantAnubaMdhI kaSAyacatuSka, mipAva aura samyam mizyAstra ina chaha prakRtiyoM
ke udayA mAvI kSaya gora inhIM ke sadayaspArUpa upazama se tathA dezapAtI
spardhaka vAlI samyaktva prakRti ke udaya meM AtmA me jo tattvArtha zramAna rUpa
pariNAma hotA hai use bAyopazAmika samyaktva kahate haiN| mithyAsSa
mohamIyakarma ke kSaya tathA upazama aura samyaktva mohanIya ke udaya se AsmA
meM hone vAle pariNAma ko kSAropazamika samyaktva kahate haiN| .

Page #519 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **Shayopashmik Samyagdristi-Mohaniya Karma:** A being who
attains right knowledge (Samyaktva) through the destruction of destructible
karmas and the mitigation of remaining karmas.  **Bhonakshaya Vitram Chham-sth
Gunasthan-Van:** A specific form of beings who have completely destroyed the
Mohaniya karma, but still have the covering of the remaining karmas like anger,
deceit, and violence.  **Kshetra Anuyogdar:** The place where the beings with
the desired dharma reside.  **Vishaki Prakriti:** The karmas that bear their
fruits based on the dominance of the field (Kshetra). Or, the karma that arises
in the state of disintegration (Vigrah-Gati) and experiences its fruits.
**Sarsparsh Namakarma:** The karma that makes the body of the being rough and
coarse like the skin of a cow. It is also called Karkasaspash Namakarma.
**Gandh Namakarma:** The karma that produces good or bad smell in the body.
**Pati-Gati Namakarma:** The karma that determines the birth of a being in a
particular realm (Paryaya) and makes it eligible for human, animal, celestial,
or hellish existence. It is also called Gati.  **Gatis:** The beings who have
the karmas of stationary beings (Sthavar) but still experience the effects of
Gati karma.  **Gati Namakarma:** The karma that makes the soul move to different
realms like human, etc.  **Gamik Shruti:** The repeated recitation of a
particular sutra with special emphasis in the beginning, middle, and end.
**Gunanu:** The indivisible part of the five bodies' atomic particles' essence
(Ras-Shakti) that is obtained by the intellect's analysis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabdakoSa zAyopazamika samyagdRSTi-mohanIyapharma kI prakRtiyoM me
se kSaya yogya prakRtiyoM ke kSaya aura zeSa rahI huI prakRtiyoM ke upazama
karane se samyaktva prApta karane vAle jIva ko kahate haiN| bhoNakaSAya vItarAma
chamastha guNasthAna-vana jIvoM ke ravarUpa vizeSa ko kahate haiM jo
mohanIyakarma kA sarvathA kSaya kara cuke haiM phinta roSa chadama [vAti karmoM
kA AvaraNa abhI vidyamAna hai| nA bhava-sampUrNa bhakoM meM sabase choTe bhava
/  kSetra anuyogadAra-jisa meM vivakSita dharma vAle jIvoM kA vartamAna nivAsa-
sthAna batalAyA jAtA hai, use kSetra anuyoganAra kahate haiM  /  viSAkI prakRti-
jo prakRtiyA~ kSetra kI pradhAnatA se apanA phala detI haiM, unheM kSetravipAko
prakRti kahate haiM  /  athavA vigraha-gati meM jo karma prakRti udaya meM AtI
hai, apane phala kA anubhava karAtI hai, vaha kSetravipAkI prakRti hai  /
sarasparza nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra gAya kI jIma jaisA
khuradarA, karkaza ho  /  ise karkazasparza nAmakama bhI kahA jAtA hai  /
gaMdha nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se pArIra meM zuma acchI yA azubha burI
gaMdha pati-gati nAmakarma ke udaya se hone vAlI jIva kI paryAya aura jisase
jIva manuSya, tiryaca, deva yA nAraka vyavahAra kA adhikArI kahalAtA hai, use
gati kahate hai| athavA cAroM gatiyo- narakI, tiryaMca, manuSya aura deva meM
yamana karane ke kAraNa ko gati kahate haiM  /  gatisa-una jIvoM ko kahate haiM
jinako udaya to sthAvara nAsakarma kA hotA hai, kintu gatikriyA pAI jAtI hai  /
gati nAmakarma-jisake lakSya se AtmA manuSyAdi gatiyoM meM gamana kare use gati
kahate haiN| gamika ala-Adi, madhya aura avasAna meM kucha vizeSatA se umI sUtra
ko bAra bAra kahanA gamika zrata hai  /  /  guNANu-pAMca zarIroM ke yogya
paramANuoM kI rasa-zakti kA buddhi ke dvArA khaMDana karane para jo avibhAgI
aMza hotA hai, use guNA yA mAvANa vAhate haiM  /

Page #520 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 **Kshayopaśamikavadhijnāna** is the type of **avadhijnāna** that is
not born with the being but arises after birth due to the strength of rituals
like **yama**, **niyama**, and **vratas**. 31 **Gunasthanas** are the specific
states of a being that arise from the purity and impurity of qualities like
**jnana**, **darshan**, and **charitra**. **Gunas** are the qualities of a being
like **jnana**, **darshan**, and **charitra**, and their **sthana** (place) or
the specific difference in the purity and impurity of these qualities, their
rise and fall, and their **jandha** (bondage) is called **gunasthanas**.
**Gunasthanas** are the parts of a being that are marked by the emotions that
arise from the **udaya**, **upashanga**, **kshaya**, and **kshayopashma** states
of **karma** like **mohaniya**. **Gunasthanakrama** is the state of gradual
development of **atmic** qualities. **Gunasanakraman** is the transformation of
the previously bound **ashubha** (unfortunate) natures into the **shubha**
(fortunate) natures that are being bound in the present. **Gunashreni** is the
establishment of **karmadalikas** in the **antarmuhurt** (inner moment) in the
order of time, whose **sthitighāt** (destruction of the state) is done. Or, it
is the creation of **karmadalikas** from the moment of **udaya** (arising) to
every moment, multiplied by countless times, in the higher state. **Gunashreni
nirjara** is the destruction of more and more **karmaparamanus** (karma atoms)
in a short period of time. **Gunahani** is the interval between the first
**nisheka** (impregnation) state and the **asha** (hope) that arises from it.
Or, it is the name of the group of **spardhakas** (competitors) that are bound
in their respective **vargana** (class) in their respective **vargana** class,
one by one, in an uninterrupted sequence. **Purubhakti** is the service,
respect, and honor of **guru** (teachers) like parents, **dharmacharayas**,
**vidyagurus**, and elder brothers and sisters. **Gurulghu** is the visible form
of a **vādara** (monkey) with eight **spargas** (touches). **Guruspash**
**namakarma** is the **karma** whose **udaya** (arising) makes the body of the
being heavy like iron. One **gavyu** (a unit of measurement) is equal to two
thousand **dhanus** (bows).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 guNapratyaya avadhijJAna jo avadhijJAna janma lene se nahIM kintu
janma lene ke bAda yama, niyama aura vrata Adi anuSThAna ke bala se utpanna hotA
haiM, usako kSAyopazamika avadhijJAna bhI kahate haiM  /  31 guNasthAna -jAna
Adi guNoM kI zuddhi aura azuddhi ke nyUnAdhika bhAva se hone vAle jIva ke
svarUpa vizeSa ko kahate haiM  /  jJAna, darzana, cAritra Adi jIva ke svabhAva
ko guNa kahate haiM aura unake sthAna arthAt guNoM kI zuddhi-azuddhi ke utkarSa
evaM apakarSa - jandha svarUpa vizeSa kA bheda guNasthAna kahalAtA hai  /
darzana mohanIya Adi karmoM kI udaya, upazaMga, kSaya, kSayopazama Adi avasthAoM
ke hone para utpanna hone vAle jina bhAvoM se jIva lakSita hote haiM, una bhAgoM
ko guNasthAna kahate haiM  /  gaNasthAna krama - Atmika guNoM ke nyUnAdhika
kramika vikAsa kI avasthA  /  guNasaMkramaNa - pahale kI ba~dhI huI azubha
prakRtiyoM ko vartamAna meM baMdhane vAlI zubha prakRtiyoM ke rUpa meM pariNata
kara denA | guNabhaNI- jina karma dalikoM kA sthitighAta kiyA jAtA hai unako
samaya ke krama se antarmuhUrta meM sthApita kara denA guNazreNI hai  /  athavA
Upara kI sthiti meM udaya kSaNa se lekara prati samaya asaMkhyAta guNe -
asaMkhyAtaguNe karmadalikoM kI racanA ko guNazreNI kahate haiM  /  guNazraNI
nirjarA-alpa- alpa samaya meM uttarottara adhika adhika karma paramANuoM kA
kSaya karanA  /  guNahAni- prathama niSeka avasthiti hAni se jitanA dUra jAkara
ASA hotA hai usa antarAla ko guNahAni kahate haiM  /  athavA apanI-apanI vargaNA
ke varga meM apanI-apanI prathama vargaNA ke varga se eka-eka avibhAgI
praticcheda anukrama se baMdhatA hai aise spardhakoM ke samUha kA nAma guNahAni
hai  /  purubhakti - gurujanoM (mAtA-pitA, dharmAcArya, vidyAguru, jyeSTha bhAI-
bahina Adi kI sevA, Adara-satkAra karanA  /  gurulaghu-ATha sparga vAle vAdara
rUpI drazya ko gurulaghu kahA jAtA hai  /  gurusparza nAmakarma - jisa karma ke
udaya se jIva kA zarIra lohe jaisA bhArI ho  /  gata do hajAra dhanuSa kA eka
gavyUta hotA hai  /

Page #521 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **Gotrakarma:** Karma that determines the birth of a being
into a high or low lineage (gotra) or creates a sense of reverence or disrespect
in the being, leading to the being being considered high or low.  **Pranthi:**
The intense consequences of karma in the form of attachment (raga) and aversion
(dvesha) experienced by a being.  **Ghatika:** A period of 37.5 lays.
**Dhatikarma:** Karma that affects the qualities of the soul's non-self
(anujeevi) aspects.  **Nali:** Another name for Ghatika.  **Ghatimi Prakruti:**
The nature of karma that destroys the qualities of the soul, such as knowledge
(jnana) etc.  **Ghan:** A number obtained by multiplying three equal numbers
together.  **Chakshuvarshan:** The perception of the general characteristics of
an object through the eyes.  **Darshakarma:** Karma that prevents the soul from
experiencing the fruits of its actions.  **Chaturipriyajati Namakarma:** Karma
that leads to the birth of a being with four senses: body, tongue, nose, and
eyes.  **Chatur Sthanik Karma Prakruti:** The presence of four times the natural
amount of fruit-producing power in the four types of karma.  **Charitramohaniya
Karma:** Karma that influences the development or enjoyment of the soul's
natural qualities (charitra).  **Bhumika:** A single chulica (a unit of
measurement) consists of 84 lakh (8.4 million) dhulikaang. A single bhutikaang
consists of 84 lakh nayut (8.4 million million) dhulikaang.  **Chaityaninda:**
The act of criticizing or denigrating virtuous beings who possess knowledge
(jnana), insight (darshan), and character (charitra), such as the Tirthankaras,
or, from a worldly perspective, monuments, stupas, and statues.  **Dhasthik:**
Beings who, even after the destruction of mohaniya karma (karma that creates
attachment), still experience the influence of other karmas (ghatikarma).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabdakoSa gotrakarma- jo karma jIva ko ucca-nIca gotra - kula meM
utpanna karAve athavA jisa karma ke udaya se jIva meM pUjyatA - apUjyatA kA
bhAva utpanna ho, jIva uccanIca kahalAye  /  pranthi - karmoM se hone vAle jIva
ke tIvra rAga-dveSa rUpa pariNAma 52 ghaTikA - sAr3he ar3atIsa laya kA samaya
dhAtikarma-AtmA ke anujIvI guNoM karane vAle karma | (gha)  /  isakA dUsarA nAma
'nAlI' hai  /  kA AtmA ke vAstavika svarUpa kA ghAta J ghAtimI prakRti- jo
karmaprakRti Atmika guNoM- jJAnAdiva kA ghAta karatI hai  /  ghana-tIna samAna
saMkhyAoM kA paraspara guNA karane para prApta saMkhyA  /  (kha) cakSuvarzana-
cakSu ke dvArA hone vAle padArtha ke sAmAnya dharma ke bodha ko kahate haiM  /
darzakarma hone ke ke grahaNa ko rokane vAlA karma | caturipriyajAti nAmakarma -
jisa karma ke udaya se jIna ko cAra indriya- zarIra, jIbha, nAka aura A~kha
prApta hoM  /  catuH sthAnika karmaprakRtiyoM meM svAbhAvika anubhAga se caugune
anubhAga - phalajanaka zakti kA pAyA jAnA  /  cAritramohanIya karma-AtmA ke
svabhAva kI prApti yA usameM ramaNa karanA cAritra hai | cAritraguNa ko bAta
karane vAlA karma cAritramohanIyakarma kahalAtA hai  /  bhUmikA- caurAsI lAkha
dhUlikAMga kI eka cUlikA hotI hai  /  dhUlikAMganaurAsI lAkha-nayuta kA eka
bhUtikAMga hotA hai  /  tyaniyA - jJAna, darzana, cAritra saMpanna guNI mahAtmA
taparavI Adi kI athavA laukika dRSTi se smAraka, stUpa, pratimA Adi kI nindA
karanA caityaniMdA kahalAtI hai  /  cha dhAsthika-- ve jIva jinako mohanIyakarma
kA kSaya hone para bhI anya moM (ghAtikarmoM) kA sadbhAva pAyA jAtA hai|

Page #522 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 The eleventh (Upaśāntamoh) and twelfth (Kṣīṇamoh) of the eleven types
of *samyama* as described for *chāyamathika* *jīvas* in the *guṇasthāna*. This
*samyama* is the re-establishment (re-planting) of the previous *sangama*
*paryāya* by removing the *kheda*. The amount obtained by adding one to the
number of *jighanya* *ananta* and *utkṛṣṭa* *ananta*. The amount obtained by
adding one to the number of *aghanya* *asankhyāta* and *tasyukta* *asankhyāta*.
The amount obtained by adding one to the number of *anyapari* *tāmanta* and
*utkṛṣṭa* *asankhyāta*. The amount obtained by adding one to the number of
*jighanya* *parota* *asankhyāta* and *utkṛṣṭa* *asankhyāta*. The amount obtained
by adding one to the number of *jighanya* *yustamāta* and *utkṛṣṭa*
*paritānanta*. The amount obtained by adding one to the number of *jighanya*
*yukta* *asalyāsa* and *utkṛṣṭa* *paritā* *asankhyāta*. *Jighanya* - the lowest
state of *bala* *bandha*. *Aghanya* *sampāta* - the number two. *Jālakāya* - a
watery body, made of *mo* *asa* atoms. *Jāsi* - this word, when spoken or heard,
causes the perception of all substances with similar qualities. *Jāti*
*nāmakarma* - the karma whose arising causes a *jīva* to obtain one, two, three,
four, or five senses from the five senses of touch, taste, etc., respectively,
and be called *ekendriya*, *dwendriya*, *triendriya*, *caturindriya*, or
*pancendriya*. *Nāti* *bhavya* - those who are capable of *bhavya* *mokṣa* but
do not attain it. They do not find the favorable conditions necessary to attain
*mokṣa*. *Jina* - those who have conquered the obstructing emotions of
attachment, aversion, delusion, lust, anger, etc., and the *mānavaraṇa* *bādi*
*rūpa* *dhāti* *dayya* karmas, and have attained their infinite knowledge,
vision, etc., *ātma* qualities.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 chAyamasthika yathAkhyAtasaMyama-gyArahaveM (upazAMtamoha) aura
bArahaveM (kSINamoha) guNasthAnavI jIvoM ko hone vAlA saMyama  /  yopasthApanIya
saMyamapUrva saMgama paryAya ko khedakara phira se upasthApana (pratA ropaNa)
krnaa| jaghanya anantAnanta- utkRSTa yutAnanta kI saMkhyA meM eka ko milAne para
prApta raashi| aghanya asaMkhyAtA saMkhyAtataskRSTa yuktAsaMkhyAta kI rAzi meM
eka ko milAne para prApta saMkhyA  /  anya parItAmanta-utkRSTa
asaMkhyAtAsaMspAta meM eka ko misA dene para prApta raashi| jaghanya
parotAsaMkhyAta-utkRSTa saMkhyAta meM eka ko milAne para prApta saMkhyA  /
jaghanya yustAmAta-utkRSTa parItAnanta kI saMkhyA meM eka ko milAne para prApta
rAzi  /  jaghanya yuktAsalyAsa- utkRSTa parItAsaMkhyAta kI rAzi meM eka ko
milAne para prApta raashi| jaghanya -sabase kama sthiti bAlA baMdha  /  aghanya
saMpAta-do kI sNkhyaa| jAlakAya jalIya zarIra, mo asa paramANuoM se banatA hai|
jAsi--yaha zabda jisake bolane yA sunane se sabhI samAna guNadharma vAle
padArthoM kA prahaNa ho jaaye| jAti nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva
sparzana, rasana Adi pAca indriyoM meM se kramazaH eka, do, tIna, cAra, pAMca
indriyA~ prApta karake ekendriya, hIndriya, zrIndriya, caturindriya mora
paMcendriya kahalAtA hai| nAti bhavya-jo bhavya mokSa kI yogyatA rakhate hue bhI
usako prApta nahIM kara pAte haiN| unheM aisI anukUla sAmagrI nahIM mila pAtI
hai jisase mokSa prApta kara skeN| jinasvarUpopalabdhi meM bAdhaka rAga, dveSa,
moha, kAma, krodha Adi bhAva ko evaM mAnAvaraNa bAdi rUpa dhAti dayya karmoM ko
jItakara apane anantajJAnadarzana Adi Atma-guNoM ko prApta kara lene vAle jIva
jina kahalAte haiN|

Page #523 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **1.** **Jina Ninda:**  Slander of the Jina (Tirthankara),
the liberated, omniscient being. It involves accusing them of falsehoods and
faults. **Jiva:** A living being, possessing the five senses (indriya), strength
(bala), lifespan (ayu), breath (shwasoচ্ছ্বাস), and inherent qualities (maya
pran) like knowledge (jnana), perception (darshan), etc. **Jiva Mipaka
Prakriti:** The nature that produces results in the form of destruction of the
inherent qualities like knowledge, etc., in the Jiva. **Navasamas:** The
collection of all beings (Jivas) through the practice of the right faith
(dharma) like that of the Jinas. It is also called Jivasamas or Jivasthan.
**Bugapsa Mohmipakarma:** The karma that causes disgust (ghrina) at the sight of
repulsive objects, with or without a reason. **Shaan:** The act of the soul
(atma) knowing the past, present, and future, including all virtues, their
qualities, and synonyms. It also refers to knowing the specific aspect of a
general object. **Shaanavaran Karma:** The karma that covers the knowledge
(jnana) aspect of the soul. **Manopyog:** The act of choosing and accepting each
object separately based on its specific qualities. **Vistaras Namakarma:** The
karma that causes the body fluids of the Jiva to become thick and sticky like
molasses or black sesame seeds. **Tiryanch:** A being that is crooked in
thought, speech, and action. They have improper food habits, are ignorant, move
in a crooked way, and have a lot of sins. They are also called Tiryanch due to
the emergence of the Tivagati Namakarma. **Kati Mamakarma:** The karma that
causes the Jiva to be called Tiryanch due to its resulting qualities.
**Tichayu:** The karma that causes the Jiva to live a life of Tiryanch
existence. **Tithankar Namakarma:** The karma that leads to the attainment of
the Tithankar (Tirthankara) status.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zamda-koSa 1. jima nindA-jina bhagavAna, nirAvaraNa kevalazAnI kI
nindA, gahIM karanA, asatya doSoM kA AropaNa karanA  /  jIva-jo dravya prANa
(indriya, bala, Ayu, zvAsocchavAsa) aura mAya prANa (jJAna, darzana Adi
svAbhASika guNa) se jItA thA, jItA hai aura jIyegA, use jIva kahate haiN|
jIvamipAko prakRti-jo prakRti jIva meM hI usake jAnAdi svarUpa kA ghAta karane
rUpa phala detI hai| nauvasamAsa-jina samAna para bhApa dharmoM ke dvArA sabhI
kA saMgraha kiyA jAtA hai, unheM jIvasamAsa yA jIvasthAna kahate haiM  /
bugapsA mohamIpakarma--jisa karma ke udaya se sakAraNa yA binA kAraNa ke hI
vIbhatsa-ghRNAjanaka padArthoM ko dekhakara ghRNA utpanna hotI hai| zAma-jisake
dvArA jIva trikAla viSayaka bhUta, vartamAna aura maviSya sambandhI samasta
pUNya aura unake guNa aura paryAyoM ko Ane  /  athavA sAmAnya vizeSAtmaka vastu
meM se usake vizeSa aMza ko jAnane vAle AtmA ke vyApAra ko zAna kahate haiN|
zAnAvaraNa karmazAramA ke jJAna guNa ko AcchAdita karane pAlA karma  /
mAnopayoga-pratyeka padArtha ko una-unakI vizeSatAoM kI mulpasA se vikalpa
karake pRSak pRthak grahaNa karanA  /  vA vistArasa nAmakarma-jisa karma ke
udaya se jIva kA bArIra-rasa sauMTha yA kAlI mirSa jaisA gharaparA ho| tiryacajo
mana, vacana, kAya kI kuTilatA ko prApta haiM, jinake AhAra Adi saMzA sumyakta
hai, nikRSTa ajJAnI haiM, tiracha gamana karate haiM aura jinameM mAtyadhika
pApa kI bahulatA pAI jAtI hai, unheM tithaMca kahate haiN| binako tivagati
nAmakarma kA udaya ho, unheM tithaMca kahate haiM  /  kati mAmakarma-jisa karma
ke uvaya se hone vAlI paryAya dvArA jIva liyaca kahalAtA hai| ticAyu-jisake
udaya se tibaMdhagati kA jIvana vyatIta karanA par3atA hai| hokara nAmaka-jisa
karma ke udaya se tIrthakara pada kI prApti hotI hai|

Page #524 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 2 The results that occur in the soul from the subtle, blood-colored,
beak-like lekshya pudgals, which bring about humility, righteousness, the desire
to benefit others, etc. Tejas-karmagamandhan karma - the karma whose arising
causes a connection between the tejas body pudgals and the karmic pudgals.
Sanjas asgandh karma - the karma whose arising causes a mutual connection
between the previously acquired tejas body pudgals and the currently acquired
tejas pudgals. Sansargna - the categories from which the tejas body is formed.
Tejas body - the body that digests the external world made of tanjul pudgals and
is the cause of tejo leshya is called the tejas body. Tejas body mam karma - the
karma whose arising causes the jiva to obtain the tejas body. Tejas par prayogya
utkrisht vargna - the category of skandhas that have one more province than the
tejas body prayogya jghanya vargna. Sansari par prayogya jghanya vargna - the
category of skandhas that have one more province than the aharak body prayogya
utkrisht vargna, which is the category that is not capable of being acquired
after the aharak body prayogya utkrisht vargna. Tejas sanchalan karma - the
karma whose arising causes a mutual connection between the pudgals that have
transformed into the tejas body form. - - BAL 35 - The effort made to create the
tejas body, which is capable of benefiting or destroying jivas. Prakarya - the
body that can move and is obtained from the arising of the bas karma. As mam
karma - the karma whose arising causes the jiva to obtain a say. Trasarenu - one
trasarenu is equal to eight udhvarena. Tristhanik - three times the natural
section of karma prakriti. Shrimindriya jiva - the jivas who have obtained the
three senses of touch, taste, and smell from the arising of the shrimindriya
jati karma are called shrimindriya jivas. Trutitaang - refers to the eighty-four
lakh previous times.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 2 tejolezyA hote kI coMca ke samAna rakta varNa ke lekSyA pudgaloM se
AtmA meM hone vAle ve pariNAma jinase namratA AtI hai, dharmaruni ka hotI hai,
dUsare kA hita karane kI icchA hotI hai Adi  /  tejasa - kArmagamaMdhana
nAmakarma jisa pharma ke udaya se tejasa zarIra pudgaloM kA kArmeNa puloM ke
sAtha sambandha ho  /  saMjasa asagaMdha nAmakarma - jisa karma ke udaya se
pUrva gRhIta tejasa zarIra pudgaloM ke sAtha gRhyamANa tejasa pugaloM kA
paraspara sambandha hotA hai  /  saMsargaNA - jina vargeNAoM se tejasa zarIra
banatA hai  /  taijasazarIra-taMjala pudgaloM se bane hue bahAra ko pacAne vAle
aura tejolezyA sAdhaka zarIra ko tejasa zarIra kahate haiM  /  taijasazarIra
mAmakarma jisa karma ke udaya se jova ko tejasa zarIra kI - prApti ho  /
taijasapara prAyogya utkRSTa vargamAtejasavArIraprAyogya jaghanya vargaNA ke
anaMtaveM mAga adhika pradeza vAle skaMdhoM ko utkRSTa vargaNA  /  ---- saMsArI
ra prAyogya jaghanya vagaMNA- -AhAraka zarIra kI grahaNayogya utkRSTa dharmaNA
ke anantara kI agrahaNa yogya utkRSTa vargeNA se eka pradeza adhika skaMdhoM kI
vargaNA tejasazarIra ke yogya adhanya vargaNA hotI hai  /  taMjasa saMcAlana
nAmakarma jisa pharma ke udaya se tejasa zarIra rUpa pariNata pudgaloM kA
paraspara sAkSiSya ho  /  - - BAL 35 - taMjayAta jIvoM ke anugraha yA vinAza
karane meM samartha taijasa pArIra kI racanA ke liye kiyA jAne vAlA samudghAta
/  prakaraya jo zarIra cala phira sakatA hai aura jo basa nAmakarma ke udaya se
prApta hotA hai  /  asa mAmakarma jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko sAya kI prApti
hotI hai  /  trasareNu - ATha udhvareNu kA eka prasareNu hotA hai  /
tristhAnika -- karma prakRti ke svAbhAvika anubhAga se tigunA anubhAga | zrImi
jIva-jina jIvoM ko zrIndriya jAti nAmakarma ke udaya se sparzana, rasana aura
ghANa yaha tIna indriyA~ prApta haiM, unheM zrIndriya jIva kahate haiM  /
truTitAMga- caurAsI lAkha pUrva ke samaya ko kahate haiM  /

Page #525 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **36** **(b)** The act of a soul residing in the Gunasthana,
who is associated with the Vanga-Sayogika, creating the regions of its body,
from top to bottom, in the Lokas, is called **Danda Samudghat** in the first
time. **Darshan** is the perception of the essence of matter, which is the
object of the general Dharma. **Paribhashik Shabd-Kosh** **Darshan** is the act
of consciousness, which is the perception of the general aspect of an object,
from the general and special characteristics of the object. Or, **Darshan** is
the knowledge of the object, by considering the special as secondary, after the
general. **Karma** that covers the **Darshan** quality of the soul. **Darshan**
is the faith in the true knowledge that can be seen, and the **Karma** that
destroys and diminishes it is called **Darshanmohaniya Karma**. In every object,
there are two types of Dharma: general and special. The use of grasping the
general Dharma is called **Darshanopyog**. **Vanarav Dharma** - The Dharma that
does not inspire the soul to give, even when there is a desire to give. **Valika
Sanjna** - The Sanjna that has a sequential knowledge of the past, present, and
future, like "I have done this work, I am doing this work, and I will do this
work." **Deepak Sabhyamsavala** - Supporting, promoting, and spreading the
benefits of actions that are like a lamp. **Sang Karma** - The Karma that makes
the soul feel indifferent to all beings, even when they are being helped.
**Lahsun Karma** - The Karma that causes the soul to have a smell like garlic or
rotten substances in its body. **Nivesh** - The persistence of disbelief, even
when the true speaker is found. **Manak Karma** - The Karma that makes the voice
and speech of the soul harsh and unpleasant to the listener.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 36 (ba) vaMga-sayogikevalI guNasthAnavartI jIva ke dvArA pahale samaya meM
apane vazarIra ke bAlya pramANa Atma pradezoM ko Upara se nIce taka loka pAsa
racane ko daMDa samudaghAta kahate haiM  /  darzana sAmAnya dharma kI apekSA jo
padArtha kI sattA kA pratimAsa hotA hai, use vama kahate haiM  /  pAribhASika
zabda-koSa sAmAnya vizeSAzmaka vastusvarUpa meM se vastu ke sAmAnya aMza ke
boSarUpa cetanA ke vyApAra ko darzana kahate hai | athavA sAmAnya kI mustA
pUrvaka vizeSa ko gauNa karake padArtha ke jAnane ko darzana kahate hai AtmA ke
darzana guNa ko AcchAdita karane vAlA karma  /  darzanIya satyArtha zraddhA ko
darzana kahate haiM aura usako ghAta karane vAle, kSAvRta karane vAle karma ko
darzanamohanIya karma  /  yI prasyeka vastu meM sAmAnya aura vizeSa yaha do
prakAra ke dharma pAye jAte haiM, unameM se sAmAnya dharma ko grahaNa karane
vAle upayoga ko darzanopoga kahate haiM  /  vAnarAva pharma- bAna kI icchA hone
para bhI jisa pharma ke udaya se jIva meM - dAna dene kA utsAha nahIM hotA  /  -
vAliko saMjJA usa saMjJA ko kahate haiM, jisameM bhUta, vartamAna aura bhaviSya
kAla saMbaMdhI kramavaddha jJAna hotA hai ki amuka kArya kara cukA hU~, amuka
kArya kara rahA hai aura amuka kArya karU~gA  /  dIpaka sonala kriyAoM se hone
vAle lAbhoM kA samarthana, pracAra, prasAra karanA dIpaka sabhyamasvalAtA hai  /
saMga nAmaka - jisa karma ke upaya se jIva upakAra karane para bhI sabhI ko
amiya lagatA hI dUsare jIva vAtratA evaM bhAva rakheM  /  zarIra meM lahasuna
athavA sar3e jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ke padArthoM jaisI gaMdha ho  /  niveza
- yathArtha vaktA milane para jo zraddhA kA viparIta banA rahanA  /  mAnaka-
jisa karma ke udaya se va kA svara va vacana zrotA ko samagra va karkaza alI  /

Page #526 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 37 Par Bhavy - A soul destined to attain liberation after a long
time. When the Devagati name karma arises, they play in various ways with
various types of divine powers in islands, oceans, and other places as per their
wish, experience unique opulence, have an abundance of divine clothes and
ornaments, and their body shines with inherent radiance. These are called Devas.
Devati name karma - The karma whose arising causes the soul to attain such a
state that it is called a Deva. Vayudeva - The air due to which the life of
Devagati is spent is called Vayudeva. Peshvati Prakriti - The nature that
partially destroys its own destructible qualities. Vesa Virati - Souls who are
free from the arising of the Apraatyakhyanavaran Kshaya due to which they can be
separated from the actions that generate sins from the Desh (part) are called
Deshvirat. Vaishbirat Gunspan - The special nature of Deshvirat souls. Deshvirat
Samyam - Partial cessation from the beginning and continuation of karma-bandha-
generating actions, not intentionally harming non-violent souls is Deshvirati
Samyam. Pranyakarma - The Pudgal that has attained the result in the form of
Jnanavaran etc. karma. Paprag - Senses, strength, lifespan, and breathing.
Prampaleshya - The color of the body produced by the arising of the Varna name
karma is called Prampaleshya. Xamved - The external special form manifested due
to the arising of the name karma that is capable of fulfilling the desire for
sexual intercourse. Vindriya - Souls who have two senses - touch and taste, and
have the Dvindriya ... jati name karma arising. Dombriyashti name karma - The
karma whose arising causes the soul to have two senses - body (touch) and tongue
(taste). Dvitiyapasmiti - The state above the intermediate space is called
Dvitiyapasmiti. Dvitiyopasham Samyaktva - The Vedak Samyagdristi souls who have
infinite Kshaya and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 37 para bhavya-jo bhagya jIva bahuta kAla ke bAda mokSa prApta
karane vAlA hai| beva-devagati nAmakarma ke udaya hone para nAnA prakAra kI bAya
vibhUti se dvIpa samudra Adi aneka sthAnoM para icchAnusAra krIr3A karate haiM,
viziSTa aizvayaM kA anubhava karate haiM, divya bastrAbhUSaNoM kI samRddhi tathA
apane zarIra ko sAhajika kAMti se jo dIptamAna rahate hai ke deva kahalAte haiM
/  devati nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udama se jIva ko aisI avasthA prApta ho ki
jisase yaha deva hai' aisA kahA jAye  /  vAyu-jisake kAraNa se devagati kA
jIvana vitAnA par3atA hai, use devAyu kahate haiN| pezayAtI prakRti-apane
ghAnane yogya guNa kA AMzika rUpa se ghAta karane vAlI prakRti  /  vezAvirati-
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya kA udaya na hone ke kAraNa jo jIva deza (aMza) se
pApajanaka kriyAoM se alaga ho sakate hai ve dezavirata kahalAte haiN|
vaizabirata guNaspAna- dezavirata jIvoM kA svarUpa vizeSa  /  dezavirata
saMyama-karmabaMdhajanaka AraMbha, samAraMma se AMzika nivRta honA, nira parASa
ghasa jIvoM kI saMkalpapUrvaka hiMsA na karanA dezavirati saMyama hai|
praNyakarma-jJAnAvaraNa Adi karmarUpa pariNAma ko prApta hue pudgala  /
paprAga-indriya, bala, Ayu aura zvAsocchavAsa  /  prampalezyA-varNa nAmapharma
ke upaya se utpanna hue zarIra ke varNa ko TravyalezyA xmaveda-maithunecchA kI
pUrti ke yogya nAmakarma ke udaya se pragaTa bAhya bimha vizeSa  /  vIndriya-
jina jIvoM ke sparzana aura rasaga yaha do indriyAM haiM tathA dvIndriya .. jAti
nAmakarma kA udaya hai| Dombriyazati nAmakama-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko do
indriyA~ - zarIra (sparzana) aura jihvA (rasatA) prApta hoN| dvitIpasmiti-antara
sthAna se Upara kI sthiti ko kahate haiM  /  vitIyopazama samyaktva-jo vedaka
samyagdRSTi jIva anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya aura

Page #527 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Glossary of Technical Terms:  Upasham samyaktva - The attainment of equanimity
through the subsidence of deluding karmas. Dvitiyopasham samyaktva - The second
stage of equanimity. Visthanik-karma prakriti - Karmic species that increase in
intensity. Dhanush - The palm of the hand. Dharana - Memory retention, the
ability to not forget what has been learned. Pravartya-prakriti - A type of
karma that arises continuously without interruption. Ashtabandha - Bondage that
can never be severed. Yupabandhinī-prakriti - A type of karma that is bound when
the appropriate cause is present. Mukhasattaka-prakriti - A fundamental deluding
karma that is eternally present in the soul. Bhasaka-veda - The desire to engage
in sexual activity with both men and women. Mayuta - Eighty-four thousand
nayutas, where one nayuta is a very large number. Mayusanga - The duration of
eighty-four thousand prayutas, where one prayuta is a very large unit of time.
Margati-namaka-karma - The karma that causes the soul to be called a hellish
being. Narakāpu - The karma that causes the soul to experience a hellish
existence. Malina - Eighty-four thousand nalinas, where one nalina is a very
small unit. Manamka-karma - The karma that causes the soul to experience various
gatis (states of existence) such as hell, animal, human, and divine, or to
experience various modes of being. Nāraka - Beings who have the karma of hellish
existence. Māraṣaṃhanā-māma - The karma that causes the bones to be strongly
bound on both sides, but without any joints or nails.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabda-koSa varNanamohanIya kA upazama karake upazama samyaktva ko
prApta hotA hai, use dvitIyopazama samyaktva kahate haiM  /  visthAnika-karma
prakRtiyoM ke svAmAvika anumAga se duganA anumAga | dhanuSa-pAra hAtha ke mAe ko
dhanuSa kahA jAtA hai| dhAraNA-avAya ke dvArA jAne hue padArtha kA kAlAntara meM
vismaraNa na ho, isa prakAra ke saMskAra bAle jJAna ko dhAraNA kahate hai|
pravolyA prakRtiapane udayakAla paryanta pratyeka samaya aura ko jisa prakRti _
kA udaya barAbara binA ruke hotA rahatA hai| aSabamba-jo baMdha na kabhI
bicchila hayA aura na hogA  /  yUpabaMdhinI prakRti-yogya kAraNa hone para jisa
prakRti kA baMdha avazya hotA hai  /  mukhasattAka prakRtijo anAdi mithyAtva
jIva ko nirantara sattA meM hotI hai, sarvadA vidyamAna rahatI hai| bhAsaka
beda-strI evaM puruSa donoM ke sAtha ramaNa karane kI icchA  /  mayutacaurAsI
lAkha nayutAMga kA eka nayukta hotA hai  /  mayusAMga-paurAsI lAkha prayuta ke
samaya ko kahate haiN| maragati nAmakarma-jisake udaya se jIva nAraka kahalAtA
hai| narakApu-jisake udaya se jISa ko narakagati kA jIvana bitAnA par3atA hai|
malina-caurAsI lAgna nalinAMga kA eka nalina hotA hai| malinAMga-caurAsI lAkha
pagna kA eka nasinAMga kahalAtA hai  /  mAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se jIka
narapha, tithaMca, manuSya aura devagati prApta karake acchI-burI vividha
paryAya prApta karatA hai, athavA jisa karma se AtmA gati Adi nAnA paryAyoM ko
anubhava kare athavA zArIra Adi bane, use nAmakarma kahate haiN| nAraka-jinako
naramagati nAmakarma kA udaya ho  /  athavA jIvoM ko leza phuNcaayeN| dravya,
kSetra, kAla, bhAva se jo svayaM tathA paraspara meM prIti ko prApta na karate
hoN| mArAsasaMhanA mAmA-jisa karma ke udaya se haDDiyoM kI racanA meM donoM
darapha mahaMTa baMdha ho, lekina veThana aura kIla na ho|

Page #528 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 39 The time of 37 and a half lavas is called a nali. Nikaachan-
Udvartana, Apvartana, Sankraman and Udirana, the absence of these four states is
called Nikaachan. The nature in which no karana is applied is called Nikaashit
Prakriti. Mira-Karma pudgals mixed with the soul like water and milk, the
destruction of one part of it. Ni-The karma whose rise causes the living being
to fall asleep in such a way that he can wake up happily, it takes effort to
wake him up. Nisha-Niza-The karma whose rise causes the living being to fall
asleep in such a way that it is difficult to wake him up. Miti-The state of
complete absence of Udirana and Sankraman of karma. Nirman Namakarma-The karma
whose rise causes the limbs of the body to be arranged in their respective
places. Niratibar Popasthapaneya Sanayama which is accepted by the Ishwar
Samayik Sanayama as a great initiation. Nivritti Bawar Gunasthan is the state in
which the unmindful soul is free from the three chatushk-shaped badar kshayas,
Anantanubandhi, Apratyakhyanavaran and Pratyakhyanavaran. Due to the
unprecedented provision of Sthitivat etc. in this, it is also called Aporvakaran
Gunasthan. Niti Pradhyedrip-The shape and structure of the senses. Milskam
Bhayau the age of which does not have Apvartana-grass. Nishmimam-Those who adopt
Parihar Vishuddhi Sanayama are called. Mishistkapik-Those who serve the holders
of Parihar Vishuddhi Sanayama. Nishchay Samppaparam-The faith of the soul and
other elements in the payala. Mil-Hiding the name of the human knowledge-giver
guru, knowing a particular subject, saying I don't know, doing Ursutra Prarupana
is called Mavilav. Moch Hus-The family that has gained notoriety and infamy for
a long time due to doing unrighteousness and injustice. Meech Gotra Karma-The
karma whose rise causes the living being to be born in a low family.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 39 mAlI-sAr3he ar3atIsa lava ke samaya ko nAlI kahate haiM  /
nikAcana-udvartanA, apavataMnA, saMkramaNa aura udIraNA ina cAra avasthAoM ke na
hone kI sthiti kA nAma nikAcana hai  /  nikAdhita prakRtijisa prakRti meM koI
bhI karaNa nahIM lagatA  /  use nikASita prakRti kA hai| mirA-AtmA ke sAtha
nIra-kSIra kI taraha Apasa meM mile hue karma pudgaloM kA ekadeza kSaya honaa|
ni-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko aisI nIMda Aye ki sukhapUrvaka jAga sake,
jagAne meM mehanata karanI pdd'e| nizA-nijA-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko
jagAnA duSkara ho, aisI nIMda Aye  /  miti- karma kI udIraNA aura saMkramaNa ke
sarvathA abhAva kI sthiti  /  nirmANa nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se zarIra
meM aMga-pratyaMga apanI-apanI jagaha vyavasthita hote haiM  /  niratibAra
popasthApanIya saMyamajisako isvara sAmAyika saMyama vAle bar3I dIkSA ke rUpa
meM grahaNa karate haiN| nivRttibAvara guNasthAnavaha avasthA, jisameM apramatta
AtmA anantAnubaMdhI, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa ina tInoM
catuSka rUpI bAdara kaSAya se nivRtta ho jAtI hai  /  isameM sthitivAta Adi kA
apUrva vidhAna hone se ise apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna bhI kahate haiN| niti
pradhyedripa-indriyoM kI AkAra-racanA  /  milsakama bhAyujisa Ayu kA.
apavartana-ghAsa nahIM hotaa| nizmimAma-parihAra vizuddhi saMyama ko dhAraNa
karane vAloM ko kahate haiM  /  miSiSTakApika-parihAravizudi saMyama dhArakoM kI
sevA karane vAle  /  nizcaya sampaparama-jIvAdi tatvoM kA payAlA se shrddhaan|
mila-mAnavaza jJAnadAtA guru kA nAma chipAnA, amuka viSaya ko jAnate hue mI maiM
nahIM jAnatA, urasUtra prarUpaNA karanA mAvi lilAva kahalAtA hai  /  moca husa-
adharma aura anIti karane se jisa kula ne cirakAla se aprasiddhi va apakIrti
prApta kI hai  /  mIca gotra karma-lisa karma ke udaya se jIva nIca kula meM
janma letA hai|

Page #529 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms:  **Moleshya:** A type of karma that arises from blue-
colored leshya particles, causing envy, intolerance, deceit, and other negative
qualities in the soul.  **Neelavarg Karma:** A type of karma that causes the
body to become green like a parrot's feather.  **Nokshaya:** A type of karma
that is not itself a kshaya (negative emotion), but arises along with kshaya or
helps to generate and intensify kshaya.  **Myagrodhparimandal Sansthan Karma:**
A type of karma that causes the body to resemble a banyan tree (nyagrodha), with
a thick upper torso and thin lower limbs.  **Panchendriya Mati Karma:** A type
of karma that grants the being five senses.  **Pandit Viryanta Karma:** A type
of karma that prevents a person, even with right vision, virtuous conduct, and a
desire for liberation, from performing actions that are conducive to liberation.
**Patgraha Prakriti:** The nature of karma that receives the karma particles
that fall upon it. Each karma nature is called a "pad."  **Padavrind:** A
collection of pads.  **Padachcha:** A collection of non-understandable letters,
and the knowledge of these letters.  **Pasamasmat:** The knowledge of a
collection of pads.  **Papa:** One leaf of the 84 lakh papaangs.
**Paraleshya:** A type of karma that arises from yellow-colored leshya
particles, causing a reduction in kshaya, a calm mind, self-control, and mastery
over the senses.  **Paag:** One paang of the 84 lakh utpals.  **Parava Karma:**
A type of karma that makes the being appear invincible even to the strongest
warriors.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabda-koSa molamezyA- azoka vRkSa ke samAna nIle raMga ke lezyA
pudgaloM se AtmA meM aisA pariNAma utpanna honA ki jisase IrSyA, asahiSNutA,
chala-kapaTa Adi hone lge| nIlavarga nAmakarma-jisa kama ke udaya se jIva kA
zarIra tote ke paMkha ke jaisA harA ho  /  nokaSAya-~-jo svayaM so kaSAya na ho
kintu kaSAya ke udaya ke sAtha jisakA udaya hotA hai athavA kaSAyoM ko paidA
karane meM, uttejita karane meM sahAyaka ho| myagrodhaparimaMDalasaMsthAna
nAmakarma--jisa karma ke udaya se zarIra kI AkRti nyagrodha (vaTavRkSa) ke
samAna ho arthAt zarIra meM nAbhi se Upara ke adhayaya pUrNa moTe hoM aura nAbhi
se nIce ke avayava hIna - patale hoN| paMcendriya mAti nAmakarma--jisa pharma ke
udaya se jIva dho pA~coM indriyA~ prApta hoN| paMDita vIryAntarAma
karmasamyagdRSTi sAdhu mokSa kI cAha rakhate hue bhI jisa karma ke udaya se
usake yogya kriyAoM ko na kara skeN| patagraha prakRtiAkara par3ane vAle karma
dalikoM ko grahaNa karane vAlI prakRti  /  parapratyeka karma prakRti ko pada
kahate haiM  /  padavRndapadoM ke samudAya ko padadhunda kahA jAtA hai| paratha
ta--avibodhaka akSaroM ke samudAya ko pada aura usake jJAna ko padazca ta kahate
haiM  /  pasamAsamata-padoM ke samudAya kA jAna  /  papa-caurAsI lAkha papAMga
kA eka patra hotA hai| parA lezyA haldI ke samAna pIle raMga ke lelyA pudgaloM
se AtmA meM aise pari NAmoM kA honA jisase kASAyika pravRtti kAphI aMzoM meM
kama ho, citta prazAnta rahatA ho, Atma-saMyama aura jitendriyatA kI vRtti AtI
ho  /  pAgacaurAsI lAsa utpala kA eka pAMga hotA hai| parAvA nAmakarma-jisa
karma ke udaya se jIva bar3e-bar3e balavAnoM kI dRSTi meM bhI ajeya mAlUma ho  /

Page #530 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix-2  **Paravartamana Prakriti:** A nature whose bondage, arising, or
both are prevented by the bondage, arising, or both of another nature.
**Pariharavishuddhi Samyama:** The meaning of Pariharavishuddhi Samyama is a
special kind of austerity and the character that achieves purity through that
austerity. Or, it is the Samyama where the austerity called Pariharavishuddhi is
performed.  **Paryapt Namakarma:** Beings with the arising of Paryapt Namakarma
are called Paryapt, and the karma whose arising makes beings endowed with their
Paryaptis is Paryapt Namakarma.  **Paryapti:** The power by which a being can
take in pudgals and transform them into food, body, etc.  **Paryayachchha:** The
amount of knowledge that increases in the second time from the part of the
subtle Nigodaya being's Kuthala in the first time of the origin of the being.
**Paryay Samas:** The collection of Paryayachchha.  **Paly:** The circular space
of death of grains, etc.  **Palyopam:** The long period of time that is compared
to Paly. It is the time that is calculated by the analogy of a circular shape
that is one Yojana long, one Yojana wide, and one Yojana deep.  **Paroksha:**
Knowledge about an object that occurs with the help of external means like mind,
senses, etc.  **Paschavanusooban:** Counting from the end to the beginning.
**Pap:** One foot of six Satsedhangul.  **Pap:** That whose arising leads to
suffering; the soul is separated from good deeds.  **Pap Prakriti:** That whose
fruit is inauspicious.  **Parinamiki Buddhi:** The intelligence obtained from
the experiences of the world for a long time due to long life.  **Parinamik
Bhava:** The state of being transformed in nature without any change in the
original object.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 parAvartamAnA prakRti- kisI dUsarI pravRtti ke baMdha, udaya athavA
donoM ko roka kara jisa prakRti kA baMtra, udaya athadA donoM hote haiN|
parihAravizuddhi saMyama-parihAra kA artha hai tapovizeSa aura usa tapovizeSa se
jisa cAritra meM vizuddhi prApta kI jAtI hai, use parihAravizuddhi saMyama
kahate haiM  /  athavA jisameM parihAravizuddhi nAmaka tapasthA kI jAtI hai,
vaha parihAra vizuddhi saMyama hai| paryApta nAmakarma-paryApta nAmakarma ke
udaya vAle jIvoM ko paryApta kahate haiM aura jisa karma ke udaya se jIya apanI
paryAptiyoM se yukta hote haiM, vaha paryApta nAmakarma hai| paryApti--jIva vI
vaha zakti jisake dvArA pudagaloM ko grahaNa karane tathA unako AhAra, zarIra
Adi ke rUpa meM badala dene kA kArya hotA hai| paryApta bhUta-utpatti ke
prathama samaya meM laSyaparyApta sUkSma nigodiyA jIva ke hone vAle kuthala kI
aMza se dUsare samaya meM jJAna kA jitanA aMza bar3hatA hai, yaha paryAyaca ta
hai| paryAya samAsa zutaparyAya ata kA samudAya  /  palya-anAja vagairaha marane
ke golAkAra sthAna ko patya kahate haiN| paruyopama....kAla kI jisa lambI avadhi
ko patya kI upamA dI jAtI hai, usako palyopama kahate haiM  /  eka yojanA lamce,
eka yojana caur3e evaM eka yojana gahare golAkAra vUpa kI upamA se jo kAla ginA
jAtA hai use palyopama kahate haiN| parokSamana aura indriya Adi bAhya nimittoM
kI sahAyatA se hone vAlA padArtha sambandhI jJAna  /  pazcAvAnusUboM-anta se
prArambha kara Adi taka kI gaNanA karanA  /  pApa-chaha satsedhAMgula kA eka
pAda hotA hai| pApa-jisake udaya se duHkha kI prApti ho; AtmA zubha kAryoM se
pRthaka rahe  /  pApa prakRti-jisakA phala azubha hotA hai  /  pAriNAmikI
buddhi-dIrghAyu ke kAraNa bahuta kAla taka saMsAra ke anubhavoM se prApta hone
vAlI bugchi  /  pAriNAmika bhAva-jisake kAraNa mUla vastu meM kisI prakAra kA
parivartana na ho kintu svabhAva meM hI pariNata hote rahanA pAriNAmika bhAva
hai  /  athavA

Page #531 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Parimaashika Shabda-Kosha  Paarinaamika Bhaava - The natural, beginningless,
transformative power of a substance that does not depend on the rise,
suppression, destruction or partial destruction of karmas.  Prakriti - The
nature or inherent characteristic of something.  Punya - Karma that gives rise
to pleasant experiences.  Punya Prakriti - The nature or characteristic of a
karma that yields auspicious results.  Pudgala Parivaarta - The movement of a
soul through the eight types of matter (audaarika, kriya, aahaara, tejas,
vaachana, svaasocchvaasa, mana, and kaarmaṇa) except the aahaara body.  Pudgala
Vipaaki Prakriti - The nature of a karma that is ready to yield its fruit, i.e.,
the karma whose fruit is experienced by the soul through the medium of matter.
Purusha Veda - The karma that gives rise to the desire for sexual enjoyment with
a woman.  Pūrva - A division of the Jain scriptures, one of the fourteen Pūrva-
aṅga.  Pūrva-dhūta - A division of the Jain scriptures, one of the fourteen
Pūrva-aṅga.  Pūrva-samāsa - Knowledge of the first fourteen Pūrva-aṅga.  Pūṅgi -
A division of time, one pūrvaṅga is equal to 84 lakh years.  Pṛthivī-kāya - The
earthly body, the body made of earth element.  Prakriti - The inherent nature or
characteristic of a karma.  Prakriti-bandha - The arising of different powers
and natures in the karma particles grasped by the soul, or the transformation of
karma particles into knowledge-obscuring, etc. forms.  Praakriti-vikalpa - The
differentiation arising from the different natures or characteristics.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pArimASika zabda-koSa karma ke udaya, upazama, kSaya aura kSayopazAma kI apekSA
na rakhane vAle dravya kI svAbhAvika anAdi pAriNAmika zakti se ho AvirbhUta
bhAva ko pAriNAmika mAva kahate haiM  /  pira prakRti-apane meM anya prakRtiyoM
ko garmita karane vAlI prakRti  /  pugdha-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko sukha
kA anubhava hotA hai  /  puNya karma-jo karma mukha kA vedana karAtA hai|| puNya
prakRti-jisa prakRti kA vimApha-phasa zubha hotA hai| puSagalaparAvarta-grahaNa
yogya ATha vargaNAoM (audArika, kriya, AhAraka, tejasa zarIra, bhASA,
zvAsocchavAsa, mana, kAmaNa kaNA) meM se AhAraka zarIra vargaNA ko chor3akara
zeSa audArika Adi prakAra se rUpI dravyoM ko grahaNa karate hue eka jIva dvArA
samasta lokAkAza ke pudgaloM kA sparza krnaa| pugatavipAkI prakRti-jo karma
prakRti pudgala meM phala pradAna karane ke sammukha ho arthAt jisa prakRti kA
phala AtmA pudgala dvArA anubhava kare  /  audArika Adi nAmakarma ke udaya se
grahaNa kiye gaye pudgaloM meM jo karma prakRti apanI zakti ko dikhAve, yaha
pudagala vipAko prakRti hai| puruSaveva--jisake udaya se puruSa ko strI ke sAtha
ramaNa karane kI icchA ho  /  pUrNacaurAsI sAkha pUrvAGga kA eka pUrva hotA hai|
pUrvadhuta aneka vastuoM kA eka pUrva hotA hai| usameM se eka kA jJAna
pUrvazruta kahalAtA hai| pUrvasamAsa va sado-cAra Adi caudaha pUrvI taka kA
jJAna  /  pUGgi-paurAsI lAkha varSa kA eka pUrvAza hotA hai| pUrvAna pUrvIjo
padArtha jisa krama se utpanna huA ho yA jisa kama se sUtrakAra ke dvArA
sthApita kiyA gayA ho, jasakI usI krama se gaNanA karanA  /  pRthvIkAya-pRthvI
se banane vAlA pArthiva zarIra  /  prakRti-..-kama ke svabhAva ko prakRti kahate
haiN| prakRti baMdha-jIva dvArA grahaNa kiye hue karma pudgaloM meM bhinna-
bhinna zaktiyoM svabhAvoM kA utpanna honA, athavA karma paramANuoM kA
jJAnAvaraNa Adi ke rUpa meM pariNata honA  /  prAkRtivikalpa-prakRtiyoM ke bheda
se hone vAle maMga  /

Page #532 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2  **Prakriti Sthan** - A group of two or three primary substances.
**Prachala** - The karma whose arising causes drowsiness while sitting or
standing.  **Prachala-Prachala** - The karma whose arising causes drowsiness
while walking or moving.  **Pratar** - The class of **ni** is called **pratar**.
**Pratipatti** - Knowing all the beings of the universe through one of the doors
like **at-gati**, senses, etc.  **Pratipasisamaas** - Knowing the beings through
two or four doors like **pati**, etc.  **Pratipaati Abhimaana** - The **avadhi-
shaan** that disappears suddenly like the flame of a lamp being extinguished by
a gust of wind.  **Prati-shalaaka** - The **paly** filled with mustard seeds
that are **prati-saakshi-bhoot**.  **Prati-shravan-anumaati** - Only hearing the
sinful karmas done by a relative like a son, and not stopping them from doing
those karmas even after hearing them.  **Prati-sevana-unnati** - Using food,
etc., that has been prepared by oneself or someone else.  **Pratyaksha** -
Knowing all substances and their synonyms only through the self-nature, without
the need for means like mind, senses, or teachings.  **Pratyaneeka-sva-gyaan** -
Acting contrary to knowledge and the means of knowledge.  **Pratyaasthaana-
avaran Kshaya** - The kshaya whose influence hinders the soul from attaining
**sarva-virati-charitra**, i.e., the attainment of **shraman-dharma**.  **Pra-
tyak** - The karma whose arising makes one being the owner of one body.
**Prathama-sthiti** - The state below the **antar-sthan**.  **Pravesh** - The
**karma-dalikas** are called **pradesh**. The **avagaha-sthan** of one atom of
**pudgala** is also called **pradesh**.  **Pravesh-bandh** - The connection of a
lesser or greater number of atoms with the soul.  **Pravesh-oshaya** - The
experience of bound karmas in another form. That is, the **ras** of the karmas
whose **dalikas** are bound is experienced with the **nishekas** of the same
kind of **prakritis** that experience them, and the bound **prakriti** itself
cannot show its **vipaak**.  **Pra-dvesh** - Having aversion or dislike for the
knowers and the means of knowledge is called **pra-dvesh**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 prakRti sthAna-do yA tIna Adi prakRtiyoM kA samudAya  /  pracalA-
jisa karma ke udaya se baiThe-baiThe yA khar3e-khahe hI nIMda Ane lage  /
pracalA-pracalA--jisa karma ke udaya se salate-phirate hI nauda A jAye  /
prataraNi ke varga ko pratara kahate haiM  /  pratipatti ata-gati, indriya Adi
dvAroM meM se kisI eka dvAra ke jarie samasta saMsAra ke jIvoM ko jAnanA  /
pratipasisamAsa ata--pati Adi do-cAra dvAroM ke jarie jIvoM kA zAna honA  /
pratipAtI abhimAna-jagamagAte dIpaka ke vAyu ke jhoMke se ekAeka bula jAne ke
samAna ekadama lupta hone vAlA avadhizAna 1 pratizalAkA patya-pratisAkSIbhUta
sarasoM ke dAnoM se bharA jAne vAlA palya  /  pratizravaNAnumati-putra Adi kisI
sambandhI ke dvArA kiye gaye pApa karmoM ko kevala sunanA aura sunakara bhI una
karmoM ke karane se unako na rokanA  /  pratisevanAmunnati-apane yA dUsare ke
kiye hue bhojana Adi kA upayoga karanA  /  pratyakSA-mana, indriya, paropadeza
Adi pada nimittoM kI apekSA rakhe binA eka mAtra AtmasvarUpa se hI samasta
dravyoM aura unakI paryAyoM ko jaannaa| pratyanIkasva-jJAna, jAnI aura jJAna ke
sAdhanoM ke pratikUla AcaraNa karanA  /  pratyAsthAnAvaraNa kaSAya--jisa kaSAya
ke prabhAva se AtmA ko sarvavirati-cAritra prApta karane meM bAdhA ho, arthAt
zcamaNadharma kI prApti na ho|| pratyeka nAmakarma jisa karma ke udaya se eka
zarIra kA svAmI eka hI jIva ho| prathamasthitiantara sthAna se nIce kI sthiti  /
pravezakarmadalikoM ko pradeza kahate haiN| pudgala ke eka paramANu ke avagAha
sthAna kI saMjJA bhI pradeza hai  /  pravezabaMdha-jIva ke sAtha nyUnAdhika
paramANu pAle kama skAghoM kA sambandha honA  /  pravezoSayabaMdhe hue karmoM kA
anya rUpa se anubhava honA  /  arthAt jina karmoM ke dalika badhi haiM unakA
rasa dUsare bhoge pAne vAle sajAtIya prakRtiyoM ke niSekoM ke sAtha bhogA jAye,
baddha prakRti svayaM apanA vipAka na batA ske| pradveSajJAniyoM aura jJAna ke
sAdhanoM para Sa rakhanA, aruci rakhanA praSa kahalAtA hai|

Page #533 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **Pramattasanyata:** A soul that has renounced all sinful
activities according to the rules, is a Sanyata (Muni), but is called
Pramattasanyata as long as they consume food.   **Pramattasanyata Gunasthan:**
Refers to the specific nature of a Pramattasanyata.  **Pramaangul:** A measure
of length equal to 2.5 Utsadhangul and 400 Gunasambha Pramanangul.  **Pramav:**
Forgetfulness of the self, lack of respect for virtuous actions, and not being
mindful of duty and non-duty.  **Prayut:** One Prayut is equal to 84 lakh
Prayutang.  **Prastang:** One Prayutang is equal to 84 lakh Ayut time units.
**Prabhat Shruta:** One Prabhat is composed of many Prabhut-Prabhuts. The
knowledge of that one Prabhat.  **Prabhut:** Knowledge of one of the Prabhut-
Prabhuts in the Pramrit Shruta-Drishtivad Anga.  **Prabhut-Prabhutsamas
Shruta:** Knowledge of four Prabhut-Prabhuts.  **Pramrit Samas Shruta:**
Knowledge of more than one Prabhut.  **(b) Bandh:** Due to Mithyatva and other
causes, the soul is bound to the karmic particles in the world, which is filled
with Paugalik dravya like a box filled with kajal. This binding is like the
relationship between water and oil, or fire and iron, where they penetrate each
other and become inseparable, occupying the same space. Alternatively, Bandh
refers to the specific relationship between the soul and karmic atoms.
**Apva:** The acceptance of new karmic actions is called Bandh.  **Bandhkash:**
The state of the binding period of the soul's lifespan.  **Bandhvicched:** The
cessation of the binding of a particular karma in any future Gunasthan.
**Bandhasthan:** The collection of all karmic natures that bind to a soul at a
particular time.  **Bandhetu:** The causes of binding, which are the Vaimāvika
parināmas (karmodaya-janya) that arise from Mithyatva and other factors.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabdakoSa pramasasaMyata--jo jIva pApajanaka vyApAroM se
vidhipUrvaka sarvathA nivRtta ho jAte haiM, ve saMyata (muni) haiM lekina
saMpata bhI jaba taka pramAda kA sevana karate haiM taba taka pramattasaMyata
kahalAle haiN| pramattasaMyata guNasthAna-pramattasaMyata ke svarUpa vizeSa ko
kahate haiM  /  pramAgAMgula-utsedhAMgula se aDhAI guNA vistAra vAlA aura
cArasau guNa sambA pramANAMgula hotA hai  /  pramAva-AtmavismaraNa honA, kuzala
karmoM meM Adara na rakhanA, kartavya-amarttavya _ko smRti ke lie sAvadhAna na
rahanA  /  prayuta-caurAsI lAkha prayutAMga kA eka prayuta hotA hai| prastAMga-
caurAsI lAkha ayuta ke samaya ko eka prayutAMga kahate haiN| prAbhata zruta-
aneka prAbhUta-prAbhUtoM kA eka prAbhUta hotA hai| usa eka prAbhUta kA jJAna  /
prAbhRta-prAmRta zruta-dRSTivAda aMga meM prAbhRta-prAbhRta nAmaka adhikAra haiM
unameM se kisI eka kA jJAna honaa| prAbhRta-prAbhRtasamAsa zruta-yo cAra
prAmRta-prAbhRtoM kA jJAna  /  prAmRtasamAsa zruta-eka se adhika prAbhUtoM kA
jJAna  /  (ba) yaSa-mithyAtva Adi kAraNoM dvArA kAjala se bharI huI DibiyA ke
samAna paugalika dravya se parivyApta loka meM karmayogya pudgala argaNAoM kA
AtmA ke sAtha nIra-sIra athavA agni aura lohapitra kI moti ekadUsare meM
anupraveza- abhedAtmaka ekakSetrAvagAha rUpa saMbaMdha hone ko baMdha kahate
haiM  /  athavA-AtmA aura kArma paramANuoM ke saMbaMdha vizeSa ko baMdha kahate
haiN| apavA abhinava navIna karmoM ke grahaNa ko baMdha kahate haiN| baMdhakAsa-
paramava saMbaMdhI Ayu ke baMdhakAla kI avasthA  /  paMdhaviccheva-Age ke kisI
bhI guNasthAna meM usa karma kA baMgha na honA  /  baMdhasthAna -eka jIva ke eka
samaya meM jitanI karma prakRtimoM kA baMdha eka sAtha (yugapat) ho unakA
samudAya  /  baMdhahetu-mithyAtva Adi jina vaimAvika pariNAmoM (kamodaya janya)
AtmA ke

Page #534 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix 2  **Karma-yogya pudgala** (particles capable of becoming karma)
become transformed into karma (in the form of **karma-rupa**). **Bandhan**
(bondage) is the power of the soul that binds karma, especially **bandhan
karma** (karma of bondage), which arises from **jiva karma** (karma of the
soul). The connection between newly acquired **pudgalas** (particles) and
previously acquired **modarik** (particles of the body) etc. is established.
**Badar uddhar palyopama** (a unit of time) is the time it takes for a **palya**
(a measure of time) to become empty when one **keshaya** (a unit of time) is
removed every hundred years from a **nadar adda popam** (a measure of time).
**Badar uddhar sagaropama** (a unit of time) is the time of ten **koti koti**
(billions of billions) **badar uddhar palyopama**.  **Badar yogakera ni evam
yojana praman lambe ek yojana praman thode aur ek yojana praman gahre ek gol
parushgadde ko ek din se lekar sat din tak ke use balayo se prasas bhar kar ki
jisko va ag jala sake, na vayu uda sake aur na jal ka hi pravesh ho sake, prati
samay ek-ek balay ke nikalne par jitne samay mein vah palya saali ho jaye, us
kal ko badar uddhar palyopama kahte hai.** (A **badar uddhar palyopama** is the
time it takes for a round, rough pit, one yojana (a unit of distance) long, one
yojana wide, and one yojana deep, filled with **balaya** (a type of fuel) for
one to seven days, to become empty when one **balaya** is removed every moment,
and neither fire, wind, nor water can enter it.)  **Badar uddhar sagaropama** is
the time of ten **koti koti** **badar uddhar palyopama**.  **Badar phal yugal
paravart** (a unit of time) is the time in which a living being, through its
death, touches each moment of a **kal chakra** (time cycle) of twenty **koti
koti** **sagaropama**, either in a **kram** (sequential) or **akram** (non-
sequential) manner.  **Badar kshetra pudgal paravart** (a unit of time) is the
time it takes for a living being to acquire and release all the atoms in the
entire universe, except for those in the **aaharaka sharira vargana** (category
of the body that consumes food), in all seven **vargana** (categories) of the
body, including the **audarik sharira** (category of the body that is the object
of perception).  **Badar bhav pudgal paravart** (a unit of time) is the time it
takes for a living being, through its death, to touch all the **kashaya sthana**
(places of passions) that are the cause of **anubhag bandha** (bondage of
experience), either in a **kram** or **akram** manner.  **Bal tapasvi** (a young
ascetic) who does not understand the true nature of the soul, due to ignorance,
performs **kayaklesh** (physical austerities) etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 |' : pariziSTa 2 pariNAma - krodha Adi ) se karma yogya pudgala karmarUpa
pariNata ho jAte haiN| baMdhanakaraNa AtmA kI jisa zakti baMdhana nAmakarma -
jirA karma ke udaya se kI vizeSa se karma kA baMdha hotA hai  /  pUrva gRhIta
modArika Adi pArIra mugaloM ke sAtha navIna grahaNa kiye jAne vAle pudgaloM kA
saMbaMdha ho  /  nAdara aDDA popama - bAdara uddhAra palya meM se sau-sau varSa
ke bAda eka-eka kezAya nikAlane para jitane samaya meM vaha khAlI ho, utane
samaya ko bAdara addhA palyopama kahate hai  /  bAdara addhA sAgaropama-- dasa
koTA koTI bAdara addhA palyopama ke kAla ko bAdara mA sAmaropama kahA jAtA hai
/  45 bAvara yogkerA ni evaM yojana pramANa lambe eka yojana pramANa thor3e aura
eka yojana pramANa gahare eka gola paruSagaDDhe ko eka dina se lekara sAta dina
taka ke use bAlAyoM se prasAsa bharakara ki jisako va Aga jalA sake, na vAyu
ur3A sake aura na jala kA hI praveza ho sake, prati samaya eka-eka bAlAya ke
nikAlane para jitane samaya meM vaha palya sAlI ho jAye, usa kAla ko bAdara
uddhAra palyopama kahate hai  /  bAdara uddhAra sAgaropama-- dasa koTA koTI
bAdara uddhAra patthopaNa ke kAla ko - ---- kahA jAtA hai  /  bAvara phAla
yugala parAvarta - jisameM bIsa koTA koTI sAgaropama ke eka kAla cakra ke
pratyeka samaya ko kama yA akrama se jIva apane maraNa dvArA sparza kara letA
hai  /  bAdara kSetra pugala parAvarta - jitane kAla meM eka jIva samasta loka
meM rahane vAle saba paramANuoM ko AhAraka zarIra vargaNA ke sivAya zeSa
audAriya zarIra Adi sAtoM vargaNA rUpa se grahaNa karake chor3a detA hai  /
bAdara bhAva pudgala parAyarsa- - eka jIva apane maraNa ke dvArA krama se yA
binA kama ke anubhAga baMdha ke kAraNabhUta samasta kaSAya sthAnoM ko jitane
samaya meM sparza kara letA hai  /  bAla tapasvI AtmasvarUpa ko na samajhakara
ajJAnapUrvaka kAyakleza Adi tapa

Page #535 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Glossary of Technical Terms  Sapaka vīryānāśa-śavira - A living being whose
development is hindered by the rise of the karma that obstructs the
manifestation of its energy.  Bāla horya-antarāya - A living being who, despite
having the capacity to perform worldly activities, is unable to do so due to the
rise of the karma that obstructs the manifestation of its energy.  Bāhya nivṛtti
- The imagination of the external form of the senses.  Bhaya mohanīyakarma - The
karma that, due to its rise, causes fear to arise either with or without a
reason.  Bhayapratyaya avadhijñāna - The knowledge of a specific state that
arises without the need for observance of vows and other spiritual practices,
but is manifested merely by being born in that state.  Bhava vipākī prakṛti -
The nature that bears fruit primarily due to the predominance of the state of
existence (bhava).  Bhavya - Those who are capable of attaining liberation or
have the potential for the manifestation of right faith, knowledge, and conduct.
Bhāva - The transformation of the substances of the soul and the non-soul in
their own respective natures.  Bhāvānuyogadvāra - The perspective in which the
nature of the intended dharma is contemplated.  Bhāṣakarma - The inauspicious
dispositions of the soul, such as false belief, due to which karmic particles
take the form of karmic bondage.  Bhāvaprāṇa - The qualities of the soul, such
as knowledge, perception, and consciousness.  Bhāvalēśyā - The specific
transformation of the soul, which is accompanied by attachment and aversion. It
is caused by the rise of passions, and hence, the activity influenced by the
rise of passions is called bhāvalēśyā.  Bhāvavēda - The inclination or desire
for sexual intercourse, which arises due to the rise of the karma that produces
the external signs corresponding to the nature of the sex-determining karma.
Bhāvacakṣu - The knowledge that arises due to the senses and the mind.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46 pAribhASika zabda-koSa sApaka vIryAnAsA-zavira it pakSa rakhatA huA bhI jIva
jisake udaya se usakA pAlana na kara sake  /  bAla horyAntarAya-sAMsArika kAryoM
ko karane kI sAmarthya hone para bhI jIva jisake udaya se unako na kara sake  /
bAhya nivRtti-indriyoM ke bAhya AkAra kI rapanA  /  bhaya mohanIyakama-jisa
karma ke udaya se kAraNavazAt yA binA kAraNa Dara paidA ho| bhayapratyaya
avadhizAna- jisake lie saMyama Adi anuSThAna kI apekSA na ho phintu jo
avadhijJAna usa gati meM janma lene se hI pragaTa hotA hai  /  bhava vipAkI
prakRti-bhava kI pradhAnatA se apanA phala dene vAlI prakRti  /  bhanya-jo mokSa
prApta karane haiM yA pAne kI yogyatA rakhate haiM athavA jinameM samyagdarzana
Adi mAba pragaTa hone kI yogyatA hai| bhAva-jIva aura ajIva dravyoM kA apane-
apane svamAya rUpa se pariNamana honaa| bhAva anuyogadvAra-jisameM vivakSita
dharma ke bhAva kA vicAra kiyA jAtA hai  /  bhASakarma-jIva ke mithyAtva Adi ve
vaimAvika svarUpa jinake nimitta se kama pudgala karma rUpa ho jAte haiN|
bhAvaprANa-jJAna, darzana, cetanA Adi jIva ke guNa | bhAvalezyA-moga aura
saMnaleza se anugata AtmA kA pariNAma vizeSa  /  saMkleza kA kAraNa kaSAyodaya
hai ataH kaSAyodaya se anuraMjita yoga pravRtti ko bhAvalezyA kahate haiN|
mohakama ke udaya yA kSayopazama yA upazAma yA kSaya se hone vAlI jIva ke
pradezoM meM * paMcalatA ko bhAvalezyA kahate haiN| bhAvaveda-maithanecchA kI
prati ke yogya nAmakarma ke udaya se pragaTa bAhma cinha vizeSa ke anurUpa
abhilASA aghavA cAritra mohanIya kI nokaSAya ko veda prakRtiyoM ke kAraNa strI,
puruSa Adi se ramaNa karane kI icchA rUpa Arama pariNAma  /  bhAvazcata-indriya
aura mana ke nimitta se utpanna hone vAlA jJAna jo ki

Page #536 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2  **Bhavat** - One who is capable of expressing the intended meaning
and is **Shruta-numari** (possessing both the word and its meaning) is called
Bhavat. Bhavat is the knowledge arising from the destruction or pacification of
the **Bhavedriya-Matijnana-Avarana Karma**, or the knowledge arising from that
purity.  **Bhasha** - The language of speech and utterance is called Bhasha.
**Bhasha-Paryapti** - The completeness of the power by which a living being, by
grasping the **Poogalas** of the language category, can transform into the form
of language and, taking that as a basis, can express itself in various ways.
**Bhasha-prayogya** **Utkrushta** **Vargana** is the highest category of
language usage, which is achieved by gradually increasing the number of
**Pradeshas** from the lowest category of language usage. **Bhasha-prayogya**
**Jghanya** **Vargana** is the lowest category of language usage, which is one
**Pradesha** more than the highest category of language usage that is capable of
being grasped by the **Tejas-Parira**.  **Bhuyas-kar-bandh** - The binding of
more **Karma-prakritis** in the second instance after the binding of fewer
**prakritis** in the first instance is called **Bhuyas-kar-bandh**.  **Bhog** -
The objects that are enjoyed once are called **Bhog**, and the objects that are
enjoyed repeatedly are called **Upbhog**.  **Bhogan-tarapa-karma** - The karma
that prevents a living being from enjoying the enjoyable objects, even though it
has the means to enjoy them.  **Matijnana** - The knowledge of an object that is
present in its proper place, obtained through the senses and mind.  **Misimana**
- The wrong use of the mind that arises from the **Miccha-darshan** karma.
**Misimga-Avarana-karma** - The karma that covers the **Mati-jnana**.  **Madhur-
rasa-namakarma** - The karma that makes the body fluids of a living being like
honey, etc.  **Madhyama** - The middle number of the thread of **Amatamant**
**Jghanya** **Anantanant**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 nimata artha ko kahane meM samartha hai tathA zru tAnumArI (zabya
aura artha ke vikalpa se yukta) hai use bhAva ta kahate haiM  /  bhAvendriya-
matijJAnAvaraNa karma ke kSayopazama se utpanna Asma-vizuddhi athavA usa
vizuddhi se utpanna hone vAlA jJAna  /  bhASA-zandoccAra kI bhASA kahate haiM  /
bhASA paryApti-usa zakti kI pUrNatA ko kahate haiM jisase jIva bhASAvargaNA ke
pUgaloM ko grahaNa karake bhASA rUpa pariNa mAve aura usakA AdhAra lekara aneH
paraHra jI svAti mA bhASAprAyogya utkRSTa vargaNAbhASAprAyogya janya vargaNA se
eka-eka pradeza bar3hate-bar3hate jaghanya vargaNA ke anantaveM bhAga adhika
pradeza vAle skandhoM kI mASAprAyogya utkRSTa vargaNA hotI hai  /  bhASAprAyogya
jaghanya vargaNAtejasa pArIra kI grahaNa yogya utkRSTa vargaNA ke bAda kI
agrahaNa yogya utkRSTa vargaNA se eka pradeza adhika skandhoM kI jo vargaNA hotI
hai, vaha bhASA prAyogyajaghanya vargaNA hai| bhUpaskAra baMdha--pahale samaya
meM kama prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karake dUsare samaya meM usase adhika karma
prakRtiyoM ke baMdha ko bhUyaskAra baMdha kahate haiM  /  bhoga-upabhoga- eka
bAra moge jAne vAle padArthoM ko moga aura bAra-bAra moge jAne vAle padArthoM ko
upabhoga kahate haiM  /  bhogAntarApa karma- moga ke sAdhana hote hue bhI jisa
karma ke udaya se jIva bhogya vastuoM kA bhoga na kara sake  /  matijAna-indriya
aura mana ke dvArA yathAyogya sthAna meM abasthita vastu kA hone vAlA jJAna  /
masimAnamicyAdarzana ke udaya se hone vAlA viparIta mati upayoga lapa jAna  /
masiGgAmAvaraNa karma-mati jJAna kA AvaraNa karane vAlA karma  /  madhurarasa
nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra-rasa midhI Adi moThe padArthoM
jaisA ho| madhyama amAtAmantajaghanya anantAnanta ke dhAge kI saba sNkhyaaeN|

Page #537 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **45**  * **Madhyam Asankhyata-sankhyata:** The number
between the lowest and highest Asankhyata-sankhyata. * **Madhyam Parita-
sankhyata:** The number that, when added to the lowest Parita-sankhyata, reaches
the highest Parita-sankhyata. * **Madhyam Parita-ananta:** The number between
the lowest and highest Parita-ananta. * **Madhyam Yukta-ananta:** The number
between the lowest and highest Yukta-ananta. * **Madhyam Yukta-sankhyata:** The
number between the lowest and highest Yukta-sankhyata. * **Madhyam Sansthata:**
The number from two upwards (three to) and one less than the highest number. *
**Mag:** The means of thinking. * **Manah-paryaya-jnana:** The knowledge of the
feelings of the liberated beings, which is obtained without the need for the
senses and mind, and is limited to the knowledge of the feelings of the
liberated beings. It is also the knowledge by which the results of the mind are
directly perceived. * **Manah-paryaya-jnana-aparan:** The karma of practicing
Manah-paryaya-jnana. * **Manah-paryapti:** The perfection of the power by which
a being, by taking in the pudgalas suitable for the mind, transforms into the
form of the mind, and by the special power of that power, releases those
pudgalas. * **Masump:** One who constantly thinks about the Heg-upadeya, tattva-
atattva, apt-anapt, dharma-adharma, etc. through the mind, and is skilled in
reducing them. * **Manushya:** Those who are the holders of the excellent mind,
are wise, and act justly and ethically. * **Mamushya-gati-namakarma:** The karma
whose effect is that the being attains the state in which it is said, "This is a
human being." * **Manushya-agu:** Birth in the human realm from the nir-ak-
udaya. * **Manodravya-yogya-utkrista-vargana:** The excellent vargana of
manodravya, which is the infinite part of the regions of the agh-am vargana,
which increases one by one from the lowest vargana of manodravya-yogya to the
highest vargana of agh-am vargana. * **Manodravya-yogya-jghanya-vargana:** The
lowest vargana of manodravya, which is after the highest vargana of swas-
occhwas-yogya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 45 madhyama asaMkhyAtAsaMkhyAta-jaghanya aura utkRSTa asaMkhyAtasaMkhyAta ke
madhya kI rAzi  /  madhyama parItAsaMkhyAta-apanya parItAsaMkhyAta ko eka
saMkhyA se yukta karane para jahAM taka utkRSTa parItAsaMkhyApta na ho, yahA~
taka kI saMkhyA  /  madhyama parItAnanta-javanya aura utkRSTa parItAnanta ke
madhya kI saMkhyA  /  madhyama puktAnanta-jaghanya aura utkRSTa yuktAnanta ke
bIca kI saMkhyA  /  madhyama yuktAlayAta-jaghanya aura utkRSTa yuktAsaMkhyAta ke
bIca kI saMkhyA  /  madhyama saMsthAta-do se Upara (tIna se lekara) aura utkRSTa
saMkhyAta se eka kama taka kI saMkhyA  /  maga-vicAra karane kA sAdhana |
manaHparyApa jAna-indrima aura mana kI apekSA na rakhate hue, maryAdA ke lie hue
saMzI jIvoM ke ganogata bhAvoM ko jAnanA mana:paryAma zAna hai athavAmana ke
cinsanIya pariNAmoM ko jisa jJAna se pratyakSa kiyA jAtA hai, use manaHparyAya
jJAna karate haiM  /  manaHparyAya jJAnAparaNa-manaHparyAyajJAna kA AcaraNa
karane vAlA karma  /  manaHparvAkti-jisa zakti se jIva mana ke yogya manovargaNA
ke pudgaloM ko brahaNa karake mana rUpa pariNamana kare aura usakI zakti vizeSa
se una pudgaloM ko vApasa chor3e, usakI pUrNatA ko manaHparyApti kahate haiN|
masumpa-jo mana ke dvArA nitya hI hega-upAdeya, tattva-atattva, Apta-anApta,
dharma-adharma Adi kA vicAra karate haiM, kama karane meM nipuNa hai| utkRSTa
mana ke dhAraka hai, vivekazIla hone se nyAya-nItipUrvaka AcaraNa karane vAle
haiM, unheM manuSya kahate haiM ! mamuSpagati nAmakarma-jisa karma ke upatha se
jIva ko vaha avasthA prApta ho ki jisameM 'yaha manuSya hai' aisA kahA jAye  /
manuSyAgu-nirAke udaya se manuSyagati meM janma ho  /  manovya yogya utkRSTa
vargaNA-manodravya yogya jaghanya vargaNA ke jAra eka eka pradeza bar3hate-
bar3hate aghAma vargaNA ke rakAgha ke pradezoM ke ananta bhAga adhina. pradeza
vAle svandhoM kI manodravya yogya utkRSTa vargaNA hotI hai| manoraNya yogya
jaghanya vargaNA-svAsocchavAsa yogya utkRSTa vagaMNA ke bAda nau

Page #538 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2  From the skandhas of the excellent class of non-grasping, a province
of more skandhas is the generative class of mind-substance. Mind-yoga is the
activity of the jiva that aids the class of man-predominant, which is grasped by
the audaric, vaikriya, or aharak body. Or, by means of body-yoga, the mind-
predominant classes are retained, and from the mind-yoga, the mind-form, which
is transformed from the substance, is called mind, and the cause-like yoga that
is associated with that mind is called mind-yoga. Or, the yoga whose object is
mind, or the contraction-expansion of the jiva that occurs due to the dependence
of the mind, which is the substance that has arisen from the mind-class, is
mind-yoga.  Maha-kamal - eighty-four lakh maha-kamalas make one maha-kamalaanga.
Maha-kamalaanga - eighty-four lakh kamalas make one maha-kamalaanga. Maha-kumuda
- eighty-four lakh maha-mridangas make one maha-kumuda. Maha-kumudaanga -
eighty-four lakh kumudas make one maha-kumudaanga. Maha-lata - eighty-four lakh
maha-lataangas make one maha-lata. Maha-lataanga - eighty-four lakh lasas make
one maha-lataanga. Maha-shalaaka-palya - the pulp that fills the maha-
saakshibhuta mustard seeds is called maha-shalaaka-palya.  Maan - the attitude
of not being humble towards others due to the defect of egotism; not having
proper respect for the small and the big; having a disdainful attitude towards
others due to pride in caste, wealth, penance, etc. Maya - the deceitful nature
of the soul. The deceitfulness or trickery, etc., that is done to deceive
others, the effort that is made to manipulate the thoughts of one's heart, is
maya. Or, the lack of uniformity in thought and action is called maya.  Maarg-
naash - to destroy the path of liberation from the cycle of birth and death.
Maarg-na - those states in which the jiva is investigated in terms of its guna-
sthana, jiva-sthana, etc., with regard to states like motion, etc. Or, those
states, periods, etc., by which the jivas are seen...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTha-2 agrahaNayogya utkRSTa vargaNA ke skandhoM se eka pradeza adhika
skandhoM kI manodravyayogya jananyavargaNA hotI hai| manoyoga-jIva kA vaha
vyApAra jo audArika, vaikriya yA AhAraka zarIra ke dvArA grahaNa kiye hue
mAnaprAdhAnya vargaNA ko sahAyatA hotA hai| athavA kAyayoga ke dvArA
manaprAyogya vargaNAoM ko rahaNa karake manoyoga se manarUpa pariNata hue vastu
vicArAtmaka dvadhapa ko mana kahate haiM aura usa mana ke sahacArI kAraNa bhUta
yoga ko manoyoga kahate hai  /  athavA jisa yoga kA viSaya mana hai athavA
manovargaNA se niSpanna hue dravya mana ke avalaMbana se jIda kA jo saMkoca-
vikoca hotA hai vaha manoyoga hai| mahAkamala-caurAsI lAgnu mahAkamalAMga kA eka
mahAkamala hotA hai  /  mahAkamalAMga-caurAsI lAkha kamala ke samaya ko eka
mahAkamalAMga kahate haiN| mahAkumuha-caurAsI lAla mahA mRdAMga kA eka mahAku
mRda hotA hai  /  mahAkamudAMga- caurAsI lAkha kumuda kA eka mahAkAmadAMga hotA
hai| mahAlatAcaurasasI lAkha mahAlatAMga ke samaya ko eka mahAlatA kahate haiN|
mahAlatAMga-caurAsI lAkha lasA kA eka mahAlatAMga kahalAtA hai  /  mahAzAkhAkA
palya - mahA sAkSIbhUta sarasoM ke dAnoM kAza bhara jAne vAle palpa ko
mahAzalAkA palya kahate haiN| mAna-nisa doSa se dUsare ke prati namane kI vRtti
na ho; choTe bar3e ke prati ucita na a bhAva na rakhA jAtA ho; jAti, ala; tapa
Adi ke ahaMkAra se dUrAre ke prati tiraskAra rUpa vRtti ho, use mAna kahate
haiN| mAyA-AtmA kA kuTila bhAva  /  dUsare ko Thagane ke lie jo kuTilatA yA
chala Adi kiye jAte haiM, apane hRdaya ke vicAroM ko vidhAne kI jo ceSTA kI jAtI
hai, vaha mAyA hai | athavA vicAra aura pravRtti meM ekarUpatA ke abhAva ko mAyA
kahate haiN| mArganAza-saMsAra-nivRtti aura mukti prApti ke mArga kA apalApa
karanA  /  mArgaNA- una avasthAoM ko kahate haiM jinameM gati Adi avasthAoM ko
lekara jIva meM guNasthAna, jIvasthAna Adi kI mArgaNA-vicAraNA-gaveSaNA kI jAtI
hai  /  athavA jina abasthAoM-paryAyo Adi se jIvoM ko dekha

Page #539 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **50** **Technical Terms - Core**  **Margana** - The
process of examining and researching something in its original form is called
Margana.  **Maranantik Samudhyat** - The state of being close to death, the
final stage before death, is called Maranantik Samudhyat.  **Mithyatva** - The
state of having false beliefs about the nature of reality.  **Mithyadristi** -
The state of having a distorted view of reality due to the influence of
Mithyatva. This is a specific characteristic of the Jiva (soul).  **Mithyatva
Mohaniya** - The karmas (actions) that cause the Jiva to have a distorted view
of reality. These are the impure karmas that contribute to Mithyatva.
**Mithyatva Shruta** - The knowledge that is based on false beliefs and
distorted views.  **Mishradristi** - The state of having a mixed view of
reality, where some aspects are seen correctly and others are seen incorrectly.
This is a specific characteristic of the Jiva. It is also called Samyagmithyatva
Gunasthan.  **Mishra Manoyog** - The state of mind that is focused on both truth
and falsehood.  **Mishra Mohaniya** - The karmas that cause the Jiva to have a
wavering mind, unable to fully embrace either truth or falsehood. These are the
semi-pure karmas that contribute to Mithyatva.  **Mishra Pariṇām** - The state
of being attracted to both truth and falsehood due to the influence of
Samyagmithyatva Mohaniya karmas.  **Mukta Jiva** - A liberated soul, free from
all karmas and dwelling in its true nature, possessing knowledge, vision, and
other virtues.  **Muhurt** - A period of two ghatikas, or 48 minutes.  **Mūla
Prakṛti** - The fundamental categories of karmas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 50 pAribhASika zabda-kora jAtA hai unakI usI rUpa meM vicAraNA, gaveSaNA karanA
mArgaNA kahalAtA hai| mAraNAntika samudyAta-maraNa ke pahale usa nimitta jo
samudghAta hotA hai, use mAraNAntika samudghAta kahate haiM  /  migyAtpa-
padArthoM kA ayathArtha zradvAna | mizyAvRSTi guNasthAna-mithyAtva mohanIya ke
udaya se jIva kI dRSTi (zraddhA, pratipani) mithyA (viparIta) ho jAnA
mithyAdRSTi hai aura mithyAsTi jIva ke svarUpa vizeSa ko mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna
kahate haiM  /  micyAsva mohanIya-jisake udaya se jIva ko tasyoM ke yathArtha
svarUpa kI raci na ho  /  mithyAtya ke azuddha dalikoM ko mithyAtva mohanIya
kahate haiM  /  mithyAtva bata-mithyAiSTi jIvoM ke zruta ko mithyAtva zruta kahA
jAtA hai  /  mitra guNasthAna-mithyAtva ke ardha zuddha pudgaloM kA udaya hone
se jaba jIva kI dRSTi kucha samyaka (zuddha ) aura kucha mithyA (azuddha) arthAt
vitra ho jAtI hai taba vaha jIva miznadRSTi kahalAtA hai aura usake svarUpa
vizeSa ko mizra guNasthAna kahate hai| isakA dUsarA nAma samyagmithyASTi
guNasthAna bhI hai| miSa manoyoga kisI aMza meM yathArtha aura visI aMza meM
ayathArtha aisA cintana jisa manoyoga ke dvArA ho use mizra manoyoga kahate
haiN| mima mohanIya-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko yathArtha kI ruci yA aruci na
hokara dolAyamAna sthiti rahe  /  mithyAtva ke ardhazuddha dalikoM ko bhI mizra
mohanIya kahA jAtA hai  /  mima samyakasma-samyagmithyAtva mohanIyakama ke udaya
se tatva aura atattva ina donoM kI ruci rUpa lene vAlA mila pariNAma  /  mukta
jIva-saMpUrNa karmoM kA kSaya karake jo apane jJAna, darzana Adi mAva prANoM se
yukta hokara AtmasvarUpa meM avasthita haiM, ve mukta jIva kahalAte haiN|
muhatado ghaTikA yA 48 minaTa kA samaya  /  mUla prakRti-karmoM ke mukhya bhedoM
ko mUla prakRti kahate haiM  /

Page #540 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **Appendix 2**  **Mrishpashcha Karma** - The karma
whose fruition makes the body of the living being as soft as butter.  **Moksha**
- The complete destruction of all karmas.  **Mohaniya Karma** - The karma that
obstructs the living being's self-awareness and self-absorption, or the karma
that destroys the soul's right knowledge and virtuous qualities is called
Mohaniya Karma.  **(Y)**  **Samakhyat Sangam** - The state of being free from
passions and attachments, as described by the nature of the soul after the
subsidence or destruction of all Mohaniya Karma.  **Yathapravritta Karan** - The
state where, due to the purification of the result, the living being reduces the
remaining seven karmas (except Ayukarma) to a fraction of an innumerable part,
like a single grain of sand in an ocean. This state, where the condition remains
the same as before the cause, is called Yathapravritta Karan.
**Yatratatranupurvi** - To count from anywhere or by considering one's own sense
objects as the first is Yatratatranupurvi.  **Yavamadhyabhag** - One
Yavamadhyabhag is equal to eight Yuka.  **Yasha Kirti** - Praise spread in one
direction is called Kirti, and praise spread in all directions is called Yasha
Kirti. Alternatively, fame gained through charity, penance, etc., is called
Kirti, and fame gained through victory over enemies is called Yasha.  **Yadaha
Kosi Karma** - The karma whose fruition makes the living being famous in the
world.  **Yavatkathit Samayik** - The Samayik that is observed from the time of
its acceptance until the end of life.  **Yug** - A period of five years.
**Yuka** - One Yuka (louse) is equal to eight Leekha.  **Yog** - To practice
self-discipline and good conduct is Yog.  **Gachan, Kay**  **Yog** is the
pulsation in the self-regions. This pulsation in the self-regions or self-power
is done by the mind. Therefore, the actions of mind, speech, and body, or the
activities of the Pugala...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 51 pariziSTa 2 mRsparza nAmakarma- - jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra
makkhana jaisA komala ho  /  mokSa - sampUrNa karmoM kA kSaya ho jAnA  /
mohanIya karma- jIva ko svapara viveka tathA svarUpa- ramaNa meM bAdhA pahu~cAne
vAlA karma athavA AtmA ke samyaktva aura cAritra guNa kA ghAta karane vAle karma
ko mohanIyakarma kahate haiN| 1 (ya) samAkhyAta saMgama - samasta mohanIyakarma
ke upazama yA kSaya se jesA jAtmA kA svabhAva batAyA hai, usa avasthA rUpa
vItarAga saMyama  /  yathApravRtta karaNa jisa pariNAma zuddhi ke kAraNa jIva
Ayukarma ke sivAya zeSa sAta karmoM kI sthiti pasyopama ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga
kaga eka kor3A kaur3I sAgaropama jitanI kara detA hai| jisameM karaNa se pahale
ke samAna avasthA (sthiti) banI rahe, use yathApravRttakaraNa kahate haiM  /
yatratatrAnupUrvI jahAM kahIM se athavA apane indrita padArtha ko prathama
mAnakara gaNanA karanA yatratatrAnupUrvI hai  /  yavamadhyabhAga - ATha yUkA kA
eka yavamadhyabhAga hotA hai  /  yazaH kIrti - kisI eka dizA meM prazaMsA phaile
use kIti aura saba dizAoM meM prazaMsA phaile use yazaHkoti kahate haiM  /
athavA dAna tapa Adi se nAma kA honA kIrti aura zatru para vijaya prApti se nAma
kA honA yaza hai  /  yadAH kosi nAmakarma - jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kI
saMsAra meM banA aura kIrti phaile  /  7 yAvatkathita sAmAyika jo sAmAyika
grahaNa karane ke samaya se jIvanaparyanta pAlA jAtA hai  /  yuga-pAMca varSa kA
samaya  /  yUkA - ATha lIkha kI eka yUkA (jUM) hotI hai  /  yoga-sAdhvAcAra kA
pAlana karanA saMyama-yoga hai  /  ghacana, kAya AtmapradezoM meM parispandana
hone ko yoga kahate haiM  /  AtmapradezoM meM athavA Atmazakti meM parispandana
mana dvArA hotA hai, ataH mana, bacana, kAya ke karma vyApAra ko athavA pugala
ke

Page #541 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **Yoga:** The power that causes a living being, composed
of mind, speech, and body, to accept karmas, arises from the ripening of the
Vipaki body karma.  **Yogasthan:** A group of competitors is called Yogasthan.
**Yojan:** A Yojan is equal to 8,000 Dhanush (bows).  **(r)**  **Rati
Mohaniya:** A karma whose ripening causes attachment and love for objects,
whether with or without a cause.  **Rathrenu:** One Rathrenu is equal to 8
Sarenu.  **Ras-Gaurav:** To consider oneself important due to the taste of
sweet, sour, etc.  **Rasdhatu:** To weaken the intense power of bound knowledge-
obscuring karmas, etc., to bear fruit through the process of Apvartankaran.
**Ras Namak:** A karma whose ripening causes the body to have bitter, sweet,
etc., auspicious and inauspicious tastes.  **Rabandh:** The presence of varying
degrees of power to bear fruit in the karma pudgalas accepted by the living
being.  **Asvipaki:** The nature of the Vipak that is determined primarily by
the Asrama of Ras (Anubhag) is called Ras Vipaki.  **Rasanu:** The smallest part
of the power of Pudgal dravya.  **Rasodaya:** To directly experience bound
karmas.  **Raju:** One Raju is equal to countless Koti Koti Yojanas, arising
from a Pramanangula. Alternatively, Raju is the seventh part of a Shreni.
**Vakshsparsh Namakarm:** A karma whose ripening causes the body of the living
being to be rough like sand.  **Sumati Mamah Paryaygyan:** To know the general
nature of an object that exists in the minds of others.  **Ridhi Gaurav:** Ridhi
refers to wealth, prosperity, and opulence. To consider oneself important due to
Ridhi is called Ridhi Gaurav.  **Manarachansahanan Namakarm:** A karma whose
ripening causes the formation of bones.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabdakoSa vipAkI zarIra nAmakarma ke udaya se mana, bacana, kAya se
yukta jIva kI karmoM ke grahaNa karane meM kAraNabhUta zakti ko yoga kahA jAtA
hai  /  yogasthAna - sparddhakoM ke samUha ko yogasthAna kahate haiN| yojana -
bAra byUta yA ATha hajAra dhanuSa kA eka yojana hotA hai  /  (ra) rati mohanIya-
jisa karma ke udaya se sakAraNa yA akAraNa padArthoM meM rAgaprema ho  /  2
rapareNa ATha sareNu kA eka rathareNu hotA hai  /  rasa- gaurava - madhura, amla
Adi rasoM se apanA gaurava samajhanA  /  rasadhAta baMdhe hue jJAnAvaraNa Adi
kamoM kI phala dene kI tIvra zakti ko apavartanakaraNa ke dvArA maMda kara denA
/  rasa nAmaka - jisa karma ke udaya se zarIra meM tikta, madhura Adi zubha,
azubha rasoM kI ho rabaMdha - jIva ke dvArA grahaNa kiye hue karma pudgaloM meM
phala dene kI nyUnAdhika zakti kA honA | esavipAkI - rasa ke Azrama arthAt rasa
( anubhAga ) kI mukhyatA se nirdizyamAna vipAka jisa prakRti kA hotA hai, usa
prakRti ko rasa bipAkI kahate haiM  /  rasANu pudagala dravya kI zakti kA sabase
choTA aMza  /  rasodaya- baMdhe hue pharmoM kA sAkSAt anubhava karanA  /  rA -
pramANAMgula se niSpanna asaMkhyAta koTA koTI yojana kA eka rAjU hotA hai  /
athavA zreNi ke sAtaveM bhAga ko rAjU kahate haiM  /  vakSasparza nAmakarma -
jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra bAlU. jaisA rUkhA ho  /  sumati mamaH
paryAyajJAna - dUsaroM ke mana me sthita padArtha ke sAmAnyasvarUpa ko jAnanA  /
ddhi gaurava ghana, sampatti, aizvarya ko Rddhi kahate hai aura usase apane ko
mahattvajJAnI samajhanA Rddhi gaurava hai  /  manArAcasaMhanana nAmakarma jisa
karma ke udaya se haDDiyoM kI racanA -

Page #542 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2  Specifically, there should be a "makarbandh" (joint) of bone on both
sides, and also a "vethan" (joint) of the third bone, but there should not be a
nail of bone piercing all three. It is considered "rochak samyaktv-jinoct kriya"
(a commendable action of a Jain) to keep "rupi" (money) in such a case.  "Laghu
sparsh namakarm" is the karma (action) whose arising makes the body of the
living being light, like a "jhak" (a type of bird). "Lata-parama" is a "lasya"
(a type of dance) that is performed in front of a "latang" (a type of tree). A
"lat" is a "latang" from eighty-four lakh years ago. The specific "ayopshma"
(destruction) of the "lasthi-jnanaavaranakarm" (karma that obscures knowledge)
is called "labdhi" (gain). "Lambitras" are those beings who experience the
arising of the "as namakarm" (karma that causes attachment) and walk around.
"Lamitra" are those beings who experience the arising of the "paryapt namakarm"
(karma that causes fulfillment) and die after fulfilling their "paryapti"
(fulfillment), not before. "Labdhi" is the "pratyaya" (perception) of the
"dainiya" (worldly) body. "Kiyala-chianya" are the actions that are performed by
humans and animals through their "bänkariya" (physical) bodies. "Samdhi
bhavetriya" is the specific ability of the "chetana shakti" (consciousness) that
arises from the "ayopshma" of the "matijnanaavaranakarm" (karma that obscures
knowledge). "Ladhyakshar" is the act of understanding the meaning of something
by hearing it or seeing it. "Lakhyaparyaps" are those beings who die without
fulfilling their "paryapti" (fulfillment). "Lav" is the time of seven "stoka" (a
unit of time). "Labhatarap karm" is the karma whose arising prevents the living
being from obtaining desired objects. "Lokh" is a "lis" (a unit of measurement)
of eight "keshag" (a unit of measurement) of the humans of the "marat" and
"airarat" regions. "Lenya" are the "parinam" (results) of the living being that
cause it to become entangled in "asmakarm" (karma that causes attachment) or to
experience the "anuranjit yog pravritti" (a state of being influenced by the
"yog" (spiritual practice)). "Sobh" is the "akanksha" (desire) or "grittata"
(greed) for things like forests. "Aham mera hai" (this is mine) is the "anurag
buddhi" (attachment) or "mamata" (love) that arises from the "parinam" (results)
of the "bahya padarth" (external objects).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 vizeSa meM donoM tarapha haDDI kA makarabaMdha ho, tIsarI haTo kA
veThana bhI ho, lekina tInoM ko bhedane vAlI haDDI kI kIla na ho| rocaka
samyaktva-jinokta kriyAoM meM rupi rkhnaa| laghu sparza nAmakarmajisa karma ke
udaya se jIva kA zarIra jhAka kI hA jasA halkA ho| latA-pArAmA lAsya latAMga ke
samakSa ko eka satA kahata hai  /  latacaurAsI lAkha pUrva kA eka latAMga hotA
hai| lasthi-jJAnAvaraNakarma ke ayopazama vizeSa ko labdhi kahate haiN|
lambitrasave jISa jinheM asa nAmakarma kA udaya hotA hai aura calate-phirate
lamitra paryApta-ve jIva minako paryApta nAmakarma kA udaya ho aura apanI yogya
paryAptiyoM ko pUrNa karake marate haiM, pahale nhiiN| labdhi pratyaya dainiya
zarIra-kiyalacianya jirA baiMkriya zarIra se manuSya aura timaMcoM dvArA viSiSa
vikriyAyeM kI jAtI haiN| samdhi bhAvetriya matijJAnAvaraNa karma ke bhayopazama
se cetanA zakti kI yogyatA vizeSa  /  lAdhyakSara- rAmada ko sunakara yA rUpa ko
dekhakara artha kA anubhavapUrvaka paryA locana karanA  /  lakhyaparyApsa-ve
jIva jo svayogya paryAptiyoM ko pUrNa kiye binA hI mara jAte haiN| lava-sAta
stoka kA samaya  /  lAbhAtarApa karma -gisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko iSTa vastu
ko prApti na ho ske| lokha-marata aura airArata kSetra ke manuSyoM ke ATha
kezAgoM kI eka lIsa hotI hai| leNyA-jIva ke aise pariNAma jinake dvArA AsmA
karmoM se lipta ho athavA kapAyodaya se anuraMjita yoga pravRtti  /  sobha-vana
Adi kI tIna AkAMkSA yA gRddhatA; bAhya padArthoM meM 'aha merA hai' isa kAra ko
anurAga buddhi, mamatA Adi ma pariNAma  /

Page #543 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **54** **Glossary of Technical Terms**  **Lomahar:**
Food that is perceived by the touch sense organ.  **Lohit Garg Karma:** The
karma that, upon its fruition, causes the body of a living being to become red
like vermillion. **(y)** **Varg:** The product obtained by multiplying two equal
numbers. **Samajati:** A community of beings of similar nature. **A विभागी
प्रतिच्छेद:** A group of indivisible intersections. **Argana:** A group of
pudgals of the same species. **Vachan Yog:** The activity of a living being that
is facilitated by the language substance accumulated through the actions of the
audaric, vaikriya, or aharak body. The pudgal that has attained the state of ada
and garima is called vachan, and the yog that occurs due to the cooperative
cause of this bond is called vachan yog. Alternatively, vachan yog is the yog
that conquers vachan, or the contraction and expansion that occurs in the
regions of a living being due to the dependence on the pudgal skandhas related
to the language category. **Vashshabhanaraabasanhanan Karma:** The karma that,
upon its fruition, results in the formation of bones, specifically the
arrangement of a bone in the form of a forest-thorn, a bull-enclosure, a strip,
and a spear, with a monkey-bond on both sides, meaning that two bones are bound
together by a monkey-bond on both sides, and a third bone is seated on top of
them, and a thorn of a bone that pierces all three bones is attached. **Gargma
Karma:** The karma that, upon its fruition, causes the body to have colors like
black, white, and golden. **Varshaman Avvijnana:**  Despite having a small
subject matter at the time of its origin, it gradually increases in subject
matter with the attainment of _parinam-vishuddhi_. **Janaspati Kay:** Living
beings whose body is made of plants. **Vastu:** A single object is the
possession of many praamritas. The knowledge of a single object is called vastu-
thu. **Vastu Samas:** The knowledge of two to four objects. **Vaman Sansthan
Karma:** The karma that, upon its fruition, causes the body to be dwarfed.
**Mayukash:** A body made of air.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 54 pAribhASika zabda-koSa lomAhAra-sparzanendriya dvArA grahaNa kiye jAne vAlA
AhAra  /  lohita garga nAmakarmajisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra sindUra
jaisA lAla ho| (ya) varga-samAna do saMkhyAoM kA Apasa meM guNA karane para
prApta rAzi  /  sajAtIya prakRtiyoM ke samudAya  /  avibhAgI praticchedoM kA
samUha  /  arganA-samAna jAtIya pudgaloM kA samUha  /  vacanayogajIva ke usa
vyApAra ko kahate haiM jo audArika, vaikriya yA AhAraka zarIra kI kriyA dvArA
saMcaya kiye hae bhASA dravya kI sahAyatA se ho.hai : adA mA garimA ko prApta
hue pudgala ko vacana kahate haiM aura usa sahakArI kAraNabhUta badhana ke dvArA
hone vAle yoga ko vacanayoga kahate haiM  /  athavA vacana ko vijaya karane vAle
yoga ko yA bhASAvargaNA sambandhI pudagala skandhoM ke avalaMbana se jo jIva
pradezoM meM saMkoca-vikoca hotA hai, use vacanayoga kahate haiN|
vazaSabhanArAbasaMhanana nAmakarmajisa kame ke udaya se haDDiyoM kI racanA
bizeSa meM vana-kIlI, RSabha-veSThana, paTTI aura nArAca-donoM ora markaTa
baMdha ho, arthAt donoM ora se makaMTa baMgha se baMdhI huI do haDDiyoM para
tIsarI haDDI kA beThana ho aura una tInoM haDDiyoM ko bhedane vAlI haDDI kI kolI
lagI huI ho  /  gargamAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se pArIra meM kRSNa gaura Adi
raMga hote haiM  /  varSamAna avavijJAna-apanI utpatti ke samaya alpa viSaya
bAlA hone para bhI _ pariNAma-vizuddhi ke sAtha uttarottara adhikAdhika viSaya
hone vAlA  /  janaspati kAya-jina jIvoM kA zarIra vanaspati maya hotA hai| bastu
- aneka prAmRtoM kA eka vastu adhikAra hotA hai  /  eka vastu aghi phAra ke
jJAna ko vastuthu ta kahate haiN| mastu samAsa zuta-do-cAra vastu adhikAroM kA
jJAna  /  bAmana saMsthAna mAmakarma jisa karma ke udaya se zarIra vAmana
(baunA) ho| mAyukASa-vAyu se banane vAlA vAyavIya zarIra  /

Page #544 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2  **Pickal** - The knowledge that is unable to know the totality of
the permutations of the gross material substances due to the incomplete
development of the direct consciousness power.  **Vitast** - A Vitast is two
Padas.  **Vimay** - Having the same understanding in Samyagdrishti and
Mithyadrishti, in the Guru and the scriptures spoken by them.  **Vipak** - The
power of the Karma-prakriti to give various types of fruits or the state of
being inclined to give fruits is called Vipak.  **Vipak-Phal** - The time when
the Karma-prakritis are inclined to give their fruits.  **Vipurotamithyatva** -
To consider the nature of Dharma etc. as opposite.  **Vipulmati** - To know the
permutations of the object of contemplation with various characteristics in
detail.  **Vibhanggyan** - The opposite knowledge of the gross substances
arising from the rise of Mithyatva is called Vibhanggyan.  **Virati** - To be
separate from the harmful actions like violence etc., i.e., to be separate from
the sinful efforts.  **Vishva Manak** - The Samayam that occurs at the time of
attaining the tenth Gunasthan for those who ascend the ten Gunasthanas by means
of Upashama or Kshapadarthani.  **Visheshad** - The bond that is said to be a
special bond due to a particular Gunasthan or a particular motion etc.
**Visanyojana** - The possibility of bondage remaining even after the
destruction of the nature.  **Bihamogapti Namkarma** - The Karma whose rise
makes the movement of the Jiva like that of an elephant, bull etc., auspicious
or like that of a camel, donkey etc., inauspicious.  **Biryansramkarma** - The
Karma whose effect makes the Jiva powerful and healthy but unable to perform
specific tasks, unable to use power and strength.  **Pev** - That by which the
pleasure caused by the senses and the conjunction is experienced. Or the desire
to consume honey is called Ved. Or the fascination of the Jiva's results caused
by the stimulation from the object of the Ved Mohaniya Karma, due to which there
is no discrimination between good and bad.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 pikala pratyakSa cetanA zakti ke apUrNa vikAsa ke kAraNa jo jJAna
bhUrta padArthoM kI samagra paryAyoM mAvoM ko jAnane meM asamartha ho| vitasti
do pAda kI eka vitasti hotI hai| vimaya mipAva- samyagrahaSTi aura mithyAdRSTi
daMba', guru aura unake kahe hue zAstroM meM samAna buddhi rkhnaa| vipAka-
karmaprakRti kI viSTi athavA vividha prakAra ke phala dene kI zakti ko aura
phala dena ke Abhamukha hone kA vipAka kahate haiN| vipAka-phAla - karma
prakRliyoM kA apane pAna dene ke abhimukha hone kA samaya  /  viparotamithyAtva
- dharmAdika ke svarUpa vo viparIta rUpa mAnanA  /  vipulamati
manaHparyAyajJAna-cintanIya vastu kI paryAyoM ko vividha vizeSatAoM sahita
raphuTatA se jaannaa| vibhaMgajJAnamithyAtva ke udaya se rUsI padArthoM ke
viparIta avadhijJAna ko vibhaMgajJAna kahate haiN| virati-hiMsAdi sAvadha
vyApAroM arthAt pApajanaka prayatnoM se alaga ho jAnA  /  vizva mAnaka
bhUmisaMparAga saMyama-upazamatheNi yA kSapadArtha Ni kA ArohaNa karane vAloM ko
dasaveM guNasthAna kI prApti ke samaya hone vAlA saMmama  /  vizeSAdha-kisI
khAsa guNasthAna yA kisI khAsa gati Adi ko lekara jo baMdha kahA jAtA hai use
vizeSabaMdha kahate haiM  /  /  visaMyojanA-prakRti ke kSaya hone para bhI punaH
baMdha kI sambhAvanA banI rhe| bihAmogapti nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva
kI cAla hAthI, baila Adi kI cAla ke samAna zubha yA U~Ta, gadhe kI cAla ke
samAna azubha hotI hai| bIryAnsarAmakarma-jisa karma ke lakSya se jIva zaktizAlI
aura niroga hote hue bhI kArya vizeSa meM parAkrama na kara sake, zakti
sAmarthya kA upayoga na kara ske| peva-jisake dvArA indriyajamya, saMyogajanya
sukha kA vedana kiyA jAye  /  athavA madhuna sevana karane kI abhilASA ko veda
kahate haiN| athavA veda mohanIyakama ke lakSya, udIraNA se hone vAlA jIva ke
pariNAmoM kA sammoha (caMcalatA) jisase guNa-doSa kA viveka nahIM rhtaa|

Page #545 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **Veva-Samyaktvakshayopaśamika Samyak-svam:** A living
being who is in the state of Samyaktvakshayopaśamika Samyak-svam experiences the
taste of the last pudgala that is capable of causing moha (delusion).  **Veva-
Sasudhala:** The agitation caused by the three types of vedana (pain, pleasure,
and neutral).  **Vaikriya Karma:** The karma that causes the living being to
experience worldly sensory pleasures and pains.  **Vaikriya Angopaanga
Namakarma:** The karma that causes the formation of limbs and organs from the
transformed pudgalas of the vaikriya body.  **Kriyakayayoga:** The activity of
the kriya body, which is the activity of the vital force. It is also known as
the effort that arises from the pulsation of the vaikriya body.  **Vaikriya
Gandham Namakarma:** The karma that causes the connection of the vaikriya body
pudgalas with the karman pudgalas.  **Paitriya-Masakarma-Bandhan Namakarma:**
The karma that causes the connection of the paitriya body pudgalas with the
tejas-karman pudgalas.  **Vaikriya-Nishbandhan Namakarma:** The karma that
causes the connection of the vaikriya body pudgalas with the tanjas pudgalas.
**Chakriya-Miśra-Kāya:** The incomplete body that exists between the beginning
of the formation of the vaikriya body and the completion of the body.
**Vaikriya-Miśra-Kāya-Yoga:** The activity of the vital force that occurs due to
the mixture of the vaikriya and karman bodies, and the vaikriya and audarika
bodies.  **Kriya-Vaikriya-Bandhan Namakarma:** The karma that causes the
connection of the previously acquired vaikriya body pudgalas with the newly
acquired vaikriya body pudgalas.  **Vaikriya Vargana:** The categories of
pudgalas that form the vaikriya body.  **Vaikriya Sharira:** The body that has
the power to create various forms, both small and large, and is formed from the
vaikriya body categories.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabda-koSa vevaka samyaktva-kSAyopazamika samyaksva meM vidyamAna
jIva samyanatva mohanIya ke antima pudgala ke rasa kA anubhava karatA hai usa
samaya ke usake pariNAma  /  vevanA sasudhAla-tIna vedanA ke kAraNa hone vAlA
samudghAta  /  vanIya karma-jisake udaya se jIva ko sAMsArika indriyajanya
sukha-duHkha kA _anumatra ho| vaikiya aMgopAMga nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se
vaikriya zarIra rUpa pariNata pudgaloM se aMgopAMga rUpa avayava nirmita hote
haiN| *kriyakAyayoga-kriya zarIra ke dvArA hone vAle vIrya-zakti ke vyApAra ko
vaikriya kApayoga kahate haiM  /  athavA vaikriya zarIra ke avalambana se
utpanna hue parispanda dvArA jo prayatna hotA hai, use baiMkriyakAyayoga kahA
jAtA hai| vaikriyakA gabaMdhama nAmakarma-jisa karma ke sadama se baiMkriya
zarIra pudgaloM kA kArmaNa pugaloM ke sAtha sambandha ho|
*phiyatamasakArmaNabaMdhana mAmakarma:- jisa karma ke udaya se paitriya zarIra
pudgaloM kA tejasa-kArmaNa pudagaloM ke sAtha sambandha ho| vaikriyanisabaMdhana
nAmakarmajisa karma ke udaya se vaikriya zArIra pudagaloM kA taMjasa pudagaloM
ke sAtha sambandha ho  /  cakiyamiya kAya- vaikriya zarIra kI utpatti prArambha
hone ke prathama samaya se lagAkara zarIra paryApti pUrNa hone taka antarmuhUrta
ke madhyavartI apUrNa zarIra ko baiMkriyamizra kAya kahate haiM  /
baiMkriyamibha kAyayoga - vaikriya aura kArmaNa tathA vakriya aura audArika ina
do gho zarIroM ke miznarava ke dvArA hone vAlA vIrya-zakti kA vyApAra  /
kriyarvaniyabaMdhana nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se pUrvagRhIta vaikriya
zarIra pudgaloM ke sAtha gRhamANa vaikriya zarIra pudagaloM kA Apasa meM mela
hotA hai| paMkriya vargaNA-ve vargaNAe~ jinase vaikrima zarIra banatA hai|
paMkriya zarIra-jisa zarIra ke dvArA choTe-bar3e, eka-aneka, vividha vicitra
rUpa banAne kI zakti prApta ho tathA jo zarIra vaikriya zarIra vargaNAoM se
niSpanna ho  /

Page #546 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 2 **Body Karma** - The karma whose fruition results in the attainment
of the physical body, the subtle body, etc. or the attainment of the gross body,
etc. **Excellent Classification of the Physical Body** - The excellent
classification of the physical body is that which is capable of receiving an
infinite number of more subtle bodies than the inferior classification of the
physical body. **Inferior Classification of the Physical Body** - The inferior
classification of the physical body is that which is capable of receiving one
more atom than the superior classification of the gross body. ... 57 7-1
**Vairagya-Samghasana Karma** - The karma whose fruition results in the mutual
proximity of the subtle body-like particles. **Vairagya-Samudghata** - The
samudghata that occurs due to the subtle body. **Vainyaiki Buddhi** - The wisdom
that is obtained through the service of gurus, etc. **Jamb** - The knowledge of
the substance or that by which the substance is killed. **Vyanjanara** - That
which makes the meaning of the letters like "a" etc. clear. Or, the
pronunciation of the letters is called Vyanjanakshara. **Vyanjanavagraha** - The
extremely subtle knowledge that occurs before the knowledge of the meaning.
**Vyavahar Paramanu** - One Vyavahar Paramanu is made up of infinite Niscaya
Paramanus. **Vyavahar** - To abandon the bad guru, bad god, and bad path and
accept the good guru, good god, and good path, and to have faith in them.
**Samyukta** - To abstain from sins like hatred, etc. is called Vrat.
**Anuvrat** - To observe the Anuvrats or Mahavrats is called Vratyuktata. (Sh)
**Body Karma** - The karma whose fruition results in the attainment of the
physical body, the subtle body, etc. or the attainment of the gross body, etc.
**Body Sufficiency** - The completeness of the living being's power to transform
the food that has been changed into the form of blood, etc. into the form of the
seven dhatus. **Shalaka-Paly** - The being who is killed by one mustard seed is
called Shalaka-Paly.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 2 zarIra nAmakarma jisa ke sevako prApta ho ! kriyazarIrayogya
utkRSTa vargaNA - kriyazarIra ke grahaNayogya jaghanya vargaNA se usake ananta
mAga adhika skandhoM kI vaikriyazarIrayogya utkRSTa NA hotI hai  /  zarIrayogya
jaghanya vargaNA odhArika zarIra ke agrahaNayogya utkRSTa vargaNA ke skandhoM se
eka adhika paramANu vAle skandhoM ko samUha rUpa varguNA  /  ... 57 7-1
vaikriyasaMghAsana nAmakarma jisa karma ke udaya se vaikriya zarIra rUpa
paripata pudgaloM kA parasparasAnnidhya ho  /  vaikiyasamudghAta - vaikriya
zarIra ke nimitta se hone vAlA samupAta | vainayikI buddhi gurujanoM Adi kI sevA
se prApta hone vAlI buddhi  /  jama padArtha ke jJAna ko athavA jisake dvArA
padArtha kA vadha kiyA jAtA hai  /  vyaMjanAra - jisase akAra Adi akSaroM ke
artha kA spaSTa bodha ho  /  athavA akSaroM ke uccAraNa ko vyaMjanAkSara kahate
haiM  /  vyaMjanAvagraha - abhyakta jJAna rUpa arthAvagraha se pahale hone vAlA
atyanta avyakta Ana  /  vyabahAra paramANu ananta nizcaya paramANuoM kA eka
vyavahAra paramANu hotA hai  /  vyavahAra sabhyapasva kuguru, phudeva aura
kumArga ko tyAga kara suguru, sudeva aura sumArga ko svIkAra karanA, unakI
zraddhA karanA  /  saMyuktA-hiyAdi pApoM se virata honA vrasa hai| aNuvratoM yA
mahAvratoM ke pAlana karane ko vratayuktatA kahate haiM  /  ( za ) zarIra
nAmakarma - jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ke auhArika, vaikriya Adi zarIra ar
athavA audArika Adi zarIroM kI prApti ho  /  zarIra paryApti-sa ke rUpa meM
badala diye gaye AhAra ko rakta Adi sAva dhAtuoM ke rUpa meM pariNamane kI jIva
kI zakti kI pUrNatA  /  zalAkApalya- jisa patya ko eka-eka sAkSIbhUta sarasoM ke
dAne se marA jAtA hai, use zalAkApatya kahate haiM  /  -

Page #547 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **Shiitasparsha Namakarma:** A karma whose fruition makes
the body of the living being cold like ice.  **Shirshaprahelika:** One of the
eighty-four types of prahelika, a type of riddle.  **Jogadalka:** A type of
nose, a specific type of shikang (body part).  **Shuklaleshya:** Relating to the
white-colored leshya jati pugals, similar to the color of a conch shell.
**Vitaraga:** The state of being free from passions, leading to the attainment
of liberation.  **Shubha Namakarma:** A karma whose fruition makes the body of
the living being auspicious, above the level of name.  **Shubhavihayogati
Namakarma:** A karma whose fruition makes the living being move like an elephant
or a bull.  **Vitatjnan:** Knowledge that is based on scripture, where the
relationship between words and meaning is established. It occurs after matijnan
and involves understanding words and meaning through the senses and mind,
following the principles of paryasochana.  **Atajnan:** Ignorance that arises
from mithyatva (false belief).  **Atajnamavarga karma:** Karma that covers up
vitatjnan.  **Bhonhi:** A row of seven raju (units of measurement) in the sky.
**Yogigat Sasavanasamyashti:** A living being who falls from the upadamanagati
and attains the sasadan gunasthan (stage of spiritual development).  **Shaileshi
Avस्था:** The state of complete stillness and equanimity, like Mount Meru,
representing the state of yoga-nirodha (cessation of mental activity).
**Shaileshikarana:** The process of eliminating the countless multiplications of
the three karmas - vedaniya, name, and gotra - and the remaining ayukarma (life-
span karma).  **Shokamohaniya:** A karma whose fruition causes sorrow or grief,
with or without a reason.  **Lakshanamsakshinka:** One of the eight
utpalakshanasakshinka (types of subtle karmic particles).  **Swasochchvas:** The
process of inhaling air from outside the body through the nose and exhaling air
from inside the body.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabda-koSa zItasparza nAmakarma -jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA
zarIra barpha jaisA ThaMDA ho  /  zIrSaprahelikA-caurAsI khAsa
pIrSaprahelikAMganI eka zIrSaprahelikA hotI hai| jogadelakA rAsa nAka, kA eka
zikAMga kahalAtA hai  /  zuklalezyA-zaMkha ke samAna zvetavarNa ke lezyA jAtIya
pugaloM ke sambandha se AtmA ke aise pariNAmI kA honA ki jinase kaSAya upazAnta
rahatI hai, vItarAga-nAba sampAdana karane kI anukUlatA A jAtI hai| zubha
nAmakarma-jisa karma ke upaya se jIva ke zarIra meM nAmi se Upara ke aba yava
zubha ho| zubhavihAyogati nAmakarmajisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko cAla hAthI,
baila kI cAla kI taraha zuma ho| va tajJAna- jo jJAna zratAnusArI hai jisameM
zabda aura argha kA sambandha mAsita hotA hai, jo matijJAna ke bAda hotA hai
tathA zabda aura artha ko paryAsocanA ke anusaraNapUrvaka indriya va mana ke
nigita se hone vAlA hai| use a tajJAna kahate haiN| ataajJAma-mithyAtva ke udaya
se sahacarita anajAna  /  va tamAnAvaragapharma- tajJAna kA AvaraNa karane vAlA
karma  /  bhoNi-sAta rAjU laMbI AkAza ke eka-eka pradeza kI paMkti  /  yogigata
sAsAvanasamyaSTi -vaha jIva jo upadAmanagi se girakara sAsAdana guNasthAna ko
prApta hotA hai  /  zailezI avasthA--meru parvata ke samAna nizcala athavA sarva
saMvara rUpa yoga nirodha kI avasthA  /  zailezIkaraNa... vedanIya, nAma aura
gotra ina tIna karmoM kI asaMkhyAta guNaNi se aura Ayukarma kI yathAsthiti se
nirjarA karanA  /  zokamohanIya-jisa karma ke udaya se kAraNavaza yA binA kAraNa
hI moka hotA hai| lakSaNamsakSiNakAATha utpalakSNaztakSiNakA kI eka
zlakSNazlakSiNakA hotI hai  /  svAsocavAsa-zarIra se bAhara kI vAyu ko nAka ke
dvArA andara khIMcanA aura andara kI havA ko bAhara nikAlanA zvAsocchvAsa
kahalAtA hai|

Page #548 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix-2  **Breath Cycle:** The time taken by a healthy, carefree, young
man to inhale and exhale once.  **Breath Fulfillment:** The complete ability of
the soul to absorb breath-worthy subtle matter, transform it into the form of
breath, extract its essence, and release it back.  **Vargana:** The breath-
worthy excellent Vargana is the infinite number of regions of the breath-worthy
inferior Vargana, with each region increasing from the inferior Vargana to the
superior Vargana.  **Breath-worthy:** The Vargana of the breath-worthy inferior
Vargana is one region more than the Vargana of the breath-worthy excellent
Vargana.  **(c)**  **Subtle Restraint:** The restraint that occurs when a soul
falling from the Upashmani attains the tenth Gunasthan.  **Transition:** The
change of a Karma in its form, nature, state, section, and region into a similar
Karma form, or the attainment of a different similar Karma nature by Karma due
to special potency.  **Number:** The counting of differences is called number.
**Number Anuyogadwar:** The Anuyogadwar in which the number of souls with the
desired Dharma is discussed.  **Numbered Vision:** The number of regions of the
self-illuminated souls is the Numbered Vargana.  **Condemnation of the Sangha:**
To condemn the Sangha, which is the form of the assembly of monks, nuns, lay
followers, and lay women.  **Sanghata Karma:** The Karma whose arising causes
the newly absorbed body-worthy subtle matter to be established in a systematic
way on the previously absorbed body-worthy subtle matter.  **Sanghata:** One
region of any one of the fourteen Marganas, such as motion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 zvAsocchvAsa kAla -- rogarahita nizcinta taruNa puruSa ke eka bAra
zvAsa lene aura tyAgane kA kAla  /  zvAsocchvAsa paryApti-davAsocchvAsayogya
pudgaloM ko grahaNa kara zvAsocchuvAsarUpa pariNata karake unakA sAra grahaNa
karake unheM vApasa chor3ane kI jIva kI zakti ko pUrNatA  /  vargeNA ke
zvAsocchvAsayogya utkRSTa vargaNA zvAsocchvAsayogya jaghanya Upara eka-eka
pradeza bar3hate-bar3hate jaghanya vargaNA ke skandha ke pradezoM ke ananta mAga
adhika pradeza vAle skandhoM kI zvAsocchvAsayogya utkRSTa gaMNA hotI hai |
zvAsocchvAsayogya kasya 5.6 gAbhAvAda kI utkRSTa agrahaNayogya vargaNA ke
skandhoM se eka pradeza adhika skandhoM kI vargaNA vAsocchvAsayogya jaghanya
vargaNA hotI hai  /  ( sa ) saMklizyAma sUkSma parAya saMyama - upazamaNi se
girane vAle jIvoM ke dasaveM guNasthAna kI prApti ke rAmaya hone vAlA saMyama  /
saMkramaNa - eka karma rUpa meM sthita prakRti, sthiti, anubhAga aura pradeza kA
abhya sajAtIya karma rUpa meM badala jAnA athavA vIryavizeSa se karma kA apanI
hI dUsarI sajAtIya karma prakRti svarUpa ko prApta kara lenA  /  saMkhyA -
bhedoM kI gaNanA ko saMkhyA kahA jAtA hai  /  saMkhya anuyogadvAra jisa anuyoga
dvAra meM vivakSita dharma vAle jIvoM kI saMkhyA kA vivecana ho  /
saMkhyAtAdarzaNA - saMkhyAta pradezI svAndhoM kI saMkhyAtANuvargaNA hotI hai  /
saMghaniyA sAdhu sAdhvI, dhAvaka zrAvikA rUpa saMgha kI nindA gardA karane ko
saMghanindA kahate haiM  /  saMghAta nAmakarma - jisa karma ke udaya se prathama
grahaNa kiye hue zarIra pudgaloM para navIna grahaNa kiye jA rahe zarorayogya
mudgala vyavasthita rUpa se sthApita kiye jAte haiM  /  saMghAta ta - gati Adi
caudaha mArgaNAoM meM se kisI eka mAgaMgA kA ekadeza jJAna  /

Page #549 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **60**  **Samasat** - The collection of many components
of a single body in a group.  **Sanjval Kashay** - The kashay whose arising
prevents the soul from attaining the four virtues (charitra) as described, and
which hinders the practice of the all-encompassing (sarvavirati) charitra.
**Sanjna** - The term used to describe the destruction or cessation of the karma
of the nine sense organs (noindriyaravan karma), or the knowledge arising from
it, or the term used to describe desire.  **Sanjnakshar** - The shape, form, and
structure of a letter, by which it is recognized as a particular letter.
**Sanshitva** - The presence of a specific mental power, a long-lasting sanjna.
**Sanshi** - A being who, with wisdom, acts or refrains from acting in
accordance with what is beneficial or harmful. Alternatively, a being who
possesses the sanjna of right knowledge (samyagjnana) is called a sanshi. Those
beings who have obtained or are using the mind in the form of labbhi or upayoga
are called sanshi.  **Sangit** - The assembly of sanshi beings.  **Sanbhav
Satya** - The belief that a particular karma-nature, even though it does not
exist at a particular time, has the potential to exist in the future.
**Sanayam** - To be free from the tendencies that lead to sin (paapjanak
pravritti), or the means by which the soul is controlled and regulated by
refraining from sinful actions (paapjanak vyapar) and their initiation (aarambh,
samarambh). Alternatively, the practice of the five great vows (mahavrat) in the
form of yamas, or the control of the five senses, is called sanayam.  **Sanbar**
- The cessation of asrava is called sanbar.  **Sanvasanमति** - To have only
affection for one's relatives, even when they are involved in sinful actions
(paapkarma).  **Sanvedh** - To meet mutually at the same time without conflict.
**Sansthan Namakarma** - The karma whose arising creates the mixed, auspicious,
or inauspicious forms of the body.  **Sansari** - Beings who, with their
respective material bodies (dravya pran) and mental bodies (jnanaadi bhav pran),
wander through the world (samsar) in the form of the four destinies (narka,
etc.).  **Sanhanan Namakarma** - The karma whose arising causes the bones to
join together, i.e., creates a specific structure.  **Sanshayik Miyatva** - The
state of being uncertain about whether something is appropriate or
inappropriate, i.e., being unsure about the nature of an object.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 60 saMghAta samAsata kisI eka mArgaNA ke aneka avayavoM kA zAna  /  saMjvala
kacAya - jisa kaSAya ke udaya se AtmA ko yathAkhyAta cAritra kI Auco pAribhASika
koma prApti na ho tathA sarvavirati cAritra ke pAlana meM bAbA ho  /  saMjJA -
noindriyAvaraNa karma ke kSayopazama yA tajjanya jJAna ko athavA abhilASA kI
saMjJA kahate hai  /  saMjJAkSara-akSara kI AkRti, banAvaTa, saMsthAna Adi
jisake dvArA yaha jAnA jAye ki yaha amuka akSara hai  /  saMzitva - - viziSTa
manazakti, dIrghakAlikI saMjJA kA honA  /  saMzI buddhipUrvaka iSTa-aniSTa meM
pravRtti nivRtti karane vAle jIva | athavA samyagjJAna rUpI saMjJA jinako ho,
unheM saMjJI kahate haiN| jinake labdhi yA upayoga rUpa mana pAyA jAye una jIvoM
ko saMzI kahate haiM  /  saMgIta - saMjJI jIvoM kA ala  /  saMbhava sattA - kisI
karma prakRti kI amuka samaya meM sattA na hone para bhI bhaviSya meM sattA kI
saMbhAvanA mAnanA  /  saMyama - sAvarA yogoM pApajanaka pravRttiyoM se uparata
ho jAnA athavA pApajanaka vyApAra- Arambha samArambha se AtmA ko jisake dvArA
saMyamita niyamita kiyA jAtA hai use saMyama kahate haiM athavA pA~ca mahAtratoM
rUpa yamoM ke pAlana karane yA pA~ca indriyoM ke jaya ko saMgrama kahate haiM  /
saMbara - Asrava kA niroSa aMbara kahalAtA hai  /  - saMvAsAnumati - putra Adi
apane sambandhiyoM ke pApakarma meM pravRtta hone para bhI una para sirpha
mamatA rakhanA  /  saMvedha - paraspara eka samaya meM avirodha rUpa se milanA
/  saMsthAna nAmakarma - jisa karma ke udaya se zarIra ke mizra mizra zubha yA
azubha AkAra baneM  /  saMsArI bhISajo apane yathAyogya dravyaprANoM aura
jJAnAdi bhAvaprANoM se yukta hokara narakAdi caturgati rUpa saMsAra meM
paribhramaNa karate haiM  /  saMhanana nAmakarma jisa karma ke udaya se hAr3oM
kA Apasa meM jur3a jAnA arthAt racanA vizeSa hotI hai  /  sAMzayika miyAtva-
samIcIna aura asamIcIna donoM prakAra ke padArthoM meM se

Page #550 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2  **Non-determination of any one.** Or, **Mithyatva** arising from
doubt. Or, remaining doubtful about **Deva-Guru-Dharma**. **Shouch** that knows
all objects, including their changing forms, simultaneously. **Satta Bandha
Ramaya Sa Sankraman** - From the time of transition until the time when those
warm atoms are destroyed by another tendency or until they are not destroyed,
their attachment to the soul. **Karma's state** that obtains its own form
through **Bampadi**. **Satta Sthan** - The community of those natures whose
existence is found together. **Satya Manoyog** - The manoyog by which the true
nature of an object is considered. Or, **Sadbhaav** - The mind that is subject
to **Bhagachin Padadhi** is called **Satya Man** and the yoga that makes it
happen is called **Satya Manoyog**. **Satya Mrusha Manoyog** - Manoyog mixed
with truth and falsehood (asatya). **Satya Mrusha Vachan Yog** - Vachan Yog
mixed with truth and falsehood. **Satya Vachan Yog** - The Vachan Yog by which
the true nature of the word is considered. **Satya Vachan** - The yoga that
happens due to the cause of **Mangana**. **Sadanu Yog Dwar** - The desired
Dharma is explained in **Mangana** that which Dharma is in **Mangana** and which
is not. **Sadbhaav Satta** - The karma whose existence is from its own nature.
**Saparyavasit At** - Endless Shruta. **Sama Chaturasra** - When sitting with
legs crossed, the four corners of the body are equal, i.e., the distance between
the chin and the crown, the distance between both knees, the distance between
the right and left knees, the distance between the right shoulder and the right
knee are equal. **Samunnatra Sansthan Naama Karma** - The karma due to which the
**Samuktastra Sansthan** is obtained. Or, according to **Samudrik Shastra**, the
body whose entire **atra** is equal. **Samay** - The extremely subtle,
indivisible part of time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 kisI bhI eka kA nizcaya na honA  /  athavA saMzaya se utpanna hone
vAlA mithyAtva  /  athavA-deva-guru-dharma ke viSaya meM sadehazIla bane rahanA
/  sakalapratyakSa- sampUrNa padArthoM ko unakI vikAlavatI paryAyoM sahita
yugapata jAnane vAlA zauca  /  sattA baMdha rAmaya sA saMkramaNa samaya se
lekara jaba taka una vArma paramANuoM kA anya pravRti rUpa se makA hotA yA usI
dina nahI hasIna taka unakA AtmA se lage rahanA  /  baMpAdi ke dvArA sva-svarUpa
ko prApta karane vAle karmoM kI sthiti  /  sattAsthAnajina prakRtiyoM kI sattA
eka sAtha pAI jAge unakA samudAya  /  satya manoyoga-jisa manoyoga ke dvArA
vastu ke yathArtha svarUpa kA vicAra kiyA jAtA hai  /  athavA sadbhAva arthAt
bhagAcIna padAdhI ko viSaya karane vAle mana ko satyamana aura usake dAga hone
vAle yoga ko satya manoyoga kahate haiN| satyamRSA manoyoga * satya aura pRSA (
asanya) se mizrita manoyoga  /  satyamRSA cacanayoga-rAtya aura bhUpA se mizrita
bacanayoga  /  satya yananayoga . jisa bacAnayoga ke dvArA dalnu ke yathArtha
svarUpa kA kaNava tiyA jAtA hai  /  satya vacana magaMNA ke nimitta se hone vAlA
yoga  /  sadanuyogadvAra- vivakSita dharma kA mArgaNAo meM batalAyA jAnA ki kiga
mArgaNAoM meM vaha dharma hai aura vina mArgaNAoM meM nahIM hai| sadbhAva
sattAjisa karma kI sattA apane svarUpa se ho| saparyavasita ata antahIna zruta
/  samacaturasra- gAlathI mArakara baiThane para jisa zarIra ke cAroM koga
mabhAna hoM, yAnI AmA aura kapAla kA antara, donoM ghuTanoM kA antara, dAhine kA
aura bAyeM jAnu kA antara, mAyaM kaMdhe aura dAhine jAnU gA antara mamAna ho|
samunnataratra saMsthAna nAmakarma- jisa karma ke jadaya se samuktastra
saMsthAna kI pAdita ho athavA sAmudrika zAstra ke anusAra jisa zarIra ke
sampUrNa atra vyaya zuma hoN| samaya-kAla kA atyanta sUkSma avibhAgI aMza  /

Page #551 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms  **Samas-Adhik:** A collection or aggregate.
**Samudghat:** A defect in the physical body; the expulsion of impurities from
the body.  **Sayogikevali:** A being who has destroyed the four karmas (actions)
and attained omniscience and perfect knowledge. They do not rely on senses or
external factors for knowing and seeing the nature of reality. They are united
with their own inherent power, energy, enthusiasm, and strength (yoga).
**Sayogikevali Gunasthan:** The specific nature of a Sayogikevali.
**Sayogikevali Yathakyatsanyam:** The Yathakyatsanyam (perfect restraint) of a
Sayogikevali.  **Samyak:** The right faith of a Samyagdristi (one who has right
vision).  **Samprapram:** The acceptance of the six principles, five astikayas
(categories of existence), and nine tattvas (elements) as taught by the Jina
(Tirthankara). It is the acceptance of these truths with complete faith and
understanding.  **Samman:** The result of the soul's actions that are not
opposed to liberation (moksha).  **Samyaktva-Mohaniya:** A karma that, while
arising from the desire for worldly pleasures, also hinders the attainment of
right faith (samyaktva) by causing delusion or obscuration.  **Samyaktva-
Mohaniya:** The pure karmas of delusion that are unable to destroy right faith
(samyaktva).  **Savipaak Nirjara:** The gradual elimination of karmas through
the experience of their ripening (paak) and the subsequent release from their
effects.  **Sagaropama:** A metaphor used to describe the vastness of something,
like the ocean.  **Saat Gaurav:** Pride in one's physical health, beauty, etc.
**Saatdevniya Karma:** A karma that causes the soul to experience pleasure
through the senses and their objects.  **Saativaar Chekopaasthaapniya Sanyam:**
A restraint that is re-adopted after being temporarily abandoned due to some
reason, such as a weakening of the inherent qualities (mahayatas).  **Sadi-
Anant:** Something that is infinite, even though it has a beginning.
**Savibandh:** A bond that stops and then starts again.  **Sadishrut:**
Knowledge that has a beginning (aaram, shuruwat).  **Sapisaant:** A bond or an
arising that stops in the middle, starts again, and then ceases completely over
time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAribhASika zabda-koSa samAsa-adhika, samudAya yA saMgraha  /  samudghAta-
bhUla zarIra meM koI bigA hai: AmA pradaMgoM kA bAhara niklnaa| sayogikevalI-ve
jIva jinhoMne cAra zatikarmoM kA kSaya karake kevalajJAna aura darzana prApta
kara liyA hai jo padArtha ke jAnane dekhane meM indriya alopha Adi kI apekSA
nahIM rakhate aura yoga (AtmavIrya zakti utsAha parAkrama) se sahita haiN|
sogikevalI guNasthAna-sayogiphevalI ke svarUpa vizeSa ko kahate haiM  /
sayogikevalI yayAkhyAtasaMyama -sayogiphevalI kA yathAkhyAtasaMyama  /  samyak
ata samyagdRSTi jIvoM kA zrata | sampaparama-chaha tathya, paMca astikAya, nava
tatvoM kA jinendra deva ne jamA kathana kiyA hai, usI prakAra se unakA zradAna
karanA athavA tasvArtha zraddhAn  /  mokSa ke avirodhI AtmA ke pariNAma ko
sammAna kahate hai| samyaktvamohanIya-jisakA udaya tAnvika ruci kA nimitta
hokara bhI aupazAmika yA kSAyika mAva ghAlI tattva sani vA pratibaMdha karatA
hai| samyaktva kA ghAta karane meM asamartha mithyAtva ke zuddha dalikoM ko
samyaktya mohanIya kahate hai  /  savipAka nirNarA yathAkrama se paripAka kAla
ko prApta aura anubhava ke lie udayAvali ke rola meM praviSTa hue zumAzubha
karmoM kA phala dekara nivRtta honA  /  sAgaropama-dasa kor3Aphor3I palpopama kA
eka sAgaropama hotA hai| sAta gaurava-zarIra ke svAsthya, saundarya Adi kA
abhimAna karanA  /  sAtAdevanIya karma-jisa karma ke udaya se AtmA ko indriya-
viSaya sambandhI sukha kA anubhava ho| sAtivAra chekopasthApanIya saMyama-jo
kisI kAraNa se mUla guNoM-mahAyatoM ke maMga ho jAne para punaH grahaNa kiyA
jAtA hai  /  sAdi-ananta - jo Adi sahita hokara bhI ananta ho  /  sAvi
baMdhavaha baMdha jo rukakara punaH hone lagatA hai| sAdizruta-jisa zvata jJAna
kI Adi (mArambha zurUAta) ho  /  sApisAnta-jo baMdha yA udaya bIca meM rukakara
puna: prAramma hotA hai aura kAlAnsara meM punaH vyuschinna ho jAtA hai  /

Page #552 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 **Savisansthan Namkarma** - A karma whose arising causes the elements
above the name to be thin and the elements below the name to be thick.
**Sadharan Namkarma** - A karma whose arising causes an infinite number of
beings to have one body, i.e., infinite beings become the owners of one body.
**Sannipasik Bhav** - The feeling of two or more beings coming together.
**Santara Sthiti** - The state between the first and second states, where the
karma particles are absent. **Samayik** - The absence of attachment and aversion
is called equanimity, and the restraint through which equanimity is attained, or
knowledge, vision, and conduct are called equanimity, and the attainment of
their income and profit is called Samay, and the feeling of Samay or Samay is
called Samayik. **Sasanadan Samyaktva** - When a being, having departed from the
state of Upshama Samyaktva, is inclined towards Mithyatva, the particular result
of his state until he attains Mithyatva is called Sasanada Samyaktva.
**Sasanadan Samyagdristi** - A being who, having attained the state of
Aushamashik Samyagdristi, is inclined towards Mithyatva due to the arising of
infinite Anubandhi Kashayas, but has not yet attained Mithyatva, is called
Sasanadan Samyagdristi for that period. **Sasanadan Gunasthan** - Refers to the
specific nature of a Sasanadan Samyagdristi being. **Sisavarna Namkarma** - A
karma whose arising causes the being's body to be white like a conch shell.
**Sikh Pad** - Those scriptures whose every verse is well-established due to
following the meaning of Sarvajokta are called Sikh Pad; similarly, the Jivastan
and Gunasthan are called Siddha Pad. **Subha Namkarma** - A karma whose arising
causes the being to be loved by all, even without doing any favor or having any
relationship. **Surabhigandha Namkarma** - A karma whose arising causes the
being's body to have a fragrance like camphor, musk, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 sAvisaMsthAna nAmakarma-jisa pArma ke udaya se nAmi se Upara ke
avayava hIna patale aura nAmi se nIce ke avayava pUrNa moTe hoN| sAdhAraNa
nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se ananta jIvo kA eka zarIra ho arthAt ananta jIva
eka zarIra ke svAmI baneM  /  sAnnipAsika bhAva-do yA do se adhika mile ie bhAva
/  sAntara sthiti-prathama aura dvitIya sthiti ke bIca meM karma dalikoM se
zUnya apasthA  /  sAmAyika-rAgadveSa ke abhAva ko sama bhAva kahate haiM aura
jisa saMyama se samabhAva kI prApti ho athavA jJAna-darzana-cAritra ko sama
kahate haiM aura unakI Aya-lAbha prApti hone ko samAya tathA samAya ke bhAva ko
athavA samAya ko sAmAyika kahA jAtA hai| sAsAdana samyaktva-upazama samyaktva se
vyuta hokara, mithyAtva ke abhimukha huA jIva jaba taka mithyAtva ko prApta
nahIM karatA hai, taba taka ke usake pariNAma vizeSa ko sAMsAdA sAyaratva kahate
haiN| sAsAdana samyagdRSTi-jo auSazAmika samyaSTi jIva anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya ke
udaya se samyavasva se nyuta hokara mithyAtva kI ora abhimukha ho rahA hai,
kintu abhI mithyAtya ko prApta nahIM huA, utane samaya ke lie vaha jIva rAgAdana
samyagdRSTi kahalAtA hai  /  sAsAdana guNasthAna- sAsAdana samyagdRSTi jIva ke
svarUpa vizeSa ko kahate haiN| sisavarNa nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva
kA zarIra zaMkha jaisA sapheda ho  /  sikha pada-jina granthoM ke saba pada
sarvajokta artha kA anusaraNa karane bAle hone se supratiSThita hai una granthoM
ko; athathA jIvasthAna guNasthAnoM ko siddha pada kahate haiN| subhA nAmakarma -
jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kisI prakAra kA upakAra na karane para bhI aura kisI
prakAra kA sambandha na hone para bhI sabhI ko priya lagatA ho| surabhigaMdha
nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ke zArIra meM kapUra, kastUrI Adi padArtho
jaisI sugandha ho  /

Page #553 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 64: Glossary of Technical Terms  **Susvara Namakarma:** The karma
that causes the voice of a living being to sound pleasing to the listener.
**Sookshma Namakarma:** The karma that results in the attainment of a subtle
body free from mutual obstruction. This body neither obstructs nor is obstructed
by anything else.  **Sookshma Adhapalyaopam:** The time taken to empty a vessel
by removing one strand of hair every hundred years, from a vessel filled with
strands of hair as subtle as the subtle liberation vessel.  **Sookshma
Adhasagaropama:** One Sookshma Adhasagaropama is equal to ten koți koți Sookshma
Adhapalyaopamas.  **Sookshma Uddhar Palyaopam:** The time taken to empty a
vessel filled with strands of hair as subtle as the subtle liberation vessel, by
removing one strand of hair every moment, with the vessel being filled with
courage by countless strands of hair, which are infinitely subtle compared to
the substance and space of the vessel.  **Sookshma Uddhar Sagaropama:** One
Sookshma Uddhar Sagaropama is equal to ten koți koți Sookshma Uddhar
Palyaopamas.  **Lakshma Kala Pudgala Paravarta:** The time taken by a living
being to traverse the periods of ascending and descending time through its
death.  **Sookshma Kriya Nivriti Shukla Dhyana:** The state of meditation where,
through the power of omniscience, all other yogas are stopped by the infinite
subtle body yoga, in the process of yoga restraint.  **Sookshma Kshetra
Palyaopam:** Imagine a vessel filled tightly with countless fragments of the
subtle liberation vessel, each fragment being a part of the subtle liberation
vessel. The time taken to remove one fragment of space from the vessel every
moment, until all the fragments of space, both touched and untouched, are
removed, is called one Sookshma Kshetra Palyaopam.  **Sookshma Kshetra Pudgala
Paravarta:** A living being, while wandering in the world, encounters...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 64 pAribhASika zabda koSa -jisa ke udaya se jIva kA svara zrotA ko priya lagatA
susvara nAmakarmahai  /  sUkSma nAmakarma - jisa krama ke udaya se paraspara
vyAghAta se rahita sUkSma zarIra kI prApti ho| yaha zarIra svayaM na kisI se
rukatA hai aura na anya kisI ko rokatA hai  /  sUkSma aApasyopama - sUkSma
uddhAra patya meM se sau-sau varSa ke bAda kezAya kA eka-eka khaMDa nikAlane
para jitane samaya meM vaha pazya khAlI ho jAtA hai utane samaya ko sUkSma
aApalyopama kahate haiM  /  sUkSma asA sAgaropama - dasa koTA koTI sUkSma
addhApalyopama kA eka sUkSma addhAsAgaropama kahalAtA hai| sUkSma uddhAra
pasyoSama dravya, kSetra kI apekSA asaMkhyAtaguNI sUkSma avagAhanA vAle kezAya
khaMDoM se palya ko sAhasa bharakara prati samaya una kezA khaMDoM meM se eka-
eka khaMDa ko nikAlane para jitane samaya meM vaha patya khAlI ho, usane samaya
ko sUkSma uddhAra galyoga kahate hai  /  sUkSma uddhAra sAgaropama-dasa koTAkoTI
sUkSma uddhAra palyopama kA eka sUkSma uddhAra sAgaroSama hotA hai  /
lakSmakAla pudgala parAvarta - jitane samaya meM eka jIva apane maraNa ke dvArA
utsarpiNI aura avasarpiNI kAla ke samayoM ko krama ro ga kara letA hai  /
sUkSmakriyA nivRti zuSaladhyAna- jirA zukladhyAna meM sarveja magatrAna dvArA
yoga nirodha ke krama meM ananta: sUkSma kAyayoga ke Azraya se anya yogoM ko
roka diyA jAtA hai  /  sUkSma kSetra patyopatra bAdara kSetra palya ke bAlAoM
meM se pratyeka ke asaMkhyAta khaMDa karake pazya ko ThasAThasa bhara do| ve
khaMDa usa palya meM AkAza ke jitane pradezoM ko sparza kareM aura jina pradezoM
ko sparza na kareM, unase prati samaya eka-eka pradeza kA avaharaNa karate-
karate jitane samaya meM spRSTa aura aspRSTa sabhI pradezoM kA avaharaNa kiyA
jAtA hai, utane samaya ko eka sUkSma kSetra palyopabha kahate haiM  /  sUkSma
kSetra pugala parAvarta -- koI eka jIva saMsAra meM bhramaNa karate hue AkANa

Page #554 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2  When a being dies in one region and then dies again in another
region adjacent to it, and then dies again in a third region adjacent to the
second, and so on, dying in successive regions until it has died in all the
regions of the Lokakasha, the time taken for this is called **Sookshma Kshetra
Parayata**.   A **Sookshma Kshetra** is like an ocean, containing ten koți koți
**Sookshma Kshetras**. A **Suddha Kshetra** is like an ocean, containing ten
koți koți **Sookshma Kshetras**.  **Pragala Paravarta** is the time taken for
all the atoms to be absorbed and released by the seven categories of **Audarik**
(material) substances, one by one, like the Ganges River.  **Sookshma Bhava Yuga
Paravarta** is the time taken for a being to touch its past lives due to the
**Anumaga Bandha** (bond of karma) at the time of its death.  **Sookshma
Samparaya Gunasthan** is a state where the **Samparaya** (greed, a type of
**Kashaya**) is subtle and only its subtle fragments arise.  **Samparaya** is
the wandering in the world due to the **Kashaya** (passions) like anger, etc.
Therefore, they are called **Samparaya**.  **Samyama** is a state where the
**Samparaya** (arising of **Kashaya**) is subtle (very subtle).  **Sevarta
Sanhanan Karma** is a type of karma that causes the bones to be joined together
without any visible bond, tightening, or nailing.  **Stika Sankrama** is a type
of karma that transforms the **Dalikas** (particles) of the **Anudaya** (non-
arising) **Karma** into **Sthili** (stable) **Karma** of the same type and equal
**Sthili** (stability), and then enjoys them along with their **Dalikas**.
**Stoka** is the measure of time during the inhalation and exhalation of breath.
**Sthanini** is a type of karma that causes the ability to perform in a dream
what was thought about in the waking state. Or, it is a type of karma that
causes the manifestation of special strength in the dream state. Or, it is a
type of karma that causes the accumulation of desires related to wealth and
resources in the dream state.  **Stroveva** is a type of karma that causes the
desire to engage in sexual intercourse with a man.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 ke kisI eka pradeza meM maraNa karake puna: usa pradeza ke
samIpavartI dUsare . pradeza meM maraNa karatA hai, punaH usake nikaTavartI
tIsare pradeza meM maraNa karatA hai  /  isa prakAra agantara-anantara pradeza
meM maraNa karate hue jaba samasta lokAkAza ke pradezoM meM maraNa kara letA hai
taba utane samaya ko sUkSma kSetrapUgala parAyate kahate haiN| sammakSetra
sAgaropama-dasa koTAkoTI sUkSma kSetra galpopama kA eka sUdhamakSetra sAgaropama
hotA hai| sakSmAnya pragala parAvarta-jitane samaya meM samasta paramANaoM ko
audArika Adi sAto vargaNAo me se kisI eka gaMgA rUpa se brahaNa karake chor3a
detA hai| sUkSmabhAvayugala parAvartajitane samaya meM eka jItra apane maraNa ke
dvArA anumAga baMdha ke kAraNa bhUta baSIyasthAnoM ko kama se sparza kara letA
hai| sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAnajisameM saMparAya arthAt lobha kaSAya ke sUkSma
khaMDoM kA hI udaya ho| samma rAya saMyama- krodhAdi kaSAyoM dvArA saMsAra meM
paribhramaNa hotA hai ata:, unako saMparAya kahate hai| jisa saMyama meM
saMparAya (kaSAya kA udaya) sUkSma (atisvarUpa) rahatA hai| sevArtasaMhanana
nAmakarma-jisa pharma ke udaya se haDDiyoM kI racanA meM parkaTa baMdha,
gheThana aura kIlana na hokara do hI haDDiyAM Apasa meM jur3I hoN|
stikasaMkrama- anudayavartI pharma prakRtiyoM ke dalikoM ko sajAtIya aura tulya
sthilivAlI udayavartI kargaprakRtiyoM ke rUpa meM badalakara unake dalikoM ke
sAtha bhoga lenaa| stoka-sAsa zvAsocchavAsa kAla ke samaya pramANa ko stoka
kahate haiN| sthAnani-jisa karma ke udaya se jAgrasa avasthA meM soce hue kArya
ko nidrA vasthA meM karane kI mAmathyaM prakaTa ho jaae| athavA jisa nidrA ke
udaya se nidrita avasthA meM vizeSa bala pragaTa ho jAe  /  athavA jisa nidrA
meM dina meM cintita artha aura sAdhana viSayaka AkAMkSA kA ekatrIkaraNa ho jAye
/  stroveva-jisa karma ke udaya se puruSa ke sAtha ramaNa karane kI icchA ho  /

Page #555 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Monthly Glossary  **Syāvar Nāmakarma:** A karma whose arising causes the body
to remain stable, lacking the strength to protect itself from cold and heat.
**Sthitakalpī:** Those who are situated in these ten kalpas: Bāchelakya,
Auddeshika, Shayatarpiṇḍa, Rājapit, Kr̥tikarma, Nata, Jyeṣṭha, Pratikramāṇa,
Māsa, and Payuṣaṇa.  **Sthitāsthitakalpī:** Those who are situated in these four
kalpas: Shayatarpiṇḍa, Vrata, Jyeṣṭha, and Kr̥tikarma, and are not situated in
the remaining six kalpas.  **Sthiti:** The duration of time for which a
vivakṣita karma remains attached to the soul.  **Sthitighāta:** Reducing the
large sthiti of karmas through apvartaṇākaraṇa, i.e., removing the karmas that
are about to arise from their designated time of arising through
apvartaṇākaraṇa.  **Sthitibandha:** The time limit for which the karmic pudgalas
taken by the jīva do not abandon their syāmāva and remain with the jīva. The
specific results of the jīva that arise from the destruction of the nearby kṣaya
and cause sthitibandha are called sthitibandha adhyavasyaya.  **Sthitisthāna:**
The stages of sthiti, from the lowest state of a karma-prākṛti to the highest
state, increasing one by one.  **Sthira Nāmakarma:** A karma whose arising
causes the body parts of the jīva, such as teeth, bones, neck, etc., to remain
stable in their respective places.  **Snigdhasparśa Bhāmakarma:** A karma whose
arising causes the body of the jīva to become smooth like ghee.  **Sparaka:** A
group of vargaṇās is called a sparaka.  **Sparśa Nāmakarma:** A karma whose
arising causes the touch of the body to be rough, soft, smooth, dry, etc.
**Sparśanendriya Vyāñjāmāvagṛha:** The extremely subtle knowledge that arises
through the touch sense.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pArimASika zabda-koSa syAvara nAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se jIca sthira
rahe, sardI-gamI se bacane kA prayatna karane kI zakti na ho  /  sthitakalpo-jo
bAcelakya, auddezika, zayyAtara piMDa, rAjapiTa, kRtikarma, nata, jyeSTha,
pratikramaNa, mAsa aura payUSaNa ina dasa kalpoM meM sthita haiM  /
sthitAsthitakalpI-jo zayyAsarapiMDa, vrata, jyeSTha aura kRti karma ina cAra
kalpoM meM sthita tathA zeSa chaha kalpoM meM asthita haiN| sthiti-vivakSita
karma ke AtmA ke sAtha lage rahane kA kAla  /  sthitighAta-karmoM kI bar3I
sthiti ko apavartanAkaraNa dvArA ghaTA dene arthAt jo karma daliyaH Age udaya
meM Ane vAle haiM unheM apavartanAkaraNa ke dvArA apane udaya yo niyata samaya
se haTA denA sthitighAta hai  /  sthitibaMdha-jIva ke dvArA grahaNa kiye hue
karma pudgaloM meM amuka samaya taka apane-apane syamAva kA tyAga na kara jIva
ke sAtha rahane kI kAla maryAdA kA honA  /  ki akSara-pAsa ke kSaya se hone vAle
jIva ke jina pariNAma vizeSoM se sthitibaMdha hotA hai, una pariNAmoM ko
sthitibaMSa adhyavasAya kahate haiM  /  sthitisthAna-kisI karma prakRti kI
jaghanya sthiti se lekara eka-eka samaya banate-bar3hate utkRSTa sthiti paryanta
sthiti ke bheva  /  sthira nAmakarma-jisa pharma ke udaya se jIva ke dAMta,
guDDI, grIvA Adi zarIra ke avayava sthira hoM apane-apane sthAna para raheM  /
snigdhasparza bhAmakarma-jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra dhI ke samAna
cikanA ho| parvaka-vargaNAoM ke samUha ko sparaka kahate haiN| spardha
mAmakarma-jirA karma ke udaya se zarIra kA sparza karkaSA, mRdu, snigdha, rUkSa
Adi rUpa ho| sparzama anuyogadvAra - vivakSita dharma yAle jIvoM dvAga kiye jAne
vAle kSetra sparza kA samuccaya rUpa se nirdeza karanA  /  sparzanendriya
vyaMjamAvagraha-sparzanendriya ke dvArA hone vAlA atyanta adhyakta jJAna  /

Page #556 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I Appendix 2 67 (h) The measure of two hands is called a hand. **Haridravana
karma** - The karma whose fruition makes the body of the living being hollow
like turmeric. - **Hasya mohaniya** - The karma whose fruition causes laughter,
with or without reason. **Hiyaman avadhijnana** - The avadhijnana which, due to
the impurity of its results, becomes progressively less and less extensive in
its scope, from being very extensive at the time of its origin. **Indasansthana
karma** - The karma whose fruition makes all the limbs of the body deformed,
prone to **Huhu - eighty-four lakh huhu - one huhu is a limb - eighty-four lakh
is the number of limbs.** **Hetuvaayopaveshako sanjna** - The knowledge which is
useful for the sustenance of one's body, leading to inclination towards what is
beneficial and aversion to what is harmful, is called **Hetuvaadopaadeshiki
sanjna**. **Hetuvipaki** - The nature of the **vipak** - the experience of the
fruit - which arises from the **hetu** - the cause - in the form of **pudgala**
etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 I pariziSTa 2 67 (ha) hAtha-do ktisti ke mApa ko hAtha kahate haiM  /
hAridravarNa nAmakarma jisa karma ke udaya se jIva kA zarIra haldI jaisA polA ho
/  - hAsya mohanIya- - jisa karma ke udaya se kAraNavaza athavA binA kAraNa ke
haMsI AtI hai  /  hIyamAna avadhijJAna - apanI utpatti ke samaya adhika viSaya
vAlA hone para mI pariNAmoM kI azuddhi ke kAraNa dinoMdina kramaza: alpa,
balpatara, aspatama viSayaka hone vAlA avadhijJAna | iMDasaMsthAna nAmakarma --
jisa karma ke udaya se zarIra ke sabhI avayava beDaula hoM, praNayukta haha-
caurAsI lAkha huhu-aMga kA eka huhu hotA hai  /  -aMga - caurAsI lAkha abava kI
saMkhyA | hetuvAyopavezako saMjJA- apane zarIra ke pAlana ke lie iSTa meM
pravRtti aura aniSTa vastu se nivRtti ke lie upayogI sirpha vartamAnakAlika
jJAna jisase hotA hai, vaha hetuvAdopadezikI saMjJA hai  /  hetuvipAkI -
pudgalAdi rUpa hetu ke Azraya se jisa prakRti kA vipAka- phalAnubhava hotA hai
/

Page #557 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 3 Glossary of terms indicating Pindaprakriti found in the narratives
and explanations of Karma Granthas (a) Agurulughuchak Agurulughu name,
Upadhatanama Varaghatanam Ucchvasanam | Aghatichatuska— Vedaniya, Ayu, Nama,
Gotra Karma. Shruta-ajnan Vibhangashan (Avadhi-ajnan) Ajnanatrik - - Pratijnan,
Anantanubandhi Ektrinashat- (Anantanubandhi Kosh etc. 31 Prakritis)
Anantanubandhi Kosh, Man, Maya, Lobh Nyayosh Parimandal, Sadi, Vaman, Kubj
Sansthan; Rishmanarach Sanhanan, Rishabhanarach Narach, Ardhanarach, Kolika
Sanhanan: Shubh Vihayogati, Neelgotra, Strived, Durmag Nama, Dushbar Nama,
Anadesh Nama, Nidra-Nidra, Prachala-Prachala, Stmanaddhi, Rot Nama;
Tiryaanshvashati, Tichanupurvi Titrayuh Manushayay, Manushayagati,
Manusyanupurvi Shradarik Sharira, Audarik Angopang. 1 J Anantanubandhi
Chaturvishati  - (Anantanubandhi Kosh etc. 24 Prakritis) Anantanubandhi Krodh,
Man, Maya, Lobh Nyagrov Parimandal, Sadi Vaman Kubj Sansthan Rishmanarach,
Narach Ardhanarach Kilika Sanhanan Ashubh Vihayogati, Nich Gotra, Strived,
Dubhang Nama, Dushwar Nama, Anadey Nag, Nidra-Nidra, Prachala-Prachala, Sthan,
Udyot Nama, Tiryanchagati, Tijapurvi.  - P 7 Anantanubandhi Chatushka-
Anantanubandhi, Krodh Man, Maya, Lobh. Anstanubandhi Shavishati (Anantanubandhi
Krodh etc. 26 Prakritis) Anantanubandhi Kodh, Man, Maya, Lobh;
Nyagrodhparimandal, Sadi, Vaman, Kutra Sansthan; Rishabhanarach Narach
Ardhanarach Kilika Sanhanan Ashubh Vihayogati, Nichgotra, Strived, Dubhang Nama,
Dushwar Nama, Anadey Nama, נ

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 3 karmagranthoM kI gAthAoM evaM vyAkhyA meM Agata piNDaprakRti-sUcaka
zabdoM kA koSa (a) agurulaghucaka agurulaghu nAma, upadhAtanAma varAghAtanAma
ucchvAsanAma | aghAticatuSka-- vedanIya, Ayu, nAma, gotra karma  /  zrutaajJAna
vibhaMgazAna ( avadhi-ajJAna) ajJAnatrika - - pratijajJAna, anantAnubaMdhI
ekatriMzat- (anantAnubaMdhI koSa Adi 31 prakRtiyA~) anantAnubaMdhI koSa, mAna,
mAyA, lobha nyayoSa parimaMDala, sAdi, vAmana, kubja saMsthAna; RSamanArAca
saMhanana, RSabhanArAca nArAca, ardhanArAca, kolikA saMhanana: zubha vihAyogati,
nIlagotra, strIveda, durmaga nAma, duHsbara nAma, anAdeza nAma, nidrA-nidrA,
pracalApracalA, stmAnaddhi, rota nAma; tiryazvazati, ticAnupUrvI titrAyuH
manuSyAya, manuSyagati, manuSyAnupUrvI zradArika zarIra, audArika aMgopAMga  /
1 J anantAnubaMdhI catuvizati - ( anantAnubaMdhI koSa Adi 24 prakRtiyA~)
anantAnubaMdhI krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha nyagrova parimaMDala, sAdi vAmana kubja
saMsthAna RSamanArAca, nArAca ardhanArAca kIlikA saMhanana azubha vihAyogati,
nIca gotra, strIveda, dubhaMga nAma, du:svara nAma, anAdeya nAga, nidrA-nidrA,
pracalApracalA, sthAna, udyota nAma, tiryaMcagati, tijApUrvI  /  - P 7
anantAnubaMdhIcatuSka- anantAnubaMdhI, krodha mAna, mAyA, lobha  /
anastAnubaMdhI Savizati (anantAnubaMdhI krodha Adi 26 prakRtiyoM) anantAnubaMdhI
kodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha; nyagrodhaparimaMDala, sAdi, vAmana, kutra saMsthAna;
RSabhanArAca nArAca ardhanArAca kIlikA saMhanana azubha vihAyogati, nIcagotra,
strIveda, dubhaMga nAma, duHsvara nAma, anAdeya nAma, n

Page #558 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-3 Nidra-Nidra, Prachala-Prachala, Tyanaddhi, Udyot names;
Tiryanchagati, Tiryancha Nupurvi, Tithanchayu; Manushayau. Alaveyadrik -Anadey
names, Athashakiiti names. Ango-pangalik-Audarik Ango-pang, Vaikriya Ango-pang,
Aharak Ango-pang. Antaraya-panchak Dana-antaraya, Labhan-saraya, Mogan-taraya,
Upbhogantaraya, Veeryantaraya. Antim Sanhanan-trik-Ardhanaraach, Kilika, Sevat
Sanhanan. Apratyakhyamavaran-kashay-chaturshk -Apratyakhyanavaran Kosh, Man,
Maya, Lobh. Aparayapt-shatak -Aparayapt Sukshma Evendriya, Badar Ekendriya, Dwi-
indriya, Shri-indriya, Ridriya, Arni Panchendriya. Avashidvik-Avadhigyan,
Avhidarshan. Asthir-dvik -Asthir names, Ashubh names. Asthir-shatak-Asthir
names, Ashum names, Dumang names, Duhswar names, Anadey names, Ayash:kiiti
names. (a) Akruti-nik-(1) Sama-chaturan, Nyagro-aparimandal, Sadi, Vaman, Puj,
Hund Sansthan, (2) Vach-rishbhanaraach, Rishmanashch, Naraach, Arghanaraat,
Kilika, Sevat Sanhanan, (3) Ekendriya, Dwi-indriya, Shri-indriya, Chaturindriya,
Panchendriya jati. Asapatik-Aatash names, Udyot names. Ayutrik-Narakayu,
Tiryanchayu, Manushayau. Abrag-Navak-~-Mati, Shrut, Abash, Manah-paryay, Keval
Gyanavaran; Chakshu, Achakshu, Abadhi, Keval Darshanavaran. Aharak-dwiksh-Aharak
Sharira Gam, Aharak Ango-pang names. Baharak-saptaka Aharak Parira, Aharak Ango-
pang, Aharak Sanghat, Aha rak-Aharak Bandhan, Aharak-Tejas Bandhan, Aharaka
Karman Bandhan, Aha rak-Saimasa-Karman Bandhan names. Aharak-patak-Aharak
Sharira, Aharak Ango-pang, Devayu, Narakati, Par kanupurvi, Narakasau.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-3 nidrA-nidrA, pracalA-pracalA, tyAnaddhi, udyota nAma; tiryaMcagati,
tiryaMcA nupUrvI, tithaMcAyu; manuSyAyu  /  alAveyadrika -anAdeya nAma,
athazaHkIti nAma  /  aMgopAMgalika-audArika aMgopAMga, vaikriya aMgopAMga,
AhAraka aMgopAMga  /  aMtarAyapaMcakadAnAntarAya, lAbhAnsarAya, mogAntarAya,
upabhogAntarAya, viiryaantraay| aMtima saMhananatrika-ardhanArAca, kIlikA,
sevAta saMhanana  /  apratyAkhyAmAvaraNakaSAyacatuSka-apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa koSa,
mAna, mAyA, lobha  /  aparyAptaSaTaka-aparyApta sUkSma evendriya, bAdara
ekendriya, dvIndriya, zrIndriya, ridraya, aranI paMcendriya  /  avaSidvika-
avadhijJAna, avadhidarzana  /  asthiradvi pha~-asthira nAma, azubha nAma  /
asthiraSaTaka-asthira nAma, azuma nAma, dumaMga nAma, duHsvara nAma, anAdeya
nAma, ayaza:kIti nAma  /  (A) akRtinika-(1) samacaturana, nyagroaparimaNDala,
sAdi, vAmana, puja, huMDa saMsthAna, (2) vacaRSabhanArAca, RSamanAzaca, nArAca,
arghanArAta, kIlikA, sevAta saMhanana, (3) ekendriya, dvIndriya, zrIndriya,
caturindriya, paMcendriya jAti  /  Asapatika-AtaSa nAma, udyota nAma  /
Ayutrika-narakAyu, tiryaMcAyu, manuSyAyu  /  abaraga-navaka-~-mati, zruta,
abaSi, manaHparyAya, kevala jJAnAvaraNa; cakSu, acakSu, abadhi, kevala
darzanAvaraNa  /  AhArakadvikSa-AhAraka zarIra gAma, AhAraka aMgopAMga nAma  /
bAharakasaptakA AhAraka pArIra, AhAraka aMgopAMga, AhAraka saMghAta, AhA raka-
AhAraka baMdhana, AhAraka-taijasa baMdhana, AhArakA kArmaNa baMdhana, AhA raka-
saimasa-kArmaNa baMdhana nAma  /  AhArakapaTaka-AhAraka zarIra, AhAraka
aMgopAMga, devAyu, narakati, para kAnupUrvI, narakAsu  /

Page #559 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  70 ##  Pinprakriti-Indicative Word-Glossary **(U)** **Upvasachatushk** -
Ucchvas, Atap, Udyot, Paraghāt. **Udyotchatushk** - Udyot, Niyamati,
Liyanchayuṣī, Tethēchayu. **Udyotnik** - Uchot, Atap, Paraghāt. **Udyotvik** -
Udyot, Atap. **Ekedriyatrik** - Ekedriya Jāti, Sthāpar, Āsap. **(Au)**
**Auvārikarik** - Audārik Śarīr, Audārik Angopāng. **Auparikasaptak** - Audārik
Pārīr, Audārik Angopāng, Audārik Sanghāt. **Audārik** - Audārik Bandhan,
Autārik-Tanjas Bandhan, Audārik Kārmaṇ Bandhan, Audārik-Tanjas-Kārmaṇ Bandhan.
**Rūpāyapamchaviśatiḥ** - (Kṣayā Mohaniya ke 25 Bhed) Anantānubandhī Koṣa, Mān,
Māyā, Lom; Apratyākhyānāvaraṇa Krodha, Mān, Māyā, Som, Pratyākhyānāvaraṇa
Krodha, Mān, Māyā, Lom; Sanjvalana Koṣa, Mān, Māyā, Lomā Hāsya, Rati, Arati,
Śoka, Bhaya, Jugupsā, Strīved, Puruṣaved, Napumsakaved. **Kṣāmayōjak** -
Anantānubandhī Krodha, Mān, Māyā, Lobha; Apratyākhyānāvaraṇa Krodha, Mān, Māyā,
Lomā Pratyāsthānāvaraṇa Koṣa, Mān, Māyā, Lobha. Sanjvalana Koṣa, Mān, Māyā, Lom.
**Kevalnik** - Kevalśānāvaraṇa, Kevaldarśanāvaraṇa. **Khagatītik** - Śubha
Vihāyogati, Aśubha Vihāyogati. **Gpratik** - Surabhigandha, Dūrmigandha.
**Gatītrik** - Gati, Ānupūrvī, Āyukarma. **Gativik** - Gati, Ānupūrvī Karm.
**Gotrahif** - Nīca Gotra, Ucchagotra Karma. **Śālatrik** - Matijhān, Śrutajnān,
Avadhīśām.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 70 piNaprakRti-sUcaka zabda-koSa (u) upavAsacatuSka-ucchavAsa, Atapa, udyota,
parAghAta nAma  /  udyotacatuSka- udyota nAma, niyamati, liyaMcAyuSI, tethecAyu
/  udyotanika-ucota nAma, Atapa nAma, parAghAta nAma  /  udyotavika-uyota nAma,
Atapa nAma  /  ekedriyatrika-ekendriya jAti, sthApara nAma, Asapa nAma  /  (au)
auvArikarika-audArika zarIra, audArika aMgopAMga nAma  /  aupArikasaptaka-
audArika pArIra, audArika aMgopAMga, audArika saMghAta audArika-audArika
baMdhana, autArika-taMjasa baMdhana, audArika kArmaNa baMdhana, audArika-tajasa-
kArmaNa baMdhana nAma  /  rupAyapaMcavizatiH- (kaSAya mohanIya ke 25 bheda)
anantAnubaMdhI koSa, mAna, mAyA, loma; apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, mAna, mAyA,
soma, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, mAna, mAyA, loma; saMjvalana koSa, mAna, mAyA,
lomA hAsya, rati, arati, zoka, bhaya, jugupsA, strIveda, puruSaveda,
napuMsakaveda  /  kaSAmayojaka-anantAnubaMdhI kodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha;
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kroSa, mAna, mAyA, lomA pratyAsthAnAvaraNa koSa, mAna, mAyA,
lobha saMjvalana koSa, mAna, mAyA, loma  /  kevalanika-kevalazAnAvaraNa,
kevaladarzanAvaraNa  /  khagatitika-zubha vihAyogati nAma, azubha vihAyogati
nAma  /  gapratika-surabhigaMdha nAma, dUramigaMdha nAma  /  gatitrika-gati
nAma, AnupUrvI nAma, Ayukarma  /  gati vika-gati nAma, AnupUrvI nAmakarma  /
gotrahipha-nIca gotra, uccagotra karma  /  zAlatrika-matijhAna, zrutajJAna,
avadhizAma  /

Page #560 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-3 Five types of knowledge-obscuring karma: Matijnanaavaran,
Tatjnanaavaran, Avadhijnanaavaran, Manahparyaya Jnanaavaran, and
Kevaljnanaavaran. Knowledge-obscuring karma: - Matijnanaavaran,
Shutajnanaavaran, Avadhijnanaavaran, Manahparyaya Jnanaavaran, and Noval
Jnanaavaran. - Jnanaantaraya, Samantaaraya, Bhogaantaraya, Upamogaantaraya, and
Dhiryantaraya. Four types of Ghatichaturshka karma: Jnanaavaran, Darshanavaran,
Mohaniya, and Antaraya karma. Four types of Jativaturshka karma: Ekendriya jati,
Dviendriya jati, Triendriya jati, and Chaturendriya jati. Aatitrik: (1)
Ekendriya, Dviendriya, Triendriya, Chaturendriya, and Panchendriya jati; (2)
Narak, Tiryanch, Manushya, and Devati; (3) Shubh Viha yogati, and Ashubh Viha
yogati. Five types of Jinpanchak: Tirthankara naam, Devagati, Devanupurvi,
Vaikriya sharir, and Vaikriya angopaang naam. Jin Kaav: (Tirthankara and other
11 types of prakriti) Tirthankara naam, Devagati, Devanupurvi, Vaikriya sharir,
Vaikriya angopaang, Aharak sharir, Aharak angopaang, Devayu, Narakati,
Narakanupurvi, and Narakayu. Eight types of Tanu: (1) Audarik, Vaikriya, Aharak,
Tejas, and Karman sharir; (2) Audarik, Vaikriya, Aharak, and Angopaang; (3) Sama
Chaturasra, Nyagrodha parimandal, Sadi, Vaman, Kulja, and Hund sansthan; (4)
Banrishabhanaraach, Rishabhanaraach, Naraach, Ardhanaraach, Kilika, and Sewart
sanhanan; (5) Ekendriya, Dviendriya, Triendriya, Chaturendriya, and Panchendriya
jati; (6) Narak, Tiryanch, Manushya, and Devagati; (7) Shubh Viha yogati, and
Ashubh Viha yogati; (8) Narakanupurvi, Tiryanchanupurvi, Manushyanupurvi, and
Devanupurvi. Four types of Tanuchaturshka: (1) Audarik, Vaikriya, and Aharak
sharir; (2) Audarik, Vaikriya, and Aharak angopaang; (3) Sama Chaturasra,
Nyagrodha parimandal, Sadi, Vaman, Kushna, and Hund sansthan; (4)
Banrishabhanaraach, Rishabhanaraach, Naraach, Ardhanaraach, Kilika, and Sewart
sanhanan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-3 bhAnAvaraNapaMcaka- matijJAnAvaraNa, va tajJAnAvaraNa,
avadhijJAnAvaraNa, mana:paryAya jJAnAvaraNa, kevalajJAnAvaraNa  /  jAnAvaraNa-
aMsarAyavazaka- matijJAnAvaraNa, zutajJAnAvaraNa, avadhijJAnAvaraNa,
manaHparyAyajJAnAvaraNa, novala jJAtAvaraNa; jJAnAntarAya, sAmAnta rAya,
bhogAntarAya, upa mogAntarAya, dhIryAnta rAya  /  ghAticatuSkazAnAvaraNa,
darzanAvaraNa, mohanIya, anta rAya karma  /  jAtivatuSka - ekendriya jAti,
hIndriya jAti, trIndriya bAsi, caturindriya jAti  /  Atitrika-(1) ekendriya,
hIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya, pacandriya jAti; (2) narapha, niyaMtra,
manuSya, devatiH (3) zubha bihAyogati, azuma vihAyogati  /  jinapaMcaka-
tIrthakara nAma, devagati, devAnupUrvI, vakriya zarIra, baiMkriya aMgopAMga nAma
/  jinakAva- (tIrthakara Adi 11 prakRtiyAM) tIrthakara nAma, devagati,
devAnupUrvI, vaikriya zarIra, baiMkriya aMgopAMga, AhAraka zarIra, AhAraka
aMgopAMga, devAyu, narakati, marakAnupUrvI, narakAyu  /  tanu-aSTaka-(1)
yaudArika, baiMkriya, AhAraka, tejasa, kArmaNa zarIra; (2) audArika, vaikriya,
AhAraka, aMgopAMga; (3) samacaturana, nyagroSaparimaMDala, sAdi, vAmana, kulaja,
haNDa saMsthAna; (4) bacaRSabhanArAca, RSamanArAca, nArAca, ardhanArAca, kIlikA,
sevAta saMhanana; (5) ekendriya, renni ya, zrIndriya, caturindriya, paMpenSTriya
jAti; (6) naraka, tithaMca, manuSya, devagati; (7) zuma vihAyogAta, azubha
viyogati; (8). nara kAnupUrvI, tiyaMcAnupUrvI, manuSpAnupUrvI, devAnupUrvI  /
tanucatuSka-(1) audArika, baiMkriya, AhAraka zarIra; (2) bhaudArika, vaikiya,
AhAraka aMgopAMga, (3) sama caturasra, nyagrodhaparimaMDala, sAdi, vAmana,
kuSNa, huNDa saMsthAna; (4) banaRSamanArAca, RSabhanArAca, nArAca ardhanArAca,
kIlikA, sevArta saMhanana  /

Page #561 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 72  **Trika Trika Tiyanch Gati** - Three, three, and their motion, with their
respective positions. **Tichhnik-Tidhagati** - Three, three, and their motion,
with their respective positions. **Triteeya Kashay-Pratyakhyanavaran** - Third,
the covering of rejection of passions: anger, pride, deceit, greed. **Tejaskamam
Saptak** - Seven of Tejas and Karma: Tejas body, Karma body, Tejas Tejas
bondage, Tejas Karma bondage, Karma Karma bondage, Tejas aggregation, Karma
aggregation. **Tejas Chatushk** - Four of Tejas: Tejas, Karma, Agurulghu,
Nirman. **As Chatushk** - Four of As: Tras, Badar, Paryapt, Prateyk. **Jas
Trik** - Three of Jas: Tras, Badar, Paryapt. **As Dashak** - Ten of As: Tras,
Badar, Paryapt, Prateyk, Sthir, Shubh, Subhag, Suswar, Aadey, Yash: Kirti.
**Savik As** - As with Savik: Khader. **Prasanavak** - Prasanavak: Tras, Badar,
Paryapt, Prateyk, Sthir, Shubh, Subhag, Suswar, Aadey. **Saptak Bas** - Seven of
Bas: Badar, Paryapt, Prateyk, Sthir, Shubh. **Sadi Bees** - Twenty of Sa: Badar,
Paryapt, Prateyk, Sthir, Shubh, Subhag, Suswar, Aadey, Yash: Kirti, Swavar,
Sukshma, Aparyapt, Sadharan, Asthir, Anum, Dubhang, Duhswara, Anaadey, Ayash:
Kirti.  **(D)**  **Darshan Chatushk** - Four of Darshan: Chshudarshan,
Anchshudarshan, Avadhi Darshan, Keval Darshan. **Darshan Trik** - Three of
Darshan: Chshudarshan, Achshudarshan, Avadhi Darshan. **Darshan Ki** - Darshan
Ki: Chshudarshan, Avchshudan. **Barshanavaran Asur** - Covering of Darshan:
Chshudarshanavaran, Achshudarshanavaran, Avadhi Darshanavaran, Keval
Darshanavaran. **Barshanavaran Vak** - Barshanavaran Vak: Chshudarshanavaran,
Achshudarshanavaran, Avadhi Darshanavaran, Keval Darshanavaran, Nidra, Prachala.
**Barshan Moh Trik** - Three of Barshan Moh: Midhyaswa, Samyagmithyatwa,
Samyaktwa Mohaniya. **Darshan Moh Tak** - Darshan Moh Tak: Midhyatwa, Samyag
Mithyatwa, Samyaktwa Mohaniya, Anantanubandhi Krodh, Man, Maya, Lobh. **Dubhang
Chatushk** - Four of Dubhang: Dubhang, Duhswara, Anaavey, Jayash: Kirti.  **Pind
Prakriti - Suchak Dabd - Koy** - Pind Prakriti - Indicative Word - Koy.
**Prateyk Sthit Lum, Subhag, Suswar, Aadey** - Each position: Lum, Subhag,
Suswar, Aadey.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 72 tica trikatiyaMca gati, tithaMdhAnupUrvI, ticA  /  ticahnika-tidhagati,
ticAnupUrvI  /  tRtIya kaSAya- pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha  /
tejasakAmaMAsaptaka - tejasa zarIra, kArmaNa zarIra, tejasa tejasa baMdhana,
taijasa kAmaMNa baMdhana, kArmaNa-kArmaNa baMdhana, taMjasa saMghAtana, kArmaNa
saMghAsana | tejasacatuSka- taMjasa, kArmaNa, agurulaghu, nirmANa nAma  /
asacatuSka - trasa, bAdara, paryApta, pratyeka nAma | jasatrika trasa, bAdara,
paryApta nAma  /  asadazaka- trasa bAhara yazaHkIrti nAma ! savika asa nAma,
khAdara nAma | prasanavaka - zrasa, bAdara, paryApta, pratyeka, sthira, zubha,
subhaga, susvara, Adeya nAma  /  sapaTaka basa nAma, bAdara nAbha, paryApta
nAma, pratyeka nAma, sthira nAma, zubha nAma  /  sAdi bIsa-sa, bAdara, paryApta,
pratyeka, sthira, zubha, subhaga, susvara, Adeya, yaza: kIrti, svAvara, sUkSma,
aparyApta, sAdhAraNa, asthira, anuma, dubhaMga, duHsvara, anAdeya, ayazaH kIrti
nAma  /  (da) - -- darzanakhatuSka kSudarzana, anazudarzana avadhidarzana
kevaladarzana  /  darzanatrika-cakSudarzana, acakSudarzana avadhidarzana *
darzana ki-cakSudarzana, avakSudana  /  barzanAvaraNa asuraka...
cakSudarzanAvaraNa, acakSudarzanAvaraNa, avadhidarzanAvaraNa,
kevaladarzanAvaraNa | varzanAvaraNavaka - cakSudarzanAvaraNa,
acakSudarzanAvaraNa, avadhidarzanAvaraNa, kevaladarzanAvaraNa, nidrA, pracalA  /
varzana mohatrika midhyAsva, samyagmithyAtva, samyaktva mohanIya  /  darzana
mohataka-midhyAtva, samyag midhyAtva samyaktva mohanIya, anantAnubaMdhI krodha,
mAna, mAyA, lobha  /  dubhaMga dhatuSka dubhaMga, duHsvara, anAveya, jayazaHkIti
nAma | . piNDaprakRti-sUcaka dAbda-koya patyeka sthita luma, subhaga, susvara,
Adeya, r !

Page #562 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix - 3  **Durbhagnik Dubhang Name, Duhswar Name, Anadeya Name.**
**Second Kavaya - Pratyakhyanavaran Kosa, Man, Maya.**  **1.  **  **Vevatrik -
Devagati, Devanupurvi, Devayu.**  **Ki - Devagati, Devanupurvi**  **Vo Yugal -
Hasya Rati, Shok-Arati.**  **(N)**  **Som.**  **Narakatrik - Narakagati,
Narakanupurvi, Narakayu.**  **Narakdvik - Narakagati, Narakanupurvi.**  **73**
**Napumsak Chatushk - Napumsak Ved, Mithyatva Mohaniya, Indrasansthan,
Sewartasanhanan.**  **Naratrik - Manusya Gati, Manusyanupurvi, Manusyasu.**
**Nardvik - Manusya Gati, Manusyanupurvi.**  **Narak' (Baccha - Narakagati,
Narakanupurvi, Narakayu, Sukshma, Madhyam, Aparyapt, Ekendriya, Dwindriya,
Triendriya, Chaturindriya Jati, Stavar Name, Atap Name.**  **Naramvak -
Narakagati, Narakanupurvi, Narakayu, Sukshma, Sadharan, Aparyapt, Ekindriya,
Triendriya, Chaturindriya Jati.**  **F**  **Marakshodasha - (Narakagati Aadi 16
Prakrutiyaan) Narakagati, Narakanupurvi, Narakayu, Ekendriya Jati, Dwindriya
Jati, Triendriya Jati, Chaturindriya Jati, Stavar Name, Sukshma Name, Aparyapt
Name, Sadharan Name, Tund Sansthan, Sewart Sanshanan, Atap Name, Napumsak Ved,
Mithyatva Mohaniya.**  **Nidravik - Nidra, Prachala.**  **Nidrapanyak - Nidra,
Nidra-Nidra, Prachala, Prachala Prachala, Styanaddhi.**  **Nokshanav - Hasya,
Rati, Barati, Shok, Bhay, Jugupsa, Stri Ved, Purush Ved, **  **J**  **Napumsak
Ved.**  **(P)**  **Paraghas Saptak - Paradhat Uchchwas, Atap Udyot, Anurulghu,
Tirthankar, Nirman Name.**  **Pratyastahanavaran Kshayachaturshk -
Pratyakhyanavaran Kosa, Man, Maya, Lobh.**  **Pratiyaka Ashtak - Parapat,
Uchchwas, Alap, Udyat, Agurulghu, Tirthankar, Nirman, **  **Upghat Name.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 S C. pariziSTa- 3 durbhagaNika dubhaMga nAma, duHsvara nAma, anAdeya nAma  /
dvitIya kavAya - apratyAkhyAnAdaraNa koSa, mAna, mAyA, - 1 vevatrika - devagati,
devAnupUrvI, devAyu  /  ki- devagati, devAnupUrvI vo yugala - hAsya rati, zoka
-arati  /  (na) soma | narakatrika narakagati, narakAnupUrvI, narakAyu  /
narakadvika - narakagati, narakAnupUrvI  /  73 napuMsaka catuSka napuMsaka veda,
mithyAtva mohanIya, iMDasaMsthAna, sevArtasaMhanana  /  naratrika - manuSya
gati, manuSyAnupUrvI, manuSyAsu  /  naradvika - manuSyagati, manuSyAnupUrvI  /
naraka' (baccA - narakagati, narakAnupUrvI, narakAyu, sUkSma, mAdhAraNa,
aparyApta, ekendriya dvIndriya, zrIndriya, caturindriya jAti, sthAvara nAma,
Atapa nAma  /  naramavaka - narakagati, narakAnupUrvI, narakAyu, sUkSma,
sAdhAraNa, aparyApta, hIndriya, zrIndriya, caturindriya jAti  /  F marakaSoDaza-
( narakagati Adi 16 prakRtiyA~) narakagati, narakAnupurvI narakAyu, ekendriya
jAti, dvindriya jAti trIndriya jAti caturindriya jAti, sthAvara nAma, sUkSma
nAma, aparyApta nAma, sAdhAraNa nAma TuMDa saMsthAna, sevArta saMhanana, bAtapa
nAma, napuMsakaveda, mithyAtvamohanIya nidrAvika- nidrA, pracalA  /
nidrApaMcaka-nidrA, nidrA-nidrA, pracalA, pracalApracalA, styAnaddhi  /
nokaSAnava - hAsya, rati, barati zoka, bhaya, jugupsA, strIveda, puruSaveda, J
napuMsaka veda  /  (pa) parAghAta saptaka - parAdhAta ucchvAsa, Atapa udyota,
anurulaghu, tIrthaMkara, nirmANa nAma  /  pratyAsthAnAvaraNakaSAyaMcatuSka -
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa koSa, mAna, mAyA, lobha | pratyeka aSTaka - parApAta,
ucchvAsa, Alapa, udyata, agurulaghu, tIrthaMkara, nirmANa, upaghAta nAma  /

Page #563 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  7k **Pinḍaprakṛti-sūcak Śabdakoś**  **Aṃśamapañcak** - Audārika śarīra
bandhan, paitriya śarīra bandhan, āhārak śarīra bandhan, tamas śarīra bandhan,
kāmaṇ śarīra bandhan nāma.  **Pañcakpañcavaś** - Audārika-audārika bandhan,
audārika-taijas bandhan, audārika-kāmaṇ bandhan, audārika-taijas-kāmaṇ bandhan,
vairiya-kriya bandhan, vairiya-taijas bandhan, vairiya-kāmaṇ bandhan, vairiya-
taijas-kāmaṇ bandhan, āhārak-āhārak bandhan, āhārak-taijas bandhan, āhārak-kāmaṇ
bandhan, āhārak-taijas-kāmaṇ bandhan, tejas-taijas bandhan, tejas-kāmaṇ bandhan,
kāmaṇ-kāmaṇ bandhan nāma.  **Madhyamasamsthāna-caturṣka** -
Nyagrodhaparimaṇḍala, sādi, vāmana, tumna samsthāna.  **Madhyamasamhanana-
caturṣka** - Ṛṣimanārāca, nārāca, ardha-nārāca, kīlikā samhanana.
**Manuṣyatrika** - Manuṣyagati, manuṣyānu-pūrvi, manuṣyāyu.  **Manuṣyahika** -
Manuṣyagati, manuṣyānu-pūrvi.  **Mithyātvatrika** - Mithyātv, sā-sādana, mithyā-
dṛṣṭi.  **Mithyātvadvīka** - Mithyātv, sā-sādana.  **Rasapancak** - Tiktaras,
kaṭṭaras, kaṣāyaras, amlaras, madhuras ras.  **Varṇacaturṣka nāma (varga)** -
Varṇanāma, gandhanāma, rasanāma, sparśanāma.  **Varṇapancak** - Kṛṣṇa varṇa,
nīla varṇa, lohita varṇa, hāridra varṇa, śveta varṇa nāma.  **Parṇādi vīs** -
Pañca varṇa, pañca ras, dva gandha, aṣṭa sparśa nāmakarma.  **Vikasatrika** -
Vīndriya jāti, śrīndriya jāti, caturindriya jāti nāma.  **Vihayogati-vipha** -
Śubha vihayogati, aśubha vihayogati nāma.  **Vevatrika** - Strīveda, puruṣaved,
napuṃsakaved.  **Vebaniyatīka** - Sātāvedaniya, asātāvedaniya.  **Vairiya-
aṣṭaka** - Vairiya śarīra, vairiya angopāṅga, devagati, devānu-pūrvi, devāyu,
narakagati, narakānu-pūrvi, narakāyu.  **Vairiya-ekādaś** - Devagati, devānu-
pūrvi, narakagati, narakānu-pūrvi, vairiya śarīra, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 7k piNDaprakRti-sUcaka zabda-koSa aMSamapaMcaka audArika zarIra baMdhana,
paitriya zarIra baMdhana, AhAraka zarIra baMdhana, tamasa zarIra baMdhana,
kAmaMNa zarIra baMdhana nAma | paMdhakapaMcavaza - audArika-audArika baMdhana,
audArika-taMjasa baMdhana, audArikA kAmeNa baMdhana, audArika-taMjasa-kArmaNa
baMdhana, vaikriya-kriya baMdhana, vaikiyataijasa baMdhana, vaikriya-kArmaNa
baMdhana, vaikriya-taijasa kArmaNa baMdhana, AhAraAhAraka baMdhana, AhAraka-
taMjasa baMdhana, AhAraka-kArmaNa baMdhana, AhArakataMjasa-kArmaNa baMdhana,
tejasa-jasa baMdhana, saMjasa-kArmaNa baMdhana, kArmaNakAmaMNa baMdhana nAma  /
madhyamasaMsthAnacatuSka- nyagrodhaparimaMDala, sAdi, vAmana, tumna saMsthAna  /
madhyamasaMhamanacatuSka-RSamanArAca, nArAca, ardhanArAgha, kIlikA saMhnana  /
manuSyatrika-manuSyagati, manuSyAnupUrvI manuSyAyu  /  manuSyahika-manuSyagati,
manuSyAnupUrvI  /  mithyAtvatrika- mithyAtva, sAsAdana, mitha dRSTi  /
mithyAtvAdvika-mithyAtva, sAsAdana ! rasapaMcaka-tiktarasa, kaTTarasa,
kaSAyarasa, amlarasa, madhura rasa  /  varNacatuSka nAma (varga)-varNanAma,
gaMdhanAma, rasanAma, sparzanAma  /  varNapaMcaka-kRSNa varNa, nIla varNa,
lohita varNa, hAridra varNa, zveta varNa nAma | parNAdi bIsa-pAMca varNa, pAca
rasa, do gaMdha, ATha sparza nAmakarma  /  vikasatrika-vIndriya Ati, zrIndriya
jAti, caturindriya jAti nAma  /  bihAyogativipha-zubha vihAyogati, azubha
vihAyogati nAma  /  vevatrika-strIveda, puruSaveda, napuMsakaveda  /
vebanIyatika sAtAvedanIya, asAtAvedanIya  /  vaikriya-aSTaka vaiphiya zarIra,
vakiya aMgopAMga, devagati, devAnupUrvI, devAyu, narakagati, narakAnupUrvI,
narakAyu  /  maikriya-ekAdazadevagati, devAnupUrvI, narakagati, narakAnupUrvI,
vaikiya zarIra,

Page #564 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-3 Vaikriya Angopanga, Vaikriya Sanghata, Vaikriya-Kriya Bandhana,
Kriya-Tajasa Bandhana, Vaitriya Karman Bandhana, Vaikriya-Tanjasa-Karman
Bandhana. Bakriyavik - Vaikiya Sharira, Vaikriya Angopanga.  Kriyashatak -
Vaikriya Parira, Vaikriya Angopanga, Narakagati, Narakanupurthi, Devagati,
Devanupurvi. (Sh) Sharirapachak-Audarik Sharira, Vakiya Sharira, Maharak
Sharira, Tajasa Sharira, Karman Sharira Mam. Sanghaasanpanchak-Audarik
Sanghatan, Vaikriya Sanghatan, Aharak Sanghatan, Tajasa. Sanghatan Na, Karman
Sanghatan Nama. Sanjwalanakshayachatushk-Sanjwalan Krodha, Mana, Maya, Loma.
Sanjwalanakshayatrik-Sanjwalan Kosa, Mana, Maya. Sanjeetik-Sanjee Panchendriya
Paryapta, Pandriya Prapti. Sansthanashatak-Ramchaturasra, Nyagrodhaparimandala,
Sadi, Vaman, Kubja, Hunda Sansthan. Sanhananashatak-Vajrishmanaracha,
Rishmanaracha, Narasha, Ardhanaran, Kolika, Sevat Sanhanan. Samyaktvatrik-
Aupashamic Samyavattva, Sayopamic Samyaktva, Kshayik Sampaty. Samyaktvatrik
Kshayopashamic Samyaktva, Kshayik Samyaktva. Sumagchatushk - Suabhaga Nama,
Susvara Nama, Aadeya Nama, Yasha:Kiti Nama. Mubhagatrik- Suabhaga Nama, Susvara
Nama, Aadeva Nama. Muratrik  Devagati, Devanupurvi, Devayu. Surakhik-Devagati,
Devanupurvi. Sukshmatrayodashaka-(Sukshma Nama Adi 13 Prakrusiya) Sukshma Nama,
Sadharan Nama, Aparyapta Nama, Ekendriya Jati, Vaindriya Jati, Shreendriya Jati,
Chaturindriya Jati, Sthavara Nama, Ata Nama, Napumsakaved, Mikhyatna Mohaniya,
Hunda Sansthan, Sevat Sanhanan. Sukhmatrik-Sukshma Nama, Sadharan Nama,
Aparyapta Nama.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-3 vaikisa aMgopAMga, vaikriya saMghAta, vaikriya-kriya baMdhana,
kriya-tajasa baMdhana, vaitriya kArmaNa baMdhana, vaikriya-taMjasa-kArmaNa
baMdhana  /  bakriyavika - vaikiya zarIra, vaikriya aMgopAMga  /  /  kriyaSaTaka
- vaikriya pArIra, vaikriya aMgopAMga, narakagati, narakAnupUrthI, devagati,
devaanupuurvii| (za) zArIrapaMcaka-audArika zarIra, vakiya zarIra, mAhAraka
zArIra, tejasa zarIra, kArmaNa zarIra maam| saMghAsanapaMcaka-audArika
saMghAtana, vaikriya saMghAtana, AhAraka saMghAtana, tejasa  /  saMghAta na,
kArmaNa saMghAtana nAma  /  saMjvalanakaSAyacatuSka-saMjvalana krodha, mAna,
mAyA, loma  /  saMjvalanakaSAyatrika-saMjvalana koSa, mAna, mAyA  /  saMjItika-
saMjI paMcendriya paryApta, pandriya prApti  /  saMsthAnaSaTaka-rAmacaturasra,
nyagrodhaparimaMDala, sAdi, vAmana, kubja, huMDa sNsthaan| saMhananaSadaka-
vajaRSamanArAca, RSamanArAca, nArASa, ardhanArAna, kolikA, sevAta saMhanana  /
samyaktvatrika-aupazAmika samyavatva, sAyopamika samyaktva, kSAyika sampatya  /
samyaktvatika kSAyopazamika samyaktva, kSAyika samyaktva  /  sumagacatuSka -
subhaga nAma, susvara nAma, Adeya nAma, yaza:kIti nAma  /  mubhagatrika- samaga
nAma, susvara nAma, Adeva nAma  /  muratrika devagati, devAnupUrvI, devAyu  /
surakhika-devagati, devAnupUrvI  /  sUkSmatrayodazaka-(sUkSma nAma Adi 13
prakRsiyA) sUkSma nAma, sAdhAraNa nAma, aparyApta nAma, ekendriya jAti,
vaundriya jAti, zrIndriya jAti, caturindriya jAti, sthAvara nAma, AtA nAma,
napuMsakaveda, mikhyAtna mohanIya, huMDa saMsthAna, sevAta saMhanana  /
sUkmatrika-sUkSma nAma, sAdhAraNa nAma, aparyApta nAma  /

Page #565 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaprakṛti-sūcak Śabda Koṣa  **Surekomviśati** - (Devagātādi 12 Prakṛttis)
Devagati, Devanupūrvī, Vaikriya Śarīra, Vaikriya Angopānga Āhārak Śarīra,
Māhārak Angopānga, Devāyu, Narakagati, Narakānupūrvī, Narakāyu, Sūkṣma Nāma,
Sādhāraṇa Nāma, Aparyāpta Nāma, Ekenḍriya Jāti, Haundriya Jāti, Trīndriya Jāti,
Caturindriya Jāti, Sthāvara Nāma, Ātapa Nāma.  **76**  **Syānitrak-hatyānandhi,
Nidrā-nidrā, Prachalāprachalā**  **Hathāvarcaturṣka** - Sthāvara Nāma, Sūkṣma
Nāma, Aparyāya Nāma, Sādhāraṇa Nāma | Sthāvaravaśaka - Sthāvara, Sūkṣma,
Aparyāpta, Sādhāraṇa, Asthira, Aśubha, Durbhaga, Tuḥsvara, Anādeya Nīti Nāma :
Sthāvara Trick - Sthāvara Nāma, Sūkṣma Nāma.  **Sparśa-aṣṭaka** - Karkasa
Sparśa, Mṛdu Sparśa, Guru Sparśa, Laghu Sparśa, Śīta Sparśa, Uṣṇa Sparśa,
Snigdha Sparśa, Rūkṣa Sparśa Nāma.  **Sthirapaṭka** - Sthira Nāma, Śubha Nāma,
Subhaga Nāma, Susvara Nāma, Āveya Nāma, Yaśaḥkoti Nāma.  **(H)**  **Hāspaṣaṭka**
- Hāsya, Rati, Arati, Śoka, Jaya, Jugupsā, Mohaniya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaprakRti-sUcaka zabda koSa surekomavizati - (devargAta Adi 12 prakRttiyA~)
devagati, devAnupUrvI, vaikriya zarIra, vaikriya aMgopAMga AhAraka zarIra,
mAhAraka aMgopAMga, devAyu, narakagati, narakAnupurvI, narakAyu, sUkSma nAma,
sAdhAraNa nAma, aparyApta nAma, ekendriya jAti, haundriya jAti trIndriya jAti,
caturindriya jAti, sthAvara nAma, Atapa nAma  /  ' 76 , syAniitraka-hatyAnaddhi,
nidrA-nidrA, pracalApracalA hathAvaracatuSka- sthAvara nAma, sUkSma nAma,
aparyAya nAma, sAdhAraNa nAma | sthAvaravazaka sthAvara, sUkSma, aparyApta,
sAdhAraNa, asthira, azubha, durbhaga, tuHsvara, anAdeya nIti nAma : sthAvara
Trika - sthAvara nAma, sUkSma nAma ! sparza-aSTaka - karkaza sparza, mRdu
sparza, guru sparza laghu sparza, zIta sparza, sparza, snigdha sparza, rUkSa
sparza nAma  /  uSNa sthirapaTka sthira nAma, zubha nAma, subhaganAma, susvara
nAma, Aveya nAma, yazaHkoti nAma  /  (ha) hAspaSaTka hAsya, rati, arati zoka,
jaya, jugupsA mohanIya | -LL

Page #566 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Saptaatika Prakarana's Gatha's Akaraavi Gaya Sankhya (ar) 25 12 30 3 5 36 66 70
52 58 $19 13 I w ev 6 41 18 46 11 27 Atisevakaras Atthagassatta Gacchacchau
Attay Baras Avittaya Atta Evigappa Asu Panchasu Ege Anyarayaniyam Ah Suday
Sayaljag Is Vilidiy Sagale Gudrumध्यमत्तो Ilo Chabandhai Is Kammapadaanai (3)
Udayasudiranaae Uvaraybandhe Cha (Prathama Pankti) Uvasantech Pan (Prayam
Pankti) Ekkag Chakkevaras Ekk Dekkarerekkaarsev (i) Ekkam V Do V Chauro Eg
Bialelekkaras Parisishta 4 Anukram Pruth Sankhya ve 73 187 17 27 221 440 446 361
386 0 370 375 36 255 110 276 66 176

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptatikA prakaraNa kI gAthAoM kA akArAvi gAyA saMkhyA (ar) 25 12 30 3 5 36 66
70 52 58 $19 13 I w ev 6 41 18 46 11 27 atIsevakArasa aTThagasatta gacchaccau
aTTaya bArasa avittaya aTTa evigappa asu paMcasu ege anayarayaNIyaM aha sudaya
sayalajaga isa vilidiya sagale gudrumadhyamatto ilo cabaMdhAI isa kammapadANAI
(3) udayasudIraNAe uvarayabaMdhe ca (prathama paMkti ) uvasaMteca paNa (prayama
paMkti) ekkaga chakkevArasa ekka DekkArekkAraseva (i) ekkaM va do va cauro ega
biyAlekkArasa pariziSTa 4 anukrama pRSTha saMkhyA ve 73 187 17 27 221 440 446
361 386 0 370 375 36 255 110 276 66 176

Page #567 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Gali ja mahi anukshan Eg suhamsaramo egegamatto egegegegammegtise eso u
bandhasamito dho 272 307 Ka bandhto veyah Gunthanagesu atthasu Chau panavisa
solas chattaramai nam Stunnav chakkam tig chabbavise chan chayalasesamiso 383
Jogovoagle sa jo jaty apdipurano 283 451 Tavanupunnvishiya tignege egege
tiththagardevnirayagam tisthagaraharag tidunai jagumai tinnegh p babise
tibingapppagithanehi terasujiv tere nav cha tevis papnavisa 442 303 363 351 154
122 200 142

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gaalii jaa maahi anukssnn ega suhamasarAmo egegamaTTa egega egegamegatIse eso u
baMdhasAmitaodho 272 307 kA baMdhato veyaha guNaThANagesu aTThasu cau paNavIsA
solasa cattAramAi nama sTuNNava chakkaM tiga chabbAvIse cana chAyAlasesamIso 383
jogovaogalesA jo jatya apaDipurAno 283 451 tavANupunvisahiyA tigNege egega
titthagaradevanirayAgaM tisthagarAhAraga tidunAI jagumAI tinnegha pa bAbIse
tibiMgappapagaiThANehi terAsu jIva tere nava ca tevIsa papaNavIsA 442 303 363
351 154 122 200 142

Page #568 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-4 18 Dasanavapanna Rasaai Das Babise Nav Durihigamani Un Devgaisahgamao
Do Chakkatu Chaupaka 117 Navatesiyasaehi Navapanchaanauisae Nav Panchodaya Santa
Naanantaraap Tinihi (Pratham Pankti) Naanantarayadasagan 188 254 378 122 365
Panchvihvavihesan Padhamakasaayach Ukt Pahamakasaayachukke Pan Dug Panagan
Purisan Kohe Koh 420 Ras Bandhass Ya Santass Badhokyasantasa Baavisa Eganam
Baachis Ekkamisa Kiyaavarane Navbandh 388 36 Manugagai Jai Manuyagaisahgayaao
Micchasage Biie (Dvitiya Pankti) Missai Niyattio 255

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-4 18 dasanavapanna rasAI dasa bAbIse nava durahigamani uNa
devagaisahagamAo do chakkaTu caupaka 117 navatesIyasaehi navapaMcANauisae nava
paMcodaya saMtA nANaMtarApa tiniha (prathama paMkti) nANaMtarAyadasagaM 188 254
378 122 365 paMcavihvavihesaM paDhamakasAyaca ukta pahamakasAyacaukke paNa duga
pANagaM purisaM kohe kohaM 420 rasa baMdhassa ya saMtassa badhokyasaMtasA bAvIsA
egaNaM bAcIsa ekkamIsA kIyAvaraNe navabaMdha 388 36 maNugagai jAi
maNuyagaisahagayAo micchAsAge biie (dvitIya paMkti) missAi niyaTTIo 255

Page #569 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
80 So 26 € 41 38 13 43 1 (b) biromie afirat sa chavi sagaï mayagoe (second line)
beyaṇiya upagoe (second line) (c) sattaṭubandha aṭṭa satteva apajjattā santassa
pagṭhāṇāï sattaï dasau micche siddhhi mah gādhāoṁ kā akārādi anukrama at 158 46
267 22 228 73 272 5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 80 So 26 EUR 41 38 13 43 1 (kha) biromie afiratsA cavI sagAi mAyagoe (dvitIya
paMkti) beyaNiyA upagoe (dvittIya paMkti) (sa) sattaTubaMdha aTTa satteva
apajjattA saMtassa pagaThANAI sattAi dasau micche siddhahi maha gAdhAoM kA
akArAdi anukrama t 158 46 267 22 228 73 272 5

Page #570 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 5 List of Auxiliary Texts Used in the Explanation of Karma Granthas
Anuyogadwar Sutra - Magamodaya Committee, Surat Anuyogadwar Sutra Tika
(Maladhari Hemchandra Suri) Bhagmodaya Committee, Surat Acharang Sutra Tika
(Shilankacharya) Avarang Sutra Niyukti (Bhadrabahu Swagi) Apt Mimamsa (Swami
Samantabhadra) Jain Siddhant Prakashini Sanstha, Kolkata Avasyak Niyukti
(Madraba8 Swami) Agamodaya Committee, Surat Avasyak Niyukti Tika (Haribhadra
Suri) Avasyak Niyukti Tika (Malayagiri) Agamodaya Committee, Surat
Uttaraadhyayanasutra Uttaraadhyayanasutra Tika (Shantisuri) Upasakadasang Sutra
Appalik Sutra - Amomodaya Committee, Surat Karma Prakriti Muktabai Shan Mandir,
Imoei Karma Prakriti Pooni - Muktabai Gyan Mandir, Imoei Karma Prakriti Tika
(Upadhyay Yashovijay) Muktabai Jan Mandir, Moi Karma Prakriti Tika (Malayagiri)
Muktabai Gyan Mandir, Amoei Kashayapahudu (Gunadhar Acharya) Kadhampahudu Chuni
(Sthavir Pativrushma) Kalalok Prakash - Devchand Lal'mai Pustakodhar Sanstha,
Murut Kshapanasar (Nemichandra Siddhantvakravati) Bharatiya Jain Siddhant
Prakashini Sanstha, Kolkata Gommatasar Karmakand (Nemichandra
Siddhantchakravarti) Raychand Jain Granthmala, Bai Gommatasar Jiwant
(Nemichandra Siddhantchakravarti) Raychand Jain Granthmala, Bombay

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 5 karmagranthoM kI vyAkhyA meM prayukta sahAyaka granthoM kI sUcI
anuyogadvArasUtra-mAgamodaya samiti, sUrata anuyogadvArasUtra TIkA (maladhArI
hemacandra sUri) bhAgamodaya samiti, sUrata AcArAMgasUtra TIkA (zIlAMkAcArya)
AvArAMgasUtra niyukti (bhadrabAhu svAgI) AptamImAMsA (svAmi samantabhadra) jaina
siddhAnta prakAzinI saMsthA, kalakattA Avazyakaniyukti (madrabA8 svAmI)
Agamodaya samiti, sUrata Avazmakaniyukti TIkA (haribhadrasUri) Avazyakaniyukti
TIkA (malayagiri) Agamodaya samiti, sUrata uttarAdhyayanasUpa
uttarAdhyayanasUtra TIkA (zAMtisUri) upAsakadazAMga sUtra apapAlika sUtra-
Amamodaya samiti, sUrata karmaprakRti muktAbAI zAna mandira, imoI kama prakRti
pUNi-muktAbAI jJAna mandira, imoI karmaprakRti TIkA (upAdhyAya yazovijaya)
muktAbAI jAna mandira, moI karmaprakRti TIkA (malayagiri) muktAbAI jJAna
mandira, amoI kaSAyapAhuTha (guNadhara AcArya) kadhAmapAhuDa cUNi (sthavira
pativRSama) kAlalokaprakAza-devacanda lAla'mAI pustakoddhAra saMsthA, mUrata
kSapaNAsAra (nemicandra siddhAntavakravartI) bhAratIya jaina siddhAnta prakAzinI
saMsthA, kalakattA gommaTasAra karmakANDa (nemicandra siddhAntacakravartI)
rAyacanda jaina grandhamAlA, bAI gommaTasAra jIvANTa (nemicandra
siddhAntacakravartI) rAyacanda jaina granNamAlA, bambaI

Page #571 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Auxiliary Bibliography  * **Jamdhavala** (Vīrasena Ācārya) * **Ambudvīpa
Prajñapti** * **Jambudīpaprajñapti** (Sanskrit Commentary) *
**Jīvābhigamasūtra** * **Jīvasthānachūlikā** - Sthāna Sabhūtkīrtana * **Jain
Sāhityoddhārak Fund**, Amravati * **Jyotiṣakaraṇḍaka** - Śrī Ṛṣamadevajī
Keśarīmalasī Dave. Sansthā, Ratlām * **Jñānabhindu** (Upādhyāya Praśovijaya) *
**Tattvārthasūtra** (Umāsvāti) * **Tattvārtha Rājvātik** (Akalaṅkadeva) * **Śrī
Jain Siddhānta Prākāśinī Sansthā**, Kolkata * **Tattvārthādhigamāmāśya**
(Jamāsvāti) * **Trilokasāra** (Nemichandra Siddhānta Chakravartī) * **Śrī
Māṇikacanda Di. Jain Granthamālā**, Bombay * **Dravyaloka Prākāśa** - Devacanda
Lāsamaī Pustakoddhāra Sansthā, Surat * **Havya Sangraha** (Nemichandra Siddhānta
Chakravartī) * **Dhavala Udayādhikāra** (Vīrasena Ācārya) * **Dhavala
Udoraṇādhikāra** (Vīrasena Ācārya) * **Nandīsūtra** (Devarṣiṇi Kṣamāśramaṇa) *
**Nandīsūtra Ṭīkā** (Malayagiri) * **Navīna Prathama Karmgrantha Svopākṣa Ṭīkā**
(Devendrasūri) * **Śrī Ātmānanda Jain Rāmā**, Bhavnagar * **Navīna Dvitīya
Karmgrantha Svopākṣa Ṭīkā** (Devendra Bhūri) * **Śrī Ārmānanda Jain Sabhā**,
Bhavnagar * **Navīna Tṛtīya Karmgrantha Anacūrikā Ṭīkā** (Devendrasūri) * **Śrī
Ātmānanda Jain Sabhā**, Bhavnagar * **Nadhīna Caturtha Karmgranthya Svopākṣa
Ṭīkā** (Devendramūri) * **Śrī Ātmānanda Jain Samā**, Bhavnagar * **Navīna
Pañcama Karmgrantha Svīpākṣa Ṭīkā** (Devendrasūri) * **Śrī Ātmānanda Jain
Samā**, Bhavnagar * **Prāvanagara** * **Navīna Karmgranthōṁ Ke Ṭīkā**
(Jayasomasūri, Jīvavijaya)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sahAyaka graMtha sUcI jamadhavalA (vIrasena AcArya) ambUdvIpa prajJapti
jambUdIpaprajJaptisaMskRta TIkA jIvAbhigamasUtra jIvasthAnacUlikA-sthAna
sabhutkIrtanajaina sAhityoddhAraka phaMDa, amarAvatI jyotiSakaraNDaka-zrI
RSamadevajI kezarImalasI dave. saMsthA, ratalAma jJAnabindu (upAdhyAya
prazovijaya) tatvAryasUtra (umAsvAti) tattvArya rAjavAtika (akalaMkadeva) zrI
jaina siddhAnta prakAzinI saMsthA, kalakattA tattvAryAdhigamamASya (jamAsvAti)
trilokasAra (nemicandra siddhAnta cakravartI) zrI mANikacanda di0 jaina
granthamAlA, bambaI dravyalokaprakAza-devacanda lAsamAI pustakoddhAra saMsthA,
sUrata havyasaMgraha (nemicandra siddhAntacakravartI) dhavalA udayAdhikAra
(vIrasena AcArya) dhavalA udoraNAdhikAra (vIrasena AcArya) nandIsUtra (devarSiNi
kSamAzramaNa) nandIsUtra TIkA (malayagiri) navIna prathama kArmagrantha svopakSa
TIkA (devendrasUri) zrI AtmAnanda jaina rAmA, bhAvanagara navIna dvitIya
karmagrantha svopajJa TIkA (devendrabhUri) zrI AramAnanda jaina sabhA,
bhAvanagara navIna tRtIya karmagrantha anacUrikA TIkA (devendra sUri) zrI
AtmAnanda jaina sabhA, bhAvanagara nadhIna caturtha karmagranthya svopajJa TIkA
(debendramUri) zrI AtmAnanda jaina samA, bhAvanagara navIna paMcama karmagrantha
svIpajJa TIkA (devendra sUri) zrI AtmAnanda jaina samA, prAvanagara navIna
karmagranthoM ke TavA (jayasomasUri, jIvavijaya)

Page #572 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-5 New Karma Granth Translations in Gujarati - Jain Shreyaskar Mandal,
Mehsana * **Niryasara** (Kundakunda Acharya) * **Nyayadarshan** (Gautam Rishi) *
**Panchasangrah** (Chandrashi Mahttar) - Shwetamber Sanstha, Ratlam *
**Panchasangrah** (Amitagati) - Shri Manikchand Di. Jain Granthmala, Bombay *
**Panchasangrah Tika** (Malayagiri) - Muktabai Gyan Mandir, Bhoi *
**Panchasangrah Prakrut Panchasangrah Saptathika** - Muktabai Gyan Mandir, Moi *
**Panchaastikaya** (Kundakunda Acharya) - Ray Chand Jain Shastramasa, Bombay *
**Panghaashak** (Haribhadrasuri) - Shwetamber Sanstha, Ratlam * **Natangal
Yogadarshan** (Patanjali) - Prakaran Ratnakar - Bhimasi Manak, Bombay *
**Prashabharati Prakaran** (Umaswali) * **Pravachansara Tika**
(Amritchandracharya) - Rashchand Jain Shastramala, Bombay * **Pravachansaro
uddhar** - Devband Lal Mai Pustakoddhar Sanstha, Sarat * **Pravachansaro bar
Tika** - Devchand Lalmai Pustakoddhar Sanstha, Surat * **Prashastapadmaasya
Pramemakamalmartanda** (Pramachandracharya) - Nirnayasagar Press, Bombay *
**Prajnapanasutra** - Marananaswa Buli * **Prajnapanasutra Tika** (Malayagiri) *
**Prachin Chaturth Karma Granth** (Jinavall Manath) * **Prachin Chaturth
Karmagranth Bhashya** * **Prachin Chaturth Karmagranth Tika** (Malayagiri) *
**Prachin Chaturya Karmagranth Tika** (Haribhadrasuri) * **Prachin Bandh
Swamitva** * **Prachin Pancham Karmagranth** * **Vrihani Bhagavadgita** *
**Bhagavatisutra**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-5 navIna karmagranthoM ke gujarAtI anuvAda-jaina zreyaskara maMDala,
mehasAnA niyamasAra (kundakundAcArya) nyAyadarzana (gautama RSi) paMcasaMgraha
(candraSi mahattara) zvetAmbara saMsthA, ratalAma paMcasaMgraha (amitagati) zrI
mANikacanda di0 jaina granthamAlA, bambaI paMcasaMgraha TIkA (malayagiri)
muktAbAI jJAna mandira, bhoI paMcasaMgrahaprAkRta paMcasaMgraha saptatikA-
muktAbAI jJAna mandira, moI paMcAstikAya (kundakundAcArya) rAya canda jaina
zAstramAsA, bambaI paMghAzaka (haribhadrasUri) zvetAmbara saMsthA, ratalAma
NataMjala yogadarzana (pataMjali prakaraNa ratnAkara--bhImasI mANaka, bambaI
prazabharati prakaraNa (umAsvAli) pravacanasAra TIkA (amRtacandrAcArya)
rASacanda jaina zAstramAlA, bambaI pravacanasAroddhAra--devabanda lAla mAI
pustakoddhAra saMsthA, sarata pravacanasArobAra TIkAdevacanda lAlamAI
pustakoddhAra saMsthA, sUrata prazastapAdamASya pramemakamalamArtaNDa
(pramAcandrAcArya) nirNayasAgara presa, bambaI prajJApanAsUtra mraannnaar`sb
buli prajJApanAsUtra TIkA (malayagiri) prAcIna caturtha karma grantha (jinavalla
manAtha) prAcIna caturtha karmagrantha bhASya prAcIna caturtha karmagrantha TIkA
(malayagiri) prAcIna caturya karmagrantha TIkA (haribhadrasUri) prAcIna baMdha
svAmitva prAcIna paMcama karmagrantha vRhaNi bhagavadgItA bhagavatIsUtra

Page #573 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
4 Auxiliary Texts: Bhagavati Sutra Tika (Abhaydev Bhuri), Mahabharata
(Vedavyasa), Mokshamarg Prakash-Anantiti Granthamala, Bombay, Yogadarshan
Bhashya Tika, etc. including Yogavashishta Labdhisar (Nemichandra Siddhant
Chakravarti), Bharatiya Jain Siddhant Prakasini Sanstha, Kolkata, Lokaprakama-
Devchand Sal Mai Pustakodwar Sanstha, Surat, Visheshvaavshayak Maashya
(Jinmadraganikshmaashrapan), Visheshvaavshayak Maashya Tika (Kokyacharya),
Svetambar Sanstha, Ratlam, Nipaekamaati Lama Visheshvaavshayak Maadhy
Vrihadvritti-Yashovijay Granthamana, Kashi, Visheshnavati
(Jinbhadraganikshmaashrapan), Svetambar Sanstha, Ratlam, Vrihatkarmastavbhashya
Vrihatsangrahani (Jinmadraganikshmaashrapan), Vrihatsangrahani Tika
(Malayagiri), Vaisheshik Darshan (Kavad), Shatpahuund (Kundakundaacharya),
Sangrahani Sutra (Chandsuri), Saptaatikaani Saptaatika Prakaran Tika
(Malayagiri), Shri Atmanand Jain Sama, Bhavnagar, Sanmatitarka (Siddhasen
Diwakar), Sarvarth Siddhi (Puujyapaadaacharya), Sankhyakarika Sankhyadarshan
(Kapil Rishi), Sutrakrtaang Sutra Tika (Sheelaankaacharya), Sutrakrtaang Niyukti
{ Bhadrabahu Swami), Swami Keetikeyaanupreksha (Aacharya Kartikeya), Bharatiya
Jain Siddhant Prakasini Sanstha, Kolkata.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
4 sahAyaka graMtha sUco ! bhagavatIsUtra TIkA (abhayadeva bhUri) mahAbhArata
(vedavyAsa) mokSamArga prakAza-anantIti granthamAlA, bambaI yogadarzana bhASya
TIkA Adi sahita yogavAsiSTha labdhisAra (nemicandra siddhAnta cakravartI)
bhAratIya jaina siddhAna pravAzinI saMsthA, kalakatA lokaprakAmA- devacanda sAla
mAI pustakodvAra saMsthA, sUrata vizeSAvazyaka mASya (jinamadragaNikSamAzrapaNa)
vizeSAvazyakamASya TIkA (kokhyAcArya) svetAmbara saMsthA, ratalAma nipAekAmAtI
lAmA vizeSAvazyaka mAdhya vRhadvRtti-yazovijaya granthamAnA, kAzI vizeSaNavatI
(jinabhadragaNikSamAzramaNa) zvetAmbara saMsthA, ratalAma vRhatkarmastavabhASya
vRhatsaMgrahaNI (jinamadragaNikSamAzramaNa) vRhatsaMgrahaNI TokA (malayagiri)
vaizeSika darzana (kavAda) SaTpAhuMDa (kundakundAcArya) saMgrahaNIsUtra
(candasUri) saptatikANi saptatikAprakaraNa TIkA (malayagiri) zrI AtmAnanda jaina
samA, bhAvanagara sanmatitarka (siddhasena divAkara) sarvArtha siddhi
(pUjyapAdAcArya) sAMkhyakArikA sAMkhyadarzana (kapila RSi) sUtrakRtAMgasUtra
TIkA (zIlAMkAcArya) sUtrakRtAMga niyukti { bhadrabAhu svAmI) svAmI
kItikeyAnuprekSA (AcArya kArtikeya) bhAratIya jaina siddhAnta prakAzinI saMsthA,
kalakatsA

