Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/090240/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In Commemoration of the 25th Nirvana Century of Bhagwan Shri Mahavira Shrimad
Devendrasurji Composed 1952 Karmastava, a Karma Granth [Second Part Original,
Gathaarth, Vishesharth, Vivechan and Tippani and Parishishta Included Commentary
Marudharakesari, Pravartak Muni Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj Editor Shrichand Surana
'Saras' Devkumar Jain Publisher Shri Marudharakesari Sahitya Prakashan Samiti
Jodhpur-Vyavara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhagavAna zrI mahAvIra ko 25vIM nirvANa zatAgdI ke upalakSya meM zrImad
devendrasUri viracita 1952 karmastava nAmaka karmagrantha [dvitIya bhAga mUla,
gAthArtha, vizeSArtha. vivecana evaM TippaNa tathA pariziSTa yukta vyAkhyAkAra
marudharakesarI, pravartaka muni zrI mizrImala jI mahArAja sampAdaka zrIcanda
surAnA 'sarasa' devakumAra jaina prakAzaka zrI marudharakesarI sAhitya prakAzana
samiti jodhapura-vyAvara

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Editorial . The key to understanding Jainism is the 'Karma Siddhanta'. The soul
is the foundation of the entire philosophy and knowledge. And the 'Karma
Siddhanta' reveals the mystery of the various states, forms of the soul and its
transformations. Therefore, to understand Jainism, it is essential to understand
the 'Karma Siddhanta'. . Among the major texts that discuss the Karma Siddhanta,
'Shrimad Devendramoori's Karmagranth' holds a special significance. They occupy
a very important place in Jain literature. Even those who are curious about the
truth consider the Karmagranths as objects of daily study and self-study, like
the Agamas.  _ The Sanskrit commentaries on the Karmagranths are very important.
There have also been many Gujarati translations of them. The first commentary on
the Karmagranths in Hindi was presented by the learned sage, the great scholar,
Pt. Sukhlalji. His style is comparative and scholarly. Pt. Sukhlalji's
commentary is now almost inaccessible. For some time now, inspiration has been
coming from Ashukaviratna Gurudevshri Marudharakesariji M. that the Karmagranths
should be presented in a modern style. This editing began with his inspiration
and direction. With the inspiration of Vidya Vinod Shri Sukhanmuniji, this work
progressed rapidly. The cooperation of Shri Devkumarji Jain was received and the
work became ready to take shape in a short time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sampAdakIya . jainadarzana ko samajhane kI kuMjI hai-'karmasiddhAnta'  /
samagra darzana evaM tattvajJAna kA AdhAra hai AtmA  /  aura AtmA kI vividha
dazAoM, svarUpoM kA vivecana evaM usake parivartanoM kA rahasya udghATita karatA
hai, 'karmasiddhAnta'  /  isalie jainadarzana ko samajhane ke lie
'karmasiddhAnta' ko samajhanA anivArya hai| . karmasiddhAnta kA vivecana karane
vAle pramukha granthoM meM 'zrImad devendramUri racita karmagnantha apanA
viziSTa mahattva rakhate haiN| jaina sAhitya meM inakA atyanta mahattvapUrNa
sthAna hai| tattvajijJAsu bhI karmagranthoM ko Agama kI taraha pratidina
adhyayana evaM svAdhyAya kI vastu mAnate haiM  /  _ karmagranthoM kI saMskRta
TIkAeM bar3I mahatvapUrNa hai  /  inake kaI gujarAtI anuvAda bhI ho cuke haiN|
hindI meM karmagranthoM kA sarvaprathama vivecana prastuta kiyA thA
vidvadvareNya manISI pravara mahAprAjJa paM0 sukhalAlajI ne  /  unakI zailI
tulanAtmaka evaM vidvattApradhAna hai| paM0 sukhalAlajI kA vivecana Aja prAyaH
duSprApya-sA hai| kucha samaya se Azukaviratna gurudevazrI marudharakesarIjI ma.
se preraNA mila rahI thI ki karmagranthoM kA Adhunika zailI meM vivecana
prastuta karanA cAhie  /  unakI preraNA evaM nidezana se yaha sampAdana
prArambha huaa| vidyAvinodI zrI sukanamunijI kI preraNA se yaha kArya bar3I gati
ke sAtha Age bar3hatA gyaa| zrI devakumArajI jaina kA sahayoga milA aura kArya
kucha hI samaya meM AkAra dhAraNa karane yogya bana gyaa|

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
} ( In this editing work, the cooperation of Jain scholars, commentators, and
especially the works of Pt. Sukhlalji was received, and the discussion of such a
profound text became easily understandable. I express my heartfelt gratitude to
all the aforementioned scholars. AL The timely guidance of the venerable Shri
Marudhar Kesari Ji M., the inspiration of Shri Rajtamuni Ji and Shri Suknamuni
Ji, and the cooperation of the officials of the Sahitya Samiti, especially the
heartfelt inspiration and cooperation of the committee's administrator Shri
Sujanmalji Sethia, have brought dynamism to the publication and editing of the
book. It would be entirely appropriate to accept your heartfelt gratitude. If
there are any errors, theoretical mistakes, ambiguities, and printing errors in
the discussion, I apologize and expect the wise readers to kindly inform me.
Those who help in correcting mistakes and avoiding negligence are commendable.
With this request, : Vinil - Shrichand Surana 'Saras'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 } ( isa saMpAdana kArya meM jina kAroM, vive vana karttAoM tathA vizeSataH paM0
sukhalAlajI ke granthoM kA sahayoga prApta huA aura itane gahana grantha kA
vivecana sahajagamya bana sakA  /  meM ukta sabhI vidvAnoM kA asIma kRtajJatA ke
sAtha AbhAra mAnatA hU~  /  AL zraddheya zrI marudhara kesarI jI ma0 kA samaya-
samaya para mArgadarzana, zrI rajatamunijI evaM zrI sukanamunijI kI preraNA evaM
sAhityasamiti ke adhikAriyoM kA sahayoga, vizeSakara samiti ke vyavasthApaka zrI
sujAnamalajI seThiyA kI sahRdayatApUrNa preraNA va sahakAra se grantha ke ryug
sampAdana - prakAzana meM gatizIlatA AI hai, se Apa sabakA hRdaya AbhAra svIkAra
karU - yaha sarvathA yogya hI hogA  /  vivecana meM kahIM truTi, saiddhAntika
bhUla, aspaSTatA tathA mudraNa Adi meM azuddhi rahI ho to usake lie meM
kSamAprArthI hU~ aura haMsabuddhi pAThakoM se apekSA hai ki ve snehapUrvaka
sUcita kara anugRhIta kreNge| bhUla sudhAra evaM pramAda parihAra meM sahayogI
banane vAle abhinandanIya hote haiN| basa isI anurodha ke sAtha : vinIla
-zrIcanda surAnA 'sarasa'

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Illumination**  One of the primary and creative objectives of the Shri
Marudhar Kesari Sahitya Prakashan Samiti is to publish literature related to
Jainism and philosophy. The institution's guiding light, the highly revered Shri
Marudhar Kesari Ji M., is himself a great scholar, impromptu poet, and an expert
in Jain Agamas and philosophy. Under his guidance, the institution's various
philanthropic activities are ongoing. Gurudev Shri is a connoisseur and
enthusiast of literature. Inspired by him, we have published discourses,
biographies, poetry, Agamas, and profound analytical works. Now, we are
presenting to scholars and inquisitive readers their long-awaited work,
"Karmagranth" with commentary.  "Karmagranth" is a great text of Jain
philosophy. Its six parts contain a comprehensive analysis of Jain philosophy.
Under the guidance of the revered Gurudev, renowned author-editor Shri Shri
Chand Ji Surana and his associate Shri Devkumar Ji Jain have jointly edited it
beautifully. This grand work has been completed beautifully with the inspiration
of the ascetic Shri Rajtamuni Ji and the scholar Shri Suknamuni Ji.  We will
soon present the complete "Karmagranth" with commentary to readers in other
parts. The first part has already reached the hands of readers some time ago.
Now this second part is presented before the readers.  **Minister -** Shri
Marudhar Kesari Sahitya Prakashan Samiti

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakIya zrI marudhara kesarI sAhitya prakAzana samiti ke vibhinna uddezyoM
meM eka pramukha evaM racanAtmaka uddezya hai- jainadharma evaM darzana se
sambandhita sAhitya kA prakAzana krnaa| saMsthA ke mArgadarzaka paramazradveya
zrI marudhara kesarI jI ma0 svayaM eka mahAna vidvAna, Azukavi tathA jaina Agama
tathA darzana ke gaja haiM aura unhIM ke mArgadarzana meM saMsthA kI vibhinna
lokopakArI pravRttiyA~ cala rahI haiM  /  gurudeva zrI sAhitya ke marmajJa evaM
anurAgI hai| unakI preraNA se aba taka hamane pravacana, jIvanacaritra, kAvya,
Agama tathA gambhIra vivecanAtmaka granthoM kA prakAzana kiyA hai  /  aba
vidvAnoM evaM tattvajijJAsu pAThakoM ke sAmane hama unakA cira pratIkSita
grantha 'karmagrantha' vivecana yukta prastuta kara rahe haiM  /  karmagrantha
jaMnadarzana kA eka mahAna granya hai  /  inake chaha bhAgoM meM jaina
tattvajJAna kA sarvAMga vivecana samAyA huA hai  /  pUjya gurudevadhI ke
nirdezana meM prasiddha lekhaka - sampAdaka zrIyuta zrIcanda jI surAnA evaM
unake sahayogI zrI devakumArajI jaina ne milakara isakA sundara sampAdana kiyA
hai  /  tapasvIvara zrI rajatamunijI evaM vidyAvinodI zrI sukanamunijI kI
preraNA se yaha virATa kArya sundara DhaMga se sampanna huA hai  /  hama
atizIghra kramaza : anya bhAgoM meM sampUrNa karmagrantha vivecanayukta pAThakoM
kI sevA meM prastuta kreNge| prathama bhAga kucha samaya pUrva hI pAThakoM ke
hAthoM meM pahu~ca cukA hai| aba yaha dUsarA bhAga pAThakoM ke samakSa prastuta
hai  /  mantrI - zrI marudhara kesarI sAhitya prakAzana samiti

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Second Edition 'Karmagranth', which comprehensively elucidates 'Karmavada', is a
representative text of Jain 'Karma' theory. While publishing it, we imagined
that there would be very few readers for such a profound and esoteric subject,
hence we printed only a limited number of copies. But the readers embraced this
text with great enthusiasm, it was welcomed everywhere. Like the first part, the
edition of the second part also got exhausted, and the demand from readers
continued. As a result, this new edition of the second part is presented for the
service of the readers. Despite the exorbitant cost of paper, printing, etc., no
change has been made in its price for the convenience of the readers. - Mantro

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya AvRtti 'karmavAda' kA sAMgopAMga nirUpaNa karane vAlA 'karmagrantha'
jaina kama' siddhAnta kA pratinidhi grantha hai| isakA prakAzana karate samaya
hameM kalpanA thI ki isa prakAra ke gahana-gUr3ha viSaya ke pAThaka bahuta hI
kama hogeM, ata: hamane sImita pratiyA~ hI chapavAI  /  kintu pAThakoM ne isa
grantha ko ati utsAha ke sAtha apanAyA, sarvatra isakA svAgata huaa| prathama
bhAga kI taraha dvitIya bhAga kA saMskaraNa bhI samApta ho gayA, tathA barAbara
pAThakoM kI mAMga Ane lagI  /  phalasvarUpa yaha dvitIya bhAga kA navIna
saMskaraNa pAThakoM kI sevA meM prastuta hai| kAgaja chapAI Adi kI atyadhika
mahagAI hote hue bhI pAThakoM kI suvidhA ke lie isake mUlya meM koI parivartana
nahIM kiyA gayA hai  /  - mantro

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  The soul is the foundation of all Jain thought, contemplation,
and analysis. The soul is an all-powerful, independent force. It is both the
creator of its own happiness and sorrow, and the one who experiences the fruits
of its actions. The soul itself is formless, perfectly pure, yet it wanders
through the world in a state of coldness, ignorance, and impurity. Despite being
inherently blissful, it is caught in the cycle of happiness and sorrow. Though
eternal and immortal, it is swept away in the flow of birth and death. It is
astonishing that the soul, which is supremely powerful, is also experiencing
suffering and hardship in the world as a helpless, sorrowful, and impoverished
being. What is the reason for this?  Jain philosophy, while examining this
reason, states that karma is what causes the soul to wander in the world. Karma
is the root of birth and death - "Kammam ca jai maranassa mulan" - this
statement of Bhagwan Shri Mahavira is absolutely true, a fact. Due to karma,
this universe is constantly changing through various cycles of events. While
theistic philosophies attribute the diversity of this world and happiness and
sorrow to God, Jain philosophy considers karma as the cause of all happiness,
sorrow, and the diversity of the world. Karma itself is not an independent
force, it is matter, inert. However, when performed by the soul driven by
attachment and aversion, it becomes so powerful and potent that it binds the
doer in its chains. It even makes the master its servant. This is the
extraordinary power of karma. All of our lives and the world around us...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Amukha jainadarzana ke sampUrNa cintana, manana aura vivecana kA AdhAra AtmA
hai  /  AtmA sarvatantra svatantra zakti hai| apane sukha-dukha kI nirmAtA bhI
vahI hai aura usakA phala-bhoga karane vAlI bhI vahI hai  /  AtmA svayaM meM
amurta hai, parama vizuddha hai ki vaha zIta rAya nigna vanamaH azuddha dazA meM
saMsAra meM paribhramaNa kara rahI hai| svayaM parama Ananda svarUpa hone para
bhI sukha-dukha ke cakra meM pisa rahI hai| ajara, amara hokara bhI janma-mRtyu
ke pravAha meM baha rahI hai  /  Azcarya hai ki jo AtmA parama zaktisampata hai,
vahI dIna-hIna, dukhI, daridra ke rUpa meM saMsAra meM yAtanA aura kaSTa bhI
bhoga rahI hai  /  isakA kAraNa kyA hai ? jainadarzana isa kAraNa kI vivecanA
karate hue kahatA hai-AtmA ko saMsAra meM bhaTakAne vAlA karma hai| karma hI
janma-maraNa kA mUla hai kammaM ca jAI maraNassa mUlaM-bhagavAna zrI mahAvIra kA
yaha kathana akSarazaH satya hai, tathya hai| karma ke kAraNa hI yaha vizva
vividha ghaTanAcakroM meM pratipala parivartita ho rahA hai| IzvaravAdI darzanoM
ne isa vizvavaicitrya evaM sukha-duHkha kA kAraNa jahA~ Izvara ko mAnA hai,
vahAM jainadarzana ne samasta sukha-duHkha evaM vizvavaicitrya kA kAraNa karma
mAnA hai  /  karma svatantra rUpa se koI zakti nahIM hai, vaha svayaM meM
pudgala hai, jar3a hai  /  kintu rAga-dveSavazavartI AtmA ke dvArA karma kiye
jAne para ve : itane balavAna aura zaktisampanna bana jAte haiM ki kartA ko bhI
apane bandhana meM bAMdha lete haiM  /  mAlika ko bhI naukara kI taraha navAte
haiM  /  yaha , karma kI bar3I vicitra zakti hai  /  hamAre jIvana aura jagata
ke samasta

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
What is this main seed of transformations, Karma? What is its nature? How are
its diverse results? This is a very serious subject. Jain philosophy describes
Karma in great detail. A very subtle and profound discussion of Karma is found
in Jain Agamas and subsequent texts. Because it is in Prakrit and Sanskrit
languages, it is for the learned, but it is difficult for the ordinary seeker.
Ancient Acharyas have woven together the various forms of Karma theory in
chunks, which proves to be a good source of knowledge for the ordinary seeker of
truth when memorized. The Karmagranth occupies an important place in the ancient
texts of Karma theory. The six parts of Srimad Devendrasur's work are very
important. They present a discussion of all Jain philosophy-approved Karmavada,
Munasthan, Margana, Jiva, Ajiva, their distinctions and sub-distinctions, etc.
The original text is in Prakrit language and many commentaries on it are also
famous in Sanskrit. Its discussion is also quite famous in Gujarati. Pandit
Sukhlalji, a famous scholar and sage, prepared a discussion on it in Hindi
language about 40 years ago. _ Currently, the Hindi discussion of Karmagranth
was becoming difficult to obtain, and by this time, the style of discussion had
also changed considerably. Many seekers of truth, Munivar and devout Shravaks,
had been requesting for many years from the most revered Gurudev Marudhar
Kesariji M. Sa. that a new style of discussion and publication of such a vast
and serious text like Karmagranth should be done. Only a capable scholar,
scholar and great saint like you can accomplish this very laborious and
expensive task. Gurudevshri was also attracted to this. The body has become
quite old. Even in this, long travels and many institutions

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 parivartanoM kA yaha mukhya bIja karma kyA hai ? isakA svarUpa kyA hai ? isake
vividha pariNAma kaise hote haiM ? yaha bar3A hI gambhIra viSaya hai|
jainadarzana meM karma kA bahuta hI vistAra ke sAtha varNana kiyA gayA hai  /
karma kA sUkSmAtisUkSma aura atyanta gahana vivacana jaina AgamoM meM aura
uttaravartI granthoM meM prApta hotA hai| vaha prAkRta evaM saMskRta bhASA meM
hone ke kAraNa vidvadbhogya to hai, para sAdhAraNa jijJAsu ke lie durbodha hai
/  thokar3oM meM karmasiddhAnta ke vividha svarUpa kA varNana prAcIna AcAryoM ne
guMthA hai, kaNThastha karane para sAdhAraNa tattva-jijJAsu ke lie acchA
jJAnadAyaka siddha hotA hai| karmasiddhAnta ke prAcIna granthoM meM karmagrantha
kA mahatvapUrNa sthAna hai| zrImad devendrasUriracita isake chaha bhAga atyanta
hI mahatvapUrNa haiN| inameM jainadarzanasammata samasta karmavAda, muNasthAna,
mArgaNA, jIva, ajIva ke bheda-prabheda Adi samasta janadarzana kA vivecana
prastuta kara diyA gayA hai| mUlagrantha prAkRta bhASA meM hai aura isakI
saMskRta meM aneka TIkAeM bhI prasiddha haiN| gujarAtI meM bhI isakA vivecana
kAphI prasiddha hai  /  hindI bhASA meM isa para vivecana prasiddha vidvAna
manISI paM. sukhalAlajI ne lagabhaga 40 varSa pUrva taiyAra kiyA thaa| _
vartamAna meM karmagrantha kA hindI vivecana duSprApya ho rahA thA, phira isa
samaya taka vivecana kI zailI meM bhI kAphI parivartana A gyaa| aneka tattva-
jijJAsu munivara evaM zraddhAlu zrAvaka paramazraddhaya gurudeva marudhara
kesarIjI ma. sA. se kaI varSoM se prArthanA kara rahe the ki karmagrantha jaise
vizAla aura gambhIra grantha kA naye DhaMga se vivecana evaM prakAzana honA
caahie| Apa jaise samartha zAstrajJa vidvAna evaM mahAsthavira santa hI isa
atyanta zramasAdhya evaM vyaya-sAdhya kArya ko sampanna karA sakate haiN|
gurudevazrI kA bhI isa ora AkarSaNa thaa| zarIra kAphI vRddha ho cukA hai|
isameM bhI lambe-lambe vihAra aura aneka saMsthAoM

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(2) Organizing Programs! In your busy life, you still spend 10-12 hours or more
engaged in scriptural study, literary creation, etc. Last year, Gurudevshri
resolved to take this work forward. He began writing the *vivechana*. The
responsibility for making the *vivechana* beautiful and interesting in terms of
language style, etc., and for collecting footnotes, citations from the *Agamas*,
writing the introduction, etc., was entrusted to the renowned scholar Shri Shri
Chand Ji Surana 'Saras'. Shri Surana Ji is in very close contact with
Gurudevshri's literature and thoughts! Under Gurudev's guidance, he has worked
very hard to make this scholarly work useful for the general public. This
*vivechana* is fulfilling a long-standing need. At the same time, society is
receiving a cultural and philosophical treasure in a new form, which is a matter
of great joy. I have a special interest in this subject. I have been encouraging
Gurudev and the editorial team to complete it from time to time. After the first
part, this second part is now coming before the public. I am very happy about
it. - Sukhan Muni

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 2 ) kAryakramoM kA Ayojana ! vyasta jIvana meM Apa 10-12 ghaNTA me adhika
samaya taka Aja bhI zAstra svAdhyAya, sAhitya sarjana Adi meM lIna rahate haiM
/  gata varSa gurudevazrI ne isa kArya ko Age bar3hAne kA saMkalpa kiyaa|
vivecana likhanA prArambha kiyA  /  vivecana ko bhASAzailI Adi dRSTiyoM se
sundara evaM rucikara banAne tathA phuTanoTa, AgamoM ke uddharaNa saMkalana,
bhUmikA-lekhana Adi kAryoM kA dAyitva prasiddha vidvAna zrIyuta zrIcanda jI
surAnA 'sarasa' ko soMpA gyaa| zrI surAnA jI gurudevazrI ke sAhitya evaM vicAroM
ke atinikaTa samparka meM haiM! gurudeva ke nirdezana meM unhoMne atyadhika
zrama karake yaha vidvattApUrNa tathA sarva sAdhAraNajana ke lie upayoga kiyA
hai| isa vivecana se eka dIrghakAlIna abhAva kI pUrti ho rahI hai| sAtha hI
samAja ko eka sAMskRtika evaM dArzanika nidhi naye rUpa meM mila rahI hai, yaha
atyadhika prasannatA kI bAta hai  /  mujhe isa viSaya meM vizeSa ruci hai| maiM
gurudeva ko tathA sampAdaka bandhuoM ko isakI saMpUrti ke lie samaya-samaya para
prerita karatA rahA  /  prathama bhAga ke pazcAt yaha dvitIya bhAga Aja janatA
ke samakSa A rahA hai| isakI mujhe hArdika prasannatA hai  /  - sukana muni "

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction The basis for accepting the theory of Karma: Two schools of
thought, the view of Karma in the Nivartaka Dharma, differences of opinion among
Nivartaka Dharma followers.  ## Table of Contents The outline of Karma elements
in Jain philosophy, the purpose of composing the second Karma text, the style of
subject description, a brief discussion of the Gunasthanas, the basis of the
Gunasthanas order, discussion of Gunasthanas in other texts, the subject
division of the text and the basis of its composition.  ## Chapter 1 Invocation
(Praise), indication of the subject discussed in the text, discussion of Bandha,
Udaya, Udirana and Satya, the characteristics of Gunasthanas.  ## Verse 2 Names
of the Gunasthanas, arrangement of the Gunasthanas, definition of the
Gunasthanas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA karmasiddhAnta mAnane kA AdhAra karmasiddhAnta kI mAnyatA : do
vicAradhArAyeM nivartakadharma kA karma viSayaka maMtavya nivartakadharmavAdiyoM
meM vicArabhinnatAyeM anukramaNikA jainadarzana kI karmatatva sambandhI
rUparekhA dvitIya karmagrantha kI racanA kA uddezya viSaya varNana kI zailI
guNasthAnoM kA saMkSepa meM vivecana guNasthAna krama kA AdhAra 'anya granthoM
meM guNasthAna sambandhI carcA grantha kA viSaya vibhAga aura racanA kA AdhAra
gAyA maMgalAcaraNa (stuti) grantha meM varNita viSaya kA saMketa bandha, udaya,
udIraNA va sattA kA vivecana guNasthAna kA lakSaNa gAthA 2 guNasthAnoM ke nAma
guNasthAnoM kI vyavasthA guNasthAnoM kA paribhASA pR0 17 se 26 17 15 16 20 22 23
23 24 25 30 35 pRSTha 1 OUT 2 6 7- 46 no It 8 11

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mithyatva Gunasthan, Saasvadan Gunasthan ## Process of Obtaining Aupashamik
Samyaktvam (11)  ## Mixed Gunasthan, Avirast Samyagdristi Gunasthan ##
Deshavirast Gunasthan ## Pramattasanyat Gunasthan ## Apramattasanyat Gunasthan,
Nivrittibhadar Gunasthan ## Anivritti Gunasthan ## Sukshmasampray Gunasthan ##
Upashant-Kashaya-Vitrag Chhadyasth Gunasthan ## Kshina-Kashaya-Vitrag Chhadmasth
Gunasthan ## Sayogikevali Gunasthan ## Ayogikevali Gunasthan  ## Indication of
the Eternal, Non-Eternal, etc. of the Gunasthanas ## Gatha 3  ## The
Characteristic of Bandha ## Generally, the Indication of the Number of Bandha-
Yogya Prakrutis and the Cause ## Bandha Prakrutis in Mithyatva Gunasthan ##
Gatha 4  ## Names of Bandha-Vicchhinna Prakrutis in Mithyatva Gunasthan, Bandha-
Yogya Prakrutis in Saasvadan Gunasthan ## Gatha 5  ## Names of Bandha-Vicchhinna
Prakrutis in Saasvadan Gunasthan, 11 15 16 20 22 24 26 27 28 30 35 35 36 41 43
45 46-54 50 51 53 54-56 54 56 56-58 56

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 midhyAtva guNasthAna sAsvAdana guNasthAna aupazamika samyaktva kI prApti
viSayaka prakriyA ( 11 ) mizra guNasthAna avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna
dezavirata guNasthAna pramattasaMyata guNasthAna apramattasaMyata guNasthAna
nivRttibAdara guNasthAna anivRtti guNasthAna sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna
upazAMta-kaSAya- vItarAga chadyastha guNasthAna kSINakaSAya- vItarAga chadmastha
guNasthAna sayogikevalI guNasthAna ayogikevalI guNasthAna guNasthAnoM ke zAzvata
azAzvata Adi kA saMketa gAthA 3 bandha kA lakSaNa sAmAnyatayA bandhayogya
prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA kA nirdezana va kAraNa mithyAtva guNasthAna meM bandha
prakRtiyA~ gAthA 4 mithyAtva guNasthAna meM bandha vicchinna prakRtiyoM ke nAma
sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM bandhayogya, prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA gAthA 5 sAsvAdana
guNasthAna meM bandhavicchinna prakRtiyoM ke nAma, 11 15 16 20 2 24 26 2.7 28 na
mv 35 35 36 41 43 45 46-54 50 51 53 54-16 54 56 56 - 58 56

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The number of Bandha-yogya (bondable) Prakṛtis (natures) in Miśraguṇa-sthāna
(mixed-quality state) The reason for the decrease in the number of Bandha-yogya
Prakṛtis in Miśraguṇa-sthāna is 58 Māma 6 The number of Bandha-yogya Prakṛtis in
Avirata-samyagdṛṣṭi-guṇa-sthāna (state of uninterrupted right vision) The reason
for the increase in the number of Bandha-yogya Prakṛtis in Avirata-samyagdṛṣṭi-
guṇa-sthāna is the number of Bandha-yogya Prakṛtis in Deśavira-guṇa-sthāna
(state of non-attachment to the world) The names of Bandha-vicchinna (bond-
severed) Prakṛtis in Deśavira-guṇa-sthāna The number of Bandha-yogya Prakṛtis in
Pramatta-saṁgata-guṇa-sthāna (state of heedless conduct) is 61 Gāma 7, 62-64 The
names of Bandha-vicchinna Prakṛtis in Pramatta-saṁyata-guṇa-sthāna (state of
heedless restraint) The number of Bandha-yogya Prakṛtis in Apramatta-saṁyata-
guṇa-sthāna (state of heedful restraint) is 63 Explanation of the difference in
the number of Bandha-yogya Prakṛtis in Apramatta-saṁyata-guṇa-sthāna is in Gāthā
6, 10, 11 The number of Bandha-yogya Prakṛtis in Apūrva-karaṇa-guṇa-sthāna
(state of non-creation of new karma) is 66 The number and names of 66 Bandha-
vicchinna Prakṛtis in the seven parts of Apūrva-karaṇa-guṇa-sthāna The number of
Bandha-yogya Prakṛtis in Anivṛtti-bādhara-guṇa-sthāna (state of non-obstruction
of liberation) is 65 The number and order of 67 Bandha-vicchinna Prakṛtis in the
five parts of Anivṛtti-bādhara-guṇa-sthāna The number of Bandha-yogya Prakṛtis
in Sūkṣma-saṁparāya-guṇa-sthāna (state of subtle perception) is 68 Gāthā 12 The
names of Bandha Prakṛtis in Sūkṣma-saṁparāya-guṇa-sthāna

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mizraguNasthAna meM bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA mizraguNasthAna meM
bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI nyUnatA kA kAraNa 58 mAmA 6 aviratasamyagdRSTi
guNasthAna meM bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aviratasamyagdRSTi guNa sthAna
meM bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA kI adhikatA kA kAraNa dezavita guNasthAna
meM bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA dezavirata guNasthAna meM bandhavicchinna
prakRtiyoM ke nAma pramattasaMgata guNasthAna meM bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI
saMkhyA 61 gAmA 7, 62-64 pramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM bandhayogya viccinna
prakRtiyoM ke nAma apramattasaMyatta guNasthAna meM bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI
saMkhyA 63 apramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI bhinnatA kA
spaSTIkaraNa gAthA 6, 10, 11 apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM bandhayogya prakRtiyoM
kI saMkhyA 66 apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ke sAta bhAgoM meM bandha-viccinna 66
prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA va nAma anivRtibAdara guNasthAna ko bandhayogya prakRtiyoM
kI saMkhyA 65 anivRttibAdara guNasthAna ke pAMca bhAgoM meM bandhavicchinna 67
hone vAlI prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA va krama sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna kI
bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA 68 gAthA 12 sUkSmasaMparAya muNasthAna meM
bandha prakRtiyoM ke nAma

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(13) Upaśāntamoha, Kṣīṇamoha, Sayogikevalī Bandhayogya Prakṛti and Kāraṇa
Ayogakevalī Guṇasthāna Gāthā 13 Udaya and Udīraṇa's Lakṣaṇa Guṇasthāna Abandha
and its Kāraṇa In Generally, the number of Udayayogya Prakṛtis and Kāraṇa in
Mithyātva Guṇasthāna Udayayogya Prakṛtis Nāma 14 15 16, 17 In Mithyātva
Guṇasthāna Udayavicchinnā Prakṛtis in Sāsāvadana Guṇasthāna Udayayogya Prakṛtis
and Kāraṇa in Sāsāvadana Guṇasthāna Udayavicchinnā Prakṛtis in Miśra Guṇasthāna
Udayayogya Prakṛtis Māthā 15, 16 In Aviraṭ Samyagdṛṣṭi Guṇasthāna Udayayogya
Prakṛtis in Deśaviraṭ Guṇasthāna Udayayogya Prakṛtis' number and Kāraṇa In
Deśaviraṭ Guṇasthāna Udayavicchinnā Prakṛtis in Pramattaviraṭ and Apramattaviraṭ
Guṇasthāna Udayayogya Prakṛtis In Apūrvakaraṇa Guṇasthāna Udayayogya Prakṛtis in
Anivṛttikaraṇa Guṇasthāna Udayayogya Prakṛtis in Sūkṣmasampārāya Guṇasthāna
Udayayogya Prakṛtis in Upaśānta Moha Guṇasthāna Udayayogya Prakṛtis Mādā 20 In
Kṣīṇamoha Guṇasthāna Udayayogya Prakṛtis in Sayogikevalī Guṇasthāna Udayayogya
Prakṛtis 06. 190 72-73 73 74 75 76-7 77 78 7 80 81 82 82 85 8760 Dad 86 60 60
61-63 *? 62

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 13 ) upazAMtamoha, kSINamoha, sayogikevalI bandhayogya prakRti aura kAraNa
ayogakevalI guNasthAna gAthA 13 udaya va udIraNA kA lakSaNa guNasthAna meM
abandha va usakA kAraNa meM sAmAnyataH udayayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA va
kAraNa mithyAtvaguNasthAna meM udayayogya prakRtiyA~ nAmA 14 15 16, 17
mithyAtvaguNasthAna meM udayavicchinna prakRtiyA~ sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM
udayogya prakRtiyoM va kAraNa sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM udayavicchinna prakRtiyAM
mizra guNasthAna meM udayayogya prakRtiyA~ mAthA 15, 16 avirata samyagdRSTi
guNasthAna meM udayayogya prakRtiyA~ dezavirata guNasthAna meM udayayogya
prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA va kAraNa dezavirata guNasthAna meM udayavicchinna
prakRtiyA~ pramattavirata va apramattavirata guNasthAna meM udayayogya
prakRtiyA~ apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM udayayogya prakRtiyA~ anivRttikaraNa
guNasthAna meM udayayogya prakRtiyAM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM udayayogya
prakRtiyA~ upazAMta moha guNasthAna meM udayayogya prakRtiyA~ mAdA 20 kSINamoha
guNasthAna meM udayayogya prakRtiyA~ sayogikevalI guNasthAna meM udayayogya
prakRtiyAM 06. 190 72-73 73 74 75 76-7 77 78 7 80 81 82 82 85 8760 dada 86 60 60
61-63 *? 62

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
66 Mama 21, 22 63-66 ' 'Sayogikevali Gunasthan in Udayavichchhinna Prakrutiyaan
Ayogikevali Gunasthan in Udayayogya Prakrutiyaan Gatha 23, 24 66   66  _ Uday
and Udirana Prakrutiyaan in Asamanata ka Karan 16 Maya 25 66-105 Satya ka
Lakshana Satya Prakrutiyaan ki Sankhya aur Karan 102 Mithyatya se Upashantakshay
Gunasthan tak Samanya se Satya Yogya Prakrutiyaan v Karan Gaya 26 105-..-107
Aviratsamyagdristi se Upashantamoh Gunasthan tak Upashamasheni adi ki Apeksha
Satya Yogya Prakrutiyaan 107 Makha o 107-111 Kshapakashreni ki Apeksha Sana
Yogya Prakrutiyaan ka Kathana v Karan 108 Gatha 28, 26 111-113 · Kshapakashreni
ki Apeksha Anivritibadar Gunasthan ke Dusre se Nauven Bhag tak Prakrutiyaan ki
Satya 112 Gatha 30 114 -116 Sukshmasampray and Kshinamoha Gunasthan in Satya
Prakrutiyaan Mama 31, 32, 33 116-120 Sayogikevali, Ayogikevali Gunasthan ki
Satya Prakrutiyaan

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 66 mAmA 21, 22 63-66 ' 'sayogikevalI guNasthAna meM udayavicchinna prakRtiyAM
ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM udayayogya prakRtiyA~ gAthA 23, 24 66 66 _ udaya aura
udIraNA prakRtiyoM meM asAmAnatA kA kAraNa 16 mAyA 25 66-105 sattA kA lakSaNa
sattA prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura kAraNa 102 mithyAtya se upazAntakaSAya
guNasthAna taka sAmAnya se sattA yogya prakRtiyA~ va kAraNa gAyA 26 105-..-107
aviratasamyagdaSTi se upazAntamoha guNasthAna taka upazamazeNI Adi kI apekSA
sattA yogya prakRtiyA~ 107 maakhaa o 107-111 kSapakrazreNI kI apekSA sanA yogya
prakRtiyoM kA kathana va kAraNa 108 gAthA 28, 26 111-113 * kSapakazreNI kI
apekSA anivRttibAdara guNasthAna ke dUsare se nauveM bhAga taka prakRtiyoM kI
sattA 112 gAthA 30 114 -116 sUkSmasaMparAya aura kSINamoha guNasthAna meM sattA
prakRtiyA~ mAmA 31, 32, 33 116-120 sayogikevalI, ayogikevalI guNasthAna kI sattA
prakRtiyA~

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
120–122 120 122-215 125 162 176 Nana 34 Fourteen Mupasyas in which the fairies
are destroyed Alternative Conclusion Appendix Explanation of Karma Bandha, Udaya
and Satya, Time Calculation. Jain Perspective Comparative Opinion Bandhayantra
Udayayantra Udiranayantra Sanayantra Gunasthan-Bandhadi Vishayak Yantra Udaya
Avinavaavi Prakritis ka Varnaan Karma Prakritis ka Bandhanimittak Varnaan
Gunasthanon mein Karmaprakriliyon ke Bandha, Udaya, Udirana Satya ka Varnaan 150
182 183 18 186 194-195 167 017

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 120-122 120 122-215 125 162 176 nAnA 34 caudaha mupasyA meM kSaya hone vAlI
pariyoM kA matAntara upasaMhAra pariziSTa karma bandha, udaya aura sattA
viSayaka spaTIkaraNa kAlagaNanA. jaina dRSTi tulanAtmaka mantavya bandhayantra
udayayaMtra udIraNAyantra sanAyantra guNasthAna-bandhAdi viSayaka yantra udaya
avinAmAvI prakRtiyoM kA vivaraNa karma prakRtiyoM kA bandhanimittaka vivaraNa
guNasthAnoM meM karmaprakRliyoM ke bandha, udaya, udIraNA sattA kA vivaraNa 150
182 183 18 186 194-195 167 017

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
According to the Harga Siddhanta, the basis of acceptance is Dharma, Artha, Kama
and Moksha, these four Purusharthas. Many thinkers have expressed their views on
these from their own perspectives. Those who consider this visible world to be
the only reality, they considered Artha and Kama Purusharthas as the main ones
and set the goal of life as acquiring wealth in some way or the other.
Therefore, they were not bound to accept any principle, nor were they eager to
accept any principle that would lead to good or bad, rebirth or attainment of
the afterlife. This side became known as the Charvaka Darshan tradition, whose
sole aim is:  "Live happily as long as you live, drink after taking a loan.
Where is the return of the body that has been reduced to ashes?"  But along with
this, there has been and still is a widespread thought that accepts another
superior or inferior realm beyond the visible world, the existence of rebirth
after death. Therefore, Dharma and Moksha Purusharthas were also accepted.
Happiness in the afterlife and rebirth is not possible without accepting Dharma
and Moksha Purusharthas. Its meaning is that "if there are no Karmas, then the
relationship of birth-rebirth, this world and the afterlife cannot be properly
established. Therefore, the concept of rebirth...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hargasiddhAta mAnane kA AdhAra dharma, artha, kAma aura mokSa yaha cAra
puruSArtha haiN| inake bAre meM aneka cintakoM ne apane-apane dRSTikoNa se
vicAra vyakta kiye haiM  /  jinakI dRSTi meM yaha dRzyamAna jagata hI saba
kuSTha hai, unhoMne to artha aura kAma puruSArtha ko mukhya mAnA aura kisI na
kisI prakAra se sustra prApta karanA jIvana kA lakSya nirdhArita kiyaa| ataeva
ve aisA koI siddhAnta mAnane ke lie bAdhya nahIM the aura na utsuka hI jo acche-
bure. janmAntara yA paraloka kI prApti karAne vAlA ho  /  yaha pakSa
cArvAkadarzana-paramparA ke nAma se prakhyAta huaa| jisakA ekamAtra lakSya hai
yAvajjIved sukhaM jIved RNaM kRtvA dhRtaM pibet  /  bhasmIbhUtasya dehasya
punarAgamanaM kutaH  //  lekina isake sAtha hI yaha cintana bhI vyApaka rahA hai
aura Aja bhI hai, jo dRzyamAna jagata ke atirikta anya koI zreSTha yA kaniSTha
loka, mRtyu ke bAda janmAntara kI sattA bhI svIkAra karatA hai  /  alaeva dharma
aura mokSa puruSArtha ko bhI svIkAra kiyA gyaa| paraloka aura punarjanma meM
sukhaprApti dharma aura mokSa puruSArtha mAne binA sambhava nahIM hai  /  usakA
mantavya hai ki 'yadi karma na hoM to janma-janmAntara, ihalokaparaloka kA
sambandha ThIka se nahIM baiTha sakatA hai| ataeva punarjanma kI

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(18) The belief in karma is the basis of the karmic system. Those who hold this
belief are called reincarnationists. Two schools of thought on the theory of
karma:  There are two schools of thought among these karma theorists. One school
of thought is that rebirth and the afterlife are inevitable as a result of
karma, but for a superior world and a superior birth, karma must also be
superior. Their conception of a superior world is limited to heaven. They
believe in the three goals of life: dharma, artha, and kama. In their view,
moksha has no place as a goal of life. Therefore, they are called
tripurushartha-vadis.  The essence of these tripurushartha-vadi thinkers is that
the fruit of good deeds is heaven and the fruit of bad deeds is hell, etc. This
dharma and adharma are called punya-papa or adrishta, and through them the cycle
of birth-rebirth, heaven-hell continues. Its destruction is not possible, but it
is possible that if one wants to attain a superior world and superior happiness,
then one should perform the dharma purushartha. Adharma-papa is to be avoided
and dharma-punya is to be adopted. Their belief in dharma and adharma is that
socially acceptable good conduct is dharma and reprehensible conduct is adharma.
Therefore, one should behave in a refined manner for the sake of social order.
This school of thought became famous by the name of pravartanadharma. Wherever
pravartanadharma is mentioned, it is indicative of the views of these
tripurushartha-vadi thinkers. They are known as Brahman-marg, Mimamsaka or
Karmakandi.  On the contrary, the views of the other supporters of the karma-
tattva-vadis are stated...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 18 ) mAnyatA ke AdhArabhata karatantra kA mAnanA ArAka hai  /  isa prakAra kI
mAnyatA vAle punarjanmavAdI kahalAte haiM  /  karmasiddhAnta ko mAnyatA : do
vicAradhArAe~ ina karmasiddhAntavAdiyoM meM do vicAradhArAe~ dRSTigocara hotI
haiN| eka vicAradhArA yaha hai ki karma ke phalasvarUpa janmAntara aura paraloka
avazya hai, kintu zreSThaloka aura zreSThajanma ke lie karma bhI zreSTha honA
cAhie  /  zreSThaloka ke rUpa meM unakI kalpanA svarga taka hI sImita hai  /  ve
dharma, artha aura kAma ina tIna puruSArthoM ko mAnane vAle haiN| unakI dRSTi
meM mokSa kA puruSArtha rUpa meM koI sthAna nahIM hai  /  isalie inako
tripuruSArthavAdI kahA jAtA hai  /  ina tripuruSArthavAdI vicArakoM kA mantavya
saMkSepa meM isa prakAra hai ki dharma- zubhakarma kA phala svarga aura adharma
azubhakarma kA phala naraka Adi hai  /  yaha dharmAdharma hI puNya-pApa yA
adRSTa kahalAte haiM aura inhIM ke dvArA janma-janmAntara, svarga-naraka kI
prAptirUpa cakra calatA rahatA hai  /  jisakA uccheda zakya nahIM hai, kintu
itanA hI sambhava hai ki yadi uttamaloka aura uttamasukha pAnA hai to dharma
puruSArtha kro| adharma-pApa heya hai aura dharma -puNya upAdeya hai| dharma
aura adharma ke rUpa meM inakI mAnyatA hai ki samAjamAnya ziSTa AcaraNa dharma
aura nindya AcaraNa adharma hai  /  ataeva sAmAjika suvyavasthA ke lie ziSTa
AcaraNa karanA caahie| isa vicAradhArA kI pravartakadharma ke nAma se prasiddhi
huI  /  jahA~ bhI pravartakadharma kA ullekha kiyA jAtA hai, vaha ina
tripuruSArthavAdI cintakoM ke mantavya kA sUcaka hai| brAhmaNa-mArga, mImAMsaka
yA karmakANDI ke nAma se yaha tripuruSArthavAdI prasiddha haiN| isake viparIta
karmatattvavAdI dUsare samarthakoM kA maMtavya ukta

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is fundamentally different from the proponents of *pravratak dharma* and
*tripurushartha*. They believe that karma is indeed the cause of rebirth. By
performing righteous and prescribed actions (deeds), one can attain heaven. But
being content with attaining heaven is not the goal of the soul, nor is it the
fulfillment of the soul's purpose. Where is the attainment of the soul's
independent, pure form in this? Therefore, for the attainment of the self-nature
and the fulfillment of the purpose, *dharma-punya* is as objectionable as
*adharma-papa*. According to them, the fourth *moksha* purpose is independent,
and *moksha* is the only goal of the soul. For *moksha*, both *punya-rupa* and
*papa-rupa* karma are necessary. Not only that, *diyi* cannot be destroyed.
Karma can be destroyed by effort. This ideology became known as *nivartak
dharma*. Its vision is not limited to the social system, but is primarily
individualistic (self-developmental). An individual can achieve the ultimate
goal by developing himself through his own efforts. The *nivartak dharma* view
on karma  According to the *nivartak dharma* view, ultimate karma cessation is
possible, and it is possible only through the efforts of the soul itself.
Indicating the root cause of the origin of karma, it is said that the root cause
of *dharma-punya* and *adharma-papa* is not the prevailing social tendencies-
rejections, prohibitions, but ignorance and attachment-aversion. No matter how
righteous the social behavior may be, if it is based on ignorance and
attachment-aversion, it will give rise to *adharma*. This distinction between
*punya* and *papa* is for those who have a gross vision. In reality, *punya* and
*papa*, being based on ignorance and attachment-aversion, are *adharma* and
objectionable. Therefore, self-independence

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pravartakadharmavAdiyoM, tripuruSArthavAdiyoM se nitAnta bhinna hai| ve mAnate
haiM ki punarjanma kA kAraNa karma avazya hai| ziSTa-sammata evaM vihita karmoM
(kAryoM) ke AcaraNa se svarga prApta kiyA jA sakatA hai| kintu svarga kI prApti
vArane meM hI santoSa mAnanA jIva kA lakSya nahIM hai aura na isameM AtmA ke
puruSArtha kI pUrNatA hai| isameM AtmA ke svatantra, zuddha svarUpa kI upalabdhi
kahA~ hai ? ataeva AtmasvarUpa kI upalabdhi evaM puruSArtha kI pUrNatA ke lie
adharma-pApa kI taraha dharmapuNya bhI heya hai| inake anusAra cauthA mokSa
puruSArtha svatantra hai aura mokSa hI ekamAtra AtmA kA lakSya hai  /  mokSa ke
lie puNyarUpa yA pAparUpa donoM prakAra ke karma ke haiN| yahI nahIM hai diI kA
uccheda nahIM kiyA jA sakatA hai| prayatna ke dvArA karma kA uccheda zakya hai
/  yaha vicAradhArA nivartakadharma ke rUpa meM prakhyAta huii| isakI daSTi
sAmAjika vyavasthA taka hI sImita na hokara mukhya rUpa se vyaktivikAsavAdI
(Atma-vikAsavAdI) hai| vyakti apanA vikAsa karake parama lakSya kI prApti apane
puruSArtha ke bala para kara sakatA hai  /  nivartakadharma kA karma viSayaka
maMtavya nivartakadharma ke mantavyAnusAra Atyantika karmanivRtti zakya hai aura
vaha svayaM AtmA ke prayatnoM dvArA hI sambhava hotI hai 1 karma kI utpatti ke
mUla kAraNa kA saMketa karate hue kahA gayA hai ki dharma-puNya aura adharma
pApa ke mUla kAraNa pracalita sAmAjika pravRtti-nivRtti, vidhiniSedha nahIM
haiM, apitu ajJAna aura rAga-dveSa haiM  /  kaisA bhI ziSTa-sammata sAmAjika
AcaraNa kyoM na ho, agara vaha ajJAna evaM rAga-dveSamUlaka hai to usase adharma
kI hI utpatti hogii| puNya-pApa kA yaha bheda to sthUladRSTi vAloM ke lie hai|
vastutaH puNya evaM pApa satra ajJAna evaM rAga-dveSa mUlaka hone se adharma
evaM heya haiN| isalie AtmasvAtantrya

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
For the ignorant and the society-prescribed customs based on attachment and
aversion are also to be abandoned like the sinful karmas rooted in adharma, and
their eradication is essential. When the Nivartaka Dharmavadis accepted the
eradication of karma and liberation as the main purushartha, it became necessary
to determine the causes that eradicate karma and lead to liberation. Therefore,
since the tendency towards karma is born out of ignorance and attachment-
aversion, the main remedy for its complete eradication was considered to be
Samyagjnana, which is opposed to ignorance, and Samabhava (Samyakcharitra),
which is opposed to attachment-aversion, and these were considered as the means.
Swadhyaya, tapas, dhyana, etc. were accepted as aids to Samyagjnana and Samyama.
When the Nivartaka Dharmavadis deeply contemplated the nature of liberation and
the means of attaining it, they also had to contemplate the karma tattva. They
also defined karma, its divisions, and the definitions of its divisions. They
classified karmas from the perspective of cause and effect. They discussed their
power to bear fruit, their time limits, etc. They also considered the mutual
relationship of karmas, the power of the soul, etc., and systematically
discussed everything else that was necessary in this regard. In this way, the
systematic contemplation of the Nivartaka Dharmavadis on the subject of karma
led to the creation of a good karma shastra. The difference of opinion among the
Nivartaka Dharmavadis regarding the karma theory is that their general opinion
is that by destroying the root of karma in some way or the other, one should
attain that state from which one does not return to the cycle of birth and
death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ke lie ajJAna evaM rAga-dveSamUlaka samAjavihita ziSTakarma bhI adharmamUlaka
pApa karmoM kI taraha tyAjya haiM aura unakA uccheda honA Avazyaka hai| jaba
nivartakadharmavAdiyoM ne karma kA uccheda aura mokSa ko mukhya puruSArtha mAna
liyA taba karma ke ucchedaka aura mokSa ke janaka kAraNoM ko nizcita karanA
Avazyaka ho gyaa| ataeva karmapravRtti ajJAna evaM rAga-duSajanita hone se usakI
Atyantika nivRtti kA mukhya upAya ajJAna-virodhI samyagjJAna aura gaga-dveSa-
virodhI samabhAva (samyakcAritra), saMpama ko sAdhana mAnA tathA svAdhyAya,
tapa, dhyAna Adi upAyoM ko samyagjJAna aura saMyama ke sahayogI rUpa meM svIkAra
kiyaa| nivartakadharmavAdiyoM ne jaba mokSa ke svarUpa aura usakI prApti ke
sAdhanoM ke bAre meM gaharA vicAra kiyA taba usake sAtha ho karmatattva kA
cintana bhI karanA pdd'aa| unhoMne karma, usake bheda tathA bhedoM kI
paribhASAe~ bhI nizcita kI  /  kArya-kAraNa kI dRSTi se karmoM kA vargIkaraNa
kiyaa| unakI phala dene kI zakti evaM kAla-maryAdA Adi kA vivecana kiyA  /
karmoM kA pArasparika sambandha, AtmA kI zakti Adi kA bhI vicAra evaM isase
sambandhita aura bhI jo kucha vicAra Avazyaka the, sabhI kA kramabaddha
vyavasthita vivecana kiyaa| isa prakAra nivartakadharmavAdiyoM ke karma-viSayaka
vyavasthita cintana me eka acche karmazAstra kA nirmANa ho gyaa|
niztakadharmavAdiyoM meM vicArabhinnatAe~ _karmasiddhAnta ke sambandha meM
nivartakadharmavAdiyoM kA sAmAnya mantavya yaha hai ki kisI na kisI prakAra
karmoM ke mUla ko naSTa karake usa avasthA ko prApta karanA, jisase punaH janma-
maraNa ke cakra meM na AnA

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(21) Having attained the ultimate cessation of karmas, the soul, free from all
attachments, attains the supreme state. However, due to different processes of
philosophical inquiry, variations are observed in the understanding of these
principles. There are mainly three types: (1) Atomistic, (2) Principalist, and
(3) Atomistic with an element of the Principal.   Among these, the Atomistic
view, while advocating for liberation, is not as opposed to the Dharma of
Conduct as the second and third types of thinkers. This view became known as the
Nyaya-Vaisheshika philosophy.  The second view is the Principalist. This view,
advocating for the ultimate cessation of karmas, considers the Dharma of Conduct
as undesirable. This view is known as the Samkhya-Yoga philosophy. Based on the
role of this philosophy, the Vedanta philosophy and the path of renunciation
gained prominence.  The third view is that of the Atomistic with an element of
the Principal. This view, like the second, is fundamentally opposed to the
Dharma of Conduct and is known as Jain philosophy. Buddhist philosophy is also
considered opposed to the Dharma of Conduct, but it is considered a later
development, a blend of the second and third views.  While Buddhist and Samkhya
philosophies have considered the principle of karma, they later focused their
thought on the path of meditation, leading to a one-sided perspective. As a
result, their contribution to the literature on karma is negligible, and what
exists does not contribute to the development of thought. However, Jain
thinkers, like their contemplation on other subjects, have also deeply explored
the principle of karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 21 ) par3e  /  karmoM kI Atyantika nivRttisa AtmaH soyA nAlabdhi karake
parama avasthA ko prApta kara le| lekina tattvacintana ko bhinna-bhinna
prakriyAoM ke kAraNa unameM vibhinnatAe~ dekhI jAtI haiM  /  inameM mukhyatayA
tIna prakAra dekhe jAte haiM-(1) paramANuvAdI, (2) pradhAnavAdI, aura (3)
paramANuvAdI hokara bhI pradhAna kI chAyA vAlA 1 inameM paramANuvAdI mokSa-
samarthaka hone para bhI pravartakadharma ke utane virodhI nahIM, jitane dUsare
aura tIsare prakAra ke vicAraka haiN| yaha pakSa nyAya-vaizeSika darzana ke rUpa
meM prasiddha huaa| dUsarA pakSa pradhAnavAdI hai| yaha pakSa Atyantika
karmanivRtti kA samarthaka hone se pravartakadharma ko heya batalAtA hai| yaha
pazna sAMsya-yoga ke nAma se prasiddha hai| isI krI tattvajJAna kI bhUmikA ke
AdhAra para vedAnta-darzana aura saMnyAsa mArga kI pratiSThA huI  /  tIsarA
pakSa pradhAna-chAyApana paramANuvAdiyoM kA hai| yaha pakSa bhI dUsare pakSa ko
taraha pravartakadharma kA Atyantika virodhI hai jo jainadarzana ke nAma se
vikhyAta hai| bauddha-darzana bhI pravartakadharma kA virodhI mAnA jAtA hai,
lekina vaha dUsare aura tIsare pakSa ke mizraNa kA eka uttaravartI vikAsa
kahalAtA hai| bauddha aura sAMkhyadarzana meM karmatattva ke bAre meM kucha
vicAra avazya kiyA gayA hai, lekina bAda meM unhoMne dhyAna mArga kA anusaraNa
karake usa para hI apanI cintanadhArA kendrita kara lii| jisase unakA dRSTikoNa
ekAMgI bana gyaa| isakA pariNAma yaha huA ki karmasAhitya meM unakI dena
nagaNya-sI raha gaI aura jo kucha hai bhI, vaha cintana kI vikasita karane meM
sahAyaka nahIM banatI hai| lekina jaina-cintakoM ne anya-anya viSayoM ke cintana
kI taraha karmatatva ke bAre meM bhI gahana

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(22) Through deep thought and subtle contemplation, Indian philosophy has made a
great contribution that is unique and unparalleled in itself. The framework of
karma in Jain philosophy, while outlining the characteristics of karma, its
divisions, and sub-divisions, considers three stages for each karma: bondage,
existence, and fruition. These stages of karma are also described in other
philosophies. They call bondage 'kriyaman', existence 'mantrit', and fruition
'prarabdh'. However, the way Jain philosophy explains the different experiential
states of the embodied soul through eight karmas, including jnanavarniya, and
their sub-divisions, is not found in other philosophies. Even in Patanjali's
philosophy, karma is categorized into three types of consequences: jati (birth),
ayu (lifespan), and bhog (enjoyment). But compared to Jain philosophy's views on
karma, this description appears unclear and insignificant.  Jain philosophy
clearly defines the nature of the soul and karma, explaining how karma is
connected to the soul, its causes, the reasons for the development of different
powers in karma, the duration of the connection between the soul and karma, its
minimum and maximum time limits, the duration for which karma can bear fruit,
whether the time for karma to bear fruit can be changed, and if so, what self-
transformations are necessary for it. What self-transformations can transform
the intensity of karma from strong to weak and vice versa? How is the inherently
pure soul stained by the influence of karma, and why does the soul not deviate
from its nature even when covered by the veils of karma?  These are some of the
questions about the bondage, existence, and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 22 ) vicAra aura sUkSmAtisUkSma cintana karake bhAratIyadarzana ko mahAna
dena dI jo apane Apa meM anUThI aura advitIya hai  /  jainadarzana kI karmatatva
sambandhI rUparekhA jainadarzana meM karma kA lakSaNa, usake bheda, prabheda Adi
kA digdarzana karAte hue pratyeka karma kI bandha, sattA aura udaya - yaha tIna
avasthAyeM mAnI haiN| jenetara darzanoM meM bhI karma kI ina avasthAoM kA
varNana milatA hai  /  unameM bandha ko 'kriyamANa', sattA ko 'maMtrita' aura
udaya ko 'prArabdha' kahA hai | parantu jainadarzana meM jAnAvaraNIya Adi ATha
karmoM aura unake prabhedoM ke dvArA saMsArI AtmA kA anubhavagamya vibhinna
avasthAoM kA jaisA spaSTa va sarala vivecana kiyA hai, vaisA anya darzanoM meM
nahIM hai  /  pAtaMjaladarzana meM bhI karma ke jAti, Ayu aura bhoga - yaha tIna
taraha ke vipAka banalAge haiM, lekina jainadarzana ke karma samvandhI vicAroM
ke sAmane vaha varNana aspaSTa aura akiMcitkara pratIta hotA hai  /
jainadarzana meM AtmA aura karma kA lakSaNa spaSTa karate hue AtmA ke sAtha
karma kA sambandha kaise hotA hai ? usake kAraNa kyA haiM? kisa kAraNa se karma
meM kaisI zakti utpanna ho rahI hai ? AtmA ke sAtha karma kA sambandha kisa
samaya taka rahatA hai, usakI kama se kama aura adhika se adhika kitanI kAla
maryAdA hai ? karma kitane samaya taka phala dene meM samartha rahatA hai ?
karma ke phala dene kA samaya badalA bhI jA sakatA hai yA nahIM; aura yadi
badalA bhI jA sakatA hai to usake lie kaise Atma- pariNAma Avazyaka haiM ?
karmazaktiyoM kI tIvratA ko mandatA meM aura mandatA ko tIvratA meM pariNamita
karane vAle kauna se AtmapariNAma haiM ? svabhAvataH zuddha AtmA bhI karma ke
prabhAva se kisa-kisa prakAra malina hai aura karma ke AvaraNoM se AvRta hone
para bhI AtmA apane svabhAva se cyuta kyoM nahIM hotI ? ityAdi karmoM ke bandha,
sattA

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(23) A detailed and comprehensive explanation of the countless questions arising
from the concept of *udaya* (arising) is provided in Jain Karma literature. Jain
Karma Shastra describes various stages of karma, generally categorized as
*bandha* (binding), *satta* (existence), *udaya* (arising), *udirana*
(stimulation), *udvartana* (ascent), *apvartana* (descent), *sanक्रमण*
(transition), *upashmana* (mitigation), *nidhatti* (destruction), *nikachan*
(extraction), and *abada* (unhindered). This classification comprehensively
explains the power of karma and the soul's capacity, enabling it to break free
from the cycle of birth and death and attain its true nature. Classification of
Differences Based on the aforementioned concise outline of Jain philosophy on
karma, the discussion reveals the progression of the soul's power, demonstrating
the gradual decline of *bandha*, *satta*, and *udaya* stages of karma due to the
soul's purity. Now, we delve into the "Karmastava" (second Karma text). This
text primarily focuses on the soul's increasing progress along this path of
development. The purpose of composing the second Karma text is to elaborate on
the soul's capacity for *bandha*, *udaya*, and *udirana* of karma, while the
first Karma text, "Karmavipak," outlined the fundamental and derived natures of
karma and their *bandha*, *udaya*, *udirana*, and *satta* potential. Style of
Subject Description There are countless beings in the world. Therefore, it is
impossible to illustrate the capacity for *bandha* and other aspects of karma
based on a single individual.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 23 ) aura udaya kI apekSA utpanna hone vAle saMkhyAtIta praznoM kA sayuktika
vizada, vistRta spaSTIkaraNa jaina karmasAhitya meM kiyA gayA hai| jaina
karmazAstra meM karma kI jina vividha avasthAoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai, unakA
sAmAnyatayA bandha, sattA, udaya, udIraNA, udvartanA, apavartanA, saMkramaNa,
upazamana, nidhatti, nikAcana aura abAdha ina te haiN| isa vargIkaraNa meM karma
kI zakti ke sAtha AtmA kI kSamatA kA pUrNarUpeNa spaSTIkaraNa kiyA gayA hai|
jisase vaha janma-maraNa ke cakra kA bhedana kara apane svarUpa ko prApta kara
usameM sthita ho jAtI hai  /  bhedoM meM vargIkaraNa jainadarzana kI ukta
karmaviSayaka saMkSipta rUparekhA ke AdhAra para varNita viSaya ke bAre meM
vicAra Atmazakti ke vikAsa kA krama AtmA kI vizuddhatA ke kAraNa krama-krama se
karmoM kI bandha, sattA aura udayAvasthA kI hInatA kA digdarzana karAyA hai  /
aba 'karmastava' ( dvitIya karmagrantha) meM karate haiN| isa grantha meM mukhya
rUpa se aura usa vikAsapatha para bar3hatI huI dvitIya karmagrantha kI racanA kA
uddezya 'karmavipAka' nAmaka prathama karmagrantha meM granthakAra ne karma kI
mUla tathA uttaraprakRtiyoM evaM unakI bandha, udaya- udIraNA, sattA yogya
saMkhyA kA saMketa kiyA hai aura isa dvitIya karmagrantha meM una prakRtiyoM kI
bandha, udaya - udIraNA, sattA ke lie jIva kI yogyatA kA varNana kiyA gayA hai|
viSaya varNana kI zailI saMsArI jIva ananta haiM  /  ataH kisI eka vyakti ke
AdhAra meM una satra kI vandhAdi sambandhI yogyatA kA digdarzana karAyA jAnA
sambhava

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(24) No. In addition, a person's qualifications related to karma, etc., are not
always the same, because the qualifications related to karma, etc., change
constantly due to the changing results and thoughts every moment. Therefore, the
spiritualists have classified worldly beings based on their inner purification-
induced evolution and impurity-induced devolution. This classification is called
'Gunasthan Krama' in the classical definition.  This order of Gunasthan is such
that it makes it easy to include all worldly beings in those divisions and to
explain their suitability related to karma, etc. And the ability of a being,
which changes constantly, can also be demonstrated by some division. This order
of Gunasthan has been established and eliminated by a psychoanalytic examination
of the fluid nature of the inner purity of worldly beings. This makes it easy to
tell and understand that a certain type of inner purity or impurity is the cause
of so many karmic natures, bondage, rise-excitation, and existence.  A brief
discussion of Gunasthan The places of qualities (soul powers), i.e., the gradual
stages of the soul's development, are called Gunasthan. In Jain philosophy,
'Gunasthan' is a technical term and its meaning is the state of the soul's
powers emerging - their pure function form - becoming manifest in the form of
tamas-bhaava.  The true nature of the soul is pure consciousness and complete
bliss, but as long as the three karmic coverings are overshadowing it, then
its...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 24 ) nahIM hai  /  isake atirikta eka vyakti kI kamavandhAdi sambandhI
yogyatA bhI sadA eka-samAna nahIM rahatI hai, kyoMki pratikSaNa pariNAmoM aura
vicAroM ke badalate rahane ke kAraNa bandhAdi sambandhI yogyatA bhI pratisamaya
parivartita hotI rahatI hai| ataeva adhyAtmajJAniyoM ne saMsArI jIvoM ke unakI
bhAbhyantara zuddhijanya utkrAnti, azuddhi-janya apakrAnti ke AdhAra para unakA
vargIkaraNa kiyaa| isa vargIkaraNa ko zAstrIya paribhASA meM 'guNasthAna krama'
kahate hai  /  /  guNasthAna kA yaha krama aisA hai ki jisase una vibhAgoM meM
sabhI saMsArI jIvoM kA samAveza evaM bandhAdi sambandhI unako yonyatA ko batAnA
sahaja ho jAtA hai aura eka jIva kI yogyatA jo pratisamaya badalA karatI hai,
usakA bhI nidarzana kisI na kisI vibhAga dvArA kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  ina
guNasthAnoM kA krama saMsArI jIvoM kI Antarika zuddhi ke taralama bhAva ke
manovizleSaNAtmaka parIkSaNa dvArA siddha karake nivarita kiyA gayA hai  /
isase yaha batAnA aura samajhanA sarala ho jAtA hai ki amuka prakAra kI Antarika
zuddhi yA azuddhi bAlA jIva itanI karmaprakRtiyoM ke bandha, udaya-udIraNA aura
sattA kA anikArI hai| guNasthAnoM kA saMkSepa meM vivecana guNoM (AtmazaktiyoM)
ke sthAnoM ko arthAt AtmA ke vikAsa kI . kramika avasthAoM ko guNasthAna kahate
haiN| jainadarzana meM 'guNasthAna' yaha eka pAribhASika zabda hai aura usakA
artha AtmazaktiyoM ke AvibharbhAva-unake zuddha kArya rUpa meM pariNata hote
rahane kI tara tama-bhAvApanna avasthA hai| AtmA kA yathArtha svarUpa zuddha
cetanA aura pUrNa Anandamaya hai, lekina jaba taka usa para tIna karmAvaraNa
chAyA huA ho taba taka usakA

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(25) The true nature is not visible. As the coverings are shed or destroyed, the
true nature is revealed. When the coverings are in their most intense state, the
soul is at the lowest level of its undeveloped state. This is the lowest level
of the soul's state, and when the coverings are completely destroyed, the soul
becomes stable in the fullness of its pure nature. That is its complete nature.
The highest, supreme, and unchangeable state. As the intensity of the coverings
of karma on the soul decreases, the soul gradually gains the benefit of its pure
nature, leaving its primary role and moving towards the highest role. In this
transitional state, the soul experiences many kinds of high and low
consequential states, which, while moving towards upliftment, also bring it back
to a lower role, and again from that lower role, it moves towards upliftment
with its specific consequences. This process continues, and finally, by the
strength of the soul's power, it overcomes those states and attains the ultimate
goal. These transitional states, from the beginning to the end and in the
middle, have been classified into fourteen divisions, which are called the
fourteen Gunasthanas.  The basis of Gunasthanas is the predominance of Mohkarma
in karmas, therefore its covering is the most prominent. That is, as long as Moh
is strong and intense, all other karma coverings remain strong and intense, and
as Moh weakens, the state of other coverings also weakens. Therefore, the main
obstacle in the development of the soul is the strength of Moh, and the main
helper is the weakening of Moh.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 25 ) asalI svarUpa dikhAI nahIM detA hai| jaise-jaise AvaraNa zithina yA
naSTa hote haiM bale vame jasakA asalI svarUpa pragaTa hotA jAtA hai| jaba
AvaraNoM kI tIyatama sthiti hotI hai taba AtmA avikasita dazA ke nimnatama stara
para hotI hai| yaha AtmA kI nimnatama stara kI sthiti ' hai aura jaba AcaraNa
vilkula naSTa ho jAte haiM taba AramA apane zuddha svarUpa kI pUrNatA meM sthira
ho jAtI hai  /  jo usakA pUrNa svabhAva hai| uccatama sarvocca apratipAtI sthiti
hai| AtmA para karmoM ke AvaraNa kI tIvatA jaise-jaise kama hotI jAtI hai,
vaise-vaise AtmA apanI prAthamika bhUmikA ko chor3akara zanaiH zanaiH zuddha
svarUpa kA lAbha karatI huI carama ucca bhUmikA kI ora gamana karatI hai  /  isa
gamanakAlIna sthiti meM AtmA aneka prakAra kI uccanIca pariNAmajanya sthitiyoM
kA anubhava karatI hai, jisase utthAna kI ora agrasara hote hue bhI punaH nimna
bhUmikA para bhI A pahuMcatI hai aura punaH usa nimna bhUmikA se apane pariNAma-
vizeSoM se utthAna kI ora agrasara hotI hai  /  yaha krama calatA rahatA hai
aura anta meM Atmazakti kI prabalatA se una sthitiyoM ko pAra karate hue carama
laHya ko prApta kara hI letI hai  /  prArambhika aura antima tathA madhya kI
saMkrAMtikAlIna ina saba avasthAoM kA vargIkaraNa karake usake caudaha vibhAga
kiye haiM, jo caudaha guNasthAna kahalAte haiN| guNasthAna kama kA AdhAra karmoM
meM mohakarma pradhAna hai ataH isakA AvaraNa pramukhatama hai arthAt jaba taka
moha balavAna aura tIda hai taba taka anya sabhI karmAvaraNa sabala aura tIvra
bane rahate haiM aura moha ke nirbala hote hI anya AvaraNoM kI sthiti bhI
nirbala banatI jAtI hai  /  isalie AtmA ke vikAsa meM mukhya bAdhaka moha kI
prabalatA aura mukhya sahAyaka moha ko nirbalatA

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(26)  It is for this reason that the sequential stages of the soul's development
are based on the intensity, mildness, and absence of *guna-sthana* and *moha-
shakti*.  The primary powers of *moha* are two: *darshan-moha* and *charitra-
moha*. The first power prevents the soul from having *darshan*, i.e., the
discernment of its true nature and form. The second power, even after the soul
has gained discernment, prevents it from acting accordingly. In practice, it is
also seen that when the true nature of an object is perceived, an effort is made
to obtain or avoid that object. For the soul progressing in spiritual
development, these are the two main tasks: *swaroop-darshan* and acting
accordingly, i.e., being established in one's true nature. Of these two powers,
the power that prevents the knowledge of one's true nature is called *darshan-
moha*, and the power that prevents one from being established in one's true
nature is called *charitra-moha*. Of these, the first power, in the form of
*darshan-moha*, can never be weak as long as the second power, in the form of
*charitra-moha*, is strong. As the first power becomes weaker and weaker, the
second power also becomes weaker accordingly. When the knowledge of one's true
nature is attained, the path to attaining the benefits of one's true nature
becomes easy.  The most covered state of the soul is the first *guna-sthana*,
which is called the *mithyatva guna-sthana*. In this, due to the strongest
influence of both powers of *moha*, the soul remains in a state that is
completely inferior to the spiritual state. Nevertheless, an infinite part of
that power remains revealed. In this role, no matter how much the soul achieves
material prosperity, it remains almost empty from the perspective of the
knowledge of its true nature. But the soul's nature is to develop, so knowingly
or unknowingly, when the veil of *moha* begins to diminish, it progresses
towards development and, while mitigating the most intense *raga* and *dvesha*,
it weakens *moha*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 26 ) hai| isI kAraNa AtmA ke vikAsa kI yaha kramagata avasthAeM - guNasthAna
mohazakti kI utkaTatA - mandatA aura abhAva para AdhArita haiM  /  moha kI
pradhAna zaktiyA~ do haiM- darzanamoha evaM cAritramoha  /  inameM se prathama
zakti AtmA ko darzana arthAt svarUpa pararUpa kA nirNaya, viveka nahIM hone detI
hai  /  dUsarI zakti AtmA ko viveka prApta kara lene para bhI tadanusAra
pravRtti nahIM karane detI hai  /  vyavahAra meM bhI yahI dekhA jAtA hai ki
vastu kA yathArtha darzana - bodha hone para usa vastu ko pAne yA zyAmane kI
ceSTA kI jAtI hai| AdhyAtmika vikAsagAmI AtmA ke lie bhI yahI do mukhya kArya
haiM - svarUpa-darzana aura tadanusAra pravRtti, yAnI svarUpa meM sthita honA  /
ina donoM zaktiyoM meM se svarUpa-bodha na hone dene vAlI zakti ko darzanamoha
aura svarUpa meM sthita na hone dene vAlI zakti ko cAritramoha kahate haiN|
inameM darzanamoharUpa prathama zakti jaba taka prabala ho taba taka dUsarI
cAritramoharUpa zakti kabhI nirbala nahIM ho sakatI hai| prathama zakti ke manda
mandatama hone ke sAtha hI dUsarI zakti bhI tadanurUpa hone lagatI hai  /
svarUpabodha hone para svarUpa lAbha prApti kA mArga sugama ho jAtA hai  /  AtmA
kI adhikatama AvRta avasthA prathama guNasthAna hai| jise mithyAtva guNasthAna
kahate haiN| isameM moha kI donoM zaktiyoM kA prabalatama prabhAva hone ke
kAraNa AtmA AdhyAtmika sthiti se sarvathA nimna dazA meM rahatI hai| phira bhI
usa zakti kA anantatra bhAga udghATita rahatA hai| isa bhUmikA meM AtmA bhautika
vaibhava kA utkarSa kitanA bhI kara le, lekina svarUpa-bodha kI dRSTi se prAyaH
zUnya rahatI hai  /  lekina vikAsa karatA to AtmA kA svabhAva hai, ataeva jAnate
-anajAnate jaba moha kA AvaraNa kama hone lagatA hai taba vaha vikAsa kI ora
agrasara ho jAtI hai aura tIvratama rAga-dveSa ko manda karatI huI moha kI

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
। 27) First, the soul manifests the strength to shatter the power of karma. This
is the role of the beginning of development. Even when the path of self-
realization is paved, the results of the soul sometimes become upward-facing,
sometimes downward-facing. This continues until the self-results become stable.
This stability is achieved in two ways - either the covering of self-realization
is completely destroyed or the covering is subdued (calm). In the state of being
subdued, the covering shows its effect when the opportunity arises, but when it
is destroyed, it is considered to be the state of self-realization. After the
development of the power of perception, the order of the development of the
power of character comes. Even after weakening the main power of attachment -
perception attachment - and realizing the true self, the soul cannot attain its
true state until the second power - character attachment - is weakened.
Therefore, it strives to subdue the second power of attachment. When it is able
to partially weaken that power, its evolution begins to become more upward-
facing. As this state increases, so does the stability of the true self. Even in
this state, the soul that has subdued perception attachment can fall from self-
realization and return to its initial state, and then all the previous results
of purification, etc., become useless. But the soul that has completely
destroyed perception attachment attains perfection and then rests.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  27 ) prathama zakti ko chinna-bhinna karane yogya Atmabala pragaTa kara
letI hai| yahI vikAsa ke prArambha hone kI bhUmikA hai  /  svarUpa-bodha kA
mArga prazasta hone para bhI kabhI AtmA ke pariNAma UrdhvamukhI hote haiM, kabhI
adhomukhI banate haiN| yaha kama bhI taba taka calatA rahatA hai jaba taka Atma-
pariNAmoM meM sthAyitva nahIM A jAtA  /  yaha sthAyitva do prakAra se prApta
hotA hai-yA to svarUpa-bodha ke AvaraNa kA pUrNatayA kSaya ho yA baha AvaraNa
zamita (zAnta) ho jaay| zamita hone kI sthiti meM to nimitta milane para AvaraNa
apanA prabhAva dikhAtA hai, lekina kSaya hone para marampa-bokSa kA sAta mAnA jA
rahA hai| darzanazakti ke vikAsa ke bAda cAritrazakti ke vikAsa kA krama AtA
hai| moha kI pradhAna zakti-darzanamoha ko zithila karake svarUpadarzana kara
lene ke bAda bhI jaba taka dUsarI zakti- cAritramoha ko zithila na kiyA jAye
taba taka AtmA kI svarUpasthiti nahIM ho sakatI hai| isalie vaha moha kI dUsarI
zakti ko manda karane ke lie prayAsa karatI hai| jaba vaha usa zakti ko aMzata:
zithila kara pAtI hai, taba usakI utkrAnti aura bhI UrdhvamukhI hone lagatI hai
/  jaise-jaise yaha sthiti vRddhigata hotI hai, vaise-vaise svarUpasthiratA bhI
bar3hatI jAtI hai  /  isa avasthA meM bhI darzanamoha ko zamita karane vAlI AtmA
svarUpa-bodha se patita hokara punaH apanI prArambhika avasthA meM A sakatI hai
aura taba pUrva meM jo kucha bhI pAriNAmika zuddhi Adi kI thI, vaha saba
vyartha-sI ho jAtI hai| lekina jisane darzanamoha kA sarvathA nAza kara diyA
hai, yaha AtmA to pUrNatA ko prApta karake hI virAma letI hai|

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(28) In these fourteen divisions of Gunasthana, the amount of development in the
subsequent Gunasthana is greater than the previous one, the third greater than
the second, and so on. This order of development depends on the degree of
spiritual stability. The degree of stability depends on the purity of the power
of Darshan and Charitramoha. In the first, second, and third Gunasthana, the
development of the soul's Darshan and Charitra power does not occur because they
are dominated by their restrictive causes. From the fourth Gunasthana onwards,
these restrictive Samskaras become weaker, which initiates the process of
development of powers in those respective Gunasthanas. These restrictive
Samskaras are called Kshayas.  There are four main divisions of these Kshayas.
These divisions are based on the intensity of the fruit-bearing power of the
Kshayik Samskaras. The first division is of Darshanmohaniya and Anantanabandi
Kshayas. This division restricts the Darshan power. The remaining three
divisions, which are called Apratyakhyanabaran, Pratyakhyanabaran, and Sanjwalan
respectively, are restrictive of the Charitra power. When the intensity of the
first division is present, the Darshan power does not manifest, but as the state
of weakness or absence develops, the Darshan power is expressed.  When the
Darshan power is expressed, or in other words, when the velocity of Darshanmoha
and Anantanabandi Kshayas is calmed or destroyed, at the end of the fourth
Gunasthana, 1. This statement is from a general perspective. Actually, the
second Gunasthana is not a stage of development, but rather a temporary abode
for a soul that has fallen from a higher state.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 28 ) guNasthAna ke ina caudaha bhedoM meM pahale kI apekSA dUsare meM, dUsare
kI apekSA tIsare meM isa prakAra pUrva-pUrvavartI guNasthAna kI apekSA
paraparavatI guNasthAna meM vikAsa kI mAtrA adhika hotI hai  / ' vikAsa ke isa
krama kA nirNaya Atmika sthiratA kI nyUnAdhikatA para avalambita hai  /
sthiratA kA tAratamya darzana aura cAritramoha zakti kI zuddhi kI taratamatA
para nirbhara hai  /  pahale, dUsare aura tIsare guNasthAna meM AtmA kI darzana
aura cAritra zakti kA vikAsa isalie nahIM ho pAsA ki unameM unake pratibandhaka
kAraNoM kI adhikatA rahatI hai| caturtha Adi guNasthAnoM se ve pratibandhaka
saMskAra manda hote haiM, jisase una-una guNasthAnoM meM zaktiyoM ke vikAsa kA
krama prArambha ho jAtA hai| ina pratibandhaka saMskAroM ko kaSAya kahate haiM
/  ina kaSAyoM ke mukhya rUpa meM cAra vibhAga haiM  /  ye vibhAga kASAyika
saMskAroM kI phala dene kI taratama zakti para AdhArita haiN| inameM se prathama
vibhAga-darzana mohanIya aura anantAnabandhI kaSAya kA hai| yaha vibhAga
darzanazakti kA pratibandhaka hotA hai| zeSa tIna vibhAga jinheM kramaza
apratyAkhyAnAbaraNa, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura saMjvalana kahate haiM,
cAritrazakti ke pratibandhaka haiN| prathama vibhAga kI tIvratA rahane para
darzanazakti kA AvirbhAva nahIM hotA hai, lekina jaise-jaise mandatA yA abhAva
kI sthiti banatI hai, darzanazakti vyakta hotI hai| darzana zakti ke vyakta hone
para yAnI-darzanamoha aura anantAnubandhI kaSAya kA vega zAnta yA kSaya hone
para caturtha guNasthAna ke anta meM 1. yaha kathana sAmAnya dRSTi se hai| vaise
dUsarA guNasthAna to bikAsa kI bhUmikA nahIM kintu Upara se patita huI AtmA ke
kSaNika abasthAna kA hI bhUcaka hai|

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The *apratyakhyanavaran kshaya* karmas are not present. In the fifth
*gunasthan*, the *charitra shakti* develops primarily. Subsequently, at the end
of the fifth *gunasthan*, the *pratyakhyanavaran kshaya* karmas cease to exist,
further enhancing the *charitra shakti*. This leads to detachment from the
senses, transforming the being into a *sadhu* (ascetic). This is the sixth stage
of development. In this stage, the *charitra* is still subject to disturbances
due to the presence of the opposing *sanjwalan kshaya* karmas. However, the
*charitra shakti* does not weaken. There are continuous obstacles to purity and
stability, and the soul constantly struggles against these disruptive factors.
When the soul overcomes these obstacles and continues to progress, surpassing
the seventh and subsequent *gunasthanas*, it reaches the twelfth *gunasthan*. In
the twelfth *gunasthan*, the opposing karmas of *darshan shakti* and *charitra
shakti* are completely destroyed, leading to the full development of both
powers. In this state, the being attains the state of *jivanmukta* *arihant* due
to the continued presence of the body, lifespan, etc. Later, upon the separation
from the body, etc., the soul attains the state of pure knowledge, *darshan*,
etc. The *jivanmukta* state is the thirteenth, and the state of complete
liberation without the body, etc., is the fourteenth *gunasthan*. The soul that
attains the fourteenth *gunasthan* develops into its true form and attains a
permanently stable state. This is called *moksha*. The complete absence of the
soul's powers in their most subtle form is the first *mithyatva gunasthan*, and
the gradual development and manifestation of the soul's complete form,
culminating in its own essence, is the fourteenth *ayogikevali gunasthan*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya kA saMskAra nahIM rahatA hai| jisame pAMcaveM
guNasthAna meM cAritrazakti kA prAthamika vikAsa hotA hai  /  inake anantara
pAMca guNasthAna ke anta meM pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya kA vega na rahane se
cAritrazakti kA vikAsa aura bar3hatA hai, jisase indriviyayoM me virakta hone
para jIva sAdhu (anagAra) bana jAtA hai| yaha vikAsa kI chaThavI bhUmikA hai|
isa bhUmikA meM cAritra kI vipakSI saMjvalana kaSAya ke vidyamAna rahane se
cAritrapAlana meM vikSepa to par3atA rahatA hai, kintu cAritrazakti kA vikAsa
dabatA nahIM hai  /  zuddhi aura sthiratA meM antarAya Ate rahate haiM aura AtmA
una vighAtaka kAraNoM se saMgharSa bhI karatI rahatI hai| isa saMgharSa meM
saphalatA prApta kara jaba saMjvalana saMskAroM ko dabAtI huI AtmA vikAsa kI ora
gatizIla rahatI hai taba sAtaveM Adi guNasthAnoM ko lA~ghakara bArahaveM
guNasthAna meM pahuMca jAtI hai  /  bArahavaM guNasthAna meM to darzana-zakti
aura cAritra-zakti ke vipakSI saMskAra sarvathA kSaya ho jAte haiM, jisase donoM
zaktiyAM pUrNa vikasita ho jAtI haiN| usa sthiti meM zarIra, Ayu Adi kA
sambandha rahane se jIvanmukta arihanta avasthA prApta ho jAtI hai aura bAda meM
zarIra Adi kA bhI viyoga ho jAne para zuddha jJAna, darzana Adi zaktiyoM se
sampanna AtmAvasthA prApta ho jAtI hai| jIvanmukta avasthA terA aura zarIra Adi
me rahita pUrNa niAkarma avasthA caudahavAM guNasthAna kahalAtA hai| _
caudahavA~ guNasthAna prApta AtmA apane yathArtha rUpa meM vikasita hokara sadA
ke lie susthira dazA prApta kara letI hai| isI ko mokSa kahate haiN| AtmA kI
samagra zaktiyoM ke atyadhika rUpa meM avyakta rahanA prathama mithyAtva
guNasthAna hai aura kramika vikAsa karate hue paripUrNa rUpa ko vyakta karake
Atmastha ho jAnA caudahavA ayogikevalI guNa

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is the place. This fourteenth Gunasthan is the identification of the
divinity, the Paramatmatva, seen in the fourth Gunasthan. The Gunasthanas from
the second to the thirteenth, between the first and fourteenth Gunasthanas, are
the names of the achievements obtained as a result of the duel between karma and
the soul. These are the links in the chain of the Gunasthanas, which are the
roles that the soul has to play in the path of gradual development.  Here is a
very brief outline of the Gunasthanas. The names of the Gunasthanas, their
systematic and detailed description, are given in the second chapter of this
book. In other books, the discussion about Gunasthanas is similar to the
Janadarshan. In other philosophies too, the development of the soul has been
considered. In them too, it is believed that the karma-bound soul gradually
develops and attains complete liberation. In books like Yoga Vashishtha and
Patanjali Yoga Sutras, the roles of self-development have been described in
detail. Yoga Vashishtha has considered seven roles of ignorance and seven roles
of knowledge. Their names are as follows:  Roles of Ignorance: 1. Beejajagrat,
2. Jagrat, 3. Mahajagrat, 4. Jagratswapna, 5. Swapna, 6. Swapnajagrat, 7.
Sushuptak.  Roles of Knowledge: 1. Shubhechcha, 2. Vicharana, 3. Tanumansa, 4.
Sattvapatti, 5. Asansakti, 6. Padarthaabhavini, 7. Turyaga.  The summary of the
above 14 roles is as follows:  1. Beejajagrat: In this role, the awareness of
ego and possessiveness does not awaken. But there is the ability to awaken in
the form of a seed. This role is considered in small bodies like plants etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthAna hai  /  yaha caudahavAM guNasthAna caturtha guNasthAna meM dekhe gaye
Izvaratva, paramAtmatva kA tAdAtmya hai| pahale aura caudahaveM guNasthAnoM ke
bIca jo do se lekara terahaveM paryanta guNasthAna haiM, ve karma aura AtmA ke
dvandvayuddha ke phalasvarUpa prApta hone vAlI upalabdhiyoM ke nAma haiN|
kramika vikAsa ke mArga meM AtmA ko kina-kina bhUmikAoM para AnA par3atA hai,
yahI guNasthAnoM kI kramabaddhaVkhalA kI ve eka-eka kar3iyA~ haiM  /  yahA~
guNasthAnoM kI ati saMkSipta rUparekhA batalAI hai| guNasthAnoM ke nAma, unakA
kramabaddha vyavasthita vizeSa vivaraNa isI grantha kI dUsarI gAthA meM diyA
gayA hai| anya granthoM meM guNasthAna sambandhI carcA janadarzana ke samAna hI
anya darzanoM meM bhI AtmAvikAsa ke sambandha meM vicAra kiyA gayA hai| unameM
bhI karmabaddha AtmA ko kramika vikAsa karate hue pUrNa mukta dazA ko prApta
karanA mAnA hai  /  yogavAziSTa aura pAtaMjala yogasUtra Adi granthoM meM
AtmavikAsa kI bhUmikAoM kA vistAra se kathana kiyA gayA hai yogavAziSTa meM sAta
bhUmikAyeM ajJAna kI aura sAta bhUmikAyeM jJAna kI mAnI haiN| unake nAma
kramazaH isa prakAra haiM azAna kI bhUmikAyeM-1. bIjajAgrata, 2. jAgrata, 3
mahAjAgrata, 4. jAgratasvapna, 5. svapna, 6. svapnajAgrata, 7. suSuptaka  /
jJAna kI bhUmikAyeM-1. zubhecchA, 2. vicAraNA, 3. tanumAnasA, 4. sattvApatti, 5.
asaMsakti 6. padArthAbhAvinI, '7. tuurygaa| ukta 14 bhUmikAoM kA sArAMza nimna
prakAra hai 1. bojajAgnata-isa bhUmikA meM ahaM evaM mamatva buddhi kI jAgRti
nahIM hotI hai| kintu bIja rUpa meM jAgRpti kI yogyatA hotI hai| yaha bhUmikA
vanaspati Adi kSudra nikAya meM mAnI gaI hai  /

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(31) 2. **Jagrat** - In this state, the ego and possessiveness are slightly
awakened. 3. **Mahajagrat** - In this state, the ego and possessiveness are
strengthened. This state can be considered as human or divine. 4.
**Jagratswapna** - In this state, there is an element of delusion even while
awake. For example, seeing two moons instead of one, or the illusion of silver
in a shell. Due to the presence of delusion, this state is called Jagratswapna.
5. **Swapna** - The perception of a dream after waking up from sleep is called
the Swapna state. 6. **Swapnajagrat** - This state involves the immersion of a
dream that has been ongoing for years. It continues even after the body dies. -
7. **Sushuptak** - A state like deep sleep. In this state, there is a state of
inertia, and karmas remain only in the form of desires.  This is a summary of
the seven states of ignorance. The third to seventh states occur in the human
body. The states of knowledge are as follows:  1. **Shubhechcha** - A desire
with a lineage of self-reflection. 2. **Vicharana** - A tendency towards good
conduct due to the study of scriptures and the practice of detachment through
good company. 3. **Tanumansa** - A decrease in attachment to sense objects due
to Shubhechcha and Vicharana. 4. **Sattvapatti** - Being established in the true
and pure self.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 31 ) 2. jAgrata - isameM ahaM evaM mamatva buddhi alpAMza meM jAgrata hotI
hai  /  3. mahAjAgrata - isa bhUmikA meM AI va mamatya buddhi dizene puSTa hotI
hai| yaha bhUmikA mAnava, devamamUha meM mAnI jA sakatI hai| 4. jAgratasvapna -
isa bhUmikA meM jAgate hue bhI bhrama kA samAveza hotA hai  /  jaise eka candra
ke badale do dikhanA, sIpa meM cAMdI kA bhrama honA  /  isa bhUmikA meM bhrama
hone ke kAraNa yaha jAgratasvAna kahalAtI hai| 5. svapna nidrAvasthA meM Ae hue
svapna kA jAgane ke pazcAta jo bhAna hotA hai, use svapna bhUmikA kahate haiM  /
6. svapnajAgrata varSoM taka prArambha rahe hue svapna kA isameM mamAveza hotA
hai | zarIrapAta ho jAne para bhI calatA rahatA hai  /  - 7. suSuptaka -
pragAr3ha nidrA jaisI avasthA | isameM jar3a jaimI sthiti ho jAtI hai aura karma
mAtra vAsanA rUpa meM rahe hue hote haiM  /  yaha sAta ajJAnamaya bhUmikA ke
bhedoM kA sArAMza hai  /  inameM tIsarI se sAtavIM taka kI bhUmikAyeM mAnava
nikAya meM hotI haiM  /  jJAnamaya bhUmikAoM kA rUpa nimna haiM 1. zubhecchA-
AtmAvalokana kI vaMzagyayukta icchA  /  2. vicAraNA zAstra aura satsaMgapUrvaka
vairAgyAbhyAsa ke kAraNa sadAcAra meM pravRtti  /  3. tanumAnasA - zubhecchA
aura vicAraNA ke kAraNa indriyaviSayoM meM Asakti kama honA  /  4. sattvApatti -
satya aura zuddha AtmA meM sthira honA  /

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(32) (5) The emergence of supreme joy in the mind due to the ripening of non-
attachment and non-association. (6) Padarthaabhavini - In this, all desires for
external and internal objects are destroyed. (7) Turyaga - Being stable in one's
own nature by completely forgetting the awareness of discrimination. This is a
state like that of a Jivanmukta. The state of Videhamukti is the Turyatita state
that follows it.  The seven stages of ignorance can be counted in the order of
involution due to the strength of ignorance, and the seven stages of knowledge
can be counted in the order of evolution due to the gradual increase of
knowledge.  Buddhist philosophy also contemplates the evolution of the soul and
considers the states of the soul such as samsara and moksha. The Tripitaka
describes spiritual development, which outlines the following six stages of
development: (1) Andha Puthujjana, (2) Kalyana Puthujjana, (3) Sotapanna, (4)
Sakadagami, (5) Aupapatika, (6) Arhat.  Puthujjana means ordinary human being.
Two distinctions have been made between Andha Puthujjana and Kalyana Puthujjana.
Just as Jain Agamas describe karma, Buddhist literature also describes ten
samyojanas (bondages).  Andha Puthujjana and Kalyana Puthujjana have ten types
of samyojanas. However, the difference between the two is that the former does
not receive the Aryan vision and good company, while the latter does. Both are
far from the path of Nirvana. To attain the path of Nirvana,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 32 ) (5) asaMsakti-asaMgarUpa paripAka se citta meM niratizaya Ananda kA
prAdurbhAva honaa| (6) padArthAbhAvinI-isameM bAhya aura Abhyantara sabhI
padArthoM para meM icchAyeM naSTa ho jAtI haiN| (7) tUryagA-bhedabhAva kA
bilkula bhAna bhUla jAne se eka mAtra svabhAvaniSThA meM sthira rahanA  /  yaha
jIvanmukta jaisI avasthA hotI hai  /  videhamukti kA viSaya usake pazcAt kI
tUryAtIta avasthA hai  /  ajJAna kI sAta bhUmikAoM ko ajJAna kI prabalatA se
avikAsakrama meM aura jJAna kI sAta bhUmikAoM meM kramazaH jJAna kI vRddhi hone
se vikAsa krama meM ginA jA sakatA hai  /  bauddhadarzana meM bhI AtmA ke
vikAsa-krama ke bAre meM cintana kiyA gayA hai aura AtmA kI saMsAra aura mokSa
Adi avasthAyeM mAnI haiN| tripiTaka meM AdhyAtmika vikAsa kA varNana upalabdha
hotA hai  /  jisameM vikAsa kI nimnalikhita 6 sthitiyA~ batAI haiM (1) andha
puthujjana, (2) kalyANa puthujana, (3) sotApana, (4) sakadAgAmI, (5) aupapAtika,
(6) arahA  /  puthujjana kA artha hai sAmAnya mAnava  /  usake andha puthujjana
aura kalyANa puthujjana yaha do bheda kiye gaye haiN| jainAgamoM meM karma
sambandhI varNana kI taraha bauddha sAhitya meM bhI dasa saMyojanAoM (bandhana)
kA varNana hai| andha puthujjana aura kalyANa pRthujjana meM dasoM prakAra kI
saMyojanAyeM hotI haiN| lekina una donoM meM yaha antara hai ki pahale ko Arya
darzana aura satsaMga prApta nahIM hotA hai, jabaki dUsare ko vaha prApta hotA
hai  /  donoM nirvANamArga se parAGa mukha haiN| nirvANamArga ko prApta karane

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(33) There are four types of beings: those who have destroyed three of the ten
fetters are called Sotapanna, those who have destroyed three and weakened two
are called Sakadagami, and those who have destroyed five are called Anagami.
Those who have destroyed all ten fetters are called Arhat.  The first stage
represents the time of spiritual underdevelopment. In the second, there is a
slight glimmer of development, but the influence of underdevelopment is more
pronounced than development. The third to sixth stages represent the progressive
increase of spiritual development, which culminates in the sixth stage - Arhat,
after which the state of Nirvana is attained.  The Ajivika sect may have also
indicated spiritual development through stages. As the leader of the Ajivika
sect, Mankhaliputra Goshalak is considered a rival of Lord Mahavira. Therefore,
he must have conceived of something like the Gunasthanas to explain spiritual
development. However, since no literature of his is available, nothing can be
said for certain. Nevertheless, Buddhist literature mentions eight stages of
spiritual development in the Ajivika sect: (1) Mand, (2) Khidda, (3) Pad Vimana,
(4) Ujjugat, (5) Sekh, (6) Saman, (7) Jin, (8) Panna.  Buddhaghosa, in his
Sumangalavilasini commentary on the Majjhima Nikaya, describes these eight
stages as follows: (1) Mand - From birth to seven days, the being remains in the
Mand state due to the pain of birth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 33 ) vAloM ke cAra prakAra haiN| jinhoMne tIna saMyojanAoM kA kSaya kiyA ve
sotApanna, jinhoMne tIna saMyojanAoM kA kSaya aura do ko zithila kiyA ve
sakadAgAmI aura jinhoMne pA~ca kA kSaya kiyA ve aupapAtika haiN| jinhoMne dasoM
saMyojanAoM kA kSaya kara diyA ve arahA kahalAte haiM  /  inameM prathama sthiti
AdhyAtmika avikAsa kAla kI hai| dUsarI meM vikAsa kA alpAMza meM sphuraNa hotA
hai, kintu vikAsa kI apekSA avikAsa kA prabhAva vizeSa rahatA hai| tIsarI se
chaTho sthiti bAdhyAtmika vikAsa ke uttarottara abhivRddhi kI hai aura vaha
vikAsa chaTavIM bhUmikA - arahA meM pUrNa hotA hai aura isake pazcAt nirvANa kI
sthiti banatI hai  /  AjIvaka mata meM bhI AtmavikAsa ko kamika sthitiyoM kA
saMketa kiyA gayA hogaa| kyoMki AjIvaka mata kA adhinetA maMkhaliputra gozAlaka
bhagavAna mahAvIra kI dekhA dekhI karane vAlA eka pratidvandvI sarIkhA mAnA jAtA
hai| isalie usane avazya hI AtmavikAsa kI kramika sthitiyoM ko batalAne ke lie
guNasthAnoM jaisI parikalpanA kI hogI  /  lekina usakA koI sAhitya upalabdha na
hone se nizcita rUpa se kucha bhI nahIM kahA jA sakatA hai| phira bhI bauddha
sAhitya meM AtmavikAsa ke lie AjIvaka mata ke ATha sopAna batalAye haiM (1)
manda, (2) khiDDA, (3) pada vImaMsA, (4) ujjugata, (5) sekha, (6) samaNa, (7)
jina, ( = ) panna | ina AThoM kA majjhimanikAya kI sumaMgalavilAsanI TIkA meM
buddhaghoSa ne nimna prakAra se varNana kiyA hai (1) manda - janma dina se
lekara sAta dina taka garbha niSkramaNajanya duHkha ke kAraNa prANI mandasthiti
meM rahatA hai  /

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(2) A child born from *khidda-durgati* (hellish existence) cries repeatedly,
while a child born from *sugati* (heavenly existence) remembers *sugati* and
laughs. This is the *khidda* (play) role. (3) *Pad Bimamsa* is when a child
takes its first steps on earth, either with the support of its parents or
someone else. (4) *Ujjugat* is when a child gains the ability to walk
independently. (5) *Sekh* is the role of a student during the time of learning
crafts, arts, etc. (6) *Saman* is the role of leaving home and taking monastic
vows. (7) *Jin* is the role of attaining knowledge by worshipping the *Acharya*.
(8) *Pann* is the role of a wise monk who has become *prajna* (enlightened) and
does not engage in any conversation, a selfless *Shraman*.  These eight roles,
the first three indicate a lack of development, while the last five indicate
development. After them, there should be liberation.  The aforementioned
*Patangala*, *Buddhist*, and *Ajivika* views on the roles for self-development
do not have the same systematic order and clarity as the *Gunasthanas* (stages
of spiritual progress) in Jainism. However, they are mentioned because these
philosophies, which believe in rebirth and the existence of this world and the
next, have contemplated the liberation of the soul from its bound state.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (2) khiDDA-durgati se Akara janma lene vAlA bAlaka punaH punaH rudana karatA
hai aura sugati se Ane vAlA sugati kA smaraNa kara hAsya karatA hai  /  yaha
khiDDA (krIr3A) bhUmikA hai  /  (3) pada bImasA-mAtA-pitA ke hAtha yA anya kisI
ke sahAre se bAlaka kA dharatI para paira rakhanA pada bImaMsA hai| (4) ujjugata
-paroM se svatantra rUpa se calane kI sAmarthya prApta krnaa| (5) sekha-zilpa
kalA Adi ke adhyayana ke samaya kI ziSya bhUmikA  /  (6) samaNaghara se
nikalakara saMnyAsa grahaNa karanA, samaNa bhUmikA hai| (7) jina-AcArya kI
upAsanA kara jJAna prApta karane kI bhuumikaa| (8) panna-prAjJa banA huA bhikSu
jaba kucha bhI bAtacIta nahIM karatA aise nirlobha zramaNa kI bhUmikA pamna hai
/  _ ina ATha bhUmikAoM meM prathama tIna bhUmikAe~ avikAsa kA aura anta kI
pAMca bhUmikAyeM vikAsa kA sucana karane vAlI haiM  /  unake bAda mokSa honA
caahie| ukta pAtaMjala, bauddha aura AjIvaka mata kI AtmavikAsa ke lie mAnI jAne
vAlI bhUmikAoM meM jainadarzana ke guNasthAnoM jaisI kramabaddhatA aura spaSTa
sthiti nahIM hai| phira bhI unakA prAsaMgika saMketa isalie kiyA hai ki janma-
janmAntara evaM ihaloka-paraloka mAnane vAle darzanoM ne AtmA ko kamabaddha
avasthA se mukta hone ke lie cintana kiyA hai  /

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The subject matter of the text and the basis of its composition: This second
Karmagrantha describes the bondage, arising, stimulation, and existence of the
lower natures in the order of the Gunasthanas. Therefore, from the perspective
of subject division, it has these four main divisions. In the Bondage section,
the bondage capacity of each being residing in each Gunasthana is shown, and in
the Arising, Stimulation, and Existence sections, the capacities related to
arising, stimulation, and existence are shown respectively.  This text is based
on the ancient Karmagrantha called "Karmastava," and its subject matter is the
same. The only difference between the two is that the ancient Karmagrantha has
55 verses, while this one has 34. What is said in detail in the ancient text is
said in a limited number of words in this one.  The author of this Karmagrantha,
which is based on the ancient one, has not mentioned the name "Karmastava" at
the beginning of the text. However, there is no doubt that it is called
"Karmastava." Because another author has mentioned this name in the last verse
of his third Karmagrantha with the phrase "Neyam Kammatyayam Soum."  In
practice, the ancient Karmagrantha is called "Karmastava," but it is clear from
its initial verse that its real name is "Bandhodayasattwa-yukta Stada." There is
also a chapter with this name in the Gommatasar Karmakanda. There is no
significant difference between the two names. Although both names contain the
word "stava," the meaning of the word "staba" is different in the Gommatasar
Karmakanda. In "Karmastava," the word "stava" means praise, which is well-known,
but in the Gommatasar, the meaning of "stava" is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 grantha kA viSaya-vibhAga aura racanA kA AdhAra isa dvitIya karmagrantha meM
guNasthAnoM ke krama meM kamaprakRtiyoM ke bandha, udaya-udIraNA aura sattA kA
kathana kiyA gayA hai  /  ata: viSayavibhAga kI dRSTi meM isake yahI mukhya cAra
vibhAga haiM  /  bandha adhikAra meM pratyeka guNasthAnavartI jIvoM kI bandha
yogyatA ko, udaya, udIraNA aura sattA adhikAra meM kramazaH udaya, udIraNA aura
sattA sambandhI yogyatA ko dikhalAyA hai  /  isa grantha kI racanA prAcIna
karmastava nAmaka dUsare karmagrantha ke AdhAra para huI hai aura usakA va isakA
viSaya eka hI hai| donoM meM bheda itanA hI hai ki prAcIna karmagrantha meM 55
gAthAyeM haiM aura isameM 34  /  prAcIna meM jo bAta kucha vistAra se kahI gaI
hai, isameM usa parimita zabdoM ke dvArA kaha diyA hai| prAcIna ke AdhAra se
banAye gaye isa karmagrantha kA 'karmastava' nAma kartA ne grantha ke prArambha
meM ullikhita nahIM kiyA hai, phira bhI isakA karmastava nAma hone meM koI
sandeha nahIM hai| kyoMki anyakartA ne apane race tIsare karmagrantha kI antima
gAthA meM neyaM kammatyayaM souM isa aMza se isa nAma kA kathana kara diyA hai
/  vyavahAra meM prAcIna karmagrantha kA nAma karmastava hai, kintu usako
prArambhika gAthA se spaSTa jAna par3atA hai ki usakA asalI nAma
'bandhodayasattva-yukta stada' hai| isI nAma se gommaTasAra karmakANDa meM bhI
eka prakaraNa hai| donoM ke nAmoM meM koI vizeSa antara nahIM hai, donoM meM
'stava' zabda mamAna hone para bhI gommaTasAra karmakANDa meM staba zabda kA
artha bhinna hai| karmastava' meM stava zabda kA matalaba stuti se hai, jo
sarvatra prasiddha hai, kintu gommaTasAra meM stava kA artha

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The term "Stuti" has been used here in a symbolic sense, referring to a
scripture that elaborates on all aspects of a subject, either in detail or in
summary.  _ Thus, even though there is similarity in the subject matter and
nomenclature, the difference in name and meaning seems to be a result of
differences in tradition and the time and place of the composition of the text.
Some points have been indicated in the preface. Readers, by studying the text
based on these ideas and observing other texts of Karma literature, will
experience a special joy. Sri Chand Surana 'Saras' - Devkumar Jain

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 stuti na lekara eka sAMketika artha kiyA hai--kisI viSaya ke samasta aMgoM kA
vistAra yA saMkSepa se varNana karane vAlA zAstra  /  _ isa prakAra viSaya aura
nAmakaraNa meM samAnatA hone para bhI nAmArtha meM jo bheda pAyA jAtA hai, vaha
sampradAyabheda tathA grantharacanA sambandhI dezakAla ke bheda kA pariNAma jAna
par3atA hai| prAkkathana ke rUpa meM kucha bAtoM kA saMketa kiyA gayA hai|
pAThaka gaNa ina vicAroM ke AdhAra para grantha kA adhyayana karate hue karma
sAhitya ke anya-anya granthoM kA avalokana kareMge to unheM eka vizeSa Ananda kI
anubhUti hogii| zrIcanda surAnA 'sarasa' -devakumAra jaina

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Our Important Publications 1-6 Karmagranth | Parts 1 to 6 Complete Text] 7
Pravachan Prabha 8 Jeevan Jyoti 4 Dhaval-Gyan-Dhara 10 Pravachan-Sudha 11
Sadhana Ke Path Par 12 Mishri Ki Daliyan | Part 1] 13 Jain Ramayashorasyan [Jain
Ramayan 14 Pandav Yashogasyan | Jan Mahabharat 25 15 Dashavkalik Sutra Padyamay
Anuvaad V Hindi Anuvaad] 16 Uttaradhyayanasutra | Charitanuvaad | 15 Jain Dharma
Mein Lagah Swaroop Aur Vishleshan 18 Tirthankar Mahavira 16 Sanwa Aur Sadhana Ke
Dhni Marudharke Marg Shri Mishrimal Ji Maharaj 20-26 Sudharm Pravachan Mala
[Parts 1 to 10] 30 Kismat Ka Khiladi 31 Beej Aur Vriksh 32 Bhagya-Krida 33
Sanjh-Sabeera 34 Vishvabandhu Mahavira

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hamAre mahatvapUrNa prakAzana 1-6 karmagrantha | bhAga 1 se 6 taka sampUrNa
maTa] 7 pravacana prabhA 8 jIvana jyoti 4 dhavala-jJAna-dhArA 10 pravacana-sudhA
11 sAdhanA ke patha para 12 mizrI kI DaliyAM | bhAga 1] 13 jaina
rAmayazorasAyana [jaina rAmAyaNa 14 pAMDava yazogasAyana |jana mahAbhArata 25 15
dazavakAlika sUtra padyamaya anuvAda va hindI anuvAda] 16 uttarAdhyayana sUtra |
caritAnuvAda | 15 jainadharma meM lagaH svarUpa aura vizleSaNa 18 tIrthaMkara
mahAvIra 16 saMvA aura sAdhanA ke dhanI marudharakemarga zrI mizrImala jI
mahArAja 20-26 sudharma pravacana mAlA [bhAga 1 se 10] 30 kismata kA khilAr3I 31
bIja aura vRkSa 32 bhAgya-krIr3A 33 sAMjha-saberA 34 vizvabandhu mahAvIra

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
35 Heart Transformation [Play] 36 Sattvic and Addiction-Free Life 37 The Root of
Financial Ruin: Gambling 38 Mamahar: A Cause of Great Misfortune 36 The Enemy of
Humanity: Alcohol Consumption Prostitution: The Leprosy of Human Life 41 Shivar:
The Source of Sins 42 Theft: The Mother of Immorality 43 Adultery: The Path to
Destruction 44 Life Improvement | Set of the Above Eight Books] Available at:
Shrimrudhar Kesaro Sahitya Prakashan Samiti Pop Lia Bazaar Vyavara | Rajasthan |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 35 hRdaya parivartana [nATaka] 36 sAtvika aura vyasana mukta jIvana 37 vittiyoM
kI jar3a-jUA 38 mAmAhAra asA anarthoM kA kAraNa 36 mAnava kA zatru : madyapAna
vezyAgamana : mAnava jIvana kA kor3ha 41 zivAra : pApoM kA srota 42 corI :
anaitikatA kI jananI 43 parastrI-mobana : sarvanAza kA mArga 44 jIvana-sudhAra
|ukta AThoM pustakoM kA seTa] prApti sthAna : zrImarudhara kesaro sAhitya
prakAzana samiti popa liyA bAjAra vyAvara | rAjasthAna |

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Part Two Karma Grantha [Karmastava]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya bhAga karmagrantha [karmastava]

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vande Veeram Shreemad Devendrasuri Virachit Karmastava [Dvitiya Karmagranth Taha
Thuninimo Veerajinam Maha Gunthanesu Sayalakammai.
Bandhudaodiranayasattapattaani Khayiyani ||1|| Gathaarth- Shree Veer Jinendra
has destroyed all karmas in the Gunasthanas, including Bandha, Uday, Udirana,
and Sattasthan. We pray that we may also be able to do the same. Vishesharth-
This gatha indicates the subject matter to be discussed in the granth, while
praising Shree Veerajineshwara. Praise is done in two ways... by pranam and by
describing extraordinary qualities. This gatha includes both types of praise,
because describing extraordinary and real qualities is called praise. The
complete destruction of all karmas is an extraordinary and real quality of
Bhagwan Mahavira. He did not destroy karmas in just one state, but destroyed all
karmas in all states, including Bandha, Uday, Udirana, and Satya, and attained
the Sachchidanandamya Atmaswaroop.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vande vI ram zrImad devendrasUri viracita karmastava [dvitIya karmagrantha taha
thuNimo vIrajiNaM maha guNaThANesu sylkmmaaii| bandhudaodIraNayAsattApattANi
khayiyANi  // 1 //  gAthArtha-zrI vIra jinevara ne jisa prakAra guNasthAnoM meM
bandha, udaya, udIraNA aura sattAsthAna ko prApta hue samasta karmo kA kSaya
kiyA hai, usI prakAra hama bhI kara sakeM, isI Azaya se unakI stuti karate haiM
/  vizeSArtha- isa gAthA meM zrI vIrajinezvara kI stuti karate hue grantha' meM
varNana kiye jAne vAle viSaya kA saMketa kiyA hai| stRti do prakAra se kI jAtI
hai... praNAma dvArA aura asAdhAraNa guNotkIrtana dvaaraa| isa gAthA meM donoM
prakAra kI stutiyoM kA antarbhAva hai, kyoMki asAdhAraNa aura vAstavika guNoM kA
kathana stuti kahalAtA hai  /  sakala karmoM kA niHzeSa rUpa se kSaya karanA
bhagavAna mahAvIra kA asAdhAraNa aura vAstavika guNa hai 1 unhoMne karmoM kA jo
kSaya kiyA hai, vaha kisI eka hI prakAra kI avasthA rUpa meM vidyamAna karmoM kA
nahIM kiyA hai, apitu bandha, udaya, udIraNA, sattArUpa samagra avasthAoM meM
rahe hue karmoM kA kSaya karake saccidAnandamaya AtmasvarUpa ko prApta

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
2 The salutation has been done. This is a praise in the form of गुणानुवाद by the
author and a salutation in the form of प्रणाम by the verb थपिमो' in the verse.
Action does not happen without a cause. The wandering of the soul in the world
is an action and its cause is karma. As long as the soul remains in the world,
there are states of karma like अन्ध, उदय, etc. But as the destruction of karma
reduces the binding of new karma, the power of karma also gradually becomes
निस्सत्व - निश्शेष and the spiritual qualities gradually develop, and finally,
when karma is completely destroyed, the soul attains the form of शुभ आत्मम्वरूप.
The attainment of this pure आत्मस्वरूप by the soul is called मोक्ष. But as long
as there is no lack of the ability to bind new karma and the complete निर्जरा of
past karma, it is possible for karma to be चन्धन. There are not only two states
of karma, बन्ध and क्षय, but also other states like फल देना, etc. These states
of karma are mainly called बन्ध, उदय, उदीरणा, सत्ता. Among these states,
बन्धावस्था is the main one, and only when बन्ध happens, do states like उदय,
उदीरणा, सत्ता, etc. occur. The description of these states is being done in this
text in order. Their characteristics are as follows: बन्ध - मिथ्यात्व, अविरत,
प्रमाद, कषाय, परिणत in the causes of योग in the form of शानावरणादि, the merging
of the subtle कर्मपुद्गलों with the soul like milk and water in the same field,
अनन्तानन्त प्रदेश वाले, is called बन्ध. Due to मिथ्यात्वादि, the soul takes in
कर्म योग्य पुद्गलों and due to the bound कर्मपुद्गलों,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2 kamaMstava kara liyA hai  /  yaha granthakAra dvArA kI gaI guNAnuvAdarUpa
stuti huI aura gAthAgata thapimo' kriyApada dvArA praNAmarUpa stuti kI gaI hai|
kAraNa ke binA kArya nahIM hotA hai  /  jIva kA saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karanA
kArya hai aura usakA kAraNa hai karma  /  jaba taka jIva saMsAra meM rahatA hai,
taba taka karmoM kI andha, udaya Adi avasthAyeM hotI rahatI haiN| kintu jaise-
jaise karmoM kA kSaya hone para navIna karmoM kA bandha honA kama ho jAtA hai,
vaise-vaise karmoM kI sattA-zakti bhI dhIre-dhIre nissatva - nizzeSa hotI jAtI
hai aura Atmika guNoM kA kramazaH vikAsa hote-hote anta meM samagrarUpa meM
karmakSaya hone para jIva zubha AtmamvarUpa ko prApta kara letA hai| jIva dvArA
isa zuddha AtmasvarUpa kI prApti ko mokSa kahate haiM  /  parantu navIna karma
bAMdhane kI yogyatA kA jaba taka abhAva nahIM hotA aura pUrvabaddha karmoM kI
Atyantika nirjarA nahIM ho jAtI, taba taka karma kA candhana honA sambhava hai|
kramoM kI sirpha bandhra aura kSaya ye do hI sthitiyAM nahIM haiM, kintu phala
denA Adi rUpa aura bhI sthitiyA~ hotI haiN| kamoM kI ina sthitiyoM- avasthAoM ko
mukhya rUpa se bandha, udaya, udIraNA, sattA kahate haiN| ina avasthAoM meM
bandhAvasthA mukhya hai aura bandha hone para hI udaya, udIraNA, sattA Adi
sthitiyoM hotI haiM  /  inhIM avasthAoM kA varNana kramazaH isa grantha meM kiyA
jA rahA hai  /  jinake lakSaNa isa prakAra haiM bandha-mithyAtva, avirata,
pramAda, kaSAya, yoga ke nimittoM meM zAnAvaraNAdi rUpa se pariNata hokara
anantAnanta pradeza vAle sUkSma karmapudgaloM kA AtmA ke sAtha dUdha-pAnI ke
samAna ekakSetrAvagAr3ha hokara mila jAnA bandha kahalAtA hai| mithyAtvAdi se
jIva karma ke yogya pudgaloM ko grahaNa karatA hai aura ba~dhe hue karmapudgaloM
ke kAraNa

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  The Jiva continuously undergoes transformations like
Mithyatva (falsehood) and others. Thus, these two are interdependent.  **Uday**
(fruition) is the experience of auspicious and inauspicious fruits when the
**Udayakal** (time of fruition) arrives. In other words, it is the experience of
the bound karma, as per the state of the bound karma or as per the intensity or
reduction of karma due to Apvartana (reduction) and Udvartana (increase), etc.
During the **Bandhanakal** (time of binding), the Kashayik Adhyavasayas
(passions) that are the cause of karma, develop the power to give intense or
mild fruits in each karma, according to their intensity. Accordingly, when the
Udayakal arrives, one has to experience the karma-phala (fruits of karma). This
power to give fruits resides in the karma itself and gives fruits according to
that karma, not according to the nature of another karma.  The experience of
karma does not happen immediately after binding, but begins after a certain
period of time. This period of time is called **Avadhakal** (time of latency).
For example, even if water is boiling in a pot, the object placed in it for
cooking will sit at the bottom of the pot for some time before it starts
cooking. Similarly, the state and time of sitting at the bottom should be
understood as Avadhakal.  However, this Avadhakal is different for each karma,
depending on its own state.  1. The time when the fruits of a karma are
experienced after the Avadhakal has passed is called **Udayakal**. 2. The time
during which the soul does not experience the auspicious and inauspicious fruits
of the remaining karma is called **Avadhakal**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha jIva mithyAtva Adi rUpa pariNAma karatA rahatA hai| isa
prakAra ye donoM paraspara Azrita haiM  /  udaya udayakAla' Ane para zubhAzubha
phala kA bhoganA udaya kahalAtA hai  /  arthAt bA~dhI gaI karma kI sthiti ke
anusAra athavA apavartanA- udvartanA Adi karaNoM se kama huI athavA bar3hI huI
sthiti ke anusAra yathAsamaya udayAvalikA meM prApta karma kA vedana honA udaya
kahalAtA hai  /  bandhanakAla meM karma ke kAraNabhUta kASAyika adhyavasAyoM ko
tIvratAmandatA ke anusAra pratyeka karma meM tIvra-manda phala dene kI zakti
utpanna hotI hai aura tadanusAra udayakAla Ane para karma-phala ko bhoganA
par3atA hai yaha phala dene kI zakti svayaM karma meM niSTha hotI hai aura usI
karma anusAra phala detI hai, dUsare karma ke svabhAva anusAra nahIM  /  - karma
kA vedana bandha hote hI tatkAla nahIM hotA hai, kintu kucha samaya vizeSa taka
sthira rahane ke bAda usakA vedana honA prArambha hotA hai  /  isa sthira rahane
ke samaya ko akAla' kahate haiM  /  jaise varta - mAna meM pAnI kitanA bhI ubala
rahA ho, lekina usameM pakane ke lie DAlI gaI vastu kucha samaya ke lie bartana
ke tale meM baiTha jAtI hai aura phira usake bAda usakA pakanA prArambha hotA
hai| isa prakAra tale meM baiThane kI sthiti aura samaya abAdhAkAla samajhanA
cAhie  /  lekina yaha avadhAkAla sabhI karmoM kA apanI-apanI sthiti ke 1.
abAdhAkAla vyatIta ho cukane para jisa karma ke phala kA anubhava hotA hai, usa
samaya ko udayakAla kahate haiM  /  2. baeNce hue karma kA jitane samaya taka
AtmA ko zubhAzubha phala kA vedana nahIM hotA, utane samaya ko abAdhAkAla kahate
haiM  /

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma, according to its nature, varies. Sometimes it passes naturally in its
uninterrupted course, and sometimes, due to the combination of a particular
cause and a particular potency, it also becomes exhausted. The completion of
this uninterrupted course of karma is called 'Apvarthanakaran'.  Just as the
state and essence of karmas bound by a particular potency can be reduced,
similarly, karma can be transformed from its own nature into its homologous
nature by a particular potency. This transformation of karma into its own
homologous karmic nature by a particular potency is called 'Samkranti'.  The
original natures of karmas do not transform into each other. However, the sub-
divisions of the original karma can transform, or they may not. For example,
'Jnanaavaranakarma' is the original karmic nature, and 'Matijnanaavaran',
'Shrutajnanaavaran', etc. are its sub-natures. Among these, 'Matijnanaavaran'
karma can transform into 'Shrutajnanaavaran' karma, or 'Shrutajnanaavaran' karma
can transform into 'Matijnanaavaran', etc. This is because these natures are
homologous to each other, being sub-divisions of the original karma
'Jnanaavaran', and they only cover knowledge, but they do not have the capacity
to cover other qualities of the soul.  In other words, 'Jnanaavaran' does not
transform into 'Darshanavaran', and 'Darshanavaran' does not transform into
'Jnanaavaran' karma. This is because these two karmas have different natures and
they have the capacity to perform different functions. They can only function
according to their own nature, but they do not have the power to abandon their
original nature. If the original natures of karmas were to abandon their
original nature, then the entire karmic system would be disrupted.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava anusAra bhinna-bhinna hotA hai| kabhI to yaha avAdhAkAla svAbhAvika
krama ke anusAra vyatIta hotA hai aura kabhI kAraNa-vizeSa bIrya-vizeSa ke
saMyoga se zIna bhI purA ho jAtA hai| abAdhAkAla ke isa zIna pUrNa hone ko
apavartanAkaraNa' kahate haiN| jisa prakAra vIrya-vizeSa se pahale baMdhe hae
kamoM kI sthiti va rasa ko ghaTAyA jA sakatA hai, usI prakAra bIrya-vizeSa se
kama apane svarUpa ko chor3akara apane sajAtIya svarUpa meM parivartita karake
bhomA jA sakatA hai  /  isa prakAra vIrya-vizeSa se karma kA apanI hI dusarI
sajAtIya karmaprakRtisvarUpa ko prApta kara lenA saMkramaNa kahalAtA hai| _
karmoM kI mUla prakRtiyoM kA eka dasare meM saMkramaNa nahIM hotA hai| kintu
mUla karma ke uttarabhedoM meM saMkramaNa hotA hai aura nahIM bhI hotA hai  /
jaise ki jJAnAvaraNakarma mUla karmaprakRti hai aura matijJAnAvaraNa,
zrutajJAnAvaraNa Adi uttaraprakRtiyA~ haiM  /  inameM se matijJAnAvaraNa. karma
zrutajJAnAvaraNakarma ke rUpa meM athavA zrutajJAnAvaraNakarma matijJAnAvaraNa
Adi ke rUpa meM parivartita ho jAtA hai| kyoMki ye prakRtiyA~ mUla karma
jJAnAvaraNa ke uttarabheda hone se paraspara sajAtIya haiM aura jJAna ko hI
AvRta karatI haiM, kintu AtmA ke anya guNoM ko AvRta karane kI sAmarthya nahIM
rakhatI haiN| arthAt jJAnAvaraNa kA darzanAvaraNa ke rUpa meM aura darzanAvaraNa
kA jJAnAbaraNakarma ke rUpa meM parivartana nahIM hotA hai| kyoMki ina donoM
kamoM kA alaga-alaga svabhAva hai aura ye alaga-alaga kArya karane kI kSamatA
rakhate haiM aura apane svabhAva ke anurUpa hI kArya kara makate haiM, kintu
apane mUla svabhAva ko chor3ane kI zakti nahIM rakhate haiN| yadi karmoM kI mUla
prakRtiyA~ apane mUla 1. jisa vIryavizeSa me pahale baMdhe hue karma kI rithati
tathA rasa ghaTa jAte hai, usako apavartanAkaraNa kahate haiN|

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  **If you remove the nature of things, their existence
will not remain, and the number will not be fixed.**  **5**  **I**  Although it
is certain that the original natures of karmas do not transition, there are many
sub-natures within the Uttaraprakritis that also do not transition with each
other, even if they are of the same type. For example, Darshanmoha and
Charitramoha. Both are sub-natures of Mohaniya Karma, but Darshanmoha does not
transition into Charitramoha, or vice versa. Similarly, one should understand
about the Uttaraprakritis of Anukarma that Narakayu does not transition into
Tiryanchayu or any other Ayu.  **Udirana:** Bringing forth karmas into fruition
by the special power of the soul, even without the attainment of the Udayakal
(time of fruition), is called Udirana. In other words, even after the
unobstructed time has passed, those karmas that are about to come into fruition
from behind are brought into the Udayavalika (period of fruition) by special
effort and made to experience fruition along with those that have already
attained fruition.  **Satta:** The bound karma remaining attached to the soul
without abandoning its own nature is called Satta.  For example, if the karmas
of Manushya-Gati (human birth) and Manushyanupurvi (human-like qualities) are
bound, then both will be considered to have attained their own nature due to
being bound. As long as both remain in their own nature, their Satta will be
considered.  Even though Mithyatva-Mohaniya Karma is bound and has the nature of
Satta, its ability to bear fruit diminishes, resulting in two further divisions:
Ardha-Rasa (half-ripe) and Norasa-Praya (almost unripe). Even when these two are
not bound, the Satta of Mishra-Mohaniya (mixed-delusion) and Samyaktva-Mohaniya
(right-belief delusion) is considered.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvittIya karmagranya svabhAva ko chor3a deM to unakA astitva nahIM rahegA aura
saMkhyA bhI niyata nahIM rahegI  /  5 I yadyapi yaha to nizcita hai ki karmoM kI
mUla prakRtiyAM saMkramaNa nahIM karatI haiM, lekina uttaraprakRtiyoM meM bhI
kitanI hI aisI haiM, jo sajAtIya hone para bhI paraspara saMkramaNa nahIM karatI
haiM, jaise- darzanamoha aura cAritramoha | ye donoM mohanIyakarma kI
uttaraprakRtiyA~ haiM, kintu darzanamoha cAritramoha ke rUpa meM athavA
cAritramoha darzanamoha ke rUpa meM saMkramaNa nahIM karatA hai| sI taraha
anukarma ke uttoM ke bAre meM bhI samajhanA cAhie ki narakAyu kA tiryaMcAyu ke
rUpa meM athavA kisI anya Ayu ke rUpa meM saMkramaNa nahIM hotA hai  /  udIraNA
- udayakAla prApta hue binA hI AtmA kI sAmarthyavizeSa se karmoM ko udaya meM
lAnA udIraNA hai  /  arthAt abAdhAkAla vyatIta ho cukane para bhI jo kamaMdalika
pIche se udaya meM Ane vAle hote haiM, unako prayatna - vizeSa se udayAvalikA
meM lAkara udayaprApta dalikoM ke sAtha bhoga lenA udIraNA kahalAtA hai  /
sattA - ba~dhe hue karma kA apane svarUpa ko na chor3akara AtmA ke sAtha lage
rahanA sattA kahalAtI hai  /  jaise ki manuSyagati aura manuSyAnupUrvI ye do
karma ba~dhe hoM to ve donoM bandha hone ke kAraNa apane svarUpa ko prApta hue
mAne jAe~ge aura jaba taka donoM apane svarUpa meM sthita raheMge, taba taka
unakI sattA mAnI jAyegI  /  mithyAtvamohanIyakarma bandha hone ke kAraNa
sattArUpa hone para bhI usameM se phala dene kI zakti kama ho jAne se usake
arddha rasa vAle aura norasaprAya- ye do vibhAga aura ho jAte haiM aura una
donoM ke bandha na hone para bhI mizra mohanIya aura samyaktvamohanIya kI sattA
mAnI

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma is yours, it is yours. Because both these natures, without bondage, have
attained their own form and thus proved their existence. All these karmas, with
their bondage and other states, were not destroyed by Bhagwan Mahavira in a
moment. But by their gradual destruction, he developed the powers of the soul in
a series, one after another, and became the Supreme Soul, the Omniscient, the
All-seeing. This is the order of the development of the powers of the soul, and
every soul has to make its own efforts for this. The special qualities that are
known by the wax of knowledge, vision, character, etc., due to the efforts made
by the soul for its development, are called Gunasthanas. That is, Gunas -
knowledge, vision, character, etc. are the nature of the soul and Sthanas - the
form attained by them due to their intensity, are called Gunasthanas. These
special forms - knowledge, vision, character, etc. are the states of purity and
impurity of these qualities. The main reason for the intensity of purity and
impurity of qualities is the rise, subsidence, destruction, and destruction-
subsidence of Mohaniya karma. When the obstructive karma decreases, the purity
of knowledge, vision, etc. qualities becomes more apparent, and when the
obstructive karma increases, the purity of knowledge, etc. qualities decreases.
This gradual development of the soul's qualities, from less to more, is called
Gunasthanakrama. Although there can be countless types of special forms of the
soul born from purity and impurity, all these special forms are included in the
form of fourteen Gunasthanas in brief. These Gunasthanas are like steps to
attain the Moksha Mahal.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava jAtI hai| kyoMki ina donoM prakRtiyoM ne binA bandha ke hI, apane
svarUpa ko prApta karane ke dvArA apanI vidyamAnatA siddha kara sattA prApta kI
hai| ina bandha Adi sthitiyoM vAle samasta kamoM kA kSaNamAtra meM hI bhagavAna
mahAvIra ne kSaya nahIM kiyA thaa| kintu kramazaH unake kSaya dvArA zreNI-
anuzreNI AtmazaktiyoM kA kramika vikAsa kara ve paramAtmA, sarvajJa, sarvadarzI
bane the  /  yahI AtmazaktiyoM ke vikAsa kA krama hai aura pratyeka AtmA ko
isake lie apane-apane prayatna karane par3ate haiN| jIva dvArA apane vikAsa ke
lie kiye jAne vAle prayatnoM dvArA jJAna, darzana, cAritra Adi kI moma se jAnA
vizeSa yo guNasthAna kahate haiN| arthAt guNa-jJAna, darzana, cAritra Adi jIva
kA svabhAva aura sthAna- unakI taratamatA se upalabdha svarUpa ko guNasthAna
kahate haiN| ye svarUpa-vizeSa jJAna, darzana, cAritra Adi guNoM kI zuddhi aura
azuddhi ke taratamabhAva ge hote haiN| guNoM kI zuddhi aura azuddhi meM
taratamabhAva hone kA mukhya kAraNa mohanIyakarma kA udaya, upazama, kSaya,
kSayopazama Adi haiM  /  jaba pratirodhaka karma kama ho jAtA hai, taba jJAna-
darzanAdi guNoM kI zuddhi adhika prakaTa ho jAtI hai, aura jaba pratirodhaka
karma kI adhikatA hotI hai, taba jJAnAdi guNoM kI zuddhi kama hotI hai  /
Atmika guNoM ke ima nyUnAdhika kramika vikAsa kI avasthA ko guNasthAnakrama
kahate haiN|  /  yadyapi zuddhi aura azuddhi se janya jIva ke svarUpa-vizeSa
asaMkhya prakAra ke ho sakate haiM, tathApi una saba svarUpa-vizeSoM kA saMkSepa
meM caudaha guNasthAnoM ke rUpa meM antarbhAva ho jAtA hai  /  ye guNasthAna
mokSamahala ko prApta karane ke lie sopAna ke samAna haiN|

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  This section describes the binding, arising,
stimulation, and existence of different types of karmas in each of the
Gunasthanas. The number and nature of these karmas will be explained in the
following verses.  The names of the Gunasthanas are: Mithyatva, Sasvadan, Mise,
Avirat, Desevirat, Pamatt, Apamatt, Niyatti, Aniyatti, Suhmusam, Khona, Sajogi,
and Ajoigi.   **Explanation:** Before explaining the binding and other states of
karmas in the Gunasthanas, it is necessary to mention the names of these
Gunasthanas. This verse lists the names of the Gunasthanas. These names are:  1.
Mithyatva 2. Sasvadan (Sasaadan) 3. Mith (Samyagmithyadristi) 4. Avirat
Samyagdristi 5. Desevirat 6. Pamatt Samyata 7. Apamatt Samyata 8. Nivritti
(Apuurvakaran) 9. Anivritti Vadar Samparaya 10. Sukshma Samparaya 11. Upashanta
Moha-Vitaraag 12. Ksheena Mohaa-Vitaraag 13. Sayogikevali 14. Ajoigikevali  The
word "Gunasthan" should be added to each of these names. For example, Mithyatva
Gunasthan, etc.  The order of these Gunasthanas reflects a systematic
progression of the soul's spiritual development. Each Gunasthan represents a
higher state than the previous one, indicating...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha pratyeka guNasthAna meM kitanI-kitanI aura kina-kina
prakRtiyoM kA bandha, udaya, udIraNA aura sattA ho sakatI hai, isakA varNana
kramazaH Age kI gAthAoM meM kiyA jA rahA hai| guNasthAnoM ke nAma micce mAsaNa
mose aviraya dese pamatta apmtte| niyaTTi aniyaTTi suhamuSasama khoNa sajogi
ajogi guNA  // 2 //  gAthArtha-mithyAtva, sAsvAdana, mizra, avirata, dezavirata,
pramattavirata, apramattavirata, nivRtti, anivRtti, sUkSma, upazama, kSINa,
sayogi aura ayogi-ye guNasthAna haiN| vizeSArtha--guNasthAnoM meM karmoM kI
vandha Adi avasthAoM ko batalAne se pahale guNasthAnoM ke nAmoM kA kathana
karanA jarUrI hone se isa gAthA meM guNasthAnoM ke nAma ginAye haiN| inake nAma
kramazaH isa prakAra haiM (1) mithyAtva, (2) sAsvAdana (sAsAdana) (3) mitha
(samyagmithyAdRSTi), (4) avirata samyagdRSTi, (5) dezavirata, (6)
pramattasaMyata, (7) apramattasaMyata, (8) nivRtti (apUrvakaraNa), (9)
anivRttivAdarasaMparAya, (10) sUkSmasaMparAya, (11) upazAntamoha-vItarAga, (12)
kSINamoha-vItarAga, (13) sayogikevalI, (14) ayogikevlii| ukta nAmoM meM pratyeka
ke sAtha guNasthAna zabda jor3a lenA caahie| jaise-mithyAtva guNasthAna Adi  /
_ guNasthAnoM ke nAmoM ke krama meM jIva ke AdhyAtmika vikAsa ko vyavasthita
praNAlI ke darzana hote haiM ki pUrva-pUrva ke guNasthAna kI apekSA

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmastava  **Karmastava** refers to the stages of spiritual progress in
Jainism, where the purification of qualities like knowledge, perception, etc.,
increases in each successive stage. As a result, in the higher stages, there is
a greater binding of auspicious qualities compared to inauspicious ones.
Eventually, the binding of even auspicious qualities ceases, leading to the
attainment of the ultimate goal - the pure, luminous, self-illuminating, and
blissful state of liberation (Paramatmapad).  **Arrangement of Gunasthanas:**
There are countless beings in the universe, each appearing different based on
their senses, knowledge, abilities, and characteristics. However, from a
spiritual perspective, these differences can be understood through the
arrangement of Gunasthanas.  **Two Types of Beings:** Generally, from a
spiritual perspective, there are two types of beings: (1) Mithyatvi - those with
false beliefs, and (2) Samyaktvī - those with right beliefs. This means some
beings are deeply ignorant and have misguided thoughts, while others are
knowledgeable, discerning, and follow the path of righteousness.  **Mithyatvi:**
Those who are ignorant and have misguided thoughts are called Mithyatvi. The
first Gunasthan, Mithyatva-Mithyadristi, is for such beings.  **Samyaktvī:**
Even among those with right beliefs, there are three categories: (1) Those with
slight right belief (Swalp Samyaktvī) who are on the verge of losing it, (2)
Those with half right belief and half false belief (Ardha Samyaktvī and Ardha
Mithyatvī), and (3) Those with pure right belief but without the fourfold
virtues (Vishuddha Samyaktvī). The second Gunasthan is for those with slight
right belief.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava uttara-uttara ke guNasthAna meM jJAna, darzana Adi guNoM kI zuddhi
bar3hatI jAtI hai| pariNAmataH Age-Age ke guNasthAnoM meM azubhaprakRtiyoM kI
apekSA zubhaprakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai aura krama krama se zubhaprakatiyoM kA
bhI bandha ruka jAne anta meM jIvamAna ke lie prApta karane yogya zuddha parama
zuddha, prakAzamAna Atma ramaNatArUpa paramAtmapada prApta ho jAtA hai  /
guNasthAnoM ko vyavasthA - jagata meM ananta jIva haiM  /  unameM pratyeka jIva
eka samAna dikhAI nahIM detA hai  /  indriya, veda, jJAnazakti, upayogazakti,
lakSaNa Adi vibhAgoM dvArA bhinna-bhinna prakAra se zAstra meM jIvoM ke bheda
batalAye haiM aura jagata meM vaisA dikhatA bhI hai  /  parantu AdhyAtmika
vikAsa kI dRSTi se jo vibhAga kiye gaye haiM, ve ina guNasthAnoM kI vyavasthA se
barAbara vyavasthita rUpa meM samajha jA sakate haiM  /  sAmAnyatayA AdhyAtmika
dRSTi se jagata meM jIvoM ke do prakAra haiM - (1) mithyAtvI - midhyAdRSTi, (2)
samyaktvI samyagdRSTi  /  arthAt kitane hI jIva gAr3ha ajJAna aura viparIta
buddhi vAle aura kitane hI jJAnI, vivekazIla prayojanabhUta lakSya ke marmajJa,
Adarza kA anusaraNa kara jIvana vyatIta karane vAle hote haiM  /  J f ukta donoM
prakAra ke jIvoM meM ajJAnI aura viparIta buddhi vAle jIvoM ko mithyAtvI kahate
haiN| aise jIvoM kA bodha karAne ke lie pahalA mithyAtva - mithyAdRSTi
guNasthAna hai  /  samyaktvadhAriyoM meM bhI tIna bheda ho jAte haiM - (1)
samyaktva se girate samaya svalpasamyaktva vAle ( 2 ) arddha samyaktva aura
arddhamithyAtva vAle, (3) vizuddhasamyaktva vAle kintu cArivarahita  /  ukta
sthiti vAloM meM se svalpasamyavatva vAle jIvoM ke lie dUsarA

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. There is no karma for them. Therefore, such beings with a hierarchical status
are called the eighth guna-sthana, called Nivritti (Apuvarkarana). _ Although
the gradual purity obtained due to the ascent of the hierarchy significantly
weakens the passions of the being, the power to re-arise in those passions
remains. Therefore, to make the beings aware of such karmic results, the ninth
guna-sthana called Anivritti-badarasampraya is mentioned after the eighth. The
beings of the ninth guna-sthana continuously try to destroy the passions, and
due to that, a time comes when a glimpse of the passions that are the cause of
the world is seen. Such beings are called the tenth guna-sthana, called
Sukshmasampraya.   Just as a freckle, a very subtle entity, disappears or is
destroyed, so too, the passion-activity, which has become extremely thin,
becomes peaceful, subsided, or completely destroyed, causing the being to see
its pure and immaculate nature. Thus, to indicate both the peaceful (existing in
being) and the destroyed (complete destruction) states, there are the eleventh
guna-sthana called Upshanta-moha-vitraga and the twelfth guna-sthana called
Kshina-moha-vitraga.  With the destruction of mohaniya karma, along with jnana-
avaran, darshan-avaran, and antaraya karma, the being has attained its own
inherent qualities of infinite knowledge, vision, etc. But since the connection
with the body and other yogas remains, the yoga-युक्त vitragi beings are called
the thirteenth guna-sthana, called Sayogikevali, and when they are free from the
body and other yogas, pure knowledge

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1. karmastava nahIM hotI hai  /  ataH aisI zreNIkrama sthiti bAle jIva nivRtti
(apUrvakaraNa) nAmaka AThave guNasthAnavartI kahalAte haiM  /  _ yadyapi zreNI-
ArohaNa ke kAraNa prApta kramika vizuddhatA ke bar3hane se jIva ke kaSAyabhAvoM
meM kAphI nirbalatA A jAtI hai| phira bhI una kaSAyoM meM punaH . hone kI zakti
banA rahatA hai  /  ata: aise kaSAyapariNAma vAle jIvoM kA bodha karAne ke lie
AThaveM ke bAda nauveM anivRttibAdarasaMparAya nAmaka guNasthAna kA kathana kiyA
gayA hai| nauveM guNasthAnavI jIva ke dvArA pratisamaya kaSAyoM ko kRmA karane
ke prayatna cAlU rahate haiM aura vaisA hone se eka samaya aisI sthiti A jAtI
hai, jaba saMsAra kI kAraNabhUta kaSAyoM kI eka jhalaka-sI dikhalAI detI hai|
isa sthiti vAle jIva sUkSmasaMparAya nAmaka dasaveM guNasthAnavartI kahalAte
haiN| jaise jhAI mAtra atisUkSma astitva rakhane vAlI vastu tirohita athavA
naSTa ho jAtI hai, base hI jo kaSAyavRtti atyanta kRza ho gaI hai, usake zAnta-
upazamita athavA pUrNarUpa se naSTa ho jAne se jIva ko zuddha -nirmala svabhAva
ke darzana hote haiN| isa prakAra zAnta (sattA meM hai) aura naSTa samUla
kSaya)-ina donoM sthitiyoM ko batalAne ke lie kramazaH gyArahavA~ upazAntamoha-
vItarAga aura bArahavAM kSINamoha-vItarAga nAmaka guNasthAna hai  /
mohanIyakarma ke sAtha-sAtha jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa aura antarAya karmoM kA
kSaya hone se jIva ne anantajJAna, darzana Adi apane nija guNoM ko prApta kara
liyA hai| lekina abhI zarIrAdi yogoM kA sambandha banA rahane se yogayukta
vItarAgI jIva sayogikevalI nAmaka terahaveM guNasthAnavartI kahalAte haiM aura
jaba zarIrAdi yogoM se rahita zuddha jJAna

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  The manifestation of the soul's true nature, adorned
with vision, is described by the fourteenth **guna-sthana** called
**Ayogikevali**. Achieving this state is the ultimate goal of the soul, leading
to the destruction of the cycle of birth and death, and eternal, pure,
**siddh**, **buddha**, and conscious bliss.  The **guna-sthana** are defined as
the steps in the soul's evolution. The first is **Mithyatva** and the fourteenth
is **Ayogikevali**, representing its completion. Now, we will explain the nature
of these **guna-sthana**, starting with **Mithyatva**.  **(1) Mithyatva Guna-
sthana:** The soul whose vision (belief, understanding) is distorted due to the
influence of **Mithyatva-mohaniya karma** is called **Mithyatvi**. Just as a
person who eats datura seeds sees even white objects as yellow, similarly, the
**Mithyatvi**'s vision is distorted. They consider false gods as true gods,
false gurus as true gurus, and false dharma as true dharma. They lack the
knowledge of the soul and its distinction from the non-soul, the conscious and
the inert. This specific state of the **Mithyatvi** soul is called **Mithyatva
Guna-sthana**. It is also known as **Mithyatva-drishti Guna-sthana**.
**Question:** If distorted vision is called **Mithyatva-drishti**, how can the
specific state of the **Mithyatvi** soul be called a **guna-sthana**?
**Answer:** Although the **Mithyatvi**'s vision is distorted, it is also
partially true. Because even the **Mithyatvi** recognizes and accepts humans,
animals, and birds as humans, animals, and birds respectively. Therefore, this
specific state of their consciousness is called a **guna-sthana**.  Just as the
sun's rays still shine through dense clouds...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha darzanayukta svarUparamaNatA AtmA meM prakaTa ho jAtI hai
to isakA kathana ayogikevalI nAmaka caudahavaM guNasthAna dvArA kiyA jAtA hai|
isa dazA ko prApta karanA jIva kA parama lakSya hai aura saMsAra kA nAza kara
sadA ke lie zAzvata, nirmala, siddha, buddha, caitanya rUpa meM ramaNa karatA
hai| guNasthAnoM ko paribhASA jIva ke vikAsa kI prArambhika sIr3hI pahalA
mithyAtva guNasthAna hai aura usakI pUrNatA ayogikevalI nAmaka caudahavaM
guNasthAna meM hotI hai  /  ataH aba mithyAtva Adi guNasthAnoM kA svarUpa
batalAte haiM  /  (1) midhyAtva gaNasthAna -mithyAtvamohanIyakarma ke udaya se
jisa jIva kI dRSTi (zraddhA, pratipatti) mithyA (ulTI, viparIta ho, usa
mithyAdRSTi kahate haiN| jaise dhatUre ke bIja ko khAne vAlA manuSya sapheda
vastu ko bhI pIlI dekhatA hai, vaise hI mithyAtvI manuSya kI dRSTi bhI viparIta
ho jAtI hai, arthAt kudeva ko deva, kuguru ko guru aura kudharma ko dharma
samajhatA hai  /  use AtmA tathA anya, caitanya va jar3a kA vivekajJAna hI nahIM
hotA hai| isa prakAra ke mithyAdRSTi jIva ke svarUpa-vizeSa ko mithyAtva
guNasthAna kahate haiM  /  mithyAtva guNasthAna ko mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna bhI
kahate haiM  /  prazna-viparIta dRSTi ko yadi mithyAdRSTi kahate haiM to
mithyAtvI jIva ke svarUpa-vizeSa ko guNasthAna kaise kaha sakate haiM ? uttara-
yadyapi mithyAtvI kI dRSTi viparIta hai to bhI vaha kisI aMza meM yathArtha bhI
hotI hai| kyoMki mithyAtvI jIva bhI manuSya, pazu, pakSI Adi ko manuSya, pazu,
pakSI Adi rUpa se jAnatA tathA mAnatA hai| isIlie usakI cetanA ke svarUpa-vizeSa
ko guNasthAna kahate haiN| jisa prakAra saghana bAdaloM kA AvaraNa hone para bhI
sUrya kI prabhA

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma cannot be completely covered, but some part remains open, so that the
division of day and night can be made. Similarly, even when Mithyatva-mohaniya
karma arises, the Jiva's Drishtigana is not completely covered, but the
Mithyatvi's vision is also partially true. Besides this, the Nigodaya Jiva also
has a partial use of a kind of Avyaka touch. If this is not accepted, the
Nigodaya Jiva will be called Ajiva. Therefore, Mithyatva is considered a
Gunasthan.  Question - When we accept that the Mithyatvi's vision is partially
true, what is the obstacle in calling and accepting it as Samyagdristi?  Answer
- It is true that the Mithyatvi's vision is partially true, but it cannot be
called Samyagdristi just because of that. Because the scriptures say that
whoever does not believe in even one letter of the Dvadasanga Sutra is
Mithyadristi; for example, Jamali. But the characteristic of a Samyaktvi Jiva is
that he has complete faith in the statement of the Sarvagna, and the Mithyatvi
does not. Therefore, Mithyadristi is not called Samyaktvi.  The Jiva who
experiences the Mithya results arising from the rise of Mithyatva-mohaniya karma
becomes a person of opposite faith.  1. Even the Jiva who has an infinite number
of mohas, is sometimes revealed. If, however, he is considered to be a Jiva,
then he will be considered as Ajiva. - Nandhi 75 2. First, he is not awakened,
he sleeps and desires. First, he is not awakened, he does not cry in his sleep.
The rest cry, but he desires wrongly, like Jamali.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava sarvathA Dhaka nahIM jAtI hai, kintu kucha-na-kucha khulI rahatI
hai, jisase ki dina-rAta kA vibhAga kiyA jA ske| isI prakAra
mithyAtvamohanIyakarma kA udaya hone para bhI jIva kA dRSTigaNa sarvathA Dhaka
nahIM jAtA hai, kintu Azika rUpa meM mithyAtvI kI dRSTi bhI yathArtha hotI hai|
isake sivAya nigodiyA jIva ko bhI AMzika rUpa se eka prakAra kA avyakA sparza
mAtra upayoga hotA hai| yadi yaha na mAnA jAye to nigodiyA jova ajIva
khlaayegaa|' isIlie mithyAtva guNasthAna mAnA jAtA hai| prazna -jaba mithyAtvI
kI dRSTi ko kisI aMza meM yathArtha honA mAnate haiM to use samyagdRSTi kahane
aura mAnane meM kyA bAdhA hai ? uttara-yaha ThIka hai ki kisI aMza meM mithyAtvI
kI dRSTi yathArtha hotI hai, lekina itane mAtra se use samyagdRSTi nahIM kahA jA
sakatA hai  /  kyoMki zAstra meM kahA gayA hai ki dvAdazAMga sUtrokta eka akSara
para bhI jo vizvAsa nahIM karatA, vaha mithyAdRSTi hai; jaise-jamAlI  /  lekina
samyaktvI jIva kI yaha vizeSatA hotI hai ki use sarvajJa ke kayana para akhaNDa
vizvAsa hotA hai aura mithyAtvI ko nahIM hotA hai| isIlie mithyAdRSTi ko
samyaktvI nahIM kahate haiN| mithyAtvamohanIyakarma ke udaya se utpanna hone
vAle mithyA pariNAmoM kA anubhava karane vAlA jIva viparIta zraddhA vAlA ho jAtA
1. sazvajIvANaM pi ya aksarassa aNaMtamomAgo nicvaM ugghATiyo cichacha  /  jai
puNa sovi bhAvarijjA teNaM jIvo ajIvasaNaM pANijjA  /  -nandhI 75 2. payamavi
asaddahato suptatthaM micchdio| payamasvarapi ika jo na roei suttaniddiThaM  /
sesa rovato vihu micchadichI jamAlina  /

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth ### 13  "Just as a being afflicted with jaundice does not
find even sweet taste pleasant, similarly, a Mithyatvi does not find true Dharma
pleasant."  There are five types of Mithyatva, which arise from the Mithyatva
nature and are characterized by faith contrary to Tattvartha: 1) Ekant, 2)
Vipreet, 3) Vinay, 4) Sanshay, 5) Agnan.  **Ekant Mithyatva:** To consider a
multi-faceted object as having only one facet is Ekant Mithyatva. For example,
"All things are entirely transient" or "All things are eternal."  **Vipreet
Mithyatva:** To consider the nature of Dharma, etc., in a reversed manner is
Vipreet Mithyatva. For example, "Violence leads to heaven, etc."  **Vinay
Mithyatva:** To have the same understanding of the scriptures, the Dev, the
Guru, and their teachings, both in the case of Samyagdrishti and Mithyadrishti,
is Vinay Mithyatva.  **Sanshay Mithyatva:** To not be certain about either of
the two types of objects, appropriate and inappropriate, is called Sanshay
Mithyatva.  **Agnan Mithyatva:** To not understand the nature of the soul, etc.,
in a specific way, such as "This is what they are," "This is how they are," is
called Agnan Mithyatva.  ---  ### 17  1. "The soul, afflicted by Mithyatva,
becomes like a poisonous snake. Just as a jaundiced person does not find even
sweet taste pleasant, similarly, he does not find Dharma pleasant." - Gommatasar
Jivakand - 17  2. "By abandoning Mithyatva, one abandons the false and attains
the true. This is the liberation of the soul from the cycle of Samsara." -
Gommatasar Jivakand - 15

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha 13 hai  /  jisa prakAra pittajvara se yukta jIva ko mIThA
rasa bhI acchA mAlUma nahIM hotA, usI prakAra mithyAtvI ko yathArtha dharma bhI
acchA mAlUma nahIM hotA hai  / " mithyAtvaprakRti ke udaya me tatvArtha ke
viparIta zraddhAnarUpa hone vAle mithyAtva ke ye pAMca bheda hote haiM - 1)
ekAnta, (2) viparIta, (3) famu, (8) dufaa, (2) sana 12 ekAnta mithyAtva -
anekadharmAtmaka padArtha ko kisI ekadharmAtmaka mAnanA ekAntamithyAtva hai|
jaise- "vastu sarvathA kSaNika hI hai. athavA nitya hI hai|" viparItamayyAtva -
dharmAdika ke svarUpa ko viparyayarUpa mAnanA. viparIta mithyAtva hai; jaise-
"hiMsA meM svargAdi kI prApti hotI hai  / " vinayamidhyAtva - samyagdRSTi aura
mithyAdRSTi deva, guru aura unake kahe hue zAstroM meM samAna buddhi rakhanA,
vinayamidhyAtva hai  /  saMzayamithyAtva - samIcIna aura asamIcIna- donoM
prakAra ke padArthoM meM se kisI bhI eka kA nizcaya na honA, saMzayamithyAtva
kahalAtA hai  /  ajJAna mithyAtva - jIvAdi padArthoM ko yahI haiM', 'isa prakAra
hai' - isa taraha vizeSa rUpa me na samajhane ko ajJAnamidhyAtva kahate haiM  /
-- 17 1. micchattaM vedaMto jIvo vivarIya daMsaNI hodi  /  jaya dhammaM rocedi
hU~ mahUraM khu rasaM jahA jarido  //  - gommaTasAra jovakANDa - 17 2. michoyeNa
mitamasaddaNaM tu tacca atyAgaM  /  eyaMtaM vivarIyaM viSayaM saMsadimaNANaM  //
- gommaTasAra jIvakANya - 15 --

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 14  **From the perspective of time, there are three types of
Mithyatva:** (1) Anadi-Anant, (2) Anadi-Sant, (3) Sadi-Sant.  **Anadi-Anant
Mithyatva** is experienced by Abhavya Jivas, **Anadi-Sant Mithyatva** by Bhavya
Jivas, and **Sadi-Sant Mithyatva** by Jivas who fall from a higher Gunasthan to
a lower Gunasthan.  **The Stananga Sutra also mentions ten types of Mithyatva:**
(1)  Buddhi of Dharma in Adharma, (2) Buddhi of Adharma in Dharma, (3) Buddhi of
Marg in Unmarg, (4) Buddhi of Unmarg in Marg, (5) Buddhi of Jiva in Ajeeva, (6)
Buddhi of Ajeeva in Jiva, (7) Buddhi of Sadhu in Asadhu, (8) Buddhi of Asadhu in
Sadhu, (9) Buddhi of Murta in Amurta, (10) Buddhi of Amurta in Murta.  **In
addition to these ten types mentioned in the Agamas, there are fifteen more
types of Mithyatva, including five types like Abhighahik, and ten types like
Laukik.** These are not independent types but rather explanations of the ten
types of Mithyatva. Their names are as follows:  (1) Abhighahik, (2)
Anabhighahik, (3) Abhiniveshik, (4) Sanshayik, (5) Anabhogik, (6) Laukik
Mithyatva, (7) Lokottar Mithyatva, (8) Kuprovachinak Mithyatva, (9) Nyun
Mithyatva, (10) Adhik Mithyatva, (11) Vipreet Mithyatva, (12) Akriya Mithyatva.
**1. Ten types of Mithyatva are mentioned in the Stananga Sutra:**  * Buddhi of
Dharma in Adharma * Buddhi of Adharma in Dharma * Buddhi of Marg in Unmarg *
Buddhi of Unmarg in Marg * Buddhi of Jiva in Ajeeva * Buddhi of Ajeeva in Jiva *
Buddhi of Sadhu in Asadhu * Buddhi of Asadhu in Sadhu * Buddhi of Murta in
Amurta * Buddhi of Amurta in Murta  **- Stananga 101734**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14 kamaMstava kAla kI vivakSA se mithyAtva ke nimnalikhita tIna bheda hote
haiM(1) anAdi-ananta, (2) anAdi-sAnta, (3) sAdi-sAntaH  /  inameM me anAdi-
ananta mithyAtva abhavya jIva ko, anAdi-sAnta bhavya jIva ko aura sAdi-sAnta
ucca guNasthAna ko patita hokara nimna gaNasthAna para Ane vAle jIva ko hotA hai
/  sthAnAMga sUtra meM mithyAtva ke nimna prakAra meM dasa bheda bhI batAye haiM
(1) adharma meM dharma kI buddhi, (2) dharma meM adharma kI buddhi, (3) unmArga
meM mArga kI buddhi, (4) mArga meM unmArga kI buddhi, (5) ajIva meM jIva kI
buddhi, (6) jIva meM ajIva kI buddhi, (7) asAdhu meM sAdhu kI buddhi, (8) sAdhu
meM asAdhu kI buddhi,. (6) amarta meM mUrta kI buddhi (10! mana meM samarDa kI
buddhi  / ' Agama meM varNita ina dasoM bhedoM ke atirikta mithyAtva ke
AbhigrAhikAdi pA~ca tathA laukikAdi dasa-ze pandraha bheda aura bhI milate haiN|
ve svatantra bheda na hokara inhIM dasa prakAra ke mithyAtvoM kA spaSTIkaraNa
karane vAle haiN| unake nAma kramazaH isa prakAra haiM (1) Abhigrahika, (2)
anAbhigrahika, (3) Abhinivezika, (4) sAMzayika, (5) anAbhogika, (6)
laukikamithyAtva, (7) lokottara mithyAtva, (8) kuprAvacinaka mithyAtva, (6)
nyUna mithyAtva, (10) adhika mithyAnva, (11) viparIta mithyAtva, (12) akriyA
mithyAtva, 1. dasavihe micchatte paNNate, taM jahA-adhamme dhammasaNNA, dhamme
adhamma saNNA, amarage maggasapaNA, magge ummammasaNNA, ajIbesU jIpasaNNA,
jIvesu ajIvasaNNA, asAhusu sAhusaNNA, sAhusu asAhasaNNA, amusasu muttasapaNA,
muttemu amuptasaNNA  /  -sthAnAMga 101734

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth (13) Agnana Mithyatva, (14) Abhinaya Mithyatva, (15)
Ashatan Mithyatva.  The aforementioned ten and these fifteen distinctions
combined make a total of twenty-five distinctions of Mithyatva. In summary,
these can be categorized as Nangik Mithyatva and Paropadeshapurvak Mithyatva.
Mithyatva's lowest state in Gunasthan is Annamuhurta and its highest state is
Deshonardha Pudgalparavartan.  (2) Sasvadan Gunasthan - A Jiva with Aupamika
Samyaktva, due to the arising of Anantanubandhi Kashaya, abandons Samyaktva and
leans towards Mithyatva, but has not yet attained Mithyatva. Until then, that
Jiva is called Sasvadan Samyagdristi, and the specific nature of that Jiva is
called Sasvadan Samyagdristi.  Just as the time between falling from a mountain
and reaching the ground is neither the time of staying on the mountain nor the
time of staying on the ground, but a time of experience, similarly, the time of
experience between the arising of Anantanubandhi Kashayas, the release from
Samyaktva results, and the non-attainment of Mithyatva results, is called
Sasvadan Samyagdristi Gunasthan. 1. Leaving the Aharak body, a Jiva, by taking
the remaining seven types of Spis, such as Audarik, etc., touches all the
Pudgalas of the Lokakasha, which is called Pudgalparavartan. An infinite number
of Kalachakra pass in the completion of one Pudgalparavartan. Half of it is
called Ardhapudgalparavartan, and one less than half of that is called
Devaonardha Pudgalparavartan. (See Special Appendix.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha (13) ajJAna mithyAtva, (14) abinaya mithyAtva, (15)
AzAtanA mithyaatv| pUrvokta dasa aura ina pandraha bhedoM ko milAne me mithyAtva
ke kula paccIsa bhada ho jAte haiM aura ina sabako saMkSepa meM kahA jAye to
naMgika mithyAtva aura paropadezapUrvaka mithyAtva-ye do bheda hoNge| mithyAtva
guNasthAna kI jaghanya sthiti annamuharta aura utkRSTa
dezonaardhapudgalaparAvartana' hai| (2) sAsvAdana guNasthAna - jo aupamika
samyakttI jIva anantAnubandhI kaSAya ke udaya se samyaktva ko chor3akara
mithyAtva kI ora jhuka rahA hai, kintu abhI taka mithyAtva ko prApta nahIM kiyA
hai, taba taka arthAt jaghanya eka samaya aura utkRSTa chaha AvalikA paryanta
vaha sAsvAdana samyagdRSTi kahalAtA hai aura usa jIva ke svarUpavizeSa ko
sAsvAdana samyagdRSTi kahate haiN| jisa prakAra parvata se girane para aura
bhUmi para pahu~cane ke pahale madhya kA jo kAla hai, vaha na parvata para
Thaharane kA kAla hai aura na bhUmi para Thaharane kA hai, kintu anubhayakAla
hai| isI prakAra anantAnubandhI kaSAyoM ke udaya hone se samyaktva pariNAmoM se
chUTane aura mithyAtva pariNAmoM ke prApta na hone para madhya ke anubhaya kAla
meM jo pariNAma hote haiM, unako sAsvAdana samyagdRSTi guNasthAna kahate haiN|
1. AhAraka zarIra ko chor3akara zeSa audArikAdi sAta prakAra kI spI vargaNAoM ko
grahaNa karate hue eka jIva dvArA samasta lokAkAza ke pudgaloM kA sparza karanA
pudgalaparAvartana kahalAtA hai| eka pudgalaparAvartana pUrA home meM ananta
kAlacakra vyatIta ho jAte haiN| usakA AdhA hissA arghapudgalaparAvartana hai
aura usa Adhe hisse meM bhI ekadeza kama ko devAonaardhapudgala parAvartana
kahate haiM 1 (vizeSa pariziSTa meM dekhie  / )

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Taste of Right Faith (Saasvadan Samyagdristi Gunasthan)  Although the
inclination of the soul in this Gunasthan is towards falsehood (Mithyatva), just
as someone who vomits after eating kheer still experiences the unique taste of
kheer, similarly, a Jina who falls from Right Faith (Samyaktva) and turns
towards falsehood, experiences the taste of Right Faith for a while. Therefore,
this Gunasthan is called the Saasvadan Samyagdristi Gunasthan.  The process of
attaining provisional Right Faith (Aupashamik Samyaktva) is as follows:  The
soul's inherent taste for truth (Tattvaruchi) arises from the subsidence of the
seven natures: Anantanubandhipayachatuv (Anantanubandhi Krodha, Mana, Maya,
Lobha) and Darshanamohaniyatrik (Samyaktva, Samyagmidhyatva, and Mithyatva). In
this state, the karma particles that induce falsehood remain subdued, like fire
buried in ashes, even though they are still present. There are two types of
provisional Right Faith: Granthibhedajanaya and Upashamashrenibhaavi.
**Granthibhedajanaya Aupashamik Samyaktva** is attained by the ancient beings
(Bhavya Jivas) who have been in falsehood (Mithyatva) since beginningless time.
At the time of attainment, the soul performs three actions (Karana - efforts):
Yathapravrittikaran, Apurvakaran, and Anivrittikaran. Their process is as
follows:  The soul has been wandering in the world for an endless time,
experiencing various kinds of suffering. Just as a stone lying in a mountain
river becomes round and smooth by rolling and colliding, similarly, the soul,
through enduring endless suffering, becomes soft and pure in its results
(Parinama). Due to this purification of results, the soul reduces the intensity
of the seven karmas (except Ayukarma) to a fraction of a hair's breadth, as
small as a single grain of sand compared to the vast ocean. This result...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava isa guNasthAna ke samaya yadyapi jIva kA jhukAva mithyAtva kI mora
hotA hai, tathApi jisa prakAra khIra khAkara usakA vamana karane vAle ko khIra
kA vilakSaNa svAda anubhava meM AtA hai| isI prakAra samyaktva se girakara
mithyAtva kI ora unmukha hue jIna ko bhI kucha kAla ke lie praNa ko AsvAdana
dhanubhava meM karatA hai| ataeva isa guNasthAna ko sAsvAdana samyagdRSTi
guNasthAna kahA jAtA hai  /  aupazamika samyaktva kI prApti viSayaka prakriyA
isa prakAra hai- anantAnubandhIpAyacatuva (anantAnubandhI krodha, mAna, mAyA,
lobha) aura darzanamohanIyatrika (samyaktva, samyagmidhyAtva aura mithyAtva ) -
ina sAta prakRtiyoM ke upazama hone se AtmA kI jo tattvaruci hotI hai, vaha
aupazamika samyaktva hai| isameM mithyAtva preraka karmapudgala sattA meM
rahakara bhI rAkha meM dabI huI agni kI taraha kucha samaya taka upazAnta rahate
haiN| isake do bheda haiM- granthibhedajanya aura upazamazreNibhAvI  /  16
granthibhedajanya aupazamika samyaktva anAdi mithyAtvI bhavya jIvoM ko prApta
hotA hai  /  prApti ke samaya jIvoM dvArA yathApravRttikaraNa, apUrvakaraNa aura
anivRttikaraNa aise tIna karaNa (prayatna - vizeSa) kiye jAte hai| unakI
prakriyA nimnalikhita hai - jIva anAdi kAla me saMsAra meM ghuma rahA hai aura
taraha-taraha se duHkha uTha rahA hai| jisa prakAra parvatIya nadI meM par3A huA
patthara lur3hakate - luDhakate ivara-udhara Takkara khAtA huA gola aura cikanA
bana jAtA hai, usI prakAra jIva bhI anantakAla se duHkha sahate-sahate komala
zuddha pariNAmI bana jAtA hai| pariNAma-zuddhi ke kAraNa jIva Ayukarma ke sivAya
zeSa sAta karmoM kI sthiti pasyopama ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga kama eka kor3A -
kor3I sAgaropama jitanI kara detA hai| isa pariNAma

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Kamannya  This is called **Yathapravrittikaran**. A being with
**Yathapravrittikaran** reaches the strong knot of attachment and aversion, but
cannot break it. This is called **Nandideshapraapti**. This knot of attachment
and aversion gradually becomes strong and impenetrable like a tightly woven silk
knot. **Yathapravrittikaran** can also happen to **Abhavya** beings: by keeping
the state of karma within the **Koda Kodi Sagaropama**, these beings can also
reach the **Granthidesha**, but cannot break it.  The result by which a
**Bhavya** being breaks the impenetrable knot of attachment and aversion is
called **Apuurvakaran**. This result does not come to the being repeatedly, it
comes only rarely. Therefore, it is called **Apuurvakaran**.
**Yathapravrittikaran** happens to **Abhavya** beings countless times, but
**Apuurvakaran** does not happen to **Bhavya** beings many times.  When the knot
of attachment and aversion breaks due to **Apuurvakaran**, the being's results
become purer, and this is called **Anivrittikaran**. Upon attaining this result,
the being does not return without attaining **Samyaktva**. Therefore, it is
called **Anivrittikaran**. The state of **Anivrittikaran** lasts for an
**Antarmuhurta**. At the time of this **Anivrittikaran** result, the **Veerya**
(strength) also increases compared to before.  When the **Antarmuhurta** state
of **Anivrittikaran** is about to end, a part of it remains, and the process of
**Antarakaran** begins. This means that at the end of **Anivrittikaran**, the
**Karmadalikas** of **Mithyanvamohaniya** are moved back and forth. Some
**Dalikas** are combined with the **Karmadalikas** that are about to arise at
the end of **Anivrittikaran**, and some are combined after the **Antarmuhurta**
has passed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya kamanya ko yathApravRttikaraNa kahate haiN| yathApravRttikaraNa vAlA
jIva rAgadveSa kI majabUta gA~Tha taka pahuMca jAtA hai kintu use bheda nahIM
sktaa| isako nandhidezaprApti kahate hai| rAga-dveSa kI yaha gA~Tha kramazaH
dRDha aura gur3a rezamI gAMTha ke samAna durbhedya hai| yathApravRttikaraNa
abhavya audhoM ke bhI ho sakatA hai : kamoM kI sthiti kor3A kor3I sAgaropama ke
andara karake ve jIva bhI granthideza ko prApta kara sakate haiM, kintu use
bheda nahIM skte| bhavya jIva jisa pariNAma se rAga-dveSa kI durbhadya granthi
ko tor3akara lA~dha jAtA hai, usa pariNAma ko apUrvakaraNa kahate haiN| isa
prakAra kA pariNAma jIva ko bAra-bAra nahIM AtA, kadAcit hI AtA hai| isalie
isakA nAma apUrvakaraNa hai  /  yathApravRttikaraNa to abhavya jIvoM ko bhI
ananta bAra AtA hai, kintu apUrvakaraNa bhatrya jIvoM ko bhI adhika vAra nahIM
aataa| apUrvakaraNa dvArA rAga-dveSa kI gAMTha TUTane para jIva ke pariNAma jaba
adhika zuddha hote haiM, usa samaya anivRttikaraNa hotA hai  /  isa pariNAma ko
prApta karane para jIva samyatratva prApta kiye binA nahIM lauTatA hai  /
isIlie isakA nAma anivRttikaraNa hai  /  anivRttikaraNa kI sthiti antarmuharta
pramANa hai  /  isa anivRttikaraNa nAmaka pariNAma ke samaya vIrya samullAma
arthAt sAmathya bhI pUrva kI apekSA bar3ha jAtI hai| anivattikaraNa kI jo
antamuharta pramANa sthiti batalAI gaI hai, usa sthiti kA eka bhAga zeSa rahane
para antarakaraNa kI kriyA zurU hotI hai, arthAt anivRttikaraNa ke antasamaya
meM mithyAnvamohanIya ke karmadalikoM ko Age-pIche kara diyA jAtA hai| kucha
dalikoM ko anivRttikaraNa ke anta taka udaya meM Ane vAle karma-dalikoM ke sAtha
kara diyA jAtA hai aura kucha ko annamuhUrta bItane ke bAda udaya meM

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 18  Karma is performed with the accompanying karma-dalikas. This
leads to an inter-momentary period after the cessation of the karma, in which
there are no karma-dalikas for the Mithyatva-mohaniya. Therefore, for the
Mithyatva-mohaniya karma whose abadhā-kāla is complete, there are two divisions.
One division is that which remains in manifestation until the extreme time of
cessation, and the other is that which comes into manifestation after an inter-
momentary period after the cessation. The first division is called the first
state of Mithyatva, and the second is called the second state of Mithyatva.
From the beginning of the process of internalization until the end of cessation,
Mithyatva remains in manifestation, it does not remain behind. Because at that
time, all the dalikas that have the potential to manifest are made capable of
manifesting before and after the process of internalization.  After the
cessation of the abadhā-kāla, there is Aupaśamika Samyaktvā. Upon attaining
Aupaśamika Samyaktvā, the jīva begins to have clear and unambiguous perception.
Because at that time, the Mithyatva-mohaniya karma does not manifest in both
vipaka and pradeśa. Therefore, the natural Samyaktvā guna of the jīva is
expressed. The jīva experiences joy from the removal of the great disease of
Mithyatva, just like a person who has been suffering from a chronic and severe
illness experiences joy upon recovering. At that time, there is firm faith in
the principles. The state of Aupaśamika Samyaktvā is inter-momentary, because
after this, the pudgalas of Mithyatva-mohaniya, which were said to manifest
after the inter-momentary period during internalization, either manifest or are
transformed into kṣayopaśama.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 18 karmastava Ane vAle karmadalikoM ke sAtha kara diyA jAtA hai| isase
anivRttikaraNa ke bAda kA eka antarmuhUrta kAla aisA ho jAtA hai ki jisameM
mithyAtvamohanIya kA koI kamalika nahIM rhtaa| ataeva jisakA abAdhAkAla pUrA ho
cukA hai-aise mithyAtvamohanIyakarma ke do vibhAga ho jAte haiM  /  eka vibhAga
vaha hai, jo anivRttikaraNa ke carama samayaparyanta udaya meM rahatA hai aura
dUsarA vaha, jo anivRttikaraNa ke bAda eka antarmuhUrta bItane para udaya meM
AtA hai| inameM se pahale vibhAga ko mithyAtva ko prathama sthiti aura dUsare ko
mithyA va kI dvitIya sthiti kahate haiM  /  antarakaraNakriyA ke zurU hone para
anivRttikaraNa ke anta taka to mithyAtva kA udaya rahatA hai, pIche nahIM rahatA
hai| kyoMki usa samaya jina dalikoM ke udaya kI sambhAvanA hai, ve saba dalika
antarakaraNa kI kriyA se Age aura pIche udaya meM Ane yogya kara diye jAte haiN|
anivattikaraNa kAla ke bIta jAne para aupazamika samyaktva hotA hai| aupazamika
samyaktva ke prApta hote hI jIva ko spaSTa evaM asaMdigdha pratIti hone lagatI
hai| kyoMki usa samaya mithyAtvamohanIyakarma kA vipAka aura pradeza donoM
prakAra se udaya nahIM hotaa| isalie jIva kA svAbhAvika samyaktva guNa vyakta
hotA hai  /  mithyAtvarUpa mahAn roga haTa jAne se jIva ko aisA Ananda AtA hai,
jaise kisI purAne evaM bhayaMkara rogI ko svastha ho jAne pr| usa samaya tattvoM
para dRr3ha zraddhA ho jAtI hai| aupazamika samyaktva kI sthiti antarmuhUrta
hotI hai, kyoMki isake bAda mithyAtva mohanIya ke pudgala, jinheM antarakaraNa
ke samaya antarmuharta ke bAda udaya Ane vAlA batAyA hai, ve udaya meM A jAte
haiM yA kSayopazama rUpa meM pariNata kara diye jAte haiN|

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth, Chapter 26  The period of initial right faith is called
*Upashantaddha*. Before *Upashantaddha*, that is, during the time of the inner
consciousness, the soul creates three bundles of secondary situational (arising
after *Aupashmik Samyaktv*) false faith from pure karmic results. Just as one
part of *Kodravadhan* (a type of rice) becomes so pure after being cleaned of
impurities that it does not intoxicate the eater, another part becomes semi-
pure, and the third part remains impure, similarly, out of the three bundles of
secondary situational false faith, one bundle becomes so pure that it does not
contain the power to destroy right faith (*Samyaktvaghatakarasa*). The second
bundle becomes semi-pure, and the third bundle remains impure.  When the time of
*Aupashmik Samyaktv* is complete, one of these three bundles inevitably arises
in the soul according to its karmic results. If the karmic results are pure, the
pure bundle arises, and it does not destroy right faith. The right faith that
manifests at that time is called *Kshayopaashmik Sasyatva*. If the soul's karmic
results are semi-pure, the second bundle arises, and the soul is called
*Mishradristi*. If the karmic results are impure, the impure bundle arises, and
the soul becomes *Mithyadristi*.  During *Upashantaddha*, which lasts for a
moment, the soul is peaceful, tranquil, stable, and full of bliss. When only a
small amount of time (one moment) and six *Avalika* (units of time) remain, some
souls with *Aupashmik Samyaktv* experience an obstacle in their rising karmic
results, meaning their peace is disturbed. At that time, due to the arising of
*Anantanu bandhi* passions, the soul abandons the right faith karmic result and
leans towards false faith. When...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha 26 pathamika samyaktva ke kAla ko upazAntAddhA kahate
haiN| upazAntAddhA ke pUrva arthAt antarakaraNa ke samaya meM jIva vizuddha
pariNAma se dvitIya sthitigata (opazamika samyaktva ke bAda udaya meM Ane vAle)
midhyAtva ke tIna puMja karatA hai| jisa prakAra kodravadhAnya ( kodoM nAmaka
dhAnya) kA eka bhAga opadhiyoM se sApha karane para itanA zuddha ho jAtA hai ki
khAne vAle ko bilakula nazA nahIM AtA, dUsarA bhAga arddha zuddha aura tIsarA
bhAga azuddha raha jAtA hai, usI prakAra dvitIya sthitigata mithyAtvamohanIya ke
tIna puMjoM meM se eka puMja itanA zuddha ho jAtA hai ki usameM
samyaktvaghAtakarasa (samyaktva ko nAza karane kI zakti) nahIM rahatA  /  dUsarA
puMja AdhA zuddha aura tIsarA puMja azuddha hI raha jAtA hai  /  aupazamika
samyaktva kA samaya pUrNa hone para jIva ke pariNAmAnusAra ukta tIna puJjoM meM
se koI eka avazya udaya meM AtA hai  /  pariNAmoM ke zuddha rahane para zuddha
puJja udaya meM AtA hai, usase samyaktva kA ghAta nahIM hotA  /  usa samaya
pragaTa hone vAle samyaktva ko kSAyopazamika sasyavatva kahate haiN| jIva ke
pariNAma arddha vizuddha rahane para dUsare puMraMja kA udaya hotA hai aura jIva
mizradRSTi kahalAtA hai  /  pariNAmoM ke azuddha hone para azuddha puMja kA
udaya hotA hai aura usa samaya jIva mithyAdRSTi ho jAtA hai  /  antarmuhUrta
pramANa upazAntAddhA meM jIva zAnta, prazAnta, sthira aura pUrNAnanda vAlA hotA
hai  /  jaghanya eka samaya aura utkRSTa chaha AvalikAe~ zeSa rahane para kisI-
kisI aupazamika samyaktva vAle jIva ke car3hate pariNAmoM meM vighna par3a jAtA
hai, arthAt usakI zAnti bhaMga ho jAtI hai  /  usa samaya anantAnubandhI kaSAya
kA udaya hone se jIva samyaktva pariNAma ko chor3akara midhyAtva kI ora jhuka
jAtA hai  /  jaba

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma does not attain Mithyatva (falsehood) immediately. It experiences the
taste of enjoyment (Saasvadan) for a period ranging from one Jayanya (instant)
to six Aavalikas (a unit of time). During this time, the being is called
Saasvadan Samyagdristi (one who has right vision with respect to enjoyment). A
being with Aupamika Samyaktva (partial right faith) can be Saasvadan
Samyagdristi, but not others.  The statement should be understood in terms of
Palyopam and Sagaropama.  One Yojana (a unit of distance) long, one Yojan wide,
and one Yojan deep, a well-shaped well, is compared to the time that is
measured. This is called Palyopam. Ten Koḍakoḍi Palyopams make one Sagaropama.
The time duration of the Saasvadan Gunasthan (state of being) is from one
Jayanya to six Aavalikas.  (3) Misra Gunasthan (mixed state of being) - Its full
name is Samyagmithyadristi Gunasthan. But for brevity, it is called Misra
Gunasthan.  When the impure, semi-pure, and pure forms of Mithyatvamohaniya (the
karmic matter that causes delusion) do not give rise to Anantanu bandhi Kashaya
(infinitely binding passions), and the semi-pure Pudgalas (matter) of purity and
Mithyatva arise, then when the semi-pure Pudgala arises in the form of impurity,
the being's vision becomes partly right (pure) and partly wrong (impure), i.e.,
mixed. From this, the being is called Samyagmithyadristi (mixed vision) and its
state of being is called Samyagmithyadristi Gunasthan (mixed state of being).
In this Gunasthan, there is a weakness in the growth of time, due to which the
being neither has a strong liking nor a strong dislike for the principles laid
down by the omniscient. But a man born in a coconut island, i.e., an island
where coconuts are mainly produced, the inhabitants of that island...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava . taka baha mithyAtva ko prApta nahIM karatA, arthAt jaghanya eka
samaya aura utkRSTa chaha AvalikAoM taka sAsvAdana bhAva kA anubhava karatA hai.
usa samaya jIva sAsvAdana sabhyagdRSTi kahA jAtA hai  /  aupamika samyaktva vAlA
jIva sAsvAdana samyagdRSTi ho sakatA hai, dUsarA nahIM  /  ukta kathana meM
palyopamasAgaropama kA pramANa isa prakAra samajhanA caahie| eka yojana lambe,
eka yoga, goDe kA posana gahare gogAkAra kRpa kI upamA se jo kAla ginA jAe. ume
palyopama kahate haiM tathA dasa kor3Akor3I palyopama kA eka mAgaropama hotA hai
/  sAsvAdana guNasthAna kI samayasthiti jayanya eka samaya aura utkRSTa chaha
AbalikA kAla kI hai  /  (3) mizra guNasthAna- isakA pUrA nAma samyanmithyAdRSTi
guNasthAna hai| kintu saMkSepa meM samajhane ke lie mizra guNasthAna kahate
haiN| mithyAtvamohanIya ke azuddha, arddha zuddha aura zuddha- ina tInoM ghujoM
meM se anantAnubandhI kaSAya kA udaya na hone se zuddhatA aura mithyAtva ke
arddha zuddha pRdgaloM ke udaya hone me azuddhatArUpa jaba arddha zuddha puMja
kA udaya hotA hai, taba jIva kI dRSTi kucha samyak (zuddha) aura kRSTha
mithyAtya (azava) arthAta mizra ho jAtI hai| isI se vaha jIva samyakamithyAdRSTi
(mizradRSTi) tathA usakA svarUpaviNeSa sammithyASTi guNasthAna (mizra
guNasthAna) kahalAtA hai  /  isa guNasthAna ke samaya bRddhi meM durbalatA-sI A
jAtI hai, jisase jIva sarvajJapraNIta tattvoM para na to ekAnta ruci karatA hai
aura na ekAnta aruci  /  kintu nArikela dvIpa meM utpanna manuSya ko arthAt jisa
dvIpa meM pradhAnatayA nAriyala paidA hotA hai, vahA~ ke nivAsiyoM

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
21 The second karma grantha has never seen or heard of rice and other grains.
Therefore, they do not feel any attraction or aversion towards unseen and
unheard grains: they remain in a state of non-existence. Similarly, the
sambanmithyadristi jiva also remain in a state of equanimity without feeling any
attraction or aversion towards the path that is manifested as omniscience.  Just
as when curd and jaggery are mixed together in such a way that they cannot be
separated again, then each part of it has a mixed form (a combination of both
sour and sweet). Similarly, the function of the samyagmithyatva-prakriti, one of
the karma-prakritis that destroy the qualities of the soul, is unique. It does
not result in only samyaktva-rupa or only mithyatva-rupa, but in a mixed result
of both. That is, both samyaktva and mithyatva-rupa results remain at the same
time.  _Doubt_ - This cannot become a third gunasthan because a mixed result
cannot occur. If two opposite types of results are considered in the same soul
and at the same time, then there will be a contradiction in the form of the
mutual coexistence of cold and hot. If the two results are considered to arise
in sequence, then the mixed form does not become a third gunasthan.  _Solution_
- The above statement is not correct, because according to the mitra-amin nyaya,
a friend-like result can occur in the same time and in the same soul. For
example, in a person named Devadatta, there can be friendship with Yajnadutta
and   -   - . 1. "Dhi guḍa bhib vā missaṁ pahabhāvaṁ va kāridam sakkaṁ. Evaṁ
missayabhāvo sammāmicchotti gādabhyo." - Gommat Goshaka 22

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 21 dvitIya karmagrantha ne cAvala Adi anna na kabhI dekhA hotA hai aura na
sunaa| isase ve adRSTa aura atruta anna ko dekhakara usake viSaya meM ruci yA
ghRNA nahIM karate: phintu nAsthabhA hI rahI hai| isI prakAra sambanmithyAdRSTi
jIva bhI sarvajJaprarUpita mArga para prIti yA aprIti na karake samabhAva hI
rahate hai| jisa prakAra dahI aura gur3a ko paraspara isa taraha se milAne para
ki phira donoM ko pRthaka-pRthaka nahIM kara sakeM, taba usake pratyeka aMza kA
mizra rUpa (kucha khaTTA aura kucha mIThA-donoM kA milA huA rUpa) hotA hai| isI
prakAra AtmA ke guNoM kA ghAta karane vAlI karmaprakRtiyoM meM se
samyagmithyAtvaprakRti kA kArya vilakSaNa prakAra kA hotA hai  /  usase kevala
samyaktvarUpa yA kevala mighyA tvarUpa pariNAma na hokara donoM ke mile-jule
(mizra) pariNAma hote haiM  /  arthAt eka hI kAla meM samyaktva aura
mithyAtvarUpa pariNAma rahate haiN|' _ zaMkA * mizrarUpa pariNAma hI nahIM ho
sakane se yaha tIsarA guNasthAna bana nahIM sktaa| yadi viruddha do prakAra ke
pariNAma eka hI AtmA aura eka hI kAla meM mAne jAyeM to zIta-uSNa kI taraha
paraspara sahAnavasthAna lakSaNa virodha doSa AyegA  /  yadi krama se donoM
pariNAmoM kI utpatti mAnI jAye to mizrarUpa tIsarA guNasthAna nahIM bntaa|
samAdhAna-ukta kathana ThIka nahIM hai, kyoMki mitrAmina nyAya se eka kAla aura
eka hI AtmA meM mitrarUpa pariNAma ho sakate haiN| jaise ki devadatta nAmaka
vyakti meM yajJadatta kI apekSA mitrapanA aura - - . 1. dahi guDabhiva vA missaM
pahabhAvaM va kAridaM sakkaM  /  evaM missayabhAvo sammAmicchotti gAdabyo  / '
-gommaTa goSakA 22

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 22  **Karma and A-mitra-pana (hostility) are both Dharma (principles) that
exist simultaneously and do not contradict each other. Similarly, Shraddha
(faith) in the nature of the substance as described by the Sarvagna (omniscient)
and Samichinatva (appropriateness) are both Dharma, while Mithyatva (falsehood)
and Shraddha in the A-tatva (non-existent) as described by the Sarvagna are both
Dharma. These two Dharma can occur in the same time and in the same soul, and
there is no contradiction or fault in this.**  **A Jiva (soul) with a mixed
Gunasthana (state of qualities) (Samyag-mithyatva-drishti) cannot be bound by
the lifespan of the next birth, nor can it die. If this Jiva attains the Sarana
(refuge) of the Muga-tha (the fourfold path), it can only die after attaining
either Samyaktva (right faith) or Mithyatva (false faith). In other words, if
the Jiva has been bound by the lifespan of the next birth during the time of the
result of the Samyaktva or Mithyatva, then it will die when that result occurs.
In this Gunasthana, there cannot be a Maranantik Samudghat (death-related
liberation). Additionally, a Jiva with Samyag-mithyatva-drishti cannot accept
Samyama (restraint) (either Sakala Samyama or Ekadesha Samyama).**  **The
emergence of the Adha-vishuddha-punja (partially pure bundle) of Mithyatva-
mohaniya (falsehood-obscuring) (Samyag-mithyatva-misra) lasts only for an
Antarmukhurta (a very short time). After this, either a pure or impure Punja
emerges. Therefore, the time duration of the third Gunasthana is only an
Antarmukhurta.**  **1. Samma-ichcha-ditti (right intention) does not bind.**
**2. Samudghat is the act of exiting the realms of A-rama (non-physical realms)
without leaving the Mula-darira (original body). It has seven types: Vedana
(pain), Kavaya (desire), Vaikriya (change), Maranantik (death-related), Tejas
(energy), Ahar (food), and Kevala (absolute). The Samudghat that occurs before
death is called Maranantik Samudghat.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 22 karmastava dharmadatta kI apekSA amitrapanA-ye donoM dharma eka hI kAla meM
rahate haiM aura unameM koI virodha nahIM hai| vaise hI sarvajJapraNIta padArtha
ke svarUpa ke zraddhAna kI apekSA samIcInatA aura sarvajJAbhAsa kathita atattva
zraddhAna kI apekSA mithyApanA ye donoM hI dharma eka kAla aura eka AtmA meM
ghaTita ho sakate haiN| isameM koI bhI virodhAdi doSa nahIM hai| mizra
guNasthAnavartI (samyagmithyAdRSTi) jIva parabhava sambandhI Ayu kA bandha nahIM
kara sakatA hai' aura maraNa bhI nahIM hotA hai  /  yadi isa mugAthA : gIna
saraNa karatA hai to samyaktva yA mithyAtvarUpa donoM pariNAmoM meM se kisI eka
ko prApta karake hI mara sakatA hai| arthAt isa guNasthAna ko prApta karane se
pahale samyaktva yA mithyAtva rUpa pariNAmoM meM se jisa jAti ke pariNAmakAla
meM parabhava sambandhI Ayu kA bandha kiyA ho to usI taraha ke pariNAma hone
para usakA maraNa hotA hai| isa guNasthAna meM mAraNAntika samudghAta bhI nahIM
ho sakatA hai  /  isake atirikta samyagmithyAdRSTi jIva saMyama (sakala saMyama
aura ekadezasaMyama) ko grahaNa nahIM kara sakatA hai  /  mithyAtvamohanIya ke
addha vizuddha puMja (samyagamithyAtva mizra) kA udaya antarmuhurtaparyanta
rahatA hai| isake anantara zuddha yA azuddha kisI eka puja kA udaya ho jAtA hai|
ataeva tIsare muNasthAna kI kAlasthiti antarmuhUrta pramANa hai| 1.
sammAmicchAdiTTI Au baMdhapi na karei tti  /  2. mUla dArIra ko binA chor3e hI,
AramA ke pradezoM ko bAhara nikalane ko samudghAta kahate haiN| usake sAta bheda
haiM-vedanA, kavAya, vaikriyaka, mAraNAntika, tejasa, AhAra aura kevala  /
maraNa se pUrva samaya meM hone bAle samudrAta ko mAraNAntika samudghAta kahate
hai|

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth _ 23 (4)  **Avirat Samyagdrishti Gunasthan** refers to
the state of abandoning harmful actions like violence, theft, etc., which are
the causes of sin. This is called **Virati**.  **Charitra** and **Brat** are
also names for **Virati**. A being who, despite having **Samyagdrishti**, cannot
refrain from any kind of attachment is called **Avirat Samyagdrishti**, and
their specific state is called **Avirat Samyagdrishti Gunasthan**.  The reason
for calling this **Gunasthan**-dwelling being **Avirat Samyagdrishti** and for
their lack of restraint despite **Samyagdarshan** is the emergence of the
**Ekadesha Samyam**-destroying **Apratyaakhyana Avarana Kshaya**.  A
**Samyagdrishti** being is a **Kevali** (liberated soul). They have faith in the
teachings of the **Upadesht Pravachan**. Due to ignorance, if they also have
faith in something that is not true, then upon being explained by the scriptures
or by the gurus, they abandon the inappropriate faith and begin to have
appropriate faith. If, even after being explained by the guru, acharya, etc.,
they do not abandon the inappropriate faith, then they are called
**Mithyadrishti**.  **Avirat** beings are of seven types: (1) Those who do not
know, accept, or follow the **vrats** (vows) are ordinary people. (2) Those who
do not know or accept the **vrats** but follow them are **Balatapasvi** (those
who practice austerities on their own). (3) Those who do not know the **vrats**
but accept them and do not follow them are **Dhole-Pasatthe** (hypocrites) who
do not live up to their commitments.   1. **Hinsanatasteyabrahmaparigrahebhyo
Vitritam** - Tattvarth Sutra 1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha _ 23 (4) aviratasamyagdRSTi guNasthAnahiMsAdi sAvadha
vyApAroM ko chor3a dene, arthAt pApajanaka prayaloM se alaga ho jAne ko virati
kahate haiN|' cAritra, brata virati ke hI nAma haiN| jo samyagdRSTi hokara bhI
kisI prakAra ke prata ko dhAraNa nahIM kara sakatA, vaha jIva aviratasamyagdRSTi
haiM aura usake svarUpavizeSa ko aviratasamyagdRSTi guNasthAna kAhate hai| isa
muNasthAnavartI jIva ko aviratasamyagdRSTi kahane aura samyagdarzana ke sAtha
saMyama na hone kA kAraNa ekadeza saMyama ke ghAtaka apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya
kA udaya haiN| samyagdRSTi jova kevalI dvaar| upadiSTa pravacana kA zraddhAna
karatA hai  /  ajJAnatAvaza yadi asadbhAva kA bhI zraddhAna kara letA hai to
zAstroM dvArA yA guruoM ke samajhAye jAne para asamIcIna zraddhAna ko chor3akara
samIcIna zraddhAna karanA prArambha kara detA hai| yadi guru, AcArya Adi dvArA
samajhAye jAne para bhI asamIcIna zraddhAna ko na chor3e to mithyAdRSTi kahalAtA
hai| avirata jIva sAta prakAra ke hote haiM.. (1) jo vratoM ko na jAnate haiM,
na svIkArate haiM aura na pAlate haiM, ma sAdhAraNa log| (2) jo battoM ko jAnate
nahIM, svIkArata nahIM, kintu pAlate haiM, gese apane Apa tapa karane vAle
bAlatapasvI  /  (3) jo vratoM ko jAnate nahIM haiM, kintu svIkArata hai aura
svIkAra kara pAlana nahIM karate haiM, aise Dhole-pAsatthe sAgha. jo saMyama
lekara nibhAte nahIM haiN| 1. hiMsAnatasteyAbrahmaparigrahebhyo vititam  /
-tatvAmaMsUtra 1

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Karma-sava  (4) Agi-tārtha Muni who do not have knowledge of the vows, but
accept and follow them. (5) Those who have knowledge of the vows, but do not
accept or follow them. For example, Shrenik, Shri Krishna, etc. (6) Those who
know the vows, do not accept them, but follow them. For example, the Anuttara
Vimānavāsī Devas. (7) Those who know the vows, accept them, but do not follow
them later. For example, the Samvigna Pākshika.  Vows are successful only with
Samyak Jnana (right knowledge), Samyak Grahan (right acceptance), and Samyak
Palan (right observance). Those who do not have Samyak Jnana of the vows, do not
accept the vows according to the rules, and do not observe the vows in reality,
even if they follow the vows according to the Ghunaakshar Nyaya, they cannot
attain the fruits of the vows.  Out of the seven types of Avirat mentioned
above, the first four types of Avirat beings do not have knowledge of the vows,
so they are Mithyavrushti. Because they cannot accept and follow the vows
according to the rules, but they consider them to be real.  Among the Avirat
Samyagdristi beings, some are Aupashmika Samyaktvi, some are Kshayopa-samyaktvi,
and some are Kshayik Samyaktvi.  In this Ganasthan, birth, death, lifespan, and
future life occur.  (5) Deshavirat Gunasthan - Due to the rise of
Pratyakhyanavaran Kshaya, the beings who are not completely free from sinful
actions, but can be separated from sinful actions by the Desha (part) due to the
non-rise of Pratyakhyanavaran Kshaya, are called Deshavirat.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmassava (4) jinako bratoM kA jJAna nahIM hai, kintu unako svIkAra tathA
pAlana karate haiM, aise agItArtha muni  /  (5) jinako vratoM kA jJAna hai,
kintu unako svIkAra tathA pAlana nahIM karate haiM  /  jaise zreNika, zrIkRSNa
Adi  /  (6) jo vratoM ko jAnate haiM, strIkAra nahIM karate, kintu pAlana karate
haiM  /  jaise anuttara vimAnavAsI deva  /  (7) jo vratoM ko jAnate haiM,
svIkArate haiM, kintu pIche pAlana nahIM karate haiN| jaise saMvigna pAkSika  /
samyak jJAna, samyaka gahaNa Ara samyak pAlana se hI vrata saphala hote haiN|
jinako pratoM kA samyak jJAna nahIM, bratoM ko vidhipUrvaka grahaNa nahIM karate
aura jo vratoM kA yathArtha pAlana nahIM karate, ve ghuNAkSara nyAya se vratoM
ko pAla bhI leM, to bhI usame phala prApti sambhava nahIM hai  /  avirata ke
pUrvokta sAta prakAroM meM se Adi ke cAra prakAra ke avirata jIvoM ko pratoM kA
jJAna hI nahIM hone se ve mithyAvRSTi hI haiN| kyoMki ve yathAvidhi pratoM ko
grahaNa tathA pAlana nahIM kara sakate, kintu unheM yathArtha mAnate haiN|
avirata samyagdRSTi jIvoM meM koI aupazamika samyaktvI, koI kSAyopazamika
samyaktvI aura koI kSAyika samyakttrI hote haiN| isa gaNasthAna meM janma,
maraNa, AyuSyabandha, parabhava-gamana ityAdi hotA hai| (5) dezavirata
guNasthAna-pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya ke udaya ke kAraNa jo jIva pApajanaka
kriyAoM se sarvathA to nahIM kintu apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya kA udaya na hone
ke kAraNa deza (aMza) se pApajanaka kriyAoM se alaga ho sakate haiM, ve
dezavirata kahalAte haiN|

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Second Karma Granth: Deshavira  Deshavira is also called a Shravak.
Their nature is the special Deshavira Gunasthan.   A being residing in this
Gunasthan has faith in the words of the omniscient, the Vitarag, and refrains
from violence with tolerance. However, they do not refrain from harming
stationary beings without purpose. This means that they are called Vira-Avira
because they are Vira (refraining) from violence towards sentient beings but not
Vira (refraining) from violence towards stationary beings.  Many Shravaks
residing in this Gunasthan take one vow, some take two, and some take three,
four, five, up to twelve vows. They also adopt the eleven images of a Shravak
and work for the welfare of the soul. There are also Shravaks who follow the
maximum number of vows and do not participate in any other way in sinful actions
except with permission.  There are three types of permission: (1) Pratimayanu-
mati, (2) Prati-shravananu-mati, (3) Samvasanu-mati. Using food, etc., prepared
by oneself or another is Pratimayanu-mati. Hearing about the sinful actions done
by a relative like a son, etc., and not stopping them from doing those actions
even after hearing about them is Prati-shravananu-mati. Having affection for a
son, etc., when they are involved in sinful activities, meaning not hearing
about the sinful activities and not praising them even after hearing about them
is Samvasanu-mati. The Shravak who does not participate in any way in the
beginnings of sinful actions, only accepts Samvasanu-mati, is superior to all
other Shravaks.  The Deshavira Gunasthan is only found in humans and Tiryanch
beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 T 25 dvitIya karmagrantha dezavirata ko zrAvaka bhI kahate haiN| inakA svarUpa
vizeSa dezavirata guNasthAna hai  /  isa guNasthAnavartI jIva sarvajJa vItarAga
ke kathana meM zraddhA rakhatA huA tasahiMsA se virata hotA hI hai, kintu binA
prayojana ke sthAvara hiMsA ko bhI nahIM karatA hai| arthAt sahisA ke tyAga kI
apekSA virata aura sthAvara hiMsA kI apekSA avirata hone se isa jIva ko
viratAvirata bhI kahate haiM  /  isa guNasthAna meM rahane vAle kaI zrAvaka eka
vrata lete haiM, kaI do zrata lete haiM evaM kaI tIna, cAra, pA~ca yAvat bAraha
vrata lete haiM tathA zrAvaka kI gyAraha pratimAoM ko dhAraNa kara AtmA kA
kalyANa karate haiM  /  isa prakAra adhika-se-adhika vratoM ko pAlana karane
vAle zrAvaka aise bhI hote haiM, jo pApakarmoM meM anumati ke sivAya aura kisI
prakAra ma bhAga nahIM lete haiM  /  anumati ke tIna prakAra haiM- (1)
pratimevAnumati, (2) pratizravaNAnumati, (3) sNvaasaanumti| apane yA dUsare ke
kiye hue bhojana Adi kA upayoga karanA pratisevAnumati hai  /  putra Adi kisI
sambandhI ke dvArA kiye gaye pApakarmoM ko kevala sunanA aura sunakara bhI una
karmoM ke karane se unako nahIM rokanA pratizravaNAnumati hai  /  putra Adi
apane sambandhiyoM ke pApakArya meM pravRtta hone para unake Upara sirpha mamatA
rakhanA, arthAt na to pApakArya ko sunanA aura sunakara bhI usakI prazaMsA na
karanA saMvAsAnumati hai  /  jo zrAvaka, pApa-janaka ArambhoM meM kisI prakAra
se bhI yoga nahIM detA, kevala saMvAsAnumati ko sektA hai, vaha anya saba
zrAvakoM meM zreSTha hai  /  dezavirata guNasthAna manuSya aura tithaMca jIvoM
ke hI hotA hai  /

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Karmastava**  - The four Gunasthanas (states of being) at the beginning are
applicable to all beings in the four gatis (states of existence): Deva (gods),
Manushya (humans), Tiryanch (animals), and Narak (hell beings). The duration of
this Gunasthan is from the shortest Antarmuhurt (a fraction of a moment) to the
longest Deshonapurva Koti (a vast period of time).  (6) **Pramattasanyata
Gunasthan** - Those beings who are completely free from sinful activities
through proper conduct are called Sanyatas (ascetics). However, as long as they
indulge in Pramada (negligence), they are called Pramattasanyatas, and their
specific nature is called Pramattasanyata Gunasthan. Beings in this Gunasthan
abstain from even the slightest of careless actions, to the extent that they do
not even indulge in the aforementioned Mambasanumati (indulgence in the five
senses). _Although the complete absence of Pratyakhyanavaran Kshaya (the
covering of the soul that prevents complete restraint) leads to complete
restraint in this Gunasthan, the presence of Pramada, which generates impurities
in restraint due to the arising of Sanjwalan (passion) and other Kshayas
(passions), is why it is called Pramattasanyata.  There are fifteen types of
Pramada: - Four Vikatha (stories of women, devotees, kings, and thieves). - Four
Kshayas (anger, pride, deceit, and greed). - Five attachments to the objects of
the senses (touch, taste, breath, sight, and hearing). - Sleep and affection.
In this Gunasthan, the purity of qualities is more prominent than the
renunciation of the world.  1. Vikata taha Kshaya Indrimani Dda Taheva Panayo
Ya. Chad Chad Panamegegam Honti Pamada Hu Panna Rasa. - Gommatasar Jivakand 34

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava - Adi ke cAra guNasthAna cAroM gati-deva, manuSya, tiryaMca aura
nArakako jIvoM ke ho sakate haiN| isa guNasthAna kA kAla jaghanya antarmuhUrta,
utkRSTa dezonapUrvakoTi paryanta hai| (6) pramasasaMyata guNasthAna-jo jIva
pApajanaka vyApAroM se vidhipUrvaka sarvathA nivRtta ho jAte haiM, ve saMyata
(muni) haiN| lekina saMyata bhI jaba taka pramAda kA sevana karate haiM, taba
taka ve pramattasaMyata kahalAte haiM aura unake svarUpa-vizeSa ko
pramattasaMyata guNasthAna kahate haiN| isa guNasthAnavartI jIva sAvadha karmoM
kA yahAM taka tyAga karate haiM ki pUrvokta maMbAsAnumati bhI nahIM sevate haiN|
_ yadyapi sakalasaMyama ko rokane vAlI pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya kA abhAva hone
se isa guNasthAna meM pUrNa saMyama to ho cukatA hai, kintu saMjvalana Adi
kaSAyoM ke udaya se saMyama meM mala utpanna karane vAle pramAda ke rahane se
ise pramattasaMyata kahate haiN| pramAda ke pandraha prakAra hote haiMcAra
vikathA (strIkathA, bhaktakathA, rAjakathA, caurakathA)  /  cAra kaSAya (krodha,
mAna, mAyA, lobh)| pA~ca indriyoM sparzana, rasana, prANa, cakSu aura zrotra) ke
viSayoM meM aaskti| nidrA aura sneha  /  isa guNasthAna meM dezavirati kI apekSA
guNoM- vizuddhi kA prakarSa, 1. vikatA tahA kasAyA indimaNiddA taheva paNayo ya
/  cad cad paNamegegaM hoMti pamAdA hu paNNa rasa  //  -gommaTasAra jIvakAnDa 34

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma-Prakarana  And in comparison to the Aprammat-Samyat, the pure-
quality deteriorates. In this quality-state, the fourteen pre-existing Muni use
the Ahar-Kalabdhi.  The state of the Prammat-Samyat quality-state is inferior to
one-time and superior to a little less than a crore of pre-existences, and this
and the subsequent quality-states are only for the beings of the human realm.
(7) Aprammat-Samyat Quality-State - Those who are restrained (Muni) and do not
have Vikatha, Kshaya, etc. distractions, are Aprammat-Samyat, and their specific
nature, which occurs in the extreme state of purity and impurity of the
qualities like knowledge, etc., is called the Aprammat-Samyat quality-state.
That is, the restrained (Muni) who have a mild rise of Sanjwalan and Nok-Kshaya,
and whose explicit and implicit distractions are destroyed, and who are immersed
in knowledge, meditation, and penance, with a pure mind, are called Aprammat-
Samyat.  Due to the connection with distraction, the soul's purity of qualities
deteriorates. Therefore, from this quality-state onwards, all the present Muni
remain Aprammat in their nature.  The only difference between the sixth Prammat-
Samyat quality-state and the seventh Aprammat-Samyat quality-state is that in
the seventh quality-state, there is not even a slight distraction, therefore,
transgression, etc. in the vows is not possible, but the sixth quality-state,
being prone to distraction, has the possibility of transgression in the vows.
These two quality-states are unstable like the needle of a motion-indicating
instrument. Meaning, sometimes the seventh becomes the sixth, and sometimes the
sixth becomes the seventh quality-state, respectively.  The time-duration of the
Aprammat-Samyat Muni-state is inferior to one-time and superior to an
Antarmukhurta. After that, those Aprammat Muni or...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmaprantha aura apramattasaMyata kI apekSA vizuddha - guNa kA
apakarSa hotA hai| isa guNarasthAna meM hI caturdaza pUrvadhArI muni
AhArakalabdhi kA prayoga karate haiN| pramattasaMyata guNasthAna kI sthiti
jaghanya ekasamaya aura utkRSTa karor3a pUrva se kucha kama pramANa hai aura
yaha tathA isama Age ke guNasthAna manuSyagati ke jIvoM ke hI hote haiN| (7)
apramattasaMyata guNasthAna-jo saMyata (muni) vikathA, kaSAya Adi pramAdoM ko
nahIM sakate haiM, ve apramatasaM yata haiM aura unakA svarUpavizeSa jo jJAnAdi
guNoM kI zuddhi aura azuddhi ke taratamabhAva meM hotA hai, apramattasaMyatta
guNasthAna kahalAtA hai  /  arthAt jisake saMjvalana aura nokaSAyoM kA manda
udaya hotA hai aura vyaktAvyakta pramAda naSTa ho cuke haiM aura jJAna, dhyAna,
tapa meM lIna makalasayama-mayukta saMyata (muni) ko apramattasaMyata kahate
haiN| pramAda ke saMbana se hI AtmA guNoM kI zuddhi sa giratA hai| isalie isa
guNasthAna se lekara Age ke sabhI guNasthAnoM meM vartamAna muni apane svarUpa
meM apramatta hI rahate hai| chaThe pramattasaMyata guNasthAna aura sAtave
apramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM itanA hI antara hai ki sAtaveM guNasthAna meM
thor3A-sA bhI pramAda nahI hotA hai, isalie vratoM meM aticArAdika sambhava
nahIM haiM, kintu chaThA guNasthAna pramAdayukta hone se vratoM meM aticAra
lagane kI sambhAvanA hai  /  ye donoM guNasthAna gati-sUcaka yantra kI sUI kI
taraha asthira hai| arthAna kabhI sAtaveM se chaThA, kabhI chaTe me sAtavA~
guNasthAna kramazaH hote rahate haiN| apramattasaMyata muNasthAna kI
samayasthiti jaghanya eka samaya aura utkRSTa antarmuhUrta taka kI hotI hai|
usake bAda ve apramatta muni yA

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **28**  Karma, having reached the eighth *guna-sthana*, either
takes on the *upshama* or *kshapika* category or returns to the sixth *guna-
sthana*.  **(8) Nivritti-badar Guna-sthana** This is also called *Apuvrakaran
Guna-sthana*. *Adhyavasaya*, *Parinam*, *Nivritti* - these three are synonymous
terms, in which the *aprammatta* soul's *ananta-bandhi*, *apratyakhyana-avaran*
and *pratyakhyana-avaran* - these three *chauk* shaped *badar* *kashya* are
eliminated, that state is called *Nivritti-badar Guna-sthana*.  The sixth and
seventh *guna-sthana* exist within a moment. But the *san-yata* (monk) who
attains a special type of purity by touching the sixth and seventh *guna-sthana*
and is about to establish the *upshama* or *kshapika* category, comes to the
*guna-sthana* called *Apuvrakaran*.  Although the beginning of both categories
is from the ninth *guna-sthana*, their foundation is laid in this *guna-sthana*.
The eighth *guna-sthana* is for laying the foundation of both types of
categories, and the categories begin in the ninth *guna-sthana*. That is, in the
eighth *guna-sthana*, there is only the potential for *upshama* or *kshapana*.
At the time of the eighth *guna-sthana*, the being establishes these five
things:  (1) *Sthiti-ghat*, (2) *Rasa-dhal*, (3) *Gunani*, (4) *Gun-san-kraman*
and (5) *Apuv-sthiti-bandh*.  (1) *Sthiti-ghat* - Reducing the large state of
karma by *apvartanakaran*, that is, removing the karmic particles that are about
to arise in the future from their fixed times of arising by *apvartanakaran*, is
called *Sthiti-ghat*.  (2) *Rasa-ghat* - Reducing the intense power of the bound
*shana-avaran* etc. karmas to bear fruit by *apvartanakaran* is called *Rasa-
ghat*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 28 karmastava to AThaveM guNasthAna meM pahuMcakara upazama, kSapaka zreNI le
lete haiM yA punaH chaThe guNasthAna meM A jAte haiM  /  (8) nivRttibAdara
guNasthAna isako apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna bhI kahate haiM  /  adhyavasAya,
pariNAma, nivRtti - ye tInoM samAnArthavAcaka mAbda haiM, jisameM apramatta AtmA
kI anantAnabandhI, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa - ina tIna cauka
rUpI bAdara kaSAya kI nivRtti ho jAtI hai, usa avasthA ko nivRttibAdara
guNasthAna kahate hai| antarmuhUrta meM chaThA aura antarmuhUrta meM sAtavA~
guNasthAna hotA rahatA hai| parantu isa prakAra chaThe aura sAtaveM guNasthAna
ke sparza se jo saMyata (muni) vizeSa prakAra ko vizuddhi prApta karake upazama
yA kSapaka zreNi mAMDane vAlA hotA hai, vaha apUrvakaraNa nAmaka guNasthAna meM
AtA hai| donoM zreNiyoM kA prArambha yadyapi nauveM guNasthAna se hotA hai,
kintu unakI AdhArazilA isa guNasthAna meM rakhI jAtI hai| AThavA~ guNasthAna
donoM prakAra kI zreNiyoM kI AdhArazilA banAne ke lie hai aura nauveM guNasthAna
meM zreNiyA~ prArambha hotI haiN| arthAt AThaveM guNasthAna meM upazamana yA
kSapaNa ko yogyatA mAtra hotI hai| AThaveM guNasthAna ke samaya meM jIva ina
pA~ca vastuoM kA vidhAna karatA hai (1) sthitighAta, (2) rasadhAla, (3) guNaNi,
(4) guNasaMkramaNa aura (5) apUrva sthitibandha  /  /  (1) sthitighAla .. karmoM
kI bar3I sthiti ko apavartanAkaraNa dvArA ghaTA denA arthAt jo karmalika Age
udaya meM Ane vAle haiM, unheM apavartanAkaraNa ke dvArA apane udaya ke niyata
samayoM meM haTA denA sthitighAta kahalAtA hai| (2) rasaghAta-baMdhe hue
zAnAvaraNAdi karmoM ke phala dene kI tIvra zakti ko apavartanAkaraNa ke dvArA
manda kara denA rasaghAta kahalAtA hai|

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  **(3)** The process of **guna-dheno** is the destruction
of the **karma-dalikas** of the Jinas, meaning that the **karma-dalikas** are
removed from their designated times of arising and are established in the **ant-
muhurt** in accordance with the order of time.  The order of establishment is as
follows:  From the time of arising to the **ant-muhurt**, excluding the times of
the **udaya-abalikas**, the **dalikas** established in the first time period are
few. In the second time period, the **dalikas** established are countless times
more than those established in the first time period. In this way, until the
final time period of the **ant-muhurt**, the **dalikas** established in each
subsequent time period should be understood to be countless times more than
those established in the previous time periods.  **(4)** **Guna-samkramana**...
is the transfer of previously bound **ashubha-prakritis** to the **shubha-
prakritis** being bound in the present, meaning that the previously bound
**ashubha-prakritis** are transformed into the **shubha-prakritis** being bound
in the present.  The order of **guna-samkramana** is briefly as follows:  In the
first time period, the number of **dalikas** of **ashubha-prakritis** that
undergo **samkramana** into **shubha-prakritis** is countless times less than
the number that undergo **samkramana** in the second time period, which is
countless times less than the number in the third time period. In this way, as
long as **guna-samkramana** continues, the number of **dalikas** that undergo
**samkramana** in each subsequent time period is countless times more than those
that underwent **samkramana** in the previous time periods.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha (3) guNadheNo jina karmadalikoM kA sthitighAta kiyA jAtA
hai, arthAt jo karmadalika apane-apane udaya ke niyata samayoM se haTAye jAte
haiM, unako samaya ke krama se antamuharta meM sthApita kara denA guNazreNi
kahalAtI hai| sthApita karane kA krama isa prakAra hai udaya-samaya se lekara
antarmuharta paryanta jitane samaya hote haiM, unameM se udayAbalikA ke samayoM
ko chor3akara zeSa rahe samayoM meM se prathama samaya meM jo dalika sthApita
kiye jAte haiM, ve kama hote haiM 1 dUsare samaya meM sthApita kiye jAne vAle
dalika pahale samaya meM sthApita dalikoM se asaMkhyAtagaNe adhika hote haiN|
isa prakAra antamuhUrta ke carama samayaparyanta Age-Age ke samaya meM sthApita
kiye jAne vAle dalika pahale-pahale ke samaya meM sthApita kiye gaye dalikoM se
asaMdhyAtagaNe hI samajhane caahie| (4) guNasaMkramaNa ... pahale baMdhI huI
azubhaprakRtiyoM ko vartamAna meM baMdha rahI zubhaprakRtiyoM meM sthAnAntarita
kara denA, arthAt pahale baMdhI huI azubhaprakRtiyoM ko vartamAna meM ba~dhane
vAlI zubhaprakRtiyoM ke rUpa meM pariNata kara denA gaNasaMkramaNa kahalAnA hai
/  muNasaMkramaNa kA krama saMkSepa meM isa prakAra hai prathama samaya meM
azubhaprakRtiyoM ke jitane dalikoM kA zubhaprakRti meM saMkramaNa holA hai,
usakI apekSA dusare samaya meM asaMcyAtaguNa adhika dalikoM kA saMkramaNa hotA
hai, tIsare meM dUsare kI apekSA asaMkhyAtaguNa  /  isa prakAra jaba taka gaNa-
saMkramaNa hotA rahatA hai| taba taka pahale-pahale samaya meM saMkramaNa kiye
gaye dalikoM se Age-Age ke samaya meM asaMkhyAtamuNa adhika dalikoM kA hI
saMkramaNa hotA hai|

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Firmstava (5) Apurva Sthitibandha  Apurva Sthitibandha is the binding of
karmas with extremely minimal presence, compared to before.  Although
Sthitighāt, etc., these five things also occur in the previous Gunasthanas, they
are unique in the eighth Gunasthāna. Because the purity of the Adhyavāsayas in
the previous Gunasthanas is less than their increase in the eighth Gunasthāna.
In the previous Gunasthanas, there is very little presence and very little
Rasaghāt, but in the eighth Gunasthāna, there is more presence and more
Rasaghāt. Similarly, in the previous Gunasthanas, the time limit of the
Gunashreni is more, and the Dalikas whose Gunashreni (creation or establishment)
is done are less, and in the eighth Gunasthāna, there are many more Dalikas
eligible for Gunashreni, but the time limit is very less. Compared to the
previous Gunasthanas, there is a lot of Gunasamkraman of karmas. Therefore, it
is unique, and in the eighth Gunasthāna, karmas with such minimal presence are
bound, which are never bound in the previous Gunasthanas with such minimal
presence.  Thus, due to the unique arrangement of Sthitighāt, etc., in this
Gunasthāna, this Gunasthāna is called Apurvakarana.  In this eighth Gunasthāna,
the unique Yogirupa state of the soul begins. That is, to produce the unique
fruit of Aupashmika or Kshayika Bhavarupa, it is necessary to subdue or destroy
the Charitramōhaniyakarma, and to do that, three Karana have to be done, namely
Yathapravrittikarana, Apurvakarana, and Anivrittikarana. Among them, the seventh
Gunasthāna is Yathapravrittikarana, the eighth Gunasthāna is Apurvakarana, and
the ninth Gunasthāna is Anivrittikarana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pharmastava (5) apUrva sthitibandha - pahale kI apekSA atyanta alpasthiti ke
karmo kA bAMdhanA apUrva sthitibandha kahalAtA hai  /  30 yadyapi sthitighAta
Adi ye pA~coM bAteM pahale ke guNasthAnoM meM bhI hotI haiM, tathApi AThaveM
guNasthAna meM ye apUrva hI hotI haiN| kyoMki pUrvaguNasthAnoM meM adhyavasAyoM
kI jitanI zuddhi hotI hai, usakI apekSA AThave guNasthAna meM unakI vRddhi
adhika hotI hai| pahale ke guNasthAnoM meM bahuta kama sthiti kA aura atyalpa
rasa kA ghAta hotA hai parantu AThavaM guNasthAna meM adhika sthiti aura adhika
rasa kA ghAta hotA hai| isI prakAra pahale ke guNasthAnoM meM guNazreNi kI
kAlamaryAdA adhika hotI hai tathA jina dalikoM kI guNazreNi ( racanA yA sthApanA
) kI jAtI hai, ve dalika alpa hote haiM aura AThaveM guNasthAna meM
guNazreNiyogya dalika to bahuta adhika hote haiM, kintu kAlamAna bahuta kama
hotA hai| pahale ke guNasthAnoM kI apekSA guNasaMkramaNa bahuta karmoM kA hotA
hai| ataeva vaha apUrva hotA hai aura AThaveM guNasthAna meM itanI alpasthiti ke
karma bA~dhe jAte haiM ki jitanI alpasthiti ke karma pahale ke guNasthAnoM meM
kadApi nahIM ba~dhate haiN| isa prakAra isa guNasthAna meM sthitighAta Adi
padArthoM kA apUrva vidhAna hone se isa guNasthAna ko apUrvakaraNa kahate haiM
/  isa AThavaM guNasthAna meM AtmA kI viziSTa yogIrUpa avasthA zurU hotI hai.
arthAt aupazamika yA kSAyika bhAvarUpa viziSTa phala paidA karane ke lie
cAritramohanIyakarma kA upazamana yA kSaya karanA par3atA hai aura vaha karane
ke lie bhI tIna karaNa karane par3ate haiM yathApravRttikaraNa, apUrvakaraNa
aura anivRttikaraNa  /  unameM yathApravRttikaraNarUpa sAtava, apUrvakaraNarUpa
AThavA~ aura anivRttikaraNarUpa nauvA~ guNasthAna hai|

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  Those beings who have attained, are attaining, and will
attain the A-puurva-karana Guna-sthana, the number of their Adhyavasaya-sthana
(Parinaama-bheda) is equal to the countless regions of the Lokakasha. Because
the state of this Guna-sthana is Antarmukhurta proof, and there are countless
Antarmukhurta. Of these, only the first time-bound beings of the three times,
their Adhyavasaya is also equal to the countless regions of the Lokakasha. In
the same way, the Adhyavasaya of the second, third, and other time-bound beings
are also equal to the countless regions of the Lokakasha in calculation.  There
are countless types of countless numbers. Therefore, the number of Adhyavasaya
of each time-bound being and the number of Adhyavasaya of all time-bound beings
present in all times - both these numbers are generally the same, i.e.,
countless, yet these two countless numbers are different from each other.  In
this eighth Guna-sthana, each time-bound tri-kaalik being is infinite and their
Adhyavasaya is countless. The reason for this is that although the Adhyavasaya
of many beings of the same time-bound are separate from each other (with less or
more purity), yet the Adhyavasaya of many beings of the same time-bound are
considered to be of equal purity and are not considered separate. Of the
countless Adhyavasaya of each time, those Adhyavasaya which are of less purity
are called Jghana and those Adhyavasaya which are of more purity than all other
Adhyavasaya are called Utkrishta.  Thus, there is one class of Jghana
Adhyavasaya and another class of Utkrishta Adhyavasaya. Between these two
classes, there are countless...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha k jo apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ko prApta kara cuke haiM,
kara rahe haiM aura Age prApta kareMge, una saba jIvoM ke adhyavasAyasthAnoM
(pariNAmabhedoM) kI saMkhyA asaMkhyAta lokAkAza ke pradezoM ke barAbara hai  /
kyoMki isa guNasthAna kI sthiti antarmuhUrta pramANa hai aura antarmuhUrta ke
asaMkhyAta samaya hote haiN| jinameM se kevala prathama samayavartI tInoM kAloM
ke jIvoM ke adhyavasAya bhI lokAkAza ke asaMkhyAta pradezoM ke barAbara haiN|
isI prakara dUsare-tIsare Adi samayavartI kAlika jIvoM ke adhyavasAya bhI gaNanA
meM lokAkAza ke asaMkhyAta pradezoM ke barAbara hI haiM  /  asaMkhyAta saMkhyA
ke asaMkhyAta prakAra haiM  /  ataH eka-eka samayavartI kAlika jIvoM ke
adhyavasAyoM kI saMkhyA aura saba samayoM meM vartamAna kAlika jIvoM ke
adhyavasAyoM kI saMkhyA- ye donoM saMkhyAe~ sAmAnyataH eka-sI arthAt asaMkhyAta
hI haiM phira bhI ye donoM asaMkhyAta saMkhyAeM paraspara bhinna haiM  /  J isa
AThaveM guNasthAna ke pratyeka samayavartI traikAlika jIva ananta aura unake
adhyavasAya asaMkhyAta hI hote haiM  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki samAna
samayavartI aneka jIvoM ke adhyavasAya yadyapi Apasa meM pRthak-pRthak
(nyUnAdhika zuddhi vAle) hote haiM, tathApi samasamayavartI bahuta me jIvoM ke
adhyavasAya tulyazuddhi vAle hone se alagaalaga nahIM mAne jAte haiN| pratyeka
samaya ke asaMkhyAta adhyavasAyoM meM se jo adhyavasAya kama zuddhi vAle hote
haiM, ve jaghanya aura jo adhyavasAya anya saba adhyavasAyoM kI apekSA adhika
zuddhi vAle hote haiM, ve utkRSTa kahalAte haiM  /  isa prakAra eka varga
jaghanya adhyavasAyoM kA aura dUsarA varga utkRSTa adhyavasAyoM kA hotA hai| ina
donoM vargoM ke bIca meM asaMkhyAta

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are 32 **karma** categories, all of which have **adhya-vayas** (karmic
tendencies) that are considered **madhyama** (intermediate). The purification of
the **jghanya** (inferior) **adhya-vayas** of the first category is less
difficult than the purification of the **utkrista** (superior) **adhya-vayas**
of the last category. And within the 32 categories, the **adhya-vayas** of the
later categories are considered to be more pure than the **adhya-vayas** of the
earlier categories.  Generally, one should understand that **adhya-vayas** of
the same time period are more pure than each other in the following ways:  (1)
**Ananta-bhag** (infinite parts) more pure, (2) **Asankhyata-bhag** (innumerable
parts) more pure, (3) **Sankhyata-bhag** (countable parts) more pure, (4)
**Sankhyata-guna** (countable times) more pure, (5) **Asankhyata-guna**
(innumerable times) more pure, (6) **Ananta-guna** (infinite times) more pure.
These six types of greater purity, **Ananta-bhag** more pure, etc., are called
**pad-sthana** (stages).  Thus, in the order of purification, the **adhya-
vayas** of the second time period are different from the **adhya-vayas** of the
first time period. And the **utkrista** **adhya-vayas** of the first time period
are **Ananta-guna** (infinite times) more pure than the **jghanya** **adhya-
vayas** of the first time period. And the **jghanya** **adhya-vayas** of the
second time period are also **Ananta-guna** (infinite times) more pure than the
**utkrista** **adhya-vayas** of the first time period. In this way, until the
final time period, the **adhya-vayas** of each subsequent time period are more
pure than the **adhya-vayas** of the previous time periods.  The names of these
**pad-sthana** (stages) are:  (1) **Ananta-bhag** **hina** (infinite parts
less), (2) **Asankhyata-bhag** **hina** (innumerable parts less), (3)
**Sankhyata-bhag** **hina** (countable parts less), (4) **Sankhyata-guna**
**hina** (countable times less), (5) **Asankhyata-guna** **hina** (innumerable
times less), (6) **Ananta-guna** **hina** (infinite times less).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava 32 varga haiM, jinake saba adhyavasAya madhyama kahalAte haiN|
prathama varga ke jaghanya adhyavasAyoM kI zuddhi kI apekSA antima varga ke
utkRSTa adhyavasAyoM kI anAgarika hai aura kIca ke satra vargoM meM pUrva-pUrva
varga ke adhyavasAyoM kI apekSA uttara varga ke adhyavasAya vizeSa zuddha mAne
jAte haiM  /  sAmAnyataH isa prakAra samajhanA cAhie ki samasamayavartI
adhyabasAya eka dUsare se -- (1) anantabhAga adhika zuddha, (2) asaMkhyAtabhAga
adhika zuddha, (3) saMkhyAta bhAga adhika zuddha, (4) saMkhyAtaguNa adhika
zuddha, (5) asaMkhyAtaguNa adhika zuddha, (6) anantaguNa adhika zuddha hote haiM
/  isa prakAra adhika zuddhi ke pUrvokta anantabhAga adhika zuddhi Adi chaha
prakAroM ko padsthAna kahate haiN|' isa prakAra zuddhikaraNa ke krama meM
prathama samaya ke adhyavasAyoM kI apekSA dUsare samaya ke adhyavasAya bhinna hI
hote haiM tathA prathama samaya ke jaghanya adhyavasAyoM se prathama samaya ke
utkRSTa adhyavasAya anantaguNa vizuddha aura prathama samaya ke utkRSTa
adhyavasAyoM se dUsare samaya ke jaghanya adhyavasAya bhI anantaguNa vizuddha
hote haiN| isa prakAra antima samaya taka pUrva - pUrva samaya ke adhyavasAyoM
se para para samaya ke adhyavasAya 1. utkRSTa kI upekSA hI sthAnoM ke nAma se
haiM (1) anantabhAga hIna, (2) avakhyAtamAga hona, (3) saMkhyAtabhAga hona, (4)
saMkhyAtaguNa hIna; (5) asaMkhyAtaguNa hIna, (6) anantaguNa hIna |

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth, Chapter 33  The inferior *adhyavasaya* of each and every
time should be understood as infinitely pure compared to the superior
*adhyavasaya* of that time, and the inferior *adhyavasaya* of later times should
be understood as infinitely pure compared to the superior *adhyavasaya* of
earlier times.  The time of the eighth *gunasthan* is an example of an inferior
time and the final moment is an example of a superior time.  **(6) Abhivritti
Gunasthan:** Its full name is *Anivritti-Vadasamparaya Gatasthan*. In this
*gunasthan*, *haar* (gross) *ray* (passion) arises, and because the results of
the *jivas* who are contemporaneous are the same but not different, this
*gunasthan* is called *Anivritti-Chadar-Samparaya Gunasthan*.  This *gunasthan*
is an example of an inferior and superior state, and the final moment. There are
as many *adhyavasaya* states in this *gunasthan* as there are moments in the
final moment. Because the *jivas* who are contemporaneous in the ninth
*gunasthan* all have the same *adhyavasaya*, i.e., they are of equal purity.
Similarly, until the final moment of the ninth *gunasthan*, the *adhyavasaya* of
the *jivas* present in the second, third, etc., equivalent times are the same,
and there is only one *adhyavasaya* state for the same *adhyavasaya*. That is,
there are as many results as there is time in this *gunasthan*. Therefore, there
is only one result in each time. Therefore, here there is complete dissimilarity
in the results of different contemporaneous *jivas* and complete similarity in
the results of the same contemporaneous *jivas*, and the karmas are destroyed by
these results.  **1.  "He does not drink, and the results are destroyed by him.
||56||  He becomes non-attached, and he attains the state of liberation, as
there is only one result. ||57||  He becomes pure and wise, and he knows the
nature of karma." ||57||  Gommatasar, Jivakand 56-57**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha 33 bhinna-bhinna aura pratyeka samaya ke jaghanya
adhyavasAya se usa samaya ke utkRSTa adhyavasAya anantaguNa vizuddha samajhane
cAhie tathA pUrva-pUrva samaya ke utkRSTa adhyavasAyoM kI apekSA para para
samaya ke jaghanya adhyavasAya bhI anantaguNa vizuddha samajhane cAhie  /
AThaveM guNasthAna kA samaya jaghanya eka samaya aura utkRSTa antamuhUrta
pramANa hai  /  (6) abhivRtti guNasthAna- isakA pUrA nAma anivRtti-
vAdarasaMparAya gatasthAna hai ! isameM hAra (sthUla) rAya ( kaSAya ) udaya meM
hotA hai tathA sama samayavatAM jIvoM ke pariNAmoM meM samAnatA hI hone, kintu
bhinnatA na hone se isa guNasthAna ko anivRtti- cAdara-saMparAya guNasthAna
kahate haiM  /  isa guNasthAna ko jaghanya aura utkRSTa sthiti antarmuhUrta
pramANa hai aura eka antarmuharta ke jitane samaya hote haiM, utane hI
adhyavasAyasthAna isa guNasthAna ke hote haiN| kyoMki nauveM guNasthAna meM jo
jIva -sama samayavartI hote haiM, una sabake adhyavasAya eka se arthAt
tulyazuddhi bAle hote haiM  /  isI prakAra nauveM guNasthAna ke antima samaya
taka dUsare. tIsare Adi tulya samaya meM vartamAna kAlika jIvoM ke adhyavasAya
samAna hI hote haiM aura samAna adhyavasAyoM kA eka hI adhyavasAyasthAna hotA
hai  /  arthAt isa guNasthAna kA jitanA kAla hai, utane hI usake pariNAma haiN|
isalie pratyeka samaya meM eka hI pariNAma hotA haiN| ataeva yahA~ para bhinna
samayavartI pariNAmoM meM sarvathA visadgatA aura eka samayavartI jIvoM ke
pariNAmoM meM sarvathA sadRzatA hI hotI hai tathA ina pariNAmoM dvArA karmoM kA
kSaya hotA hai  / " 1. Na pivati tahAci ya pariNAmehi miTTo jehiM  /  /  56  /
/  hoti aNiyaTTiNI te paDimamayaM jessimekka pariNAmA  /  vimalayara zANa
huyavasihAhi vidiSTa kammavaNA  //  57  //  gommaTasAra, jIvakANDa 56-57

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 34  This is now explained in detail:  There can be as many categories of
**karma** **adhyaavasayas** as there are times in a **guna-sthana**. Each
category may include an infinite number of **adhyaavasayas** of infinite
**trikaalik** beings. However, since all **adhyaavasayas** in each category are
equal in purity, the **adhyaavasaya-sthana** of each category is the same. But
the **adhyaavasaya-sthana** of the first time - the **adhyaavasayas** of the
first category - are infinitely purer than the **adhyaavasaya-sthana** of the
second time - the **adhyaavasayas** of the second category. Similarly, the
**adhyaavasaya-sthana** of the second, third, fourth, etc., up to the ninth
**guna-sthana** at the final time, should be understood as infinitely purer than
the **adhyaavasaya-sthana** of the previous times.  Although there is purity in
the **adhyaavasayas** of the eighth and ninth **guna-sthana**, they have their
own unique characteristics. For example, in the eighth **guna-sthana**, the
**adhyaavasayas** of the infinite **trikaalik** beings who are contemporary can
be divided into countless categories due to the rapid rate of purification, but
in the ninth **guna-sthana**, there is only one category due to the equal purity
of the **adhyaavasayas** of the infinite **kaalik** beings who are contemporary.
Compared to the previous **guna-sthana**, the proportion of **kṣaya** decreases
in the subsequent **guna-sthana**, and the purity of the results of the being
increases according to the decrease in **kṣaya**. The purity in the ninth
**guna-sthana** is so much higher than in the eighth **guna-sthana** that the
differences in its **adhyaavasayas** are much less than the differences in the
**adhyaavasayas** of the eighth **guna-sthana**.  Beings who attain the ninth
**guna-sthana** are of two types: (1) **upshamka** and (2) **kṣapka**. Those who
are...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34 karmastava isa bAta ko aba vizeSa rUpa se spaSTa karate haiM guNasthAna ke
adhyavasAyoM ke utane hI varga ho sakate haiM, jitane ki isa guNasthAna ke
samaya haiN| eka-eka varga meM cAhe traikAlika ananta jIvoM ke adhyavasAyoM kI
ananta vyaktiyA~ zAmila hoM. parantu pratyeka varga ke sabhI adhyavasAya zuddhi
meM barAbara hone se una-una pratyeka varga kA adhyavasAya sthAna eka hI hai  /
lekina prathama samaya ke adhyavasAyasthAna se - prathama vargIya adhyavasAyoM
se dUsare samaya ke adhyavasAyasthAna - dUsare varga ke adhyavasAya - anantaguNa
vizuddha hote haiN| isI prakAra dUsare, tIsare, cauthe Adi nauveM guNasthAna ke
antima samaya taka pUrvapUrva samaya ke adhyavasAya sthAna se uttara-uttara
samaya ke adhyavasAyasthAna anantaguNa vizuddha samajhanA cAhie  /  - yadyapi
AThaveM aura nauveM guNasthAnoM meM adhyavasAyoM meM vizuddhi hotI rahatI hai;
phira bhI una donoM kI apanI-apanI vizeSatAeM haiN| jaise ki AThaveM guNasthAna
meM sama-samayavartI traikAlika ananta jIvoM ke adhyavasAya zuddhi ke
taratamabhAva se asaMkhyAta vargoM meM vibhAjita kiye jA sakate haiM, kintu
nauveM guNasthAna meM sama-samayavartI kAlika ananta jIvoM ke adhyavasAyoM kA
samAna zuddhi ke kAraNa eka hI varga hotA hai  /  pUrva-pUrva guNasthAna kI
apekSA uttara-uttara guNasthAna meM kaSAya ke aMza bahuta kama hote jAte haiM
aura kaSAyoM kI nyUnatA ke anusAra jIva ke pariNAmoM kI vizuddhi bar3hatI jAtI
hai| AThaveM guNasthAna kI apekSA nauveM guNasthAna meM vizuddhi itanI adhika ho
jAtI hai ki usake adhyavasAyoM kI bhinnatAe~ AThaveM guNasthAna ke adhyavasAyoM
kI bhinnatAoM se bahuta kama ho jAtI haiM  /  nIveM guNasthAna ko prApta karane
vAle jIva do prakAra ke hote haiM(1) upazamaka aura ( 2 ) kSapaka | jo
cAritramohanIyakarma kA upa 1 1 U

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth ### 35  Those who subdue the karmas are called
*upashamak* (subduers), and those who destroy the *charitramohaniya* karma are
called *kshapik* (destroyers). While subduing or destroying the *mohaniya*
karma, they also subdue or destroy many other karmas.  **(10) Sukshma Samparaya
Gunasthan:** This *gunasthan* is known as "Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan" because
only the subtle fragments of *samparaya* (greed-based *kṣaya*) arise in it. Just
as a faint redness remains in a cloth dyed pink, similarly, the *jiva* in this
*gunasthan* experiences the subtle fragments of *samparaya*.  The *jiva* in this
*gunasthan* is also either an *upashamak* or a *kshapik*. Except for greed,
there is no other nature of *charitramohaniya* karma that has not been subdued
or destroyed. Therefore, those who are *upashamak* only subdue the greed-based
*kṣaya*, and those who are *kshapik* destroy it.  Whether the one who
experiences subtle greed ascends to the *upashama* or *kshapika* category, they
remain slightly less than *yathakyatacharitra*. This means that the emergence of
subtle greed slightly hinders the manifestation of *yathakyatacharitra*.  The
time duration of this *gunasthan* is from the shortest moment to the longest
*antarmuhurt*.  **(11) Upashanta-Kṣaya-Shetaraga Chhadmastra Gunasthan:** Those
whose *kṣayas* are subdued, who do not experience any *raga* at all, and who
have *chhadma* (covering, deadly karmas) attached to them, are *upashanta-kṣaya-
vitaraga* (subdued-kṣaya-free from *raga*)...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha 35 zamana karate haiM, ve upazamaka aura jo
cAritramohanIyakarma kA kSapaNa karate haiM, ve kSapaka kahalAte haiN|
mohanIyakarma kI upazamanA athavA kSapaNA karate-karate anya anekoM karmoM kA
bhI upazamana yA kSapaNa karate haiN| (10) sUkSmasamparAya guNasthAna- isa
guNasthAna meM samparAya arthAt lobhakaSAya ke sUkSma khaNDoM kA hI udaya hone
se isakA 'sUkSmasamparAya guNasthAna' aisA sArthaka nAma prasiddha hai| jisa
prakAra ghule hue gulAbI raMga ke kapar3e meM lAlimA ( surkhI) sUkSma - jhInI sI
raha jAtI hai, usI prakAra isa guNavartI jIna saMbana ke samma khaNDoM kA vedana
karatA hai  /  isa guNasthAnavartI jIva bhI upazamaka athavA kSapaka hote haiN|
lobha ke sivAya cAritramohanIyakarma kI dUsarI aisI prakRti hI nahIM hotI,
jisakA upazamana yA kSapaNa nahIM huA ho  /  ataH jo upazamaka hote haiM, ve
lobhakaSAya kA mAtra upazamana aura jo kSapaka hote haiM, ve lobhakaSAya kA
kSapaNa karate haiM  /  sUkSma lobha kA vedana karane vAlA cAhe upazamazreNI
athavA kSapakazreNI para ArohaNa karane vAlA ho; yathAkhyAtacAritra se kucha hI
nyUna rahatA hai  /  arthAt sUkSma lobha kA udaya hone se yathAkhyAtacAritra ke
pragaTa hone meM kucha kamI rahatI hai  /  isa guNasthAna kI kAla sthiti
jaghanya eka samaya aura utkRSTa antarmuhUrta hai| (11) upazAMta-kaSAya-
zetarAga chadmastra guNasthAna- jinake kaSAya upazAnta hue haiM, rAga kA bhI
sarvathA udaya nahIM hai aura jinako chadma (AvaraNabhUta ghAtIkarma) lage hue
haiM, ve jIva upazAnta - kaSAya- vItarAga

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Kamasthava** are those whose nature is characterized by **Upshant Kshaya-
Vitrag-Chhadmasth Gunasthan**.  They are like the water of a lake in the autumn
season, which becomes clear and pure due to the subsidence of the **Mohaniya
Karma**. This means that the **Mohaniya Karma** still exists but does not
manifest.  The term "**Upshant-Kshaya-Vitrag-Chhadmasth Gunasthan**" has three
adjectives: (1) **Upshant-Kshaya**, (2) **Vitrag**, and (3) **Chhadmasth**. Of
these, "**Chhadmasth**" is a **Swaroop-Visheshana** (adjective that describes
the nature of the noun). This is because even without it, the term "**Upshant-
Kshaya-Vitrag Gunasthan**" would still refer to the eleventh **Gunasthan**, and
no other meaning would be understood. Therefore, "**Chhadmasth**" is an
adjective that clarifies the nature of its noun.  "**Upshant-Kshaya**" and
"**Vitrag**" are **Byavartka-Visheshana** (adjectives that distinguish the noun
from others). Only with the presence of both these adjectives can the intended
meaning be understood. Without them, other meanings besides the intended one can
also be understood. For example, without the adjective "**Upshant-Kshaya**", the
term "**Vitrag-Chhadmasth Gunasthan**" would refer to the twelfth **Gunasthan**
as well, in addition to the intended meaning (the eleventh **Gunasthan**). This
is because the twelfth...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kamastava chamastha haiM aura unake svarUpa-vizeSa ko upazAnta kaSAya-
vItarAgachadmastha guNasthAna kahate haiN| zarada Rtu meM hone vAle sarovara ke
jala kI taraha mohanIyakarma ke upazama se sastA hone vAle nimaH pApA musAbAle
jIva ke hote haiN| Azaya yaha hai ki mohanIyakarma kI sattA to hai parantu udaya
nahIM hotA hai| "upazAnta-kaSAya-vItarAga-chadmastha guNasthAna' isa nAma meM
(1) upazAnta-kaSAya, (2) vItarAga, (3) chadmastha-ye tIna vizeSaNa' haiN| unameM
se 'chadmastha' yaha vizeSaNa svarUpa-vizeSaNa hai| kyoMki usake abhAva meM bhI
'upazAnta-kaSAya-vItarAga guNasthAna' itane nAma se gyArahaveM guNasthAna kA
bodha ho jAtA hai aura iSTa ke atirikta dUsare artha kA bodha nahIM hotA hai  /
ata: 'chadmastha' yaha vizeSaNa apane vizeSya ke svarUpa kA bodha karAne vAlA
hai  /  'upazAnta-kaSAya' aura 'vItarAga ye do byAvartaka-vizeSaNa haiN| ina
donoM ke rahane se hI iSTa artha kA bodha ho sakatA hai aura inake  /  na rahane
para iSTa artha kA bodha na hokara anya artha kA bhI bodha ho  /  jAtA hai  /
jaise 'upazAnta-kaSAya' isa vizeSaNa ke abhAva meM 'vItarAga-  /  chamastha
guNasthAna' itane nAma se iSTa artha (gyArahaveM guNasthAna) ke sivAya bArahaveM
guNasthAna kA bhI bodha hone lagatA hai| kyoMki bArahave 1. vizeSaNa do prakAra
kA hotA hai--(1) svarUpa vizeSaNa, (2) vyAvartakavizeSaNa  /  svarUpa-vizeSaNa-
jisake na rahane para bhI zeSa bhAga se iSTa artha kA boSa hotA hai| arthAta
yaha vizeSaNa apane vizeSya ke svarUpa mAtra ko jatAtA hai| vyAvartaka-vizeSaNa
--jisake rahane se hI iSTa artha kA bodha ho sakatA hai| usake abhAva meM iSTa
ke sivAya dUsare artha kA bhI  /  bodha hone lagatA hai|

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the second Karmagrantha Gunasthan, the Jiva also experiences Chhadma
(knowledge-obscuring karmas like Dhatikarma) and Vitragatva (absence of the
arising of raga), but the epithet Upshantakashaya cannot indicate the twelfth
Gunasthan. Because in the twelfth Gunasthan, the Jiva's kshayas are not Upshanta
(subdued), but rather they are destroyed. Similarly, in the absence of the
epithet 'Vitrag', the Upshanta-Kashaya-Chhadmastha Gunasthan, by that very name,
can also indicate the fourth, fifth, etc. Gunasthanas, because the Jiva's
Anantanu bandhi kshayas can be Upshanta in the fourth, fifth, etc. Gunasthanas.
But with the presence of the epithet 'Vitrag', the fourth, fifth, etc.
Gunasthanas cannot be indicated. Because in those Gunasthanas, the present Jiva
has the inherent nature of the arising of raga (maya and lobha), therefore
Vitragatva is impossible.  The Jiva existing in the eleventh Gunasthan is not
capable of attaining the further Gunasthanas; because one can only attain the
further Gunasthanas by performing Kshapakathanni, and without Kshapakshreni,
Moksha cannot be attained. But the Jiva of the eleventh Gunasthan, by rule, is
only capable of performing Upshamshreni. Therefore, that Jiva inevitably falls
from the eleventh Gunasthan.  When the time of this Gunasthan is not complete,
and the Jiva falls due to the destruction of bhava (life), then it is born in
the Anuttar Vimana in the form of a deva, and at that time, since the fifth,
etc. Gunasthanas are not possible in that place, it attains the fourth
(Aviratsamyagdristi) Gunasthan, and upon attaining the fourth Gunasthan, that
Jiva begins to experience the bandha, udaya, and udirana of all those karma-
prakritis, as many karma-prakritis are capable of bandha, udaya, and udirana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha guNasthAna meM bhI jIva ko chadma (jJAnAvaraNa Adi
dhAtIkarma) tathA vItarAgatva (rAga ke udaya kA abhAva) hotA hai, parantu
upazAntakaSAya isa vizeSaNa se bArahaveM guNasthAna kA bodha nahIM ho sktaa|
kyoMki bArahavaM guNasthAna meM jIva ke kaSAya upazAnta nahIM hote haiM, apitu
kSaya ho jAte haiN| isI taraha 'vItarAga' isa vizeSaNa ke abhAva meM upazAnta-
kaSAya-chadmastha guNasthAna itane nAma se caturtha, paMcama Adi guNasthAnoM meM
bhI jova ke anantAnubandhI kaSAya upazAnta ho sakane ke kAraNa caturtha, paMcama
Adi guNasthAnoM kA bhI bodha hone lagatA hai| parantu vItarAga isa vizeSaNa ke
rahane se caturtha, paMcama Adi guNasthAnoM kA bodha nahIM ho sakatA hai| kyoMki
una guNasthAnoM meM vartamAna jIva ke rAga (mAyA tathA lobha) ke udaya kA
sadbhAva hI hotA hai, ataeva vItarAgatva asambhava hai| _ gyArahaveM guNasthAna
meM vidyamAna jIva Age ke guNasthAnoM ko prApta karane meM samartha nahIM hotA
hai; kyoMki Age ke guNasthAna vahI pA sakatA hai, jo kSapakathaMNI ko karatA hai
aura kSapakazreNI ke binA mokSa kI prApti nahIM hotI hai| parantu gyArahaveM
guNasthAnavI jIva to niyama se upazamazreNI ko karane vAlA hI hotA hai| ataeva
vaha jIva gyArahaveM guNasthAna se avazya hI giratA hai| isa guNasthAna kA
samaya pUrA na hone para jo jIva bhava (Ayu) ke kSaya se giratA hai to vaha
anuttara vimAna meM devarUpa se utpanna hotA hai aura usa samaya usa sthAna para
pAMcau Adi-Adi anya guNasthAna sambhava na hone se cauthe (aviratasamyagdRSTi)
guNasthAna ko prApta karatA hai aura cauthe guNasthAna ko prApta kara vaha jIva
usa guNasthAna meM una saba prakRtiyoM ke vandha, udaya, udIraNA ko prArambha
kara detA hai, jitanI karmaprakRtiyoM ke bandha, udaya, udIraNA kI sambhAvanA

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
You have the knowledge. But when a being falls from the Ganasthan, while still
in the Ay, after the time of the Ganasthan is complete, it attains the
Gunasthanas in the order of ascent during the fall, and begins to bind, arise,
and stir up the karmic natures appropriate to that Gunasthan. That is, just as
during the ascent, it attains each Gunasthan in the order of ascent, and breaks
the binding, arising, and stirring up of the karmic natures, in the same way,
during the fall, the being attains each Gunasthan and begins to bind, arise, and
stir up those karmic natures. And the time of the Gunasthan ends. A being
falling from the sixth Gunasthan may fall to the fifth, the fourth, or even the
second Gunasthan.  The order of the beginning of the Upshamshreni is as follows:
A being present in any of the fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh Gunasthan first
pacifies the four Kapas, namely, anger, etc., which are Anantanubandhi. Then, in
the next moment, it pacifies the Darshanmohaniya Trika (Samyaktva, Samyaktva-
Mithyatva, Mithyatva) together.  According to the Karmagranthakarta, the
Upshamshreni cannot be done more than twice in one birth, and the Kshapakshreni
is done only once. One who has done the Upshamshreni once can become Kshapaki
and attain liberation in that birth. But one who has done the Upshamshreni twice
cannot do the Kshapakshreni in the same birth. However, the Siddhanta's opinion
is that a being can do the Shreni only once in a birth. Therefore, one who has
done the Upshamshreni once cannot do the Kshapakshreni again in the same birth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kamaMstava uga gayAna meM hai  /  parantu Aya ke Nera rahate hue gaNasthAna kA
samaya pUrA ho jAne para jo jIva giratA hai, vaha patana ke samaya ArohaNa krama
ke anusAra guNasthAnoM ko prApta karatA aura usa-uma guNasthAna ke yogya
karmaprakutiyoM kA bandha, udaya, sadIraNA karanA prArambha kara detA hai,
arthAt ArohaNa ke samaya ArohaNa-krama ke anusAra jisa-jisa guNasthAna ko pAkara
jina-jina karmaprakRtiyoM ke bandha, udaya, udIraNA kA viccheda karatA hai, usI
prakAra patana ke samaya bhI usa-usa guNasthAna ko pAkara vaha jIva una-una
karmaprakRtiyoM ke bandha, udaya, udIraNA ko prArambha kara detA hai aura
guNasthAna kA kAla samApta ho  /  jAne se girane vAlA koI jIva chaThe guNasthAna
ko, koI pAMcaveM guNasthAna ko, koI cauthe guNasthAna ko aura koI dUsare
guNasthAna meM hokara pahale taka A jAtA hai| upazamazreNI' ke prArambha kA
krama saMkSepa meM isa prakAra hai cauthe, pA~cada, chaThe aura sAtava
guNasthAna meM se kisI bhI guNasthAna meM vartamAna jIva pahale anantAnubandhI
krodhAdi cAroM kapAyoM kA upazamana karatA hai  /  anantara antarmuhUrta meM
darzanamohanIyatrika (samyaktva, samyaktva-mithyAtva, mithyAtva) kA eka sAtha
upazamana karatA hai| isake  /  1. karmagranthakartA ke abhiprAyAnusAra eka
janma meM do se adhika bAra upazama zreNI nahIM kI jA sakatI hai aura
kSapakazreNI eka hI bAra hotI hai  /  jisane eka bAra upazamazreNI kI hai, vaha
usa janma meM kSapakINI kara mokSa prApta kara sakatA hai| parantu jo do bAra
uparAbhazreNI kara cukA hai, vaha usI janma meM kSapakazveNI nahIM kara sakatA
hai| parantu siddhAnta kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki jIpa eka janma meM eka bAra hI
zreNI kara sakatA hai| isalie jisane eka bAra upazamazreNI kI hai, vaha punaH
usI janma meM apakazreNI nahIM kara sakatA hai|

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  After that, the soul repeatedly comes and goes in the
sixth and seventh Gunasthanas. Later, after attaining the eighth Gunasthana, it
reaches the ninth Gunasthana and begins the suppression of the remaining types
of Charitramohaniya Karma. This suppression occurs in the following order:
first, the suppression of Napumsakaved, followed by Strived, Hasyaadishatk
(laughter, attraction, aversion, sorrow, fear, and disgust), Purushaved,
Apratyakhyanavaran, Pratyakhyanavaran Krodhayugal, Sanjwalan Krodh,
Apratyakhyanavaran, Pratyakhyanavaran Mayayugal, Sanjwalan Maya,
Apratyakhyanavaran, Pratyakhyanavaran Lobhayugal, and finally, the suppression
of Sanjwalan Lobh in the tenth Gunasthana.  The time limit for the eleventh
Gunasthana is a minimum of one moment and a maximum of an Antarmuhurta.  **(12)
Ksheen-Kshaya-Vitrag Chadmasth Gunasthana:** This Gunasthana is attained only
after the complete destruction of Mohaniya Karma. The emotions of the soul
residing in this Gunasthana are as pure as water kept in a clear crystal vessel.
This is because Mohaniya Karma is completely destroyed here, and its existence
ceases to be.  Those who have completely destroyed Mohaniya Karma but still have
the remaining Chadma (covering of Ghatikarma) are called Ksheen-Kshaya-Vitrag
Chadmasth, and their specific nature is called Ksheen-Kshaya-Vitrag Chadmasth
Gunasthana.  In the name of this twelfth Gunasthana, there are three specific
differentiators: (1) Ksheen-Kshaya, (2) Vitrag, and (3) Chadmasth. Because
without the differentiator "Ksheen-Kshaya," the name "Vitrag Chadmasth" would
also refer to the eleventh Gunasthana. By adding the differentiator "Ksheen-
Kshaya," it specifically refers to the twelfth Gunasthana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha bAda vaha jIva chaThe aura sAtaveM guNasthAna meM aneka
bAra AtA-jAtA rahatA hai  /  bAda meM AThaveM guNasthAna meM hokara nauveM
guNasthAna ko prApta karake vahA~ cAritramohanIyakarma kI zeSa prakRtiyoM kA
upazama prArambha karatA hai, jo isa prakAra hai - sabase pahale napuMsakaveda
aura usake bAda kramazaH strIveda, hAsyAdiSaTka (hAsya, rati, arati, zoka, bhaya
aura jugupsA), puruSaveda, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodhayugala,
saMjvalanakrodha, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyAyugala, saMjcalana
mAyA, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa, pratyAsthAnAvaraNa lobhayugala ko tathA dasave
guNasthAna meM saMjvalana lobha ko upazAnta karatA hai  /   /  ma gyArahaveM
guNasthAna kI kAlamaryAdA jaghanya eka samaya aura utkRSTa antarmuhUrta pramANa
hai  /  (12) kSINa - kaSAya- vItarAga chadmastha guNasthAna - mohanIya karma kA
sarvathA kSaya hone ke pazcAt hI yaha guNasthAna prApta hotA hai  /  isa
guNasthAnavartI jIva ke bhAva sphaTikamaNi ke nirmala pAtra meM rakhe hue jala
ke samAna nirmala hote haiN| kyoMki yahA~ mohanIyakarma sarvathA kSaya ho jAtA
hai, usakI sattA bhI nahIM rahatI hai  /  jo mohanIya karma kA sarvathA kSaya
kara cuke haiM, kintu zeSa chadma ( ghAtIkarma kA AvaraNa) abhI vidyamAna haiM,
unako kSINa-kapAya -vItarAga chadmastha kahate haiM aura unake svarUpavizeSa ko
kSINakaSAya-vItarAga chadmastha guNasthAna kahate haiM  /  isa bArahaveM
guNasthAna ke nAma meM - ( 1 ) kSINakaSAya. ( 2 ) vItarAga aura ( 3 ) chadmastha
- ye tInoM vyAvartakavizeSaNa haiN| kyoMki 'kSINakaSAya' isa vizeSaNa ke abhAva
meM 'vItarAga chadamasya' itane nAma se bArahaveM guNasthAna ke sivAya
gyArahaveM guNasthAna kA bhI bodha hotA hai aura kSINakaSAya isa vizeSaNa ko
jor3a lene se bArahaveM guNasthAna

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This refers to the **Hari Na** (Hari-Na) state. Because in the eleventh
**Gunasthan** (Gunasthan), the **Kshaya** (Kshaya) are not completely destroyed,
but only subdued. The term "**Veetrag**" (Veetrag) is absent, and the **Ksheen-
Kshaya-Chhadmasya** (Ksheen-Kshaya-Chhadmasya) Gunasthan is also referred to by
this name, besides the twelfth Gunasthan. Because in those Gunasthan, the
**Ananta-Anubandhi** (Ananta-Anubandhi) and other Kshaya can be destroyed. But
due to the presence of the term "Veetrag", the fourth and other Gunasthan are
not referred to. Because in some way, **Rag** (Rag) arises in those Gunasthan,
making **Veetragatva** (Veetragatva) impossible. Similarly, the absence of the
term "**Chhadmasth**" (Chhadmasth) also makes the term "Ksheen-Kshaya-Veetrag"
refer to the thirteenth and fourteenth Gunasthan, besides the twelfth Gunasthan.
But due to the presence of the term "Chhadmasth", only the twelfth Gunasthan is
referred to. Because the **Jiva** (Jiva) residing in the thirteenth and
fourteenth Gunasthan do not have **Chhadma** (Chhadma) (the covering of
**Ghatikarma** (Ghatikarma)).  Thus, by saying "**Ksheen-Kshaya-Veetrag-
Chhadmasth**" (Ksheen-Kshaya-Veetrag-Chhadmasth), the true state of the twelfth
Gunasthan is known, and the related other doubts are resolved.  To attain the
twelfth Gunasthan, the destruction of **Mohaniya-Karma** (Mohaniya-Karma) is
necessary, and to destroy it, the **Kshapaka-Shreni** (Kshapaka-Shreni) is
performed. Therefore, here we briefly explain the order of the Kshapaka-Shreni.
The Jiva performing the Kshapaka-Shreni, first destroys the **Ananta-Anubandhi-
Kshaya-Chatushk** (Ananta-Anubandhi-Kshaya-Chatushk) and **Darshan-Moh-Trika**
(Darshan-Moh-Trika), seven in total, in any Gunasthan from the fourth to the
seventh.  1. **Ananta-Anubandhi** **Krodh** (Krodh), **Ananta-Anubandhi**
**Man** (Man), **Ananta-Anubandhi** **Maya** (Maya), **Ananta-Anubandhi**
**Lobh** (Lobh). 2. Three forms of **Darshan-Mohaniya** (Darshan-Mohaniya):
**Samyak-Tva-Mohaniya** (Samyak-Tva-Mohaniya), **Samyak-Tva-Mithyatva-Mohaniya**
(Samyak-Tva-Mithyatva-Mohaniya) (**Minn-Mohaniya** (Minn-Mohaniya)),
**Mithyatva-Mohaniya** (Mithyatva-Mohaniya).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 harinA kA hI bodha hotA hai  /  kyoMki gyArahavaM guNasthAna meM kaSAya kSINa
nahIM hote. kintu upazAntamAtra hote haiN| 'vItarAga' isa vizeSaNa se rahita
kSINa-kaSAya-chadmasya guNasthAna itane nAma se bArahaveM muNasthAna ke sivAya
caturtha Adi guNasthAna kA bhI bodha ho jAtA hai| kyoMki una guNasthAnoM meM bhI
anantAnubandhI Adi kaSAyoM kA kSaya ho sakatA hai| lekina bItarAga isa vizeSaNa
ke hone se una caturtha Adi guNasthAnoM kA bodha nahIM hotA hai| kyoMki kisI-na-
kisI aMza meM rAga kA udaya una guNasthAnoM meM rahatA hai jisase bItarAgatva
asambhava hai| isI prakAra 'chadmastha' isa vizeSaNa ke na rahane se bhI kSINa-
kaSAya-vItarAga itanA nAma bArahaveM guNasthAna ke atirikta terahaveM aura
caudahaveM guNasthAna kA bhI bodhaka ho jAtA hai| parantu chadmastha isa
vizeSaNa ke rahane se bArahaveM guNasthAna kA hI bodha hotA hai| kyoMki
terahaveM aura caudahave gugasthAna meM vidyamAna jIva ke chadma (ghAtIkarma kA
AvaraNa) nahIM hotA hai| isa prakAra 'kSINa-kaSAya-vItarAga-chadmastha' kahane
se bArahave gugasthAna kI yathArtha sthiti kA jJAna hotA hai aura sambandhita
anya AzaMkAoM kA nirAkaraNa ho jAtA hai| bArahavA~ guNasthAna prApta karane ke
lie mohanIyakama kA kSaya honA jarUrI hai aura kSaya karane ke lie kSapakazreNI
kI jAtI hai| ataH yahA~ saMkSepa meM zapakazreNI kA krama batalAte haiM
kSapakareNI ko karane vAlA jIva cauthe se lekara sAtava guNasthAna taka kisI bhI
guNasthAna meM sabase pahale anantAnubandhI-kaSAyacatuSka' aura
darzanamohatrika' ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA kSaya karatA hai  /  isake 1.
anantAnubandhI krodha, anantA0 mAna, anantA0 mAyA, anantA. lobha  /  2.
darzanamohanIya ke tIna bheSa-samyaktvamohanIya, samyaktva mithyAtvamohanIya
(minna mohanIya), mithyAtvamohanIya  /

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Firm Granth  The eighth Gunasthan begins with the destruction of the
four A-pratyakhyana Avarana Kshayas and the four Pratyakhyana Avarana Kshayas.
These eight natures do not completely perish, but in the beginning of the ninth
Gunasthan, the destruction of the sixteen natures of Styanaddhitrik Narakdwik,
Tiyan Dwik, Jati Chatushk, and Atap, Udyot, Stavar, Sukshma, and Sadharan takes
place. After this, the remaining part of the A-pratyakhyana Avarana Chatushk and
Pratyakhyana Avarana Chatushk is destroyed. At the end of the ninth Gunasthan,
the destruction of Napunsakaved, Strived, Hasyaadishatk, Purushaved, Sanjwalan
Krodh, Man, and Maya takes place in order. Finally, in the tenth Gunasthan,
Sanjwalan Lobh is also destroyed. In this way, upon the destruction of all
Mohaniya Karma, the attainment of the twelfth Gunasthan occurs.  ...  41  The
twelfth Gunasthan is the proof of the Jghanya and Utkrishta Kalasthiti
Antarmuhurt. In this Gunasthan, the present Jiva is only of the Kshapaka श्रेणी.
(13) The Sayogik Kevalo Gunasthan, which has attained Kevalgyan and Kevaldarshan
by destroying the four Ghatikarma (Gyanavaran, Darshanavaran, Mohaniya, and
Antaraya), is the one who knows and sees the substance through the Indriya,
Alok...  1. A-pratyakhyana Avarana Krodh, Man, Maya, Lobh. 2. Pratyakhyana
Avarana Krodh, Man, Maya, Lobh. 3. Nidra-Nidra Prachala-Prachala, Styan. 4.
Narakgati, Narak - Anupurvi. 5. Tiyanch Gati, Tiyanch - Anupurvi. 6. Ekendriya
Jati, Hindriya Jati, Neendriya Jati, Chaturindriya Jati.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya pharmagrantha anantara AThaveM guNasthAna meM
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNakaSAyacatuSka' aura pratyAkhyAndAvarUpaSAyatiyoM ke kSaya ko
prArambha karatA hai  /  ye ATha prakRtiyA~ pUrNa rUpa se kSaya nahIM ho pAtIM
ki bIca meM hI nauveM guNasthAna ke prArambha meM styAnaddhitrika narakadvika,
tiyaM dvika, jAticatuSka aura Atapa, udyota, sthAvara, sUkSma, sAdhAraNa ina
solaha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya kara DAlatA hai| isake anantara
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNakaSAya ca tuSka aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNakaSAyacatuSka kA kSaya
hone se zeSa rahA huA bhAga kSaya karatA hai aura nauveM guNasthAna ke anta meM
krama se napuMsakaveda, strIveda, hAsyAdiSaTka, puruSaveda, saMjvalana krodha,
mAna aura mAyA kA kSaya karatA hai  /  anta meM dasava guNasthAna meM saMjvalana
lobha kA bhI kSaya kara detA hai| isa prakAra sampUrNa mohanIyakarma kA kSaya
hone para bArahaveM guNasthAna kI prApti hotI hai  /  .. 41 bArahaveM guNasthAna
ko jaghanya aura utkRSTa kAlasthiti antarmuhUrta pramANa hai aura isa guNasthAna
meM vartamAna jIva kSapakazreNI vAle hI hote haiM  /  (13) sayogikevalo
guNasthAna jo cAra ghAtIkarmoM (jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, mohanIya aura
antarAya) kA kSaya karake kevalajJAna- kevaladarzana prApta kara cuke haiM, jo
padArtha ke jAnane-dekhane meM indriya, Aloka 1. apratyAsthAnAvaraNa krodha,
mAna, mAyA, lobha  /  2. pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, mAna mAyA, lobha 3. nidrA-
nidrA pracalApracalA, styAna  /  4. narakagati, naraka - AnupUrvI  /  5.
tiyaMcagati, tiyaMca - anupUrvI  /  6. ekendriya jAti hIndriya jAti, nIndriya
jAti caturindriya jAti  /  P

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  42 Those who do not expect anything from karma and are endowed
with yoga (self-power, strength, enthusiasm, valor) are called **Sayogikevali**,
and their specific nature is called **Sayogikevali Gunasthan**.
**Sayogikevali** are also called **Jin**, **Jinendra**, **Jineswar** because
they are free from destructive karmas.  The tendency of yoga arises from these
three instruments: mind, speech, and body. Therefore, there are three types of
yoga according to their instruments: (1) **Manoyoga**, (2) **Vachanayoga**, (3)
**Kayayoga**.  **Kevali Bhagwan** uses **Manoyoga** to answer someone mentally.
When a **Manaparyayajnani** or **Anuttar Vibhagavasi** deva asks a question
mentally without using words, **Kevali** answers them mentally. The questioner,
being a **Manaparyayajnani** or **Anuttar Vibhagavasi** deva, directly perceives
the mental substances organized by **Kevali Bhagwan** to answer through their
**Manaparyayajnan** or **Avadhijnan**. Based on the structure of these mental
substances, they infer the answer to their question. **Kevali Bhagwan** uses
**Vachanayoga** to give teachings and **Kayayoga** for actions like movement.
If a **Sayogikevali** is a **Tirthankara**, they establish a **Tirth** and
propagate it by giving teachings.  The duration of this **Gunasthan** is from
**Jghan** to **Antarmuhurt** and the highest is slightly less than crores of
years in the past.  1. **Ashay Shaanasan Sahimo Idi Kevali Hu Jogen. Juto Si
Sajogijiyo Anai Ninari Se Uto.** - Gommatasar, Peevakash, 64

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 42 karmastava Adi kI apekSA nahIM rakhate haiM aura yoga (Atma-vIya, zakti,
utsAha, parAkrama) se sahita haiM, unheM sayogikevalI kahate haiM aura unake
svarUpavizeSa ko sayogikevalI guNasthAna kahate haiM  /  sayogikevalI ko
ghAtIkarmoM se rahita hone ke kAraNa jina, jinendra, jinezvara bhI kahA jAtA
hai|" mana, vacana aura kAya ina tIna sAdhanoM se yoga kI pravRtti hotI hai  /
ataeva yoga ke bhI apane sAdhana ke anusAra tIna bheda hote haiM(1) manoyoga,
(2) vacanayoga, (3) kAyayoga  /  kevalI bhagavAna manoyoga kA upayoga kisI ko
mana se uttara dene meM karate haiM  /  jisa samaya koI mana parthayajJAnI
athavA anuttara vibhAgavAsI deza manadhAna se zabda dvArA na pUchakara mana
dvArA prazna Adi pUchatA hai, taba kevalajJAnI usake prazna kA uttara mana se hI
dete haiN| praznakartA manaHparyayajJAnI athavA anuttaravimAnavAsI deva kevalI
bhagavAna dvArA uttara dene ke lie saMgaThita kiye gaye manodravyoM ko apane
manaHparyayajJAna athavA avadhijJAna se pratyakSa kara letA hai aura tadanusAra
manodravyoM kI racanA ke AdhAra se apane prazna kA uttara anumAna meM jAna letA
hai| upadeza dene ke lie kevalI bhagavAna vacanayoga kA tathA halanacalana Adi
kriyAoM meM kAyayoga kA upayoga karate haiM  /  sayogikevalI meM yadi koI
tIrthakara ho to ve tIrtha kI sthApanA karate haiM aura dezanA dekara tIrtha kA
pravartana karate haiM  /  isa guNasthAna kA kAla jaghanya se antarmuhUrta aura
utkRSTa kucha kama karor3a pUrva varSa taka kA hai| 1. asahAya zANasaNa sahimo
idi kevalI hu jogeNa  /  juto si sajogijiyo aNAiNiNArise utto  /  /
-gommaTasAra, pIvakAza, 64

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They remain in the state of Manibhava.  The state and pudgala of the second
karma granthi.  43 (14) Ayogikevali Gunasthan - Those who are devoid of the
yogas of the Kevali Bhagavan are called Ayogikevali, that is, when the
Sayogikevali, by suppressing the yogas of mind, speech and body, become devoid
of yoga and attain the pure self-nature, then they are called Ayogikevali and
their special nature is called Ayogikevali Gunasthan.  _ In this Gunasthan, the
process of attaining liberation begins, that is, this Gunasthan is the gateway
to liberation.  The suppression of all three yogas leads to the state of Ayoni.
Only the Bhagavan remain in the Sogibhava state according to their lifespan.
But those Kevali Bhagavan whose state and pudgala atoms (regions) of the three
karmas of Vedaniya, Nama and Gotra are more than the state and pudgala atoms of
Ayukarma among the four fatal karmas, they perform 'Samudghat' and by this they
make the state and pudgala atoms of Vedaniya, Nama and Gotra karma equal to the
state and pudgala atoms of Ayukarma.  1, This Samudghat performed by the Kevali
Bhagavan is called 'Kanvalisamudghat'.  Eight times are taken in this Samudghat.
In the first time, the Kevali's Atma-pradesh becomes the size of a Danda.  This
Danda is as thick as his body and as long as fourteen Raju, extending to the
Lok.  In the second time, this Danda spreads to the East-West or North-South Lok
and takes the form of a Kapata.  In the third time, that Kapata gets stuck in
the East-South or West-North and becomes the Madhani's Nuly.  By this, most of
the Lok is filled with the Kevali's Atma-pradesh, yet due to the Madhani's
shape, some intervals of the sky remain empty, therefore in the fourth time, by
Pratarasthiti, the Kevali's Atma-pradesh reaches all those empty sky regions.
At that time, the entire...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mani avasthAmAra rahate haiM  /  pAta va pudgala dvitIya karmagranya 43 (14)
ayogikevalI guNasthAna-jo kevalI bhagavAna yogoM meM rahita haiM, ve ayogikevalI
kahalAte haiM, arthAt jaba sayogikevalI mana, vacana aura kAyA ke yogoM kA
nirodha kara yogarahita hokara zuddha AtmasvarUpa ko prApta kara lete haiM, taba
ve ayogikevalI kahalAte haiM aura unake svarUpa vizeSa ko ayogikevalI guNasthAna
kahate haiN| _ isa guNasthAna meM mokSa prApta karane kI prakriyA Arambha hotI
hai, arthAt yaha guNasthAna mokSa kA praveza dvAra hai  /  tInoM yogoM kA
nirodha karane se ayoni avasthA prA hotI hai| kevala bhagavana sogi avasthA meM
apanI Ayu ke anusAra rahate haiM  /  parantu jina kevalI bhagavAna ke cAra
aghAtI karmoM meM se Ayukarma kI sthiti va pudgala paramANuoM (pradezoM) kI
apekSA vedanIya, nAma aura gona ina tIna karmoM kI sthiti aura pudgala paramANu
adhika hote haiM, ve samudghAta' karate haiM aura isake dvArA ve Ayukarma kI
sthiti evaM pudgala paramANuoM ke barAbara vedanIya, nAma aura gotra karma kI
sthiti va pudgala paramANuoM ko kara lete haiN| 1, yaha samudghAta kevalI
bhagavAna dvArA hone meM kaMvalIsamudghAta kahalAtA hai| isa samudghAta meM ATha
samaya lagate hai| pahale samaya meM kevalI ke Atmapradeza daNDa ke AkAra ke
banate haiN| yaha daNDa moTA to apane zarIra jitanA evaM lambA lokaparyanta
caudaha rAjU kA hotA hai  /  dUsare samaya meM yaha daNDa pUrva-pazcima yA
uttara-dakSiNa lokaparyanta phailakara kapATa kA rUpa letA hai 1 lIsare samaya
meM vaha kapATa usara-dakSiNa yA pUrva-pazcima meM phaMsakara madhAnI ke nulya
banatA hai| aisA hone se loka kA adhikAMza bhAga kevalI ke AramapradezoM se
vyApta ho jAtA hai, phira bhI mathAnI kI AkRti hone se AkAza ke kucha antarAla
pradeza khAlI raha jAte haiM, ataH cauthe samaya meM pratarasthiti dvArA una
khAlI rahe hue saba AkAza-pradezoM para kevalI ke Aramapradeza pahuMca jAte hai
/  usa samaya sampUrNa

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  44  Although the complete destruction of the four fatal karmas, namely
mohaniya, etc., leads to the manifestation of liberation (vitragatva) and
omniscience (sarvagnatva), the four non-fatal karmas, namely vedaniya, etc.,
still remain. This prevents liberation. Therefore, the destruction of these
remaining karmas is also essential. When these karmas are also destroyed, the
cycle of birth and death ceases due to the complete absence of karmas, and this
is liberation.  However, if the intensity of the ayu karma is less and the
intensity of the remaining three non-fatal karmas - vedaniya, nama, and gotra -
is more, then their destruction along with ayu karma is not possible. Therefore,
the destruction of these karmas occurs along with the destruction of the
intensity of ayu karma, etc.  The soul-regions (atma-pradesh) of the Kevali
extend to every region of the universe (loka-akasha), and their aura (asma)
pervades the entire universe. This is because the countless regions of a soul
and the countless regions of the universe are equal.  After this process, the
soul-regions begin to contract. For example, in the fifth time interval, the
regions become empty and transform into a churning vessel (mathani), in the
sixth time interval, they become a door (kapat), in the seventh time interval,
they become a staff (danda), and in the eighth time interval, the soul of the
Kevali Bhagwan returns to its original form.  This process of soul-expansion
(samuddhāt) is natural. It takes only eight time intervals. Through this process
of soul-expansion, the non-fatal karmas with intensity greater than the
intensity of ayu karma are destroyed. Then, the Kevali attains liberation within
a moment (antar-muhūrta).  In this process of soul-expansion, there is no
activity of the mind (man) and speech (vachan) yogas, only the body yoga (kāya-
yoga) is active. Even in that, in the first, eighth time intervals, there is
generous body yoga (audārika kāya-yoga), in the second, sixth, and seventh time
intervals, there is mixed generous body yoga (audārika-miśra kāya-yoga), and in
the third, fourth, and fifth time intervals, there is karmic body yoga (kārmaṇ
kāya-yoga).  The soul-expansion (samuddhāt) occurs only for ordinary Kevalis,
not for the Tirthankaras.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44 karmastava yadyapi mohanIya Adi cAra ghAtIkarmoM kA Atyantika kSaya ho jAne
se vItarAgatva aura sarvajJatva prakaTa hote haiM, phira bhI usa samaya vedanIya
Adi cAra aghAtIkarma zeSa rahate haiM, jisase mokSa nahIM hotA hai| ataH zeSa
rahe hue ina karmoM kA kSaya bhI Avazyaka hai  /  jaba ina karmoM kA bhI kSaya
hotA hai, tabhI sampUrNa karmoM kA abhAva hokara janmamaraNa kA cakkara banda
par3a jAtA hai aura yahI mokSa hai| lekina aghAtIkarmoM meM Ayukarma kI sthiti
kama ho aura zeSa tIna-vedanIya, nAma aura gotra - aghAtIkarmoM kI sthiti Adi
adhika ho to unakA Ayukarma ke sAtha hI kSaya honA saMbhava nahIM hotA hai  /
isIlie Ayukarma kI sthiti Adi ke sAtha hI una karmoM kI sthiti Adi ke kSaya
lokAkAza ke pratyeka pradeza para kevalI ke Atmapradeza hote haiM evaM unakI
AsmA samasta loka meM vyApta ho jAtI hai, kyoMki eka jIva ke asaMkhya pradeza
aura lokAkAza ke asaMkhya pradeza barAbara haiN| isa kriyA ke bAda vApasa
AtmapradezoM kA saMkoca hone lagatA hai| jaise pAMcaveM samaya ke antarAla
pradeza khAlI hokara puna: mathAnI bana jAtI hai, chaThe samaya kapATa bana jAtA
hai, sAtaveM samaya daNDa bana jAtA hai, evaM AThaveM samaya meM kevalI
bhagavAna kI AtmA apane mUla rUpa meM A jAtI hai| _ yaha samudadhAta kI kriyA
svAbhAvika hotI hai| isameM kAla ATha samaya mAtra lagatA hai| isa samudghAta kI
kriyA se AyuSya karma kI sthiti se adhika sthiti vAle apAtI kamoM kI nirjarA ho
jAtI hai| phira be kevalI antarmuhUrta ke andara mokSa cale jAte haiN| isa
samudghAta kI kriyA meM mana, vacana ke yogoM kI pravRtti nahI hotI, kevala
kAmayoga hotA hai  /  usameM bhI pahale-AThaveM samaya meM audArika kAyayoga,
dUsare, chaThe, sAtave samaya meM audArikamizra kAyayoga evaM tIsare, cauthe,
pAMcaveM samaya meM kArmaNa kAyayoga hotA hai| kevalIsamudghAta sAmAnya
phevaliyoM ke hI hotA hai| lekina tIrthakaroM ke nahIM hotA hai  /

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth ## 45  It is inevitable for a Kevali Bhagwan to be
subjected to Samudghāt. However, those Kevali Jñānīs whose Vedaniya, etc., three
types of Aghati Karmas are equal to the Āyu Karma of the Pudgala Paramanu, do
not experience Samudghāt.  All Kevali Jñānīs, at the end of their Sayogi state,
due to the cause of Paramanirjarā and being devoid of Leśyā, restrain their
Yogas for the sake of attaining the extremely stable state of meditation. The
order of Yoga Nirodha is as follows:  Firstly, they restrain Bādar Mano Yoga and
Bādar Vachan Yoga from Bādar (gross) Kāya Yoga. Subsequently, they restrain that
Bādar Kāya Yoga from Sūkṣma Kāya Yoga. And from that same Sūkṣma Kāya Yoga, they
restrain Sūkṣma Mano Yoga and Sūkṣma Vachan Yoga in a sequential manner.
Finally, with the power of Sūkṣma Kriyā Nivṛtti Śukla Dhyān, the Kevali Bhagwan
also restrains Sūkṣma Kāya Yoga. In this way, upon the restraint of Yogas, the
Sayogi Kevali Bhagwan becomes Ayogi. Simultaneously, with the help of the same
Sūkṣma Kriyā Nivṛtti Śukla Dhyān, they fill the inner parts of their body -
mouth, abdomen, etc. - with the Ātma Pradesh.  Their Ātma Pradesh become so
contracted and dense that they fit within two-thirds (2/3) of the body. After
this, those Kevali Bhagwan attain Samuccinna Kriyā Apratipāti Śukla Dhyān.  1.
At the end of the order of Yoga Nirodha, the Sarvajna Bhagwan restrain the
remaining Yogas from Sūkṣma Kāya Yoga. This is then called Sūkṣma Kriyā Nivṛtti
Śukla Dhyān. Because in this, only the subtle actions like inhalation and
exhalation remain, and even the shedding and transformation from them is not
possible.  2. In this Dhyān, even the subtle actions like breathing, etc., cease
in the body, and the Ātma Pradesh become completely still. Because in this...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha 45 karane ke lie kevalI bhagavAna dvArA samudghAta kiyA
jAnA aparihArya hotA hai| parantu jina kevalajJAniyoM ke vedanIya Adi tInoM
aghAtI karmoM kI sthiti Ara pudgala paramANu Ayukarma ke barAbara haiM, ve
samudghAta nahIM karate haiN| sabhI kevalajJAnI sayogi avasthA ke anta meM
parama nirjarA ke kAraNabhUta tathA lezyA se rahita atyanta sthiratA rUpa dhyAna
ke lie yogoM kA nirodha karate haiM  /  yoganirodha kA krama isa prakAra hai
sarvaprathama bAdara sthUla) kAyayoga se bAdara manoyoga aura bAdara vacanayoga
ko rokate haiM, anantara sUkSma kAyayoga se usa bAdara kAyayoga ko rokate haiM
aura usI sUkSma kAyayoga sa kramazaH sukSma manoyoga aura sUkSma vacanayoga ko
rokate haiM  /  anta meM sUkSma kriyAnivRtti zukladhyAna' ke bala se kevalI
bhagavAna sUkSma kAyayoga ko bhI roka dete haiN| isa prakAra yogoM kA nirodha ho
jAne me sayogi kevalI bhagavAn ayogi bana jAte haiM  /  sAtha hI usI
sUkSmakriyA'nivRtti zukladhyAna kI sahAyatA se apane zarIra ke bhItarI pole
bhAga-mukha, udara Adi bhAga ko AtmA ke pradezoM se pUrNa kara dete haiN| unake
Atmapradeza itane saMkucita-ghane ho jAte hai ki ve zarIra ke do-tihAI (23)
hisse meM samA jAte haiN| isake bAda ve kevalI bhagavAn
samucchinnakriyA'pratipAti zukladhyAna' ko prApta karate haiM 1. janma sarvaza
bhagavAna yoganirodha ke krama meM antata: sUkSma kApayoga ke Azraya se dUsare
bAkI ke yogoM ko roka dete haiM, taba vaha sUkSmakiyAnivRtti zukladhyAna
kahalAtA hai| kyoMki usameM zvAsa-ucchavAsa ke samAna sUkSma kriyA hI vAkI raha
jAtI hai aura usameM se pattana-parivartana honA bhI sambhava nahIM hai| 2. isa
dhyAna meM zarIra ko zvAsa-prazvAsa Adi sUkSma kriyAeM bhI banda ho jAtI haiM
aura Asmapradeza sarvathA niSprakampa ho jAte haiN| kyoMki isameM

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 46 **Karmastaya** 1.  After, second, and the time taken to pronounce five
short vowels (a, i, u, ṛ, ḷṛ) is the time taken for **shaileshikaran**
(destruction of name, lineage and lifespan), all karmas are completely
destroyed. When those karmas are destroyed, they move upwards to the Siddha
Kshetra in a single moment of righteous conduct.  Just as a clay pot, covered in
clay, rises upwards from the water level due to its nature when the clay is
removed and becomes stable on the surface of the water, similarly, when the
karma-mala is removed, the pure soul, due to its nature of upward movement,
moves upwards to the front part of the upper realm and resides there.  The
reason for the pure soul residing in the front part of the realm is that there
is no supporting cause, **dharmaastikaya**, for further movement beyond the end
of the realm. Therefore, liberated beings only move up to the end of the upper
realm.  There is no mental, verbal or physical activity of any kind, gross or
subtle, and that state does not change later. Due to the effect of this
meditation, all attachment and bondage are stopped, all karmas are destroyed,
and liberation is attained.  1. **Shaileshi:**  The state of stillness,
stability, and equilibrium, like Mount Meru, is called **shaileshi**. In that
state, the destruction of the **vedaniya** karma, name, and lineage, from their
countless categories, along with the lifespan karma, in their respective
positions, is called **shaileshikaran**.  2. In the sky, the area where the
living beings, pudgala, dharma, etc., six substances, exist...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46 karmastaya 1 bAda vatIya, aura pA~ca hrasvAkSara (a, i, u, R, lR ) ke
uccAraNa karane jitane samaya kA zailezIkaraNa' karane ke nAma, gotra aura Ayu)
kA sarvathA kSaya kara dete haiM aura una karmoM kA kSaya hote ho ve eka samaya
mAtra kI Rjugati se Upara kI ora siddhi kSetra meM cale jAte haiM  /  jisa
prakAra miTTI ke lepoM se yukta tumbA lepoM ke haTa jAne para apane
svabhAvAnusAra jala ke tala se Upara kI ora calA AtA hai aura jala kI UparI
sataha para sthira ho jAtA hai usI prakAra karmamala ke haTa jAne se zuddha AtmA
bhI Urdhvagati karane kA svabhAva hone se Upara loka ke agrabhAga taka gati
karake vahA~ sthita ho jAtA hai  /  zuddha AtmA ke loka ke agrabhAga meM sthita
hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki loka' ke anta se Age gati sahAyaka kAraNa
dharmAstikAya kA abhAva hai  /  isalie mukta jIva Upara lokAnta taka hI gati
karate haiM  /  sthUla aura sUkSma kisI kisma ko bhI mAnasika, vAcika, kAyika
kriyA mI nahIM hotI aura vaha sthiti bAda meM jAtI nahIM hai  /  isa dhyAna ke
prabhAva se saba A aura bandha kA nirodha hokara sampUrNa karma kSINa ho jAne se
mokSa prApta hotA hai  /  1. zailezI maiH tasyeyam sthiratAvasthA sAmyAt zaile
yahA, sarvasaMvaraNIleza, AtmA tasyeyaM yoganirodhAvasthA zailezI, tasyAM
karaNaM vedanIya, nAma, gotra kamaMtrasyAsaMkhya guNayA zreNyA nirjaraNa
zailezIkaraNam  /  -- meru parvata ke samAna nizcala avasthA athavA sarvasaMvara
rUpa yoganirodha avasthA ko zailezI kahate haiM  /  usa avasthA meM bedanIya
nAma aura gotra ina tInoM karmoM kI asaMkhyAta guNa zreNI se AyukamaM kI
yathAsthiti se nirjarA karanA zailezIkaraNa kahalAtA hai| P 2. AkAza meM jitane
kSetra meM jIva, pudgala, dharma Adi SaSyoM kI sthiti

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  This is about the Supreme Being, the Siddha Bhagavan,
who resides at the forefront of the universe. They are free from the veils of
knowledge (Jnana Avarana) and other substances, as well as from the passions
(Bhavas). They experience the infinite bliss of nectar, along with peace. They
are free from the defilement of false perception (Mithyadarshana) and other
causes of new karma-binding. They possess eight qualities: knowledge,
perception, bliss, energy, non-obstruction, penetration, subtlety, and
lightness. They are eternal and have no further actions to perform.  Karma-
binding causes the soul to wander in the cycle of birth and death. The complete
destruction of karma-binding, which is achieved through the absence and
exhaustion of its causes, is liberation (Moksha).    The cycle of binding new
karma and exhausting past karma continues for worldly beings, preventing them
from attaining their true nature. However, as karma is exhausted, the causes of
karma-binding also diminish, leading the soul towards self-realization.
Eventually, they attain their true nature, which includes infinite knowledge,
perception, and other qualities.  The exhaustion of karma begins with the
attainment of right conduct (Samyaktava) and culminates in the state of
omniscience (Sarvjna). This process gradually purifies the results of karma,
leading to greater purity with each stage. The greater the purity of the
results, the less karma needs to be exhausted. This means that the amount of
karma exhausted in each stage is less than the previous stage.  The universe is
divided into two parts: Lok and Alok. Lok is the realm where there are living
beings and other objects, while Alok is the realm where there is only space
(Akasha) and no other objects. This difference is due to the presence of the
Dharma-Astikaya in Lok. It is not present in Alok. If the Dharma-Astikaya and
other substances were present outside Lok, the distinction between Lok-Akasha
and Alok-Akasha would cease to exist.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha ye loka ke agrabhAga meM virAjamAna paramAtmA siddha
bhagavanta jJAnAvaraNAdi dravya aura bhAvakoM se rahita, anantasukharUpI amRta
kA anubhava karAne vAlI zAnti sahita, navIna karmabandha ke kAraNabhUta
mithyAdarzana Adi maila se rahita, jJAna, darzana, sukha, bIrya, abhyAbAdha,
avagAhnatva, sUkSmatva, aguphalaghutva ina ATha guNoM sahita, nitya aura kRta-
kRtya (jinako koI kArya karanA bAkI nahIM rahA hai| haiN| _karmabandha ke kAraNa
jIva janmamaraNarUpa saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karatA hai  /  karmabandha aura
usake hetuoM ke abhAva evaM nirjarA me karmoM kA Atya. ntika kSaya hotA hai aura
karmabandha kA sarvathA kSaya hI mokSa hai  /  saMsArI jIvoM ke navIna karmoM kA
bandha aura pUrvabaddha karmoM ko nirjaga hote rahane kA krama calatA rahatA
hai| jisase AtmasvarUpa kI prApti nahIM ho pAtI hai| lekina karmoM kI nirjarA ke
sAtha-sAtha karmabandha evaM usake hetuoM kA bhI abhAva hote jAne se jIva
Atmopalabdhi kI ora bar3hate hue anantajJAna-darzana Adi rUpa AtmasvarUpa ko
prApta kara letA hai| karmoM kI nirjarA samyaktva kI prApti me prArambha hokara
sarvajJa avasthA meM pUrNa hotI hai| isase kramazaH pUrva-pUrva kI apekSA
uttarottara pariNAmoM meM vizuddhi mavizeSa bar3hatI jAtI hai| pariNAmoM meM
vizuddhi jitanI adhika hogI utanI kamanirjarA bhI vizeSa hogii| arthAt pUrva-
pUrva kI avasthAoM meM jitanI karmanirjarA hotI hai, usakI apekSA hai use loka
aura jahA~ AkAza ke sivAya jIvAdi dRSyoM kI sthiti nahIM hai, use aloka kahate
haiM  /  yahI vibhinnatA loka aura aloka ke svarUpa kA bheda karAne meM kAraNa
hai| isIlie dharmAstikAya loka meM vidyamAna hai, usake bAhara vidyamAna nahIM
hai  /  yadi loka ke bAhara dharmAstikAya Adi dravyoM kI sthiti mAnI jAye to
lokAkAza aura alokAkA kA bheda hI samApta ho jaayegaa|

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  85 **Karma-Nirjara**  As the purity of the results in
future states increases, the Karma-Nirjara increases innumerably. Thus, it
gradually increases and finally reaches its peak in the state of omniscience.
_In the present context of Karma-Nirjara, the least Nirjara is experienced by
the Samyagdarshi and the most by the omniscient. The names of the stages in the
increasing order of Karma-Nirjara are as follows: Samyagdarshi, Shravak, Virat,
Ananta-Anubandhi-Viyojak, Darshan-Moh-Kshapak, Moho-Upshamk, Upshant-Moh,
Kshapk, Ksheen-Moh, and Jin. These stages are successively characterized by
innumerable degrees of Nirjara. However, the time taken for each stage is
progressively less than the previous one. This means that the time taken for
Karma-Nirjara by the Samyagdarshi is less than that taken by the Shravak.
Similarly, it should be understood for the Virat and subsequent stages._  Out of
the fourteen Gunasthanas, five Gunasthanas (1, 4, 5, 6, and 13) are eternal in
the Lok, meaning they always exist. The remaining nine Gunasthanas are non-
eternal. While going to the Parbhav, the first, second, and fourth Gunasthanas
remain. The third, twelfth, and thirteenth Gunasthanas are immortal. 1. (a)
Samyagdarshi, Shravak, Virat, Ananta-Viyojak, Darshan-Moh-Kshapak, Upshamk,
Upshant-Moh-Kshapak, Ksheen-Moh, and Jin are successively characterized by
innumerable degrees of Nirjara.  . Tattvayasutr 6.47 Sammattuppasoye
Savayavirade Ananta-Kammanse. Dasan-Mohallavage Kasayauyasamge Upsante. ||
Khabang Ya Ksheen-Mohe Jinesu Dava Asanvagunidakama. Tamghivariya Kala Sankheja
Gunakkama Hoti || - Gommatsar, Bhishakand, 66-67

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 85 karmastava Age-Age kI avasthAoM meM pariNAmoM kI vizuddhi adhika-adhika hone
se karmanirjarA asaMkhyAtagaNI bar3hatI jAtI hai aura isa prakAra
bar3hatebar3hate anta meM sarvajJa avasthA meM nirjarA kA pramANa sabase adhika
ho jAtA hai| _karmanirjarA ke prastuta taratamabhAva meM sabase kama nirjarA
samyagdRSTi ko aura sabase adhika sarvajJa ko hotI hai| karmanirjarA ke bar3hate
krama kI avasthAoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiMsamyagdRSTi', zrAvaka, virata,
anantAnubandhIviyojaka, darzanamohakSapaka, mohopazamaka, upazAntamoha, kSaphka,
kSINamoha aura jina  /  anukrama se ye avasthAeM asaMkhyeyaguNa nirjarA vAlI
haiN| lekina purva-pUrva kI apekSA uttarottara samaya kama lagatA hai, arthAt
samyagdRSTi ko karmanirjarA meM jitanA samaya lagatA hai, usakI apekSA zrAvaka
ko karmanirjarA meM saMkhyAtaguNa kama lagatA hai| isI prakAra virata Adi meM
Age-Age ke lie samajhanA cAhie  /  ukta caudaha guNasthAnoM meM se 1, 4, 5, 6,
13 ye pA~ca guNasthAna loka meM zAzvata haiM, arthAt sadA rahate haiM, aura zeSa
nau guNasthAna azAzvata haiN| parabhava meM jAte samaya jIva kA pahalA, dUsarA
aura cauthA ye tIna guNasthAna rahate haiM  /  3, 12, 13 ye tIna guNasthAna
amara haiM, 1. (ka)
samyagdRSTizrAvakaviratAnantaviyojakadarzanamohalapakopazamakopazAnta
mohalapakakSINamohajinnAH kramazo'masyeya guNanirjarAH  /  . tattvAyasUtra 6.47
sammattuppasoye sAvayavirade aNaMtakammaMse  /  dasaNa mohallavage
kasAyauyasAmage upasaMte  /  /  khabaMga ya khINamohe jiNesu davA
asNvgunnidkmaa| tamghivarIyA kAlA saMkheja guNakkamA hoti  //  -gommaTasAra,
bhISakAnDa, 66-67

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The second Karmagrantha, meaning that the soul does not die in these. 1, 2, 3,
5, and 11, these five Gunasthanas are not traversed by Tirthankaras. 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, in these five Gunasthanas, the soul binds the Tirthankara Gotra. 12, 13, and
14, these three Gunasthanas are A-pratipati, meaning that once they are
attained, they are not left. 1, 4, 7, 5, 6, 10, 12, 13, 14, the soul must
traverse these nine Gunasthanas before attaining Moksha.  Thus, the nature of
the Gunasthanas has been briefly described here. To understand it in detail, one
should study other texts.  Before describing the state of binding, arising,
excitation, and existence of Karma-prakritis in each Gunasthana, we will first
describe the characteristics of binding and the Karma-prakritis that are capable
of being bound in each Gunasthana, as indicated in the Mangalacharan.
Abhinayakammargahanam, bandho ohen tattha yos sayam. Titthayaraharag-bugawanjam
michhami satar-sayam ||3||  Meaning of the verse: The acceptance of new Karmas
is called binding. Without any specific intention of a particular Gunasthana or
a particular soul, 120 Karma-prakritis are capable of being bound. Among them,
except for the Tirthankara-namakarma and Aharak-dwik, the remaining 117 Karma-
prakritis are bound in the Gunasthana with Mithyatva.  Specific meaning: The
acceptance of new Karmas is called binding. In the same space-field where the
soul's regions are, the Pudgala Skandhas, which have the potential to be
transformed into Karma-rupa, are bound in the Gunasthana with Mithyatva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha arthAt inameM jIva kA maraNa nahIM hotA hai  /  1, 2, 3,
5, aura 11 ye pA~ca guNasthAna tIrthaMkara nahIM pharasate haiM  /  4, 5, 6, 7,
8 ina pAMca guNasthAnoM meM hI jIva tIrthakara gotra bAMdhatA hai  /  12, 13
aura 14 ye tIna guNasthAna apratipAtI haiM, arthAt Ane ke bAda nahIM jAte haiM
/  1. 4, 7, 5 6. 10 12. 13 14 ina nau guNasthAnoM ko mokSa jAne se pahale jIva'
avazya pharasatA hai|' isa prakAra yahA~ saMkSepa meM guNasthAnoM kA svarUpa
kahA hai  /  vistAra se samajhane ke lie anya granthoM kA abhyAsa karanA
caahiye| pratyeka guNasthAna meM karmaprakRtiyoM ke bandha, udaya, udIraNA,
sattA kI sthiti kA varNana karane ke pUrva aba maMgalAcaraNa meM kiye gaye
saMketAnusAra sarvaprathama bandha kA lakSaNa aura pratyeka guNasthAna meM
bandhayogya karmaprakRtiyoM kA varNana karate haiM  /  abhinayakammaragahaNaM,
baMdho oheNa tattha yosa sayaM  /  titthayarAhAraga-bugavajaM michami satara-
sayaM  // 3 //  gAthArtha -navIna karmoM ke grahaNa ko bandha kahate haiN|
sAmAnya se arthAt kisI khAsa guNasthAna athavA kisI jIva vizeSa kI vivakSA kiye
binA 120 karmaprakRtiyA~ bandhayogya haiM  /  unameM me tIrthaGkara nAmakarma
aura AhArakadvika ke sivAya zeSa 117 karmaprakRtiyoM kA mithyAtva guNasthAna meM
bandha hotA hai  /  vizeSArtha * abhinava-navIna karmoM ke grahaNa ko bandha
kahate haiN| jisa AkAza-kSetra meM AtmA ke pradeza haiM, usI kSetra meM rahane
vAle karmarUpa seM pariNata hone kI yogyatA rakhane vAle pudgala skandhoM kI
varga- . - 1. pravacana dvAra 224, gA0 1302 /  pravacana dvAra 89-60, gApA 664.
700 tathA bauddha guNasthAna kA thokar3A  /

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The act of a soul accepting karmic particles in their karmic form is called
**abhinava-navina karmagrahan** (new karma acceptance), and this new karma
acceptance is called **bandha** (bondage).  The relationship after **bandha** is
not called **bandha** because it becomes integrated into the soul's existence.
Similarly, when karmas bound to the soul, through a specific result, abandon one
nature and acquire another, this acquisition of a different nature should be
understood as **samkraman** (transition), not **bandha**.  With this intention,
the **karmagrahan** alone is not called **bandha**, but the **abhinava
karmagrahan** is described as the characteristic of **bandha** in the **gatha**
(verse). This means that the qualifier '**abhinava**' (new) given in the
characteristic of **bandha** is like calling the water in a river **shoka
nanda** (joy of sorrow). However, karmas existing in the form of existence and
transitioning into a different nature are not called **bandha**.  The ability of
karmic particles to cover the natural qualities of the soul, such as knowledge
and perception, is called the transformation of karmic particles into their
karmic form. The transformation of karmic particles into their karmic form
occurs due to factors such as **mithyatva** (false belief), **avirati** (non-
restraint), **pramada** (carelessness), **kashaya** (passions), and **yoga**
(attachment). These are the inherent (distorted) nature of the soul, and they
cause the karmic particles to transform into their karmic form.  The inherent
states, such as **mithyatva**, that cause the karmic particles to become karmic
forms are called **bhavakarma** (motivating karma), and the karmic particles
that have acquired their karmic form are called **dravya karma** (material
karma). There is a mutual dependence between the two. According to the
previously accepted **dravya karma**, **bhavakarma** and...  1. **Satta
karmagathi bandhai sar attalamaanam.** (The bondage of existence is the ultimate
truth.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . karmastava NAoM ko karmarUpa se pariNata kara jIva dvArA grahaNa karane ko
abhinava-navIna karmagrahaNa kahate haiM aura isa navIna karmagrahaNa kA nAma
bandha hai| bandha ho jAne ke bAda ke sambandha ko bandha nahIM kahA jAtA hai|
kyoMki usakA sattA meM samAveza ho jAtA hai| isI prakAra AtmA ke sAtha ba~dhe
hue karma jaba pariNAma-vizeSa se eka svabhAva kA parityAga kara dUsare svabhAva
ko prApta kara lete haiM, taba usa svabhAvAntara-prApti ko saMkramaNa samajhanA
cAhie, bandha nhiiN| isI abhiprAya se karmanahaNa mAtra ko bandha na kahakara
gAthA meM abhinava karmagrahaNa ko bandha kA lakSaNa batAyA hai  /  arthAt
bandha ke lakSaNa meM diye gaye 'abhinava' vizeSaNa kA yaha zAma hai ki nadI meM
zoko nanda kahate haiN| kintu sattArUpa meM vidyamAna aura svabhAvAntara meM
saMkramita karmoM ko bandha nahIM kahate haiN| jIva ke jJAna-darzanAdi
svAbhAvika guNoM ko AvaraNa karane kI zakti kA ho jAnA yahI karmapudgaloM kA
karmarUpa bananA kahalAtA hai  /  karmayogya pudgaloM kA karmarUpa se pariNamana
mithyAtvAdi hetuoM se HTTE hotA hai  /  mithyAtva, avirati, pramAda, kaSAya aura
yoga ye jIva ke vaibhAvika (vikRta) svarUpa haiM, aura isase ve kArmaNapudgaloM
ko karmarUpa banane meM nimitta hote haiN| mithyAtvAdi jina vaibhAvika bhAvoM se
kArmaNapudgala karmarUpa ho jAte haiM, una vaibhAvika bhAvoM ko bhAyakarma aura
karmarUpa pariNAma ko prApta hue pudgaloM ko dravyakarma kahate haiN| ina donoM
meM parasparAzraya sambandha hai  /  pahale grahaNa kiye hue dravyakarmoM ke
anusAra bhAvakarma aura 1. sattA kammAgaThiI baMdhAi sara attalAmANaM  /

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Financial Karma Text  **51** According to Bhava Karma, new Karmas continue to
be bound. In this way, the binding of Dravya Karma by Bhava Karma and Bhava
Karma by Dravya Karma, such a continuous chain of cause and effect has been
going on since time immemorial.  Without specifying any particular Gunasthan and
any particular Jiva, the Karma-prakritis that are capable of being bound are
considered to be 120. Therefore, the binding of these 120 Karma-prakritis is
called **Samanya Bandha** or **Ogh Bandha**.  Although a single Jiva cannot
transform the Karma-pudgalas into 120 forms at any one time in any state, i.e.,
cannot bind 120 Karma-prakritis, yet many can bind 120 Karma-prakritis at one
time. Similarly, a Jiva can also bind 120 Karma-prakritis in different states at
different times. This is because the Karma-pudgalas can be transformed into 120
types according to the Jiva's Mithyatva, etc. Therefore, 120 Karma-prakritis are
considered to be capable of being bound.  The names of the 120 Karma-prakritis
that are capable of being bound and the number of their Uttar-prakritis are as
follows:  (1) **Jnanavarana** - 5 types (2) **Darshanavarana** - 18 types (3)
**Vedaniya** - 2 types (4) **Mohaniya** - 26 types (5) **Aaya** - 4 types (6)
**Nama** - 67 types (7) **Gotra** - 8 types (8) **Antaraya** - 5 types  These
Jnanavarana, etc. Karmas have 5, 18, 2, 26, 4, 67, 8, and 5 Uttar-prakritis
respectively.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vitIya karmagrantha 51 bhAvakarma ke anusAra phira navIna karmoM kA bandha hotA
rahatA hai| isa prakAra dravyakarma se bhAbakarma aura bhAvakarma se dravyakarma
kA bandha, aisI kAryakAraNabhAva kI anAdi paramparA calI A rahI hai| kisI khAsa
guNasthAna aura kisI khAsa jIva kI vivakSA kiye binA bandhayogya karmaprakRtiyA~
120 mAnI jAtI haiN| isalie 120 karmaprakRtiyoM ke bandha ko sAmAnyabandha yA
oghabandha kahate haiM  /  yadyapi koI eka jIva kisI bhI avasthA meM eka samaya
meM karmapudgaloM ko 120 rUpa meM pariNamita nahIM kara sakatA hai  /  arthAta
120 karmaprakRtiyoM ko nahIM bAMdha sakatA hai| para bane noca eka samaya meM
120 karmaprakRtiyoM ko bA~dha sakate haiN| isI taraha eka jIva bhI judIjudI
avasthAoM meM pRthak-pRthaka samaya saba milAkara 120 karmaprakRtiyoM ko bA~dha
sakatA hai  /  kyoMki jIva ke mithyAtvAdi pariNAmoM ke anusAra kArmaNapudgala
120 prakAra meM pariNata ho sakate haiM  /  isI se 120 kamaprakRtiyA~
bandhayogya mAnI jAtI haiM  /  bandhayogya 120 karmaprakRtiyoM ke mUla karmoM ke
nAma aura unakI uttaraprakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA isa prakAra hai (1) jJAnAvaraNa ke 5
bheda (2) darzanAvaraNa ke ha bheda (3) vedanIya ke 2 bheda (4) mohanIya ke 26
bheda (5) Aya ke bheda (6) nAma ke 67 bheda (7) gotra ke bheda (E) antarAya ke 5
bheda ina saba jJAnAvaraNAdi kamoM ke kramazaH 5.18+2+26+4+r

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
52 Karmastava - There are 120 karma-prakritis considered to be bandha-yogya
(capable of binding) due to the combination of 2+5 bhedas (categories). Although
there are 63 or 103 prakritis of nama-karma in detail, the reason for mentioning
67 prakritis here in the bandha-yogya prakritis is that bandha (binding) and
sanghatan (aggregation) are inseparable in the case of sharira nama-karma. That
is, they cannot exist without the body. Therefore, in the bandha or udaya
(arising) state, bandha and sanghatan nama-karma are not counted separately from
sharira nama-karma and are included in the sharira nama-prakriti. Also, due to
the desire for non-difference (abheda-vivksha) in the four categories of varna
(color), gandha (smell), rasa (taste), and sparsa (touch), their twenty bhedas
are included, resulting in four bhedas being taken in the bandha and udaya
states. 1. Panch nav donni chhanni samvi ya charo kaman satchhi. Vopi ya panch
pa bhania edao mandha paydio. - According to the Go. Karmakan, 35 karma-
prakritis are bandha-yogya due to abheda-vivksha (desire for non-difference).
However, due to bheda-vivksha (desire to speak of difference), there are 146
karma-prakritis that are bandha-yogya. This is because, out of the three bhedas
of darshan moha (perception-delusion) - samyaktva (rightness), samyagmithyatva
(partially rightness), and mithyatva (wrongness) - only the mula mithyatva
prakriti is considered bandha-yogya. The reason for this is that the bound
mithyatva prakriti is categorized by the jiva (soul) into three maags (paths)
through its parinamas (transformations) - ashudha (impure), ardhashudha
(partially pure), and vishudha (pure). This results in three bhedas of
mithyatva. Among them, the vishudha karma-pudgals are called samyaktva-mohaniya
(capable of being deluded by rightness) and the ardhashudha karma-pudgals are
called sampamithyatva-mohaniya (capable of being deluded by partially
rightness). Therefore, by not including the two prakritis of samyaktva and
samyagmithyatva of mohaniya-karma in the bandha-yogya prakritis, 146 prakritis
are considered bandha-yogya due to bheda-vivksha. In the first karma-grantha
(text on karma), the names of the eight prakritis that are generally bandha-
yogya, udaya-yogya, etc., have been mentioned. Therefore, they are not mentioned
again here.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 52 karmastava -2+5 bhedoM ke milane se 120 karmaprakRtiyA~ bandhayoNya mAnI gaI
haiN|' _ yadyapi nAmakarma kI vistAra se 63 yA 103 prakRtiyAM hotI hai  /
lekina yahAM bandhayogya prakRtiyoM meM 67 prakRtiyA~ batAne kA kAraNa yaha hai
ki zarIra nAmakarma meM bandhana aura saMghAtana ye donoM avinAbhASI haiM  /
arthAt zarIra ke binA ye donoM ho nahIM sakate haiM  /  ataH bandha yA
udayAvasthA meM zarIra nAmakarma se bandhana aura saMghAtana nAmakarma jude
nahIM gine jAte aura zarIra nAmaprakRti meM samAviSTa ho jAne se tathA varNa,
gandha, rasa aura sparza ina cAra bhedoM meM bhI abheda vivakSA se inake bIsa'
bheda zAmila hone se bandha aura udaya avasthA meM cAra bheda liye 1. paMca Nava
doNNi channIsamavi ya caro kameNa sattachI  /  vopiNa ya paMca pa bhaNiyA edAo
mandhapayaDIo  /  /  -go0 karmakANa 35 abhedaviSakSA se ukta 120 karmaprakRtiyA~
gandhayogya hai  /  lekina bhedavivakSA (bheda se kahane kI icchA) se 146
karmaprakRtiyA~ bandhayogma hogI  /  kyoMki darzana moha kI samyaktva,
samyagamithyAtva aura mithyAtva-ina tIna bhedoM meM se mula mithyAtva prakRti hI
bandhayogya mAnI jAtI hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki baMdhI huI mithyAtva prakRti
ko hI jIva apane pariNAmoM dvArA azuddha, ardhazuddha aura vizuddha-ina tIna
mAgoM meM vimAjita karatA hai| jisase mithyAtva ke hI tIna bheda ho jAte haiN|
unameM se vizuddha karmapUgaloM ko samyaktvamohanIya aura argha zuddha
karmapudagaloM ko sampamithyAstramohanIya kahate haiN| isalie mohanIyakarma ke
samyaksva aura samyamithyAtva ina do prakRtiyoM ko bandhayogya prakRtiyoM meM
grahaNa na karane se 146 prakRtiyAM bhedavivakSA se banna yogya mAnI jAtI hai  /
prathama pharmagrantha meM sAmAnya se andha, udaya Adi yogya AThoM ko kI
prakRtiyoM ke nAma batAye haiN| ata: yahA~ punaH nAma nahIM diye gaye haiN|

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  Sixty-seven types of **Nama Karma** are counted among
the number of **Bandha-yoga** (bondable) **Prakritis**.  Out of the
aforementioned 120 **Karma Prakṛitis** that are generally **Bandha-yoga**, the
**Tirthankara Nama Karma**, **Aharaka-Dwik-Aharaka-Sharira** and **Aharaka-
Angopanga** - these three **Karma Prakṛitis** do not bind in the **Mithyatva**
(false belief) **Gunasthan** (state of being). In other words, these three
**Karma Prakṛitis** are not **Bandha-yoga** in the **Mithyatva** **Gunasthan**.
The reason for this is that the binding of **Tirthankara Nama Karma** occurs
through **Samyaktava** (right faith) and the binding of **Aharaka-Dwik** occurs
through **Aparamatta-Samyama** (unwavering restraint). However, in the
**Mithyatva** **Gunasthan**, it is not possible for beings to attain
**Samyaktava** or **Aparamatta-Samyama**. This is because **Samyaktava** cannot
occur before the fourth **Gunasthan** - **Avirata-Samyak-Drishti**
(uninterrupted right faith) - and **Aparamatta-Samyama** cannot occur before the
seventh **Gunasthan** - **Aparamatta-Samyata** (unwavering restraint).
Therefore, beings in the **Mithyatva** **Gunasthan**, due to the presence of
**Mithyatva**, **Avirati** (non-restraint), **Pramada** (carelessness),
**Kashaya** (passions) and **Yoga** (bondage) - the causes of binding - can bind
the remaining 117 **Karma Prakṛitis** to the best of their ability, without the
aforementioned three. Therefore, in the **Mithyatva** **Gunasthan**, there are
117 **Bandha-yoga** **Prakṛitis** and 3 **Abandha-yoga** (non-bondable)
**Prakṛitis**.  Now, in the following verse, we discuss the 1 **Bandha-vichheda-
yoga** (bond-breaking) **Prakriti** in the **Mithyatva** **Gunasthan**:  1.
**Dehe Avinamāyī Bandhanasanghad Idi Abandhudaya. Vashnachoukke'abhinne Gahide
Chattari Bandhudaye.** - **Go. Karmakanda 34**  2. **Abandha** - In that
**Gunasthan**, that **Karma** does not bind, but in the subsequent
**Gunasthan**, the binding of that **Karma** occurs. This is called **Abandha**.
3. **Sammeva Titthavandha Aharadurga Pamadarahidesu.** - **Go. Karmakanda 62**
4. **Bandha-vichheda** - The absence of binding in any subsequent **Gunasthan**
is called **Bandha-vichheda**. **Chheva**, **Kshaya**, **Anta**, **Bheda**, etc.
are synonymous terms.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha jAne para nAmakarma ke 67 bheda bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI
saMkhyA meM ginAye gaye haiN| sAmAnya se bandhayogya pUrvokta 120
karmaprakRtiyoM meM se tIrthaMkara nAmakarma aura AhArakadvika-AhArakazarIra
aura AhAraka-aMgopAMga -ina tIna karmaprakRtiyoM kA mithyAtva guNasthAnavI jIvoM
ke bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  arthAt ye tIna karmaprakRtiyA~ mithyAtva guNasthAna
meM abandha yogya haiN| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki tIrthakara nAmakarma kA bandha
samyaktva se aura AhArakaTika kA bandha apramattasaMyama se hotA hai|' parantu
mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM jIvoM ko na to samyaktva honA sambhava hai aura na
apramattasaMyama honA sambhava hai| kyoMki cauthe guNasthAnaaviratasamyagdRSTi
guNasthAna meM pahale samyaktva ho hI nahIM sakatA aura sAtaveM guNasthAna-
apramattasaMyata 'gugasthAna-se pahale apramatta saMyama bhI nahIM hotA hai  /
ataH mithyAtva guNasthAnavI jIva mithyAtva, avirati, pramAda, kaSAya aura yoga-
ina bandha ke kAraNoM ke vidyamAna rahane se ukta tIna prakRtiyoM ke binA poSa
117 karmaprakRtiyoM kA yathAsambhava bandha kara sakate haiN| ataeva mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM bandhayogya prakRtiyA~ 117 aura abandha yogya 3 prakRtiyA~ haiM
/  _aba Age kI gAthA meM mithyAtva guNasthAna meM bandhaviccheda yogya 1. dehe
aviNAmAyI bandhaNasaMghAda idi abndhudyaa| vaSNacaukke'bhiNNe gahide cattAri
bandhudaye  //  -go0 karmakANDa 34 2. avandha-usa guNasthAna meM vaha karma na
ba~dhe, kintu Age ke guNasthAna meM usa karma kA bandha ho, use abandha kahate
haiN| 3. sammeva titthavandho AhAradurga pmaadrhidesu| -go0 karmakANDa 62 4.
bandhavicchera-Age ke kisI bhI guNasthAna meM bandha nahIM hone ko bandha
vichoda kahate haiN| cheva, kSaya, anta, bheda Adi samAnArthaka zabda haiN|

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
54 Karmastava This verse tells the number and names of karma-prakritis and the
number of bandha-prakritis in the second guna-sthana. Narayati Jajjar, Hungagir
Solanto Igahiyasu, Sasani Tirithi Naduhgati Gam. ||4|| Gatha-artha - The sixteen
prakritis of Naraka-trika, Jati-chatushk, Sthavara-chatushk, Hunda-samsthana,
Atapa-nama, Seva-singhana, Napusak-veda and Mithyatva-mohaniya are freed from
bandha at the end of the Mithyatva guna-sthana, leaving 101 karma-prakritis
eligible for bandha in the Sasadan guna-sthana. Out of these 101 prakritis, the
bandha-vichched of Tiryanch-trika, Styanaddhi-trika, Durbhagat-trika and the
other 16 prakritis occurs at the end of the Sasadan guna-sthana. Their names
will be mentioned in the following verses. Vishesh-artha - This verse mainly
tells the number of bandha-yogya prakritis in the second guna-sthana, Sasadan,
and the names of the sixteen prakritis that are freed from bandha at the end of
the first guna-sthana, Mithyatva. Some of these sixteen prakritis are not
mentioned by their full names, but are indicated by terms like Naraka-trika,
Jati-chatushk, etc. These terms refer to the following prakritis: Naraka-trika -
Naraka-gati, Naraka-asupurvi, Naraka-ayu. - Jati-chatushk - Ekendriya-jati, Dwi-
indriya-jati, Tri-indriya-jati, Chatur-indriya-jati. Sthavara-chatushk -
Sthavara-nama, Sukshma-nama, Apariyapta-nama, Sadharana-nama.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 54 karmastava karmaprakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura nAma evaM dUsare guNasthAna meM
bandhaprakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA batalAte haiN| narayatiga jAjara, huMgAgira solaMto
igahiyasau, sAsaNi tirithINaduhagatigaM  // 4 //  gAthArtha- narakatrika,
jAticatuSka, sthAvaracatuSka, huMDa-saMsthAna, AtapanAma', sevAsiMhanana,
napusakaveda aura mithyAtvamohanIya ina solaha prakRtiyoM kA mithyAtva
guNasthAna ke anta meM bandhaviccheda hone se sAsAdana guNasthAna meM 101
karmaprakRtiyA~ bandhayogya haiM  /  ukta 101 prakRtiyoM meM se tiryacatrika,
styAnaddhitrika durbhagatrika aura inake sivAya anya 16 prakRtiyoM kA
bandhaviccheda sAsAdana guNa sthAna ke anta meM hotA hai  /  jinake nAma Age kI
gAthA meM ginAye jaayeNge| vizeSArtha isa gAthA meM mukhya rUpa se dUsare-
sAsAdana guNasthAna meM bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura pahale mithyAtva
guNasthAna ke anta meM bandhaviccheda ko prApta hone vAlI solaha prakRtiyoM ke
nAma batAye gaye haiN| ina solaha prakRtiyoM meM se kucha eka prakRtiyoM ke pUre
nAma nahIM likhakara narakatrika, jAticatuSka Adi saMjJAoM dvArA saMketa kiyA
gayA hai| jinake dvArA nimnalikhita prakRtiyoM ko grahaNa kiyA gayA hai:
narakatrika - narakagati, narakAsupUrvI, narakAyu  /  - jAticatuSka
-ekendriyajAti, dvIndriyajAti, zrIndriyajAti, caturindriya jAti  /
sthAvaracatuSka-sthAvaranAmA, sUkSmanAma, aparyAptanAma, sAdhAraNa naam|

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Grantha ## 55  These are the names of the sixteen types of
karmas that are severed at the end of the first Mithyatva Gunasthan, along with
the natures described by the terms Naraka Trika, etc.:  (1) Naraka Gati, (3)
Naraka Ayu, (5) Dvi-Indriya Jati, (7) Chatur-Indriya Jati, (9) Sukshma Nama,
(11) Sadharana Nama, (13) Atapa Nama, (15) Napumsaka Veda, (2) Naraka Anupurvi,
(4) Eka-Indriya Jati, (6) Tri-Indriya Jati (8) Sthavara Nama, (10) Apariapta
Nama, (12) Inda Sansthan, (14) Seva-rta Sanhanan, (16) Mithyatva-mohaniya.  It
should be understood that the causes of karma-bandha in the Gunasthanas are such
that the karmas that are bound due to the causes of Mithyatva, etc., are also
bound up to the Gunasthanas where those causes arise.  The Mithyatva-mohaniya
karma arises until the end of the first Mithyatva Gunasthan, and not in the
second Gunasthan. Therefore, due to the arising of the Mithyatva-mohaniya karma,
the sixteen types of karmas, from Naraka Trika to Mithyatva-mohaniya, as shown
in the gatha, are bound, which are extremely inauspicious and mostly suitable
for Naraka, Eka-Indriya, and Vikala-Indriya beings.  1. Compare:  **Mithyatva**
**Jhund ka sapatte yakkhavaradava.** **Muhumatiya viyalidiya nirayaduriyajang
mithye.** - Go. Karmakanda 65

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha 55 ukta narakatrika Adi saMjJAoM dvArA batAI gaI
prakRtiyoM ke sAtha pahale mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna ke anta meM bandhavichinna
hone vAlI solaha prakRtiyoM ke nAma ye haiM- (1) narakagati, (3) narakAyu (5)
dvIndriyajAti, (7) caturindriyajAti, (e) sUkSmanAma, (11) sAdhAraNanAma, (13)
AtapanAma (15) napuMsaka veda, (2) narakAnupUrvI, (4) ekendriyajAti, (6)
zrIndriyajAti (8) sthAvaranAma, (10) aparyAptanAma, (12) iMDasaMsthAna, (14)
sevArta saMhanana, (16) mithyAtvamohanIya  /  guNasthAnoM meM karmabandha ke
kAraNoM ke bAre meM yaha samajha lenA cAhie ki karmabandha ke jo mithyAtvAdi
kAraNa batAye gaye haiM, unameM se jisa-jisa guNasthAna taka jinakA udaya rahatA
hai to unake nimitta se ba~dhane vAlI karmaprakRtiyoM kA bandha bhI usa
guNasthAna taka hotA rahatA hai  /  mithyAtvamohanIyakarma kA udaya pahale -
midhyAtva guNasthAna ke antima samaya taka rahatA hai, dUsare guNasthAna meM
nahIM  /  ataeva mithyAtvamohanIya karma ke udaya se atyanta azubha rUpa aura
prAyaH nAraka jIvoM, ekendriya jIvoM tathA vikalendriya jIvoM ke yogya
narakatrika me lekara mithyAtvamohanIya paryanta gAthA meM dikhAI gaI solaha 1.
tulanA kIjie---- micchatta jhuMDa kA sapatte yakkhAvarAdAvaM  /  muhumatiya
viyalidiya nirayaduriyAjagaM mithye  //  - go0 karmakANDa 65

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  56  The binding of karmas, or karmic influences, to the soul can occur until
the end of the first stage of spiritual development (guna-sthana), as long as
the delusion of false belief (mithyatva-mohaniya) persists. This binding does
not occur in the second stage. Therefore, out of the 117 karmic influences that
are considered to be bound in the first stage, 101 remain bound in the second
stage, excluding the 16 influences like naraka-trika (hellish influences).  The
verse states that the binding of the karmic influences listed in the "tirithi-
ona-duha-gati-patra" (a list of karmic influences) is severed in the second
stage. The names of the other karmic influences that are severed in the second
stage, as well as the number of karmic influences that can be bound in the third
stage, are mentioned in the following verse:  "Ananta-anubandhi-chatushk,
madhyama-samsthana-chatushk, madhyama-samhanana-chatushk, nicha-gola, udyota-
nama, ashubha-vihayo-gati-nama, and stri-veda, these 25 karmic influences are
severed at the end of the second stage. Due to the absence of the binding of
ayu-dvik (the karmic influence related to lifespan), 74 karmic influences are
bound in the mixed stage (samyama-dristi-guna-sthana)."  **Explanation:**  In
the second stage, 101 karmic influences are eligible for binding, and 25 are
severed at the end of this stage. The names of these 25 severed karmic
influences are mentioned in the previous verse using the phrase "tirithi-ona-
duha-gati-gam," which refers to the nine karmic influences of tiryancha-trika,
styana-dhitrika, and durbhaga-trika. This verse further lists the names of 16
karmic influences, starting from "ananta-anubandhi-chatushk" and ending with
"stri-veda."  Therefore, the previous verse mentions nine karmic influences, and
this verse mentions sixteen, totaling 25 karmic influences that are severed at
the end of the second stage.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 56 karmastava prakRtiyoM kA bandha pahale guNasthAna ke antima samaya taka,
jaba taka midhyAtvamohanIya kA udaya hai, ho sakatA hai, dUsare guNasthAna ke
samaya nahIM  /  isalie pahale guNasthAna meM jina 117 karma prakRtiyoM kA
bandha mAnA gayA hai, unameM se narakatrika Adi ukta solaha prakRtiyoM ko
chor3akara zeSa 101 karmaprakRtiyoM kA bandha dUsare guNasthAna meM hotA hai  /
gAthA meM 'tirithoNaduhagati patra meM ginAI gaI prakRtiyoM kA bandhaviccheda
dUsare guNasthAna meM hotA hai  /  inake atirikta dUsare guNasthAna meM anya
bandhavyucchita hone vAlI prakRtiyoM ke nAma evaM tIsare guNasthAna kI
bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA Age kI gAthA meM batalAte haiM  /
aNamajjhAgii saMghayaNacaja, niujjoyakukhagaddasthiti  /  paNavIsaMto mIse cari
Ajaya abandhA  // 5 //  gAthArtha - anantAnubandhIcatuSka, madhyama
saMsthAnacatuSka, madhyamasaMhananacatuSka, nIcagola, udyotanAma, azubhavihAyo
gatinAma aura strIveda ina 25 prakRtiyoM kA bandhaviccheda dUsara guNasthAna ke
anta meM hotA hai tathA Ayudvika abandha hone se mizra guNasthAna (
samyamathyAdRSTi guNasthAna) meM 74 karmaprakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /
vizeSArtha - dUsare guNasthAna meM bandhayogya 101 prakRtiyA~ tathA usake anta
samaya meM vyucchinna hone vAlI 25 prakRtiyA~ haiN| ina vyukhinna hone vAlI 25
prakRtiyoM ke nAmoM ke lie pUrva gAthA meM 'tirithINa duhagattigaM' pada se
tiryaMcatrika, styAnaddhitrika aura durbhagatrika ina nau prakRtiyoM ke nAma
tathA isa gAthA meM anantAnubandhacatuSka se lekara strIveda paryanta solaha
prakRtiyoM ke nAma batAye haiM  /  isa prakAra pUrva gAthA meM batAI gaI no aura
isa gAthA meM kahI

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second  Combining the sixteen Prakṛtis, there are a total of 25 Prakṛtis that
become disintegrated at the end of the second Guṇasthāna. The author has
mentioned four of these 25 Prakṛtis separately: Selicgotra Udyotanāma,
Aprashasta Vihayogatināma, and Strīveda. The names of the remaining 21 Prakṛtis
are given by the following terms: Narakanik, Styānaddhivik, Durbhagatrik,
Anantānubandhīcaturṣka, Madhyamasansthānacaturṣka, Madhyamasanhannacaturṣka.
The names of the Prakṛtis included in these terms are as follows:  *
**Tiyancatrik:** Tiyancatra, Tiyancagati, Tich-Anupūrvi, Tichary-Āyu *
**Styānaddhivik:** Nidrā-Nidrā, Prachalā-Prachalā, Tyānaddhi * **Durbhagatrik:**
Durbhaganāma, Du.svaranāma, Anādayanāma * **Anantānubandhīcaturṣka:**
Anantānubandhī Krodha, Māna, Māyā, Lobha * **Madhyamasansthānacaturṣka:**
Nyagrodhaparimandalamansthāna, Sādisansthāna, Vāmanasansthāna, Kubjasansthāna *
**Madhyamasanhannacaturṣka:** Ṛṣabhanārācasanhannana, Nārācasanhannana,
Ardhanārācasanhannana, Kīlikā Sanshana  The 25 Karma Prakṛtis, from Tiyancatrik
to Strīveda, become disintegrated at the end of the second Guṇasthāna. This
means that they cannot be bound in the third, fourth, or subsequent Guṇasthānas.
The reason for this is that the binding of these 25 Prakṛtis occurs due to the
arising of Anantānubandhīkaṣāya, and Anantānubandhīkaṣāya arises only in the
first and second Guṇasthānas, not in the third or subsequent Guṇasthānas.
Therefore, out of the 101 Prakṛtis that can be bound in the second Guṇasthāna,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya . gaI solaha prakRtiyoM ko milAne se dUsare guNasthAna ke anta samaya
meM vyucchinna hone vAlI kula 25 prakRtiyA~ ho jAtI haiN| _ granthakAra ne 25
prakRtiyoM meM selIcagotra udyotanAma, aprazasta vihAyogatinAma aura strIveda,
ina cAra kA to alaga-alaga nAmollekha kara diyA hai  /  aura bAkI bacI huI 21
prakRtiyoM ke nAma nimnalikhita saMjJAoM dvArA batAye haiM - narakanika,
styAnaddhivika, durbhagatrika, anantAnubandhIcatuSka, madhyamasaMsthAnacatuSka,
madhyamasaMhananacatuSka  /  ukta saMjJAoM meM grahaNa ko jAne vAlI prakRtiyoM
ke nAma isa prakAra haiMtiyaMcatrika ..tiyaMcagati, tica-AnupurvI, ticarya-Ayu
/  styAnaddhitrika -nidrA-nidrA, pracalA-pracalA, "tyAnaddhi  /  durbhagatrika -
durbhaganAma, du.svaranAma, anAdayanAma  /  anantAnubandhIcatuSka-anantAnubandhI
krodha, mAna, mAyA. lobha  /  madhyamasaMsthAnacatuSka
nyagrodhaparimaNDalamaMsthAna, sAdisaMsthAna, vAmanasaMsthAna, kubjasaMsthAna  /
madhyamasaMhanana catuSka- RSabhanArAcasaMhanana, nArAcasaMhanana,
ardhanArAcasaMhanana, kIlikA saMshana  /  pUrvokta tiryaMcatrika se lekara
strIveda paryaMta 25 karmaprakRtiyoM kA viccheda dUsare guNasthAna ke anta meM
ho jAtA hai| arthAt Age tIsare, cauthe Adi guNasthAnoM meM inakA bandha nahIM ho
sakatA hai| isakA kAraNa yaha ki tiryacatrika Adi 25 prakRtiyoM kA bandha
anantAnubandhIkaSAya ke udaya se hotA hai aura anantAnubandhIkaSAya kA udaya
sirpha pahale aura isare guNasthAna taka hI rahatA hai, tIsare Adi Age ke
guNasthAna meM nhiiN| isalie dUsare guNasthAna kI bandhayogya 101 prakRtiyoM meM
se

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  58 The 25 Prakṛtis, starting with the Tiryanc-trika, should be
considered as not subject to bondage, reducing the total number of bondable
Prakṛtis to 76. **Karmastava** **In the Guṇasthāna** However, the nature of a
being in the third Guṇasthāna, the mixed Guṇasthāna (Samyag-mithyā-dṛṣṭi
Guṇasthāna), is such that at that time, neither death occurs nor is there
bondage of the lifespan related to the future birth. This is because in the
state of mixed Guṇasthāna and mixed Kāya-yoga, there cannot be bondage of Āyu-
karma. Therefore, since the bondage of Naraka-āyu occurs up to the first
Guṇasthāna and the bondage of Tichā-āyu occurs up to the second Guṇasthāna, and
the remaining two Āyus, Manushya-āyu and Deva-āyu, are not bound in the third
Guṇasthāna, the total of 27 Prakṛtis, including the 25 Prakṛtis starting with
the Naraka-trika and Manushya-āyu and Deva-āyu, are reduced from the 101
bondable Prakṛtis of the Sāsādana Guṇasthāna, leaving 74 remaining Prakṛtis that
are bondable in the third Guṇasthāna. Now, in the following verse, we will
explain the number and names of the bondable Prakṛtis in the fourth Avirata-
samyag-dṛṣṭi, fifth Deśa-virata, and sixth Pramatta-samyata Guṇasthānas. **Samme
Sagari Jinau-bandhi, Badar Narati-g Viyak-say | Ural-ganto Base Base, Satsatthi
Ti-af-santo ||6||** **Gāyārtha:** In the fourth Guṇasthāna called Avirata-
samyag-dṛṣṭi, there can be bondage of 77 Prakṛtis due to the bondage of the Jin-
tīrthaṅkara Nāma-karma and two Āyus. Due to the liberation of Vajra-ṛṣabha-
nārācha-samhanana, Manushya-trika, Apratyākhyāna-āvaraṇa-kaṣāya-chatuṣka, and
Audārika-dvīka, the fifth Guṇasthāna called Deśa-virata  1. **Sammāmi-chchhā-
diṭṭhi āya-bandham pi na kareti. - iti agam-vachanāt** 1.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 58 tiryaMcatrika Adi 25 prakRtiyoM ko kama karane se tIsare 76 prakRtiyA~
bandhayogya mAnI jAnI cAhie thIM  /  karmastava guNasthAna meM kintu tIsare -
mizra guNasthAnavartI ( samyagmithyAdRSTiguNasthAnavartI) jIva kA svabhAva aisA
hotA hai ki usa samaya usakA maraNa nahIM hotA hai aura na parabhava sambandhI
Ayu kA bandha hI hotA hai  / " kyoMki mizraguNasthAna aura mizra kAyayoga kI
sthiti meM Ayukarma kA bandha nahIM ho sakatA hai  /  isalie Ayukarma ke cAra
bhedoM meM se narakAyu kA bandha pahale guNasthAna taka aura ticAyu kA bandha
dUsare guNasthAna taka hone se tathA 'duAu abandhA' bAkI kI manuSyAyu aura
devAyu ina do Ayu kA tIsare guNasthAna meM bandha na hone se narakatrika Adi
pUrvokta 25 prakRtiyoM tathA manuSyAyu evaM devAyu sahita kula 27 prakRtiyoM ko
sAsAdana guNasthAna kI bandhayogya 101 prakRtiyoM meM se kama karane para zeSa
74 kamaMprakRtiyA~ tIsare guNasthAna meM bandhayogya haiM  /  aba Age kI gAthA
meM cauthe aviratasamyagdRSTi, pA~cave dezavirata aura chaThe pramattasaMyata
guNasthAna meM bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura inake nAma batalAte haiM
samme sagari jiNAubandhi, baddara naratiga viyakasAya | uralaganto bese bese,
satsaTThI tiaphasAnto ||6|| gAyArtha - aviratasamyagdRSTi nAmaka cauthe
guNasthAna meM jina - tIrthaGkara nAmakarma aura do Ayu kA bandha hone se 77
prakRtiyoM kA bandha ho sakatA hai  /  vajraRSabhanArAcasaMhanana, manuSyatrika,
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNakaSAyacatuSka aura audArikadvika ke bandhaviccheda hone se
dezavirata nAmaka pA~caveM guNasthAna 1. sammAmicchAdiTThI AyabandhaM pi na
kareiti  /  - iti agamavacanAt 1. y

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Financial Karma Granth  In the Financial Karma Granth, 64 natures are bound,
and the severance of the third kashaya - the fourfold kashaya of rejection and
concealment - occurs at the end of the fifth guna-sthana. Therefore, 63 natures
are eligible for binding in the sixth guna-sthana, the Prammatta-Samyata guna-
sthana. To determine the name of the sixth guna-sthana and the number of natures
eligible for binding, the phrase "Tevachhipamatte" should be taken from the
following verse.  This verse specifically indicates the names of the natures
eligible for binding and those that are severed in the fourth, fifth, and sixth
guna-sthana.  First, we will discuss the number of natures eligible for binding
in the fourth guna-sthana:  In the third guna-sthana, 74 natures are eligible
for binding, and no nature is severed in this guna-sthana. Therefore, 74 natures
should have been eligible for binding in the Avira-Samyag-Drishti guna-sthana.
However, due to the principle of "Sammeva Titthabandha," only the Tirthankara
nature is bound in Samyag-Drishti. This principle allows for the binding of the
Tirthankara name in the fourth guna-sthana. Similarly, according to the
principle of "Sammâmi Châditthî Uyabandhaṁ Pi Na Karei Tti," the binding of both
human and divine lifespans, which did not occur in the third guna-sthana, can
occur in the fourth guna-sthana.  Therefore, along with the three natures of
Tirthankara name, human lifespan, and divine lifespan, the following natures are
eligible for binding in the fourth guna-sthana:  1. The binding of Naraka
lifespan and Tiryancha lifespan is severed in the first and second guna-sthana,
respectively. Therefore, these two natures, human lifespan and divine lifespan,
remain eligible for binding.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . 2. - vitIya karmagrantha meM sar3asaTha prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai aura
tIsarI kaSAya - pratyAkhyAnAvaraNakaSAyacatuSka kA viccheda pAMcaveM guNasthAna
ke anta meM hone se tiresaTha prakRtiyA~ chaThe pramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM
bandhayogya haiN| chaThe guNasthAna kA nAma aura bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI
saMkhyA batAne ke lie Age kI gAthA se 'tevachipamatte' pada lenA cAhie  / )
vizeSArthagAthA meM cauthe, pAMcaveM aura chaThe guNasthAna kI bandhayogya aura
bandhaviccheda hone vAlI prakRtiyoM ke nAmoM kA saMketa kiyA hai| sarvaprathama
cauthe guNasthAna meM bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA Adi batalAte haiM :
tIsare guNasthAna meM bandhayogya 74 prakRtiyA~ haiM aura isa guNasthAna meM
kisI bhI prakRti kA bandhaviccheda nahIM hotA hai  /  ataH cIye avirata
samyagdRSTiguNasthAna meM 74 prakRtiyA~ bandhayogya honI cAhie thIM  /  lekina
'sammameva titthabandho' samyagdRSTi ke hI tIrthaGkara prakRti kA bandha hotA
hai, yaha siddhAnta hone me cauthe guNasthAna meM tIrthaGkaranAma bAdhA jA
sakatA hai tathA isI prakAra sammAmi chAdiTThI uyabandhaM pi na karei tti' ke
siddhAntAnusAra tIsare guNasthAna meM jo manuSyAyu aura devAyu kA bhI bandha
nahIM hotA thA, una donoM AyuoM kA cauthe guNasthAna meM bandha ho sakatA hai|
isa prakAra tIrthakaranAmakarma evaM manuSyAyu, devAyu ina tIna prakRtiyoM ke
sAtha cauthe guNasthAna meM tIsare guNasthAna meM bandhayogya -. 1. narakAyu
aura tiryaMcAyu kA bandhaviccheda pahale aura dUmare guNasthAna meM ho bAne se
manuSyAyu aura devAyu ye do prakRtiyA~ bandhayogya rahatI haiM  /

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **6** The 74 karma-prakritis can also be bound,
therefore, a total of 77 karma-prakritis are considered to be bound in the
fourth guna-sthana. In the fourth guna-sthana, if the present devas and narakas
bind the lifespan related to the past, then they bind the human lifespan and the
lifespan of the vichayas, and they bind the lifespan of humans and the lifespan
of the tiryanch devas. Now, in the fifth desa-virat guna-sthana, we will explain
the number of bindable prakritis, their names, causes, etc. In the fifth guna-
sthana, 67 prakritis are bound. Out of the 77 bindable prakritis in the fourth
guna-sthana, the binding of Vajra-rishabha-naracha-samhanana, Manuyya-nik-
manushya-gati, Manushya-anupurvi and Manushya-ayu, Apratyakhyana-avaran-chatuhak
- Apratyakhyana-avaran-krodha, Apratyakhyana-acharan-mana, Apratyakhyana-avaran-
maya, Apratyakhyana-avaran-lobha and Audarik-dwik-Audarik-sharira, Audarik-
angopaang, these 10 prakritis are unbound at the end of the fourth guna-sthana,
resulting in the birth of 67 prakritis in the fifth guna-sthana.  **1** In the
pachitra and other guna-sthanas, the binding of karma-prakritis that are
eligible for human birth does not occur, only the binding of karma-prakritis
that are eligible for deva birth occurs. Therefore, these three karma-prakritis
- Manushya-gati, Manushya-anupurvi and Manushya-ayu - are only eligible for
human birth, and these three karma-prakritis - Vajra-rishabha-naracha-samhanana,
Audarik-sharira and Audarik-angopaang - are only eligible for experiencing in
human or tiryanch birth, so these six prakritis are not bound in the fifth and
other guna-sthanas. The four kshayas - Apratyakhyana-avaran-krodha, mana, maya
and lobha -   **1. Compare -** Atha vidik-saya vajjam oralam-anuṅkum-anu-bau. -
Go. Karma-kanda 97

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6 karmastava 74 karmaprakRtiyoM kA bhI bandha ho sakatA hai, ataeva saba
milAkara 77 karmaprakRtiyoM kA bandha cauthe guNasthAna meM mAnA jAtA hai| ate
guNasthAna meM vartamAna deva aura nAraka yadi parabhava sambandhI Ayu kA bandha
kareM to manuSyAyu aura vicAyu ko bAMdhate haiM aura manuSya tathA tiryaMca
devAyu ko bA~dhate haiM  /  aba pA~caveM dezavirata guNasthAna meM bandhayogya
prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA. unake nAma aura kAraNa Adi ko samajhAte haiM  /  pAMcave
guNasthAna meM 67 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  cA~dhe guNasthAna meM jo
bandhayogya 77 prakRtiyA~ haiM, unameM se vajraRSabhanArAcasaMhanana,
manuyyanika- manuSyagati, manuSya- AnupUrvI aura manuSyAyu,
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNacatuhaka - apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, apratyAkhyAnAcaraNa
mAna, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa lobha aura audArikadvika
audArikazarIra, audArika aMgopAMga ina 10 prakRtiyoM kA bandhaviccheda cauthe
guNasthAna' ke anta meM hone se pA~caveM guNasthAna meM 67 prakRtiyoM kA janma
hotA hai  /  1 pacitra Adi guNasthAnoM meM manuSyabhavayogya karmatrakRtiyoM kA
bandha na hokara devabhavayogya karmaprakRtiyoM kA hI bandha hotA hai| isalie
manuSyagati, manuSya AnupUrvI aura manuSyAyu ye tIna karmaprakRtiyA~ kevala
manuSyajanma meM tathA vajraRSabhanArAcasaMhanana, audArikazarIra aura
bhaudArika aMgopAMga ye tIna karmaprakRtiyA~ manuSya yA tiyaMca ke janma meM hI
bhogane yogya hone se ina chaha prakRtiyoM kA pAMcaveM Adi guNasthAnoM meM
bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha, ina
cAra kaSAyoM 1. tulanA karo - atha vidikasAyA vajjaM orAlamaNuGkumaNubAU  /
-go0 karmakAMDa 97

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The binding of the second karma-prakriti occurs only until the end of the fourth
guna-sthana, not in the subsequent guna-sthana. This is because the general rule
for the binding of karma is that the binding of a particular kshaya occurs in as
many guna-sthana as the kshaya can arise.  A being residing in the fifth guna-
sthana, called "desh-virat", is one who observes "desh-samyama".  "Desh-virat"
refers to one who observes "desh-samyama". The kshaya that prevents "desh-
samyama" is "apratyakhyana-avaran". Therefore, as long as this kshaya arises,
the being will not be able to attain the fifth guna-sthana.  Thus, out of the 75
bindable prakritis in the fourth guna-sthana, ten prakritis, from "baj-rishabha-
nara-acha-samhanana" to "oudarik-ango-paanga", are severed at the end of the
fourth guna-sthana, leaving 67 prakritis to be bound in the fifth guna-sthana.
Out of these 67 bindable prakritis in the fifth guna-sthana, the "pratyakhyana-
avaran-chaturshka" - the four kshayas of "pratyakhyana-avaran", "krodha",
"mana", "maya", and "lobha" - arise only until the fifth guna-sthana and are
severed at the end of the fifth guna-sthana. Therefore, excluding these four
kshayas, the remaining 63 prakritis are bindable in the sixth "pramat-virat"
guna-sthana. In other words, the binding of the four kshayas of "pratyakhyana-
avaran", "krodha", etc., occurs only until the end of the fifth guna-sthana, not
in the subsequent guna-sthana. This is because if these kshayas arise, the sixth
guna-sthana cannot be attained. Therefore, "pratyakhyana-avaran"  1. Compare
"Dese nadiya-kasaya niy meniha bandha-vochchhinna." - Go. Karma-kanda 67

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmaprantha kA bandha cauthe guNasthAna ke antima samaya taka hI hotA
hai, Age ke guNasthAnoM meM nahIM  /  kyoMki kAya ke bandha ke lie yaha sAmAnya
niyama hai ki jitane guNasthAnoM meM jima kapAya kA udaya ho sakatA hai, utane
guNasthAnoM taka usa kaSAya kA bandha hotA hai| pAMcava dezavirata
guNasthAnavartI jIva dezasaMyama kA pAlana karane vAlA hotA hai  /  arthAt
ekadeza saMyama kA pAlana karane vAle ko dezavirata kahate haiM  /  dezasaMyama
ko rokane vAlI apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya hai| ataH jaba taka usakA udaya
rahegA, taba taka dezasaMyama grahaNa nahIM ho sakane me jIva ko pA~cabarvA
guNasthAna prApta nahIM hogaa| isa prakAra cauthe guNasthAna kI bandhayogya 75
prakRtiyoM meM bajaRSabhanArAcasaMhanana se lekara audArikaaMgopAMga payaMnta
dasa prakRtiyoM kA cauthe guNasthAna ke anta meM viccheda ho jAne saM zeSa 67
prakRtiyA~ kA bandha pA~caveM guNasthAna meM honA hai| pAMcaveM guNasthAna meM
bandhayogya ukta 67 prakRtiyoM meM se pratyAkhyAvaraNacatuSka pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha-ina cAra kaSAyoM kA udaya pA~ca guNasthAna taka hI
hotA hai aura usake antima samaya meM bandhaviccheda ho jAne se
pratyAbhyAnAvaraNa krodha Adi ukta kaSAyoM ko chor3akara zeSa 63 prakRtiyAM
chaThe pramattavirata guNasthAna meM bandhayogya haiN| arthAt pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
krodha Adi cAra kaSAyoM kA bandha pA~caveM guNasthAna ke carama mamaya taka hI
hotA hai, Age ke guNasthAnoM meM nahIM hotA hai| kyoMki una kaSAyoM kA udaya
rahe to chaThA guNasthAna prApta nahIM ho sakatA hai| isalie pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
1. tulanA karo dese nadiyakasAyA Niya meNiha bndhvocchinnnnaa| -go0 karmakAMDa
67

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 62  Except for the four *kṣayās* (passions) - anger, pride, deceit, and greed
- the remaining 63 *prakṛtis* (natural tendencies) are considered to be capable
of binding in the sixth *guṇasthāna* (stage of spiritual development).  Having
explained the number of *bandha-yoga* (binding) *prakṛtis* in the fourth, fifth,
and sixth *guṇasthāna*, we now proceed to explain the number, names, and
characteristics of the *bandha-yoga* *prakṛtis* in the seventh *guṇasthāna*, the
*apramatta* (non-negligent) stage, in the next two verses.  **Verse 7:**
*Tevaṭṭhi patte soga arai adhirayuga ajaśa assāyam. Bucclijja chhacca satta ba
ne i surajam jaya niṭṭham.*  **Verse 8:**  *Guṇasatṭi appamatte suraubandhaṁ tu
jaḍa ihāgacche. Agraha aṭṭhāvaṇṇā jaṁ āhāragam bandhe.*  **Meaning of the
Verses:**  The binding of the remaining 63 *prakṛtis* occurs in the *apramatta-
samyata* (non-negligent and controlled) *guṇasthāna*. The binding of the six
*prakṛtis* - sorrow, aversion, instability, ill-fame, and the *asātavēdaniya*
(unbearable) - is severed at the end of the sixth *guṇasthāna*. The binding of
the *āhārakadvika* (food-related) *prakṛtis* occurs in the *apramatta-samyata*
*guṇasthāna*, resulting in the binding of 56 *prakṛtis*. If a being begins the
binding of the *devāyu* (divine) *prakṛtis* in the sixth *guṇasthāna* and
completes it in the same *guṇasthāna*, then, in comparison, the binding of the
six *prakṛtis* - aversion, etc. - and the *devāyu* - a total of seven *prakṛtis*
- is severed, resulting in the binding of 58 *prakṛtis*.  **Special Meaning:**
The verses explain the number of *bandha-yoga* *prakṛtis* in the seventh
*apramatta-samyata* *guṇasthāna*. They state that out of the 63 *prakṛtis*
capable of binding in the sixth *guṇasthāna*, the binding of the six *prakṛtis*
- sorrow, aversion, instability, ill-fame, and the *asātavēdaniya* - is
severed...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 62 karmava krodha Adi ukta cAra kaSAyoM ko chor3akara zeSa 63 prakRtiyA~ chaThe
guNasthAna meM bandhayogya mAnI haiM  /  isa prakAra cauthe, pAMcaveM aura ise
guNasthAna meM bambhayoga prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA Adi catanAne ke pazcAt aba Age
kI do gAthAoM meM sAtaveM apramatta guNasthAna meM bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI
saMkhyA, nAma aura vizeSatA samajhAte haiM  /  tevaTThi patte soga arai
adhirayuga ajasa assAyaM  /  buclijja chacca satta ba ne i surAjaM jayA niTThaM
// 7 //  guNasaTTi appamate surAubandhaM tu jar3a ihAgacche | agraha aTThAvaNNA
jaM AhAragaM bandhe  // 5 //  gAthArtha - ( zeSa 63 prakRtiyoM kA bandha
pramattasaMyala guNasthAna meM hotA hai  /  zoka, arati asthiradvika, ayazaH
kIrtinAma aura asAtAvedanIya - ina chaha prakRtiyoM kA bandhaviccheda chaThe
guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM ho jAne aura AhArakadvika kA bandha hone se
apramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM 56 prakRtiyoM kA aura yadi koI jIva chaThe
guNasthAna meM devAyu ke bandha kA prArambha kara use usI guNasthAna maiM pUrA
karatA hai to usakI apekSA se arati Adi pUrvokta 6 prakRtiyoM tathA devAyu kula
sAta prakRtiyoM kA bandhaviccheda kara dene se 58 prakRtiyoM kA bandha honA mAnA
jAtA hai  /  vizeSArtha - sAtaveM apramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM bandhayogya
prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA batalAte haiM ki chaThe guNasthAna meM bandhayogya 63
prakRtiyoM meM se zoka, arati, asthiradvika asthiratAma aura azubhanAma,
ayaza:kIrtinAma aura asAtAvedanIya - ina chaha prakRtiyoM kA bandhaviccheda -

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma  **63**  At the end of the sixth *guna-sthana*, 57 *prakritis*
should be bound in the seventh *guna-sthana*. However, in this *guna-sthana*,
two *prakritis* - *aaharaka-sharira* (the body of the *aaharaka*) and *aaharaka-
angopaanga* (the limbs of the *aaharaka*) - are also eligible for binding,
making a total of 56 *prakritis* eligible for binding. But those beings who
achieve the seventh *guna-sthana* after severing the bond of *deva-ayu* in the
sixth *guna-sthana* itself, have 58 *prakritis* considered eligible for binding
in the seventh *guna-sthana*.  The reason for this difference is that there are
two types of beings who attain the seventh *guna-sthana*:  (1) Those who begin
the *desh-yuka* in the sixth *guna-sthana* and attain the seventh *guna-sthana*
without ending it in the same *guna-sthana*, and sever the bond of *deva-ayu* in
the seventh *guna-sthana*.  (2) Those who begin and sever the bond of *deva-ayu*
both in the sixth *guna-sthana* itself, and then attain the seventh *guna-
sthana*.  Of these two types of beings, the first type sever the bond of six
*prakritis* - *shoka* (sorrow), *arati* (disgust), *asthiranama* (unstable
name), *ashubhanam* (inauspicious name), *arrata* (unsteadiness), and
*asataavedaniya* (unpleasant) - at the end of the sixth *guna-sthana* before
attaining the seventh *guna-sthana*. Therefore, compared to these beings, 57
*prakritis* should be eligible for binding in the seventh *guna-sthana* after
subtracting the six *prakritis* of *arati*, *shoka*, etc. from the 63
*prakritis* eligible for binding in the sixth *guna-sthana*. However, since the
emergence of *aaharaka-sharira* and *aaharaka-angopaanga* occurs in the seventh
*guna-sthana*, their binding also occurs in the seventh *guna-sthana*.
Therefore, adding these two *prakritis* to the 57 *prakritis*, there are 59
*prakritis* eligible for binding in the seventh *guna-sthana*.  **56**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmamya 63 chaThe guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM ho jAne se sAtaveM
guNasthAna meM 57 prakRtiyoM kA bandha honA cAhie, kintu isa guNasthAna meM
AhArakadvika - AhArakazarIra aura AhAraka aMgopAMga - yaha do prakRtiyA~ bhI
bandhayogya hone se 56 prakRtiyA~ bandhayogya mAnI jAtI haiN| lekina jo jIva
chaThe guNasthAna meM hI devAyu kA bhI bandhaviccheda kara sAtaveM guNasthAna ko
prApta karate haiM, unakI apekSA 58 prakRtiyAM sAtaveM guNasthAna meM
bandhayogya mAnI jAtI haiN| ukta vibhinnatA kA kAraNa yaha hai ki sAtaveM
guNasthAna ko prApta karane vAle jIva do prakAra ke haiM (1) jo chaThe
guNasthAna meM dezayukeko prArambha use usI guNasthAna meM samApta kiye binA hI
sAtaveM guNasthAna ko prApta karate haiM aura sAtaveM guNasthAna meM devAyu ke
bandha ko samApta karate haiN| (2) jo devAyu ke bandha kA prArambha tathA usakA
biccheda ina donoM ko chaThe guNasthAna meM hI karake sAtaveM guNasthAna ko
prApta karate haiM  /  ukta donoM prakAra ke jIvoM meM se pahale prakAra ke jova
to chaThe guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM zoka, arati, asthiranAma, azubhanAma,
arrata aura asAtAvedanIya ina chaha prakRtiyoM kA viccheda karake sAtave
guNasthAna ko prApta karate haiN| ataH ina jIvoM kI apekSA chaThe guNasthAna kI
bandhayogya 63 prakRtiyoM meM se ukta arati zoka Adi chaha prakRtiyoM ko kama
karane se 57 prakRtiyA~ sAtaveM guNasthAna meM bandhayogya honI cAhie thiiN|
lekina AhArakazarIra aura AhArakaaMgopAMga ina do prakRtiyoM kA udaya sAtaveM
guNasthAna meM hI hone se ina donoM kA bandha bhI sAtaveM guNasthAna meM hotA
hai| ataH ina do - prakRtiyoM ke sAtha 57 prakRtiyoM ko jor3ane se sAtaveM
guNasthAna prakRtiyA~ bandhayogya haiM  /  meM 56 -

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Karmastava**  However, in the sixth guna-sthana, the liberation of the deva-
ayu is achieved, and those who attain the seventh guna-sthana are considered to
have 58 bound karmas in the seventh guna-sthana. This is because the liberation
of the six prakritis (arati, shoka, etc.) and the deva-ayu, a total of seven
prakritis, occurs at the end of the sixth guna-sthana. This leaves 56 prakritis
out of the 63, which are combined with the aharak-dvik to form the 58 bound
karmas in the seventh guna-sthana.  The essence of both statements is that those
who attain the seventh guna-sthana without having initiated and completed the
binding of the deva-ayu in the sixth guna-sthana, are considered to have 58
bound karmas in the seventh guna-sthana. This is in contrast to those who
initiate and complete the binding of the prakritis and the deva-ayu in the sixth
guna-sthana before attaining the seventh guna-sthana.  The calculation of the
binding of the deva-ayu in the seventh guna-sthana implies that the deva-ayu
binds only the pramatta (deluded) beings, but not the aprammatta (non-deluded)
beings due to their highly purified and stable karmic results. Therefore, a
being who has bound the deva-ayu in the sixth guna-sthana and has not liberated
it in the same guna-sthana, but has attained the seventh guna-sthana due to its
purified karmic results, and has liberated the deva-ayu in this guna-sthana, is
considered to have bound the deva-ayu in the seventh guna-sthana. In this case,
56 prakritis are considered to be bound. However, the binding of the deva-ayu
does not begin in the seventh guna-sthana.  After discussing the bound karmas in
the seventh guna-sthana, we will now discuss the number and names of the bound
karmas in the eighth apuurvakarana, ninth anivrittikarana, and tenth
sukshmasampraaya guna-sthana in three verses.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava lekina chaThe guNasthAna meM hI devAyu kA bandhaviccheda karake
sAtaveM guNasthAna ko prApta karane vAle dUsare prakAra ke jIvoM kI apekSA
arati, zoka Adi chaha prakRtiyoM evaM devAyu, kula 7 prakRtiyoM kA
bandhaviccheda chaThe guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM hone se 63 prakRtiyoM meM
se zeSa rahI 56 prakRtiyoM ke sAtha AhArakadvika ko milAne se sAtaveM guNasthAna
meM 58 prakRttiyoM kA bandha mAnA jAtA hai| ukta donoM kathanoM kA sArAMza yaha
hai ki chaThe guNasthAna meM devAyu ke bandha ko prArambha kara usa usI
guNasthAna meM samApta kiye vinA hI sAtaveM guNasthAna ko prApta karane vAle
bhImoM kI apekSA, prakRtiyaH aura devAyu ke bandha kA prArambha aura usakA
viccheda ina donoM ko chaThe guNasthAna meM karake sAtaveM guNasthAna ko prApta
karane vAle jIvoM kI apekSA 58 prakRtiyA~ sAta guNasthAna meM bandhayogya haiN|
sAtaveM gaNasthAna meM devAyu ke bandha kI gaNanA kA Azaya yaha hai ki devAya ko
pramatta hI bAMdhatA hai, kintu ati vizuddha aura sthira pariNAma vAlA hone se
apramatta jIva nahIM bAMdhatA hai| isalie jisa jIva ne chaThe guNasthAna meM
devAyu kA bandha kiyA aura usI meM usakA viccheda na karake apane vizuddha
pariNAmoM ke kAraNa sAtave guNasthAna meM A gayA aura isa guNasthAna meM devAyu
kA viccheda kiyA to isa apekSA se sAtaveM guNasthAna meM devAyu kA bandha kahA
jAtA hai aura bandhayogya 56 prakRtiyAM mAnI jAtI haiN| lekina sAtava guNasthAna
meM devAyu ke bandha kA prArambha nahIM hotA hai| sAtaveM guNasthAna kI
bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kA kathana karane ke bAda aba AThaveM apUrvakaraNa,
nauveM anivRttikaraNa aura dasaveM sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM bandhayogya
prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura unake nAma tIna gAthAoM dvArA batalAte haiM

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  **Verse 6:**  At the beginning of the eighth
*apuurvakarana* *gunasthan*, fifty-six are bound in five parts by ending the
*atthavan* and *nidradvik*. In the sixth part, fifty-six are bound by ending the
*suradrik*, *panchendriyajati*, *shubhavihayogati*, *sanavak*, and all bodies
and limbs except the *oudarikasharira*, *samachatursrasansthan*, *nirman*,
*jinnam*, *varnachatushk*, and *agurulbuchatushk*.  **Verse 10:**  In the final
part, twenty-six are bound by ending the *chali*, *birgo*, and *charme*.
**Verse 11:**  In the *anivritti* *gunasthan*, twenty-two are bound by ending
*hasya*, *rati*, *jugupsa*, and *bhaya*. In the *bhagapange*, *igegaheen* and
*duvosbihabando* are bound. In the *pumsanjalanchaturnham*, seventeen are bound
in the *sukshmasampray* by the action of *kame*, *ched*, and *sukshmasampray*
respectively.  **Gathaarth:**  At the beginning of the *apuurvakarana*
*gunasthan*, fifty-six are bound in five parts by ending the *atthavan* and
*nidradvik*. In the sixth part, fifty-six are bound by ending the *suradrik*,
*panchendriyajati*, *shubhavihayogati*, *sanavak*, and all bodies and limbs
except the *oudarikasharira*, *samachatursrasansthan*, *nirman*, *jinnam*,
*varnachatushk*, and *agurulbuchatushk*. In the final part, twenty-six are bound
by ending the *chali*, *birgo*, and *charme*. In the *anivritti* *gunasthan*,
twenty-two are bound by ending *hasya*, *rati*, *jugupsa*, and *bhaya*. In the
*bhagapange*, *igegaheen* and *duvosbihabando* are bound. In the
*pumsanjalanchaturnham*, seventeen are bound in the *sukshmasampray* by the
action of *kame*, *ched*, and *sukshmasampray* respectively.  **Vishesharth:**
These three verses describe the number and names of the *bandhyogya* (bindable)
*prakritis* in the eighth *apuurvakarana*, ninth *anivrittibadasampray*, and
tenth *sukshmasampray* *gunasthanas*. They explain the number, names,
*bandhavicched* (binding-breaking) *prakriti* number, and causes of the
*bandhyogya* *prakritis* in the eighth *gunasthan*.  From the seventh
*gunasthan* onwards, the *parinam* (results) become so stable and pure that the
lifespan in those *gunasthanas*...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrandha aDavanna apuSvAimi niddadugaMto chapanna paNabhAge  /
suraga paNivi sukhagai tasanava uralaviNu taNuvaMgA  // 6 //  samacaura nimiNa
jiNa vaNNAhuna chali biirgo| carame chavIsabandho hAsaraIkucchabhayabheo  // 10
//  aniyaTTi bhAgapaNage, igegahINo duvosbihbndho| pumasaMjalaNacauNhaM, kameNa
leo satara suhame  // 11 //  gAthArtha-apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna ke prArambha meM
aTThAvana aura nidrAdvika kA anta karane se pA~ca bhAgoM meM chappana tathA
chaThe bhAga meM suradrika, paMcendriyajAti, zubhavihAyogati, sanavaka,
audArikazarIra ke sivAya zeSa zarIra aura aMgopAMga, samacaturasrasaMsthAna,
nirmANa, jinanAma, varNacatuSka aura agurulabucatuSka ina tosa prakRtiyoM kA
anta karane se antima bhAga meM chabbIsa prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai tathA
hAsya, rati, jugupsA aura bhaya kA anta karane se anivRttiguNasthAna meM bAIsa
prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| anantara puruSaved aura saMjvalana kaSAyacatuSkA
meM ge kramazaH eka ke bAda eka kAma karane, cheda hone se sUkSmasaMparAya meM
satraha prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  vizeSArtha - ina tIna gAthAoM meM
AThaveM apurvakaraNa, nauveM anivRttibAdarasaMparAya aura dasaveM
sUkSmasaMparAya ina tIna guNasthAnoM kI bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura
unake nAma batAye haiN| unameM se sarvaprathama AThaveM guNasthAna kI
bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA, nAma, bandhaviccheda prakRti saMkhyA aura
unake kAraNa Adi ko samajhAte haiN| sAtaveM guNasthAna se lekara Age ke saba
guNasthAnoM meM pariNAma itane sthira aura zuddha ho jAte haiM ki jisase una
guNasthAnoM meM Ayu

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 66 Karma thus . does not bind. Although the binding of 56 natures is
mentioned in the seventh guna-sthana, it includes devayu. To understand this, it
should be known that the devayu center initiated in the sixth guna-sthana
continues in the seventh. Therefore, from that perspective, devayu is included
in the 56 bindable natures of the seventh guna-sthana. However, the binding of
devayu does not begin in the seventh guna-sthana, and in the eighth and
subsequent guna-sthana, neither the beginning nor the end of devayu's binding
occurs. Therefore, excluding devayu, the remaining 58 natures are bindable in
the first part of the eighth guna-sthana.  The state of the eighth guna-sthana
is an antarmukhurta measure, and it has seven parts. In the first part, the
binding of 58 natures occurs, and at the end of the first part, the binding of
the two natures - nidradvik, nidra, and prachala - is severed. Then, in the
remaining five parts from the second to the sixth, the binding of 56 natures
occurs.  Of these 56 natures, the binding of the following 30 natures is severed
at the end of the sixth part: — Suradvak - Devagati, Deva-anupurvi,
Panchendriya-jati, Shubhavihayogati, Asatvak (As, Badar, Paryapt, Pratyek,
Sthir, Shubh, Subhag, Suswar, Aadey), Vaikriyasarira-nam, Aharak-sarira-nam,
Taijas-sarira-nam, Karman-sarira-nam, Vaikriya Angopang, Aharak Angopang,
Samachaturasra-samsthan, Nirman-nam, Tirthankar-nam, Varnachatusk (Varna, Gandh,
Ras and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 66 karmastatha  /  kA bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  yadyapi sAtaveM guNasthAna meM
56 prakRtiyoM ke bandha kA ApekSika pakSa kahA gayA hai, usameM devAyu kI bhI
gaNanA kI gaI hai| isake lie yaha samajhanA cAhie ki chaThe guNasthAna meM
prArambha kiye hue devAyu kendra kI sAtaveM sthAna meM hotI hai ataH usI apekSA
se sAtaveM guNasthAna kI bandhayogya 56 prakRtiyoM meM devAyu kI gaNanA kI gaI
hai| kintu sAtaveM guNasthAna meM devAyu ke bandha kA prArambha nahIM hotA aura
AThaveM Adi guNasthAna meM to devAyu ke bandha kA prArambha bhI nahIM hotA aura
samApti bhI nahIM hotI hai| ataeva devAyu ko chor3akara zeSa 58 prakRtiyA~
AThave guNasthAna ke prathama bhAga meM bandhayogya haiM  /  AThaveM guNasthAna
kI sthiti antarmuhUrta pramANa hai aura usa sthiti ke sAta bhAga hote haiM  /
ina bhAgoM meM se pahale bhAga meM to 58 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai aura
pahale bhAga ke antima samaya meM nidrAdvika nidrA aura pracalA- ina do
prakRtiyoM kA bandhaviccheda ho jAne se Age dUsare se lekara chaThe bhAga taka
pAMca bhAgoM meM 56 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  ina 56 prakRtiyoM meM se
chaThe bhAga ke anta meM nimnalikhita 30 prakRtiyoM kA bandhaviccheda ho jAtA
hai -- suradvika- devagati, deva-AnupUrvI, paMcendriyajAti, zubhavihAyogati,
asatvaka (asa, bAdara, paryApta, pratyeka, sthira, zubha, subhaga, susvara,
Adeya), vaikriyazarIranAma, AhArakazarIranAma, taijasazarIranAma,
kArmaNazarIranAma, vaikriya aMgopAMga, AhAraka aMgopAMga,
samacaturasrasaMsthAna, nirmANanAma, tIrthaGkaranAma, varNacatuSka (varNa,
gaMdha, rasa aura

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
67 The second Karma Grantha, called Sparsha Nama, has four sub-categories:
Aguhal Ghunama, Upghata Nama, Paraghata Nama, and Ucchvasa Nama.  These 30 types
of Nama Karma are bound only up to the sixth part of the eighth Gunasthan, not
beyond. Therefore, subtracting these 30 types from the aforementioned 56 types,
the remaining 26 types are bound in the seventh part of the eighth Gunasthan.
Of the remaining 26 types that are eligible for binding in the final seventh
part of the eighth Gunasthan, the binding of the last four types - Hasy, Rati,
Jugupsa, and Bhaya - which are part of the Nokashaya Mohaniya Karma, is severed
at the end. Therefore, they are not bound in the ninth and subsequent
Gunasthanas.  Now, we will explain the number, name, etc., of the types eligible
for binding in the ninth and tenth Gunasthanas.  The duration of the ninth
Gunasthan is Antarmuhurt, and it has five parts. Therefore, after the severance
of the four types - Hasy, Rati, Jugupsa, and Bhaya - at the end of the seventh
part of the eighth Gunasthan, 22 types remain in the first part of the ninth
Gunasthan. 1. Compare.-. Maranunamhi Niyattee Padhame Gitta Tahev Payagna Ya.
Chathe Bhaage Tittham Niminam Saggamana Panchidi. - Gommatasar, Karmakandu,
19-100 2. Comparech Me Hassam Cha Radi Bhayam Juguchcha Ma Bandhavochchina. -
Gommatasar, Karmakandu, 100

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 67 dvitIya karmagrantha sparzanAma), agurula bucatuSka (aguhala ghunAma,
upaghAta nAma, parAghAtanAma aura ucchvaasnaam)|' nAmakarma kI ye 30 prakRtiyA~
AThaveM guNasthAna ke chaThe bhAga taka hI bA~dhI jAtI haiM, Age nahIM  /  ataH
pUrvokta 56 prakRtiyoM meM se ina 30 prakRtiyoM ko ghaTA dene se zeSa 26
prakRtiyoM kA hI bandha AThaveM guNasthAna ke sAtaveM bhAga meM hotA hai|
AThaveM guNasthAna ke antima sAtaveM bhAga meM bandhayogya zeSa rahI huI 26
prakRtiyoM meM se antima samaya meM hAsya, rati, jugupsA aura bhaya,
-nokaSAyamohanIyakarma kI Ina cAra prakRtiyoM kA bandhaviccheda ho jAne se
nauveM Adi Age ke guNasthAnoM meM inakA bandha nahIM hotA hai| aba nauveM aura
dasava guNasthAna kI bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA, nAma Adi batalAte haiN|
nauveM guNasthAna kI sthiti antarmuharta pramANa hai aura usa sthiti ke pA~ca
bhAga hote haiM, ataeva AThaveM guNasthAna meM antima samayasAtaveM bhAga ke
anta meM hAsya, rati, jugupsA va bhaya ina cAra prakRtiyoM kA viccheda ho jAne
se nauveM guNasthAna ke prathama bhAga meM 22 prakRtiyoM 1. tulanA karo.-.
maraNUNamhi NiyaTTI paDhame giTTA taheva payagnA ya  /  chaThe bhAge titthaM
NimiNaM saggamaNapaMcidI  /  /
tejaduhAraSTrasamacausuravaNNAgurucaukkatasaNavayaM  /  - gommaTasAra,
karmakANDu, 19-100 2. tulanA karoca me hassaM ca radI bhayaM jugucchA ma
bandhavocchiNA  /  -gommaTasAra, karmakANDa, 100

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma has its own bondage. After this, the bondage of each of the five natures,
namely, *purushaveda*, *sanjvalana krodha*, *sanjvalana mana*, *sanjvalana
maya*, and *sanjvalana lobha*, is severed in the final time of each of the five
parts of the ninth *gunasthan*. Their order of severance is explained below.  In
the first part of the ninth *gunasthan*, the severance of *purushaveda* takes
place in the final time, leaving 21 natures bound in the second part. Of these
21 natures, the severance of *sanjvalana krodha* takes place in the final time
of the second part. Therefore, the remaining 20 natures are bound in the third
part. Of these 20 natures, the severance of *sanjvalana mana* takes place in the
final time of the third part, leaving 19 natures bound in the fourth part. And
in the final time of the fourth part, the severance of *sanjvalana maya* takes
place, leaving 18 natures bound in the fifth part.  Thus, 18 natures are bound
in the fifth part of the ninth *gunasthan*. Of these 18 natures, the bondage of
*sanjvalana lobha* continues until the fifth part of the ninth *gunasthan*, and
in the final time of this part, the severance of *sanjvalana lobha* takes place,
leaving 17 natures bound in the tenth *gunasthan*.  Thus, after stating the
number and names of the natures that are subject to bondage in the eighth,
ninth, and tenth *gunasthan*, the following verse continues:  - - 1. *Tusana
karopurisam chadu sanjalanam kaman aniyatit panchabhagesu.* - *Gommattasar*,
*Karmakar*, 101

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava kA bandha hotA hai  /  isake bAda puruSaveda, saMjvalana krodha,
saMjvalana mAna, saMjvalana mAyA aura saMjvalana lobha ina pA~ca prakRtiyoM meM
se eka-eka prakRti kA bandhaviccheda kramaza: nauveM guNasthAna ke pA~ca bhAgoM
meM se pratyeka bhAga ke antima samaya meM hotA hai|' inake bandhaviccheda ke
krama ko nIce spaSTa karate haiN| _ nauveM gusthAna ke pahale bhArata meM bAkI
gaI 22 prakRtiyoM meM sa puruSaveda kA viccheda pahale bhAga ke antima samaya
meM ho jAne se dUsare bhAga meM 21 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hogaa| ina 21 prakRtiyoM
meM se saMjvalana krodha kA viccheda dUsare bhAga ke antima samaya meM hotA hai|
ata: isase bAkI rahI huI 20 prakRtiyoM kA bandha tIsare bhAga meM hotA hai| ina
20 prakRtiyoM meM se saMjvalana mAna kA viccheda tIsare bhAga ke antima samaya
meM ho jAne se cauthe bhAga meM 16 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hogA aura cauthe bhAga
ke antima samaya meM saMjvalana mAyA kA viccheda ho Ane se pAMcaveM bhAga meM 18
prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  arthAt nauveM guNasthAna ke pAMcaveM bhAga meM
18 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  isa prakAra ina 18 prakRtiyoM meM se bhI
saMjvalana lobha kA bandha nauveM guNasthAna ke pAMcaveM bhAga paryanta hotA hai
aura isa bhAga ke antima . samaya meM saMjvalana lobha kA bandhaviccheda ho jAne
se dasaveM guNasthAna meM 17 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  isa prakAra
AThaveM, nauveM aura dasaveM guNasthAna meM bandhayogya prakatiyoM kI saMkhyA
aura nAmoM kA kathana ho jAne ke bAda Age kI gAthA - - 1, tusanA karopurisaM
cadu saMjalaNaM kameNa aNiyaTiTa paMcabhAgesu  /  -gommaThasAra, karmakAra, 101

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## P Financial Karma Granth  This text explains the **bandha-yoga** (binding)
nature of the eleven to fourteenth **guna-sthana** (stages of spiritual
development).  **Verse 12:**  The **bandha-vichched** (release from binding) of
the sixteen **prakriti** (natures) - four **darshanavaran** (obscurations of
perception), **uchcha-gotra** (high lineage), **yasha-kirti-nama** (fame and
reputation), and ten **jnana-avaran** (obscurations of knowledge) - occurs at
the end of the tenth **guna-sthana**. Therefore, in the eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth **guna-sthana**, only **satavedaniya karma** (karma that can be
experienced) is bound. In the **sayogikevali guna-sthana** (stage of perfect
liberation), even this is released, ending all binding in the fourteenth **guna-
sthana**.  **Explanation:**  This verse describes the **bandha-yoga** nature of
the eleven to thirteenth **guna-sthana** and explains the state of **abandha**
(non-binding) in the fourteenth **guna-sthana** and its cause.  Although the
**sthula lobha-kṣaya** (gross greed) does not arise in the tenth **guna-
sthana**, a subtle **lobha-kṣaya** remains. This subtle **kṣaya** (passion) is
not a cause of binding. However, a very subtle aspect of **kṣaya** remains in
the tenth **guna-sthana**. Therefore, due to the presence of **kṣaya** and
**yoga** (union) as the cause of binding, the four **darshanavaran** (**chakshu-
darshanavaran**, **achakshu-darshanavaran**, **avadhi-darshanavaran**, **keval-
darshanavaran**), **uchcha-gotra**, **yasha-kirti-nama**, five **jnana-avaran**
(**mati-jnana-avaran**, **shruta-jnana-avaran**, **avadhi-jnana-avaran**,
**manah-paryaya-jnana-avaran**, **keval-jnana-avaran**), and five **antaraya**
(**dana-antaraya**, **laba-antaraya**, **bhoga-antaraya**, **upbhoga-antaraya**,
**dirgha-antaraya**) remain bound.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 P vitIya karmagrantha meM gyArahave se lekara caudahaveM guNasthAna taka kI
bandhayogya prakRtiyoM ko ! batalAte haiN| caurvasaNuccajasanANavigdhavasagaM ti
solsuccheo| tisu sAyabandha cheo sajogi bandhaM tuNaMto a  // 12 //  gAthArtha-
cAra darzanAvaraNIya, uccagotra, yazaHkAtinAma aura jJAnAvaraNIya-antarAya
dazaka (jJAtAvaraNIya kI pAMca aura antarAya kI pA~ca prakRtiyA~) ina solaha
prakRtiyoM kA bandhaviccheda dasaveM guNasthAna ke anta meM ho jAne se gyAraha,
bAraha aura teraha-ina tIna guNasthAnoM meM sirpha sAtAvedanIya karma kA bandha
hotA hai aura sayogikevalI guNasthAna meM usakA bhI viccheda hone se caudahaveM
guNasthAna meM usake bhI bandha kA anta ho jAtA hai| vizeSArtha-gAthA meM
gyArahaveM Adi tIna guNasthAnoM meM bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kA nirdeza karate hue
caudahaveM guNasthAna kI abandhadazA aura usake kAraNa ko batalAyA hai| yadyapi
dasaveM guNasthAna meM bandha ke vAstavika kAraNa sthUla lobhakaSAya kA udaya
nahIM rahatA hai, kintu sUkSma-sI lobha kaSAya rahatI hai, jo bandha kA kAraNa
nahIM hai| phira bhI kaSAya kA ati sUkSma aMza dasaveM guNasthAna meM hai,
isalie bandha ke kAraNa kaSAya aura yoga ke vahA~ rahane se kaSAya nimittaka
cAra darzanAvaraNa (cakSudarzanAvaraNa, acakSudarzanAvaraNa,
avadhidarzanAvaraNa, kevaladarzanAvaraNa), uccagotra, yazaHkIrtinAma, pAMca
jJAnAvaraNa (matijJAnAvaraNa, zrutajJAnAvaraNa, avadhijJAnAvaraNa,
manaHparyayajJAnAvaraNa, kevalajJAnAvaraNa), pAMca antarAya (dAnAntarAya,
lAbhAntarAya, bhogantirAya, upabhogAntarAya, dIryA

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The binding of the 16 natural tendencies and the 7 *saataavedaniya* (seven
sense-object) tendencies, which are a total of 17 tendencies caused by yoga,
occurs in the tenth *gunasthan* (stage of spiritual progress).  At the end of
the tenth *gunasthan*, the subtle *kashaya* (passions) are destroyed, and as a
result, the binding of the aforementioned 16 natural tendencies, including the
four *darshanavaran* (veils of perception), is broken. However, since yoga is
still present, the *saataavedaniya* tendency caused by yoga remains bindable in
the eleventh *gunasthan* (called *upshant* - calm, *kashaya* - passionless,
*chhadmasth* - disguised), the twelfth *gunasthan* (called *kshinakashaya* -
subtle passion, *vitaraag* - passionless, *chhadmasth* - disguised), and the
thirteenth *gunasthan* (called *sayogikevali* - liberated with yoga).  After
this, in the fourteenth *gunasthan* (called *ayogikevali* - liberated without
yoga), since yoga is absent due to the absence of binding, neither karma is
bound nor is there any breaking of binding. Therefore, in the fourteenth
*gunasthan*, the state of *abandhak* (non-binding) is attained.  Attaining this
state of *abandhak* is the goal of the soul, and after attaining it, the soul
remains absorbed in its own nature.  In this way, the number, names, and
breaking of binding of the bindable tendencies in each of the fourteen
*gunasthan* have been explained.  The five causes of karmic binding are:
*mithyatva* (false belief), *aviraati* (non-restraint), *pramad* (carelessness),
*kashaya* (passions), and *yoga* (attachment). Regarding the number of these
causes of binding, the following three traditions are seen:  1. Compare: *
"First, the three *trigdha* (threefold), *darshan* (perception), *ujas* (light),
and *guhumant* (hidden)." * "Then, *uvasant* (calm), *khin* (subtle), *moha*
(delusion), *yog* (attachment), *nihi* (annihilation), *samavi* (equal), *yadi*
(if), *sad* (true)." - *Gommatsar*, *Karmakand*, 102 2. "The causes of binding
are: *mithyatva* (false belief), *aviraati* (non-restraint), *pramad*
(carelessness), *kashaya* (passions), and *yoga* (attachment)." - *Tattvarth
Sutra*, 8-1 - *Gommatsar*, *Karmakand*, 101

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava ntarAya) ye 16 prakRtiyA~ aura yoganimittika sAtAvedanIya kula 17
prakRtiyoM kA bandha dasaveM guNasthAna meM hotA hai 70 dasaveM guNasthAna ke
antima samaya meM sUkSma kaSAyAMza ke naSTa ho jAne se tannimittika cAra
darzanAvaraNa Adi ukta 16 prakRktiyoM kA bandhaviccheda ho jAtA hai, kintu yoga
kA sadbhAva hai, isalie gyArahaveM - upazAnta kaSAya- vItarAga chadmastha,
bArahaveM - kSINakaSAya vItarAgachadmastha aura terahaveM - sayogikevalI ina
tIna guNasthAnoM meM sirpha yoganimitta sAtAvedanIya prakRti bandhayogya rahatI
hai| isake anantara caudahaveM - ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM bandha ke kAraNa
yoga kA bhI abhAva hone se na to kisI karma kA bandha hI hotA hai aura na
bandhaviccheda hI isalie caudahaveM guNasthAna meM abandhakatva avasthA prApta
hotI hai  /  yaha abandhakatva avasthA prApta karanA jIva kA lakSya hai aura
usakI prApti ke bAda jIva apane svarUpa meM ramaNa karatA rahatA hai  /
pUrvokta prakAra se caudaha guNasthAnoM meM se pratyeka guNasthAna meM
bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA, nAma aura bandhaviccheda ko batalAyA gayA hai
/  karmabandha ke mithyAtva avirati, pramAda, kaSAya aura yogaye pA~ca kAraNa
haiN| ina bandha ke kAraNoM kI saMkhyA ke bAre meM nimnalikhita tIna
paramparAyeM dekhane meM AtI haiM J I 1. tulanA karo - paDhamaM trigdhaM
daMsaNaca ujasauccaM ca guhumante  /  2. uvasaMtakhINamohe joginhiya samaviyadI
sAdaM  /  - gommaTasAra, karmakANDa, 102 3. mithyAdarzanAviratipramAdakapAyogA
bandhahetavaH  /  - tatvArthasUtra 8-1 - go0 karmakANDa, 101

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Financial Karma Granth  (1) **Kashaya** and **Yoga** - both are the causes of
bondage. (2) **Mithyatva**, **Avirati**, **Kashaya** and **Yoga** - these four
are the causes of bondage. (3) **Mithyatva**, **Avirati**, **Pramada**,
**Kashaya** and **Yoga** - these five are the causes of bondage. In this way,
even though there are differences in number and names, there is no difference in
essence in these three traditions. **Vak Pramada** is a type of **Asanyama**.
Therefore, it is included in **Avirati** or **Kashaya**. And when examined
closely, **Mithyatva** and **Asanyama** are not separate from the nature of
**Kashaya**. Therefore, **Kashaya** and **Yoga** are considered as the causes of
bondage.  _In the Karma Granth, the role of spiritual development in the
**Gunasthanas** is explained by mentioning the four causes of bondage -
**Mithyatva**, **Avirati**, **Kashaya** and **Yoga**. These causes explain the
state of development of the soul. Therefore, the more causes of bondage are
present in a **Gunasthan**, the more the bondage of **Karma** will be in that
**Gunasthan**. And where these causes of bondage are less, the bondage of
**Karma** will also be less. In other words, the tradition of mentioning the
four causes - **Mithyatva** etc. - is adopted in the **Karma Granth** to explain
the reasons for the bondage of **Karma** that is obtained in different
**Gunasthanas**._  _It is a simple rule regarding the bondage of **Karma** that
the bondage of **Karma** continues as long as the causes of bondage exist._

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vittIya karmagrantha (1) kaSAya aura yoga-ye donoM hI bandhahetu haiM  /  (2)
mithyAtva, avirati, kaSAya aura yoga-ye cAra bandhahetu haiM  /  (3) mithyAtva,
avirati, pramAda, kaSAya aura yoga-ye pAMcoM bandhahetu haiN| isa taraha se
saMkhyA aura nAmoM ke bheda rahane para bhI tAttvika dRSTi se ina tInoM
paramparAoM meM kAmahIM hai  /  vAka pramAda eka prakAra kA asaMyama hI to hai|
ataH vaha avirati yA kaSAya ke antargata hI hai aura bArIkI se dekhane para
mithyAtva aura asaMyama ye donoM kaSAya ke svarUpa se alaga nahIM par3ate ataH
kaSAya aura yoga ina donoM ko hI bandhahetu mAnA jAtA hai| _ karmagranthoM meM
AdhyAtmika vikAsa kI bhUmikA rUpa guNasthAnoM meM baMdhane vAlI karmaprakRtiyoM
ke taratamabhAva ke kAraNa ko batalAne ke lie mithyAtva, avirati, kaSAya aura
yoga ina cAra bandhahetuoM kA kathana kiyA jAtA hai aura inake mAdhyama se jIva
kI vikAsa sthiti kA spaSTa jJAna ho jAtA hai  /  isalie jisa guNasthAna meM ukta
cAra meM se jitane adhika bandhahetu hoMge, usa guNasthAna meM karmaprakRtiyoM
kA bandha bhI utanA hI adhika hogA aura jahAM para ye bandhahetu kama hoMge,
vahA~ para karmaprakRtiyoM kA bandha bhI kama hI hogA  /  arthAt mithyAtva Adi
cAra hetuoM ke kathana kI paramparA alaga-alaga guNasthAnoM meM taratamabhAva ko
prApta hone vAle karmabandha ke kAraNoM kA spaSTIkaraNa karane ke lie
karmagranthoM meM grahaNa kI jAtI hai  /  _ karmaprakRtiyoM ke bandha ke viSaya
meM yaha eka sAdhAraNa-sA niyama hai ki jina karmaprakRtiyoM kA andha jitane
kAraNoM se hotA hai, utane kAraNoM ke rahane taka hI una karmaprakRtiyoM kA
bandha hotA rahatA hai

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
72 Karmastava The binding of karma-prakritis does not occur due to the absence
of any one cause. The binding of all other karma-prakritis occurs. For example,
the binding of the aforementioned 16 karma-prakritis, such as narakatrika, which
are extinguished at the end of the Mithyatva gunasthan, occurs due to the four
causes of Mithyatva, Aviriti, Kashaya, and Yoga. These four causes remain until
the end of the first gunasthan, therefore the binding of the aforementioned 16
karma-prakritis can also occur until that time. But Mithyatva does not remain
beyond the first gunasthan, therefore the binding of the aforementioned sixteen
prakritis, such as Kak, also does not occur beyond the first gunasthan.
Similarly, the binding and severance of other karma-prakritis depends on the
presence and absence of the binding causes. For the classification of
gunasthanas in relation to these binding causes, the number of bindable
prakritis, their names and causes, etc., see the appendix. Thus, after stating
the karma-prakritis in the gunasthanas, the next verse, as per the instructions,
clarifies the characteristics of Uday and Udirana, the number of Uday-worthy
prakritis, and the number of prakritis that attain Uday in the first Mithyatva
gunasthan, along with their causes. Udao vivaagaveyanamudoran appatti iha
buvisasayam. Sataraas micche mos samm ahaar-jin'anuvaaya ||13|| Verse meaning -
Experiencing the fruit at the time of Vipaka is called Uday, and experiencing
the fruit even when the time of Vipaka is not present is called Udirana. There
are 122 karma-prakritis that are generally eligible for Uday and Udirana. Among
them, Misramohaniya, Samyaktva

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 72 karmastava aura kisI eka kAraNa ke kama ho jAne se una karmaprakRtiyoM kA
bandha nahIM hotA hai| zeSa saba karmaprakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  jaise ki
mithyAtva guNasthAna ke anta meM vyucchinna hone vAlI narakatrika Adi pUrvokta
16 karmaprakRtiyoM kA bandha mithyAtva avirati, kaSAya aura yoga ina cAra
kAraNoM se hotA hai| ye cAroM kAraNa pahale guNasthAna ke carama samaya paryanta
rahate haiM, ataH ukta 16 karmaprakRtiyoM kA bandha bhI usa samaya taka ho
sakatA hai| lekina pahale guNasthAna se Age midhyAtva nahIM rahA hai, isalie
kaka Adi pUrvokta solaha prakRtiyoM kA bandha bhI pahale guNasthAna se Age nahIM
hotA hai  /  isI prakAra dUsarI- dUsarI karmaprakRtiyoM kA bandha va viccheda,
bandhahetuoM ke sadbhAva aura viccheda para nirbhara hai  /  ina bandhahetuoM kI
apekSA guNasthAnoM kA vargIkaraNa, bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kI alpAdhika saMkhyA,
nAma aura kAraNa Adi ke lie pariziSTa dekhiye | isa prakAra guNasthAnoM meM
karmaprakRtiyoM kA kathana karane ke pazcAta nirdezAnusAra Age kI gAthA meM
udaya aura udIraNA kA lakSaNa, udayayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura pahale
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM udaya ko prApta hone vAlI prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura
usake kAraNoM ko spaSTa karate haiM  /  udao vivAgaveyaNamudoraNa apatti iha
buvIsasayaM  /  satarasa micche mosa samma AhAra-jiNa'NuvayA ||13|| gAthArtha -
vipAka ke samaya phala ko bhoganA udaya aura vipAka kA samaya na hote hue bhI
phala kA bhoga karanA udIraNA kahalAtA hai  /  sAmAnya se udaya aura
udIraNAyogya karmaprakRtiyA~ 122 haiM  /  unameM se mizramohanIya, samyaktva

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  The absence of the five natures - Mohaniya, Aharakadvik,
and Tiyankaranama - allows for the emergence of 117 natures in the Mithyatva
Gunasthan. Specifically, the experience of auspicious and inauspicious fruits of
karmadalikas bound to the soul at their appointed time is called **Uday**, and
the act of pulling the karmadalikas through special effort before their
appointed time to experience their auspicious and inauspicious fruits is called
**Udirana**.  Any karma, from the moment it is bound, begins its existence. The
karmadalikas undergo a specific formation for the emergence of those karmas when
their uninterrupted time is complete. The karma, residing in the karma
udayavali, begins to bear fruit upon its emergence.  The experience of the
auspicious and inauspicious fruits of karma is called **Uday** and **Udirana**.
However, the difference between them is that **Uday** involves the experience of
fruit in a natural order without effort, while **Udirana** involves the
experience of fruit through effort, bringing the karma towards emergence before
its appointed time.  In the context of calling the experience of karmavipak
**Uday** and **Udirana**, **Raso-Uday** should be considered, but **Pradesho-
Uday** should not be considered in **Udayadhikār**.  Each karma, at the time of
its binding, develops the power to bear intense or mild fruit according to the
three levels of intensity of the Kashayik Adhyavasaya that caused it. When the
opportunity arises, it bears fruit accordingly. However, it should be understood
that each fruit-bearing power, residing within the karma itself, bears fruit
according to the nature of that karma, not according to the nature of other
karmas. For example, Jnanavaranakarma...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha mohanIya, AhArakadvika aura tIyaGkaranAma-ina pAMca
prakRtiyoM kA udaya na hone se mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 117 prakRtiyoM kA udaya
ho sakatA hai| vizeSArtha-AtmA ke sAtha baMdhe hue karmadalikoM kA apane niyata
samaya para zubhAzubha phaloM kA anubhava karAnA udaya hai evaM karmadalikoM ko
prayatna vizeSa se khIMcakara niyata samaya se pahale hI unake zubhAzubha phaloM
ko bhoganA udIraNA kahalAtI hai| _ koI bhI karma jisa samaya baMdhatA hai, usI
samaya se usakI sattA zurU hotI hai aura jisa karma kA jitanA abAdhAkAla ho,
usake pUre hone para hI una karmoM kI udaya meM Ane ke lie karmadalikoM ko eka
prakAra kI racanA-vizeSa hotI hai aura karma udayAvalikA meM sthita hokara,
udaya meM Akara phala denA prArambha kara detA hai| karmoM ke zubhAzubha phala
ko bhogane kA hI nAma udaya aura udIraNA hai kintu unameM bheda itanA hai ki
udaya meM prayatna binA hI svAbhAvika krama se phala kA bhoga hotA hai aura
udIraNA meM phalodaya ke aprAptakAla meM prayatna dvArA karmoM ko udayonmukha
karake phala kA bhoga hotA hai| karmavipAka ke vedana ko udaya tathA udIraNA
kahane ke prasaMga meM rasodaya ko grahaNa karanA cAhie, kintu pradezodaya ko
udayAdhikAra meM grahaNa karanA iSTa nahIM  /  pratyeka karma meM bandha ke
samaya usake kAraNabhUta kASAyika adhyavasAya ke tIna-manda bhAva ke anusAra
tIvra-manda phala dene kI zakti utpanna hotI hai aura avasara Ane para
tadanusAra phala detA hai| parantu isa viSaya meM itanA samajha lenA cAhie ki
pratyeka phalaprada zakti svayaM jisa karma meM nihita ho, usI karma ke
svabhAva, prakRti ke anusAra hI phala detI hai, dUsare karmoM ke svabhAvAnusAra
nahIM  /  jaise jJAnAvaraNakarma

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 74  The fruit-bearing power of karma gives intense or mild results according
to the nature of the karma itself, and it only serves to cover knowledge.
However, it does not give results according to the nature of other karmas like
Darshanadaran, Vedaniya, etc. Similarly, one should understand the fruit-bearing
power of other karmas.  The rule of giving results according to the nature of
karma applies only to the **Mulaprakritis** (original natures), not to the
**Uttarprakritis** (derived natures). Because, by the force of **Adhyavasaya**
(determination), any karma can be transformed into another **Uttarprakriti** of
the same karma. As a result, the previous fruit-bearing power gives intense or
mild results according to the nature of the transformed **Uttarprakriti**. For
example, when **Matijnanavarana** (covering of knowledge of the mind) is
transformed into **Shrutajnanavarana** (covering of knowledge of scriptures) or
other similar **Uttarprakritis**, the fruit-bearing power of **Matijnanavarana**
acts according to the nature of **Shrutajnanavarana**, covering **Shrutajnana**
(scriptural knowledge), **Avadhijnana** (clairvoyance), etc.  However, this rule
does not apply to all **Uttarprakritis**. There are many **Uttarprakritis** that
do not interconvert even if they are of the same type, such as **Darshanamoha**
(delusion of perception) and **Charitramoha** (delusion of conduct).
**Darshanamoha** does not transform into **Charitramoha**, and vice versa.
Similarly, the four **Ayus** (life spans) of **Ayukarma** (karma of lifespan) do
not interconvert into other **Ayus**.  Generally, there are 122 **Udayayogya
Prakritis** (natures capable of arising) and 120 **Bandhayogya Prakritis**
(natures capable of binding). Thus, there is a difference of two between
**Udayayogya** and **Bandhayogya** **Prakritis**, which should not be. Because,
as many **Prakritis** are bound, that many **Prakritis** should be considered
**Udayayogya**. In that situation, it would be considered that one experiences
the fruits of karma without **Karmabandha** (binding of karma), which is against
the principle. The explanation for this is as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 74 karmastava kI phalaprada zakti usa karma ke svabhAvAnusAra hI tIvra yA manda
phala detI hai aura jJAna kI AvRta karane kA hI kAma karatI hai, lekina
darzanAdaraNa, vedanIya Adi anya karma ke svabhAvAnusAra phala nahIM detI hai|
isI prakAra anya karmoM kI phalaprada zakti ke lie bhI samajhanA caahiye| karma
ke svabhAvAnusAra phala dene kA niyama mUlaprakRtiyoM meM hI lAgU hotA hai,
uttaraprakRtiyoM meM nhiiN| kyoMki adhyavasAya ke bala se kisI bhI karma kI eka
uttaraprakRti usI karma kI dUsarI uttaraprakRti ke rUpa meM bhI badala sakatI
hai| jisase pahale kI phalaprada zakti parivartita uttaraprakRti ke
svabhAvAnusAra tIna yA manda phala pradAna karatI hai  /  jaise matijJAnAvaraNa
jaba zrutajJAnAvaraNa Adi sajAtIya uttaraprakRti ke rUpa meM parivartita hotA
hai, taba matijJAnAvaraNa kI phalaprada zakti zrutajJAnAvaraNa Adi ke
svabhAvAnusAra hI zrutajJAna, avadhijJAna Adi ko AvRta karane kA kArya karatI
hai| lekina sabhI uttaraprakRtiyoM ke lie yaha niyama lAgU nahIM hotA hai|
kitanI hI uttaraprakRtiyA~ aisI bhI haiM jo sajAtIya hone para bhI paraspara
saMkramita nahIM hotI haiM, jaise- darzanamoha aura cAritramoha  /  darzanamoha
cAritnamoha ke rUpa meM athavA cAritramoha darzanamoha ke rUpa meM saMkramaNa
nahIM karatA hai| isI taraha Ayukarma kI cAroM AyuoM meM paraspara anya Ayu ke
rUpa meM saMkramaNa nahIM hotA hai| sAmAnyatayA udayayogya prakRtiyA~ 122 haiM
aura bandhayogya 120 pratiyo mAnI jAtI haiN| isa prakAra udaya aura bandhayogya
prakRtiyoM meM do kA antara hai, jo nahIM honA caahie| kyoMki jitanI prakRtiyoM
kA bandha ho, utanI hI prakRtiyoM ko udayayogya mAnA jAnA cAhie  /  usa sthiti
meM binA karmabandha ke karmaphala bhoganA mAnA jAyagA, jo siddhAntaviruva hai
/  isakA spaSTIkaraNa nIce likhe anusAra hai-

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  The reason for stating 122 **udayayogya** (capable of
arising) **prakritis** (nature) in comparison to 120 **bandhayogya** (capable of
binding) **prakritis** is that **bandha** (binding) only occurs for
**mithyatvamohaniya** (false belief-obscuring) **prakritis**. When
**mithyatvamohaniya** **prakritis** become **ardha-vishuddha** (semi-pure) and
**vishuddha** (pure) through the purity of **parinaamas** (results), they arise
as **mishra-mohaniya** (mixed-obscuring) and **samyaktvamohaniya** (right
belief-obscuring) **prakritis**.  Therefore, by combining these two with the 120
**bandhayogya** **prakritis**, the total number of **udayayogya** and
**udiranayogya** (capable of arising and stimulating) **prakritis** becomes 122.
The 122 **udayayogya** and **udiranayogya** **karm-prakritis** (karma-natures)
are as follows:  * **Jnanavaran** (knowledge-obscuring): 5 * **Darshanavaran**
(perception-obscuring): 6 * **Vedaniya** (experiential): 2 * **Mohaniya**
(obscuring): 28 * **Aayu** (life-span): 4 * **Naam** (name): 67 * **Gotra**
(lineage): 2 * **Antaraya** (hindrance): 5  Therefore, 5 + 6 + 2 + 28 + 4 + 67 +
2 + 5 = 122.  Out of the 122 **udayayogya** **karm-prakritis**, the **mishra-
mohaniya** **prakritis** arise in the third **gunasthan** (state of being),
**samyaktvamohaniya** **prakritis** arise in the fourth **gunasthan**,
**aaharaka-drik** (related to the **aaharaka** body and its parts) **prakritis**
arise in the **pramatta** (distracted) **gunasthan**, and **tirthankara-naam**
(name of a Tirthankara) **prakritis** arise in the thirteenth and fourteenth
**gunasthan**.  Therefore, excluding these five **karm-prakritis**, the
remaining 117 **prakritis** are considered to arise in the first **mithyatva**
(false belief) **gunasthan**. In other words, 117 **prakritis** are
**udayayogya** in the **mithyatva** **gunasthan** due to the non-arising of the
aforementioned five **prakritis**.  Having explained the characteristics and
general nature of **udaya** (arising) and **udirana** (stimulation), the number
of **udayayogya** **prakritis**, their cause, the number of **udayayogya**
**prakritis** in the first **gunasthan**, and their related causes, we will now
discuss the number of **udayayogya** **prakritis** in the remaining six
**gunasthanas** from the second **saasadan** (worldly) **gunasthan** to the
seventh **aprammattavirat** (non-distracted, non-attached) **ganasthan**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha bandhayogya 120 prakRtiyoM kI apekSA 122 prakRtiyoM ko
udayayogya batAne ke kAraNa yaha hai ki bandha kevala mithyAtvamohanIya kA hI
hotA hai aura vaha mithyAtvamohanIya jaba pariNAmoM kI vizuddhatA se arddha
vizuddha aura zuddha rUpa ho jAtA hai, taba mizramohanIya
(samyammithyAtvamohanIya) tathA samyaktvamohanIya ke rUpa se udaya meM Ane se
bandhayogya 120 meM ina donoM ko milAne para gula 122 prakRtiyA~ udaya aura
udIraNAyogya mAnI jAtI haiN| udaya aura udIraNA yogya 122 karmaprakRtiyAM isa
prakAra haiM jJAnAvaraNa 5, darzanAvaraNa 6, vedanIya 2, mohanIya 28, Ayu 4,
nAma 67, gotra 2 aura antarAya 5 /  isa prakAra 5+6-2+28+ 4+67+2+5= 122 ho jAtI
haiM  /  udayayogya 122 karmaprakRtiyoM meM se mizramohanIya kA udaya tIsare
guNasthAna meM, samyaktvamohanIya kA udaya cauthe guNasthAna meM, AhArakadrika
(AhArakazarIra, AhAraka-aMgopAMga) kA udaya pramatta guNasthAna meM aura
tIrthaGkaranAma kA udaya terahaveM aura caudahaveM guNasthAna meM hone se ina
pAMca karmaprakRtiyoM ko chor3akara zeSa 117 prakRtiyoM kA udaya pahale
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM mAnA jAtA hai| arthAt ukta pAMca prakRtiyoM kA anudaya
hone se mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 117 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya haiN| isa prakAra
udaya aura udIraNA kA lakSaNa aura sAmAnya se udayayogya prakRttiyoM kI saMkhyA,
usakA kAraNa tathA pahale guNasthAna meM udayayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura
sambandhita kAraNa ko batalAne ke bAda aba dusare sAsAdana guNasthAna se lekara
sAtaveM apramatavirata gaNasthAna paryanta 6 guNasthAnoM kI udayayogya
prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA Adi kA kathana karate haiM

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 76  **Verse 15:** **Kamamstav** **Biya Kasaya**  **Verse 14:**
**Vausayamjae** **Suhum- Tigayab - Miccham Micchatam Sasane Igarasayam.
Nirayanupuvunu Daya An-yavar Ig Vigal Anti.**  **Verse 16:** **Mise
Sayamanupurashonvaya Misodaean Mosanto. Sammapuvi Kheva Madhutiripu Push Bi-ch
Bukup Apajjaga Sarakheo. Sagasod Desi Sirigahaau Niujjoy Tikasaya.**  **Verse
17:** **Atthachcheo Igasi Pamatti Ahar - Jugal - Pakkheva. Shripatigaharag Dug
Chheo Chassayari Apasatte.**  **Verse Translation:**  **Verse 14:** The subtle
trika, the heat-name, and the false-belief-delusive, are destroyed at the end of
the false-belief guna-sthana, and the hell-preceding arises, resulting in one
hundred and eleven natures in the sasadan guna-sthana. The infinite-connected
four, the stationary-name, the one-sense-being, and the defective-sense trika
are destroyed, and the preceding-karma arises, along with the mixed-delusive,
resulting in one hundred natures in the mixed guna-sthana.  **Verse 15:**
**Kamamstav** **Biya Kasaya**  **Verse 16:** The mixed-delusive is destroyed at
the end of the third guna-sthana, and the right-belief-delusive and the four
preceding-karmas are combined, resulting in one hundred and four natures in the
uninterrupted-right-belief-vision guna-sthana. The second non-rejectable-
covering-passion four, the human-preceding, the animal-preceding, the eight-
fold-transformation, the broken, and the non-beginning-two, a total of seventeen
natures, are reduced from the one hundred and four natures of the fourth guna-
sthana, which are fit for arising, resulting in eighty-seven natures in the
country-renunciation guna-sthana.  **Verse 17:** The eighty-seven natures of the
fifth guna-sthana, from which the animal...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 76 kamaMstava biya kasAyA ||15| vausayamajae suhuma- tigAyaba - micchaM
micchataM sAsaNe igArasayaM  /  nirayANupuviNudayA aNa-yAvara iga vigala aMtI
||14|| mIse sayamaNupuraSoNavayA mIsodaeNa mosaMto  /  sammApuvi khevA
madhutiripupuSi bica bukupa apAjjaga sArakheo  /  sagasoDa desi sirigahaAu
niujjoya tikasAyA  //  16 //  aTThaccheo igasI pamatti AhAra - jugala- pakkhevA
/  zrIpatigAhAraga duga cheo chassayari apasatte  //  17  //  gAthArtha -
sUkSmatrika, AtapanAma aura mithyAtvamohanIya kA mithyAtva guNasthAna ke anta
meM kSaya hone aura narakAnupUrvI kA anudaya hone se sAsAdanaguNasthAna meM eka
sau gyAraha prakRtiyoM kA tathA anantAnubaMdhIcatuSka, sthAvaranAma,
ekendriyajAti, vikalendriyatrika kA anta hone se tathA AnupUrvInAmakarma kA
anudaya evaM mizramohanIya kA udaya hone me mizraguNasthAna meM eka sau
prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai  /  tIsare guNasthAna ke anta meM mizramohanIya kA
anta hone tathA samyaktvamohanIya evaM cAroM AnupUrviyoM ko milAne se
aviratasamyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM eka sau cAra prakRtiyoM kA aura dUsarI
apratyAkhyAnAMvaraNakaSAya catuSka, manuSya- AnupUrvI, tiryaMca AnupUrvI,
vaikriyASTaka, dubhaMga aura anAdeyadvika ina satraha prakRtiyoM ko cauthe
guNasthAna kI udayayogya eka so cAra prakRtiyoM meM se kama karane para
dezavirata guNasthAna meM satAsA prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai  /  pA~ca
guNasthAna kI ukta satAsI prakRtiyoM meM se tiryaca

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- The second karmagranya, Motion and lifespan, low-caste, brilliance, the
quartet of the third renunciation-covering passions, and the destruction of the
quartet, along with the combination of the two aharakas, results in the
emergence of eighty-one natures in the sixth pramattaviratguna-sthana. And in
the sixth guna-sthana, by reducing the five natures of styana-dvitrika and
aharaka-dvitrika, seventy-six natures emerge in the seventh apramattaviratguna-
sthana.  **Special Note:** In these four verses, the number of natures that are
capable of arising in the sasadan guna-sthana, samyagmiyyadristi (mithya) guna-
sthana, aviratasamyagdristi guna-sthana, deshavirat guna-sthana, pramattasanyata
guna-sthana, and apramattasanyata guna-sthana has been explained by the author.
_ In the first guna-sthana, out of the 117 natures that are capable of arising,
the five natures of sukshmatrika - sukshmanamakarma, apariaptanama karma,
sadharananama karma, and aatapanama karma, and mithyatvamohaneya - arise only
due to mithyatva. But in the sasadan guna-sthana, due to the destruction of
mithyatva, these five natures do not arise. _  Furthermore, the second point is
that sukshmanamakarma arises in sukshma jivas, apariaptanama karma arises in
apariapt jivas, and sadharananama karma arises in sadharan jivas. But neither
sukshma, apariapt, nor sadharan jivas attain the sasadan guna-sthana, nor do
they attain sasadanasamyaktva, and neither do sasadanasamyaktva-attaining jivas
take birth in the sukshma, apariapt, or sadharan forms. In other words, sukshma,
apariapt, and sadharan jivas are mithyatvi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - dvitIya karmagranya gati aura Ayu, nIcagotra, udyota, tIsarI
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNakaSAya catuSka kA cheda hone tayA AhArakadvika ko milAne se
chaThe pramattavirataguNasthAna meM ikyAsI prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai aura
chaThe guNasthAna kI udayayogya prakRtiyoM meM meM styAnadvitrika aura
AhArakadvika ina pA~coM prakRtiyoM ko kama karane para sAtaveM
apramattavirataguNasthAna meM chihattara prakRttiyoM kA udaya hai| vizeSArtha-
ina cAroM gAthAoM meM sAsAdana guNasthAna, samyagmiyyAdRSTi (mitha) guNasthAna,
aviratasamyagdRSTi guNasthAna, dezavirata guNasthAna, pramattasaMyata guNasthAna
aura apramattasaMyata guNasthAna kI udayayogya pravAtiyoM kI saMkhyA mauta-sA ne
ata meM vicchinna hone vAlI prakRtiyoM ko batalAyA hai| _ pahale guNasthAna meM
jo 117 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya haiM, unameM se sUkSmatrika -sUkSmanAmakarma,
aparyAptanAmakarma, sAdhAraNanAmakarma tathA AtapanAmakarma, aura
mithyAtvamohanIya-ye pA~ca prakRtiyA~ mithyAtva ke kAraNa hI udaya meM AtI haiM
/  kintu sAsAdana guNasthAna meM mithyAtva kA viccheda ho jAne para ina pAMca
prakRttiyoM kA udaya nahIM hotA hai| _ isake atirikta dUsarI bAta yaha hai ki
sUkSmanAmakarma kA udaya sUkSma jIvoM ko, aparyAptanAmakarma kA udaya aparyApta
jIvoM ko aura sAdhAraNanAmakarma kA udaya sAdhAraNa jIvoM ko hI hotA hai|
parantu sUkSma, aparyApta aura sAdhAraNa jIvoM ko na to sAsAdana guNasthAna
prApta hotA hai aura na koI sAsAdanasamyaktva ko hI prApta karatA hai aura na
sAsAdanasamyaktva prApta jIva sUkSma, aparyApta aura sAdhAraNa rUpa meM paidA
hotA hai, arthAt sUkSma, aparyApta aura sAdhAraNa jIva mithyAtvI hI hote haiN|

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
After the body's full development, the *ātapana karma* can arise in *bādar*
earth-bodied beings, not before. But those beings who attain *sāsādan* right-
belief and are born in the *bādar* earth-bodied form, vomit out the previously
attained *sāsādan* right-belief before completing their body's development. This
means that when *bādar* earth-bodied beings have the potential for *sāsādan*
right-belief, the *ātapana karma* cannot arise, and when the *ātapana karma* can
arise, *sāsādan* right-belief is not possible. For this reason, the *ātapana
karma* is not considered to arise in the *sāsādan* state.  The arising of wrong-
belief occurs only in the first wrong-belief state. It does not occur in the
second, third, or any subsequent states. Therefore, at the end of the first
wrong-belief state, the five natures, from subtle to wrong-belief, are severed,
preventing their arising in the subsequent states.  Thus, out of the 117 natures
that can arise in the first state, 112 should arise in the second state after
the five natures, from subtle to wrong-belief, are diminished. However, a being
who falls from *aupaśamika* right-belief and settles in the *sāsādan* state does
not go to hell but attains wrong-belief. Therefore, since a being going to hell
does not have the *sāsādan* state, the *narakanupūrvi* does not arise. The
*narakanupūrvi* arises in beings who go to hell through the *vakragati* (devious
path). But in that state, they...  1. *Micche miच्छादाद सुहमति
.........."udayaghoच्छिण्णा*  In the wrong-belief state, the three natures of
wrong-belief, *ātapana*, and subtle are severed. - *Gommatasāra*, *Karmakāṇḍa*,
265

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kamaMstava zarIra paryApti pUrNa ho jAne ke bAda bAdara pRthvIkAyika jIvoM ke
AtapanAmakarma kA udaya ho sakatA hai pahale nhiiN| lekina sAsAdana samyaktva ko
pAkara jo jIva bAdara pRthvIkAya meM janma grahaNa karate haiM, ve
zarIraparyApti ko pUrA karane ke pahale hI pUrvaprApta sAsvAdana samyaktva kA
vamana kara dete haiM, yAnI bAdara pRthvIkAyika jIvoM ko jaba sAsvAdana
samyaktva kI sambhAvanA hotI hai saba AtapanAmakarma kA udaya saMbhava nahIM hai
aura jisa samaya AtaphnAbhakarma honA saMbhava hotA hai, usa samaya unake
sAsvAdanasamyaktva saMbhava nahIM hai  /  isI kAraNa sAsAdana guNasthAna meM
AtapanAmakarma kA udaya nahIM mAnA jAtA hai  /  mithyAtva kA udaya pahale
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM hI hotA hai  /  dUsare, tIsare Adi Age ke guNasthAna
meM nahIM  /  ataH pahale mithyAtvaguNasthAna ke carama samaya meM sUkSma se
lekara mithyAtva paryanta pUrvokta pA~ca prakRtiyoM kA viccheda ho jAne se
dUsare Adi Age ke guNasthAnoM meM udaya nahIM hotA hai  / ' isa prakAra pahale
guNasthAna kI udayayogya 117 prakRtiyoM meM se ukta sUkSma Adi pA~ca prakRtiyoM
ke kama hone se 112 prakRtiyoM kA udaya dUsare guNasthAna meM honA cAhie thA
kintu aupazamika samyaktva se cyuta (patita) hokara sAsAdana guNasthAna meM
Akara Tikane vAlA jIva narakagati meM nahIM jAtA hai, kintu mithyAla prApta kara
hI jAtA hai  /  isalie narakagati meM jAne vAle jIva ko sAsAdana guNasthAna
nahIM hone se narakAnupUrvI kA udaya nahIM hotA hai| narakAnupUrvI kA udaya
vakragati se naraka meM jAne vAle jIvoM ko hotA hai| parantu usa avasthA meM una
1. micche micchAdAda suhamati .........."udayaghocchiNNA  /  mithyASTi
guNasthAna meM miyyAtva, Atapa, sUkSmAdi tIna-ina pAtra prakRtiyoM kI
udayavyucchitti hotI hai| -gommaTasAra, karmakANDa, 265

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  **Living beings do not attain *Sāsāvadana Samyaktvā* and
a living being who has attained *Sāsāvadana Samyaktvā* is not born in hell.
Therefore, *Narkanupūrvi* does not arise in the *Sāsāvadana* Gunasthāna.**
Thus, at the end of the first Gunasthāna, the five subtle *Prakṛtis* (subtle,
very subtle, extremely subtle, infinitely subtle, and infinitely infinitely
subtle) and *Narkanupūrvi*, totaling six *Prakṛtis*, are eliminated from the 117
*Prakṛtis* that can arise in the first Gunasthāna. Therefore, 111 *Prakṛtis* are
considered to arise in the second Gunasthāna.  Now, we will explain the number
of *Prakṛtis* that can arise in the third Gunasthāna and the names of the
*Bhātis* that rise at the end of the second Gunasthāna.  Out of the 111
*Prakṛtis* that can arise in the second Gunasthāna, the following nine
*Prakṛtis* are eliminated at the end of the second Gunasthāna: *Anantānubandhi*
(infinitely connected), *Kaṣāya Chatuṣka* (fourfold passions) - *Anantānubandhi*
*Krodha* (anger), *Māna* (pride), *Māyā* (deceit), *Loba* (greed), and
*Sthāvaranāma* (stationary name), *Ekendiriya Jāti* (one-sense being), and
*Vikalendriya Trika* (three types of imperfect sense beings) - *Dwīndriya Jāti*
(two-sense being), *Trīndriya Jāti* (three-sense being), and *Chaturindriya
Jāti* (four-sense being).  This is because the *Anantānubandhi Kaṣāya Chatuṣka*
arises only in the first and second Gunasthānas, and the *Sthāvaranāma Karma*
and the *Ekendiriya Jāti*, *Dwīndriya Jāti*, *Trīndriya Jāti*, and
*Chaturindriya Jāti* *Nāma Karma* arise only in the first and second
Gunasthānas. They do not arise in the third or subsequent Gunasthānas. This is
because the *Sthāvaranāma* and *Ekendiriya Jāti Nāma Karma* arise in one-sense
beings, the *Dwīndriya Jāti Nāma Karma* arises in two-sense beings, the
*Trīndriya Jāti Nāma Karma* arises in three-sense beings, and the *Chaturindriya
Jāti Nāma Karma* arises in four-sense beings.  1. *Pirayaṁ māsaṇasammo ṇa
pacchaditti ma ṇa tassa girayāṇū.*  - *Gommatasāra*, *Karmakāja*, 262

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha jIvoM ko sAsvAdanasamyaktva nahIM hotA hai aura
sAsvAdanasamyaktvapratipanna jIva naraka meM nahIM upajatA hai| ataH sAsAdana
guNasthAna meM narakAnupUrvI kA udaya nahIM hotA hai|' isa prakAra pahale
guNasthAna ke carama samaya meM vyucchinna hone vAlI sUkSma Adi pAMca evaM
narakAnupUrvI kula chaha prakRtiyoM ko pahale guNasthAna kI udayayogya 117
prakRtiyoM meM se kama karane para dUsare guNasthAna meM 111 prakRtiyoM kA udaya
mAnA jAtA hai| aba tIsare guNasthAna kI udayayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura
dUsare guNasthAna ke anta meM unna hone vAlI bhAtiyoM ke nAma batalAte haiN|
dUsare guNasthAna kI udayayogya 111 prakRtiyoM meM se anantAnubandhI.
kaSAyacatuSka-anantAnubandhI krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha tathA sthAvaranAma,
ekendriyajAti aura vikalendriyatrika - dvIndriyajAti, trIndriyajAti aura
caturindriyajAti-ye nau prakRtiyA~ dUsare guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM
vicchinna ho jAtI hai| kyoMki anantAnubandhIkapAyacatuSka kA udaya pahale aura
dUsare guNasthAnoM taka hI hotA hai, tathA sthAvaranAmakarma aura ekendriyajAti,
dvIndriyajAti, vIndriyajAti Ara caturindriyajAti nAmakarma ke udaya vAloM meM
pahalA aura dUsarA guNasthAna hotA hai| tIsare se lekara Age ke guNasthAna nahIM
hote haiN| kyoMki sthAvaranAma aura ekendriyajAtinAmakarma kA udaya ekendriya
jIvoM ko hotA hai tathA dvIndriyajAtinAma kA udaya dvIndriya jIvoM ko,
trIndriyajAtinAma kA udaya trIndriya jIvoM ko aura caturindriyajAti 1. pirayaM
mAsaNasammo Na pacchaditti ma Na tassa girayANU  /  -gommaTasAra, karmakAja, 262

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmastava, The name arises for the four-sense beings and these beings have two
Gunasthanas, the first or the second. Therefore, the total nine types of Karma,
from Anantanubandhi Krodha to Chaturindriya, are destroyed at the end of the
second Gunasthana. And the 'Anuprthvinudaya', meaning the destruction of the
hellish existence, takes place at the end of the first Gunasthana. The remaining
three Anupurvis, namely, the Tich, the Manushya, and the Deva, are not
considered as the arising types of the third Gunasthana because they are in the
form of Anudaya in the third Gunasthana. The Anupurvi Karma arises for the
beings at the time when they move to take birth in the next existence. But the
being in the third Gunasthana does not die and when there is a possibility of
leaving the present body and taking the body of the next existence, then only
the Anupurvi Karma can arise for the being in the third Gunasthana. Therefore,
the Anupurvis are considered as Anudaya in the third Gunasthana. Thus, the total
nine types of Karma, from Anantanubandhi Krodha to Chaturindriya, and the three
Anupurvis, namely, Tich, Manushya, and Deva, totaling twelve types, should be
subtracted from the 111 types of Karma that are eligible to arise in the second
Gunasthana. This would leave 66 types of Karma that should arise in the third
Gunasthana. But the Misramohaniya Karma arises in the third Gunasthana, 'Mise
Misodae', therefore, the said 1. Sasane Aneindi Paavaravialam Cha Udaya
Vocchishna. - Gommatasar, Karmakanda, 265

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava nAma kA udaya caturindriya jIvoM ko hotA hai aura ina jIvoM ke
pahalA yA dUsarA ye do guNasthAna hote haiM  /  tsu ataH anantAnubandhI krodha
se lekara caturindriyajAtinAma paryanta kula nau prakRtiyoM kA udayaviccheda
dUsare guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM ho jAtA hai' tathA 'aNupRthvINudayA'
arthAt narakAnupUrvI kA udayaviccheda pahale guNasthAna ke carama samaya meM ho
jAne se zeSa rahI huI ticAnupUrvI manuSyAnupUrvI, devAnupUrvI - ye tInoM
AnupUviyA~ tIsare guNasthAna meM anudayarUpa hone me tIsare guNasthAna kI udaya
prakRtiyoM meM nahIM ginI jAtI haiM  /  2 AnupUrvInAmakarma kA udaya jIvoM ko
usI samaya hotA hai, jaba ve para-bhava meM janma grahaNa karane ke lie gati se
jAte haiM  /  kintu tIsare guNasthAna meM vartamAna jIva maratA nahIM hai aura
jaba vartamAna bhava sambandhI zarIra ko chor3akara AgAmI bhava sambandhI zarIra
ko grahaNa karane kI sambhAvanA ho tIsare guNasthAnavatIM jIva ke nahIM to
AnupUrvI nAmakarma kA udaya bhI nahIM ho sakatA hai| isIlie tIsare guNasthAna
meM AnupUrviyoM kA anudaya mAnA hai  /  isa prakAra anantAnubandhI krodha se
lekara caturindriya nAmakarma paryanta kula nau prakRtiyoM tathA tiyaMca,
manuSya aura deva AnupUrvI ina tInoM AnupUrviyoM sahita bAraha prakRtiyoM ko
dUsare guNasthAna kI udayayogya 111 prakRtiyoM meM se kama karane para tIsare
guNasthAna meM 66 prakRtiyoM kA udaya honA mAnA jAnA cAhie thA  /  kintu
mizramohanIya karma kA udaya tIsare guNasthAna 'mIse mIsodaeNa' meM hI hone se
ukta 1. sAsaNe aNeindI pAvaraviyalaM ca udaya vocchiSNA  /  - gommaTasAra,
karmakANDa, 265

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  In the third Gunasthan, the 66 Prakruti of
Mishramohaniya Karma are combined, resulting in a total of 100 Prakruti.  In the
final stage of the third Gunasthan, the Mishramohaniya Prakruti cease to exist.
Therefore, in the fourth Gunasthan, the remaining 66 Prakruti, excluding
Mishramohaniya, along with Samyaktva Mohaniya (Sammagapubvikheva) and the four
Anupurvi (Naraka, Tiryanch, Manushya, and Deva Anupurvi) are capable of arising.
Hence, there are 104 Prakruti capable of arising in the fourth Gunasthan.  Out
of these 104 Prakruti, 17 Prakruti, namely Apratyakhyana Avarana Kshaya
Chatushk, Manushya Anupurvi, Tiryanch Anupurvi, Kriyashtak, Dur Bhag Namkarma,
Anadeya Namkarma, and Ayasha Kirti Namkarma, cease to exist at the end of the
fourth Gunasthan. Therefore, these 17 Prakruti...  1. Missi Missi Cha
Udayayochina. - Gommatasar, Karmakanda, 265 2. Avirat Samyagdristi Jiva does not
follow the vows and restraints, and such a Jiva (Nishilvratatvam Cha Sarvesham
Tattvarth Sutra, A. 6, Sutra 16) can bind the lifespan of all four Gatis.
Therefore, when a Jiva with Avirat Samyagdristi goes through the Vigraha Gati to
take a new body in the next life, the appropriate Anupurvi Namkarma arises from
the four Anupurvi. 3. Compare: Ayde Vidikasaaya Vegusviya Chakk Niryadevaau.
Manayatiriyaanupunvi Dubbhaganadejj Ajjasayam. - Gommatasar, Karmakanda, 266

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha 66 prakRtiyoM meM mizramohanIya karma ko milAne se kula
100 prakRtiyoM kA udaya tIsare guNasthAna meM mAnA jAtA hai  /  51 tIsare
guNasthAna meM udayayogya 100 prakRtiyoM meM se isI guNasthAna ke antima samaya
meM mizramohanIya kA udayaviccheda ho jAtA hai  / " ataH cauthe guNasthAnavartI
jIvoM ke ukta 100 prakRtiyoM meM me mizramohanIya ke sivAya zeSa rahI 66
prakRtiyoM tathA 'sammAgapubvikhevA' samyaktvamohanIya evaM cAroM AnupUrviyoM-
nAraka, tiryaMca, manuSya aura deva AnupUdiyoM kA udaya sambhava hai| isalie
cauthe guNasthAna meM 104 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya haiM  /  cauthe 'guNasthAna meM
udayayogya 104 prakRtiyAM meM se apratyAkhyAnAvaraNakaSAya catuSka,
manuSyAnupUrvI, tiryaMcAnupUrvI, kriyASTaka, durbhaga nAmakarma,
anAdeyanAmakarma, ayazaH kIrtinAmakamaM ina 17 prakRtiyoM kA cauthe guNasthAna
ke carama samaya meM anta ho jAtA hai  /  ata: ina 17 1. misse missa ca
udayayociNA  /  - gommaTasAra, karmakANDa, 265 2. avirata samyagdRSTi jIva
vratAdi saMyama kA pAlana nahIM karatA hai aura aisA jIva (niHzIlavratatvaM ca
sarveSAm tattvArthasUtra, a0 6, sUtra 16 ) cAroM gati sambandhI Ayu kA bandha
kara sakatA hai  /  ataH parabhava sambandhI zarIra ko grahaNa karane ke lie
vigrahagati se jAte samaya cAroM AnupUviyoM meM se yathAyogya usa nAma vAle
anupurvI nAmakarma kA udaya avirata samyagdRSTi jIva ko hotA hai  /  1 3. tulanA
karo ayade vidikasAyA veguzviya chakka NirayadevAU  /  maNayatiriyANupunvI
dubbhagaNAdejja ajjasayaM  //  - gommaTasAra, karmakANDa, 266

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 82  When the number of karmas is reduced from 104 in the fourth *guna-sthana*
to 87 in the fifth *guna-sthana*, it is considered that the 87 karmas arise in
the fifth *guna-sthana*.  The four *kṣayās* (attachments) of *apratyākhāṇa*,
*āvaraṇa*, *kaṣāya*, and *caturṣka* arise until the fourth *guna-sthana*. As
long as these four *kṣayās* arise, the beings cannot attain the *guna-sthānas*
of *deśavirat* and beyond.  The fifth *guna-sthana* is possible for *tiryac*
(animals), and the *guna-sthānas* from the fifth onwards are only possible for
humans, not for gods or hell beings. Even humans can only attain these *guna-
sthānas* after the age of eight, not before. Therefore, the *ānupūrvī* karma
arises in the soul when it is about to take on a body related to *parabhāva*
(the state of being a god or hell being) through *vakragati* (the path of
karma). However, it is not possible for beings to attain the fifth or higher
*guna-sthānas* at the time of the arising of any *ānupūrvī* karma. Therefore, it
is considered that their *udayavicchedha* (cessation of arising) occurs at the
end of the fourth *guna-sthana*.  The *ānupūrvīs* of hell beings and gods, these
two *ānupūrvīs*, also do not arise in the fifth *guna-sthana*. These two are
mentioned in the *gāthā* (verse) under the term "**viuvatt**" in the *vaikriṣa-
aṣṭaka* (eight *vaikriṣa* karmas). The names and numbers of these eight karmas
are as follows:  (1) *vaikriya-śarīra*, (2) *vaikriya-aṅgopāṅga*, (3) *devāyu*,
(4) *devagati*, (5) *devānupūrvī*, (6) *narakāyu*, (7) *narakagati*, and (8)
*narakānupūrvī*.  Of these eight karmas, *devāyu* and *devagati* arise in gods,
and *narakāyu* and *narakagati* arise in hell beings. The *vaikriya-śarīra* and
*vaikriya-aṅgopāṅga* karmas arise in both gods and hell beings. However, it has
already been said that gods and hell beings do not have the fifth or higher
*guna-sthānas*. And regarding the *ānupūrvīs*, it has also been explained...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 82 karmastava prakRtiyoM ko cauthe guNasthAna kI udayayogya 104 prakRtiyoM meM
se kama karane para pAMca guNasthAna meM 87 prakRtiyoM kA udaya mAnA jAtA hai  /
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNakaSAyacatuSka kA udaya cauthe guNasthAna taka rahatA hai aura
jaba taka ukta kaSAyacatuSka kA udaya hai, taba taka jIvoM ko dezavirata Adi
guNasthAnoM kI prApti nahIM ho sakatI hai| pAMcavA guNasthAna tiryacoM ko honA
sambhava hai aura pAMcaveM se lekara Age ke guNasthAna manuSyoM ko hI ho sakate
haiM, devoM aura nArakoM ko nahIM aura manuSya bhI ATha varSa kI umra ho jAne ke
bAda hI una guNasthAnoM ko prApta karane yogya hote haiM, usake pahale nahIM  /
ata: AnupUrvInAmakarma kA udaya vakragati se parabhava sambandhI zarIra ko
grahaNa karane jAte samaya AtmA ko hotA hai, parantu kisI bhI AnupUrvI karma ke
udaya ke samaya jIvoM ko pAMcavAM Adi guNasthAna honA sambhava nahIM hai  /
isIlie cAthe guNasthAna ke carama samaya meM inakA udayaviccheda honA mAnA hai|
nAraka aura deva-AnupurvIina do AnupUrviyoM kA udaya bhI pA~ca guNasthAna meM
nahIM hotA hai| ina donoM ke nAma gAthA meM 'viuvaTTha' vaikriSa-aSTaka zabda
meM grahaNa kiye gaye haiN| ina ATha prakRtiyoM ke nAma aura saMkhyA nimna
prakAra haiM (1) vaikriyazarIra, (2) vaikriya-aMgopAMga, (3) devAyu, (4)
devagati, (5) devAnupUrvI (6) narakAyu, 7) narakagati aura (8) narakAnupUrvI  /
ina ATha prakRtiyoM meM se devAyu aura devagati kA udaya devoM aura narakAyu
tathA narakagati kA udaya nArakoM ko hotA hai| vaikriyazarIra aura vaikriya-
aMgopAMga nAmakarma kA jadaya deva aura nAraka-donoM ko hotA hai  /  parantu
yaha pahale kahA jA cukA hai ki deva, nArakoM meM pA~cavA Adi guNasthAna nahIM
hotA hai tathA AnupUviyoM ke viSaya meM bhI batAyA

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth ### 83  It has already been stated that these (eight
karmas) arise when a being takes a new body from the womb, and at that time, the
five higher **guna sthana** (stages of spiritual development) are not present.
Therefore, the eight karmas mentioned in the **vaikriya ashtak** (eight types of
karmas) arise and cease at the end of the fourth **guna sthana**, and do not
arise in the fifth **guna sthana**.  **Doubt:** Both humans and animals in the
fifth **guna sthana**, upon attaining **vaikriya labdhi** (the ability to create
a **vaikriya** body), can create a **vaikriya** body and **vaikriya** limbs.
Similarly, a **muni** (ascetic) in the sixth **guna sthana** who has attained
**vaikriya labdhi** can also create a **vaikriya** body and **vaikriya** limbs.
At that time, both those humans in the sixth **guna sthana** and animals in the
fifth **guna sthana** will definitely have the **vaikriya** body and
**vaikriya** limbs **karma** arising. Therefore, the **vaikriya** body and
**vaikriya** limbs **karma** should be counted among the karmas that can arise
in the fifth and sixth **guna sthana**.  **Solution:** This discussion of
arising karmas is in relation to gods and hell beings, who have the **vaikriya**
body and **vaikriya** limbs **karma** arising throughout their lives. However,
humans and animals may have these two karmas arising for a period of time, but
not all humans and animals. Therefore, even though these two karmas can arise in
the sixth **guna sthana** in relation to humans and the fifth **guna sthana** in
relation to animals, they are not mentioned here.  In other words, humans and
animals have a **uttarvaikriya** body (a body that arises from **guna**-based
**pratyaya** (perception) and **labdhi** (attainment)), and this can also happen
to those who are constantly in the **samyak tvī** (right faith) cycle, such as
**chakravarti** (universal monarch). **Vishnu Kumar** and other **munis** also
attained **labdhi** (attainment), and the sixth **karma granth** also mentions
the arising of **vaikriya** in the requirements for **yoga**. However, here, the
**uttarvaikriya** arising from **guna**-based **pratyaya** and **labdhi**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha 83 jA cukA hai ki vakramati se navIna zarIra dhAraNa
karane jAte samaya inakA udaya hotA hai aura usa samaya jIvoM ke pA~caveM Adi
guNasthAna nahIM hote haiM  /  isalie vaikriyASTaka meM batAI gaI ATha
prakRtiyoM kA udayaviccheda cauthe guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM ho jAne se
pA~caveM guNasthAna meM udaya nahIM hotA hai  /  zaMkA- paMcama guNasthAnavartI
manuSya aura tiryaMca donoM hI vaikiyalabdhi prApta hone para vaikriyazarIra
aura vaikiya- aMgopAMga banA sakate haiN| isI prakAra chaThe guNasthAna meM
vartamAna vaikriyalabdhi-sampanna muni bhI vaiyizarIra aura paMkriya aMgopAMga
banA sakate haiN| usa samaya una chaThe guNasthAna vAle manuSyoM aura pA~caveM
guNasthAnavartI tiyaMcoM ko vaikriyazarIra aura kriya- aMgopAMga nAmakarma ina
donoM kA udaya avazya rahatA hai| isalie pA~caveM aura chaThe guNasthAna kI
udayayogya prakRtiyoM meM vaikiyazarIra aura vaikriya aMgopAMga nAmakarma ina
donoM prakRtiyoM kI gaNanA kI jAnI cAhie  /  samAdhAna - jinako janma se lekara
maraNa taka yAvajjIvana vaikriyazarIra aura vaikriya - aMgopAMga nAmakarma kA
udaya rahatA hai| aise deva aura nArakoM kI apekSA me yahA~ udayavicAra kiyA
gayA hai| kintu manuSyoM aura tiryoM ko to kucha samaya ke lie ina do prakRtiyoM
kA udaya ho sakatA hai, so bhI sabhI manuSyoM aura tiryatroM ko nahIM  /  isIlie
manuSyoM kI apekSA se chaThe aura tiyaMcoM kI apekSA se pAMcaveM guNasthAna meM
ukta do prakRtiyoM kA udaya sambhava hone para bhI usakI vivakSA nahIM kI gaI
hai| arthAt manuSya aura tipaMcoM ko uttaravai kriyazarIra (guNapratyayika -
labdhivizeSa se utpanna hone vAlA) hotA hai aura vaha avirata samyaktvI
cakrabartI Adi ko bhI ho sakatA hai tathA viSNukumArAdika muniyoM ko bhI lindhi
prApta ho gaI thI aura chaThe karmagrantha meM bhI yoga ke mAMgoM meM
apramattako vaiyadvi kA udaya kahA hai, parantu yahA~ guNapratyayika uttara -

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The term "vaikriya" does not refer to the action itself, but rather to the
"kriyadvik" (dual action) that is obtained from being born into that state
(bhavapratyayik). This bhavapratyayik vaikriya body and the "pantr angopaang"
named karma, are only found in gods and humans, but they do not have the fifth
"gunasthan" (stage of spiritual development). Therefore, the emergence of
"vaiyik" is not considered in the fifth gunasthan.  Similarly, the results of
beings who attain the fifth and subsequent gunasthanas become so pure that the
three types of karma - "dubhang" (defective), "anadeydvikanadeya" (unavoidable),
and "ayashakirtinamkarma" (karma leading to bad reputation) - can only emerge in
the first four gunasthanas, but not in the fifth and subsequent gunasthanas.
Therefore, 87 types of karma are capable of emerging in the fifth gunasthan.  In
the sixth gunasthan, 81 types of karma are capable of emerging. Their
explanation is as follows:  * Out of the 57 types of karma capable of emerging
in the fifth gunasthan, the four types of karma - "tirigai au niujjoy" (karma
leading to rebirth in the animal realm), "tiyanchagati" (karma leading to
rebirth in the animal realm), "tiryachayu" (karma leading to a short lifespan in
the animal realm), "nichgotra" (karma leading to a low birth in the animal
realm), and "udyotanamkarma" (karma leading to brilliance) - are capable of
emerging in the animal realm. And the animal realm can only have the fifth
gunasthan, not the sixth or subsequent gunasthanas. Therefore, the emergence and
cessation of these types of karma occurs at the end of the fifth gunasthan.
**Note:** The text mentions "jaidevuttaravikriya" (karma leading to the body of
a god or a sage) and states that sages and gods possess the "uttaravikriya" body
and that the "udyotanamkarma" emerges when they possess this body. Therefore,
the emergence of "udyotanamkarma" is observed in the sixth gunasthan compared to
those who possess the "vaikriya" body. Why is the emergence of "udyotanamkarma"
considered only up to the fifth gunasthan? The answer is that the emergence of
"udyotanamkarma" due to birth is considered, but not the emergence due to
attainment.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastaSa vaikriya kI vivakSA nahIM kI hai kintu usa gati meM janma lene se
prApta hone vAle (bhavapratyayika) kriyadvika kI vivakSA kI gaI hai| yaha
bhavapratyayika vaikriyazarIra aura paMtra aMgopAMga nAmakarma deva aura mArapI
ko hI hotA hai, kintu unheM pA~cavA~ guNasthAna nahIM hotA  /  isalie vaiyika kA
udaya pA~cave guNasthAna meM nahIM mAnA jAtA hai| isI prakAra pAMcaveM Adi
guNasthAnoM ko prApta karane vAle jIvoM ke pariNAma itane zuddha ho jAte haiM ki
jisase dubhaMga aura anAdeyadvikaanAdeya aura ayazaHkIrtinAmakarma ye tIna
prakRtiyoM pahale cAra guNasthAnoM meM hI udaya ko prApta ho sakatI haiM, kintu
pA~caveM Adi Age ke guNasthAnoM meM inakA udaya honA sambhava nahIM hai  /
isaliye pA~caveM guNasthAna meM 87 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya hai  /  chaThe
guNasthAna meM 81 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya haiN| jinakA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra
hai * pA~cave guNasthAna meM udayogya 57 prakRtiyoM meM se 'tirigai Au niujjoya'
tiyaMcagati tiryacAyu, nIcagotra aura udyotanAmakarma' ye cAra prakRtiyAM
tiyaMcoM meM udayayogya haiM aura tiyaMcoM ko pahale se pacava guNasthAna hI ho
sakate haiM, chaThe Adi Age ke guNasthAna nahIM hote haiM  /  isalie ina
prakRtiyoM kA udayaviccheda pA~cave guNasthAna ke antima 84 F 1. zAstra meM
'jaidevuttaravikriya' pada meM muniyoM aura devoM ko uttaravekriyazarIra dhAraNa
karane aura usa zarIra ko dhAraNa karate samaya udyotanAmakamaM kA udaya honA
kahA hai ataH jama vaikriyazarIra vAle kI apekSA se chaha guNasthAna meM
udyotanAmakarma kA udaya pAyA jAtA hai taba pAMcaveM guNasthAna taka hI
udyotanAmakarma kA udaya kyoM mAnA jAtA hai ? isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki
pAMcaveM guNasthAna taka janma ke nimitta se hone vAlA hI udyota - nAmakarma kA
udaya vivakSita kiyA gayA hai, labdhi ke nimitta se hone vAlA udyotanAmakarma kA
udaya vivakSita nahIM kiyA hai  /

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  These become extinct in time, meaning they are not
capable of arising in the sixth and subsequent Gunasthanas. Thus, the arising of
the four natures, namely Tiryanch-Gati, etc., up to Udyot, is considered to be
only up to the fifth Gunasthana. And the arising of the fourfold Pratyakhyana-
Avarana-Kshaya - Pratyakhyana-Avarana, Krodha, Mana, Maya, and Lobha - as long
as it persists, the attainment of any Gunasthana from the sixth onwards does not
occur. In other words, as long as the Pratyakhyana-Avarana Kshayas continue to
arise, the observance of all restraints cannot be achieved, nor can the sixth
Gunasthana be attained. Therefore, due to the cessation of these Kshayas at the
end of the fifth Gunasthana, they are not considered capable of arising in the
sixth Gunasthana.  Thus, out of the 87 natures capable of arising in the fifth
Gunasthana, the arising of these eight natures - Tiryanch-Gati, Tiryanch-Ayu,
Nich-Gotra, Udyot-Nama-Karma, and Pratyakhyana-Avarana Krodha, Mana, Maya, and
Lobha - ceases at the end of the fifth Gunasthana. Therefore, it should be
considered that the arising of the remaining 76 natures occurs in the sixth
Gunasthana without these eight Karma-Prakritis. However, the arising of the two
natures - Aharak-Dwik, Aharak-Sharira, and Aharak-Angopanga Nama-Karma - occurs
only in the sixth Gunasthana. Therefore, by including these two in the
aforementioned 76 natures, it is considered that the arising of a total of 81
natures occurs in the sixth Gunasthana.  The arising of Aharak-Dwik in the sixth
Gunasthana is observed when a Chaturdasha Purvadhara Muni, through Labdhi,
creates an Aharak-Sharira and assumes it. A Chaturdasha Purvadhari, through a
subtle object...  - Gommatasar, Karmakar, 267

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha samaya meM ho jAtA hai, arthAt chaThe Adi Age ke
guNasthAnoM meM ye udayayogya nahIM haiN| _ isa prakAra tiryaMcagati Adi udyota
paryanta cAra prakRtiyoM kA udaya pAMcaveM guNasthAna taka hI mAnA jAtA hai
tathA pratyAkhyAnAvaraNakapAyacatuSka-pratyAkhyAnAvarama krodha, mAna, mAyA aura
lobha - kA udaya jaba taka rahatA hai, taba taka chaThe guNasthAna se lekara Age
ke kisI bhI guNasthAna kI prApti nahIM hotI hai arthAt jaba taka
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAyoM kA udaya rahatA hai, taba taka sakala saMyama kA
pAlana nahIM ho sakatA hai aura na chaThA guNasthAna prApta hotA hai  /  isalie
ina kaSAyoM kA pA~cava guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM viccheda ho jAne se ye
chaThe gugamthAna meM udayayogya nahIM mAnI jAtI haiM  /  isa prakAra pAMcaveM
muNasthAna kI udayayogya 87 prakRtiyoM meM meM tiyaMcagati, tithaMcAyu,
nIcagotra, udyotanAmakarma aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha
ina ATha prakRtiyoM kA udayaviccheda pAMcaveM guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM ho
jAtA hai  / ' ataH ina ATha karmaprakRtiyoM ke binA 76 prakRtiyoM kA udaya
chaThe guNasthAna meM honA mAnA jAnA cAhie  /  kintu AhAraka-dvika-AhArakazarIra
aura AhAraka-aMgopAMga nAmakarma-ina do prakRtiyoM kA udaya chaThe guNasthAna
meM hI hone se pUrvokta 76 prakRtiyoM meM ina do ko milAne meM kula 81
prakRtiyoM kA udaya chaThe guNasthAna meM honA mAnA jAtA hai  /  chaThe
guNasthAna meM AhArakadvika kA udaya usa samaya pAyA jAtA hai, jisa samaya koI
caturdaza pUrvadhara muni labdhi ke dvArA AhArakazarIra kI racanAkara use
dhAraNa karate haiN| caturdaza pUrvadhArI kisI sUkSma viSaya 1. dese
tadiyakasAyA liridhAunjovaNIca tiriygdii| -gommaTasAra, karmakAra, 267

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
86 When doubt arises in the mind and it is impossible to go to the field of the
omniscient due to the absence of the omniscient nearby, they create a beautiful,
flawless, and non-violent food body using their special attainment and go to the
field of the omniscient with that body, resolve their doubts, and then return to
their place. But those fourteen former holders of the attainment are necessarily
negligent. One who uses attainment becomes curious, and curiosity leads to a
loss of stability or concentration. The loss of concentration is called
negligence. Therefore, the food body is considered to arise in the sixth stage
of the soul. Out of the 81 natures that are capable of arising in the sixth
stage of the soul, the five natures of *styanaddhitriknidra-nidra*, *prachala-
prachala*, *styanaddhi*, and *aaharaka-dvik* do not arise from the seventh stage
of the soul onwards. Because the arising of *styanaddhi* is in the form of
negligence and 1. *Shubham vishambhyaaghati chaaaharakam
chaturdashapoorvasyaive*. *Svaarth Sutra*, 246 This is also called *aaharaka
samudghaat*. This happens while creating the food body and, being the object of
the *naaharaka-sharira-naama-karma*, i.e., the virtuous person with the food
attainment desires to create a food body, thus depleting the abundant *pudgalas*
of the *sthula-poorvatraddha-aaharaka-naama-karma*. 2. Compare— *Chhathe aahar
yogatiyam udhaya*. - *Gommatsar*, *Karmakaand*, 267

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 86 karmastava meM sandeha utpanna hone para tathA nikaTa meM sarvajJa ke
vidyamAna na hone se audArika zarIra se kSetrAntara meM jAnA asambhava
samajhakara apanI viziSTa labdhi ke prayoga dvArA zubha, sundara, niravadya aura
avyAghAtI AhArakazarIra kA nirmANa karate haiM aura aise zarIra se kSetrAntara
meM sarvajJa ke pAsa pahuMcakara unase sandeha kA nivAraNa kara phira apane
sthAna para vApasa A jAte haiM  / " lekina vaha caturdaza pUrvadhArI muni labdhi
kA prayoga karane vAle hone se avazya hI pramAdI hote haiM  /  jo labdhi kA
prayoga karatA hai, vaha utsuka ho hI jAtA hai aura utsukatA huI ki sthiratA yA
ekAgratA kA bhaMga huA  /  ekAgratA ke bhaMga hone ko hI pramAda kahate haiM  /
isalie AhArakadvikakA udaya chaThe guNasthAna meM hI mAnA jAtA hai  /  chaThe
guNasthAna meM udayayogya 81 prakRtiyoM meM se styAnaddhitrikanidrA-nidrA,
pracalApracalA aura styAnaddhi tathA AhArakadvika - ina pA~ca prakRtiyoM kA
udaya sAtaveM gugasthAna se lekara Age ke guNasthAnoM meM nahIM hotA hai| kyoMki
styAnaddhanika kA udaya pramAda rUpa hai aura 1. zubhaM vizumabhyAghAti
cAhArakaM caturdazapUrvarasyaiva  /  svArtha sUtra, 246 ise AhAraka samudghAta
bhI kahate hai  /  yaha AhArakazarIra banAte samaya hotA hai evaM
nAhArakazarIranAmakarma ko viSaya karatA huA, arthAt AhAraka labdhi vAlA sAdhu
AhArakazarIra banAne kI icchA karatA huA yathA sthUla pUrvatraddha
AhArakanAmakarma ke prabhUta pudgaloM kI nirjarA karatA hai  /  2. tulanA
kIjie-- chaThe AhAra yogatiyaM udyaa| - gommaTasAra, karmakANDa, 267

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Two Hundred Karma Granths  **Chapter 6:**  There is no negligence in the
sixth *guna-sthana*. The arising of the *aaharaka-dvaya* happens only to those
who are *pramatta-samyata*. Therefore, the arising and cessation of these five
*prakritis* happens at the end of the sixth *guna-sthana*. This reduces the
number of *prakritis* that can arise in the sixth *guna-sthana* from 81 to 76,
which are then eligible to arise in the seventh *guna-sthana*.  **Chapter 7:**
Even though a *muni* may have an *aaharaka-sharira* after attaining pure
*parinaama*, they can still pass through the seventh *guna-sthana*. The line is
thin. This happens for a very short time, therefore the arising of the
*aaharaka-dvaya* in the seventh *guna-sthana* is not counted. This is why the
seventh *guna-sthana* is considered to have 76 *prakritis* that can arise.
After explaining the number of *prakritis* that can arise in each *guna-sthana*
from the first to the seventh, and the names of the *prakritis* that cease to
arise at the end of each *guna-sthana*, the following verses explain the arising
of *karma-prakritis* in the eighth *guna-sthana* - *apuurva-karan*, up to the
eleventh *guna-sthana* - *upashanta-kashaya-vitaraaga-dmastha*.  **Verse 18:**
*Sammatta-antima-sangha-ya-pati-yagacheo-bisatari-apuchve. Haasa-ichchaka-anto-
chhashatthi-aniyatthi-veyatim*.  **Meaning:**  Due to the *mantra* of the three
*samhananas* - *samyaktva-mohaniya* and the final two - the eighth *guna-sthana*
- *apuurva-karan* has 72 *prakritis* that can arise. Of these, the cessation of
the six *prakritis* - *haasya* etc. - leaves 66 *prakritis* that can arise in
the ninth *guna-sthana* - *anivritti-baadara-samparaya*.  **Verse 16:**
*Sanjala-si-gam-chchheo-sathi-suhamam-mi-turiya-lobhanto. Uvasanta-gune-guna-sa-
risana-araayagam-to*.  **Meaning:**  The tenth *guna-sthana* - *uvasanta* has 60
*prakritis* that can arise, and the eleventh *guna-sthana* - *guna-sa-risana-
araayaga* has 4 *prakritis* that can arise.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvisoya karmagrantha ; chaThe guNasthAna se bAge pramAda kA abhAva hai  /
AhArakadvikakA udaya to pramattasaMyata ko hI hotA hai| isalie ina pA~ca
prakRtiyoM kA udayaviccheda chaThe guNasthAna ke carama samaya meM ho jAtA hai|
jisase chaThe guNasthAna kI udayayogya 81 prakRtiyoM meM se ina pAMca prakRtiyoM
ko kama karane se sAtave guNasthAna meM 76 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya haiM  /  87
yadyapi AhArakazarIra banA lene ke bAda bhI koI muni vizuddha pariNAma se
AhArakazarIravAna hone para bhI sAtaveM guNasthAna ko para sakate haiM: rekhA
kama hotA hai| bahuta hI alpakAla ke lie aisA hotA hai, ataeva sAtaveM
guNasthAna meM AhArakadvika ke udaya ko nahIM ginA hai  /  isIlie sAtaveM
guNasthAna meM 76 prakRtiyoM kA udaya mAnA hai  /  isa prakAra pahale se lekara
sAtavaM guNasthAna taka kI udayayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura unake antima
samaya meM udayavicchinna hone vAlI prakRtiyoM ke nAma batAne ke anantara aba
Age kI gAthAoM meM AThaveM - apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna se lekara gyArahaveM -
upazAnta-kaSAyavItarAga-dmastha guNasthAna taka karmaprakRtiyoM ke udaya Adi ko
samajhAte haiM  /  sammattaMtima saMghayapatiyagaccheo bisatari apucve  /
hAsAichakkaaMto chasaTThi aniyaTTi veyatimaM  //  18  //  saMjalAsigaM chaccheo
saThi suhamaMmi turiyalobhaMto  /  uvasaMtaguNe guNasa risanArAyagaaM to  // 16
//  gAthArtha - samyaktvamohanIya aura anta ke tIna saMhanana kA manta hone se
apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM 72 prakRtiyoM kA udaya tathA inameM se hAsyAdiSaTka
kA anta hone se 66 prakRtiyoM kA udaya anivRttibAdarasaMparAya guNasthAna meM
hotA hai  /  veda

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Karmastava**  The six categories of **trika** and **sanjvalanatika** are
destroyed at the end of the ninth **anivrittibadasamparaya gunasthan**, leaving
60 categories eligible for arising in the tenth **sukshmasamparaya gunasthan**.
The destruction of **sanjvalnalobha** at the end of the tenth **gunasthan**
leaves 56 categories eligible for arising in the eleventh **upshantamoha
gunasthan**.  Of these 26 categories, **rishabhanaraachasanhanandvika** is
destroyed at the end of the eleventh **gunasthan**.  **Special Note:** These two
verses describe the number of categories eligible for arising in the eighth,
ninth, tenth, and eleventh **gunasthanas**, and the names of the categories that
are destroyed at the end of each.  Those who ascend the **gunasthan** series
from the seventh **gunasthan** are **munis**.  A **muni** ascends the series
when their **samyaktvamohaniyakarma** is either subdued or destroyed, not
otherwise.  As long as **samyaktvamohaniyakarma** remains active, the series
cannot be ascended.  A being who ascends the series by subduing
**samyaktvamohaniyakarma** is called an **upshamsheni** and one who ascends by
destroying it is called a **kshapaksheni**.  Therefore, of the 76 categories
eligible for arising in the seventh **gunasthan**, **samyaktvamohaniyakarma** is
destroyed at the end.  Only those beings with three **sanhananas** have the
capacity to ascend the series, and the last three **sanhananas** are those of
**mandavishuddhi** (slow purification) and they do not have the capacity to
ascend the series.  Therefore, the last **sanhananatrika** -
**ardhanaraachasanhanan**, **kolikasanhanan**, and **sevarta**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava trika aura saMjvalanatika kula chaha prakRtiyoM kA viccheda nauveM
anivRttibAdarasaMparAya guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM hone se dasaveM-
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM 60 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya haiM tathA
saMjvalanalobha kA dasavaM guNasthAna ke anta meM viccheda ho jAne se
gyArahaveM-upazAntamoha guNasthAna meM 56 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya mAnI jAtI hai
tathA ina 26 prakRtiyoM meM se RSabhanArAcasaMhananadvika kA vicchendra
gyArahaveM guNasthAna ke anta meM hotA hai| . vizeSArtha-ina do gAthAoM meM
AThaveM, nauveM, dasaveM aura gyArahaveM guNasthAnoM meM udayayogya prakRtiyoM
kI saMkhyA aura una-unake anta meM vyucchinna hone vAlI prakRtiyoM ke nAma
batalAye haiM  /  sAtaveM guNasthAna se Aga ke guNasthAna zreNI ArohaNa karane
bAle muni ke hote haiM aura zreNI kA ArohaNa vaha muni karatA hai, jisake
samyaktvamohanIyakarma kA upazama yA kSaya ho jAtA hai, dUsarA nhiiN| jaba taka
samyaktvamohanIyakarma kA udaya rahatA hai, taba taka zreNI ArohaNa nahIM kiyA
jA sakatA hai| jo jIva samyaktvamohanIya kA upazama karake zreNI ArohaNa karatA
hai, usako upazamazeNI vAlA aura jo kSaya karake zreNI ArohaNa karatA hai usako
kSapakazreNI bAlA kahate haiN| isIlie mAtaveM guNasthAna meM udayayogya 76
prakRtiyoM meM sa usake antima samaya meM samyaktvamohanIya kA udayaviccheda ho
jAtA hai tathA zreNI ArohaNa kI kSamatA Adi ke tIna saMhanana vAle jIvoM ke hI
hotI hai aura antima tIna saMhanana vAle maMda vizuddhi vAle hote haiM evaM
unakI kSamatA zreNI ArohaNa karane yogya nahIM hotI hai  /  isalie antima
saMhananatrika ardhanArAMcasaMhanana, kolikAsaMhanana aura sevArta

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 86 ## Second Karma-Grahya  **Sanhanan** ceases to arise at the end of the
seventh **guna-sthana**. Therefore, in the eighth **guna-sthana**, 72
**prakritis** arise, as four **prakritis** from the 76 **prakritis** that were
capable of arising in the seventh **guna-sthana** are eliminated.  As the
**guna-sthana** progresses, the purity of the soul's **parinaamas** increases.
Therefore, from the ninth **guna-sthana** onwards, the arising of **prakritis**
in the form of **sanklishta parinaama** (**kaashayika**) becomes progressively
less. Therefore, in the eighth **guna-sthana**, out of the 72 **prakritis**
capable of arising, six **prakritis** - **haasya**, **rati**, **arati**,
**shoka**, **bhaya**, and **jugupsa** - cease to arise at the end of the eighth
**guna-sthana**, resulting in only 66 **prakritis** arising in the ninth **guna-
sthana**.  Although 66 **prakritis** arise at the beginning of the ninth **guna-
sthana**, the purity of the **parinaamas** continues to increase, causing the
arising of six **prakritis** - **vedatrik** (**strived**, **purushaved**, and
**napumsakaved**) and **sanjwalanakashayanik** (**sanjwalan krodha**, **maan**,
and **maya**) - to cease in the ninth **guna-sthana** itself.  Therefore: 1.
Compare: **Apamatte sammatam antimatiya sanhṛdi.**  **Gommatasar, Karmakaanda,
268**  2. The order of cessation of arising of the six **prakritis** like
**vedatrik** in the ninth **guna-sthana** is as follows: If the series begins
with a woman, she first ceases to arise in **strived**, then in **purushaved**,
and then in **napumsakaved**. Subsequently, she gradually stops the arising of
**sanjwalan-trik**. If the series begins with a man, he first ceases to arise in
**purushaved**, then in **strived**, and then in **napumsakaved**, and gradually
stops the arising of **sanjwalan-trik**. And if the one who begins the series is
a **napumsak**, he first stops arising in **napumsakaved**, then in **strived**,
then in **purushaved**, and gradually stops the arising of **sanjwalan-trik**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 86 dvitIya karmagrabhya saMhanana kA sAtaveM guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM
udayaviccheda ho jAtA hai  /  isalie sAtaveM guNasthAna kI udayayogya 76
prakRtiyoM meM ukta cAra prakRtiyoM ko kama karane me AThaveM guNasthAna meM 72
prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai  /  guNasthAnA ke bar3hate krama ke sAtha AtmA ke
pariNAmoM ko vizuddhatA bar3hatI jAtI hai  /  ataH nauveM guNasthAna se lekara
Age ke guNasthAnoM meM saMkliSTa pariNAma rUpa ( kASAyika) prakRtiyoM kA udaya
honA bhI nyUna se nyUnatara hotA jAtA hai| isalie AThaveM guNasthAna meM
udayayogya 72 prakRtiyoM meM se hAsyAdiSaTka- hAsya, rati, arati, zoka, bhaya,
jugupsA ina chaha prakRtiyoM kA AThaveM guNasthAna ke carama samaya meM
udayaviccheda ho jAne se nauveM guNasthAna meM sirpha 66 prakRtiyoM kA ho udaya
hotA hai  /  yadyapi 66 prakRtiyoM kA udaya nauveM guNasthAna ke prArambha meM
hotA hai lekina pariNAmoM kI vizuddhi kramazaH bar3hatI hI jAtI hai, jisase
vedatrika- strIveda, puruSaveda aura napuMsakaveda tathA saMjvalanakaSAyanika -
saMjvalana krodha, mAna aura mAyA kula chaha prakRtiyoM kA udaya nauveM
guNasthAna meM hI kramazaH ruka jAtA hai  /  ataH 1. tulanA karo apamatte
sammataM aMtimatiya saMhRdI  /  gommaTasAra, karmakANDa, 268 2. nauveM
guNasthAna meM vevatrika Adi chaha prakRtiyoM ke udayaviccheda kA krama isa
prakAra haiM- yadi zreNI kA prArambha strI karatI hai to vaha pahale strIveda
kA, anantara puruSaveda kA aura usake bAda napuMsakaveda kA udayaviccheda karatI
hai  /  anantara kramazaH saMjvalanatrika ke udaya ko rokatI hai| yadi zreNI
prArambha karane vAlA puruSa hai to vaha sarvaprathama puruSaveda, poche
strIveda aura usake bAda napuMsakaveda kA viccheda karake kramazaH
saMjvalanatrika kA udaya rokatA hai aura oNI ko karane vAlA yadi napuMsaka hai
to pahUle napuMmakaveda kA udaya rokakara usake bAda strIveda ke udaya ko,
tatpazcAt puruSaveda ko rokakara kramaza: saMjvalanatrika ke udaya ko rokatA
hai| -

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Karmastava**  Of the 66 Prakṛtis, 60 are capable of arising in the tenth
Guṇasthāna, after the reduction of Vedatrik and Sanjvalana Kṣayika. Of these 60
Prakṛtis capable of arising in the tenth Guṇasthāna, the Sanjvalana Lobha arises
and is extinguished at the end. Therefore, the remaining 56 Prakṛtis are found
to arise in the eleventh Guṇasthāna after the reduction of Sanjvalana Lobha
Kṣaya. Of these 56 Prakṛtis capable of arising, the two Sanhananas, Ṛṣabhanārāca
Sanhanana and Nārāca Sanhanana, are extinguished at the end of the eleventh
Guṇasthāna. This is because the Upaśama Śreṇī extends up to the eleventh
Guṇasthāna, and those who ascend that Śreṇī can have all three Sanhananas; but
the Kṣapaka Śreṇī only has the Vaja Ṛṣabhanārāca Sanhanana. Therefore, in the
twelfth Guṇasthāna, there is only the Vaja Ṛṣabhanārāca Sanhanana, and the
remaining Ṛṣabhanārāca Sanhanana and Nārāca Sanhanana are extinguished at the
end of the eleventh Guṇasthāna.  After the eleventh Guṇasthāna, in the twelfth
Kṣīṇakṣaya-Vītarāga-Chhadmastha Guṇasthāna, which is attained in sequence, the
number of Prakṛtis capable of arising and the names of the Prakṛtis that are
extinguished at the end, along with the number of Prakṛtis capable of arising in
the thirteenth Sayogikechalī Guṇasthāna, are indicated in the following verse.
- 1. Compare ................"Apuṣyamhi. Chatva ṇokasāya aṇiyaṭṭībhagāmāgesu. ||
Bedatim kohamāṇam māyāsajvalaṇameva muhumante. Suhumo loho so bajenārāyaṇārāyaṁ.
|| Gommasāra, Karmakāṇḍa, 268-266

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava . 66 prakRtiyoM meM se vedatrika aura saMjvalanakaSAyanika ko kama
karane para dasaveM guNasthAna meM sATha prakRtiyA~ hI udayayogya haiN| dasaveM
guNasthAna meM udayayogya ina sATha prakRtiyoM meM se saMjvalana lobha kA udaya
antima samaya meM viccheda ho jAtA hai| ataH saMjvalana lobha kaSAya ko kama
karane meM zeSa 56 prakRtiyoM kA udaya gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM pAyA jAtA hai
aura ina udayayogya 56 prakRtiyoM meM se RSabhanArAcasaMhanana, nArAcasaMhanana
ina do saMhananoM kA anta gyArahaveM guNasthAna ke carama samaya meM ho jAtA
hai| kyoMki upazamazreNI gyArahaveM guNasthAna taka hotI hai aura usa zreNI kA
ArohaNa karane vAle Adi ke tInoM saMhanana bAle ho sakate haiM; kintu
kSapakazreNI vacaRSabhanArAcasaMhanana bAlA karatA hai  /  isalie bArahaveM
guNasthAna meM eka-vajraRSabhanArAcasaMhanana hI hotA hai aura zeSa rahe
RSabhanArAcasaMhanana aura nArAcasaMhanana kA gyArahaveM guNasthAna ke carama
samaya meM anta ho jAtA hai  /  gyArahaveM guNasthAna ke bAda kramaprApta
bArahaveMkSINakaSAya-vItarAga-chadmastha guNasthAna meM udayayogya prakRtiyoM kI
saMkhyA aura usake antima samaya meM jyucchinna hone vAlI prakRtiyoM ke nAma
sahita terahavaM -~sayogikecalI guNasthAna meM udayayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA
kA nirdeza Age kI gAthA meM karate haiM  /  - 1. tulanA karo
................"apuSyamhi  /  chatva NokasAyA aNiyaTTIbhAgamAgesu  /  /
bedatima kohamANaM mAyAsaMjalaNameva muhumaMte  /  suhumo loho so
bajeNArAyaNArAyaM  /  /  gommasAra, karmakANDa, 268-266

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  **Verse 20:**  "The Sagavan (knowledgeable) has
understood the Buchami (the nature of karma) and the Niduganto (the nature of
liberation). He has also understood the Panpaksha (the two extremes) and the
Naanantaraayadansan-chad (the five knowledge-obscuring, five obstruction, and
four vision-obscuring karmas). He is also aware of the Sajogi Baapala (the 42
karmas that are capable of arising in the state of Saayogi Kevali)."  **Verse
Meaning:**  In the state of Ksheen Kshaya (diminished passions) and Beetarag
(free from attachment), there are 57 karmas that can arise in the 57th Gunasthan
(state of being). These 57 karmas are present until the Dvicharam (the two
extremes) time. After the end of Nidradvik (the two karmas of sleep and
activity), there are only 55 karmas that can arise in the final time. The five
knowledge-obscuring, five obstruction, and four vision-obscuring karmas end at
the final time of the 12th Gunasthan. In the Saayogi Kevali Gunasthan, there are
42 karmas that are capable of arising.  **Special Meaning:**  The verse explains
the number of karmas that can arise at the beginning of the 12th Gunasthan and
the names of the karmas that end. It also explains the number of karmas that can
arise in the 13th Gunasthan.  It has been previously explained that the 12th
Gunasthan is attained by those who ascend the Kshapak Shreni (the series of
diminishing passions). Those who ascend the Kshapak Shreni are the Vajra
Rishabha Naraach Sanhanan Dharis (those who possess the Vajra Rishabha Naraach
Sanhanan and Naraach Sanhanan). Therefore, the two Sanhanans (Vajra Rishabha
Naraach Sanhanan and Naraach Sanhanan) end at the final time of the 11th
Gunasthan. When these two karmas are removed from the 56 karmas that can arise
in the 11th Gunasthan, there are 54 karmas that can arise in the 12th Gunasthan.
However, these 54 karmas are present only until the Dvicharam (the two extremes)
time. At the final time, the Nidradvik (the two karmas of sleep and activity)
cease to arise. Therefore, excluding these two karmas, there are 52 karmas that
can arise in the final time of the 12th Gunasthan.  **Note:**  Some Acharyas
(teachers) believe that the Nidra (sleep) karma arises in the Upamantmoha
Gunasthan (the state of almost-free from delusion). However, because it is
purified, it does not arise in the Ksheenmoha Gunasthan (the state of diminished
delusion).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha sagavanna khoNa bucami nidugaMto ya carami paNapakSa  /
nANaMtarAyadaMsaNa-caDa cheo sajogi bApAlA  // 20 //  gAthArtha - kSINakaSAya-
bItarAga chadmastha guNasthAna meM 57 prakRtiyoM kA udaya rahatA hai| ina 57
prakRtiyoM kA udaya dvicarama samaya paryanta pAyA hai aura nidrAdvikakA anta
hone se antima samaya meM 55 prakRtiyoM kA udaya rahatA hai  /  pA~ca
jJAnAvaraNa, pA~ca antarAya aura cAra darzanAvaraNa kA anta bArahaveM guNasthAna
ke antima samaya meM ho jAtA hai evaM sayogikevalI guNasthAna meM 42 prakRtiyoM
udayayogya haiM  /  EUR1 vizeSArtha - gAthA meM bArahavaM guNasthAna ke
prArambha meM udayayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhNa aura anta hone vAlI prakRtiyoM ke
nAma va terahava guNasthAna meM udayayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA batalAI hai  /
pUrva meM yaha batAyA jA cukA hai ki bArahavA~ guNasthAna kSapakazreNI kA
ArohaNa karane vAle prApta karate haiM aura kSapakazreNI kA ArohaNa karanevAle
vajraRSabhanArAcasaMhananadhArI jIva hote hai| ataH RSabhanArAcasaMhanana aura
nArAcasaMhanana ina do saMhananoM kA gyArahavaM guNasthAna ke carama samaya meM
anta ho jAtA hai aura usameM udayayogya 56 prakratiyoM meM se ukta do prakRtiyoM
ko kama karane para bArahaveM guNasthAna meM 57 prakRtiyoM kA udaya mAnA jAnA
caahie| parantu ina 57 prakRtiyoM kA udaya bhI dvicarama samaya arthAt antima
samaya se pUrva ke samaya paryanta pAyA jAtA hai aura antima samaya meM
nidrAdvika nidrA aura pracalA kA udaya vyucchinna hone se ina do prakRtiyoM ko
chor3akara zeSa 55 prakRtiyoM kA udaya bArahaveM guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM
mAnA jAtA hai  /  ' 1. kitane hI AcAryoM kA mata hai ki upamAntamoha guNasthAna
meM hI nidrA kA udaya hotA hai, kintu vizuddha hone se kSINamoha guNasthAna meM
udaya nahIM

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the 55 categories mentioned, the five knowledge-obscuring categories -
*matijnanaavaran*, *srutajnanaavaran*, *avadhijnanaavaran*,
*manahparyayajnanaavaran*, and *kevalajnanaavaran*, and the five obstacles -
*danantaraya*, *laabhantaraya*, *bhogantaraya*, *upabhogantaraya*,
*viryantarya*, and the four vision-obscuring categories -
*chakshudarshanaavaran*, *achakshudarshanaavaran*, *avhidarshanaavaran*, and
*kevaladarshanaavaran*, totaling 14 categories, do not arise beyond the end of
the twelfth *gunasthan*. Therefore, only 41 categories should be considered
capable of arising in the *sayogikevali* *gunasthan*. However, the thirteenth
*gunasthan* has the unique characteristic that the *tirthankaranamkarma*, which
binds the beings who become *tirthankaras*, arises in this *gunasthan*. This
*karma* does not arise in other *gunasthanas*. Therefore, by adding the
*tirthankaranamkarma* to the previously mentioned 41 categories capable of
arising, a total of 42 categories are considered to arise in the thirteenth
*gunasthan*.  The number of categories capable of arising in the thirteenth
*gunasthan* mentioned in the verse is indicated by the term "tityudaya" in the
subsequent verse.  Now, in the subsequent verses, the categories that are
destroyed in the thirteenth *gunasthan* and...  According to their opinion, all
55 categories already arise in the twelfth *gunasthan*. In the sixth
*karmagrantha*, the *kshinamoha* *ganasthan* does not mention the arising of
*nidra*. 1. Compare:  *Veenaksayaducharime nidda payala ya udayavocchhinna.
Nanantarayadasayam dasanayasari charimmi.* - *Gommatasar*, *Karmakanda*, 270 2.
*Tityam kevaligi*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava ukta 55 prakRtiyoM meM se bhI jJAnAvaraNapaMcaka-matijJAnAvaraNa,
zrutajJAnAbaraNa, avadhijJAnAvaraNa, manaHparyayajJAnAvaraNa aura
kevalajJAnAvaraNa, tathA antarAyapaMcaka-dAnAntarayaya, lAbhAntarAya,
bhogAntarAya, upabhogAntarAya, vIryAntarAya aura darzanAvaraNacatuSka-
cakSudarzanAvaraga, acakSudarzanAvaraNa, avadhidarzanAvaraNa aura
kevaladarzanAvaraNa kula milAkara cAdaha prakRtiyoM kA udaya bArahaveM
guNasthAna ke antima samaya se Age nahIM hotA hai  /  ataH terA sayogikevalI
guNasthAna meM 41 prakRliyA~ udayayogya mAnI jAnI cAhie thiiN| lekina terahaveM
guNasthAna kI yaha vizeSatA hai ki tIrthakaranAmakarma kA bandha karane vAle
jIvoM ke isakA udaya isa guNasthAna meM hotA hai| anya guNasthAnoM meM
tIrtharanAmakarma kA udaya nahIM hotA hai| ata: pUrvokta udayayogya 41
prakRtiyoM ke sAtha tIrthakaranAmakarma ko milAne se kula 42 prakR. tiyoM kA
udaya terahavaM guNasthAna meM mAnA jAtA hai| gAthA meM terahaveM guNasthAna meM
udayayogya prakRtiyoM kI jo saMkhyA batAyI hai usameM tIrthakaranAmakarma ke
udaya kA saMketa Age kI gAthA meM 'tityudayA' pada se kiyA gayA hai| aba Age kI
gAthAoM meM terahaveM guNasthAna meM kSaya hone vAlI aura hotA hai| unake
matAnusAra pahale se hI 55 prakRtiyoM kA udaya bArahaveM guNasthAna meM hotA hai
/  chaThe karmagrantha meM bhI kSINamoha gaNasthAna meM nidrA kA udaya nahIM
batAyA gayA hai  /  1. tulanA karo vINakasAyaducarime NiddA payalA ya
udayavocchiNNA  /  NANaMtarAyadasayaM dasaNayasAri carimamhi  /  /
-gommaTasAra, karmakANDa, 270 2. tityaM kevaligi  /

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The second Karma Granth, in the fourteenth Gunasthan, details the number of
उदययोग्य (udayoyogya)  natures and the names of those natures that cease to
exist at their respective peak times.  **Verse 21:** The उदययोग्य (udayoyogya)
natures are six in number:  तित्थुदया (tiththudaya), उरला (urala), अपिरखगइदुग
(apirakhgaiduga), परिसितिग (parisitiga), संठाणा (santhana), अगुरुलहुवन्नवल
(agurulahuvannaval), निमिणतेयकम्माइसंघयण (niminateyakammaisanghayan).  **Verse
22:** The second सूसर (susar) and सामासा (samasa) are eleven, and the तुच्छेओ
(tuccheo) are thirty. The twelve are अजोगि (ajogi), सुभगाइज्जजसन्नयरवेयषियं
(subhagaijjajasannayaraveyashiyam).  **Explanation:** In the thirteenth
Gunasthan, the उदरा (udara) of karma occurs.  Of the thirty उदययोग्य
(udayoyogya) natures, including साता (sata) and असाता (asata) वेदनीय (vedaniya),
one of them ceases to exist at the end of the thirteenth Gunasthan.  The
remaining twenty-six are पुद्गलविपाकिनी (pudgalvipakinī).    In the fourteenth
Gunasthan, the उदय (udaya) of twelve natures, including सत्रिक (satrik),
पंचेन्द्रियजाति (panchendriyajati), मनुष्यायु (manushyayu), मनुष्यगति
(manushygati), जिननामकर्म (jinnamakarma), and उच्चगोत्र (uchchgotra), continues
until the end of the fourteenth Gunasthan.  After this, they also cease to
exist.  **Summary:** These two verses describe the number of उदययोग्य
(udayoyogya) natures in the thirteenth and fourteenth Gunasthan, and the names
of those natures that cease to exist at their respective peak times.  In the
thirteenth Gunasthan, forty-two उदययोग्य (udayoyogya) natures exist, of which
thirty cease to exist at the end of the Gunasthan.  The remaining twenty-six are
पुद्गलविपाकिनी (pudgalvipakinī).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha caudahaveM guNasthAna meM udayayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA
tathA usake bhI carama samaya meM anta hone vAlI prakRtiyoM ke nAma balalAte
haiM  /  titthudayA uralA'pirakhagaiduga parisitiga cha sNtthaannaa|
agurulahuvannavala nimiNateyakammAisaMghayaNa  // 21 //  dUsara sUsara
sAmAsAegayaraM ca tIsa tuccheo  /  vArasa ajogi subhagAijjajasannayaraveyaSiyaM
// 22 //  tasatiga paNivi maNuyAugaha jiNuccha ti gharamasamayaMtA  /
gAthArtha-terahaveM mathAna meM hI karanApakarma kA udarA hotA hai  /
audArikahika, asthiradvika, khagati dvika, pratyekatrika, saMsthAnaSaTka,
agurulaghucataSka, varNacatuSka, nirmANanAma, taijasazarIra, kArmaNazarIra,
pahalA saMhanana, duHsvaranAma, susvaranAma, sAtA-asAtA vedanIya meM se koI eka,
kula 30 prakRtiyoM kA udayaviccheda terahaveM guNasthAna ke anta meM ho jAne ro
subhaga, Adeya, yazaHkIti, vedanIyakarma kI do prakRtiyoM meM pAnI se koI eka,
satrika, paMcendriyajAti, manuSyAyu, manuSyagati, jinanAmakarma aura uccagotra-
ina 12 prakRtiyoM kA udaya caudahaveM guNasthAna ke antima samaya taka honA hai
/  isake bAda inakA bhI anta ho jAtA hai| vizeSArtha- ina do gAthAoM meM
terahava aura caudahA guNasthAna meM udayayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura una-
unake antima samaya meM vyucchinna hone vAlI prakRtiyoM ke nAma batalAye hai|
terahaveM guNasthAna meM 42 prakRtiyoM kA udaya rahatA hai  /  inameM se 30
prakRtiyoM kA isa guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM udayaviccheda ho jAtA hai  /
ina vyucchinna hone vAlI prakRtiyoM meM sAtA aura asAtA vedanIya ma se koI eka
vedanIyakarma aura zeSa bacI 26 prakRtiyAM pudgalavipAkinI

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmas are (those which cause the experience of vipāka by pudgala). Of these,
the two natures called Susvara and Duḥsvara are Bhāṣā-pudgala-vipākinī, and the
remaining 27 natures, such as Audārika-dvīka, etc., are Paśarīra-pudgala-
vipākinī.  64 Tri-pākinī kṛtiyaṃ experience the fruit when there is harmony in
yoga. Therefore, as long as the tendency of Vacana-yoga remains and the
reception and transformation of Bhāṣā-pudgalas continues, the emergence of
Susvara and Duḥsvara-nāmakarma is possible. And as long as the reception,
transformation, and support of pudgalas is taken by Kāya-yoga, the emergence of
the 27 natures, such as Audārika, etc., is possible. But at the peak time of the
thirteenth guṇasthāna, yoga is suppressed. Therefore, the emergence of these 26
natures also stops at that time.  In the gāthā, some of these 26 natures have
been given independent names, and the remaining natures have been indicated by
designations. The names of the natures designated by designations are:
Audārika-ṭika, Audārika-śarīra, Audārika-aṅgopāṅga-nāmakarma. Asthira-dvīka,
Asthira, Aśubha-nāmakarma. Svargātida-dvīka - Śubha-vihāyoga-ti, Aśubha-
vihāyoga-ti-nāmakarma. Pratyekatra-trika, Pratyek, Sthira, Śubha-nāmakarma.  — —
Saṃsthāna-ṣaṭka - Sama-caturasra, Nyagrodha-parimaṇḍala, Sādi, Vāmana, Kubja,
and Iṇḍa-saṃsthāna.  — Aguru-laghu-catuṣka - Aguru-laghu, Upaghāta, Parāghāta,
and Ucchvāsa-nāma. Varṇa-catuṣka - Varṇa, Gandha, Rasa, Sparśa-nāma.  Through
the above designations, the names of 23 natures have been told, and the names of
the remaining six natures are as follows: Nir-māṇa, Taijasa-śarīra, Kārmaṇa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava ( pudgala dvArA vipAka kA anubhava karAne vAlI ) haiM  /  inameM se
susvara aura duHsbara nAmakarma yaha do prakRtiyA~ bhASA pudgalavipAkinI aura
zeSa audArikadvika Adi 27 prakRtiyAM pazarIra-pudgalavipAkinI haiN| 64 tripAkinI
kRtiyAM yoga ke sadbhAva rahane para phala kA anubhava karAtI haiM  /  isalie
jaba taka vacanayoga kI pravRtti rahatI hai aura bhASApudgaloM kA grahaNa,
pariNamana hotA rahatA hai, taba taka hI susvara aura duHsvaranAmakarma kA udaya
sambhava hai aura jaba taka kAyayoga ke dvArA pudgaloM kA grahaNa, pariNamana
aura Alambana liyA jAtA hai, taba taka audArika Adi 27 prakRtiyoM kA udaya ho
sakatA hai  /  lekina terahaveM guNasthAna ke carama samaya meM yogoM kA nirodha
ho jAtA hai  /  ina ataH 26 prakRtiyoM kA udaya bhI usI samaya ruka jAtA hai  /
gAthA meM ina 26 prakRtiyoM meM se kisI-kisI ke to svatantra nAma diye hai aura
zeSa prakRtiyoM ko saMjJAoM dvArA batalAyA hai  /  saMjJAoM dvArA nirdiSTa
prakRtiyoM ke nAma ye haiM audArikaTika audArikazarIra, audArika
aMgopAMganAmakarma  /  asthiradvika asthira, azubhanAmakarma  /  svargAtidvika-
zubha vihAyogati, azubha vihAyogatinAmakarma  /  pratyekatrika pratyeka, sthira,
zubhanAmakarma  /  -- -- saMsthAnaSaTka - samacaturasra, nyagrodhaparimaNDala,
sAdi, vAmana, kubja aura iMDasaMsthAna  /  - agurulaghu catuSka -agurulaghu,
upaghAta, parAghAta aura ucchvAsa nAma | varNa catuSka- varNa, gandha, rasa,
sparzanAma  /  ukta saMjJAoM ke mAdhyama se 23 prakRtiyoM ke nAma batAye haiM
aura moSa chaha prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM-nirmANa, taijasazarIra,
kArmaNa

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  **Body, Vajra-Rishabha-Naracha-Samhanana, Dusvara and
Susvara names. These 23 + 6 total 26 Prakṛtis.**  Thus, the names of the 30
Prakṛtis that are to be extinguished at the end of the thirteenth Gunasthan are:
Odarik-Sharira, Audarik Angopang, Asthir, Ashubh, Shubh Vihayogati, Ashubh
Vihayogati, Sthir, Shubh, Sama-Chaturasra-Sansthan, Nyagrodha-Parimandala-
Sansthan, Sadisansthan, Vaman-Sansthan, Kubja-Sansthan, Hund-Sansthan, Aguru-
Lagghu, Upghāt, Parāghāt, Ucchvās, Varna, Gandha, Rasa, Sparsha, Nirman,
Taijasa-Sharira, Karman-Sharira, Vajra-Rishabha-Naracha-Samhanana, Dusvara,
Susvara, and one of the Vedaniya, either Mana or Amata.  Of the 42 Prakṛtis that
are eligible to arise in the thirteenth Gunasthan, when these 30 Prakṛtis are
subtracted, the remaining 12 Prakṛtis arise in the fourteenth Gunasthan. Their
names are: Subhag, Aadey, Yash-Kirti-nam, one of the two Prakṛtis of Vedaniya
Karma, Tras, Badar, Paryapt Pancha-Indriya-Jati, Manusya-Ayu, Manusya-Gati,
Tirthankara-nam, and Uchcha-Gotra.  **2. Compare**  **Taviyek-Jyamir-Minam
Dhiras-Uhasara-G Diuralateja-Duggam. Pattey Santhanam Kshan Guru-Ch Ukk Joghi.**
**Gommatasar, Karmakand, 271**  **Both Prakṛtis of Vedaniya Karma do not arise
together in the fourteenth Gunasthan. Therefore, except for the Prakṛti that
remains in the fourteenth Gunasthan, the other Prakṛti's arising and extinction
are found at the end of the thirteenth Gunasthan.**  **3. Compare**  **Tadik-Kam
Manuvagadi Pancha-Diya-Subhag-Tasati-Gade. Jasatistham Manuva-Au Uchcham Cha
Ayogiv Rimhi.**  **Gommatasar Karmakand, 272**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha zarIra, vajraRSabhanArAcasaMhanana, duHsvara aura
susvrnaam| ye 23 + 6 kula milAkara 26 prakRtiyoM ho jAtI hai| isa prakAra
terahaveM guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM vyucchinna hone vAlI 30 prakRtiyoM ke
nAma yaha haiM- odArikazarIra, audArika aMgopAMga, asthira, azubha, zubha
vihAyogati, azubha vihAyogati, sthira, zubha, samacaturasrasaMsthAna,
nyagrodhaparimaNDalasaMsthAna, sAdisaMsthAna, vAmanasaMsthAna, kubjasaMsthAna,
huNDasaMsthAna, agurulaghu, upaghAta, parAghAta, ucchvAsa, varNa, gandha, rasa,
sparza, nirmANa, taijasazarIra, kArmaNazarIra, vajraRSabhanArAcasaMhanana,
duHsvara, susvara tathA mAnA aura amAtA vedanIya meM se koI eka  / ' terahave
guNasthAna meM udayayogya 42 prakRtiyoM meM se ina 30 prakRtiyoM ko kama karane
para zeSa rahI 12 prakRtiyoM kA udaya caudahaveM guNasthAna meM rahatA hai  /
unake nAma ye haiMsubhaga, Adeya, yazaH kIrtinAma, vedanIyakarma kI do
prakRtiyoM meM se koI eka trasa, bAdara, paryApta paMcendriyajAti, manuSyAyu,
manuSyagati, tIrthaGkaranAma aura uccagotra  /  2. tulanA karo
taviyekajyamirmiNaM dhirasuhasaraga diurAlatejaduggaM  /  patteya saMThANaM
kSaNa guruca ukka jogahi  //  gommaTasAra, karmakANDa, 271 vedanIya karma kI
donoM prakRtiyoM 2. caudahaveM guNasthAna meM kisI bhI jIva ko kA eka sAtha
udaya nahIM hotA hai| ataH una donoM meM se jisa prakRti kA caudahaveM
guNasthAna meM rahatA hai usa prakRti ke sivAya dUsarI prakRti u kA
udayaviccheda terahaveM guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM pAyA jAtA hai| 3. tulanA
karo tadikkaM maNuvagadI paMcidiyasubhagatasatigAde | jasatisthaM maNuvAu uccaM
ca ayogiva rimahi  //  65 - gommaTasAra karmakANDa, 272

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Kamstava These 12 Prakṛtis remain in existence until the end of the fourteenth
Guṇasthāna, and upon their cessation, the Jiva becomes free from Karma and
attains the state of a perfect Siddha, reaching the abode of Moksha, the eternal
and infinite bliss. And, "Svanubhutya Chakasate," it remains eternally
illuminated by its own inherent knowledge.  Having thus described the rise and
cessation of Karma Prakṛtis in the fourteen Guṇasthānas, we now proceed to
describe the Udeeraṇā of Karmas in the Guṇasthānas in the following verses.
Udau-Khudeeraṇā Parampamasaisaigaganeṣu ||23|| Esa Paryāḍ-Tigūṇā
Beyaryāmadahārajugat Taulati-g. Maṇuyāu Pamattanta Ajogi Aṇudiirgo Bhagavan
||24||  Gāthārtha - Udeeraṇā is similar to Uday. However, there is a difference
between Uday and Udeeraṇā in the seven Guṇasthānas starting from Apramāta.
Udeeraṇā is less in the three Prakṛtis. Vedaniya-drik, Āhārak-dvik, Styāna-
dvitrik, and Maṇuṣyāyu, these eight end in the Pramāta Guṇasthāna, and the
Ayogik-kevala Bhagavan does not experience the Udeeraṇā of any Karma.
Viśeṣārtha - The verse explains the similarity and difference in the number of
Uday and Udeeraṇā Prakṛtis up to which Guṇasthāna, and from which Guṇasthāna
onwards. It also clarifies the difference with reasons. 1. The extraordinary
cause of Moksha, the Punyodaya-ātmaka Prakṛtis, generally remain in Uday until
the fourteenth Guṇasthāna, hence the state of Samsara is considered up to that
point. Afterwards, the state of Siddha is attained, meaning that not a single
Karma remains in Uday or existence. Even in existence, these 12 Prakṛtis are
generally considered in the fourteenth Guṇasthāna.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kamastava ina 12 prakRtiyoM kA udaya caudahaveM guNasthAna ke antima samaya
taka rahatA hai aura inakA viccheda hote hI jIva karmamukta hokara pUrNa
siddhasvarUpa ko prApta kara ananta zAzvata sukha ke sthAna mokSa ko calA jAtA
hai aura 'svAnubhutyA cakAsate' apane jJAnAtmaka svabhAva se sadaiva prakAzamAna
rahatA hai| isa prakAra caudaha guNasthAnoM meM karmaprakRtiyoM ke udaya, udaya-
viccheda kA kathana karane ke bAda aba Age kI gAthAoM meM guNasthAnoM meM karmoM
kI udIraNA kA varNana karate haiN| udau-khudIraNA paramapamasAIsagagaNesu  // 23
//  esA paryADa-tigUNA beyaryAmadhAhArajugata taultig| maNuyAu pamattaMtA ajogi
aNudIrago bhagavaM  // 24 //  gAthArtha-udaya ke samAna udIraNA hotI hai|
tathApi apramatAdi sAta guNasthAnoM meM udaya kI apekSA udIraNA meM kucha
vizeSatA hai| udIraNA tIna prakRtiyoM kI kama hotI hai  /  vedanIyadrika,
AhArakadvika, styAnadvitrika aura manuSyAyu ina ATha kA pramatta guNasthAna meM
anta ho jAtA hai aura ayogikevala bhagavAna kisI bhI karma kI udIraNA nahIM
karate haiN| vizeSArtha-gAthA meM udaya aura udIraNA prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA meM
kisa guNasthAna taka samAnatA aura kisa guNasthAna se Age bhinnatA hai, yaha
batalAyA hai aura usa bhinnatA ko kAraNa sahita spaSTa karate hue 1. mokSa kI
asAdhAraNa kAraNamata puNyodayAtmaka prakRtiyA~ prAyaH caudahA guNa sthAna taka
udaya meM rahatI haiM isalie vahA~ taka saMsArI avasthA mAnI jAtI hai| anantara
siddhAvasthA hotI hai arthAt eka bhI karma udaya yA sattA meM nahIM rahatA hai|
sattA meM bhI caudahaveM guNasthAna meM prAyaH yahI 12 prakRtiyA~ * mAnI jAtI
hai|

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the fourteenth Aayogikevali Gunasthan of the second Karmagrantha, it is
clearly stated that just as there is no arising of Karma-prakritis, there is
also an absence of the arising of Karmas.  Although the arising of prakritis and
their udirana (arising) are the same in the Gunasthanas, this rule should be
understood from the first Mithyatva Gunasthan to the sixth Pramatta-Samyatta
Gunasthan. From the seventh Apratmatta-Samyatta Gunasthan to the thirteenth
Sayogikevali Gunasthan, there is a special characteristic in the udirana
compared to the arising of Karma-prakritis in these seven Gunasthanas.  The
reason for this special characteristic is that in the sixth Gunasthan, 81
udayayogya (capable of arising) prakritis are mentioned, and at its final stage,
the five prakritis of Aharak-dvik-Aharak-sharira and Aharak-angopanga, and
Styaddhitrik-nidra-nidra, Prachala-prachala, and Styanaddhi are severed.
However, besides these five prakritis, the udirana-vichched (severance of
arising) of the three prakritis of Vedaniyadvik-sata, Asata Vedaniya, and
Manushayayu also occurs. Beyond the sixth Gunasthan, there are no such
adhyavasayas (determinations) that can cause the udirana of these three
prakritis. Therefore, from the seventh to the thirteenth Gunasthan, the three
udiranayogya (capable of arising) prakritis are considered less than the
udayayogya prakritis.  The meaning of the above statement is that from the first
to the sixth Gunasthan, the number of udayayogya and udiranayogya prakritis is
the same in each Gunasthan. However,  1. These three prakritis arise only from
the Sanklishta parinamas (complex results), therefore, it is impossible for
these three to arise in the Apratmattadi Gunasthanas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha caudahaveM ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM jaise
karmaprakRtiyoM kA udaya nahIM rahatA hai, vaise hI karmoM kI udIraNA kA bhI
abhAva honA spaSTa kiyA hai| yadyapi guNasthAnoM meM prakRtiyoM kI udIraNaH uda
ne samAna hai| lekina yaha niyama pahale-mithyAtva gaNasthAna se lekara
chaThepramattasaMyatta guNasthAna taka samajhanA cAhie, aura Age sAtava-
apramattasaMyata guNasthAna se lekara terahaveM-sayogikevalI gaNasthAna taka-ina
sAta guNasthAnoM meM karmaprakRtiyoM ke udaya kI apekSA udIraNA meM kucha
vizeSatA hotI hai| _ isa vizeSatA kA kAraNa yaha hai ki chaThe gaNasthAna meM
udayayogya prakRtiyA~ 81 batalAI gaI haiM aura usake antima samaya meM
AhArakadvika-AhArakazarIra aura AhArakaaMgopAMga tathA styAddhitrikanidrA-nidrA,
pracalA-pracalA aura styAnaddhi-ina pA~ca prakRtiyoM kA viccheda hotA hai|
lekina ukta 5 prakRtiyoM ke mivAya vedanIyadvikasAtA, asAtA vedanIya aura
manuSyAya-ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA udIraNA-viccheda bhI hotA hai  /  chaThe
guNasthAna se Age aise adhyavasAya nahIM hote haiM, jisase vedanIyadvika aura
manupyAyu- ina tIna prakRtiyoM kI udIraNA ho ske|' isIlie sAtaveM se lekara
terahaveM guNasthAna naka udayayogya prakRtiyoM kI apekSA udIraNAyogya tIna
prakRtiyA~ kama mAnI jAtI haiN| ukta kathana kA yaha Azaya hai ki pahale se
chaThe guNasthAna taka pratyeka guNasthAna meM udaya aura udIraNAyogya
prakRtiyAM samAna haiM, kintu 1. saMkliSTa pariNAmoM se hI ina tInoM ko ubIraNA
hotI hai, isa kAraNa apra. mattAdi guNasthAnoM meM ina tInoM kI udIraNA honA
asambhaba hai  /  I

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
68 From the seventh to the thirteenth **guna-sthana**, in each **guna-sthana**,
there are three **prakriti**s that are capable of arising. Therefore, the number
of **prakriti**s that are capable of arising and those that are capable of being
destroyed in the **guna-sthana**s should be understood as follows:  **Guna-
sthana Order** | **Number of Arising Prakriti** | **Number of Destroyed
Prakriti** ------- | -------- | -------- 1 | 117 | 117  The twelfth **guna-
sthana** has 57 **prakriti**s that are capable of arising, and their arising is
considered to be until the **dvi-charam** time. Therefore, subtracting **nidra-
dvi** from the aforementioned 57 **prakriti**s leaves 55 **prakriti**s that are
capable of arising. Therefore, subtracting **vedaniya-dvi** and **manushya-ayu**
from the 57 **prakriti**s that are capable of arising before the **dvi-charam**
time leaves 54 **prakriti**s that are capable of being destroyed. And
subtracting the aforementioned three from the 55 **prakriti**s that are capable
of arising at the final time leaves...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 68 karmastava sAtava guNasthAna se terahaveM guNasthAna taka pratyeka
guNasthAna meM udayayogya prakRttiyoM kI yA tIna-tIna prakRti dhAraNAyAma kAma
hotI haiN| ataH guNasthAnoM meM udaya aura tadoraNAyogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA
nimna prakAra samajhanI cAhieguNasthAnakrama udayaprakRti saMkhyA udIraNAprakRti
saMkhyA 117 117 bArahaveM guNasthAna kI udayayogya 57 prakRtiyAM haiM, jinakA
udaya dvicarama samaya paryanta mAnA jAtA hai  /  isalie pUrvokta 57 prakRtiyoM
meM se nidrAdvika ko kama karane se 55 prakRtiyoM kA udaya rahatA hai| isalie
dvicarama samaya se pUrva kI 57 prakRtiyoM meM se vedanIyadvika aura manuSyAyu-
ina tIna prakRti ko kama karane para udIraNAyogya prakRtiyA~ 54 aura antima
samaya kI udayayogya 55 prakRtiyoM meM se ukta tIna

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Chapter  **££**  When reducing the number of **Prakritis**, 52
**Prakritis** remain **Udeernayogya**. Therefore, in the twelfth **Gunasthan**,
57 and 55 **Prakritis** are **Udayayogya** and 54 and 52 **Prakritis** are
**Udeernayogya**, respectively.  The **Udeerna** of **Karma-Prakritis** should
be understood only up to the thirteenth **Gunasthan**. In the fourteenth
**Gunasthan**, the **Sayogiketal** **Gunasthan**, there is no **Udeerna** of any
**Karma**. The reason for the absence of **Udeerna** in this **Gunasthan** is
that **Udeerna** requires **Yoga**, but in the fourteenth **Gunasthan**,
**Yoga** is completely **Nirodha**. Therefore, there is no **Udeerna** of
**Karmas** in this **Gunasthan**.  Thus, having described the **Udeerna** of
**Karmas** in fourteen **Gunasthanas**, we now explain the characteristics of
the existence of **Karmas** and how many **Karma-Prakritis** exist in each
**Gunasthan** in the following verses.  **Satta** is the state of being, the
existence of **Karma** that has been bound by **Bandha** and has attained its
own nature. From the beginning to the end, there are 148 **Prakritis** that
exist, but in the second and third **Gunasthanas**, only 147 **Prakritis**
exist, excluding the **Jinnamakarma**.  **Attached to the soul** **Eleventh
Gunasthan**  **Special Note:** The verse describes the characteristics of
**Satta** and the number of **Satta-Prakritis** from the beginning to the
eleventh **Gunasthan**. It also hints at the absence of **Tirthankura-
Namakarma** in the second and third **Gunasthanas**.  **1.**  **Compare**
**Patpitti Ajogijine Udeergha Udayapayshtinam.** - Gommatasar, Karmakanda: 280

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya kanya PSPS prakRtiyoM ko kama karane para 52 prakRtiyAM udIraNAyogya
rahatI haiN| isIlie bArahave guNasthAna meM kramazaH udayayogya 57 aura 55 tathA
udIraNAyogya 54 aura 52 prakRtiyoM ko batalAyA hai  /  karmaprakRtiyoM kI
udIraNA terahaveM guNasthAna paryanta hI samajhanA cAhie caudahaveM -
sayogiketalI guNasthAna meM kisI bhI karma kI udIraNA nahIM hotI hai|' isa
guNasthAna meM udIraNA na hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki udIraNA ke hone meM yoga kI
apekSA hai, parantu caudahaveM guNasthAna meM yoga kA sarvathA nirodha ho jAtA
hai ataH isa guNasthAna meM karmoM kI udIraNA bhI nahIM hotI hai  /  isa prakAra
caudaha guNasthAnoM meM karmoM kI udIraNA kA kathana karake aba Age kI gAthAoM
meM karmoM kI sattA kA lakSaNa tathA kisa guNasthAna meM kitanI karma-prakRtiyoM
kI sattA hotI hai, Adi batalAte haiM  /  sattA krammANa ThiI baMdhAI - laddha-
asa-lAbhANaM  /  saMte aDavAlasayaM jA uvasamu vijiNu briyataie  // 25 //
gAyArtha-bandhAdika ke dvArA karmayogya jina pudgaloM ne apane svarUpa ko prApta
kiyA hai, una karmoM ke rahane ko sattA kahate haiN| pahale se lekara taka 148
prakRtiyoM kI sattA pAI jAtI hai, kintu dUsare va tIsare gaNasthAna meM
jinanAmakarma ke sivAya zeSa 147 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  AtmA ke sAtha
lage gyArahaveM guNasthAna vizeSArtha - gAthA meM sattA kA lakSaNa aura pahale
se lekara gyArahaveM guNasthAna taka sattA prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA tathA dUsare,
tIsare guNasthAna meM tIrthakuranAmakarma kI sattA na hone kA saMketa kiyA hai|
1. J tulanA karo patpitti ajogijiNe udIragA udayapayaSTINaM  /  - gommaTasAra,
karmakANDaH 280

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 100 ##  Praise   'Bandhai - Laddha-Attalabhanam' -  The attainment of the
Self (Atma) is achieved through Bandha (bondage) and other factors.  'Bandhadi
Labdhatma - Labhanam - 'Kamman - Karmana' - The state of existence of the Karma
(action) atoms, their position, harmony, presence, and being is called 'Thii-
Sthitih' (state). Here, the word 'Bandha Adi' (bondage and others) includes
'Adi' (others) which implies 'Samkranam' (transition) and other factors.  In
other words, the Karma Pudgalas (action particles) that transform into a
specific Karma form at the time of Bandha, remain attached to the Atma in that
same Karma form. Similarly, these same Karma Pudgalas, leaving their previous
form, transform into another Karma form and remain attached to the Atma. This
state of existence is called 'Satta' (being).  The first type of Satta is called
'Bandha Satta' (bondage being) and the second type is called 'Samkranam Satta'
(transition being).  - -  When the Pudgalaskandha (particle aggregate) becomes
associated with the Atma due to Mithyatva (false belief) and other causes, it is
then called 'Karma'. From that point onwards, the existence of that Karma is
considered. For example, when the bondage of Narakagati (hell) occurs and it
arises in the Udya (emergence) and remains until its Nirjara (destruction), the
existence of the Narakagati Karma is considered. This is because the Karma
Pudgalas have attained their form as Narakagati Karma through Bandha.  Perhaps,
the Narakagati Karma may transition into the Tiyachgati Karma (animal realm). In
this case, the Narakagati Karma, which had attained its form through Bandha,
undergoes a transition into the Tiyachgati Karma.  The Tiyachgati Karma attains
its form through this transition and its existence continues. However, the
existence of the Narakagati Karma, which originated from Bandha, is discontinued
due to the transition. Similarly, the existence of Mithyatva (false belief)
occurs in Bandha, and the existence of Samyaktava (right belief) and Mohaniya
(delusion) and Misra Moh (mixed delusion) occurs in Samkranam (transition).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 100 saMstava 'bandhAI - laddha-attalAbhANaM' bandhAdika dvArA prApta kiyA hai
AtmalAbha - AtmasvarUpa - jinane jina karmoM ne ve bandhAdika ke dvArA
svasvarUpa ko prApta hue 'bandhAdi labdhAtma - lAbhAnAM - 'kammANa - karmaNA'
karmoM kI, 'ThiI-sthitiH' sthiti karma paramANuoM kA avasthAna, sadbhAva,
vidyamAnatA sattA kahalAtI hai| yahA~ 'bandha Adi' zabda meM Adi zabda se
saMkramaNa Adi kA grahaNa kara levaM  /  arthAt bandha ke samaya jo karmapudgala
jisa karmasvarUpa meM pariNata hote haiM, una karmapudgaloM kA usI karmasvarUpa
meM AtmA ke sAtha lage rahanA tathA isI prakAra unhIM karmapudgaloM kA pUrva
svarUpa ko chor3akara dUsare karmasvarUpa meM badalakara AtmA meM saMlagna
rahanA sattA kahalAtI hai| inameM prathama prakAra kI sattA ko 'bandhasattA'
aura dUsare prakAra kI sattA ko 'saMkramaNa sattA' ke nAma se samajhanA caahie|
- - AtmA ke sAtha jaba mithyAtvAdi kAraNoM se jo pudgalaskandha saMbaddha ho
jAte haiM, usa samaya se unako 'karma' aisA kahane lagate haiM aura taba se usa
karma kI sattA mAnI jAtI hai  /  jaise ki narakagati kA bandha huA aura udaya
meM Akara jaba taka usakI nirjarA na ho jAe, taba taka narakagatinAmakarma kI
sattA mAnI jAtI hai| kyoMki bandha dvArA una karmapudgaloM ne
narakagatinAmakarma ke rUpa meM apanA AtmasvarUpa prApta kiyA hai  /  kadAcit
narakagatinAma karmatiryaMcagatinAmakarma meM saMkramita ho jAe to narakagati ne
jo bandha dvArA svarUpa prApta kiyA thA, usameM tiyaMcagatinAmakarma kA
saMkramaNa hone se tiyaMcagati ne saMkramaNa dvArA apanA svarUpa prApta kiyA
aura usakI sattA kAyama rahI  /  parantu narakagatinAmakarma kI sattA jo bandha
se utpanna huI thI, usakA saMkramaNa ho jAne se usakI sattA vyucchinna ho gyii|
isI prakAra mithyAtva kI sattA bandha me hotI hai aura samyaktvamohanIya tathA
mizramoha

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth ### 101  The existence of niy is new due to the state of
mithyatva and the refraction of rasa, and it is mutual due to being mutually
connected.  There are two types of existence: sadbhavasatta and sambhavasatta.
The existence that is considered due to the possibility of the existence of many
natures in the future, even though they do not exist at a particular time, is
called sambhavasatta. And the existence of those natures that exist at that time
is called sadbhavasatta (swaroopasatta).  For example, the upshama श्रेणी does
not include the existence of narakayu and tiryanchayu. However, 148 natures are
considered to exist in the eleventh gunasthan. The reason for this is that if
devayu or manushyayu is bound before, then its sadbhavasatta will be considered.
But the sadbhavasatta of the said narak and tiryanch - these two ayus will not
be considered. But if one falls from the eleventh gunasthan and binds those two
ayus later, then it is called sambhavasatta in that expectation.  There are also
two types of sambhavasatta and sadbhavasatta: purvavaddhayu and avaddhayu. And
in them too, there are many different considerations based on the expectation of
many different jivas, the expectation of one jiva, and the basis of upshama
श्रेणी, kshapaka श्रेणी. And in these श्रेणियों, there are also considerations
based on the support of anantanubandhi visanayajak and avisanayajak, and the
support of kshayik, kshayopashamic, and aupashamic samyaktva.  The one who
performs visanayana is called visanayajak. 'Darshan Saptak 1. The destruction of
the anantanubandhi chatushk, but being in the state of mohavik satta, is called
visanayana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha 101 nIya kI sattA midhyAtva kI sthiti aura rasa ke
apavartana se navIna ho hotI hai aura paraspara mita hone se eka dUsare kI hotI
hai  /  sattA ke do bheda haiM- sadbhAva sattA aura sambhava sattA  /  amuka
samaya meM kitanI hI prakRtiyoM ko sattA na hone para bhI bhaviSya meM unake
sattA meM hone kI sambhAvanA mAnakara jo sattA mAnI jAtI hai. use sambhavasattA
kahate haiM aura jina prakRtiyoM kI usa samaya sattA hotI hai, use sadbhAva
(svarUpa) sattA kahate haiM  /  jaise ki narakAyu aura tiryacAyu kI sattA vAlA
upazama zreNI ko nahIM mAMr3atA hai| phira bhI gyArahave guNasthAna meM 148
prakRtiyoM ko sattA mAnI jAtI hai| usakA kAraNa yaha hai ki pahale yadi devAyu
athavA manuSyAyu bA~dhI ho to usa usa kI sadbhAvasattA mAnI jAyagI parantu ukta
naraka aura tiryaMca - ina do AyuoM kI sadabhAvasattA nahIM mAnI jAyagI  /
parantu gyArahaveM guNasthAna se girakara bAda meM una do AyuoM ko bA~dhane vAlA
ho to usa apekSA me sattA mAnane para use sambhava - sattA kahA jAtA hai  /
sambhava-sattA aura sadbhAva sattA meM bhI pUrvavaddhAyu aura avaddhAyu aisa do
prakAra hote haiM aura unameM bhI pRthak-pRthak aneka jIvoM kI apekSA se aura
eka jIba ko apekSA tathA upazamazreNI, kSapakazreNI ke AdhAra se bhI vicAra kiyA
jAtA hai aura ina zreNiyoM meM bhI anantAnuke visaMyojaka evaM avisaMyojaka ke
Azraya meM aura kSAyika, kSAyopaza mika aura aupazamika samyaktva ke Azraya me
bhI vicAra kiyA jAtA hai  /  visaMyojanA karane vAle ko visaMyojaka kahate
haiN|' darzana saptaka 1. anantAnubandhI catuSka kA kSaya ho, kintu mohavika
sattA meM ho, use bisaMyojanA kahate haiM  /

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
When the four *anantaanubandhi* karmas in the seven *prakritis* are destroyed,
but the remaining three *prakritis* are not destroyed, meaning that the
*mithyatvamohaniya* karma remains in existence and can manifest, then there is
still the possibility of the binding of the four *anantaanubandhi* *kṣayās*.
This type of destruction is called *visan-yojana*. When the destruction is such
that there is no possibility of binding of that *prakriti* again, it is called
*kṣaya*.  There are 148 *karma* *prakritis* that can exist. They are:  (1)
*Jñānāvaraṇa* (5), (2) *Darśanāvaraṇa* (6), (3) *Vedaniya* (2), (4) *Mohaniya*
(28), (5) *Āyu* (4), (6) *Nāma* (63), (7) *Gotra* (2), (8) *Antarāya* (5).
Adding these together, we get 5 + 3 + 2 + 28 + 4 + 63 + 2 + 5 = 148.  Although
122 *prakritis* are said to be capable of manifestation, the reason for saying
that 148 *prakritis* exist is that in the case of manifestation, the five
*bandhanas* and five *saṅghātanas* are not considered separately, but their five
*prakritis* are included in the five *śarīranāmakarma*. Similarly, at the time
of manifestation, the *varna*, *gandha*, *rasa*, and *sparśa* *nāmakarma* were
considered as one *prakriti* each. However, in the case of existence, the
*varna*, *gandha*, *rasa*, and *sparśa* *nāmakarma* are considered to have five,
two, five, and eight divisions respectively.  In this way, the 122 *prakritis*
that are capable of manifestation, instead of the five divisions of
*bandhananāmakarma* and *saṅghātananāmakarma* and the four general divisions of
*varna*, *gandha*, *rasa*, and *sparśa*, are combined with their aforementioned
twenty divisions. 1. *Varna* - *kṛṣṇa*, *nīla*, *loha*, *hāridra*, *śukla* |
*Gandha* - *surabhi*, *durabhi* | *Rasa* -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava kI sAta prakRtiyoM meM sa anantAnubandhIcatuSka kA kSaya ho aura
zeSa tIna prakRtiyoM kA kSaya nahIM huA ho, arthAt mithyAtyamohanIya karma sattA
meM hone se usakA udaya ho, taba punaH anantAnubandhIkaSAyacatuSka ke bandha kI
sambhAvanA banI rahe, aise kSaya ko visaMyojanA kahate hai| jisakA kSaya hone
para punaH usa prakRti ke bandha kI sambhAvanA hI na rahe use kSaya kahate haiM
/  sattAyogya 148 karmaprakRtiyoM kI sakhyA isa prakAra hai (1) jJAnAvaraNa 5,
(2) darzanAvaraNa 6, (3) vedanIya 2, {4) mohanIya 28, (5) Ayu 4, (6) nAma 63,
(7) gotra 2, (8) antarAya 5 /  ina saba meMdoM 5+3+2 | 28++13+3+5 ko milAne meM
kula 148 bheda ho jAte haiN| yadyapi 122 prakRtiyoM udayayogya batalAI haiN|
lekina sattA meM 148 prakRtiyoM ko kahane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki udaya ke
prakaraNa meM pA~ca bandhanoM aura pAMca saMghAtanoM kI pRthaka-pRthak vivakSA
nahIM karake una donoM kI pAMca-pAMca prakRtiyoM kA samAveza pAMca
zarIranAmakarma meM kiyA gayA thaa| isI prakAra udaya ke samaya varNa, gandha,
rasa aura sparza nAmakarma ko eka-eka prakRti vivakSita kI gayI thii| parantu
sattA ke prakaraNa meM varNa, gandha, rasa aura sparza nAmakarma ke kramaza
pA~ca, do, pA~ca aura ATha bheda grahaNa kiye haiN| isa taraha udayayogya 122
prakRtiyoM meM bandhananAmakarma aura saMghAtananAmakarma ke pAMca-pAMca bhedoM
tathA varNa, gandha, rasa aura sparza ke sAmAnya cAra bhedoM ke sthAna para
inake pUrvokta bIsa bhedoM ko milAne 1. varNa-kRSNa, nIla, lohina, hAridra,
zukma 1 gaMdha surabhi, durabhi  /  rasa

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
According to the *Vishiya Karmagrantha*, there are a total of 148 *prakritis*
(natures) considered capable of existence. The nature of these *karma-prakritis*
should be understood from the *Karmagrantha*.  Generally, there are 148
*prakritis* capable of existence. From the first *mithyatva* *gunasthan* (stage
of virtue) to the eleventh *upshantakashaya* *gunasthan*, excluding the second
*sasadan* and third *mitra* *gunasthan*, the existence of 148 *prakritis* is
stated in the remaining nine *gunasthanas*. This statement should be understood
in terms of potential. Because, at any given time, a living being cannot have
more than two *ayus* (life spans) - one being experienced and the other being
bound. However, all *karmas* have the potential to be bound, which means that
when the material for binding is available, even those *karmas* that are not
currently present can be bound and exist. In other words, even if a *karma* does
not have actual existence in the present, it is considered capable of existence
due to the possibility of its potential to be bound in the future.  **Doubt:**
In the 158 *uttaraprakritis* (secondary natures) of the eight *karmas*, 103
*prakritis* of *namakarma* (name-karma) have been mentioned earlier. Here, in
the 148 *prakritis* capable of existence, 13 *prakritis* of *namakarma* are
included.  **Resolution:** The reason for taking 63 divisions of *namakarma*
here is that, similar to *sharira-namakarma* (body-name-karma), five divisions
of *bandhana-namakarma* (binding-name-karma) are also taken:  * *Tikta*
(bitter), *katu* (pungent), *kashaya* (astringent), *amla* (sour), *madhura*
(sweet). * *Sparsha* (touch): *karkasha* (rough), *mridu* (soft), *laghu*
(light), *guru* (heavy), *sheet* (cold), *ushna* (hot), *snigdha* (unctuous),
*ruksha* (dry). * *Bandhana* (binding), *sanghatana* (combination), and *varna-
chaturshka* (four colors) - these are all *prakritis* of *namakarma*. Therefore,
to refer to their full names, the word "namakarma" should be added to each of
them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 visIya karmagrantha se kula 148 prakRtiyA~ sattAyogya mAnI jAtI haiN| ina
karmaprakRtiyoM ke svarUpa kI vyAkhyA pahale karmagrantha se jAnanI caahie|
sAmAnya se sattAyogya 148 prakRtiyA~ haiM aura pahale mithyAtva guNasthAna se
lekara gyArahava upazAntakaSAya guNasthAna taka meM se dUsare sAsAdana aura
tIsare mitra guNasthAna ko chor3akara zeSa no guNasthAnoM meM 148 prakRtiyoM kI
sattA kahI jAtI hai| yaha kathana yogyatA kI apekSA samajhanA caahie| kyoMki
kisI bhI jIva ke eka samaya meM bhujyamAna aura baddhamAna ina do AyuoM se
adhika Ayu kI sattA nahIM ho sktii| parantu yogyatA saba karmoM kI ho sakatI
hai, jisase bandhayogya sAmagrI milane para jo kama abhI vartamAna nahIM hai,
usakA bhI bandha aura sattA ho sakatI hai| arthAt vartamAna meM kama kI
svarUpasattA na hone para bhI usa karma ko bhaviSya meM baMdhane kI yogyatA kI
sambhAbanA-sambhava-sattA kI apekSA se 148 prakRtiyAM satAyogya mAnI jAtI haiN|
zaMkA-ATha karmoM kI 158 uttaraprakRtiyoM meM nAmakarma kI 103 prakRtiyA~ pahale
batalAI haiM aura yahA~ sattA kI 148 prakRtiyoM meM nAmakarma kI 13 prakRtiyoM
ko grahaNa kiyA hai| samAdhAna yahA~ nAmakarma ke 63 bheda lene kA kAraNa yaha
hai ki zarIranAmakarma ke samAna bandhananAmakarma ke bhI pAMca bheda grahaNa
kiye tikta. kaTu, kaSAya, amla, madhura  /  sparza-karkaza, mRdu, laghu, guru,
zIta, uSNa, snigdha, rUkSa  /  pUrvokta bandhana, saMghAtana' aura varNacatuSka-
ye sa mI nAmakarma kI prakRtiyAM haiN| ataH inake pUre nAmoM ko kahane ke lie
pratyeka ke sAtha 'nAmakarma' yaha zabda or3a lenA caahie|

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 104  There are 15 types of **Name Karma** (karma related to name and form).
When these 15 types are considered instead of the 5 subtle ones, there are 103
types of **Name Karma**. Then, there will be 158 **Karma Pratikrti** (types of
karma) considered as capable of existence.  **Doubt:** In the **Mithyatva**
(false belief) **Gunasthan** (stage of spiritual development), the existence of
**Tirthankara Name Karma** should not be considered. Because only a **Subhyati**
(a being who has attained the highest state of spiritual development) can become
a **Tirthankara**. Therefore, how can the existence of **Tirthankara Name
Karma** be considered when a **Mithyatvi** (a being in the state of false
belief) cannot bind this karma?  **Solution:** A being who has previously bound
**Narakayu** (hellish existence) in the **Mithyatva Gunasthan** and later
attained **Kshayopaśamika Samyaktv** (perfect knowledge and conduct) and bound
**Tirthankara Name Karma**, will inevitably abandon **Samyaktv** and attain
**Mithyatva** when going to hell. It is with respect to such a being that the
existence of **Tirthankara Name Karma** is considered in the first
**Gunasthan**. In other words, if a human being has bound **Narakayu** in the
**Mithyatva Gunasthan** in the past and later attained **Kshayopaśamika
Samyaktv** and bound **Tirthankara Name Karma**, then that being will vomit
**Samyaktv** and go to hell upon death, and attain **Samyaktv** again there.
Until the moment of death, **Mithyatva** remains. Therefore, the existence of
**Tirthankara Name Karma** is considered there. This is why 148 **Pratikrti**
are considered to exist in the **Mithyatva Gunasthan**.  No being can bind
**Tirthankara Name Karma** in the second and third **Gunasthan**. Because
**Shuddha Samyaktv** (pure perfect knowledge and conduct) is not present in
these two **Gunasthan**, **Tirthankara Name Karma** cannot be bound. Similarly,
no being can bind **Tirthankara Name Karma** and then fall from **Samyaktv** and
attain the second or third **Gunasthan**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 104 karmastava haiM  /  vaise bandhananAmakarma ke 15 bheda hote haiM aura jaba
pAMca maMdoM kI bajAya una 15 bhedoM ko grahaNa kiyA jAya to nAmakarma ke 103
bheda ho jaayeNge| taba 158 karmaprakRtiyA~ sattAyogya mAnI jAyeMgI  /  zaMkA-
midhyAtva guNasthAna meM tIrthaGkara nAmakarma kI sattA nahIM mAnI jAnI caahie|
kyoMki subhyati hI tIna landhra kara sakatA hai | isalie jaba mithyAtvI
tIrthakara nAmakarma kA bandha ho nahIM kara sakatA hai to usake tIrthaGkara
nAmakarma kI sattA kaise mAnI jA sakatI hai ? samAdhAna - jisane pahale
midhyAtva guNasthAna meM narakAyu kA bandha kara liyA hai aura bAda meM
kSAyopazamika samyaktva ko pAkara tIrthaGkara nAmakarma ko bhI bA~dha liyA hai,
vaha jIva naraka meM jAne ke samaya samyaktva kA tyAgakara midhyAtva ko avazya
prApta karatA hai, aisa jIva kI apekSA se hI pahale guNasthAna meM
tIrthaGkaranAmakarma kI sattA mAnI jAtI hai  /  arthAt manuSya ne pUrva meM
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM narakAyu kA bandha kiyA ho aura bAda meM kSAyopazamika
samyaktva ko prApta kara tIrthaGkaranAmakarma kA bandha kare to vaha jIva marate
samaya samyaktva kA vamana kara naraka meM jAya tathA vahA~ punaH samyaktva
prApta kare to usake pahale antarmuhUrta taka midhyAtva rahatA hai| ataH vahA~
tIrthaGkara nAmakarma kI sattA mAnI hai| isIlie mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 148
prakRtiyoM kI sattA mAnI jAtI hai  /  dUsare aura tIsare guNasthAna meM
vartamAna koI jIva tIrthaGkara nAmakarma ko nahIM bA~dha sakatA hai| kyoMki una
do guNasthAnoM meM zuddha samyaktva na hone kAraNa tIrthaGkaranAmakarma nahIM
bAMdhA jA sakatA aura isI prakAra tIrthaGkara nAmakarma ko bAMdhakara bhI koI
jIva samyaktva se cyuta hokara dUsare yA tIsare guNasthAna ko prApta nahIM kara
sakatA hai| : *

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth 105  Therefore, in the second and third Gunasthanas,
except for the Tirthankara-nama karma, there can be the existence of 147
Prakṛtis.  **Doubt:** The Upshama श्रेणी does not bind to Naraka and
Tiryanchayu, and without binding and arising, there is no existence of Ayukarma.
Also, in the sixth Karma Granth, Ayukarma has been explained, and there, in the
10th and 11th Gunasthanas, the existence of Naraka and Tiryanchayu is not
mentioned. Then how can the existence of 148 Prakṛtis be considered until the
eleventh Gunasthana?  **Solution:** Although the existence of Naraka and
Tiryanchayu does not decrease in the श्रेणी, still, a being can be expelled from
the Upshama श्रेणी and touch all four gatis. Therefore, from the perspective of
possible existence, here, Naraka and Vayu are not considered. The existence of
148 Prakṛtis is possible for those who have not destroyed Darshan, Moh, and Tak,
and who have uninterrupted Samyagdristi, etc.  Thus, after defining existence
and generally mentioning the Prakṛtis that are capable of existing from the
first to the eleventh Gunasthana, in the following verses, the existence of
Prakṛtis in the fourth and subsequent Gunasthanas is described in a different
way.  **Verse 26:**  **Meaning:** In the four Gunasthanas of Apurva, etc.,
except for the six Prakṛtis of Ananta-anubandhi-chatushk, Naraka, and
Tiryanchayu, if the sevenfold (Saptak) has been destroyed, then in the four
Gunasthanas of Avirat Samyagdristi, etc., there is the existence of 141
Prakṛtis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ' dvitIya karmagrantha 105 isIlie dUsare aura tIsare guNasthAna meM
tIrthaGkaranAmakarma ko chor3akara 147 prakRtiyoM kI sattA ho sakatI hai  /  P
zaMkA- naraka aura tiryaMcAyu kA bandha karane vAlA upazamazreNI karatA nahIM
hai tathA bandha aura udaya ke binA Ayukarma kI sattA hotI nahIM tathA chaThe
karmagrantha meM bhI Ayukarma ke bhAMge kiye haiM, vahA~ 10. 11, guNasthAnoM meM
naraka aura tiryaMcAyu kI sattA nahIM batAI hai to phira gyArahaveM guNasthAna
taka 148 prakRtiyoM kI sattA kaise mAnI jAtI hai ? samAdhAna - yadyapi zreNI meM
naraka aura tiryaMcAyu kI sattA ghaTatI to nahIM hai| phira bhI koI jIva
upazamazreNI se cyuta hokara cAroM gatiyoM kA sparza kara sakatA hai| ataH
sambhava- sattA kI vivakSA se yahA~ naraka aura vAyu kI nAkAlAI bAlI hai  /
darzana mohataka ko kSaya nahIM karane vAle avirata samyagdRSTi vagairaha ko 148
prakRtiyoM kI sattA sambhava hai  /  isa prakAra sattA kI paribhASA aura
sAmAnyataH pahale se lekara gyArahaveM guNasthAna taka sattAyogya prakRtiyoM kA
kathana karane ke bAda Age kI gAthAoM meM caturtha Adi guNasthAnoM meM
prakArAntara se prakRtiyoM kI sattA kA varNana karate haiM  /  apuvvA unake aNa-
tiri nirayAu viNU biyAlasayaM  /  sammAicausu sattaga-vayammi igavatta-saya
mahavA  /  /  26  /  /  gAthArtha - apUrvakaraNAdi cAra guNasthAnoM meM
anantAnubandhIcatuSka aura naraka va tiryacAyu - ina chaha prakRtiyoM ke sivAya
142 prakRtiyoM kI tathA saptaka kA kSaya huA ho to avirata samyagdRSTi Adi cAra
guNasthAnoM meM 141 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Karmastava**  **Special Meaning:** Although the previous verse states that
there are 148 karmic substances in the first eleven gunasthanas, excluding the
second and third gunasthanas, and 147 karmic substances in the second and third
gunasthanas, this statement is correct in comparison to the general case.
However, as the determination of present-day beings becomes purer from the
fourth gunastana onwards, the number of karmic substances decreases. Keeping
this in mind, we explain the number of karmic substances from the fourth
gunastana onwards.  The principle of Panchasangraha is that a being who
disconnects the four ananta-anubandhi kshayas and does not bind the hell and
tithyancha ayus, begins the upshama श्रेणी. In other words, a being who
disconnects the four ananta-anubandhi kshayas and binds the deva-ayu, entering
the upshama श्रेणी, has 142 karmic substances in the eighth and subsequent four
gunasthanas.  Those who have destroyed the seven karmic substances, namely the
four ananta-anubandhi kshayas and the darshan-mohaniya trika, have 141 karmic
substances in the four gunasthanas from the fourth to the seventh. This number
of 141 karmic substances should be understood in relation to the kshayik
samyaktvi who are without श्रेणी, and also in relation to those who are kshayik
samyaktvi but not charma-shariri, but who still have to take rebirth for
liberation. However, those who are charma-shariri kshayik samyaktvi have neither
the essence nor the possibility of any other life besides the human life.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava vizeSArtha-yadyapi pahale kI gAthA meM dUsare aura tIsare guNasthAna
ko chor3akara pahale se lekara gyArahaveM guNasthAna taka sAmAnya me 148
prakRsiyoM ko sattA batalAI hai aura dUsare tathA tIsare guNasthAna meM 147
prakRtiyoM kI sattA kahI gaI hai| sAmAnya kI apekSA yaha kathana ThIka bhI hai|
lekina cauthe se lekara Age ke guNasthAnoM meM vartamAna jIvoM ke adhyavasAya
vizuddhatara hone se karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA kama hotI jAtI hai| isI bAta ko
dhyAna meM rakhakara cauthe Adi se lekara Age ke guNasthAnoM meM sattA ko
samajhAte hai| paMcasaMgraha kA siddhAnta hai ki anantAnubandhIkaSAya catuSka kA
visaMyojana karane para tathA naraka va tithaMca Ayu kA bandha na karane vAlA
jIva upazamazreNI kA prArambha karatA hai, yAnI jo jIva
anantAnubandhIkaSAyacatuSka kI visaMyojanA kara aura devAyu ko bA~dhakara
upazamazreNI ko karatA hai, aise jIva ko AThaveM Adi cAra guNasthAnoM meM 142
prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  anantAnubandhIkaSAyacatuSka aura
darzanamohanIyatrika-ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA jinhoMne kSaya kiyA hai, unakI
apekSA caudhe se lekara sAtaveM guNasthAna paryanta cAra guNasthAnoM meM 141
prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| yaha 141 prakRtiyoM kI sattA binA zreNI vAle
kSAyika samyaktvI ko samajhanA cAhie tathA zAyika samyaktvI hone para bhI jo
caramazarIrI nahIM hai, kintu jinako mokSa ke lie janmAntara lenA bAkI hai, una
jIvoM kI apekSA me 141 karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA kA pakSa samajhanA cAhie  /
lekina jo caramazarIrI kSAyika samyaktvI haiM, unako manuSya Ayu ke atirikta
dUsarI Ayu kI na to svarUpa-sattA hai aura na sambhavasattA hI hai|

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma-pranya 107  The summary is that for non-category-classifying,
*kshayika* *sanyastri* beings, there are 141 *prakritis* in the four
*gunasthanas* from the fourth to the seventh. This statement is in relation to
many beings, and even for those who are *kshadhika* *samyaktvī* but not
*charmasarīrī*, there are also 141 *prakritis* in the four *gunasthanas* from
the fourth to the seventh.  The *upshama* category is considered from the eighth
to the eleventh *gunasthanas*, encompassing four *gunasthanas*. In other words,
these four *gunasthanas* belong to the *upshama* category, which arises from the
disassociation of the four *anantaanubandhi* *kṣayās* and does not bind to hell
or animal realms, only to the realm of gods. Therefore, out of the 148
*prakritis* that are generally possible, subtracting the six *prakritis* of the
four *anantaanubandhi* *kṣayās* and hell and animal realms, 142 *prakritis* are
considered to exist for beings classified in the *upshama* category from the
eighth to the eleventh *gunasthanas*, encompassing four *gunasthanas*.  Thus,
having described the *prakritis* that exist generally from the fourth to the
*upshama* category *gunasthanas*, we now proceed to describe the existence of
karmas in relation to the *kṣapaka* category in the following verse.  **Verse
27:**  *Lakṣaṇam tu pappa cau-su di pamyāla narayati-risu-rāja viṇā | Sat-taga
viśu aḍatī-saṁ jā aniyatṭī paḍama-bhāgo ||27||*  **Meaning:** In relation to
*kṣapaka* beings, there are 145 *prakritis* in the four *gunasthanas*, excluding
hell, animal, and god realms, and 138 *prakritis* excluding the *saptaka* until
the time of the *aniyatṭī* *paḍama-bhāgo* (the first stage of the *aniyatṭī*
*gunasthanas*).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmapranya 107 sArAMza yaha hai ki zreNI nahIM mAMDana vAle kSAyika
sanyAstrI jIvoM ke cauthe se lekara sAtaveM guNasthAna taka cAra guNasthAnoM meM
sAmAnya se 141 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai, yaha kathana aneka jIvoM kI apekSA
se hai tathA kSAdhika samyaktvI hone para bhI jo caramazarIrI nahIM hai, aige
aneka jIvoM kI apekSA se bhI 141 prakRtiyoM kI sattA ukta cauthe se sAtaveM
guNasthAna paryanta cAra muNasthAnoM meM mAnI gaI hai| upazamazreNI AThaveM se
lekara gyArahaveM gaNasthAna paryanta cAra guNasthAnoM taka mAnI jAtI hai  /
arthAt yaha cAra guNasthAna upazamazreNI ke hote haiM aura upazamazreNI
anantAnubandhokaSAyacatuSka kA visaMyojana karane se tathA naraka aura tiryaca
Aya ko nahIM bAMdhane vAle yAnI sirpha devAyu kA bandhra karane vAle ko hotI hai
/  ataH sAmAnya se sattAyogya 148 prakRtiyoM meM se anantAnubandhIkapAyacatuSka
aura naraka va tiryacAyu kula chaha prakRtiyoM ko kama karane para 142
prakRtiyoM kI sattA upazamadheNI mAMr3ane vAle jIvoM ko AThaveM bha lekara
gyArahaveM guNasthAna paryanta cAra gaNasthAnoM meM mAnI jAtI hai| isa prakAra
cauthe se lekara upazamazreNI ke guNasthAnoM paryanta sAmAnya se sattA
prakRtiyoM kA varNana karake aba kSapakazreNI kI apekSA karmoM kI sattA kA
kathana Age kI gAthA meM karate haiM  /  lakSaNaM tu pappa causu di pamayAla
narayatirisurAja viNA  /  sattaga vizu aDatIsaM jA aniyaTTI paDamabhAgo  // 27
//  gAthArtha-kSapaka jIvoM kI apekSA se cAra guNasthAnoM meM naraka, tiryaMca
aura devAyu-ina tIna prakRtiyoM ke sivAya 145 prakRtiyoM kI tathA saptaka ke
binA 138 prakRtiyoM kI sattA anivRtti guNasthAna ke pahale samaya taka hotI hai
/

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Karmastada**  In the previous verse, the existence of karma-types was
explained in relation to the Upashama category. Now, in this verse, the
existence of karma-types is explained in relation to the Kshapaka category.
**10**  Those beings who are destined to turn towards the Kshapaka category in
their present life and are Charamasheeri (those who will attain liberation in
this very life), i.e., those who are currently either Aupashmika or Kshayopa-
shmika Samyaktvi, but are destined to turn towards the Kshapaka category and
attain liberation in this very life, they only have the existence of the
Manushya-ayu (human lifespan). The existence of the other three Ayus (lifespans)
is not there, nor is their possibility. Therefore, in relation to such Kshapaka
beings, from the fourth to the seventh Gunasthan (spiritual stages), there are
145 karma-types that exist out of the 148 karma-types that are capable of
existing, as the Naraka-ayu (hellish lifespan), Tiyancha-ayu (heavenly
lifespan), and Deva-ayu (divine lifespan) are not possible for them.  However,
those beings who have attained Kshayika Samyaktva (complete liberation) by
destroying the Ananta-anubandhi-chatushk (four infinite karmas) and Darshan-
moha-trik (three karmas related to perception and delusion), and who will not
have another birth after this one, such beings, from the fourth Gunasthan
onwards, become Kshayika Samyaktvi and turn towards the Kshapaka category. In
relation to such beings, due to the destruction of the Ananta-anubandhi-chatushk
and Darshan-moha-trik, which are seven karma-types, and the non-existence of the
remaining three Ayus except the present Manushya-ayu, 138 karma-types are
considered to exist out of the 148 karma-types that are capable of existing.
This existence of 138 karma-types should be understood from the fourth Gunasthan
to the first part of the ninth Gunasthan.  But those beings who cannot turn
towards the Kshapaka category in their present life, i.e., those who are
Acharamasheeri (those who will not attain liberation in this life), among them,
some are Kshayika Samyaktvi, some are Aupashmika Samyaktvi, and some are
Kshayopa-shmika Samyaktvi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastada vizeSAyaM - pUrva gAthA meM upazamazreNI kI apekSA se
karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA batalAI gaI hai| aba isa gAthA meM kSapakazreNI kI
apekSA se karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA batalAte haiM  /  10 jo jIva vartamAna janma
meM kSapakazreNI ko mor3ane vAle haiM aura caramazarIrI haiM, arthAt abhI to jo
aupazamika yA kSAyopazamika samyaktrI hI haiM, lekina kSapakazreNI ko avazya hI
mAMr3ane vAle tathA isI janma meM mokSa pAne vAle haiM, unako manuSyAyu ko hI
sattA rahatI hai  /  anya tIna AyuoM kI sattA nahIM rahatI hai aura na unakI
sambhava - sattA bhI hai| isalie isa prakAra ke kSapaka jIvoM kI apekSA cauthe
sa lekara sAtaveM guNasthAna paryanta cAra guNasthAnoM meM narakAyu, tiyaMcAyu
aura devAya ko sattAyogya 148 prakRtiyoM meM se kama karane para 145
karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  lekina anantAnubandhacatumaka aura
darzanamohatrika kA kSaya karane se jinheM kSAyika samyaktva prApta hai aura isa
bhava ke bAda dUsarA bhava nahIM karanA hai, aise jIva cauthe guNasthAna se hI
kSAyika samyaktvI hokara kSapakazreNI karate haiM to una jIvoM kI apekSA meM
anantAnubandhIcatuSka aura darzanamohatrika ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hone se
tathA vartamAna manuSyAyu ke sivAya zeSa tIna Ayu kI bhI sattA na hone se
sattAyogya 148 prakRtiyoM meM se ukta dasa prakRtiyoM ko kama karane me 138
prakRtiyoM ko sattA mAnI jAtI hai| yaha 138 prakRtiyoM kI sattA cauthe
guNasthAna me lekara nauveM guNasthAna ke prathama bhAga paryanta samajhanI
cAhie  /  parantu jo jIva vartamAna janma meM kSapakazreNI nahIM kara sakate,
arthAt acaramazarIrI haiM, unameM se kucha kSAyika samyaktvo bhI, kucha
aupazamika samyaktvI aura kucha kSAyopazamika samyaktvI bhI hote

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  In the 25th verse, the existence of 148 karmic natures
should be understood in relation to the *Kshayopaamik Samyaktvī* and *Aupashmik
Samyavtvī* *Acharamasharīrī*. And in the 26th verse, the existence of 141 karmic
natures should be understood in relation to the *Kshayik Samyaktvī*
*Acharamasharīrī*. Because, although any *Acharamasharīrī* being does not
simultaneously possess the existence of all karmic natures, it is possible for
them to exist, therefore, they are considered to possess the existence of all
karmic natures.  In summary, 148 karmic natures are capable of existing in
general. In the second and third *Gunasthanas*, the existence of 147 karmic
natures is considered due to the absence of the *Tirthaksharanama Karma*.
However, the existence of 148 karmic natures mentioned from the first to the
eleventh *Gunasthanas* is considered due to the possibility of their existence.
This is because, a being who has attained the eleventh *Gunasthanas* can fall
back to the first *Gunasthanas* and can experience all the *Gunasthanas* in the
same order they ascended. Therefore, even though the existence of karmic natures
may be present according to the current *Gunasthanas*, the possibility of the
existence of the remaining karmic natures is considered, and hence, 148 karmic
natures are considered to exist.  However, the fourth *Gunasthanas* is called
*Avirat Samyagdristi*. There are three types of *Samyagdristi*: *Upashma
Samyagdristi*, *Kshayopaamik Samyagdristi*, and *Kshayik Samyagdristi*. Those
who have attained *Samyakdristi* by subduing the *Mohaniya Karma* that hinders
*Samyaktvī* are called *Upashma Samyagdristi*. And those who have attained
*Samyaktvī* by destroying the *Kshayoyogya* karmic natures from the *Mohaniya
Karma* and subduing the remaining karmic natures are called *Kshayopaamik
Samyagdristi*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha haiM  /  paccIsavIM gAthA meM jo 148 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
kahI gaI hai, so kSAyopathamika samyaktvI tathA aupazamika samyavatbI
acaramazarIrI. kI apekSA se samajhanA cAhie tathA chabbIsavIM gAyA meM jo 141
prakRtiyoM kI sattA kahI hai, vaha kSAyika samyaktvI acaramazarorI kI apekSA se
samajhanA cAhie  /  kyoMki kisI bhI acaramazarIrI jIva ko yadyapi eka sAtha saba
AyuoM kI sattA nahIM hotA hai, lekina unakI sattA honA sambhava rahatA hai,
imalie usako saba AyuoM kI sattA mAnI jAtI hai| sArAMza yaha hai ki sAmAnya se
148 prakRtiyA~ sattAyogya haiM aura dUsare aura tIsare guNasthAna meM
tIrthakSaranAmakarma kI sattA na hone meM 147 prakRtiyoM kI sattA mAnI jAtI hai,
lekina pahale aura cauthe meM lekara gyArahaveM guNasthAna taka jo 148
prakRtiyoM kI sattA kahI hai, vaha sambhava-sattA kI lA se mAnI nA hai| ki
jazanadenI mAMr3ane vAle ke gyArahave guNasthAna meM girane kI sambhAvanA rahatI
hai aura jisa krama se guNasthAna kA ArohaNa kiyA thA, usI krama se girate
samaya una-una guNasthAnoM ko sparza karate hue pahale mithyAtva guNasthAna ko
bhI prApta kara sakatA hai| isIlie vartamAna meM cAhe guNasthAna ke anusAra
karma-prakRtiyoM kI sattA ho, lekina zeSa prakRtiyoM kI sattA hone kI sambhAvanA
se 148 prakRtiyoM ko sattA mAnI jAtI hai  /  lekina cauthe guNasthAna kA nAma
avirata samyagdRSTi hai| ve samyagdRSTi tIna prakAra ke hote haiM- upazama
samyagdRSTi, zAyopamika samyagdRSTi aura kSAyika samyagdRSTi  /  jo samyaktva kI
bAdhaka mohanIya karma kI prakRtiyoM kA upazama karake samyakadRSTi vAle haiM,
unheM upazamasamyagRdRSTi tathA mohanIyakarma kI prakRtiyoM meM se kSayayogya
prakRtiyoM kA kSaya aura zeSa rahI huI prakRtiyoM kA upazama karane se jo
samyaktva

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **110**  Karma is obtained, and the type of liberated being who
has obtained such karma is called a *Kshayopaamik Samyagdrsti*. Those who have
obtained liberation by completely destroying the nature of the *mohaniya* karma
that obstructs liberation are called *Kshayik Samyagdrsti*.   Of these three
types of liberated beings, the *Upshama* and *Kshayopaamik Samyagdrsti* belong
to the *Upshama* category, while the *Kshayik Samyagdrsti* belong to the
*Kshapa* category. Those beings who are destined to attain the *Kshapa* category
will attain liberation by destroying all karma. However, this is not possible
for beings in the *Upshama* category. Therefore, their downfall is possible. The
order of the categories begins from the eighth *Gunasthan*.  However, those
beings who have not yet attained any category and are currently in the fourth to
seventh *Gunasthan*, if they are *Samyagdrsti* and are not destined to attain
liberation in this very life, then due to the destruction of the *Anantanubandhi
Chatushk* and the *Darshanmohaniya* group of seven natures, their existence is
considered to be 141 natures from the fourth to the seventh *Gunasthan*. Because
it is possible for any *Acharamshariri* being to exist in all lifetimes, even if
they do not exist simultaneously, their existence is considered to be in all
lifetimes. Therefore, the existence of a *Kshayik Samyagdrsti* being is
considered to be 141 natures in the four *Gunasthan* from the fourth to the
seventh.  Those beings who can attain the *Kshapa* category in the present time
and are *Charamshariri*, but have not yet destroyed the *Anantanubandhi
Chatushk* and *Darshanmohaniya*, their existence is considered to be 145
natures. And those who have destroyed the aforementioned *Anantanubandhi
Chatushk* and the seven natures, their existence is considered to be 138
natures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 110 karmastava prApta hotA hai aura usa prakAra ke samyagadRSTi vAle jIva ko
kSAyo pamika samyagdRSTi kahate haiN| jinhoMne samyaktva kI bAdhaka mohanIya
karma kI prakRtiyoM kA pUrNatayA kSaya karake samyaktva prApta kiyA hai, ve
kSAyika samyagdRSTi kahalAte haiM  /  _ ukta tInoM prakAra ke samyagadaSTi jIvoM
meM meM upazama aurakSAyopazAmika samyaktvI to upazamazreNI aura kSAyika
samyagdRSTi kSapazreNI ko mor3ate haiN| jo jIva kSapakoNI mAMr3ane vAle haiM, ve
to sampUrNa karmoM kA kSaya karake mokSa prApta kara lete haiM  /  lekina
upazamazreNI vAle jIvoM ko yaha sambhava nahIM hai| isIlie unakA patana honA
mambhava hai  /  zreNI kA krama AThaveM guNasthAna se zurU hotA hai| lekina jina
jIvoM ne abhI koI zreNI nahIM mAr3I hai aura abhI cauthe se lekara sAtaveM
guNasthAna meM vartamAna hai, aise Aba yadi gi samyaktvI haiM aura isI bhava se
mokSa prApta karane vAle nahIM hai to anantAnubandhIcatuSka aura
darzanamohanika-kula sAta prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hone se cauthe se lekara sAtava
guNasthAna paryanta unake 141 prakRtiyoM kI sattA mAnI jAtI hai| kyoMki kisI bhI
acaramazarIrI jIva ko eka sAtha saba AyuoM kI sattA na hone para bhI unakI sattA
honA sambhava rahatA hai, isIlie unako saba AyaoM kI sattA mAnI jAtI hai| isalie
cauthe se lekara sAtaveM guNasthAna paryanta cAra guNasthAnoM meM kSAyika
samyaktvI jIva ko 141 prakRtiyoM kI sattA mAnI jAtI hai  /  jo jIva vartamAna
kAla meM hI kSapakaNI kara sakate haiM aura caramazArIrI haiM, lekina abhI
anantAnubandhIcatuSka aura darzanamohanika kA bhaya nahIM kiyA hai, una joboM kI
apekSA 145 prakRtiyoM kI sattA mAnI jAtI hai aura jinhoMne ukta anantAnubandhI
catuSka Adi sAta prakRtiyoM kA kSaya kara diyA hai, una jIvoM ke 138 prakRtiyoM
kI sattA hotI hai

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  And this existence is found up to the first part of the
ninth Gunasthan. But those beings who cannot attain the Kshapaka श्रेणी in the
present birth, that is, the Acharam Shariri, some of them are also Kshayik
Samyaktvi, and some are also Aupashmik Samyaktvi, and some are also Kshayopa-
samyaktvi. Among these, the existence of Kshayopa-samyaktvi and Aupashmik
Samyaktvi Acharam Shariri beings is considered to be 148 in number.  **111**
Out of these 148 types, those beings who are about to begin the Upshama श्रेणी,
and the principle for beginning the Upshama श्रेणी is that whoever disconnects
the Ananta-anubandhi Pay Chatushk and does not have bondage to Naraka and
Tiryanch Ayus, can begin the Upshama श्रेणी. So, according to the principle,
from the eighth to the eleventh Gunasthan, there are four Gunasthanas, and in
these four Gunasthanas, there are 142 types of existence of Ananta-anubandhi
Kashay Chatushk, Naraka Ayus, and Tiryanch Ayus - these six types.  Thus, the
existence of Karmas of beings who have the Kshapaka श्रेणी, which is the cause
of Moksha, has been explained up to the first part of the ninth Gunasthan. There
are nine parts of the ninth Gunasthan. Therefore, in the next two verses, the
existence of types in the eight parts from the second to the ninth part of the
ninth Gunasthan is to be explained.  **28**  Thavar Tirinirya Ayav-Yug
Dhonatigega Vigal Saharam. Solakhao Dubisasyam Shriyans Biyatiyakasayanto.
**26**  Taiyaisu Chaudasaterabarachhapanch Uthihi Sata Kamso. Napur
Sthihasachhapu Saturiyakao Hamayamayayo Gatharth - Thavaradvik, Tiryanchadvik,
Narakadvik, Atap-trik.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha aura yaha sattA nauveM guNasthAna ke prathama bhAga taka
pAI jAtI hai| lekina jo jIva vartamAna janma meM kSapakazreNI nahIM kara sakate,
yAnI acaramazarIrI haiM, unameM se kucha kSAyika samyaktvI bhI hote haiM aura
kucha aupazamika samyaktvI tathA kucha kSAyopazamika samyaktvI bhI hote haiN|
inameM se kSAyopazamika aura aupazamika samyaktvo acaramazarIrI jIvoM ko kI
apekSA 148 prakRtiyoM kI sattA mAnI jAtI hai  /  111 ina 148 prakRtiyoM meM se
jo jIva upazamazreNI ko prArambha karane vAle haiM aura upazamazreNI prArambha
karane ke lie yaha siddhAnta hai ki jo anantAnubandhI pAya catuSka kA
visaMyojana karatA hai tathA naraka va tiryaca Ayu kA jise bandha na ho vaha
upazamazreNI prArambha kara sakatA hai, to hama siddhAnta ke anusAra AThaveM se
lekara gyArahaveM guNasthAna paryanta cAra guNasthAnoM meM anantAnubandhI
kaSAyacatuSka tathA narakAyu aura tiryaMcAyu - ina chaha prakRtiyoM ke sitrAya
142 prakRtiyoM kI mattA hotI hai| isa prakAra mokSa kI kAraNabhUta kSapakazreNI
vAle jIvoM ke nauve guNasthAna ke prathama bhAga paryaMta karmoM kI sattA
batalAI jA cukI hai  /  nauveM guNasthAna ke nau bhAga hote haiM  /  ataH Age kI
do gAthAoM meM nauveM guNasthAna ke dUsare se nauveM bhAga paryaMta ATha bhAgoM
meM prakRtiyoM kI sattA ko batalAne haiM  /  thAvaratirinirayAyava-yuga
dhoNatigega vigala sAhAraM  /  solakhao dubIsasyaM zriyaMsi biyatiyakasAyaMto
// 28 //   //  taiyAisu caudasaterabArachapaNaca utihiya saya kamaso  /  napura
sthihAsachapu saturiyako hamayamAyayao gAthArthaM - sthAvaradvika, tiryacadvika,
narakadvika, Atapatrika,  // 26 //

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **112**  The destruction of the sixteen karmas, namely,
*sthāna-dvaya*, *tiyancha-dvaya*, *naraka-dvaya*, *ātapa-hika*, *sthāna-dvaya*,
*eka-indriya-jāti*, *vikala-indriya-trika*, and *sādhāraṇa-nāma-karma*, at the
end of the first part of the ninth *guṇa-sthāna* leaves one hundred and twenty-
two karmas in the second part. Of these one hundred and twenty-two karmas, the
destruction of the eight karmas, namely, *apratyākhāyana-āvaraṇa-kaṣāya-
caturṣka* and *pratyākhāyana-āvaraṇa-kaṣāya-caturṣka*, at the end of the second
part leaves one hundred and fourteen karmas in the third part. Subsequently, the
destruction of *napumsaka-veda*, *strī-veda*, *hāsyādi-ṣaṭka*, *puruṣa-veda*,
*sanjvalana-krodha*, *māna*, and *māyā* in the third to ninth parts respectively
leaves one hundred and thirteen, twelve, six, five, four, and three karmas.
**Special Note:** The ninth *guṇa-sthāna* has nine parts. The first part has one
hundred and thirty-eight karmas, as mentioned in the previous verse. These
verses describe the names of the karmas that are destroyed in the remaining
eight parts of the *guṇa-sthāna* from the second to the ninth, and the number of
karmas remaining in each part.  The one hundred and thirty-eight karmas
mentioned in the first part are reduced to one hundred and twenty-two in the
second part after the destruction of the sixteen karmas, namely, *sthāvara-
dvaya*, *tiyancha-dvaya*, *naraka-dvaya*, *ātapa-hika*, *sthāna-dvaya*, *eka-
indriya-jāti*, *vikala-indriya-trika*, and *sādhāraṇa-nāma*.  The one hundred
and twenty-two karmas in the second part are reduced to one hundred and fourteen
in the third part after the destruction of the eight karmas, namely,
*apratyākhāyana-āvaraṇa-kaṣāya-caturṣka* and *pratyākhāyana-āvaraṇa-kaṣāya-
caturṣka*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 112 karmastava styAnadvitrika, ekendriyajAti, vikalendriyajAtitrika aura
sAdhAraNa nAmakarma ina solaha prakRtiyoM kA nauva guNasthAna ke prathama bhAga
ke antima samaya meM kSaya ho jAne se dUsare bhAga meM eka sau bAIsa prakRtiyoM
kI sattA rahatI hai| ina eka sau bAIsa prakRtiyoM meM se
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNakaSAyacatuSka aura pratyAkhthAnAvaraNakaSAyacatuSka kula ATha
prakRtiyoM kI sattA kA kSaya dUsare bhAga ke antima samaya meM ho jAne me tIsare
bhAga meM eka sau caudaha prakRtiyoM kI sattA rahatI hai  /  isake bAda tIsare
se nauveM bhAga taka kramazaH napusakaveda, strIveda, hAsyAdiSaTka, puruSaveda,
saMjvalana krodha, mAna aura mAyA kA kSaya hone me ekasau teraha, bAraha, chaha.
pAMca, cAra aura tIna prakRtiyoM kI sattA rahatI hai| vizeSArtha-nauva
guNasthAna ke nau bhAga hote hai aura ina nau bhAgoM meM se pahale bhAga meM
kSapaka zreNI kI apekSA se 138 prakRttiyoM kI sattA hone kA kathana pahale kI
gAthA meM ho cukA hai| ina gAthAoM meM ukta guNasthAna ke zeSa rahe dusare se
nauveM bhAga paryanta kula ATha bhAgoM meM kramazaH kSaya hone vAlI prakRttiyoM
ke nAma tathA sattA meM rahane vAlI prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA batalAI hai| prathama
bhAga meM jo 138 prakRttiyoM kI sattA kahI gaI hai, unameM se sthAvaradvika,
tiyaMcadvika, narakadvika, Atapahika, styAnadvitrika, ekendriyajAti nAma,
vikalendriyatrika tathA mAdhAraNanAma ina solaha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya prathama
bhAga ke antima samaya meM ho jAne para dUsare bhAga meM 122 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
rahatI hai| dUsare bhAga kI ina 122 prakRtiyoM kI sattA me meM
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNakaSAyacatuSka aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNakaSAyacatuSka ina ATha
prakR

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  113  The existence of the 114 karmas in the third part
remains after the destruction of the 114 karmas in the last time of the second
part. And after the destruction of the Nupunsakaved in the last time of the
third part, the existence of 113 karmas remains in the fourth part. And out of
these 113 karmas, the destruction of Strived in the last time of the fourth part
leaves 112 karmas in the fifth part. And after the destruction of Hasya Patak in
the last time of the fifth part, the existence of 106 karmas remains in the
sixth part.   In the sixth part, out of the 106 karmas that are capable of
existence, the absence of Purushaved in the last time of the sixth part leaves
105 karmas in the seventh part. And out of the 105 karmas that are considered
incapable of existence in the seventh part, the destruction of Sanjwalan Krodh
in the last time of the seventh part leaves 104 karmas in the eighth part.   And
out of the 104 karmas that are capable of existence in the eighth part, the
destruction of Sanjwalan Man in the last time of the eighth part leaves 103
karmas in the ninth part.   Thus, the existence of 103 karmas remains in the
last part - the ninth part - of the Nivva Gunasthan. And in the last time of
this last part - the ninth part - the destruction of Sanjwalan Maya also takes
place. After the destruction of Maya, the remaining 102 karmas remain capable of
existence in the tenth Gunasthan. This will be discussed in the following
verses.  It is a general rule that in the absence of the cause, the effect also
does not remain. Therefore, the main causes of the bondage, arising, and
existence of the karmas that were destroyed in the previous Gunasthanas are
Mithyatva, Aviriti, and Kashaya. Compared to the previous Gunasthanas, the
causes like Mithyatva etc. are absent in the subsequent Gunasthanas. Therefore,
if these causes like Mithyatva etc. are no longer present, then their
existence...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha 113 tiyoM kI mattA dUsare bhAga ke antima samaya meM kSaya
ho jAne se tIsara bhAga meM 114 prakRtiyoM kI sattA rahatI hai aura usake bAda
tIsare bhAga ke antima samaya meM napuMsakaveda kA kSaya hone se cauthe bhAga
meM 113 aura ina 113 prakRtiyoM meM se strIveva kA kSaya cauthe bhAga ke antima
samaya meM hone se 112 prakRtiyoM ko matA pA~cave bhAga meM hotI hai tathA
pAMcaveM bhAga ke anta meM hAsyapaTka kA kSaya hone se chaThe bhAga meM 106
prakRtiyoM kI sattA rahatI hai| chaThe bhAga meM sattA yogya 106 prakRtiyoM meM
meM usake antima samaya meM puruSaveda kA abhAva hone se sAtaveM bhAga meM 105
prakRtiyA~ aura sAtaveM bhAga meM jo 105 kRtiyA~ manAyogya batalAI haiM, unameM
se saMjvalana krodha kA sAtaveM bhAga ke antima samaya meM kSaya ho jAtA hai  /
ataH AThaveM bhAga meM 104 prakRtiyoM kI sattA tathA AThaveM bhAga kI sattAyogya
104 prakRtiyoM meM se AThaveM bhAga ke antima samaya meM saMjvalana mAna ko
kSaya ho jAne se nau bhAga meM 103 prakRtiyoM kI sattA rahatI hai  /  isa
prakAra nIva guNasthAna ke antima bhAga - nauveM bhAga meM 103 prakRtiyoM kI
sattA rahatI hai aura isa antima bhAga- nauveM bhAga ke antima samaya meM
saMjvalana mAyA kA bhI kSaya ho jAtA hai  /  mAyA ke kSaya hone se zeSa rahI huI
102 prakRtiyA~ dasaveM guNasthAna meM mattAyogya rahatI haiN| isakA kathana Age
kI gAthA meM kiyA jaaegaa| yaha eka sAdhAraNa niyama hai ki kAraNa ke abhAva meM
kArya kA bhI sadbhAva nahIM rahatA hai| ataH pahale ke guNasthAnoM meM jina
karmaprakRtiyoM kA kSaya huA, unake bandha, udaya aura sattA ke prAyaH pramukha
kAraNa mithyAra, avirati aura kaSAya haiN| pUrva-pUrva ke guNasthAna kI apekSA
uttara-uttara ke guNasthAnoM meM mithyAtva Adi kAraNoM kA abhAva hotA jAtA hai |
ataH aba ye midhyAtvAdi kAraNa nahIM rahe to unake sadbhAva

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Even the karmas that reside in the state of bondage, arising, and being, do not
remain. They are destroyed.  Thus, after stating the nature of existence in the
ninth stage of spiritual progress, the following verse describes the number of
existing natures in the tenth and twelfth stages, and the names of the natures
that are destroyed at their end.  **Verse 30:**  **Meaning:** (With the
destruction of the Sanjvalana Maya at the end of the ninth stage of spiritual
progress), there are 102 natures existing in the Sukhsamprayaya stage. And at
the end of this stage, with the destruction of Sanjvalana Lobha, there are 101
natures existing until the second extreme time in the Kshinamoha stage. And with
the destruction of Nidradvik, there are 6 natures existing in the final time.
And in the final time, the Darshanavaran Chatushk, Gyanavaran Panchak, and
Antaraya Panchak are also destroyed.  **Special Meaning:** The verse describes
the Kshapak category. The one who attains the Kshapak category directly reaches
the twelfth stage from the tenth stage. Therefore, after the tenth stage, the
existence of karma natures, etc., in the twelfth stage is described.  There are
102 natures existing in the tenth stage. Of these 102 natures, with the
destruction of the Sanjvalana Lobha Kshaya in the final time, there are 101
natures existing in the twelfth stage. But these 101 natures exist in this stage
only until the second extreme time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kamaMstava meM bandha, udaya aura sattArUpa meM rahane vAle karma bhI nahIM
raha pAte haiM. naSTa ho jAte haiN| isa prakAra nauveM guNasthAna meM sattA
prakRtiyoM kA kathana karane ke pazcAta Age kI gAyA meM dasaveM aura bArahaveM
guNasthAna kI sattA prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura una-unake anta meM kSaya hone
vAlI prakRtiyoM ke nAma batalAte haiN| suhami dusaya lohanto khINaducarimegasaya
dunihlaao| navanavA caramasamae cajabasaNanAgaviyanto  // 30 //  gAthArtha-
(nauveM guNasthAna ke anta meM saMjvalana mAyA kA kSaya hone se) sUkSmasaMparAya
guNasthAna meM 102 prakRtiyoM kI sattA rahatI hai tathA isI guNasthAna ke anta
meM saMjvalana lobha kA kSaya hone se kSINamoha guNasthAna ke dviparama samaya
taka 101 prakRtiyoM kI aura nidrAdvika kA kSaya hone meM antima samaya meM 6
prakRtiyoM kI sattA rahatI aura antima samaya meM darzanAvaraNacatuSka tathA
jJAnAvaraNapaMcaka, antarAyapaMcaka kA bhI kSaya ho jAtA hai| vizeSArtha gAthA
meM kSapaka zreNI kI apekSA varNana kiyA gayA hai aura kSapaka zreNI mAMr3ane
vAlA dasaveM guNasthAna se sIdhA bArahaveM guNasthAna ko prApta karatA hai| ataH
dasarve ke bAda bArahaveM guNasthAna meM karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA Adi kA kathana
kiyA gayA hai| dasaveM guNasthAna meM 102 prakRtiyoM kI sattA rahatI hai| ina
102 prakRtiyoM meM se antima samaya meM saMjvalana lobha kaSAya kA kSaya ho jAne
se bArahaveM guNasthAna meM 101 prakRtiyoM kI sattA rahatI hai  /  lekina yaha
101 prakRtiyoM kI sattA isa guNasthAna meM dvicarama samaya paryanta hI

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth ### 115  It should be understood that out of these 101
**Prakritis**, the two **Prakritis** of **Nidra** and **Prachala** are
destroyed, leaving 66 **Prakritis** remaining at the final moment.  In the
twelfth **Gunasthan**, **Mohaniya Karma** is completely destroyed. Therefore,
the **Karma Prakritis** that are bound, arise, and remain in existence due to
the intensity of **Mohaniya Karma** in the **Sattayogya Prakritis** do not
remain. Due to **Mohaniya Karma**, there is a possibility of binding, arising,
and existence of the 14 **Prakritis** - **Jnanavaran**, five **Antaraya**, and
four **Darshanavaran** like **Chakshudarshanavaran**. However, with the
destruction of **Mohaniya Karma Prakritis**, the binding, arising, and existence
of these 14 **Prakritis** also cease to exist. Therefore, at the final moment of
the twelfth **Gunasthan**, the four **Darshanavaran** - **Chakshu**,
**Achakshu**, **Avadhi Kevaldarshanavaran**, the five **Jnanavaran** - **Mati**,
**Shruta**, **Avadhi**, **Manahparyaya**, and **Kevaljnanavaran**, and the five
**Antaraya** - **Dan**, **Labh**, **Bhom**, **Upbhog**, and **Veerya** -
**Antaraya**, a total of 14 **Prakritis** are destroyed.  ---  When the
**Karma** that are **Pratibandhak Karana** (obstructive causes) are destroyed,
the **Atma** becomes free from the veil of **Chetana** (consciousness), and the
**Keval Upayog** (absolute use) manifests. **Keval Upayog** means complete
knowledge, both general and specific. The **Pratibandhak** (obstructive)
**Karma** for this **Keval Upayog** are **Jnanavaran**, **Darshanavaran**,
**Mohaniya**, and **Antaraya** - these four **Karma**. Among these, **Mohaniya
Karma** is the main one. Only after the destruction of **Mohaniya Karma** do the
remaining three **Karma** - **Darshanavaran**, **Jnanavaran**, and **Antaraya**
- get destroyed. Upon their destruction, **Kaivalya** (liberation) is attained.
Therefore,  1. **Samanya Upayog** is **Keval Darshan**, **Vishesh Upayog** is
**Keval Jnan**. 2. **Moksajjnanadarshanavaranantaragkshayaccha Kevalam**.
(Tattvarth Sutra 10.1) ---

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha 115 samajhanA caahie| ina 101 prakRtiyoM meM se nidrAdvika
- nidrA aura pracalA ina do prakRtiyoM kA kSaya ho jAne se antima samaya meM 66
prakR tiyoM kI satA rahatI hai  /  bArahaveM guNasthAna meM mohanIyakarma kA
sarvathA kSaya ho jAtA hai  /  ataH sattAyogya prakRtiyoM meM mohanIyakarma kI
prabalatA se baMdhane vAlI, udaya hone vAlI aura sattA meM rahane vAlI
karmaprakRtiyA~ nahIM rahatI haiN| mohanIyakarma ke kAraNa hI jJAnAvaraNa,
antarAya kI pA~ca-pA~ca tathA darzanAvaraNa kI cakSudarzanAvaraNa Adi cAra
prakRtiyA~ kula 14 prakRtiyoM ke bandha, udaya aura mattA kI saMbhAvanA rahatI
hai lekina mohanIya karma kI prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hone se ukta 14 prakRtiyoM kA
bhI bandha, udaya, sattA rUpa meM astitva nahIM raha sakatA hai| isalie
bArahaveM guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM darzanAvaraNacatuSka-cakSu, acakSu,
avadhi kevaladarzanAvaraNa, jJAnAvaraNapaMcaka-mati zruta, avadhi, manaHparyaya
aura kevalajJAnAvaraNa tathA antarAyapaMcaka dAna, lAbha, bhoma, upabhoga aura
vIrya - antarAya, kula 14 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya ho jAtA hai  /  , -- pratibandhaka
kAraNoM karmoM ke nAza ho jAne meM sahaja cetanA ke nirAvaraNa hone para AtmA kA
sva-svarUpa kevala upayoga kA Avi rbhAva hotA hai  /  kevala upayoga kA matalaba
hai sAmAnya aura vizeSa - donoM prakAra kA sampUrNa bodha  /  isa kevala upayoga
ke pratibandhaka jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, mohanIya aura antarAya- ye cAra
karma haiM  /  inameM mohanIyakarma mukhya hai| mohanIyakarma ke kSaya ho jAne
ke bAda hI bAkI ke darzanAvaraNa, jJAnAvaraNa aura antarAya ina tIna karmoM kA
kSaya hotA hai  /  inake naSTa hone para kaivalya kI prApti hotI hai| ataH 1.
samAnya upayoga kevaladarzana, vizeSa upayoga kevalajJAna  /  2.
mokSAjjJAnadarzanAvaraNAntarAgakSayAcca kevalam  /  tasvArthasUtra 10 / 1 --

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Firstly, it explains the arising and existence of the karmic substances that are
inseparable from the mohaniya karma, from the first Mithyatva ganasthana to the
twelfth Kshinamoha ganasthana, and then it explains the cessation of the
existence of the four darshanavaranas, five jnanavaranas, and five antarayas at
the end. Similarly, the fourteen karmic substances are also present in the
karmic substances that cease to arise at the end of the twelfth ganasthana.
Thus, when the fourteen karmic substances, including darshanavaranas, etc.,
cease to exist out of the sixty-six karmic substances that are capable of
existing at the end of the twelfth ganasthana, the thirteenth ganasthana is
attained.  Now, in the following verses, we will explain the number of karmic
substances that remain in the thirteenth and fourteenth ganasthanas, and the
names of the karmic substances that cease to exist.  **Verse 31:** The sa yogi
and a yogi karmic substances remain until the end of the two extremes of the
ganasthanas.  **Verse 32:** The devadvik, vihayogati dvik, gandha dvik, eight
sparsh, varna, rasa, sharira, bandhana, and sanghatan, each with five, the
nirmaan naam, sanhanan shatk, asthir shatk, sansthan shatk, aguru labu tuksh,
apariapt naam, sata or asata vedaniya, each with three, and the suswar and nich
gotra, these 72 karmic substances cease to exist in the fourteenth...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kamaMstava pahale mithyAtva gaNasthAna se lekara bArahavaM-kSINamoha guNasthAna
paryanta sarvaprathama mohanIyakarma kI avinAbhAvI karmaprakRtiyoM ke udaya aura
sattA kA viccheda batalAkara antima samaya meM cAra darzanAvaraNa, pA~ca
jJAnAvaraNa aura pAMca antarAya kI sattA kA viccheda honA batAyA hai| isI
prakAra bArahaveM guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM udayavicchinna hone vAlI
prakRtiyoM meM bhI ukta 14 prakRtiyA~ haiM  /  isa prakAra bArahaveM guNasthAna
ke antima samaya meM sattAyogya 66 prakRtiyoM meM se darzanAvaraNa Adi kI 14
prakRtiyoM ke kSaya ho jAne meM terahavAM gaNasthAna prApta hotA hai| aba Age kI
gAthAoM meM terahaveM, caudahavaM gaNasthAna kI sanA prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura
kSaya hone vAlI prakRtiyoM ke nAma batalAte haiM  /  paNasoi sajogi ajogi durime
devakhagaigaMdhayugaM  /  phAsaTTha unnarasataNubaMdhaNasaMghAyaNa nimiNaM  //
31 //  saMdhyaNaaghirasaMgaNa-chakka agurulahucAu apajjataM  /  sAyaM va asAyaM
vA parittusaMgatiga susara niyaM  // 32 //  bisayarikhao ya carime terasa
mnnuytstig-jsaaijj| subhagajiNunaca paNidiya terasa sAyAsAegayaracheo  // 33 //
gAthArtha-sayogi aura ayogi guNasthAna ke dvicarama samaya taka 85 prakRtiyoM kI
sattA rahatI hai| usake bAda devadvika, vihAyogatidvika, gandhadvika, ATha
sparza, varNa, rasa, zarIra, bandhana aura saMghAtana kI pAMca-pA~ca,
nirmANanAma, saMhananaSaTka, asthiraSaTka, saMsthAnaSaTka, agurulabunatuSka,
aparyAptanAma, sAtA athavA asAtAvedanIya, pratyeka va upAMga kI tInatIna,
susvara aura nIcagotra ina 72 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya cauda -

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Secondary Mantra  In the second extreme time of the fourteenth Gunasthan, the
human triad, the seventeen, the fame and glory, the name of the giver, the
auspicious name, the name of the Jina, the five-sense beings, and the seven or
non-seven sensations, these 13 substances remain. When these 13 substances also
perish in the final time of the fourteenth Gunasthan, the soul becomes free from
karma and liberated.  **Special Meaning:** In the above three verses, the number
of substances that are capable of existence in the thirteenth and fourteenth
Gunasthan, and the names of the substances that perish, have been explained
through nouns, etc.  In the twelfth Gunasthan, out of the 66 substances capable
of existence, 14 substances like Darshanavaran, etc., perish, leaving 85
substances capable of existence in the thirteenth Gunasthan. These 85 substances
remain in the thirteenth Gunasthan and also in the second extreme time (before
the final time) of the fourteenth Gunasthan. Out of these, 72 substances also
perish in the second extreme time of the fourteenth Gunasthan, leaving only 13
substances capable of existence in the final time. When these also perish in the
final time, the soul attains its pure form.  The 85 substances of the thirteenth
and fourteenth Gunasthan are bound, arise, and exist due to yoga. Until the
twelfth Gunasthan, the substances bound due to Mithyatva and continuous Kshaya
perish, and those that exist due to yoga perish in the thirteenth and fourteenth
Gunasthan. Most of these yoga-induced substances are related to Kaya Yoga, and
when the yogas cease, some become Jiva-vipaki and some become Kshetra-vipaki,
mainly along with Pudgala-vipaki in the second extreme time of the fourteenth
Gunasthan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIyakamantra havaM guNasthAna ke dvirama samaya meM ho jAne se antima samaya
meM manuSyatrika, satrika, yazaH kIrtinAma, AdeyanAma, subhaganAma, jinanAma,
paMcendriyajAtinAma tathA sAtA athavA asAtA vedana ina 13 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
rahatI hai  /  ina 13 prakRtiyoM kI sattA bhI caudahavaM guNasthAna ke antima
samaya meM kSaya ho jAne se AtmA niSkarmA hokara mukta bana jAtA hai  /  117
vizeSArtha - ukta tInoM gAthAoM meM terahava aura caudahavaM guNasthAna meM
sattAyogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura kSaya hone vAlI prakRtiyoM ke nAma
saMjJAoM Adi ke dvArA batalAye gaye hai | 85 bArahaveM guNasthAna kI sattAyogya
66 prakRtiyoM meM se darzanAvaraNa Adi kI 14 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya ho jAne meM
terahavaM guNasthAna meM prakRtiyA~ sattAyogya rahatI haiN| ye 85 prakRtiyA~
terahaveM guNasthAna ke atirikta caudahaveM guNasthAna ke dvicarama samaya
(antima samaya se pahale) taka rahatI haiN| inameM se 72 prakRtiyA~ bhI
caudahaveM guNasthAna ke dvicarama samaya meM kSaya ho jAne meM antima samaya
meM 13 prakRtiyA~ hI sattAyogya rahatI haiN| unakA bhI kSaya antima samaya meM
ho jAne se AtmA apane zuddha svarUpa ko prApta kara letI hai  /  terahaveM aura
caudahave guNasthAna kI 85 prakRtiyAM yoganimittaka bandha, udaya aura sattA
vAlI haiM  /  bArahava guNasthAna taka mithyAtva, avirata kaSAya ke nimitta se
baMdhana vAlI prakRtiyoM kA kSaya ho jAtA hai aura yoga ke kAraNa jinakI sattA
rahatI hai, ve terahaveM aura caudahaveM guNasthAna meM naSTa hotI haiM  /  ina
yoganimittaka prakRtiyoM meM bhI adhikatara kAyayoga se sambandha rakhane vAlI
haiM aura yogoM kA nirodha ho jAne se caudahaveM guNasthAna ke dvicarama samaya
meM kucha jIvavipAkA kucha kSetravipAkI prakRtiyoM ke sAtha mukhya rUpa se
pudgalavipAkI

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Kamantva 118 The essence of the **Prakritis** is destroyed. The names of the
**Prakritis** that are subject to destruction are: (1) **Devagati**, (2)
**Devanupurvi**, (3) **Shubhavihayogati**, (4) **Ashubhavihayogati**, (5)
**Surabhigandha**, (6) **Durabhigandha**, (7) **Karkashsparsh**, (8)
**Mridusparsh**, (9) **Laghusparsh**, (10) **Guruspash**, (11) **Sheetsparsh**,
(12) **Ushnasparsh**, (13) **Snigdhsparsh**, (14) **Rukhsarparsh**, (15)
**Krishnavarna**, (16) **Neelvarna**, (17) **Lohitvarna**, (18)
**Haridravarna**, (19) **Shuklavarna**, (20) **Katukaras**, (21) **Riktaras**,
(22) **Kashayaras**, (23) **Amlaaras**, (24) **Madhuraaras**, (25) **Audarik**,
(26) **Vaikriya**, (27) **Aharak**, (28) **Tejas**, (29) **Karmanasharira**,
(30) **Audarikbandhan**, (31) **Vaikriyabandhan**, (32) **Aharakbandhan**, (33)
**Taijas-bandhan**, (34) **Karmanbandhan**, (35) **Madarikasanghatan**, (36)
**Vaikriya - Sanghatan**, (37) **Aharaksanghatan**, (38) **Tejassanghatan**,
(39) **Karman Sanghatan**, (40) **Nirman**, (41)
**Vajrarishbhanaraachsanhanan**, (42) **Rishbhanaraachsanhanan**, (43)
**Naraachsanhanan**, (44) **Ardhanaraach Sanhanan**, (45) **Kilikasanhanan**,
(46) **Svatansanhanan**, (47) **Asthir**, (48) **Ashubh**, (49) **Dubhang**,
(50) **Duswar**, (51) **Anaadey**, (52) **Ayash Kirti**, (53)
**Samachaturasrasan Sthan**, (54) **Nyagrodhaparimandalsansthan**, (55)
**Sadisansthan** (56) **Vamansansthan** (57) **Kujbansansthan** (58)
**Hundsansthan**, (59) **Agurulaghu**, (60) **Upghat**, (61) **Paradhat**, (62)
**Uchchwas** (63) **Apariapt**, (64) **Pratyek**, (65) **Sthir** (66) **Shubh**,
(67) **Audarik Angopaang**, (68) **Vaikriya - Angopaang**, (69)
**Aharakangopaang**, (70) **Suswar** (71) **Neechagol** and (72) **Sata** or
**Asata Vaidaneya** from among these. 1. These **Prakritis** should be
classified as **Kshetravipaki**, **Jivavipaki** and **Pudumalavipaki**
**Prakritis** as follows.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kamaMstava 118 prakRtiyoM kI sattA kA nAza ho jAtA hai  /  kSaya hone vAlI
prakRtiyoM ke nAma ye haiM (1) devagati, (2) devAnupUrvI, (3) zubhavihAyogati,
(4) azubhavihAyogati, (5) surabhigandha, (6) durabhigandha, (7) karkazasparza,
(6) mRdusparza, (6) laghusparza, (10) gurusparza, (11) zItasparza, (12)
uSNasparza, (13) snigdhasparza, (14) rUkSaraparza, (15) kRSNavarNa, (16)
nIlavarNa, (17) lohitavarNa, (18) hAridravarNa, (16) zuklavarNa, (20)
kaTukarasa, (21) riktarasa, (22) kaSAyarasa, (23) amlarasa, (24) madhurarasa,
(25) audArika, (26) vaikriya, (27) AhAraka, (28) tejas, (29) kArmaNazarIra, (30)
audArikabandhana, (31) vaikriyabandhana, (32) AhArakabandhana, (33) taijasa-
bandhana, (34) kArmaNabandhana, (35) madArikasaMghAtana, (36) vaikriya -
saMghAtana, (37) AhArakasaMghAtana, (38) tejasasaMghAtana, (36) kArmaNa
saMghAtana, (40) nirmANa, (41) vajraRSabhanArAcasaMhanana, (42)
RSabhanarAcasaMhanana, (43) nArAcasaMhanana, (44) ardhanArAca saMhanana, (45)
kIlikAsaMhanana, (46) svAtaMsaMhanana, (47) asthira, (48) azubha, (46) dubhaMga,
(50) du:svara, (51) anAdeya, (52) ayazaH kIrti, (53) samacaturasrasaM sthAna,
(54) nyagrodhaparimaNDalasaMsthAna, (55) sAdisaMsthAna (56) vAmanasaMsthAna (57)
kubjasaMsthAna (58) huMDasaMsthAna, ( 59 ) agurulaghu, (60) upaghAta, (61)
parAdhAta, (62) ucchvAsa (63) aparyApta, (64) pratyeka, (65) sthira (66) zubha,
(67) audArika aMgopAMga, (68) vaikriya - aMgopAMga, (66) AhArakaaMgopAMga, ( 70
) susvara (71) nIcagola tathA ( 72 ) sAtA yA asAtA vaidanIya meM se koI eka  / '
1. ina prakRtiyoM meM kSetravipAkI, jIvavipAkI aura pudumalavipAkI prakRtiyoM kA
vargIkaraNa isa prakAra karanA cAhie

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Text of the Karma Grantha (Chapter 119)  **At the culmination of the 14th
Gunasthan, the 72 Prakṛtis mentioned earlier are destroyed. In the final stage,
the following 13 Prakṛtis remain:**  * **Manushyatrika:** Manushya-Gati,
Manushyanupūrvi, and Manushyayu * **Asatrika:** Pras, Vādar, Paryāpta Nāma, Yash
Kirti, Ādeya Nāma, Subhaga, Tīrthankara, Uchchagotra, Pacchendriya Jāti, and
Sāta or Asāta Vedaniya (one of these).  **These remaining 13 Prakṛtis are such
that when an Ayogika Kevali Bhagavan, in the state of Samuccchinnākriyā-
apratipāti Shukla-Dhyāna, meditates, they are destroyed within the time it takes
to utter five short syllables. This complete liberation from Karma results in
the experience of infinite bliss, free from the eight Karmas (Jñānāvarana,
etc.). They become peaceful, free from the stain of Bhavakarma (the cause of new
Karma-bandha), eternal, possessing the eight qualities of Jñāna, Darshan, Sukha,
Virya, Avyābādha, Avagāhana, Amūrtatva, and Agurulaghu. They are known as
Sikkha, residing in the forefront of the Lok.**  **Thus, in the Gunasthānas,
there is a decrease in Karma-bandha, Udaya, and Sattāyoga.**  *
**Kshetravipāki:** (The Karma whose Udaya causes the Jīva to attain a specific
location) - Devanupūrvi * **Jīvavipāki:** (The Karma whose fruit is experienced
by Jīvas) - Devagati, Shubha Vihāyoga-Gati Nāma, Ashubha Vihāyoga-Gati Nāma,
Dubhang, Dusvara, Anādeya, Ayash Kirti, Uchchhvās, Aparyāpta, Susvara,
Nīchagotra, Sāta or Asāta Vedaniya (one of these). * **Pudgalavipāki:** (The
Karma whose fruit is experienced by the Pudgala-body) - Manddhik, Spashan-
Ashtaka, Rasapanchaka, Varnapanchaka, Sharirapanchaka, Bandhanapanchaka,
Sanghatanapanchaka, Nirmananama, Sanhananashatka, Asthir, Anubha,
Sansthanashatka, Agurulaghu, Upghāta, Parādhāta, Pratiyaka, Sthir, Shubha,
Angopāntrika.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitIya karmagrantha 119 caudahaveM guNasthAna ke dvicarama samaya meM uparyukta
72 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya ho jAne se antima samaya meM nimnalikhita 13 prakRtiyoM
kI sattA rahatI hai-manuSyatrika-manuSyagati, manuSyAnupUrvI aura manuSyAyu,
asatrika-prasa, vAdara, paryApta nAma, yaza kIrti, AdeyanAma, subhaga,
tIrthaMkara, uccagotra, pacendriyajAti evaM sAtA yA asAtA vedanIya meM se koI
eka  /  zeSa rahI ye 13 prakRtiyA~ bhI aisI haiM ki jinakI ayogikevalI bhagavAn
samucchinnakriyA'pratipAti zukladhyAna meM dhyAnastha hokara pA~ca hrasva
akSaroM ke uccAraNa karane jitane samaya meM kSaya karane se sarvathA karmamukta
ho jJAnAbaraNAdi aSTakarmoM se rahita ananta sukha kA anubhava karane se
zAntimaya, navIna karmabandha ke kAraNabhUta bhAvakarmarUpI maila se rahita,
nitya, jJAna, darzana, sukha, vIrya, avyAbAdha, avagAhana, amUrtatva aura
agurulaghu-ina ATha guNoM sahita aura kutakRtya, loka ke agrabhAga meM sthita
hokara sika kahalAna lagate haiN| isa prakAra guNasthAnoM meM kama se
karmabandha, udaya aura sattAyogya kSetravipAkI-(jisa karma ke udaya se jIva
niyata sthAna ko prApta kare use kSetravipAkIkarma kahate haiN|) devaanupuurvii|
jovadhimAkI-(jisa karma kA phala jIvoM meM ho, ume jIvavipAkIkarma kahate haiM
/ ) devagati, zubha vihAyogati nAma, azubha vihAyogati nAma, dubhaMga, dusvara,
anAdeya, ayaza kIti, ucchavAsa, aparyApta, susvara, nIcagotra, sAtA yA asAtA
vedanIya kamaM meM se koI eka  /  pudgalavipAko(jisakA phala pugala-zarIra meM
ho, use pudgalavipAkI kahate haiM  / ) maMddhika, spasaM-aSTaka, rasapaMcaka,
varNapaMcaka, zarIrapaMcaka, bandhanapaMcaka, saMghAtanapaMcaka, nirmANanAma,
saMhananaSaTka, asthira, anubha, saMsthAnaSaTka, aguruladhu, upaghAta,
parAdhAta, pratyeka, sthira, zubha, aNgopaaNtrik|

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The number of karmas and their destruction at the end of their respective times
has been stated. Now, in the following verse, the conclusion of the text is made
by clearly stating the destruction of 12 karmas out of 13 karmas that are
capable of existing at the end of the 14th gunasthan.  **Verse 34:** "Salutation
to the Lord who, at the end of the 14th gunasthan, has destroyed the twelve
karmas, excluding the manushyanupurvi karma, and attained liberation. Salutation
to the great Mahavira, who is praised by the Devas and the Devas."
**Explanation:** The previous verse stated that all 13 karmas cease to exist at
the end of the 14th gunasthan, which is the state of a liberated being. However,
this verse concludes the text by hinting at the destruction of only 12 karmas.
Some Acharyas believe that the manushyanupurvi karma, a type of karma related to
human existence, is destroyed by the process of stibukasankrama (transfer) into
the ghabin manushya-gati karma (karma related to the human state of being)
within the manushyatrika (human triad) during the second-last stage of the 14th
gunasthan. Therefore, it does not remain at the end of the 14th gunasthan. The
remaining 12 karmas cannot undergo stibukasankrama without their own kind, so
their dalikas (particles) remain at the end of the 14th gunasthan.  **Note:** *
**Gunasthan:** A stage of spiritual development in Jainism. * **Karma:** Actions
that bind the soul to the cycle of birth and death. * **Stibukasankrama:** A
process of transferring karma from one type to another. * **Dalika:** A particle
of karma. * **Manushyanupurvi:** A type of karma related to human existence. *
**Manushyatrika:** The human triad, consisting of body, speech, and mind. *
**Ghabin manushya-gati karma:** Karma related to the human state of being. *
**Devas:** Gods in Jain cosmology. * **Devasena:** The assembly of gods. *
**Mahavira:** The last Tirthankara (spiritual teacher) of the present age.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . ... . 120 karmastava - prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA aura una-unake antima samaya meM
kSaya hone vAlI prakRtiyoM kA kathana kiyA jA cukA hai  /  aba Age ko gAthA meM
caudahara guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM sattAyogya 13 prakRtiyoM ke sthAna meM
12 prakRtiyoM ke kSaya hone kA abhimata spaSTa karate hue grantha kA upasaMhAra
karate haiN| . naraaNupudhdhi viNA vA bArasa carimasamayaMmi jo khaviuM  /
patto siddhi vivavaMdiyaM namaha taM boraM  // 34 /  /  gAthArtha-athavA
pUrvokta teraha prakRtiyoM me se manuSyApUrvI ko chor3akara zeSa bAraha
prakRtiyoM ko caudahavaM guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM kSayakara jinhoMne
mokSa prApta kara liyA hai tathA devendroM se athavA demenTa pari se nandita se
mahAna mahAvIra ko namaskAra kro| vizeSArtha pUrva gAthA meM caudaha-ayogikevalI
guNasthAna ke carama samaya meM teraha prakRtiyoM kI sattA kA kSaya honA
batalAyA hai| lekina isa gAthA meM bAraha prakRtiyoM kI sattA ke kSaya hone ke
mata kA saMketa karate hue grantha kA upasaMhAra kiyA gayA hai  /  kinhIM-kinhIM
AcAryoM kA mata hai ki manuSyAnupUrvI nAmakarma kI sattA caudahaveM guNasthAna
ke dvicarama samaya meM hI manuSyatrika meM gabhina manuSyagatinAmakarma prakRti
meM stibu kasaMkrama dvArA saMkrAnta hokara naSTa ho jAtI hai  /  ata:
caudahaveM guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM usake dalika nahIM rahate haiM aura
zeSa bAraha prakRtiyoM kA svajAti ke binA stibukasakrama nahIM hone se unake
dalika caudahA guNasthAna ke antima samaya 1. anudapavatI karmaprakRti ke
dalikoM ko sajAtIya aura turUpa sthiti vAlI udayavatrI karmaprakRti ke rUpa meM
badalakara amake dalikoM ke mAya bhoga lenA stibukasakrama kahalAtA hai  /

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth  In the Second Karma Granth, it is stated that the karmas
which are present in the being but have not yet matured, their existence is
destroyed in the extreme time periods. All four Anupurvi karmas are
Kshetravipaki, therefore their maturation occurs in the interval between death
(leaving the body of this birth) and taking birth in another body.  The karmas
which mature after the cessation of their uninterrupted time period are of two
types:  (1) Rasodaya, (2) Pradeshodaya.  Direct experience of bound karmas is
called Rasodaya. The experience of bound karmas in another form (the karmas
which are bound to the extremely subtle, their essence is experienced along with
the essence of other similar natures that are being experienced, like water
whose essence cannot be known by its own ripening) is called Pradeshodaya.  The
reason for experiencing karmas along with other natures is that for Rasodaya to
occur, there are five causes: Dravya, Kshetra, Kala, Bhava, and Bhaya. In the
absence of one or more of these causes, the karma does not experience Rasodaya.
For example, a being while living in the human realm, bound the karma of
Ekendriya Jati. Later, due to pure results, it bound the karma of Panchaindriya
Jati, which is suitable for the Deva realm, and was born in the Deva realm as a
Panchaindriya being. The uninterrupted time period of Ekendriya Jati passed, but
for the Rasodaya of that Ekendriya Jati, the cause in the form of the Bhav
(realm) is required, which is absent in the Deva realm. Therefore, that karma
does not experience Rasodaya but experiences Pradeshodaya.  When the maturing
karma does not find the path of Rasodaya for its ripening, its ripening takes
the path of Pradeshodaya. In the occurrence of this Pradeshodaya, the natural
ripening of those karmas takes the form of 'Sthibhuka Sankraman'. In other
words, the transition of non-matured natures to similar matured natures is
called Sthibhuka Sankraman. This can also be called Pradeshodaya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha meM bhI sattA meM rahate haiM tathA jinakA udaya pahale se
hI na ho, unakI sattA dvicarama samaya meM hI naSTa ho jAtI hai| cAroM AnupUrvI
karma kSetravipAkI haiM, ataH unakA udaya bhaTa (maraNa hone se isa jana ke
pArIH ko chor3akara dUsare janma kA zarIra dhAraNa karane) kI antarAlagati ma
baddha kamoM kA abAdhAkAla samApta hone para udaya meM jo kama Ate haiM, vaha
udaya do prakAra kA hai (1) rasodaya, (2) pradezodaya  /  ba~dhe hue karmoM kA
sAkSAt anubhava karanA sodaya hai  /  baMdhe hue karmoM kA anya rUpa (ati dalika
to jina karmoM ke bAMdhe hue haiM, unakA rasa dUsare bhoge jAne vAle sajAtIya
prakRtiyoM ke niSeka ke sAtha bhogA jAe, pAnI jisakA rasa svayaM kA vipAka na
batA saka) se anumaka, vaha pradezodaya kahalAtA hai| anya prakRti ke sAtha
jadaya hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki rasodaya hone ke lie dravya, kSetra, kAla,
bhAva va bhaya - kA~ca kAraNa haiN| unameM se kisI eka yA adhika hetuoM ke
abhAva meM usa karma kA rasodaya nahIM hotA  /  udAharaNataH kisI jIva ne
manuSyagati meM rahate hae ekendriyajAti nAmakarma kA bandhra kiyA, anantara
vizuddha pariNAmoM se devagatiprAyogya bandha karake paMcendriyajAti kA bandha
kiyA va paMcendriyarUpa me devargAta meM utpanna ho gyaa| ekendriyajAti kA
abAdhAkAna vyatIta huA, parantu usa ekendriyajAti ke ramodaya hetu bhavarUpa
kAraNa cAhie, jisakA devagati meM abhAva hai, ata: vaha karma sodaya kA anubhava
na karAke pradezodaya ko prApta karatA hai  /  udayonmukha karma niSeka ko
rasodaya kA mArga na milane se usake niSeka ke dalika anya mArga-pradezodaya ko
grahaNa karate haiM  /  isa pravezodaya ke hone meM una kamoM kA sahaja
pariNamana 'stibukasaMkramaNa' ko grahaNa karatA hai| arthAt anudayavatI
prakRtiyoM ke sajAtIya udayamatI prakatiyoM meM saMkrAnta hone ko
stibuphasaMkramaNa kahate haiM-apara mAma pradezodaya bhI kaha sakate hai|

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karyastava This happens, not in the Bhavasthana-Janmasthana. Therefore, due to
the absence of उदय (arising), the 73 Prakṛtis (principles) of the Ayogi
Gunasthana-dwelling soul are destroyed in the Dvicharama time, and the 12
Prakṛtis are destroyed in the Antyma time. That is, the Devadvika, etc., the
aforementioned 72 Prakṛtis, which do not arise, are destroyed in the Dvicharama
time by being transferred to the Udya-vati Karma-Prakṛtis through Stikasamkrama
(transfer of substance), in the same way, due to the absence of उदय, the Garmit
Manushyanupurvi Prakṛti in the Manushyatrika is also transferred to the Udya-
vati Prakṛtis through Stibukasamkrama in the Vicharama time. Therefore, the
existence of the Manushyanupurvi, which is transferred to the Udya-vati Karma-
Prakṛti in the Dvicharama time, should not be considered in the Charma time.
Therefore, in the Antyma time of the Chaudahva Gunasthana, the destruction of 12
Prakṛtis should be considered instead of 13.  In this way, after hinting at the
alternative view of the cessation of existence in the Chaudahva Gunasthana, the
author concludes the text by saying that those who have attained liberation by
destroying all Karma-Prakṛtis, and who are worshipped by the Devendras or by the
Devendrasūri, offer your salutations to the Supreme Soul, Mahavira.  Detailed
information about the binding, arising, and existence of Karma-Prakṛtis in the
Gunasthanas, and their destruction at their respective ends, is given in the
Appendix.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karyastava hI hotA hai, bhavasthAna-janmasthAna meM nahIM hotA hai| ataH udaya
kA abhAva hone se ayogi guNasthAnavartI AtmA ke dvicarama samaya meM 73
prakRtiyoM kA aura antima samaya meM 12 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hotA hai  /  arthAt
devadvika Adi pUrvokta 72 prakRtiyA~, jinakA udaya nahIM hai, jisa prakAra
dvicarama samaya meM stikasaMkrama dvArA udayavatI karmaprakRtiyoM meM saMkrAnta
hokara kSaya ho jAtI haiM, usI prakAra udaya na hone se manuSyatrika meM garmita
manuSyAnupUrvI prakRti bhI vicarama samaya meM hI stibukasaMkrama dvArA
udayavatI prakRtiyoM meM saMkrAnta ho jAtI hai| ataH dvicarama samaya meM
udayavatI karmaprakRti meM saMkrAnta manuSyAnupUrvI kI sattA ko bhI carama
samaya meM nahIM mAnanA cAhie  /  isIlie caudahA guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM
13 prakRtiyoM ke bajAya 12 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya honA mAnanA cAhie ! isa prakAra
caudahavaM guNasthAna meM sattA viccheda ke matAntara kA saMketa karane ke bAda
granthakAra grantha kA upasaMhAra karate haiM ki jinhoMna sampUrNa
karmaprakRtiyoM kA kSaya karake mokSa prApta kara liyA hai aura jo devendroM
dvArA athavA devendrasUri dvArA vandanA kiye jAte haiM, una paramAtmA mahAvIra
kI sabhI vandanA kro| guNasthAnoM meM karmaprakRtiyoM ke bandha, udaya aura
sattA tathA unaunake anta meM kSaya hone Adi kI vizeSa jAnakArI pariziSTa meM dI
gaI hai|

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix (1) Explanation of Karma Bandha, Uday and Satva (2) Time Calculation:
Jain Perspective (3) Comparative Observations (4) Bandha Yantra (5) Uday Yantra
(6) Udeerna Yantra (7) Satva Yantra (8) Yantra related to Bandha etc. in
Gunasthanas (9) Description of Uday Avinavaavi Prakrutis (10) Description of
Bandha Nimittak of Karma Prakrutis (11) Description of Satva Prakrutis (12)
Description of Bandha, Uday, Udeerna, Satva of Karma Prakrutis in Gunasthanas

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa (1) karma bandha, udaya aura sattA viSaya spaSTIkaraNa  /  (2)
kAlagaNanA : jainadRSTi  /  (3) tulanAtmaka maMtavya | ( 4 ) bandha yantra | (5)
udaya yantra | (6) udIraNA yantra | (7) sattA yantra | (8) guNasthAnoM meM
bandhAdi viSayaka yantra | ( 8 ) udaya avinAbhAvI prakRtiyoM kA vivaraNa | (10)
karmaprakRtiyoM kA baMdha nimittaka vivaraNa | (11) sattA prakRtiyoM kA vivaraNa
/  12) guNasthAnoM meM karmaprakRtiyoM ke bandha, udaya, udIraNA, sattA kA
vivaraNa |

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Explanation of Karma Bandha, Uday and Satva  **Bandha**  The acceptance of
new karmas is called bandha. Although the jiva is inherently formless, it is
embodied in the world and thus somewhat form-bound. In this state, it has been
accepting form-bound karma pudgalas since time immemorial due to kshaya and
yoga. There are many types of pudgal varganas, and the jiva accepts those that
have the potential to transform into karma. It then connects them to its own
atma-pradeshas through a specific relationship of conjunction.  Among these, the
karma bandha that occurs due to the arising of kshaya is called **samparayik
bandha**, and the rest are called **yoga-nimittak** (yoga-pratyayik) bandha.
Here, the term kshaya generally refers to mohaniya karma.  The main causes of
bandha are yoga and kshaya (mohaniya karma). The type of karma that binds
depends on the type of nimitta present in the guna-sthana. For example, the
satavedaniya karma-prakriti binds due to yoga, while the asatavedaniya karma-
prakriti requires the cooperation of kshaya for its binding.  There are two
types of bandha that occur due to mohaniya karma (kshaya): **pramadasahkrit**
and **apramadasahkrit**. Within mohaniya karma, there are also nimittas such as
**sukshmasamparaya**, **badarasamparaya**, and **badarasamparaya** with
**nivritti**, **anivritti**, **yathapravritti**, **apurvakaran**,
**pratyakhyaneya**, **apratyakhyaneya**, **anantaanubandhniya**, **mithyatva**,
etc. The **samyaktvasahakrit sankleg parinam** also acts as a nimitta in bandha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma bandha, udaya aura sattA viSayaka spaSTIkaraNa bandha navIna karmo ke
grahaNa ko bandha kahate haiM  /  jova ke svabhAvataH amUrta hone para bhI
saMsArastha jIva zarIradhArI hone me kathaMcita mUrta hai, usa avasthA meM
kaSAya aura yoga ke nimitta me anAdikAla se mUrta karmapudgaloM ko grahaNa
karatA A rahA hai| pudgala vargaNAe~ aneka prakAra kI haiM, unameM se jo
vargaNAeM karmarUpa meM pariNata hone kI yogyatA rakhatI haiM, jova unhIM ko
grahaNa karake nija AtmapradezoM ke sAtha saMyoga sambandha ke dvArA viziSTa
rUpa se jor3a letA hai| inameM se kaSAya ke udaya ke nimitta se hone vAle
karmabandha ko sAMparAyika bandha aura zeSa ko yoganimittaka ( yogapratyayika)
bandha kahate haiM  /  yahA~ kaSAya zabda se sAmAnyatayA mohanIyakameM ko
grahaNa kiyA gayA hai  /  bandha ke kAraNoM meM yoga aura kaSAya (mohanIya
karma) mukhya hai| unake kAraNa jisa guNasthAna meM jisa prakAra ke nimitta hote
hai, vaima karma ba~dhate haiM; jaise - vedanIyakarma meM se sAtAvedanIya
karmaprakRti yoga ke nimitta se baMdhatI hai aura asAtAvedanIya karmaprakRti ke
bandha meM kaSAya ke sahakAra kI AvazyakatA hotI hai  /  mohanIya karma (kaSAya)
ke nimitta se hone vAle bandha ke bhI pramAdasahakRta aura apramAdasahakRta- ye
do bheda hote hai  /  mohanIyakarma ke sUkSmasaMparAya, bAdarasaMparAya tathA
bAdarasaMparAya meM bhI nivRtti, anivRtti, yathApravRtti, apUrvakaraNa,
pratyAkhyAnIya, apratyAkhyAnIya, anantAnubandhanIya, mithyAtva Adi nimitta
banate haiM tathA samyaktvasahakRta saMklega pariNAma bhI bandha meM nimittarUpa
hotA hai  /

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Pariśiṣṭa  This statement makes it clear that in each of the
Guṇasthānas, all the Karma-prakr̥tis that bind due to the possible Nimittam in
that Guṇasthāna, bind. The details of the Nimittam and the Karma-prakr̥tis that
bind due to them are as follows:  (1) **Yoga-nimittak** - Sātāvedanīya | (2)
**Sūkṣma-samparāya** - Sahkr̥ta Saṁśleṣa-nimittak - Darśanāvaraṇa-caturṣka,
Jñānāvaraṇa-pañcaka, Antarāya-pañcaka, Uccho-gotra, Yaśaḥ-kīrtināma. (3)
**Anivṛtti-bādarasaṁparāya** - Sahkr̥ta Krodha, Māna, Māyā, Lobha, Puruṣaved.
(4) **Apūrva-karaṇa-nivṛtti-bādarasaṁparāya** - Sahkr̥ta Saṁśleṣa-nimittak -
Hāsya, Rati, Jugupsā, Bhaya, Nidrā, Pracalā, Devagati, Devānupūrvī, Pañcendriya-
jāti, Śubhavihāyoga-gati, Asa, Bādar, Paryāpta-pratyek, Sthira, Śubha, Subhaga,
Susvara, Ātreya, Vaikriya-śarīra, Taijasa-śarīra, Kārmaṇa-śarīra, Vaikriya-aṅgo-
pāṅga, Sama-catur-aṣṭra-saṁsthāna, Nirmana, Varṇa, Gandha, Rasa, Sparśa, Aguru-
la, Upadhāta-parāghāta, Śvāso-cchvāsa. (5) **Yathā-pravṛtti-apramāva-bhāva** -
Sahkr̥ta Saṁśleṣa-nimittak - Āhārak-śarīra, Āhārak-aṅgo-pāṅga. (6) **Pramāda-
bhāṣa** - Sahkr̥ta Saṁśleṣa-nimittak - Śoka, Arati, Asthira, Aśubha, Ayaśaḥ-
kīrti, Asātāvedanīya-devāyu. (7) **Pratyākhāyanīya-kaṣāya** - Sahkr̥ta Saṁśleṣa-
nimittak - Pratyākhānāvaraṇa-krodha, Māna, Māyā, Lobha. (8)
**A-pratyākhāyanīya** - Sahkr̥ta Saṁśleṣa-nimittak - A-pratyākhānāvaraṇa-krodha,
Māna, Māyā, Lobha, Manuṣya-gati, Manuṣyānupūrvī, Manuṣyāyu, Odārika-śarīra,
Odārika-aṅgo-pāṅga, Vajra-ṛṣabha-nārāca-saṁhanana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava pariziSTa ukta kathana se yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki jina
guNasthAnoM meM jitane nimitta sambhava haiM, usa usa guNasthAna meM una
nimittoM se ba~dhane vAlI sabhI karma prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  nimittoM
aura unase baMdhane vAlI karmaprakRtiyoM kA vivaraNa isa prakAra hai (1) yoga-
nimittaka - sAtAvedanIya | 1 - (2) sUkSmasaMpa rAya- sahakRta saMzlez2animittaka
- darzanAvaraNa catuSka, jJAnAvaraNapaMcaka, antarAyapaMcaka, uccagotra, yazaH
kIrtinAma  /  16 saMklezanimittakasaMjvalana 126 (3) anivRttibAdarasaM varAya -
sahakRta krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, puruSaveda  /  (4) apUrvakaraNa nivRti
bAdarasaMparAya sahakRta saMklezanimittaka-hAsya, rati, jugupsA, bhaya, nidrA,
pracalA, devagati, devAnupUrvI, paMcendriyajAti, zubhavihAyogati asa, bAdara,
paryApta pratyeka, sthira, zubha, subhaga, susvara, Atreya, vaikriyazarIra,
taijasazarIra, kArmaNazarora, vekriyaaMgopAMga, samacaturastra saMsthAna,
nirmANa, varNa, gandha, rasa, sparza, agurula, upadhAta parAghAta, zvAsocchvAsa
/  33 5. 1 (5) yathApravRtti apramAvabhAva sahakRta saMklezanimittaka -
AhArakazarIra, AhAraka aMgopAMga | (6) pramAdabhASa sahakRta saMklezanimittaka -
zoka, arati, asthira, azubha, ayazaHkIrti, asAtAvedanIya devAyu  /  - no (7)
pratyAkhyAnIyakaSAya sahakRta saMklezanimittaka - pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha,
mAna, mAyA, lobha I (8) apratyAkhyAnIya sahakRta saMklezanimittaka-
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, manuSyagati, manuSyAnupUrvI,
manuSyAyu, odArikazarIra, audArika aMgopAMga, vajraRSabhanArAca saMhanana  /  10
1 2 H

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix  **(6)** Infinitely connected karmas, co-
created by passions, leading to:  * **Tiryachgati:** Animal realm *
**Tiryachanupurvi:** Previous birth in animal realm * **Tiryachayu:** Life span
in animal realm * **Nidra-nidra:** Deep sleep * **Prachala-prachala:**
Restlessness * **Styanaddha:** Stiffness * **Dubhang:** Deformity * **Duhswar:**
Hoarse voice * **Anadeya:** Unworthy of respect * **Anantanu bandhi krodha:**
Infinitely connected anger * **Man:** Pride * **Maya:** Deceit * **Lobha:**
Greed * **Rishabhanaraachasanhanan:**  The act of crushing a bull *
**Navamanana:**  Contempt * **Kara:**  Hands * **Kilivan:**  A type of tree *
**Nyagrodhasansthan:**  A type of tree * **Sadisansthan:**  A type of tree *
**Vamanasansthan:**  A type of tree * **Kubjasansthan:**  A type of tree *
**Nauchagothra:**  A type of tree * **Udyota:**  A type of tree *
**Ashubhavihayogati:**  Unfortunate marriage * **Striveed:**  Knowledge of women
**(10)** Mithyatva (false belief), co-created by passions, leading to:  *
**Narakagati:** Hell realm * **Narakanupurvi:** Previous birth in hell realm *
**Narakayu:** Life span in hell realm * **Sthavar:** Stationary beings *
**Sukshma:** Subtle beings * **Apariapt:**  Insufficient * **Sadharan:**
Ordinary * **Ekendirijati:**  One-sense beings * **Dindirijati:**  Two-sense
beings * **Shrindirijati:**  Three-sense beings * **Chaturindirijati:**  Four-
sense beings * **Indakasansthan:**  A type of tree * **Atap:**  Heat *
**Sevasansahanan:**  The act of serving * **Napunsakaved:**  Knowledge of
eunuchs * **Mithyatva:**  False belief  **(11)** Samyaktv (right belief), co-
created by passions, leading to:  * **Tirthankara namakarma:**  The karma that
leads to becoming a Tirthankara  **(P)**  Each Gunasthan (stage of spiritual
development) has specific karmas that can be bound and others that cannot.
Understanding the reasons for this and the specific Gunasthan where each of the
120 karmas can be bound, provides a detailed understanding of karma binding in
the Gunasthanas.  **(Uvay - Udirana)**  The fruition of karma is called **Uday**
(arising), which occurs when the conditions of substance, space, time, and
emotion are fulfilled. From the moment a karma is bound, it begins to exist.
When the time for a karma to fructify arrives, a special structure called
**Niseka** is formed within the karma-dalikas (karma particles). The karma
located at the front of the Niseka resides in the **Udayavali** (arising stream)
and begins to bear fruit.  Even if the time for fruition is not fully complete,
the soul's karmic actions...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa (6) anantAnubandhI kaSAya sahakRta
saMklezanimittaka - tiryaMcagati, ticAnupUrvI, tiryacAyu, nidrA-nidrA,
pracalApracalA, styAnaddha, dubhaMga, duHsvara, anAdeya, anantAnubandhI krodha,
mAna, mAyA, lobha, RSabhanArAcasaMhanana nAvamanana karA kIlivana
nyagrodhasaMsthAna, sAdisaMsthAna, vAmanasaMsthAna kubjasaMsthAna, naucagotra,
udyota, azubhavihAyogati, strIveda  /  1 25 127 (10) mithyAtva - sahakRta
saMklezanimittaka - narakagati, narakAnupUrvI, narakAyu, sthAvara, sUkSma,
aparyApta, sAdhAraNa, ekendriyajAti, dIndriyajAti, zrIndriyajAti
caturindriyajAti, iMDakasaMsthAna, Atapa, sevAsaMsaMhanana, napuMsakaveda,
mithyAtva  /  16 (11) samyaktya - sahakRta saMklezanimittaka - tIrthakara
nAmakarma  /  1 pratyeka guNasthAna meM bandhayogya kauna-kauna sI prakRtiyA~
hotI hai aura kauna sI nahIM, isakA kAraNa tathA bandhayogya 120 prakRtiyoM meM
se pratyeka prakRti kA kisa guNasthAna taka bandha hotA hai, Adi kI tAlikA
banAne se guNasthAnoM meM karmaprakRtiyoM ke bandha kI vizeSa jAnakArI prApta kI
jA sakatI hai  /  P uvaya - udIraNA dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhAva ke nimitta me
sthiti ko pUrNa karake karma kA phala milanA udaya kahalAtA hai| abat jisa
samaya koI karma baMdhatA hai, usa samaya se hI usako sattA kI zurUAta ho jAtI
hai aura jisa karma kA jitanA abAdhAkAla hai, usake samApta hote hI usa karma ke
udaya meM Ane ke lie karma-dalikoM kI niSeka nAmaka eka vizeSa prakAra kI racanA
hotI hai aura niSeka ke agrabhAga meM sthita karma udayAvalikA meM sthita hokara
phala denA prArambha kara dete haiM  /  udaya meM Ane ke samaya ke pUrNa na hone
para bhI AtmA ke karaNa

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The special effect of karma, which is the special determination, is called
**Udirana** when it comes to fruition in the **Udayavali** (the cycle of
arising). It is important to understand that the **Samyaktvamohaniya Karma**
arises from the fourth to the seventh **Gunasthanas** (stages of spiritual
progress), the **Tirthankara Nama Karma** arises in the thirteenth and
fourteenth **Gunasthanas**, and the **Pradeshodaya** begins from the fourth
**Gunasthanas**.  There are 122 **Prakritis** (categories of karma) that are
capable of arising, and their arising is caused by the following factors. The
term **Avinabhavi** (inseparable) should be understood as "always present".  (1)
**Kevalgyan-Adhinabhavi Prakruti - Tirthankara Nama Karma** (1) (2) **Mishra
Gunasthan-Avinabhavi - Mishra Mohaniya** (3) (3) **Kshayopa-Samyaktv-Adhinabhavi
- Samyaktvamohaniya** (1) (4) **Pramattasanyata-Avinabhavi - Aharaksharir,
Aharak-Angopang** (5) (5) **Mithyatvodya-Avinabhavi - Sukshma, Apariyapt,
Sadharan, Atapnabhakarma, Mithyatvamohaniya** (6) (6) **Janmantara-Avinabhavi -
Narakanupurvi, Manushyanupurvi, Tithanchanupurvi, Devanupurvi** (7) (7)
**Anantanubandhokashayodya-Avinabhavi - Anantanubandhi Krodh, Man, Maya, Lobh,
Sthavar, Ekendriyajati, Dwiendriyajati, Triendriyajati, Chaturindriyajati Nama
Karma** (8) (8) **Apratyakhyanavaranakshayodya-Avinabhavi - Apratyakhyanavaran
Krodh, Man, Maya, Lobh, Devagati, Devayu, Narakagati, Narakayu, Vaikriyasarir,
Vaikriya-Angopang, Durbhg, Anadey, Ayash Kiitinam** (13)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava : pariziSTa vizeSa se-abhyavasAyavizeSa se kama kA udayAvalikA meM
Akara phala denA udIraNA kahalAtI hai| _ karmodaya ke viSaya meM yaha vizeSa
rUpa se samajha lenA cAhie ki samyaktvamohanIyakarma kA udaya cauthe se lekara
sAtaveM guNasthAna taka, tIrthakara nAmakarma kA rasodaya terahaveM aura
cauhadaveM guNasthAna meM aura pradezodaya cauthe guNasthAna se prArambha hotA
hai| udayayogya 122 prakRtiyA~ haiM aura unake udaya ke nimitta lagabhaga
nimnalikhita ho sakate haiN| ina nimittoM ke sAtha jor3e gaye avinAbhAvI zabda
kA artha 'sAya meM avasya rahane vAlA' karanA cAhie  /  (1) kevalajJAna-
adhinAbhAvI prakRti-tIrtharanAmakarma  /  1 (2) mizraguNasthAna-avinAbhAvI
-mizramohanIya  /  (3) kSayopazamasamyaktva-adhinabhAvo-samyaktvamohanIya  /  1
(4) pramattasaMyata-avinAbhAdo-AhArakazarIra, aahaark-aNgopaaNg| (5)
mithyAtyodaya-avinAbhAvI -sUkSma, aparyApta, sAdhAraNa, AtapanAbhakarma,
mithyAtvamohanIya  /  (6) janmAntara-avinAbhAvI-narakAnupUrvI, manuSyAnupUrvI,
tithaMcAnupUrvI, devAnupU:  /  (7) anantAnubandhokaSAyodaya-avinAbhAvo-
anantAnubandhI krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, sthAvara, ekendriyajAti,
dvIndriyajAti, zrIndriya. jAti, caturindriyajAti nAmakarma  /  (8)
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNakaSAyokya-avinAbhAvI-apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, mAna, mAyA,
lobha, devagati, devAyu, narakagati, narakAya, vaikriyazarIra, vaikriya-
aMgopAMga, durbhaga, anAdeya, ayaza kItinAma | 13

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Grantha: Appendix  **(E)**  **Pratyarayana Avarana Kashaya Udaya
Avinabhavi Pratyakhyana Avarana:**  Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha, Tiryanchati,
Tiryanchayau, Naugotr, Udyot  (These are types of Karma)  **(10)** **Pramatta
Bhava Avinabhavi:** Nidra, Nidra, Prachala, Prachala, Styanadidhi. (These are
types of Karma)  **(11)** **Purva Karana Avinabhavi:** Ardhanarachamsahanan,
Kilicasahanan, Sewartasahanan. (These are types of Karma)  **(12)** **Tathavidha
Sanklishta Parinama Avinabhavi:** Hasya, Rati, Arati, Shoka, Bhaya, Jugupsa.
(These are types of Karma)  **(13)** **Babara Kashaya Vinam Padi:**  Pumated,
Nidev, Naye Mak, Ved, Sanjwalan Krodha, Mana, Maya. (These are types of Karma)
**(14)** **Ayatha Khyata Charitra Avinabhavi:** Sanjwalan Lobha. (This is a type
of Karma)  **(15)** **Akshapka Avinabhavi:**  Rishabhanarachamsahanan,
Narachamsahanan. (These are types of Karma)  **(16)** **Chhadamasthika Bhava
Avinabhavi:** Nidra, Prachana, Jnana Avarana Panchaka, Darsana Avarana Chatushk,
Antaraya Panchaka. (These are types of Karma)  **(17)** **Badar Kayayoga
Avinabhavi:** Audarik Sharia, Audarik Angopang, Asthir, Ashubha, Shubha
Vihayogati, Ashubha Vihayogati, Pratiyaka, Sthir, Shubha, Sama Chaturasra
Sansthan, Nyagrodha Parimandala Sansthan, Sadisansthan, Vaman Sansthan, Kubja
Sansthan, Hund Sansthan, Aguru Laghu, Upghta, Paraghta, Shwasochchwas, Varna,
Gandha, Rasa, Sparsha, Nirman, Tejas Sharia, Karman Sharia, Vajra
Rishabhanarachamsahanan. (These are types of Karma)  **(18)** **Badar
Vachanayoga Avinabhavi:**  Dushwar, Suswar Nama. (These are types of Karma)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa (E) pratyArayAnAvaraNakaSAyodaya-
avinAbhAvIpratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, tiryacati, tiryaMcAyu,
naugotra, udyota nAmakarma  /  (10) pramattabhAva-avinAbhAvI-nidrA-nidrA,
pracalA-pracalA. styaanddhi| (11) pUrvakaraNa-avinAbhAvI-ardhanArAcasaMhanana,
kIlikAsaMhanana, sevaartsNhnn| (12) tathAvidha saMkliSTapariNAma-avinAbhAvI-
hAsya, rati, arati, zoka, bhaya, jugupsA  /  (13) bAbarakaSAyo vinAmapadI -
pumATeda, nIdeva, nae maka. veda, saMjvalana krodha, mAna, maayaa| (14)
ayathAkhyAtacAritra-avinAbhAvI-saMjvalana lobha  /  1 (15) akSapaka-avinAbhAvI-
RSabhanArAcasaMhanana, nArAcasaMhanana  /  _{16) chAdamasthikabhAva-avinAbhAvI -
nidrA, pracanA, jJAnAvaraNapaMcaka, darzanAvaraNacatuSka antarAyapaMcaka  /
((17) bAdarakAyayoga-avinAbhAvI-audArikazarIra, audArikaaMgopAMga, asthira,
azubha, zubhavihAyogati, azubhavihAyogati, pratyeka, sthira, zubha,
samacaturasrasaMsthAna, nyagrodhaparimaNDalasaMsthAna, sAdisaMsthAna,
vAmanasaMsthAna, kubjasaMsthAna, huNDasaMsthAna, agurulaghu, upaghAta,
parAghAta, zvAsocchvAsa, varNa, gandha, rasa, sparza, nirmANa, tejasazarIra,
kArmaNazarIra, vajra RSabhanArAcasaMhanana  /  (18) bAdaravacanayoga-avinAbhAvI
duHsvara, susvara naam| 2

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 130 **Karmastava: Parishishta (16)** Saansarikbhaav-Avinabhaavi-
Saalaavedaniya, Amataavedaniya. **(20)** Manushabhav-Avinabhaavi- Manushayagati,
Manushayaayu. 2 **(21)** Mokshasahaayak Mukhya Punyapratikriya-Sa. Baadar,
Paryapt, Panchendriyajaati, Ucchagotra, Subham, Aadey, Yashakirtinam.  The
aforementioned causes of Uday have many main causes and many other sub-causes
within them. For example, the causes of Pramattabhaav's Mithyatva,
Anantaanubandhikashaya, etc., Baabar (Sthula) Kashaya are possible until the
ninth Gunasthan. In a Saansarik Jeeva who is very close to attaining Siddhatva,
Manushabhav and Kevalshaan Avinabhaavi Prakrutis are also included. These causes
are indicated here for the ease of the students.  Udeerna should be understood
like Uday, and the increase or decrease in the Prakrutis mentioned in it should
be understood accordingly.  **Satta** _The presence of Karma Prakrutis obtained
through Bandha, etc., with the Jeeva is called Satta. There are 148 Sattayogya
Prakrutis. How many Prakrutis remain in Satta until which Gunasthan should be
understood as follows:_  **(1)** Mithyatva Gunasthan - There are mainly two
types of Atma in Mithyatva Gunasthan - (1) Anaadi Mithyatvi, (2) Saadi
Mithyatvi. Those who have never attained any other Gunasthan besides Mithyatva
are called Anaadi Mithyatvi. Even among them, there are many Jeevas who are
further...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 130 karmastava : pariziSTa (16) sAMsArikabhAva-abinAbhAvI-sAlAvedanIya,
amAtAvedanIya  /  (20) manuSyabhava-avinAbhAvI- manuSyagati, manuSyAyu  /  2
(21) mokSasahAyaka mukhya puNyaprakRtiyA-sa. bAdara, paryApta, paMcendriyajAti,
uccagotra, subhama, Adeya, yazaHkIrtinAma  /  pUrvokta udaya ke nimittoM meM
kitaneka mukhya aura dUsare kitaneka unake antargata mahAyaka nimitta bhI hote
haiN| jaise ki pramattabhAva ke mithyAtva, anantAnubandhIkaSAya Adi bAbara
(sthUla) kaSAya ke sambhAvita pratyeka nimitta nauveM guNasthAna taka hote haiN|
siddhatva ko prApta karane ke ati nikaTa saMsArI jIva meM manuSyabhava tathA
kevalazAna avinAbhAvI prakRtiyoM kA bhI samAveza hotA hai| ina nimittoM kA
abhyAmiyoM kI saralatA ke lie yahA~ saMketa kiyA gayA hai| udaya ke samAna
udIraNA samajhanA cAhie aura usameM jina prakR. tiyoM kI nyUnAdhikatA Adi
batalAI gaI hai, tadanusAra ghaTAkara samajha lenA caahie| sattA _ bandhAdika
dvArA svarUpaprApta karmaprakRtiyoM kA jIva ke sAtha vartamAna rahanA sattA
kahalAtI hai| sattAyogya 148 prakRtiyA~ haiN| kisa guNasthAna taka kitanI-kitanI
prakRtiyoM kI sattA rahatI hai, isakA spaSTIkaraNa nimna prakAra se samajhanA
caahie| (1) mithyAtva guNasthAna-mithyAtva guNasthAnavI AtmA ke mukhyatayA do
bheda haiM-(1) anAdimithyAtvI, (2) sAdimithyAtvI  /  jinhoMne mithyAtva ke
atirikta kabhI bhI anya guNasthAna prApta nahIM kiyA hai, unheM anAdimithyAtvI
kahate haiN| unameM bhI kitane hI jIva Age ke

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix ### 131  This section discusses the
qualifications of those who are capable of attaining the Gunasthanas and those
who are not. In the scriptures, they are respectively called **Bhavya** and
**Abhavya**. These categories are further divided into two: those who have not
attained **Saparyaya** and those who have attained **Shraparyaya**.    Within
these categories, there are also two further divisions: those who have bound the
lifespan of their next birth in the same state and those who have not. These are
called **Purvaayusk** and **Abaddhayusk**.   In summary, there are the following
distinctions:  1. **Anadi Mithyatvi Saparyaya Aprapta Purvabaddhayusk** 2.
**Anadi Mithyatvi Saparyaya Aprapta Abaddhayusk** 3. **Anadi Mithyatvi Saparyaya
Prapt Purvabaddhayusk** 4. **Anadi Mithyatvi Saparyaya Prapt Abaddhayusk**
These four categories, when considered in relation to **Bhavya** and
**Abhavya**, result in a total of eight distinctions.  These distinctions will
help us understand the existence of **Prakritis** in the **Mithyatva
Gunasthan**. However, before understanding the existence of **Prakritis**, it is
important to note that those who have never attained **Shraparyaya** will never
have the **Prakritis** of **Manushyadvik**, **Narakadvik**, **Devadvik**,
**Vaishriyachaturk**, **Aharakchaturk**, **Narakay**, **Manushyayu**,
**Devayu**, **Samyaktvamohaniya**, **Mishramohaniya**, **Gotra**, and
**Tirthankara** **Namakarma**.    Similarly, those who are **Anadi Mithyatvi**
will never have the **Prakritis** of **Samyaktvamohaniya**, **Mishramohaniya**,
**Aharakchaturk**, and **Tirthankara** **Namakarma**. A being can have a maximum
of two **Ayukarma** **Prakritis**.  Now, let's discuss the existence of these
eight categories in detail.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 131 guNasthAna prApta karane kI yogyatA
rakhanevAle hote haiM aura kitaneka usa prakAra kI yogyatAvihIna hote haiN|
unako zAstroM meM kramazaH bhavya aura abhavya kahA hai  /  inake bhI do bheda
haiM- unameM kitaneka jIvoM ne basaparyAya prApta hI nahIM kI hai aura kitaneka
jIva zraparyAya prApta kiye hue hote haiN| unameM bhI kitane hI jIva usI bhAva
meM AgAmI bhava kI Ayu kA bandha kiye hue aura bandha nahIM kiye hue- ye do
bheda vAle hote haiN| unheM pUrvAyuSka aura abaddhAyugaka kahate haiM  /
sArAMza yaha hai ki inake nimnalikhita bheda hote haiM- I (1) anAdimidhyAtvI
saparyAya aprApta pUrvabaddhAyuka (2) anAdimithyAtvI saparyAya aprApta
avadvAyuSka  /  (3) anAdimithyAtvI saparyAya prApta purvabaddhAyuSka 1 (4)
anAdimithyAtvI namaparyAya prApta - aba grAyuSka  /  ina cAroM ke bhavya aura
abhavya kI apekSA se kula ATha bheda haiM  /  - ukta bhedoM ke dvArA mithyAla
guNasthAna meM prakRtiyoM kI sattA samajhane meM suvidhA hogii| parantu
prakRtiyoM kI sattA samajhane ke pUrva itanA samajha lenA cAhie ki kabhI bhI
trasa paryAya prApta nahIM karane vAloM kI manuSyadvika, narakadvika, devadvika,
vaizriyacaturaka AhArakacatuSka, narakAya. manuSyAyu, devAya, samyaktvamohanIya,
mizramohanIya, gotra aura tIrthaGkara nAmakarma- ina ikkIsa prakRtiyoM kI kabhI
bhI sattA nahIM hotI hai tathA jo anAdimithyAtvI hai, unheM samyaktvamohanIya
mizramohanIya AhArakacatuSka aura tIrthaGkara nAmakarma isa sAta prakRtiyoM kI
sattA hotI hI nahIM hai| eka jIva ko adhika se adhika do Ayukarma kI sattA hotI
hai !  /  1 aba ukta ATha bhedoM meM sattA viSayaka vicAra karate haiM -

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix (1-2)  Except for the aforementioned twenty-one **Prakritis** of the
**Abhavya** beings with **Anadi Mithyatva**, **Asaparyaaya-Anapta**,
**Purvabaddhaayushk** and **Abaddhaayushk**, there are 127 **Prakritis** in
existence.  (3) The **Abhavya** being with **Anadi Mithyatva**, **Asaparyaaya-
Anapta**, and **Purvabaddhaayushk** also has **Anadi Mithyatva**, so the seven
**Prakritis** like **Samyaktava-Mohaniya** etc., which are opposite to it, do
not exist. Due to **Purvabaddhaayushk**, there are 141 **Prakritis** in
existence for many beings, and considering one being, there are 136
**Prakritis** for the being who binds the **Aaya** of other **Gati**, and 138
**Prakritis** for the being who binds the **Aaya** of its own **Gati**.  (4) The
**Abhavya** being with **Anadi Mithyatva**, **Saparyaaya-Anapta**, and
**Abaddhaayushk** has **Anadi Mithyatva**, so the seven **Prakritis** like
**Samyaktava-Mohaniya** etc., do not exist. Due to **Abaddhaayushk**, the
**Bhujyaman Aayu** exists. Therefore, the remaining three **Aayu** do not exist.
Thus, 138 **Prakritis** exist without those ten **Prakritis**.  (5-6) The
**Bhavya** beings with **Anadi Mithyatva**, **Asaparyaaya-Anapta**,
**Purvabaddhaayushk** and **Abaddhaayushk** should be understood to have the
same existence of **Karma-Prakritis** as the **Abhavya** beings, according to
the first and second **Bhangas** mentioned for the **Abhavya** beings. That is,
like those **Abhavya** beings, these two types of **Bhavya** beings should also
be understood to have 127 **Prakritis** in existence.  (7) The **Bhavya** being
with **Anadi Mithyatva**, **Saparyaaya-Anapta**, and **Purvabaddhaayushk** has
**Anadi Mithyatva**, so except for the seven **Prakritis** like **Samyaktava-
Mohaniya** etc., there are 141 **Prakritis** in existence for many beings, and
considering one being, there are

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava : pariziSTa (1-2) anAdimithyAtvI, asaparyAya-aprApta,
pUrvabaddhAyuSka aura abadAyuSka abhavya jIvoM ke pUrvokta ikkIsa prakRtiyoM ke
sivAya 127 prakRtiyA~ sattA meM hotI haiN| (3) anAdimithyAtvI, asaparyAya-
prApta, pUrvabaddhAyuSka abhavya jIva ke bhI anAdimithyAtvI hone se tadvirodhI
samyaktvamohanIya Adi sAta prakRtiyAM sattA meM hotI hI nahIM haiM tathA
pUrvabaddhAyuSka hone se aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 141 prakRtiyoM kI sasA aura eka
jIva kI apekSA vicAra karane para anya gati kI Aya kA bandha karane vAle jIva ko
136 prakRtiyoM kI tathA tadagati kI Aya kA bandha karane vAle ko 138 prakRtiyoM
ko sattA hotI hai| (4) anAdimithyAtvI, vasaparyAya-prApta, abaddhAyuSka abhavya
jIva ke anAdi mithyAtvI hone se samyaktvamohanIya Adi sAta prakRtiyA~ sattA meM
hotI hI nahIM haiM tathA abaddhAyuSka hone se bhujyamAna AyU sattA meM hotI hai|
ataH zeSa tIna Ayu bhI sattA meM nahIM rahatI haiN| isa prakAra dasa prakRtiyoM
ke binA bAkI kI 138 prakRtiyA~ sattA meM hotI haiN| (5-6) anAdimithyAtvI,
asaparyAya-anApta, pUrvabaddhAyudhaka bhavya tathA abaddhAyuSka bhavya jIvoM ko
abhavya jIvoM ke lie kahe gaye pahale va dUsare do bhaMgoM ke anusAra hI
karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA sagajhanI cAhie  /  arthAt una abhavya jIvoM kI taraha
ina donoM prakAra ke bhavya jIvoM ke bhI 127 prakRtiyoM kI sattA samajhanI
caahie| (7) anAdimithyAtvI, saparyAya-prApta, pUrvabaddhAyuSka bhavya jIva ke
anAdimithyAtvI hone se samyaktvamohanIya Adi sAta prakRtiyoM ke sivAya aneka
jIvoM kI apekSA se 141 prakRtiyoM kI tathA eka jIva kI apekSA vicAra karane para
anya Ayu kA bandha karane vAle jIva ke

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix ### 133 ### 136 A being bound by the lifespan
of the same motion has the existence of 138 karmic natures. ### 138 (4) The
karmic natures of an Anadi Mithyatvi, Saparyaya-obtained, Abaddha-Shushk Bhavy
being are subject to decay - (1) Sadbhavasatta (2) Sambhavasatta. Those beings
who are destined to attain liberation in the same bhava and possess the
existence of present karmic natures, both types of beings are included in
Sadbhavasatta. And those beings whose lifespan is possible, are included in
Sambhavasatta. Beings with Sadbhavasatta have the existence of 138 karmic
natures except for the ten natures - seven including Samyaktvamohaniya and three
Ayus. They only have Bhujyaman Ayus. In beings with Sambhavasatta, (1) due to
the counting of all four Ayus in relation to many beings, there is the existence
of 141 karmic natures, devoid of the mother natures including Samyaktvamohaniya.
(2) In relation to one being, the one bound by the lifespan of another motion
has the existence of 136 karmic natures, and (3) the one bound by the lifespan
of the same motion has the existence of 138 karmic natures. Thus, after
explaining the existence in relation to Anadi Mithyatvdrishti, now we explain
the existence of karmic natures in Sadi Mithyatvdrishti - One who, after
attaining Samyaktv, falls back to the first Gunasthan due to the influence of a
complex determination, is called Sadi Mithyatvi. Some of them fall from a higher
category, while others only fall from Samyaktv. Those who come here after
disassociating from Anantanubandhi after attaining Samyaktv, do not have the
existence of Anantanubandhi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 133 136 prakRtiyoM kI aura usI gati ko Ayu ko
bAMdhana vAle jIva ko 138 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  ( 4 ) anAdimidhyAtvI,
saparyAya prApta, abaddhAzuSka bhavya jIva kI karmaprakRtiyoM kI zatA kA vikAra
jAtA hai - (1) sadbhAvasattA (2) saMbhavasattA | jo jIva usI bhava meM mokSa
prApta karane vAle haiM aura vidyamAna karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA vAle haiM, una
donoM prakAra ke jIvoM kA samAveza sadbhAvasattA meM aura jina jIvoM ke Ayu
bandha saMbhava hai, una jIvoM kA samAveza sambhavasattA meM hotA hai  /
sadbhAvasattA vAle jIvoM ke samyaktvamohanIya Adi sAta tathA tIna Ayu - ina dasa
prakRtiyoM ke sivAya 138 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  unake sirpha
bhujyamAna Ayu ho hotI hai  /  saMbhavatA vAle jIvoM meM (1) aneka jIvoM kI
apekSA cAroM AyuoM ko ginane se samyaktvamohanIya Adi mAta prakRtiyoM se rahita
141 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| (2) eka jIva kI apekSA anya gati kI Ayu
bA~dhane vAle ko 136 prakRtiyoM kI tathA (3) usI gati kI Ayu bA~dhane vAle ko
138 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  isa prakAra anAdimithyAdRSTi kI apekSA
sattA batalAne ke anantara aba sAdimithyAdRSTi ke karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA
batalAte hai - jo samyaktva prApta karane ke anantara saMkliSTa adhyavasAya ke
yoga se girakara pahale guNasthAna meM AyA ho, use sAdimithyAtvI kahate haiN|
inameM se kitane ho zreNI se patita aura kitane hI sirpha samyaktva me patita
hote haiN| samyaktva prApta karane ke bAda anantAnubandhI kI visaMyojanA kara jo
yahA~ Ate haiM, unheM anantAnubandhI kI sattA nahIM

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
4.  It is said that there is existence, but because of the bondage here, there
is also existence. Therefore, there is existence of 148 prakritis for the beings
with pre-determined lifespan, compared to all beings. Karmstava Parishista F
There is also existence of 148 prakritis for the beings with non-determined
lifespan, compared to all beings. The reason for this is that there are beings
in all four gatis who do not have the bondage of ayukarma (avandhak). There is
existence of 145 prakritis compared to a particular gati. Upon careful
consideration, there are ten divisions of this: (1) Sadimitryatvi with existence
of Tirthankara namekarma (purvabaddhayu), (2) Sadimitryatvi with existence of
Tirthankara namekarma (abaddhayu), (3) Sadimitryatvi with existence of
Aharakchatushk (purvabaddhayu), (4) Sadimitryatvi with existence of
Aharakchatushk (abaddhayu), (5) Sadimitryatvi without existence of Tirthankara
namekarma and Aharakchatushk (purvabaddhayu), (6) Sadimitryatvi without
existence of Tirthankara namekarma and Aharakchatushk (abaddhayu), (7)
Sadimitryatvi without existence of Tirthankara namekarma and Aharakchatushk,
Samyaktvamohaniya udvelak (purvabaddhayu), (8) Sadimitryatvi without existence
of Tirthankara namekarma and Aharakchatushk, Samyaktvamohaniya udvelak
(abaddhayu), (9) Sadimitryatvi without existence of Tirthankara namekarma and
Aharakchatushk, Samyaktvamohaniya and Mishramohaniya udvelak (purvabaddhayu),
and (10) Sadimitryatvi without existence of Tirthankara namekarma and
Aharakchatushk, Samyaktvamohaniya and Mishramohaniya udvelak (abaddhayu). Those
who have existence of Tirthankara namekarma, do not have existence of
Aharakchatushk in this Mithyatva gunasthan. The existence in the above ten
divisions should be understood in this way.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 4 hotI hai, kintu tatkAla hI yahA~ usakA bandha hone se sattA bhI hotI hai|
ataH sabhI jIvoM kI apekSA pUrvabaddhAyu vAle jIvoM ke 148 prakratiyoM kI sattA
hotI hai  /  karmastava pariziSTa F avaddhAyu vAloM ko bhI sabhI jIvoM kI apekSA
se 148 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki cAroM gatiyoM meM
Ayukarma kA bandha nahIM karane vAle ( avandhaka) jIva hote haiN| amuka eka gati
kI apekSA se 145 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  vizeSa rUpa se vicAra karane
para isake dasa vibhAga ho jAte haiM(1) tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kI sattA vAlA (
pUrvacaddhAyu) sAdimithyAtvI, (2) tIrthakara nAmakarma kI sattA vAlA (abaddhAyu)
sAdimidhyAtvI, (3) AhArakapaka kI pAva (pUrva) sadimithyAtvI, (4) AhArakacatuSka
kI sattA vAlA (abaddhAyu) sAdimithyAtvI, (5) tIrthakaranAmakarma aura
AhArakacatuSka kI sattArahita ( pUrvabaddhAyu) sAdimithyAtrI, (6) tIrthaMkara
nAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSka kI sattArahita (reaAyu) sAdimithyAtvI, (7)
tIrthaMkaranAmakarma aura AhArakacatuhaka kI sattArahita samyaktvamohanIya
udvelaka (pUrvabaddhAyu) sAdimidhyAtvI, (8) tIrthaMkara nAmakarma aura
AhArakacatuSka kI sattArahita samyaktvamohanIya udvelaka ( abaddhAyu)
sAdimidhyAtvI, (6) tIrthakaranAmakarma aura mahArakacatuSka kI sattArahita
samyaktvamohanIya aura mizramohanIya udvelaka (pUrvaddhAyu) sAdimidhyAtvI, tathA
(10) tIrthaMkaranAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSka kI sattArahita samyaktvamohanIya
aura mizramohanIya udvela (abaddhAya ) sAdimidhyAtvI  /  jinako tIrthakara
nAmakarma kI sattA hotI hai, unako AharakacatuSka kI sattA isa mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM hotI hI nahIM hai| ukta dasa bhedoM meM sattA isa prakAra
samajhanI caahie|

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Appendix to the Second Karma Text  **(1)**  For a being with **Sadi-
mithyadristi** and **Purvavaddhayusk** (predetermined lifespan), excluding the
six karmas of **Aharak-chatushk**, **Tiyanchayusk**, and **Devayusk**, there are
142 karmas present, including the **Tirthankara-namakarma**.  **(2)** For a
being with **Sadi-mithyadristi** and **Avaddhayusk** (uncertain lifespan),
excluding the seven karmas of **Aharak-chatushk**, **Tiyanchayusk**,
**Devayusk**, and the three **Ayukarma** (lifespan karmas), there are 141 karmas
present, including the **Tirthankara-namakarma**.  **(3)** For a being with
**Sadi-mithyadristi** and **Purvavaddhayusk**, including the **Aharak-
chatushk**, there are 147 karmas present for multiple beings, excluding the
**Tirthankara-namakarma**. For a single being, there are 144 karmas present if
the **Ayukarma** binds the lifespan in the same **Gati** (realm), and 145 karmas
present if the **Ayukarma** binds the lifespan in a different **Gati**.  **(4)**
For a being with **Sadi-mithyadristi** and **Avaddhayusk**, including the
**Aharak-chatushk**, there are different **Ayukarma** present in all four
**Gatis**. Therefore, there are 143 karmas present for multiple beings,
excluding the **Tirthankara-namakarma**, and 145 karmas present for a single
being.  **(5)** For a being with **Sadi-mithyadristi** and **Purvavaddhayusk**,
excluding the **Tirthankara-namakarma** and **Aharak-chatushk**, there are 143
karmas present for multiple beings. For a single being, there are 140 karmas
present if the **Ayukarma** binds the lifespan in the same **Gati**, and 141
karmas present if the **Ayukarma** binds the lifespan in a different **Gati**.
**(6)** For a being with **Sadi-mithyadristi** and **Avaddhayusk**, excluding
the **Tirthankara-namakarma** and **Aharak-chatushk**, there are different
**Ayukarma** present in all four **Gatis**. Therefore, there are 143 karmas
present for multiple beings, and 140 karmas present for a single being.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 135 dvitIya karmagrantha pariziSTa (1) tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kI sattAsahita
pUrvavaddhAyuSka sAdimithyAdRSTi jIva ke AhArakacatuSka, tiyaMcAyu aura devAyu
ina chaha prakR tiyoM ke binA 142 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  (2)
tIrthakara nAmakarma kI sattAsahita avaddhAyuSka sAdimidhyAdRSTi jIvoM ke
narakAya ko hI sattA vAle hone se zeSa tIna Ayukarma aura AhArakacatuSka ina
sAta prakRtiyoM ke sivAya 141 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  (3)
AhArakacatuSka kI sattAsahita pUrvavaddhAyaka sAdimithyAdRSTi jIvoM meM aneka
jIvoM kI apekSA tIrthaGkuranAmakarma ke mivAya 147 prakRtiyoM kI aura eka jIva
kI apekSA usI gati kI Ayu bA~dhane vAle ko 144 kI tathA anya gati kI Ayu badhine
vAle ko 145 prakRtiyoM ko sattA hotI hai  /  (4) AhArakacatuSka kI sattAsahita
avaddhA sAdibhidhyAtvI jIva cAroM gatiyoM meM bhinna-bhinna Ayakarma kI sattA
vAle hote hai| ataH aneka jIvoM kI apekSA tIrthakaranAmakarma ke sivAya 143
prakRtiyoM kI aura eka jIva ko apekSA 145 kI sattA vAle hote haiM  /  (5)
tIrthakara nAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSka kI sattArahita pUrvaaator sAdimidhyAtvI
jIvoM meM tIrthakaranAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSka ke binA sabhI jIvoM kI apekSA
143 kI, eka jIva kI apekSA usI gati kI Ayu bA~dhane vAle ke 140 kI aura anya
gati kI Ayu bA~dhane vAle ke 141 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| (6)
tIrthakaranAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSkarahita avaddhAyuSka sAdimidhyAtvI jIva
cAroM gatiyoM meM bhinna-bhinna Aya kI sattA vAle hone se aneka jIvoM kI apekSA
143 kI aura eka jIva kI apekSA 140 prakRtiyoM kI sattA vAle hote haiM  /

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix to Karma  **(7)**  In **pre-bound-lifespan**, **false-belief-
originated** beings with **Tirthankara-name-karma**, **food-four-karma**, and
**right-belief-obscuring** as **stimulants**, have **142** **karmic-categories**
in relation to all beings, and **136** **karmic-categories** in relation to one
being for binding the lifespan of that particular **gati**, and **140**
**karmic-categories** for binding the lifespan of other **gatis**.  **(8)**
**Pre-bound-lifespan**, **false-belief-originated** beings with **right-belief-
obscuring** as **stimulant**, without **Tirthankara-name-karma** and **food-
four-karma**, exist in all four **gatis**. Therefore, they have **142**
**karmic-categories** in relation to many beings, and **139** **karmic-
categories** in relation to one being, excluding **Tirthankara-name-karma**,
**food-four-karma**, and **right-belief-obscuring**.  **(9)**  **Pre-bound-
lifespan**, **false-belief-originated** beings with **right-belief-obscuring**
and **mixed-obscuring** as **stimulants**, without **Tirthankara-name-karma**
and **food-four-karma**, have **141** **karmic-categories** in relation to many
beings, excluding **Tirthankara-name-karma**, **food-four-karma**, **right-
belief-obscuring**, and **mixed-obscuring**. They have **138** **karmic-
categories** in relation to one being for binding the lifespan of the same
**gati**, and **136** **karmic-categories** for binding the lifespan of other
**gatis**.  **(10)**  **Unbound-lifespan**, **false-belief-originated** beings
with **right-belief-obscuring** and **mixed-obscuring** as **stimulants**,
without **Tirthankara-name-karma** and **food-four-karma**, exist in all four
**gatis**. Therefore, they have **141** **karmic-categories** in relation to
many beings, excluding seven **karmic-categories**, and **138** **karmic-
categories** in relation to one being.  **Food-four-karma** exists with **right-
belief-obscuring** in the first **guna-sthana**. **Tirthankara-name-karma** also
exists in the same...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 na 136 karmastava : pariziSTa (7) tIrthakaranAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSkarahita
samyaktvamohanIya ke uddelaka pUrvabaddhAyuSka sAdimithyAtvI jIvoM meM sabhI
jIvoM kI apekSA tIrthakaranAmakarma, AhArakacatuSka aura samyaktvamohanIya ke
sivAya 142 prakRtiyoM kI tathA eka jIva kI apekSA tadgati kI Ayu kA bandha
karane vAle ko 136 prakRtiyoM kI aura anya gati kI Ayu bAMdhane vAle ko 140
prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| (8) tIrthakaranAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSka kI
sattArahita samyaktvamohanIya udvelaka abaddhAyuSka sAdimithyAtvI jIva cAroM
gatiyoM meM hote haiN| isalie tIrthaMkaranAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSka va
samyaktvamohanIya ke sivAya aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 142 prakRtiyoM kI aura eka
jIva kI apekSA 139 prakRtiyoM ko sattA hotI hai| (6) tIrthakaranAmakarma aura
AhArakacatuSka kI sattArahita samyaktvamohanIya aura mizramohanIya udvelaka
pUrvabaddhAyuSka sAdi mithyAtvI jIva ke aneka jIvoM kI apekSA
tIrthakaranAmakarma aura AhArakacatuka, samyaktvamohanIya aura mizramohanIya ke
sivAya 141 prakRtiyoM ko, eka jIva kI apekSA usI gati ko bA~dhane vAle ke 138 kI
aura anya gati ko bA~dhane bAle ke 136 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| (10)
tIrthakaranAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSkavihIna, samyaktvamohanIya aura
mitramohanIya udvelaka abaddhAyugaka sAdimithyAdRSTi jIva cAroM hI gatiyoM meM
hone se aneka jIvoM kI apekSA sAta prakRtiyoM ke sivAya 141 prakRtiyoM ko aura
eka jIva kI apekSA 138 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| _ AhArakacatuSka kI sattA
vAlA samyaktvamohanIya kI sattAsahita pahale guNasthAna meM hotA hai|
tIrthakaranAmakarma kI sattA vAlA bhI isI

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Text: Appendix ### 137  There are different types, and after the
manifestation of *Samyaktvamohaniya*, the *Mishramohaniya* manifests in the
first *Gunasthan*.  _After explaining the existence of natures in the *Mithyatva
Gunasthan* in relation to the general being, the four paths explain the
existence of natures in relation to the *Anadi* and *Sadi* *Mithyadrishti*
beings. Among them, the existence of *Karma* natures in the four paths in
relation to the *Anadi Mithyadrishti* is as follows:_  * **Hell Path:** Beings
in this path can only bind the two *Ayas* of *Manushya* and *Tiryanch*.
Therefore, the aforementioned two *Ayas* and the *Bhujyaman Narakayu* can exist
in relation to many beings, and out of the eight *Bhedas* mentioned earlier for
the *Anadi Mithyadrishti*, only four *Bhedas* of *Asaparyaya-Prapta* can exist
here. Therefore, in sequence, the third, fourth, seventh, and eighth *Bhedas*
can exist in the *Narakagati* for the *Purvabaddhayushk* in relation to many
beings, with seven *Prakritis* including *Samyaktvamohaniya* and without
*Devayu*, totaling 140 *Prakritis*. In the realm of possibility, the existence
is the same as mentioned above, and in relation to one being, there are 136
*Prakritis*, and for the *Abaddhayushk*, there are 138 *Prakritis*.  *
**Tiryanch Path:** In this path, all eight options mentioned earlier for the
*Anadi Mithyadrishti* can exist, and accordingly, the existence can also be.
However, the special thing is that when the *Asaparyaya-Prapta* being attains
the *Tejaskayik* and *Vayukayik* *Paryaya*, if it manifests *Devatik* or
*Narakatik*, then it will not go to another path, so it will have the *Dev*,
*Manushya*, and *Narakayu* suitable for it, and being *Anadi Mithyadrishti*, it
will have seven *Prakritis* including *Samyaktvamohaniya*, totaling twelve
*Prakritis*, except for one being, which will have 136 *Prakritis*, and as
mentioned earlier, the *Devadvik* or *Narakadvik*...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmaprantha : pariziSTa 137 prakAra hai aura samyaktvamohanIya kA
udvelana karane ke bAda hI pahale guNasthAna meM mizramohanIya kA udvelana hotA
hai| _ jIva sAmAnya kI apekSA mithyAtva guNasthAna meM prakRtiyoM kI sattA
batalAne ke pazcAt cAra patiyoM kI apekSA anAdi aura sAdi mithyAdRSTi jIvoM ke
prakRtiyoM kI sattA batalAte haiN| unameM se anAdi mizyAdRSTi kI apekSA cAroM
gatiyoM meM karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA kA kama isa prakAra hai - _ narakagati
:-isa gati ke jIva manuSya aura tiyaMca ina do AyayoM ko hI bAMdha sakate haiN|
ataH ukta do Aya aura bhujyamAna narakAyu ye tIna Ayu aneka jIvoM kI apekSA se
sattA meM ho sakatI haiM tathA anAdimithyAtTI ke pahale kahe gaye ATha bher3oM
meM se asaparyAya-prApta aise cAra bheda hI yahA~ ho sakate haiN| ataH anukrama
me tIsarA, cauthA, sAtavA~ aura AThavA~ ina cAra bhedoM kI sattA narakagati meM
pUrvabaddhAyuSka ko aneka jIvoM kI apekSA se samyaktvamohanIya Adi sAta tathA
devAyu ke binA 140 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  sambhavasattA meM bhI ukta
kathanAnusAra hI sattA hotI hai tathA eka jIva ko apekSA 136 kI tathA
abaddhAyuSka ko 138 prakRtiyoM ko sattA hotI hai| timaMcagati-isa gati meM anAdi
mithyAtvI ke pUrvokta AThoM vikalpa ho sakate haiM aura tadanurUpa hI sattA bhI
ho sakatI hai| parantu itanA vizeSa hai ki asaparyAya-prApta jIva tejaskAyika
aura vAyukAyika paryAya ko prApta karatA hai, taba devaTika athavA narakaTika kA
udvelana kare to anya gati meM nahIM jAne vAlA hone se tadyogya deva, manuSya
aura narakAyu tathA anAdimithyAtvI hone se samyaktvamohanIya Adi sAta prakRtiyA~
kula bAraha prakRtiyoM ke sivAya eka jIva kI apekSA 136 prakRtiyoM kI tathA
pahale kahe gaye devadvika adhavA narakadvika -

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
138 If one were to extract the remaining one pair from these two pairs and the
four pairs of Vaikriya, and then extract the 160 pairs of the pole of the
husband, and then extract the 126 pairs of human beings, then there would be 127
types of existence. If the earth, water, and plant-bodied beings were to extract
the pair of hell or the pair of heaven, then due to being eternally false, there
would be seven types of existence, including the delusion of right knowledge,
etc., and due to not going to heaven or hell, there would be two types of
existence, making a total of nine types of existence. Without these nine types
of existence, there would be 136 types of existence for the many beings. Because
some may extract the pair of hell and some may extract the pair of heaven, but
both pairs exist in the existence of many beings. If one were to extract only
one type of pair, then there would be 135 types of existence for those beings,
and for the many beings with the previous lifespan, there would be 135 types of
existence for those who bind the human lifespan, and 536 types of existence for
those who bind the lifespan of the Tiryach and those who are eternally dry. If
the Vaikriya disintegration were to be considered as a proper extraction, then
there would be 131 types of existence instead of 137, and 130 types of existence
instead of 136. _ The aforementioned existence should not be understood only in
the luminous-bodied and air-bodied beings, but also in the other Tiryach that
have come out from there, in the state of insufficiency for a short period of
time. Therefore, it can also be considered there. The remaining Tiryach beings
also have the third, fourth, seventh, and eighth options out of the eight
options mentioned earlier. _ In the human path, the third, fourth, seventh, and
eighth options out of the eight options mentioned earlier for the eternally
false are possible, therefore, the types of existence should be understood
accordingly.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 138 karmastava : pariziSTa ina do dvikoM meM se bAkI rahe eka dvika aura
vaikriyacatuSka-ina vaikriyapaTaka kA udvelana karane para 160 pati kI pola kA
DhekA karane para 126 kI aura manuSyadvika kI udvelanA kare to 127 prakRtiyoM kI
sattA hotI hai| pRthvI, apa aura vanaspatikAyika jIva narakadvika yA devAdvika
kA udvelana kareM to anAdimithyAtvI hone se samyaktvamohanIya Adi sAta aura deva
tathA naraka meM jAne vAlA nahIM hone se do Ayu isa prakAra kula nau prakRtiyoM
ke binA aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 136 kI sattA hotI hai| kyoMki koI narakadvika kA
udvelana kare aura koI devadvika kA udvelana kare, parantu aneka jIvoM kI apekSA
donoM dvika sattA meM hote haiM  /  amuka eka hI prakAra ke dvika kA udvelana
kareM to aise jIvoM kI apekSA 135 prakRtiyoM kI tathA pUrvabaddhAyuSka aneka
jIvoM kI apekSA manuSyAyu ko bA~dhane vAle ko 135 vI aura tiyaMcAyu bA~dhane
vAle aura abadAzuSka ke 536 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  yadi
vaikriyaghaTana ko saddhelanA kI ho to 137 ke badale 131 aura 136 ke badale 130
prakRtiyoM kI sattA hogii| _ pUrvokta sattA sirpha tejaskAyika, vAyukAyika meM
hI nahIM samajhanI cAhie, kintu vahAM se nikalakara Aye hue anya tiyacoM meM bhI
aparyApta avasthA meM alpakAla taka rahatI hai| ataH vahA~ bhI sambhAvanA mAnI
jA sakatI hai| zeSa raha hue tiryaca jIvoM ke pahale kahe gaye ATha vikalpoM meM
se tIsare, cauthe, sAtaveM aura ATava vikalpa ke anusAra bhI hotI hai| _
manuSyagatiisa gati meM anAdimithyAtvI ke pUrvokta ATha vikalpoM meM se tIsarA,
cauthA, sAtabA aura AThavAM ye cAra vikalpa sambhava haiM, ataH usI ke anusAra
prakRtiyoM kI sattA samajha lenI

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix ### 136  It is required. But for those who are
in hell or heaven, who have the seven karmas of Samyaktvamohaniya etc., and the
remaining three karmas of Abaddhayushk, a total of twelve karmas, except for one
being, there are 136 karmas, for many beings, there are 135 karmas, and for the
unique and the aforementioned dual, there are 130 karmas, which can also exist
for a very short time.  **Deva-Gati:** Beings in this gati do not go to hell.
Therefore, they do not bind the karmas of the corresponding lifespan and are
Anadi-Mithyatvi. Except for the seven karmas of Samyaktvamohaniya etc., and the
eight karmas of the aforementioned Abaddhayushk, there are 140 karmas for many
beings, 136 karmas for one being, and 138 karmas for the Abaddhayushk.  Now, we
will explain the existence of karmas in the four gatis with respect to Sadi-
Mithyatva.  **Naraka-Gati:** In this gati, for many beings with Abaddhayushk,
there are 147 karmas because they do not bind the karmas of Deva-Ayushk. For
many beings with one type of lifespan, there are 146 karmas, and for many beings
with Abaddhayushk, there are 45 karmas.  - If a being with the Tirthankara name-
karma is in Naraka-Gati with Abaddhayushk in the first Gunasthan, then he will
not have the seven karmas of Aharak-Chatushk, Deva, Manushya, and Tiryanch
Ayushk, resulting in 141 karmas. For many beings with Abaddhayushk and Aharak-
Chatushk, there are 146 karmas, for one being, there are 145 karmas, and for
Abaddhayushk, there are 144 karmas.  For many beings with Abaddhayushk and
without the Tirthankara name-karma and Aharak-Chatushk, there are 142 karmas,
for one being, there are 141 karmas, and for Abaddhayushk, there are 140 karmas.
Among them, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 136 caahie| parantu jo narakadrika athavA
devadrika kI udvelanA karane maiM, unake samyaktvamohanIya Adi sAta tathA unake
abaddhAyu vAle hona me zeSa tIna Ayu, kula bAraha prakRtiyoM ke sivAya eka jIva
kI apekSA 136 kI, aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 135 kI tathA vaiyiSaTka aura pUrvokta
dvika kI udvelanA kI ho to 130 prakRtiyoM kI bhI sanA anpa kAla ke lie ho sakatI
hai| devagati - isa gati vAle jIva narakagati meM nahIM jAte haiM  /  ataH
tadyogya Ayu kA bandha karate hI nahIM haiM aura anAdimithyAtvI hoto
samyaktvamohanIya Adi sAta kula ATha prakRtiyoM ke sivAya pUrvabaddhAyuSka ko
aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 140 kI aura eka jIva kI apekSA 136 kI aura abaddhAyuSka ko
138 prakRtiyoM ko sattA hotI hai  /  aba sAdimithyAtva kI apekSA cAroM gatiyoM
meM karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA batalAte haiM  /  narakagati - isa gati meM aneka
jIvoM kI apekSA pUrvabaddha Ayu vAle ke devAyu kA bandha na hone se 147 ko tathA
eka prakAra kI Ayu bA~dhane vAle aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 146 kI tathA abaddha Ayu
vAle ke anekaH jIvoM kI apekSA 45 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  - yadi
tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kI sattA vAlA pahale guNasthAna meM narakagati meM
abaddhAyuSka hI ho to use AhArakacatuSka, deva, manuSya, aura tiryaca Ayu- ye
sAta prakRtiyAM sattA meM nahIM hone se 141 kI aura AhArakacatuSka kI sattA vAle
pUrvabaddhAyuSka ke aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 146 kI, eka jIva kI apekSA 145 kI aura
abaddhAmuruka ke 144 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| tIrthaMkara nAmakarma aura
AhArakacatuSka kI sattA meM rahita vAyuSka aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 142 kI, eka
jIva kI apekSA 141 kI aura aator ke 140 prakRtiyoM ko sattA hotI hai| unameM bhI

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 140: Appendix on Karma  **For the Samyaktvamohaniya:**  * **Uddēlka**
(arousing) has **141** types for **many beings**, **140** for **one being**,
**136** for **Abaddhāyuṣka** (unbound lifespan), and **140** for
**Miśramohaniya** (mixed delusion) **Uddēlka** (arousing) for **many beings**,
**139** for **one being**, and **138** for **Abaddhāyuṣka**.  **For the
Tiryanchati (animal) realm:**  * **Tīrthankara** (liberated being) **karma**
does not exist. Therefore, there are **14.7** types for **many beings**, **144**
for **one being** who binds this realm, **145** for **one being** who binds
another realm, and **144** for **Abaddhāyuṣka**.  **For the Āhārakacatuṣka (four
types of food) free Abaddhāyuṣka:**  * There are **143** types for **many
beings**, **141** for **one being** who binds this realm, and **141** for
**Abaddhāyuṣka**.  **For the Samyaktvamohaniya Uddēlka Abaddhāyuṣka:**  * There
are **142** types for **many beings**, **136** for **one being** who binds this
realm, and **140** for **one being** who binds another realm.  **For the
Miśramohaniya Uddēlka Abaddhāyuṣka:**  * There are **143** types for **many
beings**, **136** for **one being** who binds another realm, **138** for **one
being** who binds this realm, and **538** for **Abaddhāyuṣka**.  **For the
Tejaskaayika (fire-bodied) and Vāyukaayika (air-bodied) realms:**  * If
**Āhārakacatuṣka** is aroused, there are **140** types. * If
**Samyaktvamohaniya** is aroused, there are **136** types. * If
**Miśramohaniya** is aroused, there are **138** types. * If **Devadvika** (two
types of gods) or **Narakadvika** (two types of hell beings) is aroused, there
are **136** types for **Abaddhāyuṣka** and **138** for **many beings**. * If
**Vaijyayiṣṭaka** (victory karma) is reduced, there are **130** types. * If
**Uchchagotra** (high lineage) is reduced, there are...   (The text continues,
but the translation ends here as the provided text is incomplete.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 140 karmastava : pariziSTa samyaktvamohanIya ke uddelaka ko batAyuSka aneka
jIvoM kI apekSA 141 kI, eka jIva kI apekSA 140 kI tathA abaddhAyuSka ke 136 kI
tathA mizramohanIya ke uddelaka ko baddhAyaka aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 140 ko aura
eka jIva kI apekSA 139 kI aura abaddhAyuSka ke 138 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai|
tiryacati-isa gati meM tIrthaMkaranAmakarma kI sattA hotI hI nahIM hai| ataH
aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 14.7 kI aura eka jIva kI apekSA usI gati ko bA~dhane vAle
ke 144 kI aura anya gati ko bA~dhane vAle ke 145 kI aura abatAyuSka ko 144
prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  _ AhArakacatuSka kI sattArahita baddhAyuSka
aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 143 kI, eka jIva kI apekSA usI gati ko bAMdhane vAle ke
141 kI tathA abadAyuSka ke bhI 141 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /
samyaktvamohanIya kA udvelana karane vAle baddhAyuSka aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 142
kI, eka jIva kI apekSA usI gati kA bandha karane vAle ke 136 kI aura anya gati
kA bandha karane vAle ke 140 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai tathA mizramohanIya
udvelaka baddhAyuSka aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 143 kI tathA anya gati kI Ayu
bA~dhane vAle eka jIva kI apekSA 136 kI evaM usI gati kI Ayu bA~dhane vAle ke
138 kI tathA abaddhAyuSka ko bhI 538 prakRttiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| tejaskAyika,
vAyukAyika meM yadi AhArakacatuSka kA udvelana kare to 140 kI tathA
samyaktvamohanIya kI udvelanA kare to 136 kI aura usake bAda yadi mizramohanIya
kI udvelanA kare to 138 kI aura tadanantara devadvika athavA narakadvika kI
uddelanA kare to 136 prakRtiyoM kI va aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 138 kI sattA hotI
hai aura usake bAda vaijhiyaSaTka ke ghaTAne para 130 kI, uccagotra kama

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix 141  When performing (an action), there are 126
**Prakritis** for a **Manushya-dvik**, and when reducing (an action), there are
127 **Prakritis**. This existence is for a short period of time for other
**Tiryanchas** who have come from **Tejas-kayika** and **Vayu-kayika**. For
other **Sthavaras**, there are 130 **Prakritis** even if they have not come from
**Tejas-kayika** and **Vayu-kayika**. And if a **Manushya-ayika** with 130
**Prakritis** binds **Karma**, then there are 131 **Prakritis**.  _**Manushya-
Gati**_ In this **Gati**, there are 146 **Prakritis** for **Bayushka** compared
to many beings, 146 **Prakritis** for many beings who bind the lifespan of the
same **Gati**, 145 **Prakritis** for many beings who bind the same **Gati**, and
145 **Prakritis** for **Abadhayushka**.  _**Aharak-Chatushk**_ There are 147
**Prakritis** for **Aharak-Chatushk** compared to many beings who have **Purva-
Basayu**, 144 **Prakritis** for those who bind the lifespan of the same
**Gati**, 145 **Prakritis** for those who bind another **Gati**, and 144
**Prakritis** for **Abadhayushka**.  If a **Baddhayushka** who is **Samyak-
tvamohaniya** is **Udvellana**, then there are 142 **Prakritis** for many beings
without **Tirthankara-namakarma**, **Aharak-Chatushk**, and **Samyak-
tvamohaniya**, 140 **Prakritis** for one being who binds the lifespan of another
**Gati**, 136 **Prakritis** for one being who binds the same **Gati**, 136
**Prakritis** for **Abaddhayushka**, and if there is **Udvellana** of
**Devadvik** or **Narakadvik**, then there are 143 **Prakritis** for many beings
without **Tirthankara-namakarma** and **Aharak-Chatushk** for a
**Baddhayushka**.  If there is **Udvellana** of **Samyak-tvamohaniya**, then
there are 142 **Prakritis**, and if there is **Naraka**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 141 karane para 126 ko aura manuSyadvika ko
kama karane para 127 prakRtiyoM ko sanA hotI hai| ukta sattA tejaskAyika,
vAyukAyika meM se Aye hue anya tiryaMcoM ke bhI alpakAla ke lie hotI hai| anya
sthAvaroM ko 130 prakRtiyoM kI sattA tejaskAyika aura vAyukAyika meM se na bhI
Aye hoM to bhI hotI hai tathA 130 prakRtiyoM kI sattA vAlA manuSyAya kA bandha
kare to 131 prakRtiyoM kI bhI sattA hotI hai| _ manuSyagatiisa gati meM aneka
jIvoM kI apekSA bAyuSka ko 146 kI evaM eka hI gati kI Ayu bAMdhane vAle aneka
jIvoM kI apekSA 146 kI tathA usI gati ko bAMdhane vAle aise aneka jIvoM kI
apekSA 145 kI aura abadAyuSka ke bhI 145 prakRtiyoM kI sanA hotI hai| _
AhArakacatuSka kI sattA bAloM ko pUrvabasAyu anaka jIvoM kI apekSA 147 kI aura
tadgati kI Ayu ko bAMdhane vAle ko 144 kI evaM anya gati ko bA~dhane vAle ko 145
kI aura abaDhAyuruka ko 144 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| yadi samyaktvamohanIya
kA udvelana karane vAlA baddhAyuruka ho to aneka jIvoM kI apekSA
tIrthakaranAmakarma, AhArakacatuSka aura samyaktvamohanIya ke binA 142 kI evaM
eka jIva kI apekSA anya gati kI Ayu kA bandha karane vAle ko 140 kI tathA usI
gati kA bandha karane vAle ko 136 kI aura abaddhAyuSka ko mo 136 kI tathA
devadvika yA narakadvika kI udvelanA kI ho to baddhAyuSka aneka jIvoM kI apekSA
tIrthaGkaranAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSka ke sivAya 143 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI
hai| yadi samyaktvamohanIya kI udavelanA kare to 142 kI tathA naraka

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
= 142 Karmastava Parishishta If the Devadvik or Narakadvik is agitated, then
there are 142 types of entities in relation to many beings, and if one Trik out
of the two Dviks is agitated, then there are 140 types of entities in relation
to many beings, and the one who binds that motion has 137 types of entities, and
the one who binds the other motion has 138 types of entities. Just as the
existence of 138 and 136 types of entities has been stated in relation to many
beings in sequence, in the same way, the one who agitates the Mishramohaniya
(where there are 142, 140, 138, and 137 types of entities, it has been said,
there should be understood 141, 136, 137, and 136 types of entities). Devagati -
In this motion, if we consider in relation to many beings, then there are 146
types of entities in this Gunasthan except for Tirthankara Namakarma and
Narakayu, and 145 types of entities in relation to one being, and 144 types of
entities for Abaddhayushk, and 142 types of entities for many beings who are
bound by Ayushk without the existence of Aharana Chatushk, and 141 types of
entities for one being, and 140 types of entities for Abaddhayushk. Thus, in the
first Mithyatva Gunasthan, the existence of 127, 126, 130, 131, 136, 137, 138,
136, 140, 142, 142, 103, 144, 145, 146, 147, and 148 has been considered in
relation to Anadi Mithyadrishti and Sadi Mithyadrishti. Now, in the second
Sasadan Gunasthan, we describe the existence of Karmapratikrtis. (2) Sasadan
Gunasthan - In this Gunasthan, it should be understood specifically about the
existence of Karmapratikrtis that (1) There is no existence of Tirthankara
Namakarma in this Gunasthan. (2) Only those who have Devadvik, Narakadvik, and
Vaikiya Chatushk in their existence come in this Gunasthan, and those who have
Aharaka Chatushk in their existence also come.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 = 142 karmastava pariziSTa dvika yA devadvika kI udvelanA kare to aneka jIvoM
kI apekSA 142 kI aura donoM dvikoM meM se eka Trika kI udvelanA kI ho to aneka
jIvoM kI apekSA 140 kI tathA usI gati kA bandha karane vAle ko 137 kI aura anya
gati ko bAMdhane vAle ke 138 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| jisa prakAra aneka
jIvoM ko apekSA anukrama se 138 aura 136 prakRtiyoM kI sattA kahI gayI hai, usI
prakAra mizramohanIya kI udvelanA karane vAle ko (jahA~ 142, 140 138 aura 137 kI
sattA hotI hai, aisA kahA hai, vahA~ 141, 136, 137 aura 136 kI sattA samajhanI
cAhie  /  devagati - isa gati meM aneka jIvoM kI apekSA vicAra kareM to
tIrthakara nAmakarma aura narakAyu- ina do ke sivAya isa guNasthAna meM 146 kI
aura eka jIva kI apekSA 145 kI aura abaddhAyuSka ko 144 kI tathA AhAranA catuSka
kI sattA se rahita baddhAyuSka aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 142 aura eka jIva kI apekSA
141 kI evaM abaddhAyuSka ko 140 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  isa prakAra
pahale mithyAtva guNasthAna meM anAdimithyAdRSTi aura sAdi midhyAdRSTi kI apekSA
127 126 130 131, 136, 137, 13. 136, 140 142.142, 103. 144, 145, 146, 147 aura
148 ina saha sattAsthAnoM kA vicAra kiyA gyaa| aba dUsare sAsAdana guNasthAna
meM karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA kA varNana karate haiN| (2) sAsAdana guNasthAna -
isa guNasthAna meM karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA ke bAre meM yaha vizeSa rUpa se
samajhanA cAhie ki (1) isa guNasthAna meM tIrthaGkaranAmakarma kI sattA nahIM
hotI hai  /  (2) jinake devadvika, nararkAdvika aura vaikiyacatuSka sattA meM
hoM ve hI isa guNasthAna meM Ate haiM tathA AhArakacatuSka kI sattA vAle bhI Ate
haiN|

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix ### 143 (3) This Gunasthan is only for those
who fall from above. In this Gunasthan, the existence of beings will be stated
in two types: Purvabaddhayu and Abaddhayu, similar to the previous ones. Among
them, there are four divisions: those with the existence of Aharak Chatushk and
those without the existence of Aharak Chatushk.  —  The existence of Karma
Prakritis in these divisions is as follows: (1) In the Sasvadan Gunasthan, those
with Purvabaddhayu and the existence of Aharak Chatushk have 47 Prakritis for
Peevas, 145 for those binding the lifespan of another being in a different
motion, 144 for those binding the lifespan of the same motion, and 145 Prakritis
for those binding the lifespan of many beings. (2) In the Sasvadan Gunasthan,
those with Abaddhayu and the existence of Aharak Chatushk have 147 Prakritis for
many beings and 144 for one being. (3) In the Sasvadan Gunasthan, those with
Purvabaddhayu and without the existence of Aharak Chatushk have 143 Prakritis
for many beings, 141 for those binding the lifespan of another being in a
different motion, 140 for those binding the lifespan of the same motion, and 141
Prakritis for those binding the lifespan of many beings. (4) In the Sasvadan
Gunasthan, those with Abaddhayu and without the existence of Aharak Chatushk
have 143 Prakritis for many beings and 140 for one being.  After stating it
generally, now we will explain the existence of Prakritis for the beings in the
Sasvadan Gunasthan in relation to their motions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 143 (3) yaha guNasthAna Upara se nIce girane
vAle ko hI hotA hai  /  isa guNasthAna meM sAmAnya se pUrvavadvAyu aura
azraddhAyu- ina do prakAra ke jIvoM ke dvArA sattA kA kathana kiyA jaaegaa|
unameM bhI AhArakacatuSka kI sattA vAle aura AhArakacatuSka ko sattArahitaisa
prakAra cAra bheda ho jAte haiM  /  -- ina bhedoM meM karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA
isa prakAra hai (1) AhArakacatuSka kI sattAsahita pUrvaddhAyuka sAsvAdana
guNasthAnoM meM pIvoM kI 47 kI aura eka jIva kI apekSA anya gati kI Ayu bA~dhane
vAle ko 145 kI aura usI gati kI Ayu bAMdhane vAle ko 144 kI aura aneka jIvoM kI
apekSA 145 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  (2) AhArakacatuSka kI sattAsahita
abaddhAyuSka sAsvAdana guNasthAnavartI jIvoM meM aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 147 kI
aura eka jIva kI apekSA 144 prakRtiyoM kI mattA hotI hai  /  (3) AhArakacatuSka
kI sattArahita pUrvabaddhAyuSka sAsvAdana guNasthAnavartI jIvoM meM aneka jIvoM
kI apekSA 143 kI, eka jIva kI apekSA anya gati kI Ayu bA~dhane vAle ko 141 kI
tathA usI gati ko Ayu bA~dhane vAle ko 140 kI tathA aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 141
prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  (4) mAhArakacatuSka kI sattArahita abaddhAyu
sAsvAdana guNasthAnavartI jIvoM meM aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 143 kI aura eka jIva
kI apekSA 140 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  sAmAnya se kathana karane ke bAda
aba gatiyoM kI apekSA sAsvAdana guNasthAnavartI jIvoM ko prakRtiyoM kI sattA
batalAte hai  /

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmastava Parishishta  **Hell Realm:** There are 146 types of beings in the
Hell realm, with respect to those who have a previous lifespan (Purvaayushk),
145 types with respect to a single being, and 144 types with respect to those
who have an unfixed lifespan (Abaddhaayushk). If the four types of Aahaarak
(food) are not present, then there are 142, 141, and 140 types of beings
respectively.  **144**  The same principle of types of beings should be
understood for the Tiryanch (animal) realm, the Human realm, and the Dev
(divine) realm, as per the Hell realm, with respect to those who have the
Saasvadan (taste) Gunasthan (state of being).  Thus, there are 140, 141, 142,
143, 144, 145, 146, and 145 types of beings in the Saasvadan Gunasthan.  **(3)
Mixed Gunasthan:** The types of beings in this Gunasthan should be understood in
the same way as the Saasvadan Gunasthan. However, the difference is that the
Saasvadan Gunasthan is for those who fall from higher Gunasthan, while the Mixed
Gunasthan is for those who ascend.  The types of beings in the Mixed Gunasthan
are explained through two categories: those with the four types of Aahaarak
present and those without the four types of Aahaarak.  **(1) Mixed Gunasthan
with the four types of Aahaarak present:** There are 147 types of beings with
respect to those who have a previous lifespan, 145 types with respect to those
who have a fixed lifespan for a single type of existence, 145 types with respect
to those who have a fixed lifespan for multiple types of existence, and 144
types with respect to a single being. For those who have disintegrated the four
types of Anantaanubandhi Kashay (infinitely binding passions), four types should
be subtracted, meaning 147, 145, 144...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava pariziSTa narakagati - aneka jIvoM kI apekSA pUrvAyuSka ke 146 kI,
eka jIva kI apekSA 145 ko aura abaddhAyuSka ko 144 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai
/  mAhArakacatuSka kI sattA na ho to anukrama se 142, 141, aura 140 kI sattA
hotI hai  /  144 narakagati ke anusAra hI tiyaMcagati, manuSyagati aura devagati
meM bhI sAsvAdana guNasthAna vAle jIvoM ke prakRtiyoM kI mattA samajhanI cAhie
/  isa prakAra sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM 140 141 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, aura
145 prakRtiyoM kI mattA hotI hai  /  (3) mizra guNasthAna - sAsvAdana guNasthAna
ke anusAra hI isa guNasthAnavartI jIvoM ke prakRtiyoM kI sattA samajhanI caahie|
lekina itanA antara hai ki sAsvAdana guNasthAna Upara ke guNasthAnoM se girane
vAle ko hI hotA hai, jabaki mizraguNasthAna car3hane vAle jIvoM ko bhI hotA hai|
mizraguNasthAna meM AhArakacatuSka kI sattArahita aura AhArakacaluka kI
sattArahita- ina do bhedoM ke dvArA prakRtiyoM kI sattA ko spaSTa karate haiM  /
(1) AhArakacatuSka kI sattAsahita mizraguNasthAnavartI jIcoM meM aneka jIvoM ko
apekSA pUrvAyuSka ke 147 kI aura anya eka hI prakAra kI gati kI Ayu ko bA~dhane
vAle jIvoM kI apekSA 145 kI aura usI gati kI Ayu ko bA~dhane vAle aneka jIvoM kI
apekSA 145. kI aura eka jIva kI apekSA 144 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai tathA
jinhoMne anantAnubandhIkaSAyacatuSka kI visaMyojanA kI ho to unake lie cAra
prakRtiyA~ kama ginanI cAhie, arthAt 147, 145, 144 ke

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix  **145** One should understand the existence of
143, 141, and 140 **Prakritis** in the **Gunasthan** of those who have the
existence of **Aharak Chatushk**. In this **Gunasthan**, **Samyaktvamohaniya**
is definitely present. Compared to many beings, **Abaddhayushk** has 147
**Prakritis**, compared to one being, it has 144 **Prakritis**, and those who
disassociate have 143 and 140 **Prakritis** respectively.  **(2)** In the
**Gunasthan** of mixed **Prakritis** where **Aharak Chatushk** is absent,
compared to many beings, **Purvabaddhayushk** has 143 **Prakritis**,
**Abaddhayushk** has 143 **Prakritis**, compared to one being, **Baddhayushk**
has 140 **Prakritis**, and **Abavayushk** also has 140 **Prakritis**. _After
**Samyaktvamohaniya** is aroused in the first **Gunasthan**, if one comes to
this **Gunasthan** after arousing **Mishramohaniya**, then one **Prakriti** less
is present. In other words, where 143, 141, and 140 **Prakritis** are mentioned,
there are 142, 140, and 139 **Prakritis** respectively._ _Those who disassociate
**Anantanubandhi Kashay Chatushk** should understand four **Prakritis** less. In
other words, where 143, 141, and 140 **Prakritis** are mentioned, there are 139,
137, and 136 **Prakritis** respectively._  **Samyaktvamohaniya** without
**Mana** does not disassociate **Anantanubandhi**. Because **Samyaktvamohaniya**
is aroused in the first **Gunasthan** when **Mithyatva** is present, and there
is no disassociation of **Anantanubandhi** there. However, even those who are
without **Samyaktvamohaniya** have its existence, and **Moha** beings may come
to the mixed **Gunasthan** after arousing **Mishramohaniya**, and those who
disassociate come to the higher **Gunasthan**, and there **Mithyatva** is
present...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 145 badale 143, 141 aura 140 prakRtiyoM kI
sattA samajhanI cAhie  /  AhArakacatuSka kI sattAvAloM ke isa guNasthAna meM
samyaktvamohanIya avazya sattA meM hotI hai  /  abaddhAyuSka aneka jIvoM kI
apekSA 147 kI aura eka jIva kI apekSA 144 kI tathA visaMyojanA karane vAloM ko
kramazaH 143 kI aura 140 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotA hai| (2) AhArakacatuSka kI
sattArahita mizra guNasthAnavI jIvoM meM aneka jIvoM kI apekSA pUrvabaddhAyuSka
ko 143 kI, avaddhAyuSka ko 143 kI tathA eka jIva kI apekSA baddhAyuSka ko 140 kI
tathA abavAyuSka ko bhI 140 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| _ pahale guNasthAna
meM samyaktvamohanIya kI udvelanA karane ke bAda mizramohanIya kI udvelanA
karake isa guNasthAna meM Aye to usakI apekSA eka-eka prakRti kama hotI hai|
arthAt pahale jahA~ 143 141 aura 140 kI sattA kahI jAtI hai, vahAM anukrama se
142. 140 aura 136 prakRtiyoM kI gattA hotI hai  /  _ anantAnubandhIkaSAyacatuSka
kI visaMyojanA karane vAle ko cAra prakRtiyA~ kama samajhanI cAhie  /  arthAt
jahA~ 143, 141 aura 140 kI sattA kahI gaI hai, vahIM anukrama me 136, 138 aura
12 prakRniyoM kI sanA hotI hai 1 samyaktvamohanIya kI manArahita ko
anantAnubandhI kI visaMyojanA nahIM hotI hai| kyoMki samyaktvamohanIya kI
udvelanA mithyAtva kI sanA rahane para pahale guNasthAna meM hI hotI hai aura
vahA~ anantAnubandhI kI bisaMyojanA nahIM hotI hai parantu vahA~ usa sattAhIna
vAle ke bhI usakI sattA hotI hai aura mome jIva mizramohanIya kI uddelanA kara
kadAcita mizra guNasthAna meM Ate haiM aura visaMyojaka to Upara ke guNasthAna
me Ate haiM aura vahA~ mithyAtva kI sattA hone

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 146  However, the **Vinsayogak** (non-attachment) does not cause the
**udabelana** (agitation) of **Samyaktva-mohaniya** (delusion of right faith).
**Karma-Parisishta** (Appendix on Karma):  Now, we will explain the number of
**Karma-prakritis** (karmic substances) in the **Mishra-gunasthan** (mixed state
of qualities) in relation to the four **gatis** (paths of existence).  **Naraka-
gati** (hell path): In this path, the existence of **satta** (being) is as
described earlier, but the existence of **deva-ayu** (divine lifespan) is not
present. Therefore, where **deva-ayu** is counted, one **prakriti** should be
subtracted. For example, if the existence of 147 **prakritis** is mentioned for
many beings, then we should consider the existence of 146 **prakritis** instead.
Similarly, we should understand the existence of **prakritis** in **tiryag-
gati** (animal path) and **manushya-gati** (human path). In **deva-gati**
(heavenly path), we should understand this peculiarity: the existence of
**naraka-ayu** (hellish lifespan) is not present, but the existence of **deva-
ayu** is present. The rest should be understood according to **naraka-gati**.
Therefore, in **Mishra-gunasthan**, the following are the **satta-sthan**
(places of existence): 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147.
**(4) Avirat-samyag-drishti-gunasthan** (state of unwavering right faith): In
this **gunasthan**, generally, there are 148 **prakritis** in existence. For one
being, the **prakritis** binding the lifespan of another path are generally 146,
and the **prakritis** binding the lifespan of its own path are 145.  Generally,
the aforementioned existence is mentioned in relation to all types of
**samyaktvi** (right-believing) beings. However, considering the **bheda**
(difference) in **samyaktva**, we need to consider the existence in relation to
three types of **samyag-drishti** (right-seeing) beings: **Upasham-samyag-
drishti** (right-seeing with pacification), **Kshayopa-samik-samyag-drishti**
(right-seeing with pacification and destruction), and **Kshayik-samyag-drishti**
(right-seeing with destruction).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 146 para bhI samyaktvamohanIya kI udabelanA karane vAlA visaMyojaka nahIM hotA
hai  /  karmastava pariziSTa : aba cAroM gatiyoM kI apekSA mizra guNasthAna meM
karmaprakRtiyoM kI tA batAte haiM  /  narakagati - isa gati meM sattA to
pUrvokta kramAnusAra hI hotI hai; parantu isa gati meM devAyu kI sattA nahIM
hotI hai| ataH jahA~ devAyu ko ginA gayA ho, vahA~ eka prakRti kama ginanI
caahie| jaise ki aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 14 7 prakRtiyoM kI sattA batalAI gaI hai,
usakI bajAya 146 prakRtiyoM kI sattA mAnanI cAhie  /  isI prakAra tiryagati aura
manuSyagati meM bhI prakRtiyoM kI sattA samajhanI cAhie | devagati meM yaha
vizeSatA samajhanI cAhie ki isa gati meM narakAyu kI sattA nahIM hotI hai, kintu
devAyu kI sattA hotI hai  /  zeSa narakagati ke anusAra samajhanA cAhie  /  2
isa prakAra mizra guNasthAna meM 137, 138, 130 140 141, 142, 143. 144, 145, 143,
147 ye sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  (4) aviratasamyagdRSTi guNasthAna - isa
guNasthAna meM sAmAnya meM 148 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai tathA eka jIva kI
apekSA anya gati kI Ayu bA~dhane vAle ko sAmAnyataH 146 kI aura apanI hI gati kI
Ayu bA~dhane vAle ko 145 prakRtiyoM kI sanA hai  /  - sAmAnyataH pUrvokta sattA
to sabhI prakAra ke samyaktvI jIvoM kI apekSA kahI hai  /  parantu samyaktva ke
bhedAnusAra sattA kA vicAra karane para to upazamasamyagdRSTi,
kSAyopazamikasamyagdRSTi aura kSAyika samyagdRSTi ina tIna prakAra ke
samyagdRSTi jIvoM kI apekSA bhattA kA vicAra karanA par3egA  /

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix ### 147 Among the three types of Samyagdrishti,
the first, Upshama Samyaktvi, considers the existence of Karma-Prakritis in
relation to Avirat Samyagdrishti. There are two types of Upshama Samyagdrishti:
(1) Avisanyojaka, (2) Visanyojaka. **Avisanyojaka:** In relation to many Jivas,
there are 148 Prakṛitis for a Jiva with a previous lifespan, 146 for a Jiva
bound to another Gati, 145 for a Jiva bound to the same Gati, and 148 for an
Abaddhataka in relation to many Jivas, and 145 for a single Jiva. It is
important to understand that if Tirthankara-Namakarma is not present, then one
Prakṛiti should be subtracted. This means that instead of 148, 146, and 145, one
should consider 147, 145, and 144 Prakṛitis respectively. If Aharak-Chatushk is
not present, then instead of 148, 146, and 145, one should consider 144, 142,
and 141 Prakṛitis. If both Tirthankara-Namakarma and Aharak-Chatushk are not
present, then one should consider 143, 141, and 140 Prakṛitis instead of 148,
146, and 145 respectively. **Visanyojaka:** Even if Anantanubandhi-Chatushk is
not present, but its root cause, Mithyatva, is present, it is still called
Visanyojaka. Therefore, in relation to many Jivas with a previous lifespan,
there are 144 Prakṛitis excluding Anantanubandhi-Chatushk. In relation to a
single Jiva, there are 142 Prakṛitis for a Jiva bound to another Gati, 141 for a
Jiva bound to the same Gati, 144 for an Abaddhataka in relation to many Jivas,
and 141 for a single Jiva. It is important to understand that if Tirthankara-
Namakarma is not present...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 147 ukta samyagdRSTi ke tIna bhedoM meM se
sabase pahale upazama samyaktvI avirata samyagdRSTi kI apekSA karmaprakRtiyoM kI
sattA kA vicAra karate haiN| upazama samyagdRSTi jIba ke do bheda haiM--(1)
avisaMyojaka, (2) visNyojk| avisaMyojaka aneka jIvoM kI apekSA pUrvabaddhAyuSka
jIvoM ke 148 kI aura eka jIva kI apekSA anya gati ke baddhAyuSka ko 146 kI tathA
usI gati kI Ayu bA~dhane vAle ko 145 kI aura abaddhATaka aneka jIvo kI apekSA
148 lathA eka jIva kI apekSA 145 prakR. tiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| yahAM yaha
vizeSa samajhanA cAhie ki jinake tIrtharanAmakarma sattA meM na ho to unake eka
prakRti kama mamajhanA caahie| arthAt 148, 146 aura 145 ke badale kramazaH 147,
145 aura 144 prakRtiyoM kA kathana karanA caahie| yadi AhArakacatuSka kI sattA
na ho to 148, 146 aura 145 ke badale 144. 142 aura 141 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
samajhanA aura tIrthaGkaranAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSka mattA meM na hoM to
anukrama se 148, 146 aura 145 ke badale 143, 141 aura 140 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
samajhanA cAhie  /  visaMyojaka-anantAnubandhIcatuSka sattA meM na ho kintu
usakA mUla kAraNa mithyAtva sattA meM ho to bhI use visaMyojaka kahate haiN|
ataH pUrvabaddhAyuSka aneka jIvoM kI apekSA anantAnabandhIcatuSka ke vinA zeSa
144 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| eka jIva kI apekSA anya gati kI Ayu bA~dhane
bAle ko 142 kI aura usI gati kI Aya bA~dhane vAle ko 141 kI tathA abaddhAyuSka
aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 144 kI aura eka jIva kI apekSA 141 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
hotI hai| yahA~ yaha vizeSa samajhanA cAhie ki tIrthaGkaranAmakarma kI sattA na

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Appendix to Karma  If the 144, 142, and 141 **Prakṛtis** are not present,
then instead of them, one should understand the presence of 143, 141, and 140
**Prakṛtis** respectively. If the **Tīrthaṅkara-nāma-karma** and
**Āhārakacatuṣka** are not present, then one should understand the presence of
136, 137, and 136 **Prakṛtis** respectively.  Now, we will discuss the presence
of **Karma-Prakṛtis** in relation to **Kṣayopaśamika Samyagdṛṣṭi**.  There are
two types of **Kṣayopaśamika Samyagdṛṣṭi**: (1) **Vinsayojaka**, (2)
**Aksayinayojaka**. One should understand the presence of **Prakṛtis** according
to the **Sattā** established by the **Ubhaga-auṣadha-āṅga**. However, when a
soul devoid of the **Anantānubandhī-caturṣka** experiences the
**Mithyātvamohaniya**, then, in relation to many beings with
**Pūrvabaddhāyuṣṭaka**, there are 143 **Prakṛtis**. In relation to one being,
there are 141 **Prakṛtis** for the one who binds the **Āyu** of another
**Gati**, and 140 **Prakṛtis** for the one who binds the **Āyu** of the same
**Gati**. There are also 140 **Prakṛtis** for the **Abadhāyuka**.  If the
**Tīrthaṅkara-nāma-karma** is not present, then instead of 143, 141, and 140,
there are 142, 140, and 139 **Prakṛtis** respectively. If the **Āhārakacatuṣka**
is not present, then instead of 143, 141, and 140, there are 136, 135, and 136
**Prakṛtis** respectively. If both the **Tīrthaṅkara-nāma-karma** and
**Āhārakacatuṣka** are not present, then instead of 143, 141, and 140, there are
138, 136, and 135 **Prakṛtis** respectively.  If, in all the above mentioned
alternatives, there is an experience of **Miśramohaniya**, then, without the
**Anantānubandhī-caturṣka**, **Mithyātvamohaniya**, and **Miśramohaniya**, in
relation to many beings, there are 142 **Prakṛtis** for the
**Pūrvabaddhāyuṣṭaka**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 148 karmastava : pariziSTa ho to 144, 142 aura 141 ke badale kramazaH 143, 141
aura 140 prakRtiyoM kI sattA tathA AhArakacatuSka kI sattA na ho to 144, 142
aura 141 ke badale kramazaH anukrama ro 140, 138 aura 137 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
samajhanA cAhie  /  yadi tIrthaGkaranAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSka kula pAMca
prakRtiyoM kI sattA na ho to 136, 137 aura 136 prakRtiyoM kI sattA samajhanA
caahie| aba kSAyopamika samyagdRSTi kI apekSA karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA kA
kathana karate haiN| kSAyopazamika samyagdRSTi ke do prakAra haiM--(1)
visaMyojaka, (2) aksiMyojaka aa inobhA auSagAMgakA sammAna ko basalAI gaI sattA
ke anusAra prakRtiyoM kI sattA samajhanA caahie| kintu jaba
anantAnubandhIcatuSka kI sattAvihIna AtmA mithyAtvamohanIya kI udvelanA kara
DAlatI hai, taba pUrvabaddhAyuSTaka aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 143 kI; eka jIva kI
apekSA anya gati kI Ayu bAMdhane vAle ko 141 kI aura usI gati kI Ayu bA~dhane
vAle ko 140 kI tathA abadhAyuka ko bhI 140 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| yadi
tIrtha karanAmakarma kI sattA na ho to 143, 141 aura 140 kI bajAya anukrama se
142, 140 aura 13 kI aura AhArakacatuSka sattA meM na ho to 143. 141 aura 140 ke
badale 136, 135 aura 136 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  yadi
tIrthakaranAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSka-kula ye pAMca prakRtiyA~ mattA meM na
hoM to 143, 141 tathA 140 ke badale 138, 136 aura 135 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI
hai| yadi uparyukta sabhI vikalpa vAloM meM mizramohanIya kI udvelanA kI ho to
unake anantAnabandhIcatuSka, mithyAtvamohanIya aura mizramohanIya ke binA aneka
jItroM ko apekSA pUrvabaddhAyuSka ko 142 kI,

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix  **Regarding the lifespan of a being:**  * For
a being bound to another गति (realm) compared to a single being, the lifespan is
140. * For a being bound to the same गति, the lifespan is 136. * For an
Abaddhayushk (one with an unbound lifespan), the lifespan is also 136.
**Regarding the absence of certain karmas:**  * If a being does not have the
Tirthankara-namakarma, their lifespan is 141, 136, and 138 respectively. * If a
being does not have the Aharakchatushk (four types of food karma), their
lifespan is 138, 136, and 135 respectively. * If a being does not have the
Tirthankara-namakarma and Aharakchatushk, their lifespan is 137, 135, and 134
respectively.  **Regarding the lifespan of a Kshayik Samyaktvi (one who has
destroyed all karmas) in the fourth Gunasthan (stage of spiritual progress):**
* For a Kshayik Samyaktvi, the lifespan is 141 for a being bound to another गति,
136 for a being bound to the same गति, 138 for an Abaddhayushk, and 138 for a
single being.  **Regarding the absence of certain karmas in a Kshayik
Samyaktvi:**  * If a Kshayik Samyaktvi does not have the Tirthankara-namakarma,
their lifespan is 140, 138, and 136 respectively. * If a Kshayik Samyaktvi does
not have the Aharakchatushk, their lifespan is 137, 135, and 134 respectively. *
If a Kshayik Samyaktvi does not have the Tirthankara-namakarma and
Aharakchatushk, their lifespan is 136, 134, and 133 respectively.  **Regarding
the lifespan of beings in the fourth Gunasthan based on different types of
Samyaktva (right faith):**  * After discussing the lifespan of beings in the
fourth Gunasthan based on the three types of Samyaktva (Aupamika, etc.), we now
discuss the lifespan based on different types of Matis (mental states).
**Regarding the lifespan of beings in the Narakagati (hell realm):**  * Beings
in the Narakagati do not have a lifespan. * Beings who do not have the
Tirthankara-namakarma...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa eka jIva kI apekSA anya gati kI Ayu bAMdhane
vAle ko 140 kI tathA usI gati kI Ayu bA~dhI ho to 136 kI da abaddhAyuSka ko bhI
136 kI sattA hotI hai| jisako tIrthaGkara nAmakarma kI sattA na ho, use anukrama
se 141, 136 aura 138 kI mattA tathA AhArakacatuSka na ho to kramazaH 138, 136
aura 135 prakRtiyAM sattA meM hotI haiN| AhAramacatuSka maura tIrtha lAnakarya
re para mArutiyAM sattA meM na hoM to 142, 140 aura 136 ke badale kramazaH 13.7,
135 aura 134 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| aba kSAyika samyaktvI kI apekSA
cauthe guNasthAna meM prakRtiyoM ko sattA batalAte haiN| kSAyika samyagdRSTi ko
aneka jIvoM kI apekSA pUrvabaddhAyuka ko 141 kI aura eka jIva kI apekSA anya
gati kI Ayu bAMdhane vAle ko 136 ko aura usI gati kI Ayu bAMdhane vAle ko 138 kI
tathA abaddhAyuSka ko bhI 138 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  yadi
tIrthaMkaranAmakarma kI sattA na ho to 145, 136 aura 137 ke badale kramazaH 140,
138 aura 136 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  yadi AhArakacatuSka sattA meM na
ho to 141, 136 aura 138 ke badale 137, 135 aura 134 kI tathA tIrthakaranAmakarma
aura AhArakacattAka kula pA~ca prakRtiyA~ sattA meM na hoM to 141, 136 aura 138
ke badale zramazaH 136, 134 aura 133 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| aupamika Adi
tInoM prakAra ke samyaktva kI apekSA cauthe guNasthAna meM karmapravAtiyoM kI
sattA batalAne ke anantara aba matiyoM kI apekSA karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA kA
kathana karate haiN| _ narakagati-isa gati kI kucha apanI vizeSatAeM haiN| jaise
ki isa gati ke jIvoM ke devAyu kI sattA nahIM hotI hai| jinako tIrthaMkara.

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karma Pariśiṣṭa: 150  There is the existence of **nāmakarma**, but not the
existence of their **āhārakacatuṣka**. And those who have the existence of
**āhārakacatuṣka**, they do not have the existence of **tīrthankara-nāmakarma**.
**Kṣāyikasamyaktva** is not newly attained, and they do not experience the
**udvelanā** of **mithyātva** and **miśramohaniya**. If, while experiencing the
**udvelanā** of **samyaktva-mohaniya karma** in a previous life, death occurs
and **narakāyu** is bound, then they complete the action of **udvelanā** upon
entering **narakagati**. Therefore, they are **udvelaka** of **samyaktva-
mohaniya**, but they do not initiate the action of **udvelanā**.  In this
**gati**, the **upśama** of **samyakṣvī**, **avirat samyagdṛṣṭi**,
**guṇasthāna** possessors, compared to many beings of previous lives, have the
existence of **devāyu** in **147** cases. If they have bound the same type of
**āyu**, then they have the existence of **146** cases compared to many beings.
**Addhāyuṣka** has the existence of **145** cases, and compared to many beings
who have the existence of **tīrthankara-nāmakarma**, they have the existence of
**143** cases in **devāyu** and **pūrvabaddhāyu** without **āhārakacatuṣka**.
Compared to one being, they have the existence of **142** cases, and
**abaddhāyuṣka** has the existence of **149** cases. Compared to many beings who
have the existence of **āhārakacatuṣka** and **pūrvabaddhāyuṣka**, they have the
existence of **146** cases except for **tīrthankara-nāmakarma** and **devāyu**.
Compared to one being, they have the existence of **145** cases, and
**abaddhāyuṣka** has the existence of **144** **prakṛti**.  If **tīrthankara-
nāmakarma** and **āhārakacatuṣka** do not exist, then compared to many beings of
previous lives, they have the existence of **142** cases except for these six
**prakṛti**: **tīrthankara-nāmakarma**, **āhārakacatuṣka**, and **devāyu**.
Compared to one being, they have the existence of **241** cases, and
**abaddhāyuṣka** has the existence of **140** **prakṛti**.  These beings are not
**visamyojaka**. Because the **upśamaśreṇī** is **up...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava pariziSTa : 150 nAmakarma kI sattA hotI hai, unake AhArakacatuSka kI
sattA nahIM hotI hai aura jinake AhArakacatuSka kI sattA hotI hai, unako
tIrthakara - nAmakarma kI sattA nahIM hotI hai| kSAyikasamyaktva navIna prApta
nahIM karate haiM tathA mithyAtva aura mizramohanIya kI udvelanA nahIM karate
haiN| yadi pUrvabhava meM samyaktvamohanIya karma kI udvelanA karate samaya
maraNa ho aura pUrva meM narakAyu kA bandha kiyA ho to narakagati meM Akara
udvelanA kI kriyA pUrI karate haiN| isalie samyastvamohanIya ke udvelaka hote
hai kintu udvelanA karane kI kriyA kI zurUAta nahIM karate haiM  /  isa gati ke
upazama samyaksvI avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna vAloM meM pUrvAyuSka aneka
jIvoM kI apekSA devAyu kI sattA na hone se 147 kI aura yadi eka hI prakAra kI
Ayu kA bandha kiyA ho to aise aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 146 kI tathA addhAyuSka ko
145 kI evaM tIrthakaranAmakarma kI sattA vAle aise aneka jIvoM kI apekSA devAya
aura AhArakacatuSka ke binA pUrvabaddhAya bAloM ke 143 kI. eka jIva kI apekSA
142 kI ora abaddhAyuSka ke 149 kI aura AhArakacatuSka kI sattA vAle
pUrvavadvAyuSka aneka jIvAM kI apekSA tIrthaMkaranAmakarma aura devAyu ke sivAya
146 kI aura eka jIva kI apekSA 145 kI tathA avaddhAyuSka ko 144 prakRtiyoM kI
sattA hotI hai  /  yadi tIrthakara nAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSka sattA meM na ho
to pUrvAyuSka aneka jIvoM kI apekSA tIrthakara nAmakarma, AhArakacatuSka aura
devAyu ina chaha prakRtiyoM ke sivAya 142 ko aura eka jIva kI apekSA 241 kI
tathA abaddhAyuSka ke 140 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  ye jIva visaMyojaka
nahIM hote haiN| kyoMki upazamazreNI kA upa

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Second Karma Grantha: Appendix  Those who have attained Samyaktv (right
faith) are capable of becoming Upshama Samyaksvi (liberated from the cycle of
birth and death) and Vinsayogak (free from karmic bondage). Other beings are not
capable of becoming Vinsayogak in Upshama Samyaktv. Beings in the hellish realm
can attain a new Upshama Samyaktv only through the three karmas, but it is not
of the श्रेणी (category) type. Therefore, they are not Vinsayogak.
Kshayopaśamika Samyaktvi (those who have attained the highest state of
liberation) with Avirat Samyagdristi (uninterrupted right vision) are of two
types: Avisayogak (not free from karmic bondage) and Vinsayogak (free from
karmic bondage). These beings should be understood according to the existence
explained for Upshama Samyagdristi. However, it is a special characteristic that
those beings who have come here by the arousal of Samyaktvamohaniya (the karma
that causes attachment to the world) do not have the natures of Devayyu (divine
beings), Tiyachyu (celestial beings), Manushayya (human beings),
Mithyatvamohaniya (the karma that causes wrong belief), and Anantanuvandhi
Chatushk (the four karmas that cause endless transmigration) in their existence,
unlike many other beings. This is because the bondage of their future life
occurs when six months of their lifespan remain. When a being who has died after
the arousal of Samyaktvamohaniya becomes a Kshayik Samyaktvi in a short time.
(Although it is said that "Kshayopaśamika Samyaktvi enters the hellish realm
only after vomiting Samyaktv," it should not be understood as a contradiction,
as it is also said in the Sixth Karma Grantha that a Samyagdristi with the
arousal of Samyaktvamohaniya goes to all four realms. However, a being who has
aroused Samyaktvamohaniya, etc., prepares to attain Kshayik Samyaktvi, and he is
also called Kshayik Samyaktvi.) Therefore, there are 136 natures in the
existence of such hellish beings who have aroused Samyaktvamohaniya, compared to
other beings. Compared to a single being, there are 135 natures in the existence
of a being who has the Tirthankara karma without the existence of the Aharak
Chatushk (the four karmas that cause attachment to food).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa ghAma samyaktva jinako hotA hai ve upazama
samyaksvI visaMyojaka ho sakate haiN| anya jIva upazama samyaktva meM
visaMyojaka nahIM hote haiN| narakagati ke jIvoM ke tIna karaNa karane se hI
navIna upazamasamyaktva hotA hai, parantu zreNI vAlA nahIM hotA hai| ataH ve
visaMyojaka nahIM hote haiN| kSAyopazamikA samyaktvI avirata samyagdRSTi jIva
avisaMyojaka aura visaMyojaka-do prakAra ke hote haiN| upazama samyagdRSTi ko
batalAI gaI sattA ke anusAra ina jIvoM ke sattA samajhanA cAhie  /  parantu yaha
vizeSatA hai ki jo jIva samyaktvamohanIya kI udvelanA kara yahA~ Aye hoM to aise
aneka jIvoM kI apekSA devAyu, tiyacAyu, manuSyAya, mithyAtvamohanIya aura
anantAnuvandhIcatuSka ye prakRtiyA~ sattA meM nahIM hotI haiN| kyoMki unake
AgAmI bhava kI Ayu kA bandha apanI Ayu ke chaha mAha bAkI raheM taba hotA hai|
jaba samyaktvamohanIya kA udvelana karate hue marakara AyA huA jIva alpa samaya
meM hI kSAyika samyaktvI hotA hai| (yadyapi kSAyopazamika samyaktvI
samyaktvavamana karane ke bAda hI narakagati meM AtA hai', aisA kahA gayA hai,
parantu samyaktvamohanIya kI udvelanA karanevAlA samyagdRSTi cAroM gati meM jAtA
hai, aisA chaThe karmagrantha meM bhI kahA gayA hai, usase kisI prakAra kA
visaMvAda nahIM samajhanA caahie| kintu samyaktvamohanIya Adi prakRtiyoM kI
udvelanA karane vAlA kSAyikasamyaktva prApta karane kI taiyArI karatA hai aura
usakI apekSA use bhI kSAyika samyaktvI kahA jAtA hai  / ) _ isalie
samyaktvamohanIya ke uddelaka aise saba nArakI jIvoM kI apekSA 136 prakRtiyoM kI
sattA hotI hai  /  eka jIva kI apekSA AhArakacatuSka kI sattArahita
tIrthakaranAmakarma kI sattA vAle ko 135

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **152**  Those with the presence of the fourfold food-karma but
without the presence of the Tirthankara-karma have 138 natures. However, those
without the presence of the Tirthankara-karma and the fourfold food-karma have
134 natures. _The sevenfold vision of the _kshaayik_ samyak-tva, _abirat_
samyak-drishti, and the hell-bound beings does not exist in the sevenfold
vision, and due to never falling from the fourth _guna-sthana_, they only bind
to the human _ayus_. Therefore, the six _ayus_ do not exist for them. Hence,
except for the aforementioned natures, the _ank_ beings have 136 natures for the
_purva-baddha-ayushk_ and 138 natures for the _abaddha-ayushk_. If the beings
without the presence of the Tirthankara-karma are _purva-baddha-ayushk_, they
have 138 natures, and if they are _abaddha-ayushk_, they have 137 natures. If
they have the presence of the Tirthankara-karma, they have 135 natures for the
_purva-baddha-ayushk_ without the fourfold food-karma and 134 natures for the
_abaddha-ayushk_. If they do not have the five natures of the Tirthankara-karma
and the fourfold food-karma, they have 134 natures for the _purva-baddha-ayushk_
and 133 natures for the _abaddha-ayushk_.  **Tiryanch-gati:** The beings of this
_gati_ do not have the presence of the Tirthankara-karma. Therefore, compared to
the _anek_ beings with _upsham_ samyak-tva, the _purva-baddha-ayushk_ have 147
natures, the _ayus_ binder of another _gati_ has 145 natures compared to one
being, the _abaddha-ayushk_ and the _ayus_ binder of the same _gati_ have 144
natures. If they do not have the presence of the fourfold food-karma, then
instead of 147, 145, and 144, they have 143, 141, and 140 natures respectively.
There are no _avisan-yojak_ and _visan-yojak_ in the _tiryanch-gati_. Because
the three _karana_ in the first _guna-sthana_ lead to _upsham_...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 152 kamastava : pariziSTa kI tathA tIrthaMkaranAmakarma kI sattArahita
AhArakacatuSka kI sattA vAle ke 138 kI sattA hotI hai  /  parantu
tIrthaMkAranAmakarma tathA AhArakacatuSka kI sattA se rahita jIvoM ke 134 ko
sattA hotI hai| _kSAyika samyaktvI abiratasamyagdRSTi nArakI jIvoM ke
darzanasaptaka sattA meM hotA hI nahIM hai tathA cauthe guNasthAna se kabhI bhI
nahIM girane ke kAraNa manuSyAya kA hI bandha karate haiN| ataH zaSa tIna Aya
unako hotI hI nahIM haiM  /  isalie ukta nI prakRtiyAM ke sivAya aMka jIvoM kI
apekSA pUrvavaddhAyuSka jIvoM ke 136 kI aura abadghAyuSka ke 138 prakRtiyoM ko
sattA hotI hai| yadi tIrthakaranAmakarma ko sattArahita jIva pUrvabaddhAyuSka
hoM to 138 ko tathA abaddhAyaka hoM to 137 prakRtiyoM kI mattA hotI hai  /  yadi
tIrthakaranAmakarma ko sattA vAle hoM to AhAraka catuSka ke binA
pUrvabaddhAyuSka ke 135 kI tathA abaddhAyuSka ke 134 kI tathA
tIrthakaranAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSka ye pA~ca prakRtiyoM na hoM to
pUrvabaddhAyuSka ke 134 kI aura annaddhAyuSka ke 133 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI
hai| tiyaMcagati - isa gati vAle jIvoM ke tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kI sattA hotI hI
nahIM hai  /  isalie upazama samyaktvI aneka jIvoM kI apekSA pUrvabaddhAyuSka ko
147 kI, anya gati ke Ayubandhaka ko eka jIva kI apekSA 145 kI, abaddhAyuSka
tathA usI gati ke Ayubandhaka ko 144 kI tathA AhArakacatuSka kI sattA na ho to
147, 145 aura 144 ke badale 143, 141 aura 140 prakRtiyoM kI sattA samajhanI
caahie| tiyaM cagati meM avisaMyojaka aura visaMyojaka-ye do prakAra nahIM hote
haiN| kyoMki pahale guNasthAna meM tIna karaNa karane se jo upazama

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix to the Second Karma Granth ### 153  Samyaktv attained by Tiryanchas
is Samyaktv, but not the Samyaktv of the श्रेणी.  **1:**  * **Kshayopaśamika
Samyaktv:**  For Tiryanchas, there are 147 types of existence compared to the
previous lifespan of many beings. If a being has a lifespan bound to another
गति, there are 135 types of existence. For those who bind the lifespan of that
गति and those who are unbound, there are 144 types of existence. If the four
types of आहारक are not present, then there are 133, 141, and 140 types of
existence instead of 147, 145, and 144 respectively. If मिध्यात्व and
मिश्रमोहनीय are not present, there are 138 types of existence.  * **Kshayika
Samyaktv:**  For Kshayika Samyaktv, there are 130 types of existence out of the
aforementioned 138 types, excluding Samyaktvamoha. These beings bind only the
lifespan of देवायु. If the four types of आहारक are absent, there are 134 and 133
types of existence instead of 138 and 137 respectively.  * **Manushya-Gati-
Upasham Samyaktv:**  The types of existence for this Samyaktv are the same as
mentioned earlier, but the 148 types of existence for the unbound are mentioned
in relation to all four गतिs. When considering only the Manushya-Gati, there are
145 types of existence. Similarly, one should understand the specific types of
existence for Kshayopaśamika and Kshayika Samyaktv. The types of existence for
other गतिs should be understood in the same way.  * **Vaivagati:**  The types of
existence in this गति should be understood in the same way as in Naraka-Gati.
However, there are five more types of existence compared to the विसंयोजक: 142,
141, 140, 136, and 138.  Thus, in the fourth गुणस्थान, there are 133, 134, 135,
136, 137, 138, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha pariziSTa 153 samyaktva prApta hotA hai vaha samyaktva
tiyaMcoM ko hotA hai, parantu zreNI kA samyaktva nahIM hotA hai  /  1:
kSAyopazamika samyaktva tiryaMcoM ke pUrvavaddhAyuSka aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 147
kI aura eka jIva ke yadi anya gati kI Ayu bAMdhI ho to 135 kI aura usa gati kI
Ayu bA~dhane vAle tathA abaddhAyuSka ko 144 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| yadi
AhArakacatuSka sattA meM na ho to 147, 145 aura 144 ke badale kramazaH 143, 141
aura 140 prakRtiyA~ sattA meM hotI haiN| midhyAtva aura mizramohanIya sattA meM
na hoM to 138 kI sattA hotI hai  /  kSAyika samyaktva ko pUrvokta 138 prakRtiyoM
meM se samyaktvamohanIya ke binAko 130 ko 138 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| ye
Ayu bAMdhane vAle devAyu ko hI bA~dhate haiM  /  yadi AhArakacatuSka kI
sattArahita hoM to 138 aura 137 ke badale 134 aura 133 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI
hai ! manuSyagati-upazama samyaktvI ko prArambha meM batalAI gaI sattA ke
anusAra hI sattA hotI hai, parantu vahA~ abaddhAyuhaka ko jo 148 prakRtiyoM kI
sattA kahI gaI, vaha cAroM gatiyoM kI apekSA kahI gaI hai aura manuSyagati kI
apekSA se vicAra karane para 145 prakRtiyoM ko sattA hotI hai  /  isI prakAra
kSAyopazamika aura kSAyika samyaktvI ke bhI vizeSatA samajhanA cAhie  /  anya
satra meM usI prakAra sattA samajha lenI cAhie  /  vaivagati - narakagati ke
samAna hI isa gati meM prakRtiyoM kI sattA samajhanA cAhie | parantu visaMyojaka
kI apekSA 142, 141, 140, 136 aura 138 - ye pAMca sattAsthAna adhika hote haiM  /
isa prakAra cauthe guNasthAna meM 133,134, 135, 136, 137, 138,

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 154: Appendix to Karma  **136, 147, 101.142, 143, 144, 145, 106,
147, and 148** - these sixteen *satta* variations should be understood.  **(5)
*Deshaviriti* Gunasthan:**  Similar to the fourth *gunasthan*, this *gunasthan*
also has sixteen *satta* variations. However, the distinction is that this
*gunasthan* is only experienced by beings in the *tiryanch* and *manushya*
realms. Therefore, wherever *satta* is mentioned in the context of *abaddhayuk*,
and all four *ayu* *satta* are considered, only *tiryanchayu* and *manushyayu* -
these two *ayu* should be considered.  For example, many beings with *avirat
samyagdristi*, *purvabaddhayusk*, *upsham*, or *kshayopshamic*, *avisayojaka*
are considered to have *satta* of 148 *prakritis*. However, in this *gunasthan*,
since there is no *narak* realm or *dev* realm, these two realms are not
present. Therefore, *satta* of 146 *prakritis* should be understood. And since
*tiryanchayu* of *kshayik samyagdristi* is also not present, *satta* of 138
*prakritis* should be understood.  Similar to the fourth *gunasthan*, these
beings in the *tiryanch* realm are *kshayopshamic samyagdristi*. However, beings
who have attained this realm after shedding *mithyatvamohaniya* and *misra
mohaniya* do not have the *satta* they have reduced. This is because such beings
are born in *tiryanch* with an immeasurable lifespan and do not attain the fifth
*gunasthan* nor do they experience *kshayik samyaktva*. Therefore, the *satta*
of *kshayik samyaktva* should not be considered here. Here, only the *satta*
related to *upsham*, *kshayopshamic*, *avisanyojaka*, and *visayojaka* should be
understood.  **(6) *Pramattasanyata* Gunasthan:** Here too, 148, 147, 146, 145,
...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 154 karmastava : pariziSTa 136, 147, 101.142, 143, 144, 145, 106 147 aura 148ye
solaha sattA vikalpa samajhanA caahie| (5) dezavirati guNasthAna - cauthe
guNasthAna ke anusAra hI isa guNasthAna meM bhI solaha sattA vikalpa hote haiN|
parantu vizeSatA yaha hai ki yaha guNasthAna tiryaMcagati aura manuSyagati ke
jIvoM ko hI hotA hai  /  ataH jahA~-jahA~ abaddhAyuka ke prasaMga meM sattA
batalAte hue cAroM Ayu sattA meM mAnI gaI haiM, vahA~ sirpha tiyaMcAyu aura
manuSyAyu- ye do Ayu at fast cAhie  /  jaise aviratasamyagdRSTi pUrvabaddhAyuSka
upazama athavA kSAyopazamika avisayojaka ke aneka jIvoM ko apekSA 148 prakRtiyoM
kI sattA mAnI jAtI hai, usake badale isa guNasthAna meM narakagati aura devagati
nahIM hone se - ye do gatiyA~ nahIM hotI haiM  /  isalie 146 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
samajhanA cAhie aura kSAyika samyagdRSTi ke tiyaMcAyu bhI nahIM hone se 138
prakRtiyoM ko sattA samajhanA cAhie  /  tiyaMcagati cauthe guNasthAna ke samAna
hI ye jIva kSAyopazamika samyagdRSTi hote haiM, parantu jo jIva
mithyAtvamohanIya aura mizra mohanIya kA kSaya karake isa gati meM Aye hoM to
unhoMne jo sattA kama kI ho, vaha isa guNasthAna meM nahIM hotI hai| kyoMki aise
jIva asaMkhyAta varSa kI Ayu vAle tiryaMca meM utpanna hote haiM aura ve
pA~cavA~ guNasthAna prApta nahIM karate haiM tathA unheM kSAyika samyaktva bhI
nahIM hotA hai  /  isalie kSAyika samyaktva kI bhI sattA yahA~ nahIM samajhanI
cAhie  /  yahA~ to sirpha upazama tathA kSAyopazamika, avisaMyojaka aura
visayojaka se sambandhita sattA samajhanA cAhie  /  (6) pramattasaMyata
guNasthAna - yahA~ bhI 148, 147, 146, 145,

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix 155  144, 143, 142, 141, 140, 139, 138, 137,
136, 135, 134, and 133, these sixteen **sattastana** can be present, and this
**gunasthan** is only for humans. Therefore, wherever the existence of 148 is
mentioned in relation to many beings with **abjnayushk** as their **ashraya**,
there one should understand the existence of 145 **prakritis**. All other
**sattastana** should be understood according to the existence of **prakritis**
mentioned in the fourth **avirata samyagdristi gunasthan**.  (7) **Aparamatta
Gunasthan** - In this **gunasthan**, similar to the sixth **paramatta samyata
gunasthan**, there are sixteen **sattastana**: 148, 147, 146, 145, 144, 143,
142, 141, 140, 139, 138, 137, 136, 135, 134, and 133.  (E) **Apuurvakaran
Gunasthan** - Humans, **tiyancha**, and beings bound to **narakayu** and
**kshayopamik samyagdristi** do not exist in this **gunasthan**. This
**gunasthan** generally has three types: (1) **Upshama samyaktivi**, beings in
the **upshama shreni**. (2) **Kshayik samyaktivi**, beings in the **upshama
shreni**. (3) **Kshayik samyaktivi**, beings in the **kshapka shreni**.  Among
these, the existence of **prakritis** is mentioned in relation to **upshama
samyaktivi** beings in the **upshama shreni**.  These beings are of two types:
(1) those who fall from the **shreni** and (2) those who maintain the
**shreni**. However, there is no specific difference in their existence, and
both are of two types: **avisanjojak** and **visanjojak**.  **Avisanjojak** -
Before the **purvabaddhayushk**, in relation to many beings...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karma grantha : pariziSTa 155 144, 143, 142, 141, 140, 139, 138, 137,
136, 135, 134, aura 133 ye solaha sattAsthAna ho sakate haiM aura yaha
guNasthAna manuSya ko hI hotA hai, ata: jisa-jisa sthAna para abajJAyuSka ke
Azraya sa aneka jIvoM kI apekSA 148 kI sattA kahI gaI ho, vahA~ 145 prakRtiyoM
kI sattA samajhanI caahie| anya saba sattAsthAna cauthe avirata samyagdRSTi
guNasthAna meM batAI gaI prakRtiyoM kI sattA ke anusAra hI samajhanA caahie| (7)
apramatta guNasthAna - isa guNasthAna meM bhI chaThaM pramattasaMyata guNasthAna
ke samAna 148, 147, 146, 145, 144. 143, 142, 181, 140, 136, 138, 137, 136, 135,
134 aura 533ye solaha sattAsthAna hote haiN| (E) apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna-
manuSya, tiyaM ca aura narakAyu ke bandha vAle aura kSAyopamika samyagdRSTi jIva
isa guNasthAna meM nahIM hote haiM  /  isa guNasthAna ke sAmAnyatayA tIna
prakAra haiM (1) upazama samyaktvI , upazamazreNI vAle jIva  /  (2) kSAyika
samyaktvI upazamazreNI vAle jIva  /  (3) kSAyika samyaktvI, kSapakazreNI vAle
jIva  /  inameM se upazama samyaktvI upazamazreNI vAle jIvoM kI apekSA
prakRtiyoM kI sattA kA kathana karate haiN| ye jIva do prakAra ke hote haiM- (1
zreNI me patita hone vAle aura (2) zreNI ko mAr3ane vAle  /  parantu ina donoM
kI sattA meM koI vizaSatA nahIM hai tathA ye donoM bhI avisaMyojaka aura
visaMyojaka aise do prakAra ke hote haiN| avisaMyojaka-aneka jIvoM kI apekSA
pUrvabaddhAyuSka ke pUrva meM

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  156 **Appendix to Karma**  Except for the bound *devāyu* and the *udayamāna*
*manuṣyāyu*, the remaining two *āyu*s, in the case of a single being, have 146
*prakṛti*s, and in the case of an *abaddhāyuṣka*, the *sadbhāva* (in terms of
existing reality, towards 145, if *āyubandha* is possible, then with that *āyu*)
has 145 *prakṛti*s. In terms of existing reality, for multiple beings, if the
*āyu* of another *gati* is bound, then it has 146 *prakṛti*s, and if the *āyu*
of the same *gati* is bound, then it has 145 *prakṛti*s. Among them, those
beings who are without the *tīrthankara* *nāmakarma*, have 147, 145, and 144
*prakṛti*s in place of 148, 146, and 145 respectively. If they have the
*hārakacatuṣka*, then they have 144, 142, and 141 *prakṛti*s in place of 148,
146, and 145 respectively. And those beings who are without the *tīrthankara*
*nāmakarma* and the *āhārakacatuṣka* - these five *prakṛti*s - have 143, 141,
and 140 *prakṛti*s in place of 148, 146, and 145 respectively.
**Disconnector:** Here too, understand the *sattā* as mentioned above, but
reduce the *ananta* *anubandhī* *caturṣka*. That is, where 145, 147, 146, 145,
144, 143, 142, 141, and 140 *prakṛti*s are mentioned, in their place, one should
say that there are 144, 143, 142, 145, 140, 138, 138, 137, and 136 *prakṛti*s.
The *sattā* of beings who fall from the *śreṇī* should also be understood in the
same way.  **(2)** In the *kṣāyika* *samyaktvī* *upasamśreṇī* *bāla*s, in the
case of multiple beings, the *sattā* of *pūrvabaddhāyuṣka* beings, except for
*darśanamāptaka* and *tiyantrāyu* and *narkāyu*, is 136 *prakṛti*s, and the
*sattā* of *abaddhāyuṣka* is 138 *prakṛti*s. Here, the binding of *āyuṣka* is
not possible. Before attaining *kṣāyika* *samyaktvī*, they are *avāka* and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 156 karmastava pariziSTa bAMdhI gaI devAyu aura udayamAna manuSyAyu ke sivAya
bAkI kI do Ayu ke binA 146 kI aura eka jIva kI apekSA abaddhAyuSka ko sadbhAva (
vidyamAna sattA kI dRSTi se 145 kI ora sambhava (yadi Ayubandha sambhava ho to
usa Ayu ke sAtha) sattA kI dRSTi se aneka jIvoM kI apekSA anya gati kI Ayu
bA~dhI ho to 146 kI aura usI gati kI Ayu bA~dhI ho to 145 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
hotI hai| unameM bhI jo jIva tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kI sattA ke binA ke hoM to
unako 148, 146, aura 145 ke badale anukrama se 147, 145 aura 144 prakRtiyoM kI
sattA hotI hai| hArakacatuSka kI ho to 14, 146 aura 145 ke badale meM kramazaH
144, 142 aura 141 prakRtiyoM ko sattA hotI hai tathA tIrthakara nAmakarma aura
AhArakacatuSka- ina pA~ca prakRtiyoM kI sattArahita jIvoM ke 145 146 aura 145 ke
badale 143, 141, aura 140 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  visaMyojaka - yahA~
bhI Upara kaha gaye anusAra hA sattA samajhanA, lekina usameM
anantAnubandhIcatuSka ko kama kara denA caahie| arthAt jahA~ 145, 147, 146, 145,
144, 143, 142, 141 aura 140 prakRtiyA~ batAI gaI hai, unake badale anukrama
0144, 143, 142, 145 140, 138, 138, 137 aura 136 prakRtiyoM kI sattA kahanA cAhie
/  zreNI se girane vAle jIvoM ko bhI isI prakAra sattA samajhanI cAhie  /  (2)
kSAyika samyaktvI upasamazreNI bAloM meM aneka jIvoM kI apekSA pUrvabaddhAyuSka
jIvoM ke darzanamaptaka aura tiyaMtrAyu aura narakAyu ke sivAya 136 prakRtiyAM
sattA meM hotI haiM aura advAyuSka ke 138 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  yahA~
AyuSka kA bandha honA saMbhava nahIM hai  /  kSAyika samyaktva prApta karane ke
pUrva avAka ho aura

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix 157  If one attains **Kshayik Samyaktv** in a
particular birth, then **Moksha** is attained in that very birth. Therefore,
there is no possibility of **Satta** (existence) in this case.  If **Tirthankara
Namakarm** does not exist, then as mentioned earlier, instead of 136 and 138,
there will be 137 and 537 in the sequence. And if **Aharak Chatushk** does not
exist, then instead of 133 and 138, there will be 135 and 134. And if
**Tirthankara Namakarm** and **Aharak Chatushk** - these five **Prakritis** do
not exist, then instead of 136 and 138, there will be 134 and 136 **Prakritis**
in existence.  (3) **Kshayik Samyaktv** beings with **Kshapak Shreni** are
always **Avaddhayusk** (having a fixed lifespan). Therefore, without **Darshan
Saptak** and **Dev**, **Niyant** and **Narakayu** - these ten **Prakritis**,
there will be 138 **Prakritis** in existence. And for beings without
**Tirthankara Namakarm**, there will be 137 **Prakritis** in existence. And for
beings without **Aharak Chatushk**, there will be 134 **Prakritis** in
existence. And for beings without **Tirthankara Namakarm** and **Aharak
Chatushk** - these five **Prakritis**, there will be 133 **Prakritis** in
existence.  Thus, in the eighth **Gunasthan**, there are sixteen **Satta Sthan**
(places of existence): 148, 147, 146, 145, 144, 143, 142, 141, 140, 139, 138,
137, 136, 135, 134, and 133.  (E) For **Anivritti Bavar Samparay Gunasthan**
with **Upsham Shreni**, the sixteen **Satta Sthan** are the same as mentioned
earlier for **Upmam** and **Kshayik Samyaktv**: 148, 147, 146, 145, 144, 143,
142, 141, 140, 139, 138, 137, 136, 135, 134, and 133.  —  For **Kshayik** with
**Kshapak Shreni**, the sixteen **Satta Sthan** are also the same as mentioned
earlier: 139, 138, 137, 136, 135, 134, and 133. However, when **Apratyaakhyana
Avaran Chatushk** and **Pratyaakhyana Avaran Chatushk** - these eight
**Prakritis** are destroyed, then instead of the aforementioned four, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 157 kSAyika samyaktva prApta kareM to usI
bhava meM mokSa prApta hotA hai  /  ataH yahA~ sambhava sattA bhI nahIM hotI hai
/  yadi tIrthaMkara nAmaka ko sattA na ho to Upara kahe anusAra 136 aura 138 ke
badale anukrama meM 13= aura 537 ko tathA AhArakacatuSka sattA meM na ho to 133
aura 138 ke badale 135 aura 134 kI evaM tIrthaMkara nAmakarma aura
AhArakacatuSka - ye pA~ca prakRtiyA~ satrA meM na hoM to 136 aura 138 ke badale
134 aura 136 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  (3) kSAyika samyaktvI kSapakazreNI
vAle jIva avaddhAyuSka hI hote haiM  /  ataH darzanasaptaka aura deva, niyaMtra
aura narakAyu- ina dasa prakRtiyoM ke binA 138 prakRtiyoM kI tathA tIrthaMkara
nAmakarma kI sattArahita jIvoM ke 137 kI tathA AhArakacatuSka kI sattArahita
jIvoM ke 134 kI tathA tIrthaGkara nAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSka- ina pA~ca
prakRtiyoM kI sattA binA ke jIvoM ke 133 prakRtiyoM kI mattA hotI hai  /  isa
prakAra AThavaM guNasthAna meM 148, 147, 146. 145.144, 143, 142, 141. 140 136
138. 137 136 135 124 aura 133 - ye solaha sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  (E)
anivRttibAvara saMparAya guNasthAna upazamazreNI ke lie upamama aura kSAyika
samyaktvI sabhI ko pahale batalAye gaye 148. 147, 146, 145. 144. 143, 142, 149,
140 136 138. 127 136, 135, 134 aura 133 - ye solaha sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  --
kSapakazreNI karane vAle kSAtrika ko bhI pahale kahe gaye anusAra hI 136, 137,
134 aura 133 ra sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  parantu apratyAkhyAnAvaraNacatuSka
aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNacatuSka- ina ATha prakRtiyoM ke kSaya hone para pUrvokta
cAroM ke bajAya

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 118 **Karma Pariśiṣṭa**  There are 130, 126, 126, and 125 **Prakṛtis** in
existence, according to the order. Out of these, (1) **sthāvara**, (2)
**sūkṣma**, (3) **tiyanc-gati**, (4) **tiyanc-anupūrvi**, (5) **narak-gati**,
(6) **narak-anupūrvi**, (7) **ātapa**, (8) **udyota**, (9) **nidrā-nidrā**, (10)
**pracalā-pracalā**, (11) **styāna-ddhi**, (12) **eka-indriya**, (13)
**d-indriya**, (14) **śrī-indriya**, (15) **tūri-indriya**, and (16)
**sādhāraṇa** - these sixteen **Prakṛtis** exist when combined, resulting in
114, 143, 110, and 106 **Prakṛtis** in existence.  Subsequently, generally, when
the **napuṁsaka-veda** decays, instead of the aforementioned existing states,
113, 112, 106, and 108 **Prakṛtis** remain in existence. Out of these, when the
**strī-veda** decays, 112, 111, 108, and 107 **Prakṛtis** remain. Out of these,
when the six **Prakṛtis** of **hāsa**, **rati**, **arati**, **śoka**, **bhaya**,
and **jugupsā** decay, 106, 105, 102, and 101 **Prakṛtis** remain. And later,
when the **puruṣa-veda** decays, 105, 104, 101, and 100 **Prakṛtis** remain in
existence.  Considering the **śreṇī-prasthāpanā** (establishment of order), (1)
**napuṁsaka-vedī śreṇī-prasthāpaka** - if the **strī-veda** and **napuṁsaka-
veda** decay at the same time, and the **puruṣa-veda** and the six **Prakṛtis**
of **hāsa** etc. decay at the same time, then when the **napuṁsaka-veda**
decays, 113, 112, 106, and 108 **Prakṛtis** exist. When the six **Prakṛtis** of
**hāsa** etc. decay, the alternative existence of 106, 105, 102, and 101
**Prakṛtis** does not occur, but the alternative existence of 113 etc. occurring
elsewhere is possible. However, the existence of 106 **Prakṛtis** does not occur
for any other reason for the **napuṁsaka-vedī kṣapaka śreṇī-prasthāpaka**.
Therefore, this alternative is completely prohibited for him.  (2) **strī-vedī
śreṇī-prasthāpaka** - if the **puruṣa-veda** and the six **Prakṛtis** of
**hāsa** etc. decay at the same time, then the 106, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 118 karmastava pariziSTa anukrama se 130, 126, 126 aura 125 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
hotI hai  /  inameM se (1) sthAvara, (2) sUkSma (3) tiyaMcagati, (4)
tiyaMcAnupUrvI, (5) narakagati, (6) narakAnupUrvI (7) Atapa (8) udyota, (6)
nidrAnidrA, (10) pracalApracalA, (11) styAnaddhi, (12) ekendriya, (13) DIndriya,
(14) zrIndriya, (15) tUrindriya aura (16) sAdhAraNa - ina solaha prakRtiyoM kA
saMtha hone para 114, 143, 110 aura 106 prakRtiyA~ sattA meM rahatI haiM  /
anantara sAmAnyataH napuMsaka veda kA kSaya hone para pUrvokta sattAsthAnoM ke
badale kramazaH 113 112, 106 aura 108 prakRtiyoM kI sattA rahatI hai| inameM se
strIveda kA kSaya hone para 112 111, 108 aura 107 prakRtiyoM kI, inameM se bhI
hAsya, rati, arati, zoka, bhaya aura jugupsA ina chaha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya ho
jAne para 106, 105, 102 aura 101 prakRtiyoM kI aura bAda meM puruSaveda kA kSaya
hone para 105. 104, 101 aura 100 prakRtiyoM kI sattA rahatI hai  /  to zreNI
prasthApanA kI apekSA vicAra karate haiN| (1) napuMsakavedI zreNI prasthApaka-
strIveda tathA napuMsaka veda kA aura puruSaveda tathA hAsyAdi paTka kA usI
samaya kSaya kare to napuMsakaveda kA kSaya hone para hI 113. 1912. 106 aura 108
prakRtiyA~ sattA meM hotI haiM  /  hAsyAdi SaTka kA kSaya hone para 106, 105,
102 aura 101 prakRti vAle sattA vikalpa nahIM hote haiM, kintu anya sthAna para
hone vAle 113 Adi ke vikalpa sambhava hai, parantu 106 prakRtiyoM kA sattAsthAna
anya kisI prasaMga ghara napuMsakavedI kSapaka zreNI prasthApaka ko hotA hI
nahIM hai| isalie yaha vikalpa to usake sarvathA varjita hai  /  (2) strIvedI
zreNoprasthApaka- puruSaveda aura hAsyAdiSaTka kA eka hI samaya meM kSaya karatA
hai, ataH usa avasara para hone vAle 106,

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix 156 74 These four options with 105, 102 and 101
natures are not possible. The option of 106 is not possible according to the
aforementioned method. But other options can be possible in other places. (3)
**Purushavedi श्रेणी प्रस्थापक** - They are **Sanasthan** as mentioned above.
Generally speaking in a relevant way, now we consider it specifically. It has
been said earlier that when **Purushaved** decays, the options of 105, 104, 101
and 100 natures remain. Out of them, when **Sanjwalan Krodh** decays, there are
these four options of 104, 103, 100 and 66 natures. Out of them, when
**Sanjwalan Man** decays, there are these four options of 103, 102, 66 and 65.
After this, with the decay of **Sanjwalan Maya**, the beginning of the tenth
**Gunasthan** occurs. - Thus, for **Kshapak**, there are 366, 100, 101, 102,
103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 125, 126, 127, 130,
132, 134, 137 and 138 - a total of 25 **Sattastahan**. And in the **Anivriti
Gunasthan**, out of the aforementioned 25 **Sattastahan**, 23 places from 18 to
134, and 135, 136, 7 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148
- these fourteen places are added, making a total of thirty-three
**Sattastahan** possible. (10) **Sookshma Paray Gunasthan** - In this
**Gunasthan**, those belonging to the **Upsham श्रेणी** have a total of sixteen
**Sattastahan** from 133 to 148 as mentioned in the previous **Gunasthan**.
Those belonging to the **Kshapak श्रेणी** have 102 **Sattastahan** at the end of
the **Niv Gunasthan** due to the decay of **Sanjwalan Maya**. Those with
**Tirthankar Namakarma** and **Aharak Chatushk** have 102 **Sattastahan**, and
if there is no **Tirthankar Namakarma** then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 156 74 105, 102 aura 101 prakRti vAle ye cAra
vikalpa sambhava nahIM haiM  /  106 kA vikalpa pUrvokta rIti se sambhava nahIM
hai  /  parantu anya vikalpa to dUsare sthAna para hone se sambhava ho sakate
haiM  /  (3) puruSavedI zreNI prasthApaka - Upara kahe gaye anusAra hI
sanAsthAna hote haiN| prAsaMgika rUpa meM sAmAnyataH kathana kara aba vizeSa
rUpa meM vicAra karate haiN| pahale kahA jA cukA hai ki puruSaveda kA kSaya hone
para 105, 104, 101 aura 100 prakRtiyoM ke vikalpa zeSa rahate haiN| unameM se
saMjvalana krodha kSaya hone para 104, 103. 100 aura 66 prakRtiyoM ke ye cAra
vikalpa hote haiM  /  unameM meM saMjvalana mAna kA kSaya hone para 103. 102, 66
aura ye cAra vikalpa hote haiM  /  isake bAda saMjvalana mAyA ke kSaya me
dasaveM guNasthAna kI zurUAta hotI hai  /  - isa prakAra kSapaka ko 366, 100,
101, 102 103. 104, 105. 106, 10.5, 108, 106, 110 111. 112, 113, 114, 125, 126,
123. 130.132, 134, 137 aura 130 - ye kula 25 sattAsthAna hote hai tathA anivRtti
guNasthAna meM pUrvokta 25 sattAsthAnoM meM se 18 se 134 taka 23 sthAna tathA
135 136, 7 137 138, 130 140 141, 142. 143, 144 145 146, 147, 148 - ye caudaha
sthAna aura milAne me kula maiMtIsa sattAsthAna sambhAvita haiM  /  (10) sUkSma
parAya guNasthAna - isa guNasthAna meM upazamazreNI vAloM ko pUrva guNasthAna
meM kahe gaye 133 me 148 taka ke kula solaha sattAsthAna hote haiN| kSapakazreNI
vAle ko nIva guNasthAna ke anta meM saMjvalana mAyA kA kSaya hone ne
tIrthakaranAmakarma aura AhArakacatuSka kI mattA vAle ko 102 kI aura tIrthaMkara
nAmakarma kI sattA na ho to

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **160** **Appendix**  If a being possesses the
**Tīrthaṅkara Nāmakarma** with 101 **Āhāra-Catuṣka** and 8 **Tīrthaṅkara
Nāmakarma** without the **Āhāra-Catuṣka**, then there are 67 **Prakṛtis**.  At
the end of this **Guṇasthāna**, the **Sanjvalana Lobha** also gets destroyed.
Then the twelfth **Guṇasthāna** begins.  Thus, in the tenth **Guṇasthāna**,
there are a total of twenty **Sattā-Sthāna** from 101, 102, and 133 to 148. The
one who performs **Kṣapaka-Śreṇī** directly attains the tenth **Guṇasthāna** to
the twelfth **Guṇasthāna**.  **(11) Upaśānta-Moha Guṇasthāna** - In this
**Guṇasthāna**, there are sixteen **Sattā-Vikalpa** from 133 to 148. A being who
enters this **Guṇasthāna** will definitely fall down.  **(12) Kṣīṇa-Moha-
Vītaraaga Guṇasthāna** - At the end of the tenth **Guṇasthāna**, due to the
destruction of **Sanjvalana Lobha**, there are four **Vikalpa** with 101, 100,
97, and 16 **Prakṛtis**. And due to the destruction of **Nidrā** and **Pracalā**
in the **Dvicarama** time, there are four **Vikalpa** with 15 and 64
**Prakṛtis**. After this, at the end of the twelfth **Guṇasthāna**, due to the
destruction of fourteen **Prakṛtis** - **Darśana-Āvaraṇa-Catuṣka**, **Jñāna-
Āvaraṇa-Pañcaka**, and **Antarāya-Pañcaka** - the thirteenth **Guṇasthāna**
begins.  Thus, in the twelfth **Guṇasthāna**, there are eight **Vikalpa** - 64,
65, 26, 27, 68, 66, 100, and 101.  **(13) Sayogika-Kevalī-Guṇasthāna** - At the
end of the twelfth **Guṇasthāna**, due to the destruction of fourteen
**Prakṛtis**, the previous 94, 65, 68, and 66 - these...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 160 kamaMstava pariziSTa 101 kI aura AhArakacatuSkarahita tIrthaMkaranAmakarma
kI sattA vAle ko 8 kI aura tIrthaMkara nAmakarma tathA AhArakacatuSka kI bhI
sattA na ho to 67 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  isa guNasthAna ke anta meM
saMjvalana lobha kA bhI kSaya ho jAtA hai. taba bArahavA~ guNasthAna prArambha
hotA hai  /  isa prakAra dasaveM guNasthAna meM 101, 102 aura 133 se 148 taka ke
solaha sthAna kula milAkara bIsa sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  kSapakazreNI karane
vAlA sIdhA dasaveM guNasthAna se bArahaveM guNasthAna ko hI prApta karatA hai  /
(11) upazAntamoha guNasthAna - isa guNasthAna meM bhI 133 me lekara 148 taka ke
solaha sattAvikalpa hote haiM  /  isa guNasthAna meM AyA huA jIva avazya hI nIce
giratA hai  /  (12) kSINamohavItarAga guNasthAna- dasaveM guNasthAna ke anta meM
saMjvalana lobha kA kSaya hone se kramazaH 101, 100, 97 aura 16 prakRti vAle
cAra vikalpa hote haiM tathA dvicarama samaya meM nidrA aura pracalA kA kSaya
hone se kramaza: 15 aura 64 prakRti vAle cAra vikalpa hote haiN| isake anantara
bArahaveM guNasthAna ke anta meM darzanAvaraNacatuSka jJAnAvaraNapaMcaka tathA
antarAyapaMcaka kula milA kara caudaha prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hone para terahaveM
guNasthAna kI zurUAta hotI hai  /  r isa prakAra bArahave guNasthAna meM 64, 65,
26, 27, 68,66, 100 aura 101 - ye ATha vikalpa hote haiM  /  (13)
sayogikevalIguNasthAna- bArahaveM guNasthAna ke anta meM caudaha prakRtiyoM ke
kSaya hone se pUrva jo 94, 65, 68 aura 66 - ye

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix  There are four options, and from the
destruction of fourteen natures in them, there are eight sattva-sthana (states
of being) with four options: 80, 81, 84, and 85, in the 13th guna-sthana (state
of merit).  It should be understood that for those with the four types of aahara
(food) and tirthankara-nama-karma (karma related to becoming a Tirthankara),
there are 85 sattvas. If there is no tirthankara-nama-karma, there are 84
sattvas. If there are no four types of aahara, there are 81 sattvas. And if
there are no tirthankara-nama-karma and four types of aahara, a total of five
natures, then there are 80 sattvas. Thus, in this guna-sthana, there are four
sattva options with 80, 81, 84, and 85 natures.  **(14) Aayogika-kevali-guna-
sthana:** In this guna-sthana, until the end of the two extremes (dvicarama),
there are four sattva-sthana with 80, 81, 84, and 85 natures. After this, for
those with 85 sattvas, the destruction of any one, all, or some of the following
72 natures leads to the remaining 13 natures: devagati (heavenly path),
devānupūrvi (heavenly lineage), śubhavihāyoga (auspicious path), aśubhavihāyoga
(inauspicious path), two gandha (smells), eight sparśa (touches), five varṇa
(colors), five rasa (tastes), five śarīra (bodies), five bandha (bonds), five
saṃghātan (aggregations), nirmāṇa (creation), six saṃhanana (solidifications),
asthira (unstable), aśubha (inauspicious), durbhaga (unfortunate), duḥsvara (bad
voice), anādeya (unworthy of respect), ayaśa kīrti (bad reputation), six
saṃsthāna (establishments), aguru-caturṣka (four types of aguru), aparyāpta
(insufficient), sāta-asāta-vedanīya (painful and painless), sthira (stable),
śubha (auspicious), audārika-vaikriya (worldly transformation), āhārak-aṅgopāṅga
(food-related limbs), susvara (good voice), and nīca-gotra (low lineage).
According to another view, the destruction of 73 natures, including
manuşyānupūrvi (human lineage), leaves 12 natures.  For those without
tirthankara-nama-karma, the destruction of 12 natures leaves 12 natures.
According to another view, the destruction of 73 natures, including
manuşyānupūrvi, leaves 11 natures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa cAra vikalpa hue haiM, unameM se caudaha
prakRtiyoM ke kSaya hona se terahaveM guNasthAna meM ukta cAra vikalpoM ke
badale 80, 81, 84 aura 85 ye cAra vikalpa vAle sattAsthAna hote haiN| yaha
vizeSa samajhanA cAhie ki AhArakacatuSka aura tIrthakaranAmakarma ko sasA vAloM
ko 85 kI, tIrthakaranAmakarma kI sattA na ho to 84 kI, AhArakacatuSka na ho to
81 kI aura tIrthaMkaranAmakarma tathA AhArakacatuSka kula pA~ca prakRtiyoM kI
sattA na ho to 80 prakR. tiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| isa prakAra isa guNasthAna meM
80, 81, 84, aura 85 prakRtiyoM vAle cAra sattA vikalpa hote haiN| (14)
ayogikevalIguNasthAna :- isa guNasthAna meM dvicarama mamaya taka pUkti 80,
81.84 aura 85 prakRti vAle cAra sattAsthAna hote haiM  /  isake bAda 85
prakRtiyoM ke sattAsthAna vAle ke devagati, devAnupUrvI, zubhavihAyogati,
azubhavihAyogati, do gandha, ATha sparza, pA~ca varNa, pA~ca rasa, pA~ca zarIra,
pA~ca bandhana, pAMca saMghAtana, nirmANa, chaha saMhanana, asthira, azubha,
durbhaga, duHsvara, anAdeya, ayaza kIrti, chaha saMsthAna, agurula catuSka,
aparyApta, sAtA asAtA vedanIya meM se koI eka, pratyeka, sthira, zubha, audArika
vaikriya aura AhArakaaMgopAMga, susvara aura nIcagotra ina 72 prakRtiyoM ke
kSaya hone para 13 prakRtiyAM zeSa rahatI haiN| anya matAnusAra manuSyAnupUrvI
sahita 73 ke kSaya hone para 12 prakRtiyA~ zeSa rahatI haiN| tIrthakaranAmakarma
kI sattArahita jIvoM ke :12 prakRtiyoM ke kSaya hone para 12 prakRtiyA~ zeSa
rahatI haiM  /  dUsare matAnusAra manuSyAnupUrvI sahita 73 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya
hone para 11 prakRtiyA~ sattA meM rahatI haiN|

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **162**  The essence of the **karma** (karmic) **parishista**
(appendix) is that according to the author's view, there are 12 and 13
**prakritis** (karmic substances) and according to other views, there are 12 and
11 **prakritis**. If the **aaharaka-chaturshka** (four types of food) are not
present in the **satta** (existence), then 68 **prakritis** are destroyed.
Because the previously mentioned 72 **prakritis** include the **aaharaka-
chaturshka**, and the **aaharaka-chaturshka** are not present in the **satta**
of this being, therefore only 68 **prakritis** are destroyed.   Therefore, from
the **prakritis** of **manushya-gati** (human path), **panchendriya-jati**
(five-sense beings), **sa** (being), **badar** (bad karma), **paryapta**
(sufficient), **subhaga** (auspicious), **aadeya** (worthy of being given),
**yasha-kiriti** (fame and reputation), **tirthankara-namakarma** (karma of
becoming a Tirthankara), **uchcha-gotra** (high lineage), **manushya-ayu**
(human lifespan), **manushya-anupurvi** (human lineage), and **sata-asata-
vedaniya** (karmas that produce pleasant and unpleasant experiences), one of
these thirteen **prakritis** remains, and according to other views, twelve
**prakritis** remain without **manushya-anupurvi**.   However, for those who do
not have **tirthankara-namakarma** and **aaharaka-chaturshka** in their
**satta**, 68 **prakritis** are destroyed. But twelve **prakritis** remain
without **tirthankara-namakarma**. According to other views, eleven
**prakritis** remain without **manushya-anupurvi**.  Thus, according to the
author's view, 12 and 13 **prakritis** have **satta-sthan** (place of
existence), and according to other views, 11 and 12 **prakritis** have **satta-
sthan**, and 80, 81, 84, and 85 - these six **satta-sthan** are in the
fourteenth **guna-sthan** (stage of spiritual progress).   After that, in the
final time, all the remaining **prakritis** are destroyed, and after leaving the
**karman-sharira** (karmic body) which has an eternal connection, they become
free from birth and death and reside in **moksha** (liberation) for an infinite
time.  Thus, the description of the existence of **karma-prakritis** in the
fourteen **guna-sthan** is complete. For more information, see the **satta-
yantra** (chart of existence) provided alongside.  **Kalaganan** (Time
Calculation): In the **janavrishti** (rain of beings) scriptures, the time
indicators are **kal** (time), **avali** (period), **ghadi** (hour), **muhurta**
(auspicious time), **palyopam** (moment), ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 162 karmastava : pariziSTa sArAMza yaha hai ki granthakAra ke matAnusAra 12
aura 13 prakRtiyoM kA tathA anya matAnusAra 12 aura 11 prakRtiyoM ke sthAna hote
haiM tathA AhArakacatuSka sattA meM na ho to 68 prakRtiyoM kA kSaya hotA hai  /
kyoMki pahale kahI gayI 72 prakRtiyoM meM AhArakacatuSka kA grahaNa kiyA gayA
hai aura AhArakacatuSka to isa jIva ko sattA meM hI nahIM. hai, ataH 68
prakRtiyoM kA hI kSaya hotA hai| ataeva manuSyagati, paMcendriyajAti, sa,
bAdara, paryApta, subhaga, Adeya, yazaHkIti, tIrthakaranAmakarma, uccagotra,
manuSyAyu aura manuSyAnupUrvI, sAtAasAtA vedanIya meM se koI eka-ye teraha
prakRtiyAM aura anya matA. nusAra manuSyAnupUrvI ke binA bAraha prakRtiyA~ zeSa
rahatI hai  /  _ lekina jinake tIrthakaranAmakarma aura AhArAcatuSka sattA meM
na hoM, unake bho 68 pAniyA~ kSaya hotI haiM. parantu tIrthakAranAmakarma ke
binA bAraha prakRtiyA~ zeSa rahatI haiM  /  anya matAnusAra manuSyAnapUrvI ke
binA gyAraha prakRtiyA~ zeSa rahatI haiM  /  isa prakAra svamatAnusAra 12, 13
prakRtiyoM kA sattAsthAna tathA anya matAnusAra 11 aura 12 prakRtiyoM kA tathA
80, 81, 84 aura 85- ye chaH sattAsthAna caudahaveM guNasthAna meM hote haiN|
anantara carama samaya meM bAkI bacI huI samasta prakRtiyoM kA kSaya kara anAdi
sambandha vAle kArmaNazarIra ko chor3akara janma-maraNa se mukta ho mokSa meM
ananta kAla taka virAjamAna rahate haiM  /  isa prakAra caudaha guNasthAnoM meM
karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattA kA varNana pUrNa huA  /  vizeSa jAnakArI ke lie sAtha
meM diye gaye sattAyantra ko dekhie| kAlagaNanA : janavRSTi zAstroM meM kAla-
sUcaka samaya, AvalI, ghar3I, muhUrta, palyopama,

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix  The terms "Appendix" and "Adi" are used in
their original places. This indicates that time is not just a moment, but a
continuously changing flow. Modern scientists also consider time to be a flow
and have reached an understanding of its many subtle aspects. However, the
Agamas have elaborated on the existence of many subtle aspects within these
subtle aspects, proving its infinity.  This discussion is presented briefly for
the benefit of the inquisitive. For detailed information, one should refer to
texts like Jambudvipaprajnapti and other scriptures and works written by the
Acharyas.  Jain philosophy defines the group of six substances, including Jiva,
as Lok. Time is one of these six substances. Just as the characteristics,
distinctions, and other aspects of the other substances like Jiva are described
in the most subtle way, so is time.  Firstly, while explaining the substance of
time, it is stated that the substance which acts upon the Jiva and Ajiva
substances and helps in changing their new, old, and other states, is called
time. Although Dharma and other substances are inherently inclined to produce
their new states, these states do not occur without an external cooperative
cause, and that cooperative cause is the substance of time. The above
characteristic of the substance of time is evident from the literal meaning of
the word "time" itself.  "Kalyate, Kshipyate, Prayate Yena Kriyavad Dravyam Sa
Kaalah." The substance which causes the active substance to "Kalyate" (be
influenced), "Kshipyate" (be thrown), "Prayate" (be motivated), is the substance
of time. This substance of time itself does not undergo transformation. (Raj Va.
414222:12)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa Adi zabdoM kA yathAsthAna prayoga kiyA jAtA
hai| ina se yaha jJAta hotA hai ki kAla eka kSaNa mAna hI nahIM hai, lekina
kramabaddha dhArApravAha rUpa se parivartanazIla hai| Adhunika vaijJAnika bhI
kAla ko pravAhAtmaka mAnakara isake aneka sUkSma aMzoM kI jAnakArI taka pahuMca
cuke haiM  /  lekina AgamoM meM ina sUkSma aMzoM ke bhI aneka sUkSma aMza hone
kI vivecanA karake usakI anantatA ko siddha kiyA hai| yaha vivecanA jijJAsuoM ko
bodhaprada evaM jJAtavya hone se saMkSepa meM prastuta karate haiM  /  vizeSa
jAnakArI ke lie jambUdvIpaprajJapti Adi mAstra evaM AcAryoM ke dvArA racita
granthoM ko dekhanA caahie| jainadarzana meM jIvAdi chaha dravyoM ke samUha ko
loka kahA hai| ina chaha dravyoM meM kAla bhI eka hai| anya jIvAdi dravyoM kA
lakSaNa, bhedaprabheda Adi-Adi ke dvArA jisa prakAra kA mUkSmatama varNana kiyA
gayA hai, usI prakAra kAla kA bhI varNana kiyA hai| sarvaprathama kAladravya kI
vyAkhyA karate hue batAyA hai ki jo dravya jIva-ajIba dravyoM para baratatA hai,
evaM unakI navIna, purAtana Adi avasthAoM ke badalane meM nimitta rUpa se
sahAyatA karatA hai, use kAla kahate haiN| yadyapi dharmAdi dravya apanI nadIna
paryAya utpanna karane meM svayaM pravRtta hote haiM, tathApi vaha paryAya bhI
bAhya sahakArI kAraNa ke binA nahIM hotI hai aura vaha sahakArI kAraNa
kAladravya hai| kAladravya kA ukta lakSaNa svayaM kAla ke zAbdika artha se
dhvanita ho jAtA hai kalyate, kSipyate, prayate yena kriyAvad dravyaM sa kAlaH
/ ' jisake dvArA kriyAvAna dravya kalyate.... ..arthAta preraNA kiye jAte haiM,
vaha kAladravya hai| yaha kAladravya na to svayaM pariNamita hotA hai 1. rAja
vA0 414222:12

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Karmastava Parishishta: 164  And one does not transform into another form,
meaning it does not transform other substances by being a motivator, but time is
the cause for substances to attain various kinds of transformations on their
own. Now the question arises: Does time exist? How can we know this? The answer
is that time, cooking, etc., are given their own specific names like time,
cooking, etc., while also being attributed the name of time in the form of time,
kala, pakakala, etc. And from this name, the existence of the primary time is
known.  This time substance is innumerable, and the primary time is in the form
of existence. Thus, based on the primary time, the secondary time of practical
usage is known in the form of hours, minutes, days, nights, fortnights, months,
etc. And through these, the primary time in the form of transformation is known.
This primary time exists in the form of one atom on each region of the
lokaakasha. There are innumerable regions of the lokaakasha. Therefore, there
are also innumerable time atoms. The most subtle part of practical time is
called time, meaning time is the focal point of time calculation, and after
that, we know about nimisha, ghadi, day-night, etc. The cause of the origin of
these times, etc., is the celestial deities like Surya-Chandra, etc., who
constantly circumambulate Meru in this human world. Due to their movement, day-
night, etc., occur in the human world.  The most subtle part of the time
substance is called time, and the definition of time is that when the time atom
is situated on a particular region of space, when that region of space is
crossed by the pudgala atoms at a slow speed,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava pariziSTa : 164 aura na anya ko anya rUpa meM pariNamAtA hai, yAnI
preraka hokara anya dravyoM kA pariNamana nahIM karatA hai, kintu svataH nAnA
prakAra ke pariNAmoM ko prApta hone vAle padArthoM ke lie kAla kAraNa hotA hai
/  aba prazna hotA hai ki hai; kAvya kA astitva hai ? yaha kaise jAnA jAye ? to
isakA uttara yaha hai ki samayAdika kriyA vizeSoM kI aura samayAdi dvArA hone
vAle pAka Adika kI samaya, pAka ityAdi rUpa se apanI-apanI rauhika saMjJA ke
rahate hue bhI usameM samaya, kAla, pAkakAla ityAdi rUpa se kAla saMjJA kA Aropa
hotA hai aura isa saMjJA se nimittabhUta mukhya kAla ke astitva kA jJAna ho jAtA
hai  /  yaha kAladravya asaMkhyAta hai aura mukhya kAla vartanA rUpa hai  /  isa
prakAra mukhya kAla ke AdhAra se hI gauNa-vyavahAra kAla kA ghar3I. minaTa,
dina-rAta, pakSa, mAsa Adi ke rUpa meM aura inake dvArA parivartana rUpa mukhya
kAla kA jJAna karate haiM, yaha mukhya kAla eka-eka aNu ke rUpa meM lokAkAza ke
eka-eka pradeza para vidyamAna hai| lokAkAza ke asaMkhyAta pradeza haiM  /
attaH kAlANu bhI asaMkhyAta haiM  /  vyavahArakAla ke sabase sUkSmatama aMza kA
nAma samaya hai. yAnI kAlagaNanA kA kendrabindu samaya hai aura usake bAda
nimiSa, ghar3I, dina-rAta Adi ko hama jAnakArI karate haiM  /  ina samayAdi kI
utpatti kA kAraNa bhI isa manuSyaloka meM meru ko nitya pradakSiNA karane vAle
sUrya-candra Adi jyotiSI deva haiM  /  inakI gati se dina-rAtri Adi kA vyavahAra
manuSyaloka meM hotA hai  /  kAladravya ke sUkSmatama aMza ko samaya kahate haiM
aura samaya kI paribhASA yaha hai ki jisa AkAza pradeza para jo kAlANu avasthita
hai jaba usa AkAza pradeza ko pudgala paramANu mandagati se ullaMghana

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix  **165.** When a karmic particle reaches
another region, the time it takes to traverse that region is equal to the amount
of time that has passed, which is a subtle manifestation of the time substance.
This time is a synonym for the time aspect of the time substance.  **The
Division of Practical Time:** The most subtle unit of practical time is
**time**. All other subsequent units of time are calculated from this **time**.
This calculation is as follows:  * There are countless **avali** (avali-ka) of
**time**. * 256 avali-ka make one **kshullkabhava** (the smallest lifespan). *
17 **kshullkabhava** (which are equal to 4446 avali-ka) make one
**pranashvasochchhvas** (breath). * 7 **pranashvasochchhvas** make one
**stoka**. * 7 **stoka** make one **lava**. * 38.5 **lava** make one **ghadi**
(hour). * 2 **ghadi** make one **muhurta**. * 30 **muhurta** make one **din-
ratri** (day and night).  * One **muhurta** contains 65,536 **kshullkabhava**
and 16,777,216 **avali-ka**. * After one **din-ratri**, 15 **din-ratri** make
one **paksha** (fortnight). * 2 **paksha** make one **mas** (month). * 2 **mas**
make one **ritu** (season). * 3 **ritu** make one **ayana** (six months). * 2
**ayana** make one **varsha** (year). * 5 **varsha** make one **yuga** (epoch).
* 2 **yuga** make one **varsha-dashak** (decade of years). * And in subsequent
time periods after the **varsha-dashak**, the time is multiplied by 10.  **1.**
According to modern time calculations, the value of **uchchhvas**, **stoka**,
and **lava** can be expressed as follows:  * 1 **avali** = 1 second * 1
**uchchhvas** = 7 seconds * 1 **stoka** = 7 **uchchhvas** = 35 seconds * 1
**lava** = 7 **stoka** = 245 seconds * 1 **ghadi** = 38.5 **lava** = 24 minutes

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . -. da dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 165 kara anya pradeza para pahu~ca
jAtA hai to usa pradeza mAtra ke atikramaNa ke parimANa ke barAbara jo kAla
padArtha kI sUkSma vRtti rUpa samaya hai, vaha kAladravya kI samayarUpa paryAya
hai| vyavahArakAla ke bheda vyavahArakAla kA sabase sUkSmatama aMza samaya hai|
isa samaya ke pazcAta hI anya uttaravartI kAla kI gaNanA hotI hai| yaha gaNanA
isa prakAra hai asaMkhya samaya kI AvalI (AvAlakA) hotI hai aura 256 Ava. likA
kA eka kSullakabhava (saba se choTI Ayu, aura kucha adhika satrahabhavoM jo
sAdhika 4446 AvalikA pramANa hote haiM, kA eka prANazvAsocchvAsa hotA hai| sAta
prANa kA eka stoka, sAta stoka kA eka lava, sAr3he ar3atIsa latra kI eka ghar3I,
do ghar3I kA eka muhUrta, tIsa muharta kI eka dina-rAtri  /  eka muhUrta meM
65536 kSullakabhava hote haiM aura 16777216 Ali. kArya hotI haiM  /  eka dina-
rAtri ke anantara 15 dina-rAta kA eka pakSa, do pakSa kA eka mAsa, do mAsa kI
eka Rtu, tIna Rtu kA eka ayana (chaha mAsa), do ayana kA eka varSa, pA~ca varSa
kA eka yuga, do yuga kA eka varSa dazaka aura isa varSa dazaka ke uttarottara
samaya meM 10 se guNA 1. Adhunika samaya gaNita ke adhusAra ucchavAsa, stoka,
lava kA pramANa isa prakAra samakSa sakate haiMsaMkhyAta AvalI ! sakeMDa eka
ucchavAsa  /  7 ucchavAsa=5 sekeNDa stoka  /  7 stoka =3761 sekeNDa=laba  /
sAr3he ar3atIsa lava24 minaTa (ghdd'ii)| sara arte 5 Mm

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 166 ## Karmastathra: Parishishta  When performing calculations, numbers like
hundred, thousand, lakh, crore, arab, kharab, etc. are used, which are commonly
known. In Jain time mathematics, to calculate time beyond common knowledge,
terms like Purvaang, Purva, Trutitaang, Trut, etc. are mentioned, and the final
term is "Shirsha Prahelika".   One Purvaang consists of 84 lakh years, and
multiplying 84 lakh by 84 lakh gives the value of one Purva, which is 70 lakh
crore years. Multiplying this 28 times results in 54 digits with 140 zeros,
which is called "Shirsha Prahelika". Here, the limit of mathematical numbers
ends, and the time beyond this is explained through metaphors like "Palyopam"
and "Sagaropama".  ## Explanation of Palyopam and Sagaropama  Palyopam and
Sagaropama have been discussed in detail in the scriptures. Curious individuals
should refer to the relevant sections of the scriptures for specific knowledge.
Here, we are only providing a brief indication.  The scriptures explain the time
measurement of Palyopam and Sagaropama through examples. The example is as
follows:  A well four kos (one yojana) long, wide, and deep is filled by
dividing the countless strands of hair of the Devakuru and Uttar Kuru couples,
who live for seven days, into countless pieces and burying them in the well.
(a) The concept of time is collected in the Jambudvipa Pannaatti Kalaadhikari.
(b) Anuyogadwar 138 to 140. (c) Pravachana Sarodwar-Dwar 158, Gaya 1018-1026.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 166 karmastatra : pariziSTa karane para zata, sahala, lAkha, karor3a, araba,
kharaba Adi kI saMkhyA nikalatI jAtI hai, jise sAdhAraNa taura para sabhI jAnate
haiN| jaina samaya gaNita meM sAmAnya jJAna se Age ke samaya kI gaNanA karane ke
lie pUrvAMga, pUrva, truTitAMga, truTita Adi kA nAmollekha kiyA hai aura una
saba meM antima nAma zIrSa prahelikA hai| inameM 84 lAkha varSoM kA eka pUrvAMga
hotA hai aura 84 lAkha ko 84 lAkha se guNA karane para eka pUrva kA pramANa
nikalatA hai  /  jisameM 70 lAkha karor3a varSa hote haiN| aise 28 bAra guNA
karane se 54 aMkoM para 140 bindiyA~ A jAtI haiM, jise zIrSa prahelikA kahate
haiN| yahA~ gaNita saMkhyAta kI sImA samApta ho jAtI haiM aura isake Age kA kAla
palyopama, sAgaropama Adi upamAoM ke dvArA samajhAyA hai  /  palyopama-
sAgaropama kI vyAkhyA palyopama aura sAgaropama kA zAstroM meM atisUkSma rUpa se
vicAra kiyA gayA hai| jijJAsu jana vizeSa jJAna ke lie zAstroM ke sambandhita
aMza dekha leveM  /  yahA~ to saMkSepa meM unakA saMketa kiyA jA rahA hai|
zAstroM meM palyopama aura sAgaropama ke kAla pramANa ko udAharaNa dvArA
samajhAyA gayA hai  /  ukta udAharaNa isa prakAra hai cAra kosa (eka yojana)
lambA, caur3A aura gaharA kuA eka-dotIna yAvata sAta dina vAle devakuru
uttarakuru yugalikoM ke bAloM ke asaMkhya khaNDa karake unheM dabAkara isa
prakAra bharA jAye ki ve vAla1. (ka) kAla kA vicAra jambUdvIpa pannatti
kAlAdhikAra meM saMgrahIta hai  /  (kha) anuyogadvAra 138 se 140  /  (ga)
pravacanasArodvAra-dvAra 158 gAyA 1018-1026  /

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix 167  Chunks cannot fly in the air and the well
becomes packed. Then, one by one after every hundred, chunks go to the friend.
When the well becomes empty as the chunks leave, that is one **Palyopam** time
(which takes countless years). And ten **Kodakodi** (multiplying 10 crore by one
crore) **Palyopam** makes one **Sagropam**. Ten **Kodakodi** **Sagropam** makes
one **Avasarpini** time, and the same amount of time, i.e., ten **Kodakodi**
**Sagropam**, makes one **Utsarpini** time. Together, they make one
**Kalchakra** of twenty **Kodakodi** **Sagropam**. This happens only in the
Bharat and Airavat regions. There are infinite **Kalchakras** in one **Pudgal
Paravartan**. In other words, it can be called infinite time.  There are three
types of **Palyopam** and **Sagropam**: **Uddhar**, **Adha**, and **Kshetra**.
These three types are further divided into two types each, based on **Vyavahar**
and **Sookshma**, making a total of six types. The **Adha** type of islands and
oceans is used to count the substances in **Dristivad** based on the differences
in **Karma Sthiti** etc.  **Time** can be **Sankhyat**, **Asankhyat**, and
**Anant** **Uddhar** and **Kshetra**  1. Time is infinite in the form of
**Pudgal Paravartan**, and it is also **Sankhyat** and **Asankhyat**. Generally,
what can be counted is **Sankhyat**, what is beyond count is **Asankhyat**, and
what has no end is **Anant**. Among these, **Sankhyat** time is finite.
**Asankhyat** is also finite, but even though it is being spent, it never ends.
Therefore, the difference between **Asankhyat** and **Anant** is that the amount
that ends when one by one number is subtracted, i.e., the amount that is
exhausted, is **Asankhyat**. And...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 167 khaNDa havA meM na ur3a sakeM aura kUpa
ThasAThasa bhara jaaye| phira sau-sau ke bAda eka-eka khaNDa mitrAlA jAye,
vikalate-nikalate jaba vaha kuMA khAlI ho jAye, taba vaha eka palyopama kAla
hotA hai (isameM asaMkhya varSa lagate haiM)  /  tathA dasa kor3Akor3I ( 10
karor3a ko eka karor3a se guNA karanA) patyopama kA eka sAgaropama hotA hai  /
dasa koDAkor3a sAgaropama kA eka avasarpiNI kAla aura itane hI kAla arthAt dasa
kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kA eka utsarpiNI kAla hotA hai  /  donoM ko milAkara bIsa
kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kA eka kAlacaka kahalAtA hai  /  jo bharata aura airAvata
kSetroM meM hI hotA hai  /  aise ananta kAlacakroM kA eka pudgala parAvartana
hotA hai  /  dUsare zabdoM meM ise anantakAla kaha sakate haiM  /  palyopama
aura sAgaropama ke uddhAra, addhA aura kSetra yaha tIna bheda haiM  /  aura yaha
tInoM bheda bhI vyavahAra tathA sUkSma ke bheda se do-do prakAra ke ho jAne se
kula milAkara chaha bheda ho jAte haiM dvIpa samudroM kI addhA bheda ke dvArA
karmasthiti Adi kI bheda se dRSTivAda meM dravyoM kI gaNanA kI jAtI hai  /   /
kAla ke saMkhyAta, asaMkhyAta, ananta rUpa uddhAra se tathA kSetra 1 pudgala
parAvartana ke rUpa meM kAla ananta hai, vaise hI vaha saMkhyAta,
asaMkhyAtAtmaka bhI hai| sAmAnyatayA jisakI ginatI kI jA sake, jaMga saMkhyAta
saMkhyAtIta ko asaMkhyAta aura jisakA anta nahIM hai use ananta kahate haiN|
inameM se saMkhyAta samaya sAnta rUpa ho hotA hai  /  asaMkhyAta bhI sAnta hai,
lekina ananta kA vyaya hote hue bhI usakA kabhI anta nahIM AtA hai| isIlie
asaMkhyAta aura ananta meM yaha antara haiM ki eka - eka saMkhyA ko ghaTAte jAne
para jisa rAzi kA anta A jAye barthAt jo rAzi samApta ho jAtI hai, vaha
asaMkhyAta hai  /  aura

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 165 **Appendix**  That which has no end, that which does not finish, is
called infinite.  The distinctions between countable, uncountable, and infinite,
and their explanations should be understood as follows:  There are three types
of countable: **jghannya**, **madhyama**, and **utkrista**. 'One' is not a
count. It is the nature of the object. Therefore, the count that begins with two
is called counting, meaning there is one number, but the count begins with two,
such as two, three, four, etc. In this count, two is called **jghannya
sankhyata** and the numbers from three to one less than **utkrista** are called
**madhyama sankhyata**.  The nature of **utkrista sankhyata** is as follows:
Imagine three wells (**palyas**) with a circumference equal to the circumference
of Jambudvipa. That is, the circumference of each **paly** is three lakh sixteen
thousand two hundred twenty-seven yojanas, three kos, 128 dhanush, and slightly
more than thirteen and a half angulas. Each has a length and width of one lakh
yojanas. The depth is one thousand yojanas, and the height is equal to the
vedika of Jambudvipa (eight yojanas). The names of these three **palyas** are
**shalaka**, **prati-shalaka**, and **maha-shalaka**, respectively.  First,
imagine filling the **shalaka paly** completely with mustard seeds. Then,
imagine a person taking one seed and dropping it into Jambudvipa, one seed into
the salt ocean, and so on, dropping one seed into each island and ocean. When
the mustard seeds are exhausted in a particular island or ocean, a vast,
uncountable **paly** is created. Then, fill this **paly** with mustard seeds and
drop one seed into the **shalaka paly**, and then continue dropping seeds into
the islands and oceans in the same way as before. In this way, imagine vast,
uncountable **palyas**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 165 kamastava : pariziSTa jisa rAzi kA anta nahIM AtA, jo rAzi samApta nahIM
hotI, use ananta kahate haiM  /  saMkhyAta, asaMkhyAta aura ananta ke bheda aura
unakI vyAkhyA nIce likhe anusAra samajhanA caahie| saMkhyAta ke tIna bheda haiM-
jadhanya madhyama aura utkRSTa  /  'eka' ginatI nahIM hai| vaha to vastu kA
svarUpa hai, ata do me prArambha hone vAlI ginatI ko gaNanA kahate haiM yAnI eka
saMkhyA to avazya hai lekina gaNanA kA prArambha do se hotA hai, jaise do, tIna,
cAra Adi  /  isa gaNanA meM do saMkhyA ko jaghanya saMkhyAta aura tIna se lekara
utkRSTa se eka kama taka kI saMkhyA ko madhyama saMkhyAta kahate haiM  /
utkRSTa saMkhyAta kA svarUpa isa prakAra hai- kalpanA se jambudvIpa ko paridhi
jitane tIna palya (kue) mAne jAyeM arthAt pratyeka patya kI paridhi tIna lAkha
solaha hajAra do sau sattAisa yojana tIna kosa 128 dhanuSa aura sAr3he teraha
aMgula se kucha adhika ho| eka-eka lAkha yojana ko lambAI caur3AI ho  /  eka
hajAra yojana kI gaharAI tathA jambUdvIpa kI vedikA jitanI (ATha yojana) UMcAI
ho  /  ina tIna palyoM ke nAma kramazaH zalAkA, pratizalAkA evaM mahAzalAkA ho
/  sarvaprathama zalAkA patya ko sarasoM meM paripUrNarUpa se bharakara meM
kalpanA se koI vyakti eka dAnA jambUdvIpa meM, eka dAnA lavaNa samudra isa
prakAra pratyeka dvIpa samudra meM DAlate DAlate jisa dvIpa yA samudra meM ve
sarasoM ke dAne samApta ho jAyeM, itane vistAra vAlA eka anavasthita palya
banAyA jAye phira use sarasoM se bharakara eka dAnA zalAkA palya meM DAlakara
pahale DAle hue dvIpa samudra ke Age pUrvavata DAlatA jAye  /  isa prakAra bar3e
vistAra vAle anavasthita palyoM kI kalpanA karate hue

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karmagramya: Appendix  And while placing one grain at a time into the
*Shalaka Palya*, when the *Shalaka Palya* is filled to the point where it cannot
hold even one more grain, and the *Anvastthit Palya* is also completely full,
then place one grain from the *Shalaka Palya* into the *PratiShalaka Palya* and
then continue placing grains into the subsequent islands and oceans. When the
*Shalaka Palya* is empty, then again, imagine new *Anvastthit Palya* of
progressively larger sizes and fill them in the same manner. When they are full,
place one grain into the *PratiShalaka Palya* and empty the remaining grains
into the island oceans. In this way, fill the *Shalaka Palya* from the
*Anvastthit* and the *PratiShalaka Palya* from the *Anvastthit Shalaka*.  After
filling the *PratiShalaka Palya*, place one grain into the *MahaShalaka Palya*
and empty the *PratiShalaka Palya* into the island oceans using the previous
method. When all four *Palya* are completely filled by filling the *MahaShalaka*
from the *Anvastthit Shalaka*, the *PratiShalaka* from the *Anvastthit Shalaka*,
and the *MahaShalaka* from the *Anvastthit Shalaka* and *PratiShalaka*, then
make a pile of these mustard seeds. If one grain is removed from this pile, then
it is considered an *Utkrushta Sankhyat*.  There are nine types of *Asankhyat*:
1. If one grain is added to the aforementioned *Utkrushta Sankhyat*, then it is
the first type of *Asankhyat* called *Jghanya Parita Sankhyat*. 2. The number
between the first and third types of *Asankhyat* is the second type of
*Asankhyat* called *Madhyama Parita Sankhyat*. 3. The number of grains in the
first type of *Asankhyat* is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagramya : pariziSTa evaM zalAkA palya meM eka-eka dAnA DAlate hue
jaba zalAkA patya itanA bhara jAye ki usameM eka dAnA bhI na samA sake aura
anavasthita palya bhI pUrA bharA huA ho| usa sthiti meM zalAkA palya se eka dAnA
pratizalAkA palya meM DAle aura phira Age ke dvIpa samudroM meM DAlatA jaaye|
jaba vaha zalAkA palya khAlI ho jAye to phira use pahale kI taraha uttarottara
adhikAdhika vistAra vAle naye-naye anavasthita palyoM kI kalpanA karake unheM
bhre| jaba ve pUre ho jAya naba eka dAnA pratizalAkA palya meM DAlakara zeSa
dAne dvIpa samudra meM DAlatA huA khAlI kre| isa prakAra anabasthita se zalAkA
aura anavasthita zalAkA se pratizalAkA palya ko bhara de| usake bharane ke bAda
eka dAnA mahAzalAkA palya meM DAlakara pUrva vidhi se pratizalAkA palya ko dvIpa
samudroM meM khAlI kare  /  aise anavasthita se zalAkA, anavasthita zalAkA se
pratizalAkA tathA anavasthita zalAkA-pratizalAkA me mahAzalAkA ko bharane para
jaba cAroM palya pUre bhara jAyeM taba unake sarasoM ke dAnoM kA eka Dhera
lagAye  /  usa Dhera meM se yadi eka dAnA nikAla liyA jAye to vaha utkRSTa
saMkhyAta hai| asaMkhyAta ke nau bheda isa prakAra haiM 1. ukta utkRSTa
saMkhyAMta meM yadi eka dAnA aura milA diyA jAya to vaha asaMkhyAta kA pahalA
bheda jaghanya parItAsaMkhyAta hai  /  2. pahale aura tIsare bheda ke bIca kI
saMkhyA asaMkhyAta kA dUsarA bheda madhyama parItAsaMkhyAta hai| 3. asaMkhyAta
ke prathama bheda ke dAnoM kI jitanI saMkhyA hai, unakA

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 170 **Appendix**  **3. Utkrushta Parita Sankhyat:**  The third type of
Asankhyat is called Utkrushta Parita Sankhyat. It is obtained by multiplying the
individual heaps of a number with each other (Anyonyabhyas) and then subtracting
one grain from the resulting number.  **4. Jghanya Yukta Sankhyat:**  The fourth
type of Asankhyat is called Jghanya Yukta Sankhyat. It is obtained by adding one
grain to the amount of the third type of Asankhyat. There are this many
Asankhyat moments in one Aavali.  **5. Madhyama Yukta Sankhyat:**  The number
between the fourth and sixth types of Asankhyat is called Madhyama Yukta
Sankhyat.  **6. Utkrushta Yukta Sankhyat:**  The sixth type of Asankhyat is
called Utkrushta Yukta Sankhyat. It is obtained by multiplying the amount of
mustard seeds in the fourth type of Asankhyat with each other and then
subtracting one grain from the resulting number.  **7. Jghanya Sankhyata
Sankhyat:**  The seventh type of Asankhyat is called Jghanya Sankhyata Sankhyat.
It is obtained by adding one grain to the amount of mustard seeds in the sixth
type of Asankhyat.  **8. Madhyama Sankhyata Sankhyat:**  The number between the
seventh and ninth types of Asankhyat is called Madhyama Sankhyata Sankhyat.
**9. Utkrushta Sankhyata Sankhyat:**  The ninth type of Asankhyat is called
Utkrushta Sankhyata Sankhyat. It is obtained by multiplying the amount of
mustard seeds in the seventh type of Asankhyat with each other and then
subtracting one grain from the resulting number.  **10. Difference between
Anyonyabhyas and Multiplication:**  When you multiply five by five, the result
is 5 x 5 = 25. However, when you perform Anyonyabhyas, the result is 3125. This
is because in Anyonyabhyas, you first establish five fives (5-5-5-5-5) and then
multiply them with each other. For example, 5 x 5 = 25, 25 x 5 = 125, 125 x 5 =
625, 625 x 5 = 3125.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 170 kamastava : pariziSTa anyonyAbhyAsa' karane para arthAt unake alaga-alaga
Dhera lagAkara phira unakA paraspara guNA karane para jo saMkhyA Aye, usameM se
eka dAnA kama karane para asaMkhyAta kA tIsarA bheda utkRSTa parItAsaMkhyAta
kahalAtA hai| 4. asaMkhyAta ke tIsare bheda kI rAzi meM eka dAnA milAne para
asaMkhyAta kA cauthA bheda jaghanya yuktAsaMkhyAta banatA hai| eka AvalI meM
itane hI asaMkhya samaya hote haiN| 5. cauthe aura chaThe ke bIca ko saMkhyA ko
madhyama yuktAsaMkhyAta kahate haiN| 6. asaMkhyAta ke cauthe bheda ke sarasoM kI
rAzi ko paraspara guNA karane se prApta rAzi meM se eka dAnA nikAlane para
asaMkhyAta kA chaThavoM bheda utkRSTa yuktAsaMkhyAta kahalAtA hai| 7. chaThe
bheda ke sarasoM kI rAzi meM eka dAnA milAna para jaghanyAsaMkhyAtAsaMkhyAta
kahalAtA hai| 8. sAtaveM aura nauveM bheda ke bIca kI saMkhyA
madhyamAsasaMkhyAtAsaMkhyAta hai| 6. sAtaveM bheda kI sarSaparAzi kA
anyonyAbhyAsa karane se prApta rAzi meM se eka dAnA kama karane para prApta hone
vAlI rAzi utkRSTAsaMkhyAtAsaMkhyAta kahalAtI hai| 1. anyonyAbhyAsa aura guNA meM
antara pA~ca ko pAMca se guNA karane para 545=25 hote haiN| aura anyonyAbhyAsa
karane se 3125 hote haiM  /  sarvaprathama 5-5-5-5-5 isa taraha ko pAMca ko
pAMca jagaha sthApita karake phira eka dUsare se guNA kiyA jAtA hai jaise
545=25, 2545= 125, 12545-625, 62545=3125  /

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix 171  The eight types of infinity are as
follows:  1. **Jghanya Paritaananta:** The first type of infinity is obtained by
adding one to the number of the ninth type of Asankhyata. 2. **Madhyama
Paritaananta:** The number between the first and third types of infinity is
called Madhyama Paritaananta. 3. **Utkrisht Paritaananta:** The third type of
infinity is obtained by subtracting one from the number obtained by multiplying
the number of the first type of infinity by itself. 4. **Jghanya Yuktaananta:**
The fourth type of infinity is obtained by adding one to the number of the third
type of infinity. 5. **Madhyama Yuktaananta:** The number between the fourth and
sixth types of infinity is called Madhyama Yuktaananta. 6. **Utkrisht
Yuktaananta:** The sixth type of infinity is obtained by subtracting one from
the number obtained by multiplying the number of the fourth type of infinity by
itself. 7. **Jghanyaanananta:** The seventh type of infinity is obtained by
adding one to the number of the sixth type of infinity. 8. **Madhyamaanananta:**
All numbers beyond Jghanyaanananta are called the eighth type of infinity,
Madhyamaanananta.  These eight types are according to the Agamas. Some Acharyas
have considered "Utkrishtanananta" as the ninth type, but it is debatable as it
is not supported by the Agamas.  1. Multiply the numbers of the seventh type of
infinity three times and then add the following six infinite things:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 171 ananta ke ATha bheda isa prakAra haiM 1.
asaMkhyAta ke nauveM bheda kI saMkhyA meM eka milAne para ananta kA pahalA bheda
hotA hai| jise jaghanya parItAnanta kahate haiM  /  2. ananta ke pahale aura
tIsare bheda ke bIca kI saMkhyA madhyama parItAnanta kahalAtI hai  /  3. ananta
ke pahale bheda kI saMkhyA kA anyonyAbhyAsa karane meM prApta saMkhyA meM se eka
kama karane para ananta kA tIsarA bheda hotA hai  /  use utkRSTa parItAnanta
kahate haiM  /  4. ananta ke tIsare bheda kI saMkhyA meM eka milAne para ananta
kA cauthA bheda jaghanya yuktAnanta kahalAtA hai  /  5. ananta ke cauthe aura
chaThe bheda ke bIca kI saMkhyA madhyama yuktAnanta hai | 6. ananta ke cauthe
bheda kI saMkhyA kA paraspara guNA karane para prApta saMkhyA meM se eka kama
karane para ananta kA chaThA bheva utkRSTa yuktAnanta kahalAtA hai  /  7. ananta
ke chaThe bheda kI saMkhyA meM eka milAne se ananta kA sAtavA~ bheda
jaghanyAnantAnanta kahalAtA hai  /  8. jayanyAnantAnanta ke Age kI saba saMkhyA
ananta kA AThavA bheda madhyamAnantAnanta kahalAtA hai  /  yaha ATha bheda
AgamAnusAra haiN| kinhIM AcAryoM ne utkRSTAnantAnanta' yaha nauvA~ bheda mAnA
hai kintu vaha Agama samarthita na hone se vicAraNIya hai  /  1. ananta ke
sAsaveM bheda kI saMkhyAoM ko tIna bAra guNA kare phira usameM nimnalikhita
chaha ananta vastuoM ko milAye -

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 172 **Karmastava: Parishista** **Pudgalparavartan: Lakshana and Meva**  It
has been previously indicated that the time in the form of Pudgalparavartan is
infinite. This infinite is equal to the infinite Utsarpini and the infinite
Avasarpini. Therefore, some special descriptions are given here in relation to
it! This Lok is filled with many types of Pudgal Varganas. These Varganas are
both grahanyogya (grasp-able) and agrahanayogya (ungrasp-able). While the
agrahanayogya Varganas exist but are not grasped, the grahanyogya Varganas have
both the ability to be grasped and ungrasped. Such grahanyogya Varganas are of
eight types:  1. Audarik Sharia Vargana, 2. Vaikriya Sharia Vargana, 3. Aharak
Sharia Vargana, 4. Tejas Sharia Vargana, 5. Bhasha Vargana, 6. Pravasouchchvas
Vargana, 7. Manova Vargana, 8. Karman Vargana.  These Varganas are increasingly
subtle from the least to the most. And their comprehension is also increasingly
less, in the measure of countless parts of a finger.  Out of the above mentioned
grahanyogya Varganas, excluding the Aharak Sharia Vargana, 1. Siddha, 2. Nigoda
Jisha, 3. Every ordinary plant, 4. Past, future, present, time of all three
periods, 5. All Pudgal Paramanu, 6. Alokaakash. After combining these six, the
amount obtained is multiplied three times, and if only knowledge and only vision
are added as synonyms, then it will be called Utkrishtaanantanant.   1. (a) A
group of Pudgal of the same type is called Vargana. (b) Panchasangrah Ga. 15
(Bandhan Karan), Aavashyakaniyukti Ga. 36.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 172 karmastava : pariziSTa pudgalaparAvartana : lakSaNa va meva yaha pahale
saMketa kiyA gayA hai ki pudgalaparAvartanarUpa kAla ananta hai| yaha ananta
utsarpiNI aura ananta avasarpiNI ke barAbara hotA hai  /  ataH usake sambandha
meM yahA~ kucha vizeSa varNana karate haiM ! _ yaha loka aneka prakAra kI
pudgala vargaNAoM se bharA huA hai  /  ye varmaNAe~ grahaNayogya bhI haiM aura
ayogya (agrahaNayogya) bhI hai| agrahaNayogya vargaNAe~ to apanA astitva rakhate
hue bhI grahaNa nahIM kI jAtI haiM, lekina grahaNayogya vargaNAoM meM bhI
grahaNa aura agrahaNa rUpa donoM prakAra kI yogyatA hotI hai| aisI grahaNayogya
vargaNAeM ATha prakAra kI haiM 1. audArikazarIravargaNA, 2.
vaikriyazarIravargaNA, 3. AhArakazarIravargaNA. 4. tejaszarIravargaNA, 5.
bhASAvargaNA, 6. pravAsocchvAsavargaNA. 7 manovargaNA, 8. kArmaNavargaNA  / ' ye
vargaNAe~ kama se uttarottara sUkSma hotI haiM  /  aura inako avagAhanA bhI
uttarottara nyUna aMgula ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa hotI hai  /  ukta
grahaNayogya vargaNAoM meM se AhArakazarIravargaNA ko chor3akara 1. siddha, 2.
nigoda jISa. 3. pratyeka sAdhAraNa vanaspati, 4. bhUta, bhaviSya, vartamAna,
tInoM kAloM ke samaya, 5. saba pudgala paramANa, 6. alokAkAza  /  ina chahoM ke
milAne ke bAda jo rAzi prApta ho, use tIna bAra guNA karake yadi kevalajJAna
aura kebaladarzana ko paryAya milA dI jAye to use utkRSTAnantAnanta kaheMge  /
1. (ka) samAna jAtIya pudgaloM ke samUha ko vargaNA kahate haiM  /  (kha)
paMcasaMgraha gA0 15 (bandhana kAraNa), Avazyakaniyukti gA0 36 !

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix  **2**  The act of a living being touching all
the pudgalas of the entire lokaakasha, while consuming the material substances
in the form of the remaining audarika and other types, is called
pudgalparavartan.  An infinite number of kalachakra pass in one mudgaparnal. One
kalachakra is equal to 20 kotakoti samaropama, in comparison to adhapatyopama.
There are four main types of pudgalparavartan:  1. Dravya pudgalparavartan 2.
Kshetra pudgalparavartan 3. Kal pudgalparavartan 4. Bhav pudgalparavartan  And
each of these four has two types: baadar and sukshma. Thus, there are eight
types of pudgalparavartan:  1. Baadar dravya pudgalparavartan 2. Sukshma dravya
pudgalparavartan 3. Baadar kshetra pudgalparavartan 4. Sukshma kshetra
pudgalparavartan 5. Baadar kal pudgalparavartan 6. Sukshma kal pudgalparavartan
7. Baadar bhav pudgalparavartan 8. Sukshma bhav pudgalparavartan  The
explanation of these eight types is as follows:  1. **Baadar Dravya
Pudgalparavartan:** The time taken by a living being to consume all the atoms
residing in the entire loka, in all seven varganas except the
aharakashariravrgana, in the form of the remaining audarikasarira and other
types.  **Note:** Digambara Acharyas consider bhav paravartan as an additional
type of pudgalparavartan, apart from these four. Bhav paravartan is the journey
of a living being from the smallest lifespan in hell to the lifespan of a vevak
vimana, taking the shortest possible time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 2 zeSa audArikAdi prakAra se rUpI dravyoM ko
grahaNa karate hue eka jIva dvArA samasta lokAkAza ke pudgaloM kA sparza karanA
pudgalaparAvartana kahalAtA hai  /  eka mudgaparnala vyatIta hone meM ananta
kAlacaka laga jAte haiM  /  addhApatyopama kI apekSA se 20 koTAkoTi sAmaropama
kA eka kAlacakra hotA hai  /  pudgalaparAvartana ke mukhya cAra bheda haiM 1.
dravya pudgalaparAvartana, 2. kSetra pudgalaparAvartana, 3. kAla
pudgalaparAvartana, 4 bhAva pudgalaparAvartana  / ' aura ina cAroM ke bhI bAdara
aura sUkSma yaha do-do prakAra ke hote haiN| isa prakAra meM pudgalaparAvartana
ke nimnalikhita ATha bheda haiM 1. bAdara dravya pudgalaparAvartana, 2 sUkSma
dravya pudgalaparAvartana, 3. bAdara kSetra pudgalaparAvartana, 4. sUkSma kSetra
pudgalaparAvartana, 5. bAdara kAla pudgalaparAvartana 6. sUkSma kAla
pudgalaparAvartana, 7. bAdara bhAva pudgalaparAvartana, 8. sUkSma bhAva
pudgalaparAvartana | ina ATha bhedoM kI vyAkhyA kramazaH nimna prakAra hai - 1.
bAdara dravya pudgalaparAvartana - jitane kAla meM eka jIva samasta loka meM
rahane vAle samasta paramANuoM ko AhArakazarIravargaNA ke sivAya zeSa
audArikazarIra Adi sAtoM vargaNArUpa meM grahaNa karake 1. digambarAcAryoM ne
ina cAra pudgalaparAvartanoM ke atirikta vibheda ma pudgaparAvartana mAnA hai  /
susaH jIva kA naraka kI choTI se choTI Ayu lekara vevaka vimAna taka kI Ayu ko
samaya kama se prApta kara bhramaNa karanA bhava parAvartana hai |

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **174** When a soul abandons all the atoms of the universe,
after having transformed them into all seven categories, including Audarik, that
period is called **Badar Dravya Pudgal Paravartan**. In essence, every atom in
the universe undergoes transformation through the seven categories, starting
with Audarik. When a soul acquires all the atoms of the universe in the form of
Audarik and other categories, a Badar Dravya Pudgal Paravartan occurs.
**Appendix:**  **2. Sukshma Dravya Pudgal Paravartan:** When a soul, over time,
acquires all the atoms in the form of any one category, including Audarik, and
then abandons them, that period is called **Sukshma Dravya Pudgal Paravartan**.
This means that when a soul transforms all the atoms of the universe into the
Audarik form, if it acquires Vayik Pudgal in between, that period is not
counted. Only the acquisition of atoms transformed into the Audarik form is
considered. The same understanding applies to other categories like Vaishrir,
etc.  **3. Badar Kshetra Pudgal Paravartan:** When a soul, upon death, touches
all the regions of the Lokakasha (universe) in sequence or without sequence, in
the same order as they are formed, that period is called **Badar Kshetra Pudgal
Paravartan**. If a soul dies in a region and then dies again in the same region,
it is not counted. Only those regions where death has not occurred before are
counted. Although a soul resides in countless regions, one region can be
considered as the main one for counting.  **4. Sukshma Kshetra Pudgal
Paravartan:** When a soul, while wandering in the universe, dies in one region
of the sky and then dies again in another region adjacent to it, and then again
in another region adjacent to that, it is called **Sukshma Kshetra Pudgal
Paravartan**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 174 chor3a detA hai, utane kAla ko bAdara dravya pudgalaparAvartana kahate haiM
/  sArAMza yaha hai ki vizva ke pratyeka paramANu audArika Adi sAtoM vargaNAoM
meM pariNamana kareM yAnI jaba jIva sAre loka meM vyApta sabhI paramANuoM ko
audArikAdi rUpa se prApta kara le taba eka bAdara dravya pudgalaparAvartana hotA
hai  /  kamastana pariziSTa : 2. sUkSma dravya pudgalaparAvartana - jisane kAla
meM samasta paramANuoM ko audArika zarIra Adi sAta vargaNAoM meM se kisI eka
vargaNA rUpa se grahaNa karake chor3a detA hai, usa kAla ko sUkSma dravya
pudgalaparAvartana kahate haiM  /  isakA artha yaha hai ki jisa samaya jIva
sarva lokavartI aNuoM kI audArika rUpa meM pariNamAtA hai, agara usa samaya ke
bIca meM vaiyi pudgaloM ko grahaNa kara le to usa samaya ko ginatI meM nahIM
lenA  /  kintu madArika rUpa meM pariNata aNuoM kA hI grahaNa karanA  /  isa
prakAra vaizirIra vargaNA Adi anya vargaNAoM ke lie bhI samajhanA cAhie | 3.
bAbara kSetra pudgalaparAvartana- eka jIva apane maraNa ke dvArA lokAkAza ke
samasta pradezoM ko krama se yA binA krama me jaise bane vaise jitane samaya meM
sparza kara letA hai, use bAdara kSetra pudgalaparAvartana kahate haiN| jisa
pradeza meM eka bAra mRtyu prApta kara cukA hai agara usI pradeza meM phira
mRtyu prApta kare to vaha isameM nahIM ginA jAyegA | kevala cehI pradeza gine
jAyeMge, jinameM pahale mRtyu prApta nahIM kI hai  /  yadyapi jIva asaMkhyAta
pradezoM meM rahatA hai phira bhI kisI pradeza ko mukhya mAna kara ginatI kI jA
sakatI hai  /  I 4. sUkSma kSetra pugalaparAvartana koI jIva saMsAra meM
bhramaNa karate hue AkAza ke kisI eka pradeza meM maraNa karake punaH usa
pradeza ke samIpavartI dUsare pradeza meM maraNa karatA hai  /  punaH usake
nikaTavartI

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix 175  **3. Subtle Region Pudgala Paravartan:**
When a being dies in an infinite number of regions, one after another, and
eventually dies in all the regions of the Lokakasha, it is called Subtle Region
Pudgala Paravartan. The difference between Badar and Subtle Region Pudgala
Paravartan is that in Badar, the order of the regions is not considered, while
in Subtle, the order of the regions is considered.  **5. Badar Kala Pudgala
Paravartan:** When a being touches each moment of a Kalachakra, which is equal
to countless oceans, in order or out of order, through its death, it is called
Badar Kala Pudgala Paravartan. If the being dies a second time in the same
moment, it is not counted. Thus, when the being touches each moment of the
Kalachakra, Badar Kala Pudgala Paravartan is complete.  **6. Subtle Kala Pudgala
Paravartan:** When a being touches each moment of the Kalachakra in order
through death, it is called Subtle Kala Pudgala Paravartan. If the moments are
touched out of order, it is not considered. For example, if the first moment is
touched and then the third moment is touched, it will not be counted. In other
words, touching the moments of the Kalachakra in a sequential manner, and
touching all the moments of the Kalachakra, is Subtle Kala Pudgala Paravartan.
**7. Badar Bhava Pudgala Paravartan:** When a being touches all the Kshaya
Sthanas, due to the cause of Anubhagabandh, through its death, i.e., when it
dies once in all the results of Mand, Mandatar, etc., it is called Badar Bhava
Pudgala Paravartan.  **8. Subtle Bhava Pudgala Paravartan:** Due to the cause of
Anubhagabandh...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 175 tIsare pradeza meM maraNa karatA hai| isa
prakAra anantara-anantara pradeza meM maraNa karate hue jaba samasta lokAkAza ke
pradezoM meM maraNa kara letA hai, taba use sUkSma kSetra pudgalaparAvartana
kahate haiN| bAdara aura sUkSma kSetra pudgalaparAvartana meM itanA antara hai
ki bAdara meM to kSetra ke pradezoM ke krama kA vicAra nahIM kiyA jAtA hai aura
sUkSma meM kSetra-pradeza ke krama kA vicAra hotA hai| 5. bAvara kAla
pudgalaparAvartana-nIsa koTA-koTI sAgaropama ke eka kAlacakra ke pratyeka samaya
ko krama me yA akrama me jIva apane maraNa dvArA sparza kara letA hai to use
bAdara kAla pudgalaparAvartana kahate haiN| jaba eka hI samaya meM jIva dUsarI
bAra maraNa prApta kara letA hai to vaha usameM nahIM ginA jAtA hai| isa prakAra
aba bha . huA jIva kAlacakra ke pratyeka samaya ko sparza kara letA hai| taba
vaha bAdara kAla pudgalaparAvartana pUrA hotA hai| 6. sUkSma kAla
pudgalaparAvartana-kAlacakra ke pratyeka samaya ko jIva jaba kramazaH mRtyu
dvArA sparza karatA hai to vaha sUdhama-kAla pudgala parAvartana hai| akrama se
samaya ko sparza kiyA to usakA isameM grahaNa nahIM hotA hai| jaisA ki agara
pahale samaya ko sparza kara tIsare samaya ko sparza kara le to vaha ginatI meM
nahIM liyA jaayegaa| yAnI kramabaddha rUpa se kAlacakra ke samayoM ko sparza
kara pUre kAlacakra ke samayoM ko sparza karanA sUkSma kAla pudgala parAvartana
hai  /  7. bAdara bhAva pudgalaparAvartana-anubhAgabandha ke kAraNa rUpa samasta
kaSAyasthAnoM ko jIva apanI mRtyu dvArA sparza kara letA hai  /  arthAt manda,
mandatara Adi unake sabhI pariNAmoM meM eka bAra mRtyu prApta kara letA hai taba
use cAdara bhAva pudgalaparAvartana kahate haiN| 8. sUkSma bhAva
pudgalaparAvartana anubhAgabandha ke kAraNabhUta

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Kashaya** (passions) of the **Parishista** (auxiliary) **Karma** (karmic
particles) touch the **Jiva** (soul) in a sequential manner. This means that if
a **Kashaya** touches a particular **Bhava** (state of mind) and then touches
another **Bhava**, it is not counted. However, if it touches a different
**Parinama** (manifestation) of the same **Bhava**, it is counted. In this way,
the **Jiva** touches all the **Parinamas** of each **Bhava** sequentially. When
the **Jiva** has touched all the **Bhavas**, the **Sukshma** (subtle) **Pudgala
Paravartan** (transformation of matter) is complete.  The eight **Bhedas**
(divisions) mentioned above are only for explaining the **Sukshma
Paravartanas**. When **Shastras** (scriptures) refer to the time of **Pudgala
Paravartan**, it is the **Sukshma Pudgala Paravartan** that should be
considered. For example, after attaining **Samyaktvam** (perfect knowledge), the
**Jiva** attains **Moksha** (liberation) within the **Deshon** (space) and
**Ardha Pudgala Paravartan** (half transformation of matter). Here, the time is
considered as **Sukshma Pudgala Paravartan**.  Thus, **Jain** literature
presents a very subtle, profound, and insightful analysis of time. Due to
**Apeksha Bheda** (differences in perspective), time can be calculated as
**Bhoot** (past), **Vartaman** (present), **Bhavishya** (future), **Sankhyat**
(countable), **Asankhyat** (uncountable), **Anant** (infinite), etc. However,
these divisions do not affect its **Anantata** (infinity). Therefore, **Lok**
(universe), **Jiva**, etc. are considered **Anadi-Anant** (beginningless and
endless) in relation to time. The **Lok** has existed since **Anadikal**
(beginningless time) and will continue to exist for **Anantkal** (endless time).
The **Samsari Jiva** (worldly soul) residing in this **Lok** attains **Moksha**
after destroying the **Anant Samsar** (endless cycle of birth and death) upon
attaining **Samyaktvam**.  **Comparative Viewpoint** (**Svetambar** and
**Digambar** beliefs generally consider **Karma** as **Bandha** (binding),
**Uday** (arising), **Udirana** (excitation), and **Satta** (existence) in
nature)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava : pariziSTa kaSAyasthAnoM ko krama se jitane samaya meM sparza
karatA hai arthAt kisI bhAva ke manda pariNAma ke sparza karane ke bAda agara
vaha dusare bhAva ko sparza karatA hai to vaha usameM nahIM ginA jAyegA  /
lekina jaba usI bhAva ke dUsare pariNAma kA sparza karegA tabhI vaha minA
jaayegaa| isa prakAra kramazaH pratyeka bhAva ke sabhI pariNAmoM ko sparza
karatA huA jIva java sabhI bhAvoM kA sparza kara letA hai taba sUkSma bhAva
pudgalaparAvartana pUrNa hotA hai| ukta ATha bhedoM meM bAdara bhedoM kA svarUpa
kevala sUkSma parAvartanoM ko samajhAne ke lie diyA gayA hai| zAstroM meM jahA~
pudgalaparAvartana kAla kA nirdeza AtA hai, vahA~ sUkSma pudgalaparAvartana hI
lenA cAhie  /  jaise samyaktva prApti ke bAda jIva dezona
ardhapudgalaparAvartana meM avazya mokSa prApta karatA hai| vahA~ kAla kA sukSma
pudgalaparAvartana hI liyA jAtA hai| isa prakAra jaina-vAGmaya meM kAlagaNanA kA
ati sUkSma, gambhIra aura talasparzI vivecana kiyA gayA hai| apekSAbheda se isa
kAla kI samaya se lekara bhUta, vartamAna, bhaviSya, saMkhyAta, asaMkhyAta.
ananta Adi ke rUpa meM gaNanA kara leN| lekina ina bheda-prabhedoM se usakI
anantatA meM kisI prakAra kA antara nahIM AtA hai| isIlie loka, jIva Adi dravyoM
ko kAla kI apekSA me anAdi-ananta mAnA hai| loka anAdikAla se hai aura
anantakAla taka rhegaa| isa loka meM vidyamAna saMsArI jIva samyaktva-prApti ke
bAda ananta saMsAra kA kSaya karake mokSa prApta kara letA hai  /  tulanAtmaka
maMtavya (zvetAmbara-digambara mAnyatA sAmAnyatayA karmoM ko bandha, udaya,
udIraNA aura sattA prakRtiyoM

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
• Second Mantra fine 177 Regarding the number and qualities of the places, the
karma-related blindness, etc., in the Marganas, there is a general similarity in
the subject matter of the karma literature written by the theoreticians, karma-
text writers, and the Svetambara-Digambara Acharyas. There are some differences,
which are worthy of study and contemplation regarding the subject of karma, and
therefore we are presenting some points here. ; Characteristics of Gunasthan In
Svetambara texts, Gunasthan is explained as "the state of the being of a living
being due to the increase or decrease in the purity and impurity of knowledge,
etc., is called Gunasthan." However, in Digambara texts, Gunasthan is explained
as follows: "The state of the living beings is known from the feelings that
arise at the time of the arising, etc., of the Darshanamohaniya and
Charitramohaniya, therefore those feelings are called Gunasthan." - Gommatasar
Jivakand Ga. 8 In the Agamas, the word Jivasthan is used for the word Gunasthan.
The word Gunasthan has been used in karma texts and other texts written by
Acharyas after the Agamas. In the Dhavala Tika of the Shatkhandagama, the word
"Jivasamas" is used for Gunasthan, and the reason for this is explained by
saying that the living being resides in the qualities, therefore it is called
Jivasamas. In Digambara literature (Go. Jivakand, Ga. 622), the living beings
have been divided into two categories, namely, punya and papa, according to the
order of Gunasthan. The Mithyatvi or Mithyatvounmukhi living beings are called
Papajivas and the Samyaktva living beings are called Punyajivas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 * dvitIya maMtra fine 177 kI saMkhyA evaM guNasthAnoM, mArgaNAoM meM karmoM ke
andha Adi ke sambandha meM saiddhAntikoM, karmagranthakAroM tathA zvetAmbara -
digambara AcAryoM dvArA racita karmasAhitya ke viSaya pratipAdana meM
adhikAMzataH samAnatA parilakSita hotI hai  /  kathaMcit bhitratA bhI hai jo
karmaviSayaka adhyayana aura manana ke yogya hone se katipaya binduoM ko yahA~
prastuta kara rahe haiM  /  ; guNasthAna kA lakSaNa svetAmbara granthoM meM
guNasthAna kI vyAkhyA- 'jJAna Adi guNoM kI zuddhi aura azuddhi ke nyUnAdhika
bhAva se hone vAle jIva ke svarUpa ko guNasthAna kahate haiM' - kI gaI hai  /
parantu digambara granthoM meM guNasthAna kI vyAkhyA isa prakAra hai-
'darzanamohanIya aura cAritramohanIya ko udaya Adi avasthAoM ke samaya jo bhAva
hote haiM, unase jIvoM kA svarUpa jAnA jAtA hai, isIlie ve bhAva guNasthAna
kahalAte haiM  / ' - gommaTasAra jIvakAMDa gA08 AgamoM meM guNasthAna zabda ke
lie jIvasthAna zabda prayoga dekhane meM AtA hai| guNasthAna zabda kA prayoga
AgamottarakAlIna AcAryo dvArA racita karmagranthoM evaM anya granthoM meM kiyA
gayA hai| SaTakhaNDAgama kI dhavalA TIkA meM guNasthAnoM ke lie 'jIvasamAsa'
zabda kA prayoga dekhane meM AtA hai aura isakA kAraNa spaSTa karate hue kahA
hai ki jIva guNoM meM rahatA hai ataH use jIvasamAsa kahate haiM  /  digambara
sAhitya (go0 jIvakAMDa, gA0 622 ) meM guNasthAna ke krama se jIvoM ke puNya,
pApa do bheda kiye haiN| midhyAtvI yA mithyAtvonmukhI jIvoM ko pApajIva aura
samyaktvo jIvoM ko puNyajIva kahA hai  /

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  178 There are 11 types of **Parigishta Desha Chirat** (long-
lasting karmic matter) mentioned in Digambara literature (Go. Jeevakanda, verse
476). These are: (1) **Darshan** (perception), (2) **Vrat** (vow), (3)
**Samayik** (meditation), (4) **Proshad** (purification), (5) **Sachitta
Virati** (cessation of mental activity), (6) **Ratribhojan Virati** (cessation
of night-time meals), (7) **Brahmacharya** (celibacy), (8) **Aarambha Virati**
(cessation of initiation), (9) **Parigraha Virati** (cessation of possessions),
(10) **Anumati Virati** (cessation of permission), (11) **Uddishta Virati**
(cessation of intention). The term "Proshad" is used here instead of "Poushad"
which is prevalent in the Svetambara sect.  Svetambara and Digambara
**karmagranthakars** (authors of karma texts) have considered the **bandhyogya
prakritis** (karmic substances capable of binding) to be the same in the
**gunasthanas** (stages of spiritual progress). However, Digambara texts (Go.
Karmakanda) mention 56 **prakritis** (karmic substances) in the seventh
**gunasthan** - **Aprammatta Virata gunasthan** (stage of perfect non-
attachment), while Svetambara karmagranthakars mention 58 or 56 **prakritis**
for binding. This difference is explained by stating that those souls who begin
the binding of **devaayu** (karmic matter related to the senses) in the sixth
**gunasthan** and attain the seventh **gunasthan** without ending the binding in
the sixth **gunasthan**, have 56 **prakritis** capable of binding. On the other
hand, those souls who begin and end the binding of **devaayu** in the sixth
**gunasthan** have 58 **prakritis** capable of binding. (See the explanation of
**Vishesh Ma. 7, 8**).  Svetambara and Digambara karmagranths consider the
**uday** (emergence) and **udirana** (activation) of **prakritis** in the
**gunasthanas** to be the same. However, this similarity is found according to
the opinion of **Bhutbali Acharya** as mentioned in the Digambara text Go.
Karmakanda, verse 264. In the same text (verse 263), the opinion of
**Yativrishabha Acharya** is mentioned, which differs in some aspects.
**Yativrishabha Acharya** believes in the emergence of 112 **prakritis** in the
first **gunasthan** and 13 **prakritis** in the fourteenth **gunasthan**. The
karmagranth mentions the emergence of 117 **prakritis** in the first
**gunasthan** and 12 **prakritis** in the fourteenth **gunasthan**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 178 karmastava : parigiSTa dezacirata ke 11 bheda digambara sAhitya (go.
jIvakAMDa gA0 476) meM haiM  /  jaise-(1) darzana, (2) vrata, (3) sAmAyika, (4)
proSadha, (5) sacittavirati, (6) rAtribhojanavirati, (7) brahmacarya, (8)
Arambhavirati, (i) parigraha virati, (10) anumativirati, (11) uddiSTabirati  /
inameM 'proSadha' zabda svetAmbara sampradAyaprasiddha 'pauSadha' zabda ke
sthAna para hai| pavetAmbara aura digambara karmagranthakAroM ne guNasthAnoM meM
baMdhayogya prakRtiyo samAna mAnI haiN| lekina digambara granthoM (go0
karmakAMDa) meM sAtaveM guNasthAna-apramattavirata guNasthAna meM 56 prakRtiyoM
kA aura zvetAmbara karmagranthakAroM ne 58 yA 56 prakRtiyoM kA bandha mAnA hai
/  isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue kahA hai ki jo jIva chaThe guNasthAna meM
devAyu ke baMdha kA prArambha kara use usI guNasthAna meM samApta kiye binA
sAtaveM guNasthAna ko prApta karate haiM, nanakI apekSA 56 prakRtiyA~
baMdhayogya haiM aura jo jIva chaThe guNasthAna meM prArambha kiye gaye devAyu
ke baMdha ko chaThe guNasthAna meM hI samApta karate haiM, unakI apekSA 58
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai| (vizeSa mA0 7, 8 kI vyAkhyA meM dekhie|
pavetAmbara aura digambara karmagranthoM meM guNasthAnoM kI udaya va udIraNA
yogya prakRtiyAM samAna mAnI haiN| lekina yaha samAnatA digambara grantha go0
karmakAMDa gA0 264 meM ullikhita bhUtabali AcArya ke matAnusAra milatI hai aura
usI grantha meM (gA0 263) vyakta yativRSabhAcArya ke mata se kahIM milatI hai
aura kahIM nahIM milatI hai  /  yativRSabhAcArya pahale guNasthAna meM 112
prakRtiyoM kA aura caudahaveM guNasthAna meM 13 prakRtiyoM kA udaya mAnate haiN|
karmagrantha meM pahale guNasthAna meM 117 aura caudahaveM guNasthAna meM 12
prakRtiyoM kA udaya batAyA hai|

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
+ Second Karmagrantha Appendix 176 In the seventh and earlier Gunasthanas, the
Vedaniya Karma does not arise, therefore, in these Gunasthanas, the Ahar Sanjna
is not considered in the Digambar literature (Go. Jeevakanda Ga. 138). However,
there is no objection to considering the said Sanjna in the said Gunasthanas
because other causes such as the arising of Asata Vedaniya are possible in those
Gunasthanas.  In the Karmagrantha, in the second Gunasthana, except for the
Tirthankara Nama Karma, the existence of 147 Prakṛtis is considered. However, in
the Digambar Grantha (Go. Karmakanda), except for the Aharakadvik and
Tirthankara Nama Karma, the existence of 145 Prakṛtis is considered. Similarly,
according to Go. Karmakanda Ga. 333-336, in the fifth Gunasthana, the present
Jiva does not have the existence of Naraka, and in the sixth and seventh
Gunasthanas, the existence of Rahu and Tiryanchayu is not considered. Therefore,
according to that Grantha, in the fifth Gunasthana, the existence of 147 is
considered, and in the sixth and seventh Gunasthanas, the existence of 146 is
considered. However, according to the Karmagrantha, in the fifth Gunasthana, the
existence of Narakayu is possible, and in the sixth and seventh Gunasthanas, the
existence of Narakayu and Tiryanchayu is also possible.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 + dvitIya karmagrantha pariziSTa 176 sAtaveM Adi guNasthAnoM meM vedanIya karma
kI udIraNA nahIM hotI, isase una guNasthAnoM meM AhAra saMjJA ko digambara
sAhitya (go0 jIvakAMDa gA0 138 ) meM nahIM mAnA hai  /  parantu ukta guNasthAnoM
meM ukta saMjJA ko mAnane meM koI Apatti nahIM jAna par3atI hai kyoMki una
guNasthAnoM meM asAtAvedanIya ke udaya Adi anya kAraNa sambhava hai  /  :
karmagrantha meM dUsare guNasthAna meM tIrthaMkaranAmakarma ke sivAya 147
prakRtiyoM kI satA mAnI hai  /  parantu digambara grantha (go0 karmakAMDa meM
AhArakadvika aura tIrthaMkaranAmakarma ina tIna prakRtiyoM ke sivAya 145
prakRtiyoM kI sattA mAnI hai| isI prakAra go0 karmakAMDa gA0 333-336 ke
matAnusAra pA~caveM guNasthAna meM vartamAna jIva ko narakA kI sattA nahIM hotI
aura chaThe va satrAyeM gujarathAna meM rAhu tiryaMcAyu ina do kI sattA nahIM
hotii| ataH usa grantha ke anusAra pA~cave guNasthAna meM 147 kI aura chaThe,
sAtaveM guNasthAna meM 146 kI sattA mAnI hai kintu karmagrantha ke anusAra
pA~caveM guNasthAna meM narakAyu kI aura chaThe, sAtave guNasthAna meM narakAya,
tiryaMcAyu kI sattA bhI ho sakatI hai  /

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 180 1. Bandhayantra     * Kama Gunasthan Name     * Sul Prakruti     * Uttar
Prakruti     * Mana Avarana     * Parsana Avarana     * Vaniya     * Aayu     *
TE     * Botr     * Antaraya     * 8     * 120     * 5     * 6     * 2     * 2
* 4     * 67     * 2     * 5     * .     * Samanya 1 Mithyatva 2 Sasadan     * .
* :     * || 8 M     * 4     * ~ mor     * 4 5 6 7 8     * Avirat Deshavirat
Pramattasanyata 8 Apramattasanyata Apurvakarana Bhag 1 7     * 6     * 1     *
63 5 56.58 5 58 5     * 2 1 1     * 1 1 0     * 32     * 1 31     * 1 1 1     *
5 57 561162 V 5 62 ||     * 6     * Kamansatava: Parishishta     * xx

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 180 1. bandhayaMtra kama guNasthAna nAma sUla prakRti | uttara prakRti
mAnAvaraNa parsanAvaraNa vanIya Ayu TE botra antarAya 8 120 5 6 2 2 4 67 2 5 .
sAmAnya 1 mithyAtva 2 sAsAdana . :  //  8 ma 4 ~ mor 4 5 6 7 8 avirata
dezavirata pramattasaMyata 8 apramattasaMyata apUrvakaraNa bhAga 1 7 6 1 63 5 56
/ 58 5 58 5 2 1 1 1 1 0 32 1 31 1 1 1 5 57 561162 va 5 62  /  /  6 kamaMstava :
pariziSTa xx

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## क्रम  **Gunasthan Name** | **Apuvarkaran** | **JJ** | **tr** | **Bhaag 4**
---|---|---|---|---| | 10. Sukshmasampray | 11. Upshantamoh | 12. Ksheenamoh |
13. Sayogikevali | 14. Ayogikevali |   **"** | **31** | **M** | **"** | **"** |
**"** | **"** | **"** | **"** | **"** | **#t** | **Anivrittikaran Bhaag 1** |
**113** | **23** | **3** | **7** | **5** | **7** | **56** | **19** | **56** |
**19** | **6** | **RAS** | **-** | **स'** | **Mool Prakriti** | **Uttar
Prakriti** | **7** | **の** | **7** | **21** | **57** | **67** | **26** | **کس**
| **Gyaanavaran** | **छ** | **N** | **X** | **X** | **5** | **206** | **ライ** |
**5** | **4** | **4** | **X** | **Varshaavaran** | **Yeshmiyay** | **Mohniyay**
| **Aayu** | **ܡ** | **5** | **16** | **5. Y** | **18** | **0** | **4** | **Y**
| **K** | **"** | **1** | **x** | **1** | **a** | **1** | **1** | **1** | **"**
| **ह** | **5.** | **X** | **1** | ** ू** | **0** | **수** | **D** | **.** |
**0** | **D** | **O** | **Naam** | **31** | **+** | **Gotra** | **1** | **5** |
**1** | **D** | **0** | **Antaray** | **0** | **.** | **स'** | **34** | **0** |
**0** | **D** | **b** | **Bhabhandh** | **112121212** | **64** | **23** | **64**
| **ह** | **££** | **e** | **101** | **܀܀** | **103** | **116** | **116** |
**116** | **120** | **Dvitiya Karmagranth: Parishishta** | **181** |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 krama guNasthAna nAma apUrvakaraNa JJ tr bhAga 4 10 sUkSmasaMparAya 11
upazAMtamoha 12 kSINamoha 13 sayogikevalI 14- ayogikevalI " 31 M " " " #t
anivRttikaraNa bhAga 1 113 23 3 7 5 7 56 19 56 19 6 RAS - s' mUla prakRti uttara
prakRti 7 no 7 21 57 67 26 khs jJAnAvaraNa cha N X X 5 206 rai 5 4 4 X
varzanAvaraNa yezmIya mohanIya Ayu m 5 16 5. Y 18 0 4 Y K " 1 x 1 a 1 1 1 " ha
5. X 1 uu 0 su D . 0 D O nAma 31 + gotra 1 5 1 D 0 antarAya 0 . s' 34 0 0 D b
bhabandha 112121212 64 23 64 ha PSPS e 101 //// 103 116 116 116 120 dvitIya
karmagrantha : pariziSTa 181

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
2. Udayayantra Kam Gunasthanam Nama Tar Prakriti Bozhasidha Nama HR mm |
Dharshanavaran ANA | Vavaniya xxx Shanavaran . | Masudap (r . ॥ 11-11 . 1 ॥ Sa
Prakriti . . Me xxxxxxxxxx. . Samanya 28 4 67 2 5 Mithyatva Sasadan Mitra 100 5
6 2 2 4 51 : 5 Avira 8 104 5 2 23 4 55 2 5 18 Deshavira 8 87 5 2 18 2 44 2 5 35
Pramattasanyata Apramattasanyata 8 76 56 2 141 42 1 5 46 Apurvakaran
Anivritikaran 866 56 271 36 1 5. 56 Sukshmasampray Upashantamooh 56 5 6
Kshinamooh 7 5755 5 614 2 0 1 15 65 Sayogikevali 4 42 0 2 0 1 3. 1 0 0
Ayogifevali 100 0 0 xxx Karmastav : Parimishta 13 14

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2. udayayaMtra kama guNasthAna nAma tara prakRti bojhAsIdha nAma HR mm |
dharzanAvaraNa ANA | vevanIya xxx zAnAvaraNa . | masudapa (r .  //  11-11 . 1
//  sa prakRti . . Me xxxxxxxxxx. . sAmAnya 28 4 67 2 5 mithyAtva sAsAdana mitra
100 5 6 2 2 4 51 : 5 avirata 8 104 5 2 23 4 55 2 5 18 dezavirata 8 87 5 2 18 2
44 2 5 35 pramattasaMyata apramattasaMyata 8 76 56 2 141 42 1 5 46 apUrvakaraNa
anivRttikaraNa 866 56 271 36 1 5. 56 sUkSmasaMparAya upazAMtamoha 56 5 6
kSINamoha 7 5755 5 614 2 0 1 15 65 sayogikevalI 4 42 0 2 0 1 3. 1 0 0
ayogiphevalI 100 0 0 xxx karmastava : parimiSTa 13 14

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## क्रम गुणस्थान नाम  **General** 1. Mithyatva 2.  3. Udiranayantra 4. Sasadan
Mishra 5. Avirat 6. Desh Virat  **Pramattasanyata** **Bhool Prakriti** 5 122 6
LS L 5 5 u = 5 9. Apramattasanyata 5. Apurvakaran 6. Anivrittikaran 6 6 7 10.
Sukshmasampray 6 11. Upashantamooh **Uttar Prakriti** 0 ܗ ܐ ܕ 111 100 108 87 81
73 66 63 57 56 5 54|5.2 12. Kshinamooh 13. Sayogikevali 2 36 14. Ayogikevali 0
**Jnanavarana** **D** 5. w 4 5. 5 0 **Varshanavarana** **Vedaniyap**
**Mohaniyap** parm m **Sarva Karta Pare** . ut C 8 2020 2 ウ v D wx 18 3 14 13 19
. **Aayu** 4 4 5 5 ง D **Gotra** 22 **Naam** 67 4.6 51 55 ૪૪ 44 Ꭰ I 0 44 42 36
26 36 36 1 37 1 38 { 1 1 Dur **Antaraya** @ X ★ + 5 5 5. 5 1 0 Xx X
**Anudirana** · 18 35 41 46 568 70 83 122 53 56 65 66 **Vinay Firmgranth**
**Parisishta** 183

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 krama guNasthAna nAma sAmAnya 1. mithyAtva 2. sAsAdana mizra 4. avirata 5. deza
virata pramattasaMyata bhUla prakRti 5 122 cha LS L 5 5 u = 5 9.
apramattasaMyata 5. apUrvakaraNa 6. anivRttikaraNa 6 6 7 10. sUkSmasaMparAya 6
11. upazAMtamoha uttara prakRti 0 h ' d 111 100 108 87 81 73 66 63 57 56 5
54|5.2 12. kSINamoha 13. sayogikevalI 2 36 14. ayogikevalI 0 3. udIraNAyantra
jJAnAvaraNa d 5. w 4 5. 5 0 varzanAvaraNa vedanIpa mohanIya parm m sarva karate
pare . ut C 8 2020 2 u v D wx 18 3 14 13 19 . Ayu 4 4 5 5 ng D gotra 22 nAma 67
4.6 51 55 44 44 a I 0 44 42 36 26 36 36 1 37 1 38 { 1 1 Dur aMtarAya @ X  + 5 5
5. 5 1 0 Xx X anudIraNA * 18 35 41 46 568 70 83 122 53 56 65 66 vinIya
pharmagrantha pariziSTa 183

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
4. Sattayantra 14 Gunasthanas in Satta | Mula Prakriti Uttara Prakriti
Upshamshreni : Kshapamsheni Bashnavaran Vavaniya Mohaniya Sa * | Gnanavaran Naam
Gotra xxx RF Xx; Antaraya 147 Samanya 814% 1. Mithyatva 148 2. Sasadan 147 28 2
2 3. Mitra 4. Avirat M 148+ 148.141 1451138 5 2 28.24.21 4' 13 2 5. Deshavirat
6. Pramattasanyata 148 , 5 62 7. Apramattasanyata 8 148 , 5 62 8. Apurvakaran
814|14* 142.136 138 5 62 2. 1: 25 6. Anivriti- 18 || Karan ke 2 122 5662
_,E३1882 5. 6 Bhag 3 hote hain 4 1135 , 2 12 || || 2 5. Kamansatva : Parisishta

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 4. sattAyantra 14 guNasthAnoM meM sattA | mUla prakRti uttara prakRti
upazamazreNI : kSapamazreNI bazanAvaraNa vevanIya mohanIya sA * | jJAnAvaraNa
nAma gotra xxx RF Xx; antarAya 147 sAmAnya 814% 1. mithyAtva 148 2. sAsAdana 147
28 2 2 3. mitra 4. avirata ma 148+ 148 / 141 1451138 5 2 28 / 24 / 21 4' 13 2 5.
dezavirata 6. pramattasaMyata 148 , 5 62 7. apramattasaMyata 8 148 , 5 62 8.
apUrvakaraNa 814|14* 142 / 136 138 5 62 2. 1: 25 6. anivRtti- 18  //  karaNa ke
2 122 5662 _,E31882 5. 6 bhAga 3 hote haiM 4 1135 , 2 12  //   //  2 5.
kamaMstava : pariziSTa

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the 14 Gunasthanas, the **Satta** (being) is:  **Uttara Prakriti**
**Upashmanani** **Jhapakoshi** **Samawaram** **Arshnavaran** **Vevaniya**
**Antaraya** **Gm** | **Mula Prakriti** **. RF** | **Mohaniya**  **Dvitiya
Kramprad: Parishishta** **ShE3180 2**  **10. Sukshmasampray 8148.142 1421136 102
5. 228||24||211. . 2 5** **11. Upashantamooh 81485142 142.136 101 5, 2
28||24||21 ,, 25** **12. Ksheenamooh 1016 0 10166 5.4 . 1 63 25** **13.
Sayogikevali 4 . 5 . 2 0 1 0 2 0** **14. Ayogikevali 4 85.13.12 ||13.12 : 21 0
18062.10**  * **Tadbhay** (those who are on the path to liberation)
**Mokshagami** (liberation-bound) **Anantanubandhi** (infinitely connected)
**Visanyojaka** (disconnecting) **Upashmashreni** (those who practice the
Upashma path) **Kshayopaashaamik** (those who have overcome the Kshaya)
**Samyagdristi** (those who have right vision) are considered to have the
**Satta** of 141. * **Tadbhav** (those who are not on the path to liberation)
**Moksha** (liberation) **nahi jaane wale** (those who do not know liberation)
**Upashmashreni** (those who practice the Upashma path) **bale** (those who
have) **Sayik** (those who are bound) **Mamyadristi** (those who have wrong
vision) are considered to have the **Satta** of 140.  In the ninth **Gunasthan**
(stage of spiritual development), the **Mohaniya** (the state of delusion)
should be understood in nine parts, with the numbers 28-24-1.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14 guNasthAna meM sattA meM uttara prakRti upazamanaNI jhapakoSI sAmAvArama
arzanAvaraNa vevanIya | antarAya Gm | mUla prakRti . RF | mohanIya dvitIya
kramaprada : pariziSTa zaE3180 2 lh lh mr bh 10. sUkSmasaMparAya 8148 / 142
1421136 102 5 /  228 // 24 // 211  /   /  2 5 11. upazAMtamoha 81485142 142 /
136 101 5 , 2 28 // 24 // 21 ,, 25 12. kSINamoha 1016 0 10166 5.4 . 1 63 25 13
sayogikevalI 4 . 5 . 2 0 1 0 2 0 14. ayogikevalI 4 85 / 13 / 12  // 13 / 12 : 21
0 18062 / 10 * tadbhaya mokSagAmI anantAnubandhI visaMyojaka upazamazreNI ko
karane vAle kSAyopazAmika samyagdRSTi ko 141 kI sattA mAnI jAtI hai| * tadbhava
mokSa nahIM jAne vAle upazamazreNI bAle sAyika mamyAdRSTi kI mAnI jAtI hai  /
nauvaM guNasthAna meM nau bhAgoM meM mohanIya ke 28-24-1 aMka sahita samajhanA
caahie|

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
'Karmasta: Parishishta Putthan-Gangaadi Shiyaak Kam Aath Kamon Ki 148
Prakrutiyon Ka Bandh, Uvay, Udirana and Sattaa Kis-Kis Gunasthan Tak Hoti Hai
Paanak . Uttar Prakrutiyon' ! Ki Sanstha Ka Kram Mool Karma Ki Uttar Prakrutiyon
Ke Naam | Kis Gunasthan | Sak Bandh * Kis Gunasthan Tak Uday Udaarana | 3 4 15
10 12 12 Jnaanadharan-5 1 Matijnaanavaran 2 Shrutajnaanavaran 3
Avadhijnaanavaran 4 Manahparyayjnaanavaran 5 Kevaljnaanavaran Darshnaavaran - 1
Chakshudarshnaavaran 2 Achakshudarshnaavaran 3 Avhidarshnaavaran
Kevaldarshnaavaran 5 Nidra . 8 E 4 15 16 12 12 10 12 12 12 10 Ek Samay Aavlika
Ek Nyun-12 Samayaadhik Samay Nyun-12 Nyun-12

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ' karmastA : pariziSTa putthAna-gaMgAdi ziAyaka kama ATha kamoM kI 148
prakRtiyoM kA bandha, uvaya, udIraNA aura sattA kisa-kisa guNasthAna taka hotI
hai pAnaka  /  uttara prakRtiyoM ' ! kI saMsthA kA krama mUla karma kI uttara
prakRtiyoM ke nAma | kisa guNasthAna | saka baMdha * kisa guNasthAna taka udaya
udAraNA | 3 4 15 10 12 12 jJAnAdharaNa-5 1 matijJAnAvaraNa 2 zrutajJAnAvaraNa 3
avadhijJAnAvaraNa 4 manaHparyayajJAnAvaraNa 5 kevalajJAnAvaraNa darzanAvaraNa -
1 cakSudarzanAvaraNa 2 acakSudarzanAvaraNa 3 avadhidarzanAvaraNa
kevaladarzanAvaraNa 5 nidrA . 8 E 4 15 16 12 12 10 12 12 12 10 eka samaya
AvalikA eka nyUna-12 samayAdhika samaya nyUna-12 nyUna-12

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Second Karma Granth: Appendix or W 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 {E 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
27 28 6. G & 1 * 7 3 ? 11 12 Nidanita Prachala Prashvala Prachala Styanaddha
Vedaniya - 2 Satavedaniya Asatavedaniya , " " 4 Pratya0 2 닛 13 6 6 12. S. Samaya
12. Samaya- 12 Dhik Samaya Avalika Nyun Nyun Nyun Din w 14 14 Mohaniya – 28 11-7
Samyaktva Mohaniya Bandh Nahin 4 Se 74 Se 7 Mishra Mohaniya ' Hota Hai Teesre
Gu. Teesre Gu. 11-7 Mithyatva Mohaniya 3 1 1 1 11 7 2 11-7 ૪ Anantanubandhiko 2
5 Anantanubandhiman 2 2 11-07 11–7 Anantanubandhimaya 2 Anandananubandhilobh 2
Apratya0 Krodh 11-7 11-1 Man X Maya 4 Lobh 4 Krodh 5 187 2 7 4 4 f scula & 14 14
25 :: "

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIyaH karmagrantha : pariziSTa or W 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 {E 20 21 22 23 24
25 26 27 28 6. ga & 1 * 7 3 ? 11 12 nidAnitA pracalA prazvalA pracalA styAnaddha
vedanIya - 2 sAtAvedanIya asAtAvedanIya , " " 4 pratyA0 2 nis 13 6 6 12. sa.
samaya 12. samayA- 12 dhika samaya AvalikA nyuna nyuna nyUna dina w 14 14
mohanIya - 28 11-7 samyaktvamohanIya baMdha nahIM 4 se 74 se 7 mizra mohanIya '
hotA hai tIsaregu. tIsare gu. 11-7 mithyAtvamohanIya 3 1 1 1 117 2 11-7 4
anantAnubandhIko 2 5 anantAnubandhImAna 2 2 11-07 11-7 anantAnubandhImAyA 2
anandAnubandhIlobha 2 apratyA0 krodha 11-7 11-1 mAna X mAyA 4 lobha 4 krodha 5
187 2 7 4 4 f scula & 14 14 25 :: "

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 188 **Karma Appendix** - F .:: m 11 11-10 **Viannxihimamala** 1 11-6 " 26 13
**Pratya** Gana **Maya** **Lobha** 32 16 **Sanjwalana** **Krodha** " **Mana** 34
15 **Maya** 4   35 16 **Lobha** 1 1010 36 20 **Hasya** **Nokashaya** = 67 21
**Rati**, 87 8 22 **Arati**. 39 23 **Shoka** 6 - 40 24 **Bhaya** 87 8 8
**Jugupsa**, 42 26 **Purushaveda**, 1 6 27 **Striveda**,  _44 6 **Nasakaved**,
.1 6 **Ayu** **Karma**-4 . | 45 1 **Devayu** 2 **Manushyayu** | 48 3
**Tithanchayu** 48 4 **Narakayu** " 11-6 MI M * R * In the third **Gunasthan**,
there is no bondage of any **Ayu**, therefore, except for the third
**Gunasthan**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 188 karmava: pariziSTa - F .:: m 11 11-10 viannxhimamala 1 11-6 " 26 13 pratyA0
gAna mAyA lobha 32 16 saMjvalana krodha " mAna 34 15 mAyA 4 35 16 lobha 1 1010
36 20 hAsya nokaSAya = 67 21 rati , 87 8 22 arati  /  39 23 zoka 6 - 40 24 bhaya
87 8 8 jugupsA , 42 26 puruSaveda , 1 6 27 strIveda , _44 6 nasakaveda ,.1 6 Ayu
karma-4 . | 45 1 devAyu 2 manuSyAyu | 48 3 tithaMcAyu 48 4 narakAyu " 11-6 MI M
* R * tIsare guNasthAna meM kisI Ayu kA bandha nahIM hotA hai, isalie tIsare
guNa sthAna ke sivAya  /

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Germ-Group: Appendix 199 14 46.1 50 2 513 52 4 14 116 8 56 Name of
Karma -: Human Path 4 14 13 Animal Path 2 5 5 God Path 4 4 Hell Path 4 4 One-
sense beings. Two-sense beings. Three-sense beings. 1 Four-sense beings. 1 Five-
sense beings. Audaric Body 4 13 Vaikriya Body 864 Aharak Body 816 Sixth Sixth
Tejas Body 6 13 13 Karman Body 6 Audaric limbs 4 Vaikriya, 86 Aharak, 86 Sixth
Sixth Audaric wealth in Vaikriya, all 58 10 65 16 * One-sense and विकलेन्द्रिय
are only the first and second Gunasthanas - these two: are the Gunasthanas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya jarmagrama : pariziSTa 199 14 46 .1 50 2 513 52 4 14 116 8 56 nAma kara
-: manUSyagati 4 14 13 tiryaMcagati 2 5 5 devagati 4 4 narakagati 4 4
ekendriyajAti  /  dvIndriya jAti trIndriyajAti 1 caturindriyajAti 1
paMcendriyajAti audArikazarIra 4 13 vaitriyazarIra 864 AhArakazarIra 816
chaThavAM chaThavAM tejasazarIra 6 13 13 kArmaNazarIra 6 audArikaaMgopAMga 4
vaikriya , 86 AhAraka , 86 chaThavAM chaThavAM audArikarbadhana ina vaikriya ,
saba 58 10 65 16 * ekendriya aura vikalendriya ko mAtra pahalA aura dUsarA
gRNasthAna- ye do : hI guNasthAna hote haiN|

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmastasha: Parishishta 68 Swa Swa 14 Sharira Sharira 14 Tulya Tulya 14 75 Ka
Bandha Swa Sharira Taly "U Chhathava Chhathava 74 K -... .   20 Aharaka R 21
Teja. 22 Karman Bandhan 23 Audarik Sanghatan Nama 24 Vaitriya. 25 Aharaka, 26
Tejas 27 Karman Sanghatan 28 Vrishbhanaraach San. 4 26 Rishbhanaraach San. 30
Naraach Sanhanan 31 Ardhanaraach Sanhanan 32 Kolika 33 Mewat 34 Sama Chaturasra
Sansthan. 35 Nyagrodha 36 Sadi 37 Vaman 38 Kubja 36 Handaka 1 40 Krishna Varna
Nama 41 Neel . ... 7 ... .. im .. .. .. ... mr more 87 13 2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastaSa : pariziSTa 68 sva sva 14 zarIra zarIra 14 tulya tulya 14 75 kA
bandha sva zarIra talya "U chaThavAM chaThavAM 74 ka -... . 20 AhAraka ra 21
tejA  /  22 kArmaNa bandhana 23 audArika saMghAtana nAma 24 vaitriya  //  25
AhAraka , 26 tejasa 27 kArmaNasaMghAtana 28 vaRSabhanArAca saM0 4 26
RSabhanArAca saM0 30 nArAcasaMhanana 31 ardhanArAcasaMhanana 32 kolikA 33 mevAta
34 samacaturasra saMsthAna  /  35 nyagrodha 36 sAdi 37 vAmana 38 kubja 36
haNDaka 1 40 kRSNa varNa nAma 41 nIla . ... 7 ... .. im .. .. .. ... mr more 87
13 2

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth :: Appendix  **12** **13** **13** **14** ' ra ' ,, **13**
**14** to **42** Lohit Varna **43** Haridra, **44** Shweta **45** Surabhi Gandha
**46** Durabhi **47** Tikta Rasa **48** Katak **46** Kashaya **50** Amla **51**
Madhura **52** Karkasha **53** Mrdu **54** Guru **55** La **56** Sheet **57**
Ushna **58** Snigdha. ] I PM P nAP ' ' " " m m r m 2 ' **106** m " **6.**
Narakanupurvi **61** Tiryanchanupurvi **62** Manusyanupurvi **63** Devanupurvi.
**112**  **64** Shubhavihayogati **11- 41-** **46 2 1-2-4 1-2.4  _ ra 1-2-4
1-2-4 816 1-0.4 1-2-4 14** **14**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha :: pariziSTa mum 12 13 13 14 ' ra ' ,, 13 14 to 42 lohita
varNa 43 hAridra , 44 zveta 45 surabhi gandha 46 durabhi 47 tikta rasa 48 kaTaka
46 kaSAya 50 Amla 51 madhura 52 karkaza 53 mRdU 54 guru 55 la 56 zIta 57 uSNa 58
snigdha  /  ] I PM P nAP ' ' " " m m r m 2 ' 106 m " 6. narakAnupUrvI 61
tiryaMcAnupUrvI 62 manuSyAnupUrvI 63 devAnupUrvI . 112 64 zubhavihAyogati 1 1-
41- 46 2 1-2-4 1-2.4 _ ra 1-2-4 1-2-4 816 1-0.4 1-2-4 14 14

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmastaka: Appendix 162 - - - -   my 09 150 - - Ka 13-14 13 - - -  _65
Ashubhavihayogati 66 Paraghatanamkarma 1.7 Ushvasa || 6. Atap, 69 Udyot 71
Agurulaghu 71 Tirthankara, 120 72 Nirman, 121 73 Upghāt 122 123 75 Bādar 76
Paryāpt 77 Pratiyaka 78 Sthira 127 76 Shubha, 1280 Subhaga " 21 Susvara 82 Ādeya
Nāmakarma 83 Yashakīrti, 84: Sthāvara Nāmakarma 133 85 Sūkṣma 86 Aparyāpt.
Sādhāraṇa Prxxx mirmirm , Prama 1 1 1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastaka : pariziSTa 162 - - - - my 09 150 - - kA 13-14 13 - - - _65
azubhavihAyogati 66 parAghAtanAmakarma 1.7 uzvAsa  //  6. Atapa , 69 udyota 71
agurulaghu 71 tIrthakara , 120 72 nirmANa , 121 73 upaghAta 122 123 75 bAdara 76
paryApta 77 pratyeka 78 sthira 127 76 zubha , 1280 subhaga " 21 susvara 82 Adeya
nAmakarma 83 yazaHkIrti , 84: sthAvara nAmakarma 133 85 sUkSma 86 aparyApta  /
sAdhAraNa Prxxx mirmirm , prama 1 1 1

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Financial Karma Granth: Appendix ir w७02 4 13 4 13 14 14 18 Asthir Naamakarma 86
Ashubha, 13. 10 Durbhaga 136 11 Duhsvara, 2 12 Anaadeya,  _13 Ayashahkeeti
Naamakarma 6 Gotrakarma2 1421 Uchchagotra 143 2 Neechagotra Antaraaya 5 1
Daanaantaraaya 2 Laabhaantaraaya 3 Bhogaantaraaya 10 4 Upbhogaantaraaya 5
Veeryaantaraaya 12 12 12 Note -(1. In this Yatra, Upshama and Kshapaka are
considered as two categories. (2) The Naamakarma whose existence is mentioned in
the fourteen Maajasthanas, out of them, except for Manushya Gati, Panchendriya
Jaati, Sa, Baavar, Paryapt, Subhaga, Aadesh, Yashakoni, Teerthankara Naamakarma,
the existence of the remaining 71 types of Naamakarma is till the time of the
two extremes of the 14th Gunasthan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vittIya karmagrantha : phariziSTa ir w702 4 13 4 13 14 14 18 asthira nAmakarma
86 azubha , 13. 10 durbhaga 136 11 duHsvara , 2 12 anAdeya , _13 ayazaHkIti
nAmakarma 6 gotrakarma2 1421 uccagotra 143 2 nIcagotra antarAya 5 1 dAnAntarAya
2 lAbhAntarAya 3 bhogAntarAya 10 4 upabhogAntarAya 5 vIryAntarAya 12 12 12 noTa
-(1 /  isa yatra meM upazama aura kSaphaka isa prakAra do zreNiyoM kI vivakSA lI
gaI hai| (2) nAmakarma kI jina prakRtiyoM kI sattA caudaha majasthAna saka kahI
hai. unameM se manuSyagati, paMcendriya jAti, sa, bAvara, paryApta, subhaga,
Adeza, yazaHkoni, tIrthakara nAmakarma ke sivAya 71 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
dhaudahaveM guNa sthAna ke dvicarama samaya taka hotI hai|

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
164 Karmastava: Parishishta Upay Adhinaabhayo L , 2 uro 4 Ka Yad Avinamashee
Prakrutiyo Ke Nimitta Prakrutiyaan 1. Kevalgyaan 2. Mishragunasthan 3.
Kshayopaashama Samyaktava 4. Pramattasanyata Mithyatva Jamanatar 7.
Anantaanubandhiyaa Apratyakhyaneya Pratyakhyaneya Pramadabhaava Sanklesha
Yathapravritti-Apoovarnakaran Tathavi Dha Sanklishta Parinaama 13.
Baadarakashaya Ayathaakhyata Charitra Akshapka Bhaava Chaadmasthikabhaava
Baadarakayavaagyoyog 26 Sansaari Jeevan 16. Maanav Man Sidhatvasparshee Puny Kul
Nimitta Kul Prakrutiyaan 132 Kitni Prakrutiyaan Nahin Hoti Hai. 27 28 29 117 5
111 11 100 22

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 164 karmastava : pariziSTa upaya adhinAbhAyo la , 2 uro 4 kA yad avinAmASI
prakRtiyoM ke nimitta prakRtiyAM 1. kevalajJAna 2. mizraguNasthAna 3.
kSayopazama samyaktva 4. pramattasaMyata mithyAtva jamAntara 7. anantAnubandhIya
apratyAkhyAnIya pratyAkhyAnIya pramAdabhAva saMkleza yathApravRtti-apUrvakaraNa
tathAvidha saMkliSTa pariNAma 13. bAdarakaSAya ayathAkhyAta cAritra akSapaka
bhAva chAdmasthikabhAva bAdarakAyavAgayoga 26 saMsArI jIvana 16. mAnava mana
siddhatvasparzI puNya kula nimitta kula prakRtiyA~ 132 kitanI prakRtiyA~ nahIM
hotI hai . 27 28 29 117 5 111 11 100 22

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
165 Third Karma Granth: Description of the Appendix Prakritis 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
12 13 14 Gunas Sthana KI AA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 26 26
26 26 26 26 26 26 26 0 13 U 1 18 . 35 41 46 50 56 62 63 65 80 110 .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 165 tIya karmagrandha : pariziSTa prakRtiyoM kA vivaraNa 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
13 14 guNa sthAna KI AA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 26 26 26 26 26 26
26 26 26 0 13 U 1 18 . 35 41 46 50 56 62 63 65 80 110 .

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Karma Pratikrti's Bondage  **Order - Gunasthan**  **Yoga-
nimittak**  **Sookshma-samparaya-nimittak** * Anivritti-bavar **Kashay-
nimittak** ::| A-purvakaran-nivritti-sarvas **Bavar-kashay-nimittak** °,
Apramattabhav-nimittak . PacK Pratyakhyaneya-kashay Samyaktva-sahat-sambalesh-
asalyaya-kash Nimittak . . . . . | Pramattabhav-nimittak Anat-anubandhiya-
nimisaka-nimittak Nimittak •| Mithyatva-nimittak  **Total Pratikrti**  **in
marrrr .) 33 d) u Lu. 155 1. Mithyatva 2. Sasvadan 3. Mishra 4. Avirati 5.
Deshavirati 6. Pramattasanyata 1 16 7. Apramattasanyata 1 16 8, A-purvakaran 16
1 16 6. Anivritti-bavar 1 16 10. Sookshma-samparaya 1 16 11. Upashant-moha 12.
Ksheen-moha 1 13. Sayogikevali 1 14. Ayogikevali  **Total Gunasthan 13 10**
**33 2 0 . 0 1 0 58 5 5 5 5 0 0 10 . . . . . . | . . . . . . 0 .. . 0 .
Karmastav : Parishishta 6 5 2**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karma prakRtiyoM kA bandhanimittaka vivaraNa krama - guNasthAna yoganimittaka
sUkSmasaMparAya nimittaka * anivRttibAvara kaSAya nimittaka ::| apUrvakaraNa
nivRttisaharUsa bAvara kaSAya nimittaka deg, apramattabhAva nimittaka . PacK
pratyAkhyAnIya kaSAya samyaktvasAhata saMbalezaasalyaya kaSa nimitsaka . . . . .
| pramasabhAva nimittaka anAtAnubandhIya nimisaka nimittaka nimittaka *|
mithyAtva nimittaka kula prakRtiyA~ in marrrr .) 33 d) u Lu. 155 1. mithyAtva 2.
sAsvAdana 3. mizra 4. avirati 5. dezavirati 6 pramattasaMyata 1 16 7.
apramattasaMyata 1 16 8, apUrvakaraNa 16 1 16 6. anivRttibAdara 1 16 10.
sUkSmasaMparAya 1 16 11. upazAMta moha 12. kSINamoha 1 13. sayogikevalI 1 14.
ayogikevalI kula guNasthAna 13 10 33 2 0 . 0 1 0 58 5 5 5 5 0 0 10 . . . . . . .
| . . . . . . 0 .. . 0 . karmastava : pariziSTa 6 5 2

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 167: Second Karma Granth: Description of Karma Natures in the
Supplementary Gunasthanas, Their Bandha, Udaya, Ukoorma, and Satva  **Bandha
Natures: 120, Udaya and Udeerna Natures: 122, Satva Natures: 148**  **General
Description of Ogh:** This description is without any specific Gunasthana or
Jiva in mind.  **Bandha Description:**  **Osh (Root Nature):**  **Uttara
Natures: 120**  (1) **Jnanavarana:** 5 (2) **Darshanavarana:** 6 (3)
**Vedaniya:** 2 (4) **Mohaniya:** 26 (5) **Aayu:** 4 (6) **Naam:** 67 [Pind
Natures: 36, Each Nature: 8, Sadashka: 10, Stavaradashka: 10 = 67] (7) **Gona:**
2 (8) **Antaraya:** 5 - **Total: 120**  **1. Mithyatva:**  **Ussar: 117:**
There is no Bandha for Tirthankaras and Aharakdvikas (Aharak body, Maharaka
Angopaanga Naam Karma).  **2. Sasvadan (Root): 8**  **U: 101:**  The four Narka-
trikas (Narka-Gati, Narka-Aayu, Narka-Anupurvi) and the four Stavar-chaturkas
(Stavar, Sukshma, Apariapt, Sadharan Naam, Hundasanstahan, Mewatsanhanan,
Atapnaam, Napunsakved, Mithyatva-Mohaniya = 16 Natures) have their Bandha-
vichched (release from Bandha) through Mithyatva Guna.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 167 dvitIya karmagranma : pariziSTa guNasthAnoM meM karma prakRtiyoM kA bandha,
udaya, ukoramA, sattA kA vivaraNa bandha prakRtiyA~ 120, udaya va udIraNA
prakRtiyA~ 122, satA prakRtayA~ 148 ogha-sAmAnyarUpa se vinA kisI vizeSa
guNasthAna va jIva vizeSa kI vivakSA ke kthn| bandha-vivaraNa oSa mUlaprakRti -
uttaraprakRti 120 (1) jJAnAvaraNa 5, (2) darzanAvaraNa 6, (3) vedanIya 2, (4)
mohanIya 26, (5) Ayu 4, (6) nAma 67, [piMDa prakRtiyAM 36, pratyeka prakRtiyA~
8, sadazaka 10, sthAvaradazaka 10 =67] (7) gona 2, (8) antarAya 5-120 1.
mithyAtva usara 117 tIrthakara aura Aharakadvika (AhAraka zarIra, mAhAraka
aMgopAMga nAmakarma) kA bandha nahIM hotaa| 2. sAsvAdana mUla 8 u0 101
narakatrika (narakagati, narakAyu. narakAnupUrvI) jAti-catuSka (ekendriya,
dvIndriya trIndriya, caturindriya) sthAvaracatuSka (sthAvara, sukSma, aparyApta,
sAdhAraNa nAma huMDasaMsthAna, mevAtasaMhanana, AtapanAma, napuMsakaveda,
mithyAtvamohanIya =16 prakRtiyoM kA bandhaviccheda mithyAtva guNa

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karmastavas: The remaining 101 bondage is possible due to the end of the
Parishista Sthana. 3. Misra Mula 7 U074 Siyancharik (Tiryachgati, Tiryachayu,
Tiryachanupurvi) Styanaditrik (Nidra-Nidra, Prachala Prachala, Styanali)
Durbhagatrik (Dubhangnam, Duhsvarnam, Adayanam) Anantanubandhi Chatushk, Madhyam
Sansthana Chatushk (Nyagrodhaparimandala, Vaman, Sadi, Kubja) Madhyam Sanhanan
Chatushk (Rishabhanaracha, Naracha, Ardhanaracha, Kilika) Nichgotra, Udyotnam,
Ashubhavihayogati, Strived = 25 bondage is possible in the second Gunasthana due
to the end of the second Gunasthana and the absence of any Ayu bondage in the
Mitra Gunasthana. Therefore, subtracting the remaining two Ayus (Manushyayu,
Devayu) 27 Prakrutis are reduced. 4. Aviratasampadristi Mula 8 U077 Manushyayu,
Devayu and Tirthankara names are possible, adding these three to the 74
Prakrutis of Misra Gunasthana = 77. Note - Naraka and Deva, who are in the
fourth Gunasthana, bind Manushyayu, and Tiryach and Manushya bind Devayu. 5.
Veshaviras Mula 8 J.67 Vajrishabhanaracha Sanhanan, Manushyatrika (Manushygati,
Manushyayu, Manushyanupurvi) Apratyakhyanavaran Chatushk, Audarikdwik
(Audarikasarira,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava : pariziSTa sthAna ke anta meM ho jAne se zeSa 101 kA baMdha
sambhava hai| 3. mizra mUla 7 u074 siyaMcatrika (tiryacagati, tiryaMcAyu,
tiryacAnupUrvI) styAnaditrika (nidrA-nidrA, pracalA pracalA, styAnali)
durbhagatrika (dubhaMganAma, duHsvaranAma, AdeyanAma) anantAnubandhIcatuSka,
madhyama saMsthAnacatuSka (nyagrodhaparimaNDala, vAmana, sAdi, kubja) madhyama
saMhananacatuSka (RSabhanArAca. nArAca, ardhanArAca, kIlikA) nIcagotra,
udyotanAma, azubhavihAyogati, strIveda=25 kA bandha dUsare guNasthAna meM anta
hone va mitra guNasthAna meM kisI Ayu kA bandha sambhava na hone se zeSa do Ayu
(manuSyAyu, devAyu) ko ghaTA dene se 27 prakRtiyoM kama hotI haiM  /  4.
aviratasampadRSTi mUla 8 u077 manuSyAyu, devAyu va tIrthakara nAma kA bandha
hone se mizra guNasthAna kI 74 prakRtiyoM meM yaha tIna jor3eM=77  /  noTa-
naraka va deva jo caturtha guNasthAnavartI haiM, ve to manuSyAyu kA aura tiyeca
va manuSya devAyu kA bandha karate haiM  /  5. vezavirasa mUla 8 ja.67
vajaRSabhanArAcasaMhanana, manuSyatrika (manuSyagati, manuSyAyu, manuSyAnupUrvI)
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNacatuSka, audArikadvika (audArikazarIra,

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Financial Karma Granth: Appendix 169 6. Pramtvirat 7. Apramatsvirat
Audarikangopang) A total of 10 Prakruti's are liberated at the end of the fourth
Gunasthan, leaving 67 capable of binding. Original 8 U. 63 The binding and
liberation of the four Pratyakhyanavaran Chatushk occurs at the end of the fifth
Gunasthan, leaving 67-4 = 63 Prakruti's capable of binding. Original 87 U. 56,
58 At the end of the sixth Gunasthan, the binding and liberation of the six
Prakruti's - Arati, Shok, Asthir, Ashubh, Ayash:koti, Asatavedaniya - leaves 56
remaining. [A being who begins binding Devaayu in the sixth Gunasthan and ends
that binding there, attaining the seventh Gunasthan, has 56 Prakruti's bound. A
being who begins binding Devaayu in the sixth Gunasthan and ends it in the
seventh has 56-1=57 Prakruti's bound].  And since binding of Aharaksharir,
Aharak-angopang is possible in the seventh Gunasthan, adding two to the total,
56+2=58, 57-2=56 Prakruti's are capable of binding. Original 7 U. 58, 56, 26 In
the first part, 58 Karma Prakruti's are capable of binding. 8. Apurvakaran

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vitIya karmagrampa : pariziSTa 169 6. pramatavirata 7 apramatsavirata
audArikaaMgopAMga) kula 10 prakRtiyoM kA vinda caturtha guNastAna ke anta samaya
meM hone se zeSa 67 kA bandha sambhava hai| mUla 8 u0 63
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNacatuSka kA bandhaviccheda pAMcaveM guNasthAna ke anta samaya
meM ho jAne se 67-4 =63 prakRtiyoM kA bandha sambhava hai  /  mUla 87 u0 5658
chaThe guNasthAna ke anta meM-arati, zoka, asthira, azubha, ayaza:koti,
asAtAvedanIya, ina chaha prakRttiyoM kA bandhAdaccheda ho jAne se zeSa rahI 56
/  [jo jIvaM chaThe guNasthAna meM devAyu kA bandha prArambha kara usa bandha ko
vahIM samApta kara sAtaveM guNasthAna ko prApta karatA hai, usake 56 prakRtiyA~
va jo jIva chaThe muNasthAna meM devAyu kA bandha Arambha kara sAtava meM
samApta karatA hai usake 56-1=57 prakRtiyoM kA bandha rahatA haiM] tathA sAtaveM
guNasthAna meM AhArakazarIra, AhAraka-aMgopAMga kA bandha sambhava hone se do
jor3ane se 56+2=58, 57 - 2=56 prakatiyoM kA bandha sambhava hai| mUla 7 u058,
56, 26 prathama bhAga meM 58 karmaprakRtiyoM kA bandha sambhava hai| 8.
apUrvakaraNa

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
2. 0. | Karma Svas: Parishishta Note-1. In this Gunasthan, the beginning and end
of the bondage of Devayu does not occur. 2. At the end of the first part, Nidra,
Prachala is severed, therefore 58-2=56 3. From the second part to the sixth
part, this bondage of 56 is possible. At the end of the sixth part, Suradvik
(Devagati, Devagatyānupūrvi) Panchendriya jati, Shubhavihayogati, Prasanavak:
(S, Badar, Paryāpt, Prateka, Sthira, Shubha, Subhaga, Susvara, Ādeya)
Audārikasharīra, leaving the remaining four bodies, Audārik Angopāng, leaving
the remaining two Angopāng, Samachaturasrasansthān, Nirman, Tirthankar, Varna,
Gandha, Rasa, Sparsha, Agurulughuchatuska (Agurulughu, Upghāt, Parāvāsa,
Ucchvāsa) these 30 Prakṛtis are bound and severed. In the seventh part, these do
not remain. Therefore 56-30=26. 4. At the end of the seventh part of the eighth
Gunasthan, Hāsya, Rati, Jugupsā, Bhaya these 4 Prakṛtis are severed, leaving
26-4=22 Prakṛtis whose bondage is possible in the foundation. Mula 7 U 22, 21,
20, 16, 18 At the beginning of this Gunasthan, the bondage of 22 Prakṛtis. 1. At
the end of the first part, the severance of Purushaveda = 21. 2. At the end of
the second part, the severance of Sanjvalan Krodha = 20. 6. Anivritivāvar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2. 0  /  karmassava : pariziSTa noTa-1. isa guNasthAna meM devAyu ke bandha kA
prArambha va samApti nahIM hotii| 2. prathama bhAga ke anta meM nidrA, pracalA
kA viccheda ho jAtA hai ata: 58-2=56 3. dUsare mAga se chaThe bhAga taka yahI 56
kA bandha sambhava hai| chaThe bhAga ke anta meM suradvika (devagati,
devagatyAnupUrvI) paMcendriyajAti, zubhavihAyogati, prasanavaka: (sa, bAdara,
paryApta, pratyeka, sthira, zubha, subhaga, susvara, Adeya) audArikazarIra ko
chor3a zeSa cAra zarIra, audArika aMgopAMga ko chor3a zeSa do aMgopAMga,
samacaturasrasaMsthAna, nirmANa, tIrthakara, varNa, gandha, rasa, sparza,
agurulaghucatuSka (agurulaghu, upaghAta, parAvAsa, ucchvAsa) ina 30 prakRtiyoM
kA bandhaviccheda hotA hai| sAtava bhAma meM ye nahIM rhtii| ata: 56-30-26 /  /
4. AThaveM guNasthAna ke sAtava bhAga ke anta meM hAsya, rati, jugupsA, bhaya
ina 4 prakRtiyoM kA viccheda ho jAne me 26-4=22 prakRtiyoM kA bandha nIva meM
sambhava hai| mula 7 u0 22, 21, 20, 16, 18 isa guNasthAna ke prAraMbha meM 22
prakRtiyoM kA baMdha  /  1. pahale bhAga ke anta meM puruSaveda kA viccheda =21
/  2. dUsare bhAga ke anta meM saMjvalana krodha kA vicched-20| 6.
anivRttivAvara

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
201 Second Karma Granth: Appendix 3. At the end of the third part, the value of
Sanjwalan is = *: 4. In the fourth part, the separation of Sanjwalan Maya = 16.
5. At the end of the fifth part, there is no bondage of greed. Therefore, 17
remaining Natures will remain in the tenth Gunasthan. 10. Subtle Samparaya root
6 U. 17 At the end of the tenth Gunasthan, Darshanavaran 4, Uchchgotra 1,
Gyanavaran 5, Antaraya 5, Yashkoti 1 = 16 natures are bound Separation takes
place, 1 nature remains. 11. Upshantmoha root 1 U01 The bondage of Satavedaniya
takes place. [Its state is of two time units. Yoga is the cause.] 12. Kshonmoha
Root 1 Satavedaniya [The state of being Yoga-caused is of two time units. 13.
Sayogikevali root? Like the twelfth Gunasthan

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 201 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 3. tosare bhAga ke anta meM saMjvalana
mAna kA vi = *: 4. cauthe bhAga meM saMjvalana mAyA kA viccheda =16 /  5.
pA~cava bhAga ke anta samaya meM lobha kA bandha nahIM hotaa| ataH dasaveM
guNasthAna meM zeSa 17 prakRtiyAM rheNgii| 10. sUkSmasaMparAya mUla 6 U. 17
dasaveM guNasthAna ke anta samaya meMdarzanAvaraNIya 4, uccagotra 1,
jJAnAvaraNIya 5, antarAya 5, yazaHkotinAma 1=16 prakRtiyoM kA bandha viccheda ho
jAtA hai, zeSa 1 prakRti rahatI hai| 11. upazAntamoha mUla 1 u01 sAtAvedanIya kA
bandha hotA hai  /  [sthiti isakI do samaya mAtra kI hotI hai  /  yoga nimittaka
hai|] 12. kSoNamoha mUla 1 sAtAvedanIya [yoganimittaka hone meM sthiti do samaya
mAna kI hai| 13, sayogikevalI mUla ? bArahaveM guNasthAna kI taraha

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 202 14. Ayogikevalo Mula Osh 1. Mithyatva 2. Sasvadan 3. Misra Abandhak Drish
Uday-Vivaran Kamantva Parishishta : 300 Mula Prakriti Uttara Prakriti 122
Jnanaavaraneya 5, Darshanavaraneya 6 Vedaniya 2, Mohaniya 28, Ayu 4, Naam 67,
Gov 2, Ant Ray 5 = 122 (Misra Mohaniya and Samyaktava Mohaniya, these two
Prakritis do not have bandha but have uday, therefore 20 Prakritis of Mohaniya
are counted.) Mula 1 U 117 Misra Mohaniya, Samyaktava Mohaniya, Aharakhanik and
Tirthankar Naam Karma do not have uday, therefore 5 Prakritis are less. Mula 8 U
111 Sukshmatrik (Sukshma Apariapt Sadharan Naam) Atap Naam, Mithyatva Mohaniya,
Narakanupurvi = 6 Prakritis do not have uday. Mula 8 U 100 Anantanubandhi
Chatushk, Sthavar Naam, Ekendriya Jati, Vikalendriya Trik (Dwiendriya
Triendriya,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 202 14. ayogikevalo mUla oSa 1. mithyAtva 2. sAsvAdana 3. mizra abandhaka dRS
udaya-vivaraNa kamaMstava pariziSTa : 300 mUla prakRti uttaraprakRti 122
jJAnAvaraNIya 5, darzanAvaraNIya 6 vedanIya 2, mohanIya 28, Ayu 4, nAma 67, gova
2, anta rAya 5 = 122 (mizramohanIya aura samyaktvamohanIya ina do prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha nahIM hotA kintu udaya hotA hai ataH mohanIya kI 20 prakRtiyA~ ginI gaI
haiM  /  mUla 1 u0 117 mizramohanIya, samyaktvamohanIya, AhArakahnika aura
tIrthakaranAmakarma kA udaya nahIM hone se 5 prakRtiyA~ nyUna | mUla 8 u0 111
sUkSmatrika (sUkSma aparyApta sAdhAraNa nAma ) Atapa nAma, mithyAtva mohanIya,
narakAnupUrvI = 6 prakRtiyoM kA udaya nahIM hotA hai  /  mUla 8 u0 100
anantAnubandhI catuSka, sthAvaranAma, ekendriyajAti, vikalendriyatrika
(dvIndriya trIndriya,

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix  **203. Chaturindriya:**  The 12 Prakṛtis
(tiryanchānupūrvī, manushyanupūrvī, devānupūrvī) do not arise, but the
Miśramohaniya does arise. Therefore, (191 - 11 - 08) is possible.   **4.
Aviratasamyagdṛṣṭi Mūla 8** U.104: Samyaktva Mohaniya and the Anupūrvī Chatuṣka
can arise. But Miśramohaniya does not arise. Therefore, 100 + 5 - 1 - 104 is
possible.  **5. Deśavirat Mūla 8** U.87: Apratyākhyānāvaraṇa Chatuṣka,
Manushyanupūrvī, Tiryanchānupūrvī, Vaikriyāṣṭaka (Devagati, Devāyu, Devānupūrvī,
Narakati, Narakāyu, Narakānupūrvī, Vaikriyasharīra, Vaikriya Angopānga),
Durbhagatrik (Durbhaganām, Anādeyanām, Ayashahkoṭinām) = 17 do not arise.
Therefore, 104 - 17 = 87 is possible.  **6. Pramattavirat Mūla 8** U.1:
Tiryachgati, Tiryanchānupūrvī, Nīchagotra, Udyotanām, Pratyākhyānāvaraṇakṣaya
Chatuṣka do not arise, but Āhārakaddhika can arise. Therefore, 87 - 8 + 2 = 81
Prakṛtis are eligible to arise.  **7. Apratamatavirat Mūla 8** U.76:
Styānaddhitrik (Nidrā-Nidrā, Prachalā-Prachalā, Styānaddhi) and Āhārakaddhika in
the Apratamat state...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 203 caturindriya) tiryaMcAnupUrvI,
manuSyAnupUrvI, devAnupUrvI-12 prakRtiyoM kA to udaya nahIM hotA kintu
mizramohanIya kA udaya hotA hai ataH (191 - 1 1 -08 kA udasa sambhava hai| 4.
aviratasamyagdRSTi mUla 8 u0104 samyaktvamohanIya va AnupUrvIcatuSka kA udaya
sambhava hai| kintu mizramohanIya kA udaya nahIM hotaa| ata: 100+5-1-104 kA
udaya sambhava hai| 5. dezavirata mUla u.87 apratyAkhyAnAvaraNacatuSka,
manuSyAnupUrvI, tiryacAnupUrvI, vaikriyASTaka (devagati, devAyu, devAnupUrvI,
narakati, narakAyu, narakAnupUrvI, vaikriyazarIra, vaikriya aMgopAMga)
durbhagatrika (durbhaganAma, anAdeyanAma, ayazaHkotinAma)=17 kA udaya sambhava
nahIM hotaa| ataH 104-17=87 kA udaya sambhava hai| 6. pramattavirata mUla 8 u01
tiryacagati, tiryaMcAnapUrvI, nIcagotra, udyotanAma,
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNakaSAyacatuSka kA udaya to sambhava nahIM kintu AhArakaddhika
kA sambhava hone se 87-8+2=81 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya haiM  /  7. apramattavirata
mUla 8 u.76 styAnaddhitrika (nidrA-nidrA, pracalA-pracalA, styAnaddhi) va
AhArakaddhika kA apramatta avasthA

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
204 8. A-pūrva-karaṇa Karma, thus, is a residue It is not possible for the
1-5-76 to arise. 10. Lakshma-sampāya [Although the sixth guna-sthāna is pramada-
varti (eager) due to the use of labdhi while making the āhāraka body, but then
due to the purity of the determination of that śarīrī jīva, it is not called
pramadi even when that body exists in the seventh guna-sthāna] Source U. 72 J
The arising and cessation of the four natures of samyak-tva-mohaniya,
ardhanārācha-kīlikā, sevārta-sanhanana occurs at the end of the seventh guna-
sthāna, therefore it is not possible for these four to arise in this guna-
sthāna. Therefore, it is possible for the 76-4-72 natures to arise! C Anivriti-
bāvar Mūla 30-66 It is not possible for the arising of the six natures of hāsya,
rati, arati, śoka, bhaya, jugupsā. Because their arising and cessation occurs at
the end of the eighth guna-sthāna. Source U. 60 It is not possible for the
arising of the six natures of strī-veda, puruṣa-veda, napumsaka-veda,
sanjvalana-krodha, māna, māyā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 204 8. apUrvakaraNa karmastatha : pariziSTa meM udaya sambhava nahIM ataH 1 -
5-76 kA udaya sambhava hai  /  10. lakSmasaMpAya [ yadyapi AhAraka zarIra banAte
samaya labdhi kA upayoga karane se chaThA guNasthAna pramAdavartI ( utsukatA se
) hotA hai, parantu phira usa tad zarIrI jIva ke adhyavasAya kI vizuddhi se
sAtaveM guNasthAna meM tad zarIra ke hone para bhI pramAdI nahIM kahA jAtA []
mUla u0 72 J samyaktvamohanIya, ardhanArAca kIlikA, sevArtasaMhanana ina cAra
prakRtiyoM kA udaya viccheda sAtaveM guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM ho jAne se
isa guNasthAna meM ina cAra kA udaya sambhava nahIM  /  ataH 76 - 4 72
prakRtiyoM kA udaya sambhava hai ! C anivRttibAvara mUla 30 66 hAsya, rati,
arati, zoka, bhaya, jugupsA =6 prakRtiyoM kA udaya sambhava nahIM hai  /  kyoMki
inakA udayaviccheda AThaveM guNasthAna ke anta samaya meM ho jAtA hai  /  mUla
u0 60 strIveda, puruSaveda, napuMsakaveda, saMjvalana kodha, mAna, mAyA = 6
prakRtiyoM kA udayaM sambhava nahIM  /

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix 205  [Their emergence occurs only until the
final time of the ninth Gunasthan. Note: If the beginning of the series is a
male, then he will first stop the emergence of the Purusha Veda, then the Stri
Veda, then the Napunsaka Veda, and then the Sanjwalana Adhik. If it is a female,
then she will first stop the emergence of the Stri Veda, then the Purusha Veda,
then the Napunsaka Veda, and if it is a... then he will first stop the emergence
of the... Veda, then the... Veda, then the Purusha Veda. 11. Upshanta Moh Mula 7
U. 56 The emergence of Sanjwalana Lobha does not remain. [Its emergence is
severed at the final time of the tenth Gunasthan. Those who have the Rishabha
Naga Cha and Nara Cha Sanhanan are the ones who perform the Upshama series. 12.
Kshina Moh Mula 7 U. 57 The emergence of Rishabha Nara Cha and Nara Cha Sanhanan
is not possible. Their emergence occurs until the eleventh Gunasthan. The
Kshapaka series cannot be formed without Rishabha Nara Cha Sanhanan, therefore
56-2=57. At the final time of the twelfth Gunasthan, the emergence of Nidra and
Prachala also does not remain, therefore 57-2=55. 13. Sayogikevali Mula 4 U. 42
Jnanavaraniya 5, Darshanavaraniya 4, Antaraya...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 205 [inakA udaya to nauveM guNasthAna ke
antima samaya taka hI hotA hai| noTa-yadi zreNI kA prArambhaka puruSa hai to
pahale puruSaveda ke, phira strIveda ke, phira napuMsaka veda ke udaya ko rokegA
tadanantara saMjvalanadhika ko| yadi strI hai to pahale strIveda ko, phira
puruSaveda, phira napusakaveda ke udaya ko aura yadi taka hai to pahale naI
sAyada ko, kirAtrI veda ko, phira puruSaveda ke udaya ko rokegA  /  11.
upazAMtamoha mUla 7 u. 56 saMjvalana lobha kA udaya nahIM rahatA hai| [usakA
udaya to dasaveM guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM viccheda ho jAtA hai  /  jinako
RSabhanAgaca va nArAca saMhanana hotA hai ve hI upazama zreNI karate haiN| 12.
kSINa moha mUla 7 u0 57 RSabhanArAca va nArAcasaMhanana kA udaya sambhava nahIM
| inakA udaya gyArahaveM guNasthAna taka hotA hai| kSapakazreNI
banaRSabhanArAghasaMhanana ke binA nahIM hotI, ataH 56-2=57 bArahaveM guNasthAna
ke anta samaya meM nidrA, pracalA kA bhI udaya nahIM rahatA ata: 57-2 -55 13
sayogikevalI mUla 4 u0 42 jJAnAvaraNIya 5, darzanAvaraNIya 4, antarAya

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 206 **Karmastava: Parishishta**  **5=14** arises only until the end of the
twelfth Gunasthan. Therefore, **55-14=41** and the Tirthankara name karma can
arise, therefore **41+1=42** types of karma can arise.  **14. Ayogikavali Mula
4**  **U 12** Audarikadvik (Audarikasarira, Audarik-angopanga), Asthiradvik
(Asthiranama, Ashubhanam), Khagatidvik (Shubhavihayogati, Ashubhavihayogati),
Pratyekatrik (Pratyekanama, Shubhanam, Sthiranama), Sansthanashatka
(Samachaturasra, Nyagnodha, Sadi, Vaman Kuma, Hunda), Amulpatumka (Agurulathu,
Upghāt, Parāghāt, Ucchvās Nām), Varnachatuska (Varna, Gandha, Rasa, Sparsha),
Nirmananama, Tanjasasarira, Karmanasarira, Vajrishabhanaracha Samhanan, Dusvara,
Susvara, Sata or Asata Vedaniya (one of these), these **30** types of karma can
arise only until the end of the thirteenth Gunasthan. Therefore, subtracting
these, the remaining **42.30=12** types of karma remain in the fourteenth
Gunasthan. The remaining **12** types of karma that arise until the end of the
fourteenth Gunasthan are: Subhaganama, Adayanama, Yash:koti nama, Sata or Asata
Vedaniya (one of these), Satrik (Sanam, Badaranama, Paryaptanama), Panchendriya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 206 karmastava : pariziSTa 5=14 kA udaya bArahaveM guNasthAna ke antima samaya
taka hI rahatA hai| ataH 55-14 =41 tathA tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kA udaya sambhava
hai ataH 41+1-42 prakRtiyoM kA udaya sambhava 14. ayogikavalI mula 4 u0 12
audArikadvika (audArikazarIra audArika-aMgopAMga) asthiradvika (asthiranAma,
azubhanAma), khagatidvika (zubhavihAyogati, azubhavihAyogati) pratyekatrika
(pratyekanAma, zubhanAma, sthiranAma) saMsthAnaSaTka (samacaturasra, nyagnodha,
sAdi, vAmana kuma, huMDa) amulapAtumkA (agurulathu, upaghAta, parAghAta,
ucchvAsa nAma) varNacatuSka (varNa, gandha, rasa, sparza) nirmANanAma,
taMjasazarIra, kArmaNazarIra, vajaRSabhanArAcasaMhanana dusvara, susvara, sAtA
yA asAtAvedanIya meM se koI eka, yaha 30 prakRtiyA~ terahaveM guNasthAna ke
antima samaya taka hI udaya ko pA sakatI hai  /  ataH inako ghaTAne para zeSa
42.30 = 12 prakRtiyoM caudahaveM guNasthAna meM rahatI haiN| zeSa jina 12
prakRttiyoM kA udaya caudahavaM guNasthAna ke antima samaya taka rahatA hai, ve
yaha haiMsubhaganAma, AdeyanAma, yaza:kotinAma, sAtAasAtA meM se koI eka
vedanIya karma, satrika (sanAma, bAdaranAma, paryAptanAma) paMcendriya

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix ## Ouch 1. Mithyatva 2. Sasvavān 3. Misra 207
Jāti, Manushayau, Manushayagati Tirthankaranām Ucch Gotra - 12 5. Vaishviret 6.
Pramattavireta ## Udiranā - Description According to the Mulaprakriti Udayayogya
Mula 8 U 117 Misramohaniya, Samyaktvamohaniya, Aharakaddhika and
Tirthankaranām's Udiranā is not possible, hence 5 Prakritis are less. Mula 8
Understand it as Uday. ## 4. Aviratasamyagdristi Mula Chalati 122 30 111 Mula 30
100 Udayavat 12 Prakritis' Udiranā is not possible, but Misramohaniya's Udiranā
is possible. U 104 Misramohaniya's Udiranā is not possible. Samyaktvamohaniya
and four Anupūrvi can be Udiranā. Therefore 100 ÷ 5 - 1 - 104. Bhool 8 087
Udayavat 17 Prakritis' Udiranā is possible. Mula 8 J 81 Udayavat is possible.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa oca 1. mithyAtva 2. sAsvAvana 3. mizra 207
jAti, manuSyAyu, manuSyagati tIrthaMkaranAma ucca gotra - 12 5. vaizavirata 6.
pramattavirata udIraNA-vivaraNa mUlaprakRti udayayogya ke anusAra mUla 8 u0 117
mizramohanIya, samyaktvamohanIya, AhArakaDhika va tIrthaMkaranAma kI udIraNA
sambhava nahIM hone se 5 prakRtiyA~ nyuna  /  mUla 8 udaya ke samAna samajhanA
/  4. aviratasamyagdRSTi mUla calati 122 30 111 mUla 30 100 udayavat 12
prakRtiyoM kI udIraNA to sambhava nahIM, va mizramohanIya kI udIraNA sambhava
hai  /  u0 104 mizramohanIya kI udIraNA sambhava nahIM  /  samyaktvamohanIya va
cAra AnupUrvI ko udIramA sambhava hai  /  ata: 100/5-1-104 | bhUla 8 087
udayavat 17 prakRtiyoM kI udIraNA sambhava hai  /  mUla 8 ja0 81 udayavat
sambhava hai |

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
200 Karmastava: Parishishta 7, Aprammattavirata Mula 6 U073 Vedaniyadvik (Sata,
Asata) Aharakdvik, Styanadditrik, Manushayau-8. In the final time of the sixth
Gunasthan, it is possible for the udirana of these eight prakritis to stop,
resulting in the udirana of 81-8-73. Note- In the sixth Gunasthan, there are no
further adhyavasyas in which the udirana of Sata, Asata Vedaniya, and Manushayau
can occur. Therefore, these three karma prakritis are counted less than the
udaya. 8. Apurvakarana U066 Samyaktvamohaneya, Ardhanarachamsahnan,
Kolikasahnan, Se Vartasahnan, the udirana of these four prakritis is not
possible. 6. Anivritibavar Mula 6 Hasy, Rati, Arati, Shok, Bhay, Jugupsa-6, the
udirana of these is not possible. 10. Sukshmasamprayay Mula 6 U057 Strived,
Puspaved, Napusakaved, Sanjwalan Krodh, ...., Man, Maya-6, the udirana of these
is not possible. 11. Upashantamooh Mula 5 U. 56 Sanjwalan Lobh, the udirana of
this does not occur. Mula 6

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 200 karmastava : pariziSTa 7, apramattavirata mUla 6 u073 vedanIyadvika (sAtA,
asAtA) AhArakadvika, styAnaddhitrika, manuSyAyu-8  /  chaThe guNasthAna ke
antima samaya meM ina ATha prakRtiyoM kI udIraNA ruka jAne me 81-8-73 kI udIraNA
sambhava hai| noTa-chaThe guNasthAna me Age aise adhyavasAya nahIM hote jisameM
sAtA, asAtA vedanIya, manughyAyu kI adIraNA ho sake ataH udaya kI apekSA ye tIna
karma prakRtiyA~ kama ginI haiN| 8. apUrvakaraNa u066 samyaktvamohanIya,
ardhanArAcasaMhanana, kolikAsaMhanana, se vArtasaMhanana ina cAra prakRtiyoM kI
udIraNA sambhava nhiiN| 6. anivRttibAvara mUla 6 hAsya, rati, arati, zoka,
bhaya, jugupsA-6 kI udoraNA sambhava nahIM haiN| 10. sUkSmasaMparAya mUla 6 u057
strIveda, puspaveda, napusakaveda, saMjvalana krodha, . .... , mAna, mAyA-6 kI
udIraNA sambhava nahIM hai  /  11. upazAMtamoha mUla 5 u. 56 saMjvalana lobha kI
udIraNA nahIM hotii| mUla 6

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix 12. Kshina-moha 13. Sayogika-kevali 14.
Ayogika-kevali Ogh 1. Mithyatva Mula 5 U 54 Rishabhanaracha and Naracha Sanhanan
are not mounted on the Kshapaka Shreni. 56 - 2 = 54 Sleep is not possible beyond
the end time, nor is the stimulation of Prachala. Therefore, 54 - 2 = 52 **30
€** Mula 2 Jnana-avaraneya 5, Darshan-avaraneya 4, Antaraya 5 = 14 Prakritis are
not possible to stimulate in this Gunasthan, and by adding Tirthankara-nama, 52
- 14 + 1 = 3 Prakritis are possible to stimulate. No karma is stimulated. Satta-
vivaran Mula Prakriti Uttara Prakriti 148 Jnana-avaraneya 5, Darshan-avaraneya
4, Vedaniya 2, Mohaniya 25, Ayu 4, Nama 13 (Pinda Pra 65, each Sadshak 10,
Stavaradshak 1063) Gotra 2 Antaraya 5. Mula 8 U 148 The being who has first
bound the Narakayu, then attains Kshayopa-shमिक Samyaktva and then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 12. kSINamoha 13. sayogikevalI 14. ayogikevalI
ogha 1. mithyAtva mUla 5 u0 54 RSabhanArAca va nArAca saMhanana, kSapakazreNI
ArUr3ha ke nahIM hote  /  56-2=54 anta samaya ke Age nidrA, pracalA kI udIraNA
sambhava nahIM  /  ataH 54 - 2=52 tw 30 EUR mUla 2 jJAnAvaraNIya 5,
darzanAvaraNIya 4. antarAya 5= 14 prakRtiyA~ isa guNasthAna meM na rahane meM
udIraNA sambhava nahIM, tathA tIrthaMkaranAma jor3a dene se 52 - 14+1=3
prakRtiyoM kI udIraNA sambhava hai  /  kisI karma kI udIraNA nahIM hotI hai  /
sattA-vivaraNa mUla prakRti uttara prakRti 148 jJAnAvaraNIya 5, darzanAvaraNIya
hai, vedanIya 2, mohanIya 25, Ayu 4, nAma 13 (piMDa pra0 65, pratyeka sadazaka
10, sthAvaradazaka 1063) gotra 2 antarAya 5  /  mUla 8 u0 148 jisa jIva ne
pahale narakAyu kA bandha kara liyA ho, va phira kSAyopazamika samyaktva pAkara
usake

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A being who has bound the *Jinanama karma* due to the *parishista vala* of
*karmastava* will inevitably experience *sampartava* when going to hell, but the
*Tirthankara nama karma* exists in the *gunasthan*. Therefore, there are 148
*prakritis* in this *gunasthan*.  (In terms of eligibility) 2. *Sasvadan* root 8
Ex. 147 No being can attain the *Sasvadan gunasthan* by binding the *Tirthankara
nama karma*, therefore it does not have the *Jinanama karma* in other
*gunasthanas*. 3. *Mishra* root Ex. 147 Similar to other *gunasthanas*. 4.
*Aviratasamyagdristi* root 8 Ex. 148, 145, 141, 141, 138  Although a being
cannot have more than two lifetimes at any given time in terms of the
possibility of existence, the binding and existence of karmas that are not
present can occur if the appropriate materials are available. Therefore, in
terms of eligibility (in terms of *aupashamika samyaktvī*, *kshayopamika
samyaktvī*, and *acharamasharīrī*) 148 (a) *Charamasharīra* (kshapka) fourth
*gunasthanavarti*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava : pariziSTa vala se jinanAmakarma bAMdha liyA ho vaha jIva naraka
meM jAte samaya samparatva ko sAma3.:. mithyAkha ko avazya hI prApta karatA hai,
parantu tIrthakaranAmakarma kI sattA to hama guNasthAna meM hai, ataH isa
guNasthAna meM 148 prakRttiyoM kI sattA hai| (yogyatA kI apekSA se) 2. sAsvAdana
mUla 8 u0 147 koI bhI jIva tIrthakaranAmakarma bAMdhakara sAsvAdana guNasthAna
prApta nahIM karatA hai ataH dUsare guNasthAna meM ise jinanAmakarma kI sattA
nahIM hotI hai| 3. mizra mUla u0147 dUsare guNasthAna ke samAna 4.
aviratasamyagdRSTi mUla 8 u0 148, 145, 141, 141, 138 sambhavasattA kI apekSA me
yadyapi kisI eka samaya meM kisI eka jIva ko do Ayu se adhika kI sattA nahIM
hotI, parantu yogya sAmagrI milane para jo karma vidyamAna nahIM haiM, unakA bhI
bandha va sattA ho sakatI hai| ata: yogyatA kI apekSA se 148 (aupazamika
samyaktvI, kSAyopamika samyaktvI acaramazarIrI kI apekSA se) (ka) caramazarIra
(kSapaka) caturtha guNasthAnavartI

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Second Karma Granth: Appendix 211 Three Ayus are not present, from 145 (b)
Kshayik Samyaktvī, Avaram Shariri's Anantānubandhi Chatushk and Darshan Trik are
not present, therefore 148-7=14130. (c) Upsham Shreni (Vishayona - those Karma
Prakṛitis which have been transferred to other Prakṛitis in the present, their
presence is not there in the present, but their presence is possible again) in
comparison to 148. Anantānubandhi Chatushk and Darshan Trik are less than 151
(d) Charam Shariri in comparison to (Kshayik Samyaktvī) Anantānubandhi 4,
Darshan Trik 3, reducing Ayu by 3, 130 Pra. 5. Veshvirat Mula 8 0 similar to the
fourth Gunasthan in comparison to possible presence (in ability) 148 k vat 145
kh vat 141 g vat 141 gh vat 138 6. Prammatvirat Mula 8 u similar to the fourth
Gunasthan in comparison to possible presence (in ability) 148

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvatIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 211 ke tIna Ayu kI sattA narahane se 145 pra.
(kha) kSAyika samyaktvI, avaramazarIrI ke anantAnubandhI catuSka va darzanatrika
kI sattA nahIM rahatI ataH 148-7=14130  /  (ga) upazamazreNI (visayojanA-jo
karma prakRtiyA~ vartamAna meM to kisI dUsarI prakRtiyoM meM saMkramita kara dI
gayI hoM, vartamAna meM to unakI sattA nahIM hai, parantu phira se unakI sattA
sambhava ho) kI apekSA me 148 | anantAnuvandhIcatuSka va darzanatrika ke nyUna
hone para 151 (gha) caramazarIrI kI apekSA meM (kSAyika samyaktvI)
anantAnubandhI 4, darzanatrika 3, Ayu 3 ke kama karane para 130 pra0 kii| 5.
vezavirata mUla 8 0 cauthe guNasthAna ke sadaza sambhava sattA kI apekSA se
(yogyatA me) 148 ka vat 145 kha vat 141 ga vat 141 gha bat 138 6. pramattavirata
mUla 8 u0 cauthe guNasthAna ke sadRza sambhava sattA kI apekSA se (yogyatA me)
148

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Karmastava: Parishista**  7. Aprammattavirata 8. Apurvakarana  **K** vat 145
**Kh** vat 141 **G** vat 141 **P** vat 138 **Mula** 8 **Uo** Fourth guna's an ke
sadrish sambhav satta ki apeksha 148 **K** vat 145 **Kh** vat 141 **G** vat 141
**Gh** vat 138 **Mula** 8 **Uo** 148, 142, 136, 138 Sambhavsatta ki apeksha se
(yogyata se) 148. Anantanubandhi va narakayu, tiryanchayu wala upshama gheni
nahi kar sakta, is apeksha se 142. Anantanubandhichatushk, darshanatrik
(visanjoyana) narak ba tiryanchayu in prakritiyon ko kamane me 136. (Panch
Sangrah me kaha hai ki anantanubandhichatushk ki vimanyojana bina jeev
upshamshreni par aruddh nahi ho sakta. Sarvamat hai ki narak va tiryanch
ayukarma ki satta wala ho upgamshreni nahi chad sakta.) **Gh** vat 138

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmastava : pariziSTa 7. apramattavirata 8. apUrvakaraNa ka bat 145 kha vat
141 gavat 141 pavat 138 mUla 8 u0 cauthe guNasyAna ke sadRza sambhava sattA kI
apekSA 148 kavat 145 khaM vat 141 ga bat 141 ghavat 138 mUla8 u0 148, 142, 136,
138 sambhavasatA kI apekSA se (yogyatA se) 148  /  anantAnubandhI va narakAyu,
tiryacAyu vAlA upazama gheNI nahIM kara sakatA, isa apekSA se 142  /
anantAnubandhIcatuSka, darzanatrika (visaMyojanA) naraka ba tiryaMcAyu ina
prakRtiyoM ko kama karane me 136  /  (paMca saMgraha meM kahA hai ki
anantAnubandhIcatuSka kI vimaMyojanA binA jIva upazamazreNI para ArUr3ha nahIM
ho sktaa| sarvamata hai ki naraka va tiryaMca Ayukarma kI sattA vAlA ho
upagamazreNI nahIM car3ha sakatA  / ) ghavat 138

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Second Karma Granth: Appendix 6. Anivrittikaran Mula 8 213 U 148 Final 103
Possibly, in the Upshama श्रेणी, the Anantanubandhi Chatushk and the existence
of Naraka Tiryanchayu would not remain, 148-6142. In the Upshama श्रेणी, the
disassociation of the Anantanubandhi Chatushk and Darshan Trik, and the absence
of Naraka Tiryanchayu, 146-7-2136. In the Kshapaka श्रेणी, Part 1 - The
Anantanubandhi 4, Darshan Trik, and the existence of Aayu 3 would not remain.
148-10138 Part 2 -  Sthavar Dwik, Tiryancha Dwik, Naraka Dwik 1 Atap Udyot
Styanaddhi Trik, Ekendriya Vikalendriya Trik, the existence of Sadharan Naama
Karma would not remain. 138-16= 122 r Part 3 - At the end of the second part,
Apratyakhyana -A Pratyakhyana Avarana Varana Chatushk, Chaturuk, their existence
would be destroyed. 122-80 114 — Part 4 - At the end of the third part, the
destruction of Napunsak Ved. 114-1 113 Part 5 - At the end of the fourth part,
the destruction of Stri Ved. =

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 6. anivRttikaraNa mUla 8 213 u0 148 aMtima 103
sambhavatA kI apekSA 148 upazamazreNI meM anantAnubandhIcatuSka aura naraka
tiryaMcAyu kI sattA na rahane para 148-6142  /  upazamazreNI meM
anantAnubandhIcatuSka aura darzanatrika kI visaMyojanA va naraka tiyacAyu kA
abhAva hone se 146 - 7 - 2136  /  kSapaka zreNI meM bhAga 1 meM - anantAnubandhI
4, darzanatrika, Ayu tIna kI sattA na rahane se  /  148 - 10138 bhAga 2 meM -
sthAvaradvika, tiryacadvika, narakadvika 1 Atapa udyota styAnaddhitrika,
ekendriya vikalendriyatrika, sAdhAraNa nAmakarma kI sattA nahIM rahatI 138-16=
122 r bhAga 3 meM dUsare bhAga ke anta meM apratyAkhyAnA -A pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
varaNacatuSka, caturuka kI sattA kSaya ho jAtI hai  /  122 -80 114 -- bhAga 4
meM tIsare bhAga ke anta meM napuMsakaveda kA kSaya ho jAne se  /  114-1 113
bhAga 5 meM - bothe bhAga ke anta meM strIveda kA =

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma-srava: From the destruction of the Pariśiṣṭa. 113-1=112. In the sixth part
- at the end of the fifth part, the destruction of Hāsa, Rati, Arati, Śoka,
Bhaya, Jugupsā. 112-6=106. In the seventh part - at the end of the sixth part,
the destruction of Puruṣaved. 106-1=105. In the eighth part - at the end of the
seventh part, the destruction of Sanjvalana Krodha. 105-1=104. In the ninth part
- at the end of the eighth part, the destruction of Sanjvalana Māna. 104-1=103.
In the tenth part - at the end of the ninth part, the destruction of Sanjvalana
Māyā. 103-1=102. These 102 Prakṛtis are the essence of the tenth. Source - J.
148; Final 102. In comparison to the Sambhava-sattā, 148. In the Upasama-śreṇī,
due to the reduction of the Ananta-anubandhi-caturṣka and Naraka-tiyancāyu
(through the Visam-yojanā), 148-6=142. In the Upasama-śreṇī, like the ninth
Guṇasthāna, 136. In the Kṣapaka-śreṇī, 102. At the end of the tenth Guṇasthāna,
the destruction of Sanjvalana Lobha leaves 101.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmassava : pariziSTa kSaya ho jAne se  /  113-1=112 bhAga 6 meM-pA~caveM
bhAga ke anta meM hAsya, rati, arati, zoka, bhaya, jugupsA kA kSaya hone se  /
112-6=106 bhAga 7 meM - chaThe bhAga ke antasamaya meM puruSaveda kA kSaya hone
se 106-1= 105 bhAga meM-sAtaveM bhAga ke anta meM saMjvalana krodha kA kSaya
hone se 105 1= bhAga meM AThaveM bhAga ke anta meM saMjvalana mAna kA kSaya hone
se 104-.1= 10. sakSamasaMparAya nauve bhAga ke anta meM saMjvalana mAyA kA kSaya
hone se 102 prakRtiyAM jo 10veM kI sattA hai| mUla - ja0 148; aMtima 102
sambhavasattA kI apekSA se 148 upazamazreNI meM anantAnubandhIcatuSka va naraka
tiyaMcAyu ko kama karane se (visaM yojanA se) 148-6=142 upazamazreNI meM nauveM
guNasthAnavat) 136  /  kSapakazreNI meM 102, dasa guNasthAna ke antima samaya
meM saMjva. lana lobha kA kSaya hone se zeSa rahI 101

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Karma Granth: Appendix **11. Upshantmoha** **12. Ksheenmoha**  **215**
The natures which are in the first time of the twelfth Gunasthan. **Source:** U.
148, 142, 138 **With respect to Sambhavata:** 14 = Upsham श्रेणी में
अनन्तानुबन्धीचतुष्क व नरकायु, विचायु घटाने से 148–6–142 Upsham श्रेणी में 138
(There is no Kshapak श्रेणी in this Gunasthan.) **Source:** 7 **U. 101** In the
Dvicharam time, due to the destruction of Nidra and Prachala, 101 - 2 = 66 In
the Ant time, due to the destruction of Jnanavarana 5, Darshanavarana 4, and
Antaraya 5, 66 - 14 = 85, which are the natures of the thirteenth Gunasthan.
(There is no Upsham श्रेणी in this Gunasthan.) **13. Sayogikevali** **Source:**
4 **14. Ayogikevali** **Source:** 4 **U. 85** 85 natures, 72 natures which are
destroyed in the Dvicharam time of the fourteenth Gunasthan, and 12 natures
which are destroyed in the Ant time, and one of either Satavedaniya or
Asatavedaniya. **U. 12, 13** In the fourteenth Gunasthan, until the Dvicharam
time, the 85 natures remain. In the Dvicharam time -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa 11. upazAntamoha 12. kSINamoha 215 prakRtiyA~
jo bArahaveM guNasthAna ke prathama samaya meM haiM  /  mUla u0 148, 142, 138
sambhavattA kI apekSA 14= upazamazreNI meM anantAnubandhIcatuSka va narakAyu,
vicAyu ghaTAne se 148-6-142 upazamazreNI meM 138 ( isa guNasthAna meM
kSapakazreNI nahIM hotI hai  / ) mUla 7 u0 101 dvicarama samaya meM nidrA va
pracalA kA kSaya hona se 101 - 2=66 antima samaya meM jJAnAvaraNa 5
darzanAvaraNa 4 aura antarAya 5 kA kSaya hone se 66-14= 85, jo terahaveM
guNasthAna kI sattA prakRtiyA~ haiM  /  (isa guNasthAna meM upazamazreNI nahIM
hotI  /  13. sayogikevalI mUla 4 14. ayogikevalI mUla 4 u0 85 85 prakRtiyA~,
caudahaveM guNasthAna ke dvicarama samaya meM kSaya hone vAlI 72 prakRtiyA~ evaM
anta samaya meM kSaya hone vAlI 12 prakRtiyA~ tathA sAtAvedanIya yA
asAtAvedanIya meM meM koI eka  /  u0 12 13 caudahaveM guNasthAna ke dvicarama
samaya paryanta jo 85 prakRtiyoM kI sattA rahatI hai usameM meM dvicarama samaya
meM-

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
216 Karmas, namely: Parishishta Devadhik, Khagatidvik, Sharira Nama 5, Bandhana
Nama 5, Sanghatan 5, Nirman, Sanhanan 6, Asthirshadak, Sansthan 6, Agurulavu
Chatushk, Apariapt Nama, Sata or Asata Vedaniya, Pratyekatrik, Angopag 3, Suswar
Nama, Nich Gotra = 72, become the nature of the Prakruti: At the end of the 14th
Gunasthan, the absence of any one of these 13 Prakruti, namely: Manushyatrika,
Vastratrika, Yash Kirti Nama, Aadey Nama, Subhag, Tirthankara Nama, Uchch Gotra,
Panchendriya Jati, Sata or Asata Vedaniya, leads to the liberation of the soul.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
216 karmastava : pariziSTa devaddhika, khagatidvika, zarIranAma 5, bandhananAma
5, saMghAtana 5, nirmANa, saMhanana 6, asthiraSadaka, saMsthAna 6,
agurulavucatuSka, aparyAptanAma, sAtA yA asAtAvedanIya, pratyekatrika, aMgopAga
3, susvaranAma, nIca gotra= 72, prakRtiyoM kI sanA kA ho jAtA hai : caudahaveM
guNasthAna ke antima samaya meMmanuSyatrika, vasatrika, yaza kIrtinAma,
AdeyanAma, subhaga, tIryakaranAma, uccagotra, paMcendriyajAti, sAtA yA
asAtAvedanIya meM se koI eka ina 13, prakRtiyoM kA abhAva ho jAne se AtmA mukta
ho jAtI hai|

