Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/090241/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Srimad Devendrasuri Virachit 2155 Bandhaswamitva Namak Karmagranth Hitiya
Bhag [Bhool, Gatyarth, Vishesharth, Vivechan Evam Tipyan Tatha Anek Parisishta
Thuts] Sthakhyakar Mahadharakesari, Pravartak Muni Shri Mishrimal Ji Maharaj
Sampadak Shrichand Sugna 'Saras' Devkumar Jain Prakashk Shri Marudharakesari
Sahitya Prakashan Samiti _ Jodhpur Thavar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . zrImad devendrasUri viracita 2155 bandhasvAmitva nAmaka karmagrantha hitIya
bhAga [bhUla, gatyArtha. vizeSArtha, vivecana evaM TipyaNa tathA aneka pariziSTa
thutsa] sthAkhyAkAra mahadharakesarI, pravartaka muni zrI mizrImala jI mahArAja
sampAdaka zrIcanda suganA 'sarasa' devakumAra jaina prakAzaka zrI
marudharakesarI sAhitya prakAzana samiti _ jodhapurathyAvara

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
3 **Illumination [First Edition]** **Shri** **Kesari Sahitya Prakashan Samiti**
One of the primary and creative objectives of the Kesari Sahitya Prakashan
Samiti is to publish literature related to Jainism and Daman. The institution's
guide, the highly revered Shri Marudhar Kesariji Maharaj, is himself a great
scholar, poet, and master of Jain Agamas and Daman. Under his guidance, the
institution's various philanthropic activities are ongoing. Gurudevshri is also
a connoisseur of literature and a visionary. Inspired by him, we have published
discourses, biographies, poetry, Agamas, and profound analytical works. Now, we
are presenting his long-awaited work, "Karmagranth Vivechan," to scholars and
discerning readers.  Karmagranth is a great text of Jain philosophy. It
encompasses a comprehensive analysis of Jain metaphysics. Under the guidance of
the revered Gurudevshri, renowned author-editor Shriyut Shrichandji Surana and
his associate Shri Devkumarji Jain have jointly edited this work beautifully.
With the inspiration of the ascetic Shri Rajtamuni Ji and the scholar Shri
Suknamuni Ji, this grand project is being completed in a timely and beautiful
manner. The sponsorship of this book is being provided by Shriman Stria Ji
Mohanlalji Sethia, Mysore, and Shriman Seth Merumal Ji Rofa, Secunderabad. We
express our heartfelt gratitude to all scholars, monks, and supportive generous
householders and hope that we will soon present the complete Karma Vivechan to
readers in other parts of the book. The first and second parts have already
reached the hands of readers some time ago. Scholars and readers have welcomed
them. Now, this third part is being presented to the readers.  **X** **Humble
Servant, Secretary** **Shri Kesari Sahitya Prakashan Samiti**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 3 prakAzakIya [ prathama saMskaraNa ] zrI kesarI sAhitya prakAzana samiti ke
vibhinna uddezyoM meM eka pramukha evaM racanAtmaka uddezya hai jaina dharma
evaM damana se sambaMdhita sAhityakA prakAzana karanA  /  saMsthA ke
mArgadarzaka paramazraddheya zrI marUdhara kesarIjI mahArAja svayaM eka mahAna
vijJAna, Azukavi tathA jaina Agama tathA damaNa ke mameza hai aura unhoM ke
mArgadarzana meM saMsthA kI vibhinna nokopakArI pravRttiyA~ cala rahI haiN|
gurudevazrI sAhitya ke marmajJa bhI haiM, nurAgI bhI haiN| unakI preraNA se ba
-taka hamane pravacana, jIvanacaritra, kAvya, Agama tathA gambhIra vivecanAtmaka
granthoM kA prakAzana kiyA hai| aba vidvAnoM evaM craftary pAThakoM ke sAmane
hama unakA cira pratIkSita grantha 'karmagrantha vivecana sahita prastuta kara
rahe haiN| karmagrantha jaina darzana kA eka mahAna graMtha hai| isameM jaina
tattvajJAna kA sarvAMga vivecana samAyA huA hai| pUjya gurudevazrI ke nirdezana
meM prasiddha lekhaka-saMpAdaka zrIyuta zrIcanda kI surAnA evaM unake sahayogI
zrI devakumAra jI jaina ne milakara isakA sundara sampAdana kiyA hai  /
tapasvIvara zrI rajatamuni jI evaM vidyAvinodI zrI sukanamunijI kI preraNA se
yaha virATa kArya samaya para sundara jaMga se sampanna ho rahA hai  /  isa
grantha kA sxenena zrImAn stria jI mohanalAlajI seThiyA maisUra evaM zrImAn
seTha merumala jI rophA, sikandrAbAda ke artha saujanya se kiyA jA rahA hai|
hama sabhI vidvAnoM, munivaroM evaM sahayogI udAra gRhasthoM ke prati hArdika
AbhAra prakaTa karate hue AzA karate haiM ki atizIghra kramaNa: anya bhAgoM meM
hama sampUrNa kam vivecana yukta pAThakoM kI sevA meM prastuta kreNge| prathama
va dvitIya wor kucha samaya pUrva hI pAThakoM ke hAthoM meM pahu~ca cuke haiN|
vidvAnoM evaM arra ne unakA svAgata kiyA hai| aba yaha tRtIya are pAThakoM ke
makSa prastuta hai  /  ! X vinIta, mantrI zrI kesarI sahahitya prakAzana samiti

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
TWIMorpawanpan Prakashkiya The second edition of the Karmagranth, Part 3, was
published in 1965. The entire stock of Parts 1, 2, and 3 was exhausted in these
five years, and the demand from readers continues unabated. Seeing the utility
of the book and the interest of the readers, the committee had already
undertaken the reprinting of Parts 1 and 2. Now, Part 3, in its second edition,
is presented for the service of the readers.  In this edition, most of the
printing errors have been corrected, and some revisions and additions have also
been made. Due to the rising inflation, the cost of printing the book has
increased considerably, yet we have maintained the same old price.  In the
printing of this edition, Shriman Jalmal Chandji Bafna (Bhopalgarh) has
generously provided full financial assistance. He himself is a devout Jain and a
righteous person. He has a deep understanding of Tattvajnan. His entire family
is very noble and cultured. We express our heartfelt gratitude for the generous
donation you have given to the institution's literature.  Vinay, Mantri, Shri
Manohar Kesari Sahitya Prakashan Samiti

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 TWIMorpawanpan prakAzakIya dvitIya saMskaraNa karmagrantha kA bhAga 3, san 1965
meM prakAzita huA thA  /  ina pAMca karoM meM hI bhAga 1, 2. 3. kI samasta prati
samApta ho gaI tathA pAThakoM kI mAMga nirantara pA rahI hai| pAThakoM kI ruci
ke pustaka kI payogitA dekhakara samiti meM bhAga 1, 2 kA punaH mudraNa gata
kArya kiyA thA  /  anna bhAga 3 va dvitIya saMskaraNa pAThakoM kI sevA meM
prastuta hai  /  isa saMskaraNa meM presa sambandhI bhUloM kA prAyaH saMzodhana
kara liyA gayA hai, kahIM-kahIM saMzodhana parivardhana bhI kiyA hai  /
bar3hatI huI mahAgAI meM bacA dustaka kI lAgata komala kAphI bar3ha gaI hai,
phira bhI hamane vahI purAnA bhUlya hI ima saMskaraNa ke matraNa meM sampUrNa
artha-sAhayoga zrImAna jAlama candajI bAphanA (bhopAlagar3ha) ne udAratApUrvaka
pradAna kiyA hai  /  apa svayaM bhI sapA -bagiyA aura dharmaniSTa haiM  /
tattvajJAna meM ApakI gaharI 4 hai| ApakA sampUrNa parivAra bar3A frka aura
susaMskArI hai  /  Apane saMsthA ke sAhitya meM chi lekara jo anudAna diyA hai.
sadargha hArdika dhanyavAda ! vinIla, maMtrI zrI manadhara kesarI sAhitya
prakAzana samiti

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Editorial  The key to understanding Jain philosophy is the 'Karma Siddhanta'.
It is certain that the foundation of the entire philosophy and knowledge is the
soul and the discussion of the various states and forms of the soul, and the
'Karma Siddhanta' reveals the mystery of its transformations. Therefore, to
understand Jain philosophy, 'Karma Siddhanta' is essential.  The major texts
that discuss 'Karma Siddhanta' include 'Shrimad Devendrasuri Rachit Karma'.
These hold a special significance. They occupy a very important place in Jain
literature. Those seeking knowledge consider Karma as a subject of daily study
and self-study, like fire.  The Sanskrit commentaries on Karma texts are very
important. There are also many Gujarati translations of these. The first
discussion of Karma texts in Hindi was presented by the wise and learned
scholar, Mahakshak Pandit Sukhlalji. His comparison is both comparative and
scholarly. Pandit Sukhlalji's essay is now almost inaccessible. For some time,
there has been inspiration from Ashukavi Ratna Gurudevshri Marudharakesariji
Maharaj to present a modern discussion of Karma texts. This editing began with
his inspiration and guidance. With the inspiration of Vidya Vinod Shri Sumuniji,
this work progressed rapidly. With the help of Shri Devkumarji Jain, the work
became ready to take shape in a short time.  This editing work has received the
support of ancient text writers, commentators, discussants, and especially the
works of Pandit Sukhlalji.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sampAdakIya jaina darzana ko samajhane kI kuMjI hai- 'karmasiddhAnta' | yaha
nizcaya hai ki samagra darzana evaM tasvajJAna kA AdhAra hai AtmA aura AtmA kI
fafer dazAoM, svarUpoM kA vivecana evaM usake parivartanoM kA rahasya udghATita
karatA hai 'karmasiddhAnta'  /  isaliye jainadarzana ko samajhAne ke lie
'karmasiddhAnta' samAnA ahai  /  * karmasiddhAnta kA vivecana karane vAle
pramukha granthoM meM 'zrImad devendrasUra racita karma apanA viziSTa mahattva
rakhate haiN| jaina sAhitya meM inakA atyanta mahattvapUrNa sthAna hai| tasva-
jijJAsu bhI karmoM ko Aga kI taraha pratidina adhyayana evaM svAdhyAya kI vastu
mAnate haiN| I karmagranthoM kI saMskRta TIkAe~ bar3I mahattvapUrNa haiN| inake
kaI gujarAtI anuvAda bhI ho cuke haiN| hindI meM karmagranthoM kA sarvaprathama
vivecana prastuta kiyA thA vitRvRSaNya manISI pravara mahAzakSa paM0 sukhalAlajI
ne unakI sI tulanAtmaka evaM vidvattApradhAna hai| paM0 sukhalAlajI kA
nibaMdhana Aja prAya: duSprApya sA hai| kucha samaya se Azukaviratna gurudevazrI
marudharakesarIjI mahArAja kI preraNA mila rahI thI ki karmagranthoM kA Adhunika
lI meM vivecana prastuta karanA caahie| unakI preraNA evaM nirdezana se yaha
sampAdana prArambha huA  /  vidyAvinodI zrI sumunijI kI preraNA se yaha kArya
bar3I gati ke sAtha Ane bar3hatA gayA  /  zrI devakumAra jI jaina kA sahayoga
milA aura kArya kucha hI samaya meM AkAra dhAraNa karane yogya bana gayA  /  isa
saMpAdana kArya meM jina prAcIna grantha lekhakoM, TIkAkAroM, vivecanakarttAoM
tathA vizeSataH paM0 sukhalAlajI ke granthoM kA sahayoga prApta huA

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And thus, the contemplation of such profound others has become comprehensible. I
express my gratitude with boundless appreciation to all the learned scholars.
The timely guidance of the invincible Shri Marudharakesari Ji M., the
inspiration of Shri Rajtamuni Ji and Shri Sukhanamuni Ji, and the cooperation of
the officials of the Sahitya Samiti, especially the heartfelt inspiration and
cooperation of the Samiti's administrator Shri Subhanmal Ji Sethia, have brought
dynamism to the editing and publication of the book. I accept this with
heartfelt gratitude, and it will be truly fitting. If there are any errors,
semantic mistakes, ambiguities, or impurities in printing, etc., in the
contemplation, I humbly apologize and request the readers with discerning minds
to kindly point them out and forgive me. Those who help in correcting errors and
avoiding mistakes are commendable. - With this request, Humble ... Shriman
Sukrana 'Saras'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aura itane gahana anya kA vivecana sahajagamya bana sakA  /  maiM usa sabhI
vidvAnoM kA asIma kRtajJatA ke sAtha AbhAra mAnatA huuN| ajeya zrI
marudharakesarI jI ma0 kA samaya-samaya para mArgadarzana, zrI rajatamunijI evaM
zrI sukanamunijI kI preraNA evaM sAhitya samiti ke adhikAriyoM kA sahayoga,
vizeSakara samiti ke vyavasthApaka zrI subhAnamala jI seThiyA kI sahRdayatApUrNa
preraNA va sahakAra se grantha ke saMpAdana-prakAzana meM gatimIlatA AI hai,
maiM hRdaya se AbhAra svIkAra kara yaha sarvapA yogya hI hogaa| vivecana meM
kahIM aTi, sevAntika bhUla, aspaSTatA tathA mudraNa Adi meM azuci rahI ho to
usake lie maiM dhamAprArthI hU~ aura, haMsa-buddhi pAThakoM se apekSA hai ki ve
snehapurvaka sUcita kara amugrahIta kreNge| bhUla sudhAra evaM pramAdaparihAra
meM sahayogI banane vAle abhinandanIya hote haiM  /  - isI anurodha ke sAtha
vinIta ...zrImAnka surAnA 'sarasa'

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Ātmā** is the foundation of all the thinking, contemplation, and analysis
of Jain philosophy. The **Ātmā** is an all-pervading, independent power. It is
the creator of its own happiness and sorrow, and it is also the one who
experiences the fruits of its actions. The **Ātmā** is inherently pure, but it
is wandering in the world in an impure state, embodied with the body. Even
though it is inherently blissful, it is being ground down by happiness and
sorrow. Even though it is immortal, it is flowing in the stream of birth and
death. The **Ātmā**, which is supremely powerful, is also experiencing suffering
and pain in the world in the form of poverty, misery, and suffering. What is the
reason for this?  Jain philosophy, while analyzing this reason, says that
**karma** is what makes the **Ātmā** wander in the world. **Karma** is the root
of birth and death. "**Karma** is the root of death" - this statement of Bhagwan
Shri Mahavira is absolutely true, a fact. Due to **karma**, this world is
constantly changing in various strange cycles of events. While theistic
philosophies have attributed the cause of this world's diversity and happiness
and sorrow to God, Jain philosophy has attributed the cause of all happiness and
sorrow and the world's diversity primarily to the **jīva** and its main helper,
**karma**. **Karma** is not an independent power; it is itself **pudgala**,
inert. But when **karma** is performed by the **Ātmā** due to attachment and
aversion, it becomes so powerful and potent that it binds the doer in its own
bondage. It makes the master dance like a servant. This is the strange power of
**karma**. What is this **karma**, the main seed of all the changes in our life
and the world? What is its nature? How do its methods and results occur? This is
a very serious subject.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 A mukha jaina darzana ke saMpUrNa cintana, manana aura vivecana kA AdhAra AtmA
hai  /  mAtmA sarvataMtra svatantra zakti hai| apane sukha-duHkha kA nirmAtA bhI
vahI hai aura usakA phala bhoga karane vAlA bhI yahI hai| AtmA svayaM meM se ma
vizuddha hai, kintu vaha zarIra ke sAtha mUrtimAna banakara azuddha dazA meM
saMsAra meM paribhramaNa kara rahA hai  /  svayaM parama AnandasvarUpa hone para
bhI sukha-duHkha ke meM pisa rahA hai| ajara-amara hokara bhI janma-mRtyu ke
pravAha meM baha rahA hai  /  hai ki jo AtmA parama zaktisampanna hai, vahI
dIna-hIna, dukha, baritra ke rUpa meM saMsAra meM yAtanA aura kaSTa bhI bhoga
rahA hai| isakA kAraNa kyA hai ? *ges jaina darzana isa kAraNa kI vivecanA
karate hue kahatA hai- AtmA ko saMsAra meM bhaTakAne vAlA karma hai| karma hI
janma-maraNa kA mUla hai kam maraNassa mulaM bhagavAna zrI mahAvIra kA yaha
kathana akSarazaH satya hai, tathya hai  /  karma ke kAraNa hI yaha vizva
vividha vicitra ghaTanA cakroM meM pratipala parivartita ho rahA hai  /
IzvaravAdI darzanoM ne isa vizvavaicitya evaM sukha-duHkha kA kAraNa jahA~
Imbara ko mAnA hai, vahAM jainadarzana ne samasta sukha-duHkha evaM vizvavikrama
kA kAraNa mUlataH jIva evaM usakA mukhya sahAyaka karma mAnA hai| karma
svataMtra rUpa se koI zakti nahIM hai, vaha svayaM meM pudgala hai, jar3a hai|
kintu rAga-dveSavaza vartI AtmA ke dvArA karma kiye jAne para ve itane balavAna
aura zaktisampanna bana jAte haiM ki karttA ko bhI apane bandhana meM bA~dha
lete haiM | mAlika ko bhI naukara kI taraha nacAte haiM  /  yaha karma kI bar3I
vicitra zakti hai  /  hamAre jIvana aura jagata ke samasta parivartanoM kA yaha
mukhya bIja pharma kyA hai ? isakA svarUpa kyA hai ? isake vidhi pariNAma kaise
hote hai ? yaha bar3A hI gambhIra viSaya hai| *

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Karma is described in great detail in Jainism. A very subtle and profound
examination of karma is found in the Jain Agamas and subsequent texts. It is
written in Prakrit and Sanskrit, making it accessible but difficult for the
average seeker to understand. Ancient Acharyas have described the various forms
of karma theory in brief, which proves to be a good source of knowledge for the
average seeker of truth when memorized.  The Karmagranth holds an important
place in the ancient texts of the Jain faith. The five parts of this work,
written by Shrimad Devendrasur, are extremely important. They present a
discussion of all Jain philosophy, including karma theory, gunasthan, maganna,
jiva, and ajiva, along with their various distinctions. The text is in complex
Prakrit and has many famous commentaries in Sanskrit. It is also well-known in
Gujarati. A commentary on it in Hindi was prepared by the famous scholar Pt.
Sukhlalji about 40 years ago.  Currently, a Hindi commentary on the Karmagranth
was available. Then, there was a significant change in the way it was being
studied. Many learned monks and lay devotees had been requesting for years that
a work as vast and profound as the Karmagranth should be re-interpreted and
published in a new way. Only a capable scholar like you, a great saint and
master of the scriptures, could undertake this extremely laborious and expensive
task. There was also a desire for this. The body has become quite old. Even now,
you spend more than 10-12 hours a day engaged in scriptural study, literary
creation, and other activities. Last year, Suredevatri resolved to take this
work forward. She began writing the commentary. The responsibility for making
the language of the commentary beautiful and engaging, collecting footnotes and
quotations from the Agamas, writing the introduction, and other tasks was
entrusted to the renowned scholar Shriyut Shrichand Gurana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (=) jaina meM karma kA bahuta hI vistAra ke sAtha varNana kiyA gayA hai| pharma
kA sUkSmAtisUkSma aura atyanta gahana vivecana jaina AgamoM meM aura uttaravartI
granthoM meM prApta hotA hai  /  vaha prAkRta evaM saMskRta bhASA meM hone ke
kAraNa vibhogya to hai para sAdhAraNa jijJAsu ke lie durbodha hai| thokar3oM meM
karmasiddhAnta ke vividha svarUpa kA varNana prAcIna AcAryoM ne gaMgA hai,
kaMThastha karane para sAdhAraNa tatva- jijJAsu ke lie vaha acchA jJAnadAyaka
siddha hotA hai  /  eifera ke prAcIna granthoM meM karmagrantha kA mahatvapUrNa
sthAna hai| zrImad devendrasUri racita isake pAMca bhAga atyanta hI mahatvapUrNa
hai| inameM jainadarzanasammata samasta karmavAda, guNasthAna, mAgaMNA, jIva,
ajIva ke bheda-prabheda bAda samasta jainadarzana kA vivecana prastuta kara diyA
gayA hai| grantha jaTila prAkRta bhASA meM hai aura isakI saMskRta meM aneka
TIkAe~ bhI prasiddha haiN| gujarAtI meM bhI isakA vivecana kAphI prasiddha hai|
hindI bhASA meM isa para vivecana prasiddha vidvAn paM0 sukhalAlajI ne lagabhaga
40 varSa pUrva taiyAra kiyA thA  /  vartamAna meM karmagrantha kA hindI vivecana
prApya ho rahA thA. phira usa ma ta cina kI lI meM bhI kAphI parivartana A gyaa|
aneka tattvafare munivara evaM zrAvaka paramazra gurudeva mavarisarIja ma0 sAva
se kaI varSoM se prArthanA kara rahe the ki karmagrantha jaise vizAla aura
gambhIra grasma kA naye DhaMga se frier evaM prakAzana honA caahie| Apa jaise
samartha vAsta vidhAna evaM mahAsthavira saMta hI isa atyanta zramasAdhya evaM
vyaya-sAdhya cArma ko sampana karA sakate haiN| geet aa bhI isa ora AkarSaNa cha
/  zarIra kAphI dhUma ho cukA hai| isameM bhI lambe-lambe bihAra aura aneka
saMsthAoM * kAryakramoM kA Ayojana | area ater meM Apa 10-12 ghaMTA se adhika
samaya taka AAja bhI zAstra svAdhyAya, sAhitya sarjana Adi meM lIna rahate haiM
/  gala varSa surudevatrI ne isa kArya ko Age bar3hAne kA saMkalpa kiyaa|
vivecana likhanA prArambha kiyaa| vivecana kI bhASA Adi STiyoM se sundara evaM
rucikara banAne tathA phuTanoTa AmoM ke uddharaNa saMkalana, bhUmikA lekhana
bAda kAryoM kA dAyitva prasiddha vidvAna zrIyuta zrIcanda gurAnA ko sauMpA gayA
.

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Muranaji Gurudevshri is in very close contact with the literature and the
vices. Under the guidance of Bhurudeva, he has prepared this Visapuu, which is
useful for the common people, with great effort. This Vivēcan is fulfilling the
long-standing lack of Shaka. At the same time, the society is getting a cultural
and philosophical treasure in the form of a treasure, which is a matter of great
satisfaction. I have a special interest in this subject? I have been inspiring
Gurudev and the editor brothers from time to time to fulfill this. After the
first and second parts, this third part is in front of the public. I am very
happy about it. It has been reported that the first two parts have been liked by
the inquisitive readers and have been helpful in their self-knowledge.
Hopefully, like the first and second parts, this third part will also be more
useful in increasing knowledge. ...-Sukan Muni

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI murAnAjI gurudevazrI ke sAhitya evaM vikAroM se atinikaTa samparka meM hai|
bhurudeva ke nirdezana meM unhoMne atyadhika zrama karake yaha visApU tathA
sarva sAdhAraNa jana ke lie upayogI vivezana taiyAra kiyA hai  /  isa vivecana
meM zaka dIrghakAlIna abhAva kI pUrti ho rahI hai  /  sAtha hI samAja ko eka
sAMskRtika evaM dArzanika nidhi maye rUpa meM mila rahI hai, yaha atyadhika
prasamatA kI bAta hai| mujhe isa viSaya meM vizeSa ruci hai ? maiM gurudeva ko
tathA saMpAdaka bandhuoM ko isakI pUrti ke lie samaya-samaya para prerita karatA
rahA  /  prathama va dvitIya bhAga ke pazcAt yaha tRtIya bhAga nAma janatA ke
samakSA rahA hai  /  isakI mujhe hArSika prasannatA hai| pahale ke do bhAga
jijJAsu pAThakoM ne pasanda kiye haiM, unaka svajJAna-vRddhi meM ke sahAyaka
bane haiM, aisI sUcanA milI haiM  /  AzA hai prathama va dvitIya bhAga kI taraha
yaha tRtIya bhAga bhI jJAnavRddhi meM adhika upayogI bnegaa| ...-sukana muni

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Proposal**  **Characteristics of *Margna* due to *Fafe***  **Diversity of the
World: Jain Perspective**  **Utility of the Knowledge of *Bandhasvamitva* in
*Margna***  **Text Introduction**  **Verse 1**  **Auspiciousness and *Kevica***
**Explanation of *Margna***  **Difference between *Margna* and *Gunasthan***
**Names and Characteristics of *Margna***  **Number and Names of *Ma*
Subdivisions**  **Number of *Gunasthan* in *Margna***  **Verse 13**  **Index**
**Collection of Useful Nature for Indication**  **Verse 4**  ***Bandhasvamitva*
of General Hellish Existence**  **Verse 5**  ***Bandhasvamitva* of *Ratnaprabha*
etc. *Sarakavaya***  ***Bandhasvamitva* of *Pankaprabha* etc. Hell**  **15**
**• our the eve o**  **16**  **21**  **26**  **30**  **10 1-11**  **1**  **1**
**ક્**  **6**  **Page 1113**  **11.**  **Page 13-16**  **1**  **10 1721**  **1**
**20**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvamA mAgaMNA kA lakSaNa fafeoM ke kAraNa loka vaicitrya : jainadRSTi
mArgaNAoM meM bandhasvAmitva ke jJAna kI upayogitA grantha- paricaya gAyA 1
maMgalApana aura kevikA pa 'mArgaNA' kI vyAkhyA mArgaNA aura guNasthAna meM
antara mArgaNAoM ke nAma aura unake lakSaNa mAoM ke uttarabhedoM kI saMkhyA aura
nAma mArgaNAoM meM kitane guNasthAna gAthA 13 anukramaNikA saMketa ke liye
upayogI prakRtiyoM kA saMgraha gAthA 4 sAmAnya narakagati kA bandhasvAmitva gAvA
5 ratnaprabhA Adi sarakavaya kA bandhasvAmitva paMkaprabhA Adi naraka kA
bandhasvAmitva 15 * our the eve o 16 21 26 30 10 1-11 1 1 k 6 pR0 1113 11. pR0
13-16 1 10 1721 1 20

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Gama 6,7 Mahalam Prabha Naraka's Bandhaswamitva Swamitva Paryapt Tirya's Gandha
Paryapt Tirya's from the second to the fifth Gunasthan's Bandh Swamitva Gan
Swamitva Paryapt Manushya's Aparyapt Tirya, Manushya's Bandhaswamitva Gatha 10
(12) Devagati and Kapatrik's Bandyaswamitva Bhavan Patibhik's Swamitva Gaya 11
ereKumar Adi Kalpas' Bat Kalp se Navvek tak ka afte Anuttar Vimanwasi Devas'
Swamitva Ekodriya, Vikal Tray and Prithvi, Jal, Vanaspati Kay's Bamb tarfara
Matha 13 Gatha 14 Panchendriya fferent Man, Vachan, Audarika's Swamitva Kay's
Swamitva affa Dhru 21-27 12 25 Pru 27-30. Gatha 12 Ekendriya Adi's Sasadan
Gunasthan mein Bandhaswamitva and Matantar aarfrefer Kayayog's Swamitva * Pru
30-35 as C 34 Pru 35-38 36 67 Pru 38-42 36 4 4 042-46 43 Pru 06-46 47 63 Tu 10 4
- 54 Pu

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gAmA 6,7 mahAlamaprabhA naraka kA bandhasvAmitva svAmitva paryApta tiryoM kA
gAMdhA paryApta tiryoM kA dUsare se pA~caveM guNasthAna taka kA ban svAmitva
gAna svAmitva paryApta manuSya kA aparyApta tiryaya, manuSya kA bandhasvAmitva
gAthA 10 ( 12 ) devagati va kapaTrika kA banyasvAmitva bhavana patibhika kA
svAmitva gAyA 11 erekumAra Adi kalpoM kA bAta kalpa se navaveka taka kA afte
anuttara vimAnavAsI devoM kA svAmitva ekodriya, vikalatraya tathA pRthvI, jala,
vanaspati kAya kA bamba tarfara mAthA 13 gAthA 14 paMcendriya fferent mana,
vacana, audArikA kA svAmitva kAya kA svAmitva affa dhR0 21-27 12 25 pR0 27-30.
gAthA 12 ekendriya Adi kA sAsAdana guNasthAna meM bandhasvAmitva va matAntara
aarfrefer kAyayoga kA svAmitva * pR0 30-35 as C 34 pR0 35-38 36 67 pR0 38-42 36
4 4 042-46 43 pR 06-46 47 63 Tu 10 4 - 54 pU0

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
d 4 Gama 15 Audarikāmadhya Kāyayoga Kā Chautha, Terahvaṁ Muṇasthāna Kā
Bandhasvāmitva Kāmaēṇ Kāpayoga Kā Bandhasvāmitva Āhārak Kāyayoga Nik Kā
Bandhasvāmitva Gāṇā 16 10 62-66 Bankiya Kāyayoga Kā Bandhasvāmitva Vaikriyāmaya
Kāyayoga Kā Bandhasvāmitva Chamārgaṇā Kā Bandasvāmitva Anantānubandhī
Kaṣāyachatushk Kā Bandhasvāmitva Apratyākhyānāvaraṇa Pāyachatushk Kā
Indhasvāmitva Pratyāsmanāvaraṇa Kaṣāyachatushk Kā Bannasvāmitva Kāpayamārgaṇā Kā
Sāmānya Bandha-svāmitva Gāthā 17 Sanjvalana Kaṣāyachatushk Kā Bandhasvāmitva
Avirata Kā Ananasvāmitva Ajñānayik Kā Balasvāmitva Vakṣadarṇana. Adarśana Kā
Bandhasvāmitva Khānābidha Kā Anāmira Pra. 73-74 Manaḥparyāya Jñāna Kā.
Badhasvāmitva Sāmāyik, Dhopastānīcha Dhāriṇ Kā Bandhasvāṣirat Parihāra Viśuddhi
Sanyama Kā Bandhasvāmisatra Kaivalyaśāna Bana Kā Bandhasvāmitva 74 Mati, Śruta
Va Adhiddhīk Kā Bandhasvāmitva Gāthā 11 Pṛ. 7 Japalam Samyaktava Kā
Bandhasmābhīsvā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 d 4 gAmA 15 audArikAmadha kAyayoga kA cauthe, terahaveM muNasthAna kA
bandhasvAmitva kAmaiNa kApayoga kA bandhasvAmitva AhAraka kAyayoga nika kA
bandhasvAmitva gANA 16 10 62-66 baiMkiya kAyayoga kA bandhasvAmitva vaikriyAmaya
kAyayoga kA bandhasvAmitva camArgaNA kA bandasvAmita anantAnubandhI
kaSAyacatuSka kA bandhasvAmitva apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa pAyacatuSka kA indhasvAmitva
pratyAsmAnAbaraNa kaSAyacataSka kA bannasvAmitva kApAyamArgaNA kA sAmAnya
bandha-svAmitva gAthA 17 saMjvalana kaSAyacatuSka kA bandhasvAmitva avirata kA
ananasvAmitva ajJAnayika kA balasvAmitva vakSadarNana. adarzana kA
bandhasvAmitva khaanaabidh kaa anaamir' pra073-74 manaHparyAya jJAna kA.
badhasvAmitva sAmAyika, dhopasthAnIca dhAriNa kA bandhasvASirata parihAra
vizuddhi saMyama kA bandhasvAmistra kaivalazAna bana kA vandhasvAmitva 74 mati,
zruta va adhiddhika kA bandhasvAmitva gAthA 11 pR. 7 japalama samyaktva kA
bandhasmAbhisvA.

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(14) Kshayopaśamika Samyaktvā kā Bandhasvāmitva arfe rate kā Svāmitva feerefore,
traarishra, Sūkṣmaparāya Cāritra kā Samdha Svāfica Āhārak Jīvōṁ kā Bandhasyāmi
Gāthā 20 Upaśama Samyaktvā kī Viśeṣatā Gāya 21, 22 eerMāgaṁgaṇā hā Asvasvābhisya
Gāthā 23 Bhavya, Abhavya, Saṁśī, Asī Māgaṁgaṇāōṁ et waterfere Svāmitva Anāhāranā
kā Gāya 24 Yāōṁ meṁ Guṇasthāna Grantha kī Samāpti kā Saṁketa Pariśiṣṭa 78 78 •
Jain Karmasāhitya kā Saṁkṣipta Paricaya • Karmagrantha Bhāga 1 se 3 tak kī Mūla
Gāvāyeṁ ● Saṁkṣipta Śabdakōṣa vK & Pṛ. 1-64 82 Pṛ. 64-65 84 Pṛ. 65-66 6. 5 6 50
66- 101 16 101 Pu. 103-236 ● Māgaṁgaṇāōṁ meṁ Udaya Udīraṇā Sattās vāmitva 105 ●
Mārgēṇāōṁ meṁ Bandha, Udaya, Sattās vāmitva frees Digambar 130 Sāhitya kā Dha •
Vetāṁbara-Disambara Karmasāhitya ke Samāna Asamāna Mantavy ● Māgaṁgaṇāōṁ meṁ
Bandhasvāmitva Pradarśaka Yantra 157 160 163 206 522

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 14 } kSayopazamika samyaktva kA bandhasvAmisva arfe rate kA svAmitva
feerefore, traArizra, sUkSmaparAya cAritra kA samdha svAfica AhAraka jIvoM kA
bandhasyAmi gAthA 20 upazama samyaktva kI vizeSatA gAya 21, 22 eermAgaMNA hA
asvasvAbhisya gAthA 23 bhavya, abhavya, saMzI, azI mArgaNAoM et waterfere
svAmitva anAhArANA kA gAyA 24 yAoM meM guNasthAna grantha kI samApti kA saMketa
pariziSTa 78 78 * jaina karmasAhitya kA saMkSipta paricaya * karmagrantha bhAga
1 se 3 taka kI mUla gAvAyeM * saMkSipta zabdakoSa vK & pR0 1-64 82 pR0 64-65 84
pR0 65-66 6. 5 6 50 66- 101 16 101 pu0 103-236 * mArgaNAoM meM udaya udIraNA
sattAsvAmitva 105 * mArgeNAoM meM bandha, udaya, sattAsyAmitva frees digambara
130 sAhitya kA dha * vetAmbara-disambara karmasAhitya ke samAna asamAna mantavya
* mArgaNAoM meM bandhasvAmitva pradarzaka yaMtra 157 160 163 206 522

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Proposal No.  In the scriptures of karma, the concepts of *Jiva-sthana*
(abode of the soul), *Margana-sthana* (path of the soul), and *Guna-sthana*
(state of the soul) are explained. These three categories are a detailed
examination of the variations of worldly beings, their *Vikas* (evolution),
*Sukha* (happiness), and *Dukha* (suffering) in the form of *Kava* (covering).
*Jiva-sthana* describes the physical forms and types of worldly beings, ranging
from the dense karmic state of the soul in various *Guna-sthana* (states of
qualities) to the ultimate pure development, the radiant and supreme state.
*Margana-sthana* classifies the soul's external (physical) and internal
(spiritual) states, outlining their diverse variations.   From this perspective,
*Margana-sthana* acts as a middle ground (threshold) similar to the *Kshepaka
Nyaya* (theory of projection), encompassing both the physical aspects of
*Abasthana* (state) and the spiritual aspects of *Guna-sthana*.  Furthermore,
*Margana-sthana* has a unique characteristic. While *Jiva-sthana* only describes
the types and variations of beings, and *Guna-sthana* informs about the
sequential development of the soul through karmic states, they are not
interconnected. They are *Krama-bhavi* (sequential). However, *Margana-sthana*
is *Saha-bhavi* (co-existent). It is connected to both *Jiva-sthana* and *Guna-
sthana*. Beings with both types of characteristics are inevitably included in
some *Margana-sthana*.  ## My Time  In the world, there are countless beings.
Their external and internal lives exhibit a variety of peculiarities,
differences, and complexities. There is diversity in their physical forms,
shapes, colors, sensory organs, movements, actions, thoughts, and *Sukha* and
*Dukha*. Each being is distinct from the other.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAva nA karmagranthoM meM jIvasthAna, mArgaNAsthAna aura batalAI jAtI hai
/  sthAna ina tIna prakAroM (dvAroM dvArA saMsArI jIvoM kI vivitAoM,
vikAnsukhatA mAdi kA kava hika rUpa meM vivecanA hai| ina tInoM meM se
jIvasthAna ke dvArA saMsArI jIvoM kI zArIrika AkAra-prakAra kI fafe guNasthAnoM
meM AtmA kI saghana karmA dazA se lekara parama nirmala vikAsa zrI ujjvala evaM
sarvocca bhUmikA taka vikAsonmukhI *mada zreNiyoM kA kathana hai aura
mArgaNAsthAnoM meM AtmA kI donoM sthitiyoM kA bAhya (zArIrika) aura AtaMrika
(Atmika ) bhitara, fvavidhatAoM kA vargIkaraNa karate hue vive vana kiyA gayA
hai  /  isa dRSTi se dekheM to mArgAsthAna madhya dvAra (dehalI)kSepaka nyAya ke
samAna abasthAna ke zArIrika-mAhya aura guNasthAna ke bAsmika tarika donoM
prakAra ke kathanoM ko apane se pati karatA hai  /  isake atirikta mArgaNAsthAna
kI apanI eka aura vizeSatA hai ki jIvasthAna sirpha jIvoM ke prakAroM,
vividhatAoM kA kathana karatA hai aura guNasthAna AtmA ke kramabhAvI vikAsa ko
kamika avasthAoM kI sUcanA karate haiM ataH unakA eka dusare ke sAtha sambandha
nahIM hai, ve kamabhAvI hote haiM; lekina mArgaNAsthAna sahabhAvI haiN| inakA
jIvasthAnoM ke sAtha bhI sambandha hai aura guNasthAnoM ke sAtha bhii| donoM
prakAra kI mitratAoM vAle jIvoM kA kisI na kisI mArgaNAsthAna meM avazya
antarbhAva- samAveza ho jAtA hai 1 * mAmA kA samaya saMsAra meM ananta jIva haiM
aura una jIvoM ke bAhya va Antarika jIvana kI nirmiti meM aneka prakAra kI
vicitratA, vibhitA, pavaktA kA darzana hotA hai  /  zarIra ke AkAra-prakAra,
rUpa-raMga, indriya-racanA, halana calana, gati, vicAra, afae refdhakatA Adi Adi
aneka rUpoM meM eka dUsare jIva meM bhinnatA * ..

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is evident. This difference is so great that it appears to be an amazing
museum (treasure house) of all the differences in the seed race. The diversity
of the living world is so immense that even people of the same species cannot be
compared to each other. Let us look at our human race itself. We have similar
hands, feet, etc., but the form is not the same, some are tall, some are short,
some are fair complexioned, some are dark complexioned, etc. This is the
difference in physical appearance, but consider the difference in mental
appearance, some have dull intelligence and some have sharp intelligence, and
there are many types of variations between them. We see these kinds of other
differences every day. We experience them as one. There is a plethora of
differences even within a species, so how can it be possible to understand the
vast differences that exist in other animals, birds, gods, and hellish beings?
Nevertheless, all the spiritualists have classified these infinite differences
as a path, calling it a path characteristic..... The living beings existing in
the Jithanas and Gunasthanas are called Margana by the emotions or synonyms by
which they are traced or lost. _ To make this work of declaration simple and
systematic, fourteen divisions of Margana Sthana have been made and these
fourteen divisions also have subsequent divisions. Their names and subsequent
differences, names etc. are given in this other place in this other place, in
which all the infinite differences related to the life and maternal life of all
living beings are classified. In this third Karmagrantha, the bondage of bondage
is discussed based on the Gunasthanas based on the Manas, i.e. how many
Gunasthanas are possible in which Manas and the abilities of Karmabandha in
those Marganavarti beings according to the division of Gunasthanas are
discussed. ....... The reason for this is that the differences, diversities
existing in the Jithas,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dRSTigata hotI hai| yaha bhinnatA itanI adhika hai ki samasta bIya jAta
vimitratAoM kA eka AzcaryajanakaH saMgrahAlaya (ajAyabaghara) pratIta hotA hai
/  jIva jagata kI vibhinnasA, itanI anansa haiM ki eka hI jAti ke logoM ko bhI
paraspara eka dusare se tulanA nahIM kI jA sakatI hai| hama apanI manuSya jAti
ko hI dekha leM  /  sannake hAtha-paira Adi aMga-gAMga haiM, lekina bhAkRti
samAna nahIM hai, koI lambA hai to koI diganA, koI gaura varNa hai to koI kRSNa
varNa aadi| yaha to huI zArIrika dRSTi kI vibhinnatA, lekina vonika dRSTi kI
vibhinnatA kA vicAra kareM to kisI kI buddhi manda hai aura koI kuzANa nudhi,
aura. isake bIca bhI aneka prakAra kI taratamatA dekhane meM AsI.I. isI
prakArako anyAnya vibhinnatAe~ hama pratidina dekhate haiM. anubhava karase eka
maanaa| jAti meM bhI anekatAoM kI bharamAra hai so anya pazu, pakSI, deva,
nArakI ra meM vidyamAna jIvoM meM pahane bAlI bhinnatAbhoM kI zAha lenA se
sambhava ho sakatA hai? phira bhI adhyAtmavijJAnI sarvanoM ne ina ananta
bhinnatAoM kA mArgamA ke rUpa meM vargIkaraNa karate hue mArgaNA lakSaNa kahA
hai..... jIthAnoM aura guNasthAnoM meM vidyamAna jIva jina bhAvoM ke dvArA
athavA jina paryAyoM ke dvArA anumArgaNa kiye jAte haiM kho jAte haiM. sarara
ganezaNI, mImAMsA kI jAtI hai, unheM mArgamA kahate haiM  /  _ isa goSaNA ke
kArya ko sarala aura vyavasthita rUpa dene ke lie mArgaNA sthAna ke caudaha
vibhAga kiye haiM aura ina paudaha vibhAgoM ke bhI acAnsara vibhAga haiN| inake
nAma aura anAntara bhedoM kI saMjyA, nAma Adi yathAsthAna isI anya maiM anyatra
diye gaye jinameM samasta jIvoM kI bAya evaM mAtarika jIvana sambandhI ananta
bhinnatAe~ vargIkRta ho jAtI hai| isa tRtIya karmagrantha meM mAnoM ke AdhAra o
guNasthAnoM ko lekara bandhasvAmitva kA kAthana kiyA gayA hai arthAta kisa-kisa
mANA meM kitane mumasthAna sambhava haiM aura una mArgaNAvartI jIvoM meM sAmAnya
se tathA guNasthAnoM ke vibhAgAnusAra karmabandhaH kI yogyatAoM kA kyana kiyA
gayA hai| ....... Frefareer kAraNa . . . . ara prata yaha hai ki jIdoM meM
vidyamAna pimitratAmoM, vividhatAoM kA

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
What is the cause? To solve the question of 'what', different philosophers and
thinkers have presented their own views and arguments, which are hinted at in
the following verse from the Shvetashvatara Upanishad 19...  "Time, nature,
destiny, chance, the elements like earth, and the Purusha (soul) - these are the
causes of diversity. The soul experiences happiness and sorrow due to these
causes. It is not the soul itself. In the same way, other thinkers have
presented their own perspectives. If these different views are compiled, a great
treatise can be prepared. But here, without going into detail, we will briefly
discuss the following views on causes...  1. Time, 2. Nature, 3. Destiny, 4.
Chance, 5. Effort, 6. Purusha (God).  All these views contradict each other and
claim to be the sole cause of action. Their perspectives are as follows:
**Kalavada** - This philosophy considers time as the primary cause. This
philosophy states that every action in the world is happening due to the
influence of time. Without time, nature, effort, etc. can do nothing. A person
performs a good or bad deed, but its fruit is not received at that time. When
the right time comes, its good or bad (auspicious-inauspicious) fruit is
received. In time, the sun shines and in winter, it is cold. Similarly, a person
cannot do anything on their own, but when the time comes, all actions happen as
they should. This is all the glory of time. The perspective of Kalavada is:
"Time ripens all beings, time destroys all beings. Time comes to those who are
asleep, time is very difficult to overcome."  1. Mahabharata 1.24

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAraNa kyA hai ? sa 'kyA kA samAdhAna karane ke lie vibhina dArzanikoM,
minsakoM ne apane-apane vicAra evaM kRSTiko prastuta kiye haiM, jinakA saMketa
zvetAzvataropaniSaH 19 ke nimnalikhita zloka meM dekhane ko milatA hai......
kAlaH svabhAvo nipratipadacchA bhUtAniyoniH puruSa iti pizyam  /  saMyoga evA ma
svAtmabhAvAdAtmAyanozaH sumadhuHkha haloH  //  kAsa, svabhAva, niyati, yadRcchA,
pRthivyAdi bhUta aura puruSa-ye vibhitratA ke kAraNa haiM | jIva syAne dakha-
duHsa zAti ke lie hai. vaha na haiN| isI prakAra se anya-anya vicArakoM ne
apane-apane iSTikoNa upasthita kiye hai  /  yadi una saha vicAroM kA saMkalana
kiyA jAye to eka mahA nibandha taiyAra ho sakatA hai| lekina yahAM vistAra meM
na jAphara saMkSepa meM kAraNoM ke rUpa meM nimnalikhita vicAroM ke bAre meM
varSA karate haiM.. 1 kAla, 2 svabhAva, 3 niyati, 4 yahacchA, 5 pauruSa, 6
puruSa (iishvr)| ye sabhI vicAra paraspara eka dUsare kA khaMDana evaM apane
dvArA hI kArya siddhi kA maMjuna karate haiM  /  inakA dRSTikoNa kramazaH nIce
likhe anumAra hai| kAlavAda-yaha darzana kAla ko mukhya mAnatA hai  /  isa
darzana kA kathana hai ki saMsAra kA pratyeka kArya bAla ke prabhAva se ho rahA
hai  /  kAla ke binA svabhAva, pauruSa Adi kucha bhI nahIM kara sakate haiN| eka
makki pApa yA puSpa kArya karatA hai, kintu uso samaya usakA phala nahIM milatA
hai| yogya samaya Ane para usakA acchA yA buga (zubha-azubha phala milatA hai  /
yIma kAla meM sUrya tapatA hai aura zIta Rtu meM zIta pAhatA hai  /  isI prakAra
manuSya svayaM kucha nahIM kara sakatA hai kintu * bhaya Ane para saba kArya
yathAyogya prakAra se hote jAte haiM  /  yaha saba kAla kI mahimA hai  /
kAlavAda kA dRSTikoNa kAlaH sUjati bhUtAni kAlaH saMharate prajA  /  kAlaH
supteSu Agati kAlohi duralikamaH  /  /  1 mahAbhArata 1.24

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is Time that creates and destroys the world of beings. Due to the influence
of Time, the population expands and contracts. Even when everyone is asleep,
Time remains awake. Therefore, Time, the destroyer, is the root cause of the
strangeness, diversity, and joys and sorrows of this world.  The doctrine of
Svabhavad-Svabhashabada has a unique perspective. It has its own principles! It
states that whatever actions are happening in the world are happening due to the
influence of their own nature. Without nature, Time, destiny, etc. ... can do
nothing. The mango seed has the nature of becoming a mango tree, therefore, a
mango tree and fruit are obtained from it, and the neem seed has the nature of
becoming a neem tree. Why is neem bitter and sugarcane sweet? The reason is the
nature present in them. The following quote is useful for understanding the
ideas of Svabhavad:  "The sharpness of thorns, the diversity of feathers in
birds, etc. are all due to nature. No other reason for the creation of this
world is visible. It is natural - it is inherent, there is no contribution of
any other effort in it."  Niyativad considers the immutable laws of nature as
destiny. Niyativad says that whatever is destined to happen at a particular
time, happens. The sun will rise from the east, the lotus will be born in water,
cows, bulls, etc. animals will have four legs and humans will have two hands,
two feet. Why does this happen? The only reason is that it is destined to be so.
Makkhali Gosala was a follower of this Niyativad. He believed that there is no
cause, no reason for the birth, etc. of beings, without reason, without cause,
beings experience joy, sorrow, and suffering.  1. Sumamtam Tika

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kA hai ta bhUtoM kI sRSTi karatA hai, saMhAra karatA hai  /  kAla ke prabhAva
se prajA kA saMkoca-vistAra hotA hai  /  sabhI ke so jAne para bhI kAla sadaiva
jAgrata rahatA hai  /  isIlie durasitama kAla hI isa saMsAra kI vicitratA,
vividhatA aura jItroM ke sukha-duHkha Adi kA mUla kAraNa hai| stra bhAvaSAda-
svabhASabAda kA apama anUThA hI dRSTikoNa hai  /  usake apane sarva hai ! vaha
kahatA hai ki saMsAra meM jo kucha bhI kArya ho rahe haiM, ve saba apaneapane
svabhAva ke prabhAva se ho rahe haiN| svabhAva ke binA kAla, niyati Adi ...
kucha bhI nahIM kara sakate haiM  /  Ama kI guThalI meM Ama hone kA svabhAva
hai, isIliye usase Ama kA vRkSa aura phala prApta hotA hai aura nIma kI nimbolI
meM nIma kA vRkSa hone kA svabhAva hai  /  nIma kakSyA aura Ikha mIThA kyoM hai|
so isakA kAraNA una-unameM vidyamAna svabhAva hai| svabhAvavAda ke vicAroM ke
liye nimnalikhita uddharaNa upayogI hai yaH kanTakAmA prakaroti samaya vicitramA
magapazinA pa . svabhAvataH sarvamidaM pravRsa ma kAmacAro'sti kutaH prayatnaH
kAMToM kA nukIlApana, maga tra pakSiyoM meM pipatra-vicitra ma Adi honA svabhAva
se hai  /  anya koI kAraNa ima saSTi ke nirmANa Adi kA nahIM dikhatA hai  /
saka svAbhAvika hai--nitaka hai, anya ke prayatna kA isameM sahayoga nahIM hai|
niyativAda-prakRti ke aTala niyamoM ko niyati mahate haiM  /  niyativAda kA
kahanA ki jisakA jisa samaya meM nahIM jo honA hai, vaha hotA hI hai  /  sUrya
pUrva se udita hogA, kamala jala meM utpanna hogA, gAya, baila Adi pazuoM ke
cAra paira aura manuSya ke do hAtha, do para hoMge  /  aisA. kyoM hotA hai ? to
isakA ekamAtra kAraNa aisA honA niyata hai| makhali gozAlaka isI niyativAda . kA
anugAmI thA  /  usakA mata thA ki prANiyoM ke paleza Adi ke liye koI hetu nahIM,
pratyatya nahIM, binA pratyaya, vinA hetu hI prANI mukha-duHkha, kleza pAte 1
sUmAtama TIkA

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The text discusses different philosophical perspectives on the nature of destiny
and free will.   **Determinism (Niaitivad)**:   The text cites the
*Suchakritanga Tika* 1/1/2, which states that whatever good or bad is destined
for humans, it will inevitably happen.  No matter how much effort one puts in,
what is not meant to be will not happen, and what is meant to be cannot be
stopped.  All beings have a predetermined destiny, and they will experience it
according to their situation.  **Chance (Yadrichchavad)**:  This perspective is
used when the cause-and-effect relationship is not clear.  It suggests that
events happen randomly, without a clear connection to prior actions.  This view
implies a sense of indifference, where there is no opportunity to consider cause
and effect.  **Effort (Purusharthavad)**:  This philosophy emphasizes the
importance of effort and action in shaping one's destiny.  It argues that every
action in the world requires effort, and without it, nothing can be achieved.
All progress in the world is a result of effort.  For example, if one is hungry,
they must make an effort to find food; simply thinking about it will not satisfy
the hunger.  While objects have their own inherent nature, their manifestation
requires effort.  The text quotes, "Do effort, do effort, for the sake of
happiness."  **Theism (Purushvad-Ishwarvad)**:  This is the most prominent view,
which emphasizes the role of God.  The text mentions that the other philosophies
are limited in their scope of thinking.  The text also references the *Majjhima
Nikaya* 2/3.6, which describes determinism.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 haiM Adi  /  niyativAdI dRSTikoNa ke sambandha meM sUcakRtAMga TIkA 1/1/2 meM
saMketa kiyA gayA haiprAptadhyo niprati basAzrayeNa yo'yaH so'vazyaM bhavati
nRNAM zumAmAmo yA matAnAM mahati kRte'pi prayarane mAbhAvyaM bhavati ma
mAzino'sti mAzaH  /  /  _ manuSyoM ko niryAta ke kAraNa jo bhI zubha aura azubha
prApta honA hai. vaha avazya prApta hotA hai  /  prANI kitanA bhI prazasta kara
le, lekina jo nahIM honA hai, vaha mahIM hI hogA aura jo honA hai, use koI roka
nahIM sakatA hai  /  saba jIvoM kA saba kucha niyata hai, aura vaha apanI sthiti
ke anusAra hogaa| yahacchAvAda-jisa viSaya meM kAryakAraNa paramparA kA sAmAnya
jJAna nahIM ho pAtA hai, usake sambandha meM paschA kA sahArA liyA jAtA hai  /
yadRcchA thAnI akasmAta hI kArya-kAraNa kA sambandha na jur3ane para mamIna
kArya kI utpatti ho jAnA  /  yahacchA meM eka prakAra kI upekSA kI bhAvanA
alakatI hai, usameM kAryakAraNa bhAtha Adi para vicAra karane kA avasara nahIM
hai| porudhavAyapuruSArtha, prayatna Adi isake dUsare nAma haiM  /
puruSArthavAda kA apanA darzana hai  /  usakA kahanA hai ki saMsAra ke pratyeka
kArya ke liye prayatna honA jarUrI hai| binA puruSArtha ke koI bhI kArya saphala
nahIM hotA hai  /  saMsAra meM jo kucha bhI unnati hotI hai, vaha saba
puruSArtha kA pariNAma hai| yadi peTa meM bhUkha mAlUma par3atI hai to usakI
nivRtti ke liye prayatna karalA pohA, bhUkha kI zAti vicAroM se nahIM ho jAyegI
/  saMsAra meM jitane bhI padArtha haiM unakA svabhASa Adi apamA-apanA hai,
lekina usakI abhivyakti puruSArtha ke binA nahIM ho sakatI hai  /  isIliye kahA
hai kuru kuru paruSArtha ni sAnanda hetoH  /  /  mukti sukha kI prApti ke liye
puruSArtha karo ! puruSArtha karo ! ukta vAdoM ke alAvA sabase pramukha vAda
haipuruSavAda- IzvaravAda  /  IzvaravAda ke atirikta pUrvokta vicAradhArAyeM to
apane-apane cintana saka 1 majhima nikAya 2/3.6 meM niyativAda kA varNana kiyA
gayA hai|

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Limited and becoming particularly influential in theism, it became extinct in a
way and God was primarily considered the cause of this bock-variety and the
happiness and sorrow of the living beings. Purushkar - Generally, man is the
doer, destroyer and creator of this world - this opinion is called Purushavaak.
There are two thoughts in Purushabad. One is Brahmavad and the other is
Ishwarkatu. In Mahabad, Brahma is the cause of all the conscious and
unconscious, concrete and abstract substances of the world, and in Ishwarvad,
God is self-evident and becomes the cause in the mutual combination of the
substances. Brahma and Ishwar, these two distinctions become of Purushavad due
to the cause of upadan and the cause of nimis. The meaning of Brahmavad is that
just as a spider is the cause for a web, a banyan tree is the cause for a tree,
in the same way, Purusha is the cause of the creation, existence, and
destruction of all beings in the world. What has happened, what will happen, who
is the master of liberation, who gets growth from food, who is moving, who is
still, who is far, who is near, who is present in all the conscious and
unconscious, and who is the hair of all, he is Brahma. Therefore, there is no
diversity in it, but whatever is seen is seen as the illusion of Brahma, and no
one sees Brahma. 1. Karna nama iva ashoonaam chandrakanta iva ambhasam.
Prarohaanam iva laksha: sa hetu sarva janminaam.  - Upanishad 2 (a) Purusha eva
idam sartha yad bhutam yantra bhashyam. Uta amritatvasya eshaama yadan nena ati
rohati. ...mveva purusha saks (b) Yadejati yannajati yad dure yadantika.
Basantarasy sarvaspa yaduta sarvasyaaram chaahata. —Ishavasya Upanishad (c)
Sarva va khalvi dam brahma neha naanaasti kinchan. * Aaram tasya pashyanti na
tam pashyati kanchan !!   Chhandogya Uo 3.14

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sImita rahI aura IzvaravAda ke vizeSa prabhAvazAlI bana jAne para eka prakAra
se vilupta-sI ho gaI aura pramukha rUpa se Izvara ko hI isa boka-vaicitya evaM
jIvajagata ke sukha-duHkha Adi kA kAraNa mAnA jAne lgaa| puruSakAra- sAmAnyataH
puruSa hI isa jagata kA kartA, hartA aura vidhAtA hai-yaha mata puruSavAkSa
kahalAtA hai| puruSabAda meM do vicAra gabhita haiM. eka brahmavAda aura dUsarA
IzvarakatuM rakhavAva  /  mahAbAda meM brahma ho jagata ke cetanaavetana, mUrta-
amUrta Adi sabhI padArthoM kA apAdAna kAraNa hai aura IzvaravAda meM Izvara
svayaMsiddha ar3a-celAna padArthoM meM paraspara saMyojana meM nimita banatA
hai| upAdAna kAraNa aura nimisa kAraNa ke dvArA brahma aura Izvara yaha do bheda
puruSavAda ke ho jAte haiN| brahmavAda kA mantavya hai ki jaise makar3I jAle ke
liye, vaTavRkSa joM liye kAraNa hotA hai, usI taraha puruSa samasta jagata ke
prANiyoM kI sRSTi, sthiti, pralaya kA kAraNa hai  /  jo huA hai, jo hogA, jo
mokSa kA svAmI hai. AhAra se vRddhi ko prApta hotA hai. gatimAna hai, sthira
hai, dUra hai, nikaTa hai, dhetana aura acetana saba meM vyApta hai aura sabake
bAla hai, vaha saba brahma hI hai| isaliye isameM nAnAtva nahIM hai, lekina jo
kucha bhI dikhatA hai vaha bahma kA prapaMca dikhatA hai aura brahma ko koI
nahIM dekhtaa|' 1 karNanAma ivAzUnAM candrakAnta ivAmbhasAm  /  prarohANAmiva
lakSaH sa hetu sarva janminAm  /  /  -upaniSada 2 (ka) puruSa evedaM sartha
yadbhUtaM yantra bhASyam  /  utAmRtatvasyezAmA yadannenAti rohati  /  ...mveva
puruSasaksa (kha) yadejati yannajati yada dUre yadantika  /  basantarasya
sarvaspa yaduta sarvasyArama cAhataH  /  /  --IzAvAsyopaniSada (ga) sarva va
khalvidaM brahma neha nAnAsti kiMcana  /  * ArAma tasya pazyanti na taM pazyati
kaMcana !! chAndogya u0 3.14

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(21) In Eurvada, God is considered the cause of the creation of objects and
beings in the world, and the giver of happiness and sorrow. To support this
view, it is argued that the universe, both stationary and mobile (inanimate and
animate), is the work of a particular male being. Because earth, trees, etc.,
are effects, and effects are produced by an intelligent agent, just as pots,
etc., are effects and are therefore made by an intelligent agent, so the
intelligent agent of these is called God.  Just as God is the creator of the
universe, he is also the cause of their attainment of heaven, hell, etc. They
experience God -  —— The cause of happiness and sorrow for the beings of the
world is God. The beings of the world, due to their humility, hope, and
inspiration, experience happiness and sorrow - —— *Asho* *Sukhaduhkhayo:*
*Janturameeso'yam atmanah Ishwaraprerito gacchet svarga va shvabhrameva va.*
Similarly, other thinkers have put forward their own views regarding the
relationship between the soul and the body, and have refuted the views of
others. The result of this refutation and defense has been that confusion has
arisen among ordinary people, and those views that could have helped in
understanding the truth have become unable to reach the core of the truth due to
lack of coordination.  *Shiya: Janna Drishti*  But Bhagwan Mahavira resolved the
conflict of ideas regarding the diversity of the world. This solution was done
in two ways. Those ideas that could be coordinated were coordinated, and those
ideas that were useless were logically refuted, and the root cause of diversity
was explained.  *2 Mahabharata Vanaparva*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 21 ) EurvAda meM Izvara ko jagata meM utpanna hone vAle padArthoM, jIvoM ko
sukha-duHkha dene Adi ke prati nimitta mAnA hai| isa vicAra kI puSTi ke liye
vaha kahatA hai ki sthAvara aura jaMgama ( jar3a-cetana) rUpa vizva kA koI
puruSavizeSa kartA hai| kyoMki pRthvI, vRkSa Adi padArtha kArya haiM aura inake
kArya hone se kisI buddhimAna kartA ke dvArA nirmita haiM, jaise ki ghaTa Adi
padArtha pRthvI Adi bhI kArya hai ata: inako buddhimAna kartA ke dvArA banAyA
huA honA cAhiye aura inakA jo buddhimAna kartA hai, usI kA nAma Izvara hai  /
sRSTi ke nirmANa kI taraha Izvara unheM svarga-naraka Adi prApta karAne meM aura
paratastha haiM; ve to Izvara ko anubhava karate haiM - ---- saMsAra ke prANiyoM
ko sukha-duHkha dene, kAraNa hai  /  saMsAra ke jIva to dIna, AzA evaM preraNA
se sukha-duHkha kA azo sukhaduHkhayoH  /  janturamIzo'yamAtmanaH Izvaraprerito
gacchet svarga vA zvabhrameva vA  //  isI prakAra anyAnya vicArakoM ne agala-
paMcilya ke sambandha meM apane-apane faere are kiye haiM aura una vicAroM kA
mana kara dUsaroM ke vicAroM kA khaNDana kiyA hai  /  isa khaMDana-maMDana kA
pariNAma yaha huA ki sAdhAraNa janoM meM bhrAntiyA~ utpanna ho gaI aura jo
vicAra satya ko samajhane-samajhAne meM sahAyaka bana sakate the ve samanvaya ke
abhAva meM satya ke mUla marma ko prApta karane meM asamartha ho gaye  /  Siya :
jaMna dRSTi lekina bhagavAna mahAvIra ne loka- vaicitya ke eka vicAroM ke
saMgharSa kA samAdhAna kiyA  /  yaha samAdhAna do prakAra se kiyA gayA  /  jina
vicAroM kA samanvaya kiyA jA sakatA yA unakA samanvaya karake aura jina vicAroM
kI upayogitA hI nahIM thI unakA sayuktika khaMDana aura vicitratA ke mUla kAraNa
2 mahAbhArata vanaparyaM

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It has been indicated and presented before the world, the truth that presents
useful ideals for the creation of life. It has been indicated earlier that there
are two types of substances in the world... conscious and unconscious. Both
these types of substances exhibit diversity. Where there is a relationship
between the peculiarities of unconscious substances and the diversities of
partially conscious elements, the Jain view is that the combination of time,
etc., is the cause. The origin of any work does not happen from only one cause,
but the origin of that work happens when all the necessary causes come together.
It never happens that one power alone can accomplish its work. Yes, it may be
that there is one main cause in a work and others are secondary, but it does not
happen that one alone can accomplish the work independently. This statement is
logical and reasonable. We experience this in our daily lives and our perception
is also of the same kind. But Purushavada-Brahmavada and Ishwaravada... in the
world, the peculiarities and diversities of conscious or unconscious substances
in any form... do not become the main or secondary cause. Because in the form in
which the nature of Brahma and Ishwara has been considered, its validity is not
established and their importance is only harmed. The concept of Purushavada in
relation to the world has been hinted at earlier, but to show the futility of
that concept, we consider some special points here. The first form of
Purushavada is Brahmavada and its view is that there is one Brahma, it is Sat,
it has no other form, but whatever diversity we see is all illusion, that is, it
is the Maya of Brahma, but Brahma itself is not visible to anyone and this
illusion is a false form, because it appears to be false. What appears to be
false is false, it is Asat. Just as there is a false perception of silver in a
piece of conch shell. The same...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kA saMketa karake saMsAra ke sAmane usa satya ko rakhA jo jIvana nirmANa ke
liye upayogI Adarza prastuta karatA hai| pUrva meM yaha saMketa kiyA jA cukA hai
ki loka meM do prakAra ke padArtha haiM..sadhetana aura acetana  /  ina donoM
prakAra ke padArthoM meM baiMtriya, vaividhya parilakSita hotA hai  /  jahA~
saka acetana padArthagata vicitrasAoM evaM AMzika rUpa se sacetana tattva kI
vividhatAoM kA sambandha hai, unake bAre meM jaina iSTi kA yaha maMtavya hai ki
kAla Adi pAdoM kA samandaya kAraNa hai| kisI kArya kI utpatti kevala eka hI
kAraNa se nahIM ho jAtI kissu usa kArya kI utpatti Avazyaka sabhI kAraNoM ke
milane para hotI hai  /  aisA kabhI nahIM hotA hai ki eka hI zakti apane yasa
para kArya siddha kara de  /  ho, yaha ho sakatA hai ki kisI kArya meM koI eka
pradhAna kAraga ho aura dUsare goga, kintu yaha nahIM hotA ki koI akelA hI
kAraNa mthatantra *pa se kArya siddha kr| yaha kathana sayuktika evaM pakSa hai|
mAraH kha nAma patI kA anubhava karate hai evaM pratIti bhI isI prakAra kI hotI
hai  /  lekina puruSavAda-brahmavAda aura Izvarakata tvadAya... lo loka ka
sasana yA adhetana padArthoM kI vicitratAoM aura vividhatAoM kA kisI bhI rUpa
meM... mukhya yA gauNa rUpa meM kAra nahIM banatA hai| kyoMki jisa rUpa meM
brahma aura Izvara ke svarUpa ko mAnA gayA hai, usa rUpa meM usakI siddhi nahIM
hotI hai aura unake mahatva ko hAni hI pahuMcatI hai  /  loka ke sambandha meM
puruSavAda kI dhAraNA kA pUrva meM yatkicit saMketa kiyA hai, lekina usa dhAraNA
ko nirarthakatA batalAne ke liye yahA~ kucha vizeSa vicAra karate haiN|
puruSavAda kA prathama rUpa brahmavAda haiM aura usakA yaha pakSa hai ki eka
brahma ho sat hai, usake cAnA rUpa nahIM hai, lekina jo kucha bhI nAnArUpatA
hameM dikhalAI detI hai vaha saba prapaMca hai, yAnI brahma kA mAyA pa hai,
lekina prahA svayaM kisI ko dikhalAI nahIM detA hai aura yaha prapaMca mithyA
rUpa hai, kyoMki usameM mithyArUpatA pratIta hotI hai  /  jo miSyArUpa pratIta
hotA hai, vaha mithyA hai, asada hai| jaise sIpa ke Tukar3e meM cAMdI kI mithyA
pratIti hotI hai  /  usI

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This visible world-phenomenon appears to be false, therefore it is false. Its
other name is Brahmavad.  But when the aforementioned views of Brahmavad are
tested on the touchstone of logic, they appear ridiculous. Firstly, if this
phenomenal world is Maya to Brahma, then this Maya is different from Brahma. If
it is considered non-different, then we will have to accept the existence of
these two substances, Brahma and Maya. In that situation, it cannot be said that
there is only one substance, that it is non-dual. If Maya and Brahma are non-
different, then the Maya-like nature of this phenomenal world does not become
clear. If it is said that Maya is the same as Brahma, then the non-duality is
not established because of the existence of two substances, Brahma and Maya. If
Maya is considered non-existent, then the origin of the substances of the three
worlds cannot happen. Secondly, it is also worth considering how a single
principle can become the material cause for the transformation of different
substances? By simply calling all the substances of the world Maya, their
separate existence and individuality cannot be destroyed. Their individuality
and existence are their own. If one eats food, it does not create food for
another. The mouth of one being cannot be considered the mouth of another being.
Therefore, it appears imaginary and even pleasing to the imagination to consider
only one substance as the material cause for infinite actions by negating the
infinite inert and sentient substances of the world. It is against perception to
imagine a single real substance by seeing the existence of reality in the
substances of the world and considering it as real. If the existence of this
world is established by inference, etc., then because of the separate existence
of the reason and the conclusion, the reason is established instead of the
conclusion, and there is no real difference between cause and effect, merit and
demerit, the fruits of karma, heaven and hell, knowledge and ignorance, bondage
and liberation, etc. Therefore, Brahmavad is not suitable for the establishment
of the state of perception-established reality.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAra yaha dRzyamAna jagala-prapaMca mithyA pratIta hotA hai, isIliye yaha
mithyA hai  /  isakA apara nAma brahmAtavAda hai,| lekina jaba brahmavAda ke
ukta maMtavya kare tarka kI kasauTI para parakhate haiM to vaha upahAsanIya-sA
pratIta hotA hai  /  prathama to yaha ki yaha prapaMca rUpa agasta paSi brahmA
ko mAyA hai to yaha mAyA brahma se bhinna hai, hA abhinna bhinna mAnane para
brahma aura mAyA ina do padArthoM kA samAva mAnanA par3egA  /  usa sthiti meM
yaha nahIM kahA jA sakatA hai ke mAtra eka prA hA hai, advaita hai  /  yadi mAyA
aura mA abhinna hai to isa Agatika prapaMca kI mAyArUpatA sikha nahIM hotI hai
/  yadi kahA jAye ki mAyA satarUpa hai to bar3A aura mAyA ina do padArthoM kA
sababhAva hone se advaita kI siddhi nahIM hotI hai  /  mAyA ko asas mAnA jAye to
tInoM lokoM ke padArthoM kI utpatti nahIM ho sakatI hai| dUsarI bAta yaha bhI
vicAraNIya hai ki prArUpa eka hI tattva vibhinna padArthoM ke pariNamana meM
upAdAna kaise bana sakatA hai ? jagata ke samasta padArthoM ko mAyA kaha dene
mAtra se unakA pRthaka-pRthakA astitna va vyaktitva naSTa nahIM kiyA jA sakatA
hai  /  unakA vyaktitva, astitva apanA-apanA hai  /  eka bhojana karatA hai to
dUsare ko sRpti nahIM ho jAtI hai  /  eka jIva kA mukha sanakA sukha nahIM mAnA
jA sakatA hai| ataH jamata ke ananta jar3a-cettara mata padArthoM kA apalApa
karake kevala eka puruSa ko ananta kAryoM ke prati upAdAna mAnanA kAlpanika
pratIta hotA hai aura kalpanA se ramaNIya bhI mAlUma hotA hai  /  agata ke
padArthoM meM sat kA anvaya dekhakara eka sat tatva kI kalpanA karanA aura use
hI vAstavika mAnatA pratItiviruddha hai| isa avakAnta kI sisi adhi anumAna Adi
pramANa se kI jAtI hai to hetu, aura sAdhya ina do ke pRthak-pRSaka hone se ata
kI bajAya hu~ta ko siddhi hotI hai tathA kAraNa kArya kA, puNya-pApa kA, karma
ke sukha-duHkha phala kA; bahaloka-paraloka kA, vidyA avidhA kA, bandha-mokSa
Adi kA vAstavika bheda hI nahIM rahatA hai| ataH pratItisiddha jagahasyavasthA
ke liye bayAda kA mAnamA ubita nahIM hai  /

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The second form of male chauvinism is **Ishwarvada-Ishwarkartṛtvavāda**. This
world-pervading peculiarity is absolutely **Ishwar** (God). The term
**Ishwarkartṛtvavāda** is the essence of this concept.    **Ishwarvadis**
(theists) declare the greatness of **Ishwar** by saying that he is unique,
omnipresent, independent, and eternal. The meaning of these adjectives used for
**Ishwar** is as follows:  **Ishwar** is one. - This means that he is singular.
Because if many **Ishwars** are considered to be the creators of the world, then
there will be conflict in their desires, and the creation of one thing in
another form will lead to a lack of unity and order in the world.  **Ishwar** is
omnipresent. If **Ishwar** is considered to be limited to a particular region,
then the proper creation of all substances in unlimited places will not be
possible.  **Ishwar** is omniscient. If **Ishwar** is not considered to be
omniscient, then he will not be able to create actions according to the
appropriate material causes due to his lack of knowledge of them.  **Ishwar** is
independent. - This means that he makes all beings experience happiness and
sorrow according to his own will.  **Ishwar** is eternal. Eternal means
timeless, uncreated, and unchanging. If **Ishwar** is considered to be
impermanent, then the creation of one **Ishwar** from another, and another from
the second, and so on, will not be possible, and he will become dependent for
his existence.  The following arguments are used to support the belief in
**Ishwar**:  1. Creation is an act, so there must be a cause for it. 2. At the
beginning of creation, there is a connection between two atoms, and from this
connection, an atom is created. This act of arrangement must have a doer. 3.
Creation must have a basis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 puruSavAda kA dUsarA rUpa hai IzvaravA-Izvara kartRtvavAda  /  isa
jagatavyApinI vicitratA kA kataI Izvara hai. pada Izvarakata navavAda kA sArAMzA
hai  /  Izvara ko mahAnatA batalAse hue IzvaravAdI kahate haiM ki vaha advitIya
hai, sarvavyApI, svatantra, nisya hai aura Izvara ke liye prayukta ina vizeSaNoM
kA artha isa prakAra kiyA jAtA hai Izvara eka hai.- yAnI bhanitIya hai| kyoMki
padi bahuta se IzvaroM ko saMsAra kA kartA mAnA jAyegA to eka dUsare kI icchA
meM virodha hone para eka vastu ke anya rUpa meM bhI nirmANa hone para saMsAra
meM aikya va phrama kA abhAva ho jAyagA  /  Izvara sarva pApI hai. yadi Izvara
ko niyala dezavyApI mAnA jAye to aniyata sthAnoM ke samasta padArthoM kI
yathArIti se utpatti mana nahIM hai  /  Izvara sarvaka hai. yadi Izvara ko
sarvajJa na mAneM to sthAyogya upAdAna kAraNoM ke na jAnane para vaha unake
anurUpa kAryoM ko utpati meM kara skegaa| Izvara svatanya hai-.-boSiH vaha apanI
icchA se hI saMpUrNa prANiyoM ko sukha-duHkha kA anubhava karAtA hai  /  Izvara
nitya hainitya yAnI adimAzI, anutpana aura sthira rUpa haiM  /  amistha mAnane
para eka Izvara se dUsare Izvara kI utpatti, dUsare se tIsare ko, isa prakAra
paramparA kA mansa nahIM A sakegA aura vaha apane astitva ke liye| parAzrita ho
jaayegaa| Izvara ko kA mAnane ke sambandha meM nimnalikhita yuktiyoM kA
abalambana liyA jAtA hai' 1 -sRSTi kArya hai ataH usake liye koI kAraNa honA
cAhidhe  /  2. suSTi ke Adi meM do paramANuoM meM sambandha hone sa imaNuka ko
utpatti hotI hai, isa Ayojana kriyA kA koI kartA honA cAhiye  /  . 3. suSTi kA
koI AdhAra homA kAhiye  /  enAIR... 1 gyAyakasumajili

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
4. - Someone must have taught weaving, pottery, etc. before they were
established. Therefore, there must be an original teacher. ..... There must be
someone who creates the extreme. 6. - There must be a creator of the Vedas. 7. -
A molecule is formed from the combination of two atoms, it must have a mother.
The self-proclaimed theories of God are questionable in themselves. Because
first it must be considered that in the creation of the universe, is God's
intention for himself or for others? God is self-sufficient, all his desires
have been fulfilled, therefore he cannot create the universe to fulfill his
desires. If God creates the universe for others, then he cannot be called
intelligent. In this situation, God's freedom is hindered and he has to depend
on the will of others. God does not create the universe out of compassion
either. In that situation, all living beings in the universe should be happy. No
one should be unhappy, this is what a compassionate person keeps in mind. This
is also not logical. If God is considered omnipresent in the body, then his
pervasiveness in the three worlds will leave no space for other existing
substances, and if God is considered omnipresent in terms of knowledge, then it
contradicts the Vedas. Because the Vedas say that God is omnipresent:
"Vishvataschala Vishvato Mukho Vishvatah Panistha Vishvatah Pad." God is the
holder of eyes, mouth, hands and feet everywhere, meaning he is omnipresent
through his body. If he is considered to have a body, then this is another
contradiction.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 4.-kapar3A bunane, ghar3A banAne Adi kAryoM ko puSTi ke pahale kisI ne sikhAyA
hogaa| isaliye koI Adi zikSaka honA caahiye| .....koI ati kA banAne vAlA honA
caahie| 6- vedavAiyoM kA koI kA honA cAhiye  /  7 - do paramANuoM ke sambandha
se saNuka banatA hai, isakA koI mAtA honA cAhiye  /  Izvara kA svavAdiyoM kI
urata kalpanAyeM svayaM apane Apa meM vicAraNIya haiN| kyoMki sarvaprathama yaha
sosanA hogA ki jamata ke nirmAdha karane meM Izvara kI pravRti apane lie hotI
hai athavA dUsaroM ke lie ? Izvara kRtakRtya hai, usakI sampUrNa icchAoM kI
pUrti ho sakI hai, ata: vaha apanI icchAyoM ko pUrNa karane ke lie jagata kA
nirmANa nahIM kara sakatA  /  yadi Izvara dUsaroM ke lie sRSTi kI racanA karatA
hai to use buddhimAna nahIM kahA jA sakatA hai  /  isa sthiti meM Izvara kI
svatantratA meM rukAvaTa AtI hai aura use dUsare kI imachA para nirbhara rahanA
par3atA hai| karuNA se bAdhya hokara bhI Izvara sRSTi kA nirmANa nahIM karatA
hai  /  usa sthiti meM agata ke saMpUrNa jIvoM ko sukhI honA cAhie thaa| koI
dukhI nahIM ho, yaha karuNAzIla vyakti dhyAna rakhatA hai| INna ra sabaMgata bhI
nahIM hai  /  yadi zarIra se sarvagata mAnA jAye so Izvara ke tInoM lokoM meM
vyApta ho jAne se dusare bahane vAle padArtho ko rahane kA avakAza hI nahIM
rahegA aura yadi zAna kI apekSA sarvamata mAnA jAye to veda kA virodha hotA hai
/  kyoMki veda meM Izvara ko sarvagata mAnane ke bAre meM kahA hai vizvatazcala
vizvato mukho vizvataH pANista vizvataH pAd  /  Izvara sarvatra netroM kA, mukha
kA, hAthoM aura pairoM kA dhAraka hai, yAnI vaha apane zarIra ke dvArA
sarvazyApI hai  /  zArIravAna mAnane para dUsarA yaha mI kSepa Mi 1 zukla
Rjurveda saMhitA 1716

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(26. It is said that the creation of his body is due to unseen causes, just like
the bodies of ordinary beings are created by their own unseen causes (destiny,
past karma), so too the body of God is created due to unseen causes. And being
bodiless, he cannot create material things from nothing. Because it is seen that
the effect arises according to the cause. If it is said that God has the nature
to create the world, then he will never be able to rest from the work of world
creation. And if he takes rest, then his nature will be harmed. If it is said
that God does not have the nature to maintain the world, then God can never
create the world. Creation and destruction are two different actions, and God
performs both actions of creation and destruction of the world, then two natures
will have to be assumed in him. Because creation and destruction are two
different actions, and if both actions happen from one nature, then creation and
destruction will become one, and two contradictory things cannot arise from one
nature-like cause. In addition, it is also worth considering that if the world
arose from non-existence, and God also created all beings from non-existence,
then all of them are mutually cooperative and exist due to the material
obtained, then why is the omnipotent God considered to be the creator? When the
world is self-conscious and independent of form, it is not created by anyone and
evolves according to its own nature. Is there any need for God in this? Also, to
imagine a God for the salvation of the world is to make the free form of matter
dependent. Every being is responsible for its own progress through its own
intellect and love, not responsible to any other creator, nor does it receive
the knowledge of duty and obligation from him. Therefore, the concept of God is
meaningless in the world. From the above statement, it becomes clear that God is
not the cause of the conscious diversity, but the living being itself progresses
on the path of development and destruction, rise and fall of its own karma. That
is why Jain vision has considered karma as the cause of the diversity of the
living world. This vision

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 26  /  jAtA hai ki janasAdhAraNa kI taraha usakA zarIra nirmANa adRSTa
nimittaka hai - jaise sAdhAraNa prANiyoM ke zarIra kA nirmANa una-unake adRSTa (
bhAgya, pUrvakRta karma) se huA hai, usI prakAra Izvara kA zarIra bhI adRSTa ke
kAraNa banA hai aura azarIrI hone para hRmayamAna padArthoM ko usase utpatti
nahIM ho sakatI hai| kyoMki kAraNa ke anurUpa kArya kI utpati hotI dekhI jAtI
hai | yadi yaha kahA jAye ki Izvara kA jagata racane kA svabhAva hai to use
jagata nirmANa ke kArya se kabhI vizrAma nahIM milegA aura yadi vizrAma letA hai
to usake svabhAva ko hAni pahuMcatI hai| yadi kahA jAye ki Izvara kA jagata
rakhane kA svabhAva nahIM hai to Izvara kabhI jagata ko nahIM banA sakatA hai|
sRSTi aura saMhAra yaha do alaga-alaga kArya haiM aura Izvara jagata ko rASTi va
saMhAra donoM kArya karatA hai, to usameM do svabhAva mAnane pdd'eNge| kyoMki
nirmANa aura nAza do bhinna-bhinna kArya haiM aura eka svabhAva se hI donoM
kArya hone para sRSTi va saMhAra eka ho jAyeMge tathA eka svabhAva rUpa kAraNa
se paraspara virodhI do kA upana nahIM ho sakate haiM  /  isake atirikta yaha
bhI vicAraNIya hai ki aar teri aarfare se apane astitva evaM tathA Izvara ne bhI
asat se kisI eka bhI sat ko ve saba paraspara sahakArI hokara prApta sAmagrI ke
rahate haiM, taba sarvazaktimAna Izvara ko mAmane kI jaba jagata meM sacetana
aura svarUpa se svataMtra siddha haiM utpanna nahIM kiyA hai aura anusAra
pariNamana karate. Rear bhI yA hai ? sAtha hI jagata ke uddhAra ke lie kisI
Izvara kI kalpanA karanA to padArthoM ke freerUpa ko hI parataMtra banA denA hai
1 pratyeka prANI apane viveka aura pyAra se apanI unnati ke lie uttaradAyI hai,
na ki anya kisI vidhAtA ke prati jimmedAra haiM aura na usase prerita hokara hI
vaha kartavya evaM avataMya kA bodha prApta karatA hai  /  ataH jagata meM
khilya ke liye puruSavAda nirarthaka hai  /  prANiyoM meM vidyamAna pUrva
kathana se yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki sacetana viSamatA ke kAraNa Izvara Adi
nahIM hai kintu svayaM jIva apane karmoM ke vikAsa va vinAza, utthAna va patana
ke mArga para agrasara hotA hai  /  isIlie jaina dRSTi ne karmavAda ko jIva
jagata kI favaar kA kAraNa mAnA hai  /  yaha dRSTi

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(27) Not imagined but based on real facts. The main purpose of karma theory is
to explain the problem of visible inequality in the world. The general meaning
of karma is known, but when we understand its connotative meaning, it is the
combination of karmic atoms that affect the soul's power due to the actions
performed by the living being. This combination is called karma, and this karma
is the seed of the different, diverse, and unequal states of the living beings.
Through this seed, the living being acquires various types of afflictions,
diseases, and limitations. This is what the Turkish proverb says: "Karma is the
master, whatever you do, you will get the same result." As a living being acts,
so it receives the fruits. There is no injustice in this. The common people
believe that "karma's path does not stop." Indian thinkers have given great
importance to the theory of karma. All, whether they are soul-believing Jains,
Sankhya and other non-soul-believing schools, and even God-believing thinkers,
have accepted the existence of karma and the fact that it brings happiness,
sorrow, etc. to the living being. Due to the consequences of karma, the living
being acquires various types of inequalities. As one has acted with karma, so
one's destiny and outcome become. Past karma arises and according to it, new
karma is bound. This cycle has been going on since time immemorial. To clarify
the meaning of karma, various philosophers have used words like Maya, Avidya,
Prakriti, Apurva, Vasana, Dharma-Adharma, Adrishta, Sanskar, etc. 1 Acharanga 31

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 27 ) kalpita nahIM kintu vAstavika tathyoM para AdhArita hai| karmavAda kA
mUla prayojana jagata kI dRzyamAna viSamatA kI samasyA ko sUjhalAnA hai  /
karma kA sAmAnya abhiyArtha kiyA hai, lekina jaba usake vyaMjanAtmaka artha ko
grahaNa karate haiM to jIva dvArA hone vAlI kiyA se Atmazakti ko acchAfer karane
vAle paugalika paramANuoM kA saMyoga hotA hai aura isa saMyoga ke are at ko
fafar avasthAnoM kI prApti honA karma kahalAtA hai aura yahI karma prANijagata
kI svarUpa sthiti kI vibhinnatAoM, vividhatAoM, viSamatAoM kA bIja hai| isa bIja
ke dvArA jIva nAnA prakAra kI Adhi, vyAdhi, aura upAdhiyoM ko prApta karatA hai
kasuNA uvAhI jAya  /  isI bAta karU turkI ke zabdoM meM-karma pradhAna fvazya
kara rakhA jo jasa kara hi so tasa phala claa| prANI jaisA karatA hai, vaisA hI
phala prApta hotA hai| isameM kisI prakAra kI malabhatA nahIM hai| janasAdhAraNa
meM so karma ke bAre meM yaha mAnyatA hai karamagati TA nahi TaraM  /  bhAratIya
koM ne to karmasiddhAnta ko ati mahatvapUrNa sthAna diyA hai| jisane bhI
AtmavAdI -jaina, sAMkhyAdi anAtmavAdI bI evaM yahA~ taka ki IzvaravAdI vicAraka
haiM, sabhI me kama kI sasA aura usake dvArA jIva ko sukha-duHkha Adi kI prApti
honA mAnA hai aura karmavipAka ke kAraNa yaha jIva vividha prakAra kI viSamatAoM
ko prApta karatA hai| jisane jaisA karma kA andha kiyA hai, usake anusAra sI-sI
usako mati aura pariNati hotI jAtI hai| pUrvavaddha karma udaya meM AtA hai aura
usI ke anusAra navIna karmabandha hotA jAtA hai| yaha cakra anAdi se cala rahA
hai  /  karma ke Azaya ko spaSTa karane ke lie vibhinna darzaniyoM ne mAyA
avidyA, prakRti, apUrva, vAsanA, dharmAdharma, adRSTa, saMskAra Adi zabdoM kA 1
AcArAMga 31

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is observed and concluded that every action and tendency of a living being
creates karmas, which result in happiness or sorrow, either immediately or in
the future. These karmas are the cause of the living being experiencing
auspicious or inauspicious fruits. However, when the soul, through its own
power, becomes free from all karmas and attains liberation, it is called
liberated. In this state of liberation, karmas no longer bind with the soul and
do not bear their fruits.  The peculiarity of the conscious entity cannot be
explained without accepting karma. The soul, according to its past karmas,
creates its own nature and circumstances, which influence external material
objects and lead to their transformation. This is how karma-phala (fruits of
karma) are obtained. The time of ripening of karma is determined by the time of
its creation, and even during the time of its manifestation, the material
elements of space, time, and emotions play a role. Therefore, the soul
experiences the fruits of its karma accordingly, whether they are subtle,
moderate, or gross.  The question arises: how does karma become connected with
the living being, making it experience happiness, sorrow, and other forms of
duality, and how does it receive the fruits of karma in this way? The answer is
that even though the soul is pure and luminous, it continues to accept subtle
particles (pudgalas) through its karmic-narrative self. This process of
acceptance involves the participation of the mind, speech, and body. As long as
the living being is attached to passions (kṣayā), it continues to bind karmas
that bear fruits (vipaka-udaya). According to these bound karmas, the living
being experiences auspicious or inauspicious fruits. There is no other giver or
helper in this process of experiencing fruits. If someone else is considered to
be a helper in receiving the fruits of karma, then the karmas created by the
living being become meaningless. Furthermore, if the living being is considered
to receive the fruits of karma from someone else, then the principle of self-
created karma becomes invalid.  1. Good karma leads to good fruits, and bad
karma leads to bad fruits. 2. Due to the presence of passions, the living being
accepts karmas from the subtle particles. (Sattvārthasūtra 12)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prayoga kiyA aura una saba kA phalitArtha yahI nikalatA hai ki jIva dvArA kI
gaI pratyeka kriyA, pravatti aise saMskAroM kA nirmANa karatI hai jisase yaha
ova tatkAla yA kAlAntara meM sukha-duHvarUpa phala ko prApta karatA rahatA hai
aura ve jIva ko zubha-azubha phala prApta karAne ke kAraNa banate haiN| lekina
jaba pach AtmA apanI vizeSa zakti se samasta saMskAroM se rahita ho nAsanAnanya
ho jAtI hai taba vaha mukta kahalAtI hai aura isa mukti ke za6 punaH karma AtmA
ke sAtha sambaddha nahIM hote hai aura na apanA phala hI dete haiN| sacetana
tattva kI vicitratA kA samAdhAna karma ko mAne dinA nahIM ho sakatA hai  /  AzmA
apane pUrvAta kamoM ke anusAra vaise svabhAva aura paristhitiyoM kA nirmANa
karatI hai, jisakA prabhAva bAhya sAmagrI para par3atA hai aura unake anusAra
pariNamana hotA hai ! tadanumAra karma-pala kI prApti hotI hai  /  aba karma ke
paripAka kA samaya AlA hai tana unaH udaya kAla meM bhI harA . kSetra, kAla,
bhAva kI sAmagrI hotI hai, vaisA hI usakA tIya. sada, madhyama phala prApta hotA
rahatA hai|' aba prazna yaha hotA hai ki jIva ke sAtha kAmo kA sambandha juhA
kase, jisase vaha sukha-duHkha Adi rUpa viSamatAoM kA bhoktA mAnA jAtA hai aura
karma kA usa usa rUpa meM phala prApta hotA hai to isakA uttara hai ki mAma ke
jhAnadarzanamaya hone para bhI baiMkArika -.. kathAmAtmaka prati maiM dvArA meM
pudagaloM ko grahaNa karatA rahatA hai aura isa grahaNa karane kI pratriyA meM
mana-vacanakAya kA parispandana sahayobhI banatA hai 1 namaH kaSAyAma jIva meM
vimAna hai taba taka tIna vipAkodaya bAle (phala dene vAle karmoM kA bandha hotA
hai| ina iMdhe hue karmoM ke anusAra zubhAzubha phala prApta hotA rahatA hai  /
isa phala. prApti kA na to anya koI pradAtA hai aura na sahAyaka  /  yadi
karmaphala kI prApti meM dUsare ko sahAyaka mAnA jAye to svakRta karma
nirarthaka ho jAyeM  /  dUsare bAta yaha bhI hai ki yadi jIva ko karmaphala kI
prArita dUsare ke dvArA honA 1 suciraNA kammA sucipgaa| phalA havaM ti  /
dhiSaNA kammA duniSNA kalA hadekhi  /  ....dezAtaH 6 2 sakaSAyatvAmjIvaH karmaNo
yogyAn pudgalAnAdatta  /  sattvArthasUtra 12

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(26) It can be argued that this leads to a loss of the soul's effort. If the
soul's attainment of fruits is dependent on others, then enthusiasm for
righteous actions and detachment from actions will not arise, and no effort or
endeavor will be made in this direction. The essence of the above statement is
that karma is the cause of the diverse varieties visible in worldly beings, such
as farmers, etc. It is due to being bound by karma that worldly beings have an
infinite variety of bodies, senses, and their strengths and weaknesses. Not only
this, but karma is also the cause of the differences in the development of their
soul qualities. The Marganas classify these worldly beings, who are endowed with
physical, mental, and spiritual limitations due to karma, based on their
limitations. Marganas are not indicators of the development of beings, but
rather they provide a systematic classification of their natural forms in
various ways, so that their physical capabilities and the fluidity of their soul
qualities due to those capabilities can be accurately depicted. In the Marganas,
the utility of the knowledge of ownership is explained in the Karmagrantha,
where the Marganas are used to show the capacity of beings for karma-bandha. The
question arises: when another Karmagrantha has already described the fourteen
divisions of all worldly beings according to their Gunasthanas, and has
described the capacity of each division for karma-bandha, udhaya, jadaurana, and
satta, and this knowledge reveals the spiritual progress and decline of all
beings, then what is the utility of again explaining their capacity for bandha
based on the Marganas, and is there even a need for such an effort? The answer
is that even with the same Gunasthana, beings of different species, beings with
different senses, beings with different Ligas (Vedas), beings with different
Kashaya results, beings with different Yogas, and beings with different types of
knowledge, vision, restraint, and other soul qualities, are classified based on
the Marganas to show their different capacities. This has two benefits: one is
that beings with certain types of motion, etc.,...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 26 ) mAnA jAye to isameM jIva ke puruSArtha kI hAni hI hai| aba jIva ko phala
kI prApti parAdhIna hai to phira satkarmoM meM pravRtti evaM karmoM se nivRti ke
lie utsAha jAgata nahIM hogA aura na isa ora prayatna paruSArtha kiyA jAyegA  /
ukta kathana kA sArAMza yaha hai ki saMsAro jIvoM meM dRzyamAna vicitratAoM,
farmeroM Adi kA kAraNa karma hai  /  karmAdhIna hokara hI saMsAra ke ananta tara
fvabhinna prakAra ke zarIroM, indriyoM ko nyUnAdhikatA vAle haiN| itanA hI
nahIM, unake AtmaguNoM ke vikAsa kI alpAdhikatA kA kAraNa bhI karma hai  /
mArgaNAoM meM kabandha ke kAraNa zArIrika, mAnasika aura AdhyAtmika fer se yukta
inhIM saMsArI jIvoM kA vargIkaraNa kiyA gayA hai  /  mANAyeM jIvoM ke vikAsa kI
sUcaka nahIM hai kintu svAbhAvika vaibhAvika rUpoM kA aneka prakAra se
vargIkaraNa karake unakA vyavasthita rUpa diyA gayA hai jisase ki unakI zArIrika
kSamatA kA aura kSamatA ke kAraNa hone vAle Atmika free kI taralatA kA sahI rUpa
meM aMkana kiyA jA sake  /  mArgaNAoM meM svAmitva ke jJAna kI upayogitA arat
karmagrantha meM mArgaNAoM ke AdhAra se jIvoM ko karmabandha kI yogyatA kA
digdarzana karAyA gayA hai, to prazna hotA hai ki jaba dUsare karmagrantha meM
guNasthAnoM ke anusAra samasta saMsArI jIvoM ke caudaha vibhAga karake pratyeka
vibhAga kI karmaviSayaka vandha, udaya, jadauraNA aura sattA sambandhI yogyatA
kA varNana kiyA jA cukA hai aura usase sabhI jIvoM ke AdhyAtmika utkarSa -
apakarSa kA jJAna ho jAtA hai taba mArgaNAoM ke AdhAra se punaH unakI
bandhayogyatA batalAne kI kyA upayogitA hai aura aise prayAsa kI AvazyakatA bhI
kyA hai ? 2 isakA uttara yaha hai ki samAna guNasthAna hone para bhI bhinna-
bhinna jAti ke jIvoM ko nyUnAdhika indriya vAle jIvoM kI bhinna-bhinna liga
(veda) dhArI jIvoM kI, vibhinna kaSAya pariNAma vAle jIvoM kI yoga vAle jIvoM kI
tamA isI prakAra jJAna darzana saMyama Adi AtmaguNoM kI dRSTi se bhinna-bhinna
prakAra ke jIvoM ko yogyatA batalAne ke liye mArgaNAoM kA AdhAra liyA gaya hai|
isase do lAbha haiM eka to yaha hai ki amuka gati Adi vAle jIva.

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(30) } : How many Gunasthana can there be and secondly, even if the Gunasthana
are the same, how many karmas does a being bind to its body, senses, etc.? This
cannot be possible by explaining the ownership in relation to Gunasthana.
Therefore, it is worth pondering for those with spiritual vision. **Book
Introduction** There are many books that impart knowledge of sifare. Among them
are six karmagranthas namely Karmavipak, Karmastav, Swamitva, Padashiti, ure and
Saptatika. These are called Pramin Shat Karmagranthas. The authors are also
mixed and different Acharyas and the time of composition is also different. The
ancient epithet is not used with them to indicate their antiquity, but it is
used to indicate their position from the new karmagranthas created on the basis
of their service. Shrimaddevendra has created five karmagranthas following the
above. Their names are as follows: But none of them Collection of subjects also
1. Karmavipak 2. Karmaere. 3. Swamitva 4. Parsithi 5. Shatak These karmagranthas
are smaller in size than the ancient karmagranthas, the subject matter has not
been left out and many new ones have been added. As a result, students of karma
literature have adopted these books and except for a few scholars, ordinary
people do not even know that there are other ancient karmagranthas besides those
of Shri Devendrasur. The subject matter of general karmagranthas is karma
siddhant. But when one is inclined to know the content of each book, it is to be
known that the first karmagrantha describes the karmas like jnanaavaran, their
types and their fruits. The second karmagrantha explains the nature of
Gunasthana and discusses the binding, arising, excitation and maturity of karma
natures in them. : The third karmagrantha describes the owners of the binding of
karma natures with the help of margena. It describes which and how many natures
a being with a particular margena binds. The fourth karmagrantha describes the
jivasthana, margena sthana, guna

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 30 ) } : ke guNasthAna kitane ho sakate haiM aura dUsarA yaha ki guNasthAnoM
ke samAna hone para bhI jIva apane zarIra, indriya Adi ko apekSA kitane karmoM
kA bandha karate haiM  /  yaha kArya guNasthAnoM kI apekSA ho svAmitva batalAne
se sambhava nahIM ho sakatA hai| ataH AdhyAtmika dRSTi vAloM ko manana karane
yogya hai  /  grantha paricaya sifare kA jJAna karAne vAle aneka grantha haiN|
unameM karmavipAka, karmastava, svAmitva, paDazIti, ure aura saptatikA nAmaka
chaha karmagrantha haiM  /  inako prAmIna SaT karmagrantha kahA jAtA hai| inameM
racayitA bhI mizra bhitra AcArya haiM aura racanA kAla bhI pRthaka-pRthaka hai|
inake sAtha prAcIna vizeSaNa unakA purAnApana batalAne ke liye nahIM lagAyA jAtA
hai kintu usake AdhAra sevA ke bane navIna karmagranthoM se unakA pAya batalAne
ke liye lagAyA gayA hai | zrImaddevendra ne uktoM kA anusaraNa karata hue pA~ca
karmagrantha banAye haiN| jinake nAma kramaza: isa prakAra hai- lekina unakA koI
bhI viSayoM kA bhI saMgraha 1. karmavipAka 2 karmaere. 3 svAmitva 4. parasIti 5
zataka ye karmagrantha parimANa meM prAcIna karmagranthoM se choTe haiM, varNya
viSaya chUTane nahIM pAyA hai aura anya aneka naye kiyA gayA hai| phalataH
karmasAhitya ke adhyetAoM ne ina granthoM ko apanAyA aura katipaya vidvAnoM ke
sivAya sAdhAraNa jana yaha bhI nahIM jAnate ki zrI devendrasUri ke karmagranthoM
ke alAvA anya koI prAcIna karmagrantha bhI hai| sAmAnya rUpa ke karmagranthoM kA
pratipAdita viSaya karmasiddhAnta hai| lekina jaba pratyeka grantha ke ko jAnane
kI ora unmukha hote haiM to yaha jJAtavya hai ki prathama karmagrantha meM
jJAnAvaraNa Adi karmoM aura unake bhedaprabhedoM ke nAma tathA unake phala kA
varNana hai| dUsare karmacanda meM guNasthAnoM kA svarUpa samajhAkara unameM
karma prakRtiyoM ke bandha, udaya udIraNA aura mattA kA vicAra kiyA gayA :
tIsare karmagrantha meM mArgeNAoM ke Azraya se karma prakRtiyoM ke bandha ke
svAmiyoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai ki amuka mArgaNA vAlA jIva kina-kina aura
kitanI prakRtiyoM kA bandha karatA hai  /  catumaM karmagrantha meM jIvasthAna,
mArgeNAsthAna, guNa

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(31) The text describes in detail the division of karma based on location,
state, and number. The fifth chapter of the first karma text explains which of
the afra karmas are dhruva, abhuva, bandha, udaya, and satta. It also explains
which are sarva deshghati, apati, punya papa, parayartman, and aparavartman.
Following this, it explains which karmas are kshetra, jiva bhava, and pudgala
vipaki. Subsequently, the text describes the nature of karma, its state, rasa,
and pradesh, along with the different types of bandha. Finally, it concludes
with the path of upshama shreni and kshapaka shreni.  The third karma text
focuses on the 14 marganas, including गति (motion), and their respective
उत्तरभेद (subdivisions). It explains the bandha of karmas in relation to the
general and specific locations. In other words, it explains how many karmas a
jiva with a particular margana binds. While the text does not explicitly mention
the names of the marganas and their subdivisions like गति, इन्द्रिय, काय, etc.
at the beginning, it does mention their ownership, allowing the reader to easily
understand the origin and subdivisions of the marganas.  The subject matter of
this text and the ancient karma text is similar. However, the ancient text
provides a more detailed description of the subject matter, while this text
focuses on the kshetra. Nevertheless, no topic is omitted in this text.
Gommata's Sar Karmakanda also describes the subject matter of this text, but its
description is slightly different. It includes topics not found in the third
karma text, but which are beneficial for the study of karma. The third karma
text describes the bandha ownership of the marganas, while the Sar Karmakanda
describes the udaya, udirana, and satta ownership in addition to bandha
ownership. This description is beneficial for practitioners and is therefore
included as an appendix.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 31 ) r sthAna, bhAva aura saMkhyA se vibhAga karake unakA vistAra se varNana
kiyA gayA hai| paMcama katha meM prathama karmagrantha meM afra prakRtiyoM meM
se kauna-kauna sI dhruva, abhUva, bandha, udaya, sattA vAlI haiM. kauna-sI sarva
dezaghAtI apAtI, puNya pApa, parAyartamAna aparAvartamAna hai aura usake bAda
una prakRtiyoM meM kaunasI kSetra, jIva bhava ra pudgala vipAkI hai yaha
batalAyA gayA hai| isake bAda karmaprakRtiyoM ke prakRti, sthiti, rasa aura
pradeza va isa bAra prakAra ke bandhoM kA svarUpa batalAyA gayA hai tathA unase
saMbandhita anya kathanoM kA samAveza karate hue anta meM upazama zreNI kSapaka
zreNI kA patha kiyA gayA hai| tRtIya karma kA viSaya prastuta karmagrantha meM
gati Adi 14 mAgaMNAoM ke uttarabhedoM meM sAmAnya va guNasthAnoM kI apekSA
karmakRtiyoM ke gaMdha ko batAyA hai| yAnI kisa mArpaNA vAlA jIna fear - kitanI
karmaprakRtiyoM kA bandha karatA hai  /  yayA grantha ke prArambha meM
mArgaNAtroM aura unake usaramedoM kA kama-krama se gati, indriya kAya Adi
mArgAoM ke 1 nAmollekha nahIM hai lekina prabhedoM kA Aya lekara svAmitva kA
kathana kiyA hai, jisase adhyetA mArgaNAoM ke mUla aura unake avAntara bhedoM ko
sahaja meM samajha letA hai| 1 isa grantha aura prAcIna karmamya kA varNyaviSaya
samAna hai lekina ina donoM meM yaha antara hai ki prAcIna meM viSaya varNana
kucha vistAra meM kiyA gayA hai aura isameM kSetra se lekina usakA koI bhI
viSaya isameM chUTA nahIM hai| gommaTalekina sAra karmakANDa meM bhI isa grantha
ke viSaya kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| usakI varNana kucha bhinna hai tathA jo
viSaya tIsare karmagrantha meM nahIM hai, parantu jisa viSaya kA varNana
adhyayana karane vAloM ke liye upayogI hai, vaha saba karme meM hai  /  tIsare
karmagrantha meM mAgaMgAoM meM bandhasvAmitva kA varNana kiyA arr hai kintu
karmakAMDa meM bandhasvAmitva ke atirikta udaya, udIraNA va sattAsvAmitva kA bhI
varNana hai  /  yaha varNana abhyAsiyoM ke lie upayogI hone se pariziSTa ke rUpa
meM saMkalita kiyA gayA hai  /

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is possible that there may be some differences in the description of karma-
kāṇḍa in the Karmagrantha and Gommatasāra. However, the planetary friendship
will be partial and there is more similarity than difference. Therefore, from
the perspective of the tattvajña, the Gommatasāra karmakāṇḍa, even though it is
a small part, is useful for comparative study of the karma-sākṣya. This is the
aspiration.  In this, the readers have also been given a historical introduction
to various texts written on less literature so far, so that those who are
curious about the subject may be attracted to the study of these texts.  The
original gāthās of the first three parts have also been given so that the lovers
of the Karmagrantha can memorize them and make the entire text heart-felt.
Overall, the effort has been made to make it useful from all other perspectives.
The evaluation is in the hands of the readers.  ...Śrīcandra Surāna 'Saras' -
Devakumāra Jain

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMbhavataH karmagrantha aura gommaTasAra karmakANDa ke varNana meM kahIM-kahIM
bhinnatA ho sakatI hai  /  lekina graha mitratA AMzika hogI aura usakI apekSA
samAnatA adhika hai  /  ata: jibhAnujana vAde-sAde jAyate tattvajo kI dRSTi se
gommaTasAra karmakANya . jadata aMza kI upayogitA samA32 karmasAkSiya ke
tulanAtmaka adhyayana kI ora pravRtta hoM, yaha AkAMkSA hai  /  ansa meM
pAThakoM ko aba taka kama sAhitya para likhita vividha granthoM kA aitihAsika
paricaya bhI kara diyA hai, tAki viSaya ke zijJAsu, ina granthoM ke parizIlana
kI ora AkRSTa hoN| prathama tInoM bhAga kI mUla gAthAeM bhI isalie dI gaI hai ki
karmagrantha ke rasika unheM kaNThastha karake pUrai grantha ko hAI hRdayaMgama
kara sakeM  /  kula milAkara prayatna yaha gayA kiyA hai ki anya sabhI dRSTiyoM
se upayogI bana sake  /  mUlyAMkana pAThakoM ke hAtha meM hai| ...zrIcanda
surAnA 'sarasa' - devakumAra jaina

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I bow to the valiant, the glorious Devadhari-composed Bandhaswamitva. The third
Karma-prastha, the destroyer of bondage, the luminous, the moon-like, the Jina,
the destroyer of the cycle of births and deaths. I ask, in summary, about
Bandhaswamitva. ||15||  **Meaning:** This verse, composed by the great
Devadhari, is dedicated to the valiant, the glorious, the moon-like, the
luminous, the Jina, the destroyer of the cycle of births and deaths, the Lord
Vardhamana (Vira). It is the third Karma-prastha, the destroyer of bondage. The
verse asks, in summary, about Bandhaswamitva, the nature of bondage.
**Explanation:** The author, in the beginning of the text, offers salutations to
the Lord Vardhamana (Vira), who is free from the bondage of Karma, luminous like
the moon, and possesses the supreme knowledge (Kevalgyan). He then briefly
introduces the topic of the text, which is about Bandhaswamitva, the nature of
bondage.  Bandhaswamitva refers to the relationship between the soul and Karma.
This relationship is established through the causes of Karma-bandha, such as
Mithyatva (false belief), etc. The text will further explain the nature of
Bandhaswamitva, i.e., which soul binds which types of Karmas, in relation to the
different stages of the soul's journey (Margana, Gati, etc.).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vande vIram zrImana devadhari viracita bandhasvAmitva tRtIya karmaprastha
bandhavihANAdhama, kSaya sipiramANajina  /  gaiyAIsu buccha, samAsao
baMdhasAmita  // 15 //  gAdhArtha-karmabandha ke vidhAna se vimukta, candramA ke
samAna saumya zrI vardhamAna (vIra) jinezvara ko namaskAra karake gati Adi
mArgaNAoM meM vartamAna jIvoM ke bandhasvAmitva ko saMkSepa meM kahatA hai|
vizeSArtha-granthakAra ne granthArambha meM maMgalAcaraNa karate hue grantha meM
varNita viSaya kA saMkSepa meM saMketa kiyA hai| AramapradezoM ke sAtha karma ke
sambandha ko bandha kahate haiM aura yaha sambandha mithyAtvAdi karmabandha ke
kAraNoM dvArA hotA hai| arthAt midhyAvAdi kAraNoM dvArA AtmA ke sAtha hone vAle
karmabandha ke sambandha ko karmavidhAna kahate haiM  /  isa karmavidhAna se
vimukta yAnI mithyAtvAdi kAraNoM se sarvathA rahita hokara candramA ke samAna
prakAzamAna, saumya aura kevalajJAnarUpa zrI lakSmI se samRddha vardhamAna-dhIra
jinezvara kI vandanA karake saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karane vAle jIvoM ke gati
Adi mArgaNAoM kI apekSA saMkSepa meM bandhasvAmitva-kauna-sA jIva kitanI
prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhatA hai--kA varNana isa grantha meM Age kiyA jA rahA hai|
mArgaNAgati Adi jina avasthAoM ko lekara jIva meM guNasthAna, jIvasthAna Adi kI
mArgaNA-vicAraNA, gaveSaNA kI jAtI hai, una

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **2**  The term "Margana" refers to the states or conditions of
a living being. It means to examine and investigate the way in which a living
being is perceived, in terms of its states, transformations, etc.  **1**  There
are infinite living beings in the world. Each being has a unique external and
internal life. The size of the body, senses, color, appearance, intellect,
mental strength, etc., differ from one being to another. This difference arises
due to karma-generated states, such as Audayik, Autsargik, Kshayopaśamik, and
Kshayik, and also due to inherent consequential states. These infinite
differences have been categorized by the wise into 62 divisions. These divisions
of the external and internal life of living beings are called Margana.  The wise
have also categorized living beings into fourteen divisions based on the
development of their spiritual qualities. These divisions are called
Gunasthanas.  The wise consider the state of a living being with attachment and
ignorance as the lowest state, and the attainment of complete knowledge without
attachment, or Moksha, as the highest state. Gradually, the living being
progresses by shedding the veils of attachment and develops the inherent
qualities of the soul, such as knowledge, perception, and character. In this
path of development, the living being passes through fourteen states. These
progressive states of the path of development are called Gunasthanas. These
countless progressive states have also been categorized by the wise into
fourteen divisions. These fourteen divisions are called Gunasthanas in the
scriptures.  The difference between Margana and Gunasthanas lies in the way they
are categorized.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2 asterfer avasthAoM ko mArgaNA kahate haiM  /  arthAt jAhi va Asu na jIvA
after jahA tahA diTThA - jisa prakAra se athavA jina avasthA- paryAyoM Adi meM
jIvoM ko dekhA gayA hai. unakI usI rUpa meM vicAraNA, gaveSaNA karatA mArgaNA
kahalAtA hai| love 1 saMsAra meM jIva ananta haiM  /  pratyeka jona kA bAhya
aura AbhyaMtara jIvana alaga-alaga hotA hai| zarIra kA AkAra, indriyA~, raMga-
rUpa, vicArarkti, manobala Adi farai meM eka jIva dUsare jIva se bhina hai |
yaha bheda karmajanya audayika, autafts, kSAyopazamika aura kSAyika bhAvoM ke
kAraNa tathA sahaja pAriNAmika bhAva ko lekara hotA hai | ina ananta bhitAoM ko
jJAniyoM ne ate free meM fabhAjita kiyA hai| ina da vibhAgoM ke avAntara bheda
62 ho  /  jIvoM ke bAhya aura Abhyantara jIvana ke ina vibhAgoM ko mArgaNA kahA
jAtA hai  /  jJAniyoM ne jIvoM ke AdhyAtmika guNoM ke vikAsakrama ko dhyAna meM
rakhate hue, dusare prakAra se bhI caudaha vibhAga kiye haiN| ina vibhAgoM ko
guNasthAna kahate hai  /  jJAnIjana jIva kI moha aura ajJAna kI avasthA ko
nimnatama avasthA kahate haiM, aura moharahita sampUrNa jJAnAvasthA kI prApti ko
jIva kI uccatama avasthA athavA mokSa kahate haiM  /  nimnatama avasthA se
zanaiH zanaiH moha ke AvaraNoM ko dUra karatA huA jIva Age bar3hatA hai. aura
AtmA ke svAbhAvika jJAna, darzana, cAritra Adi guNoM kA vikAsa karatA hai  /
isa vikAsa mArga meM are ete avasthAoM meM se gujaratA hai  /  vikAsamArga kI
ina zramika avasthAoM ko guNasthAna kahA jAtA hai| ina kramika asaMkhyAta
avasthAoM ko bhI jJAniyoM ne caudaha bhAgoM meM vibhAjita kiyA hai| ina caudaha
vibhAgoM ko zAstroM guNasthAna kahate haiN| NA aura guNasthAna meM antara
mArgaNA meM kiyA jAne vAlA

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Karm Granth  The Sutra Karm Granth does not consider the ultimate
nature of the states of karma, but rather examines them through the lens of
physical, mental, and spiritual characteristics, as perceived by the Marganas.
In contrast, the Gunasthanas provide knowledge about the tendencies and
cessation of the ultimate nature and yogas of the karma patalas.  Marganas do
not reveal the evolutionary path of a being, but rather differentiate their
natural and inherent forms in various ways. Conversely, Gunasthanas describe the
evolutionary path of a being and categorize the stages of its karmic
development. Marganas are co-existent, while Gunasthanas are sequential. This
means that a single being can possess fourteen Marganas, while only one
Gunasthan can exist within it.  One can progress through Gunasthanas, leaving
behind previous ones, and achieve spiritual growth. However, it is not possible
to acquire new Marganas while retaining previous ones, nor can spiritual
perfection be attained through them. A being who has attained the thirteenth
Gunasthan, the Kevalasthan, possesses all Marganas except the Kashaya Margana.
However, there is only one thirteenth Gunasthan. Even in the final stage of a
being, the Pat, all Marganas except three or four remain, while there is only
one fourteenth Gunasthan in the Gunasthanas.  Thus, there is a distinct
difference between Marganas and Gunasthanas. The Gunasthanas have been discussed
in another Karm Granth. Here, we focus on understanding the karmic bondage and
ownership of a being through the Marganas.  Just as there are fourteen
Gunasthanas, each with its own name like Mithyatva, Sasvadan, etc., there are
also fourteen Marganas, with names as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sutIya karma grantha vicAra karma kI avasthAoM ke taratama bhAva kA vicAra
nahIM hai, kintu zArIrika, mAnasika aura zAmagi zinAoM se milI kA vicAra
mArgaNAoM dvArA kiyA jAtA hai| jabaki guNasthAna karmapaTaloM ke taratama bhAvoM
aura yogoM kI pravRtti-nivRtti kA jJAna karAte haiN| mArgaNAeM jIva ke vikAsa
krama ko nahIM batAtI haiM, kintu inake svAbhAvika vaibhAvika rUpoM kA aneka
prakAra se pRSakkaraNa karatI haiN| jabaki guNasthAna jIva ke vikAsa-krama ko
batAte haiM aura vikAsa kI kamika avasthAoM kA vargIkaraNa karate haiN|
mArgaNAe~ sahabhAvI haiM. aura guNasthAna kramabhASI haiN| arthAt eka hI jIva
meM caudaha mArga NAeM ho sakatI haiM, jabaki guNasthAna eka jIva meM eka hI ho
sakatA hai  /  pUrva-pUrva guNasthAnoM ko chor3akara uttarottara guNasthAna
prApta kiye jA sakate haiM aura AdhyAtmika vikAsa ko bar3hAyA jA sakatA hai,
kintu pUrva-pUrva kI mArgaNAoM ko chor3akara uttarottara mArgaNAe~ prApta nahIM
kI jA sakatI hai aura unameM AdhyAtmika vikAsa kI siddhi bhI nahIM ho sakatI hai
/  terahaveM guNasthAna ko prApta yAnI kevalazAna ko prApta karane vAle jIva meM
kaSAyamArgaNA ke sivAya bAkI kI saba marmANAeM hotI haiM  /  parantu guNasthAna
to mAtra eka terahavA hI hotA hai  /  aMtima avasthA pAta jIva meM bhI tIna-cAra
mArgamAoM ko chor3akara bAkI kI sava mArgaNAe~ hotI haiM, jabaki guNAsthAnoM meM
sirpha caudahavA muNasthAna hI hotA hai| isa prakAra mArgaNAoM aura guNasthAnoM
meM paraspara antara hai| guNasthAnoM kA kathana dUsare karmagrantha meM kiyA jA
cukA hai| yahA~ para mArgaNAoM kI apekSA jIva ke karmabandhasvAmitva ko
samajhAte haiM  /  jisa prakAra guNasthAna cAMdaha hote haiM, aura unake
mithyAtva, sAsvAdana Adi caudaha nAma haiM, usI prakAra mArgaNAe~ bhI caudaha
hotI haiM tathA unake nAma isa prakAra haiM

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  "Vachasvamitva" (14 Paths)  1. **Gati-marg-na:** The path of motion,
referring to the transmigration of the soul through different births (Gati) due
to the ripening of Karma. 2. **Indriya-marg-na:** The path of senses, referring
to the ability of the soul to perceive objects through the senses, which is
possible due to the diminishing of the "Avarana" Karma (Karma that obscures the
senses). 3. **Kaya-marg-na:** The path of the body, referring to the physical
body that the soul inhabits during its transmigration. 4. **Yoga-marg-na:** The
path of Yoga, referring to the practice of various techniques to control the
mind and senses, leading to liberation. 5. **Veda-marg-na:** The path of the
Vedas, referring to the study and understanding of the sacred scriptures for
spiritual knowledge. 6. **Kasaya-marg-na:** The path of passions, referring to
the internal afflictions (Kasaya) that hinder spiritual progress. 7. **Jnana-
marg-na:** The path of knowledge, referring to the pursuit of true knowledge
about the self and the universe. 8. **Samyama-marg-na:** The path of self-
control, referring to the practice of restraining the senses and mind. 9.
**Darshan-marg-na:** The path of vision, referring to the development of right
perception and understanding. 10. **Leshya-marg-na:** The path of subtle
tendencies, referring to the inherent tendencies (Leshya) that influence the
soul's actions and thoughts. 11. **Bhavya-marg-na:** The path of the blessed,
referring to the path of those who are destined for liberation. 12. **Samyak-
tvam-marg-na:** The path of right conduct, referring to the practice of living a
virtuous life. 13. **Sanjna-marg-na:** The path of consciousness, referring to
the development of awareness and understanding. 14. **Ahar-marg-na:** The path
of food, referring to the importance of mindful eating and the impact of food on
the soul.  **Explanation of the terms:**  * **Gati:** The transmigration of the
soul through different births. * **Indriya:** The senses, which are the
instruments of perception. * **Kaya:** The physical body. * **Yoga:** A system
of practices for controlling the mind and senses. * **Veda:** Sacred scriptures
containing spiritual knowledge. * **Kasaya:** Internal afflictions such as
anger, greed, and pride. * **Jnana:** True knowledge about the self and the
universe. * **Samyama:** Self-control. * **Darshan:** Right perception and
understanding. * **Leshya:** Subtle tendencies that influence the soul's actions
and thoughts. * **Bhavya:** Blessed, destined for liberation. * **Samyak-tvam:**
Right conduct. * **Sanjna:** Consciousness. * **Ahar:** Food.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vAcasvAmitva 1. gatimArgaNA, 2. indriyamArgaNA, 3. kAyamArgaNA, 4. yogamArgaNA,
5, vedamArgaNA, 6. kaSAyamArgaNA, 7. jJAnamArgamA, 8. saMyamamArgaNA, 6.
darzanamArgaNA, 10. lezyAmArgaNA, 11. bhavyamArgaNA, 12. samyaktvamArgaNA, 13.
saMjJimArgaNA, 14. aahaarbhaargnnaa|' inake lakSaNa isa prakAra haiM (1)
gatigati nAmakarma ke udaya se hone vAlI jIva kI paryAya ko athavA manuSya Adi
cAroM matiyoM (bhava) meM jAne ko gati kahate haiN| (2) indriya AvaraNa karma kA
kSayopazama hone para bhI svayaM padArtha kA zAna karane meM asamartha
zasvabhAva kapa AnmA ko padArtha kA zAna karAne meM nimittabhUta kAraNa ko
indriya kahate haiM  /  athavA' jisake dvArA AtmA jAnA jAye, use indriya kahate
haiN| athavA indra ke samAna 1 (ka) gaindira ya kAra joe vAra kamAyanANesa  /
saMgamaramaNalesA bhava samme maSi AhAre 11 -caturtha karmapranyaha (a)
gahandiyesU kAye joge vaide kasAyA ya _ saMjamadasaNalessAdiyA sammatta samiNa
AhAra  / 3 -re jIvakAMpa 41 2 aMNizya-tirivana-maNussandekSA Niccatta kamma ta
padi gAma 1 lA 1335, 5, 101136.316 3 indattIti indra AtmA  /  sasya
zasvabhAvasya tadAvaraNazyopazame sati svayamaryAn gRhItumasamarthasya
yadarthopalabdhiliMga tadindrasya liganindhiyamityucyate  /  -sarvisiddhi 1114 4
AtmanaH sUkSmasthAstisyAdhigame ligamindriyam  /  .. samiti 114 5 mahamidA jaha
devA adhisasaM ahamahaM ti madhyatA  /  IsaMti ekkamekaM indA icha indiyaM jANe
!!

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(3) **Kāya** - The state of the soul that arises from the non-abiding **As** of
the **Kāya-Jāti** karma and the arising of the **Sthāvara** karma is called
**Kāya**.  (4) **Yoga** - The activity of the mind, speech, and body is called
**Yoga**. Alternatively, the power of the living being, equipped with mind,
speech, and body, to acquire karma due to the arising of the **Pudgala Vipāki
Śarīra** karma is called **Yoga**.  (5) **Ved** - The desire to indulge in
sensory pleasures due to the arising of the **Nokṣāya Mohaniya** is called
**Ved**.  (6) **Kaṣāya** - That which destroys the qualities of the soul (or
that which increases the cycle of birth and death, or that which prevents the
attainment of **Samyaktvam**, **Deśa-Cāritra**, **Sakala-Cāritra**, and
**Yathākhyāta-Cāritra**) is called **Kaṣāya**.  (7) **Śān** - That by which the
living being knows all substances, their qualities, and their various states in
the three times is called **Śān**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagrantha apane-apane sparzAdika viSayoM meM dUsare kI (rasanA Adi
kI) apekSA na rakhakara jo svataMtra hoM, unheM indriya kahate haiN| (3) kAya
-jAti nAmakarma ke avinAbhAvI asa aura sthAvara nAmakarma ke udaya se hone vAlI
AtmA kI paryAya ko kAya kahate haiN| (4) yoga-mana, vacana, kAyA ke vyApAra ko
yoga kahate haiM, athavA pudagala vipAkI zarIra nAmakarma ke udaya se mana-
vacana-kAya se yukta jIva kI jo kamAM ke grahaNa karane meM kAma zakti hai, use
yoga kahate haiN|' (5) veca-nokaSAya mohanIya ke udaya se aindriya-ramaNa karane
kI abhilASA ko veda kahate haiN| (6) kavAya- jo AtmaguNoM ko kaSe (naSTa kare
athavA jo janma-maraNarUpI saMsAra ko bar3hAye athavA samyaktva, dezacAritra,
sakalacAritra, yathAkhyAtacAritra ko na hone de, use kaSAya kahate haiN|' (7)
zAna... jisake dvArA jIva trikAlaviSayaka samasta dravya aura unake guNa tathA
unakI aneka prakAra kI paryAyoM ko jAne, use zAna kahate haiM  /  1 maNamA vAyA
kAraNa vA vi jhutassa viriya pariNAmo 1 _ jihappaNijogo jogo ti jihi cihiTcha  /
paMdhasaMgraha 2 AtmapravRtta maithunasaMmohotpAdoM vedaH  /  -salA 11414 3 (ko
kapasyAtmAnaM hinasti iti kavAya ityucyate  /  (kha) cAritapariNAma kaSayAt
kaSAyaH  /  -rAvAlikA 4 jJAyate-parimichadyate vastyane nAmAdammili vA jhArna,
jAnAti cipaeM paricipsIti kA jJAnaM  /  .....anuyogadvArasUtra iti

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **(8) Samyama:**  Samyama is the control or restraint
of the five senses through mindful effort, leading to the cessation of sinful
activities or the initiation of virtuous actions. It is also the practice of the
five great vows (Mahavratas).  **(9) Darshan:** Darshan is the perception of the
general aspect of a substance, while excluding its specific attributes. It is
the perception of the general form of a substance, excluding its specific
attributes, through the process of Jivakalp (mental perception).  **(10)
Leshya:** Leshya refers to the consequences of karma that bind the soul. It is
also defined as the tendency towards attachment due to the arising of passions
(Kashaya).  **(11) Bhavya:** A Bhavya is a soul who is capable of attaining
liberation (Moksha).  **(12) Samyaktva:** Samyaktva is the belief in the six
substances, five aggregates, nine substances, and seven principles as explained
by the Jina (Tirthankara). It is the belief in the true nature of reality
(Tattvartha).  **(1) Darshan:** Darshan is characterized by the knowledge of the
general principles of the universe.  **(2a) Liye Apa Ki Rai Eyae Shiyay Gur:**
What is the nature of the soul, and how does it become bound by karma?  **(2b)
Bhavaleshya:** Bhavaleshya is the tendency towards attachment due to the arising
of passions (Kashaya).  **(3a) Chah Dal Pad Payastha Sast Tacc Shidiva:**  The
six categories of substances are the foundation of the universe.  **(3b)
Tattvartha Shramanam Samyadarshanam:**  The belief in the true nature of reality
(Tattvartha) is called Samyaktva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 agdhasvAmitva (8) saMyama -sAvadhayoga se nivRtti athavA pApa-vyApArarUpa
Arambha-samAraMbhoM se AsmA jisake dvArA kAbU meM Aye athavA paMca mahAvata rUpa
yamoM kA pAlana ayakA pAMca indriyoM ke jaya . ko saMyama kahate haiN| (E) bama-
sAmAnya vizeSAtmaka padArtha ke vizeSa aMza kA . prahama karake kevala sAmAnya
aMza kA jo jivikalpa rUpa se grahaNa hotA hai, use darzana kahate haiN|' (10)
lezyA-jinake dvArA AtmA karmoM meM lipta ho, jIva ke aise pariNAmoM ko lezyA
kahate haiM athavA kaSAyodaya se anurakta yogapravRtti ko lezyA kahate haiN|'
(11) madhya-jisa jIva meM mokSaprApti kI yogyatA ho use bhavya kahate haiN| (12)
samyaktva-chaha dravya, paMca astikAya, nava padArtha sAta tatvoM kA jinendra
deva ne jaisA kathana kiyA hai, usI prakAra meM unakA zraddhAna karanA athavA
tattvArtha ke zraddhAna ko samyaktva kahate haiN| 1 darzana zAsana
sAmAnyAnabodha lakSaNam  /  - zama samuccaya 2015 2 (ka) liI apA kI rai eyAe
ziyaya gur |ca  /  jIcosi hoI lesA lesAguNajANyakhAyA ? _ yasasaMgraha 142 (kha)
bhAvalezyA kaSAyodayarajitA sApazyatiriti kRtvA audayakotyucyate  /
sarvArthasiddhi saI 3 (ka) chaha dala pada payasthA sasta tacca zidivA  /
sadahAi tANa rUvaM so sahiTThI bhuNebhayo  /  /  -varzanapAhaba 112 (kha)
tasvArthazramAnaM samyAdarzanam  /  tatsvArthapUna 12

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma Granth (13-14)  **(13)** The term "Sansha" refers to the desire
for objects (Sammi-Abhilasha). The one who possesses this desire is called a
"Sanshi". Alternatively, Sansha refers to the destruction or cessation of the
Karma of the nine Indriya Avaranas (No-Indriya Avarana Karma), or the knowledge
arising from it. The one who possesses this is called a "Jago Sanshi".
Alternatively, the one who possesses the mind in the form of acquisition or use
is called a "Sanshi".  **(14)** "Aahar" refers to the acceptance of the No-Karma
Vargana, which is capable of becoming the form of body, speech, and material
mass, due to the arising of the Karma called "Sharira Nama Karma".
Alternatively, Aahar refers to the acceptance of the Pudgalas suitable for the
three bodies and six Paryaptas.  In the original text, the number and names of
the sub-categories of each of the fourteen types of Marganas mentioned are as
follows:  1. **Aahar** etc. **Vishaya Abhilasha** is **Sanshati**. ...
**Sarvarth Siddhi** 2124 2. **Go-Indriya Avarana Kshayo-Upshama** is **Sansha**.
The one who possesses this is called a "Sanshi". This is the meaning of the
text. ... **Gora Jiwat** 13.3 3. **Sanshina** are **Samanaraka**. ...
**Tattvarth Pushti** 2524 4. **Bhaya** (fear), **Sharira** (body), **Paryapta**
(sufficient), **Pudgal** (matter), **Grahana** (acceptance), **Aahar** (food).
... **Marth Siddhi** 30 5. **Guranar** (teacher), **Tirth** (pilgrim),
**Bhirabagai** (wandering ascetic), **Igabiliyach** (one who has attained
liberation), **Upanidhi** (one who has attained knowledge). ... **Twaya** (by
you)  **Bhujal** (water), **Jal** (water), **Anil** (wind), **Vana** (forest),
**Tasa** (heat), **Y** (and), **Apvana** (water), **S** (and), **Joga** (yoga).
**Vesha** (clothing), **Maristhin** (flesh), **Pusa** (man), **Kasaya**
(passions), **Koh** (anger), **Mayamaya** (illusion), **Lo** (greed).
**Maiyavahi** (one who is attached to the world), **Kevala** (absolute),
**Vihangam** (bird), **Imuana** (one who is free from attachment), **Samara**
(battle). **Samayagar** (one who is free from time), **Parihar** (avoidance).
**Muh** (mouth), **Ahva** (call), **Yada** (when), **E** (this), **Asan**
(food). **Chav** (taste), **Khu** (smell), **An** (sound), **Kyu** (sight),
**Mohi** (attachment), **Kevala** (absolute), **Kshan** (moment), **Vam**
(vomit), **Ki** (what), **Paha** (mountain), **Nila** (blue), **Kao** (black),
**Tel** (oil), **Pamha** (we), **Y** (and), **Muk** (face), **Bhaviyara**
(future), **Vedha** (knowledge), **Gabagu** (speech), **Vasa** (dwelling),
**Mimi** (I), **Chhami** (I), **Masa** (month), **Saya** (evening).
**Saniyare** (on Saturday). ... **Ahare** (in food) ... ...  **...** **Matu-Arth
Karma Granth** 10-14

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 -A w -.- - - tRtIya karmagrantha (13) saMmI-abhilASA ko saMjJA kahate hai aura
yaha jisake ho vaha saMzI kahalAtA hai  /  athavA noindriyAvaraNa karma ke
kSayopazama ko yA tajjanya jJAna ko saMzA kahate hai| yaha jisake ko jAgo saMzI
kahate haiN|' athavA jisake labdhi yA upayogarUpa mana pAyA jAye usako saMzI
kahate haiN| (14) AhAra....zarIra nAmakarma ke udaya se deha, vacana aura
dravyamAna rUpa banane yogya nokarmavargaNA kA jo grahaNa hotA hai usako AhAra
kahate haiM  /  athavA tIna zarIra aura chaha paryAptiyoM ke yogya pudgaloM ke
grahaNa ko AhAra kahate haiN| mUla meM mArgaNAoM ke ukta caudaha bhedoM meM se
pratyeka mArgaNA ke uttarabhedoM kI saMkhyA aura nAma 5 yaha hai1 AhArAdi
viSayAbhilASaH saMzati  /  .... sarvArthasidi 2124 2 goindiA pAvaraNa khaoksama
tamanohaNaM sshaa| sA jasmA so du saNaNI idarI sesidiya acAho  /  ...gora jIvATa
13. 3 saMzinaH samAnarakAH ...tattvArtha puSa 2524 4 bhayANAM zarIrANAM pazyAM
paryAptImA progya pudgala grahagAmAhAraH  /  ....... mArthasisi 30 5 guranara
tiri bhirabagaI igabiliyaca upaNidi tvayA  /  bhUjalajalaNAnilavaNa tasA ya
apavaNasa] jogaa| veSamaristhinapusA kasAya koha mayamAyalo ta  /  maiyavAhimA
kevala vihaMgamaimuanANa saamaaraa| sAmAyagaraparihAra muhamaahavAyadema asanamA
/  cavakhUanakyUmohI kevalakSaNa vAma kipahA nIlA kAU tela pamhA ya muka
bhaviyarA vedhagabaguvasamamichamImasAsAyA saniyare  /  /  AhAre arabhe....
....... .............." mAturtha karmagrantha 10-14
.................................... .............. ...... ......... -v -..-wi -
-IAIAn -imw krA

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Path Names and Their Divisions  **Path Name** | **Number of Divisions** |
**Divisions** ---|---|---| 1. **Gati Margana** | 5 | Naraka (Hell), Tiryanch
(Animal), Manushya (Human), Dev (God) 2. **Indriya Margana** | 11 | Ekendriya
(One sense), Dwiendriya (Two senses), Triendriya (Three senses), ... 3. **Kay
Margana** | 6 | Prithvi (Earth), Ap (Water), Tejas (Fire), Vayu (Air), Vanaspati
(Plant), Sar (Animal) 4. **Yog Margana** | 3 | Padma (Lotus), Shukla (White) 5.
**Ved Margana** | 3 | Bhavya (Auspicious), Abhavya (Inauspicious) 6. **Kshaya
Margana** | 4 | Vedak (Knower), Kshayik (Destroyer), Mishr (Mixed), Mithyatva
(False Belief) 7. **Jnana Margana** | 8 | Mati Jnana (Knowledge of Mind), Shruta
Jnana (Knowledge of Scriptures), Avadhi Jnana (Clairvoyance), Man:paryaya Jnana
(Knowledge of Mind's Activities), Kevala Jnana (Omniscience), Mati-ajnan
(Ignorance of Mind), Shruta-ajnan (Ignorance of Scriptures), Avadhi-ajnan
(Ignorance of Clairvoyance) 8. **Samyam Margana** | 7 | Samayik (Meditation),
Chhedopasthaniy (Contemplation), Parihar Vishuddhi (Purification of Conduct),
Sukshma Samp (Subtle Concentration), Ray Yathakyat (Right Understanding), Desh
Virati (Non-attachment to Place), Avirati (Non-attachment to Time) 9. **Varnan
Margana** | 6 | Man (Mind), Vachan (Speech), Kay (Body), Purush (Male), Stri
(Female), Napumsak (Neuter) 10. **Leshya Margana** | 2 |  Krodh (Anger), Man
(Pride), Maya (Deception), Lobh (Greed) 11. **Bhavya Margana** | 2 | Chakshu
(Seeing), Achakshu (Not Seeing), Avadhi (Clairvoyance), Kevala (Omniscience) 12.
**Samyaktva Margana** | 2 | Krishna (Black), Neel (Blue), Kapoth (Pigeon), Tejas
(Bright), ... 13. **Sanshi Margana** | 2 | Upsham (Calmness), Sasadan (Comfort)
14. **Ahar Margana** | 2 | Aharak (Food), Anaharak (Non-food)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mArgakA nAma 1. gatimArgaNA 2. indriyamANA 3. kAya mArgaNA 4. yogamArgaNA 5.
vedamArgaNA 6. kaSAyamArgaNA 7. jJAnamArgaNA 8. saMyamamArgaNA 6. varNana
mAgaMNA 10. lezyA mArgaNA meva saMkhyA vAra pAMca 11. bhavyamArgaNA 12.
samyaktvamANA chaha tIna tIna cAra ATha sAta svAra chaha do chaha do do free
nAma naraka, tiryaMca, manuSya, deva  /  ekendriya, hIndriya zrIndriya, i
pRthvI, apa, teja, vAyu, vanaspati, sa padma, zukla  /  bhavya abhavya vedaka,
kSAyika, mizra, mithyAtva saMjJi asazi | 13. saMzimArgaNA 14. AhAramArgaNA
AhAraka, anAhAraka  /  prazna : mArgaNAoM ke jo uttara bheda batAye haiM, unameM
jJAnamArgaNA ke matijJAna Adi pA~ca jJAnoM aura mati ajJAna Adi tIna ajJAnoM ko
milAkara kula ATha bheda kahe haiM tathA saMyamamArgaNA ke bhedoM meM sAmAyika
Adi bhevoM ke sAtha saMyama ke pratipakSI asaMyama mana, vacana, kAya puruSa,
strI, napuMsaka 1 krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha 1 mati zruta, avadhi, mana:paryaya,
kevala, matiajJAna, zrutAjJAna, avadhi-ajJAna (vibhaMgajJAna) | sAmAyika,
chedopasthAnIya, parihAravizuddhi, sUkSmasampa rAya yathAkhyAta, deza virati,
avirati  /  cakSu, acakSu, avadhi, kevala 1 kRSNa nIla, kApota, teja, r upazama
sAsAdana  /

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma Granth  This also includes the **Karma Granth**. Why are they
called **Jnana Margana** and **Samyama Margana**?  **Answer:**  Each **Margana**
is named based on its primary characteristics. The primary characteristics are
**vare** and the opposing characteristics are secondary. For example, in a
forest, Neem trees are in a smaller number and Mango trees are in a larger
number, so it is called a Mango forest. Similarly, in **Jnana Margana**,
**Mati**, **Shruta**, **Avadhi**, **Man:paryaya**, and **Keval Jnana** are the
five main types of knowledge, while **Mati Ajnan**, **Shruta Ajnan**, and
**Vibhang Jnana** are secondary. In **Samyama Margana**, **Samayik** etc. up to
**Yayakhyat Paryant** are the main types, and **Asamyama**, the opposite of
**Samyama**, is secondary. Therefore, due to the prominence of **Mati** etc.
knowledge and **Samayik** etc. **Samyama**, they are respectively named **Jnana
Margana** and **Samyama Margana**.  In **Margana**, generally, and in relation
to **Gunasthanas**, the statement of **Bandh** ownership is made. Generally, the
**Gunasthanas** in **Margana** are as follows:  **Gati:** In **Tiyancha Gati**,
there are five **Gunasthanas** from the beginning, in **Dev** and **Naraka
Gati**, there are four **Gunasthanas** from the beginning, and in **Manushya
Gati**, there are all fourteen **Gunasthanas** from the beginning with
**Mithyatva** to **Ayogikevali**.  **Indriya:** In **Ekendriya**,
**Dwiindriya**, **Triindriya**, and **Chaturindriya**, there are two
**Gunasthanas**, the first and the second. In **Panchendriya**, there are all
**Gunasthanas**.  **Kay:** In **Prithvi**, **Jal**, and **Vanaspati Kay**, there
are two **Gunasthanas**, the first and the second. In **Tejas Kay** and **Vayu
Kay**, there is one **Gunasthan**, the first. In **Us Kay**, there are all
**Gunasthanas**.  **Yog:** There are thirteen **Gunasthanas** from the first to
the thirteenth (**Sayogikevali**).  **Ved:** In **Vedatrik**, there are nine
**Gunasthanas** from the beginning (in relation to **Sadaya**).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagrantha kA bhI samAveza kiyA gayA hai| phira bhI unako jJAnamArgaNA
aura saMyamamArgaNA kahane kA kyA kAraNa hai ? utara pratyeka mArgaNA kA
nAmakaraNa mukhya bhedoM kI apekSA se kiyA gayA hai| mukhya bheda vare haiM aura
pratipakSabhUta bheda gauNa  /  jaise kisI vana meM nIma Adi ke vRkSa
alpasaMkhyA meM aura AmravRkSa adhika saMkhyA meM hote haiM, to use Amravana
kahate haiN| isI prakAra jJAnamArgaNA ke bhedoM meM mati, zruta, avadhi,
mana:paryaya aura kevalajJAna yaha pA~ca jJAna mukhya haiM tathA mati ajJAna,
zruta-ajJAna aura vibhaMga-jJAna gauNa haiM, tathA saMyamamArgaNA ke bhedoM meM
sAmAyika Adi yayAkhyAtaparyanta pradhAna tathA saMyama kA pratipakSI asaMyama
gauNa hai  /  isIlie mati Adi jJAnoM aura sAmAyika Adi saMyamoM kI mukhyatA hone
se kramaza: jJAnamArgaNA aura saMyamamArgaNA yaha nAmakaraNa kiyA gayA hai|
mArgaNAoM meM sAmAnya rUpa se tathA guNasthAnoM kI apekSA baMdha svAmitva kA
kathana kiyA gayA hai| mArgaNAoM meM sAmAnyatayA guNasthAna nIce likhe anusAra
haiM gati - tiyaMcagati meM Adi ke pAMca, deva aura naraka gati meM Adi ke cAra
tathA manuSyagati meM pahale mithyAtva se lekara ayogikevalI paryanta sabhI
caudaha guNasthAna hote haiM  /  I indriya ekendriya, dvIndriya, zrIndriya,
caturindriya meM pahalA, aura dUsarA ye do guNasthAna hote haiM  /  paMcendriyoM
meM saba guNasthAna hote haiM  /  kAya - pRthvI, jala aura vanaspati kAya meM
pahalA aura dUsarA ye do guNasthAna haiN| matitrasa tejaHkAya aura vAyukAya meM
pahalA guNasthAna hai  /  usakAya meM sabhI guNasthAna hote haiM  /  wwww yoga-
pahale se lekara terahaveM ( sayogikevalI ) taka teraha guNasthAna hote haiM  /
veda vedatrika meM Adi ke nau guNasthAna hote haiM  /  (sadayApekSA ) -www

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Self-Possession  **Kashaya** - There are ten **guna-sthana** (stages of
development) in the **kashya** (passions) of anger, pride, deceit, and greed.
(For example, in anger, there are ten guna-sthana.)  **Udaya-peksha** - There
are nine **guna-sthana** in the **jhana** (meditation), **mati** (knowledge),
**shruta** (scriptural knowledge), **avadhi-jnana** (clairvoyance), and
**samyak-drishti** (right faith) (For example, in samyak-drishti, there are nine
guna-sthana).  **Manah-paryaya-jnana** - There are seven **guna-sthana** in
**manah-paryaya-jnana** (knowledge of the mind).  **Kevala-jnana** - There are
two final **guna-sthana** in **kevala-jnana** (omniscience): **sayogika-kevali**
(omniscience with karma) and **ayogika-kevali** (omniscience without karma).
**Mati-ajnana** - There are two **guna-sthana** in **mati-ajnana** (ignorance of
knowledge).  **Shruta-ajnana** - There are three **guna-sthana** in **shruta-
ajnana** (ignorance of scripture).  **Vibhang-jnana** - There are three **guna-
sthana** in **vibhanga-jnana** (knowledge of differentiation).  **Samyama-
samagi** - There is one **guna-sthana** in **samyama-samagi** (collection of
restraints).  **Dva-sthaniya** - There are two **guna-sthana** in **vichar**
(reflection), **parihar-vishuddhi** (purification of conduct), and **sangram**
(effort).  **Sukshma-samparaya** - There is one **guna-sthana** in **sukshma-
samparaya** (subtle connection).  **Yatha-khyata-charitra** - There are four
**guna-sthana** in **yatha-khyata-charitra** (conduct according to knowledge).
**Desha-virat** - There is one **guna-sthana** in **desha-virat** (freedom from
attachment to place).  **Avirati** - There are four **guna-sthana** in
**avirati** (non-stop effort).  **Darshan** - There are twelve **guna-sthana**
in **chakshu** (eye) and **achakshu-darshan** (non-eye vision).  **Avadhi-
darshan** - There are nine **guna-sthana** in **avadhi-darshan** (clairvoyance).
**Kevala-darshan** - There are two final **guna-sthana** in **kevala-darshan**
(omniscient vision).  **Leshya** - There are six **guna-sthana** in the
**leshya** (color) of **krishna** (black), **nila** (blue), and **kapota**
(grey). There are seven **guna-sthana** in the **leshya** of **tej** (bright)
and **padma** (red). There are thirteen **guna-sthana** in the **leshya** of
**shukla** (white).  **Masy-bhasya** - There are fourteen **guna-sthana** in
**masya-bhasya** (living beings).  **Abhavy** - The first **guna-sthana** for an
**abhavy** (non-liberated being) is **mithyatva** (false belief).  **Samyak-
tva** - There are eight **guna-sthana** in **samyak-tva** (right belief) from
the fourth to the eleventh. There are four **guna-sthana** in **vedaka**
(knowledge of the passions) from the fourth to the seventh. There are eleven
**guna-sthana** in **kshayika** (destruction of karma) from the fourth to the
fourteenth.  **Mithyatva** - There is one **guna-sthana** in **mithyatva**
(false belief).  **Sasvadana** - There is one **guna-sthana** in **sasvadana**
(enjoyment of the senses).  **Mith-ishti** - There is one **guna-sthana** in
**mith-ishti** (false perception).  **Sad-sanjee** - There are fourteen **guna-
sthana** in **sad-sanjee** (living beings with a soul).  **Asanjee** - There are
two **guna-sthana** in **asanjee** (living beings without a soul).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sanasvAmitva kaSAya-krodha, mAna, mAyA meM Adi ke gau guNasthAna tathA lobha
meM Adi ke dasa guNasthAna hote haiN| (udayApekSA jhAna mati, zruta, avadhijJAna
meM avirata samyagdRSTi Adi nau guNasthAna pAye jAte haiN| manaHparyayajJAna meM
pramattasayata Adi sAta guNasthAna haiN| kevalajJAna meM sayogikevalI aura
ayogikevalI yaha aMtima do guNasthAna pAye jAte haiN| mati-ajJAna, thuta-ajJAna
aura vibhaMga-jJAna ina-tIna azAnoM meM pahale do yA tIna guNasthAna hote haiN|
saMyama-sAmAgi, dopasthAnIya meM vicAra guNasthAna, parihAravizuddhi saMgrama
meM pramattabhayata Adi do guNasthAna, sUkSma-saMparAya meM apane nAma vAlA
guNasthAna arthAt dasavA~ guNasthAna, yathAkhyAtacAritra meM aMtima cAra
guNasthAna (gyAraha meM caudahI, dezavirata meM apane nAma vAlA (pA~cavA
dezavarata! guNasthAna hai| avirati meM Adi ke cAra guNasthAna pAye jAte haiM  /
varzana- cakSu, acakSudarzana meM Adi ke bAraha guNasthAna, avadhivarzana meM
cauthe se lekara bArahaveM taka no guNasthAna hote haiN| kevaladarzana meM
aMtima do guNasthAna pAye jAte haiN| lekyA-kRSNa, nIla, kApota ina tInoM lezyAoM
meM Adi ke chaha guNasthAna, teja aura padma lezyA meM Adi ke sAta guNasthAna,
aura zukla lezyA meM pahale se lekara lerahaveM taka teraha guNasthAna hote
haiN| _ masya-bhazya jIvoM ke caudaha gaNasthAna hote haiN| abhavya jIva ko
pahalA mithyAtva guNasthAna hai| samyaksa....-upazama samyakva meM cauthe ma
lekara gyArahancha taka ATha guNasthAna, vedaka (kSAyopamika) samyaktva meM
cauthe se lekara sAtaveM guNasthAna taka cAra guNasthAna, kSAyika samyaktva meM
cauthA Adi gyAraha guNasthAna hote haiN| mithyAtva meM pahalA, sAsvAdana meM
dUsarA aura mitha iSTi meM tIsarA guNasthAna hotA hai| sadisaMjhI jIvoM ke eka
se lekara caudaha taka sabhI muNasthAna hote haiM tathA asaMzI jIyoM meM Adi ke
do muNasthAna haiN|

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Kamprath  **Dietary beings** have thirteen Gunasthanas, starting from
Mithyatva and ending with the thirteenth Sayogikevali. **Non-dietary beings**
have five Gunasthanas: the first, tenth, fourth, thirteenth, and twenty-fourth.
After explaining the characteristics of the Marganas and their sub-categories,
the following two verses indicate a collection of certain natures that help in
explaining the ability of Jivas to bind karma according to their respective
natures.  **Verse 26:** Jin, Suravidvahar, Vaikriya, Aharak, Vayu, Narakatik,
Sukshmatrik, Vikalnik, Ekendriya, Stavar, Atap, Napusak, Mithyatva, Hun, Mevat,
Anantanubandhi Chatushk, Madhyam Sansthan Chatushk, Madhyam Sanhanan Chatushk,
Ashubhavihayogati, Nich Gotra, Strived, Dubhang Trik, Styanaddhi Trik, Udyot,
Tiyanch, Tiyanchay, Manusmayu, Manusya, Audarik, and Vrishabhanara are the 55
natures that help in explaining the bondage of Jivas.  **Verse 3:** An
Majmagidd, Sandhayan, Kukhag, Liy, Iyi, Duhayog, Usloyatiri, Dugam, Tiri, Narau,
Nar, Ur, Lagarisah.  **Explanation:** These 55 natures are listed in order
because they are helpful in explaining the bondage of Jivas.  **Special Note:**
There are 120 bondable natures. Of these, the 55 mentioned above are
specifically used in this Karmagranth for reference. In other words, these two
verses provide a concise summary of 55 natures to avoid repeatedly mentioning
them in the following verses. For example, the term "Suragunadhis" should be
understood to include the 16 natures from Devadhik onwards.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya kamaprastha AhAra-AhAraka jIvoM ke pahale mithyAtva meM lekara terahaveM
sayogikevalI paryanta teraha guNasthAna hote haiN| anAhAraka jIvoM ke, pahalA,
dasarA, cauthA, terahavA, cauvahA~, yaha pAMca guNasthAna hote haiM  /  isa
prakAra mArgaNAoM ke lakSaNa aura unake avAntara bhedoM kI saMsthA aura nAma Adi
batalAne ke bAda jItroM ke apane-apane yogya karma-prakRtiyoM ke bandha karane
kI yogyatA kA kathana karane meM sahAyaka kucha eka prakRtiyoM ke saMgraha kA
saMketa Age kI do gAthAoM meM karate haiN| jiNa suravir3avAhAravu vevAra ya
narayasuhamavigalatiga  /  egidi thAvarAdhyaya naSu mincha huDa chevaLa  // 26
//  aNa majmAgidda saMdhayaNa kukhaga liya iyi duhAyogaliga  /  usloyatiri dugaM
tiri narAu nara ura lagArisahaM  // 3 //  gAvArtha-jinanAma, suradvika,
vaikriyatika, AhArakadvika, vAyu, narakaTika, sUkSmatrika, vikalanika,
ekendriya, sthAvaranAma, AtapanAma, napusakayeda, mithyAtva, hUM isaMsthAna,
mevAta saMhanana, anantAnubandhIcatuSka, madhyama saMsthAna catuka, madhyama
saMhananacatuka, azubhavihAyogati, nIca gotra, strIveda, dubhaMgatrika,
styAnaddhitrika. udyotanAma, tiyaMcadvika, tiryaMcAyu, manusmAyu, manuSyadvika,
audArikadika, aura vaRSabhanArAca saMhanana yaha 55 prakRtiyA~ jIvoM kA
baMdhasvAmitva batalAne meM sahAyaka hone se anukrama se ginAI gaI haiN|
vizeSArtha-baMdhayogya 120 prakRtiyA~ hai| unameM se ukta 55 karmaprakRtiyoM kA
vizeSa upayoga isa karmagrantha meM saMketa ke liye haiM  /  arthAta ina do
gAthAoM meM saMketa dvArA saMkSepa meM bodha karAne ke lie 55 prakRtiyoM kA
saMgraha kiyA gayA hai, jisase Age kI gAthAoM meM baMdha prakRtiyoM kA
nAmollekha na karake amuka se amuka taka prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA ko samajha liyA
nAya  /  jaise ki 'suraguNadhIsa' isa pada se devaddhika se lekara Age kI 16
prakRtiyoM ko grahaNa kara lenA caahiye|

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Names of the Natures Collected in the Gathas:  (1) Tirthankara Namekarma (2)
Devadvi - Devagati, Devanupurvi (3) Kriyadvik - Vaikriya Sharira, Vaikriya
Angopang (4) Aharakdvik - Aharak Sharira, Aharak Angopang (5) Devayu (6)
Narakatrik - Narakagati, Narakanupurvi, Narakayu (7) Sukshmatrik - Sukshma Nama,
Aparayapt Nama, Sadharan Nama (8) Vikasatrik - Hindriya Jati, Shrindriya Jati,
Chaturindriya Jati (9) Ekendriya Jati (10) Stavar Nama (11) Atap Nama (12)
Napunsak Veda (13) Mithyatva Mahaniya (14) Jhund Sansthan (15) Seva Sanhanan
(16) Anantanubandhi Chatushk - Anantanubandhi Krodh, Man, Maya, Lobh (17)
Madhyam Sansthan Chatushk - Nyomrdh Parimandal, Sadi, Vaman, Ardh Kubj Sansthan
(18) Madhyam Sanhanan Chatushk - Rishabhanaracha, Naracha Kilika Sanhanan (19)
Ashubh Vihayogati (20) Nichgotra (21) Striveda (22) Durbhagatrik - Dubhang Nama,
Duhsbar Nama, Anadeya Nama (23) Sthanak - Nidra, Nidra, Prachala, Prachala,
Styana (24) Srot Nama - Naracha

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 12 www.lade gAthAoM meM saMgraha kI gaI prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM-(1)
tIrthaGkara nAmakarma, (2) devadvi-devagati, devAnupUrvI, (3) kriyadvika
vaikriya zarIra vaikriya aMgopAMga, AURLAL (4) AhArakadvika AhAraka zarIra,
AhAraka aMgopAMga, (5) devAyu, (6) narakatrika--- narakagati, narakAnupurvI,
narakAyu, (7) sUkSmatrika sUkSma nAma, aparyApta nAma, sAdhAraNa nAma: (8)
vikasatrika hIndriya jAti, zrIndriya jAti caturindriya F JAA jAti, (6) ekendriya
jAti, (10) sthAvara nAma, (11) Atapa nAma, (12) napuMsaka veda, (13) mithyAtva
mAhanIya, TELE www. turefire (14) jhuMDa saMsthAna, (15) sevA saMhanana, (16)
anantAnubaMdhI catuSka- anantAnubandhI krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, ( 17 )
madhyama saMsthAnacatuSka- nyomradha parimaMDala, sAdi, vAmana, ardha kubja
saMsthAna, (18) madhyama saMhananacatuSka RSabhanArAca, nArAca kIlikA saMhanana,
(16) azubha vihAyogati, (20) nIcagotra. TIT (21) strIveda, (22) durbhagatrika
dubhaMga nAma, duHsbara nAma, anAdeya nAma, (23) sthAnaka - nidra nidrA,
pracalApracalA, styAnaa, (24) srota nAma, F nArAcaM,

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma-Grantha  **(25)** Tiryanch-drik - Tiryanch-gati, Tiryanch-
anupurvi. **(26)** Tiryanch-ayu, **(27)** Manusya-ayu, **(20)** Manusya-dvik,
Manusya-gati, Manusya-anupurvi, **(26)** Audarik-dvik, Audarik-sharira, Audarik-
angopaang. 1 13 **(30)** Vajra-rishabha-narach-samhanan.  Thus, in brief, to
indicate the nature of the karmas that bind, the collection of karmas is
explained. In the next four gathas, the bondage-ownership of the hell-gati is
explained in the fourteen marganas, through the distinction of the gati-marg-
bha.  **Gatha-arth:** ... Of the 120 karmas that bind, except for the nineteen
karmas like Surakshik, one hundred and one karmas bind the narak-jiva in
general. The narak-jiva who is in the Mithyatva-gunasthan, binds one hundred
karmas without the Tirth-dur karma. And the narak-jiva who is in the Sasvadan-
gunasthan, binds sixty-nine karmas except for the four napunsak. In the Tri-rth-
gatha, the karmas that bind in the hell-gati in general (O) and specifically in
the Mithyatva-gunasthan and the Sasvadan-gunasthan are explained.  1. **Ogh-
bandh:** The bondage of all narak-jiva, without any specific intention towards
any particular gunasthan or khaam, is called their Ogh-bandh or general bondage.
2. **Vishesh-bandh:** The bondage of the narak-jiva, with specific intention
towards a particular gunasthan or a particular khaam hell, is called their
Vishesh-bandh. For example, the narak-jiva who is in the Mithyatva-gunasthan
binds one hundred karmas, etc. Similarly, in the other marganas, the meaning of
Ogh-bandh and Vishesh-bandh is explained.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagratha (25) tiryacadrika - tiyaMcagati tiyaMtrAnupUrvo. (26) ticAyu
(27) manuSyAyu, (20) manuSyadvika manuSyagati, manuSyAnupUrvI, (26)
audArikadvika audArika zarIra, audArika aMgopAMga. 1 13 (30) vajraRSabhanArAca
saMhanana  /  isa prakAra saMkSepa meM baMdhayogya prakRtiyoM kA saMketa karane
ke lie prakRtiyoM kA saMgraha batalAkara Age kI cAra gAthAoM meM caudaha
mArgeNAoM meM meM gatimArgabhA ke bheda narakagati kA baMdha-svAmitva batalAte
haiN| suraiguNavIsacajjaM isa oheNa vaha nirayA  /  tittha viNA micha saya
sAsaNi napucau thiNA chuI" 11 gAthArtha ... baMdhayogya 120 prakRtiyoM meM meM
surakSika Adi unnIsa prakRtiyoM ke sivAya eka sau eka prakRtiyA~ sAmAnyarUpa se
nAraka jIva bAMdhate haiN| mithyAtva guNasthAna meM vartamAna nAraka tIrthadUra
nAmakarma ke binA sau prakRtiyoM ko aura sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM napuMsaka
catuSka ke sivAya chiyAnave prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhate hai  /  trirtha gAthA meM
sAmAnya (o) rUpa se narakagati meM tathA vizeSa rUpa se usake pahale mithyAtva
guNasthAna aura dUsare sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM baMdhayogya prakRtiyoM kA kapana
kiyA gayA hai| 1. oghabaMdha kisI grAma guNasthAna yA khAma tarapha kI vivakSA
kiye binA hI saba nAka jIvoM kA jo baMdha kahA jAtA hai. vaha unakA oSabaMdha yA
sAmAnyabaMdha kahalAtA hai  /  2. vizeSabaMdha - kisI khAsa guNasthAna yA kisI
khAma naraka ko lekara nArakoM meM jo baMdha kahA jAtA hai, vaha unakA
vizeSabaMdha kahalAtA hai| jaise ki midhyAtva guNasthAnavartI nAraka 100
prakRtiyoM ko bA~dhate haiM ityAdi  /  isI prakAra Age anyAnya mArgaNAoM meM bhI
proSa aura vizeSa baMdha kA Azaya

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ownership  **Nārakas** are those who are born in the hellish realm due to the
arising of the karma of hellish existence, or those who cause suffering to human
beings. Alternatively, they are those who, due to the field of substance, time,
and emotion, do not attain love for themselves or others. Nārakas constantly
suffer from natural, physical, mental, and other types of pain.  **Generally, 20
natures are considered to be capable of binding for living beings.** Out of
these, 55 natures are mentioned in the previous two verses. From the collection
of these 55 natures, starting with Devadvika, etc., the 16 natures mentioned in
sequence are not capable of binding in the hellish realm. Therefore, generally,
101 natures are considered to be capable of binding. In other words, in the
verse where the term "Surarāṇī" appears, the following 19 natures are not
capable of binding due to the nature of the hellish beings' existence: (1)
Devagati, (2) Ānu-pūrva, (3) Vaikriya-śarīra, (4) Chaikriya-ango-pānga, (5)
Āhārak-śarīra, (6) Āhārak-ango-pānga, (7) Devāyu, (8) Narakagati, (9) Narak-ānu-
pūrva, (10) Narakāyu, (11) Sūkṣma-nāma, (12) Aparyāpta-nāma, (13) Sādhāraṇa-
nāma, (14) Dvīndriya-jāti, (15) Trīndriya-jāti, (16) Chaturindriya-jāti, (17)
Ekendriya-jāti, (18) Sthāvara-nāma, and (19) Ātapa-nāma. Therefore, out of the
120 eligible natures, these 19 natures should be subtracted, leaving 101 natures
that are generally considered to be capable of binding in the hellish realm.
Because the places where these 19 natures arise are not places where hellish
beings can be born after leaving the hellish realm, they are not capable of
binding.  1. (a) When the motion of the body is due to the effort of the soul,
then it is called "Bhārakā". (b) The eternal, auspicious, and pleasant results
are called "Devāvikriyā".  *Go. Jīvakāṇḍa 146*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svAmitva nAraka - narakagatinAmakarma ke udaya se jo hoM athavA 'narAnjIvoM ko,
kAryanti-kleza pahu~cAyeM unako nAraka kahate haiN| athavA dravya kSetra, kAla
bhAva se jo svayaM tathA paraspara meM prIti ko prApta na karate hoM, unheM
nAraka kahate haiN| nAraka nirantara hI svAbhAvikazArIrika-mAnasika Adi dukhoM
meM dukhI rahate haiM  / ' * sAmAnyatA va vaMzAcI jIvoM ko zA 20 prakRtiyAM
bandhayogya mAnI gaI hai| unameM se pUrva kI do gAthAoM meM kahI gaI 55
prakRtiyoM ke saMgraha meM se devadvika Adi se lekara anukrama se kahI gaI aate
pratiyaf narakagati meM bandhayogya hI na hone se sAmAnyataH 101 prakRtiyoM kA
baMdha mAnA jAtA hai| arthAt gAthA meM jo 'surarANI pada AyA hai usameM - (1)
devagati, (2) va Anu pUrvI, (3) vaikriyazarIra. (4) caikriya aMgopAMga, (5)
AhAraka zarIra (6) AhAraka aMgopAMga, (7) devAyu, (8) narakagati (2) naraka
AnupUrvI (10) narakAyu, (11) sUkSma nAma, (12) aparyApta nAma, (13) sAdhAraNa
nAma (14) dvIndriya jAti (15) zrIndriya jAti (16) caturindriya jAti. (17)
ekendriya jAti, (18) sthAvara nAma tathA (16) Atapa nAma ina unIsa prakRtiyoM kA
nAraka jIvoM ke bhava-svabhAva ke kAraNa baMdha hI nahIM hotA hai ataH yogya 120
prakRtiyoM meM se ina 16 prakRtiyoM ko kama karane para 101 prakRtiyoM ko
sAmAnya meM narakagati meM badhayogya mAnanA caahie| t " kyoMki jina sthAnoM meM
ukta unnIsa prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai, nAraka jIva narakagati meM se
nikalakara una sthAnoM meM utpanna nahIM 1. ( ka ) gati jado din sesa kA aha
jamhA tamhA se bhArakA bhAve ya ziyA 11 * go0 jIvakAnDa 146 33 (kha)
nityAzubhataralezya pariNAma devenAvikriyAH  /

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third Karma Grantha are: Devagati, Devanupurvi, Baintriya Sharira, Vaikriya
Agopaang, Devayu, Narakagati, Marakanapurvi and Narakayu. These eight Prakruti
are Dev and Narakiya-prayogya and Narak जीव do not get born in Narak or Dev गति
after death. Therefore, these eight Prakruti do not bind in Narakagati.  The
three Prakruti, Sukshma Naam, Apariapt Naam and Sadharan Naam, are also not
bound by Narak जीव. Because the rise of Sukshma Naamkarma is from Sukshma
Ekendriya, the rise of Apariapt Naamkarma is from Apariapt Tiryanch and Manusya,
and the rise of Sadharan Naamkarma is from Sadharan Vanrupati.  Similarly, the
three Prakruti, Ekendriya Jaati, Sthavar Naam and Atap Naam, are Ekendriya-
prayogya and Vikalendriya are Vikalendriya-prayogya. Therefore, these six
Prakruti are not bound by Narak जीव. And the rise of Aharak Drik is only for
Charitrasampanna Labdhidhari Muni, not for others. Therefore, from Devadrik to
Atap Naamkarma, 16 Prakruti are not bound, and in Narakagati, 101 Prakruti are
bound in general.  Although 101 Prakruti are bound in Narakagati in general,
Narak जीव have four Gunasthan from Mithyatva Gunasthan to Chaude Avirat
Samyagdristi Gunasthan. Therefore, 100 Prakruti are bound in Mithyatva Gunasthan
because Tirthankar Naamkarma is not bound. Because the one who is eligible for
the binding of Tirthankar Naamkarma is Samyaktvi, i.e., the binding of
Tirthankar Naamkarma can only happen if one is Samyaktvi. But there is no
Samyaktvi in Mithyatva Gunasthan, therefore, Tirthankar Naamkarma is not bound
for Narak जीव in Mithyatva Gunasthan. Therefore, 100 Prakruti are bound for
Narak जीव in Mithyatva Gunasthan.  Secondly, Narak जीव in Sastrain Gunasthan,
Napusakaved, Mithyatva...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . ..... .... .. tatIya karmagrantha hote hai  /  arthAt ukta 16 prakRtiyoM meM
se devagati, devAnupUrvI, baiMtriya zarIra, vaikriya agopAMga, devAyu,
narakagati, marakAnapUrvI aura narakAyuyeka prakRtiyoM deva aura nArakIya-
prAyogya hai aura nArako jIva marakara naraka athavA deva gati meM utpanna nahIM
hote haiM  /  ataH ina ATha prakRtiyoM kA bharakagati meM baMdha nahIM hotA hai|
sUkSma nAma, aparyApta nAma aura sAdhAraNa nAma ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA bhI
baMdha nAraka jIvoM ke nahIM hotA hai| kyoMki sukSma nAmakArma kA udaya sUkSma
ekendriya ke, aparyApta nAmakrama kA udaya apara pti tiryacoM aura manuSyoM ke
tathA sAdhAraNa nAmakarma kA udaya sAdhAraNa vanarUpati ke holA hai|| isI
prakAra ekendriya jAti, sthAvara nAma aura Atapa nAma ye tIna prakRtiyAM
ekendriya-prAyogya hai tathA vikalendriyatrika vikalendriyaprAyogya haiN| ataH
ina chaH prakRtiyoM ko mAraka jIva nahIM bAMdhate haiM tathA AhAraka drika kA
udaya cAritrasaMpanna labdhidhArI muniyoM ko hI hotA hai, anya ko nahIM 1 isalie
devadrika meM lekara Atapa nAmakarma paryanta 16 prakRtiyA~ abandha hone meM
narakamati meM sAmAnya me 101 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai| yASi narakagati meM
sAmAnya meM 101 prakRtiyAM baMdhayogya haiM, lekina nArakoM meM pahale mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM lekara caudhe avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna paryanta cAra
guNasthAna hote haiM  /  ataH mithyAtva muNasthAna meM sIrthaGkara nAmakarma kA
baMdha nahIM hone meM 100 prakRttiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai 1 kyoMki tIrthaGkara
nAmakarma ke baMdha kA adhikArI samyaktvI hai, arthAt samyaktva ke hone para hI
tIrthaGkara nAmakarma kA baMdha ho sakatA hai  /  lekina mithyAtva guNAsthAna
meM samyaktva nahIM hai, ataH mithyAtva guNasthAnavI nAraka jIva ke tIrthaGkara
nAmakarma kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai| isIlie mithyAtva guNasthAna meM nAraka jIvoM
ke 100 prakRtiyA~ baMdhayogya hai| dUsare sAstrAina guNasmAnI nAraka jIva
napusakaveda, mithyAtva.

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Yasvamiśtra, Mohaniya, Haṇḍa-sthāna and Sevāt-saṁhanana - these four Prakṛtis
are not bound. Because the binding of these four Prakṛtis occurs during the time
of Mithyātva's arising. But at the time of Sāsvādana, Mithyātva does not arise.
That is, Naraka-trika, Jāri-catuṣka, sthāvara-catuṣka, Haṇḍa-sthāna, Ātapa-nāma,
Mevāt-saṁhanana, Napuṣaka-veda and Mithyātva-mohaniya - these sixteen Prakṛtis
are bound due to Mithyātva. Out of these, Naraka-trika, Sūkṣma-trika, Vikala-
trika, Eka-indriya-jāti, sthāvara-nāma and Ātapa-nāma - these twelve Prakṛtis
are not bound by the Nārakīya Jīvas due to their different nature. Therefore, by
taking them in Deva-dvīka etc., these twelve Prakṛtis are reduced at the time of
general binding. And the remaining Napuṣaka-veda, Mithyātva-mohaniya, Haṇḍa-
sthāna and Mevāt-saṁhanana - these Prakṛtis are bound due to Mithyātva, and
Mithyātva does not arise in the Sāsvādana Guṇasthāna. Therefore, in the
Sāsvādana Guṇasthāna, by reducing these four Prakṛtis from the 100 Prakṛtis that
are bound by the Māraka Jīvas residing in the Mithyātva Guṇasthāna, the 66
Prakṛtis of the other Nārakīya Jīvas residing in the Sāsvādana Guṇasthāna are
not eligible for binding.   The summary is that out of the 120 Prakṛtis that are
eligible for binding, in the Naraka-gati, compared to the general binding, 101
Prakṛtis are bound because 16 Prakṛtis are not eligible for binding from the
Ātāpa-nāmakarma up to the Sura-dvīka etc.   In the Naraka-gati, there are four
Guṇasthānas from the first to the ninth. Therefore, out of the 101 Prakṛtis that
are eligible for binding in the Naraka-gati, the binding of the Tīrthaṅkara
Nāmakarma is due to Samyaktva, and since the Tīrthaṅkara Nāmakarma is not bound
by the Nārakīya Jīvas residing in the Mithyātva Guṇasthāna, 100 Prakṛtis are
bound, and the binding of the four Prakṛtis like Napuṣaka-veda etc. occurs when
Mithyātva arises. And since Mithyātva does not arise in the Sāsvādana
Guṇasthāna, by reducing the four Prakṛtis like Napuṣaka-veda etc. from the 100
Prakṛtis that are eligible for binding in the Mithyātva Guṇasthāna, 66 Prakṛtis
are bound.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yasvAmistra mohanIya, haMDasasthAna aura sevAta saMhanana-ina cAra prakatiyoM
ko nahIM bAMdhate haiN| kyoMki ina cAra prakRtiyoM kA baMdha mithyAtva ke
udayakAla meM hotA hai| lekina sAsvAdana ke samaya mithyAtva kA udaya nahIM hotA
hai| arthAt narakatrika, jAricatuSka, sthAvaracatuSka, haMDa saMsthAna, Atapa
nAma, mevAta saMhanana, napa saka veTa aura mithyAtvamohanIya-ina solaha
prakRtiyoM kA badha mithyAtva nimittaka hai| inameM se narakaSika, sUkSmatrikA
vikalatrika. ekendriya jAti. sthAvara nAma aura Atapa nAma-ina bAraha prakRtiyoM
ko nAraka jIva bhanna-svabhAva ke kAraNa bA~dhate hI nahIM haiN| ataH deva dvika
Adi meM grahaNa karake ina bAraha prakRtiyoM ko sAmAnya baMdha ke samaya hI kama
kara diyA gayA aura zeSa rahI napusaka veda, mithyAtya mohanIya. haMDa saMsthAna
aura mevAta saMhanana-ye prakRtiyAM mithyAtva ke nimitta se ba~dhatI haiM aura
mAsvAdana guNasthAna meM mithyAtva kA udaya nahIM hai| ataH sAsvAdana guNasthAna
meM ina cAra prakRtiyoM ko mithyAtva guNasthAnavartI mAraka jIvoM kI baMdhayonya
100 prakRtiyoM meM se kama karane para dUsare sAsvAdana guNasthAnavI nAraka
jIvoM ke 66 prakatiyA~ baMdhayogya nahIM haiN| _ sArAMza yaha hai ki baMdhayogya
120 prakRtiyoM meM me narakagati meM sAmAnya baMdha kI apekSA suradvika Adi AtA
nAmakarma paryanta 16 prakRtiyoM ke baMdhayogya na hone meM 101 praRtiyoM kA
baMdha hotA hai| narakagati meM mithyAtvAdi pahale meM nauthe taka cAra
guNasthAna hote haiM  /  ataH narakagati meM baMdhayogya 101 prakRtiyoM meM meM
tIrthaGkara nAmakarma kA baMdha samyaktva nimittaka hone se mithyAtva
gaNasthAnavartI nAraka' jIvoM ke tIrthaGkara nAmakarma kA baMdha nahIM hone se
100 prakRtiyoM kA tathA napusaka veda Adi cAra prakRtiyoM kA baMca mithyAtva ke
udaya hone para hotA hai aura sAsvAdana muNasthAna meM mithyAtva kA udaya nahIM
hone se mithyAtva guNasthAna kI baMdhayogya 100 prakRtiyoM meM se napusaka veda
Adi cAra prakRtiyoM ko kama karane se 66 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai|

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
: ## Third Karma-Pranya 27 Having described the bondage of karma-prakritis in
the hell-realm, in the first and second guna-sthana, and of the hell-beings, we
now proceed to describe the bondage of karma-prakritis in the third and fourth
guna-sthana, and of the hell-beings in the Ratna-prabha and other realms, in the
following verse:  5 **Verse Meaning:** In the mixed guna-sthana, there is
bondage of seventy karma-prakritis, excluding the twenty-six prakritis of the
Ananta-anubandhi Chatushk, etc. Adding the Tirthankara name and human lifespan
to these, there is bondage of seventy-two prakritis in the Samyak-tva guna-
sthana. Similarly, this general method of bondage in the hell-realm should be
understood in the four guna-sthana of the hell-beings in the three hell-realms
of Ratna-prabha, etc. And in the Panka-prabha and other hells, the remaining
general method of bondage, excluding the Tirthankara name-karma, should be
understood as before.  **Special Meaning:** After describing the bondage of
karma-prakritis in the first and second guna-sthana in the hell-realm, this
verse describes the bondage of karma-prakritis in the third and fourth guna-
sthana, and of the hell-beings in the six hell-realms of Ratna-prabha, etc.  The
hell-beings in the mixed guna-sthana have bondage of 70 karma-prakritis. Because
the Ananta-anubandhi Chatushk, Madhyama Sansthana Chatushk, Madhyama Sanhanan
Chatushk, Ashubha Vihayoga-ti, Nica-gotra, Stri-veda, Dur-bhag, Duh-svara,
Anadeya Sthan-trik, Udyota, and Niyantrik, these 25 prakritis do not have
bondage in the mixed guna-sthana due to the absence of the arising of Ananta-
anubandhi. The arising of Ananta-anubandhi kshaya occurs until the first and
second guna-sthana, not in the third and subsequent guna-sthana. At the end of
the second guna-sthana, the Ananta-anubandhi kshaya is disjoined or destroyed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 : tRtIya karmapranya 27 isa prakAra narakagati meM sAmAnya se tathA pahale aura
dUsare guNasthAna meM nAraka jIvoM ke karmaprakRtiyoM ke bandhasvAmitva kA
varNana karane ke bAda aba Age kI gAthA meM tIsare aura cauthe guNasthAna tathA
ratnaprabhA Adi bhUmiyoM ke nArakoM ke baMdhasvAmitva ko kahate haiM- for
aNavIsa mI bisari sammammi jiNanarAja juyA  /  tya rayaNAisa bhaMgo paMkAsu
titthayarahoNo 5 gAthArtha anantAnubaMdhI catuSka Adi chabbIsa prakRtiyoM ke
binA mizraguNasthAna meM sattara tathA inameM tIrthaGkara nAma aura manuSyAyu ko
jor3ane para samyaktva guNasthAna meM bahattara prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai  /
isI prakAra narakagati kI yaha sAmAnya baMdhavidhi ratnaprabhAdi tIna
narakabhUmiyoM ke nArakoM ke cAroM guNasthAna meM bhI samajhanA sAhie tathA
paMkaprabhA Adi narakoM meM tIrthaGkara nAmakarma ke binA zeSa sAmAnya
baMdhavidhi pUrvavata samajhanA caahie| vizeSArtha - narakagati meM pahale aura
dUsare guNasthAna meM baMdhasvAmitva kahane ke bAda isa gAthA meM tIsare aura
cauthe guNasthAna aura ratnaprabhA Adi chaha narakabhUmiyoM ke nArakiyoM ke
prakRtiyoM ke baMdha ko batalAte haiN| mizra guNasthAnavartI nArakoM ke 70
karmaprakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai  /  kyoMki anantAnubaMdhI kaSAya ke udaya se
ba~dhane vAlI anantAnubaMdhI catuSka, madhyama saMsthAnacatuSka. madhyama
saMhananacatuSka azubha vihAyogati nIcagotra, strIveda, durbhaga, duHsvara,
anAdeya sthAnatrika, udyota aura niyaMtrika, ina 25 prakRtiyoM kA mizra
guNasthAna meM anantAnubaMdhI kA udaya na hone se baMdha nahIM hotA hai  /
anantAna baMdhI kaSAya kA udaya pahale aura dUsare guNasthAna taka hrI hotA hai,
tIsare Adi guNasthAnoM meM nahIM  /  dUsare guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM
anantAnubaMdha kaSAya kI visaMyojanA yA kSaya ho jAtA hai, * *

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Bandhasvamitva  Therefore, the bondage of the aforementioned 25
**Prakritis** which bind the **Anantanu bandhi** does not occur in the third
**Gunasthan** (state of virtue). And no being residing in the **Mishra
Gunasthan** (mixed state of virtue) performs the bondage of **Ayukarma** (life-
span karma). Therefore, **Manushyayu** (human life-span) cannot occur.   Hence,
from the 96 **Prakritis** that bind the **Naraka** (hell) beings residing in the
second **Gunasthan**, the aforementioned 25 **Prakritis** like **Anantanu
bandhi** **Kshaya Chatushk** (fourfold passions) and **Manushyayu**, totaling 26
**Prakritis**, should be deducted. This leaves 70 **Prakritis** for the
**Naraka** beings residing in the **Mishra Gunasthan**.  However, the **Naraka**
beings residing in the fourth **Gunasthan** (state of perfect vision) called
**Avirat Samyagdrishti**, due to their **Samyaktva** (right faith), can perform
the bondage of **Tirthankara Namakarma** (karma that leads to becoming a
Tirthankara). This is because the bondage of **Tirthankara Namakarma** occurs
only in the presence of **Samyaktva**. And due to the rule that **Ayukarma**
does not bind beings residing in the **Mishra Gunasthan**, the **Manushyayu**
that was not bound in the **Mishra Gunasthan** gets bound in the fourth
**Gunasthan**. This adds two **Prakritis** - **Tirthankara Namakarma** and
**Manushyayu** - to the 70 **Prakritis** that bind beings in the **Mishra
Gunasthan**. Therefore, the **Naraka** beings residing in the fourth
**Gunasthan** bind 72 **Prakritis**.  The reason why the **Naraka** beings
residing in the fourth **Gunasthan** do not bind **Manushyayu** is that they
cannot bind the life-span of **Naraka** again, nor can they bind the life-span
of **Deva** (heaven). Therefore, these two **Ayukarma** **Prakritis** are not
bound in **Naraka**. This has been indicated in the fourth **Gatha** (verse)
before the phrase "**Surugunnisav**". The bondage of **Linyachayu** (life-span
of a specific type of hell) occurs when **Anantanu bandhi** **Kshaya** arises.
And the arising of **Anantanu bandhi** **Kshaya** occurs in the first and second
**Gunasthan**.  1. (a) **Sammāmichhaddiṭṭī āuyadha pi na karei ti**. (b)
**Missūṇe āisam**....! - **Go Karma** TER 2. **Sammeva titmabandho**. - **O
Karmakanda** 11

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 andhasvAmitva isaliye anantAnubaMdhI ke kAsa baiMdhane vAlI ukta 25 prakRtiyoM
kA baMdha tIsare mitra guNasthAna meM nahIM hotA hai tathA mizra guNasthAna meM
rahane vAlA koI bhI jIva Ayukarma kA baMdha nahIM karatA hai| ataH manuSyAnu kI
daE nahIM ho sakatA hai: _ ataH dUsare guNasthAnavartI nAraka jIvoM ke baMdhane
kAlI 96 prakRtiyoM meM se anantAnubaMdhI kaSAyacatuSka Adi pUrvokta 25
prakRtiyoM tathA manuSyAyu, kula milAkara 26 prakRtiyoM ko kama karane se mizra
guNasthAnavartI narakagasi ke jIvoM ko 70 prakRtiyoM kA baMdhasvAmitva mAnanA
caahie| lekina cauthe aviratasamyagdRSTi guNasthAnavI mAraka jIva samyaktva ke
hone se tIrthakaranAmakarma kA baMdha kara sakate haiM kyoMki samyaktva ke
sadbhAva meM hI tIrthakaranAmakarma kA badha hotA hai| tathA mizra guNasthAnavI
jIva ke Ayukarma ke baMdha na hone ke niyama se jisa manuSyAyu kA baMdha nahIM
hotA thA, usakA cauthe guNasthAna meM baMdha hone se mizra guNasthAna meM baMdha
hone vAlI 70 prakRtiyoM meM tIrthakaranAma aura manudhyAyu-...ina do prakRtiyoM
ko milAne se cauthe guNasthAnavI nAraka jIva 72 pratiyoM kA baMdha karate haiN|
narakragati meM cauthe guNasthAnavartI bhArakoM ke manuSyAyu ke iMca hone kA
kAraNa yaha hai ki mAraka jIva punaH narakagati kI Ayu kA bandha nahIM kara
sakate aura na devAyu kA hI bandha kara sakate haiN| ataH yaha do Ayukarma kI
prakRtiyoM bharakagati meM abandha haiN| inakA saMketa gAthA cAra meM
'suraguNanIsava' pada se pahale kiyA jA cukA hai| liyaMcAyu kA bandha
anantAnubandhI kaSAya ke udaya hone para hotA hai aura anantAnubandhI kaSAya kA
udaya pahale, dUsare guNasthAna 1. (ka) sammAmichaddiTTI Auyadha pi na karei ti
/  (kha) missUNe Aisma"....! -go karma TER 2. sammeva titmbNdho| -0 karmakAMDa
11

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Karma Granth 16  This is only the case in the lower four Gunasthanas,
not in the higher ones. Therefore, in the fourth Gunasthana, there cannot be any
binding of Tiryanchayu for the Naraka beings. Thus, since there is no binding of
Naraka, Deva, and Tiryanchayu, only Manushyayu remains. And, since the principle
of non-binding of the Parbhava-related Ayus in the third Misra Gunasthana is
established, the Naraka beings in the fourth Gunasthana can bind Manushyayu.  In
this way, after explaining the binding ownership in relation to the Gunasthanas
in the Naraka Gati, we now explain the binding ownership of the Narakas residing
in the Naraka Bhumi.  Ratna Prabha, Sharkara Prabha, Valuka Prabha, Pank Prabha,
Dhum Prabha, Tamah Prabha, and Maha Tamah Prabha - these are the seven Naraka
Bhumi. These Bhumi are situated on Ghanaambu, Vata, and Akasha. They are
situated one below the other, with the lower ones being more extensive.  In
these seven Narakas, the binding ownership of the Naraka beings in Ratna Prabha,
Sharkara Prabha, and Valuka Prabha should be considered the same as the binding
ownership mentioned in relation to the four Gunasthanas in general. That is,
just as in the Naraka Gati, the binding of 100, 66, 70, and 72 Prakruti is
considered in the first, second, third, and fourth Gunasthanas respectively,
similarly, the binding ownership of the Karma Prakruti in their respective
Gunasthanas should be understood for the Naraka beings residing in Ratna Prabha,
Sharkara Prabha, and Valuka Prabha.  Although the plural word 'Raisu' in the
verse should have included all seven Narakas, including Ratna Prabha, etc., the
reason for including only the first, second, and third Narakas here is:  1.
Ratna Sharkara Baluka Pank Dhum Tamo Maha Tamo Prabha Bhumiyo Ghanaambu Vata
Akasha Pratiṣṭhāḥ Sapta Adho Adha Prithutarāḥ. - Sava 331

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtIya karma grantha 16 taka hI hotA hai, Age ke guNasthAnoM meM nahIM  /  ataH
cauthe guNasthAna meM nAraka jIvoM ke tiryacAyu kA bandha nahIM ho sakatA  /
isa prakAra naraka, deva aura tiryaMcAyu ke bandha nahIM hone se sirpha
manuSyAyu zeSa rahatI hai tathA tIsare mizraguNasthAna meM parabhava sambandhI
bAyu kA bandha na hone kA siddhAnta hone se cauthe guNasthAnavartI nAraka jIva
manuSyAyu kA bandha kara sakate haiM  /  isa prakAra narakagati meM guNasthAnoM
kI apekSA bandhasvAmitva batalAne ke bAda narakabhUmiyoM meM rahane vAle nArakoM
ko apekSA baMdhasvAmitva batalAte haiM  /  ratnaprabhA, zarkarAprabhA,
vAlukAprabhA, paMkaprabhA, dhUmaprabhA, tamaH prabhA aura mahAtamaH prabhA - ye
sAta narakabhUmiyA~ haiN| ye bhUmiyA~ ghanAmbu, vAta aura AkAza para sthita
haiN| eka dUsare ke nIce haiM aura nIce kI ora adhika vistIrNa hai|' ina sAta
narakoM meM ratnaprabhA, zarkarAprabhA, bAlukAprabhA ina narakoM meM sAmAnya va
cAroM guNasthAnoM kI apekSA kahe gaye nAraka jIvoM ke aratarface ke samAna hI
bandhasvAmitva mAnanA caahie| arthAta jaise narakagati meM pahale guNasthAna meM
100, dUsare meM 66, tIsare meM 70 aura cauthe meM 72 prakRtiyoM kA bandha mAnA
gayA hai, usI prakAra ratnaprabhA, zarkarAprabhA vAlukAprabhA - ina narakoM meM
rahane vAle nAraka jIvoM ke apane-apane yogya guNasthAna meM karmaprakRtiyoM kA
svAmitva samajhanA caahie| gAthA meM Aye hue 'rAisu' isa bahuvacanAtmaka pada se
yadyapi ratnaprabhA Adi sAtoM narakoM kA grahaNa honA cAhie thA, kintu yahA~
ratnaprabhA Adi pahale, dUsare aura tIsare naraka ke grahaNa karane kA kAraNa 1.
ratnazarkarA bAlukApaMkadhUmatamo mahAtamaH prabhA bhUmiyo
dhanAmbuvatAkAzapratiSThAH saptAdho'dhaH pRthutarAH  /  -savA 331

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bandhaswamitva  This is because the term 'Pankais' is used in this very
verse, which means that the Bandhaswamitva of Pankaprabha and other Narakas will
be discussed separately. For this reason, the three Narakas of Raprabha,
Sharkaraprabha, and Balkaaprabha, which come before the fourth Naraka called
Pankaprabha, have been taken here. And the term 'Kasu' should be used to include
the remaining Narakas starting from Pankaprabha. But the term 'Pankais' is used
to include the three Narakas of Pankaprabha, Dhumpapraba, and Tamapraba, because
the Bandhaswamitva of the seventh Naraka called Mahatamahpraba is mentioned
separately in the next verse. This verse is meant to convey that the Naraka
beings from Pankaprabha to Mahatamahpraba do not have the Bandhaswamitva of
Tirthankaranamkarma. The term 'Pankais' is used to convey this.  The
Tirthanamkarma does not have Bandhaswamitva in the Narakas of Pamp, etc.,
Pausal, and the sixth Naraka called Maun.  The reason why the
Tirthankaranamkarma does not have Bandhaswamitva in Pankaprabha, etc., is that
even after attaining Samyaktva in the Narakas of Pankaprabha, Dhumpapraba, and
Tamapraba, the Tirthankaranamkarma does not have Bandhaswamitva due to the
influence of the Kshetra and the lack of Adhyavasaya of the Lata type. Because
the scriptures say that a being who comes to the first Naraka can become a
Chakravarti. A being who comes to the second Naraka can become a Vasudeva. And a
being who comes to the third Naraka can become a Tirthankara. A being who comes
to the fourth Naraka can become a Kevali. A being who comes to the fifth Naraka
can become a Sadhu. A being who comes to the sixth Naraka can become a
Deshavirat. And a being who comes to the seventh Naraka can attain Samyaktva but
cannot attain Deshavirattva. Therefore, a Naraka being who comes from
Pankaprabha, etc., does not attain Tirthankaratva. Therefore, the
Tirthankaranamkarma is considered to be Avandhya in the three Narakas of
Pankaprabha, etc., and the Bandha of 100 Prakrutis should be understood.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bandhasvAmitva yaha hai ki isI gAthA meM 'paMkAisa' pada diyA hai, jisakA artha
hai ki paMkaprabhA Adi marakoM meM bandhasvAmitva kA kathana alaga se kiyA
jAyagA  /  isI kAraNa paMkaprabhA nAmaka cauthe naraka se pahale ke rAprabhA,
zarkarAprabhA, bAlakAprabhA ina tIna narakoM kA yahA~ grahaNa kiyA gayA hai
tathA 'kAsu' pada se paMkaprabhA Adi zeSa narakoM kA grahaNa karanA cAhie lekina
'paMkAisu' isa pada se paMkaprabhA, dhUmaprabhA aura tamaprabhA ina tInoM
narakoM kA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai, kyoMki Age kI mAthA meM mahAtamaHprabhA nAmaka
sAtave naraka kA bandhasvAmitva alaga se kahA hai| isa gAthA meM to
lIrthakaranAmakarma kA bandhasvAmitva paMkaprabhA Adi mahAtama prabhA paryanta
ke nAraka jIvoM ke hotA hI nahIM hai, isa bAta ko batAne ke lie pakAima' pada
diyA hai| _paMpa Adi bhauthA, pausalA aura chaThA-nama mauna narakoM meM
tIranAmakarma kA bandha nahIM hotA hai| pakaprabhA Adi meM tIrtha dharanAmakarma
ke bandhasvAmitva na hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki paMkaprabhA, dhUmaprabhA aura
tamaHprabhA narakoM meM samyaktva prApti hone para bhI kSetra ke prabhAva se
aura lathAprakAra ke adhyavasAya kA abhAva hone se tIrthakaranAmakarma kA bandha
nahIM hotA hai  /  kyoMki zAstra meM kahA gayA hai ki pahale naraka meM AyA jIva
cakravartI ho sakatA hai  /  dUsare naraka taka se AyA jIva vAsudeva ho sakatA
hai aura tIsare naraka taka se AyA jIva tIrthakara ho sakatA hai| cothe naraka
taka se AyA jIva kevalI aura pAMcave naraka taka se AyA jIva sAdhu evaM chaThe
naraka taka se AyA jIva dezAvirata ho sakatA hai aura sAtaveM naraka taka se Aye
jIva samyaktva ko prApta kara sakate haiM. parantu dezaviratitva prApta nahIM
kara sakate haiN| ataH paMkaprabhA Adi se AyA nAraka jIva tIrtharatva ko prApta
nahIM karatA hai| isalie tIrthaGkaranAmakarma paMkaprabhA Adi tIna narakoM meM
avandhya hone se 100 prakRtiyoM kA bandha samajhalA vaahie|

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma Text  In the three hells of Pankaprabha, etc., in the first
Gunasthan, there are 100 types of karma bound, both generally and specifically.
In the second and third Gunasthan, there are 66 and 70 types of karma bound
respectively, similar to the three hells of Ratnaprabha, etc. In the fourth
Gunasthan, even after attaining Samyaktva, due to the influence of the field and
the absence of asaara of that type, there can be a binding of 71 types of karma,
as the Tirthankara-nama karma is not bound.  **Summary:** In the hell realm,
there are 70 types of karma bound in the third Gunasthan and 72 in the fourth
Gunasthan. This binding should be understood in the same way as the binding
mentioned in relation to the Gunasthanas, even in the three hells of
Ratnaprabha, etc. However, in the three hells of Pankaprabha, etc., where the
Tirthankara-nama karma is not bound, there are 100 types of karma bound in the
first Gunasthan, 66 in the second, 70 in the third, and 71 in the fourth, both
generally and specifically.  After describing the ownership of beings in the
hell realm from the first to the sixth hell, the next two verses describe the
ownership of the seventh hell and the Tirthankara-nama karma in the Tiryancha
realm.  **Verse 6:** In the seventh hell, the Tirthankara-nama karma and the
Manushyasu karma are generally not bound. The remaining types of karma are bound
in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, without the Manushyadvik and the higher gotra.
**Verse 7:** In the Sasvadana Gunasthan, 61 types of karma are bound, without
the Tiryanchayu and the Napumsakchatushk. These 91 types of karma...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagrantha paMkaprabhA Adi ina tIna narakoM meM sAmAnya aura vizeSa
rUpa meM pahale guNasthAna meM 100, dUsare aura tIsare guNasthAna meM
ratnaprabhA Adi tIna narakoM ke samAna kramazaH 66 aura 70 prakRtiyoM aura
cauthe guNasthAna meM samyaktva prApti hone para bhI kSetra ke prabhAva se aura
tathAprakAra ke asaara kA abhAva hone se tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kA bandha na hone
se 71 prakRtiyoM kA bandha ho sakatA hai  /  21 sArAMsa yaha hai ki narakagati
meM tIsare guNasthAna meM 70 aura ate guNasthAna meM 72 prakRtiyoM kA bandha
hotA hai aura guNasthAnoM kI apekSA kahe gaye bandhasvAmitva ke samAna
ratnaprabhA Adi tIna narakoM meM bhI samajhanA caahie| lekina paMkaprabhA Adi
tIna narakoM meM tIrthaGkaranAmakarma kA bandha na hone meM sAmAnya aura vizeSa
rUpa meM pahale guNasthAna meM 100, dUsare meM 66. tIsare meM 30 aura cauthe meM
71 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  isa prakAra se narakagati meM pahale se
lekara chaThe naraka taka ke jIvoM ke svAmitva kA kathana karane ke bAda aba Age
kI do gAthAoM meM sAta naraka tathA tiryaca gati meM paryApta tirthaMdoM ke
bandhasvAmitva ko kahate haiM www aNi maAja Ahe salamie naratutucca viNu micche|
ina navaI sAsaNe tiriAja napuMsakauvajjaM  //  6  //  aNacajavIsavirahiyA
sanaraguccA yasari mosaduge  /  satarasau ohi miche pajatiriyA triNu jiNAhAraM
//  7  //  gAthArtha sAtaveM naraka meM sAmAnya rUpa se tIrthakuranAmakarma aura
manuSyAsu kA bandha nahIM hotA hai tathA manuSyadvika aura ucca gotra ke binA
zeSa prakRtiyoM kA mithyAtva guNasthAna meM bandha hotA hai| sAsvAdana
guNasthAna meM tiryaMcAyu aura napuMsakacatuSka ke binA 61 prakRtiyoM kA bandha
hotA hai tathA ina 91 prakRtiyoM

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  BandhasvAmitva  In the **SadhasvAmitva**, from the infinite **AnantAnubandhi
Adi Chatushk** 24 **Prakritis**, by reducing the **Prakritis** and combining the
three **Prakritis** of **Manushyadik** and **Uchchamotr**, there are 7
**Prakritis** bound in the **Mishradvik Gunasthan**. In **TiryanchGati**, the
**Tiryach TIrthankarNamakarma** and **AharakDvik Meshin** bind 117 **Prakritis**
in the **Samaanya** and **Gunasthan**.  Specifically, in these two verses, the
**BandhasvAmitva** of the **Samaanya** and **Gunasthan** in the **Narakas** of
the seventh hell, and the **Tiryach** in **TiryanchGati**, is described.  In the
**Samaanya** of **NarakGati**, 101 **Prakritis** are capable of being bound. Due
to the influence of **Kshetragat**, the **TirthankarNamakarma** is not bound in
the **Narakas** of the seventh hell, as there is a lack of **Adhyavasaya** of
that type. Also, **Manushyaayu** can only be bound up to the sixth hell. The
**Manushyaayu** is a superior **Punyakriti** compared to the seventh hell.
Therefore, its binding can only occur with superior **Adhyavasaya**. Hence, the
**Narakas** of the seventh hell do not bind **Manushyaayu**.  Thus, from the 101
**Prakritis** capable of being bound in the **Samaanya** of **NarakGati**, by
reducing the two **Prakritis** of **TirthankarNamakarma** and **Manushyaayu**,
66 **Prakritis** are considered bound in the seventh hell.  Among the
**Prakritis** that are capable of being bound in the seventh hell, the
**Narakas** of the first **Mithyatva Gunasthan** in that hell, namely
**Manushyadik**, **ManushyaGati**, and **ManushyaAnupurvi**, and **UchchaGotr**,
do not bind these three **Prakritis** due to the lack of **Tathavid Vishuddhi**.
Because the seventh hell...  1. **Chhoti Manuaau**.  **Kago Karmakand** 106

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zAdhasvAmitva meM se anantAnubandhI Adi catuSka 24 prakRtiyoM ko kama karake
aura manuSyadhika evaM uccamotra ina tIna prakRtiyoM ko milAne se mizradvika
guNasthAna meM 7 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  tiryaMcagati meM paryApta
tiryana tIrthakaranAmakarma aura AhArakadvika mezina sAmAnya ne sapA jimmAna
gumAyAra meM 117 prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhate hai| vizeSAya-ina do gAthAoM meM sAtaveM
naraka ke nArakoM meM sAmAnya aura guNasthAnoM kI apekSA meM evaM tiryaMcati meM
paryAptatiryacoM ke bandhasvAmitva kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| narakagati meM
sAmAnya meM 101 prakRtiyA~ bandhayogya hai| unameM se kSetragata prabhAva ke
kAraNa tIrthaGkaranAmakarma ke bandhayogya tathAprakAra ke adhyavasAyoM kA
abhAva hone se sAtava naraka ke nAraka tIrthakaranAmakarma kA bandha nahIM
karate haiM tathA manuSyAyu kA chaThe naraka taka hI bandha ho sakatA hai aura
sAta va saraka kI apekSA manuSyAyu utkRSTa puNya prakRti hai  /  ataH isakA
bandha utkRSTa adhyakasAyoM ke hone para ho sakatA hai| isalie sAtaveM naraka ke
nArakoM ko manuSyAyu kA bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  isa prakAra narakagati meM
sAmAnya se bandhayo 105 prakRtiyoM meM se tIrthakaranAmakarma aura manuSyAyu ina
do prakRtiyoM ko kama karane se sAtathe naraka meM 66 prakRtiyoM kA bandha mAnA
jAtA hai  /  _sAtaveM naraka meM jo hara prakRtiyA~ bA~dhane yogya batalAI haiM.
unameM se usI naraka ke pahale mithyAtva guNasthAnavI nAraka manuSpadvikA
manuSyagati aura manuSyAnupUrvI tathA ucca gotra.ina tIna prakRtiyoM ko
tathAvidha vizuddhi ke abhAva meM nahIM baaNcte| kyoMki sAtaveM naraka 1 choti
ma mnnuaau| kAgo karmakANDa 106

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma Granth  For the inhabitants of the seventh hell, these three
karmic natures are considered excellent and virtuous: **Manushya Gati**,
**Manushyanupurvi**, and **Uchcha Gotra**. These are bound by **Utkrishta
Vishuddha Madhyavasaya** and their **Adhyavasaya** is in the **seventh hell**,
in the **third and fourth Gunasthanas**.   Therefore, since these three karmic
natures are considered **Avandhya** (not subject to binding), out of the 66
karmic natures that are generally subject to binding, these three are reduced.
This leaves 63 karmic natures that are considered bound for the inhabitants of
the seventh hell in the **Mithyatva Gunasthan**.  In the **Sasvadan Gunasthan**
of the seventh hell, five karmic natures are considered **Avandhya**: **Tiryach-
ayu**, **Napunsak Chatushk** (Napunsak Ved, Mithyatva, Hund Sansthan, and Sewart
Sanhanan). Therefore, out of the 66 karmic natures that are generally subject to
binding, these five are reduced, leaving 61 karmic natures bound in the
**Mithyatva Gunasthan**.  This is because in this Gunasthan, **Yogya
Adhyavasaya** (proper determination) is absent, so **Tiryach-ayu** is not bound.
Also, **Napunsak Chatushk** arises from **Mithyatva**, but **Mithyatva** does
not arise in the **Sasvadan Gunasthan**. Therefore, **Napunsak Chatushk** is not
bound.  Thus, by reducing these five karmic natures from the 66, the inhabitants
of the seventh hell in the **Sasvadan Gunasthan** are bound by 61 karmic
natures.  ## HIINON 25  Out of the 61 karmic natures that are considered bound
for the inhabitants of the seventh hell in the **Sasvadan Gunasthan**, 24 karmic
natures are considered **Ananta Anubandhi Chatushk** and **Tiryadvik Paryant**.
These include:  * **Ananta Anubandhi** (Infinitely Bound): Krodha (Anger), Mana
(Pride), Maya (Delusion), Lobha (Greed) * **Nyagrodha Parimandal** * **Sadi
Vaman Kubj Sansthan** * **Rishabhanaraach Naraach Ardha Naraach Kilika
Sanhanan** * **Ashubha Vihayogati** * **Neecha Gotra** * **Stri Ved** *
**Dubhang** * **Duhswar** * **Anadeya** * **Nidra Nidra** * **Prachala
Prachala** * **Styan Di Udyot** * **Tiryach Gati** * **Tiryach Anupurvi**
**Note:** The text also includes a verse in Prakrit, which translates to:  "In
the seventh hell, the binding of **Mithyatva** (false belief) is strong. The
**Sasvadan** (enjoyment) of the **Mithyatva** is the cause of the **Manushya
Gati** (human birth)."  **Source:** **Karmakand** 107

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagrantha ke nAraka ke liye ye tIna prakRtiyoM utkRSTa
puNyaprakRtiyA~ haiM, jo utkRSTa vizuddha madhyavasAya se bAMdhI jAtI haiM aura
utkRSTa adhyavasAya sthAna sAtaveM naraka meM tIsare aura cothe guNasthAna meM
hote haiN|' isalie manuSya gati, manuSyAnupUrvI tathA ucca gotra- ina tIna
prakRtiyoM ke avandhya hone se sAmAnya se baMdhayogya 66 prakRtiyoM meM se ina
tIna prakRtiyoM ko kama karane para mithyAtva guNasthAna meM sAtaveM sara ke
nArakoM ke 66 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha honA mAnA jAtA hai  /  sAtaveM naraka ke
nArakoM ke dUsare sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM tiryacAyu aura napuMsakacatuSka-
napuMsaka veda, midhyAtva, huMDa saMsthAna aura sevArta saMhanana kula pA~ca
prakRtiyA~ avandhya hone se mithyAtva guNasthAna meM jo e6 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
kahA gayA, unameM se ina prakRtiyoM ko kama karane para 61 prakRtiyoM kA bandha
hotA hai| kyoMki isa guNasthAna meM yogya adhyavasAya kA abhAva hone meM
tiryaMcAyu kA bandha nahIM hotA hai aura napuMsakacatuSka mithyAtva ke udaya meM
hotA hai, kintu sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM mithyAtva kA udaya nahIM hai  /  ataH
napuMsakacatuSka kA bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  isaliye 66 prakRtiyoM meM se ina
pA~ca prakRtiyoM ko kama karane se sAsvAdana guNasthAnavartI sAtaveM naraka ke
nArakoM ko 91 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  HIINON 25 sAtaveM narakavartI
sAsvAdana guNasthAna vAle nArakoM ko jo ha prakRtiyoM kA bandha kahA gayA hai,
unameM se anantAnubandhIcatuSka Adi tiryadvika paryanta 24 prakRtiyoM ko, arthAt
anantAnubandhI kodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, nyagrodha parimaMDala, sAdi vAmana
kubja saMsthAna, RSabhanArAca nArAca ardhanArAca kIlikA saMhanana, azubha
vihAyogati, nIcagotra, strIveda, dubhaMga, duHsvara, anAdeya, nidrAnidrA,
pracalApracalA. styAnadi udyota tiryaMcagati tiryacAnupUrvI ina 1 r 1 ww 1 mi
sAbira ucca matrayugaM sattame have baMdho  /  micchA sAsanasammA manuSNaM ga ti
//  www. mI0 karmakAMDa 107

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bandhaswamitva  The bondage of the 24 **Prakritis** occurs with the arising
of **Kshaya** that is **Anantanu bandhi** (infinitely binding). The arising of
**Anantanu bandhi** **Kshaya** occurs until the first and second
**Gunasthanas**. Therefore, after reducing these 24 **Prakritis** from the
aforementioned 61 **Prakritis**, 67 **Prakritis** remain. By combining these
three **Prakritis** - **Manushyadvik**, **Manushya** **Gati**, and
**Uchchamotr**, the bondage of 70 **Prakritis** occurs for the **Narakas** of
the third **Mishra Gunasthan** and the fourth **Avirat Samyag Dristi Gunasthan**
in the **Salve Naraka**.  The **Narakas** of the **Purva-Purva Naraka** have a
very low **Amvasya** (dark fortnight) **Jhudhi** (understanding) compared to the
**Narakas** of the **Uttara-32 Naraka**. The **Bandhak Parinam** (binding
results) of **Punyaprakritis** become progressively less from **Purva-Purva
Naraka** to **Uttara-Uttara Naraka**. Although a **Jiva** can bind **Mati**
(mind) at any time until the sixth part of the eighth **Gunasthan**, the
**Adhyavasaya** (determination) suitable for **Naraka Gati** (hellish state) is
until the first **Gunasthan**, for **Tiryanch Gati** (animal state) until the
second **Gunasthan**, for **Dev Gati** (heavenly state) until the sixth part of
the eighth **Gunasthan**, and for **Manushya Gati** (human state) until the
fourth **Gunasthan**. **Naraka Jivas** cannot bind **Naraka** and **Dev Gati**.
Therefore, in the third and fourth **Gunasthanas**, the **Narakas** of the
seventh **Naraka** can bind **Manushya Gati**. However, these **Jivas** bind
**Ayushya** (lifespan) only in the first **Gunasthan**. They do not bind in
other **Gunasthanas** due to the lack of **Adhyavasaya** suitable for **Yoga**.
In the first and fourth **Gunasthanas**, the **Manushya Mati** (human mind)
**Prayogya Bandha** (binding suitable for human state) does not occur for the
**Jivas** of the seventh **Naraka** due to the lack of **Laycha Parinam**
(result of binding).  The **Punyaprakritis** that are bound by the **Mithyastri
Narakas** of the first **Naraka** in the form of **Manushyadvik** and
**Uchchagotr** cannot be bound in the seventh **Naraka** except in the third and
fourth **Gunasthanas**. The **Utkrishta Vishuddha Parinam** (excellent pure
results) in the seventh **Naraka** are the ones that bind the aforementioned
three **Prakritis**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bandasvAmitva 24 prakRtiyoM kA bandha anantAnubandhI kaSAya ke udaya meM hotA
hai aura anantAnubandhI kaSAya kA udaya pahale aura dUsare guNasthAna taka hotA
hai, ataH pUrvokta 61 prakRtiyoM meM se ina 24 prakRttiyoM ko kama karane para
67 prakRttiyA~ rahatI hai| inameM manuSyAdvika-manuSyagati, manuSyAnu. pUrvI
tathA uccamotra hama tIna prakRtiyoM ko milAne se tIsare mizra guNasthAna aura
cauthe aviratasamyagdaSTi guNasthAnavI sAlave naraka ke nArakoM ke 70 prakRtiyoM
kA bandha hotA hai| . pUrva-pUrva naraka ne uttara-3ra naraka meM amavasAyoM kI
jhuddhi itanI kama ho jAtI hai ki puNyaprakRtiyoM ke baMdhaka pariNAma pUrva-
pUrva se uttara-uttara naraka meM alpa se alpatara hote jAte haiN| yadyapi
AThaveM guNasthAna ke chaThe bhAga taka jIva prati samaya kisI na kisI mati kA
bandha kara sakatA hai| kintu narakagati ke yogya adhyavasAya pahale guNasthAna
taka, tiryaMcagati ke yogya Adi ke do guNasthAna taka, devagati ke yogya AThaveM
guNasthAna ke chaThe bhAga taka aura manuSyati ke yogya cauthe guNasthAna taka
hote haiN| nAraka jIba naraka aura deva gati kA bandha nahIM kara sakate haiM  /
ataH tIsare aura cauthe muNasthAna meM sAtaveM naraka ke nAraka manuSya-
gatiyogya vandha kara sakate haiN| lekina ve jIva AyuSya kA bandha pahale
guNasthAna meM hI karate haiM. anya guNasthAnoM meM tayogya adhyavasAya kA
abhAva hone se bandha nahIM karate haiN| pahale aura cauthe guNasthAna meM
sAtaveM naraka ke jIva ke manuSyamati prAyogya bandha ke lAyacA pariNAma nahIM
hone meM manuSya prAyogya bandha nahIM hotA hai| manuSyAdvika aura uccagotra
rUpa jina puNyaprakatiyoM ke bandhaka pariNAma pahale naraka ke mithyAstrI
nArakoM ko ho sakate haiM, unake bandhayogya pariNAma sAtaveM naraka meM tIsare,
cauthe guNasthAna ke sivAya anya guNasthAna meM asaMbhava hai| sAtaveM naraka
meM utkRSTa vizuddha pariNAma ve hI haiM, jinase ukta tIna prakRtiyoM kA bandha
kiyA jA

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third chapter can be considered. Therefore, the three mentioned are the most
excellent Marīs in the seventh hell. Although a human being arises in many
births, the beings of the seventh hell do not bind the human lifespan. However,
in the absence of it, they bind the human lifespan in the third and fourth
stages of the qualities. This means that the human lifespan is not bound with
the human lifespan. The binding of the water lifespan should be accompanied by
the binding of the karma of intellect and replenishment, there is no such rule.
The human lifespan can also be bound in the third and fourth stages of the
qualities, and it arises in many births. Thus, after stating the ownership of
the binding of the hellish path, now we explain the ownership of the binding of
the animal path. Those who have the karma of the animal path arising are carried
by the animal path. There are two types of animals: sufficient animals and
insufficient animals. Of these two, here we explain the ownership of the binding
of sufficient animals. Out of the 120 natures that are generally bindable in
relation to all beings, the karma of the Tirthankara and the food-related karma,
these two natures are not bound in the Tirthankara path. Therefore, there is a
binding of 117 natures of sufficient animals from the general. Because even when
animals become enlightened, there is a lack of the necessary conditions for the
binding of the karma of the Tirthankara in their birth-nature, and the food-
related karma - the food-related body, the food-related limbs - is bound only to
those who have adopted conduct. But animals are not entitled to conduct. 1. The
binding of the food-related karma is not bound with the human lifespan, just as
the wind is bound, so too is the karma of intellect and replenishment. Even if
it is bound, it is bound with the water lifespan. ...Third Karma Chapter, page
101

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya sAmagrantha sakatA haiN| ataevaM sAtaveM naraka meM sabase utkRSTa
mAriyoM ukta tIna hI haiN| yapi manuSyadhika bhavAntara meM udaya AtA hai. kintu
sAtaveM naraka ke jIva manuSyAyu ko bAMdhate nahIM haiM, tathApi usake abhAva
meM tIsare-cauthe guNasthAna meM manuSyadvika kA bandha karate haiM, isakA artha
yaha hai ki manuSyadrika kA manuSyAyu ke sAtha pratibandha nahIM hai, pAnI Ayu
kA bandha mati aura AnupurtI nAmakarma ke bandha ko sAtha hI honA cAhie, aisA
niyama nahIM hai| manuSya Ayu ke siMcAya bhI tIsare aura cauthe guNasthAna meM
manuSyadrika kA bandha ho sakatA hai aura vaha bhavAntara meM udaya AtA hai  /
isa prakAra sarakAgati ke bandhasvAmitva kA kathana karane ke bAda aba
tiryaMcagati kA bandhasvAmitva batalAte haiN| jinako tithaMcagati nAmakarma kA
udaya ho unko tiryaca vAhate haiN| tiryaMcoM ke do bheda haiM. paryAptatiryaMca
aura aparyAptatithaMca hai ina donoM meM se yahA~ paryAptatiyaMcoM kA
bandhasvAmitva batalAte haiN| samasta jIvoM kI apekSA sAmAnya se bandhayogya 120
prakRtiyoM meM me tIrthakharanAmakarma aura AhArakadvika ina dona prakRtiyoM kA
bandha tirthanagati meM nahIM hotA hai| ataH sAmAnya se paryAptatithaMcoM ke 117
prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| kyoMki tiryaMcoM ke samyaktvI hone para bhI
janma-svabhAva meM hI tIrthakaranAmakarma ke bandhrayogya adhyavasAyoM kA abhAva
hotA hai aura AhArakadvika- AhAraka zarIra, AhAraka aMgopAMga kA bandha cAritra
dhAraNa karane vAloM ko hI hotA hai| parantu tiryaMca cAritra ke adhikArI nahIM
haiN| 1 madvikasya narAyuSA saha bhAvadhayaM pratibandhA yaduta ra vAyurvadhyate
taya galyAnupUrvIdvayamapi, tasyAjyadA'pi bandhAt  /  ...tIya karmasamma
avacUrikA pR0 101

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 26  **Swami,**  Therefore, the three karmas mentioned in the general bondage
of the Tiryancha (animal) realm are not counted. Hence, the Tiryancha realm is
considered to have 117 karmas in bondage, excluding the general ones.  The
Tiryancha realm has five Gunasthanas (stages of spiritual progress) from
Mithyatva (false belief) to the fifth, Deshvirat (free from attachment to the
world). These five Gunasthanas belong to the Paryapta Tiryancha (those who have
attained the full potential of the Tiryancha realm), while only the first
Gunasthan, Mithyatva, belongs to the Aparyapta Tiryancha (those who have not
attained the full potential).  Just as the Paryapta Tiryancha are said to have
117 karmas in bondage, excluding the general ones, the same should be understood
for the first Gunasthan, Mithyatva. As we have already explained, the
Tirthankara karma is bound when one attains Samyaktv (right faith), and the
Aharakarma is bound by those who practice Charitra (right conduct). However, in
the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there is neither Samyaktv nor Charitra. Therefore, the
Paryapta Tiryancha bind 117 karmas in the Mithyatva Gunasthan.  In summary, the
Narakas (hell beings) in the seventh Naraka, who bind 91 karmas in the second
Gunasthan, have 24 karmas less, including Anantanubandhi Chatushk and other
Tiryancha karmas. The remaining 67 karmas, along with the three karmas of
Manushya Dwik and Uchcha Gotra, are bound in the third, Mishra (mixed), and the
fourth, Botha Avirat Samyagdristi Gunasthanas.  The Paryapta Tiryancha, in the
Tiryancha realm, cannot bind the Tirthankara karma and Aharakarma due to the
absence of the necessary Adhyavasayas (resolutions) from the 120 karmas that are
eligible for bondage. Therefore, they bind 117 karmas, excluding the general
ones and the first Gunasthan.  Thus, in the Naraka realm, compared to the
general and Gunasthanas, there are...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26 svAmina ataeva tiryaMcagati bAloM ke sAmAnya bandha meM ukta tIna prakRtiyoM
kI ginatI nahIM kI gaI hai aura isIlie tiryaMcagati meM sAmAnya se 117
prakRtiyoM bandha mAnA jAtA hai| tiryaMcagati meM pahale mithyAtva se lekara
pAMcaveM dezavirata guNasthAna taka pA~ca guNasthAna hote haiM  /  ye pAMcoM
guNasthAna paryAptatiryatha ko hote haiM aura aparyAptatiryaMca ko sirpha pahalA
mithyAtva guNasthAna hI hotA hai  /  paryApti tiryoM ke jo sAmAnya se 117kRti
svAmitva batalAyA gayA hai, usI prakAra pahale mithyAtva guNasthAna meM bhI
unake 117 prakRtiyoM kA bandha samajhanA caahie| kyoMki pahale batA cuke haiM ki
tIrthaGkara nAmakarma kA bandha samyaktva hone para hotA hai aura AhArakaDhika
kA bandha cAritra dhAraNa karane vAloM ke hotA hai| kintu midhyAtva guNasthAna
meM na to samyaktva hai aura na cAritra hai  /  ataH mithyAtva guNasthAna meM
paryAptatiryaca 117 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karate haiM  /  sArAMza yaha hai ki
sAtaveM naraka ke nAraka dUsare guNasthAna meM jo 91 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karate
haiM, unameM se anantAnubaMdhIcatuSka Adi tiryacaki paryanta 24 prakRtiyoM ko
kama kara dene se zeSa rahI 67 prakRtiyA~ tathA ina 67 prakRtiyoM meM
manuSyadvika aura ucca gotra, ina tIna prakRtiyoM ko milAne se tIsare mizra aura
bothe avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna- ina do guNasthAnoM meM OM prakRtiyoM kA
vandha karate haiM  /  tiyaMcagati meM paryAptatiryaca bandhayogya 120
prakRtiyoM meM se tathAyogya adhyavasAyoM kA abhAva hone se tIrthakaranAmakarma
aura AhARafae kA bandha nahIM kara sakate haiN| ataH sAmAnya se aura pahale
freutra guNasthAna meM 117 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karate haiN| isa prakAra
narakagati meM sAmAnya aura guNasthAnoM kI apekSA aura

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma Granth  After stating the general binding of Paryapta Tiryach in
the Tiryach Gati and the binding of Swamitva in relation to the first Mithyatva
Gunasthan, the following verse explains the Swamitva in each Gunasthan from the
second to the fifth:  **Verse 8:**  * **fer Narayaso Sasani Surau An Egatis
Vishnu Mile. Sasuraj Sarvar Samme Moyakasae Vina Vese.**  **Meaning of the
Verse:**  In the Sasvadan Gunasthan, the Paryapta Tiryach bind 101 of the 117
total Paryapta Tiryach, excluding the 16 Prakruti of Narak Trik, Narak Gati,
Narak Anupurvi, Narak Ayu, Jati Chatushk (Ekendirya, Dwiendriya, Triendriya,
Chaturindriya), Sthavar Chatushk, Sthavar Naam, Sukshma Naam, Aparyapt Naam,
Sadharan Naam, Hund Sansthan, Sewale Sanhanan, Atap Naam, Napunsak Ved, and
frerraratata. In the Mishr Gunasthan, they bind 31 Prakruti, excluding the
Devayuk and Ananta Anubandhi Chatushk. In the Samyaktva Gunasthan, they bind 70
Prakruti, including the tary. In the Deshvirat Gunasthan, they bind without the
second Kashay.  **Special Meaning:**  After explaining the general binding of
Paryapta Tiryach and their Swamitva in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, this verse
explains the binding of Karma from the second to the fifth Gunasthan.
**Explanation:**  The Paryapta Tiryach bind 117 Prakruti in general and in the
first Mithyatva Gunasthan. Of these, the Prakruti that bind due to the rise of
Mithyatva do not bind in the Sasvadan Gunasthan because Mithyatva does not rise
there. Therefore, the binding of the 16 Prakruti of Narak Trik, Narak Gati,
Narak Anupurvi, Narak Ayu, Jati Chatushk (Ekendirya, Dwiendriya, Triendriya,
Chaturindriya), Sthavar Chatushk, Sthavar Naam, Sukshma Naam, Aparyapt Naam,
Sadharan Naam, Hund Sansthan, Sewale Sanhanan, Atap Naam, Napunsak Ved, and
frerraratata does not occur, resulting in the binding of 101 Prakruti.  **KB:**
* **Narasing Jai Thavarach Daivachhikthh Nagum Solo Hi Sa Sasani**  **- Karma
Granth** **14**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagrantha tiyaMcagati meM paryAptatiyaMtra ke sAmAnya se tathA pahale
mithyAtva guNasthAna kI apekSA bandhasvAmitva kA kathana karane ke bAda Age kI
gAthA meM paryAptatiryaca ke dUsare se pA~caveM guNasthAna taka pratyeka
guNasthAna meM svAmitva ko batalAte haiM- fer narayaso sAsaNi surAu aNa egatIsa
viSNu miile| sasurAja sarvAra samme moyakasAe vinA vese  //  8  //  gAthArtha
sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM narakatrika Adi solaha prakRtiyoM ke binA tathA mizra
guNasthAna meM devAyu aura anantAnubaMdhIcatuSka Adi ikatIsa ke binA aura
samyaktva guNasthAna meM tary sahita sattara tathA dezavirata guNasthAna meM
dUsare kaSAya ke binA paryAptatica prakRtiyoM kA bandha karate haiM  /
vizeSArtha - sAmAnya se aura mithyAtva guNasthAna meM paryAptatiryaMcoM ke
svAmitva ko batalAne ke bAda yahA~ dUsare me lekara pAMcaveM guNasthAnaparyanta
karmabandha ko batalAte haiM  /  paryApta tacoM ke sAmAnya se tathA pahale
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 117 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai, unameM se midhyAtva
ke udaya se ba~dhane vAlI jo prakRtiyA~ haiM, unakA sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM
mithyAtva kA udaya na hone se narakatrika narakagati, narakAnupUrvI, narakAyu,
jAticatuSka - ekendriya dvIndriya, zrIndriya, caturindriya jAti,
sthAvaracatuSka. sthAvaranAma, sUkSmanAma, aparyAptanAma, sAdhAraNanAma, hu~Da
saMsthAna, sevAle saMhanana, AtapanAma, napuMsakaveda, aura frerraratata ina
solaha prakRtiyoM kA bandha nahIM hone se 101 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  / '
www. 1. narasiMga jAi thAvaraca DAyavachikTTha naghuma solo hi sa sAsaNa KB www.
- karmagrantha 14

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bandhasvamitva  The 501 types of bondage mentioned in the second Gunasthan of
Paryaptatiryanch, are not bound in the Mishragunasthan of Paryaptaliyach due to
the absence of Sadhyogya Abhyanasaya and the absence of Aayu Bandha in the
Mishragunasthan. Therefore, the Devayau and Anantanubandhi Kashaya arise only up
to the second Gunasthan. Consequently, the following 25 types of bondage do not
occur due to them:  * **Niryantrik:** Tiryanchgathi, Tiryanchanupurvi,
Tiryanchayu, Styanaddhatrik, Nidra-Nidra, Prathela-Prachala, Styanaddhi; * **Dur
Bhaghatrik:** Dubhang, Duhswar, Anadayanam; * **Anantanubandhi Kashayachaturk:**
Anantanubandhi Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha; * **Madhyamasansthanchaturk:**
Nyagrodha Parimandal Sansthan, Sadi Sansthan, Vaman Sansthan, Kubja Sansthan; *
**Madhyama Mahananchaturk:** Rishabhanaracha Sanhan, Maracha Tahman,
Ardhanaracha Sanhan, Kilika Sanhanan; * **Nichegotra, Udyotanam, Ashubha
Vihayogathi, and Strived.**  Furthermore, the following six types of bondage do
not occur due to their suitability for Manushya Gathi:  * **Manushyatrik:**
Manushya Gathi, Manudhyanapurvi, Manushyayu; * **Audarikaddhik:** Audarik
Sharira, Audarik Angopang; * **Vanrishabhanaracha Sanhanan.**  Similar to the
fourth Gunasthan, in the third Gunasthan, both Paryaptamanshya and Tiryanch bind
the types suitable for Devagathi, but not the types suitable for Manushya Gathi.
Therefore, in the third Mishragunasthan, the 25 types of bondage due to Devayau
and Anantanubandhi Kashaya of Paryaptatiryanch, and the six types suitable for
Manushya Gathi, do not occur. This results in a total of 32 types of bondage not
occurring, which when subtracted from the 101 types of bondage in the second
Gunasthan, leaves 66 types of bondage remaining.  -  1 ... ... .... .......
Tiryiin Duhagathim. Anamjalaagiisanghyanancha Niujjoy Khagahatyi Ti. Kamassam
214,5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bandhasvAmitva paryAptatiryacoM ke dUsare guNasthAna meM jo 501 prakRtiyoM kA
bandha batalAyA hai unameM se paryAptaliyaMca mizra guNasthAna meM sadyogya
abhyanasAya kA abhAva hone se tathA mizca guNasthAna meM Ayu badha na hone ke
kAraNa devAyu tathA anantAnubandhI kaSAya kA udaya dUsare guNasthAna taka hI
hotA hai, ataH usake nimitta se baMdhane vAlI niyaMtrika tiryaMcagati,
tithaMcAnupUrvI, tiryaMcAyu, styAnAddhatrika nidrA-nidrA, prathalA-pracalA,
styAnaddhi; durbhagatrika-dubhaMga, duHsvara, anAdayanAma: anantAnubandhI
kaSAyacatukaanantAnubaMdhI krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, madhyamasaMsthAnacatuSka -
nyagrodha parimaNDala saMsthAna, sAdi saMsthAna, vAmana saMsthAna, kubja
saMsthAna; madhyama mahananacatuSka RSabhanArAca saMhAna, mArAca tahamAna,
ardhanArAca saMhAna, kIlikA saMhanana, nIcagotra, udyotanAma. azubha vihAyogati
aura strIveda ina paccIsa prakRtiyoM kA bhI bandha nahIM karate haiM tathA
manuSyatrika-manuSyagati, manudhyAnapUrvI manuSyAyu; audArikaddhika - audArika
zarIra, audArika aMgopAMga aura vanaRSabhanArAca saMhanana-ina chaha prakRtiyoM
ke manuSya gati yogya hone se ve nahIM bAMdhate haiN| kyoMki cauthe guNasthAna
kI taraha tIsare guNasthAna ke samaya paryAptamanuSya aura tiryaca donoM hI
devagati yogya prakRtiyoM ko bA~dhate haiM, manuSyagati-prAyogya prakRtiyoM ko
nahIM bAMdhate haiN| isa prakAra tIsare mizra guNasyAnavauM paryAptatiryacoM ke
devAyu anantAnubandhI kaSAya nimittaka paccIsa prakRtiyoM tathA
manuSyagatiprAyogya chaha prakRtiyoM kA bandha nahIM hone se kula milAkara 32
prakRtiyoM ko dUsare guNasthAna kI bandhayogya 101 pratiyoM meM meM ghaTA dene
para zeSa 66 prakRtiyoM kA bandhra hotA hai| - 1 ... ... .... .......
tiriyINaduhagattimaM  /  /  aNamajalAgiisaMghayaNaJca niujjoya khagahatyi ti|
kamasamma 214,5

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma Granth, Chapter 26  In the fourth **Avirat Samyagdrishti**
Gunasthan of the **Paryapt Tiryanch**, it is known that **Devaayu** can be bound
along with the 66 **Bandhyogya** (bindable) **Prakritis** of the **Mishra
Gunasthan**. This is because in the third Gunasthan, there is no rule for the
binding of **Aayu** (lifespan), so **Ayukarma** (lifespan karma) is not bound.
However, in the fourth Gunasthan, the binding of **Aayu** related to the
**Parbhaav** (previous life) is possible. But, both the **Paryapt Tiryanch** and
humans in the fourth Gunasthan are eligible for **Devagati** (heavenly path),
and they do not bind the **Prakritis** eligible for **Manushya Gati** (human
path). Therefore, the binding of **Devaayu** in the fourth Gunasthan for
**Paryapt Tiryanch** can be considered.  Thus, by adding the **Devaayu**
**Prakriti** to the 66 **Bandhyogya** **Prakritis** of the third Gunasthan, the
binding of 70 **Prakritis** occurs in the fourth **Avirat Samyagdrishti**
Gunasthan of the **Paryapt Tiryanch**.  In the fourth **Deshavirat** Gunasthan,
out of the aforementioned 70 **Prakritis**, the binding of 66 **Prakritis**
occurs after reducing the four **Apratyaakhyanaavaran** **Kshaya Chatushk** -
**Krodh** (anger), **Maan** (pride), **Maya** (delusion), and **Lobh** (greed).
The binding of **Apratyaakhyanaavaran** **Kshaya Chatushk** does not occur in
the fifth and subsequent Gunasthanas. This is because the **Yathayogya**
(appropriate) **Kshaya** is the cause of the **Atyayogya** (inappropriate)
**Kshaya** binding. However, in the fifth Gunasthan, the
**Apratyaakhyanaavaran** **Kshaya Chatushk** does not arise, therefore, their
binding cannot occur here. Their arising occurs from the first to the fourth
Gunasthan, hence, their binding also occurs until here. Therefore, the binding
of 66 **Prakritis** for **Paryapt Tiryanch** is considered in the fifth
Gunasthan, excluding the **Apratyaakhyanaavaran** **Kshaya Chatushk**.  In
summary, out of the 117 **Bandhyogya** **Prakritis** in the first **Mithyatva**
Gunasthan of the **Paryapt Tiryanch**, 101 **Prakritis** are bound in the second
**Saasvadan** Gunasthan after reducing the 16 **Prakritis** like **Narakatrik**
etc., which are bound due to the arising of **Mithyatva**. And, the binding of
**Devaayu** and **Ananta**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagrantha 26 paryAptatitroM ke cauthe aviratasamyagdRSTi guNasthAna
meM mizra guNasthAna kI bandhayogya 66 prakRtiyoM ke sAtha devAyu kA bandha bhI
saMbhava hone meM 70 safari at rannA jAtA hai  /  kyoMki tIsare guNasthAna meM
Ayu ke bandha kA niyama na hone se Ayukarma kA bandha nahIM hotA hai, kintu
cauthe guNasthAna meM parabhava sambandhI Ayu kA baMdha saMbhava hai  /  parantu
cauthe guNasthAnavartI paryAptitithaMca aura manuSya donoM devagati yogya
prakRtiyoM ko haiM, manuSyagati yogya prakR tiyoM ko nahIM bA~dhate haiN| ataH
cauthe guNasthAna meM paryAptatiyaMcoM ke vAyu kA baMdha mAnA jA sakatA hai| isa
prakAra tIsare guNasthAna kI baMdhayogya 66 prakRtiyoM meM devAyu prakRti ko
milAne meM paryApta tiryacoM ke cauthe aviratasamyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM 70
prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  ke fcaveM dezavirata guNasthAna meM pUrvokta
70 prakRtiyoM meM se apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAyacatuSka - krodha, mAna, mAyA,
lobha ina cAra prakRtiyoM ko kama kara dene para 66 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA
hai  /  apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAyacatuSka kA bandha pA~caveM aura usake Age ke
guNasthAnoM meM nahIM hotA hai| kyoMki yathAyogya kaSAya kA udaya tathAyogya
kaSAya ke bandha kA kAraNa hai | kintu pani guNasthAna meM apratyAsthAnAvaraNa
kaSAyacatuSka kA udaya nahIM hotA hai, ata: unakA yahA~ bandha bhI nahIM ho
sakatA hai| inakA udaya pahale se lekara cauthe guNasthAna taka hotA hai, ataH
yahA~ taka hI bandha hotA hai  /  isalie apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAyacatuSka kA
bandha nahIM paryAptaticoM ke 66 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha pA~caveM gaNasthAna meM
mAnA jAtA hai  /  sArAMza yaha hai ki paryAptatiryoM ke pahale mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM bandhayogya 117 prakRtiyoM meM se mithyAtva ke udaya se ba~dhane
vAlI narakatrika Adi solaha prakRtiyoM ko kama karane se dUsare sAsvAdana
guNasthAna meM 101 prakRtiyoM kA tathA devAyu aura anantAgrat

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bandhasvamitva  **Bandhasvamitva** refers to the ownership of the bondage of
karmas.   This passage describes the bondage of karmas in different stages of
spiritual progress, starting from the **BalasvAmitva** (stage of initial
bondage) and moving towards the **Desavirat** (stage of detachment).
**BalasvAmitva:**  * **25** **Prakritis** (types of karmas) caused by
**Kashaya** (passions) and **6** **Prakritis** unsuitable for humans, totaling
**32** **Prakritis**, are not bound. * This leaves **66** **Prakritis** out of
the **101** **Prakritis** that can be bound in the **Dvitiya Gunasthan** (second
stage of spiritual progress). * In the **Mishra Gunasthan** (mixed stage),
**66** **Prakritis** can be bound. * In the **Tritiya Gunasthan** (third stage),
**70** **Prakritis** can be bound, including the **Devaayu** (divine life
force). * In the **Chaturtha Gunasthan** (fourth stage), **66** **Prakritis**
are bound after removing the **Apratyaakhyana Avarana** (veil of non-acceptance)
and **Chapay Chatushk** (four types of karmas). * This process continues until
the **Pancha Desavirat Gunasthan** (fifth stage of detachment), where **66**
**Prakritis** are bound.  **ParyaptamAnushya (Perfect Human):**  *
**ParyaptamAnushya** (perfect human) binds karmas similar to
**ParyaptamAtiyantra** (perfect instrument) from the first to the fourth
**Gunasthan**. * However, **ParyaptamAnushya** can bind **Tirthankara
Namakarma** (karma related to becoming a Tirthankara) but not
**ParyaptamAtibandha** (perfect bondage). * From the fifth **Gunasthan**
onwards, they bind karmas as described in the **Dvitiya Karmagrantha** (second
text on karmas).  **ApayaptamAtiyantra (Imperfect Instrument) and Manushya
(Human):**  * **ApayaptamAtiyantra** and **Manushya** bind **106** **Prakritis**
out of **117**, excluding **Tirthankara Namakarma** and other **11**
**Prakritis**.  **Conclusion:**  This passage explains the **Bandhasvamitva** of
**ParyaptamAnushya**, **ApayaptamAtiyantra**, and **Manushya**, highlighting the
different types of karmas they bind and the stages of spiritual progress they
achieve.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 balasvAmitva kaSAya nimittaka 25 prakRtiyoM aura manuSyamazi-yogya chaha
prakRtiyoM kula 32 prakRtiyoM kA bandha na hone se dUsare guNAsthAna kI
baMdhogya 101 prakRtiyoM meM se jana 32 prakRtiyoM ko kama karane se
mizraguNasthAna meM 66 prakRtiyoM kA tathA mitha guNasthAna kI ukta 66
prakRtiyoM meM devAyu kA vandha honA saMbhava hone se cauthe guNasthAna meM 70
prakRtiyoM kA tathA ina 70 prakRtiyoM meM se apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa cApAyacatuSka
ko kama karane se pA~ca dezavirata guNasthAna meM 66 prakRtiyoM kA dhandha hotA
hai  /  isa prakAra se siyaMcagati meM paryAptatiryacoM ke bandhasvAmitva kA
varNana karane ke bAda Age kI gAthA meM manuSyamati ke paryApta aura aparyApta
manaSyoM aura aparyApta niyaMtroM ke bAvAziva ko batalAte haiM iya caupuNesu vi
narA paramajayA sajiga oha vesAI  /  jiNaipakArasahoNaM navasaGa
apajattatiriyanarA El gAthAparyAptamanuSya pahale se cauthe guNasthAna taka
paryAptatiyaMtra ke samAna prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhate haiN| parantu itanA vizeSa
samajhanA ki samyagdRSTi paryAptamanuSya tIrthakaranAmakarma kA bandha kara
sakate haiM, kintu paryAptatibaMdha nahIM tathA pA~ca guNasthAna se lekara Age
ke guNasthAnoM meM sAmAnya se kamastava (dvitIya karmagrantha} meM kahe gaye
anusAra karmaprazatiyoM ko bAMdhate haiM  /  aparyAptatiyaMca aura manuSya
tIrthaGkara nAmakarma Adi gyAraha prakRtiyoM ko chor3akara zeSa 106 prakRtiyoM
kA baMdha karate haiN| vizeSArtha -isa gAthA meM paryAptamanudhya aura
aparyAptatipaMca tathA manuSyoM ke baMdhasvAmitva ko batalAyA gayA hai|
manuSyagatinAmakarma aura manuSyAyu ke udaya se jo manuSya kahalAte haiM apayA
jo mana ke dvArA nitya hI heya-upAdeya, tatva

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third category, other than the above two, is that of humans. Consider the
concepts of Dharma and Adharma, and those who can remember the Guru-dosha, etc.,
through their mind. Those who are excellent in matters of the mind are called
humans.  Like the Tiryanchas, humans are also primarily divided into two
categories: sufficient and insufficient. Of these two categories, the sufficient
bind 120 types of karmas, more than the ordinary. The description of these 120
bindable karmas has been given in detail in another Karmagrantha. However, for
the sake of brief knowledge, their number should be understood as follows:
_Jnanabaran 5, Darshanabaran 6, Vedrigah 2, Mohaniya 26, Ayu 4, Naam 67, Gotra
2, Antaraya 5. Combining these categories, we get a total of 120 karmas.  Out of
the above 120 karmas, in the first Mithyatva Gunasthan, sufficient humans, like
sufficient Tiryanchas, do not bind the three karmas of Tirthankar-namakarma,
Aharak-katrik, Aharak-sharira, Aharak-angopang, and Shunya. This is because the
binding of Tirthankar-namakarma occurs in the Samyak-tva state, and the binding
of Aharak-nik occurs in the An-mattasangat state. However, in the Mithyatva-
drishti Gunasthan, neither Samyak-tva nor An-mattasangat is possible for beings.
Samyak-tva is not possible before the fourth Gunasthan, and An-mattasangat is
not possible before the seventh Gunasthan. Therefore, in the first Gunasthan,
sufficient humans bind 115 karmas.  Panch par ghodhin chhathvi samann-i va
chauro kaman mat-di. Doni ya panch ya mani ya pao pravasa-padi-o. -Mo.
Karmakasht 35 2. Sisthaya rahar-gadug-valam micchhan-mi sataram-ayam. —Bhapraay
263

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya kama anya atarava, dharma-adharma kA vicAra kareM aura jo mana dvArA
gurupa-doSAdi kA vicAra, smaraNa kara sake. jo mana ke viSaya meM utkRSTa ho,
unheM manuSya kahate haiN| _ tiryaMcoM ke samAna hI manuSyoM ke mukhyatayA
paryApta aura aparyApta ye do bheda haiN| ina do bhedoM meM se paryAptamA
sAmAnya kI apekSA 120 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karatA hai| ina bandhayogya 120
prakRtiyoM kA varNana dusare karmagrantha meM vizeSa rUpa se kiyA jA cukA hai|
phira bhI saMkSepa meM jJAna kara lene ke lie unakI saMkhyA isa prakAra
samajhanI cAhie_jJAnAbaraNa 5, darzanAvaraNa 6. vedarIgha 2, mohanIya 26, Ayu 4,
nAma 67, gotra 2. antarAya 5  /  ra bhedoM ko milAne meM kula 120 prakRtiyA~ ho
jAtI haiN| ukta 120 prakRtiyoM meM se pahale mithyAtva guNasthAna meM
paryAptatiryoM ke samAna hI paryAptamanuSya, tIrthakaranAmakarma aura
AhArakaTrika . AhAraka zarIra, AhAraka aMgopAMga, zUna tIna prakRtiyoM kA bandha
nahIM karate haiM  /  kyoMki tIrtha dharamAmakarma kA baMdha samyakttI ko aura
AhArakanika kA bandha anamattasaMgata ko hotA hai, kintu mithyAda STi guNasthAna
meM jIvoM ke na to samyaktva saMbhava hai aura na apramattamayama hii|
sammakatva cauthe guNasthAna se pahale tathA apramattArAma sAtaveM guNasthAna
meM pahale nahIM ho sakatA hai  /  anaH pahale guNasthAna meM paryApta manuSya
ke 115 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| paMca para ghodhina chathvIsamanni va
cauro kameNa mtdii| doNi ya paMca ya maNi yA pAo pravasApaDIo  /  /  -mo.
karmakASTa 35 2. sisthaya rAhAragadugavalaM micchanmi sataramayaM  /  --bhaprAya
263

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the second *guna-sthāna* (stage of spiritual progress), within the second
*karma-grantha* (text on karma), the 16 *prakṛtis* (categories of karma)
mentioned as "Rajaiyavarach Dav Chivak Namucchi (Gāthā 4)" are eliminated by the
end of the first *guna-sthāna*. Therefore, the *paryāpta-manuṣya* (perfect human
being) binds 101 *prakṛtis*.  In the third *miśra guna-sthāna* (mixed stage),
the *paryāpta-manuṣya* binds 60 *prakṛtis* out of the 101 *prakṛtis* of the
second *guna-sthāna*. This is because, according to the *bandha-svāmitva* (law
of binding) for *paryāpta-tiryac* (perfect animal), 25 *prakṛtis* with *devāyu*
(divine life) and *ananta-navandhi* (infinitely non-binding) *kaṣāya* (passions)
and 6 *prakṛtis* suitable for human existence are eliminated, totaling 32
*prakṛtis*.  Although the *paryāpta-tiryac* in the fourth *guna-sthāna* binds 30
*prakṛtis* due to binding *deva* (divine) karma along with the 66 *prakṛtis*
from the third *guna-sthāna*, the *paryāpta-manuṣya* binds 71 *prakṛtis* due to
the binding of *tīrtha-rāma-karma* (karma of a Tirthankara) along with the
aforementioned 70 *prakṛtis*. This is because, while the *paryāpta-tiryac*
attains *samyak-tvā* (perfect knowledge) in the fourth *guna-sthāna*, they lack
the *adhyavasāya* (determination) necessary to bind *tīrtha-kara-nāma-karma*
(karma of a Tirthankara) and therefore cannot bind it.  In the *karma-grantha*
part 2 (*karma-stava*), the *bandha-adhikāra* (right to bind) for *paryāpta-
manuṣya* and *tiryac* in the third *miśra* and fourth *avirat-samyak-dṛṣṭi*
(uninterrupted perfect vision) *guna-sthāna* is described as follows: The
*karma-stava* mentions the binding of 74 *prakṛtis* in the third *miśra* *guna-
sthāna* and 77 *prakṛtis* in the fourth *avirat-samyak-dṛṣṭi* *guna-sthāna*.
However, in the *tiryac* *miśra* *guna-sthāna*, the five *prakṛtis* of *manuṣya-
dvīka*, *audārika-dvīka*, and *vajra-ṛṣabha-nārāca-saṁhanana* are not bound,
resulting in the binding of 66 *prakṛtis*.  1. "Suraj Ṛṇa Egatis Viṣṇu Mise
(Tṛtīya Karma-grantha Gāo 8)" - The names of the 32 *prakṛtis* are given on the
next page.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 waterfora ukta 117 prakRtiyoM meM se dUsare guNasthAna meM dUsare karmagrantha
meM batAI gaI 'rajAiyAvaraca DAva chivaka namucchi (gAthA 4) ina 16 prakRtiyoM
kA anta pahale guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM ho jAne se paryAptamanuSya 101
prakRtiyoM kA bandha karate haiM I 3 tIsare mizra guNasthAna meM paryAptamanuSya
paryAptitiryaca ke liye batAye gaye bandhasvAmitva ke anusAra dUsare guNasthAna
kI 101 prakRtiyoM meM se devAyu tathA anantAnavandhI kaSAya ke udaya se dhane
vAlI 25 prakRtiyoM tathA manuSyagati-yogya chaha prakRtiyoM kula 32 prakRtiyoM
ko kama karane se 60 prakRtiyoM ko bA~dhate haiM  /  yadyapi paryAptatiyaMca
cauthe guNasthAna meM tIsare guNasthAna kI baMdhayogya 66 prakRtiyoM ke sAtha
devA kA bandha karane ke kAraNa 30 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karate haiM  /  kintu
paryAptamanuSya ke ukta 70 prakR siyoM ke sAtha tIrtharAmakarma kA bhI baMdha ho
sakane se 71 prakRtiyoM kA bandha kara karate haiN| kyoMki paryAptaticoM ko
cauthe guNasthAna meM samyaktva to hotA hai, kintu tIrthakaranAmakarma ke
bandhayogya adhyavasAyoM kA abhAva hone se tIrthakara nAmakarma kA bandha nahIM
kara pAte haiM  /  karmagrantha bhAga 2 (karmastava) meM kahe gaye bandhAdhikAra
kI apekSA paryAptamanuSya aura tiryaca ke tIsare - mizra aura cauthe-
aviratasamyasdRSTi guNasthAna meM isa prakAra kI vizeSatA hai - karmastava meM
tIsare mizra guNasthAna meM 74 aura cauthe aviratasamyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM 77
prakRtiyoM kA bandha kahA gayA hai| parantu yahA~ tiryaca mitraguNasthAna meM
manuSyadvika, audArikadvika aura vajraRSabhanArAca saMhanana ina pA~ca
prakRtiyoM kA abandha hone se 66 prakRktiyoM ko bAMdhate haiM aura 1. 'surAja
RNa egatIsa viSNu mIse  /  (tRtIya karmagrantha gA08) 32 prakRtiyoM ke nAma
pRSTha para diye gaye haiM  /

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third karma, *Avirat Samyagdristi Gunasthan*, binds 70 *Prakritis* including
*Devaayu* and the *Tithankara* *Namakarma* in the *Avirat Samyagdristi
Gunasthan*, along with *Devaayu*, binds 71 *Prakritis*. In the fourth
*Gunasthan*, these 71 *Prakritis* are combined with six *Prakritis* -
*Manushyadvik*, *Audarikadhik*, *Bṛṣabhanārāc* *Sanhanan*, and *Manushyāyu* -
resulting in 77 *Prakritis* bound, as stated in the *Karmastava Bandhadhikar*.
Additionally, the 66 *Prakritis* bound in the third *Gunasthan* for *Pāpti*
*Manushya* and *Tiryach* include five *Prakritis* from the aforementioned six,
excluding *Manushyāyu*, leading to a total of 74 *Prakritis* bound.  The binding
of *Paryāpta* *Manushya* from the first to the fourth *Gunasthan* should be
understood as described above. From the fifth to the thirteenth *Gunasthan*, the
number of *Prakritis* bound in each *Gunasthan* should be understood according
to the *Bandhayoga* *Prakritis* mentioned in the *Bandhadhikar* of the second
*Karmagrantha*. For example, in the fifth *Gunasthan*, 67 *Prakritis* are bound,
in the sixth *Gunasthan*, 63 *Prakritis* are bound, and in the seventh
*Gunasthan*, 56 or 58 *Prakritis* are bound. For detailed information, refer to
the *Bandhadhikar* of the second *Karmagrantha*.  The binding of 63 *Prakritis*
for *Paryāpta* *Manushya* and 66 *Prakritis* for *Paryāpta* *Tiryach* in the
fifth *Gunasthan* is mentioned, while the second *Karmagrantha* states that 67
*Prakritis* are bound in the fifth *Gunasthan*. The reason for this discrepancy
is that *Paryāpta* *Tiryach*, even after attaining *Samyaktva* in the fourth
*Gunasthan*, do not have the *Adhyavasaya* to bind the *Tithankara* *Namakarma*,
resulting in the binding of 70 *Prakritis*. These 70 *Prakritis* are reduced to
66 *Prakritis* by excluding the *Apratyaasthanāvarana* *Kaphāyachatuṣka*.
However, *Paryāpta* *Manushya* in the fourth *Gunasthan* can bind the
*Tithankara* *Namakarma*. Therefore, from the general binding, 71 *Prakritis*
are bound...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmA avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM devAyu sahita 70 prakRtiyoM ko
evaM manuSya mizraguNasthAna meM 69 aura avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM
tIrthakara nAmakarma aura devAyu sahita 71 prakRtiyoM ko bA~dhate haiN| cauthe
guNasthAna kI ina 01 prakatiyoM meM manuSyadvika, audArikaddhika, baRSabhanArAca
saMhanana aura manuSyAyu ina chaha prakRtiyoM ko milAne meM karmastava
bandhAdhikAra meM sAmAnya me kahI gaI 77 prakRtiyoM kA tathA yahA~ papti manuSya
aura tiryacoM ko tIsare guNasthAna meM jo 66 prakRtiyoM kA bagdha kahA gayA hai,
unameM pahale kahI gaI manuSyadvika Adi chaha prakRtiyoM meM se manuSyAyu ke
sivAya zeSa pA~ca prakRtiyoM ko milAne se 74 prakRtiyoM kA bandha samajhA jA
sakatA hai| paryApta manuSya ke pahale se cauthe guNasthAna taka kA bandha.
svAmitva pUrvokta prakAra meM samajhanA cAhie aura pAMcaveM se lekara terahaveM
guNasthAna paryanta pratyeka guNasthAna meM dUsare karmagrantha ke bandhAdhikAra
meM kahI maI bandhayogya prakRtiyoM ke anusAra utanIutanI prakRtiyoM kA bandha
samajha lenA caahie| jaise ki pA~ca guNasthAna meM 67, chaThe gupAsthAna meM 63,
sAtaveM meM 56 yA 58 ityaadi| vizeSa jAnakArI ke lie dUsare karmagrantha kA
bandhAdhikAra dekha leN| pA~ca guNasthAna meM paryApta manuSya ke 6.3 prakRtiyoM
kA aura paryApta tiryaMca ke 66 prakRtiyoM kA bandha batalAyA gayA hai tathA
dUsare karmagrandha meM pAMcaveM guNasthAna meM 67 prakRtiyoM kA bandha batalAyA
gayA hai to isa bhinnatA kA kAraNa yaha hai ki paryApta tiryacoM ke cauthe
muNasthAna meM samyaktya hone para bhI tIrthaGkara nAmakarma ke bandhayogya
adhyavasAyoM ke na hone se 70 prakRtiyoM kA bandha batAyA gayA hai aura una 70
prakRtiyoM meM meM apratyAsthAnAvaraNa kaphAyacatuSkA ko kama karane se 66
prakRtiyoM kA bandha kahA gayA hai jabaki paryApta manuSya cauthe guNasthAna meM
tIrthaGkaranAmakarma kA bhI :: bandha kara sakate haiM  /  ataH sAmAnya se
bandhayonya 71 prakRtiyoM meM se

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
34 Bandhaswami It is said that by reducing the fourfold classification of non-
rejection (Apratyaakhyana Varana Chatushk), 67 karmas are bound. After stating
the Bandhaswamitva of sufficient animals and humans, now we explain the
Bandhaswamitva of insufficient animals and humans, both in general and in
particular! _ Insufficient animals and insufficient humans - in these, the word
"insufficient" should be understood as "Lendhi" insufficient, not "Karpa"
insufficient. Because the reason for the word "insufficient" having the said
meaning is that an insufficient human can also bind the Tirthankara-namakarma.
In general, these Lendhi-sufficient animals and humans, out of the 120 karmas
that can be bound, 11 karmas are reduced - Tirthankara-namakarma, Devadvik,
Kriyadvik, Aharakdvik, Devayu, Narakatrik - leaving 106 karmas to be bound. And
in the insufficient state, only Mithyatva-munasthan is present, so in this
munasthan, 16 karmas can also be bound. Because in Mithyadristi, Tirthankara-
namakarma and Aharakdvik are not bound, and they do not go to the Devagati after
death, therefore Devadvik, Vaikriya-dvik and Devayu are also not bound.
Insufficient beings are not born in Narakagati, therefore Narakatrik is also not
bound. Therefore, by reducing the said eleven karmas, it is considered that 109
karmas are bound in the Mithyatva-munasthan of insufficient animals and humans,
compared to the general case. In summary, in the human state, sufficient humans
have fourteen gunasthanas and 120 karmas can be bound from the general case. But
now, only Bandhaswamitva in relation to the human state. 1. The Kshayopa-shama-
visha of Mana-avaran karma is Lendhi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34 bandhasvAmida apratyAkhyAnA varaNacatuSka ko kama karane se 67 prakRtiyoM ke
bandha hone kA kathana kiyA jAtA hai| paryApta timaMcoM aura manuSyoM ke
bandhasvAmitva kA kathana karane ke bAda aba aparyApta tiryaMcoM aura manuSyoM
ke sAmAnya tathA vizeSa donoM prakAra se bandhavAmitva ko batalAte haiM ! _
aparyApta tiryaca aura aparyApta manuSya- inameM aparyApta zabda kA matalaba
landhi' aparyApta samajhanA cAhie, karapA aparyApta nahIM  /  kyoMki aparyApta
zabda kA ukta artha karane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki aparyApta manuSya
tIrthakaranAmakarma ko bhI bAMdha sakatA hai  /  /  ina ladhyaparyApta tiryacoM
aura manuSyoM ke sAmAnya meM tIrthaMkara nAmakarma, devadvika, kriyAdvika,
AhArakadvika, devAyu, narakatrikaila gyAraha prakRtiyoM ko baMdhayogya 120
prakRtiyoM meM se kama karane para 106 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai tathA
aparyApta avasthA meM sirpha mithyAtva suNasthAna hI hone se isa muNasthAna meM
bhI 16 prakRtiyoM kA bandha kara sakate haiM  /  kyoMki midhyAdRSTi hone meM
tIrthaMkara nAmakarma aura AhArakadvika kA bandha nahIM karate haiM tathA
marakara devagati meM jAte nahIM, ataH devadvika, vaikriya dvika aura devAyu kA
bhI bandha nahIM karate haiM  /  aparyApta jIva narakagati meM utpanna nahIM
hote, ataH narakatrika kA bhI bandha nahIM karate haiN| isalie ukta gyAraha
prakRtiyoM ko kama karane se sAmAnya kI apekSA aura mithyAtva mugasthAna meM
aparyApta tiryaMcoM aura manuSyoM ke 109 prakRtiyoM kA bandha mAnA jAtA hai|
sArAMza yaha hai ki manuSyagati meM paryApta manuSyoM ke caudaha guNasthAna hote
haiM aura sAmAnya se 120 prakRtiyoM kA badha ho sakatA hai| lekina aba sirpha
manuSyagati kI apekSA bandhasvAmitva ho  /  1. mAnAvaraNa karma ke
kSayopazamaviSa ko laMdhika  /

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Story of Binding  **It is important to understand the binding of karmas
according to the previous chapters, which describe the binding of karmas for all
beings from the first to the fifth **guna-sthana**. However, there is a special
characteristic in the fourth and fifth **guna-sthana**. In the fourth **guna-
sthana**, the **tiryanch** bind 70 **prakritis**, while in the fifth **guna-
sthana**, they bind 66 **prakritis**. However, in the fourth **guna-sthana**,
humans also bind the **tirthankara-namakarma**, resulting in a total of 71
**prakritis** bound. Similarly, in the fifth **guna-sthana**, humans bind 67
**prakritis**.  Therefore, the total number of **prakritis** bound by
**paryapta** beings is: 117 in the first **guna-sthana**, 101 in the second
**guna-sthana**, 66 in the third **guna-sthana**, 71 in the fourth **guna-
sthana**, and 67 in the fifth **guna-sthana**. From the sixth to the thirteenth
**guna-sthana**, the binding of karmas should be understood as described in the
second **karma-grantha**.  **A-paryapta** humans and **tiryanch** do not bind
the **tirthankara-namakarma** and the eleven **prakritis** related to **naraka-
trika** and **paryanta**. Therefore, their binding should be understood as 106
**prakritis** less than the **paryapta** beings in the first **guna-sthana**.
After explaining the binding of karmas in the human realm, the following
chapters will describe the binding of karmas in the **deva-gana**.  **The
binding of karmas for **naraka** beings is similar to that of **devas**.
However, there is a difference in the binding of karmas in the first **guna-
sthana**. **Eka-indriya-trika** **devas** bind karmas, but **naraka** beings do
not. The same applies to **kalpa-dvipa**.  **Jyotishka**, **bhavana-pati**, and
**vyantar** **devas** bind all **prakritis** except the **tirthankara-
namakarma**, similar to the **devas** of the first and second **deva-loka**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bur'iiy' glp batalAnA ho to pahale se lekara pAMcaveM guNasthAna taka pUrva
gAthA meM kahe gaye paryApta tiryaMcoM ke baMdhasvAmitva ke anusAra bandha
samajhanA cAhie  /  lekina itanI vizeSatA hai ki cauthe aura pA~ca guNasthAna
meM paryApta tipatra 70 aura 66 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karate haiM, usakI bajAya
paryApta manuSyoM ke cauthe guNasthAna meM tIrthakara nAmakarma kA bhI bandha ho
sakane se 71 tathA pA~cava guNagAna meM , pratiyoM kA hogaa| arthAt paryApta
madhya pahale guNasthAna meM 117. dUsare guNasthAna meM 101, tIsare guNasthAna
meM 66, cauthe guNasthAna meM 71 aura pA~caveM guNasthAna meM 67 prakRtiyoM kA
bandha karate haiM aura chaThe guNasthAna se lekara terahaveM guNasthAna taka
dUsare karmagrantha meM batAye gaye bandhAdhikAra ke samAna bandha samajhanA
caahie| aparyApta manuSya aura tiyaMca ke tIrthakaranAmakarma meM lekara
narakatrika paryanta gyAraha prakRtiyoM kA bandhra hI nahIM hotA hai tathA
pahalA guNasthAna hotA hai ataH sAmAnya aura guNasthAna ko apekSA 106 prakRtiyoM
kA bandha samajhanA caahie| isa prakAra manuSyagati meM bandhasvAmitva batalAne
ke bAda aba Age kI gAthA meM devagana ke bandhasvAmitva kA varNana karate
haiM... niraya vya surA navaraM ohe micche igiditigasahiyA  /  /  karapaduge vi
ya evaM jiNahINo joibhavaNavaNe  // 10 //  mAdhAnArakoM ke prakRtibandha ke hI
samAna devoM ke bhI bandha samajhanA caahie| lekina sAmAnya se aura pahale
guNasthAna kI bandhayogya prakRtiyoM meM kucha vizeSatA hai| kyoMki
ekendriyatrika ko deva bAMdhate haiM, kintu nAraka nahIM bAMdhate haiN|
kalpadvika meM isI prakAra samajhanA cAhie tathA jyotiSkoM, bhavanapatiyoM aura
byaMtara deva nikAyoM ke, tIrthakaranAmakarma ke sivAya anya saba prakRtiyoM kA
bandha pahale aura dusare devaloka ke devoM ke samAna samajhanA caahie|

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Self-Ownership  **Special Note:** We are now discussing the bondage-ownership
in the heavenly realm, in comparison to the general and the qualities of the
realms. The heavenly beings, namely the Bhavanavasi, Vyantar, Jyotishka, and
Kalpavasis, are distinct categories. Even in the heavenly realm, there are four
qualities similar to the hellish realm. Therefore, after explaining the general
bondage-ownership, we are now describing the bondage-ownership in relation to
the qualities of these four categories.  Although the bondage of the heavenly
beings is similar to the bondage of the hellish beings in terms of nature, there
are some differences in the bondage-worthy natures in the heavenly realm due to
the possibility of being born as an Ekendriya-Trika, Ekendriya, Sthavar, and
Atap. This is because the heavenly beings, unlike the hellish beings, can be
born in these categories.  The statement "Niryadh Suraya" (meaning "Hellish
beings are not born in the heavenly realm") implies that just as hellish beings
do not die and get reborn in the hellish or heavenly realms, similarly, heavenly
beings also do not die and get reborn in these two realms. Therefore, they do
not bind the eight natures: Devanik, Naraktrik, and Vaikriya-Dvik. They also do
not bind the Aharak-Dvik due to the absence of the first quality, Sarvadis.
Furthermore, heavenly beings do not die and get reborn as subtle Ekendriya or
Vikala-Indriya, which means they do not bind the six natures: Sukhma-Trika and
Vikala-Indriya-Trika. Thus, by excluding these 16 natures from the total 120
bondage-worthy natures, the heavenly beings bind 104 natures in general.  In the
hellish realm, it is said that 101 natures are bound because 16 natures, from
Sura-Dvik to Asap Karma, are not bound out of the total 120 bondage-worthy
natures. However, in the hellish realm, the three natures: Ekendriya-Trika,
Ekendriya, Sthavar, and Atap are also included. But heavenly beings can be born
as Badar Ekendriya after death. Therefore, heavenly beings bind these three
natures more than hellish beings. Hence, in comparison to the hellish realm...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasvAmitva vizeSArtha-aba devagati meM sAmAnya aura guNasthAnoM kI apekSA
baMdhasvAmitva batalAte haiM  /  devoM ke bhavanavAsI, vyaMtara, jyotiSka aura
kalpavAsI the pAra nikAya haiM aura devagati meM bhI narakagati ke samAna pahale
cAra guNasthAna hote haiM  /  ataH sAmAnya se baMdhasvAmitva batalAne ke bAda
cAroM nikAyoM meM guNasthAnoM kI apekSA baMdhasvAmitva kA varNana kiyA jA rahA
hai| yadyapi devoM ko prakRtibandha nArakoM ke prakRtibandha ke samAna hai|
tathApi devagati meM ekendriyatrika-ekendriya jAti, sthAvara nAma aura Atapa
nAma-kA bhI vaidha ho sakane se sAmAnya baMdhayogya va pahale mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM narakagati kI apekSA bandhayogya prakRtiyoM meM kucha vizeSatA
hotI hai| 'niraya dhya surA' nArakoM kI taraha devoM ke bhI bandha kahane kA
matalaba yaha hai ki jaise nAraka marakara narakagali aura devagati meM utpanna
nahIM hote haiM, vaise hI deva bhI marakara ina donoM gatiyoM meM utpanna nahIM
hote haiN| isalie devanika, narakatrika aura vaikriyadvika ...ina ATha
prakRtiyoM kA bandhra nahIM karate haiM tathA sarvadista prathama ke abhAva meM
AhArakadvika kA bhI baMdha nahIM karate haiM aura deva marakara sUkSma ekendriya
tathA vikale ndriyoM meM bhI utpanna nahIM hote haiM, jisase sUkSmatrika aura
vikalendriyatrika ina chaha prakRtiyoM kA bandha nahIM karate haiM  /  isa
prakAra ukta kula 16 prakRtiyA~ bandhayoga 120 prakRtiyoM meM se kama karane
para sAmAnya me 104 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| narakagati meM jo bandhayogya
120 prakRtiyoM meM meM suradvika se lekara Asapa nAmakarma paryanta 16
prakRtiyoM kA bandha nahIM hone se 101 prakRtiyoM kA bandha kahA gayA hai, vahA~
ekendriyatrikaekendriya, sthAvara aura Atapa ina tIna prakRtiyoM ko bhI grahaNa
kiyA gayA hai| lekina deva marakara bAdara ekendriya meM utpanna ho sakate haiN|
ataeva nArakiyoM kI apekSA ekendriya, sthAvara aura Atapa- ina tIna prakRtiyoM
ko deva adhika bAMdhate haiN| isalie narakagati ke

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutiy Karmagranth  **Considering the bondage of the 16 types of Prakṛtis in
the Bharakagati as an obstacle in the commonality of the Devas, the bondage of
104 Prakṛtis is considered due to the bondage of Ekendriyatrika, instead of 101
Prakṛtis of the Devas.**  **In this way, the bondage of 174 Prakṛtis in the
Devagati from the commonality should be understood in the same way for the first
Sodharma and the second Ishana Kalpas of the Kalpavasī Devas.**  **Out of the
104 Prakṛtis that are bondable in the commonality, the bondage of 103 Prakṛtis
occurs due to the bondage of Tirthankara-namakarma in the Mithyatva Gunasthan of
the Devas of the Devagati and the aforementioned Kalpattika, and the remaining
6, 70, and 12 Prakṛtis are bound in the second, third, and fourth Gunasthans
respectively, similar to the Narakagati.**  **The bondage of Tirthankara-
namakarma does not occur in the Devas of the Jyotishka, Bhavanavāsī, and
Vyantara Nikayas, so the bondage of 103 Prakṛtis should be understood in
comparison to the commonality and the first Mithyatva Gunasthan, because the
Devas of these three Nikayas do not become Tirthankaras after leaving them, and
beings with the essence of Tirthankara-nama do not arise in the Bhavanapati,
Antara, and Jyotirūka Devanikayas. Also, the beings of these three Nikayas do
not go to the Parbhava with Avadhishana, and Tirthankaras are born in the
Gharbhaka with Avadhishana. Therefore, the bondage of Tirthankara-namakarma does
not occur in the Devas of these three Nikayas.**  **Therefore, the bondage of
103 Prakṛtis in the commonality and the first Gunasthan, 66 in the second, 70 in
the third, and 71 instead of 72 in the fourth due to the absence of the bondage
of Tirthankara-namakarma in the Devas of the three Nikayas like Jyotishka,
etc.**  **In summary, even though the rule of bondage being similar to
Narakagati in comparison to the commonality in Devagati, the bondage of
Ekendriyatrika is more. Therefore, just as in Narakagati, the commonality is
101...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sutIya karmagrantha samAna hI devoM ke sAmAnya meM bAdha mAnakara bhI
bharakagati kI avandhya 16 prakRtiyoM meM se ekendriyatrika kA bandha hone se
devoM ke 101 kI bajAya 104 prakRtiyoM kA bandha mAnA jAtA hai| isa prakAra
sAmAnya se devagati meM jo 174 prakRtiyoM kA bandha batalAyA gayA hai, usI
prakAra kalpavAsI devoM ke pahale sodharma aura dUsare IzAna ina do kalpoM taka
samajhanA caahie| sAmAnya me bandhayogya 104 prakRtiyoM meM se devagati tathA
pUrvoktaH kalpaTTika ke devoM ke mithyAtva guNasthAna meM tIrthakaranAmakarma kA
bandhana hone se 103 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai tathA zeSa dUsare, tIsare
aura cauthe guggasthAna meM marakagati ke samAna hI kramazaH 6, 70 aura 12
prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  jyotiSka, bhavanavAsI aura vyantara nikAya ke
devoM ke tIrthakara nAmakarma kA bandha nahIM hone se sAmAnya aura pahale
mithyAtva guNAsthAna kI apekSA 103 prakRtiyoM kA bandha samajhanA cAhie kyoMki
ina sIna nikAyoM ke deva vahA~ se nikalakara tIrthakara nahIM hote haiM aura
tIrthakara nAma kI sattA vAle jIva bhavanapati, antara aura jyotiruka
devanikAyoM meM utpanna nahIM hote haiM tathA ina tIna nikAyoM ke jIva
avadhizAna sahita parabhava meM jAte nahIM aura tIrthakara avadhijJAna mahita hI
gharabhaka meM jAkara utpanna hote haiM  /  isalie ina tIna nikAyoM ke devoM ke
tIrthakara nAmakarma kA bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  isalie jyotiSka Adi tIna
nikAyoM ke devoM ke sAmAnya se aura pahale guNasthAna meM 103, dUsare meM 66.
tIsare meM 70 aura cauthe meM tIrthaka ra nAmakarma kA bandha na hone se 72 kI
bajAya 71 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| _sArAMza yaha hai ki devamati meM
sAmAnya kI apekSA narakagali ke samAna bandha hone kA niyama hone para bhI
ekendriyatrika kA bandha adhika hotA hai  /  isalie jaise marakamati meM sAmAnya
ra 101

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Manasvamitva  The bondage of the 1.1 Prakṛtis is considered, but it should
be understood that the bondage of 104 Prakṛtis is to be considered when the
Ekendriya (one-sense) Prakṛtis are added to these 1.1 Prakṛtis.  The bondage of
these 104 Prakṛtis should be understood from the common to the Kalpavāsi Devas
and the Devas of the first and second Kalpas. However, in the Mithyātva
Guṇasthāna, there is no bondage of the Tīrthankara Nāmakarma, so there are 103
Prakṛtis. In the second Guṇasthāna, due to the rise of Mithyātva, the Ekendriya
Jāti and other seven Prakṛtis are not bound, so there are 16 less. And from
these 66 Prakṛtis, the Anantānubandhī Chatuṣka and other 26 Prakṛtis are
reduced, so in the third Guṇasthāna, there is bondage of 70 Prakṛtis. And in the
fourth Guṇasthāna, due to the bondage of the Manushayāyu and Tīrthankara
Nāmakarma, there is bondage of 72 Prakṛtis, as these two Prakṛtis are added to
the 70 Prakṛtis of the Miśra Guṇasthāna.  The Devas of the Jyotiṣka,
Bhavanapati, and Vyantar Nikāyas do not have the bondage of the Tīrthankara
Nāmakarma. Therefore, the Prakṛtis that are bondable from the common to these
three Nikāyas are 103, and in the Mithyātva Guṇasthāna, there is also bondage of
103 Prakṛtis. In the second and third Guṇasthānas, there are 66 and 70 Prakṛtis
respectively, similar to the Kalpavāsi Devas, and in the fourth Guṇasthāna, due
to the absence of the bondage of the Tīrthankara Nāmakarma, there is bondage of
71 Prakṛtis instead of 72.  In this way, after explaining the bondage of
Manasvamitva from the common to the Kalpavāsis, and the Kalpadvika and Jyotiṣka,
Bhavanapati, and Vyantar Nikāyas, in the following verse, the description of
Manasvamitva in the Kalpas of Sanatkumāra, etc., and in the Indriya and Kārmāṇā
is given...  Rayaṇ va Saṇkumārāi āṇadhāi ujopachḍa rahiya. Apayatiriya va
navasamigidi yuddhavijalsaravigale. ||11||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 manasvAmitva prakRtiyoM kA bandha mAnA jAtA hai, usakI apekSA ina 1.1
prakRtiyoM meM ekendriyanika ko aura milAne para 104 prakRtiyoM kA bandha
samajhanA caahie| ina 104 prakRtiyoM kA bandha sAmAnya se kalpavAsI devA tathA
pahale aura dUsare kalpa ke devoM ko samajhanA caahie| lekina mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM tIrthakaranAmakarma kA bandha nahIM hone se 103 prakRtiyoM kA,
dUsare guNasthAna meM mithyAtva ke udaya se ba~dhane vAlI ekendriya jAti Adi
sAta prakRttiyoM ke nahIM baMdhane se 16 aura ina 66 prakRttiyoM meM se
anantAnubandhIcatuSka Adi 26 prakRttiyoM ko kama karane se tIsare guNasthAna meM
70 prakRtiyoM kA bandhra hotA hai aura cauthe sthAna meM manuSyAyu evaM
tIrthakaranAmakarma kA bandha hone meM mizra guNasthAla kI 70 prakRtiyoM meM ina
do prakRtiyoM ko jor3ane se 72 prakRtiyoM kA banna hotA hai| _jyotiSka,
bhavanati aura vyaMsara nikAya ke devoM ke tIrthakara nAmakarma kA bandha nahIM
hotA hai| ataH ina tInoM nikAyoM ke devoM ke sAmAnya se bandhayogya prakRttiyA~
103 haiM tathA mithyAtva muNasthAna meM bhI 103 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai|
dUsare tathA tIsare guNasthAna meM kalpavAsI devoM ke samAna hI 66 aura 70
prakRtiyoM kA aura cauthe guNasthAna meM tIrthakaranAmakarma kA bandha na hone
se 72 kI bajAya 71 prakRtiyoM kA bandha samajhanA caahie| isa prakAra se
devagati meM sAmAnya se tathA kalpavAsiyoM ke kalpadvika tathA jyotiSka,
bhavanapati aura vyaMtara nikAyoM ke guNasthAnoM kI apekSA bandhasvAmitva
batalAne ke bAda Age kI gAthA meM sanatkumArAdi kalpoM aura indriya evaM kAra
mArmaNA meM bandhasvAmitva kA varNana karate haiM... rayaNa va saNakumArAI
ANadhAI ujopacaDa rahiyA  /  apayatiriya va navasamigidi yuddhavijalasaravigale
// 11 //

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutiy Karma  The karma of the gods from Sanatkumar onwards in the Devalokas
should be understood as similar to the marakas of the Ratnaprabha Naraka, and in
the Anat etc., all but the four Ukhots should be considered as bondage. In the
one-sensed, earth, water, plant, and the disabled-sensed, bondage of 109 types
occurs, similar to the insufficient three-fold bondage.  **Special Note:** This
verse describes the bondage of the gods from the third Devaloka, Sanatkumar, to
the Navagrambheyaka Devas, and the bondage of the one-sensed, disabled-sensed,
two-sensed, three-sensed, and four-sensed in the Indriyamargna, and the earth,
water, and plant-bodied beings in the Kayamargna.  The verse describes the
bondage of the gods from Sanatkumar to Navagrambheyaka in two parts. The first
part includes the gods from Sanatkumar to the eastern Sahasrar of the Anat
heaven, and the second part includes the gods from the Anat heaven to
Navagrambheyaka.  Although the verse does not mention the Anuttara Vimanas, the
Anuttara Vimanas always produce Samyakkrusti beings, and their fourth Gunasthan
is the only one. Therefore, due to the lack of increase or decrease in the
bondage of karma-types, the bondage is the same as that of the general
Gunasthan. The gods in the fourth Gunasthan have bondage of 72 types, so it
should be understood that they also have the same.  In the above two parts, the
gods from Sanatkumar to the Sahalar Devaloka in the first part, like the narakas
of the Ratnaprabha Naraka, should be understood to have the same number of
karma-types as they bind in the general and the Munasthanas. Because these gods
are not born in the one-sensed when they leave those Devalokas, they do not bind
the three types of karma: one-sensed-applicable one-sensed jati, sthavar nama,
and aatpa mama. Therefore, they bind 101 types of karma in general. In the
Mithyatva Gunasthan, the Tirthankara nama...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sutIya karmatha gAyA sanatkumArAdi devalokoM meM ratnaprabhA naraka ke mArakoM
ke samAna tathA AnatAdi meM ukhota catuSka ke sivAya zeSa bandha samajhanA
caahie| ekendriya, pRthvI, jala, vanaspati aura vikale. ndriyoM meM aparyApta
tibaMdhoM ke samAna 109 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| vizeSArtha-isa gAthA meM
sanatkumAra Adi tIsare devaloka meM lekara navagraM veyaka devoM paryanta tathA
indriyamArgaNA ke ekendriya, vikalendriya- dvIndriya, zrIndriya aura
caturindriya evaM kAyamArgaNA ke pRthvI, jala, dhanaspati kAya ke jIvoM ke
bandhasvAmitva ko batalAyA gayA hai| _ gAthA meM sanatkumAra nAmaka tIsare
devaloka se navagraMbeyaka taka ke devoM ke vandhasvAmitva kA varNana do
vibhAgoM meM kiyA gayA hai| pahale vibhAga meM sanatkumAra se lekara Amata
svarga ke pUrva sahasrAra taka ke devoM ko aura dUsare vibhAga meM Anata svarma
se lekara navagraMde. yaka paryanta devoM ko grahaNa kiyA hai  /  yadyapi gAthA
meM anuttara vimAnoM ke bAre meM saMketa nahIM kiyA gayA hai, lekina anuttara
vimAnoM meM sadaiva samyakRSTi jIva utpanna hote haiM aura unake cauthA
guNasthAna hI hotA hai  /  isalie karmaprakRtiyoM ke bandha meM nyUnAdhikatA na
hone se sAmAnya se va guNasthAna kI apekSA eka sA hI bandha hotA hai  /  devoM
ke cauthe guNasthAna meM 72 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai, ataH inake bhI vahI
samajhanA caahie| ukta do vibhAgoM meM pahale vibhAga ke sanatkumAra se sahalAra
devaloka taka ke deva jaise ratnaprabhA naraka ke nAraka sAmAnya se aura
muNasthAnoM meM jitanI prakRtiyoM kA bandha karate haiM, vaise hI utanI
prakRttiyoM kA bandha ina devoM ko samajhanA caahie| kyoMki ye deva una-una
devalokoM se jaba kara ekendriya meM utpanna nahIM hote haiM, isalie ekendriya-
prAyogya ekendriya jAti, sthAvara nAma aura Atapa mAma-ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA
bandha nahIM karate haiM  /  isalie sAmAnya se 101 prakRtiyoM ko bA~dhate haiM
/  mithyAtva guNasthAna meM tIrthakaranAma

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**XO**  **Graming**  The 100 karmas without karma, 16 without the Napumsak
Chaturuk in the Sasvadan Gunasthan, and 70 without the Ananta Anubandhi Chaturuk
etc. 26 in the Misra Gunasthan, and 72 in the Avira Samyamdrishti Gunasthan due
to the binding of the Manushyayu, Tirthankar Naamakarma, bind 72 prakritis.  The
Devas from Anatadi Navagran to Veyak Paryant, the Udyot Chaturshka: Udyot Naama,
Tiryanch Gati, Tithanchanupurvi and Sina, do not bind these four Prakalis.
Because these Devas are born in the Manushya Gati after falling from these
heavens, not in the Tibandhas. Therefore, the Tiryanch Prayogya do not bind
these four prakritis. Therefore, in the 120 prakritis, they bind 15 prakritis in
general by reducing the 19 prakritis like Suradvik etc. and the four prakritis
like Uchot etc. and they destroy 16 in the first, 12 in the second, 10 in the
third and 72 in the fourth Gunasthanas respectively.  Samyaktvi Jivas are born
in the Anusar Vimanas and the fourth Gunasthan is according to Sammanav.
Therefore, one should understand that they bind 72 prakritis in general and
according to the Gunasthan.  After explaining the Bandhaswamitva in the Gati
Margna, now we will explain the Bandhaswamitva in the Indriya and Kama Margna.
The Jivas in the Indriya Margna, Ekeindriya, Dveindriya, Triindriya and
Chaturindriya, and in the Kama Margna, Prithvikaaya, Apkaaya and Vanaspatikaaya,
bind 106 prakritis like the Apyaapt Tiryanchas. Because the Apyaapt Tiryanchas
or Manushya do not bind 11 prakritis from Tirthankar Naamakarma to Narakatrik
Paryant, similarly these seven Margna Jivas do not have Samyaktva and the
Devagati and   1. Jin Karas Honam Nabasau Apatalipianara. -Manny 3, Ga. 6

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 XO graamiN karma se rahita 100, sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM napuMsakacaturuka ke
binA 16 aura mizra guNasthAna meM anantAnubandhIcatuSka Adi 26 se rahita 70 aura
avirata samyamdRSTi guNasthAna meM manuSyAyu, tIrthakaranAmakarma kA bhI bandha
hone se 72 prakRtiyoM ko bA~dhate haiN| AnatAdi navagraM veyaka paryanta ke deva
udyotacatuSkaH udyotanAma, tiryaMcagati, tithaMcAnupUrvI aura sinA ina cAra
prakAligoM ko nahIM bAMdhate haiN| kyoMki ina svargoM se cyava kara ye deva
manuSya gati me hI utpanna hote haiM, tibaMdhoM meM nahIM  /  ataH tiryaMca
prAyogya ina cAra prakRtiyoM ko nahIM bAdhate haiN| isalie 120 prakRtiyoM meM
suradvika Adi unnIsa aura ucota Adi cAra prakRtiyoM ko kama karane meM 15
prakRtiyoM kA sAmAnya meM bandha karate haiM aura guNasthAnoM kI apekSA pahale
meM 16, dUsare meM 12, tIsare meM 10 aura cauthe meM 72 prakRtiyoM kA vadha
karate haiN| anusara vimAnoM meM samyaktvI jIva hI utpanna hote haiM aura
sammAnava kI apekSA cauthA guNasthAna hotA hai  /  ata: inake sAmAnya se aura
guNasthAna kI apekSA 72 praRtiyoM kA andha samajhanA caahie| isa prakAra se
gatimArgaNA meM bandhasvAmitva batalAna ke bAda aba Age indriya aura kAma
mArgaNA meM bandhasvAmitva ko batalAte haiN| indriyamANA meM ekendriya.
dvIndriya, zrIndriya aura caturindriya tathA kAdhamArgaNA meM pRthvIkAya,
apakAya aura vanaspatikAya ke jIva aparyApta tiryacoM ke samAna 106 prakRtiyoM
ko bandha karate haiN|' kyoMki apanIpta tiryaMca yA manuSya tIrthakaranAmakarma
se lekara narakatrika paryanta 11 prakRttiyoM kA bandha nahIM karate haiM, isI
prakAra yaha sAtoM mAgaMNA vAle jIvoM ke samyaktva nahIM hai tathA devagati aura
1 jiNa kArasa hoNaM nabasAu apAtalipiyanarA  /  -maMnya 3, gA06

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sutosh Karmaprastha are not born in Narakagati. Therefore, they do not bind the
eleven natures: Tirthankaranam, Davati, Devanupurvi, Devayu, Narakagati,
Narakanupurvi, Narakayu, Bainkriya Sharira, Bainkriya Angopang, Aharak Sharira,
Aharak Angopang. Therefore, they bind 106 natures in the 4th Mithyatva Gunasthan
from the general.  In summary, from Sanatkumar to Sahasrar Devalokaparyant, the
Dev Ratnaprabha bind 101 natures from the general, like the Narakas of Narak,
and 100 in Mithyatva Gunasthan, 66 in Sasvadan Gunasthan, 50 in Misra Gunasthan,
and 72 in Avirat Samyagdristi Gunasthan.  From Anat to Nav Ganveyak, the Devas
are not born in Tiryanmagati. Therefore, they do not bind Tirf Dhagliyogya
Udyot, Tirvacgati, Tiryanchanapurvi, and Tiryanchay. Therefore, from the 101
natures considered generally bindable in Sanatkumar etc. Devas, these four
natures are also reduced, making them bind 97 natures from the general. In terms
of Gunasthan, the Anat etc. Kalpa Devas should be understood to bind 66, 62, 70,
and 72 natures respectively.  In Anuttar Vimanas, Samyaktvi Jin are born, and
they have the fourth Gunasthan. Therefore, from the general and in terms of
Gunasthan, they should be understood to bind 72 natures, the same as the fourth
Gunasthan of the previously mentioned Devas.  After explaining the binding in
the different types of Gatimargna, the binding in the Kram-prapta Indriya and
Kay Margna is mentioned.  There are five Indriyas: Sparshan, Rasna, Pran,
Chakshu, and Dhrotra. The number of Indriyas a Jiva has determines...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sutoSa karmaprastha narakagati meM utpanna nahIM hote haiM  /  isalie
tIrthakaranAma, davati, devAnupUrvI, devAyu, narakagati, narakAnupUrvI,
narakAyu, baiMkriya zarIra, baiMkriya aMgopAMga, AhAraka' zarIra, AhAraka
aMgopAMga ina myAraha prakRttiyoM kA bandha nahIM karate haiM  /  isalie inake
sAmAnya se 4 mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 106 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| sArAMza
yaha ki sanatkumAra se lekara sahasrAra devalokaparyanta ke deva ratnaprabhA
naraka ke nArakoM ke samAna hI sAmAnya se 101 prakRtiyoM kA aura mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM 100, sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM 66, mizra gUNasthAna meM 50 tathA
avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM 72 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karate haiN| Anata se
lekara nava gaMveyaka taka ke deva tiryamagati meM utpanna nahIM hote haiN| ataH
tirpha dhagaliyogya udyota, tirvacagati, tiryaMcAnapUrvI aura tiryaMcAyu kA
bandha nahIM karate haiM ataH sanatkumArAdi devA meM sAmAnya se baMdhayogya
batAI gaI. 101 prakRtiyoM meM se ina cAra prakRtiyoM ko bhI kama karane se
sAmAnya se de 17 prakRtiyoM kA bancha karate haiM  /  guNasthAnoM kI apekSA
Anata Adi kalpoM ke devoM meM bandhasvAmitva kramazaH 66, 62,70, 72 prakRtiyoM
kA samajhAnA caahie| anuttara vimAnoM meM samyaktvI jIna utpanna hote haiM aura
unake cauthA guNasthAna hotA hai  /  ataH sanake sAmAnya se aura guNasthAna kI
apekSA pahale kahe gaye devoM ke cauthe guNasthAna ke bandhasvAmitva ke samAna
72 prakRliyoM kA bandha samajhanA caahie| gatimArgaNA ke prabhedoM meM
bandhasvAmitva ko batalAne ke bAda kramaprApta indriya aura kAya mArgaNA meM
bandhasvAmitva kA kathana kiyA hai| indriyA~ pA~ca hotI haiM-sparzana, rasana,
prANa, cakSu aura dhotra; . . aura jisa jIva ko krama se jitanI-jitanI indriyAM
hotI haiM, usako

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  42 A being with many senses is called a many-sensed being. For
example, a being with only the sense of touch is called a one-sensed being, a
being with the senses of touch and taste is called a two-sensed being. In this
way, by adding one sense at a time, beings with five senses are called five-
sensed beings. Of these beings, from one-sensed to five-sensed, this verse
describes the bondage of one-sensed, two-sensed, three-sensed, and four-sensed
beings, as well as the bondage of the three types of bodies - earth body, water
body, and plant body - within the six categories mentioned earlier in the
context of body-path.  These seven types of beings, from one-sensed to four-
sensed, and earth, water, and plant bodies, should be understood to have bondage
of 109 natures in general, similar to the bondage of the insufficient Tiryanchas
mentioned in the motion-path. And the bondage of 106 natures should be
understood for the insufficient controllers in the first guna-sthana of the
insufficient Tiryanchas.  In this way, after explaining the bondage of the gods
from Sanatkumar to Anuttar in the motion-path, the one-sensed to the defective-
sensed in the sense-path, and the earth body, water body, and plant body in the
body-path, the following verse explains a different opinion regarding the
bondage of one-sensed beings, etc., in relation to the guna-sthana of
savasana...  "Even without the subtle-trika and other thirteen natures, the one-
sensed beings, etc., bind 66 natures in the savasana guna-sthana. Some Acharyas
believe that they do not achieve full bodily perfection, and therefore bind 14
natures without the lifespan of a Tiryancha and a human."  ...  1. "Not a being"
is also a reading.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 42 manyazasisya utanI indriyoM vAlA jIva kahate haiN| jaise--jisake pahalI
sparzanendriya hotI hai use ekendriya, jisake sparzana, rasanA-yaha do indriyAM
hotI haiM, use dvIndriya kahate haiM  /  isI prakAra krama-krama se eka-eka
indriya ko. bar3hAte jAne para paMcendriya jIva kahe jAte haiM  /  ina ekendriya
se lekara paMcendriya taka ke jIvoM meM se isa gAthA meM ekendriya, bIndriya,
zrIndriya caturindriya jIvoM kA tathA kAyamArgaNA ke pahale batAye gaye chaha
bhedoM meM meM pRthvIkAya. apakAya aura vanaspatikAtha-ina tIna kAyoM kA
bandhasvAmitva batalAyA gayA hai| ye ekendriya se lekara caturindriya taka tathA
pRthvI, apa aura vanaspatikAya kula sAta prakAra ke jIvoM meM pahale gatimArgamA
meM kahe gaye aparyApta tiryacoM ke bandhasvAmitva ke samAna hI 109 prakRtiyoM
kA sAmAnya se bandha samajhanA cAhiye tathA aparyApta tiryo  /  ke pahale
guNasthAna meM aparyApta niyaMtroM ke samAna 106 prakRtiyoM kA bandha samajhanA
caahie| isa prakAra gatimArgaNA meM sanatkumAra se anuttara taka ke devoM tathA
indriyamArgaNA meM ekendriya ba vikalendriyoM aura kAyamArgaNA meM pRthvIkAya,
apakAya aura vanaspatikAya ke bandhasvAmitva ko batalAne ke bAda aba Age kI
gAthA meM ekendriya Adi kA sAsvAdana guNAsthAna kI. apekSA bandhasvAmitva
sambandhI matAntara batalAte haiM .... chanavaI sAsaNi viNa suhamalera kei ghuNa
biti calanavAi  /  siriyanarAhi viNA tapajjatti' mate jati  // 16 //  gAyArtha
pUrvokta ekendriya Adi jIva sUkSmatrika Adi teraha prakRttiyoM ke binA sAsvAdana
guNasthAna meM 66 prakRti ko bandha karate haiM  /  kinhIM AcAryoM kA mata hai
ki ve zArIraparyApti pUrNa nahIM karate haiM, ataH tithaMcAyu aura manuSyAyu ke
binA 14 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karate haiN| "...........-.-............. 1. 'na
jati jao' aisA mI pATha hai  /

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma Granth ## Prohibition Meaning  This verse explains the bondage of
the **Y. Nimoniya. C., Ap, and plant-bodied beings** in the **Swasadan
Gunasthan**.  The previous verse explained the bondage of 106 **Prakritis** in
the **Mithyatva Gunasthan** for beings with one sense organ, etc., compared to
the **Mar and Gumasthan** of beings with one sense organ, etc. Out of these 101
**Prakritis**, 13 **Prakritis** are bound by the arising of **Mithyatva** in the
**Swasadan Gunasthan**: **Sukshmatrik, Vikalvik, Ekendiy jati, Sthavar naam,
Napusakaved, Mithyatvamohaniya, Hund Sansthan, and Sewat Sanhanan**. However,
since **Mithyatva** does not arise in the **Swasadan Gunasthan**, the bondage of
66 **Prakritis** occurs when these 13 **Prakritis** are reduced. This is because
when **Devas** of the **Bhavanapatti, Vyantar, etc. Devjati** attain
**Samyaktva** after binding the **Ayu** of **Ekendiy-Prayogya** due to
**Mithyatvanimittak**, they are born as **Ekendiy** at the time of death after
vomiting **Samyaktva**. If they attain **Swasadan Samyaktva** before their body
is fully developed, they bind 66 **Prakritis**.  However, other **Acharyas**
believe that these beings with one sense organ, etc., do not bind the **Ayu** of
**Tiryanchay** and **Manushy** during other **Gunasthanas**, and therefore bind
only 64 **Prakritis**. In this same **Granth**, the **Audarik Mishra** also
prohibits **Ayu-bandh** in the **Swasadan Gunasthan** because it is
insufficient.  The principle is that no being can bind **Ayu** without
completing **Indriyaparapti**.  1. **Sukshmanam, Sadharannam, Aparaptanam**. 2.
**Dwiindriy, Triindriy, Chaturindriy**. 3. **Sasani Chajanavad Vina Narasiriaau
Suhamaler**.  **Verse 14, Chapter 13**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagrantha vizedhArtha - isa gAthA meM eka ya. nimoniya. sI, apa aura
vanaspati kAya ke jIvoM ke sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM bandhasvAmitva ko batalAyA
hai| pUrvagAthA meM ekendriya Adi jIvoM ke sAmAnya mara aura gumasthAna kI
apekSA mithyAtva guNasthAna meM aparyApta tiyaMtroM ke samAna 106 prakRtiyoM kA
bandha batalAyA thA  /  ina 101 prakRtiyoM meM se sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM
sUkSmatrika, vikalavika, ekendriya jAti, sthAvara nAma, napusakaveda,
mithyAtvamohanIya, huMDa saMsthAna aura sevAta saMhanana ye 13 prakRtiyA~
mithyAtva ke udaya se baMdhatI hai, kiMtu sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM mithyAtva kA
udaya na hone se inako kama karane para 66 prakRtiyoM kA bindha hotA hai kyoMki
bhavanapatti, vyantara Adi devajAti ke deva mithyAtvanamittaka ekendriya-
prAyogya Ayu kA bandha karane ke anantara samyaktva prApta kareM to ve maraNa ke
samaya samyaktva kA vamana karake ekendriya rUpa meM utpanna hote haiM  /  unake
zarIra paryApti pUrNa karane ke pahale sAsvAdana samyaktva ho to ve 66
prakRttiyoM kA bandhra karate haiM  /  lekina dUsare AcAryoM kA mata hai ki ye
ekendriya Adi dusare guNasthAna ke samaya tiryaMcAyu aura manuSyAyu kA bhI
bandha nahIM karane se 64 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karate haiN| isI grantha meM Age
audArikamizra meM bhI sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM Ayubandha kA niSedha kiyA hai|
kyoMki yaha aparyApta hai| yaha siddhAnta hai ki koI bhI jIva indriyaparyApti
pUrI kiye binA Ayu kA bandha nahIM kara sakate haiN| 1. sUkSmanAma,
sAdhAraNanAma, aparyAptanAma  /  2. dvIndriya, vIndriya, caturindriya  /  3.
sAsaNi cajanavada viNA narasiriAU suhamalera  /  pandha 3, gAthA 14

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Difference in the Number of  *Bandhasvamitva* (Binding Ownership) of 66
and 64 *Prakritis* (Principles)  The difference in the *Bandhasvamitva* of 66
and 64 *Prakritis* is also seen in ancient *Bandhasvamitva*. The following
verses relate to this:  "A *Saana* (small) being, even if it is *Lolasa*
(greedy) and *Martig* (prone to death), does not die. It is bound by the
*Oghena* (flow of karma), *Bosusar* (the five senses), and *Panchinya* (the five
senses) in the 13th *Sandhi* (stage)." (13)  "A *Saana* being, even if it is
*Savilidi* (with a body) and *Sanu* (small), does not die. It is bound by the
*Nar* (man), *Tirya* (animal), and *Agandha* (odorless) *Mayansaran* (the five
senses) in the 24th *Sandhi*." (24)  Those who believe in 16 *Prakritis* believe
that after the completion of the *Indriyaparyapti* (perfection of the senses),
when the time for *Ayubandha* (binding of life) comes, the *Saasvadan*
(enjoyment) feeling remains. Therefore, a one-sensed being, etc., can be bound
in the *Saasvadan* *Gunasthan* (state of qualities) as a *Tiryanch* (animal) or
a *Manudhya* (human).  However, the *Acharyas* (teachers) who believe in 64
*Prakritis* believe that the lifespan of a one-sensed being is 256 *Avali*
(units of time). The lifespan of the next birth is bound in the third part of
the lifespan of this birth after the lifespan of this birth has passed two-
thirds of its way. In other words, the lifespan of the next birth is bound in
the 171st *Avali* after 170 *Avali* of the 256 *Avali* lifespan of this birth
has passed. The time for *Saasvadan* *Samyakd* (right knowledge) (six *Avali*)
is already over. Even if we assume that the first three *Paryapti* (perfections)
are completed in the *Saasvadan* state, *Ayubandha* is not possible. The
*Audarik* (generous) *Mishn* (path) *Margna* (path) states that there are 64
*Prakritis* of binding. Therefore, the belief in 64 *Prakritis* of binding seems
to be logical.  Shri *Jivavijayaji* and *Jayasomasuri* have also stated the same
in their *Tave* (commentary) in support of this belief. *Gommatasar* *Karmakand*
(the section on karma in the *Gommatasar* text) also supports this belief by
*Namichandra* *Siddhantchakravarti*.  "The *Purinavar* (ancient ones) have said
that the *Vigivigala* (those who have attained liberation) are *Tathushana*
(those who have attained the state of being) and *Sasaai* (those who have
attained the state of being). They have said that *Pajjati* (those who are born)
are *Mavi* (those who are not liberated) and *Pavi* (those who are liberated)
and *Iritirip* (those who are bound) and *Aaus* (those who are not bound)."
(1131)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prAmAmisva 66 aura 64 prakRtiyoM ke bandhasvAmitva kI matabhinnatA prAcIna
bandhasvAmitva meM bhI dekhI jAtI hai  /  isa sambandhI gAthAe~ nimna prakAra
haiM sANA bannAha lolasa maratiga hoNA yA mota nauI  /  ogheNaM bosusara sayaM
ca paMciniyA sandhe 13 //  savilidI sANA saNu patti na maMti meM teNa  /  nara
tirayAu agandhA mayaMsaraNa su bajagAI  // 24 //  16 prakRtiyoM kA bandhra
mAnane vAloM kA abhiprAya yaha pratIta hotA hai ki indriyaparyApti ke pUrNa ho
cukane ke bAda, jabaki Ayuvandha kA kAla AtA hai, taba taka sAsvAdana bhAva banA
rahatA hai  /  isalie sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM ekendriya Adi jIva tiryaMcAyu
tathA manudhyAyu kA bandha kara sakate haiN| lekina 64 prakRttiyoM kA baMdha
mAnane vAle AcAryoM kA mata hai ki ekendriya jIva kA jaghanya AyuSya 256 AlikA
hotA hai  /  AgAmI bhava kA AyuSya isa bhava ke AyuSya do bhAya bola jAne ke
bAda tIsare bhAga meM baMdhatA hai, arthAt AgAmI bhava kA AyuSya 256 AvalikA ke
do bhAga 170 AvalikA bIta jAne ke bAda tIsare bhAga ko 171vI AvalI meM baMdhatA
hai aura sAsvAdana samyakada kA samaya (chaha AvalI) pahale hI pUrA ho jAtA hai|
sAsvAdana avasthA meM pahalI tIna paryApti pUrNa ho jAtI haiM, yadi aisA mAna
bhI liyA jAya to bhI AyuSya-bandha sambhava nahIM mAnA jA sakatA hai tathA
audArikamizna mArgaNA meM 64 prakRtiyoM kA bandha kahA gayA hai  /  ataH 64
prakRtiyoM ke bandha kA mata yuktisaMgata mAlUma hotA hai  /  isI mata ke
samarthana meM zrI jIvavijayajI tathA jayasomasUri ne apane Tave meM yahI bAta
kahI hai| isI mata kA samarthana gommaTasAra karmakANDa meM namicandra
siddhAntacakravartI ne bhI kiyA hai puriNavara vigivigale tasthuSANo hu sasAI
vehe  /  pajjati mavi pAvi iritiripAUsa garitha  // 1131 //

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 45 ### The Third Karma Text (Understanding the 106 natures that are capable
of bondage in the state of *ferrato* in the one-sensed and the three-impaired,
that is, the two-sensed, three-sensed, and four-sensed, because the
*Tirthankaras*, the two *Aharakas*, the gods, the human beings, the hell beings,
and the *Vaikriya* beings do not experience bondage of these 12 natures. And a
being born in the one-sensed and the three-impaired cannot complete the body
(physical form) in the *Savasdana* *Gunasthan* because the time of *Savasdana*
is short and the time of the state of insufficient liberation is very long. For
this reason, the bondage of human life and *Ticha* also does not occur in this
*Gunasthan*.)  The explanation of the above two opinions is as follows: 'In the
opinion regarding the bondage of 66 and 14 natures in the *Savasdana*
*Gunasthan* in the one-sensed etc., the opinion of those who believe in the
bondage of 66 natures is that even after the body is fully complete, *Savasdana*
remains, and if at that time the bondage of lifespan occurs, then the bondage of
66 natures occurs! This suggests that the *Antarmukhurta* becomes *Gadyam* in
the six *Avaliakas*, therefore the body becomes complete in the six *Avaliakas*,
and after that the bondage of lifespan occurs. However, Shri *Jivavijayaji* and
*Jayasomasuri* have shown in their own works and in the *Yommatsar* *Karmakanda*
that the lifespan of the one-sensed etc. is 256 *Avaliakas* in length, and the
bondage of lifespan is possible only after two-thirds of it, that is, 170
*Avaliakas*, have passed. But before that, *Savasdana* *Samyaktva* disappears,
because it lasts until the end of the six *Avaliakas*. Therefore, even if it is
assumed that the body and the senses become fully complete in the *Savasdana*
state, the bondage of lifespan is not possible in any way in the *Savasdana*
state. As evidence of this, the *Audarikmitra* *Maganga* has mentioned the
bondage of 64 natures related to the *Savasdana* *Gunasthan*. The *Gommatsar*
*Karmakanda* also states that a *Savasdana* *Samyaktvi* being born in the one-
sensed and the three-impaired, the body becomes fully complete...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 45 tRtIya karmagrantha (ekendriya tathA vikalatraya, arthAta do indriya
teindriya, cauindriya meM, ferratoka avasthA kI taraha bandhayogya 106
prakRtiyA~ samajhanA, kyoMki tIrthaMkara, AhArakadvaya, deva yu. narakAyu aura
vaikriya baka isa taraha bhyAraha prakRtiyoM kA bandha nahIM hotA aura ekendriya
tathA vikalatraya meM utpanna huA jIva sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM deha (zarIra)
paryApta ko pUrA nahIM kara sakatA hai kyoMki sAsvAdana kAla alpa hai aura
nirvRtti aparyApta avasthA kA kAla bahuta hai  /  isa kAraNa isa guNasthAna meM
manuSyAyu tathA ticA kA bhI bandha nahIM hotA hai  / ) ukta donoM matoM kA
spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai 'ekendriya Adi meM sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM 66 aura
14 prakratiyoM ke baMdha viSayaka matoM meM se 66 prakRtiyoM ke bandha vAloM kA
mantavya yaha hai ki zarIraparyApta pUrNa hone ke bAda bhI sAsvAdana rahatA hai
aura usa samaya AyuSya kA bandha kare to 66 prakRtiyoM kA bandha ho ! isase yaha
pratIta hotA hai ki chaha AvalikA meM antarmuhUrta gadhyama ho jAtA hai, isalie
zarIraparyApta chaha AlikA meM pUrNa ho jAtI hai, usake bAda AyuSya kA bandha
hotA hai, aisA mAlUma hotA hai| parantu zrI jIvavijayajI aura jayasomasUri ne
apane meM tathA yommaTasAra karmakANDa meM yaha mata pradarzita kiyA hai ki
ekendriya Adi kI jaghanya Ayu 256 AvalikA pramANa hai aura usake do bhAga
arthAta 170 AvalikAe~ bItane para hI Ayubandha saMbhava hai  /  parantu usake
pahale hI sAsvAdana samyaktva calA jAtA hai, kyoMki vaha utkRSTa chaha
AvalikAparyanta rahatA hai| isaliye sAsvAdana avasthA meM hI zarIra aura
indriyaparyApti kA pUrNa bana jAnA mAna bhI liyA jAye tathApi sAsvAdana avasthA
meM Ayubandha kisI taraha saMbhava nahIM hai  /  isake pramANa meM audArikamitra
mAgaMgA ke sAsvAdana guNasthAna sambandhI 64 prakRtiyoM ke bandha kA ullekha
kiyA hai| gommaTasAra karmakANDa meM bhI batAyA hai ki ekendriya tathA
vikalendriya meM paidA huA sAsvAdana samyaktvI jIva zarIraparyApti !

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
46 "If one cannot fulfill the entire [karma], then he does not get bound by the
Manushyayu and Titrayu in that state." Atham-sva From the above evidence, it
becomes clear that the side of the bondage of 4 prakritis appears to be
agreeable and reasonable. However, what is the intention of the Acharyas who
believe in the bondage of 66 prakritis is only knowable to the Kevalis. The gist
is that the beings of Ekendriya, Vikalatrai, Dviendriya, Triendriya,
Chaturindriya, Prithvikra, Akaya and Vanaspatikaaya, in the Sasvadan Gunasthan,
reduce the thirteen prakritis like Sukshmatrik etc. from the 106 prakritis that
are eligible for bondage in the Freera Reasthan, and have to bind 96 prakritis.
And some Acharyas believe that these beings of Ekendriya etc. up to
Vanaspatikaaya, who have seven Margena, do not have complete Sharira-paryapti in
the Sasvadan Gunasthan, so they do not get bound by Manushyayu and Titrayu
related to Parbhav. Therefore, they bind 64 prakritis. After stating the
bondage-ownership of Ekendriya etc., in the next verse, they tell about the
duafora related to Panchendriya, Gativasa and Yog Margena. Ohu Panidi Tase
Gaitase Jivikar Naratimuchcha Vina. Manatrayajoge Oho Use Narbhanghu Tammisse 13
Gatharth - To know the bondage similar to the bondage mentioned in the Ogh-
Vaidhadhikar in the Panchendriya jati and Sakaya, and in the Galiyas, except for
Jinekaadasha, Manushyamika and Uchchagotra, the bondage of the remaining 205
prakritis takes place, and in Manoyog and Vachanayog, to understand the bondage
similar to the Ogh-Bandhadhikar, and in Audarik Kayayog, to understand the
bondage similar to the Manushya Gati, and in Audarik Misra, ant at afa, they do
it in the next verse.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46 ko pUrI nahIM kara sakatA hai, isase usako usa avasthA meM manuSyAyu aura
titrAyu kA bandha nahIM hotA hai|" asthamasva ukta pramANoM se yaha spaSTa ho
jAtA hai ki 4 prakRtiyoM ke bandha kA pakSa vizeSa sammata aura yuktiyukta
pratIta hotA  /  phira bhI 66 prakRtiyoM ke bandha ko mAnane vAle AcAryoM kA kyA
abhiprAya hai, yaha kebalIgamya hai | mArAMza yaha hai ki ekendriya, vikalatraya
dvIndriya, zrIndriya, caturindriya, pRthvIkara, akAya aura vanaspatikAya ke jIva
sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM sukSmatrika Adi teraha prakRtiyoM ko pahale freera
resthAna kI baMdhayogya 106 prakRtiyoM meM se kama karane para 96 prakRtiyoM ko
bA~dhane haiM tathA kinhIM kinhIM AcAryoM kA mata hai ki ina ekendriya Adi
vanaspatikAyaparyanta sAta mArgeNA vAle jIvoM ke sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM
zarIraparyApti pUrNa na hone se parabhava sambandhI manuSyAyu aura ticA kA bhI
bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  ataH ye 64 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karate haiM  /
ekendriya Adi ke bandhasvAmitva kA kathana karane ke bAda Age kI gAthA meM
paMcendriya, gativasa aura yoga mArgeNA sambandhI duafora ko batalAte haiM ohu
paNidi tase gaitase jivikAra naratimucca viNA  /  maNatrayajoge oho use
narabhaMgu tammisse 13 gAthArtha - paMcendriya jAti va sakAya meM ogha -
vaidhAdhikAra meM batAye gaye bandha ke samAna bandha jAnanA tathA galiyasa meM
jinaekAdaza tathA manuSyamika evaM uccagotra ke sivAya zeSa 205 prakRtiyoM kA
bandha hotA hai tathA manoyoga aura vacanayoga meM ogha bandhAdhikAra ke samAna
tathA audArika kAyayoga meM manuSya gati ke samAna bandha samajhanA aura
audArika mizra meM ant at afa Age kI gAthA meM karate haiM  /

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  47 ### Third Karma-Pratya **Special Meaning:** This verse begins the
discussion of the five-sense beings (Panchendriya-jati), the body (Jaskaya), and
the mobile beings (Gatis) in relation to karma.  The bondage ownership
(Bandhaswamitva) of the five-sense beings and the body should be understood in
the same way as the bondage ownership in general and according to the bondage
described in relation to the Gunasthanas. This means, just as the Karmagrantha
in the second part describes the bondage of 120 types in general and 117, 101,
74, 77, etc. types in the Gunasthanas from the first to the thirteenth,
respectively, the bondage of the five-sense beings and the body should also be
understood as 120 types in general and 117, 101, 74, 77, etc. types in the
Gunasthanas, respectively. Similarly, in any other Margana where bondage
ownership is mentioned, it should be understood that the bondage ownership is
the same in all the Gunasthanas that are possible in that Margana.  In the
scriptures, all living beings (Jivas) are considered to be of two types: mobile
(Gativas) and immobile (Labdhiyas). Those who experience the rise of the S-karma
and are also mobile are called Labdhiyas. Those who experience the rise of the
stationary karma (Sthavar-karma) but possess the ability to move are called
Gativas. The bondage ownership of the four types of Labdhiyas has already been
explained. Now, we will explain the bondage ownership of the Gativas.  There are
two types of Gativas: Danta and Vakaya. Both of these experience the rise of the
stationary karma (Sthavar-karma). However, due to their similarity in movement,
they are called Gativas.  1. Dwindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya, Panchendriya
- these are called so because they experience the rise of the S-karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 47 tRtIya karmapratya vizeSArtha - isa gAthA meM paMcendriyajAti, jasakAya,
gatisa ke aa area karane ke sAya yoga meM ke kA prArambha kiyA gayA hai  /
paMcendriyajAti aura xeera kA bandhasvAmitva bandhAdhikAra meM sAmAnya se tathA
guNasthAnoM kI apekSA kahe gaye bandha ke anusAra hI samajhanA cAhie arthAt
jaisA karmagrantha dUsare bhAga meM sAmAnya se 120 aura vizeSa rUpa se
guNasthAnoM meM pahale se lekara terahaveM paryanta kramaza: 117 201, 74, 77 Adi
prakRtiyoM kA bandha kahA hai, vaisA hI paMcendriyajAti aura sAtha meM sAmAnya
se 120 aura guNasthAnoM meM kramazaH 117, 101, 74, 77 Adi prakRtiyoM kA bandha
samajhanA cAhiye  /  isI taraha Age bhI jisa mArgaNA meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna
bandha svAmitva kahA jAya, vahA~ usa mArgaNA meM jitane guNasthAnoM kI
saMbhAvanA ho, utane guNasthAnoM meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna bandhaFarfare
samajha lenA cAhiye  /  zAstra meM sa jIva do prakAra ke mAne gaye haiM-
gativasa, labdhiyasa  /  jinheM sa nAmakarma kA udaya hotA hai aura jo calate-
phirate bhI haiM, unheM labdhisa' tathA jinako udaya to sthAvara nAmakarma kA
hotA hai, parantu gatikriyA pAI jAtI haiM, unheM gatitrasa kahate haiM  /  ukta
donoM prakAra ke nasoM meM se four ke Pataria ko batalAyA jA cukA hai  /  aba
gatitrasa ke bandhasvAmitva ko batalAte haiM  /  gatisa ke do bheda haiM- danta
aura vAkAya  /  ina donoM ke sthAvara nAmakarma kA udaya hai| lekina gati
sAdharmyaM se unako gatisa kahate haiM  /  1 dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya,
paMcendriya, ye kahalAte haiM kyoMki - inako sa nAmakarma kA udaya hai|

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 46 ## Ownership of Bondage  In the commonality of these two buses, in the 120
natures that are capable of bondage, the 11 natures from Jina-Ekadasha, meaning
Tirthankara-namakarma, to Naraka-trika, and the 15 natures of Manushya-trika and
Uccha-gotra, do not bind. Therefore, out of the 120 natures, 15 are excluded,
leaving 105 natures that are capable of bondage.  The reason why the 15 natures,
starting with Tirthankara-namakarma, do not bind is because the beings of Kaya
and Vayu-kaya are not born in Devas, humans, and Narakas. Therefore, they do not
bind the 14 natures that are suitable for them. Teu-kaya and Vayu-kaya beings
are born in Tithanch-gati, and there, the Bhavanimittak-ni Man-udaya occurs.
Therefore, they cannot bind Uccha-gotra.  These two Gati-trasas only have
Mithyatva-grunasthan, not Sasvadan-gunasthan, because no being who vomits
Samyaktva is born in this Gunasthan. Therefore, just as Teu-kaya and Vayu-kaya
beings bind 105 natures in general, similarly, in Mithyatva-gunasthan, 105
natures are bound.  After discussing the ownership of bondage in Kaya-margana,
now we explain the ownership of bondage in Yoga-margana.  At the root of Yoga
are Manoyoga, Vachanayoga, and Kayayoga - these are the three main divisions.
And within these, there are four divisions of Manoyoga, four divisions of
Vachanayoga, and seven divisions of Kayayoga. In the two divisions of Manoyoga
and Manoyoga-mahit Vachanayoga, there are thirteen Gunasthanas. Therefore, one
should understand the bondage in them according to the bondage explained in the
second Karma-grantha.  In the Gash's 'Manavayam-oge Oho Urne Darbhanga' verse,
'Manashya-yoge' and 'Urle' - these two words are common. However, the meaning of
'Oho' and 'Bharamangu' used in between is Manoyoga-sahit Vachanayoga.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46 manyasvAmitva ina donoM basoM ke sAmAnya meM bandhayogya 120 prakRtiyoM meM
meM jina-ekAdaza arthAta tIrthakaranAmakarma se lekara narakatrikaparyanta 11
prakRtiyoM tathA manuSyatrika aura uccagotra ina 15 prakRtiyoM kA bandha nahIM
hotA hai  /  ataH 120 prakRtiyoM meM se 15 prakRtiyoM ko kama karane meM 105
prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| tIrthakaranAmakarma Adi 15 prakRtiyoM ke bandha
na hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki kAya aura vAyukAya ke jIva deva, manuSya aura
nArakoM meM utpanna nahIM hote haiM, isalie unake yogya 14 prakRtiyoM kA bandha
nahIM karate haiN| teukAya aura vAyukAya jIva tithaMcagati meM utpanna hote haiM
tathA vahA~ bhavanimittakanI mana udaya meM hotA hai; isalie ucca gotra kA badha
nahIM kara sakate haiN| ina donoM gatitrasoM ke sirpha midhyAtva gRNasthAna hI
hotA hai, sAsvAdana guNasthAna nahIM hotA hai, kyoMki samyaktva kA vamana karatA
huA koI jIva isa guNasthAna meM Akara utpanna nahIM hotA hai| isalie sAmAnya se
jaise seukAya aura vAyukAya ke jIva 105 prakatiyoM ko bAMdhate haiM, usI prakAra
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM bhI 105 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| _kAya mArgaNA
meM bandhasvAmitva kA kAthana karane ke bAda aba yogamArgaNA meM bandhasvAmitva
batalAte haiN| yoga ke mUla meM manoyoga, vacasyoga aura kAyayoga-ye tIna mukhya
bheda haiM aura inameM bhI manoyoga ke cAra, vacanayoga ke cAra aura kAyayoga ke
sAta bheda hote haiM  /  manoyoga aura manoyoga mahita vacana yoga ina do bhedoM
meM teraha guNasthAna hote haiM, ataH unameM dUsare karma grantha meM batalAye
gaye vandha ke anusAra hI bandha samajhanA cAhiye  /  gAza ke 'maNavayamaoge oho
urane darabhaMga' pada meM maNazya yoge tathA urale- ye donoM pada sAmAnya haiM
tathApi 'oho' aura 'bharamaMgu para ke madhya meM prayoga' kA matalaba manoyoga
sahita vacanayoga

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Chapter  And the meaning of "Ural" should be understood as **Audarik
Kayayog** including **Manoyog** and **Vachanayog**. The concept of
**Bandhaswamitva** has been considered from the same perspective. But if only
**Vachanayog** is taken from **Ayog** and only **Audarik Kayayog** from
**Varal**, then **Vachanayog** without **Manoyog** should be understood as
**Bandhaswamitva** similar to **Vikalendriya** and **Kayayog** should be
understood as similar to **Ekendriya**. That is, just as in **Vikalendriya** and
**Ekendriya**, the **Bandhaswamitva** in them should be understood in the same
way.  The summary is that in **Panchendriya** and **As Margna**, **Bandha**
should be understood as similar to **Samanya Bandhadhikar**. And in
**Galitras**, **Jin-Ekadas**, **Manushyatrika**, and **Uchchgotra**, these 15
**Prakritis** are reduced to 105 **Prakritis**, and **Bandha** occurs from
**Samanya** and in the first **Gunasthan**.  In **Yog Margna**, **Bandha**
should be understood as similar to the **Bandha** mentioned in the **Manudhya**
of those who have **Audarik Kayayog** including **Manoyog** and **Vachanayog**.
The **Bandhaswamitva** of only **Vachanayog** and **Kayayog** should be
understood as similar to the **Bandha** mentioned as similar to **Ekendriya**
and **Vikalendriya**.  Thus, after explaining the **Bandhaswamitva** in **Man**,
**Vachan**, and **Audarik Kayayog** including them, and in **Kayayog** as
**Audarik Kayayog**, they further explain the **Bandhaswamitva** in the
remaining categories of **Kayayog**. Among them, they first explain the
**Bandhaswamitva** of **Audarik Mishr Kayayog**:  **Ahar Chhag Vinohe Chausasad
Micchi Jinayamaghiin. Sasani Chalanava Vina Naratirim Sahamateer. ||14||**  1.
**Tiriyanasak...iti Pathantaram.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya kamapanya aura urala kA matalaba manoyoga, vacanayoga sahita audArika
kAyayoga samajhanA cAhiye  /  usI dRSTikoNa kI apekSA bandhasvAmitva kA vicAra
kiyA gayA hai| lekina ayoga se kevala vacanayoga aura varala se kevala audArika
kAgrayoga grahaNa kiyA jAya to manoyoga rahita bacanayoga meM bandhasvAmitva
vikalendriya ke samAna aura kAyayoga meM ekendriya ke samAna samajhanA cAhie  /
arthAt jaise vikalendriyoM aura ekendriya meM kramazaH sAmAnya se 106. mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM 106 aura sAsvAdana guNasthAna hada a riyoM kA naI pAsavA hai usI
prakAra inameM bhI bandhasvAmitva samajhanA caahie| _ sArAMza yaha hai ki
paMcendriya tathA asa mArgaNA meM sAmAnya bandhAdhikAra ke samAna bandha
samajhanA aura galitrasoM meM jina-ekAdaza, manuSyatrika aura uccagotra ina 15
prakRtiyoM ko kama karane me 105 prakRttiyoM kA sAmAnya se aura pahale
guNasthAna meM baMdha hotA hai| yoga mArgaNA meM manoyoga, bacanayoga sahita
audArika kAyayoga vAloM ke paryApta manudhya meM kahe gaye bandha ke samAna hI
bandha samajhanA  /  kevala bacanayoga aura kAyayoga kA bandhasvAmitva ekendriya
aura vikalendriyoM ke samAna batAye gaye bancha ke samAna samajhanA caahie| isa
prakAra mana, vacana va una sahita audArika kAyayoga meM pUrNa rUpa se tathA
kAyayoga meM audArika kAyayoga kA bandhasvAmitva batalAne ke bAda Age kAyayoga
ke zeSa bhedoM meM bandhasvAmitva batalAte haiN| unameM meM sarvaprathama
audArikamizra kAyayoga kA bandhasvAmitva batalAte haiM AhAra chaga viNohe
causasaDa micchi jiNayamagahIna  /  sAsaNi calanavA viNA naratirima sahamatera
// 14 //  1. tirianasaka ...iti pAThAntaram  /

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bamhasvami  **General Meaning:** (Taking the verse from the previous chapter)
In the Audarik Mishrayog, there is bondage of 164 substances in general, without
the Aharakapatak. In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, one should consider the bondage of
106 substances from the Jinanam Pancham. In Sasvadan, there is bondage of 14
substances except for the thirteen groups of 15 substances, including
Manushyayu, Tiyanchayu, and Sukshmatrik.  **Specific Meaning:** In the previous
verse, the bondage of Bamhasvami in the Audarik Mishrayog Kayayog Margha has
been mentioned in general and in the first and second Gunasthan.  A living being
coming from the previous birth, in the first instance of its birth, takes food
only through Karmanayog. After that, the Audarik Kayayog begins. It is mixed
with Karman until the body is complete. In the Kevalisamuddhat state, in the
second, sixth, and seventh instances, it is mixed with Karman and Audarik
Mishrayog. The Audarik Mishrayog is only in the incomplete state of humans and
animals. It has four Gunasthan: first, second, fourth, and thirteenth.  In the
Audarik Mishrayog, in general, there is bondage of 114 substances out of 120
substances that are eligible for bondage, excluding the Aharakatik - Aharak
Sharira, Aharak Angopang, Devayu, and Naraktrik... Narakgati, Narakanupurvi,
Narakayu. This is because, due to the absence of specific character, and because
bondage occurs only in the seventh Gunasthan, the Aharakatik cannot be bound in
the Audarik Mishrayog. Also, the bondage of these four substances - Devayu
and... Naraktrik... - does not occur without the completion of the entire
Paryapti. Therefore, the bondage of these six substances is not considered in
the Audarik Mishrayog.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bamhasvAmiya gAmArtha- (pUrva gAthA meM lammise pada yahA~ liyA jAya) audArika
mizrayoga meM sAmAnya se AhArakapaTaka ke binA 164 prakRtiyoM kA : bandha hotA
hai aura mithyAtva guNasthAna meM jinanAmapaMcama : se hona 106 prakRtiyoM kA
bandha mAnanA cAhie tathA sAsvAdana meM manuSyAyu aura tiyaMcAyu tathA
sUkSmatrika Adi teraha kula 15 prakRtiyoM ke sivAya 14 prakRttiyoM kA bandha
hotA hai  /  vizeSArtha gAthA meM audArikamizra kAyayoga mArgahA meM sAmAnya
rUpa se aura pahale, dUsare guNasthAna meM bandhasvAmitva kA kathana kiyA gayA
hai| pUrvabhava meM Ane vAlA jIva apane utpati sthAna meM prathama samaya meM
kevala kArmaNayoga dvArA AhAra grahaNa karatA hai  /  usake bAda audA. rika
kAyayoga kI zuruAta hotI hai, vaha zarIraparyApti znane taka . kArmaNa ke sAtha
mitha hotA hai aura kevalisamuddhAta avasthA meM dUsare, chaThe aura sAtaveM
samaya meM kArmaNa ke sAtha audArikamidha yogada hotA hai| audArikAmazca kA
yogayamanuSya aura tiryaMcoM ke aparyApta avasthA meM hI hotA hai aura isameM
pahalA, dUsarA, cauthA aura terahavA ye cAra guNasthAna hote haiN| audArakamitha
kAyayoga meM sAmAnya meM AhArakaTika-AhAraka zarIra, AhAraka aMgopAMga, devAyu
aura narakatrika... narakagati, narakAnupUrvI, narakAyu ina chaha ko baMdhayogya
120 prakRtiyoM meM se kama karane meM 114 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai  /
kyoMki viziSTa cAritra ke abhAva meM; sathA sAtaveM guNasthAna meM hI bandha
hone se mAhArakRtika kA audArikamizra kAyayoga meM bandha nahIM ho sakatA tathA
devAyu aura .. narakatrika-... ina cAra prakatiyoM kA baMdha sampUrNa paryApti
pUrNa kiye binA nahIM hotA hai, ataH ina chaha prakRtiyoM kA baMdha
audArikamidhaH  /  kAyayoga meM nahIM mAnA jAtA hai  /

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  51. In the Audārikamishra Kāyayoga, during the first Mithyātva
Guṇasthāna, out of the 114 Prakṛtis that are generally susceptible to bondage,
106 Prakṛtis are bound when the five Jinas - Tīrthaṅkara, Lāmakarma, Devati,
Devanupūrvi, Baṅkriya Śarīra, and Vaikaya Angopāṅga - are reduced.  In the
Audārikamishra Kāyayoga, the 101 Prakṛtis that are considered to be bound in the
Mithyātva Guṇasthāna include Manushyāyu and Tithanchayu. In this regard, Śīlānka
Āchārya believes that Audārikamishra Kāyayoga continues until the completion of
Śarīra Paryāpti. Śrī Bhadrabahu Svāmī has also supported this view.  "The living
being is nourished by the food that is eaten." "The body is worn out by the
passage of time."  Regarding this, Śrī Jīvavijaījī has raised a doubt in his
commentary, stating that Audārikamishra Kāyayoga continues until the completion
of Śarīra Paryāpti and not beyond. Āyubandha occurs after the completion of
Śarīra Paryāpti and Indriya Paryāpti, not before. Therefore, during
Audārikamishra Kāyayoga, i.e., before the completion of Śarīra Paryāpti, the
bondage of Āyu is not possible. Hence, the inclusion of these two Āyus in the
106 Prakṛtis is debatable.  However, it is not a rule that Audārikamishra
Kāyayoga continues only until the completion of Śarīra Paryāpti and not beyond.
The statement by Śrī Bhadrabahu Svāmī, "Śarīra Nikkalī," does not mean that the
Audārikamishra Kāyayoga continues until the body is fully formed. The
completeness of the body cannot be achieved solely by the completion of Śarīra
Paryāpti. For this, the living being needs to have complete Paryāpti of its
respective Indriya, Śvāsochchhvās, Bhāṣā, and Mana.  1. Audārikakāyayoga is
present in humans until the completion of Śarīra Paryāpti. ... Ābāṭoka

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 51 asIma karma prastra _audArikamizra kAyayoga meM pahale mithyAtva guNasthAna
ke samaya jinapaMcaka- tIrthaGkaralAmakarma, devati, devAnupUrvI, baiMkriya
zarIra, vaikaya aMgopAMga ko sAmAnya se baMdhayogya 114 prakRtiyoM meM se kama
karane para 106 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA hai| audArikamizra kAyayoga meM jo 101
prakRtiyoM kA baMdhasvAmitva mithyAzva guNasthAna meM mAnA gayA hai, usameM
manuSyAyu aura tithaMcAyu kA bhI prahaNa kiyA gayA hai| isa sambandha meM
zIlAMkAcArya kA mata hai ki audArikamizra kAyayoga zarIraparyApti ke pUrNa hone
ke pUrva taka hotA hai| zrI bhadrabAhu svAmI ne bhI isI mata ke samarthana meM
yukti dI hai.-. joeNa kammaeNaM AhAre ataraM jiivo| lega para mausenaM jarakha
sarora misphatI  /  /  isako lekara zrI jIvavijayajI ne apane Taba meM zaMkA
uThAI hai ki audArikamizra kAyayoga zarIraparyApti ke pUrNa hone paryanta rahatA
hai, Age nahIM aura AyubaMdha zarIraparyApti aura indriyaparyApti pUrI ho jAne
ke bAda hotA hai, pahale nahIM  /  ataeva audArikamizra kAyayoga ke samaya,
arthAt garIraparyApti pUrNa hone se pUrva Ayu kA baMdha sambhava nahIM hai|
isalie ukta do AyuoM kA 106 prakRtiyoM meM grahaNa vicAraNIya hai| lekina yaha
koI niyama nahIM hai ki zarIraparyApti pUrI hone paryanta audArikamizna kAyayoga
mAnA jAya, Age nhiiN| zrI bhadrabAhu svAmI ne jo yukti dI hai usameM 'sarIra
nikkalI' pada kA yaha artha nahIM hai ki zarIra pUrNa bana jAne paryanta upaka
yoga rahatA hai  /  zarIra kI pUrNatA kebala zarIraparyApti ke bana jAne se
nahIM ho sakatI hai  /  isake lie jIva kA apane-apane yogya indriya,
zvAsocchavAsa, bhASA aura mana saba paryAptiyoM ke pUrNa ho jAne meM hI zarIra
kA 1. audArikakAyayogasti manuSyayoH zarIraparyAptakarvam  /  ...AbATokA

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
52 Andhasvamik It can be considered that the old forest has become. The meaning
of the word 'Sarira Nipfatto' is not self-created. This Marg's Sapna Pada has
been given by Suri in the fourth Karmagranth composed by him, in the fourth
Maya, 'Samup Jaralmagne'. This part has been explained in the following
commentary: Although their bodies were created by the combination of the
elements, due to the incompleteness of the body, the karma of this body is also
mixed with the Audarikamishra Kayayog. Now, this is also a point that
Audarikamishra Kayayog remains until all the necessary things are fulfilled. All
the Audarikamishra Kayayog remains until the body is complete, not after that.
And the Aayubandha happens after the body and senses are complete, not before.
There is no room for doubt in this. Because even when the opportunity for
Aayubandha comes after the senses are complete, Audarikamishra Kayayog remains.
Therefore, it is appropriate to consider the bondage of these two Aayus,
Manushyaayu and Tiyanchayu, during the time of Mithyal Munasthan in
Audarikamishra Kayayog. During the time of Mithyatva Gunartham, the bondage of
the above two Aayus in Audarikamishra Kayayog is as described in the
Karmagranth. The same is explained in Gommatsar Karmakand: Lora ya Misme Na
Suraniryauhani Rayadhurga: Mihasun Bamotir Na Hi Avirde Atyi ||11|| Meaning...
To know the creation of Audarikamishra Kayayog in Audarik Kayayog. The special
thing is that the bondage of these six natures, Devayu, Narakayu, Aharakadvick,
Narakgati, Narakanupurvi, does not happen. 1 Apamaschavik Kammuralamiis Joga
Apjamannisu Se! - Savindhamiis Es. Tapajje Uralamnale.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 52 andhasvAmika purA bana jAnA mAnA jA sakatA hai  /  'sarIra nipaphatto' pada
kA yaha artha svakalpita nahIM hai| isa marga kA sapana pada sarakArI dene sUri
meM svaracita cauthe karmagrantha kI cauthI mAyA' ke 'samupa jaralamagne 'isa
aMza kI nimnalikhita TIkA meM kiyA hai yapi teSAM zarIra paryAditaH avajaniSTa
saMbAyoniyodhAsA. mAmAdhyanidhyayana garIrasyAsapUrNasvAtaeva kArmaNasyAsyApi
dhApriyamA svAcArika mizrameva sevA yuktyA ghATamAmakArmAta  /  _ aba yaha bhI
pakSa hai ki svayogya saba paryAptiyAM pUrI ho jAne taka audArikamizna kAyayoga
rahatA hai, saba aukSArikAMmadha kAya yoga zarIraparyApti ke pUrNa hone paryanta
rahatA hai, Age nahIM aura AyubaMdha bharIraparyApti aura indriyaparyApti pUrNa
ho jAne ke bAda hotA. haiM, pahale nahIMisa saMdeha ko kucha bhI avakAza nahIM
rahatA hai  /  kyoMki indriyaparyApti pUrNa bana jAne ke bAda jaba ki AyubaMdha
kA avasara AtA hai, taba bhI audArikamizra kAyayoga to rahatA hI hai  /  isaliye
audArikamizra kAyayoga meM mithyAla muNasthAna ke samaya manuSyAyu aura tiyaM
cAyuina do AyuoM kA bandhasvAmitva mAnA jAnA isa pakSa kI apekSA yukta hI hai| _
mithyAtva guNarathAma ke samaya audArikamizra kAyayoga meM ukta do AyuoM ke
.saMdha kA pakSa jaisA karmagrantha meM nirdiSTa kiyA gayA hai| vaisA hI
gommaTasAra karmakANDa meM bhI batAyA hai lorA yA misme Na suraNirayAuhANi
rayadhurga : mihasuna bamotira Na hi avirade atyi  // 11 //  arthAt
....audArikamitra kAyayoga meM audArika kAyayomacata racanA jAnanA  /  vizeSa
bAta yaha hai ki devAyu, narakAyu, AhArakAdvika, narakagati, narakAnupUrvI ina
chaha prakRtiyoM kA bandha bhI nahIM hotA hai| 1 apamasachavika kammuralamIsa
jogA apajamannisu se ! - savindhamIsa esa. tApaje uralamanle  /  /

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Less Than  53  That is, there are 114 **Prakritis** bound. Even in
that, in the two **Gunasthanas** of **Mithyatva** and **Sasvadan**, the five
**Prakritis** of **Devchatushk** and **Tirthankara** **Namakarma** are not
bound, but they are bound in the fourth **Avirat Samyagdristi Gunasthan**. Not
even the confirmation.  Suri has also done this in his **Daba**. He has written
that, "If this side is accepted that **Audarik Mishra Kayayog** remains until
the completion of **Sharira Paryapti**, then the killing of **Tiryancha** and
**Manushyayu** in **Mithyatva** cannot happen in any way. Therefore, in
comparison to this side, in that **Yog**, it should be understood that there are
112 **Prakritis** bound in general and 107 **Prakritis** in the **Mithyatva
Gunasthan**.  From this statement, clear information is received that **Audarik
Mishra Kayayog** remains until the completion of **Swayogya Paryapti**. From
this, it becomes clear that it is reasonable to consider 114 **Prakritis** as
generally bound in **Audarik Mishra Kayayog** and 102 **Prakritis** in the first
**Mithyatva Gunasthan**.  After explaining the **Bandhaswamitva** of **Audarik
Mishra Kayayog** in the first **Gunasthan**, now the **Swamitva** is explained
in the second **Sasvadan Gunasthan**. In this **Gunasthan**, **Manushyayu** and
**Tiryanchayu** are not bound. Because the living being who is in the **Sasvadan
Gunasthan** does not complete **Sharira Paryapti**. Because after the completion
of **Sharira Paryapti**, it is possible for **Ayubandha** to happen, and since
**Mithyatva** does not arise here, the binding of 13 **Prakritis** from
**Sukshmatrik** to **Seva Sanhanan** due to the arising of **Mithyatva** also
does not happen. Therefore, by reducing these 15 **Prakritis** from the 106
**Prakritis** that are bound in the first **Mithyatva Gunasthan**, there are 94
**Prakritis** bound. That is, due to the separation of 13 **Prakritis** from the
said 15 **Prakritis** at the end time of the **Mithyatva Gunasthan** and the
non-binding of the two **Ayus**, there are **Prakritis** bound in the **Tunya
Samasthan** of the one who has **Audarik Kayayog**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya kama pratya 53 arthAt 114 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  usameM bhI
mithyAtva aura sAsvAdana- ina do guNasthAnoM meM devacatuSka aura tIrthakara
nAmakarma ina pA~ca prakRtiyoM kA bandha nahIM hotA hai, parantu cauthe avirata
samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM inakA bandha hotA hai  /  na kI puSTi bhI sUri ne
apane dabe meM bhI kI hai| unhoMne likhA hai ki 'yadi yaha pakSa mAnA jAya ki
zarIraparyApti pUrNa hone taka hI audArikamizra kAyayoga rahatA hai to mithyAtva
meM tiryaMcA tathA manuSyAyu kA vadha kathamapi nahIM ho sakatA hai  /  isalie
isa pakSa kI apekSA usa yoga meM sAmAnya rUpa se 112 aura midhyAtva guNasthAna
meM 107 prakRtiyoM kA bandhasvAmitva samajhanA cAhiye  / ' isa kathana se
svayogya paryApta pUrNa vana jAne taka audArikamizra kAyayoga rahatA haiM - isa
pakSa kI spaSTa sUcanA milatI hai| isase yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki
audArikamizra kAyayoga meM sAmAnya se baMdhayogya 114 prakRtiyA~ aura pahale
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 102 prakRtiyA~ yogya mAnanA yuktisaMgata hai  /  pahale
guNasthAna meM audArikamizra kAyayoga kA bandhasvAmitva bata lAne ke bAda aba
dUsare sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM svAmitva batalAte haiM  /  isa guNasthAna meM
manuSyAyu aura tiryacAyu kA bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  kyoMki sAsvAdana
guNasthAna meM bartatA jIva zarIraparyApta pUrNa nahIM karatA hai| kyoMki
zarIparyApta pUrNa ho jAne ke bAda Ayubandha honA saMbhava hai tathA yahA~
mithyAtva kA udaya na hone se mithyAtva ke udaya se bA~dhane vAlI sukSmatrika se
lekara sevA saMhanana paryanta 13 prakRtiyoM kA bhI bandha nahIM hotA hai  /
ataH ukta do aura teraha ye kula pandraha prakRtiyoM ko pahale midhyAtva
guNasthAna kI bandhayogya 106 prakRtiyoM meM se kama karane para 94 prakRtiyoM
kA bandha hotA hai  /  arthAt ukta 15 prakRtiyoM meM se 13 prakRtiyoM kA
viccheda mithyAtva guNasthAna ke carama samaya meM ho jAne se tathA do Ayu
abandha hone se audArikafor kAyayoga vAle ke tUne samasthAna meM prakRtiyoM kA
bandha hotA haiM  /  -

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
.......... Bandhaswamitva The summary is that in the Audarikamitra Kayayog
Marganga, there are 114 types of bandhyogya (capable of binding) from the
general, and this yogi has first, second, and thirteenth places. Of these, the
first gunasthan has 106 and the second gunasthan has 64 types. .. 54 Thus, after
explaining the bandhaswamitva in the Audarikamitra Kayayog Marganga, from the
general and in comparison to the first and second gunasthan, in the next gatha,
they explain the bandhaswamitva in the fourth and thirteenth gunasthan. Along
with this, they also explain the swamitva in the Karman Kayayog and Aharak
Kayayogdvik. Anchavasi Vina Jinapanjay Sambhi Jogini Sayam. Dinu Tirinaraou
Kasme Vi Evam Aharavugiaoho ||15|| Gathath: From the aforementioned 94 types, by
reducing the twenty-four types including Anantanubandh Chatushk, the remaining
types, when combined with the Tirthankara name, result in 75 types of bandha in
the fourth gunasthan of the Audarikamitra Kayayog, and only one Satavedaniya
bandha in the Sayogikevali gunasthan. The Karman Kayayog is the same as the
Tarfrator Kayayog, without the Tiryanchrayu and Manushyayu, and all other types.
In the Aharakdvik, the bandha should be understood as the same as the bandha
explained in the gunasthan. Vishesharth: In the previous gatha and this gatha
combined, the bandhaswamitva of the first, second, fourth, and thirteenth
gunasthan of the Audarikamitra Kayayog has been considered. In the second
gunasthan, the bandha of 24 types has been explained. By reducing the 24 types
from Anantanubandhi Chatushk to Tiryanchdvik, 70 types remain. 1. According to
the third Karmagranth, Ga. 3.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 .......... basvAmitva sArAMza yaha hai ki audArikamitra kAyayoga mArgaNA meM
sAmAnya se 114 prakRtiyoM bandhayogya haiM aura isa yoga vAle ke pahalA, dUsarA
terA ye sthAna hote haiN| inameM se pahale guNasthAna meM 106 tathA dUsare
guNasthAna meM 64 prakRtiyoM kA hotA hai  /  .. 54 isa prakAra auerfokamizra
kAyayoga mAgaMNA meM sAmAnya se tathA guNasthAna kI apekSA pahale, dUsare
guNasthAna meM bandhasvAmitva batalAne ke bAda Age kI gAthA meM cauthe aura
terahaveM guNasthAna meM bandhasvAmitvaM batalAte haiN| sAtha hI kArmaNa
kAyayoga aura AhAraka kAyayogadvika meM bhI svAmitva batalAte haiM aNacavIsAi
viNA jiNapaNajaya sambhi jogiNI sAyaM  /  diNu tirinarAu kasme vi
evamAhAravugioho ||15|| gAthArtha pUrvokta 94 prakRtiyoM meM se
anantAnubandhacatuSka Adi caubIsa prakRtiyoM ko kama karake zeSa rahI prakRtiyoM
meM tIrthaMkara nAmaka ke milAne se audArikamitra kAyayoga meM cauthe guphA
sthAna ke samaya 75 prakRtiyoM kA tathA sayogikevalI guNasthAna meM sirpha eka
sAtAvedanIya kA bandha hotA hai| kAmaMNa kAyayoga tiryactrayu aura manuSyAyu ke
binA aura saba prakRtiyoM kA tarfrator kAyayoga ke samAna hI hai aura
AhArakadvika meM guNa sthAnoM meM batAye bandha ke samAna bandha samajhanA
caahie| vizeSArtha pUrvagAthA aura isa gAthA meM milAkara audAriya mizra
kAyayoga ke pahale, dUsare, cauthe aura terahaveM guNasthAna ke ban svAmitva kA
vicAra kiyA hai  /  dUsare guNasthAna meM 24 prakRtiya kA bandha batalAyA gayA
hai, unameM se anantAnubandhI catuSka se leka tiryadvika paryanta 24 prakRtiyoM
ko kama karane me 70 prakRtiyA~ ze 1 tRtIya karmagrantha, gA0 3 ke anusAra J

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma Text **1** They remain, and in them, the combination of the five
Jina, the Tīrthaṅkara, the Nāmakarma, the Devadvik, and the Vaikriya results in
the bondage of 75 Prakṛtis in the fourth Guṇasthāna.  **Doubt:** In the fourth
Guṇasthāna, the Audārika-miśra Kāyayoga is said to have ownership of the bondage
of 75 Prakṛtis. Among them are the five Prakṛtis: Manuşyadvik, Ārfrefae, and
Vajraṛṣabha-nārāca-sahana. On this, Śrī Jīvavijaī has raised a doubt in his
commentary, stating that the Audārika-miśra Kāyayogi in the fourth Guṇasthāna
cannot bind these five Prakṛtis. Because this yoga is not possible with anyone
other than Tīrthaṅkara and Manuşya, and Niyantrā and Manuşya cannot bind these
five Prakṛtis in this Guṇasthāna. Therefore, the 70 and 71 Prakṛtis mentioned in
the Tīrthaṅkara-gati and Manuşya-gati in the fourth Guṇasthāna do not include
these five Prakṛtis.  **Solution:** Śrī Jayasoṃasūri has resolved this doubt in
his commentary, stating that the word "asa" in the verse should not be
interpreted as "the 24 Prakṛtis starting with Anantānubandhī," but rather, the
word "āha" should include five more Prakṛtis, making a total of 26 Prakṛtis,
including the 24 starting with Anantānubandhī and the five starting with
Manuşyadvik. This interpretation removes the doubt. Because subtracting 20 from
94 leaves 65 Prakṛtis, and adding the five Jina to them results in 70 Prakṛtis.
The ownership of their bondage in that yoga at the time of that Guṇasthāna is
not contradictory in any way. This solution seems authentic.  **Another point:**
There is no word in the original verse that indicates the number 75. Śrī
Nemicandra Siddhāntacakravartī also accepts the separation of 20 Prakṛtis in the
second Guṇasthāna.  **Paṇṇarasasunu tī** **Mirge avira chīvī cauro.** **Go.
Karmakāṇḍa, Māyā 116**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagratha 1 rahatI haiM, aura unameM jinapaMcaka tIrthaMkara nAmakarma
devadvika aura vaikriyafre ko milAne se 75 prakRtiyoM kA bandha cauthe
guNasthAna meM hotA hai  /  Wo Zhuang  zaMkA- cauthe guNasthAna ke samaya
audArikamizra kAyayoga meM jina 75 prakRtiyoM kA bandhasvAmitva kahA hai, unameM
manuSyadvika, aarfrefae aura vajraRSabhanArAca sahanana ina pAMca prakRtiyoM kA
samAveza hai| isa para zrI jIvavijayajI ne apane Tabe meM zaMkA uThAI hai ki
cauthe guNasthAna meM audArikamizra kAyayogI ukta pA~ca prakRtiyoM at afs nahIM
sakatA hai| kyoMki tica tathA manuSya ke sivAya dUsaroM se yaha yoga saMbhava
nahIM hai aura niyaMtra tathA manuSya isa guNasthAna meM ukta pA~ca prakRtiyoM
ko bA~dha nahIM sakate haiM. ataeva tiyaMcagati aura manuSyagati meM cauthe
guNasthAna ke samaya kama meM jo 70 aura 71 prakRtiyoM kA Fatafore kahA gayA
hai, usameM ukta pAMca prakRtiyoM nahIM AtI haiM  /  4 isakA samAdhAna zrI
jayasomasUri ne apane Tabe meM kiyA hai ki gAthAgata 'asA' isa pada kA artha
'anantAnubandhI Adi 24 prakRtiyA~' yaha nahIM karanA cAhie, kintu 'Aha' zabda
meM aura bhI pAMca prakRtiyA~ lekara anantAnubandhI Adi 24 tathA manuSyadvika
Adi pA~ca kula 26 prakRtiyA~ yaha artha kadanA caahiye| aisA artha karane se
ukta sandeha nahIM rhtaa| kyoMki 94 meM se 20 ghaTAne se zeSa rahI 65 prakRtiyoM
meM jinapaMcaka milAne se 70 prakutiyA~ hotI haiM. jinakA bandhasvAmitva usa
yoga meM ukta guNasthAna ke samaya kisI taraha viruddha nahIM hai  /  yaha
samAdhAna prAmANika jAna par3atA hai  /  dUsarI bAta yaha hai ki mUla gAthA meM
75 saMkhyA kA bodhaka koI : pada nahIM hai| zrI nemicandra siddhAntacakravartI
bhI dUsare guNasthAna meM 20 prakRtiyoM kA viccheda mAnate haiM paNNarasasunatI
mirage avira chivI cauro  /  go0 karmakANDa, mAyA 116 +

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samvasvāmin  Although the commentary (Tīkā) clearly states the bondage of 75
types of *bandhasvāmitva*, as mentioned earlier, the *bandhasvāmitva* named
*prāguktā*, *banarvāta*, *ramasānubayādiśati*, *prativinā*,
*jimnāmāvipratipakṣamatā*, and *pañcasaptati* *stāmovārika* *nikāyayogi* bind
together. The ancient *karmagrantha* (Gāthā 2826) also considers the bondage of
75 types. Similarly, in the commentary on the ancient *bandhasvāmitva*, Śrī
Govindācārya has not offered any solution to this doubt. This suggests that this
topic has been passed down from tradition without much thought, both in the
original text and the commentary. The *karmagranthakārās* should consider this.
Until then, there is no harm in giving importance to the solution of Śrī
Jayasomasūri.  The *Audārikamiśra Kāyayoga* states that humans and *tiryac*
(non-human beings) are the masters of *kāyayoga*, and in the fourth *guṇasthāna*
they are bound by 71 and 20 types of *prakrti* respectively. However, in the
*Audārikamiśra Kāyayoga*, the bondage of 70 *prakrti* is accepted while
considering the bondage of 71 *prakrti* in the fourth *guṇasthāna* because this
*yoga* occurs in an incomplete state. In an incomplete state, humans or *tiryac*
cannot be bound by *devāyu*. Because *devāyu* is included in the *prakrti* that
can bind *tiryac* and humans. But the *Audārikamiśra Kāyayoga* has removed it
from the *prakrti* that can bind.  In the thirteenth *guṇasthāna*, the
*Audārikamiśra Kāyayoga* states that there is bondage of one *sātavēdaniya*
*prakrti*. The explanation of this *bandhasvāmitva* in the *Audārikamiśra
Kāyayoga* is based on the opinion of the *karma*...*āy*. But according to the
principle...  1. The mentioned commentary is not by Śrī Devendrasūri.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samvasvAmina yadyapi TIkA' meM 75 prakRtiyoM ke bandhasvAmitva kA nirdeza
spaSTa kiyA hai-prAguktA banarvAta ramasAnubayAdizatipratIvinA
jimanAmAvipratipakSamatA va paMcasaptatistAmovArika nikAyayogI samma badhnAti
tathA bandhasvAmitva nAmaka prAcIna sIsare karmagrantha (gAthA 2826) meM bhI 75
prakRtiyoM ke hI bandha kA vicAra kiyA gayA hai  /  isI prakAra prAcIna
bandhasvAmitva kI TIkA meM zrI govindAcArya ne bhI isa viSaya meM kisI prakAra
kA zaMkA-samAdhAna nahIM kiyA hai  /  isase jAna par3atA hai ki yaha viSaya yoM
hI binA vizeSa vicAra kiye paramparA se mUla aura TIkA meM calA AyA hai  /  isa
ora karmagranthakAroM ko vicAra karanA cAhie  /  taba taka zrI jayasomasUri ke
samAdhAna ko mahatva dene meM koI hAni nahIM hai| _ audArikamizra kAyayoga ke
svAmI manuSya aura tiryaca hai aura cauthe guNasthAna meM unako kramazaH 71 aura
20 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha kahA hai tathApi audArikamizra kAyayoga meM cauthe
muNasthAna ke samaya 71 prakRttiyoM kA baMdha ma mAnakara 70 prakRtiyoM ke
baMdha ko mAnane kA samarthana isalie kiyA jAtA hai ki yaha yoga aparyApta
avasthA meM hotA hai aura aparyApta avasthA meM manuSya athavA tithaMca devAyu
kA baMdha nahIM kara sakate haiN| kyoMki tica tathA manuSya kI gaMdhayogya
prakRtiyoM meM devAyu parigaNita hai| parantu audArika mizra kAzyoga ko
baMdhayogya prakRtiyoM meM se usako nikAla diyA hai  /  terahaveM guzasthAna meM
audArikamizra kAyayoga meM eka sAtAvedanIya prakRti kA baMdha hotA hai|
audArikamizra kAyayoga meM ukta baMdhasvAmitva kA kapana karma- .. aAya ke
matAnusAra kiyA gayA hai| lekina siddhAnta ke matAnusAra 1 ukta TIkA mUsakartA
zrI devendrasUri kI nahIM hai|

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karmagrantha  This yoga also includes two more (fifth, sixth)
Gunasthanas. The Siddhanta's view is that at the time of the beginning of the
Bainkriya body from Bainkriya Labdhi, i.e., in the fifth and sixth Gunasthanas,
and at the time of the formation of the Aharak body from Aharak Labdhi, i.e., in
the sixth Gunasthanas, there is Audarik-Mishra Kayayoga. This view is mentioned
in the fourth Karmagrantha, verse 46.  "Sarapasave Nanam Vijayamaharage
Uralammis. Gidis Samano Nehabhiyam Suyamapam Ghi"  This is explained in detail
in its own commentary... - A man who is a Naineyalambhidharak with an Audarik
body, who has acquired the five knowledges, and who has sufficient Vayukaya,
when he forms a Chakriya body, at that time, while residing in the Audarik body,
he expands his territories and takes Bainkriya body-worthy Pudgals, and until he
completes the Bainkriya body's paryapti, his Audarik Kayayoga has friendship
with the Vaikriya body, but in practice, one should consider the Audarik as the
primary, because it is the dominant one. Similarly, one should know that there
is a mixture of Audarik Kayayoga with the Aharak body at the time of its
formation.  The meaning of the Siddhanta's statement is that the Audarik is
mixed with the Bainkriya and Aharak at the time of their beginning, hence it is
called Audarik-Mishra. When the said body is formed after Bainkriya Labdhi and
Aharak Labdhi, it is present in the Audarik body yoga. Until the body paryapti
is complete in the Vaikriya body or the Aharak body, there is a mixture.
However, since the Audarik is the main one, the designation is Audarik-Mishra.
That is, while doing Vaikriya and Aharak, it is called Audarik-Mith.  1.
Pramapana, Pada 16, Patra 316-1 (Chaturth Karmanamp Vopam Teeka p. 12, par
savat)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagrantha isa yoga meM aura bhI do (pA~cAM, chaThA) guNasthAna mAne
jAte haiM  /  isa sambandha meM siddhAnta kA mata hai ki baiMkriyalabdhi se
baiMkriya zarIra kA prArambha karane ke samaya arthAt pA~caveM, chaThe
guNasthAna meM aura AhArakalabdhi se AhAraka zarIra kI racanA ke samaya arthAt
chaThe guNasthAna meM audArikamizra kAyayoga hotA hai|| isa mata kI sUcanA
cauthe karmagrantha kI gAthA 46 meM kI gaI hai.. sArapasAve nANaM vijayamAhArage
uralamisa  /  gidisa sAmANo nehAbhiyaM suyamapaM ghi isakI svopajJa dIkA meM
andhakAra meM spaSTa kiyA hai ...- audArika zarIravAlA nainiyalamvidhAraka
manuSya, paMcevidaya liyaca mA bAdara paryApta vAyukAya jisa samaya cakriya
zarIra racatA hai, usa samaya vaha audArika zarIra meM rahatA huA apane pradezoM
ko phailAkara aura baiMkriya zArIra-yogya pudagaloM ko lekara jaba taka
baiMkriya zarIra paryApti ko pUrNa nahIM karatA taba taka usake audArika
kAyayoga kI vaikiyArIra ke sAtha mitratA hai, parantu vyavahAra audArika ko
lekara audArika-mithatA kA karanA cAhie, kyoMki usI kI pradhAnatA hai| isI
prakAra AhAraka zarIra karane ke samaya bhI usake sAtha audArika kAyayoga kI
mizratA ko jAna lenA caahie| siddhAnta ke ukta kathana kA Azaya yaha hai ki
baiMkriya aura AhAraka kA prArambha kAla meM audArika ke sAtha mizraNa hone se
audArikamizra kahA hai| baiMkriyalabdhi, AhArakalabdhi sampanna jaba ukta zarIra
karatA hai taba audArika zarIrayoga meM vartamAna hotA hai| jaba taka vaikriya
zArIra yA AhAraka zarIra meM zarIraparyApti pUrNa na kara le taba taka mizratA
hotI hai| parantu audArika kI mukhyatA hone se vyapadeza audArikamizra kA hotA
hai  /  arthAt vaizyi aura AhAraka karate samaya lo audArikamitha yaha kahA jAtA
1. pramApanA, pada 16, patra 316-1 (caturtha karmaNampa vopama TIkA pR. 12 para
savata)

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
58 Swami There is a distinction between Vaikriyamiśra and Āhārakamiśra in the
sequence of the time of abandonment. But the Karmagranthakāra believe that any
body can perform Kāyayoga, but the Audārik body is Anmasiddha and the Vaikriya
and Āhārak are Labdhijanaya. Therefore, considering the predominance of the
Labdhijanaya body, Vaikriyamiśra and Āhārakamiśra should be practiced at the
time of beginning and abandonment, not Audārikamiśra. The scholars of the
Karmagranth who consider four Gunasthanas in Audārikamiśra Kāyayoga seem to mean
that the Yoga that occurs with the cooperation of both the Kāmaṇ body and the
Audārik body should be called Audārikamiśra Kāyayoga, which can be found only in
the first, second, fourteenth and thirteenth Gunasthanas. But the intention of
the Saiddhantikas is that just as Audārikamiśrata is considered with the Kāmaṇ
body, in the same way, Audārikamiśra Kāyayoga should be considered by
considering the friendship of the Labdhijanaya Vaikriya and Āhārak bodies. The
above viewpoint of the Siddhanta is also worth accepting and from that
perspective, the fifth and sixth Gunasthanas can be considered in Audārikamiśra
Kāyayoga. But, here Bandhasvāmitva is being explained according to the
Karmagranthas, therefore, the consideration of Bandhasvāmitva related to the
fifth and sixth Gunasthanas has not been done. After stating the Bandhasvāmitva
of Audārikamiśra Kāyayoga, now we explain the Bandhasvāmitva of Kāmaṇ Kāyayoga.
Kāmaṇ Kāyayoga occurs during the interval of Antaralmati while going for
Bhavantera and at the first time of taking birth. The first, second, fourth and
thirteenth Gunasthanas are of the beings who have Kāmaṇ Kāyayoga. Of these, the
thirteenth Gunasthan is of the Sayogikevali Bhagavan in the third, fourth and
fifth times of Kevali Samudghāt and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 58 svAmila hai aura parityAga kAla meM anukrama meM vaizthimizra aura
AhArakamitha yaha vyapadeza hotA hai  /  lekina karmagranthakAra mAnate haiM ki
kisI bhI zarIra dvArA kAyayoga kA vyApAra ho parantu audArika zarIra anmasiddha
hai aura baiMkriya va AhAraka labdhijanya hai ataH landhijanya zarIra kI
pradhAnatA mAnakara prArambha aura parityAga ke samaya vaikriyamizra aura
AhArakamizra vyavahAra karanA cAhie, na ki audaarikmishr| audArikamizra kAyayoga
meM cAra guNasthAna mAnane vAle karmagrantha ke vidvAnoM kA tAtparya itanA hI
jAna par3atA hai ki kAmaNa zarIra aura audArika zarIra donoM ke sahayoga se hone
vAle yoga ko audArikamizra kAyayoga kahanA cAhie jo pahale, dUsare. caudhe aura
terahaveM ina cAra guNasthAnoM meM hI pAyA jA sakatA hai| kintu saiddhAntikoM kA
Azaya yaha hai ki jisa prakAra kAmaNa zarIra ko lekara audArika mizratA mAnI
jAtI hai, usI prakAra lamdhijanya vatriya aura AhAraka zarIra kI mitratA
mAnakara audArikamizra kAyayoga mAnanA caahie| siddhAnta kA ukta dRSTikoNa bhI
grahaNa karane yogya hai aura usa dRSTi se audArikamizra kAyayoga meM pAMcavAM,
chaThA yaha do guNasthAna mAne jA sakate haiM  /  kintu, yahA~ bandhasvAmitva
karmagranthoM ke anusAra batalAyA jA rahA hai ataH pAMcaveM, chaThe guNasthAna
sambandhI andhasvAmitva kA vicAra nahIM kiyA hai  /  audArikamizra kAyayoga ke
bandhasvAmitva kA kathana karane ke bAda aba phArmaNa kAyayoga ke bancasvAmitva
ko batalAte haiM  /  kArmaNa kAyayoga bhavAntara ke lie jAte hue antarAla mati
ke samaya aura janma lene ke prathama samaya meM hotA hai  /  kArma kAyayoga
vAle jIvoM ke pahalA, dUsarA. cauthA aura terahavA.... ye cAra guNasthAna hote
haiN| inameM se terahavAM guNasthAna kevalI samudghAta ke tIsare, cauthe aura
pAMcave samaya meM sayogikevalI bhagavAna ko hotA hai aura

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Third Karma-Vatma  The remaining three Gunasthana occur in the interval
between other beings, at the time of death, and at the time of the first birth.
This Karman Kayayog Margna should be understood as having the same
Bandhaswamitva as the Audarik Mishra Kayayog at the time of the general S and
Musthana. However, there is a special feature in this, that neither Tiryanchay
and Manughayau can be bound in it. That is, in the Bandhadhikar of the second
Karmagranth, where 120 Prakruti are said to be bindable, in the Audarik Mishra
Kayayog Margna, by reducing Aharak Sharira, Aharak Ango Pang, Vayu, Narakgati,
Narakanupurvi and Narakayu, these 6 Prakruti, the binding of 114 Prakruti is
mentioned. But in Karman Kayayog, along with the aforementioned six Prakruti, by
further reducing Tiryanchay and Manuthyathu, the binding of 112 Prakruti occurs
in general.  In the Mithyatva Gunasthana, out of the aforementioned 112
Prakruti, like the Audarik Mishra Kayayog, without the five Prakruti like
Tirthankar Namakarma, 107 remain. And out of these 107 Prakruti, in the second
Gunasthana, by reducing 13 Prakruti like Sukshmatrik, 64 remain. And out of
these 64 Prakruti, by reducing 24 Prakruti like Anantanubandhi Krodh, and adding
five Prakruti like Tirthankar Namakarma, in the fourth Gunasthana, the binding
of 75 Prakruti occurs. And in the thirteenth Gunasthana, only one Sasavedaniya
Karma Prakruti remains bound.  Although Karman Kayayog Bandhaswamitva is said to
be similar to Audarik Mishra Kayayog, and in the fourth Gunasthana, by taking
the binding of 75 Prakruti in Audarik Mishra Kayayog, the binding of 70 Prakruti
is supported. But in Karman Kayayog, at the time of the fourth Gunasthana, there
is no need to doubt this, because Audarik Mishra Kayayog only occurs in humans
and Tiryanchas, but the beneficiaries of Karman Kayayog are humans and
Tiryanchas, in addition to Devas and Narakas, who are Manushyathik...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmavatmA zeSa tIna guNasthAna anya jIvoM ke antarAla pati ke samaya
tathA janma ke prathama samaya meM hote haiN| isa kArmaNa kAyayoga mArgaNA meM
sAmAnya sa tathA musthAnoM ke samaya audArikamizra kAyayoga ke samAna
bandasvAmitva samajhanA cAhie  /  kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki isameM tithaMcAyu
aura manughyAyu kA bhI bandha nahIM ho sakatA hai| arthAt dUsare karmagrancha ke
bandhAdhikAra meM jo bandhayogya 120 praRtiyAM batalAI haiM, unameM meM
audArikamizra kAyayoga mArgaNA meM AhAraka zarIra, AhAraka aMgo pAMga, vAyu,
narakagati, narakAnupUrvI aura narakAyu ina 6 prakRtiyoM ke kama karane se 114
prakRtiyoM kA bandha batalAyA hai| kintu kArmaNa kAyayoga meM ukta chaha
prakRtiyoM ke sAtha tiryaMcAyu aura manuthyAthu ko aura kama karane meM sAmAnya
me 112 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| mithyAtva guNasthAna meM ukta 112
prakRtiyoM meM meM audArikamizra kAyayoga kI taraha tIrthakaranAmakarma Adi
pAMca prakRtiyAM ke binA 107 tathA ina 10.7 prakRtiyoM meM se dUsare muNasthAna
meM sukSmatrika Adi 13 prakRtiyoM ko kama karane meM 64 evaM ina 64 prakRtiyoM
meM se anantAnubandhI krodha Adi 24 prakRtiyoM ko kama karane tathA
tIkaramAmakarma Adi pA~ca prakRtiyoM ko jor3ane se cauthe guNasthAna meM 75
prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai aura terahaveM muguNasthAna meM sirpha eka
sAsAvedanIya karmaprakRti kA bandha hotA hai  /  yadyapi kArmaNa kAyayoga
bandasvAmitva audArikAmatha kAyayoga ke samAna kahA gayA hai aura cauthe
gusthAna meM audArikamizra kAyayoga meM 75 prakRtiyoM ke bandha ko lekara kA
uThAkara 70 prakRtiyoM ke bandha kA samarthana kiyA hai  /  lekina kArmaNa
kAmayoga meM caturtha guNasthAna ke samaya ukta zaMkA karane kI AvazyakatA nahIM
hai, kyoMki audArikamizra kAyayoga sirpha manuSyoM aura siryoM ke hI hotA hai,
kintu kArmaNa kAyayoga ke adhikArI manuSya tathA siyaMtroM ke atirikta deva aura
nAraka bhI haiM, jo manuSyatika

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bandhasvamitva  The five primordial substances bind. This is why the five
substances are also included in the fourth *gunasthan* of *karman* *kayayog*.
*Aharak* *kayayognik*, meaning *Aharak* *kayayog* and *Aharakmishn* *kayayog*,
are both found in the sixth *gunasthan*. Therefore, in both these *yog* paths,
there is a binding of 63 substances, similar to the sixth *gunasthan*.  In
*Aharak* *kayayog*, there are two *gunasthanas*: *pramat* and *apramat* *virat*.
When the fourteen *purvadhari* perform *Aharak* body, they are *pramat* due to
the use of *labdhi*. This is the sixth *gunasthan*. At that time, when they
begin the *Aharak* body, they are mixed with *oudarik*. This means that the
sixth *gunasthan* exists in both *Aharakmishr* and *Aharak* *yogas*. However,
later, with the power of *vishuddhi*, they come to the seventh *gunasthan*, and
then it is only *Aharak* *yog*. This means that in *Aharak* *yog*, there are two
*gunasthanas*: the sixth and the seventh. In *Aharakmishr* *kayayog*, there is
only the sixth *gunasthan*. Therefore, in the sixth *gunasthan*, there is a
binding of 63 substances. Of these substances, when the six substances of
*shok*, *arati*, *asthir* *dvik*, *ayash* *kiiti*, and *asata* *vedaniya* are
reduced, there is a binding of 57 substances in the seventh. If *devayu* is also
bound, then there is a binding of 56 substances. In the 146th verse of
*Panchasangrah* *Sapttatika*, it is stated that *Aharak* *yog* and *Aharakmishn*
*kayayog* bind 57 and 63 substances respectively. This means that *Aharak*
*kayayog* binds 63 substances in the sixth *gunasthan* and 57 in the seventh,
while *Aharakmishn* *kayayog* binds 63 substances in the sixth *gunasthan*.  As
it is considered in this *karmagranth*, so is the ancient *bandhasvamitva*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mandhasvAmitva Adi pA~ca prakRtiyoM ko bA~dhate haiM  /  isI se kArmaNa
kAyayoga ke cauthe guNasthAna meM ukta pAMca prakRtiyoM ko bhI grahaNa kiyA gayA
hai| AhAraka kAyayoganika, arthAta AhAraka kAyayoga aura AhA. rakamizna
kAyayoga-ye donoM chaThe guNasthAna meM pAye jAte haiM  /  ataH chaThe
guNasthAna ke samAna ina donoM yoga mArgaNAoM meM 63 prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hotA
hai| AhAraka kAyayoga meM pramatta aura apramatta virata ye do guNasthAna hote
haiN| jaba caudaha pUrvadhArI AhAraka zarIra karatA hai, usa samaya labdhi kA
upayoga karane se pramAdayukta hotA hai, taba chaThA mugAsthAna hotA hai  /  usa
samaya AhAraka zarIra kA prArambha karate samaya vaha audArika ke sAtha mizra
hotA hai| arthAt AhArakamizra aura AhAraka ina do yogoM meM chaThA guNasthAna
hotA hai, kintu bAda meM vizuddhi kI zakti se sAla guNasthAna meM AtA hai, taba
AhArakayoga hI hotA hai  /  arthAt AhArakayoga meM chaThA aura sAtavAM ye do
muNasthAna tathA AhArakamizra kAyayoga meM chaThA guNasthAna hotA hai  /  taba
chaThe guNasthAna meM 63 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karatA hai  /  ukta prakRtiyoM meM
zoka, arati, asthiradvika, ayaza kIti aura asAtA vedanIya ina chaha prakRliyoM
ko kama karane para sAtaveM meM 57 prakRtiyoM kA aura devAyu kA bandha meM kare
to 56 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karatA hai  /  paMcasaMgraha saptatikA kI gAthA 146
meM batAyA gayA hai ki AhArakayoga aura AhAra kamizya kAyayoga vAle anukrama se
57 aura 63 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karate haiN| yAnI' AhAraka kAyayoga vAlA chaThe
guNasthAna meM 63 aura sAtaveM guNasthAna meM 57 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karatA hai
aura AhArakamizna kAyayoga vAlA chaThe guNasthAna meM 63 prakRtiyoM kA bandha
karatA hai| jaisA isa karmagrantha meM mAnA haiM, usI prakAra prAcIna
bandhasvAmitva

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Third Karma Granth In the Aharak Kayayogdik, the sixth Gunasthan, the Maman
Bandhamnaminya Marata is mentioned, and... "Taharage Jaha Masas" - Shabin
Badhaswamitva. Ma 42. However, Nemichandracharya in his Sansch Yommmatmar
Karmakand, while accepting the 63 Prakruti Bandha in the Aharak Kayayog in the
sixth Gunasthan, does not accept the Bandha of Devayu in the Aharak Kayayog.
According to him, there are 62 Prakruti Bandha... "Chharga Bahare Lambhiyo Sthi
Devau". ...Gi. Karma Ka Ma 118. Meaning, in the Aharak Kayayog, there is
Bandhaprasswamitva similar to the sixth Gunasthan, but there is no Bandha of
Vayu in the Aharak Kayayog. The summary is that according to the Karma Granth,
in the Aharak Kayayog, in the fourth Gunasthan, there is Bandha of 5 Prakruti,
while according to Mihanta, there is Bandha of 90 Prakruti. And in the Siddhant,
while using the Jidwarika and Haraklabdhi, the Jidwarika is also considered, but
its Vivaksha is not mentioned here because the Kamadhyakara does not accept it,
therefore, the Bandha of the fifth and sixth Gunasthan is not mentioned. In the
Siddhant, the Bandha of 12 Prakruti is mentioned, in which the words "Banyag
Bimayi" etc. mentioned in the Geya, are considered to be other Prakruti, there
is no doubt in the opinion of the Karma Granth and Siddhant. In this way, from
the 4 Prakruti eligible for Bandha in the second Gunasthan, 24 Prakruti like
Anatanubandhi Chatushk etc. and 5 other Prakruti are reduced, and by adding the
Tirthankaranama Karma Panchak Prakruti, the total becomes 70 Prakruti.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagrantha meM AhAraka kAyayogadika meM chaThe guNasthAna ke mamAna
bandhamnAminya mAratA hai tathA ..... TahArage jahA masAsa' - zabIna
badhasvAmitva. mA 42 kintu nemicandrAcArya apane saMzca yommaTamAra karmakANDa
meM yadyapi AhAraka kAyayoga meM chaThe guNAyAma ke samAna 63 prakRtiyoM kA
bandha mAnate haiM. lekina AhArakamizna kAyayoga meM devAyu kA bannA nahIM
mAnate haiN| unake matAnusAra 62 kRliyoM kA inca hotA hai...... charagAbAhAre
lambhio sthi devAU  /  .....gI. karma kA mA0 118 arthAta AhAraka kA prayoga meM
chaThe gazasthAna kI saraha bandhaprasvAmitva hai parantu AhArakamitha kAya yoga
meM vAyu kA bandha nahIM sArAMza yaha hai ki karmagrantha ke anusAra
audArikAranaM kAyayoga meM cauthe guNasthAna meM sammAna 5 prakaliyoM kA sava
hotA hai, jabaki mihAnta ke anusAra 90 kaliyoM kA banna mAnA jAtA hai tathA
siddhAnta meM kiyAni aura hArakalabdhikA prayoga karate samaya bhI
jIdvArikApayoga mAnA hai, lekina yahA~ usakI vivakSA nahIM kI gaI hai kyoMki
kamaandhakAra baisA nahIM mAnate haiM, isalie pA~caveM aura chaThe guNasthAna kA
bandha nahIM kahA hai| _ siddhAnta meM jo 12 prakRtiyoM kA bandha kahA gayA hai.
umameM gAyA meM Aye bANagya bImAI' pada Adi yAda meM anya ca prakaliyoM kA
grahaNa kiyA jAnA karmagrantha aura siddhAnta ke mata meM koI zaMkA nahIM rahatI
hai| isa prakAra dUsare guNasthAna kI bandhayogya 4 prakRtiyoM meM se
anAtAnubandhIcatuSka Adi 24 aura anya 5 prakRtiyoM ko kama karane se aura
tIrthakaranAmakarmapaMcaka prakRttiyoM ko milAne se 70 prakavizAlomA

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Vāsvamisva**  In Kārmāṇa Kāyayoga, bondage should be understood as similar to
Audārika Miśrayoga, but in the case of Tiryaṅvāyu and Manuṣyāyu, these two
natures should be considered as having bondage of 112 natures less than the
general. And in terms of Guṇasthānas, in Mithyātva Guṇasthāna, there is bondage
of 177, in the second, 14, in the fourteenth, 75, and in the thirteenth, 1
Sātavēdaniya.  In Āhārak Kāyayoga, bondage should be understood as similar to
Guṇasthāna. That is, just as there are 13 natures in the sixth Guṇasthāna, so it
should be understood in this yoga. In another opinion, bondage of 63.47 natures
has also been said. Some Ācāryas have considered bondage of 62 natures in
Āhārakamith Kāyayoga.  Thus, after explaining the bondage in Audārika, Kārmāṇa,
and Āhārak Kāyayoga, in the next verse, we explain the bondage in Vaikriya
Kāyayoga, Veda, and Kṣaya Mārgāṇa, in the infinite-bound, non-rejectable, and
rejectable Kṣaya distinctions.  **Verse 16:**  **Gāthārtha:** In Vaikriya
Kāyayoga, bondage should be understood as similar to Devamati, and in
Vaikriyamiṭra Kāyayoga, bondage of other natures except Tiryaṅvāyu and Manuṣyāyu
should be understood as similar to Vaikriya Kāyayoga, and in Veda and Kṣaya
Mārgāṇa, bondage should be understood as follows: in Veda Mārgāṇa, nine from the
beginning, in infinite-bound Kṣaya, two from the beginning, in the second, non-
rejectable Kṣaya, twelve from the beginning, and in the third, rejectable Kṣaya,
five from the beginning, like the Guṇasthānas.  **Viśeṣa:** In the above, the
bondage in Vaikriya Kāyayoga and Vaikriyamiṭra Kāyayoga, or in Veda and Kṣaya
Mārgāṇa, in the infinite-bound, non-rejectable, and rejectable Kṣaya, has been
explained.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vAsvamisva kArmaNa kAyayoga meM bhI audArika mizrayoga ke samAna bandha
samajhanA cAhie, kintu tiryavAyu aura manuSyAyu ina do prakRttiyoM ko kama
karane meM sAmAnya se 112 prakRtiyoM kA bandhra mAnanA cAhie aura guNasthAnoM kI
apekSA mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 177, dUsare meM 14, caudhe maiM 75 aura
terahaveM maiM 1 sAtAvedanIya kA bandha hotA hai| AhAraka kAyayogadvika meM
guNasthAna ke samAna hI bandha samajhanA cAhiye  /  arthAt chaThe guNasthAna meM
jaise 13 pratiyoM kA madhosA hai, vaise hI isa yoga meM samajhanA caahie|
matAntara me 63. 47 prakRtiyoM kA bhI bandha kahA gayA hai  /  kinhIM AcAryoM ne
62 prakRtiyoM kA bandha AhArakamidha kAyayoga meM mAnA hai| isa prakAra
audArika, kArmaNa aura AhAraka kAyayoga meM bandhasvAmitva batalAne ke bAda aba
Age kI gAthA meM baiMkriya kAyayogadvika, veda tathA kaSAya mArgaNA ke
anantAnubandhI, apratyAkhyAnAvaramA aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya bhedoM meM
bandhasvAmitva batalAte haiM... suraoho ucce tiriyabharAu rahio pa sammisse  /
beyatigAhama biya tiya kasAya nava du ca paMca guNA  // 16 //  gAthArtha-
vaikriya kAyayoga meM devamati ke samAna tathA vaikriyamitra kAyayoga meM
tiryaMcAyu aura manuSyAyu ke sivAya anya saJca prakAtiyoM kA bandha baiMkriya
kAyayoga ke samAna tathA veda aura kapAya mArgaNA meM zramazaH veda mArgaNA meM
Adi ke nau, anantAnubandhI kaSAya meM Adi ke do, dvitIya apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
kaSAya meM Adi ke bAra, tRtIya pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya meM Adi ke pA~ca
guNasthAna kI taraha bandhasvAmitva samajhanA cAhie  /  vizeSA-mAthA meM
baiMkriya kAyayoga aura baiMkriyamitra kAyayoga yA veda aura kaSAya mArgaNA ke
anantAnubandhI, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNamatuSka ke
bandhasvAmitva ko batalAyA hai| . . - - - - . . . - . . .. . . . ... .. .

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The officials after rape are gods and hell beings. Because gods and hell beings
are born from the womb. Those born have a physical body. Therefore, their
qualities are considered similar to the path of gods and their ownership is also
similar to the path of gods, i.e., 104 in general, 103 in the first quality, 66
in the second, 90 in the third and 32 in the fourth.  The owners of aftaar aata
are also gods and hell beings like the Vayikayoga. Therefore, in this yoga also,
there should be bondage similar to the path of gods. But it should be understood
that in this yoga, the bondage of age is impossible. Because this yoga is of
gods and hell beings only in the incomplete state. Gods and hell beings in the
complete state, i.e., when six months of potatoes remain, they bind the age
related to the future. Therefore, in the Vaikriyamishra Kayayoga, except for the
lifespan of animals and humans, all other qualities should be considered similar
to the Akriya Kayayoga (path of gods).  One more special feature should be
understood in the Vaikriyamishra Kayayoga compared to the Vaikriya Kayayoga,
that in the Vaikriya Kayayoga there are four quality places in the beginning,
while in the Vaikriyamishra Kayayoga there are only three quality places, the
first, second and fourth. Because this yoga is in the incomplete state.
Therefore, there are more quality places in it.  1. Naraka Devanam Uppapat:
Sutra 2135 Transforming the three pugals located in the place of origin into a
body form for the first time is Uppapat birth.  2. Kriyauppapatakam: - Tavaarya
2/47

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 after rape ke adhikArI deva tathA nAraka hote haiN| kyoMki deva aura nArakoM kA
upapAtajanma hotA hai  /  janma vAloM ko vaizriya zarIra hotA hai| isase isameM
guNasthAna devagati ke samAna hI mAne gae haiM aura isakA svAmitva bhI devamati
ke samAna ho, arthAt sAmAnya se 104, pahale guNasthAna meM 103. dUsare meM 66,
tIsare meM 90 aura cauthe meM 32 prakRtiyoM kA hai  /  aftaar aata ke svAmI bhI
vaiyi kAyayoga kI taraha deva aura nAraka hote haiN| ataH isa yoga meM bhI
devagati ke samAna bandha honA cAhie thaa| lekina itanI vizeSatA samajhanA cAhie
ki isa yoga meM Ayu kA bandha asaMbhava hai| kyoMki yaha yoga aparyApta avasthA
meM hI devoM tathA nArakoM ke hotA hai  /  deva tathA nAraka paryApta avasthA
meM, arthAt chaha mahIne pramANa AlU zeSa rahane para hI parabhava sambandhI Ayu
kA bandha karate haiN| isaliye vaikriyamizra kAyayoga meM tiryaMcA aura
manuSyAyu ke sivAya bAkI ko anya saba prakRtiyoM kA are akriya kAyayoga
(devagati) ke samAna samajhAnA cAhie  /  vaikiya kAyayoga kI apekSA
vaikriyamitra kAyayoga meM eka aura vizeSatA samajhanI cAhie ki vaiyi kAyayoga
meM pahale ke cAra guNasthAna hote hai, jabaki vaikriyamizra kAyayoga meM
pahalA, dUsarA aura cauthA ye tIna guNasthAna hI hote haiN| kyoMki yaha yoga
apayapti avasthA meM hotA hai  /  isase isameM adhika guNasthAna honA 1. nAraka
devAnAmupapAtaH  /  sUtra 2135 utpattisthAna meM sthita tri pugaloM ko pahale-
pahala zarIra rUpa meM pariNata karanA upapAta janma hai| 2. kriyamopapAtikam  /
- tavArya 2/47

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  64 || It is impossible. In the same way, in ancient
bondage, even in the case of *micche sasane* or *avisyasammi*, the *ab mahiyan
anti* is tested by *sesekkarasane* *mis* meaning - when a living being dies and
goes to the next world, they are then in the first, second, or *gunasthan*, but
except for these three, no living being attains the remaining eleven
*gunasthanas* for the next world. Therefore, in general, 102 should be
understood in the first *gunasthan*, 101 in the second, 64 in the third, and 71
in the fourth *gunasthan*. *Vaikriya kayayog* is also born from attainment. As
in the fifth *gunasthan*, the present *Ambar parivrajaka* etc., and in the sixth
*gunasthan*, the present *Vishnukumar* etc. *munis* have attained *vaikriya*
bodies by the power of *vaikriya labdhi*. Although it is possible for *vaikriya
kayayog* and *vaishramisra kayayog* to occur in the fifth and sixth
*gunasthanas*, the reason why the four *gunasthanas* from the first to the
fourth are mentioned for living beings with *vaikriya kayayog*, and the first,
second, and fourth *gunasthanas* are mentioned for *kriyamishra kayayog*, seems
to be that here the natural *bhavapratyay* of *deva* and *naraka* is the desire
for *vaikriya* body. Therefore, the first four *gunasthanas* are considered for
them. Due to the desire for *vaikriya kayayog* from *labdhipratyay*, there is no
desire for more *gunasthanas* for humans and animals. That is, only by taking
the *bhavapratyay* *vaikriya* body, the aforementioned four and three
*gunasthanas* are mentioned in *vaikriya kayayog* and *kriyamitra kayayog*
respectively. -II 1 *Vedhvam panjase idare khalu hodi tasma misan tu.
Suranigyacauthane misse mahi mijogo hai.* 11 2 *Labdhipratyayam cha.* 3 *Ambar
parivrajaka* description is *aupapatik*. *Swamitva* . 4 is 0 *Khod* 682
*Tasvarthasutra* 214e

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 64 || asaMbhava hai| prAcIna bandhasvAmitva meM bhI isI prakAra micche sAsAne
yA avizyasammammi aba mahiya aMti kiyA parakhoe sesekkArasane mIsa arthAta -
jIva marakara paraloka meM jAte haiM, taba ve pahale, dUsare yA guNasthAna ko
grahaNa kiye hue hote haiM, parantu ina tInoM ke sivAya zeSa gyAraha guNasthAnoM
ko grahaNa kara paraloka ke lie koI jIva samana nahIM karatA  /  ataeva isameM
sAmAnya rUpa se 102, pahale guNasthAna meM 101, dUsare meM 64 aura cauthe
guNasthAna meM 71 prakRtiyoM ar area fire samajhanA cAhie  /  vaikriya kAyayoga
labdhi se bhI paidA hotA hai| jaisA ki pA~caveM guNasthAna meM vartamAna ambar3a
parivrAjaka' Adi ne tathA chaThe guNasthAna meM vartamAna viSNukumAra Adi muni
ne vaikriya labdhi ke bala se vaiyi zarIra kiyA thaa| yadyapi isase vaiyi
kAyayoga aura vaizriyamizra kAyayoga kA pafer aura chaThe guNasthAna meM honA
saMbhava hai, tathApi vaikriya kAyayoga vAle jIvoM ke pahale se lekara cauthe
taka cAra guNasthAna tathA kriyamizra kAyayoga meM pahalA, dUsarA aura cauthA ye
tIna guNasthAna batalAye gaye haiM, usakA kAraNa yaha jAna par3atA hai ki yahA~
aa aura nArakoM ke svAbhAvika bhavapratyaya vaikiya zarIra kI vivakSA hai  /
isalie unake Adi ke cAra guNasthAna mAne gaye haiM  /  labdhipratyaya vaikrima
kAyayoga kI vivakSA se manuSya, tiryaMca kI apekSA adhika guNasthAnoM meM usakI
vivakSA nahIM hai  /  arthAta kevala bhavapratyaya vaikiya zarIra ko lekara hI
vetriya kAyayoga tathA kriyamitra kAyayoga meM krama se ukta cAra aura tIna
guNasthAna batalAye haiM  /  -II 1 vedhvaM paJjase idare khalu hodi tasma misaM
tu . suraNigyacauThANe misse mahi mijogo hai 11 2 labdhapratyayaM ca  /  3
ambar3a parivAjaka kA varNana aupapAtikaH svAmitva  /  4 hai 0 khoDa 682
tasvArthasUtra 214e

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
After stating the bondage ownership of the Yoga path in the third Karma section,
now they explain the bondage ownership of the Veda and the Kshaya path, which
are infinitely connected, non-revocable, and revocable Kshaya distinctions.
There are three types of Veda: Purusha Veda, Stri Veda, and Namaka Veda. All
three types of Veda arise only up to the ninth Gunasthan. That is, the Veda
arises only up to the ninth Gunasthan, so the bondage ownership of the Veda
should be considered like the bondage authority, like the nine Gunasthanas. That
is, just as in the bondage authority, there are 120 in general, 117 in the first
Gunasthan, 101 in the second, 74 in the third, 77 in the fourth, 17 in the
fifth, 63 in the sixth, 56-58 in the seventh, 58, 56, and 26 in the eighth, and
22 in the ninth, the bondage ownership of the beings on the Veda path should be
understood in the same way.  The Anantanubandhi Kshaya arises only in the first
and second Gunasthanas. Therefore, only these two Gunasthanas are considered as
the Guruasthanas in this Kshaya. At the time of these two Gunasthanas, there is
neither Samyaktva nor Charitra. Therefore, Tirtharanama Karma (whose bondage is
only from Samyaktva) and Aharakdvik (whose bondage is only from Charitra), these
three natures are prohibited in the general bondage of those with Anantanubandhi
Kshaya. Therefore, those with Anantanubandhi Kshaya bind 117 natures from
general and 101 in the first Gunasthan.  The Apratyakhyanavaran Kshaya, like
anger, arises up to the first four Gunasthanas. Therefore, there are four
Gunasthanas in these. At the time of these Kshayas, since Samyaktva is possible,
the bondage of Tirthakarama can occur. But since there is no Charitra, the
bondage of Aharakdvik does not occur. Therefore, in these Kshayas, there are 118
from general and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tatIya karmapranya yogamAgaMNA ke bandhasvAmitva kA kathana karane ke bAda aba
veda aura kaSAyamArgaNA ke anantAnubandhI, apratyAsthAnAvaraNa aura
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya bhedoM kA bandhasvAmitva batalAte haiM  /  veda ke
tIna bheda haiM-puruSaveda, strIveda aura namakaveda  /  ina tInoM prakAra ke
vedoM kA udaya nauveM guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai|' arthAt veda kA udaya nauveM
guNasthAnaparyanta hI hotA hai, isalie veda kA bandhasvAmitva vadhAdhikAra kI
taraha nau guNasthAnoM jaisA mAnanA cAhie  /  arthAt jaise bandhAdhikAra meM
sAmAnya se 120, pahale guNasthAna meM 117, dUsare meM 101, tIsare meM 74. cauthe
meM 77. pAMcaveM meM 17, chaThe meM 63, sAtave meM 56-58, AThaya meM 58, 56
tathA 26 aura nau meM 22 prakRtiyoM kA bandha batalAyA hai, usI prakAra
vedamArgamA vAle jIvoM kA bandhasvAmitva samajhanA caahie| _ anantAnubandhI
kaSAya kA udaya pahale, dusare-do guNasthAnoM meM hI hotA hai| isase isa kaSAya
meM ukta do hI gurusthAna mAne jAte haiN| ukta do guNasthAnoM ke samaya na to
samyaktva hotA hai aura na cAritra  /  ataH tIrtharanAmakarma (jisakA bandha
samyaktva se hI hotA hai aura AhArakadvika (jinakA bandha cAritra se hI hotA
hai), ye tIna prakRtiyAM anantAnubandhI kaSAya vAloM ke sAmAnya bandha meM
varjita haiM  /  ataeva anantAnubandhI kaSAya vAle sAmAnya se tathA pahale
guNasthAna meM 117 aura dUsare meM 101 prakRtiyoM kA bandhra karate haiN|
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodhAdi kaSAyoM kA udaya pahale cAra guNasthAnaparyaMta
hotA hai| ata: inameM pahale cAra guNasthAna hote haiM  /  ina kaSAyoM ke samaya
samyaktva kA saMbhava hone me tIrthakaramAma kA bandha ho sakatA hai| lekina
cAritra kA abhAva hone se AhArakadvika kA bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  ataeva ina
kaSAyoM meM sAmAnya se 118 aura 1 aNiyaTisa ya paDhamI bhAloti jiNehi NihiTa  /
...mo. sarakAra mmmmmmmmmMM

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bandhasvamitva  **It should be understood that in the first Gunasthan, there
are 117, in the second 101, in the third 74, and in the fourth 557 Prakṛtis
bound.**  **The emergence of Kṣayās, Pratyakhyānavarana, occurs up to the fifth
Gunasthan. Therefore, from the first to the fifth Gunasthan, they are considered
Paṇi Gunasthan.**  **Although there is no Bandha of Āhārakarma due to the
absence of Sarvaviratī Cāriś in these Kṣayās, Bandha of Tīrthaṅkara Nāmakarma
can occur due to Samyaktva. Therefore, generally, 118 and in the first Gunasthan
114, in the second 101, in the third 14, in the fourth 77, and in the fifth 167
Prakṛtis are bound.**  **In Kṣayāmārgaṇā, it is not stated separately for each,
from Anantānubandhī to Sañcalamaparayant, in terms of Bandhasvamitva. However,
if the Gunasthan is stated in the general categories of Māna, Māyā, and Lobha,
then in the case of Krodha, Māna, and Māyā, the three Kṣayās remain up to the
second, third, and fourth parts of the ninth Gunasthan respectively, and the
Kṣayā Lobha remains up to the tenth Gunasthan. If the Gunasthan is considered in
this way, then in Kṣayāmārgaṇā, there are ten Gunasthan from the first to the
tenth, and their Bandhasvamitva should be understood according to
Bandhādhīkāra.**  **However, the author has stated their Bandhasvamitva in the
Gunasthan in Kṣayāmārgaṇā in relation to Anantānubandhī etc. The summary is that
in Vaikriya Kāyayoga, Bandhasvamitva is similar to Devagati, i.e., 104 in
general and in the Gunasthan, 103 in the first, 93 in the second, 5 in the
third, and 72 in the fourth Prakṛtis. In Vaikriya Mithya Kāyayoga, there is no
Bandha of the two Prakṛtis, Tiryañcāyu and Manuṣyāyu, so the remaining Prakṛtis
should be understood as bound in the same way as in Vaikriya Kāyayoga. This
means that in Kriya Mithya Yoga, there are 102 Prakṛtis that are eligible for
Bandha in general, and this Yoga...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 badhasvAmitva pahale guNasthAna meM 117. dUsare meM 101, tIsare meM 74 aura
cauthe meM 557 prakRtiyoM kA bandha samajhanA cAhie  /  pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
kaSAyoM kA udaya pAMcaveM guNasthAnaparyanta hotA hai 1 ataH inameM pahale se
lekara panavaM guNasthAna paryanta pani guNasthAna mAne jAte haiM  /  yadyapi
ina kapAyoM ke samaya sarvavirati cAriza na hone se AhArakaddhika kA nandha
nahIM ho sakatA hai, tathApi samyaktva hone se tIrthaGkaranAmakarma kA bandha ho
sakatA hai| isalie sAmAnya rUpa se 118 aura pahale guNasthAna meM 114, dUsare
meM 101, tIsare meM 14, cauthe meM 77 aura pAMca meM 167 prakRtiyoM 67 bandha
jAnanA caahie| kaSAyamArgaNA meM gadi anantAnubandhI Adi saMJcalamaparyanta kI
apekSA se pratyeka kA alaga-alaga banzvasvAmitva kA kathana na kara koca. mAna,
mAyA aura lobha ina sAmAnya bhedoM meM muNyasthAna kA kathana kiyA jAye to
krodha, mAna, mAyAmeM tIna kaSAya nauveM guNasthAna ke kramazaH dUsare. tIsare
aura cauthe bhAga paryanta tathA lobhaH kaSAya dasaveM guNasthAna taka rahatA
hai isa apekSA se yadi guNasthAna mAna jAyeM to kaSAyamAmaNA meM pahale meM
lekara dasaveM guNasthAna paryanta dasa guNasthAna hote haiM aura unakA
bandhazvAmitva bandhAdhikAra ke anusAra samajhanA cAhiye  /  lekina granthakAra
ne yahAM kaSAya mArgaNA meM anantAnubandhI Adi kI apekSA meM unakA gusthAnoM meM
indhasvAmitva kA kathana kiyA hai| _ sArAMza yaha hai ki vaikiya kAyayoga meM
bandhasvAmitva devagati ke samAna, arthAt sAmAnya se 104 evaM guNasthAnoM meM
pahale meM 103, dUsare meM 93. tIsare meM 5 aura cauthe meM 72 prakRttiyoM kA
hai aura vaikriyamidha kAyayoga meM tiryaMcAyu aura manuSyAyu ina do prakRtiyoM
kA bandha nahIM hone se inake binA zeSa prakRtiyo kA bandha vaiktiya kAyayoga ke
samAna samajhanA caahie| jisakA artha yaha hai ki kriya mitrayoga meM sAmAnya se
bandhayogya 102 prakRtiyAM haiM tathA yaha yoga dim. i n .

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma Granth  The third Gunasthan does not exist in the state of
*aparayaapt*. Therefore, in the first Gunasthan, 101, in the second 16, and in
the fourth 72 *prakritis* are bound.  The emergence of *veb* occurs until the
ninth Gunasthan. Therefore, one should understand according to the
*bandhadhikar* as mentioned, and according to the binding of *prakritis*
mentioned until the ninth Gunasthan.  In *kashayamargna*, the *anantaanubandhi*
*kashay* emerges until the first and second Gunasthan. Therefore, in relation to
the Gunasthan, the binding is the same as the binding mentioned in
*bandhadhikar*, but instead of 120, there is a binding of 117, because this
*kay* holder does not have *samyakkarma* and *charitra*, so there is no loss of
*tirthankaranam* and *aaharadvik*.  The *apratyakhyanavaran* *kashay* emerges
until the fourth Gunasthan, and during this *kashay*, *samyaktv* is possible, so
the binding of *tirthankaranam* can occur. Therefore, there are 118 *prakritis*
eligible for binding in general, and in the Gunasthan, one should understand
117, 101, 74, and 77 *prakritis* as per *bandhadhikar*.  The *pratyakhyanavaran*
*kashay* emerges until the fifth Gunasthan. Therefore, there are five Gunasthan
from the first to the fifth *lak*. While this *kashay* remains, *samyaktv* is
possible, but since there is no *sarvavirati* *charitra*, there is no binding of
*aaharadvik*, so there is a binding of 118 *prakritis* in general, and in the
Gunasthan, there is a binding of 117, 101, 74, 77, and 67 *prakritis*
respectively.  Now, further in the *gatha*, we will discuss the binding of the
remaining *sanjwalan* *kashay* in *kashayamargna*, and the binding of *sanjam*,
*gyan*, and *darshan* *margna*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagrantha aparyApta avasthA meM hone se tIsarA guNasthAna nahIM hotA
hai ! ataH pahale guNasthAna meM 101. dUsare meM 16 aura cauthe meM 72
prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| veba kA udaya nauveM guNasthAna taka hotA hai  /
ataH bandhAdhikAra meM kahe gaye anusAra hI sAmAnya se aura nauveM guNasthAna
taka batAye gaye prakRtiyoM ke bandha ke anusAra samajhanA caahie| kaSAyamArgaNA
meM anantAnubandhI kaSAya kA udaya pahale aura dUsare guNasthAna taka hotA hai,
ataH guNasthAnoM kI apekSA bandha to bandhAdhikAra meM batAye gaye bandha ke
samAna hI hotA hai, lekina sAmAnya se 120 kI bajAya 117 kA bandha hotA hai,
kyoMki isa kAya vAle ko samyakrama aura cAritra nahIM hone se tIrthaGkaranAmaka
aura AhArakadvika kA hAra nahIM hotA hai| _ apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya kA udaya
cauthe guNasthAna taka hotA hai aura isa kaSAya ke samaya samyaktva saMbhava
hone se tIrthakaranAmakamaM kA bandha ho sakatA hai| ataH sAmAnya se bandhayogya
118 prakRtiyAM hai aura guNasthAnoM meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna 117, 101, 74
aura 77 prakRtiyA~ samajhanA caahie| pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya kA udaya pA~caveM
guNasthAnaparyanta hotA hai  /  ataH isameM pahale se lekara pAMcaveM laka pA~ca
guNasthAna hote haiN| isa kaSAya ke rahane para samyaktva ho sakatA hai, lekina
sarvavirati cAritra na hone se AhArakadvika kA bandha nahIM hone se sAmAnya rUpa
se 118 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai aura guNasthAnoM meM kramazaH 117, 101, 74,
77 aura 67 prakRtiyoM kA bandhasvAmitva aba Age ko gAthA meM kaSAyamArgaNA kI
zeSa rahI saMjvalana kaSAya tathA saMyama, jJAna aura darzana mArgaNA ke
bandhasvAmitva kA kathana karate haiM

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Sanjwalan Trika (Sanjwalan Krodha, Mana, Maya), there are nine
Gunasthanas and the Gaur Sanjana zone has its own places. In Aviriti, there are
four, in Agnanasik (Mati-Agnana, Shruta-Agnana, Vibhangashan) there are two or
three, and in Achakshudarshan, Chakshudarshan, there are twelve in the beginning
and four in the Yathakyatacharitra at the end. Therefore, in the aforementioned
Marganas, one should understand the Bandhaswamitva according to the
Bandhadhikar, both generally and in the Gunasthanas.  Specifically, in the
Kshaya Margna, the final distinction of Sanjwalan Kshaya, among the four
distinctions of Krodha, Mana, Maya, and Lobha, there are nine Gunasthanas in
Krodha, Mana, and Maya, and ten in Lobha. Therefore, the Bandhaswamitva of these
four Kshayas is the same as the Gunasthanas, both generally and specifically.
That is, the rise of Sanjwalan Krodha, Mana, and Maya occurs up to the ninth
Gunasthan, therefore, their Bandhaswamitva should be understood as described in
the Bandhadhikar in relation to the Gunasthanas. That is, generally 120, and in
the Gunasthanas, from the first to the ninth, one should understand 117, 101,
74, 177, 67, 63, 56, 58, and 22 Prakritis respectively.  In Sanjwalan Lobha,
there are ten Gunasthanas from the first to the tenth, therefore, up to the
ninth Gunasthan, one should understand the Bandhaswamitva according to the
aforementioned Sanjwalan Trika, and in the tenth Gunasthan, there are 17
Prakritis bound. In the Samyama Margna, along with the distinctions of Samyama
like Samayik, etc., the Asamyam-Aviriti, which is the opposite of Samyama, is
also considered. Therefore, before explaining the Bandhaswamitva of the
distinctions of the Samyama Margna, the Bandhaswamitva in Asamyam Aviriti is
mentioned. Aviriti means...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 graaphi saMjalagalige nava isa lobhe ghau anai cha ti anaanntige| bArasa
acakkhucakkhumu paDhamA akhAi caramaca  // 17 //  gAthArtha-saMjvalanatrika
(saMjvalana krodha, mAna, mAyA) meM nau guNasthAna aura gaura saMjanA jona meM
sthAna hote haiM tathA avirati meM cAra, ajJAnazika (mati-ajJAna, zruta-ajJAna,
vibhaMgazAna) meM do yA tIna aura acakSudarzana, cakSudarzana meM Adi ke bAraha
aura yathAkhyAtacAritra meM anta ke cAra guNasthAna hote haiM  /  ataH ukta
mArgaNAoM meM banchasvAmitva bandhAdhikAra meM batAye gaye anusAra sAmAnya se
aura guNasthAnoM meM samajhanA caahie| vizeSArtha-kaSAyamArgaNA ke antima bheda
saMjvalana kaSAya ke krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha ina cAra bhedoM meM se krodha,
mAna aura mAyA meM no aura lobha meM dasa guNasthAna hote haiM  /  ataH ina
cAroM kaSAyoM kA bandhasvAmitva sAmAnya rUpa se aura vizeSa rUpa se guNasthAnoM
ke samAna hI haiN| arthAt majvalana krodha, mAna, mAyA kA udaya naunheM
guNasthAna taka hotA hai, ataH unakA bandhasvAmitva jaisA bandhAdhikAra meM
guNasthAnoM kI apekSA batalAyA gayA hai, usI prakAra samajhanA cAhie  /  yAnI
sAmAnya se 120 aura guNasthAnoM meM pahale se lekara  /  mauveM guNasthAna taka
kramazaH 117, 101, 74, 177. 67. 63, 56, 58 aura 22 prakRtiyoM kA samajhanA
caahie| saMjvalana lobha meM eka se lekara dasa guNasthAna hote haiM, ataH
isameM nauveM guNasthAna taka to pUrvokta saMjvalanatrika ke anusAra bandha- .
svAmitva samajhanA cAhie aura dasaveM guNasthAna meM 17 prakRtiyoM kA bandha
hotA hai| _saMyamamArgaNA meM sAmAyika Adi saMyama ke bhedoM ke sAtha saMyama
pratipakSI asaMyama-avirati ko bhI mAnA jAtA hai  /  ataH saMyama mArgaNA ke
bhedoM ke bandhasvAmitva ko batalAne ke pahale asaMyama adhirati meM
bandhasvAmitva kA kathana karate haiM  /  avirati kA matalaba

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Third Karma Granth  This is about the state of Samyaktva being attained
but not the observance of Charitra. Therefore, there are four Gunasthanas in the
beginning, and in the fourteenth Gunasthan, due to the presence of Samyaktva,
the binding of Tirthankara-namakarma is possible, but the binding of Aharak-dvig
is not possible because it requires restraint. Therefore, in Aviriti, generally,
except for Aharak-dvig, 118, in the first Gunasthan 117, in the second 101, in
the third 74, and in the fourth Gunasthan 77, types of binding occur.  In
Jnanamargna, both knowledge and ignorance are considered. Among these, there are
five types of knowledge: Mati, Shruta, Avadhi, Manahparyaya, and Kevalgyan.
Among these, Mati, Shruta, and Avadhigyan are also opposite. That is, there are
three types of ignorance: Mati-agyan, Shruta-agyan, and Adhand-agyan. Of these
eight types of Jnanamargna, here, the binding of Ashan-trik is explained.  In
Ashan-trik, there are two or three Gunasthanas in the beginning. From their
general binding, Tirthankara-namakarma and Aharak-dvig, these three types should
be reduced. Because the cause of ignorance is Mithyatva, and in these Ashan-
trik, Mithyatva is present, so from the general and in the first Gunasthan 117,
in the second 101, and in the third 74, types of binding should be understood.
The meaning of Ashan-trik being considered as two or three Gunasthanas is that
in the third Gunasthan, the vision of the present being is not completely pure
or impure, but it is partly pure and partly impure, and partly mixed with
impurity. According to this mixed state, the knowledge of those beings is also
considered as mixed - partly in the form of knowledge and partly in the form of
ignorance. When there is more purity in it, then due to the increase in the
purity of vision and the decrease in impurity, 1 Mati-Shruta-Avadhi-yo-vishay-
pashcha.  Tatsvarth-poon, 1932

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagrantha hai ki samyaktva bhI ho jAye kintu cAritra kA pAlana nahIM
ho ske| ataH isameM Adi ke cAra guNasthAna hote haiM aura caudhe guNasthAna meM
samyaktva hone ke kAraNa tIrthakSaranAmakarma kA bandha saMbhava hai, parantu
AhArakadvika kA bandha saMyamasApekSa hone se inakA bandha nahIM hotA hai|
isalie avirati meM sAmAnya rUpa se AhArakadvika ke sivAya 118, pahale guNasthAna
meM 117, dUsare meM 101, tIsare meM 74 aura cauthe guNAsthAna meM 77 prakRtiyoM
kA bandha hotA hai| jJAnamArmaNA meM jJAna aura ajJAna-donoM ko mAnA jAtA hai  /
inameM matiH zruta, avadhi, manaHparyAya aura kevalajJAna ye mAna ke pAMca bheda
haiN| inameM mati, zruta aura avadhijJAna viparIta bhI hote haiN| arthAta-ajJAna
ke mati-ajJAna, zruta-ajJAna aura adhAMdha-ajJAna... ye tIna bheda hote haiN|
jJAnamArgaNA ke ina ATha bhedoM meM se yahA~ azAnatrika kA bandhasvAmiska
batalAte haiN| ajJAnatrika meM Adi ke do yA tIna guNasthAna hote haiN| inake
sAmAnya bandha meM se tIrthakaranAmakarma aura AhArakadvika ye tIna prakRtiyoM
kama kara denA caahie| kyoMki ajJAna kA kAraNa mithyAtva hai aura ina
ajJAnatrika meM mithyAtva kA sadbhAva rahatA hai, jisase sAmAnya se tathA pahale
guNasthAna meM 117, dUsare meM 101 aura tIsare meM 74 prakRtiyoM kA
bandhasvAmitva samajhanA caahiye| ajJAnatrika meM do yA tIna guNasthAna mAne
jAne kA Azya yaha hai ki tIsare guNasthAna meM vartamAna jIva kI dRSTi sarvathA
zuddha yA azuddha nahIM hotI hai, kintu zuddha kucha aura kucha azuddha tathA
kisI aMza meM azuddhamizra hotI hai  /  isa mizraiSTi ke anusAra una jIvoM kA
jJAna bhI mizra rUpa-kisI aMza meM jJAna rUpa tathA kisI aMza meM ajJAna rUpa
mAnA jAtA hai  /  jaba usameM zuddhatA adhika hotI hai, taba dRSTi kI zuddhi kI
adhikatA ke kAraNa aura azuddhi kI kamI ke kAraNa 1 matizrutAvadhayo viSaya
pazca  /  tasvArthapUna, 1932

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bandhaswamitva  In mixed knowledge (Mishragyan), the amount of knowledge is
greater and the amount of ignorance is less. Such beings with mixed knowledge
can be counted among Shani beings. However, they are considered Ashani. From
this perspective, in the first and second Gunasthanas, the being should be
considered Ashani.  But when there is an excess of impurity in the vision, and
the amount of ignorance is greater in mixed knowledge, and the amount of
knowledge is less due to lack of purity, then that mixed knowledge is considered
ignorance, and the mixed Shani beings are counted among ignorant beings.
Therefore, at that time, the first, second, and third Gunasthanas should be
considered ignorant.  The reason for both these situations is that when a being
comes from the Mithyatva Gunasthan to the third Gunasthan, the Mithyatva element
is more in the mixed vision, resulting in special impurity. And when it comes to
the third Gunasthan after leaving Samyaktva, the Samyaktva element is more in
the mixed vision, resulting in special purity. Therefore, two or three
Gunasthanas are considered in the Agnanatrika.  Here, the difference of opinion
regarding the consideration of two or three Gunasthanas in the Agnanatrika has
been presented. The Karmagranthakars consider the Sasvadan as ignorance. In the
first Gunasthan, due to the rise of Mithyatva Mohaniya, there is ignorance. And
the rest, which is mixed, also has the rise of Mohaniya Karma. Since there is no
understanding of the true nature there, many Acharyas consider it as ignorance.
Because it is said in Panchasangrah that in the mixed, there is only ignorance
mixed with knowledge, not pure knowledge. Here, knowledge is considered in
relation to pure Samyaktva. If we consider the one with impure Samyaktva as
Shani, then we will have to consider Sasvadan as Shani too. But this is not
desirable for the Karmagranthakars, because in the Karmagranth, it is said that
Sasvadan is ignorance. In this regard...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bandhasvAmitva mizrajJAna meM jJAna kI mAtrA adhika hotI hai aura ajJAna kI
mAtrA kama hotI hai, taba isa prakAra ke mizra jJAna se yukta jIvoM kI ginatI
zAnI jIvoM meM bhI kI jA sakatI hai. lekina vaha hai azAna ho| isa dRSTi se usa
samaya pahale aura dUsare do guNasthAnoM meM jIva ko hI azAnI samajhanA caahie|
parantu jaba dRSTi meM azuddhi kI adhikatA ke kAraNa mitrajJAna meM ajJAna kI
mAtrA adhika hotI hai aura zuddhi kI kamI ke kAraNa jhAna kI mAtrA kama taba usa
mizrajJAna ko ajJAna mAnakara mizra zAnI jIvoM kI gimatI ajJAnI jIvoM meM kI
jAtI hai  /  ataeva usa samaya pahale, dUsare aura tIsare.. ina tI gumAkA
sanyAsI aura ko ajJAnI samajhanA caahie| ukta donoM sthitiyoM kA kAraNa yaha hai
ki jo jIva mithyAtva guNasthAna se tIsare guNasthAna meM AtA hai, taba
mizradRSTi meM mivyAtvAMza adhika hone se azuddhi vizeSa hotI hai aura jaba
samyaktva chor3akara tIsare gaNasthAna meM AtA hai, taba mizradRSTi meM
samyaktvAMza adhika hone ke zuddhi vizeSa rahatI hai| isIlie ajJAnatrika meM do
yA tIna guNasthAna mAne jAte haiN| yahA~ ajJAnatrika meM do yA tIna guNasthAna
mAnane viSayaka matAntara kA digdarzana kiyA gayA hai| karmagrandhakAra
sAsvAdana ko ajJAna hI mAnate haiN| pahale guNasthAna meM mithyAtya mohanIya kA
udaya hone se ajJAna hI hai aura bAkI rahA mizra, vahA~ bhI mohanIyakarma kA
udaya hotA hai| vahA~ yathAsthita tatva kA bodha nahIM hone se : kitane hI
AcArya ajJAna rUpa hI mAnate haiN| kyoMki paMcasaMgraha meM kahA hai mizra meM
jJAna se mizrita ajJAna hI hote haiM, zuddha jJAna nahIM . hote haiN| yahA~
zuddha samyaktva kI apekSA se hI jJAna mAnA gayA hai| yadi azuddha samyaktva
vAle ko zAna mAneM to sAsvAdana ko bhI zAna mAnanA pdd'egaa| kintu
karmagranthakAroM ko yaha iSTa nahIM hai, kyoMki karmagrantha meM sAsvAdana ko
ajJAna hotA hai, aisA kahA hai  /  isa amekSA - - - -

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **71**  There are three karmic states. While many Acharyas
believe that there are more Mithyatva-mohaniya pudgalas in the mixed karmic
state, leading to more ignorance and less knowledge, and more Samyaktava-
mohaniya pudgalas, leading to more knowledge and less ignorance, they still
acknowledge a trace of knowledge in the mixed karmic state. Therefore, in the
state of ignorance, there are only the first two karmic states. (This statement
is made in the commentary of the Jina's teachings.) Thus, according to the
authors of the karmic texts, there are two or three karmic states.  The bondage
of the state of ignorance in the path of knowledge is explained here. The
bondage of the remaining five types of knowledge, namely, Matijnana, etc., will
be explained later. Now, we will explain the bondage of the two types of
Darshan, namely, Chakshu Darshan and Achakshu Darshan, in the path of Darshan.
**A**  In both Chakshu Darshan and Achakshu Darshan, there are twelve karmic
states. This is because both are क्षायोपशमिक (kshayopaśamika) states, and
क्षायोपशमिक states exist up to the twelfth karmic state. Therefore, their
bondage is the same in general and in each karmic state. That is, just as the
bondage is explained as 120 in general and 117 in the first karmic state, and so
on, up to the twelfth karmic state, similarly, the bondage should be understood
in the Chakshu Darshan and Achakshu Darshan paths.  As is known, the Charitra
(conduct) is present in the last four karmic states. Therefore, there are four
karmic states from the eleventh to the fourteenth. In the fourteenth karmic
state, there is no bondage due to the absence of Yoga. However, in the eleventh,
twelfth, and thirteenth karmic states, there is bondage due to the presence of
Yoga. Therefore, only one nature, namely, the Saataavedaniya, is bound due to
Yoga. Therefore, in this Charitra, one should understand the ownership of this
nature in general and in particular.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 71 tRtIya karmaca se tIna guNasthAna hote haiN| jabaki feaneka AcArya
mizramohanIya pudgaloM meM mithyAtvamohanIya ke pudagala adhika hoM to ajJAna
adhika aura jJAna alpa tathA samyaktvamohanIya ke pudgala adhika hoM to jJAna
adhika aura ajJAna alpa aisA mAnate haiM se jJAna kA leza-aMza mizra guNasthAna
meM mAnate haiN| isalie usa apekSA se ajJAnatrika meM prathama do guNasthAna hI
hote haiN| (yaha kathana jinarecite safeaa kI TIkA meM kiyA gayA hai | isa
prakAra se do athavA tIna guNasthAna karmagranthakAroM ke matAnusAra hote haiM
/  jJAnamArgaNA ke ajJAnatrika kA bandhasvAmitva yahAM batalAyA gayA hai| zeSa
matijJAnAdi pA~ca bhedoM kA avatarfire Age batalAyA jAyagA | aba darzana mArgeNA
ke bheda cakSa darzana aura akSadarzana kA bandhasvAmitva batalAte haiM  /  A
kSudarzana aura acakSudarzana ina do darzanoM meM pahale se lekara bAraha
guNasthAna hote haiN| kyoMki ye donoM kSAyoparfmaka bhAva haiM aura
kSAyopazamika bhAva bAraha guNasthAna paryanta hote haiN| ataH inakA svAmitva
sAmAnya rUpa se tathA pratyeka guNasthAna meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna hai|
arthAt bandhAdhikAra meM jaise sAmAnya se 120 aura guNasthAnoM meM pahale meM
117 Adi guNasthAna ke krama se lekara bArahaveM guNasthAnaparyanta bandha
batalAyA gayA hai. isI prakAra cakSudarzana aura akSadarzana mArgaNA meM bandha
samajhanA caahie| yathAkhyAta cAritra aMtima cAra guNasthAnavartI jIvoM meM hotA
hai | ataH gyArahaveM se lekara caudahaveM guNasthAna taka- ye cAra guNasthAna
hote haiN| caudahaveM guNasthAna meM to yoga kA abhAva hone se bandha hotA hI
nahIM hai  /  kintu gyArahaveM Adi tIna guNasthAnoM meM bandha ke kAraNa yoga kA
sadbhAva hotA hai  /  ataH yoga ke nimitta se ba~dhane vAlI sirpha eka prakRti -
sAtAvedanIya kA bandha hotA hai| isalie isa cAritra meM sAmAnya aura vizeSa se
eka prakRti kA svAmitva samajhanA caahie|

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The summary is that among the four types of Kshaya Margna, namely Sanjwalan
Krodha, Mana, Maya and Lobha, Krodha, Mana and Maya remain until the ninth
Gunasthan. Therefore, there are nine Gunasthanas from the first to the ninth for
these three, and Lobha remains until the tenth Gunasthan. Therefore, their
Bandhaswamitva should be understood according to the dreams.  There are four
Gunasthanas in the beginning of Avirati, a type of Samyam Margna. In the fourth
Gunasthan, due to the presence of Samyaktva, the Bandha of Tirthakur Namakarma
is possible, but the Bandha of Aharakdvik is not possible because it is
dependent on Samyasa. Therefore, in Avirati, there are 18 types of Bandhas
except for Aharakdvik, and in Gunasthanas, there are 101 in the first, 74 in the
third, and 77 in the fourth.  In the first, there are 117, and in the second,
there are 101 types of Bandhas. In Ajnana Trik, there are two or three
Gunasthanas, therefore, from the general Bandha, Tirthakur Namakarma and
Aharakdvik, these three types should be reduced. Therefore, from the general and
in the first Gunasthan, there are 177, in the second, there are 101, and in the
third, there are 74 types of Bandhas.  In Chakshudarshan and Achakshudarshan,
there are twelve Gunasthanas in the beginning, and their Bandhaswamitva should
be understood as the same as the general and in relation to the Gunasthanas.  In
Yathakyat Charitra, there are four final Gunasthanas from the eleventh to the
fourteenth, and in the fourteenth Gunasthan, there is no Bandha due to the
absence of Yoga, and in the remaining three - eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth
- there is only one Bandha of Satavedaniya.  In this way, Sanjwalan Chatushk of
Kshaya Margna, Avirati and Yathakyat Charitra of Samyam Margna, and Ajnana of
Jnana Margna.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dH Waterfere sArAMza yaha hai ki kaSAyamAgaMNA ke cauthe bheda saMjvalana
kodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha meM se krodha, mAna, mAyA nauveM guNasthAna taka
rahatI hai  /  ata: ina tInoM ke pahale se lekara no guNasthAna hote haiM tathA
lobha dasaveM guNasthAnaparyanta rahatA hai| ataH inakA bandhasvAfere sapanoM ke
anusAra ye samajhanA cAhie  /  saMyamamArgaNA ke bheda avirati meM Adi ke cAra
guNasthAna hote haiN| cauthe guNasthAna meM samyaktva hone ke kAraNa tIrthakara
nAmakarma kA bandha saMbhava hai, parantu AhArakadvika kA vadha saMyasApekSa
hone se nahIM hotA hai  /  ataH avirati meM sAmAnya se AhArakadvika ke sivAya 18
prakRtiyoM kA tathA guNasthAnoM meM meM 101, tIsare meM 74 aura cauthe meM 77
hotA hai  /  pahale meM 117. dUsare prakRtiyoM kA bandha ajJAnatrika meM do yA
tIna guNasthAna hote isalie isake sAmAnya bandha meM se tIrthakuranAmakarma aura
AhArakadvika ina tIna prakRtiyoM ko kama kara lenA caahie| ataH sAmAnya se aura
pahale guNasthAna meM 177, dUsare meM 101 aura tIsare meM 74 prakRtiyoM kA
Tatarfara samajhanA cAhie  /  cakSudarzana aura acakSudarzana inameM Adi ke
bAraha guNasthAna hote haiM aura inakA bandhasvAmitva sAmAnya se evaM guNasthAna
kI apekSA guNasthAnoM ke samAna samajhanA caahie| yathAkhyAta cAritra meM
gyAraha se caudaha aMtima cAra guNasthAna hote haiM aura caudahaveM guNasthAna
meM yoga kA abhAva hone se bandha nahIM hotA aura zeSa tIna- gyAraha bAraha aura
teraha ina tIna guNasthAnoM meM sirpha eka sAtAvedanIya kA bandha hotA hai  /  "
isa prakAra kaSAyamArgaNA ke saMjvalanacatuSka aura saMyamamArgaNA ke avirati
aura yathAkhyAta cAritra, jJAnamArgaNA ke ajJAna

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Bondage of Karma in the Path of Knowledge  This passage discusses the
bondage of karma in the different stages of the path of knowledge, specifically
focusing on the **Manahparyaya** (mental perception) and **Mati** (intellectual)
knowledge. It also mentions the **Samyama** (restraint) and **Shana** (spiritual
power) paths, and their respective stages of bondage.  The passage begins by
stating that the bondage of karma is discussed in the previous verses,
specifically in the context of the **Trika** (threefold path) and the
**Darshanmarg** (path of vision). It then moves on to explain the bondage of
karma in the **Samyamamarg** and **Shanamarg**, highlighting the different
stages of **Matijnana** (intellectual knowledge) and other types of knowledge.
**Verse 18** states: "All victories are achieved through time, and only through
restraint can one overcome them. Only in the **Kevalidvik** (two-fold path of
liberation) are there no more obstacles."  **Explanation:**  * **Manahparyaya
Jnana:** This stage of knowledge encompasses seven **Gunasthanas** (stages of
spiritual development), from **Pramattasanyata** (controlled by passions) to
**Kshaya Kshaya** (destruction of passions). While **Manahparyaya Jnana** arises
in the seventh **Gunasthan**, a monk can still fall back into the sixth
**Gunasthan** due to carelessness. Those who possess this knowledge do not
remain in the first five **Gunasthanas** (Mithyatva, etc.), as they are free
from the **Kshayas** (passions). However, they do not remain in the last two
**Gunasthanas** (thirteenth and fourteenth), as it is impossible to be free from
passions while still experiencing them. Therefore, **Manahparyaya Jnana** is
considered to exist from the sixth to the twelfth **Gunasthanas**.  * **Mati
Jnana:** This stage of knowledge encompasses nine **Gunasthanas**, from **Avirat
Samyagdristi** (unwavering right faith) to the ninth **Gunasthan**.  *
**Samyamamarg:** This path encompasses three types of **Charitra** (conduct):
**Samayik** (temporary vows), **Chhedopasthaniya** (partial vows), and
**Pariharavishuddhi** (purified conduct). Each of these **Charitra** has its own
stages of bondage, with **Pramattasanyata** being the lowest stage.  *
**Shanamarg:** This path encompasses the **Avadhi Darshan** (clairvoyance) and
**Keval Darshan** (omniscience) stages of **Darshanmarg**.  The passage
concludes by stating that the detailed explanation of the bondage of karma in
each stage of knowledge is provided in the verses that follow.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mRtIya karmapragya trika, darzanamArgaNA ke darzana aura acakSuzana meM
bandhasvAmitva kA kaSana karane ke bAda Age kI gAthA meM saMyamamArgaNA aura
zAnamArgaNA ke matijJAna Adi bhedoM meM banprasvAmitva batalAte haiM- raNanANi
saga jayAI samaya cheya u kunni parihAre  /  kevaligi do gharamA'ayAi naba
maisumohiduge  // 18 //  gAbhArtha- manaHparyAya jJAna meM pramattasaMyata Adi
arthAt chaThe se lekara bArahaveM guNasthAnaparyanta sAta tathA sAmAyika aura
chedopasthAnIya cAritra meM pramattasaMyata Adi cAra guNasthAna evaM
parihAravizuddhi cAritra meM pramattasaMyata Adi do guNasthAna hote haiM  /
kevaladvika meM antima do guNasthAna tathA bhatijJAna, zrutajJAna aura
avadhinika meM avirata samyagdRSTi se lekara nau muNasthAna hote haiN|
vizedhArtha.....? sa gAthA meM jJAnamAgaMNA ke bhedoM .. manaHparyAyajJAna,
matijJAna, a tazAna. avadhijJAna, kevalajJAna, saMyamamAgaMNA ke sAmAyika,
chedIpasthAnIya aura parihAravizuddhi cAritra. darzanamArgaNA ke avadhivarzana
aura kevaladarzana meM bandhasvAmitva kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| inakA vizada
artha gAthA meM batAye gaye krama ke anusAra kiyA jAtA hai| manaHparyAyajJAna
meM chaThe guNasthAna-pramasasaMyata se lekara kSI kaSAyaparyanta sAta
guNasthAna hote haiM  /  yadyapi manaHparyAyajJAna kA AvirbhAva sAtaveM
guNasthAna meM hotA hai, parantu isakI prApti ke bAda muni pramAdavaza chache
guNasthAna ko bhI prApta kara sakatA hai tathA isa jJAna ke dhAraka mithyAtva
Adi pA~ca guNasthAnoM meM vartamAna nahIM rahate haiM tathA yaha kSAyopazamika
hone se aMtima guNasthAna ... terahaveM aura caudahaveM guNasthAna meM nahIM
rahatA hai, kyoMki kSAyika avasthA meM kSAyopazAmika sthiti rahanA asaMbhava
hai| isalie manaHparyAya zAna meM chaThe se lekara bArahaba guNasthAna taka mAne
jAte haiN| isameM AhAraka

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **General**  It is possible for the *dvik* of *saaman* to be
bound. Therefore, in this knowledge, one should understand the ownership of the
binding of 65 *prakritis* in general and the same ownership of binding in each
*gunasthan* from the sixth to the twelfth *munasthan*. In other words, in the
*manahparyayajnanamargna*, there are 65 *prakritis* in general, and from the
sixth to the twelfth *gunasthan*, there are 63 in the sixth, 5658 in the
seventh, 585626 in the eighth, 2212112011618 in the ninth, 17 in the tenth, 1 in
the eleventh, and 1 in the twelfth.  **Samayik and Chandopastaniy**  These two
*sanayam* are found in the sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth *munasthan*. During
these *sanayam*, it is possible for the *dvik* of *aaharaka* to be bound.
Therefore, 65 *prakritis* are capable of being bound in general, and the same
binding should be understood in each *gunasthan* from the sixth onwards, in
accordance with the *gunasthan*. In other words, there are 63 in the sixth,
56358 in the seventh, 585626 in the eighth, and 221211201618 in the ninth.
**Pariharavishuddhi**  A *sanayami* with *pariharavishuddhi* cannot attain the
*munasthan* beyond the seventh *gunasthan*. Therefore, this *sanayam* occurs
only in the sixth and seventh *gunasthan*. Although the *dvik* of *aaharaka*
does not arise during this *sanayam*, because a *sanayami* with
*pariharavishuddhi* does not have complete knowledge of the ten *purva*, and the
*dvik* of *aaharaka* can arise only in the *chaturdashapurvadhara*. However, it
is possible for the *dvik* of *aaharaka* to be bound. Therefore, the ownership
of binding is 65 *prakritis* in general, and the same binding should be
understood in each *gunasthan*, in other words, 63 in the sixth *gunasthan* and
56 or 58 in the seventh.  **Kevalahit**  *Kevalahit*, which includes *kevalgyan*
and *kevaldarshan*, consists of the thirteenth and fourteenth *gunasthan*.
However, in the *bauddh* *munasthan* out of these two *gunasthan*, due to the
absence of the causes of binding, no *karmaprakriti* is bound. However, in the
thirteenth *gunasthan*...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAmAna dvika kA bhI bandha saMbhava hai| isalie isa jJAna meM sAmAnya rUpa se
65 prakRtiyoM kA tathA chaThe se lekara bArahaveM muNasthAnaparyanta pratyeka
guNasthAna meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna ho prakRtiyoM kA bandhasvAmitva samajhanA
caahie| arthAta manaHparyAyajJAnamArgaNA meM sAmAnya se 65 prakRtiyoM kA aura
chaThe se lekara bArahaveM guNasthAna taka chaThe meM 63, sAtaveM meM 5.6 / 58,
AThaveM meM 5856 / 26. nauve meM 22121120116 18, dasaveM meM 17, myArahaveM meM
1, bArA meM 1 prakRti kA bandha samajhanA caahie| sAmAyika aura chaMdopasthAnIya
ye do saMyama chaThe, sAtaveM, AThaveM aura nauveM ina cAra muNasthAnoM meM pAye
jAte haiM  /  ina saMyamoM ke samaya AhArakadvika kA bandha honA bhI saMbhava
hai  /  ataH sAmAnya se 65 prakRtiyA~ bandhayogya haiM aura guNasthAnoM kI
apekSA chaTha Adi pratyeka guNasthAna meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna hI banadha
samadaranA caahie| arthAta chaThe meM 63, sAtaveM meM 56358, AThaveM se 58:5626,
nauce meM 22121120 / 16 / 18 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| parihAravizuddhi
saMyamI sAtaveM guNasthAna se Age ke muNasthAnoM ko nahIM pA sakatA hai| ataH
yaha saMyama sirpha chaThe aura sAtaveM guNasthAna meM hI hotA hai| isa saMyama
ke samaya yadyapi AhArakadvika kA udadha nahIM hotA, kyoMki parihAravizuddhi
saMyamI ko dasa pUrva kA bhI pUrNa jJAna nahIM hotA aura AhArakaddhika kA udaya
caturdazapUrvadhara ke saMbhava hai  /  tathApi isako AhArakadvika kA bandha
saMbhava hai| isalie bandhasvAmitva sAmAnya rUpa se 65 prakRtiyoM kA aura
muNasthAnoM kI apekSA bandhAdhikAra ke samAna, arthAt chaThe guNasthAna meM 63
aura sAtave meM 56 yA 58 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| kevalahika arthAt
kevalajJAna aura kevaladarzana meM terahavI aura caudahavAM ye do guNasthAna
hote haiN| lekina vakta do guNasthAnoM meM se baudaha muNasthAna meM bandha ke
kAraNoM kA abhAva ho jAne se kisI bhI karmaprakRti kA bandha nahIM hotA hai,
lekina derahaveM guNasthAna

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The karma of the third (Tṛtīya) is mainly present, and that bondage is only of
the seven-sense-object (Sātavedanīya). Therefore, in both of these, the bondage-
ownership is of the same nature as the general and in comparison to the quality-
places (Guṇasthāna). _The knowledge of mind (Matigñāna), the knowledge of
scripture (Śrutigñāna), and the knowledge of perception (Avadhi-dvīka-
Avadhijñāna and Avadhīdarśana) - these four paths (Mārgaṇā) do not have the
first three quality-places (Guṇasthāna) and the last two quality-places. That
is, there are nine quality-places from the thought (Vicāra) to the twelfth
quality-place of the weakened passions (Kṣīṇakṣayā). The reason for not having
the first three quality-places is that these four are considered real when there
is right conduct (Samyaktvā), and there is no pure right conduct in the first
three quality-places. And the reason for not having the last two quality-places
is that they have knowledge of passions (Kṣayika jñāna), not the cessation of
passions (Kṣayopashamika). Therefore, in these four, a total of nine quality-
places are considered from the fourth to the twelfth quality-place. In these
four paths, since the bondage of the two-fold food (Āhārakadvika) is possible,
it should be understood that there are 16 natures in general and in comparison
to the quality-places, the bondage-ownership is the same as the bondage-
authority in each quality-place from the fourth to the twelfth quality-place.
That is, in the fourth quality-place, the food body (Āhārak śarīra) and the food
limbs (Āhārak angopānga) - these two natures are added to the 77 natures that
are bondable in general, resulting in bondage of 76 natures in comparison to the
general, and in comparison to the quality-places, 37 in the fourth, 67 in the
fifth, 63 in the sixth, 56158 in the seventh, 556126 in the eighth, 2sarś2011618
in the ninth, 17 in the tenth, ? in the eleventh, and in the twelfth, the
bondage of nature should be understood. In summary, in the path of knowledge of
mental states (Manaḥparyāya jñānamārgaṇā), there are seven quality-places from
the sixth to the twelfth quality-place, and since the bondage of the two-fold
food is possible in this, there are 65 natures in general, and in comparison to
the quality-places, the bondage should be understood in each quality-place from
the sixth to the twelfth quality-place, the same as the bondage-authority.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtasya karma prAya meM hotA hai, aura vaha bandha sirpha sAtAvedanIya kA hotA
hai| isalie ina donoM meM sAmAnya se aura guNasthAna kI apekSA banchasvAmitva
eka hI prakRti kA hai| _matijJAna, zrutajJAna aura avadhidvika-avadhijJAna aura
avadhidarzana ina cAra mArgaNAoM meM pahale ke tIna muzasthAna tathA pratima do
guNasthAna nahIM hote haiM  /  arthAt aura vicAra bAraha kSINakaSAya guNasthAna
taka nau guNasthAna hote haiN| Adi ke tIna guNasthAna na hone kA kAraNa yaha hai
ki ye cAroM samyaktva ke hone para yathArtha mAne jAte haiM aura Adi ke tIna
guNasthAnoM meM zuddha samyaktva nahIM hotA hai tathA antima do guNasthAna na
hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki unameM kSAyika jJAna hotA hai. kSAyopazamika nahIM
hai isalie ina cAroM meM cauthe se lekara bArahavaM guNasthAna taka kula no
guNasthAna mAne jAte haiN| ina cAroM mArgaNAoM meM bhI AhArakAdvika' kA bandha
saMbhava hone se sAmAnya meM 16 prakRttiyoM kA aura guNasthAnoM kI apekSA cauthe
se lekara bArahaveM guNasthAna taka pratyeka guNasthAna meM bandhAdhikAra ke
samAna bandhasvAmitva samajhanA cAhie  /  arthAt cauthe guNasthAna ko
bandhayogya 77 prakRtiyoM meM AhAraka zarIra aura AhAraka aMgopAMga - ina do
prakRtiyoM ko aura jor3ane se sAmAnya kI apekSA 76 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai
aura guNasthAnoM kI apekSA cauthe meM 37, pAMcaveM meM 67, chaThe meM 63,
sAtaveM meM 56158, AThaveM meM 556126. nau meM 2saraza2011618, dasaveM meM 17,
gyArahaveM meM ?. bArahaveM meM prakRti kA bandha samajhanA caahie| sArAMza yaha
hai ki manaHparyAya jJAnamArgaNA meM chaThe se lekara bArahave
guNasthAnaparyanta sAta guNasthAna hote haiM aura isameM AhArakadvika kA bandha
saMbhava hone se sAmAnyatayA 65 prakRtiyoM kA aura guNasthAnoM kI apekSA
bandhAdhikAra ke samAna chaThe se lekara bArahaveM guNasthAna taka pratyeka
guNasthAna meM bandha samajhanA caahie|

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Samayika and Chhedopasthaniya** are two types of **Samyama**
that occur from the sixth to the ninth **Gunasthanas** (stages of spiritual
development). In these, **Aharakaddhik** (external influences) can also lead to
**Bandha** (bondage). Therefore, the **Bandhaswamitva** (ownership of bondage)
in both is generally 65 **Prakritis** (categories of karma), and the
**Bandhadhikar** (right to bondage) is the same in each **Gunasthan** from the
sixth to the ninth.  **Parihar Vishuddhi** is a pure **Samyama** and a
**Gunasthan**. Although **Aharakaddhik** does not arise during this **Samyama**,
**Bandha** is possible. Therefore, its **Bandhaswamitva** is generally 65
**Prakritis**, and specifically, the **Bandhadhikar** is 63 in the sixth
**Gunasthan** and 56 or 58 **Prakritis** in the seventh.  **Kevaladwik** -
**Kevalgyan** and **Kevaldarshan** - are the last two **Gunasthanas**, the
thirteenth and fourteenth. However, in the fourteenth **Gunasthan**, **Bandha**
does not occur due to the absence of causes of **Badha** (obstacles). In the
thirteenth **Gunasthan**, only one **Sataavedaniya Karma** (karma that can be
destroyed in this life) is bound. Therefore, its general and specific **Bandha**
is only one **Sataavedaniya** **Prakriti**.  **Matigyan**, **Shrutigyan**, and
**Avadhi** - **Avadhigyan** and **Avhidarshan** - are four **Marganas** (paths
of knowledge). The first three **Gunasthanas** do not have **Shuddha Samyaktv**
(perfect knowledge), and the last two are **Kshayikbhav** (prone to
destruction). All four are **Sayopashmik** (prone to external influences).
Therefore, they span nine **Gunasthanas** from the fourth to the twelfth. In
these four **Marganas**, **Aharakaddhik** can lead to **Bandha**, so the
**Bandhaswamitva** should be understood as 76 **Prakritis** generally and the
same as the **Bandhadhikar** in each **Gunasthan** from the fourth to the
twelfth.  Thus, the **Gyanyamargna** (path of knowledge) includes **Mati**,
**Shruti**, **Avadhi**, **Manahparyaya**, and **Kevalgyan**, and the
**Darshanamargna** (path of perception) includes **Avhidarshan** and
**Kevaldarshan**. The **Samyamamargna** (path of self-control) includes
**Samayika**, **Chhedopasthapaniya**, and **Parihar Vishuddhi**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 WrrenAmi sAmAyika aura chedopasthAnIya ye do saMyama chaThe se lekara nauveM
taka cAra guNasthAna paryanta hote haiM tathA inameM AhArakaddhika kA bhI bandha
saMbhava hai  /  ataH ina donoM meM bandhasvAmitva sAmAnya rUpa se 65 prakRtiyoM
kA aura chaThe se lekara nauveM taka pratyeka guNasthAna meM bandhAdhikAra ke
samAna hI hai| parihAra vizuddha saMyama aura mAtrA ko guNasthAna hote haiM  /
yadyapi isa saMyama ke samaya AhArakaddhika kA udaya nahIM hotA hai, kintu
bandha saMbhava hai  /  ataH isakA bandhasvAmitva sAmAnya rUpa se 65 prakRtiyoM
kA aura vizeSa rUpa se bandhAdhikAra ke samAna chaThe guNasthAna meM 63 aura
sAtaveM meM 56 yA 58 prakRtiyoM kA hotA hai| kevala dvika - kevalajJAna aura
kevaladarzanameM antima do guNa. sthAna-terahavAM aura caudahavA hote haiN|
lekina ukta do guNasthAnoM meM se caudahaveM guNasthAna meM bAdha ke kAraNoM kA
abhAva hone meM bandha nahIM hotA hai aura terahaveM guNasthAna meM sirpha eka
sAtAvedanIya karma kA bandha hotA hai| isalie isakA sAmAnya aura vizeSa bandha
eka sAtAvedanIya prakRti kA hI hai| matijJAna, zrutajJAna aura avadhidvika
avadhijJAna aura avadhidarzana ina cAra mArgaNAoM meM pahale tIna guNasthAnoM
meM zuddha samyaktva nahIM hone se tathA antima do guNAsthAna kSAyikabhAva vAle
hone se aura ina cAroM ke sAyopazamika bhAva vAle hone se cauthe se lekara
bArahaveM guNasthAna paryanta no guNasthAna hote haiM  /  ina cAra mArgaNAoM meM
AhArakadrika kA bandha sambhava hone se sAmAnya se 76 prakRtiyoM kA aura
gugdhasthAnoM kI apekSA cauthe se lekara bAraha taka pratyeka guNasthAna meM
bandhAdhikAra ke samAna andhasvAmitva' samajhanA caahie| isa prakAra ke
jJAnamArgaNA ke mati, zruta, avadhi, manaHparyAya aura kavalazAna tathA
darzanamArgaNA ke avadhidarzana aura kevaladarzana tathA saMyamamArgaNA ke
sAmAyika, chedopasthApanIya aura parihAravizuddhi bheda

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the third chapter of Karma, we have already discussed the bondage of the soul
in relation to general and specific qualities. Now, in the following verses, we
will explain the remaining distinctions between the paths of Right Faith
(Samyaktvamargna) and Restraint (Samyamamargna), and the bondage of the soul in
the path of Food (Aharakmargna).  **Verse 16:** There are four qualities in the
path of Right Faith (Samyaktvamargna) called "Upasham," eleven qualities in the
path of Right Faith (Samyaktvamargna) called "Kshayopamik," one quality in the
path of False Faith (Mithyatvamargna) called "Mithyatva," one quality in the
path of Restraint (Samyamamargna) called "Deshacharitra," and one quality in the
path of Restraint (Samyamamargna) called "Sookshma Samparaya." There are
thirteen qualities in the path of Food (Aharakmargna). One should understand
that the bondage of the soul in each of these paths is equal to the number of
qualities in each path.  **Explanation:** This verse explains the bondage of the
soul in the paths of Right Faith (Samyaktvamargna) - "Upasham," "Vedak"
(Kshayopamik), "Kshayik," "Mithyatva," "Sasvadan," and "Mith," and in the paths
of Restraint (Samyamamargna) - "Deshavirat," "Sookshma Samparaya," and
"Aharakmargna."  Those who have attained "Upasham" or those who are comparable
to the beings with infinite attachments and the three poisons of passions
(Kshaya), perception (Darshan), and delusion (Moh), are said to have attained
"Upasham Samyaktvam." This "Upasham Samyaktvam" exists in the qualities of
"Deshavirati," "Pramattasanyatavirati," or "Aparamattasanyatavirati," except for
"Avirat Samyaktvam." Similarly, this "Upasham" category exists in the beings who
are in the eighth to eleventh qualities. Therefore, in this "Samyaktvam," there
are a total of eight qualities from the fourth to the eleventh qualities.
During this "Samyaktvam," there is no bondage of lifespan. In the fourth
quality, there is no bondage of either divine lifespan or human lifespan. In the
fifth and subsequent qualities, there is no bondage of divine lifespan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmapanya meM sAmAnya aura guNasthAnoM kI apekSA balasvAmitva kA kapana
kiyA jA cukA hai| aba Age kI gAthA meM samyaktva mArgaNA tathA saMyama mArgaNA
ke zeSa bhedoM aura AhAraka mArgaNA meM bandhasvAmitva batalAte haiM aDa upasami
cau vyagi khaie ikAra micchatigi se| sumi saThANaM terasa AhAragi niyaniyaguNoho
// 16 //  re:- -upazama sanyArava' ma mA dA dAyopazamika samyaktva meM cAra,
kSAyika samyaktva meM gyAraha, mithyAtvatrika aura dezacAritra, sUkSmasaMparAya
saMyama meM apane apane nAma vAle eka-eka guNasthAna hote haiM tathA AhAraka
mArgaNA meM teraha guNasthAna hote haiM aura sAmAnya se apane-apane guNasthAna
ke samAna bandha samajhanA caahie| zivAyaM- isa gAthA meM samyaktva mArgaNA ke
upazama, vedaka (kSAyopamika), kSAyika, mithyAtva, sAsvAdana aura mitha tathA
saMyama mArgaNA ke dezavirata, sUkSmasaMparAya evaM AhAraka mArgaNA kA
bandhasvAmitva batalAyA gayA hai| upazamaNi ko prApta hue athavA anantAnubandhI
kaSAyacalaSka aura darzanamohatrika ko upamita karane vAle jIvoM ko upazama
samyaktva hotA hai| yaha upazcama samyaktva avirata samyaktva ke sivAya
dezavirati, pramattasaMyatavirati yA apramattasaMvatavirati guNasthAnoM meM
tathA isI prakAra AThaveM se lekara gyArahaveM taka cAra guNasthAnoM meM
vartamAna upazama zreNI vAle jIvoM ko rahatA hai| isI kAraNa isa samyaktva meM
cauthe se lekara gyAraha guNasthAna taka kula ATha guNasthAna kahe gaye haiN|
isa samyaktva ke samaya Ayu kA bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  isase cauthe guNasthAna
meM deva aura manuSyAyu ina donoM kA bandha nahIM hotA hai .. aura pAMca adi
guNasthAna meM devAyu kA bandha nahIM hotA hai|

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  78 Therefore, in this Samyaktv, generally 75 Prakṛtis are
bound, in the plant Guṇasthāna 75, in the fifth 66, in the sixth 62, in the
seventh 58, in the eighth 585626, in the ninth 22021120.16.18, in the tenth 17,
and in the eleventh Guṇasthāna 1 Prakṛti is said to be bound.  Vedakasamyaktv is
also called Kṣayopamika Samyaktv. Kṣayopamika Samyaktv destroys the arising of
Mithyatva and pacifies the non-arising. Therefore, it is called Kṣayopamika
Samyaktv. This Samyaktv occurs in four Guṇasthānas from the fourth to the
seventh. In this, the binding of Āhāravik also occurs, generally 79 Prakṛtis are
bound, and specifically, in comparison to the Muṇasthāna, in the fourth
Guṇasthāna 77, in the fifth 67, in the sixth 63, and in the seventh 56 or 58
Prakṛtis are bound. After that, the series begins. Therefore, in the Upasama
series, there is Upasama Samyaktv, and in the Kṣapaka series, there is Kṣayika
Samyaktv.  The special characteristic of Aupaśamika and Kṣayopamika Samyaktv is
that Kṣayopamika Samyaktv experiences the arising of the region of Mithyatva-
mohaniya, and Upasama Samyaktv does not experience either the arising of the
result or the arising of the region. In Kṣayopamika Samyaktv, there are Pudgalas
of Mithyatva-mohaniya, therefore it is called Vedaka. In summary, in Aupaśamika
Samyaktv, there is no experience of the result of the particles of Mithyatva,
nor from the region. But in Kṣayopamika Samyaktv, there is experience in
comparison to the region.  From the destruction of all three types of Darśana-
mohaniya Karma, which are the causes of the world, there is Kṣayika Samyaktv. In
this Samyaktv, there are eleven Guṇasthānas from the fourth to the fourteenth.
In this, the binding of Āhāraka-dvik can occur. Therefore, generally, its
binding is of 79 Prakṛtis, and in comparison to the Guṇasthānas, it is the same
in each Guṇasthāna. That is, in Avirata 77, in Deśavira

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 78 ataeva isa samyaktva meM sAmAnya rUpa se 75 prakRtiyoM kA sathA paudhe
guNasthAna meM 75, pAMcaveM meM 66, chaThe meM 62, sAtaveM meM 58, AThaveM meM
585626. nauve meM 22021120 / 16 / 18, dasaveM meM 17 aura gyArahaveM guNasthAna
meM 1 prakRti kA bandhasvAmitva batAyA hai| vedakasamyakrana kA dUsarA nAma
kSAyopamika samyaktva bhI hai| kSAyopazamika samyaktvI udaya prApta mithyAtva kA
kSaya aura anudayaprApta kA upazama karatA hai| isIlie ise kSAyopazamika
samyaktva kahate haiM  /  yaha samyaktva cauthe se sAta taka cAra guNasthAnoM
meM hotA hai| isameM AhArAvika kA bhI saMghasA isA bandhasvAmitva sAmAnya se 79
prakRtiyoM kA aura vizeSa rUpa se muNasthAma kI apekSA cauthe guNasthAna meM 77,
pAMcaveM meM 67, chaThe meM 63 aura sAtave meM 56 yA 58 prakRtiyoM kA hai  /
usake bAda zreNI kA prArambha ho jAtA hai  /  isalie upazama zreNI meM upazama
samyaktva aura kSapaka zreNI meM kSAyika samyaktva hotA hai| _aupazamika aura
kSAyopAmika samyaktva meM yaha vizeSatA hai ki kSAyozapamika samyaktvI
mithyAtvamohanIya ke pradezodaya kA anubhava karatA hai, aura upazama samyaktvo
vipAkodaya tathA pradezodaya donoM kA hI anubhava nahIM karatA hai  /
kSAyopazamika samyaktva meM mithyAtva mohanIya ke pudgala hote haiM, isIlie use
vedaka kahA jAtA hai  /  sArAMza maha hai ki aupazamika samyaktva meM mithyAtva
ke dalikoM kA vipAka aura pradeza se bhI vedana nahIM hotA hai. kintu bAyopAmika
samyaktva meM pradeza kI apekSA vedana hotA hai| saMsAra ke kAraNabhUta tInoM
prakAra ke darzanamohanIya karma ke kSaya se kSAyika samyaktva hotA hai| isa
samyaktva meM cauthe se lekara caudahaveM taka gyAraha guNasthAna hote haiN|
isameM AhArakadvika kA bandha ho sakatA hai| isaliye sAmAnya rUpa se isakA
bandhasvAmitva 79 prakRtiyoM kA aura guNasthAnoM kI apekSA pratyeka guNasthAna
meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna hai  /  arthAt avirata meM 77, dezavirata maiM

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma Granth 79  67 in *Pramattavirata*, 63 in *Aparamattavirata*, 56
or 58 in *Apoovarnakaran*. 5856326 in *Anivrittikaran*, 17 in *Sookshma
Samparaya*, and *Upshanta Moh*, *Ksheenoi*. In *Sayogimasthan*, 11 *Prakriti*
should be understood as bondage, and *Ayodhi Gunasthan* is the manager.
*Mithyatvatrika*, meaning *Mithyatva*, *Sasvadan*, and *Mishradristi*, are three
sub-divisions of *Samyaktva Ma*. Each of these has a *Gunasthan* named after it.
That is, the first *Gunasthan* is *Mithyatva*, the second is *Sasvadan*, and the
third is *Mishra*. Therefore, the general and specific bondage ownership of
these three should be understood as the same as the bondage ownership of these
*Gunasthan*. That is, generally and specifically, *Mithyatva* has 117 *Prakriti*
bondage ownership, *Sasvadan* has 101, and *Mishra Gunasthan* has 74.
*Deshavirata* and *Sookshma Samparaya* are two divisions of *Sanayama Marg*.
Each of these two *Sanayama* has a *Gunasthan* named after it. That is,
*Deshavirati Sanayama* is only in the fifth *Gunasthan*, and *Sookshma
Samparaya* is only in the tenth *Gunasthan*. Therefore, the bondage ownership of
these two is also the same as the bondage ownership of their respective
*Gunasthan*. That is, generally and specifically, *Deshavirati* has 67
*Prakriti* bondage ownership, and *Sookshma Samparaya* has 17.  ... "Whoever
consumes food at the time, is called *Aharak* (eater). All worldly beings, as
long as they remain in the world due to their lifespan, consume their respective
karmas. With respect to *Gunasthan*, all beings from the first *Gunasthan* to
the thirteenth *Gunasthan* are *Aharak*, and all these beings consume through
*Aharan Marg*. Therefore, in this, first...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagrantha 79 67, pramattavirata meM 63, apramattavirata meM 56 yA 58.
apUrvakaraNa meM 5856326. anivRttikaraNa meM 22621120116618, sUkSmasaMparAya meM
17 tathA upazAntamoha, kSINoi. sayogimasthAna meM 11 prakRti kA bandha samajhanA
cAhiye aura ayodhi guNasthAna prabandhaka hotA hai| mithyAtvatrika yAnI
mithyAtva, sAsvAdana aura mizradRSTi meM tInoM samyaktva mA ke avAntara bheda
haiN| inameM apane apane nAma vAlA eka-eka guNasthAna hotA hai  /  arthAt
mithyAtva meM pahalA mithyAtva guNasthAna, sAsvAdana meM dUsarA sAsvAdana
guNasthAna aura mizradRSTi meM tIsarA mizra guNasthAna hotA hai  /  ataeva ina
tInoM kA sAmAnya va vizeSa bandhasvAmitva ina-ina muNasthAnoM ke bandhasvAmitva
ke samAna hI samajhanA cAhie  /  arthAt sAmAnya aura vizeSa rUpa se mithyAtva
meM 117, sAsvAdana meM 101 aura mizra guNasthAna meM 74 prakRtiyoM kA
bandhasvAmitva hotA hai| dezavirata aura sUkSmasaMparAya ye do saMyamamArgaNA ke
bheda haiM aura ina donoM saMyamoM meM apane apane nAma vAlA eka-eka guNasthAna
hotA hai| yAnI dezavirati saMyama kevala pAMcaveM muzasthAna meM aura
sUkSmasaMparAya kevala dasaH guNasthAna meM hotA hai  /  ataeva ina donoM kA
bandhasvAmitva bhI apane-apane nAma vAle guNasthAna meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna
ho hai 1 arthAt sAmAnya aura vizeSa rUpa se dezavirati kA bandhasvAmistha 67
prakRtiyoM kA aura sUkSmasaMparAya kA bandhasvAmitva 17.prakRtiyoM kA hai| ...
"samaya-samaya jo AhAra kare use AhAraka (AhArI) kahate haiM  /  jitane bhI
saMsArI jIva haiM, ve jaba taka apanI-apanI AyuSya ke kAraNa saMsAra meM rahate
haiM, apane-apane yogya kamoM kA AharaNa karate rahate haiN| guNasthAnoM kI
apekSA pahale guNasthAna se lekara terahaveM guNasthAna paryanta ke sabhI jIva
AhAraka haiM aura ina saba jIvoM kA : ahaNa AhAramArgaNA meM kiyA jAtA hai|
ataeva isameM pahale

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Imghaswamitva**  Mithya kar tej narogi hani gummas na ram rah gunasthan
mane jaate hain. Is margana mein vidyaman jiyon ke saamaany se tatha vishesh se
apne-apne pratyek gunasthanon mein bandhadhikar ke saman bandhaswamitva samjhana
chahiye. Jaise ki bandhadhikar mein saamaany me 120 prakrtiyon ka bandh bataya
gaya hai. Baig hi ahaarmaganga mein bhi 120 prakrtiyon ka tatha gunasthanon ki
apeksha pehle mein 417, dusre mein 171, teesre mein 74, chauthe mein 7, panchve
mein 65, chhathe mein 63, saatve mein 56 ya 58, aathve mein 58.5.6.26, nauve
mein 22||21||20.16.18, dasve mein 17, gyarahve mein 1, barahve mein 1, aur
terahve mein 1 prakrti ka bandh samjhana chahiye.   Saaransha yah hai ki
samyaktava ke aaupmik, kshayopaashaamik aur shayik teen bhed hain. Unmein se
aaupaashaamik samyaktava, upashaam bhaav chauthe se lekar gyarahvan
gunasthanparyant aath gunasthan tak rahta hai. Isliye upashaam samyaktava
margana mein aath gunasthan mane jaate hain. Upaam samyaktava ke samay ayubandh
nahin hota hai, at: saamaany ki apeksha 75 prakrtiyon ka bandh hota hai.  Vedak
samyaktava (kshayopashaamik samyaktava) chauthe se lekar saat gunasthan tak
chaar gunasthanon mein hota hai. Iske baad shreni praarambh ho jaati hai aur
shreni do prakar ki hain - upashaam shreni aur kshapak shreni. Atah
kshayopaathaamik samyaktava mein chauthe se lekar saatve gunasthan tak chaar
gunasthan hote hain. Ismein ahaaratik ka bandh hona sambhav hai. Isliye iska
saamaany se bandhaswamitva 76 prakrtiyon ka aur gunasthanon ki apeksha
bandhadhikar ke saman chauthe se lekar saatve gunasthan tak ka bandhaswamitva
samjhana chahiye.  Kshayik samyaktava chauthe gunasthan se praarambh hokar
chaudahve gunasthan tak gyarah gunasthanon mein paya jaata hai. Ismein bhi pani
ka retiremannary

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 imghasvAmitva mithyA kara teja narogi hAnI gummas na rAma raha guNasthAna mAne
jAte haiN| isa mArgaNA meM vidyamAna jIyoM ke sAmAnya se tathA vizeSa se apane-
apane pratyekaH guNasthAnoM meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna bandhasvAmitva samajhanA
cAhie 1 jaise ki bandhAdhikAra meM sAmAnya me 120 prakRttiyoM kA bandha batAyA
gayA hai. baiga hI AhAramAgaMNA meM bhI 120 prakRtiyoM kA tathA guNasthAnoM kI
apekSA pahale meM 417, dUsare meM 171. tIsare meM 74, cauthe meM 7, pA~caveM meM
65, chaThe meM 63, sAtaveM meM 56 yA 58, AThaveM meM 58 / 5.6 / 26, nauveM meM
22 // 21 //  20 / 16 / 18, dasaveM meM 17, kyArahaveM meM 1. bArahaveM meM 1.
aura terahaveM meM 1 prakRti kA bandha samajhanA caahie| sArAMzA yaha hai ki
samyaktva ke aupamika. kSAyopazAmika aura zAyika tIna bheda haiN| unameM se
auSAmika samyaktva, upazama bhAva cauthe se lekara gyArahavaM guNasthAnaparyanta
ATha guNasthAna taka rahatA hai| isalie upazama samyaktva mArgaNA meM ATha
guNasthAna mAne jAte haiM  /  upaAma samyaktva ke samaya Ayubandha nahIM hotA
hai, ata: sAmAnya kI apekSA 75 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  vedaka
samyaktva kSAyopazamika samyaktva) cauthe se lekara sAta guNasthAna taka cAra
guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai  /  isake bAda zraNI prAraMbha ho jAtI hai aura zreNI
do prakAra kI haiM.- upazama zreNI aura kSApaka zreNI  /  ataH kSAyopathamika
samyaktva meM cauthe se lekara sAtaveM guNasthAna taka cAra guNasthAna hote
haiN| isameM AhArakaTika kA bandha honA saMbhava hai| isalie isakA sAmAnya se
bandhasvAmitva 76 prakRtiyoM kA aura guNasthAnoM kI apekSA bandhrAdhikAra ke
samAna cauthe se lekara sAtayeM gaNasthAna taka kA bandhasvAmitva samajhanA
cAhie  /  kSAyika samyaktva cauthe guNasthAna se prArambha hokara caudahaveM
guNasthAna taka gyAraha guNasthAnoM meM pAyA jAtA hai| isameM bhI pani kA
retiremannary

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma  In the third karma, the bondage should be understood in the same
way as the bondage in the fourth to the alega, in comparison to the Gunasthanas.
1. Mithyatva, Sasvadan, and Misra - these three are also divisions of the
Samyaktvamargna, and each has a Gunasthan with its own name. Therefore, the
general and specific bondage of these three should be understood as being in the
Gunasthan with its own name, along with its Uma.  In the Samyammargna, there is
one Gunasthan with its own name for each of Deshaviriti and Sukshmaparaya
Samyama, i.e., the tenth Gunasthan called Deshaviriti in Deshaviriti and the
tenth Gunasthan called Sukshmasamparaya in Sukshmaparaya. Therefore, the bondage
of these two should also be understood in the same way as these Gunasthanas,
both generally and specifically.  In the Aharakmargna, all worldly beings are
included until Moksha is attained. Therefore, this Margna has thirteen
Gunasthanas from the first to the thirteenth. In this Margna, the bondage should
be understood in the same way as the general and the specific bondage in each
Gunasthan.  Thus, after stating the bondage in the general and specific aspects
of some divisions of the Samyaktvamargna and the Samyammargna, and in the
Aharakmargna, we now describe the characteristics of the division of the
Samyaktvamargna, Upshama Samyaktv, in the following verse:  **Verse 20:**
**Meaning:** In Upshama Samyaktv, the present beings do not bind themselves with
the Ayubandha. Therefore, in the Ayat Avirat Samyagdristi Gunasthan, bondage
occurs in other natures except for the Devayus and Manushayus, and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmaNya aura guNasthAnoM kI apekSA bandhAdhikAra ke samAna cauthe se
lekara alega taka pratyeka guNasthAna meM bandhAdhikAra samajhanA cAhie  /  1
mithyAtva sAsvAdana aura mizra- ye tInoM bhI samyakva mArgamA ke bheda haiM aura
inameM apane-apane nAma vAlA eka-eka guNasthAna hotA hai  /  ataeva ina tInoM kA
sAmAnya tathA vizeSa bandha apane-apane nAma guNasthAna ke umA saMga bAhie  /
saMyamamArgaNA ke dezavirati aura sUkSmaparAya saMyama meM apane-apane nAma vAlA
eka-eka guNasthAna, arthAt dezavirati meM dezavirala nAmaka feat aura sUkSma
parAya meM sUkSmasaMparAya nAmaka dasavA~ guNasthAna hotA hai  /  ataeva ina
donoM kA bandhasvAmitva bhI ina-ina guNasthAna ke samAna sAmAnya aura vizeSa
rUpa se samajhanA caahie| AhArakamArgaNA meM mokSa na hone se pUrva taka ke
sabhI saMsArI jIvoM kA grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai| ataeva isa mArgaNA meM pahale se
lekara terahaveM guNasthAna taka teraha guNasthAna haiN| isa mArgaNA meM sAmAnya
se tathA pratyeka guNasthAna meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna bandhasvAmitva
samajhanA caahie| isa prakAra se samyaktvamArgaNA va saMyamamArgeNA ke kucha
bhedoM tathA AhAramArgaNA meM sAmAnya aura vizeSa meM bandhasvAmitva kA kathana
karane ke pazcAta aba samyaktvamArgeNA ke bheda upazama samyaktva kI vizeSatA ko
Age kI gAthA meM batAte haiM- paramumi vatA Aja na baMdhaMti teNa ajayaguNe  /
devamaNuAuhoNo desAisa puNa surAu viNA  // 20 //  gANArtha - upazama samyaktva
meM vartamAna jIva bAyubandha nahIM karate haiN| isalie ayata avirata
samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM devAyu aura manuSyA ko chor3akara anya prakRtiyoM kA
bandha hotA hai tathA -

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Swami, In the Gunasthanas of Deshaviriti etc., there is bondage of other self-
worthy actions without Devayau. - In the previous verse, the bondage-ownership
in the Upasham, Kshayopavan and Kshayik divisions of Samyak Margana has been
explained. In them, eight Gunasthanas from the fourth to the eleventh of Asara
have been explained and bondage-ownership has been done in comparison to the
general and Gunasthanas. But there is a special feature in Samyak that there are
no such present-day living beings in it, which can bind the age. Because Upasham
Samyaktva is of two types - (1) Granthibhedjanaya and (2) Upasham category. Of
these, Granthibhedjanaya Upasham Samyak is for the Anadi Mithyatva living being
and the Upasham category is in the eighth to eleventh, these four Gunasthanas.
Of the above two types, the bondage of age is prohibited in the Gunasthanas
related to the Upasham category. Because age bondage happens up to the seventh
Gunasthana, not beyond that. Granthibhedjanaya Upasham Samyaktva happens from
the fourth to the seventh Gunasthana. But in these Gunasthanas, the Aupashamik
Samyakvi age 1. For clarity on the subject of Gamaya, in the ancient ownership
(Pa 51, 52) is   A In it Give you タ They are not bound by age. Or Sura-Nara-Mahu
Anatu. || arit are Sura-Uhonu Javu Uvasanto. In the present living being, none
of the four does not bind the age of the Avirat Samyadrishti living being.
Therefore, Aupamik Avirat Samyadrishti does not bind Devayau and Manushayau, and
they do not bind Devayau in Deshaviriti etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svAmi dezavirati Adi guNasthAnoM meM devAyu ke binA anya svayogya akRtiyoM kA
bandha hotA hai  /  - pUrva gAthA meM samyak mArgaNA ke upazama, kSayopavana
aura kSAyika bhedoM meM bandhasvAmitva batalAyA gayA hai| unameM asara ke cauthe
se lekara gyArahaveM taka ATha guNasthAna batalAye gaye haiM aura sAmAnya evaM
guNasthAnoM kI apekSA bandhasvAmitva kiyA gayA hai| lekina samyak meM gahU
vizeSatA hai ki isameM vartamAna jIva ke adhyavasAya aise nahIM hote haiM,
jinase Ayu kA bandha kiyA jA ske| kyoMki upazama samyaktva do prakAra kA 2- (1)
granthibhedajanya tathA (2) upazama zreNI meM hone vaalaa| inameM se
granthibhedajanya upazama samyak anAdi mithyAtva jIva ko hotA hai aura upazama
zreNI vAlA AThaveM meM gyAraha ina cAra guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai| ukta donoM
prakAroM meM se upazama zreNI sambandhI guNasthAnoM meM Ayu kA bandha survA
varjita hai  /  kyoMki Ayubandha sAtaveM guNasthAna taka hotA hai, usase Age
nahIM  /  granthibhedajanya upazama samyaktva cauthe meM lekara sAtaveM
guNasthAna taka hotA hai| lekina ina guNasthAnoM meM aupazamika samyaktvI Ayu 1.
gamAyA ke viSaya kI spaSTatA ke lie prAcIna svAmitva (pA 51, 52 ) meM hai e
usame dAta te ta unhakkipi AuyaM neyaM  /  yA suranaramAuhi aNastu  //  arit are
surAuhoNo jAva uvasanto  /  upa meM vartamAna jIva cAroM meM se eka bhI Ayu kA
avirata samyadRSTi jIva kA nahIM karatA hai| isalie aupAmika avirata samyam
dRSTi devAyu aura manuSyAyu kA bandha nahIM karate haiM tathA dezavirati Adi
maiM devA kA ba nahIM karate haiN|

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third karma-praaya cannot bind. Because the binding of kshaya, which is
infinite, its arising, the binding of life, and death, these four actions can be
experienced by the samyavasi, but none of these actions can be experienced by
the upshama samyadrishti. Therefore, at the time of upshama samyaktva, there are
no results that are fit for binding of life. Therefore, in the fourth gunasthan,
which is fit for upshama samyaktva, the upam sammadrishti is denied the two
lives of deva-ayu and manushya-ayu because in that, the binding of these two
lives is possible, but the binding of other lives is not possible because in the
fourth gunasthan, the present deva and naraka manushya-ayu can only bind the
deva-ayu of the tiryanch and manushya, and the manushya deva-ayu. Therefore, in
the general binding authority, where the binding of 77 prakritis is mentioned in
the fourth gunasthan, in its place, the upshama sammadrishti binds 75 prakritis.
In the binding of the fifth and subsequent gunasthanas of the upshama
samyagdristi, only the deva-ayu has been left out. The reason for this is that
in those gunasthanas, only the binding of deva-ayu is possible. Because the
fifth gunasthan is possessed by the tiryanch and manushya, and the sixth and
seventh gunasthanas are possessed by the manushya, who can only bind the deva-
ayu. The manushya-ayu has already been reduced from the general binding.
Therefore, in the deshavirat of the upshama samyagdristi, there is binding of 66
prakritis, in the pramattavirat, there is binding of 62 prakritis, and in the
apramattavirat, there is binding of 58 prakritis.  In summary, the upshama
samyaktva is of two types: adhibhedajanaya and upshama shrenipata. Of these, the
adhibhedajanaya upshama samyaktva has eight gunasthanas from the fourth to the
seventh, and the shrenipata has eight gunasthanas from the eighth to the
eleventh. Of these, the upshama shrenipata...  1. Anabandhodayamaugabanyam ka
cha sasako krishna i. Utrasamasamaditthi chadahamimmakashi no kugai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmaprAya bandha nahIM kara sakatA hai| kyoMki anantAnubandhI kaSAya kA
bandha, usakA udaya, Ayu kA bandha aura maraNa ina cAra kAryoM ko sAsvAdana
samyavasvI kara sakatA hai, parantu inameM se eka bhI kArya upazama samyAdRSTi
nahIM kara sakatA hai| ataH upazama samyaktva ke samaya Ayubandhayogya pariNAma
nahIM hote haiN| ataeva upazama samyaktva ke yogya ATha guNasthAnoM meM se
cauthe guNasthAna meM upama sammAdRSTi ko devAyu aura manuSyAyu ina do kA
varjana isalie kiyA ki usameM ina do AyuoM kA bancha saMbhava hai, anya AyuoM kA
bandha nahIM kyoMki cauthe guNasthAna meM vartamAna deva tathA nAraka manudhyAyu
ko aura tithaMca tathA manuSya devAyu ko hI bA~dha sakate haiM  /  isalie
sAmAnya se bandhAdhikAra meM jo cauthe gaNasthAna meM 77 prakRtiyoM kA bandha
batalAyA gayA hai. usake sthAna para apazama samma mhaSTi 75 prakRtiyoM kA
bandha karatA hai| upazama samyagdaSTi ke pAMcaveM Adi guNasthAnoM ke bandha meM
kevala devAyu ko chor3a diyA hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki una guNasthAnoM meM
kevala devAyu kA bandha saMbhava hai| kyoMki pAMcaveM guNasthAna ke adhikArI
tithaMca aura manuSya haiM aura chaThe evaM sAtaveM guNasthAna ke adhikArI
manuSya hI haiM, jo kevala devAyu kA hI bandha kara sakate haiM  /  sAmAnya
bandha meM se manuSyAyu pahale hI kama kI jA cukI hai  /  ataeva upazama
samyagdRSTi ke dezavirata meM 66, pramattavirata maiM 62 aura apramattavirata
meM 58 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| sArAMza yaha hai ki upazama samyaktva
anthi bhedajanya aura upazama zreNIpata ke bheda dA prakAra kA hai| unameM se
adhibhedajanya upazama samyaktva meM cauthe se sAtaveM taka aura veNIgata meM
AThaveM se lekara gyArahaveM taka kula ATha guNasthAna hote haiM  /  inameM se
upazama zreNIgata ... 1. aNabandhodayamAugabanyaM kA ca sAsako kRSNa I  /
utrasamasamAdiTThI cadAhamimakaSi no kugaI  /  /

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the **Gunasthanas**, there is no **Ayubandha**. Because **Apubandha** and its
associated **Adhyavasyas** only exist up to the **Sasva** **Gunasthanas**. And
even in these **Gunasthanas**, there are no such **Adhyavasyas** that could lead
to **Ayubandha**. Therefore, from the first to the seventh **Gunasthanas**,
instead of considering the same **Bandha** as **Bandhadhikar**, one should
understand that there are 75 **Prakritis** bound in the fourth, 66 in the fifth,
62 in the sixth, and 58 in the seventh.  After explaining the characteristics of
**Upshama Samyaktvam** related to **Samyaktvamargna**, the next two verses
explain the **Bandhasvamitva** of **Lenyamargna**.  **Verse 21:**  **Ahtarasayam
Aharadamana Aile Sati. Tam Titthonam Minche Sanai Sasvahi Oho.**  **Verse 22:**
**Teu Naravanavana Ujoyachar Narayavar Vin Sukka. Vinu Naramvara Pamha
Ajinaahara Ima Minche.**  **Verse Meaning:**  The general **Bandhasvamitva** of
118 **Prakritis**, excluding the **Aharakaddhik**, is in the three **Leshyas**
of **Krishna**, **Neela**, and **Kapoot**. Among them, in the **Mithyaral
Gunasthanas**, the **Tirthakar Prakruti** is less, and in the three
**Gunasthanas** of **Sasvadan** etc., one should understand the
**Bandhasvamitva** as similar to **Bandhadhikar**.  The **Bandhasvamitva** of
**Tejoleshya** is for all **Prakritis** except **Narakanavaka**. The **Bandha**
of all **Prakritis** except the **Udyotchaturshka** and **Narakadwadash** (total
16 **Prakritis**) is in **Shuklaleshya**. And in **Paleshya**, the **Bandha** is
for all **Prakritis** except the aforementioned **Narakadwadash**.  In the
**Mithyatva Gunasthanas**, the **Bandhasvamitva** of **Tej** etc. in the
aforementioned three **Leshyas** should be understood as excluding the
**Tirthakar** and **Aharakaddhik**.  **Special Meaning:** These two verses
explain the **Bandhasvamitva** of **Leyamarg**. There are six types of
**Leshyas**: (1) **Krishna**, (2) **Neela**, (3) **Kapoot**, (4) **Tej**, (5)
**Padam**, and (6) **Shukla**. **Krishna** etc. are included in **Yoga**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 andhasvAmiya guNasthAnoM meM to Ayubandha hotA hI nahIM hai| kyoMki Apubandha
ke sAgya adhyavasAya sAsaveM guNasthAna taka hI hote haiM aura ina guNasthAnoM
meM bhI aise adhyavasAya nahIM hote haiM ki jinase Ayuvandha ho sake ! isalie
kauthe se lekara sAtaveM guNasthAna meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna bandha na hone
kI bajAya cauthe meM 75. pA~caveM meM 66, chaThe meM 62 aura sAtaveM meM 58
prakRtiyoM kA bandha samajhanA caahie| isa prakAra se samyaktvamArgaNA ke bheda
upazama samyaktva sambandhI vizeSatA batalAne ke bAda aba Age kI do gAthAoM meM
leNyAmArgaNA kA bandhasvAmitva batalAte haiM ohe aThArasayaM AhAradamaNa
Ailesati  /  taM titthoNaM minche sANAisa sasvahi oho  // 21 //  teU
naravanavaNA ujoyacara narayavAra viNa sukkA  /  viNu naramavAra pamhA ajiNAhArA
imA micche  // 22 //  gAthArtha Adi kI tInakRSNa, nIla, kApotalezyAoM meM
AhArakaddhika ko chor3a kara zeSa 118 prakRtitroM kA sAmAnya bandhasvAmitva hai|
unameM se mithyArala guNasthAna meM tIrthakara prakRti kama aura sAsvAdana Adi
tIna guNasthAnoM meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna banchasthAbhisva samajhanA cAhie 1
tejolezyA kA bandhasvAmitva narakanavaka ke sivAya anya saba prakRtiyoM kA hai
tathA udyotacatuSka evaM narakadvAdaza ina solaha prakRttiyoM ko chor3akara anya
saba prakRtiyoM kA bandha zuklalezyA meM hotA hai tathA pAlezyA meM ukta
narakadvAdaza ke sivAya anya saba prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM teja Adi ukta tIna lezyAoM meM bandhasvAmitva tIrthakaranAmakarma
aura AhArakadvika ko chor3akara samajhanA caahie| vizeSArtha-ina donoM gAthAoM
meM leyAmArga kA bandhasvAmitva batalAte haiM  /  lezyAoM ke chaha bheda
haiM-(1) kuSNa, (2) nIla, (3) kApota, (4) teja, (5) padama aura (6) zukla  /
yogAntargata kRSNAdi

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma Grantha  The auspicious and inauspicious results of the soul in
relation to the substance are called **Leshyas**. **Kashaya** are their
collaborators. As the intensity of **Kashaya** increases, the **Leshyas** become
more and more inauspicious. As the **Kashaya** become milder, the **Leshyas**
become more and more pure. For example, when the **Kashaya** that is bound to
the soul arises with the greatest intensity, it is **Krishna Leshya**, and when
it arises with mild intensity, it is **Shukla Leshya**.  Sometimes, the color of
the bodies of Devas and Narakas are considered **Leshyas**. This is because
their **Leshyas** are based on their state of being. **Samyaktv** (perfect
knowledge) is considered to be achieved through **Leshyas**. In this context,
**Krishna Leshya** is also considered in relation to the substance, and
**Samyaktv** is achieved only through auspicious **Leshyas**. If this is the
case, how can a being residing in **Krishna Leshya** achieve **Samyaktv**? To
explain this, it is believed that **Leshyas** related to the substance are the
color of the body, but **Leshyas** related to the mind can also be present in
them. At the time of achieving **Samyaktv** by the Narakas of the seventh hell,
there is pure **Bhavaleśya** (mental Leshya), but from the substance, there is
**Krishna Leshya**, which means it is like **Tejo Leshya** (Leshya of light) in
a reflected form.  The implication is that the **Leshyas** of Devas and Narakas
are based on their state of being, but the **Leshyas** related to the substance
are the color of the body, and the **Leshyas** related to the mind are based on
the state of mind at that time.  Here, it is worth considering that in the third
**Karma Grantha**, there are three **Leshyas** - **Krishna**, **Neel**, and
**Kapot**, and in the fourth **Karma Grantha**, there are six **Leshyas**
mentioned in **Padmapratisas** (verse 233). The solution to this is that those
who have already attained the fifth and sixth **Gunasthanas** (stages of
spiritual progress) can have the three **Leshyas** of **Krishna**, **Neel**, and
**Kapot**, but those who have the three **Leshyas** of **Krishna**, **Neel**,
and **Kapot** cannot attain the fifth and sixth **Gunasthanas**. Therefore, from
this perspective, there are four...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 E: tRtIya karmagrantha dravya ke sambandha se AtmA ke jo zubhAzubha pariNAma
hote haiM, unheM lezyA kahate haiM  /  kaSAya usakI sahakArI haiM  /  kaSAya kI
jaisI jaisI tIvratA hotI hai, vaisI vaisI lezyAe~ azubha se azubhatara hotI haiM
aura kaSAya ko jaisI jaisI mandatA hotI hai, vaise-vaise lezyAeM vizuddha se
vizuddhatara hotI haiN| jaise ki anantAnubandhI kaSAya ke tIvratama udaya hone
para kRSNazyA hotI hai aura manda udaya hone para zukla lezyA hotI hai  /  W x
kahIM-kahIM devoM aura nArakoM ke zarIra ke varNarUpa lezyA mAnI haiN| kyoMki
unakI avasthita hotI hai| uka samyaktva prApti mAnI hai| vahA~ dravya kI apekSA
kRSNalezyA bhI mAnI hai aura samyaktva kI prApti zubhalezyAoM meM hI hotI hai|
jaba aisA hai to kRSNaleNyA meM rahane vAle jIva ko samyaktva kaise ho sakatA
hai ? isake lie aisA mAnA jAtA hai ki dravyalezyA zarIra ke varNarUpa hotI haiM
kintu maratzyA usame free bhI ho sakatI hai aura usase sAtaveM naraka ke nArakoM
ke samyaktva prApti ke samaya vizuddha bhAvalezyA hotI hai, kintu dravya se to
kRSNalezyA hotI hai arthAta prativimba rUpa se tejolezyA sarIkhI hotI hai|
tAtparya yaha hai ki deva aura nArakoM kI lezyAe~ avasthita hotI hai, parantu
zarIra ke varNarUpa dravyalezyAe~ hotI hai aura bhAva ko apekSA ve lezyAe~ usa
usa samaya ke bhAvAnusAra holI hai| yahA~ yaha vicAraNIya hai ki tIsare
karmagrantha meM kRSNa, nIla, kApota - ina tIna lezyAoM meM mithyAtvAdi cAra
guNasthAna aura cauthe karmagrantha meM padmapratisAsa ucca' (gAthA 233 dvArA
chaha lezyAe~ batalAIM haiN| to isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki pUrvaprApta ( pahale
se pAye hue) pA~caveM, chaThe guNasthAna vAla ke kRSNAdika tIna lezyAeM ho
sakatI haiM, kintu kRSNAdika tIna lezyA vAle pA~cavAM, chaThA guNasthAna prApta
nahIM kara sakate haiM  /  ataH isa dRSTi se cAra bara

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ownership of Karma  There is no contradiction in the six stages of spiritual
progress (gunasthana) being present in the Krishna, Adi, and Sina Leshya. For
example:  "Sammal Su Savar Lai, Suddis Si Hay Dharri."  "Pughn Divam Ao Push Ann
Pia 3 Lesa Ae."  Samyakdrav Shruta is present in all Leshyas, and Charitra is
attained in three auspicious Leshyas - Teja, Pam, and Shakl.  Furthermore, those
who have attained the previous stages (Samyaktvad, Samayik, Shruta Samayik,
Deshabirati Samayik, Savirati Charitra Samayik) can be found in any of the six
Leshyas.  The aforementioned Krishna, Adi, and Sina Leshyas, which are three
Leshyas, do not experience the bondage of Aharakaddhik karma. This is because
the bondage of Aharakaddhik karma does not occur in any of the stages of
spiritual progress except the seventh. The aforementioned Krishna, Adi, and Sina
Leshyas, at most, reach the sixth stage of spiritual progress. Therefore, their
bondage of 118 karmic types is considered as follows:  * In the first stage, 117
karmic types are bound, excluding the Tirthankara karma. * In the second stage,
101 karmic types are bound. * In the third stage, 74 karmic types are bound. *
In the fourth stage, 77 karmic types are bound.  The ownership of 77 karmic
types in the fourth stage of spiritual progress for the Krishna, Adi, and Sina
Leshyas is considered according to the statement "Sanais Sahi Oho." This is also
mentioned in the ancient texts on karma.  "Suranar Madayas Sahiya Avirya Sammad
Hoti Yaya. Tisthaparena Juya: Saha Teule Se Param Boccham."  This excerpt
clearly states that the 77 karmic types in the fourth stage of spiritual
progress for the Krishna, Adi, and Sina Leshyas include the lifespan of a deva
(god) just like the lifespan of a human. Similarly, in the Gommatasar Karmakand,
the ownership of karma for all types of karma, from Vedmarggana to
Aharakmarggana, is described in terms of the stages of spiritual progress.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 banchasvAmitva chaha guNasthAna kRSNAdi sIna lezyA vAloM ke hone meM koI
virodha nahIM hai| jaise ki. sammala su savAra laii, suddhIsa si haya dhAri  /
pugnadivamao puSa annapIe 3 lesAe  /  samyakrava zruta sarva lezyAoM meM hotA
hai aura cAritra tIna zubha leNyAbhoM-teja, pama aura zakla meM prApta hotA hai
tathA pUrvapratipanna (samyaktvAdi sAmAyika, zruta sAmAyika, dezabirati
sAmAyika, savirati cAritra sAmAyika ye pUrva meM prApta hue hoM vaise) jIba
chaha meM se kisI bhI lezyA meM hote haiN| ukta kRSNa Adi kA lezyAloM meM mA,
nagara kApoTaina tIna lezyA vAloM ke AhArakaddhika kA baMdha nahIM hotA hai|
kyoMki AhArakadika kA bandha sAtaveM guNasthAna ke sivAya anya guNasthAnoM meM
nahIM hotA hai tathA ukta kRSNAdi tIna lezyA vAle adhika se adhika chaha
guNasthAnoM taka pAye jAte haiM  /  ataeva unake sAmAnya se 118 prakRtiyoM kA
aura guNasthAnoM kI apekSA pahale guNasthAna meM tIrthaGkara nAmakarma ke sivAya
117, dUsare meM 101, tIsare meM 74 aura cauthe meM 77 prakRttiyoM kA bandha mAnA
hai| kRSNAdi tIna vezyAoM meM cauthe guNasthAna ke samaya 77 prakRtiyoM kA
bandhasvAmitva 'sANAisa sahi oho' isa kathana ke anusAra mAnA hai aura isI
prakAra prAcIna bandhasvAmitva meM bhI ullekha kiyA gayA hai
suranaramAdayasahiyA avirayasammADa hoti yayA  /  tisthapareNa juyAH saha
teUlese paraM bocchaM  /  / 4 /  /  ukta uddharaNa se yaha spaSTa hai ki kRSyAdi
tIna lazyAoM ke caturtha guNasthAna kI 77 prakRtiyoM meM manuSyAyu kI taraha
devAyu kI ginatI haiN| isI prakAra gommaTasAra karmakANDa meM bhI vedamArgaNA se
lekara AhArakamArgaNA paryanta saba mArgaNAoM kA bandhasvAmitva guNa

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma Bandha  **24**  It is said that the fourth quality of the place
is the same as the place, and the bondage of 77 natures is clearly considered in
the fourth quality.  Thus, the authors of the Karma Grantha, like Krishna,
consider the bondage of 77 natures in the fourth quality in three types of
births, while there is a difference of opinion in the Siddhanta. The Siddhanta
states that the bondage of life, which is said to be in the fourth quality of
the three births of Krishna, etc., is possible only for one human being! Because
the hellish beings and the gods bind the human life. But humans and animals do
not bind the life of the gods! Because the birth should be in the same Leshya in
which the life bondage occurs, and the Samyagdrsti only bind the life of the
Vaimanika Devas, and there are no Krishna, Neel, and Kapata in the Vaimanika
Devas. The Samyagdrsti with impure Lama do not bind the life of the gods. In
this regard, the text of 'Bhagavati' Matak 30, Uddeshak 1 is as follows:
"Kanhalessaanam Mante! Khoyya Kiriyaadi Bank Param Paramati Puchha? Goyama! No
Ra Imaushyam Pahrenti. Pare Tirikhopiya Parati, Massavadh Pati, No Devaauyam
Pakrenti. Akiriya Asaniy Vegayaavavi Ya Saridhi Aauyam Pakrati. Evam Jis Lahsayi
Kalesssadi."  "Kanhamesssaanam Ase! Kiriyadhaadi Vishayatirikshonya Ki
Raiyaauyam Puchha? Asyma! Po Paramaauyam Parati, No Tiriklonyaajy Pakrenti Bho
Manussajy Pak Renti No Dedhaajy Pakati. Akiriyaavadi Agaaniyavaachi Venaiyavadi
Samyahyam Pi Pakrenti 1 Jah: Karahassa Evam Bolalesssayi Kauleessadi. .. 'Maha
Panchaniyatirimakhonyaanam Vattamya Bforer Evam Massapani Maniabbba.' 1
Vedadaaharoti Ya Sagunaanam Abhogam Tu."  - Ho, 116 2 Go. Karmakanda, Ma. 103

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya kamaMpandha 24 sthAna ke samAna kahA hai aura caturtha guNasthAna meM 77
prakRtiyoM kA bandha spaSTa rUpa se mAnA hai| isa prakAra karmagranthakAra
kRSNAdi tIna leNyAoM meM caturtha guNasthAna meM 77 prakRtiyoM kA bandha mAnate
haiM, jabaki siddhAnta kI apekSA isameM matabhinnatA hai| siddhAnta meM batalAyA
gayA hai ki kRSNAdi tIna leNyAoM ke cauthe guNasthAna meM jo Ayu kA bandha kahA
hai, vahA~ eka hI manuSyAghu kA bandhra sambhava hai ! kyoMki nAraka, deva to
manuSyAyu ko bA~dhate haiN| parantu manuSya aura tiryaMca devAyu ko nahIM
bAMdhate haiM ! payoMki jisa lezyA meM Ayubandha ho, usI lezyA meM utpanna honA
cAhie aura samyagdRSTi to vaimAnika devoM kA hI Ayu bAMdhate haiM aura vaimAnika
devoM meM kRSNa, nIla evaM kApAta saMzyA nahIM hai. azuddha lAmA vAle
samyagadRSTi devAyu kA bandha nahIM karate haiM  /  isa sambandha meM
"bhagavatI' mAtaka 30, uddezaka 1, kA pATha yaha hai kaNhalesANaM maMte ! khoyA
kiriyAdI baiMka parAmaM parati puchA ? goyamA ! No ra imAuSaM pahareMti. pare
tirikkhopiyA parati, massAvadha pati, No devAuyaM pakareMti  /  akiriyA azAniya
vegaiyavAvI ya sAridhi AuyaM pakarati  /  evaM jIsa lahasAyi kAlessAdi  /
'kaNhamessANaM ase ! kiriyAdhAdI viSayatirikSoNiyA ki raiyAuyaM puchA ? azyamA !
po paramAuyaM parati, No tirikloNiyAjya pakareMti bho maNussAjyaM paka reMti No
dedhAjyaM pakati  /  akiriyAvAdI agANiyavAcI veNaiyavAdI sAmyahaM pi pakareMti 1
jahaH karahassA evaM bolalessAya kAulessAdi  /  .. 'mahA
pA~caniyatirimakhoNiyANaM vattamyA bhaforer evaM massApani maaniybbaa|' 1
vedAdAhAroti ya saguNANamabhoghaM tu  /  -ho , 116 2 go0 karmakAMDa, mA0 103

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Ownership**  "O Bhagavan! Do the Kriṣṇaleśyā (rightly-seeing) action-
performers bind the hell-life, etc.?" "O Gautama! They do not bind the hell-
life, nor the animal-life, they bind the human-life, they do not bind the god-
life, and the non-action-performers, etc., the wrongly-seeing, bind all four
lives. Similarly, understand for the blue and the pigeon-colored leśyā!"  85  "O
Bhagavan! Do the Kriṣṇaleśyā rightly-seeing five-sensed animals bind the hell-
life?" "O Gautama! They do not bind the hell-life, nor the animal-life, nor the
human-life, nor the god-life, and the wrongly-seeing bind all four lives.
Similarly, understand for the blue and the pigeon-colored leśyā."  "Just as it
has been said for the five-sensed animal beings, so also understand for the
humans."  Based on the above statement of the principle, Śrī Jīvavijaī and Śrī
Jaisomasūrī have raised doubts in their respective commentaries, that the beings
with the three leśyā, Kriṣṇā, etc., who are in the fourth stage of the soul,
cannot be considered to bind the god-life. Therefore, in the fourth stage of the
soul, instead of 77 types of karmas, only 76 types of karmas should be
considered, excluding the god-life. This difference has not been resolved
anywhere. The commentators have also left it as very difficult to understand. In
the Gommatasāra Karmakāṇḍa, this doubt does not even have a place, because there
is no insistence on accepting the text of the Bhagavatī. But for the karma-
granthikas who accept the Bhagavatī sūtra, this doubt is not negligible.  1. The
word "kriyāvādi" means "action-performing rightly-seeing" in the commentary.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svAmitva 'he bhagavan ! kRSNalezyA vAle kriyAvAdI (samyagdRSTi)' auva kyA
narakAyu kA bandha karate haiM ityAdi ? he gautama! naraka Ayu ko nahIM bAMdhate
haiM, tica Ayu ko nahIM bA~dhate haiM, manuSyAyu ko bAMdhate haiM, devAyuM ko
nahIM bA~dhate haiM, aura akriyAvAdI Adi mithyAdRSTi cAroM Ayu kA bandha karate
haiN| isI prakAra nIla aura kApota legyA vAloM ke lie bhI samajhanA ! 85 'he
bhagavana ! kRSNalezyA vAle samyagdRSTi paMcendriya tiryaca kyA narakAyu kA
bandha karate haiM ? gautama ! vai narakAyu kA vadha nahIM karate haiM, ticAyu
kA bandha nahIM karate haiM, manuSyAyu kA bandha nahIM karate haiM, devAyu kA
bandha nahIM karate haiM aura mithyAdRSTi cAroM Ayu kA bandha karate haiN| isI
prakAra nIla aura kApota lezyA ke lie bhI samajhanA caahie| 'jisa prakAra se
paMcendriya tirvaca jIvoM ke lie kahA hai vaise hI manuSyoM ke liye bhI
samajhanA cAhie  / ' siddhAnta ke ukta kathana ke AdhAra para zrI jIvavijayajI
aura zrI jayasomasUri ne apane-apane Tabe meM zakA uThAI hai ki cauthe
guNasthAnavartI kRSNAdi tIna lezyA vAle jIvoM ko devAyu kA bandhaH nahIM mAnA jA
sakatA hai  /  ataH caturtha guNasthAna meM 77 prakRtiyoM ke bajAya devAyu ke
binA 76 prakRtiyoM kA bandha mAnA jAnA caahie| isa mabhinnatA kA samAdhAna kahIM
nahIM kiyA gayA hai| TabAkAroM ne bhI bahutagamya kahakara use chor3a diyA hai
/  gommaTasAra karmakAMDa meM to isa zaMkA ko sthAna hI nahIM hai, kyoMki vahA~
bhagavatI kA pATha mAnya karane kA Agraha nahIM hai  /  parantu bhagavatI sUtra
ko mAnane vAle karmagrAMthikoM ke lie yaha zaMkA upekSaNIya nahIM hai  /  1
'kiriyAvAdI' zabda kA artha TIkA meM kriyAvAdI samyaktvI--kiyA gayA hai  /  www.

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Eg Therefore, regarding the aforementioned doubt, until another authentic
solution is found, there should be no objection to accepting this solution: that
the classification of Krishna, etc., as three *leya* within the *samyashti*,
which is considered as *deva* in nature, is a view based on the *karmagrantha*,
not the *siddhant*. There are differences of opinion between the *karmagrantha*
and the *siddhant* on many subjects. Therefore, even in this *karmagrantha*, it
is appropriate to resolve the contradiction by accepting that there is a
difference of opinion between the *karmagrantha* and the *siddhant* regarding
the bondage or non-bondage of the aforementioned *devayau*. 1 Having explained
the bondage of the three inauspicious *leshya* - Krishna, Neel Kapoot - we now
explain the bondage of the auspicious *leshya* - Teja, Padma, and Shukla. The
*tejo-leshya* is found from the first *mithyatva* *gunasthan* to the seventh
*gunasthan*, and the nine natures - *narak-navak*, *narak-gati*, *narak-
anupurvi*, *narak-ayu*, *sukshma*, *apar-yapt*, *sadharan-nam*, *dvi-indriya*,
*chi-indriya*, and *chatur-indriya* - are bound in the inauspicious *leshya*.
Therefore, those who possess the *tejo-leshya* are not bound by these nine
natures, and they are not born in those places where these natures arise in
*narak-gati*, *sukshma*, *eka-indriya*, and *vikala-indriya*. Therefore, in the
*tejo-leshya*, there is bondage of 111 natures in general. 1. *Sasan-bhave nanam
vishvagaharay urlami disasana neogivam sutham-ayam* । wwww Eng In the *sasan*
state, *samyak-gyan*, *kriya-sharira* formation, *audarik-mishva* *kay-yoga*,
and the absence of the *sasan* *gunasthan* - these three things, although they
are not mentioned in this text, are still considered to be valid. —
*Karmagrantha* 44£ And the *aharaka* body In *eka-indriya* beings Are in
accordance with the *siddhant* wwww wwwwwwwwww. wwww

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 eg ataeva ukta zaMkA ke sambandha meM jaba taka dUsarA prAmANika mAdhAna na
mile, taba taka yaha samAdhAna mAna lene meM Apatti nahIM honI cAhie ki kRSNa
Adi tIna leyA vAle samyaSTi ke jo prakRti meM devarg kI gaNanA kI gaI hai vaha
karmagrantha sambandhI mata hai, saMddhAntika mata nahIM hai| karmagrantha aura
siddhAnta kA kaI viSayoM meM matabheda hai| isalie isa karmagrantha meM bhI ukta
devAyu kA bandha hone na hone ke sambandha meM karmagrantha aura siddhAnta kA
matabheda mAnakara Apasa meM virodha kA parihAra kara lenA ucita hai  /  1 isa
prakAra kRSNa, nIla kApota ina tIna azubha zyAoM kA bandhasvAmitva batalAne ke
bAda aba teja, padma aura zukla - ina zubha zyAoM kA bandhasvAmitva batalAte
haiM  /  tejolezyA pahale mithyAtva guNasthAna se lekara sAtaveM guNasthAna taka
pAI jAtI hai aura narakanavaka - narakagati, narakAnupUrvI, narakaAyu, sUkSma,
aparyApta, sAdhAraNanAma, dvIndriya, cIndriya aura caturi ndriya ina nau
prakRtiyoM kA bandha azubha lezyAoM meM hone ke kAraNa tejolezyA dhAraNa karane
vAloM ke ukta no prakRtiyoM kA bandha nahIM hone se aura tejolezyA vAle una
sthAnoM meM paidA nahIM hote jinameM narakagati, sUkSma ekendriya aura
vikalendriya meM ukta prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai, ataH tejolezyA meM sAmAnya
se 111 prakRtiyoM kA bandha 1. sAsaNabhAve nANaM vizvvagAhAraye uralami disAsANo
neAgivaM suthamayaM  /  wwwww Ying  sAsAdana avasthA meM samyagjJAna,
kriyazarIra banAne ke samaya audArikamizva kAyayoga aura sAsAdana guNasthAna kA
abhAva yaha tIna bAteM yadyapi tathApi isa grantha meM inakA adhikAra nahIM hai
/  -- karmagrantha 44PS tathA AhAraka zarIra ekendriya jIvoM meM siddhAnta
sammata haiM wwwww wwwwwwwwww. wwww

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **aratarfara**  It is believed that in the first **guna-
sthana**, due to the absence of **tirthankara-karma** and **aahara-kathika**
bondage, 3 out of the 111 bondable **prakritis** are reduced, leaving 108
**prakritis**. From the second to the seventh **guna-sthana**, the bondage of
**prakritis** is similar to that of **karma**. This means that in the second
**guna-sthana**, 101 **prakritis** are bound, in the third 74, in the fourth 77,
in the fifth 68, in the sixth 63, and in the seventh 57 or 58 **prakritis** are
bound.  Although according to the **gatha**, the bondage of **shukla-leshya**
should be mentioned first, for convenience, we will mention the bondage of
**padma-leshya** first, which comes after **tejo-leshya** in the sequence.
**Padma-leshya** also has seven **guna-sthana** from the first **mithyatva**
**guna-sthana** to the seventh, similar to **tejo-leshya**. However, the
difference between **tejo-leshya** and **padma-leshya** is that those with
**padma-leshya** do not bind the three **prakritis** of **ekendriya**,
**sthavara**, and **apa**, in addition to **naraka-navaka**, unlike those with
**tejo-leshya**. This is because those with **tejo-leshya** can be born as
**ekendriya**, but those with **padma-leshya** are not born in **naraka** etc.
or as **ekendriya**, hence they do not bind these three **prakritis**.  The
bondage of **aage cover** is generally 108 **prakritis**, and in the first
**guna-sthana**, due to the absence of **tirthankara-karma** and **aahara-
kathika** bondage, it is 105. From the second to the seventh **guna-sthana**,
the bondage of **prakritis** should be understood to be the same as that of
**indriya-adhikarya**. The number of bondable **prakritis** from the second to
the seventh **guna-sthana** has been mentioned above.  In **shukla-leshya**,
there are thirteen **guna-sthana** from the first to the thirteenth. The
difference between **shukla-leshya** and **patha-leshya** is that those with
**shukla-leshya** do not bind the twelve **prakritis** of **naraka-gati** etc.,
which are not bondable.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aratarfara mAnA jAtA hai tathA pahale guNasthAna meM tIrthaGkaratAkarma aura
AhArakaTika kA bandha na hone se sAmAnya se bandhayogya 111 prakR tiyoM meM se 3
prakRtiyoM ko kama karane para 108 prakRtiyoM kA aura dUsare se sAtaveM
guNasthAna meM kAra ke samAna bandhasvAmitva hai| arthAta dUsare meM 101, tIsare
meM 74. cauthe meM 77, pA~caveM meM 68, chaThe meM 63 aura sAtaveM meM 57 yA 58
prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| yadyapi gAthA ke saMketAnusAra pahale zuklalezyA
kA bandha svAmitva batalAnA cAhie  /  lekina suvidhA kI dRSTi se pahale
tejolezyA ke bAda kramaprApta padmalezyA kA bandhasvAmitva bata lAte haiM  /  60
padmazyA me bhI tejolezyA ke samAna pahale mithyatva guNasthAna se lekara sAta
guNasthAna hote haiM, kintu tejolezyA kI apekSA padmalezyA kI yaha vizeSatA hai
ki isa lezyA vAle tejolezyA kI narakanavaka ke atirikta ekendriya, sthAvara aura
Apa ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA bhI bandha nahIM karate haiN| kyoMki tejolezyA vAle
ekandriya rUpa se paidA ho sakate haiM, kintu padmalezyA vAle narakAdi evaM
ekendriya meM utpanna nahIM hote haiM, isalie ekendriya Adi tIna prakRtiyoM kA
bhI bandha nahIM hotA hai | aage cover kA bandhasvAmitva sAmAnya rUpa se 108
prakRtiyoM kA aura pahale guNasthAna meM tIrthaMkaranAmakarma tathA
AhArakadvikakA banna na hone se 105 kA aura dUsare se sAtaveM taka pratyeka
guNasthAna meM indhAdhikAra ke samAna hI prakR tiyoM kA bandha samajhanA caahie|
dUsare se lekara sAtaveM guNasthAna meM barayogya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA Upara
batalAI jA cukI hai| zuklalezyA meM pahale se lekara terahaveM guNasthAna taka
teraha guNasthAna hote haiM  /  pathalezyA kI apekSA zuklalezyA kI yaha vizeSatA
hai freera kI nahIM baMdhaneyogya narakagati Adi bAraha prakRtiyoM do

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **61**  Apart from the four Udyota (Udyota Chatushk),
the Karma called Udyota, Tiyanchagati, Tiyechaanupurvi and Tiyancha do not bind.
Because these Karmas are applicable to the Tiryancha. One with Padmaleshya can
be born in those Tiryancha where Udyota Chatushk arises, but one with
Shuklaleshya is not born in the places where these Karmas arise. Therefore, the
aforementioned 16 Karmas are not binding in Shuklaleshya. Hence, the binding of
104 Karmas is considered in general. And in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, except for
the Tirthankara Karma and Aharakdvik, 101 Karmas bind. And in the second
Gunasthan, by reducing the four Karmas of Napunsakaved, Hudsansthan, Mithyatva
and Sewart Sanhanan from the 101 Karmas binding in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, the
binding of 67 Karmas remains. The reason for reducing these four Karmas of
Napunsakaved etc. is that these four bind in the presence of Mithyatva, but
Mithyatva is absent in the second Gunasthan. From the third to the thirteenth
Gunasthan, the binding of Karmas in each Gunasthan should be understood in the
same way as explained in Bandhadhikar.  **Title**  The binding of 16 Karmas,
including Narakgati and Tiryanchayu, is not considered in the ownership of
Shuklaleshya. Therefore, there is a doubt here:  In Tattvarthabhashya,
"Potpadmashuklaleshya Dvitriyeshu" (Chapter 4, Sutra 23), "Shesheshus Saskaadi
Dhyaservarthasiddha Shuklaleshya" and in Sangrahni, "Kampihihale Santasis
Subakalans Huti Sura" (Gatha 175).  In the first two Devalokas, Tejoaleshya, in
the three Devalokas, Palaleshya and up to the Sarvarthasiddha of Lantakakalp,
Shuklaleshya is mentioned. So, the question arises that if the Devas with
Shuklaleshya from Lantakakalp to Sahasrar Kalp are also born in Tiryancha, then
why don't they bind the Udyota Chatushk, which is applicable to them? And in the
eleventh Gatha of the same text, it is mentioned that the ownership of binding
of Anatyadi Devalokas...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 61 tRtIya karmamya ke alAvA udyotacatuSka udyotanAmakarma, tiyaMcagati,
tiyecAnupUrvI aura tiryaMcA kA bhI bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  kyoMki ye kAra
prakRtiyA~ tiryacaprAyogya haiM  /  padmalezyA vAlA to una tiryathoM meM utpanna
ho sakatA hai, jahA~ udyotacatuSka kA udaya hotA hai, kintu zuklalezyA vAlA ina
prakRtiyoM ke udaya vAle sthAnoM meM utpanna nahIM hotA hai| ataeva ukta 16
prakRtiyA~ zuklalezyA meM bandhayogya nahIM hai ataH sAmAnya se 104 prakRtiyoM
kA bandha mAnA jAtA hai tathA mithyAtva guNasthAna meM tIrthaMkara nAmakarma
aura AhArakadvika ke sivAya 101 prakRtiyoM kA aura dUsare guNasthAna meM
napuMsaka veda, huDasaMsthAna, mithyAtva aura sevArta saMhanana ina cAra
prakRtiyoM ko pahale mithyAtva guNasthAna kI bandhayogya 101 prakRtiyoM meM se
kama karane para 67 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| napuMsakaveda Adi ina cAra
prakRtiyoM ko kama karane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki ye cAroM mithyAtva ke sadbhAva
meM baMdhatI haiM, kintu dUsare guNasthAna meM mithyAtya kA abhAva hai  /
tIsare se lekara terahaveM guNasthAna taka pratyeka guNasthAna meM karma
prakRtiyoM kA bandha jaisA bandhAdhikAra meM batalAyA hai, usI prakAra
zuklalezyA vAloM ke lie samajha lenA cAhie  /  Judul zuklazyA ke bandhasvAmitva
meM narakagati Adi tiryaMcAyu paryanta 16 prakRtiyoM kA bandha nahIM mAnA hai  /
ataH yahA~ zaMkA hai- tatvArthabhASya meM 'potapadmazuklezyA dvitriyeSu 1 (a0 4,
sUtra 23) zeSeSu sAsakAdidhyAsarvArthasiddhA chukla lezyAH tathA saMgrahaNI meM.
kampapihale saMtAisa subakalaMsa huti surA ( gAthA 175)  /  prathama do
devalokoM meM tejolezyA, tIna devalokoM meM palezyA aura lAntakakarUpa
sarvArthasiddhaparyanta zuklalezyA batAI hai  /  to yahA~ prazna hotA hai ki
lAnsakakalpa se lekara sahasrAra kalpa paryanta ke zuklalezyA vAle deva
tiryaMcoM meM bhI utpanna ho jAte haiM to tatprAyogya udyotacatuSka kA bandha
kyoM nahIM karate haiM tathA isI grantha kI gyArahavIM gAthA meM AnatAdi
devalokoM ke bandhasvAmitva

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Regarding Bandhaswamitva**  It is said that, in the context
of Bandhaswamitva, all beings except the four types of Devas (Udyot Chatushk) of
the Amatadi Kalpa, are bound. This means that the four types of Devas of the
Sahasrar Kalpa are bound, and here, in the Shuklaleshya Margna, the binding is
prohibited. Thus, there is a contradiction between the two statements.  Sri
Jivavijayaji and Sri Jaysomasuri have also pointed out this contradiction in
their respective arguments.  Similarly, there is a description of this in the
Digambara Karma Shastra. In the 112th verse of the Gommatamar Karmakanda, it is
said:  "Kappi sthithis na sith sadarasaharamoti tiriyakugam. Siriya oge yi ladi
gati sadarachou."  In this verse of the Gommatasar Karmakanda, the Sahasrar
Devaloka is mentioned as the limit of Bandhaswamitva, and the Udyot Chatushk is
counted in it, similar to the eleventh verse of this Karmagranth. Also, in the
121st verse of the Gommatasar Karmakanda, the Udyot Chatushk is mentioned in the
context of Bandhaswamitva of Shuklaleshya.  Therefore, even though the
Bandhaswamitva is the same in the Karmagranth and the Gommatasar, there is no
contradiction in the Digambara Shastra because:  1. The Tirthankara nature is
not bound in the Kalpavamini women. 2. The four natures - Liyank Tik,
Tithanchayu, and Udyot - are bound only up to the Shyalarasahasar heaven. These
four natures are not bound in the Amatadi Kalpa. Therefore, these four are
considered as the Satara Chatushk. 3. Their binding is only up to the
Pataryugal. 4. Subake sadarachou, vamatiambarasam cha na asthi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bandhasvAmitva ke prasaMga meM 'ANAI ujoyasa uhiyA' AmatAdi kalpa ke deva
udyotacatuSka ke sivAya zeSa prakRtiyoM kA bandha karate haiM, aisA kahA hai|
isakA artha yaha huA ki sahasrAra kalpa taka ke deva udyotacatuSka kA bandha
karate haiM aura yahA~ zuklalezyA mArgaNA meM bandha kA niSedha kiyA hai  /  isa
prakAra pUrvApara virodha hai  /  zrI jIvavijayajI aura zrI jayasomasUri ne bhI
apane-apane dAve meM isa pUrvApara virodha kA digdarzana karAyA hai| isa kamaMca
ke samAna hI digambarIya karmazAstra meM bhI varNana hai  /  digambarIya
karmazAstra gommaTamAra karmakANDa kI gAthA 112 meM kahA hai kappisthIs Na
sistha sadarasahAramoti tiriyakugaM  /  siriyA oge yi lar3I gatiya sadaracaU  /
' gommaTasAra karmakANDa kI isa gAthA meM jo sahasAra devaloka taka kA
bandhasvAmitra kahA hai, usameM isa karmagrantha kI gyArahavIM gApA ke samAna hI
udyotacatuSka kI gaNanA kI gaI hai| tathA gommaTasAra karmakANDa kI gAthA 121
meM zuklalezyA ke bannasvAmitva ke kathana meM bhI udyotacatuka kA varNana hai|
_ ataH karmagrantha aura gommaTasAra meM bandhasvAmitva samAna hone para bhI
digambarIya zAstra meM upayukta virodha nahIM AtA hai  /  kyoMki 1. kalpavAminI
striyoM meM tIrthakaraprakRti kA bandha nahIM hotA hai aura liyaMka tika,
tithaMcAyu aura udyota ina cAra prakRtiyoM kA bandha zyalArasAhasAra nAmaka
svarga taka holA hai| AnatAdi meM ina cAra prakRtiyoM yA banna nahIM hotA hai  /
ata: ina cAra ko satAra catuSpaH cI kAhase haiM: kyoMki pAtArayugala taka hI
inakA bandha hotA hai  /  2 subake sadaracaurpha vAmatimabArasaM ca Na 4 asthi
/

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Chapter  According to the Digambara sect, the **Lantaka** (Lantay)
Devaloka is inhabited by **Paleshya** beings. Therefore, based on this Digambara
doctrine, it can be said that the calculation of the four types of **Udyota**
(Udyotcha-tushk) during the **Bandhaswamitva** (Bandhaswamitva) period of a
thousand **Kalpas** (Kalpa) is in relation to **Padmaleshya** beings, not
**Shuklaleshya** beings. However, this contradiction cannot be resolved based on
the mentions of **Leshya** in Devalokas in texts like **Tattvarthabhashya** and
**Sangrahani**. Although **Shri Jivavijayaji** did not write anything about this
contradiction in his **Taba**, **Dhi Jarasomasuri** resolved it by stating that
it should be believed that **Shuklaleshya** exists in the ninth and subsequent
Devalokas. According to this statement, by accepting **Padma** and **Shukla** as
the two **Leshyas** in the sixth, seventh, and eighth Devalokas, and only
**Shuklaleshya** in the ninth and subsequent Devalokas, the aforementioned
contradiction is resolved.  However, a question arises: why is **Shuklaleshya**
also mentioned in the sixth, seventh, and eighth Devalokas in
**Tattvarthabhashya** and **Sangrahani Sutra**? The solution is that the
statement in **Tattvarthabhashya** and **Sangrahani Sutra** is from the
perspective of **Bahulata** (majority). This means that **Shuklaleshya** is in
the majority in the sixth, seventh, and eighth Devalokas, and therefore, even
though **Padmaleshya** is possible, it is not mentioned. In other words, the
**Bandhaswamitva** attributed to **Shuklaleshya** beings is in relation to pure
**Shuklaleshya**, not **Padmaleshya**. Therefore, by interpreting
**Tattvarthabhashya** and **Sangrahani Sutra** liberally, the contradiction can
be resolved.  In summary, except for the **Aharakatrika** (Aharakatrika) beings
with **Krishna**, **Neela**, and **Kapol** **Leshyas** among the **Krishna** and
other **Leshyas**, there are **Garpanaleshya** beings in the **Brahmaloka** and
**Lantaka** Devalokas, as well as in the **Shukra**, **Mahashukra**, and
**Alarasahara** **Kalpas**.  - **Putra**, 4.22, **Sarvarth Siddhi Tika**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya kAMgrantha digambara matAnusAra lAntaya (lAntaka) devaloka meM pAlezyA
hI hai|' ataeva ukta digambarIya siddhAntAnusAra yaha kahA jA sakatA hai ki
sahasrArakalpaparyanta ke bandhasvAmitva meM udyotacatuSka kI jo gaNanA kI gaI
hai, so padmalezyA vAloM kI apekSA se hai, zuklalezyA vAloM kI apekSA se nahIM
/  lekina tattvArtha bhASya, saMgrahaNI Adi granthoM meM devalokoM kI lezyA ke
viSaya meM kiye gaye ullekhAnusAra ukta virodha kA parihAra nahIM hotA hai|
yadyapi isa virodha kA parihAra karane ke lie zrI jIvavijayajI ne apane Tabe meM
kucha nahIM likhA hai, lekina dhI jarAsomasUri ne isakA samAdhAna karate hue
likhA hai ki yaha mAnanA cAhie ki nauveM Adi devalokoM meM hI zuklaleNyA hai|'
isa kathana ke anusAra chaThe Adi tIna devalokoM meM padma-zukla do leNyAe~ aura
nauveM Adi devalokoM meM kevala zaklalezyA mAna lene se ukta virodha kA parihAra
ho jAtA hai| lekina isa para prazna hotA hai ki tattvArthabhASya aura saMgrahaNI
sUtra meM chaThe, sAtaveM aura AThaveM devaloka meM zaklaleza kA bhI ullekha
kyoM kiyA gayA hai ? isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki tatvArthabhASya aura saMgrahaNI
sUtra meM jo kathana hai vaha bahulatA kI apekSA se hai  /  arthAt chaThe Adi
tIna devalokoM meM zuklalezyA kI bahulatA hai aura isIlie unameM padmalezyA
saMbhava hone para bhI usakA kathana nahIM kiyA gayA hai| arthAta zuklalezyA
vAloM ke jo andhasvAmitva kahA gayA hai, vaha vizuddha zuklalezyA kI apekSA se
hai| - isa prakAra tatvArthabhAgya aura saMgrahaNIsUtra kI vyAkhyA ko udAra
banAkara virodha kA parihAra kara lenA caahie| sArAMza yaha hai ki kRSNAdi
lezyAoM meM kRSNa, nIla, kApola ina tIna lezyAvAle AhArakaTrika ko chor3akara
sAmAnya se 118 2 brahmalokanahossaralAntavakApiTeSu ena leNyA
zutramahAzukrAlArasahasAreSu garapAnalezyAH  /  - pUtra, 4 / 22 sarvArthasidhi
TIkA

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Panyamanit**  The **Prakritis** bind and **Mithyatva** in the **Gugunasthan**
does not bind the **Tirthankara Prakriti**, so it should be understood that 117
**Prakritis** are bound in the first **Gunasthan**, and the same binding should
be understood in the second, third, and fourth **Gunasthan** as well, according
to the **Bandhaswamitva**.  At the time of the fourth **Gunasthan**, the binding
of 77 **Prakritis** is considered in these three **Leshyas** of **Krishnadi**,
which also includes **Devaayu**, which is correct from the perspective of
**Karmaandhakara**. But in the **Bhagavati Sutra**, it is stated that
**Samyaktv** humans with the three **Leshyas** of **Krishnadi** can bind
**Devaayu**, but not other **Aayu**. Thus, the binding of 76 **Prakritis**
should be considered. The simple solution to this contradiction is that the
inclusion of **Devaayu** in the binding of **Prakritis** for **Samyaktv** with
the three **Leshyas** of **Krishnadi** is according to the opinion of
**Karmagranthakara**, not according to the **Sandhanthik** opinion.
**Tejoleshya** is found in the first seven **Gunasthanas**, and by not binding
the **Narakanavaka** with this **Leshya**, they bind 111 **Prakritis** in
general, and in the first **Gunasthan**, it should be understood that 108
**Prakritis** are bound except for **Tirthankara Namakarma** and **Aharakdvik**,
and in the second to seventh **Gunasthanas**, the same **Bandhaswamitva** should
be understood as the **Bandhadhikar**.  In **Padmaleshya** also, there are seven
**Gunasthanas** similar to **Tejoleshya**. But the difference between
**Tejoleshya** and **Padmaleshya** is that in **Padmaleshya**, in addition to
the **Narakanavaka**, they do not bind the three **Prakritis** of **Ekendriya**,
**Sthavar**, and **Atap**. Therefore, the **Bandhaswamitva** of **Padmaleshya**
should be understood as 108 **Prakritis** in general, and in the first
**Gunasthan**, by subtracting **Tirthankara Namakarma** and **Aharakchik**, it
should be understood as 105, and in the second to seventh **Gunasthanas**, the
same **Bandhaswamitva** should be understood as the **Bandhadhikar**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 panyamAnita prakRtiyoM kA bandha karate haiM aura mithyAtva guguNasthAna meM
tIrthakaraprakRti kA bandha na hone se 117 prakRtiyoM kA tathA dUsare, tIsare
aura cauthe guNasthAna meM bandhasvAmitva ke samAna hI bandha samAnA caahie|
cauthe guNasthAna ke samaya ina kRSNAdi tIna lezyAoM meM 77 prakRtiyoM kA bandha
mAnA hai, usameM devAyu kA bhI grahaNa hai, jo karmaandhakAroM kI dRSTi se ThIka
hai  /  lekina bhagavatI sUtra meM batAyA hai ki kRSNAdi tIna lezyAvAle
samyaktvI manuSyAyu ko bAMdha sakate haiM, anya Ayu ko nhiiN| isa prakAra 76
prakRtiyoM kA bandha mAnA jAtA cAhie  /  isa virodha kA parihAra karane kA
sarala upAya yaha hai ki kRSNAdi tIna lezyA vAle samyaktiyoM ke prakRtibandha
meM jo devAyu kI gaNanA kI gaI hai, vaha karmagrandhakAroM ke matAnusAra hai,
saMddhAntika mata ke anusAra nhiiN| tejolezyA pahale sAta guNasthAna meM pAI
jAtI hai aura isa leNyA vAle narakanavaka kA bandha nahIM karane se sAmAnya se
111 prakRtiyoM kA bandha karate haiM aura pahale guNasthAna meM
tIrthakaranAmakarma aura AhArakadvika ke sivAya 108 aura dUsare se sAtaveM taka
pratyeka guNasthAna meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna bandhasvAmitva samajhanA caahie|
padamalezyA meM bhI tejolezyA ke samAna hI sAta guNasthAna hote haiM  /  lekina
tejolezyA se isameM vizeSatA yaha hai ki padmalezyA vAle narakanavaka ke
atirikta ekendriya, sthAvara aura Atapa ina tIna prakRtiyoM ko bhI nahIM
bAMdhate haiM  /  ataeva pAlezyA kA bandhasvAmitva mAmAnya rUpa se 108
prakRtiyoM kA tathA pahale guNasthAna meM tIrthaMkara nAmakarma tathA
AhArakacika ko ghaTAne se 105 kA aura dUsare meM lekara sAtaveM guNasthAna taka
pratyeka meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna hI bancha samajhAnA caahie| mumwwwAALI-.

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Firmgranth  The third Firmgranth is found from the Sukleshya to the
thirteenth Gunasthan. In it, besides the twelve Abandhya Prakṛtis of the
Paleshya, the four Udyot Chatushk are also not bound, making a total of sixteen
Prakṛtis that are not counted in the general bondage. Therefore, generally, 104
Prakṛtis are bound, and in the Vidhyatvagunasthan, except for the Tirthankar
Naamakarma and Aahar, 101 are bound. In the second Gunasthan, by reducing the
four of Napunsak Veda, Hudsansthan, Mithyatva, and Seva Sanhanan from 101, the
remaining 67 Prakṛtis should be understood to have the same ownership as the
Gunasthanas from the third to the thirteenth Gunasthan.  **65.**  After
explaining the bondage ownership of the Avatargana, the following verse
describes the ownership of the Bhavy, etc., remaining Marggana.  **Verse 23:**
*Savvagunabhavyasannisuoha abhava asannisaminsama. Sasani asannisannisava
kammabhangao anahaare.*  **Meaning:**  The Bhavy and Sanjñi Marggana have the
same bondage ownership in all Gunasthanas, while the Abhavy and Asanshi have the
same bondage ownership as the Mithyatva Gunasthan. In the Sasvadan Gunasthan,
the Asanshi have the same bondage ownership as the Sanshi, and the
Anaharakamargena have the same ownership as the Karmanayoga.  **Special Note:**
This verse explains the ownership in the different types of Bhavy and Sanjñi
Marggana, and the different types of Aahar, including the Anaharakamargena.  The
Bhavy and Sanjñi are both entitled to fourteen Gunasthanas. Therefore, their
bondage ownership is 120 Prakṛtis in general, and 117 in the Mithyatva Gunasthan
compared to the Gunasthanas, and in the Sasvadan Gunasthan...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya pharmagrantha zuklezyA pahale se terahave guNasthAna taka pAI jAtI hai|
isameM pAlezyA kI abandhya bAraha prakRtiyoM ke atirikta udyota catuSka kA bhI
bandha nahIM hone se solaha prakRtiyA~ sAmAnya bandha meM nahIM ginI jAtI haiM
/  isalie sAmAnya rUpa se 104 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai aura
vidhyAtvaguNasthAna meM tIrthakaranAmakarma aura AhAraafar ke sivAya 101 kA
tathA dUsare guNasthAna meM napuMsaka veda, huDasaMsthAna, mithyAtva aura sevA
saMhanana ina cAra ko 101 meM meM kama karane se zeSa 67 prakRtiyoM kA aura
tIsare me lekara terahaveM guNasthAna taka guNasthAnoM ke samAna hI svAmitva
samajhanA cAhie  /  65. isa prakAra avatarrgaNA kA bandhasvAmitva batalAne ke
bAda Age kI gAthA meM bhavya Adi zeSa raho mArgaNAoM ke svAmitva kA kathana
karate haiM savvaguNabhavyasannisu oha abhaHvA asanniminsamA  /  sAsaNi asanni
sanni va kammabhaMgo aNAhAre ||23|| gAthArtha bhavya aura saMjJI mArgaNAoM meM
sabhI guNasthAnoM meM bandhadhikAra ke samAna bandhasvAmitva hai tathA abhavya
aura asaziyoM kA bandhasvAmitva mithyAtva guNasthAna ke samAna hai  /  sAsvAdana
guNasthAna meM asaMjJiyoM kA bandhasvAmitva saMzI ke samAna tathA
anAhArakamArgeNA kA canvasvAmitva kArmaNayoga ke samAna jAnanA cAhie  /
vizeSArtha - isa gAthA meM bhavya va saMjJI mArgaNA ke bhedoM meM tathA prefer
ke bheda anAhAraka arer meM svAmitva bata lAyA hai| bhavya aura saMjJI - ye
donoM caudaha guNasthAnoM ke adhikArI haiM  /  isalie inakA bandhasvAmitva
sAmAnya se 120 prakRtiyoM kA aura guNasthAnoM kI apekSA mithyAtva guNasthAna meM
117, sAsAdana guNa

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are 6 In the place of 101 etc., one should understand it as being the same
as the bondage authority. The description of bondage in the general and quality
places has been done in detail in another karma text, therefore it has not been
repeated here. Without the substance mind, there is no feeling mind, such as the
non-cognizant. It is stated in the principle that even without the feeling mind
of the Kevali Bhagwan, there is a substance mind. ' That is, the Kevali Bhagwan
does not have the feeling mind in the form of the mind result arising from the
destruction of the knowledge-obscuring karma, but they answer the questions
asked by the gods of the Uttar Vimana with the substance mind. Therefore, it
happens without and not the mind is up to the fourteenth quality place. In the
principle, it has been called no-cognizant-non-cognizant. Here, in the cognizant
path, the fourteen quality places have been told considering the substance mind
as cognizant. The first friend-like quality place is the one for the non-
liberated beings, and due to not attaining right faith and conduct, the bondage
of the Tirthankara-name karma and the food-consuming karma is not possible.
Therefore, the non-liberated beings are entitled to the bondage of 117
qualities, excluding the three qualities of Tirthankara-name karma, food-
consuming karma, and these three qualities from the general and the first
quality place. The first and second of these two quality places are for the
liberated beings. Due to the non-bondage of the Tirthankara-name karma and the
food-consuming karma in the general and the first false-faith quality place,
there is bondage of 117 qualities, excluding the three qualities. In the second
quality place, they are entitled to the bondage of 101 qualities, like the
cognizant beings. In the non-food-consuming path, the karmic body-yoga path
should be understood as being the same as the aavarfree antar. This path is the
first, second, fourth... wwwwwwww. after faar वचित' न स्वसंनियत् । विनाऽपि माचिस
तु द्रव्यं केवलिनो भवेत् ॥

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hai 6 sthAna meM 101 Adi bandhAdhikAra ke samAna samajhanA cAhie  /  sAmAnya
aura guNasthAnoM meM bandha kA varNana dUsare karmagrantha meM vida rUpa se kiyA
gayA hai, ataH yahAM punarAvRtti nahIM kI gaI hai  /  dravyamana ke binA
bhAvamana nahIM hotA hai jaise ki asaMjJI | kevalI bhagavAna ke bhAvamana ke
binA bhI dravyamana hotA hai, aisA siddhAnta meM batAyA gayA hai  / ' arthAt
kevalI bhagavAna ke matijJAnAvaraNa karma ke kSayopazamajanya manana pariNAma
rUpa bhAvamana nahIM haiM, parantu anuttara vimAna ke devoM ke dvArA pUche gaye
praznoM ke uttara dravyamana se dete haiM  /  isalie ke binA hotA hai aura naha
mana caudaha guNasthAna taka hotA hai| siddhAnta meM use nojJInoasaMjJI kahA
hai| yahA~ saMjJImArgaNA meM dravyamana kI apekSA saMjJI mAnakara caudaha
guNasthAna batalAye gaye haiM  /  abhavya jIvoM ke pahalA mitrayAtva guNasthAna
hI hotA hai aura samyaktva evaM cAritra ko prApti na hone ke kAraNa
tIrthaGkuranAmakarma tathA AhArakadvikakA bandha saMbhava ho nahIM hai  /
isalie sAmAnya se tathA pahale guNasthAna meM tIrtharAmakarma, AhAraefere ina
tIna prakRtiyoM ko chor3akara sAmAnya va guNasthAna ko apekSA abhavyajIva 117
prakRtiyoM ke bandha ke adhikArI haiN| svAma azI jIvoM ke pahalA aura dUsarA
yaha do guNasthAna hote haiM  /  inake sAmAnya se aura pahale mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM tIrtharAmaka aura AhArakafe kA bandha nahIM hone se tIna
prakRtiyoM ko chor3akara 117 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai| dUsare guNasthAna
meM saMjJI jIvoM ke samAna ve 101 prakRtiyoM ke bandhAdhikArI haiM  /  anAhAraka
mArgaNA meM kArmaNa kAyayoga mArgaNA ke samAna aavarfree antar cAhie | yaha
mArgaNA pahale, dUsare cauthe. wwwwwwww. after faar vacita' na svasaMniyat  /
vinA'pi mAcisa tu dravyaM kevalino bhavet  //

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third karma, *praaya*, is found in the thirteenth and fourteenth of these
five *guna sthana*. The first, second, and fourth of these three *guna sthana*
occur when the being goes through *vigraha gati* to be born in another place. At
that time, for one, two, or three periods, the being does not have a gross body
like *oudarik*, etc., and remains in a state of *anahaarak*. In the thirteenth
*guna sthana*, during the third, fourth, and fifth periods of *kevali
samudghāt*, there is *anahaarak*. In the fourteenth *guna sthana*, due to the
cessation (absence) of *yoga*, no kind of food is possible. Therefore,
*anahaarak* is considered to be present in these five *guna sthana*.  However,
the reason for the statement that *anahaarak* is similar to *karma yoga* in
*margana* should be understood as follows: Here, four *guna sthana* are
mentioned in relation to *bandha*, because those who are not *yogi* are
*avandha* due to the cessation (absence) of *yoga*. The remaining first, second,
fourth, and thirteenth *guna sthana* also have a state of *anahaarak* due to the
absence of the *bhavadharani* body of the being in *vigraha gati*. And in the
thirteenth *guna sthana*, when *kevali samudghāt* occurs, there is a state of
*anahaarak* during the third, fourth, and fifth periods. From this perspective,
the thirteenth *guna sthana* should be understood. _*Anahaarak* is similar to
*karma yoga* in *margana*._ - *Samaya Sara*, 112 1. (a) *Padmatimadgaajaya
Anahaare Magmanamu Guna!* _... *Karmaasya*, 4||23 (b) *Viggadimaavannaa Kevanino
Samaasado Ajogiya. Siddha Ya Anahaasa Sesaa Aahaarya Jichaa.* —*Po Jivaka*, 635
2. *Eka Hau Bindanahaarakah.* *Swaasoon*, 21 - - -  -.....ANEvA...
PRIMIAINMMUNIndia

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karma prAya terahaveM aura caudahaveM ina pAMca guNa sthAnoM meM pAI
jAtI haiN| inameM se pahalA, dUsarA aura cauthA-..ye tIna guNasthAna usa samaya
hote haiM, jisa samaya jIva dUsare sthAna meM paidA hone ke lie vigrahagati se
jAte haiM, usa samaya eka, do yA tIna samaya paryanta jIva ko audArika Adi
sthUla zarIra nahIM hone se anAhAraka avasthA rahatI hai tathA serahaveM
guNasthAna meM kevalI samudghAta ke tIsare, cauthe aura pAMcaveM samaya meM
anAhArakatva rahatA hai| caudahaveM gusthAna meM yoga kA nirodha (abhAva) ho
jAne se kisI taraha kA AhAra saMbhava nahIM hai| isIlie ukta pAMca guNasthAnoM
meM anAhAraka mANA mAnI jAtI hai| kintu yahAM jo kAmaNa yoga ke samAna anAhAraka
mArgaNA meM bandhasvAmitva kahA hai usakA kAraNa yaha samajhanA cAhie ki yahA~
cAra guNasthAna bandha kI apekSA se batAye gaye haiM, kyoMki ayogI to
yoganirodha (abhAva) ke kAraNa avandhaka hI haiM  /  zeSa rahe pahale, dUsare,
cauthe aura terahaveM guNasthAna, unameM bhI vigrahAti sthita jIva ke
bhavadhAraNIya zarIra ke abhAva ke kAraNa anAhAraka avasthA hotI hai tathA
terahaveM guNasthAna meM jaba kevalI samudaghAta kare, taba tIsare cauthe aura
pAMcaveM samaya meM anAhAraka avasthA hotI hai  /  isa apekSA se terahavA~
guNasthAna samajhanA caahie| _ anAhAraka mArgaNA meM kArmaNa yoga ke samAna
sAmAnya se 112 1. (ka) paDhamatimadagaajayA aNAhAre magmaNAmu guNA ! _...
karmAsya, 4 // 23 (kha) viggadimAvaNNA kevaniNo samASado ajogIya  /  siddhA ya
aNAhAsa sesA AhArayA jIcA  //  --po jIvakA, 635 2. eka hau bIndAnAhArakaH  /
svAsUna 21 - - - -.....ANEvA... PRIMIAINMMUNIndia

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Due to ignorance, one should understand the ownership of the 107 Prakṛtis in the
first Gunasthāna, 24 in the second, 75 in the fourth, and 1 in the thirteenth.
In the Anaahāraka Mārgṇā, the ownership of Bandha is explained in relation to
the general, etc. Its explanation is as follows: Out of the 120 Prakṛtis that
are capable of being bound, by reducing the eight Prakṛtis of Ādhārakartṛka
Devāyu, Narakaśika, Manuṣyāyu, and Tīca, there are 112 in relation to the
general. And by reducing the five Prakṛtis of Jinanāma Devanika and Cakriyādṛka
from these, there are 107 Prakṛtis in the first Gunasthāna. And by reducing the
thirteen Prakṛtis of Sukṣmatṛka, Viklatṛka, Ekendriyajāti sthāvaranāma,
Ālapnāma, Napuṣakaved, Mithyātva-mohaniya, Huṇḍa-samsthāna, and Sevā-samhanana
from these 107 Prakṛtis, there are 34 Prakṛtis in the second Sāsvādana
Gunasthāna. And by reducing the twenty-four Prakṛtis of Ananta-anubandha-
caturṣka, etc., and adding the free Prakṛtis, there are 75 Prakṛtis in the
fourth Gunasthāna. And in the Yoga-kevala Gunasthāna, there is the binding of
one Sātavēdaniya Prakṛti.  In summary, the same places exist in both the Bhavyā
and Aṃśī Mārgṇās. Therefore, one should understand them in relation to the
general and the Gunasthānas, as they are bound by their respective rights.
Therefore, the Abhavyā remain in the first Gunasthāna, and their ownership of
Bandha is 117 Prakṛtis in the first Gunasthāna, in relation to the general and
the Gunasthāna.  The first and second Gunasthānas exist for the Asamjīvas, and
in these, the binding of the three Prakṛtis of Tīrthaṅkara-nāmakarma and
Āhāraka-vika is not possible. Therefore, there are 117 Prakṛtis in the general
and the first Gunasthāna, and 101 Prakṛtis in the second, in relation to the
ownership of Bandha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aMdhatvAdasya prakRtiyoM kA aura pahale guNasthAna meM 107, dUsare meM 24,
cothe meM 75. aura terahaveM meM 1 prakRti kA svAmitva samajhanA cAhie  /
anAhAraka mArgaNA meM o sAmAnya Adi kI apekSA bandha svAmitva batalAyA hai,
usakA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra haiM bandhayogya 120 prakRtiyoM meM se
AdhArakatrika devAyu, narakaSika, manuSyAyu, ticA ina ATha prakRtiyoM ko kama
karane para sAmAnya se 112 tathA inameM se jinanAma devanika tathA caikiyadrika
ina pA~ca prakRtiyoM ko kama karane se pahale guNasthAna meM 107 prakRtiyoM kA
aura ina 107 prakRtiyoM meM se sukSmatrika, viklatrika. ekendriyajAti
sthAvaranAma, AlapanAma. napusakaveda mithyAtvamohanIya. huMDa saMsthAna aura
sevA saMhanana na teraha prakRtiyoM ke kama karane para dUsare sAsvAdana
guNasthAna meM 34 prakRtiyoM kA tathA inameM se ana ntAnubandhacatuSka Adi
caubIsa prakRtiyoM ko kama karane tathA free prakRtiyoM ko milAne para cauthe
guNasthAna meM 75 prakRtiyoM kA tathA yogakevala guNasthAna meM eka sAtAvedanIya
prakRti kA bandha hotA hai  /  sArAMza yaha hai ki bhavya aura aMzI ina do
mArgaNAoM meM vaha hI sthAna hote haiM. ataH inakA sAmAnya se aura guNasthAnoM
kI apekSA aafna FatdhikAra meM basa gaye anusAra samajhanA cAhie  /  ataH makA
abhavya pahale hI guNasthAna meM avasthita rahate bandhasvAmitva sAmAnya evaM
guNasthAna kI apekSA pahale guNasthAna meM 117 prakRtiyoM kA hai  /  6 AA." asaM
jIvoM ke pahalA aura dUsarA, ye do guNasthAna hote haiM aura inameM tIrthaGkara
nAmakarma aura AhArakavika ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA bandha honA saMbhava nahIM
hai, ataH sAmAnya ge aura pahale guNasthAna meM 117 prakRtiyoM kA aura dUsare
meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna 101 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  -

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Permswar  "The third karma-patya, although it is in the second, fourth,
thirteenth, and fourteenth, there are five gunasthana in the state of anaharaka.
But in terms of bandha, there are four gunasthana in the anaharaka margana,
similar to the first, second, fourth, and thirteenth... because karma bandha is
possible only up to that point, and in these, it should be understood as similar
to bandha karmayoga, in comparison to the general and gunasthana. From the very
general, there are 112, in the first gunasthana, 107, in the second, 14, in the
fourth, 5, and in the thirteenth, 1 bandha.  Thus, the movement in the day and
night has been explained. Now, in the next gatha, the end of the granth and the
gunasthana in the leshya are mentioned...  "Tisu, Dusu, Suikaai guna baḍ sa ter
ti samit. Devind rilihiyam yam ka satyav khoi." ||24|| Gayath... In the first
three leshya, there are four gunasthana in the beginning, in the Tanj and Padma,
there are seven gunasthana in the beginning, and in the Shukla leshya, there are
thirteen gunasthana. Thus, the knowledge of this Bandhaswamitva prakarana,
composed by Shri Devendrasur, should be known by knowing the second karmagranth,
called 'Kamstak'.  Special points - This gatha indicates the end of the granth
and tells about the gunasthana in the halandhama.  The reason for mentioning the
gunasthana in the leshya separately is that there is no difference in the number
of gunasthana in other margana, as mentioned in the fourth karmagranth, but
there is no agreement regarding the leshyamargna. According to the fourth
karmagranth, there are six gunasthana in the Krishna, etc., three leshya. But
according to this third karmagranth,  1. Asmabhim pakshamadurg
paramatileasasuchch duse sala"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 permswar " tRtIyaM karmapatya yadyapi rahane. dusare, cauthe, leraha aura
caudaha, ima pA~ca guNasthAnoM meM anAhAraka avasthA hotI hai| kintu bandhakI
apekSA se anAhAraka mArgaNA meM kArmaNa kAnayoga ke samAna pahalA, dUsarA,
cauthA aura terahavA ... ge cAra guNasthAna hote haiM  /  kyoMki karma bandha
honA vahIM taka saMbhava hai, aura inameM sAmAnya va guNasthAnoM kI apekSA
bandha kAmayoga ke samAna samajhanA cAhie  /  ati sAmAnya se 112, pahale
guNarabAna meM 107. dUsare meM 14, cauthe meM : 5 ca terahaveM meM 1 kRti kA
dhandha hotA hai  /  isa prakAra gati dinadaha gAoM meM manA mila kiyA jA cukA
hai| aba Age kI gAthA meM grantha-samApti evaM lezyAoM meM guNasthAnoM kA
kathana karate hai ..... tisu dusu suikAI guNA baGa sA tera ti sAmita  /
devinda rilihiyaM yaM kA satyava khoi  // 24 //  gayAthaM ... pahalI tIna
leNyAoM meM Adi ko cAra muNasthAna, taMja aura padma ina do lezyAoM meM Adi ke
sAta guNasthAna tathA zuklatezyA meM teraha muNasthAna hote hai  /  isa prakAra
zrI devendrasUri dvArA racita isa bandhasvAmitva prakaraNa kA jJAna 'kamastaka'
nAmaka dusare karmagrantha ko jAnakara karanA caahie| vizeSAyeM - isa gAyA meM
grantha-samApti kA saMketa kara hAlaMdhamAoM meM guNasthAnoM ko batalAyA hai|
leNyAoM meM guNasthAnoM kA kathana alaga se karane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki anya
mArgaNAoM meM jitane kitane guNasthAna cauthe karmagrantha meM batalAye gaye
haiM, unameM koI matabheda nahIM haiM, para- lezyAmArgamA ke sambandha meM sA
nahIM hai  /  cauthe karmagrantha ke matAnusAra kRSNa Adi tIna leNyAoM meM chaha
guNasthAna hai| parantu isa tIsare karmagrantha ke 1 asmAbhima pakSamadurga
paramatilesAsu chacca dusa salA

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **100**  According to the **Badhakamittva** doctrine, there are
only four **Gunasthanas** (stages of spiritual progress). This statement of four
**Gunasthanas** is according to the **Panchasangraha** and the ancient
**Bandhaswamittva** doctrine. The relevant verses of **Panchasangraha** and
ancient **Bandhaswamittva** are as follows:  **Panchasangraha 1-30:** "Chassmasu
sikshin simuchchaehanga sukkha amogi alessa."  **Ancient Bandhaswamittva, verse
40:** The above views are also supported in **Gommatasar**.  Therefore, in the
three **Leshyas** (types of souls) of **Krishna** etc., **Bandhaswamittva** also
considers only four **Gunasthanas**. The intention of considering these three
**Leshyas** in the first four **Gunasthanas** is that these **Leshyas**, being
in the form of inauspicious results, cannot be found in the other
**Gunasthanas**.  Out of the three **Leshyas** of **Tej** etc., **Tej** and
**Pa** are auspicious, but their auspiciousness is much less than that of
**Shukla Leshya**. Therefore, these two **Leshyas** are found up to the seventh
**Gunasthanas**, and the nature of **Shukla Leshya** is so auspicious due to the
mildness (purity) of its results that it can be found up to the thirteenth
**Gunasthanas** (**Sak**).  The general **Bandhaswamittva** of these six
**Leshyas** in comparison to the four **Gunasthanas** has been explained in
verses 21 and 22. Therefore, one should understand it from there.  **Verse 691,
Jiva Kanda:** "Thavarakayappahudu avirksha sammoti amuhti halessa. Sarani do
apamalo av du sujhati pipalessaao."  **Meaning:** The first three inauspicious
**Leshyas** are from **Thavarakaya** to the fourth **Gunasthanas**, and the last
two auspicious **Leshyas** are from **Sanshi Mithyashti** to **Aparamatta**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 100 bAdhakAmitva matAnusAra unameM cAra guNasthAna hI mAne haiM  /  yaha cAra
guNasthAnoM kA kathana paMcasaMgraha aura prAcIna bandhasvAmitva ke matAnusAra
hai| paMcasaMgraha aura prAcIna bandhasvAmitva kI tatsambandhI gAthAe~ ghara
prakAra hai'challessA jAba sammoti' paMcasaMgraha 1-30 'chasmasu sikSiNa
sImuchaehaM sukkA amogI alessA  / ' prAcIna baMdhasvAmisva, gAthA 40 ukta maloM
kA samarthana gommaTasAra meM bhI kiyA gayA hai| ataeva kRSNAdi tIna lezyAoM meM
bandhasvAmitva bhI cAra guNasthAnoM ko lekara hI kiyA gayA hai| kRSNa Adi tIna
leNyAoM ko pahale cAra guNasthAnoM meM mAnane kA Azaya yaha hai ki ye lezyAeM
azubha pariNAma rUpa hone se Age ke anya guNasthAnoM meM nahIM pAI jA sakatI
haiM  /  teja Adi tIna lezyAoM meM se teja aura pA.- ye do lezyAeM zubha haiM
parantu unakI zubhatA zuklaleNyA se bahuta kama hai, isalie ve do leNyAeM sAta
guNasthAna taka pAI jAtI haiM aura zuklalezyA kA svarUpa pariNAmoM kI mandatA
(zuddhatA) se itanA zubha ho sakatA hai ki vaha terahaveM guNasthAna saka pAI
jAtI hai  /  ina chaha lezyAoM kA sAmAnya 4 guNasthAnoM kI apekSA baMdhasvAmitva
gAthA 21 aura 22 meM batalAyA jA cukA hai| ataH vahA~ se samajha lenA caahie| 1
thAvarakAyappahudo avirakSasammotti amuhtihlessaa| sAraNI do apamalo Ava du
sujhatipipalessAo  /  /  _..-go jIvakAMDa 691 arthAt pahalI tIna azuma lakSyAe~
sthAvarakAya se lekara caturtha guNasthAna paryanta hotI haiM aura anta ko sIna
zAbha leNyAeM saMzI mithyASTi se lekara apramattaparvanta hotI hai  /

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Third Karma Granth: Bandhasvamitva  This Granth discusses the bondage of
souls due to **Marganas** (karmic particles) in relation to **Payana** (the path
of liberation). It is essential to study the second Karma Granth before
understanding this one, as it deals with **Gunasthanas** (stages of spiritual
evolution) and **Prakritibandha** (bondage to the material world), which are
relevant to this discussion. This Granth explains how the bondage of a
particular **Margana** is similar to the bondage of **Bandha-Dhikara** (karmic
tendencies).  This Granth is named **Bandhasvamitva** because it explores the
bondage of souls due to their **Margana**-induced capacity for
**Prakritibandha**.  Thus ends the third Karma Granth, **Bandhasvamitva**,
composed by Shri Devendrasuri.  The Third Karma Granth, **Bandhasvamitva**, is
complete.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karma grantha isa grantha meM mArgaNAoM ko lekara jIvoM ke
bandhasvAmitva kA kathana sAra rUpa se pAyAna ko lekara vizeSa sama se kiyA gayA
hai| isalie isa prakaraNa ko spaSTa rUpa se samajhane ke lie dUsare karmagrantha
kA adhyayana kara lenA jarUrI hai| kyoMki dUsare karmagrantha meM guNasthAnoM ko
lekara prakRtibandha kA vicAra kiyA gayA hai jo isa prakaraNa meM bhI AtA hai ki
amuka mArgaNA kA bandhasvAmitva bandhA. dhikAra ke samAna hai| isa prakaraNa kA
nAma bakSasvAmima rakhane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki isameM mArgaNAoM ke dvArA jIvoM
ko prakRtibandha sambandhI yogyatA ke bandhasvAmitva kA vicAra kiyA gayA hai|
isa prakAra zrI devendrasUri viracita bandhasvAmisTa nAmaka yaha tIsarA
karmagrantha samApta huaa| bandhasvAmitva nAmaka tRtIya karmagraMtha smaapt|

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 3 Marganas in Uday Udiraabhit Meaning of Ferrer Karma-Sahitya on
Bandha-Vaya-Sa-Swamitva in Marganas !] Dissimilar Meaning of Shwetambar-
Digambar Karma Sahitya 1] Instrument Demonstrating Bandha in Marganas 10 Brief
Introduction of Jain- Karma Sahitya Original Gathaas of Karmagranth Part 1 to 3
11 Brief Word-Dictionary

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 3 mArgaNAoM meM udaya udIrAbhita mArgaNAoM meM bandha-vaya-sA-
svAmitva viSayaka ferrer karmasAhitya kA mantavya !] zvetAmvara- digambara karma
sAhitya ke samAna asamAna mantavya 1] mArgaNAoM meM bandhAmi pradarzaka yaMtra
10 jaina- karmasAhitya kA saMkSipta paricaya karmagrantha bhAga 1 se 3 taka kI
mUla gAthAeM 11 saMkSipta zabda-koza

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## KirtamAlANKavryayv४:१५:57..  **Chapter 4, Verse 15, Line 57**  This chapter
discusses the ownership of *udaya*, *udirasha*, and *satta* in the context of
*marganas*. The third *karmagrantha* mentions the ownership of *bandha* in
*marganas* through general and *gunasthanas*, but it does not discuss the
ownership of *udaya*, *udirasha*, and *satta*. However, it seems necessary to
briefly discuss them for practical purposes. Therefore, an explanation related
to them is provided.  **Ownership of *Udaya***  In the *marganas*, there are
four *gunasthanas* from *mithyatva* to *aviratsamashti munasthan*. Generally,
there are 122 *prakritis* that are capable of *udaya*. Out of these, 17
*prakritis* are *dhruvobhadhi* - they are always *udayavati* in their respective
*udaya* realms. These include *jnanavaran*, *darshanavaran*, *antaraya*,
*mithyatvamohaneya*, *jasanama*, *karmanama*, *varnapan*, *anuruludhu nama*,
*nirmananama*, *sthiranama*, *asthiranama*, *shubhanam*, and *ashubhanam*. The
*udaya* realm of *mithyatvamohaneya* is the first *gunasthan*, and it is
*dhruvobhadhi* there.  The *udaya* of the five *jnanavaran*, four
*darshanavaran*, and five *antaraya* - a total of fourteen *prakritis* - occurs
in the twelfth *gunasthan* called *lak*. The *udaya* of the remaining twelve
*prakritis* occurs in the eleventh *gunasthan* called *sak*. This is the case
for all beings.  These twenty-seven *dhruvobhadhi* *prakritis*, along with
*nidra prapala*, *vedaniya vik*, *neech gotra*, *narakatrik*, *patteindriya
jati*, *vaishiyatik*, *hundasanasthan*, *ashubhavihayogati*, *paradhat*,
*ucchvasanama*, *upghat*, *machatusk*, *durbhag*, *iswar*, *anadesh*, *ayash*,
sixteen *kashayas*, *hasyaadishatk*, *napa ved*, *sammatvamohaneya*, and *mishra
mohaneya* - a total of 76 *prakritis* - arise in the *udaya* of *narakas* due to
*samagam*.  Out of these, the *udaya* of *satyavarnatrik* does not occur in
*kriya bhariri deva* and *narakas* according to the *panchasangrah* and
*karmaprakriti*. It is said that the lifespan of an *asankhya* years...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 KirtamAlANKavryayv4:15:57.. mArgaNAoM meM udaya-udIraNA-sattA-svAmitva tIsare
karmagrantha meM sAmAnya aura guNasthAnoM ke mAdhyama se mAgAoM meM
bandhasvAmitva kA kathana hai kintu udaya, udIrazA, sattA ke svAmitya kA vidhAra
nahIM kiyA gayA hai  /  lekina upayogitA kI dRSTi se saMkSepa meM unakA vivecana
Avazyaka pratIta honA hai  /  ata: unase sambandhita spaSTIkaraNa kiyA jAtA hai|
udayasvAmitva maragati- isa mArgaNA meM mithyAtva se lekara aviratasamaSTi
muNasthAna paryanta cAra guNasthAna hote haiN| sAmAnyatayA udayayogya 122
prakRtiyAM haiM, unameM se jJAnAvaraNa gara, darzanAvaraNa cAra, aMtarAya pA~ca,
mithyAtvamohanIya, jasanAma, kArmaNanAma. varNapaNa, anuruladhu nAma,
nirmANanAma, sthiranAma, asthiranAma, zubhanAma aura azubhanAma meM salAvIsa
prakRtiyA~ dhru bobadhI - apanI-apanI udaya bhUmikA payaH avazya udayavatI hotI
haiN| unameM mithyAtvamohanIya kI udayabhUmi prathara gupasthAna hai aura vahA~
vaha dhruvoyayI hai| pAMca jhAtAvaraNIya, cAra dAtAvaraNIya aura pAMca antarAya
ina caudaha prakRtimoM kA udaya bArahaveM guNasthAna laka aura zeSa bAraha
prakRtiyoM kA udaya le rahavaM guNasthAna saka sabhI jIvoM ke hone se vedha
bolyo hai  /  ye sattAvIsa dhUvodayI prakRtiyoM tathA nidrA prapalA, vedanIya
vika, nIca gotra. narakatrika. pattendriya jAti, vaiziyatika, huNDasaMsthAna,
azubhavihAyogati, parAdhAta, ucchavAsanAma, upaghAta, macatuSka, durbhaga,
isvara, anAdeza , ayaza, solaha kaSAya. hAsyAdiSaTka, napA veda.
sammamatvamohanIya aura mizra mohanIya ye 76 prakRtiyA~ sAmAgama se nArakoM ke
udaya meM hotI haiM  /  unameM se paMcasaMgraha aura karmaprakRti ke mata se
satyAnarvitrika kA udaya kriya bhArIrI deva aura nArakoM ke nahIM hotA hai  /
kahA hai ki asaMkhya varSa kI Ayu

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **106** **Third Karma Granth: Appendix**  Except for the
following: humans, Liyach, those with Vaikriya bodies, those with Aharaka
bodies, those with black bodies, and the Anumala Sadhu, the remaining beings
experience the rise and fall of Sthana Chitra.  From the 76 Prakruti's that
arise from the general, 68 Prakruti's in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, and 72
Prakruti's in the Sasvadan Gunasthan, excluding the Samyakvamohaniya and Misra
Mohaniya, are eligible for liberation.  By reducing the Agamlanuvandhi Chatushka
and adding Mitra Mohaniya, 66 Prakruti's arise in the Misra Gunasthan.  By
reducing the Misra Mohaniya and adding the Sabyakarna Mohaniya and
Narakanupurvi, 70 Prakruti's arise in the Aviral Samyashti Gunasthan.
**Tibandigati:** In this fall, there are five Gunasthan's.  In this, the
following fifteen Prakruti's do not arise: Devathik, Narakvik, Vaikriyathika,
Aharakadvick, Manushyamik, Uchcha Gotra, and Jinnam.  Therefore, by reducing
these fifteen Prakruti's from the 122 eligible Prakruti's, 107 Prakruti's arise
from the general.  The Tyantr's do not have a Bhavadharniya Vaikriya body, but
they do have a Labdhipratyaya Vaikriya body.  Therefore, by adding Vaikriyadvik,
108 Prakruti's can be considered to arise, but in general, 107 Prakruti's are
considered eligible to arise.  From the aforementioned 107 Prakruti's, by
reducing the Samyak and Mitra Mohaniya, 105 Prakruti's arise in the Mithyatva
Gunasthan.  Except for the following five Prakruti's: Saksham, Apariyapt,
Sadharan, Atapnam, and Mithyatvamohani, 100 Prakruti's are eligible to arise in
the Sasvadan Gunasthan.  From these, the Anantanuvandhi Chatushka,  1 (a) - See
Karma Prakriti Udir. Pakaran Gatha 19. 'Samparat Varsha' age. Those with
Karmabhoomi, humans, and Liyach, after their Indriya Paryapti is complete,
should enter the Sthana Dinika Jap.  In this, those with Aharakalabdhi and
Vaishyailabdhi do not experience its rise. (b) - Dhinati Guruo Pare, Siriye 1. -
No Karmakaya 25.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 106 tRtIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa vAle manuSya, liyaMca, baiMkriya zarIra
vAle, AhAraka zarIra kAle aura anamala sAdhu ke sivAya zeSa anya ke
ssthAnacintrika kA udaya aura vAraNA hoto sAmAnya se udayavatI 76 prakRtiyoM meM
se samyakvamohanIya aura mizra mohanIya ko kama karane para mithyAtva guNAsthAna
meM 68 prakRniyo tathA narakAnupUrvI aura mithyAtvamohanIva ke sivAya 72
prakRtiyAM sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM udAra nogya haiM, unameM se agamlAnuvandhI
catuSkA ko kama karane aura mitramohanI ko jor3ane para mizraguNasthAna meM 66
prakRtiyoM aura unameM se mizramohanIya ko kama karane aura sabhyakarana
mohanIya tathA narakAnupUrvI kA prakSepa karane se aviralasamyaSTi guNasthAna
meM 70 prakRliyA~ udaya meM hotI haiM  /  tibaMdhagati-.'isa mArgaNA meM pani
guNasthAna hose haiM  /  isameM devatika, narakavika, vaikriyatikA.
AhArakAdvika, manuSyamika, ucca gotra aura jinanAma-ina pandraha prakRtiyoM kA
udaya nahIM hotA hai| isalie udayayogya 122 prakRtiyoM meM se pandraha
prakRtiyoM ko kama karane para sAmAnya se 107 pracAliyA~ udaya meM hotI haiN|
tiyaMtroM ke bhavadhAraNIya vaikriya zarIra nahIM hotA hai. kintu labdhipratyaya
.vaikriya zarIra hotA hai, ata: usakI apekSA se vairidvika ko sAtha johane para
1.6 prakRtiyA~ udaya meM mAnI jA sakatI hai lekina sAmAnya me 10.7 prakaliyAM
sadayayogya mAnI jAtI haiN| pUrvokta 107 prakRtiyoM meM se samyaka aura mitra
mohanIya..... ina do prakRtiyoM ko kama karane se mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 105
prakRtiyA, sakSama, aparyApta, sAdhAraNa, AtapanAma aura mithyAtvamohanI-~-na
pA~ca prakRtiyoM ke sivAya sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM 100 prakRliyA~ jadayayogya
hotI haiM, unameM se anantAnuvandhIcatuzka, 1 (ka)-dekheM karmaprakRti
udIra.pAAkaraNa gAthA 19.'saMmparata varSa kI Ayu vAle karmabhUmija manuSya aura
liyaMca ke indriyaparyApti pUrNa hone ke bAda styAnadinikA japaya meM Ane yothya
hai, usameM AhArakalabdhi tathA vaiziyalabdhi vAle ko usakA udaya nahIM hotA
hai| (ba)-dhINatiguruo pare, siriye 1  /  -no karmakAya 25

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Marganas, the arising of the Udhay-Udhoran Sasa-Swamitva, the immovable
name, the Ekandyaadi Jaatichatuk and the Tirthabanupurvi ten natures, when
reduced, and the Mithmohaniya is added, there are 61 natures in the Mith
Gunasthan. Of these, when the Mithmohaniya is reduced and the Samyaksyamohaniya
and the Tithanchanupurvi - these two natures are combined, there are 62 natures
in the Avirat Gunasthan. Except for the Apratyaachyanavaran Chatushk, Durbhaga,
Anadeya, Apash and Niyamanupurvi, these eight natures, there are 84 natures in
the Denavirat Gunasthan.  Here, the Nerva Nandin Pratyay Vaikriya Sharira is not
intended, therefore, the Naikriya Sharira, Vaikriya Angopang, these two natures
are to be considered the same everywhere.  In the Manushya Gati, there are
fourteen Gunasthanas. The Devtrik, Naraknika, Vaikriyaadhik Balibatashk,
Tiryaachtrik, Ujhot, Sthavar, Mukshma, Sadharan and Atap, these 20 natures do
not arise in humans, therefore, when they are reduced, there are 102 natures in
the Sadhay. But, in comparison to the Madhinimisak Vaikriya Sharira, when the
Usarvaikriya Sharira is made, the Vaikriyaatik and the Jat name arise, so these
three natures, along with 15 natures, can also arise. But, they are not expected
here. Here, of the 102 natures that arise, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, the
Aharakadvak, Jimnam, Samman and Mithmohaniya, these five natures do not arise,
so when they are reduced, there are 2 natures in the Udan. Except for the
Aparyaptanam and the Miyamohaniya, there are 95 natures in the Sasvadan
Gunasthan. When the Anantaambandhi Chatushk and the Manushyanupurni, these five
natures are reduced, and the Mishra Mohaniya is added, there are 61 natures in
the Mith Gunasthan. And, of these, when the Mithramohaniya is reduced and the
Samyaktyamohaniya and the Manushyanupursho are combined, there are 92 natures in
the Avirat Samyashti Gunasthan. Except for the Apratyaakhyanavaran Kashay
Chatushk, Manushyanupurvi, Dumang, Anadesh, Ayahkoti and Nidhgotr, these 8
natures, there are 13...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Du r ammemy........... mArgaNAoM meM udaya-udhoraNa sasA-svAmitva sthAvara
nAma, ekandiyAdi jAticatuka aura tirthabAnupUrvIina dasa prakRtiyoM ko kama
karane para aura mithamohanIya ko jor3ane se mitha guNasthAna meM 61 prakRtiyA~
udaya meM hotI haiN| unameM se midhamohanIya ke kama karane aura
samyakasyamohanIya taghA tithaMcAnupUrvI-ina do prakRtiyoM ko milAne meM avirata
guNasthAna ga 62 akSara meM hotI haiM  /  aprasthAcyAnAvaraNacatuSka, durbhaga,
anAdeya, apaza aura niyamAnupUrvI ina ATha prakRttiyoM ke sivAya deNAvirati
muNasthAna meM 84 prakRtiyA~ udaya meM hotI haiM  /  yahIM narvatra
nandhipratyaya vaikriya zarIra ko vivakSA nahIM kI hai, ataeka nai kriya zarIra.
vaikira aMgopAMga ina do prakRtiyoM ko sarvatra kAma samAnA baahie| manuSyagati-
isameM caudaha guNasthAna hote haiN| devatrika, narakanikA, baiMkriyadhika
bAlibataSka tiryacatrika, ujhota, sthAvara, mukSma, sAdhAraNa aura Atapaina 20
prakRtiyoM kA udaya manuSya ke hotA nahIM hai, isalie unako kama karane para
sAmAnya se 102 prakRtiyA~ sadaya meM hotI haiM  /  parantu madhinimisaka
baiMkrie zarIra kI apekSA usaravaikriya zArIra karane para baiMkriyatika aura
jAta nAma kA udaya hone se ina tIna prakRttiyoM sahita 15 prakRtiyA~ bhI udaya
meM ho sakatI hai| lekina unakI yahA~ apekSA nahIM kI gaI hai  /  yahA~ sAmAnya
se jo 1.22 prakRttiyA~ udaya meM AtI haiM, unameM se mithyAtva guNasthAna meM
AhArakAdvaka, jimanAma, sammAna aura mithamohanIya ina pAca prakRttiyoM kA udaya
nahIM hone se, unheM kama karane para 2 prakRtiyA~ udana meM hotI haiM  /
aparyAptanAma aura miyAmohanIya--ina do prakRtiyoM ke mivAya sAsvAdana
muNasthAna meM 95 prakRtiyA~ udara meM hotI haiN| unameM anantAmubandhI catuSka
aura manuSyAnupUrnI ina pAMca prakRtiyoM ko kama karane aura mizra mohanIya ko
jor3ane para mitha guNasthAna meM 61 prakRtiyAM haiM tathA inameM se
mitramohanIya ko kama karane tathA samyaktyamohanIya evaM manuSyAnupUrSoM ko
milAne para avirata samyaSTi guNasthAna meM 92 prakRtiyAM udaya meM hotI haiN|
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya catuSka, manuSyAnupUrvI, dumaMga, anAdeza, ayAHkoti
aura nIdhagotra ina 8 pratiyoM ke sivAma dezavirata musthAna meM 13

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 108  **Shush Kaal:** Bi. **Sip**  The 23 Prakruti are capable of arising. Out
of these 23 Prakruti, the Pratyakhyanaavaranapatuk arises and ceases in the 5th
Gunasthan, leaving 76 Prakruti capable of arising in the 6th Pramabirat
Gunasthan. However, the Aahaarakadwik arises in the 6th Gunasthan, so combining
these two Prakruti, the total number of Prakruti arising is 61.  Apart from the
Ruvanchittarik and Aahaarakadwik, there are 76 Prakruti in the 6th Gunasthan.
Reducing the Samyaktvamohaniya and the last three Sanhanan from these Prakruti,
there are 72 Prakruti arising in the Apoovarakaran.  Except for the
Haasyadishtak, there are 66 Prakruti arising in the Anishripti Gunasthan.
Excluding the Vedamik and Sanjwalan Trik, there are 60 Prakruti arising in the
Sukshmasampraay Gunasthan.  Without the Sanjwalan Lok, there are 56 Prakruti in
the Upshantamaah Gunasthan. Excluding the Rishabhanaraach and Naaraan, there are
57 Prakruti in the Ksheenamoha Gunasthan during the two extreme times. And
excluding Nidra and Prachasa, there are 55 Prakruti in the Ksheenamoha Gunasthan
during the final time.  The Gyaanaavaran (5), Darshanavaran (4), and Antaram (5)
... these 14 Prakruti arise and the Tirthankar Naamakarma becomes capable of
arising, resulting in 42 Prakruti in the Sayogikevali Gunasthan.  Oudaarifatrik,
Bihaayogasiddhik, Asthir, Ashubh, Pratyek, Sthir, Shubh, Manthanashtak,
Agurulanalashk, Varnachanumk, Nirman Jas, Kaarman, Van, Bhanarasatra Sanhanan,
Duhswar, Suruvar, Saataavedaniya, and Asaataavedaniya - excluding any one of
these 31 Prakruti, there are 12 Prakruti arising in the Ayogikevali Gunasthan.
Subhag, Aadesh, Yash-koti, Saata or Asaata Vedaniya (any one), Pras, Baadar,
Paryapt, Panchendriya Jaati, Manushatik, Jinnaam, and Ucch Gotr - these 12
Prakruti cease to arise at the end of the Ayogikevali Gunasthan.  **Gheshgati:**
This path has four Gunasthan. Naraknik, Tiryanchchatik, Manushatik,
Jaatichatushk, Oudaarikadwik, Aahaarakadwik, Sanhanan Shadhak,
Yagrodhaparimandalaadi (five Santhan), Ashubh Vihaamogati, Bhaatya, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 108 zuza kAla : bi. sipa prakRliyAM udayayogya haiM  /  ukta 23 prakRtiyoM meM
se pratyAkhyAnAvaraNapatuka kA udayaviccheda patriveM guNasthAna meM ho Ane se
chaThe pramasabirata guNasthAna meM 76 prakRtiyoM udayayogya haiM, lekina
AhArakadvika kA upaya chaThe guNasthAna meM hotA hai ata: ina do prakRtiyoM ko
milAne se 61 prakRtiyoM kA udaya mAnA ruvAnacitrika aura AhArakaddhika-ina pAMca
prakRttiyoM ke siyAya apramata muNasthAna meM 76 prakRliyAM hotI haiN|
samyaktvamohanIya aura aMtima tIna saMhanana ina dAra prakRtiyoM ko kama karane
para apUrvakaraNa meM 72 prakRtiyAM udaya meM hotI haiM  /  hAsyAdiSaTka ke
sivAya anizrRpti guNasthAna meM 66 prakRtimA udaya meM hotI haiM  /  vedamika
aura saMjvalanatrika ina chaha prakRtiyoM ke alAnA sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna
meM 60 prakRtiyAM udaya meM hotI haiN| saMjvalana lo ke binA upazAMtamAha
guNasthAna meM 56 prakRtiyAM hotI haiN| RSabhanArAca aura nArAna ina do
prakRtiyoM ke sivAya kSINamoha guNasthAna ke dvicarama samaya meM 57 prakRtiyA~
aura nidrA, pracasA ke sivAya kSINamoha ke aMtima samaya meM '55 prakRtiyA~ sotI
haiN| jJAnAvaraNa 5, darzanAvaraNa 4 aura antarAma 5... ina baudaha prakRtiyoM
meM udayavida hone tathA tIrthaMkara nAmakarma udayayogya hone se sayogikevalI
guNasthAma' meM 42 prakRtiyoM hotI haiN| audAriphaTrika. bihAyogasiddhika,
asthira. azubha, pratyeka, sthira, zubha, maMsthAnaSaTka. agurulaanalaSka,
varNacanumka. nirmANa jasa, kArmaNa, vana bhanArasatra saMhanana, duHsvara,
suruvara, sAtAvedanIya aura asAtAvadanIya meM me koI eka-ina 3 //  prakRsiyoM ke
binA ayogikaMvalI guNasthAna meM 12 prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai| subhaga,
Adeza, yaza-koti, sAtA yA asAtA vedanIya meM se koI eka, prasa, bAdara,
paryApta, paMcendriya jAti, manuSyatika, jinanAma aura uzca gotra meM 12
prakRtiyo bhayogikevalI guNasthAna ke antima samaya udaya bicchanna hotI haiN|
gheSagati-isa mArgaNA meM prathA cAra guNasthAna hote haiM  /  narakanika
tiryaMcatrika, manuSyaSika, jAticatuSka, audArikadvika, AhArakaddhika,
saMhananaSadaka, yagrodhaparimaNDalAdi pAMca saMsthAna, azubha vihAmogati,
bhAtaya,

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Marganas, the establishment of the arising and awakening is as follows:
**106**  1. 1. 1. Except for the four stationary things of the Jina name, the
harsh voice, the neuter Veda, the low lineage, and the 42 natures of the
terrafafter, the 80 natures of the gods arise from the Osha. Here, it is
possible for the arising of the research karma called Shodha of the gods to be
done by the Upkeya Parisha. But, there is no fault in the arising of the Udyot,
which is the cause of the body of the Bhava Pratyay, being desired. Due to the
Anushaya of the mixed and the Samyaktava Mohaniya in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, 78
natures are eligible for Udyoga. Due to the absence of the free, 77 natures are
in the Sasvadan, and the four Ananta Anubandha and the Devana Purvi - by
reducing these five natures and adding the mixed Mohaniya, there are 73 natures
in the mixed Gunasthan. By reducing the mixed Mohaniya and adding the Samyaktava
Mohaniya and the Devana Purvi natures to these, there are 74 natures eligible
for Udyoga in the Avirast Sampandashti Gunasthan.  F The Ekaindriya jati - in
the Ekaindriya Margana, there are two Gunasthanas in the beginning: Vaishtaka,
the five institutions of the human-higher lineage, the female Veda, the male
Veda, the four Dwiiindriya jati, the Aharakashika, the Audarika, the Angopaanga,
etc., the six Sanhanan, the harsh voice, the pleasant voice, the Samyaktava
Mohaniya, the mixed Mohaniya, the Shubhagana Adeyatama - without these 42
natures, there are generally 80 natures in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, and the
Kriya Sharira  P The arising of the name occurs in the Ekaindriya Margana in 1
nature. Except for the eight natures of the Sukshmatrika aayanama, the Udyotama,
the Mithyatva Mohaniya, the Ghadhatanama, and the Shwaso Chwasanama, 72 natures
arise in the Sasvadan Gunasthan. Because the Sasvadan Gunasthan occurs in the
Ekaindriya Prithvi, A, and Vanaspati in the insufficient state before becoming
heavy-sufficient-complete, and the Atapanama, the Udyotanama, the Paravatanam,
and the Ucchwasanama are not  > ! 1. In the Go Karmakanda, the Dubhang, the
Anadeya, and the Ayasha Kiti new natures are not considered eligible for Udyoga
in the Devagati. Therefore, the natures are eligible from the general.
Therefore, in the Naro Gunasthanas, there is an Udyoga of 75, 74, 20, and 71
natures respectively. - Go Karmakanda 304 ❤

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mArgaNAoM meM udaya udIraNA-sA sthAmitva 106 1 1 udyota jinanAma
sthAvaracatuSka duHsvara, napuMsaka veda, nIca gotra aura terrafafter 42
prakRtiyoM ke sivAya oSa se devoM ke 80 prakRtiyoM udaya meM hotI haiM  /  yahA~
upakiya parISa karane ko devoM ke zodha nAmakarma kA udaya saMbhava hai. parantu
bhavapratyaya zarIra nimittaka udyota kA udaya vivakSita hone se doSa nahIM hai|
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM mizra va samyaktva mohamIva kA anuSaya hone se 78
prakRtiyA~ udayogya hai | free kA biche ho jAne se sAsvAdana meM 77 prakRtiyA~,
anantAnubandhacatuSka aura devAnupUrvI -ina pAMca prakRtiyoM ko kama karane aura
mizramohanI ko milAne para mizra guNasthAna meM 73 prakRtiyA~, mizramohanIya ko
kama karane tathA samyaktva mohanIya aura devApurvI inase prakRtiyoM ko jor3ane
para aviratasampaNDaSTi guNasthAna meM 74 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya hai|" F
ekendriya jAti- ekendriya mArgaNA meM Adi ke do guNasthAna hote haiM vaiSTaka,
manuSyadhika uccagotra strIveda, puruSaveda, dvIndriyajAticatuSka, AhArakakSika,
audArika aMgopAMga Adi ke pA~ca saMsthAna, bihAgatika jinanAma, basa, chaha
saMhanana, duHsvara, susvara, samyaktvamohanIya, mizramoTa nIya, subhaganAma
AdeyatAma ina 42 prakRtiyoM ke binA sAmAnyataH aura midhyAtva guNasthAna meM 80
prakRtiyoM hotI haiM aura kriya zarIra P nAma kA udaya hone se ekendriya mArgaNA
meM 1 prakRtiyoM meM hotI haiN| sUkSmatrika aaynAma, udyotamAma
mithyAtvamohanIya, gadhAtanAma aura zvAsocchvAsanAma- ina ATha prakRtiyoM ke
sivAya sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM 72 prakRtiyoM udaya meM hotI hai| kyoMki
sAsvAdana guNasthAna ekendriya pRthvI, a aura vanaspati ko aparyApta avasthA meM
bhArIparyApta pUrNa hone ke pahale hotA hai aura AtapanAma, udyotanAma,
parAvAtanAma aura ucchvAsa kA adabha > ! 1 go0 karmakAMDa meM dubhaMga, anAdeya
aura ayazaHkIti navIna prakRtiyoM ko devagati meM udayogya nahIM mAnA hai  /
ataH prakRtiyoM sAmAnya se udayogya haiN| ataH nAroM guNasthAnoM meM zramazaH 75
74, 20 aura 71 prakRtiyoM kA uya hotA hai| -go karmakAMDa 304

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **110** **Appendix to the Third Karma Granth:**  **Body-
Perfection and its Completion:**  After the body-perfection is complete, the
subtle one-sensed being who is inclined towards right-conduct (Samyaktvam) does
not arise in the insufficient and ordinary plant realm. Therefore, the subtle
trika (threefold) does not arise there.  **One-Sensed:**  Just like the one-
sensed, the two-sensed also has two Gunasthanas (states of being). The eight
Vikriya (modifications), the three Manushya (human), the high-lineage, the
female-knowledge, the male-knowledge, the four-fold one-sensed without the two-
sensed, the two-fold food-taker, etc., these five Samhananas (aggregations),
five Sansthanas (abodes), auspicious Viha-yoga-gati (path of liberation), Jina-
name, stationary, subtle, ordinary, heat, auspicious, receivable, right-conduct-
delusive, mixed-delusive, these forty Prakritis (principles) are not eligible
for arising. Therefore, generally, in the Mithyatva (false-belief) Gunasthana,
82 Prakritis are eligible for arising. Out of these, without the eight Prakritis
of insufficient name, Udyot (radiance), Mithyatva (false-belief), Paradhvas
(destruction), inauspicious Viha-yoga-gati, Ucchvas (exhalation), Susvara (good
voice), Dusbara (difficult), there are 34 Prakritis that arise in the Sasvadana
(taste) Gunasthana. This is because the Mithyatva-mohaniya (delusion of false-
belief) does not arise there, and except for that, the rest of the Prakritis
arise only after the body-perfection is complete, and Sasvadana occurs before
the body-perfection is complete.  **Three-Sensed and Four-Sensed:**  In both the
three-sensed and four-sensed Jati-dana (birth-giving), the Gunasthanas are
similar to the two-sensed, and the Udavasvamitva (ownership of the body) should
also be understood similarly, but instead of the two-sensed, understand the
three-sensed and four-sensed.  **Five-Sensed:**  In the five-sensed Jati, there
are these Gunasthanas. Without the eight Prakritis of four-fold Jati,
stationary, subtle, ordinary, and heat, there are 114 Prakritis that arise in
the second Gunasthana, before the general one, in the general one.
**Footnotes:**  1. In the Go-Karma-Kanda, it is stated that in the second
Gunasthana, before the general one, there are 66 Prakritis (excluding the
Sthavara) that arise. - Go-Karma-Kanda 306-308  2. In the Go-Karma-Kanda, it is
stated that in the second Gunasthana, before the general one, there are 51
Prakritis that arise, and in the second one, there are 71 Prakritis that arise
in the Vikalendriya (one-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed). - Go-Karma-Kanda
306-308

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 110 tRtIya karmagrantha pariziSTa : zarIraparyApti evaM pUrI hone ke bAda hotA
hai  /  aupafee samyaktva kA mana karane vAlA sUkSma ekendriya labdhi- aparyApta
aura sAdhAraNa vanaspati meM utpasa nahIM hotA hai, ataH usake vahA~ sUkSmatrika
udaya meM nahIM haiM  / ' I r jAti - ekendriya ke samAna hIndriya ke bhI do
guNasthAna hote haiM  /  vaikriyASTaka, manuSyatrika, uccagotra, strIveda,
puruSaveda, dvIndriya ke binA ekendriya jAticatuSka AhArakadvika, Adi ke pA~ca
saMhanana, pA~ca saMsthAna, zubha vihAyogati jinanAma sthAvara sUkSma sAdhAraNa
Atapa subhaga, Adeya, samyaktvamohanIya mizramohanIya ina cAlIsa prakRtiyoM ke
udaya-ayogya hone se sAmAnyataH aura mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 82 prakRtiyAM
udaya yogya haiM  /  unameM se aparyApta nAma, udyota midhyAtma parAdhAsa azubha
vihAyogati, ucchvAsa susvara, duHsbara ina ATha prakRtiyoM ke binA sAsvAdana
guNasthAna meM 34 prakRtiyoM udaya meM hotI haiM, kyoMki mithyAtvamohanIya kA
udaya to vahA~ hotA nahIM hai aura usake sivAya zeSa prakRtiyoM kA udaya
zarIraparyApta pUrNa hone ke bAda hI hotA hai aura sAsvAdana to zarIraparyApti
pUrNa hone ke pahale hI hotA hai| www zrIndriya aura caturizriya jAtidana donoM
mArgaNAoM meM bhI dvIndriya ke samAna ho dI guNasthAna hote haiM aura
udavasvAmitva bhI usake samAna jAnanA cAhie, kintu dIndriya ke sthAna para
zrIndriya aura caturindriya samajhanA  / " paMcendriya jAti isameM vaha
guNasthAna hote haiN| jAticatuSka, sthAvara, sUkSma, sAdhAraNa aura Apa ina ATha
prakRtiyoM ke binA sAmAnya se 114 1 go0 karmakAMDa meM sAmAnya se pahale
guNasthAna meM dUsare guNasthAna meM 66 (styA rahita) prakRtiyoM kA udaya batAyA
hai| -go0 karmakAMDa 306-308 2 vikalendriyoM (ndriya, zrIndriya, phlurindriya)
meM sAmAnya se pahale guNasthAna meM 51 va dUsare meM 71 prakRtiyoM kA udaya go0
karmakAMDa meM batAyA hai  /  -go0 karmakAMDa 306-308

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Marganas, the Jay-Javiran Sasa ownership of the Prakruti is present.
Among them, Aharakavik, Jinnam, Samyaktva, and Mishmatyamohmi - these five
Prakruti are reduced, then 106 Prakruti arise in the Miya Gunasthan. And
Mithyatvamohniya, Apariapt, and Narakanupurvi... except these three Prakruti,
106 Prakruti arise in the Sasvadan Gunasthan.   Bagumdhachaturshka and
Anupurvitrik, these seven Prakruti, are absent, and by adding Mitra Modniya, 103
Prakruti arise in the Mi Gunasthan. By reducing Mitra Mohniya and combining Bhar
Anupurvo and Samyaktvamohniya, 104 Prakruti arise in the Aviratsamyagdristi
Gunasthan.   Apratyaakhyanavaran Chaturshka, Vaikriyashtka, Manushyanupurvi,
Tithanchanupurchi, Durbhaga, Anaav, and Ayashkiti, these 17 Prakruti, are
absent, then 15 Prakruti arise in the Deshavirapt Gunasthan. And from the sixth
Gunasthan to the Dhaurava Gunasthan, one should understand the Udavsvaamitva of
81, 76, 72, 66, 60, 56, 57, 42, and 12 Prakruti, respectively, similar to the
Manushya Gati.  Prithvikaaya... in this Margana, one should understand two
Gunasthan like Aikandiya. In the Aikandiya Margana, 42 Prakruti mentioned, and
except Sadharpanam, the general Prakruti, and 6 Prakruti arise in the
Mithyantranapasthan.   Sukshma, Labdhi-Apariapt, Matar, Uchaut, Mithyashya,
Paradhat, Masochchhyas, these seven Prakruti, are absent, then 72 Prakruti arise
in the Sasvadan Gunasthan. In the Sasvadan Gunasthan, Karan-Apariapt is present
for Prithvikaayadi, but Samidh-Apariapt is not present.  Similar to Apaya-
Prithvikaaya, here also two Gunasthan are present. In the Prithvikaaya Margana,
43 Prakruti mentioned, and except Aatapanam, the general Prakruti, and Prakruti
arise in the Mithyast Gunasthan.   Here, Sukshma, Apariapt, Uyoth, Mithyatva,
Paradhat, and Ucchhvas, these six Prakruti, are absent, then 72 Prakruti arise
in the Sasvadan Gunasthan. Because in Bhoomi, Aikandir, and Labdhi-Apariapt, no
being is born who can perform the Udavman of Samyaktva. Therefore, in the
Sasvadan Gunasthan, Sukshma and Apariyas are present.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 margaNAoM meM jaya-javIraNa sasA svAmitva prakRtiyoM udaya meM hotI haiN|
unameM se AhArakavika, jinanAma, samyaktva aura mizmAtyamohamIya-ina pAMca
prakRtiyoM ko kama karane para miyA guNasthAna meM 106 prakRtiyAM udaya meM hotI
haiM tathA mithyAtvamohanIya, aparyApta aura narakAnupUrvI....ina tIna
prakRtiyoM ke sivAya sAsvAdana guNaspana me 106 ani  /  bAgumadhAcatuSka aura
anupUrvItrika ina sAta prakRttiyoM ke binA aura mitra moDnIya ko milAne se mi
guNasthAna meM 103 prakRtiyAM udaya meM hotI haiM  /  mitramohanIya ko kama
karane aura bhAra AnupUrvo tathA samyaktvamohanIya ko saMyukta karane para
aviratasamyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM 104 prakRtiyAM hotI haiM ! apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
catuSka, vaikriyASTakA, manuSyAnupUrvI, tithaMcAnupUrcI, durbhaga, anAva aura
ayazakIti ina 17 prakR. siyoM ke sivAya dezavirapta guNasthAna meM 15
prakuttiyAM udaya meM hotI haiM aura cha guNasthAna se lekara dhaurahaveM
guNAsthAna taka manuSyagati ke samAna 81,76, 72, 66, 60, 56, 57, 42, aura 12
prakRtiyoM kA udavasvAmitva samajhanA caahie| pRthvIkAya ... isa mArgaNA meM
aikandhiya kI taraha do guNasthAna samajhanA pAhie  /  aikendriya mArgaNA meM
kahI gaI 42 prakRtiyAM aura sAdhArapanAma ke sivAya sAmAnya ho aura midhyAntra
napasthAna meM 6 prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai  /  sUkSma, labdhi-aparyApta,
mAtara, ucauta, mithyAzya, parAdhAta, mAsocchyAsa ina sAta prakRtiyoM ke binA
sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM 72 prakRtiyoM udaya meM hotI haiM  /  sAsvAdana
guNasthA karaNa-aparyApta pRthvIkAyAdi ko hotA hai. kintu samidha-aparyApta ko
nahIM hotA hai| apAya-pRthvIkAya ke samAna yahA~ bhI do muNasthAna hote haiM  /
pRthvIMkAya mAgaMNA meM kahI gaI 43 akRtiyA~ aura AtapanAma ke sidhAya sAmAnya
meM aura mithyAsta guNasthAna meM prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai| mameM sUkSma,
aparyApta, uyota, mithyAtva, parAdhAta aura ucchavAsa ina chaha prakRtiyoM ke
alAza sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM 72 prakRtiyAM hotI hai| kyoMki bhUma, aikendira
aura labdhi-aparyApta meM samyaktva kA udavamana karane vAlA koI jIva utpanna
nahIM hotA hai  /  ataeva sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM sUkSma aura aparyAsa nAma kA
avaya

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma Text: Appendix  It does not happen. After the completion of
Pariirapati, the Udyot name and Paradhat Maam arise. After the completion of
Shwaso-chchwas-paryaapti, Shwaso-m-chchwas occurs, and Mithyatva-moha does not
arise here.  In Hejas-kay and Kasu-kay, the first Gunasthan occurs. In Tejas-
kay, except for the 44 Ap-kay, Agros, and Yash-Kiti, 76 Prakruti arise, and in
Vayu-kaam, along with Rip-sharira, 77 Prakruti arise.  In Vanaspati-kay... there
are two Gunasthan in this Maangana. In Ekaindriya Maangana, except for the 42
Prakruti and Atap-naam, 76 Prakruti arise in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, and 72
Prakruti arise in the Sasvadan Gunasthan.  In Sa-kay, there are fourteen
Gunasthan. In it, except for the five Prakruti of Stavar, Sukshma, Sadharan,
Aasap, and Ekaindriya jati, 117 Prakruti arise from the general, and 112
Prakruti arise in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, excluding the five Prakruti of
Aharak-vik, Jin-naam, Samyak-tva-mohaniya, and Mith-mohaniya. Out of these, by
reducing the three Prakruti of Mithyal, Apariapt, and Narak-anupurvi, 109
Prakruti arise in the Sasvadan Gunasthan. Out of these, the ten Prakruti of
Ananta-anubandhi-chatursh, Vikal-endriya-nik, and Anupurvi-chik, undergo Uday-
vikchhed, and by adding Mishr-mohaniya, 100 Prakruti arise in the Mishr
Gunasthan. By adding the five Prakruti of Anupurvi-chatursh and Samyak-tva-
mohaniya, and reducing Mishr-mohaniya, 104 Prakruti arise in the Avirat Samyag-
drishti Gunasthan. In the Gunasthan of Desh-virat, etc., the 87, 81, 76, 72, 66,
60, 56, 57, 42, and 12 Prakruti mentioned in the general Uday-adhik-ar should be
understood as Prama.  In Pramomog, there are thirteen Gunasthan. Except for the
thirteen Prakruti of Stavar-chatursh, Jati-chatursh, Bhatap, and Anupurvi-
chatursh..., 106 Prakruti arise from the general. In the Mithyatva Gunasthan,
124 Prakruti arise, excluding the five Prakruti of Aharak-tik, Jin-gaam, Samyak-
tva, and Min...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karma grantha : pariziSTa nahIM hotA hai  /  pArIrapati pUrNa hone ke
bAda udyota nAma aura parAdhAta mAma kA udaya hotA hai  /  zvAsocchvAsaparyApti
pUrNa hone ke anantara zvAsomachvAsa kA upama hotA hai aura mithyAtvamoha kA
udaya yahA~ hotA nahIM hai  /  hejaskAya, kAsukAya inameM pahalA guNasthAna hotA
hai| tejaskAya meM apakAya kI '44 tathA agrosa aura yaza-kIti ina 46 prakRtiyoM
ke sivAya 76 prakRtiyoM kA sathA vAyukAma meM Ripa zarIra sahita 77 prakRtiyoM
kA udaya hotA hai| banaspatikAya... isa mAgaMNA meM do guNasthAna hote haiN|
ekendriya mAgaNA meM kahI bAI 42 prakRtiyoM aura AtapanAma ke atirikta sAmAnya
se aura mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 76 aura sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM 72 prakRtiyA~
jadaya meM hotI haiN| sakAya isameM caudaha guNasthAna hote haiM  /  usameM
sthAvara, sUkSma, sAdhAraNa, Asapa aura ekendriya jAti ina pAMca prakRtiyoM ke
alAvA sAmAnya se 117 va AhArakavika, jinanAma. samyaktvamohanIya aura
midhamohanIya ina pA~ca prakRtiyoM ke binA mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 112
prakRtiyAM akSya meM hotI haiM  /  unameM se mithyAla, aparyApta aura
narakAnupUrvI-ina tIna prakRtiyoM ko kama karane se sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM 109
prAptiyAM hotI haiN| unameM se anantAnubandhIcatuSka, vikalendriyanika aura
AnupUrvI cika-ina dasa prakRtiyoM kA udayavikacheda hotA hai aura mizramohanIya
ko milAne para mizra guNasthAna meM 100 prakRtiyA~ udaya meM hotI haiN|
AnupUrvIcatuSka aura samyaktvamohanIya ima pA~ca prakRtiyoM ko milAne aura
mizramohanIya ko kama karane para avirata samyagdRSTi guNalyAna meM 104
prakRtiyA~ uyaya meM hotI haiN| dezavirata Adi guNasthAnoM meM sAmAnya
udayAdhikAra meM kahA gayA 87, 81, 76, 72, 66, 60, 56, 57, 42 aura 12 prakRtiyoM
kA udaya prAmAH samajhanA cAhie  /  pramomoga-yahA~ teraha guNasthAna hote haiM
/  sthAvaracatuSka, jAticatuSka, bhAtapa aura AnupUrvIcatuSkA-...ina teraha
prakRtiyoM ke simAya sAmAnya se 106 prakRtiyAM udaya meM hotI haiN| AhArakatika,
jinagAma, samyaktva aura mina ina pAMca prakRtiyoM ke alAvA mithyAtva guNasthAna
meM 124 prakRtiyA~,

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
-: In the Margana of Ushadha Udirana-Satta Swami, 113 In the Sasvadan devoid of
Mithyatva, 103. By reducing the Anantaanusree Chatushk and merging the mind, in
the Misra Gunasthan, 100, and by reducing the Misra Mod and abandoning the
Samyaktva Moheeya, in the Aviratamyashta Gunasthan, 100, apart from the
Apratyaasthanavaran Chatushk, Vedic Devagati Devayu, Narakati Narakayu Dur Bhag,
Anadeya and Avash - these thirteen Prakritis, in the Deshavirasa Gunasthan, 57
Prakritis arise. In the remaining Gunasthanas, one should understand the Udaya
to be similar to the Manushya Gati Margana. · Vachanayoga - Here there are
thirteen Gunasthanas. Apart from the Stavar Chatushk, Ekendriya Jati, Atap and
Anupurvik - these ten Prakritis, from the Samanya, 112. Aharakavik, Jinnaam,
Samyavattva and Misra - these five Prakritis, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, 107,
apart from the Mithyatva Moheeya and Vikalendriya Trik, these four Prakritis, in
the Sasvadan Gunasthan, 103 Prakritis arise. Although Vikalendriya is
Vachanayoga, it happens only after the Bhasha Paryapti is complete, and before
the Marira Paryapti from Sasvadan. Therefore, in the ten Margana, in the
Sasvadan Gunasthan, Vachanayoga does not happen. Therefore, Vikalendriya Trik
has been removed. By reducing the Anantaanusree Chatushk and merging the Misra
Moheeya, in the Misra Gunasthan, 100 Prakritis arise. From Avirat Samyashti
onwards, in the subsequent Gunasthanas, one should understand it to be similar
to the Manoyoga Margana. Kayayoga - In this Margana, there are thirteen
Gunasthanas. In this, from the Samanya, 122. In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, 117, in
the Sasvadan, 111, etc., one should understand the Udaya of the Prakritis
mentioned in the Maamanya Udayadhikari. Purushabeb - In this, there are nine
Gunasthanas. Apart from Narakavik, Jati Chatushk, Stavar, Sukshma, Sadharan,
Atap, Aparyapt Jinnaam, Streeved and Napunsak, these fifteen Prakritis, from the
Samanya, 107 Prakritis arise. Apart from Baharakavik, Samyaktva and Misra, these
four Prakritis, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, 103 Prakritis, in the Sasvadan
without the Mithyatva Prakriti, 102 Prakritis, from them, Anantaanubandh
Chatushk and Janupurthi wwwww ............................................
.......

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 -: mArgaNAoM meM uSadha udIraNA-sattA svAmisva 113 mithyAtva se rahita
sAsvAdana meM 103. anantAnuzrIcatuSka ko kama karane aura mana ko milAne para
mizra guNasthAna meM 100 tathA mizramor3afre ko kama karane aura
samyaktvamohanIya ko chor3ane para aviratamyaSTa guNasthAna meM 100,
apratyAsthAnAvaraNacatuSka vaidika devagati devAyu, narakati narakAyu durbhaga,
anAdeya aura avaza - ina teraha prakRtiyoM ke sivAya dezavirasa guNasthAna meM
57 prakRtiyAM udaya meM hotI hai| zeSa rahe guNasthAnoM meM manuSyagati mArgaNA
ke samAna udaya samajhanA cAhie  /  * vacanayoga yahA~ teraha guNasthAna hote
haiM  /  sthAvaracatuSka ekendriya jAti Atapa aura AnupUrvIka - ina dasa
prakRtiyoM ke sivAya sAmAnya se 112. AhArakavika, jinanAma. samyavatva aura
mizra - ina pA~ca prakRtiyoM ke fear mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 107
midhyAtvamohanIya aura vikalendriyatrika ina cAra prakRtiyoM ke sivAya sAsvAdana
guNasthAna meM 103 prakRtiyoM hotI hai  /  yadyapi vikalendriya ko vacanayoga
hotA hai, parantu bhASAparyApti pUrNa hone ke bAda hI hotA hai aura sAsvAdana se
marIraparyApti pUrNa hone ke pahale hotA hai| isalie dasa mAgaMNA meM sAsvAdana
guNasthAna meM vacanayoga nahIM hotA hai  /  ataeva vikalendriyatrika nikAla
diyA hai| usameM se anantAmuarates ko kama karane aura mizramohanIya ko milAne
para mizra guNasthAna meM 100 prakRtiyA~ udaya meM hotI hai | aviratasamyaSTi se
lekara Age ke guNasthAnoM meM manoyoga mArgaNA ke samAna samajhanA caahie|
kAyayoga- isa mArgaNA meM teraha guNasthAna hote haiN| isameM sAmAnya se 122.
midhyAtva guNasthAna meM 117 sAsvAdana meM 111 ityAdi mAmAnya udayAdhikAra meM
kahI prakRtiyoM kA udaya samajhanA cAhie  /  puruSabeba isameM nau guNasthAna
hote haiM  /  narakavika, jAticatuSka, sthAvara, sUkSma, sAdhAraNa, Atapa
aparyApta jinanAma, strIveda aura napuMsaka ina 15 prakRtiyoM ke sivAya sAmAnya
se 107 prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai  /  unameM se bAhArakadvika, samyaktva aura
mizra ina cAra prakRtiyoM ke alAvA mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 103 prakRtiyA~,
mithyAtva prakRti ke binA sAsvAdana meM 102 prakRtiyA~, unameM se
anantAnubandhacatuSka aura jAnupUrthI wwwww
............................................ .......

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Sutiya Kapanya: Parishit Rif  In the **Mithyatva Gunasthan**, by reducing
the seven **Prakritis** and adding **Mishra Mohaniya**, there are 66
**Prakritis**, and by removing **Mishra Mohaniya** from them and adding
**Samyaktv** and **Anupurvitrik** - these four **Prakritis**, there are no
**Nihinas** in **Abhirati Shay Gunaru G**.  Further, in the **Denavirata
Gunasthan**, without these 14 **Prakritis**: **Atyakhyanavaran Chaturuk**,
**Devagati**, **Devayu**, **Naitriya Dwik**, **Durbhag**, **Anadeya**, and
**Ayashch**, there are 85 **Prakritis**.  By reducing these five **Prakritis**:
**Pratyashyanavaran Chaturuk**, **Niyanchagati**, **Tithanchayu**, **Udyot**,
and **Nichagotra**, and adding **Aharak Dwik**, there are 76 **Prakritis** in
the **Pramattasanyata Gunasthan**.  In the **Aparamatta Gunasthan**, excluding
these five **Prakritis**: **Styanaddhitrik** and **Aharak Dwik**, there are 74
**Prakritis**. In the **Apuvrakaran Gunasthan**, without these four
**Prakritis**: **Samyaktvamohaniya** and the last three **Sanhanan**, there are
72 **Prakritis**. And in the **Anivriti Gunasthan**, without these
**Prakritis**: **Hasyaadi**, there are 64 **Prakritis**.  In the **Striveda**,
there are also nine **Gunasthanas**, similar to the **Purushaveda**. Here, one
should understand the emergence of the remaining **Prakritis** from the general
and in the **Pramatta Gunasthan**, excluding **Aharak Dwik**, and in the fourth
**Gunasthan**, excluding **Anupurvitrik**. Because, generally, during the
**Parabhava** of the **Striveda**, the fourth **Gunasthan** does not occur.
Therefore, **Anupurvitrik** does not emerge, and the **Stri** is not a
**Chaturdasha Purvadhara**. Similarly, **Aharak Dwik** does not occur for her.
Therefore, one should understand the emergence from the general and in the nine
**Gunasthanas** sequentially as 105, 103, 102, 66, 65, 74, 70, and 64.  In the
**Napunsakaved**, there are also nine **Gunasthanas**. In this, excluding these
eight **Prakritis**: **Devtrik**, **Jinnam**, **Striveda**, **Purushaveda**, and
**Aharak Dwik**, there are 114 **Prakritis** from the general. In the
**Mithyatva Gunasthan**, excluding these two **Prakritis**:
**Samyaktvamohaniya** and **Mishra Mohaniya**, there are 112 **Prakritis** in
emergence. By reducing these six **Prakritis**: **Sukshmaruk**, **Asap**,
**Mithyatva**, **Narakanupu**, there are 106 **Prakritis** in the **Sasvadan
Gunasthan**. By reducing these 11 **Prakritis**: **Anantanubandhi Chaturuk**,
**Manushyanupurvi**, **Tithanchaanupurvo**, **Sthavar**, and **Jatichatur**, and
adding...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtIya kapanya : parizita ripha -ina sAta prakRtiyoM ko kama karane aura
mizcamohanIma ko jor3ane se mizca guNasthAna meM 66 prajAtiyoM aura unameM se
mizra mohanIya ko nikAlakara samyaksya tathA AnupurvItrika-ina cAra prakRtiyoM
ko jor3ane se abhirati zAya guNaru ga meM nahINoM hotI haiM ! adhika,
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNacatuSpha, devagati, devAyu, naitriyadvika, durbhaga, anAdeya
aura ayazca ina 14 prakRtiyoM ke binA deNavirata guNasthAna meM 85 prakRtiyAM
hotI hai| pratyAzyAnAvaraNa caturuka, niyaMcagati, tithaMcAyu, udyota aura
nIcagotra ina AU prakRtiyoM ko kama karake AhArakadvika ko milAne se
pramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM 76 prakRtiyA~ hotI haiN| unameM se
styAnaddhitrika aura AhArakadvika-ina pA~ca prakRttiyoM ke sivAya apramatta
guppasthAna meM 74 prakRsiyA, samyaktvamohanIya aura aMtima tIna saMhanana ina
cAra prakRtiyoM ke binA apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM :prakRtiyA~ hotI hai aura
hAsyAdi yaha prakRtiyoM ke binA anivRtti guNasthAna meM 64 prakRtiyA~ hotI haiM
/  stroveva-isameM bhI puruSaveda ke samAna no guNasthAna hote haiM aura yahAM
sAmAnya se tathA pramatta guNasthAna meM AhArAvika ke vinA tathA cauthe
guNasthAna meM AnupUrvItrika ke sivAya zeSa rahIM prakutiyoM kA udaya samajhanA
cAhie  /  kyoMki prAyaH strIvAdI ke parabhava meM jAte samaya caturtha
guNasthAna nahIM hotA hai  /  ata: AnupUrthItrika kA udaya nahIM hotA hai aura
strI caturdaza pUrvadhara nahIM hotI hai  /  imaliyA use AhArakadvika kA bhI
savaya nahIM hotA hai| ataH sAmAnya se tathA nau guNasthAnoM meM anukrama se
105, 103, 102, 66, 65, , 74, 20 aura 64 isa prakAra udaya samajhanA cAhie  /
napusakAveda isameM bhI nau guNasthAna hote haiN| isameM devatrika, jinanAma,
strIveda aura puruSaveda, AhArAdvika ina 8 prakRtiyoM ke sivAya sAmAnya se 114,
samyaktvamohanIya aura mizramohanIya-ina do prakRtiyoM ke binA mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM 112 pravRttiyA~ udaya meM hotI haiN| unameM se sUkSmarika, Asapa,
mithyAtva, narakAnupU.-...-ina chaI prakRtiyoM ko kama karane para sAsvAdana
guNasthAna meM 106 prakRtiyAM hotI haiM  /  anantAnubandhIcatuSka,
manuSyAnupUrvI, tithaMcAnupUrvo, sthAvara aura jAticatuka ina 11 prakRtiyoM ke
kama karane aura

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:
**UruaruwelkewiswavidyaiikiVM100000000mikankviovbecणदेशालारसपाराश**  In the
**UruaruwelkewiswavidyaiikiVM100000000mikankviovbecणदेशालारसपाराश** (a specific
Jain text or concept), the **Upay-Udoraksha-Sasa-Swamitva** (means of
protection, defense, and ownership) are discussed.  **Margnaon mein upay-
udoraksha-sasa-swamitva**  In the **Margnaon** (paths or stages of spiritual
progress), the **Upay-Udoraksha-Sasa-Swamitva** are important.  **Mishramohaniya
ko pilane par mishra sthān mein 6 prakruttiyon aur mitr. Mohaniya ke kshay v
samyakasv v marakānupūrvi ke udaugyogya hone se vist sambharashti gunasthan mein
67 prakrutti ma udauy mein hoti hain.**  When the **Mishramohaniya** (mixed
karmic influences) are consumed, in the **Mishra Sthan** (mixed state), 6
**Prakruti** (categories of karma) and **Mitr. Mohaniya** (friendly karmic
influences) are destroyed. This leads to the **Samyakasv** (right faith) and
**Marakānupūrvi** (right conduct) becoming suitable for development. As a
result, 67 **Prakruti** arise in the **Vist Sambharashti Gunasthan** (the state
of extensive accumulation of karmic matter).  **Unmein se
atyarupānābaranchatuṣk, narakadhi, vaikriyādik, dubhang. Anāye aur ay - in bārāh
prakruttiyon ke bina deṇavirat gunasthām mein 85 prakruttiyāṁ hotī hain.**  Out
of these, without the **Atyarupānābaranchatuṣk** (four types of covering karma),
**Narakadhi** (hellish karma), **Vaikriyādik** (karma related to
transformations), **Dubhang** (karma related to deformities), **Anāye** (karma
related to non-perception), and **Ay** (karma related to non-existence), there
are 85 **Prakruti** in the **Deṇavirat Gunasthan** (the state of non-
attachment).  **Sirvachagati, siyantrāmu, nīmagotr, udyot aur
pratyāsamatāvaranchatugak - in ā3 prakruttiyon ko kam karne se 75 prakruttiyāṁ
pramatt gunasthan mein hotī hain.**  By reducing the **Sirvachagati** (karma
related to fast movement), **Siyantrāmu** (karma related to control),
**Nīmagotr** (karma related to low birth), **Udyot** (karma related to
radiance), and **Pratyāsamatāvaranchatugak** (four types of covering karma
related to rebirth), there are 75 **Prakruti** in the **Pramatt Gunasthan** (the
state of distracted mind).  **Ssyānaskhitrik... in tīn prakruttiyon ke sivāy
apratmatt gunasthan mein 74 prakruttiyāṁ, samyaktvamohaniya aur antim tān
sanhanan - in sār prakruttiyon ke bina apūrvakaraṇ śuṇasthan mein 70
prakruttiyon aur hāsyāviṣad ke ke bina aniti gunasthan mein 64 prakruttiyāṁ
udauy mein hotī hain.**  Except for the **Ssyānaskhitrik** (karma related to
mental distractions), there are 74 **Prakruti** in the **Apratmatt Gunasthan**
(the state of non-distracted mind). Without the **Samyaktvamohaniya** (karma
related to right faith), **Antim Tān Sanhanan** (karma related to final
binding), there are 70 **Prakruti** in the **Apūrvakaraṇ Śuṇasthan** (the state
of non-creation). Without the **Hāsyāviṣad** (karma related to laughter and
sorrow), there are 64 **Prakruti** in the **Anīti Gunasthan** (the state of non-
righteousness).  **Krodh-..yahān nau gunasthan hote hain. Mān-..-4, māyā.4,
lobha-... aur jinānām - is terah prakruttiyon ke vimā sāmanya se 106, sāmyavask,
mith aur āhārakādvīk-.-in 4 prakruttiyon ke bina mithyātv gamasthan mein 105,
rāmvīk, ātap, mithyātv aur narakānupū:  in chhah prakruttiyon ke bina sāsvādan
mein 1 prakruttiyāṁ udauy mein hotī hai.**  There are nine **Gunasthan** (states
of being) in total. Without the **Krodh** (anger), **Mān** (pride), **Māyā**
(delusion), **Lobha** (greed), and **Jinānām** (knowledge of the Jinas), there
are 106 **Prakruti** in the **Sāmanya** (ordinary) state. Without the
**Sāmyavask** (karma related to equality), **Mith** (karma related to
falsehood), and **Āhārakādvīk** (karma related to food), there are 105
**Prakruti** in the **Mithyātv Gamasthan** (the state of false belief). Without
the **Rāmvīk** (karma related to attachment), **Ātap** (karma related to heat),
**Mithyātv** (karma related to falsehood), and **Narakānupū** (karma related to
hellish rebirth), there are 1 **Prakruti** in the **Sāsvādan** (state of
enjoyment).  **Anantānubandhī shodh, sthākar, ātiśchak aur ānapūrvīvīk - in mo
prakruttiyon ko kam karne**  By reducing the **Anantānubandhī Shodh** (karma
related to endless searching), **Sthākar** (karma related to stability),
**Ātiśchak** (karma related to excessive activity), and **Ānapūrvīvīk** (karma
related to previous actions),  **Aur mishramohaniya ko milāne par min gunasthan
mein 61 prakruttiyon, unmein se mishramohaniya ko kam karne aur samdhyasya
mohaniya tatha ānapūrvīyatutak ko milāne par avirat gunāasthan mein 15
prakruttiyāṁ, unmein se apratyāratyāndāvaran krodh, ānapūrvīchatuṣk, degati,
devāyu, narakmati narakāyu, vaitriy vik, dubhang, anādeya aur ayy...-in faudah
prakruttiyon ke bina deśavīras gunasthan mein 81 prakruttiyāṁ hotī hai.**  And
by combining the **Mishramohaniya** (mixed karmic influences), there are 61
**Prakruti** in the **Min Gunasthan** (the state of minimal karmic matter). By
reducing the **Mishramohaniya** and combining the **Samdhyasya Mohaniya** (karma
related to harmony) and **Ānapūrvīyatutak** (karma related to previous actions),
there are 15 **Prakruti** in the **Avirat Gunāasthan** (the state of non-stop
progress). Without the **Apratyaratyāndāvaran Krodh** (karma related to anger
that covers the eyes), **Ānapūrvīchatuṣk** (four types of karma related to
previous actions), **Degati** (karma related to speed), **Devāyu** (karma
related to divine life), **Narakmati Narakāyu** (karma related to hellish
rebirth), **Vaitriy Vik** (karma related to transformations), **Dubhang** (karma
related to deformities), **Anādeya** (karma related to non-perception), and
**Ayy** (karma related to non-existence), there are 81 **Prakruti** in the
**Deśavīras Gunasthan** (the state of heroic detachment).  **Virya dhagati,
tithanchayu, udyot, nīchgotr aur pratyākhyānāvaran krodh - in pāñch prakruttiyon
ke nyūn karne aur āhārakavīk ke milāne par pramatt śuṣasthan mein 8 prakruttiyāṁ
hotī hain.**  By reducing the **Virya Dhagati** (karma related to vigor),
**Tithanchayu** (karma related to lifespan), **Udyot** (karma related to
radiance), **Nīchgotr** (karma related to low birth), and **Pratyākhyānāvaran
Krodh** (karma related to anger that covers the eyes) and combining the
**Āhārakavīk** (karma related to food), there are 8 **Prakruti** in the
**Pramatt Śuṣasthan** (the state of distracted mind).  **Ssyānaskhitrik aur
āhārakatik - in pāñch pravāsīyon ko kam karne par apratmatt gunasthan mein 73
pratiyo, samyavaskamohaniya aur antim lōn sanhanan - in chār prakruttiyon ke
bina apūrvakaraṇ gunasthan mein 66 aur hāsyādiṣaṭk bina anivṛtti gunasthan mein
63 prakruttiyāṁ udauy mein hotī hain.**  By reducing the **Ssyānaskhitrik**
(karma related to mental distractions) and **Āhārakatik** (karma related to
food), there are 73 **Prakruti** in the **Apratmatt Gunasthan** (the state of
non-distracted mind). Without the **Samyavaskamohaniya** (karma related to right
faith), **Antim Lōn Sanhanan** (karma related to final binding), there are 66
**Prakruti** in the **Apūrvakaraṇ Gunasthan** (the state of non-creation).
Without the **Hāsyādiṣaṭk** (karma related to laughter and sorrow), there are 63
**Prakruti** in the **Anivṛtti Gunasthan** (the state of non-return).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ra UruaruwelkewiswavidyaiikiVM100000000mikankviovbecNadezAlArasapArAza
mArgaNAoM meM upaya-udorakSA-sasA-svAmitva mizramohanIya ko pilAne para mizra
sthAna meM 6 prakRttiyoM aura mitra. mohanIya ke kSaya va samyakasva va
marakAnupUrvI ke udayogya hone se vista sambaraSTi guNasthAna meM 67 prakRtimA
udaya meM hotI haiN| unameM se atyArupAnAbaraNacatuSka, narakadhika,
vaikriyAdika, dubhaMga. anAye aura aya -ina bAraha prakRtiyoM ke binA deNavirata
guNasthAma meM 85 prakRtiyAM hotI haiM  /  sirvacagati, siyaMtrAmu, nImagotra,
udyota aura pratyAsamatAvaraNacatugaka - ina A3 prakRtiyoM ko kama karane se 75
prakRtiyA~ pramatta guNasthAna meM hotI haiN| ssyAnakSitrika... ina tIna
prakRtiyoM ke sivAya apramatta guNasthAna meM 74 prakRtiyA~, samyaktvamohanIya
aura aMtima tAna saMhanana-ina sAra prakRtiyoM ke binA apUrvakaraNa zuNasthAna
meM 70 prakRtiyoM aura hAsyAviSada ke ke binA aniti guNasthAna meM 64 prakRtiyA~
udaya meM hotI haiM  /  krodha-..yahA~ nau guNasthAna hote haiM  /  mAna-..-4,
mAyA.4, lobha-... aura jinanAma- isa teraha prakRtiyoM ke vimA sAmAnya se 106,
sAmyavaska, mitha aura AhArakAdvika-.-ina 4 prakRttiyoM ke binA mithyAtva
gamasthAna meM 105, rAmavika, Atapa, mithyAtva aura narakAnupU: ina chaha
prakRtiyoM ke binA sAsvAdana meM 1 prakRtiyA~ udaya meM hotI hai  /
anantAnubandhI zodha, sthAkara, Atizcaka aura AnupUrvIvika-ina mo prakRtiyoM ko
kama karane aura mizramohanIya ko milAne para mina guNasthAna meM 61 prakRsiyoM,
unameM se mizramohanIe ko kama karane aura samdhasyamohanIya tathA
AnupUrvIyatuTaka ko milAne para avirata guNAsthAna meM 15 prakRttiyAM, unameM se
apratyAratyAndAvaraNa krodha, AnupUrvIcatuSka, degati, devAyu, narakamati
narakAyu, vaitriya vika, durbhaga, anAdeya aura ayaya...-ina phaudaha prakRtiyoM
ke binA dezavirasa guNasthAna meM 81 prakRtiyA~ hotI hai  /  viryadhagati,
tithaMcAyu, udyota, nIcagotra aura pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha- ina pAMca
prakRtiyoM ke nyUna karane aura AhArakavika ke milAne para pramata zuSasthAna
meM 8 prakRttiyoM hotI haiN| ssyAnaddhitrika aura AhArakatika-ina pAMca
pravAsiyoM ko kama karane para apramata guNasthAna meM 73 pratiyo,
samyavasvamohanIya aura antima lona saMhanana-ina cAra prakRtiyoM ke binA
apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM 66 aura hAsyAdiSaTka binA anivRtti guNasthAna meM 63
prakRtiyA~ udaya meM hotI haiN|

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma-Praya: Appendix  Here, the ownership of the arising of **mana**,
**maya** and **lobha** should be understood as before. However, in the **mana**
karma, there are nine **gana-sthana**. Similarly, the twelve natures of the
other three karmas, excluding **mana**, should also be reduced. For example, in
the **mana** karma, there are twelve divisions, including **an-an-san-ubandhi**,
etc., of the other three karmas, and **jin-nama**. Apart from these thirteen
natures, there are 109 natures that arise in general. Similarly, it should be
understood for other karmas. In the **lobha** karma, there are 60 natures that
arise when the three **veva** are reduced in this **guna-sthana**.  **Mati**,
**bhut** and **avadhi** karma: Here, the fourth to twelfth **guna-sthana** are
present. In general, 106 **pravritti** are eligible to arise. Except for
**a-har-kanik**, in the **a-virat** **guna-sthana**, there are 104, and in the
**desa-virat**, etc., **guna-sthana**, there are 87, 81, 76, 72, 66, 60, 56 and
57 natures, respectively, according to the general right to arise.  **Manah-
parya-yajama** karma: In this karma, there are seven **guna-sthana** from the
**pramat** **guna-sthana** to the twelfth **guna-sthana**. Therefore, there are
51 natures in general, and in the **pramat**, etc., **guna-sthana**, there are
76, 72, 66, 65, 56 natures that arise, respectively.  **Kevala-mana** karma: In
this karma, there are two **guna-sthana**, the thirteenth and the **bhavan**. In
them, there are 42 and 12 natures, respectively, in general.  **Mali-ajnan** and
**at-ajama** karma: Here, there are three **guna-sthana** from the beginning.
Except for **a-har-kanik**, **jin-nama** and **samyak-tv-mohaniya**, there are
118 natures in the **mithyatva** **guna-sthana**, 111 in the **sasvadan**
**guna-sthana**, and 100 in the **misra** **guna-sthana** in general.  **Vimang-
jan** karma: Here too, there are three **guna-sthana** as mentioned before.
Except for **a-har-kanik**, **jin-nama**, **samyak-tv**, **sthavar-chaturshka**,
**jati-chaturshka**, **at-ap**, **manushya-an-upurvi** and **tiyan-cha-an-
upurvi**, there are 105 natures that are eligible to arise in general. In
**manushya** and **tirth-cha**, **vi-graha-gati** does not arise with **vi-
bhang-shama**, but arises with **rij-u-gati**. Therefore, **manushya-an-upurvi**
and **tiyan-cha-an-upurvi** are prohibited here. In the **mithyatva** **guna-
sthana**, there are 106 natures except for **misra-mohaniya**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karbhaprAya : pariziSTa mAna, mAyA aura loma yahA~ udayasvAmitva
pUrvavat samajhanA cAhie  /  parantu mAna aura mAyA kaSAya mANA meM nau
gaNasthAna hote haiM  /  isI prakAra apane sivAya anya tIna kaSAyoM kI bAraha
prakRtiyAM bhI kama karanI caahie| jaise ki mAna mANA meM anya tIna kaSAya ke
anansAnubandhI Adi bAraha bheda aura jinanAma--ina teraha prakRtiyoM ke sivAya
sAmAnya se 109 prakRtiyA~ udaya meM hotI haiM  /  isI prakAra anya RSAyoM ke lie
bhI samajhanA cAhie  /  lobha mArgaNA meM isa. guNasthAna meM tIna vevoM ko kama
karane para 60 prakRtiyA~ udaya meM hotI haiN| mati, bhUta aura avadhi zAna.
yahAM cauthe se lekara bArahaveM taka mau guNasthAna hote haiM  /  sAmAnya meM
1.6 pravRttiyA~ udayayogya haiM  /  AhArakanika ke sivAya avirata guNasthAna meM
104 aura dezavirata Adi guNanyAnoM meM sAmAnya udayAdhikAra ke anusAra kramazaH
87, 81,76, 22, 66, 60. 56 aura 57 kA adayasvAmitva samajhanA caahie|
manaHparyAyajAma isa mArgaNA meM pramatta guNasthAna se lekara bArahaH
guNasthAna taka sAta guNasthAna hote haiM, isalie sAmAnma se 51 aura pramAdi
guNasthAnoM meM anubhama se +1,76, 72, 66, 65, 56 prakRtiyA~ udaya meM samalanI
caahie| kevalamAna-...isa mArgaNA meM terahavAM aura bhAvahAM ye do guNasthAna
hote haiN| unameM sAmAnyataH 42 aura 12 prakRtiyAM anukrama se samajhanA cAhie
/  _ mali-ajJAna aura ata-ajAma-yahA~ Adi ke tIna guNasthAna samajhanA cAhie  /
AhArakadvika, jinanAma aura samyaktvamohanIya ke binA sAmAnya se aura mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM 118, sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM 111 aura mizra guNarathAna meM 100
prakRtiyAM udaya meM hotI haiM  /  vimaMga jAna....yahA~ bhI pUrva kathanAnusAra
tIna guNasthAna hote haiM  /  AhArakadika, jinanAma, samyaktva, sthAvaracatuSka,
jAticatuSka, Atapa, manuSyAnupUrvI aura tiyaMcAmapUrvI ina pandraha prakRtiyoM
ke sivAya sAmAnya se 105 prakRtiyA~ upayayogya hotI hai| manuSya aura tirthaca
meM vigrahagati se vibhaMgazAma' sahita nahIM upajatA hai. Rjugati se upajatA
hai, ataeva yahIM manuSyAnupUrvI aura siyaMcAnupUrvI kA niSedha kiyA hai  /
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM mizramohanIya ke sivAya 106

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Rasas  **mmmmarwarermveveo0000000TTERVISHAwereorompOTO**  In the Marganas, in
the state of **Uvirama-Satta-Swamitva**, 104 **Prakritis** arise in the **Min
Gunasthan** due to the combination of **Mithyatva** and **Narakanupurvi** in
**Prakritis**, **Sastayan**, and the reduction of **Anantanuvandhibhaska** and
**Deshanupurvi**, and the merging of **Mishra Mohaniya**.  **Samaathik** and
**Chhedopasthapaniya** **Samyama** - these two **Dharimas** have four
**Gunasthanas** from **Pramat** to **Neka**. In them, one should understand the
**Upayaswamitva** of 81.76, 72, and 66 **Prakritis**, respectively.
**Pariharavishuddhi** - here, the sixth and seventh **Gunasthanas** exist. In
them, there are 73 **Prakritis** from **Samanya** to **Pramat**, excluding eight
**Prakritis** from the aforementioned 81 **Prakritis**: **Aharakatik**,
**Strived**, **Pratham Sanhanan**, and the remaining **Paudha Sanhanan**.
**Pariharavishuddhi** **Charitra** does not exist for the fourteenth
**Purvagara**, and **Stri** does not pass **Pariharavishuddhi**. Only those with
**Vajrishabhanaracha Sanhanan** have **Pariharavishuddhi Charitra**. Therefore,
the arising of the aforementioned eight **Prakritis** is prohibited here.
**Sthanaachatri** is present in the **Aapramad Gunasthan** in **Prakriti**.
**Sukshmasampraaya** - here, the tenth **Gunasthan** is **Sukshmasampraaya**!
Generally, the arising of 60 **Prakritis** should be understood here.
**Yathasabat** - here, the last four **Gunasthanas** are the eleventh, twelfth,
thirteenth, and fourteenth. In them, there is the arising of 56 **Prakritis** in
**Upshant Moh**, 57 **Prakritis** in **Seen Goh** during **Vicharam Samaya**
excluding **Rishabhanarav** and **Magach** **Sanhanan**, 55 **Prakritis** in the
final **Samaya** excluding **Nidraadi**, 42 **Prakritis** in the **Mabogikowali
Gunasthan**, and 12 **Prakritis** in the **Ayoginiti Gunasthan**.
**Deshavirat** - here, there is one **Gunasthan** and the arising of
**Prakritis** from **Samanya** should be understood in it.  **Avirat** - in this
**Margana**, the first four **Gunasthanas** exist. In it, there are 116
**Prakritis** from **Samanya**, excluding **Jinnam** and **Aharamaabik**.
**Digambaraacharyas** have considered 77 **Prakritis** as **Udayayogya** and
have stated the arising of 77 and 74 **Prakritis** in the seventh and eighth
**Gunasthanas**, respectively.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAsasa mmmmarwarermveveo0000000TTERVISHAwereorompOTO mArgaNAmoM meM sabaya-
uvIramA-sattA-svAmitva prakRtiyoM, sAsthAyana meM mithyAtva aura narakAnupUrvI
ke binA 104 prakRtiyA~, anantAnuvandhIbhASka aura dezAnupUrvI ko kama karane
aura mizra mohanIya ko milAne para mina guNasthAna meM 100 prakRtiyA~ udaya meM
hotI haiN| sAmAthika aura chedopasthApanIya saMyama-ina donoM dhArimoM meM
pramatta se nekara cAra guNasthAna hote haiN| unameM 81.76, 72 aura 66
prakRtiyoM kA kamazaH upayasvAmitva samajhanA cAhie  /  parihAravizaziyahA~
chaThA aura sAtavA~ ye do guNasthAna hote haiM  /  unameM pUrvokta 81 prakRtiyoM
meM se AhArakatika, strIveda, prathama saMhanana ke sivAya zeSa paudha
saMhanana... ina ATha prakRttiyoM ke binA sAmAnya se aura pramata meM 73
prakRtiyAM hotI hai| parihAravizuddhi cAritra vAlA caturdaza pUrvaghara nahIM
hotA hai tathA strI ko parihAravidhi pArita nahIM hotA hai aura vajaRSabhanArAca
saMhanana vAle ko hI parihAravimuddhi cAritra hotA hai, amIlie yahA~ pUrvota
ATha prakRtiyoM ke udaya kA niSedha kiyA hai| sasthAnAcatri ke sivAna apramAda
guNastAna meM prakRti meM hai  / ' sUkSmasaMparAya-yahA~ mi dasayA~
mUkSmasaMparAva guNasthAna hI hotA hai ! sAmAnyataH yahA~ 60 prakRtiyoM kA udaya
mamAnA caahie| yathAsabAta--yahA~ anta ke 11, 12, 13 aura 14 ye kAra guNasthAna
hote haiN| unameM upazAnta moha meM 56, RSabhanArava aura mAgaca ina do
saMhanana ke sivAya sINa goha meM vicarama samaya meM 57, nidrAdi ke hinA antima
samaya meM 55, mabogikovAlI guNasthAna meM 42 aura ayoginatI guNasthAna maiM 12
prakRsiyoM kA udaya hotA hai| dezavirata--yahA~ pA~ca eka ho guNasthAna hotA hai
aura usameM mAmAnya se prakRttiyoM kA udaya jAnanA caahie| avirata isa mArgaNA
meM prathama cAra gugaNasthAna hote haiN| isameM jinanAma aura AhAramAbika ina
tIna pravaliyoM ke sivAya sAmAnya se 116, 1 digambarAcAryoM ne 77 prakRtiyAM
udayayogya mAnI hai aura nd. sAsaveM guNasthAna meM kramaza: 77, 74 prakRtiyoM
kA udaya kahA hai|

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## AIMIREvokrushnaviROR... 118  **Third Karma Bandha:**  * In **Mithyatva**
(False Belief) there are 117 **Prakritis** (Karmic Particles) without
**Parishista Samyakav** (Perfect Knowledge) and **Mishra Mohaniya** (Mixed
Delusion). * In **Sasvadan** (Taste of Liberation) there are 111 **Prakritis**
without **Sumatrik**, **Patap**, **Mithyatva** (False Belief) and
**Narakanupurvi** (Hell-bound). * In **Mi** (Intermediate) **Gunasthan** (State
of Being) there are 101 **Prakritis** after reducing the 12 **Prakritis** of
**Anantanubandhin Chatushk**, **Sthavar Chatushk** and **Annapurvi Trik** and
adding **Mishra Mohaniya** (Mixed Delusion). * In **Avirat** (Uninterrupted)
**Gunasthan** (State of Being) there are 104 **Prakritis** after adding the 5
**Prakritis** of **Anupurvo Chatushk** and **Samyaktava Mohaniya** (Perfect
Knowledge Delusion) and reducing **Mishra Mohaniya** (Mixed Delusion).
**Chakshusha Darshan** (Clairvoyance):  * There are 12 **Gunasthanas** (States
of Being) here. * In **Samanya** (Ordinary) there are 106 **Prakritis** without
the 13 **Prakritis** of **Jatishik**, **Sthavar Chatushk**, **Jinnam**,
**Aasap**, **Anupurvi Chatushk**. * In **Mithyatva** (False Belief)
**Gunasthan** (State of Being) there are 105 **Prakritis** without the 4
**Prakritis** of **Ahar Kalika**, **Samyaktava** (Perfect Knowledge) and
**Mishra** (Mixed). * In **Sasvadan** (Taste of Liberation) there are 104
**Prakritis** without **Mithyatva** (False Belief). * In **Mi** (Intermediate)
**Gunasthan** (State of Being) there are 102 **Prakritis** after adding
**Jagandriya Mali** (Worldly Sensory Objects) and **Mith Mohaniya** (Mixed
Delusion). * In **Avirat Samyagduti** (Uninterrupted Perfect Conduct) there are
100 **Prakritis**. * In **Deshavirat** (Uninterrupted in Space) and other
**Gunasthanas** (States of Being) one should understand the **Udayaswamitva**
(Ownership of Arising) as **Samanya** (Ordinary).  **Amakshudarshan**
(Clairvoyance of Non-Material Objects):  * There are also 12 **Gunasthanas**
(States of Being) in this **Margna** (Path). * In **Samanya** (Ordinary) there
are 121 **Prakritis** without **Jinnam**. * In **Mithyatva** (False Belief)
**Gunasthan** (State of Being) there are 115 **Prakritis** without the 4
**Prakritis** of **Ahar Kalika**, **Samyaktava** (Perfect Knowledge) and
**Mishra** (Mixed). * In the remaining **Gunasthanas** (States of Being) one
should understand the **Udayaswamitva** (Ownership of Arising) as 111, 110, 104,
105, 101, 100, 96, 92, 88, 84 and 83 respectively.  **Avadhi Darshan**
(Clairvoyance of Space and Time):  * There are **Gunasthanas** (States of Being)
from the fourth to the twelfth here. * According to the **Siddhant** (Doctrine),
**Vibhangshani** (Those who have attained the knowledge of the destruction of
karma) are also called **Anidarshan** (Those who do not have Clairvoyance).
Therefore, they also have the **Gunasthanas** (States of Being) of **Avik**
(Those who have not attained the knowledge of the destruction of karma). *
However, according to the **Kamgranth** (Text on Karma), **Vibhangshani** (Those
who have attained the knowledge of the destruction of karma) do not have
**Avadhi Darshan** (Clairvoyance of Space and Time). * Like an **Asagrav
Avadhigyani** (One who has attained the knowledge of Space and Time without
pride), there are 106 **Prakritis** in **Samanya** (Ordinary) and 104
**Prakritis** in **Avirat** (Uninterrupted) **Gunasthan** (State of Being). * In
the subsequent **Gunasthanas** (States of Being) one should understand the
**Udayaswamitva** (Ownership of Arising) as **Samanya** (Ordinary).  **Keval
Darshan** (Omniscience):  * There are the last two **Gunasthanas** (States of
Being) here and one should understand the arising of 42 and 12 **Prakritis** in
them respectively.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AIMIREvokrushnaviROR... 118 tRtIya karmanandha : pariziSTa samyakAva aura mizra
mohanIya -ina do prakRtiyoM ke binA mithyAtva meM 117, sumatrika, pAtapa,
mithyAtva aura narakAnupUrvI - ina chaha prakRtiyoM ke binA sAsvAdana meM 111,
anantAnubandhInatuSka. sthAvara, jAticatuSka aura annapUrvI trika- ina bAraha
prakRtiyoM ko kama karane aura mizra mohanIya ko milAne para mitha guNasthAna
meM 1.0 prakRtiyAM hotI haiM, unameM AnupUrvocatuTaka aura samyaktvamohanIya-ina
pAMca prakRtiyoM ko milAne aura mizramohanIya kI kama karane para avirata
guNasthAna meM 104 prakRtiyA~ udaya meM hotI haiM  /  cakSavarzana--yahIM bAraha
guNasthAna hote haiN| jAtiSika, sthAvaracatuSka, jinanAma, Asapa,
AnupUrvIcatuSkaina teraha prakRtiyoM ke binA sAmAnya me 1.6. AhArakalikA,
samyaktva aura mizra-ina cAra prakRtiyoM ke binA mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 105,
mithyAtva ke binA sAsvAdana meM 104, anantAnubandhIcatuSka aura. jagandriya
mAli-..inpana saya 6, ji| aura midhamohanIya ko milAne para mitra guNasthAna meM
102 tathA aviratasamyagaduTi meM 100, dezavirata Adi guNasthAnoM meM sAmAnya
udayasvAmitva samajhanA caahie| amakSudarzanaima mArgaNA meM bhI bAraha
guNasthAna hote haiM  /  isameM jinanAma ke binA mAmAnya se 121, AhArakadrika,
samyaktya aura mitra-ina cAra prakRtiyoM ke binA mithyAsya guNasthAna meM 115
pratiyAM hotI haiM  /  zeSa muNasthAnoM meM kramaza: 111,170, 104, 5, 81, 6, 72,
66, 60, 56 aura 57 kA udayasvAmitva samajhanA cAhie  /  avadhidarzana yahA~
cauthe se lekara bArahaveM guNasthAna takanI guNasthAna hote haiN| siddhAnta ke
matAnusAra vibhaMgazAnI ko bhI anidarzana kahA hai| atAva unake mana meM Avi ke
hIna guNasthAna bhI hote haiN| parantu kAmagrantha ke mata meM vibhaMgamAnI ko
avanidAna nahIM hotA hai| asagarva avadhijJAnI ke samAna sAmAnya se 106 va
avirata guNasthAna meM 104 prakRtiyAM hotI haiM  /  Age ke guNasthAnoM meM
sAmAnya udayasvAmitva samajhanA cAhie  /  kevaladarzana ..yahA~ antima do
guNasthAna hote haiM aura unameM 42 tathA 12 prakRtiyoM kA anukrama se udaya'
samajhanA caahie|

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  In the Marganas, the Avaya-Udirana-Sasa-Swamitva  **116**  Krishna, Neel,
Kayot Leshya - There are six Gunasthanas from the first to the sixth, compared
to the previous ones. There are 121 Prakruti's in general, without the
Jinanamas, but there are four Gunasthanas from the beginning, compared to the
Prati-shchamana. Compared to that, there are 116 Prakruti's in general, without
the Adharakatrika, and 113, 116, 504, 5651 Prakruti's in the Mithyatvaadi
Gunasthanas, in order.  **Tejoleshya** - There are seven Gunasthanas from the
first to the Apamat. There are 111 Prakruti's in general, without the
Sukshmatrika, Vikasatrika, Naravatri, Jatpanam and Minnam. There are 107
Prakruti's in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, except for Aharakatrika, Sampavaraka and
Mishra Mohaniya. There are 106 Prakruti's in the Sasvadan, without the
Mithyatva. There are 106 Prakruti's in the Sasvadan, without the Mithyatva.
There are 101 Prakruti's in the Samshadristi Tapasya, after removing the
Anantaanubandhi Chatushk, Stavaranam, Ekendriya and Anupurvitrika - these nine
Prakruti's and adding the Mishra Mohaniya. There are 85 Prakruti's in the
Deavirat Gunasthan, without the Anupurvitrika and the Sabhyatva Mohaniya, and
adding the Minmohaniya. There are 76 Prakruti's in the Pragat Gunasthan and in
the Apramat.  **Pavamaleshya** - There are eight Gunasthanas in this. There are
116 Prakruti's in general, without the Stavar Chatushk, Jati Asushm, Narakashik,
Jitnam and Atap - these thirteen Prakruti's. The Devas of the Sanatkumar,
Mahendra and Brahmaloka have Padmaleshya, and they do not go to Ekendriya after
death. Also, the first three Leshyas are in Naraka, and the Jitnam arises only
for those with Shuvalleshya. The thirteen Prakruti's like Asayan Shavarchat etc.
are separated. There are 135 Prakruti's in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, without the
Aharakatrika, Mabyastva Mohaniya and Mishra Mohaniya - these four Prakruti's.
There are 104 Prakruti's in the Sasvadan, without the Mithyatva. There are
Prakruti's in the Mitra Gunasthan, after removing the Anantaanubandhi Chatushk
and Anupurvitrika - these seven Prakruti's and adding the Mishra Mohaniya. Of
those, there are Prakruti's in the ... after removing the Mishra Mohaniya and
adding the Anupurvitrika and ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mArgaNAoM meM avaya-udIraNA-sasA-svAmitva 116 kRSNa, nIla, kAyota lezyA-tyahA~
pUrvapratipanna kI apekSA prathama se lekara chaha guNasthAna hote haiN|
jinanAma ke binA sAmAnya se 121 prakRttiryA hotI haiM, parantu pratiSazcamAna kI
apekSA Adi ke cAra guNasthAna hote haiN| usa apekSA se AdhArakaTrika ke binA
mAmAnya se 116 pratiyAM hotI haiM aura mithyAtvAdi guNasthAnoM meM anukrama meM
113. 116. : " . 504, 5 6 51 prakRtiyoM kA udaya samajhanA cAhie  /  tejolezyA-
isameM pahale se lekara apamata taka sAta guNamyAna hote haiM  /  isameM
sUkSmatrika, vikasatrika, naravatriza, jAtapanAma aura minanAma ina 11
prakRtiyoM ke binA sAmAnya se 111, AhAraphadrika, sampAvaraka aura mizra
mohanIya ke sivAya mithyAtva zuNasthAna meM 107, mithyAya ke binA sAsvAdana meM
106, anantAnubandhIcatuSka, sthAvaranAma, ekedriya aura Anu. pUrvItrika-ina nau
prakRtiyoM ke sivAya aura miznamohanIya ke gilAne para mizra gasthAna meM 6.
AnupUrvI trika aura sabhyatva mohanIya kA prakSepa karane aura minamohanIya ko
kama karane para ti samzAdRSTi tapasyAna meM 101, apratyAzyAnAvarAya.
AnupurnItrika, TidikayAti, devAyU, maMganAma, anAva aura ayaza na 14 prakaliyoM
ke binA deavirata guNasthAna meM 85. pragata guNaH thAna meM haiM aura apramatta
meM 76 prakRtiyA hotI hai| pavamalezyA- isameM sAla guNasthAna hote haiM  /
isameM sthAvara catuSka, jAti asuSma, narakaSika, jitanAma aura AtApa ina teraha
prakRttiyoM ke binA mAmAnya se 1.6 prakRttiyA~ udagra meM hotI hai  /
sanatkumAra, mAhendra aura brahmaloka ke devoM ke padmalezyA hotI hai aura ve
marakara ekendriya meM nahIM jAte haiM. tathA naraka meM pahalI tIna lezvAra
hotI haiM aura jitanAma kA udaya zuvalalezyA vAle ko hI hotA hai  /  asAyana
zAvaracata Adi teraha prakRttiyoM kA viccheda kahA hai| AhArakaTika,
mabhyastvamohanIya aura mizramohanIya-...ina cAra prakRtiyoM ke binA mithyAla
gaNasthAna meM 135, sAsvAdana meM mithyAtna ke binA 104. anantAnubandhIcatAka
aura AnupUrvIrika ina sAta prakRtiyoM ko kama karane aura mizramohanIya ko
milAne para prakRtiyAM mitra guNasthAna meM hotI hai| unameM se mizramohanIya ko
kama karane aura AnupU/trika tathA

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third Karma Granth: By combining the Parishista Samyaktamohaniya, there are
101 Prakṛtis in the Aviraṭa Guṇasthāna. Out of these, without the
A-pratyākhyāna-āvaraṇa-caturṣka, Ānūpūrvi-trika, Devagati, Devāyu, Vaikriya-
ādika, Dubhang, Anādeya and Ayas - these fourteen Prakṛtis, there are 7 Prakṛtis
in the Deśaviraṭa Guṇasthāna, 81 in the Pramasa and 76 in the Anmata.   In the
Śuklāleśyā, there are thirteen Guṇasthānas. Without the sthāvara-caturṣka, jāti-
vṛṣaka, naraka-trika and ātapa-nāma - these twelve Prakṛtis, there are 110
Prakṛtis in the Sāmānya. Without the āhāra-katika, samyak-sva, mith and jina-
nāma - these five Prakṛtis, there are 105 Prakṛtis in the Mithyātva. Without the
miśra-rasa, there are 104 Prakṛtis in the Sāsvādana. By reducing the
Ananṣānubandhi-caturṣka and Ānūpūrvi-vika from these and combining the Mitra-
mohaniya, there are 68 Prakṛtis in the Mitra Guṇasthāna, 101 in the Aviraṭa
Guṇasthāna and 87 in the Deśaviraṭi. In the further Guṇasthānas, one should
understand the Sāmānya Udayasvāmitva.  Bhavya... Here there are fourteen
Guṇasthānas and in them, one should understand the Sāmānya Udayasvāmitva.
Abhavya - There is only the first Guṇasthāna in this. Without the Samyaktvam,
Miśra, Jinanāma and Āhāra-kanika - these five Prakṛtis, there are 117 Prakṛtis
in the Sāmānya and the Mithyātva Guṇasthāna.  Upasama Samyakth... In the
Sāmargaṇā, there are eight Guṇasthānas from the fourth to the eleventh. Without
the Jāvara-caturṣka, Jāti-caturṣka, Ananṣānubandhi-caturṣka, Samyaktvam,
Mohaniya, Miśra-mohaniya, Mithyātva-mohaniya, Jinanāma, Āhāra-katika, Ātapa-nāma
and Ānūpūrvi-caturṣka - these twenty-three Prakṛtis, there are 66 Prakṛtis in
the Sāmānya and the Aviraṭa Guṇasthāna. According to the opinion of other
Ācāryas, when the Upasama Samyakdṛṣṭi dies after his lifespan is complete and is
born in the Anuttar Devaloka, then at that time, he has the Devānūpūrvi's Uday
in the Aviraṭa Guṇasthāna. In this expectation, there are 100 Prakṛtis in the
Sāmānya and the Aviraṭa Guṇasthāna. Without the A-pratyākhyāna-āvaraṇa-caturṣka,
Devagati, Devānūpūrvi, Devāyu, Narakagati, Marakāyu, Vaikriya-ādika, Dubhang,
Anādeya and Ayas - these fourteen Prakṛtis, there are...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa samyaktyamohanIya ko milAne se 101 prakRtiyA~
avirata guNasthAna meM hotI haiN| anameM se apratyAkhyAnAvaraNacatuSka,
AnupUrvItrika, devagati, devAyu, baiMkriyAdika, dubhaMga, anAdeya aura
ayaza-~-ina caudaha prakRtiyoM ke binA dezavirata guNasthAna meM 7, pramasa meM
81 aura anamata meM 76 prakRtiyA~ hotI hai| zuklAlezyA- isameM teraha guNasthAna
/  sthAvaracatuSka, jAtivatRSaka, narakatrika aura Atapa nAma - ina 12
prakRtiyoM ke binA sAmAnya se 110 prakRtiyA~ hotI haiN| AhArakatika, samyaksva,
mitha aura jinanAma ina pA~ca prakRtiyoM ke binA mithyAtva meM 105 prakRtiyAM
hotI haiM 1 mizyArasa ke binA sAsvAdana maiM 104, unameM se
anansAnubandhIcatuSka aura AnupUrvIvika ko kama karake mitramohanIya ko milAne
se mitra guNasthAna meM 68, avirata guNasthAna meM 101 aura dezavirati meM 87
prakRtiyA~ hotI haiN| Age ke guNasthAnoM meM sAmAnya udayasvAmitva samajhanA
caahie| bhavya ... yahA~ caudaha guNasthAna hote haiM aura unameM sAmAnya
udayasvAmitva samajhanA caahie| abhavya- isameM sirpha pahalA guNasthAna hotA
hai  /  samyaktva, mizra. jinanAma aura AhArakanikA - ina pAMca prakRtiyoM ke
binA sAmAnya se aura mithyAtva muNasthAna meM 117 prakRtiyAM hotI hai| upazama
samyakatha... sa mArgaNA meM cauthe se lekara gyArahaveM taka ATha guNasthAna
hote hai  /  jyAvaracaluva. jAticatuSka, anantAnubandhIcatuSka, samyaktva.
mohanoya, mizramohanIya, mithyAtvamohanIya, jinanAma, AhArakavika, Atapa. nAma
aura AnupUrvIcatuka...ina teIma prakRtimoM ke binA mAmAnya se aura avirata
guNasthAna meM 66 prakRtiyAM hotI hai| anya AcArya ke mata se upazama
samyagdRSTi Ayu pUrNa hone se marakara anuttara devaloka taka utpanna hotA hai,
to usa samaya use avirata guNasthAna meM devAnupUrvI kA udaya hotA hai, isa
apekSA sAmAnya se aura avirata guNasthAna meM 100 prakRtiyAM hotI hai|
apratmAkhyAnAne raNacatuSka, devagati, devAnupUrvI, devAya, narakagati,
marakAyu, vaikriyaddhika, dubhaMga, anAdeya aura ayaza-na 14 prakRtiyoM ke binA
deza

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Marganas, there are 55 or 86 natures in the Virata Tunasthan. In the
Pramatta Gunasthan, there are 75 natures without the eight natures of
Tiryanchati, Tithanchayu, Nīca Pona, Udyola, and Pratyakhyanadharanasthask. In
the Aprmatta Ganadhan, there are 75 natures without the three Syamddhitrik, and
in the Apurvakaran, there are 72 natures without the final three Sanhanan. After
that, in the subsequent Marganas, there are 66, 67.5, and 6 natures in the Uday.
In the Sayik Samyaktv, there are eleven Pushasthanas from the fourth to the
fourteenth. There are 103 natures in the general, 103 in the Aharaknik and
Jinnam, and 103 in the Anita Yuganana without the sixteen natures of
Jasichatusk, Stavarachatusk, Anantanubandhichatuk, Asap, Samyaktt, Min, and
Mishaty. In the Deshivirata Gunasthan, there are 3 natures without the twenty
natures of Pratyakhyanavaranchatuka, Bainkriastak, Manushayampurvi, Liyantrik,
Dubhang, Amaday, Ayam, and Udyot. In the Pramatta Gunasthan, there are natures
by reducing the Pratyakhyanacharanamanusk and Nisha Gotra and adding the
Aharakatik. In the Adharas Shunasthan, there are 15 natures without the five
natures of Styanadinik and Aharakdik. In the Apurvakaran, there are 12 natures
by reducing the final three Sanhanan. In the subsequent Gunasthanas, one should
understand it as the same as Udayaswamitva.  In the Ayogashabhik Samyakttra,
there are four Gunasthanas from the fourth to the seventh. There are 104 natures
in the Avira Gunasthan without the sixteen natures of Bhyatva, Mitra, Jinnam,
Jatichatusk, Stavarachatusk, Asap, and Annsanubandhi Chak. In the Deshivirata
Gunasthan, there are 67 natures, in the Pramatta, there are 81, and in the
Aprmatta, there are 76 natures.  In the Min Sampashva, there is a third Mitra
Pushasthan, and there are 100 natures in it.  In the Sasthavan, there is only a
second Sasvadan Gunasthan, and there are 111 natures in it.  In the Mishayasy,
there is a first Gunasthan, and there are 117 natures in it without the four
natures of Aharakatik, Jinnam, Samyantva, and Min.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mArgaNAoM meM udaya-doSaNA-sattAsvAmitva virata tuNasthAna meM 55 yA 86
prakRtiyAM hotI haiM  /  tiryaMcati, tithaMcAyu, nIca pona, udyola aura
pratyAkhyAnAdharaNastaSka ina ATha prakRttiyoM ke binA pramata guNasthAna meM
75, ssyAmaddhitrika ke binA apramatta gaNAdhAna meM 75 aura antima tIna
saMhanana ke binA apUrvakaraNa meM 72 prakRtiyoM hotI haiM aura usake bAda Age
ke mRNAsthAnoM meM anukrama se 66, 67. 5.6 prakRtiyA~ udaya meM hotI haiM  /
sAyika samyaktva-yahA~ cauthe se lekara caudahavaM taka gyAraha puSasthAna hote
haiM  /  isameM jAsicatuSka, sthAvaracatuSka, anantAnubandhIcatuka, Asapa,
samyaktta, mina, mizAtya ina 16 prakRsiyoM ke binA sAmAnya se 1.6, AhArakanika
aura jinanAma ina jAtiyoM meM nA anitA yugANAna meM 103.
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNacatuka, baiMkriyASTaka, manuSyAmpUrvI, liyaMtrika, dubhaMga,
amAdeya, ayama aura udyota - ina 20 prakRtiyoM ke binA dezavirata guNasthAna meM
3 prakRtiyA~ hotI haiN| pratyAkhyAnAcaraNamanuSka va nISa gotra ko kama karake
AhArakaTTika ke milAne para pramatta guNasthAna meM prakRtiyA~ hotI hai|
styAnadinika. AhArakadika-ina pAMca prakRttiyoM ke binA adhArasa zuNasthAna meM
:15, apUrvakaraNa meM antima tIna saMhAna kama karane meM 12 tathA Age
guNasthAnoM meM upayasvAmitva ke samAna samajhanA cAhie Ayogazabhika samyakttra-
isameM cauthe se lekara sAtaveM taka cAra guNasthAna hote haiN| bhi yAtva.
mitra. jinanAma, jAticatuSka. sthAvaracatuSka, Asapa aura anansAnubandhI caka
ina solaha prakRtiyoM ke binA sAmAnya se 1.6, AhArakaDika ke binA avirata
guNasthAna meM 104, dezavirata sthAna meM 67, pramatta meM 81 aura apramatta meM
76 pratiyoM kA udaya samajhanA cAhie  /  mina sampabazva..- isameM eka tIsarA
mitra puSasthAna hotA hai aura usameM 100 prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai  /
sAstAvana..yahA~ sirpha dUsarA sAsvAdana guNasthAna hotA hai aura usameM 111
prakRsiMgoM kA udaya samajhanA caahie| miSyAsya-sameM prathama guNasthAna hotA
hai aura usameM AhArakaTika, jinanAma, samyanatva aura mina ina pAya prakRtiyoM
ke binA 117 prakRtiyoM kA udaya hotA hai| -rwwin -RAIN

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## WAVIMA 122 Third Karma Granth: Appendix  **Saints:** There are fourteen
Gunasthans in this. In relation to Yama, only the Kevalishani is considered a
Sanshi, therefore there are fourteen Gunasthans here. But if we consider the
Sanshi in relation to the destruction and pacification of Matibhanaavaran, which
is the state of mind that arises from contemplation and absorption, then there
are twelve Gunasthans in this Margna. In this, there are 114 pratiyas in the
state of Udya, excluding the four pratiyas of Sthavar, Sukshma, Sadharan, Aata,
and Jaati. If we consider the Sanshi in relation to Bhaavaman, then there are
113 pratiyas in this Margna, as there is no rise of Vilaan in the state of Udya.
Excluding the four pratiyas of Prahaar Kshatik, Samyaktva, and Mishra, there are
176 pratiyas in the state of Mishab. Excluding the three pratiyas of Apariapt
Naam, Mithyatva, and Narakasupurvi, there are 136 pratiyas in the state of
Saasvadan. Excluding the seven pratiyas of Anantaanubandhi Chatushk and
Aapatrik, and including Mishra Mohniya, there are 10 pratiyas in the state of
Mishra Gunasthan. And in the Gunasthans of Nirata and onwards, one should
understand the general state of Udya Swamitva.  **Non-Saints:** There are two
Gunasthans in this. Excluding the sixteen pratiyas of Vaikriya Ashtak, Jinnaam,
Shrahaar Kshatik, Sabhyapatya, Mishra Mohniya, Uchch Gotra, Stri Ned, and Purush
Ved, there are 106 pratiyas in the state of Udya. Excluding the fifteen pratiyas
of Bhukhsmatrik, Aata, Udyot, Manushya Vik, Mithyaasva, Garadhat, Janaam,
Susvar, Dusvar, Shubh Vihaamogati, and Ashubh Vihaayogati, there are 11 pratiyas
in the state of Saasvadan. In the state of Udya, the Asantri has been given six
Mahanan and six Grah Sansthans. Therefore, he also has those six Mahanan and six
Sansthans, as well as Shubh, Aadesh, and Shubh Vihaayogati.  **Ahaarash:** There
are 118 Gunasthans in this. Excluding the four pratiyas of Anupurvi Chatushk,
there are 118 pratiyas in the state of Udya. Excluding the five pratiyas of
Maharakaadik, Jinnaam, Samyaktva Mohniya, and Min Mohniya, there are 113
pratiyas in the state of Mishab. Excluding the five pratiyas of Sukshma Vik,
Aata, and Minyaay, there are 158 pratiyas in the state of Saasvadan. Excluding
the nine pratiyas of Anantaanubandhi Chatushk, Sthavar Naam, and Jaati Chatushk,
and including Mishra Mohniya, there are...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 WAVIMA 122 tRtIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa saMto--isameM caudaha gRNasthAna
hote hai  /  yamana ke sambandha se kevalazAnI ko saMjhI kahA hai, ataH yahA~
caudaha guNasthAna hote haiM  /  parantu yadi matibhAnAvaraNa ke
kSayopazamajanya manana-parigAmarUpa bhAvamana ke sambandha meM saMzI kaheM to
isa mArgaNA meM bAraha muNasthAna hote haiM  /  isameM sthAvara, sUkSma,
sAdhAraNa, AtA aura jAticatuzka-ina Ada pratiyoM ke binA sAmAnya se 114 pratiyA~
udaya meM hotI haiN| yadi bhAvamana ke sambandha se saMzI kAhai so maMtrI
mArgaNA meM vilanAma kA udaya na hone se use kama karane para. 113 prakRtiyA~
hotI haiN| prAhArakaSTika, samyaktva aura mizra-ina cAra prakRliyoM ke binA
mizAba meM 176, aparyApta nAma, mithyAtva, narakAsupUrvI-ina tIna prakRtiyoM ke
binA sAsvAdana meM 136 prakRtiyA~ hotI haiM  /  anantAnubandhIcatuSka aura
Apatrika... ina sAta prakatiyoM ke sivAya aura mizramohanIma ke milane para
mizca guNasthAna meM 10. prakRtiyoM hotI haiM aura nirata Adi Ane ke guNasthAnoM
meM sAmAnya udayasvAmitva samajhanA cAhie  /  asaMjho.....isa meM Adi ke do
guNasthAna hote haiM  /  vaikriyASTaka, jimanAma, zrAhArakadvika, sabhyapatya.
mizramohanIya, uccagotra, strIneda aura puruSaveda ina solaha prakRtiyoM ke binA
sAmAnya se 106 praktiyAM hotI haiN| unameM meM bhUkSmatrika, Atae, udyota,
manUSyavika, mithyAsva. garAdhAta, janAma susvara, duHsvara, zubha vihAmogati
aura azubha vihAyogati-ina pandraha prakatiyoM ke binA sAsvAdana meM 11 prapha
tiyA~ hotI haiN| mantati meM udayasthAnaka meM asaMtrI ko chaha mahanana aura
graha saMsthAna ke mAMge diye haiM. isalie use vaha saMhanana aura chaha
saMsthAna tathA subhaga, AdeSa aura zUbha vihAyogali kA bhI savaya hotA hai|
AhAraSa-hamameM leraha guNasthAna hote haiN| AnupUrvIcatuSka ke binA sAmAnya se
118, mahArakAdika, jinanAma, sammakatvamohanIya aura minamohanIya...-ina pA~ca
pratiyoM ke binA miyAda gasthAna meM 113, sukSmavika, Atapa aura minyAya ina
pA~dha prakasiyoM ke sivAya mAsvAdana meM 158, unameM se anantAnubandhIcatuSka,
sthAvara nAma aura jAti catuSka - ina nau prakRtiyoM ko kama karane aura
mizramohanIya ko milAne para mitra muNasthAna meM

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Marganas, the Uday-Udhorana-Sasar ownership 123 150, out of which, by
removing the Misra Mohaniya and adding the Sampanatyamohiya in its place, there
are 87 natures in the Aviras Gunasthan, 100 in the Avyabhyanavaran Chatushk,
Bankriyatik, Devgat, Vayu, Parakamati, Narakayu, Dubhang, Anath and Yajna -
these thirteen natures are absent in the Deshirat Grunasthan. In the coming
Gunasthanas, one should understand the general Upayaswamitwa. Anaharak - in this
Margana, 1, 2, 4, 13 and 14 - these are the five Gunasthanas. Audarikdwik,
Vaikriyatik, Aharakdrik, Sanhanan Shadak, Sansthan Shadak, Vihayo Gatidwik,
Upadhas, Paraghāt, Umdyas, Pasap, Udhot, Pratyek, Sadharan, Muswar, Duhswar,
Misra Mohaniya and Nidra Panchak - without these 35 natures, there are 8 in the
general Khe. Jinnam and Samyaktva Mohaniya - without these two natures, there
are 25 in Mithyatva. Sukshma, Apariyapt, Mithyatva and Naraktrik - without these
six natures, there are 76 natures in Saswadan. There is no Anaharak in the Misra
Gunasthan. Anantanubandho Chatushk, Sthavar and Jatipat Shadak - without these
nine natures, and by adding Samyaktva Mohaniya and Naraktrik - these four
natures, there are 74 natures in the Aviras Gunasthan. Varnavatarak, M. Karman,
Amukal, Nirman, Sthir, Asthir, Bh. Abh, Manushayagati, Panchendriya Jati,
Jinnam, Prasadik Mumbhag, Aadey, Yash, Manushayay, Vedaniyanik and Uchchgotra -
these twenty-five natures arise in the Madhyagini Gunasthan only upon the
occurrence of Mamushwas in the third, fourth and fifth time. Vastrika,
Mamukhyagati, Manushayayu, Uchchgotra, Jinnam, Sata or Asata - one of these,
Vedaniya, Subhag, Aadey, Yash and Panchendriya Jati - these twelve natures arise
in the fourteenth Bhubhasman. Here, the intention of Usarvaikriya is not
expressed in the Uday. In the Siddhant, Prithvi, Ap and Vanaspati are not
considered as Saswadan Gunasthan, the one who has Saswadan Gunasthan is called
Matishrutshani. Vibhangavani is called Avhidarshan and Kriyamitra and Paharakami
are called Audarikami, but this is not expressed in the Karmagranth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mArgaNAoM meM udaya-udoraNA-sasara svAmitva 123 150, unameM se mizra mohanIya
ko nikAlakara badale meM sampanatyamohanIya ko jor3ane se avirasa gaNasthAna meM
100, apratyAbhyAnAvaraNacatuSka, baiMkriyatika, devagata, vAyu, parakamati,
narakAyu, dubhaMga, anAtha aura yajJa ina teraha prakRtiyoM ke binA dezavirata
gRNasthAna meM 87 prakRtiyAM hotI haiN| Ane ke guNasthAnoM meM sAmAnya
upayasvAmitva samajhanA cAhie  /  anAhAraka- isa mArgaNA meM 1. 2, 4, 13 aura 14
--ye pAya guNAsthAna hote haiN| audArikadvika vaikriyatika, AhArakadrika,
saMhananaSadaka, saMsthAnaSaka, vihAyo gatidvika, upadhAsa, parAghAta, umadyAsa,
pAsapa, udhota, pratyeka, sAdhAraNa. musvara, duHsvara, mizramohanIya aura
nidrApaMcaka -isa 35 prakRtiyoM ke binA sAmAnya khe 8. jinanAma aura
samyaktvamohanIya-ina do prakRtiyoM ke binA mithyAtva meM 25. sUkSma, aparyApta,
mithyAtya aura narakatrika-ina chaha prakRtiyoM ke sivAya sAsvAdana meM 76
prakRtiyAM hotI hai  /  mizra guNasthAna meM koI anAhAraka nahIM hotA hai  /
anantAnubandhocatuSka, sthAvara aura jAtipataSka-ina nau prakRtiyoM ke binA aura
samyaktvamohanIya tathA narakatrika ina cAra prakRtiyoM ko milAne para avirata
guNasthAna meM 74 prakRtikA hotI haiN| varNavataraka. ma. kArmaNa. amukala ,
nirmANa, sthira, asthira. bha. abha, manuSyagati. paMcendriya jAti, jinanAma,
prasAdhika muMbhaga, Adeya. yaza. manuSyAya, vedanIyanika aura uccagotra-ye
paccIsa prakRtimA le raharve madhoginalI guNasthAna meM kevalamamuzvAsa karane
para tIsare, cauthe aura pAMca samaya meM udaya hotI haiN| vasatrikA,
mamukhyagati, manuSyAyu, uccagotra. minanAma, sAtA athavA asAtA meM se koI eka
vedanIya, subhaga, Adeya, yaza aura paMcendriya jAti-ye bAraha prakRtimA
caudahaveM bhUbhasmAna meM udaya hotI haiN| yahIM sarvatra udaya meM
usaravaikriya kI vivakSA nahIM kI hai| siddhAnta meM pRthvI, apa aura vanaspati
ko sAsvAdana muNasthAna nahIM batAza hai, sAsvAdana guNasthAna vAle ko
matizrutazAnI kahA hai  /  vibhaMgavAnI ko avadhidarzana kahA hai aura
kriyamitra tathA pAhArakAmiya meM audArikamiya kahA hai, parantu yaha
karmagrantha meM vivakSita nahIM hai| ....................... . ........- -ITH

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **124** **Third Karma Granth: Appendix**  The period
from the time of the arising of the Udharana-Swamitva (ownership of the
Udharana) until one Avali (a unit of time) is called Udhaya-Avali. No
Karmapudgal (karma particle) that enters the Udhaya-Avali is subject to any
Karan (cause). The Udharana is the experience of the Karmapudgal that remains
outside the Udhaya-Avali, combined with the Karmapudgal of the Udhaya-Avali. The
Udharana of the Karmas of the same type occurs as the arising of the Karmas of
that type. Therefore, generally, in the same Mangana (stage of existence) and in
the same Gunasthan (stage of spiritual development), the number of Udharanas of
the Karmaprakritis (types of karma) is equal to the number of Karmaprakritis
that arise. However, there are exceptions:  * If, while experiencing a
particular Prakriti (type of karma), there are Karmapudgal remaining in its Mala
(chain) that are eligible for experience within the Avali period, then its
Udharana does not occur. * Karmas that enter the Udhaya-Avali before the
completion of the Sharira-Parapti (perfection of the physical body) are not
eligible for Udharana. * After the completion of the Sharira-Parapti, if the
Indriya-Parapti (perfection of the senses) is not complete, then the Udharana of
the five Indriyas (senses) does not occur, only their arising. * From the sixth
Gunasthan onwards, the Udharana of the Manushya-Ayu (human lifespan), the Sata
and Asata Vedaniya Karmas (karmas that produce pleasant and unpleasant
experiences) does not occur due to the absence of the Yogya Adhyavasaya
(suitable determination) for their removal, only their arising. * In the
fourteenth Gunasthan, due to the absence of Yoga (spiritual union), the Udharana
of any Prakriti does not occur, only their arising.  **Sasvasmitva**  The
Sasvasmitva (ownership of the self) discusses the existence of the Prakritis in
the 62 Uttar-Manganas (higher stages of existence) after the Joodga-Jiraya-
Swamin (the owner of the Joodga-Jiraya). There are 148 Prakritis mentioned in
the Sasvasmitva.  **Marpati and Devagati**  In both the Marpati (hell) and
Devagati (heaven) Manganas, there are 117 Prakritis that exist, except for the
Devayau (heavenly lifespan) in Marpati and the Narayau (human lifespan) in
Devagati. This is because the Devayau does not exist in Narakagati (hell), and
the Narayau does not exist in Devagati. In the Mithyatva Gunasthan (stage of
false belief), the Jitnaga (knowledge of the self) does not exist in Devagati,
but it does exist in Marakagati (hell). Therefore, in Devagati, there are 146
Prakritis in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, and in Narakagati, there are 147
Prakritis. In the second and third Gunasthan, there are 146 Prakritis that
exist, except for the Jinnama (knowledge of the Jina). In the Avirat Gunasthan
(stage of non-stop activity), the Kshayik (destructive) ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 124 tRtIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa udoraNAsvAmitva udaya-samaya se lekara eka
AvalikA taka ke kAla ko udayAvasikA kahate haiM  /  udayAvalikA meM praviSTa
karmapugala ko koI bhI karaNa lAgU nahIM par3atA hai  /  udapAvalikA ke bAhara
rahe hue karma pudagala ko udayAlikA ke karmapadAla ke sAtha milAkara bhogane ko
udIraNA kahate haiM  /  jisa Ati ke karmoM kA udaya ho, jasI jAti ke karmoM kI
udIraNA hotI hai| isalie sAmAnya rIti se jisa mAgaMNA meM jisa guNasthAna meM
jitanI karmaprakRttiyoM kA udaya hotA hai, usa mAgaMNA meM usa guNasthAna meM
uttanI prakRtiyoM kI udhIraNA bhI hotI hai| parantu itanA vizeSa hai ki jima
prakRti ko bhogate hue usakI mAlA meM mAna eyA AvalikA kAla meM bhogane yogya
karmapadgala zeSa rahe, taba usakI jadauragA nahIM hotI hai, azrata udayAva
smikkA meM praviSTa karma udIraNAyogya nahIM rahatA tathA zarIraparyApta pUrNa
hone ke bAda jaba saka indriyaparyApti pUrNa na ho, taba tavA pA~ca nidrAnoM kI
udIraNA nahIM hotI, udaya rahatA hai| chaThe guNasthAna se Ane manuSyAyu, sAtA
aura asAtA vedanIya karma kI tayogya adhyavasAya ke abhAva meM dIraNA nahIM hotI
hai, uSaya hI hotA hai tathA caudahaveM guNasthAna meM yoga ke abhAva meM kisI
bhI prakRti kI udIraNA nahIM hotI hai, sirpha udaya hI holA hai| sasAsvAmitva
jUdaga-jI rayA-svAmina ke anantara 62 uttara-mArgaNAoM meM prakRtiyoM kI sattA
kA kAthana karate haiM  /  sattAdhikAra meM 148 prakRtiyA~ vivakSita hai|
marapati aura veva gati- ina donoM mArgaNAoM meM eka dUsare ke vAyu aura
naramAyu ke sivAya 117 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  kyoMki narakagati meM
devAyu kI aura devagati meM sarakAra kI sastA nahIM hotI hai  /  mithyAtva
guNasthAna meM devamati meM jitanAga kI sasA nahIM hotI hai, parantu marakagati
meM hotI hai. isalie devagati meM mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 146 aura narakagati
meM 147 prakRttiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  dUsare aura tIsare guNasthAna meM
jinanAma ke siya 146 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI. hai  /  avirata muNasthAna meM
kSAyika

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Marganas, the seven-ownership of Upay-Ubirana-Sapta-Swamitva 125 The four
Anantanubandhi of Samyagdristi, Samyaktva-mohaniya, Mishra-mohaniya,
Mithyasvamohaniya and two Ayus... these nine natures have the existence of 136
natures without them. The Samyagdrishti of Aupamika and Kshayopaamika has the
existence of 147 natures without one Ayu. Because the Devayus of the Marakas and
the Narakayu of the Devas do not exist in the assembly. The Kshayika
Samyagdristi also does not exist in the Sivayu. Here in the Manushya-Gati, there
is the existence of 148 species in the general and Mithyatva Gunasthan. In the
second and third Gunasthan, there is the existence of 143 natures except for the
Jinanam. In the Avirat Samyagdristi Gunasthan, the Kshayika Sampadristi
(Acharamshariri) has the existence of 136 natures without these nine natures:
the Upashamak of Maritra-moha, Tiryanchayu, Narakayu, Anantanubandhi-chatushk
and Darshanmohaniya-trika. And the Barmadhariri, the Upashamak of Charitra-moha,
the Upashama-Samyagdristi, has the existence of 141 natures except for three
Ayus after the disassociation of Anantanubandhi-chatushk. The Dharayopaamika
Samyagdristi, the Gharamshariri, who is going to start Kshapani in the future,
has the existence of 145 natures except for these three natures: Narakayu,
Tiryanchayu and Devasyu. And after the destruction of these seven natures:
Anantanubandhi-chatushk and Darshanmohaniya-trika, there is the existence of 138
natures. The Barashama-Samyagdristi (Charamshariri), the starter of the Upashama
category in the future, has the existence of 146 natures except for Narak and
Tiryancha Ayu. And after the disassociation of Anantanubandhi-chatushk, there is
the existence of 142 natures. In these three places: Deshavirat, Pramaps and
Apramat, there is the existence of the fourth Gunasthan of the Upashama category
and the Kshapaka category, which takes refuge in them. In the Apoovarnakaran
Gunasthan, the Upashamak of Charitra-moha, the Upashama-Samyagdristi, has the
existence of 142 natures without these six natures: Anantanubandhi-chatushk,
Tiryanchayu and Narakayu. The Kshayika Sampadristi, the Upashamak of Charitra-
moha...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mArgaNAoM meM upaya-ubIraNA-saptA-svAmitva 125 samyagdRSTi ke
anantAnubandhIcatuSka, samyaktvamohanIya, mizramohanIya, mithyAsvamohanIya aura
do Ayu ....ina no prakRtiyoM ke binA 136 kRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  aupamika
aura kSAyopaNamika samyaSTi ke eka Ayu ke binA 147 prakRtiyoM ko sattA hotI hai
/  kyoMki mArakoM ke devAyu aura devoM ke narakAyu sabhA meM nahIM hotI hai|
kSAyika samyagdRSTi ke sivAyu bhI sattA meM nahIM hotI hai| manuSyagatiyahA~
sAmAnya se aura mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 148 prajAtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai |
khUsare aura tIsare guNasthAna meM jinanAma ke sivAya 143 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
hotI hai| avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM kSAyika sampAdasTi acaramazarIrI)
mAritramoha ke upazamaka ko tithaMcAyu. narakAyu. anantAnubandhIcatuka aura
darzanamohanIyatrikAina nau prakRtiyoM ke binA 136 prakRtiyA~ sattA meM hotI
haiM aura baramadhArIrI cAritramoha ke upazamaka upazamasamyagdRSTi ko
anatAnubandhIcAlaka kI visaMyojanA karane ke bAda tIna Ayu ke sivAya 141
prakRtiyAM sattA meM hotI haiM  /  dharAyopAmika samyagdRSTi bhaviSya meM
kSapaNI kA prArambha karane vAle gharamazarIrI ko narakarayu, tiryaMcAyu aura
devasyu-ina tIna prakRsiyoM ke sivAya 145 kI sattA hotI hai aura
anantAnubandhIcatuSka tathA darSanamohanIyavika-ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA kSaya
karane ke bAda 138 prakRtiyoM ko sasA hotI hai  /  bhaviSya meM upazama zreNI ke
prArampaka barazamasamyagdRSiTa (carama zArIrI) ko naraka aura tiryaMca Ayu ke
sivAya 146 prakRtiyoM ko aura anantAnusandhItuSka kI visaMyojanA karane ke bAda
142 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| dezAvirata, pramapsa aura apramata -ina tIna
sthAnoM meM upazama zreNI aura kSapaka zreNI kA Azraya lene vAle ke cauthe
guNasthAna aso sattA hotI hai| apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna meM cAritramoha ke
upazamakaH upazamasabhyaSTi ke manantAnubandhIcatuSka, tiryaMcAyu aura
narakAdhu-ina chaha prakRtiyoM ke binA 142 prakRtiyA~ sattA meM hotI haiM  /
cAritramoha ke upakSamA kSAyika sampaSTi

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **156**  There are 136 substances without cake, narakayu and
tiryanchayu, and the existence is as per the previous statement in the Apka
category.  **Third Karma Granth Appendix:**  One should understand the same
authority of existence here as mentioned in the second Karma Granth in the
Anivrsyaadi Gunasthan.  **Tiryanchgati:** Here, from the general and Mithyatva
Saasvadan and Misra Gaan, there are 147 substances except for the Jinnaama. In
the Avirat Gunasthan, there are 138 substances except for Darshan Saptak,
Narakayu and Manushyayu for Kshayik Samyashti. And there are 147 substances
except for Jinnaama for Upa Sham Sampahnristi and Ayopashmik Samyagdristi.
**Deshavirat Gunasthan:** There are 140 substances except for Jinnaama for
Aupanamik and Kshayopaashmik Samyagdristi. Kshayik Sampahnristi has an infinite
lifespan and does not have Deshavirat Gunasthan.  **Ekendirya and
Vikalendirya:** In these four marganas (Ekendirya, Dwiindirya, Shrotriya,
Chaturindirya jati), there are 145 substances except for Jinnaama, Devaasu and
Narakayu from the general and Mithyatva Saasvadan Gunasthan. But in the
Saasvadan Gunasthan, there are 144 substances except for Manushyayu due to the
absence of bondage of lifespan.  - In this margana, one should understand the
existence as per the Manushygati. In the three marganas of Prithvi, Ap and
Vanaspatikaya, one should understand the existence as per the Ekendirya margana.
**Sky and Vayukaya:** Here, from the general and Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are
144 substances without Jinnaama, Deva, Manushya and Narakayu.  - Here, one
should understand the existence as per the Manushygati.  **Prasaka, Manoyog, Yog
and Kashyayog:** In these three marganas, one should understand the existence as
per the Manushygati margana till the 13th Gunasthan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 : 156 J keka, narakAyu aura tiryacAyu ke binA 136 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai
aura apaka zreNI ke pUrva meM kar3e gaye anusAra sattA hotI hai  /  tRtIya
karmagrantha pariziSTa : anivRsyAdi guNasthAna meM dUsare karma grantha meM kahe
gaye sattAdhikAra ke samAna yahA~ bhI samajha lenA cAhie  /  ~2w tiyaMcagati
yahA~ sAmAnya se aura mithyAsva sAsvAdana aura mizra gAna meM jinanAma ke sivAya
147 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| avirata guNasthAna meM kSAyika samyaSTi ko
darzanasaptaka, narakAgu aura manuSyAyu ke sivAya 138 aura upazama sampanhRSTi
tathA Ayopazamika samyagdaSTi ko jinanAma ke sivAya 147 prakRtiyoM ko sattA hotI
hai  /  dezavira guNasthAna meM aupaNAmika aura kSAyopazamika samyagdaSTi ke
jinanAma ke sivAya 140 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| kSAyika sampaSTi tica
asaMkhyAta varSa ke AyuSya vAlA hotA hai aura usako dezAvirata guNasthAna nahIM
hotA hai  /  ekendriya aura vikalendriya ina cAra mArgaNAoM (ekendriya
dvIndriya, zrotriya, caturindriya jAti) meM sAmAnya se aura mithyAtva sAravAdana
guNasthAna meM jinanAma devAsu aura narakAyu ke sivAya 145 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
hotI hai  /  parantu sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM Ayu kA bandha nahIM hone kI apekSA
se manuSyAyu ke sivAya 144 pravRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai 1 - isa mArgaNA meM
manuSyagati ke anusAra sattA samajhanA cAhie  /  pRthvI, ap aura vanaspatikAya
ina tIna mArgaNAma meM ekendriya mArgaNA ke samAna sattA samajhanA cAhie | SHIMA
skAya aura vAyukAya - yahA~ sAmAnya se aura mithyAtva guNasthAna meM jinanAma,
deva, manuSya aura narakAyu ina cAra prakRtiyoM ke binA 144 prakRtiyoM ko sastA
hotI hai  /  yahA~ manuSyagati pramANa sazA samajhanA caahie| prasakA manoyoga,
yoga aura kazyayoga- ina tIna mArgaNAoM meM manuSyagati mArgaNA kI taraha teraha
guNasthAna taka sasA samajhanA cAhie  /

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**55.0M.M.IMALAIMIMMM.......**  **In the *Manas* (mind) *Uday-Badhirana-
Swamitva* (arising-deafness-ownership) **  * **Lean, anger, pride, delusion...**
In these, one should understand the *Satta* (being) as similar to the *Manushya-
Gati-Margna* (human path) up to the *Nee-Gunasthan* (second stage of spiritual
progress). * **Greed-grasping** should be understood as similar to the
*Manushya-Gati* (human path) up to the *Munasthan* (first stage of spiritual
progress). * **Bhati-Jnana, Bhut-Ahan, and Adhiman** (three types of knowledge)
- In these three *Margna* (paths), one should understand the *Satta-Swamitva*
(ownership of being) as similar to the *Mamumbapati-Margna* (path of the great
lord) from the plant stage up to the *Bharho-Munasthan* (highest stage of
spiritual progress). * **Manaparyavashan** - Here, there are 146 *Prakriti*
(principles) except for the *Tiryanch-Ayu* (animal life) and *Naraka-Ayu* (hell
life). From the sixth *Gunasthan* (stage of spiritual progress) to the twelfth
*Gunasthan*, one should understand the *Satta-Swamitva* as similar to the
*Manushya-Gati-Margna* (human path). * **Keval-Shan** - Here, one should
understand the *Satta-Swamitva* as similar to the *Manushya-Gati* (human path)
in the final *Gunasthan* (stage of spiritual progress) as mentioned. * **Masy-
Jnana, Bhut-Ahan, and Tri-Bhang-Jnana** - In these, there are 148 *Prakriti*
(principles) except for the *Mithya-Jnana-Gunasthan* (stage of false knowledge)
and 145 *Prakriti* (principles) without the *Jin-Nama* (name of the Jina) in the
second and third *Gunasthan* (stages of spiritual progress). * **Samayik and
Khevopastaniy** - In these two *Margna* (paths), there are 148 *Prakriti*
(principles) except for the *Manaparyavashan-Margna* (path of mind-control).
From the sixth *Gunasthan* (stage of spiritual progress) to the ninth
*Gunasthan*, one should understand the *Satta-Swamitva* as similar to the
*Manaparyavashan-Margna* (path of mind-control). * **Parihar-Vishuddhi** - In
this, one should understand the *Satta-Swamitva* as similar to the *Kahe-Gaye-
Anumar* (mentioned in the scriptures) in the sixth and seventh *Gunasthan*
(stages of spiritual progress). * **Sookshma-Samparaya** - In this, there are
146 *Prakriti* (principles) except for the *Tiryanch-Ayu* (animal life) and
*Naraka-Ayu* (hell life). For those who have achieved *Ananta-Anubandhi*
(infinite attachments) and are *Manushya* (human), there are 142 *Prakriti*
(principles) except for the *Ananta-Anubandhi-Chatushk* (four types of infinite
attachments), *Tiryanch-Ayu* (animal life), and *Naraka-Ayu* (hell life). *
**Yatha-Syat** - Here, one should understand the *Satta-Swamitva* as similar to
the *Manushya-Gati-Margna* (human path) from the eleventh to the fourteenth
*Gunasthan* (stages of spiritual progress). * **Desh-Virat** - Here, there are
148 *Prakriti* (principles) in *Satta* (being). There is only one fifth
*Gunasthan* (stage of spiritual progress), and in that, one should understand
the *Satta-Swamitva* as similar to the *Manushya-Gati* (human path).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mammysDIA.OTOS) 55.0M.M.IMALAIMIMMM....... .. . . /  mANAoM meM udaya-
badhIraNAsalA-svAmitva lIna paMda, krodha, bhAna, mAyA.. inameM
manuSyagatimArgaNA kI taraha nI guNasthAna taka sattA samajhanA caahiye| lobha-
grahI manuSyagati ke samAna va muNasthAna taka sasA samajhanA cAhie  /
bhatijJAna, bhutahAna aura adhimAna-ima tIna mAgaMNAoM meM mamumbapatimAgaMNA ke
samAna paudhe se lekara bhAraho muNasthAna taka sasAsvAmitva samajhanA caahie|
manAparyavazAna -yahAM sAmAnya se tiryaMcAyu aura narakAyu ke sivAya 146
prakRtiyoM kI sastA hotI hai aura chaThe gusthAna se lekara bArahaveM guNasthAna
taka manuSyagatimAyA ke samAna sattAsvAmitva jAnanA cAhie  /  kevalazAna...
yahA~ manuSmagati ke samAna antima ho guNasthAnoM meM kahA gayA sattAsvAmitva
samajhanA cAhie  /  masyajJAna. bhUtAzAna aura tribhaMgajJAnainameM sAmAnya se
aura mithyAlna gaNasthAna meM 148 aura dUsare, tIsare guNasthAna meM jinanAma ke
binA 145 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai| sAmAyika aura khevopasthAnIya...ina do
mArgaNAoM meM sAmAnya se 148 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai aura isameM chaThe
guNasthAna se lekara nau sthAna taka manaHpavAmamArgaNA ko samAna sattAsvAmitva
samajhanA cAhie  /  parihAravizuddhi.....isameM chaThaM aura sAtaveM guNasthAna
meM kAhe gaye anumAra sattAsvAmitva samajhanA caahie| sUkSmasaMparAya-isameM
sAmAnya se ticA aura parakAyu ke sivAya 146 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai azva
anantAnubandhI manuSka kI visaMyojanA karane vAle ko anantAnubandhIcatuSka,
liyaMcAyu aura narakAyu ina chaha prakRliyoM ke sivAya 142 prakRtiyoM kI sattA
hotI hai| yathAsyAta--yahA~ gyAraha se lekara caudahA guNasthAna taka
sattAsvAmitva manuSyagatimArgagA ke samAma samajhanA caahie| dezavirata...yahA~
sAmAnya se 148 prakRtiyAM sattA meM hotI haiN| isameM eka pAcavA guNaspAma hI
hotA hai aura usameM manuSyagati ke samAna sattAsvAmitva samajhanA caahie|

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma Text: Appendix  **Avirat:** Here, from the first to the fourth
Gunasthan, one should understand the Satta-Swamitva as similar to the Manushya-
Gati Margna.  **128**  **Darshan and Avashudarshan:** In both these Margna, from
the first to the twelfth Gunasthan, one should understand the Swamitva as
similar to the Manushya-Gati Margna. **Avadhi-darshan:** Here, one should
understand the Satta-Swamitva according to the Avadhi-Jnana Margna.  **Keval
Darshan:** One should understand the Satta-Swamitva as similar to the Keval-
Jnana Margna.  **Krishna, Neel and Kapoth Leva:** In these three Margna, from
the first to the sixth Gunasthan, one should understand the Satta-Swamitva as
similar to the Manushya-Gati.  **Tej and Padam Leshya:** From the first to the
seventh Gunasthan, one should understand the Satta-Swamitva as similar to the
Manushya-Gati.  **Shukla:** From the first to the thirteenth Gunasthan, one
should understand the Satta-Swamitva as similar to the Manushya-Gati.
**Bhavya:** One should understand the Satta-Swamitva as similar to the Manushya-
Gati.  **Abhavya:** From the common and in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there is
Satta of 141 Prakruti without the seven Prakruti of Jinnam, Jahaarak, Aare, and
Mishramohaniya.  **141**  **Aupshamik Samyaktv:** From the fourth to the
eleventh Gunasthan, one should understand the Satta as similar to the Manushya-
Gati.  **The Arattern Samyaktv:** In this, from the fourth to the seventh
Gunasthan, one should understand the Satta as similar to the Manushya-Gati.
**Kshayik Samyaktv:** Here, there is Satta of 141 Prakruti without the seven
Prakruti of Ananta-Anubandha-Chatushk and Darshan-Mohaniya Trik, and from the
fourth to the fourteenth Gunasthan, one should understand the Swamitva as
similar to the Manushya-Gati.  **Swasadan:** Here, there is Satta of 147
Prakruti without the Jinnam from the common and the second Gunasthan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karma grantha : pariziSTa avirata yahA~ pahale se cauthe guNasthAna taka
sattAsvAmitva manuSyagati mArgaNA ke samAna samajhanA caahie| 128 darzana aura
avazudarzana- ina donoM mArgaNAoM meM pahale se bArahaveM guNasthAna taka
svAmitva manuSyagati mArgaNA ke samAna samajhanA caahie| avadhivarzana - yahA~
avadhijJAnamArgaNA ke anusAra sattAsvAmitva samajhatA cAhie  /  kevala darzana
kevalajJAnamArgeNA ke saddazya sattAsvAmitva samajhanA caahie| YPALLA kRSNa,
nIla aura kApota levA-tIna mArgaNAtroM meM pahale se lekara chaThe guNasthAna
taka manuSyagati ke anusAra sattAsvAmitva samajhanA caahie| teja aura padma
lezyA - pahale se sAtaveM puNasthAna taka manuSyagati ke samAna sattAsvAmitva
samajhanA caahie| zuklA pahale se lekara terahavaM guNasthAna taka manuSyagati
ke samAna sasA samajhanA cAhie  /  bhavya manuSyagati ke samAna sattAsvAmitva
samajhanA cAhie  /  abhavya - sAmAnya se aura mithyAtva guNasthAna meM jinanAma,
jAhArakaaare, area aura mizramohanIya isa sAta prakRtiyoM ke binA 141 J
prakRtiyoM kI satA hotI hai  /  aupazamika samyaktva. - cauthe se gyArahaveM
guNasthAna taka manuSyagati ke samAna sattA samajhanA cAhie  /  The arattern
samyakrava - isameM cauthe se sAtaveM guNasthAna taka manuSyagati ke samAna
sattA samajhanA cAhie  /  kSAyika samyaktva - yahA~ anantAnubandhacatuSka aura
darzanamohanIya trika ina sAta prakRtiyoM ke binA sAmAnya se 141 prakRtiyoM kI
sattA hotI hai aura cauthe se caudaha guNasthAna taka manuSyagati ke samAna
svAmitva samajhanA cAhie  /  sAsvAdana - yahA~ sAmAnya se aura dUsare guNasthAna
meM jinanAma ke binA 147 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Magangas, the ownership of Uday, Udirana, and Satta is as follows:
**Mithyatva:** Here, from the general to the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 148
Prakṛtis in existence.  **Sanji:** From the first to the thirteenth Gunasthan,
one should know the ownership of existence as in the human path. Here, only the
Kevalajnani is called Sanji in relation to the Bravyaman. If the expectation of
Bhavamana is kept, then there are twelve Gunasthanas in the Sansi Margna.
**Asanti:** Here, from the general to the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 147
Prakṛtis in existence except for the Jinnama, and in the Sasvadan Gunasthan,
there are 146 Prakṛtis in existence except for the Narakayu. However, here in
the Aparaptavāstā, it is not possible for anyone to have the Dhar of Devayu and
Manushayau, therefore, there are 144 Prakṛtis in existence from that
perspective.  **Aharak:** From the first to the thirteenth Gunasthan, one should
know the ownership of existence as in the Manushayati Margma.  **Anaharak:** In
this Margna, there are five Gunasthanas: the first, second, and fourth, and in
them, one should know the ownership of existence as in the human path.
**Tryam:** Thus, the discussion of Uday, Udirana, and Satta ownership is
complete. In particular, the thirteenth and fourteenth Gunasthanas are the same
as the human path.  This is a description of Uday, Udirana, and Satta ownership
in the Magangas, according to my best knowledge. If there are any errors or
ambiguities, I humbly request the learned readers to kindly point them out so
that I can rectify my understanding. I will be grateful for their cooperation
and guidance.  Editor

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mAgaMgAoM meM udaya udIraNA-sA svAmitva mithyAttha yahA~ sAmAnya se aura
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 148 prakRtiyA~ sattA meM hotI haiM  /  - saMjJI -
pahale se lekara terahaveM guNasthAna taka manuSyagati ke samAna sattAsvAmitva
jAnanA caahie| isameM kevalajJAnI ko bravyamana ke sambandha se saMjI kahA hai
/  yadi bhAvamana kI apekSA rakhI jAya to saMsI mArgaNA meM bAraha guNasthAna
hote haiM  /  asaMtI - yahA~ sAmAnya se aura mithyAtva guNasthAna meM jinanAma
ke sivAya 147 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai aura sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM
narakAyu ke sivAya 146 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai, parantu yahA~
aparyAptAvasthA meM devAyu aura manuSyAyu kA dha karane vAlA koI saMbhava nahIM
hai, isalie usa apekSA se 144 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hotI hai  /  L AhAraka -
pahale se lekara terahaveM puNasthAna taka manuSyamati mArgamA ke samAna
sattAsvAmitva jAnanA caahie| anAhAraka- isa mArgaNA meM pahalA, dUsarA, cauthA
ye pAMca guNasyAna hote haiM aura unameM manuSyagati ke cAhie  /  TRYAM isa
prakAra udaya, udIraNA aura satAsvAmitva kA vivecana pUrNa huA  /  vizeSa
terahavAM aura caudahavA~ samAna sasA jAnanA apanI nikaTatama jAnakArI ke
anusAra mAgaMNAoM meM udaya udIraNA evaM sasA svAmitva kA vivaraNa prastuta kiyA
hai| saMbhavataH koI truTi yA aspaSTatA raha gaI ho to vijJa pAThakoM se
sAnurodha nivedana hai ki saMzodhana kara sUcita karane kI kRpA kareM jisase
apanI dhAraNA ca truTi kA parimArjana kara sakeM  /  unake sahakAra evaM
mArgadarzana ke liye AbhArI raheMge | sampAdaka

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
••••••••••••••••14PANAYA ************* **The meaning of Bandha, Udaya and Satta-
Samitva in the Digambara Karma-Sahitya**  The third Karma-Grantha discusses the
Bandha-Samitva in the Marganas based on the Gunasthanas. Similarly, this is also
discussed in the Gommatasar Karma-Kanda in Gatha 105 to 121. The information
necessary to understand this generally is also indicated in Gatha 64 to 104.
The discussion of Udayas in the Upastanas is not found in the ancient or the new
third Karma-Grantha. It is discussed in the Mo. Karma-Kanda in Gatha 260 to 332.
The necessary information for this is collected in Gatha 263 to 286. The
discussion of Udiranas-Samitva is also included in this Udaya-Samitva chapter.
Similarly, the discussion of Satta-Samitva in the Marganas is also found in the
Go. Karma-Kanda, but not in the Karma-Grantha. This chapter is in the Go. Karma-
Kanda in Gatha 346 to 356. The general information for this is in Gatha 333 to
345.  Students of Karma-Shastra should study these sections comparatively and
use them from a scientific perspective. For complete details, one should refer
to the above sections of the Go. Karma-Kanda.  **Bandha-Samitva**  To discuss
Bandha-Samitva in the Marganas with the Gunasthanas, the number of Karma-Kriyas
that are generally capable of being bound, incapable of being bound, and those
that are bound and then broken, are explained in three Gathas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ....... ****************14PANAYA ************* mArgacAoM meM bandha, udaya aura
sattA-sAmitva ferre digambara karmasAhitya kA mantavya tRtIya karmagratha meM
guNasthAnoM ke AdhAra se mArgaNAoM meM baMdhasvAmitva kA se kathana kiyA gayA
hai| isI prakAra se gommaTasAra karmakANDa meM gAdhA 105 121 taka meM bhI kiyA
gayA hai tathA sAmAnya se usako jAnane ke lie jina bAtoM kI jAnakArI Avazyaka
hai, unakA saMketa bhI gAthA 64 se 104 meM hai  /  upasthAnoM ke vAthoM meM kA
vicAra prAcIna a navIna tRtIya karmagrantha meM nahIM hai, vaha bhI mo0
karmakANDa meM gA0 260 se 332 taka meM kiyA gayA hai tathA isake lie Avazyaka
saMketa gAthA 263 se 286 taka meM saMgRhIta haiN| isa udayasvAmitva prakaraNa
meM udIraNAsvAmitva kA vicAra bhI sammilita haiN| isI prakAra mArgaNAoM meM
sattAsvAmitva kA vicAra bhI go0 karmakANDa meM hai, kintu karmagrastha meM nahIM
yaha prakaraNa go. karmakANDa meM gAthA 346 se 356 taka hai tathA isake lie
sAmAnya saMketa gAvA 333 se 345 meM hai  /  i karmazAstra ke adhyetAoM ko usa
aMza tulanAtmaka adhyayana karane evaM vijJAna kI dRSTi se upayogI hone se
katipaya Avazyaka aMza uta kiye jAte haiN| pUrNa vivaraNa ke lie gI0 karmakANDa
ke ukta aMzoM ko dekha lenA cAhie 1 aratvAmitva guNasthAnoM pUrvaka mArgaNAoM
meM baMdhasvAmitva kA vivecana karane ke lie guNasthAnoM meM sAmAnya se
bandhayogya, avandhayogya tathA bandhavicchinna hone vAlI karmakRtiyoM kI
saMkhyA ko tIna gAthAoM dvArA batalAte haiM

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bandhaadi Swamitva Vigambar Karmasahitya Ka  **Number of Bandha Prakṛitis**
**Sattarseka Ggasyam Chausattari Samatt Tevatthi. Dhavanadu Vīs Sattarseko.** ||
1*3 ||  The number of Bandha Prakṛitis in the Gunasthānas starting from
Mithyādṛṣṭi are respectively 117, 101, 7475, 67, 63, 56, 58, 22, 17, 1, 1. This
type of Bandha occurs until the 13th Gunasthāna. In the 14th Gunasthāna, there
is no Bandha. This means that there are 120 Prakṛitis that are generally capable
of Bandha. In the Mithyādṛṣṭi Gunasthāna, the Bandha of three Prakṛitis, namely
Ārer and Āhārakādi, does not occur, leaving 120 - 3 = 117 Prakṛitis. Similarly,
one should understand in the second and subsequent Gunasthānas that, for
example, in the first Gunasthāna, there are 16 Vyuchchhinna Prakṛitis and 3
Prakṛitis are bound, so 16 + 3 = 16 Prakṛitis are bound in the second
Gunasthāna, meaning that 16 Prakṛitis are not bound. Similarly, in the
subsequent Gunasthānas, by subtracting the Vyuchchhinna Prakṛitis, the number of
Bandha Prakṛitis for each Gunasthāna can be determined.  **Number of Avandha
Prakṛitis**  **Liya Unavīs Chasiyatal Tevann Sattvannam Cha. Igidugasatti Virhiy
Say Tiyadanavis Sahiy Vīs Sayam.** || 104 ||  The number of Avandha Prakṛitis in
the Gunasthānas starting from Mithyādṛṣṭi are respectively 16, 46, 43, 53, 57,
61, 62, 6, 103, 116, 116, 116, and 120. This means that, according to the
numbers mentioned above, the Bandha of the corresponding number of Prakṛitis
does not occur in each Gunasthāna.  **Number of Bandhani Prakṛitis**  **Solas
Panavis Garbha Das Yau Chhakkekka Bandhavohina. Dug Tīs Chakurpuve Pan Soles
Jogino Ekko**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 badhAdi svAmitva vigambara karmasAhitya kA baMdha prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA
sattarasekaggasyaM causatatari samaTTha tevaTThI  /  dhAvaNAduvIsa sattAraseko
/  /  1*3 //  1 mithyAdRSTi Adi guNasthAnoM meM kramazaH 117, 101 7475 67, 63,
56, 58, 22. 17, 1, 1 1. isa prakAra kA bandha terahaveM guNasthAna taka hotA hai
| caudahaveM guNasthAna meM bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  isakA artha yaha hai ki
sAmAnya se bandhayogya 120 prakRtiyA~ haiM, unameM meM midhyAdRSTi guNasthAna
meM areer aura AhArakadika ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA bandha nahIM hone se 120 - 3H
117 prakRtiyoM zeSa rahatI haiN| isI prakAra se dvitIya Adi guNasthAnoM meM bhI
samajhanA cAhie ki jaise pahale guNasthAna meM vyuci prakRtiyA~ 16 haiM aura 3
prakRtiyAM bandha hai to 16 + 3 == 16 prakRtiyAM dUsare guNasthAna meM
bandharUpa hai, yAnI 16 prakRtiyoM kA bandha nahIM hotA hai| isI prakAra age ke
guNasthAnoM meM bhI vyucchinna prakRtiyoM ko ghaTAne se pratyeka guNasthAna kI
bandhasaMkhyA nikala AtI hai  /  avandha prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA liya uNavIsaM
chasiyatAla tevaNNa sattavaNNaM ca  /  igidugasaTThI virahiya saya
tiyaDaNavIsasahiya vIsa sayaM  //  104 //  131 mithyAdRSTi Adi jIvaha
guNasthAnoM meM krama se 16,46, 43, 5.3, 57. 61 62 6 103 116 116, 116 aura 120
prati abandha ! haiM  /  arthAt Upara likhI gaI saMkhyA ke anusAra pratyeka
guNasthAna meM kamaprakRtiyoM kA bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  bandhani prakRtiyoM
kI saMkhyA * solasa paNavIsa garbha dasa yau chakkekka bandhavohiNA  /  duga
tIsa cakurapuve paNa solasa jogiNo ekko

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
.......... Third Karma Text: Appendix In the fourteen Gunasthanas of Mithyatva,
etc., there are 16, 25, 0 (zero), 1, 4, 6, 1, 36 (2+34), 5, 16, respectively.
0.01 Nature is cut off. It is Holi. 132 The general rule of the bondage of
Karma-natures in the Gunasthanas is as follows: "Aharadugam pamadarahideesu.
Missu aus ya micchaadisuu sesabandhi." ||2|| From the eighth Gunastana of
Aviratamyasti, the nature of the Tirthankara is cut off. The bondage of
Aharakadrik occurs in the Apramattasanyata Gunastana. In the Misra Gunastana,
there is no bondage of Ayu, and the bondage of the remaining natures occurs in
the Gunasthanas of Mithyadristi, etc., until their own cutting off. Bondage,
Abandha, and Bandhyuchchitti in the Marganas Six- In the Marganas, the bondage,
Abandha, and Bandhyuchchitti of the Karma-natures should be understood as being
the same as in the Gunasthanas. But the special features in them are explained
in detail with respect to each Margana, such as गति (Gati), etc. Gati Margana
"Oye va aadeshe narayamiichhi chaari vochchina. Uvarim varas surachau suraj
aharayam bandha." ||105|| In the Marganas, it should be understood as being the
same as in the Gunasthanas of Yuti, etc., but in the Mithyatva Gunastana, out of
the sixteen natures that are cut off, the Narakagati *********... 1 There is no
cutting off of the bondage of any nature. F 2 Vyuchchhinna is the name for being
cut off. The meaning of the number of natures that are cut off in the Gunastana
where it is mentioned is that the association of that nature remains until that
Gunastana, but in the subsequent Gunasthanas, its bondage, उदय (Uday), and
existence do not remain.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 .......... tRtIya karmaprantha : pariziSTa mithyAtva Adi caudaha guNasthAnoM
meM kramazaH 16, 25, 0 (zUnya), 1 4, 6, 1, 36 (2+34), 5, 16. 0.01 prakRti
vyucchina holI hai  /  132 guNasthAnoM meM karmaprakRtiyoM ke bandha kA sAmAnya
niyama isa prakAra haiMsammea farest AhAradugaM pamAdarahidesu  /  missU Aus ya
micchAdisu sesabandhI  // 2 //  aviratamyaSTi guNasthAna se tIrthakara prakRti
kA kadha hotA hai  /  AhArakadrika kA apramattasaMyata guNasthAna meM bandha
hotA hai| mizra guNasthAna meM Ayu kA bandha nahIM hotA hai tathA zeSa
prakRtiyoM kA bandha mithyAdRSTi Adi afe guNasthAnoM meM apane bandha kI
vyucchitti taka hotA hai  /  mArgaNAoM meM bandha, abandha, bandhayucchitti
chati- mArgaNAoM meM karmaprakRtiyoM kA bandha, aara aura bandha ye tInoM
avasthAe~ guNasthAna ke samAna samajhanA cAhie  /  lekina unameM jojo vizeSatA
hai, usako gati Adi pratyeka mArgaNA ko apekSA kramazaH spaSTa karate haiM  /
gatimArgaNA oye vA Adese NArayamiccha icAri vocchiNA  /  uvarima vArasa suracau
surAja AhArayamabandhA  //  105  //  mArgaNAoM meM yuti Adi guNasthAnoM ke
samAna samajhanA, lekina mithyAtva guNasthAna meM vyucchinna hone vAlI solaha
prakRtiyoM meM se narakagati *********... 1 kisI bhI prakRti kA bandhaviccheda
nahIM  /  F 2 vyucchinna nAma hai vilar3ane kA  /  jisa guNasthAna meM kama kI
vyucchinna hone vAlI prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA kahI gaI hai, usakA artha yaha hai ki
usa guNasthAna taka to usa ti kA saMyoga rahatA hai, usake Age ke guNasthAna meM
usakA bandha, udaya aura sattA nahIM rahatI hai  /

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The commentary on the Karma Sastra by Andhaadi Swami Vigambar states that there
are four types of vyutpatti (origin): Mithyatva, Hud Sansthan, Napunsak Veda,
and Sewart Sanhanan. In addition to these, there are sixteen other prakritis
(principles): the four remaining prakritis, Devanati Devanupurvi, Vaiya Sharira
Vaiya Angopang, Devayu, Aharak Sharira, and Aharak Angopang. This means that the
11 prakritis are not bound in the Mithyatva Gunasthan of the Narakpati (hell-
lord). There are 101 prakritis that are capable of being bound from the general
perspective.  **Verse 1106:** In the first hell (Varma), the Tirthankara
prakriti is bound in both the sufficient and insufficient states. In the second
and third hells (Mansha Bhaeya), the sufficient being is bound by the
Tirthankara prakriti. Up to the sixth hell (Maghavi), the Manudhyayu is bound.
In the seventh hell (Heat), only the Mithyatva Gunasthan is bound.  **Verse
107:** In the seventh hell, the Misra and Avirat Gunasthan are bound by the
three prakritis: Manushya Gali, Manushyanupurvi. Beings with the Mithyatva and
Samadan Gunasthan do not bind these three prakritis.  **Verse 108:** In the
Tiryag (animal) realm, the understanding is similar to the Vyuchchitti etc.
Gunasthan. However, the Tirthankara Aharak Sharira and Aharak Angopang are not
bound. Therefore, 117 prakritis are capable of being bound in the Tiryag realm.
In the Bidhe Avirat Gunasthan, only the four prakritis of Apratyakhyanavaran,
Krodha, etc. are vyuchchitti. The remaining are suitable for the Manushya Gati
(human realm).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 andhAdi svAmiee vigambara karmasAhitya kA mantabya meM midhyAtva, huDa
saMsthAna, napuMsaka veda, sevArta saMhanana ina cAra kI vyuta hotI hai tathA
inake atirikta zeSa cAra prakRtiyoM tathA devanati devAnupUrvI, vaiya zarIra
vaiyi aMgopAMga, devAyu, AhAraka zarIra, AhAraka aMgopAMgaye saba 16 prakRtiyA~
haiM  /  arthAt narakapati ke midhyAtva guNasthAna meM 11 prakRtiyoM kA bandha
nahIM hotA | aaca sAmAnya se bandhayogya 101 prakRtiyA~ haiM  /  ghamme fari
Traft vasAmedhANa pugo veva  /  chaTThottiya maNuvAU barime miccheva tiriyAU  //
1106 //  153  /  varmA ( prathama naraka) meM paryApta, aparyApta donoM
mavasthAoM meM tIrthakura prakRti kA bandha hotA hai| dUsare, tIsare (maMzA
bhaiyA) naraka meM paryApta jIva ko tIrthaGkara prakRti kA vadha hotA hai  /
chaTe ( maghavI ) naraka taka manudhyAyu kA bandha hotA hai| sAtaveM (Heat)
naraka meM mithyAtva guNasthAna meM hI i kA bandha hotA hai| - missAfvara ucca
maNuvadugaM sattame have bNdho| micchA arenammA madugucca Na baMdhati  //  107
//  sAtaveM naraka meM mizra aura avirata guNasthAna meM hoga manuSya gali.
manuSyAnupUrvI ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA baMdha hai| mityA va sAmAdana guNasthAna
vAle jIva kahA~ para jaba gotra aura manuSyadrika ina tIna prakRtiyoM ko nahIM
bAMdhate haiN| ---- tiriye odho tityAhArUNo avira chidI cauro  /  uvara chidI
sAmaNasamme have niyamA  //  108 //  F tigati meM bhI vyucchitti Adi guNasthAnoM
kI taraha hI samajhanA  /  parantu frer hai ki tIrthakara AhAraka zarIra,
AhAraka aMgopAMga--ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA bandha hI nahIM hotA hai| ataH sAmAnya
se 117 prakRtiyoM ci gati meM bandhayogya haiN| bIdhe avirata guNasthAna meM
apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha Adi 4 kI hI vyucchita hotI hai tathA seya rahI
manuSyagati-yogya vA www.**************

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
HTRANNover.... **Death Karma Question: Appendix**  The six types of
**pratikrti** (nature) - **rishbhanaraach**, **samhanan**, etc. - are
**vyuchikta** (separated) in the second **gunasthana** (stage of spiritual
progress) of **saasvadan** (taste). This is because here, the **pratikrti**
related to the **manushya** (human) path are not bound in **misyadhik** (false
perception).  The above statement should be understood in the context of the
**nirgach** (liberation) in the **samaan vich** (general thought) - **matron ka
samay 1** (time of the matras), **panthendriya tiyanch**, **paryapt tiyanch**,
**striya vich**, and **ladhyaparyapt niyanch**.  Of these five categories, the
**ladhyaparyapt niyanch** should be excluded. The remaining four types of
**tiryanch** (non-human beings) should be understood in comparison to the
**tiryanch**.  The **tiryanch** of the **ladhyaparyapt niyanch** have
**tirthar** (pilgrims) names and **aaharaka** (food-taking) bodies, **aaharaka
angopaang** (food-taking limbs), and **man** (mind) **leen pratikrti** (absorbed
nature). The following **pratikrti** are also not bound:  **Suraniryaou apushon
kegumviyakkamvi sthii ||106||**  **Devayau**, **narakayau**, and **vaishyishtak-
devagati**, **devanupurvi**, **narakagati**, **narakanupurvi**, **vaikriya
parir**, **vaikriya angopaang** - these 13 **pratikrti** are also not bound.
**Tiryedha gare gavari hu tisthaaram cha asthi amev ||110||**  In the
**manushya** path, **andhayumiti** (blindness) and other **tiryanch** paths
should be understood similarly, but with the exception that in the **manushya**
path, **tirthar** (pilgrims), **krura** (cruel), and **aaharaka** (food-taking)
**aaharaka arir** (food-taking body), **aaharaka angopaang** (food-taking limbs)
are also bound, making a total of 120 **pratikrti** that can be bound.  There
are 14 **gunasthana** (stages of spiritual progress) in the **manushya** path,
so the **bandha** (binding) and **vichched** (separation) should be understood
in the same way as in the **gunasthana**.  The above **bandha** and **vichched**
in the **manushya** path have been explained generally. However, the **bandha**
etc. of the **ladhy-aparyapt** (limited) **manushya** should be understood
similarly to the **ladhy-aparyast** (limited) **tiryanch**. In other words, the
**ladhy-aparyapt** **manushya** also have 106 **pratikrti** that can be bound.
**Nirev hodi deve aisaanoti satt kaam chidi 1** **Solas chev abandha bhavatie
nasthi tisthayar ||11||**  In the **devagati** (heavenly path), the **bandha**
and **vichched** of **karma** **pratikrti** (karmic nature) are similar to the
**narakagati** (hellish path).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 HTRANNover.... mRtIya karma prazya : pariziSTa RSabhanArAca saMhanana Adi chaha
prakRtiyoM kI vyuchikti dUsare sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM ho jAtI hai  /  kyoMki
yahAM para niyaMca manuSyagati sambandhI prakRtiyoM kA mizyAdika meM bandha
nahIM hotA hai| ukta kathana nirgaca meM sAmAnya vica ( matroM kA samaya 1),
paMthendriya tiyaMca, paryApta tiryaca, strIya vica aura ladhyaparyApta
niyaMtra- ina pA~ca bhedoM meM se layaparyApta bheda ko chor3akara zeSa cAra
prakAra ke tiryatroM kI apekSA samajhanA caahie| ladhyaparyApta niyaMcoM ke
tIrthara nAma aura AhAraka zarIra. AhAraka aMgopAMga-mana lIna prakRtiyoM ke
sAtha nimna likhita suraNirayAu apuSoM kegumviyAkkamavi sthi  /  / 106  /  /
devAyu, narakAyu aura vaizyiSaTaka-devagati. devAnupUrvI, narakagati.
narakAnupUrvI, vaikriya pArIra, baiMkriya aMgopAMga-ina A3 prakRtiyoM kA bhI
bandha nahIM hotA hai| tiriyedha gare gavari hu tisthAhAraM ca asthi emeva  //
110 /  /  manuSyati meM andhayumiti vagairaha tiryakgati ke samAna samajhanA
cAhie, lekina prasanI nizeSatA hai ki manusmagati meM tIrtha krUra aura
AhArakadrika AhAraka arIra, thAhAraka aMgopAMgaina sIna kA bhI bandha hone se
120 prakRtiyA~ banAyogya hai| manuSyagati meM guNasthAna 14 hote haiM, ataH
guNasthAnoM kI taraha manuSyagati meM bhI bandhaviccheda samajhanA caahie|
manuSyagati meM ukta pratibandha viccheda sAmAnya se batAyA hai. kintu lali-
aparyApta manuSya ke bandha Adi tiryaMca labdhi-aparyAsta ke samAna samajhanA
cAhie  /  arthAt madhi-aparyApta manuSya ke bhI 106 prakRtiyA~ badhayogya haiN|
Nirayeva hodi deve AIsANotti satta kAma chidI 1 solasa ceva abandhA bhavatie
Nasthi tisthayaraM  // 11 //  devagati meM karmaprakRtiyoM kA bandhavinoda Adi
narakagati ke samAna

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sadhavi Gvamitva: Vigambar Karma Sahitya ka Mansamy 135 It should be understood.
But there is a special feature that in the Madhyavrusti Gunasthan, from the
first Gunasthan to the Ishana heaven, only the Mithyara, etc., 16 types of
Prakruti are destroyed. The remaining nine, namely, Sukshma, etc., Deva-mati,
Devanupurti, Vaikriya Bharira, Krim Angopang, Devayu, Maharak Sharira, Baharak
Angopang - 7, are a total of 16 types of Andharupa. Therefore, there are 104
types of Bandhayoga Prakruti here. In Bhavanavaso, Syantar and Jyotishi Devi,
there is no smell of Sikar Prakruti, so 1.3 types of Bandhayoga are present. Nit
and Kama Margana Punidaranga Vigivigale Tatthupyayo Hu Sasanda) Dehe. Pajatti Vi
Pavati Idi Garitiriayaug Patthi. 113. In Ekendriya and Vikalayokendriya,
Shrendriya and Masurindriya, there are 106 types of Bandhayoga Prakruti, like
the state of Lamdhiaparyapt. Because in the state of Aparyapt, the 11 types of
Prakruti, namely, Tirghar, Aharakathik, Devayu, Narakagu and Kiyapadak, do not
bind. The first and second of the Ekendriya and Vikalatraya are the two
Shrunasthan. In the first Gunasthan, there are 15 types of Bandhabhyuksiti.
Because it is said that in the first Gunasthan, 16 types of Prakruti are
destroyed, but here, Marakdrik and Garmayu are destroyed, and Manushayau and
Tirya-chayu are increased. Therefore, only 15 types are destroyed. The reason
for saying that Manushayau and Tirya-chayu are destroyed in the first Gunasthan
is that the Jina born in Ekendriya and Vikalayokendriya cannot complete the
Bharira-paryapsi in the Mrunasthan, because the time of the Sasvadan Gunasthan
is short and the time of the Niyati Aparyapt state is long. Due to this,
Manushayau and Tirya-chayu are not bound in the Mrunasthan, and binding and
destruction occur only in the first Gunasthan. Panchendrigesu Oshan Airale Va
Vanpadiyate. Manuvaduga Manukaau Undh Gahi Teu Baummhi. 114. .............. .. .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAdhAvi gvAmitva : vigambara karma sAhitya kA mansamya 135 samajhanA cAhie  /
parantu itanI vizeSatA hai ki madhyAvRSTi guNasthAna meM IzAna svarga taka
pahale guNasthAna kI solaha prakRtiyoM meM se mithyArA prAdi sAla REtiyoM ko hI
vyacchiAsa hoto hai  /  meSa rahI huI sUkSmAdi nau savA devamati, devAnupUrtI,
vaikriya bhArIra, krima aMgopAMga, devAyu, mAhAraka zArIra, bAhAraka aMgopAMga-7
kula solaha andharUpa haiN| isalie yahA~ bandhayogya prakRtiyA~ 104 haiM  /
bhavanavAso, syaMtara aura jyotiSI devI meM sIkara prakRti kA gandha nahIM hone
se 1.3 pratimA bandhayonya hai| nita va kAma mArgaNA puNidaraM vigivigale
tatthupyAyo hu sasANDa) dehe| pajjatti vi pAvadi idi garitiriyAuga patthi  /  /
113 /  /  ekendriya aura vikalaya kondriya, zrIndriya aura masurindriya) meM
lamdhiaparyApta avasthA kI taraha bandhayogya 106. prakRtiyA~ samaranA mAhie  /
kyoMki aparyApta avasthA meM tIrghara, AhArakaThika, devAyu, narakAgu aura
kiyapadaka... ina 11 prakRtiyoM kA bandha nahIM hotA hai| kendriya evaM
vikalatraya ke pahalA aura dUsarA ye do zRNasthAna hote haiN| inameM se pahale
gujasthAna meM bandhabhyUkSitti 15 prakRtiyoM kI hotI haiN| kyoMki yaSi pahale
guNasthAna meM 16 prakRtiyoM kA bandhaviccheda kahA gayA hai, parantu yahA~ para
unameM se marakadrika aura garamAyu Ta jAtI hai tathA manuSyAyu aura tiryacAyu
bar3ha jAtI hai  /  ata: 15 mA hI ciccheda hotA hai| manuSyAyu aura siya vAyu ke
sandhavizveda ko pahale guNasthAna meM kahane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki ekendriya
aura viphalendriya meM utpanna huA jIna sAsvAdana mRNAsthAna meM bharIraparyApsi
ko pUrNa nahIM kara sakatA, kyoMki sAsvAdana guNasthAna kA kAla alpa hai aura
niyati azyApta avasthA kA kAla adhika  /  isa kAraNa sAsvAdana mRgasthAna meM
manuSyA va ticAya kA bandha nahIM hotA hai aura prathama guNasthAna meM hI
bandha aura viccheda hotA hai| paMcendigesu oSaM eyarale vA vaNapadIyate  /
maNuvadugaM maNukAU undha gahi teu bAumhi  /  / 114 /  /  .............. .. .

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 136: Appendix to the Third Karma  **Understanding the Guṇasthānas of
the Five-Sensed Beings**  The Guṇasthānas of the five-sensed beings, such as
Vyuchitti, should be understood in the same way as the Guṇasthānas of the earth-
bodied beings, etc., up to the plant-bodied beings. In Kāyamārgaṇā, the
Vyuchitti, etc., should be understood as being like the one-sensed beings. The
special feature is that in the Tejas-kāya and Vāyu-kāya, there is no bondage of
the four natures: human motion, human-like beings, human lifespan, and higher
realms. The Guṇasthāna is only a false perception (Miśyādṛṣṭi).  **Understanding
the Guṇasthānas of the Śrama-kāya**  The Guṇasthānas of the Śrama-kāya should be
understood in the same way as the Guṇasthānas of the blind-sighted, etc. In
Yogamārgaṇā, the Manoyoga and Vachanayoga are also like Guṇasthānas. In Audārika
Kāyayoga, the bondage and liberation are similar to human motion.
**Understanding the Guṇasthānas of the Audārika Kāyayoga**  In Audārika
Kāyayoga, the bondage and liberation are similar to the Audārika Kāyayoga, but
there is a special feature: there is no bondage of the six natures: Devay,
Narakāyu, Āhārak Śarīra, Āhārak Angopānga, Narakagati, and Narakāsupūrvi. This
means that there is only bondage of 114 natures. Even in these, there is no
bondage of the five natures: Devacatuṣka and Tīrthaṅkara name, in the two
Guṇasthānas of Mithyātva and Sāsvādana. However, there is bondage of these in
the Avirad Samyagdṛṣṭi Guṇasthāna.  **Understanding the Guṇasthānas of the
Audārika Miśra Kāyayoga**  In Audārika Miśra Kāyayoga, the bondage and
liberation of 15 and 26 natures should be understood in the two Guṇasthānas of
Miśyādṛṣṭi and Sāsvādana, respectively. In the 14th Avirad Samyagdṛṣṭi
Guṇasthāna, there is bondage and liberation of 66 natures: the four mentioned
above and 65 others. In the 13th Sayogikevalī Guṇasthāna, there is only
Vyuchitti of one Sāsāvedaniya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 136 tatIya karmananya : pariziSTa paMcendriya jIvoM ke vyuchitti Adi guNasthAna
kI saraha samajhanA cAhie  /  kAyamArgaNA meM pRthvIkAya Adi
banaspatikAyaparyanta meM ekendriya kI taraha jyuchitti Adi jAnanA  /  vizeSatA
yaha hai ki tejaskAya tathA vAyukAya meM manuSya gati, manuSyAnupUoM, manuSyAyu
aura ucca gola- ina cAra prakRtiyoM kA bandha nahIM hotA hai aura guNasthAna eka
mizyAdRSTi hI hai| yaal oghaM sasa maNavapaNe orAle maNugaibhaMgo  /  / 11 /  /
zramakAya meM andha-vida Adi guNasthAnoM kI taraha samajhanA cAhie  /
yogamArgaNA meM manoyoga tathA vacanamoga kI rasanA bhI guNasthAnoM kI taraha
hai tathA audArika kAyayoga meM bandha viccheda Adi manuSyagati ke samAna hai|
orAle vA misse Na suraNirayAvahAraNirayadurga  /  micchadugai devacao titthaM hi
avirade asthi  /  / 116 /  /  aumArikamidha kAyayoga meM audArika kAyayoga kI
taraha bandha-viccheda Adi haiM, lekina itanI vizeSatA hai ki devAya, narakAyu,
AhAraka zarIra, AhAraka aMgopAMga, narakAgati, narakAsupUrvI..ina chaha
prakRtiyoM kA batA nahIM hotA hai, arthAt 114 prakRtiyoM kA hI bandha hotA hai 1
inameM bhI mithyAtva aura sAsvAdana....ina do guNasthAnoM meM devacatuSka aura
tIrthaGkara nAma... ina pA~ca prakRttiyoM kA bandha nahIM hotA, kinna bhrIya
avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM inakA bandha hotA hai| paNArasamunatIsa
micchaduo avirade siMdI bjrii| varimapaNamaTThIvi ya ekkaM sAdaM sajogimhi  //
117 /  /  audArikamizra kAyayoga meM mizyAca aura sAsvAdana' ina do guNasthAnoM
meM 15 va 26 prakRtiyoM kA bandha-viccheda krama se jAnanA cAhie  /  caudhe
avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna meM Upara kI cAra tathA anya 65 -kula milAkara 66
prakRtiyoM ka sandhavinoda hotA hai| teraha sayogikevalI guNasthAna meM sirpha
eka sAsAvedanIya kI vyumichatti hotI hai|

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The essence of the text is about the different types of karma and their
effects on the soul's liberation in Jainism.**  **Here's a breakdown of the
translation:**  * **"Andhavisvamisva vigambar karma sahitaya ka mantrabhya"** -
This phrase refers to the "blind universe" (Andhavisvamisva) and the "unclothed
karma" (vigambar karma) which are concepts related to the state of ignorance and
the accumulation of karma. The phrase "mantrabhya" suggests a discussion about
the mantras or teachings related to these concepts.  * **"Deve va ve misse
paratiriyaaun gurnvahare tammisse path"** - This translates to "In the case of
gods or in the case of mixed beings, the qualities of the soul are revealed."
This refers to the different types of beings in the Jain cosmology and how their
karmic states affect their qualities.  * **"Kayayoga mein devagata ke saman
bandhavicchedh aadi samjhana chahiye"** - This means "In the context of Kayayoga
(the practice of controlling the body), one should understand the liberation
from karma as similar to that of the gods." This highlights the importance of
Kayayoga in achieving liberation.  * **"Kriyamishra kayayoga mein saudharma
aishana sambandhi apariapt devon ke saman bandhayuti hai, kintu us mishra mein
mamushayau aur visanu ka bandh nahin hota hai"** - This translates to "In the
mixed Kayayoga, which involves actions, there is a connection to karma similar
to that of the imperfect gods of the Saudharma and Aishana realms. However, in
this mixed state, there is no bondage to the lifespan of a human (mamushayau) or
to the lifespan of a poisonous creature (visanu)." This explains the different
types of karma and their effects on different beings.  * **"Aharak kayayoga mein
chathe gunasthan jaisa bandhavicchedh aadi hota hai"** - This means "In the
Kayayoga of the Aharak (those who consume food), the liberation from karma is
similar to that of the sixth Gunasthan (stage of spiritual progress)." This
further clarifies the different types of Kayayoga and their corresponding levels
of liberation.  * **"Aharak mishrayoga mein vayu ka bandh nahin hota hai"** -
This translates to "In the mixed Kayayoga of the Aharak, there is no bondage to
the lifespan of a being with a wind-like body (vayu)." This emphasizes the
specific karmic limitations of different types of beings.  * **"Kamme ural misse
vanavadushi va hindi ayde"** - This means "In the Kayayoga of Karma (Kamme
ural), the liberation from karma is similar to that of the noble ones
(vanavadushi) and the non-violent ones (hindi)." This highlights the importance
of ethical conduct in achieving liberation.  * **"Karman kayayoga mein
bandhavicchedh aadi audarikamiv kayayoga ke sadrish hain"** - This translates to
"In the Kayayoga of Karma, the liberation from karma is similar to that of the
noble Kayayoga." This emphasizes the connection between ethical conduct and
liberation.  * **"Lekin vimati mein aayu ka bandh nahin hone se manushayau tatha
tichayau - in do ka bhi nahin hota hai aur vo gunasthan mein nau prakritiyon ki
vyut hoti hai"** - This means "However, due to the absence of bondage to the
lifespan (aayu) in the state of non-violence (vimati), there is no bondage to
the lifespan of a human (mamushayau) or to the lifespan of a creature with a
lifespan of three years (tichayau). And in that Gunasthan, there is a separation
of the nine natures." This explains the specific karmic effects of non-violence
and the resulting spiritual progress.  * **"Ved se aharak marganga paryant"** -
This translates to "From the Vedas to the Aharak marganga (the path of those who
consume food)." This refers to the different stages of spiritual progress in
Jainism.  * **"Vedadahaarot ya sagunaththana mocham tu"** - This means "The
Vedas teach the liberation from the Gunasthan (stages of spiritual progress)."
This highlights the importance of the Vedas in understanding the path to
liberation.  * **"Variya satrasammai rasurakshauuni gasthi niyamen"** - This
translates to "The seven types of good conduct (satrasammai) protect the soul
(rasurakshauuni) and lead to liberation (gasthi niyamen)." This emphasizes the
importance of ethical conduct in achieving liberation.  * **"Sukke sadar
vamatimbarasan cha va"** - This means "The white (sukka) and the black
(vamatimbarasan) are both part of the path to liberation." This refers to the
two types of karma, white and black, and their role in the path to liberation.
* **"Kammeva anahare bandhassanto maganto ya"** - This translates to "The karma
(kammeva) that is not consumed (anahare) leads to bondage (bandhassanto) and the
path to liberation (maganto ya)." This emphasizes the importance of controlling
karma in order to achieve liberation.  * **"Margena mein sabhi arthath dono hi
up samyakta jivon ke manushayau aur vayu ka bandh nahin hota"** - This means "On
the path (margena), both types of beings who are partially enlightened (up
samyakta) are free from the bondage to the lifespan of a human (mamushayau) and
to the lifespan of a being with a wind-like body (vayu)." This explains the
specific karmic limitations of partially enlightened beings.  * **"Heereint mein
tejo leshya va ke midhyatva gunasthan ki ant ki nau tatha padam leshya vale ke
miya gunaswan ki anya ki barah prakritiyon ka bandh nahin hota hai"** - This
translates to "In the case of those who have the Tejo leshya (radiant aura) and
those who are in the state of ignorance (midhyatva), there is no bondage to the
nine natures of the last Gunasthan and to the twelve natures of the other
Gunasthan of those who have the Padam leshya (footprint aura)." This explains
the specific karmic limitations of different types of beings based on their
aura.  * **"Shukla leshya"** - This means "White aura." This refers to the aura
of those who have achieved a high level of spiritual progress.  **Overall, the
text discusses the different types of karma, their effects on the soul's
liberation, and the importance of ethical conduct and spiritual practice in
achieving liberation.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 andhavisvAmisva vigambara karmasAhitya kA mantabhya deve vA ve misse
paratiriyaAuna gurNavAhare tammisse pattha 137 patthi  /  devAka  // 11 //  fer
kAyayoga meM devargAta ke samAna baMdhaviccheda Adi samajhanA cAhie  /
kriyamizra kAyayoga meM saudharma aizAna sambandhI aparyApta devoM ke samAna
baMdhayuti hai, kintu usa mizra meM mamuSyAyu aura viSANu kA bandha nahIM hotA
hai  /  AhAraka kAyayoga meM chaThe guNasthAna jaisA bandhaviccheda Adi hotA hai
/  AhAraka mizrayoga meM vAyu kA bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  kamme urAla missa
vANAvaduSi va hiMdI ayade 1 kArmaNa kAyayoga meM vandhaviccheda Adi audArikamiva
kAyayoga ke sadRza haiN| lekina vimati meM Ayu kA bandha na hone se manuSyAyu
tathA ticAyu- ina do kA bhI nahIM hotA hai aura vo guNasthAna meM nau prakRtiyoM
kI vyuta hotI hai  /  veda se AhAraka mArgaNA paryanta vedAdAhAroti ya
saguNaTThANA mocaM tu  //  116  //  variya satrasammai rasurakSAUNi gasthi
niyameNa  /  frewriter raj vAraMNa hi teupammesu  //  120  //  sukke sadara
vAmatimabArasaM ca va afe | kammeva aNAhAre baMdhassaMto magaMto ya  // 121 //
veNA se lekara AhArakamAgaMNA taka kA kathana guNasthAnoM ke sAdhAraNa kathana
jaisA samajhanA cAhie  /  lekina samyaktramArgaNA tathA leNyAmArgaNA ko
zubhalezyAoM meM aura AhAramArgaNA kI kucha vizeSatA hai ki * mArgeNA meM sabhI
arthAt donoM hI upa samyaktva jIvoM ke manuSyAyu aura vAyu kA bandha nahIM hotA
| Heereint meM tejolezyA vA ke midhyAtva guNasthAna kI anta kI nau tathA
padamalezyA vAle kemiyA guNasvAna kI anya kI bAraha prakRtiyoM kA baMdha nahIM
hotA hai| zuklalezyA

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Tasiya Karmagranth: Appendix  The four Shatar Chatushkas (Tiyangat, Tirya-
manupurvi, Liyandhay, Uchit) and the 12 of the Mithya-hristi Gunasthanas,
totaling 16 Prakrutis, do not experience Bandha.  One should understand the
Bandha-vichched (binding and release) in the Ahar-marg-na as being like the work
of Anahan or the work of Yoga.  In the Uday and Udirana-svamitva Marg-nas,
before stating the Uday and Udirana-svamitva, the following verses explain the
general rules:  **Uday Prakrutis in Gunasthanas**  > "Sattarsep-kar-khach-du-
sahi-yas-yam sagi-gisi-di du-sadari. Chavaththi sathi nav-sag-van-nas du-das-
bar-udaya." (27)  In the Mithya-hristi and other 14 Gunasthanas, there are at
least 117, 111, 100, 104, 87, 81, 76, 72, 66, 60, 56, 57, 42, and 12 Prakrutis
that experience Uday.  **Anushaya Prakrutis**  > "Panchekk-aras-ba-vis-sattha
ras-panch-tis igi-chhad-alan. Paparn chhapp bit-pan-si-iy asi-di du-gu-ya-ghan-
yan-nam." (277)  In the Mithya-hristi and other Gunasthanas, there are at least
5, 11, 22, 15, 35, 41, 46, 50, 56, 62, 63, 65, 80, and 110 Prakrutis that are
Anudaya (do not experience Uday).  **Up-vibhinna Prakrutis**  > "Pan nav igi
sattar-san ad' panch ch chour chhak chch-ev. Igi-d-g solas tis-an baras udare
a-jog-ta." (264)  In the Mithya-hristi and other 14 Gunasthanas, there are 5, 6,
1, 17, 1, 5, 4, 6, 6, 1, 2, 16, 30, and 12 Prakrutis that experience Udar-disht
(manifestation).  Prakrutis that do not experience Uday are called Anushaya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tasIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa vAle ke zAtAra catuSka (tiyaMgati,
tiryamAnupUrvI, liyaMdhAyu, ucIta) aura midhyAhRSTi guNasthAna ke anta kI 12
kula milAkara 16 prakRsiyoM kA bandha nahIM hotA hai  /  AhAramArgaNA meM
anAhAna yA meM kArya yoga jasA bandhaviccheda Adi samajhanA caahie| udaya evaM
udIraNAsvAmitva mArgaNAoM meM udaya aura udIraNA svAmitva kA kathana karane ke
pUrva nimnAkita gAthAoM meM sAmAnya niyamoM ko batalAte haiMgugasthAnoM meM
udaya prakRtiyoM sattarasepakArakhacadusahiyasayaM sagigisIdi dusdrii|
chAvaThThi saThi NavasagavaNNAsa dudAsabArudayA  // 27 //  mighyAiSTi Adi
caudaha guNasthAnoM meM kama se 117, 111, 100, 104, 87, 81,76, 72, 66, 60, 56,
57, 42, 12 prakRtiyoM kA udaya anuSaya prAsiyoM paMcekkArasabAvIsaTThA
rasapaMcatIsa igichAdAlaM  /  paparNa chappa bitipaNasiiya asIdi
duguyAghaNayaNNaM  // 277|| mizyATi Adi guNasthAnoM meM kama se 5, 11, 22, 15,
35, 41. '46, 50, 56, 62, 63, 65, 80, 110 prakRtiyA~ anudaya rUpa haiN|
upavibhinna prakRtiyoM paNa Nava igi sattarasaM aDa' paMca ca caura chakka
chacceva  /  igidga solasa tIsaM bArasa udare ajogatA  /  / 264 migyAtva Adi
caudaha guNasthAnoM meM kramaza: 5, 6, 1, 17, 1, 5, 4, 6, 6. 1, 2, 16, 30 aura
12 prakRtiyoM kA udaradista hotA hai  /   /  jina kRtiyoM kA udaya nahIM hotA
hai, unheM anukSya kahate haiN|

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Bandhavisvamitva Digambar Karmagrahitva ka Mantvya:**  **Translation:**
**Commentary on Bondage, Universal Lordship, Digambara, and Karma-Acceptance:**
**Verse 285:**  The rise of speed, anupurvi, and lifespan occurs in the past
time itself, suitable for the intended fear. The rise of lifespan, called "aya,"
occurs only for the badara-sufficient living beings. The rise of lineage occurs
only for humans and gods, and the rise of the three sleep states, styanaddhi,
etc., occurs for humans and the three types of beings.  **Verse 286:**  The rise
of the three sleep states, styanaddhi, etc., occurs for humans and the three
types of beings who have a lifespan of a countable number of years and whose
sensory faculties are fully developed. However, it does not occur for humans who
possess the power of food and the power of macrocosm.  **Verse 287:**  In the
non-harmonious guna-sthana of the nirvrittyaryataks, there is no rise of the
Vedas. Similarly, except for the first hell, ratnaprabha, the other three gatis
do not experience the rise of the state of being a eunuch in the fourth guna-
sthana, which is the state of eternal perfection. Therefore, the non-harmonious
beings who have the female Veda and the eunuch Veda do not experience the rise
of the four anupurvis and the three anupurvis of the hell, which are the final
anupurvis.  **Verse 288:**  The three types of beings, the eunuchs, and the
humans do not experience the rise of the anupurvis. The rise of the anupurvis
occurs for the other types of beings, the gods, and the devendras.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bandhavisvAmitva digambara karmagrAhitya kA mantabya : gadiANu Auudao sapade
bhUpuNNabAdare tAo  /  ucbudao paradeve zrImatiguda gare tiriye  //  285 //
kisI bhi ke pUrva samaya meM hI usa vivakSita bhaya ke yogya gati, AnupUrvI aura
Ayu kA udaya hotA hai| Aya nAmaka kA udaya bAdara paryApta pRuatara jIvoM ko hI
hotA hai| gotra kA udaya manuSya aura devoM ko hI hotA hai aura styAnaddha Adi
tIna nidrAoM kA udaya manuSya aura ticoM ke hotA hai 1 styAdi Adi tIna vinAoM ke
udaya kA vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai - saMkhAugaNa ra tirie
indiyapajjatagAdu thoNatiya  /  jogamudedu vajjiya AhAraviguvvazuddhavame ||286
//  136 saMkhyAta varSa kI Ayu vAle karmabhUmija manuSya aura siyaMtroM ke hI
indriyaparyApta ke pUrNa hone ke bAda styAnaddhi Adi tIna nidrAoM kA udaya huA
karatA hai  /  parantu AhAraka Rddhi aura maikriya Rddhi ke dhAraka manuSyoM ko
inakA udaya nahIM hotA hai| adANe Na hi thI saMdovi ya dhammaNArayaM munnA  /
zrImaMdas kamaso NANucaU carimadiSNANa  // 287 //  nirvRtyaryAtaka ke asaMgata
guNasthAna meM veda kA udaya nahIM hai| isI prakAra prathama naraka gharmA
(ratnaprabhA) ke sivAya anya tIna gatiyoM ko caturtha guNasthAnavartI nitya
paryApta avasthA meM napuMsakatveda kA bhI udaya nahIM hotA hai| isI kAraNa se
strIveda vAle tathA napuMsakaveda vAle asaMyata ke kama se cAroM anUpUrvI tathA
naraka ke cinA anta kI tIna AnupUrvI prakRtiyoM kA udaya nahIM hotA hai|
afrfanmurarcaU tirie apuSNo Narevi saMghaDaNaM  /  orAla paratirie veguvvadu
devaNeramie  // 28 //

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Third Karma Bandha: Appendix  **The three types of disabilities, namely,
Afeendriya, Deendriya, and Vikal, and the four types of beings, namely, Sthavar,
etc., are eligible for birth in the realm of the Ringamंच. The insufficient
nature is also eligible for birth in the realms of Tiryanch and Manushya. The
six types of Sanhanan, namely, Vajra, Rishabha, Nara, Ach, etc., and the pair of
Audarik Parira Karma (Audarik body, Audarik limbs) are eligible for birth in the
realm of Manushya. The Kriya body and the remaining limbs are eligible for birth
in the realms of Dev and Narak.**  **Teutiguṇatirikhhesumjovo Bāhareṣu Puṇṇeṣu.
Māṇaṁ Payadiṇaṁ Oga vā Hodi Udao Du. ||26||**  **Except for the Tejaskaayik,
Vayukaayik, and the common Vanaspatikaayik, the remaining sufficient Tiryanch
beings are eligible for birth in the realm of Udyot Prakriti. The remaining
eligible beings should be understood according to their Gunasthanas.**  **Thus,
having understood the rules of birth for the various types of beings, we now
discuss the types of beings eligible for birth in the various Marganas.**
**Gati Margana**  **Thonatithi Purisna Ghaadi Niryaauṇīchayanīyam. Nāme
Samachithaṇam Giramaṇa Nāra Sudaya. ||2||**  **Except for the five types of
beings, namely, Styanadidhi, etc., the 42 types of beings belonging to the Ghati
Karma, the Charakayu, the Nīcha Gotra, and the Sata Asata Vedaniya, and the 26
types of beings belonging to the Namakarma, which are eligible for birth in the
realm of Bhagyapatti, and the 76 types of beings belonging to the
Narakgatyānupūrvi, are eligible for birth in the realm of Bharakgati.**  **The
names of the 26 types of beings are as follows:**  **Veguvvatejavirasudugu
Duggadihundanimin Pandhindi. Pirayagadi Dubbhamaagurutasavannach Ya Bachithaṇam.
||2613||**  **Kriya, Taija, Sthira, Shubha - these pairs, and the Aprast
Vihayogati, Huns Sansthan, Nirman, Pankhendri, Narakgati, and the Dubhang-
Agusaladhu-Bas-Varna.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtopa karmabandha : pariziSTa ephendriya tathA dIndriya Adi vikalatraya aura
sthAvara Adi cAra prakRtiyoM kA udaya riMgamaMca ke hove yogya hai  /  aparyApta
prakRti tiryaca va manuSya ke bhI udaya hone yogya hai  /  vajaRSabhanArAca Adi
chaha saMhanana aura audArika pArIra yugala nAmakarma (audArika zarIra, audArika
aMgopAMga) manuSya ba tiyaMpa ke udaya hone yogya hai  /  kriya zarIra va bakiya
aMgopAMga ye do prakatiyAM deva nArakoM ke udayayogya haiN|
teutigUNatirikkhesumjovo bAharesu puNNesu  /  mANaM payaDINaM ogha vA hodi udao
du  // 26 //  tejaskAyika, vAyukAyika aura sAdhAraNa vanaspatikAyikaH-5na tInoM
ko chor3akara anya bApara paryAptaka liyacoM ke udyota prakRti kA udaya hotA
hai| inake atirikta anya zeSa rahI prakRtiyoM kA udaya guNasthAnoM ke anusAra
jAnanA caahie| isa prakAra se kamaprakaliyoM ke udaya-niyamoM ko phahakara aba
mArgaNAoM meM udaya-prakRtiyoM kA kathana karate haiN| gatimArgaNA
thoNatithIpurisNA ghAdI NirayAuNIcayaNiyaM  /  NAme samaciThANaM giramANa NAra
sudayA  /  / 2 /  /  styAnaddhi Adi tIra, strIveda aura paveda ina pA~ca ke
sivAya ghAti karmoM kI 42 prakRttiyAM, carakAyU, nIca gotra aura sAtA asAtA
vedanIya tathA nAmakarma meM se cArakiyoM ke bhAgyApatti ke sthAna meM hone vAlI
26 prakRliyA~ tathA narakagatyAnapUrvI ye 76 prAkRtiyA~ bharakagati meM udaya
hone yogya haiN| 26 prakRtiyoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM... veguvvatejavirasuduga
duggadihuMDaNimiNa paMdhindI  /  pirayagadi dubbhamAgurutasavaNNaca ya
baciThANaM  / 2613 //  kriya, taijA, sthira, zubha-~inakA yugala aura aprAsta
vihAyogati, hu~sa saMsthAna, nirmANa, paMkhendrI, narakagati sathA dubhaMga-
agusaladhu-basa-varNa

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bandhaadi Swamitva: Vigamvar Karma Sahitya ka Mantvya **141**  These 26
Prakṛtis, in total, arise in place of the verbal expressions of the destructive
emotions.  **Miṣamantam Miṣṣam Miṣṣādītiye Kama Chidi Ayade.** **Vidiyakasāya
Dubhagaṇādejjadugāuṇirayacau 33262.**  Firstly, in the three realms of hell, the
fourfold Miṣyatva, which is eternally connected, and Samyagmiṣyatva, are cut off
from arising. In the fourth realm of hell, the fourfold A-pratyāropa-āvaraṇa,
Durbhaga, Svar, Anādeya, Ayāna, Koti-narakāyu, Naraka-dvīka, Vaikiya-śarīra,
Vaikriya-angopaṅga... these 16 Prakṛtis are cut off from arising.  **Bidīyāvisu
Chasu Puḍhavimu Evam Gari Ya Asanjadatṭhāṇe.** **Pāsthi ṇirayāṇapanthī Tissē
Miṣṣēba Bocchadōn. ||2**  From the second to the seventh hell, the arising of
the first hell is considered the same, but there is this difference: in the
realm of the un-controlled qualities, the arising of the hell is not sequential.
Therefore, in the realm of the Miṣyatva qualities, the arising of the hell is
cut off along with the Svāsana Prakṛti.  **Tirithé Odho Suraṇaraṇirayāūnaccha
Mahāradurg.** **Vegunvchakkalittham Pathi Hu Émeva Samāgnaṁ. ||264||**  In the
third hell, the realm of qualities is considered to have the same arising.
However, among them, Devāyu, Manuṣyāyu, Narakāyu, Ucca-gotra, Manuṣmati-nik,
Āhāra-kāddhika, and Vaikriya-śarīra, along with the 6 Leśa-kara, these 15
Prakṛtis are not eligible for arising. Therefore, only 105 Prakṛtis arise.
Similarly, in the five divisions of the third hell, the general Prakṛtis are
also considered the same.  **Thāvaradugasāhāranaṭāvigivivigaluga Tāṇi
Pañcakkhé.** **Itthiāpajjata ṇā Té Puṇṇé Udayapayaḍīō. ||26||**  From the 107
general Prakṛtis mentioned above, the 2 Prakṛtis of sthāvara, along with
Sādhāraṇa, Ātapa, Eka-indriya, and Vikala-tray, these 8 Prakṛtis are subtracted,
leaving the remaining...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bandhAdi svAmitva : vigamvara karma sAhitya kA mantavya 141 inakA khatuSkaH,
isa prakAra kula milAkara ye 26 prakRtiyo mAraka bhAvoM ke vacanaparyAsta ke
sthAna para udaya rUpa hotI hai| michamaNataM missaM micchAditie kamA chidI
ayade  /  vidiyakasAyA dubhagaNAdejjadugAuNirayacAu 33262 /  /  prathama naraka
ke miyAdRSTi Adi tIna, zuSasthAnoM meM bha se mithyAtva anantAnubandhI catuSka
aura samyagmithyAtva yaha udayavicchinna hote haiM aura cauthe suNasthAna meM
apratyArUpAnAvaraNacatukA, durbhaga, svara, anAdeya, ayAna koti narakAyu,
narakadvika, vaikiya zarIra, vaikriya aMgopAMga -.... yaha 16 pratiyAM
udayavidhi hotI haiN| bidiyAvisu chasu puDhavimu evaM gari ya asaMjadaTThANe  /
pAsthi NirayANapanthI tisse miccheba bocchadoM  // 2 dUsare se lekara sAtaveM
bharaka taka pahale naraka ke sAmAna udayAdi mAnanA, kintu itanI vizeSatA hai ki
asaMyata guNasthAna meM narakAnupUrvI kA udaya nahIM hai  /  isa kAraNa
mithyAtva guNasthAna meM hI svAsna prakRti ke sAtha narakAnu. pUrvI kA bhI
upayathiccheda ho jAtA hai| tirithe odho suraNaraNirayAUnaccha mahAradurga 1
vegunvachakkalitthaM pathi hu emeva sAmagNaM  // 264 //  tidhati meM guNasthAna
ne samAna hI udaya jAnanA  /  garantu unameM se devAyu, manuSyAyu, narakAyu,
uccagotra. manuSmatinika, AhArakAddhika sathA baiMkriya bharIra Adi 6, tathA
lIrthakara ye saba 15 prati udayayogya nahIM haiN| isa kAraNa 105 prakRtiyoM kA
hI udaya hanA karatA hai| isI prakAra tithaMca ke pA~ca bhedoM ke sAmAnya
tiyAnoM meM bhI jAnanA  /  thAvaradugasAhAraNatAvigivigaluga tANi paMcakkhe  /
itthiapajjata NA te puNNe udayapayaDIo ||26|| ukta sAmAnya timaMca kI 107
prakRtiyoM meM se sthAvara Adhi 2, sAdhArathA, Atapa, ekendriya, vikalatrayaina
ATha prakRtiyoM ko ghaTA dene vara zeSa bacI

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##    **142**  **Srsoya Karma: Appendix 66**  The five-sense transmigrants are
eligible for 66 natures.  Out of these 66 natures, by reducing the two natures
of "Swaya" and "Aparaapta", the remaining 64 natures become eligible for the
arising of "Paryaapta Bandha".  **Tiryanchana's L 11: HT:** By reducing the
"Pune" and "Madhu Kaaved" and combining the "Streeved", 66 natures become
eligible for arising.  Even in the fourth "Avirat Samyagdrishti Shunasthana",
the "Tithanchana" does not arise.  The "Labya Paryaapta" five-sense "Liyanch"
mentioned in the above 66 natures, by reducing the "Streeved", "Tyannadhi" etc.
3, "Pradhata" etc. 2, and "Paryaapta Udyot", "Swar Yugal", "Biha Yogali Yugal",
"Yash Kiti", "Aadey", "Sam Chaturas" etc. five "Sansthana", "Vajra Rishabha
Naraach" etc. five "Sanhanan", "Subhag", "Samyaktva", "Sampamithyatva" ... these
16 natures, and combining the two natures of "Aparaapta" and "Napusakaaved", a
total of 51 natures become eligible for arising.  **Manuke Odho
Paavratiriyaadavdugae Yavilidi.** **Saharani Daratiya Bemubbiychakk Parihino.**
||26||  Out of the 132 natures mentioned in the "Gunasthanas" of ordinary
humans, by reducing the pair of "Sthavar", "Tithanchana Gati", "Atap", and the
six natures of "Ekendiya", "Vikalendriya", "Sadharan", "Manushyaayu", and the
other two "Aayu" and "Kriya Sharira", the remaining 102 natures become eligible
for arising.  **Manusopa Va Bhoge Duhbhagach Univasanvathi Patiyam.** **Duggati
Sthamapunnam Sanhadishthana Charimpavan.** ||302||  **Haraduhina Evam Tirye
Manuduchchgodamanuvaum.** **Avaniya Pavikhav Nicham Tirya Tiryaauujjoy.**
||303||  Out of the 605 natures of ordinary humans in the "Bhogabhumik" humans,
by reducing the four natures of "Dubhang" etc., "Nicha Gotra", "Napusakaaved",
"Styanadhi" etc. three, "Aprashast Vihayoapati", "Tirthankara", "Aparaapti",
"Vajra Naraach" etc. five "Sanhanan", "Nyagrodha Parimandal" etc. five
"Sansthana", and the pair of "Aharak Sharira", a total of 24 natures, the
remaining 581 natures become eligible for arising.  Similarly, in the
"Bhogabhumik"...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . 142 sRsoya kamma : pariziSTa 66 prakRtiyAM paMcendriya tirgaca ke upayayogya
haiM aura ina 66 prakRtiyoM meM se bhI svIya tathA aparyApta ima do ko kama
karane se zeSa rahIM 67 prakRtiyA~ paryAptatibaMdha ke udayayogya hotI haiN|
tiryadhanI ke ela 11: HT : puNe va madhu kAveda kI kama karake aura strIveda ko
milAne se 66 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya hai  /  usameM bhI cothe aviratasamyagTaphiTa
zuNasthAna meM tithaMcAnupUrvI kA udaya nahIM hai| labyaparyAptaka paMcendripa
liyaMca ke uktaH 66 prakRtiyoM meM strIveda, tyAnaddhi Adi 3, paradhAtAdi 2,
tathA paryApta. udyota. svara yugala, bihAyogaliyugala, yaza kIti, Adeya,
samacaturasa Adi pAMca saMsthAna, vajraRSabhanArAca Adi pAMca saMhanana,
subhaga, samyaktva, sampamithyAtva...ina 16 prakRliyoM ko kama karake tathA
aparyApta va napusakAveda ina do prakRtiyoM ko milAne se kula 51 prakRtiyA~
udayayogya haiN| maNuke odho pAvaratiriyAdAvadugaeyavilidi  /  sAharaNidarAtiya
bemubbiyachakka parihINo  // 26 //  sAmAnya manuSya ke guNasthAnoM meM kahI gaI
132 prakRtiyoM meM se sthAvara, tithaMcagati, Atapa, ina tInoM kA yugala aura
ekendriya, vikalendriyA, sAdhAraNa, manuSyAyu ke atirikta anya sIna Ayu aura
kriya zarIra Adi chaha prakRtiyoM ko kama karane se zeSa udayayogya 102 pratiyAM
haiN| maNusopaM vA bhoge duHbhagaca uNIvasaMvathIpatiyaM  /
duggaditisthamapuNNaM saMhadisaThANacarimapaNaM  // 302 /  /  hAraduhINA evaM
tiriye maNuduccagodamaNuvAuM  /  avaNiya pavikhava NIcaM tiriyatiriyAuujjoya  /
/ 3 / 03 /  /  bhogabhumika manuSyoM meM sAmAnya manuSya kI 605 prakRtiyoM meM
se dubhaMga Adi cAra, nIca gotra, napusakaveda, styAnadi Adi tIna, aprazasta
vihAyopati, tIrthaGkara, aparyApti, vajranArAca Adi pAna saMhanana,
nyagrodhaparimaNDala Adi pA~ca saMsthAna aura AhAraka zarIra kA yugala inna 24
prakRtimoM ko kama kara dene para zeSa rahIM 78 prakRtiyAM udayayogya hai  /
isI prakAra bhogabhUmika emairmanenimammmm. ...

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Masininewwwwwrectorxmooompu  **Dhadhi Swamitva: Vigadhar Karmasahitya Ka
Masamm**  **143**  In the Tichons, like humans, there are 71 Prakṛtis, including
Manusyakti and two others, Ubhagotra and Manushayau. By reducing these three
Prakṛtis and combining the five Prakṛtis of Nichakottra, Tishgati, and two
others, Tichayu and Udyot, there are 76 Prakṛtis that are eligible for birth.
In the Bhoga and Sure, like humans, there are 78 Prakṛtis, including Manusyakti
and four others, Manushayau, Rishabhanas, Sanhanan. By reducing these six
Prakṛtis and combining the four Prakṛtis of Devagati and others, Devapu, there
are 77 Prakṛtis that are eligible for birth. However, in the Devas, there is no
birth of Strived, and in the Devanganas, there is no birth of Purushaved.
Therefore, in the Devas and Devanganas, only 76 Prakṛtis should be considered
eligible for birth.  **304**  Avirathaanam ek adisadis surodhamev have.
Bhavanatikappithinām asanjade asthi devāṇū.  There is only one Asanyata
Gunasthan in the Vimanas. Therefore, there are 50 Prakṛtis that are eligible for
birth, similar to the Avirat Sunasthan of the Deshas. In the Bhavanatrik
(Bhavanakasi, Dhyantar, Jyotishi) Devas, Devis, and Kalpavamini women, there are
77 Prakṛtis, like the general Devas, with 46 Prakṛtis eligible for birth without
Strived or Purushaved. However, there is no birth of Devanupurvi in the Chaudhe
Achira Gunasthan, because a Samyagdristi does not get born in the Bhavanatrik
after death. Therefore, there are only 66 Prakṛtis that are eligible for birth
in the Chal Gunasthan of the Bhavanatrik and Kalpavamini Devis, and also in
their Sasare.  **306**  Niyamargama Tiriyappunnam vage
parshadavaupakapushnasaharanam. Eindiyajaspiinatishavarajugalam cha milidbavam.
In the Tiryak, there is a combination of Parashada, Upakapushna, and Saharanam.
This combination should be combined with the Indriyajaspi and Tishavarajugalam.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 masininewwwwwrectorxmooompu dhAdi svAmitva : vigAdhara karmasAhitya kA masamma
143 ticoM meM manuSyoM kI taraha 71 prakRtiyoM meM manuSyakti Adi do, ubhAgotra
aura manuSyAyu ina pAra prakRtiyoM ko kama karane tathA nIcakotra, tiSagati Adhi
do, ticAyu aura udyota ina pAMca ko milAne se 76 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya haiN|
bhoga va sure paracavaNarAuNajjUNa survsuraa| khiva deve vitthI ithimmi Na
purisavedo y||304| sAmAnya se devI meM bhI bhogabhUbhika manuSya kI taraha 78
prakRtiyoM meM manuSyagati Adi cAra, manuSyAyu, RSabhanAsa saMhanana' ina chaha
prakRtiyoM ko kama kara aura devagati Adi cAra, devApu ina pA~dha ko milAne se
77 prakRtiyAM udayanIya hai| parantu devoM meM strIveda kA udaya aura
devAMganAoM meM puruSaveda kA upama nahIM hotA hai  /  ataH deva aura
devAMganAoM meM 76 pratiyA~ hI azyayogya samajhanA caahie| aviradaThANaM eka
adisAdisu surodhameva have  /  bhavaNatikappitthINaM asaMjade asthi devANU  //
30 //  anuiiMza kAdi vimAnoM meM eka asaMyata guNasthAna hI hai  /  ata: dezoM
ke avirata suNasthAna kI saraha upamayogya 50 prakRtiyA~ jAnanA  /  bhavanatrika
(bhavanakAsI, dhyaMtara, jyotiSI) deva, deviyoM tathA kalpavAminI striyoM ke
sAmAnya devoM kI taraha 77 prakRtiyoM meM strIveda athavA puruSavedha ke binA 46
prakRtiyA~ udadhayogya haiM, kintu caudhe acirasa guNasthAna meM devAnupUrvI kA
udaya nahIM hai, kyoMki samyagdRSTi maraNa karake bhavatrika meM utpanna nahIM
hotaa| arthAt bhavanantrika va kalpavAsinI deviyoM ke calu guNasthAna meM va
sAsare meM bhI udayayogya 66 prakRtiyAM hI haiN| niyamArgamA tiriyaapuNNaM vage
paraSAdavaupakapuSNasAharaNaM  /  eindiyajasapINatiSAvarajugalaM ca milidabvaM
// 30 //

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Third Karmagrantha: Appendix**  **Rinmangovangat-sam Sanhadipanchaka** is
mentioned here.   **Avaniya Thavarajugalam** is mentioned along with
**Saharanayaksham** etc.  ||307||   **Khiv Tasadummadidussaramangovang
Sajadisesavathai**   **Ogh Sayale Saharanigivigaladaakthavardugunam** ||30||
In **Ekendiya Marggana**, there are 71 **Prakritis** in **Tirthach Labdhi-
Apariapt**.   **Parachata** etc. are mentioned, along with **Paryapt**,
**Sadharan**, **Ekendiya Jati**, **Yash-Kirti**, **Sthanamitri**, **Sthavar**,
and **Sukshma Kul**.   These 13 **Prakritis** are combined with **Angopaang**,
**Bas**, **Savart Sanhanan**, and **Panchendrin** (4 in total).   By subtracting
these 4, we get 80 **Prakritis** that are **Udayayogya** (fit for arising).
In **Vikalay**, there are 10 **Prakritis** similar to **Ekendiya**.   By
subtracting **Sthavar Yugalam**, **Sadharan**, **Ekendiya**, and **Atap** (5 in
total), and adding **Pras**, **Aprashasthavihayogati**, **Duhvar**,
**Angopaang**, **Apni-Apni Jati**, and **Sevatam Sanhanan** (6 in total), we get
81 **Prakritis** that are **Udayayogya**.    In **Panchendriya**, similar to
**Gunasthan**, there are 122 **Prakritis**.   By subtracting **Sadharan**,
**Ekendiya**, **Vikalatray**, **Ala**, and **Shanagar** (5 in total), we get 114
**Prakritis** that are **Jyayogya** (fit for arising).    **Kayama Yogmarggana**
**Eyan Va Panakaye Na Hi Saharanaminam Cha Aadabam**   **Dussu Sadgamujjavam
Kamen Chaarimhamhi Aadadam** ||30||    In **Prithvikaay** etc. (5 **Kayas** in
total), there are 80 **Prakritis** similar to **Ekendiya**.   By subtracting one
**Sadharan** **Prakriti**, we get 79 **Prakritis** that are **Udayayogya** in
**Prithvikaay**.   By subtracting **Sadharan** and **Atap** **Prakritis**, we
get 76 **Prakritis** that are **Udayayogya** in **Alakaay**.   By subtracting
**Sadharan**, **Malap**, and **Uchchot** (3 in total) in **Tejaskay** and
**Yayukay**, we get 77 **Prakritis** that are **Udayayogya** in both.   In
**Vanaspatikaay**, by subtracting only **Atap** **Prakriti**, we get 76
**Prakritis** that are **Udayayogya**.    **Oshan Tase Na
Thavardugasaharaneyataavam Ath Oghan**   **Manavayanassattagen Hitavigivimalam
Cha Thavaraguchao** ||310||    In **Ghasakay**, similar to **Gunasthan**, there
are 122 **Prakritis**.   By subtracting **Sthavar** etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 470Nmmarrormim tRtIya karbhagrantha : pariziSTa riNamaMgovaMgatasaM
saMhadipaMcakasamevamiha thirAle  /  avaNiya thAvarajugalaM sAharaNayakSamAdAvaM
// 307 /  /  khiva tasadummadidussaramagovaMga sajAdisevaTai  /  /  ogha sayale
sAharaNigivigalAdAkthAvaraduguNaM  // 30 //  ekendriya mArgaNA meM tirthaca
labdhi-aparyApta kI 71 prakRtiyoM meM parAcAta Adi bAra, paryApta, sAdhAraNa,
ekendriya jAti, yaza-kIrti, sthAnamitrika, sthAvara aura sUkSma kula teraha
prakRtiyAM milAkara aura aMgopAMga, basa, savArta saMhanana, paMcendrina ina
cAra ko kama karame se 80 prakRtiyAM udayayogya jAnanA  /  vikalAya meM
ekendriya ke samAna 10 prakRtiyoM meM se sthAvara yugala, sAdhAraNa, ekandriya,
Atapa ina pAMca prakRtiyoM ko kama karake tathA prasa, aprazastavihAyogati,
duHvara, aMgopAMga, apanI-apanI jAti, sevAtaM saMhanana, ina chaha prakRtiyoM ko
milAne se udayayogya 81 prakRtiyAM haiN| paMcendriya meM guNasthAna kI taraha
122 meM se sAdhAraNa, ekendriya, vikalatraya, AlA. zAnagara - 5 prakRtiyoM ko
kama karane para 114 prakRtiyA~ jyayogya hai  /  kAyamA yogamArgaNA eyaM vA
paNakAye Na hi sAharaNamiNaM ca AdAbaM  /  dusu sadgamujjAvaM kameNa carimamhi
AdAdaM  /  / 30 /  /  pRthvIkAya Adi pAMcoM kAyoM meM ekendriya kI taraha 80
prakRtiyoM meM se eka sAdhAraNa prakRti ko kama karane para pRthvIkAra meM haiM
aura sAdhAraNa va Atapa prakRti ko ghaTAne para alakAya meM udayogya 76 tathA
tejaskAya, yAyukAya, ina donoM meM sAdhAraNa, mAlapa, uzcota- ina tIna
prakRtiyoM ko ghaTAne para 77 prakRtiyAM undrayayogya haiN| vanaspatikAya meM
sirpha Atapa prakRti ko kama karane para 76 prakRtiyAM udayayogya haiN| oSaM
tase Na thAvaradugasAharaNeyatAvamatha oghaM  /  maNavayaNasattageNa
hitAvigivimalaM ca thAvarAgucao  // 310 ghasakAya meM guNasthAna sAmAnya ko 122
prakRtiyoM meM se sthAvara Adi Prammar . . ............ A mA-
...................... - - - .. - -

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## PAMMAMALIM **Magdhavi's Ownership: A Commentary on Digambar Kamasahithya**
**145**  Two, ordinary, one-sensory, and heat-receiving nature, being me, are
capable of giving rise to 517 entities.  In the seven yogas, namely four
manoyogas and three vachanayogas, the central, vikalatriya, sthavar, etc., four
anupurvi - these 13 natures do not exist, therefore 101 natures are capable of
arising.  **Anubhayavachan** yoga, with 106 natures, including vikalatriya,
gives rise to 113 entities.  In **Audarik Kayayoga**, out of 112, the following
13 natures do not exist: Aharak sharir yugal, deshyu, krimshatk, manushy
anupurvi, liyanchanupurvi, apariapt, narakas - leaving 106 natures capable of
arising.  **Audarik Mishr Kaprayog**, with 101 natures from before, after adding
pariapt and removing the following 12 natures: mindhprakriti, tyanimishki,
svaraday, bihayogaliyugad, paradhatadi charin - leaves 68 natures capable of
arising.  In the fourth **Avirat Gunasthan**, anadeya yugal, durbhag,
nayesakaved, strived - these do not arise. The dissolution of these natures
should happen in the **Sasvadan Gunasthan**. In the **Mithyatva Gunasthan**,
mithyasth, sukshmatray - these two natures are dissolved.  In **Sasvadan**, 14
natures like anantanubandhi, in **Asanayat**, 44 natures like apratyakhyana, and
in **Samogikevarali**, 36 natures - knowing the arising and dissolution of these
is important.  **Devosham gudhe na suradan paklivejj na nirayau! Nirayagadi usad
duggadi durubhagavo nichan!** (314)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 PAMMAMAALIM magdhAvi svAmitva : digambara kamasAhitya kA mantavya 145 do,
sAdhAraNa, ekendriya, Atapaya pAtra prakRtimA ma hone se 517 pratiyAM udaya hone
yogya haiN| cAra manoyoga tathA tIna vacanayoga kula sAta yogoM meM Atae,
kendriya, vikalatraya, sthAvara Adi kAra, cAra AnupUrvI-ye 13 prakRtiyAM nahIM
hotI haiM, lataH 101 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya haiN| aNubhayavaci viyalajudA
oghamurAle pahAra devaal| veguSyachakkaNaratiriyANu apajjattaNirayAU  // 311
anubhaya bacanayoga meM 106 prakRtiyoM meM bikalatraya milAkara 113 prA. tiyA~
udayogya hai| audArika kAyayoga meM 112 meM se AhAraka zarIra yugala, dezayu,
krimaSaTka, manuSyAnupUrvI, liyaMcAnupUrvI, aparyApta. narakAsu-ina 13
prakRtiyoM ke na hone se 106 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya hai  /  tammimme puNNajudA yA
missINatiyasaravihAya dugaM  /  paraghAdacao ayade NAdejadudubhagaM chA saMhitI
// 31 //  sANe tesi chedo vAme cattAri codasA sANe  /  cadAla vochedo ayade
jogimhi chattIsaM 1313 audArikamizra kAprayoga meM pUrva kI 101 prakRtiyoM meM
paryApta ke milAne tathA mindhaprakRti, tyAnamizki, svaradaya, bihAyogaliyugada,
parAdhAtAdi cAraina bAraha prakRtiyoM ke na hone se 68 prakRtiyAM udayogya haiM
! cautha avirata guNasthAna meM anAdeya yugala, durbhaga, nae sakaveda, strIveda
inakA udaya nahIM hai, ina prakRtiyoM kI vyucchitti sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM hI
bAnanA sAhie  /  isake mithyAtva guNasthAna meM mithyAstha, sUkSmantraya ye pAra
prakRtiyA~ vyuchinna hotI haiM  /  sAsvAdana meM anantAnubandhI Adi 14, asaMyata
meM apratyAkhyAnAdi 44 tathA samogikevaralI meM 36 prakRtiyoM kA udaya viccheda
jAnanA devoSaM gudhdhe Na surANa paklivejja NirayAU ! nirayagadi usada duggadi
durubhagavao NIcaM  // 314 //

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 146 ## Sutiya Karmagrantha: Appendix  In the Vaikriya Kayayoga, out of the 77
Prakṛtis similar to Devagati, by reducing Devaspūrvi and adding four - Narakayu,
Narakagati, Huṇḍa Sansthāna, Napusakaved, Ashubha Vihayogati, Durbhaga, and ten
- Nīcha Gotr, there are 86 Prakṛtis that are Udayayogya.  ||315||  Vegubvam vā
misse | Misss paradhadasaravihayadurg | Sāṇe ṇ huḍasanha dubbhaganādejj
ajasanaym ||  ||316||  Piramadīākhanīca te khisaydevaṇijj thīved | Chaṭṭhaguṇam
vāhāreṇ thīṇatiyasabathīdam ||  ||317||  Duggadidussarasanhādi orāladdu
carimpañcasanhāṇam | Te tammisse sussar paradhadadusatthayādi honā ||  In the
Vaikriya Misna Kayayoga, out of the 86 Prakṛtis of Vaikriya, the pair of
Minamohaniya, Paradhata, and Svar-Vihayogati are not Ubayarūpa, meaning these
seven Prakṛtis are not Udayayogya, leaving 76 Prakṛtis that are Udayayogya. Even
in these, in the Sasvadana Gunasthāna, Huṇḍa Sansthāna, Napusakaved, Durbhaga,
Anadeya, Ayash-Kirti, Marakkamati, Parakayu, and Nīcha Gotr do not arise,
because the Sasvadana Gunasthāna does not lead to Naraka after death, but their
arising remains in the Aviрата Gunasthāna. In Sasvadana, there is Vyuchchitti of
five Prakṛtis - Strived and Anantānubandhī Chatuva. In Adhirati, there is
Vyuchchitti of thirteen Prakṛtis - Apratyākhyāna Kṣaya Chatuka, Kriyatika,
Devagati, Marakagati, Devayu, Naravayu, and Durbhagatrik.  In the Ahārak
Kayayoga, out of the 81 Prakṛtis of the sixth Gunasthāna, there is no Uday of
twenty Prakṛtis - Pratyākhyātrik, Masakaved, Strived, Aprashastha Vihayogati,
Duḥsarkar, six Sanhanana, Audārika Vik, and the last five Sansthāna.  In the
Ahārak Misna Kayayoga, out of these 61 Prakṛtis, by reducing two - Musvar,
Paradhata, and four - Prashastha Vihayogati, there are 57 Prakṛtis that are
Udayayogya.  ||318||  Ogh kamme saragadīpatta yāhāruāladduga misse |
Uvaghadapanaviguldhdudhīṇatisanṭhāṇasanhadee pāsthee ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 146 sUtIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa vaikriya kAyayoga meM devagati ke samAna 77
prakRtiyoM meM se devAsapUrvI ko kama karane aura narakAyu, narakagati, huMDa
saMsthAna, napusakaveda, azubha vihAyogati, durbhaga Adi cAra, nIca goya. ina
dasa prakRtiyoM ko milAne se 86 prakRtiyoM udayayogya haiN| vegubvaM vA misse |
missa paradhAdasaravihAyadurga  /  sANe Na huDasaMha dubbhagaNAdejja ajasayaM
// 315|| piramAdiAkhaNIca te khisayadevaNijja thIveda  /  chaTThaguNaM vAhAreNa
thINatiyasabathIdaM 1316|| duggadidussarasaMhadi orAladu carimapaMcasaMhANaM  /
te tammisse sussara paradhAdadusatthayAdi hoNA  // 31.7 /  /  vaikriyamizna
kAyayoga meM baiMkriya kI 86 prakRttiyoM meM se minamohanIya, parAdhAtasvara-
vihAyogati- ina tIna kA yugala ubayarUpa nahIM hai, arthAta ye sAta prakRtiyA~
udaya yogya na hone se 76 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya haiN| inameM bhI sAsvAdana
guNasthAna meM hu saMsthAna, napusakaveda, durbhaga, anAdeya, ayaza.kIrti
marakkamati, parakAyu, nIghagotra kA udaya nahIM hai, kyoMki sAsvAdana
guNasthAna bAlA marakara naraka ko nahIM AtA, kintu avirata guNasthAna meM inakA
udaya rahatA hai  /  sAsvAdana meM strIveda aura anantAnubandhIcatuvA ina pAMca
ekattiyoM kI vyucchitti hai  /  adhirati meM apratyAkhyAnakaSAyacatuka,
kriyatika, devagati, marakagati, devAyu, naravAyu aura durbhagatrika ina teraha
prakRtiyoM kI thyucchiti hotI hai  /  AhAraka kAyayoga meM chaThe guNasthAna kI
81 prakRtiyoM meM se pratyAddhitrika, masakaveda, strIveda, aprazastavihAyogati,
duHrakara, chaha saMhanana, audArikavika, aMta ke pAMca saMsthAna . na 20
prakRtiyoM kA ukSya nahIM hai  /  AhArakamizna kAyayoga meM ina 61 pratiyoM meM
se musvara, parAdhAtAdi do, prazastavihAyogati ina cAra ko kama karane se 57
prakRtiyA~ udayayogya haiN| ogha kamme saragadipatta yAhArurAladuga missa  /
uvaghAdapaNaviguldhadudhINatisaMThANasaMhadI pAsthi  // 31 //

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The meaning of the Gandhadhi Swamitva Vigambar literature   **Verse 316** If one
drinks the poison of the six substances (gil, styan, dvitrik), the six
institutions, and the six consolidations, then one will be born in hell.
**Verse 320** In the Purusha Veda, out of the 122 principles, 15 principles are
not present:  the stationary, the hell-bound, the two-fold hell-bound, the
Tirthankara, the one-sensed, the three-fold विकल, the female, the neuter, the
sun, and the hell-bound. Therefore, 107 principles are capable of arising.
**Verse 321** In the female Veda, out of the 107 principles, the three
principles of the food-body, the gum, and the male are reduced, and the female
is added, making 105 principles capable of arising. In the neuter Veda, out of
the 122 principles, eight principles are reduced: the two-fold heavenly, the
food-body, the female, the male, the heavenly, and the Tirthankara. Therefore,
114 principles are capable of arising.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gandhAdi svAmitva vigambara sAhitya kA mantavya sANe pIyedachidI
NirayaduNirayAu Na tiyadasamaM  /  afrati arati fmacchAdisu casu vocchedo  //
316 TWRAA kArmaNa kAyayoga meM 122 prakRtiyoM meM se svara - vihAyogati pratyeka
AhArakazarIra - bhaudArikazarIra ina sabakA yugana, mizramohanItha, upadhAta Adi
pA~ca, gila, styAnadvitrika, chaha saMsthAna, chaha saMhanana, ina prakRtiyoM ke
na hone se yaha prakRtiyA~ udayayogya haiN| usameM bhI sAsvAdana guNasthAna meM
strIveda kI vyucchita hotI hai aura narakagatiDika, narakAyu- ina tIna kA udaya
nahIM hotA hai tathA midhyAtvAdi (mithyAtva sAsvAdana, avirata, sayogikevalI)
cAra guNasthAnoM meM krama se 3, 10, 51.25 prakRtiyoM ko upasthiti hotI hai| ce
r 147 AAJLA mUloSaM puMvede thAvaracauNirayajugalatitthayaraM  //  igivigalaM
thoDaM tAvaM NirayAugaM gatthi  //  320  //  itthovedevi tahA hAradupuripUNa
misthisaMttaM  /  o saM Na hi surahArathIpuMsurA utityayaraM  /  /  321 //
puruSaveda meM mUlavat 122 prakRtiyoM meM se sthAvara Adi bAra, narakagati
dvika, tIrthaGkara ekendriya, vikalatrika, strIveda, napuMsakaveda, Atapa,
narakAdhuna 15 prakRtiyoM ke na hone se 107 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya haiN| puru,
zAma, saMyama va darzana mAgA strIveda meM ukta 107 prakRtiyoM meM se
AhArakazarIra gumaya, puruSaveda ina tIna prakRtiyoM ko kama karake aura
strIveda ko milAne se 105 prakRtiyAM udayayogya haiN| napuMsakaveda meM 122
prakRtiyoM se se devagatiyugala, AhArakaDika, strIveda, puruSaveda, devAyu,
tIrthadUra ina ATha prakRtiyoM ke kama hone se 114 prakRtiyA~ ukyayogya haiM  /
tizvacaramANamAyAlohacaukkUNa moghamiha kohe  /  aNarahide NivivigalaM
tAvaNakohANathAvaracaunaka ||22||

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Third Firmagram: Appendix and Manaditi Madisuda Annange Du Sagunopa. Vebhagevi
Na Tadigividalindi Thavaranuchaka.  Sannanapamdhayaddi Sanamarganapadotti
Sagunodha. Manapajjava Parihare Navari Na Samdisthi Haradurga.  Chakkhumi Na
Saharanatavigibitijati Thavara Suhama. Krodha Kasaya Maganna Me Samanya 122
Prakritiyon Me Se Tirthamkara Tatha Mana, Maya, Lobhaschatushka Sambandhi 12
Kashayon - In 13 Prakritiyon Ko Kama Karne Se 106 Prakritiyan Udayayogya Hai
Tatha Anantanubandhi Rahita Bodha Me Ekendriya, Vikalaniika, Atapa,
Anantanubandhi Krodha, Chara Anupurvi, Sthavara Adi Chara, Is Prakar 106 Me Se
14 Prakritiyan Tatha Anantanubandhi Mana Adi Tina Va Mithyatva Ye Kara Kula 18
Prakritiyon Ko Chhodakar Udayayogya 61 Prakritiyan Hain.  Isi Prakar Mana Adi
Tina Kashayon Me Bhi Apane Se Anya 12 Kasaya Tatha Tirtha Ra Prakruti Chha 13
Prakritiyon Ke Na Hone Se 106 Prakritiyan Udayayogya Samana. Jnana Margana Me
Kumati Aur Kuvata Jnana Me Samanya Gunasthanatvat 122 Me Se Paharak Adi 5 Ke
Sivaya 117 Prakritiyan Udayayogya Hain. Vibhanga (Kuavadhi) Jnana Me Bhi Ukt 117
Prakritiyon Me Se Asapa, Ekendriya, Vikalendriya Traya, Sthavara Adi Chara,
Anupurvi Bhara, Kula Milaakar 13 Prakritiyan Udaya Na Hone Ke Karana 104
Prakritiyan Udayayogya Hain.  Pancha Samyagjna Se Lekar Darsana Marganasthana
Paryanta Apane-Apane Gunasthana Sarikhi Udayayogya Prakritiyan Hain, Lekin Manah
Paryavashana Ke Vishaya Me Yah Vishesh Janne Yogya Hai Ki Napumsakveda,
Striveda, Aharaka Yugala Me Chara Prakritiyan Udayayogya Nahi Hain.  Darsana
Margana Ke Chakshudarsana Me 122 Me Se Sadharan, Atipa, Ekendriya, Viendriya,
Shrendriya Jati, Sthavara, Sukshma, Tirthamkara...In Ashta Prakritiyon Ka Udaya
Na Hone Ke Karana 114 Prakritiyan Udayayogya Hain.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya pharmagrantha : pariziSTa evaM mANAditie madisuda aNNANage du saguNopaM
/  vebhagevi Na tAdigivigaliMdI thAvarANucaka  /  / 323 /  /  saNNANapaMdhayAdI
saNamaggANapadotti saguNodha  /  maNapajjava parihAre Navari Na saMdisthi
hAradurga  /  / 3243 cakkhummi Na sAhAraNatAvigibitijAi thAvara suhama  /
krodha kaSAya mAgaMNA meM sAmAnya 122 prakRtiyoM meM se tArthaGkara tathA mAna,
mAyA, lobhazcatuSka sambandhI 12 kaSAmoM - ina 13 prakRsiyoM ko kama karane se
106 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya hai tathA anantAnubandhIrahita bhodha meM ekendriya,
vikalanika, Atapa, anantAnubandhI krodha, cAra AnupUrvI, sthAvara Adi cAra, isa
prakAra 106 meM se 14 prakRtiyAM tathA anantAnubandhI mAna Adi tIna va
mithyAstra ye kAra kula 18 prakRttiyoM ko chor3akara udayayogya 61 prakRtiyA~
haiM  /  isI prakAra mAna Adi sIna kaSAyoM meM bhI apane se anya 12 kaSAya tathA
tIrtha ra prakRti chana 13 pratiyoM ke na hone se 106 prakutiyAM utyayogya
smaanaa| _ jJAna mAgaMNA meM kumati aura kuvata jJAna meM sAmAnya guNasthAnabat
122 meM se pAhAraka Adi 5 ke sivAya 117 prakRtiyA~ udayogya haiN| vibhaMga
(kuavadhi) zAna meM bhI ukta 117 prakRtiyo meM se Asapa, ekendriya, vikAlendriya
traya, sthAvara Adi cAra, AnupUrthI bhAra, kula milAkara 13 pratiyAM udaya na
hone ke kAraNa 104 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya haiN| pAMca samyagjJAna se lekara
darzana mArgaNAsthAna paryanta apane-apane guNasthAna sarIkhI udayayogya
prakRtiyA~ haiM, lekina manaHpAvasAna ke viSaya meM yaha vizeSa jAnane momma hai
ki napusakaveda, strIveda, AhAraka yugala meM cAra prakRtiyA~ udayayogya nahIM
haiN| darzana mArgaNA ke cakSudarzana meM 122 meM se sAdhAraNa, atipa,
ekendriya, vIndriya, zrIndriya jAti, sthAvara, sUkSma, tIrthakara ...ina ATha
prakRtiyoM kA udaya na hone ke kAraNa 114 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya haiM  /

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mineers **Sandhadi Swamitva: Digambar Karmasahitya ka Mantvya** **14**
**Shyamargam** Kinhadhuge Sagunogham Minche Girayanu Vocchedo 35325. Saane
Suraausuragadidevathirikhayudochhiddi Evam. Kaode Ayadgune
Pirayatirikvaanuyochhedo ||326|| Tetiye Sagunogham Shadavigivimalayavarach Ukke.
Girayadutaatiriyanu Parana Pad Micchhadhuge ||325||  In the Leshya Marg, in the
Krishna and Neel Leshyas, there are 116 Prakruti's useful for Siddha, according
to their respective Munasthan. But in the Mithyaishti Gunasthan, one should
understand that even before Naskaana, there is Chhin. In the Saasadan Gunasthan,
there is Vyuchhitti of Devathu, Devagati, Devanupurvi, and Liyantraanupuchi.
Similarly, in Kapareta Leylya, there is Vyuchhitti of Naramanapurvi and
Tiryanchanupurvi in the Kinna Abhirata Munasthan.  In the Tejo Leshya and other
three Shubh Leyyas, there is no Uday of 13 Prakruti's, namely Aattap, Ekendriya,
Vikalendriyanik, Sthavar Badi Par, Parakgasiddhik, Narakayu, and Tiryancha
Nupurvi, out of 122, according to their respective Sthan. Therefore, there is
Uday of 109 Prakruti's. Even in that, there is no Uday of Manusyanupurvi in the
Mithyaishti and other two Gunasthan.  Bhavya, Samdhava, and Sanjni Pranas Vasyam
Mammo Veso Par Ek Jado Tahi Na Tiriyaau. Ujjavam Tiriyamdi Lesi Ayamhi Vocchedo
||32||  In the Bhavya, Abhaya, Upshamsamyaktva, Vedak (Kshayopshamic) Samyaktva,
and Nayikamadhyam Margamanas, one should know, according to their respective
Gunavan, that in Upshamsamyavasn and Sadhiksamyaktva, Samyaktvamohaniya is not
Udayyogya. And in Upanamsamyavasn, Narakayanupurvi and other three Anupurvi and
Aharakdrik Prakruti's are not Udayyogya.  Bhavidaruv Samavedagkhayiye
Sagunodhabhuvasame Khayiye. Na Hi Sammamvuvasame Puna Madityaanu Ya Haradurg
15326.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mineers sandhAdi svAmitva : digambara karmasAhitya kA mantavya 14 zyA mArgamA
kiNhaduge saguNoghaM minche girayANu vocchedo 35325 /  /  sANe
surAusuragadidevatirikkhAyu dochidI evaM  /  kAode ayadaguNe
pirayatirikvANuyochedo  // 326 //  tetiye saguNoghaM zAdAvigivimalayAvaraca ukke
/  girayadutadAtiriyANu parANa par3a micchaduge  // 325 //  lezyA mArgaNA meM
kRSNa, nIlaina do lezyAmoM meM apane-apane muNasthAnavat tIrtharAdi tIna
prakRtiyoM ke sidhAya 116 prakRtiyAM upayogya hai  /  lekina mithyAiSTi
guNasthAna meM nazkAnapUrvI bhI china samajhanA  /  sAsAdana guNasthAna meM
devAthu. devagati. devAnupUrvI, liyaMtrAnupucI... ina cAra kI vyuchitti hotI hai
/  isI prakAra kApareta lelyA meM bhI, kinna abhirata maNasthAna meM
naramAnapUrvI va tiryaMcAnupUrvI ina do prakRtiyoM kI vyuchitti hai  /  /
tejolezyA Adi tIna zubha leNyAoM meM apane-apane sthAnavat 122 meM se Attapa,
ekandriya, vikalendriyanika, sthAvara bAdi pAra, parakagasiddhika, narakAyu,
tiryaMcA nupUrvIena 13 prakRtiyoM kA udaya na hone se 1.6 prakRtimA
udathayorakha hai  /  usameM bhI mighyATTaSTi Adi do guNasthAnoM meM
manuSyAnupUrvI kA bhI udaya nahIM hai| bhavya, samdhava va saMjJI prANA
vAzyamammo veso para eka jado tahi Na tiriyAU  /  ujjovaM tiriyamadI lesi ayAmhi
vocchedo  // 32 //  bhavya, abhaya, upazamasamyaktva, vedaka (kSAyopazamika)
samyamatva aura nAyikamadhyama mArgamAnoM meM apane apane guNavAna ke kathana kI
taraha jAnanA kinna vizeSa yaha jAnanA ki upazamasamyavasna tathA
sAdhikasamyaktva meM samyaktvamohanIya udayayogya nahIM hai tathA
upaNamasamyavasva meM Adi kI narakAnupUrvI Adi tIna AnupUrvI aura AhArakadrika
ye prakRtiyA~ utyayogya nahIM hai| bhavidaruvasamavedagakhAiye
saguNodhabhUvasame khayiye  /  Na hi sammamuvasame puNA mAditiyANU ya hAradurga
15326 /  /

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third Karma Granth, the appendix called "Desha Samyata", states that a
person with perfect vision (Samyagdrishti) is in the state of "Gunasthan".
Therefore, the three natures of Liyankayu, Udyot, and Tiryaagati do not arise.
Hence, the arising and ceasing of these three occur in the continuous Gunasthan.
"Meshanam sagunoss sanissavi tyi tavasharanam. Thavarasuhami givigalam asaninodi
ya ga manuducc." (330)  The three natures of Mithyaastra, Saasadan, and Misra
Samyaktva, have their own Gunasthan, which should be understood. For example, in
Mithyaatva, 117 Pramatis are capable of arising.  In the Sankhi Margana, six
Prakalis are not capable of arising: Atap, Sadharan, Sthanar, Sukshma, Ekendir,
Vikalendriyadik, and the previously mentioned Tirthankar Prakupti. These are
excluded from the general 122 Prakalis.  In the Amaanji, the following 26
Prakritis are not capable of arising: Manushya Galivika, Gotra, Vakriya Sharira,
Shatka, Panch Sanhanan, Panch Sansthan, Prashast Vihar Yogakti, Subhag Adi Teen,
Marma Adi Seen Aayu.  Therefore, subtracting these 26 Prakritis from the 117 of
Misthaashti, we are left with 61 Prakritis that are capable of arising.  "Ahaar
Maya Ahare Saguno Navarin Mantranupubbi Ko." (331)  "Kamme Va Anahare, Payadin
Udayamevamadese." (332)  The four Anushi Prakritis do not arise. Therefore,
there are 118 Prakritis capable of arising.  In the Anadarak state, 66 Prakritis
are capable of arising, similar to the Kama Kayayog.  In the states of Satta,
Swaamitva, Pati, and other Marganas, the four Prakritis of Prakriti, Sthiti,
Anubhag, and Pradesh are...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwMilliAIMIM5Malay tRtIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa
dezasaMyata nAmaka yAMcavaM guNasthAna meM zAyika samyagdRSTi manuSya hI hotA
hai, isalie liyaMkAyu, udyota, tiryagati ina tIna prakRtiyoM kA udaya nahIM hai,
ata: ina tIna kI udayavyuchitti avirala guNasthAna meM ho AtI hai  /  mesANaM
saguNoSa saNissavi tyi tAvasAharaNa  /  thAvarasuhamigivigalaM asaNiNodi ya ga
maNuducca  /  / 330 /  /  vegubbacha paNasaMhadisaMThANa sugamaNa subhagAutirtha
/  zeSa mithyAstra , sAsAdana, mizra samyaktva, ina tInoM meM apane-apane
guNasthAna kI taraha utyAdi jAnanA  /  arthAta misyAtva meM 117 pramAtiyA~
udayayogya hai ityAdi  /  saMkI mArgaNA meM saMzI ke bhI sAmAnya 122 meM se
Atapa, sAdhAraNa, sthAnara, sUkSma, ekendira, vikalendriyadhika aura pUrvokta
tIrthaGkara prakupti kula 6 prakaliyA~ udayayogya nahIM haiM  /  amAMjI ke
manuSyagalivikA, una gotra, vakriya zarIra Adi SaTka, Adi ke pAMca saMhanana,
Adi ke pAMca saMsthAna, prazasta viharayogakti, subhagAdi tIna, maramAdi sIna
Ayu..ye 26 prakRtiyA~ udayayogya nahIM haiN| asaH mizthASTi kI 117 meM se 26
prakRtiyA~ ghaTAne para 61 pratiyA jadayayogya haiN| AhAramAyA AhAre saguNo
NavariNa mantrANupubbIko  // 33 //  kamme va aNAhAre, payaDINa udayamevamAdese
// 332 //  saallaamaa saaki sbkthaa # maadaakh mukhaasn subi samajhAnA, paramna
cAroM AnuSI prakRtiyoM kA upaya nahIM hotA hai  /  ata: jadayayogya 118
prakRtiyAM hai| anADAraka avasthA meM kAma kAyayoga kI taraha 66 prakRtimA
udayayogya haiN| sattAsvAmitva pati Adi mArgaNAoM meM prakRti, sthiti, anubhAga
aura pradeza ina cAra

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aarfe Office: Commentary on Digambar Karma-Sahitya 15.1  **The truth of the
natures, taking into account the differences, is being stated in the proper
order. To explain the essence, the definition sutra is stated first:**
**"Tiththahāra jugayam savvam tityam ṇa micchhgaadittie. Tastammiyāṇam
vagguṇṭhāṇam ṇa sambhavadi |||333|||**  In the three guṇasthānas, Mithyādr̥ṣṭi,
Sāsādana, and Miśra, the Tīrthankara and Āhāraka are not present in the same
time in the first, all three are not present in the same time in the second, and
in the Miśra, the Tīrthankara nature is not present. That is, in Mithyātvam,
there are 148 natures in relation to the various beings, in Sāsādana, there are
145 natures because all three are not present in the same time, and in the Miśra
guṇasthāna, there are 140 natures because the Tīrthankara nature is not present.
Because these guṇasthānas of Mithyātvam etc. are not possible for beings with
these inherent natures.  **"Cattārivi khettai āugabandheṇa hoi sammatam. Aṇuvad
mahadāi ga lahai devāugaṁ motu |||334|||**  In all four fields, samyag-sthāna is
attained by the auga-bandha, but except for the blind of the devāyu, the other
three cannot hold the aṇuvrata and mahāvratas with the bandha of the māsu,
because there are no pure results due to the cause.  **"Girayatirikta surāun
satte na hi desasayalachadakhavaga. Ayadacchakkam tu aṇa aṇiyatṭīkaraṇa śrarimmi
|||335||| Jugavam saṁjogiyā puṇo tri aṇiyatṭīkaraṇa bahubhāga. Atra seat fee
misse samm khavedikame |||336|||**  When there are beings in hell, the animal
realm, and the human realm, there are no devavrata, sat (mahāvrat), and kṣak
categories. And the seven natures, starting with the bandhi, who have the four
guṇasthānas of asan̄yatā etc., become kṣayika samyagdṛṣṭi in order by removing
the aṇiyatṭīkaraṇa. Of those seven, the first, the anantānubandhītuka, has the
aṇivṛttikaraṇa form of the results, which is the end of the time of the end of
the results, and is disintegrated only once at the end of the time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aarfe office : digambara karmasAhitya kA mantabya 15.1 bhedoM ko liye hue
prakRtiyoM ke saca kA yathAyogya krama se kathana kiyA jA rahA hai| satva ko
batalAne ke lie sarvaprathama paribhASA sUtra kahate haiM titthAhArA jugayaM
savvaM tityaM Na micchgAditie  /  tastammiyANaM vagguNaThANaM Na saMbhavadi
|||333  //  mithyAdRSTi sAsAdana, mizra ina tInoM guNasthAnoM meM krama se
pahale meM tIrthaMkara aura AhArakadvika eka kAla meM nahIM hote, tathA dUsare
meM tInoM hI kisI kAla meM nahIM hote aura mizra meM tokara prakRti nahIM hotI
/  arthAt mithyAtva meM nAnA jIvoM kI apekSA 148 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hai,
sAsAdana meM tInoM hI ke kisI kAla meM na hone se 145 kI sasA hai aura mizra
guNasthAna meM tIrthaMkara prakRti ke na hone se 140 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hai|
kyoMki ina sva prakRtiyoM vAle jIvoM ke ye midhyAtvAdi guNasthAna ho saMbhava
nahIM haiN| cattArivi khettAi AugabandheNa hoi sammataM  /  aNuvada mahadAI ga
lahai devAugaM motu  //  334  //  nAroM hI gatiyoM meM kisI bhI kAma hone para
samyagastha hotA hai, parantu devAyu ke andha ke sivAya anya tIna mAsu ke bandha
vAlA aNuvrata tathA mahAvrata dhAraNa nahIM kara sakatA, kyoMki vahA~ ta ke
kAraNabhUta vizuddha pariNAma nahIM haiN| girayatirikta surAuna satte na hi
desasayalacadakhavagA  /  ayadacakkaM tu aNa aNiyaTTIkaraNa zrarimamhi  //  335
//  jugavaM saMjogiyA puNotri aNiyaTTikaraNa bahubhAga  /  atra seat fee misse
samma khavedikame ||336|| naraka, tiryaca tathA deza ke satva hone para kama se
devavrata, sata ( mahAtrata) aura kSaka zreNI nahIM hotI aura asaMyatAdi cAra
guNasthAna vAle bandhI Adi sAta prakRtiyoM kA krama se ya karake kSAyika
samyagdRSTi hote haiM  /  una sAtoM meM se pahale anantAnubandhItuka kA
anivRtikaraNa rUpa pariNAmoM ke aMta kAla ke anta samaya meM eka hI bAra
disaMyojana arthAt

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **Third Karma Granth: Parist**  The twelve *Kavaay* forms of
*Anantaanubandhi Chatuk*, such as *Apratyaakhyana*, etc., undergo
transformation, leaving behind only one part of the *Anivrittikaran* time, while
the remaining parts are filled with the nature of *Mithyatva*, *Mishch*, and
*Samyaktya* in succession, starting from the first time. Thus, there is a
decrease in the decay of the seven natures. Here, in the three *Gunasthanas*,
the nature of *Gaya* and *Asan* is present, and from the seventh *Gunasthan*
onwards, the *Upshama Samyak Hari* and *Kshayopahsama Sampadristi* both have the
presence of *Anantaanubandhi*, etc., in the fourth *Gunasthan*, resulting in the
presence of 148 natures. In the fifth *Gunasthan*, due to the absence of
*Narakaaya*, there are 141 natures. In the *Pramat Gunasthan*, due to the
absence of both *Naraka* and *Tiyavaayu*, there are 146 natures. In the
*Aparamat* *Gunasthan*, there are also 146 natures. Due to the decay of the
seven natures, namely *Anantaanubandhi Chatuk* and *Darshanmohavik*, in the
*Kshayik Samyakdristi*, there is a decrease of seven each. In the
*Apoovarnakaran Gunasthan*, there are two categories. In the *Apak* category,
there are 13 natures, as the decay of the seven natures of *Anantaanubandhi
Chatuk* had already occurred, and the presence of *Marak*, *Liyanch*, and *Vayu*
is absent.  **Solkkimikarak Chadd Sekk Badare Ado Ekkam. Khine Solamajoge
Bayattari Teruvartete ||337||**  In the *Aniyattikaran*, there is a decrease in
the presence of *Prakashiya* from 16, 8, 1, 1, and 6 in succession, and in the
final part, there is only one *Sanavyujichchhanna*. In the tenth *Gunasthan*,
there is only one *Nyuchit*. In the eleventh, there is no *Yogyatha*. In the
twelfth, in the *Antsamar*, there are 16 natures present. In the *Sayogik
Kevali*, there is no decrease in any nature. In the two times at the end of the
*Ayogik Gunasthan*, there are 72 natures in the first time and 13 natures in the
second time.  **Gunasthanon mein Saty aur Asaty Prakritiyon ki Sankhya ka Kram
is Prakar**  **Namatiginabhaiigi Dodo Das Das Solagadidiine Su... Sattah Havanti
Evam Asahaay Parakkamuddivene ||342||**  m-am-m

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 w -gA Marrywwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwinnewwwwwwwwwwwwwwww 152 tRtIya karma
granya : pariSTa anantAnubandhIcatuka ko apratyAkhyAnAdi bAraha kavAya rUpa
pariNamana karA detA hai tathA anivRtikaraNa kAla ke bahabhAga ko chor3akara
zeSa saMpAtaveM eka bhAga meM pahale samaya se lekara krama se mithyAtva, mizca
aura samyaktya prakRti kA bhaya karate haiN| isa prakAra sAta prakRtiyoM ke
kSaya kA kama hai| yahA~ para tIna guNasthAnoM kA prakRtisapara ho: hI gAya
tathA asaM isa se lekara sAtaveM gUNasthAna taka upazamasamyaharida tathA
kSayopazamasampAdRSTi ina donoM ke cauthe guNasthAna meM anantAnubandhI Adi kI
upazamA sattA hone se 148 prakRtiyoM kA satva hai| pAMcaveM guNasthAna meM
narakAya na hone se 141 kA, pramata gaNasthAna meM naraka tathA tiyavAyu ina
donoM kA sascha na hone se 146 sazvA apramatta meM bhI 146 kA samaya hai aura
kSAyika samyagdRSTi ke anantAnubandhIyatuSka aura darzanamohavika ina sAta
prakRtiyoM ke kSaya hone se sAta-sAta kama samajhanA  /  apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna
meM do zreNI haiM, unameM se apaka zreNI meM to 13. prakRtiyoM kA sattva hai
kyoMki anantAnubandhI 'di 7 prakRttiyoM kA to pahale hI kSaya kiyA thA aura
maraka, liyaMca tathA vAyu ina tInoM kI sattA hI nahIM hai| solakkimikaraka cad
sekka bAdare ado ekkaM  /  khINe solamajoge bAyattari teruvartate  // 337 /  /
aniyattikaraNa meM Rma se 16, 8, 1, 1, 6 prakAsiya sattA se byUmichama hotI haiM
tathA aMtima bhAga meM eka kI hI sanAvyujichanna hotI hai  /  dasaveM guNaspAna
meM eka kI hI nyucita hai  /  gyArahaveM meM yogyatA hI nahIM hai| bArahane ke
antasamara meM 16 prakRttiyoM kI sasyacchiti hotI hai  /  sayogikevalI meM kisI
bhI prakRti kI byuchitti nahIM hai  /  ayogi guNasthAna ke aMta ke do samayoM
meM se pahale samaya meM 72 ko tathA dUsare samaya meM 13 prakRtiyA~ thumminna
hotI haiN| guNasthAnoM meM satya aura asatya prakRtiyoM kI saMkhyA kA krama isa
prakAra NamatigiNabhaigi dodo dasa dasa solagAdihINesu  /  .. sattA havaMti evaM
asahAya parakkamuddiveM  // 342 /  /  m-am-m

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bombari Ownership: The Depth of Digambar Karma Literature  **Mithyadristi**
(false view) and other **Apuurvakaran** (primordial) **Gunasthanas** (stages of
spiritual progress) are devoid of **Aam** (matter) from **0** to **31**, **0**
to **1**, **22**, and **10** respectively. This means these **Prakritis**
(principles) do not exist. In the first part of **Ativritikaran**
(transgression), there are **10** **Prakritis**, in the second part **16**, and
in the third part and onwards, there are **Jaad** (material) **Prakritis**.
Recognizing these **Prakritis** as **Asatya** (false) and subtracting them from
all **Satya** (true) **Prakritis**, the remaining **Prakritis** are **Satya**
(true) **Prakritis** in their respective **Gunasthanas**. (This is what the
valiant **Shree Mahavira Swami**, who is devoid of any support, has said.)
**153**  In **Aavaran** (covering) also, one should understand the order of
**Kshapana** (destruction) like **Kshapana** in **Kshapana** (destruction)
itself. However, it is special that between **Sanjwalana Kshaya** (burning
passion) and **Purushaved** (knowledge of the soul), there are two **Aavaran**
(covering) and **Pratyaatma Aavaran** (covering of the soul) **Kshayas**
(passions) related to **Krodha** (anger) etc. So, first, one should reduce them
to **Upaaner** (subdued), and then reduce **Sanjwalana Kshaya** (burning
passion) etc. This means that in the **Upshama** (subduing) category, like the
**Apak** (lower) category, the **Upshama** (subduing) of the eight **Kshayas**
(passions) in the second part of the ninth **Gunasthan** (stage of spiritual
progress) does not happen, but it happens before **Purushaved** (knowledge of
the soul) and **Sanjwalana** (burning). And its order is such that after
**Purushaved** (knowledge of the soul), the **Upshama** (subduing) of both
**Rveersire** (pride) and **Pratyakhyan** (rejection) happens, and then the
**Upshama** (subduing) of **Sankhyam** (attachment) etc. One should understand
the same order in **Maan** (ego) etc.  **Tiryagati** (animal realm) has no
**Tiryak** (animal) **Prakriti** (principle). In **Tarak** (heavenly),
**Tiryantra** (animal realm), **Manushya** (human), and **Devagati** (divine
realm), there are **Bhujyaman Narak** (suffering hell) and **Badyaman** (bound)
**Manushyaayu** (human lifespan) in order. These three **Aayu** (lifespans) are
**Bhujyaman** (suffering) **Tiryavaayu** (animal lifespan) and **Badyaman**
(bound) **Narak** (hell), **Tiryach** (animal), **Manushya** (human), and
**Devaayu** (divine lifespan). These four are **Bhujyaman** (suffering)
**Manushyaayu** (human lifespan) and **Badyaman** (bound) **Narak** (hell),
**Tiryach** (animal), **Manushya** (human), and **Devaayu** (divine lifespan).
These four are **Bhujyaman** (suffering) **Devaayu** (divine lifespan) and
**Badyaman** (bound) **Tiryantra** (animal realm) and **Manushyaayu** (human
lifespan). These three **Aayu** (lifespans) are **Karm** (karmic) **Prakritis**
(principles) that are capable of existing. The existence of the remaining
**Prakritis** (principles) should be understood like the **Gunasthanas** (stages
of spiritual progress).  **Parimana** (quantity)  **Ogh** (flow) or **Rahiye**
(remaining) **Na Suraau** (do not say) **Tityamatti** (there is) **Tadio**
(that) **Tti** (is). **Chhatthiti** (sixth) **Magussaau** (say) **Tiryie**
(animal) **Bodh** (knowledge) **Na Tityapar** (not beyond). **346**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bambAri svAmitva : digambara karmasAhitya kA bhatathya midhyAdRSTi Adi
apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna taka ama se zUnya (0), 31, zunya (0) 1, 22. 10 itanI
prakRtiyoM kA aere areat arthAt ye prakRtiyA~ nahIM rahatI haiM aura
ativRtikaraNa ke pahale bhAga meM 10, dUsare meM 16, tIsare Adi bhAga meM jAdi
prakRtiyoM asatya jAnanA aura ina asattva prakRtiyoM ko saba sastra prakRtiyoM
meM ghaTAne se avazeSa prakRtiyA~ apane-apane guNasthAnoM meM sattva prakRtiyA~
haiM  /  ( aisA sahAyatA rahita parAkrama ke dhAraka zrI mahAvIra svAmI ne kahA
hai  / ) 153 are furt meM bhI kSapaNA ke vidhAna kI taraha krama jAnanA cAhie,
kintu yaha vizeSa hai ki saMjvalanakaSAya aura puruSaveda ke madhya meM
apanAvaraNa aura pratyAtmAnAvaraNa kaSAya sambandhI do-do krodhAdi hai, so
pahale unako kama se upaaner karatA hai, pIche saMjvalana koSAdi kA upazama
karatA hai| arthAt apaka zreNI kI taraha upazama zreNI meM nauveM guNasthAna ke
dUsare bhAga meM madhyama ATha kaSAyoM kA upazama nahIM hotA hai kintu
puruSaveda ke aura paMjvalana ke pahale hotA hai aura usakA krama aisA hai ki
puruSadeva ke bAda rveersire aura pratyAkhyAna donoM ke kona kA upazama
tatpazcAt saMkhyama ko kA upazama ityAdi  /  mAna Adi meM bhI aisA hI kama
jAnanA cAhie  /  tirie Na tityasattaM NirayAdisu tiya cakka ca tiSNa  /  AUNi
hoti sattA me oghAdu jAjjo  //  344 //  || tiryagati meM tIra prakRti kI sattA
nahIM hai tathA taraka, tiyaMtra, manuSya tathA devagati meM krama se bhujyamAna
narakAyeM aura badhyamAna vi manuSyAyu-ina tIna AyuoM kI bhujyamAna tiryavAyu
aura badhyamAna-naraka, tiryaca manuSya, devAvu ina cAra ko bhujyamAna manuSyAyu
aura vadhyamAna naraka, tica manuSya va devAyu ina cAra kI bhujyamAna devAyu
aura vadhyamAna niyaMtra va manuSyAyu ina tIna Ayu karmoM kI sattA rahane yogya
hai tathA zeSa prakRtiyoM kI sattA guNasthAna kI saraha samajhanA cAhie  /
parimANA ogha vA raiye Na surAU tityamatthi tadiyo tti  /  chaTThitti magussAU
tirie bodha Na tityaparaM  // 346||

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix to the Karma Granth:  **Hell:** In the hell realm, all 63 qualities
are present, making 157 natures eligible. The Tīrthankara nature is present
until the third hell, while the human nature is present until the sixth hell.
**Animal Realm:** In the animal realm, the qualities are present as in the human
realm, but the Tīrthankara nature is absent, making 147 natures eligible.  **The
Five-Senses:** In the five-sense animals, the qualities are present as usual,
but the animal realm does not have the hell or god nature.  **Humans:** In the
three types of humans, the qualities are present as usual, but in the "Lampa-
paryāpta" humans, the hell, god, and Tīrthankara natures are absent, making 145
natures eligible.  **Gods:** In the god realm, the qualities are present as
usual, but the hell nature is absent, making 147 natures eligible. The animal
nature is present until the "Sāhābara" heaven. The "Bhavana-nik" gods and
"Kalpa-vāsinī" women do not have the Tīrthankara nature.  **Five-Sense and One-
Sense:** In the five-sense and one-sense beings, the qualities are present as
usual. In the remaining beings, from the one-sense to the "Aturi-indra" beings,
and in the "sthāvara-kāya" (stationary beings) like earth, etc., the qualities
are present as in the "Lampa-paryāpta" humans, making 145 natures eligible.
**Tejas-kāya and Vāyu-kāya:** In the "Tejas-kāya" (fire beings) and "Vāyu-kāya"
(air beings), the human nature is absent, making 144 natures eligible.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRsIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa narakagati meM guNasthAnaSat sasA jAnanA,
phinsu devAyu kI sattA meM hone se 157 prakRtiyA~ savayogya haiN| tIsare maraka
taka tIrthaGkara prakRti kI sattA hai tathA manuSyAyu kI sattA cha, naraka taka
hai  /  tirmaTha gati meM bhI sasA guNasthAnavat samajhanA lekina tIrthaGkara
prakRti kA sattva nahIM hai, isalie khasSayogya' 147 prakRtiyAM haiN| evaM
paMcatirivakhe puNNidare Nasthi pirydevaas| o masatiye su vi lAge paNa apuNNeca
// 347 /  /  isI prakAra pA~dha jAti ke siyaMcoM meM bhI sAmAnya rIti se satva
jAnanA, lekina vizeSa yaha hai ki madhyaparyAptaka tiryaMca meM narakAyu,
devAyuina do ko sattA nahIM hai  /  manuSya ke tIna bhedoM meM bhI guNasthAnavat
satya samajhamA, parantu lamparyAptaka manuSya meM lavyApsaka tithaMca kI saraha
narakAyu, devAyu aura tIrthakara ina tIna prakRtiyoM ke vimA 145 prakRtiyA~
sasAyogya haiN| oSa deve hi girayAU sArotti hodi tiriyAU  /
bhavaNatiyakappayAsiyaitthIsu Na titthayarasattaM  // 3481 devagati meM
sAmAnyavat jAnanA, kintu narakAyu na hone se 147 prakRtiyoM kI sattA hai  /
sAhabAra svarga taka tiryaMcAyu kI sasA hai| bhavananika devoM va kalpavAsinI
striyoM meM tIrthakara prakRti kI sasA nahIM hai| iyikAyamANA oghaM
paMcakkhatase seMsidiyakAyage apugNaM vaa| tekhaduge Na parAka savatyuvelaNAvi
have  // 346 /  . paMcendriya va sakAya meM sAmAnya guNasthAna kI taraha
prakRtiyoM kI sattA hai| zeSa ekendriya Adi aturindriya taka tathA pRthvI Adi
sthAvarakAma meM lakhyaparyAptaka kI saraha 145 prakRtiyoM ko sattA jAnanA  /
para tejaskAya aura vAyukApa meM manuSyAya kA satva na hone se ina donoM meM 144
kI sattA

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation with Jain terms preserved:  Sandhāri Svāmiṣ: Perspective on
Digambara Karmasāhitya 155 Understand. There is also an 'uddesa' (purpose) of
the prakṛtis (karmic matter) in the indriya (sense organs) and kāya mārganā
(bodily activities). In the yogamārga (path of spiritual practice),
Puṇṇekārasajoge sāhārayamissakevi saguṇoghaṃ | Vaiguḍḍhiyamisse vi ya bhāvari ṇa
māṇusatirikkāū 535|| The sattva (pure) prakṛtis should be known in the 11 pūrṇa
yogas (complete spiritual practices) and āhārakamiśra yoga (mixed spiritual
practice) according to their respective guṇasthānas (stages of spiritual
development). In the vaikriyika yoga (transformation of body), the sattva
prakṛtis should be known as in the śuddhasthāna (pure stage), but the specialty
here is that the manuṣyāyu (human lifespan) and tiryañcāyu (animal lifespan)
prakṛtis are not present, so there are 146 saptāyogya (seven-fold) prakṛtis.
Orālamissa joge ogha suṇiraya-āuṇa patya | Tamssivamagge sira kammavi saguṇo ||
353|| In the audārika-miśra yoga (mixed physical body), the sattva prakṛtis are
present as in the general guṇasthānas, but since the devāyu (divine lifespan)
and narakāyu (hellish lifespan) prakṛtis are not present, there are 143
saptāyogya prakṛtis. The sīpamkara (false belief) prakṛti is not present in the
first guṇasthāna of the audārika-miśra mithyādṛṣṭi (false belief), so there are
143 prakṛtis.  In the pārmaṇakāvayoga (transformation of body), 148 prakṛtis
should be known as per the guṇasthānas. The āhāra mārganā (food intake) is
paryāpta (complete) from the devas (celestial beings).  Vedādāhāroti ya
samuṇodha gari saṃḍhayīkhavage | Kiṇhagasuhatilessiyabāmevi ga titthagarasaṃ
1354|| The tīrthaṅkara-rasa (essence of the Tīrthaṅkaras) is mixed in the āhāra
(food) of the abhavasiddha (liberated) gṛhastha (householder). The tīrthaṅkara-
rasa is not present in the āhāracatuṣka (four types of food) of the asaṃjñī-jīva
(unconscious being).  Kammevāṇāhāre payaḍīṇa sattabhevamādese 61 The specific
result of the prakṛti whose karmic bondage was done, transforms into another
prakṛti form, i.e., the fruit is not experienced, but it is first destroyed,
which is called udvelaṇa (suppression). The udvelaṇayogya (suppressible)
prakṛtis are 13 - āhārakadrika, samyaktva-mohanīya, miśra-mohanīya,
devapratyāpanna, narakagati-ādi-para, ucca-motra, manuṣyagati-trika.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sandhAri svAmiSa : digambara karmasAhitya kA mantabya 155 samajhanA  /  indriya
aura kAya mArgaNA meM prakRtiyoM kI uddesamA' bhI hotI hai| yogamArgamA
puNNekArasajoge sAhArayamissagevi saguNoghaM  /  vaigubdhiyamisse vi ya bhAvari
Na mANusatirikkhAU 5352 /  /  manoyoga Adi 11 pUrNa yogoM meM aura AhArakamizra
yoga meM apane-apane guNasthAnoM kI taraha sattva prakRtiyAM jAnanA  /
vaizyimiya yoga meM bhI zuNDasthAnavat hI sasA jAnavA, kintu yaha vizeSatA hai
ki yahA~ para manuSyAyu aura tiryacAya.....ina do kI sattA nahIM hai, ataH 146
sapsAyogya prakRsiyA hai| orAlamissa joge ogha suraNirayAuna patya  /
tamssivAmage sira kammavi sagubho  // 353 /  /  audArikamizdha yoga meM sAmAnya
guNasthAnavat sattA hai, kintu devAyu aura narakAyu do prakRtiyAM na hone se 143
prakRtiyo sasAyogya haiM  /  audArikamizra mithyAiSTi ke sIpaMkara prakRti nahIM
hai, ataH pahale guNasthAna meM 143 phA saspa hai  /  phArmaNakAvayoga meM
guNasthAnavat 148 prakRtiyoM kI sasA samAnA saahie| dheva se AhAra mAgaMNA
paryagsa vedAdAhAroti ya samuNodha gari saMDhayIkhavage  /
kiNhagasuhatilessiyabAmevi ga titthayarasasaM 1354 /  /  abhavasiddhe gasthi ha
sattaM titthayarasammamissANaM  /  AhAracaukkassavi asaNNiAjIve Na tilpayaraM  /
/ 355 /  /  kammevANAhAre payaDINa sattabhevamAdese 6 1 jisa prakRti kA bandha
kiyA thA usakA pariNAmavizeSa se anya prakRti rUpa pariNamana karake nAma kara
demA arthAt phala udaya meM nahIM mAne dimA, pahale nAza kara diyA, use udvelana
kahate haiM  /  uddelanayogya prajAtiyA~ 13 haiM- AhArakadrika, samyakrama
mohamIya, mizramohanIma, devapatirika, narakati Adi pAra, ucca motra,
manuSyagatitika  /  Mmmmmmuni tAMMoowww- - Maowwoodoktm

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pawwana The **sṛtīya kamanandha** should be understood as having a general
**sattva** according to its own **guṇasthāna**, from **parishiṣṭa veda mārgṇā**
to **āhārak mārgṇā**. However, there is a special feature: **napusakabeva** and
**strīya apak** category beings do not have the **sattva** of **tīrthaṅkara**
nature. Similarly, **kṛṣṇa** and **nola**, these two **leṇyā** with
**mithyādṛṣṭi**, and **pīta** etc. three **śubha leśyā** with **mithyādṛṣṭi**,
also do not have the **sattva** of **tīrthaṅkara** nature.  _**Abhaya jīva**s do
not have the **sattva** of the seven **prakṛti**s: **nīkara**, **mamyava**,
**madhamodaniya**, and **āhārak caturṣka** (**āhārak śarīra**, **āhārak
angopāṅga**, **āhārak bandhana**, **āhārak saṅghāta**). **Asanjnī jīva** does
not have the **sattva** of **tīrthaṅkara** nature._ In **anāhārak mārgṇā**, the
**prakṛti**s should be understood as having **māva** like **kāmaṇ kāyayoga**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Pawwana sRtIya kamanandha : pariziSTa beda mArgaNA se lekara AhAraka mArgaNA
paryanta apane-apane guNasthAnavat sAmAnya sattva samajhanA cAhie, kintu itanI
vizeSatA hai ki napusakabeva' aura strIya apaka zreNI vAle ke tIrthaGkara
prakRti kI sattA nahIM hai| isI prakAra kRSNa va nola ina do leNyA vAle
mithyAdRSTi ko aura pItAdi tIna zubha lezyA pAle miyAdRSTi ke bhI tIrthakara
prakRti kA sattva nahIM hai| _ abhaya jIvoM ke nIkara, mamyava, madhamodanIya
tayA AhAraka catuSka (AhAraka zarIra, AhAraka aMgopAMga, AhAraka bandhana,
AhAraka saMghAta) ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA satva nahIM hai  /  asaMjJI jIva ke
tIrtha ra prakRti kI sattA nahIM hai| anAhAraka mArgaNA meM kAmaNa kAyayogavat
prakRtiyoM kA mAva samajhanA caahie|

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Svetambara-Digambara Karma-Sahitya Similarities and Differences  Here we
present the similarities and differences in the views of Svetambara and
Digambara Karma-Sahitya regarding the bondage of karma:  **(1)**  There is
agreement between the Patamar and Digambara Karma-Sahitya regarding the non-
bondage of Aayubandha in the third Gunasthan. The Svetambara Karma-Sahitya does
not consider the bondage of Aayukarma in the third Gunasthan. This is also the
view of the Digambara Karma-Sahitya.  **(2)**  There is a difference of opinion
in the Karmagrantha regarding the bondage of 64 Prakṛtis in the second Gunasthan
in the case of Prithvikaaya and other Margana. However, the Gommatasar
Karmakanda only considers the bondage of 64 Prakṛtis.  **(3)**  The Karmagrantha
considers the first and second Gunasthan in the case of the Ekendriya to
Chakshusindriya Par Indriya Margana and the Prithvi, Jal, and Vanaspati - these
three Kaya Margana. The Gommatasar Karmakanda also accepts this view. However,
the Sarvartha Siddhikar has a different opinion on this matter. They consider
only the first Gunasthan in the case of the Ekendriya and other four Indriya
Margana and the Prithvikaaya and other five Kaya Margana.  **(4)**  Regarding
the acceptance of Gunasthan in Ekendriya, there are two views in the Svetambara
sect. The theoretical view considers only the first Gunasthan, while the
Karmagrantha view considers the first and second Gunasthan. The same two views
are also seen in the Digambara sect. The Sarvartha Siddhi and Bhojiva-kanda
represent the theoretical view, while the Gommatasar Karmakanda represents the
Karmagrantha view.  **(5)**  In the Audarikamishrakaayayoga Margana, the bondage
of 176 Prakṛtis in the Mithyatva Gunasthan is considered in the Gommatasar
Karmakanda, similar to the Karmagrantha.  **(6)**  In the
Audarikamishrakaayayoga Margana, the Aviratasamyashti...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zvetAmbara-digambara karmasAhitya ke samAna-asamAna mantavya zvetAmbara-
digambara krarmasAhitya ke bandhasvAmitva sambandhI samAna asamAna mantavya
yahA~ upasthita karate haiM..... (1) tIsare guNasthAna meM Ayubandha nahIM hone
ke bAre meM patAmAra evaM digambara karmasAhitya meM samAnatA hai| zvetAmbara
karmasAhitya meM tIsare mima guNasthAna meM Abukarma kA bandha nahIM mAnA gayA
hai  /  yahI mansumya digambara karma-sAhitya kA bhI hai| (2) pRthvIkAya Adi
mArgaNAoM meM dUsare guNasthAna meM aura 64 prakRtiyoM kA bandha matabheda se
karmagrantha meM hai sekina gommaTasAra karmakANDa meM kevala 64 prakRtiyoM kA
bandha mAnA gayA hai| (3) ekendriya se cakSurindriya' paryanta pAra indriya
mArgaNAoM tathA pRthvI, jala aura banaspati-ina tIna kAya mArgaNAoM meM pahalA
aura dUsarA yaha do guNasthAna karmagrantha meM mAne haiM  /  go karmakANDa meM
bhI isI pakSa ko svIkAra kiyA hai  /  lekina sarvArtha siddhikAra kA isa viSaya
meM bhinna mata hai  /  ye ekendriya Adi cAra indriya mArgaNAoM evaM pRthvIphAya
Adi sIna kAya mArgadhAmoM meM pahalA hI guNasthAna mAnate haiN| (4) ekendriyoM
meM guNasthAna mAnane ke sambandha meM zvetAmbara sampradAya meM do pazca haiN|
saiddhAntika pakSa sirpha pahalA zudhAsthAma aura karmagrantha pakSa pahalA,
dUsarA ye do guNasthAna mAnatA hai  /  digambara sampradAya meM bhI yahI do
pakSa dekhane meM Ate haiM  /  sarvArtha siddhi aura bho jIvakANDa meM
saiddhAntika pakSa tathA gora karmakANDa meM karmagrAmika pakSa hai| (5)
audArikamiznakAyayoga mArgaNA meM mithyAtva guNasthAna meM 176 prakRtiyoM kA
bandha karmagrantha kI taraha go0 karmakANDa meM bhI mAnA gayA hai| (6)
audArikamizrakAyayoga mArgaNA meM aviratasamyaSTi ko 50

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 150  **Regarding the bondage of specific natures, the opinion of Dave is also
supported by the Go. Karmakanda.**  (7) The Karmagranth in the Aharakamisna
Kayayog considers the bondage of 63 natures, but the Go. Karmakanda considers
the bondage of 62 natures.  (8) The Karmagranth and Go. Karmakanda both consider
the bondage of 75 natures in the three Leshyas of Krishna, etc., and the
Sanvantik Pas also considers the bondage of 75 natures.  The Karmagranth and Go.
Karmakanda have the same ownership of the bondage of Shushlaleshya.  In the
third Karmagranth, the three Leshyas of Krishna, etc., are considered in the
first four Gunasthanas. Similarly, the opinion of Gommatsar and Sarvarthasiddhi
is also the same.  (9) The Svetambar sect considers 12 Devalokas (Sasvay. A. 4,
Su. 20 commentary), but the Digambar sect considers 16 (Tasvarth 074, Su. 18
Sarvarthasiddhi commentary). According to the Svetambar sect, there are six
Devalokas from Sanatkumar to Sahasrar, but according to the Digambar sect, there
are 10. Of these, Amoत्तर, Kapishth, Shukra, and Shatar are four Devalokas that
are not considered in the Svetambar sect.  In the Svetambar sect, only
Padmaleshya is considered from the third Sanatsfumar to the fifth Brahmalok, and
Shuklaleshya is considered from the sixth Lantak onwards. However, in the
Digambar sect, Tejalaleshya and Padmaleshya are considered in the two Devalokas
of Sanatkumar and Mahendra; Padmaleshya is considered in the four Devalokas of
Brahmalok, Brahmottar, Lantav, and Kapishth; Padmashuklaleshya is considered in
the four Devalokas of Shukra, Mahashukra, Shatar, and Sahasrar; and only
Shuklaleshya is considered in all the Devalokas of Anant, etc., and Ghosha.
(10) In both the Svetambar and Digambar sects, the Tejasvi Vayukayik Jiva is
considered a Sthavar due to the rise of the Sthavar Karma. However, in Svetambar
literature, they are also called Pras. In Tattvarthabhavy Diika, etc., Tejaskaik
and Vayukaik are called 'Gatinasa', and in Acharangnithucti and its commentary,
they are called 'Sandi Asa'. However, the meaning of both these terms is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 150 dasaura karAyA  /  viziSTa prakRtiyoM ke bandha viSayaka dave ke mata kI
puSTi go0 karmakANDa se bhI hotI hai| (7) karmagrantha meM AhArakamizna kAyayoga
meM 63 prakRtiyoM kA bandha mAnA hai, kintu go0 karmakANDa meM 62 prakRtiyoM kA
randha mAnA gayA hai  /  (4) kRSNA Adi tIna lezyAoM meM karmagrantha aura go
karmakANDa meM 75 prakutiyoM aura saMvAntika pasa ne 75 prakRtiyoM kA bandha
mAnA hai| karmagrantha go karmakANDa meM zuslalezyA kA bandhasvAmitva samAna
hai| tIsare karmagrantha meM kRSNa Adi tIna lezyAe~ pahale cAra guNasthAnoM meM
mAnI hai| isI prakAra kA gommaTasAra aura sarvArthasiddhi kA bhI mata hai  /
(8) kvetAmbara sampradAya meM 12 devaloka mAne haiM (sasvAya. a. 4, sU0 20 kA
bhASya) parantu bigambara sampradAya meM 16 (tasvArtha 074, sU0 18 kI
sarvArthasiddhi TIkA)  /  zvetAmbara sampradAya ke anusAra sanatkumAra se
sahasrAra paryanta chaha devaloka hai, kintu digambara sampradAya ke anusAra 10
/  inameM se amottara, kApiSTha, zukra, zatAra ye cAra devaloka haiM, jo
zvetAmbara sampradAya meM mahIM mAne haiN| svetAmbara sampradAya meM tIsare
sanasphumAra se lekara pAMcaveM brahmaloka paryanta kevala padamaleNyA tathA
chaThe lAntaka se lekara Upara ke saba devalokoM meM zukla leNyA mAnI hai, kintu
digambara sampradAya meM sanatkumAra, mAhendra do devaloko meM tejIlezyA va
padmalezyA; brahmaloka, brahmottara, lAntava, kApiSTha ina cAra devalokoM meM
padmaleNyA; zukra, mahAzukra, zatAra, sahasrAraina cAra' devalokoM meM padama
zukla le gayA tathA Anata AdighoSa saba devalokoM meM basa zuklaleNyA mAnI hai|
(10) zvetAmbara, disambara donoM sampradAyoM meM tejasva vAyukAyipha jIva
sthAvara nAmakarma ke udaya ke kAraNa sthAvara mAne gaye haiM, tathApi
zvetAmbara sAhitya meM apekSA vizeSa ke unako prasa bhI kahA hai|
tattvArthabhAvya dIkA Adi meM tejaHkAyika, bAyakAmika ko 'gatinasa' aura
AcArAMganithukti aura usakI TIkA meM ... sandhi asa' kahA hai, lekina ina donoM
mAmboM ke tAtparya meM

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pesambara-Digambara Karma-Sahitya's Similar-Dissimilar Aspects  15. There is no
difference. The meaning of both is that in the six Vayukayika, there is no
Asanam Karma-Uday like the Indriya, etc., but because of the form of movement
being Sakti, it is considered Vastu. In Dvi-Indriya, etc., there is Vastu of
Asanam Karma-Uday and movement action form in two ways.  But in Digambara
literature, Teja-Kayika, Vayukayika beings are called only Sthavara, not Prasna,
with special consideration.  (11) In Pancha-Sangraha (written by Shri Chandrashi
Mahatara), in the Audarika-Anmadh Kayayoga, the same as the Karma-Grantha, the
mind of Tri-Ayush and Manushya-Ayush is considered.  (12) In Karma-Grantha, 13
types of Bandha are said in Aharak Kama. But the Pancha-Sangrahakar's opinion is
different on this subject. They consider 57 types of Bandha in Aharak Kayayoga.
It is hoped that the above differences in opinion will be helpful to the
inquisitive in their in-depth study.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pesAmbara-digambara karmasAhitya ke samAna-asamAna mamsamya 15 koI antara nahIM
hai| donoM kA Azaya yaha hai ki lejas 6 vAyukAyika meM hIndriya bhAdi kI taraha
asanAma karmodaya nahIM hai, lekina gamana kiyA rUpa saktiH hone se vasatva mAnA
hai  /  dvIndriyAdi meM usanAma pharmodaya va gamana kriyA rUpa dhonoM prakAra
kA basatya hai| lekina digambara sAhitya meM tejAkAyika, vAyuyAyika jIvoM ko
sthAvara hI kahA hai, apekSAvizeSa se unako prasanahIM kahA hai| (11)
paMcasaMgraha (zrI candraSi mahatara racita) meM audArikAMmadha kAyayoga meM
karmagrantha ke samAna tighAyu aura manuSyAyu ke mana ko mAnA hai  /  (12)
karmagrantha meM AhAraka kAma meM 13 pratiyoM mA banadha kahA hai| lekina isa
viSaya meM paMcasaMgrahakAra kA mata bhinna hai  /  ye AhAraka kAyapoga meM 57
prakRtiyoM kA bandha mAnate haiM  /  AzA hai ukta matabhivatAe~ jijJAsuoM ko
talaspazI adhyayana meM sahAyaka banegI 1 . !

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The 120 **Jñānavarana** and other eight **Karmas** are **Bandha-yoga**
(bondable) in nature. • **Mārgaṇās** describe the **Bandha-svāmitva** (bond
ownership) of **Odha** (general) and **Guṇasthānas** (qualities) in relation to
each other. It explains how many **Prakṛtis** (natures) are bondable in each
**Mārgaṇā** and how many **Prakṛtis** are bondable in relation to each
**Guṇasthāna**. • **Māṣās** use the following 55 **Prakṛtis** to explain
**Bandha-vicchedha** (bond-liberation). Their names are as follows: 1.
**Tīrthaṅkara Nāmakarma** 2. **Ekeṇdriya** 3. **Devagati** 4. **Devamānu-pūrvi**
5. **Vaikriya Śarīra** 6. **Vaikriya Aṅgopāṅga** 7. **Āhārak Śarīra** 8.
**Āhārak Aṅgopāṅga** 9. **Devāyu** 10. **Narakagati** ... • **Mārgaṇās** use the
following **Yantra** (instrument) to demonstrate **Bandha-svāmitva**: 11.
**Naraka Ānu-pūrvi** 12. **Naraka-Āyu** 13. **Sūkṣma** 14. **Aparyāpta** 15.
**Sādhāraṇa** 16. **Dvīndriya** 17. **Naudriya** 18. **Caturindriya** ... 19.
**Swayara** 20. **Āsapa Nāmakarma** 21. **Napuṃsakaved** 22. **Mithyātva** 23.
**Huṇḍa Saṃsthāna** 24. **Sevā Saṃhanana** 25. **Anantānubandhī Krodha** 26.
**Ananvānubandhī Māna** 27. **Anantānubandhī Māyā** 28. **Anantānubandhī Lobha**
29. **Nyagrodha-Parimandala Saṃsthāna** 30. **Sādi Saṃsthāna** 31. **Vāmana
Saṃsthāna** 32. **Kubja Saṃsthāna** 33. **Ṛṣabhanārāca Saṃhṛtam** 34. **Nārāca
Saṃhanana**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jJAnAvaraNa Adi aSTa karmoM ko baMdhayogya prakRtiyA~ 120 haiM | * mArgaNAoM
meM odha (sAmAnya) aura guNasthAnoM ko apekSA bandha-svAmitva kA varNana kiyA
gayA hai ki sAmAnya se kisa mArgaNA meM kitanI prakRtiyA~ aura guNasthAna kI
apekSA kitanI prakRtiyAM baMdhayogya haiM  /  mASAoM meM bandha-viccheda
batalAne ke liye nimnalikhita 55 prakRtiyoM kA adhika upayoga huvA hai  /  unake
nAma kramaza: nimna prakAra haiM 1 tIrthaMkara nAmakarma, 28 ekendriya 2
devagati 3 deva mAnupUrvI, 4 vaikriya zarIra, 5 vaikriya aMgopAMga 6 AhAraka
zarIra, 7 AhAraka aMgopAMga, devAyu, 6 narakagati : mArgaNAoM meM baMdha-
svAmitva pradarzaka yaMtra 10 naraka AnupUrvI, 11 naraka- Ayu, 12 sUkSma, 13
aparyApta, 14 sAdhAraNa, 15 dvIndriya 16 naundriya, 17 caturindriya J 13 svAyara
ka 20 Asapa nAmakarma, 21 napuMsakaveda, 22 mithyAtva 23 huMDa saMsthAna, 24
sevA saMhanana, 25 anantAnubandhI krodha, 26 ananvAnubandhI mAna, 27
anantAnubandhI mAyA, 28 anantAnubandhI lobha, 26 nyagrodha-parimaNDala
saMsthAna, 30 sAdi saMsthAna, 31 vAmana saMsthAna, 32 kubja saMsthAna, 33
RSabhanArAca saMhRtama, 34 nArAcasaMhanana

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Instruments Demonstrating Ownership in the Path**  35 Ardhanaraach Samhanan 46
Upoot, 36 Meelika Samhanan 47 Sigaat, A Sapashigabi, 48 Tiryaashanupurvi, 38
Neechakotr, 46 Sibayu, 36 Streeved, 50 Manusya-Bhamu, 40 Yug, 51 Manusyamati, 41
Duhswar, 12 Manushyaanupurvo, 42 Anaadey, 53 Audarik Shareer, 43 Niva-Nidra, 54
Audarik Angopaang, 44 Prachala Prapala, 55 Brihasbhanaraach Samhanan. 45
Syaandi,  In the following instruments, to indicate bondage-liberation, the
names of the initial progress to the final nature will be mentioned. This means
that all the Prakruti's (natures) from the initial nature to the final nature,
including the name of the nature, should be taken. For example, if it is written
from Devagati to Narakayu, then all the Prakruti's from Devagati, Devanupurvi,
Kriya Shareer, Krim Angopaang, Ahaar Shareer, Aaharak Ammohepaang, Devayu,
Narakgati, Narak-Aanupurvi, Narak Ayu (2 to 11) should be taken.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mArgamAoM meM svAmitva pradarzaka yantra 35 ardhanArAca saMhanana 46 upota, 36
mIlikA saMhanana 47 sigAta, e spshigbi, 48 tiryazAnupurvI, 38 nIcakotra, 46
sibAyu, 36 strIveda, 50 manuSya-bhAmu, 40 yuga, 51 manuSyamati, 41 duHsvara, 12
manuSmAnupUrvo, 42 anAdeya, 53 audArika zarIra, 43 nivA-nidrA, 54 audArika
aMgopAMga, 44 pracalA prapalA, 55 baRSabhanArAca saMhanana  /  45 syAnadi, agale
yantroM meM bandha-viccheda batalAne ke lie prArambhika pragati se antima
prakRti kA nAmollekha kiyA jAyegA jisakA artha yaha hai ki usa nAma vAlI prakRti
ke nAma sahita aMtima prakRti ke nAma taka kI sabhI prakAziyoM kA grahaNa karanA
caahiye| jaise devagati se narakAyu taka likhA hone para inameM devagati,
devAnupUrvI, kriyazarIra, krima aMgopAMma, AhArazarIra, AhAraka aMmohepAMga,
devAyu, narakagati, naraka-AnupUrvI, naraka Ayu (2 se 11) taka kI sabhI
prakRtimoM kA grahaNa hogaa|

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
whmanuali -Decemininewwww Panatala
irmirmimoonawrrammarrovernmoviwaroornvergreempaniwwwm wwwrator Tutiya Karmachann
: Parisad Narakagati tatha Ratnaprabha, Sharkaraprama, Basukamama Narakaya Ka
Bandh-Swamitva Samanya Bandhyogya 101 Prakrittiya Munasthan....Aadi ke War
Bhagati (2) se lekar Atap Namakarma (20) tak ki 16 Prakrittiyon se Biheen 101
Gu00 Namdhyogya! Banch. Punah Bandh Bandh-Vicched Napunsak Ved, Mithyatva, Haj
Sansthan Sevat Sanhanan 4 Sorthkar Nam . Anantaabhubandhi Krodh (25) se lekar
Tiryanchayau (6) 1 Manushayau! x x Tirthankara Masushya-Ayu Abandh.....Kiska
Vivakshit Gunasthan mein Bandh nahin hota, lekin anya Gupasthan mein Bandh
sambhav hai. Punahbandh—Jiska anya Gunasthan mein Bandh nahin hota hai lekin is
Gunasthan mein bandh hota hai. Ex-Vidhyey—Jiska Bandh is Gunasthan tak hi hota
hai, aage ke Gunasthanon mein hota hi nahin hai. mers......

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 whmanuali -Decemininewwww paNAtalA
irmirmimoonawrrammarrovernmoviwaroornvergreempaniwwwm wwwrator tutIya karmacanma
: parisAda narakagati tathA ratnaprabhA, zarkarApramA, bAsukAmamA narakAya kA
bandha-svAmitva sAmAnya bandhayogya 101 prakRttiyA~ muNasthAna....Adi ke vAra
bhagati (2) se lekara Atapa nAmakarma (20) taka kI 16 prakRtiyoM se bihIna101
gu00 namdhayogya ! bancha. punaH bandha bandha-viccheda napuMsaka veda,
mithyAtva, haja saMsthAna sevAta saMhanana 4 sorthakara nAma  /  anantAbhubandhI
krodha (25) se lekara tiryaMcAyu (6) 1 manuSyAyu ! x x tIrthakara masuSya-Ayu
abandha.....kisakA vivakSita guNasthAna meM bandha nahIM hotA, lekina anya
gupasthAna meM bandha sambhava hai  /  punaHbandha--jisakA anya guNasthAna meM
bandha nahIM hotA hai lekina isa guNasthAna meM baMdha hotA hai| Ex-vidhayeya
--jisakA bandha isa guNasthAna taka hI hotA hai, Age ke guNasthAnoM meM hotA hI
nahIM hai| mers......

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Mechanism demonstrating ownership in emotions General binding 100 natures From
the 20 natures of the four Tirthankara karmas, namely Gunasthan etc. (1) to Atap
karma (20) Free from - 100 Pankprabha, Dhoopma, Tamah Prabha, Marakjaya's
binding-owner Gu.Kr. Binding eligible 1 2 100 66 70 71 A-bandh X PHWAN |1
Manushayau X Punah bandh X X 1 Manushayau Nanah LAM Bandh-vichched Napumsakaved,
Mithyatva, Devarta Sanh 4 Naraka samayavat anantanan krodh (25) to Tiya Chayu
(46): x wwwwwww X wwwwww 025

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAvanAmoM meM svAmitva pradarzaka yantra sAmAnya bandhayogya 100 prakRtiyA~
guNasthAna Adi ke cAra tIrthaMkara nAmakarma ( 1 ) se Atapa nAmakarma (20) taka
kI 20 prakRtiyoM se vihIna - 100 paMkaprabhA, dhUpamA, tamaH prabhA marakajaya
kA bandha-svAmi gu0kra0. bandha yogya 1 2 100 66 70 71 avandha X PHWAN |1
manuSyAyu X punaH bandha X X 1 manuSyAyu nanaH LAM bandha-viccheda
napuMsakaveda, midhyAtva, devArta saMha 4 naraka sAmAnyavat anantAna krodha (25)
se lekara tiya cAyu (46) taka: x wwwwwww X wwwwww 025

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
WIROMoleel199999 9 99णणारएसएसपएशIIMMMMMMMMMMUMIIILIL Appendix to the Third
Karma-Prabandha The Great Soul's (Mahatma) Karma-Bandha-Swamitva (Karma-Bondage-
Ownership) General Bandhyoga (Bondable) 66 Replicas Gunasthan (Qualities) etc.
Four Tirthankara (Liberated Souls) Name-Karma (1) to Atap-Karma (20) with
Manushya-Ayu (Human Life) Absent Bandhyoga (Bondable) Abandha (Non-Bondable)
Punah-Bancha (Re-Bondable) Bandha-Vicched (Bond-Severance) Napunsakond
(Impotence), Mithyatva (False Belief), Hundasanstham (Animalistic Conduct),
Sewas-Sanhanan (Accumulation of Karma), Tiryanchayu-5 (Animal Life-5) | Uchcha-
Gosh (High Voice) Manushya-Gati (Human Realm) Manushya-Anupurvi (Human
Precedence) Ananta-Anu (Infinite Precedence) Krodha (Anger) (25) to Liyancha-
Anupurvi (Animal Precedence) (18) up to 0.24 70 Uchcha-Motr (High Voice)
Manushya-Gati (Human Realm) Manushya-Anupurvi (Human Precedence) AM

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 WIROMoleel199999 9 99NaNAraesaesapaezaIIMMMMMMMMMMUMIIILIL tRtIya karmaprandha
: pariziSTa mahAtamaHpramA maraka kA bandha-svAmitva sAmAnya bandhyogya 66
pratiyAM guNasthAna Adi ke cAra tIrthakara nAmakarma (1) se Atapa nAmakarma (20)
sathA manuSyAyu vihIna bandhayogya abandha puna: bancha bandha-viccheda
napuMsakoMda, mithyAtva, huMDasaMsthAma, sevAsa saMhanana tiryaMcAyu-5  /
uccagoSa manuSyagAsa manuSyAnupUrvI anantAnu0 krodha (25) se lekara
liyaMcAnupUrvI (18) taka 0.24 70 uccamotra manuSyagati manuSyAnupUrvI AM

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In Maaks, ownership-indicating device Tigt sufficient Sidh's blind-ownership
General bandhyogya 117 natures Adi ke Pi Gunasthan Tirthankar namakarma, aharak
sharir, maharak angopaang viheen 117 Gu= Kr. Bandhyogya 1 wwwwww 117 101 Tun 70
66 Akhan X x 9 Devamu X X Punah Yan X X X Devayu X SATA           Bandh-vichched
164: Narakgati (6) se seva sanhanan (24) tak 16 Anantanu bandhi krodh (25) se
vajrarishbhanaraach sanhanan (55) tak 31 X Aan Dh, Man, Maya, Lobh 4 X

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mAkoM meM svAmitva pradarzaka yantra tigata paryApta sidha kA andha-svAmitva
sAmAnya bandhayogya 117 prakRtiyA~ Adi ke pi guNasthAna tIrthaMkara nAmakarma,
AhAraka zarIra, mAhAraka aMgopAMga vihIna 117 gu= kra0 bandhayogya 1 wwwwww 117
101 dun 70 66 akhanna X x 9 devAmu X X punaH yan X X X devAyu X SATA bandha-
viccheda 164: narakagati ( 6 ) se sevA saMhanana (24) taka 16 anantAnubandhI
krodha (25) se vajraRSabhanArAca saMhanana (55) taka 31 X Ana dha, mAna, mAyA,
lobha4 X

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma Chapter: Appendix  **Insufficient, Tich, Insufficient Human's
Bond-Ownership of the 106 General Bondable Natures**  **Gunasthan First
(Mithyatva)**: The 106 natures are devoid of the 11 natures of the **Sthirthakar
Namakarma (1)** and **Naraka-Ayu (11)**.  **Am-Punah An**. **Bandha-Vislesha**
**X**  **IMGAM**  The meaning of "Insufficient" here is from **Sandi-
Insufficient**, not **Karan-Insufficient**. The reason for taking the meaning of
**Labdhi-Insufficient** is that **Karan-Insufficient** humans can bind the
**Tirthankara Namakarma**, but **Labdhi-Insufficient** cannot. Therefore,
**Tirthankara Namakarma** is not included in the general bondable natures in
relation to **Labdhi-Insufficient**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmapanya : pariziSTa aparyApta, tica, aparyApta manuSya kA baMdha-
svAmitva sAmAnya bandhayogya 106 prakRtiyA~ guNasthAna prathama (mithyAtva)
sIrthakara nAmakarma (1) se naraka-Ayu (11) saka kI 11 prakRtiyoM se vihIna- 106
gu00 gayo  /  ama- punaH an  /  bandha-vizleva X IMGAM thaparyApta kA artha
yahA~ sandhi-aparyApta se hai, karaNa-aparyApta se mAhIM  /  labdhi-aparyApta
artha lene kA kAraNa yaha hai ki karaNa-aparyApta manu tIrthakaranAmakarma kA
bandha kara sakatA hai, ladhi aparyApta nahIM  /  isIliye labdhi-aparyAptatA kI
apekSA tIrthakaranAmakarma ko sAmAnya bandhayogya prakRtiyoM meM grahaNa nahIM
kiyA gayA hai  /

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Magas, the Ownership Demonstrator Device Sufficient human and mind,
speech, and conduct with fine subtle yoga - Ownership General bondable 120
natures (as explained in the Bandhaadhikār) Gunasthan - 14 Gu.Kr. | Bandhayogyam
117 101 6ε 9 F 67 63 : Abab 3 Tirthankara name Aharaksharir Aharak Ango Pang X 1
Devayu X x. X Puna Bandha X Tirthankara name, Devayu X Bandha-Vicched Narakagati
(9) to Seva Har (24) Sak 16 Anantanu bandhi htt (25) to Vrishabhanaraach
Sanhanan (55) tak 31 167 X " Apratyakhyanavaran Kosh, Man, Maya, Lobh Similar to
Bandhaadhikār =4 6/7

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mAgAoM meM svAmitva pradarzaka yantra paryApta manuSya tathA mana, vacana hoga
sahita bArika phAyayoga ka -svAmitva sAmAnya bandhayogya 120 prakRtiyoM
(baMdhAdhikAra meM batAye gaye anusAra) guNasthAna - 14 gu0kra0] bandhayogyaM
117 101 6e 9 F 67 63 : ababa 3 tIrthaMkara nAma AhArakazarIra AhAraka aMgo pAMga
X 1 devAyu X x. X punaH bandha X tIrthakara nAma, devAyu X vandha-viccheda
narakagati ( 9 ) se sevA Har (24) saka 16 anantAnubandhI htt (25) se
vaRSabhanArAca saMhanana (55) taka 31 167 X " apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa koSa, mAna,
mAyA, lobha vandhAdhikAra ke samAna =4 6/7

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
E 168 Pu.k. Bandhyogya 7 8 10 ev te 11 12 13 14 56/58 “ 56 26 22 * 20 Haf 1 17 1
X Avandha X XXXXX X X x X Punaha Bandha 2 Aharak Sharira Aharak Ango Pang X
XXXXX X X X Triteeya Dharma Granth: Parishishta Bandha-Vicched Bandhadhikar ke
saman 1 auftkar ke saman 2 /30 /4 " JJ 34 F It Th 15 13 X ph 16

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 E 168 pu0ka0 bandhayogya 7 8 10 ev te 11 12 13 14 56/58 " 56 26 22 * 20 haafe 1
17 1 X avandha X XXXXX X X x X punaH bandha 2 AhAraka zarIra AhAraka aMgo pAMga
X XXXXX X X X tRtIya dharmagrantha : pariziSTa bandha-viccheda bandhAdhikAra ke
samAna 1 auftkAra ke samAna 2 /30 /4 " JJ 34 F It Th 15 13 X ph 16

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Instruments Demonstrating Blind-Ownership in the Marganas 166 General Avatis,
Siddharama, Shan Devaloka, Paikiya Kayoga's Bond-Ownership General Bondable 104
Prakṛtis Munasthan-...etc. Burden Devagati (2) to Chaturindriya Jati (17) Sak 16
Prakṛtis devoid Gunaka | Bondable Abandha Puna Bandha Bandha-Vishesh 103
Tirthankaranam Napumsaka Veda, Mithyaraka Huinsansthan, Sevat Sahanan Festriya,
Staka. Attay Ananta Krodha (25) to Liyashu (49) x 701 Manushayau An Ghosh,
Manushayau

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mArgaNAoM meM andha-svAmitva pradarzaka yantra 166 sAmAnya avati, sIdharma,
zAna devaloka, paikiya kAyayoga kA bandha-svAmitva sAmAnya bandhayogya 104
prakRtiyA~ munasthAna-...Adi ke bhAra devagati (2) se caturindriya jhAti (17)
saka 16 prakRtiyoM se vihIna guNaka | bandha yogya abandha punaH bandha bandha-
vizeSa 103 tIrthakaranAma napuMsaka veda, mithyAraka hu~isaMsthAna, sevAta
sahanana phesTriya, sthAkA. Attaya anantA krodha (25) se liyASu (49) taka x 701
manuSyAyu An ghoss, manuSyAyu

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
TRANCExeyma.mntAIArmymamanimomsony 170 .. Third Karma Granth: Appendix
Sanatkumar to Sahasrar Parayan Devalokas Bandh-Swamitva Samanya Bandhyogya 101
Prakrutiyaan Gunasthan Adi Ke Bar Devagati (2) to Atap Namkarma (20) - 16
Prakrutiyaan Viheen 101 Su00 Bandhyogya. Abandh Punah Bandh Bandh-Vicched
Napunsak Ved, Mithyad, Insh Sansthan, Sevars Sanhanan Seerthkarnaam Anantanu
bandhi Krodh (25) to Timanchayu (49) 425 Manushyathu Teerthkarnaam Manushyayu
MARA

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 TRANCExeyma.mntAIArmymamanimomsony 170 .. tRtIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa
sanatkumAra se sahasrAra paryanta devalokoM kA bandha-svAmitva sAmAnya
bandhayogya 101 prakRtiyA~ guNasthAna Adi ke bAra devagati (2) se lekara Atapa
nAmakarma (20) taka kI 16 prakRtiyoM se vihIna 101 su00 bandha yogya  /  abandha
puna: bandha bandha-viccheda napuMsaka veda, mithyAda, iMza saMsthAna, sevArsa
saMhanana sIrthakaranAma anantAnubandhI krodha (25) se lekara timaMcAyu (49) 425
manuSyAthu tIrthakaranAma manuSyAyu MARA

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Ownership Promoting Mechanism in Marganas**  67 processes from Bhamar to Aspat
and the ownership of newly entered Klokas are generally bondable.  16 from
Munspana etc. to Atap Namkarma (20) of the four Devagati (2) and 17 from Ukhot,
Tiryaak_Gati, Niyanchanupurvi, Siyanchayau - a total of 23 Prakrutis - are
**not** bondable.  **Bondable!**  * Abandha * Punah Bandha * Bandha Vicched *
Tirthankaranam * Napusak Ved; Mithyakh, Huinsansthan, Sevahsamhanan 4  **From
Annsanu0 Kosh (25) to Styanndi (45) - 21**  * Manushyayu * wriHARom *
Tirthankaranam ... | Manushyayu Anusar to Sarvarth Siddhi - the ownership of the
Devlokas is generally bondable in 72 Praliyas.  * Munasthan - Ek (Avirat) * PAWP
* Po०| Bandha Yogya | Abandha * Nah Bandha * Bandha-Vicched * Siker, Manushyayu
* wasur

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mArgaNAoM meM svAmitva pravarzaka yaMtra bhAmara se aspata paryanta tathA
navapraveSaka klokoM kA svAmitva sAmAnya bannayogya 67 prakRsiyA muNaspAna Adi
ke cAra devagati (2) se Atapa nAmakarma (20) taka kI 16 tathA ukhota, tiryaka_
gati, niyaMcAnupUrvI, siyaMcAyu ye cAra- kula 23 prakRtiyoM se vihIMga -17 maka
bandha yogya ! abandha punaH bandha bandha viccheda tIrthakaranAma napusaka
veda; mithyAkha, hu~isaMsthAna, sevAHsaMhanana 4  /  anansAnu0 koSa (25) se
styAnadi (45) taka-21 manuSyAyu wriHARom tIrthakaranAma ...... | manuSyAyu
anusara se sarvArthasiddhi taka devalokoM kA bandhasvAmitva sAmAnya bandhayogya
72 prAliyoM muNasthAna-eka (avirata) PAWP Po0| bandha yogya | abandha naH bandha
bandha-viccheda sIkara, manuSyAmu wasur

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 172 **General Bandha-yoga (Bondable) 103 Prakṛtis**  **Regarding Guṇasthāna
etc.**  From Tīrthankara Nāmakarma (1) to Chaturindriya Jāti (17), excluding 17
Prakṛtis, there are 103.  **Gu.Kr. [Guṇasthāna-Karma] Bandha-yoga**  **1**
**Water, Vyastara and Jyotiṣī Devas's Swa-fre**  **103**  **1**  **6**  **10**
**71**  **Abandha**  **Manuṣyāyu X**  **General Abandha-yoga (Non-bondable) 105
Prakṛtis**  **Again Bandha**  **Abandha**  **X**  **X**  **X**  **1**
**Manuṣyāyu**  **Third Chapter: Appendix**  **Tekaaya, Vāyukāya (Motion) Kā
Sthāni**  **Again Bandha**  **Xx**  **LEVET MANA**  **Bandha-Viccheda**
**Water, Veda, Mithyātva, Inta Santan, Ekendriya, Sthāvara, Ātapa**  From
Tīrthankara Nāmakarma (1) to Narakādhu (11), excluding 11, and Manuṣyamati,
Manuṣyānupoorvi, Manuṣyāyu, Upa Gotr, these four Kulas, excluding 15 Prakṛtis,
there are 105.  **Gu.Kr. Bandha-yoga**  **Anantā. Krodha (25) to Tiryachādhu
(46), excluding 25**  **X**  **Guṇasthāna One (Mithyātva)**  **LITTED**
**Abandha-Viccheda**  **X**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 172 sAmAnya bandhayogya 103 prakRtiyA~ guNasthAna Adi ke bAra tIrthaMkara
nAmakarma ( 1 ) se caturindriya jAti (17) taka 17 prakRtiyoM se vihIna 103
gu0ka0 ] bandha yogya 1 OM do water, vyastara aura jyotiSI devoM kA svAfre 103 1
hai 6 10 71 abandha manuSyAyu X sAmAnya andhayogya 105 prakRtiyA~ olaeg punaH
bandha abandha X X X 1 manuSyAyu tRtIya kaire: pariziSTa tekAya, vAyukAya (gati)
kA sthAni punaH bandha Xx LEVET MANA bandha-viccheda ayer veda, mithyAtva, iMTa
saMtana, ekendriya, sthAvara, Atapa tIrthakara nAmaka ( 1 ) se narakAdhu ( 11 )
taka 11 tathA manuSyamati manuSyAnupUrvI, manuSyAyu, upa gotra ye cAra kula 15
prakRtiyoM se vihIna 105. gu0kra0 bandha yogya anantA0 krodha (25) se tiryacAdhu
(46) taka 25 X guNasthAna eka (midhyAtva) LITTED andha-viccheda X

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
RAMM, Lalala msomamiverseoniRIANATATAAI in the Maanganaons Swamistra Pradarshak
Yantra 173 Ekendriya, Vikale Grip (Dwi-mbiya, Naun-trip, Chaturindriya) Vachan-
yoga, Kay-yoga, Prithvi, Jal tatha Vanaspatikaya ka Bandh-swamitva Samaanya
Bandh-yogya 106 Prakashit Sush... ho Tirthankar Lamfarm (1) se Marakayu (11) tak
ki 11 Prakrutiyon se viheen Guska Bandh Yogya Prabhandh! Punah Bandh Andh-
vishayeva x Sookshma (12) se lekar Mewat Sanhan (24) Sak-13 2 1 Kinhi-kinhi
Aacharyo ka Mantvya hai ki dusre Gunasthan mein Ekendriya aadi Jin Manushya-bayu
aur Siyacha ka bhi Bandh nahin karte hain As: 14 Prakrutiyon ka Bandh dusre
Gunasthan mein manana chahiye. Atah Midhyatva Gunasthan ki Vichchin Prakrutiyon
mein do Prakrutiyon ko aur milaane par 15 Prakrutiyaan hoti hain. Unko kam karne
par 64 Prakrutiyaan dusre Munasthan mein Bamb-yogya rahti hain. Mo. Kamkod mein
dusre Gunasthan ki Adhyogya Prakrutiyo 14 hi mani hain.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 RAMMlA lAlAlAmsomamiverseoniRIANATATAAI mAgaMNAoM meM svAmistra pradarzaka
yaMtra 173 ekendriya, vikale gripa (dvImbiya, nauntripa, caturindriya)
vacanayoga, kAyayoga, pRthvI, jala tathA vanaspalikAya kA bandhasvAmitva sAmAnya
bandhayogya 106 prakAzita suSa ... ho tIrthaMkara lAmapharma (1) se marakAyu
(11) taka kI 11 prakRtiyoM se vihIna gusakA bandha yogya prabandha ! punaH
bandha andha-viSayeva x sUkSma (12) se lekara mevAta saMhAna (24) saka-13 2 1
kinhIM-kinhIM AcAryo kA mantavya hai ki dUsare guNasthAna meM ekendriya Adi jIna
manuSyabAyu aura siyacA kA bhI bandha nahIM karate haiM asa: 14 prakRtiyoM kA
bandha dUsare guNasthAna meM mAnanA cAhiye  /  ataH midhyAtva guNasthAna kI
vicchina prakRtiyoM meM do prakRtiyoM ko aura milAne para 15 prakRtiyA~ hotI  /
unako kama karane para 64 prakRtiyA~ dUsare muNasthAna meM bambayogya rahatI
haiN| mo0 kAmakoDa meM dUsare guNasthAna kI adhayogya prakRtiyo 14 hI mAnI haiM
/

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 174 www. Gu. 0 Bandha Yogya 4 Samanya Bandha Yogya 124 Aharak Sharira, Aharak
Angopang, Devayu, Narakgati, Narakanupurvi, Nar Kayu Viheen 114 106 4 75
SLUMPADEGRASSMEMÓ 1 Audarik Mishra Kayayog Ka Swamitva Abandha 裴 Tirthankar Naam
Devaki Viki X Gunaspam 1, 2, 4, 13 (War Gunasthan) Punaha MTTV Tritiya
Karmagranth: Parisishta X 5. Tirthankar Naam Devtrik Vai X Bandha Vid Sukshmanam
(12) Se Sewal San (24) Tak 13, Tatha Manushayau Vichayau 15 13 i Vishesh-
Jijnasu Me Yahaan Shanka Ki Hai Ki Darik Mishra Kayayog Tich Aur Manusya Ko Hota
Hai Aur Tiyantr Va Manushaygati Ke Bandhaswamitva Me Chauthe Gunasthan Me
Kramshah 70 Aur 71 Prakrutiyon Ka Bandha Kaha Hai Aur Yahaan Audarik Mishra
Kayayog Me 75 Prakrutiyon Ka. In 75 Prakrutiyon Me Manushadvik, Audarikdvik Aur
Vrishbharatra Sanhanan Ka Samavesh Hai. Inka Tiyanchgati Aur Manushaygati Ke
Chauthe Gunasthan Ki Bandha Yogya Prakrutiyon Me Samavesh Nahin Hota Hai Atah 75
Prakrutiyon Ka Bandhaswamitva Manna Yukti-Pursar Nahin Hai. Anantan • Krodh (25)
Se Tiriychanupurvi (48) Tak = 24

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 174 www. gu00 bandha yogya 4 sAmAnya bandhayogya 124 AhAraka zarIra, AhAraka
aMgopAMga, devAyu, narakagati, narakAnupUrvI, nara kAyu vihIna 114 106 4 75
SLUMPADEGRASSMEMO 1 audArikamiSa kAyayoga kA svAmitva abandha Pei  tIrthaMkara
nAma devaki vikii X guNaspAma 1, 2, 4, 13 (vAra guNasthAna) punaH MTTV tRtIya
karmagrantha : pariziSTa X 5. tIrthaMkara nAma devatrika vaii X bandha vida
sUkSmanAma ( 12 ) se sevAla sana (24) taka 13, tathA manuSyAyu vicAyu 15 13 i
vizeSa- jijJAsu me yahA~ zaMkA kI haiM ki dArika mizra kAyayoga tica aura
manuSya ko hotA hai aura tiyaMtra va manuSyagati ke bandhasvAmitva meM cauthe
guNasthAna meM kramazaH 70 aura 71 prakRtiyoM kA bandha kahA hai aura yahA~
audArikamizra kAyayoga me 75 prakRtiyoM kA  /  ina 75 prakRtiyoM meM
manuSyadvika, audArikadvika aura vaRSabhArAtra saMhanana kA samAveza hai| inakA
tiyaMcagati aura manuSyagati ke cauthe guNasthAna kI bandhayogya prakRktiyoM meM
samAveza nahIM hotA hai ataH 75 prakRtiyoM kA bandhasvAmitva mAnanA yukti-
purassara nahIM hai  /  anantAna * krodha (25) se tiryacAnupUrvI (48) taka = 24

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Time as a Factor in the Path of Liberation:  In the Gommatasara Karmakanda,
70 and 71 prakritis are considered to be capable of binding in the fourth
gunasthan.  _The solution to this is that in verse 15, the term 'anajadisaai'
should not only refer to the twenty-four prakritis like Ananannunandhi Chatushk,
but also include the prakritis like 'Aai' (manushyatvika) by taking the word
'Aai' into account. This removes any doubt. In this case, 70 and 71 prakritis
can be considered capable of binding in the fourth gunasthan._  Even after
accepting this solution, the question arises as to why the Karmagrantha mentions
the binding of 75 prakritis. This needs to be considered.  According to the
principles of Audarikamishra Kayayoga, the fifth and sixth gunasthanas are
considered. In this regard, the Sikhanta's opinion is that just as Audarik
Kayayoga is called Audarik Mishra Kayayoga because it is mixed with Karman
Kayayoga until the body of Audarik Kayayoga is fully developed, similarly, the
Vaikriya and Aharak bodies should be considered Audarik Mishra Kayayoga until
they are fully developed and mixed with the Audarik body in their initial
stages.  The Sivanta's perspective is acceptable, and from that perspective, the
fifth and sixth gunasthanas can be considered as Audarik Mishra Kayayoga.
However, the Karmagrantha does not consider the Vaikriya and Aharak bodies as
Audarik Mishra Kayayoga, giving priority to the Labdhiabhyudaya body. Only the
yoga that arises from the cooperation of both Karman and Audarik bodies should
be called Audarik Mishra Kayayoga, and this yoga is found in the first, second,
fourth, and seventh gunasthanas.  Therefore, the binding of these four
gunasthanas has been mentioned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mArgamAoM meM nimitva samaya: gomTasAra karmakAMDa meM bhI cauthe guNasthAna
meM 70,71 prakRttiyA~ baMdhayogya mAnI haiN| _ isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki gAthA
15 meM asgata 'anajadIsAI' pada kA artha sirpha anannAnunandhIcatuSka Adi
caubIsa prakRtiyAM na karake 'AI' zabda se manuSyatikA Adi pani prakRtiyoM ko
grahada kara liyA jAye to zaMkA ko koI sthAna nahIM rahatA hai  /  usa sthiti
meM 70 aura 71 prakRtiyoM ko pAya guNasthAna meM bandhayogya mAnA jA sakatA hai|
isa prakAra kA samAdhAna kara lene para bhI karmagrantha meM 75 prakRtiyoM ke
bandha ko mAnane kA kAraNa kyA hai, yaha jijJAsA janI rahatI hai| ataH
vicAraNIya hai  /  audAriphamina kAyayoga meM siddhAnta ke matAnusAra pAMcavo,
chaThA yaha do guNasthAna mAne jAte haiM  /  isa sambandha meM sikSAnta kA
abhiprAya yaha hai ki jaise audArika kApayoga kI zarIraparyApta pUrNa nahIM hone
ke samaya taka kArmaNakAyayoga ke sAtha mithatA hone se audArika kAyayoga ko
ovAripha mithakAyayoga kahA jAtA hai, vaise hI lazcitanya vakriya ora AhAraka
zarIra kA inake prArambha kAla meM odAriyA zarIra ke sAtha mizraNa hone ke
samaya ada taka baiMkriya yA AhAraka zarIra meM zarIrapti pUrNa na ho taba taka
ke liye audArika mizrakAyayoga mAnA jAnA cAhie  /  sivAnta kA janta dRSTikoNa
grAhya hai aura usa dRSTi se audArikamizra kAyayoga meM pAMcoM, chaThA
guNasthAna mAne jA sakate haiM  /  lekina karmagranthoM meM labdhiabhya zarIra
ko pradhAnatA na mAnakara baiMkriya aura AhAraka zarIra ko audArikamizra
kAyayoga nahIM mAnA hai| sirpha kArmaNa aura audArika pArIra donoM ke sahayoga
se hone vAle yoga ko audArikamizra kAyayoga kAhanA cAhie aura yaha yoga pahale,
dUsare, caupe tathA serahaveM guNasthAna meM pAyA jAtA hai| isaliye ina cAra
guNasthAnoM meM bandhasvAmitva kA kathana kiyA hai|

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Karma Group: Appendix  **Karma Kayoga and Anaharaka** are bound by the
same 112 Gunasthanas: 1, 2, 4, 13 (four Gunasthanas).  **Aharaka** (with 8 types
of births: Deva, Naraka, Manushya, Tiryanch) are devoid of these 112
Gunasthanas.  **Bound by:** * **Punarbhava** (rebirth) * **Andha-Vicched**
(blindness) * **Sookshmanama** (12) to **Sanhanan** (24) - 13 Gunasthanas *
**Tirthankara** to **Devatrik** (divine beings) - 24 Gunasthanas * **Ananna**
(non-violence) to **Sirvadhanapurvi** (48) - 24 Gunasthanas  **Note:** Anaharaka
Margana is found in Gunasthanas 1, 3, 4, 13 and 14. Karma Kayoga is bound by the
same four Gunasthanas: 1, 2, 4, and 13. This is because in the 14th Gunasthan,
there is no possibility of Karma binding due to the complete absence of causes
for Karma binding. In the remaining Gunasthanas, the causes of binding
(Mithyasvad etc.) remain active. Therefore, Karma Kayoga and Anaharaka Margana
are bound by the same four Gunasthanas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagrampa : pariziSTa kArmaga kAyayoga va anAhAraka mA andhasvAbhisya
sAmAnma bandhayogya 112 guNasthAna1, 2, 4, 13 (cAra guNasthAna) AhArakaddhika,
devAyu, narakatrika, manuSyAyu, tiyaMcAyu kula 8 prakRtiyoM se vihIna- 112 gu00
banna yogya puna badha andha-viccheda sUkSmanAma (12) se sevAta saMhanana (24)
sakALa 13 tIrthakaranAma devatika kriyaTrika anannA krodha (25) se
sirvadhAnapUrvI (48) taka 24 | tIrthakaranAma * devAdika baiMkriyAdvika IA - - -
- vizeSa- padhapi anAhAraka mArgaNA 1, 3, 4, 13 aura 14 ina pAtra guNasthAnoM
meM pAI jAtI hai, aura bandhasvAmitva kArmaNa kAmayoga ke samAna 1, 2, 4 ora 13
ina cAra guNasthAnoM kA batalAyA hai to isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki caudahaveM
guNasthAna meM karmabandha ke kAraNoM kA sarvathA abhAva ho jAne se kisI bhI
karma kA bandha nahIM hotA hai aura zeSa guNasthAnoM meM mithyAsvAdi
bandhakAraNa apanI-apanI bhUmikA taka rahate haiM  /  ataH phArmaNa kAya. yoga
jaisA anAhAraka mArgaNA kA cAra guNasthAnoM meM bandhasvAmitva batalAyA hai|
.......

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
* **Machines Demonstrating Blindness in the Path** 177 There are two meanings of
*Anaharaka*: 1 - Complete cessation of the intake of karmas due to the complete
cessation of the causes of karma-bandha. This state is attained in the
fourteenth *guṇasthāna* of *ayogikevali*. Therefore, the fourteenth *guṇasthāna*
is considered *Anaharaka* in the *mārgaṇā*. 2 - The state in which only the
*pugaḷa-vargaṇā* of the *phārmika-kāya-yoga* is taken is called the *Anaharaka*
state. From this perspective, the worldly being now leaves one body and travels
by *vigraha-gati* to obtain a new birth. In that state, *karmāṇ-yoga* remains,
and other *auvārika-kāya* etc. do not remain as *prātha-varmaṇā*. These beings
have only the first, second, and fourth *guṇasthāna*. T *Yogī-sevā-guṇasthāna*
is included in *Anaharaka-mārgaṇā* because when the atoms of *āyu-karma* are
more than the other karmas, seven actions are performed to make them equal to
the state of *āyu-karma*. In this *samuddhāta* state, only *karmāṇ-yoga*
remains, and the karmas in the *afte* state are made equal to the state of *āyu-
karma*. This is done by the *sāva-nīya-karma-bandha*. Therefore, the thirteenth
*guṇasthāna* is included in *Anaharaka-mārgaṇā*. ... ... ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 * mArgeNAoM meM mandhasvAmitva pradarzaka yantra 177 anAhAraka ke do artha haiM
1 - karmabandha ke kAraNoM kA pUrNarUpa se nirodha ho jAne se karmoM kA sarvathA
AhAra-bahaNa na karanA  /  yaha avasthA cauha ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM prApta
hotI hai, isIliye caudahavA~ guNasthAna atAhAraka mArgaNA meM mAnA jAtA hai| 2
jisa sthiti meM sirpha phArma kAyayoga kI pugalavargaNA kA grahaNa hotA ho use
anAhAraka avasthA kahate haiN| isa dRSTi se saMsArI jIva aba eka zarIra ko
chor3akara bhavAntara- prApti liye vigrahagati dvArA gamana karatA hai| usa
sthiti meM kArmaNa yoga sAtha rahatA hai, anya auvArika kAya Adi ko prAtha
varmaNAyeM nahIM rahatI haiN| ina pAsa meM sthita jIvoM ke sirpha pahalA dUsarA
aura cauthA yaha tIna guNasthAna hote haiM  /  T yogI sevA guNasthAna )
anAhAraka mArgaNA meM isaliye grahaNa kiyA gayA hai ki Ayu karma ke paramANuoM
se anya karmoM kI sthiti adhika ho to unako Ayukarma kI sthiti ke barAbara
karane ke liye sAta kriyA karate haiN| isa samuddhAta sthiti meM sirpha kArmaNa
yoga rahatA hai aura afte sthiti vAle kamoM ko vo dvArA karma kI sthiti ke
barAbara kara liyA jAtA hai| yaha sAta sayogakevalI dvArA hotA hai, isIliye
terahavA~ guNasthAna anAhAraka mArgaNA meM Her gayA aura vaha sirpha sAvA nIya
karma kA badha hotA hai  /  ... ... ...

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 178: Appendix ###  Bond-Ownership of Aharak and Aharak-Mishra
Kayayog  According to the Karmagrantha, the bond-ownership of Aharak and Aharak-
Mishra Kayayog is like the sixth Prammatta-Samyata Gunasthan, which has 63
Prakruti, as mentioned in the general context and in relation to the Gunasthan.
However, the Pancha-Sangraha Sapta-Tika states that Aharak Kayayog has two
Gunasthan, the sixth and the seventh, while Aharak-Mishra Kayayog has only the
sixth Gunasthan. Therefore, the bond of Aharak Kayayog should be considered as
63 Prakruti in the sixth Gunasthan, 57 in the seventh Gunasthan, and 66 if there
is no bond of Devayu.  The basis for this statement is that the seventh
Gunasthan is the bond-worthy Gunasthan for the Aharak body, while the sixth is
the Ud-yogya (suitable for effort). When the fourteen Purva-dhari perform Aharak
body, they experience the sixth Gunasthan due to the involvement of Pramada
(negligence) in utilizing the Labdhi (gain). At the beginning of the Aharak
body, it is mixed with Bodarik (materiality), meaning that the sixth Gunasthan
exists in both Aharak and Aharak-Mishra Kayayog. However, later, due to the
power of Vishuddhi (purification), it reaches the seventh Gunasthan, where only
Aharak Yog remains, and the Gunasthan is the seventh.  Therefore, it is
appropriate to consider the sixth and seventh Gunasthan for Aharak Kayayog and
the sixth Gunasthan for Aharak-Mishra Kayayog. Consequently, all Aharak Kayayog
would have 63 and 17 Prakruti, while Aharak-Mishra Kayayog would have 63
Prakruti.  In the Gommatasar Karmakanda, 63 Prakruti are considered bond-worthy
for Aharak-Mishra Kayayog, and 62 Prakruti are considered bond-worthy for Aharak
Kayayog, considering the bond of Devayu. The reason for considering the bond of
Devayu is the rule that Ayus (life span) does not bind in the mixed state.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 178 tRtIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa AhAraka evaM AhArakamiva kAyayoga kA
bandha-svAmitva karmagrantha ke matAnusAra AhAraka aura AhArakamizra kAyayoga kA
bandha svAmitva sAmAnya se aura guNasthAna kI apekSA bandhAdhikAra meM batAye
gaye chaThe pramattasaMyata guNasthAna ke jaisA 63 prakRtiyoM kA hai aura
guNasthAna chaThA batalAyA hai  /  lekina paMcasaMgraha saptatikA kA mata hai ki
AhAraka kAyayoga meM chaThA aura sAtavAM yaha do guNasthAna haiM tathA
bahArakamizra kAyayoga meM sirpha chaThA guNasthAna hai| tava AhAraka kAyayoga
kA bandha guNasthAna meM 63 va sAtaveM guNasthAna meM 57 aura devAyu kA bandha
na ho to 66 prakRtiyoM kA mAnA jAnA cAhie  /  ukta mantavya kA AdhAra yaha hai
ki AhAraka zarIra kA bandhayogya guNa sthAna sAtavAM hai aura udayogya chaThA  /
jaba caudaha pUrvadhArI AhAraka zarIra karatA hai, usa samaya labdhi kA upayoga
karane se pramAdayukta hone se chaTA guthasthAna hotA hai aura AhAraka zarIra kA
prArambha karate samaya vaha bodArika ke sAtha mizra hotA hai, yAnI AhAraka aura
AhArakamizra kAyayoga meM chaThA guNasthAna hotA hai kintu bAda meM vizuddhi kI
zakti se sAtaveM guNasthAna meM AlA hai taba AhAraka yoga hI rahatA hai aura
guNasthAna sAtavA~  /  isa efsc se AhAraka kAyayoga meM chaThA aura sAtavA~
tathA AhArakamizra kAyayoga meM chA guNasthAna mAnA jAnA cAhiye aura saba
AhAraka kAyayoga meM 63 aura 17 tathA AhArakamizra kAyayoga meM 63 prakRtiyA~
yogya hoMgI  /  gommaTasara karmakAMDa meM bahAraka kAyayoga meM 63 prakRtiyA~
aura AhA cafer kAyayoga meM devAyu kA bandhana mAnane se 62 prakutiyA~
bandhayogya mAnI haiN| devAsu ke bandhana mAnane kA kAraNa yaha niyama hai ki
mizra avasthA meM Ayu kA bandha nahIM hotA hai  /

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Bhaav in Ownership Demonstrative Paper General Bandhyogya 102 Prakrutis
Gunasthan - 1, 2, 4 (Total three) Sukshma, Apariapt, Sadharan, Deendriya,
Jeendriya, Chaturindriya, Naraktrik, Devtrik, Vaishyadvik, Aharak Dik, Ticha 201
J Gu.K. ] Bandhyogya io 1 3 101 £6 7 71 Affer Kayayog Ka Bandh-Swamitva ! Abandh
1 Tirthankar Naam Punaha Bandh X 1 Tirthankar M P Bandh-Vicche 176 Miya,
Indsansthan, Ekentriya, Sthavar, Aay, Napunsakved, Seva Sanhanan 7 = Out of the
25 Prakrutis mentioned in Bandhadhikar, 24 Prakrutis except Ticha www Special
Although it is possible for Kriya and Vaishyamishra Kayayog to have the fifth
and sixth Gunasthan in comparison to the Sandijanya Kriyasharira, the reason for
considering one to four Gunasthan in Kriya Kayayog and 1, 2, 4 Gunasthan in
Vaishyamishra Kayayog is that here the natural Bhavaprasthaya Vaikriya Sharira
has been considered. Therefore, four Gunasthan have been considered in Kiya
Kayayog and 1, 2, these three Gunasthan have been considered in Kriyamishra
Kayayog.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAoM meM svAmitva pradarzaka patra sAmAnya bandhayogya 102 prakRtiyAM
guNasthAna - 1, 2, 4 (kula tIna ) sUkSma, aparyApta, sAdhAraNa, DIndriya,
jIndriya, caturindriya, narakatrika, devatrika, vaizyadvika, AhAraka Dika, ticA
201 J gu0ka0 ] bandha yogya io 1 3 101 PS6 7 71 affer kAyayoga kA bandha-
svAmitva ! abandha 1 tIrthaMkara nAma punaH bandha X 1 tIrthaMkara ma P bandha-
vicche 176 miyA, iMDasaMsthAna, eketriya, sthAvara, Aya, napuMsakaveda, sevA
saMhanana 7 = bandhAdhikAra meM batAI gaI 25 prakRtiyoM meM se tiyaMcA ko
chor3akara 24 prakRtiya www vizeSa yadyapi sandhijanya kriyazarIra kI apekSA
kriya aura vaizyami kAyayoga meM pAMca aura chaTA guNasthAna honA bhI sambhava
hai, lekina kriya kAyayoga meM eka se cAra aura vaizvimizra kAyayoga meM 1, 2,
4, guNasthAna mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki yahA~ svAbhAvika bhavaprasthaya
vaikriya zarIra kI kakSA kI gaI hai  /  isIliye kiya kAyayoga meM cAra aura
kriyamiTa kAyayoga meM 1, 2, yaha tIna guNasthAna mAne haiM  /

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 180 ## 5 ## General Bandha-yoga 120 ## Gunasthan 14 Gunasthan ## 120
Prakritis mentioned in the Bandha-adhikār for the eight Aṣṭakamas, beginning
with Jñānāvaraṇa ## Mu. 00 Bandha-yoga ## * ## 2 ## 117 ## 101 ## 74 ## 77 ## 6
## 63 ## Non-ownership of Pariyā, Kāya, Bhavyā, and Saṁśo ## r ## r ## 3 ##
Tirthankara Āhā Śarīra ## Āhā ## 0 Bango ## AF ## Banch ## Deva and Manushya ##
Āyu ## ====== \\_/\_\\www.co ## X ## * ## X ## ! ## Punah Bandha ## Tirthankara
Nāma, Yev ## Manushyāyu ## Tṛtīya Karmagrantha: Pariśiṣṭa ## X ## Bandha-vicched
## 4 ## According to Bandha-adhikār ## 16 ## According to Ratf-dhikār ## 25 ##
According to Vā-dhikār ## Same as Bandha-adhikār ## | Same as Bandha-adhikār !
6/7

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 180 5 sAmAnya bandhayogya 120 guNasthAna 14 guNasthAna jJAnAvaraNa Adi
aSTakamoM kI bandhAdhikAra meM batAI gaI 120 prakRtiyA~ mu00 bandhayogya * 2 117
101 74 77 6 63 pariya, kAya, bhavya, saMzo kA asvAmitva r r 3 tIrthaMkara AhA
zarIra AhA 0baMgo0 AF bancha deva va manuSya Ayu ====== \\_/\_\\www.co X * X !
punaH bandha tIrthaMkara nAma, yeva manuSyAyu tRtIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa X
bandha-viccheda 4 bandhAdhikAra ke anusAra 16 ratfdhakAra ke anusAra 25
vAdhikAra ke anusAra bandhAdhikAra ke samAna | bandhAdhikAra ke samAna ! 6/7

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Mārganāoṃ meṃ bandhsvāmitva pradarśaka yantra Gulaka bandha yogya Abandha Punaḥ
bandha Andha-vikaccheda Bandhādhikāra ke anusāra 1 āhāraka śarīra thāhāraka aṃgo
Bandhādhikāra ke anusāra 2 bandhādhikāra ke anusāra 37 bannādhikāra ke anusāra 4
Bandhādhikāra ke anusāra haiṃ xxxxx x Dhandhādhikāra ke anusāra 16 xx x x x
xxxxx x x Badhādhikāra ke anusāra hai x x Anirwāṇam

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mArgaNAoM meM bandhasvAmitva pradarzaka yaMtra gulaka bandha yogya abandha
punaH bandha andha-vikacheda banadhAdhikAra ke anusAra 1 AhAraka zarIra
thAhAraka aMgo bandhAdhikAra ke anusAra 2 bandhAdhikAra ke anusAra 37
bannAdhikAra ke anusAra 4 bandhAdhikAra ke anusAra haiM xxxxx x dhandhAdhikAra
ke anusAra 16 xx x x x xxxxx x x badhAdhikAra ke anusAra hai x x Anirwanam

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix:  **1. General Differences between the Paths of the Vedas and the
Path of Conduct:**  The three common differences between the paths of the Vedas
and the Path of Conduct are: anger, pride, deceit, and greed. Of these, anger,
pride, and deceit are the 120 binding natures. There are nine stages of
qualities, starting from false belief and ending with non-obstruction. According
to the above mantra, each stage of quality has 120 binding natures.  **2. The
Fourth General Difference in the Path of Conduct: Greed:**  The fourth general
difference in the Path of Conduct, greed, has 120 binding natures. There are ten
stages of qualities, starting from false belief and ending with subtle
perception. The ownership of these binding natures should be understood as
mentioned above.  The four infinite-binding passions (anger, pride, deceit, and
greed) are found in the first two stages of qualities. The Tirthankara and the
Aharaka cannot be bound by these passions because they have renounced the
appropriate nature, and the binding of the Aharaka is dependent on the
community. However, the infinite-binding passions do not have right faith or
right conduct. Therefore, when these three natures are reduced, there are 117
binding natures remaining, and the number of binding natures in the stages of
qualities is reduced to 117 in the first stage and 101 in the second stage.  The
four passions of the non-returning covering (anger, pride, deceit, and greed)
exist from the beginning until the stage of the holder of the four qualities.
Therefore, there are four stages of qualities in this passion. Even with the
presence of this passion, the Tirthankara can be bound due to right faith, but
the Aharaka cannot be bound due to the absence of complete renunciation of
conduct. Therefore, since the Aharaka cannot be bound, there are 118 binding
natures remaining, and the number of binding natures in the stages of qualities
is reduced to 117, 101, 74, and 77 in the first four stages of qualities,
respectively.  The four passions of the rejecting covering (anger, pride,
deceit, and greed) have one-sided conduct, and therefore there are five stages
of qualities in this passion. The Tirthankara can be bound by this passion, but
the Aharaka cannot be bound. Therefore, there are 118 binding natures remaining,
and the number of binding natures in the stages of qualities is reduced to 117,
101, 74, 77, and 67 in the first five stages of qualities, respectively.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 emy.mararyaT722072711000rprernaw wwMMRODURATARI A ng tsIya kamanagya :
pariziSTa 1 vedamAgaMNA tathA kayAyamArgaNA ke sAmAnya bhedI ... kodha, mAna,
mAyA aura lobha-meM se zrodha, mAna, mAyA ina tIna bhedoM meM bandhayogya
prakRtiyA~ 120 haiM tathA pahale mithyASa se nau anivRtikaraNa taka no guNa
sthAna hote haiN| unameM Upara kahe gaye mantra ke anusAra pratyeka guNasthAma *
kaashi ykssaa  /  2 kaSAyamArgaNA ke cauthe sAmAnya bheda lobha meM bandhayogya
120 prakRtiyA~ haiM aura guNasthAna mighyAstra se sUkSmasaMparAyaparyanta dasa
hote haiM  /  inakA baMdhasvAmitva para kaheM gaye anusAra jAnanA  /
anantAnubandhI kaSAyacatuSka (krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha) prArambha ke do
guNasthAnoM meM pAI jAtI hai| isameM tIrthaGkara evaM AhArakadvika kA bandha
sambhava nahIM hai| kyoMki lAyaka prakRti kA saMnyAsa hai aura AhArakAdvika kA
bandha saMghamasApekSa  /  kintu anantAnubandhI kaSAya meM na samyaktva hai aura
na cArikha  /  asaH tIna prakRtiyoM ko kama karane para sAmAnya se 117 aura
guNasthAnoM meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna pahale se 117 aura dUsare meM 101
prakRtiyA~ bandhayogya haiN| apratyAyAmAbaraNa kaSAyacatuSka kA udaya mAdi ke
dhAra gRNAsthAna paryanta rahatA hai ataH isameM cAra guNasthAna mAne jAte haiM
/  isa kaSAya ke rahate hue bhI samyakAva hone se tIrthaMkara prakRti kA bandha
ho sakatA hai kintu sarvavirata cAritra na hone se AhArakaTika kA bandha nahIM
hotA  /  ataH bAhAra dvika ke bandhayogya na hone se sAmAnya se 118 prakRtiyA~
tathA guNasthAnoM meM invAdhikAra ke samAna Adi ke cAra gRNa sthAnoM meM
kramazaH 117, 101, 74, 77 prakRtiyA~ bandhayogya haiN| pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
kaSAyacatuSka meM ekadeza cAriSa home se Avi ke pAMca guNasthAna hote haiM  /
tIrthaGkara prakRti bandha yogya hai lekina AhArakadvika kA bandha sambhava
nahIM hai  /  ataH sAmAnya se 118 prakRliyA~ tathA guNasthAnoM meM eka se lekara
pAMcaveM taka kramazaH 117, 101, 74, 77, 67 prakRtiyAM bandhayogya haiN| 5

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## In Bhavas (States of Being)  **Regarding the Yantras (Instruments) of the Six
Sanjvalana Kashayas (Afflictions)**  * **Anger, Pride, and Deceit:** These arise
from Mithyatva (False Belief) and continue until the Nivriti Gunasthan (State of
Liberation). They are present in all Gunasthanas (States of Being). * **Greed:**
This arises until the tenth Sukhsamgraya Gunasthan (State of Subtle Collection).
Therefore, there are 120 general Bandha-yogya (Capable of Binding) Prakritis
(Substances).    **Regarding the Ownership of Bandha (Binding) in the
Gunasthanas:**  * **Anger, Pride, and Deceit:** Their ownership of Bandha is
similar to the Bandha-adhikarya (Right to Bind) from the first to the ninth
Gunasthanas.  The respective numbers are 11.5, 101, etc. * **Greed:** It remains
until the tenth Gunasthan. Therefore, until the ninth Gunasthan, it is similar
to the binding of Anger, Pride, and Deceit. In the tenth Gunasthan, it has 17
Prakritis.  ## In the Gyanamarg (Path of Knowledge)  **Regarding the Different
Types of Agyan (Ignorance)**  * **Mati Agyan (Intellectual Ignorance), Shruta
Agyan (Scriptural Ignorance), and Avadhi Agyan (Clairvoyance Ignorance):** These
have two or three Gunasthanas at the beginning. Since there is no Samyaktva
(Right Faith) or Charitra (Right Conduct), the Tirthankara and Aharadrik (Those
who consume food) are not capable of binding these three Prakritis. Therefore,
there are 115 general Bandha-yogya Prakritis. The Bandha-adhikarya in these
three Gunasthanas is 110, 101, and 74 respectively.  **Regarding the Four
Marganas (Paths)**  * **Mati Gyan (Intellectual Knowledge), Shruta Gyan
(Scriptural Knowledge), Avadhi Gyan (Clairvoyance Knowledge), and Avadhi Darshan
(Clairvoyance Vision):** These have nine Gunasthanas from the fourth Avira
(Uninterrupted) to the twelfth Kshina Moh (Subdued Delusion). Since the
Aharadrik can bind in these, there are 76 Prakritis, which are the 7.5 general
Prakritis plus the Aharadrik. The Bandha-adhikarya in these Gunasthanas is 77,
67, etc., until the twelfth.  **Regarding the Manah Paryaya Gyan (Knowledge of
Mental Transformations)**  * **This arises from the sixth Prabhamanayat
(Illuminated by the Light of Knowledge) to the twelfth Kshina Moh (Subdued
Delusion).** Therefore, there are seven Gunasthanas. Since the Aharadrik can
bind in these, there are 63 and 64 general Bandha-yogya Prakritis. The Bandha-
adhikarya in these Gunasthanas is from the sixth to the twelfth.  **Regarding
the Two Marganas (Paths) of Kevala Gyan (Omniscience) and Kevala Darshan
(Omniscient Vision)**  * **These have the final two Gunasthanas: Ayogika Kevali
(Non-Functional Omniscient) and Yogika Kevali (Functional Omniscient).** In the
Ayogika Kevali Gunasthan, there is no Bandha-karan (Cause of Binding), so no
Prakriti can be bound.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAoM meM yaMtra 6 saMjvalana kaSAyacatuSka meM se krodha, mAna, mAyA kA udaya
mithyAtva se anivRti guNasthAnaparyanta mI guNasthAnoM meM hotA hai, tathA lobha
kA udaya dasaveM sUkSmasaMgarAya guNasthAna taka / ataH sAmAnya me bandha yogya
prakRtiyA~ 120 hai tathA guNasthAnoM kI apekSA sambalana krodha, mAna aura mAyA
kA svAmitva bandhAdhikAra ke samAna pahale se lekara nau guNasthAnoM meM Rpa
11.5. 101 Adi maent caahiye| saMcalana lobha dasaveM guNasthAna taka rahatA hai
ataH nau guNasthAna taka to koSa, mAna aura mAyA ke bandha jaisA aura dasaveM
guNasthAna meM 17 prakRtiyoM kA matva hai| in 5 183 & jJAnamArga ke bheda
ajJAnatrika (mati ajJAna, zrutAjJAna, avadhi- ajJAnavibhaMgajJAna) meM Adi ke do
yA tIna guNAsthAna hote haiN| isameM samyaktva cAritra nahIM hone se tIrthaMkara
aura AhAradvi ina tIna prakRtiyoM ke bandhayogya nahIM hone se sAmAnya
bandhayogya 115 prakRtiyA~ haiM aura tInoM guNasthAnoM meM bandhAdhikAra ke
sammAna kramaza 110 101.74 prati bandhayogya haiM  /  matijJAna, zrutajJAna,
avadhijJAna tathA avadhidarzana ina cAra mArgaNAoM meM cauthe avirata se lekara
bArahaveM zrISamohaparyanta nau guNasthAna hote hai  /  inameM AhArakadrika kA
bandha saMbhava hai, ata: sAmAnya se ve guNasthAna kI banyo 7.5 ekRtiyoM ke
sAtha AhAra ko milAne se 76 prakRtiyA~ haiM, tathA guNasthAnoM meM bandhAdhikAra
ke samAna kramazaH 7767 Adi bArahaveM sthAna taka samajhanA cAhiye  /
manaHparyAyajJAna chaThe pramabhamaMyata se lekara bArahaveM kSINamohapata hotA
| ataH isameM sAta guNasthAna meM tathA AhArakaTTika kA bandha saMbhava hone se
63 2 64 prakRtiya sAmAnya banprayogya haiM aura guNasthAnoM meM bandhAdhikAra ke
samAna chaha se bAraha taka kA bandhasvAmitva jAnanA  /  10 kevalajJAna aura
kevaladarzana ina do mArgaNAoM meM antima do guNasthAnasayogikevalI ayogikevalI
hote haiN| ayogikevalI guNasthAna meM to bandha-kAraNa kA abhAva hone se kisI
bhI prakRti kA bandha nahIM hotA hai dily STATE

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 184: Appendix to the Third Karma-Ghatya  **1.** In the **Yoga-Lila**
(state of liberation), only one **Prakriti** (nature) is bound, which is
**Saata-Vedaniya** (pertaining to the seven senses).  **2.** The **Darshan-
Marg** (path of perception) exists from the **Kshetra-Kshudarshan** (perception
of the field of action) and **Adarshan** (non-perception) stages of **Kshaya-
Upa-Shमिक** (destruction of karma) until the twelfth **Gunasthan** (stage of
spiritual progress). Therefore, their ownership is similar to the general
**Bandha-Adhikar** (right to bind) in the **Gunasthanas**. In other words, the
general **Bandha-Yogya** (capable of being bound) are 120, and in the
**Gunasthanas**, they are respectively 117, 101, 74, 77, etc., until the twelfth
**Gunasthan**.  **3.** The **Samyama-Marg** (path of restraint) has four
**Gunasthanas** in the **Avirati** (non-stopping) stage. In the fourth
**Gunasthan**, the **Samyaktva** (right faith) can bind the **Tirthankara-Nama**
(name of a Tirthankara). However, since **Feng** (a specific type of karma) is
not present, the **Aharak-Drik** (pertaining to food and drink) is not bound in
the four **Vasapeksha** (dependent) stages. Therefore, 118 **Prakritis** are
generally **Bandha-Yogya**, and in the **Gunasthanas**, they are respectively
117, 101, 74, 77, similar to the **Bandha-Adhikar**.  **4.** The **Samayik** and
**Chheda-Upa-Sthaniya** (two types of restraint) are found from the sixth to the
ninth **Gunasthanas**. In these, the **Aharak-Drik** is possible. Therefore, the
**Bandha-Yogya** 63 **Prakritis** of the sixth **Gunasthan** are added to the
**Aharak-Drik** (63 + 2), making 65 **Prakritis** generally **Bandha-Yogya**. In
the seventh, eighth, and ninth **Gunasthanas**, the **Bandha-Swamitva**
(ownership of binding) should be understood as 62/56/58/58/56/26. 22/21/20/16/18
respectively.  **5.** In the **Parihar-Vivridhi** (restraint of increase)
**Samyama**, the sixth and seventh **Gunasthanas** are present. In these two
**Samyamas**, the **Aharak-Drik** does not arise, but it is possible. There are
65 **Prakritis** that are **Vrata-Yogya** (capable of taking vows), and in the
**Gunasthanas**, they are respectively 63, 56/58.  **6.** In the **Sukshma-
Samparaya** (subtle restraint) **Samyama**, the tenth **Gunasthan** called
**Sukshma-Samparaya** is present, and in the **Desha-Virat** (restraint of
space) **Samyama**, the eleventh **Gunasthan** called **Desha-Virat** is
present. The **Bandha-Swamitva** of both is similar to the general and
**Gunasthanas**, with the **Bandha-Yogya** **Prakritis** being in their
respective **Gunasthanas**. In other words, there are 17 **Prakritis** **Bandha-
Yogya** in **Sukshma-Samparaya** and 67 in **Desha-Virat**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 184 tRtIya karmagratya pariziSTa afer rahaveM yogilI guNasthAna meM sirpha eka
prakRti sAtAvedanIya kA bandha hotA hai  /  11 darzanamArgeNA ke kSetra
kSudarzana aura adarzana kSAyopazamika bhAva hone se pahale se lekara bArahave
guNasthAna taka rahate haiM ataH inakA svAmitva sAmAnya se aura guNasthAnoM meM
bandhAdhikAra ke samAna hai| arthAt sAmAnya banyo 120 aura guNasthAnoM meM
kramaza: 117, 101, 74, 77 Adi bArahave guNasthAna taka sAmAhiye  /  12
saMyamamArgaNA ke bheda avirati meM Adi ke cAra guNasthAna hote haiM  /  caube
guNasthAna meM samyaktva hone se tIrthaMkaranAma kA bandha ho sakatA hai feng
afta na hone se cArivasApekSa AhArakadrika kA bandha na hone se 118 prakRtiyoM
sAmAnya bandhayogya haiM aura guNasthAnoM meM bandhAdhikAra ke samAna pahale se
cauthe taka kramazaH 117 101 74, 77 prakRtiyoM kA hai | 13 sAmAyika,
chedopasthAnIya ye do saMyama chaTe se nauveM guNasthAnaparyanta vAra guNasthAna
meM pAye jAte haiM  /  inameM AhArakadvikakA anya sambhava hai | ataH chaThe
guNasthAna kI bandhayogya 63 prakRtiyoM ke sAtha AhAradrika ko (63 + 2) jor3ane
se sAmAnya se 65 prakRtiyAM bandhayogya haiM aura sAtaveM, AThaveM, nauveM
guNasthAna meM kramazaH 62 / 56/58/58 / 56/26. 22/21/20/16/18 kA bandhasvAmitva
samajhanA cAhiye  /  14 parihAravivRddhi saMyama meM chaThA aura sAya yaha do
saMma meM AhArakavi kA udaya nahIM hotA hai, kintu saMbhava hai  /  guNasthAna
haiM isa vrataH yogya 65 prakRtiyA~ haiM aura guNasthAnoM meM kramazaH 63, 56/58
Tarfect samajhanA 15 sUkSmasaMparAya saMyama meM apane nAma vAlA sUkSmasaMyarAya
nAmaka dasava guNasthAna evaM deza virata saMyama meM apane nAma vAlA dezavirata
nAmaka feat guNasthAna hotA hai| ina donoM kA bavasvAmitva sAmAnya aura
guNasthAna kI apekSA apane guNasthAna meM bandhayogya prakRtiyoM kA hai arthAt
sUkSmaparAya meM 17 aura zakti meM 67 prakRtiyA~ bandhayoga haiN|

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
THANKlacom **A Device for Demonstrating the Bandha-Karma in the Gunasthana**
16. The last four Gunasthana in the 16 Yathajya-Charitra are: Upshama-moha,
Kshina-moha, Payogi-kevali, and Ayogi-kevali. Of these four Gunasthana, the
Ayogi-kevali Gunasthana does not have any Bandha-karana, so there is no Bandha
of any nature. However, in the remaining three Gunasthana, there is Bandha of
the seven Vedaniya, both general and specific, according to the Bandha-
adhikarya.  17. Upshama-samyak-darshana is found from the fourth to the eleventh
Gunasthana. The special characteristic of this Samyak-tva is that there is no
Bandha of Aayu. In the fourth Gunasthana, there is no Bandha of Manushya-ayu and
Deva-ayu, and in the fifth Gunasthana, there is no Bandha of Deva-ayu.
Therefore, out of the 77 Prakruti that are Bandha-yogya in the fourth
Gunasthana, the two Aayu are reduced, leaving 75 Prakruti that are Bandha-yogya.
Therefore, from the fifth to the seventh Gunasthana, one Prakruti is reduced
from the Bandha-samstha mentioned in the Bandha-adhikarya, resulting in Bandha
of 66, 62.5, and 58 Prakruti respectively. After this, from the eighth to the
eleventh Gunasthana, there is Bandha-svamitva according to the Bandha-adhikarya.
18. In the Vedaka (Sayopamika), the sequence of the Upshama or Kshapaka category
begins from the A-purvakarana Gunasthana. Therefore, from the fourth Avirati to
the seventh Virata Gunasthana, there are six Gunasthana. In this, Bandha of
Aharakatik is possible. Therefore, by adding Aharakatik to the 77 Prakruti that
are Bandha-yogya in the fourth Gunasthana, there are 78 Prakruti that are
Bandha-yogya in general. And in the other Gunasthana, the Bandha-svamitva is 77,
67, 63, 56, and 58 Prakruti respectively, as mentioned in the Bandha-adhikarya.
19. With the destruction of Darshan-moha, there are eleven Gunasthana from the
fourth to the fourteenth in the other Bhashika Samyak-tva. In this, Bandha of
Aharakatik is possible, so the Bandha-svamitva is 79 Prakruti in general. And in
relation to the Gunasthana, the Bandha-adhikarya is 77, 67, 63, 56, 54, etc., up
to one Prakruti in the thirteenth Sthapithakevali Gunasthana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 THANKlAcom mAgaMNAoM meM banyasyAmistra pradarzaka yaMtra 16 yathAjyAtacAritra
meM antima cAra (upazAmatamoha, kSINamoha, payogi kevalI, ayogikevalI)
guNasthAna haiN| ina cAra guNasthAnoM meM se ayogi:kevalI gumasthAna meM bandha-
kAraNa kA abhAva hone se kisI prakRti kA bancha nahIM hotA hai kintu zeSa tIna
guNasthAnoM meM bAdhikAra ke anusAra sAmAnya va viSa eka prakRti sAtA vedanIya
kA banna hotA hai  /  17 upazama samyakadra caudhe se lekara gyArahaveM
guNasthAna taka pAyA jAtA hai  /  isa samyaktva kI yaha vizeSatA hai ki
Ayubandha nahIM hotA hai  /  cauthe guNasthAna meM manuSyAyu aura devAthu kA
sathA pAMcaveM mAvi meM devAyu kA bandha nahIM hone se cauthe guNasthAna kI
bandhayogya 77 prakaliyoM meM se ukta do vAyu ko kama karane se sAmAnya kI
apekSA 75 pakutiyAM bandhayogya hai| ata: pAMca se sAta muNasthAna saka
bandhAdhikAra meM batAI gaI bandhasaMsthA meM se ekanAka prakRti ko kama karane
para kramazaH 66, 62.58 prakRtiyoM kA bandha hotA hai  /  isake bAda AThaveM se
gArahaveM gRNasthAna taka dadhAdhikAra ke anusAra bandhasvAmitva hai| 18 vedaka
(sAyopamika) meM Apa apUrvakaraNa guNasthAna se upazama yA kSapaka zreNI kA
krama prArambha ho jAne se cauthe avirati se lekara sAtameM apramazaH virata
guNasthAna taka bAra guNasthAna hote haiM  /  isameM AhArakatika kA bandha
sambhava hai, ataH cauthe guNasthAna ko bandhapraregya 77 prakRtiyoM ke sAtha
bAhArakavika ko jor3ane se 76 pratiyaI mAmAnya ko bandhakopa haiM aura
majasthAnoM meM bandhasvAmitva bandhAdhikAra meM batAye gaye anusAra kramazaH 77
67, 63, 56 / 58 prakRtiyoM kA hai  /  16 darzanamoha ke kSaya se anya bhASika
samyakasva meM cauthe se caudaha taka gyAraha guNaspAna hote haiN| isameM
AhAraphArika kA bandha sambhava hone se sAmAnyarUpa meM bandhasvAmitva 79
prajAtiyoM kA hai aura sthAnoM kI apekSA bandhAdhikAra meM guNa sthAnoM ke krama
meM kramaza: 77, 67, 63. 56:54 Adi se 1 prakRti paryanta terahaveM sthApithekalI
guNasthAna paryansa mamariaww

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix to the Third Karma Granth  **Bondage and Liberation**  The
fourteenth, Aayogikevali, Gunasthan is free from bondage because it is not a
cause of bondage. The twenty Mithyatva, Samavadan, and Mishradristi are also
divisions of the path of Samyaktva. Each of these has one Gunasthan,
respectively the first, second, and third.  Since the Tirthankara and
Aaharakadvik (Aaharak body, Aaharak limbs) are not capable of being bound, there
are 117, 11, and 74 natures capable of being bound in Mithyatva, Samavadan, and
Mishradristi respectively.  The 21 Abhavyas have only the first Mithyatva
Gunasthan. Due to the attainment of Samyaktva and Paritran, the Tirthankara and
Aaharakadvik cannot be bound. Therefore, 117 natures are capable of being bound
compared to the general and Gunasthan.  The 22 Asanshi have the first and second
Gunasthan. Since the Tirthankara and Aaharakadvik cannot be bound in the general
and the first Gunasthan, there are 117 natures capable of being bound, and 101
natures are bound in the second Gunasthan according to the statement of the
authority.  In the Aaharak path, all Manovrit Sansari beings are included. From
the first Mithyatva to the thirteenth Aayogikevali Gunasthan, there are thirteen
Gunasthan. The bondage of these should be understood according to the general
and the authority of each Gunasthan. That is, there are 120 natures capable of
being bound in general, and 117, 101, 74, 77, 67, etc. should be understood up
to Aayogikevali.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 -remniwwwwwcommommmmmmmer c e tRtIya karmagranya pariziSTa bandha samasanA
vAhiye  /  caudahavAM ayogikevanI guNasthAna bandha-kAraNa na hone se abAdhaka
hai| 20 mithyAtya, sAmavAdana aura mizraSTi ye sIma bhI samyaktva mArgaNA ke
avAntara bheda haiN| inameM apane apane nAma vAlA kramaza: pahalA, dUsarA,
sIsarA, eka-eka gaNasthAna hotA hai| tIrthakaranAma aura AhArakAdvikaAhAraka
zarIra, AhAraka aMgopAMga-ina tIna prakAtiyoM ke bandhayogya na hone se
mithyAtva meM 117, sAsAdhana meM 1.1 aura mizradRSTi meM 74 prakRtiyA~ sAmAnya
se bandhayogya haiN| 21 abhavya jIvoM ke sirpha pahalA mithyAtva guNa sthAna
hotA hai  /  midhyAva ke kAraNa samyaktva aura pAritra kI prApti meM hone se
tIrthaGkara aura AhArakadvika kA bandha sambhava nahIM hai  /  isaliye sAmAnya
aura guNasthAna kI apekSA 117 prakRtiyA~ andhayogya haiN| 22 asaMzI jovoM ke
pahalA aura dUsarA yaha do guNasthAna hote haiN| inake sAmAnya se aura pahale
guNasthAna meM tIrthakara aura AhArakaTika kA bandha nahIM hone se 117
prakatiyoM kA tathA dusare gaNasthAna meM bandhAdhikAra ke kathanAnusAra 101
prakRtiyoM kA khandha hotA hai| 23 AhAraka mArgaNA meM sabhI manovRta saMsArI
jIvoM kA grahaNa hone se pahale mithyAtva se lekara terahaveM sayogikevalI
guNasthAna taka teraha muNasthAna hai| isakA nandhasvAmitva sAmAnma se aura
guNasthAnoM kI apekSA pratyeka meM padhAdhikAra ke kathanAnusAra jAnanA cAhiye
/  arthAt sAmAnya bannayogya 120 prakRtiyA~ haiM aura guNasthAnoM meM 117, 101,
74, 77, 67 Adi kA kama sayogikevalI taka kA samajhanA caahie|

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Instrument demonstrating samitv in magama 17 Krishna, Bhil, Kapota - these three
leshyas' andhaswamitva, common bandhyogya 115 prakritis Gunasthan - in the 120
prakritis mentioned in the mar bandhadhikar of adi, devoid of aharakdvig Gu•|
Bandhyogya Prabhandh Punah bandh Bandh-vichched | Similar to bandhadhikar 16
Tirthankaranam karma Similar to bandhadhikar 25 74 Manushyayu. Tirthankara name,
deva and manushyayu - - -   The reason why aharakadik is not considered in
Krishnadi seen leshyas is that their bandh happens in the seventh gunasthan, and
Krishnadi, having three legyah, can reach a maximum of the sixth gunasthan.
Therefore, the bandhaswamitva of these leshyas' 118 prakritis is considered
common. In karmagranths, the bandh of 77 prakritis in the sixth gunasthan is
mentioned for Krishnadi three leshyas, and this includes devayu of manushyayu.
But the siddhant's opinion is that in the sixth gunasthan of Krishnadi seen
leshyas,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mAgamAoM meM zAmitva pradarzaka yaMtra 17 kRSNa, bhIla, kApota leNyAoM kA
andhasvAmitva sAmAnya bandhayogya 115 prakRtiyA~ guNasthAna-Adi ke mAra
bandhAdhikAra meM kahI gaI 120 prakRliyoM meM AhArakadvika se vihIna gu*| bandha
yogya prabandha punaH bandha bandha-viccheda | bandhAdhikAra ke samAna 16
tIrthakaranAma karma bandhAdhikAra ke samAna 25 74 manuSyAyu  /  tIrthakara
nAma, deva va manuSyAdhu - - - kRSNAdi sIna lezyAoM meM AhArakAdika kA indha na
mAnane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki inakA bandha sAtaveM guNasthAna meM hI hotA hai
aura kRSNAdi tIna legyaha vAle adhika se adhika chaTe guNasthAna saka pAye jA
sakate haiM  /  isIlie ina lezyAoM ke sAmAnya se 118 prakRtiyoM kA
bandhasvAmirada mAnA hai| karmagranthoM meM kRSNAdi tIna lezyAoM ke paudhe
guNasthAna meM 77 prakRtiyoM kA bAda kahA hai aura inameM manuSyAyu ke devAyu kA
samAveza hai  /  lekina siddhAnta kA mata hai ki kRSNAdi sIna lezyAoM ke sauSe
muNasthAna meM jo

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Third Karma Granth: Appendix  It is said that the bondage (bandh) applies to
humans and not to gods. However, it only binds the human soul (manushyayu) and
not the divine soul (devayau). Therefore, instead of 77, 76 types of bondage
should be considered.  The aforementioned opinion of the सिद्धान्त (Siddhant) is
not addressed in the Karma Granth and is simply dismissed as "बहुश्रुतगम्य"
(bahushrutgamya). However, it is definitely worthy of consideration and until it
is resolved, it must be accepted that the inclusion of the divine soul (devayau)
in the bondage of nature (prakritibandh) by the Samyagdrsti who have attained
three knowledges (tri-jnana), like Krishna, is an opinion related to the Karma
Granth and not just a "संडासिक मल" (sandasik mal).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagrandha : pariziSTa manuSyAya aura devAya nA bandha kahA hai, baha!
sirpha manuSyAyu ko bAMdhate haiM parantu devAyu ko nahIM bAMdhate haiM  /  ataH
77 kI bajAya 76 prakRtiyoM kA bancha mAnanA maahie| siddhAnta ke ukta mata kA
samAdhAna karmagrantha meM kahIM nahIM kiyA gayA hai aura bahuzrutagamya
kahakara chor3a diyA hai| lekina vidhAraNIya avazya he aura jaba taka isakA
samAdhAna nahIM hosA taba taka yaha mAnanA par3egA ki kRSNAdi tIna leNyA vAle
samyagdRSTi ke jo prakRtibandha meM devAyu kI gaNanA hai vaha karmagrantha
sambandhI mata hai, saMDAsika mala nahIM hai|

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Maganas, Ownership Demonstrator Traveler Lekholeshya's Bandhaswami
General Bandha-worthy 111 Natures Gunasthan etc. seven Maraknayaka-Narakagati,
Narakanupurvi, Marakadhu, Sakshma, Sadharan, Aparyaps, Dwiindriya, Triindriya,
Chaturindriya Vihan 111 Guruka Bandha-worthy Abandha Punah Bandha. Bandha-
Vicched Tirthankaranama, Ahar Dwik Mithyatma, Dhumbasanthan, Napumsak Ved, Seva
Sanho, Ekeindriya, : Sthayara, Asap Similar to Bacchaadhikaran These and Humans
Ayu Similar to Andhashikar 10 Sarthakaranama, Dev and Manushyayu: Similar to
Badhaadhikaran 4 Similar to Bandhaadhikaran 5658 Ahar Kadik Mami

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mAgaNAoM meM svAmitva pradarzaka yAtra lekholezyA kA bandhasvAmistha sAmAnya
bandhayogya 111 prakRtiyA~ guNAsthAna Adi ke sAta marakanayaka-narakagati,
narakAnupUrvI, marakAdhu, sakSama, sAdhAraNa, aparyApsa, dvIndriya, trIndriya,
caturindriya vihAna 111 guruka bandha yogya abandha punaH bandha  /  bandha-
viccheda tIrthakaranAma, AhAra dvika mithyAtma,DhuMbasaMsthAna, napuMsaka veda,
sevA saMha0, ekendriya, : sthAyara, Asapa baccAdhikAra ke samAna ye va manuSya
Ayu andhAzikAra ke samAna 10 sArthakaranAma, deva va manuSyAyu: badhAdhikAra ke
samAna 4 bandhAdhikAra ke samAna 5658 AhArakAdika mami

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
160 Third Karma Granth: Parishit In Padmaleshya, there are 7 Gunasthanas from
the beginning, but its general Bandhaswamitva has the characteristic that it
does not have the bondage of Trik-Ekendriya, Sthavar, Atap along with the
Naraknadak of Tejo leshya, so the general bondage is of 108 Prakritis. And in
the first Gunasthan, Tirth Karnam and Aharakdvik, these three Prakritis are not
bound, so 105 Prakritis are bondable. Out of them, when the bondage of
Mithyatva, Hudra Sansthan, Napusakved, Sewart Sanhanan, these four Prakritis is
broken, then there are 101 Prakritis bondable in the second Gunasthan. From the
third to the seventh Gunasthan, you should understand it as the same as the Tru
Bandhadhikar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 160 tRtIya karmagrantha : parizita padamalezyA meM Adi ke 7 guNasthAna hote
haiM, lekina isake sAmAnya bandhasvAmitva meM yaha vizeSatA hai ki tejolezyA ke
narakanadaka ke sAtha ekendriya trika-ekendriya, sthAvara, Atapa kA bhI bandha
nahIM hone se sAmAnyabandha 108 prakRtiyoM kA hai aura pahale guNasthAna meM
tIrtha karanAma aura AhArakadvika yaha tIna prakRtiyAM abandha hone se 105
prakRtiyA~ bandhayogya haiM  /  unameM se mithyAtva, hudra saMsthAna,
napusakaveda, sevArta saMhanana ina cAra prakRtiyoM kA bandhaviccheda hone para
dUsare guNasthAna kI bandhayogya 101 pratAtiyAM hotI haiM  /  tIsare se lekara
sAta guNasthAna taka kA Tru bandhAdhikAra ke samAna samajhanA paahiye|

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Instruments Demonstrating Bondage in the Paths  **Sukla's**  **General
Bondable 104 Natures**  (Explained in the **Udyota Chatushk** under the heading
**Udyotanam, Tiyanchagati, Tearer Free** ) - **104**  **Gu.Ka.** [Bondable]  |
**1** | **8** | **101** | **7** | **74** | **7.3** | **€iy** | **63** | **565**
| **5.8** | **Abandha** | |---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---| |
**Tirthankara Name, Aharakdvik** | *** ** | **Dev & Manusya** | **X** | **X** |
**X** | **Swamitva** | **Gunasthan** (previously Tiyanupurvi Tiyayu) | **Punah
Bandha** | **X** | **Tirthankara Name, Dev & Manusyaayu** | **LALLAVYYYY** | |
**X** | **X** | **X** | **Aharakvik** | **X X X** | **SITES** | **4327** |
**Sansthan, Napunsak, Mithyatva Seva Sanhanan** | **4** | **-Vicched** |
**Bandhadhikar's 25 Tiyans, Udyotak Nyun** | | **: 21** | **Kar ke saman 10** |
**8** | **FuKar ke saman 4** | **Bandhadhikar ke saman 637** | **Tarfer ke saman
1** | **Bandhadhikar ke saman 2** | **Dhikar ke saman 30** | **4** |  |  |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mArgAoM meM bandhasvAmitva pradarzaka yantra suklA kA sAmAnya bandhayogya 104
prakRtiyA~ udyota catuSka udyotanAma, tiyaMcagati, tearer freeaa meM batalAI gaI
) vihona 104 gu0ka0 ] bandha yogya 1 8 101 7 74 7.3 EURiy 63 565 5. 8 abandha
tIrthaMkara nAma, AhArakadvika * deva va manuSyA X x X svAmitva guNasthAna
pahale se ticAnupUrvI ticAyu tathA punaH bandha X tIrthakara nAma, deva va
manuSyAyu LALLAVYYYY x x AhArakavika X X X SITES 4327 saMsthAna, napuMsaka,
midhyAtva sevA saMhanana 4 -viccheda bandhAdhikAra kI 25 tiyoM meM se udyotaka
nyUna : 21 kAra ke samAna 10 8 fukAra ke samAna 4 bandhAdhikAra ke samAna 637
Tarfer ke samAna 1 bandhAdhikAra ke samAna 2 dhikAra ke samAna 30 4

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
162 Third Karma Granth: Appendix Mak Bandha-yogya | Abandha Punaha Bandha
Bandha-vichched Andhadhikar ke saman 1 xxxxxx Xxx x x x xxxxx x wesomeowww wIMP
Samas varnan of Bandhaswamitva in Marganas "inditin ARRRRRRRRRISH NA

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 162 tRtIya karmagramma : pariziSTa maka bandha yogya | abandha punaH bandha
bandha-viccheda andhAdhikAra ke samAna 1 xxxxxx Xxx x x x xxxxx x wesomeowww
wIMP mArgaNAoM meM bandhasvAmitva kA varNana samAsa "inditin ARRRRRRRRRISH NA

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## A Brief Introduction to Jain Karma Literature  There are three main branches
of Indian philosophy: (1) Vedic, (2) Buddhist, and (3) Jain. The concept of
karma has been discussed in all three branches. While Vedic and Buddhist
literature have limited discussions on karma, they lack dedicated texts solely
focused on it. However, Jain literature, in contrast, boasts numerous texts
dedicated to karma, presenting a systematic, evolutionary, and comprehensive
analysis of the subject. Karma literature holds a significant place in Jain
scriptures and is known as *Karma Prakriti* or *Karma Anuyoga*.    Apart from
independent texts on karma, various other texts written by *Aacharyas* (Jain
teachers) also contain discussions on karma.  The foundation of karma literature
lies in Jain scriptures. The compilation of *Karma Shastra* (science of karma)
includes ancient texts on karma, which both the Svetambara and Digambara Jain
traditions consider to be authentic. These traditions consider
*Angrayaniyapurva* (the second of the fourteen *Purvas*) to be part of the
twelfth *Anga* (canonical text). Both traditions agree that the twelve *Angas*
and fourteen *Purvas* are direct pronouncements of Lord Mahavira. While the
current *Karma Shastra* may not be in its original form, it is essentially the
essence of Lord Mahavira's teachings, passed down through tradition.  Another
belief is that all *Angavidya* (Jain scriptures) are not only from Lord
Mahavira's time but also from previous *Tirthankaras* (Jain prophets) and are
therefore timeless. However, the flow...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Mo50000000condwanawalawww. di v yWIMMINMAL 0 ww.
poraryayorpawayyyyayariyanmasns.orrarare.......... jaina-karmasAhitya kA
saMkSipta paricaya bhAratIya tattvacitana kI mukhya tIna zAkhAeM haiM-(1)
vaidika, (2) bauddha aura (3) jaina  /  ina tInoM zAkhAoM ke bAra mAsa meM
karmavAda ke sambandha meM vicAra kiyA gayA hai| vaidika evaM bauddha sAhitya
meM kiyA gayA karma-sambandhI kinAra isanA alpa hai ki unameM sirpha karma-
viSayaka vicAra karane vAle koI alaga grantha nahIM hai; yatra-sana prAsaMgika
rUpa meM kicita vicAra vaya kiyA gayA hai| lekina isake viparIta ana bAjhamaya
meM meM sambandhI aneka grandha upaladha hote haiM. jinameM karmavAda kA
kramabaddha, vikAsonmukhI, pUrvApara zrRMkhalA basa evaM suzavasthita ativyApaka
rUpa meM vivecamma kiyA gayA hai  /  jana-sAlabaddha meM karma-sampanI sAhitya
kA apanA eka mahatvapUrNa sthAna hai o kama prakRta apayA kamaanya ke rUpa meM
prasiddha hai| svatantra karmagranthoM ke atirikta ArAma. tathA uttarapratI
AcAryoM dvArA racita granthoM meM yatra-tatra karmaviSayaka jAeM dekhane ko
milatI haiN| karmasAhitya kA mUla AdhAra jaina dhAGamaya meM isa samaya o bhI
karmazAstra kA saMkalana kiyA gayA hai, usameM se prAcIna mAne jAne vAle
karmaviSayaka granthoM kA sAkSA sambandha zvetAmbara evaM digambara donoM hI
jaina paramparAeM agrAyaNIya pUrva se batalAtI hai aura aMgrAyaNIya pUrva ko
dRSTivAda mAmaka bArahaveM aMga ke antargata caudaha pUrSoM meM se dUsarA pUrva
kahatI haiN| donoM hI paramparAe~ samAna rUpa se mAnatI haiM ki bAraha aMga aura
caudaha pUrva bhagavAna mahAvIra kI vipada vANI kA sAkSAta phala haiM  /  ali
vartamAna meM viddhamAna samaya karmazAstra mandapa se nahIM to bhAvarUpaM se
bhagavAna mahAvIra ke sAkSAt upadeza kA hI paramparA meM prApta sAra hai  /  isI
prakAra se eka dUsarI mAnyatA bhI hai ki vastutaH samasta aMgavidyAyeM bhAvarUpa
se kevala bhagavAna mahAvIrakAlIna hI nahIM, balki pUrva-pUrva meM hue anya
tIrthaGkaroM se bhI pUrvakAla kI haiM, ataeva anAdi haiM, kintu pravAha

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Three Divisions of Karmaśāstra  Though the knowledge of the Angas
(canonical texts) of the Tirthankara lineage is considered to be eternal, it has
taken on new forms from time to time. Hemchandracharya, in his *Pramana
Mimamsa*, states: "The eternal knowledge of the Angas, due to the desire for
brevity or expansion, takes on new forms, and is revealed by different authors.
The knowledge of the Angas is never lost."  This Karmaśāstra, which has been
passed down in the form of *Prayahara* (oral tradition) since time immemorial,
can be divided into three parts from the time of Bhagavan Mahavira to the
present:  (1) **Pūrvatmaka Karmaśāstra:** This is the largest and oldest part.
Its essence is considered to have existed until the time of the *Pūrva-vidya*
(ancient knowledge). After Bhagavan Mahavira, the *Pūrva-vidya* existed for
about 600 or 1000 years in a gradual form. The eighth *Pūrva* (ancient text) out
of the fourteen *Pūrvas* was primarily concerned with Karma. Similarly, there
was a section called *Karma-prabha* in the second *Pūrva* of the *Agravaniya*
(ancient text). However, the complete portion of the *Pūrvatmaka Karmaśāstra* is
not found in the present-day Śvetāmbara and Digambara literature.  (2)
**Pūrvohṛta Karmaśāstra:** This division is much smaller than the first, but it
is considered quite large from the perspective of present-day practitioners.
Therefore, it is also called "Ākara Karmaśāstra." This part is directly quoted
from the *Pūrvas* and is considered to be present in the Karmaśāstra of both the
Śvetāmbara and Digambara traditions. Due to the division of the traditions
during the time of the compilation of the literature, the quoted portions are
known by different names. For example, in the Śvetāmbara tradition, they are
known as (1) *Krama-prakriti*, (2) *Śataka*, (3) *Patra-sangraha*, (4) *Sapta-
tika*, and in the Digambara tradition, they are known as (1) *Mahakarma-
prakriti-prabha*, (2) *Kavya-bhūta*. Both traditions consider their respective
texts to be *Pūrvohṛta* (quoted from the *Pūrvas*).  (3) **Prākaraṇika
Karmaśāstra:** This is the result of the third compilation. It includes numerous
large and small chapters related to Karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 IITUTIO NS . 194 tRtIya karmapranya : pariziSTa rUpa se AnAdi hone para bhI
samaya-samaya para hone vAle tIrtharoM dhArA ke aMgavidyAe~ navIna rUpa dhAraNa
karatI rahatI haiN| isI bAta ko spaSTa karate hue ... hemacandrAcArya meM
pramANa mImAMsA meM kahA hai anAdaya ektA vidyAH saMkSepavistAra vivakSayA
navanavIbhavanti, tattat kartRkApamocyante  /  kisAnoSIH na kadAcidanodazaM
jagat  /  anAdikAla se prayAharUpa meM cale A rahe isa karmazAstra kA bhagavAna
mahAvIra se lekara vartamAna samaya taka jo saMkalana habA hai, usake
nimnalikhita tIna vibhAga kiye jA sakate haiM (1) pUrvAtmaka karmazAstra, (2)
pUrvArdhata karmazAstra aura (3) prAkaraNika karmazAstra  /  (1) pUrvAtmaka
karmazAstra-yaha bhAga sakse bar3A aura pahalA hai  /  isakA tatva pUrvavidyA ke
biskima hone ke samaya taka mAnA jAtA hai| bhagavAna 13 bIra ke bAda karIba 600
yA 100 varSa taka kramika lAsa rUpa meM pUrvavidyA vidyamAna raho  /  caudaha
pUrSoM meM se AThavA pUrva karmapravAda hai, jo mukhyatathA karmaviSayaka hI thA
/  isI prakAra agrAvaNIya pUrva mAmaka dUsare pUrva meM bhI karmaprAbhata nAmaka
eka bhAga thA  /  lekina vartamAna zvetAmbara tathA disambara sAhitya meM
pUrvAtmaka karmapAska kA pUrNa aMza nahIM rahA hai| (2) pUrvokRta karmazAstra-
yaha vibhAga pahale vibhAga kI apekSA kAphI choTA hai, lekina vartamAna
abhyAsiyoM kI dRSTi se kAphI bar3A hai| isalie ise 'Akara karmazAstra' saha
saMjJA dI hai| yaha bhAga sAkSAta pUrva se uddhRta hai aura zvetAmbara evaM
digambara ... donoM hI sampradAyoM ke karmazAstra meM yaha pUrvodhRta aMga
vidyamAna hai, aisI mAnyatA hai ! sAhitya udvAra ke samaya sampradAyabheda rUha
ho jAne ke kAraNa uddhRta aMza kucha bhinna-bhinna nAma se prasita hai| jaise ki
zvetAmbara sampradAya meM(1) krama prakRti, (2) zataka, (3) patrasaMgraha, (4)
saptatikA aura digambara sampradhAna meM ....(1) mahAkarmaprakRtiprAbhata, (2)
kavAyAbhUta  /  donoM sampravAsa apane-apane ukta granthoM ko pUrvodhUta mAnatI
haiM  /  (3) prAkaraNika karmazAstrayaha vimAma tIsarI saMkalanA kA pariNAma hai
/  isameM karmaviSayaka choTe-bar3e aneka prakaraNa andhoM ko. sahammalita kiyA
gayA

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## A Brief Introduction to Karma Literature  This text discusses the study and
teaching of Karma literature, particularly the "Prakaran" texts. It emphasizes
the importance of studying these texts before delving into the "Aakar" texts.
The "Prakaran" system of Karma Shastra developed and flourished from the 8th-9th
to the 16th century CE.  Karma Shastra can be divided into three categories
based on compilation:  1. **Prakrit Language:** The earliest Karma Shastra texts
were written in Prakrit languages. A significant portion of "Prakaran" Karma
Shastra is also written in Prakrit, including commentaries on the original
texts. 2. **Sanskrit Language:** As Sanskrit became the dominant language of
literature, Jain Acharyas began composing Karma Shastra in Sanskrit. Most
commentaries on Karma Shastra were also written in Sanskrit. Some original
"Prakaran" texts are also available in Sanskrit. 3. **Vernacular Languages:**
These include Kannada, Gujarati, and Rajasthani Hindi. While some "Prakaran"
texts exist in these languages, they are relatively few. These languages were
primarily used for translations of original texts and commentaries. Digambara
authors favored Kannada and Hindi, while Svetambara authors favored Gujarati.
The total volume of available Karma literature is estimated to be around 700,000
verses. The earliest texts date back to the 2nd century CE.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 na karmasAhitya kA saMkSipta paricaya 165 hai Ajakala vizeSatayA inhIM
prakaraNa granthoM ke adhyayana-adhyApana kA pracalana hai  /  ina prakaraNa
granthoM kA adhyayana karane ke bAda pUrvoddhRtagranthoM (Akara anyoM) kA
adhyayana karane kI parabhyAkaraNika bho mahatvapUrNa hai aura Akara granthoM kA
abhyAsa karane se pUrva inakA adhyayana karanA jarUrI hai  /  yaha prAkaraNika
karmazAstra vikrama kI AThavI-nauvIM satAbdI se lekara solaha-satAbdI taka
nirmita evaM pallavita huA hai| saMkalanA ko dRSTi se karmazAstra ke jaise tIna
vibhAga kiye gaye haiN| vaMse hI bhASA kI dRSTi se bhI use tIna bhAgoM meM
vibhAjita kara sakate haiM(1) prAkRta bhASA, (2) saMskRta bhASA aura (3)
pracalita loka mAyA pUrvAtmaka aura pUrvota karmazAstra kA Akalana prAkRta
bhASAoM meM huA hai| prAkaraNika karmazAstra kA bhI bahuta bar3A bhAga prAkRta
bhASA meM nivaddha kiyA gayA hai tathA mulagranthoM ke atirikta una para TIkA-
TippaNa bhI prAkRta bhASA meM likhe gaye haiM  /  prAkRta bhASA ke anansara jaba
saMskRta bhASA sAhitya kI bhASA bana gaI aura prAyaH saMskRta meM sAhitya kA
nirmANa vyApaka rUpa se hone lagA to jainAcAryoM ne bhI saMskRta meM karmazAstra
kI racanA kI evaM adhikatara saMskRta bhASA meM karmazAstra para TIkA-TippaNa
Adi likhe  /  kucha mUla prAkaraNika karmagrantha saMskRta bhASA meM likhe gaye
bhI upalabdha hote haiM  /  lokabhASA meM mukhyatayA karNATakI, gujarAtI aura
rAjasthAnI hindI-ina tIna bhASAoM kA vega hotA hai| ina bhASAoM meM bhI kucha
mItika karmagrantha likhe gaye haiN| lekina unakI gaNanA atyalpa hai| vizeSakara
ina bhASAoM kA upayoga mUla tathA TIkAoM ke anuvAda karane meM hI kiyA gayA hai
/  ye TIkA ! TippaNa anuvAda Adi prAkaraNika karmazAstroM para likhe gaye haiM
/  karNATakI aura hindI bhASA kA Azraya digambara sAhityakAroM ne liyA aura
gujarAtI bhASA kA vetAmbara sAhitya mamazoM ne  /  vartamAna meM upalabdha
sAhitya kA granthamAna lagabhaga sAta lAkha zloka pramANa mAnA gayA hai aura
samaya kI dRSTi se vikrama ko dUsarI sIsarI zatAbdI

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## AnwerJhudaalaalomonal ### Third Kamanthany: Appendix  This section covers the
period from the third century to the twentieth century. During this time, the
Acharyas elaborated on the Karma Shastra in the form of commentaries, Vrinis,
Bhashyas, Vrittis, etc.  Jain Acharyas have extensively discussed the subject of
Karma. However, due to the differences in opinion that arose after the death of
Bhagwan Mahavira, this discussion became fragmented. The sectarian differences
became so rigid that scholars from both sects were unable to come together to
discuss the Karma theory as taught by Bhagwan Mahavira. As a result, even though
there was no disagreement on the core subject, there were some differences in
the technical terms, their interpretations, and sometimes in the underlying
meaning. If we consider these differences from a neutral perspective, we can see
the truth in them. We can conclude that the Jain Acharyas were fully aware of
the importance of preserving the essence of the Karma theory, the fundamental
contribution of Jain philosophy. They ensured the preservation of the core
principles of Karma literature.  ### Some Important Karma Texts  Many of the
Karma texts currently available, or those whose existence is known from
references in other texts, are unpublished. However, the published texts
themselves clearly demonstrate the importance of Jain Karma literature. A look
at the list of published texts reveals that commentaries or Sanskrit
commentaries on the original texts have been published. Commentaries written in
regional languages are still unpublished.  This section provides a brief
introduction to some of the published texts that are widely used in study and
teaching.  ### Karma Prakriti  This text contains 455 verses, compiled based on
the second Purva of the Aggraseni Purva Nayaka. In this text, the Acharya has
discussed eight aspects of Karma: Bandha (binding), Sankraman (transition),
Udhalana (loosening), Apavasana (detachment), Udirana (arousal), Upshaman
(suppression), Nidhatti (destruction), and Nikayana (classification).  ...  1.
Satika Chwaswarah Karmagranthah (edited by Muni Punyavinayaji).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anwerJhudaalaalomonal tutIya kamaMdhanya : pariziSTa se bIsavIM zatAbdI taka kA
prApta hotA hai  /  isa kAla meM TIkA, vRNi, bhASya, vRtti Adi ke rUpa meM
AcAryoM ne karmazAstra ko vistRta rUpa diyA hai  /  jaina AcAryoM ne
karmaviSayaka vicAraNA vyApaka rUpa se kI hai  /  lekina bhagavAna mahAvIra ki
fi desA35 samma ko bakhAnoM, vijita ho jAne se yaha vicAraNA bhI vibhAjita-sI ho
gaI  /  sampradAyabheda itanA kaTTara ho gayA ki bhagavAna mahAvIra dvArA
upadiSTa kamatasya para milakara vicAra karane kA avasara bhI donoM sampradAyoM
ke vidvAna prApta na kara sake  /  isakA phala yaha haA ki mUla viSaya meM
matabheda na hone para bhI kucha pAribhASika zabdoM, unakI vyAkhyAoM aura kahIM-
kahIM khanake tAtparya meM thoDAbahuta bheda ho gyaa| ina bhinnatAoM para
tarastha dRSTi meM vicAra kareM to bheda meM bhI abhada ke darzana hote haiM
aura isa niSkarSa para pahuMcate haiM ki jainadarzana kI maulika dena kramavAda
kI garimA ko surakSita rakhane meM jainAcArya sarvAtmanA sajaga rahe aura
karmasAhitya ke mUla hArda ko surakSita rakhA  /  katipaya pramukha
pharmagrantha vartamAna meM upalabdha karmagranthoM athavA jinake hone kA patA
anya granthoM meM ullikhita ullekhoM se lagatA hai, unakA bahuta-sA-bhAga
aprakAzita hai  /  lekina jo anya prakAza meM Aye haiM, una se bhI jaina karma
sAhitya kA mahattva spaSTa ho jAtA hai| prakAzita granthoM kI sUcI dekhane se
yaha jJAta hotA hai ki mUla grantha ke bhASya athavA saMskRta TIkAe~ prakAzita
huI haiN| prAdezika bhASAoM meM raSita TIkAe~ abhI bhI aprakAzita haiN| prastuta
prasaMga meM prakAzita evaM adhyayana-adhyApana meM adhikatara pracalita
katipaya anyoM kA saMkSipta paricaya diyA jA rahA hai  /  /  karmaprakRti bhasa
prantha meM 455 gAthAe~ hai, jo agrAsaNIya pUrva nAyaka dvitIya pUrva ke AdhAra
para saMkalita kI gaI haiN| isa grantha meM AcArya ne karma sambandhI bandhana,
saMkramaNa, udhalanA, apavasanA, udIraNA, upazamana, nidhatti aura nikAyanAATha
-.... 1 saTIkAzcasvAraH karmagranthAH (muni puNyavinayajI dvArA saMpAdita)  /

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## A Brief Introduction to Jain Karma Literature  **167**  This text describes
the two states of **karmas** (actions): **udaya** (arising) and **satta**
(existence). At the beginning, the author pays homage to Lord Mahavira and
expresses his intention to describe the eight **karmas**, **udaya**, and
**satta** - a total of ten topics.  The author of this text is **Ata
Shivasarmasuri**, who is believed to have lived around the 12th century. He was
likely a contemporary or predecessor of **Jagmodarak Devadhisha** of the
**Kshamasraman** order. He may have also been a member of the **Dashaputraghar**
lineage. However, there is limited information available to shed light on these
possibilities. Nevertheless, it can be confidently stated that
**Shivasarmasuri** was a brilliant and knowledgeable scholar with a deep and
profound understanding of **karma**.   Besides **Karma-prakriti**, he is also
credited with the **Praachi Panchama Karmagrantha** (Ancient Fifth Karma Text).
Some believe that he also authored the **Saptaatika** (Ancient Seventh Text),
while others attribute it to **Chandra Mahत्तर**.  **Explanations of Karma-
prakriti**  There are three known commentaries on **Karma-prakriti**. One is in
**Prakrit** and is known as the **Purnika**. The author of this commentary is
unknown, but it is likely to be the work of the renowned **Churnakar
Jinavasaamani Mahत्तर**. Among the Sanskrit commentaries, one is by the famous
commentator **Mantrayagiri**, and the other by **Nyayaacharya Yashovijay**. The
**Purnika** has approximately 7,000 verses, the **Mantrayagiri** commentary has
8,000 verses, and the **Yashovijay** commentary has 13,000 verses.
**Panchasangraha**  **1**  **1**  The **Panchasangraha** contains approximately
1,000 verses. It discusses topics such as **yoga**, **upayoga**, **gunasthan**,
**karmabandha**, **bandhahetu**, **udaya**, **satta**, **bandha**, and the eight
**karmas**, among others. The author begins by paying homage to the valiant
**Jineshwara**, who destroys the **karmas**, and then expresses his intention to
compose a text called **Sangraha**, which is full of profound meaning.  The
author then explains the two ways in which the **Panchasangraha** is
meaningful...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jaina-karma sAhitya kA saMkSipta paricaya 167 karaNoM evaM udaya tathA sattA
ina do avasthAoM kA varNana kiyA hai  /  grantha ke prArambha meM granthakAra ne
maMgalAcaraNa ke rUpa meM bhagavAna mahAvIra ko namaskAra kiyA hai evaM
karmASTaka ke ATha karaNa, udaya aura sattA- ina dasa viSayoM kA varNana karane
kA saMkalpa kiyA hai| wwwwww prastuta grantha ke atA zivazarmasUri haiM aura
unakA samaya anumAnata: free at feat zatAbdI mAnA jAtA hai  /  sambhavataH me
jAgamodAraka devadhiaf kSamAzramaNa ke pUrvavartI yA samakAlIna hoM  /
sambhavataH ye dazaputraghara bhI  /  lekina na sa sambhAvanAoM para prakAza
DAlane vAlI sAmagrI kA prAyaH Tere hI hai phira bhI yaha nizcita rUpa se kahA jA
sakatA hai ki free sUri eka pratibhAsampana pAraMgasa vidvAna the aura unakA
karmaviSayaka jJAna bahuta hI gahana aura sUkSma thA  /  karmaprakRti ke
atirikta taka (prAcI paMcama karmagrantha) bhI ApakI kRti mAnI jAtI hai| eka
mAnyatA aisI bhI hai ki saptatikA ( prAcIna paSTha grantha) bhI ApakI kRti hai
/  dUsarI mAnyatA hai ki saptatikA candra mahattara kI kRti hai  /  karma
prakRti kI vyAkhyAe~ pharmaprakRti ko tIna vyAkhyAe~ prakAzita ho cukI haiN|
inameM se eka prAkRta pUrNi hai| pUrNikAra kA nAma ajJAta hai  /  sambhavataH
yaha pUrNa suprasiddha cUrNakAra jinavAsamaNi mahattara kI ho| saMskRta kI
TIkAoM meM eka TIkA suprasiddha TIkAkAra mantrayagirikRta hai aura dUsarI
nyAyAcArya yazofarer hai| una tInoM syAkhyAoMoM meM aNi kA granthamAna sAta
hajAra zloka pramANa malayagirikUta TIkA kA granthamAna bAda hajAra zloka
pramANa tathA yazovijayakRta TIkA kA granthamAna teraha hajAra zloka pramANa
hai| FLILL - paMcasaMgraha 1 1 saMgraha meM lagabhaga eka hajAra mAtrAeM haiN|
inameM yoga upayoga guNasthAna, karmabandha bandhahetu, udaya, sattA, bantra Adi
ATa karaNa evaM isI prakAra ke anya viSayoM kA vivecana kiyA gayA hai| prArambha
meM vATha kamoM kA nAza karane vAle vIra jinezvara ko namaskAra karake mahAna
artha vAle saMgraha nAmaka graMtha kI racanA kA saMkalpa kiyA gayA hai| isake
bAda granthakAra ne 'paMcasaMgraha' nAma kI do prakAra se sArthakatA batalAte

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Third Karma Granth: Appendix  It is written that this text contains a
summary of the five texts, Shatakadi, or an introduction to the five doors.
The names of the doors are as follows: (1) Yogayog Margna (2) Bandhak (3)
Bandhanya (4) Bandhetu and (5) Bandhavidhi.  The author of this text is Acharya
Chandra Mahत्तर. The author has mentioned the names of the five doors, Yogayog
Margna, etc., but the five texts, Shatakadi, etc., which are the basis of these
doors, are not indicated in the original text or the commentary. Acharya
Malayagiri has clarified in his commentary on this text that the author has
included Shataka, Saptatika, Kshayaprābhṛt Matkarma, and Karmapratiti in these
five texts. Out of these five texts, Acharya Malayagiri has mentioned four texts
in his commentary as evidence. This proves that, except for Kshayabhūt, the
remaining four texts were present during Acharya Malayagiri's time. Even in
these four texts, Satkarma is not available today, and the remaining three texts
- Shataka, Saptatika, and Karmapratiti - are available at this time.  It is not
mentioned that Machch, etc., existed during Mahत्तर's time. In his own
commentary, he has only mentioned that he was a disciple of Nepa. Similarly,
there is no mention of the term Mahत्तर in his own commentary. It is possible
that he was called Mahत्तर based on common usage.  Regarding the time of Acharya
Chandra Mahत्तर, it can be said that the terms like Patra, Chandavi, and Rishi
Shabdant were particularly prevalent in the 10th century. Therefore, he must
have existed in the 10th century Vikram era. Except for Panchasangrah and its
commentary, no other work of Chandra Mahत्तर is available.  Panchasangrah is
explained by - There are two important commentaries on Panchasangrah.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 165 tRtIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa hue likhA hai ki isameM zatakAdi pA~ca
granthoM ko saMkSepa meM samAviSTa kiyA gayA hai athavA pA~ca dvAroM kA saMkSepa
meM paricaya diyA hai| dvAroM ke nAma kramazaH isa prakAra haiM (1) yogayoga
mArgaNA (2) bandhaka (3) vandhanya, ( 4 ) bandhahetu aura (5) bandhavidhi  /
isa grantha ke racayitA AcArya candra mahattara hai| graMthakAra ne yogopayoga
mArgaNA Adi pA~ca dvAroM ke nAmoM kA ullekha vo avazya kiyA hai, lekina ina art
ke AdhArabhUta zataka Adi pA~ca graMtha kauna se haiM. isakA saMketa mUla evaM
earpakSa TIkA meM nahIM kiyA hai| bAcArya malayagiri ne isa grantha kI apanI
TIkA meM spaSTa kiyA hai ki granthakAra ne zataka, saptatikA kaSAyaprAbhRta
matkarma aura karmaprakRti ina pani anyoM kA samAveza kiyA hai  /  ina pA~ca
granthoM meM se terrora ke fart cAra grathoM kA AcArya malayagiri ne apanI TIkA
meM pramANa rUpa se ullekha kiyA hai| isase siddha hai ki kaSAyabhUta ko
chor3akara poSa cAra grantha AcArya malayagiri ke samaya meM vidyamAna meM ina
cAra granthoM meM bhI Aja satkarma anupalabdha hai aura zeSa tIna grantha-
zataka naptatikA evaM sixkRti isa samaya upalabdha haiM  /  hA . mahattara ke
samaya maccha Adi kA ullekha upalabdha nahIM hotA hai| apanI stravRtti meM
itanA-sA ullekha avazya kiyA hai ki nepA ke ziSya the| isI prakAra mahatara pada
ke viSaya meM bhI kisI prakAra kA ullekha apanI svopajJa TIkA meM nahIM kiyA hai
/  sambhavataH sAmAnya pracalita ullekhoM ke AdhAra para hI unheM mahasara kahA
gayA hai  /  ! AvArya candra mahatara ke samaya ke viSaya meM yahI kahA jA
sakatA hai for fraft pAtra, candavi Adi RSi zabdAnta nAma vizeSa rUpa se atafat
zatAbdI meM adhika pracalita the, ataH ye vikrama kI nIvI-dasavIM zatAbdI meM
vidyamAna rahe hoN| paMcasaMgraha aura usakI svopaza TIkA ke sivAya candra
mahatara kI anya koI kRti upalabdha nahIM haiN| paMcasaMgraha ko vyAvAyeM -
paMcasaMgraha kI do mahatvapUrNa TIkAe~ prakAzikSa

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A Brief Introduction to Karma Literature 161  ...Svopaja Vritti and Malayagiri's
commentary. Svopaja Vritti is nine thousand verses long and Malayagiri's
commentary is eighteen thousand verses long. Ancient Shat Karma Pramanya -
Devendra Suri's Karmagranth is called Malina Karma Pramanya, while their basic
old Karmagranth is called Ancient Karma. There are six such ancient Karmagranth
and they are the works of different Acharyas like Shivsharm Suri. Their names
are as follows: (1) Karmavipak, (2) Kastab, (3) Randhaswamitva, (4) Parshiti,
(5) Shatak, (6) Maptatika. The author of Karmavipak is Gargaghi. His time is
probably the 8th century Vikram. There are three commentaries available for
Karmavipak - Garmanand Suri's commentary, Udayaprasamuri's commentary and an
anonymous commentary. All three commentaries seem to be from the 12th-13th
century Vikram. The author of Kamrata is Amapt. There are two commentaries and
two commentaries on it. One commentary is by Govindacharya and the other is by
Abhayaprabhamuri in the form of a commentary. The time of composition of both is
probably the 13th century Vikram. The author of Bandhaswamitva is also unknown.
It has a commentary by Haribhadrasuri, which was written in 1112 Vikram Samvat.
Parshipti is the work of Jinavallabhamणि and was written in the 12th century
Vikram. There are two anonymous commentaries and many commentaries on it. The
commentators include Haribhadrasuri and Malayagiri. Its other name is
Agamikayastuvicarsar Prakaran. The author of Shatak is Shivsharm Suri. There are
three commentaries, one commentary and three commentaries on it. There are two
short commentaries and the author of the large commentary is Poswarhari. The
name of the commentator is unknown. One of the three commentaries is by Mal
Dhari Hemchandra (12th century Vikram), the second by Udayaprabhamuri and ...
the third by Gunaratnamuri (15th century Vikram).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hena karmasAhitya kA saMkSipta paricaya 161 hai ....svopaja vRtti evaM
malayagirikRta ttiikaa| svopaza vRtti nau hajAra zloka pramANa tathA
malayagirikRsa TIkA aThAraha hajAra zloka pramANa hai| prAcIna SaT kama pranya-
devendra sUriracita karmagrantha malIna karmapanya kahe jAte haiM, jabaki unake
AdhArabhUta purAne karmagrantha prAcIna karma kahalAte haiM  /  isa prakAra ke
prAcIna karmagranthoM kI saMkhyA chaha hai aura ye zivazarma sUri Adi bhikSa-
bhinna AcAryoM kI kRtiyA~ haiN| inake nAma kramazaH isa prakAra haiM.... (1)
karmavipAka, (2) kastaba, (3) randhasvAmitva, (4) parazIti, (5) zataka, (6)
maptatikA  /  karmavipAka ke kartA gargaghi haiN| inakA samaya sambhavataH
vikrama kI basoM zatAbdI hai  /  karmavipAka ko sIna TIkAeM upalabdha hotI haiM-
garamAnanda surivRta iti, udayaprasamUrikRta dipA aura eka amAta kartRka vyAkhyA
/  meM tInoM TIkAeM vikrama kI bArahavoM-terahIM zatAbdI kI racanAe~ pratIta
hotI hai| _ kamaratA ke kartA amApta hai  /  isa para do mAthya evaM do TIkAeM
haiM  /  TIkAoM meM eka govindAcAryakRta vRtti hai aura dumarI
abhayaprabhamUrikRta TippaNa ke rUpa meM hai| ina donoM kA racanAkAla
sambhavataH vikrama ko serahI zatAbdI hai| baMdhasvAmitva ke kartA bhI ajJAta
haiN| isa para haribhadramurikRta vRti hai, jo vi0 saM0 11:12 meM likhI gaI hai|
_ paDazIpti jinavallabhamaNi kI kRti hai aura isakI racanA vizrama kI bArahavIM
zatAbdI meM huI hai| isa para do ajJAta kartRka mAraya aura aneka TIkAe~ hai  /
TIkAkAroM meM haribhadrasari va malayagiri muhama haiM  /  isakA aparanAma
AgamikayastuvicArasAraprakaraNa hai| zataka ke kartA zivazarmasUri haiN| isa
para tIna mAsya, eka nUmi va tIna TIkAeM hai| bhASyoM meM do laghu bhASya haiM
aura vRhada bhASya ke karvA pozvarahari haiN| cUrNikAra kA nAma ajJAta hai| tIna
dIkAoM meM eka ke kartA mala dhArI hemacandra (vikrama kI bArahavIM satAnI),
dUsarI ke udayapramabhUri aura ... tIsarI ke guNaratamuri (vikrama kI
pandrahavIM zatAbdI) hai  /

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Third Karma Text: Parishi  It is not certain who authored the Sapttatika.
Some consider Chandrashi Mahत्तर to be the author, while others believe it was
Shivsharm Suri. There are commentaries on this text by Abhaydev Suri,
Ashakartri, Chandrashi Mahत्तर, Malaygiri, Mesthu, Ramdev, and Gunarasna.  The
first five of these texts cover the same topics as the five Karma texts by
Devendra Suri, but in a more concise form. The Sapttatika (Panchkarma text)
discusses the following topics:  * Bandha (bondage) * Uday (arising) * Satya
(existence) * Prakriti (nature) * The future natures of the Jivas who are to be
liberated * The location of Bandha, etc. * The location of the eight Karmas *
The location of the Moksha (liberation) * The nature of Bandha * The types of
motion and nature * The Upshama (cessation) category, the Eka (one) category,
and the Kshapaka (destruction) category * The final fruit of the ascent  The
five Karma texts by Acharya Devendra Suri are called the Navya Karma texts.
These texts are based on the five ancient Panchkarma texts. The names of these
texts are: Karmavipak, Dharmastav, Panyswamitva, Padashiti, and Palak. These
texts are known as the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth Karma texts,
respectively. The first three names are based on the subject matter, while the
last two are based on the structure of the verses.  The author of the five Navya
Karma texts is Devendra Suri. These texts are based on the Karma texts written
by ancient Acharyas like Shivsharm Suri and Chandrashi Mahत्तर. Devendra Suri
not only included the essence of the ancient Karma texts in his own texts, but
also preserved the names, topics, and order of presentation. He also added some
new topics. The language of these texts is Prakrit, like the ancient Karma
texts, and the meter is Arya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 O Ml.... tRtIya karmaanya : pariziE saptatikA ke kartA ke viSaya meM nizcita
#se kucha nahIM kahA jA sakatA hai| koI candrarSi mahattara ko isakA kartA
mAnate haiM aura koI zivazarmasUri ko| isa para abhayadevamUrikRta bhASya,
azAsakartRka bhUNi, candraSi mahattarakRta prAkRta vRtti, malayagirikRta TIkA,
mestuga mUrikAta bhASyavRtti, rAmadevakRta TippaNa va guNarasnamurikRta avadhUri
hai| _ina yaha granthoM meM prathama pAMca meM unhIM viSayoM kA pratipAdana
kigsa gayA hai, jo devendrasuri kRta pAca nasya karmagranthoM meM sAra rUpa se
hai| saptatikA (paNkarma grandha) meM nimnalikhita viSayoM kA vivecana kiyA gayA
hai...... bandha, udaya, sattA va prakatirapAna, janAvaraNIya bhAvi jhamo kI
uttara prakRtiyoM evaM bandhra Adi sthAna, ATha karmoM ke udIraNA sthAna,
muNasthAna evaM prakRti bandhra, gatiyA~ evaM prakRtiyA~, upazama zreNI va eka
zreNI tathA kSapaka zreNI ArohaNa kA antima phala  /  nasya karmagrantha prAcIna
paT karmagranthoM meM se pAMca karmagranthoM ke AdhAra para AcArya devendra
suTine jina pA~ca kamagranthoM kI racanA kI hai, ve nA karmagrantha kahe jAte
haiN| hama karmagranthoM ke nAma bhI bahI hU~... karmavipAka phArmastava,
panyasvAmitva, paDazItti aura pAlaka  /  dhe paudhoM karmacantha kramaza:
prathama, dvitIya, tRtIya, catuSaM va paMcama karmagrantha ke nAma se prasiddha
haiN| uparyukta pAca nAmoM meM se prathama dvitIya aura tRtIya nAma viSaya kI
dRSTi se aura antima do nAma gAthA saMdhyA kI dRSTi se rakhe gaye haiN| pAMca
navya karmagranthoM ke racayitA devendasUri haiN| ina pAMca karmapranyoM kI
racanA kA AdhAra Niva zarmasUri, candraSi mahasara Adi prAcIna AcAryoM dvArA
race gaye karmagrantha haiN| devendrasUri ne apane karmagranthoM meM kevala
prAcIna karmapranthoM kA bhAvA athakA sAra hI nahIM liyA hai, apitu nAma,
viSaya, varNanakrama Adi bAte bhI usI rUpa meM rakhI hai| kahIM-kahIM navIna
viSayoM kA bhI samAveza kiyA hai| ina granthoM kI bhASA prAcIna karmagranthoM ke
samAna prAkRta hai aura chanda AryA hai|

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A Brief Introduction to Jain Literature  **The 201 Grand Karma Granthas** -
Acharya Devendrasuri wrote commentaries on his Karma Granthas, but for some
reason, the commentary on the third Karma Grantha was lost. Later, an Acharya
wrote a new commentary in the form of an Avadhuri for this Grantha.
Gunaratnasuri and Munishekharsuri wrote commentaries on all five Karma Granthas.
In addition to these, Kamal Sanayam Upadhyay, etc., have also written small
commentaries on these Karma Granthas. There has been considerable discussion on
these in Hindi and Gujarati languages as well.  In the Hindi language, the
commentaries of Mahaprash Pandit Sukhlagnji were written about 40 years ago.
Now, they are being published again with the commentary of Muni Shri Mishrimalji
Maharaj, the founder of Marudhar Kemri, edited by Shri Shri Chanan Surana
'Maras' and Shri Devkumar Jain. The book contains information on the differences
between Digambar and Svetambar beliefs, a comparative study of their beliefs,
and various mantras and tables.  **Karma Shataka** This is also called Maha
Karma Prakriti Prabhut, Patkhaayam, etc. Its authors are Acharya Pushpadant and
Bhootbali. The time of its composition is estimated to be the second or third
century of the Vikram era.  This Grantha is 16,000 loka in length. Its language
is Prakrit (Shaurseni). Acharya Pushpadant has covered the essence of the
subject in 1957 sutras, and Acharya Bhootbali has covered the remaining part in
6000 sutras. The names of the six chapters of Karma Prabhut are as follows: (1)
Jeevasthan, (2) Kshudrak Bandh, (3) Bandhaswamitva Vichay, (4) Vedana, (5)
Vargana, (6) Mahabandh.  There are eight Anuyogadwaras and many Ulikas within
Jeevasthan. There are eleven Adhikars in Kshudrak Bandh. In Bandhaswamitva
Vichay, the binding of Karma Prakritis with Jivas, the presence of Karma
Prakritis in Gunasthans, the types of Karma Prakritis like Syoday, Indh,
Paroday, Bandh, and Lav, are discussed. There are two Anuyogadwaras called Kriti
and Vevama in Vedana. The main Adhikar of Vargana Khand is Anjaniya, which
contains a detailed description of Varganas. In addition to this, it also
contains...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jana kasAhitya kA saMkSipta paricaya 201 bhavya karmagranthoM kI
dhAsyAeM.-bAcArya devendrasUri meM apane karmagranthoM para svopakSa TIkA likhI
thI, kintu kisI kAraNa se tRtIya kamaMganya kI TokA naSTa ho gaI 1 isakI mUrti
ke lie bAda meM kisI AcArya ne avadhuri rUpa naI TokA likhI hai| guNaratnasUri
va munizzekharasUri ne pAMcoM karmagranthoM para abariyAM likhI haiN| inake
atirikta kamalasaMyama upAdhyAya Adi ne bhI ina karmagranthoM para choTI-choTI
TIkAeM likhI haiN| hindI aura gujarAtI bhASA meM bhI ina para paryApta vivecana
kiyA gayA hai| hindI bhASA meM mahAprAza paM. sukhalAgna jI kI TIkAyeM karIba 40
varSa pUrva likhI gaI thIM  /  aba punaH marudhara kemarI pravartaka muni zrI
mizrImalajI ma0 kI dhyAmyAsahita zrI zrIcanna surAnA 'marasa evaM zrI devakamAra
jaina dvArA saMpAdita hokara prakAra ho rahe haiN| patA : sara masita phArmaroM
se vizighaTatA hai  /  digambara zvetAmbara mAnyatAoM kA lanAtmaka adhyayana
evaM aneka prakAra ke maMtra ya tAlikAe~ bhI dI gaI haiN| karmazamata isako
mahAkarmaprakRtiprAbhuta, paTkhAyAmama Adi bhI kahate haiM  /  inake racayitA
AcArya puSpadanta aura bhUtabali haiM  /  isakA rapanA samaya anumAnataH vikrama
kI dUsarI-sIsarI zatAbdi hai| yaha grantha 16000 loka pramANa hai| isakI bhASA
prAkRta (zaurasenI) hai| AcArya puSpadanta ne 1957 sUtroM meM matvarUpa aMga
aura AcArya bhUtabali ne 6000 sUtroM meM zeSa sampUrNa andha liyA hai  /
karmaprAbhUta ke chaha aNDoM ke nAma isa prakAra hai (1) jIvasthAna, (2)
kSudraka bandha, (3) banabhasvAmitvavicaya (4) vedanA, (5) vargaNA, (6)
mahAbandha 1 jIvasthAna ke antargata ATha anuyogadvAra aura mI yUlikAe~ haiM  /
jhurakavandha ke gyAraha adhikAra haiN| bandhasvAmisvaviSaya meM karma
prakRtiyoM kA jIvoM ke sAtha bandha, karma prakRtiyoM kI guNasthAnoM meM
myumisi, syodaya indha rUpa prakRtiyA~, parodaya bandha lava prakRtiyoM kA
kayana kiyA gayA hai  /  vedanA sAha meM kRti aura vevamA nAmaka do anuyogadvAra
haiN| vANA khuNDa kA mukhya adhikAra anjanIya hai, jisameM vargamAoM kA vistRta
varNana hai| isake atirikta isameM SSCSSANTERE:::..

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Religious Text: Appendix  The four rights of **sparsha karma** (touch
karma), **prakriti** (nature), and **bandha** (bondage) are also included.
**202**  The **Tees Hajar RTE Prayaan Mahabandha**, a six-part text, extensively
describes the four types of **bandha** (bondage): **prakritibandha** (nature
bondage), **sthiitibandha** (state bondage), **anubhagbandha** (experience
bondage), and **pradeshabandha** (region bondage). **Mahabandha** is also known
as **Mahaghavla**.  **Commentaries on the Praabhrut:**  **Veer Senaacharya**'s
**Dhavla Tika** is a very important and extensive commentary on **Karma Maasa**
(**Shatkhandagam**). The original text contains 72,000 verses and was composed
around 605 Vikram Samvat.  In addition to this commentary, **Indanandi**'s
**Shrutavatar** mentions the existence of the following commentaries on **Karma
Praabhrut**. However, these commentaries are currently unavailable.
**Kundakundaacharya** wrote a commentary called **Pari Karma** on the first
three parts of **Karma Praabhrut**. This commentary contained 12,000 verses and
was written in Prakrit. The **Dhavla Tika** mentions this text several times.
**Aachaarya Shaamkund** wrote a commentary called **Paddhati** on the first five
parts of **Karma Praabhrut**. He also wrote a commentary with the same name on
**Kayaabhrut**. Both commentaries contain 12,000 verses and were written in a
mixture of Prakrit, Sanskrit, and **Kad** languages.  **Sumbuluuraacharya**
wrote a commentary called **Chudamani** on the first five parts of **Karma
Praabhrut** and **Kashaya Praabhrut**. This commentary contained 84,000 verses
and was written in Kannada. In addition, he wrote a commentary called
**Panjika** in Prakrit on the six parts of **Karma Praabhrut**, containing 7,000
verses.  **Samantbhadra Swami** wrote a commentary on the first five parts of
**Praabhrut** containing 48,000 verses. Although the **Dhavla** mentions
**Samantbhadra**'s commentary, it is currently unavailable.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya dharmagrantha : pariziSTa sparza karma prakRti aura bandha cAra
adhikAroM kA bhI antarbhAta kiyA gayA hai  /  202 tIsa hajAra rte prayANa
mahAbandha nAmaka cha khaNDa meM prakRtivandha, sthiti andha, anubhAgandha aura
pradezabandha ina cAra prakAra ke andhoM kA bahuta vistAra se varNana kiyA gayA
hai  /  mahAbandha kI prasiddhi mahAghavalA ke nAma se bhI hai  /  prabhRta ko
TIkAeM - vIrasenAcArya viracita dhavalA TIkA karma mAsa ( SaTkhaNDAgama) kI ati
mahatvapUrNa bRhatkAya vyAsthA hai| mUla vyAkhyA kA granthamAna 72000 zloka
pramANa hai aura racanA kAla lagabhaga vikrama saMvat 605 hai  /  isa vyAkhyA ke
atirikta indanandi kRta zrutAvatAra meM karmaprAbhRta kI nimnalikhita TIkAoM ke
hone kA saMketa hai| lekina vartamAna meM ye TIkAe~ anupalabdha haiN|
kundakundAcArya meM karmaprAbhUta ke prathama tIna khaNDoM para parikarma nAmaka
bAraha hajAra zloka pramANa TIkA grantha likhA thA  /  yaha TIkA grantha prAkRta
meM thA | dhavalA TIkA meM isa grantha kA aneka bAra ullekha kiyA gayA hai  /
karmaprAbhRta ke prathama pA~ca AcArya zAmakuNDa ne paddhati nAmaka TIkA grantha
khaNDoM para likhA thA | kAyAbhUta para bhI unakI isI nAma ko TIkA thI  /  ina
donoM TIkAoM kA pramANa bAraha hajAra loka pramANa hai  /  bhASA
prAkRtasaMskRta-kar3a mizrita thii| sumbulUrAcArya ne bho karmaprAbhUta ke
prathama pani khaNDoM tathA kaSAyaprAbhRta para eka TIkA likhI thI, jisakA nAma
cUDAmaNi thaa| yaha TIkA caurAsI hajAra loka pramANa thI aura bhASA kannar3a
thii| isake atirikta karyaprAbhRta ke cha khapa para prAkRta meM paMjikA nAmaka
vyAkhyA likhI zrI, jisakA paribhAga sAta hajAra loka pramANa thA  /
samantabhadra svAmI ne prAbhUta ke prathama patra khaNDoM para ar3atAlIsa hajAra
zloka pramANa TIer fret | dhavalA meM yadyapi samantabhadra kRta Apta

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A Brief Introduction to Jain Karma Literature 203  References have been made to
the descent of Shrimaansa etc., but the present commentary is not found in it.
Padev Guru has written commentaries on Karmapraabhrut and Kathaayaabhoot. The
commentary written on the five chapters of Karmapraabhrut is called
Vyakhyaaprajnapti or. His commentary on the sixth chapter was brief, which was
about eight thousand and five verses long. The combined total of the five
chapters and the commentary on Kashaymaabhooka was about sixty thousand verses
long. The language is Prakrit. Veersen is the author of the commentary on
Karmapaatko. He was a disciple of Aryanandi and a disciple of Chandrasen. His
teachings were. The commentary on Karmapraabhrut is also written by Veersen,
which is part of the beginning of Jayadhwala. This is noteworthy for the water
scholars. Rivaayaabhoot Paapad or Kashayapraabhrut is also called Pejdospaat
Potaat or Doshaabhoot. Just like Karmapraabhrut, the origin of Bhoota is also
the Arvaag called Drishtivaad. From the third Praabhrut called Jadosh of the
tenth object of the Pawein called Gyaanpravaad in it, Kaayaabhoot is born. The
author of Kashayapraabhrut is Acharya He has written in the Maatha Sutras.
Gundhar is. Others have been bound. Although there are 233 verses in Prakrit,
but in reality there are 100 verses in this book and there are 5 Maayas.
Kashayapraabhrutkar Gundharaacharya is not the author, but possibly Acharya
Naagahasti, which was added later as a commentary. According to Jayadhwalaakar
in Prakrit, the following 15 Arthaadhikars are: (1) Praposh (2)
Prakritivibhakti, (3) Sthiti (4) Anubhaagvibhakti (5) Pradeshvibhakti-
Kshonaashronapradesha- Sthityantika

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jaina karmasAhitya kA saMkSipta paricaya 203 zrImAMsA Adi ke avataraNa uddhRta
kiye gaye haiM, kintu prastuta TIkA kA ullekha usameM nahIM pAyA jAtA hai|
padeva guru ne karmaprAbhRta aura kathAyAbhUta para TIkAe~ likhI haiN|
karmaprAbhUta ke pA~ca khaNDoM para likhI gaI TIkA kA nAma vyAkhyAprajJapti yA
/  SaSTa khaNDa para unakI vyAkhyA saMkSipta thI jo paMcAdhika ATha hajAra zloka
pramANa thI  /  pA~ca khaNDoM aura kaSAyamAbhUkha kA TIkAoM kA saMyukta
parimasATha hajAra zloka pramANa thA  /  bhASA prAkRta po borasena hai 1 vidyA
guru eka tihAI karpapAtako TIkA dhanayA ke kartA kA nAma ye Aryanandi ke ziSya
tathA candrasena ke praziSya the| inake ejAtrAyeM the| kapAprAbhRta ko TIkA
jayadhavalA ke prArambha kA bhAga bhI inhIM vIrasena kA likhA huA hai  /  yaha
vATarmazAstrAoM ke lie draSTavya hai  /  RvAyAbhUta pApaDa athavA kaSAyaprAbhRta
ko pejadosapATa poTAta athavA doSAbhUta bhI kahate haiM  /  karmaprabhRta ke
samAna hI bhUta kA udgama sthAna bhI dRSTivAda nAmaka Arava aga hai| usake
jJAnapravAda nAmaka paveiM pUrva kI dasavoM vastu ke jadoSa nAmaka tIsare
prAbhRta se kAyAbhUta kI utpatti haiN| kaSAyaprAbhRta ke racayitA AcArya inhone
mAthA sUtroM meM guNadhara hai| anya ko nibaddha kiyA hai| vaise to prAkRta kI
233 gAthAe~ mAnI haiM, parantu vastutaH isa grantha meM 100 gAthAe~ hai aura me
5 mAyAeM kaSAyaprAbhRtakAra guNadharAcAryakRta na hokara saMbhavataH AcArya
nAgahasti kRta ho, jo vyAkhyA ke rUpa meM bAda meM jor3I gaI hai  /  prAkRta meM
jayadhavalAkAra ke anusAra nimnalikhita 15 arthAdhikAra haiM (1) prapoSa (2)
prakRtivibhakti, (3) sthiti (4) anubhAgavibhakti (5) pradezavibhakti-
kSoNAzroNapradeza- sthityantika

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Tṛtīdha Karma: Appendix Section, (6) Bandhaka, (7) Veva, (8) Upayoga, (9)
Manu Sthāna, (10) Vyānjana, (11) Samyaktva, (12) Deśa Virati, (13) Saṅgha, (14)
Pārivamohaniya's Upśamana, (:::) Gāyili Sāp  At this place, Ayadhavalakāra has
also invested that in the same way, from other types, fifteen Arthaadhikāras
should be formulated. From this, it appears that in the calculation of the
rights of Kṣayaprābhūta, there is no uniformity.  ##  Kṣayāmṛta's Commentaries -
According to the mention of Indra Nandīkṛta Śrutābhāra, the following
commentaries have been written on Kṣayāmṛta...  (1) Ācārya Yativṛṣabha's
Niśūtra, (2) Uccāraṇācārya's Uccāraṇāvṛtti or Mūla Uccāraṇa, (3) Ācārya
Śāmakunda's Paddhati Tīkā, (4) Sumbulrācārya's Sūḍāmaṇi Vyākhyā, (5)
Cappadevaguru's Vyākhyāprāpti Vṛtti, (6) Ācārya Vīrasena Jinaseṇa's Jayadhavla
Tīkā. Out of these six commentaries, the first two, namely, Niśūtra and
Jayadhavla, are available at present. The Niśūtra by Yativṛṣabha is six thousand
loka in size, and the Jayadhavla Tīkā is seven thousand loka in size.  ##
Gommatasāra  It has two parts: (1) Jīvakāṇḍa and (2) Karmakāṇḍa. The author is
Miccandra Sibāstachakravartī, who lived in the eleventh century of the Vikram
era. He was a contemporary of Samuṣṭa Rāya.  The composition of Gommatasāra was
done by Cāmuṇḍarāya, whose other name is Gompaṭarāya... according to the
question of... as a summary of the Siddhānta texts, hence this text was named
Gommatasāra. Its other name is Pañcasammaha, because it describes five topics:
Mandha, Badhyamāna, Bandhasvāmi, Mandhahetu, and Bandhabheda.  Gommatasāra has
1705 māthās, out of which 733 are in Jīvakāṇḍa and 972 are in Karmakāṇḍa. In
Jīvakāṇḍa, there are five topics: Jīvasthāna, Kṣudrabandha, Bandhasvāmi,
Vedanakhaṇḍa, and Vargapaṇḍa, related to the Siddhānta of Mahākarmaprābhūta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIdha karmaya : pariziSTa pradeza, (6) bandhaka, (7) vevaka, (8) upayoga, (9)
manu sthAna, (10) vyaMjana, (11) samyaktva, (12) deza virati, (13) saMghama,
(14) pArivamohanIya kI upazamanA, (:::) gAyilI sApa isa sthAna para
ayadhavalAkAra ne yaha bhI niveza kiyA hai ki isI taraha anya prakAroM se bhI
pandraha arthAdhikAroM kA prarUpaNa kara lenA cAhie  /  isase pratIta hotA hai
ki kaSAyaprAbhUta ke adhikAroM kI gaNanA meM ekarUpasA nahIM kaSAyAmata kI
TIkAe~-indranandikRta zrutAbahAra ke ullekha ke anusAra kaSAyamAmRta para
nimnalikhita TIkAeM likhI gaI ..... (1) AcArya yativRSabhakuta NisUtra, (2)
uccAraNAcAryakRta uccAraNAvRtti athavA mUla uccAraNa, (3) AcArya zAmakuNDakRta
paddhati TIkA, (4) sumbularAcAryakRta sUDAmaNi vyAkhyA, (5) cappadevagurukRta
vyAkhyAprApti vRti, (6) AcArya vIrasena jinasena kRta jayadhavala TIkA  /  ina
chaha TIkAkSoM meM se prathama caNi va jayadhavalA ye do TIkAeM vartamAna meM
upalabdha hotI haiM  /  pativRSabhakRta pUrNi chaha hajAra loka pramANa tathA
jayadhavalA TIkA sAta hajAra praloka pramANa hai| gommadasAra isake do bhAga
haiM(1) jIvakANDa aura (2) karmakANDa  /  racayitA micandra sibAstacakravartI
haiM, jo vikrama kI gyArahavIM zatAbdI meM hue haiN| ye sAmuSTa rAya ke
samakAlIna the| gommaTasAra kI racanA cAmuNDarAya, jinakA ki dUsarA nAma
gompaTarAya kA...-ke prazna ke anusAra siddhAnta granthoM ke sAra rUpa meM huI
hai, ata: isa grantha kA nAma gommarasAra rakhA gyaa| isakA eka nAma
paMcasaMmaha bhI hai, kyoMki isameM mandha, badhyamAna, bandhasvAmI, mandhahetu
Sa bandhabheda-ina pA~ca viSayoM kA varNana hai| gommaTasAra meM 1705 mAthAe~
haiM jisameM se jIvakANDa meM 733 aura karmakoca meM 972 gAthAe~ haiM  /
jotrakANDa meM mahAkarmaprAbhUta ke siddhAsa sambandhI jIvasthAna, kSudrabandha,
bandhAsvAmI, vedanAkhaNDa aura vargapAkhaNDa - ina pA~ca viSoM

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
... MI mummonetrinavi This is a brief introduction to the Jain literature on
karma. It discusses the various states of the soul in twenty categories:
Gunasthan, Jivasamas, Parit, Language, Sanjha, 16 Marana, and Usage. The
Karmakanda section contains the following nine chapters on karma: (1) Prakriti
Samutkirtana, (2) Bandhodaya Satva, (3) Matvastan Bhang, (4) Vichalika, (5)
Sthan Samutkirtana, (6) Pratyay, (7) Bhav Chulika, (8) Nikarana Dhullika, (9)
Kasmiti Rachana. Gommatsar has commentaries... The first commentary on Gommatsar
was written by Gommatarayamamulray in the form of a Vritti called Limbi, which
was reviewed by Nebhisand Simant Chakravarti. Based on this review, Keshavdi
wrote a commentary in Sanskrit. Then Abhay Chandra Siddhanta Chakravarti wrote a
Sanskrit commentary called Mandaprabodhini. Based on these two commentaries,
Pandit Todarmalji wrote a Hindi commentary called Samyashan Kandhika. Based on
these commentaries, the Hindi translation of Jivakanda was done by Pandit
Subachandraji and the translation of Karmakanda was done by Pandit Manoharsalji.
J. Jaini has done a beautiful English translation of this work. Bhagtisar
(Kshapanasar Gabhit) was written by Nemichandra Siddhanta Chakravarti. Labdhisar
discusses the means of liberation from karma. Labdhisar has 646 verses, of which
261 are from Kshapanasar. It has three proofs: (1) Darshanalabdhi, (2)
Charitralabdhi, (3) Kshamaikamarit. Among these, the Hayik Parit section is also
considered as an independent text in the form of Kshapanasar. Keshavdi wrote a
commentary on Sandhimar in Sanskrit and Pandit Todarmalji wrote a commentary in
Hindi. The Sanskrit commentary is only up to the Charim Lamdhi section. The
Hindi commentator Todarmalji has explained up to the Parivannavidhi section
according to the Sanskrit commentary, but he has explained the Mayik Jarin
Prakarpa, i.e., Kshapanasar, according to the Sanskrit prose Kshapanasar written
by Madhavchandra. If one studies the above mentioned texts thoroughly, one can
get a clear understanding of the karma literature.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ... MI mummonetrinavi jama karmasAhitya kA saMkSipta paricaya kA vivecana hai|
isameM guNasthAna, jIvasamAsa, pArita, bhASA, saMjhA, 16 mAraNA aura upayoga ina
bIsa adhikAroM meM jIva kI vividha avasthAoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai|
karmakANDa meM karma mambandhI nimna nau prakaraNa haiM.... (1)
prakRtisamutkIrtana, (2) bandhodaya satva, (3) matvasthAna bhaMga, (4) vicalikA,
(5) sthAna samutkItana, 16} pratyaya, (7) bhAva cUlikA, (8) nikaraNa dhUlikA,
(6) kAsmitiracanA  /  gompasmAra ko TIkAe~... gommaTamAra para sarvaprathama
gommaTa rAyamAmularAya ne kAra meM vRtti limbI, jisakA avalokana svayaM
nebhisanda simAnta cakravartI ne kiyaa| isa dRsi ke adhAra para kezavadI ne
saMskRta meM TokA likhI  /  phira abhaya candra siddhAntacakravartI ne
mandaprabodhinI nAmaka saMskRta TIkA liAhI  /  ina donoM TIkAoM ke AdhAra para
paM0 ToDaramalajI meM samyAzAna kandhikA nAmaka hindI dIkA dikhI  /  isa TIkAoM
ke AdhAra para jIvakANDa kA hindI anuvAda thI paM0 sUbacandragjI ne va
karmakANDa kA anuvAda zrI paM0 manoharasAlajI ne kiyA hai| zrI je. jainI ne
isakA aMgrejI meM sundara anuvAda kiyA hai| bhagdhisAra (kSapagAsAra gabhita
isake racayitA zrI nemicandra siddhAntacakravartI haiM  /  labdhisAra meM kama
se mukta hone ke upAya kA pratipAdana kiyA hai  /  labdhisAra kI 646 pAthAe~
haiM, jinameM 261 gAthAe~ hapaNAsAra kI haiM  /  isameM tIna pramANa haiM(1)
darzanalabdhi. (2) cAritralavidha, (3) kSAmikamAritra  /  inameM hAyika pAritra
prakaraNa kSapaNAsAra ke rUpa meM svatantra natha bhI ginA jAtA hai| sandhimAra
para kezavakSI ne saMskasa meM tathA paMta doDAmAla jI ne hindI meM TIkA likhI
hai  /  saMskRta TIkA cArima lamdhi prakaraNa taka hI hai| hindI TokAkAra
ToDaramasajI ne pArivanavidha prakaraNa taka to saMskRta TIkA ke anusAra
vyAkhyAta kiyA hai, kintu mAyika jArina prakarapA, arthAt kSapaNAsAra kA
vyAkhyAna mAdhavacanda kRta saMskRta gadyAtmaka kSapaNAsAra ke anusAra kiyA hai|
yahA~ para tallikhita prayoM kA pUrNa rUpa se adhyayana kiyA jAya to kamasAhitya
kA sanaspI bhAna prApta ho sakatA hai  /

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Third Karma Grantha: Appendix  After the above information, it would be
appropriate to briefly mention the names, authors, and time periods of the
printed texts. These texts include references to the Karma Granthas of both the
Shvetambara and Digambara traditions.  Author Shloka Pramana Composition Period
36,000 206 Brahmanama Mahakarmaprakruti Prabhuta or Karmaprabhruta
(Patkhandashashtra) Dhavala Commentary Kashayamabhuta Jayabala Commentary
Gommatasara Sanskrit Tika Sanskrit Tika Hindi Tika Pushpadanta and Bhutabali
Virasena Gundhara Vattivrishhabha Virasena and Jinasena Nemichandra
Siddhantachakravarti Keshavarna Abhayachandra Todarmal Dhasar Mitra :
(Kshapaṇasāragarbhita) Siddhantachakravarti Sanskrit Tika Hindi Tika Keshavarna
Todarmal Samgraha (Sanskrit) Amitgati Samgraha (Prakrit) Panchasamgraha
(Sanskrit) Shripata 72,000 Ga. 236 6,000 — 600,000 Ga. 1,705 Ga. 650 Elo. 1,456
Ga. 1,394 Dhalo. 1,243 Approximately Vikrama Samvat 605 Approximately Vikrama
Samvat 300 Approximately Vikrama Samvat 600 Vikrama Samvat 900 Vikrama Samvat
1800 Vikrama Samvat 1100 Vikrama Samvat 1600

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa ukta jAnakArI ke anantara abhI taka mudrita
granthoM ke nAma, racayitA, samaya Adi kA saMkSepa meM ke kara denA ucita hogaa|
ina graMthoM meM zvetAmbara evaM digambara donoM sampradAyoM ke karmagranthoM kA
ullekha kiyA gayA hai www. kartA zlokapramANa racanAkAla 36000 206 brammanAma
mahAkarmaprakRti prAbhUta athavA karmaprAbhUta ( paTakhaMDazAstra) dhavalA TIkA
kaSAyamAbhUta jayabalA TIkA gommaTasAra saMkRta TokA saMskRta TIkA hindI TIkA
puSpadanta tathA f bIrasena guNadhara vativRSabha vIrasena tathA jinasena
nemicandra siddhAntacakravartI kezavarNI abhayacandra ToDaramala dhasAra mindra
: (kSapaNasAragarbhita ) siddhAntacakravartI saMskRta TIkA hindI TIkA kezavarNI
ToDaramalla saMgraha (saMskRta amitagati saMgraha (prAkRta) paMcasaMgraha
(saMskRta) zrIpAta 72000 gA0 236 6000 -- 60000 gA0 1705 gA0 650 elo. 1456 gA0
1394 Dhalo. 1243 anumAnasaH vikrama kI dUsarI-tIsarI palAdi lagabhaga vi0
saM0605 anumAnata: vikrama kI tIsarI zatAi anumAnata: vikrama kI chaThI zatAbdi
bikrama kI naunI araj earf vikrama kI gyArahavIM zatAbdi vikrama kI 18 vIM zatAi
vikrama kI gyArahavI zatAdi vikrama kI 16 vIM lAbdi vi0 saM0 107 vi0 0 17 vIM
zata

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A Brief Introduction to Jain Karma Literature  **Other Names:** * Kammaprakriti
* Kata Chitramuri * Rasoka Pramana Rabama Kala Ga 455 (possibly Vikram Samvat
5th century) * 700 Vikrama Samvat 12th century  **Commentary:** * Malayagiri *
Ni-13.13 Shaka (Yasovijaya 1300 Vikrama Samvat, 18th century) * Pankhasangraha
Nandhashi Mahatara Ga 0663 Mbopa Sha Vritti Malayagiri (18858 Vikrama Samvat,
12-13th century)  **Ancient Shad Karmagrantha:** * 547, 551, 567 (A) Karma
Vipaka Margashi Ga 16 (Vritti Manandamoori 122 Vikrama Samvat, 12-13th century)
**Matadhya:** * (1) Karmamlava * Ma: 57 Bhagya * Ma: 24, Bhashya * Ma: 32
(possibly Vikrama Samvat) * Govindanayan 1ts 1288 (before) (E) Bandha-Swamitva
(Ma: 50) Vritti Haribhadra Suri 56 Vikrama Samvat * 1972 (E) Padashiti Minlal
Bhagani Ma: 56 Bhashya * Ma: 35 Vritti Haribhadra Suri * Vikrama Samvat 12th
century Prasad Malayagiri 2140: Vikrama Samvat 12-13th century  **Matadhya:** *
Thathi * Vritti

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jaina karmasAhitya kA saMkSipta paricaya iwariBansaniamare anya nAma
kamaMprakRti katA citramUri rasoka pramANa rabamA kAla gA 455 saMbhavataH
vikrama kI 5vIM zatAbdi 700 vi kI 12 koM se vRtti malayagiri ni- 13.13 za.
yazovijaya 1300 vi. 18vIM za paMkhasaMgraha nanddhaSi mahatara gA0663 mbopaza
vRtti vRtti malayagiri. 18858 vizama kI 12-13 hauM  /  zatAbdi prAcIna Sada
karmagrantha yA 547,551, 567 (a) karma vipAkA margaSi gA0 16. vRtti mAnandamUri
122 vi0 12-13 vo matAdI dhyAcyA (1) karmamlava mA: 57 bhAgya mA0 24, bhASya mA0
32 saMbhavata: vi0 saM0 govindAnAyaM 1ts 1288 se pUrva (i) bandha-svAmitva (mA0
50) vRtti haribhadra sUri 56. vi0 saM0 1972 (I) paDazIti minala bhagaNi mA0 56
bhASya mA0 35 vRti haribhadrasuriH vi kI 12vI prasAda malayagiri 2140 : vikrama
kI 12-13 vIM  /  matAdhi : thati vRti

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 200 ### Third Karma Other: Appendix #### The Birth of Pishachas **(j) Sad
Bhashya, Vrihad Bhashya** ##### Verse Evidence, Composition Time 111 Ma. 24 1413
Vi. Sa. 11:59 Chakke Svar Suri Purani Bupti **(k) Sapttatika Shivsharm Suri or**
Chandrashi Mahttar 75 Bhasha Abhaydevapi Ga. 161 Vikram ki Gyarahavi Barahvi
Shatabdi Malayagiri 3780 Vi. ki 13-13 Bon Sh. Bhashyatthi Bherusugamuri 4550 Vi.
Sa. 1443 Sai Shatak Jinavallabh Gani Ga. 155 Vi 12vi Shatabdi Yatti Baneshvar
Suri 3700 Vi. Sa. 1171 Naveen Panch Karma Granth Devendrasuri Ga. 304 Vi. ki
13-14-di Svoshgyan Tika (Adhswamita ko Vi. ki 13-14 vi chhodkar) 10131 Shatabdi
Bandhswamisva-avchari 426 Pad Karmgranth Balpaprabodh Jayasom 10.10 Di. ki 17 vi
Shata. Avprakaran Vijayavimal Gani Ga. 30 Vi. Sa. 1623 Svopagyan Vritti
Andhhetuvayatrimanngi Harshakulgani Ga. 65 Vi. 16 vi Sh Vritti Vanarapi Gani
1150 Vi. Sa. 1602 Bandhichayasasaprakarana Vijayavimal Gar 24 Vi. 17 vi Sh. ka
Gani Sthop Avari. **Form Sansveshabhang Prakarana Devchand Sankramanakaran
Premvijaygani** Vi. Sa. 1985 Is Prakarana ke Lekhan mein An Sahitya ka Vrihad
Itihas Bhag 4 (Par Vi. Sa. Sa. Varanasi) ka Adhar Liya gaya hai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 200 tRtIya karma anya : pariziSTa kA pizaprasUtI (ja) sada bhASya vRhada bhASya
zloka pramANa racanAkAla 111 mA0 24 1413 vi0 saM0 11:59 cakke svara suri pUrNi
bupti (ka) saptatikA zivazarmasUri athavA candraSi mahattara 75 bhASA
abhayadevamapi gA0 161 vikrama kI gyArahavIM bArahavIM zatAbdi malayagiri 3780
vi0 kI 13-13 boM za. bhASyatti bherusugamUri 4550 vi0 saM0 1443 sAI zataka
jinavallabha gaNi gA0 155 vi 12 vIM zatAbdi yatti banezvara suri 3700 vi0 saM0
1171 navIna paMca karma grantha devendrasUri gA0 304 vi. kI 13-14-dI svoSajJa
TIkA (adhasvAmitA ko vi0 kI 13-14 vI chor3akara) 10131 zatAbdi bandhasvAmisva-
avacari 426 pada krarmagrandha bAlapapabodha jayasoma 10.10 di0 kI 17 vI zatA.
AvaprakaraNa vijayavimala gaNi gA0 30 vi0 saM0 1623 svopajJa vRtti
andhahetUvayatrimaMgI harSakulagaNi gA0 65 vi0 16 vIM za vRtti vAnarapi gaNi
1150 vi0 saM0 1602 bandhIcayasasAprakaraNa vijayavimala gAra 24 vi0 17 vIM za.
kA gaNi sthopA avari  /  0g pharmasaMvezabhaMga prakaraNa devacanda
saMkramakaraNa premavijayagaNi vi0 saM0 1985 isa prakaraNa ke lekhana meM ana
sAhitya kA vRhad itihAsa bhAga 4 (pAra vi0 sa0 saM0 bArANasI) kA AdhAra liyA
gayA hai|

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Fundamental Verses of the Karmagranthi Verses of the First Karmagranthi I
bow to the victorious Jina. The Karmavivarana (exposition of karma) is
summarized. It is done by the soul as the cause, by which it experiences karma.
(1) The four-fold nature of the Mokshadhara (path to liberation) is described.
The primary nature and the secondary nature, the difference of a hundred and
eight, (2) Thus, the knowledge-obscuring, faith-obscuring, feeling-obscuring,
and life-obscuring (karmas), the name and gotra (lineage) (karmas). The
enumeration of the twenty-eight and the four hundred and fifty (karmas). (3) The
pure knowledges - Mati, Sruta, Avadhi, and Kevala - are there. In that, Mati-
jnana (sensory knowledge) is fourfold, with the distinction of the four modes of
mind. (4) Aticharya, Ihavaya, Dharana - these six are the activities of the
mind. The twenty-two and the fourteen, the twenty, and the six - these are the
subtle, the gross, the mixed, and the perfect (stages of the soul). (5) The
seven stages of the Angapravritti (manifestation of the soul's qualities) are
thus explained. (6) The Paryaya (modifications), the Akshara (indestructible),
the Prayoga (application), the Pratipatti (realization), the Anuyoga (scriptural
exposition), the Pahuda (preliminary), the Palungya (advanced), the Pahudavatthu
(subject matter of the preliminary), and the Purvayoga (previous exposition) -
all these are summarized. (7)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karmagrantha kI mUla gAthAe~ prathama karmagrantha kI gAthAe~ siri vIra jiNaM
baMdiya, kammavivAma samAsao vucchN| kIrai jieNa heuhi, jeNaM to bhaSNae kammaM
// 1 //  pagaiThiirasapaesA taM cauhA moyagassa didrutA  /  mUlapagai'ha
uttarapagaI aDavanasaya bheyaM 2 //  ii. nANadasaNAvaraNaveyamohAu nAmagoyANi  /
vigdhaM ca paNanavaduaTThavIsacautisayadupaNavihaM  // 3 //  mai-sukha-ohI-maNa
kevalANi nANANi tattha mainANaM  /  baMjaNavAmaha cauhA maNanayaviNidiya caukkA
// 4 //  atyuggaha IhAvAyadhAraNA karaNamANasehiM chahA  /  jhya adavIsabheyaM
caudasahA vIsahA va surya zA aksara sannI samma sAimaM khalu sapajjavasiya cha
/  gamiyaM aMgapaviDhe sattavi ee sapaDivaktA  // 6 //  pajjaya aksara paya
saMghAyA paTiyatti taha ya aNuogo  /  pAhuDapAluGa pAhuDavatthU puvvA ya sa-
samAsA  /  / 7 /  /

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Third Karma Pranya: Appendix The six types of Anugami Vaddhamana Pratipati-
vihara are: Riumai, Viulmai, Manana, Anana, Kevala-miya-vihana. ॥8॥ This is the
covering (Avarana) that obstructs the right perception (Darsana) and right
knowledge (Jnana). The three types of Darsanavarana are: Ghatu, Prajnapti, and
Varttikavastha. ॥9॥ The Caksudarshana, Acaksus, Sesa-indriya, and Kevala are the
four types of Darsana. The three types of Samanya-labhavarana are: Sukha-
pratibodhika, Nidra, and Nidranidra. ॥10॥ The three types of Duhkha-pratibodhika
are: Paryavasthita, Paryavasthita-paryavasthita, and Cakramadhya. ॥11॥ The four
types of Drcchiti-granthikarani are: Sthirakshi, Ardha-cakki, Ardha-bala, and
Mahulisa-khagadharalalihana. ॥12॥ The two types of Darsana-carana-moha are:
Osanna (in celestial and human beings) and Asamya (in infernal and animal
beings). ॥13॥ The three types of Isana-moha are: Sammoha, Mithya, and Avidya.
The three types of Mithya are: Suddha, Asuddha, and Asuddha-krama. ॥14॥ The four
types of Jneyajneya, Punya-papa, Asrava, Samvara, Bandha, and Moksa-nijjara are:
Jiva, Ajiva, Purnna-pava-asrava, and Samvara-bandha-mukkhani-jjarna. ॥15॥ The
Raga-dvesa are not present in the Jina-dharma, which is the ultimate truth. The
Naliyadipa-manuna (one who follows the wrong path) is the opposite of the Jina-
dharma. ॥16॥ The sixteen Kasayas and nine Nokaṣāyas are the two types of
Cāritra-mohanīya. The three types are: Ananuprekṣā, Paccakkhāna, and Samjalana.
॥17॥ The four types of Jiva-risi, Caturmasa-paksa, Naraka, Tiryanc, Nara, and
Amara are the ones who practice the right conduct and attain the destruction of
Karmas. ॥18॥

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmapranya : pariziSTa aNugAmi vaDDamANaya paSTivAIyaravihA chahA ohii|
riumai viulamaI maNanANaM kevalamiyavihANaM  // 8 //  esa je AvaraNa paDubdha
susta ta tayAvara desaNa ghau paNanihA vittisa dasaNAvaraNaM  /  / 6 /  /
cakkhUdiTThi acaya sesidiya ohi kevalehi ca  /  dasaNamiha sAmannaM lamsAvaraNaM
tayaM uhA  // 10 //  suhapaDibohA nidA nihAniddA ya dukkhapaDibohA  /  payalA
ThioviTThasa payalapayalA ya cakamao  // 11 //  dicitigrasthakaraNI thINakhI
addhacakki addhblaa| mahulisakhagadhArAlihaNaM va duhA u yaziyaM  // 12 //
osannaM suramaNue sAyamasAyaM tu tiriyanaraesu  /  maja va mohazIyaM duvihaM
dasaNacaraNamohA  /  / 13 /  /  IsaNamoha tiviha samma mosaM taheva micchataM  /
suddha avisuddha avisuddha taM havai kamaso  // 14!! jiyaajiya puNNapAvAsaba
sNvrbndhmukkhnijjrnnaa| jeNaM sahaiyaM tayaM samma khaigAibahumeyaM  /  / 15 /
/  mIsA na rAgadoso jiNadhamme aMtamuhajahA anne| nAliyaradIvamaNuNo miccha
jiNadhammabivarIyaM  /  / 16 /  /  solasa kasAya nava nokasAya duviha
carittamohaNiyaM 1 aNa appaccakvANA paccakkhANA ya saMjalaNA  // 17 //
jAjIvarisacaumAsapaksagA narayatiriya nara amarA  /
sammANusandhaviraIahakhAyacaritapAyakarA  // 18 //

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Karma Grantha Verses  **Verse 16:**  Like a drop of water falling on a
hot iron, so is the soul, bound by the two karmas of knowledge and conduct.
**Verse 20:**  The soul is covered by the veil of Maya, entangled in the web of
karma, like iron covered with rust, like a lotus covered with mud.  **Verse
21:**  The soul experiences joy, sorrow, fear, and anger due to the karmas.
These are the causes of delusion and attachment.  **Verse 22:**  The soul is
bound by the karmas of attachment, aversion, and ignorance, like a bird caught
in a net. These karmas are like a fire that burns the soul.  **Verse 23:**
There are 84 lakhs of species of beings, each with its own karma. These karmas
are classified into 19 categories, 100 sub-categories, and 76 sub-sub-
categories.  **Verse 24:**  The karmas are classified into 5 categories: 1)
body, 2) speech, 3) mind, 4) conduct, and 5) knowledge. These karmas are further
classified into 14 sub-categories.  **Verse 25:**  The karmas of body, speech,
and mind are classified into 14 categories: 1) birth, 2) lifespan, 3) form, 4)
color, 5) smell, 6) taste, 7) touch, 8) sound, 9) knowledge, 10) faith, 11)
conduct, 12) power, 13) wealth, and 14) happiness.  **Verse 26:**  The karmas of
conduct and knowledge are classified into 20 categories: 1) attachment, 2)
aversion, 3) ignorance, 4) anger, 5) pride, 6) deceit, 7) greed, 8) jealousy, 9)
violence, 10) cruelty, 11) lust, 12) hatred, 13) envy, 14) fear, 15) worry, 16)
doubt, 17) laziness, 18) carelessness, 19) forgetfulness, and 20) foolishness.
**Verse 27:**  The karmas of body, speech, and mind are classified into 4
categories: 1) good, 2) bad, 3) mixed, and 4) neutral. The karmas of conduct and
knowledge are classified into 4 categories: 1) good, 2) bad, 3) mixed, and 4)
neutral.  **Verse 28:**  The karmas of body, speech, and mind are classified
into 4 categories: 1) good, 2) bad, 3) mixed, and 4) neutral. The karmas of
conduct and knowledge are classified into 4 categories: 1) good, 2) bad, 3)
mixed, and 4) neutral.  **Verse 29:**  The karmas of body, speech, and mind are
classified into 4 categories: 1) good, 2) bad, 3) mixed, and 4) neutral. The
karmas of conduct and knowledge are classified into 4 categories: 1) good, 2)
bad, 3) mixed, and 4) neutral.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karma grantha ko gAthAe~ jalareNu puDavipanvayarAIsariso bAviho koho
/  tigisalayAkadviyaselatthaMbhovamo mANo  //  16  //
mAyAvalehiMgomuttimilasiMgaghaNavaM simulasamA  /  loho
halidakhaMjaNakaddamakimirAgasAmANo  //  20 }} jassudayA hoi jie hAsa raI arai
soga bhaya kucchaa| sanimittimanahA vA taM iha hAsAimohaNiya  // 21 //
parisisthi tadubhaya par3a ahilAso javasA havAi sou  /  yInaranapuudayo
phaphumataNanagaradAhasamo  // 22 //  suranaratirinarayAU haDisarisaM nAmakamma
vitisama  /  bAyAlatinavavihaM tiuttarasayaM ca sattaTThI  // 23 //
gaijAitaNuUvaMgA bandhaNasaMghAyaNANi saMghayathA  /
saMThANavaNNagandharasaphAsa aNupubdhi vihAgAI  // 24 //  piMDapaDitti caudasa,
paradhA ussAsa AyavujoyeM  /  agurulahutitthanimagovAyamiya apatayA  // 2 //
tasa vAyara pajjata patteya dhiraM subhaM ca subhagaM ca  /  susarAijja jasaM
tasadasagaM thAvaradasaM tu imaM  // 26 //  thAvara sahama apaja sAhAraNa athira
asubha dubhgaanni| dussaraNAijAjasamiya nAme seyarA vIsaM  // 27 //  tasabau
thirachakka athiraka suhamatiga thAvaracaukkaM  /  subhagatigAivibhAsA
sadAisalAhi payaDIhiM  /  / 2 /  /  vapaNaca agullahubau sasAitira misthAI  /
iya anAvi vibhAsA tayAi saMkhAhi paraDIhiM  // 26 //

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **212**  The twenty-one, two, four, four, three, three,
six, six, are the **Panchchhachchakka** (five-fold) **Panadupa** (two-fold)
**Dugg** (two-fold) **Uttarabheya** (north-facing). ||30||  These twenty-two
**Juya** (types of) **Faras** (actions) are in the **Sante** (state of)
**Panarabandhana** (binding) **Tisa** (three-fold). The **Bandha** (bond)
**Sanghaya** (group) is **Tanu** (subtle) **Samann** (equal) **Vanna** (color)
**Chara** (moving). ||31||  These seven **Tatti** (types of) **Bandhodaya**
(bond-arising) are not **Samm** (equal) **Misa** (mixed) **Bandha** (bond). The
**Bandhudaya** (bond-arising) is **Sa** (with) **Sri** (auspicious) **Duvi**
(two) **Satt** (seven) **Vanna** (color) **Sana** (small). ||32||  **Univaio**
(said).  **Panasarira** (body of the soul). ||33||  **Tatiya** (third)
**Karmagrahya** (object of karma) **Parishista** (appendix)  **Niryati** (exit)
**Tirinarasuragai** (hell, animal, human, and celestial realms) **Imaviyati**
(in this world)  **Oralavivaharagateyakammana** (actions of speech, conduct, and
thought)  **Sesa** (remaining)  **Bahur** (arm) **Pitt** (back) **Sir** (head)
**Ur** (chest) **Uyarang** (upper body) **Uvang** (limb) **Angulipaha**
(fingernails) **Go** (cow) **Vanga** (group) **Padmatanu** (lotus-like body)
**Tigassu** (three-fold) **Vanga** (group). ||34||  **Fragaticorr** (fragrance)
**Sambandha** (connection). **Urlai** (chest) **Bandhana** (binding) **Neyam**
(this). ||35||  **Urlai** (chest) **Pugnala** (individual)  **Jam** (that which)
**Kunai** (does) **Jausamam** (like a Jain) **Tam** (that)  **Jam** (that which)
**Sandhaya** (group) **Urlai** (chest) **Puggale** (individual) **Sanghaya**
(group) **Bandhana** (binding) **Mitra** (friend)  **Tapagana** (group of
austerities) **Va** (or) **Datali** (tooth-like). **Tanuname** (subtle name)
**Panchaviham** (five-fold). ||36||  **Tam** (that)  **Sagateya** (with thought)
**Kammajuttana** (karma-bound).  **Ol** (speech) **Vijvaharaya** (conduct)
**Ana** (and) **Nava** (nine) **Bandhana** (bond) **Ani** (these) **Yarasahya**
(with the soul) **Ana** (and) **Tini** (three) **Tesi** (these) **Cha** (also).
||37||  **Sanghayana** (group) **Mani** (jewel) **O** (oh) **Tam** (that)
**Chhadda** (six) **Bajja** (type of) **Risanaray** (binding). **Naray**
(binding) **Risahanaray** (binding)  **Tahu** (also) **Ya** (which)  **Kili**
(hook) **Cheva** (end) **Iharisah** (with the soul) **Patti** (band) **Ya**
(which) **Kiliya** (hook) **Vajjam** (type of).  **Ubha** (both) **O** (oh)
**Makkadabangho** (binding of the throat) **Naray** (binding)  **Enerati**
(energy)  **Santhana** (structure)  **Vrinna** (wrinkled)  **Addhanarayam**
(half-binding). ||38||  **Imamulange** (in this world). ||39||  **Nigohasa**
(black) **Ijj** (like) **Vamanam** (vomit) **Hui** (became). **Kindani** (below)
**Nila** (blue) **Lohiya** (blood) **Halisiya** (like). ||40||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 212 gaiyAI u kamaso caupaNapaNa tipaNapaMcachacchakkeM  /  paNadUpaNaca duga
uttarabheyapaNasI  // 30 //  iya aDavIsa juyA faras saMte vA panarabaMdhaNe
tisayaM  /  baMdha saMghAya ho taNUsu sAmannavaNNacara  // 31 //  iya sattaTTI
baMdhodaya na ya sammamIsayA baMdhe  /  baMdhudae sAe zrIduvIsaaTTavannasaNaM
//  32  //  uNivAio  /   //  paNasarIrA ||33|| tatIya karmagrabhya: pariziSTa
nirayatirinarasuragaI imaviyati orAlavivAhAragateyakammaNa sesA bAhUru piTTi
sira ura uyaraMga uvaMga aMgulIpahA  /  govaMgA paDhamataNutigassuvaMgANi  /  /
34  /  /  fragaticorr saMbandhaM  /  uralAIbaMdhaNaM neyaM  //  /  35||
uralAipugnalANaM jaM kuNai jausamaM taM jaM saMdhAya uralAI puggale saMghAyaM
baMdhaNamitra tapagaNaM va datAlI  /  taNunAmeNa paMcavihaM  //  36|| taM
sagateya kammajuttaNA  /  ola vijavAhArayANa nava baMdhaNANiiyarasahiyANaM tini
tesi ca  // 37 //  saMghayaNamanio taM chaddhA bajja risanArAya  /  nArAya
risahanArAya taha ya kIli cheva iharisaho paTTI ya kIliyA vajjaM  /  ubhao
makkaDabaMgho nArAya enerati saMThANA vRnnA addhanArAyaM ||38|| imamulaMge
||36|| nigohasAijjA vAmaNaM huI  /  kindanIlalohiyahalisiyA ||40||

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Prathama Karmgrantha ko gapaye Surahidurahi rasa pana tittakadukasaya anita
majura. Phasa gurulahumi ukharasi umha siniddharupalatttha ||4|| Nila kasina
dugandha tita kadu guha ruksa. Siya cha asuhanavaraga ikkara saga subha asam
||142|| Chauha gaivanupuvvigai prithvidurga tiga nidhaujurya. Prithviudao bakke
suhaasuhavassutta vihagai ||43|| Paradhaudaya pani parasi balina pi hoi duriso.
Usasanaddhi jutto havei usasanamavasa ||44|| Ravidibbe u jiyanga lavajuye ayavau
na u jalaye. Jamusina phasassa tahi lehiyavannassa udau ti ||45|| Anusinapa
yasarupam jiyangamujjoyae ihuujjoya he jaidevuttaratrivikayajoisakkhajjayamaivva
||46|| Angam na guru na lahuyam jayada jivasssa agurulahuudaya. Tittthe
tihunassa vi pujjo se udao kevalimo ||47|| Angopanganiymana nimmana kunai
suttaharasamae. Abagaya uvahammati satanukkabalang bigaihim ||4||
Bitichaupaninidina tasa vayarao vayara liya thula. Niyaniyapajjattijuya pajjatta
laddhikaranehim ||46|| Patteyatana patte udayenam dantaddhimai ghira 3 namuvari
sirai suhe subhagao savvajano ||50|| Susara muharasuhjhuni aijja
sabbaloyagijjhavao. Jasao jasakittio thavaradasangam vivajjallam ||51||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama karmagrantha ko gApAe~ sUrahidurahI rasA paNa tittakaDukasAya anitA
majurA  /  phAsA gurulahumiukharasI umha siNiddharUpalaTThA  // 4 //  nIla
kasiNaM dugaMdhaM titaM kaDya guha ruks| sIyaM ca asuhanavarga ikkArasaga subhaM
asaM  // 142 /  /  cauha gaivaNupuSvIgai pRthvidurga tiga nidhAujurya  /
puthvIudao bakke suhaasuha vasuTTa vihagaI  // 43 //  paradhAudayA pANI parasiM
baliNaM pi hoi duriso| UsasaNaddhijutto havei UsAsanAmavasA  // 44 //  ravidhibe
u jiyaMga lAvajuye AyavAu na u jalaye  /  /  jamusiNaphAsassa tahi
lehiyavannassa udau ti  // 45 //  aNusiNapayAsarUvaM jiyaMgamujjoyae ihujjoyA
hai jaidevuttaratrivikayajoisakhajajAyamAivva  // 46 //  aMgaM na guru na
lahuyaM jAyada jIvassa agurulhuudyaa| titthe tihuyaNassa vi pujjo se udao
kevaslimo  // 47 //  aGgovaMganiyamaNaM nimmANaM kuNai suttahArasame  /
abaghAyA uvahammai sataNukyabalaM bigAIhiM  // 4 //  biticaupaNidina tasA
vAyarao vAyarA liyA thUlA  /  niyaniyapajjattijuyA pajjattA laddhikaraNehi  //
46| patteya taNa patte udayeNaM daMtaDhimAI ghira 3 nAmuvari sirAi suhe subhagAo
savvajaNa i8o  // 50 //  susarA muharasuhajhuNI AijjA sbbloygijjhvo| jasao
jasakittIo thAvaradasagaM vivajjalyaM  // 51 //

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
214 Third Karma Granth: Appendix Suvabhumbhalayam. Viriye ca ||52|| Jivo vi
||53|| Go-yam duhaccaneyam kulala iva vigdha dana laabe bhoguvabhoga-nsu sirir-
iyas jaha padikule-na tena tena ra-ya-i. Na kunada dana-i-ya evam vigve-na
parini-tta nihava uvadhaya pasa atara-ranam. Accasa-vanaya-ae avarana durga jio
jayai ||54|| Guru-bhatti-tikaruna-vayajogakasa-tha vijayadana-juo. Dhamma-i ajja
saya-masayam tri-vijay ||55|| Ummade-sanam-aggana-sana deva-davva-haranehi-m.
Dansana-moham jinamuni-cesya sangha-i padini-lo ||56|| Duviham pi charana-moham
kasaya-ha saha visaya vivasamano. Bandha-da naraya-sa mahara-mbha-parigga-haro
ruddo ||57|| Tiriya-ja guda-hiyo sadho sasallo taha manussau. Payai tanuka-sao
darui majjhima-guno a ||58|| A-visya-mai sura-cam balata-vo'ka-mani-jjaro
jayada. Saralo agara-villo suha-namam anna-ha aham ||59|| Guna-pehi mayara-hiyo
ajjhaya-na-jhava-narui niccam. Pakuna-i jina-i bhatto ucca niyam isara-ha u
||60|| Jinapuya-vigdha-karo hisa-i-parayana-o jaya vigyam. ar aafaarita lihio
devinda-surihi ||61|| || First Karma Gatha-s are complete ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 214 tRtIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa suvabhuMbhalAIyaM  /  vIrie ca  // 52 //  |
jIvo vi  //  53  //  | goyaM duhaccanIyaM kulAla iva vigdhaM dANe lAbhe
bhoguvabhogaMsu siririyasa jaha paDikUleNa teNa teNa rAyAI  /  na kuNada dANAIya
evaM vigveNa pariNItta nihava uvadhAya pasa atarAraNaM  /  accAsAvaNayAe AvaraNa
durga jio jayai  //  54  //  ga urubhattitikaruNA-vayajogakasAtha vijayadANajuo
/  dhammAI ajja sAyamasAyaM trivajjaya || 55  //  ummadesaNAmagganAsaNA
devadavvaharaNehiM  /  daMsaNamohaM jiNamuNicezya saMghAi paDiNIlo  //  56  //
duvihaM pi caraNamohaM kasAyahA sAha visaya vivasamaNo  /  baMdhada narayAsa
mahAraMbhapariggaharao ruddo || 57 //  tiriyAja gUDhahiyo saDho sasallo tahA
maNussAu  /  payaI taNukasAo dAruI majjhimaga uNo a  //  58  //  avizyamAi
surAcaM bAlatavo'kAmanijjaro jayada  /  saralo agAravillo suhanAmaM annahA ahaM
// 56 //  guNapehI mayarahio ajjhayaNajhAvaNAruI niccaM  /  pakuNai jiNAi bhatto
ucca nIyaM isarahA u  // 60 //  jiNapUyAvigdhakaro hisAiparAyaNo jaya vigyaM  /
ar aafaarita lihio devindasUrihi 61  //   //  prathama karma kI gAthAeM samApta
//

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Verses of the Second Karma Grantha  1. **Thunimo** the **Veerajina** in
all **guna-thanas**, all **karma** are bound.
**Bandhu**-**udirana**-**asatta**-**patta** are **khachya**. 2. **Miya-chhe**
the **Sasana** in **abhiraya** land, **pamatta** and **apamatta**. **Niyatti**
and **aniyatti**, **suha** and **avasam**, **khin**, **sajogi** and **ajogi**
**gunas**. 3. **Abhinava-karma-rahan**, **bandho** by **ohe**, **vis-sayam** for
him. **Tistaya**, **rahar-ga-du-ga-vajja**, **michchhami** **satara-sayam**. 4.
**Narayati-ga** **jai-tha-avar-chat**, **hunday-av-chiv-vatthan-pumi-chchha**.
**So-lato** **iga-hi-ya-sau**, **Sasani** **ti-rik-shi-na-du-ha-mati-ma**. 5.
**Anam-jha-agi** **is-ang-hay-an-chau**, **ni-uj-joy-ku-kha-gas-thi** **ti**.
**Pan-vis-anto** **bhog** **pau-say-ar** **du-a-khya-andha**. 6. **Samme'**
**sa-ga-sa-ri** **ji-a-u-bandhi**, **bai-ra** **nar-ati-ma** **vi-ya-fa-saya**.
**Ural-du-ga** **to** **se**, **satta-thi** **ti-a** **ka-saya-ta-he**. 7.
**Teva-di-tha** **pamatte** **soga** **ar-ai** **adhi-ra-du-ga** **aja-sa**
**as-say-am**. **Vuch-chhin-na** **chhach** **sa-sa** **v**, **ne-i** **su-rau**
**ja-ya** **nit-tha**. 8. **Guna-sach-chi** **appa-matte** **su-rau-bandha**
**tu** **jar** **i-ha-gan-chha**. **Anna-ha** **at-tha-van-na** **jan** **a-har-
ga-du-rga** **bandhe**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya karmagrantha kI gAthAe~ taha thuNimo vIrajiNaM jaha guNaThANesu
sayalakammAI  /  bandhuodIraNayAsattApattANi khaciyANi  // 1 //  miyache sAsaNa
mIse abiraya dese pamatta apamatta  /  niyaTi aniyaTTi suhamuvasama khINa sajogi
ajogiguNA |2| abhinavakammarahaNa, baMdho oheNa tasya vIsa-sayaM  /  tisthaya
rAhAraga-dugavajja micchami satara-sayaM  // 3 //  narayatiga jAithAvaracata,
huMDAyavachivaTThanapumiccha  /  solato igahiyasau, sAsaNi tirikSINaduhamatima
/  / 4 /  /  aNamajhAgi isaMghayaNacau, niujjoyakukhagasthi ti  /  paNavIsaMto
bhoga pausayAra duAkhyaandhA  // 5 //  samme' sagasari jiyAubaMdhi, baira
naratima viyaphasAyA  /  uraladuga to se, sattaTThI tiA kasAyatahe  // 6 //
tevadiTha pamatte soga arai adhiraduga ajasa assAyaM  /  vucchinna chacca sasa
va, neI surAu jayA niTTha  /  / 7 /  /  guNasachi appamate surAubaMdha tu jara
ihAgancha  /  annaha aTThAvaNNA jaM AhAragadurga bandhe  // 8 //

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Third Karmabhanda: Appendix The forty-two parts of the Karmabhanda. The Suradu
Paniti, the Sukhagati, the Trisanvara, the Uralvinu, the Tanuvaṃga. The
Samacatuṣka, the Nimiṇa, the Jiṇavaṇṇagara, the Laddacatuṣka, the Chalasiṃ, the
Tīsaṃto. The Carame, the Vāsabandhi, the Sarakū, the Yāyāvara, the Aniyadiṭṭha,
the Bhāgapanaga, the Igegahīṇo, the Dubīsavihanndo. The Pumasaṃjalanaācauṇaha,
the Kameṇa, the Cheo, the Satara, the Suhame. The
Caturdasanuccajasanāṇavigghada, the Saṃsaga, the Solasuccheo. The Tisu, the
Sāyabandha, the Cheo, the Sajogi bandhaṃ, the Tuṇato a. The Udao, the
Vivāgaveyanamudīraṇa, the Apatti, the Iha, the Dudhīssaya. The Sattarasa, the
Micche, the Mīsa, the Sammāhāra, the Jiṇaśudayā. The Suhuma-tigāyava-miccha, the
Micchataṃ, the Sāsaṇe, the Igārasa. The Nirayānupuggviṇudayā, the Aṇaṭṭhāvara,
the Imacigalaggaṃto. The Mose, the Sayamapuvīdayā, the Mīsodaeṇa, the Mīsaṃto.
The Cau-saya-majae, the Sammānupubbi-khevā, the Diya-kasāyā. The
Maṇutirinupuddhi, the Viuvaṭṭha, the Duhaga, the Aṇājaduma, the Sattaraccheō.
The Sagasīi, the Desi, the Tirigaiāu, the Niujjoya, the Tikasāyā. The Accheo,
the Igasī, the Patti, the Āhāra-jugala-pakkevā. The Mīṇatigāhāragaduga, the Chō,
the Chassayari, the Apama. The Sammattatimasaṃghayaṇatiyaccheō, the Bisattari,
the Apuṭave. The Hāsāicchakkayato, the Sahi, the Aniyaṭṭhiveya-ligaṃ. The
Saṃjalanaṭiga, the Chalacheo, the Savi, the Suhammaṃmi, the Turiyalohaṃto. The
Upasaṃtaguṇe, the Guṇasahi, the Risahanārāyadugaṃto.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya kabhanantha : pariziSTa aDavana apunvAimi nivaduyato chapamna paNabhAge
/  suraduga paNidi sukhagai tasanava uralaviNu taNuvaMgA || samacaura nimiNa
jiNa vaNNaagaralaDDacau chalasi tiisNto| carame vAsabaMdhI sarakU yAyAvara
aniyadiTha bhAgapaNage, igegahINo dubIsavihanandho  /  pumasaMjalaNacAuNaha,
kameNa cheo satara suhame  /  / 11 /  /  caurdasaNuccajasanANavigdhadasagaM ti
solsuccheo| tisu sAyabandha cheo sajogi bandhaM tuNato a  // 12 //  udao
vivAgaveyaNamudIraNa apatti iha dudhIsasaya  /  satarasaya micche mIsa samma-
AhAra-jiNazudayA  // 13 //  suhuma-tigAyava-miccha micchataM sAsaNe igArasayaM
/  nirayANupugviNudayA aNa-thAvara-imacigalagraMto  // 14 //  mose
sayamaNapuvIdayA mIsodaeNa mIsaMto  /  causayamajae sammANupubvi-khevA diya-
kasAyA  // 15 /  /  maNutiriNupubdhi viuvaTTha duhaga aNAijaduma sataracheo  /
sagasIi desi tirigaiAu niujjoya tikasAyA  /  / 16 /  /  accheo igasI patti
AhAra-jugala-pakkhevA  /  mINatigAhAragaduga cho chassayari apamasa  // 17 //
sammattatimasaMghayaNatiyagaccheo bisattari apuTave  /  hAsAichakkayato sahi
aniyaTTiveyaligaM ||18|| saMjalaNatiga chalacheo savi suhamaMmi turiylobhNto|
upasaMtaguNe guNasahi risahanArAyadugaaMto  // 16 //

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- Fate is the result of karma. 217 The soul, having exhausted its karmic
impurities, attains liberation. It is the ultimate goal of all beings. The six
substances, earth, water, fire, air, ether, and soul, are the foundation of the
universe. The soul is the essence of all beings. 21 The soul is pure and
eternal. It is the source of all happiness and sorrow. 22 The soul is the
ultimate reality. It is the source of all knowledge and wisdom. 23 The soul is
the ultimate goal of all beings. It is the source of all liberation. 24 The soul
is the ultimate reality. It is the source of all happiness and sorrow. 25 The
soul is the ultimate reality. It is the source of all knowledge and wisdom. 26
The soul is the ultimate reality. It is the source of all liberation. 27 The
soul is the ultimate reality. It is the source of all happiness and sorrow. 28
The soul is the ultimate reality. It is the source of all knowledge and wisdom.
29 The soul is the ultimate reality. It is the source of all liberation. 30 The
soul is the ultimate reality. It is the source of all happiness and sorrow.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - fate karmanya ko mAyAyeM 217 sagavanna khINa ducami niddadugaMto ya carami
paNayantrA  /  nANaMtarAyadaMsaNa- cau sarvomi kAmezva tithUdayA
uralA'dhirakhagaiduga paritatima chaH saMThANA  /  nimiNateyakammAisaMghayaNaM
//  21  //  agurula huvannacara dUsara susara sAyAsAegayaraM ca tIsa vuccheo  /
vArasa ajogi subhagAijjajasannara veyaNiya  // 22 //  tasati paNidi maNuyA ugai
jiNucca ti caramasamayatA  /  udaudIraNA paramattAIsa mesu  //  23  //  esA
paryADi - viNA veyaNivAhArajugala thINa tigaM  /  maNuyAu ghamattaMtA ajogi
aNudIramo bhagavaM ||24|| sattA kammANa ThiI baMdhAI-lakha atta-lAbhANaM  /
saMte aDavAlasayaM jA uvasamu vijiNu viyataie ||25|| avvAcaukke atiri-nirayAu
viNu viyAlasayaM  /  sammAda usu sattama khayambha igavatta-sayamahavA ||26||
aai tu pappa usu vi paNayAla narayatirisurAu viNA  /  sattar far raati jA
aniyaTTI paDhamabhAgo ||27|| thAvara tiri nirayAyava duga thINatigega vigala
sAhAram  /  solakhao duvIsasayaM viyaMsi biyatiyakasAyaMtI ||28|| taiyAi
udasaterabAra chapaNa cacatihiyasaya kamaso |
napuisthihAsachagapuMsaturiyakohamayamAyakhao 126 //  suhumi dusaya lohanto
khINaducarimegabhao dunikha  /  navanavadda carama samae cau daMsaNanANa
vigvanto  //  30  //

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Gīya bandha; vicchhi paṇasī'i sayoga ajogi ducharime devakhagai gandhadūgaṁ.
Phās bannaras tanu bandhaṇa saṁghāyapana niminaṁ. ||31|| Saṁghāyaṇadhira
saṁsthāṇaṁ chāk agurulaḍnuchau apjattaṁ. Sāyaṁ va asāyaṁ dhā parisuvangati ga
susara niyam. ||32|| Bisayarikhaoy charime terasa maṇuyatasatiga jasā'incch.
Subhagajiṇucchpaṇidiya sāyāsā'ega yarchhe'o. ||33|| Naraṇuputiya viṇā vā bārasa
charim samarthammi jo khaviḍaṁ. Patto siddhi devindaṁ diyaṁ namah taṁ vīraṁ.
||34|| || Dvitīya karma grantha ko gāyā'eṁ samāpt ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 giiy' bndh ; bicchi paNasIi sayoga ajogi ducarime devakhagai gaMdhadugaM  /
phAsa bannarasa taNu bandhaNa saMghAyapaNa nimiNaM  // 31 //
saMghayaNaadhirasaMThANaM chAka agurulaDnucAu apajjataM  /  sAyaM va asAyaM dhA
parisuvaMgatiga susara niyaM  // 32 //  bisayarikhaoya carime terasa
maNuyatasatiga jasAincha  /  subhagajiNuccapaNidiya sAyAsAegayaracheo  // 33 //
naraaNuputiya viNA vA bArasa carima samarthami jo khviddN| patto siddhi
devindavaM diyaM namaha taM vIraM  // 34 /  /   //  dvitIya karma grantha ko
gAyAeM samApta  //  m

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Tṛtīya krammagrantha kī gāthāeṃ Bandhavihāṇavimukka, vandiya
siridaddhāṇajinacarda hai gayāīsu vuccha samāsao bandhhasāmittaṃ jina
suraviyuvāhāradu devāna ya narayasuhhamavigalatima. Egidi thāvarājyava napu
miccha huṃḍa chhevaṭṭha 12॥ Aṇa majjhāgi saṃghayaṇa kukhaga niya isthhi
dugathīṇatig. Ujjoyatiri dugaṃ tiri narāu nara uraldurisaha ॥3॥
Suraigunabīsavajja hagasata āheṇa andhahi nirayā. Titttha viṇā micchi saya
sāsaṇi napucau viṇā chhuṇui 114 Viṇu aṇachabīsa mīse visari sammammi jinarāu
juā. Iya raṇāisu bhaṃgo paṃkāisu tittthyarahīṇo ॥5॥ Ajinamamaṇumāu ohe sattamie
naragacca viṇu mile. Igaṇavayī sāsaṇe tirimāu napusauvaja ॥6॥ Apacauvīsavirahiyā
saṇaraducacā ya sathhari mausaduge. Satarasau ohi milche patiriyā viṇu jiṇāhāraṃ
॥7॥ Viṇu narayasola sāsaṇi surāja aṇa egalīsa niṇu mīse. Sasurāja sathhari samme
bīyakasāye viṇā se l

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya krarmagrantha kI gAthAe~ baMdhavihANavimukka, vaMdiya
siridaddhamANajiNacarda hai gaiyAIsu vuccha samAsao baMdhasAmittaM jiNa
suraviuvAhAradu devAna ya narayasuhamavigalatima  /  egidi thAvarAjyava napu
miccha hu~Da chevaTTha 12 //  aNa majjhAgi saMghayaNa kukhaga niya isthi
dugthiinntig| ujjoyatiri dugaM tiri narAu nara uraladurisaha  // 3 //
suraiguNabIsavajja hagasata AheNa aMdhahi niryaa| tittha viNA micchi saya sAsaNi
napucau viNA chunui 114 viNu aNachabIsa mIse visari sammammi jiNarAu juaa| iya
rayaNAisu bhaMgo paMkAisu titthyarahINo  // 5 //  ajiNamaNumAu ohe sattamie
naragacca viNu mile  /  iganavaI sAsaNe tirimAu napusauvaja  // 6 //
apacauvIsavirahiyA sanaradugaccA ya sathari mausaduge  /  satarasau ohi milche
patiriyA viNu jiNAhAraM  // 7 //  viNu narayasola sAsaNi surAja aNa egalIsa niNu
mIse  /  sasurAja sathari samme bIyakasAe viNA se l

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 220: Appendix of the Third Karma Granth  **These three human beings,
with their supreme victory, are the true devotees.**  They are not like the
Tiryanchas.  **District:** Shatrasal  **Hell and heaven are not the goal, but
the desire for them is.**  This is the cause of suffering.  The Jina, who is the
true victor, is the one who is free from these desires. ||1||  **The Tiryanchas
are like the animals, who are always seeking pleasure.**  They are not like the
true victors, who are free from all desires. ||11||  **Without the right
knowledge, there is no true happiness.**  Without the right knowledge, there is
no true victory. ||12||  **The Jina is the true victor, and he is not like the
Tiryanchas.**  He is free from all desires, and he is the one who can help us to
achieve liberation. ||13||  **The fourteen types of wrong conduct are the cause
of suffering.**  Without the right knowledge, there is no true happiness. ||14||
**The twenty-four types of wrong conduct are the cause of suffering.**  Without
the right knowledge, there is no true victory. ||15||  **The Tiryanchas are like
the animals, who are always seeking pleasure.**  They are not like the true
victors, who are free from all desires. ||16||  **The ten types of greed are the
cause of suffering.**  The four types of anger are the cause of suffering.  The
two types of delusion are the cause of suffering. ||17||  **The twelve types of
wrong thoughts are the cause of suffering.**  The five types of wrong actions
are the cause of suffering.  The four types of wrong speech are the cause of
suffering. ||18||  **The thirteen types of wrong food are the cause of
suffering.**  The Tiryanchas are like the animals, who are always seeking
pleasure.  They are not like the true victors, who are free from all desires.
||19||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 220 tRtIya karmagrantha : pariziSTa iya jagaNaM tri narA paramajayA sajiNa ohu
desAI  /  apajattatiriyanarA || jilA zatrasala niraya va surA navaraM Ahe micche
imiditigasahiyA  /  kappaduge vi ya evaM jiNahoNo jodabhavaNavaNe  // 1 //
rayaNa va sarNakumArAI ANavAI ujoyacaurahiyA | apajatiriya va
navarayamigidipuDha vijalataruvigale  //  /  11 //  chanavai sAsaNi viNu
suhamatera kei puNa viti caDanavai'  /  tiriyanarAjahiM viNA taNupatti na te
jaiti  //  12  //  ohu paNidi ta gaise jiNikkAra naratigucca viNA  /  maNayajoge
oho urale tarabhaMga vammisse ||13|| AhArachA viNohe caudasasau micchi
jiNapaNagahINaM  /  sAsaNi navai viNA naratiriAU suhRmatera || 14 || aNacavIsaha
viNA jigapaNajaya sammi jogiNI sAyaM  /  viNu tirinarAu kamme vi evamAhAradugi
oho ||15|| suraoho vedave tiriyamarAja rahio ya tamisse | defense far far kasAya
nava Du va paMca gaNA  /  /  16  /  /  saMjalapati nava dasa lobhe cau ajai du
ti anApatige  /  bArasa atramakhu cakkhusu pahamA ahavAi caramacaU  //  17 //
maNanANi sama jayAI samaya cheya vau hunni parihAre  /  kevalidugi do
varamA'jayAi nava mahasuohiduge || 18 || aDa uvasami ca yagi khaie ikkAra
micchatigi dete  /  suhRmi saThANaM terasa AhAragi niyaniyaMga poho  // 16 //

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Third Karma Granth's Verses  221  The Supreme Being is present everywhere,
but does not bind, due to his invincible qualities. He is the God, and he shows
himself, but without the Suras. ||20||  Oh, the eighteen types of food, doubled,
have come. From there, the wrong beliefs are in all the Sanas. ||21||  That is
the light of Narayana, the Narambar, the pure Sukka. Without the Narabar, see,
the wrong food is here. ||22||  All the qualities are present, but the wrong
beliefs are not present. The wrong beliefs are not present, and the Karma Bhang
is in the wrong food. ||23||  The three types of suffering, the Sukka, the
qualities, and the thirteen types of bondage. This is written by the Devinda
Sura, for the purpose of Karma. ||24||  || The Verses of the Third Karma Granth
are complete. ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya karmaprantha ko mAyAyeM 221 paramuvasami vaTTatA Au na baMdhati teNa
ajayaguNe  /  devama AuhINa desAisu puNa surAu viNA ||20|| ohe aTThArasayaM
AhAradUguNa Ailesatige  /  taM tithoNaM micche sANAsu sarvvAhi oho ||21|| teka
narayanaNA ujoyaca narambAra vizu sukkA  /  viNu narabAra pahA ajiNAhArA imA
micche ||22|| savvaguNamavvasanni ohu abhavyA asanti micchAsamA  /  sAsaNi
asanni sanni va kammabhaMgo aNAhAre ||23|| tisu dukhu sukkAi guNA ca saga tera
ti baMdhasAmitaM  /  devindasUrilihiyaM niya kammatthaya souM  //  24 //   //
tRtIya karmagrantha kI gAthAyeM samA

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
296k amwOOMOOVomwwwwwwen **Karmagrantha**  Mag 1 to 3 **Abridged Glossary**
**Ang**...Body, part of the body. **Angapani** Angpravist **Acharaang** etc. 12
**Agam** **Angovang-Ang**, **Upang**, **Pariir** ko Rekha, **Perv** etc.
**Asamuh (t)** - **Antarmuhurt** (one time less than 48 minutes) **Antaraa** -
**Antaraya**, obstacle, hindrance **Akamanijmr** - **Akamanirjar** (bearing
suffering without desire, performing karma nirjara) **Agavis** - **Nirabhiman**
**Agul** - **Agurusatru** **Namakarma** **Agulhasau** - **Agullagghu**,
**Apghāt**, **Parādhāt**, **Uchchhvās** **Māmakarma** **Avadhu** -
**Achakshudarshan** **Achāsāyanā** - **Avahelanā**, neglect, disregard,
**Āśātana** **Ajay** - **Ayat**...**Avirat** **Samyagdṛṣṭi** **Jīv** **Ajaygun**
- **Ayat** **Gunasthan** **Anayāī** - **Avirat** **Samyagdṛṣṭi** etc. **Akas** -
**Ayashāphīti** **Namakarma** **Ajiy** - **Ajiy**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 296k amwOOMOOVomwwwwwwen karmagrantha mAga eka se tIna taka kA saMkSipta zabda-
koSa aMga...zarIra, zarIra kA avayava  /  aMgapani aMgapraviSTa AcArAMga Adi 12
Agama aMgovaMga-aMga, upAMga, pArIra ko rekhA, parva Adi asamuha (ta)-
antarmuhUrta (eka samaya kama 48 minaTa) aMtarAa-antarAya, vighna, rukAvaTa
akAmanijmara-akAmanirjara (binA icchA ke kaSTa sahana kara karma nirjarA karane
vAlA) agAvisa-nirabhimAna agala-agurusatru nAmakarma agullahasauagugalaghu,
apaghAta, parAdhAta, ucchvAsa mAmakarma avadhu-acakSudarzana acAsAyaNA
avahelanA, upekSA, AzAtanA ajaya-ayata...avirata samyagadRSTi jIva ajayaguNa-
ayata guNasthAna anayAI-avirata samyagdRSTi Adi akasa - ayazaHphIti nAmakarma
ajiya-ajIya

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Kosa 223  **Abhinahar:**  Ajinahaarak-Jinnamakarma and Ahaarak-Dwik
**rehit** Ajina Manuau-Abhin Manushayuk-Siker namakarma and Manushayamu
**Adhik** Asthi, Haadi Athavann - Atthavan (58) Attarasay - Ashtadasha Shat
(118) Ayana - Atthavan (58) ... Ashta Aar Ashalay - Ekaso Asalis (148) Asvan
Atthavan (58) Abos - Atthais (28) Ag... Anantanubandhi Kashay An-ekasis
Ankarshishat - Anantanubandhi Aadi 31 Prakrutiya An Dhajalis ... Anantanubandhi
Aadi 24 Prakruti ma.  **Sarthi** ~ **Gannamili** ~~ **Nabagi Khabi:**
**Sangbida** Anaij ... Anadeya namakarma Agahar Anahaarak Margana Anupamyo -
Manupurvi namakarma Asin - Anushna (Sheetal) Asthagaha... Aryavagraha Abhir -
Asthir Mamakarma Amir Chakk - Asthir, Ashubh, Durvhay, Duhswar, Abhav, Apakiti,
TE **Karma ki Chha Prakrutiya**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 koza 223 abhiNAhAra- ajinAhAraka-jinanAmakarma tathA hAhAraka-dvika rahita
ajina maNuAu-abhina manuSyAyuk-sIkara nAmakarma tathA manuSyAmu adhika asthi,
hADI aThavanna -aTThAvana (58) aTThArasaya- aSTAdazazata (118) ayANA-aTThAvana
(58) a... aSTaAra azyAlaya-ekaso asAlIsa (148) asvanaaTThAvana (58) abosa-
aTThAIsa (28) aga...-anantAnubandhI kaSAya aNaekasIsa anakarSizata-
anantAnubandhI Adi 31 prakRtiyA~ aNa dhajalIsa ... anantAnubandhI Adi 24
prakRtimA  /  srtheii ~ gnnnmili~~-nbaagii khaabi : sNbidhaa aNAija ... anAdeya
nAmakarma agAhAra anAhAraka mArgaNA anupamyo-mAnupUrvI nAmakarma asiNa - anuSNa
(zItala) asthAgaha... aryAvagraha abhira-asthira mAmakarma amira chakka-asthira,
azubha, durbhaya, duHsvara, abhAva, apakIti, TE karma kI chaha prakRtiyoM

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
224 Anka Adha Bhag Anashaya Ardhanaracha Samhanan Amar - Anyatha Ananasinga
Agnanatrika-mati Adi Teen Agnan Aniy—i Abhivritti Badar Samparaya Gunasthan
Apchakkhana-Apratyakhyanavaran Kashaya Apja - Aparyapt Namakarma Aparyapt Jiva
Apatti   Samaya Prapt Na Hone Par —- www Apmat—Apratmatvirat Gunasthan
Ayogiyogivali Gunsyan Araharati Mohaniya Avaleh - Bans Ka Chhilka Avaya
Matijnana Ka Apay Namak Bhed Avirya Avirat Samyagdristi ; Avirat Samyagdristi
Gunasthan Ani Asanji Asa Asataavedaniya 2 Asum - (Asuh ) — Ashubh Namakarma A
Tritiya Farmabhyah: Parisishta 1 Asunavarg - Krishna, Neel Varn, Durgandha, Tikt
Katu Ras, Guru, Bar Rooksh, Sheet Sparsh, Yah Ni Prakritiyaan Mashumanavak
Kahalati Hain | Ahvay Charil... Yathakyat Charitra Ai Adi, Pehla Pratham www
Aham Aadey Namakarma Ailesaling Adi Leshyatrik – Krishna Adi Teen Lebhyaen www
Ayukarma

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 224 aGkaAdhA bhAga anAzaya ardhanArAca saMhanana amara - anyathA anANasiMga
ajJAnatrika-mati Adi tIna ajJAna aniya--i abhivRtti bAdara saMparAya guNasthAna
apacakkhANa-apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya apaja - aparyApta nAmakarma aparyApta
jIva apatti samaya prApta na hone para --- www apamata--apramattavirata
guNasthAna ayogiyogivalI guNasyAna araharati mohanIya avaleha - bAMsa kA chilakA
avAya matijJAna kA apAya nAmaka bheda aviraya avirata samyagdRSTi ; avirata
samyagdRSTi guNasthAna ani asaMjI asA asAtAvedanIya 2 asuma - (asuha ) -- azubha
nAmakarma A tRtIya pharmabhya: pariziSTa 1 asunavarga - kRSNa, nIla varNa,
durgandha, tikta kaTu rasa, guru, bara rUkSa, zIta sparza, yaha nI prakRtiyA~
mazumanavaka kahalAtI haiM | ahavAya carila... yathAkhyAta cAritra Ai Adi,
pahalA prathama www ahama Adeya nAmakarma AilesaliMga Adi lezyAtrika - kRSNa Adi
tIna lebhyAe~ www Ayukarma

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Word Glossary  225  Aalyaai-Aanat, Aadi Devalok, Apath-Aatap, Naamakarma,
Maavarna…Aavaranvik (Haanaavaran, Vanaavaran), Aaspaasav Tattva, Haag, Hay!…A
Padeer Naam; Aaharak Sharira, Aahar-Aaharaknik Naamakarma, Aahar-Dug, Aaharak
Tatha Aaharak Mishrayog, Adhyaya Aaharak Sharira,  Aaharak Angopaang, Aahar-
Chhag, Aaharak-Patak, Aaharak Haadi Chhah Prakritarsh, Igat-Iktaaliis (41),
Iganvaa - Ekanavati, Ifaanne (8), Igas Ek Sau Ek (101), Igsi-Ikyaasi (81), Ighim
Say-(Ekaadhik Shat) Ek Sau Ek (101), Ingidhi (Egindi)k-Ekendirya Jaati, Gidi-
Tig-Eke Diya-Nik…Ekendirya Kadi Seen Prati Indhiyaa Pak-Sparshan, Rasan, Ghaan
Aur Shreen Yah Chaar Indriyaan, Hasthi-Stree, Streeved Naamakarma, Jay-
Uchchgotra, Ujlobh-Jayot Naamakarma, Ummoa-B-Jos Aadi Chaar Prakritin, Ujjoya,
Udyot Naamakarma, Vanh, Ushna, Sparm, Maamfarm, Sama, Shastravishay-Vachchand

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zabda koza 225 AlyAi-Anata Adi devaloka Apatha-Atapa nAmakarma
mAvaraNA.....AvaraNavika (hAnAvaraNa, vanAvaraNa) AsapAsava tatva hAga hAya!
...a padIra nAma ; ahAraka zarIra AhAra-AhArakanika nAmakarma AhAra-dugaAhAraka
tathA AhAraka mizrayoga adhyayA AhAraka zarIra, AhAraka aMgopAMga AhAra-
chagaAhAraka-paTaka, AhAraka hAdi chaha prakatirza igata-ikatAlIsa (41) iganavA
- ekanavatiiphAnane (8} igasa eka sau eka (101) igasI-ikyAsI (81) igahima
saya-(ekAdhikazata) eka sau eka (101) iMgidhi (egindi)ka-ekendriya jAti gidi-
tiga-eke diya-nika...ekendriya kAdi sIna prati indhiya paka-sparzana, rasana,
ghANa aura zrIna yaha cAra indriyA~ hasthI-strI, strIveda nAmakarma jaya-
uccagotra ujlobha-jayota nAmakarma ummoa-ba-josa Adi cAra prakRtiyoM ujjoyA
udyota nAmakarma vaNhauSNa sparma mAmapharma samAzAstraviSaya-vacchanda

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
226 Upper Stomach www Chest, Thorax Ural-Audarik-Sthul, Audarik Karmayoga Lag
Audarikhi Naamakarma Uralang Darik Sharira Ubang - Upang; Anguli Aadi Sharira ke
Bang Upadhay - Upghat Naamakarma, Nash Uksham — Aupashmik Samyaktv. Upashantmoha
Vitrag Udyasy Gunasthan Utsas- Ucchvas Naamaka Upikasa Ushna Sparsh Naamakarma
www Upper Thigh Ussanaladdhi - Shwasocchwas ki Shakti Usasanam-Vas Naamakarma
Egyar — Kisi Ek ka Oralaudarik Sharira Naamakarma Audarik Sharira Oh Ogh -
Samaan Ohi Avadhi Darshan Avadhigyaan FM Ohi Avadhi-Vik Fwww. Tritiya Karmapray:
Parishishta FTY Ahe. Samaan Roop se Kad Katuka Ras Naamakarma Kampg - Kalp- Dwik
- 1-2 Devalok Kamm- (Kamman) Karman Kayayog Karan Idriya Kalay - Kashay Mohaniya
Karma, Kashayras Naamakarma

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 226 upara peTa www chAtI, bakSasthala urala-audArika-sthUla, audArika kAmayoga
laga odArikahi nAmakarma urAlaMga dArika zarIra ubaMga - upAMga; aMgulI Adi
zarIra ke baMga upadhAya - upaghAta nAmakarma, nAza uksama -- aupazamika
samyaktva  /  upazAntamoha vItarAga udyasya guNasthAna utsAsa- ucchvAsa nAmaka
upikAsa uSNa sparza nAmakarma www U jaMghA UsasaNaladdhi- zvAsocchvAsa kI zakti
UsAsanAma-vAsa nAmakarma egayara -- kisI eka kA orAlaaudArika zarIra nAmakarma
audArika zarIra oha ogha - sAmAnya ohi avadhidarzana avadhijJAna FM ohi avadhi-
vika Fwww. tRtIya karmapragya: pariziSTa FTY Ahe. sAmAnya rUpa se kaDa kaTukA
rasa nAmakarma kampaga - kalpa- dvika - 1-2 devaloka kamma- (kammaNa ) kArmaNa
kAyayoga karaNa idriya kalAya - kaSAya mohanIya karma, kaSAyarasa nAmakarma

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shava Kora 227 Kasina-Kushnavarna namakarma kinha - Krishna varna namko kolia-
kilika sanhan mampharam; khola kukh-ashubh vihayogati namakarma kumchha - qana
kevala-yug (kevala) kevalgyan, kevaldarshan phali-jayi kohkodh kshaya
khogkshinmoha bisarag apasth gunasthan ti.....kshama khamba-milame se kam
kshayik samyaktva khako kshaya hone se jagah-sayik bam salwar ghar-ghar sparna
namakam khuj kummsanthan gah gati namakarma maitas gatis-hemaskay, vayukay gamia
- gatikashrut gunagunasthan punasditha-unasath (56) guru-shuru sparsh namakarma;
athava vajandar, bhari

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zava korA 227 kasiNa-kuSNavarNa nAmakarma kiNha -kRSNa varNa nAmako koliyA-
kIlikA saMhAna mAmapharma ; kholA kukha-azubha vihAyogati nAmakarma kumachA-qNA
kevala-yuga (kevala) kevalajJAna, kevaladarzana phali-jayI kohakodha kaSAya
khogakSINamoha bIsarAga apastha guNasthAna ti.....kSamA khaMbA-milAme se kAma
kSAyika samyaktva khako kSaya hone se jagaha-sAyika bama salavAra ghara-ghara
sparNa nAmakama khuja kummasaMsthAna gahagati nAmakarma mAitasagatisa-hemaskAya,
vAyukAya gamiyA-gatikazruta guNaguNasthAna puNasadiTha-unasaTha (56) guru-zuru
sparza nAmakarma ; athavA vajanadAra, bhArI

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 228 **Gadhiyam Competition** - **Gotra Karma** **Chajana Maudanaven (2)**
**Vahi Char Prakar Ka Rohत्तर (74)** **Uha - Char Prakar Ka** **BAALA**
**Chakshuvarshan Athava Aankh** **Charanmoh - Charitra Mohaniya Karma** **Ris
Mohaniya Charitra Mohaniya** **FTTTYSAL** **SAJJJAA** **Chhapka Chhah (6) Ka
Samuh** **2155** **Chhadda.** **Chhe-Chhah Ka Kshay Hone Se** **Chhah Prakar
Ka** **Dhanu (Dhan) - Navati Chhiyanave (16)** **VYBALL** **Chhappan - Chhappan
(56)** **Chhalansi Chhate Bhag Mein** **Is** **Chhiyasath (66)**
**Chharchiyattar (76)** **wwwww** **Chha Chhah Prakar Ka** **Chhetra -
Chhedopasthaniy Vastri** **Chevat Seva Sanhanan** **Jai - Sadhu** **Jaj**
**Lakha** **Tapai - Prammatasanyata Adi Gunasthan** ***22099*..." **Tritiya
Karmaprmya: Parishishta**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 228 gaDahiyama kaMpaTI - gotra karma cajanA maudAnaveM (2) vahI cAra prakAra kA
rohattara (74) uhA-- cAra prakAra kA BAALA cakSuvarzana athavA A~kha caraNamoha
cAritra mohanIya karma risa mohaNiya cAritra mohanIya FTTTYSAL SAJJJAA chapaka
chaha (6) kA samUha 2155 chaddhA. che-chaha kA kSaya hone se chaha prakAra kA
dhanu (dhana) - Navati chiyAnave (16) VYBALL chapanna- chappana (56) chalaMsi
chaTe bhAga meM isa chiyAsaTha (66) charachiyattara (76) wwwww chahA chaha
prakAra kA chetra- chedopasthAnIya vAstri chevaTa sevA saMhanana jaI - sAdhu
jaja lAkha tapAi pramattasaMyata Adi guNasthAna ***22099*..." tRtIya
karmapramya: pariziSTa

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
: aa Kosha As - Yash: Kirti Naamakarma Jah - Jaati Naamakarma Jis Aatma Jin -
Panag - Jin Aadi Panch Prakritiyaan For - Inkaar (Jikkar) Jin Aadi Gyaarah
Prakritiyaan Jiya - Jeev Satya Joy Jeev Job AAAAAAA -Aatma Shubh Yut - Sanhit Oi
Jyotishidhev BAALA MAJJAL Jois - Chandra, Nakshatra Aadi Jyotishk Mandal Jog -
Sanayam Yogi Sayogi Kevali Thik Sthiti, Sthitibandh Muvaya Uday Na Hone Se
Laisisihare Aadi Bhaagon Mein Tanu - Masheer Athava Shareer Naamakarma Khanutiga
Teen Mariir Sapanati - Shareer Paryapt Lampiks - Tamiv Tad Mishr Kayayog Amuk Ka
Mishr) Tah Vanaspatikay Tas - Nas Naamakars Tasach - Las, Badar, Paryapt,
Pratiyeki Naamakarma Ki Char Prakritiyaan vy ++ 226 (Amuk Kayayog Ke Saath

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 : aa koza asa- yazaH kIrti nAmakarma jAha-jAti nAmakarma jisa AtmA jiNa-paNaga
- jina Adi pAMca prakRtiyAM for- inakAra ( jikkAra ) jina Adi gyAraha prakRtiyAM
jiya-jIva satya joya jIva joba AAAAAAA -AtmA zubha yuta - saMhita oi jyotiSIdeva
BAALA MAJJAL joisa-candra, nakSatra Adi jyotiSka maMDala joga - saMyama yogi
sayogi kevalI Thika sthiti, sthitibandha muvayA udaya na hone se lAisIsare Adi
bhAgoM meM taNu-mazarIra athavA zarIra nAmakarma khaNutiga tIna marIra sapanati-
zarIra paryApta lampiksa - tamiva tad mizra kAyayoga amuka kA mizra) taha
vanaspatikAya tasa-nasa nAmakarsa tasaca - lasa, bAdara, paryApta, pratyeka
nAmakarma kI cAra prakRtiyA~ vy ++ 226 (amuka kAyayoga ke sAtha

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
230 Third Karma: Appendix Sasas -  Name Karma's Tas, Badar, Paryapt, Pratiyaka,
Sthira, Shubh, Subhag, Suswar, Aveg, Yash:Kirti, there are 10 Prakruti. Ti -
Three (3) Tig - Group of three Tithisakhma - Mant Tit -  Tikt Rasa named Titva (
Tirthayara ) - Tirthankara Name Karma Timmi - Three MAMMYYYY Sim Kalam - Third
Kashay - Pratyakhyanavaran Kashay Tiri Tiyandh Tiriyuga - Sidh Thik Sirimaraj (
Tiriumarau ) - Viyanv Ayu and Manushya Ayu Tirian MAAAA Sam - Tejaskaay or Tejo
Leshya Tem - Tejas Sharira ........ Yavarach Ukk - Sthavar Sukshma Aparyapt
Sadharan, these are four Prakruti P Pawaraks - Sthavar etc. ten Prakruti Mir -
Sthira Name Karma Viralak - Sthira etc. six Prakruti Shri Stri MAAY Yonatig -
Styanatrika ( Prachala, Prachala Prachala and Styanad, three types of Nidra )
Shrimati - Sthan named Nidra Vishesh       . .....

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 230 tRtIya karmanya: pariziSTa sasasa nAmakarma kI tasa, bAdara, paryApta,
pratyeka, sthira, zubha, subhaga, susvara, Avega, yazaHkIrti me 10 prakRtiyAM  /
titIna (3) tiga-tIna kA samUha tithisakSamA-maMta tita - tikta rasa nAmaka titva
( tirathayara ) - tIrthaMkara nAmakarma timmi tIna MAMMYYYY sima kalAma tIsarA
kaSAya- pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya tiritiyaMdha tiriyuga-sidha Thika sirimarAja (
tiriyamarAu ) viya~va Ayu tathA manuSya Ayu tiriyana MAAAA sama tejaskAya athavA
tejolezyA tema -tejasa zarIra ........ yAvaraca ukka-sthAvara sUkSma aparyApta
sAdhAraNa, yaha cAra prakRtiya P pAvaraksa - sthAvara Adi dasa prakRtiyAM mira-
sthira nAmakarma viraLaka sthira Adi chaha prakRtiyAM zrI strI MAAY yoNatiga-
styAnatrika (pracalA, pracalApracalA evaM styAnadi nidrA ke tIna bheda )
zrImatI-sthAna nAmaka nidrA vizeSa . .....

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## State Treasury  **Vasan** - True Shravaka **Darshan U** - Darshanavaran
Chatushk (Sudarshan Chakshu, Avadhi Darshan, Keval Darshan, the covering of
Darshan) **San Moh** - Darshan Mohaniya **Sanavar Dona Avaran** - Karma **Bug
(Bu)** - Two (2) **Bugandh** - Durabhigandha Naama Karma, Dubhara Dur Bhag Naama
Karma **Durahi** - Durabhigandha Naama Karma **Dussar** - Duhsbar Naama Karma
**Bug** - Dubhang Naama Karma  **TLAMAA** **ATTE** **Sar** - Duhsvar Naama Karma
**Veva Manuja Dev Aayu** - Deva Aayu, and Manushaya Aayu **Des** - Deshaviriti
Gunasthan **Durg** - Deshaviriti Adi Gunasthan **"** **Napu** - Napunsakaved
**Napur** - (Napu Sach) Napunsak Chatushk **Nah** - Manushayagati, Purusha
**Rest** - Adholoka **Saray** - Naraka, Narakagati **Marayam Av** - Narakagati
Adi to Prakrutiyaan **Naram Bar** - Narakagati Adi Barah Prakrutiyaan **Madhya
Sol** - Narakagati Adi 16 Prakrutiyaan **Naravanaraka Aayu** 231 7

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAjya koza vasana - yathArtha zravA daMsaNa u-darzanAvaraNa catuSka (sudarzana
cakSuna avadhidarzana kevala darzana kA AvaraNa ) saNa mohadarzana mohanIya
saNAvara donAvaraNa karma buga (bu) do (2) bugaMdha durabhigandha nAmakarma
dubharAdurbhaga nAmakarma durahi- durabhigaMdha nAmakarma dussara duHsbara
nAmakarma buga- dubhaMga nAmakarma TLAMAA ATTE sara duHsvara nAmakarma
vevamanuja deva Ayu tathA manuSyAyu desa dezavirati guNasthAna durg - dezavirati
Adi guNasthAna " napu-napuMsakaveda napura ( napuM saca ) napuMsakacatuSka naha-
manuSyagati, puruSa rest - adholoka saraya-naraka, narakagati marayamava-
narakagati Adi to prakRtiyAM narama bAra- narakagati Adi bAraha prakRtiyA~
madhya sola- narakagati Adi 16 prakRtiyA~ naravAnaraka Ayu 231 7

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
232 Naraaj.... Manushya Aayu Man Mday Naaj - Gyaan Naam Naamakarma Bharraay -
Naaraach Sanhanan. Dono Or Markeet Bandh Roop Asthi Rachna Nigmoha   Nyagrodh
Parimandal Sansthan Niyam   Rachna Nirajjoy Neeshgotr, Udyotnaam Nishva  -
Chhipana, Apalaap Karna Nimmaan (Mimina) - Nirman Naamakarma Fee (Niy) Apna Apna
Neechgotr Niyaddh  Nivritti (Apoovarnakaran) Gunasthan Nirath Narak, Naarak
(Narak Ke Jeev) Mey   Jaanne Yogya Kasay Nokashay Mohniya Pankaar - Pankprabha
Aadi Narak Or Paes Pradeshbandh Pos   Ati (Kh) Pah  Taraph, T TYM Tritiya
Mantramya Parishishta Panchakhan... Pratyakhyanaavaran Kasay Panas Paryapt
Naamakarma Pati  Paryapti (Pudgalopachay-Janaya Shaktivishesh) Pajay  - Paryay
Paryay T Patt - Bethan BAJAJHY

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 232 narAja.... manuSya Ayu mana Mday nAja - jJAna nAma nAmakarma bhArarAya -
nArAca saMhanana  /  donoM ora markeTa bandha rUpa asthi racanA nigmoha
nyagrodha parimaNDala saMsthAna niyama racanA nirajjoya nISagotra, udyotanAma
niSva - chipAnA, apalApa karanA nimmANa (mimiNa ) -nirmANa nAmakarma fee (nIya)
apanA apanA nIcagotra niyaddha nivRtti (apUrvakaraNa) guNasthAna nirathanaraka,
nAraka ( naraka ke jIva ) meya jAnane yogya kasAya nokaSAya mohanIya paMkAra -
paMkaprabhA Adi naraka ora paesa pradezabandha posa ati (kha) paha tarapha, T
TYM tRtIya maMtramya pariziSTa paJcakakhANa... pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya panasa
paryApta nAmakarma pati paryApti (pudgalopacaya-janya zaktivizeSa) pajaya -
paryAya paryAya ta paTTa - beThana BAJAJHY

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary  **23**  * **Par Patti Pakshi Niya San** - Bird-like enemy *
**Shatruta Pashishasi** - Enemy of the enemy * **Pratipati Shruta Parivaar** -
Family of the learned * **Pratipati Avadhi Gyan** - Knowledge of the limits *
**Panaya San** - Forty-five (45) * **Paisaali** - Forty-five (45) * **Pavma** -
Fifty-five (55) * **Pachpan** - Fifty-five (55) * **Yanasiha** - Eighty-five
(85) * **Panchasi** - Eighty-five (85) * **Panidi** - Five senses *
**Panchendriya** - Five senses * **Pasay** - Each * **Pratyek Nama Karma** -
Each name karma * **Aavantar Bhed Rahit Prakriti Par Ya S** - Each nature
without any difference * **Pratyek Tanu** - Each body (whose owner is a living
being, like a physical body) * **Papp** - Obtained * **Pas** - Near * **Pramat
Virat Gunasthan** - State of being free from delusion * **Pamha** - Fifty *
**Pachaleshya** - Fifty * **Path Padayat** - Walking on the path * **Paya** -
Nature * **Prakriti Bandh** - Bond of nature * **Pati** - Karma nature *
**Khaay** - Eats * **Maatha Naam** - Head name * **Paris** - Each * **Pratyek
Naam Parihaar** - Each name avoidance * **Parihaar Vishuddhi** - Purity of
avoidance * **Marish** - Death * **Paani** - Water * **Jeev** - Living being *
**Pahu Daamrit** - Nectar of the soul * **Shruta** - Heard * **Pid Par Ya** -
Suffering * **Pinha Prakriti** - Nature with difference * **Pus** - Man *
**Purush Ved** - Knowledge of the soul * **Kunkum Akante Ki Aag** - Fire of the
saffron mark

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zaba koza 23 parapaTTI pakSiNIyasaNa-zatrutA paziSasi pratipati zruta
parivArapratipAti avadhijJAna paNayAsaM--paisAlIsa (45) pavamA-pacapana (55)
yaNasIha - pacAsI (85) panidi-paMcendriya pasaya-pratyeka nAmakarma ; avAntara
bhedarahita prakRti para ya sa.-.pratyeka tanu (jisakA svAmI eka jIva hai, jaisA
sarIra) pappa-..-prApta karake pAsa-pramattavirata guNasthAna pamhA- pacalezyA
patha padayata payA-svabhAva ; prakRtibandha pati - karmaprakRti
khaay'-~~maathaa naam parisa-pratyeka nAmaka parihAraparihAravizuddhi mAriSa
pANi....jIva pAhuDAmRta zruta piDaparyA-piNha prakRti (avAntara bheda vAlI
prakRti pusa-..puruSaveda kuMkumAkaNTe kI Aga

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
UNAMAMATWwwgowwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww w wwwwwwwwwwwwwICILITVIC . UVJU anian v
mewwwooomno **Tṛtīya karmapa:** Pariśiṣṭa phās sparśa nāmakarma bandha-
bandhatasva, bandhaprakaraṇa bandhaś-bandhana nāmaka patna-vihāna-bandha karṇā
banasya varttamāna meṃ bandhane vāla vāyara - rāmakarma; gāra' pāyāla-bayālīs
(42) biya (fa)... (2) śiyāla sāyaṃ eka sau bayālīs (142) visari (bisatari) -
visaptati bahattar (72) bīma kathāma-dūsara kāpāya-apratyākyānāvaraṇa kāya
bhavana-bhavanapatideva mammala-madyapaatra māi -matimaāna maha-sua- mati evaṃ
śrutamaāna makara bancha markata ke samāna bancha majāminamadhyākṛti bīpa ke
saṃsthāna maṇa-mana, manaḥparyāyaśāna manaṃāṇa-manaḥparyāyajñāna mama ayogamāna-
yoga tatha vacanayoga mam (ma) manuṣya, manuja mahara- madhura rasa māmakarma,
mīṭhā māṇasamāna mija-mṛdusparma nāmaka ..: -...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 UNAMAMATWwwgowwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww w wwwwwwwwwwwwwICILITVIC . UVJU anian v
mewwwooomno tRtIya karmaapa : pariziSTa phAsa sparza nAmakarma baMdha-
bandhatasva, baMdhaprakaraNa baMdhaza-bandhana nAmaka patna-vihAna-bandha karanA
banasaya vartamAna meM baMdhane vAlA vAyara- rAmakarma ; gAra' pAyAla-bayAlIsa
(42) biya (fa)... (2) ziyAla sAyaMeka sau bayAlIsa (142) visari (bisatari) -
visaptati bahattara (72) bIma kathAma-dUsarA kApAya-apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kAya
bhavaNa-bhavanapatideva maMmala-madyapAtra mAi-matimAna maha-sua- mati evaM
zrutamAna makara bancha markaTa ke samAna bancha majAminamadhyAkRti bIpa ke
saMsthAna maNa-mana, manaHparyAyazAna manamANa-manaHparyAyajJAna mama ayogamAna-
yoga tathA vacanayoga mam (ma )manuSya, manuja mahara- madhura rasa mAmakarma,
mIThA mANasamAna mija-mRdusparma nAmaka ..: -...

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
500MMISLIM ..... Sab Kosh Mid-dd Mich (Mi) - Mithyatma Mohaniya Athava
Madhyahristi Gunasthan Minchas-Mithyatva Mohaniya Michati-g Mithyadristi Adi
Seen Bhoonasthan Mich-Sam - Mithyasthi Gunasthan Ke Tulya Micha Mithyatva
Mohaniya Bhos (Misey, Mouse) - Mi Mohaniya, Mishra (Samyamithyatva) Gunasthan
Mees-Gar   Mishra Aur Avirat Samyagdristi Gunasthan Sumadh-Gos Maspaah-
Mukhyaprakriti Ram-Aasakt Rad-Prem, Anurag, Rati Naamakarma Rayana (Rayan)-
Ratnaprabha Adi Narak Rai-Rekha, Lakir Rioum-ai Rijumati Manahparyayashan Risah-
Asham (Patt Bethan) Athava Rishabhanaram Sanhanand Risahanaray  Rishabhanarac
Sanhanan Hamkh-Saksasparshnaamakarma Sandhiga-Padim Sam-Ilka Lihil-Likha Hua
Lihanbatma Moh- Lobh, Mamta Lohiy-Lohityarth Naamakarma

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 500MMISLIM ..... saba koza miDa-Da micha (mi)-mithyAtma mohanIya athavA
madhyAhRSTi guNa sthAna minchasa-mithyAtva mohanIya michatigamithyAdRSTi Adi
sIna bhUNasthAna miccha-sama -mithyASTi guNasthAna ke tulya michAmithyAtva
mohanIya bhosa (mIsaya, mause)-mitha mohanIya, mizra (samyamithyAtva) guNasthAna
mIsa-gara mizra aura avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna sumadha-gosa masapAha-
mukhyaprakRti rama-Asakta rada-prema, anurAga, rati nAmakarma rayaNA (rayaNa)-
ratnaprabhA Adi naraka rAI-rekhA, lakIra riumaiRjUmati manaHparyAyazAna risaha-
aSama (paTTa beThana) athavA RSabhanArAma saMhananda risahanArAya RSabhanArAca
saMhanana hamakha-sakSasparzanAmakarma saMdhigA-par3Ima sama-ilakA lihila-likhA
huA lihaNabATamA moha- lobha, mamatA lohiya-lohityartha nAmakarma

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
236 Samul - Bamboo root (a metaphor for a type of Maya-Kashaya) Bahar   Vajra-
Rishabha Narach Sanhanan -Svila Vaj T Yajna-Rishabha Narach Sanhanan Vajanavagg
- Vyanjanavagraha: Matijnana Dodkar ke Bas   Vartaman Vardhamanay - Vardhaman (a
specific type of Avadijnana) Van-Vanavyantar Dev Vanavanam Namakarma Yatra Varna
Namakarma Vas   Bail Adhinata ; www. - Vaman Sansthan Vaman Vijay (Unya) –
Vainyi Sharira Namakarma tatha Vaikriya Kayayog Vijay - Vaikriya Ashtak
(Vaikriya Parira adi aath Prakritiyaan) Digdha - Vighna, Antaraya Karma fare -
Vikalendriya farelalig Vikalatrika BELLY www Vijinu chhodkar Visi Darban Vimasa
- Paribhasha-Sanket Vimala Vimalamati Manah Paryayashan Tatiya Karmapramya:
Parisishta AWAA Vivashta - (Vivajjaya-Vivariy) Viparit, Ulta Diwag - Vipak, Phal
(Prabhav, Asar)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 236 samUla- bAMsa kI jar3a (mAyAkaSAya ke eka bheda kI upamA ) bahara
vajraRSabha nArAca saMhanana -svIlA vaja T yajJarisanArAya vacaSabha nArAca
saMhanana vajanavagga - vyaMjanAvagrahaH matijJAna Dor3akara ke basa vartamAna
vaDhamANaya - vardhamAna ( avadhijJAna kA bheda vizeSa ) vana-vANavyantara deva
vaNavaNaM nAmakarma yatra varNa nAmakarma vasa baila adhInatA ; www. - vAmana
saMsthAna vAmaNa vijaya (uNya) - vainyi zarIra nAmakarma tathA vaikriya kAyayoga
vijaya- vaikriya aSTaka (vaikriya pArIra Adi ATha prakRtiyA~) digdha - vighna,
antarAya karma fare - vikalendriya farelaliga vikalatrika BELLY www vijiNU
chor3akara visi darabAna vimAsA - paribhASA-saMketa vimala vimalamati manaH
paryAyazAna tatIya karmapramya: pariziSTa AWAA vivastha- (vivajjaya-vivarIya)
viparIta, ulTA divAga - vipAka, phala ( prabhAva, asara)

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dictionary Biggad Vihayogati Karma:  due to this karma Bea-Vedamohaniya:  not
able to be understood by the Vedas Be-Ling- Stri-Purush Napunsak Ved:  not male,
female, or neuter according to the Vedas Deya... Vedaniya Kam:  less worthy,
less deserving Shreyana Bhogana, Anubhav Karna:  to experience, to enjoy
Defredaniya Karma:  karma that is not worthy of being done www Sanghpan Sanhanan
Karma:  the creation of bones Sandhay Sanghāt Shrutagyan; Sanghāt Namak:
knowledge of the combination; called combination Sanghāyan Sanghāt Karma:  karma
of combination Sanjal-Sanjwalan Kay:  body that is constantly moving Sanjanagi
Sanyajan Shrodh, Man, Maya:  attachment, mind, illusion Santhan Sansthan Karma:
karma of establishment Sant Sattaa:  being, existence Santi -Sanjni (Manavala),
Sanjimaganna:  the knower (human), the knower's group Sambh-Avirat Mamyashti
Gunasthan:  the place of qualities, the place of the self, the place of the soul
Sag—Apna:  one's own AAJJAN Sagavann — Sattavān (57) Sagasari Sathattar (77)
Sagasah Satasi (87) Sa Thana – Swa-Apna Gunasthan:  one's own place of qualities
- Samakumaraastra - Sanatkumarādi Devalok:  the heavenly realm of Sanatkumara
and others Satgu - Apna Sharira:  one's own body Satg -Sat Prakritiyon Ka Samuh
Sar Satrah (17):  the group of seven substances, seventeen FF 237

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zabdakoza bigagaDa vihAyogati nAmakarma hone se bea-vedamohanIya be-liMga-
strI-puruSa napuMsaka veda deya... vedanIya kama zreyaNa bhoganA, anubhava
karanA defreddanIya karma www saMghapaNa saMhanana nAmakarma : haDDI kI racanA
saMdhAya saMghAta zrutajJAna; saMghAta nAmaka saMghAyaNa saMghAta nAmakarma
saMjala-saMjvalana kAya saMjaNagi saMyajana zrodha, mAna, mAyA saMThANa
saMsthAna nAmakarma saMta sattA saMti-saMjJI (manavAlA), saMjJImAgaMNA saMbha-
avirata mamyaSTi guNasthAna saga--apanA AAJJAN sagavanna -- sattAvana (57)
sagasari satahattara (77) sagasaha satAsI (87) sa ThANA - sva-apanA guNasthAna -
samakumArASTra - sanatkumArAdi devaloka satagu - apanA zarIra sataga -sAta
prakRtiyoM kA samUha sara satraha (17) FF 237

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
romedyosranAmAWAJ 20 Srīloma karmadhana parisiṣṭa satasa-saptadāśaśata - eka sau
sataraha (115) sapajjāmiyanta-sahita sapadīya-virodhī sahita samasa-sāmāyika
cāritra samayaur ... (samanada ..samcāra samm-samyāṣṭi, samyakrada mohaniya
samāsa-saṃkṣepa sari sattara (70) samo-sayogikevalī guṇasthāna sambavirai-
sarvaviratī cārisa samalla-māyā ādi śasya sahita sāhitha-sāhita sātha-sādi
saṃsthāna sāiya-ādi sahita sāmāna....nirākāra sāya  sātāvedanīya (sukha)
sāpāsāegyar sāta asātā meṃ se koī eka sāṣaṇa (sāsāṇa)—sāsavādana guṇasthāna
sāhāraṇa. sādhāraṇa nāma karma siṇiva-..snigdhasparśa nāmakarma siya-sisa
nāmakarma (sapheda, śveta) soa (sīya) jītasparśa nāmakarma suskāraśuklaleśyā
suhāgara-śubha vihāyogati

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 romedyosranAmAWAJ 20 sRloma karmadhanya pariziSTa satasa-saptadazAzata-eka sau
satraha (115) sapajjAmiyaantasahita sapaDiya-virodhI sahita samasa-sAmAyika
cAritra samayaura ... (samanada ..samacAra samma-samyASTi, samyakrada mohanIya
samAsa-saMkSepa sari sattara (70) samo-sayogikevalI guNasthAna sambaviraI-
sarvavirati cArisa samalla-mAyA Adi zasya sahita sAhitha-sAhita sAtha-sAdi
saMsthAna sAiya-Adi sahita sAmAna....nirAkAra sAya sAtAvedanIya (sukha)
sApAsAegayarasAtA asAtA meM se koI eka sAsaNa (sAsANa)--sAsvAdana guNasthAna
sAhAraNa. sAdhAraNa nAma karma siNiva-..snigdhasparza nAmakarma siya-sisa
nAmakarma (sapheda, zveta) soa (sIya) jItasparza nAmakarma suskArazuklalezyA
suhAgara-zubha vihAyogati

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sab kosh subh-sundar, achchha, shubh namakarma sumang-subhag namakarma suy
shruta-shan sura-guna-vis - sura-kona-vimshati-devamati badi 16 praphuliyo
sarhi-suramigandha namakarma sara... deva-ayu sasar... suswar namakarma suh...
gubh namakarma, mukh-prad, sukha suham-sukshma namakarma; sukshma-samparaya
charitra; sukshma-paraya gunasthan susamasinga-sukshma-nik (sukshma, apariyapt,
sadharan namakarma) sahmate... sukshma namakarma adi terah prakritiyaan susar-
suswar namakarma seyar s-itar s-pratipaksh selasyam-mo patthar ka khamma (man
kshaya ke ek bhed ki upma) haji-bedi hasid-haridra namakarma havaai hai, hota
hai hoh hota hai has hansi hasya-hasya mohaniya huu-huinsthan heu hetu, karan
ho... hota hai tattiya anya samapt

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
zaba koza subha-sundara, acchA, zubha nAmakarma sumaga-subhaga nAmakarma
suyazrutazAna surahaguNavIsa--suraikonaviMzAtidevamati bAdi 16 praphuliyo
sarahi-suramigaMdha nAmakarma sarA...devAyu sasara ... susvara nAmakarma suha...
gubha nAmakarma, mukhaprada, sukha suhama-sUkSma nAmakarma; sUkSmasaMparAya
cAritra ; sUkSmaparAya guNasthAna susamasiMga-sUkSmanika (sUkSma, aparyApta,
sAdhAraNa nAmakarma) sahamatera... sUkSma nAmakarma Adi teraha prakRtiyAM
sUsara-susvara nAmakarma seyarasa-itarasa-pratipakSa selasyaMmopatthara kA
khammA (mAna kaSAya ke eka bheda kI upamA) haji-ber3I hasida- hAridra nAmakarma
havAi hai, hotA hai hohahotA hai hAsa hA~sI hAsya-hAsya mohanIya huu-
hU~isaMsthAna heu hetu, kAraNa ho...hotA hai tattIya anya samApta

