Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/001140/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sansthan Granthamala : 7 Editor Yo Sagarmal Jan Samiaaye Dhamme Aarihein
Pavvaiye Mahapaccravan Painnay (Mahapratyakhyan-Prakirnak Suresh Sisodiya
Savvathesu Saman Care Savvam Jagam Tu Samayaanuphee Piyampiyam Kass Vinoo
Karejja Sammattadansi Na Karei Pavam 294-482 Didi Saya Amudhe Asamiyaaye Muni
Hoi Agam Ahinsa-Samata Evam Prakrit Sansthan. Udaypur

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama saMsthAna granthamAlA : 7 sampAdaka yo sAgaramala jana samiyAe dhamme
AriehiM pavvaiye mahApaccakravANa paiNNaya (mahApratyAkhyAna-prakIrNaka sureza
sisodiyA savvatthesu samaM care savvaM jagaM tu samayANupehI piyamappiyaM kassa
vino karejjA sammattadaMsI na karei pAvaM 294-482 didi sayA amUDhe asamiyAe muni
hoi Agama ahiMsA-samatA evaM prAkRta saMsthAna  /  udayapa

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Āgama Sansthān Praṇthāmalā : 7 Mahāpacchakkhāṇapaiṇṇayam ( Mahāpratyākhyāna -
Prakirṇaka ) ( Muni Puṇyavijaya Jī byā Sāmpādita Mūlapāṭha ) Anuvādaka Sureśa
Sisodiyā  Saha Shodha Adhikārī Āgama Ahiṃsā-Samatā evaṃ Prākṛta Sansthān
Udayapura (Rājo) Bhūmikā Pro. Sāgaramal Jaina Sureśa Sisodiyā Sāmpādaka Pro.
Sāgaramal Jaina (Pin-yin) Āgama, Ahiṃsā-Samatā evaṃ Prākṛta Sansthān Udayapura

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama saMsthAna pranthamAlA : 7 mahApaccakkhANapaiNNayaM ( mahApratyAkhyAna -
prakIrNaka ) ( muni puNyavijaya jI dvArA saMpAdita mUlapATha ) anuvAdaka sureza
sisodiyA saha zodha adhikArI Agama ahiMsA-samatA evaM prAkRta saMsthAna
udayapura (rAja0 ) bhUmikA pro0 sAgaramala jaina sureza sisodiyA sampAdaka pro0
sAgaramala jaina (Ping Ri  Agama, ahiMsA-samatA evaM prAkRta saMsthAna udayapura

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
©Publisher: Āgama Ahiṁsā-Samatā evaṁ Prākṛt Saṁsthān, Pamini Marg, Rajasthan
Patrika Kāryālaya ke Pās, Udaipur (Raj.) 313001 Edition: First 1991-92 Price :
Rs. 35.00 Mahāpaccakkāņapaiņnayam Hindi Translation by Suresh Sisodiya Printer:
Vardhamāna Mudrṇālaya, Jawahar Nagar, Varanasi

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (c)prakAzaka : Agama ahiMsA-samatA evaM prAkRta saMsthAna paminI mArga,
rAjasthAna patrikA kAryAlaya ke pAsa udayapura ( rAja0) 313001 saMskaraNa :
prathama 1991-92 mUlya : ru0 35-00 Mahapaccakkanapainnayam Hindi Translation by
Suresh Sisodiya Edition : First 1991-92 Price : Rs. 3500 mudraka : varddhamAna
mudraNAlaya, javAharanagara. vArANasI

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Prakashkiy Ardhamagadhi Jain Agam-Sahitya** is an invaluable treasure of
Indian culture and literature. Unfortunately, due to the lack of available
translations of these texts, both the general public and scholars are unfamiliar
with them. Many of the Agam texts, though ancient and spiritually profound, have
remained inaccessible. It is our good fortune that the original texts of these
scattered texts, edited by the revered Muni Shri Punyavijayji, have been
published by the Shri Mahavira Jain Vidyalaya, Bombay. However, due to the lack
of translations, they have not become accessible to the general public. For this
reason, the Coordination Committee of Jain Vidya scholars decided to prioritize
the publication of translated Agam texts and commentaries. In this context, the
task of translating the scattered texts was given to the Agam Institute. The
Institute has so far published three scattered texts, namely **Devendrastava**,
**Tandulavaicharaka**, and **Chandravedhyaka**, along with their translations.
We are pleased to announce that Shri Suresh Sisodiya, Associate Research Officer
of the Institute, has completed the translation of **"Mahapratyakhyan-
Prakirnak"**. The present book has been enriched by the detailed and thoughtful
introduction written by Professor Sagarmalji Jain, Honorary Director of the
Institute, and Shri Suresh Sisodiya. We are grateful to them for their
contribution. We are also grateful to Professor Kamalchandji Sogani, Honorary
Co-Director, Dr. Sushmaji Singhavi, Honorary Co-Director, and Shri Virendra
Singhji Lodha, Minister, who are providing all possible support and guidance in
the development of the Institute. Dr. Subhash Kothari is also involved in the
Institute's scattered text translation project, and we are grateful to him.  On
this occasion of publication, we also express our gratitude to the officials of
the Parshvanath Vidyalaya Research Institute, Varanasi, who provided ample
facilities and support during the printing of this book in Varanasi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakIya arddhamAgadhI jaina Agama-sAhitya bhAratIya saMskRti aura sAhitya
kI amUlya nidhi hai| durbhAgya se ina granthoM ke anuvAda upalabdha na hone ke
kAraNa janasAdhAraNa aura vidvadvarga donoM hI inase aparicita haiN| Agama
granthoM meM aneka prakIrNaka prAcIna aura adhyAtmapradhAna hote hue bhI aprApta
se rahe haiN| yaha hamArA saubhAgya hai ki pUjya muni zrI puNyavijaya jI dvArA
sampAdita ina prakIrNaka granthoM ke mUlapATha kA prakAzana zrI mahAvIra jaina
vidyAlaya, bambaI se ho cukA hai, kintu anuvAda ke abhAva meM janasAdhAraNa ke
lie ye grAhya nahIM bana ske| isI kAraNa jaina vidyA ke vidvAnoM kI samanvaya
samiti ne anudita Agama granthoM aura Agamika vyAkhyAoM ke anuvAda ke prakAzana
ko prAthamikatA dene kA nirNaya liyA aura isI sandarbha meM prakIrNakoM ke
anuvAda kA kArya Agama saMsthAna ko diyA gyaa| saMsthAna dvArA aba taka
devendrastava, tandulavaicArika evaM candravedhyaka nAmaka tIna prakIrNaka
anuvAda sahita prakAzita kiye jA cuke haiN| hameM prasannatA hai ki saMsthAna ke
saha zodha adhikArI zrI sureza sisodiyA ne 'mahApratyAkhyAna-prakIrNaka' kA
anuvAda sampUrNa kiyaa| prastuta grantha kI suvistRta evaM vicArapUrNa bhUmikA
saMsthAna ke mAnad nidezaka pro0 sAgaramala jI jaina evaM zrI sureza sisodiyA ne
likhakara grantha ko pUrNatA pradAna kI hai, isa hetu hama unake kRtajJa hai|
hama saMthAna ke mArgadarzaka pro0 kamalacanda jI sogAnI, mAnad saha nidezikA
DaoN0 suSamA jI siMghavI evaM mantrI zrI vIrendra siMha jI loDhA ke bhI AbhArI
hai, jo saMsthAna ke vikAsa meM hara sambhava sahayoga evaM mArgadarzana de rahe
haiN| DaoN0 subhASa koThArI bhI saMsthAna kI prakIrNaka anuvAda yojanA meM
saMlagna hai ataH unake prati bhI AbhArI haiM  /  prakAzana kI isa velA meM hama
pArzvanAtha vidyAzrama zodha saMsthAna, vArANasI ke padAdhikAriyoM ke prati bhI
AbhAra prakaTa karate haiM, jinhoMne prastuta pustaka ke vArANasI mudraNa ke
daurAna paryApta suvidhA pradAna kara sahayoga diyA hai|

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(4) In the publication of this book, the family of the late Shri Fathalalji
Hingar, former Minister of the Institution, has provided a grant of ten thousand
rupees in his sacred memory. For this, we express our gratitude to them. We are
also grateful to Vardhaman Press for the beautiful and timely printing of the
book.  Ganpatraj Bohra Sardarmal Kankaria President Maha Mantri

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 4 ) prastuta pustaka ke prakAzana meM saMsthAna ke pUrva maMtrI svargIya zrI
phatahalAla jI hiMgara kI puNya smRti meM unake parijanoM ne dasa hajAra ru0 kA
anudAna pradAna kiyA hai, etadartha hama unake prati bhI kRtajJatA jJApita
karate haiM  /  grantha ke sundara evaM sattvara mudraNa ke lie hama varddhamAna
mudraNAlaya ke bhI AbhArI haiN| gaNapatarAja boharA saradAramala kAMkariyA
adhyakSa mahAmaMtrI

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Financial Contributors to this Publication** **Late Shri Fathlalji Sa. Hingar
- Udaipur: An Introduction**  The family members of Late Shriman Fathlalji Sa.
Hingar have provided financial support for the publication of this book in his
sacred memory. Late Fathlalji Sa. Hingar was born on Kartik Shukla 6, 1919 in
Udaipur. His father's name was Lakshmilalji and his mother's name was Devkuvar.
He obtained a graduate degree from Kashi Hindu University in technical
education, industrial chemistry and chemical engineering. He knew many languages
and played an active role in India's independence movement.  After working in
Hyderabad, Singh, Porbandar, Bhavnagar, and Ahmedabad, he retired from his
position as Deputy General Manager of the Ayurveda Sewashram in Udaipur after 26
years.  He and his family were deeply rooted in religious values. He had the
benefit of serving many Acharyas of the Sadhumarg Sangh closely. His grandmother
and great-grandmother from his family had accepted Bhagavati Diksha.  He was
elected the first minister of the Udaipur Sadhumarg Jain Sangh and later served
as the president. The establishment of Shri Ganesh Jain Hostel...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastuta prakAzana ke artha sahayogI sva0 zrI phatahalAla jI sA0 hiMgara-
udayapura : eka paricaya prastuta grantha ke prakAzana meM sva0 zrImAn
phatahalAla jI sA0 hiMgara kI puNya smRti meM unake pArivArika janoM ne artha
sahayoga pradAna kiyA hai  /  sva0 phatahalAla jI sA0 hiMgara kA janma san 1919
kArtika zuklA 6 ko udayapura nagara meM huA, unake pitAjI kA nAma lakSmIlAla jI
evaM mAtAjI kA nAma devaku vara thA  /  Apane kAzI hindU vizvavidyAlaya se
snAtakIya upAdhi takanIkI zikSA audyogika rasAyana evaM rAsayanika iMjiniyariMga
viSaya lekara prApta kI  /  Apa kaI bhASAe~ jAnate the evaM bhArata ke
svatantratA AMdolana meM bhI Apane sakriya bhUmikA nibhAI thI  /  haidarAbAda,
siMgha, porabaMdara, bhAvanagara, ahamadAbAda meM kArya karane ke bAda Apa
udayapura meM Ayurveda sevAzrama ke upamahAprabandhaka ke pada para 26 varSa
rahane ke pazcAt sevA nivRtta hue  /  Apa evaM ApakA parivAra dhArmika saMskAroM
se otaprota rahA hai  /  Apane sAdhumArgI saMgha ke kaI AcAryoM kI nikaTa se
sevA kA lAbha liyA thA  /  Apake parivAra se ApakI dAdIjI evaM bhUvAjI ne
bhAgavatI dIkSAe~ aMgIkAra kI haiM  /  Apa udayapura sAdhumArgI jaina saMgha ke
prathama mantrI cune gaye aura bAda meM adhyakSa pada para bhI kArya kiyA thA  /
zrI gaNeza jaina chAtrAvAsa kI sthApanA

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Your contribution has been significant. The establishment of the Jain Vidya and
Prakrit Department and the Agam, Ahimsa-Samata and Prakrit Institute in Udaipur
is a result of your tireless efforts. You have been a minister of the Agam
Institute since its inception. You were the coordinator of the Shri Ganesh Jain
Hostel for many years and the Vice President of the Shri A.B.S. Jain Sangh for
the past 3 years. Your family consists of four sons and two daughters, and your
son is involved in the Lions Club and several social and cultural organizations,
continuing the legacy of social service. The Institute will always be grateful
for your contributions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 meM ApakA mahatvapUrNa yogadAna rhaa| udayapura meM jaina vidyA evaM prAkRta
vibhAga tathA Agama, ahiMsA-samatA evaM prAkRta saMsthAna kI sthApanA Apake
athaka prayAsoM kA hI pariNAma hai| Agama saMsthAna ke Apa prAraMbha se hI
maMtrI rahe the| zrI gaNeza jaina chAtrAvAsa ke Apa kaI varSoM taka saMyojaka
rahe aura zrI a0bhA0 sA0 jaina saMgha ke pichale 3 varSoM se upAdhyakSa rahe
the| _ Apake parijanoM meM cAra putra evaM do putriyAM haiM tathA samAja sevA kI
kar3I meM Apake suputra lAyansa klaba evaM kaI sAmAjika, sAMskRtika saMsthAoM se
jur3e hue haiN| saMsthAna zrI hiMgara sA0 ke yogadAna ke lie sadaiva AbhArI
rhegaa|

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Page Number .... .... .... samanna .... .... .. . .... .... 20 Table of Contents
Verse Number Introduction Mangal and Abhidheya Miscellaneous Rejection All
Beings Forgiveness Condemnation, Crowd and Criticism Mamatva Chhedan and Atma-
Dharma Swaroop Moolgun, Uttargun's Worship Followed by Atma-Ninda 12 Ekattva
Bhavana 13-16 Sanyog Sambandh Paritjag 17 Asanyam Aadi Ki Ninda and Mithyatva Ka
Tyag ..... 18-19 Agnat Aparadh Alochna Maya Nihnan Updesh Alochak Ka Swaroop Aur
Meekshgamitva .. ..." 22-23 Shalyodharan Prarupana 24-29 Alochna Phal
Prayashchit Anusaran Prarupana. 31-32 Pran-Hinsa Aadi Ka Pratyakhyan and Asan
Aadi Ka Paritjag 33-34 Nirdosh Palan, Bhav Shudh and Pratyakhyan Swaroop 35-36
Vairag Updesh 37-40 Panditmaran Prarupana 41-50 Nirved Updesh 51-67 Panch
Mahavrata Raksha Prarupana 68-76 Gupti Samiti Pradhan Prarupana ওও Tap Mahatmya
78-79 Atmarth Sadhan Prarupana 80-84 Akrit Yog and Krit Yog Ke Gunadosh Ki
Prarupana 85-89 PAGGG G6 % 11-13 ... 17-19

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pRSTha kramAMka .... .... .... samanna .... .... .. . .... .... 20
viSayAnukrama gAthA kramAMka bhUmikA maMgala aura abhidheya vividha pratyAkhyAna
sarva jIva kSamApanA nindA, gardI aura AlocanA mamatva chedana aura Atma-dharma
svarUpa mUlaguNa, uttaraguNa kI ArAdhanA pUrvaka Atma-niMdA 12 ekatva bhAvanA
13-16 saMyoga sambandha parityAga 17 asaMyama Adi kI nindA aura mithyAtva kA
tyAga ..... 18-19 ajJAta aparAdha AlocanA mAyA nihanana upadeza Alocaka kA
svarUpa ora mIkSagAmitva .. ..." 22-23 zalyoddharaNa prarUpaNA 24-29 AlocanA
phala prAyazcita anusaraNa prarUpaNA  /  31-32 prANa-hiMsA Adi kA pratyAkhyAna
aura asaNa Adi kA parityAga 33-34 nirdoSa pAlana, bhAva zuddha aura pratyAkhyAna
svarUpa 35-36 vairAgya upadeza 37-40 paMDitamaraNa prarUpaNA 41-50 nirveda
upadeza 51-67 paMca mahAvrata rakSA prarUpaNA 68-76 gupti samiti pradhAna
prarUpaNA oo tapa mAhAtmya 78-79 AtmArtha sAdhana prarupaNA 80-84 akRta yoga
aura kRta yoga ke guNadoSa kI prarUpaNA 85-89 PAGGG G6 % 11-13 ... 17-19

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Verse Number Page Number 90-92 93-94 23-25 25 25-27 97-98 .... 99-100 ....
101-106 107 " 108-110 .... 111-112 2729 Subject Panditamaran Prarupana Anaradhak
Swaroop Aradhana Mahatmya Vishuddha Man Pradhanya Pramad Dosha Prarupana Sanvar
Mahatmya Gyan-Pradhanaya Prarupana Jinadharma Mein Shraddha Vividh Tyag
Prarupana Pratyakhyan Se Samadhi Prapti Arahant Adi Ek Pad Ke Sharan Grahan Evam
Pratyakhyan Karne Se Aradhaktava Vedana Sahana Ka Upadesh Abhyudyatamaran
Prarupana Aradhana Pataaka Prapti Prarupana Sansar Taran Aur Karma Nistaran
Upadesh Aradhana Ke Bhed Aur Uske Phal Sarv Jiv Kshamapana Dheeramaran Prashansa
Pratyakhyan Palan Ka Phal Parisishta (1) Mahapratyakhyan Prakiranak Mein Prayukt
Vishisht Shabd (2) Mahapratyakhyan Prakiranak Ki Gathanukramanika (3) Sahayak
Granth Soochi " 113-120 .... ..." 121-125 "" 126-127 128-134 135-136 137-139 140
141 142 34-42 43-45 46-47

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gAthA kramAMka pRSTha kramAMka 90-92 93-94 23-25 25 25-27 97-98 .... 99-100
.... 101-106 107 " 108-110 .... 111-112 2729 viSaya paMDitamaraNa prarUpaNA
anaArAdhaka svarUpa ArAdhanA mAhAtmya vizuddha mana prAdhAnya pramAda doSa
prarUpaNA saMvara mAhAtmya jJAna-prAdhAnya prarUpaNA jinadharma meM zraddhA
vividha tyAga prarUpaNA pratyAkhyAna se samAdhi prApti arahaMta Adi eka pada ke
zaraNa grahaNa evaM pratyAkhyAna karane se ArAdhakatva vedanA sahana kA upadeza
abhyudyatamaraNa prarUpaNA ArAdhanA patAkA prApti prarUpaNA saMsAratarana aura
karma nistAraNa upadeza ArAdhanA ke bheda aura usake phala sarva jIva kSamApanA
dhIramaraNa prazaMsA pratyAkhyAna pAlana kA phala pariziSTa (1) mahApratyAkhyAna
prakIrNaka meM prayukta viziSTa zabda (2) mahApratyAkhyAna prakIrNaka kI
gAthAnukramaNikA (3) sahAyaka grantha sUcI " 113-120 .... ..." 121-125 ""
126-127 128-134 135-136 137-139 140 141 142 34-42 43-45 46-47

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  In every religious tradition, sacred texts hold a significant
place. Just as the Vedas are important for Hindus, the Tripitaka for Buddhists,
the Avesta for Parsis, the Bible for Christians, and the Quran for Muslims, the
**Agam literature** holds the same position and importance for Jains.   Although
the **Agam** in the Jain tradition are not considered **apaurusheya** like the
Vedas, nor are they considered divine messages delivered through a prophet like
the Bible and the Quran, they are a compilation of the words of **Arhats** and
**Rishis** who attained the light of truth through their spiritual practices and
purity.   While the **Angasutras** in Jain **Agam** literature are attributed to
the **Tirthankaras**, we must remember that the **Tirthankaras** are merely the
speakers of the meaning. In other words, they present thoughts or ideas, which
are then given a verbal form by the **Ganadharas** or other enlightened
**Acharyas** or **Sthaviras** to create the text.  The Jain tradition, unlike
the Hindu tradition, does not place as much emphasis on words. It considers
words as merely a means of expressing thought. In its view, it is not the word
but the meaning (**tatparya**) that is paramount. Due to this lack of emphasis
on words, the **Agam** texts of the Jain tradition have undergone linguistic
changes over time and have not remained intact in their verbal form like the
Vedas. This is why the Jain **Agam** literature later divided into two branches:
**Ardhamagadhi Agam literature** and **Shourseni Agam literature**.   The
**Ardhamagadhi Agam literature** is not only older but also closer to the
original teachings of Mahavira. The development of **Shourseni Agam literature**
is also based on these ancient **Agam** texts of the **Ardhamagadhi Agam
literature**. Therefore, **Ardhamagadhi Agam literature** is the foundation of
**Shourseni Agam literature** and is also older than it.   Although this
**Ardhamagadhi Agam literature** is also... 1. '**Attham bhasai araha sutam
ganthanti ganha - Aavashyakaniyukti, Gatha 92**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhUmikA pratyeka dharma paramparA meM dharma grantha kA eka mahattvapUrNa
sthAna hotA hai| hinduoM ke lie veda, bauddhoM ke lie tripiTaka, pArasiyoM ke
lie avestA, IsAiyoM ke lie bAibila aura musalamAnoM ke lie kurAna kA jo sthAna
aura mahattva hai, vahI sthAna aura mahattva jainoM ke lie Agama sAhitya kA hai|
yadyapi jaina paramparA meM Agama na to vedoM ke samAna apauruSeya mAne gaye
haiM aura na hI bAibila aura kurAna ke samAna kisI paigambara ke mAdhyama se
diyA gayA Izvara kA saMdeza, apitu ve una arhatoM evaM RSiyoM kI vANI kA
saMkalana haiM, jinhoMne sAdhanA aura apanI AdhyAtmika vizuddhi ke dvArA satya
kA prakAza pAyA thaa| yadyapi jaina Agama sAhitya meM aMga sUtroM ke pravaktA
tIrthaMkaroM ko mAnA jAtA hai, kintu hameM yaha smaraNa rakhanA cAhie ki
tIrthakara bhI mAtra artha ke pravaktA haiM, dUsare zabdoM meM ve cintana yA
vicAra prastuta karate haiM, jinheM zabda rUpa dekara grantha kA nirmANa
gaNadhara athavA anya prabuddha AcArya yA sthavira karate haiN|' _jaina-
paramparA hindU-paramparA ke samAna zabda para utanA bala nahIM detI hai| vaha
zabda ko vicAra kI abhivyakti kA mAtra eka mAdhyama mAnatI hai| usakI dRSTi meM
zabda nahIM, artha (tAtparya ) hI pradhAna hai  /  zabdoM para adhika bala na
dene ke kAraNa hI jaina-paramparA ke Agama granthoM meM yathAkAla bhASika
parivartana hote rahe aura vedoM ke samAna zabda rUpa meM ve akSuNNa nahIM bane
raha ske| yahI kAraNa hai ki Age calakara jaina AgamasAhitya-arddhamAgadhI
Agama-sAhitya aura zaurasenI Agama-sAhitya aisI do zAkhAoM meM vibhakta ho gyaa|
inameM arddhamAgadhI Agama-sAhitya na kevala prAcIna hai apitu vaha mahAvIra kI
mUlavANI ke nikaTa bhI hai| zaurasenI Agama-sAhitya kA vikAsa bhI arddhamAgadhI
Agama sAhitya ke prAcIna stara ke inhIM Agama granthoM ke AdhAra para huA hai|
ataH arddhamAgadhI Agama-sAhitya zaurasenI Agama-sAhitya kA AdhAra evaM usakI
apekSA prAcIna bhI haiN| yadyapi yaha arddhamAgadhI Agama-sAhitya bhI 1. 'atthaM
bhAsai arahA sutaM gaMthaMti gaNahA-Avazyakaniyukti, gAthA 92  /

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Mahapaccakkhannapainnāya** has been compiled and edited over a long period
of about a thousand years, from the time of Mahavira to the Valabhi reading of
**Veer Nirvan Samvat 980** or **993**. Therefore, some revisions, changes, and
additions have also been made in it during this period.  In ancient times, this
**Ardhamagadhi** **Agam** literature was divided into two sections: **Ang-
Pravist** and **Ang-Bahya**. The **Ang-Pravist** included eleven **Ang**
**Agams** and the twelfth **Dristivad**. While the **Ang-Bahya** included all
those **Agam** texts in addition to these, which were considered to be the
creations of **Shrutakevali** and **Purvadhar** **Sthaviras**. Again, this
**Ang-Bahya** **Agam** literature has also been divided into two parts in the
**Nandi Sutra**: **Aavashyak** and **Aavashyak Vyatirikt**. The **Aavashyak
Vyatirikt** has also been divided into two parts: **Kalik** and **Utkalik**.
This classification of the **Nandi Sutra** is as follows:  **Shruta (Agam)**
**Ang-Pravist** **Ang-Bahya** **Aavashyak** **Aavashyak Vyatirikt** **Acharaang
Sutra** **Krtaang** **Sthanaang** **Samavaayaang** **Vyakhya Prajnapti** **Jnata
Dharma Katha** **Upasak Dashaang** **Antakrit Dashaang** **Anuttaroupapattik
Dashaang** **Prashna Vyakaran** **Vipak Sutra** **Dristivad** **Samayik**
**Chaturvinshati Stav** **Vandana** **Pratikraman** **Kayotsarg**
**Pratyakhyan**  1. **Nandi Sutra-Sam. Muni Madhukar, Sutra 76, 79-81**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccakkhANapaiNNaya mahAvIra ke kAla se lekara vIra nirvANa saMvat 980 yA
993 kI valabhI kI vAcanA taka lagabhaga eka hajAra varSa kI sudIrgha avadhi meM
saMkalita aura sampAdita hotA rahA hai| ataH isa avadhi meM usameM kucha
saMzodhana, parivartana aura parivardhana bhI huA hai| prAcIna kAla meM yaha
arddhamAgadhI Agama sAhitya-aMga-praviSTa aura aMgabAhya aise do vibhAgoM meM
vibhAjita kiyA jAtA thA  /  aMga praviSTa meM gyAraha aMga AgamoM aura bArahaveM
dRSTivAda ko samAhita kiyA jAtA thaa| jabaki aMgabAhya meM inake atirikta ve
sabhI Agama grantha samAhita kiye jAte the, jo zrutakevalI evaM pUrvadhara
sthaviroM kI racanAe~ mAne jAte the| punaH isa aMgabAhya Agama-sAhitya ko bhI
nandIsUtra meM Avazyaka aura Avazyaka vyatirikta aise do bhAgoM meM vibhAjita
kiyA gayA hai  /  Avazyaka vyatirikta ke bhI punaH kAlika aura utkAlika aise do
vibhAga kiye gaye haiN| nandIsUtra kA yaha vargIkaraNa nimnAnusAra hai zruta (
Agama) aMgapraviSTa aMgabAhya Avazyaka Avazyaka vyatirikta AcArAMga sUtrakRtAMga
sthAnAGga samavAyAGga vyAkhyAprajJapti jJAtAdharmakathA upAsakadazAMga
antakRtadazAMga anuttaraupapAtikadazAMga praznavyAkaraNa vipAkasUtra dRSTivAda
sAmAyika caturviMzatistava vandanA pratikramaNa kAyotsarga pratyAkhyAna 1.
nandIsUtra-saM0 muni madhukara, sUtra 76, 79-81  /

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction 3  _| - Kalik - Utkalik Uttaraadhyayana Veshramanopapata
Dashakalik Suryaprajnapti DashashrutaSkandha Velandhropapata Kalpikakalpik
Paurushimंडल Kalp Devendropapata Chullakalpashruta Mandalpravesha Vyavahara
UththanaShruta Mahakalpashruta Vidyaacharan Viniश्चय Nishīth SamutthanaShruta
Aupapatik Ganividya Mahanishīth Nagaparijnāpanikā Rājaprashnīya Dhyanavibhakti
Rishibhaashit Nirāyavalikā Jīvābhigam Maranavibhakti Jambudvīpaprajnapti Kalpikā
Prajnapana Atmavishodhi DvīpaSāgaraprajnapti Kalpavatanshikā Mahāprajnapana
VītarāgaShruta Chandraprajnapti Pushpitā Pramādāpramāda SanlekhanāShruta
Kshullikāvimāna- Pushpachūlikā Nandī Viharakalpa -Pravibhakti Vrishnidasha
Anuyogadvara Charanavidhi Mahัลlikāvimāna Devendrastava Aturpratyākhyāna
-Pravibhakti Tandulavaichārik Mahāpratyākhyāna Angachūlikā Chandravēdyaka
Vaggachūlikā Vivahachūlikā Arunoppapata Varunoppapata Garudoppapata
Dharanoppapata  Thus, we see that the Mahāpratyākhyāna is mentioned in the Nandī
Sūtra as an Angabāhya, Āvashyak-Vyatirikt Utkalik Āgama. The style of
classification of Āgamas adopted in the Pākshika Sūtra has some differences in
name and order. In it too, the Mahāpratyākhyāna has been placed 28th among the
Utkalik Āgamas. In addition, an ancient style of classification of Āgamas is
also found in the Shourseni Āgama 'Mūlāchār' of the Yāpanīya tradition. The
Mūlāchār classifies Āgamas into four parts: (1) Tīrthankara-Katha (2)
Pratyekabuddha 1. Mūlāchār-Bharatiya Jñānapīṭha-Gāthā 277

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhUmikA 3 _| - kAlika - utkAlika uttarAdhyayana vezramaNopapAta dazavakAlika
sUryaprajJapti dazAzrutaskandha velandharopapAta kalpikAkalpika pauruSImaMDala
kalpa devendropapAta cullakalpazruta maNDalapraveza vyavahAra utthAnazruta
mahAkalpazruta vidyAcaraNa vinizcaya nizItha samutthAnazruta aupapAtika
gaNividyA mahAnizItha nAgaparijJApanikA rAjapraznIya dhyAnavibhakti RSibhASita
nirayAvalikA jIvAbhigama maraNavibhakti jambUdvIpaprajJapti kalpikA prajJApanA
Atmavizodhi dvIpasAgaraprajJapti kalpAvataMsikA mahAprajJApanA vItarAgazruta
candraprajJapti puSpitA pramAdApramAda saMlekhaNAzruta kSullikAvimAna-
puSpacUlikA nandI vihArakalpa -pravibhakti vRSNidazA anuyogadvAra caraNavidhi
mahallikAvimAna devendrastava AturapratyAkhyAna -pravibhakti tandulavaicArika
mahApratyAkhyAna aMgacUlikA candravedhyaka vaggacUlikA vivAhacUlikA aruNopapAta
varuNopapAta garuDopapAta dharaNopapAta isa prakAra hama dekhate haiM ki
nandIsUtra meM mahApratyAkhyAna kA ullekha aMgabAhya, Avazyaka-vyatirikta
utkAlika AgamoM meM huA hai| pAkSikasUtra meM AgamoM ke vargIkaraNa kI jo zailI
apanAyI gayI hai usameM nAma aura krama meM kucha bhinnatA hai| usameM bhI
mahApratyAkhyAna ko utkAlika AgamoM meM aTThAIsavA~ sthAna milA hai| isake
atirikta AgamoM ke vargIkaraNa kI eka prAcIna zailI hameM yApanIya paramparA ke
zaurasenI Agama 'mUlAcAra' meM bhI milatI hai| mUlAcAra AgamoM ko cAra bhAgoM
meM vargIkRta karatA hai'-(1) tIrthaMkara-kathita (2) pratyekabuddha1. mUlAcAra-
bhAratIya jJAnapITha-gAthA 277 ...

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Mahapatalpainnayan** is said to be (3) **Shruta-kevali**-said and (4)
**Purvadhara**-said. Again, in **Moolachar**, these **Agamic** texts are
classified as **Kalik** and **Utkalik**, but the name **Mahapratyakhyan** does
not appear anywhere in **Moolachar**. Therefore, it is difficult to say in which
category the **Yapaneya** tradition classified it.  Currently, the **Agamas**
are divided into **Anga**, **Upanga**, **Cheda**, **Moolasutra**, **Prakirnak**,
etc. This division is first found in **Vidhimargprapa** (Jinaprabha - 13th
century). Generally, the meaning of **Prakirnak** is a collection of texts on
various subjects. **Malayagiri**, the commentator of **Nandosootra**, has
written that **Shramanas** used to compose **Prakirnakas** by following the
**Shruta** taught by the **Tirthankaras**. According to tradition, it is also
believed that each **Shramana** composed one **Prakirnak**. The **Samavayanga
Sutra** mentions eighty-four thousand **Prakirnakas** of eighty-four thousand
disciples of **Rishabhdev** by saying "**Choraasiin Pannag Sahassaain
Pannaatta**". In **Mahavira**'s **Tirtha**, mention of fourteen thousand monks
is found. Therefore, the number of **Prakirnakas** in his **Tirtha** is also
considered to be fourteen thousand. But today, the number of **Prakirnakas** is
considered to be ten.  These ten **Prakirnakas** are as follows: (1)
**Chatuhsharan** (2) **Atur Pratyakhyan** (3) **Sanstarak** (4)
**Chandravedhyak** (5) **Gachhachar** (6) **Tandulavaicharik** (7)
**Devendrastav** (8) **Ganividya** (9) **Mahapratyakhyan** and (10) **Maran
Vidhi**.  In **Painnayasuttaim** edited by Muni Punyavijayji, the names of the
ten **Prakirnakas** are as follows: (1) **Chatuhsharan** (2) **Aturpratyakhyan**
(3) **Bhaktaparijna** (4) **Sanstarak** (5) **Tandulavaicharik** (6)
**Chandravedhyak** (7) **Devendrastav** (8) **Ganividya** (9)
**Mahapratyakhyan** and (10) **Virastav**.  The **Shwetamber Martipujak** sect
considers these ten **Prakirnakas** to be in the category of **Agamas**. But if
a collection of these texts called by the name **Prakirnak** is made, then the
following twenty-two names are obtained: 1. **Vidhimargprapa** - Page 55. 2.
**Samavayanga Sutra** - Muni Madhukar - 84th Samavay. 3. **Painnayasuttaai**,
Introduction Page 20.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApAtAlapaiNNayaM kathita (3) zrutakevalI kathita aura (4) pUrvadhara-kathita
/  punaH mUlAcAra meM ina Agamika granthoM kA kAlika aura utkAlika ke rUpa meM
vargIkaraNa kiyA gayA hai kintu mUlAcAra meM kahIM bhI mahApratyAkhyAna kA nAma
nahIM AyA hai  /  ataH yApanIya paramparA ise kisa varga meM vargIkRta karatI
thI, yaha kahanA kaThina hai| vartamAna meM AgamoM ke aMga, upAMga, cheda,
mUlasUtra, prakIrNaka Adi vibhAga kiye jAte haiN| yaha vibhAgIkaraNa hameM
sarvaprathama vidhimArgaprapA (jinaprabha-13vIM zatAbdI) meM prApta hotA hai|
sAmAnyatayA prakIrNaka kA artha vividha viSayoM para saMkalita grantha hI kiyA
jAtA hai| nandosUtra ke TIkAkAra malayagiri ne likhA hai ki tIrthaMkaroM dvArA
upadiSTa zruta kA anusaraNa karake zramaNa prakIrNakoM kI racanA karate the|
paramparAnusAra yaha bhI mAnyatA hai ki pratyeka zramaNa eka-eka prakIrNaka kI
racanA karatA thaa| samavAyAMga sUtra meM "corAsIiM paNNaga sahassAiM paNNattA"
kahakara RSabhadeva ke caurAsI hajAra ziSyoM ke caurAsI hajAra prakIrNakoM kA
ullekha kiyA hai| mahAvIra ke tIrtha meM caudaha hajAra sAdhuoM kA ullekha
prApta hotA hai| ataH unake tIrtha meM prakIrNakoM kI saMkhyA bhI caudaha hajAra
mAnI gayI hai| kintu Aja prakIrNakoM kI saMkhyA dasa mAnI jAtI hai| ye dasa
prakIrNaka nimna haiM (1) catuHzaraNa (2) Atura pratyAkhyAna (3) saMstAraka (4)
candravedhyaka (5) gacchAcAra (6) tandulavaicArika (7) devendrastava (8)
gaNividyA (9) mahApratyAkhyAna aura (10) maraNa vidhi  /  muni puNyavijaya jI
dvArA sampAdita paiNNayasuttAiM meM dasa prakoNakoM ke nAma nimnAnusAra haiM (1)
catuHzaraNa (2) AturapratyAkhyAna (3) bhaktaparijJA (4) saMstAraka (5)
tandulavaicArika (6) candravedhyaka (7) devendrastava (8) gaNividyA (9)
mahApratyAkhyAna aura (10) vIrastava dasa prakIrNakoM ko zvetAmbara martipUjaka
sampradAya AgamoM kI zreNI meM mAnatA hai| parantu prakIrNaka nAma se abhihita
ina granthoM kA saMgraha kiyA jAya to nimna bAIsa nAma prApta hote haiM 1.
vidhimArgaprapA-pRSTha 55  /  2. samavAyAMga sUtra-muni madhukara-84vA~ samavAya
/  3. paiNNayasuttAI, prastAvanA pRSTha 20  /

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(1) Chatursharana (2) Aturpratyakhyana (3) Bhaktaparijna (4) Sanstharak (5)
Tandulavaicharik (6) Chandravedhyak (7) Devendrastav (8) Ganividya (9)
Mahapratyakhyana (10) Virastav (11) Rishibhashit (12) Ajiva Kalp (13)
Gachchachar (14) Maranasamadhi (15) Titthogali (16) Aradhanapataka (17)
Dvipasagaraprajnapti (18) Jyotishkarandak (19) Angavidya (20) Siddapramrit (21)
Saravali and (22) Jova Vibhakti.  In addition to these, there are many scattered
texts with the same name, such as three texts available under the name 'Aur
Pacchakkhan'. Of these, seven names - Devendrastav, Tandulavaicharik,
Chandravedhyak, Ganividya, Maranavibhakti, Maranasamadhi, Mahapratyakhyana - are
found in the category of Uttalik Sutras of Nandi and Paakshik, and two names -
Rishibhashit and Dvipasagaraprajnapti - are found in the category of Kalik
Sutras. Thus, nine scattered texts are mentioned in Nandi and Paakshik Sutras.
Although there is a difference of opinion regarding the number and names of
scattered texts, it is certain that Mahapratyakhyana has been given a place in
all the different classifications of scattered texts.  Although the place of
scattered texts in the series of Agamas is secondary, if we consider from the
point of view of linguistic antiquity and spiritual-dominant subject matter,
scattered texts seem more important than some Agamas. In scattered texts, there
are scattered texts like Rishibhashit, etc., which are older than even ancient
level Agamas like Uttaradhyayanasutra and Dashakalika.  Mahapratyakhyana-
Prakirnak Mahapratyakhyana-Prakirnak (Mahapacchakkhana-Painnayam) is a poetic
composition in Prakrit language. Its first mention is found in Nandi Sutra and
Paakshik Sutra. Both the texts mention 'Mahapratyakhyana' under the category of
'Uttalik Shruta' which is necessary-extra. 1. Painnayassuttai, page 18. 2. Nandi
Sutra Madhukar Muni, page 80-81. 3. Regarding the antiquity of Rishibhashit
etc., see Dr. Sagarmal Jain-Rishibhashit Ek Adhyayan (Prakrit Bharati Sansthan,
Jaipur). 4. (a) Ukkaliam Anegavihm Pannaatam Tam Jaha-(1) Dasaveaaliam" (29)
Mahapacchakkhanam, Evam Ai. -Nandi Sutra-Madhukar Muni-page 161-162, (b) Namo
Tesim Khamasamanaanam""Angabaharam Ukkaliyam Bhagavantam. Tam Jaha-:
Dasaveaaliam (1)""Mahapacchakkhanam (28). . (Paakshik Sutra-Devchandra Lalbhai
Jain, Pustakoddhara, page 76)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (1) catuHzaraNa (2) AturapratyAkhyAna (3) bhaktaparijJA (4) saMsthAraka 5)
taMdulavaicArika (6) candrAvedhyaka (7) devendrastava (8) gaNividyA 1)
mahApratyAkhyAna (10) vIrastava (11) RSibhASita (12) ajIvakalpa (13) gacchAcAra
(14) maraNasamAdhi (15) titthogAli (16) ArAdhanApatAkA 27) dvIpasAgaraprajJapti
(18) jyotiSkaraNDaka (19) aMgavidyA (20) siddhaprAmRta (21) sArAvalI aura (22)
jovvibhkti|' isake atirikta eka hI nAma ke aneka prakIrNaka bhI upalabdha hote
haiM, yathA-'Aura paccakkhAna' ke nAma se tIna grantha upalabdha hote haiN|
_inameM se nandI aura pAkSika ke utkAlika sUtroM ke varga meM devendrastava,
taMdulavaicArika, candravedhyaka, gaNividyA, maraNavibhakti, maraNasamAdhi,
mahApratyAkhyAna-ye sAta nAma pAye jAte haiM aura kAlikasUtroM ke varga meM
RSibhASita aura dvIpasAgaraprajJapti ye do nAma pAye jAte haiN| isa prakAra
nandI evaM pAkSika sUtra meM nau prakIrNakoM kA ullekha milatA hai| yadyapi
prakIrNakoM kI saMkhyA aura nAmoM ko lekara paraspara matabheda dekhA jAtA hai,
kintu yaha sunizcita hai ki prakIrNakoM ke bhinna-bhinna sabhI vargIkaraNoM meM
mahApratyAkhyAna ko sthAna milA hai| yadyapi AgamoM kI zrRMkhalA meM prakIrNakoM
kA sthAna dvitIyaka hai, kintu yadi hama bhASAgata prAcInatA aura adhyAtma-
pradhAna viSaya-vastu kI dRSTi se vicAra kareM to prakIrNaka, kucha AgamoM kI
apekSA bhI mahattvapUrNa pratIta hote haiM  /  prakIrNakoM meM RSibhASita Adi
aise prakIrNaka haiM, jo uttarAdhyayana aura dazakAlika jaise prAcIna stara ke
AgamoM kI apekSA bhI prAcIna haiN|' mahApratyAkhyAna-prakIrNaka
mahApratyAkhyAna-prakIrNaka (mahApaccakkhANa-paiNNayaM) prAkRta bhASA kI eka
padyAtmaka racanA hai  /  isakA sarvaprathama ullekha nandIsUtra evaM
pAkSikasUtra meM prApta hotA hai| donoM hI granthoM meM Avazyaka-vyatirikta
utkAlika zruta ke antargata 'mahApratyAkhyAna' kA ullekha milatA hai| 1.
paMiNNayasuttAI, pRSTha 18 /  2. nandIsUtramadhukara muni, pRSTha 80-81  /  3.
RSibhASita Adi kI prAcInatA ke sambandha meM dekheMDaoN. sAgaramala jaina-
RSibhASita eka adhyayana (prAkRta bhAratI sNsthaan,jypur)| 4. (ka) ukkAliaM
aNegavihaM paNNattaM taM jahA-(1) dasaveAliaM" (29) mahApaccakkhANaM, evamAi  /
-nandIsUtra-madhukara muni-pRSTha 161-162, (kha) namo tesiM
khamAsamaNANaM""aMgabAhiraM ukkAliyaM bhagavaMtaM  /  taM jahA-: dasaveAliaM
(1)""mahApaccakkhANaM (28) /  . (pAkSikasUtra-devacandra lAlabhAI jaina,
pustakoddhAra, pRSTha 76)

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Mahapāñcakkhāṇapaiṇṇaya** (Great Fivefold Renunciation) is described in
the **Pākṣika Sūtra Vṛtti** as follows: "**Mahāpratyākhyānam** (Great
Renunciation) is the state where **sthavirakalpika** (those who have reached the
stage of old age) are unable to continue their **vihāra** (wandering) and
perform **anashanauccāra** (fasting unto death) at the end of their lives. This
is all described in detail in the **Mahāpratyākhyānam**." Thus, the **Pākṣika
Sūtra Vṛtti** only mentions the **samādhimaraṇa** (death by meditation) of
**sthavirakalpika**s. It does not discuss how **jīnakalpika**s (those who have
reached the stage of liberation) accept **samādhimaraṇa**.  The **Nandī Sūtra
Cūrṇi** describes **Mahāpratyākhyānam** as follows: "**Therakappeṇaṁ** (those
who have reached the stage of old age) or **jiṇakappeṇaṁ** (those who have
reached the stage of liberation) who have been wandering, the **therakappiya**s
(those who have reached the stage of old age) perform **sanlehaṁ**
(renunciation) after twelve years of **sthiravāsa** (stationary dwelling), while
the **jiṇakappiya**s (those who have reached the stage of liberation) perform
**sanlehaṁ** (renunciation) while still wandering, when the appropriate time
arrives. They renounce all **bhavacarim** (worldly attachments) with unwavering
effort and **paccākvaṁti** (renounce) all **āhāradi** (food and drink) until
death. This is all described in detail in the **Mahāpratyākhyānam**."  This
explanation from the **Nandī Cūrṇi** suggests that there was a difference in the
**sanlehaṇa** (renunciation) practices of **sthavirakalpika**s and
**jīnakalpika**s at that time. **Sthavirakalpika**s, knowing their old age,
would stop their **vihāra** (wandering) and perform **sanlehaṇa** (renunciation)
over a long period of twelve years, gradually renouncing **āhāradi** (food and
drink) while dwelling in one place. This also implies that they would gradually
reduce their **āhāradi** (food and drink) intake.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaJcakkhANapaiNNayaM pAkSikasUtra vRtti meM mahApratyAkhyAna kA paricaya
dete hue kahA gayA hai--'mahApratyAkhyAnam atrAyaM bhAvaH sthavirakalpikA
vihAreNaiva saMlIDhAH prAnte'nazanauccAraM kurvanti evametatsarvam savistaraM
varNyate yatra tanmahApratyAkhyAnam  / " arthAt jo sthavirakalpI jIvana kI
sandhyA velA meM vihAra karane meM asamartha hote haiM, unake dvArA jo
anazanavrata (samAdhimaraNa ) svIkAra kiyA jAtA hai, una sabakA jisameM vistAra
se varNana kiyA gayA hai, use mahApratyAkhyAna kahate haiM  / " isa prakAra
pAkSikasUtra vRtti meM mAtra sthavirakalpikoM ke samAdhimaraNa kA hI ullekha
milatA hai| jina kalpI samAdhimaraNa kaise svIkArate haiM, isa sambandha meM
pAkSikasUtra vRtti meM koI vivecana nahIM diyA gayA hai  /  nandIsUtra cUrNi meM
mahApratyAkhyAna kA paricaya dete hue kahA gayA hai - "therakappeNaM jiNakappeNa
vA viharittA aMte the kappiyA bArasa vAse saMlehaM karettA, jiNakappiyA puNa
vihAreNeva saMlIDhA tahA vi jahAjutaM saMlehaM karettA nivvAghAtaM saceTThA ceva
bhavacarimaM paccakvaMti, etaM savittharaM jattha'jhayaNe vaNijjaMti
tamajjhayaNaM mahApaccakkhANaM  / " arthAt sthavirakalpa aura jinakalpa ke dvArA
vicaraNa karane vAloM meM se sthavira - kalpI antima samaya meM (sthiravAsa
karake) bAraha varSa meM saMlekhanA karate haiM jabaki jinakalpI vihAra karate
hue hI saMlekhanA ke yogya avasara A jAne para saMlekhanA svIkAra karate haiM
aura nirapavAda prayatnapUrvaka jIvana paryanta kA (AhArAdi kA) pratyAkhyAna
karate haiM, isakA jisa adhyayana meM savistAra varNana kiyA gayA hai, vaha
adhyayana mahApratyAkhyAna hai  /  " mahApratyAkhyAna ke viSaya meM nandIcUrNi
kI isa vyAkhyA se aisA lagatA hai ki usa samaya sthavirakalpikoM aura
jinakalpikoM ko saMlekhanA vidhi meM antara thA  /  sthavirakalpI vRddhAvasthA
kI sthiti ko jAnakara apanI vihAracaryA ko sthagita kara dete the aura eka
sthAnapara sthita hokara (sthiravAsa karake) kramika rUpa se AhArAdi kA tyAga
karate hue bAraha varSa taka kI dIrgha avadhi kI saMlekhanA karate the  /  isakA
eka tAtparya yaha bhI hai ki ve AhArAdi meM dhIre-dhIre kamI karate hue kramazaH
1. pAkSikasUtra, pRSTha 78  /  2. nandIsUtra cUrNi pRSTha 50 ( prAkRta TeksTa
sosAyaTI, vArANasI)  /

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  The Jain ascetics (Jinkalpi) continuously wandered, while the
stationary ascetics (Sthavirakalpi) progressed towards complete renunciation of
food and other necessities. When the Jinkalpi felt that wandering was no longer
possible, they would accept Sanlekhana (voluntary death by fasting) after
renouncing food and other necessities. This fact is confirmed by the current
Sanlekhana practices of the Svetambara and Digambara traditions.  According to
the Digambara tradition, when a monk becomes unable to wander, even to the point
where begging for food is no longer possible, he accepts Sanlekhana. This is
because in this tradition, there is no practice of accepting food brought by
others. In contrast, according to the Svetambara tradition, monks become
stationary in old age and gradually reduce their intake of food and other
necessities, eventually accepting Sanlekhana. However, it is important to note
that not all monks reduce their intake of food and other necessities after
becoming stationary.  The different Sanlekhana practices described for
Sthavirakalpi and Jinkalpi in the Nandi Churna seem appropriate considering the
practices of these two types of ascetics. Even today, Digambara monks follow the
Jinkalpi practice in some form, while Svetambara monks are closer to the
Sthavirakalpi practice. It is a separate matter that the practice of Sanlekhana
after twelve years is no longer prevalent, but this practice is mentioned in the
Bhagavati Aradhana, a text accepted by the Digambara tradition. The Yapaniya
tradition even allows for the acceptance of food brought by others in
exceptional circumstances. The Bhagavati Aradhana explicitly mentions that four
monks should bring food and other necessities for the monk performing
Sanlekhana, and four other monks should protect that food and other necessities.
Thus, both Sthavirakalpi and Jinkalpi practices are mentioned in the Yapaniya
tradition.  ## Significance of the Name  This work is called Mahapratyakhyana.
In scattered texts, both Mahapratyakhyana and Aturpratyakhyana are mentioned as
texts on Samadhi-marana (death by meditation).  1. Bhagavati Aradhana, verse
254. 2. Ibid., verses 661-663.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhUmikA AhArAdi ke sampUrNa tyAga kI dizA meM Age bar3hate the, jabaki
jinakalpI satat rUpa se vihAra karate rahate the aura jaba unheM yaha AbhAsa ho
jAtA hai ki aba vihAracaryA sambhava nahIM hai to ve AhArAdi kA tyAga karake
saMlekhanA svIkAra kara lete the  /  isa tathya kI puSTi vartamAna meM
zvetAmbara aura digambara paramparA kI pracalita saMlekhanA vidhi se ho jAtI hai
/  digambara paramparAnusAra jaba muni vihAra karane meM asamartha ho jAtA hai,
yahA~ taka ki usake lie bhikSArtha jAnA bhI jaba sambhava nahIM rahatA hai to
vaha muni saMlekhanA svIkAra kara letA hai kyoMki isa paramparA meM dUsaroM ke
dvArA lAe gae AhAra ko grahaNa karane kI paramparA nahI hai, jabaki zvetAmbara
paramparAnusAra vRddhAvasthA meM muni sthiravAsI ho jAte haiM aura kramazaH
AhArAdi kama karate hue saMlekhanA svIkAra karate haiM  /  yaha alaga bAta hai
ki sthiravAsI ho jAne ke pazcAt bhI sabhI muni AhArAdi kama nahIM karate haiM  /
nandI cUrNa meM sthavirakalpiyoM aura jinakalpiyoM ko jo bhinna-bhinna
saMlekhanA vidhi batalAI gaI hai, vaha ina donoM kalpoM kI caryA kI dRSTi se
ucita pratIta hotI hai  /  Aja bhI digambara muni kisI na kisI rUpa meM
jinakalpa kA pAlana to karate hI haiM aura zvetAmbara muni sthavirakalpa ke
nikaTa hai  /  yaha eka alaga bAta hai ki Aja bAraha varSa ko saMlekhanA karane
kI vidhi pracalana meM nahIM raha gaI hai kintu bAraha varSa kI isa saMlekhanA
vidhi kA ullekha digambara paramparA dvArA mAnya yApanIya grantha bhagavatI
ArAdhanA meM bhI milatA hai  / " yApanIya paramparA to ApavAdika sthiti meM
dUsaroM ke dvArA lAe gae AhAra ko grahaNa karane kI anumati bhI detI hai  /
bhagavatI ArAdhanA meM spaSTa rUpa se yaha ullekha hai ki saMlekhanA karane vAle
muni ke lie cAra muni AhArAdi lAe aura cAra muni usa AhArAdi kI rakSA kare  /
isa prakAra yApanIya paramparA meM bhI sthavirakalpa aura jinakalpa donoM kA
ullekha milatA hai  /  nAmakaraNa kI sArthakatA - prastuta kRti ko
mahApratyAkhyAna kahA gayA hai  /  prakIrNaka granthoM meM mahApratyAkhyAna aura
AturapratyAkhyAna - ye donoM grantha samAdhimaraNa kI 1. bhagavatI ArAdhanA,
gAthA 254  /  2. vahI, gAthA 661-663  /

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is related to the concept of **Mahaprayakhyana**. The literal meaning of
the word **Mahaprayakhyana** is the greatest renunciation. **Prayakhyana** means
renunciation. Accordingly, the greatest renunciation is called
**Mahaprayakhyana**. If there is any greatest renunciation in a person's life,
it is the renunciation of the body. Renunciation of the body with
**Prayakhyana** is called **Samadhimaran**. This work is named
**Mahaprayakhyana** because of the special mention of **Samadhimaran**. The way
**Samadhimaran** is mentioned in **Nandichurni** and **Paakshikasutra** while
introducing **Mahaprayakhyana**, it becomes clear that **Mahaprayakhyana** is
related to **Samadhimaran**.  There are many other texts besides
**Mahaprayakhyana** in the texts related to **Samadhimaran**, such as
**Aturprayakhyana**, **Maranavibhakti**, **Maranasamadhi**, **Maranavishuddhi**,
**Sanlekhanashruta**, **Bhaktaparijna** and **Aradhana**, etc. All these texts
related to **Samadhimaran** have been compiled into one text and named
**Maranavibhakti**. The available **Maranavibhakti** contains eight texts:
**Maranavibhakti**, **Maranasamadhi**, **Maranavishuddhi**,
**Sanlekhanashruta**, **Bhaktaparijna**, **Aturprayakhyana**,
**Mahaprayakhyana** and **Aradhana**. Out of these eight texts, the names of
**Maranavibhakti**, **Maranasamadhi**, **Sanlekhanashruta**, **Bhaktaparijna**,
**Aturprayakhyana** and **Mahaprayakhyana** are found in the **Nandi Sutra** and
its **Churni**. But the names of the remaining two texts, **Maranavishuddhi**
and **Aradhana**, are not available in the **Nandi Sutra** and its **Churni**.
The inclusion of **Mahaprayakhyana** in **Maranavibhakti** indicates that it is
a work related to **Samadhimaran**. The name **Mahaprayakhyana** of the text is
also meaningful because it emphasizes the renunciation of the body, which is the
root center of the creature's **ragatmatva** or attachment. In fact, in this
sense, this text is called **Mahaprayakhyana**.  The question of the validity of
**Prakirnaka** is accepted as **Agam** by both the **Shwetambar** tradition,
which believes in 84 **Agam**, and the tradition, which believes in 45 **Agam**.
But the **Sthanakvasi** and **Terapanthi** traditions, which only accept 32
**Agam**, have accepted ten **Prakirnaka**, **Jitakalp**, 1. (a) **Nandi Sutra**
80. (b) **Nandi Sutra** 80, **Churni** page 58.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccA gaNapaNNayaM avadhAraNA se sambandhita haiN| mahApratyAkhyAna zabda
kA zAbdika artha hotA hai-sabase bar3A pratyAkhyAna  /  pratyAkhyAna kA tAtparya
tyAga se hai| isa anusAra sabase bar3A tyAga mahApratyAkhyAna kahalAtA hai|
vyakti ke jIvana meM sabase bar3A tyAga yadi koI hai to vaha hai-deha tyAga  /
pratyAkhyAnapUrvaka deha tyAga karane ko hI samAdhimaraNa kahA jAtA hai|
samAdhimaraNa kA vizeSa ullekha hone se hI prastuta kRti ko mahApratyAkhyAna
nAma diyA gayA hai  /  nandacUNi aura pAkSikasUtra meM mahApratyAkhyAna kA
paricaya dete hue jisa prakAra samAdhimaraNakA ullekha huA hai, usase bhI yaha
spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki mahApratyAkhyAna kA sambandha samAdhimaraNa se hai|
samAdhimaraNa se sambandhita viSayavastu vAle graMthoM meM mahApratyAkhyAna ke
atirikta aura bhI aneka graMtha haiM jaise-AturapratyAkhyAna, maraNavibhakti,
maraNasamAdhi, maraNavizuddhi, saMlekhanAzruta, bhaktaparijJA aura ArAdhanA Adi
/  samAdhimaraNa se sambandhita ina sabhI granthoM ko eka grantha meM samAhita
karake use 'maraNavibhakti' nAma diyA gayA hai  /  upalabdha maraNavibhakti meM
maraNavibhakti, maraNasamAdhi, maraNavizuddhi, saMlekhanAzruta, bhaktaparijJA,
AturapratyAkhyAna, mahApratyAkhyAna aura ArAdhanA-ye ATha prantha samAhita haiN|
ina ATha granthoM meM se maraNavibhakti, maraNasamAdhi, saMlekhanAzruta,
bhaktaparijJA, AturapratyAkhyAna aura mahApratyAkhyAna-ina granthoM ke nAma
hameM nandIsUtra mUla aura usakI cUrNI meM milate haiN| kintu zeSa do grantha
maraNavizuddhi aura ArAdhanA ke nAma nandIsUtra mUla aura usakI cUrNI meM
upalabdha nahIM hai| mahApratyAkhyAna kA maraNavibhakti meM samAhita kiyA jAnA
isa bAta kA sUcaka hai ki vaha samAdhimaraNa se sambandhita racanA hai| grantha
kA mahApratyAkhyAna nAma isalie bhI sArthaka hai ki isameM prANI kI rAgAtmakatA
yA Asakti ke mUla kendra zarIra ke hI parityAga para bala diyA gayA hai,
vastutaH isI artha meM yaha grantha mahApratyAkhyAna kahA jAtA hai| prakIrNakoM
ko mAnyatA kA prazna zvetAmbaroM meM cAhe 84 Agama mAnane vAlI paramparA ho,
cAhe 45 Agama mAnane vAlI paramparA ho-donoM ne prakIrNaka granthoM ko Agama
rUpa meM svIkAra kiyA hai  /  kintu sthAnakavAsI aura terApaMthI paramparA jo 32
AgamoM ko hI mAnya kara rahI haiM, unhoMne dasa prakIrNaka, jItakalpa, 1. (ka)
nandIsUtra 80 /  (kha) nandIsUtra 80, cUrNI pRSTha 58  /

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **The two traditions have rejected thirteen Agam texts,
including Gopaniyukti and Mahanishith, and accepted only 32 out of 45 Agams. The
reasons given by both traditions for rejecting the Prakiranakas and three other
texts as Agams are that these texts contain many statements that contradict the
original Agams and their traditional beliefs.**  **Muni Kishnalalji has
mentioned the following reasons for rejecting the Prakiranakas:**  1. **"In
Aurarpacchakkhana, Gatha 8, the right of Panditmaran is mentioned. In Gatha 31,
there is an order to use wealth (parigraha) in seven places. In Gatha 30, there
are instructions for Guru Puja, Samini Bhakti, and seven other things.
Aurarpacchakkhana is a witness, but its name is not mentioned in Bhattapainna.
The use of Savadya (sinful) language cannot be used in the Sutra, therefore it
is invalid."**  2. **"In Ganivjja Painne, there is also a description of
astrology. For example, initiation should not be taken in the three
constellations of Shravana, Dhaneshta, and Punarvasu (Gatha 22). But in the
Agams, it is mentioned that 20 Tirthankaras took initiation in the Shravana
constellation. How can something be considered valid if it prohibits what is
considered valid in the Agam? What can be its basis? Further, it is mentioned
there that one should not serve the Guru in certain constellations, and one
should not perform lunchan in certain constellations. All these things are not
approved in the Agam. Therefore, they are not considered valid."**  3. **"The
discussion about Santhan in Tandalveyaliyam is different from the instructions
mentioned in the Agams. They do not match each other. It is written there that
the final Sanhanan and Santhan of a human being occurs in the fifth Aare. In
other Agams, it is mentioned that there are only six Santhan Sanhanan found in
humans. How can Tandalveyaliyam be considered valid due to this contradiction?
Such unauthentic statements are mentioned in Chandagavijjhay, Gatha 98, about
the excellence of a Sadhu."**  **1. Authentic number of Agams: Jayacharyakrit
Vivechan-Tulsiprajna-Khand 16, Issue 1 (June 1990)**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gopaniyukti tathA mahAnizItha-isa prakAra kula teraha Agama granthoM ko
asvIkAra karake 45 AgamoM meM se 32 AgamoM ko hI svIkAra kiyA hai| prakIrNaka
tathA tIna anya granthoM ko Agama rUpa meM amAnya karane ke jo kAraNa ina donoM
paramparAoM dvArA batAe jAte haiM, ve yaha haiM ki prakIrNakoM tathA ina tIna
granthoM meM aneka aise kathana haiM jo mUla AgamoM aura inakI paramparAgata
mAnyatAoM ke viruddha haiN| muni kizanalAla jI ne prakIrNakoM ko amAnya karane
ke lie nimnalikhita kAraNoM kA ullekha kiyA hai 1. "AurapaccakkhANa, gAthA 8 meM
paMDitamaraNa kA adhikAra kahA gayA hai| gAthA 31 meM sAta sthAnoM para dhana
(parigraha) kA upayoga karane kA Adeza hai| gAthA 30 meM gurupUjA, sAminI bhakti
Adi sAta boloM kA nirdeza hai| AurapaccakkhANa kI sAkSI hai kintu bhattapaiNNA
meM nAma nahIM hai  /  sAvadya (pApa sahita) bhASA kA upayoga sUtra meM nahIM ho
sakatA, isalie yaha amAnya hai|" 2. "gaNivijjA painne meM bhI jyotiSa kI
prarUpaNA kI hai| usake udAharaNa haiM-zravaNa, dhaneSTA, purnavasu-tIna
nakSatroM meM dIkSA nahIM lenI cAhie (gAthA 22)  /  lekina 20 tIrthaMkaroM ne
zravaNa nakSatra meM dIkSA grahaNa kI, aisA AgamoM meM ullekha hai| Agama meM
jisa kArya ko mAnya kiyA usake viparIta usakA niSedha kare, use kaise mAnya kiyA
jaae| usakA AdhAra kyA ho sakatA hai ? Age vahIM AyA hai-kisI-kisI nakSatra meM
guru kI sevA nahIM karanI cAhie, luJcana nahIM karanA cAhie ye saba bAteM Agama
meM anumodita nahIM hai| isalie inako mAnya nahIM kiyA gayA hai|" 3.
"tandulaveyAliyaM meM saMThANa ke sambandha meM jo carcA hai, vaha AgamoM meM
sUcita nirdezoM se bhinna hai| paraspara mela nahIM khAtI  /  vahA~ likhA
haipAcaveM Are ke manuSya ke antima saMhanana aura saMThANa hotA hai| dUsare
AgamoM meM chaha hI saMThANa saMhanana manuSyoM meM pAe jAne kI sUcanA hai|
paraspara virodhAbhAsa se taMdulaveyAliyaM ko bAta kaise mAnya kI jA sakatI hai
? aise aprAmANika vacana 'candagavijjhaya' gAthA 98 meM sAdhu ke utkRSTa 1.
AgamoM kI prAmANika saMkhyA : jayAcAryakRta vivecana-tulasIprajJA-khaMDa 16,
aMka 1 (jUna 1990)

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"The Mahapacchakkhaṇappaiṇṇaya mentions three bhavās, while other Āgamas believe
that liberation is attained in the fifteen excellent bhavās." 4. "In the
Devindastava, a woman is addressed as 'Aho Sundari!' while in the Ācārāṅga, a
woman is addressed as 'Bahin'. The address 'Sundari' is not appropriate." 5. "In
the Mahapacchakkhaṇagāthā 62, it is stated that Devendra and Chakravartitva have
been attained by all beings an infinite number of times. It is not possible for
every being to attain Chakravartitva an infinite number of times. This statement
contradicts the Āgamas and cannot be accepted."  Thus, we see here that the Muni
has attempted to show that all the Prakirṇakas contradict the Āgamas by citing
some statements from the Āturpratyākhyāna, Gaṇividya, Tandalavaicārika,
Chandraveḍhya, Devindastava, and Mahapratyākhyāna. The arguments given by the
Muni to invalidate the Chandraveḍhya and Tandalavaicārika are not supported by
any references from the Āgamas. How can the authenticity of his statements be
accepted in the absence of references?  His objection to the Devindastava is not
of much significance, because there, not a Muni but a Śrāvaka has called his
wife 'Sundari'. Moreover, the word 'Sundari' is also found in the Upāsakadāśāṅga
and Bhagavatisūtra, etc. Āgamas.  Regarding the Āturpratyākhyāna, Gaṇividya, and
Mahapratyākhyāna, we would like to refute the objections raised by the Muni, as
far as possible. The Muni's objection to the Āturpratyākhyāna is that it orders
the use of wealth in seven places. This statement is invalid because it is
cautious. We do not understand how the use of wealth in Guru Bhakti, Sārṁika
Bhakti, etc. is cautious. Even if food, etc. is not prepared for the Muni for a
specific purpose, the use of wealth is involved in the donations given to them.
1. Upāsakadāśāṅga - 'Sundari ṇam Devāṇuppiyā', quoted - Paiyasaddamahaṇṇavo -
page 911-912. 3. Bhagavati 9/33; quoted - Ardhamagadhi Kośa, Part 4, page 776.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccaklANapaiNNaya tIna bhavoM kA ullekha hai jabaki anya AgamoM kI mAnyatA
meM utkRSTa pandraha bhava meM mokSa jAtA hai|" 4. "devindastava meM strI ke lie
aho sundarI ! AmantraNa hai  /  AcArAMga meM strI ke lie bahina kA sambodhana
hai| sundarI kA sambodhana samucita nahIM hai|" 5. "mahApaccakkhANa gAthA 62 meM
devendra tathA cakravartItva samasta jIva anantabAra upalabdha hue haiN|
pratyeka jIva cakravartItva anantabAra upalabdha nahIM ho skte| kathana Agama
viruddha hai, isako mAnya nahIM kiyA jA sktaa|" isa prakAra yahA~ hama dekha hai
ki munijI ne AturapratyAkhyAna, gaNividyA, taMdulavaicArika, candrava paka,
devendrastava aura mahApratyAkhyAna ke kucha kathana lekara sabhI prakIrNakoM ko
Agama viruddha batalAne kA prayAsa kiyA hai| muni jI ne candravedhyaka aura
tandulavaicArika ko amAnya karane ke lie jo tarka die haiM unakI puSTi : unhoMne
Agama ke koI sandarbha nahIM die haiN| sandarbha ke abhAva meM unake kathana kI
prAmANikatA kaise svIkAra kI jA sakatI hai ? devendrastava ke bAre meM unakA jo
AkSepa hai vaha koI vizeSa mahattva nahIM rakhatA, kyoMki vahA~ kisI muni ne
nahIM varan kisI zrAvaka ne apanI patnI ko sundarI kahA hai  /  punaH sundarI
zabda kA prayoga to upAsakadazAMga' aura bhagavatIsUtra' Adi AgamoM meM bhI
milatA hai| AturapratyAkhyAna, gaNividyA aura mahApratyAkhyAna ke sambandha meM
muni jI ne jo AkSepa lagAe haiM, yahA~ hama unakA yathAsambhava nirAkaraNa
karanA caaheNge| _ AturapratyAkhyAna ke sambandha meM muni jI kA AkSepa yaha hai
ki usameM sAta sthAnoM para dhana ke upayoga karane kA Adeza hai, yaha kathana
sAvadha hone ke kAraNa amAnya hai| gurubhakti, sArmika bhakti Adi meM sampatti
kA upayoga honA kisa artha meM sAvadha hai, yaha hameM samajha meM nahIM A rahA
hai| muni ke lie auddezika rUpa se bhojanAdi cAhe na banAe jAe~ kintu unheM jo
dAna diyA jAtA hai usameM sampatti kA viniyoga to hotA 1.
upAsakadazAMga-'sundarI NaM devANuppiyA', udRta-pAiasaddamahaNNavo-pRSTha
911-912  /  3. bhagavatI 9/33; udRta-arddhamAgadhI koza, bhAga 4, pRSTha 776  /

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **11** ... This is the role. Without wealth, food, clothing,
and the tools of a monk's life cannot be obtained. Again, the mention of
preaching, devotion, and the affection of the righteous is also found in the
*Jñatadharmakathā* in the context of acquiring the *Tīrthankara* name-karma.
'The donation of food, clothing, etc. is also considered to be virtuous.' In
support of this statement, we would like to say that the *Āgama* texts mention
the giving of donations by the *Tīrthankaras* before taking initiation. 2. We
would like to know from the monk whether the donation given by a *Tīrthankara*
is without the use of wealth? Is it mindful? It is understandable that a sadhu
does not speak mindlessly, but how can it be accepted that he does not make the
householder aware of his duties of donation, etc.? We do not understand how the
monk has tried to invalidate the *sārṁika-bhakti* etc., merely by mentioning the
four *cāritra* qualities like *ātūrapratyākhyāna* and the *prakiṛṇaka* which is
primarily about *sādhanā*.  The monk has given the argument for rejecting
*gaṇividyā* that it states that initiation, *keśaloca*, and service to the guru
should not be performed in certain specific constellations. Further, the monk
has also written that *gaṇividyā* prohibits initiation in the *Śravaṇa*
constellation, while the monk says, "There is mention in the *Āgamas* that 20
*Tīrthankaras* took initiation in the *Śravaṇa* constellation. How can that
which prohibits something be accepted when the *Āgamas* accept that action?" We
would like to ask the monk which *Āgama* text among the 32 *Āgamas* accepted by
him mentions that the initiation of 20 *Tīrthankaras* took place in the
*Śravaṇa* constellation. We do not know on what basis the monk has made this
statement. If he were to give *āgamika* evidence, then this matter could be
further considered. The discussion of the constellation, etc., of initiation is
found only in later texts, not in the *Āgamas*. At least in the 32 *Āgamas*,
there is no such statement. Here we would like to say one more thing: although
there may not be mention of constellations, etc., for initiation, *keśaloca*,
etc., in a theoretical sense, as far as we know, whether it be the
*sthānakavāsī*, the *terāpanthī*, or any other tradition,  1. *Jñatadharmakathā
Sūtra* 8/14. 2. Ibid., 8/154.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 11 ... bhUmikA .... hI hai| binA dhana ke bhojana, vastra aura muni jIvana ke
upakaraNa Adi prApta nahIM kiye jA skte| punaH pravacana bhakti aura svadharmI
vAtsalya kA ullekha to jJAtAdharmakathA meM tIrthaMkara nAmakarma upArjana ke
sandarbha meM bhI huA hai  /  ' anna, vastrAdi ke dAna ko to puNyarUpa bhI mAnA
gayA hai  /  apane isa kathana kI puSTi meM hama kahanA cAheMge ki tIrthaMkaroM
ke dvArA bhI dIkSA lene ke pUrva dAna dene kA ullekha Agama granthoM meM milatA
hai| 2. hama muni jI se yaha jAnanA cAheMge ki kyA tIrthaMkara dvArA diyA gayA
dAna dhana ke viniyoga ke binA hotA hai ? kyA vaha sAvadha hotA hai ? sAdhu
sAvadha bhASA na bole, yaha bAta to samajha meM A sakatI hai kintu vaha gRhastha
ko usake dAna Adi kartavya kA bodha bhI na karAe, yaha kaise mAnya kiyA jA
sakatA hai ? hameM samajha meM nahIM A rahA hai ki sArmika-bhakti Adi kA ullekha
hone mAtra se AturapratyAkhyAna jaise cAritraguNa aura sAdhanA pradhAna
prakIrNaka ko muni jI ne kaise amAnya batalAne prayAsa kiyA hai ? gaNividyA ko
asvIkAra karane kA tarka muni jI ne yaha diyA hai ki usameM kucha viziSTa
nakSatroM meM dIkSA, kezaloca aura guru sevA Adi nahIM karane ke lie kahA gayA
hai| Age muni jI ne yaha bhI likhA hai ki gaNividyA zravaNa nakSatra meM dIkSA
lene kA niSedha karatI hai jabaki muni jI kA kahanA hai- "20 tIrthaMkaroM ne
zravaNa nakSatra meM dIkSA grahaNa kI, aisA AgamoM meM ullekha hai| AgamoM meM
jisa kArya ko mAnya kiyA jAe usake viparIta jo usakA niSedha kare, use kaise
mAnya kiyA jaae|" hama muni jI se pUchanA cAheMge ki unake dvArA mAnya 32 AgamoM
meM kauna-sA aisA Agama grantha hai, jisameM yaha ullekha milatA ho ki 20
tIrthaMkaroM kI dIkSA zravaNa nakSatra meM huI  /  patA nahIM muni jI ne kisa
AdhAra para yaha kathana kiyA hai  /  yadi ve Agamika pramANa dete to isa viSaya
meM Age vicAra kiyA jA sakatA thaa| dIkSA ke nakSatra Adi kI carcA to paravartI
granthoM meM hI hai, AgamoM meM nahIM hai| kama se kama 32 AgamoM meM to aisA
kathana hai hI nhiiN| yahA~ hama eka bAta aura kahanA cAheMge ki saiddhAntika
rUpa se bhale hI dIkSA, kezaloca Adi ke lie nakSatra Adi kA ullekha nahIM milatA
ho, kintu jahA~ taka hameM jJAta hai cAhe vaha sthAnakavAsI, terApaMthI yA anya
koI bhI paramparA 1. jJAtAdharmakathAsUtra 8/14  /  2. vahI, 8/154  /

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Mahapachchama-innay is a great rejection, in practice everyone observes and
follows the auspicious time for initiation, etc. The present text,
Mahapratyakhyan, has been rejected by Muni Ji due to the reason given in the
62nd verse of this text, as stated by Jayacharya. The essence of this verse is
that this being has enjoyed the supreme pleasures of Devenndra, Chakravartitva
and kingdoms for an infinite number of times, yet it has not been satisfied. In
this regard, Muni Ji says, "In this verse, it is stated that all beings have
attained Devenndra and Chakravartitva for an infinite number of times. Every
being cannot attain Chakravartitva for an infinite number of times. This
statement is against the Agamas, it cannot be accepted." In this regard, our
submission is that firstly, this statement is not for all beings, as Muni Ji has
said. In the original verse, it is nowhere explicitly written that every being
can attain Chakravartitva for an infinite number of times, and secondly, this is
a didactic verse, its purpose is only to show that this being has not been
satisfied even after attaining the best pleasures many times. It is not
appropriate to take this general statement in a meaning contrary to its spirit.
An Indian is poor - this is a general statement, it would not be appropriate to
take it to mean that no Indian is wealthy. Muni Ji, in his statement, has used
the words 'all beings' once and 'every being' another time, emphasizing each
word specifically, only then has he declared this text invalid. In our opinion,
Muni Ji's misconception arose due to his inability to understand the word
'patta' written in this verse correctly, possibly Muni Ji has interpreted the
word 'patta' as 'every'. In fact, the word 'patta' does not mean 'every' but
'obtained'. If the word 'patta' is interpreted in this way here, then Muni Ji
would not have had such a misconception. Here we would like to clarify one more
thing, that is, all the statements in the Agamic texts are relative. No Jina-
vchan is absolute. If the Agamas are interpreted from an absolute perspective,
then even in the thirty-two Agamas which the Sthanakvasi and Terapanthi sects
consider authentic, many such inconsistencies can be seen which will be
considered against their tradition. The reality is that...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccamaiNNaya ho, vyavahAra meM to sabhI dIkSA muhUrta Adi dekhate hI haiM
aura usakA pAlana bhI karate haiN| prastuta grantha mahApratyAkhyAna ko muni jI
ne jayAcArya dvArA asvIkRta karane kA kAraNa isa grantha kI 62vIM gAthA batalAyA
hai| isa gAthA kA mUla bhAva yaha hai ki isa jIva ne devendra, cakravartItva
evaM rAjyoM ke uttama bhogoM ko anantabAra bhogA hai phira bhI ise tRpti prApta
nahIM huI hai| isa sambandha meM muni jI kA kahanA hai-"isa gAthA meM devendra
tathA cakravartItva samasta jIva anantabAra upalabdha hae hai, aisA kathana hai|
pratyeka jIva cakravartItva anantabAra upalabdha nahIM ho skte| yaha kathana
Agama viruddha hai, isako mAnya nahIM kiyA jA sktaa|" isa sambandha meM hamArA
nivedana isa prakAra hai ki prathama to yaha kathana samasta jIvoM ke lie hai hI
nahIM, jaisA ki muni jI ne kahA hai| mUlagAthA meM yaha kahIM bhI spaSTa rUpa se
nahIM likhA hai ki pratyeka jIva cakravartItva anantabAra upalabdha ho sakate
haiM aura dUsarA yaha eka upadezAtmaka gAthA hai isakA uddezya mAtra yaha
batalAnA hai ki aneka bAra zreSTa bhogoM ko prApta karake bhI yaha jIva tRpta
nahIM huA hai  /  isa sAmAnya kathana ko isakI bhAvanA ke viparIta artha meM
lenA samucita nahIM hai| bhAratIya garIba hai-yaha eka sAmAnya kathana hai,
isakA yaha artha lenA ucita nahIM hogA ki koI bhI bhAratIya dhanavAna nahIM hai
/  muni jI ne apane kathana meM eka bAra 'samasta jIva' aura dUsarI bAra
"pratyeka jIva' kahakara pratyeka zabda para bizeSa bala dekara hI isa grantha
ko amAnya batAyA hai  /  hamAre matAnusAra muni jI ko yaha bhrAnti isa gAthA meM
likhe hue 'pattA' zabda kA ThIka se artha na kara pAne ke kAraNa huI hai,
saMbhavatayA muni jI ne isI 'pattA' zabda kA artha 'pratyeka' kara diyA hai|
vastutaH 'pattA' zabda kA artha pratyeka nahIM hokara 'prApta kiyA' aisA artha
hai| yadi yahA~ isa rUpa meM 'pattA' zabda kA artha kiyA jAtA to muni jI ko aisI
bhrAnti nahIM hotii| yahA~ hama eka bAta aura spaSTa rUpa se kahanA cAheMge,
vaha yaha ki Agama granthoM meM jo bhI kathana haiM, ve saba sApekSika hai| koI
bhI jinavacana nirapekSa nahIM hote| yadi nirapekSa dRSTi se AgamoM kA artha
kiyA jAegA to jina battIsa AgamoM ko sthAnakavAsI aura terApaMthI sampradAya
prAmANika mAna rahe haiM, unameM bhI aisI aneka visaMgatiyA~ dikhAI jA sakatI
haiM jo inakI paramparA ke viruddha mAnI jaaegii| vAstavikatA to yaha hai ki

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Initially, the Lokashah, the followers of the Sthanakvasi tradition, had access
to only thirty-two Agamas. Therefore, they accepted only these thirty-two Agamas
as authoritative. Once they accepted these thirty-two Agamas, there was no
question of changing them. Hence, even when the Prakirnaks became available
later, they were not accepted as Agamas.  While some Prakirnaks like Tithogali
and Ganividya may contain statements that differ slightly from their tradition,
it is not appropriate to reject the entire Prakirnak literature. If we were to
do so, we would also have to reject many Agama texts, as they contain even more
statements that contradict their beliefs than these Prakirnaks. The
Suryaprajnapti contains more cautious teachings than the Ganividya. And as far
as the question of statements differing from traditions is concerned, the Agamas
contain more references to images and worship than the Prakirnaks. Would we then
refuse to accept the Sthananga Sutra, Jnatadharmakatha, and Rajaprashniya, etc.,
as Agamas because they contain such references? The mistake that the Digambara
monks made in rejecting the Svetambara Agama literature is probably the same
mistake that the Sthanakvasi and Terapanthi are making by rejecting the
Prakirnaks. The unfortunate consequence of this is that the Sthanakvasi and
Terapanthi communities have been deprived of this vast treasure of knowledge,
which is purely instructive, focused on austerity, and emphasizes character. We
should instead focus on how these texts contribute to the development of human
spiritual, devotional, and ethical values. If, after studying them, we find that
they contain useful material, then, despite some differences in beliefs, we
should accept them as Agamas and promote their study and teaching.   1.
Suryaprajnapti, 10/17 (Sriharshapushpamrit Jain Granthamala).  2. 'Chattari
Jinapdimaao Savvarayanamiao' - Sthanangasutra - Madhukar Muni, 4/339.  3.
'Pavarparihhia Jinapdimaanam Acchanam Karei' - Jnatadharmakatha - Madhukar Muni,
16/118.  4. 'Tasi Gam Jinapdimaanam' - Rajaprashniyasutra - Madhukar Muni, Sutra
177-179.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prArambha meM lokAzAha jora sthAnakavAsI paramparA ko battIsa Agama hI
upalabdha ho sake isIlie unhoMne battIsa AgamoM ko hI mAnya rakhA aura jaba
ekabAra battIsa AgamoM kI paramparA unake dvArA svIkAra kara lI gaI to phira use
parivartita karane kA prazna hI nahIM uThatA thaa| ataH bAda meM prakIrNakoM ke
upalabdha hone para bhI unheM Agama rUpa meM mAnya nahIM kiyaa| prakIrNakoM meM
titthogAlI, gaNividyA Adi eka-do prakIrNaka aise bhI haiM jo inakI paramparA se
kucha bhinna kathana karate hoM, to bhI sampUrNa prakIrNaka sAhitya ko asvIkAra
kara denA ucita nahIM haiN| aisI sthiti meM to hameM aneka Agama granthoM ko bhI
asvIkAra kara denA hogA, kyoMki unameM to ina prakIrNakoM kI apekSA bhI adhika
aise kathana haiM jo inakI mAnyatAoM ke viparIta jAte haiN| sUryaprajJapti meM
gaNividyA kI apekSA adhika sAvadha upadeza haiN| aura jahA~ taka paramparAoM se
bhinna kathana kA prazna hai to. AgamoM meM prakIrNakoM kI apekSA bhI jina
pratimA aura jina pUjA ke jyAdA ullekha milate haiM, kyA aise ullekha karane
vAle sthAnAMgare, jJAtAdharmakathA aura rAjapraznIya Adi ko hama Agama rUpa meM
mAnane se inkAra karanA cAheMge? jo bhUla digambaroM ne zvetAmbara Agama sAhitya
ko amAnya karane ko kii| saMbhavata vahI bhUla sthAnakavAsI aura terApaMthI
prakIrNakoM ko amAnya karake kara rahe haiM  /  isakA jo duHkhada pariNAma hai
vaha yaha ki sthAnakavAsI aura terApaMthI samAja vizuddha rUpa se upadezAtmaka,
tapa pradhAna evaM cAritra pradhAna isa vipula jJAna sampadA se vaMcita raha
gayA hai| jabaki hameM dekhanA yaha cAhie ki ye grantha manuSya ke AdhyAtmika,
sAdhanAtmaka evaM cAritrika mUlyoM ke vikAsa meM kitanA yogadAna karate haiN|
yadi hameM inake adhyayana karane ke pazcAt aisA lage ki inameM upayogI sAmagrI
rahI huI hai to yatkicita mAnyatA bheda ke rahate hue bhI inheM Agama rUpa meM
svIkAra kara lenA cAhie aura inake adhyayana-adhyApana ko bhI vikasita karanA
caahie| 1. sUryaprajJapti, 10/17 (zrIharSapuSpAmRta jaina grnthmaalaa)| 2.
'cattAri jiNapaDimAo savvarayaNAmaIo'-sthAnAMgasUtra-madhukara muni, 4/339  /
3. 'pavaraparihiyA jiNapaDimANaM accaNaM karei'-jJAtAdharmakathA-madhukara muni,
16/118 4. 'tAsi gaM jiNapaDimANaM-rAjapraznIyasUtra-madhukara muni, sUtra
177-179  /

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Introduction to the Manuscript Copies Used in the Mahapratyakhyanamanapainnay
Muni Shri Punyavijayaji used the following manuscripts in determining the text
of this work:  1. Saṅ: Manuscript on palm leaves from the Jain Gyan Bhandar in
Sanghvipada. 2. Pu.: Manuscript written by Muni Shri Punyavijayaji Maharaj. 3.
Sa.: Manuscript edited by Acharya Sagarnandasuriśvara. 4. Haṅ: Manuscript
written by Muni Shri Hansavijayaji Maharaj.  We have taken the textual
variations of these manuscripts, numbered 1 to 4, from the work *Paṇṇayasuttaī*
edited by Muni Punyavijayaji. For detailed information about these manuscripts,
we recommend that readers refer to pages 23-27 of the introduction to the
*Paṇṇayasuttaī* work.  **Thoughts on the Author and Time of Composition**
Although the Mahapratyakhyan is mentioned in many works like the Nandīsutr,
Pākṣikasūtr, etc., no information is available about the author of this work.
Based on the clues we have, we can only say that it is a work of some *sthavira
ācārya* from the 5th century CE or earlier. It is difficult to say anything more
about the author because no clues are available in the form of any sūtra.
However, as far as the time of composition of this work is concerned, it can be
said with certainty that it was composed before the 5th century CE. This is
because the Mahapratyakhyan is mentioned in the Nandīsutr and Pākṣikasūtr, as
well as in the Nandīcūṛṇi, etc. The subject matter of this work is also briefly
mentioned in the commentary on the Pākṣikasūtr and the Nandīcūṛṇi. The time of
the commentaries is considered to be around the 7th century CE, so the
Mahapratyakhyan must have been composed before the Nandīcūṛṇi. Further, the
Mahapratyakhyan is clearly mentioned in the original Nandīsutr and Pākṣikasūtr.
Muni Shri Punyavijayaji and Paṇḍit Dalasukh Bhai Malavaniya have discussed the
time of Devavācak, the author of the Nandīsutr, in detail. In the Nandīṇi,
Devavācak is said to be a disciple of Śyāganī. Some scholars have identified
Devavācak, the author of the Nandīsutr, with Devaddhigaṇī, who compiled the
Āgamas...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccaramANapaiNNaya anya meM prayukta hastalikhita pratiyoM kA paricaya
muni zrI puNyavijaya jI ne isa grantha ke pATha nirdhAraNa meM nimna pratiyoM kA
upayoga kiyA thA1. saM0 : saMghavIpAr3A jaina jJAna bhaMDAra kI tAr3apatrIya
prati  /  2. pu0 : muni zrI puNyavijaya jI mahArAja kI hastalikhita prati  /  3.
sA0 : AcArya sAgaranandasUrIzvara jI dvArA sampAdita prati  /  4. haM0 : muni
zrI haMsavijaya jI mahArAja ko hastalikhita prati  /  _ hamane kramAMka 1 se 4
taka kI ina pANDulipiyoM ke pATha bheda muni puNyavijaya jI dvArA saMpAdita
paiNNayasuttAI nAmaka grantha se ho lie haiM  /  ina pANDulipiyoM kI vizeSa
jAnakArI ke lie hama pAThakoM se paiNNayasuttAI grantha kI prastAvanA ke pRSTha
23-27 dekha lene kI anuzaMsA karate haiN| lekhaka evaM racanAkAla kA vicAra
mahApratyAkhyAna kA ullekha yadyapi nandIsUtra, pAkSikasUtra Adi aneka granthoM
meM milatA hai kintu isa grantha ke lekhaka ke sambandha meM kahIM para bhI koI
nirdeza upalabdha nahIM hotA hai jo saMketa hameM milate haiM usake AdhAra para
mAtra yahI kahA jA sakatA hai ki yaha 5vIM zatAbdI yA usake pUrva ke 'kisI
sthavira AcArya ko kRti hai| isake lekhaka ke sandarbha meM kisI bhI prakAra kA
koI saMketa sUtra upalabdha na ho pAne ke kAraNa isa sambandha meM adhika kucha
bhI kahanA kaThina hai| kintu jahA~ taka isa grantha ke racanAkAla kA prazna
hai, itanA to sunizcita rUpa se kaha sakate haiM ki yaha IsvI san kI 5vIM
zatAbdI ke pUrva kI racanA hai kyoMki mahApratyAkhyAna kA ullekha hameM
nandIsUtra evaM pAkSikasUtra ke atirikta nandIcUNi Adi meM bhI milatA hai|
pAkSikasUtra kI vRtti tathA nandIcUrNi meM isa grantha kI viSayavastu kA bhI
saMkSipta ullekha hai  /  cUNiyoM kA kAla lagabhaga 7vIM zatAbdI mAnA jAtA hai,
ataH mahApratyAkhyAna kA racanAkAla nandIcUrNi se pUrva hI honA caahie| punaH
mahApratyAkhyAna kA spaSTa nirdeza nandIsUtra evaM pAkSikasUtra mUla meM bhI
hai| nandIsUtra ke kartA devavAcaka ke samaya ke sandarbha meM muni zrI
puNyavijaya jI evaM paM0 dalasukha bhAI mAlavaNiyA ne vizeSa carcA kI hai|
nandINi meM devavAcaka ko SyagaNI kA ziSya kahA gayA hai| kucha vidvAnoM ne
nandIsUtra ke kartA devavAcaka aura AgamoM ko pustakArur3ha karane vAle
devaddhigaNI

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
... Introduction There is a misconception that the 15 Kshamashramanas are all
the same. Muni Shri Kalyanvijayji also fell prey to this misconception, but
based on the mentions, while the guru of Devadhh is Ary Shandilly, the guru of
Devavachka is Dushyagani. Therefore, it is certain that Devavachka and Devadhh
are not the same person. Devavachka has explicitly mentioned Dushyagani in the
Nandi Sutra Sthviravali. Pandit Dalsukhabhai Malvaniya has considered the time
of Devavachka to be Veer Nirvana Samvat 1020 or Vikram Samvat 550, but this is
considered to be the final period. Devavachka would have existed before that.
The mention of Nando and Anuyogadwar Sutras is in the Avashyak Niyukti, and if
Avashyak Niyukti is also considered to be the work of the second Bhadrabahu,
then its time is proven to be the first half of the fifth century Vikram. Based
on all these grounds, it is certain that the Nandi Sutra, composed by
Devavachka, is a work of the first half of the fifth century AD. In this
context, we will direct you to see the discussion related to the time of
Devavachka in the introduction of the Nandi Sutra by Muni Shri Punyavijayji and
Pandit Dalsukhabhai Malvaniya for special knowledge. Since the Nandi Sutra
mentions Mahapratyakhyan, based on this evidence, we can only say that this text
was created before the 5th century AD. But it is difficult to say what the upper
limit of its composition could be. Many stories of the Mahapratyakhyan Prakirnak
are found in ancient Agamas like Uttaradhyayana, in Avashyak Niyukti,
Uttaradhyayana Niyukti and Ogh Niyukti etc. Niyuktis and in Maran Vibhakti, Atur
Pratyakhyan, Chandravedhyak, Titthogali, Sanstark, Aradhana Pataka and Aradhana
Prakaran etc. Prakirnaks, as well as in the accepted texts of the Yapaneya and
Digambar traditions, Bhagwati Aradhana, Mulachar, Niyamsar, Samyasar, Bhavpahuḍ
etc. All these texts are from the middle of the 5th-6th century AD. Although it
is difficult to determine here whether all these stories have been taken from
these texts into Mahapratyakhyan or whether these stories have gone from
Mahapratyakhyan into these texts, yet it can be assumed that the stories that
are later than Nandi must have gone from Mahapratyakhyan. Especially the similar
stories available in Mulachar, Bhagwati Aradhana etc. must have gone from
Mahapratyakhyan directly or indirectly. Again, the sub...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ... bhUmikA 15 kSamAzramaNa ko eka hI mAnane kI bhrAnti kI haiN| isa bhrAnti ke
zikAra muni zrI kalyANavijaya jI bhI hue haiM, kintu ullekhoM ke AdhAra para
jahA~ devaddhi ke guru Arya zAMDilya haiM, vahIM devavAcaka ke guru dUSyagaNI
hai  /  ataH yaha sunizcita hai ki devavAcaka aura devaddhi eka hI vyakti nahIM
haiN| devavAcaka ne nandIsUtra sthavirAvalI meM spaSTa rUpa se dUSyagaNI kA
ullekha kiyA hai| paM0 dalasukhabhAI mAlavaNiyA ne devavAcaka kA kAla vIra
nirvANa saMvat 1020 athavA vikrama saMvat 550 mAnA hai, kintu yaha antima avadhi
hI mAnI jAtI hai| devavAcaka usase pUrva hI hue hoNge| Avazyaka niyukti meM
nando aura anuyogadvAra sUtroM kA ullekha hai, aura Avazyakaniyukti ko dvitIya
bhadrabAhu kI racanA bhI mAnA jAya to usakA kAla vikrama ko pA~cavIM zatAbdI kA
pUrvArddha hI siddha hotA hai  /  ina saba AdhAroM se yaha sunizcita hai ki
devavAcaka aura usake dvArA racita nandIsUtra IsA kI pA~cavIM zatAbdI ke
pUrvArddha kI racanA hai| isa sandarbha meM vizeSa jAnane ke lie hama muni zrI
puNyavijaya jI evaM paM0 dalakhasukhabhAI mAlavANiyA ke nandIsatra kI bhUmikA
meM devAcaka ke samaya sambandhI carcA ko dekhane kA nirdeza kreNge| cUMki
nandIsUtra meM mahApratyAkhyAna kA ullekha hai, ataH isa pramANa ke AdhAra para
hama kevala itanA hI kaha sakate haiM ki yaha grantha IsavI san kI 5vIM zatAbdI
ke pUrva nirmita ho cukA thaa| kintu isako racanA kI uttara sImA kyA ho sakatI
hai, yaha kaha pAnA kaThina hai| mahApratyAkhyAna prakIrNaka kI aneka gAthAe~
uttarAdhyayana jaise prAcIna Agama meM, Avazyakaniyukti, uttarAdhyayananiyukti
tathA oghaniyukti Adi niyuktiyoM meM tathA maraNavibhakti, AturapratyAkhyAna,
candravedhyaka, titthogAlI, saMstAraka, ArAdhanApatAkA tathA ArAdhanAprakaraNa
Adi prakIrNakoM meM sAtha hI yApanIya evaM digambara paramparA ke mAnya graMthoM
bhagavatI ArAdhanA, mUlAcAra, niyamasAra, samayasAra, bhAvapAhuDa Adi meM haiN|
ye sabhI grantha IsavI san ko pA~cavIM-chaThI zatAbdI ke madhya ke haiN| yadyapi
yahA~ yaha nirdhArita kara pAnA kaThina hai ki ye sabhI gAthAeM ina granthoM se
mahApratyAkhyAna meM lI gaI haiM yA mahApratyAkhyAna se ye gAthAe~ ina granthoM
meM gaI haiM, phira bhI jo grantha nandI se paravartI haiM unameM ye gAthAe~
mahApratyAkhyAna se hI gaI hogI, yaha mAnA jA sakatA hai  /  vizeSa rUpa se
mUlAcAra, bhagavatI ArAdhanA Adi meM upalabdha hone vAlI samAna gAthAe~
pratyakSa yA parokSa rUpa meM mahApratyAkhyAna se hI gaI hogii| punaH isa
grantha kI upa

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 16  The **Mahapanchavaanapariṇṇaya**  The **taḍpaṭra** (palm leaf) copies
also confirm that this text is sufficiently ancient.  A significant piece of
evidence for considering the time of composition of the **Mahapratyākhyāna** is
the mention of the **dvādaśavidha śruta-skandha** (twelve categories of
scriptures) in it. This implies that the **dvādaśavidha śruta-skandha** existed
when this text came into being. We must remember that the concept of the
**dvādaśa-aṅga** (twelve parts) is quite ancient in the Jain tradition. The
**dvādaśa-aṅga** are also mentioned in ancient **āgama** texts like
**sthānāṅga**, **samavāyāṅga**, etc. Although this statement does not provide
much help in determining the time of composition of this text, it can be said
that this text was composed when the **dvādaśavidha śruta-skandha** existed. The
mention of the **dvādaśa-aṅga** in the text also automatically implies that this
text was composed after the composition of the **dvādaśa-aṅga** and before the
disappearance of the earlier literature. The mention of the **dvādaśa-aṅga** in
this text, but the absence of the names of **niyukti**, **bhāṣya** and
**cūrṇī**, indicates that this text was composed sometime after the second
century CE and before the fifth century CE.  Another point worth noting in
relation to the time of composition is that this text does not mention
**guṇasthāna** (categories of qualities) anywhere in the context of **samādhi-
maraṇa** (death in meditation), whereas the **yāpanīya** tradition's
authoritative texts on **samādhi-maraṇa**, **Bhagavati Ārādhanā** and
**Mūlācāra**, also discuss **guṇasthāna**. In an independent essay, we have
considered the time of the developed concept of **guṇasthāna** to be after the
**Tattvārthabhāṣya**, i.e., after the third century CE, and before the
**Sarvārthasiddhiṭīkā**, i.e., before the fifth-sixth century CE. Based on this,
we can say that the concept of **guṇasthāna** was fully developed around the
fifth century CE. This also leads us to the same conclusion that the
**Mahapratyākhyāna**...  1. **Gāthā**, 102. 2. **Sthānāṅga** 10/103. 3.
**Samavāyāṅga** 1/2. 4. **Śramaṇa** (January-March 1992)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 16 mahApaJcavANapaiNNayaM labdhatAr3apatrIya pratiyA~ bhI yahI pramANita karatI
hai ki yaha grantha paryApta rUpa se prAcIna hai  /  mahApratyAkhyAna ke
racanAkAla ke sandarbha meM vicAra karane ke lie eka mahattvapUrNa sAkSya hamAre
samakSa yaha hai ki isameM dvAdazavidha zrutaskandha kA ullekha huA hai  / "
isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki jaba kabhI yaha grantha astitva meM AyA hogA taba
taka dvAdaza-vidha zrutaskandha astitva meM A cuke the  /  hameM yaha smaraNa
rakhanA cAhie ki dvAdaza aMgoM kI avadhAraNA jaina paramparA meM paryApta
prAcIna hai  /  dvAdazaaMgoM kA ullekha sthAnAMgara, samavAyAMga Adi prAcIna
Agama granthoM meM bhI milatA hai  /  yadyapi isa kathana se isa grantha ke
racanAkAla ko nirdhArita kara pAne meM koI vizeSa sahAyatA to nahIM milatI hai
kintu isa AdhAra para itanA to kahA hI jA sakatA hai ki jaba dvAdazavidha
zrutaskandha astitva meM AyA hogA taba hI isa graMtha kI racanA huIM hogI  /
grantha meM ullikhita dvAdaza aMgoM ke kathana se yaha artha bhI svataH hI
phalIbhUta hotA hai ki isa grantha kI racanA dvAdazaaMgoM kI racanA ke bAda
tathA pUrva sAhitya ke lupta hone ke pUrva huI hogii| isa grantha meM dvAdaza
aMgoM kA ullekha, kintu niyukti, bhASya aura cUrNI ke nAmoM kA abhAva yahI
sUcita karatA hai ki isa grantha kI racanA IsA kI dvitIya zatAbdI ke bAda tathA
pA~cavoM zatAbdI ke pUrva kabhI huI hogI  /  racanAkAla ke sambandha meM hI eka
aura bAta dhyAna dene yogya hai ki isa grantha meM samAdhimaraNa ke prasaMga meM
kahIM bhI guNasthAnoM kI carcA nahIM huI hai jabaki samAdhimaraNa kI viSayavastu
kA pratipAdana karane vAle yApanIya paramparA ke mAnya grantha bhagavatI
ArAdhanA aura mUlAcAra meM bhI guNasthAnoM kI carcA kI gaI hai| hamane apane eka
svatantra nibandha meM guNasthAna kI vikasita avadhAraNA kA kAla
tattvArthabhASya ke pazcAt arthAt tIsarI zatAbdI ke bAda aura
sarvArthasiddhiTIkA ke pUrva arthAt pA~cavIM-chaThIM zatAbdI ke pUrva mAnA hai|
isa AdhAra para hama yaha kaha sakate haiM ki guNasthAna kI avadhAraNA lagabhaga
pA~cavIM zatAbdI ke AsapAsa kabhI pUrNata: vikasita huI hai| isase bhI hama isI
niSkarSa para pahu~cate haiM ki mahApratyA 1. gAthA, 102  /  2. sthAnAMga 10 /
103  /  3. samavAyAMga 1 / 2  /  4. zramaNa (janavarI-mArca 1992)

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  17  The Mahapratyakhyana is a composition from before the 17th
century. In conclusion, it can be said that the Mahapratyakhyana was composed
sometime between the 2nd and 4th centuries.   **Subject Matter:**  The
Mahapratyakhyana contains a total of 142 verses, which describe the following
subject matter:  The text begins with a mangalacharan, paying homage to the
Tirthankaras, Jindevas, Siddhas, and Sannyamīs.  Following this, it states that
one should renounce all types of external and internal titles through mind,
speech, and body (1-5).  It states the equality of all beings, saying that one
should forgive all beings and that all beings should forgive them. It also
speaks of condemning, reproaching, and criticizing actions that are worthy of
condemnation, reproach, and criticism (6-8). It inspires the individual to
remain steadfast in detachment, knowing the nature of possessiveness. Regarding
the soul, it states that the soul is the renunciation, and that restraint and
yoga are also the soul (9-11).  The next verse condemns the non-observance of
the fundamental and secondary virtues. Upadhyay Shri Devendramuni Shastri, in
his book "Jain Agam Sahitya Manan aur Meemamsa," describes the subject matter of
the Mahapratyakhyana, interpreting this verse as follows: "The seeker should
renounce the fundamental and secondary virtues." However, looking at the
original text, it is clear that it does not call for the renunciation of the
fundamental and secondary virtues. Instead, it clearly states that due to
carelessness, I condemn all those virtues (qualities) that I have not been able
to cultivate in the fundamental and secondary virtues (12).  While discussing
the soul, it states that the soul is the individual's own (self), while all
other substances are not theirs but external. It also states that due to the
chain of suffering, one should renounce the connections in three ways:  1. Jain
Agam Sahitya Manan aur Meemamsa, page 390.  C

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhUmikA 17 mAna caukI zatAbdI se pUrva kI racanA hai  /  niSkarSa rUpa meM yahI
kahA jA sakatA hai ki mahApratyAkhyAna dUsarI se cauthI zatAbdI ke madhya kabhI
nirmita huA hai  /  viSayavastu- mahApratyAkhyAna meM kula 142 gAthAe~ haiM,
jinameM nimnalikhita viSaya vastu kA vivaraNa upalabdha hotA hai grantha kA
prArambha maMgalAcaraNa se karate hue sarvaprathama tIrthaMkaroM, jinadevoM,
siddhoM aura saMyamiyoM ko praNAma kiyA gayA hai tatpazcAt bAhya evaM abhyantara
samasta prakAra kI upadhi kA mana, vacana evaM kAyA - tInoM prakAra se tyAga
karane kA kathana hai (1-5)  /  samasta jIvoM ke prati samatAbhAva kA kathana
karate hue kahA gayA hai ki sabhI jIvoM ko maiM kSamA karatA hU~ aura samasta
jIva mujhe kSamA kare  /  sAtha hI nindA karane yogya karma kI nindA, garhA
karane yogya karma kI garhA aura AlocanA karane yogya karma kI AlocanA karane kA
bhI kathana hai (6-8)  /  isameM vyakti ko yaha preraNA dI gaI hai ki vaha
mamatva ke svarUpa ko jAnakara nirmamatva meM sthira rahe  /  AtmA ke viSaya meM
kahA gayA hai ki AtmA hI pratyAkhyAna hai tathA saMyama va yoga bhI AtmA hI hai
(9-11)  /  agrima gAthA meM mUlaguNoM aura uttaraguNoM kI samyak paripAlana
nahIM karane kI nindA kI gaI hai  /  upAcArya zrI devendramuni zAstrI ne apane
grantha 'jaina Agama sAhitya manana aura mImAMsA' meM mahApratyAkhyAna kI
viSayavastu kA varNana karate hue isa gAthA kA artha isa prakAra kiyA hai-
"sAdhaka ko mUlaguNa aura uttaraguNoM kA pratikramaNa karanA cAhie  / " mUla
graMtha ko dekhane se jJAta hotA hai ki vahA~ mUlaguNoM aura uttaraguNoM kA
pratikramaNa karane ke lie nahIM kahA gayA hai varan vahA~ to spaSTa likhA hai
ki pramAda ke dvArA mUlaguNoM aura uttaraguNoM meM jina (guNoM) kI maiM jo
ArAdhanA nahIM kara pAyA hU~, usa sabakI nindA karatA hU~ (12)  /  AtmA viSayaka
nirUpaNa karate hue kahA gayA hai ki AtmA hI vyakti kI sva (apanI ) hai, zeSa
samasta padArtha usake nahIM hokara para (bAhya) haiM  /  sAtha hI duHkha
paramparA ke kAraNa saMyoga sambandhoM ko trividha rUpa se tyAga 1. jaina Agama
sAhitya manana aura mImAMsA, pRSTha 390  /  C

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 18: The Great Liberation  This chapter provides guidance on how to
conduct oneself (13-17). It states that one should criticize, condemn, and
censure those who engage in unrestrained behavior, ignorance, and falsehood, as
well as all types of offenses, known and unknown (18-20). Maya (illusion) is
described as something to be abandoned, not embraced. A virtuous person should
criticize all their own faults, abandoning Maya and pride (21-23).  The chapter
then explores the question of who attains liberation. It states that only those
who have shed the three poisons of Maya, etc., achieve liberation. These three
poisons – falsehood, Maya, and attachment – are described as harmful, hindering
the attainment of enlightenment and leading to endless cycles of rebirth if they
remain in the mind during the time of meditation (24-29). Therefore, a vigilant
seeker strives to eliminate these poisons from their heart to escape rebirth
(24-29).  The chapter also advises disciples to confess all their actions and
inactions to their guru, and then follow the penance prescribed by the guru
(30-32). It emphasizes the need to abandon all forms of violence, falsehood,
stealing, sexual misconduct, and attachment in thought, word, and deed. It
highlights the 8.4 million species in the world, stating that a soul is born in
each of these species countless times (33-40).  The chapter praises the concept
of "Pandit-maran" (wise death), stating that parents, siblings, children, etc.,
are neither protectors nor saviors. Each soul acts alone and experiences the
consequences of its actions alone. Individuals should remember the suffering in
hell, heaven, and the human realm, as well as the death that awaits even in the
heavenly realm, and strive for a wise death. A wise death can end countless
cycles of rebirth (41-50).  The chapter concludes by discussing the harmful
nature of attachment to food, sensual pleasures, and possessions, urging their
abandonment (51-60). It also advises the abandonment of anger, pride, Maya,
greed, attachment, hatred, and thirst, and encourages the practice of the five
great vows (61-70).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 18 mahApaccakkhANa paiNNayaM karane kA upadeza hai (13 - 17)  /  nindA, garhA,
aura AlocanA kisakI ko jAe, isake viSaya meM kahA gayA hai ki asaMyama, ajJAna
aura mithyAttva Adi kI nindA aura garhA tathA jJAta-ajJAta sabhI prakAra ke
aparAdhoM kI AlocanA karanI cAhie ( 18-20 )  /  mAyA ke viSaya meM kahA gayA hai
ki vaha apanAne ke lie nahIM varan tyAgane ke lie hotI hai  /  sAdhu ko apane
samasta doSoM kI AlocanA mAyA evaM mada tyAgakara karanI cAhie (21-23)  /  kauna
jIva siddha hotA hai ? isa viSayaka nirUpaNa karate hue kahA gayA hai ki vahI
jIva siddha hotA hai, jisane mAyA Adi tIna zalyoM kA mocana kara diyA ho  /
mithyA, mAyA aura nidAna ina tInoM zalyoM ko aniSTakArI batalAte hue kahA hai ki
samAdhikAla meM yadi ye zalya mana meM upasthita rahate haiM to bodhi kI prApti
durlabha ho jAtI hai, pariNAma svarUpa jIva anantasaMsArI ho jAtA hai  /  isalie
sajaga sAdhaka punarjanma se bacane ke lie ina zalyoM ko hRdaya se nikAla
pheMkatA hai (24-29)  /  isameM ziSya ke lie yaha upadeza hai ki use apane dvArA
kiye gaye sabhI kArya akArya ko guru ke samakSa yathArUpa kaha denA cAhie aura
phira guru jo prAyazcita de, usakA anusaraNa karanA cAhie (30-32)  /  sabhI
prakAra kI prANa-hiMsA, asatyavacana, adattagrahaNa, abrahmacarya aura parigraha
ko mana, vacana va kAyA se tyAgane kA bhI nirdeza hai| loka meM yoniyoM ke
caurAsI lAkha mukhya bheda batalAte hue kahA hai ki jIva pratyeka yoni meM
anantabAra utpanna hotA hai (33 - 40)  /  paNDitamaraNa ko prazaMsanIya batAte
hue kahA gayA hai ki mAtA-pitA, bhAI-bahina, putra-putrI ye sabhI na to kisI ke
rakSaNakartA hai aura na hI trANadAtA | jIva akelA hI karma karatA hai aura
usake phala ko bhI akelA hI bhogatA hai  /  vyakti ko cAhie ki vaha naraka-loka,
tiyaMca-loka aura manuSya-loka meM jo vedanAe~ haiM unheM tathA devaloka meM jo
mRtyu hai, una sabakA smaraNa karate hue paNDitamaraNa pUrvaka mare  /  kyoMki
eka paNDita - maraNa saiMkaDoM bhava-paramparA kA anta kara detA hai ( 41-50 )
/  sacitta AhAra, viSayasukha evaM parigraha Adi kI vizeSa carcA karate hue
inheM du:khadAyaka batalAyA hai tathA inakA tyAga karane kI preraNA dI gaI hai
(51-60 )  /  sAtha hI krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, rAga, dveSa aura tRSNA ko
tyAgane tathA mahAvratoM kA pAlana karane kA upadeza hai (61-70 )  /

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  The following chapters contain details related to the six
*leshyas* and meditation. It is stated here that the *Krishna*, *Neela*, and
*Kapota* *leshyas*, as well as the *Aarta* and *Roudra* meditations, are all to
be abandoned. However, the *Tejo*, *Padma*, and *Shukla* *leshyas*, and the
*Dharma* and *Shukla* meditations are to be adopted. Details of the six
*leshyas* and meditation are also found in the *Sthananga*, *Samavayanga*,
*Uttaraadhyayana*, and other *Agam* texts (71-72).  It is stated that a
*sanayati* (practitioner) who is endowed with *Triguti*, *Panchasamiti*, and
*Dwadash Bhavana* should protect the five great vows (73-76). It is also stated
that *Guptis* and *Samitis* are the protectors and saviors of an individual
(77).  Not everyone is capable of achieving the purpose of the soul. Who is
capable of achieving the purpose of the soul? It is stated that if a virtuous
person is free from desire and self-aware, they can achieve the purpose of their
soul even in a cave, on a rocky surface, or in an inaccessible place (80-84).
While describing the merits and demerits of *Akrit-yoga* and *Krit-yoga*, it is
stated that even if someone is learned, but has outward-facing senses, a broken
character, is unrefined, and has not practiced in the past, they will inevitably
fall into the lower realms at the time of death. Such a person is unable to bear
the consequences of their actions at the time of death. However, a person who is
not attached to worldly pleasures, does not desire future rewards, and whose
passions have been destroyed, will not be disturbed even when facing death, but
will embrace it with eagerness (85-93). This is indeed the state of *Samadhi-
maran* (death in meditation). Every Jain follower desires to die in this way,
free from all kinds of afflictions, abandoning attachment and aversion, in the
final moments of their life.  What is the cause of *Samadhi-maran*? It is stated
that neither a bed of grass nor a bed of soft earth is the cause of *Samadhi-
maran*. 1. *Sthananga* 1/191, 3/1/58, 3/4/515, 4/1/60. 2. *Samavayanga* 4/20,
6/31. 3. *Uttaraadhyayana* 30/35, 31/8.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhUmikA Age kI gAthAoM meM SaTlezyAoM aura dhyAna se sambandhita vivaraNa hai,
yahA~ kahA gayA hai ki kRSNa, nIla aura kapota lezyA tathA Arta aura raudra
dhyAna-ye sabhI tyAgane yogya haiM, kintu tejo, padma aura zukla lezyA tathA
dharma aura zukla dhyAna-ye apanAne yogya haiM  /  SaTlezyAoM aura dhyAna kA
vivaraNa sthAnAMga', samavAyAMgara, uttarAdhyayana Adi Agama granthoM meM bhI
milatA hai (71-72) /  trigupti, paMcasamiti aura dvAdaza bhAvanA se upasampanna
hokara saMyatI pA~ca mahAvratoM kI rakSA karane kA kathana kiyA gayA hai (73-76)
/  sAtha hI gaptiyoM aura samitiyoM ko hI vyakti kA zaraNadAtA evaM trANadAtA
batalAyA hai (77) /  AtmA ke prayojana ko siddha karane meM sabhI samartha nahIM
haiN| AtmA ke prayojana ko siddha karane meM kauna samakSa hai? yaha kathana
karate hue kahA hai ki yadi sadpuruSa anAkAMkSa aura AtmajJa haiM to ve parvata
ko guphA, zilAtala yA durgama sthAnoM para bhI apanI AtmA ke prayojana ko siddha
kara lete haiM (80-84) /  akRta-yoga aura kRta-yoga ke guNa-doSa kI prarUpaNA
karate hue kahA hai ki koI zruta sampanna bhale hI hoM, kintu yadi vaha
bahirmukhI indriyoM vAlA, chinna cAritra vAlA, asaMskArita tathA pUrva meM
sAdhanA nahIM kiyA huA hai to vaha mRtyu ke samaya meM avazya adhora ho jAtA
hai| aisA vyakti mRtyu ke avasara para paroSaha sahana karane meM asamartha hotA
hai| kintu jo vyakti viSayasukhoM meM Asakta nahIM rahatA, bhAvIphala kI AkAMkSA
nahIM rakhatA tathA jisake kaSAya naSTa ho gae hoM, vaha mRtyu ko sAmane
dekhakara bhI vicalita nahIM hotA, apitu tatparatApUrvaka mRtyu kA AliMgana kara
letA hai (85-93)  /  vastutaH yahI samAdhimaraNa kI avasthA hai| pratyeka jaina
matAvalambI apane jIvana ke antima kSaNa meM samasta prakAra ke kleSoM se mukta
ho, rAga-dveSa ko tyAga karake isI prakAra marane kI abhilASA karatA hai|
samAdhimaraNa kA hetu kyA hai ? isa viSaya meM kahA gayA hai ki na to tRNoM kI
zayyA hI samAdhimaraNa kA kAraNa hai aura na prAsuka bhUmi ho, 1. sthAnAMga
1/191, 3/1/58, 3/4/515, 4/1/60  /  2. samavAyAMga 4/20, 6/31  /  3.
uttarAdhyayana 30/35, 31/8  /

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  20 The soul that is pure, in other words, the one who has
conquered the four *kṣayās*, is the one who is the *saṁstāraka*.  The path that
the seeker enters into the path of Dharma is given the utmost importance and it
is said that the seeker should not abandon that path even at the end of his life
(101-106). The Dharma as exemplified by the Jina Devas is described as
beneficial in the text and it is said that one should have faith in it with
mind, speech and body, because this is the path to liberation (107). In the
following verses, mentioning various types of renunciations, it is said that the
seeker should renounce all prohibited actions in three ways: those that are not
worthy of being thought about by the mind, those that are not worthy of being
spoken by speech, and those that are not worthy of being done by the body
(108-110). The five positions of Arhant, Siddha, Acharya, Upadhyaya and Sadhu
are considered worthy of worship and it is said that by remembering them, a
person should abandon his sinful actions (114-120). While discussing the subject
of pain, it is said that if a Muni takes refuge, he will suffer. All beings are
advised to bear pain with equanimity (121-122). The text describes the solitary
conduct of the Jina Kalpi Muni as being taught by the Jinas and praised by the
learned, and the *abhyudyatamaraṇa* served by the Jina Kalpis is praised
(126-127). It is said to the seeker that he should destroy the four *kṣayās*,
the three *gāravas*, the objects of the five senses and the *pariṣahas* and
raise the flag of *ārādhana* (134).  While advising to cross the ocean of the
world and destroy the karmas, it is said: "O seeker! If you wish to cross the
ocean of the world, do not think, "I will live for a long time or I will die
soon." Instead, think that liberation is possible only by being vigilant towards
knowledge, vision, character and Jina's words (135-136). Upadhyay Shri Devendra
Muni Shastri, in his book 'Jain Agam Sahitya Manan aur Meemamsa', while
describing the subject matter of *Mahapratyakhyana*,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 20 mahApaccakkhANapaiNNayaM apitu jisakA mana vizuddha hotA hai, dUsare zabdoM
meM kaheM to jisane caturvidha kaSAyoM para vijaya prApta kara lI ho, vahI AtmA
saMstAraka hotI sAdhaka jisa eka pada se dharma mArga meM praviSTa hotA hai usa
pada ko sarvAdhika mahattva diyA gayA hai aura kahA hai ki sAdhaka ko cAhie ki
vaha jIvana ke antima samaya taka bhI usa pada kA parityAga nahIM kare (101-106)
/  _grantha meM jinendra devoM dvArA prarUpita dharma ko kalyANakArI batalAyA
hai tathA kahA hai ki mana, vacana evaM kAyA se isa para zRddhA rakhanI cAhie
kyoMki yahI nirvANa prApti kA mArga hai (107) /  Age kI gAthAoM meM vividha
prakAra ke tyAgoM kA ullekha karate hue kahA gayA hai ki jo mana se cintana
karane yogya nahIM hai, vacana se kahane yogya nahIM haiM, tathA zarIra se jo
karane yogya nahIM haiM, una sabhI niSiddha karmoM kA sAdhaka trividha rUpa se
tyAga kare (108-110) /  arahaMta, siddha, AcArya, upAdhyAya aura sAdhu-ina pA~ca
padoM ko pUjanIya mAnA gayA hai tathA kahA hai ki inakA smaraNa karake vyakti
apane pApa karmoM kA tyAga kare (114-120) /  vedanA viSayaka carcA karate hue
kahA hai ki yadi muni Alambana karatA hai to use duHkha prApta hotA hai| samasta
prANiyoM ko samabhAvapUrvaka vedanA sahana karane kA upadeza diyA gayA haiM
(121-122) /  grantha meM jinakalpI muni ke ekAkIvihAra ko jinopadiSTa aura
vidvatjanoM dvArA prazaMsanIya batalAyA hai tathA jinakalpiyoM dvArA sevita
abhyudyatamaraNa ko prazaMsanIya kahA hai (126-127) /  sAdhaka ke lie kahA hai
ki vaha cAra kaSAya, tIna gArava, pA~co indriyoM ke viSaya tathA parISahoM kA
vinAza karake ArAdhanArUpI patAkA ko phaharAe (134)  /  _ saMsAra samudra se
pAra hone aura karmoM ko kSaya karane kA upadeza dete hue kahA gayA hai ki he
sAdhaka ! yadi tU saMsArarUpI mahAsAgara se pAra hone kI icchA karatA hai to
yaha vicAra mata kara ki "maiM cirakAla taka jIvita rahU~ athavA zIghra hI mara
jaauu|" apitu yaha vicAra kara ki jJAna, darzana, cAritra aura jinavacana ke
prati sajaga rahane para hI mukti sambhava hai (135-136)  /  upAcArya zrI
devendra muni zAstrI ne apane grantha 'jaina Agama sAhitya manana aura mImAMsA'
meM mahApratyAkhyAna kI viSayavastu kA varNana karate hue

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The introduction states that a seeker attains liberation in seven to eight
births through inferior and medium *āradhanā*. Upon examining the original text,
it is found that although the text mentions four *skandhas* of *āradhanā* -
knowledge, perception, conduct and austerity, and its three types - excellent,
medium and inferior in verse 137, but in verse 138, which indicates the fruit of
*āradhanā*, it is said that the wise seeker who performs the excellent practice
of these four *skandhas* is liberated in the same birth. Again, in verse 139, it
is said that the wise seeker who performs the inferior practice of all four
*āradhanā* *skandhas* attains liberation after seven to eight births by
undergoing pure transmigration. Here, the text does not mention the fruit of
medium *āradhanā* anywhere. We would like to know from the Muni Ji on what basis
he has said that the one who performs medium *āradhanā* attains liberation after
seven to eight births. If he has made this statement on the basis of any other
text, then it is a different matter, otherwise there is no such indication in
the present work to confirm his conclusion. If we have to find out the fruit of
medium *āradhanā*, then we will have to find it out only between the fruit
obtained from excellent *āradhanā* and inferior *āradhanā*, i.e. it will have to
be assumed that a person can attain liberation in a minimum of two births and a
maximum of six births through medium *āradhanā* based on the purity of the
results. In *Bhagawti Āradhanā* also, while stating the fruit of medium
*āradhanā*, it has been said that the patient man attains liberation in the
third birth by performing medium *āradhanā*. Again, the statement of *Bhagawti
Āradhanā* regarding the fruit of excellent and inferior *āradhanā* is similar to
the great rejection. The text concludes by saying that the patient man also
attains death and the cowardly man also, but it is only the one who attains
death with patience that dies meaningfully. Because death in meditation is the
best death. The last verse says that the restrained seeker who attains death by
following this rejection properly will either be a celestial being or a *siddh*
after death. 1. Jain Āgama Literature Contemplation and Interpretation, pp.
390-391. 2. *Bhagawti Āradhanā*, verse 2155. 3. *Bhagawti Āradhanā*, verse 2154,
2156.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhUmikA likhA hai ki sAdhaka jaghanya va madhyama ArAdhanA se sAta-ATha bhava
meM mokSa prApta karatA hai|' mUla grantha ko dekhane para jJAta hotA hai ki
yadyapi grantha kI gAthA 137 meM ArAdhanA ke cAra skandhoM-jJAna, darzana,
cAritra aura tapa kA tathA usake tIna prakAroM-utkRSTa, madhyama aura jaghanya
kA ullekha huA hai, kintu ArAdhanA phala ko sUcita karane vAlI gAthA 138 meM
yaha kahA gayA hai ki jo vijJa sAdhaka ina cAra skandhoM kI utkRSTa sAdhanA
karatA haiM, vaha usI bhava meM mukta ho jAtA hai| punaH gAthA 139 meM kahA gayA
hai ki jo vijJa sAdhaka cAroM ArAdhanA skandhoM kI jaghanya sAdhanA karatA hai
vaha zuddha pariNamana kara sAta-ATha bhava karake mukta ho jAtA hai  /  yahA~
grantha meM madhyama ArAdhanA ke phala kA kahIM koI ullekha nahIM huA hai| hama
muni jI se jAnanA cAheMge ki unhoMne kisa AdhAra para yaha kahA hai ki madhyama
ArAdhanA vAlA sAta-ATha bhava karake mokSa prApta karatA hai| kisI anya grantha
ke AdhAra para unhoMne yaha kathana kiyA ho to alaga bAta hai anyathA prastuta
kRti meM aisA koI saMketa nahIM hai jisase unake niSkarSa kI puSTi kI jA ske|
yadi hameM madhyama ArAdhanA ke phala ko nikAlanA hai to utkRSTa ArAdhanA aura
jaghanya ArAdhanA se prApta phala ke madhya hI nikAlanA hogA arthAt yaha mAnanA
hogA ki vyakti madhyama ArAdhanA se pariNAmoM kI vizuddhi ke AdhAra para kama se
kama do bhava aura adhika se adhika chaha bhava meM mukti prApta kara sakatA
hai| bhagavatI ArAdhanA meM bhI madhyama ArAdhanA kA phala batAte hue yaho kahA
hai ki madhyama ArAdhanA karake dhIra puruSa tIsare bhava meM mukti prApta
karate haiN| punaH utkRSTa aura jaghanya ArAdhanA ke phala ke viSaya meM bhI
bhagavatI ArAdhanA kA kathana mahApratyAkhyAna ke samAna ho hai| grantha kA
samApana yaha kaha kara kiyA gayA hai ki dhairyavAn bhI mRtyu ko prApta hotA hai
aura kAyara puruSa bhI, kintu maranA usI kA sArthaka hai jo dhIratApUrvaka
maraNa ko prApta hotA hai| kyoMki samAdhimaraNa hI uttama maraNa hai| antima
gAthA meM kahA gayA hai ki jo saMyamI sAdhaka isa pratyAkhyAna kA samyak prakAra
se pAlana kara mRtyu ko prApta hoMge, ve mara kara yA to vaimAnika deva hoMge yA
siddha hoNge| 1. jaina Agama sAhitya manana aura mImAMsA, pR0 390-391  /  2.
bhagavatI ArAdhanA, gAthA 2155  /  3. bhagavatI ArAdhanA, gAthA 2154, 2156  /

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Mahapranihana Prakirnaka and Other Agama Texts Comparative Description

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApratyAkhyAna prakIrNaka aura anya Agama grantha tulanAtmaka vivaraNa

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
24 Mahapaccakkhannapainnanyam Comparison of Subject Matter Many verses of
'Mahapratyakhyana' are found as they are in 'Maran Vibhakti'. Due to fear of
expansion, all those verses are not being written here, only their serial
numbers are being written. Mahapratyakhyana Verse Number Maran Vibhakti Verse
Number 210 211' 217 220 120, 222 223 101 226 110, 227 111, 228 112, 229 230 231
2322 233 0 2343 35 36 235 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 40 0 0 1 1. Here the word
'Anagaram' is used in place of 'Niragaram'. 2-3. Here in the fourth verse there
is only verbal difference, the Bhagavat is the same.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 24 mahApaccakkhANapaiNNayaM viSayavastu kI tulanA 'mahApratyAkhyAna' kI aneka
gAthAe~ 'maraNa vibhakti' meM jyoM kI tyoM prApta hotI hai| vistAra bhaya ke
kAraNa yahA~ una sabhI gAthAoM ko nahIM likhakara mAtra unake kramAMka hI likhe
jA rahe haiN| mahApratyAkhyAna gAthA kramAMka maraNa vibhakti gAthA kramAMka 210
211' 217 220 120, 222 223 101 226 110, 227 111, 228 112, 229 230 231 2322 233 0
ls d llh s 2343 35 36 G 235 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 40 0 0 1 1. yahA~
'nirAgAraM' ke sthAna para 'aNAgAraM' zabda prayukta huA hai| 2-3. yahA~ cauthe
caraNa meM mAtra zAbdika bhinnatA hai, bhAgavata to samAnatA hI hai|

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Mahapratyakhyana Gatha Number Maran Vibhakti Gatha Number 2431 244 245 246 247
2482 249 2513 252 253 254 255 256 257 258 259 262 2604 2615 2646 263 1. Here in
the first stanza, instead of 'Ekko Karei Kamma', the words 'Ekko Jayai Marai Ya'
have been used. 2. In this Gatha, there is a partial difference in the form of
the word, but the Bhagavat similarity is there. 3. Here in the third stanza,
instead of 'Uvwavae', the word 'Paribhogena' has been used. 4. Here in the
second stanza, instead of 'Atta Rodai', the word 'Suppasattani' has been used.
5. Here in the second stanza, instead of 'Dhamm-Sukkai', the word 'Suppasattani'
has been used, but the Bhavagat similarity is there. 6. Here, instead of
'Sacchviou', the word 'Appamatto' has been used.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApratyAkhyAna gAthA kramAMka maraNa vibhakti gAthA kramAMka 2431 244 245 246
247 2482 249 2513 252 253 254 255 256 257 258 259 262 2604 2615 2646 263 1.
yahA~ prathama caraNa meM 'ekko karei kamma' ke sthAna para 'ekko jAyai marai
ya' -ina zabdoM kA prayoga huA hai| 2. isa gAthA meM zabda rUpa meM AMzika
bhinnatA hai, kintu bhAgavata samAnatA hai| 3. yahA~ tIsare caraNa meM 'uvavAe'
ke sthAna para 'paribhogeNa' zabda prayukta huA hai| 4. yahA~ dUsare caraNa meM
'aTTa rodAI ke sthAna para 'suppasatthANi' zabda prayukta huA hai| 5. yahA~
dUsare caraNa meM 'dhamma-sukkAI' ke sthAna para 'supasatthANi' zabda prayukta
huA hai, lekina bhAvagata samAnatA hai| 6. yahA~ 'saccaviU' ke rathAna para
'appamatto' zabda prayukta huA hai|

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Mahapaccakkhannapainnanyam Mahapratyakhyana Gatha Kranka Maran Vibhakti Gatha
Kranka. 266 75 76 265 77 267 268 78 79 2692 27.3 2717 2721 273 274 275 276. 277
2787 279 280 281 282 284 284 2850 2879 1. Here, in the first two stanzas, there
is a partial verbal difference. 2. Here, the word 'Dhaniyamaiddham' is used in
place of 'Khuhiumaraddham'. Here, the word 'Girikkuhar-kandaragaya' is used in
place of 'Panbhar-kandaragaya'. 4-5. Here, although there is a partial
difference in the form of the word, there is a similarity in the meaning. 6.
Here, the word 'Jivon' is used in place of the words 'Visayasuhasamuiyo Appa',
but there is a similarity in the meaning. 7. Here, the word 'Suhbhaavo' is used
in place of 'Maipuuvvam'. 8. Here, the word 'Aloyana' is used in place of
'Arahana'. 9. Here, the word 'Marantas' is used in place of 'Mano Jass'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccakkhANapaiNNayaM mahApratyAkhyAna gAthA kramAMka maraNa vibhakti gAthA
kramAMka . 266 75 76 265 77 267 268 78 79 2692 27.3 2717 2721 273 274 275 276.
277 2787 279 280 281 282 284 284 2850 2879 1. yahA~ prathama do caraNa meM
AMzika rUpa se zAbdika bhinnatA hai| 2. yahA~ 'khuhiumAraddhaM' ke sthAna para
'dhaNiyamAiddhaM' zabda prayukta huvA hai| yahA~ 'panbhAra-kaMdaragayA' ke
sthAna para 'girikuhara-kaMdaragayA' zabda prayukta huA hai| 4-5. yahA~ zabda
rUpa meM AMzika bhinnatA hote hue bhI bhAvagata samAnatA hai| 6. yahA~
'visayasuhasamuio appA' zabdoM ke sthAna para 'visayasuhaparAio jIvoM zabda
prayukta hue haiM, kintu bhAvagata samAnatA hai  /  7. yahA~ 'maipuvvaM' ke
sthAna para 'suhabhAvo' zabda prayukta huA hai| 8. yahA~ 'ArAhaNA' ke sthAna
para 'AloyaNA' zabda prayukta huA hai| 9. yahA~ 'maNo jassa' ke sthAna para
'maraMtassa' zabda prayukta huA hai|

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
27 Mahaprayatana Gatha - Introduction Maran Vibhakti Gatha Number 288 289 290
2911 .. 293 . . . 295 294 105 108 297 298 2992 110 302 111 112 114 120 121 126
127 3043 308 309 3104 311 3125 . wwwwwww wor Mor rmirmirmmmm :5921 314 315. 316
317 139 318 138 321 141 3227 323 1.. These Gathas have partial verbal and
emotional differences.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 27 mahApratyAna gAthA - bhUmikA maraNa vibhakti gAthA kramAMka 288 289 290 2911
.. 293 . . . 295 294 105 108 297 298 2992 110 302 111 112 114 120 121 126 127
3043 308 309 3104 311 3125 . wwwwwww wor Mor rmirmirmmmm :5921 314 315. 316 317
139 318 138 321 141 3227 323 1.. ina gAthAoM meM AMzika rUpa se zAbdika evaM
bhAvagata bhinnatA haiM  /

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 28 ## The Great Renunciation  This is a comparative description of where and
in what form the verses of the Great Renunciation, apart from the death-verse,
are available in the Mágam literature, the miscellaneous literature, the
exegetical literature of the Agamas, and the Digambara tradition in the form of
Agamas.  [1] I make this renunciation to the Tirthankaras, the supreme
conquerors. To all the Jinas, the Siddhas, and the Sanjayas. (Great
Renunciation, Verse 1)  [2] To the Siddhas, free from all suffering, I bow. I
accept the Jina-path, the path of liberation, as my own. (Great Renunciation,
Verse 2)  [3] Whatever is wrong, I condemn it in all respects. I renounce the
three types of attachment, completely and without reservation. (Great
Renunciation, Verse 3)  [4] I renounce the external, the internal, and the
intermediate, the body and all its parts, with my mind, speech, and body, in all
three ways. (Great Renunciation, Verse 4)  [5] I renounce attachment, bondage,
passion, greed, hatred, anger, fear, sorrow, and the cycle of birth and death.
(Great Renunciation, Verse 5)  [6] I renounce anger, prejudice, deceit, and
pride. Whatever is said to me, I renounce it in all three ways. (Great
Renunciation, Verse 6)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 28 mahApANapaiNNayaM maraNavibhakti ke atirikta mahApratyAkhyAna kI gAthAe~
mAgama sAhitya, prakIrNaka sAhitya, Agamika vyAkhyA sAhitya evaM digambara
paraMparA meM Agama rUpa meM mAnya granthoM meM kahA~ evaM kisa rUpa meM
upalabdha haiM, isakA tulanAtmaka vivaraNa isa prakAra hai [1] esa karemi
paNAmaM titthayarANaM aNuttaragaINaM  /  savvesiM ca jiNANaM siddhANaM
saMjayANaM ca  //  ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 1) [2] savvadukkhappahINANaM
siddhANaM arahao namo  /  sadahe jiNapannattaM paccakkhAmi ya pAvagaM  /  /  (
mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 2) [3] jaM kiMci vi duccariyaM tamahaM niMdAmi
savvabhAveNaM  /  sAmAiyaM ca tivihaM karemi savvaM niraagaarN.|| (
mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 3) [4] bAhirabhaMtaraM uvahiM sarIrAdi sabhoyaNaM  /
maNasA : vaya kAeNaM savvaM tiviheNa vosire  //  ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 4)
[5] rAgaM baMdhaM paosaM ca harisaM doNabhAvayaM  /  ussugattaM bhayaM sogaM
raimaraiM ca vosire  //  (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 5) T6] roseNa paDiniveseNa
akayaNNuyayA taheva sddhyaae| jo me kiMci vi bhaNio tamahaM tiviheNa khAmemi  /
/  ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 6) -

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Other Agama texts [1] I offer obeisance to the Jina, the Lord of the Universe,
the great one, the increasing one. I offer obeisance to all the Jinas, the
leaders of the congregations, and all the Tirthankaras. || _(Moolachar, Gatha
108)' [2] (i) I offer obeisance to the Siddhas, the Arhats, who are free from
all suffering. I offer obeisance to the Jina's teachings, which are like a
blazing fire. || (Aturpratyakhyan, Gatha 17) (ii) I offer obeisance to the
Siddhas, the Arhats, who are free from all suffering. I offer obeisance to the
Jina's teachings, which are like a blazing fire. || (Moolachar, Gatha 37) [3]
(i) Whatever wrong I have done, I repent for it in all three ways. I offer
atonement in all three ways, completely free from attachment. || (Niyamsar,
Gatha 103) (ii) Whatever wrong I have done, I repent for it in all three ways. I
offer atonement in all three ways, completely free from attachment. ||
(Moolachar, Gatha 39) [4] I repent for all three ways, with my body, speech, and
mind, for all the wrong I have done, both internally and externally. ||
(Moolachar, Gatha 40) [5] (i) I repent for attachment, hatred, and delusion, for
arrogance, lowliness, fear, sorrow, and anger. || (Aturpratyakhyan, Gatha 23)
(ii) I repent for attachment, hatred, and delusion, for arrogance, lowliness,
fear, sorrow, and anger. || (Moolachar, Gatha 44) [6] (i) Whatever I have spoken
out of anger, hatred, or delusion, I forgive it in all three ways. ||
(Aturpratyakhyan, Gatha 35) (ii) Whatever I have spoken out of anger, hatred, or
delusion, I forgive it in all three ways. || (Moolachar, Gatha 58) 1. Although
the words are not the same, the meaning is the same.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anya Agama grantha [1] esa karemi paNAma jiNavaravasahassa vddddhmaannss|
sesANaM ca jiNANaM. sagaNagaNadharANaM ca savvesi  /  /  _(mUlAcAra, gAthA 108)'
[2] (i) savvadukkhappahINANaM siddhANaM arahao nmo| saddahe jiNapannattaM
paccakkhAmi ya pAvagaM  //  (AturapratyAkhyAna, gAthA 17) (ii)
savvadukkhappahINANaM siddhANaM arahado nnmo| saddahe jiNapaNNattaM paccakkhAmi
ya pAvagaM  /  /  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 37) [3] (i) jaM kiMci me duccaritaM savvaM
tiviheNa vosare  /  sAmAiyaM tu tivihaM karemi savvaM NirAyAraM  /  /
(niyamasAra, gAthA 103) (ii) jaM kiMci me duccariyaM savvaM tivihaNa vosre|
somAiyaM ca tivihaM karemi savvaM NirAyAraM  //  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 39) [4]
bajjhanbhaMtaramuvahiM sarIrAiM ca sabhoyaNaM  /  maNasA vaci kAyeNa savvaM
tiviheNa vosare  //  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 40) [5] (i) rAgaM baMdhaM paosaM ca
harisaM dINabhAvayaM  /  ussugattaM bhayaM sogaM raiM araiM ca vosire  //
(AturapratyAkhyAna, gAthA 23) (ii) rAyabaMdhaM padosaM ca harisaM vINabhAvayaM
/  ussugattaM bhayaM sogaM radimaradi ca vosare  /  /  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 44) [6]
(i) rAgeNa va doseNa va jaM me akapannuyApamAeNaM  /  jo me kiMci vi bhaNio
tamahaM tiviheNa khAmemi  /  /  (AturapratyAkhyAna, gAthA 35) (ii) rAgeNa ya
doseNa ya jaM me akadaNhuyaM pamAdeNa  /  jo me kiMcivi bhaNio tamahaM savvaM
khamAvemi  //  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 58) 1. yahA~ zabda rUpa meM samAnatA nahIM hote
hue bhI bhAvagata samAnatA hai  /

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
30 [6] [4] I condemn what is condemnable, and I reproach what is reproachable. I
renounce everything that is harmful, as taught by the Jinas. [9]
Mahapachakkhana-panaya I forgive all living beings, may all living beings
forgive me. I have renounced all attachments, and I am established in the right
understanding. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 7) [20] (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 8)
Mamattam I recognize my own egotism and I have renounced it. I have renounced
all attachments and I am established in the right understanding.
(Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 10) Aaya My knowledge is my refuge, my conduct is my
refuge, my renunciation is my refuge, my restraint is my refuge, my yoga is my
refuge. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 11)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 30 [6] [4] niMdAmi niMdaNijjaM garahAmi ya jaM ca me garahaNijjaM  /  Aloemi ya
savvaM jiNehiM jaM jaM ca paDikuThaM  //  [9] mahApacakkhANapaNayaM khAmemi
savvajIve savve jIvA khamaMtu me  /  Asave vosirittANaM samAhi paDisaMdhae  /  (
mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 7 ) [20] ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 8 ) mamattaM
parijANAmi nimmamatte uvaTThio  /  AlaMbaNaM ca me AyA avasesaM ca vosire  //  (
mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 10 ) AyA AyA majjhaM nANe AyA me daMsaNe carite ya  /
paccavakhANe AyA me saMjame joge  //  ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 11 )

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Other Agam texts  Khamāmi savvajīvāṇam savve jīvā khamantu me. Mitti me
savvabhūdesu veraṁ majhaṁ ṇa keṇavi. (Mūlācāra, Māthā 43)' [8] (i) Nindāmi
nindanija garahāmi ya jaṁ ca me garhaṇijaṁ. Āloemi ya savvaṁ sabhitar bahirṁ
uvahiṁ. (Āturpratyākhyāna, Gāthā 32) (ii) Jindāmi jindanijaṁ garahāmi ya jaṁ ca
me garhaṇīyaṁ. Ālocemi ya savvaṁ sabbantar bahirṁ uhi. (Mūlācāra, Gāthā 55) [2]
(i) Mammattam parivajjāmi nimmamattam uvaḍhio. Ālambanaṁ ca me āyā, avasesaṁ ca
vosire. (Āturpratyākhyāna, Gāthā 24) (ii) Matti parivajjāmi
ṇimmamattimuvaṭṭhido. Ālambanaṁ ca me āda avasesaṁ ca vosire. (Niyamasāra, Gāthā
99) (iii) Matti parivajjāmi ṇimmamattimuvaṭṭhido. Ālambanaṁ ca me āda avasesāi
vosire. (Mūlācāra, Gāthā 45) [10] (i) Āyā hu mahaṁ nāṇe, āyā me dāsaṇe caritte
ya. Āyā paccakkhāṇe, āyā me saṁjame jōge. (Āturpratyākhyāna, Gāthā 25) (ii) Āda
khu majjha nāṇe āda me dāsaṇe caritte ya. Āda paccakkhāṇe āda me saṁvare jōge.
(Niyamasāra, Gāthā 100) (Bhāvapāhuḍ, Gāthā 58) (Mūlācāra, Gāthā 46) (ii) Āda khu
majjha nāṇaṁ āda me dāsaṇaṁ carittaṁ ca. Āda paccakkhāṇaṁ āda me saṁvaro jōgo.
(Samayasāra, Gāthā 277) 1. Only the first two lines are the same. 2. In
Mūlācāra, 'hu' is used instead of 'khu'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anya Agama.grantha khamAmi savvajIvANaM savve jIvA khamaMtu me| mittI me
savvabhUdesu veraM majhaM Na keNavi  //  (mUlAcAra, mAthA 43)' [8] (i) niMdAmi
niMdaNijja garahAmi ya jaM ca me garahaNijjaM  /  Aloemi ya savvaM sabhitara
bAhiraM uvhiN|| (AturapratyAkhyAna, gAthA 32) (ii) jiMdAmi jiMdaNijjaMgarahAmi
ya jaM ca me garahaNIyaM  /  Alocemi ya savvaM sabbhaMtarabAhiraM uhi  //
(mUlAcAra, gAthA 55) [2] (i) mamattaM parivajjAmi nimmamattaM uvddhio| AlaMbaNaM
ca me AyA, avasesaM ca vosire  //  (AturapratyAkhyAna, gAthA 24) (ii) matti
parivajjAmi nnimmmttimuvtttthido| AlaMbaNaM ca me AdA avasesaM ca vosare  /  /
(niyamasAra, gAthA 99) (iii) matti parivajjAmi NimmamattimuvaTThido  /
AlaMbaNaM ca me AdA avasesAI vosare  /  /  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 45) [10) (i) AyA hu
mahaM nANe, AyA me dasaMNe caritte ya  /  AyA paccakkhANe, AyA me saMjame joge||
(AturapratyAkhyAna, gAthA 25) (ii) AdA khu majjha NANe AdA me daMsaNe caritte ya
/  AdA paccakkhANe AdA me saMvare joge  /  /  (niyamasAra, gAthA 100)
(bhAvapAhuDa, gAthA 58) (mUlAcAra, gAthA 46) (ii) AdA khu majjha NANaM AdA me
daMsaNaM carittaM ca  /  AdA paccakkhANaM AdA me saMvaro jogo  /  /
(samayasAra, gAthA 277) 1. mAtra pahale do caraNa hI samAna hai| 2. mUlAcAra meM
'khu' ke sthAna para 'hu' hai|

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
3 Mahafamyaksama [11] Mūlaguṇe uttaraguṇe je me nā rāhiya pamāeṇam. Te savve
nindāmi paḍikkame āgamissāṇam. (Mahāpratyākhyāna, Gāthā 12) [12] Ekko ham nathi
me koī, na cāhamavi kassai. Evam adīṇamaṇaso appāṇamaṇusāsae. (Mahāpratyākhyāna,
Gāthā 13) [13] Ekko uppajjaye. Jīvo, ekko ceva vivajjai. Ekkass hoī maraṇam ekko
sijjhai nīro. (Mahāpratyākhyāna, Gāthā 14) [14] Ekko karei kammam, phalam avi
tassekkō samaṇuhavī. Ekko jāyai marai ya, paraloayam ekkao jāi.
(Mahāpratyākhyāna, Gāthā 15) _ [15] Ekko me sāsao appā nāṇ-dansaṇalakkhaṇo. Sesā
me bāhira bhāvā savve saṃjogalakkhaṇā. . (Mahāpratyākhyāna, Gāthā 16).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 3 mahAphamyAksAmA [11] mUlaguNe uttaraguNe je me nA'rAhiyA pamAeNaM  /  te
savve niMdAmi paDikkame AgamissANaM  //  ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 12) [12] ekko
haM nathi me koI, na cAhamavi kssii| evaM adINamaNaso appANamaNusAsae  /  (
mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 13) [13] ekko uppajjae. jIvo, ekko ceva vivajjaI  /
ekkassa hoi maraNaM ekko sijjhai nIro  /  ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 14) [14]
ekko karei kammaM, phalamavi tassekkao samaNuhavai  /  ekko jAyai marai ya,
paraloyaM ekkao jAi  //  ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 15) _ [15] ekko me sAsao appA
naann-dNsnnlkkhnno| sesA me bAhirA bhAvA savve sNjoglkkhnnaa|| . (
mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 16 ).

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**[11]** (i) The *Mūlaguṇa* and *Uttara-guṇa* are not mine, nor are they mine in
the sense of being my own. I have come to know them all through the *Parikkama*
of the *Āgama*. (Āturapratyākhyāna, Gāthā 29) (ii) The *Mūlaguṇa* and *Uttara-
guṇa* are not mine, nor are they mine in the sense of being my own. I have come
to know them all through the *Parikkama* of the *Āgama*. (Mūlācāra, Gāthā 50)
**[12]** (i) I am one, I have no other, nor am I anyone else. I do not see that
which is I, nor do I see that which is not I. (Candravedhyaka, Gāthā 161) (ii) I
am one, I have no other, nor am I anyone else. Rather, the Dharma of the Jina is
the seed that is sown within me. (Ārādhanāprakaraṇa, Gāthā 64)  **[13]** (i) One
living being dies, one living being lives on its own. One's death is born, one's
birth is extinguished. (Niyamasāra, Gāthā 101) (ii) One living being dies, one
living being is reborn. One's death is born, one's birth is extinguished.
(Mūlācāra, Gāthā 47)  **[14]** One performs actions, one wanders in the two
worlds. One is born, one dies, thus is the nature of these things. (Mūlācāra,
Gāthā 701)  **[15]** (i) My own breath is the *Jñāna-darśana-saṃjñā*. All other
external feelings are the marks of *saṃyoga*. (Candravedhyaka, Gāthā 160)
(Āturapratyākhyāna, Gāthā 27) (Ārādhanāprakaraṇa, Gāthā 67) (Āturapratyākhyāna
(1), Gāthā 29) (i) My own breath is the *Jñāna-darśana-saṃjñā*. All other
external feelings are the marks of *saṃyoga*. (Niyamasāra, Gāthā 102) (iii) My
own breath is the *Jñāna-darśana-saṃjñā*. All other external feelings are the
marks of *saṃyoga*. (Mūlācāra, Gāthā 48)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anya Agama grantha [11] (i) mUlaguNa uttaraguNe je me nA''rAhiyA pamAeNaM  /
tamahaM savvaM nide paDikkame AgamissANaM  //  (AturapratyAkhyAna, gAthA 29)
(ii) mUlaguNauttaraguNe jo me NArAhio pamAeNa  /  tamahaM savvaM Nide paDikkame
AgamamissANaM  //  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 50) [12] (i) ekko haM natthi me koI, natthi
vA kassaI ahaM  /  na taM pekkhAmi jassAhaM, na taM pekkhAmi jo mhN||
(candravedhyaka, gAthA 161) (11) ego haM natthi me koI, na yA'hamavi kssii|
varaM dhammo jiNakkhAo etthaM majjha biijjao  //  - (ArAdhanAprakaraNa, gAthA
64) [13] (i) ego ya maradi jIvo ego ya jIvadi sayaM  /  egassa jAdi maraNaM ego
sijjhadi nniiro|| (niyamasAra, gAthA 101) (ii) eo ya marai jIvo eo ya uvvjji|
eyassa jAimaraNaM eo sijjhai nniiro| (mUlAcAra, gAthA 47) [14] ekko karei kammaM
ekko hiMDadi ya dohasaMsAre  /  ekko jAyadi maradi ya evaM citehi eyattaM  //
(mUlAcAra, gAthA 701) [15] (i) ego me sAsao appA naanndNsnnsNjuo| sesA me bAhirA
bhAvA savve saMjogalakkhaNA  //  (candravedhyaka, gAthA 160) (AturapratyAkhyAna,
gAthA 27) (ArAdhanAprakaraNa, gAthA, 67) (AturapratyAkhyAna (1), gAthA 29) (i)
ego me sAsado appA nnaanndsnnlkkhnno| sesA me bAhirA bhAvA savve saMjogalakkhaNA
//  (niyamasAra, gAthA 102) (iii) eo me sassao appA nnaanndNsnnlkkhnno| sesA me
bAhirA bhAvA savve saMjogalakkhaNA  //  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 48)

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mahapacchakkhagapadannaya [16] [17] Due to the **samyoga** (association)
root, the **jiva** (soul) experiences the chain of suffering. Therefore, all
**samyoga** relationships should be abandoned in all three ways.
(Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 17) I condemn and despise the **asamsama**
(uncontrolled) mind, the **micchattā** (wrong belief), and the **mamatā**
(attachment) in all beings and non-beings. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 18) I praise
those who know the **Jina** (Victorious One) in all places, in all ways.
(Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 20) [18] [19] The **maya** (illusion) that has arisen
and that has not arisen is the path to be destroyed. It is not possible to
destroy it through praise, condemnation, or contempt. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha
21) Just as a child, playing, speaks both truth and falsehood, so too, the
**maya**-bound, deluded one praises. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 22) [20]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccakkhAgapaDaNNaya [16] [17] saMjogamUlA jIveNaM pattA dukkhprNpraa|
tamhA saMjogasaMbaMdhaM savvaM tiviheNa vosire  /  /  (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA
17) assaMjamamaNNANaM micchattaM savvao vi ya mamattaM  /  jIvesu ajIvesu ya taM
niMde taM ca garihAmi  //  ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 18) je me jANaMti jiNA
avarAhA jesu jesu ThANesu  /  te haM AloemI uvaDhio savvabhAveNaM  //  (
mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 20) [18] [19] uppannA'NuppannA mAyA aNumaggo nihaMtavvA
/  AloyaNa-niMdaNa-garihaNAhiM na puNa tti yA bIyaM  /  /  (mahApratyAkhyAna,
gAthA 21) jaha bAlo jaMpaMto kajjamakajjaM ca ujjuyaM bhaNai  /  taM taha
AloijjA mAyA-mayavippamukko u|| ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 22) [20] .

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Other Agam texts (iv) are characterized by knowledge-perception (naan-dasan),
while the rest are characterized by external emotions (bahira bhava) and all are
characterized by conjunction (sanjog).  (Bhaavpahuud, Gatha 59) [16] The root of
conjunction (sanjoy) is the cause of suffering (dukkha) and its continuation.
Therefore, the relationship of conjunction (sanjoy) is to be abandoned in all
three ways. (Moolaachaar, Gatha 41) [17] (i) I condemn and despise all that is
uncontrolled (assamjam), ignorant (an-naan), wrong (michchatt), and mine
(mammatt), both in living beings (jeevesu) and non-living beings (ajeevesu).
(Aaturpratyakhyan, Gatha 31) (i) I condemn and despise all that is uncontrolled
(assamjam), ignorant (an-naan), wrong (michchatt), and mine (mammatt), both in
living beings (jeevesu) and non-living beings (ajeevesu). (Moolaachaar, Gatha
51) [18] (i) Those who know the Jinas, who are free from attachment (avaraha),
in knowledge-perception (naan-dasan) and conduct (charitra), are all to be
praised (aaloe) in all ways. (Chandravedhyak, Gatha 132) (ii) Those who know the
Jinas, who are free from attachment (avaraha), in every place (jesu jesu
thaanesu), are all to be praised (aaloe) in all ways. (Maranvibhakti, Gatha 120)
(Aradhana Pataaka (1), Gatha 207) (Aaturpratyakhyan (2), Gatha 31) (ii) Those
who know the Jinas, who are free from attachment (avaraha), in every place (jesu
jesu thaanesu), are all to be praised (aaloe) in all ways. (Nishith Sutra
Bhashya, Gatha 3873) [19] The arisen (uppanna) and the not arisen (anuppanna),
the illusion (maya) that has enveloped (anumaggato), is to be destroyed
(nihantavva). Praising (aaloayan), condemning (nindan), and despising (garahan)
do not destroy it (te na poono vi biianti). (Nishith Sutra Bhashya, Gatha 3864)
[20] (i) Just as a child jumps and speaks about what is work (kajj) and what is
not work (akajj), so too, one should praise (aaloejja) the illusion (maya) and
the delusion (mosam) by understanding it. (Aaturpratyakhyan, Gatha 33) 1. In
those places (tesu tesu thaano) Aaturpratyakhyan. 2. In the world (loe) Aradhana
Pataaka.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anya Agama grantha (iv) ego me sassado AdA NANadaMsaNalakkhaNo  /  sesA me
bAhirA bhAvA savve saMjogalakkhaNA  /  /  (bhAvapAhuDa, gAthA 59) [16]
saMjoyamUlaM joveNa pattaM dukkhaparaMparaM  /  tamhA saMjoyasaMbaMdhaM savvaM
tiviheNa vosare  //  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 41) [17] (i) assaMjamamannANaM micchattaM
savvameva ya mamattaM  /  jIvesu ajIvesu ya taM niMde taM ca garihAmi  /  /
(AturapratyAkhyAna, gAthA 31) (i) assaMjamamaNNANaM micchattaM savvameva ya
mamatti  /  jIvesu ajIvesu ya taM Nide taM ca garihAmi  //  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 51)
[18] (i) je me jANaMti jiNA avarAhe nANa-dasaNa-caritte  /  te savve Aloe
uvaDhio savvabhAveNaM  //  (candravedhyaka, gAthA 132) (ii) je me jANaMti jiNA
avarAhA 'jesu jesu ThANesu  /  te haM AloemI uvaDhio savvabhAveNaM  //
(maraNavibhakti, gAthA 120) (ArAdhanApatAkA (1), gAthA 207) (AturapratyAkhyAna
(2), gAthA 31) (ii) je me jANaMti jiNA avarAhe jesu jesu ThANesu  /  tehaM
Aloetu uvaTTito savvabhAveNa  /  /  (nizIthasUtra bhASya, gAthA 3873) [19]
uppaNNANuppaNNA, mAyA aNumaggato NihaMtavvA  /  AloyaNa niMdaNa garahaNA te Na
pUNo vi biiyaMti  //  (nizIthasUtra bhASya, gAthA 3864) [20] (i) jaha bAlo
jaMpato kajjamakajjaM ca ujjuyaM bhaNai  /  taM taha AloejjA mAyAmosaM
pamottUNaM  //  _ (AturapratyAkhyAna, gAthA 33) 1. tesu tesu ThA0
AturapratyAkhyAna  /  /  2. loeu ArAdhanApatAkA  //

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Great Renunciation  [21] [22] The same upright and pure Dharma abides.
Nirvana is the ultimate goal, for the purified and the pure. (Mahapratyakhyana,
Gatha 23) One does not become purified with all the impurities, as it is said in
the teachings of the wise. One becomes purified of all impurities by abandoning
the impurities. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 24) Nor does the Tathagata, nor the
Asanga, nor the wicked one, nor the one who is angry, do anything wrong. The
wicked one, like a snake, is full of poison and anger. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha
27) [23]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccakkhANapaiNNayaM [21] [22] sohI ujjuyabhUyasya dhammo suddhassa
citttthii| nivvANaM paramaM jAi ghayasitte va pAvae  /  (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA
23) nahu sijjhaI sasallo jaha bhaNiyaM sAsaNe dhuyarayANaM  /
uddhariyasavvasallo sijjhai jovo dhuykileso|| (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 24 ) na
vi taM satthaM va visaM va duppautto va kuNai veyaalo| jaMtaM duppauttaM sappo
va pamAyao kuddho  //  ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 27) [23]

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[21] [22] (iii) Just as a child jumps and speaks straightforwardly about what is
to be done and what is not to be done, so too should one be aware of the
illusory world and be free from it. (Ogh Niyukti, Gatha 801) (Panchashak, Gatha
741) Other Agama Texts (1) Just as a child jumps and speaks straightforwardly
about what is to be done and what is not to be done, so too should one be aware
of the illusory world and be free from it. (Aradhana Pataka, Gatha 172)
(Aradhana Prakarana, Gatha 18) [23] (iv) Just as a child jumps and speaks
straightforwardly about what is to be done and what is not to be done, so too
should one be aware of the illusory world and be free from it. (Nishita Sutra
Bhashya, Gatha 3863) (v) Just as a child jumps and speaks straightforwardly
about what is to be done and what is not to be done, so too should one be aware
of the illusory world and be free from it. (Moolachar, Gatha 56) (vi) Just as a
child jumps and speaks straightforwardly about what is to be done and what is
not to be done, so too should one be aware of the illusory world and be free
from it. (Bhagavati Aradhana, Gatha 549) The Dharma of the righteous and pure
abides. Nirvana is the ultimate goal, like a white cloud. (Uttaraadhyayanasutra,
Gatha 3/12) One does not become aware of the self, just as it is said in the
scriptures, for those who are deluded. The self becomes aware when the delusion
is removed. (Aradhana Pataka, Gatha 218) (Aradhana Prakarana, Gatha 8) (Ogh
Nirukti, Gatha 798) The one who is deluded does not understand, just as a snake
is compared to one who is angry. (Aradhana Pataka, Gatha 215) (Aradhana
Prakarana, Gatha 5) (Ogh Niyukti, Gatha 803) (Panchashak, Gatha 731) 1. In
Aradhana Prakarana, 'sijjhai' is used instead of 'sujjhai'. 2. In Aradhana
Prakarana, 'pamayo' is used instead of 'pamaio', and in Ogh Nirukti, 'pamaino'
is used. 37

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [21] [22] (iii) jaha bAlo jaMpato kajjamakajjaM va ujjuyaM bhaNai  /  taM taha
AloejjA mAyAmayavippamukko u|| ( ogha niyukti, gAthA 801 ) (paMcAzaka, gAthA
741) anya Agama grantha (1) jaha bAlo jaMpato kajjamakajjaM ca ujjuyaM bhaNai  /
taM taha AloejjA mAyA-mayavippamukko ya  //  ( ArAdhanApatAkA, gAthA 172) (
ArAdhanAprakaraNa, gAthA 18) [23] (iv) jaha bAlo jaMpato, kajjamakajjaM ca
ujjuyaM bhaNati  /  taM taha AloejjA, mAyAmadavippakko u  //
(nizIthasUtrabhASya, gAthA 3863) (v) jaha bAlo jaMpato kajjamakajjaM ca ujjuyaM
bhaNadi  /  taha AloceyavvaM mAyA mosaM ca mottUNa  //  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 56 )
ujjuaM bhaNai  /  ca mottUNa  //  ( bhagavatI ArAdhanA, gAthA 549) (vi) jaha
bAlo jaMpato kajjamakajjaM va taha AlocedavvaM mAyAmosaM sohI ujjuyabhUyassa
dhammo suddhassa ciTThaI | nivvANaM paramaM jAi ghaya-sitta vva pAvae  //
(uttarAdhyayanasUtra, gAthA 3 / 12) na hu sujjhaI sasallo jaha bhaNiyaM sAsaNe
dhuyarayANaM  /  uddhariya sabvasallo 'sujjhai jIvo dhuyakileso  //  vitaM
satthaM va visaM jaMtaM va duppauttaM ( ArAdhanApatAkA, gAthA 218) (
ArAdhanAprakaraNa, gAthA 8) ( oghaniryukti, gAthA 798) duppautto va kuNai veyAlo
/  sappo va upamAio kuddho  //  va ( ArAdhanApatAkA, gAthA 215 ) (
ArAdhanAprakaraNa, gAthA 5) ( oghaniyukti, gAthA 803) (paMcAzaka, gAthA 731) 1.
ArAdhanAprakaraNa meM 'sujjhai' ke sthAna para 'sijjhai'  /  2. 'pamAio' ke
sthAna para ArAdhanAprakaraNa meM 'pamAyao' aura oghanirmukti meM 'pamAiNo'  /
37

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 18 A . . **Mahapacchakkasapahmanaya** [24] Whoever acts with **bhavasalla**
(attachment to worldly existence) without **anudhiya** (reflection) in this
**uttimaḍakāla** (precious time), is **dullhambahohiyattam** (hard to attain
liberation) and **ananta samsariyattam** (bound to endless cycles of rebirth).
(**Mahapratyakhyana**, Gatha 28) [25] They are rescued by the **garavarahita**
(free from pride) **mula** (root) of **punabbhavalaya** (merit-making), which is
**micchadasanasalla** (attachment to wrong views), **mayasalla** (attachment to
illusion), and **niyanam** (control). (**Mahapratyakhyana**, Gatha 29) [26] Even
a **kayapavo** (person) who is **aloiya** (ignorant) and **nidiu** (sleeping) in
the **gurusaghasa** (company of the wise) becomes **airegalahu** (light) and
**oharivabharu** (burdened) like a **bharavahu** (carrier of burdens).
(**Mahapratyakhyana**, Gatha 30) [27] I renounce all **paṇārambha** (beginning
of life), **aliyavayaṇa** (killing), **savvamadinnādāṇa** (taking what is not
given), and **abbambha pariggaha** (acceptance of gifts). (**Mahapratyakhyana**,
Gatha 33) [28] No creature is **dusiy** (polluted) by **rage**, **hatred**, or
**parinaamaṇa** (change). This is the **pacchakhaṇa** (understanding) that is
**bhavasuddha** (pure in essence) and should be **muṇeyavva** (meditated upon).
(**Mahapratyakhyana**, Gatha 36) [29] I would rather die a **balamarana** (death
of a fool) in the **tiriyammi** (animal realm) than be **mayaim** (deluded) and
**bahuyai** (attached to many things). Therefore, I will strive for a
**panḍiyamarana** (death of a wise person). (**Mahapratyakhyana**, Gatha 41)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 18 A . . mahApacnaksApahamNaya [24] jaM kuNai bhAvasallaM aNuddhiyaM
uttimddhkaalmmi| dullaMbhabohiyattaM aNaMtasaMsAriyattaM ca  //  (
mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 28) [25] to uddharaMti gAravarahiyA mUlaM
puNabbhavalayANaM  /  micchAdasaNasallaM mAyAsallaM niyANaM ca  //  (
mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 29) [26] kayapAvo vi maNUso Aloiya nidiu gurusagAse  /
hoi airegalahuo ohariyabharU vva bhAravaho  /  (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 30) [27]
savva pANAraMbhaM paccakkhAmI ya aliyavayaNaM ca  /  savamadinnAdANaM abbaMbha
pariggahaM ceva  //  ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 33) 28] rAgeNa va doseNa va
pariNAmaNa va na dUsiyaM jNtu| taM khalu paccakkhANaM bhAvavisuddhaM muNeyavvaM
// 36 //  ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 36 ) [29] uDDhamahe tiriyammi ya mayAiM
bahuyAI baalmrnnaaii| to tAI saMbharaMto paMDiyamaraNaM marIhAmi  //
(mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 41)

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Other Agam Texts  **24]**  Whoever considers attachment to be insignificant
in the *uttama-kāla* (the time of death), is bound to experience the difficulty
of liberation, endless transmigration, and so on.  (Ārādhanāpatākā, Gāthā 216)
(Ārādhanāprakaraṇa, Gāthā 6) (Oghanīyukti, Gāthā 804) (Pañcāśaka, Gāthā 732)
**25]**  He who is liberated from the root of *gāra-varahiyā* (worldly
attachments) and the cycle of *puṇabhava* (rebirth), is free from the attachment
to wrong belief, illusion, and ignorance. (Ārādhanāpatākā, Gāthā 217)
(Ārādhanāprakaraṇa, Gāthā 7) (Oghanīyukti, Gāthā 805)  **26]**  Even a human
being who is *āloyaṇa-nidao* (attached to worldly pleasures) and *guru-sayāse*
(attached to the teachings of the guru), becomes burdened with the weight of
*urauhiya-bhāro* (worldly burdens) in a short time. (Bhagavatī Ārādhanā, Gāthā
615)  **27]** (i) I renounce all *pāṇārambha* (actions that cause harm to living
beings), *aliyavayaṇa* (false speech), *sabamadinna-dāna* (gifts given with the
expectation of reward), and *mehuṇṇa-pariggaha* (sexual intercourse).
(Āturapratyākhyāna, Gāthā 13) (Ārādhanāpatākā, Gāthā 563) (Mūlācāra, Gāthā 41)
(ii) I renounce all *pāṇāivāyaṁ* (actions that cause harm to living beings),
*aliyavayaṇa* (false speech), *savyam-adatta-dāna* (gifts given without
expectation of reward), and *abbambha-pariggaha* (taking what is not given).
(Āvaśyakanīyukti, Gāthā 1284)  **28]**  Whatever is tainted by attachment,
aversion, or mental defilement, should be renounced. But what is pure in thought
and free from attachment should not be renounced. (Mūlācāra, Gāthā 645)  **29]**
(i) I renounce *udḍhamahe* (pride), *tiriyammi* (attachment to worldly things),
*vi-mayāṇi* (attachment to the body), *jīveṇa* (attachment to life),
*bālamaraṇāṇi* (death of a child), *daśana-nāṇasahagāo* (death of a learned
person), and *paṇḍiyamaraṇaṁ* (death of a wise person). (Āturapratyākhyāna,
Gāthā 47)  **Notes:**  1. In Ārādhanāprakaraṇa and Pañcāśaka, "uttama" is
replaced with "uttiṁ". 2. In Oghanīyukti, "rahiyā" is replaced with "rahitā". 3.
In Ārādhanāpatākā, "dinna-dānaṁ mehuṇṇa" is replaced with "ditta-dānaṁ
mehuṇaya", and in Mūlācāra, "dattā-dānaṁ mehuṇ" is used.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anya Agama grantha 24] jaM kuNai bhAvasallaM aNuddhiyaM 'uttmttrkaalmmi|
dullahabohIyattaM aNaMtasaMsAriyattaM ca  //  (ArAdhanApatAkA, gAthA 216)
(ArAdhanAprakaraNa, gAthA 6) (oghaniyukti, gAthA 804) (paMcAzaka, gAthA 732)
[25] to uddharaMti gAravarahiyA mUlaM puNabbhavalayANaM  /  micchAdasaNasallaM
mAyAsallaM niyANaM ca  /  /  (ArAdhanApatAkA, gAthA 217) (ArAdhanAprakaraNa,
gAthA 7) (oghaniyukti, gAthA 805) [26] kadapAvo vi maNusso AloyaNaNidao
gurusayAse  /  hodi acireNa lahuo urUhiya bhArovva bhAravaho  //  (bhagavatI
ArAdhanA, gAthA 615) [27] (i) savvaM pANAraMbhaM paccakkhAmi tti aliyavayaNaM ca
/  sabamadinnAdANaM mehuNNa pariggahaM ceva  /  (AturapratyAkhyAna, gAthA 13)
(ArAdhanApatAkA, gAthA 563) (mUlAcAra, gAthA 41) (ii) savvaM pANAivAyaM
paccakkhAI mi aliyavayaNaM ca  /  savyamadattAdANaM abbaMbha pariggahaM savvahA
//  (Avazyakaniyukti, gAthA 1284) [28] rAgeNa va doseNa va maNapariNAmeNa
dUsidaM jaM tu  /  taM puNa paccakkhANaM bhAvavisudaM tu NAdavvaM  //
(mUlAcAra, gAthA 645) [29] (i) uDDhamahe tiriyammi vi mayANi jIveNa bAlamaraNANi
/  dasaNa-nANasahagao paMDiyamaraNaM aNumarissaM  //  (AturapratyAkhyAna, gAthA
47) 1. ArAdhanAprakaraNa tathA paMcAzaka meM 'uttama" ke sthAna para 'uttima  /
2. oghaniyukti meM 'rahiyA' ke sthAna para rahitA'  /  3. ArAdhanApatAkA meM
dinnAdANaM mehuNNa' ke sthAna para "dittAdANaM mehuNaya' tathA mUlAcAra meM
'dattAdANaM mehUNa'  /

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mahapratyakhyana (Great Renunciation)  **[30]** The world is filled with
those who are attached to Maya, parents, and friends, for the sake of worldly
existence.  Many are born in the cycle of births and deaths, and they do not
find refuge or liberation. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 43)  **[31]** One creates
karma, another experiences the consequences of that karma. One lives in the
cycle of birth, old age, death, and the four gatis (states of existence).
(Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 44)  **[32]** I would rather die than endure the
suffering of birth and death, or the torments of hell. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha
45)  **[33]** One death, the death of ignorance, is the cause of many births.
That death must be embraced, so that one may become liberated.
(Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 49)  **[34]** In the cycle of existence, all four types
of beings are bound by karma. ... Through the accumulation of karma, the eight
types of karma groups are formed. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 51)  **[35]** Fish go
to the terrible hell because of their food.  One should not even think about
food with a mind that is not pure. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 54)  **[36]** Even
with thorns, fire, salt water, or thousands of blows, this living being cannot
be satisfied by sensual pleasures. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 55)  **[37]** By
destroying the net of delusion, by cutting the knot of karma, by breaking the
chains of birth and death, one becomes liberated from the cycle of existence.
(Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 66)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccakkhANapaiNNaya [30] mAyA-pii-baMdhUhi saMsAratthehiM pUrio logo  /
bahujoNivAsieNaM na ya te tANaM ca saraNaM ca  //  ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 43)
[31] ekko karei kamma ekko aNuhavai dukkayavivAgaM  /  ekko saMsarai jio jara-
maraNa-cauggaIguvilaM  //  (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 44). [32] ubveyaNayaM
jammaNa-maraNaM naraesu veyaNAo vaa| eyAiM saMbharaMto paMDiyamaraNaM marIhAmi
//  (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 45) [33] ekkaM paMDiyamaraNaM chidai jAIsayAi
bhuyaai| taM maraNaM mariyavvaM jeNa mao summao hoi  /  (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA
49) [34] bhavasaMsAre savve cauvvihA poggalA mae bddhaa| .. pariNAmapasaMgeNaM
aTThavihe kmmsNghaae.|| (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 51) [35] AhAranimittAgaM macchA
gacchaMti dArUNe narae  /  saccitto AhAro na khamo maNasA vi pattheuM  /
(mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 54) [36] taNa-kaTeNa va aggI lavaNajalo vA
naIsahassehiM  /  na imo jIvo sakko tippeuM kAma-bhogehiM  //
(mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 55) - [35] haMtUNa mohajAlaM chettUNa ya
aTTakammasaMkaliyaM  /  jammaNa-maraNarahaTTa bhettUNa bhavAo muccihisi  /  /
(mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 66 )

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Other Agam texts (4) Uddhamdho tiriyasi du kadani balamaranaani bahugani.
Dasananaanasahagado pandiamarana anumarisse. _(Moolachar, Gatha 75) 130] Maya
piya nhsa bhaya bhajja putta ya orasa. Nalant te mam tanaya luppantassa
sakkamuna. (Uttaradhyayanasutra, Gatha 6/3)' [31] Ekko karei kammam ekko hindadi
dihasansare. Ekko jayadi maradi ya evam citehi eyattam. (Moolachar, Gatha 701)
[3] Unveyamarana jaadimarana niraesu vedanao ya. Edani sambharato pandiamarana
anumarisse. (Moolachar, Gatha 76). [33] Egam pandiamarana chidai jaisayani
bahugani. Tam marana maridavvam jena sadam summadam hodi. (Moolachar, Gatha 117)
[34] Sansaracakkavalammi mae savvevi puggala bahuso. Aharida ya parinamide ya na
ya me gada titti. (Moolachar, Gatha 79)2. [35] Aharananimittam kira maccha
gacchanti sattami pudhavi. Sacchitto aharo na kappati manasaavi patthedu.
(Moolachar, Gatha 82) [36] (1) Tana-kathehi va aggi lavanajalo va naisahaassehi.
Na imo jivo sakko tippeu kam-bhogehi. (Aturpratyakhyana, Gatha 51). (ii)
Tinakattana va aggo lavanasamuddo nadisehaassehi. ... Na imo jivo sakko tippe,
kamabhogehi. (Moolachar, Gatha 80) [37] Hatun ragadose chettu ya atthakamma
sankhaliyam. Jammanamarana rahat bhettun bhavahi mucchihasi. (Moolachar, Gatha
90). 1-2. Here, although there are some differences in the form of words, there
is a similarity in the meaning.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 'anya Agama grantha (4) uDDhamadho tiriyasi du kadANi bAlamaraNANi bahugANi  /
dasaNaNANasahagado paMDiyamaraNaM aNumarisse  //  _(mUlAcAra, gAthA 75) 130]
mAyA piyA NhasA bhAyA bhajjA puttA ya orasA  /  nAlaM te mama tANAya luppantassa
sakammuNA  //  (uttarAdhyayanasUtra, gAthA 6/3)' [31] ekko karei kammaM ekko
hiMDadi dIhasaMsAre  /  ekko jAyadi maradi ya evaM citehi eyattaM  //
(mUlAcAra, gAthA 701) [3] unveyamaraNaM jAdImaraNaM Niraesu vedaNAo y| edANi
saMbharato paMDiyamaraNaM aNumarisse  /  /  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 76)  /  [33] egaM
paMDiyamaraNaM chidai jAIsayANi bahugANi  /  taM maraNaM maridavvaM jeNa sadaM
summadaM hodi  //  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 117) [34] saMsAracakkavAlammi mae savvevi
puggalA bhuso| AhAridA ya pariNAmidA ya Na ya me gadA tittii|| (mUlAcAra, gAthA
79)2 . [35] AhAraNimittaM kira macchA gacchaMti sattami puDhavi  /  saccitto
AhAro Na kappadi maNasAvi pattheduM  /  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 82) [36] (1) taNa-
kaThehi va aggI lavaNajalo vA naIsahassehiM  /  na imo jIvo sakko tippeuM kAma-
bhogehiM  //  (AturapratyAkhyAna, gAthA 51). (ii) tiNakaTThaNa va aggo
lavaNasamuddo NadIsahassehiM  /  ... Na imo jIvo sakko tippe, kAmabhogehiM  //
(mUlAcAra, gAthA 80) [37] hatUNa rAgadose chettUNa ya aTThakammasaMkhaliyaM  /
jammaNamaraNarahaTa bhettUNa bhavAhi muccihasi  //  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 90) . 1-2.
yahA~ zabda rUpa meM kucha bhinnatA hote hue bhI bhAvagata samAnatA hai  /

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[38] I renounce the five great evils: anger, pride, deceit, greed, and lust. I
will protect myself from them with great care. (Mahaprayakhyana, Gatha 68) [39]
Black, blue, red, and yellow are the four colors of the body. I renounce them
and protect myself with great care. (Mahaprayakhyana, Gatha 71) [40] White is
the color of the body, and righteousness is the color of the soul. I am well-
established and will protect myself with great care. (Mahaprayakhyana, Gatha 72)
If you, O good man, are in a difficult situation, like a mountain pass, and are
bound by your possessions, how can you be free? (Mahaprayakhyana, Gatha 81) [42]
How can you be free by relying on the support of others, by the strength of your
connections, or by the power of the next world? (Mahaprayakhyana, Gatha 82) [43]
The words of the Jina are incomparable, sweet to the ears, and liberating to
those who hear them. By them, you can be free in this very life.
(Mahaprayakhyana, Gatha 83)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [38] mahApaJcaslANapaigNayaM kohaM mANaM mAyaM lohaM pijjaM taheya dosaM ca  /
caiUNa appamatto rakkhAmi mahavvae pNc|| (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 68) [39] kiNhA
nIlA kAU lesA jhANAI atttt-rodaaii| parivajjito gutto rakkhAmi mahavvae paca  //
(mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 71) [40] teU pamhA sukkA lesA jhANAI dhmm-sukkaaii|
uvasaMpanno jutto rakkhAmi mahabvae paMca  //  ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 72) jai
tAva te supurisA girikaDaga-visama-duggesu  /  dhiidhaNiyabaddhakacchA sAhitI
appaNo attuN|| ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 81) [42] kiM puNa aNagArasahAyageNa
aNNoNNasaMgahabaleNaM  /  paraloeNaM sakkA sAheuM appaNo aTTha?  //  (
mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 82) [43] jiNavayaNamappameyaM mahuraM kaNNAhuiM
suNaMteNaM  /  sakkA hu sAhumajjhe sAheuM appaNo attuN|| (mahApratyAkhyAna,
gAthA 83)

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Other Agama Texts  [38] Anger, pride, deceit, greed, and hatred are indeed the
five types of passions. Delusion, aversion, attachment, laughter, and sorrow are
the six types of defects. (Uttaradhyayana Niyukti, Verse 240)  [39] (i) The
three Lesyas (psychic colors) - black, blue, and grey - are all impure. With
these three, the soul is reborn in the lower realms again and again.
(Uttaradhyayana Sutra, Verse 34/56) (ii) The three Lesyas - black, blue, and
grey - are all inauspicious. The one who has attained equanimity abandons them
and attains the ultimate state of spiritual awakening. (Bhagavati Aradhana,
Verse 1902)  [40] (i) The three Lesyas - white, yellow, and red - are all
auspicious. With these three, the soul is reborn in the higher realms again and
again. (Uttaradhyayana Sutra, Verse 34/57) (ii) The three Lesyas - white,
yellow, and red - are all auspicious. The one who has attained equanimity
gradually adopts them and attains the ultimate state of spiritual awakening.
(Bhagavati Aradhana, Verse 1903)  [41] If the courageous ascetics dwell in the
difficult caves of the Sakyakula mountain, they become the best companions and
supporters of the wise. (Aradhana Pataka, Verse 89)  [42] (i) What is the use of
the companionship of the ascetics and their mutual support, if one cannot attain
one's own ultimate goal in the next world? (Aradhana Pataka, Verse 90) (i) What
is the use of the companionship of the ascetics and their mutual support, if one
cannot attain the supreme goal in the next world? (Nishitha Sutra Bhashya, Verse
3913) (ii) What is the use of the companionship of the ascetics if one cannot
perform penance and worship the Sangha when it is in distress? (Bhagavati
Aradhana, Verse 1554)  [43] The infinite, sweet, and melodious words of the Jina
can indeed help one cross the ocean of worldly existence in the company of the
ascetics. (Aradhana Pataka, Verse 91)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anya Agama granya [38] koho mANo mAyA lobhe pijje taheva dose ya  /  micchatta
vea arai rai hAsa soge ya duggaMchA  //  (uttarAdhyayananiyukti, gAthA 240) [39]
(i) kiNhA nIlA kAU tinni vi eyAo ahammalesAo  /  eyAhi tihi vi jIvo duramaI
uvavajjaI bahuso  /  /  (uttarAdhyayanasUtra, gAthA 34/56) (ii) kiNhA nIlA kAo
lessAo tiNNi appstthaao| pajahai virAyakaraNo saMvegaMNuttaraM patto  //
(bhagavatI ArAdhanA, gAthA 1902) [40] (1) teU pamhA sukkA tinni vi eyAo
dhmmlesaao| eyAhi tinni vi jIvo suggaiM uvavajjaI bhuso|| (uttarAdhyayanasUtra,
gAthA 34/57) (ii) teo pamhA sukkA lessAo tiNi vi du pstthaao| paDivajjei ya
kamaso saMvegaMNuttaraM patto  //  (bhagavatI ArAdhanA, gAthA 1903) [41] jai
tAva sAkyAkulagirikaMdara-visamakaDaga-duggesu  /  sAhiti uttamaThe
dhiidhaNiyasahAyagA dhIrA  //  (ArAdhanApatAkA, gAthA 89) [42] (i) kiM puNa
aNagArasahAyageNa annonnasaMgahabaleNa  /  paraloie na sakkA sAheuM appaNo
alaiM?  //  (ArAdhanApatAkA, gAthA 90) (i) kiM puNa aNagArasahAyaeNa
aNNoNNasaMgahabaleNa  /  paraloiyaM Na sakkai, sAheuM uttimo aTTho  //
(nizIthasUtra bhASya, gAthA 3913) (ii) kiM puNa aNayArasahAyageNa kIrayaMta
paDikammo  /  saMghe olaggaMte ArAdhedu Na sakkejja  /  (bhagavatI ArAdhanA,
gAthA 1554) [43] (i) jigavayaNamappameyaM mahuraM kannAmayaM suNiteNaM  /  sakkA
hu sAhumajjhe saMsAramahoyahi tariu  /  /  (ArAdhanApatAkA, gAthA 91) Ana 1.
yahA~ AMzika rUpa se zAbdika bhinnatA hai  /

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mahapacchakkhaṇapaiṇṇaya [4] Dhirpurisappaṇṇattāṁ sappurisaniseviyaṁ
paramaghoraṁ | Dhannā silāyalagayā sāhitī appaṇo aṭuṁ | (Mahāpratyākhyāna, Gāthā
84) [45] [46] Puvvamākārijogo samāhikāmo ya maraṇakālammi | Na bhavaī
parīsahaṣaho visayasuhasamuiyo appā || (Mahāpratyākhyāna Gāthā 86) Puci kārijogo
sāmahīkāmo ya maraṇakālammi | Sa bhavaī parīsahaṣaho visayasuhanivāriyo appā ||
(Mahāpratyākhyāna, Gāthā 87) Indiyasuhasāulao ghora parīsahaparāiya parajjho |
Akayaparīkammā kīvo mujjhai ārahaṇakāle || (Mahāpratyākhyāna, Gāthā 93) [47]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccakkhANapaiNNaya [4] dhIrapurisapaNNattaM sappurisaniseviyaM
paramaghoraM  /  dhannA silAyalagayA sAhitI appaNo aTuM  /   /
mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 84) [45] [46] puvvamakAriyajogo samAhikAmo ya
maraNakAlammi  /  na bhavai parIsahasaho visayasuhasamuio appA  //
(mahApratyAkhyAna gAthA 86) puci kAriyajogo sAmAhikAmo ya maraNakAlammi  /  sa
bhavai parIsahasaho visayasuhanivArio appA  //  (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 87)
iMdiyasuhasAulao ghorpriishpraaiyprjjho| akayaparikamma kIvo mujjhai ArAhaNAkAle
//  (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 93 ) : [47]

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Other Agam Texts  **(1)** Jinavayanam appameyya, mahurum kannahudi
sunneteṇam. Sakka hu sahum majjhe, samsara mahorayahi tariu. (Nishīthasūtra
Bhāṣya, Gāthā 3914)  **(iii)** Jinavayanam amida bhūdam mahurum kannahudi
sunanteṇam. Sakka hu sangha majjhe sahedu uttamam aṭṭha. (Bhagavati Ārādhanā,
Gāthā 1555) [44] **(i)** Dhirpurisapanṇattaṃ sappurisaniseviyaṃ paramaghoram.
Dhannā silāyalagaya sāhaṃti uttamam aṭṭha. (Samstāraka, Gāthā 92) **(ii)**
Dhirpurisapanṇatte sappurisanisevie aṇasanammi. Dhannā silāyalagaya nirāvayakkhā
nivjjanți. (Ārādhanāpatākā, Gāthā 88) **(ii)** Dhirpurisapanṇatte,
sappurisaniśevite paramaramme. Dhannā silātalagatā nirāvayakkhā nivjjanți.
(Nishīthasūtra Bhāṣya, Gāthā 3911) **(iv)** Dhirpurisapanṇattaṃ
sappurisaniśeviaṃ uvanamittā. Dhannā nirāvayakkhā santhāragaya nisajjanți.
(Bhagavati Ārādhanā, Gāthā 1671) [45] **(i)** Evamkārijogo puriso marane
uvatṭhie sante. Na bhavai parisahasho angesu parisahanivaae. (Candraveḍhyaka,
Gāthā 119) **(ii)** Puvvamkāridajogo samādhikāmo taha maranakāle. ṇ bhavadī
parisahasho visayasuhe mucchido jīvo. (Bhagavati Ārādhanā, Gāthā 193) [46]
**(i)** Puvvi kāriyadjogo samāhikāmo ya maranakālammi. Bhavai ya parisahasho
visayasuhanivārio appā. (Candraveḍhyaka, Gāthā 120) **(ii)** Puvvaṃ kāridajogo
samādhikāmo taha maranakāle. Hodi parisahasho visayasuhparammūho jīvo.
(Bhagavati Ārādhanā, Gāthā 195) Indiyasuhsāulo ō ghoraparisahparājiya parasso.
Akadpariyammi kīvo mujjhadi ārāhanākāle. (Bhagavati Ārādhanā, Gāthā 191) [47]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anya Agama grantha (1) jiNavayaNamappameyaM, mahuraM kaNNAhUti surNeteNaM  /
sakkA hu sAhumajjhe, saMsAra mahoryAhi tariu | (nizIthasUtra bhASya, gAthA 3914)
(iii) jiNavayaNamamidabhUdaM mahuraM kaNNAhudi suNaMteNa  /  sakkA hu
saMghamajje sAhedu uttamaM aTTha  //  ( bhagavatI ArAdhanA, gAthA 1555 ) [44]
(i) dhIrapurisapaNNattaM sappurisaniseviyaM paramaghoraM  /  dhannA silAyalagayA
sAhaMtI uttamaM aTTha  //  ( saMstAraka, gAthA 92 ) (ii) dhIrapurisapannatte
sappurisanisevie aNasaNammi | dhannA silAyalagayA nirAvayakkhA nivajjaMti  //  (
ArAdhanApatAkA, gAthA 88 ) (ii) dhIrapurisapaNNatte, sappurisaNisevite
paramaramme  /  dhaNNA silAtalagatA NirAvayakkhA NivajjaMti  //  (nizIthasUtra
bhASya, gAthA 3911)(iv) dhIrapurisapaNNattaM sappurisaNiseviyaM uvaNamittA  /
dhaNNA NirAvayakkhA saMthAragayA NisajjaMti  //  (bhagavatI ArAdhanA, gAthA
1671) [45] (i) evamakArijogo puriso maraNe uvaTThie saMte  /  na bhavai
parIsahasaho aMgesu parIsahanivAe  //  ( candravedhyaka, gAthA 119 ) (ii)
puvvamakAridajogo samAdhikAmo tahA maraNakAle  /  Na bhavadi parIsahasaho
visayasuhe mucchido jIvo  //  ( bhagavatI ArAdhanA, gAthA 193 ) [46] (i) puvvi
kAriyajogo samAhikAmo ya maraNakAlammi  /  bhavai ya parIsahasaho
visayasuhanivArio appA || (candravedhyaka, gAthA 120 ) (ii) puvvaM kAridajogo
samAdhikAmo tahA maraNakAle  /  hodi parIsahasaho visayasuhaparammUho jIvo  //
(bhagavatI ArAdhanA, gAthA 195 ) iMdiyasuhasAulao ghoraparIsahaparAjiyaparasso
/  akadapariyamma kIvo mujjhadi ArAhaNAkAle  /  (bhagavatI ArAdhanA, gAthA 191 )
[ 47 ] p

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
46 [48] [49] One should not be ashamed of the **mahapachcharakha** due to
**lajjaigara** or **bahussuyama** or **duccariya**. One who does not speak of it
to the **guru** is not a **arahga**.  (Mahapraytyakhyan, Gatha 94) There is no
**tanamo** or **santharo** as a cause, nor is there any **fasuya** earth. The
**visuddho mano** is the only **santharo** for him. (Mahapraytyakhyan, Gatha 96)
What the **anani** eats with many **vasakodhi**, the **nani** eats with
**usasa** alone. (Mahapraytyakhyan, Gatha 101) [50] [51] There is no **uvagga**
in death, the twelve **suyakkhandho** are not possible. With a
**samatthacitta**, one can overcome all **anuchita** **dhana**.
(Mahapraytyakhyan, Gatha 102) [52] When one is born, one should generate
**sanvega** with **viyarayama**. That will be his **nana** by which he will be
free from **viraga**. (Mahapraytyakhyan, Gatha 103)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46 [48] [49] mahApaccarakhAnapAina lajjAi gAraveNa ya bahussuyamaeNa vA vi
duccariyaM  /  je na kahiti gurUNaM na hu te ArAhagA hoti  //
(mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 94) na vi kAraNaM taNamao saMthAro, na vi ya phAsuyA
bhuumii| appA khalu saMthAro hoi visuddho maNo jassa  //  ( mahApratyAkhyAna,
gAthA 96) jaM annANI kammaM khavei bahuyAhiM vAsakoDIhiM  /  taM nANI tihiM
gutto khavei uusaasmittennN|| ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 101) [50] [51] nahu
maraNammi uvagge sakkA bArasaviho suykkhNdho| savvo aNuciteuM dhaMtaM pi
samatthacitteNaM  /  /  (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 102) [52] ekkammi vi jammi pae
saMvegaM kuNai viiyraayme| taM tassa hoi nANaM jeNa virAgattaNamuvei  /  /
(mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 103)

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[48] Other Agama texts Shame and excessive hearing, or even misconduct. Those
who do not speak of the Gurus, I do not consider them to be followers.
(Uttaraadhyayana Niyukti, Gatha 217) [49] (i) There is no cause for the
destruction of the body, nor is there any cause for the destruction of the
earth. It is the self that is the cause of destruction, and it is the pure
conduct that is the cause of destruction. (Samstaraka, Gatha 53) (ii) There is
no cause for the destruction of the body, nor is there any cause for the
destruction of the community. It is the evil one who is the cause of
destruction, and it is the death of the evil one that is the cause of
destruction. (Bhagavati Aradhana, Gatha 1667) 1 [50] (i) What the ignorant one
eats with many thousands of lives, the wise one eats with a single breath.
(Samstaraka, Gatha 114) (Tithogali, Gatha 1223) (Panchavastu, Gatha 564) (ii)
What the ignorant one eats with thousands of lives, the wise one eats with a
single breath. (Pravachana Sara, Gatha 3/38) 51 (i) In death, the twelve kinds
of happiness are not possible. All wealth is useless, even with a strong mind.
(Chandravedhyaka, Gatha 96) (ii) In that place and time, the twelve kinds of
happiness are not possible. All wealth is useless, even with a strong mind.
(Atur Pratyakhyana, Gatha 59) [52] (i) When one experiences a single birth, one
develops aversion and attachment. One attains knowledge by which one becomes
free from aversion and attachment. (Visheshaavashyak Bhashya, Gatha 3577) (ii)
When one experiences a single birth, one develops aversion and attachment. One
attains knowledge by which one becomes free from aversion and attachment.
(Chandravedhyaka, Gatha 93)  1. Only one line is the same. 2. In Tithogali,
"bahuyahi" is replaced by "bahumahi". 3. In Tithogali, "tihi" is replaced by
"tihi".  47.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [48] anya Agama grantha lajjAi gAraveNa ya bahussuyamaeNa vA'vi duccariaM  /
je na kahaMti gurUNaM na hu te ArAhagA huMti  //  (uttarAdhyayananiyukti, gAthA
217 ) [49] (i) na vi kAraNaM taNamao saMthAro na vi ya phAsuyA bhUmI  /  appA
khalu saMthAro havai visuddhe caritami  //  ( saMstAraka, gAthA 53) (ii)
NavikAraNaM taNAdosaMthAro Na vi ya saMghasamavAo  /  sAdhussa saMkilesaMtassa
ya maraNAvasANammi || (bhagavatI ArAdhanA, gAthA 1667 ) 1 [50 ] (i) jaM annANI
kammaM khavei bahuyAhiM vAsakoDIhi  /  taM NANI atihi gutto khavei UsAsametteNaM
//  ( saMstAraka, gAthA 114) (titthogAlI, gAthA 1223) ( paMcavastu, gAthA 564)
(ii) jaM aNNANI kammaM khavedi bhavasaya sahassakoDIhi  /  taM NANI tihi gutto
khavedi ussAsametteNaM  //  ( pravacanasAra, gAthA 3/38) 51 (i) na hu maraNammi
uvagge sakkA bArasaviho suyakkhaMdho  /  savvo aNuciteuM dhaNiyaM pi
samatthacitteNaM  //  ( candravedhyaka, gAthA 96) (ii) na hu tammi desakAle
sakko bArasaviho sukkhaMdho  /  savvo aNuciu dhaNiyaM pi samatthacitteNaM  //  (
Atura pratyAkhyAna, gAthA 59 ) [52] (i) ekkammi vi jammi pate saMvegaM kuNati
vIyarAgamate  /  taM tassa hoti NANaM jeNa virAgattaNamuveti  //
(vizeSAvazyakabhASya, gAthA 3577) (ii) ekkammi vi jammi pae saMvegaM vaccae
naro'bhikkhaM  /  taM tassa hoi nANaM jeNa virAgattaNamuvei  //  (
candravedhyaka, gAthA 93 ) 1. mAtra eka caraNa samAna hai  /  2. titthogAlI meM
'bahuyAhi' ke sthAna para 'bahumAhi'  /  3. titthomAlI meM 'tihi' ke sthAna para
'tihi'  /  47.

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[53] The **Mahapaccakkhannapainnna** (Great Renunciation) inspires **veerayame**
(heroic resolve) in one who is born into the **jammi** (worldly existence). With
**ajjhappayoga** (self-effort), he breaks through the **mohajala** (net of
delusion). (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 104) [54] The **Mahapaccakkhannapainnna**
inspires **veerayame** in one who is born into the **jammi**. The person who is
**abhikkham** (aware) of this **maran** (death) should die to it.
(Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 105) [55] First, I am a **samana** (ascetic), second, I
am **sanjao** (self-controlled) in all ways. I renounce everything that is
**padikula** (unwholesome) as taught by the **Jinas** (Victorious Ones).
(Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 108) [56] The **arahanta** (liberated ones) are my
refuge, the **arahanta** are my gods. I renounce everything that is **kittatta**
(unwholesome) to the **arahanta**. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 115) The **siddha**
(perfected ones) are my refuge, the **siddha** are my gods. I renounce
everything that is **kittatta** to the **siddha**. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 116)
The **ayariya** (venerable ones) are my refuge, the **ayariya** are my gods. I
renounce everything that is **kittatta** to the **ayariya**. (Mahapratyakhyana,
Gatha 117) [58]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [53] mahApaccakkhANapaiNNayaM ekkammi vi jammi pae saMvegaM kuNai viiyraayme|
so teNa mohajAlaM chidai ajjhappayogeNaM  /  /  ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 104)
[54] ekkammi vi jammi pae saMvegaM kuNai viiyraayme| vaccai naro abhikkhaM taM
maraNaM teNa mariyavvaM  /  (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 105) [55] samaNo mi tti ya
paDhama, bIyaM savvattha saMjao mi tti| savvaM ca vosirAmi jiNehiM jaM jaM ca
paDikuLeM  //  (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 108) [56] arahaMtA maMgalaM majjha,
arahaMtA majjha devyaa| arahate kittaittANaM vosirAmi tti pAvagaM  //
(mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 115) siddhA ya maMgalaM majjha, siddhA ya majjha devayA
/  siddhe ya kittaittANaM vosirAmi tti pAvagaM  /  /  (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA
116 ) AyariyA maMgalaM majjha, AyariyA majjha devyaa| Ayarie kittaittANaM
bosirAmi tti pAvagaM  // .. ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 117 } [58]

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(42. Other Agama texts [53] (6) One who generates enthusiasm in the path of
liberation from passions in one birth, he cuts the net of delusion by right
effort. (Visheshavashakabhashya, Gatha 3578) (ii) One who generates enthusiasm
in the path of liberation from passions in one birth, he cuts the net of
delusion by right effort. (Chandravedhyaka, Gatha 95) [54] (i) One who generates
enthusiasm in the path of liberation from passions in one birth, he goes to that
death, he is not to be released. (Chandravedhyaka, Gatha 94) (i) One who
generates enthusiasm in the path of liberation from passions in one birth, he
goes to that death, he is to be released. (Aturpratyakhyana, Gatha 60) (i) One
who generates enthusiasm in the path of liberation from passions in one birth,
he goes to that death, he is not to be released. (Bhagavati Aradhana, Gatha 774)
(iv) One who generates enthusiasm in the path of liberation from passions in one
birth, he goes to that death, he is not to be released. (Moolachar, Gatha 93)
[55] (i) I am a monk, I am completely liberated everywhere. I have renounced
everything, this is said in summary. (Aturpratyakhyana, Gatha 63) (i) I am a
monk, I am completely liberated everywhere. I have renounced everything, this is
said in summary. (Moolachar, Gatha 98) Arhats are my refuge, Arhats are my
refuge among the gods. I renounce everything for the sake of Arhats, this is my
refuge. (Aturpratyakhyana (1), Gatha 1) [57] Siddhas are my refuge, Siddhas are
my refuge among the gods. I renounce everything for the sake of Siddhas, this is
my refuge. (Aturpratyakhyana (1), Gatha 2) [58] Aaryas are my refuge, Aaryas are
my refuge among the gods. I renounce everything for the sake of Aaryas, this is
my refuge. (Aturpratyakhyana (1), Gatha 3)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (42 . anya Agama grantha [53] (6) ekkammi vi jammi pate saMvegaM kuNati
viitraagmte| so teNa mohajAlaM chindati ajjhappajogeNaM  /  /
(vizeSAvazyakabhASya, gAthA 3578) (ii) ekkammi vi jammi pae saMvegaM kuNai
vIyarAyamae  /  so teNa mohajAlaM khavei ajjhappajogeNaM  //  (candravedhyaka,
gAthA 95) [54] (i) ekkammi vi jaMmmi para saMvegaM viiyraagmggmmi| vaccai naro
abhikkhaM taM maraNaMte na mottavvaM  //  (candravedhyaka, gAthA 94) (i) egammi
vi jammi pae saMvegaM viiyraaymggmmi| gacchai naro abhikkhaM taM maraNaM teNa
mariyavvaM  //  (AturapratyAkhyAna, gAthA 60) (i) ekkammi vi jammi pade saMvegaM
vIdarAyamaggammi  /  gacchadi Naro abhikkhaM taM maraNaMte Na mottavvaM  //
(bhagavatI ArAdhanA, gAthA 774) (iv) ekkahmi bidiyahmi pade saMvego
vIyarAyamaggammi  /  vaccadi Naro abhikkhaM taM maraNaMte Na mottavvaM  //
(mUlAcAra, gAthA 93) [55] (i) samaNo ti ahaM paDhama, boyaM savvattha saMjao mi
tti  /  /  savvaM ca vosirAmI, eyaM bhaNiyaM smaasennN|| (AturapratyAkhyAna,
gAthA 63) (i) samaNo metti ya paDhamaM bidiyaM savvastha saMjado metti  /
savvaM ca vossarAmi ya evaM bhaNidaM samAseNa  //  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 98) arahaMtA
maMgalaM majjha, arahaMtA majjha devyaa| arahate kittaittANaM vosirAmi tti
pAvagaM  //  (AturapratyAkhyAna (1), gAthA 1) [57] siddhA ya maMgalaM majjha,
siddhA ya majjha devayA  /  siddha ya kittaittANaM vosirAmi ti pAvagaM  /
(AturapratyAkhyAna (1), gAthA 2) 58] AyariyA maMgalaM majjha, AyariyA majjha
devayA  /  Ayarie kittaittANaM vosirAmi ti pAvagaM  //  (AturapratyAkhyAna (1),
gAthA 3)

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mahapachpalanapainyam  **[59]** Ujjhaya mangalam majjha, ujjhaya majjha
devaya. Ujjhae kittaittanam vosirami tti pavagam. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 118)
**[60]** Sahu ya mangalam majjha, sahu ya majjha devaya. Sahu ya kittaittanam
vosirami tti pavagam. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 119)  **[61]** Arahanouvatto samm
kaun suvihio kallam. Ukkossam tinni bhave gantun labejja nevvana.
(Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 131)  **[62]** Samm me savvabhuyesu, ve majjha na
kenai. Khamemi savvajive, khamam'ham savvajivanan. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 140)
**[63]** Dhirena vi mariyavyan kaurisena vi avass mariyavvan. Donhan pi ya
marananan varam khu dhirattan maru. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 141)  **[64]** Eyan
pacchakkhanam anupaleun suvihio samm. ... vemanio va devo havijj aha va vi
sijjheja. (Mahapratyakhyana, Gatha 142)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApacapalANapaiNayaM 59] ujjhAyA maMgalaM majsa, ujjhAyA majjha devayA  /
ujjhAe kittaittANaM vosirAmi tti pAvagaM  //  ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 118)
[60] sAhu ya maMgalaM majjha, sAhU ya majjha devayA  /  sAhU ya kittaittANaM
vosirAmi tti pAvagaM  /  /  (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 119) [6] ArAhaNovautto
samma kAUNa suvihio kAlaM  /  ukkosaM tinni bhave gaMtUNa labhejja nevvANaM  /
/  (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 131 ) [62] sammaM me savvabhUesu, ve majjha na keNai
/  khAmemi savvajIve, khamAma'haM savvajIvANaM  //  (mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA
140) [63] dhIreNa vi mariyavyaM kAuriseNa vi avassa mariyavvaM  /  doNhaM pi ya
maraNANaM varaM khu dhIrattaNe mariu  /  ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 141) [64]
eyaM paccakkhANaM aNupAleUNa suvihio sammaM  /  . . vemANio va devo havijja
ahavA vi sijjhejjaa| ( mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 142)

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Other common texts [59]**  * **Ujjhaya Mangalam Majjha, Ujjhaya Majjha Devaya.
Ujjhae Kittaittanam Vosaramitti Pavagam.** (Aturpratyakhyan (1), Gatha 4) [60] *
**Sahavo Mangalam Majjha, Sahavo Majjha Devaya. Sahavo Kittaittanam Vosaramitti
Pavagam.** (Aturpratyakhyan (1), Gatha 5) [61] * **(i) Arahanai Jutto Samm Kaun
Suvihio Kalam. Ukkosan Tinni Bhave Gantun Labejja Nivvanam.** (Ogha Niyukti,
Gatha 808) * **(ii) Arahanouvatto Samm Kaun Suvihio Kalam. Ukkosan Tinni Bhave
Gantun Labejja Nivvanam.** (Chandravedhyak, Gatha 98) * **(iii) Arahan Uvajutto
Kalam Kaun Suvihio Samm. Ukkassan Tinni Bhave Gantan Ya Lahai Nivvanam.**
(Moolachar, Gatha 97) [62] * **(i) Sammam Me Savvabhuyesu Veram Majjha Na Kenai.
Aasaao Vosarittaanam Samahim Padivvajjae.** (Aturpratyakhyan, Gatha 22) * **(ii)
Sammam Me Savvabhudeasu Veram Majhan Na Kenavi. Aasa Vosarittaanam Samahim
Padivvajjae.** (Moolachar, Matha 42) * **(iii) Sammam Me Savvabhudeasu Veram
Majjhan Na Kenavi. Aasaae Vosarittaanam Samahim Padivvajjae.** (Niyamsar, Gatha
104) [63] * **(i) Dhirena Vi Mariyavvam, Kauriseena Vi Avass Mariyavvam. Donhan
Pi Hu Mariyavve Varan Khu Dhirattane Marium.** (Aturpratyakhyan, Gatha 65) *
**(ii) Dhirena Vi Maridavvam Nidhirena Vi Akss Maridavvam. Jdi Dohim Vi
Maridavvam Varan Hi Dhirattane Mariudavvam.** (Moolachar, Gatha 100) [64] *
**Edam Pacchakkhanam Jo Kahadi Maranadesayalammi. Dhiro Amudhasanno So Gachchai
Uttamam Thanam.** (Moolachar, Gatha 105) 1. Here, although there are differences
in the form of words, there is a similarity in the meaning.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anya Amama grantha [59] ujjhAyA maMgalaM majjha, ujjhAyA majjha devyaa| ujjhAe
kittaittANaM vosirAmi tti pAvagaM  /  /  (AturapratyAkhyAna (1), gAthA 4) [60]
sAhavo maMgalaM majjha, sAhavo majjha devyaa| sAhavo kittaittANaM vosirAmi tti
pAvagaM  //  . (AturapratyAkhyAna (1), gAthA 5) [61] (i) ArAhaNAi jutto samma
kAUNa suvihio kAlaM  /  ukkosaM tiNNi bhave gaMtUNa labhejja nivvANaM  //
(oghaniyukti, gAthA 808) (ii) ArAhaNovautto samma kAUNa suvihio kAlaM  /
ukkosaM tiNNi bhave gaMtUNa labhejja nivvANaM  //  (candravedhyaka, gAthA 98)
(iii) ArAhaNa uvajutto kAlaM kAUNa suvihio samma  /  ukkassaM tiNNi bhave
gaMtaNa ya lahai nivvANaM  //  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 97) [62) (i) sammaM me
savvabhUesu veraM majjha na keNaI  /  AsAo vosirittANaM samAhiM paDivajjae  /  _
(AturapratyAkhyAna, gAthA 22) (ii) sammaM me savvabhUdesu veraM majhaM Na keNavi
/  AsA vosirittANaM samAhiM pddivjje|| (mUlAcAra, mAthA 42) (iii) sammaM me
savvabhUdesu veraM majjhaM Na keNavi  /  AsAe vosarittANaM samAhi paDivajjae  /
(niyamasAra, gAthA 104) [63] (i) dhIreNa vi mariyavvaM, kAuriseNa vi avassa
mariyavvaM  /  doNhaM pi hu mariyavve varaM khu dhIrattaNe mariuM  /
(AturapratyAkhyAna, gAthA 65) (ii) dhIreNa vi maridavvaM NiddhIreNa vi akssa
maridavvaM  /  /  jadi dohiM vi maridavvaM varaM hi dhIrattaNeNa maridavvaM  //
. (mUlAcAra, gAthA 100) [64] edaM paccakkhANaM jo kAhadi maraNadesayAlammi  /
dhIro amUDhasaNNo so gacchai uttamaM ThANaM  //  (mUlAcAra, gAthA 105) 1. yahA~
zabda rUpa meM bhinnatA hote hue bhI bhAvagata samAnatA hai  /

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  52 ##  Mahapaccakkhannapainnanyam  In this comparative study, we find that
out of the 142 verses of Mahapaccakkhanna, 4 verses are found in the Agam
literature, 8 verses in the Niruktis, 8 verses in the Bhashya literature, and 60
verses in other miscellaneous works besides Maranavibhakti. As far as the
Shourseni Yapaniya Agam equivalent literature is concerned, about 45 verses of
the Mahapaccakkhanna miscellaneous work are also found in Mulachar and Bhagavati
Aradhana. In the major texts of Yapaniya literature, Mulachar and Bhagavati
Aradhana, we see that not only Mahapaccakkhanna, but also verses from many
miscellaneous works have been assimilated in their original form, except for the
Shourseni and Ardhamagadhi language transformations. The inclusion of most of
the verses of Avasyakanuyukti and the entire Aturpratyakhyana in Mulachar
indicates that the Yapaniya tradition initially accepted the miscellaneous
literature, but in later times, when texts like Mulachar and Bhagavati Aradhana
were composed based on the verses of miscellaneous literature and the Niyukti
literature, the tradition of studying miscellaneous works and Niruktis also
became extinct in that tradition. Only in Digambar literature do we find a verse
that states that the Acharaanga, etc., Anga texts and the earlier miscellaneous
works were formulated by the Jina Devas.  Whether directly or through the
Yapaniya literature, Mulachar and Bhagavati Aradhana, many verses of the
miscellaneous literature are also found in Kundakunda's literature.  Alone, 9
verses of the Mahapaccakkhanna miscellaneous work are found in various texts of
Kundakunda. The presence of these verses in Bhagavati Aradhana and Mulachar
suggests that these verses were interpolated into Kundakunda's texts from
Bhagavati Aradhana and Mulachar. Here, the question can be asked: Is it not
possible that these verses went from Kundakunda's literature to the
miscellaneous works? The direct and clear answer to this question is that it has
been proven by many evidences that Kundakunda is not an Acharya from before the
6th century.  11 1. "Ayaradai Anga Puvva Painna Jinehi Pannatta. Je Je Virahiya
Khalu Miccha Me Dukkadam Huja."  Siddhantasaraadisangraha - Kallanaloayana,
verse 28  (Manikchand Digambar Jain Granthamala, Bombay)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 52 mahApaccakkhANapaiNNayaM isa tulanAtmaka adhyayana meM hama yaha pAte haiM
ki mahApratyAkhyAna kI 142 gAthAoM meM se 4 gAthAe~ Agama sAhitya meM, 8 gAthAe~
niryuktiyoM meM, 8 gAthAe~ bhASya sAhitya meM tathA maraNavibhakti ke atirikta
60 gAthAe~ anya prakIrNakoM meM bhI upalabdha hotI haiM  /  jahA~ taka zaurasenI
yApanIya Agama tulya sAhitya kA prazna hai, mahApratyAkhyAna prakIrNaka kI
lagabhaga 45 gAthAe~ mUlAcAra aura bhagavatI ArAdhanA meM bhI upalabdha hotI hai
/  yApanIya sAhitya ke pramukha grantha mUlAcAra aura bhagavatI ArAdhanA meM
hama dekhate haiM ki inameM mahApratyAkhyAna hI nahIM apitu anekAneka
prakIrNakoM kI gAthAe~ zauraseNI aura arddhamAgadhI bhASAyI rUpAntaraNa ko
chor3akara yathAvata rUpa meM AtmasAta kara lI gaI haiN| mUlAcAra meM
Avazyakaniyukti kI adhikAMza gAthAe~ tathA samagra AturapratyAkhyAna kA samAhita
kara liyA jAnA yahI sUcita karatA hai ki prArambha meM yApanIya paramparA ko
prakIrNaka sAhitya mAnya thA, kintu paravartI kAla meM jaba prakIrNaka sAhitya
evaM niyuktisAhitya kI gAthAoM ke AdhAra para mUlAcAra aura bhagavatI ArAdhanA
jaise granthoM kI racanA ho gaI to usa paramparA meM prakIrNakoM aura
niryuktiyoM ke adhyayana kI paramparA bhI vilupta ho gaI  /  digambara sAhitya
meM hI hameM eka aisI bhI gAthA upalabdha hotI hai jisameM kahA gayA hai ki
AcArAMga Adi aMga grantha evaM pUrva prakIrNaka jinendra devoM dvArA prarUpita
haiM  /  ' cAhe pratyakSa rUpa meM ho athavA yApanIya sAhitya mUlAcAra aura
bhagavatI ArAdhanA ke mAdhyama se ho, prakIrNaka sAhitya kI aneka gAthAe~
kundakunda ke sAhitya meM bhI upalabdha hotI hai  /  akele mahApratyAkhyAna
prakIrNaka kI 9 gAthAe~ kundakunda ke vibhinna granthoM meM ulapalabdha ho jAtI
haiM  /  bhagavatI ArAdhanA aura mUlAcAra meM ina gAthAoM kI upasthiti se aisA
pratIta hotA hai ki kundakunda ke granthoM meM ye gAthAe~ bhagavatI ArAdhanA
aura mUlAcAra se hI anusyUta huI haiM  /  yahA~ yaha prazna kiyA jA sakatA hai
ki kyA yaha sambhava nahIM ki kundakunda sAhitya se hI ye gAthAe~ prakIrNakoM
meM gaI ho ? isa prazna kA sIdhA aura spaSTa uttara yahI hai ki aneka pramANoM
se yaha siddha ho cukA hai ki kundakunda chaThIM zatAbdI se pUrva ke AcArya
nahIM haiM  /  11 1. " AyArAdI aMgA puvva paiNNA jiNehi paNNattA  /  je je
virAhiyA khalu micchA me dukkaDaM hujja  /  / ' siddhAntasArAdisaMgraha --
kallANAloyaNA, gAthA 28 ( mANikacanda digambara jaina granthamAlA, bambaI )

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
53 - The 'Mirkara inscription', which claims to be sufficiently ancient to prove
Kundakunda's existence, has been proven to be forged by historians. After the
Mirkara inscription was proven to be forged, no other inscription from before
the 9th century is available that mentions Kundakunda or his lineage.
Furthermore, the fact that no other Acharya before Amritachandra (10th century)
wrote a commentary on Kundakunda's texts during the era of commentaries and
interpretations also proves that Kundakunda is relatively later. The clear
concept of Gunasthan and Saptabhangi found in Kundakunda's literature also leads
to the same conclusion, that Kundakunda is an Acharya from after the 5th
century, because the clear concept of Gunasthan and Saptabhangi was formed in
the 4th-5th century, as we have mentioned in the previous pages of the
introduction. Thus, the attempt to place Kundakunda in the 1st century AD is
neither supported by any inscriptional evidence nor is any such literary
evidence available in this regard that can prove Kundakunda to be from the 1st
century. In determining the time of Kundakunda, we agree with Prof. Madhusudan
Dhaky, according to whom Kundakunda is an Acharya from after the 6th century. On
this basis, it can be said that the stories of Mahapratyakhyan have gone from
Bhagavati worship and Mulachar to Kundakunda literature.  _ In this comparative
study, the question naturally arises whether the similar stories found in
Mahapratyakhyan have come into this text from the Agamas and appointments or
whether these stories have gone from this text into the Agamas and appointments?
As far as the Agama literature is concerned, it can be clearly said that the
stories found in Mahapratyakhyan  1. Prof. M. A, Dhaky Aspects of Jainology,
Vol. 3, Dalsukh Bhai Malvania felicitation, Vol. 1, Page 190. 2. Nathuram Premi-
Purusharthsiddhupay, Introduction Page 4. 3. See-Introduction Page 16-17. 4.
Prof. M. A. Dhaky Aspects of Jainology, Vol. 3, Dalsukh Bhai Malvania
felicitation, Vol. 1, Page 196. :

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 53 - bhUmikA kundakunda ko paryApta rUpa se prAcIna batAne vAlA 'markarA
abhilekha' itihAsa ke vidvAnoM dvArA jAlI pramANita kiyA jA cukA hai|' markarA
abhilekha ko jAlI pramANita kiye jAne ke pazcAt navIM zatAbdI se pUrva kA aisA
koI anya abhilekha upalabdha nahIM hai jisameM kundakunda yA unake anvaya kA
ullekha huA ho  /  punaH TIkA aura vyAkhyAoM ke yuga meM hue kundakunda ke
granthoM para amRtacandra (dasavIM zatAbdI) ke pUrva kisI anya AcArya ke dvArA
TIkA kA na likhA jAnA bhI yaha siddha karatA hai ki kundakunda paryApta rUpa se
paravartI hai  /  kundakunda ke sAhitya meM guNasthAna aura saptabhaMgo kI
spaSTa avadhAraNA milatI hai usase bhI yahI niSkarSa nikalatA hai ki kundakunda
pA~cavIM zatAbdI ke bAda ke AcArya haiM, kyoMki guNasthAna aura saptabhaMgI ko
spaSTa avadhAraNA cauthI-pA~cavIM zatAbdI meM nirmita huI hai yaha ullekha
hamane bhUmikA ke pUrva pRSThoM meM bhI kiyA hai| isa prakAra kundakundako IsvI
san kI prathama zatAbdI meM le jAne kA prayatna na to kisI abhilekhIya sAkSya se
siddha hotA hai aura na koI aisA sAhityika sAkSya hI isa sambandha upalabdha
hotA hai jo kundakunda ko prathama zatAbdI kA pramANita kara sake  /  kundakunda
ke kAla nirdhAraNa meM hama pro0 madhusudana DhAkI se sahamata haiM unake
anumAra kundakunda lagabhaga chaThI zatAbdI ke bAda ke AcArya haiN| isa AdhAra
para yaha kahA jA sakatA hai ki mahApratyAkhyAna kI gAthAe~ bhagavatI ArAdhanA
aura mUlAcAra se kundakunda sAhitya meM gaI haiN| . _ isa tulanAtmaka adhyayana
meM yaha prazna bhI svAbhAvika rUpa se utpanna hotA hai ki mahApratyAkhyAna meM
upalabdha hone vAlI samAna gAthAe~ Agama evaM niyuktiyoM se isa grantha meM AI
hai athavA isa grantha se ye gAthAe~ Agama evaM niyuktiyoM meM gaI haiM ? jahA~
taka Agama sAhitya kA prazna hai to yaha spaSTa kahA jA sakatA hai ki
mahApratyAkhyAna meM upalabdha hone vAlI 1. Prof. M. A, Dhaky Aspects of
Jainology, Vol. 3, Dalsukh Bhai Malvania felicitation, Vol. 1, Page 190. 2.
nAthurAma premI-puruSArthasiddhaupAya, bhUmikA pRSTha 4  /  3. dekheM-bhUmikA
pRSTha 16-17  /  4. Prof. M. A. Dhaky Aspects of Jainology, Vol. 3, Dalsukh Bhai
Malvania felicitation, Vol. 1, Page 196. :

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
54. **Mahapacc Kshanaparinnay**  All four similar verses are taken from the Agam
literature itself, because these four verses are from the Uttaradhyayanasutra
and there they are in their proper place and order. Also, the
Uttaradhyayanasutra is older than the Mahapratyakhyan, so it is certain that
these four verses have gone from the Uttaradhyayanasutra to the Mahapratyakhyan.
Again, this text mentions the twelve-fold Shruta-skandha. This also makes it
clear that the Anga Agam literature was composed before the Mahapratyakhyan.  As
far as the Niyukti literature is concerned, it contains 8 verses of the
Mahapratyakhyan. Of these eight verses, most are found only in the Oghanniyukti.
We feel that these verses have gone from the Mahapratyakhyan to the
Oghanniyukti, because the Oghanniyukti is not mentioned in the Nandi Sutra,
while the Mahapratyakhyan is mentioned in the Nandi Sutra. Therefore, it must be
assumed that the Oghanniyukti was composed after the Mahapratyakhyan. On this
basis, it seems more reasonable to say that these verses have gone from the
Mahapratyakhyan to the Oghanniyukti.  Regarding the Churni literature, we would
only say that the Churnis were composed after the Prakirnak literature, because
the Nandiini clearly mentions the Mahapratyakhyan by name. Again, the Churnis
are originally written in prose, so if any verse of the Mahapratyakhyan is
quoted in them, it must be assumed that these verses have gone from the
Mahapratyakhyan to them, because chronologically, while the Churnis are from the
7th century, the Mahapratyakhyan is a composition from before the 5th century.
From the point of view of its subject matter, the Mahapratyakhyan is a Prakirnak
text that is primarily focused on practice. It mainly provides instructions on
Samadhimaran and its previous process. Samadhimaran can be considered an
important part of Jain practice. In the Jain tradition, whether a sadhak is a
muni or a householder, he is encouraged to take Samadhimaran. There are some
verses in the Mahapratyakhyan that encourage the sadhak to take Samadhimaran,
and there are some other verses that instruct on criticism, etc. In fact, they
are in the form of the previous process of Samadhimaran.  1. Mahapratyakhyan,
verse 102. 2. Nandi Churni, Sutra 81.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 54. mahApacca kSANapaiNNaya cAroM samAna gAthAe~ isameM Agama sAhitya se hI lI
gaI haiM, kyoMki ye cAroM gAthAe~ uttarAdhyayana sUtra kI haiM aura vahA~ ve
apane samucita sthAna evaM krama meM haiM  /  sAtha hI uttarAdhyayana
mahApratyAkhyAna kI apekSA prAcIna bhI hai, ataH yaha nizcita hai ki ye cAroM
gAthAe~ uttarAdhyayana se hI mahApratyAkhyAna meM gaI haiN| punaH isa grantha
meM dvAdaza-vidha zrutaskandha kA ullekha huA hai|' usase bhI yaha spaSTa ho
jAtA hai ki mahApratyAkhyAna se pUrva aMga Agama sAhitya kI racanA ho cukI thii|
jahA~ taka niyukti sAhitya kA prazna hai, usameM mahApratyAkhyAna kI 8 gAthAe~
pAI jAtI hai, ina ATha gAthAoM meM se bhI adhikAMza gAthAe~ mAtra oghaniyukti
meM pAI jAtI haiN| hameM aisA lagatA hai ki ye gAthAe~ mahApratyAkhyAna se ho
oghaniyukti meM gaI hai, kyoMki oghaniyukti kA ullekha nandIsUtra meM nahIM hai,
jabaki mahApratyAkhyAna kA ullekha nandIsUtra meM hai| ataH yaha mAnanA hogA ki
oghaniyukti kI racanA mahApratyAkhyAna ke bAda hI huI hai, isa AdhAra para yaha
kahanA adhika yuktisaMgata lagatA hai ki ye gAthAe~ mahApratyAkhyAna se hI
oghaniyukti meM gaI hogii| cUNi sAhitya ke viSaya meM to hama yahI kahanA
cAheMge ki cUrNiyoM kI racanA prakIrNaka sAhitya ke bAda hI huI hai, kyoMki
nandINi meM to mahApratyAkhyAna kA spaSTa nAmollekha bhI upalabdha hotA hai|
punaH cUNiyA~ to mUlataH gadya meM hI likhI gaI haiM ataH unameM
mahApratyAkhyAna kI koI gAthA udRta bhI ho to yahI mAnanA hogA ki unameM ye
gAthAe~ mahApratyAkhyAna se hI gaI haiM, kyoMki kAlakrama kI dRSTi se jahA~
cUrNiyA~ sAtavIM zatAbdI kI hai vahIM mahApratyAkhyAna pA~cavIM zatAbdI ke pUrva
kI racanA hai  /  apanI viSayavastu kI daSTi se mahApratyAkhyAna prakIrNaka eka
sAdhanA pradhAna grantha hai| isameM mukhya rUpa se samAdhimaraNa tathA usakI
pUrva prakriyA kA nirdeza upalabdha hotA hai| samAdhimaraNa jaina sAdhanA kA eka
mahattvapUrNa aMga mAnA jA sakatA hai| jaina paramparA meM sAdhaka cAhe muni ho
athavA gRhastha, use samAdhimaraNa grahaNa karane kI preraNA dI gaI hai  /
mahApratyAkhyAna kI kucha gAthAe~ aisI haiM jo sAdhaka ko samAdhimaraNa grahaNa
karane kI preraNA detI haiM, kucha anya gAthAe~ aisI bhI haiM jo AlocanA Adi kA
nirdeza karatI haiM, vastutaH ve samAdhimaraNa kI pUrva prakriyA ke rUpa meM 1.
mahApratyAkhyAna, gAthA 102  /  2. nandIcUNi, sUtra 81  /

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
These 55 are. The purpose of the remaining other villages is to instruct the
seeker on how to maintain their mental attitudes in the state of Samadhimaran.
The concept of Samadhimaran is found in Jain Agam literature from the time of
Acharanga. The first Shruta Skandha of Acharanga not only inspires Samadhimaran,
but also clarifies its process. 'The fifth chapter of Uttaradhyayanasutra has a
detailed discussion on the nature of Balamaran and Panditamaran. Many
biographies described in Jain literature are also depicted as taking
Samadhimaran at the end of their practice. The present text, Mahapratyakhyan, as
its name suggests, is also indicative of Samadhimaran or in other words, it is a
text related to Samadhimaran. Samadhimaran means that now death is present at
the door of life and is giving notice of its arrival, then the seeker should
abandon the efforts of body nourishment and practice the feeling of ruthlessness
towards the body and instead of hiding from death present at the door, prepare
himself for its welcome. In fact, Samadhimaran is the process of embracing death
peacefully, it is the test hour of practice. We can understand it this way that
if a seeker has practiced non-attachment and equality throughout his life, but
if he gets distracted at the time of death, then his entire practice becomes
futile in a way, just as if a student does not succeed in the exam, then his
study is not considered meaningful. Samadhimaran is the test of our life's
practice and Mahapratyakhyan instructs us to pass that test. _ Samadhimaran is
neither an escape from life nor suicide, but it is an art of embracing death and
he who has not learned this art, his life does not become meaningful. A Urdu
poet rightly said 1. Acharanga, First Shruta Skandha, Study 8, Uddeshak 2.
Uttaradhyayanasutra 5/2-3.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 55 hI haiN| zeSa anya gAvAoM kA prayojana sAdhaka ko samAdhibharaNa kI sthiti
meM apanI manovRttiyoM ko kisa prakAra rakhanA cAhie, isakA nirdeza karanA hai|
samAdhimaraNa kI avadhAraNA jaina Agama sAhitya meM AcArAMga ke kAla se hI pAI
jAtI hai| AcArAMga kA prathama zruta skandha na kevala samAdhimaraNa kI preraNA
detA hai, apitu usakI prakriyA bhI spaSTa karatA hai|' uttarAdhyayanasUtra ke
pAMcaveM adhyAya meM bAlamaraNa aura paMDitamaraNa ke svarUpa ko lekara vistRta
carcA hai| jaina sAhitya meM varNita aneka jIvana caritra bhI sAdhanA ke anta
meM samAdhimaraNa grahaNa karate hue hI citrita kiye gaye haiN| prastuta grantha
mahApratyAkhyAna jaisAki isake nAma se ho spaSTa hai,yaha bhI samAdhimaraNa kA
hI sUcaka hai yA dUsare zabdoM meM kaheM to yaha samAdhimaraNa se hI saMbaMdhita
grantha hai| samAdhimaraNa kA tAtparya hai ki aba mRtyu jIvana ke dvAra para
upasthita hokara apane Agamana kI sUcanA de rahI ho to sAdhaka ko cAhie ki vaha
deha poSaNa ke prayatnoM kA parityAga kara de tathA zarIra ke prati nirmamatva
bhAva kI sAdhanA kare aura dvAra para upasthita mRtyu se muMha chipAne kI apekSA
usake svAgata hetu svayaM ko tatpara rkhe| vastutaH samAdhimaraNa zAnta bhAva se
mRtyu kA AliGgana karane kI prakriyA hai vaha sAdhanA kI parIkSA ghar3I hai  /
ise hama yoM samajha sakate haiM ki yadi kisI sAdhaka ne jIvanabhara vItarAgatA
aura samatA kI sAdhanA kI ho, kintu mRtyu ke samaya para yadi vaha vicalita ho
jAe to usakI sampUrNa sAdhanA eka prakAra se vaise hI niSphala ho jAtI hai,
jaise koI vidyArthI yadi parIkSA meM saphala nahIM hotA hai to usakA adhyayana
sArthaka nahIM mAnA jAtA hai| samAdhimaraNa hamAre jIvana kI sAdhanA kI parIkSA
hai aura mahApratyAkhyAna hameM usI parIkSA meM kharA utarane kA nirdeza detA
hai| _ samAdhimaraNa na to jIvana se palAyana hai aura na hI AtmahatyA hai,
apitu vaha mRtyu ke AliGgana kI eka kalA hai aura jisane yaha kalA nahIM sIkhI,
usakA jIvana sArthaka nahIM bana pAtA hai| eka urdU zAyara ne ThIka hI kahA hai
1. AcArAMga, prathama zruta skandha, adhyayana 8, uddezaka 2. uttarAdhyayana
5/2-3  /

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
56 Mahapंचक्खाणपइण्णर्य He who sees history, has complete faith in this. He who
does not live, does not die. In reality, Mahapratyakhyan presents before us a
detached view of life, which makes both our birth and death meaningful. We can
summarize this life view of Mahapratyakhyan as follows: Life came, fate took it
away. Neither our happiness came, nor our happiness went. Thus, we see that
Mahapratyakhyan is a text that gives us a new perspective on living life. The
decision of Agam, Ahimsa-Samata and Prakrut Sansthan, Udaipur to publish this
scattered literature, which propagates such noble life values, is meaningful
only when we can study these scattered literature and implement the life values
propagated in them in our lives. Varanasi 12 December, 1991  Sagarmal Jain
Suresh Sissodia

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 56 mahApaJcakkhANapaiNNarya jo dekhI hisTrI, isa bAta para kAmila yakI AyA  /
use jInA nahIM AyA, jise maranA nahIM AyA  //  vastutaH mahApratyAkhyAna hamAre
sAmane eka aisI anAsakta jIvana dRSTi prastuta karatA hai jisase hamArA janma
aura maraNa donoM hI sArthaka bana jAte haiM  /  mahApratyAkhyAna kI isa jIvana
dRSTi ko hama saMkSepa meM isa prakAra rakha sakate haiM lAI hayAta A gae, kaz2A
le calI cale cale  /  na apanI khuzI Ae, na apanI khuzI gae  //  isa prakAra
hama dekhate haiM ki mahApratyAkhyAna eka aisA grantha hai jo hameM jIvana jIne
kI navIna dRSTi pra dAna karatA hai| aise udAtta jIvana mUlyoM ko pratipAdita
karane vAle prakIrNaka sAhitya ko Agama, ahiMsA-samatA evaM prAkRta saMsthAna,
udayapura ne sAnuvAda prakAzita karane kA jo nirNaya kiyA hai usakI sArthakatA
tabhI hai jaba ina prakIrNakoM kA adhyayana karake hama inameM pratipAdita
jIvana mUlyoM ko apane jIvana meM utAra sakeM  /  vArANasI 12 dimsabara, 1991
sAgaramala jaina sureza sisodiyA

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Mahapaccakkhannapainnnayan (Mahapratyakhyana-prakirnak)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccakkhANapaiNNayaM (mahApratyAkhyAna-prakIrNaka) -

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Great Confession** (Also known as the Mangala)  I offer my salutations to
the Tirthankaras, the Supreme Conquerors, the Jinas, the Siddhas, and the
Sanjayas. ||1||  To the Siddhas, free from all suffering, the Arhats, I bow. I
confess my sins, the fire of karma. ||2||  (Various Confessions) Whatever I have
done wrong, in thought, word, or deed, I condemn it completely. I make the
threefold confession, free from attachment. ||3||  Externally, internally, and
in between, from body to all possessions, with mind, speech, and body, I confess
all three. ||4||  I confess attachment, bondage, anger, hatred, pride, greed,
fear, sorrow, and the cycle of birth and death. ||5||  (Confession to All Living
Beings) With anger, prejudice, and unkindness, and with stubbornness, whatever I
have spoken, I confess it threefold. ||6||  I confess to all living beings, may
all living beings forgive me. With the intention of abandoning all karmic
impurities, I make this confession. ||7||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccakkhANapaiNNayaM (maMgalamabhidheyaM ca) esa karemi paNAmaM
titthayarANaM aNuttaragaINaM  /  savvesiM ca jiNANaM siddhANaM saMjayANaM ca  //
1 //  savvadukkhappahINANaM siddhANaM araho namo  /  saddahe jiNapannattaM
paccakkhAmi ya pAvagaM  // 2 //  (vivihA vosiraNA) jaM kiMci vi duccariyaM
tamahaM niMdAmi savvabhAveNaM  /  sAmAiyaM ca tivihaM karemi samvaM nirAgAraM
// 3 //  bAhira'bbhaMtaraM uvahiM sarIrAdi sabhoyaNaM  /  maNasA vaya kAeNaM
savvaM tiviheNa vosire  //  4 //  rAgaM' baMdhaM paosaM ca harisaM doNabhAvayaM
/  ussugattaM bhayaM sogaM raimaraiM2 ca vosire  //  5  //  (sanvajIvakhAmaNA)
roseNa paDiniveseNa akayaNNuyayA taheva sddhyaae| jo me kiMci vi bhaNio tamahaM
tiviheNa khAmemi  //  6  //  khAmemi "savvajIve savve jIvA khamaMtu me| Asave
bosirittANaM samAhiM paDisaMdhae  // 7 //  1. rAgabaMdhaM sA0  /  2. degrayaM ca
sN0| 3. degNNuyAe taheva'sajjhAe pu0 sA0  /  4. dego tivihaM tiviheNa sApA0  /
5. savve jIve sN0| 6. AsAyo vo pu0 saa0|

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mahapratyakhyana Prakirnak (Mangal and Abhisheya)  (1) Thus, I bow down to
all the Tirthankaras, Jin-Devas, Siddhas and Samyami who have attained
Siddhagati. (2) Salutations to all the Siddhas and Arhats who are completely
free from all sorrows. I have faith in the true nature of Jinaprasapta and I
renounce all sinful actions.  (Various Renunciations) (3) I condemn all my evil
conduct with all my being and accept Samayik in its threefold form, free from
all exceptions. (4) The practitioner who accepts Samadhi-maran should renounce
all external and internal attachments, food, body, etc., in thought, word and
deed. (5) The practitioner should renounce all attachments in the form of love
and hatred, joy and sorrow, curiosity, fear and grief, and attraction and
aversion.  (Atonement for All Beings) (6) The practitioner should say: "I seek
forgiveness in threefold form for whatever I have said out of anger, regret,
ingratitude, and deceit." (7) I forgive all beings, may all beings forgive me.
Renouncing all Asravas, I resolve to attain Samadhi (i.e., I unite myself with
Samadhi).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApratyAkhyAna prakIrNaka (maMgala aura abhiSeya) (1) isa prakAra ( maiM )
siddhagati ko prApta samasta tIrthaMkaroM, jina-devoM, siddhoM aura saMyamiyoM
ko praNAma karatA huuN| (2) samasta duHkhoM se sarvathA mukta siddhoM aura
arhatoM ko namaskAra ho| jinaprazapta tattva-svarUpa para ( maiM ) zraddhA
rakhatA hai aura pApakarma kA pratyAkhyAna karatA huuN| (vividha pratyAkhyAna)
(3) jo kucha bhI merA duzcaritra hai, usakI ( maiM ) sarvabhAva se niMdA karatA
hU~ aura sabhI prakAra ke apavAda se rahita sAmAyika ko trividha rUpa se grahaNa
karatA huuN| (4) (samAdhimaraNa grahaNa karane vAlA sAdhaka ) sabhI prakAra ke
bAhya aura abhyantara parigraha, bhojana evaM zarIra Adi kA manasA, vAcA evaM
karmaNA tInoM prakAra se tyAga kre| (5) ( sAdhaka ) rAga-dveSa rUpa bandhana,
harSa-viSAda, utsukatA, bhaya-zoka aura rati-arati ( sabhI) kA tyAga kre| (sarva
jIva kSamApanA) (6) ( sAdhaka aisA kahe ki) roSa, pazcAtApa, kRtaghnatA tathA
kapaTa vRtti se jo kucha bhI mere dvArA kahA gayA hai, usake lie maiM trividha
rUpa se kSamA mA~gatA huuN| (7) samasta jIvoM ko ( maiM ) kSamA karatA hU~,
samasta jIva mujhe kSamA kareM  /  AzravoM ko tyAgakara ( maiM ) samAdhi kA
pratisandhAna karatA - hU~ ( arthAt apane ko samAdhi se yojita karatA hU~ ) /  :

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Mahapacchakkhanapainaayam** (Nivana-garaha-aloyanaao) I condemn what is
condemnable, I reproach what is reproachable. I censure all that is
objectionable, according to the Jinas. || 8 || (Mamattacheyanama Ayadhamma
Saruvam Cha) I renounce the body, food, and the fourfold possessions. I
recognize only non-attachment in all things. || 9 || I have renounced
attachment, I am established in non-attachment. My support is the path, my
refuge is the liberation. || 10 || The path is in my knowledge, the path is in
my vision, conduct, and renunciation. The path is in my restraint and
meditation. || 11 || (Mulu Uttara Guna Arahanapuvvam Nindanaiparuvana) I condemn
all the root and auxiliary virtues that I have not attained due to my
negligence, for I am approaching the path. || 12 || (Egatta Bhavana) I am alone,
I belong to no one, nor do I belong to anyone. Thus, with an unyielding mind, I
instruct myself. || 13 || One being is born, one being dies. One being
experiences death, one being becomes dry. || 1 || 1. This is established.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccakkhANapaiNayaM (nivaNA-garahaNA-AloyaNAo) niMdAmi niMdaNijja garahAmi
ya jaM ca me grhnnijj| Aloemi ya savvaM jiNehiM jaM jaM ca paDikuThaM  //  8 //
( mamattacheyaNaM AyadhammasarUvaM ca ) uvahI sarIragaM ceva AhAraM ca cauvvihaM
/  mamattaM savvadavvesu parijANAmi kevalaM  // 9 //  mamattaM parijAgAmi
nimmamatte uvddhio| AlaMbaNaM ca me AyA avasesaM ca vosire  // 10 //  AyA
majjhaM nANe AyA me daMsaNe caritte ya  /  AyA paccakkhANe AyA me saMjame joge
// 11 //  ( mUluttaraguNArAhaNApuvvaM niMdaNAiparUvaNaM) mUlaguNe uttaraguNe je
me nA''rAhiyA pamAeNaM  /  te savve niMdAmi paDikkame AgamissANaM  // 12 //  (
egattabhAvaNA) ekko haM natthi me koI, na cAhamavi kassaI  /  evaM adINamaNaso
appANamaNusAsae  // 13 //  ekko uppajjae jIvo, ekko ceva vivjjii| ekkassa hoi
maraNaM ekko sijjhai nIrao  // 1 //  1. paDisiddha saa|

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mahapratyakhyana Prakirnak  **(Condemnation, Repentance and Criticism)** (8)
I condemn that which is condemnable and I repent for my own faults. I criticize
all those (sinful actions) that are forbidden by the Jinas.  **(Severing
Attachment and Self-Dharma)** (9) I know the helpless state of the four types of
bodily food, tools and all substances, and I know the attachment I have towards
them.  **(10)** I know the attachment that exists in my non-attachment (i.e.,
dispassion). Knowing that the soul is my support, the seeker renounces all other
(external substances).  **(11)** The soul is my knowledge, the soul is my vision
and my character. The soul is my renunciation, and the soul is my restraint and
yoga (physical, verbal and mental actions).  **(Worship of the Fundamental and
Secondary Qualities with Self-Condemnation)** (12) I condemn and repent for all
those (qualities) that I have not been able to worship due to my negligence in
the fundamental and secondary qualities. I renounce the future (faults).
**(Oneness)** (13) I am alone, I have no one, and I belong to no one. In this
way, the seeker disciplines the soul with a detached attitude.  **(14)** The
being is born alone and dies alone. It is alone that dies and it is alone that
becomes free from the karmic dirt.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApratyAkhyAnaprakIrNaka ( nindA, gardA aura AlocanA) (8) nindA karane yogya
kI (maiM ) nindA karatA hU~ aura gahIM karane yogya mere jo doSa haiM, unakI
gahIM karatA hU~ tathA jo-jo bhI (pApa karma ) jinadevoM ke dvArA niSiddha haiM,
una sabakI (maiM) AlocanA karatA huuN| ( mamatva chedana aura Atma-dharma
svarUpa) (9) zarIra saMbaMdhI cAroM prakAra ke AhAra, upakaraNa tathA
sarvadravyoM kI asahAya-dazA evaM unake prati rahe hue ( mere ) mamatva ko
(maiM) jAnatA huuN| (10) nirmamatva ( arthAt vairAgya bhAva ) meM upasthita
mamatva ko (meM) jAnatA huuN| AtmA hI merA Alambana hai (yaha jAnakara sAdhaka)
zeSa sabhI ( paradravyoM kA ) tyAga kre| (11) AtmA merA jJAna hai, AtmA hI merA
darzana aura cAritra hai  /  AtmA hI pratyAkhyAna hai tathA AtmA hI merA saMyama
aura yoga ( kAyika, vAcika aura mAnasika kriyA ) hai| (. mUlaguNa, uttaraguNa kI
ArAdhanA pUrvaka Atma-nindA) (12) pramAda ke kAraNa mUlaguNa aura uttaraguNa meM
jina ( guNoM) kI ArAdhanA maiM nahIM kara pAyA hU~, una sabakI nindA karatA hU~
evaM pratikramaNa karatA hU~ tathA bhaviSya meM Ane vAle ( doSoM kA pratyAkhyAna
karatA hU~ ) /  ( ekatva bhAvanA) (13) maiM akelA hU~, merA koI bhI nahIM hai,
maiM bhI kisI kA nahIM hai| isa prakAra nirapekSa bhAva se (sAdhaka ) AtmA ko
anuzAsita kre| (14) jIva akelA utpanna hotA hai aura akelA hI naSTa ho jAtA hai|
akele kI hI mRtyu hotI hai ( tathA ) akelA hI karmarUpI mala se rahita hokara
mukta (bhI) hotA hai|

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The great liberation (Mahapaccakklanapanna) is achieved by one, the fruit of
that is also attained by one. One goes and dies, to the next world one goes.
||15|| One is my Self, endowed with knowledge and vision (Naan-dasanalakkhano).
The rest are external, all are marked by attachment (Sanjogalakkhana). ||16||
(Sanjogasambandhavosarana) Attachment (Sanjomamala) is the cause of the cycle of
suffering (Dukkhaparampra) for the soul (Jive). Therefore, attachment
(Sanjogasambandha) should be abandoned in all its three forms. ||17||
(Asanjamainaan Nivana Micchattchaago Ya) Non-self-control (Assanjamamannaana),
wrong belief (Micchatt), and pride (Mamatta) are all to be abandoned. I abandon
them in the soul (Jiva) and in non-soul (Ajiva). ||18|| I know all wrong belief
(Micchatt) is non-self-control (Assanjama) and non-virtuous (Aliya). I abandon
all pride (Mamatta) and forgive all. ||19|| (Annaayaavarahaaloayana) Those who
know me (Jina) are the ones who are free from attachment (Avaraha) in all places
(Jesu Jesu Thaanesu). I am present in them, I am present in all beings (Uvadhio
Savvabhavana). ||20|| (Maayan ihanano vaeso) The arising and non-arising
(Uppanna Anuppanna) Maya (illusion) is to be destroyed (Nihantava). By knowing
(Aloyana), cutting off (Chindana), and abandoning (Garihana), the seed of Maya
is not fully destroyed. ||21|| 1. ṇasamjubo. (masculine, singular) 2. Savvam
khaamavemi. (masculine, singular) 3. Tam taha a°. (singular)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccaklANapaNNa ekko kareha kAmaM, phalamavi tassekkao samaguhavai  /  ekko
jAyai marai ya, paraloyaM ekkao jAi  // 15 //  ekko me sAsao appA naann-
dsnnlkkhnno'| sesA me bAhirA bhAvA savve saMjogalakkhaNA  // 16 //
(saMjogasaMbaMdhavosiraNA) saMjomamalA jIveNaM pattA dukkhaparaMparA  /  tamhA
saMjogasaMbaMdhaM savvaM tiviheNa vosire  // 17 //  ( asaMjamAINaM nivaNA
micchattacAgo ya) assaMjamamaNNANaM micchattaM savvao vi ya mamattaM  /  jIvasU
ajIvesa ya taM nide taM ca garihAmi  // 18 //  micchattaM parijANAmi savvaM
assaMjamaM alIyaM ca  /  /  savvatto ya mamattaM cayAmi 'savvaM ca khAmemi  //
19  //  ( aNNAyAvarAhAloyaNA) je me jANaMti jiNA avarAhA jesu jesu ThANesu  /
ute haM AloemI uvaDhio savvabhAvaNaM  //  20  //  (mAyAnihaNaNovaeso)
uppannA'NuppannA mAvA aNumAgao nihaMtavvA  /  AloyaNa-ciMdaNa-garihaNAhiM na
pUNa ti yA bIyaM  /  /  21  //  1. NasaMjubo  /  pu0 sA0  /  2. savvaM khamAvemi
pu0 sA0  /  3. taM taha Adeg saa0| www.jainelibraty.org

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mahapratyakhyana Prakirnak  **(15)** The (Jiva) alone performs karma, and
alone experiences its fruits. Alone it is born, dies, and alone it goes to the
afterlife.   **(16)** This eternal 'Atma' alone, endowed with knowledge and
vision, is my (self), and all other substances, endowed with the characteristic
of 'Samyoga', are external (par) to me.   **(17)** Due to the 'Samyoga'
relationship, Jivas experience the cycle of suffering. Therefore, (the seeker)
should renounce all 'Samyogic' relationships in all three ways.  **(18)** I
condemn and renounce 'Asanyama', ignorance, 'Mithyatva', and the sense of
'Mamatva' (mine-ness) inherent in all Jivas and Ajiva. I know all kinds of
'Asanyama', unreliability, and 'Mithyatva'. Therefore, I renounce all forms of
'Mamatva' and seek forgiveness from all.  **(20)** The Tirthankaras know all the
offenses I have committed in all situations. Therefore, I am present to
criticize them completely.  **(21)** Maya, whether it is born or unborn, is
worthy of renunciation. Through condemnation and renunciation, it will not be
reborn again.  **Note:**  * 'Jiva' refers to the soul or living being. * 'Karma'
refers to actions and their consequences. * 'Samyoga' refers to the relationship
between the soul and matter. * 'Asanyama' refers to non-restraint or indulgence.
* 'Mithyatva' refers to false belief or wrong understanding. * 'Mamatva' refers
to the sense of 'mine-ness' or attachment. * 'Tirthankara' refers to a spiritual
teacher or prophet in Jainism. * 'Maya' refers to illusion or delusion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApratyAkhyAnaprakIrNaka (15) (jIva ) akelA karma karatA hai, usake phala ko
bhI akelA hI bhogatA hai| akelA janma letA hai, maratA hai tathA akelA hI
paraloka ko jAtA hai| (16) jJAna-darzana se yukta yaha akelI zAzvata 'AtmA hI
merI ( sva ) hai (tathA) saMyoga lakSaNa se yukta zeSa samasta padArtha mere lie
bAhya (para) hai| (saMyoga sabandha parityAga) (17) saMyoga saMbaMdha ke kAraNa
hI jIva duHkha paramparA ko prApta hote haiM isalie (sAdhaka ) samasta sAMyogika
saMbaMdhoM ko tInoM prakAra se tyaage| ( asaMyama Adi kI nindA aura mithyAtva kA
tyAga) (18) asaMyama, ajJAna, mithyAtva tathA sabhI jIva-ajIvoM meM nihita
mamatva-una ( saba ) kI ( maiM ) nindA aura gardA karatA huuN| saba prakAra ke
asaMyama, aprAmANikatA aura mithyAtva ko maiM jAnatA huuN| isalie saba prakAra
se mamatva kA tyAga karatA hU~ aura sabase (maiM ) kSamAyAcanA karatA huuN| (
annAta aparAba AlocanA) (20) jina-jina sthitiyoM meM mere dvArA jo-jo aparAdha
hue haiM, ( una sabako) tIrthaMkara jAnate haiN| isalie maiM una (aparAdhoM) ko
sarvathA prakAra se AlocanA karane ke lie upasthita huA huuN| (mAyA nihanana
upadeza) (21) utpanna yA anutpanna mAyA parityAga karane yogya hai  /  nindA
aura gahA~ se (vaha) punaH utpanna nahIM hotii| 1. saMskRta evaM prAkRta bhASA
meM AtmA puliGga zabda hai kintu hindI bhASA meM AtmA zabda strIliGga rUpa meM
prayukta hotA hai| yahA~ bhI strIliMga rUpa meM hI artha kiyA gayA hai|

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Great Liberation** (The nature of liberation and its cause)  Just as a
child, jumping about, speaks both truth and falsehood, so too does the deluded
one speak, being bound by illusion. || 22 ||  The Dharma of the liberated one is
pure and steadfast. Nirvana is the ultimate goal, attained by the destruction of
passions. || 23 ||  (The nature of liberation)  The one who is bound by passions
does not attain liberation, just as a ship does not sail without a rudder. The
one who is free from all passions attains liberation, just as a ship with a
rudder sails. || 24 ||  Even if one has many passions, if one is liberated by
the teachings of the Guru, one becomes free from passions and attains the state
of liberation. || 25 ||  Even if one has few passions, if one is not liberated
by the teachings of the Guru, even if one has attained the highest state of
knowledge, one does not become liberated. || 26 ||  The one who is not liberated
does not perform good deeds, nor does he avoid evil deeds. He is like a snake,
poisonous and angry. || 27 ||  The one who performs actions motivated by
passions, without being liberated, in this very life, is destined for endless
suffering in the cycle of birth and death. || 28 ||  The Guru, the refuge of the
virtuous, liberates one from the root of all evil, from the passions of wrong
belief, illusion, and ignorance. || 29 ||  (The fruits of liberation)  The
person who is liberated by the teachings of the Guru becomes light and free,
like a ship that has been unloaded of its burden. || 30 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccakkhANapaiNNaya ( Aloyagassa sarUvaM mokkhagAmittaM ca ) jaha bAlo
jaMpaMto kajjamakajjaM ca ujjuyaM bhaNai  /  taM taha AloijjA mAyA-
mayavippamukko' u  //  22 //  sohI ujjuyabhUyassa dhammo suddhassa citttthii|
nivvANaM paramaM jAi ghayasitte va pAvae  //  23  //  ( salluddharaNaparUvaNA)
na hu sijjhaI sasallo jaha bhANayaM sAsaNe dhuyarayANaM  /  uddhariyasavvasallo
sijjhai jovo ghuykileso||24|| subahu pi bhAvasallaM je AloyaMti gurusagAsammi  /
nissallA saMthAragamuvaiti ArAhagA hoti  //  25  //  appaM pi bhAvasallaM je
NA''loyaMti gurusagAsammi  /  dhaMtaM pi suyasamiddhA na hu te ArAhagA hoti  //
26  //  na vi taM satthaM va visaM va duppautto va kuNai veyaalo| jaMtaM va
duppauttaM sappo va pamAyao kuddho  //  27 //  jaM kuNai bhAvasallaM aNuddhiyaM
uttimaTTakAlammi  /  dullaMbhabohiyattaM aNaMtasaMsAriyattaM . ca  //  28 //  to
uddharaMti gAravarahiyA mUlaM puNabbhavalayANaM  /  micchAdasaNasallaM
mAyAsallaM niyANaM . ca  /  /  29  //  (AloyaNAphalaM) kayapAvo vi maNUso Aloiya
nidiu gurusgaase| hoi airegalahuo ohariyabharu vva bhAravaho  //  30 //  1.
degmukkeNaM  /  sN0| 2. yasitti va pApu0  /  yasittu va pA sA0  /  3. degsallaM
AloeUNa guru pu0 sA0  /  4. bharo bva sN0|

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mahapratyakhyanaprakirnak (The Nature of Criticism and Liberation) (22) Just
as a child naturally expresses his actions and inactions, in the same way, a
seeker should criticize (all his faults) by abandoning deceit and ego. (23) Only
the simple-minded are purified, and in the pure-minded, Dharma resides, and (he
who has Dharma residing in him) attains ultimate Nirvana, like fire moistened by
ghee. (Shalyoddhranaprarupana). (24) In the Jain teachings, it is said that even
a person free from karmic impurities, if afflicted by the three poisons of Maya,
etc., does not attain liberation. But the being who has liberated himself from
all poisons, that being free from afflictions, attains liberation. (25) Those
(disciples) who are deeply afflicted by the poison of attachment, who criticize
(themselves) before their Guru, attain Samadhi-death and become devotees. (26)
Those (disciples) who are minimally afflicted by the poison of attachment, who
do not criticize (themselves) before their Guru, even though they are rich in
scriptural knowledge, do not become devotees. (27-28) A misused weapon, poison,
a ghost, a machine operated incorrectly, and a furious serpent do not harm a
careless person as much as the poisons of Maya, Mithyatva, and Nidana, residing
in the mind during Samadhi, harm. (This) makes the attainment of enlightenment
rare and (the person) becomes eternally bound to the cycle of birth and death.
(29) Therefore, the (seeker) free from pride, removes the root of the creeper of
rebirth, the poison of Mithyatva, the poison of Maya, and the poison of Nidana
(from within). (Criticism's Fruit) (30) By criticizing and condemning his own
sins in the presence of the Guru, a person quickly becomes free from burden,
just like a burden-bearer after unloading his load.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApratyAkhyAnaprakIrNaka (Alocaka kA svarUpa aura mokSagAmitva ) (22) jisa
prakAra bAlaka ( apane ) kArya-akArya ko sahajabhAva se vyakta kara detA hai usI
prakAra sAdhaka ko (apane samasta doSoM kI ) AlocanA kapaTa evaM ahaMkAra kA
tyAga karake karanI caahie| (23) saralacitta vAle kI hI zuddhi hotI hai aura
jisakA citta zuddha hai usameM hI dharma sthita rahatA hai tathA ( jisameM
dharma sthita rahatA hai, vaha hI) parama nirvANa ko prApta karatA hai, jaise
dhI se sikta agni| (zalyoddharaNa prarUpaNA). (24) jinazAsana meM isa prakAra
kahA gayA hai ki karmaraja se rahita vyakti bhI yadi mAyA Adi tIna zalyoM se
yukta hai to vaha mukti ko prApta nahIM karatA hai| kintu jisa jIva ne samasta
zalyoM kA mocana kara diyA hai, vaha kleza rahita jIva mukti ko prApta karatA
hai| (25) atyadhika bhAva zalya se yukta jo ( ziSya ) guru ke samIpa (apanI)
AlocanA kara lete haiM, (ve) samAdhimaraNa ko prApta karate haiM aura ArAdhaka
hote haiN| (26) alpatama bhAva-zalya se yukta jo ( ziSya ) guru ke samIpa
(apanI) AlocanA nahIM karate haiM, ve zrutajJAna se samRddha hote hue bhI
ArAdhaka nahIM hote haiN| (27-28) duSprayukta zastra, viSa, preta, asamyak
prakAra se saMcAlita yantra evaM kruddha sarpa bhI pramAdI kA utanA aniSTa nahIM
karate jitanA aniSTa samAdhikAla meM mana meM rahe hue mAyA, mithyAtva evaM
nidAna rUpa bhAva-zalya karate haiM ( isase) bodhi kI prApti durlabha ho jAtI
hai aura ( vyakti ) anaMtasaMsArI ho jAtA hai|| (29) isIlie garva-rahita (
sAdhaka ) punarjanma rUpI latA ke mUla mithyA darzana zalya, mAyA zalya evaM
nidAna (zalya ) ko ( antaraMga se) nikAla dete haiN| (AlocanA phala) (30) guru
ke sAnidhya meM ( apane ) kRta pApa kI AlocanA aura nindA karake manuSya zIghra
hI usI prakAra nirbhAra ho jAtA hai, jisa prakAra bojha ko utAra dene para bojhA
Dhone vaalaa| .

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Great Chapter on the Five Great Vows (Pāyachchitta Anusaran Paruvana)
**(Following the Confession)**  The confession that the guru instructs on the
path, that should be followed diligently, with a fear of falling into wrong
conduct. || 31 ||  **(Free from the Ten Evils)**  Therefore, everything should
be avoided with a mind free from the ten evils. Whatever action is done, it
should be spoken of as if it were a dream. || 32 ||  **(Carrying a Living Being,
Cutting, Stealing, Lying, and Sexual Misconduct)**  The beginning of the taking
of life, the five kinds of stealing, the three kinds of lying, and sexual
misconduct, all these should be completely abandoned, as well as the acceptance
of gifts. || 33 ||  **(Food and Drink)**  All food and drink, both external and
internal, should be consumed in three ways. || 34 ||  **(Purity of Conduct,
Purity of Thought, and Right Understanding)**  When a famine arises, or a great
calamity occurs, whatever is protected and not destroyed, that should be known
as purity of conduct. || 35 ||  **(Right Understanding)**  Whatever is not
tainted by attachment, aversion, or delusion, that should be known as purity of
thought and right understanding. || 36 ||  **(The Limitless Ocean)**  The ocean
of milk, the ocean of honey, and the ocean of water are all limited. But the
ocean of the world is limitless, with countless mothers and fathers. || 37 ||
**(The Rising of the Sun)**  Many times, the sun rises and sets in the ocean of
water. Similarly, many times, the sun of knowledge rises and sets in the ocean
of the world. || 38 ||  **(Summary)**  1. Whatever action is done, it should be
spoken of as if it were a dream. 2. All gifts should be abandoned. 3. All
acceptance of gifts should be abandoned. 4. Many times, the sun rises and sets
in the ocean of water.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccAsAgapaDaparva (pAyacchitANusaraNaparUvaNA) tassa ya pAyacchittaM jaM
maggaviU gurU uvaisati  /  taM taha aNusariyanvaM aNavatthapasaMgabhIeNaM  //
31  //  dasadosavippamukkaM tamhA savvaM agUhamANeNaM  /  jaM kiMpi' kayamakajja
taM jahavattaM kaheyabvaM  //  32 //  ( pANavahAipalyAsANaM asagAiyosiraNA ya)
sambaM pANAraMbhaM paJcaklAmI ya aliyayaNaM c| sabvamadinnAdANaM abbaMbha
pariggahaM ceva  //  33  //  savvaM pi asaNa pANaM caubvihaM jo ya bAhiro uchii|
abhitaraM ca uvahiM savvaM tiviheNa vosire  //  34  //  ( pAlaNAsuddha-
bhAvasuddhapaccakkhANasahavaM ) katAre dubhikkhe Ayake vA mahayA samuppanne  /
jaM pAliyaM, na bhaggaM taM jANasu pAlaNAsuddhaM  //  35  //  rAgeNa va doseNa
va pariNAmeNa va na dUmiyaM jNtu| taM khalu paccakkhANaM bhAvavisuddha
muNeyavvaM  //  36  /  /  (nimveovaeso) pIyaM thaNayacchoraM sAgarasalilAu
bahutaraM hojjaa| saMsArammi aNate mAINaM anmamannAgaM  // 37 //  bahuso vi eva
ruNNaM puNo puNo tAsu sAsu jaaiisu| nayaNodayaM pi jANasu bahuyayaraM
sAgarajalAo  //  38  //  2. savaM ca'dattadANaM sN| 3. sa'bbabhapa0 pu0|| 1.
kiMci kadeg saM0  /  4. vi mae rudeg saa0||

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Great Discourse on Atonement (Atonement Practice Model)  (31) When a
knowledgeable guru instructs a disciple on the atonement for their offense, the
disciple, who is fearful of the cycle of births and deaths, should follow the
instructions diligently. (32) Freed from the ten vices, the disciple should
confess all their actions and inactions, without hiding anything, to their guru.
(Rejection of violence, etc., and renunciation of food, etc.) (33) I renounce
all forms of violence, falsehood, theft, sexual misconduct, and possessions.
(34) I renounce all four types of food (eating, drinking, etc.), all external
possessions, and all internal possessions (passions). (Renunciation in the form
of pure conduct, pure intention, and complete rejection) (35) I consider those
rules of conduct that are not broken even in the face of a terrifying forest,
famine, or extreme terror, to be pure. (36) I consider that renunciation which
is not tainted by attachment, aversion, or passion, to be pure in intention.
(Discourse on Dispassion) (37) This being has drunk so much milk from the
breasts of different mothers in its countless cycles of existence that it
surpasses the water of the ocean. (38) This being has cried so much in different
wombs during its countless cycles of existence that its tears surpass the water
of the ocean.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahAtvAkhyAnamakIrNaka (prAyazcita anusaraNa prarUpaNA) (31) (ziSya ke aparAdha
ko jAnakara ) sanmArga-vijJa guru ( use ) jisa prAyazcita kA nirdeza karate
haiM, anavasthA-bhIru usa (ziSya ) ko usI prakAra usakA anusaraNa karanA caahie|
(32) dasa doSoM se vimukta (vaha ziSya ) samasta ( doSoM ko) binA chipAe hue hI
jo kucha bhI kArya-akArya kiyA hai, usako usI prakAra ( guru ke samakSa ) kaha
de| (prANa-hiMsA Adi kA pratyAkhyAna aura asaNa Adi kA parityAga) (33) sabhI
prakAra kI prANa-hiMsA, asatya bana, adatta grahaNa (stena karma ), abrahmacarya
evaM parigraha ko ( maiM ) tyAmatA huuN| (34) asaNa, pAna Adi cAra prakAra ke
AhAra, samasta bAhya upadhi (parigraha ) evaM jo abhyantara upadhi (kaSAya-
bhAva) haiM, (sAdhaka una ) sabhI ko tInoM prakAra se tyaage| (nirdoSa pAlana,
bhAva zuddha aura pratyAkhyAna svarUpa) (35) bhayAnaka aTavI, durbhikSa athavA
atyadhika AtaMkapUrNa sthiti ke utpanna hone para bhI jo AcAra-niyama khaNDita
nahIM kiye jAte, unakA pAlana hI nirdoSa jaanauN| (36) rAga, dveSa tathA bhAva
se jo (pratyAkhyAna ) dUSita nahIM hotA, usI pratyAkhyAna ko bhAva-vizuddha
jAnanA caahie| ( vairAgya upadeza) (37) ( yaha jIva ) ananta saMsAra meM
(paribhramaNa karate hue ) alaga_ alaga mAtAoM ke stanoM kA itanA adhika dUdha
po cukA hai ki ( usakI mAtrA ) samudra ke jala se bhI bahuta adhika hai| (38)
(yaha jIva saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karate hue ) bAra-bAra una-una yoniyoM meM
itanA adhika royA hai ki ( usake) nayanodaka (azrurUpI jala ) ( kI mAtrA )
samudra ke jala se bhI bahuta adhika jaanoN|

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mahapacchalanaparinnayan  There is no such thing as a "good" death in this
world.  Even while wandering in the cycle of existence, there is no place where
one can die peacefully.  || 39 ||  There are countless births in this world,
millions of species, and countless beings are born in each of them.  || 40 ||
(Panditarana Paruvaana) I am afraid of dying in the animal realm, where there
are many deaths and many young ones die.  I am afraid of dying a Panditarana
death.  || 41 ||  I am afraid of dying a Panditarana death because of my
attachment to my wife, my children, my brothers, and my sisters.  || 42 ||  The
world is filled with attachments to family, friends, and worldly possessions.
Many beings are born and reborn, but they do not find refuge in these things.
|| 43 ||  One creates karma, another experiences the consequences of that karma.
One is reborn, lives, ages, and dies, caught in the cycle of existence.  || 44
||  I am afraid of dying a Panditarana death because of the suffering of birth,
death, and the hells.  || 45 ||  I am afraid of dying a Panditarana death
because of the suffering of birth, death, and the hells in the animal realm.  ||
46 ||  I am afraid of dying a Panditarana death because of the suffering of
birth, death, and the hells in the human realm.  || 47 ||  I am afraid of dying
a Panditarana death because of the suffering of birth, death, and the hells in
the heavenly realms.  || 48 ||  Only one Panditarana death can break the cycle
of countless rebirths.  One must die this death to become liberated.  || 49 ||
How can I achieve this Panditarana death, which the Jinas have attained?  How
can I become pure and liberated?  || 50 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccaklANapaiNNayaM natthi kira so paeso loe vAlaggakoDimitto vi| saMsAre
saMsaraMto jattha na jAo mao vA vi  //  39  //  culasII kila loe' joNINaM
pmuhsyshssaaii| ekkekkammi ya etto aNaMtakhutto samuppanno  //  40 //
(paMDiyamaraNaparUvaNA) uDDhamahe tiriyammi ya mayAiM bahuyAI baalmrnnaaii| to
tAi saMbharaMto paMDiyamaraNaM marIhAmi  /  /  41  //  mAyA mi tti piyA me bhAyA
bhagiNI ya putta dhIyA ya  /  eyAI saMbharaMto paMDiyamaraNaM marIhAmi  /  /  42
//  mAyA-pii-baMdhUhi saMsAratthehiM pUrio logo| bahujoNivAsieNaM na ya te tANaM
ca saraNaM ca  /  /  43  //  . ekko karei kammaM ekko aNuhavai dukkayavivAgaM  /
ekko saMsarai jio jara-maraNa-cauggaIguvilaM  //  44  //  "uvveyaNayaM jammaNa-
maraNaM naraesu veyaNAo vA  /  eyAiM saMbharaMto paMDiyamaraNaM marIhAmi  //  45
//  "uvveyaNayaM jammaNa-maraNaM tiriesu veyaNAo vaa| eyAiM saMbharaMto
paMDiyamaraNaM marIhAmi  //  46  //  "uvvayaNayaM jammaNa-maraNaM maNuesu
veyaNAo vaa| eyAiM saMbharaMto paMDiyamaraNaM marIhAmi  // 47 //  "unveyaNayaM
jammaNa-maraNaM cavaNaM ca devlogaao| eyAiM saMbharaMto paMDiyamaraNaM marIhAmi
//  48 //  ekkaM paMDiyamaraNaM chidai jAIsayAI bhuyaaii| taM maraNaM mariyavvaM
jeNa mao summao hoi  //  49  //  kaiyA Nu taM sumaraNaM paMDiyamaraNaM jiNehiM
pannattaM  /  suddho uddhiyasallo pAovagao marIhAmi ?  // 50 //  1. dege
joNIpamuhAi saya saa0| 2. miyAI pu0| 3. dhUyA pu0 sA0  /  4. degehiM na pu0 sA0
/  5. degmvevaNa0 sN0| .

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mahapratyakhyan Prakirnak 13  (39) There is no place in the universe, even a
single hair's breadth, where this being has not taken birth and death while
wandering in the world. (40) Eighty-four lakh main divisions of species are said
to exist in the universe, and this being has been born in each of these species
countless times. (Panditmaran Praroopana) (41) I have died countless times in
the upper, lower, and intermediate realms due to ignorance (Balmaran).
Therefore, remembering those Balmarans, I will die the death of a wise one
(Panditmaran). (42-43) Remembering the impermanence of worldly relationships
like parents, siblings, and children, I will die the death of a wise one.
Because mothers, fathers, relatives, and all beings in the world, in various
species, are neither protectors nor saviors. (44) The being alone performs
karma, alone experiences the consequences of its bad karma, and alone attains
old age and death, wandering in the four miserable states. (45) Remembering the
pains of birth, death, anxiety, and hellish life, I will die the death of a wise
one. (46) Remembering the pains of birth, death, anxiety, and animal life, I
will die the death of a wise one. (47) Remembering the pains of birth, death,
anxiety, and human life, I will die the death of a wise one. (48) Remembering
birth, death, anxiety, and falling from the heavenly realms, I will die the
death of a wise one. (49) One Panditmaran ends hundreds of cycles of existence,
therefore one should die that death (Panditmaran) which leads to remembrance.
(50) This remembrance is called Panditmaran by the Jinas. Having removed the
thorns of Maya, Nidana, and Mithya (from the body), will I die the pure death of
Praayopgaman?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApratyAkhyAnaprakIrNaka 13 (39) loka meM vAlAgrakoTi ( saMkhyA vizeSa )
mAtra bhI vaha sthAna ( avaziSTa ) nahIM rahA hai, jahA~ saMsAra meM
paribhramaNa karate hue ( isa jIva ne ) janma-maraNa na kiyA ho  /  (40) loka
meM yoniyoM ke caurAsI lAkha mukhya bheda kahe gae haiM aura ( yaha jIva ) ina
pratyeka yoniyoM meM anantabAra utpanna huA hai  /  ( paMDitamaraNa prarUpaNA )
( 41 ) Urdhva, adhaH aura tiryak loka meM mere dvArA aneka bAra bAlamaraNa (
ajJAna - maraNa) marA gayA hai  /  isalie (aba maiM ) una bAla-maraNoM ko
smaraNa karatA huA paMDitamaraNa ( samAdhimaraNa ) marU~gA  /  (42-43) mAtA-
pitA, bhAI-bahina aura putra-putrI rUpa ina ( sAMsArika saMbaMdhoM kI azaraNatA
) ko smaraNa karatA huA meM paMDitamaraNa marU~gA  /  kyoMki mAtA, pitA, bandhu
aura saMsAra meM vividha yoniyoM meM rahe hue samasta prANI na to ( kisI ke)
rakSaNakartA hai aura na trANadAtA hI hai  /  (44) jIva akelA karma karatA hai,
akelA apane duSkarmoM ke vipAka ko bhogatA hai aura akelA hI jarA maraNa ko
prApta kara kuTila catugati meM paribhramaNa karatA hai  /  (45) janma, maraNa,
udvignatA tathA nArakIya jIvana meM jo vedanAeM haiMinako smaraNa karatA huA (
aba maiM ) paMDitamaraNa marU~gA  /  (46) janma, maraNa, udvignatA tathA tiyaMca
jIvana meM jo vedanAe~ haiMinako smaraNa karatA huA ( aba maiM ) paMDitamaraNa
marU~gA  /  (47) janma, maraNa, udvignatA tathA mAnava jIvana meM jo vedanAe~
haiMsant smaraNa karatA huA ( aba maiM ) paMDitamaraNa marU~gA  /  (48) janma,
maraNa, udvignatA tathA devaloka se cyuti - inako smaraNa karatA huA (aba maiM )
paMDitamaraNa marU~gA  /  (49) eka paNDitamaraNa saikar3oM bhava-paramparA kA
anta kara detA hai isalie vaha maraNa ( arthAt paMDitamaraNa ) hI maranA cAhie,
jisase maraNa sumaraNa ho jAtA hai  /  (50) jinendroM ke dvArA usI sumaraNa ko
paMDitamaraNa kahA gayA hai  /  mAyA, nidAna aura mithyA zalya ko ( zarIra se )
bAhara kiyA: huA ( maiM kyA ) zuddha prAyopagamana maraNa marU~gA ?

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 24 (Nimobeesoo) In the cycle of existence, all twenty-four types of beings
are bound. Due to the accumulation of karmic consequences, they are unable to
escape the cycle of birth and death. ||51||  All these beings are bound in the
wheel of existence, mostly due to their karmic consequences. They are bound by
their actions and their consequences, and they cannot escape this cycle. ||52||
Due to their actions, all beings are born in the hellish realms. They are born
in the hellish realms due to their actions, and they are born in the realms of
misery due to their actions. ||53||  Due to their actions, they are born in the
hellish realms. A fish goes to the terrible hell due to its actions. A person
who eats meat is not able to escape the hellish realms. ||54||  Even if a being
is subjected to thousands of tortures like thorns, stones, fire, salt water,
etc., it cannot be freed from the cycle of birth and death by sensual pleasures.
||55||  Even if a being is subjected to thousands of tortures like thorns,
stones, fire, salt water, etc., it cannot be freed from the cycle of birth and
death by material wealth. ||56||  Even if a being is subjected to thousands of
tortures like thorns, stones, fire, salt water, etc., it cannot be freed from
the cycle of birth and death by delicious food. ||57||  A being trapped in the
cycle of birth and death is like a fish caught in a net, or like a person
trapped in a terrible hell. It cannot be freed from the cycle of birth and death
by fragrant flowers. ||58||  This being is bound by its actions and cannot
escape the cycle of birth and death. It is constantly subjected to the cycle of
birth, aging, sickness, and death. It is constantly subjected to the cycle of
birth, aging, sickness, and death. ||59||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 24 (nimobaeso) bhavasaMsAre savve cauvvihA poggalA mae bddhaa|
pariNAmapasaMgeNaM avihe kammasaMghAe  // 51  /  /  saMsAracakkavAle savve te
pogmalA mae bhuso| AhAriyA ya pariNAmiyA ya na ya haM gao titti  /  /  52  //
AhAranimittAgaM' ahayaM savvesu narayaloesu  /  ubavaNNo mire subahuso savvAsu
ya micchajAIsu  /  /  53  /  /  AhAranimittAga "macchI gacchati dAruNe nre|
saccitto AhAro na khamo maNasA vi pattheu  //  54  //  taNa-kaTTaNa va aggI
lavaNajalo vA niishssehiN|| na imo jIvo "sakko tippeu kAma-bhogehiM  /  /  55
//  taNa-kaTThaNa va aggI lavaNajalo vA naIsahassehiM  /  na imo jIvo 'sakko
tippeu atthasAreNaM  //  56  //  taNa-kaTThaNa va aggI lavaNajalo vA
"naIsahassehiM  /  na imo jIvo sikko tippeu bhoyaNavihIe  /  /  57  /  /
valayAmuhasAmANo duppAro va Narao 'aprimejo| na imo jIvo 1degsakko tippeugaMdha-
mallahiM  /  /  58  //  1'aviyaNho'yaM jIvo aIyakAlammi AgamissAe  /  sadANa ya
rUvANa ya gaMdhANa rasANa phAsANaM  //  59  //  1. nimitteNaM adeg sA0  /  2. mi
ya ba pu0 sA0  / 3. ranimittoNaM madeg sA0  /  4. yicchA pu0| 5-6. sakkA pu0| 7.
deghassesu sN0| 8. sakkA pu0  /  9. parimijjo sA0  /  10. sakkA tappe saa0| 11.
avivaddho'yaM sA0  /  avitatto'yaM saapaa|

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Great Path (Niry-Upadesh) (51)  While wandering in the world of
existence, all four types of pudgala dravya (skandha, desha, pradesha, and
paramanu) have been bound to me (as karma). And through the results of my mind
(mano-bhavas), I have accumulated eight types of karma. (52) While wandering in
the cycle of existence, all those pudgala dravya have been transformed into food
by me, yet I have not attained liberation. (53) Due to my greed for food, I have
been born in the lower realms, in all the hells, and in many mleccha jati (lowly
castes) in the human realm. (54) Due to greed for food, fish go to the painful
hell realms. Therefore, even mentally desiring food with awareness is not
permissible for a muni. (55) Just as fire cannot be satiated by offerings of
grass and wood, and the salt sea cannot be filled by the waters of thousands of
rivers, this being cannot be satisfied by sensual pleasures. (56) Just as fire
cannot be satiated by offerings of grass and wood, and the salt sea cannot be
filled by the waters of thousands of rivers, this being cannot be satisfied by
wealth. (57) Just as fire cannot be satiated by offerings of grass and wood, and
the salt sea cannot be filled by the waters of thousands of rivers, this being
cannot be satisfied by various types of food. (58) Just as it is difficult to
cross a vast hell like a great fire, this being cannot be satisfied by
fragrances and garlands. (59) This being has never been satisfied by sound,
form, fragrance, taste, and touch in the past, and will never be satisfied in
the future.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahAmArgaka (nira upadeza ) (51) bhava saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karate hue (
skandha, deza, pradeza aura paramANu rUpa) cAroM prakAra kA samasta pudgala
dravya mere dvArA (karma rUpa meM pariNata hokara) baddha humA hai tathA mana ke
pariNAmoM (manobhAvoM) dvArA ( maiMne ) ATha prakAra ke karma saMcita kiye haiN|
(52) saMsAra ke cakravAla meM paribhramaNa karate hue ve samasta pudgala dravya
mere dvArA AhAra rUpa meM pariNata hue haiM, to bhI mujhe tapti prApta nahIM huI
hai| (53) AhAra kI lolupatA ke kAraNa ( maiM ) adholoka meM, sabhI narakoM meM
tathA ( manuSya loka meM ) aneka bAra mleccha jAtiyoM meM utpanna huA huuN| (54)
AhAra kI lolupatA ke kAraNa machaliyA~ duHkha-pUrNa naraka loka meM jAtI haiM  /
isIlie (muni ke lie) sacitta AhAra kI mana se bhI icchA karanA kSamya nahIM hai|
(55) (jisa prakAra ) tRNa aura kASTha kI Ahuti se agni ko tathA hajAroM nadiyoM
ke jala se lavaNa samudra ko ( tRpta nahIM kiyA jA sakatA hai usI prakAra )
kAma-bhogoM se isa jIva ko tRpta karanA zakya nahIM hai| (jisa prakAra ) tRNa
aura kASTha kI Ahuti se agni ko tathA hajAroM nadiyoM ke jala se lavaNa samudra
ko ( tRpta nahIM kiyA jA sakatA hai usI prakAra) dhana se isa jIva ko tRpta
karanA zakya nahIM hai| (57) (jisaprakAra ) tRNa aura kASTha kI Ahuti se agni ko
tathA hajAroM nadiyoM ke jala se lavaNa samudra ko ( tRpta nahIM kiyA jA sakatA
hai usI prakAra ) vividha prakAra ke bhojana se isa jIva ko tRpta karanA zakya
nahIM hai| (58) (jisaprakAra ) bar3avAnala ke samAna vizAla naraka ko pAra
karanA kaThina hai ( usIprakAra ) gandha-mAlya se isa jIva ko tRpta karanA zakya
nahIM hai| (59) yaha jIva zabda, rUpa, gandha, rasa aura sparza se na to
atItakAla meM (kabhI) tRpta huA hai aura na hI bhaviSyakAla meM kabhI tRpta
hogaa|

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This great ascetic, born from the wish-fulfilling tree, among the gods and the
Kuru clan, is not attached to the world, nor to men, nor to the gods. ||60||
Neither by food nor by drink does he become attached to this body. If he is to
be reborn, then he will be reborn. ||61||  He has enjoyed the best of pleasures,
the royal pleasures of the wheel-turning king. He has seen the infinite, and is
not attached to it. ||62||  He has enjoyed the pleasures of the milk-filled
clusters, the sweet fruits, the great oceans, and many others. But his thirst is
quenched by the water of liberation. ||63||  He has enjoyed the three kinds of
pleasures, the pleasures of the senses, the pleasures of the mind, and the
pleasures of the body. But he is not attached to them. ||64||  Whatever desires
I have, I have given them up, along with anger, hatred, and attachment. I have
given up all my possessions and I am content. ||65||  He has cut through the net
of delusion, and has abandoned the eight karmas. He has broken the chains of
birth and death, and has attained liberation. ||66||  He has conquered the five
great vows, the three kinds of vows, and the vows of the body, speech, and mind.
He is ready to face death. ||67||  (The five great vows)  I will protect myself
from anger, pride, deceit, greed, and hatred. I will be mindful and protect
myself from these five great vows. ||68||  I will avoid quarreling, backbiting,
and gossip. I will be silent and protect myself from these five great vows.
||69||  I will control my five senses and avoid the five kinds of sensual
pleasures. I will be fearless and protect myself from these five great vows.
||70||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccasApainayaM kappatarusaMbhavesU devuttarakuravasaMpasUesu  /  uvavAe Na
ya titto, na ya nara-vijjAhara-suresu  //  60 //  . khaieNa va pIeNa va na ya
eso tAio havai appA  /  jai duggaina vaccai to nUNaM tAio hoI  //  61  //
deviMda-cakkavaTTittaNAI rajjAi uttamA bhogaa| pattA aNaMtakhutto na ya haM
titti gao tehiM  /  /  62  //  khIradagucchurasesu sAUsu mahodahIsu bahuso vi  /
uvavaNNo Na ya taNhA chinnA me sIyalajaleNaM  //  63  //  tiviheNa ya suhamaulaM
tamhA kAmaraivisayasokkhANaM  /  bahuso suhamaNubhUyaM na ya suhataNhA
paricchiNNA  //  64  //  jA kAi patthaNAo kayA mae rAga-dosavasaeNaM  /
paDibaMdheNa bahuvihaM taM nide taM ca garihAmi  //  65  //  haMtUNa mohajAlaM
chettUNa ya aTThakammasaMkaliyaM  /  jammaNa-maraNarahaTTa bhettUNa 4bhavAo
muccihisi  //  66  /  /  paMca ya mahavvayAItivihaM tiviheNa AraheUNaM  /  maNa-
vayaNa-kAyagutto sajjo maraNaM paDicchijjA  /  /  67  /  /
(paMcamahanvayarakkhAparUvaNA) kohaM mANaM mAyaM lohaM pijjaM taheya dosaM ca  /
caiUNa appamatto rakkhAmi mahavvae paMca  //  68 //  kalahaM abbhakkhANaM
pesuNNaM pi ya parassa parivAyaM  /  parivajjato gutto rakkhAmi mahAvvae paMca
//  69  //  paMceMdiyasaMvaraNaM paMcava nirubhiUNa kAmaguNe  /  "accAsAtaNabhIo
rakkhAmi mahatvae paMca  //  70  //  1.deg bhavesu devuttarakuruvaMsapasU pu0
sA0  /  2. to maraNe tA pu0 sA  /  3. degdagecchu sA0  /  4. degvA vimu sA0  /
5. degsAyaNadeg saM0 vinA  /

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Great Renunciation Discourse (60)  Devakuru and Uttar Kuru – where
Kalpavriksha trees eternally exist, (there) born and reborn as humans,
Vidyadharas and Devas, (this being) has not been satiated. (61) The soul does
not attain liberation through eating and drinking. If (the soul) does not desire
hellish realms, then it surely attains liberation. (62) (I) have attained the
supreme enjoyments of Devas, Chakravartis (emperors) and kingdoms countless
times, yet I have not been satisfied by them. (63) (I) have been born countless
times in the Kshirodak ocean, Ikshu-ras ocean and the delicious Mahodadhi ocean,
yet my thirst has not been quenched by their cool waters. (64) (This being) has
experienced countless times the unparalleled joy of sensual pleasures related to
love and desire in all three ways, yet its thirst for sensual pleasures has not
been quenched.  Driven by attachment and aversion, whoever (person) makes
various requests to me with attachment, I rebuke and scorn them. By ending the
web of delusion, piercing the eight accumulated karmas, and breaking the cycle
of birth and death (samsara), you will be liberated from the world (bhavan-
parampara). (67) (The seeker) should desire the death of a wise person,
observing the five great vows in all three ways, and being restrained in mind,
speech and body (i.e., possessing tri-gupta). (Five Great Vows Protection) (68)
Abandoning anger, pride, deceit, greed and similarly attachment and aversion, I
(am) diligently protecting the five great vows. (69) Abandoning strife, slander,
gossip and criticism of others, I (am) restrainedly protecting the five great
vows. (70) By restraining the five types of sensual qualities and the five
senses,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApratyAkhyAnaprakIrNaka (60) devakura aura uttarakuru'-jahA~ sadaiva
kalpavRkSa hote haiM, (vahA~ ) utpanna hokara tathA manuSya, vidyAdhara aura
deva rUpa meM utpanna hokara bhI ( yaha jIva ) tRpta nahIM huA hai| (61) khAne-
pIne se yaha AtmA trANa prApta nahIM kara pAtI hai| yadi (AtmA) durgati ko nahIM
cAhatI hai to nizcaya hI trANa prApta karatI hai| (62) ( maiMne ) devendroM,
cakravatiyoM ( samrAToM) aura rAjyoM ke uttama bhogoM ko anantabAra prApta kiyA
hai, to bhI unase mujhe tRpti nahIM (63) (meM) kSIrodaka samudra, ikSurasa
samudra tathA svAdiSTa mahodadhi samudra meM aneka bAra utpanna huA hai, to bhI
unake zItala jala se bhI merI tRSNA zAMta nahIM huI hai| (64) (isa jIva ne )
kAma-rati sambandhI viSaya-sukhoM ke atula Ananda kA tInoM prakAra se anekabAra
anubhava kiyA hai phira bhI ( isake ) viSaya-sukha kI tRSNA zAMta nahIM huI hai|
rAga-dveSa ke vazIbhUta hokara jo koI (vyakti) Asakti pUrvaka mujhase vividha
yAcanA karatA hai to maiM usakI niMdA aura gardA karatA huuN| moha jAla ko
samApta karake, saMkalita kiye hue ATha karmoM ko cheda karake aura janma-maraNa
ke cakra (ra~haTa) ko tor3a karake tuma saMsAra (bhava-paramparA) se mukta ho
skoge| (67) (sAdhaka ) trividha-trividha rUpa se paMca mahAvratoM kA pAlana
karake tathA mana, vacana aura zarIra se saMyata ( arthAt trigupti se yukta)
hokara paMDitamaraNa kI icchA kre| (paMca mahAvata rakSA prarUpaNA) (68) krodha,
mAna, mAyA, lobha aura usI prakAra rAga-dveSa ko tyAga karake apramatta huA (
maiM ) pA~ca mahAvratoM kI rakSA karatA huuN| (69) kalaha, lAJchana, cugalI aura
para-niMdA ko tyAgate hue ( maiM) saMyatI pA~ca mahAvratoM kI rakSA karatA huuN|
(70) pAMca prakAra ke kAma guNoM kA nirodha karake aura paMcendriyoM kA 1.
devakuru aura uttarakuru uttama bhoga bhUmi hai| vahA~ sadaiva hI pahalA aura
dUsarA bArA rahatA hai tathA sadaiva sabhI icchAeM pUrNa karane vAle kalpavRkSa
vahA~ hote hai|

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Great Liberation of the Five Great Vows  **Verse 71:** The dark blue
robe, the Jain ascetic, is a restraint against the external world. I hold the
five great vows with great importance.  **Verse 72:** The white robe, the Jain
ascetic, is a restraint against the internal world. I hold the five great vows
with great importance.  **Verse 73:** With the mind, with the truth of the mind,
with effort, and with action, I hold the five great vows with great importance.
**Verse 74:** Free from the fear of the seven deadly sins, having overcome the
four attachments, and with the eight-fold attainment, I hold the five great vows
with great importance.  **Verse 75:** With the knowledge of the five great vows,
the right understanding, the right contemplation, the right knowledge, and the
right vision, I hold the five great vows with great importance.  **Verse 76:**
Free from the three types of violence, pure in the three jewels, free from the
three types of attachment, I hold the five great vows with great importance.
**Verse 77:** (Understanding the five great vows) I understand the five great
vows, the right understanding, and the right contemplation. I understand the
five great vows, the middle path, the right understanding, and the right refuge.
**Verse 78:** (The Great Treasure) Just as a ship full of jewels is safe in the
ocean, so too is a wise person who is free from attachment to the world.
**Verse 79:** Just as a ship full of jewels is safe in the ocean, so too is a
wise person who is free from attachment to the world. Thus, the wise and
courageous ones, who are free from attachment to the world, are praised.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccakkhANapaNNaya kiNhA nIlA kAU lesA jhANAI attr-rodaaii| 'parivajjito
gutto rakkhAmi mahavvae paMca  //  71 //  teU pamhA sukkA lesA jhANAI dhmm-
suukkaaii| uvasaMpanno jutto rakkhAmi mahanvae paMca  /  /  72  //  maNasA
maNasaccaviU vAyAsacceNa karaNasacceNa  /  tiviheNa vi saccaviU rakkhAmi
mahavvae paMca  /  /  73  //  sattabhayavippamukko cattAri niru bhiUNa ya kasAe
/  aTThamayaTThANajaDho rakkhAmi mahavvae paMca  //  74  //  'guttIo samiI-
bhAvaNAo nANaM ca daMsaNaM ceva  /  uvasaMpanno jutto rakkhAmi mahatvae paMca
//  75  /  /  evaM tidaMDavirao tikaraNasuddho tisllnissllo| tiviheNa appamatto
rakkhAmi mahavvae paMca  // 76  //  ( gutti-samiipAhaNNaparUvaNA) saMgaM
parijANAmi sallaM tiviheNa uddhareUNaM  /  guttIo samiIo majjhaM tANaM ca
saraNaM ca  /  /  77 //  (tavamAhappaM) jaha khuhiyacakkavAle poyaM
rayaNabhariyaM samudammi  /  nijjAmagA dharatI kayakaraNA buddhisaMpaNNA  // 78
//  tavapoyaM guNabhariyaM parIsahummIhi khuhiumAraddhaM  /  taha ArAhiti viU
uvaesa'valaMbagA dhIrA  //  79  //  1. degvajjaMto saM0 vinaa| 2. sammattaM
guttIo samiIo bhAvaNAo nANaM ca uvasaM 10  /  3. 'mAiTTha (kha) saM0  /

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
By practicing the **Mahapratyakhyana** and **Prakirnak** **Samvara**, and being
fearless of honor and dishonor, I protect the five great vows. (71) By
abandoning **Krishna Leshya**, **Neel Leshya**, **Kapot Leshya**, and **Aart**
and **Roudra** **Dhyana**, I, with restraint, protect the five great vows. (72)
By attaining **Tejo Leshya**, **Padma Leshya**, and **Shakl Leshya**, and
**Dharma Dhyana** and **Shakl Dhyana**, I, with restraint, protect the five
great vows. (73) Knowing truth with the mind, speaking truth with the words, and
acting truthfully with the body - in this way, as a **Satya-vid**, I protect the
five great vows. (74) By restraining the four **Kshayas**, being free from the
seven types of fear, and abandoning the eight **Mad** places, I protect the five
great vows. (75) By being endowed with **Gupti** (**Tri-Gupti**), **Samiti**
(**Panch Samiti**), **Bhavana** (**Dwadasha Bhavana**), and knowledge and
vision, I, with restraint, protect the five great vows. (76) Being free from the
three staffs, pure in the three organs, and free from the three **Shalyas** - in
this way, I, with unwavering focus, protect the five great vows. (**Gupti Samiti
Pradhan Prarupana**) (77) By eliminating the three types of **Shalyas**, I know
the consequences of attachment. **Guptis** and **Samitis** are my refuge and
salvation. (**Tap Mahatmya**) (78-79) Just as a skilled and intelligent
**Niryamak** (ship captain) protects a ship filled with jewels in a turbulent
sea with a **Chakraval**, similarly, those who follow the teachings, with
patience and wisdom, protect the **Tap** (austerity) ship filled with virtues in
the sea of **Trishna** (desire) that is turbulent with waves of **Parishad**
(society).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApratyAkhyAnaprakIrNaka saMvaraNa karake mAna-apamAna se bhayabhIta huA (
maiM ) pA~ca mahAvratoM kI rakSA karatA huuN| (71) kRSNa lezyA, nIla lezyA,
kApota lezyA tathA Arta aura raudra dhyAna ko tyAgate hae ( maiM ) saMyatI pA~ca
mahAvratoM kI rakSA karatA huuN| (72) tejo lezyA, padma lezyA evaM zakla lezyA
tathA dharma-dhyAna aura zakla dhyAna ko prApta ( maiM ) saMyatI pAMca
mahAvratoM kI rakSA karatA huuN| (73) mana se satya jAnane vAlA, vacana se satya
bolane vAlA aura zarIra se satya AcaraNa karane vAlA-isa prakAra vividha rUpa se
satyavid ( maiM ) pA~ca mahAvratoM kI rakSA karatA huuN| (74) cAroM kaSAyoM kA
nirodha karake, sAta prakAra ke bhayoM se mukta tathA AThoM mada sthAnoM kA
tyAgI ( maiM ) pA~ca mahAvratoM kI rakSA karatA huuN| (75) gupti (trigupti ),
samiti (paMca samiti ), bhAvanA (dvAdaza bhAvanA ) evaM jJAna tathA darzana se
upasampanna (meM) saMyatI pA~ca mahAvratoM kI rakSA karatA huuN| (76) tridaMDa
se rahita, trikaraNa se zuddha, trizalya se niHzalya-isa prakAra vividha rUpa se
apramatta ( maiM ) pA~ca mahAvratoM kI rakSA karatA haiN| (gupti samiti pradhAna
prarUpaNA) (77) trividha rUpa se zalya kA nirAkaraNa karake ( maiM ) Asakti ke
pariNAma ko jAnatA huuN| guptiyA~ aura samitiyA~ hI mere lie zaraNa aura trANa
hai| (tapa mAhAtmya ) (78-79) jisaprakAra kArya kuzala aura buddhi sampanna
niryAmaka ( jahAja cAlaka) cakravAla se kSobhita samudra meM ratna se bhare hue
jahAja kI surakSA karatA hai usIprakAra upadeza kA avalambana lene vAle
dhairyavAn vidvatjana parISaha rUpI taraGgoM se kSobhita tRSNA rUpI samudra meM
guNoM se yukta tapa rUpI pota kI surakSA karate haiM ( arthAt ArAdhanA karate
haiN)|

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Great Liberation (Mahapacchakkhanapainnāya)  **(Explanation of the nature of
true fortitude)**  If those noble souls are surrounded by a multitude of
friends, they remain steadfast.  They are content with their own company, like a
mountain range or a cave. || 80 ||  If those noble souls are in difficult and
dangerous places, like mountain passes or cliffs, they remain steadfast. They
are content with their own company, like a mountain range or a cave. || 81 ||
But what about those who are alone, without the support of others, and without
the strength of companionship? Can they remain steadfast in the face of the
afterlife? || 82 ||  The teachings of the Jinas are sweet and pleasant to hear.
They are the true source of strength, and they can help us remain steadfast in
the face of the afterlife. || 83 ||  The noble qualities of a courageous person,
the company of good people, and the practice of the highest virtues are all
sources of strength. They are content with their own company, like a mountain
range or a cave. || 84 ||  **(Explanation of the benefits and drawbacks of
unskillful and skillful actions)**  Those who engage in unskillful actions in
their previous lives will experience suffering and misfortune in their next
life. They will not be able to enjoy the pleasures of the senses. || 85 ||
Those who engage in unskillful actions at the time of death will not be able to
overcome the suffering of the afterlife. They will not be able to enjoy the
pleasures of the senses. || 86 ||  Those who engage in skillful actions at the
time of death will be able to overcome the suffering of the afterlife. They will
be able to enjoy the pleasures of the senses. || 87 ||  Those who engage in
skillful actions throughout their lives will be able to overcome the suffering
of the afterlife. They will be able to enjoy the pleasures of the senses. || 88
||  Those who have accumulated good karma will be able to escape the suffering
of the afterlife. They will be able to enjoy the pleasures of the senses. || 89
||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccakkhANapaiNNaya ( appaTusAhaNaparUvaNA) jai tAva te supurisA
AyAroviyabharA nirvykkhaa| panbhAra-kaMdaragayA sAhitI appaNo aTuM  /  /  80  //
jai tAva te supurisA girikaMdara-kaDaga-visama-duggesu  /
dhiidhaNiyabaddhakacchA sAhitI appaNo aTuM  /  /  81  //  kiM puNa
aNagArasahAyageNa aNNoNNasaMgahabaleNaM  /  paraloeNaM sakkA sAheu appaNo aTTha?
/  /  82  //  jiNavayaNamappameyaM mahuraM kaNNAhuI suNateNaM  /  sakkA hu
sAhumajjhe sAheu appaNo atttth|| 83  /  /  dhIrapurisapaNNattaM
sappurisaniseviyaM paramaghoraM  /  dhannA silAyalagayA sAhitI appaNo aTuM  /  /
84  //  ( akAriyajoga-kAriyajogANaM hANi-guNaparUvaNA) bAhiti iMdiyAiM
puvvamakAriyapaiNNacArINaM  /  akayaparikamma kIvA maraNe suyasaMpayAyammi  //
85  //  pubbamakAriyajogo samAhikAmo ya maraNakAlammi  /  na bhavai parIsahasaho
visayasuhasamuio appA  //  86  //  puvi kAriyajogo sAmAhikAmo ya maraNakAlammi
/  sa bhavai parIsahasaho visayasuhanivArio" appA  //  87  /  /  puci kAriyajogo
aniyANo IhiUNa maipuvvaM  /  tAhe maliyakasAo sajjo maraNaM paDicchejjA  /  /
88 //  pAvANaM pAvANaM kammANaM appaNo sakammANaM  /  sakkA palAiu je taveNa
sammaM pautteNaM  /  /  89  //  1. degsA sAyA' sN0| 2. suhasaMgatAyammi sA0  /
suhasaMgacAyammi pu0  /  3-4. u saM0  /  5. vArao saM0  /

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mahapratyakhyanaprakirnak **(Atmarth Sadhan Prarupana) (80-83)** If a
virtuous person is free from desires and self-aware, they can attain the purpose
of their soul (i.e., attain liberation) by going to a cave in the mountains. And
if they are intelligent and equipped with practice, they can attain the purpose
of their soul (i.e., attain liberation) by residing in a cave in the mountains,
mountainous terrain, and similarly in difficult and inaccessible places. Then
why wouldn't it be possible for them to attain the purpose of their soul (i.e.,
Atmarth) in the afterlife with the help of the virtuous and through mutual
inspiration? While living among the virtuous, by listening to the sweet words of
the Jinas with their ears, a virtuous person is certainly capable of attaining
the purpose of their soul. (4) Those who attain the difficult Atmarth, which is
expounded by patient men and worshipped by virtuous men, while residing on a
stone slab, are blessed.   **(Akritayog and Kritayog Gun-Dosha Prarupana) (85)**
An extroverted person with a broken character, unrefined, and without previous
practice, even if learned, becomes impatient at the time of death. A soul that
has not practiced yoga before and is attached to worldly pleasures, even if
desiring samadhi, is not able to bear the trials at the time of death. (87) Only
a soul that has practiced yoga before and is not attached to worldly pleasures,
even if desiring samadhi, is able to bear the trials at the time of death. (88)
A person who has practiced yoga before and has become wise, free from the desire
for future fruits, and with subdued passions, embraces death willingly (i.e.,
they are not disturbed by the sight of death). (89) For one who is inclined
towards equanimity through penance, it is possible to transcend the sins of the
wicked and their own good deeds.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApratyAkhyAnaprakIrNaka ( AtmArtha sAdhana prarUpaNA) (80-83) yadi supuruSa
anAkAMkSa aura AtmajJa haiM, to ve parvata kI guphA meM jAkara apanI AtmA ke
prayojana ko siddha kara lete haiM ( arthAt mukti prApta kara lete haiM) aura
yadi ve supuruSa buddhivAn evaM sAdhanA sannaddha haiM, to parvata kI guphA,
parvatIya bhU-bhAga aura isI prakAra viSama evaM durgama sthAnoM para (sthita
hokara ) apanI AtmA ke prayojana ko siddha kara lete haiN| to phira sAdhuoM kI
sahAyatA se aura eka-dUsare kI preraNA se ( unake lie ) paraloka meM apane
prayojana kI ( arthAt AtmArtha ) kI siddhi kyoM nahIM saMbhava hogI ? sAdhuoM ke
madhya meM rahate hue madhura jinavacanoM ko kAnoM se zravaNa karake (supuruSa
apanI) AtmA ke prayojana ko siddha karane ke lie avazya hI samartha hai| (4)
dhairyavAn puruSoM dvArA pratipAdita aura satpuruSoM dvArA ArAdhita dussAdhya
Atma artha ko (jo puruSa ) zilAtala para avasthita hokara siddha kara lete haiM,
ve dhanya haiN| (akRtayoga aura kRtayoga ke guNa-doSa ko prarUpaNA) (85)
bahirmukhI indriyoM vAlA, chinna cAritra vAlA, asaMskArita tathA pUrva meM
sAdhanA nahIM kiyA huA (vyakti) zruta sampanna hokara bhI maraNakAla meM adhIra
ho jAtA hai| pUrva meM jisane yoga-sAdhanA nahIM kI hai aura ( jo) viSaya-sukhoM
meM Asakta hai, aisI AtmA samAdhi kI icchuka hokara bhI mRtyu ke avasara para
parISaha sahana karane meM samartha nahIM hotI hai| (87) pUrva meM jisane yoga-
sAdhanA kI hai aura ( jo) viSayasUkhoM meM Asakta nahIM hai, aisI AtmA hI
samAdhi kI icchuka hokara mRtyu ke avasara para parISaha sahana karane meM
samartha hotI hai| (88) pUrva meM jisane yoga-sAdhanA kI hai aura jo vivekayukta
hokara bhAvI phala kI AkAMkSA se rahita ho gayA hai aisA madita kaSAya vAlA (
vyakti ) mRtyu kA tatparatApUrvaka AliMgana kara letA hai ( arthAt vaha mRtyu ko
dekhakara vicalita nahIM hotA hai ) /  (89) jo tapa ke dvArA samatvabhAva meM
pravRtta hotA hai ( usake lie) pApiyoM ke pApakarmoM tathA apane satkarmoM kA
atikramaNa kara pAnA zakya hotA hai|

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
* Mahapacchakkhanapainnanyam ( Pandiamarana Paruvaana ) One who abandons the
death of a wise person is a good person, not a fool. He is free from the death
of a wise person, there is no end to him, he is infinite. || 90 || What is the
death of a wise person? What are the supports and the words? | What do the wise
ones like to call it? || 91 || The support is the non-attachment, the
understanding, the meditation, and the contemplation. The wise ones like to call
this the death of a wise person. || 92 || ( Anahaaragasaruvam ) The pleasures of
the senses are a great danger, they are the cause of suffering and rebirth. One
who is free from these actions is liberated at the time of death. || 93 || One
who is ashamed of his body, who is proud of his body, or who is arrogant, is not
a true seeker. || 94 || ( Arahananamahappam ) One who is wise, who is free from
suffering, who knows the path, and who has attained liberation, is a true
seeker. || 95 || ( Visuddhamanapahanam ) The purification of the mind is not a
matter of external rituals or practices. It is the purification of the mind
itself. || 96 || ( Pamayadosaparuvana ) May I be a follower of the Jinas, may I
be a meditator, may I be a yogi. May I be free from delusion at the time of
death. || 97 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 * mahApaccakkhANapaiNNayaM ( paMDiyamaraNaparUvaNA ) ekkaM paMDiyamaraNaM
paDivajjiya supuriso asaMbhaMto  /  khippaM so maraNANaM kAhI aMtaM anaMtAnaM
//  90  //  ki taM paMDiyamaraNaM ? kANi va AlaMbaNANi bhaNiyANi ? | eyAI nAUNaM
kiM AyariyA pasaMsaMti ?  //  91  //  aNasaNa pAokgamaM AlaMbaNa jhANa bhAvaNAo
ya  /  eyAI nAUNaM paMDiyamaraNaM pasaMsaMti  //  92  //  ( aNAhAragasarUvaM )
iMdiyasuhasA ulao ghoraparIsahaparAiyaparajjho  /  akayaparikamma kIvo mujjhai
ArAhaNAkAle  //  93  //  lajjAi gAraveNa ya bahussuyamaeNa vA viduccariyaM  /
je na karhiti gurUNaM na hu te ArAhagA hoMti  //  94  //  ( ArAhaNAmAhappaM )
sujjhai dukkarakArI, jANai maggaM ti pAvae kitti  /  viNigUhito jiMdas, tamhA
ArAhaNA seyA  //  95  //  ( visuddhamaNapAhaNaM ) navikaraNaM tamao saMthAro, na
vi ya phAsuyA bhUmI  /  appA khalu saMthAro hoi visuddho maNo jassa  //  96  //
( pamAyadosaparUvaNA ) jiNakya aNugayA me hou maI jhANajogamallINA  /  jaha
tammi desakAle amUDhasanno cayai dehaM  //  97  //

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mahapratyakhyana Prakirnak **(Panditmaran Prarupana)**  **(90)** The
infallible (knower of the true nature of things), the virtuous man, advocates
only Panditmaran, because it quickly ends infinite deaths (i.e., grants
liberation).   **(91)** What is Panditmaran and what are its supports? Why do
the Acharyas praise it knowing these?   **(92)** Anashan and Prayopgamana (are
Panditmaran) and Dhyana and Bhavanas (Anuprekshaas) are its supports. Knowing
these, the Acharyas praise Panditmaran.  **(Anaaradhak Swarup)**  **(93)** The
person who is engrossed in sensual pleasures, defeated by terrible trials,
attached to objects, unrefined and impatient, becomes distracted during the time
of Aradhana (i.e., at the time of Samadhimaran).  **(94)** Those who do not
reveal their bad character to the Guru due to the ego of shame, pride and being
well-versed, are not Aaradhaks.  **(Aradhana Mahatmya)**  **(95)** The one who
performs severe austerities becomes pure, and the one who knows the path of
Sadhana attains fame. And the one who criticizes his own offenses, his Aradhana
is auspicious.  **(Vishuddha Mana Pradhanya)**  **(96)** Neither a bed of grass
nor a bed of earth is the cause of Samadhimaran. The one whose mind is pure, his
soul is the true savior (from the ocean of Samsara).  **(Pramdadosha
Prarupana)**  **(97)** May I be a follower of the Jina's words, and be endowed
with wisdom, meditation and yoga, so that (when the time of death arrives) I may
be able to leave the body in that country and time, with a clear mind
(unwavering consciousness).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApratyAkhyAnaprakIrNaka ( paMDitamaraNa prarUpaNA ) (90) asaMbhrAnta (
yathArtha vastu svarUpa ke jJAtA ) satpuruSa ekamAtra paMDitamaraNa kA hI
pratipAdana karate haiM kyoMki vaha zIghra hI ananta - maraNoM kA anta kara detA
hai (arthAt mukti pradAna kara detA hai )  /  (91) vaha paMDitamaraNa kyA hai
aura usake Alambana kauna se kahe gaye. haiM ? inako jAnakara AcArya ( usakI )
prazaMsA kyoM karate haiM ? (92) anazana aura prAyopagamana ( paMDitamaraNa hai
) tathA dhyAna aura bhAvanAe~ ( anuprekSAe~ ) hI usake Alambana haiMinako
jAnakara hI ( bAcArya ) paMDitamaraNa kI prazaMsA karate haiM  /  ( anaArAdhaka
svarUpa ) (93) indriyasukhoM meM lIna, bhayaMkara parISahoM se parAjita, para (
padArthoM) meM Asakta, asaMskArita evaM adhIra vyakti ArAdhanA kAla meM ( arthAt
samAdhimaraNa ke avasara para ) vicalita ho jAtA hai  /  (94) lajjA, abhimAna
evaM bahuzrutatA ke ahaMkAra ke kAraNa jo ( ziSya apane ) duzcaritra ko guru ke
samakSa prakaTa nahIM karate haiM, ve ArAdhaka nahIM hote haiM  /  23 ( ArAdhanA
mAhAtmya ) (95) kaThina tapa karanevAlA vizuddha hotA hai aura jo sAdhanA mArga
ko jAnatA hai vaha kIrti prApta karatA hai| tathA jo apane aparAdhoM kI AlocanA
kara letA hai, usakI ArAdhanA zreyaskara hotI hai  /  ( vizuddha mana prAdhAnya
) (96) na to tRNamaya saMstAraka ( tRNoM kI zayyA ) hI samAdhimaraNa kA hetu hai
aura na prAsuka bhUmi hI  /  jisakA mana vizuddha hotA hai vahI AtmA saMstAraka
( saMsAra samudra se samyak rUpa se tArane vAlI ) hotI hai  /  ( pramAdadoSa
prarUpaNA ) (97) maiM jinavacana kA anusaraNa karane vAlA tathA viveka, dhyAna
aura yoga se yukta hoU~ tAki ( mRtyu kA avasara upasthita hone para ) usa deza
aura kAla meM amUDha saMjJA ( apramattacetA ) hokara deha kA tyAga kara sakUM  /

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 24 ## Mahapacchakkhanapainnāya  **98.**  Whoever is heedless, devoid of the
path of the Jina, and unliberated, is a thief of the senses, acting contrary to
self-restraint. (Sanvaramahappam)  **99.**  When one is established in
restraint, following the path of the Jina, then just as fire burns down a forest
with its roots and branches, so too does karma burn down completely.  **100.**
Just as fire burns down trees in a forest, so too does the knowledge of the wise
burn down karma completely.  **101.**  (Nāṇapāhaṇṇaparūvaṇā)  Just as an
ignorant person eats karma, like a hungry person eats food, so too does a wise
person eats karma with the help of breath.  **102.**  There is no escape from
death, even with the twelve auspicious signs. One should contemplate the
impermanence of all things with a focused mind.  **103.**  Whoever experiences a
surge of energy in even one birth, due to the power of the vow, will attain
knowledge and become liberated from attachment.  **104.**  Whoever experiences a
surge of energy in even one birth, due to the power of the vow, will break
through the net of delusion with the right effort.  **105.**  Whoever
experiences a surge of energy in even one birth, due to the power of the vow,
will be reborn as a human being, and will die a worthy death.  **106.**
Whatever leads to detachment should be embraced with all one's being. The one
who is awakened is liberated, and the one who is not awakened is bound to
endless suffering.  **1.**  (Dhaniyaṁ pi sā.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 24 mahApaccakkhANapaiNNaya jAhe hoi pamatto jiNavaravayaNarahio annaautto| tAhe
iMdiyacorA kariti tava-saMjamavilomaM  /  /  98 //  ( saMvaramAhappaM )
jiNavayaNamaNugayamaI jaM velaM hoi saMvarapaviTTho  /  aggI va vAusahio
samUlaDAlaM Dahai kammaM  /  /  99  //  jaha Dahai vAusahio aggI rukkhe vi
hariyavaNasaMDe  /  taha purisakArasahio nANI kammaM khayaM NeI  // 10 //
(nANapAhaNNaparUvaNA) jaM annANI kamma khavei bahayAhi vaaskoddiihiN| taM nANI
tihiM gutto khavei UsAsamitteNaM  // 10 //  na hu maraNammi uvagge sakkA
bArasaviho suykkhNdho| savvo aNuciMteuM dhaMtaM pi samatthacitteNaM  /  / 102 //
ekkammi vi jammi pae saMvegaM kuNai vIyarAyamae  /  taM tassa hoi nANaM jeNa
virAgattaNamuvei  // 103 //  ekkammi vi jammi pae saMvegaM kuNai viiyraayme| so
teNa mohajAlaM chidai ajjhappayogeNaM  // 104 //  ekkammi vi jammi pae saMvegaM
kuNai vIyarAyamae  /  vaccai naro abhikkhaM taM maraNaM teNa mariyavvaM  /  /
105 //  jeNa virAgo jAyai taM taM savvAyareNa kAyavvaM  /  muccai hu sasaMvegI,
aNaMtao hoasaMvego  // 106 /  /  1. dhaNiyaM pi saa0||

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mahapratyakhyanaprakirnak 25  (98) When a person is heedless, devoid of Jina-
vacana, and inattentive, then the thieves in the form of senses destroy (steal)
tapas and restraint. (Samvara Mahatmya)  (99) Just as fire with wind burns a
tree completely from root to tip, similarly, when the intellect, following Jina-
vacana, enters the state of samvara, it destroys karma completely.  (100) Just
as fire with wind burns trees and lush forests, similarly, a wise person,
endowed with purushartha, knowing karma, destroys them. (Jnana-Pradhanya
Prarupana)  (101) The vast karma that an ignorant person destroys over millions
of years, a wise person, endowed with trigunas, destroys in a single breath.
(102) Certainly, even a knower of the twelve types of Shruta-skandha, when near
death, cannot properly renounce them with a resolute mind.  (103) The one step
by which a person attains attachment (vairagya) in the path of the Vitaraga (the
path of Dharma), that step is his knowledge.  (104) The one step by which a
person attains attachment (vairagya) in the path of the Vitaraga (the path of
Dharma), that step, through Adhyatma Yoga, cuts through his web of delusion.
(105) The one step by which a person attains attachment (vairagya) in the path
of the Vitaraga (the path of Dharma), by repeatedly uttering that step, a person
does not die even after death (he becomes immortal).  (106) Those things that
generate detachment should be practiced with utmost respect. Because, the one
who is attached (to the world) ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApratyAkhyAnaprakIrNaka 25 ( 98 ) jisa samaya vyakti pramatta, jinavacana
rahita aura asAvadhAna hotA hai usa samaya indriyarUpI cora tapa aura saMyama kA
vilopana karate haiM (arthAt haraNa kara lete haiM )  /  ( saMvara mAhAtmya )
(99) jisa prakAra vAyu sahita agni ( vRkSa ko ) jar3a-mUla se arthAt pUrNatayA
jalA detI hai usI prakAra jinavacana kA anusaraNa karane vAlI buddhi jaba
saMvara bhAvanA meM praviSTha hotI hai taba karma ko sampUrNa rUpa se naSTa kara
detI hai  /  (100) jisa prakAra vAyu sahita agni vRkSoM evaM hare-bhare vana
pradeza ko bhI jalA detI hai usI prakAra puruSArtha yukta jJAnI vyakti karma ko
jAnakara unakA kSaya kara detA hai  /  ( jJAna - prAdhAnya prarUpaNA ) ( 101)
ajJAnI vyakti jina vipula karmoM ko karor3oM varSoM meM kSaya karatA hai, una
karmoM ko trigupti se yukta jJAnI vyakti eka zvAsa-mAtra meM hI kSaya kara detA
hai  /  ke (102) nizcaya hI mRtyu ke samIpa hone para bAraha prakAra ke
zrutaskandha jJAtA ke dvArA bhI samarthacitta se una sabakA anucitana karanA
saMbhava nahIM hai  /  (103) jisa eka pada ke dvArA ( vyakti ) vItarAga ke mata
( arthAt dharma mArga) meM saMvega ( vairAgya bhAva ) ko prApta karatA hai,
vairAgya ko prApta karAne vAlA vaha pada hI usa vyakti kA jJAna hotA hai  /
(104) jisa eka pada ke dvArA (vyakti) vItarAga ke mata ( arthAt dharma mArga)
meM saMvega ko prApta karatA hai, vaha pada AdhyAtmayoga ke dvArA usake moha
jAla ko chinna kara detA hai  /  ( 105) jisa eka pada ke dvArA (vyakti) vItarAga
ke mata ( arthAt dharmaM mArga) meM saMvega ko prApta karatA hai, usa pada kA
bAra-bAra uccAraNa karatA huA ( vaha ) manuSya marakara bhI nahIM maratA hai
(arthAt amara ho jAtA hai )  /  (106) jinase vairAgya utpanna hotA hai una unako
sarvathA sammAnapUrvaka AcArita karanA cAhie  /  kyoMki ( jo ) saMvegI hotA hai
( vaha )

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(Jinadhammasadhana) I proclaim the Dharma, established by the Jinas, in three
ways: through the path of the immobile and mobile beings, leading to liberation.
||107|| (Vivihavosiranaparuvana) First, the one who is a monk, second, the one
who is completely detached from everything. I proclaim everything that is
forbidden by the Jinas. ||108|| I proclaim the restraint of the body, the
restraint of food in four ways, and the restraint of the mind and body. ||109||
I proclaim the restraint of the mind in three ways: not thinking about anything,
not speaking about anything, and not doing anything. ||110|| (Pacchakkhane
Samāhilambho) Restraint from unwholesome actions, detachment, solitude,
renunciation of attachment, patience, liberation, and detachment. ||111|| This
is the explanation, in the context of the teachings of the Jinas. One who
understands this explanation, attains concentration. ||112|| (Arahantai
Egapayasaranagahanana Vi Vosirana Ae Arahatam) If one has the opportunity to
explain this, then one should explain it in this way, even to a single person.
||113|| 1. The path to liberation. 2. The inner self.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (jiNadhammasadahaNA) dhamma jiNapannattauM sammamiNaM saddahAmi tiviheNaM  /
tasa-thAvarabhUyahiyaM paMthaM nevvANagamaNassa'  // 107 //
(vivihavosiraNAparUvaNA) samaNo mitti ya paDhama, bIyaM savvattha saMjao mi tti|
savvaM ca vosirAmi jiNehiM jaM jaM ca paDikuLeM  // 108 //  uvahI sarIragaM
caiva AhAraM ca caunvihaM  /  maNasA vaya kAeNaM vosirAmi tti bhAvao  // 109 /
/  maNasA acitaNijjaM savvaM bhAsAya'bhAsaNijjaM ca  /  kAeNa akaraNijjaM savvaM
tiviheNa vosire||110|| ( paccakkhANeNa samAhilaMbho) assaMjamavogasaNaM uvahi
vivegakaraNaM uvasamo ya  /  paDirUyajogavirao khaMtI muttI vivego ya  // 111 //
eyaM paccakkhANaM AurajaNAvaIsu bhAveNa  /  aNNayaraM paDivaNNo jaMpato pAvai
samAhiM  /  / 112 //  ( arahaMtAiegapayasaraNagahaNaNa vi vosiraNAe ArAhAtaM)
eyaMsi nimittammI paccakkhAUNa jai kare kaalN| to paccakkhAiyavvaM imeNa ekkeNa
vi paeNaM  // 113 //  1. ninvANamaggassa sA0  /  2. aMtayaraM saM0  /

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mahaatyayana Prakirnak 27  **Liberation** is attained by one who is free from
passions (āsakti), while one who is attached to passions wanders endlessly in
the cycle of births and deaths. (Faith in Jainism)  **(107)** I have faith in
this right path (samyak dharma) as exemplified by the liberated ones (vītarāga)
in all three ways (i.e., mind, speech, and body). This path is beneficial for
all living beings, both mobile and immobile, and is the path to liberation
(nirvāṇa).  **(Various Renunciations)**  **(108)** Firstly, I am an ascetic
(śramaṇa) and secondly, I am completely restrained (samyata). Therefore, I
renounce everything that is forbidden by the Jinas.  **(109)** I renounce with
full awareness, through mind, speech, and body, all attachments (upadhi), the
body, and the four types of food.  **(110)** The practitioner should renounce,
through all three ways (i.e., mind, speech, and body), all forbidden actions
that are not worthy of thought, speech, or action.  **(Attaining Samadhi through
Renunciation)**  **(111)** In times of adversity, the practitioner should
renounce unrestraint, contemplate on attachments (upadhi), and cultivate the
feeling of calmness (upasama). They should refrain from actions of the mind,
speech, and body that are not right, and maintain awareness of forgiveness
(kṣamā) and detachment (vairāgya).  **(112)** In times of adversity, the
practitioner attains samadhi by accepting these and other renunciations with a
sense of urgency.  **(Becoming a Devotee by Taking Refuge in and Renouncing the
One-Step Path of Arhant, etc.)**  **(113)** If a monk (muni) attains the end of
time (i.e., death) by renouncing in this way, they attain samadhi through this
single step of renunciation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahAtyAyanaprakIrNaka 27 mukti ko prApta karatA hai aura ( jo ) asaMvegI (
Asakta ) hotA hai ( vaha ) ananta saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karatA hai  /  (
jinadharma meM zraddhA ) (107) vItarAga dvArA prarUpita isa samyak dharma meM (
maiM ) tInoM prakAra se ( arthAt mana, vacana va kAyA se ) zraddhA karatA hU~  /
( yaha dharma ) sa evaM sthAvara jIva samUha ke lie hitakArI hai tathA nirvANa
prApti kA mArga hai  /  ( vividha tyAga prarUpaNA ) (108) prathama to maiM
zramaNa hU~ aura dUsare meM sarvathA saMyata bhI hU~ isalie jinadevoM ke dvArA
jo-jo bhI niSiddha haiM, una sabakA meM tyAga karatA hU~  /  (109) ( maiM )
upadhi ( parigraha ), zarIra evaM cAroM prakAra ke AhAra. kA mana, vacana aura
kAyA se bhAvapUrvaka tyAga karatA hU~  /  ( 110) mana se jo cintana karane yogya
nahIM hai, vacana se jo kahane yogya nahIM hai aura zarIra se jo karane yogya
nahIM hai - una sabhI niSiddha karmoM kA ( sAdhaka ) tInoM prakAra se ( arthAt
mana, vacana evaM kAyA se ) tyAga kare  /  ( pratyAkhyAna se samAdhi prApti )
(111) ApattikAla meM sAdhaka asaMyama kA tyAga kare, upadhi ( arthAt. parigraha
) kA viveka kare aura upazama bhAva ko dhAraNa kare  /  asamyak mana, vacana
evaM kAyA ke vyApAra se virata hoe tathA kSamA bhAva aura vairAgya bhAva kA
viveka banAe rakhe ( arthAt unakA bodha kare )  /  (112) ApattikAla meM
Aturajana bhAva pUrvaka isa aura isa prakAra ke anya pratyAkhyAnoM ko grahaNa
karatA huA samAdhi ko prApta karatA hai  /  ( arahaMta Adi eka pada ke zaraNa
grahaNa evaM pratyAkhyAna karane se ArAdhakatva ) (113 ) aise avasara para
pratyAkhyAna karake yadi ( muni) kAladharma ko ( arthAt matyu ko ) prApta hotA
hai to vaha isa pratyAkhyAna ke ekahI pada se ( samAdhi ko prApta hotA hai )  /

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Mahapaccakklanapainvaayam**  My auspicious Arihantas, Siddhas, Sadhus, and
Dharma, I take refuge in them. I declare this to be auspicious. ||114||
Arihantas are auspicious to me, Arihantas are divine to me. I declare this to be
auspicious for all Arihantas. ||115||  Siddhas are auspicious to me, Siddhas are
divine to me. I declare this to be auspicious for all Siddhas. ||116||  Ayariyas
are auspicious to me, Ayariyas are divine to me. I declare this to be auspicious
for all Ayariyas. ||117||  Ujjhaayas are auspicious to me, Ujjhaayas are divine
to me. I declare this to be auspicious for all Ujjhaayas. ||118||  Sadhus are
auspicious to me, Sadhus are divine to me. I declare this to be auspicious for
all Sadhus. ||119||  The Siddha, the perfect Arihanta, is the only one who is
free from all attachments. This is the only way to attain liberation. ||120||
(Veyanahiyasanovaseso) The Muni, who is free from all attachments, does not
think about anything. What can cause suffering to a Muni who is free from all
attachments? ||121||  What is there for me to lament about in the face of
suffering? What is there to cling to? What is there to suffer from? ||122||  The
suffering of the highest beings is the highest suffering. I have realized this
through my own experience. ||123||  I have done this karma, I have accumulated
this karma. I have realized this through my own experience. ||124||  Therefore,
I am free from all suffering. I do not think about life, non-life, or the past.
||125||  1. 'Ocinna' is a Sanskrit word.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccaklANapaiNvayaM mama maMgalamarihaMtA siddhA sAha suyaM ca dhammo ya  /
tesiM saraNovagao sAvajjaM vosirAmi ti  // 114 //  arahaMtA maMgalaM majjha,
arahaMtA majjha devyaa| arahate kittaittANaM vosirAmi tti pAvagaM  // 115 //
siddhA ya maMgalaM majjha, siddhA ya majjha devayA  /  siddhe ya kittaittANaM
vosirAmi ti pAvagaM  // 116 //  AyariyA maMgalaM majjha, AyariyA majjha devayA
/  Ayarie kittaittANaM vosirAmi ti pAvagaM  // 117 /  /  ujjhAyA maMgalaM
majjha, ujjhAyA majA devyaa| ujjhAe kittaittANaM vosirAmi ti pAvagaM  // 118 //
sAhu ya maMgalaM majjha, sAhU ya majjha devayA  /  sAhU ya kittaittANaM vosirAmi
tti pAvagaM  // 119 /  /  siddha uvasaMpaNNo arahate kevali tti bhAveNaM  /
etto egayareNa vi paeNa ArAhao hoi  /  / 120 //  ( veyaNAhiyAsaNovaeso)
samuiNNaveyaNo puNa samaNo hiyaeNa kiM pi ciNtijjaa| AlaMbaNAI kAI kAUNa muNI
duhaM sahai ?  // 121 //  veyaNAsu uinnAsu kiM me sattaM niveye| kiMcA''laMbaNaM
kiccA taM dukkhamahiyAsae  /  / 122 /  /  aNuttaresu naraesu veyaNAo annuttraa|
pamAe vaTTamANeNaM mae pattA aNaMtaso  // 123 //  mae kayaM imaM kammaM
samAsajja abohiyaM  /  porANagaM imaM kammaM mae pattaM aNaMtaso  // 124 //
tAhiM dukkhavivAgAhiM 'uvaciNNAhiM tahiM tahiM  /  na ya jIvo ajIvo u kayapuvvo
u ciMtae  /  / 125 /  /  1. ociNNA' sN0|

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Mahapratyakhyana Prakirnak (114)**  Arhant, Siddha, Sadhu, Shrutagyan and
Dharma are auspicious for me. By taking refuge in them, I abandon sinful
actions. (115) Arhant is auspicious for me and Arhant is worthy of my worship.
Remembering Arhants, I abandon sinful actions. (116) Siddha is auspicious for me
and Siddha is worthy of my worship. Remembering Siddhas, I abandon sinful
actions. (117) Acharya is auspicious for me and Acharya is worthy of my worship.
Remembering Acharyas, I abandon sinful actions. (118) Upadhyaya is auspicious
for me and Upadhyaya is worthy of my worship. Remembering Upadhyayas, I abandon
sinful actions. (119) Sadhu is auspicious for me and Sadhu is worthy of my
worship. Remembering Sadhus, I abandon sinful actions. (120) Thus, with
devotion, taking refuge in any one of these - Siddha, Arhant, and Kevali - a
person becomes a devotee in this world.  **(Teaching on Enduring Pain)** (121)
When pain arises, what should a Shraman think with his heart? The Muni takes
refuge and only by taking refuge does he endure pain. (122) When pain arises,
what should be said to the being (the creature)? It is because of refuge that
you have obtained this pain. Therefore, endure it with equanimity. (123) The
pains of those existing in the last hell are extremely (painful). Due to being
under the influence of carelessness, I have obtained (that state) countless
times. (124) These (cruel) actions have been done by me because of being
ignorant. In the past, I have also done these actions many times. (125) Due to
doing those (cruel) actions, I have obtained those painful consequences. These
are the actions of the living being, not of the non-living being. One should
think like this.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApratyAkhyAnaprakIrNaka (114) arahaMta, siddha, sAdhu, zrutajJAna aura
dharma mere lie kalyANakArI hai| inakI zaraNa meM jAkara ( maiM ) pApakarma ko
tyAgatA huuN| (115) arahaMta mere lie maMgala hai aura arahaMta mere lie
pUjanIya hai| ara hantoM ko smaraNa karatA huA ( maiM ) pApakarma ko tyAgatA
huuN| (116) siddha mere lie maMgala hai aura siddha mere lie pUjanIya hai|
siddhoM ko smaraNa karatA huA ( maiM ) pApakarma ko tyAgatA huuN| (117) AcArya
mere lie maMgala hai aura AcArya mere lie pUjanIya hai| AcAryoM ko smaraNa
karatA huA ( maiM ) pApakarma ko tyAgatA huuN| (118) upAdhyAya mere lie maMgala
hai aura upAdhyAya mere lie pUjanIya hai| upAdhyAyoM ko smaraNa karatA huA( maiM
) pApakarma ko tyAgatA huuN| (119) sAdhu mere lie maMgala hai aura sAdhu mere
lie pUjanIya hai| sAdhuoM ko smaraNa karatA huA ( maiM ) pApakarma ko tyAgatA
huuN| (120) isa prakAra bhAvapUrvaka siddha, arahaMta aura kevali-inameM se kisI
eka bhI pada kI zaraNa grahaNakara ( vyakti) isa ( loka ) meM ArAdhaka hotA hai|
. ( vedanA sahana kA upadeza ) (121) vedanA ke utpanna hone para zramaNa hRdaya
ke dvArA kyA vicAra kare ? muni Alambana karatA hai aura Alambana karake hI
duHkha ko sahana karatA hai| (122) vedanA ke utpanna hone para sattva ko (prANI
ko) kyA sambodhita karanA cAhie  /  Alambana ke kAraNa hI vaha duHkha tujhe
prApta huA hai  /  ataH samabhAvapUrvaka use sahana kara  /  (123) antima naraka
meM vidyamAna ( jIvoM kI ) vedanAe~ atyadhika (kaSTa kara hotI haiM ) /  pramAda
ke vazIbhUta hokara maiMne (usa avasthA ko) anantabAra prApta kiyA hai  /  (124)
mere dvArA ajJAna se yukta hone ke kAraNa ye ( krUra ) karma kiye gaye haiM  /
pUrvakAla meM bhI mere dvArA anekabAra ye karma kiye gye| (125) una-una (krUra)
karmoM ko karane ke kAraNa ( maiM ) una duHkhavipAkoM ko prApta huA huuN| (ye)
pUrvakRta karma jIva ke hI haiM, ajIva ke nahIM  /  aisA vicAra karanA caahie|

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  20 Mahāsacakkasāgapāṇaya
(Description of Arbuddhajaya Maraṇa) The Arbuddhajaya Vihāra is thus praised by
the Jina-Ācāryas. It is served by great men, and the Arbuddhajaya Maraṇa is
praised. (126) As in the last time, the great Tīrthaṅkara-preached is praised.
Then, 'I attain the certain goal, the Arbuddhajaya Maraṇa.' (127) (Description
of Ārāhaṇā and Padāgāharaṇa) With the strength of the Yoga-saṃgraha, he performs
the Bāttīsamaṃḍiyāhi. Exerting with the Twelve-fold Austerities, he drinks the
Tavaṇehapāṇa. (128) In the midst of the Saṃsāra-arena, with the strength of
Dhiti and Vavassāya, he fights the battle. Defeating the Mohamalla, he takes the
Ārāṇapadāga. (129) He destroys the old Karma and does not create any new one.
Climbing on the Kammakalaṃkallavalli, he cuts the Saṃthāra. (130) Having
properly performed the Ārāhaṇā, O friend! and having attained the highest in the
three Bhava, he obtains the Nirvāṇa. (131) O courageous man! This is the supreme
and dreadful, served by the good people. Descending, you have conquered the
arena; take the Padāya without obstruction. (132) O courageous one! Perform the
Padāgāharaṇa as per the time and place. Bound by the unwavering Dhiti, according
to the meaning of the Sutta. (133) The four Kasāya, the three Gārava, the five
Indriyagāma - conquer them all and take the Ārāhaṇapadāga. (134)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 20 mahAsacaksAgapANaya ( abbhujjayamaraNaparUvaNA ) abbhujjayaM vihAraM itthaM
jiNaesiyaM viupasatthaM  /  nAu mahApurisaseviyaM ca abbhujjayaM maraNaM  // 126
//  jaha pacchimammi kAle pacchimatitthayaradesiyamuyAraM  /  pacchA
'nicchayapatthaM uvemi abbhujjayaM maraNaM  // 127 //  (
ArAhaNapaDAgAharaNaparUvaNA) battIsamaMDiyAhiM kaDajogI jogasaMgahabaleNaM  /
ujjamiUNa ya bArasaviheNa tavaNehapANeNaM  // 128 //  saMsAraraMgamajjhe
dhiiblvvsaaybddhkcchaao| haMtUNa mohamallaM harAhi ArANapaDAgaM  // 129 //
porANagaM ca kammaM khavei annaM navaM ca na ciNAi  /  kammakalaMkalavalli
chidai saMthAramAruDho  // 130 /  /  ArAhaNovautto samma kAUNa suvihio kAlaM  /
ukkosaM tinni bhave gaMtUNa labhejja nevvANaM  // 131 //  dhIrapurisapannatta
sappurisaniseviyaM paramaghoraM  /  oiNNo hu si raMga harasu paDAyaM aviggheNaM
/  / 132 //  dhIra ! paDAgAharaNaM kareha jaha tammi desakAlammi  /
sutta-'tthamaNuguNaMto dhiiniccalabaddhakacchAo  /  / 133 /  /  cattAri kasAe
tinni gArave paMca iMdiyaggAme  /  haMtA parosahaca{ harAhi ArAhaNapaDAgaM  /  /
134 //  1. degpacchaM pu0 sN0| 2. tava-NiyamapAdeg saM0  /  3. ca nA''Ai sN0| 4.
vallI pu0|

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Mahamamsyanakik** (Abhyudyattmaran Prarupana) (126) (Jinkalpi Muni ka) This is
a solitary conduct instructed by the Jinas and is commendable by the learned.
Practiced by the great men and served by the Jinkalpis, this death
(Abhyudyattmaran) is worth knowing. (127) (The seeker should say that) I accept
the beneficial Samadhi death (Abhyudyattmaran) worthy of being done at the end
of life, as instructed by the last Tirthankara, in the twilight of life, in a
disciplined manner. (Aradhanapataka Prapti Prarupana) (128) Adorned with the
strength of thirty-two types of yoga collections, the Kritayogi drinks the
nectar of twelve types of austerities and concludes it. (129) (The seeker)
tightens the loincloth of intellect-strength and defeats the wrestler of
attachment on the stage of the world, and waves the flag of worship. (130)
Mounted on the stretcher (i.e., deathbed), (the seeker) destroys old karmas and
does not accumulate any new karmas, and cuts the vine of karma-stain. (131)
(The) disciplined seeker who attains death in a right way, being endowed with
worship (Samadhi death), attains Nirvana after going through (i.e.,
experiencing) a maximum of three births. (132) Through the extremely difficult
worship, modeled by the courageous men and served by the virtuous men, (the
seeker) descends the ocean of the world and waves the flag of Dharma without any
obstacles. (133) The courageous seeker, endowed with the loincloth of stable
intellect (Sthitaprajna), waves the flag (of Dharma) in that country and time,
while practicing the Sutras and their meaning. (134) By destroying the four
passions, three garbs, five sense-objects (objects of the five senses), and the
service of the Pariṣha, (the seeker) waves the flag of worship.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahAmasyAmAnAkIka ( abhyudyattamaraNa prarUpaNA ) (126) (jinakalpI muni kA )
yaha ekAkI vihAra jinopadiSTa hai aura vidvatjanoM ke dvArA prazaMsanIya hai|
mahApuruSoM ke dvArA Acarita aura jinakalpiyoM dvArA sevita yaha maraNa (
abhyudyatamaraNa ) jAnane yogya hai| (127) ( sAdhaka aisA kahe ki ) carama
tIrthaMkara dvArA upadiSTa jIvana ke antima samaya meM karane yogya kalyANakArI
samAdhimaraNa (abhyudyatamaraNa ) ko jIvana kI sandhyAvelA meM ( maiM )
niyamapUrvaka aMgIkAra karatA huuN| ( ArAdhanApatAkA prApti prarUpaNA) (128)
battIsa prakAra ke yoga saMgraha bala se maNDita kRtayogI bAraha prakAra ke
tapoM ke amRta kA pAna karake usakA samApana kre| (129) ( sAdhaka )
buddhibalarUpI laMgoTa ko kasakara saMsArarUpI raMgamaMca para moharUpI malla ko
parAjita kara ArAdhanArUpI patAkA ko phaharAtA hai| (130) saMstAraka ( arthAt
mRtyu zaiyyA) para ArUr3ha ( sAdhaka ) purAne karmoM kA kSaya karatA hai aura
anya naye karma saMcita nahIM karatA hai tathA karma kalaMkarUpI latA kA chedana
karatA hai| (131) ( jo ) saMyamI sAdhaka ArAdhanA ( samAdhimaraNa ) se yukta
hokara samyak prakAra se mRtyu ko prApta karatA hai (vaha) adhika se adhika tIna
bhava meM jAkara ( arthAt tIna bhava karake) nirvANa prApta karatA hai| (132)
dhIrapuruSoM dvArA prarUpita aura satpuruSoM dvArA sevita ati kaThina ArAdhanA
ke dvArA (sAdhaka ) saMsAra samudra ko avatIrNa kara nirvighnarUpa se dharmarUpo
patAkA ko phaharAtA hai| (133) sthirabuddhi (sthitaprajJa ) rUpI laMgoTa se
yukta dhIra sAdhaka sUtra aura artha kA anucitana karatA huA usa deza aura kAla
meM (dharmarUpI ) patAkA ko phaharAtA hai| (134) cAra kaSAya, tIna gAraba aura
pA~ca indriyagrAma (pA~ca indriyoM ke.viSaya:) tathA parISaharUpI sevA kA vinAza
karake ( sAdhaka ) ArAdhanArUpI patAkA ko phaharAtA hai|

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 32: The Great Liberation of the Five Great Vows  **(Liberation from
the Cycle of Rebirth and Destruction of Karma)**  "Do not desire much, O soul!
Live long, die quickly, or live a short time. If you wish to cross the ocean of
the world, which is without shores,..." (135)  "...just as you wish to destroy
all the fiery karmas, be a world-renowned person, endowed with the knowledge,
faith, conduct, and character of the Jinas." (136)  **(The Fourfold Path and Its
Threefold Fruits)**  "Knowledge, faith, and conduct are your fourfold path. This
path has three fruits: the middle, the lower, and the highest." (137)  "The
fourfold path, when practiced with the highest fruit, leads to the destruction
of karma and liberation." (138)  "The fourfold path, when practiced with the
lower fruit, leads to the destruction of karma and liberation in the heaven of
the thirty-seven." (139)  **(Compassion for All Beings)**  "May I be well with
all beings, may I have no hatred towards anyone. May I be well with all beings,
may I be well with all beings." (140)  **(Praise for Dying with Courage)**  "One
should die with courage, one should die with a warrior's spirit. Of the two
deaths, it is better to die with courage." (141)  **(The Fruits of Observing the
Five Great Vows)**  "By observing the five great vows, one becomes well-
established in the right path. One becomes a god, a human, or a liberated soul."
(142)  **The Great Liberation of the Five Great Vows is complete.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 32 mahApaccatANapaiNNayaM  /  ( saMsArataraNa-kammanittharaNovAso) 'mA ya bahuM
citijjA 'jIvAmi ciraM marAmi va lahuti  /  jai icchasi tariu je
saMsAramahoyahimapAraM  // 135 //  jaha icchasi nitthariu savvesiM ceva
pAvakammANaM  /  jiNavayaNa-nANa-dasaNa-carittabhAvujjuo jagga  /  / 136 //  (
ArAhaNAe bheyA tapphalaM ca ) dasaNa-nANa-caritte tave ya ArAhaNA cukkhNdhaa| .
*sA ceva hoi tivihA ukkosA1 majjhimara jahannA3  // 137 //  ArAheUNa viU
ukkosArAhaNaM' caukkhadhaM  /  kammarayavippamukko teNeva bhaveNa sijjhejjA  //
138 /  /  ArAheUNa viU jahannamArAhaNaM caukkhadhaM  /  sattaSTubhavaggahaNe
pariNAmeUNa sijjhejjA  // 139 /  /  ( savvajIvakhAmaNA) sammaM me savvabhUesu,
veraM majjha na keNai  /  khAmemi savvajIve, khamAma'haM savvajIvANaM  // 140 //
(dhIramaraNapasaMsA) dhIreNa vi mariyavvaM kAuriseNa vi avassa mariyavvaM  /
doNhaM pi ya maraNANaM varaM khu dhIrattaNe mariu  // 14 //  (
paccakkhANapAlaNAphalaM) eyaM paccakkhANaM aNupAleUNa suvihio samma  /  vemANio
va devo havijja ahavA vi sijjhajjA  // 142 //  ||'mhaapcckkhaannpinnnnyN smmtt|
1. mA''yA ! hu va cideg sA0  /  2. niSphiDiu sN0| 3. jagge pu0  /  4. sa cceva
pu0| 5-6. deghaNA caukkhaMghA sN0| 7. dhvajIvANaM khadeg pu0  /  8. degkkhANaM
sadeg saM0  /

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(The Great Dispeller of Misery) (World-crossing and Karma-liberation
Instruction) (135) (O seeker desirous of Samadhi-death!) If you desire to cross
the great ocean of the world, do not think, "May I live for a long time or may I
die soon." (136) (O seeker!) If you desire to be freed from all sinful karmas,
be awakened with sincerity towards knowledge, perception, conduct, and the words
of the Jinas.  (The Distinction of Worship and its Fruits) (137) Worship is of
four types (in relation to) perception, knowledge, conduct, and austerity. It is
also of three types: excellent, moderate, and inferior. (138) By practicing the
excellent practice of all four limbs of worship, the wise seeker becomes free
from karma-dust and is liberated in the same existence. (139) The wise seeker
who practices the inferior practice of all four limbs of worship, becomes
liberated after taking seven or eight existences, undergoing pure
transmigration.  (Forgiveness of All Beings) (140) I have equanimity towards all
beings, I have no animosity towards anyone. I forgive all beings, may all beings
forgive me.  (Praise of Calm Death) (141) The patient man dies, and the cowardly
man also dies. Of these two deaths, dying with patience (i.e., dying with
equanimity) is certainly better.  (The Fruit of Following Renunciation) (142) By
following this renunciation properly, the restrained seeker will either be a
celestial being or a Siddha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApratyAyAmaprakIrNaka ( saMsAratarana aura karma nistAraNa upadeza ) (135)
(he samAdhimaraNa ke icchuka sAdhaka!) yadi tU saMsArarUpI mahA sAgara se pAra
hone kI icchA karatA hai to yaha vicAra mata kara ki "maiM cirakAla taka jIvita
rahU~ athavA zIghra hI mara jaauuN|" (136) (he sAdhaka !) yadi tU samasta
pApakarmoM se chuTakArA pAne kI icchA rakhatA hai to jJAna, darzana, cAritra
aura jinavacana ke prati niSkapaTa bhAva se jAgRta rh| (ArAdhanA ke bheda aura
usake phala ) (137) darzana, jJAna, cAritra aura tapa ( kI apekSA se ) ArAdhanA
cAra prakAra kI hai| vaha bhI utkRSTa, madhyama aura jaghanya-isa bheda se tIna
prakAra kI hotI hai| (138) cAroM ArAdhanA skandhoM kI utkRSTa sAdhanA karake
vijJa sAdhaka karma raja se vimukta ho, usI bhava meM mukta ho jAtA hai| (139)
(jo ) vijJa sAdhaka cAroM ArAdhanA skandhoM kI jaghanya sAdhanA karatA hai,
(vaha) sAta-ATha bhava grahaNa karake zuddha pariNamana kara mukta ho jAtA hai|
(sarva jIva kSamApanA) (140) samasta prANiyoM ke prati merA samabhAva hai, kisI
se bhI merA vaira nahIM hai  /  meM samasta jIvoM ko kSamA karatA hU~, samasta
jIva mujhako kSamA kreN| (dhIramaraNa prazaMsA) (141) dhairyavAn ke dvArA bhI
marA jAtA hai aura kAyara puruSa ke dvArA bhI avazya marA jAtA hai| ina donoM hI
maraNoM meM se dhIratApUrvaka maranA . ( arthAt samAdhibhAva se maranA ) nizcaya
hI uttama hai| (pratyAkhyAna pAlana kA phala ) (142) isa pratyAkhyAna kA samyak
prakAra se pAlanakara saMyamI sAdhaka yA to vaimAnika deva hoMge yA siddha
hoNge|

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix: Specific Terms Used in the Mahapratyakhyana Prakirnak
**Aradhana:**  Aradhana is the practice of observing and upholding a virtuous
path without committing any transgressions (doshas). There are three types of
Aradhana: (1) Jnana Aradhana, (2) Darshan Aradhana, and (3) Charitra Aradhana.
According to Digambara literature, Aradhana is the proper cultivation,
culmination, firm adherence, reawakening (when they weaken), and lifelong
practice of Samyagdarshan, Samyagjnana, Samyagcharitra, and Samyagtap. Thus, in
the Digambara tradition, Tap is also included in the category of Aradhana along
with Jnana, Darshan, and Charitra.  **Aalocna (Criticism):** Due to the
constantly arising and waning Kashayas, the Sadhaka's faith and character are
affected by both known and unknown flaws. It is essential to eliminate these
flaws for the purification of life. Aalocna is the best way to achieve this.
Aalocna is the act of openly revealing all one's faults, both small and large,
to an Acharya, Guru, or senior person.  **Aahar (Food):** The Agamas mention
four types of food for humans: (1) Asan, (2) Pan, (3) Khady, and (4) Swady.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 pariziSTa mahApratyAkhyAna prakIrNaka meM prayukta viziSTa zabda ArAdhanA
aticAra (doSa) na lagAte hue nirdoSa sAdhanA kA pratisevana/pratipAlana karanA
ArAdhanA hai| ArAdhanA ke tIna bheda haiM-(1) jJAna ArAdhanA, (2) darzana
ArAdhanA aura (3) cAritra ArAdhanA  /  digambara sAhitya ke anusAra
samyagdarzana, samyarajJAna samyagcAritra va samyagtapa-ina cAroM kA yathAyogya
rIti se udyotana karanA, unameM pariNati karanA, unako dRr3hatApUrvaka dhAraNa
karanA, unake manda par3a jAne para punaH punaH jAgRta karanA aura unakA AjIvana
pAlana karanA ArAdhanA hai| isa prakAra digambara paramparA meM jJAna, darzana
aura cAritra ke sAtha tapa ko bhI ArAdhanA kI zreNI meM sammilita kiyA gayA hai|
AlocanA- pratikSaNa udita hAna vAle kaSAyoM ke kAraNa sAdhaka kI AsthA evaM
caritra meM jJAta evaM ajJAta-donoM prakAra ke doSa Ate haiM, jIvana-zodhana ke
lie unako dUra karanA atyAvazyaka hai  /  isake lie AlocanA sabase uttama mArga
hai  /  AcArya, guru yA variSThajanoM ke samakSa niSkapaTa bhAva se apane choTe
evaM bar3e sabhI doSoM ko prakaTa kara denA AlocanA hai| AhAra AgamoM meM
manuSyoM ke cAra prakAra ke AhAra kA ullekha milatA hai -(1) azana, (2) pAna,
(3) khAdya aura (4) svAdya  /  1. (ka) sthAnAMga 3/4/434, (kha) zrI jaina
siddhAnta bola saMgraha, bhAga 1, pRSTha 62-63  /  2. jainendra siddhAnta koza,
bhAga 1, pR0 284  /  3. vahI, bhAga 1, pR0 290  /  4. sthAnAMga, 4/4/512  /

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix 35  **Indriyayagram:** The desires related to the five senses are
called Indriyayagram.   **Upadhi:** An acquired or accumulated object is called
Upadhi. Generally, attachment is called Upadhi. There are three types of Upadhi:
(1) Karma Upadhi, (2) Sharira Upadhi, and (3) Bahir Upadhi (external objects
like clothes, utensils, etc.).  According to the Digambar tradition, there are
two types of Upadhi: (1) Bahir Upadhi, such as a fan, a water pot, etc., and (2)
Abhyantar Upadhi, such as anger, pride, deceit, greed, etc.  **Karma:** The
actions performed by the soul due to reasons like Mithyatva, Kashaya, etc., are
called Karma. There are eight types of Karma: (1) Jnanavaraniya Karma, (2)
Darshanavaraniya Karma, (3) Vedaniya Karma, (4) Mohaniya Karma, (5) Ayu Karma,
(6) Nama Karma, (7) Gotra Karma, and (8) Antaraya Karma.  **Kashaya:** The
passions that pollute the pure soul, i.e., defile it with Karma-mala, are called
Kashaya. In other words, Kashaya is that which causes the soul to repeatedly
fall into the cycle of birth and death. There are four main Kashayas: (1) Krodha
Kashaya, (2) Mana Kashaya, (3) Maya Kashaya, and (4) Lobha Kashaya.  **Garda:**
The renunciation of passions like attachment, etc., in the presence of the
Panchparameshthi, with self-witnessing, is called Garda. Repenting for sins
committed in the past is also called Garda. In fact, Garda is a form of
atonement.   1.  **Stanaanga, 3/1/94** 2.  **Jainendra Siddhanta Kosh, Part 1,
Page 455** 3.  (a) **Stanaanga, 2/4/424**, (b) **Prajnaapana 23/1**, (c) **Shri
Jain Siddhanta Bol Sangrah, Part 3, Page 44-45** 4.  See **Abhidhan Rajendra
Kosh, Volume 3, Page 395** 5.  (a) **Stanaanga, 4/1/75**, (b) **Samavaayaanga
4/20**, (c) **Prajnaapana, 28/7**, (d) **Shri Jain Siddhanta Bol Sangrah, Part
1, Page 269**, (e) **Jainendra Siddhanta Kosh, Part 2, Page 33**, (f) **Vyakhya
Prajnaapti, 1/3**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 35 indriyagrAma- pAMcoM indriyoM sambandhI vAsanAoM ko indriyagrAma
kahA jAtA hai| upadhi- parigrahIta yA saMcita vastu upadhi hai| sAmAnyatayA
parigraha ko upadhi kahA jAtA hai| upadhi tIna prakAra kI haiM'-(1) karma
upadhi, (2) zarIra upadhi aura (3) vastra-pAtra Adi bAhya upadhi  /  digambara
paramparAnusAra upadhi do prakAra kI kahI gaI haiM-(1) bAhya upadhi, yathA-
pIchI, kamaNDalu Adi aura (2) Abhyantara, upadhi, yathA-krodha, mAna, mAyA,
lobhaadi| karma- mithyAtva kaSAya Adi kAraNoM se jIva ke dvArA jo kiyA jAtA hai,
vaha karma hai| karma ke ATha bheda haiM(1) jJAnAvaraNIya karma, (2)
darzanAvaraNIya karma, (3) vedanIya karma, (4) mohanIya karma, (5) Ayu karma,
(6) nAma karma, (7) gotra karma aura (8) antarAya karma  /  kaSAya- jo zuddha
svarUpa vAlo AtmA ko kaluSita karate haiM arthAt karmamala se malIna karate
haiM, ve kaSAya haiM  /  dUsare zabdoM meM yaha bhI kahA jA sakatA hai ki jisase
jIva punaH pUnaH janma-maraNa ke cakra meM par3atA hai, vaha kaSAya hai|4 kaSAya
mukhya rUpa se cAra haiM'-(1) krodha kaSAya, (2) mAna kaSAya, (3) mAyA kaSAya
aura (4) lobha kaSAya  /  garhA paMcaparameSThI ke samakSa AtmasAkSIpUrvaka jo
rAgAdi bhAvoM kA tyAga hai, vaha gardA hai| bhUtakAla meM kiye gaye pApoM kI
nindA karanA bhI gardA hai| vastutaH gardA prAyazcita 1. sthAnAMga, 3/1/94  /
2. jainendra siddhAnta koza, bhAga 1, pR0 455  /  3. (ka) sthAnAMga, 2/4/424,
(kha) prajJApanA 23/1, (ga) zrI jaina siddhAnta bola saMgraha, bhAga 3, pR0
44-45  /  4. dekhie-abhidhAna rAjendra koza, khaNDa 3, pR0 395  /  5. (ka)
sthAnAMga, 4/1/75, (kha) samavAyAMga 4/20, (ga) prajJApanA, 28/7, (gha) zrI
jaina siddhAnta bola saMgraha, bhAga 1, pR0 269, (Ga) jainendra siddhAnta koza,
bhAga 2, pR0 33, (ca) vyAkhyAprajJApti, 1/3  /

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Premise of Mahapapiniya  This is the premise of Mahapapiniya. There are
four types of Garha (1) Upsampradayarupa Garha, (2) Vichikitsarupa Garha, (3)
Micchamirupa Garha and (4) Evampiprajnaptirupa Garha.  Garva - Garva means ego.
There are three types of Garva (1) Riddhi-Garva, (2) Rasa-Garva and (3) Sata-
Garva.  In Digambar literature, there are also three types of Garva. But instead
of Rasa-Garva, it is Shabda-Garva. Again, there is a difference in their order -
(1) Shabda-Garva (2) Riddhi-Garva and (3) Sata-Garva.  Gupti - The word Gupti is
derived from Gopana, which means to hide, to remove. The second meaning of the
word Gupti is a cover or a protective shield. According to the first meaning,
removing the mind, speech and body from evil tendencies is Gupti, and according
to the second meaning, protecting the soul from evil is Gupti. There are three
types of Gupti - (1) Mano-Gupti, (2) Vachan-Gupti and (3) Kaya-Gupti.  Eighty-
four lakh Yoni - According to the Svetambar tradition, there are seven lakh
Prithvikaaya, seven lakh Apkaaya, seven lakh Tejaskaaya, seven lakh Vayukaaya,
ten lakh each Vanaspatikaaya, fourteen lakh ordinary Vanaspati, two lakh
Dviindriya, two lakh Triindriya, two lakh Chaturendriya, four lakh Devata, four
lakh Naraki, four lakh Tiryanchpanchendriya and fourteen lakh...  1.
**Stanaanga**, 4/2/264. 2.  (a) **Stanaanga** 3/4/505, (b) **Samavaayaanga**
3/15, (c) **Shri Jain Siddhanta Bol Sangrah**, Part 1, Page 70. 3.  **Jainendra
Siddhanta Kosh**, Part 2, Page 239. 4.  (a) **Samavaayaanga** 3/15, (b)
**Uttaraadhyaayana** 24/1-2, (c) **Shri Jain Siddhanta Bol Sangrah**, Part 1,
Page 16, (d) **Jainendra Siddhanta Kosh**, Part 2, Page 248.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApapaiNNaya kI pUrva bhUmikA hai| gardA cAra prakAra kI ho gaI haiM(1)
upasampradAyarUpa gardA, (2) vicikitsArUpa gahIM, (3) micchAmirUpa gardA aura
(4) evamapiprajJapti rUpa gre| gArava- gArava kA artha ahaMkAra hai  /  gArava
(ahaMkAra) tIna prakAra ke kahe gaye haiM(1) Rddhi-gaurava, (2) rasa-gaurava
aura (3) saataa-gaurv| digambara sAhitya meM bhI gArava tIna kahe gaye haiN|
kintu vahA~ rasa gArava nahIM hokara zabda gArava hai  /  punaH unake krama meM
bhI bhinnatA hai-(1) zabda gArava (2) Rddhi gArava aura (3) sAta gArava  /
gupti- gupti zabda gopana se banA hai, jisakA artha hai-khoMca lenA, dUra kara
lenA  /  gupti zabda kA dUsarA artha DhaMkane vAlA yA rakSA kavaca bhI hai  /
prathama artha ke anusAra mana, vacana aura kAyA ko azubha pravRttiyoM se haTA
lenA gupti hai, aura dUsare artha ke anusAra AtmA kI azubha se rakSA karanA
gupti hai| guptiyA~ tIna haiM-(1) mano gupti, (2) vacana-gupti aura (3) kaay-
gupti| caurAsI lAkha yoni-zvetAmbara paramparAnusAra sAta lAkha pRthvIkAya, sAta
lAkha apkAya, sAta lAkha tejaskAya, sAta lAkha vAyukAya, dasa lAkha pratyeka-
vanaspatikAya, caudaha lAkha sAdhAraNa vanaspati, do lAkha dvIndriya, do lAkha
trIndriya, do lAkha caturendriya, cAra lAkha devatA, cAra lAkha nArakI, cAra
lAkha tiryaJcapaMcendriya aura caudaha lAkha 1. sthAnAMga, 4/2/264  /  2. (ka)
sthAnAMga 3/4/505, (kha) samavAyAMga 3/15, (ga) zrI jaina siddhAnta bola
saMgraha, bhAga 1, pR0 70  /  3. jainendra siddhAnta koza, bhAga 2, pR0 239  /
4. (ka) samavAyAMga 3/15, (kha) uttarAdhyayana 24/1-2, (ga) zrI jaina siddhAnta
bola saMgraha, bhAga 1, pR0 16, (gha) jainendra siddhAnta koza, bhAga 2, pR0 248
/

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Meditation  **Dhyana** (Meditation) is the concentration of the mind on a
single object for a specific period of time. There are four types of meditation:
1. **Aarta Dhyana** (Agitated Meditation) 2. **Roudra Dhyana** (Fierce
Meditation) 3. **Dharma Dhyana** (Righteous Meditation) 4. **Shukla Dhyana**
(Pure Meditation)  Meditation can be classified as **Prashastha** (Auspicious)
or **Aprashastha** (Inauspicious). Dharma Dhyana and Shukla Dhyana are
auspicious, while Aarta Dhyana and Roudra Dhyana are inauspicious.  ##
Renunciation  **Pratyakhyana** (Renunciation) is a vow to refrain from a
particular action in the future, either for life or for a limited time. There
are five types of renunciation mentioned in the **Sthananga Sutra**:  1.
**Shraddhanashuddha Pratyakhyana** (Renunciation based on pure faith) 2.
**Vinayashuddha Pratyakhyana** (Renunciation based on pure conduct) 3.
**Anubhashana Shuddha Pratyakhyana** (Renunciation based on pure speech) 4.
**Anupalana Shuddha Pratyakhyana** (Renunciation based on pure observance) 5.
**Bhavasuddha Pratyakhyana** (Renunciation based on pure emotion)  ## Fear
**Bhaya** (Fear) is generally defined as the apprehension of future harm. From a
theoretical perspective, it is the specific nature of **Mohaniya Karma** (Karma
that obscures knowledge).  ## Appendix  **Parishista** (Appendix)  **Manushya
Yoni** (Human Birth): There are 84 lakh (8.4 million) **Yonis** (Births) in
total. According to the **Digambar tradition**, there are seven lakh (700,000)
Yonis in each of the six **Sthanas** (Abodes): **Nitya Nigoda**, **Itra
Nigoda**, **Prithvikaayik**, **Apkaayik**, **Tejaskayik**, and **Vayukaayik**.
Each **Vanaspati** (Plant) has ten lakh (1 million) Yonis. There are two lakh
(200,000) Yonis each for **Dwiindriya** (Two-sense beings), **Triindriya**
(Three-sense beings), and **Chaturendriya** (Four-sense beings). There are four
lakh (400,000) Yonis each for **Deva** (Gods), **Naraki** (Hell beings), and
**Tiryanch** (Animals with five senses). Finally, there are fourteen lakh (1.4
million) Yonis for humans. This totals 84 lakh (8.4 million) Yonis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dhyAna pratyAkhyAna bhaya pariziSTa manuSya yoni  /  isa prakara kula caurAsI
lAkha yoni haiM  /  ' digambara paramparAnusAra nityanigoda, itaranigoda,
pRthvIkAyika, apkAyika, tejaskAyika aura vAyukAyika - ina chahoM sthAnoM meM
pratyeka meM sAta-sAta lAkha yoni, pratyeka vanaspati meM dasa lAkha yoni,
dvIndriya, trIndriya aura caturendriya-pratyeka meM do-do lAkha yoni, deva,
nArakI aura tiryaJcapaMcendriya - pratyeka meM cAra-cAra lAkha yoni tathA
manuSyoM meM caudaha lAkha yoniyA~ hotI hai  /  isa prakAra kula caurAsI lAkha
yoni haiN| cittavRttiyoM kA kisI eka viSaya para kAla vizeSa taka kendrita
rahanA dhyAna hai  /  dhyAna cAra prakAra kA hai (1) Arta dhyAna, (2) raudra
dhyAna, (3) dharma dhyAna aura (4) zukla dhyAna  /  1. zrAvaka
pratikramaNasUtra, pR0 66  /  2. gommaTasAra ( jIvakANDa), gAthA 89  /  prazasta
aura aprazasta isa bheda se dhyAna do prakAra kA hai| dharma dhyAna aura zukla
dhyAna- ye donoM dhyAna prazasta dhyAna haiM tathA AtaM dhyAna aura raudra
dhyAna - ye donoM dhyAna aprazasta dhyAna haiM  /  yAvajjIvana yA sImita samaya
ke lie bhaviSya meM kisI kriyA ko na karane kI pratijJA karanA hI pratyAkhyAna
hai  /  pratyAkhyAna kaI prakAra kA hai  /  sthAnAMgasUtra meM nimna pA~ca
prakAra ke pratyAkhyAnoM kA ullekha upalabdha hotA hai* (1) zraddhAnazuddha-
pratyAkhyAna, (2) vinayazuddha-pratyAkhyAna, (3) anubhASaNA zuddha -
pratyAkhyAna, (4) anupAlanAzuddha- pratyAkhyAna, (5) bhAvazuddha- pratyAkhyAna
/  sAmAnyatayA bhAvI ahita kI AzaMkA ko bhaya kahate haiM  /  saiddhAntika dRSTi
se mohanIya karma kI prakRti vizeSa ke 3. (ka) sthAnAMga 4/1/60, bola saMgraha,
bhAga 1, pR0 193-194, 2, pR0 494  /  4. sthAnAMga 5/3/221  /  27 (kha)
samavAyAMga 4 / 20, (ga) zrI jaina siddhAnta (gha) jainendra siddhAnta koza,
bhAga

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 38. Mad (Pride)  **Fear** is a specific consequence of the soul arising from
the state of *udaya*. There are seven types of fear: (1) *Ihaloka bhaya* (fear
of this world), (2) *Paraloka bhaya* (fear of the next world), (3) *Adan bhaya*
(fear of taking on new bodies), (4) *Akasmat bhaya* (fear of the unexpected),
(5) *Vedana bhaya* (fear of pain), (6) *Maran bhaya* (fear of death), and (7)
*Ashlok bhaya* (fear of hell).  The seven fears are also mentioned in the
*Samavayanga Sutra*, but the fifth fear is called *Ajiva bhaya* (fear of
livelihood) instead of *Maran bhaya*. The names and order of the remaining six
fears are the same as in the *Sthananga Sutra*.  Although the Digambara
literature also mentions seven fears, their names and order differ from the
Svetambara literature. The seven fears mentioned in the Digambara literature
are: (1) *Ihaloka* (this world), (2) *Paraloka* (next world), (3) *Arakṣā* (lack
of protection), (4) *Agupti* (lack of attainment), (5) *Maran* (death), (6)
*Vedana* (pain), and (7) *Akasmik bhaya* (fear of the unexpected).  **Pride** is
to be arrogant about one's caste, etc., or to be frenzied in joy and excitement.
There are eight types of pride: (1) *Jatimad* (pride in one's caste), (2)
*Kulmad* (pride in one's family), (3) *Balmad* (pride in one's strength), (4)
*Rupmad* (pride in one's beauty), (5) *Tapomad* (pride in one's austerities),
(6) *Srutamad* (pride in one's knowledge), (7) *Labhmad* (pride in one's
wealth), and (8) *Aishwaryamad* (pride in one's power).  Although the Digambara
literature also mentions eight types of pride, their names and order differ. The
eight types of pride mentioned in the Digambara literature are: (1) *Vijnan*
(knowledge), (2) *Aishwarya* (power), (3) *Agyna* (command), (4) *Kul* (family),
(5) *Bal* (strength), (6) *Tap* (austerities), (7) *Rup* (beauty), and (8)
*Jati* (caste).  1. (a) *Sthananga*, 7/27, (b) *Shri Jain Siddhant Bol Sangrah*,
Part 2, p. 268. 2. *Samavayanga* 7/37. 3. *Jainendra Siddhant Kosh*, Part 3, p.
217. 4. (a) *Sthananga* 8/21, (b) *Samavayanga* 8/44. 5. *Jainendra Siddhant
Kosh*, Part 3, p. 270.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 38 mada mahApaccakkhANapaiNNayaM udaya se paidA hue AtmA ke pariNAma vizeSa ko
bhaya kahate haiM  /  bhaya sAta prakAra ke haiM - ( 1 ) ihaloka bhaya, (2)
paraloka bhaya, (3) AdAna bhaya, (4) akasmAt bhaya, (5) vedanA bhaya, (6) maraNa
bhaya aura (7) azloka bhaya  /  sAta bhayoM kA ullekha samavAyAMgasUtra meM bhI
upalabdha hotA hai  /  kintu yahA~ pAMcavA bhaya maraNa bhaya na hokara AjIva
bhaya kahA gayA hai zeSa chaha bhayoM ke nAma evaM krama sthAnAMgasUtra ke
samAna hI hai  /  " yadyapi digambara sAhitya meM bhI sAta bhayoM kA ullekha
milatA hai, kintu unake nAma evaM krama zvetAmbara sAhitya se bhinna hai  /
digambara sAhitya meM ullekhita sAta bhaya isa prakAra haiM - (1) ihaloka (2)
paraloka (3) arakSA (4) agupti (5) maraNa (6) vedanA aura (7) Akasmika bhaya  /
jAti Adi kA ahaMkAra karanA athavA harSa aura Aveza meM unmatta honA mada hai  /
mada ATha prakAra ke kahe gae haiM * - (1) jAtimada (2) kulamada (3) balamada
(4) rUpamada (5) tapomada ( 6 ) zrutamada (7) lAbhamada aura (8) aizvaryamada  /
digambara sAhitya meM bhI saMkhyA kI dRSTi se to mada ATha hI kahe gae haiM,
kintu unake nAma evaM krama bhinna haiM  /  digambara sAhitya meM ullekhita ATha
mada isa prakAra haiM - ( 1 ) vijJAna (2) aizvarya (3) AjJA (4) kula (5) bala
(6) tapa (7) rUpa aura (8) jAti mada  /  1. (ka) sthAnAMga, 7/27, (kha) zrI
jaina siddhAnta bola saMgraha, bhAga 2, pR0 268  //  2. samavAyAMga 7 / 37  /
3. jainendra siddhAnta koza, bhAga 3, pR0 217  /  4. (ka) sthAnAMga 8/21, (kha)
samavAyAMga 8 / 44  /  5. jainendra siddhAnta koza, bhAga 3, pRSTha 270  /

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The decay of the lifespan of the body is death. Death is said to be of many
types. Maya is the attempt to hide anything or deceit. In other words, Maya is
the deceitful nature of the soul. Maya is of five types: (1) Nikriti (2) Upadhi
(3) Satiprayog (4) Pranidhi and (5) Pratikunchan.   In the Samavayangasutra,
sixteen names of Maya are mentioned, and in the Vyākhyāprajñaptisūtra, fifteen
names of Maya are mentioned. Mlechchha - People of non-Aryan race are also
called Mlechchha people. The commentator Shyamacharya has mentioned the names of
many non-Aryan races in the fourth Upanga text called Prajñāpanā Sūtra. Such as
Shaka, Yavana, Kirata, Shabara, Barbar, Kay, Marund, Udd, Bhandak (Bhadak),
Ninnak (Ninnak), Pakkanik, Kulaksh, Gond, Sinhala, Parsya (Parsak), Andhra
(Kraunch), Udamb (Ambadak), Tamil (Damil-Dravid), Chillal (Chillas or Chilllak),
Pulind, Haros, Domb (Dom), Pokkan (Vokkan), Gandaharak (Kandharak), Bahlik
(Balhik), Ajjal (Ajjal), Rom, Pas (Mas), Pradush (Prakush), Malaya (Malayali),
Chanchak (Bandhuk), Mayali (Chulik), Konkanak, Med (Mev), Palhav, Malav, Gaggar
(Maggar), Abhashik, Nakk (Kanvir), China, Lhasik (Lhasa's), Khas, Khasik (Khasi
tribe), Nedur (Nedur), Mandh (Mondh), Dombilk, Laos, Bakush, Kaikey, 1. (a)
Sthananga 3/4/519, (b) Jainendra Siddhanta Kosh, Part 3, Page 290 291. 2. Ibid.,
Part 3, Page 307. 3. Samavayanga 52/284. 4. Vyākhyāprāpti 12/5. 5. Prajñāpanā
1/98.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa Ayu kA kSaya honA hI maraNa hai| maraNa kaI prakAra kA kahA gayA hai|
mAyA- kisI bhI bAta ko chipAne kI ceSTA karanA athavA kapaTavRtti mAyA hai|
dUsare zabdoM meM AtmA kA kuTila bhAva mAyA hai| mAyA pA~ca prakAra kI haiM(1)
nikRti (2) upadhi (3) sAtiprayoga (4) praNidhi aura (5) prtikunycn|
samavAyAMgasUtra meM mAyA ke solaha nAmoM kA tathA vyAkhyAprajJaptisUtra meM
mAyA ke pandraha nAmoM kA ullekha upalabdha hotA hai| mleccha- anArya jAti ke
manuSyoM ko mleccha manuSya bhI kahA jAtA hai| vAcaka zyAmAcArya ne prajJApanA
sUtra nAmaka caturtha upAMga grantha meM kaI anArya jAtiyoM kA nAmollekha kiyA
hai| yathA zaka, yavana, kirAta, zabara, barbara, kAya, marUNDa, uDDa, bhaNDaka
(bhaDaka), ninnaka (niNNaka), pakkaNika, kulAkSa, goMDa, siMhala, pArasya
(pArasaka), Andhra (krauMca), uDamba (ambaDaka), tamila (damila-dravir3a),
cillala (cillasa yA cillaka), pulinda, hArosa, DoMba (Doma), pokkANa (vokkANa),
gandhAharaka (kandhAraka), bahalIka (bAlhIka), ajjala (ajjhala), roma, pAsa
(mAsa), praduSa (prakuSa), malaya (malayAlI), caMcaka (bandhuka), mayalI
(cUlika), koMkaNaka, meda (meva), palhava, mAlava, gaggara (maggara), AbhASika,
Nakka (kaNavIra), cInA, lhAsika (lAsA ke), khasa, khAsika (khAsI jAtIya), neDUra
(nedUra), maMDha (moMDha), Dombilaka, laosa, bakuza, kaikeya, 1. (ka) sthAnAMga
3/4/519, (kha) jainendra siddhAnta koza, bhAga 3, pRSTha 290 291  /  2. vahI,
bhAga 3 pRSTha 307  /  3. samavAyAMga 52/284  /  4. vyAkhyAprApti 12/5  /  5.
prajJApanA 1/98  /

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **40**  **Leshya:** The influence that causes a living being
to become entangled in karma (punya-papa) is called Leshya. There are six types
of Leshya: (1) Krishna Leshya, (2) Neel Leshya, (3) Kapoth Leshya, (4) Tejo
Leshya, (5) Padma Leshya, and (6) Shukla Leshya.  Leshya are categorized into
two types based on auspiciousness and inauspiciousness. Tejo, Padma, and Shukla
are the three auspicious Leshya, while Krishna, Neel, and Kapoth are the three
inauspicious Leshya.  **Loka (World):** The fourteen Rajoo Parimaan (units of
measurement) of space, encompassing all substances, both Dharmastikaya and
Adharmastikaya, is called Loka. There are three types of Loka: (1) Urdhva Loka
(Upper World), (2) Adho Loka (Lower World), and (3) Tiryaak Loka (Intermediate
World).  Another classification divides Loka into four types: (1) Dravya Loka
(World of Substance), (2) Kshetra Loka (World of Space), (3) Kaal Loka (World of
Time), and (4) Bhava Loka (World of Emotion).  **Valagra Koti:** The smallest
possible division of the tip of a hair is called Valagra Koti. In other words,
Valagra Koti represents an extremely minute region.  **Vishaya (Object of
Knowledge):** Vishaya refers to the object of knowledge. According to Shwetamber
literature, there are three types of sound, five types of form, two types of
smell, five types of taste, and eight types of touch. Thus, there are a total of
twenty-three Vishaya for the five senses. However, according to Digamber
literature,  **Loka:** **Vishaya:** **Mahapaap Innayan:** People from countries
like Arbaak (Akkaag), Hoon, Rosak (Russians or Romans), Marook, Root (Bhramar
Root), and Vilas (Chilat) etc.  **Footnotes:** 1. (a) Staananga 3/1/58, (b)
Samavaayaang 6/31, (c) Uttaraadhyaayan 34/3, (d) Prajnaapana 17/2, 28/4, (e)
Shri Jain Siddhant Bol Sangrah, Part 2, Page 70-77, (f) Jainendra Siddhant Kosh,
Part 3, Page 436. 2. (a) Shri Jain Siddhant Bol Sangrah, Part 1, Page 45-46, (b)
Jainendra Siddhant Kosh, Part 3, Page 456. 3. Vyakhya Prajnaapti 11/10/2. 4.
Shri Jain Siddhant Bol Sangrah, Part 6, Page 175.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 40 lezyA - jisake dvArA jIva puNya-pApa se apane ko lipta karatA hai, usako
lezyA kahate haiM  /  lezyA chaha prakAra kI haiM'(1) kRSNa lezyA (2) nIla lezyA
(3) kApota lezyA (4) tejolezyA (5) padma lezyA aura (6) zukla lezyA  /  zubha
aura azubha ke bheda se lezyA do prakAra kI kahI gaI haiN| tejo, padma aura
zukla ye tInoM lezyA zubha lezyA haiM tathA kRSNa, nIla aura kApota- ye tInoM
lezyA azubha lezyA haiM  /  dharmAstikAya aura adharmAstikAya se vyApta sampUrNa
dravyoM ke AdhAra rUpa caudaharAjUparimANa AkAza khaNDa ko loka kahate haiM  /
sampUrNa loka ke tIna bheda haiM - ( 1 ) Urdhvaloka (2) adholoka aura (3) tiryak
loka  /  eka anya bheda se loka cAra prakAra kA hai - (1) dravyaloka (2)
kSetraloka (3) kAlaloka aura (4) bhAvaloka  /  vAlAgrakoTi - bAla ke agrabhAga
ke karor3oM khaNDa karane para jo usakA eka khaNDa hotA hai, use vAlAgra koTi
kahate haiM  /  dUsare zabdoM meM vAlAgrakoTi atyanta sUkSma pradeza kA sUcaka
hai  /  viSaya jJeya ko kahate haiM  /  zvetAmbara sAhityAnusAra zabda ke tIna,
rUpa ke pA~ca, gandha ke do, rasa ke pA~ca aura sparza ke ATha bheda  /  isa
prakAra pA~ca indriyoM ke kula teIsa viSaya haiN| kintu digambara sAhitya ke
anusAra loka viSaya - mahApApaiNNayaM arabAka (akkhAga), hUNa, rosaka ( rUsavAsI
yA romako, marUka, rUta, (bhramararUta) aura vilAsa (cilAta ) dezavAsI Adi  /
1. (ka) sthAnAMga 3/1/58, (kha) samavAyAMga 6 / 31, (ga) uttarAdhyayana 34/3, -
(gha) prajJApanA 17 / 2, 28/4, (Ga) zrI jaina siddhAnta bola saMgraha, bhAga 2,
pRSTha 70-77, (ca) jainendra siddhAnta koza, bhAga 3, pRSTha 436  //  2. (ka)
zrI jaina siddhAnta bola saMgraha, bhAga 1, pRSTha 45-46, (kha) jainendra
siddhAnta koza, bhAga 3, pRSTha 456  /  3. vyAkhyAprajJapti 11/10/2  /  4. zrI
jaina siddhAnta bola saMgraha, bhAga 6, pRSTha 175  /

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix Five tastes, five colors, two smells, eight touches and seven sounds -
these twenty-seven distinctions are the objects of the five senses and one
distinction is the mind's many alternative forms of objects. Thus, according to
the Digambara tradition, there are twenty-eight objects in total. That which
causes pain is called a *Shalya*. Three types of *Shalya* have been mentioned:
(1) *Maya Shalya*, (2) *Nidana Shalya* and (3) *Mithyadarshan Shalya*.
**Samyoga Sambandha** - *Samyoga Sambandha* is said to be of two types: (1)
*Deshpratyasattikrit Samyoga Sambandha* and (2) *Gunpratyasattikrit Samyoga
Sambandha*.  **Sanstarak** - The general meaning of *Sanstarak* is a bed, a
couch or a mattress, but in a special sense, *Sanstarak* refers to the bed that
the seeker takes at the time of *Samadhimaran*. Four types of *Sanstarak* have
been mentioned: (1) Earth, (2) Stone, (3) Plank and (4) Grass.  **Samiti** - The
seeker's tendency towards restraint or the effortful practice is called
*Samiti*. There are five *Samitis*: (1) *Irya* (movement) *Samiti*, (2) *Bhasha*
*Samiti*, (3) *Eshana* (begging) *Samiti*, (4) *Adan-Bhand-Patra Nikshepan
Samiti* and (5) *Ucchaar Prasravan-Khel-Singhan-Jall Prati sthapanika Samiti*.
In the *Uttaraadhyayanasutra*, the names of the last two *Samitis* are slightly
different. There, the fourth *Samiti* is *Adan...*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa pAMca rasa, pA~ca varNa, do gandha, ATha sparza aura sAta svara-ye
sattAIsa bheda pA~coM indiyoM ke viSayoM ke aura eka bheda mana kA aneka vikalpa
rUpa viSaya hai|' isa prakAra digambara paramparAnusAra viSaya kula aTThAIsa
haiN| jisase pIr3A hotI ho, use zalya kahate haiM  /  zalya ke tIna bheda kahe
gaye haiN|-(1) mAyA zalya (2) nidAna zalya aura (3) mithyAdarzana zalya  /
saMyoga sambandha-saMyoga sambandha do prakAra kA kahA gayA hai (1)
dezapratyAsattikRta saMyoga sambandha aura (2) guNapratyAsattikRta saMyoga
sambandha saMstAraka- saMstAraka kA sAmAnya artha bistara, zayyA athavA bichaunA
hai, kintu vizeSa artha meM saMstAraka usa zayyA ko kahA jAtA hai jise
samAdhimaraNa ke avasara para sAdhaka grahaNa karatA hai| saMstAraka cAra
prakAra ke kahe gaye haiM - (1) pRthvI (2) zilA (3) phalaka aura (4) tRNa  /
samiti- saMyama kI sAdhaka pravRtti yA yatanApUrvaka kI jAne vAlI pravRtti ko
samiti kahate haiN| samitiyA~ pA~ca haiM(1) IryA (gamana) samiti (2) bhASA
samiti (3) eSaNA (yAcanA) samiti (4) AdAna-bhaNDa-pAtra nikSepaNa samiti aura
(5) uccAraprasravaNa-khela-siMghANa-jalla pratisthApanikA samiti  /
uttarAdhyayanasUtra meM antima donoM samiti ke nAmoM meM zAbdika bhinnatA hai|
vahA~ cauthI samiti AdAna 2. jainendra siddhAnta koza, bhAga 3, pRSTha 578  /
2. (ka) sthAnAMga 3/3/385, (kha) samavAyAMga 3/15, (ga) zrI jaina siddhAnta bola
saMgraha, bhAga 1, pRSTha 73, (gha) jainendra siddhAnta koza, bhAga 4, pRSTha 26
/  3. vahI, bhAga 4, pRSTha 142  /  4. vahI, bhAga 4, pRSTha 154  /  /  5. (ko
sthAnAMga 5/3/457, (kha) samavAyAMga 5/26, (ga) zrI jaina siddhAnta bola
saMgraha, bhAga 1, pRSTha 330-331  /

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Mahapacchakkamanapariṇṇayaṃ is the fourth committee, and the fifth committee
is the Uccāra Samiti.  _ Digambara literature also mentions five committees.
There, too, the names of the last two committees differ slightly from the
Svetambara literature. There, the fourth committee is called the Ādāna Nikṣepaṇa
Samiti and the fifth committee is called the Pratiṣṭhāpana Samiti.  Beings who
have completely destroyed the eight karmas, such as jñānāvaraṇa, and have
attained liberation are called Siddhas.  Siddha 1. Uttarādhyayana 24/1-2. 2.
Jainendra Siddhānta Kośa, Part 4, page 340. 3. (a) Prajñāpanā, verse 1, (b) Śrī
Jain Siddhānta Bol Sangraha Part 5, page 117.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahApaccakmANapaiNNayaM samiti hai tathA pA~cavIM samiti uccAra samiti hai|' _
digambara sAhitya meM bhI pA~ca samitiyoM kA ullekha hai  /  vahA~ bhI antima
donoM samiti ke nAmoM meM zvetAmbara sAhitya se AMzika bhinnatA hai| vahA~ cothI
samiti AdAna nikSepaNa samiti aura pAMcavIM samiti pratisthApana samiti kahI gaI
hai| jJAnAvaraNAdi ATha karmoM kA sarvathA kSaya karake mokSa meM jAnevAle jIva
siddha kahalAte haiN| siddha 1. uttarAdhyayana 24/1-2  /  2. jainendra siddhAnta
koza, bhAga 4, pRSTha 340  /  3. (ka) prajJApanA, pada 1, (kha) zrI jaina
siddhAnta bola saMgraha bhAga 5, pRSTha 117 /

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix: Index of Verses in the Mahapratyakhyana Prakirnak  **Verse Number**
| **Verse** ------- | -------- 46 | **Unveiling Birth and Death in the
Tiryanchas** (Animals) | **Anasan Pao Vagamam** (The Path of Non-Violence) 45 |
**Unveiling Birth and Death in Humans** | **Anuttare Narasu** (The Highest
Humans) 47 | **Unveiling Birth and Death in Humans** | **Appam Pi Bhavasallan**
(Even a Little Bit of Attachment) 26 | **Anbhujjayam Viharam** (The Enjoyment of
the World) 115 | **"Ekka-mmi Vi Jammi Pae"** (Born in the Same Place) |
**Arhanta Mangalam Majjha** (The Blessed Arhat) 18 | **"Ekka-mmi Vi Jammi Pae"**
(Born in the Same Place) | **Assanjamana-nna-nam Micchatan** (The Wrong Views of
the Uncontrolled) 111 | **"Ekka-mmi Vi Jammi Pae"** (Born in the Same Place) |
**Ba** (The Path of Non-Violence) | **So Te-na Ayariya Mangalam Majjha** (The
Blessed Ayariya) | **Ekka-mmi Vi Jammi Pae"** (Born in the Same Place) 131 |
**"Ekka-mmi Vi Jammi Pae"** (Born in the Same Place) | **Ekka Pandiya-maran-nam
Chindai Aya Majjha-nna-ne** (The One Who Cuts the Bond of Birth and Death) |
**Ekka Pandiya-maran-nam Padivajjiya Arahan-nov-utto Samma** (The One Who Has
Conquered Birth and Death) 138 | **"Ekko Uppajjaye Jivo Arahe-un Vi-u Ukko-sa"**
(The One Who is Born, Lives, and Dies) 139 | **"Ekko Karei Kammam Ekko Marahe-un
Vi-u Jahann"** (The One Who Creates Karma, The One Who Dies) | **"Ekko Karei
Kammam Phalam-avi Ahar-nimitta-gam Ahayam"** (The One Who Creates Karma, The One
Who Experiences the Fruits) | **"Ekko Me Sas-o Appa Ahar-nimitta-gam Maccha"**
(The One Who is My Self, The One Who is My Food) 13 | **"Ekko Han Natyi Me Koi,
Na Chaham-avi"** (The One Who is Not Mine, The One Who is Not Me) 142 | **"Eyan
Pacchakkhan-nam Anupa-le-un"** (Following These Teachings) | **Indiya-suha-sa-
ul-o** (The Enjoyment of the Senses) 112 | **"Evan Pacchakkhan-nam Ma-ur-ajan"**
(Following These Teachings) | **Eyansi Nimittam-mi** (This is the Cause) 113 |
**"Evan Tidanda-viro Ujja-ya Mangalam Majjha"** (Following These Teachings) |
**Eyansi Nimittam-mi** (This is the Cause) 118 | **"Es Karemi Panam-nam
Titthaya-ran-nam Uddhamahe Tiriya-mmi Uppa-nna-nna-uppa-nna Maya"** (I Offer My
Respect to the Tirthankaras) | **"Kaiya-nna-m Tu Sumaran-nam Uvahi Sarira-ng
Cheva"** (Remember the Body) | **"Manasa"** (With the Mind) 109 | **"Kappa-taru-
sam-bhave-su"** (In the Kalpa Tree) | **"Uva-va-e Uvahi Sarira-ng Cheva"**
(Remember the Body) 9 | **"Mamattam"** (Attachment) | **"Kalha-m Abbakkhan-nam
Pesun-nam"** (The Cause of Quarrels) 48 | **"Ubbe-yan-yam Jamman-maran-nam
Chavan-nam"** (Unveiling Birth and Death) | **"Katare Dun-bhik-khe"** (In the
World of Suffering) 21 | **"Katare Dun-bhik-khe"** (In the World of Suffering)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2. pariziSTa mahApratyAkhyAna prakIrNaka kI gAthAnukramaNikA 126 gAthA kramAMka
gAthA kramAMka unveyaNayaM jammaNa-maraNaM tiriesu 46 aNasaNa pAovagamaM 92
unveyaNayaM jammaNa-maraNaM naraesu 45 aNuttaresu naraesu 123 uvveyaNarya
jammaNa-maraNaM maNuesu 47 appaM pi bhAvasallaM 26 anbhujjayaM vihAraM ekkammi
vi jammi pe"| arahaMtA maMgalaM majha 115 taM tassa aviyaNho'yaM jIvo ekkammi vi
jammi pe| assaMjamamaNNANaM micchataM 18 vaccai assaMjamavogasaNaM 111 ekkammi
vi jammi pe| bA so teNa AyariyA maMgalaM majma ekkaM paMDiyamaraNaM chiMdai AyA
majjhaM nANe ekkaM paMDiyamaraNaM paDivajjiya ArAhaNovautto samma 131 ekko
uppajjae jIvo ArAheUNa viU ukkosA 138 ekko karei kammaM ekko mArAheUNa viU
jahanna 139 ekko karei kammaM phalamavi AhAranimittAgaM ahayaM ekko me sAsao
appA AhAranimittAgaM macchA ekko haM natyi me koI, na cAhamavi 13. eyaM
paccakkhANaM aNupAleUNa 142 iMdiyasuhasAulao evaM paccakkhANaM mAurajaNadeg 112
eyaMsi nimittammI 113 evaM tidaMDavirao ujjhAyA maMgalaM majha 118 esa karemi
paNAmaM titthayarANaM uDDhamahe tiriyammi uppannA'NuppannA mAyA kaiyA NaM tu
sumaraNaM uvahI sarIraMga cev"| maNasA 109 kpptruusNbhvesu"| uvavAe uvahI
sarIragaM ceva" mamattaM 9 kalahaM abbhakkhANaM pesuNNaM ubveyaNayaM jammaNa-
maraNaM cavaNaM 48 katAre dunbhikkhe 21

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 30 ## T ## 55 ## 57 ## 125 ## 2 ## G ## Mahapaccaklanapainnayam Gatha ##
**Kramanka Gatha Kayapavo Vi Manaso Kinha Nila Kau Lesa Jhanai 71 Tan Katten Va
Aggi**. Aththakin Tam Pandiamaranam? Kani 91 Sarenam. **Kin Pun Anagarasahayagen
82 Tan Katten Va Aggi** "Kamakoham Manam Mayam Loham 68 Bhogehi".  **Tan Katten
Va Aggi**. Bhoyanakhaiyen Va Piyen Va Vihie. Khamemi Sanva Jive  Tavapom
Gunabhariyam 79 Khiradaguchchurasesu 63 Tassa Ya Payacchittam  Tahim
Dukkhavivaagahim Guttio Sami-Bhavanao  Trivihen Ya Suhamaulan  Teu Pamha Sukka
Lesa. Chattari Kasae Tinni ..134 To Udharanti Garavarahiya Chulsee Kil Loe . 40
Dasadosavippaamukkam Jai Ichchasi Niththari  Dassan-Nan-Charitta Teve 137 Jai
Tav Te Supurisa Ayaroo 80 Devind-Chakkavatti Tanai Jai Tav Te Supurisa Giri Jah
Khuhiyachakkavale  Dhamma Jinapannattam  107 Jah Dahai Vausahiyo  Dhir!
Padagarahanam Jah Pacchimammi Kale  Dhirpurisapannattam**. Oinno Jah Balo
Jampanto Kajjamakajj 22 Dhirpurisapannattam**. Dhannam Jan Annani Kamma 101
Dhiren Vi Mariyavvam  141 Jan Kinchi Vi Ducchariyam Jan Kunai Bhavasallan
Natthi Kir So Paeso. Ja Kai Patthanao ....... 65 Na Vi Karanam Tanam Abo Jahe
Hoi Pamatto  98 Na Vi Tam Sattham Va Visam Jinavayanamanugayam  99 Nahum
Maranammi Uvagge 102 Jinavayanamanugaya  97 Nahum Sijjhai Sasallo
Jinavayanappameyam Mahuram 83 Nidami Nindanijja Jen Virago Jayai  106 Je Me
Jananti Jina . 20 Panch Ya Mahalkai  100 127 132 84 . .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 30 ta 55 57 125 2 G mahApaccaklANapaiNNayaM gAthA kramAMka gAthA kayapAvo vi
maNaso kiNhA nIlA kAU lesA jhANAI 71 taNa kaTTeNa va aggii"| atthakiM taM
paMDiyamaraNaM ? kANi 91 sAreNaM  //  kiM puNa aNagArasahAyageNa 82 taNa kaTTeNa
va aggI"kAmakohaM mANaM mAyaM lohaM 68 bhogehi  //  taNa kaTTeNa va aggii""|
bhoyaNakhaieNa va pIeNa va vihiie|| khAmemi sanva jIve tavapoyaM guNabhariyaM 79
khIradagucchurasesu 63 tassa ya pAyacchittaM tAhiM dukkhavivAgAhiM guttIo samiI-
bhAvaNAo tiviheNa ya suhamaulaM teU pamhA sukkA lesA. cattAri kasAe tinni ..134
to uddharaMti gAravarahiyA culasII kila loe . 40 dasadosavippamukkaM jai icchasi
nitthari daMsaNa-nANa-caritte tave 137 jai tAva te supurisA AyAro0 80 deviMda-
cakkavaTTi taNAI jai tAva te supurisA giri jaha khuhiyacakkavAle dhamma
jiNapannattaM 107 jaha Dahai vAusahio dhIra ! paDAgAharaNaM jaha pacchimammi
kAle dhiirpurispnnttN""| oiNNo jaha bAlo jaMpaMto kajjamakajja 22
dhiirpurispnnttN"| dhannA jaM annANI kamma 101 dhIreNa vi mariyavvaM 141 jaM
kiMci vi duccariyaM jaM kuNai bhAvasallaM natthi kira so paeso  /  jA kAi
patthaNAo ....... 65 na vi kAraNaM taNamabo jAhe hoi pamatto 98 na vi taM
satthaM va visaM jiNavayaNamaNugayamaI 99 nahu maraNammi uvagge 102
jiNavayaNaaNugayA 97 nahu sijjhai sasallo jiNavayaNappameyaM mahuraM 83 nidAmi
niMdaNijja jeNa virAgo jAyai 106 je me jANaMti jiNA . 20 paMca ya mahalkyAI 100
127 132 84 . .

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Gaya  **Panchendriya Samvaranam**  * **Pavaanam Pavaanam Kammam** * **Piyam
Thanayachchhiram** * **Puvvamkariyajogo** * **Puvvi Kariyajogo Aniyano** *
**Puvvi Kariyajogo Samahikamo Poranagan Cha Kammam**  **Or**  *
**Battisamandiyaahi Kadajogi Bahuso Vi Eva Runam Bahrataram Vah Mahiti
Indiyaai**  **Bhavasansare Savve**  * **Mae Karyam Iman Kaman Manasa
Achitanijjam**  **Bha**  **Ma**  * **Manasa Manasa Cha Viuu** * **Mammatam
Parijanami** * **Mam Mangalamarihanta Maya Bahum Chitija** * **Maya-P-
Bandhuhi** * **Maya Miti Piya Me** * **Micchattam Parijanami Mulagune
Uttaraguane** * **Ragam Bandham Paosam Cha**  **Parishishta**  **Kramank**  *
**70** * **89** * **37** * **86** * **88** * **87** * **130**  **Gaya**  *
**Ragen Va Dosen Va** * **Rosen Padinivesen** * **128 Sattabhayavippamukko** *
**38** * **4** * **85** * **10** * **114** * **135**  * **Lajjai Garaven** *
**43** * **42** * **19** * **12**  * **Valayamuhasaamano Veyanasu Uinnasu** *
**5** * **124** * **110 Sanjogamula Jivenam** * **73**  * **Sansarachakkavale**
* **Samuinnnaveni Pun Sammam Me Savvabhuues Savvadukkhappinaanam** * **51 Savyam
Panaramham Pacchakhaami** * **Savvam Pi Asanam Panam** * **Sangam Parijanami**
**La**  * **Samano Mittiya Padham**  **Sa**  * **Sansar Rangamajjhe** * **Sahu
Ya Mangalam Majjha** * **Siddha Uvasampanno** * **Siddha Ya Mangalam Majjha**  *
**Sujjhai Dukkarakari** * **Subahu Pi Bhavasallan** * **Sohi Ujjuyabhuuyass** *
**Tunan Mohajalam**  **Kramank**  * **36** * **94** * **58.** * **122.** *
**74** * **108** * **121** * **140** * **2** * **33** * **34** * **77** *
**17.** * **52** * **129** * **119** * **120** * **116** * **95.** * **25.** *
**23** * **66**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gAyA paMceMdriyasaMvaraNaM pAvANaM pAvANaM kammANaM pIyaM thaNayacchIraM
puvvamakAriyajogo puvvi kAriyajogo aniyANo puvvi kAriyajogo samAhikAmo porANagaM
ca kammaM va battIsamaMDiyAhi kaDajogI bahuso vi eva rUNaM baharataraM vaha
mahiti iMdiyAI bhavasaMsAre savve mae karya imaM kamaM maNasA acitaNijjaM bha ma
maNasA mANasaccaviU mamattaM parijAnAmi mama magaMlamarihaMtA mAya bahuM citijA
mAyA-pa- baMdhUhi mAyA miti piyA me micchattaM parijANAmi mUlaguNe uttaraguNe
rAgaM baMdhaM paosaM ca pariziSTa kramAMka 70 89 37 86 88 87 130 gAyA rAgeNa va
doseNa va roseNa paDiniveseNa 128 sattabhayavippamukko 38 4 85 10 114 135 lajjAi
gAraveNa 43 42 19 12 valayAmuhasAmANo veyaNAsu uinnAsu 5 124 110 saMjogamUlA
jIveNaM 73 saMsAracakkavAle samuiNNaveNI puNa sammaM me savvabhUesa
savvadukkhappINANaM 51 savyaM pANAraMbhaM paccakkhAmI savvaM pi asaNaM pANaM
saMgaM parijAnAmi la samaNo mittiya paDhamaM sa saMsAra raMgamajjhe sAhu ya
maMgalaM majjha siddha uvasaMpaNNo siddhA ya maMgalaM majjha sujjhai dukkarakArI
subahu pi bhAvasallaM sohI ujjuyabhUyassa tUNa mohajAlaM kramAMka 36 94 58. 122.
74 108 121 140 2 33 34 77 17. 52 129 119 120 116 95. 25. 23 66

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix ### Bibliography  1. **Abhidhan Rajendra Kosh**: Shri Vijay Rajendra
Suriji - Ratlam. 2. **Ashtapahuḍ**: (Kundakunda) - Language Translation:
Mahendra Kumar Jain. (Shri Digambar Jain Swadhyay Mandir Trust, Saunagarh). 3.
**Uttaraadhyayanasutra**: Editor Madhukar Muni (Shri Aagam Prakashan Samiti,
Byawar). 4. **Gommatasar**: Editor A.N. Upadhye (Bharatiya Gyanpeeth Prakashan,
Delhi). 5. **Chandravadhyaka Prakirnak**: Translated by Suresh Sisodiya (Aagam,
Ahimsa Samata Evam Prakrit Sansthan, Udaipur). 6. **Comparative Study of Jain,
Buddhist and Gita Based Philosophies**: Dr. Sagarmal Jain (Prakrit Bharati
Sansthan, Jaipur). 7. **Jain Lakshnavalli**: Editors Balachandra Siddhant
Shastri (Veer Seva Mandir Prakashan, Delhi) (Parts 1-3). 8. **Jainendra Siddhant
Kosh**: Jinendra Varni Prakashan, Delhi) (Parts 1-4). 9. **Nandi Sutra**: Editor
Madhukar Muni (Shri Aagam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar). 10. **Nandi Sutra Churni
(Devavachaka)** - Editor Muni Punyavijay (Prakrit Text Society, Varanasi). 11.
**Nandi Sutra Vritti (Devavachaka)** - Editor Muni Punyavijay (Prakrit Text
Society, Varanasi). 12. **Niyamasar**: (Kundakunda) - Hindi Translation:
Parameshthidas (Sahitya Prakashan Evam Prachar Vibhag, Shri Kundakunda Kahan
Digambar Jain Tirth Suraksha Trust, Jaipur). 13. **Niyukti Sangrah
(Bhadrabahu)** - Editor Vijayajinenrdrasuriswar. 14. **Nishith Sutra (Bhashya)**
- Editor Amarchand Ji M. Sa. (Sanmati Gyanpeeth, Agra) (Parts 1-4).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 3. pariziSTa sahAyaka grantha sUcI 1. abhidhAna rAjendra koza : zrI vijaya
rAjendra sUrijI - ratalAma  /  2. aSTapAhuDa : (kundakunda ) - bhASA parivartana
: mahendra kumAra jaina  /  ( zrI digambara jaina svAdhyAya maMdira TrasTa,
saunagar3ha )  /  3. uttarAdhyayana sUtra : sampAdaka madhukara muni (zrI Agama
prakAzana samiti, byAvara )  /  4. gommaTasAra : sampAdaka e0 ena0 upAdhye
(bhAratIya jJAnapITha prakAzana, dillI  /  candravedhyaka prakIrNaka : anu0
sureza sisodiyA ( Agama, ahiMsAsamatA evaM prAkRta saMsthAna, udayapura)  /  5.
6. jaina bauddha aura gItA ke AdhAra darzanoM kA tulanAtmaka adhyayana : DaoN0
sAgaramala jaina (prAkRta bhAratI saMsthAna, jayapura )  /  7. jaina lakSaNAvalI
: sampAdakaM bAlacandra siddhAnta zAstrI (vIra sevA mandira prakAzana, dillI (
bhAga 1- 3 )  /  (bhAratIya jJAnapITha 8. jainendra siddhAnta koza : jinendra
varNI prakAzana, dillI) (bhAga 1 - 4)  /  9. nandIsUtra : sampAdaka madhukara
muni (zrI Agama prakAzana samiti, byAvara )  /  10. nandIsUtra cUrNi
(devavAcaka) -- sampAdaka muni puNyavijaya (prAkRta TeksaT sosAyaTI, vArANasI)
/  11. nandIsUtra vRttiH ( devavAcaka ) - sampAdaka muni puNyavijaya (prAkRta
TeksaT sosAyaTI, vArANasI)  /  12. niyamasAra : ( kundakunda) - hindI anu0
parameSThIdAsa (sAhitya prakAzana evaM pracAra vibhAga, zrI kundakunda kahAna
digambara jaina tIrtha surakSA TrasTa, jayapura)  /  13. niyukti saMgraha
(bhadrabAhu ) - sampAdaka vijayajinendrasUrIzvara 14. nizIthasUtra (bhASya ) -
sampAdaka amaracanda jI ma0 sA0 (sanmati jJAnapITha, AgarA) (bhAga 1 - 4)  /

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Appendix** 15. **Païnayasutaï** - Editor Muni Punyavijay (Shri Mahavira Jain
Vidyalaya, Bombay) (Parts 1-2). 16. **Paakshikasutra** - Devchandra Lalbhai Jain
Pustakodhar Fund. - 17. **Pravachansara** : (Kundakunda) - Editor Adinath
Neminath Upadhye (Shrimud Rajchandra Ashram, Agas). 18. **Prajnapanasutra** :
Editor Madhukar Muni (Aagam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar) (Parts 1-3). 19.
**Bhagavati Aaradhana** : (Shivary) - Editor Kailashchandra Shastri (Jain
Sanskriti Rakshak Sangh, Sholapur) (Parts 1-2). 20. **Moolachar** : (Vattakera)
Editor Kailashchandra Shastri (Bharatiya Gyanapith Prakashan, Delhi) (Parts
1-2). 21. **Visheshavasyakabhashya** : (Jinabhadra) Editor Pandit Dalsukh
Malvaniya (La. Da. Bha. San. Vidya Mandir, Ahmedabad). 22.
**Vyakhyaprajnaptisutra** : Editor Madhukar Muni (Shri Aagam Prakashan Samiti,
Byawar) (Parts 1-3). 47 23. **Samaysara** : (Kundakunda) Editor Dr. Pannalal
(Shri Ganeshprasad Varni Granthamala Prakashan, Varanasi). - 24.
**Samavayangasutra** : Editor Madhukar Muni (Shri Aagam Prakashan Samiti,
Byawar). 25. **Sthanangasutra** : Editor Madhukar Muni (Shri Aagam Prakashan
Samiti, Byawar). 26. **Shravak Pratikramanasutra** : (Agarchand Bhairodan Sethia
Jain Paramार्थिक Sanstha, Bikaner). 27. **Shri Jain Siddhant Bol Sangrah** :
(Agarchand Bhairodan Sethia Jain Paramार्थिक Sanstha, Bikaner) (Parts 1-8). 28.
**Jnatadharmakathasutra** : Editor Madhukar Muni (Shri Aagam Prakashan Samiti,
Byawar).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 15. paiNayasutAI - sampAdaka muni puNyavijaya (zrI mahAvIra jaina
vidyAlaya, bambaI ) ( bhAga 1-2 )  /  16. pAkSikasUtra - devacandra lAlabhAI
jaina pustakoddhAra phaNDa  /  - 17. pravacanasAra : (kunkunda ) - sampAdaka
AdinAtha neminAtha upAdhye ( zrImad rAjacandra Azrama, agAsa)  /  18.
prajJApanAsUtra : sampAdaka madhukara muni ( Agama prakAzana samiti, byAvara)
(bhAga 1 - 3)  /  19. bhagavatI ArAdhanA : ( zivArya) - sampAdaka kailAzacandra
zAstrI ( jaina saMskRti rakSaka saMgha, zolApura ) ( bhAga 1-2 )  /  20.
mUlAcAra : ( vaTTakera) sampAdaka kailAzacandra zAstrI ( bhAratIya jJAnapITha
prakAzana, dillI) ( bhAga 1-2 )  /  21. vizeSAvazyakabhASya : ( jinabhadra)
sampAdaka paNDita dalasukha mAlavaNiyA (lA0 da0 bhA0 saM0 vidyA mandira,
ahamadAbAda )  /  22. vyAkhyAprajJaptisUtra : sampAdaka madhukara muni (zrI
Agama prakAzana samiti, byAvara ) ( bhAga 1-3)  /  47 23. samayasAra : (
kundakunda) sampAdaka DaoN0 pannAlAla (zrI gaNezaprasAda varNI granthamAlA
prakAzana, vArANasI)  /  - 24. samavAyAMgasatra : sampAdaka madhukara muni (zrI
Agama prakAzana samiti, vara)  /  25. sthAnAMgasUtra : sampAdaka madhukara muni
(zrI Agama prakAzana samiti, byAvara )  /  26. zrAvaka pratikramaNasUtra : (
agaracanda bhairodAna seThiyA jaina paramArthika saMsthA, bIkAnera ) | 27. zrI
jaina siddhAnta bola saMgraha : (agaracanda bhairodAna seThiyA jaina
paramArthika saMsthA, bIkAnera ) ( bhAga 1-8)  /  28. jJAtAdharmakathAsUtra :
sampAdaka madhukara muni (zrI Agama prakAzana samiti, byAvara )  /

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Institution - Introduction  The **Agam Ahimsa-Samata** and **Prakrit
Institution** was established in January 1983 in memory of Acharya Shri
Nanalalji Ma. Sa.'s 1981 Udaipur Varshavas. The main objective of the
institution is to train scholars in Jain Vidya and Prakrit, publish unpublished
Jain literature, provide study facilities for students interested in Jain Vidya,
prepare and publish books on Jain ethics, philosophy and history from a
scientific perspective for the protection of Jain culture, and organize
seminars, lectures, and events for the dissemination of Jain Vidya. This is a
key initiative of the Shri A. Bha. Sa. Jain Sangh.  The institution is
registered under the Rajasthan Societies Act 1958 and is exempt from income tax
under sections 80 (G) and 12 (A) of the Income Tax Act on donations received.
You can participate in this noble work of Jain religion and culture in the
following ways:  (1) Individuals or institutions can become **Param Rakshak
Members** by donating one lakh rupees or more. The names of such members are
displayed on the institution's letterhead in order of donation date.  (2) You
can become a **Rakshak Member** by donating 51,000 rupees.  (3) You can become a
**Hitaishi Member** by donating 25,000 rupees.  (4) You can become a **Sahayak
Member** by donating 11,000 rupees.  (5) You can become a **Sadharan Member** by
donating 1,000 rupees.  (6) Any organization, trust, board, society, etc. that
donates 20,000 rupees together will be a member of the **Institution Council**.
(7) You can help by donating for building construction and other necessary
equipment in memory of your elders.  (8) You can donate ancient manuscripts,
Agam literature, and other useful literature lying at your home.  Your
contribution will propel the chariot of knowledge-cultivation on the path of
progress.  Jain Excation International

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMsthAna - paricaya Agama ahiMsA-samatA evaM prAkRta saMsthAna AcArya zrI
nAnAlAla jI ma0 sA0 ke 1981 ke udayapura varSAvAsa kI smRti meM janavarI 1983
meM sthApita kiyA gyaa| saMsthAna kA mukhya uddezya jaina vidyA evaM prAkRta ke
vidvAn taiyAra karanA, aprakAzita jaina sAhitya kA prakAzana karanA, jainavidyA
meM ruci rakhane vAle vidyArthiyoM ko adhyayana kI suvidhA pradAna karanA, jaina
saMskRti kI surakSA ke lie jaina AcAra, darzana aura itihAsa para vaijJAnika
dRSTi se grantha taiyAra kara prakAzita karavAnA evaM jaina vidyA prasAra kI
dRSTi se saMgoSThiyA~, bhASaNa, samAroha Adi Ayojita karanA hai  /  yaha zrI a0
bhA0 sA0 jaina saMgha kI eka mukhya pravRtti hai  /  saMsthAna rAjasthAna
sosAyaTIja ekTa 1958 ke antargata rajisTarDa hai evaM saMsthAna ko anudAna rUpa
meM dI gayI dhanarAzi para Ayakara adhiniyama kI dhArA 80 (G) aura 12 (A) ke
antargata chUTa prApta hai  /  jaina dharma aura saMskRti ke isa punIta kArya
meM Apa isa prakAra sahabhAgI bana sakate haiM (1) vyakti yA saMsthA eka lAkha
rupayA yA isase adhika dekara parama saMrakSaka sadasya bana sakate haiM  /
aise sadasyoM kA nAma anudAna tithi - krama se saMsthAna ke leTarapaiDa para
darzAyA jAtA hai  /  (2) 51,000 rupayA dekara saMrakSaka sadasya bana sakate
haiM  /  (3) 25,000 rupayA dekara hitaiSI sadasya bana sakate haiM  /  (4)
11,000 rupayA dekara sahAyaka sadasya bana sakate haiM  /  (5) 1,000 rupayA
dekara sAdhAraNa sadasya bana sakate haiM  /  (6) saMgha, TrasTa, borDa,
sosAyaTI Adi jo saMsthA eka sAtha 20,000 rupaye kA anudAna pradAna karatI hai,
vaha saMsthA saMsthAna - pariSad kI sadasya hogI  /  (7) apane bujurgoM kI smRti
meM bhavana nirmANa hetu va anya Avazyaka yaMtrAdi hetu anudAna dekara Apa isakI
sahAyatA kara sakate haiM  /  (8) apane ghara para par3I prAcIna pAMDulipiyA~,
Agama-sAhitya va anya upayogI sAhitya pradAna kara sakate haiM  /  ApakA yaha
sahayoga jJAna-sAdhanA ke ratha ko pragati ke patha para agrasara karegA  /
Jain Excation International e

