Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/034707/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Namo Namo Nimmaladansanas, Bal Brahmachari Shri Neminaathay Namah. Pujya Anand-
Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-Sudharmasagar-Guru-bhyo Namah. Aagam-39 Mahanishith Aagam
Sutra Hindi Anuvaad Anuvaadak Evam Sampadak Aagam Deepaakar Muni Deepa Ratna
Sagarji [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. Shruta Maharshi ] Aagam Hindi-Anuvaad-Shreni
Pushp-39

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 namo namo nimmaladaMsaNassa bAla brahmacArI zrI neminAthAya namaH pUjya Ananda-
kSamA-lalita-suzIla-sudharmasAgara-gurUbhyo nama: Agama-39 mahAnizItha
AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda anuvAdaka evaM sampAdaka Agama dIvAkara muni
dIparatnasAgarajI [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. zruta maharSi ] Agama hindI-anuvAda-zreNI
puSpa-39

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number Agam
Sutra-39- 'Mahanishith' Chhed Sutra-6- Hindi Translation Where to see what? |
Page Order Order Subject Subject Shalyoudharan Karmavipak Description Kushil
Lakshana Kushil Sansargi Navaneet Saar Geetarth Vihar Prayashchitta Sutra 96 37
7 117 61 Sushadh Anagar Katha 135 Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam
Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
AgamasUtra-39- 'mahAnizItha' chedasUtra-6- hindI anuvAda kahAM kyA dekhe? |
pRSTha krama krama viSaya viSaya zalyauddharaNa karmavipAka vivaraNa kuzIla
lakSaNa kuzIla saMsargI navanItasAra gItArtha vihAra prAyazcitta sUtra 96 37 7
117 61 susaDha aNagAra kathA 135 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 2

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Cheda Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' **Study/Purpose/Sutra Number** 45
Agam Classification Sutra Order Order Agam Name Agam Name Sutra 01 | Achar Ang
Sutra-1 | | Sutra Krit Ang Sutra-2 03 | Sthan Ang Sutra-3 | 04 | Samavay Payanna
Sutra-2 Payanna Sutra-3 Payanna Sutra-4 Payanna Sutra-5 Payanna Sutra-6 Payanna
Sutra-7 Payanna Sutra-7 Payanna Sutra-8 05 | Bhagavati 06 | Jnatadharmakatha 25
| Aturpratyakhyan 26 Mahapratyakhyan 27 Bhaktaparijna 28 | Tandulavaicharick 29
| Sanstark 30.1 Gachhachar 30.2 Chandravedhyak 31 |Gani Vidya 32 Devendrastav 33
| Veerastav Nishith Upasakdasha Ang Sutra-4 Ang Sutra-5 Ang Sutra-6 | Ang
Sutra-7 Ang Sutra-8 Ang Sutra-9 Ang Sutra-10 Ang Sutra-11 Upang Sutra-1 Upang
Sutra-2 Upang Sutra-3 08 Antkrit Dasha 09 Anuttaroppapatikdasha
Prashnavyakaranadasha 11 | Vipakshrut | Aupapatik Rajprashchiy Jivajivabhigam
Payanna Sutra-9 34 12 35 Brihatkalp 36 Vyavahar Upang Sutra-4 38 Upag Sutra-5
Upang Sutra-6 Payanna Sutra-10 Cheda Sutra-1 Cheda Sutra-2 Cheda Sutra-3 Cheda
Sutra-4 Cheda Sutra-5 Cheda Sutra-6 Mul Sutra-1 Mul Sutra-2 Mul Sutra-2 Mul
Sutra-3 Mul Sutra-4 Chulikasutra-1 Chulikasutra-2 37 Dashashrutaskandh Jitkalp
39 Mahanishith | Aavashyak 41.1 Oghanuyukti 41.2 Pindanuyukti 42 | Dashavaikalik
40 Upang Sutra-7 Prajnapana Surya Prajnapti 17 Chandra Prajnapti 18 Jambudvipa
Prajnapti Nirayavalika 20 | Kalpavatanshika 21 Pushpika Pushpachulika 23 |
Vrishnidasha 24 | Chatuh Sharan 19 Upang Sutra-8 Upang Sutra-9 Upang Sutra-10
Upang Sutra-11 43 | Uttaradhyayana 44 | Nandi 45 | Anuyogdwar Upang Sutra-12
Payanna Sutra-1 Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad
Page 3

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka 45 Agama
vargIkaraNa sUtra krama krama Agama kA nAma Agama kA nAma sUtra 01 | AcAra
aMgasUtra-1  /  | sUtrakRt aMgasUtra-2 03 | sthAna aMgasUtra-3  /  04 | samavAya
payannAsUtra-2 payannAsUtra-3 payannAsUtra-4 payannAsUtra-5 payannAsUtra-6
payannAsUtra-7 payannAsUtra-7 payannAsUtra-8 05 | bhagavatI 06 |
jJAtAdharmakathA 25  /  AturapratyAkhyAna 26 mahApratyAkhyAna 27 bhaktaparijJA
28 | taMdulavaicArika 29  /  saMstAraka 30.1 gacchAcAra 30.2 candravedhyaka 31
|gaNividyA 32 devendrastava 33  /  | vIrastava nizItha upAsakadazA aMgasUtra-4
aMgasUtra-5 aMgasUtra-6  /  aMgasUtra-7 aMgasUtra-8 aMgasUtra-9 aMgasUtra-10
aMgasUtra-11 upAMgasUtra-1 upAMgasUtra-2 upAMgasUtra-3 08 aMtakRt dazA 09
anuttaropapAtikadazA praznavyAkaraNadazA 11  /  vipAkazruta | aupapAtika
rAjaprazciya jIvAjIvAbhigama payannAsUtra-9 34 12 35 bRhatkalpa 36 vyavahAra
upAMgasUtra-4 38 upAgasUtra-5 upAMgasUtra-6 payannAsUtra-10 chedasUtra-1
chedasUtra-2 chedasUtra-3 chedasUtra-4 chedasUtra-5 chedasUtra-6 mUlasUtra-1
mUlasUtra-2 mUlasUtra-2 mUlasUtra-3 mUlasUtra-4 cUlikAsUtra-1 cUlikAsUtra-2 37
dazAzrutaskandha jItakalpa 39 mahAnizItha | Avazyaka 41.1 oghaniyukti 41.2
piMDaniyukti 42 | dazavaikAlika 40 upAMgasUtra-7 prajJApanA sUryaprajJapti 17
candraprajJapti 18 jaMbUdvIpaprajJapti nirayAvalikA 20 | kalpavataMsikA 21
puSpikA puSpacUlikA 23 | vRSNidazA 24 | catu:zaraNa 19 upAMgasUtra-8
upAMgasUtra-9 upAMgasUtra-10 upAMgasUtra-11 43 | uttarAdhyayana 44  /  nandI 45
/  anuyogadvAra upAMgasUtra-12 payannAsUtra-1 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 3

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aagam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Maha Nishit'  **Study/Purpose/Sutra Number**
13  **Muni Diperatnasagarji Published Literature - Aagam Literature**  **Aagam
Literature - Literature Name - Books Order - Literature Name**  **Books -
Original Aagam Literature:** 1476 | Aagam Other Literature: |-1- Aagam Suttanni-
Mulam prin [49] -1- Maaram Thanuyog 06 -2- Aagam Suttanni-Mulam Net [45]] -2-
Aagam Sambandhi Saahitya 02 -3- Aagam Manjusha (Mula Prat) [53] -3- Rishi
Bhashit Sutrani 01 Aagam Anuvaad Saahitya: 165 1-4- Aagamiy Suktaavali 01 -1-
Maagam Sutra 44 Raati Manuvaah [47] Aagam Saahitya- Kul Pustak 516 |-2- Aagam
Sutra Hindi Anuvaad Net: [47] -3- Aagam Sootra English Trans. [11] -4- આગમસૂત્ર
સટીક ગુજરાતી અનુવાદ -5- Aagam Sutra Hindi Anuvaad prin [12]  **Other Literature:
3 Aagam Vivechan Saahitya:** 171 1 Tatvaabhyas Saahitya-1- Aagam Sutra Satikam
[46] 2 Santralyaas Saahitya 06 -2- Aagam Sutrani Satikam Prataakar-17 [51]| 3
વ્યાકરણ સાહિત્ય 05 |-3- Aagam Sutrani Satikam Prataakar-2 | [09] 4 Vyaajyan
Saahitya 04 -4- Aagam Churni Saahitya [09] 5 Unalat Saahitya 09 |-5- Savrittik
Aagam Sutrani-1 [40] 6 Vidh Saahitya 04 -6- Savrittik Aagam Sutrani-2 [08] 7
Maaraadhana Saahitya 03 -7- Sachurnik Aagam Suttanni | [08] 81Baaha 04 Aagam
Kosh Saahitya: 14 | 54n Saahitya-1- Aagam Saddakoso [04] 10 Tirthar Sanvitarshan
25 | -2- Aagam Kahakoso [01] | 11 Hee Saahitya 05 -3- Aagam-Sagar-Kosh: । [05]
12iparatnasagarna Vadhushodhanibandh -4- Aagam-Shabdaadi-Sangrah (Pra-San-Gu) -
[04]] આગમ સિવાયનું સાહિત્ય ફૂલ પુસ્તક 85 Aagam Anukram Saahitya: -09 -1- Maaram
Vishayanubh- (1) 02 | 1- Aagam Saahitya (Kul Pustak) | 516 -2- Aagam
Vishayanukram (Satik) 2- Aagametar Saahitya (Kul 085 -3- Aagam Sutra-Gatha
Anukram 03 Diperatnasagarji ke Kul Prakashan | 601 - C મુનિ દીપરત્નસાગરનું
સાહિત્યકા 1 Muni Hiperatnasarnu Aam Saahitya [ yeds 516] Tenas Pana [98,300] 2 |
Bhunitiperatnasagarunu Sany Saahitya [hut Pust. 85] Tenal Pana [09,270] | 3
Bhumihiperatnasagar Sanlit Tatvarth Sutra'ni Vishisht DVD Tana Sa Pana [27,930]
| Mabhaprashanoos 01 + Vishisht DVD Is Pana 1,35,5000 02 05 04  **Muni
Diperatnasagar Krit (Maha Nishit) Aagam Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad** Page 4

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka 13 muni
dIparatnasAgarajI prakAzita sAhitya Agama sAhitya Agama sAhitya sAhitya nAma
bUksa krama sAhitya nAma bUksa mUla Agama sAhitya: 1476 | Agama anya
sAhitya:|-1- AgamasuttANi-mUlaM prin [49] -1-mArAma thAnuyoga 06 -2-
AgamasuttANi-mUlaM Net [45]] -2- Agama saMbaMdhI sAhitya 02 -3-AgamamaJjUSA
(mUla prata) [53] -3-RSibhASita sUtrANi 01 Agama anuvAda sAhitya:165 1-4-
Agamiya sUktAvalI 01 -1- mAgamasUtra 44rAtI manuvAha [47] Agama sAhitya- kula
pustaka 516 |-2-AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda Net: [47] -3- Aagam Sootra English
Trans. [11] -4- AgamasUtra saTIka gujarAtI anuvAda -5- AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda
prin [12] anya sAhitya:3 Agama vivecana sAhitya: 171 1tatvAbhyAsa sAhitya-1-
AgamasUtra saTIkaM [46] 2 saMtrAlyAsa sAhitya 06 -2-AgamasUtrANi saTIkaM
pratAkAra-17 [51]| 3 vyAkaraNa sAhitya 05 |-3- AgamasUtrANi saTIkaM pratAkAra-2
| [09] 4 vyAjyAna sAhitya 04 -4- Agama cUrNi sAhitya [09] 5 unalata sAhitya 09
|-5- savRttika AgamasUtrANi-1 [40] 6 vidha sAhitya 04 -6- savRttika
AgamasUtrANi-2 [08] 7 mArAdhanA sAhitya 03 -7-sacUrNika AgamasuttANi | [08]
81BAhA 04 Agama koSa sAhitya: 14 | 54na sAhitya-1- Agama saddakoso [04] 10
tIrthara saMvitarzana 25 | -2- Agama kahAkoso [01] | 11 hI sAhitya 05 -3- Agama-
sAgara-koSa:  /  [05] 12IparatnasAgaranA vadhuzodhanibaMdha -4-Agama-zabdAdi-
saMgraha (prA-saM-gu) - [04]] Agama sivAyanuM sAhitya phUla pustaka 85 Agama
anukrama sAhitya: -09 -1- mArAma viSayAnubha- (1) 02 | 1-Agama sAhitya (kula
pustaka) | 516 -2- Agama viSayAnukrama (saTIka) 2-Agametara sAhitya (kula 085
-3- Agama sUtra-gAthA anukrama 03 dIparatnasAgarajI ke kula prakAzana | 601 - C
muni dIparatnasAgaranuM sAhityakA 1 muni hIparatnasArnu Ama sAhitya [ yeds 516]
tenAsa pAnA [98,300] 2 | bhuniTIparatnasAgaranuM sanya sAhitya [huta pust| 85]
tenAla pAnA [09,270] | 3 bhumihIparatnasAgara saMlita tatvArthasUtra'nI viziSTa
DVD tanA sA pAnA [27,930] | mabhAprAzanosa 01 + viziSTa DVD isa pAnA 1,35,5000
02 05 04 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 4

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Study/Purpose/Sutra Number **Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'**
[39] Mahanishith Chhed Sutra-6 - Hindi Translation Study-1-Shalyodharan Sutra-1
Salutations to the Tirthankaras, salutations to the Arhant Bhagavants. I have
heard from the Ayushman Bhagavant that, here, any Sadhu or Sadhvi who engages in
a deceptive action, should, according to the 'Mahanishith' Shruta Skandha
Shruta, which is extremely profound, extremely excellent, and the ultimate truth
and essence, be free from all three types of (mind, speech, body) and three
types of (doing, causing to do, approving) in all ways, and free from internal
and external impurities, for the benefit of the soul, should engage in extremely
severe, heroic, intense, and arduous austerities and practices, completely
abandoning all attachments to distractions, spending all their time, both night
and day, free from distractions, constantly in a state of sorrow, with
unwavering, great faith, devotion, and detachment, without hiding their
strength, power, effort, and courage, without feeling shame, with a body that
has renounced possessions, with a focused mind, repeatedly immersing themselves
in austerities, practices, etc. Sutra-2  But, many distractions in the name of
attachment, aversion, delusion, objects, passions, knowledge attachments,
prosperity, taste, pride of the three types, anger-filled meditation, sorrowful
meditation, falsehood, wrong belief, non-restraint (of mind, speech, body), evil
association, indulgence in non-righteous things, laziness, etc., gossiping,
falsely accusing, quarreling, being intoxicated by the eight types of pride
(caste, etc.), envy, arrogance, anger, possessiveness, ego, many types of
darkness-filled heart, should not be present without closing the broken doors of
the flow of impurities, which are like a thick, intense, extremely fierce,
heavy, smooth, sinful karma-dirt, which leads to violence, theft, lying, sexual
misconduct, attachment, intention, etc., which are the beginning of inauspicious
results. Having said this, Sadhus and Sadhvis should not be involved in the flow
of impurities. Sutra-3  (When Sadhus or Sadhvis know their faults, then) even
for a moment, a second, a Muhurta, a blink of an eye, half a blink, or even a
fraction of a half blink, the time that is free from impurities is like this.
Sutra-4-6  When I become completely calm and then become detached from all
objects, abandoning attachment, aversion, and delusion, then the soul, which
experiences devotion, should think with a focused mind, in the right way, about
the path to the afterlife, "Oh! Where will I go after death? What Dharma have I
attained? What vows and rules do I have? What austerities have I practiced? What
conduct have I adopted? What have I donated?" Sutra-7-9  What will enable me to
attain happiness and prosperity in heaven or the human realm, in a low, middle,
or high family? Or what is the benefit of being sorrowful? I know the soul well,
I know my bad character, my faults, and my virtues. In this way, I will go to
the hellish underworld, which is filled with intense darkness, where I will have
to endure thousands of sufferings for a long time.  Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
(Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' [39]
mahAnizItha chedasUtra-6- hindI anuvAda adhyayana-1-zalyauddharaNa sUtra-1
tIrtha ko namaskAra ho, arahaMta bhagavaMta ko namaskAra ho  /  AyuSmAn
bhagavaMta ke pAsa maiMne isa prakAra sunA hai ki, yahA~ jo kisI chadmastha
kriyA meM vartate aise sAdhu yA sAdhvI ho vo-isa paramatattva aura sArabhUta
cIja ko sAdhanevAle ati mahA artha garbhita, atizaya zreSTha, aise 'mahAnisIha''
zrutaskaMdha zruta ke mutAbika trividha (mana, vacana, kAyA) trividha (karaNa,
karAvaNa, anumodana) sarva bhAva se aura aMtara-abhAvI zalyarahita hokara AtmA
ke hita ke lie ati ghora, vIra, ugra, kaSTakArI tapa aura saMyama ke anuSThAna
karane ke lie sarva pramAda ke Alambana sarvathA chor3akara sArA vakta rAta ko
aura dina ko pramAda rahita satata khinnatA ke sivA, ananya, mahAzraddhA,
saMvega aura vairAgamArga pAe hue, niyANArahita, bala-vIrya, puruSakAra aura
parAkrama ko chipAe binA, glAni pAe binA, vosirAe-tyAga kie dehavAle, sunizcita
ekAgra cittavAle hokara bArabAra tapa saMyama Adi anuSThAna meM ramaNatA karanI
caahie| sUtra-2 lekina rAga, dveSa, moha, viSaya, kaSAya, jJAna Alambana ke nAma
para honevAle kaIM pramAda, Rddhi, rasa, zAtA ina tInoM taraha ke gArava,
raudradhyAna, ArttadhyAna, vikathA, mithyAtva, avirati (mana, vacana, kAyA ke)
duSTayoga, anAyatana sevana, kuzIla Adi kA saMsarga, cugalI karanA, jhUThA Aropa
lagAnA, kalaha karanA, jAti Adi ATha taraha se mada karanA, irSyA, abhimAna,
krodha, mamatvabhAva, ahaMkAra aneka bheda meM vibhakta tAmasabhAva yukta hRdaya
se hiMsA, corI, jhUTha, maithuna, parigraha kA Arambha, saMkalpa Adi azubha
pariNAmavAle ghora, pracaMDa, mahAraudra, gAr3ha, cikane pApakarma-mala samAna
lepa se khaMDita Azrava dvAra ko banda kie bagaira na honaa| yaha batAe hue
Azrava meM sAdhu-sAdhvI ko pravRtta nahI honA cAhie  /  sUtra -3 (isa prakAra
jaba sAdhu yA sAdhvI unake doSa jAne taba) eka pala, lava, muhUrta, A~kha kI
palaka, ardha palaka, ardha palaka ke bhItara ke hisse jitanA kAla bhI zalya se
rahita hai-vo isa prakAra haisUtra-4-6 jaba maiM sarva bhAva se upazAMta banUMgA
aura phira sarva viSaya meM virakta banU~gA, rAga, dveSa aura moha kA tyAga
karU~gA, taba saMvega pAnevAlA AtmA paraloka ke paMtha ko ekAgra mana se samyak
taraha se soce, are ! maiM yahA~ mRtyu pAkara kahA~ jAUMgA ? maiMne kauna-sA
dharma prApta kiyA hai ? mere kauna-se vrata-niyama haiM ? maiMne kauna-se tapa
kA sevana kiyA hai ? maiMne kaisA zIla dhAraNa kiyA hai ? maiMne kyA dAna diyA
hai ? sUtra-7-9 ki jisake prabhAva se maiM hIna, madhyama yA uttama kula meM
svarga yA mAnava loka meM sukha aura samRddhi pA sakU~ ? yA viSAda karane se kyA
phAyadA? AtmA ko maiM acchI taraha se jAnatA hU~, merA duzcaritra aura mere doSa
evaM guNa hai vo saba maiM jAnatA hU~  /  isa taraha ghora aMdhakAra se
bharapUra aise pAtAla-narka meM hI maiM jAUMgA ki jahA~ lambe arase taka hajAroM
duHkha mujhe sahane pdd'eNge| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 5

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number
Sutra-10-11 In this way, all beings know Dharma-Adharma, Sukh-Dukha, etc.
Gautama! Among them, there are some beings who do not practice Dharma, which is
beneficial to the soul, due to Moha and ignorance. And then, if someone
practices such Dharma, which is beneficial to the soul for the afterlife, out of
Maya-Dambha, they will not feel its benefit. Sutra-12-14 This soul is mine. I
know my soul truly. It is difficult to realize the soul. Dharma also happens
through self-witness. Whoever considers something beneficial or dear, they
establish it on a beautiful path. (Because) a lioness considers her cruel child
to be more dear. All beings in the world, without thinking that "other souls are
like my own", imagine the soul as Anatma and behave with evil speech, body, and
mind, including actions. When that soul is called innocent. It is free from
impurities. It has abandoned partiality. It is far away from the sinful and
impure heart. And it is free from the net of equal faults. Sutra-15-16 Such men,
who are established in the true meaning, the essence, and who prove the
wonderful thing, through the rituals performed by them, that (innocent) soul
delights itself. Such a soul has the highest Dharma, the highest Tapas-Sampatti,
good character, and conduct, therefore, they attain the highest state.
Sutra-17-18 O Gautama! There are also some beings who have reached such a high
level, but still practice Dharma with a 'Shalya' (blemish) in their mind, and
cannot understand the benefit of the soul. If such a person, with a 'Shalya',
performs Tapas of the painful, fierce, severe, and heroic class, like a deity,
for a thousand years, will that Tapas be fruitless? Sutra-19 The 'Shalya' which
is not criticized. It is not condemned or dusted, or the scriptural atonement is
not done. That 'Shalya' is also called sin. Sutra-20 Maya, Dambha, and deceit
are not appropriate. Performing big secret sins, practicing Ajayana and Anachar,
keeping 'Shalya' in the mind, all this accumulates eight Karmas. Sutra-21-26 _
Asanayam, Adharma, lack of good character and vows, being with Kshaya, impurity
of Yoga, all these destroy good deeds and virtues, and make one wander in such a
terrible state from which one cannot escape, and then one has to suffer extreme
anguish in the endless world full of physical and mental pain, some get ugliness
of form, poverty, misfortune, pain that causes havoc, a living being who gets
deprived, cruelty, lack of compassion, cruelty, lack of mercy, shamelessness, a
hidden heart, crookedness, opposite mindedness, attachment, hatred, delusion,
terrible falsehood, destruction of the right path, getting disgrace,
disobedience, ignorance, being without 'Shalya', all these are Bhavo-Bhavas. In
this way, many synonyms of the sin 'Shalya' are explained. Sutra-27-30 _ Once, a
person with a 'Shalya' heart, in many other births, suffers from 'Shalya' pain
in all limbs and appendages repeatedly. That 'Shalya' is described in two ways.
Subtle and Gross. Both of them have three types each. Severe, Fierce, and
Fiercer. Severe Maya is of four types. It is severe, fierce, human-like, and
also full of Maya, greed, and anger. Similarly, understand these four divisions
of Fierce and Fiercer. The Muni, by liberating these 'Shalyas' with their subtle
and gross divisions and their sub-divisions, Muni Deepa Ratna Sagar Krit
(Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 6

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
sUtra-10-11 isa taraha sarva jIva dharma-adharma, sukha-duHkha Adi jAnate haiM
/  gautama ! usameM kucha prANI aise hote haiM ki jo Atmahita karanevAle dharma
kA sevana moha aura ajJAna kI kAraNa se nahIM karate  /  aura phira paraloka ke
lie Atma hita rUpa aisA dharma yadi koI mAyA-daMbha se karegA to bhI usakA
phAyadA mahasUsa nahIM kregaa| sUtra - 12-14 yaha AtmA merA hI hai  /  maiM mere
AtmA ko yathArtha taraha se jAnatA hU~  /  AtmA kI pratIti karanA duSkara hai|
dharma bhI AtmasAkSI se hotA hai  /  jo jise hitakArI yA priya mAne vo use
sundara pada para sthApana karate haiM  /  (kyoMki) zeranI apane krUra bacce ko
bhI jyAdA priya mAnatI hai  /  jagata ke sarva jIva ''apanI taraha hI dUsare kI
AtmA haiM', isa taraha soce binA AtmA ko anAtmA rUpa se kalpanA karate hue duSTa
vacana, kAyA, mana se ceSTA sahita vyavahAra karatA hai  /  jaba vo AtmA nirdoSa
kahalAtI hai  /  jo kaluSatA rahita hai  /  pakSapAta ko chor3a diyA hai|
pApavAle aura kaluSita dila jisase kAphI dUra hue haiM  /  aura doSa samAna jAla
se mukta hai| sUtra-15-16 parama arthayukta, tattva svarUpa meM siddha hae,
sadbhuta cIja ko sAbita kara denevAle aise, vaise puruSoM ne kie anuSThAna dvArA
vo (nirdoSa) AtmA khuda ko Anandita karatA hai| vaise AtmA meM uttamadharma hotA
hai uttama tapa-saMpatti zIla cAritra hote haiM isalie vo uttama gati pAte haiN|
sUtra - 17-18 he gautama ! kucha aise bhI prANI hote haiM ki jo itanI uttama
kakSA taka pahu~ce ho, lekina phira bhI mana meM zalya rakhakara dharmAcaraNa
karate haiM, lekina Atmahita nahIM samajha sakate  /  zalyasahita aisA jo
kaSTadAyaka, ugra, ghora, vIra kakSA kA tapa devatAI hajAra sAla taka kare to
bhI usakA vo tapa niSphala hotA hai ? sUtra-19 jisa zalya kI AlocanA nahIM hotI
/  niMdA yA gardA nahIM kI jAtI yA zAstrokta prAyazcitta nahIM kiyA jAtA  /  vo
to zalya bhI pApa kahalAtA hai| sUtra-20 mAyA, daMbha, chala karane ke ucita
nahIM hai  /  bar3e-gupta pApa karanA, ajayaNA anAcAra sevana karanA, mana meM
zalya rakhanA, vo ATha karma kA saMgraha karavAtA hai  /  sUtra - 21-26 _
asaMyama, adharma, zIla aura vrata rahitatA, kaSAya sahitatA, yoga kI azuddhi
yaha sabhI sukRta puNya ko naSTa karanevAle aura pAra na pA sake vaisI durgati
meM bhramaNa karanevAle ho aura phira zArIrika mAnasika duHkha pUrNa aMta rahita
saMsAra meM ati ghora vyAkulatA bhugatanI par3e, kucha ko rUpa kI badasUratI
mile, dAridrya, durbhagatA, hAhAkAra karavAnevAlI vedanA, parAbhAva pAnevAlA
jIvita, nirdayatA, karuNAhIna, krUra, dayAhIna, nirlajjatA, gUDhahRdaya,
vakratA, viparIta cittatA, rAga, dveSa, moha, ghanaghora mithyAtva, sanmArga kA
nAza, apayaza prApti, AjJAbhaMga, abodhi, zalya-rahitapana yaha saba bhavobhava
hote haiN| isa prakAra pApa zalya ke eka arthavAle kaIM paryAya btaae|
sUtra-27-30 _ eka bAra zalyavAlA hRdaya karanevAle ko dUsare kaIMbhava meM sarva
aMga ora upAMga bAra-bAra zalya vedanAvAle hote haiM  /  vo zalya do tarIke kA
batAyA hai  /  sUkSma aura bAdara  /  una donoM ke bhI tIna tIna prakAra haiM  /
ghora, ugra aura ugratara | ghora mAyA cAra taraha kI hai  /  jo ghora ugra
mAnayukta ho aura mAyA, lobha aura krodhayukta bhI ho  /  usI taraha ugra aura
ugratara ke bhI yaha cAra bheda samajhanA  /  sUkSma aura bAdara bheda-prabheda
sahita ina zalya ko muni uddhAra karake muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha)
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 6

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  **Study/Purpose/Sutra Number:**
Please provide it quickly, but the Muni should not remain with the affliction
even for a moment. Sutra-31-32  **Just as a snake's offspring is small, a
mustard seed-sized fire is small, but if it sticks, it destroys. After its
touch, separation is not possible. Similarly, if minor or even smaller karmic
afflictions are not removed, they cause great suffering and increase the cycle
of rebirth.** Sutra-33-37  **O Bhagavan! Some people do not even know how to
remove this karmic affliction that can be removed through suffering, and then
causes suffering. O Gautam! This karmic affliction is said to be completely
uprooted. No matter how difficult the affliction is, it is said to be pierced
along with all its parts and limbs. First, right faith, second, right knowledge,
and third, right conduct, when these three are gathered together, when the being
becomes the field of the affliction, and the karmic affliction has reached a
very deep place, you cannot even see it, it is in the bones and within them,
trapped in all parts and limbs, causing pain inside and out, such an affliction
should be uprooted.** Sutra-38-40  **Action without knowledge is useless, and
knowledge without action is also not successful. Just as a blind man who can see
and a lame man who can run die in a wildfire, therefore, O Gautam! When both are
combined, the work is accomplished. A chariot does not run on one wheel. When
the blind and the lame become one, that is, the lame shows the way and the blind
follows it, then both, crossing the forest of wildfire, reach the desired city
safely and without hindrance. Knowledge illuminates, austerity purifies the
soul, and restraint prevents the senses and mind from going astray. When these
three are truly combined, O Gautam! There is liberation. Otherwise, there is no
liberation.** Sutra-41-42  **Therefore, those who, free from afflictions,
renounce all afflictions, and serve Dharma with freedom from afflictions, their
restraint is considered successful. Not only that, but they obtain abundant
wealth and prosperity in birth after birth, and enjoy eternal happiness by
tradition.** Sutra-43-47  **A soul aspiring to remove afflictions, such as
transgressions and other faults, should observe a fast or perform Ayambil
tapasya for ten days, with auspicious days, good tithi, karana, muhurta, and a
strong moon. Then, they should chant the eight hundred Panchamangala
(Mahashrutaskandha) mantras. After that, they should observe three more fasts
and perform Ayambil tapasya. On the day of breaking the fast, they should pay
homage to the Chaitya, the Jinalaya, and the Sadhus. They should make their soul
free from anger and full of forgiveness. They should offer "Micchami Dukkadam"
with their mind, speech, and body, free from afflictions, to all those who have
done any wrong deeds.** Sutra-48-50  **Then, going back to the Chaityalaya, they
should offer heartfelt and focused devotion to the image of the Vitaraga Supreme
Being, and offer praise to everyone. After paying homage to the Chaitya with
proper rituals, they should perform the sixth devotional tapasya and chant the
Vidya called Shrutadeva for a lakh times in the Chaityalaya. They should chant
with a calm mind, focused mind, firm determination, dedication, a steady mind,
free from attachment, desire, and aversion, in the sacred place of the
Chaityalaya.** Sutra-51  **(This Sutra contains mantras, which cannot be
translated into Hindi. Those who are curious should refer to our Agam Suttanni,
Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation)**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka jalda se
nIkAla de  /  lekina palabhara bhI muni zalyavAlA na rahe  /  sUtra-31-32 jisa
taraha sA~pa kA baccA choTA ho, sarasapa pramANa kevala agni thor3A ho aura jo
cipaka jAe to bhI vinAza karatA hai  /  usakA sparza hone ke bAda viyoga nahIM
kara sakate  /  usI taraha alpa yA alpatara pApa-zalya uddharela na ho to kAphI
saMtApa denevAle aura kroDa bhava kI paramparA baDhAnevAle hote haiN|
sUtra-33-37 he bhagavan ! duHkha se karake uddhara sake aisA aura phira duHkha
denevAlA yaha pApazalya kisa taraha uddharanA vo bhI kucha loga nahIM jAnate  /
he gautama ! yaha pApazalya sarvathA jar3a se Ukher3anA kahA hai  /  cAhe kitanA
bhI ati durghara zalya ho use sarva aMga upAMga sahita bhedanA batAyA hai  /
prathama samyagdarzana, dUsarA samyagjJAna, tIsarA samyakcAritra yaha tInoM jaba
ekasamAna ikaTThe hoM, jIva jaba zalya kA kSetrIbhUta bane aura pApazalya ati
gahana meM pahu~cA ho, dekha bhI na sakate ho, haDDiyA~ ho aura usake bhItara
rahA ho, sarva aMga-upAMga meM pha~sA ho, bhItara aura bAhara ke hisse meM darda
utpanna karatA ho vaise zalya ko jar3a se ukher3anA cAhie  /  sUtra-38-40 kriyA
binA jJAna nirarthaka hai aura phira jJAna binA kriyA bhI saphala nahIM hotI  /
jisa taraha dekhanevAlA laMgar3A aura daur3anevAlA aMdhA dAvAnala meM jala mare
/  isalie he gautama ! donoM kA saMyoga ho to kArya kI siddhi ho  /  eka cakra
yA pahiye se ratha nahIM calatA  /  jaba aMdhA aura laMgar3A donoM eka rUpa bane
yAni laMgar3e ne rAstA dikhAyA aura aMdhA usa mutAbika calA to donoM
dAvAnalavAle jaMgala ko pasAra karake icchita nagara meM nirvighna sahI salAmata
pahu~ce  /  jJAna prakAza dete haiM, tapa AtmA kI zuddhi karate haiM, aura
saMyama indriya aura mana ko Ar3e-Ter3he rAste para jAne se rokate haiN| isa
tInoM kA yathArtha saMyoga ho to he gautama ! mokSa hotA hai| anyathA mokSa
nahIM hotaa| sUtra - 41-42 ukta-usa kAraNa se niHzalya hokara, sarva zalya kA
tyAga karake jo koI niHzalyapana se dharma kA sevana karate haiM, usakA saMyama
saphala ginA hai  /  itanA hI nahIM lekina janma-janmAntara meM vipula saMpatti
aura Rddhi pAkara paramparA se zAzvata sukha pAte haiN| sUtra-43-47 zalya yAni
aticAra Adi doSa uddharane kI IcchAvAlI bhavyAtmA suprazasta-acche yogavAle
zubha dina, acchI tithi-karaNa-muhUrta aura acche nakSatra aura balavAna candra
kA yoga ho taba upavAsa yA AyaMbila tapa daza dina taka karake AThaso
paMcamaMgala (mahAzrutaskaMdha) kA japa karanA cAhie  /  usa para aThuma-tIna
upavAsa karake pAraNe AyaMbila karanA cAhie  /  pAraNe ke dina caitya-jinAlaya
aura sAdhuoM ko vaMdana karanA  /  sarva taraha se AtmA ko krodha rahita aura
kSamAvAlA banAnA  /  jo koI bhI duSTa vyavahAra kiyA ho una sabakA trividha
mana, vacana aura kAyA se niHzalyabhAva se micchAmidukkaDam'' denA cAhie  /
sUtra-48-50 phira se caityAlaya meM jAkara vItarAga paramAtmA kI pratimA kI
ekAgra bhaktipUrvaka hRdaya se haraeka kI vaMdanA -stavanA kare  /  caitya ko
samyag vidhi sahita vaMdanA kara ke chaThTha bhakta tapa kara ke caityAlaya meM
yaha zrutadevatA nAmaka vidyA kA lAkha pramANa japa kare  /  sarvabhAva se
upazAnta honevAlA, ekAgracittavAlA, dRr3ha nizcayavAlA, upayogavAlA, DAmADola
citta rahita, rAga-rati-arati se rahita banakara caityAlaya kI pavitra jagaha
meM vidhivata japa kare  /  sUtra-51 (isa sUtra meM maMtrAkSara haiM  /  jisakA
hindI anuvAda nahIM ho sakatA  /  jijJAsuoM ko hamArA AgamasuttANi muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 7

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  (Study/Purpose/Sutra Number
Part-39 Mahanishith Page-5 should be seen.) Sutra - 52  The Siddhantis have
given this knowledge in Sutra-51 in the original Ardhamagadhi language, written
in the Mahavidya script. This discourse of knowledge should not be given to or
explained to those who do not understand the essence of the scriptures, who are
foolish. Sutra - 53-55  By this excellent knowledge, one should completely
control oneself, suppress the senses, and sleep with a controlled mind. Whatever
auspicious or inauspicious dream one sees in sleep, one should carefully observe
and remember it. According to the nature of the dream seen, one should consider
it auspicious or inauspicious. If the dream is beautiful, one should understand
that it is the essence of the ultimate truth, the removal of the 'Shalya'
(affliction). Sutra - 56-57  In this way, one should offer pure criticism to the
soul desiring to be free from 'Shalya', praising the Siddhas who reside in the
front part of the world. One should criticize one's own sins, reveal them to the
Guru, and become free from 'Shalya'. After that, one should also worship the
'Chaitya' (shrine) and the 'Sadhu' (saint) and properly apologize to the
'Sadhu'. Sutra - 58-62  By apologizing for the 'Papashalya' (sinful affliction),
one should again, according to the proper procedure, give joy to the world,
including gods and demons, and remove the 'Shalya' through complete eradication.
According to that, one should become free from 'Shalya', and again, according to
the proper procedure, worship the 'Chaitya' and apologize to the 'Sadharmic'
(those who follow the right path). Especially to those with whom one has lived
in an 'Upashraya' (shelter), with whom one has wandered from village to village,
those who have given inspiration through 'Saran' (refuge) etc., those to whom
one has spoken harsh, severe, and cruel words, whether in the course of work or
without any reason, and who have also responded in front of you, whether they
are alive or dead, one should apologize to them with all one's heart. If they
are alive, one should apologize to them with humility, and if they are dead, one
should apologize in the presence of a 'Sadhu' (saint). Sutra - 63-65  In this
way, one should apologize to the three worlds with all one's heart, and becoming
pure in mind, speech, and body, one should declare with certainty, "I forgive
all beings. May all beings forgive me. I have a feeling of friendship towards
all beings. I have no animosity towards any being. I, who come into contact with
every being in this world and the next, forgive everyone with all my heart, in
every way, through mind, speech, and body." Sutra - 66  Having established and
declared this, one should worship the 'Chaitya', and with the witness of the
'Sadhu', one should properly apologize to the Guru. Sutra - 67-70  Having
properly apologized to the Guru Bhagvant, one should praise the glory of
knowledge according to one's capacity. Again, one should worship with the proper
procedure. How to perform this 'Shalyoddharan' (removal of affliction), which is
the ultimate truth, the essence, and the same as the essence, one should learn
from the Guru's mouth. Having learned, one should criticize accordingly, so that
only knowledge is generated through criticism.  One should remain in such a
beautiful state of mind and perform 'Nishalya' (affliction-free) criticism, so
that only knowledge is generated through criticism. O Gautam! Some great souls,
great men, are mentioned who, through criticism with feeling, generated only
knowledge. Sutra - 71-75  Yes, I have done evil deeds, I have thought evil
thoughts, yes, I have given false approval, with such feeling and emotion...
Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 8

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka bhAga-39
mahAnisIha pRSTha-5 dekhanA cAhie  / ) sUtra - 52 siddhAMtione yaha vidyA
sUtra-51 meM mUla ardhamAgadhI meM dI huI mahAvidyA lipI varNa se likhI hai  /
zAstra ke marma ko samajhA na ho, kuzIlavAlA ho unheM gItArtha zrutadhara ko
yaha pravacana vidyA na denA yA prarUpanA nahIM cAhie  /  sUtra - 53-55 yaha
zreSTha vidyA se sabhI tarIke se khuda ko abhimaMtrita karake usa kSamAvAn
indriya kA damana karanevAle aura jitendriya so jAe niMda meM jo zubha yA azubha
sapanA Ae use acchI taraha se avadhAraNa kare, yAda rakhe, vahA~ jisa taraha kA
sapanA dekhA ho usake anusAra zubha yA azubha bane  /  yadi suMdara sapanA ho to
yaha mahA paramArthatattvasArabhUta zalyoddhAra bane aisA smjhnaa| sUtra-56-57
isa taraha kI ATha mada ko aura loka ke agra hisse birAjamAna siddha ko stavatA
ho vaise niHzalya hone kI abhilASAvAle AtmA ko zuddha AlocanA denA  /  apane
pApa kI AlocanA karake, guru ke pAsa prakaTa karake zalyarahita bane  /  usake
bAda bhI caitya aura sAdha ko vaMdana karake sAdha ko vidhivata khmaae|
sUtra-58-62 _pApazalya ko khamAkara phira se vidhivat deva-asUra sahita jagata
ko Ananda dete hue nirmUlapana se zalya kA uddhAra karate haiM  /  usa mutAbika
zalyarahita hokara sarva bhAva se phira se vidhi sahita caitya ko vAMde aura
sAdharmika ko khamAe  /  khAsa karake jisake sAtha eka upAzraya vasati meM vAsa
kiyA hai  /  jisake sAtha gA~va-gA~va vicaraNa kiyA ho, kaThina vacana se
jinhoMne sAraNAdika preraNA dI ho, jina kisI ko bhI kArya avasara yA kArya binA
kaThina, kar3e, niSThura vacana sunAe ho, usane bhI sAmane kucha pratyuttara
diyA hai, vo zAyada jindA yA marA huA ho to use sarva bhAva se khamAe, yadi
jindA ho to vahA~ jAkara vinaya se khamAe, mare hue ho to sAdhu sAkSI meM
khmaae| sUtra-63-65 usa prakAra tIna bhuvana ko bhI bhAva se kSAmaNA karake
mana, vacana, kAyA ke yoga se zuddha honevAlA vo nizcayapUrvaka isa prakAra
ghoSita kare, ''maiM sarva jIva ko khamAtA hU~  /  sarva jIva mujhe kSamA do  /
sarva jIva ke sAtha mujhe maitrI bhAva hai  /  kisI bhI jIva ke sAtha mujhe
baira-bhAva nahIM  /  bhavobhava meM haraeka jIva ke sambandha meM AnevAlA maiM,
mana, vacana, kAyA se sarvabhAva se sarva taraha se saba ko khamAtA huuN| sUtra
-66 isa prakAra sthApanA, ghoSaNA karake caityavaMdanA kare, sAdhusAkSIpUrvaka
guru kI bhI vidhivat kSamA yAcanA kare sUtra - 67-70 samyak taraha se guru
bhagavaMta ko khamAkara apanI zakti anusAra jJAna kI mahimA kare  /  phira se
vaMdana vidhi sahita vaMdana kare  /  paramArtha, tattvabhUta aura sAra samAna
yaha zalyoddhAraNa kisa taraha karanA vo guru mukha se sUne  /  sUnakara usa
mutAbika AlocanA kare, ki jisakI AlocanA karane se kevalajJAna utpanna ho| aise
sandara bhAva meM rahe ho aura niHzalya AlocanA kI ho ki jisase AlocanA karate-
karate vahIM kevala jJAna utpanna ho  /  he gautama ! vaise kucha mahAsattvazAlI
mahApuruSa ke nAma batAte haiM ki jinhoMne bhAva se AlocanA karate-karate
kevalajJAna utpanna kiyA  /  sUtra - 71-75 hA~, maiMne duSTa kAma kiyA, duSTa
socA, hA~ maiMne jhUThI anumodanA kI, usa taraha saMvega se aura bhAva se muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 8

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  **Only those who have attained
Kevalgyan (omniscience) can analyze the study/purpose/sutra number.** They
became Kevalis by placing their feet with Iryasamiti (proper posture), they
became Kevalis by copying the scriptures with Muhpatti (proper pronunciation),
they became Kevalis by performing the right kind of Pratikraman (atonement),
they became Kevalis by thinking "Ha-ha, I am a sinner", they became Kevalis by
repenting, "Ha-ha, I became insane and acted against the right path", they
became Kevalis by being in the state of Anagar (non-attachment), they became
Kevalis by following the unbroken Shila (conduct) by not consuming food with
Savadha Yoga (mindfulness), they became Kevalis by protecting the Shila in all
ways, they became Kevalis by performing countless types of Pratikraman. (Sutra
76-78)  They became Kevalis by performing Nishpattikarma (purification) like
cleaning the impurities of the body, they became Kevalis by not scratching, not
even blinking their eyes, they became Kevalis by staying in one place for two
Prahar (three hours) and observing Maunvrat (silence), they became Kevalis by
thinking, "I am not capable of following Sadhupana (virtue), therefore I will
remain in Anashan (fasting)", they became Kevalis by counting Navkar (prayer),
they became Kevalis by thinking, "I am blessed to have received such a teaching,
even after obtaining all the material possessions, why haven't I become a
Kevali?" (Sutra 79-80)  They became Kevalis by thinking, "Until people call me a
sinner like a strong guard, I will not leave the Kaussagg (state of being a
Kevali)", they became Kevalis by thinking, "Oh! It will be Ajayana (violence)
and Jiva-viradhana (harm to living beings)" when their feet touched a moving
piece of wood, they became Kevalis by saying, "I will perform Pratikraman in the
pure side", they became Kevalis by thinking, "Our life is fickle", "This
humanity is impermanent and momentary". (Sutra 81-83)  They became Kevalis by
enduring countless hardships through criticism, slander, praise, severe and
difficult Pratikraman, they became Kevalis by removing their hand (like the way
Kevalgyan happened when Chandanbala removed her hand), they became Kevalis by
living in a dwelling, they became Kevalis by eating like Kurugadamuni (half-
Kevali) and performing tapasya (austerity) like eating one grain after ten
years, they became Kevalis by starting Pratikraman, they became Kevalis by
performing half-Pratikraman, they became Kevalis by completing Pratikraman, they
became Kevalis by attaining Kevalgyan like Rishabhdev etc. in the excellent 108
count. (Sutra 84-87)  They became Kevalis by thinking, "How good it would be if
I became a Kevali quickly without purification and Pratikraman", they became
Kevalis by thinking, "Now I will perform such Pratikraman that I don't have to
perform tapasya and conduct", they became Kevalis by thinking, "Even by giving
up my life, I will not violate the command of the Jineswar Paramatma (Supreme
Soul)", they became Kevalis by thinking, "This body is different and the soul is
different, I have attained Samyaktva (right faith)", they became Kevalis by
thinking, "This is how Kevalgyan happens". (Sutra 88-90)  They became Kevalis by
thinking, "I will cleanse the dirt of the Karmas (actions) attached to the soul
since the beginning of time", they became Kevalis by thinking, "Now I will not
perform any other conduct due to carelessness", they became Kevalis by thinking,
"If the body decays, let my body-soul be destroyed, restraint is the pure
essence of the body", they became Kevalis by thinking, "If the Shila is broken
even by the mind, I will not sustain life, and then I will protect the Shila by
speech and body". (Sutra 91-95)  In this way, they attained Munipana (state of
being a monk) by wandering since the beginning of time. In some births, some
criticism was successful. Oh Gautam! In some births, they became the one who
purifies the mind through Pratikraman, the one who forgives, the one who
controls the senses, the one who is content, the one who conquers the senses,
the one who speaks the truth, the one who is free from the three types of
bondage from the beginning of the six types of living beings, the one who is
free from the three types of restraint, the one who is free from the restraint
of speech and body, the one who does not talk to women, the one who does not
look at the limbs of women, the one who... (This way, it is explained in which
states Kevalgyan happened).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka AlocanA
karanevAlA kevalajJAna pAe  /  iryAsamiti pUrvaka pA~va sthApana karate hue
kevalI bane, muhapatti pratilekhana se kevalI bane, samyak taraha se prAyazcitta
grahaNa karane se kevalI bane, 'hA-hA maiM pApI hU~" aisA vicarate hue kevalI
bane  /  'hA hA maiMne unmatta banakara unmArga kI prarUpaNA karake aise
pazcAttApa karate hue kevalI bane  /  aNAgArarUpa meM kevalI bane, sAvadha yoga
se sevana mata karanA'' - usa taraha se akhaMr3itazIla pAlana se kevalI bane,
sarva taraha se zIla kA rakSaNa karate hue, kor3I-karor3a taraha se prAyazcitta
karate hue bhI kevalI bane  /  sUtra - 76-78 zarIra kI malinatA sApha karane
samAna niSpattikarma karate hue, na khujalAnevAle, A~kha kI palaka bhI na
jhapakAte kevalI bane, do prahara taka eka bagala meM rahakara, maunavrata
dhAraNa karake bhI kevalI bane, 'sAdhupana pAlane ke lie maiM samartha nahIM hU~
isalie anazana meM rahU~' aisA karate hue kevalI bane, navakAra ginate hue
kevalI bane, 'maiM dhanya hU~ ki maiMne aisA zAsana pAyA, saba sAmagrI pAne ke
bAda bhI maiM kevalI kyoM na huA ?'' aisI bhAvanA se kevalI bane  /  sUtra -
79-80 (jaba taka dRr3haprahArI kI taraha loga mujhe) pApa-zalyavAlA bole taba
taka kAUssagga pAruMga nahIM usa taraha kevalI bane, calAyamAna kASTha-lakar3e
para pA~va par3ane se soce ki are re ! ajayaNA hogI, jIva-virAdhanA hogI aisI
bhAvanA se kevalI bane, zuddha pakSa meM prAyazcitta karU~ aisA kahane se kevalI
bane  /  "hamArA jIvana caMcala hai|' - 'yaha mAnavatA anitya aura kSaNavinAzI
hai| usa bhAva se kevalI bane  /  sUtra-81-83 AlocanA, niMdA, vaMdanA, ghora
aura duSkara prAyazcitta sevana - lAkho upasarga sahana karane se kevalI bane,
(caMdanabAlA kA hAtha dUra karane se jisa taraha kevalajJAna haA vaise) hAtha
dUra karane se, nivAsasthAna karate, ardhakavala yAni kuragaDamuni kI taraha
khAte-khAte, eka dAnA khAne samAna tapa prAyazcitta karane se dasa sAla ke bAda
kevalI bne| prAyazcitta zurU karanevAle, arddhaprAyazcitta karanevAle kevalI,
prAyazcitta pUrA karanevAlA, utkRSTa 108 ginatI meM RSabha Adi kI taraha kevala
pAnevAle kevalI  /  sUtra-84-87 'zuddhi aura prAyazcitta binA jalda kevalI bane
to kitanA acchA'' aisI bhAvanA karane se kevalI bane  /  "aba aisA prAyazcitta
karU~ ki mujhe tapa AcaraNa na karane pdd'e| aisA vicarane se kevalI bane  /
'prANa ke parityAga se bhI maiM jinezvara paramAtmA kI AjJA kA ullaMghana nahIM
karU~gA usa taraha se kevalI bane  /  yaha merA zarIra bhinna hai aura AtmA
bhinna hai  /  mujhe samyaktva huA hai  /  isa prakAra kI bhAvanA se kevala
jJAna hotA hai| sUtra-88-90 anAdi kAla se AtmA se jur3e pApakarma ke maila ko
maiM sApha kara dUM aisI bhAvanA se kevalajJAna hotA hai  /  aba pramAda se maiM
koI anya AcaraNa nahIM karU~gA isa bhAvanA se kevalajJAna hotA hai  /  deha kA
kSaya ho to mere zarIraAtmA ko nirjarA ho, saMyama hI zarIra kA niSkalaMka sAra
hai  /  aisI bhAvanA se kevalI bane  /  mana se bhI zIla kA khaMDana ho to mujhe
prANadhAraNa nahIM karanA aura phira vacana aura kAyA se meM zIla kA rakSaNa
karU~gA aisI bhAvanA se kevalI bne| .......(isa taraha se kauna-kauna sI avasthA
meM kevalajJAna huA vo batAyA) sUtra - 91-95 usa prakAra anAdi kAla se bhramaNa
karate hue bhramaNa karake munipana pAyA  /  kucha bhava meM kucha AlocanA
saphala haI  /  he gautama ! kisI bhava meM prAyazcitta citta kI zuddhi
karanevAlA banA, kSamA rakhanevAlA, indriya kA damana karanevAlA, saMtoSI,
indriya ko jItanevAlA, satyabhASI, cha kAya jIva ke samArambha se trividha se
viramita, tIna daMDamana, vacana kAyA daMDa se viramita strI ke sAtha bhI bAta
na karanevAlA, strI ke aMga-upAMga ko na dekhanevAlA, zarIra muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 9

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Criticism (Aalocna)  **Sharakat** Aagam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5,
'Mahanishith'  **Do not have attachment to study, purpose, or sutra numbers. Do
not have attachment to the time, place, or person of the journey. Be afraid of
being in the womb of a woman with a great desire for wealth. Be afraid of the
many sorrows and fears of the world. With this kind of feeling, give criticism
to the critic who comes to the Guru to reveal his faults.**  **The critic should
also do penance to the Guru. The penance should be done in the same order as the
fault was committed.** Sutra - 96-98  **The critic should not criticize with
Maya, pride, or malice. Such criticism increases the world. I will tell you the
names of those who have fallen into the lower realms, who have been afflicted by
evil thoughts for an endless time, who have been in the ocean of the world with
many waves, and who have been criticized even after committing criticism. They
are those who have received penance along with criticism, and whose minds are
polluted by emotional faults.** Sutra - 99-102  **The wicked person who has
committed sin by criticizing and doing penance with malice, endures great
unbearable suffering. He lives there enduring unbearable suffering. He is a
heavy consumer of unrestraint, hates the virtuous, is devoid of virtue in sight
and speech, and is also wicked in mind. He criticizes subtle matters. He asks,
"What is the penance for what others have done?" and does penance himself. He
criticizes a little, criticizes a little, criticizes even if he has not
committed the fault, criticizes others in front of people for their
entertainment, criticizes with the thought, "I will not do penance," or
criticizes deceitfully.** Sutra - 103-105  **He speaks of the austerities and
conduct done in the past with Maya, pride, and deceit. He says, "I do not feel
any penance," or does not reveal the faults committed. He reveals the faults
committed nearby. He asks for small penances. He says, "We make such efforts
that there is no opportunity to receive criticism." He asks for criticism that
will lead to auspicious bondage. He says, "I am unable to do great penance." He
does not do penance by relying on the service of the sick, saying, "I have to
serve the sick." The critic, the virtuous, ignores him.** Sutra - 106-108  **He
does not do penance, saying, "I will not do penance for the sake of appeasement,
I will not do penance with my tongue to please people." After accepting penance,
he enters it after a long time, that is, he conducts himself, or he does
something else after accepting penance. He repeatedly commits great sins with
cruelty. He is proud of the object of love, Kamadeva, saying, "Even if I give
any penance, I am capable of doing it." And then he commits penance by ignoring
the penance-free consumption.** Sutra - 109-113  **He does penance as described
in the book. He does penance according to his own imagination. He does penance
according to the previous criticism. He becomes attached to caste, family, caste
and family, knowledge, profit, wealth, austerity, scholarship, respect, etc. He
is excited by pride, thinking, "I am not worthy of worship, I am alone." He
criticizes with the pollution, "I am a great sinner." He criticizes through
others or with disrespect. He criticizes unlawfully. He criticizes with such
evil feelings as mentioned above.** Sutra - 114-116  **O Gautam! The soul who
has been consuming emotional faults for an endless time has gone down to the
seventh hell, inside, due to the suffering caused by the virtuous. O Gautam! In
such a world, the virtuous are free from malice. They are their own...**  Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Aagam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 10

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zarakata Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
kI mamatA na ho, apratibaddha vihArI yAni vihAra ke kSetrakAla yA vyakti ke lie
rAga na ho, mahA-sArA AzayavAlA strI ke garbhavAsa meM rahane se bhayabhIta,
saMsAra ke kaIM duHkha aura bhaya se trasta isa taraha ke bhAva se (guru samakSa
apane doSa prakaTa karane AnevAlA) Alocaka ko AlocanA denA  /  Alocaka ne (bhI)
guru ko diyA prAyazcitta karanA - jisa krama se doSa sevana kiyA ho usa krama se
prAyazcitta karanA caahie| sUtra - 96-98 AlocanA karanevAle ko mAyA daMbha-zalya
se koI AlocanA nahIM karanI caahie| usa taraha kI AlocanA se saMsAra kI vRddhi
hotI hai  /  anAdi anantakAla se apane karma se durmativAle AtmA ne kaI vikalpa
samAna kallolavAle saMsAra samudra meM AlocanA karane ke bAda bhI adhogati
pAnevAle ke nAma batAUM use sUna ki jo AlocanA sahita prAyazcitta pAe hue aura
bhAva doSa se kaluSita cittavAle hue haiN| sUtra-99-102 zalya sahita AlocanA-
prAyazcitta karake pApakarma karanevAle narAdhama, ghora ati duHkha se saha sake
vaise ati duHsaha duHkha sahate hue vahA~ rahate haiM  /  bhArI asaMyama sevana
karanevAlA aura sAdhu ko napharata karanevAlA, dRSTa aura vANI viSaya se zIla
rahita aura mana se bhI kuzIlavAle, sUkSma viSaya kI AlocanA karanevAle,
''dUsaroM ne aisA kiyA usakA kyA prAyazcitta ?'' aisA pUchakara khuda
prAyazcitta kare thor3I-thor3I AlocanA kare, thor3I bhI AlocanA na kare, jisane
doSa sevana nahIM kiyA usakI yA logoM ke raMjana ke lie dUsaroM ke sAmane
AlocanA kare, 'maiM prAyazcitta nahIM karU~gA'' vaise socakara yA chalapUrvaka
AlocanA kare  /  sUtra- 103-105 mAyA, daMbha aura prapaMca se pUrve kie gae tapa
aura AcaraNa kI bAteM kare, mujhe koI bhI prAyazcitta nahIM lagatA aisA kahe yA
kie hue doSa prakaTa na kare, pAsa meM kie doSa prakaTa kare, choTe-choTe
prAyazcitta mA~ge, hama aisI ceSTA pravRtti karate haiM ki AlocanA lene kA
avakAza nahIM rahatA  /  aisA kaheM ki zubha baMdha ho vaisI AlocanA mA~ge  /
maiM bar3A prAyazcitta karane ke lie azakta huuN| agara mujhe glAna-bImAra kI
sevA karanI hai aisA kahakara usake Alambana se prAyazcitta na kare AlocanA
karanevAlA sAdhu sUnA-anasUnA kare  /  sUtra - 106-108 tuSTi karanevAle chUTe-
chUTe prAyazcitta maiM nahIM karU~gA, logoM ko khuza karane ke lie jihvA se
prAyazcitta nahIM karU~gA aisA kahakara prAyazcitta na kare  /  prAyazcitta
apanAne ke bAda lambe arase ke bAda usameM praveza kare - arthAt AcaraNa kare yA
prAyazcitta kabUla karane ke bAda anyathA - alaga hI kucha kare  /  nirdayatA se
bAra-bAra mahApApa kA AcaraNa kare  /  kaMdarpa yAni kAmadeva viSayaka abhimAna
- ''cAhe kitanA bhI prAyazcitta de to bhI maiM karane ke lie samartha hU~ aisA
garva kare  /  aura phira jayaNA rahita sevana kare to sUnA-anasUnA karake
prAyazcitta kare  /  sUtra - 109-113 kitAba meM dekhakara vahA~ batAyA huA
prAyazcitta kare, apanI mati kalpanA se prAyazcitta kare  /  pUrva AlocanA kI ho
usa mutAbika prAyazcitta kara le  /  jAtimada, kulamada, jAtikula ubhayamada,
zrutamada, lAbhamada, aizvaryamada, tapa mada, paMr3itAI kA mada, satkAra mada
Adi meM lubdha bane  /  gArava se uttejita hokara (AlocanA kare) maiM apUjya
huuN| ekAkI hU~ aisA soce  /  maiM mahApApI hU~ aisI kaluSitatA se AlocanA kare
/  dUsaroM ke dvArA yA avinaya se AlocanA kare  /  avidhi se AlocanA kare  /
isa prakAra kahe gae yA anya vaise hI duSTa bhAva se AlocanA kare  /  sUtra -
114-116 he gautama ! anAdi ananta kAla se bhAva-doSa sevana karanevAle AtmA ko
duHkha denevAle sAdhu nIce bhItara sAtavIM naraka bhUmi taka gae haiM  /  he
gautama ! anAdi ananta aise saMsAra meM hI sAdhu zalya rahita hote haiM  /  vo
apane muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 10

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishītha'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
Those who experience the same results of **virasa-katu** (bitter and tasteless)
due to **bhāva-doṣa** (faults in thought) will continue to experience these
bitter and tasteless results for an infinite time in the future. Therefore, a
**muni** (ascetic) should not harbor even a small **śalya** (blemish).
**Sūtra-117**  **O Gautama!** There is no count of **śramaṇī** (female ascetics)
who, with a pure, **śalya**-free, **viśuddha** (pure), **śuddha** (clean),
**nirmala** (stainless), **vimala** (spotless) mind, having cleansed themselves
through **abhyantara viśodhi** (internal purification), by scrutinizing and
removing all **bhāva-śalya** (mental blemishes) like **ati-cāra** (excess) etc.,
through the practice of **tapo-karma** (austerity), by fully performing
**prāyaścitta** (atonement), by washing away the stains like the dirt of **pāpa-
karma** (sinful actions), have attained **divya-uttama** (divine and supreme)
**kevala-jñāna** (omniscience), and are **mahānubhāga** (great in virtue),
**mahā-yaśa** (great in fame), **mahā-sattva** (great in being), **sampannā**
(prosperous), **su-grahita** (well-controlled), **nāma-dhārī** (name-bearing),
and have attained **moksha** (liberation) with infinite supreme happiness.
**Sūtra-118-120**  **O Gautama!** Some **sādhvī** (female ascetics) who have
attained **kevala-jñāna** (omniscience) through scrutiny are called **puṇya-
bhāgī** (blessed). **Oh!** I am a **pāpīṇī** (sinner), a **pāpa-matī** (sinful-
minded) woman. Indeed, I am a **pāpīṇī** (sinner) who has committed many sins.
**Oh!** I have indulged in many evil thoughts. Because I was born a woman in
this life, I will now practice **ghora** (intense), **vīra** (heroic), **ugra**
(fierce), **kaṣṭa-dāya** (painful) **tapa** (austerity) and **samyama** (self-
control). **Sūtra-121-125**  An infinite amount of **pāpa-rāśi** (sinful
actions) accumulate to obtain the **śuddha** (pure) state of womanhood. Now, I
will make the accumulated **pāpa-karma** (sinful actions) that led to womanhood
so thin that I will not be a woman anymore and will attain **kevala-jñāna**
(omniscience). I will not even look at **śīya-khaṇḍana** (sexual intercourse)
anymore. Now, I will become a **śramaṇa-kevalī** (male omniscient ascetic).
**Oh!** In the past, I may have thought some **āhaṭṭa-dohaṭṭa** (very evil)
thoughts. I will scrutinize and purify them quickly and become a **śramaṇī-
kevalī** (female omniscient ascetic). Seeing my beauty, radiance, brilliance,
and splendor, someone might become like a **titali** (butterfly), a **madhma**
(low) being, and perish. To prevent that, I will become a **kevalī**
(omniscient) in the state of **śramaṇī** (female ascetic). Now, I will
definitely not touch anyone other than **vāyara** (air). **Sūtra-126-129**  I
will not engage in the **ārambha-samārambha** (beginning and continuation) of
the six **kāya** (bodies) of living beings. I will become a **śramaṇī-kevalī**
(female omniscient ascetic). I will keep my body, waist, breasts, thighs, the
inner part of my private area, navel, and the area between the thighs, etc., all
**gopan** (hidden) and will not even tell my mother about them. With this
intention, the **sādhvī** (female ascetic) became a **kevalī** (omniscient). I
have gone through countless **bhavantara** (past lives), and while following the
tradition of **garbhāvāsa** (womb-dwelling), I have somehow attained the
knowledge that destroys **pāpa-karma** (sinful actions) and the beautiful
humanity with **cāritra** (good conduct). Now, I will scrutinize and criticize
all **bhāva-śalya** (mental blemishes) every moment. With the intention of not
committing such sins again, I will perform **prāyaścitta** (atonement).
**Sūtra-130-132**  I will not engage in any actions of **mana** (mind),
**vacana** (speech), and **kāya** (body) that require **prāyaścitta**
(atonement), such as the **samārambha** (beginning) of **pṛthvī** (earth),
**jala** (water), **agni** (fire), **vāyu** (air), **vanaspati-kāya** (plant
body), and **bīja-kāya** (seed body), or the **samārambha** (beginning) of two,
three, four, or five-sense beings, which means I will not kill, lie, accept dust
and ashes that have not been given, even in my dreams, I will not desire sexual
intercourse with my mind, and I will not possess anything that could lead to the
**skhalanā** (slip) of **mūla-guṇa** (root qualities) and **uttara-guṇa**
(higher qualities). **Sūtra-133-136**  I will be free from **mada**
(intoxication), **bhaya** (fear), **kaṣāya** (passions), **mana** (mind),
**vacana** (speech), and **kāya** (body), the three **daṇḍa** (punishments), and
will dwell in **gupti** (secrecy) and **samiti** (harmony), and will control my
senses. I will become a being with a body adorned with eighteen thousand
**śīlāṅga** (virtues), and will dwell in **svādhyāya** (self-study), **dhyāna**
(meditation), and **yoga** (union). I will become such a **śramaṇī-kevalī**
(female omniscient ascetic). I, who will wear the **linga-cihna** (symbol) that
the **dharma-tīrthankara** (religious ford-maker), who is like a pillar capable
of protecting the three realms, has worn, will perhaps be ground in a **yantra**
(machine) and my body will be cut into two pieces.   **Muni Dīparatna Sāgara Kṛt
(Mahānishītha) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda** **Page 11**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka bhAva-
doSa samAna virasa-kaTu phala bhugatate haiM  /  abhI bhI-zalya se zalyita
honevAle vo bhAvi meM bhI anantakAla taka virasa kaTu phala bhugatate raheMge  /
isalie muni ko jarA bhI zalya dhAraNa nahIM karanA caahie| sUtra-117 he gautama
! zramaNI kI koI ginatI nahIM jo kaluSitatA rahita, zalyarahita, vizuddha,
zuddha, nirmala, vimala mAnasavAlI hokara, abhyaMtara vizodhi se AlocanA karake
sApha aticAra Adi sarva bhAvazalya ko yathArtha tapokarma sevana karake,
prAyazcitta pUrI taraha AcaraNa karake, pApa karma ke mala ke lepa samAna
kalaMka dhokara-sApha karake utpanna kie divya-uttama kevalajJAnavAlI,
mahAnubhAga, mahAyazA, mahAsattva, saMpannA, sugrahita, nAmadhArI, ananta uttama
sukhayukta mokSa pAI huI haiN| sUtra - 118-120 he gautama ! puNyabhAgI aisI
kucha sAdhvI ke nAma kahate haiM ki jo AlocanA karate hue kevalajJAna pAe hue
haiN| are re ! maiM pApakarma karanevAlI pApINI-pApamatI vAlI huuN| sacamuca
pApINI meM bhI adhika pApa karanevAlI, are re ! maiMne kAphI duSTa cintavana
kiyA, kyoMki isa janma meM mujhe strIbhAva paidA huA to bhI aba ghora, vIra,
ugra kaSTa dAyaka tapa saMyama dhAraNa kruuNgii| sUtra - 121-125 anantI pAparAzi
ikaTThI ho taba pApakarma ke phala samAna zuddha strIpana milatA hai  /  aba
strIpana ke ucita ikaTe hae pApakarma ke samaha ko aise patale karU~ki jisase
strI na bana aura kevalajJAna pAUM  /  najara se bhI aba zIyala khaMDana nahIM
karU~gI, aba maiM zramaNa-kevalI banU~gI  /  are re ! pUrve mana se bhI maiMne
koI AhaTTa-dohaTTa ati duSTa socA hogA  /  usakI AlocanA karake maiM jalda usakI
zuddhi karU~gI aura zramaNI-kevalI banU~gI  /  merA rUpa-lAvaNya dekhakara aura
kAnti, teja, zobhA dekhakara koI mAnava samAna titalI adhama hokara kSaya na ho
usake lie anazana nAkara maiM zramaNIpana meM kevalI bnuuNgii| aba nizcaya se
vAyarA ke alAvA kisI dUsare kA sparza nahIM kruuNgii| sUtra - 126-129 aba cha
kAya jIva kA Arambha-samArambha nahIM kruuNgii| zramaNI-kevalI banU~gI  /  mere
deha, kamara, stana, jA~gha, gupta sthAna ke bhItara kA hissA, nAbhi,
jaghanAntara hissA Adi sarvAMga aise gopana karU~gI ki vo jagaha mA~ ko bhI
nahIM batAUMgI  /  aisI bhAvanA se sAdhvI kevalI bane  /  aneka kror3a
bhavAntara maiMne kie, garbhAvAsa kI paramparA karate vakta maiMne kisI taraha
se pApa-karma kA kSaya karanevAlA jJAna aura cAritrayukta sundara manuSyatA pAI
hai| aba pala-pala sarva bhAvazalya kI AlocanA-niMdA karU~gI  /  dUsarI bAra
vaise pApa na karane kI bhAvanA se prAyazcitta anuSThAna kruuNgii| sUtra -
130-132 jise karane se prAyazcitta ho vaise mana, vacana, kAyA ke kArya, pRthvI,
pAnI, agni, vAyu, vanaspatikAya aura bIjakAya kA samArambha, do-tIna, cAra-pA~ca
indriyavAle jIva kA samArambha yAni hatyA nahIM karU~gI, jhUTha nahIM bolUMgI,
dhUla aura bhasma bhI na die hae grahaNa nahIM karU~gI, sapane meM bhI mana se
maithuna kI prArthanA nahIM karU~gI, parigraha nahIM karU~gI jisase mUla guNa
uttara-guNa kI skhalanA na ho| sUtra - 133-136 mada, bhaya, kaSAya, mana,
vacana, kAyA samAna tIna daMr3a, una sabase rahita hokara gupti aura samiti meM
ramaNa karU~gI aura indriyajaya karU~gI, aThAraha hajAra zIlAMgose yukta
zarIravAlI bana~gI, svAdhyAya-dhyAna aura yoga meM ramaNatA karU~gI  /  aisI
zramaNI kevalI banU~gI  /  tIna loka kA rakSaNa karane meM samartha staMbha
samAna dharma tIrthaMkara ne jo liMgacihna dhAraNa kiyA hai use dhAraNa
karanevAlI maiM zAyada yaMtra meM pIsakara mere zarIra ke bIca meM se do khaMDa
kie muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 11

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Go to the study/purpose/sutra
number, tear or rip me apart. Be thrown into a blazing fire, have my head
pierced, even then I will not break the vows I have taken, nor will I mentally
break my character and conduct even for a single birth. I will become a Kevali
as a Shramana. Sutra - 137-139 I have wandered a lot in the realm of donkeys,
camels, dogs, etc., being attached to desires. I have done countless karmas in
infinite births and future births that are not worthy of being done. Now, even
after entering the order, if I do such evil deeds, then it will be difficult for
me to escape from the hellish earth, which is full of darkness. Such a beautiful
human birth, when spread out in the objects of desire due to attachment, becomes
the recipient of many sorrows. Sutra - 140-144 Human birth is impermanent, it is
by nature prone to destruction in an instant, it is a mixture of many sins,
punishments and faults. I was born as a woman in that, which is condemned by the
entire three realms, but even then, having obtained such a religion without
obstacles and hindrances, I will not now in any way obstruct that religion with
sins and faults. I will not now engage in any kind of adornment, attachment,
passion, or desire. I will not even look at any man with a peaceful gaze, except
for the preacher of religion. I will not converse with him either. I will follow
the criticism given in the same way as the great sin that I could not tell, and
the pain that arose from it. With such a feeling, I will become a Shramana-
Kevali. Sutra - 145-148 In that way, giving (receiving) pure criticism,
countless Shramanas become free from pain, having attained Kevalgyan in the
beginningless time, O Gautam! Having attained Siddhi, suppressing the senses of
forgiveness, conquering the senses of contentment, speaking the truth,
abstaining from the six types of karma from the beginning of the three types,
stopping the flow of the three types of karma, abandoning the stories of men and
the company of men, abstaining from conversation and seeing the limbs of men,
free from attachment to one's own body, great in glory, unattached to the field
of matter, time, and feeling, that is, free from attachment, afraid of
womanhood, pregnancy, and the cycle of births, such a feeling (of the Sadhvis)
should be criticized. Sutra - 149-151 Do penance in the same way as these
Shramanas have done penance, but do not criticize anyone with illusion or pride,
because doing so increases sinful karma. The Sadhvi who has been criticizing
with illusion, pride, and deceit from the beginningless infinite time, has
become full of pain, has obtained servitude as if she has to rule, and has gone
to the sixth hell by tradition. Sutra - 152-153 I am telling you the names of
some Sadhvis, understand and believe that they have criticized. But by consuming
the feeling-fault (like illusion and deceit), their restraint and the limbs of
their character have been eroded by the dirt of sinful karma in a special way.
The praise of that freedom from pain, which is not free from perfect purity even
for a moment. Sutra - 154-155 Therefore, O Gautam! Some women do not have such
pure, pure mind, even in future births, that they can attain freedom from pain.
Some Shramanas, by fasting repeatedly, such as six-day fast, eight-day fast,
four-day fast, five-day fast, dry up their bodies, but they do not criticize or
abandon the feeling of attachment. Sutra - 156-157 Giving many options, he
immersed himself in the sorrow of the waves of the surging series. Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 12

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka jAe,
mujhe phAr3a yA cIra de  /  bhar3abhar3a agni meM pheMkA jAe, mastaka chedana
kiyA jAe to bhI maiMne grahaNa kie niyamavrata kA bhaMga yA zIla aura cAritra kA
eka janma khAtira bhI mana se bhI khaMDana nahIM karU~gA aisI zramaNI hokara
kevalI banU~gI sUtra - 137-139 gadhe, UMTa, kUtte Adi jAtivAle bhava meM
rAgavAlI hokara maiMne kAphI bhramaNa kiyA  /  anantA bhava meM aura bhavAntara
meM na karanelAyaka karma kie  /  aba pravrajyA meM praveza karake bhI yadi
vaise duSTa karma karU~ to phira ghoraaMdhakAravAlI pAtAla pRthvI meM se mujhe
nIkalane kA avakAza milanA hI muzkila ho  /  aisA sundara mAnavajanma rAga dRSTi
se viSaya meM pasAra kie jAe to kaIM duHkha kA bhAjana hotA hai| sUtra-140-144
mAnavabhava anitya hai, pala meM vinAza pAne ke svabhAvavAlA, kaIM pApa-daMDa
aura doSa ke mizraNavAlA hai| usameM maiM samagra tIna loka jisakI niMdA kare
vaise strI banakara utpanna haI, lekina phIra bhI vighna aura aMtarAya rahita
aise dharma ko pAkara aba pApa-doSa se kisI bhI taraha usa dharma kA virAdhana
nahIM karU~gI aba zRMgAra, rAga, vikArayukta, abhilASA kI ceSTA nahIM karU~gI,
dharmopadezaka ko chor3akara kisI bhI puruSa kI ora prazAnta najara se bhI nahIM
dekhuugii| usake sAtha AlApa saMlApa bhI nahIM karU~gI, na batA sake usa taraha
kA mahApApa karake usase utpanna hue zalya kI jisa prakAra AlocanA dI hogI usa
prakAra pAlana karU~gI  /  aisI bhAvanA rakhakara zramaNI-kevalI bnuuNgii| sUtra
- 145-148 usa prakAra zuddha AlocanA dekara-(pAkara) ananta zramaNI niHzalya
hokara, anAdi kAla meM he gautama ! kevalajJAna pAkara siddhi pAkara, kSamAvatI-
indriya kA damana karanevAlI saMtoSakara-indriya ko jItanevAlI satyabhASI
-trividha se cha kAya ke samArambha se viramita tIna daMr3a ke Azrava ko
rokanevAlI - puruSakathA aura saMga kI tyAgIpuruSa ke sAtha saMlApa aura
aMgopAMga dekhane se viramita-apane zarIra kI mamatA rahita mahAyazavAlI-
dravyakSetra kAla bhAva prati apratibaddha yAni rAgarahita, auratapana,
garbhAvasthA aura bhavabhramaNa se bhayabhIta isa taraha kI bhAvanAvAlI
(sAdhvIoM ko) AlocanA denaa| sUtra-149-151 jisa taraha isa zramaNIoM ne
prAyazcitta kiyA usa taraha se prAyazcitta karanA, lekina kisI ko bhI mAyA yA
daMbha se AloyaNA nahIM karanA cAhie kyoMki aisA karane se pApakarma kI vRddhi
hotI hai, anAdi ananta kAla se mAyA-daMbha-kapaTa doSa se AlocanA karake
zalyavAlI banI huI sAdhvI, hukUma uThAnA par3e jaisA sevakapana pAkara paramparA
se chaThI nArakI meM gaI hai| sUtra - 152-153 kucha sAdhvI ke nAma kahatA hU~
use samajha-mAna ki jinhoMne AlocanA kI hai  /  lekina (mAyA-kapaTa samAna)
bhAva-doSa kA sevana karane se viziSTa taraha se pApakarmamala se usakA saMyama
aura zIla ke aMga kharar3Aye hae haiM  /  usa niHzalyapana kI prazaMsA kI hai jo
palabhara bhI paramabhAva vizuddhi rahita na ho  /  sUtra - 154-155 isalie he
gautama ! kucha strIyoM ko ati nirmala, citta-vizuddhi bhavAntara meM bhI nahIM
hotI ki jisase vo niHzalya bhAva pA sake, kucha zramaNI chaThU-aThuma, cAra
upavAsa, pA~ca upavAsa isa taraha bArabAra upavAsa se zarIra sUkhA dete haiM to
bhI sarAga bhAva kI AlocanA karatI nahIM-chor3atI nhiiN| sUtra-156-157 aneka
prakAra ke vikalpa dekara kallola zreNI taraMga meM avagAhana karanevAle duHkha
se karake avagAha kiyA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 12

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  It is impossible to know the
one who wanders like a mind in the ocean of the Paras, who can find the Paras.
How can one who is not free of mind give criticism? Those who remove the salya
of such a salya-bearer are worthy of being worshipped every moment. Sūtra -
158-160  Free from attachment and aversion, with a feeling of affection,
delighting in Dharma-meditation, possessing the limbs of virtue and the abode of
excellent qualities, a woman and many other bonds, considering home, woman, etc.
as a prison, with a very pure and extremely pure mind, and who removes the
salya, such a great-renowned man is worthy of being seen, worshipped, and is
superior, even the Devendra is worthy of being worshipped by him. He who, having
renounced all worldly things, attains such a state of renunciation, is worthy of
being seen and worshipped. Sūtra-161-163  (It is explained how those sādhvīs who
do not criticize the salya receive the fruits of the world.) I will not
criticize, why should I? Or let the sādhvī criticize a little, not many faults,
let the sādhvīs speak only of the faults they have seen, I speak only of the
faultless and sinless, for the sake of knowledge, etc., one has to take the
fault, what is there to criticize in that? A śramaṇī who asks for forgiveness
for negligence, a śramaṇī who commits sin, a śramaṇī who does not have the
strength to speak, a śramaṇī who speaks against the world, "Others have
committed such a sin, how much criticism is there." Saying this, she takes
criticism upon herself, if she has heard of the atonement for such a fault, let
her do it according to that, but let her not confess her own fault, and a
śramaṇī who is suspicious in eight ways, such as caste, etc. (do not take such
pure criticism) Sūtra- 164-165  Do not take criticism for fear of being caught
after lying, being corrupted by rasa, ṛddhi, śatā, and garva, and then being
subject to many such emotional faults, filled with sinful salya, such śramaṇīs
have been countless in number and for countless ages. Those countless śramaṇīs
have gone to many places of suffering. Sūtra - 166-167  Countless śramaṇīs who
are afflicted with the salya of the beginningless salya. They have suffered the
pain of the bitter taste of the fruit, which is severe, fierce, and fiercer,
acquired from only one salya in the form of emotional faults, and are still in
hell today, and will continue to experience the bitter fruit acquired from such
salya for countless ages in the future. Therefore, śramaṇīs should not even take
on the slightest salya for a moment. Sūtra - 168-169  The body easily burns in
the great, terrifying, heavy, great fire, which is agitated by a row of flames
ignited by the word "dhag dhag". It is better to die than to suffer the pain of
diving into the embers, then into the water, then from there to the land, then
from there the body again into the river. Sūtra-170-171  It is easy to make
one's body dead by smearing it with lime, turmeric, etc. It is easy to cut off
one's head with one's own hands. But it is difficult to practice such austerity,
so that one becomes free from salya. Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama
Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda Page 13

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka jAe,
pArasa pA sake vaise mana samAna sAgara meM vicaranevAle ko jAnanA nAmumakIna
hai  /  jisake citta svAdhIna nahIM vo AlocanA kisa taraha de (le) sake? aise
zalyavAle kA zalya jo uddharate haiM vo pala-pala vaMdanIya haiN| sUtra -
158-160 sneha-rAga rahitapana se, vAtsalyabhAva se, dharmadhyAna meM ullasita
karanevAle, zIla ke aMga aura uttama guNa sthAnaka ko dhAraNa karanevAlA strI
aura dUsare kaIM baMdhana se mukta, gRha, strI Adi ko kaidakhAnA mAnanevAle,
suvizuddha ati nirmala cittayukta aura jo zalyarahita kare vo mahAyazavAlA
puruSa darzana karane ke yogya, vaMdanIya aura uttama aise vo devendra ko bhI
pUjanIya hai  /  kRtArthI saMsArika sarva cIja kA anAdara karake jo uttara aise
virati sthAna ko dhAraNa karatA hai  /  vo darzanIya-pUjanIya hai| sUtra-161-163
(jisa sAdhvIoM ne zalya kI AlocanA nahIM kI vo kisa taraha se saMsAra ke kaTa
phala pAtI hai ye batAte haiN|) maiM AlocanA nahIM karU~gI, kisa lie karU~? yA
sAdhvI thor3I AlocanA kare, kaIM doSa na kare, sAdhvIoM ne jo doSa dekhe ho vo
hI doSa kahe, maiM to niravadya-niSpApa se - kahanevAlI hU~, jJAnAdika Alambana
ke lie doSa sevana karanA par3e usameM kyA AlocanA karanA ? pramAda kI kSamApanA
mA~ga lenevAlI zramaNI, pApa karanevAlI zramaNI, balazakti nahIM hai aisI bAteM
karanevAlI zramaNI, lokaviruddha kathA karanevAlI zramaNI, "dUsaroM ne aisA pApa
kiyA hai use kitanI AlocanA hai| aisA kahakara khuda kI AlocanA lenevAlI, kisI
ke pAsa vaise doSa kA prAyazcitta sUnA ho usa mutAbika kare lekina apane doSa kA
nivedana na kare aura jAti Adi ATha taraha se zaMkita huI zramaNI (isa taraha
zuddha AlocanA na le) sUtra- 164-165 jhUTha bolane ke bAda pakar3e jAne ke bhaya
se AlocanA na le, rasa Rddhi zAtA gArava se dUSita huI ho aura phira isa taraha
ke kaIM bhAva doSa ke AdhIna, pApazalya se bharI aisI zramaNI anantA saMkhyA
pramANa aura anantAkAla se huI haiM  /  vo anantI zramaNI kaIM duHkhavAle sthAna
meM gaI huI haiN| sUtra - 166-167 anantI zramaNI jo anAdi zalya se zalyita huI
hai  /  vo bhAvadoSa rUpa kevala eka hI zalya se upArjita kie ghora, ugra-
ugratara aise phala ke kaTu phala ke virasa rasa kI vedanA bhugatate hue Aja bhI
naraka meM rahI hai aura abhI bhAvi meM bhI anantA kAla taka vaisI zalya se
upArjana kie kaTu phala kA ahasAsa karegI  /  isalie zramaNIoM ko palabhara ke
lie bhI sUkSma se sUkSma zalya bhI dhAraNa nahIM karanA caahie| sUtra - 168-169
dhaga dhaga aise zabda se prajvalita jvAlA paMkti se Akula mahAbhayAnaka bhArita
mahAagni meM zarIra saralatA se jalatA hai  /  aMgAra ke r3haga meM eka DUbakI
lagA ke phira jala meM, usameM se sthala meM, usameM se zarIra phira se nadI meM
jAe aise duHkha bhUgate ki usase to maranA acchA lge| sUtra-170-171 paramAdhAmI
deva zastra se nArakI jIva ke zarIra ke choTe-choTe TukaDe kara de, hamezA use
salukAI se agni meM home, sakhta, tIkSNa karavata se zarIra phAr3akara usameM
lUNa-usa-sAjIkhAra bhare isase apane zarIra ko ati zuSka kara de to bhI jIne
taka apane zalya ko utArane ke lie samartha nahIM ho sktaa| sUtra - 172-173
java-khAra, haldI Adi se apanA zarIra lIMpakara mRtaHprAya karanA sarala hai  /
apane hAthoM se mastaka chedana karake rakhanA sarala hai  /  lekina aisA
saMyama tapa karanA duSkara hai, ki jisase niHzalya banA jAe  /  muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 13

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number Sutra-
174-177 One who is afflicted by his own 'Shalya' (sinful act), and hides the
'Shalya-Pap' (sinful act) committed due to Maya (illusion) and Dambha (pride),
cannot reveal his 'Shalya'. Perhaps a king of bad character might ask him to
give up all his possessions and his body, but he would not be able to confess
his bad character. Perhaps the king might say, "I will give you the entire
earth, but you must reveal your bad character." Even then, no one would be
willing to confess their bad character. At that time, even the earth would be
considered like a blade of grass, but they would not confess their bad
character. The king might say, "I will take your life, so tell me your bad
character." Even then, they would not confess their bad character even if they
lost their life. Even if they lose all their possessions, their kingdom, or
their life, no one would confess their bad character. I too, perhaps, would go
to the Patal-Narak (hell), but I would not confess my bad character. Sutra-
178-179 A man who is a sinner, a wicked person, and hides the sin of one birth,
is a person who hides his own bad character. He is not called a 'Mahapurash'
(great person). A 'Satpurush' (righteous person) is one who is immersed in 'Tap'
(austerity) without any 'Shalya'. Sutra- 180-183 The soul itself should not
desire to commit 'Pap-Shalya' (sinful act), and in the time of half a blink of
an eye, it can be freed from the burden of infinite sins. With a mind free from
'Dambha' (pride) and 'Maya' (illusion), through meditation, self-study, intense
'Tap' (austerity), and self-control, one can liberate oneself from their sins at
that very moment. By criticizing oneself without any 'Shalya', by self-
condemnation, by humbling oneself before the Guru (spiritual teacher), one
should perform such a strong 'Prayashchit' (atonement) that the 'Shalya' is
completely eradicated. In the next birth, one should fully earn and become
firmly established in the soul, but the 'Pap-Shalya' should be eradicated within
a blink of an eye, half a blink of an eye, a moment, or a lifetime. Sutra-
184-185 He is truly a 'Subhat' (noble person), a 'Purush' (man), a 'Tapasvi'
(ascetic), a 'Pandit' (scholar), a 'Kshamavala' (forgiving), a 'Indriya-Vash'
(one who controls the senses), a 'Santoshi' (content). His life is successful.
He is a 'Shurvir' (brave), worthy of praise. He is worthy of seeing every
moment, who has confessed his sins to his Guru, ready to accept pure criticism,
and has clearly revealed his bad character. Sutra- 186-189 O Gautam! There are
some beings in the world who eradicate half of their 'Shalya' and due to 'Maya'
(illusion), 'Lajja' (shame), 'Bhay' (fear), and 'Moh' (attachment), they lie and
keep half of the 'Shalya' in their mind. Such beings of low character suffer
greatly from this. Due to the fault of ignorance, they do not think that they
will surely suffer in the future because they have not eradicated the 'Shalya'
from their mind. Just as if a thorn or a sharp object with one or two points
enters someone's body and is not removed, it will cause pain in that one birth,
in that one place, or it will become like flesh. But if 'Pap-Shalya' (sinful
act) enters the soul, then just as a vajra (thunderbolt) with countless points
pierces a mountain, this 'Shalya' pierces the entire body for countless births.
Sutra- 190-192 O Gautam! There are also some beings who, after countless births,
have eradicated their 'Shalya' through self-study, meditation, yoga, intense
'Tap' (austerity), and self-control, and have become free from suffering and
distress, but again, due to double or triple negligence, become full of
'Shalya'. Then, after many births, they may gain the ability to eradicate the
'Shalya' through 'Tap' (austerity) that burns away karma. Sutra- 193-196 In the
same way, even if one obtains the means to eradicate the 'Shalya' again, anyone
who is under the influence of negligence loses all the means of achieving well-
being in this and future births. The thief of negligence steals the wealth of
well-being. O Gautam! There are also some beings who, under the influence of
negligence, consume intense 'Tap' (austerity) but... Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
(Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 14

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra-
174-177 apane zalya se duHkhI, mAyA aura daMbha se kie gae zalya-pApa
chipAnevAlA vo apane zalya prakaTa karane ke lie samartha nahIM ho sakatA  /
zAyada koI rAjA duzcaritra pUche to sarvasva aura deha dene kA maMjUra ho  /
lekina apanA duzcaritra kahane ke lie samartha nahIM ho sakatA  /  zAyada rAjA
kahe ki tumheM samagra pRthvI de dUM lekina tuma apanA duzcaritra prakaTa karo
/  to bhI koI apanA duzcaritra kahane ke lie taiyAra na ho  /  usa vakta pRthvI
ko bhI tRNa samAna mAne-lekina apanA duzcaritra na kahe  /  rAjA kahe ki terA
jIvana kATa detA hU~ isalie tumhArA duzcaritra kaho  /  taba prANa kA kSaya ho
to bhI apanA duzcaritra nahIM kahate  /  sarvasva haraNa hotA hai, rAjya yA
prANa jAe to bhI koI apanA duzcaritra nahIM kahate  /  maiM bhI zAyada pAtAla-
naraka meM jAUMgA lekina merA duzcaritra nahIM khNgaa| sUtra - 178-179 jo pApI-
adhama buddhivAle eka janma kA pApa chipAnevAle puruSa ho vo sva duzcaritra
gopate haiM  /  vo mahApuruSa nahIM kahalAte  /  caritra meM satpuruSa use kahA
hai ki jo zalya rahita tapa karane meM lIna ho  /  sUtra - 180-183 AtmA khuda
pApa-zalya karane kI IcchAvAlA na ho aura ardhanimiSa A~kha ke palaka se bhI
AdhA vakta jitane kAla meM ananta guNa pApabhAra se tUTa jAe to nirdabha aura
mAyArahita kA dhyAna, svAdhyAya, ghora tapa aura saMyama se vo apane pApa kA usI
vakta uddhAra kara sakate haiM  /  niHzalyapana se AlocanA karake, niMdA karake,
guru sAkSI se gardA karake usa taraha kA dRr3ha prAyazcitta kare jisase zalya kA
anta A jAe  /  dUsare janma meM pUrI taraha upArjana kie aura AtmA meM dRr3ha
hokara kSetrIbhUta hue, lekina palaka yA ardha palaka meM kSaNa-muhUrta yA janma
pUrA hone taka jarura pApazalya kA anta karanevAlA hotA hai| sUtra - 184-185 vo
vAkaI subhaTa hai, puruSa hai, tapasvI hai, paMr3ita hai, kSamAvAlA hai, indriya
ko vaza meM karanevAlA, saMtoSI hai| usakA jIvana saphala hai  /  vo zUravIra
hai, tArIpha karane ke lAyaka hai  /  pala-pala darzana ke lAyaka hai ki jisane
zuddha AlocanA karane ke lie taiyAra hokara apane aparAdha guru ke pAsa prakaTa
karake apane duzcaritra ko sApha batAyA hai| sUtra- 186-189 he gautama ! jagata
meM kucha aise prANI-jIva hote haiM, jo ardhazalya kA uddhAra kare aura mAyA,
lajjA, bhaya, moha ke kAraNa se mRSAvAda karake ardhazalya mana meM rakhe  /
hIna sattvavAle aise unako usase bar3A duHkha hotA hai| ajJAna doSa se unake
citta meM zalya na uddharane ke kAraNa se bhAvi meM jarura duHkhI hogA aisA
nahIM socate  /  jisa taraha kisI ke zarIra meM eka yA do dhAravAlA zalya-kA~TA
Adi ghUsane ke bAda use bAhara na nIkAle to vo zalya eka janma meM, eka sthAna
meM rahakara darda de yA vo mA~sa samAna bana jAe  /  lekina yadi pApazalya AtmA
meM ghUsa jAe to, jisa taraha asaMkhya dhAravAlA vajra parvata ko bhedatA hai
usI taraha yaha zalya asaMkhyAta bhava taka sarvAMga ko bhedatA hai
sUtra-190-192 he gautama ! aise bhI kucha jIva hote haiM jo lAkha bhava taka
svAdhyAya-dhyAna-yoga se aura phira ghora tapa aura saMyama se, zalya uddhAra
kara ke duHkha aura kleza se mukta hue phira se dugune-tIgune pramAda ke kAraNa
se zalya se pUrNa hotA hai  /  phira kaIM janmAntara bAda tapa se jalA denevAlA
karmavAlA zalyoddhAra karane ke lie sAmarthya pA sakatA hai| sUtra-193-196 usa
prakAra phira se bhI zalyoddhAra karane kI sAmagrI kisI bhI taraha pAkara, jo
koI pramAda ke vaza meM hotA hai vo bhavobhava ke kalyANa prApti ke sarva
sAdhana hara taraha se hAra jAtA hai  /  pramAdarUpI cora kalyANa kI samRddhi
la~Ta letA hai  /  he gautama ! aisI bhI kucha jIva hote haiM ki jo pramAda ke
AdhIna hokara ghora tapa kA sevana karane ke muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 14

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  **Despite studying/purpose/sutra
number, they hide their shalya in every way. But they don't know from whom they
have hidden this shalya? Because the five Lokapals, their soul and five senses,
nothing is secret from them. In this world, including the Suras and Asuras,
nothing is secret from the five great Lokapals, the soul and the five senses,
from those eleven. Sutra - 197**  **O Gautam! In the four gatis, the same world,
deceived by the pleasures of the world like a mirage, cheated by the shalya like
a mental defect, and wanders in the four gatis of the world. Sutra - 198-200**
**Having understood this in detail, one should have firm determination and
courage from the heart. And then, with a spear like the great supreme sattva,
one should pierce the Maya Rakshasi. With many simple emotions, one should churn
and destroy Maya in many ways, and then control the proud Gajendra with the
ankush of humility, etc. With a mace-sambil like gentleness-simplicity, one
should pulverize hundreds of objects, and seeing the crocodile-fish fighting
from afar, one should condemn them. Sutra - 201-205**  **Anger and pride that
are not suppressed, Maya and greed that are increasing, these four aggregate
kshayas cannot be rescued from excessive suffering, such shalya enters the soul,
then one should overcome anger with forgiveness-pacification, conquer pride with
humility, conquer Maya with simplicity, and conquer greed with contentment. In
this way, having conquered the kshayas, one who has renounced the seven
bhayasthanas and the eight madasthanas, is ready to receive pure criticism from
the Guru. As per the defects, transgressions, and shalya that have occurred, one
should present all one's bad character without doubt, without agitation,
fearlessly to the Guru. As if the ghosts and spirits have surrounded him, or as
if he is speaking with the simplicity of a child, one should present all the
truth to the Guru, as per the shalya-paap that has occurred, and criticize
oneself. Sutra - 206-207**  **Whatever has been done by entering the underworld,
by going into the water, in a secret place in the house, at night or in
darkness, or even with one's mother, and besides that, whatever other misdeeds
have been done with others, once or repeatedly, one should tell the Guru
truthfully, so that the sin may be destroyed. Sutra - 208**  **The Guru Maharaj
will also tell him the atonement according to the command of the Tirthankara
Paramatma, so that he may become free from shalya and avoid asanaya. Sutra -
209-210**  **Asanaya is called sin, and it has been described in many ways. It
is as follows: violence, lying, stealing, sexual intercourse, possession. The
five objects of the senses: sound, form, taste, smell, touch, the four kshayas:
anger, pride, Maya, greed, the three dands: mind, speech, body. Without
renouncing these sins, one cannot be free from shalya. Sutra - 211**  **Earth,
water, fire, air, plants, these five are stationary, the sixth is the Trasa
jiva, or the nine-ten or fourteen types of jivas. Or, according to the various
types of bodies, one can describe the violence (of the sin of violence) of many
types of jivas. Sutra - 212**  **Leaving aside the Hitopadeśa, the best and the
ultimate truth-based Dharma, there are many kinds of false statements, criticize
all the shalya in the form of falsehood. **  **Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
(Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation** **Page 15**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka bAvajUda
bhI sarva taraha se apanA zalya chipAte haiM  /  lekina vo yaha nahIM jAnate ki
yaha zalya usane kisase chipAyA? kyoMki pA~ca lokapAla, apanI AtmA aura pA~ca
indriya se kucha bhI gupta nahIM hai  /  sura aura asura sahita isa jagata meM
pA~ca bar3e lokapAla AtmA aura pA~ca indriya una gyAraha se kucha bhI gupta
nahIM hai| sUtra - 197 he gautama ! cAra gati samAna saMsAra meM magajala samAna
saMsAra ke sukha se Thagita, bhAva doSa samAna zalya se dhokhA khAtA hai aura
saMsAra meM cAroM gati meM ghUmatA hai| sUtra - 198-200 itanA vistAra se kahA
samajhakara dRr3ha nizcaya aura dila se dhIraja rakhanI cAhie  /  aura phira
mahA uttama satva samAna bhAle se mAyA rAkSasI ko bhedanA cAhie  /  kaIM sarala
bhAva se kaI taraha mAyA ko nirmathana-vinAza karake vinaya Adi aMkuza se phira
mAna gajendra ko vaza meM kare, mArdava-saralatA samAna musala-sA~bila se
seMkaDo viSayoM ko cUrNa kara denA aura krodha-lAbha Adi magara-matsya ko dUra
se lar3ate hue dekhakara usakI niMdA kre| sUtra - 201-205 nigraha na kiyA huA
krodha aura mAna, vRddhi pAnevAle mAyA aura lobha aise cAra samagra kaSAya
atizaya duHkha se karake uddhara na sake vaise zalya AtmA meM praveza kare taba
kSamA se-upazama se krodha ko hara le, namratA se mAna ko jIta le, saralatA se
mAyA ko aura saMtoSa ke lobha ko jItanA isa prakAra kaSAya jItakara jisane sAta
bhayasthAna aura ATha madasthAna kA tyAga kiyA hai, vo guru ke pAsa zuddha
AlocanA grahaNa karane ke lie taiyAra ho  /  jisa prakAra doSa, aticAra, zalya
lage ho usa mutAbika apanA sarva duzcaritra zaMkA rahita, kSobha rakhe binA,
guru se nirbhaya hokara nivedana kare  /  bhUta-preta ne gherA ho yA bacce kI
taraha ati saralatA se bole vaise guru sanmukha jisa mutAbika zalyapApa haA ho
usa prakAra saba yathArtha nivedana kare-AlocanA kre| sUtra - 206-207 pAtAla meM
praveza karake, pAnI ke bhItara jAkara, ghara ke bhItara gupta jagaha meM, rAta
ko yA aMdhere meM yA mA~ ke sAtha bhI jo kiyA ho vo saba aura usake alAvA bhI
anya ke sAtha apane duSkRtya eka bAra yA bAra-bAra jo kucha kie ho vo saba guru
samakSa yathArtha kahakara batAnA jisase pApa kA kSaya ho  /  sUtra- 208 guru
mahArAja bhI use tIrthaMkara paramAtmA kI AjJA ke anusAra prAyazcitta kahe,
jisase zalyarahita hokara asaMyama kA parihAra kre| sUtra- 209-210 asaMyama pApa
kahalAtA hai aura vo kaIM taraha se batAyA hai  /  vo isa prakAra - hiMsA,
jhUTha, corI, maithuna, parigraha  /  zabda, rUpa, rasa, gaMdha, sparza aise
pA~ca indriya ke viSaya, krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha vo cAra kaSAya, mana, vacana,
kAyA aise tIna daMr3a  /  ina pApa kA tyAga kie binA niHzalya nahIM ho sktaa|
sUtra-211 pRthvI-apa-teU, vAyu vanaspati ye pA~ca sthAvara, chaThe trasa jIva yA
nava-daza athavA caudaha bheda se jIva  /  yA kAyA ke vividha bheda se batAte
kaI taraha ke jIva ke hiMsA (ke pApa kI AlocanA kare  / ) sUtra - 212 hitopadeza
chor3akara sarvottama aura pAramArthika tattvabhUta dharma kA mRSAvacana kaIM
taraha kA hai usa mRSArUpa sarva zalya (kI AlocanA kare  / ) muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 15

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number
Sutra-213 Origin Production Desire Distinction Form Food Water etc. from forty-
two and five Mandali's faults contaminated such vessels-utensils equipment
water-food and then all these nine categories- (mind, speech, body from action,
causing action, approval) become impure then if one consumes it then the fault
of theft is incurred. (Criticize him.) Sutra-214-215 Divine work, sensual
pleasure if one does it with mind, speech, body, causes it, approves it, such
three-fold-three-fold from sensual pleasure is obtained or generous sensual
pleasure is obtained or generous sensual pleasure is thought of even in the mind
then consider him non-celibate. Nine types of secrecy of celibacy which any
sadhu or sadhvi violates or looks with lustful eyes then he/she incurs the sin
of celibacy. (Criticize him.) Sutra-216 Collecting more than the prescribed
amount of religious-articles from the community, that is attachment.
Sutra-217-218 With passion-based cruel feeling, whoever speaks contaminated
language, with sinful faulty words whoever replies, that should be known as
false-untruthful speech. Without giving, whatever is received with dust-dirt,
that is theft. Enjoyment of the subject of handcraft, words etc. that is sexual
intercourse, in which there is fainting, greed, desire, possessive feeling, that
is attachment, not to be gluttonous, eating to the full, that is called night-
meal. Sutra-219-221 In desirable words, form, taste, smell, touch, attachment
and in undesirable words etc. aversion, even for a moment, the muni should not
do, four passions four-fold should be pacified in the mind, avoid the punishment
of evil mind, speech, body, do not consume-use water with impure-mind, do not
touch-contact seed-stationary body. Sutra-222-224 If one does not abandon this
great sin then he/she does not become free from the affliction. From this great
sin, if one commits a small-subtle sin for the body then that muni does not
become free from the affliction. Therefore, by revealing the sin in front of the
guru, by performing the atonement given by the guru maharaj, by practicing
penance free from deceit-hypocrisy-affliction, whoever is born in the realm of
gods or humans, there he/she obtains excellent birth, excellent prosperity,
excellent accomplishment, excellent form, excellent fortune. If in that realm
accomplishment is not obtained then surely all these excellent materials are
obtained. According to that, I say what I heard from the Bhagvant. Sutra-225
Here the fault of miswriting was not seen in Shruthadhar. But in the previous
copy of this Sutra, somewhere the part of the verse, somewhere the word-letter,
somewhere the line, somewhere three-three pages, such a lot of part of the text
was diminished. Study-1-The Hindi translation by Muni Diparatnasagar is
complete. Muni Diparatnasagar's (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page
16

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra-213
udgama utpAdanA eSaNA bhedarUpa AhAra pAnI Adi ke bayAlIsa aura pA~ca mAMDalI ke
doSa se dUSita aise jo bhAjana-pAtra upakaraNa pAnI-AhAra aura phira yaha saba
nau koTI- (mana, vacana, kAyA se karaNa, karAvaNa, anumodana) se azuddha ho to
usakA bhogavaTA kare to corI kA doSa lage  /  (usakI AlocanA kare  / )
sUtra-214-215 divyakAma, ratisukha yadi mana, vacana, kAyA se kare, karavAe,
anumodanA kare, aise trividha-trividha se ratisukha pAe yA audArika ratisukha
pAe yA audArika ratisukha mana se bhI cintavana kare to use a-brahmacArI maano|
brahmacarya kI nau taraha kI gupti kI jo koI sAdhu yA sAdhvI virAdhanA kare yA
rAgavAlI dRSTi kare to vo brahmacarya kA pApazalya pAtI hai  /  (usakI AlocanA
karanA  / ) sUtra-216 gaNa ke pramANa se jyAdA dharma-upakAraNa kA saMgraha
kare, vo parigraha hai| sUtra - 217-218 kaSAya sahita krUra bhAva se jo kalUSita
bhASA bole, pApavAle doSayukta vacana se jo uttara de, vo bhI mRSAasatya vacana
jAnanA cAhie  /  raja-dhUla se yukta binA diyA huA jo grahaNa kare vo corI  /
hastakarma, zabda Adi viSaya kA sevana vo maithuna, jisa cIja meM mUrchA,
lAlaca, kAMkSA, mamatvabhAva ho vo parigraha, uNodarI na karanA, AkaMTha bhojana
karanA use rAtri bhojana kahA hai| sUtra - 219-221 iSTa zabda, rUpa, rasa,
gaMdha, sparza meM rAga aura aniSTa zabda Adi meM dveSa, palabhara ke lie bhI
muni na kare, cAra kaSAya catuSka ko mana meM hI upazAnta kara de, duSTa mana,
vacana, kAyA ke daMr3a kA parihAra kare, aprAsuka-sacitta pAnI kA paribhoga na
kare-upabhoga na kare, bIja-sthAvarakAya kA saMghaTTa-sparza na kare  /  sUtra -
222-224 Upara kahe gae isa mahApApa kA tyAga na kare taba taka zalyarahita nahIM
hotA  /  isa mahA-pApa meM se zarIra ke lie eka choTA-sUkSma pApa kare taba taka
vo muni zalyarahita na bane  /  isalie guru samakSa AlocanA yAni pApa prakaTa
karake, guru mahArAja ne diyA prAyazcitta karake, kapaTa-daMbha-zalya rahita
tapa karake jo deva yA mAnava ke bhava meM utpanna ho vahA~ uttama jAti, uttama
samRddhi, uttama siddhi, uttama rUpa, uttama saubhAgya pAe  /  yadi usa bhave
siddhi na pAe to yaha saba uttama sAmagrI jarura pAe  /  usa mutAbika bhagavaMta
ke pAsa jo maiMne sUnA vo kahatA huuN| sUtra- 225 yahA~ zrutadhara ko kulikhita
kA doSa na dekhA  /  lekina jo isa sUtra kI pUrva kI prati likhI thI  /  usameM
hI kahIM zlokArdha bhAga, kahIM pada-akSara, kahIM paMkti, kahIM tIna-tIna panne
aise kAphI grantha hissA kSINa huA thaa| adhyayana-1-kA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
hindI anuvAda pUrNa muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 16

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agama Sutra 39, Cheda Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' **Study/Purpose/Sutra Number**
Study-2-Karmavipak-Prathipadan **Purpose-1 Sutra - 226-227** _O Gautama! With
all your being, remove all the obstacles and think correctly that in this world,
whether it be sentient or non-sentient, a Bhavy or an Abhavy, but any soul
seeking happiness, whether it be crooked, upward, downward, here or there,
wanders in all ten directions._ **Sutra-228-229** Know that there are two types
of non-sentient beings: Vikalendriya, meaning those with one, two, three, or
four senses, and Ekendriya, like worms, Kunthu, Mali, in that order, with two,
three, or four senses. Vikalendriya beings, and earth, water, fire, air, and
plants, those are the stationary Ekendriya non-sentient beings. Animals, birds,
Naraki, humans, and Devas, all are sentient. And within that limit, there is
Bhavyata and Abhavyata in all beings. Naraki do not have Vikalendriya or
Ekendriya. **Sutra-230-231** We also seek happiness (with such a desire), a
Vikalendriya being goes to the shade when it is hot and to the warmth when it is
cold. So, even there, they experience suffering. Those with very delicate
bodies, their soles cannot bear even a moment of heat or a moment of cold, etc.,
any adversity. **Sutra-232-233** Due to the desire for sexual pleasure and the
attachment, delusion, and ignorance arising from it, those born as Ekendriya
beings like earth-bodied beings, etc., do not experience suffering. Those
Ekendriya beings undergo infinite transformations and some attain the state of
being without senses, some do not attain it, and some attain it after an
infinite period of time. **Sutra-234** Deer, animals, birds, snakes, etc., who
are defeated by cold, heat, wind, rain, etc., cannot even find peace for the
time it takes for the blink of an eye, even in their dreams. **Sutra-235** How
can a Naraki, who is in hell, who experiences many pains every moment, being
cut, torn, and chopped by sharp weapons like a cruel, unwanted touch, and other
such hard weapons, find happiness? **Sutra-236-237** Even in the Devaloka, where
the divinity of all is equal, there is suffering when one Deva becomes a vehicle
and another (more powerful) Deva mounts it. Even though their hands and feet are
equal and similar, they are still unhappy. At that time, they are deluded and
think, "I have lost my Bhava, damn me, I did so much penance, yet my soul was
cheated. I have attained a lesser divinity." **Sutra-238-241** In human life,
those who seek happiness engage in farming, service, work, trade, and crafts,
day and night. They endure the heat, what happiness do they have? Some fools are
envious seeing the prosperity of others. Some poor souls cannot even satisfy
their hunger. And the wealth of some people also diminishes. If there is an
increase in punya, then there is an increase in fame, glory, and wealth. If
punya starts to decrease, then fame, glory, and prosperity start to decrease.
Some virtuous people enjoy equal happiness for a thousand years continuously,
while some beings...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
adhyayana-2-karmavipAka-pratipAdana uddezaka-1 sUtra - 226-227 _ he gautama !
sarva bhAva sahita nirmUla zalyoddhAra kara ke samyag taraha se yaha pratyakSa
soco ki isa jagata meM jo saMjJI ho, asaMjJI ho, bhavya ho yA abhavya ho lekina
sukha ke arthI kisI bhI AtmA tirachI, urdhva adho, yahA~ vahA~ aise daza dizA
meM aTana karate haiN| sUtra-228-229 asaMjJI jIva do taraha ke jAnanA,
vikalendrI yAni eka, do, tIna, cAra itanI indriyavAle aura ekendriya, kRmi,
kuMthu, mAlI usa krama se do, tIna, cAra indriyavAle vikalendriya jIva aura
pRthvI, jala, agni, vAyu, vanaspati vo sthAvara ekendriya asaMjJI jIva haiM  /
pazu, paMchI, nArakI, mAnava, deva vo sabhI saMjJI haiN| aura vo maryAdA meM-
sarvajIva meM bhavyatA aura abhavyatA hotI hai  /  nArakI meM vikalendri aura
ekendriyapana nahIM hotaa| sUtra- 230-231 hameM bhI sukha mile (aisI IcchA se)
vikalendriya jIva ko garmI lagane se chA~va meM jAtA hai aura ThaMr3a lage to
garmI meM jAtA hai  /  to vahA~ bhI unheM duHkha hotA hai  /  ati komala
aMgavAle unakA talavA palabhara garmI yA dAha ko palabhara ThaMDaka Adi
pratikUlatA sahana karane ke lie samartha nahIM ho skte| sUtra- 232-233 maithuna
viSayaka saMkalpa aura usake rAga se-moha se ajJAna doSa se pRthvIkAya Adi
ekendriya meM utpanna honevAle ko duHkha kA ahasAsa nahIM hotA  /  una ekendriya
jIva kA anantAkAla parivartana ho aura vo beindriyapana pAe, kucha beindriyapana
nahIM pAte  /  kucha anAdi kAla ke bAda pAte haiN| sUtra - 234 zardI, garmI,
vAyarA, bArisa Adi se parAbhava pAnevAle mRga, jAnavara, paMchI, sarpa Adi
sapane meM bhI A~kha kI palaka ke ardha hisse kI bhItara ke vakta jitanA bhI
sakha nahIM pA sakate  /  sUtra - 235 kaThina anacAhA sparzavAlI tIkSNa karavata
aura usake jaise dUsare kaThina hathiyAra se cIranevAle, phaTanevAle,
kaTanevAle, pala-pala kaIM vedanA kA ahasAsa karanevAle nArakI meM rahe becAre
nAraka ko sukha kaise mile? sUtra - 236-237 devalokameM devatva saba kA samAna
hai to bhI vahA~ eka deva vAhana bane aura dUsarA (jyAdA zaktivAle) deva usa
para ArohaNa kare aisA vahA~ duHkha hotA hai  /  hAtha, pA~va, tulya aura samAna
hone ke bAvajUda bhI vo duHkhI haiM  /  usa vakta mAyA-daMbha kara ke maiM bhava
hAra gayA, dhikkAra ho mujhe, itanA tapa kiyA to bhI AtmA Thagakara  /  halkA
devapana paayaa| sUtra-238-241 mAnavapana meM sukha kA arthI khetI karma sevA-
cAkarI vyApAra zilpakalA hamezA rAta-dina karate haiM  /  usameM garmI sahate
haiM, usameM unako bhI kauna-sA sukha hai ? kucha mUrakha dUsaroM ke ghara
samRddhi Adi dekhakara dila meM jalate haiM | kucha to becAre peTa kI bhUkha bhI
pUrI nahIM kara sakate  /  aura kucha logoM kI ho vo lakSmI bhI kSINa hotI hai
/  puNya kI vRddhi ho-to yaza-kIrti aura lakSmI kI vRddhi hotI hai, yadi puNya
kama hone lage to yaza, kIrti aura samRddhi kama hone lagate haiM  /  kucha
puNyavaMta lagAtAra hajAra sAla taka eka samAna sukha bhugatate rahate haiM,
jaba ki kucha jIva eka muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 17

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishītha'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
Even on the day of their death, they depart in sorrow without experiencing
happiness, because humans have abandoned the practice of virtuous deeds. Sūtra -
242  This is a brief description of the sorrow of all beings in the world. O
Gautama! The sorrow that exists in the human race, listen to it briefly. Sūtra -
243  Hundreds of kinds of sorrow that are constantly felt, causing distress and
boredom, some humans do not attain detachment. Sūtra - 244-245  **Briefly,
humans experience two types of sorrow, one physical and the other mental. And
then there are three types of each, intense, fierce, and extremely fierce.
Sorrow that ends in a single moment is called intense sorrow. Sorrow that has
some respite in between is called fierce sorrow. Sorrow that is endured equally
at all times without respite is called extremely fierce sorrow. Sūtra - 246**
Humans experience intense sorrow. In the animal realm, there is fierce sorrow,
and O Gautama! The sorrow of beings in hell is extremely fierce. Sūtra - 247
Humans experience three types of sorrow: minor, moderate, and superior. Animals
do not experience minor sorrow, and beings in hell experience superior sorrow.
Sūtra - 248-250  The minor sorrow experienced by humans is of two types: subtle
and gross. The other, greater sorrow, is devoid of divisions. Subtle sorrow is
experienced by unconscious humans, and gross sorrow by gods. Gods who are in the
state of decline experience gross mental sorrow from the time of their decline.
Gods who are servants and subject to orders experience gross mental sorrow from
birth until the end of their life. Gods do not experience physical sorrow. Gods
have a heart that is as strong as a thunderbolt, extremely powerful. Otherwise,
their heart would break into a hundred pieces due to mental sorrow. Sūtra -
251-252  The remaining two types of sorrow, devoid of divisions, are moderate
and superior. These types of sorrow are experienced by humans born in the womb.
Those who live for countless years experience moderate sorrow, and those who
live for a countable number of years experience superior sorrow. Sūtra - 253
Now, the synonyms for the word sorrow are mentioned. Unsuccessful, pain,
disease, ache, sorrow, non-cessation, restlessness, aversion, distress, etc.,
are many synonymous words used for sorrow.  **Study-2, Purpose-2, Sūtra-254**
The two types of sorrow, physical and mental, have been described. Now, O
Gautama! I will describe physical sorrow very clearly. Listen to it with
concentration. Sūtra - 255-262  Even if a mere fraction of the tip of a hair
touches a virtuous, pure-minded, motionless being, it causes them so much pain
that if we were to be cut with a knife or pierced in the heart or head with a
weapon, we would tremble.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka dina bhI
sukha pAe binA duHkha meM kAla nirgamana karate haiM, kyoMki manuSya ne
puNyakarma karanA chor3a diyA hotA hai  /  sUtra - 242 yaha to jagata ke sAre
jIva kA saMkSepa se duHkha batAyA  /  he gautama ! mAnava jAta meM jo duHkha
rahA hai use sUna sUtra- 243 hara samaya ahasAsa karanevAle seMkar3o taraha ke
duHkha se udvega pAnevAle aura Uba jAnevAle kucha mAnava vairAgya nahIM paate|
sUtra - 244-245 _ saMkSepa se mAnava ko do taraha kA duHkha hotA hai, eka
zArIrika dUsarA mAnasika  /  aura phira donoM ke ghora pracaMDa aura mahAraudra
aise tIna-tIna prakAra hote haiM  /  eka muharta meM jisakA aMta ho use ghora
duHkha kahA hai| kucha dera bIca meM vizrAma-ArAma mile to ghora pracaMDa duHkha
kahalAtA hai  /  jisameM vizrAnti binA hara eka vakta meM eka samAna duHkha
hamezA sahanA pdd'e| use ghora pracaMDa mahAraudra kahate haiN| sUtra - 246
mAnava jAtime ghora duHkha hai  /  tiryaMcagati meM ghora pracaMDa dukha hai
aura he gautama ! nAraka ke jIva kA dukha ghora pracaMr3a mahAraudra hotA hai|
sUtra - 247 mAnava ko tIna prakAra kA duHkha hotA hai  /  jaghanya, madhyama
aura uttama  /  tiryaMca ko jaghanya duHkha nahIM hotA, nAraka ko utkRSTa duHkha
hotA hai| sUtra-248-250 mAnava ko jo jaghanya duHkha ho vo do taraha kA jAnanA-
sUkSma aura bAdara  /  dUsare bar3e duHkha vibhAga rahita jAnanA  /  samUrchima
mAnava ko sUkSma aura deva ke lie bAdara duHkha hotA hai  /  maharddhika deva ko
cyavanakAla se bAdara mAnasika duHkha ho hukuma uThAnevAle sevaka-Abhiyogika
deva ko janma se lekara jIvana ke anta taka mAnasika bAdara duHkha hotA hai  /
deva ko zArIrika duHkha nahIM hotA  /  devatA kA vajra samAna ati balavAna
vaikriya hRdaya hotA hai| varanA mAnasika duHkha se 100 Tukar3e hokara usakA
hRdaya bhagna hotA hai| sUtra - 251-252 bAkI ke do hisse rahita vo madhyama aura
uttama duHkha  /  aise duHkha garbhaja mAnava ke lie mAno  /  anaginata sAla kI
AyuvAle yugalIyA ko vimadhyama taraha kA duHkha ho  /  ginata sAla ke Ayu vAle
mAnava ko utkRSTa duHkha  /  sUtra - 253 aba duHkha ke arthavAle paryAya zabda
kahA hai  /  asukha, vedanA, vyAdhi, darda, duHkha, anivRtti, aNarAga (becainI)
arati, kleza Adi kaIM ekArthika paryAya zabda duHkha ke lie istamAla kie jAte
haiN| adhyayana-2 uddezaka-2 sUtra-254 zArIrika aura mAnasika aise do bhedavAle
duHkha batAe, usameM aba he gautama ! vo zArIrika duHkha ati spaSTatayA kahatA
hU~  /  use tuma ekAgratA se sUno  /  sUtra - 255-262 kezAgra kA lAkha-
kraur3avAM bhAga ho kevala utane hisse ko chue to bhI nirdoSa vRttivAle
kuMthujIva ko itanA darda hotA hai ki yadi hameM koI karavata se kATe yA hRdaya
yA mastaka ko zastra se bhede to hama thara-thara kA~pe, vaise muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 18

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtrāṅka**  The
Kunthuā, with all its parts, experiences intense pain both internally and
externally from mere touch. Its body starts to tremble, and being unable to
speak, it cannot express its pain. But its mental and physical suffering is
immense, like a burning fire. It thinks, "What is this? I have received this
heavy, painful suffering. I am taking long, hot breaths. When will this
suffering end? When will I be freed? What should I do to be free from this
suffering? Where should I run? What should I do to alleviate the suffering and
attain happiness? Or what should I cover myself with? What should I eat?" Due to
the actions of these three classes, it is trapped in the intense suffering of
Mahāduḥkha. It experiences the pain up to the Saṅkhyātī Āvalikā, and thinks, "I
have an itch. This itch will not subside in any way." Sūtra - 263-265  **This
determined human, what does he do now? O Gautama! Listen now. If the Kunthuā's
life had not gone elsewhere, he would have scratched and scratched, killing the
Kunthuā's life. Or he would have rubbed his body against the wall, causing the
Kunthuā's life to suffer until death. While scratching the dying Kunthuā, that
human is certainly in a state of extreme Roudra Dhyāna. Consider this: if that
human were to know the nature of Ārta and Roudra, then such a scratcher is a
pure Ārta Dhyāna practitioner. Sūtra - 266**  He who dwells in Roudra Dhyāna
binds himself to the highest Naraka Ayusha, and the Ārta Dhyāna practitioner
earns misfortune, femininity, unmanliness, and animal birth. Sūtra - 267-269
The restless human, desiring to be free from the itch caused by the touch of the
Kunthuā's foot, experiences the following state. He says, "My beauty is gone."
He is extremely miserable, grief-stricken, anxious, empty-minded, distressed,
foolish, troubled by suffering, slow, taking long breaths, agitated in mind, and
due to incessant suffering, he binds himself to the appropriate karma of an
inauspicious animal and hellish being, and wanders in the cycle of births. Sūtra
- 270  In this way, if the soul, through the power of Kṣayopaśama, overcomes the
suffering caused by the Kunthuā, and for a moment attains equanimity and does
not scratch the Kunthuā's life, then consider him to have crossed the great
suffering. Sūtra - 271-275  He does not harm the helpless being, but makes it
happy, and therefore experiences great joy. With a healthy mind, he thinks and
reflects, "I have given refuge to a being." And then he thinks, "Now I have
attained liberation and peace. I have destroyed the sinful karma and suffering
caused by scratching. By scratching and harming that being, I do not know
whether I will enter Roudra Dhyāna or Ārta Dhyāna. By multiplying the suffering
of Roudra and Ārta Dhyāna, I will reach infinite suffering. I will suffer
continuously, day and night, without a moment's respite. I will suffer in hell
and animal realms, like an ocean of suffering, for countless eons. At that time,
my heart will become like a liquid, and I will feel as if I am being melted by
the fire of suffering." Sūtra - 276  When suffering the pain caused by touching
the Kunthuā, he thinks in his mind, "It would be good if this suffering were not
there." But at that time, he should contemplate, "How should I count the
suffering of this itch caused by the touch of the Kunthuā?"  Muni Dīparatnasāgar
Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi Translation Page 19

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka kuMthuA
ke sarva aMga kevala chUne se use bhItara aura bAhara bhArI pIr3A hotI hai  /
usa ke zarIra meM kaMpArI hone lage, vo parAdhIna vAcA rahita hone se vedanA
nahIM batA sakate  /  lekina bhArA huA agni sulage vaise usakA mAnasika aura
zArIrika duHkha atizaya hotA hai  /  socate haiM ki yaha kyA hai ? mujhe yaha
bhArI darda denevAlA duHkha prApta huA hai, lambe uSNa nisA~se lete haiM  /
yaha duHkha kA anta kaba hogA ? kaba chUTakArA milegA ? isa duHkhasaMkaTa se
mukta hone ke lie kyA karU~? kahA~ bhAga jAUM? kyA karU~ ki jisase duHkha dUra
ho aura sukha mile? yA kyA AcchAdana karU~? kyA pathya karU~? aise tIna kakSAke
vyApArake kAraNa tIvra mahAduHkhake saMkaTameM Akara pha~sA hU~, saMkhyAtI
AvalikA taka maiM klezAnubhava bhUgatuM, samajhatA hU~ ki yaha mujhe khujalI AI
hai, kisI taraha yaha khujalI zAnta nahIM hogii| sUtra - 263-265 _ yaha
adhyavasAyavAlA mAnava aba kyA karatA hai vo he gautama ! tuma sUno aba yadi usa
kuMthu kA jIva kahIM ora calA gayA na hotA to vo khujalI khujalAte khujalAte usa
kuMthu ke jIva ko mAra DAlate haiM  /  yA dIvAra ke sAtha apane zarIra ko ghise
yAni kuMthu kA jIva kleza pAe yAvat mauta ho, marate hue kuMthuA para khujalAte
hue vo mAnava nizcaya se ati raudra dhyAna meM par3A hai  /  aisA samajho yadi
vo mAnava Artta aura raudra ke svarUpa ko jAnanevAlA ho to aisA khujalAnevAlA
zuddha ArtadhyAna karanevAlA hai aise smjho|| sUtra-266 usameM hI raudradhyAna
meM vartatA ho vo utkRSTa narakAyuSa bA~dhe aura Arta dhyAnavAlA durbhagapana,
strIpana, nApuruSapana aura tiryaMcapana upArjana kre| sUtra - 267-269 kuMthuA
ke pA~va ke sparza se utpanna huI khujalI se mukta hone kI abhilASAvAlA becaina
mAnava phira jo avasthA pAtA hai vo kahate haiM  /  lAvaNya calA gayA hai aisA
atidIna, zokamagna, udvegavAlA, zUnya manavAlA, trasta, mUr3ha, duHkha se
parezAna, dhIme, lambe niHsAse chor3anevAlA, citta se Akula, avizrAMta duHkha ke
kAraNa se azubha tiryaMca aura nArakI ke ucita karma bA~dhakara bhava paramparA
meM bhramaNa kregaa| sUtra - 270 isa prakAra karma ko kSayopazama se kuMthuA ke
nimitta se utpanna hue duHkha ko kisI taraha se AtmA ko majabUta banAkara yadi
palabhara samabhAva pAe aura kuMthu jIva kona khujalAe vo mahAkleza ke pAra huA
smjho| sUtra-271-275 zaraNa rahita usa jIva ko kleza na dekara sukhI kiyA,
isalie ati harSa pAe  /  aura svastha cittavAlA hokara soce-mAne ki yadi eka
jIva ko abhayadAna diyA aura phira socane lage ki aba maiM nivRtti-zAMti prApta
huaa| khujalAne se utpanna honevAlA pApakarma duHkha ko bhI maiMne naSTa kiyA  /
khujalAne se aura usa jIva kI virAdhanA hone se maiM apaneApa nahIM jAna sakatA
ki maiM raudra dhyAna meM jAtA yA Arta dhyAna meM jAtA ? raudra aura Arta dhyAna
se usa duHkha kA varga guNAMka karane se anantAnanta duHkha taka pahu~ca jAe  /
eka vakta ke bhI AMtarA rahita satata jaisA dina ko aisA rAta ko lagAtAra duHkha
bhugatate hue mujhe bIca meM thor3I zAnti bhI na mila sake, naraka aura tiryaMca
gati meM aisA duHkha sAgaropama ke aura asaMkhyAtakAla taka bhugatanA par3e aura
usa vakta hRdaya rasarUpa hokara duHkharUpa agni se jaise pIgala jAtA ho aisA
ahasAsa kare  /  sUtra - 276 kuMthuA ko chUkara upArjana kie duHkha bhugatane ke
vakta mana meM aisA soce ki yaha duHkha na ho to sundara, lekina usa vakta
ciMtavana karanA cAhie ki isa kuMthu ke sparza se utpanna honevAlI khujalI kA
duHkha mujhe kauna-se hisAba meM gine jAe? muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 19

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth' Study/Purpose/Sūtrāṅka Sūtra-277
The pain of the touch of a Kunthuā or itching is only mentioned here as a
symptom. In the world, everyone experiences pain directly. Even though they are
aware of it, some beings do not know, therefore I say. Sūtra-278-279 Secondly,
however, the most terrible pain is experienced by all beings in the world. O
Gautama! How many pains are there to be described here? In birth after birth,
only so much is spoken by the tongue, "Kill, strike," the fruit of those words
alone, and the sinful karma that arises from them, I say. Sūtra-280-283 Wherever
it is born, there, in many Bhava-vana, it always wanders, killing, beating, and
crushing. If it breaks the limbs, eyes, ears, nose, waist, bones, etc., of any
being, or of an insect, butterfly, etc., or if it approves of someone who does
so, then, by the arising of that karma, it will be ground in a millstone or in
such a machine, just as sesame seeds are ground. In this way, it will receive a
succession of pain for one, two, three, twenty, thirty, or a hundred, a
thousand, a lakh, not just a number, but until the end of Bhava. Sūtra-284-286
If, out of carelessness or ignorance, someone speaks falsely due to the fault of
envy, and utters words that are unpleasant and harmful to the listener, if, out
of pride in the cunning of Kāmadeva, they speak repeatedly with prejudice, or if
they are called so or approve of it, if they speak falsely, unpleasantly, and
harmfully out of anger, greed, fear, or laughter, then, by the arising of that
karma, they will be dumb, ugly-mouthed, foolish, sick, and fruitless-spoken, in
every Bhava, they will be repeatedly branded as a liar, even though they are
light and small, and well-behaved. Sūtra-287 If truthful words are spoken for
the benefit of the Jīvanikāya, those words are blameless, and even if they are
perhaps false, the blame of falsehood does not attach. Sūtra-288 In this way,
knowing the fruits of theft, etc., the loss of wealth acquired in this Bhava or
in a previous birth by performing karma like farming, etc., is seen to be due to
sin. Study-2 Purpose-3 Sūtra-289-291 In the same way, some, having suffered the
consequences of sexual misconduct, come into the human womb for an infinite
time. Even in humanhood, some people have weak digestion, and they find it
difficult to digest food. If they eat a little more food, their stomach hurts.
Or they are thirsty all the time, and perhaps they die on the way. They want to
speak very much, but no one sits near them, they cannot sit still in any place
comfortably, they sit with difficulty, even if they find a place, they do not
find any welcome because they are devoid of art and science, that poor soul
cannot even sleep. Sūtra-292-293 In this way, due to the fault of attachment and
beginning, they are bound to the life of hell, and they suffer the intense pain
of hell for the duration of the thirty-three Sagaropama. No matter how much they
are satisfied, they are not satisfied even after eating that much food, just as
a traveler does not find peace, in the same way, this poor soul is not satisfied
even after eating. Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi
Anuvāda Page 20

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra-277
kuMthuA ke sparza kA yA khujalI kA duHkha yahA~ kevala upalakSaNa se batAyA  /
saMsAra meM sabako duHkha to pratyakSa hI hai| usakA ahasAsa hone ke bAvajUda
bhI kucha prANI nahIM jAnate isalie kahatA huuN| sUtra - 278-279 dUsare lekina
mahAghora duHkha sarva saMsArI jIva ko hote haiM  /  he gautama ! vo kitane
duHkha yahA~ bayAna karanA? janma-janmAntara meM kevala vAcA se itanA hI bole
ki, "haNa lo-mAro'' utane vacana mAtra kA jo yahA~ phala aura pApakarma kA udaya
hotA hai vo kahatA huuN| sUtra-280-283 jahA~-jahA~ vo utpanna hotA hai
vahA~-vahA~ kaIM bhava-vana meM hamezA maranevAlA, pITanevAlA, kUTanevAlA hamezA
bhramaNa karatA hai  /  jo kisI prANI ke yA kIr3e titalI Adi jIva ke aMga upAMga
A~kha, kAna, nAsikA, kamara, haDDiyA~ Adi zarIra ke avayava ko tor3a de, agara
tur3avA de yA aisA karanevAle ko acchA mAne to vo kie karma ke udaya se ghANI-
cakkI yA vaise yaMtra meM jaise tala pIle jAe vaise vo bhI caka yA vaise yaMtra
meM pIlA jAegA  /  isa taraha eka, do, tIna, bIsa, tIsa yA so, hajAra, lAkha
nahIM lekina saMkhyAtA bhava taka duHkha kI paramparA prApta kregaa| sUtra -
284-286 pramAda yA ajJAna se agara irSyA doSa se jo koI asatya vacana bolatA
hai, sAmanevAle ko acche na lagane vAle aniSTa vacana sUnAte haiM-kAmadeva ke
agara zaThapana ke abhimAna se durAgraha se bAra-bAra bole, kahalAe yA usakI
anumodanA kare, krodha se lAlaca se, bhaya se, hAsya se, asatya, apriya, aniSTa
vacana bole to usa karma ke udaya se gUMgA, bUre mu~havAlA, mUrakha, bimAra,
niSphala vacanavAlA hara eka bhava meM apanI hI ora se lAghava-laghupana, acche
vyavahAravAlA hone ke bAvajUda hara eka jagaha bAra-bAra jhUThe kalaMka pAnevAlA
hotA hai| sUtra-287 jIvanikAya ke hita ke lie yathArtha vacana bolA gayA ho vo
vacana nirdoSa hai aura zAyada-asatya ho to bhI asatya kA doSa nahIM lgtaa|
sUtra - 288 isa prakAra corI Adi ke phala jAnanA, kheta Adi Arambha ke karma
karake prApta dhana kI isa bhava meM yA pUrva janma meM kie pApa se hAni hotI
dikhatI hai| adhyayana-2 uddezaka-3 sUtra - 289-291 usa prakAra maithuna ke doSa
se sthAvarapana bhugatakara kucha anantakAla mAnava yoni meM Ae  /  mAnavapana
meM bhI kucha logoM kI hojarI maMda hone se muzkila se AhAra pAcana ho  /
zAyada thor3A jyAdA AhAra bhojana kare to peTa meM darda hotA hai  /  yA to
pala-pala pyAsa lage, zAyada rAste meM unakI mauta ho jAe  /  bolanA bahuta cAhe
isalie koI pAsa meM na biThAe, sukha se kisI sthAna para sthira na baiTha sake,
muzkila se baiThe, sthAna mile to bhI kalA-vijJAna rahita hone se kahIM AvakAra
na mile, pApa udayavAlA vo becArA nidrA bhI na pA sake  /  sUtra- 292-293 isa
prakAra parigraha aura Arambha ke doSa se narakAyuSa bA~dhakara utkRSTa taiMtIsa
sAgaropama ke kAla taka nArakI kI tIvra vedanA se pIr3ita hai| cAhe kitanA bhI
tRpta ho utanA bhojana karane ke bAvajUda bhI saMtoSa nahIM hotA, musAphira ko
jisa taraha zAnti nahIM milatI usI taraha yaha becArA bhojana karane ke bAda bhI
tRpta nahIM hotaa| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 20

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth' Study/Purpose/Sūtrāṅka Sūtra-
294-295 Due to the faults of kṣaya like anger, etc., having obtained the poison
of sight, serpent poison, and the poison of sight, and then practicing fierce
meditation, one becomes a mithyādrṣṭi. The mithyādrṣṭi, while in the human
state, being cunning, deceitful, scheming, and pretentious, for a long time,
showing their importance to people, while deceiving them, obtained the state of
a tiryañc. Sūtra-296-298 Here too, they become the recipient of many diseases,
sorrows, and grief. Overwhelmed by poverty and distress, they are hated by many.
Due to the faults of the arising of their karma, they are always anxious, their
bodies are weak, and they are always burning with the flames of envy and sorrow.
Such ignorant, childish beings are harassed by many sorrows. The fault lies in
their bad character. Therefore, who should they be angry with? Sūtra - 299-300
In this way, by breaking vows and rules, by breaking one's character, by
indulging in unrestraint, by practicing the false path of utsūtraprūpaṇā, by
acting contrary to the commands of the Lord in many ways, by indulging in
careless conduct, by doing something with the mind, or something with speech, or
something with the body alone, by causing it to be done, and by approving it,
the fault arises from the careless conduct of the mind, speech, and body.
Sūtra-301 This fault that arises cannot be purified without proper condemnation,
reproach, criticism, pratikramṇa, and atonement. Sūtra - 302 While remaining
with the śalya, for countless times, in the womb, for 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 months,
their bones, hands, feet, and head do not form, even before that, they dissolve
within the womb, meaning the womb melts away. Sūtra-303-306 Despite obtaining
human birth, they become afflicted with leprosy, tuberculosis, etc., even while
alive, they have worms in their body. Many flies sit on their body, buzz and
fly, all parts of their body always rot, their bones become weak, etc., they are
overwhelmed by such sorrows, they become extremely shy, bad, and contemptible,
causing anxiety to many people, they cause unwanted anxiety to their close
relatives and friends. Due to such a particular result of determination, they
obtain the state of a ghost or a demon due to the lack of desire and the
exhaustion of karma. Due to the śalya of the previous birth, due to such a
particular determination, they are thrown far away in all ten directions by the
karma earned in many births, where food and water are difficult to obtain, where
even breathing is not possible, they are born in such a desolate forest.
Sūtra-307-309 Or they are born as earthworms, attached to each other's limbs,
confused in intoxication, not knowing when the sun rises and sets. They
experience the state of existence and the state of the body as earthworms there,
and then they obtain humanity, but they are born as eunuchs. Being eunuchs, they
bear the extremely cruel, terrible, and fierce consequences, and due to the wind
of those consequences, they burn, fall, and die, and after death, they are born
in the state of a plant. Sūtra - 310-313 Having obtained the state of a plant,
they spend countless eons with their feet up and their mouth down, unable to
obtain the state of being without senses. After experiencing the state of
existence and the state of the body as a plant, they later obtain the state of
one, two, three, four, (five) senses.  Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kr̥t (Mahānishīth)
Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda Page 21

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra-
294-295 krodhAdika kaSAya ke doSa se gho AzIviSa dRSTiviSa sarpapana pAkara,
usake bAda raudradhyAna karanevAlA mithyAdRSTi hotA hai, mithyAdRSTi vAle
mAnavapana meM dhUrta, chala, prapaMca, daMbha Adi lambe arase taka karake apanI
mahattA logoM ko dikhAte hue usa chala karate hue unhoMne tiryaMcapana paayaa|
sUtra-296-298 yahA~ bhI kaIM vyAdhi roga, duHkha aura zoka kA bhAjana bane  /
daridratA aura kleza se parAbhavita honevAlA kaIM logoM kI napharata pAtA hai|
usake karma ke udaya ke doSa se hamezA phikra se kSINa honevAle dehavAlA irSA-
viSAda samAna agni jvAlA se hamezA dhaNadhaNa-jala rahe zarIravAle hote haiM  /
aise ajJAna bAla-jIva kaIM duHkha se hairAnaparezAna hote haiM  /  usameM unake
duzcaritra kA hI doSa hotA hai| isalie vo yahA~ kisa para gussA kare? sUtra -
299-300 isa taraha vrata-niyama ko tor3ane se, zIla ke khaMDana se, asaMyama meM
pravartana karane se, utsUtraprarUpaNA mithyA mArga kI AcaraNA-pavartAva se, kaI
taraha kI prabhu kI AjJA se viparIta AcaraNa karane se, pramAdAcaraNa sevana se,
kucha mana se yA kucha vacana se yA kucha akelI kAyA se karane se, karavAne se
aura anumodana karane se mana, vacana, kAyA ke yoga kA pramAdAcaraNa sevana se-
doSa lagatA hai| sUtra-301 yaha laganevAle doSa kI vidhivata trividha se niMdA,
garhA, AlocanA, pratikramaNa, prAyazcitta kie binA doSa kI zuddhi nahIM hotii|
sUtra - 302 zalyasahita rahane se ananta bAra garbha meM 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 mAsa
taka usakI haDDiyA~, hAtha, pA~va, mastaka AkRti na bane, usake pahale bhI
garbha ke bhItara vilaya ho jAtA hai yAni garbha pIgala jAtA hai| sUtra-303-306
mAnava janma milane ke bAvajUda vaha kor3ha-kSaya Adi vyAdhivAlA bane, jindA
hone ke bAvajUda bhI zarIra meM kRmi ho  /  kaIM makkhiyA~ zarIra para baiThe,
baNabaNakara ur3e, hamezA zarIra ke sabhI aMga sar3a jAe, haDDiyA~ kamajhora
bane Adi aise duHkha se parAbhava pAnevAlA ati zarmIlA, bUrA, garhaNIya kaIM
logoM ko udvega karavAnevAlA bane, najadIkI riztedAroM ko aura bandhuoM ko bhI
anacAhA udvega karavAnevAlA hotA hai  /  aise adhyavasAya-pariNAma vizeSa se
akAma-nirjarA se vo bhUta-pizAcapana pAe  /  pUrvabhava ke zalya se usa taraha
ke adhyavasAya vizeSa se kaIM bhava ke upArjana kie gae karma se dazoM dizA meM
dUra-dUra pheMkA jAe ki jahA~ AhAra aura jala kI prApti muzkila ho, sA~sa bhI
nahIM lI jAe, aise virAna araNya meM utpanna ho  /  sUtra-307-309 yA to eka-
dUsare ke aMga-upAMga ke sAtha jur3e hue hoM, moha-madirA meM cakacUra banA,
sUrya kaba udaya aura asta hotA hai usakA jise patA nahIM calatA aise pRthvI
para gola kRmipana se utpanna hote haiM  /  kRmipana kI vahA~ bhavadazA aura
kAyadazA bhugatakara kabhI bhI mAnavatA pAte hue lekina napuMsaka utpanna hotA
hai  /  napuMsaka hokara ati krUra-ghora-raudra pariNAma kA vahana karate aura
usa pariNAmarUpa pavana se jalakara-gIrakara mara jAtA hai aura marakara
vanaspati-kAya meM janma letA hai| sUtra - 310-313 vanaspatipana pAkara pA~va
Upara aura mu~ha nIce rahe vaise hAlAta meM anantakAla bItAte hue beindriyapana
na pA sake vanaspatipana kI bhava aura kAyadazA bhugatakara bAda meM eka, do,
tIna, cAra, (pA~ca) indriyapana pAe  /  pUrva kie muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 21

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishītha'  If due to the fault of
Pāpaśalya, one is born in the realm of Tiryancha, even then one experiences the
births of Mahāmātsya, predatory birds, bulls like Saṇḍha, lions, etc. There, due
to the special consequence of extremely cruel actions like eating meat, killing
five-sense beings, etc., one descends deeper and deeper, even reaching the
seventh Naraka. Sūtra-314-315  There, after experiencing such great and terrible
suffering for a long time, one is born again in the realm of cruel Tiryancha,
performs cruel actions, and returns to Naraka. In this way, one experiences the
cycle of birth in Naraka and Tiryancha, experiencing various kinds of great
suffering. Even after crores of years, one would not have the strength to
describe the suffering. Sūtra-316-318  After that, one experiences births as
donkeys, camels, bulls, etc., carrying loads, bearing burdens, enduring the pain
of being hit with spiked wood, getting stuck in mud while carrying loads,
enduring the suffering of heat, cold, and rain, being killed, bound, having ears
and noses pierced for marking, being branded, enduring insults, being yoked and
forced to walk together, being beaten with whips, goads, etc., constantly
experiencing terrible suffering, day and night, throughout life. One experiences
this and many other groups of suffering for a long time, and while suffering,
with a tormented mind, one barely gives up the breath. Sūtra-319-323  Then, due
to some special auspicious determination, one may attain human birth. But even
after becoming a human, due to the fault of the previous Śalya, one is born
poor. There, one is surrounded by diseases like leprosy, scabies, etc., and
everyone considers it auspicious to not see them. One's heart burns with the
strong desire to seize the wealth of others. One dies without achieving success
in life. Relying on special determination, one may wander in the realm of
stationary beings like earth, or in the realm of two, three, four, or five-sense
beings, experiencing such extremely fierce, terrible, and great suffering. (O
Gautama!) That being wanders, experiencing unbearable pain in all four realms of
existence, and experiences the birth and body condition in the realm of snakes.
Sūtra-324  One who has consumed Śalya or the fault of sin in a previous birth,
due to that, wanders in all four realms, experiencing birth in each realm,
various diseases, pain, suffering, sorrow, poverty, distress, false accusations,
the suffering of being in the womb, etc., like burning in fire. That unfortunate
being cannot attain the state of Nirvāṇa, the proper joy of the great festival,
the power of Samarthya Yoga, the liberation-bestowing chariot of eighteen
thousand Śīlāṅga, the destruction of all sins and eight types of karma, the
characteristics of non-violence, the state of being free from attachment, the
all-knowing Dharma, and the state of Bodhi Samyaktvā. Sūtra-325-327  Relying on
special consequences, a soul may attain Bodhi after a long time, after countless
transformations of Pudgala. Such a rare Bodhi Ratna, which destroys all
suffering, is attained with great difficulty. One who becomes negligent after
attaining such a Bodhi Ratna, returns to the same realm, in the same order, on
the same path, and experiences the same suffering. Sūtra-328-329  In that way,
one experiences the transformation of all Pudgala, all Paryāya, all Varṇāntara,
all Gandha, Rūpa, Rasa, Sparśa, and Saṃsthāna, in one's own body form. One
experiences the transformation of Bhavasthiti and Kāyasthiti, and all the states
of existence in the world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka hae
pApazalya ke doSa se tiryaMcapana meM utpanna ho to bhI mahAmatsya, hiMsaka
paMchI, sA~r3ha jaise baila, zera Adi ke bhava pAe  /  vahA~ bhI ati krUratara
pariNAma vizeSa se mA~sAhAra, paMcendriya jIva kA vadha Adi pApakarma karane ke
kAraNa se gaharA utaratA jAe ki sAtavIM narakI taka bhI pahu~ca jaae|
sUtra-314-315 vahA~ lambe arase taka usa taraha ke mahAghora duHkha kA ahasAsa
karake phira se krUratiryaMca ke bhava meM paidA hokara krUra pApakarma karake
vApasa nArakI meM jAe isa taraha naraka aura tiryaMca gati ke bhava kA bArI-bArI
parAvartana karate hue kaI taraha ke mahAduHkha kA ahasAsa karate hu hue ke jo
duHkha haiM unakA varNana karor3a sAla bAda bhI kahane ke lie zaktimAna na ho
ske| sUtra-316-318 usake bAda gadhe, UMTa, baila Adi ke bhava-bhavAntara karate
hue gAr3I kA boja uThAnA, bhAravahana karanA, kIlakayukta lakar3I ke mAra kA
darda sahanA, kIcar3a meM pA~va pha~sa jAe vaise hAlAta meM bojha uThAnA  /
garmI, ThaMDI, bArIsa ke duHkha sahanA, vadha ba~dhana, aMkana-nizAnI karane ke
lie kAna-nAka chedana, nilchana, DAma sahanA, ghusarI meM jur3akara sAtha
calanA, paroNI, cAbUka, aMkuza Adi se mAra khAne se lagAtAra bhayAnaka duHkha
jaisA rAta ko aisA dina meM aise sarvakAla jIvana paryanta duHkha sahanA yaha
aura usake jaise dUsare kaIM duHkhasamUha ko cIrakAla paryanta mahasUsa karake
duHkha se pIr3ita ArtadhyAna karate hue mahA muzkila se prANa kA tyAga karatA
hai| sUtra - 319-323 aura phira vaise kisI zubha adhyavasAya vizeSa se kisI bhI
taraha manuSyatva pAe lekina abhI pUrva kie gae zalya ke doSa se manuSya meM Ane
ke bAda bhI janma se hI daridra ke vahA~ utpanna hotA hai| vahA~ vyAdhi, khasa,
khajalI Adi roga se ghire hae rahatA hai aura saba loga use na dekhane meM
kalyANa mAnate haiM  /  yahA~ logoM kI lakSmI har3apa lene kI dRr3ha manobhAvanA
se dila meM jalatA rahatA hai  /  janma saphala kie binA vApasa mara jAe
adhyavasAya vizeSa ko Azrita karake vaise pRthvI Adi sthAvarakAya meM ghUme yA
to do, tIna, cAra, pA~ca indriyavAle bhava meM usa taraha kA ati raudra ghora
bhayAnaka mahAduHkha bhugatate hue cAroM gati samAna saMsAra aTavI meM duHsaha
darda sahate hue (he gautama !) vo jIva sarpa yoni meM bhava aura kAya dazA
khapAte hue ghUmatA rahatA hai| sUtra-324 jo Age eka bAra pUrvabhava meM zalya
yA pApa doSa kA sevana kiyA thA, usa kAraNa se cAroM gati meM bhramaNa karate
hue aura hara eka bhava meM janmadhAraNa, aneka vyAdhi, darda, roga, zoka,
daridratA, kleza, jhUThe kalaMka pAnA, garbhAvAsa Adi ke duHkha samAna agni meM
jalanevAlA becArA ''kyA nahIM pA sakatA'' vo batAtA hai  /  nirvANa gamana ucita
Ananda mahotsava svarUpa sAmarthyayoga, mokSa dilAnevAlA aThAraha hajAra zIlAMga
ratha aura sarva pAparAzi evaM ATha taraha ke karma ke vinAza ke lie samartha
aise ahiMsA ke lakSaNavAlA vItarAga sarvajJakathita dharma aura bodhisamyaktva
nahIM pA sktaa| sUtra- 325-327 pariNAma vizeSa ko Azrita karake koI AtmA lAkha
pudgala parivartana ke lambe arase ke bAda mahA musIbata se bodhi prApta kare  /
aisA ati durlabha sarva duHkha kA kSaya karanevAlA bodhi ratna prApta karake jo
koI pramAda kare vo phira se isa taraha ke pahale batAe usa yoni meM usI krama
meM usI mArga meM jAte haiM aura vaise hI duHkha pAte haiN| sUtra - 328-329 usa
prakAra sarva pudgala ke sarva paryAya sarva varNAntara sarva gaMdharUpa se,
rasarUpa se, sparzapana se, saMsthAnapana se apanI zarIrarUpa meM, pariNAma pAe,
bhavasthiti aura kAyasthiti ke sarvabhAva loka ke lie pariNAmAntara pAe, utane
muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 22

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
Whether one attains enlightenment or not by the time of the cessation of the
reflection of pudgala. Sūtra- 330-331  **Translation**  Thus, one who breaks the
vows and rules, neglects those who break the vows and rules, does not stabilize
them, breaks the conduct, neglects those who break the conduct, violates the
restraint or neglects those who violate the restraint, promotes the wrong path
and does not stop doing so, practices the wrong path and does not stop it even
when capable or neglects it, all of them wander through the four realms of
existence in the order described above. Sūtra - 332-333  If the person in front
of you becomes angry or pleased, talks about death after consuming poison or
expresses fear, even then, always speak in a way that benefits your own side,
speak in a way that benefits yourself or others, such a person who speaks
beneficial words attains enlightenment or purifies the enlightenment they have
already attained. Sūtra - 334-335  Living beings with open āśrava doors are
lubricated by karma due to their nature, state, region, and taste. How can such
a soul, trapped in the eight severe karmas, be freed from suffering? Without
practicing severe austerities, they cannot be freed from the karma they have
created without repenting for their past misdeeds. Sūtra-336-337  Except for the
Siddha soul, the incompetent, and those who remain in the state of
Śaileśīkaraṇa, all worldly souls bind karma every moment. There is no living
being without karma binding. Through good intentions, one binds good karma,
through bad intentions, one binds bad karma, through intense results, one
acquires karma with intense taste and state, and through weak results, one
acquires karma with weak taste and state. Sūtra - 338  The amount of karma that
is accumulated by gathering all the sinful karmas is multiplied by countless
times, and the amount of karma that is accumulated by breaking the conduct and
restraint of austerities and restraint, by promoting the wrong path, by
practicing the wrong path, and by worshipping it. Sūtra - 339  If all giving and
other actions are performed for the benefit of oneself and others, even the
heavy, dense, and impenetrable mass of infinite, great, and heavy sinful karma
will be destroyed. By practicing restraint and austerities, all sinful karma
accumulated over a long period of time is destroyed. Sūtra-340-344  If the
āśrava doors are bound with the purity of samyaktva, and one remains vigilant
there, then one should bind less there and perform a lot of nirjarā. When the
āśrava doors are bound, one should not break the commands of the Lord and remain
firm in knowledge, vision, and conduct, then one should exhaust all the karma
bound before and bind karma with a weak state. Even those karmas that have not
yet arisen should be eradicated by enduring severe hardships and then achieving
victory over karma. In this way, by stopping the cause of āśrava, by abandoning
all desires, by engaging in self-study, meditation, and yoga, and then by
immersing oneself in the austerities of patience and heroism, one should
practice complete restraint with mind, speech, and body, then one will not bind
superior karma and will perform infinite nirjarā of karma. Sūtra-345-348

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka pudagala
parAvartana kAla taka bodhi pAe yA na paae| sUtra- 330-331 isa prakAra vrata-
niyama kA bhaMga kare, vrata-niyama tor3anevAle kI upekSA kare, use sthira na
kare, zIla-khaMDana kare, agara zIla khaMDana karanevAle kI upekSA kare, vo
saMyama virAdhanA kare yA saMyama virAdhaka kI upekSA kare, unmArga kA
pravartana kare aura aisA karate hue na roke, utsUtra kA AcaraNa kare aura
sAmarthya hote hue bhI use na roke yA upekSA kare, vo saba Age varNita krama se
cAroM gatirUpa saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karatA hai| sUtra - 332-333 sAmanevAlA
AdamI krodhita bane yA toSAyamAna bane, jhahara khAkara maraNa kI bAteM kare yA
bhaya batAtA ho to bhI hamezA svapakSa ko guNa karanevAlA khuda ko yA dUsaroM kA
hita ho vaisA hI bhASA bolanI isa taraha hitakArI vacana bolanevAlA bodha pAe yA
pAe hue bodhi ko nirmala karatA hai| sUtra - 334-335 khule Azrava dvAravAle jIva
prakRti, sthiti, pradeza aura rasa se karma kI cikanAIvAle hote haiM  /  vaisI
AtmA karma kA kSaya yA nirjarA kara sake isa taraha ghora ATha karma meM mala
meM phaMse hue sarva jIva ko duHkha se chUTakArA kisa taraha mile ? pUrva
duSkRtya pApa karma kie ho, usa pApa kA pratikramaNa na kiyA ho aise khuda ke
kie hue karma bhugate binA aghora tapa kA sevana kie binA usa karma se mukta
nahIM ho sakate  /  sUtra-336-337 siddhAtmA, ayogI aura zailezIkaraNa meM rahe
sivAya tamAma saMsArI AtmA haraeka vakta karma bA~dhate haiM  /  karmabaMdha
binA koI jIva nahIM hai  /  zubha adhyavasAya se zubha karma, azubha adhyavasAya
se azubha karmabaMdha, tIvratara pariNAma se tIvratara rasasthitivAle aura maMda
pariNAma se maMdarasa aura alpa sthitivAle karma upArjita kre| sUtra - 338 sarva
pApakarma ikaTThe karane se jitanA rAsir3haga ho, use asaMkhyAta gunA karane se
jitanA karma kA parimANa ho utane karma, tapa, saMyama, cAritra kA khaMDana aura
virAdhanA karane se aura utsUtra mArga kI prarUpaNA, utsUtra mArga kI AcaraNA
aura usakI upAsanA karane se upArjana hotA hai| sUtra - 339 yadi sarva dAnAdi
sva-para hita ke lie AcaraNa kiyA jAe to a-parimita mahA, UMce, bhArI, AMtarA
rahita gADha pApakarma kA Dhaga bhI kSaya ho jAe  /  saMyama-tapa ke sevana se
dIrghakAla ke sarva pApakarma kA vinAza ho jAtA hai| sUtra-340-344 yadi
samyaktva kI nirmalatA sahita AnevAle AzravadvAra baMdha karake jaba vahA~
apramAdI bane taba vahA~ baMdha alpa kare aura kAphI nirjarA kare, AzravadvAra
baMdha karake jaba prabhu kI AjJA kA khaMDana na kare aura jJAna-darzana cAritra
se dRr3ha bane taba pahale ke bAMdhe hue sarva karma khapA de aura alpa
sthitivAle karma bA~dhe, udaya na hae ho vaise vaise karma bhI ghora upasarga
pariSaha sahakara udIraNA karake usakA kSaya kare aura karma para jaya pAe  /
isa prakAra Azrava ke kAraNa ko rokakara sarva AzAtanA kA tyAga karake svAdhyAya
dhyAna yoga meM aura phira dhIra vIra aise tapa meM lIna bane, sampUrNa saMyama
mana, vacana, kAyA se pAlana kare taba utkRSTa baMdha nahIM karatA aura ananta
guNa karma kI nirjarA karatA sUtra-345-348 sarva Avazyaka kriyA meM udyamavanta
bane hae, pramAda, viSaya, rAga, kaSAya Adi ke Alambana rahita bAhya abhyaMtara
sarva saMga se mukta, rAgadveSa moha sahita, niyANA rahita bane, viSaya ke rAga
se nivRtta bane, garbha paramparA se muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha)
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 23

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  Study/Purpose/Sūtrāṅka: Fear
arises, by blocking the Āśrava door, remaining in Kṣamādi Yati Dharma and
Yamaniyamadi, ascending in the category of Śukla Dhyāna, attaining
Śaileśīkaraṇa, then burning and incinerating all the karma bound for a long
time, not binding new minor karma. In the fire of Dhyāna Yoga, five short
syllables are spoken, in that short time, burning and reducing to ashes all the
karma that remains until Bhava. Sūtra - 349-350  Thus, the Jīva, by the power
and strength of Yoga, completely freed from the armor of Karma Kalanka by
tradition, at one time attains eternal, pain-free, disease, old age, and death-
free, where sorrow or poverty is never seen. Always experiencing joy, such a
blissful Śivālaya-Moksha sthāna is attained. Sūtra-351-353  O Gautama! There are
also such Jīvas who, even after binding the Āśrava door and attaining Kṣamādi
Daśavidha Samyama sthāna, etc., experience mixed joy and sorrow. Therefore,
until all eight Karmas are completely eradicated by intense penance and
restraint, the Jīva cannot experience happiness even in dreams. In this world,
all Jīvas continuously suffer without rest. There is not a single moment when
this Jīva has endured the pain that has come to it with equanimity.
Sūtra-354-355  How big is the body of a Kunthuā Jīva? O Gautama! If you think -
smaller than the smallest, even smaller than that, even much smaller than that,
in it is Kunthu, how big is its foot? The foot's edge is only a very small part,
even if that part touches our body or goes on someone's body, it will not cause
us pain. Even if you collect millions of Kunthuā bodies and weigh them on a
small scale, they will not even make a pal (milligram), then how big is the body
of one Kunthuā? We cannot bear the touch of the edge of the foot of such a small
Kunthuā, and Jīvas endure such a state as described above when they touch the
foot's edge. O Gautama! Listen to what kind of feeling should be held during
such pain. Sūtra - 356-365  A small animal like a Kunthuā may roam, move, and
walk on my unclean body, but I will not destroy it by scratching, but protect
it. It will not always be here. Perhaps it will leave in the next moment, it
will not be here in the next moment. Perhaps it will not leave in the next
moment, then O Gautama! This is how one should feel, this Kunthuā is not
attached to me with attachment or hatred towards me, it does not touch me with
anger, envy, jealousy, hatred, or a desire to play. Kunthuā does not climb on
anyone's body out of hatred. It climbs on anyone's body like that. It may be
disabled, a child, another animal, or enter burning fire and well water. It
never thinks that this is my former enemy or my relative, therefore the soul
should think that this is the rise of my Āśātanā-Pāpa. What kind of sorrow of
Āśātanā have I done to this Jīva? This is moving around my body in all
directions, oblique, upward, downward, and in all directions, for the benefit of
my soul, to experience the fruits of the sinful deeds done in the previous birth
or to end that pool of sin. I will endure this pain with equanimity, then my
sinful deeds will end.  Perhaps the Kunthuā is caught by a strong wind while
roaming on the body, then the Kunthuā experiences unbearable physical pain and
the great pain of Raudra and Ārtadhyāna increases. At such a time, think that
even a little pain from the touch of this Kunthuā, you cannot bear it and go
into Ārta Raudra Dhyāna, then due to that pain, you will start Śalya, and you
will have to endure its fruits for a long time, being Śalyavāla in Manoyoga,
Vachanayoga, Kāyayoga, time, Āvalikā, Muhurta. How will you be able to bear such
pain at that time?  Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi
Anuvāda Page 24

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka bhaya
lage, Azrava dvAra kA rodha karake kSamAdi yatidharma aura yamaniyamAdi meM rahA
ho, usa zukla dhyAna kI zreNI meM ArohaNa karake zailezIkaraNa prApta karatA
hai, taba lambe arase se bA~dhA huA samagra karma jalAkara bhasma karatA hai,
nayA alpa karma bhI nahIM bA~dhatA  /  dhyAnayoga kI agni meM pA~ca hrasvAkSara
bole jAe utane kama samaya meM bhava taka TikanevAle samagra karma ko jalAkara
rAkha kara detA hai| sUtra - 349-350 isa prakAra jIva ke vIrya aura sAmarthya
yoga se paramparA se karma kalaMka ke kavaca se sarvathA mukta honevAle jIva eka
samaya meM zAzvata, pIr3A rahita roga, bur3hApA, maraNa se rahita, jisameM kisI
dina duHkha yA dAridra na dekhA jAtA ho  /  hamezA Ananda kA ahasAsa ho vaise
sukhavAlA zivAlaya-mokSasthAna pAtA hai| sUtra-351-353 he gautama ! aise jIva
bhI hote haiM ki jo AzravadvAra bandha kara ke kSamAdi dazavidha saMyama sthAna
Adi pAyA huA ho to bhI duHkha mizrita sukha pAtA hai  /  isalie jaba taka
samagra ATha karma ghora tapa aura saMyama se nirmUlasarvathA jalAe nahIM, taba
taka jIva ko sapane meM bhI sukha nahIM ho sakatA  /  isa jagatameM sarva jIva
ko vizrAnti binA duHkha lagAtAra bhugatanA hotA hai  /  eka samaya bhI aisA
nahIM jisameM isa jIvane AyA huA duHkha samatA se sahA ho sUtra-354-355 kuMthuA
ke jIva kA zarIra kitanA? he gautama ! vo tu yadi soce- choTe se choTA, usase
bhI choTA, usase bhI kAphI alpa usameM kuMthu, usakA pA~va kitanA ? pA~va kI
dhAra to kevala choTe se choTA hissA, usakA hissA bhI yadi hamAre zarIra ko chu
le yA kisI ke zarIra para cale to bhI hamAre duHkha kA kAraNa na bane  /  lAkha
kuMthuA ke zarIra ko ikaTThe karake choTe tarAjU se tola-nApa karake usakA bhI
eka pala (miligrAma) na bane, to eka kuMthu kA zarIra kitanA ho ? aise choTe eka
kuMthuA ke pA~va kI dhAra ke hisse ke sparza ko saha nahIM sakate aura pAdAgra
hisse ko chUne se Age kahe anusAra vaisI dazA jIva sahate haiM  /  he gautama !
vaise duHkha ke samaya kaisI bhAvanA rakhanI vo sUna  /  sUtra - 356-365 kuMthu
samAna choTA jAnavara mere malIna zarIra para bhramaNa kare, saMcAra kare, cale
to bhI usako khujalAkara naSTa na kare lekina rakSaNa kare, yaha hamezA yahA~
nahIM rahegA  /  zAyada dUsare pala meM calA jAe, dUsare pala meM nahIM rhegaa|
zAyada dUsare pala meM na calA jAe to he gautama ! isa prakAra bhAvanA rakhanI,
yaha kuMthu rAga se nahIM basA yA muja para use dveSa nahIM, krodha se, matsara
se, IrSyA se, baira se mujhe u~satA nahIM yA krIr3A karane kI IcchA se muje
DaeNsatA nhiiN| kuMthu vaira bhAva se kisI ke zarIra para nahIM car3atA  /  vo
to kisI ke bhI zarIra para aise hI car3a jAtA hai  /  vikalendriya ho, baccA ho,
dUsare kisI jAnavara ho, yA jalatA huA agni aura vAvar3I ke pAnI meM bhI praveza
kare  /  vo kabhI bhI yaha na soce ki yaha mere pUrva kA bairI hai yA merA
riztedAra hai isalie AtmA ko aisA socanA cAhie ki isameM merI AzAtanA-pApa kA
udaya huA hai |aise jIva ke prati maiMne kauna-sI azAtA kA duHkha kiyA hogA  /
pUrvabhava meM kie gae pApakarma ke phala bhugatane kA yA usa pApa pUMja kA anta
lAne ke lie mere AtmA ke hita ke lie yaha kauna-sA tirachI, Urdhva, adho dizA
aura vidizA meM mere zarIra para idhara-udhara ghUmatA hai  /  isa duHkha ko
samabhAva se sahana karU~gA to mere pApakarma kA anta hogaa| zAyada kuMthu ko
zarIra para ghUmate-ghUmate mahAvAyarA kI jhapaTa lagI ho to usa kuMthu ko
zArIrika dussaha duHkha aura raudra aura ArtadhyAna kA mahAduHkha vRddhi pAe  /
aise vakta meM soco ki isa kuMthuA ke sparza se tujhe thor3A bhI duHkha haA hai
vo bhI tuma saha nahIM sakate aura Arta raudra dhyAna meM calA jAtA hai to usa
duHkha ke kAraNa se tU zalya kA Arambha karake manoyoga, vacanayoga, kAyayoga,
samaya, AvalikA, muhUrta taka zalyavAlA hokara usakA phala tumheM dIrghakAla
taka sahanA par3egA usa vakta vaise duHkha ko tU kisa taraha saha sakegA? muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 24

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number
Sutra-366 How will that suffering be? You will have to endure many births and
rebirths, in the four states of existence and 84 lakh species, enduring
constant, intense, terrifying suffering every moment of the day and night -
Alas! - You will have to lament like "He is dead!" Sutra-367 In the hellish and
animal realms, there is no protector or refuge. The poor soul is alone, with no
one to help their body, and they have to suffer the bitter and harsh fruits of
their sins. Sutra-368 If a hell-being goes to a forest of trees with leaves like
the edge of a sword, seeking shade, the wind will blow the leaves onto their
body, causing it to be cut to pieces. They will drown in the Vaitarani river,
which is full of blood, pus, fat, and hair, and has a foul odor. They will be
ground in a mill, cut limb from limb, embraced by thorny salmali trees, cooked
in a pot, and beaten by the beaks of crows and other birds. They will suffer the
pain of being chewed by lions and other animals, and many other sufferings, all
while being under the control of others. Sutra-369-370 Animals will have their
noses and ears pierced, be slaughtered, bound, and tormented. Their flesh will
be cut, their skin will be peeled, they will be forced to pull carts and plows,
carry heavy loads, and be yoked with sharp plows. They will suffer from hunger
and thirst, have nails hammered into their feet, be bound and branded with
weapons, and have burning substances applied to their eyes. They will endure
many other cruel sufferings, all while being under the control of others.
Sutra-371 You are not able to bear the itching caused by the touch of a worm's
foot, so how will you be able to bear the extremely terrifying suffering of hell
and the animal realm, which is far greater? Sutra-372-375 What is the difference
between the suffering of hell and the animal realm, and the suffering caused by
the touch of a worm's foot? It is said that even if you multiply the atoms of
Mount Meru by infinity, it would still not be equal to the suffering caused by
the touch of a worm's foot. These beings have been longing for happiness for a
long time within the cycle of birth and death, but they only find suffering. And
then, remembering the suffering of the past, they become even more miserable.
Thus, the living being is trapped in this world, full of countless sufferings
and calamities. If they suddenly attain the middle path, they will not let go of
the happiness they have found, but... the soul that does not understand the
difference between what is right and wrong, what is to be done and what is not
to be done, what is beneficial and what is harmful, what is to be served and
what is not to be served, and what is to be practiced and what is not to be
practiced (does not know right and wrong), what will be the state of that poor
soul in the future? Sutra-376 Therefore, having heard this truth, one who wishes
to end suffering should renounce women, possessions, and attachments, and
cultivate self-control and austerity. Sutra-377-384 Even if a woman is sitting
on a separate seat, sleeping, turning her face away, wearing ornaments or not,
not present in person but depicted in a picture, looking at her with
carelessness will attract the weak human being. That is, one cannot help but
feel attachment upon seeing her. Therefore, just as one should immediately avert
their gaze when seeing the midday sun in the summer, one should immediately
avert their gaze when seeing a woman depicted in a painting or a beautifully
adorned woman. It is said that whoever has hands and feet... Muni Diperatnasagar
Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 25

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra-366
vo duHkha kaise hogA? cAra gati aura 84 lAkha yoni svarUpa kaIM bhava aura
garbhAvAsa sahanA par3egA, jisameM rAta-dina ke pratyeka samaya satata ghora,
pracaMDa mahA bhayAnaka duHkha sahanA par3egA - hAhA-are re ! - mara gayA re
aise Akranda karanA pdd'egaa| sUtra-367 nAraka aura tiryaMca gati meM koI rakSA
karanevAlA yA zaraNabhUta nahIM hotA  /  becAre akele-apane zarIra ko kisI
sahAya karanevAlA na mile, vahA~ kaTU aura kaThina virasa pApa ke phala
bhugatanA pdd'e| sUtra-368 nArakI talavAra kI dhAra samAna patravAle per3a ke
vana meM chA~va kI IcchA se jAe to pavana se patte zarIra para bhI par3e yAni
zarIra ke Tukar3e ho  /  lahU, paru, carabI kezavAle durgaMdhayukta pravAhavAlI
vaitaraNI nadI meM DUbanA, yaMtra meM pIlanA, karavata se kaTanA  /
kaMTakayukta zAlmalI per3a ke sAtha AliMgana, kuMbhI meM pakAnA, kaue Adi paMchI
kI coMca kI mAra sahanA, zera Adi jAnavara ke cabAne ke duHkha aura vaise kaIM
duHkha narakagati meM parAdhIna hokara bhugatanA pdd'e| sUtra-369-370 tiryaMca
ko nAka-kAna bIMdhanA, vadha, ba~dhana, AkraMdana karanevAle prANI ke zarIra meM
se mA~sa kATe, camar3I utAre, hala-gAr3I ko khIMcanA, ati bojha sahana karane ke
lie, dhAravAlI paroNI bhoMkanA, bhUkha pyAsa kA, loha kI la, pA~va meM khIlI
lagAI hai, balAtkAra se bA~dhakara zastra se agni ke DAma dekara aMkita kare  /
jalana utpanna karanevAlI cIja ke aMjana A~kha meM lagAe, Adi parAdhInapana ke
nirdayatA se kaIM duHkha tiryaMcabhava meM bhugatanA pdd'e| sUtra-371 kuMthuA ke
pA~va ke sparza se utpanna honevAlI khujalI kA duHkha tU yahA~ sahane ke lie
samartha nahIM banatA to phira Upara kahe gae naraka tiryaMcagati ke ati
bhayAnaka mahAduHkha AeMge taba usakA nistAra-pAra kaise pAeMge? sUtra- 372-375
nArakI aura tiryaMca ke duHkha aura kuMthuA ke pA~va ke sparza kA duHkha vo
donoM duHkha kA aMtara kitanA hai ? to kahate haiM meru parvata ke paramANu ko
ananta gune kie jAe to eka paramANu jitanA bhI kuMthu ke pA~va ke sparza kA
duHkha nahIM hai  /  yaha jIva bhava ke bhItara lambe arase se sukha kI AkAMkSA
kara rahe haiM  /  usameM bhI use duHkha kI prApti hotI hai  /  aura phira
bhUtakAla ke duHkha kA smaraNa karane se vo ati duHkhI ho jAtA hai  /  isa
prakAra kaIM duHkha ke saMkaTa meM rahe lAkha ApadA se bharA aise saMsAra meM
jIva basA hai  /  usameM acAnaka madhyabindu prApta ho jAe to milA haA sukha koI
na jAne de, lekina...jo AtmA pathya aura apathya, kArya aura akArya, hita aura
ahita sevyaasevya aura AcaraNIya - anAcaraNIya ke pharka kA viveka nahIM karatA
(dharma-adharma ko nahIM jAnatA) vo becAre AtmA kI bhAvi meM kaisI sthiti ho ?
sUtra-376 isalie yaha sarva hakIkata sUnakara duHkha kA anta karanevAle ko strI,
parigraha aura Arambha kA tyAga karake saMyama aura tapa kI AsevanA karanI
caahie| sUtra - 377-384 alaga Asana para baiThI huI, zayana meM sotI huI, mu~ha
phirAkara, alaMkAra pahane ho yA na pahane ho, pratyakSa na ho lekina tasavIra
meM batAI ho unako bhI pramAda se dekhe to durbala mAnava ko AkarSaNa karate
haiM  /  yAni dekhakara rAga hue binA nahIM rahatA  /  isalie garmI vakta ke
madhyAhna ke sUrya ko dekhakara jisa taraha dRSTibaMdha ho jAe, vaise strI ko
citrAmaNavAlI dIvAra yA acchI alaMkRta huI strI ko dekhakara turanta najara haTA
lenA  /  kahA hai ki jisake hAtha pA~va muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha)
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 25

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chedasutra-5, 'Mahanisitha'  A brahmacharini should avoid a woman
whose eyes, nose, or lips have been pierced, whose body is ravaged by leprosy,
or who is afflicted by other diseases. One should also avoid an elderly wife, a
young woman whose youthful charms are fading, an unmarried woman of advanced
age, a woman whose husband has gone abroad, a young widow, a woman from the
inner quarters, a nun who preaches the heretical doctrine of self-indulgence, a
prostitute, or a eunuch. Not only these, but also animals like dogs, buffaloes,
cows, donkeys, mules, goats, sheep, and even stone statues of women, adulterous
women, and women afflicted from birth - all such women, whether known or
unknown, who come and go at night or live in secluded places, should be
completely avoided by a brahmacharini.  Sutra 385  O Gautama! One should not
converse or associate with them on the path. Nor should one engage in even brief
conversations with other women. One should not walk with them.  Sutra 386  O
Venerable One! Should one not look at a woman at all? O Gautama! No, one should
not look at or see a woman, whether she is adorned with clothes and ornaments or
not. O Venerable One! Should one not even converse with women? O Gautama! No,
one should not converse with a woman. O Venerable One! Should one not even stay
with a woman for a moment? O Gautama! No, one should not stay with a woman even
for a moment. O Venerable One! Can one walk on the path with a woman? - O
Gautama! A brahmacharini cannot walk on the path alone with a woman.  Sutra 387
O Venerable One! Why do you say that one should not look at a woman's sensitive
parts, not talk to her, not stay with her, and not walk with her alone? O
Gautama! All women are highly excited by intense passion and desire for sensual
pleasures. Their sexual desire is always burning. Their fickle mind is
constantly running towards sensual objects. Their heart is always pained by the
fire of desire, and they constantly pray for sensual pleasures in all
directions. Therefore, they are always eager to fulfill the resolve and desire
of a man.  Therefore, whether the one who sings with a melodious voice is
handsome or ugly, young or old, seen before or unseen, endowed with supernatural
powers or not, has recently gained prosperity or not, is satiated with sensual
pleasures or desirous of them, has an old body or a strong body, is of great
virtue or of low virtue, is of great valor or a coward, is an ascetic or a
householder, is a brahmin or an outcast, of low or high caste - by using the
faculties of hearing, sight, taste, smell, and touch, she will immediately
become focused on acquiring the object of desire. Becoming focused, her mind
will shine.  And then she will be in doubt whether she will get it or not. After
that, perspiration will break out on her body. After that, there will be harm in
this world and the next due to such inauspicious thoughts. The karmic results of
that, more or less, will have to be experienced by her. When that thought goes
out of her mind, she abandons shame, fear, infamy, disgrace, and propriety, and
sits down from a higher place to a lower place. The more she expects a lighter
result from that woman, the more countless time periods and aeons pass.  In
those countless time periods and aeons, the state of karma from the first time,
the second time, the third time, and so on, up to countless, infinite time
periods.  Translated by Muni Deepratan Sagar (Mahanisitha), Agam Sutra - Hindi
Translation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka kaTa gae
ho, kAna, nAka, hoTha chedana hue ho, kor3ha roga ke vyAdhi se sar3a gaI ho  /
vaisI strI ko bhI brahmacArI puruSa kAphI dUra se tyAga kare  /  bur3hI bhAryA
yA jisake pA~ca aMga meM se zRMgAra Tapaka rahA ho vaisI yauvanA, bar3I umra kI
ka~vArI kanyA, paradeza gae hue pativAlI, bAlavidhavA aura aMtaHpura kI strI
svamatta-paramatta ke pAkhaMr3a dharma ko kahanevAlI dIkSita sAdhvI, vezyA yA
napuMsaka aise vijAtIya mAnava ho, utanA hI nahIM lekina tiryaMca, kuttI,
bheMsa, gAya, gadhI, khacarI, bokar3I, gheTI, patthara kI banI strI kI mUrata
ho, vyabhicArI strI, janma se bImAra strI  /  isa taraha se paricita ho yA
anajAna strI ho, cAhe jaisI bhI ho aura rAta ko AtI jAtI hai, dina meM bhI
ekAnta jagaha meM rahatI hai vaise nivAsa sthAna, upAzraya, vasati ko sarva
upAya se atyaMta rUpa se ati dUra se brahmacArI puruSa tyAga kare sUtra - 385 he
gautama ! unake sAtha mArga meM sahavAsa-saMlApa-bAtacIta na karanA, usake sivA
bAkI strIyoM ke sAtha ardhakSaNa bhI vArtAlApa na karanA  /  sAtha mata calanA
/  sUtra-386 he bhagavaMta ! kyA strI kI ora sarvathA najara hI na karanA? he
gautama ! nA, strI kI ora najara nahIM karanI yA nahIM dekhanA, he bhagavaMta !
pahacAnavAlI ho, vastrAlaMkAra se vibhUSita ho vaisI strI ko na dekhanA yA
vastrAlaMkAra rahita ho use na dekhanA ? he gautama ! donoM taraha kI strI ko
mata dekhanA  /  he bhagavaMta ! kyA strIyoM ke sAtha AlApa-saMlApa bhI na kare
? he gautama ! nahIM, strI ke sAtha vArtAlApa bhI mata karanA  /  he bhagavaMta
! strI ke sAtha ardhakSaNa bhI saMvAsa na karanA ? he gautama ! strI ke sAtha
kSaNArdha bhI saMvAsa mata karo  /  he bhagavaMta ! kyA rAste meM strI ke sAtha
cala sakate haiM ? - he gautama ! eka brahmacArI puruSa akelI strI ke sAtha
mArga meM nahIM cala sakatA  /  sUtra-387 he bhagavaMta ! Apa aisA kyoM kahate
haiM ki-strI ke marma aMga-upAMga kI ora najara na karanA, usake sAtha bAta na
karanA, usake sAtha vAsa na karanA, usake sAtha mArga meM akele na calanA? he
gautama ! sabhI strI sarva taraha se ati utkaTa mada aura viSayAbhilApa ke rAga
se uttejita hotI hai  /  svabhAva se usa kA kAmAgni hamezA sulagatA rahatA hai|
viSaya kI ora usakA caMcala citta daur3atA rahatA hai  /  usa ke hRdaya meM
hamezA kAmAgni darda detA he, sarva dizA vidizAmeM vo viSaya kI prArthanA karatA
hai| isalie sarva taraha se puruSa kA saMkalpa aura abhilASa karanevAlI hotI hai
usa kAraNa se jahA~ sundara kaMTha se koI saMgIta gAe to vo zAyada manohara
rUpavAlA yA badasUrata ho, tarotAjA javAnIvAlA yA bItI huI javAnIvAlA ho  /
pahale dekhA huA ho yA anadekhA ho  /  RddhivAlA yA rahita ho, naI samRddhi pAI
ho yA na pAI ho, kAmabhoga se Uba gayA ho yA viSaya pAne kI abhilASA vAlA ho,
bur3he dehavAlA yA majabUta zarIravAlA ho, mahAsattvazAlI ho yA hIna sattvavAlA
ho, mahAparAkramI ho yA kAyara ho, zramaNa ho yA gRhastha ho, brAhmana ho yA
nindita, adhama-nIca jAtivAlA ho vahA~ apanI zrotrendriya ke upayoga se, cakSu-
indriya ke upayoga se, rasanendriya ke upayoga se, ghrANendriya ke upayoga se,
sparzendriya ke upayoga se turanta hI viSaya prApti ke lie, tarka, vitarka,
vicAra aura ekAgra cittavAlI banegI  /  ekAgra cittavAlI hokara usakA citta
zobhAyamAna hogaa| aura phira citta meM mujhe yaha milegA yA nahIM? aisI dvidhA
meM rheNge| usake bAda zarIra meM pasInA chUTegA  /  usake bAda Aloka-paraloka
meM aisI azubha soca se nukasAna hogA  /  usake vipAka mujhe kama-jyAdA pramANa
meM bhugatane par3eMge vo bAta usa vakta usake dimAga se nIkala jAe taba lajjA,
bhaya, apayaza, apakIrti, maryAdA kA tyAga karake UMce sthAna se nIce sthAna meM
baiTha jAte haiN| jitane meM UMce sthAna se nIce sthAna para pariNAma kI apekSA
se halake pariNAma vAlI usa strI kI AtmA hotI hai  /  utane meM asaMkhyAta
samaya aura AvalikA bIta jAte haiN| jitane meM asaMkhyAta samaya aura AvalikA
calI jAtI hai  /  utane meM prathama samaya se jo karma kI dazA hotI hai aura
dUsare samaya tIsare samaya usa prakAra pratyeka samaya yAvat saMkhyAtA samaya
asaMkhyAta samaya, ananta samaya muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 26

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Cheda Sutra-5, 'Mahanisitha'  The study/purpose/sutra number
progresses sequentially. Then, in the future, it accumulates the state of karmas
with innumerable, infinite, and endless qualities. Until the complete cycle of
ascent (utsarpini) and descent (avasarpini) is over, it acquires the excellent
karmic state for both the infernal and the animal gati (state of existence). In
this way, through the yogas (activities) of feminine thoughts and so on, it has
to undergo the cycle of ascent and descent for crores and lakhs of times, and
acquire the appropriate karmic state for the infernal and animal existence.
After coming out from there, it describes the conditions to be faced in the next
life. By looking at or having lust for a woman, it becomes ugly in appearance,
dark-bodied, devoid of luster and charm, and the luster that gets destroyed is
inauspicious. Then, on seeing it, others also get agitated.  Its sense of touch
becomes dull. Thereafter, its eyes and limbs become reddish due to lustful
attachment. The eyes become reddish towards the opposite sex. In some, the two
eyes become reddish and intoxicated due to lust.  Due to the blindness of lust,
it does not consider the extremely grave faults, the breach of the vow of
brahmacharya, the violation of rules, the commission of extremely grave and
terrible sinful acts, the destruction of morality. It does not care about the
fear of the infernal world, which is like a deep darkness. It forgets the self,
its karmas, and its spiritual stages. It does not care even for the unviolable
command of the entire universe, including the gods and the asuras. It will have
to undergo the cycle of 84 lakh species and the endless series of births, which
it forgets. Even the moment that is less than half an eyelid is devoid of
happiness, and there is only absolute suffering in the four gatis (states of
existence). It does not see what is worth seeing and sees what is not worth
seeing.  The entire community is gathered. Even though the effulgent rays of the
sun have spread in all ten directions, illuminating the one sitting, standing,
lying on the ground, sleeping or walking, and visible to all, it thinks as if
there is total darkness in all directions. Blinded by passion and lust, it does
not realize that it is seen and known by everyone. While it has committed the
extremely grave faults of vow-breaking, moral destruction, violation of
restraint, fear of the next world, transgression of command, and the fear of
wandering in the cycle of existence for endless time, it does not see or care
about them. It sees what is not worth seeing.  The one whose extraordinary
fortune has completely vanished, with a drooping face and reddish complexion,
becomes faded, unsightly, not worth seeing, and with a lotus-like face. At that
time, it suffers a lot. Then, its lotus-like parts, hips, thighs, waist, arms,
chest, and neck gradually become manifest. Thereafter, they make the hidden and
exposed parts lustful. All its limbs and parts are pierced and shattered by the
arrows of Cupid. The entire body is covered with goosebumps, and the bodily
elements become unstable to the extent that the body is pierced by the arrows of
Cupid. Then, the buttocks, thighs, and arms are tormented by the arrows of
Cupid. The control over the body is not self-dependent. It can bear the great
hardship of the hips and the body.  And while doing so, it cannot recognize or
understand the condition of its own bodily state. After attaining such a state,
within twelve breaths, it becomes motionless. The breathing becomes irregular.
Then, it takes slow breaths.  In this way, it experiences such a strange state
due to the effort of lust. And it is as if some male or female is possessed by a
demonic influence. Just as a cunning demon has entered the body, the woman
afflicted by lust may also speak incoherent words, wander in the turbulent ocean
of lust, and utter words that arouse infatuation, looking at or not looking at
the youthful or elderly, powerful or weak male.  Translation by Muni Deepratan
Sagar (Mahanisitha), Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 27

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka kramazaH
pasAra hotA hai  /  taba Age ke samaya para saMkhyAtaguNa, asaMkhyAtaguNa,
anantaguNa karma kI dazA ikaTThI karatA hai  /  yAvat asaMkhyAta utsarpiNI-
avasarpiNI pUrI ho taba taka nArakI aura tiryaMca donoM gati ke lie utkRSTa
karma sthiti upArjana kare  /  isa prakAra strI viSayaka saMkalpAdika yoga se
karor3a lAkha utsarpiNI-avasarpiNI taka bhugatanA par3e vaise naraka tiryaMca ke
ucita karmadazA upArjana kre| vahA~ se nIkalane ke bAda bhavAntara meM kaise
hAlAta sahane par3ate haiM vo batAte haiM ki strI kI ora dRSTi yA kAmarAga
karane se usa pApa paramparA se kadarUpatA, zyAma dehavAlA, teja, kAnti rahita,
lAvaNya aura zobhA rahita, naSTa honevAle teja aura saubhAgyavAlA aura phira use
dekhakara dUsare udvega pAe vaise zarIravAlA hotA hai  /  usakI sparzaindriya
sIdatI hai  /  usa ke bAda usa ke netra-aMga upAMga dekhane ke lie rAgavAle aura
/  lAla varNavAle hote haiM  /  vijAtIya kI ora netra rAgavAle hote haiM  /
jitane meM nayanayugala kAmarAga ke lie aruNa varNavAle madapUrNa banate haiN|
kAma ke rAgAMdhapana se ati mahAna bhArI doSa aura brahmavrata bhaMga,
niyamabhaMga ko nahIM ginate, ati mahAna ghora pApakarma ke AcaraNa ko,
zIlakhaMDana ko nahIM ginate ati mahAna sabase bhArI pApakarma ke AcaraNa,
saMyama virAdhanA kI paravA nahIM karate  /  ghora aMdhere samAna nArakI rUpa
paraloka ke bhaya ko nahIM ginate  /  AtmA ko bhUla jAte haiM, apane karma aura
guNasthAnaka ko nahIM ginate  /  deva aura asura sahita samagra jagata ko jisakI
AjJA alaMghanIya hai usakI bhI paravA nahIM  /  84 lAkha yoni meM lAkha bAra
parIvartana aura garbha kI paramparA ananta bAra karanI par3egI  /  vo bAta bhI
bhUla jAte haiM  /  ardha palaka jitanA kAla bhI jisameM sukha nahIM hai  /
aura cAroM gati meM ekAnta duHkha hai  /  vaha jo dekhanelAyaka hai vo nahIM
dekhate aura na dekhanelAyaka dekhate haiN| sarvajana samudAya ikaTThe hue haiM
/  unake bIca baiThI huI yA khar3I honevAlI, bhUmi para laiTI huI - soI huI yA
calatI haI, sarva loga se dikhanevAlI jhagamaga karate sarya kI kiraNoM ke
samaha se daza dizA meM teja rAzi phaila gaI hai to bhI jaise khuda aisA mAnatI
ho ki sarva dizA meM zUnya aMdherA hI hai| rAgAndha aura kAmAndha banI khuda
jaise aisA na mAnatI ho ki jaise koI dekhatA yA jAnatA nahIM  /  jaba ki vo
rAgAMdha huI ati mahAna bhArI doSavAle vratabhaMga, zIlakhaMDana, saMyama
virAdhanA, paraloka bhaya, AjJA kA bhaMga, AjJA kA atikramaNa, saMsAra meM
ananta kAla taka bhramaNa karane samAna bhaya nahIM dekhatI yA paravA nahIM
karatI  /  na dekhanelAyaka dekhatI hai  /  saba logoM ko prakaTa dikhanevAlA
sUrya hAjira hone ke bAda bhI sarva dizA meM jaise aMdherA phailA ho aisA mAnate
haiN| jisakA saubhAgyAtizaya sarvathA UDa gayA hai, mu~ha laTakAnevAlI,
lAlImAvAlI thI vo phIke-mu igae, durdarzanIya, nahIM dekhanelAyaka,
vadanakamalavAlI hotI hai  /  usa vakta kAphI tar3apatI thI  /  aura phira usake
kamalapura, nitamba, vatsapradeza, jaghana, bAhulatikA, vakSaHsthala,
kaMThapradeza dhIre-dhIre sphurAyamAna hote haiM  /  usake bAda gupta aura
prakaTa aMga vikAravAle banA dete haiM  /  usake aMga sarva upAMga kAmadeva ke
tIra se bhedita hokara jarjarita hote haiM  /  pUre deha para kA romAMca khar3A
hotA hai, jitane meM madana ke tIra se bhedita hokara zarIra jarjarita hotA hai
utane meM zarIra meM rahI dhAtu kucha calAyamAna hotI hai  /  usake bAda zarIra
pudgala nitamba sA~thala bAhulatikA kAmadeva ke tIra se pIr3ita hotI hai  /
zarIra para kA kAbU svAdhIna nahIM rahatA  /  nitamba aura zarIra ko mahA
musIbata se dhAraNa kara sakate haiM  /  aura aisA karate hue apane zarIra
avasthA kI dazA khuda pahacAna yA samajha nahIM sktii| vaisI avasthA pAne ke
bAda bAraha samaya meM zarIra se nizceSTa dazA ho jAtI hai  /  sA~sa
pratiskhalita hotI hai  /  phira maMda-maMda sA~sa grahaNa karate haiN| isa
prakAra kahI huI itanI vicitra taraha kI avasthA kAma kI ceSTA pAtI hai  /  aura
vo jaise kisI puruSa yA strI ko graha kA valagADa cIpakA ho  /  hoziyAra pizAca
ne zarIra meM praveza kiyA ho taba cAhe kacha idhara-Udhara kA mana cAhe aisA
bakavAsa kare usakI taraha kAmapizAca yA grasta honevAlI strI bhI kAmAvasthA meM
cAhe vaise asaMbaddha vacana bole, kAmasamudra ke viSamAvarta meM bhaTakatI,
moha utpanna karanevAle kAma ke vacana se dekhate hue yA anadekhe manohara
rUpavAle yA bagaira rUpavAle, javAna yA buDhe puruSa kI khIlatI javAnIvAlI yA
mahA parAkramI ho muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 27

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Cheda Sutra-5, 'Mahanisitha'  The one who, with the intention of
lust, fearfully and shrinkingly invites a person of low character, a virtuous
person, or any other condemned, inferior, and low-born person, calls that person
with a passionate voice and a sidelong glance, and observes him with attachment.
At that time, he may acquire meritorious or demeritorious karmas of the highest
degree, lasting for countless descending and ascending cycles of time, i.e.,
millions and billions of years, but he does not bind those karmas. Now, at the
time when he is about to touch the limbs of that person, he binds the state of
those karmas, but he does not make them manifest. Sutra - 388  O Gautama! Now,
the person who, being under the influence of association, engages in sexual
activity with that woman and indulges in sensual pleasures under her influence,
is unfortunate. The decision to engage in or abstain from association lies with
the man. Therefore, the excellent person who is not under the influence of
association is fortunate. Sutra - 389  O Venerable One! Why is it said that the
person who does not engage in sexual activity with that woman is fortunate, and
the one who does is unfortunate? O Gautama! If that sinful woman, whose karmas
have reached the state of being bound and manifested, associates with a man,
then those karmas become more intense, i.e., the wretched woman, by obtaining
such a course of action from the bound and manifested karmas, wanders endlessly
in the state of a single-sensed being, such as an earth-bodied organism, but
does not attain the state of a two-sensed being. In this way, after enduring
great suffering for countless eons, they exhaust the karmas of the single-sensed
state and, by performing karmas, perhaps attain the state of a human being with
five senses, but still end up obtaining a female birth, which is inauspicious.
They are born as eunuchs and then have to undergo innumerable sufferings in the
animal realm, where there is always lamentation, and where they do not find any
refuge, not even in their dreams. Constantly experiencing torment and anxiety,
devoid of relatives, kinsmen, and friends, they perform condemnable, censurable,
blameworthy, and despicable karmas, praising many people, pleading with sweet
words, and hearing words of their defeat, barely managing to sustain their
lives, and wandering in the four gatis (realms of existence).  O Gautama!
Understand this further: the sinful woman who has acquired bound, manifested,
and intensified karmic state, and the man who desires her, both acquire an
infinite number of such karmic states, which are even more superior or supreme
than hers. This is why, O Gautama, it is said that the person who does not
associate with her is fortunate, and the one who does is unfortunate. Sutra -
390  O Venerable One! How many types of persons are there, about whom you speak
in this way? O Gautama! Six types of persons are described: 1. the most
inferior, 2. the inferior, 3. the mediocre, 4. the excellent, 5. the most
excellent, and 6. the supreme. Sutra - 391  Among them, the one called the
supreme person, even if he were to make a woman with excellent physical
features, youthful age, and supreme beauty and grace sit on his lap for a
hundred years due to compulsion, would not desire her. And the one described as
the most excellent person would not desire the woman at all. However, he may
have a momentary desire, but in the next moment, he would restrain his mind and
condemn his own soul, but would not desire the woman in that birth again.
Translated by Muni Deepratan Sagar from the Mahanisitha Agam Sutra (Hindi
translation).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka vaise ko
hIna sattvavAle yA satpuruSa ko yA dUsare kisI bhI nindita adhama hIna jAtivAle
puruSa ko kAma ke abhiprAya se bhaya pAnevAlI sikur3akara AmaMtrita karake
bulAtI hai aise saMkhyAtA bhedavAle rAgayukta svara aura kaTAkSavAlI najara se
usa puruSa ko bulAtI hai, usakA rAga se nirIkSaNa karatI hai| usa vakta nArakI
aura tiryaMca donoM gati ko ucita asaMkhyAta avasarpiNI-utsarpiNI karor3a lAkha
sAla yA kAlacakra pramANa kI utkRSTa-dazAvAle pApakarma upArjana kare yAni karma
bA~dhe, lekina karmaba~dha spRSTa na kare  /  aba vo jisa vakta puruSa ke zarIra
ke avayava ko chUne ke lie sanmukha ho, lekina abhI sparza nahIM kiyA usa vakta
karma kI dazA baddha spRSTa kare  /  lekina baddha spaSTa nikAcita na kre| sUtra
- 388 he gautama ! aba aise vakta meM jo puruSa saMyoga ke AdhIna hokara usa
strI kA yoga kare aura strI ke AdhIna hokara kAma sevana kare vo adhanya hai  /
saMyoga karanA yA na karanA puruSa AdhIna hai| isalie jo uttama puruSa saMyoga
ko AdhIna na ho vo dhanya hai| sUtra - 389 he bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se aisA
kahalAtA hai ki jo puruSa usa strI ke sAtha yoga na kare vo dhanya aura yoga
kare vo adhanya? he gautama ! baddhaspRSTa-karma kI avasthA taka pahu~cI huI vo
pApI strI puruSa kA sAtha prApta ho to vo karma nikAcitapana meM badale, yAni
baddhaspRSTa nikAcita karma se becArI usa taraha ke adhyavasAya pAkara usakI
AtmA pRthvIkAya Adi ekendriya sthAvarapana meM anantakAla taka paribhramaNa kare
lekina do indriyapana na pAe  /  usa prakAra mahA muzkila se kaIM kleza sahakara
anantA kAla taka ekendriyapana kI bhavadazA bhugatakara ekendriyapana kA karma
khapAte haiM aura karma karake do-tIna aura cAra indriyapana kleza se
bhugatakara paMcendriya meM manuSyatva meM zAyada A jAe to bhI badanasIba
strIrUpa ko prApta karanevAlA hotA hai| napuMsaka rUpa se utpanna ho  /  aura
phira tiryaMcapana meM bezUmAra vedanA bhugatanA par3atA  /  hamezA hAhAkAra
karanevAle jahA~ koI zaraNabhUta nahIM hotA  /  sapane meM bhI sukha kI chA~va
jisa gati meM dekhane ko nahIM milatA  /  hamezA saMtApa bhugatate hue aura
udvega pAnevAle riztedAra svajana baMdhu Adi se rahita janmaparyanta kutsanIya,
garhaNIya, nindanIya, tiraskaraNIya aise karma karake kaIM logoM kI tArIpha
karake seMkar3oM mIThe vacana se binatI karake una logoM ke parAbhava ke vacana
sUnakara muzkila se udara poSaNa karate karate cAroM gati meM bhaTakanA par3atA
hai| he gautama ! dUsarI bAta yaha samajho ki jisa pApI strI ne baddha, spRSTa
aura nikAcita karmadazA upArjana karake usa strI kI abhilASA karanevAlA puruSa
bhI utanI hI nahIM lekina usake hAlAta se bhI utkRSTa yA utkRSTatama aisI ananta
karmadazA upArjana kare aura ese baddha spRSTa aura nikAcita kare, isa kAraNa se
he gautama ! aisA kahA jAtA hai ki jo puruSa usakA saMga nahIM karatA vo dhanya
hai aura saMga karatA hai vo adhanya hai| sUtra-390 he bhagavaMta ! kitanI
taraha ke puruSa haiM jisase Apa isa prakAra kahate ho ? he gautama ! puruSa cha
taraha ke batAe haiM vo isa prakAra -1. adhamAdhama, 2. adhama, 3. vimadhyama,
4. uttama, 5. uttamottama, 6. sarvottama  /  sUtra - 391 usameM jise sarvottama
puruSa kahA, vo jisa ke pA~va aMga uttama rUpa lAvaNya yukta ho, navayauvana
vaya pAyA ho, uttama rUpa lAvaNya kAnti yukta aisI strI majabUrI se bhI apanI
goda meM so sAla taka biThAkara kAmaceSTA kare to bhI vo puruSa usa strI kI
abhilASA na kare  /  aura phira jo uttamottama puruSa batAe vo khuda strI kI
abhilASA na kare  /  lekina zAyada alpa mana se kevala eka samaya kI abhilASA
kare lekina dUsare hI pala mana ko rokakara apane AtmA kI nindA garhaNA kare,
lekina dUsarI bAra usa janmameM strI kI mana se bhI abhilASA na kre| muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 28

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishītha' Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number
Sūtra-392 And then, the man of the highest kind, upon seeing a woman who
desires, may desire her in his mind for a moment or a Muhurta, but he shall not
engage in improper conduct with her for a Pahora or half a Pahora. Sūtra-393 If
that man is a Brahmachari or has renounced Abhigraha, or if he is not a
Brahmachari or has not renounced Abhigraha, then he shall not be intensely
desirous in the enjoyment of the act of understanding Bhajana-Vikalpa in
relation to his wife. O Gautama! This man shall be bound by karma, but he shall
not bind himself to the proper karma of wandering in the infinite world.
Sūtra-394 And then, the man of the middle kind shall engage in conduct with his
wife in this way, but he shall not engage in such improper conduct with another
woman. But if such a man is not a fierce Brahmachari from behind, then he shall
become an Ananta Samsari, or he shall not. Who shall not become an Ananta
Samsari? It is said that the Bhavyātmā, who knows the nine Tattvas, including
Jīva, shall not become an Ananta Samsari. According to the Āgama and other
scriptures, the Uttama Sadhu Bhagavant, who is a benefactor in Dharma, who gives
donations of food and other things, who practices the four kinds of Dharma,
namely Dana, Shīla, Tapa, and Bhavana, to the best of his ability, who does not
break the rules and vows he has taken, even in any kind of difficulty, shall,
while experiencing the consequences of his actions, become a Uttama Manavata or
Uttama Devapana in the tradition, and then, without falling from Samyak Tv,
shall become a Nisarga Samyak Tv, or, through Abhigami Samyak Tv, shall
gradually acquire eighteen thousand Shīlaangas, bind the Āshrava Dwār, become
free from Karma Raj and Papa Mala, consume the Papa Karma, and attain Siddha
Gati. Sūtra-395 The Adhama man shall be attached to his own or another woman,
with a mind that is cruel in its consequences, and shall be engrossed in the
beginning and acquisition, etc. And then, the Adhama Adhama man shall desire
every woman with his mind, speech, and body, in all three ways, at all times.
And he shall be engrossed in the beginning and acquisition, with a mind that is
intensely cruel in its consequences, and shall spend his lifespan in this way.
Thus, understand the Ananta Samsari nature of both the Adhama and the Adhama
Adhama. Sūtra-396 O Bhagavant! You have explained the Ananta Samsari nature of
both the Adhama and the Adhama Adhama in the same way, so what is the difference
between an Adhama and an Adhama Adhama? O Gautama! The Adhama man, even though
he is attached to his own or another woman, has a mind that is cruel in its
consequences, and is engrossed in the beginning and acquisition, shall not
engage in improper conduct with a Dīkshita Sadhvī, who desires to protect Shīla,
even if he comes into contact with her, even if he demands, inspires, invites,
or requests improper conduct, because he is driven by desire. But the Adhama
Adhama man shall engage in improper physical conduct with his mother, sister,
etc., or even with a Dīkshita Sadhvī. Because of this, he is called an Adhama
Adhama man who commits great sins. O Gautama! This is the difference between the
two. And then, the Adhama man can attain Bodhi after an infinite period of time.
But the Adhama Adhama man, who commits great sins and engages in improper
conduct with a Dīkshita Sadhvī, even if he wanders in the infinite world for an
infinite number of times, shall not become eligible to attain Bodhi. Consider
this to be a difficult distinction. Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishītha) Āgama
Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda Page 29

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra-392
aura phira jo uttamottama taraha ke puruSa ho vo abhilASA karanevAlI strI ko
dekhakara palabhara yA muhUrta taka dekhakara mana se usakI abhilASA kare,
lekina pahora yA ardha pahora taka usa strI ke sAtha anucita karmasevana na kre|
sUtra-393 yadi vo puruSa brahmacArI yA abhigraha pratyAkhyAna kiyA ho  /  yA
brahmacArI na ho yA abhigraha pratyAkhyAna kie na ho to apanI patnI ke viSaya
meM bhajanA-vikalpa samajhane ke kAmabhoga meM tIvra abhilASAvAlA na ho  /  he
gautama ! isa puruSa ko karma kA baMdha ho lekina vo ananta saMsAra meM ghUmane
ke ucita karma na bA~dhe  /  sUtra-394 aura phira jo vimadhyama taraha ke puruSa
ho vo apanI patnI ke sAtha isa prakAra karma kA sevana kare lekina parAI strI ke
sAtha vaise anucita karma kA sevana na kare  /  lekina parAI strI ke sAtha aisA
puruSa yadi pIche se ugra brahmacArI na ho to adhyavasAya vizeSa ananta saMsArI
bane yA na bane  /  ananta saMsArI kauna na bane ? to kahate haiM ki usa taraha
ka bhavya AtmA jIvAdika nau tattva ko jAnanevAlA haA ho  /  Agama Adi zAstra ke
mutAbika uttama sAdhu bhagavaMta ko dharma meM upakAra karanevAlA, AhArAdika kA
dAna denevAlA, dAna, zIla, tapa aura bhAvanA samAna cAra taraha ke dharma kA
yathAzakti anuSThAna karatA ho  /  kisI bhI taraha cAhe kaisI bhI musIbata meM
bhI grahaNa kie gae niyama aura vrata kA bhaMga na kare to zAtA bhugatate hue
paramparA meM uttama mAnavatA yA uttama devapana aura phira samyak tva se
pratipatita hue binA nisarga samyaktva ho yA-abhigamika samyaktva dvArA
uttarottara aThAraha hajAra zIlAMga dhAraNa karanevAlA hokara AzravadvAra bandha
karake karmaraja aura pApamala rahita hokara pApakarma khapAkara siddhagati
paae| sUtra - 395 jo adhama puruSa ho vo apanI yA parAI strI meM Asakta manavAlA
ho  /  haraeka vakta meM krUra pariNAma jisake citta meM calatA ho Arambha aura
parigrahAdika ke lie tallIna manavAlA ho  /  aura phira jo adhamAdhama puruSa ho
vo mahApApa karma karanevAle sarva strI kI mana, vacana, kAyA se trividha
trividha se pratyeka samaya abhilASA kare  /  aura ati krUra adhyavasAya se
pariNamita cittavAlA Arambha parigraha meM Asakta hokara apanA AyukAla gamana
karatA hai| isa prakAra adhama aura adhamAdhama donoM kA ananta saMsArIpana
smjho| sUtra-396 he bhagavaMta ! jo adhama aura adhamAdhama puruSa donoM kA eka
samAna ananta saMsArI isa taraha batAyA to eka adhama aura adhamAdhama usameM
pharka kauna-sA samajhe? he gautama ! jo adhama puruSa apanI yA parAI strI meM
Asakta manavAlA krUra-pariNAmavAle cittavAlA Arambha parigraha meM lIna hone ke
bAvajUda bhI dIkSita sAdhvI aura zIla saMrakSaNa karane kI IcchAvAlI ho  /
pauSadha, upavAsa, vrata, pratyAkhyAna karane meM udyamavAlI duHkhI gRhastha
strIoM ke sahavAsa meM A gae ho vo anucita aticAra kI mA~ga kare, preraNA kare,
AmaMtrita kare, prArthanA kare to bhI kAmavaza hokara usake sAtha durAcAra kA
sevana na kre| lekina jo adhamAdhama puruSa ho apanI mA~-bhaginI Adi yAvat
dIkSita sAdhvI ke sAtha bhI zArIrika anucita anAcAra sevana kare  /  usa kAraNa
se use mahApApa karanevAlA adhamAdhama puruSa kahA  /  he gautama ! ina donoM
meM itanA pharka hai |aur phira jo adhama puruSa haiM vo ananta kAla se bodhi
prApta kara sakatA hai  /  lekina mahApApa karma karanevAlA dIkSita sAdhvI ke
sAtha bhI kukarma karanevAle adhamAdhama puruSa anantI bAra ananta saMsAra meM
ghUme to bhI bodhi pAne ke lie adhikArI nahIM bana sakatA  /  yaha duHsama bheda
mAno  /  muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page
29

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Cheda Sutra-5, 'Mahanisitha' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number Sutra -
397 - Among these six persons, consider the one who has attained the state of a
Chadmastha Vitaraga (a householder who has attained the state of detachment) as
the most superior. He should be known as the one who possesses the qualities of
an Uttamottama Purusha (the most superior person), such as being devoid of
psychic powers, and being an Upashamaka (one who has subdued passions) and
Ksapaka (one who has destroyed karmas) Muni (ascetic). And then, consider the
one who is an Apramatta Muni (vigilant ascetic) as the superior one. Thus, the
description of these persons is given.  Sutra - 398 And then, the one who, being
a Mithyadristi (one with wrong belief), practices severe celibacy, abandoning
violence, initiation, and possession, is a Mithyadristi, not a Samyagdristi (one
with right belief). They do not have the knowledge of the existence of the nine
substances (Jiva, etc.). They do not appreciate or praise the ultimate goal of
liberation, but they renounce sins like violence, celibacy, etc., and attain
celestial maidens in the next life through austerities and celibacy, out of the
desire to obtain worldly pleasures. Sutra - 399 The Vimaddhyama Purusha (the
mediocre person) is the one who, adopting such an attitude, practices the vows
of a Shravaka (lay follower). Sutra - 400 And the Adhama and Adhamaadhama (the
inferior and the most inferior) are the ones who, in solitude, engage in the
acquisition of karmic status, just as it was said for women. The only special
consideration for men is that men tend to develop more attachment towards the
upper parts of the female body, such as the breasts and face, compared to the
genital area. Thus, the six types of persons are described. Sutra - 401 O
Gautama! Some women are Bhavya (worthy) and possess firm right faith. If one
contemplates their superiority, they can be considered in the category of the
most superior persons. But not all women are like that. Sutra - 402 O Gautama!
Similarly, there are women who do not attain the company of a man in the three
time periods (past, present, and future). Despite the availability of a male
partner, they do not engage in sexual activity even in the thirteenth,
fourteenth, or fifteenth time periods. Just as when a fire is ignited in a
village, town, or forest filled with firewood and is fanned by a strong wind,
the fire becomes highly intense. After a long time, the fire subsides on its
own. Similarly, O Gautama! the fire of passion in a woman becomes intense and
grows, but in the fourth time period, it becomes calm, just as the flame of a
lamp becomes invisible, but if oil is added, it flares up again on its own.
Similarly, a woman becomes excited by the sight of a man, his conversation, his
attraction, his pride, and his passion, and her fire of passion is rekindled.
Sutra - 403 O Gautama! If, at such a time, that woman endures the pain of
passion due to fear, shame, the blemish of her family's reputation, faith in
religion, and does not engage in improper conduct, then she is blessed,
meritorious, worthy of veneration, worshipful, worthy of sight, possessing all
auspicious qualities, the repository of all welfare, the most auspicious
treasure, the goddess of learning, the pure goddess, the indestructible goddess,
the queen of gods, the most pure and superior one, worthy of being addressed as
the eternal, auspicious, and liberated state. Sutra - 404 If that woman does not
endure the pain and engages in improper conduct, then she is inauspicious,
devoid of merit, unworthy of veneration, unworthy of worship, not worth seeing,
without any auspicious qualities, the cause of all inauspiciousness and
misfortune, devoid of virtue, and deserving of condemnation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra -
397 - ina cha puruSa meM sarvottama puruSa use mAno ki jo chadmastha
vItarAgapana pAyA ho jise uttamottama puruSa batAe haiM vo unheM jAnanA ki jo
Rddhi rahita ityAdi se lekara upazAmaka aura kSapaka munivara ho  /  aura phira
uttama unheM mAno ki jo apramatta munivara ho isa prakAra ina puruSa kI nirupaNA
krnaa| sUtra- 398 aura phira jo mithyAdRSTi hokara ugra brahmacarya dhAraNa
karanevAlA ho hiMsA-Arambha parigraha kA tyAga karanevAlA vo mithyAdRSTi hI hai,
samyakdRSTi nahIM  /  unako jIvAdika nau tattva ke sadbhAva kA jJAna nahIM hotA
vo uttama cIja mokSa kA abhinandana yA prazaMsA nahIM karate, vo brahmacarya
hiMsA Adi pApa kA parihAra karake usa dharma ke badale meM Age ke bhava ke lie
tapa brahmacarya ke badale meM niyANA karake devAMganA pAe utane brahmacarya se
bhraSTa bane saMsAra ke paudgalika sukha pAne kI IcchA se niyANA kare  /
sUtra-399 vimadhyama puruSa use kahate haiM ki jo usa taraha kA adhyavasAya
aMgIkAra karake zrAvaka ke vrata apanAe ho  /  sUtra-400 aura jo adhama aura
adhamAdhama vo jisa taraha ekAntameM strIyoM ke lie kahA usa taraha karmasthiti
upArjana kare  /  kevala puruSa ke lie itanA vizeSa samajho ki puruSa ko strI ke
rAga utpanna karavAnevAle stana-mukha Upara ke hisse ke avayava yoni Adi aMga
para adhikatara rAga utpanna hotA hai  /  isa prakAra puruSa ke cha tarIke
btaae| sUtra-401 he gautama ! kucha strI bhavya aura dRr3ha samyaktvavAlI hotI
hai| unakI uttamatA soce to sarvottama aise puruSa kI kakSA meM A sakate haiN|
lekina sabhI strI vaisI nahIM hotii| sUtra-402 he gautama ! usI taraha jisa strI
ko tIna kAla puruSa saMyoga kI prApti nahIM huI  /  puruSa saMyoga saMprApti
svAdhIna hone ke bAvajUda bhI terahave-caudahave, paMdrahave samaya meM bhI
puruSa ke sAtha milApa na huA  /  yAni saMbhoga kArya AcaraNa na kiyA  /  to
jisa taraha kaIM kASTha lakar3e, IMdhaNa se bhare kisI gA~va, nagara yA araNya
meM agni phaila uThA aura usa vakta pracaMDa pavana pheMkA gayA to agni vizeSa
pradIpta haa| jalA-jalAkara lambe arase ke bAda vo agni apane-Apa bujhakara
zAnta ho jAe  /  usa prakAra he gautama ! strI kA kAmAgni pradIpta hokara vRddhi
pAte haiM  /  lekina cauthe vakta zAnta ho usa mutAbika ikkIsave, bAIsave yAvat
sattAIsave samaya meM zAnta bane, jisa taraha dIe kI zikhA adRzya dikhe lekina
phira tela DAlane se agara apane Apa agara usa taraha ke cUrNa ke yoga se vApasa
prakaTa hokara calAyamAna hokara jalane lage  /  usI taraha strI bhI puruSa ke
darzana se yA puruSa ke sAtha bAtacIta karane se usake AkarSaNa se, mada se,
kaMdarpa se usake kAmAgni se sateja hotI hai| phira se bhI jAgRta hotI hai|
sUtra-403 he gautama ! aise vakta yadi vo strI bhaya se, lajjA se, kula ke
kalaMka ke doSa se, dharma kI zraddhA se, kAma kA darda saha le aura asabhya
AcaraNa sevana na kare vo strI dhanya hai  /  punyavaMtI hai, vaMdanIya hai  /
pUjya hai  /  darzanIya hai, sarva lakSaNavAlI hai, sarva kalyANa sAdhanevAlI
hai| sarvottama maMgala kI nIdhi hai  /  vo zruta devatA hai, sarasvatI hai|
pavitra devI hai; acyutA devI hai, indrANI hai, paramapavitrA uttamA hai  /
siddhi mukti zAzvata zivagati nAma se saMbodhana lAyaka hai sUtra -404 yadi vo
strI vedanA na sahe aura akAryAcaraNa kare to vo strI, adhanyA, apuNyavaMtI,
avaMdanIya, apUjya, na dekhane lAyaka, binA lakSaNa ke tUTe hue bhAgyavAlI,
sarva amaMgala aura akalyANa ke kAraNavAlI, zIlabhraSTA, muni dIparatnasAgara
kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 30

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  Study/Purpose/Sutra Number
Corruption, hatred, despicable, sinful, most sinful among sinners, impure. O
Gautam! A woman, with cleverness, fear, cowardice, greed, madness, lust, pride,
dependence, rape, knowingly corrupts herself in restraint and virtue. Stay away
from a woman who engages in improper conduct without abandoning her attire,
repeatedly desires to be enjoyed by a man, and plays with a man, on the path of
the road, in the village, in the city, in the capital. According to what is said
further, she is not even worthy of being seen.  Similarly, if a sadhu sees such
a woman, then with madness, pride, lust, dependence, willingly, knowingly,
without fear of sin, an Acharya, an ordinary sadhu, a king praised, one who has
gained wind, one who has gained penance, one who has gained yoga, one who has
gained knowledge, a leader of the age, a preacher who influences, such a Muni,
if he engages in sexual play with another woman, desires her, wants to enjoy
her, or enjoys her, repeatedly enjoys her, or engages in conduct that is not
worthy of being done with excessive attachment, then that Muni is extremely
wicked, insignificant, of small character, unworthy, not to be worshipped, not
to be seen, harmful, unrefined, inauspicious, not auspicious, blameworthy,
censurable, hateful, despicable. He is a sinner, and among sinners, he is a
great sinner, he is a very great sinner, of corrupt character, one who is
extremely corrupt in virtue, one who performs great sinful karma.  Therefore,
when he is ready to perform atonement, he experiences the state of Samadhi-death
in the best way, like a horse of the low caste, who has the power of Vajra-
Rishabha-Narachan-Sanghyan, who has excellent prowess, excellent character,
knowledge of the best principles, excellent strength and ability, excellent
combination, excellent faith in Dharma, while performing atonement. O Gautam!
Such virtuous sadhus, who avoid the eighteen sinful places, who follow the
secrecy of the nine Brahmacharyas, are described in the scriptures as having
such qualities. Sutra-405  O Bhagavan! Is there purification through atonement?
O Gautam! Some people are purified, and some are not. O Bhagavan! Why do you say
that one is purified and one is not? O Gautam! If a man is of the nature of
Maya, arrogance, deceit, cheating, of crooked conduct, he performs atonement
while remaining with a soul full of thorns. Therefore, their inner consciousness
is not purified, and they have a polluted intention. Therefore, they are not
purified. Some souls are simple, who, in the same way that they have been
blamed, truly request the Guru. Therefore, they are free from thorns, free from
doubt, with a completely pure heart, they accept open criticism, and perform
atonement with the right attitude. They are purified with purity and freedom
from impurities. Therefore, it is said that one who has a pure intention is
purified, and one who has thorns cannot be purified. Sutra-406-407  O Gautam!
This woman is like a downpour of wealth, like a vast expanse of land, for all
the sinful deeds, all the unrighteousness of a man. She is like a mine of the
mud of delusion and karma-dust, an obstacle to the path of liberation, a ladder
to descend into hell, a poisonous creeper without roots, a fireless hearth, food
without a cure for indigestion, a disease without a name, a swoon without
consciousness, a seizure without a cause, a prison without chains, a noose
without a rope, death without a cause, or sudden death. All the similes
mentioned can be applied to a woman. A man should not even think about enjoying
such a woman in his mind, he should not make such a determination, he should not
do it with prayer, contemplation, choice, or resolution, desire, remembrance, in
three ways, in three ways.  O Gautam! Just as the presiding deity of a Vidya or
Mantra harms its practitioner, in the same way, a woman also harms a man and
creates a stain. The Muni who resolves to kill sin, the one who...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
bhraSTAcAravAlI, napharatavAlI, dhRNA karanelAyaka, pApI, pApI meM bhI mahA
pApINI, apavitrA hai  /  he gautama ! strI hoziyArI se, bhaya se, kAyaratA se,
lolupatA se, unmAda se, kaMdarpa se, abhimAna se, parAdhInatA se, balAtkAra se
jAna-bujhakara yaha stra saMyama aura zIla meM bhraSTa hotI hai  /  dUra rahe
rAste ke mArga meM, gA~va meM, nagara meM, rAjadhAnI meM, veza tyAga kie binA
strI ke sAtha anucita AcaraNa kare, bAra-bAra puruSa bhugatane kI IcchA kare,
puruSa ke sAtha krIr3A kare to Age kahane ke matAbika vo pApINI dekhane lAyaka
bhI nahIM hai| usI prakAra kisI sAdhu aisI strI ko dekhe phira unmAda se,
abhimAna se, kaMdarpa se, parAdhInatA se, svecchA se, jAnabujhakara pApa kA Dara
rakhe binA koI AcArya, sAmAnya sAdhu, rAjA se tAripha pAe gae, vAyu labdhivAle,
tapa labdhivAle, yoga labdhivAle, vijJAna labdhivAle, yuga pradhAna, pravacana
prabhAvaka aise munivara bhI yadi dUsarI strI ke sAtha ramaNa krIr3A kare, usakI
abhilASA kare,bhugatanA cAhe yA bhugate  /  bAra-bAra bhugate yAvat ati rAga se
na karane lAyaka AcAra sevana kare to vo muni ati duSTa, tuccha, kSudra
lakSaNavAlA, adhanya, avaMdanIya, adarzanIya, ahitakArI, aprazasta,
akalyANakara, maMgala, niMdanIya, garhaNIya, napharata karanelAyaka
dugaMcchanIya hai  /  vo pApI hai aura pApI meM bhI mahApApI hai vo ati mahApApI
hai, bhraSTa zIlavAlA, cAritra se ati bhraSTa honevAlA mahApApa karma karanevAlA
hai| isalie jaba vo prAyazcitta lene ke lie taiyAra ho taba vo usa maMda jAti ke
azva kI taraha vajraRSabhanArAcasaMghayaNavAle, uttama parAkramavAle, uttama
sattvavAle, uttama tattva ke jAnakAra, uttamavIrya sAmarthyavAle, uttama saMyoga
vAle, uttama dharma-zraddhAvAle prAyazcitta karate vakta uttama taraha ke
samAdhi maraNa kI dazA kA ahasAsa karate haiM  /  he lie vaise sAdhuoM kI
mahAnubhAva aThAraha pApa sthAnaka kA parihAra karanevAle nava brahmacarya kI
gupti kA pAlana karanevAle aise guNayukta unheM zAstra meM batAe haiN| sUtra-405
he bhagavaMta ! kyA prAyazcitta se zuddhi hotI hai ? he gautama ! kucha logoM kI
zuddhi hotI hai aura kucha logoM kI nahIM hotI  /  he bhagavan ! aisA kisa
kAraNa se kahate ho ki eka kI hotI hai aura eka kI nahIM hotI? he gautama ! yadi
koI puruSa mAyA, daMbha, chala, ThagAI ke svabhAvavAle ho, vakra AcAravAlA ho,
vaha AtmA zalyavAle rahakara, prAyazcitta kA sevana karate haiM  /  isalie unake
aMtaHkaraNa vizuddhi na hone se kaluSita AzayavAle hote haiM  /  isalie unakI
zuddhi nahIM hotI  /  kucha AtmA saralatAvAlI hotI hai, jisase jisa prakAra doSa
lagA ho usa prakAra yathArtha guru ko nivedana karate haiM  /  isalie vo
niHzalya, niHzaMka, pUrI taraha sApha dila se prakaTa AlocanA aMgIkAra karake
yathokta najariye se prAyazcitta kA sevana kare  /  vo nirmalatA niSkaluSatA se
vizuddha hote haiM isa kAraNa se aisA kahA jAtA hai ki eka niHzalya AzayavAlA
zuddha hotA hai aura zalyavAlA zuddha nahIM ho sktaa| sUtra-406-407 he gautama !
yaha strI, puruSa ke lie sarva pApakarma kI sarva adharma kI dhanavRSTi samAna
vasudhArA samAna hai| moha aura karmaraja ke kIcar3a kI khAna samAna sadgati ke
mArga kI argalA-vighna karanevAlI, naraka meM utarane ke lie sIr3I samAna, binA
bhUmi ke viSavelar3I, agni rahita uMbADaka-bhojana binA visUcikAMta bImArI
samAna, nAma rahita vyAdhi, cetanA binA mUrchA, upasarga binA marakI, ber3I binA
kaida, rassI binA phA~sI, kAraNa binA mauta yA akasmAta mauta, batAI huI sarva
upamA strI ko laga sakatI hai  /  isa taraha ke badasUrata upanAmavAlI strI ke
sAtha puruSa ko mana se bhI usake bhoga kI phikra na karanA, aisA adhyavasAya na
karanA, prArthanA, dhAraNA, vikalpa yA saMkalpa abhilASA smaraNa trividha
trividha se na karanA  /  he gautama ! jaise koI vidyA yA maMtra ke adhiSThAyaka
deva usake sAdhaka kI bUrI dazA kara dete haiM usI taraha strI bhI puruSa kI
durdazA karake kalaMka utpanna karanevAlI hotI hai  /  pApa kI hatyA ke saMkalpa
karanevAle ko jisa muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 31

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agama Sutra 39, Chedasutra-5, 'Mahanisitha'  Just as the touch of religion does
not occur to one who resolves to perform it, so also it does not touch the one
who has lapsed in conduct. If there has been a lapse in conduct, then there is
no resolve for the one whose resolve is towards a woman, to undergo penance,
censure, reproach. Due to not undergoing censure etc., one has to wander in the
cycle of transmigration with infinite suffering. Even though the purification of
penance has occurred, yet again the tendency towards lack of restraint arises
due to coming into contact with them. Like the act of a great sin, direct
violence, demoness-like, hated by the three worlds. Not seeing the great harm of
the other world, like the abode of deep darkness of hell, always a repository of
many sorrows. Even the resolve to see the limbs, parts, vital spots or the
beauty and charm of a woman's form, or her sweet speech, or that which increases
passion, should not be made.  Sutra 408 O Gautama! This woman is like the night
of dissolution, always enveloped in the darkness of ignorance. Like lightning,
she appears for a moment and then gets destroyed. Like those who attack the one
who has taken refuge, she immediately devours the life of the newborn child, a
great sinner. Like the waves of the saline ocean stirred by the strong wind, she
is a series of various options, not staying steady in one place for one master.
Just as it is very difficult to fathom the depth of the self-existent ocean,
similarly it is very difficult to understand the heart full of deceit of a
woman. A woman is fickle-minded like the wind, devouring like fire, greedy like
a dog. Like a dog, as long as you give her something, she remains a friend, and
then becomes an enemy after taking everything. Like fish in the waves of the
ocean, she is affectionate as long as she is near, and forgets after going away.
In this way, full of countless defects, with all limbs and parts, externally and
internally, a great sinner, like shamelessness. The woman, from whose body
always emanate foul-smelling, impure, contemptible, hateful, all limbs and
parts, and then if one considers from the spiritual perspective, her internal
and external bodily constituents are known to be of great essence, nauseating to
Kamadeva, and known to the soul after attaining detachment, the supreme and best
person who well understands the nature of righteousness and unrighteousness, how
can he have even a moment's desire for such a woman?  Sutra 409-410 The woman
whose desire a man fulfills, in her womb, at the time of a single union of the
man, nine million five-sensed living beings are destroyed. Those living beings,
being extremely subtle in form, cannot be seen by the physical eyes. Therefore,
it is said that one should not converse with a woman even once or repeatedly,
and also not inspect her limbs or parts with attachment. As far as possible, a
celibate man should not walk on the path with a woman.  Sutra 411 O Venerable
One! Is it the abandonment of conversation with a woman, not seeing her limbs
and parts, or the abandonment of sexual intercourse? O Gautama! Abandon both. O
Venerable One! Is the abandonment of sexual intercourse alone, or the complete
abandonment for life, in every way, of sexual intercourse with all conscious and
unconscious objects, through mind, speech and body, the three modes? O Gautama!
Abandon it in all ways.  Sutra 412 O Venerable One! If any ascetic-ascetic woman
engages in sexual intercourse, should they get others to pay obeisance to them?
Translation of Mahanisitha Agama Sutra by Muni Deepratan Sagara.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka taraha
dharma kA sparza nahIM hotA vaise unakA saMkalpa karanevAle ko dharma nahIM
chUtA  /  cAritra meM skhalanA huI ho to strI ke saMkalpavAle ko AlocanA, niMdA,
gardA prAyazcitta karane kA adhyavasAya nahIM hotA  /  AlocanA Adi na karane ke
kAraNa se anantakAla taka duHkha samUhavAle saMsAra meM ghUmanA par3atA hai  /
prAyazcitta kI vizuddhi ke hone ke bAvajUda bhI phira se unake saMsarga meM Ane
se asaMyama kI pravRtti karanI par3atI hai  /  mahApApa karma ke r3haga samAna
sAkSAt hiMsA pizAciNI samAna, samagra tIna loka se napharata pAI huI  /
paraloka ke bar3e nukasAna ko na dekhanevAle, ghora aMdhakAra pUrNa narakAvAsa
samAna hamezA kaIM duHkha ke nidhAna samAna  /  strI ke aMga upAMga marmasthAna
yA usakA rUpa lAvaNya, usakI mIThI bolI yA kAmarAga kI vRddhi karanevAlA usake
darzana kA adhyavasAya bhI na karanA  /  sUtra-408 he gautama ! yaha strI
pralayakAla kI rAta kI taraha jisa taraha hamezA ajJAna aMdhakAra se lipIta hai
/  bIjalI kI taraha palabhara meM dikhate hI naSTa hone ke sneha svabhAvavAlI
hotI hai  /  zaraNa meM AnevAle kA ghAta karanevAle logoM kI taraha tatkAla
janma die bacce ke jIva kA hI bhakSaNa karanevAle samAna mahApApa karanevAlI
strI hotI hai, sajjaka pavana ke yoga se cUMghavAte uchalate lavaNasamudra ke
lahara samAna kaI taraha ke vikalpa-taraMga kI zreNI kI taraha jaise eka sthAna
meM eka svAmI ke lie sthira mana karake na rahanevAlI strI hotI hai  /
svayaMbhUramaNa samudra kAphI gaharA hone se use avagAhana karanA ati kaThina
hotA hai| vaise strI ke dila ati chala se bhare hote haiN| jisase usake dila ko
pahacAnanA kAphI muzkila hai  /  strI pavana samAna caMcala svabhAvavAlI hotI
hai, agni kI taraha sabakA bhakSaNa vAlA strI hotI hai, cAra kI taraha parAI
cIja pAne kI lAlasAvAlI hotI hai| kutte ko roTI kA Tukar3A de utane vakta dosta
bana jAe  /  usakI taraha jaba taka use artha do taba taka maitrI rakhanevAlI
yAni sarvasva har3apa karanevAlI aura phira bairiNI hotI hai  /  matsya laharoM
meM ikaTThe ho, kinAre para alaga ho jAe, usake pAsa ho taba taka sneha
rakhanevAlI, dUra jAne ke bAda bhUla jAnevAlI hotI hai  /  isa taraha kaIM lAkha
doSa se bharapUra aise sarva aMga aura upAMgavAlI bAhya aura abhyaMtara mahApApa
karanevAlI avinaya samAna  /  viSa kI velaDI, avinaya ke kAraNa se anartha
samUha ke utpanna karanevAlI strI hotI hai| jisa strI ke zarIra se hamezA
nIkalate badabUvAle azuci sar3e hue kutsanIya, nindanIya, napharata ke lAyaka
sarva aMga upAMgavAlI aura phira paramArtha se socA jAe to usake bhItara aura
bAhara ke zarIra ke avayava se jJAta mahAsattvavAlI kAmadeva se UMbanevAle aura
vairAgya pAkara AtmA se jJAta, sarvottama aura uttama puruSa ko aura
dharmAdharma kA rUpa acchI taraha se samaje ho unako vaisI strI ke lie palabhara
bhI kaise abhilASA ho ? sUtra-409-410 jisakI abhilASA puruSa karatA hai, usa
strI kI yoni meM puruSa ke eka saMyoga ke samaya nau lAkha paMcendriya
saMmUrchima jIva naSTa hote haiM  /  vo jIva ati sUkSma svarUpa hone se
carmacakSu se nahIM dekha sakate  /  isa kAraNa se aisA kahA jAtA hai ki strI ke
sAtha eka bAra yA bAra bAra bolacAla na karanA  /  aura phira usake aMga yA
upAMga rAgapUrvaka nirIkSaNa na karanA  /  yAvat brahmacArI puruSa ko mArga meM
strI ke sAtha gamana nahIM karanA  /  sUtra-411 he bhagavaMta ! strI ke sAtha
bAtacIta na karanA, aMgopAMga na dekhanA yA maithuna sevana kA tyAga karanA ? he
gautama! donoM kA tyAga karo  /  he bhagavaMta ! kyA strI kA samAgama karane
samAna maithuna kA tyAga karanA yA kaI taraha ke sacitta acitta cIja viSayaka
maithuna kA pariNAma mana, vacana, kAyA se trividha se sarvathA yAvajjIvana
tyAga kare ? he gautama ! use sarva tarIke se tyAga kro| sUtra -412 he
bhagavaMta ! jo koI sAdhu-sAdhvI maithuna sevana kare vo dUsaroM ke pAsa vandana
karavAe kyA ? muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda
Page 32

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  **Study/Purpose/Sutra Number** O
Gautama! If any sadhu-sadhvi, through divine, human or animal association,
engages in evil intentions regarding things like handcraft, etc., with a
conscious mind, and indulges in sexual intercourse through mind, speech, and
body, inspires others to do the same, considers those who engage in it as good,
and uses artificial and natural tools to engage in three-fold sexual
intercourse, or encourages or approves of it, then that sadhu-sadhvi is a bad
person with terrible consequences, ugly, extremely bad, whose face is not even
worth looking at, a consumer of the path of the world, far from the path of
liberation, a doer of great sins, not worthy of being worshipped. Not worthy of
being worshipped. Not worthy of being considered good by those who worship. Not
worthy of the three types of worship, or until they attain purity through
atonement, if others worship them, then do not worship them yourself.  **O
Bhagvant!** What do those who worship such people attain? **O Gautama!** They
become a great aspirant of the great Tirthankara Bhagvant, who possesses
eighteen thousand sheelangs. And relying on the results of that aspiration, they
attain endless worldly existence. **Sutra-413-415**  **O Gautama!** There are
some beings who can renounce women well. They also give up sexual intercourse.
Yet, they cannot give up the attachment to possessions. To the extent they have
attachment to possessions, whether conscious, unconscious, or both, whether much
or little, they enjoy them, to that extent they are called 'Sangwala'. A
'Sangwala' being cannot practice the three disciplines of knowledge, etc.,
therefore renounce possessions. **Sutra-416**  **O Gautama!** There are also
beings who renounce possessions, but do not renounce 'Aarammbh', they are also
called those who attain the cycle of existence. **Sutra-417**  **O Gautama!** If
a being is ready to begin, and engages in actions like 'Sanghatan' etc., of a
one-sensed or multi-sensed being, then **O Gautama!** Understand the type of
sinful karma they bind. **Sutra-418-420**  If a senseless being is forcibly,
unwillingly, for a short time, brought into contact with another being through
hands, feet, or other tools like a stick, etc., or if someone causes such
contact, or considers the one who does it as good, **O Gautama!** When this
karma, bound in this way, arises in the being's birth, then they suffer its
consequences with great distress for six months. The same karma, bound through
forceful contact, is suffered for twelve years. If they suffer intense remorse,
then for a thousand years, and if they suffer even more intense remorse, then
for ten thousand years. If they suffer intense 'Kilamana', then for a hundred
thousand years, and if they suffer even more intense 'Kilamana', then for ten
lakh years, they suffer the consequences of that karma. If they die, then they
suffer the pain of that karma for a crore years. Understand the same for beings
with three, four, and five senses, **O Gautama!**  The destruction of a subtle
earth-bodied being is called 'Alparambh' by all Kevalis. **O Gautama!** The
destruction of a subtle earth-bodied being is called 'Maharambh' by all Kevalis.
**Sutra-421**  **O Gautama!** In this way, intense karmas accumulate in infinite
measure. The soul is bound by the karma that it initiates. **Sutra-422-423**
Those who initiate bind karmas in the bound, touched, and removed states,
therefore one should renounce 'Aarammbh'. One who has renounced 'Aarammbh',
which brings an end to all beings, from earth-bodied beings onwards, in all
ways, is...  **Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi
Translation** Page 33

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka he
gautama ! yadi koI sAdhu-sAdhvI dIvya, mAnava yA tiryaMca saMga se yAvat
hastakarma Adi sacitta cIja viSayaka duSTa adhyavasAya kara ke mana, vacana,
kAyA se khuda maithuna seve, dUsaroM ko preraNA upadeza dekara maithuna sevana
karavAe, sevana karanevAle ko acchA mAne, kRtrima aura svAbhAvika upakaraNa se
usI taraha trividha-trividha maithuna kA sevana kare, karavAe yA anumodanA kare
vo sAdhu-sAdhvI duranta bUre vipAkavAle paMta-asuMdara, ati bUrA, mukha bhI
jisakA dekhanelAyaka nahIM hai, saMsAramArga kA sevana karanevAlA, mokSamArga se
dUra, mahApApa karma karanevAlA vo vaMdana karane lAyaka nahIM hai| vaMdana
karavAne lAyaka nahIM hai| vaMdana karanevAleko acchA mAnane lAyaka nahIM hai,
trividhe vaMdana ke ucita nahIM yA jahA~ taka prAyazcitta karake vizuddhi na ho,
taba taka dUsare vaMdana karate ho to khuda vaMdana na krnaa| he bhagavaMta !
aise logoM ko jo vaMdana kare vo kyA pAe ? he gautama ! aThAraha hajAra zIlAMga
dhAraNa karanevAle mahAnubhAva tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta kI mahAn AzAtanA
karanevAlA hotA hai  /  aura AzAtanA ke pariNAma ko Azrita karake yAvat ananta
saMsArIpana pAtA hai| sUtra-413-415 he gautama ! aise kucha jIva hote haiM ki jo
strI kA tyAga acchI taraha se kara sakate haiN| maithuna ko bhI chor3a dete haiM
/  phira bhI vo parigraha kI mamatA chor3a nahIM sakate  /  sacitta, acitta yA
ubhayayukta bahuta yA thor3A jitane pramANa meM usakI mamatA rakhate haiM,
bhogavaTA karate haiM, utane pramANa meM vo saMgavAlA kahalAtA hai  /  saMgavAlA
prANI jJAna Adi tIna kI sAdhanA nahIM kara sakatA, isalie parigraha kA tyAga
kro| sUtra - 416 he gautama ! aise jIva bhI hote haiM ki jo parigraha kA tyAga
karate haiM, lekina Arambha kA nahIM karate, vo bhI usI taraha bhava paramparA
pAnevAle kahalAte haiM  /  sUtra-417 he gautama ! Arambha karane ke lie taiyAra
haA aura ekendriya evaM vikalendriya jIva ke saMghaTana Adi karma kare to he
gautama ! vo jisa taraha kA pApakarma bA~dhe use tU smjh|| sUtra - 418-420 kisI
beindriya jIva ko balAtkAra se usI anicchA se eka vakta ke lie hAtha se pA~va se
dUsare kisI salI Adi upakaraNa se agAr3ha saMghaTTa kare  /  saMghaTTA karavAe,
aisA karanevAle ko acchA mAne  /  he gautama ! yahA~ isa prakAra bA~dhA huA
karma jaba vo jIva ke udaya meM AtA hai, taba usake vipAka bar3e kleza se cha
mahine taka bhugatanA par3atA hai| vo hI karma gAr3hapana se saMghaTTa karane se
bAraha sAla taka bhugatanA par3atA hai  /  agAr3ha paritApa kare to eka hajAra
sAla taka aura gAr3ha paritApa kare to daza hajAra sAla taka, agAr3ha kIlAmaNA
kare to eka lAkha sAla, gAr3ha kIlAmaNA kare to daza lAkha sAla taka usake
pariNAma-vipAka jIva ko bhugatane par3ate haiM  /  maraNa pAe to eka karor3a
sAla taka usa karma kI vedanA bhugatanI pdd'e| usI taraha tIna, cAra, pA~ca
indriyavAle jIva ke lie bhI samajho he gautama ! sUkSma pRthvIkAya ke eka jIva
kI jisameM virAdhanA hotI hai use sarva kevalI alpAraMbha kahate haiM  /  he
gautama ! jisameM sUkSma pRthvIkAya ko vinAza hotA hai, use sarva kevalI
mahAraMbha kahate haiM  /  sUtra - 421 he gautama ! usa taraha utkaTa karma
ananta pramANa meM ikaTe hote haiM  /  jo Arambha meM pravartate haiM vo AtmA
usa karma se ba~dhatA hai| sUtra-422-423 Arambha karanevAlA baddha, spRSTa aura
nikAcita avasthAvAle karma bA~dhate haiM isalie Arambha kA tyAga karanA cAhie  /
pRthvIkAya Adi jIva kA sarva bhAva se sarva taraha se aMta lAnevAle Arambha kA
jisane tyAga kiyA ho vo muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 33

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number: Those
who are free from birth and death, old age, all kinds of poverty and sorrow.
Sutra- 424-426 O Gautam! There are also beings in the world who, even after
knowing this, cannot be inclined to the worship of the right path due to their
solitary, peaceful nature. A being may engage in the right path and practice
severe and heroic restraint, but if he does not give up these five things that
will be said to him, then the restraint he has practiced is all in vain. 1.
Kusheel, 2. Oosann-Shithilpan such a difficult restrained life? They might say.
3. Yathachhandaswachhand, 4. Sabal-Dushit Charitrawale, 5. Pasattho. Do not even
look at these five. Sutra-427 The path taught by the omniscient Bhagvant
destroys all sorrow. And one who is trapped in worldly pride, who practices lax
conduct, and who abandons the path to liberation taught by Bhagvant. Sutra-428
Consider anyone who does not accept, does not take interest in, and contradicts
even a single word or a single step taught by the omniscient Bhagvant to be a
false-sighted person. Sutra-429 Knowing this, one should avoid all contact with
those five, including seeing them, talking to them, recognizing them, living
with them, etc., by all means for the sake of welfare and well-being. Sutra-430
O Bhagvant! You forbid seeing the corrupt in conduct, and then you give them
atonement. How can these two things be compatible? Sutra-431 O Gautam! It is
very difficult for a corrupt soul to cross the ocean of the world. Therefore,
such a soul is certainly given atonement out of compassion. Sutra-432 O
Bhagvant! Does atonement break the bondage of hell? O Gautam! Even after doing
atonement, many souls have gone to hell. Sutra-433-434 O Gautam! Souls who have
earned an infinite world certainly destroy it through atonement, then why don't
they break the age of hell? In this abode, nothing is impossible with atonement.
Except for one Bodhilabh, nothing is impossible for a being with atonement. Once
Bodhilabh is lost, it is difficult to get it back. Sutra-435-436 Apkay Paribhog,
Agnigay Aarambh and Mithun Sevan are the ones who bind the Abodhi Labh-Karma,
therefore, one should avoid them. Restrained souls should strive to abandon
Mithun, Apkay, and Agnigay, which bind Abodhi. Sutra-437 O Bhagvant! If Abodhi
Labh happens from the above-mentioned actions, then those householders are
always inclined towards such actions. Should they be considered to have failed
in adopting Shikshavrata, Gunavrata and Anuvrata? Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
(Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 34

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka satvare
janma-maraNa, jarA sarva taraha ke dAridrya aura duHkha se mukta hote haiM  /
sUtra- 424-426 he gautama ! jagata meM aise bhI jIva haiM ki jo yaha jAnane ke
bAda bhI ekAnta sukhazIlapana ke kAraNa se samyaga mArga kI ArAdhanA meM
pravRtta nahIM ho sakate  /  kisI jIva samyaga mArga meM jur3akara ghora aura
vIra saMyama tapa kA sevana kare lekina usake sAtha yaha jo pA~ca bAteM kahI
jAegI usakA tyAga na kare to usake sevana kie gae saMyama tapa sarva nirarthaka
haiM  /  1. kuzIla, 2. osanna-zithilapana aisA kaThina saMyama jIvana ? aisA
bola uThe  /  3. yathAcchaMdasvacchaMda, 4. sabala-dUSita cAritravAle, 5.
pAsattho  /  ina pA~ca ko dRSTi se bhI na dekheN| sUtra-427 sarvajJa bhagavaMta
ne upadeza dIyA huA mArga sarva duHkha ko naSTa karanevAlA hai| aura zAtA
gaurava meM pha~sA huA, zithila AcAra sevana karanevAlA, bhagavaMta ne batAe
mokSamArga ko choDanevAlA hotA hai| sUtra-428 sarvajJa bhagavaMta ne batAe eka
pada yA eka zabda ko bhI jo na mAne, ruci na kare aura viparIta prarUpaNA kare
use jarura mithyAdRSTi smjho| sUtra-429 isa prakAra jAnakara usa pA~ca kA
saMsarga darzana, bAtacIta karanA, pahacAna, sahavAsa Adi sarva bAta hita
kekalyANa ke arthI sarva upAya se varjana karanA  /  sUtra-430 he bhagavaMta !
zIla bhraSTa kA darzana karane kA Apa niSedha karate ho aura phira prAyazcitta
to use dete ho  /  yaha donoM bAta kisa taraha saMgata ho sake ? sUtra - 431 he
gautama ! zIlabhraSTa AtmA ko saMsAra sAgara pAra karanA kAphI muzkila hai|
isalie yakInana vaise AtmA kI anukaMpA karake use prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai|
sUtra - 432 he bhagavaMta ! kyA prAyazcitta karane se naraka kA ba~dhA huA Ayu
chedana ho jAe? he gautama ! prAyazcitta karake bhI kaIM AtmAe durgati meM gaI
hai| sUtra - 433-434 he gautama ! jinhoMne ananta saMsAra upArjana kiyA hai aise
AtmA yakInana prAyazcitta se use naSTa karate haiM, to phira vo naraka kI Ayu
kyoM na toDe ? isa bhavana meM prAyazcitta se cha bhI asAdhya nahIM hai  /  eka
bodhilAbha sivA jIva ko prAyazcitta se kucha bhI asAdhya nahIM hai  /  eka bAra
pAyA huA bodhilAbha hAra jAe to phira se milanA muzkila hai sUtra - 435-436
apakAya paribhoga, agnikAya Arambha aura maithuna sevana abodhi lAbha-karma
baMdhAnevAle haiM, isalie usakA varjana karanA  /  abodhi ba~dhAnevAle maithuna,
apakAya, agnikAya kA paribhAga saMyata AtmAe prayatnapUrvaka tyAga kare  /
sUtra - 437 he bhagavaMta ! upara batAe hue kArya se abodhi lAbha ho to vo
gRhastha hamezA vaise kArya meM pravRtta hote haiM  /  unheM zikSAvrata,
guNavrata aura aNuvrata dhAraNa karanA niSphala mAnA jAe kyA ? muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 34

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number -
438-443  O Gautam! The path to liberation is said to be of two kinds. One is of
the Uttama Shraman and the other is of the Uttama Shravak. The first is of the
Mahavrata-dhari and the second is of the Anuvrata-dhari. The Sadhus have
renounced all sinful activities for life, through the three-fold threefold. The
Shraman has accepted the severe Mahavrata, which is the means to liberation. The
Grihastha has renounced the three-fold, two-fold, or one-fold grossness for a
limited time, meaning the Shravak accepts the vows from the country. While the
Sadhus have renounced the three-fold threefold of Moksha, Iccha, Aarambh, and
Parigraha. They have donned the Ling-chinha or the attire of the Jineshwara,
having renounced sins. When the Grihastha serves the Shraman without renouncing
Iccha, Aarambh, and Parigraha, and without donning the attire of the Jineshwara,
remaining attached to his wife, then O Gautam! The Grihastha observes the vow of
renouncing sins from the country, therefore, his path does not have hope.
Sutra-444-445  Those who have renounced all sins, have adopted the five
Mahavrata, and have accepted the attire of the Lord, if they do not renounce
Mithuna, Apkay, and Agnikai, then they are said to have great hope. For the same
reason, the Jineshwara say that these three have great hope. Therefore, do not
even desire to consume these three in your mind. Sutra-446-447  O Gautam! It has
been said with great determination that the Yati binds the karma of Abodhilaabh,
and the Grihastha does not bind Abodhilaabh. And then the restrained Muni binds
the Abodhilaabh karma with these three intentions: 1. Violation of command, 2.
Breaking of vows, and 3. Deviation from the right path. Sutra-448  Mithuna,
Apkay, and Teukaay, the consumption of these three leads to Abodhik Laabh.
Therefore, the Muni should strive to completely renounce these three. Sutra-449
The soul that consumes atonement and holds on to the afflictions in the mind,
and then does not act according to what has been said, will go to hell.
Sutra-450  O Gautam! The one who has weak faith, does not perform atonement, or
if he does, he does it with a troubled mind, then should it not be considered
against compassion? Sutra-451-452  O Gautam! When the kings and others fight in
battle, some soldiers get injured, the arrow enters the body, then removing the
arrow or performing surgery causes pain. But it is not considered against
compassion to perform surgery. The one who performs surgery is not considered
devoid of compassion, similarly, in the battle of the world, the removal of the
internal or external arrow-like afflictions is considered unparalleled
compassion by the Bhagvant. Sutra-453-455  O Bhagvant! As long as the arrow
remains in the body, the being experiences pain, when the arrow is removed, he
becomes happy. Similarly, the one who deceives the Tirthankara, Siddha Bhagvant,
Sadhu, and Dharma, and performs any wrong conduct, becomes happy by performing
atonement. He becomes happy by removing the emotional arrow, similarly, what
virtue will atonement have for the soul? The poor man should act in a difficult
and painful way, like...  Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra -
Hindi Translation Page 35

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra -
438-443 he gautama ! mokSa mArga do taraha kA batAyA hai  /  eka uttama zramaNa
kA aura dUsarA uttama zrAvaka kA  /  prathama mahAvratadhArI kA aura dUsarA
aNuvratadhArI kA  /  sAdhuoM ne trividha trividha se sarva pApa vyApAra kA
jIvana paryanta tyAga kiyA hai  /  mokSa ke sAdhanabhUta ghora mahAvrata kA
zramaNa ne svIkAra kiyA hai| gRhastha ne parimita kAla ke lie dvividha, ekavidha
yA trividha sthUlapana se sAvadha kA tyAga kiyA hai, yAni zrAvaka deza se vrata
aMgIkAra karate haiM  /  jaba ki sAdhuoMne trividha trividha se mUrchA, IcchA,
Arambha, parigraha kA tyAga kiyA hai  /  pApa vosirAkara jinezvara ke liMga-
cinha yA veza dhAraNa kiyA hai  /  jaba gRhastha IcchA Arambha parigraha ke
tyAga kie binA apanI strI meM Asakta rahakara jinezvara ke veza ko dhAraNa kie
binA zramaNa kI sevA karate haiM, isalie he gautama ! eka deza se gRhastha pApa
tyAga vrata kA pAlana karate haiM, isalie usake mArga kI gRhastha ko AzAtanA
nahIM hotii| sUtra-444-445 jinhoMne sarva pApa kA pratyAkhyAna kiyA hai  /
paMca mahAvrata dhAraNa kiyA hai, prabhu ke veza ko svIkAra kiyA hai| vo yadi
maithuna apkAya agnikAya sevana kA tyAga na kare to unako bar3I AzAtanA batAI
hai  /  usI kAraNa se jinezvara ina tIna meM bar3I AzAtanA kahate haiM  /
isalie una tIna kA mana se bhI sevana ke lie abhilASA mata kro| sUtra-446-447 he
gautama ! kAphI dRr3ha socakara yaha kahA hai ki yati abodhilAbha kA karma
bA~dhe aura gRhastha abodhilAbha na bA~dhe  /  aura phira saMyata muni ina tIna
Azaya se abodhilAbha karma bA~dhate haiM  /  1. AjJA kA ullaMghana, 2. vrata kA
bhaMga aura 3. unmArga pravartana  /  sUtra-448 maithuna, apakAya aura teUkAya
ina tIna ke sevana se abodhika lAbha hotA hai  /  isalie muni ko kozIza karake
sarvathA ina tInoM kA tyAga karanA caahie| sUtra - 449 jo AtmA prAyazcitta kA
sevana kare aura mana meM saMkleza rakhe aura phira jo kahA ho usake anusAra na
kare, to vo naraka meM jaae| sUtra-450 he gautama ! jo maMda zraddhAvAlA ho, vo
prAyazcitta na kare, yA kare to bhI kliSTa manavAlA hokara karatA hai  /  to
unakI anukaMpA karanA viruddha na mAnA jAe? sUtra - 451-452 he gautama! rAjAdi
jaba saMgrAmameM yuddha karate haiM, taba usameM kucha sainika ghAyala hote
haiM, tIra zarIra meM jAtA hai taba tIra bAhara nIkAlane se yA zalya uddhAra
karane se use duHkha hotA hai  /  lekina zalya uddhAra karane kI anukaMpA meM
virodha nahIM mAnA jAtA  /  zalya uddhAra karanevAlA anukaMpA rahita nahIM mAnA
jAtA, vaise saMsAra samAna saMgrAma meM aMgopAMga ke bhItara yA bAhara ke zalya-
bhAva zalya rahe ho usakA uddhAra karane meM anupama anukaMpA bhagavaMta ne
batAI sUtra-453-455 he bhagavaMta ! jaba taka zarIra meM zalya ho taba taka jIva
duHkha kA ahasAsa karate haiM, jaba zalya nIkAla dete haiM taba sukhI hote haiM
/  usI prakAra tIrthaMkara, siddhabhagavaMta, sAdhu aura dharma ko dhokhA dekara
jo kucha bhI akArya AcaraNa kiyA ho usa kA prAyazcitta kara sukhI hotA hai  /
bhAvazalya dUra hone se sukhI ho, vaise AtmA ke lie prAyazcitta karane se kauna-
sA guNa hogA ? becAre dIna puruSa ke pAsa duSkara aura duHkha meM AcaraNa kiyA
jAe vaise muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page
35

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānīśītha' Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number Why
give Prāyaścitta? Sūtra-456-457 O Gautama! When a surgical instrument is removed
from the body, but the wound is not healed until ointment is applied and a
bandage is tied, then the wound does not heal. Similarly, after the removal of
the mental wound, this Prāyaścitta is like ointment, bandage, and tying the
bandage. Just as a person is comforted by sorrow, Prāyaścitta is an infallible
remedy for quickly healing the wound of sin. Sūtra-458-460 O Bhagavant! Does the
Prāyaścitta mentioned by the omniscient, even in a small amount, purify all sins
in practice, hearing, or knowing? O Gautama! In the summer, when one is
extremely thirsty and there is extremely delicious cold water nearby, but until
it is consumed, the thirst is not quenched. Similarly, knowing the Prāyaścitta,
until it is practiced with sincerity, the sin increases but does not decrease.
Sūtra-461 O Bhagavant! Does sin increase due to negligence? If at some point the
soul becomes careful and stops committing sin, does that sin remain the same or
does it stop increasing? Sūtra-462 O Gautama! Just as a snake bite occurs due to
negligence, but the poison increases from behind for the one in need, so does
sin increase. Sūtra-463-465 O Bhagavant! Those who know the ultimate truth, who
know all the Prāyaścitta, do they also have to speak according to their actions?
O Gautama! Those humans who, through mantras and spells, can revive the
unconscious without surgery and without a needle, even if they are
knowledgeable, become unconscious, wounded by a spear in battle, they revive
others who are unconscious without surgery. Similarly, even though a virtuous
sage is skilled, he should truthfully reveal his sin to another sage. Just as a
disciple reveals his sin to his teacher, then he becomes pure. Similarly, to
purify oneself, one should confess one's faults to others and perform
Prāyaścitta according to the rules. Study-2-The Muni Dīparatnasāgar's Hindi
translation of the complete Sūtra-466 This 'Mahānīśītha' Sūtra should be read
aloud to all Śramaṇa (Śramaṇī) according to the rules of both studies. Muni
Dīparatnasāgar's (Mahānīśītha) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Translation Page 36

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
prAyazcitta kyoM de? sUtra-456-457 he gautama ! zarIra meM se zalya bAhara
nIkAlA lekina jhakhma bharane ke lie jaba taka malhama lagAyA na jAe, paTTI na
bA~dhI jAe taba taka vo jhakhma nahIM bharatA  /  vaise bhAvazalya kA uddhAra
karane ke bAda yaha prAyazcitta malhama paTTI aura paTTI bA~dhane samAna samajho
/  duHkha se karake rUjha lAI jAe vaise pApa rUpa jhakhma kI jalda rUjha lAne ke
lie prAyazcitta amogha upAya hai| sUtra-458-460 he bhagavaMta ! sarvajJa ne
batAe prAyazcitta thor3e se bhI AcaraNa meM, sUnane meM yA jAnane meM kyA sarva
pApa kI zuddhi hotI hai ? he gautama ! garmI ke dinoM meM ati pyAsa lagI ho,
pAsa hI meM ati svAdiSTa zItala jala ho, lekina jaba taka usakA pAna na kiyA jAe
taba taka tRSA kI zAnti nahIM hotI usI taraha prAyazcitta jAnakara jaba taka
niSkapaTa bhAva se sevana na kiyA jAe taba taka usa pApa kI vRddhi hotI hai
lekina kama nahIM hotaa| sUtra -461 he bhagavaMta ! kyA pramAda se pApa kI
vRddhi hotI hai ? kyA kisI vakta AtmA sAvadha ho jAe aura pApa karane se ruka
jAe to vo pApa utanA hI rahe yA vRddhi hote rUka na jAe ? sUtra-462 he gautama !
jaise pramAda se sA~pa kA DaMkha lagA ho lekina jaruratavAle ko pIche se viSa kI
vRddhi ho vaise pApa kI bhI vRddhi hotI hai| sUtra-463-465 he bhagavaMta ! jo
paramArtha ko jAnanevAle hote haiM, tamAma prAyazcitta kA jJAtA ho unheM bhI kyA
apane akArya jisa mutAbika hue ho usa mutAbika kahanA par3e? he gautama ! jo
mAnava taMtra maMtra se karor3a ko zalya binA aura iMkha rahita karake mUrchita
ko khar3A kara dete haiM, aisA jAnanevAle bhI iMkhavAle hue ho, nizceSTa bane
ho, yuddha meM barachI ke ghA se ghAyala hue ho unheM dUsare zalya rahita mUrchA
rahita banAte haiM  /  usI taraha zIla se ujjvala sAdhu bhI nipuNa hone ke
bAvajUda bhI yathArtha taraha se dUsare sAdhu se apanA pApa prakAzita kare  /
jisa taraha apanA ziSya apane pAsa pApa prakaTa kare taba vo vizuddha hote haiM
/  vaise khuda ko zuddha hone ke lie dUsaroM ke pAsa apanI AlocanA prAyazcitta
vidhivata karanA caahie| adhyayana-2-kA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt hindI anuvAda
pUrNa sUtra-466 yaha 'mahAnisIha'' sUtra ke donoM adhyayana kI vidhivata sarva
zramaNa (zramaNI) ko vAcanA denI yAni paDhAnA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 36

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number
Study-3-Kushila-Lakshan Sutra - 467 This third study is of such a nature that it
can be explained to all four (Sadhu-Sadhvi, Shravak-Shravika). Because there are
very large and very excellent Sutras and meanings worthy of being believed by
command. It should be given to the appropriate disciple in the true way.
Sutra-468-469 Whoever reveals it from the beginning, gives it to someone who is
not well-versed, teaches it to an unchaste person, teaches it to someone who is
devoid of purpose and method, will suffer the pain of madness, insanity, or
long-term illness-terror, become corrupt in restraint, and not receive worship
at the time of death. Sutra-470-473 Here, the first study explains the previous
method. In the second study, it is said to be of this kind, and the rest of the
studies are to be understood as being without method. In the second study, there
are five Ayambils, and in them there are nine Uddeshas. In the third, there are
eight Ayambils and seven Uddeshas. Just as it is said in the third, so also
understand it in the fourth study. In the fifth study, there are six Ayambils,
in the sixth, two, in the seventh, three, and in the eighth, ten Ayambils. In
this way, one should continuously carry and bear this excellent Shruta Skandha
named Mahanishith, along with the Ayambils, Tapas, and the attached Auttvaayana,
including the intake of food and water. Sutra - 474 Those who are serious,
great, intelligent, endowed with the qualities of Tapas, well-tested, and have
the method of time-taking, should receive the recitation from the Vachanacharya.
Sutra - 475-476 Always purify the area carefully when you do this reading.
Otherwise, you will be surprised by some area deity. This is the essential and
excellent essence of the Sutra, including the limbs and appendages. Just as one
is cheated by taking a treasure without the proper method, so also there is an
opportunity to be cheated by taking this Shruta Skandha without the proper
method. Sutra-477-478 Either auspicious-beneficial actions are full of
obstacles. Even in auspiciousness, there is auspiciousness, so this Shruta
Skandha should be taken without obstacles. Only those who are blessed and
virtuous can read it. Sutra-479 O Bhagvant! What are the characteristics of that
Kushila, etc., so that one can know them well and completely abandon them? Sutra
- 480-481 O Gautam! Generally, understand their characteristics in this way and
completely abandon their contact. Know that there are two hundred types of
Kushila, and two types of Osanna have been described. There are twenty-two types
of Passathas of knowledge, etc., and three types of strong-charactered. O
Gautam! Of those, the two hundred types of Kushila, I tell you first, are those
whose contact corrupts the Muni in an instant. Sutra-482-484 In brief, there are
two types of Kushila: 1. Parampara Kushila, 2. Aparampra Kushila. Of those, the
Parampara Kushila is of two types: 1. Seven-eight Guru Parampara Kushila and 2.
One, two, three Guru Parampara Kushila. And Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
(Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 37

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
adhyayana-3-kuzIla-lakSaNa sUtra - 467 yaha tIsarA adhyayana cAroM ko (sAdhu-
sAdhvI, zrAvaka-zrAvikA ko) sUnA zake usa prakAra kA hai  /  kyoMki ati bar3e
aura ati zreSTha AjJA se zraddhA karane ke lAyaka sUtra aura artha haiM  /  use
yathArtha vidhi se ucita ziSya ko denA caahie| sUtra-468-469 jo koI ise
prakaTapana se prarUpe, acchI taraha se binA yoga karanevAle ko de, abrahmacArI
se par3hAe, uddezAdika vidhi rahita ko par3hAe vo unmAda, pAgalapana pAe yA
lambe arase kI bImArI-AtaMka ke duHkha bhugate, saMyama se bhraSTa ho, maraNa ke
vakta ArAdhanA nahIM pAte  /  sUtra-470-473 yahA~ prathama adhyayana meM pUrva
vidhi batAI hai  /  dUsare adhyayana meM isa taraha kA vidhi kahanA aura bAkI ke
adhyayana kI avidhi samajhanA, dUsare adhyayana meM pA~ca AyaMbila usameM nau
uddezA hote haiM  /  tIsare meM ATha AyaMbila aura sAta uddezo, jisa prakAra
tIsare meM kahA usa prakAra cauthe adhyayana meM bhI samajhanA, pA~cave
adhyayana meM cha AyaMbila, chaThe meM do, sAtave meM tIna, AThave meM daza
AyaMbila aise lagAtAra AyaMbila tapa saMlagna AUttavAyaNA sahita AhAra pAnI
grahaNa karake yaha mahAnizItha nAma ke zreSTha zrutaskaMdha ko vahana dhAraNa
karanA caahie| sUtra - 474 gambhIratAvAle mahA buddhizAlI tapa ke guNa yukta
acchI taraha se parIkSA meM uttIrNa hue hoM, kAla grahaNa vidhi kI ho unheM
vAcanAcArya ke pAsa vAcanA grahaNa karanI caahie| sUtra - 475-476 hamezA kSetra
kI zuddhi sAvadhAnI se jaba kare taba yaha par3hAnA  /  varanA kisI kSetra
devatA se hairAna ho  /  aMga aura upAMga Adi sUtra kA yaha sArabhUta zreSTha
tattva hai  /  mahAnidhi se avidhi se grahaNa karane meM jisa taraha dhokhA
khAtI hai vaise isa zrutaskaMdha se avidhi se grahaNa karane meM ThagAne kA
avasara utpanna hotA hai| sUtra- 477-478 yA to zreyakArI-kalyANakArI kArya kaIM
vighnavAle hote haiM  /  zreya meM bhI zreya ho to yaha zrutaskaMdha hai, isalie
use nirvighna grahaNa karanA cAhie  /  jo dhanya hai, puNyavaMta hai vo hI ise
par3ha sakate haiN| sUtra-479 he bhagavaMta ! usa kuzIla Adi ke lakSaNa kisa
taraha ke hote haiM ? ki jo acchI taraha jAnakara usa kA sarvathA tyAga kara
sake? sUtra - 480-481 he gautama ! Ama tora para unake lakSaNa isa prakAra
samajhanA aura samajhakara usakA sarvathA saMsarga tyAga karanA, kuzIla do sau
prakAra ke jAnanA, osanna do taraha ke batAe haiM  /  jJAna Adi ke pAsatthA,
bAIza taraha se aura sabala cAritravAle tIna taraha ke haiM  /  he gautama !
usameM jo do sau prakAra ke kuzIla haiM vo tumheM pahale kahatA hU~ ki jisake
saMsarga se muni palabhara meM bhraSTa hotA hai| sUtra-482-484 usameM saMkSepa
se kuzIla do taraha kA hai  /  1. paramparA kuzIla, 2. aparamparA kuzIla  /
usameM jo paramparA kuzIla hai vo do taraha kA hai  /  1. sAta-ATha guru
paramparA kuzIla aura 2. eka, do, tIna guru paramparA kuzIla  /  aura muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 37

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
Then, the one who is skillful in the non-traditional way is of two types. The
one who is skillful in the Āgama, in the Guru Paramparā, in the order or
practice, is considered skillful. Sūtra-485-486  The one who is skillful in the
non-Āgama is of many types, they are as follows: Jñāna Kushīla, Darśana Kushīla,
Chāritra Kushīla, Tap Kushīla, and the one who is skillful in Vīryāchāra. Among
them, the one who is Jñāna Kushīla is of three types: Praśasta Praśasta Jñāna
Kushīla, Apraśasta Jñāna Kushīla, and Supraśasta Jñāna Kushīla. Sūtra-487  Among
them, the one who is Praśasta Praśasta Jñāna Kushīla is of two types: from the
Āgama and from the non-Āgama. Among them, the one who is from the Āgama, the one
who teaches the study of the group of things that are Praśasta Praśasta in the
form of Vibhangajñānī, is the study Kushīla. The one who is from the non-Āgama,
the one who reads, teaches, recites, and examines the group of meanings of the
scriptures of various types of Praśasta-Praśasta Parpākhaṇḍa, is the same as the
Kushīla. Sūtra-488  Among them, the one who is Apraśasta Jñāna Kushīla is of 29
types. They are as follows:  1. The one who is skillful in using mantras and
tantras related to Sāvadya Vāda. 2. The one who teaches and learns Vidya-Mantra-
Tantra, i.e., the one who is skillful in Vastu Vidya. 3. The one who observes,
tells, and teaches the four astrological sciences of Graha-Nakshatra, i.e., the
one who is skillful in Lakṣaṇa. 4. The one who tells about Nimitta, i.e., the
one who is skillful in Lakṣaṇa, who tells by observing the characteristics of
the body, and teaches its scriptures. 5. The one who tells and teaches the
Lakṣaṇa Śāstra of Śakuna Śāstra, i.e., the one who is skillful in Lakṣaṇa. 6.
The one who teaches and learns the scriptures of the one who teaches Hasti
Shiksha, i.e., the one who is skillful in Lakṣaṇa. 7. The one who learns the
education of Dhanurveda and teaches its scriptures, i.e., the one who is
skillful in Lakṣaṇa. 8. The one who teaches the use of Gandharva Veda, i.e., the
one who is skillful in Rūpa. 9. The one who teaches the scriptures that tell the
characteristics of men and women, i.e., the one who is skillful in Rūpa. 10. The
one who tells and teaches the use of Kāma Śāstra, i.e., the one who is skillful
in Rūpa. 11. The one who teaches and uses the scriptures of Kautuka Indrajal,
i.e., the one who is skillful. 12. The one who teaches Lekhanakala and
Chitrakala, i.e., the one who is skillful in Rūpa. 13. The one who teaches
Lepkarma Vidya, i.e., the one who is skillful in Rūpa. 14. The one who performs,
causes to perform, teaches, and tells about various types of Vellari, its roots,
and its extraction, inspires, breaks and cuts plants and vines, i.e., the one
who is skillful in Rūpa, who uses various types of faulty Vaidaka Vidya
scriptures. 15. The one who uses Anjan in that way. 16. The one who uses Yoga
Churna. 17. The one who uses Suvarna Dhatuvada. 18. The one who uses
Rajadandaniiti. 19. The one who uses Śāstra Astra Agni Bijali Parvat. 20. The
one who uses Sphatik Ratna. 21. The one who uses Ratna Ki Kasauti. 22. The one
who uses Ras Vedha related scriptures. 23. The one who uses Amatya Shiksha. 24.
The one who uses Gupt Tantra-Mantra. 25. The one who uses Kal Desha Sandhi. 26.
The one who gives advice on fighting. 27. The one who uses Śastra. 28. The one
who uses Marg. 29. The one who uses Jahaj Vyavahar.  And so on, the one who
tells and causes to tell the meaning of the scriptures that explain this, i.e.,
the one who is Apraśasta Jñāna Kushīla. In this way, the one who reads,
contemplates, reflects, searches, investigates, listens to, and examines Pāpa-
Śruta is called Apraśasta Jñāna Kushīla. Sūtra-489  Among them, the one who is
Supraśasta Jñāna Kushīla is also of two types: from the Āgama and from the non-
Āgama. Among them, the one who is from the Āgama...  **Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kr̥t
(Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda** Page 38

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka phira jo
aparamparA kuzIla hai vo do tarIke kA hai  /  Agama se guru paramparA se krama
yA paripATI meM jo koI kuzIla the vo hI kuzIla mAne jAte haiN| sUtra-485-486
noAgama se kuzIla kaI taraha ke haiM vo isa prakAra - jJAna kuzIla, darzana
kuzIla, cAritra kuzIla, tapa kuzIla, vIryAcAra meM kuzIla  /  usameM jo jJAna
kuzIla hai vo tIna prakAra ke haiM  /  prazastA prazasta jJAna kuzIla, aprazasta
jJAna kuzIla aura suprazasta jJAna kuzIla  /  sUtra -487 usameM jo prazastA
prazasta jJAna kuzIla hai use do taraha ke jAno  /  Agama se aura noAgama se  /
usameM Agama se vibhaMga jJAnI ke prarUpela prazastA prazasta cIja samUhavAle
adhyayana paDhAnA vaha adhyayana kazIla, noAgama se kaI taraha ke prazastA-
prazasta parapAkhaMr3a ke zAstra ke artha samUha ko par3hanA, par3hAnA, vAcanA,
anuprekSA karane samAna kushiil| sUtra - 488 usameM jo aprazasta jJAna kuzIla
hai vo 29 prakAra ke haiM  /  vo isa taraha1. sAvadyavAda viSayaka maMtra,
taMtra kA prayoga karane samAna kuzIla  /  2. vidyA-maMtra-taMtra par3hAnA-
par3hanA yAni vastuvidyA kuzIla  /  3. graha-nakSatra cAra jyotiSa zAstra
dekhanA, kahanA, par3hAnA samAna lakSaNa kuzIla  /  4. nimitta kahanA  /  zarIra
ke lakSaNa dekhakara kahanA, usake zAstra par3hAnA samAna lakSaNa kuzIla  /  5.
zakuna zAstra lakSaNa zAstra kahanA, par3hAnA samAna lakSaNa kuzIla  /  6. hasti
zikSA batAnevAle zAstra par3hanA par3hAnA samAna lakSaNa kuzIla  /  7.
dhanurveda kI zikSA lenA usake zAstra par3hAnA samAna lakSaNa kuzIla  /  8.
gaMdharvaveda kA prayoga zIkhalAnA yAni rUpa kuzIla  /  9. puruSa-strI ke
lakSaNa kahanevAle zAstra paDhAnevAle rUpa kuzIla  /  10. kAmazAstra ke prayoga
kahanevAle, par3hAnevAle rUpa kuzIla  /  11. kautuka indrajAla ke zastra kA
prayoga karanevAle par3hAnevAle kuzIla  /  12. lekhanakalA, citrakalA
zIkhalAnevAle rUpa kuzIla  /  13. lepakarma vidyA par3hAnevAle rUpa kuzIla  /
14. vamana virecana ke prayoga karanA, karavAnA, zIkhalAnA, kaI taraha kI
velar3I usakI jar3a nIkAlane ke lie kahanA, preraNA denA, vanaspati-vela
tor3anA, kaTavAne ke samAna kaIM doSavAlI vaidaka vidyA ke zastra anusAra
prayoga karanA, vo vidyA par3hanA, par3hAnA yAni rUpa kuzIla  /  15. usa prakAra
aMjana prayoga  /  16. yogacUrNa  /  17. suvarNa dhAtuvAda  /  18. rAjadaMDanIti
/  19. zAstra astra agni bIjalI parvata  /  20. sphaTika ratna  /  21. ratna kI
ksauttii| 22. rasa vedha viSayaka zAstra  /  23. amAtya zikSA  /  24. gupta
taMtra-maMtra  /  25. kAla dezasaMdhi krvaanaa| 26. lar3AI karavAne kA upadeza
/  27. zastra  /  28. mArga  /  29. jahAja vyavahAra | Adi yaha nirupaNa
karanevAle zAstra kA artha kathana karanA karavAnA yAni aprazasta jJAna kuzIla
/  isa prakAra pApa-zruta kI vAcanA, vicAraNA, parAvartana, usakI khoja,
saMzodhana, usakA zravaNa karanA aprazasta jJAna kuzIla kahalAtA hai| sUtra -
489 usameM jo suprazasta jJAnakuzIla hai vo bhI do taraha ke jAna lene Agama se
aura noAgama se  /  usameM Agama muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 38

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'**  Study/Purpose/Sutra Number from
well-established knowledge, such five types of knowledge or those who possess
well-established knowledge, aspiring to well-established knowledge, i.e., well-
established knowledge seeker. Sutra -490  From no Agam, well-established
knowledge seeker is of eight types - study well-established knowledge untimely,
teach, receive well-established knowledge from disrespect, make others receive,
read well-established knowledge from disrespect, read well-established knowledge
without wearing any Upadhan, teach, hide the one who has read the well-
established Sutra meaning, read the Sutra without vowels and consonants, with
fewer letters, with more letters, teach, read the Sutra, meaning oppositely,
teach. Read and teach the doubtful Sutra etc. Sutra -491  Those who read or
teach well-established knowledge without wearing any Upadhan, those who approve
of the reader or teacher as good, are the great sinners, aspiring to the great
well-established knowledge. Sutra -492  O Bhagvant! If this is so, then should
one wear the five auspicious Upadhan? O Gautam! First knowledge and then
compassion, i.e., restraint, i.e., knowledge, leads to the cultivation of
character and compassion. Compassion makes one see all the living beings,
creatures, ghosts, and beings of the world as oneself. Seeing that all the
living beings, creatures, ghosts, and beings of the world experience happiness
and sorrow like oneself, one stays away from causing pain, torment, harassment,
etc., to frighten, and terrify other beings. By doing so, there is no inflow of
karma. By stopping the inflow of karma, the doors of inflow of karma are closed
due to the same cause. By closing the doors of inflow, there is suppression of
the senses and calmness in the soul.  Therefore, there is equality towards
enemies and friends. From equality towards enemies and friends, there is freedom
from attachment and aversion, from that, there is forgiveness, humility,
simplicity, non-greed, from that, there is freedom from passions. From freedom
from passions, there is right conduct. From right conduct, there is knowledge of
the soul and other things. From that, there is freedom from attachment to
everything. From no attachment to everything, there is destruction of ignorance,
delusion, and falsehood, i.e., there is wisdom. From wisdom, there is a true
understanding of what is harmful and what is beneficial, and a firm
determination to attain solitary liberation.  From this, there is abandonment of
what is harmful and practice of what is beneficial, one becomes very diligent in
such work. After that, there is a gradual practice of the supreme Dharma, which
is pure, excellent, forgiveness, etc., ten types, non-violence, and a
concentrated and attached mind in practicing and making others practice. After
that, i.e., the practice of the ten types of Dharma, including forgiveness,
etc., and non-violence, there is concentration and attachment in the soul, there
is abandonment of all attachments, which are the supreme forgiveness, supreme
gentleness, supreme simplicity, supreme external wealth, gold, etc., and
internal attachments, which are the form of desire, anger, etc. And there is
self-absorption and supreme bliss in the practice of the twelve types of
extreme, fierce, and painful austerities and vows.  Further, there is a firm
determination to practice all the seventeen types of complete restraint. There
is a firm determination to practice the supreme truthfulness in speech, the
welfare of the six types of living beings, one's strength, vigor, effort, and
prowess without hiding, and to practice the path of liberation. There is a firm
determination to practice the supreme self-study, meditation, like water, to
wash away the dirt of sinful karma. And then, there is the supreme non-
possession, supreme purity, with all feelings, completely pure, free from all
faults, with nine secrets, restrained from the eighteen places of restraint,
i.e., abandoning the eighteen types of non-Brahma.  After that, there is the
supreme forgiveness, humility, simplicity, non-greed, austerity, restraint,
truthfulness, sorrow, non-possession, extreme firmness,  Muni Diparatnasagar
Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 39

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka se
suprazasta jJAna aise pA~ca taraha ke jJAna kI yA suprazasta jJAna dhAraNa
karanevAloM kI AzAtanA karanevAlA yAni suprazasta jJAna kushiil| sUtra -490
_noAgama se suprazasta jJAna kuzIla ATha taraha ke - akAla suprazasta jJAna
par3he, par3hAe, avinaya se suprazasta jJAna grahaNa kare, karavAe, abahumAna se
suprazasta jJAna paThana kare, upadhAna kie binA suprazasta jJAna par3hanA,
par3hAnA, jisake pAsa suprazasta sUtra artha par3he ho use chipAe, vo svara-
vyaMjana rahita, kama akSara, jyAdA akSaravAle sUtra par3hanA, par3hAnA, sUtra,
artha viparItapana se par3hanA, par3hAnA  /  saMdehavAle sUtrAdika par3hanA-
par3hAnA  /  sUtra -491 yaha ATha taraha ke pada ko jo kisI upadhAna vahana kie
binA suprazasta jJAna par3he yA par3hAe, par3hanevAle yA par3hAnevAleko acche
mAnakara anumodanA kare vo mahApApa karma suprazasta jJAna kI mahA AzAtanA
karanevAlA hotA hai sUtra -492 he bhagavaMta ! yadi aisA hai to kyA paMca
maMgala ke upadhAna karane cAhie ? he gautama ! prathama jJAna aura usake bAda
dayA yAni saMyama yAni jJAna se cAritra-dayA pAlana hotA hai  /  dayA se sarva
jagata ke sAre jIva-prANI-bhUta-sattva ko apanI taraha dekhanevAlA hotA hai  /
jagata ke sarva jIva, prANI, bhUta sattva ko apanI taraha sukha-duHkha hotA hai,
aisA dekhanevAlA hone se vo dUsare jIva ke saMghaTTa karane ke lie paritApa yA
kIlAmaNA-upadrava Adi duHkha utpanna karanA, bhayabhIta karanA, trAsa denA
ityAdika se dUra rahatA hai  /  aisA karane se karma kA Azrava nahIM hotA  /
karma kA Azrava banda hone se karma Ane ke kAraNa samAna Azrava dvAra banda hote
haiM  /  Azrava ke dvAra banda hone se indriya kA damana aura AtmA meM upazama
hotA hai| isalie zatru aura mitra ke prati samAna bhAva sahitapana hotA hai  /
zatru mitra ke prati samAna bhAva sahitapana se rAgadveSa rahitapana usase
kSamA, namratA, saralatA, nirlobhatA hone se kaSAya rahitapana prApta hotA hai
/  kaSAya rahitapana hone se samyaktva utpanna hotA hai  /  samyaktva hone se
jIvAdika cIja kA jJAna hotA hai  /  vo hone se sarva mamatArahitapana hotA hai
/  sabhI cIjoM meM mamatA na rahane se ajJAna moha aura mithyAtva kA kSaya hotA
hai  /  yAni viveka AtA hai| viveka hone se heya aura upAdeya cIja kI yathArtha
soca aura ekAnta mokSa pAne ke lie dRr3ha nizcaya hotA hai isase ahita kA
parityAga aura hita kA AcaraNa ho vaise kArya meM ati udyama karanevAlA bane  /
usake bAda uttarottara paramArtha svarUpa pavitra uttama kSamA Adi daza taraha
ke, ahiMsA lakSaNavAle dharma kA anuSThAna karane aura karavAne meM ekAgra aura
Asakta citravAlA hotA hai  /  usake bAda yAni ki kSamA Adi daza taraha ke aura
ahiMsA lakSaNa yukta dharma kA anuSThAna kA sevana karanA aura karavAnA usameM
ekAgratA aura Asakta cittavAle AtmA ko sarvottama kSamA, sarvottama mRdutA,
sarvottama saralatA, sarvottama bAhya dhana, suvarNa Adi parigraha aura kAma
krodhAdika abhyaMtara parigraha svarUpa sarva saMga kA parityAga hotA hai  /
aura sarvottama bAhya abhyantara aise bAraha taraha ke ati ghora vIra ugra
kaSTavAle tapa aura caraNa ke anuSThAna meM AtmaramaNatA aura paramAnanda
prakaTa hotA hai| Age sarvottama sattaraha prakAra ke samagra saMyama anuSThAna
paripAlana karane ke lie baddhalakSapana prApta hotA hai| sarvottama satya bhASA
bolanA, cha kAya jIva kA hIta, apanA bala, vIrya, puruSArtha, parAkrama chipAe
binA mokSa mArga kI sAdhanA karane meM kaTibaddha hue sarvottama svAdhyAya
dhyAna samAna jala dvArA pApakarma samAna mala ke lepa ko prakSAla karanevAlA -
dhonevAlA hotA hai  /  aura phira sarvottama akiMcanatA, sarvottama
paramapavitratA sahita, sarva bhAvayukta suvizuddha sarva doSa rahita, nava
gupti sahita, 18 parihAra sthAnaka se viramita yAni 18 taraha ke abrahma kA
tyAga karanevAlA hotA hai| usake bAda yaha sarvottama kSamA, namratA, saralatA,
nirlobhatA, tapa, saMyama, satya, zoca, AkiMcanya, atidurdhara, muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 39

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  One who renounces all worldly
beginnings with auspicious rituals like studying, purpose, and holding the
Brahmavat Dharana, then renounces the beginning, commencement, and origin of the
stationary beings with two, three, four, and five senses in the form of earth,
water, fire, air, and plants, and the non-living body, through the three-fold of
mind, speech, and body, and through the three-fold of the three-fold, renounces
the four types of knowledge, namely food, etc., with the restraint of the sense
objects of the ear, etc., and thus washes away sins.  Then, by holding the
eighteen thousand pure Shilaangas, one becomes unshakeable, unbroken,
unblemished, unchallenged, beautiful, fierce, fiercer, unique, and wondrous, and
sustains the Abhigraha. Then, one endures the severe hardships and afflictions
inflicted by gods, humans, and animals with equanimity. After that, one makes
great efforts for the sake of the image, etc., day and night. Then, one becomes
free from the clinging to the body and its impurities. With the body becoming
free from regression, one attains steadiness in the white meditation.  Then, one
destroys the accumulated eight types of karma from the beginningless cycle of
births. One escapes from the prison of the four realms of existence and becomes
free from all suffering, attaining liberation. Within liberation, there is no
birth, old age, death, union with the unpleasant, separation from the pleasant,
distress, anxiety, disgrace, false accusations, pain of severe illness, disease,
sorrow, poverty, suffering, fear, discord, etc., forever. Then, there is
absolute, ultimate, complete freedom from suffering, unchangeable, permanent,
eternal, and the best happiness in liberation.  The root cause of all this
happiness is knowledge. This inclination begins with knowledge. Therefore, O
Gautam! One who desires absolute, ultimate, supreme, eternal, permanent,
continuous, and the best happiness, should first, with respect, receive the
twelve-limbed Shruta-knowledge, from the Samayik Sutra to the Lokabindu-sar,
along with the method of grasping time, and should wear the Upadhana, as
prescribed in the scriptures and the Tapas like Ayambil, etc., after renouncing
the five, namely violence, etc., through the three-fold of the three-fold, and
after performing atonement for their sins. One should understand this knowledge,
which is received from the mouth of a pure Guru, with proper respect, with the
correct pronunciation of vowels, consonants, matras, bindu, words, letters,
without speaking more or less, without the defect of word division, in a verse-
bound, sequential, previous-to-previous, subsequent-to-previous, and non-
subsequent-to-previous manner, as one and only.  O Gautam! Like the vast, self-
illuminated, boundless ocean without beginning and end, where one can immerse
oneself in happiness, the Shruta-knowledge is the ultimate cause of all
happiness. To cross this ocean of knowledge, one should bow to the chosen deity.
Without bowing to the chosen deity, one cannot cross it. Therefore, O Gautam! If
there is a chosen deity, it is the Navkar, which is the Panchamangal. There is
no other chosen deity or auspiciousness equal to it. Therefore, it is essential
to first wear the Upadhana of the Panchamangal. Sutra - 493  O Bhagavant! How
should one wear the Upadhana of the Panchamangal? O Gautam! We will explain
further, one should wear the Upadhana of the Panchamangal in that way.  When the
time, karana, muhurta, nakshatra, yoga, lagna, and moon strength are very
auspicious and beautiful, one who is free from the eight types of intoxication,
has unwavering faith and devotion, whose devotion is greatly increased, who
experiences great and intense joy, who has a good resolve, who has complete
devotion and respect, who is free from the desire for any kind of worldly or
otherworldly fruits, and who has continuously performed five fasts with the
Pacchakkhana, should reside in a place free from living beings in a Jain temple,
with a head full of devotion, with the body tingling with joy, with eyes like
blooming lotus flowers with a hundred petals, with a calm, gentle, and steady
gaze, and with waves of devotion rising in the lake of the heart.  One who
experiences great and intense joy, who is free from internal darkness, who is
inconceivable, supremely auspicious, and who has a special outcome, should, with
the utmost respect, wear the Upadhana of the Panchamangal.  Muni Diperatnasagar
Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 40

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka brahmavat
dhAraNa karanA ityAdika zubha anuSThAna se sarva samArambha kA tyAga karanevAlA
hotA hai| phira pathvI, pAnI. agni, vAyu, vanaspati rUpa sthAvara jIva do, tIna,
cAra, pA~ca indriyavAle jIva kA aura ajIva kAya kA saraMbha, samArambha, Arambha
ko mana, vacana, kAyA ke trika se trividha trividha se zrotrAdi indriya ke
viSaya ke saMvarapUrvaka AhArAdi cAra saMjJA kA tyAga karake pApa ko vosirAtA
hai| phira nirmala aThThAraha hajAra zIlAMga dhAraNa karanevAlA hone se
askhalita, akhaMDita, amalina, avirAdhita, sundara, ugra, ugratara, vicitra,
Azcarya utpanna karanevAlA abhigraha kA nirvAha karanevAlA hotA hai  /  phira
devatA, manuSya, tiryaMca ke kie hue ghora pariSaha upasarga ko samatA rakhakara
sahanevAle hote haiN| usake bAda ahorAtra Adi pratimA ke lie mahA kozIza
karanevAlA hotA hai  /  phira zarIra kI-TApaTIpa rahita mamatArahita hotA hai  /
zarIra niSpratikramaNavAlA hone se zukla dhyAna meM ar3olapana pAtA hai| phira
anAdi bhava paramparA se ikaTe kie samagra ATha taraha ke karma rAzi kA kSaya
karanevAlA hotA hai  /  cAra gati rUpa bhava ke kaidakhAne meM se bAhara
nIkalakara sarva duHkha se vimukta hokara mokSa meM gamana karanevAlA hotA hai|
mokSa ke bhItara sadA ke lie janma, bur3hApA, maraNa, aniSTa kA milana, iSTa kA
viyoga, saMtApa, udvega, apayaza, jhUThA Aropa lagAnA, bar3I vyAdhi kI vedanA,
roga, zoka, dAridra, duHkha, bhaya, vaimanasya Adi duHkha nahIM hote, phira
vahA~ ekAntika Atyantika nirupadravatAvAlA, milA huA vApasa na calA jAe aisA,
akSaya, dhruva, zAzvata hamezA rahanevAlA sarvottama sukha mokSa meM hotA hai|
yaha sarva sukha kA mUla kAraNa jJAna hai  /  jJAna se hI yaha pravRtti zuru
hotI hai isalie he gautama ! ekAntika Atyantika, parama zAzvata, dhruva,
nirantara, sarvottama sukha kI IcchA vAle ko sabase pahale Adara sahita sAmAyika
sUtra se lekara lokabindusAra taka bAraha aMga svarUpa zrutajJAna kAlagrahaNa
vidhi sahita AyaMbila Adi tapa aura zAstra meM batAI vidhivAle upadhAna vahana
karane pUrvaka, hiMsAdika pA~ca ko trividha trividha se tyAga karake usake pApa
kA pratikramaNa karake satra ke svara, vyaMjana, mAtrA, binda pada, akSara, kama
jyAdA na bola sake vaise padaccheda doSa, gAthAbaddha, kramasara, pUrvAnupUrvI,
AnupUrvI, anAnupUrvI sahita suvizuddha guru ke mukha se vidhivat vinaya sahita
grahaNa kiyA ho aisA jJAna ekAMte saMdara smjhnaa| he gautama ! Adi aura binA
anta ke kinArA rahita ati vizAla aise svayaMbhUramaNa samudra kI taraha jisameM
duHkha se karake avagAhana kara sakate haiM  /  samagra sukha kI parama kAraNa
samAna hI to vo zrutajJAna hai  /  aise jJAna sAgara ko pAra karane ke lie iSTa
devatA ko namaskAra karanA cAhie  /  iSTa devatA ko namaskAra kie binA koI usako
pAra nahIM kara sakate isalie he gautama ! yadi koI iSTa deva ho to navakAra  /
yAni ki paMcamaMgala hI hai  /  usake alAvA dUsare kisI iSTadeva maMgala samAna
nahIM hai  /  isalie prathama paMca maMgala kA hI vinaya upadhAna karanA jarurI
hai| sUtra -493 he bhagavaMta ! kisa vidhi se paMcamaMgala kA vinaya upadhAna
kare? he gautama ! Age hama batAeMge usa vidhi se paMcamaMgala kA vinaya
upadhAna karanA caahie| ati prazasta aura zobhana tithi, karaNa, muhUrta,
nakSatra, yoga, lagna, candrabala ho taba ATha taraha ke mada sthAna se mukta
ho, zaMkA rahita zraddhAsaMvega jisake ati vRddhi pAnevAle ho, ati tIvra mahAna
ullAsa pAnevAle, zubha adhyavasAya sahita, pUrNa bhakti aura bahumAna se kisI
bhI taraha ke Aloka yA paraloka ke phala kI IcchArahita banakara lagAtAra pA~ca
upavAsa ke paccakkhANa karake jina maMdira meM janturahita sthAna meM rahakara
jisakA mastaka bhaktipUrNa banA hai  /  harSa se jisake zarIra meM romAMca
utpanna huA hai, nayana samAna zatapatrakamala praphullita hotA hai  /  jisakI
najara prazAnta, saumya, sthira hai| jisake hRdaya sarovara meM saMvega kI
lahare uThI hai| ati tIvra, mahAna, ullAsa pAnevAle kaIM, ghana-tIvra AMtarA
rahita, aciMtya, parama zubha, pariNAma vizeSa se muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 40

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  Those who are delighted by the
study/purpose/sutra number, who grow constantly through the power of the soul,
who have a joyful, pure, extremely pure, stable, unwavering inner self, who are
established on the earth like the image of Shri Rishabh and other great Dharma
Tirthankaras, who are established with unwavering mind and body, who are
devoted, knowledgeable about the soul, have strong character, are endowed with
virtues, who are gurus with a small amount of words, who perform rituals with a
unique goal, whose words are spoken without hindrance to the guru's words, who
have received respect, joy, compassion, and many sorrows, pains, anxieties,
great illnesses, severe suffering, poverty, troubles, diseases, birth, old age,
death, gestation, etc., who are like a boat in the ocean of existence filled
with evil creatures (a particular type of being) and fish, who practice this
entire Agam-Shastra in the middle, who are killed by the fault of falsehood, who
have imagined their own weapons with a special intellect, and whose words do not
contain the entire meaning, example, and reasoning.  Not only that, but they are
capable of destroying the imagined words of the ignorant with reason, example,
and reasoning. Such are the five auspicious great Shruta Skandha, with five
studies and one Chulika, the best, presided over by the preaching deity, with
three parts, one speaker, and seven letters, which reveal the infinite meaning
of the path, the ultimate seed of the great mantra and the best knowledge, like
'Namo Arihantaanam'. This first study should be read with devotion. On that day,
after fasting for five days, after taking the first study, on the second day,
one should perform Parana with Ayambil tapas.  Similarly, on the second day,
that is, the seventh day, one should read the second study, 'Namo Siddhaanam',
which has two parts, one speaker, and five letters, which is said to achieve the
meaning described above, which is endowed with many extraordinary virtues. On
that day too, one should perform Pacchakkhana with Ayambil.  Similarly,
according to the order mentioned earlier, one should read the third study, 'Namo
Ayariyaanam', which has three parts, one speaker, and seven letters, which
achieves the meaning mentioned earlier, and perform Ayambil.  One should read
the fourth study, 'Namo Uvvajjaayaanam', which has three parts, one speaker, and
seven letters, which achieves the meaning mentioned above, and perform Ayambil.
Similarly, one should read the fifth study, 'Namo Loe Savvasahunam', which has
four parts, one speaker, and nine letters, and perform Ayambil on the fifth day,
that is, the tenth day.  Similarly, one should read the Pancha Namokkar, which
has eleven parts, three speakers, and thirty-three letters, like a Chulika,
which follows its meaning, 'Savva Pavappanasano. Mangalaanam Cha Savvesim,
Padham Havayi Mangalam', taking one part each for three days, and performing
Ayambil tapas with the same order and division on the sixth, seventh, and eighth
days. Similarly, prepare this five auspicious great Shruta Skandha with its
sounds, letters, parts, parts, letters, dots, and measures, which is pure, of
great virtue, which has been taught by the guru, which has been read, in such a
way that it is well remembered on the front part of the tongue, in the order of
the past, the order of the future, and the order of the present.  After that,
according to the instructions given, in a place of Chaityalaya-Jinalaya, which
is free from creatures, at an auspicious time according to the date, Karan,
Muhurta, Nakshatra, Yoga, Lagna, and Chandrabala, one should listen carefully to
the clear recitation with great arrangement and pomp, along with the eighth
tapas, purpose, and permission, and understand it well. This is the method of
performing the five auspicious Vinaya Upadhan. Sutra - 494  O Bhagavan! Are
these the principles and meanings of the five auspicious great Shruta Skandha,
which is like the wish-fulfilling Kalpavriksha? O Gautam! This is the five
auspicious great Shruta Skandha, which is like the unimaginable wish-fulfilling
Kalpavriksha, which fulfills all desires.  Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
(Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 41

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka Anandita
honevAle, jIva ke vIrya yoga se hara vakta vRddhi pAnevAle, harSapUrNa zuddha
ati nirmala sthira nizcala aMtaHkaraNa vAle, bhUmi para sthApana kiyA ho usa
taraha se zrI RSabha Adi zreSTha dharma tIrthaMkara kI pratimA ke lie sthApana
kie naina aura manavAlA usake lie ekAgra bane pariNAmavAlA ArAdhaka AtmA zAstra
ke jAnakAra dRr3ha cAritravAle guNa saMpatti se yukta guru laghumAtrA sahita
zabda uccAra karake anuSThAna karavAne ke advItiya lakSavAle guru ke vacana ko
bAdhA na ho usa taraha jisake vacana nIkalate ho  /  vinaya Adi sammAna harSa
anukaMpA se prApta huA, kaIM zoka saMtApa udvega mahAvyAdhi kA darda, ghora
duHkha-dAridrya, kleza roga-janma, jarA, maraNa, garbhAvAsa Adi samAna duSTa
zvApada (eka jIva vizeSa) aura maccha se bharapUra bhavasAgara meM nAva samAna
aise isa samagra Agama kI-zAstra kI madhya meM vyavahAra karanevAle, mithyAtva
doSa se vadha kie gae, viziSTa buddhi se khuda ne kalpanA kie hue kuzAstra aura
usa ke vacana jisameM samagra Azaya-dRSTAMta yukti se ghaTIta nahIM hote| itanA
hI nahIM lekina hetu, dRSTAMta, yukti se kumatavAloM kI kalpIta bAtoM kA vinAza
karane ke lie samartha haiN| aise paMcamaMgala mahA zrutaskaMdhavAle pA~ca
adhyayana aura eka culikAvAle, zreSTha, pravacana devatA se adhiSThita, tIna
pada yukta, eka AlApaka aura sAta akSara ke pramANavAle ananta gama-paryAya
artha ko batAnevAle sarva mahAmaMtra aura zreSTha vidyA ke parama bIja samAna
aise namo arihaMtANaM' isa taraha kA pahalA adhyayana vAMcanApUrvaka par3hanA
cAhie  /  usa dina yAni pA~ca upavAsa karane ke bAda pahale adhyayana kI vAMcanA
lene ke bAda dUsare dina AyaMbila tapa se pAraNA karanA caahie| usI prakAra
dUsare dina yAni sAtave dina kaIM atizaya guNa saMpadAyukta Age batAe gae artha
ko sAdhanevAle kahe krama ke mutAbika do padayukta eka AlApaka, pA~ca zabda ke
pramANavAle aise 'namo siddhANaM' aise dUsare adhyayana ko par3hanA cAhie  /
usa dina bhI AyaMbila se paccakkhANa karanA caahie| usI prakAra pahale batAe hue
krama anusAra pahale kahe artha kI sAdhanA karanevAle tIna padayukta eka
AlApaka, sAta zabda ke pramANavAle 'namo AyariyANaM' aise tIsare adhyayana kA
paThana karanA aura AyaMbila krnaa| Age batAe artha sAdhanevAle tIna padayukta
eka AlApaka aura sAta zabda ke pramANavAlA namo uvajjhAyANaM aise cauthe
adhyayana kA paThana karanA  /  AyaMbila karanA  /  usI prakAra cAra padayukta
eka AlApaka aura nau akSara pramANavAlA 'namo loe savvasAhUNaM' aise pA~cave
adhyayana kI vAcanA lekara par3hanA aura vo pA~cave dina yAni kula dazaveM dina
AyaMbila krnaa| usI prakAra usake artha ko anusaraNa karanevAle gyAraha
padayukta tIna AlApaka aura taiMtIsa akSara pramANa vAlI aisI culikA samAna aiso
paMca namokkAro, savva pAvappaNAsaNo  /  maMgalANaM ca savvesiM, paDhamaM havaI
maMgalaM tIna dina eka eka pada kI vAcanA grahaNa karake, chaThe, sAtave, AThave
dina usI krama se aura vibhAga se AyaMbila tapa karake paThana karanA  /  usI
prakAra yaha pA~ca maMgala mahA zrutaskaMdha svara, varNa, pada sahita, pada
akSara bindu mAtrA se vizuddha bar3e guNavAle, guru ne upadeza die hue, vAcanA
die hue aise use samagra ora se isa taraha par3hakara taiyAra karo ki jisase
pUrvAnupUrvI pazcAnupUrvI anAnupUrvI vo z2abAna ke agra hisse para acchI taraha
se yAda raha jaae| usake bAda Age batAe anusAra tithi, karaNa, muhUrta,
nakSatra, yoga, lagna, candrabala ke zubha samaya janturahita aise caityAlaya-
jinAlaya ke sthAna meM kramasara Ae hue, aThThama tapa sahita samuddeza anujJA
vidhi karavAke he gautama ! bar3e prabandha ADambara sahita ati spaSTa vAcanA
sUnakara use acchI taraha se avadhAraNa karanA cAhie  /  yaha vidhi se
paMcamaMgala ke vinaya upadhAna karane caahie| sUtra - 494 he bhagavaMta ! kyA
yaha cintAmaNI kalpavRkSa samAna paMca maMgala mahAzrutaskaMdha ke sUtra aura
artha ko prarUpe haiM ? he gautama ! yaha aciMtya ciMtAmaNI kalpavRkSa samAna
manovAMchita pUrNa karanevAlA paMcamaMgala mahA zrutaskaMdha ke muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 41

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishītha'  Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number
Sūtra and Meaning are the prototypes. They are as follows -  Just as oil spreads
in the earth, nectar in the lotus, and the five Astikāyas in all the worlds, in
the same way, this five-fold auspiciousness is pervasive in the entire Āgama for
the Mahāśruta Skandha. The nature of the qualities of all beings has been
stated. So, to whom should the ultimate praise be given? To those who were in
this world in the past. In this entire world, all those who were or will be
excellent in the past or future are worthy of praise. Such excellent and
virtuous ones are only the five - Arihant, Siddha, Āchārya, Upādhyāya, and
Sādhu. There is no other supreme being besides them. They are of five types -
Arihant, Siddha, Āchārya, Upādhyāya, and Sādhu. These five have been described
as having the essence-truth qualities of the Supreme Being.  Humans, gods, and
Asuras recognize this entire world through the eight Mahāprātihārya, etc., and
their worship. They are extraordinary, inconceivable in their influence,
possessors of Kevala Jnāna, and have been blessed with the highest excellence.
They are called 'Arihant' because they have attained complete destruction of
karma, their seed of rebirth has been completely extinguished, and they will not
be born again in this world. Or, they have conquered the eight karma enemies by
overcoming extreme suffering, destroyed them, broken them into pieces, melted
them, ended them, and subdued them. They have destroyed the karma enemies
forever. Such ones are called 'Arihant'.  Thus, the Arihant is understood in
many ways, explained, and described. They are called, taught, made, and
instructed.  And the Siddha Bhagavant, who have attained Siddhahood through
great effort, like the restraint of yoga, with their inconceivable power of
Mahākalyaṇa, Mahāānanda, Mahotsava, Nirūpama Sukha, and Nishkampa Shakladhyāna,
etc. Or, they have attained Siddhahood by consuming the practice of Siddhahood
through the destruction of the eight types of karma. Such Siddha Bhagavants are
those who have become Siddhas by burning the karma bound by the fire of
Shukladhyāna. They are Siddhas, complete, free, and have fulfilled all their
purposes. Such are the Siddha Bhagavants! These Siddha Bhagavants are of many
types - male, female, neuter, other-gender, householder, every-Buddha, self-
Buddha, etc., who have attained Siddhahood by destroying all karma.  And the
Āchārya, who always conduct themselves without any lapse in their conduct, with
the thirty-six types of knowledge, etc., and the Āchāra, relying on the eighteen
thousand Shilaṅgas, and with a body. They are Āchārya because they conduct
themselves for the benefit of all truth and the community of disciples. They are
Āchārya because they do not initiate the beginning of the existence of the
earth-body, etc., beings, even at the time of the abandonment of the body. Or,
they are Āchārya because they do not approve of the beginning. Even though they
commit a great offense, they do not commit any sin in their mind. Thus, they are
called Āchārya. They are described in many ways, such as name-establishment,
etc.  And the Upādhyāya, who have well-bound the Asrava doors, use their mind,
speech, and body in beautiful yoga, and are well-versed in the twelve limbs of
the Shruta Jnāna, reading and teaching the pure twelve limbs with proper
pronunciation, consonants, vowels, dots, words, and letters. They contemplate
and focus on their own and others' means of liberation. They contemplate,
remember, and meditate on the twelve-limbed Shruta Jnāna, including the
infinite-going categories, which they have become familiar with. Thus, they are
explained in many ways.  The Sādhu Bhagavants are those who have extreme,
severe, and intense austerities and conduct, various vows, rules, fasts, and
special observances, and who endure the hardships of loneliness, equality, and
suffering. They are called Sādhu Bhagavants because they are free from all
suffering and practice liberation. This is what we should contemplate in our
minds.  What will the salutation to these five, 'Eso Panch Namokkāro', do? It
will destroy all sins, including the Jñānavarṇīya, etc., in every direction. It
is the destroyer of all sins. This verse is called the first purpose within the
mind, 'Eso Panch Namokkāro Savvapāvappaṇāsano'. This purpose is of this nature.
Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishītha) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi Translation Page 42

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra
aura artha prarUpela haiM  /  vo isa prakAra - jisa kAraNa ke lie tala meM
taila, kamala meM makaranda, sarvaloka meM paMcAstikAya phaile rahe haiM  /  usI
taraha yaha paMcamaMgala mahAzrutaskaMdha ke lie samagra Agama ke bhItara
yathArtha kriyA vyApI hai  /  sarvabhUta ke guNa svabhAva kA kathana kiyA hai  /
to parama stuti kisakI kare ? isa jagata meM jo bhUtakAla meM ho usakI  /  isa
sarva jagata meM jo kucha bhUtakAla meM yA bhAvi meM uttama hue ho vo saba stuti
karane lAyaka haiM vaise sarvottama aura guNavAle ho ve kevala arihaMtAdika
pA~ca hI haiM, usake alAvA dUsare koI sarvottama nahIM hai, vo pA~ca prakAra ke
haiM - arihaMta, siddha, AcArya, upAdhyAya aura sAdhu  /  yaha pA~ca parameSThi
ke garbhArtha-yathArtha guNa sadbhAva ho to vo isa prakAra batAe haiN| manuSya,
deva aura asuravAle isa sarva jagata ko ATha mahAprAtihArya Adi ke pUjAtizaya se
pahacAnanevAle, asAdhAraNa, acintya prabhAvavAle, kevalajJAna pAnevAle, zreSTha
uttamatA ko vare hue hone se arahaMta', samagra karmakSaya pAe hue hone se
jisakA bhavAMkura samagra tarIke se jala gayA hai, jisase aba vo phira se isa
saMsAra meM utpanna nahIM hote  /  isalie unheM arUhaMta bhI kahate haiM  /  yA
phira ati duHkha se karake jina para vijaya pA sakate haiM vaise samagra ATha
karmazatruoM ko nimarthana karake vadha kiyA hai  /  nirdalana Tukar3e kara die
haiM, pIgalA die haiM  /  aMta kiyA hai, paribhAva kiyA hai, yAni karma samAna
zatruoM ko jinhoMne hamezA ke lie vadha kiyA hai  /  aise 'arihaMta' kahA hai|
isa prakAra isa arihaMta kI kaI prakAra se samaja dI hai, prajJApanA kI jAtI
hai, prarUpaNA kI jAtI hai  /  kahalAte haiM  /  par3hAte haiM, banAte haiM,
upadeza diyA jAtA hai| aura siddha bhagavaMta paramAnanda mahotsava meM
mahAlate, mahAkalyANa pAnevAle, nirUpama sukha bhugatanevAle, niSkaMpa
zakladhyAna Adi ke aciMtya sAmarthya se apane jIvavIrya se yoga nirodha karane
samAna mahA kozIza se jo siddha hue haiM  /  yA to ATha taraha ke karma kA kSaya
hone se jinhoMne siddhapana kI sAdhanA kA sevana kiyA hai, isa taraha ke siddha
bhagavaMta yA zukladhyAna samAna agni se baMdhe karma bhasmIbhUta karake jo
siddha hue haiM, vaise siddha bhagavaMta siddha kie haiM, pUrNa hue haiM, rahita
hue haiM, samagra prayojana samUha jinako aise siddha bhagavaMta ! yaha siddha
bhagavaMta strI-puruSa, napuMsaka, anyaliMga gRhasthaliMga, pratyekabuddha,
svayaMbuddha yAvat karmakSaya karake siddha hue-aise kaI taraha ke siddha kI
prarUpaNA kI hai (aura) aThThAraha hajAra zIlAMga ke Azraya kie dehavAle
chattIsa taraha ke jJAnAdika AcAra pramAda kie binA hamezA jo AcaraNa karate
haiM, isalie AcArya, sarva satya aura ziSya samudAya kA hita AcaraNa karanevAle
hone se AcArya, prANa ke parityAga vakta meM bhI jo pRthvIkAya Adi jIva kA
samArambha, AcaraNa nahIM karate  /  yA Arambha kI anumodanA jo nahIM karate, vo
AcArya bar3A aparAdha karane ke bAvajUda bhI jo kisI para mana se bhI pApa
AcaraNa nahIM karate yoM AcArya kahalAte haiM  /  isa prakAra nAma-sthApanA Adi
kaIM bheda se prarUpaNA kI jAtI hai| (aura) jinhoM ne acchI taraha se
AzravadvAra bandha kie haiM, mana, vacana, kAyA ke suMdara yoga meM upayogavAle,
vidhivat svara-vyaMjana, mAtrA, bindu, pada, akSara se vizuddha bAraha aMga,
zrutajJAna par3hanevAle aura par3hAnevAle evaM dUsare aura khuda ke mokSa upAya
jo socate haiM-usakA dhyAna dharate haiM vo upAdhyAya  /  sthira paricita kie
anantagama paryAya cIja sahita dvAdazAMgI aura zrutajJAna jo ekAgra mana se
cintavana karate haiM, smaraNa karate haiM, dhyAna karate haiM, vo upAdhyAya  /
isa prakAra kaIM bheda se usakI vyAkhyA karate haiN| ati kaSTavAle ugra ugratara
ghora tapa aura cAritravAle, kaIM vrata-niyama upavAsa vividha abhigraha vizeSa,
lana, samatA rahita pariSaha upasarga sahanevAle, sarva duHkha rahita mokSa kI
sAdhanA karanevAle vo sAdhu bhagavaMta kahalAte haiM  /  yahI bAta culikA meM
soceNge| eso paMca namokkAro-ina pA~ca ko kiyA gayA namaskAra kyA karegA ?
jJAnAvaraNIya Adi sarva pApakarma vizeSa ko hara eka dizA meM naSTa kare vo
sarva pApa naSTa karanevAle  /  yaha pada culikA ke bhItara prathama uddezo
kahalAe 'eso paMca namokkAro savvapAvappaNAsaNo' yaha uddezaka isa taraha kA
hai| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 42

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  Study/Purpose/Sutra Number
Mangalanam Cha Savvesim, Padham Havayi Mangalam. In the word Mangal, the word
Mangal means Nirvana Sukh. Such Dharma, which is capable of achieving Moksha
Sukh, has the form of Samyag Darshan, etc., and is characterized by Ahimsa,
which brings me to it, is Mangal. And it is Mangal that takes me beyond Bhav -
Samsara. Or, it is Mangal that destroys, merges, and annihilates my eight types
of Karma groups, which are bound, touched, and extracted.  What is the special
feature of this Mangal and other Sarva Mangal? The praise of Arihant in the
beginning is this Mangal. This is the meaning in brief. Now, know the meaning in
detail below. At that time, O Gautam! There are Dharma Tirthankar Arihants,
whose words have the meaning explained later, who are more worthy of worship
than the supremely worshipful. Because they have the characteristics mentioned
here. They are Achintya, Aprameya, Nirupam, incomparable, and are endowed with a
group of superior and superior qualities, and are therefore the greatest in the
three worlds, and are the producers of mental joy. Just as the group of streams
of the first rain gives peace to the peacock group, which is scorched by the
heat of the long summer, in the same way, the Arihant Bhagvant, by the rise of
the Tirthankar name-karma, which is the form of great merit accumulated over
many births, gives the best advice, etc., and destroys the suffering of the
Bhavy Jiva, who is bound by the results of such things as Sajjad Raga, Dvesha,
Moha, Mithyatva, Avirati, Pramada, and Dushta-Sanklishta, which are caused by
the terrible evil karma.  They are omniscient because they know everything. They
are endowed with inexhaustible strength, vigor, wealth, sattva, and valor, which
are unmatched in the world, due to the group of great merits accumulated over
many births. The form of the front part of the big toe of their beautiful,
radiant feet is so extraordinary that it makes the series of all planets, stars,
and the moon dull in comparison to the group of radiant, powerful rays of the
sun, which appears in ten directions. The brilliance of the body of the
Tirthankar Bhagvant makes the entire beauty, radiance, brilliance, grace, and
form of the gods, including all the Vidyadharas, Devanganas, Devendras, and
Asurendras, dull and lifeless.  There are thirty-four such extraordinary,
superior, incomparable, and unusual things, four of which are natural, eleven
due to the destruction of karma, and nineteen due to the gods. Seeing them,
Bhavanpati, Vanavyantar, Jyotishk, Vaimanik, Ahmindra, Indra, Apsara, Kinnar,
Nar Vidyadhar, Sur, and Asura, along with the beings of the world, are amazed.
Oh! We have never seen anything like this before today. They are all gathered
together. Today we have seen a group of unparalleled, great, inconceivable
qualities, the ultimate wonder, in one person. At that time, they were filled
with great joy, which arose continuously from such auspicious results. They were
filled with joy and affection, and they began to speak words of joy to each
other, and they went ahead, walking with the Bhagvant, and then they began to
criticize their own souls. They said to each other, "Indeed, we are worthy of
hatred, we are unworthy, we are without merit. The Bhagvant has gone ahead,
walking, and then we have experienced turmoil. They fainted, their hearts filled
with turmoil. Their bodies became extremely weak due to their trembling. Their
bodies contracted, their hands and feet spread out, they showed joy, their eyes
blinked, their bodily functions were bound, they spoke in a slurred, slow voice,
unable to understand, and they let out long, warm sighs with a slow, long groan.
Only a very intelligent person could judge their mind.  The beings of the world
began to think, "How can we obtain such great Siddhi by practicing such
austerities?" They were amazed by their Siddhi and prosperity, and by seeing
them, they placed their hands on their chests, creating a great wonder, and
marveling at their minds. Therefore, O Gautam! The group of qualities of the
Arihant Bhagvant, who is the propagator of the Dharma Tirth, whose name is well
received, whose body is endowed with an infinite group of qualities, is like a
treasure trove of jewels. Even if Indra Maharaj, or any other four knowledgeable
or great extraordinary beings, were to describe it with thousands of tongues,
day and night, for millions of years, they would still not be able to describe
the qualities of the Arihant, who is like the self-born ocean.  Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 43

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
maMgalANaM ca savvesiM, paDhamaM havaI maMgalaM usameM maMgala zabda meM rahe
maMgala zabda kA nirvANasukha artha hotA hai  /  vaise mokSa sukha ko sAdhane
meM samartha aise samyagdarzanAdi svarUpavAlA, ahiMsA lakSaNavAlA dharma jo muje
lAkara de vo mNgl| aura muje bhava se-saMsAra se pAra kare vo maMgala  /  yA
baddha, spRSTa, nikAcita aise ATha taraha ke mere karma samUha ko jo chA~ne,
vilaya, naSTa kare vo mNgl| yaha maMgala aura dUsare sarva maMgala meM kyA
vizeSatA hai ? prathama Adi meM arihaMta kI stuti yahI maMgala hai  /  yaha
saMkSepa se artha batAyA  /  aba vistAra se nIce mutAbika artha jAna lo  /  usa
kAla usa vakta he gautama ! jisake zabda kA artha Age batAyA gayA hai aisA jo
koI dharma tIrthaMkara arihaMta hote haiM, vo parama pUjya se bhI vizeSa taraha
se pUjya hote haiM  /  kyoMki vo saba yahA~ batAeMge vaise lakSaNa yukta hote
haiN| acintya, aprameya, nirupama jisakI tulanA meM dUsarA koI na A sake,
zreSTha aura zreSThatara guNa samUha se adhiSThita hone ke kAraNa se tIna loka
ke ati mahAna, mana ke Ananda ko utpanna karanevAle haiM  /  lambe grISmakAla ke
tApa se saMtapta hue, mayura gaNa ko jisa taraha prathama varSA kI dhArA kA
samUha zAnti de, usI taraha kaIM janmAntara meM upArjana karake ikaTThe kie
mahA-puNya svarUpa tIrthaMkara nAmakarma ke udaya se arihaMta bhagavaMta uttama
hitopadeza denA Adi ke dvArA sajjar3a rAga, dveSa, moha, mithyAtva, avirati,
pramAda, duSTa-saMkliSTa aisA pariNAma Adi se baMdhe azubha ghora pApakarma se
honevAle bhavya jIva ke saMtApa ko nirmUla karate haiN| sabako jAnate hone se
sarvajJa haiM  /  kaIM janma se upArjana kie mahApuNya ke samUha se jagata meM
kisI kI tulanA meM na Ae aise akhUTa bala, vIrya, aizvarya, sattva,
parAkramayukta dehavAle vo hote haiM  /  unake manohara dedIpyamAna pA~va ke
aMgUThe ke agra hisse kA rUpa itanA rUpAtizayavAlA hotA hai ki jisake Age sUrya
jaise dasa dizA meM se (spharAyamAna) prakaTa pratApI kiraNoM ke samaha se sarva
graha, nakSatra aura candra kI zreNI ko tejahIna batAte haiM, vaise tIrthaMkara
bhagavaMta ke zarIra ke teja se sarva vidyAdhara, devAMganA, devendra, asarendra
sahita deva kA saubhAgya, kAnti, dIpti, lAvaNya aura rUpa kI samagra zobhA
phikhI-nisteja ho jAtI hai| svAbhAvika aise cAra, karmakSaya hone se gyAraha
aura deva ke kie unnIsa aise cauMtIsa atizaya aise zreSTha nirupama aura
asAmAnya hote haiM  /  jisake darzana se bhavanapati, vANavyaMtara, jyotiSka,
vaimAnika, ahamindra, indra apsarA, kinnara, nara vidyAdhara, sUra aura asUra
sahita jagata ke jIva ko Azcarya hotA hai  /  are ! hama Aja taka kisI bhI dina
na dekhA huA Aja dekhA  /  eka sAtha ikaTThe hue  /  atula mahAna aciMtya guNa
parama Azcarya kA samUha eka hI vyakti meM Aja hamane dekhA  /  aise zubha
pariNAma se usa vakta ati gaharA satata utpanna honevAle pramodavAle hue  /
harSa aura anurAga se sphurAyamAna honevAle naye pariNAma se Apasa meM harSa ke
vacana bolane lage aura vihAra kara ke bhagavaMta Age cale taba apane AtmA kI
niMdA karane lage  /  Apasa meM kahane lage kI vAkaI hama napharata ke lAyaka
haiM, adhanya haiM, puNyahIna haiM, bhagavaMta vihAra karake cale gae phira
saMkSobha pAe hue hRdayavAle mUrchita hue, mahA musIbata se hoza AyA  /  unake
gAtra khIMcane se ati zithila ho gae  /  zarIra sikur3anA, hAtha-pA~va phailAnA,
prasannatA batAnI, A~kha meM palakAra honA, zarIra kI kriyAeM-bandha ho gaI, na
samajha sake vaise skhalanavAle maMda zabda bolane lage, maMda lambe hu~kAra ke
sAtha lambe garma nisA~se chor3ane lage  /  ati buddhizAlI puruSa hI unake mana
kA yathArtha nirNaya kara sake jagata ke jIva socane lage ki kisa taraha ke tapa
ke sevana se aisI zreSTha Rddhi pA sakeMge? unakI RddhisamRddhi kI soca se aura
darzana se Azcarya pAnevAle apane vakSaHsthala para hastatala sthApana karake
mana ko camatkAra denevAle bar3A Azcarya utpanna karate the| isalie he gautama !
aise ananta guNa samUha se yukta zarIravAle acchI taraha se sammAnapUrvaka
grahaNa kie gae nAmavAle dharmatIrtha ko pravartAnevAle arihaMta bhagavaMta ke
guNa-samUha samAna ratnanidhAna kA bayAna indra mahArAjA, anya kisI cAra
jJAnavAle yA mahA atizayavAle chadmastha jIva bhI rAta dina hara eka pala
hajAroM jabAna se karor3oM sAla taka kare to bhI svayaMbhUramaNa samudra samAna
arihaMta ke guNa ko bayAna nahIM kara sakate muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 43

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishītha'  Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number:
Because, O Gautama! The Arihant Bhagavants, who are the propagators of Dharma
Tīrtha, possess infinite qualities and treasures. Therefore, what should be said
about them here? Where the lords of the three realms, the gurus of the world,
the one kin of the three universes, the best quality-based Dharma Tīrthankaras
of the three realms, the selection of such a Tīrthankara is only a part of the
tip of a thumb, adorned with many qualities. The form of its infinite parts is
not capable of being described by Indra and others. While specifically
mentioning this, it is said:  If the gods and Indra, or any such devotee, were
to describe the qualities of their thumb for the destruction of the suffering,
poverty, distress, birth, old age, death, disease, affliction, dejection,
illness, pain, etc., caused by the mass of evil karma accumulated over many
lifetimes, then the group of qualities of the Bhagavan, which shines brightly on
the tip of their tongue like a group of sun rays, would be spoken by the gods,
including Indra, together, but even then, they would not be able to describe it.
Then what would the Kevalajnani, who has the eye of knowledge, say?  Therefore,
O Gautama! In this matter, understand this ultimate truth here: Only the
Kevalajnani Tīrthankara is capable of describing the ocean of qualities of the
Tīrthankara Bhagavants. No one else can be capable of doing so. Because their
speech is extraordinary. Therefore, they are capable of speaking. Or, O Gautama!
What is the point of saying more about this matter? I will tell you the
essential meaning, which is as follows: Sūtra - 495-496  The Jinesvara
Bhagavants, whose feet are worshipped by gods and Indra, are free from the stain
of the eight types of karma, which are like dirt, and whose mere name is
remembered by the mind, speech, and body, which are the three causes, and who
are focused on them, and whose soul does not contradict the rules of conduct and
restraint, and who are constantly engaged in the vows of conduct and restraint,
will surely attain liberation in a short time. Sūtra - 497-499  Whoever is
distressed by the suffering of the world of living beings and desires to attain
the happiness of liberation, let them become like a bee immersed in a lotus
grove, and let them be absorbed in praising, glorifying, and chanting auspicious
victory chants for the Bhagavants. Let them, with a heart full of devotion,
place their forehead on the ground before the pair of feet of the Jinesvara,
with folded hands, and let them, with a firm vow and conduct, free from doubts
and other impurities, and with a complete understanding of the meaning of right
conduct, embrace the single quality of the Tīrthankara in their heart, then they
will surely attain liberation. Sūtra - 500  O Gautama! The manifestation of such
Tīrthankara Bhagavants in the world, whose holy name is the source of such
excellent fruits, is a great wonder, a vast manifestation in the three
universes, and such an extraordinary expansion is of this nature. Sūtra -
501-503  Even those beings who have not attained Kevalajnana, Manahparyavajnana,
and the ultimate body, are capable of destroying the eight types of karma by
seeing the extraordinary qualities of the Arihant. They are free from great
suffering and gestation, they are great yogis, they are distressed by the ocean
of existence filled with various sufferings, and they become detached from the
world in an instant. Or, O Gautama! Putting aside another statement, but in this
way, the Dharma Tīrthankara is such a noble name. It adorns the Arihant,
Bhagavant, Jinesvara, Dharma Tīrthankara, who is the kin of the three universes.
It is not fitting to give this name to others. Because they have, without hiding
the power of their heroic deeds, which have been manifested in many births,
marked by the characteristics of the cessation of delusion, emotion, detachment,
compassion, and faith, and which have been touched by right faith and joy,
constantly practiced severe, difficult, and painful austerities, and have
acquired a group of great merits of the highest kind. They have become the best,
the most excellent, the pure, the kin of the entire universe, the name and the
supreme master.  Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt (Mahānishītha) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi
Translation Page 44

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka kyoMki he
gautama ! dharmatIrtha pravartAnevAle arihaMta bhagavaMta aparimita
guNaratnavAle hote haiM  /  isalie yahA~ unake lie kyA batAe ? jahA~ tIna loka
ke nAtha jagata ke guru, tIna bhUvana ke eka bandhu, tIna loka ke vaise-vaise
uttama guNa ke AdhAra samAna zreSTha dharma tIrthaMkara ke varaNa kA eka aMgUThe
ke agra hissekA kevala eka hissA kaIM guNa ke samaha se zobhAyamAna hai| usameM
anantA hisse kA rUpa indrAdi varNana karane ke lie samartha nahIM hai  /  ye
bAta vizeSa batAte hue kahate haiM deva aura indra yA vaise kisI bhakti meM lIna
hue sarva puruSa kaIM janmAntara meM upArjana kie gae aniSTa duSTa karmarAzi
janita durgati udvega Adi duHkha dAridraya, kleza, janma, jarA, maraNa, roga,
saMtApa, khinnatA, vyAdhi, vedanA Adi ke kSaya ke lie unake a~gUThe ke guNa kA
varNana karane lage to sUrya ke kiraNoM ke samUha kI taraha bhagavAna ke jo kaIM
guNa kA samUha eka sAtha unake jihvA ke agra hisse para sphUrAyamAna hotA hai,
use indra sahita devagaNa eka sAtha bolane lage to bhI jisakA varNana karaneke
lie zaktimAna nahIM hai, to phira carmacakSuvAle akevalI kyA boleMge? isalie he
gautama ! isa viSaya meM yahA~ yaha paramArtha samaje ki tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta
ke guNa sAgara ko akele kevalajJAnI tIrthaMkara hI kahane ke lie zaktivara haiM
/  dUsare kisI kahane ke lie samartha nahIM ho sakate  /  kyoMki unakI bolI
sAtizaya hotI hai  /  isalie vo kahane ke lie samartha hai  /  yA he gautama !
isa viSaya meM jyAdA kahane se kyA ? sArabhUta artha batAtA hU~ vo isa prakAra
haisUtra - 495-496 samagra ATha taraha ke karma samAna mala ke kalaMka rahita,
deva aura indra se pUjita caraNavAle jInezvara bhagavaMta kA kevala nAma smaraNa
karanevAle mana, vacana, kAyA samAna tIna kAraNa meM ekAgratAvAlA, pala-pala meM
zIla aura saMyama meM udyama-vrata niyama meM virAdhanA na karanevAlI AtmA
yakInana alpa kAla meM turaMta siddhi pAtI hai| sUtra-497-499 jo kisI jIva
saMsAra ke duHkha se udvega pAe aura mokSa sukha pAne kI abhilASAvAlA bane taba
vo jaise kamalavana meM bhramara magna bana jAe usI taraha'' bhagavaMta ko
stavanA, stuti, mAMgalika jaya jayArava zabda karane meM lIna ho jAe aura
jhaNajhaNate guMjArava karate bhakti pUrva hRdaya se jinezvara ke caraNa-yugala
ke Age bhUmi para apanA mastaka sthApana karake aMjali jor3akara zaMkAdi dUSaNa
sahita samyaktvavAlA cAritra kA arthI akhaMr3ita vrata-niyama dhAraNa karanevAlA
mAnavI yadi tIrthaMkara ke eka hI guNa ko hRdaya meM dhAraNa kare to vo jarura
siddhi pAtA hai| sUtra-500 he gautama ! jinakA pavitra nAma grahaNa karanA aise
uttama phalavAlA hai aise tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ke jagata meM prakaTa mahAna
AzcaryabhUta, tIna bhuvana meM vizAla prakaTa aura mahAna aise atizaya kA
vistAra isa prakAra kA hai| sUtra-501-503 kevalajJAna, manaHparyavajJAna aura
carama zarIra jinhoMne prApta nahIM kiyA aise jIva bhI arihaMta ke atizaya ko
dekhakara ATha taraha ke karma kA kSaya karanevAle hote haiM  /  jyAdA duHkha
aura garbhAvAsa se mukta hote haiM, mahAyogI hote haiM, vividha duHkha se bhare
bhavasAgara se udvigna banate haiM  /  aura palabhara meM saMsAra se virakta
manavAlA bana jAtA hai  /  yA he gautama ! dUsarA kathana karanA eka ora
rakhakara, lekina isa taraha se dharma tIrthaMkara aise zreSTha akSaravAlA nAma
hai  /  vo tIna bhuvana ke bandhu, arihaMta, bhagavaMta, jInezvara, dharma
tIrthaMkara ko hI zobhA detA hai  /  dUsaroM ko yaha nAma denA zobhA nahIM detA
/  kyoMki unhoMne moha kA upazama, saMvega, nirveda, anukaMpA aura Astikya
lakSaNayukta kaIM janma meM chUnevAle prakaTa kie gae samyagdarzana aura ullAsa
pAe hue parAkrama kI zakti ko chipAe binA ugra kaSTadAyaka ghora duSkara tapa kA
hamezA sevana karake ucca prakAra ke mahApuNya skaMdha samUha ko upArjita kiyA
hai  /  uttama, pravara, pavitra, samagra vizva ke bandhu, nAma aura zreSTha
svAmI bane hote haiN| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 44

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  **Study/Purpose/Sutra Number**
From the beginning of time, the unique Tirthankara, who has bound the sinful
karma by the power of the sinful thoughts of the cycle of birth and death, has
been cutting it. He is adorned with a thousand and eight auspicious marks, which
are extremely beautiful, radiant, illuminating the ten directions, and
unparalleled. He is the abode of the highest beauty in the world, and his
appearance fills the hearts of gods and humans with wonder, and their eyes and
minds with great amazement and joy. The Tirthankara Bhagvant is free from the
stain of all sinful karma. He possesses the most sacred and supreme body,
adorned with the perfect square institution and the best Vajrishbhanaraach
Sanghayan.  Such Tirthankara Bhagvant, who is the most glorious, powerful,
influential, and supreme, is the one who establishes the Dharma Tirth. And then
it is said in Sutra-504-508:  If all the humans, gods, Indra, and goddesses are
gathered together, and their form, radiance, and beauty are compared to the tip
of the toe of the Jinendra's foot, even a crore or lakh part of it, then the
form of those gods and goddesses will appear dull like a piece of gold placed
near the Meru mountain. Or if all the virtues of all the men in this world are
gathered together, they will not even reach a fraction of the virtues of that
Tirthankara. If the entire three worlds are gathered together on one side, and
the Tirthankara Bhagvant is alone on the other side, even then he is superior in
virtues. Therefore, he is the most worthy of worship, praiseworthy, and
venerable. He is wise and intelligent, therefore, bow down to that Tirthankara
with devotion. Sutra-509-512  In the world, the people of a village, town, city,
province, country, or even the whole of India, obey the commands of their
respective rulers. But if the village headman is very happy, how much will he
give from a village? Give whatever you have. Even a small donation from a
Chakravarti will destroy the poverty of his entire lineage (all the relatives).
And then he desires the position of a minister, the minister desires the
position of a Chakravarti, and the Chakravarti desires the position of a king.
The Devendra desires the position of a Tirthankara, who gives the desired
happiness to the world. Sutra-513-514  The Tirthankara Bhagvant, whose position
even Indra desires with great devotion and single-minded focus, is the best.
There is no doubt about it. Therefore, all the gods, demons, planets, stars,
sun, moon, etc., also worship the Tirthankara. And indeed, he is the destroyer
of sins. Sutra-515-516  Two types of worship are described for the Dharma
Tirthankara, who is worthy of worship in the three worlds and the guru of the
world: material worship and devotional worship. Performing virtuous acts and
practicing severe austerities is devotional worship, and the Deshvirati Shravak
who performs worship, respects, and gives charity, etc., is material worship. O
Gautam! Understand the meaning here in this way. Sutra-517  Devotional worship
is like the practice of excellent character, while material worship is like the
worship of the Jina. Devotional worship is for the Muni, and both types of
worship are described for the Shravak. Among them, devotional worship is
commendable. Sutra-518  O Gautam! Here, some people who do not understand the
true meaning of the scriptures, are depressed, weak, and lazy, and are always
attached to the worldly life. They are the Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
(Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 45

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka anantA
kAla se vartate bhava kI pApavAlI bhAvanA ke yoga se bA~dhe hue pApakarma kA
chedana karake advitIya tIrthaMkara nAmakarma jinhoMne bA~dhA hai  /  ati
manohara, dedIpyamAna, daza dizA meM prakAzita, nirupama aise eka hajAra aura
ATha lakSaNa-se zobhAyamAna hotA hai  /  jagata meM jo uttama zobhA ke nivAsa kA
jaise vAsagRha ho vaisI apUrva zobhAvAle, unake darzana hote hI unakI zobhA
dekhakara deva aura mAnava aMtaHkaraNa meM Azcarya kA ahasAsa karate haiM, evaM
netra aura mana meM mahAna vismaya aura pramoda mahasUsa karate haiM  /  vo
tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta samagra pApakarma samAna maila ke kalaMka se mukta hote
haiM  /  uttama samacaturasra saMsthAna aura zreSTha vajaRSabhanArAca saMghayaNa
se yukta parama pavitra aura uttama zarIra ko dhAraNa karanevAle hote haiN| isa
taraha ke tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta mahAyazasvI, mahAsattvazAlI, mahAprabhAvI,
parameSThI ho vo hI dharmatIrtha ko pravartanevAle hote haiN| aura phira kahA
hai kisUtra-504-508 samagra mAnava, deva, indra aura devAMganA ke rUpa, kAnti,
lAvaNya vo saba ikaTe karake usakA r3haga zAyada eka aura kiyA jAe aura usakI
dUsarI ora jinezvara ke caraNa ke aMgUThe ke agra hisse kA karor3a yA lAkha
hisse kI usake sAtha tulanA kI jAe to vo deva-devI ke rUpa kA piMr3a suvarNa ke
merU parvata ke pAsa rakhe gae r3haga kI taraha zobhArahita dikhatA hai  /  yA
isa jagata ke sAre puruSa ke sabhI guNa ikaTThe kie jAe to usa tIrthaMkara ke
guNa kA anantavAM hissA bhI nahIM AtA  /  samagra tIna jagata ikaTThe hokara eka
ora eka dizA meM tIna bhuvana ho aura dUsarI dizA meM tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta
akele hI ho to bhI vo guNa meM adhika hote haiM isalie vo parama pujanIya haiM
/  vaMdanIya, pUjanIya, arhata haiM  /  buddhi aura mativAle haiM, isalie usI
tIrthaMkara ko bhAva se namaskAra karo  /  sUtra - 509-512 loka meM bhI gA~va,
pura, nagara, viSaya, deza yA samagra bhArata kA jo jitane deza kA svAmI hotA
hai, usa kI AjJA ko usa pradeza ke loga mAnya rakhate haiM  /  lekina
grAmAdhipati acchI taraha se ati prasanna huA ho to eka gA~va meM se kitanA de ?
jisa ke pAsa jitanA ho usameM se kucha de  /  cakravartI thor3A bhI de to bhI
usake kula paramparA se Ate (samagra baMdhu varga kA) dAridra naSTa hotA hai |
aura phira vo maMtrIpana kI, maMtrI cakravartIpana kI, cakravartI surapatipana
kI abhilASA karatA hai  /  devendra, jagata ke yathecchita sukhakula ko denevAle
tIrthaMkarapana kI abhilASA karate haiN| sUtra-513-514 ekAnta lakSa rakhakara
ati anurAga pUrvaka indra bhI jisa tIrthaMkara pada kI IcchA rakhate haiM, aise
tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta sarvottama hai  /  usameM koI sandeha nahIM  /  isalie
samagra deva, dAnava, graha, nakSatra, sUrya aura candra Adi ko bhI tIrthaMkara
pUjya haiM  /  aura vAkaI meM vo pApa naSTa karanevAle haiN| sUtra - 515-516
tIna loka meM pUjanIya aura jagata ke guru aise dharmatIrthaMkara kI dravyapUjA
aura bhAvapUjA aise do taraha kI pUjA batAI hai  /  cAritrAnuSThAna aura
kaSTavAle ugra ghora tapa kA Asevana karanA vo bhAvapUjA aura dezavirati zrAvaka
jo pUjA-satkAra aura dAna-zIlAdi dharma sevana kare vo dravyapUjA  /  he gautama
! yahA~ isakA tAtparya isa prakAra samajho sUtra - 517 bhAva-arcana pramAda se
utkRSTa cAritra pAlana samAna hai  /  jaba ki dravya arcana jinapUjA samAna hai|
muni ke lie bhAva arcana hai aura zrAvaka ke lie donoM arcana batAe haiM  /
usameM bhAva arcana prazaMsanIya hai| sUtra - 518 he gautama ! yahA~ kucha
zAstra ke paramArtha ko na samajanevAle avasanna zithilavihArI, nityavAsI,
paraloka ke muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda
Page 45

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  Those who do not think about
the loss of study/purpose/sūtra number, who behave according to their own mind,
who are free-willed, attached to ṛiddhi, rasa, śātā-gārava, etc., who are deeply
attached to raga, filled with raga-dvesha, moha-andhakāra-mamatva, etc., who are
turned away from all restraint and true dharma, who are merciless, shameless,
devoid of hatred for sin, devoid of compassion, merciless, who have a mind that
is attached to the act of sin, who are extremely cruel, fierce, and cruel in
solitude, who are of false vision, who are devoid of all association, beginning,
and attachment, who take samayika grahana from dravya (through mind, speech, and
body, by doing, causing, and allowing) but not from bhava, who only have their
heads shaved in name, who have only left the aṇagāra-ghar in name, who are only
a mahāvratadhari in name, who, despite being a śramaṇa, follow and promote the
wrong path by holding contrary beliefs, they are like this:  We always perform
tīrtha prabhavana by worshipping the fragrance, garland, lamp, samārjana,
liṁpana, cloth, bali, dhūpa, etc., of Arihant Bhagvant. Those who believe in
them promote the wrong path. Thus, their duty is not in accordance with true
dharma. O Gautama! One should not even approve of their duty through words.  O
Bhagvant! Why is it said that one should not approve of their dravya pūjana even
through words? O Gautama! According to their words, there is an abundance of
asanyama and the destruction of the root qualities, which leads to the inflow of
karma, and then, with adhyavasaya, there is a binding of gross and subtle
auspicious and inauspicious karma-natures, the mahāvrat, which is like the
renunciation of all precautions, is broken, the breaking of the vrata leads to
the fault of disobeying the command, which leads to following the wrong path,
which leads to the loss of the right path, promoting the wrong path and
destroying the right path is like a great misfortune for a yati. Because those
who commit such a great misfortune have to take birth and death in the four
gatis for an infinite time. Therefore, one should not approve of such words.
Sūtra-519-520  Dravyastava and bhavastava, both are good, but bhavastava is much
better. Those who say that dravyastava is very good, their mind is not wise. O
Gautama! One should behave in such a way that the welfare of the six-sense
beings is protected. This dravyastava, worshipping the Lord with fragrance,
flowers, etc., is considered appropriate for a śrāvaka who is a desha-virati but
has not renounced all sins. But for a restrained sadhu who has renounced all
sins, performing dravyastava is not appropriate, it is like worshipping with
flowers, etc. Sūtra-521-522  O Gautama! Perhaps you think that since the thirty-
two Indras have performed both dravyastava and bhavastava, it is appropriate to
do so. But understand it this way. This is considered to be bhavastava, which is
like a desire to obtain their favour. For an avirati Indra, bhavastava
(compassion for the six-sense beings in the form of trividha trividha) is
impossible. King Daśārṇabhadra honoured Bhagvant with pomp and show, he
performed dravya pūjana and lost in comparison to Indra, then he accepted the
diksha, which is like bhavastava. Then he also defeated Indra. This is an
example to be applied here, therefore bhavastava is the best. Sūtra-523-526  The
Chakravarti, Surya, Chandra, Datta, Damaka, etc., asked Bhagvant, "Did they
perform pūjana-satkāra with devotion, which no one could do with all kinds of
ṛiddhi? Did they understand it as sarva-savadha? Or did they understand it as
trividha virati? Or did they consider it as pūjana for those who are virati with
all kinds of yoga?" O Bhagvant, Indra has performed all kinds of pūjana with all
his power. O Gautama! Even if an avirati Indra has performed pūjana-satkāra with
the best kind of devotion, one should combine the dravya and bhavastava of both
the desha-virati and the avirati according to their ability.  Muni
Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda Page 46

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka nukasAna
ke bAre meM na socanevAle, apanI mati ke anusAra vyavahAra karanevAle,
svacchaMda, Rddhi, rasa, zAtA-gArava Adi meM Asakta hue, rAga-dveSa, moha-
aMdhakAra-mamattva Adi meM ati pratibaddha rAgavAle, samagra saMyama samAna
saddharma se parAGmukha, nirdaya, lajjAhIna, pApa kI dhRNA rahita, karuNA
rahita, nirdaya, pApa AcaraNa karane meM abhinivezakadAgraha buddhivAlA, ekAnta
meM jo ati caMr3a, rUdra aura krUra abhigraha karanevAlI mithyAdRSTi, sarva
saMga, Arambha, parigraha se rahita hokara, trividha-trividha se (mana, vacana,
kAyA se kRta, kArita, anumati se) dravya se sAmAyika grahaNa karatA hai lekina
bhAva se grahaNa nahIM karatA, nAma mAtra hI mastaka muMDana karavAte haiM  /
nAma se hI aNagAra-ghara chor3a diyA hai  /  nAma kA hI mahAvratadhArI hai  /
zramaNa hone ke bAvajUda bhI viparIta mAnyatA karake sarvathA unmArga kA sevana
aura pravartana karatA hai  /  vo isa prakAra hama arihaMta bhagavaMta kI
gandha, mAlA, dIpaka, saMmArjana, liMpana, vastra, bali, dhUpa Adi kI pUjA
satkAra karake hamezA tIrtha kI prabhAvanA karate haiN| usake anusAra mAnanevAle
unmArga pravartAte haiM  /  isa prakAra unake kartavya sAdhu dharma ke anurUpa
nahIM hai  /  he gautama ! vacana se bhI unake isa kartavya kI anumodanA nahIM
karanI caahie| he bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se aisA kahA jAtA hai ki vacana se
bhI unake isa dravyapUjana kI anumodanA na kare? he gautama ! unake vacana ke
anusAra asaMyama kI bahulatA aura mUla guNa naSTa ho isase karma kA Azrava ho
aura phira adhyavasAya ko lekara sthUla aura sUkSma zubhAzubha karma prakRti kA
baMdha ho, sarva sAvadha kI kI gaI virati samAna mahAvrata kA bhaMga ho, vrata
bhaMga hone se AjJA ullaMghana kA doSa lage, usase unmArgagAmIpana pAe, usase
sanmArga kA lopa ho, unmArga pravartana karanA aura sanmArga kA vipralopa karanA
yati ke lie mahAAzAtanA samAna hai  /  kyoMki vaisI mahAAzAtanA karanevAle ko
anantA kAla taka cAra gati meM janma-maraNa ke phere karane par3ate haiM  /  isa
kAraNa se vaise vacana kI anumodanA nahIM karanI cAhie  /  sUtra- 519-520
dravyastava aura bhAvastava ina donoM meM bhAva-stava bahuta guNavAlA hai  /
''dravyastava'' kAphI guNavAlA hai aisA bolanevAle kI buddhi meM samajadArI
nahIM hai  /  he gautama ! cha kAya ke jIva kA hita-rakSaNa ho aisA vyavahAra
karanA  /  yaha dravyastava gandha puSpAdika se prabhubhakti karanA una samagra
pApa kA tyAga na kiyA ho vaise deza-viratIvAle zrAvaka ko yukta mAnA jAtA hai  /
lekina samagra pApa ke paccakkhANa karanevAle saMyamI sAdhu ko puSpAdika kI pUjA
samAna, dravyastava karanA kalpatA nhiiN| sUtra-521-522 he gautama ! jisa kAraNa
se yaha dravyastava aura bhAvastava rUpa donoM pUjA battIsa indra ne kI hai to
karane lAyaka hai aisA zAyada tuma samaja rahe ho to usameM isa prakAra samajanA
/  yaha to kevala unakA viniyoga pAne kI abhilASA samAna bhAva-stava mAnA hai  /
avirati aise indra ko bhAvastava (cha kAya jIva kI trividha trividha se dayA
svarUpa) nAmumakIna hai  /  dazArNabhadra rAjA ne bhagavaMta kA ADaMbara se
satkAra kiyA vo dravyapUjA aura indra ke sAmane mukAbale meM hAra gae taba
bhAvastava samAna dIkSA aMgIkAra kii| taba indra ko bhI harAyA - vo dRSTAMta kA
yahA~ lAgu karanA, isalie bhAva stava hI uttama hai| sUtra- 523-526 cakravartI,
sUrya, candra, datta, damaka Adi ne bhagavAna ko pUchA ki kyA sarva taraha kI
Rddhi sahita koI na kara sake usa taraha bhakti se pUjA-satkAra kie vo kyA sarva
sAvadha samaje ? yA trividha virativAlA anuSThAna samaje yA sarva taraha ke
yogavAlI viratI ke lie use pUjA mAne ? he bhagavaMta, indra ne to unakI sArI
zakti se sarva prakAra kI pUjA kI hai  /  he gautama ! avirativAle indra ne
uttama taraha kI bhakti se pUjA satkAra kie ho to bhI vo deza virati vAle aura
avirativAle ke yaha dravya aura bhAvastava aise donoM kA viniyoga usakI
yogyatAnusAra jor3anA  /  muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-
hindI anuvAda Page 46

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishītha' Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number
Sūtra-527 O Gautama! All Tīrthankara devotees have practiced the same conduct as
those who have eradicated all eight karmas. Sūtra-528-530 Those who are afraid
of existence, wherever they go, wherever there is a possibility of harming
living beings, such as touching them, and wherever there is a possibility of
causing harm to themselves or others, their minds do not engage in such
activities. Therefore, those who are restrained from harming themselves or
others should practice such rituals that are beneficial in all ways. The only
ritual that is the essence of the path to liberation, that is solitary, that
gives happiness, and that reveals the ultimate truth is the conduct of complete
renunciation. It is as follows: Sūtra-531-537 Imagine a Meru mountain, as high
as a lakh yojanas, adorned with a sea of jewels, made of gold, extremely
beautiful, pleasing to the eyes and mind, extremely knowledgeable, extremely
strong, and invisible, joined together in such a way that it appears as if it
were one, extremely smooth, with parts well-divided, with many peaks, with many
bells and flags, with excellent toranas, where the beauty of the mountain or
palace is visible as one walks step by step. Similarly, imagine incense made of
camphor, sandalwood, etc., which emits a fragrance when placed in fire, well-
decorated with many kinds of wonderful and beautiful flowers, filled with many
kinds of dances, with sweet sounds of mridanga, filled with hundreds of people
of good intentions, with people whose minds are filled with the desire to hear
the character and teachings of Jineshvara Bhagavan, where stories are told,
where there are commentators, dancers, apsaras, gandharvas, and the sounds of
musical instruments are heard. This is the kind of world that is filled with the
qualities mentioned above, where there are thousands of pillars made of gold,
jewels, and gems, all earned through righteous means, and where the floor is
made of gold. The temple of the Jina that is built with such qualities is said
to be filled with many qualities of austerity and restraint. Sūtra-538-540 In
this way, through austerity and restraint, one cleanses the dirt of the karmas
accumulated over many existences, and attains liberation, which is full of
infinite happiness, in a short time. Even if a devotee who practices the four
kinds of beautiful Dharma, such as dana, etc., which adorn the entire earth with
the Jina's teachings, attains the highest speed, he cannot go beyond the twelfth
devlok. He can only go up to the twelfth devlok, which is called Achyuta.
Sūtra-541-542 O Gautama! Even the gods who reside in the seventh devlok, called
Sarvarthasiddha, fall from there. If we think about the rest, there is no
permanent or stable place in the world. How can the present happiness be called
happiness when it is followed by suffering after a long time? How can the
happiness that is temporary and ends in death be considered great? Even if all
the humans and gods are gathered together for a long time, they cannot
experience or hear as much happiness as even a small part of the infinite
happiness of liberation. Sūtra-543-545 O Gautama! Within the happiness of this
great world, there are thousands of terrible and fierce sufferings hidden. But
those who are dull-witted cannot recognize them when the karmas that cause
suffering arise. Even in a mountain of jewels and gold, there is iron hidden
inside.  Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt (Mahānishītha) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Translation
Page 47

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra-527
he gautama ! sarva tIrthaMkara bhakta ne samagra ATha karma kA nirmUlakSaya
karanevAle aise cAritra aMgIkAra karane samAna bhAvastava kA khuda AcaraNa kiyA
hai| sUtra - 528-530 bhava se bhayabhIta aise unako jahA~-jahA~ AnA, jantu ko
sparza Adi prapuruSana-vinAzakAraNa pravartatA ho, sva-para hita se virame hue
ho unakA mana vaise sAvadha kArya meM nahIM pravartatA  /  isalie sva-para ahita
se virame hue saMyata ko sarva taraha se savizeSa parama sArabhUta jyAdA
lAbhaprada aise anuSThAna kA sevana karanA cAhie  /  mokSa-mArga kA parama
sArabhUta vizeSatAvAlA ekAnta karanevAlA pathya sukha denevAlA prakaTa
paramArtha rUpa koI anuSThAna ho to kevala sarva virati samAna bhAvastava hai  /
vo isa prakAra - sUtra - 531-537 lAkha yojana pramANa meru parvata jaise UMce,
maNisamudra se zobhAyamAna, suvarNamaya, parama manohara, nayana aura mana ko
Ananda denevAlA, ati vijJAnapUrNa, ati majabUta, dikhAI na de usa taraha jur3a
diyA ho aisA, ati ghisakara mulAyama banAyA huA, jisake hisse acchI taraha se
bA~Te gae haiM aisA kaIM zikharayukta, kaI ghaMTa aura dhvajA sahita, zreSTha
toraNa yukta kadama-kadama para Age-Age calane se jahA~ (parvata) yA rAjamahala
samAna zobhA dikhAI detI ho  /  vaise agara, kapUra, caMdana Adi kA banAyA huA
dhUpa jo agni meM DAlane se mahakatA ho, kaI taraha ke kaIM varNavAle
AzcaryakArI sundara puSpa samUha se acchI taraha se pUje gae, jisameM nRtya
pUrNa kaIM nATikA se Akula, madhura, mRdaMga ke zabda phaile hue hoM, saiMkar3oM
uttama AzayavAle logoM se Akula, jisameM jinezvara bhagavaMta ke cAritra aura
upadeza kA zravaNa karavAne ke kAraNa se utkaMThita hue cittayukta loga ho,
jahA~ kahane kI kathAeM, vyAkhyAtA, nRtya karanevAle, apsarA, gaMdharva,
vAjiMtra ke zabda sunAI de rahe ho  /  yaha batAe guNasamUha yukta isa pRthva
meM sarvatra apanI bhujA se upArjana kie gae nyAyopArjita artha se suvarNa ke,
maNi ke aura ratna ke dAdaravAlA, usI taraha ke hajAra staMbha jisameM khar3e
kie gae ho, suvarNa kA banAyA huA bhUmitala ho, aisA jinamaMdira jo banavAe
usase bhI tapa aura saMyama kaIM guNavAle batAe haiN| sUtra - 538-540 isa
prakAra tapasaMyama dvArA kaIM bhava ke upArjana kie pApakarma ke mala samAna
lepa ko sApha karake alpakAla meM anaMta sukhavAlA mokSa pAtA hai  /  samagra
pRthvI paTTa ko jinAyatana se zobhAyamAna karanevAle dAnAdika cAra taraha kA
sundara dharma sevana karanevAlA zrAvaka jyAdA se jyAdA acchI gati pAe to bhI
bArahaveM devaloka se Age nahIM nIkala sakatA  /  lekina acyuta nAma ke bArahave
devaloka taka hI jA sakatA hai| sUtra- 541-542 he gautama ! lavasattama deva
yAni sarvArthasiddha meM rahanevAle deva bhI vahA~ se cyavakara nIce Ate haiM
phira bAkI ke bAre meM socA jAe to saMsAra meM koI zAzvata yA sthira sthAna
nahIM hai  /  lambe kAla ke bAda jisameM duHkha milanevAlA ho vaise vartamAna ke
sukha ko sukha kaise kahA jAe? jisameM anta meM mauta AnevAlI ho aura alpakAla
kA zreya vaise sukha ko tuccha mAnA hai| samagra nara aura deva kA sarva lambe
kAla taka ikaTThA kiyA jAe to bhI vo sukha mokSa ke ananta hisse jitanA bhI
zravaNa yA anubhava kara zake aisA nahIM hai| sUtra-543-545 he gautama ! ati
mahAna aise saMsAra ke sukha kI bhItara kaIM hajAra ghora pracaMDa duHkha chipe
haiM  /  lekina maMda buddhivAle zAtA vedanIya karma ke udaya meM use pahacAna
nahIM sakatA  /  maNi suvarNa ke parvata meM bhItara chipakara rahe loha muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 47

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, ‘Mahanishith’  **Study/Purpose/Sutra Number**
Like a rock or like a merchant's daughter (this is worthy of an occasion. There,
such meaning can be derived that just as the face of a well-born, modest, and
veiled merchant's daughter cannot be seen by others, so also the bliss of
liberation is not described.)  **Like a guest in a city** who comes and stays, a
Bhil cannot describe the city's pleasures like the royal palace, etc. Similarly,
here, even the most knowledgeable person cannot describe the bliss of liberation
in the realms of gods, demons, and humans. Sutra-546  **How can you call it
punya** (merit) when its end is not visible even after a long time? And then,
how can you call it punya or happiness when its end is with suffering and it
increases the cycle of the world? Sutra-547  **The one who thinks about the
splendor of the divine chariot** and then the falling away from the heavenly
realm, his heart is truly made of the strength of a Vikriya body. Otherwise, it
would break into a hundred pieces. Sutra-548-549  **The suffering within the
hellish realm** is so unbearable that even if someone who lives for millions of
years starts to describe it, they would not be able to complete it. Therefore, O
Gautam! Only through the practice of the ten types of Yati Dharma, severe
austerities, and restraint, can one attain the imperishable, liberation, and
bliss. Sutra-550  **In the realm of the hellish beings, in the realm of the
animals, in the realm of the gods, or in the form of Indra,** one cannot attain
what one can attain in the human realm. Sutra-551  **Only when the great, very
numerous, and very powerful karmas called Charitravaraniya are destroyed,** O
Gautam! can a being become capable of attaining the state of liberation.
Sutra-552  **One cannot attain the highest Dharma of character without acquiring
a human birth** and the great accumulation of punya earned in past lives.
Sutra-553  **Those who have practiced well, are free from malice and pride, and
whose character is incomparable,** they attain the infinite, imperishable bliss
of liberation, which remains in the forefront of the three realms. Sutra-554-556
**Having acquired a human birth with the qualities of wisdom, etc., which burns
away the eight types of sinful actions, like a high mountain, accumulated over
many lifetimes,** whoever does not practice self-interest and the restraint of
inflow according to the scriptures, and then does not diligently uphold the
eighteen thousand vows, they continuously burn in the fierce fire of suffering
for a long time, with great anxiety, and burn endlessly. Sutra-557-560  **The
womb, filled with foul-smelling excrement, pus, bile, vomit, phlegm, mucus,
etc., and with fat, flesh, thick impurities, feces, urine, and blood, is a place
of constant churning, movement, and decay, where all the limbs are gathered and
contracted.** In this womb, one takes birth in many wombs.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka ror3A kI
taraha yA vaNika putrI kI taraha (yaha kisI avasara kA pAtra hai  /  vahA~ aisA
artha nIkala sakatA hai ki jisa taraha kulavAna, lajjAvAlI aura ghughaTa
nIkAlanevAlI vaNika putrI kA mu~ha dUsare nahIM dekha sakate vaise mokSa sukha
bhI bayAna nahIM kiyA jAtA  / ) nagara ke atithi kI taraha rahakara AnevAlA
bhIla rAjamahala Adi ke nagarasukha ko bayAna nahIM kara sakatA  /  vaise yahA~
devatA, asura aura manuSya ke jagata meM mokSa ke sukha ko samartha jJAnI puruSa
bhI bayAna nahIM kara skte| sUtra-546 dIrghakAla ke bAda bhI jisakA anta dikhAI
na de use puNya kisa taraha kaha sakate haiM  /  aura phira jisakA anta duHkha
se honevAlA ho aura jo saMsAra kI paramparA bar3hAnevAlA ho use puNya yA sukha
kisa taraha kaha sakate haiM? sUtra-547 vo deva vimAna kA vaibhava aura phira
devaloka meM se cyavana ho  /  ina donoM ke bAre meM socanevAlA kA hRdaya vAkaI
vaikriya zarIra ke majabUtI se banAyA hai  /  varanA usake so Tukar3e ho jaae|
sUtra - 548-549 narakagati ke bhItara ati duHsaha aise jo duHkha haiM use
karor3a sAla jInevAlA varNana zUru kare to bhI pUrNa na kara sake  /  isalie he
gautama ! dasa taraha kA yatidharma ghora tapa aura saMyama kA anuSThAna
ArAdhana vo rUpa bhAvastava se hI akSaya, mokSa, sukha pA sakate haiN| sUtra-550
nArakI ke bhava meM, tiryaMca ke bhava meM, devabhava meM yA indrarUpa meM use
pA nahIM sakate ki jo kisI mAnava bhava meM pA sakate haiN| sUtra-551 ati mahAna
bahota cAritrAvaraNIya nAma ke karma dUra ho taba hI he gautama ! jIva
bhAvastava karane kI yogyatA pA sakate haiN| sUtra-552 janmAntara meM upArjita
bar3e puNya samUha ko aura mAnava janma ko prApta kie binA uttama cAritra dharma
nahIM pA skte| sUtra-553 acchI taraha se ArAdhana kie hae, zalya aura
daMbharahita hokara jo cAritra ke prabhAva se tulanA na kI ho vaise ananta
akSaya tIna loka ke agra hisse para rahe mokSa sakha pAte haiN| sUtra - 554-556
kaIM bhava meM IkaTThe kie gae, UMce pahAr3a samAna, ATha pApakarma ke r3haga ko
jalA denevAle viveka Adi guNayukta mAnava janma prApta kiyA  /  aisA uttama
mAnava janma pAkara jo koI Atmahita aura zrutAnusAra Azrava nirodha nahIM karate
aura phira apramatta hokara aThThAraha hajAra zIlAMga ko jo dhAraNa nahIM karate
/  vo dIrghakAla taka lagAtAra ghora duHkhAgni ke dAvAnala meM ati udvegapUrvaka
zekate hue anantI bAra jalatA rahatA hai| sUtra - 557-560 ati badabUvAle viSTA,
pravAhI, kSAra-pitta, ulTI, balakhA, kapha Adi se paripUrNa carabI ora paru,
gAr3ha azuci, malamUtra, rUdhira ke kIcar3avAle kar3hakar3ha karate hue
nIkalanevAlA, calacala karate hue calAyamAna kie jAnevAlA, Dhalar3hacha karate
hue DhalanevAlA, rajhor3ate hue sarva aMga ikaTThe karake sikur3A huA garbhAvAsa
meM kaIM yoni meM muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 48

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  The study/purpose/sūtra number
remained. The controlled limbs, each one, repeatedly wandered in the womb, now
the one who was terrified by the suffering of the world and the strangeness of
the world, such as birth, death, and womb, should make a strong effort and
inclination for that, knowing the effect of Bhāva-stava, which destroys all this
fear. Sūtra - 561  In the same way, the world of Vidyādhara, Kinnara, Manava,
Deva, and Asura praised the Jinesvara, who is the best in the three worlds, in
two ways: Dravya-stava and Bhāva-stava. Sūtra - 562-569  O Gautama! The Dharma
Tīrthankara Bhagavan, Arihant, Jinesvara, who have attained vast ṛiddhi. Such
prosperity is independent, yet the world-friend is not even tempted by it for a
moment. Their supreme glory, beauty, grace, color, strength, body size, power,
fame, and renown, as they descended from the Deva-loka here, as they attained
the Deva-loka in another bhava by intense tapas, as they bound the Tīrthankara
name-karma by worshipping one Ādi-visthānak, as they attained Samyaktva, as they
worshipped Śramaṇapan in the remaining bhava, as the queen Triśalā, the wife of
the king Siddārtha, received fourteen great dreams, as the inauspicious and
impure things were removed from the womb and fragrant and sweet smells were
established, as Indra Raja, with great devotion, placed the nectar food in the
joint of the thumb, as the Bhagavan was praised by Indra and others until birth,
and then as the Dik-kumārī came and performed the birth-related rituals, as the
thirty-two Deva-endras, with glorious devotion, fulfilled all their duties with
great joy and all ṛiddhi, as they performed the coronation of the Lord on the
peak of Mount Meru, then the bodies of the devotees, filled with excitement,
became thrilled with the touch of the garment, and they thought, "Indeed, our
birth has been fulfilled." Sūtra - 570-579  For a moment, they moved their
hands, sang in a beautiful voice, made the sound of a deep drum, uttered
auspicious words from their mouths like the sounds that emerged from the ocean
of milk, and they joined their hands in anjali, as they performed the coronation
festival with a tall kalasa made of gold and jewels, perfumed with the fragrance
of many fragrant things from the water of the ocean of milk, as the Jinesvara
moved the mountain, as the Bhagavan, even though he was eight years old, created
the "Indra Grammar," as he spent his childhood, as he had to get married, as the
Lokāntika Deva gave him enlightenment, as all the Devas and Asuras rejoiced and
celebrated the Bhagavan's initiation, as he endured the severe hardships of the
divine human and animal realms, as he burned the four ghanaghati karmas with
intense tapas, meditation, and yoga, as he attained the Kevala-jnana that
illuminated the Lokāloka, as the Devas and Asuras praised the glory of Kevala-
jnana and asked questions about Dharma, Nīti, Tapas, and Charitra, as he sat on
the throne prepared by the Devas and prepared the best Samvasarana, as the Devas
compared his ṛiddhi with the ṛiddhi of the world, as the Arihant Bhagavan, the
great teacher of the entire universe, wandered wherever he wanted, as the eight
great miracles are present in the beautiful signs of the Tīrtha, as he destroys
the entire karma of the smooth Mithyātva of the ancient bhava of the glorious
jīva, as he gives enlightenment and establishes them in the path, as he
initiates the Ganadhara, and then he weaves the great sūtras, as the Jinenadra
tells the Ganadhara the meaning of the Anantagama Paryāya. Sūtra - 580-585  As
the Lord of the world attains Siddhi, as all the Sura-vrendras celebrate his
Nirvāṇa festival, and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka rahatA
thA  /  niyaMtrita kie aMgavAlA, hara eka yonivAle garbhAvAsa meM punaH punaH
bhramaNa karatA thA, aba muje saMtApaudvega janmajarA maraNa garbhAvAsa Adi
saMsAra ke duHkha aura saMsAra kI vicitratA se bhayabhIta honevAle ne isa
samagra bhaya ko naSTa karanevAle bhAvastava ke prabhAva ko jAnakara usake lie
dRr3hapana se ati udyama aura pravRtti karanI cAhie sUtra - 561 usa prakAra
vidyAdhara, kinnara, mAnava, deva asuravAle jagata ne tIna bhuvana meM utkRSTa
aise jinezvara kI dravyastava aura bhAvastava aise do taraha se stuti kI hai|
sUtra-562-569 he gautama ! dharma tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta, arihaMta, jinezvara jo
vistAravAlI Rddhi pAe hue haiM  /  aisI samRddhi svAdhIna phira bhI jagat bandhu
palabhara usameM mana se bhI lubhAe nhiiN| unakA paramaizvarya rUpa zobhAyamaya
lAvaNya, varNa, bala, zarIra pramANa, sAmarthya, yaza, kIrti jisa taraha
devaloka meM se cyavakara yahA~ avatare, jisa taraha dUsare bhava meM, ugra tapa
karake devaloka pAyA  /  eka Adi vizasthAnaka kI ArAdhanA karake jisa taraha
tIrthaMkara nAmakarma bA~dhA, jisa taraha samyaktva pAyA  /  bAkI bhava meM
zramaNapana kI ArAdhanA kI, siddhArtha rAjA kI rAnI trizalA ko caudaha mahA
sapane kI jisa taraha prApti huI  /  jisa taraha garbhAvAsa meM se azubha azuci
cIja kA dUra honA aura sugaMdhI suvAsa sthApana kiyA  /  indra rAjA ne bar3I
bhakti se aMgUThe ke parva meM amRtAhAra kA nyAsa kiyA  /  janma huA taba taka
bhagavaMta kI indrAdika stavanA karate the aura phira jisa prakAra dizikumArI ne
Akara janma sambandhI sUtikarma kie  /  battIsa devendra gauravavAlI bhakti se
mahA Ananda sahita sarva Rddhi se sarva taraha ke apane kartavya jisa taraha se
pUre kie, meru parvata ke zikhara para prabhu kA janmAbhiSeka karate the taba
romAMca rUpa kaMcuka se pulakita hue dehavAle, bhaktipUrNa, gAtravAle aisA
socane lage ki vAkaI hamArA janma kRtArtha huA  /  sUtra - 570-579 palabhara
hAtha hilAnA, sundara svara meM gAnA, gambhIra duMdubhi kA zabda karate, kSIra
samudra meM se jaise zabda prakaTa ho vaise jaya jaya karanevAle maMgala zabda
mukha se nIkalate the aura jisa taraha do hAtha jor3akara aMjali karate the,
jisa taraha kSIra sAgara ke jala se kaIM khuzabUdAra cIja kI khuzabU se suvAsita
kie gae suvarNa maNiratna ke banAe hue UMce kalaza se janmAbhiSeka mahotsava
deva karate the, jisa taraha jinezvara ne parvata ko calAyamAna kiyA  /  jisa
taraha bhagavaMta ATha sAla ke the phira bhI 'indra vyAkaraNa'' banAyA  /  jisa
taraha kumArapana bitAyA, zAdI karanI pdd'ii| jisa taraha lokAMtika deva ne
pratibodha kiyA  /  jisa taraha harSita sarva deva aura asura ne bhagavAna kI
dIkSA kA mahotsava kiyA, jisa taraha divya manuSya aura tiryaMca sambandhI ghora
pariSaha sahana kie  /  jisa taraha ghora tapasyA dhyAna yoga se agni se cAra
ghanaghAtI karma jalA die  /  jisa taraha lokAloka ko prakAzita karanevAlA
kevalajJAna upArjana kiyA, phira se bhI jisa taraha deva aura asura ne
kevalajJAna kI mahimA karake dharma, nIti, tapa, cAritra viSayaka saMzaya pUche
/  deva ke taiyAra kie hue siMhAsana para birAjamAna hokara jisa taraha zreSTha
samavasaraNa taiyAra kiyA  /  jisa taraha deva unakI Rddhi aura jagata kI Rddhi
donoM kI tulanA karate the  /  samagra bhuvana ke eka guru mahAyazavAle arihaMta
bhagavaMta ne jahA~ jahA~ jisa taraha vicaraNa kiyA  /  jisa taraha ATha
mahApratihArya ke suMdara cinha jina tIrtha meM hote haiM  /  jisa taraha bhavya
jIva ke anAdikAla ke cikane mithyAttva ke samagra karma ko nirdalana karate
haiM, jisa taraha pratibodha karake mArga meM sthApana karake gaNadhara ko
dIkSita karate haiM  /  aura phira mahAbuddhivAle vo sUtra bunate haiM  /  jisa
taraha jinendra anantagama paryAya-samagra artha gaNadhara ko kahate haiN|
sUtra-580-585 jisa taraha jagata ke nAtha siddhi pAte haiM, jisa taraha sarva
suravarendra unakA nirvANa mahotsava karate haiM aura muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 49

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahānishīth' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number Then,
those gods, finding sorrow in the absence of the Bhagvant, were washing their
bodies with the flow of tears, the sound of which was like the rustling of
water. And then they lamented in sorrowful voices, "O Master! You have made us
orphans." Just as the gods, with the wood of the fragrant sandalwood tree,
performed the funeral rites of the Bhagvant. After performing the rites, those
who were grieving looked towards the empty ten directions. Just as the bones of
the Jineswar were washed in the Kshir-Sagar, taken to the Devalok, anointed with
the best sandalwood paste, worshipped with the flowers of the Ashoka tree, the
Parijat tree, and the lotus of the Shatapatra Sahasrapatra variety, and then
praised in their respective abodes. (That entire account is known in great
detail from the Arhant Charitra) Know it from the Antagad Dasha. Sutra-586-589
Here, if it is said, leaving aside the current authority, then there will be a
digression, irrelevance, and a long expansion of the text. Despite the lack of a
proposal, we have explained so much, there is a very big reason for the
teaching, which is explained here. It is said for the benefit of those noble
beings. Just as a modak mixed with good ghee is eaten, so too, great mental joy
arises in people. In the same way, even though there is no opportunity here, the
Bhavatma, whose mind is drawn to the absorption of the Nirguna, burdened by
devotion, experiences great joy. Sutra-590 This Panchamangal Mahashrutaskandha
Navakar was explained in great detail by the Tirthankar, who possessed infinite
knowledge and vision, different from the Sutras, such as the Niyukti, Bhashya,
and Churni. In the same way, it was explained briefly. But due to the defect of
the passage of time, those Niyukti, Bhashya, and Churni were broken, and that
time-period passed away. Then, twelve-limbed Shruta-bearing, born, named Vraj
Swami, who possessed great wealth, gain, and prosperity, appeared. He rescued
this Panchamangal Mahashrutaskandha, writing it in the middle of the original
Sutra. Gandhar-Bhagvant explained the original Sutra from the Sutra perspective,
and Dharma Tirthankar Arhant Bhagvant explained it from the meaning. The Veer
Jinendra, worshipped by the three worlds, shaped it in this way. This is the
tradition of the old Acharyas. Sutra-591 Here, wherever there are words
connected with each other, and where the continuous Sutra-alapk is not
available, the Shruthadharas, the Lahiyas, have written falsely. Do not blame
such a fault, but the original copy of this Mahānishīth Shrutaskandha, which is
like an unfathomable Chintamani and Kalpavriksha, was eaten by Udhayi, etc., and
due to that, it became a fragmented copy. Many leaves have rotted, yet this
Mahānishīth Shrutaskandha is full of great meaning. Knowing that it is the
ultimate essence, the best, the most meaningful, and the most profound of the
entire discourse, and believing that many noble beings will benefit from the
affection of the discourse, and for the benefit of his own soul, Acharya
Haribhadrasuri wrote what was in that ideal, purifying it with his own mind.
Other Acharyas, such as Siddhen Diwakar, Vridhvadi, Yakshasen, Devgupta,
Yashovardhan, Kshamasraman's disciple Ravigupta, Nemichandra, Jindasagani,
Kshamak, Satyarsi, etc., the main Shruthadharas of the age, have honored it.
Sutra-592 O Gautam! According to what is said further, after reading the
Panchamangal Mahashrutaskandha (Navakar) with Vinaya-Upadhan, in the order of
the past, the order of the future, and the order of the present, with the
correct pronunciation of the vowels, consonants, matras, bindu, and letters, and
after making it stable and familiar in the heart, and knowing the Sutra and its
meaning in great detail, what should be read? O Gautam! After that, the Iriya
Vahiy Sutra should be read. Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahānishīth) Agam Sutra-
Hindi Translation Page 50

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka phira
bhagavaMta kI geramojudagI meM zoka pAe hue vo deva apane gAtra ko bahate
azrujala ke sarasara zabda karanevAle pravAha se jisa taraha dho rahe the  /
aura phira duHkhI svara se vilApa karate the ki he svAmI ! hame anAtha banAyA  /
jisa taraha surabhI gaMdhayukta gozIrSa caMdanavRkSa ke kASTa se sarva devendra
ne vidhivat bhagavaMta ke deha kA agnisaMskAra kiyaa| saMskAra karane ke bAda
zoka pAnevAle zUnya daza dizA ke mArga ko dekhate the  /  jisa taraha kSIra-
sAgara meM jinezvara ke asthi ko prakSAlana karake devaloka meM le jAkara
zreSTha caMdana rasa se una asthi kA vilepana karake azokavRkSa, pArijAta vRkSa
ke puSpa aura zatapatra sahasra patra jAti ke kamala se usakI pUjA karake apane
apane bhavana meM jisa taraha stuti karate the  /  (vo sarva vRttAMta mahA
vistAra se arihaMta caritra nAma) aMtagar3a dazA se jaannaa| sUtra-586-589 yahA~
abhI jo cAlu adhikAra hai use chor3akara yadi yaha kahA jAe to viSayAntara
asaMbaddhatA aura graMtha kA lambA vistAra ho jAe  /  prastAva na hone ke
bAvajUda bhI itanA bhI hamane nirupaNa kiyA usameM ati bar3A kAraNa upadezIta
hai jo yahA~ batAyA hai| una bhavya sattva ke upakAra ke lie kahA gayA hai|
acche vasANA se mizrita modaka kA jisa taraha bhakSaNa kiyA jAtA hai, vaise
logoM meM ati bar3I mAnasika prIti utpanna hotI hai  /  usa taraha yahA~ avasara
na hone ke bAvajUda bhI bhakti ke bojha se nirbhara aura nijaguNa grahaNa karane
meM khIMce hae cittavAle bhavAtmA ko bar3A harSa utpanna hotA hai| sUtra-590
yaha paMcamaMgala mahAzrutaskaMdha navakAra kA vyAkhyAna mahA vistAra se
anantagama aura paryAya sahita sUtra se bhinna aise niyukti, bhASya, cUrNi se
ananta jJAna-darzana dhAraNa karanevAle tIrthaMkara ne jisa taraha vyAkhyA kI
thii| usI taraha saMkSepa se vyAkhyAna kiyA jAtA thaa| lekina kAla kI parihANI
hone ke doSa se vo niyukti bhASya, cUrNikA viccheda pAkara isa taraha kA samaya-
kAla baha gayA thA, taba mahA-Rddhi, labdhi, saMpanna padAnusArI labdhivAle
vrajasvAmI nAma ke bAraha aMga rUpa zruta ko dhAraNa karanevAle utpanna hue  /
unhoMne paMcamaMgala mahAzrutaskaMdha kA yaha uddhAra mUlasUtra ke bIca likhA  /
gaNadhara-bhagavaMta ne mUlasUtra ko sUtrapana se, dharma tIrthaMkara arahaMta
bhagavaMta ne artha se batAyA  /  tIna loka se pUjita vIra jinendra ne isakI
prarUpaNA kI isa prakAra se vRddha AcArya kA sampradAya hai| sUtra-591 yahA~
jahA~ jahA~ pada pada ke sAtha jur3e ho aura lagAtAra sUtrAlApaka prApta na ho
vahA~ zrutadhara ne lahIyAoM ne jhUTha likhA hai  /  aisA doSa mata denA lekina
jo kisI isa acintya cintAmaNI aura kalpavRkSa samAna mahAnizItha zrutaskaMdha kI
pUrvAdarza pahale kI likhI huI prati thI usameM hI UdhaI Adi jIvAMta se khAkara
usa kAraNa se Tukar3evAlI prata ho gaI  /  kAphI patte sar3a gae to bhI ati
atizayavAlA bar3e artha se bharapUra yaha mahAnizItha zrutaskaMdha hai  /
samagra pravacana ke parama sArabhUta zreSTha tattvapUrNa mahA, artha, garbhita
hai aisA jAnakara pravacana ke vAtsalya se kaIM bhavyajIva ko upakAramaMda hoMge
aisA mAnakara aura apane AtmA ke hita ke lie AcArya haribhadrasUrI ne jo usa
Adarza meM likhA, vo sarva apanI mati se zuddha karake likhA hai| dUsare bhI
AcArya-siddhena divAkara, vRddhavAdI, yakSasena, devagupta, yazovardhana,
kSamAzramaNa ke ziSya ravigupta, nemicandra, jinadAsagaNi, kSamaka, satyarSI Adi
yuga pradhAna zrutadhara ne use bahumAnya rakhA hai| sUtra - 592 he gautama !
isa prakAra Age kahane ke anusAra vinaya-upadhAna sahita paMcamaMgala mahA-
zrutaskaMdha (navakAra) ko pUrvAnupUrvI, pazcAnupUrvI aura anAnupUrvI se svara,
vyaMjana, mAtrA, bindu aura padAkSara se zuddha taraha se par3hakara use dila
meM sthira aura paricita karake mahA vistAra se sUtra aura artha jAnane ke bAda
kyA par3hanA cAhie? he gautama ! usake bAda iriyAvahiya sUtra par3hanA caahie|
muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 50

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishītha'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra
Number:** O Bhagvant! Why is it said that after reading the Panchamangal Mahā
Śruta Skandha, one should read the Iriyāvahiya Sūtra?  **O Gautama!** When our
soul, due to the results of actions like coming and going, becomes entangled in
many beings, prānas, bhūtas, and sattvas, due to misuse or negligence, and then
there is a clash, disturbance, or injury, and then its criticism is done through
pratikramna, and for the destruction of all karma, some ritual like caitya
vandan, svādhyāya, dhyāna, etc. is performed, at that time, whether there is a
concentrated mind or not, because due to the involvement of the mind in the
results of many other activities like coming and going, some beings do not leave
the previous results and remain in the state of dullness for some time. Then
there is a conflict in its results. And when, due to some fault like ignorance,
attachment, delusion, etc., there is a sudden clash or suffering of a one-sense
being, and after that, "Oh! This bad deed has been done by us. How have we
become blind in the attachment, hatred, delusion, false belief, and ignorance?
We do not even think about the bitter fruits of this deed in the afterlife.
Indeed, we are cruel and heartless." In this way, the souls who regret and feel
intense remorse, by criticizing the fault, doing bad deeds, bowing down to the
guru, and taking prāyaścitta, become free from the burden. When the ritual
becomes useful for self-benefit, then the mind attains a state of complete
concentration for the destruction of evil karma. From that, the desired fruit is
obtained for all beings, prānis, bhūtas, and sattvas in the world.  Therefore, O
Gautama! No ritual should be performed without reading the Iriyāvahiya
Padikkama. If one desires the true fruit, then, O Gautama! It is said that after
making the Panchamangal Mahā Śruta Skandha, the Navakāra Sūtra, its meaning, and
both of them stable and familiar, one should read the Iriyāvahiya Sūtra.
**Sūtra-593**  **O Bhagvant!** How should the Iriyāvahiya Sūtra be read? **O
Gautama!** It should be read according to the method of the Panchamangal Mahā
Śruta Skandha. **Sūtra-594**  **O Bhagvant!** What should be done after reading
the Iriyāvahiya Sūtra? **O Gautama!** One should read the Śakrastava, etc.,
caitya vandan. But the Śakrastava should be read once, and then thirty-two
āyambils should be performed after it. For the Arhant sattva, i.e., the Arihant
Cheiāṇam, one upavāsa and five āyambils should be performed. For the twenty-four
stava-logass, one chhaḷū, one upavāsa, and twenty-five āyambils should be
performed. The Śrutastava-Pukkhara Varadīvadḍhe Sūtra should be read properly
with one upavāsa and five āyambils.  In that way, the study of the sūtra should
be done with pure pronunciation, consonants, vowels, dots, word divisions,
words, and letters, so that the letters of one word do not merge into another.
The study of the sūtra should be done with other qualities mentioned in the same
way. The study of the entire sūtra and its meaning should be done with the
mentioned penance and method. Wherever there is any doubt, that sūtra should be
thought about again. After thinking, it should be understood without any doubt.
**Sūtra-595**  In this way, after reading the sūtra, its meaning, and both of
them, along with the caitya vandan, etc., rituals, if there is a combination of
auspicious date, karana, muhūrta, nakshatra yoga, lagna, and moon strength,
then, according to one's ability, one should gather the equipment for
worshipping the Jagadguru Tirthankara Bhagvant, and with a devotional heart,
full of devotion, and thrilled with excitement, one should offer it to the Sadhu
Bhagvant.  **Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt (Mahānishītha) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda**
**Page 51**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka he
bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se aisA kahalAtA hai ki paMcamaMgala mahA zrutaskaMdha
ko par3hane ke bAda iriyAvahiya sUtra par3hanA cAhie? he gautama ! hamArI yaha
AtmA jaba-jaba AnA-jAnA Adi kriyA ke pariNAma meM pariNata huA ho, kaIM jIva,
prANa, bhUta aura sattva ke anupayoga yA pramAda se saMghaTTana, upadrava yA
kilAmaNA karake phira usakA Alocana pratikramaNa kiyA jAe aura samagra karma ke
kSaya ke lie caityavaMdana, svAdhyAya, dhyAna Adi kisI anuSThAna kiyA jAe usa
vakta ekAgra cittavAlI samAdhi ho yA na bhI ho, kyoMki gamanAgamana Adi kaIM
anya vyApAra ke pariNAma meM Asakta honevAle citta se kucha jIva usake pUrva ke
pariNAma ko na chor3e aura durdhyAna ke pariNAma meM kucha kAla vartatA hai  /
taba usake phala meM visaMvAda hotA hai  /  aura jaba kisI taraha ajJAna moha
pramAda Adi ke doSa se acAnaka ekendriyAdika jIva ke saMghaTTana yA paritApana
Adi ho gae ho aura usake bAda are re ! yaha hamase bUrA kAma ho gyaa| hama kaise
sajjar3a rAga, dveSa, moha, mithyAtva aura ajJAna meM aMdha bana gae haiM  /
paraloka meM isa kAma ke kaise kaTu phala bhugatane par3eMge usakA khayAla bhI
nahIM AtA  /  vAkaI hama krUra karma aura nirdaya vyavahAra karanevAle haiM  /
isa prakAra pachatAvA karate hue aura ati saMvega pAnevAlI AtmAeM acchI taraha
se prakaTapana meM iriyAvahiya sUtra se doSa kI AlocanA karake, bUrAI karake,
guru ke sAmane gardA karake, prAyazcitta kA sevana karake zalya rahita hotA hai|
citta kI sthiratAvAlA azubhakarma ke kSaya ke lie jo kucha Atmahita ke lie
upayogavAlA ho, jaba vo anuSThAna meM upayoga vAlA bane taba use parama ekAgra
cittavAlI samAdhi prApta hotI hai| usase sarva jagata ke jIva, prANIbhUta aura
sattva ko jo ISTaphala ho vaisI iSTaphala kI prApti hotI hai| usa kAraNa se he
gautama ! iriyAvahiya paDikkame binA caityavaMdana svAdhyAyAdika kisI bhI
anuSThAna na karanA cAhie  /  yadi yathArthaphala kI abhilASA rakhatA ho to, isa
kAraNa se ki gautama ! aisA kahA jAtA hai ki paMcamaMgala mahAzrutaskaMdha
navakAra sUtra artha aura tadubhaya sahita sthira-paricita kara ke iriyAvahiya
sUtra par3hanA cAhie sUtra- 593 he bhagavaMta ! kisa vidhi se iriyAvahiya sUtra
paDhanA cAhie? he gautama ! paMca maMgala mahAzrutaskaMdha kI vidhi ke anusAra
par3hanA caahie| sUtra- 594 he bhagavaMta ! iriyAvahiya sUtra par3hakara phira
kyA karanA cAhie ? he gautama ! zakrastava Adi caityavaMdana par3hanA cAhie  /
lekina zakrastava eka aThuma aura usake bAda usake upara battIsa AyaMbila karanA
cAhie  /  arahaMta satva yAni arihaMta ceIANaM eka upavAsa aura usa para pA~ca
AyaMbila karake  /  caubIsa stava-logassa, eka chaLU, eka upavAsa para pacIsa
AyaMbila karake  /  zrutastava-pukkharavaradIvaDDhe sUtra, eka upavAsa aura
upara pA~ca AyaMbila karake vidhivat par3hanA caahie| usa prakAra svara,
vyaMjana, mAtrA, bindu, padaccheda, pada, akSara se vizuddha, eka pada ke akSara
dUsare meM na mila jAe, usI taraha vaise dUsare guNa sahita batAe sUtra kA
adhyayana karanA  /  yaha batAI gaI tapasyA aura vidhi se samagra sUtra aura
artha kA adhyayana karanA  /  jahA~ jahA~ koI saMdeha ho vahA~ vahA~ usa sUtra
ko phira se socanA  /  socakara niHzaMka avadhAraNa karake niHsaMdeha krnaa|
sUtra- 595 isa prakAra sUtra, artha aura ubhaya sahita caityavaMdana Adi vidhAna
par3hakara usake bAda zubha tithi, karaNa, muhUrta, nakSatra yoga, lagna aura
candrabala kA yoga huA ho usa samaya yathAzakti jagadguru tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta
ko pUjane lAyaka upakaraNa ikaTe karake sAdhu bhagavaMta ko pratilAbhI kA bhakti
pUrNa hRdayavAlA romAMcita banakara pulakita hae muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 51

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'**  A person with a body, with a
smiling face, filled with faith, devotion, wisdom, and supreme detachment, who
has eradicated the deep-rooted impurities of attachment, hatred, delusion, and
false belief, who experiences such pure, extremely pure, spotless, auspicious,
and especially auspicious joy, I am truly blessed and virtuous for having
established a statue of the Bhuvanaguru Jinendra, with my sight and mind, with a
focused mind. I have made my birth successful by worshipping Jinendra.  With
this belief, one should join both hands above the forehead, creating an Anjali,
and with both knees on the ground, for the sake of the earth devoid of living
plants, seeds, animals, etc., with a pure heart, in a beautiful manner, one
should respectfully offer salutations to the Chaitya, having understood the true
meaning of the Sutras and their implications without any doubt, with a firm
character, a scholar of the scriptures, with many virtues like unwavering
devotion, etc., along with the Guru, Sadhus, Sadhvis, and fellow Dharma
practitioners. After that, one should, as much as possible, offer salutations to
the fellow Dharma practitioners, and then, with a soft, clean, and precious
garment, one should honor them with great respect. At this time, one should give
a Dharma discourse to the Guru Maharaj, who has understood the essence of the
scriptures, elaborating on the principles of Dharma, generating dispassion for
the world, increasing faith and devotion. Sutra-596-597  After that, with utmost
faith, devotion, and eagerness, one should make some commitments for life. For
example, "O beloved of the gods! You have truly obtained a beautiful human birth
and made it successful. From today onwards, for the rest of your life, you
should always contemplate the Chaitya with a peaceful and focused mind, without
haste, in all three times. This is the essence of humanity, which is impure,
impermanent, and fleeting. Do not put water in your mouth until you have
worshipped the Chaitya and the Sadhu every morning. Do not eat your midday meal
until you have visited the Chaitya. Do not violate the evening ritual without
contemplating the Chaitya. Make these commitments for life." Then, O Gautam! We
will tell you further, after empowering the Guru with the (Vardhaman) Vidya, one
should place seven handfuls of fragrant powder on his head and say these
blessings: "May you become one who crosses the ocean of this world."  Vardhaman
Vidya- Om Namo Bhagavao Arahao Sijjhau Me Bhagavati Mahavijjā Vire Mahavirē
Jayavīrē Seṇavīrē Vaddhamān Vīrē Jayantē Aparājīē Swāhā.  One should fast and
perform the Sadhana according to the rituals. With this Vidya, you will become
one who crosses every Dharma worship. In the Great Initiation, with the
permission of the Ganipada, one should chant this Vidya seven times and say,
"May you cross the Nitharaga." When one accepts the final Sadhana, the Anasan,
one should empower them with this Vidya and perform the Vasakshepa, then they
become a soul worshipper. The influence of this Vidya pacifies the group of
obstacles and brings about auspiciousness. When a valiant man enters battle, he
will not be defeated by anyone. At the end of the Kalpa, he will bring about
auspiciousness and prosperity. Sutra-598  Then, one should say to the Sadhus,
Sadhvis, Shravakas, Shravikas, and all the nearby fellow Dharma practitioners,
"You are truly blessed and virtuous," and while saying this, one should perform
the Vasakshepa mantra and accept it.  After that, one should accept a fragrant,
unbleached white garland, in the place of the Jagadguru Jinendra, and the Guru
Maharaj should place it on both pillars with his own hands, saying, "O great
soul! You have made your human birth, which you have obtained and earned well,
successful, with the group of great merits earned in past lives. O beloved of
the gods! The doors to hell and the animal realm are closed for you. You will
not be bound by disgrace, ill-repute, or the karma of a low lineage. When you go
to the next life, the five prostrations will not be rare for you."  Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 52

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
zarIravAlA, harSita hue mukhAraviMdavAlA, zraddhA, saMvega, viveka parama
vairAga se aura phira jisane gahare rAga, dveSa, moha, mithyAtva samAna mala
kalaMka ko nirmUlapana se vinAza kiyA hai vaisI, suvizuddha, ati nirmala,
vimala, zubha, vizeSa zubha isa taraha ke Ananda pAnevAle, bhuvanaguru jinezvara
kI pratimA ke lie sthApanA kiye hue dRSTi aura mAnasavAlA, ekAgra cittavAlA
vAkaI meM dhanya hU~, puNyazAlI hU~ | jinezvara ko vaMdana karane se maiMne merA
janma saphala kiyA hai| aisA mAnate hue lalATa ke Upara do hAtha jor3akara
aMjali kI racanA karanevAle sajIva vanaspati bIja jantu Adi rahita bhUmi ke lie
donoM jAnuoM sthApana karake acchI taraha se sApha hRdaya se sundara rItI se
jAne hue jisane yathArtha sUtra artha aura tadubhava niHzaMkita kie haiM aisA,
pada-pada ke artha kI bhAvanA bhAtA huA, dRr3ha cAritra, zAstra ko jAnanevAlA,
apramAdAtizaya Adi kaIM guNa saMpattivAle guru ke sAtha, sAdhu, sAdhvI,
sAdharmika bandhuvarga parivAra sahita prathama usako caitya ko juhAranA cAhie
/  usake bAda yathAzakti sAdharmika bandhu ko praNAma karane pUrvaka ati kiMmatI
komala sApha vastra kI paharAmaNI karake usakA mahA Adara karanA cAhie unakA
sundara sammAna karanA  /  isa vakta zAstra ke sAra jinhoMne acchI taraha se
samajhA hai  /  aise guru mahArAja ko vistAra se AkSepaNI nikSepaNI dharmakathA
kahakara saMsAra kA nirveda utpAda zraddhA, saMvega vardhaka dharmopadeza denA
caahie| sUtra-596-597 usake bAda parama zraddhA saMvega tatpara banA jAnakara
jIvana paryanta ke kucha abhigraha denA  /  jaise ki he devAnupriya ! tune vAkaI
aisA sundara mAnavabhava pAyA use saphala kiyA  /  tujhe Aja se lekara jAvajjIva
hamezA tIna kAla jaldabAjhI kie binA zAnta aura ekAgra citta se caitya kA
darzana, vaMdana karanA, azuci azAzvata kSaNabhaMgura aisI mAnavatA kA yahI sAra
hai  /  roja subaha caitya aura sAdhu ko vaMdana na karu taba taka mukha meM
pAnI na DAlanA  /  dopahara ke vakta caityAlaya meM darzana na karU~ taba taka
madhyAhana bhojana na karanA  /  zAma ko bhI caitya ke darzana kie binA
saMdhyAkAla kA ullaMghana na karanA  /  isa taraha ke abhigraha yA niyama
jIvanabhara ke karavAnA  /  usake bAda he gautama ! Age batAeMge usa
(vardhamAna) vidyA se maMtrIta karake guru ko usake mastaka para sAta
gaMdhacUrNa kI muSThi DAlanI aura aise AzIrvAda ke vacana kahanA ki isa saMsAra
samudra kA nistAra karake pAra pAnevAlA bana  /  vardhamAna vidyA-OM namo
bhagavao arahao sijjhau me bhagavatI mahAvijjA vIre mahAvIre jayavIra seNavIre
vaddhamANa vIre jayaMte aparAjie svaahaa| upavAsa karake vidhivat sAdhanA karanI
cAhie  /  isa vidyA se hara eka dharmArAdhanA meM tUM pAra pAnevAlA bana  /
baDI dIkSA meM, gaNIpada kI anujJA meM sAta bAra isa vidyA kA japa karanA aura
ninthAraga pAragA hoha aisA khnaa| aMtima sAdhanA anasana aMgIkAra kare taba
maMtrIta karake vAsakSepa kiyA jAe to AtmA ArAdhaka banatA hai  /  isa vidyA ke
prabhAva se vighna ke samUha upazAnta utpanna hotA hai  /  zUravIra puruSa
saMgrAma meM praveza kare to kisI se parAbhava nahIM hotA  /  kalpa kI samApti
meM maMgala aura kSema karanevAlA hotA hai| sUtra-598 aura phira sAdhu-sAdhvI
zrAvaka-zrAvikA samagra najadIkI sAdharmika bhAI, cAra taraha ke zramaNa saMgha
ke vighna upazAnta hote haiM aura dharmakArya meM saphalatA pAte haiN| aura
phira usa mahAnubhAva ko aisA kahanA ki vAkaI tuma dhanya ho, puNyavaMta ho,
aisA bolate-bolate vAsakSepa maMtra karake grahaNa karanA caahie| usake bAda
jagadguru jinendra kI Age ke sthAna meM gaMdhayukta, na mujhAI huI zveta mAlA
grahaNa karake guru mahArAja apane hasta se donoM khaMbhe para AropaNa karate
hue niHsaMdeha rUpa se isa prakAra kahanA-ki-are mahAnubhAva ! janmAntara meM
upArjita kie mahApuNya samUhavAle ! tune terA pAyA huA, acchI taraha se upArjita
karanevAlA mAnava janma saphala kiyA, he devAnupriya ! tumhAre narakagati aura
tiryaMcagati ke dvAra banda ho gae  /  aba tuje apayaza apakIrti halke gautra
karma kA ba~dha nahIM hogA  /  bhavAntara meM jAegA vahA~ tumhe paMca namaskAra
ati durlabha nahIM hogaa| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-
hindI anuvAda Page 52

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
In future births, due to the influence of the five prostrations, wherever you
are born, you will obtain the highest caste, the highest family, the highest
man, health, and wealth. These things you will surely get.  And then, due to the
influence of the five prostrations, you will not get slavery, poverty,
misfortune, birth in a low family, or disability. What more to say? O Gautama!
Whoever, by this method, performs the five prostrations and other daily rituals,
and is devoted to the eighteen thousand śīlāṅga, even if he does not attain
liberation by the practice of restraint, he will still enjoy long-lasting
happiness in the excellent heavenly realms like Graiveyak, Anuttar, etc., and
then be born in a noble family in this human world, obtaining a beautiful,
attractive, and perfect body, becoming proficient in all arts, and bringing joy
to people's hearts. He will attain great power like the king of the gods, be
eager to show compassion and mercy, be free from the suffering of sensual
pleasures, practice true Dharma, abandon the karmic residue, and attain
liberation. Sūtra-599  **O Bhagavant! Should the five auspicious upadhāna be
received with the same discipline and tapas as the study of the entire Śruta-
jñāna, like Samāyika, etc.?**  **O Gautama! Yes, the study should be done with
the same discipline and tapas as the upadhāna. Especially when teaching the
Śruta-jñāna, one should strive to protect the eight types of ācāra, like kāla,
etc. Otherwise, there will be a great loss of the Śruta-jñāna. Another thing to
keep in mind is that for the study of the twelve angas of the Śruta-jñāna, one
should always strive to read and teach in the first and last prahara. And for
reading the five auspicious Navakāra, eight pahora have been mentioned.
Secondly, remember that the five auspicious Navakāra can be read in Samāyika or
even outside of Samāyika. But the Samāyika, etc., and the Sūtra, Ārambha, and
Parigraha are only read after abandoning them and performing the Jāvājīva
Samāyika. They cannot be read without abandoning the Ārambha-Parigraha or
without performing the Jāvājīva Samāyika and taking all the vows. And besides
the five auspicious, there are the Ālāpake-Ālāpake, then the Śakrastavādi, and
the twelve angas, all of which are the same Śruta-jñāna. The purpose of study
(Samuddeśa-Anuññā Vidhi Vakt) is to make it a habit. Sūtra-600**  **O Bhagavant!
You have mentioned very strict rules and regulations for the study of the five
auspicious Śruta-skandha. How can children follow such strict rules?**  **O
Gautama! Whoever does not desire these mentioned rules, studies the five
auspicious Śruta-jñāna, etc., without discipline and upadhāna, or studies
without upadhāna, or considers it good to teach without upadhāna, or gives
Navakāra to such a person, or teaches them Samāyika, etc., is not considered a
lover of Dharma or a firm follower of Dharma. He is not considered a devotee of
the Śruta. He is one who destroys the Sūtra, its meaning, the Sūtra and its
meaning together, and the Guru. Whoever disrespects the Sūtra, its meaning,
both, and the Guru, becomes a destroyer of the past, future, and present
Tirthankaras. He who destroys the Śruta-jñāna, the Arihant, the Siddha, and the
Sadhu, remains trapped in the endless ocean of Samsara for a long time. He is
born again and again in the 84 lakh types of yoni, both hidden and revealed,
cold and hot, mixed, and many others. And then he has to endure immense pain in
the terrible womb, which is filled with foul-smelling excrement, pus, urine,
bile, phlegm, impurities, fat, and flesh, vomit, feces, and blood, and is slimy
and muddy, and looks ugly and repulsive. He has to endure the pain of being
squeezed, pressed, moving with a rattling sound, shaking, trembling, and being
tied up tightly like a bundle, all while being confined in the womb for a long
time.**  **Those who study this Sūtra, etc., according to the method described
in the scriptures, do not deviate even slightly. As said, ...**  **Muni
Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda** **Page 53**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka bhAvi
janmAntara meM paMca namaskAra ke prabhAva se jahA~-jahA~ utpanna hogA vahA~
vahA~ uttama jAti, uttama kula, uttama puruSa, sehata, saMpatti prApta hogI  /
yaha cIjeM yakInana tumheM milegI hii| aura phira paMca namaskAra ke prabhAva se
tumheM dAsapana, dAridra, badanasIbI, hInakula meM janma, vikalendriyapana nahIM
milegA  /  jyAdA kyA kahanA ? he gautama ! isa batAe hue vidhi se jo koI paMca-
namaskAra Adi nitya anuSThAna aura aThAraha hajAra zIlAMga ke lie ramaNatA
karanevAlA ho, zAyada vo sarAga se saMyama kriyA kA sevana kare usa kAraNa se
nirvANa na pAe to bhI graiveyaka anuttara Adi uttama devaloka meM dIrghakAla
Ananda pAkara yahA~ mAnavaloka meM uttamakula meM janma pAkara utkRSTa sundara
lAvaNya yukta sarvAMga sundara deha pAkara sarva kalA meM pAraMgata hokara logoM
ke mana ko Ananda denevAlA hotA hai, surendra samAna Rddhi prApta karake ekAnta
dayA aura anukaMpA karane meM tatpara, kAmabhoga se vyathita yathArtha
dharmAcaraNa karake karmaraja ko chor3akara siddhi pAtA hai| sUtra- 599 he
bhagavaMta ! kyA jisa taraha paMca maMgala upadhAna tapa karake vidhivat grahaNa
kiyA usI taraha sAmAyika Adi samagra zrutajJAna par3hanA cAhie? he gautama ! hA,
usI prakAra vinaya aura upadhAna tapa karane lAyaka vidhi se adhyayana karanA
cAhie  /  khAsa karake vo zrutajJAna par3hAte vakta abhilASAvAle ko sarva kozIza
se ATha taraha ke kAlAdika AcAra kA rakSaNa karanA cAhie  /  varanA zrutajJAna
kI mahA AzAtanA hotI hai  /  dUsarI bAta yaha bhI dhyAna meM rahe ki bAraha aMga
ke zrutajJAna ke lie prathama aura aMtima prahara par3hane ke lie aura par3hAne
ke lie hamezA kozIza karanI aura paMcamaMgala navakAra par3hane ke lie - ATha
pahora batAe haiM  /  dUsarA yaha bhI dhyAna rakho ki paMca maMgala navakAra
sAmAyika meM ho yA sAmAyika meM na ho to bhI par3ha sakate haiM  /  lekina
sAmAyika Adi sUtra Arambha parigraha kA tyAga karake aura jAvajjIva sAmAyika
karake hI par3hA jAtA hai  /  Arambha-parigraha kA tyAga kie binA yA jAvajjIva
ke sAmAyika-sarva viratI grahaNa kie binA par3he nahIM jA sakate  /  aura
paMcamaMgala AlAve, AlApake-AlApake aura phira zakrastavAdika aura bAraha aMga
samAna zrutajJAna ke uddezA  /  adhyayana kA (samuddeza-anujJA vidhi vakta)
AyaMbila karanA  /  sUtra-600 he bhagavaMta ! yaha paMcamaMgala zrutaskaMdha
par3hane ke lie vinayopadhAna kI bar3I niyaMtraNA-niyama batAe haiM  /  bacce
aisI mahAna niyaMtraNA kisa taraha kara sakate haiM ? he gautama ! jo koI Isa
batAI huI niyaMtraNA kI IcchA na kare, avinaya se aura upadhAna kie binA yaha
paMcamaMgala Adi zrutajJAna par3he-par3hAe yA upadhAna pUrvaka na par3he yA
par3hAnevAle ko acchA mAne use navakAra de yA vaise sAmAyikAdi zrutajJAna
par3hAe to priyadharmavAlA yA dRr3hadharmavAlA nahIM mAnA jAtA  /
zrutabhaktivAlA nahIM mAnA jaataa| usa sUtra kI, artha kI, sUtra, artha,
tadubhaya bhI hIlanA karanevAlA hotA hai  /  guru kI hIlanA karanevAlA hotA hai
/  jo sUtra, artha aura ubhaya evaM guru kI avahelanA karanevAlA ho vo atIta,
anAgata aura vartamAna tIrthaMkara kI AzAtanA karanevAlA bane jisane zrutajJAna,
arihaMta, siddha aura sAdhu kI AzAtanA kI usa dIrghakAla taka anantA saMsAra
sAgara meM aTakA rahatA hai, usa taraha ke gupta aura prakaTa, zIta uSNa, mizra
aura kaIM 84 lAkha pramANavAlI yoni meM bAra-bAra utpanna hotA hai| aura phira
gaharA aMdhakAra-badabUvAle viSThA, pravAhI, pizAba, pitta, balakhA, azuci cIja
se paripUrNa carabI ora paru, ulTI, mala, rudhira ke cIkane kIcar3avAle, dekhane
meM acchA na lage vaise bibhatsa ghora garbhavAsa meM apAra darda sahanA par3atA
hai  /  kar3ha-kar3ha karanevAle, kaThita, calacala zabda karake calAyamAna
honevAlA Tala-Tala karate hae TAlanevAlA, rajhaDane vAlA sarva aMga ikaTre
karake jaise jorase gaTharI meM bA~dhI ho vaise lambe arase taka niyaMtraNA-
vedanA garbhAvAsa meM sahanA par3atA hai| jo zAstra meM batAI huI vidhi se isa
sUtrAdika ko par3hate haiM jarA sA bhI aticAra nahIM lagAte  /  yathokta muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 53

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'**  Those who, by the
study/purpose/sutra-number provision, adorn themselves with the Shruta-knowledge
of Panchamangal etc., do not neglect that Sutra, O Gautam! They do not neglect
the meaning, they do not aspire for the meaning, they do not aspire for the
Sutra-meaning, both, they do not aspire for the Tirthankara who happens in the
three times, they do not aspire for the Siddha who has removed the dirt like
karma-dust residing on the top of the three lokas. Those who do not aspire for
such Siddha, do not aspire for Acharya, Upadhyaya and Sadhu. They are extremely
dear to Dharma, firm in Dharma and devoted in solitude. Those who are extremely
delighted in the meaning of the Sutra, with a mind full of devotion, are the
ones who obtain faith and emotion. Such a virtuous soul does not suffer the pain
of repeated births, etc., in this prison-like existence. Sutra-601  But O
Gautam! A child who has not yet known the meaning of sin and virtue is
inappropriate for that 'Pancha Mangal' in solitude. Do not give him even a
single verse of the Panchamangal Mahashruta-Skandha. Because, if the child,
having obtained this verse, does not worship properly the karma-mass accumulated
in the countless past lives, then it will be a loss for him. That child should
first be devoted to Dharma-katha. After that, when you know that he has become
dear to Dharma, firm in Dharma and devoted, then make him perform as many
Pacchakkhanas as he is capable of performing. Make him perform as many
Pacchakkhanas as he is capable of performing, according to his ability, in the
form of Ratri-bhojan-vidhi, Trividh, Chauveeh. Sutra-602  O Gautam! By
performing 45 Navkarashi, 24 Porisi, 12 Purimudoo, 10 Avadu and four Ekasana
(one fast can be counted in this. Two Ayambil and one pure, clean, faultless
Ayambil are also counted as one fast.) O Gautam! If one is single-minded in
performing Roudradhyan-Artadhyan, Vikatha-free Swadhyaya, without any business,
then even if he performs only one Ayambil, he surpasses the Masakshaman.
Therefore, make him eligible to read Panchamangal by increasing the number of
Tapas-Upadhan in the same proportion as the number of Visama he performs, then
make him read Panchamangal, otherwise do not make him read it. Sutra-603  O
Bhagvant! If this is done, and if a long time passes and he dies in the middle,
how can he perform the final worship without Navkar? O Gautam! When someone
starts Tapasya with a sincere intention for the sake of Sutra-Upachaar,
understand that he has started studying the Sutra, its meaning and both at the
same time. Because that devotee soul does not receive the Sutra, meaning and
both of the Pancha Namaskar with improper conduct. But he receives it by
performing Tapasya in such a way that he is a devotee with a good intention that
it will not be destroyed even in the future lives. Sutra-604  O Gautam! If
someone has learned from someone else and has prepared himself by reading the
Panchamangal Sutra after receiving the Sutra given by ear from the Shruta-
Jnanavaraneya's Kshayopa-sham, should he also perform Tapasya? O Gautam! Yes, he
should also be made to perform Tapasya. O Bhagvant! Why should he perform
Tapasya? O Gautam! For the benefit of easy enlightenment. Consider those who do
not perform this Tapasya-vidhan as ignorant. Sutra-605  O Bhagvant! If someone
has the rise of a very great Jnanavaraneya karma, and even after chanting day
and night, only half a verse is stable and familiar after one year, what should
he do? Such a soul should be given Abhigraha for the whole life. Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 54

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka vidhAna
se paMcamaMgala Adi zrutajJAna kA vinayopadhAna karate haiM, ve he gautama ! usa
sUtra kI hIlanA nahIM karate  /  artha kI hIlanA-AzAtanA nahIM karate, sUtra-
artha, ubhaya kI AzAtanA nahIM karate, tIna kAla meM honevAle tIrthaMkara kI
AzAtanA nahIM karatA, tIna loka kI coTI para vAsa karanevAle karmaraja samAna
maila ko jinhoMne dUra kiyA hai| aise siddha kI jo AzAtanA nahIM karate, AcArya,
upAdhyAya aura sAdhu kI AzAtanA nahIM karate  /  ati priyadharmavAle dRr3ha
dharmavAle aura ekAnta bhaktiyukta hote haiM  /  sUtra artha meM ati raMjita
mAnasavAlA vo zraddhA aura saMvega ko pAnevAlA hotA hai isa taraha kA puNyazAlI
AtmA yaha bhava rUpI kaidakhAne meM bArabAra garbhavAsa Adi niyaMtraNa kA duHkha
bhugatanevAlA nahIM hotaa| sUtra-601 lekina he gautama ! jisane abhI pApa-puNya
kA artha na jAnA ho, aisA baccA usa 'paMca maMgala'' ke lie ekAnte anucita hai
/  use paMcamaMgala mahAzrutaskandha kA eka bhI AlAvA mata denA  /  kyoMki anAdi
bhavAntara meM upArjana kie karmarAzI ko bacce ke lie yaha AlApaka prApta karake
baccA samyak taraha se ArAdhana na kare to unakI laghutA ho  /  usa bacce ko
pahale dharmakathA se bhakti karanI cAhie  /  usake bAda priyadharma
dRr3hadharma aura bhaktiyukta bana gayA hai aisA jAnane ke bAda jitane
paccakkhANa nirvAha karane ke lie samartha ho utane paccakkhANa usako karavAnA
/  rAtri bhojana ke vidha, trividha, caUviha-aise yathAzakti paccakakhANa
krvaanaa|| sUtra-602 he gautama ! 45 navakArazI karane se, 24 porisI karane se,
12 purimuDU karane se, 10 avaDU karane se aura cAra ekAsaNA karane se (eka
upavAsa ginatI meM le sakate haiM  / ) do AyaMbila aura eka zuddha, nirmala,
nirdoSa AyaMbila karane se bhI eka upavAsa ginA jAtA hai  / ) he gautama !
vyApAra rahitatA se raudradhyAna-ArtadhyAna, vikathA rahita svAdhyAya karane meM
ekAgra cittavAlA ho to kevala eka AyaMbila kare to bhI mAsakSamaNa se Age nIkala
jAtA hai| isalie visAmA sahita jitane pramANa meM tapa-upadhAna kare utane
pramANa meM usI ginatI meM bar3hautI karake paMcamaMgala par3hane ke lAyaka
bane, taba use paMca-maMgala kA AlAvA par3havAnA, varanA mata pddh'aanaa| sUtra
- 603 he bhagavaMta ! isa prakAra karane se, dIrghakAla bIta jAe aura yadi
zAyada bIca meM hI mara jAe to navakAra rahita vo aMtima ArAdhanA kisa taraha
sAdha sake? he gautama ! jisa vakta sUtropacAra ke nimitta se azaThabhAva se
yathAzakti jo koI tapa kI zurUAta kI usI vakta usane usa sUtra kA, artha kA aura
tadubhaya kA adhyayana paThana zurU kiyA aisA samajhanA  /  kyoMki vo ArAdhaka
AtmA usa paMca namaskAra ke sUtra, artha aura tadubhaya ko avidhi se grahaNa
nahIM karatA  /  lekina vo usa taraha vidhi se tapasyA karake grahaNa karatA hai
ki - jisase bhavAntara meM bhI naSTa na ho aise zubha-adhyavasAya se vo ArAdhaka
hotA hai| sUtra-604 he gautama ! kisI dUsare ke pAsa par3hate ho aura
zrutajJAnAvaraNIya ke kSayopazama se kAna se sUnakara diyA gayA sUtra grahaNa
karake paMcamaMgala sUtra par3hakara kisI ne taiyAra kiyA ho - kyA use bhI tapa
upadhAna karanA cAhie? he gautama ! hA, usako bhI tapa karAke denA caahie| he
bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se tapa karanA cAhie ? he gautama ! sulabha bodhi ke
lAbha ke lie  /  isa prakAra tapa-vidhAna na karanevAle ko jJAna-kuzIla
samajhanA  /  sUtra - 605 he bhagavaMta ! jisa kisI ko ati mahAna jJAnAvaraNIya
karma kA udaya huA ho, rAta-dina raTane ke bAda bhI eka sAla ke bAda kevala
ardhazloka hI sthira parIcita ho, vo kyA kare ? vaise AtmA ko jAvajjIva taka
abhigraha muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page
54

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  The one who studies, aims, and
grasps the Sūtra numbers or does svādhyāya, should recite with a focused mind,
remembering the two and a half thousand proofs of the Panchamangal Sūtras, their
meaning, and both together, every day. O Bhagvant! Why (do you say so)? O
Gautam! The monk who does not do svādhyāya equally, such as reading, etc., to
the best of his ability, in all four times, being free from attachment to
worldly possessions, is considered to be ignorant. Sūtra - 606  Secondly, the
one who understands the knowledge of the past, with attachment to worldly
possessions, until the end of life, reflects on the knowledge acquired earlier
in his inability, and recites the two and a half thousand Panchamangal Navakāra
in his inability, is also a worshiper of the soul. They attain liberation by
consuming their knowledge-obscuring karma, becoming a Tirthankara or a
Ganadhara, and attaining the status of a worshiper. Sūtra - 607-610  O Bhagvant!
Why is it said that one should do svādhyāya in all four times? O Gautam! The
soul, which is hidden by mind, speech, and body, consumes knowledge-obscuring
karma every moment. The one who remains in svādhyāya and meditation becomes
capable of attaining detachment every moment. For the one who does svādhyāya,
the upper world, the lower world, the world of light, the world of flying
vehicles, liberation, all worlds, and the world without light are directly
visible. There is no other austerity equal to svādhyāya for the soul with right
vision, and there will never be, for the twelve types of austerities, both
internal and external. Sūtra - 611-615  One, two, three months, or even a year,
one may fast without eating, but if one is devoid of svādhyāya and meditation,
one does not get even the fruit of one fast. The one who always consumes pure
food, produced from the earth, and uses the three yogas of mind, speech, and
body with focus, and does svādhyāya every moment, cannot be compared to the one
who fasts for a year, even with a focused mind. Because the one who does
svādhyāya with focus has infinite nirjarā. The muni who is tolerant, controls
the senses, expects nirjarā, and has five samitis and three guptis, does
svādhyāya with a focused and steady mind. O Gautam! The one who explains such
well-established knowledge of the scriptures, and the one who listens to it with
a good intention, both immediately bind the doors of āśrava. Sūtra - 616-619
The one who awakens such a suffering being and establishes him on the path of
liberation, is like a drummer who plays a loud drum in this world, including
gods and demons. Just as gold, which is predominantly mixed with other metals,
does not attain the state of gold without the action of gold, similarly, all
beings do not attain awakening without the teachings of the Jinas. The one who
knows the scriptures, free from attachment and aversion, and delusion, narrates
the Dharmakatha. If the speaker explains the Sūtras and their meaning to the
listener in a true way, then the speaker has nirjarā in solitude, and the
listener may or may not have nirjarā. Sūtra - 620  O Gautam! Therefore, it is
said that one should do svādhyāya in all four times, with attachment to worldly
possessions. And again, O Gautam! The monk who reads well-established knowledge
properly and then becomes proud of his knowledge is called ignorant. In this
way, ignorance is described in many ways. Sūtra - 621-622  O Bhagvant! How many
types of ignorance of vision are there? O Gautam! There are two types of
ignorance of vision - one from the Āgama and the other from outside the Āgama.
In this, one doubts right vision from the Āgama, desires other doctrines, and
has a desire for the dirty clothes of the sadhus and sadhvis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka grahaNa
karanA yA svAdhyAya karanevAle kA veyAvacca aura pratidina DhAI hajAra pramANa
paMcamaMgala ke sUtra, artha aura tadubhaya kA smaraNa karate hue ekAgra mana se
raTana kare  /  he bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se? (kahate ho?) he gautama ! jo
bhikSu jAvajjIva abhigraha rahita cAroM kAla yathAzakti vAcanAdi samAna
svAdhyAya na kare use jJAnakuzIla mAnA hai| sUtra - 606 dUsarA - jo kisI
yAvajjIva taka ke abhigraha pUrvaka apUrvajJAna kA bodha kare, usakI azakti meM
pUrva grahaNa kie jJAna kA parAvartana kare, usakI bhI azakti meM DhAI hajAra
paMcamaMgala navakAra kA parAvartana-japa kare, vo bhI AtmA ArAdhaka hai  /
apane jJAnAvaraNIya karma khapAkara tIrthaMkara yA gaNadhara hokara ArAdhakapana
pAkara siddhi pAte haiM sUtra-607-610 he bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se aisA
kahalAtA hai ki cAra kAla meM svAdhyAya karanA cAhie ? he gautama ! mana, vacana
aura kAyA se gupta honevAlI AtmA hara vakta jJAnAvaraNIya karma khapAtI hai  /
svAdhyAya dhyAna meM rahatA ho vo hara pala vairAgya pAnevAlA banatA hai  /
svAdhyAya karanevAle ko urdhvaloka, adholoka, jyotiSa loka, vaimAnika loka,
siddhi, sarvaloka aura aloka pratyakSa hai  /  abhyaMtara aura bAhya aise bAraha
taraha ke tapa ke lie samyagdRSTi AtmA ko svAdhyAya samAna tapa nahIM haA aura
hogA bhI nhiiN| sUtra - 611-615 eka, do, tIna mAsakSamaNa kare, are ! saMvatsara
taka khAe binA rahe yA lagAtAra upavAsa kare lekina svAdhyAya-dhyAna rahita ho
vo eka upavAsa kA bhI phala nahIM pAtA  /  udgama utpAdana eSaNA se zuddha aise
AhAra ko hamezA karanevAlA yadi mana, vacana, kAyA ke tIna yoga meM ekAgra
upayoga rakhanevAlA ho aura hara vakta svAdhyAya karatA ho to usa ekAgra
mAnasavAle ko sAla taka upavAsa karanevAle ke sAtha barAbarI nahIM kara sakate
/  kyoMki ekAgratA se svAdhyAya karanevAle ko ananta nirjarA hotI hai  /  pA~ca
samiti, tIna gupti, sahanazIla, indriya ko damana karanevAlA, nirjarA kI apekSA
rakhanevAlA aisA muni ekAgra mana se nizcala hokara svAdhyAya karatA hai  /  jo
koI prazasta aise zrutajJAna ko samajhAte haiM, jo kisI zubha bhAvavAlA use
zravaNa karatA hai, vo dono he gautama ! tatkAla Azrava dvAra bandha karate
haiN| sUtra - 616-619 duHkhI aise eka jIva ko jo pratibodha dekara mokSa mArga
meM sthApana karate haiM, vo devatA aura asura sahita isa jagata meM amArI
par3aha bajAnevAle hote haiM, jisa taraha dUsarI dhAtu kI pradhAnatA yukta
suvarNa kriyA binA kaMcanabhAva ko nahIM pAtA  /  usa taraha sarva jIva
jinopadeza binA pratibodha nahIM pAte  /  rAga-dveSa aura moha rahita hokara jo
zAstra ko jAnanevAle dharmakathA karate haiM  /  jo yathArtha taraha se sUtra
aura artha kI vyAkhyA zrotA ko vaktA kahe to kahanevAle ko ekAnte nirjarA ho
aura sunanevAle kA nirjarA ho yA na ho| sUtra- 620 he gautama ! isa kAraNa se
aisA kahA jAtA hai ki-jAvajjIva abhigraha sahita cAra kAla svAdhyAya karanA  /
aura phira he gautama ! jo bhikSu vidhivat suprazasta jJAna par3hakara phira
jJAnamada kare vo jJAnakuzIla kahalAtA hai  /  usa taraha jJAna kuzIla kI kaIM
taraha prajJApanA kI jAtI hai  /  sUtra - 621-622 he bhagavaMta ! darzanakuzIla
kitane prakAra ke hote haiM ? he gautama ! darzanakuzIla do prakAra ke haiM-eka
Agama se aura dUsarA noAgama se| usameM Agama se samyagdarzana meM zaka kare,
anya mata kI abhilASA kare, sAdhu-sAdhvI ke maile vastra aura muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 55

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
To consider the body as disgusting. To feel aversion. To doubt whether one will
get the fruits of Dharma or not. Not to praise the virtues of the Samyaktvādi.
To lose faith in Dharma. Not to encourage those who desire to abandon Sadhupana.
Not to have affection for a Sadharmika or not to show devotion to the Shasana-
prabhava even when one has the power. To understand these eight points from the
perspective of Darshanakushila.  **Noāgama**  There are different types of
Darshanakushila according to Noāgama. They are: Chakshu-kushīla, Ghrana-kushīla,
Shravana-kushīla, Jihva-kushīla, and Sharira-kushīla. Chakshu-kushīla is of
three types: Prashasta-chakshu-kushīla, Prashasta-aprashasta-chakshu-kushīla,
and Aprashasta-chakshu-kushīla. One who keeps their gaze fixed on the image of a
Tirthankara Bhagvant like Rishabha, etc., is called Prashasta-chakshu-kushīla.
Prashasta-aprashasta-chakshu-kushīla is one who, while looking at the image of
the Tirthankara Bhagvant with their heart and eyes, looks at something else. And
then, Prashasta-aprashasta-chakshu-kushīla is one who looks at something like a
crow, a bug, a blanket, a butterfly, a peacock, etc., or a beautiful woman with
charming beauty.  **Aprashasta-chakshu-kushīla**  O Bhagvant! What are the
sixty-six Aprashasta-chakshu-bheda? O Gautam! They are: 1. Sabhrakataksha, 2.
Tara, 3. Manda, 4. Madalsa, 5. Vankā, 6. Vivankā, 7. Kushīla, 8. Ardha-ikshita,
9. Kana-ikshita, 10. Bhramita, 11. Udbhramita, 12. Chalita, 13. Valita, 14.
Chalavalita, 15. Ardhamilita, 16. Milimila, 17. Manusya, 18. Pashva, 19.
Yakshika, 20. Sarisrupa, 21. Ashanta, 22. Aprasanta, 23. Asthira, 24.
Bahuvakasha, 25. Sanuraga, 26. Ragu-udaranī, 27. Rogaja-rajaga, 28. Amaya-
utpadani-mad-utpadani, 29. Madani, 30. Mohani, 31. Vyamohi, 32. Bhaya-udirani,
33. Bhayajani, 34. Bhayankari, 35. Hridayabhedani, 36. Sanshaya-apaharani, 37.
Chitta-chamatkara-utpadani, 38. Nibaddha, 39. Anibaddha, 40. Gata, 41. Agata,
42. Gata-gata, 43. Gata-gata-patyagata, 44. Nirdharani, 45. Abhilashani, 46.
Aratikara, 47. Ratikara, 48. Dina, 49. Dayamani, 50. Shura, 51. Dhira, 52.
Hanani, 53. Marani, 54. Tapani, 55. Santapani, 56. Kruddha-prakruddha, 57.
Dhira-maha-dhira, 58. Chandi, 59. Da-surudra, 60. Haha-bhuta-sharana, 61.
Ruksha, 62. Snigdha, 63. Ruksha-snigdha. (Understand the meaning of these types
of Kushīla-drishti according to their names.)  **Chakshu-kushīla**  To look at
the feet, toes, the front part of the feet, nails, hands that are well-
decorated, the body and nails colored with red or alta, nails that are like a
rainbow due to the gathering of the rays of gems, feet that are raised like a
tortoise, well-rounded knees, thighs, the place of the wide waist, the groin,
buttocks, navel, breasts, the area near the private parts, the throat, the
shoulder joint, the lower lip, the lips, the teeth, the ears, the nose, the
eyes, the eyebrows, the mouth, the forehead, the head, the hair, the braid, the
twisted braid, the back, the tilak, the earrings, the cheeks, the hair that is
like the leaves of the tamal tree with black color from anjan, the bodice, the
anklets, the bracelets adorned with gems, the bangles, the rings, etc., all the
beautiful and glittering ornaments, the thin silk clothes, the fine clothes,
etc., that are used to decorate the women, and to look at these parts, limbs,
ornaments, etc., of the women with desire and lustful eyes, is called Chakshu-
kushīla. (Sūtra 623-624)  **Ghrana-kushīla**  One who goes to smell a good
fragrance and wrinkles their nose and feels disgusted when they smell a bad odor
is called Ghrana-kushīla.  **Shravana-kushīla**  There are two types of
Shravana-kushīla: Prashasta and Aprashasta. One who listens to Gandharva-nataka,
Dhanurveda, Hast-shiksha, Kamashastra, Ratishashtra, etc., which arouse lust,
excitement, and passion, and does not criticize them or perform their atonement,
is considered Aprashasta-shravana-kushīla.  **Jihva-kushīla**  There are many
types of Jihva-kushīla. They are: bitter, pungent, tasteless, sweet, sour, and
salty tastes.  **Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi
Anuvad** Page 56

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka zarIra
dekhakara dugaMchA kare  /  ghRNA kare, dharma karane kA phala milegA yA nahIM,
samyaktva Adi guNavaMta kI tArIpha na karanA  /  dharma kI zraddhA calI jAnA  /
sAdhupana chor3ane kI abhilASAvAle ko sthira na karanA  /  sAdharmika kA
vAtsalya na karanA yA zakti hote hue zAsanaprabhAva bhakti na karanA  /  isa
ATha sthAnaka se darzanakuzIla samajhanA  /  noAgama se darzanakuzIla ke koI
prakAra ke samaje, vo isa prakAra-cakSakuzIla, ghrANakuzIla, zravaNakuzIla,
jihvAkuzIla, zarIrakuzIla, ve cakSukuzIla tIna taraha ke haiM  /  vo isa
prakAra-prazastacakSukuzIla, prazastAprazasta cakSukuzIla aura aprazasta
cakSukuzIla  /  usameM jo kisI prazasta aise RSabhAdika tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta
ke biMba ke Age dRSTi sthira karake rahA ho vo prazasta cakSukuzIla aura
prazastAprazasta cakSukuzIla use kahate haiM ki hRdaya aura netra se tIrthaMkara
bhagavaMta kI pratimA ke darzana karate-karate dUsarI kisI bhI cIja kI ora
najara kare vo prazastAprazasta kuzIla kahalAtA hai  /  aura phira
prazastAprazasta dravya jaise ki kauA, baga, DhaMka, tittara, mora Adi yA
manohara lAvaNya yukta khUbasUrata strI ko dekhakara usakI ora netra se dRSTi
kare vo bhI prazastAprazasta cakSukuzIla kahalAtA hai| aura phira aprazasta
cakSukuzIla-laiMsaTha taraha se aprazasta sarAgavAlI cakSu kahA hai| he
bhagavaMta ! vo aprazasta taisaTha cakSubheda kauna se haiM ? he gautama ! vo
isa prakAra - 1. sabhrakaTAkSA, 2. tArA, 3. maMdA, 4. madalasA, 5. vaMkA, 6.
vivaMkA, 7. kuzIlA, 8. ardha ikSitA, 9. kANa-ikSitA, 10. bhrAmitA, 11.
udbhrAmitA, 12. calitA, 13. valitA, 14. calavalitA, 15. ardhamilitA, 16.
milimilA, 17. manuSya, 18. pazavA, 19. yakSikA, 20. sarIsRpA, 21. azAntA, 22.
aprazAntA, 23. asthirA, 24. bahuvikAzA, 25. sAnurAga, 26. rAgaudAraNI, 27.
rogajA-rAjagA, 28. Amaya-utpAdAnI-mada utpAdanI, 29. madanI, 30. mohaNI, 31.
vyAmohanI, 32. bhaya-udIraNI, 33. bhayajananI, 34. bhayaMkarI, 35.
hRdayabhedanI, 36. saMzaya-apaharaNI, 37. cittacamatkAra utpAdanI, 38. nibaddhA,
39. anibaddhA, 40. gatA, 41. AgatA, 42. gatA gatA, 43. gatAgata-patyAgatA, 44.
nirdhAranI, 45. abhilaSaNI, 46. aratikarA, 47. ratikarA, 48. dInA, 49. dayAmaNI,
50. zurA, 51. dhIrA, 52. haNaNI, 53. mAraNI, 54. tApaNI, 55. saMtApaNI, 56.
kruddhA-prakruddhA, 57. dhIrA mahAdhIrA, 58. caMr3I, 59. dA-surudrA, 60.
hAhAbhUtazaraNA, 61. rUkSA, 62. snigdhA, 63. rUkSa snigdhA (isa prakAra kuzIla
dRSTi yahA~ batAI hai, usa nAma ke anusAra artha-vyAkhyA samaja lenA  / )
strIyoM ke caraNa a~gUThe, usakA agra hissA, nAkhUna, hAtha jo acchI taraha se
Alekhela ho, lAla raMga yA alatA se gAtra aura nAkhUna raMge ho, maNi ki kiraNeM
ikaTe hone ke kAraNa se jaise meghadhanuSa na ho vaise nAkhUna ko, kachue kI
taraha unnata caraNa ko acchI taraha se gola rakhe gae gUDha jAnuo, jaMghAo,
vizAla kaTI taTa ke sthAna ko, jaghana, nItamba, nAbhi, stana, guptasthAna ke
pAsa kI jagaha, kaMTha, bhujAliSTa, adhara, hoTha, daMtapaMkti, kAna, nAsikA,
netrayugala, bhramara, mukha, lalATa, mastaka, keza, sethI, Ter3hI kezalaTa,
pITha, tilaka, kuMDala, gAla, aMjana zyAma varNavAle tamAla ke patra samAna keza
kalApa, kaMdorA, nupUra, bAhu rakSaka maNi ratna jar3ita kaMgana, kaMkaNa,
mudrikA Adi manohara aura jhilamila rahe AbhUSaNa, rezamI patale vastra, sutarAu
veza Adi se sajAvaTa karake kAmAgni ko pradIpta karanevAlI nArakI aura
tiryaMcagati meM ananta duHkha dilAnevAlI ina strIoM ke aMga upAMga AbhUSaNa Adi
ko abhilASA pUrvaka sarAga najara se dekhanA vo cakSukuzIla kahalAtA hai| sUtra
- 623-624 ghrANakuzIla use kahate haiM jo acchI sugaMdha lene ke lie jAe aura
durgaMdha AtI ho to nAka Ter3hA kare, dugaMchA kare aura zravaNakuzIla do taraha
ke samajhanA, prazasta aura aprazasta  /  usameM jo bhikSu aprazasta kAmarAga ko
utpanna karanevAle, uddIpana karanevAle, ujjavala karanevAle, gaMdharvanATaka,
dhanurveda, hasta zikSA, kAmazAstra, ratizAstra Adi zravaNa kara ke usa kI
AlocanA na kare yAvat usakA prAyazcitta AcaraNa na kare use aprazasta zravaNa
kuzIla mAnanA aura jihvAkuzIla kaIM taraha ke mAnanA, vo isa prakAra-kaTu,
tIkhe, svAdahIna, madhura, khaTTe, khArA rasa kA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 56

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  **Studying/Purpose/Sūtra Number
Tasting.** Not seeing, not hearing, light, afterlife, both worlds, those with
opposite faults, uttering such abusive words like 'Makar-Jakar Mammo Chachcho'.
Accusing falsely, causing disgrace, putting a stain on someone, having the
tendency to preach Dharma without knowing the scriptures. Consider that to be
tongue-skill. O Bhagvant! Does skillfulness arise from speaking? O Gautam! Yes,
it does. O Bhagvant! Then should one not preach Dharma? O Gautam! One who does
not know the difference between careful-blameless speech and other speech, does
not have the right to speak, then where is the space for preaching Dharma?
Sūtra-625  And know that there are two types of body skillfulness, skillful
effort and skillful adornment. Among them, the monk who is like a dwelling place
for this group of worms, food for birds and dogs. Decaying, falling, being
destroyed, such a nature, impure, impermanent, worthless, such a body is always
nourished by food etc. and such a body is made to exert itself, but does not
perform the extremely difficult, fierce, painful, severe austerities of penance,
including knowledge-vision etc., which are rare in hundreds of births, that is
called effort skillfulness.  And then, the one who is skillful in adornment is
also of many types - in this way - anointing the body with oil, massaging,
applying paste, getting a body massage, bathing, applying oil, rubbing away
dirt, eating tambok, giving sunbath, perfuming the body with fragrant things,
polishing teeth, making them soft, making the face beautiful, wearing flowers or
garlands, making hair, using shoes-sandals, moving with pride, speaking,
laughing, sitting, getting up, falling, pulling, wearing clothes in such a way
that the adornment of the body is visible, taking a staff, all these are
considered to be skillful adornment monks. This skillful monk is a destroyer of
preaching, has evil consequences, has bad signs, is a skillful adornment monk
who does evil deeds that are not worth seeing. Thus, the chapter on vision
skillfulness is complete. Sūtra - 626  Now know that there are many types of
character skillfulness in the original qualities and the subsequent qualities.
Among them, the five great vows and night-time food are the six original
qualities. One who is careless about those six, in that, Prāṇātipāt, i.e.,
killing beings with one sense, two, three, four, five senses, in the form of
earth, water, fire, air, plants, causing them pain, tormenting them.  There are
two types of Mṛṣāvāda - subtle and gross. In that, 'Payla Ullamarue'  One monk
was sleeping during the day - eating a snack. Another monk said to him - why are
you sleeping during the day? He replied that I am not sleeping. Then sleep came
again. He started eating the snack, then the monk said - don't sleep. Then the
reply came - I am not sleeping. So this is subtle Mṛṣāvāda.  One monk went out
in the rain. Another monk said - why are you going in the rain? He said - no, I
am not going in the rain. Saying this, he started going. Here, the word
Vāsṛdhātu is used, so if there is a word, then I am not going. Using such
deceitful words is subtle Mṛṣāvāda.  One monk said at the time of food - eat
food. He replied - I am full - saying this, he immediately started eating.
Another monk asked - you said you just ate, and then you eat food. Then he said
- did I not deny the restraint of the five great vows, including Prāṇātipāt? In
this way, this is subtle Mṛṣāvāda due to the use of deceit. Subtle Mṛṣāvāda and
Kanyālik etc. are called gross Mṛṣāvāda.  Taking without giving, its two
divisions are subtle and gross. Among them, taking grass, stones, Raksakundī
etc. is   Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi Translation
Page 57

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka svAda
karanA  /  na dekhe, anasUne, Aloka, paraloka, ubhayaloka, viruddha doSavAle,
makAra-jakAra mammo cacco aise apazabda uccAranA  /  apayaza mile aise jhUThe
Aropa lagAnA, achattA kalaMka car3hAnA, zAstra jAne binA dharmadezanA karane kI
pravRtti karanA  /  use jihvAkuzIla mAnanA  /  he bhagavaMta ! bhASA bolane se
bhI kyA kuzIlapana ho jAtA hai ? he gautama ! hA, aisA hotA hai  /  he
bhagavaMta ! to kyA dharmadezanA na kare ? he gautama ! sAvadha-niravadya vacana
ke bIca jo pharka nahIM jAnatA, use bolane kA bhI adhikAra nahIM, to phira
dharmadezanA karane kA to avakAza hI kahA~ hai ? sUtra-625 aura zarIra kuzIla do
taraha ke jAnanA, kuzIla ceSTA aura vibhUSA-kuzIla, usameM jo bhikSu isa kRmi
samUha ke AvAsa samAna, paMchI aura zvAna ke lie bhojana samAna  /  sar3anA,
giranA, naSTa honA, aise svabhAvavAlA, azuci, azAzvata, asAra aise zarIra ko
hamezA AhArAdika se poSe aura vaise zarIra kI ceSTA kare, lekina seMkar3oM bhava
meM durlabha aise jJAna-darzana Adi sahita aise zarIra se ati ghora vIra ugra
kaSTadAyaka ghora tapa saMyama ke anuSThAna na Acare use ceSTA kuzIla kahate
haiN| aura phIra jo vibhUSA kuzIla hai vo bhI kaI taraha ke-vo isa prakAra-tela
se zarIra ko abhyaMgana karanA, mAliza karanA, lepa lagAnA, aMga puruSana
karavAnA, snAna-vilepana karanA, maila ghisakara dUra karanA, taMboka khAnA,
dhUpa denA, khuzabUdAra cIja se zarIra ko vastra vAsita karanA, dA~ta ghIsanA,
mulAyama karanA, caherA suzobhita banAnA, puSpa yA usakI mAlA pahananA, bAla
banAnA, jUte-pAvar3I istamAla karanA, abhimAna se gati karanA, bolanA, ha~sanA,
baiThanA, uThanA, giranA, khIMcanA, zarIra kI vibhUSA dikhe usa prakAra vastroM
ko pahananA, daMr3a grahaNa karanA, ye saba ko zarIra vibhUSA kuzIla sAdhu
samajhanA  /  yaha kuzIla sAdhu pravacana kI ur3AhaNA-upaghAta karavAnevAle,
jisakA bhAvi pariNAma duSTa hai vaise azubha lakSaNavAlA, na dekhane lAyaka
mahApApa karma karanevAlA vibhUSA-kuzIla sAdhu hotA hai  /  isa prakAra
darzanakuzIla prakaraNa pUrA huaa| sUtra - 626 aba mUlaguNa aura uttaraguNa meM
cAritrakuzala aneka prakAra ke jAnanA  /  usameM pA~ca mahAvrata aura rAtri
bhojana chaThA-aise mUlaguNa batAe haiM  /  vo cha ke lie jo pramAda kare,
usameM prANAtipAta yAni pRthvI, pAnI, agni, vAyu, vanaspati rUpa ekendriyajIva,
do, tIna, cAra, pA~ca indriyavAle jIva kA saMghaTTA karanA, paritApa una
kilAmaNA karanI, upadrava karanA  /  mRSAvAda do taraha kA-sUkSma aura bAdara
usameM 'payalAullAmarue'' kisI sAdhu dina meM sote hue-jhoke khA rahA thA,
dUsare sAdhu ne use kahA ki-dina meM kyoM so rahe ho ? usane uttara diyA ki maiM
so nahIM rahA  /  phIra se nIMda Ane lagI  /  jhokA khAne lagA taba sAdhu ne
kahA ki mata so  /  taba pratyuttara milA ki maiM so nahIM rahA  /  to yaha
sUkSma mRSAvAda  /  kisI sAdha bArisa hone ke bAvajada bhI bAhara nIkale  /
dUsare sAdhu ne kahA ki bArisa meM kyoM jA rahe ho ? usane kahA ki nahIM, maiM
bArisa meM nahIM jA rahA  /  aisA kahakara jAne lagA  /  yahA~ vAsRdhAtu zabda
karanA ho isalie zabda hotA ho taba maiM nahIM jAtA  /  aise chala ke zabda
istamAla kare vo sUkSma mRSAvAda  /  kisI sAdhu ne bhojana ke vakta kahA ki-
bhojana kara lo  /  usane uttara diyA ki muje paccakkhANa hai-aisA kahakara
turanta khAne lagA, dUsare sAdhu ne pUchA ki abhI-abhI paccakkhANa kiyA hai,
aisA kahatA thA aura phIra bhojana karatA hai  /  taba usane kahA ki kyA maiMne
prANAtipAta Adi pA~ca mahAvrata kI viratI kA pratyAkhyAna nahIM kiyA ? isa
taraha se yaha chalane ke prayoga se sUkSma mRSAvAda lage  /  sUkSma mRSAvAda
aura kanyAlIka Adi bAdara mRSAvAda kahalAtA hai| die binA grahaNa karanA usake
do bheda sUkSma aura bAdara usake tRNa, paththara, rakSAkuMDI Adi grahaNa karanA
vo muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 57

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  **Study/Purpose/Sutra Number**
Subtle and Gross Adattadan. To understand Adattadan as similar to accepting
gold, etc., without a pot and with a pot. And to know the eighteen types of
Mithuna, Divine and Generous, distinguishing them as Mind, Speech, Body, Action,
Causation, and Approval. And then, to know the distinction between the conscious
and unconscious in manual labor, or by violating the nine secrets of celibacy,
similar to adorning the body with clothes, etc.  **In the community, there are
two types of possessions:** Subtle and Gross. Protecting clothes and utensils
with a sense of ownership, not giving them to others for use, is subtle
possession. Accepting or possessing gold, etc., is gross possession. Owning
something is gross possession. Eating food at night during the day and eating at
night, eating during the day and eating the next day, eating at night and eating
at night, etc., are all distinctions. Sutra-627-632  **To know the following as
the qualities of the body:** Purity, balance, contemplation, two types of
penance, wearing an image, accepting possessions, etc. Among them, to know the
sixteen origin defects, sixteen production defects, ten craving defects, and
five defects of combination, etc., in the purity of the body. The origin defects
are as follows: 1. Adhakarma, 2. Auddeshik, 3. Puti Karma, 4. Misrajat, 5.
Sthapana, 6. Prabhutika, 7. Pradushkaran, 8. Krit, 9. Pramityak, 10.
Paravartita, 11. Abhyahita, 12. Ubhinna, 13. Malopharita, 14. Achhidya, 15.
Atisrusht, 16. Adhyav Purvak - these sixteen defects occur in the preparation of
the body. Sutra-633-635  **The sixteen defects of production are as follows:**
1. Dhatridoष, 2. Dutidoष, 3. Nimittadosh, 4. Aajivakadosh, 5. Vanipkadosh, 6.
Chikitsadosh, 7. Krodhadosh, 8. Mandosh, 9. Mayadosh, 10. Lobhadosh, this defect
11. the defect of acquaintance occurring before or after, 12. Vidyadosh, 13.
Mantradosh, 14. Churnadosh, 15. Yogadosh, and 16. Mulakarmdosh - these sixteen
defects occur in production. Sutra-636-637  **To know the ten defects of craving
as follows:** 1. Shakti, 2. Mrkshit, 3. Nikshipt, 4. Pihit, 5. Sanhrit, 6.
Dayak, 7. Unmishra, 8. Aparinat, 9. Lipt, 10. Chardit. Sutra-638  **Among them,
the origin defects arise from the householder. The defects of production arise
from the virtuous, and the craving defects arise from both the householder and
the virtuous.**  **To know the five defects of the community as follows:** 1.
Combination, 2. Eating more than the measure, 3. Angar, 4. Dhum, 5. Lack of
reason - these are the five defects of eating and drinking. Among them, the
combination defect is of two types: 1. Equipment related and 2. Food and water
related. And then, there are two distinctions within both of them: internal and
external. - Sutra-639  **Measure - Thirty-two Kavals are the measure. Food is
considered to be the filler of the stomach. If one eats food, etc., that is
pleasing to the taste due to attachment, then the Angar defect occurs, and if
one eats something unwanted due to aversion, then the Dhumra defect occurs.
Sutra-640-643**  **Lack of Reason Defect** - Unable to bear the pain of hunger,
unable to be active due to a weak body, loss of eyesight, and damage to the
ability to move. For the sake of observing restraint, for the sake of saving
life, for the sake of practicing religion and meditation, for this reason,
**And**  **Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi
Translation** Page 58

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUkSma
adattAdAna  /  ghar3e binA aura ghar3A huA suvarNa Adi grahaNa karane samAna
bAdara adattAdAna smjhnaa| aura maithuna dIvya aura audArika vo bhI mana,
vacana, kAyA, karaNa, karAvaNa, anumodana aise bheda karate hue aThThAraha
bhedavAlA jAnanA  /  aura phIra hastakarma sacitta acitta bhedavAlA yA
brahmacarya kI navagupti kI virAdhanA karane dvArA karake, zarIra vastrAdika kI
vibhUSA karane samAna  /  mAMDalI meM parigraha do taraha se  /  sUkSma aura
bAdara  /  vastrapAtra kA mamatvabhAva se rakSA karanA  /  dUsaroM ko istamAla
karane ke lie na denA vo sUkSma parigraha, hiraNyAdika grahaNa karanA yA dhAraNa
kara rakhanA  /  mAlikI rakhanI, vo bAdara parigraha  /  rAtri-bhojana dina meM
grahaNa karanA aura rAta ko khAnA, dina meM grahaNa karake dUsare dina bhojana
karanA  /  rAta ko lekara dina meM khAnA  /  rAta ko lekara rAta meM khAnA  /
ityAdi bhedayukta  /  sUtra-627-632 uttara guNa ke lie piMr3a kI jo vizuddhi,
samiti, bhAvanA, do taraha ke tapa, pratimA dhAraNa karanA, abhigraha grahaNa
karanA Adi uttara guNa jAnanA  /  usameM piMr3a vizuddhi-solaha udgama doSa,
solaha utpAdanA doSa, dasa eSaNA ke doSa aura saMyojanAdika pA~ca doSa, usameM
udgama doSa isa prakAra jAnanA  /  1. AdhAkarma, 2. auddezika, 3. pUti karma, 4.
mizrajAta, 5. sthApanA, 6. prAbhRtikA, 7. prAduSkaraNa, 8. krIta, 9. prAmityaka,
10. parAvartita, 11. abhyAhata, 12. ubhinna, 13. mAlopahRta, 14. Achidya, 15.
atisRSTa, 16. adhyava pUraka-aise piMr3a taiyAra karane meM solaha doSa lagate
haiN| sUtra-633-635 utpAdana ke solaha doSa isa prakAra batAe haiM  /  1.
dhAtrIdoSa, 2. dutidoSa, 3. nimittadoSa, 4. AjIvakadoSa, 5. vanIpakadoSa, 6.
cikitsAdoSa, 7. krodhadoSa, 8. mAnadoSa, 9. mAyAdoSa, 10. lobhadoSa, yaha isa
doSa 11. pahale yA bAda meM honevAle paricaya kA doSa, 12. vidyAdoSa, 13.
maMtradoSa, 14. cUrNadoSa, 15. yogadoSa aura 16. mUlakarmadoSa-aise utpAdana ke
solaha doSa lagate haiN| sUtra - 636-637 eSaNA ke dasa doSa isa prakAra jAnanA -
1. zakti, 2. mrakSita, 3. nikSipta, 4. pihita, 5. saMhRta, 6. dAyaka, 7.
unmizra, 8. apariNata, 9. lipta, 10. chardita  /  sUtra - 638 usameM udgamadoSa
gRhastha se utpanna hote haiM  /  utpAdana ke doSa sAdhu se utpanna honevAle
aura eSaNA doSa gRhastha aura sAdhu donoM se utpanna honevAle haiN| mAMDalI ke
pA~ca doSa isa prakAra jAnanA-1. saMyojanA, 2. pramANa se adhika khAnA, 3.
aMgAra, 4. ghuma, 5. kAraNa abhAva-aise grAsesaNA ke pA~ca doSa hote haiM  /
usameM saMyojanA doSa do taraha ke-1. upakaraNa sambandhI aura 2. bhojana pAnI
sambandhI  /  aura phIra una donoM ke bhI abhyantara aura bAhya  /  aise do
bheda haiM - sUtra - 639 pramANa-battIsa kavala pramANa  /  AhAra kukSipUraka
mAnA jAtA hai  /  khAne meM acche laganevAle bhojanAdika rAga se khAe to usameM
IMgAla doSa aura anacAhe meM dveSa ho to dhUmra doSa lagatA hai| sUtra- 640-643
kAraNAbhAva doSa -kSudhA vedanA saha na sake, kamajhora zarIra se vaiyAvacca na
ho sake, A~kha kI rozanI kama ho jAe aura iriyAsamiti meM kSati ho  /  saMyama
pAlana ke lie aura jIva bacAne ke lie, dharmadhyAna karane ke lie, isa kAraNa ke
aura mA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 58

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  Eating for study/purpose/sutra
number is a vow. There is no pain equal to hunger, therefore eating for its
peace. A weak-bodied person due to hunger cannot be capable of doing Viyayavach.
Therefore, eating is necessary. If one does not search for Iryasamiti properly,
cannot manage Prekshadik Samyam, the power to do Swadhyayadik decreases,
strength starts to decline, and one cannot do Dharma Dhyan, therefore a Sadhu
should eat for this reason. This is how to know Pind Vishuddhi. Sutra - 644
Now, five Samiti are explained as follows: Iryasamiti, Bhashasamiti,
Eshanasamiti, Adanbhand-Mattaniksepan Samiti, and Ucchaar-Pasavan Khel
Sindhanajallaparishthapanika Samiti. And three Gupti: Man Gupti, Vachan Gupti,
and Kayagupti. And twelve Bhavana: 1. Anitya Bhavana, 2. Asharan Bhavana, 3.
Ekatva Bhavana, 4. Anyatva Bhavana, 5. Ashuchi Bhavana, 6. Vichitra Sansar
Bhavana, 7. Karma ke Ashrav ki Bhavana, 8. Sanvar Bhavana, 9. Nirjara Bhavana,
10. Lok Vistara Bhavana, 11. Tirthankar ne achchhi tarah se bataya hua aur
achchhi tarah se prarupa hua uttam dharma ki soch saman Bhavana, 12. Karod
janmantr mein durlabh aisi bodhi durlabh Bhavana.  One who is negligent in Adi
Sthanantar should be known as Charitra Kusheel. Sutra - 645  Tap Kusheel is of
two types: one is Baahya Tap Kusheel and the other is Abhyantar Tap Kusheel. A
Muni who does various types of long-term Tapas like Upvasadik Tap, Unodarika,
Vrutti Sanksepa, Ras Parityag, Kay-Klesh, Ango-pang sikude rakhne saman
Sanlinata, these six types of Baahya Tap, even after having the power in them,
does not make an effort, is called Baahya Tap Kusheel. Sutra - 646-647  Twelve
types of Bhikku Pratima are as follows: Ek Maasiki, Do Maasiki, Teen Maasiki,
Char Maasiki, Panch Maasiki, Chh Maasiki, Saat Maasiki, these seven Pratima.
Aathvi Saat Aho-ratri ki, Nauvi Saat Aho-ratri ki, Dasvi Saat Aho-ratri ki,
Gyarahavi Ek Aho-ratri ki, Barahvi Ek Ratri ki, these are twelve Bhikku Pratima.
Sutra - 648  _ From Abhigha-dravya, Kshetra, Kal, and Bhava. In that, Dravya
Abhigha, taking Umbale Undad etc. dravya, from Kshetra, taking in the village or
outside the village, from Kal, taking in the first etc. Porisi, from Bhava,
taking what is given by someone with Kshaya like Krodhadik, "I will take it",
this is how Uttar Gun Sanksepa is summarized. By doing this, Charitra Achar is
also completed in a concise way. Tapa Achar also comes in it concisely. And then
Virya Achar is called that which does not consume the lesser Achar in these five
Achar.  In these five Achar, whoever consumes any Atichara knowingly,
intentionally, with arrogance, negligence, vow, intentionally or
unintentionally, according to the sin committed, should perform the penance
given by the Guru after criticism, and follow it properly. In this way, in the
eighteen thousand limbs of Sheel, whoever has committed negligence in any limb,
should be considered Kusheel from that negligence fault. Sutra - 649  In the
same way, know about Osanna. We do not write it here. We do not write about
Gyanadhik Vishayak Pasattha, Swachhand, Utsutramargagami, Shabal here due to
fear of expanding the text. Wherever there are other readings, one who has known
the essence of the scriptures properly, should connect the relationship with
such Geetarthavarya. Because earlier, many texts were destroyed in the ideal
Pratim. Wherever there was a need to connect the relationship, many Shraddha
Dharas gathered together and collected the remaining Ang, Upang, Shrutaskandh,
Adhyayan, Uddesham from the twelve Ang form Shruti Samudra.  Muni Diparatnasagar
Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 59

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka lie
bhojana karanA kalpe  /  bhUkha samAna koI darda nahIM isalie usakI zAnti ke lie
bhojana karanA  /  bhUkha se kamajora dehavAlA vaiyAvacca karane meM samartha
nahIM ho sakatA  /  isalie bhojana karanA  /  iriyAsamiti acchI taraha se na
khoje, prekSAdika saMyama na sa~bhAla sake, svAdhyAyAdika karane kI zakti kama
ho jAe, bala kama hone lage, dharmadhyAna na kara sake isalie sAdhu ko isa
kAraNa se bhojana karanA cAhie  /  isa prakAra piMr3a vizuddhi jaannaa| sUtra -
644 aba pA~ca samiti isa prakAra batAI hai-IyAsamiti, bhASAsamiti, eSaNAsamiti,
AdAnabhaMDa-mattanikSepaNA samiti aura uccAra-pAsavaNa khela
siMdhANajallapAriSThApanikA samiti aura tIna gupti, mana gupti, vacana gupti
aura kAyagupti aura bAraha bhAvanA vo isa prakAra-1. anityabhAvanA, 2. azaraNa
bhAvanA, 3. ekatvabhAvanA, 4. anyatvabhAvanA, 5. azucibhAvanA, 6. vicitra
saMsArabhAvanA, 7. karma ke Azrava kI bhAvanA, 8. saMvara bhAvanA, 9.
nirjarAbhAvanA, 10. loka vistAra bhAvanA, 11. tIrthaMkara ne acchI taraha se
batAyA huA aura acchI taraha se prarUpA huA uttama dharma kI soca samAna
bhAvanA, 12. karor3a janmAntara meM durlabha aisI bodhi durlabha bhAvanA  /
yaha Adi sthAnAntara meM jo pramAda kare use cAritra kuzIla jAnanA  /  sUtra-645
tapa kuzIla do taraha ke eka bAhya tapa kuzIla aura dUsarA abhyantara tapa
kuzIla  /  usameM jo koI muni vicitra isa taraha kA dIrghakAla kA upavAsAdika
tapa, uNodarikA, vRttisaMkSepa, rasaparityAga, kAya-kleza, aMgopAMga sikur3e
rakhane samAna saMlInatA  /  isa cha taraha ke bAhya tapa meM zakti hone ke bAda
bhI jo udyama nahIM karate, vo bAhya tapa kuzIla kahalAte haiN| sUtra-646-647
bAra taraha kI bhikSu pratimA vo isa prakAra-eka mAsikI, do mAsikI, tIna mAsikI,
cAra mAsikI, pA~ca mAsikI, cha mAsikI, sAta mAsikI aise sAta pratimA  /  AThavI
sAta ahorAtra kI, nauvI sAta ahorAtra kI, dazavIM sAta ahorAtra kI, gyArahavIM
eka ahorAtra kI, bArahavIM eka rAtri kI aisI bAraha bhikSu pratimA hai| sUtra -
648 _ abhigraha-dravya se, kSetra se, kAla se aura bhAva se  /  usameM dravya
abhigraha meM UMbAle UMr3ada Adi dravya grahaNa karanA, kSetra se gA~va meM yA
gA~va ke bAhara grahaNa karanA, kAla se prathama Adi porisI meM grahaNa karanA,
bhAva se krodhAdika kaSAyavAlA jo muje de vo grahaNa karU~gA isa prakAra
uttaraguNa saMkSepa se samAsa kie  /  aisA karane se cAritrAcAra bhI saMkSepa se
pUrNa huA  /  tapAcAra bhI saMkSepa se usameM A gayA  /  aura phIra vIryAcAra
use kahate haiM ki jo isa pA~ca AcAra meM nyUna AcAra kA sevana na kare  /  ina
pA~ca AcAra meM jo kisI aticAra meM jAna-bUjhakara ajayaNA se, darpa se, pramAda
se, kalpa se, ajayaNA se yA jayaNA se jisa mutAbika pApa kA sevana kiyA ho usa
mutAbika guru ke pAsa AlocanA karake mArga jAnanevAle gItArtha guru jo
prAyazcitta de use acchI taraha AcaraNa kare  /  isa taraha aThAraha hajAra zIla
ke aMga meM jisa pada meM pramAda sevana kiyA ho, use usa pramAda doSa se kuzIla
samajhanA caahie| sUtra- 649 usa prakAra osannA ke lie jAnanA  /  vo yahA~ hama
nahIM likhate  /  jJAnAdika viSayaka pAsatthA, svacchaMda, utsUtramArgagAmI,
zabala ko yahA~ graMtha vistAra ke bhaya se nahIM likhate  /  yahA~ kahIM kahIM
jo-jo dUsarI vAcanA ho vo acchI taraha se zAstra kA sAra jisane jAnA hai, vaise
gItArthavarya ko riztA jor3anA cAhie  /  kyoMki pahale Adarza pratameM kAphI
grantha vipranaSTa haA hai| vahA~ jo-jo sambandha honeke yogya jaDane kI jarura
haI vahA~ kaIM zratadhara ne ikaTre hokara aMga-upAMga sahita bAraha aMga rUpa
zruta samudra meM se bAkI aMga, upAMga, zrutaskaMdha, adhyayana, uddezAmeM se
ucita muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 59

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Āgama Sūtra 39, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth' Study/Purpose/Sūtrāṅka relations
collected together which were related, are written here, but nothing said itself
is kept. Sūtra- 650-652 Oh Gautama! These five great sins which are not
renounced, just as the Śrāvaka named Sumati wandered in the world by committing
sins like conversation with Kuśīla etc., they will also wander. One who is in
the state of existence and who is in the state of existence, cannot obtain the
ten kinds of Dharma, characterized by enlightenment, non-violence, etc., which
are in the world of great suffering. Like the parrot who lived in the hermitage
of the sage and in the house of the Bhil, learned to speak sweetly from the
qualities of contact and learned to speak abusive words from the defects of
contact. Oh Gautama! Just as both parrots received the result of the defect of
contact, in the same way, one who desires self-benefit should know the reality
of this bird and completely abandon the contact of Kuśīla by all means. Study-3
of Muni Dīparatnasāgar's Hindi translation is complete. Muni Dīparatnasāgar's
(Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi translation Page 60

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sambandha
ikaTThe karake jo kisI sambandha rakhate the, vo yahA~ likhe haiM, lekina khuda
kahA huA kucha bhI rakhA nahIM hai| sUtra- 650-652 ati vizAla aise yaha pA~ca
pApa jise varjana nahIM kiyA, vo he gautama ! jisa taraha sumati nAma ke zrAvaka
ne kuzIla Adi ke sAtha saMlApa Adi pApa karake bhava meM bhramaNa kiyA vaise vo
bhI bhramaNa kreNge| bhavasthiti kAyasthitivAle saMsAra se ghora duHkha meM
par3e bodhi, ahiMsA Adi lakSaNayukta daza taraha kA dharma nahIM pA sakatA  /
RSi ke Azrama meM aura bhilla ke ghara meM rahe tote kI taraha saMsarga ke
guNadoSa se eka mIThA bolanA zIkha gayA aura dUsarA saMsarga doSa se apazabda
bolanA zIkha gayA  /  he gautama ! jisa taraha donoM tote ko saMsarga doSa kA
natIjA milA usI taraha Atmahita kI IcchAvAle ko isa paMchI kI hakIkata jAnakara
sarva upAya se kuzIla kA saMsarga sarvathA tyAga karanA caahie| adhyayana-3 kA
muni dIparatnasAgara kRt hindI anuvAda pUrNa muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 60

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth' Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number
Study-4-Kushīla Samsarga Sūtra-654  O Bhagvant! How did that Sumati engage in
Kushīla Samsarga, that he would wander in this terrifying, painful, and endless
ocean of existence, filled with suffering, devoid of liberation, with such a
terrible state of being and body? He would not attain the ten virtues of
forgiveness, etc., as taught by the omniscient Bhagvant, nor would he attain
Samyaktva. O Gautam! This is the story:  In this Bharatavarsha, there was a
country called Magadha. In it, there was a city called Kushasthal. In that city,
there were two brothers, Sumati and Nagil, who were Shravakas, who understood
the nature of virtue and vice, and who had a deep understanding of the true
nature of beings and their livelihood. They were both wealthy and prosperous. At
one time, due to the rise of Antaray Karma, their wealth was destroyed. But
their character and courage remained strong. They were steadfast in their
character and courage, extremely fearful of the afterlife, free from deceit,
trickery, and lies, and they practiced the four types of charity and other
virtues as taught by Bhagvant. They followed the Shravaka Dharma, did not harm
anyone, were humble, simple in nature, like a dwelling place for the jewels of
virtue, oceans of forgiveness, friends of the virtuous, and repositories of
virtue, whose virtues could be described for many days.  They experienced the
rise of inauspicious karma, and their wealth became insufficient for performing
rituals like the Ashtahnika Mahamahotsava, honoring the wishes of the deities,
honoring the righteous, and engaging in family affairs. Sūtra-655-660  Now, when
guests came to their house, they could not be properly welcomed. They could not
fulfill the desires of their loved ones. Their friends, relatives, family
members, kin, wives, sons, nephews, and other relations distanced themselves,
forgetting their ties. Then, filled with sorrow, those Shravakas thought, "O
Gautam! When a man has wealth, people obey him. Even lightning avoids a cloud
without water." Thinking this, Sumati first said to his brother Nagil, "Look, a
man without wealth is unfortunate. Let him go to a country where he will not
find relatives or a home." The other brother also said, "People come to those
who have no wealth, but those who have wealth have many relatives." Sūtra-661
Thus, they agreed with each other and decided to leave the country. They decided
to go to an unknown land, thinking that if their desires were not fulfilled
after a long time, they would take Diksha if it was favorable to the gods. Then,
they left the city of Kushasthal and decided to go abroad. Sūtra-662  Now, as
they were traveling to another country, they saw five Sadhus and a sixth
Shramanopasaka on the way. Then, Nagil said to Sumati, "O Sumati! Bhadramuka,
look at the company of these Sadhus. Let us also go with this community of
Sadhus." He said, "Alright, let's do that." They were only traveling to a single
destination when Nagil said to Sumati, "O Bhadramuka! The twenty-second
Tirthankara, Shri Arishtanemi Bhagvant, who was like the emerald gem, the jewel
of the Harivaṃśa, with a dark complexion, was sitting comfortably at his lotus
feet. When he heard this, he determined that those who take on such an
innumerable form are considered Kushīla. And those who are Kushīla should not
even be seen, let alone engage in any kind of contact with them. Therefore, let
them go. We will go with a smaller group. Because the Tirthankara's...  Muni
Dīparatnasāgar Kr̥t (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Translation Page 61

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
adhyayana-4-kuzIla saMsarga sUtra-654 he bhagavaMta ! usa sumati ne kuzIla
saMsarga kisa taraha kiyA thA ki jisase isa taraha ke ati bhayAnaka duHkha
parINAmavAlA bhavasthiti aura kAyasthiti yukta pAra rahita bhavasAgara meM
duHkha saMtapta becArA vo bhramaNa karegA  /  sarvajJa-bhagavaMta ke upadezIta
ahiMsA lakSaNavAle kSamA Adi daza prakAra ke dharma ko aura samyaktva na pAegA,
he gautama ! vo bAta yaha hai isa bhAratavarSa meM magadha nAma kA deza hai|
usameM kuzasthala nAma kA nagara thA, usameM puNya-pApa samajanevAle, jIva-
ajIvAdika cIja kA yathArtha rUpa jinhoMne acchI taraha se pahacAnA hai, aisI
vizAla RddhivAle sumati aura nAgila nAma ke do sage bhAI zrAvaka dharma kA
pAlana karate the  /  kisI samaya aMtarAya karma ke udaya se unakA vaibhava
vilaya huA  /  lekina sattva aura parAkrama to pahale se hI thA  /  acalita
sattva parAkramavAle, atyanta paraloka bhIru, chala-kapaTa aura jhUTha se
viramita, bhagavaMta ke batAe cAra taraha ke dAna Adi dharma kA sevana karate
the  /  zrAvaka dharma kA pAlana karate, kisI kI burAI na karate, namratA
rakhate, sarala svabhAvavAle, guNarUpa ratna ke nivAsa sthAna samAna, kSamA ke
sAgara, sajjana kI maitrI rakhanevAle, kaIM dina taka jisake guNaratna kA
varNana kiyA jAe vaise guNa ke bhaMDAra samAna zrAvaka the| unako azubha karma
kA udaya haA aura unakI saMpatti aba aSTAhnikA mahAmahotsava Adi ISTadevatA kI
icchA anusAra pUjA, satkAra, sAdharmika kA sammAna, baMdhuvarga ke vyavahAra Adi
karane ke lie asamartha huI  /  sUtra-655-660 aba kisI samaya ghara meM mahamAna
Ate to usakA satkAra nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /  snehIvarga ke manoratha pUre nahIM
kara sakate, apane mitra, svajana, parivAra-jana, bandhu, strI, putra, bhatIje,
rizte bhUlakara dUra haTa gae taba viSAda pAnevAle usa zrAvakoM ne he gautama !
socA kI, "puruSa ke pAsa vaibhava hotA hai to vo loga usakI AjJA svIkArate haiN|
jala rahita megha ko bIjalI bhI dUra se tyAga karatI hai  / '' aisA socakara
pahale sumati ne nAgilabhAI ko kahA ki, mAna, dhana rahita badanasIba puruSa ko
aise deza meM cale jAe ki jahA~ apane riztedAra yA AvAsa na mile aura dUsare ne
bhI kahA ki, "jisake pAsa dhana na ho, usake pAsa loga Ate haiM, jisake pAsa
artha ho usake kaIM ba~dhu hote haiN|" sUtra-661 isa prakAra vo Apasa meM
ekamata hue aura vaise hokara he gautama ! unhoMne dezatyAga karane kA taya kiyA
kihama kisI anajAna deza meM cale jAe  /  vahA~ jAne ke bAda bhI dIrghakAla se
cintavana kie manoratha pUrNa na ho to aura deva anukUla ho to dIkSA aMgIkAra
kare  /  usake bAda kuzasthala nagara kA tyAga karake videza gamana karane kA
taya kiyaa| sUtra - 662 aba dezAntara kI aura prayANa karanevAle aise una donoM
ne rAste meM pA~ca sAdhu aura chaTThA eka zramaNopAsakaunheM dikhe  /  taba
nAgila ne sumati ko kahA ki are sumati ! bhadramukha, dekho, ina sAdhuoM kA
sAtha kaisA hai to hama bhI isa sAdhu ke samudAya ke sAtha jAe  /  usane kahA ki
bhale, vaisA kare  /  kevala eka mukAma para jAne ke lie prayANa karate the taba
nAgila ne sumati ko kahA ki he bhadramukha ! harivaMza ke tilakabhUta marakata
ratna ke samAna zyAma kAnti vAle acchI taraha se nAma grahaNa karane ke yogya
bAIsave tIrthaMkara zrI ariSThanemi bhagavaMta ke caraNa kamala meM sukha se
baiThA thA, taba isa prakAra sunakara avadhAraNa kiyA thA ki isa taraha ke
agaNAra rUpa ko dhAraNa karanevAle kuzIla mAne jAte haiM  /  aura jo kuzIla hote
haiM unheM dRSTi se bhI dekhanA na kalpe, isalie unake sAtha gamana saMsarga
thor3A sA bhI karanA na kalpe, isalie unheM jAne do, hama kisI choTe sAthe ke
sAtha jAeMge  /  kyoMki tIrthaMkara ke muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha)
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 61

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' One should not violate the
study/purpose/Sutra number statement. Even the gods and asuras of this world are
not worthy of violating the words of the Tirthankara. Secondly, as long as they
are with them, let alone their darshan, but even their conversation, etc.,
should be regulated; so should we go violating the words of the Tirthankara?
Thinking in that way, holding the hand of Sumati, he left with the Nagil Sadhu.
Sutra - 663-669 _ Seeing with his eyes, he sat on pure and lifeless ground.
After that, Sumati said that the knowledge-giving guru, parents, elders and
sister or where you cannot give an answer, O God! What should I say? According
to their command, it is necessary to do this and accept it. Whether it is good
or bad for me, there is no time to think about it. But today, in this matter,
the Arya has to answer it, and that too with difficult, harsh, unpleasant, evil,
cruel words. Or how can my tongue rise before my elder brother, in whose lap I
have played many times with clothes without impurity, with a dirty body. Or why
doesn't he himself shy away from speaking such unwanted words? That this is
Kushil. And one should not even look at those Sadhus with one's eyes. As long as
he himself has not thought and spoken, in the meantime, the elder brother Nagil,
who is skilled in knowing the shape of the gesture, recognized his heart's
feeling that this Sumati is a liar with false kashayas. So he started thinking
about what kind of answer to give. Sutra-670-676 Without reason, without
occasion, even if he is angry, he will not be honored even if he is not
understood now. So should I explain it to him now, so that he can spend time?
Time will pass, then his kashayas will be pacified and then he will accept all
the things I have said. Or is this present opportunity such that I can remove
his doubts. Until he is specially understood, this Bhadrak brother will not
understand anything. Thinking this, Nagil said to his younger brother Sumati - O
brother! I am not blaming you, I consider it my own fault that - even if a
relative is told with good intentions, he becomes angry. The living being caught
in the net of eight karmas is to blame here, that the teachings that take him
out of the four faults do not affect him. The soul, eaten by the faults of
stubborn raga, dvesha, kadagrah, ignorance, mithyatva, even nectar like
teachings seem like poison to it. Sutra-677 Hearing this, Sumati said - You are
the truth-speaker and can speak in this way. But it is not at all appropriate
for a Sadhu to speak in an unrefined way. Why doesn't he look at the other
behavior of the great soul? Six, eight, four-five fasts, massakshaman, etc.,
after doing penance, they take food, they suffer from heat in the summer. And
then, taking different kinds of abhigrahas like virasana, utkatukasana, doing
difficult penance, etc., performing religious rituals, those who have dried up
the flesh and blood, it is not appropriate for you, a great speaker of the
assembly, a great Shravak, to think of such a Sadhu as Kushil. After that, Nagil
said - O Vats! Don't be satisfied with his religious rituals. Just as today I
have been robbed by disbelief, by the suffering of being subjected to what has
come without desire, even karma is destroyed by akam nirjara, then why not karma
be destroyed by balatapas? Consider all of them to be balatapaswis. Don't you
see the little consumption of the Utka Sutramarg? And then, O Vats Sumati! I
don't have even a subtle hatred in my mind for this Sadhu, so that I can accept
his fault. But I have understood from the Tirthankara Bhagvant that you should
not look at Kushil. Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi
Translation Page 62

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka vacana kA
ullaMghana nahIM karanA cAhie  /  deva aura asuravAle isa jagata ko bhI
tIrthaMkara kI vANI ullaMghana karane ke lAyaka nahIM hai  /  dUsarI bAta yaha
ki-jaba taka unake sAtha cale taba taka unake darzana kI bAta to jAne do lekina
AlApa-saMlApa Adi bhI niyamA karanA par3e; to kyA hama tIrthaMkara kI vANI kA
ullaMghana karake gamana kare ? usa prakAra socakara sumati kA hAtha pakar3akara
nAgila sAdhu ke sAtha meM se nIkala gyaa| sUtra - 663-669 _ netra se dekhakara,
zuddha aura nirjIva bhUmi para baiThA  /  usake bAda sumati ne kahA ki jJAna
denevAle guru, mA~bApa, bujurga aura bahana yA jahA~ pratyuttara na de sakate ho
vahA~ he deva ! maiM kyA kahU~ ? unakI AjJA ke anusAra tahatti aisA karake
apanAnI hI ho  /  yaha mere lie iSTa hai yA aniSTa yaha socane kA avakAza hI
nahIM hai  /  lekina Aja to isa viSaya meM Arya ko isakA uttara denA hI par3egA
aura vo bhI kaThina, karkaza, aniSTa, duSTa, niSThura zabda se hI  /  yA to
bar3e bhAI ke Age yaha merI z2abAna kaise uThatI hai ki jisakI goda meM maiM
vastra binA azuci se kharar3ita aMgavAlA kaIM bAra khelA hai  /  yA to vo khuda
aisA anacAhA bolane se kyoM nahIM zaramAte ? ki yaha kuzIla hai  /  aura A~kha
se una sAdhuoM ko dekhanA bhI nahIM cAhie  /  jitane meM khuda ne socA huA abhI
taka nahIM bolatA  /  utane meM iMgita AkAra jAnane meM kuzala bar3e bhAI nAgila
usakA hRdayagata bhAva pahacAna gae ki yaha sumati phijhUla meM jhUThe
kaSAyavAlA hai  /  to kauna-sA pratyuttara denA aise socane lgaa| sUtra-670-676
binA kAraNa binA avasara para krodhAyamAna hue bhale abhI vaise hI rahe, abhI
zAyada use samaja na dI jAe to bhI vo bahumAnya nahIM kareMge  /  to kyA abhI
use samajAe ki hAla kAlakSepa kare ? kAla pasAra hogA to use kaSAya zAnta hoMge
aura phira merI batAI sArI bAtoM kA svIkAra hogA  /  yA to hAla kA yaha avasara
aisA hai ki usake saMzaya ko dUra kara sakU~gA  /  jaba taka vizeSa samaja na dI
jAe taba taka isa bhadrika bhAI kI samaja meM kucha na AegA  /  aisA socakara
nAgila choTe bhAI sumati ko kahane lagA-ki he bandhu ! maiM tuje doSa nahIM de
rahA, maiM isameM apanA hI doSa mAnatA hU~ ki-hita buddhi se sage bhAI ko bhI
kahA jAe to vo kopAyamAna hotA hai  /  A~Tha karma kI jAla meM pha~se jIva ko hI
yahA~ doSa hai ki cAra doSa meM se bAhara nIkAlanevAle hitopadeza unheM asara
nahIM karatA sajjar3a rAga, dveSa, kadAgraha, ajJAna, mithyAtva ke doSa se khAe
hue manavAle AtmA ko hitopadeza samAna amRta bhI kAlakUTa viSa lagatA hai|
sUtra-677 aisA sunakara sumati ne kahA-tuma hI satyavAdI ho aura isa prakAra
bola sakate ho  /  lekina sAdhu ke avarNavAda bolanA jarA bhI ucita nahIM hai  /
vo mahAnubhAva ke dUsare vyavahAra para najara kyoM nahIM karate ? cha?,
aTThama, cAra-pA~ca upavAsa mAsakSamaNa Adi tapa karake AhAra grahaNa karanevAle
grISma kAla meM AtApanA lete hai| aura phira virAsana utkaTukAsana alaga-alaga
taraha ke abhigraha dhAraNa karanA, kaSTavAle tapa karanA ityAdI dharmAnuSThAna
AcaraNa karake mA~sa aura lahU~ jinhoMne sUkhA die haiM, isa taraha ke guNayukta
mahAnubhAva sAdhuoM ko tuma jaise mahAn bhASA samitivAle bar3e zrAvaka hokara
yaha sAdhu kuzIlavAle aisA saMkalpa karanA yukta nahIM hai| usake bAda nAgila ne
kahA ki-he vatsa ! yaha usake dharmaanuSThAna se tu saMtoSa mata kara  /  jaise
ki Aja meMavizvAsa se lU~Ta cUkA hU~, binA icchA se Ae hue parAdhInatA se
bhugatane ke duHkha se, akAma nirjarA se bhI karma kA kSaya hotA hai to phira
bAlatapa se karmakSaya kyoM na ho? ina sabako bAlatapasvI mAnanA  /  kyA tumheM
utakA utsUtramArga kA alpa sevanapana nahIM dikhatA ? aura phira he vatsa sumati
! muje yaha sAdhu para mana se bhI sUkSma pradveSa nahIM ki jisase maiM unakA
doSa grahaNa karU~  /  lekina tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ke pAsa se usa prakAra
avadhAraNa kiyA hai ki kuzIla ko mata dekhnaa| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 62

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'**  Then Sumati said to him, "Just
as you are foolish, so will be the Tirthankara who told you this." After that,
binding the mouth-shaped hole of Sumati, who spoke in this way, with his hand,
Nagil said to him, "Do not hope for the Tirthankara Bhagvant, the great teacher
of the world. Tell me what you have to say, I will not give you any reply." Then
Sumati said to him, "If this Sadhu is Kushila in this world, then there will be
no Sushil Sadhu anywhere." Then Nagil said, "Sumati! Here in the world, one
should accept the words of Bhagvant, who has inviolable words, with respect. The
Astik soul never has any discord in his words and do not respect him in his
actions, because according to the words of Jinendra, he certainly appears to be
Kushila.  _ There is no smell for his renunciation. Because if this Sadhu has
another mouth-pot, then this Sadhu is more Kushila due to the fault of excessive
attachment. Bhagvant did not command the Sadhu to hold excessive possessions in
his hand. Therefore, O Vats! Even a low-minded person should not think in his
mind that if my mouth-pot breaks and gets destroyed, then where will I get
another one? He does not think that by holding more and useless possessions, my
Pari Graha Vrat will be broken or what? Is it right for a soul who is dyed in
restraint to be a means like a mouth-pot, which is an instrument of Dharma
necessary for restraint? Surely such a soul does not find sorrow in it. Truly,
such a soul reveals himself as a low-minded person, praises the conduct of the
wrong path, and defiles the sermon. Can't you see this common reality?  This
Sadhu saw the body of a woman without clothes yesterday, and he did not do
Pratikraman by thinking about it with attachment, don't you know? This Sadhu has
blisters on his body, and he does not see the face of the one who is amazed by
it. He just took ashes without giving them to himself with his own hand to make
him feel better, you have also seen them doing that directly. Yesterday, he told
the Sanghatak before sunrise, "Get up and let's go, we will go for a walk." The
sun has risen. Didn't you hear it yourself? The one who is a big Navadishit in
this, he slept without any use and touched the electricity fire, you saw it. He
did not take Santhara, then in the morning he collided with the edge of the
clothes worn on the green grass, then he consumed water in the open. He walked
by stepping on the seed-plant body. He walked on the salty ground illegally and
then transitioned to the sweet ground. And after walking on the way, the Sadhu
should do Iriyaavhiyan Pratikraman after walking a hundred steps.  One should
walk in such a way, one should act in such a way, one should speak in such a
way, one should sleep in such a way that the subtle or dense, sufficient or
insufficient, coming and going, all living beings, Pranabhoot or Sattv, do not
get collision, suffering, pain or disturbance. None of these things mentioned in
these Sadhus are seen here. And then I encouraged that Sadhu to take the mouth-
pot, saying that you are making a fluttering sound while taking the mouth-pot,
which causes a collision of the air body. I reminded him of the reason for
taking the mouth-pot. Whose restraint is like this, which is used in this way,
and you follow it a lot, then there is no doubt that you have such use in it? At
this time, you stopped me and said, "Keep quiet, we should not say anything to
the Sadhus." Have you forgotten this reality? He did not protect even one of the
Samyak Stanak in the Samyak Stanak, in which How can a Sadhu be called a Sadhu
who has such negligence? Those who have such destruction are not Sadhus. O
Bhadra Mukh! See, this one who is destroying the six-sense beings like a dog,
why should I have affection for him? Or even a dog is good, whose very subtle
rules and vows are not broken.  How can one compare him to someone who breaks
this rule? Therefore, O Vats! Sumati! One cannot become a Sadhu by such
artificial conduct. Who will worship them who remember the words of Tirthankara?
Another thing to keep in mind is that their contact may also make us slack in
our actions, that Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi
Translation Page 63

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka taba
sumati ne use kahA ki, jisa taraha kA tU nirbuddhi hai usI taraha ke vo
tIrthaMkara hoMge jisane tumheM isa prakAra kahA  /  usake bAda isa prakAra
bolanevAle sumati ke mukha rUpI chidra ko apane hasta se baMdha karake nAgila ne
use kahA ki- jagata ke mahAna guru, tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta kI AzAtanA mata kara
/  mujhe tumheM jo kahanA hai vo kaho, maiM tumheM koI pratyuttara nahIM dUMgA
/  taba sumati ne use kahA ki isa jagata meM yaha sAdhu bhI yadi kuzIla ho to
phira suzIla sAdhu kahIM nahIM mileMge  /  taba nAgila ne kahA ki-sumati ! yahA~
jagata meM alaMghanIya vacanayukta bhagavaMta vacana mAna sahita grahaNa karanA
cAhie  /  Astika AtmA ko usake vacana meM kisI dina visaMvAda nahIM hotA aura kI
ceSTA meM Adara mata karanA kyoMki jinendra vacana anusAra yakInana vo kuzIla
dikhate haiN| _ unakI pravrajyA ke lie gaMdha bhI nahIM dikhatI  /  kyoMki yadi
isa sAdhu ke pAsa dUsarI mu~hapotikA dikhatI hai| isalie yaha sAdhu jyAdA
parigrahatA doSa se kuzIla hai  /  bhagavaMta ne hasta meM jyAdA parigraha
dhAraNa karane ke lie sAdhu ko AjJA nahIM dii| isalie he vatsa ! hIna sattvavAlA
bhI mana se aisA adhyavasAya na kare ki zAyada merI yaha mu~hapotikA phaTakara-
tUTakara naSTa hogI to dUsarI kahA~ se milegI? vo hInasattva aisA nahIM socatA
ki-adhika aura anupayoga se upadhi dhAraNa karane se mere parigraha vrata kA
bhaMga hogA yA kyA saMyama meM raMgI AtmA saMyama meM jarurI dharma ke upakaraNa
samAna mu~hapatti jaise sAdhana meM sidAya sahI ? jarura vaisI AtmA usameM
viSAda na pAe  /  sacamuca vaisI AtmA khuda ko maiM hIna sattvavAlA hU~, aisA
pragaTa karatA hai, unmArga ke AcaraNa kI prazaMsA karatA hai  /  aura pravacana
malina karatA hai  /  yaha sAmAnya hakIkata tuma nahIM dekha sakate? isa sAdhu
ne kala binA vastra kI strI ke zarIra ko rAgapUrvaka dekhakara usakA cintavana
karake usakI AlocanA pratikramaNa nahIM kie, vo tumheM mAlUma nahIM kyA ? isa
sAdhu ke zarIra para pholle hue haiM, usa kAraNa se vismaya pAnevAle mukhavAlA
nahIM dekhatA  /  abhI-abhI use loca karane ke lie apane hAtha se hI binA die
bhasma grahaNa kI, tune bhI pratyakSa vaisA karate hue unheM dekhA hai  /  kala
saMghATaka ko sUryodaya hone se pahale aisA kahA kiuTho aura calo, hama vihAra
kareM  /  sUryodaya ho gayA hai  /  vo khuda tune nahIM sunA ? isameM jo bar3A
navadikSita hai vo binA upayoga ke so gayA aura bijalI agnikAya se sparza kiyA
use tune dekhA thA  /  usane saMthArA grahaNa na kiyA taba subaha ko hare ghAsa
ke pahanane ke kapar3e ke chora se saMghaTTA kiyA, taba bAhara khule meM pAnI kA
paribhoga kiyaa| bIja-vanaspatikAya para paga cA~pakara calatA thA  /  avidhi se
khArI z2amIna para calakara madhura z2amIna para saMkramaNa kiyA  /  aura rAste
meM calane ke bAda sAdhu ne sau kadama calane ke bAda iriyAvahiyaM pratikramanA
caahie| usa taraha calanA cAhie, usa taraha ceSTA karanI cAhie, usa taraha
bolanA cAhie, usa taraha zayana karanA cAhie ki jisase cha kAya ke jIva ko
sUkSma yA bAdara, paryAptA yA aparyAptA, Ate-jAte sarva jIva prANabhUta yA
sattva ko saMghaTTa paritApana kilAmaNA yA upadrava na ho  /  ina sAdhuoM meM
batAe ina sarva meM se eka bhI yahA~ nahIM dikhatA  /  aura phira muhapatikA
paDilehaNa karate hue usa sAdhu ko maiMne preraNA dI ki vAyukAya kA saMghaTTA ho
vaise phaDaphaDATa AvAz2a karate hue paDilehaNA karate ho  /  paDilehaNa karane
kA kAraNa yAda karavAyA  /  jisakA isa taraha ke upayogavAlA jayaNAyukta saMyama
hai  /  aura vo tuma kAphI pAlana karate ho to binA saMdeha kI bAta hai ki
usameM tuma aisA upayoga rakhate ho ? isa samaya tumane muje rokA ki mauna
rakho, sAdhuoM ko hameM kucha kahanA na kalpe  /  yaha hakIkata kyA tUM bhUla
gayA ? isane samyak sthAnaka meM se eka bhI sthAnaka samyak taraha se rakSaNa
nahIM kiyA, jisameM ha kA pramAda ho use sAdhu kisa taraha kaha sakate haiM ?
jinameM isa taraha kA nirdhvaMsapana ho vo sAdhu nahIM hai  /  he bhadramukha !
dekha, zvAna samAna nirdaya cha kAya jIva kA yaha virAdhana karanevAlA ho, to
usake lie mujhe kyoM anurAga ho? yA to zvAna bhI acchA hai ki jise ati sUkSma
bhI niyama vrata kA bhaMga nahIM hotA | isa niyama kA bhaMga karanevAlA hone se
kisake sAtha usakI tulanA kara sake ? isalie he vatsa ! sumati ! isa taraha ke
kRtrima AcaraNa se sAdhu nahIM bana sakate  /  unako tIrthaMkara ke vacana kA
smaraNa karanevAlA kauna vaMdana kare ? dUsarI bAta yaha bhI dhyAna meM rakhanI
hai ki unake saMsarga se hameM bhI caraNa-karaNa meM zithilatA A jAe ki muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 63

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
which causes us to wander repeatedly in the terrible cycle of births.  Then
Sumati said that whether he is Kushīl or Sushīl, I will take vows only with him.
And then you say that is the Dharma, but who is capable of doing it today?
Therefore, leave my hand, I have to go with him. If he goes far away, then
meeting will be difficult. Then Nāgil said - O Bhadra Mukha! Going with him will
not be your welfare, I give you words of benefit. It is more beneficial to
consume that which is more virtuous than this situation. I am not holding you by
force.  Now, even after many attempts to prevent it for a long time, he did not
stop. And the unfortunate Sumati, O Gautam! accepted vows. After that, when time
came, while wandering, after five months, a terrible twelve-year famine struck.
Then that ascetic, due to the fault of that time, without doing Pratikramāṇa of
the fault, died and was born as a vehicle of Bhūta, Yaksha, Rākshasa, Pishacha,
etc. Vyantar Dev. Later, he became a cruel, meat-eating Mlechchha. Due to being
of cruel consequences, he was born in the seventh Naraki. From there, he will
attain Samyaktva in the third Chaubīsī. After attaining Samyaktva, he will
attain Siddhi in the third birth, but the fifth one, who was the biggest, will
not attain Siddhi. Because he is completely Mithyādṛishti and Abhavya. O
Bhagavan! Is Sumati Bhavy or Abhavya? O Gautam, he is Bhavy. O Bhagavan! If he
is Bhavy, then where will he be born after death? O Gautam! He will be born
among the Parmadhārma Asuras. Sūtra-678  O Bhagavan! Is it true that a Bhavy
Jīva is born among the Parmadhārma Asuras? O Gautam! Those who, despite being
told well, disregard the best Hitopadeśa due to the arising of strong Rāga,
Dvesha, Moha, and Mithyātva. They consider the twelve Angas and Śrutagyāna as
unproven and do not know the harmony and difference of the scriptures. They
praise and promote unrighteousness, just as Sumati praised and promoted those
ascetics - "He is not a Kushīl ascetic. If even this ascetic is Kushīl, then
there is no Sushīl ascetic in this world." I have decided to take vows with
those ascetics, and just as you are foolish, so will those Tirthankaras be. By
speaking in this way, O Gautam! even after being a great ascetic, he will be
born among the Parmadhārma Asuras.  O Bhagavan! Where are the Parmadhārma Devas
born after death? O Bhagavan! Where will the Jīva of Sumati go after leaving the
Parmadhārma Asura Devas? O Gautam! This unfortunate one, by praising and
promoting unrighteousness, approved the destruction of the entire righteous
path. Due to the fault of that karma, he earned an endless cycle of births.  Did
you say the origin of births? I will tell you some births briefly, even though
there is no way to escape from the four Gatis, the same cycle of births, for
many Padgal Paravartan Kālas. Listen -  There is a salty ocean surrounding this
Jambudvīpa, which is slowly circular. In that place where the Sindhu Mahānādī
enters, in the south direction of that region, there is a place called Prati
Santapa Dayak, which is twelve and a half Yojanas in size, like the shape of an
elephant's trunk, in the middle of a Vedikā that is fifty-five Yojanas in size.
That place is seven and a half Yojanas high from the water of the salty ocean.
There are forty-six caves in that place, with a sky of a very dark, dense, and
dark hour institution. In those caves, there are water-dwelling humans, two by
two. They are the ones who are Vajraṛishbhanārch Sanghayanavala, with great
strength and power, with a body of twelve and a half Ventas, with a lifespan of
countless years, who love liquor and meat. By nature, they are lustful towards
women, very dark in complexion, delicate, evil, hard, stony-bodied, with a
terrifying face like the leader of the Chandals, with a fierce gaze like a lion,
terrifying like Yama Raja, who do not show their backs to anyone, who strike
fiercely like lightning, who are proud of being Mānḍhāta. Such are those egg-
shaped humans.  By taking the inner golika in their body, they are born from the
white tail hair of a cow.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka jisase
bAra-bAra ghora bhava-paramparA meM hamArA bhramaNa ho  /  taba sumati ne kahA
ki vo kuzIla ho yA suzIla ho to bhI maiM to unake pAsa hI pravrajyA apanAUMgA
aura phira tuma kahate ho vahI dharma hai lekina use karane ke lie Aja kauna
samartha hai ? isalie merA hAtha chor3a do, muje unake sAtha jAnA hai vo dUra
cale jAeMge to phira milana honA muzkila hai  /  taba nAgila ne kahA ki-he
bhadramukha ! unake sAtha jAne meM tumhArA kalyANa nahIM, maiM tumheM hita kA
vacana detA huuN| yaha hAlAta hone se jyAdA guNakAraka ho usakA hI sevana kara
/  maiM kahIM tumheM balAtkAra se nahIM pakar3a rhaa| aba bahota samaya kaIM
upAya karake nivAraNa karane ke bAvajUda bhI na rUkA aura maMda bhAgyazAlI usa
sumati ne he gautama ! pravrajyA aMgIkAra karake usa ke bAda samaya Ane para
vihAra karate karate pA~ca mahine ke bAda mahA bhayAnaka bAraha sAla kA akAla
par3A, taba vo sAdhu usa kAla ke doSa se, doSa kI AlocanA pratikramaNa kie binA
mauta pAkara bhUta, yakSa, rAkSasa, pizAca Adi vyaMtara deva ke vAhanarUpa se
pedA hue  /  bAda meM mleccha jAti meM mA~sAhAra karanevAle krUra AcaraNa
karanevAle hue  /  krUra parINAmavAle hone se sA~tavI nArakI meM paidA hue vahA~
se nIkalakara tIsarI caubIsI meM samyaktva pAeMge  /  usake bAda samyaktva
prApta hue bhava se tIsare bhava meM cAra loga siddhi pAeMge, lekina jo sarvathA
bar3e pA~cave the vo eka siddhi nahIM pAeMge  /  kyoMki vo ekAnta mithyAdRSTi
aura abhavya haiM  /  he bhagavaMta ! jo sumati hai vo bhavya yA abhavya ? he
gautama, vo bhavya haiM  /  he bhagavaMta ! vo bhavya haiM to marake kahA~
utpanna hoMge ? he gautama ! paramadhArmika asuroM meM utpanna hogaa| sUtra-678
he bhagavan ! bhavya jIva paramAdhArmika asura meM paidA hote haiM kyA ? he
gautama ! jo kisI sajjar3a rAga, dveSa, moha aura mithyAtva ke udaya se acchI
taraha se kahane ke bAvajUda bhI uttama hitopadeza kI avagaNanA karate haiM  /
bAraha taraha ke aMga aura zrutajJAna ko apramANa karate haiM aura zAstra ke
sadbhAva aura bheda ko nahIM jAnate, anAcAra kI prazaMsA karate haiM, usakI
prabhAvanA karate haiM, jisa prakAra sumati ne una sAdhuoM kI prazaMsA aura
prabhAvanA kI-vo kuzIla sAdhu nahIM hai, yadi yaha sAdhu bhI kuzIla hai to isa
jagata meM koI suzIla sAdhu nahIM  /  una sAdhuoM ke sAtha jAkara muje pravrajyA
aMgIkAra karane kA taya hai aura jisa taraha ke tuma nirbuddhi ho usa taraha ke
vo tIrthaMkara bhI hoMge usa prakAra bolane se he gautama ! vo kAphI bar3A
tapasvI hone ke bAda bhI paramAdhAmI asuroM meM utpanna hoNge| he bhagavaMta !
paramAdhArmika deva vahA~ se marake kahA~ utpanna hote haiM ? he bhagavaMta !
paramAdhArmika asura devatA meM se bAhara nIkalakara usa sumati kA jIva kahA~
jAegA ? he gautama ! maMdabhAgI aise usane anAcAra kI prazaMsA aura abhyudaya
karane ke lie pUre sanmArga ke nAza ko anumodana kiyA, usa karma ke doSa se
ananta saMsAra upArjana kiyaa| ne bhava kI utpatti kahe ? kaI padagala
parAvartana kAla taka cAra gati samAna saMsAra meM se jisakA nIkalane kA koI
cArA nahIM to bhI saMkSepa se kucha bhava kahatA hU~ vo suna - isI jambUdvIpa ko
cotarapha dhIre hue vartulAkAra lavaNa samudra haiM  /  usameM jo jagaha para
siMdhu mahAnadI praveza karatI hai usa pradeza ke dakSiNa dizA meM 55 yojana
pramANavAlI vedIkA ke bIca meM sAr3e bAraha yojana pramANa hAthI ke kuMbhasthala
ke AkAra samAna prati saMtApadAyaka nAma kI eka jagaha hai  /  vo jagaha lavaNa
samudra ke jala se sAr3e sAta yojana jitanA UMcA hai  /  vahA~ ati ghora gAr3ha
aMdherevAlI ghar3I saMsthAna ke AkAzavAlI chiyAlIsa guphA hai  /  usa guphA meM
do-do ke bIca jalacArI mAnava rahate haiM  /  jo vajraRSabhanAraca
saMghayaNavAle, mahAbala aura parAkramavAle sAr3e bAraha veMta pramANa kAyAvAle,
saMkhyAtA sAla ke, AyuvAle, jinhe madya, mA~sa priya hai  /  vaise svabhAva se
strI lolupa, ati bUre varNavAle, sukumAra, aniSTa, kaThina, patharIle dehavAle,
caMDAla ke netA samAna bhayAnaka mukhavAle, sIMha kI taraha ghora najaravAle,
yamarAjA samAna bhayAnaka, kisIko pITha na dikhAnevAle, bIjalI kI taraha
niSThara prahAra karanevAle, abhimAna se mAMdhAtA honevAle aise vo aMDagolika
mAnava hote haiN| unake zarIra meM jo aMtaraMga golikA hotI hai use grahaNa
karake camarI gAya ke zveta pU~cha ke bAla se vo muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 64

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  The students/purpose/sutra
numbers weave golikai (beads). After that, they tie the woven golikai to both
ears and enter the ocean with the desire to obtain precious, excellent, caste-
born gems. The water, elephants, buffaloes, lizards, crocodiles, large fish,
dolphins, etc., in the ocean do not cause any harm to them. Due to the influence
of the golikai, they roam freely in all the ocean water without fear, collect
excellent caste-born gems as per their desire, and emerge with an intact body.
Oh Gautam! They experience the unbearable, extremely intense, terrifying
suffering, which is the result of the extremely fierce karma accumulated in
their previous births, due to the connection with the inner golikai.  Oh
Bhagvant! Why is that? Oh Gautam! Who can be capable of taking their golikai
while they are alive? When they take the golikai from their body, they have to
control themselves with great courage and many kinds of bravery. Many brave men,
wearing armor, armed with swords, spears, chakras, and weapons, capture them
alive using their intelligence. The kind of physical and mental suffering they
experience when they are captured is compared to the suffering of hell.  Oh
Bhagvant! Who takes their inner golikai? Oh Gautam! In that salt ocean, there is
an inner island called Ratnadeep, which is 3100 yojanas away from the place of
suffering. Humans from Ratnadeep take it. Oh Bhagvant! How do they take it? They
capture them according to the tradition received from the previous men who were
perfected by the nature of the field. Oh Bhagvant! What is the method perfected
by their previous men? Oh Gautam! In that Ratnadeep, there are excellent
vajrashila (diamond) containers in the shape of a mill, measuring 20, 19, 18,
10, 8, and 7 dhanushya (bows). Separating them, the humans of Ratnadeep, using
the yoga perfected by the nature of the field, prepared by the previous men,
collect many fish and honey, make them very sweet, and then add pieces of cooked
meat, excellent wine, and other things. They prepare a suitable mixture for
their food, sit in a vehicle made of the wood of a large, tall tree, and consume
many tumbas (containers) filled with delicious old wine, meat, fish, and honey,
and come near the place called Prati-Santapa-dayak.  When they give one tumba to
the egg-shaped human living in the cave and use the method of request and plea,
they drive the worthy wooden vehicle with great speed towards Ratnadeep.  The
egg-shaped human consumes the mixture of honey, meat, etc., from the tumba, and
because it tastes extremely delicious, they run after them separately to get
more. Then, Gautam! Before they come very close, they place a tumba of old wine,
flavored with delicious honey and fragrant substances, on the way and again move
towards Ratnadeep with great speed. And then, the egg-shaped human runs after
them with great skill to get the delicious, honey-flavored, fragrant, prepared
old wine, meat, etc. They place a tumba filled with honey for them. In this way,
Gautam! They trap them with the wine and liquor from the tumba until they reach
the place where the previously mentioned vajrashila containers in the shape of a
mill are located. When they reach the mill and enter it, Gautam! They see the
previously cooked pieces of meat, the food filled with wine and liquor, and the
honey-coated stone slab, and they experience great satisfaction, joy, great
contentment, and great pleasure.  In this way, while eating wine, liquor, and
cooked meat, they spread out for seven to eight, fifteen days. During this time,
the residents of Ratnadeep gather, some wearing armor, some armed, and they
surround the vajrashila in seven to eight rows, holding it tightly. Then, some
other humans from Ratnadeep, using a ghantal (bell), ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka golikAeM
bunatI haiM  /  usake bAda vo bA~dhI huI golikAoM ko donoM kAna ke sAtha
bA~dhakara anamola uttama jAtivaMta ratna grahaNa karane kI icchAvAle samudra ke
bhItara praveza karate haiM  /  samudra meM rahe jala, hAthI, bheMsa, godhA,
magaramaccha, bar3e matsya, taMtu susumAra Adi duSTa zvApada use koI upadrava
nahIM karate  /  usa golikA ke prabhAva se bhayabhIta hue binA sarva samudrajala
meM bhramaNa karake icchA ke anusAra uttama taraha ke jAtivaMta ratna kA
saMgraha karake akhaMr3a zarIravAlA bAhara nIkala AtA hai  /  unheM jo aMtaraMga
golikA hotI hai unake sambandha se vo becAre he gautama ! anupama ati ghora
bhayAnaka duHkha pUrvabhava meM upArjita ati raudra karma ke AdhIna bane vo
ahesAsa karate haiN| he bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se ? he gautama ! vo jindA ho
taba taka unakI golikA grahaNa karane ke lie kauna samartha ho sake ? jaba unake
deha meM se golikA grahaNa karate haiM taba kaIM taraha ke bar3e sAhasa karake
niyaMtraNA karanI par3atI hai  /  bakhtara pahana ke, talavAra, bhAlA, cakra,
hathiyAra sajAe aise kaIM zUravIra puruSa buddhi ke prayoga se unako jindA hI
pakaDate haiM  /  jaba unheM pakaDate haiM taba jisa taraha ke zArIrika-mAnasika
duHkha hote haiM vo saba nAraka ke duHkha ke sAtha tulanA kI jAtI hai| he
bhagavaMta ! vo aMtaraMga golikA kauna grahaNa karate haiM ? he gautama ! usa
lavaNa samudra meM ratnadvIpa nAma kA aMtardIpa hai, pratisaMtApadAyaka sthala
se vo dvIpa 3100 yojana dUra hai vo ratnadvIpa mAnava use grahaNa karate haiM  /
he bhagavaMta ! kisa prayoga se grahaNa karate haiM ? kSetra ke svabhAva se
siddha honevAle pUrva puruSoM kI paramparA anusAra prApta kie vidhAna se unheM
pakar3ate haiM  /  he bhagavaMta ! unakA pUrva puruSa ne siddha kiyA huvA vidhi
kisa taraha kA hotA hai ? he gautama ! usa ratnadvIpa meM 20, 19, 18,
10,8,7dhanuSya pramANavAle cakkI ke AkAra ke zreSTha vajrazilA ke saMpuTa hote
haiM  /  use alaga karake vo ratnadvIpavAsI mAnava pUrva ke puruSa se siddha
kSetra-svabhAva se siddha-taiyAra kie gae yoga se kaIM matsya-madhu ikaTThe
karake ati rasavAle karake usake bAda usameM pakAe hue mA~sa ke Tukar3e aura
uttama madya, madIrA Adi cIjeM DAlate haiN| aise unake khAne ke lAyaka ucita
mizraNa taiyAra karake vizAla lambe bar3e peDa ke kASTa se banAe yAna meM
baiThakara svAdiSTa purAne madIrA, mA~sa, matsya, madha Adi se paripUrNa kaIM
taMbaDA grahaNa karake prati saMtApadAyaka nAma kI jagaha ke pAsa Ate haiM  /
jaba guphAvAsI aMDagolika mAnava ko eka tuMbar3A dekara aura abhyarthanA-binatI
kA prayoga karake lAyaka usa kASThayAna ko ati vegavAn calAkara ratnadvIpa kI
aura daur3a jAte haiN| aMDagolika mAnava usa tuMba meM se madha, mA~sa Adi
mizraNa-bhakSaNa karate haiM aura ati-svAdiSTa lagane se phira pAne ke lie unake
pIche alaga-alaga hokara daur3ate haiN| taba gautama ! jitane meM abhI kAphI
najadIka na Ae utane meM sundara svAdavAle madhu aura khuzabUvAle dravya se
saMskArita purANA madirA kA eka tuMba rAste meM rakhakara phira se bhI ati
tvarita gati se ratnadvIpa kI aura cale jAte haiM  /  aura phira aMDagolika
mAnava vo ati svAdiSTa, madhu aura khuzabUvAle dravya se saMskArita taiyAra kie
purAne madirA mA~sa Adi pAne ke lie atidakSatA se usakI pITha pIche daur3ate
haiM  /  unheM dene ke lie madhu se bhare eka tuMba ko rakhate haiM  /  usa
prakAra he gautama ! madya, madirA ke lolupI bane unako tuMba ke madya, madirA
Adi se phA~sate taba taka le jAta haiM ki jahA~ pahale batAe cakkI AkAra ke
vajra kI zIlA ke saMpuTa haiM  /  jitane meM khAdya kI lAlaca se vo jitanI bhUmi
taka Ate haiM utane meM hI jo pAsa ke vajrazIlA ke saMpuTa kA agra hissA jo
bagAsA khAte puruSa ke AkAra samAna chUTA pahale se hI rakhA hotA hai  /  vahIM
madya, madirA se bhare bAkI rahe kaIM tuMba unakI A~kha ke sAmane ho vahA~
rakhakara apanI-apanI jagaha meM cale jAte haiM  /  vo madyamadirA khAne ke
lolupI jitane meM cakkI ke pAsa pahu~ce aura usa para praveza kare usa samaya he
gautama ! jo pahale pakAe hue mA~sa ke Tukar3e vahA~ rakhe hoM aura jo madya-
madirA se bhare bhojana vahA~ rakhe ho aura phira madha se lIpita zIlA ke par3a
ho use dekhakara unheM kAphI saMtoSa, Ananda, bar3I tuSTi, mahApramoda hotA hai|
isa prakAra madya-madirA pakAe hue mA~sa khAte-khAte sA~ta-A~Tha, paMdraha dina
jitane meM pasAra hote haiM, utane meM ratnadvIpa nivAsI loga ikaTThe hokara
kucha logoM ne bakhtara, kucha logoM ne Ayudha dhAraNa kie hoM, vo usa vajrazIlA
ko cIpakakara sA~ta-A~Tha paMkti meM ghera lete haiM  /  aura phira
ratnadvIpavAsI dUsare kucha manuSya usa zilA par3a ko ghaMTAla muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 65

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishītha'  They gather at the
study/purpose/sūtra number. When two millstones are brought together, then O
Gautama! by striking a clap, in the time of its third part, one or two humans
trapped inside come out. After that, the Ratnadvīpa residents build temples and
palaces there along with trees. At that time, the time of destruction of his
bone-body arises. In that way, O Gautama! when they grind and grind by crushing
him between the two millstones of the Vajrashīla, until all the bones are
crushed and well ground into powder, then the life of the Andagolika does not
separate. His bones are as strong as Vajraratna, difficult to grind. There, they
place him between the two millstones of the Vajrashīla and, with black bulls
yoked, they grind him round like a rent with great effort.  Even after a year of
grinding effort, his strong bones do not break. At that time, even after
experiencing the intense, terrible, excruciating pain of physical and mental
suffering, even after the life has departed, his bones do not break, do not
split, do not grind, do not wear away, but the joints and places of binding all
separate and become dilapidated. After that, seeing some bone fragments of the
fingers and other forelimbs like flour that slips like a normal stone mill, the
Ratnadvīpa residents rejoice, lift the millstones, take the Andagolika, take
many wealth groups from the dry-arid part of it, and sell it. In this way, the
Ratnadvīpa residents take the human Andagolika.  O Bhagavant! How will those
poor souls sustain their life for a year without food and water, enduring such
intense, terrible, sharp, unbearable suffering? O Gautama! One who desires to
know the special right of this from the experience of one's own karma, should
know it from the detailed explanation of the Praśna Vyākaraṇa Sūtra. Sūtra - 679
O Bhagavant! Where will the soul of that Sumati be born after dying there? O
Gautama! He will be born in the same place called Prati-saṁtāpa-dāya, in the
same order, in the form of an Andagolika human for seven births. After that, in
the birth of a wicked dog, then in a black dog, then in a Vāṇavyantar, then in a
Neem tree, then in the form of a female gem, then in the sixth Naraki, then a
leprous human, then a Vāṇavyantar, then a Maha-kāya-vāla Yuthādhipati elephant,
there, due to excessive attachment in copulation, he will become an Ananta-kāya
plant, there he will endure the suffering of birth and death for an infinite
time, and become a human. Then, in human form, he will again go to the Mahānimi,
then to the seventh, then he will become a large fish in the self-wandering
ocean. He will die after eating many creatures, and go to the seventh.  After
that, he will become an Ānkhalā, then a human, then a cuckoo on a tree, then a
Jalo, then a Maha-matsy, then a Tandu-matsy, then the seventh, then a donkey,
then a dog, then a Kṛmi-jīva, then a frog, then in the Agni-kāya, then a Kunthu,
then a honeybee, then a bird, then an Udhai, then in a plant, after an infinite
time like this, he will become a human, then a female gem, then the sixth, then
a camel, then in the town called Veṣāmaṅkita, near the house of the Upādhyāya,
he will become a Neem tree, then a human, then a small hunchbacked woman, then a
eunuch, then a suffering human, then a beggar, then in the Prithvī-kāya and
other bodies, he will suffer the fate of birth and the fate of the body in each,
then a human, then an ignorant ascetic, then a Vāṇavyantar, then a Purohita,
then the seventh, then a Tandu-matsy, then the seventh Naraki, then a bull, then
a human, then a Mahā-samyag-dṛṣṭi Avirati Chakravarti, then the first Naraki,
then a wealthy merchant, then a Śramaṇa Anagāra, from there to the Anuttar
Devaloka, then becoming a Chakravarti Mahā-saṁgha-yaṇa-vāla, he will attain
dispassion from the enjoyment of desires, and becoming a Tīrthaṅkara Bhagavant,
he will practice the complete restraint as described, and attain his Nirvana.
Sūtra - 680  And then, the monk or nun who praises the hypocritical, or praises
the worthless, who are agreeable to them... Muni Dīparatna-sāgara Kṛt
(Mahānishītha) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi Translation Page 66

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka para
ikaTThA ho vaise rakhate haiM  /  jaba do par3a ikaTThe kie jAe taba he gautama
! eka capaTI bajAkara usake tIsare hisse ke kAla meM usake bhItara pha~se
manuSyameM se eka yA do bAhara nIkala jAte haiM  /  usake bAda vo ratnadvIpavAsI
per3a sahita maMdira aura mahala vahA~ banAte haiM  /  usI samaya usake hAr3a
kA-zarIra kA vinAzakAla paidA hotA hai, usa prakAra he gautama ! usa vajrazIlA
ke cakkI ke do par3a ke bIca pIsakara pIsate-pIsate jaba taka sArI haDDiyA~
dabakara acchI taraha na pIse aura cUrNa na ho taba taka vo aMDagolika ke prANa
alaga nahIM hote  /  usake asthi vajraratna kI taraha muzkila se pIsa sake vaise
majabUta hote haiM  /  vahA~ usako vajrazIlA ke do par3a ke bIca rakhakara kAle
baila jur3akara kAphI kozIza ke bAda reMTa kI taraha gola bhamADAte haiN| eka
sAla taka pIsane kI kozIza cAlU hone ke bAda bhI usakI majabUta asthi ke Tukar3e
nahIM hote  /  usa samaya usa taraha ke ati ghora dAruNa zArIrika aura mAnasika
mahAduHkha ke darda kA kaThina ahesAsa karane ke bAda bhI prANa bhI cale gae
hone ke bAda bhI jisake asthibhaMga nahIM hote, do hisse nahIM hote, pIsate
nahIM, ghisate nahIM lekina jo kisI saMdhisthAna jor3oM kA aura ba~dhana kA
sthAna hai vo saba alaga hokara jarjarIbhUta hote haiM  /  usake bAda dUsarI
sAmAnya patthara kI cakkI kI taraha phisalanevAle oNTe kI taraha kucha UMgalI
Adi agrAvayava ke asthikhaMr3a dekhakara vo ratnadvIpavAsI loga Ananda pAkara
zIlA ke par3a Upara uThAkara usakI aMDagolikA grahaNa karake usameM jo zuSka-
nIrasa hissA ho vo kaIM dhanasamUha grahaNa karake beca DAlate haiM  /  isa
prakAra se vo ratnadvIpa nivAsI mAnava aMtaraMr3a golikA grahaNa karate haiN| he
bhagavaMta ! vo becAre usa taraha kA ati ghora dArUNa tIkSNa duHssaha
duHkhasamUha ko sahate hue AhAra-jala binA eka sAla taka kisa taraha prANa
dhAraNa karate hoMge? he gautama ! khuda ke kie karma ke anubhava se isakA
vizeSa adhikAra jAnane kI icchAvAle ko prazna vyAkaraNa sUtra ke vRddha vivaraNa
se jAna lenaa| sUtra - 679 he bhagavaMta ! vahA~ marakara usa sumati kA jIva
kahA~ utpanna hogA ? he gautama ! vahIM vo pratisaMtApa dAyaka nAma kI jagaha
meM, usI krama se sA~ta bhava taka aMDagolika mAnava rUpa se paidA hogA  /
usake bAda duSTa zvAna ke bhava, usake bAda kAle zvAna meM, usake bAda
vANavyaMtara meM, usake bAda nIma kI vanaspati meM, usake bAda strI-ratna ke
rUpameM, usake bAda chaTThI nArakI meM, phira kuSThi mAnava, phira vANa-
vyaMtara, phira mahAkAyavAlA yuthAdhipati hAthI, vahA~ maithuna meM ati Asakti
hone se anantakAya vanaspati meM vahA~ ananta kAla janma-maraNa ke duHkha
sahakara mAnava bnegaa| phira mAnavapana meM mahAnimiti ko phira sA~tavI meM,
phira svayaM-bhUramaNa samudra meM bar3A matsya banegA  /  kaIM jIva kA
matsyAhAra karake marakara sA~tavI meM jaaegaa| usake bAda A~khalA, phira mAnava
meM, phira per3a para kokilA, phira jalo, phira mahA matsya, phira taMdula
matsya, phira sA~tavI meM, phira gadhA, phira kuttA, phira kRmijIva, phira
mer3haka, phira agnikAya meM, phira kuMthu, phira madhumakkhI, phira cIDiyA,
phira udhai, phira vanaspati meM aise anantakAla karake mAnava meM strIratna,
phira chaTThI meM, phira UMTa, phira veSAmaMkita nAma ke paTTaNa meM upAdhyAya
ke gRha ke pAsa nIma kI vanaspati meM, phira mAnava meM choTI kubjA strI, phira
nAmarda, phira duHkhI mAnava, phira bhIkha mA~ganevAle, phira pRthvIkAya Adi
kAya meM bhavadazA aura kAyadazA haraeka meM bhugatanevAle, phira mAnava, phira
ajJAna tapa karanevAle, phira vANavyaMtara, phira purohita, phira sA~tavI meM
taMdula matsya, phira sA~tavI nArakI meM, phira baila, phira mAnava meM
mahAsamyagdRSTi avirati cakravartI, phira prathama nArakI meM, phira zrImaMta
zeTha, phira zramaNa aNagArapana meM, vahA~ se anuttara devaloka meM, phira
cakravartI mahAsaMghayaNavAle hokara kAmabhoga se vairAga pAkara tIrthaMkara
bhagavaMta kathita saMpUrNa saMyama ko sAdhakara usakA nirvANa hogaa| sUtra -
680 aura phira jo bhikSu yA bhikSuNI parapAkhaMr3I kI prazaMsA kare yA nihnavoM
kI prazaMsA kare, jinheM anukUla ho muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 66

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishītha'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
Those who speak such words, enter the temples and houses of the Nihnvas, who
model the scriptures, śāstras, verses or letters of the Nihnvas, who perform
austerities like modeled body-afflictions, etc., who practice restraint, who
practice their knowledge, who recognize it in a special way, who listen, who
become learned, who advocate for it, who praise it or its śāstra in the company
of the learned, even they are born as Asuras in the form of Paramādharmic
Sumati. Sūtra - 681  **O Bhagvant!** Why did the soul of that Sumati have to
wander in the world for so long in different births in such hellish, animal,
human, Asura, etc. states, even though he had embraced Śramaṇapan at that time?
**O Gautama!** If such things as linga-vesha, etc. are adopted, which hinder the
Āgama, then it is only a show and is considered to be the cause of a very long
world. How long its limit is, cannot be told, for the same reason (according to
Āgama) restraint is considered difficult.  **Then, on the other hand, keep this
in mind:** For Śramaṇapan, one has to abandon the Kusīla Samsargī in the place
of restraint. If one does not abandon it, then restraint itself does not last.
So, the virtuous Sadhu should follow the same conduct, praise the same, promote
the same, advise the same, follow the same, which is in the Āgama-śāstra as told
by Bhagvant. In this way, by transgressing the Sūtra, just as Sumati wandered in
the long world, in the same way, others like Sundar, Vidur, Sudarśan, Śekhar,
Nilabhadra, Sabhomeya, Khaggadhārī, Stenaśramaṇa, Durdāntadeva, Rakshit Muni,
etc. have also gone astray. How many of them can be counted? Therefore, knowing
the ultimate purpose of this matter, one should completely abandon Kusīla
Samsarg. Sūtra-682  **O Bhagvant!** Did the Nāgil Śrāvaka tell those five Sadhus
in the Kusīla form of their own free will or by the means of the Āgama śāstra?
**O Gautama!** What ability would the poor Śrāvaka have to say such a thing?
When the Śrāvaka, who spoke the Avarnāvāda of the great virtuous Sadhu out of
his own free will, was in the presence of the twenty-second Dharma Tīrthankara,
Ariṣṭanemi, who was like the emerald gem, the crest jewel of the Harivaṃśa
lineage, with a dark complexion. He had gone to him for the purpose of paying
homage. He had been modeled by the Kevali Bhagvant, the knower of
Anantagamaparva, in the Ācārāṅga Sūtra. He had truly understood it in his heart.
There, he had declared thirty-six Āchāras. Of those Āchāras, whoever, whether a
Sadhu or a Sadhvī, violates any Āchāra, is considered to be equal to a
householder. If one behaves, conducts oneself, or models oneself against the
Āgama, then one is an Ananta Ansārī.  Therefore, **O Gautama!** Whoever has
taken more than one-mouthed cloth, his fifth Mahāvrata has been broken. Whoever
has seen the limbs of a woman, thought about it, and then did not criticize it,
has violated the secrecy of Brahmacharya. Just as a burnt cloth is called a
burnt cloth in one part, in the same way, here the fourth Mahāvrata is said to
be broken. Whoever has picked up ashes with his own hands, accepted it without
giving it, his third Mahāvrata has been broken. Whoever has said that the sun
has risen before sunrise, his second Mahāvrata has been broken. The Sadhu who
has cleaned his eyes with living water and has crossed from one land to another
in the path of the land without the proper time. The seed-body has collided with
the plant-body from the edge of the cloth. The touch of lightning. The violation
of the air-body by the mouth-lord due to the flapping sound from the un-eaten.
All of them have broken their first Mahāvrata. By their breaking, the five
Mahāvrata have been broken. Therefore, **O Gautama!** These Sadhus have been
called Kusīla by the Āgama method. Because the breaking of the Uttaraguṇa is
also not desirable, then the breaking of the Mūlaguṇa is completely undesirable.
**O Bhagvant!** So, should one accept Mahāvrata only after thinking about this
example? **O Gautama!** This is the truth, O  Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt
(Mahānishītha) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Translation Page 67

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka vaise
vacana bole, nihnavoM ke maMdira-makAna meM praveza kare, jo nihnavoM ke
graMtha, zAstra, pada yA akSara ko prarUpe, jo nihnavoM ke prarUpita kAyakleza
Adi tapa kare, saMyama kare  /  usa ke jJAna kA abhyAsa kare, vizeSa taraha se
pahacAne, zravaNa kare, pAMDitya kare, usakI taraphadArI karake, vidvAna kI
parSadA meM usa kI yA usa ke zAstra kI prazaMsA kare vo bhI sumati kI taraha
paramAdhArmika asura meM utpanna hotA hai| sUtra - 681 he bhagavaMta ! usa
sumati ke jIva ne usa samaya zramaNapana aMgIkAra kiyA to bhI isa taraha ke
nAraka tiryaMca mAnava asurAdivAlI gati meM alaga-alaga bhava meM itane kAla
taka saMsAra bhramaNa kyoM karanA par3A ? he gautama ! jo Agama ko bAdhA pahu~ce
usa taraha ke liMga veza Adi grahaNa kie jAe to vo kevala dikhAvA hI hai aura
kAphI lambe saMsAra kA kAraNa samAna vo mAne jAte haiM  /  usakI kitanI lambI
hada hai, vo batA nahIM sakate, usI kAraNa se (Agama -anusAra) saMyama duSkara
mAnA gayA hai| to dUsarI bAta yaha dhyAna meM rakhe ki zramaNapana ke lie
saMyama sthAna meM kuzIla saMsargI kA tyAga karanA hai| yadi usakA tyAga na kare
to saMyama hI TikatA nahIM  /  to sundara mativAle sAdhu ko vahI AcaraNa karanA,
usakI hI prazaMsA karanA, usakI hI prabhAvanA-unnati karanA, usakI hI salAha
denA, vo hI AcaraNa karanA ki jo bhagavaMta ne batAe Agama-zAstra meM ho, isa
prakAra sUtra kA atikramaNa karake jisa taraha sumati lambe saMsAra meM bhaTakA
usI taraha dUsare bhI sundara, vidura, sudarzana, zekhara, nilabhadra,
sabhomeya, khaggadhArI, stenazramaNa, durdAntadeva, rakSita muni Adi ho cUke
usakI kitanI ginatI batAe? isalie isa viSaya kA paramArtha jAnakara kuzIla
saMsarga sarvathA varjana kre| sUtra-682 he bhagavaMta ! kyA vo pA~ca sAdhu ko
kuzIla rUpa meM nAgila zrAvaka ne batAyA vo apanI svecchA se yA Agama zAstra ke
upAya se ? he gautama ! becAre zrAvaka ko vaisA kahane kA kauna-sA sAmarthya
hogA ? jo kisI apanI svacchanda mati se mahAnubhAva susAdhu ke avarNavAda bole
vo zrAvaka jaba harivaMza ke kulatilaka marakata ratna samAna zyAma kAntivAle
bAIsaveM dharma tIrthaMkara ariSTanemi nAma ke the| unake pAsa vaMdana ke
nimitta se gae the  /  vo hakIkata AcArAMga sUtra meM anantagamaparyava ke
jAnakAra kevalI bhagavaMta ne prarUpI thii| use yathArtha rUpa se hRdaya meM
avadhAraNa kiyA thA  /  vahA~ chattIsa AcAra kI prajJApanA kI thii| una AcAra
meM se jo kisI sAdhu yA sAdhvI kisI bhI AcAra kA ullaMghana kare vo gRhastha ke
sAtha tulanA karane ke ucita mAnA jAtA hai  /  yadi Agama ke khilApha vyavahAra
kare, AcaraNa kare yA prarUpe to vo ananta aMsArI hotA hai| isalie he gautama !
jisane ekamukhavastrikA kA adhika parigraha kiyA to usake pA~caveM mahAvrata kA
bhaMga huaa| jisane strI ke aMgopAMga dekhe, ciMtavana kiyA phira usane AlocanA
kI nahIM to usane brahmacarya kI gupti kI virAdhanA kI usa virAdhanA se jaise
eka hisse meM jale hue vastra ko jalA huA vastra kahate haiM usI taraha yahA~
cauthe mahAvrata kA bhaMga kahate haiM, jisane apane hAthoM se bhasma uThA lI,
binA die grahaNa kiyA usake tIsare mahAvrata kA bhaMga huA  /  jisane sUryodaya
hone se pahale sUryodaya huA aisA kahA usake dUsare mahAvrata kA bhaMga huA  /
jisa sAdhu ne sajIva jala se A~kha sApha kI aura avidhi se mArga kI bhUmi meM se
dUsarI bhUmi meM saMkramaNa kiyA  /  bIjakAya ko cAMpe vastra kI kinAra se
vanaspatikAya kA saMghaTTA huA  /  bIjalI kA sparza huA  /  ajayaNA se
phar3aphar3a AvAja karane se muhapati se vAyukAya kI virAdhanA kI  /  una sabake
pahale mahAvrata kA bhaMga huA  /  unake bhaMga se pA~ca mahAvratoM kA bhaMga
huA  /  isalie he gautama ! Agama yukti se ina sAdhuoM ko kuzIla kahA hai|
kyoMki uttaraguNa kA bhaMga bhI iSTa nahIM hai to phira mUlaguNa kA bhaMga to
sarvathA aniSTa hotA hai| he bhagavaMta ! to kyA isa dRSTAMta ko socakara hI
mahAvrata grahaNa kareM ? he gautama ! yaha bAta yathArtha hai, he muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 67

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
O Bhagvant! For what reason? O Gautama! These two distinctions, Sushraman or
Sushravak, have been explained. The third distinction has not been explained.
Either, O Bhagvant, follow Sushramanapan as instructed in the scriptures.
Similarly, Sushravakapan should be followed truthfully. But the Shraman should
not allow excess in his Shramanapan, or the Shravak should not allow excess in
his Shravakapan. Niratichar Vrat is praiseworthy. One should follow Niratichar
Vrat. This Shraman Dharma, being of the form of Sarvavirati, is free from
change, without any thought, and with complete deliberation. As the observance
of Mahavrat is explained in the scriptures, it should be followed truthfully.
Whereas, for the Shravak, there are thousands of rules. He should observe the
Vrat and not allow excess in it. In this way, the Shravak should adopt Anuvrat.
Sūtra - 683  **O Bhagvant! Where was that Nagil Shravak born?**  O Gautama! He
went to Siddhi Gati.  **O Bhagvant! How?**  O Gautama! The noble Nagil,
separating himself from that Kusil Sadhu, in a dense, terrifying forest filled
with many Shravaks and trees, considering the words of the Tirthankar Bhagvant,
the ultimate benefactor, free from the stain of all sins and impurities,
extremely rare even in hundreds of births, adopted Niratichar Padupopagaman
Anashan, in a lifeless region where he did not have to worry about his body.
Now, at some time, Arishta Nemit, who was wandering in that same region, came to
this glorious soul, who was steadfast and unwavering, for his benefit. He spoke
the most excellent, profound, and enlightening words, which were like a means of
attaining Samadhi and death. Hearing the words of the Tirthankar, which were as
deep as a rain-filled cloud and as beautiful as the sound of a divine drum, he
attained the क्षपक श्रेणी (Kshapak Shreni) through the power of the अपूर्वकरण
(Apuvarkaran). He became a Kevali in the end. He attained Siddhi. Therefore, O
Gautama! There is such a difference between one who abandons the Kusil Samsargi.
**Study-4-The Muni Diparatnasagar's Hindi Translation is Complete**  In this
fourth study, the Siddhantagyatas do not have true faith in some speakers. They
remain faithless, therefore, we also do not have true faith. This is the
statement of Acharya Haribhadrasuriji. Understand that not only this entire
fourth study, but also other studies, have a sense of disbelief in some limited
speakers of this fourth study. Because, in the Sūtras of Sthān, Samavāya,
Jīvābhigaman, Prajñāpanā, etc., no truth is revealed about the place of the
Prati Santapaka. There are humans who live in its cave. In it, the Parmadharmic
Asura creates havoc seven or eight times. They have to be ground between the
millstones of the Darun Vajrashila. Even after being ground excessively, their
life does not end for a year. (But) the Vṛddhavāda is such that it is an
Ārshasūtra, there is no distortion in it. There is a lot of meaning in this
Shruta Skandha. These are the words of the Ganadhar, spoken with beautiful,
excessive, and extraordinary qualities. Therefore, do not doubt here easily.
**Muni Diparatnasagar Krut (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Translation** Page 68

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se? he gautama ! suzramaNa yA suzrAvaka yaha do bheda
hI batAe haiM  /  tIsarA bheda nahIM batAyA  /  yA to bhagavaMta ne zAstra meM
jisa prakAra upadeza diyA hai, usa prakAra suzramaNapana pAlana karo  /  usI
prakAra suzrAvakapana yathArtha taraha se pAlana karanA cAhie  /  lekina zramaNa
ko apane zramaNapana meM aticAra nahIM lagane dene cAhie yA zrAvaka ko
zrAvakapana ke vrata meM aticAra nahIM lagAne cAhie  /  niraticAra vrata
prazaMsA ke lAyaka hai  /  vaise niraticAra vrata kA pAlana karanA cAhie | jo
isa zramaNadharma sarvavirati svarUpa hone se nirvikAra chuTachATa binA suvicAra
aura pUrNa socayukta hai  /  jisa prakAra mahAvrata kA pAlana zAstrameM batAyA
hai  /  usa prakAra yathArtha pAlana karanA cAhie  /  jaba ki zrAvaka ke lie to
hajAra taraha ke vidhAna haiM  /  vo vrata pAlana kare aura usameM aticAra na
lage usa prakAra zrAvaka aNuvrata grahaNa kare  /  sUtra - 683 he bhagavaMta !
vo nAgila zrAvaka kahA~ paidA huA ? he gautama ! vo siddhigati meM gayA  /  he
bhagavaMta ! kisa taraha? he gautama ! mahAnubhAva nAgila ne usa kuzIla sAdhu ke
pAsa se alaga hokara kaIM zrAvaka aura per3a se vyApta ghora bhayAnaka aTavI meM
sarva pApa kalimala ke kalaMka rahita carama hitakArI seMkaDoM bhava meM bhI ati
durlabha tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta kA vacana hai aisA mAnakara nirjIva pradeza meM
jisameM zarIra kI paravA TApa-TIpa na karanA par3e vaisA niraticAra
pAdapopagamana anazana aMgIkAra kiyA  /  aba kisI samaya usI pradeza meM
vicarate ariSTanemi ta acalita sattvavAle isa bhavyAtmA ke pAsa usake ahesAna ke
lie A pahu~ce  /  uttamArtha samAdhimaraNa sAdhanevAle atizayavAlI dezanA kahI
/  jalavAle megha ke samAna gambhIra aura deva duMdubhi samAna sundara svaravAlI
tIrthaMkara kI vANI zravaNa karate karate zubha adhyAvasAya karane se
apUrvakaraNa se kSapaka zreNI meM ArUr3ha huA  /  aMtakRt kevalI banA  /  usane
siddhi pAI  /  isalie he gautama ! kazIla saMsargI kA tyAga karanevAle ko itanA
aMtara hotA hai| adhyayana-4-kA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt hindI anuvAda pUrNa isa
cauthe adhyayana meM siddhAMtajJAtA kucha AlApaka kI samyag zraddhA nahIM karate
/  vo azraddhA karate rahate haiM isalie hama bhI samyag zraddhA nahIM karate
aisA AcArya haribhadrasUrijI kA kathana hai| pUrA cauthA adhyayana akelA hI
nahIM, dUsare adhyayana bhI isa cauthe adhyayana ke kucha parimita AlApaka kA
azraddhAn karate haiM aisA bhAva samajo  /  kyoMki sthAna, samavAya,
jIvAbhigama, prajJApanA Adi sUtra meM vo koI bhI hakIkata batAI nahIM hai ki
prati saMtApaka jagaha hai  /  usakI guphA meM vAsa karanevAle mAnava hai|
usameM paramAdhArmika asura kA sA~ta-A~Tha bAra utpAt hotA hai, unheM dArUNa
vajrazIlA kI cakkI paTala ke bIca pIsanA par3atA hai| ati pile jAne se darda kA
ahesAsa hone ke bAda bhI eka sAla taka unake prANa naSTa nahIM hote  /  (lekina)
vRddhavAda aise hai ki yaha ArSasUtra hai, usameM vikRti kA praveza nahIM huaa|
isa zrutaskandha meM kAphI arthapUrNatA hai| suMdara atizaya sahita sAtizaya
yukta kahe yaha gaNadhara ke vacana hai| aisA hone se sahaja bhI yahA~ zaMkA
mata krnaa| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda
Page 68

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number
Study-5-Navaneet Saar Sutra-684-685 This way, by abandoning the worldly
attachments with all efforts, those who enter the right path and earn their
livelihood through a particular profession and reside in that particular path,
do not attain freedom from obstacles, effortless asceticism, self-control,
austerity, and beautiful emotions. Not only that, but liberation also remains
far away from them. Sutra-686-691  O Gautam! There are beings who reside in the
path that leads to liberation and wander in the cycle of birth and death. Even
though they reside in the Guru's abode for half a night, a night, a day, a
fortnight, a month, or a year, those who are pleasure-seeking, lazy, or have a
dull mind or heart, O Gautam! Even those with a dull enthusiasm, upon seeing the
side of such a noble and virtuous ascetic, become eager to perform all actions
with great effort. And then, witnessing, doubt, fear, and shame, their energy
becomes aroused. O Gautam! When the energy of a being is aroused, it burns the
karmas performed in past lives with the emotions of the heart. Therefore, one
should carefully examine the path that leads to liberation and reside in it with
a controlled monk for the rest of their life. Sutra-692  O Bhagvant! Which paths
are suitable for residing in? O Gautam! The path where there is an equal
attitude towards both enemies and friends. The path where there are ascetics
with a very pure and clear inner consciousness, who are afraid of indulging in
desires, who are dedicated to the welfare of their own and others' souls, who
have immense compassion for all the six categories of beings, who are free from
all distractions, who are extremely vigilant and specifically identified, who
are harmonious with the scriptures, who are free from anger and sorrow, who do
not hide their strength, energy, determination, and courage, who are worthy of a
solitary ascetic, who are simple in their clothes and other possessions, who do
not indulge in them, who are afraid of hindering the practice of solitude, who
are interested in the truth, who are eager to perform actions, who do not engage
in stories of women, food, thieves, kings, countries, or those who have deviated
from the right conduct in solitude, who are free from all kinds of strange,
incomprehensible, and all kinds of false stories in solitude, who are devoted to
the 18,000 precepts as much as possible, who are constantly engaged in the
practice of the path of liberation according to the scriptures day and night,
who are endowed with many virtues, who remain on the path without any slip-ups,
who are holders of unbroken virtuous conduct, who are highly praised, who are
highly respected, who are noble and virtuous, who are endowed with the qualities
of knowledge, perception, and character, and who are such virtuous Acharyas. The
path where such virtuous Acharyas reside is called a 'Gachch'. Sutra-693  O
Bhagvant! Does one receive the benefit of residing in the Guru's abode by
residing in it? O Gautam! Yes, some ascetics definitely receive the benefit of
residing in the Guru's abode by residing in it, and there are some who do not
reside in such a path. O Bhagvant! Why is it said that some reside and some do
not? O Gautam! One soul is a devotee of the Guru's commands, and another is a
rebel against the Guru's commands. The one who abides by the Guru's commands is
a devotee of right faith, knowledge, and conduct, and they, O Gautam! are
extremely knowledgeable and strive in various ways on the path of liberation.
The one who does not follow the Guru's commands, who rebels against the
commands, is filled with the four poisons of anger, deceit, pride, and greed.
They are filled with the accumulations of attachment, aversion, delusion, and
false belief. Those who are deeply immersed in attachment, aversion, delusion,
and false belief are like those who cannot be compared, who wander in the
terrible ocean of the world. Those who wander in the terrible ocean of the world
have to experience birth, old age, and death again and again, and then they have
to be reborn in the 84 lakh species again and again.  Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
(Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 69

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
adhyayana-5-navanItasAra sUtra-684-685 isa taraha kuzIla saMsargI kA sarvopAya
se tyAga karake unmArga praveza kie hae gaccha meM jo veza se AjIvikA karanevAle
ho aura vaise gaccha meM vAsa kare use nirvighnapana ke kAraNa, kleza rahita
zramaNapana, saMyama, tapa aura sundara bhAva kI prApti nahI hotI, itanA hI
nahIM le, mokSabhI usa se kAphI dUra rahatA hai| sUtra-686-691 he gautama ! aise
prANI hai ki jo unmArga meM praveza kie hue gaccha meM vAsa karake bhava kI
paramparA meM bhramaNA karate haiM  /  ardha pahora, eka pahora, eka dina, eka
pakSa, eka mAsa yA eka sAla taka sanmArga meM praveza kie hue gaccha meM
gurukula vAsa meM rahanevAle sAdhu he gautama ! mauja-maje karanevAlA yA AlasI,
nirutsAhI buddhi yA mana se rahatA ho lekina mahAnubhAva aise uttama sAdhu ke
pakSa ko dekhakara maMda utsAhavAle sAdhu bhI sarva parAkrama karane ke lie
utsuka hote haiM  /  aura phira sAkSI, zaMkA, bhaya, zarma usakA vIrya ullasIta
hotA hai  /  he gautama ! jIva kI vIrya zakti ullasIta hote janmAntara meM kiye
karmoM ko hRdaya ke bhAva se jalA dete haiM  /  isalie nipuNatA se sanmArga meM
praveza kie gaccha ko jA~cakara usameM saMyata muni ko jIvana paryanta vAsa
krnaa| sUtra - 692 he bhagavaMta ! aise kauna-se gaccha haiM, jisameM vAsa kara
sakate haiM ? he gautama ! jisameM zatru aura mitra pakSa kI tarapha samAna
bhAva vartatA ho  /  ati sunirmala vizuddha aMtaHkaraNavAle sAdhu ho, AzAtanA
karane meM bhaya rakhanevAle ho, khuda ke aura dUsaroM ke AtmA kA ahesAna karane
meM udyamavAle hoM, cha jIva nikAya ke jIva para ati vAtsalya karanevAle ho,
sarva pramAda ke Alambana se vipramukta ho, ati apramAdI vizeSa taraha se
pahacAne hue, zAstra ke sadbhAva vAle, raudra aura ArtadhyAna rahita, sarvathA
bala, vIrya, puruSakAra, parAkrama ko na gopanevAle ekAnta meM sAdhvI ke pAtrA,
kapar3e Adi vahore hoM, usakA bhoga na karanevAle, ekAnta dharma kA aMtarAya
karane meM bhaya rakhanevAle, tattva kI ora rUci karanevAle, parAkrama karane kI
rUcivAle, ekAnta meM strIkathA, bhojanakathA, corakathA, rAjakathA, dezakathA,
AcAra se paribhraSTa honevAle kI kathA na karanevAlA, usI taraha vicitra
aprameya aura sarva taraha kI vikathA karane se vipramukta ekAnta meM yathAzakti
18 hajAra zIlAMga kA ArAdhaka samagra rAta-dina tatparatA se zAstra ke anusAra
mokSamArga kI prarUpaNA karanevAle, kaIM guNa se yukta mArga meM rahe,
askhalita, akhaMDita zIlaguNa ke dhAraka hone se mahAyazavAle, mahAstavavAle,
mahAnubhAva jJAna, darzana aura cAritra ke guNayukta aise guNa ko dhAraNa
karanevAle AcArya hote haiN| vaise guNavAle AcArya kI nizrA meM jJAnAdika
mokSamArga kI ArAdhanA karanevAle ko gaccha kahA hai| sUtra-693 he bhagavaMta !
kyA usameM rahakara isa guruvAsa kA sevana hotA hai ? he gautama ! hA, kisI
sAdha yakInana usameM rahakara gurukula vAsa sevana karate haiM aura kucha aise
bhI hote haiM ki jo vaise gaccha meM vAsa na kare  /  he bhagavaM kisa kAraNa se
kahA jAtA hai ki koI vAsa kare aura koI vAsa nahIM karate? he gautama ! eka AtmA
AjJA kA ArAdhaka hai aura eka AjJA kA virAdhaka hai  /  jo guru kI AjJA meM rahA
hai vo-samyagdarzana-jJAna cAritra kA ArAdhaka hai, aura vo he gautama ! atyaMta
jJAnI kaIM prakAra ke mokSamArga meM udyama karanevAle haiM, jo guru kI AjJA ke
anusAra nahIM calatA, AjJA kI virAdhanA karatA hai, ve anantAnubandhI krodha,
mAyA, mAna, lobhavAle cAra kaSAya yukta hote hai, ve rAga, dveSa, moha aura
mithyAtva ke pU~javAle hote haiM, jo gahare rAga, dveSa, moha mithyAtva ke
r3hagavAle hote haiM vo upamA na de sake vaise ghora saMsAra sAgara meM
bhaTakate rahate haiM  /  anuttara ghora saMsAra sAgara meM bhaTakanevAle kI
phira se janma, jarA, mota phira janma, bur3hApA, mauta pAkara kaIM bhava kA
parAvartana karanA par3atA hai| aura phira usameM 84 lAkha yoni meM bAra-bAra
paidA honA par3atA hai| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 69

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  To enter the lineage of a womb,
which is enveloped in the most unbearable, intense, deep, dark darkness, smeared
with blood, fat, pus, vomit, bile, phlegm, foul-smelling, impure flowing, and
filled with lungs, excrement, urine, etc., causing distress, extremely severe,
fierce, and terrifying with wrathful suffering, is indeed sorrow, distress,
disease, and terror. It is grief, anguish, and anxiety, causing unrest. Due to
this unrest, it leads to the non-attainment of desired aspirations. Due to the
non-attainment of desired aspirations, five types of obstructing karma arise.
Where five types of karma arise, there arises the first poverty, which is the
root of all suffering. Where there is poverty, there are many forms of suffering
like disgrace, false accusations, defamation, and stigma. When such suffering
arises, the being becomes shameful, blameworthy, contemptible, causing casteism,
creating obstacles, and defeated by all. Such a being is far removed from right
faith, knowledge, conduct, and other virtues. The human birth becomes futile, or
one completely loses faith in religion.  Therefore, one becomes completely
detached from right faith, knowledge, conduct, and other virtues. One cannot
stop the inflow of karma. One cannot close the door of inflow. One becomes the
abode of great sinful karma. One becomes bound by karma. Being bound, one
becomes subservient like a prisoner in a jail, trapped in the web of all
inauspiciousness and misfortune. It is very difficult to escape from this, as
one cannot break the knot of harsh, deep, bound, touched, and exhausted karma.
Due to this, one suffers various physical and mental pains in the states of one-
sense, two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, five-sense, hellish, animal, and
human. One has to suffer such misery.  Therefore, O Gautam! It is said that
there are some souls who, while residing in the Gachch of the Gītārt, receive
the benefits of the Guru-kula, but do not receive any benefits. Sutra-694  O
Bhagvant! Are there any Gachch who practice falsehood? O Gautam! Any Gachch who
are ignorant and oppose the teachings are surely engaged in the practice of
falsehood. O Bhagvant! What is the command that makes a Gachch a devotee? O
Gautam! The command of the Gachch is stated as the transfer of the infinite
number of places. In which there is a devotee. Sutra-695  O Bhagvant! In the
transfer of the infinite number of places of the Gachch, is there any transfer
that, even if it repeatedly violates the rules or commands due to negligence,
carelessness, or exception, is still considered a devotee? O Gautam! Surely,
that is not a devotee. O Bhagvant! Why do you say so? O Gautam! The Tirthankara
performs the pilgrimage, and then the Tirthankara, with four castes, is
established in the Shraman Sangh Gachch. In the Gachch, right faith, knowledge,
and conduct are also established. This right faith, knowledge, and conduct are
worthy of refuge in the highest respect. They are also suitable for the three
special services in the highest service. Anyone who opposes these refuge-worthy,
respectable, and serviceable, in any way, in any place, in any Gachch, is a
destroyer of the right path, a preacher of the wrong path. In the Gachch where
the right path is destroyed and the wrong path is preached, surely there is a
violation of the command. Therefore, O Gautam! It is said that in the infinite
number of places of the Gachch, there is a transfer of rules. Anyone in the
Gachch who violates the rules or commands in one or more places is a violator of
the single command.  Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi
Translation Page 70

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka aura
phira bAra-bAra ati duHsaha ghora gahare kAle aMdhakAravAle, lahU~ se lathapatha
carabI, paru, ulTI, pitta, kapha ke kIcar3avAle, badabUvAle, azuci bahanevAle
garbha kI cAroM ora lIpaTanevAle ora phephar3e, viSThA, pezAba Adi se bhare
aniSTa, udvega karanevAle, ati ghora, caMr3a, raudra duHkha se bhayAnaka aise
garbha kI paramparA meM praveza karanA vAkaI meM duHkha hai, kleza hai, vo roga
aura AtaMka hai, vo zoka, saMtApa aura udvega karanevAle haiM, vo azAnti
karavAnevAle haiM, azAnti karavAnevAle hone se yathAsthiti iSTa manoratha kI
aprApti karavAnevAle haiM, yathAsthiti iSTa manoratha kI prApti na hone se usako
pA~ca taraha ke aMtarAya karma kA udaya hotA hai| jahA~ pA~ca taraha ke karma kA
udaya hotA hai, usameM sarva duHkha ke agrabhUta aisA prathama dAridraya paidA
hotA hai, jise dAridra hotA hai vahA~ apayaza, jhUThe Aropa lagAnA, apakIrti
kalaMka Adi kaIM duHkhoM ke r3haga ikaTThe hote haiM  /  usa taraha ke duHkha kA
yoga ho taba sakala logoM se zarmIdA karanevAle, niMdanIya, garhaNIya,
avarNavAda karavAnevAle, durgaMchA karavAnevAle, sarva se parAbhava pAe vaise
jIvitavAlA hotA hai taba samyagdarzana jJAna cAritra Adi guNa unase kAphI dUra
hote haiM, aura mAnava janma vyartha jAtA hai yA dharma se sarvathA hAra jAtA
hai| to samyagdarzana jJAna cAritra Adi guNa se ati vipramukta hote haiM yAni vo
Azrava dvAra ko roka nahIM sktaa| vo Azrava dvAra ko banda nahIM kara sakatA, vo
kAphI bar3e pApa karma kA nivAsabhUta banatA hai  /  jo kAphI bar3e pApakarma kA
nivAsabhUta banatA hai, vo karma kA baMdhaka banatA hai  /  ba~dhaka huA yAni
kaidakhAne meM kaidI kI taraha parAdhIna hotA hai, yAni sarva akalyANa amaMgala
kI jhAla meM pha~satA hai, yahA~ se chUTanA kAphI muzkila hotA hai kyoMki kaI
karkaza gahare baddha spRSTa nikAcita sevana karma kI graMthi tor3a nahIM
sakate, usa kAraNa se ekendriyapana meM beindriyapana meM, teindriya,
caurindriya, paMcendriyapana meM, nArakI, tiryaMca kumAnavapana Adi meM kaI
taraha ke zArIrika, mAnasika duHkha bhugatane par3ate haiM  /  azAtA bhugatanI
par3atI hai  /  isa kAraNa se he gautama ! aisA kahA jAtA hai kiaisI kucha
AtmAeM hotI hai ki jo vaise gItArtha ke gaccha meM rahakara gurukulavAsa sevana
karate haiM aura kucha sevana nahIM krte| sUtra- 694 he bhagavaMta! mithyAtva ke
AcaraNavAle kucha gaccha hote hai kyA ? he gautama ! jo koI ajJAnI, virAdhanA
karane vAle gaccha ho vo yakInana mithyAtva ke AcaraNa yukta hote haiM  /  he
bhagavaMta ! aisI kauna-sI AjJA hai ki jisameM rahA gaccha ArAdhaka hotA hai ?
he gautama ! saMkhyAtIta sthAnAMtara se gaccha kI AjJA batAI hai| jisameM
ArAdhaka hotA sUtra- 695 he bhagavaMta ! kyA usa saMkhyAtIta gaccha maryAdA ke
sthAnAMtara meM aisA koI sthAnAntara hai ki jo utsarga yA apavAda se kisI bhI
taraha se pramAda doSa se bAra-bAra maryAdA yA AjJA kA ullaMghana kare to bhI
ArAdhaka ho ? gautama ! yakInana vo ArAdhaka nahIM hai  /  he bhagavaMta ! kisa
kAraNa se Apa aisA kahate ho? he gautama ! tIrthaMkara usa tIrtha ko karanevAle
haiM aura phira tIrtha cAra varNavAlA usa zramaNasaMgha gaccha meM pratiSThita
hote haiM  /  gaccha meM bhI samyagdarzana, jJAna, cAritra, pratiSThita hue haiM
/  yaha samyagdarzana jJAna, cAritra parama pUjya meM bhI jyAdA zaraNa karane ke
lAyaka haiM  /  jyAdA sevana karane meM bhI yaha tIna vizeSa sevana ke lie ucita
haiM  /  aise zaraNya, pUjya, sevya, darzanAdika ko jo kisI gaccha meM kisI bhI
sthAna meM kisI bhI taraha virAdhanA kare vo gaccha samyagmArga ko naSTa
karanevAlA, unmArga kI dezanA karanevAlA hotA hai  /  jisa gaccha meM
samyagmArga kA vinAza hotA hai, unmArga kA dezaka hotA hai yakInana AjJA kA
virAdhaka hotA hai  /  isa kAraNa se he gautama ! aisA kahate haiM ki,
saMkhyAtIta gacchameM maryAdA kA sthAnAMtara hotA hai| gaccha meM jo koI kisI
bhI eka yA jyAdA sthAna maryAdA AjJA kA ullaMghana kare vo ekAnta AjJA kA
virAdhaka muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page
70

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth' Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number
Sūtra-696 O Bhagvant! For how long is the Gachch's boundary? For how long should
the Gachch not violate the boundary? O Gautam! As long as the Maha Yashas, Maha
Sattvas, Mahānubhavas are Duppasah Anagar, then for that long, the Gachch's
boundary is to be maintained. That is, until the end of the fifth Āre, the
Gachch boundary should not be violated. Sūtra-697 O Bhagvant! By what signs is
the violation of the boundary indicated? It is said that there is a lot of
Āshātana and the Gachch has entered the wrong path - should this be considered?
O Gautam! One who repeatedly changes Gachch, does not remain stable in one
Gachch, behaves according to their own will, has attachment to bed, bedding, and
other things, has external Prānas that are not subdued, enjoys water with a
mind, is unaware of the five faults of the Maṇḍalī and consumes those faults,
violates the time of all necessary actions, does not perform the necessary
Pratikramṇa, does not perform the necessary actions in the right amount, has
less or more Rajoharaṇa than the prescribed amount, wears the wrong kind of
Pātra, Daṇḍa, Muhpattī, etc., uses the Guru's equipment, contradicts the
Uttarguṇa, acts according to the desires of the householder, acts in their
honor, causes harm to Earth, water, fire, air, plants, Bījakāya, Trasakāya, two,
three, four, five-sensed beings due to carelessness or without reason, does not
see the fault in causing harm, engages in Ārambh Parigraha, does not criticize
in front of the Guru, speaks untruth, wanders around without time, collects
things illegally, gives Pravrajyā without testing, gives a big initiation, does
not teach the ten types of Vinaya Samāchārī, engages in Ṛiddhi, Rasa, Shāta,
Gārava, does not establish the eight types of Mad, four types of Kṣaya,
Mamattvabhāva, Ahankāra, Kaṅkāsa, Klesha, fights, quarrels, storms,
Roudrārtadhyāna, disrespects the elders by saying "Hey, two" with a hand
gesture, becomes lax after a long time, learns Vidya, Mantra, Tantra, Yoga,
Anjana, etc., and then tries to do it alone, does not carry the Yoga of the
Mūlasūtra and the Ganī Padavī, takes refuge in calamities like famine, buys and
consumes cooked food, etc., is ready to get treatment for a small illness by
exaggerating the cause, happily invites such work, sleeps during the day if they
are sick, speaks and imitates with a desire for praise, follows the words and
rituals that come out of the mouth of the Agītartha, carries out many faults,
carries weapons like swords, bows, daggers, arrows, spears, discs, etc., wanders
around by abandoning the Sadhu's attire and wearing other attire, such a Gachch
is considered unstable up to three and a half Koṭi, O Gautam! And other types of
Gachch with signs can be summarized. Sūtra-698 Such a Gachch with great
qualities is recognized in this way - the Guru is like a mother who has
affection for all beings, creatures, and Bhūta Sattvas in the world, then where
is the affection for the Gachch incomplete? And then, to benefit the disciple
and the community in solitude, to give the path of light and the happiness of
the afterlife, such a Gachch gives Āgamānusārī Hitopadeśa. The teachings of the
Guru Mahārāja are superior and better than the attainment of the prosperity of
Devenndra and Narenndra. The Guru Mahārāja teaches with compassion for the
suffering souls of the world, these Bhavyas are suffering a lot from birth, old
age, death, etc. When will they attain the eternal Shiva-Sukha? The Guru
Mahārāja teaches with compassion, but not by becoming defeated by addiction or
trouble. As if the planet has a bad influence, they have become insane, they
have a desire for revenge, as if they will get some benefit from giving this
Hitopadeśa, such greed arises, then O Gautam! The Guru and the disciple do not
cross the ocean of the world, and the relationship of all good and bad deeds
done by others,  Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda
Page 71

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra-
696 he bhagavaMta ! kitane kAla taka gaccha kI maryAdA hai ? kitane kAla taka
gaccha maryAdA kA ullaMghana na kare? he gautama ! jaba taka mahAyazavAle
mahAsattvavAle mahAnubhAva duppasahaaNagAra hoMge taba taka gaccha kI maryAdA
sa~bhAlane ke lie AjJA kI hai| yAni ki pA~cave Are ke anta taka gaccha maryAdA
kA ullaMghana na krnaa| sUtra - 697 he bhagavaMta ! kina nizAnIoM se maryAdA kA
ullaMghana batAyA hai? kAphI AzAtanA batAI hai aura gaccha ne unmArga meM
praveza kiyA hai-aisA mAne ? he gautama ! jo bAra-bAra gaccha badalatA ho, eka
gaccha meM sthira na rahatA ho, apanI marajI ke anusAra vyavahAra karanevAlA,
khATa-pATalA, paTarI Adi mamatA rakhanevAlA, aprAsuka bAhya prANavAle sacitta
jala kA bhoga karanevAle, mAMDalI ke pA~ca doSa se anajAna aura una doSa kA
sevana karanevAle, sarva Avazyaka kriyAoM ke kAla kA ullaMghana karanevAle,
Avazyaka pratikramaNa na karanevAle, kama yA jyAdA Avazyaka karanevAle gaNa ke
pramANa se kama yA jyAdA rajoharaNa, pAtra, daMDa, muhapatti Adi upakaraNa
dhAraNa karanevAle, guru ke upakaraNa kA paribhogI, uttaraguNa kA virAdhaka,
gRhastha kI icchA ke anusAra pravRtti karanevAlA, usake sanmAna meM pravartIta,
pRthvI, pAnI, agni, vAyu, vanaspati, bIjakAya, trasakAya do, tIna, cAra, pA~ca
indriyavAle jIva ko kAraNa se yA kAraNarahita pramAda doSa se saMghaTTana Adi
meM doSa ko na dekhate hue Arambha parigraha meM pravRtti karake, guru ke pAsa
AlocanA na kare, vikathA kare, binA samaya ke kahIM bhI ghumanevAlA, avidhi se
saMgraha karanevAlA, kasauTI kie binA pravrajyA de, bar3I dIkSA de, daza taraha
kI vinaya sAmAcArI na zIkhalAe  /  Rddhi, rasa, zAtA gArava karanevAlA, mati Adi
A~Tha mada, cAra kaSAya, mamattvabhAva, ahaMkAra, kaMkAsa, kleza, jhagar3e,
lar3AI, tuphAna, raudraArtadhyAnayukta sthApana nahIM kiyA, bujurga ko jisane
hAtha se tiraskArayukta he-do' aisA kahanA, dIrghakAla ke bAda loca karanevAle,
vidyA, maMtra, taMtra, yoga, aMjana Adi zIkhakara usameM hI ekAnta koziza
karanevAle, mUlasUtra ke yoga aura gaNI padavI ke yoga vahana na karanevAlA,
akAla Adi ke Alambana grahaNa karake akalpya kharIda kie hue pakAe hue Adi kA
paribhoga karane ke svabhAvavAle, thor3I bImArI huI ho to usakA kAraNa Age
karake cikitsA karavAne ke lie taiyAra ho, vaise kAma ko khuzI se AmaMtrita
kare, jo kisI roga Adi hue ho to dina meM zayana karane ke svabhAvavAle, kuzIla
ke sAtha bolane aura anukaraNa karanevAle, agItArtha ke mukha meM se nIkale kaIM
doSa pravartAnevAle vacana aura anuSThAna ko anusarane ke svabhAvavAle,
talavAra, dhanuSa, khaDga, tIra, bhAlA, cakra Adi zastra grahaNa karake calane
ke svabhAvavAle, sAdhu veza chor3akara anya veza dhAraNa karake bhaTakanevAle,
isa taraha sAr3he tIna pada koTi taka he gautama ! gaccha ko asaMsthita kahanA
aura dUsare kaI taraha ke liMgavAloM nizAnIvAle gaccha ko saMkSepa se kaha
sakate haiN| sUtra-698 isa taraha ke bar3e guNavAle gaccha pahacAnanA vo isa
prakAra- guru to sarva jagata ke jIva, prANI, bhUta sattva ke lie vAtsalya bhAva
rakhanevAlI mA~ samAna ho, phira gaccha ke lie vAtsalya kI bAta kahA~ adhUrI hai
? aura phira ziSya aura samudAya ke ekAnta meM hita karanA, pramANavAle, pathya
Aloka aura paraloka ke sukha ko denevAle aise AgamAnusArI hitopadeza ko denevAle
hote haiM  /  devendra aura narendra kI samRddhi kI prApti se bhI zreSTha aura
uttama guru mahArAja kA upadeza hai  /  guru mahArAja saMsAra ke duHkhI AtmA kI
bhAva anukaMpA se janma, jarA, maraNa Adi duHkha se yaha bhavya jIva kAphI
duHkha bhugata rahe haiM  /  vo kaba zAzvata kA ziva-sukha pAeMge aisA
karuNApUrvaka guru mahArAja upadeza de lekina vyasana yA saMkaTa se parAbhavita
banakara nahIM  /  jaise ki graha kA valagaNa lagA ho, unmatta huA ho, kisI
taraha ke badale kI AzA se jaise ki isa hitopadeza dene se muje kucha phAyadA
hogA-aisI lAlaca paidA ho, to he gautama ! guru ziSya kI nizrA meM saMsAra kA
pAra nahIM pAte aura dUsaroM ne kie hue sarva zubhAzubha karma ke rizte muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 71

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Study/Purpose/Sutra Number Aagam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' does
not exist for anyone. Sutra - 699-700 So, O Gautam! If such circumstances arise,
and there are steadfast, virtuous, and highly qualified Gurus, who repeatedly
say things like, "Put your finger in the mouth of this serpent and tell me its
size," or "How many teeth are in its jaw? Count them and tell me," then they
should act accordingly. They are the ones who know the work. Sutra-701-702 Those
who know the Aagam, even if they say "white crow," should trust the Acharya's
words. There will be a reason for such a statement. Those who accept the Guru's
words with a happy and receptive mind, find them as beneficial as a medicinal
drink. Sutra-703 Bhavyas, who are blessed with the fruits of their past good
deeds, become recipients of knowledge and other forms of wealth. Those who are
destined for future well-being, worship the Guru like a deity. Sutra - 704-706
There are countless Acharyas, who provide millions of comforts and liberate from
hundreds of sorrows. Keshi Gandhar and the Pradesh Raja are prominent examples.
The Pradesh Raja had prepared himself for hell, but due to the influence of the
Acharya, he attained a divine chariot. Acharyas are virtuous, beautiful, sweet-
spoken, and explain cause, effect, and analogies. They inspire their disciples
by making their hearts happy with such words. Sutra - 707-708 There are 55
crore, 55 lakh, 55 thousand, 5 hundred, and 55 crore Acharyas. Among them, there
are those who are highly qualified and possess a multitude of virtues, who are
like Tirthankaras in their excellence and are true Guru-Acharyas. Sutra- 709
Those, O Gautam! are like the words of a deity. Like the sun, other Acharyas
should be worshipped with the same devotion as the twenty-four Tirthankaras.
Sutra - 710 To attain the position of an Acharya, one must study the twelve-fold
scripture. However, I will now summarize it in essence. It is as follows: Sutra
- 711-712 Muni, Sangha, Tirth, Gan, Pravachan, Mokshamarg - these are words that
convey the same meaning. Darshan, Gyan, Charitra, Ghor, Ugra Tap - these are all
synonyms for Gachch. One should know that a Gachch where the Guru inspires the
disciple with Sarana, etc., with attachment, aversion, or ill intentions, or
where they intimidate the disciple, is not a true Gachch, O Gautam! Sutra -
713-720 Those who reside in such a Gachch, experience great purification. They
are freed from the faults of Sarana, Vayana, Choyana, etc. Those who follow the
Guru's mind, are extremely humble, conquer their senses, are patient, steadfast,
not greedy, not arrogant, do not speak falsehoods, and are forgiving. They are
like the senses... Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Aagam Sutra - Hindi
Translation Page 72

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' kisI ko
nahIM hote| sUtra - 699-700 to he gautama ! yahA~ isa taraha ke hAlAta hone se
yadi dRr3ha cAritravAle gItArtha bar3e guNa se yukta aise guru hoM aura vo bAra-
bAra isa prakAra vacana kahe ki isa sarpa ke mukha meM UMgalI DAlakara usakA
nApa batAe yA usake cokaThe meM kitane dA~ta haiM ? vo ginakara kahe to usI ke
anusAra hI kare vo hI kArya ko jAnate haiM  /  sUtra-701-702 Agama ke jJAtA
kabhI bhI zveta kauA kahe to bhI AcArya jo kahe usa prakAra bharosA karanA  /
aisA kahene meM bhI kucha kAraNa hogA  /  jo koi prasanna gamanavAle bhAva se
guru ne batAyA huA vacana grahaNa karate haiM, vo use pIne ke auSadha kI taraha
sukhAkArI hotI hai  /  sUtra-703 pUrva kie hue puNya ke udayavAle bhavya sattva
jJAnAdika lakSmI ke bhAjana banate haiM  /  bhAvi meM jisakA kalyANa honA hai vo
devatA kI taraha guru kI paryupAsanA karate haiN| sUtra - 704-706 kaIM lAkha
pramANa sukha denevAle, seMkar3o duHkha se mukta karanevAle, AcArya bhagavaMta
haiM, usa ke prakaTa dRSTAnta rUpa se kezI gaNadhara aura pradezI rAjA haiM  /
pradezI rAjA ne naraka gamana kI pUrI taiyArI kara dI thI  /  lekina AcArya ke
prabhAva se deva vimAna prApta kiyA  /  AcArya bhagavaMta dharmamativAle,
suMdara, madhura, kAraNa, kArya, upamA sahita isa prakAra ke vacana ke dvArA,
ziSya ke hRdaya ko prasanna karate-karate preraNA dete haiN| sUtra - 707-708
pacapana kror3a, pacapana lAkha, pacapana hajAra pA~ca so pacapana kroDa saMkhyA
pramANa yahA~ AcArya haiM usameM se bar3e guNavAle guNasamUha yukta aise hote
haiM ki jo sarva taraha ke uttama bhedoM dvArA tIrthaMkara samAna guru-AcArya
hote haiM  /  sUtra- 709 vo bhI he gautama ! devatA ke vacana samAna hai  /  usa
sUrya samAna anya AcArya kI bhI caubIsa tIrthaMkara kI ArAdhanA samAna ArAdhanA
karanI caahie| sUtra - 710 isa AcArya pada ke lie dvAdazAMga kA zruta par3hanA
par3atA hai  /  tathApi aba yaha bAta saMkSepa meM sAra ke rUpa meM karatA hU~
vo Isa prakAra haisUtra - 711-712 muni, saMgha, tIrtha, gaNa, pravacana,
mokSamArga yaha samAna artha kahanevAle zabda haiM  /  darzana, jJAna, cAritra,
ghora, ugra tapa yaha saba gaccha ke paryAya nAma jAnanA, jisa gaccha meM guru,
rAga, dveSa yA azubha Azaya se ziSya ko sAraNAdika preraNA dete ho, dhamakate ho
to he gautama ! vo gaccha nahIM hai| sUtra - 713-720 mahAnubhAga aise gaccha meM
gurukulavAsa karanevAle sAdhuoM ko kAphI nirjarA hotI hai  /  aura sAraNA,
vAyaNA, coyaNA Adi se doSa kI nivRtti hotI hai  /  guru ke mana ko
anusaranevAle, atizaya vinIta, pariSaha jItanevAle, dhairya rakhanevAle, stabdha
na honevAle, lubdha na honevAle, gArava na karanevAle, vikathA na karanevAle,
kSamA rakhanevAle, indriya muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-
hindI anuvAda Page 72

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  Those who suppress the
study/purpose/sutra number, who are content, who protect the six kayas, who are
immersed in the path of detachment, who consume the ten types of Samachari, who
perform the necessary, who strive in restraint, who are humiliated hundreds of
times with harsh, severe, rough, unpleasant, wicked, cruel words. Even if such
behavior is done, those who do not become angry, those who do not slander, those
who do not defame or do wrong. Even if their throat is choked, they do not
behave in such a way as to disrespect the discourse. Those who are constantly
immersed in self-study and meditation, those who have bodies worn out by severe
penance and walking, from whom anger, pride, and delusion have gone, and who
have completely renounced attachment and hatred from afar, who are skilled in
humility and courtesy, who are skilled in speaking sixteen types of words with
purity, who speak faultless words, who are of a nature not to speak much, who do
not speak repeatedly, who are submissive, who answer 'I wish' even if the Guru
has spoken harsh, difficult, rough, cruel, unpleasant words with or without
reason, such qualities are found in the disciple in the Gachch.
**Sutra-721-723**  Completely abandoning the feeling of possessiveness in places
of travel and journeys, those who are detached even from their own body, who
take food only for the sake of maintaining restraint, and that food is also free
from 42 defects, not for the nourishment of the senses through the form of the
body, even while eating, they do not become proud of getting suitable food for
themselves, but only for the sake of bearing the restraint, for the sake of
following Iryasamiti, for the sake of Vyavachch, they eat. They eat because they
cannot bear the pain of hunger, for the sake of following Iryasamiti, for the
sake of Padilhan etc. restraint.  **Sutra-724-725**  The disciple who has great
effort in acquiring and retaining unprecedented knowledge, who knows the Sutra,
the meaning, and both, and who always strives, the eight of Jnanaachar, the
eight of Darshanachar, the eight of Charitraachar (twelve of Tapaachar), and the
thirty-six of Viryaachar, who strives with great concentration of mind, speech,
and body without hiding strength and vigor in them, such a disciple is in the
Gachch.  **Sutra-726**  Even if the Guru Maharaj reprimands hundreds of times
with harsh, severe, cruel words, the disciple who does not respond in the Gachch
is called a Gachch.  **Sutra-727**  Even if one has attained unimaginable gains
and extraordinary powers due to the effect of penance, the disciple who does not
disrespect the Guru in the Gachch is called a Gachch.  **Sutra-728**  Even if a
disciple has once defeated a group of difficult hypocrites, earned a group of
glories, and does not disrespect the Guru in the Gachch, he is called a Gachch.
**Sutra-729**  Those who speak in such a way that the letters do not mix with
each other, those who do not speak in such a way that the letters are crooked,
those who have pure words and letters, those who have found the twelve parts of
the Sutra and Shrutagyan with humility and respect, are the Gachch.  **Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation** **Page 73**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka kA damana
karanevAle, saMtoSa rakhanevAle, cha kAya kA rakSaNa karanevAle, vairAga ke
mArga meM lIna, daza taraha kI samAcArI kA sevana karanevAle, Avazyaka ko
AcaranevAle, saMyama meM udyama karanevAle, seMkar3oM bAra kaThora, kar3e,
karkaza aniSTa duSTa niSThura vacana se apamAna kiyA jAe  /  agara vaisA
vyavahAra kiyA jAe to bhI jo roSAyamAna nahIM hote, jo apakIrti karanevAle,
apayaza karanevAle yA akArya karanevAle nahIM hote  /  gale meM jAna aTaka jAe
to bhI pravacana kI apabhrAjanA ho vaisA vyavahAra nahIM karate  /  niraMtara
svAdhyAya aura dhyAna meM lIna manavAle, ghora tapa aura caraNa se zoSe hue
zarIravAle, jisameM se krodha, mAna, mAyA cale gae haiM aura rAga, dveSa
jinhoMne dUra se sarvathA tyAga kiyA hai vinayopacAra karane meM kuzala, solaha
taraha ke vacana zuddhipUrvaka bolane meM kuzala, niravadya vacana bolanevAle
jyAdA na bolane ke svabhAvavAlA, bAra-bAra na bolanevAle, guru ne sakAraNa yA
binA kAraNa kaThora, kaThina, karkaza, niSThura, aniSTa zabda kahe ho taba bhI
tahatti' karanevAlA 'icchaM' uttara denevAlA isa taraha ke guNavAle jo gaccha
meM ziSya hoM use gaccha kahate haiN| sUtra-721-723 bhramaNasthAna-yAtrAdi meM
mamatvabhAva kA sarvathA tyAga karake, apane zarIra ke lie bhI niHspRha
bhAvavAlI, saMyama ke nirvAha taka kevala AhAra grahaNa karanevAle, vo AhAra bhI
42 doSa rahita ho, zarIra ke rUpaka se indriya ke rasa ke poSaNa ke lie nahIM,
bhojana karate-karate bhI anukUla AhAra khuda ko milane ke badale abhimAna na
karanevAlA ho, kevala saMyamabhoga vahana karane ke lie, iryAsamiti ke pAlana ke
lie, vaiyAvacca ke lie, AhAra karanevAlA hotA hai  /  kSudhA-vedanA na saha
sake, iryAsamiti pAlana ke lie, paDilehaNAdika saMyama ke lie, AhAra grahaNa
karanevAlA hotA hai| sUtra- 724-725 _ apUrva jJAna grahaNa karane ke lie,
dhAraNA karane meM ati udyama karanevAle ziSya jisameM ho, sUtra, artha aura
ubhaya ko jo jAnate haiM aura vo hamezA udyama karate haiM, jJAnAcAra ke A~Tha,
darzanAcAra ke A~Tha, cAritrAcAra ke A~Tha (tapAcAra ke bAraha) aura vIryAcAra
ke chattIsa AcAra, usameM bala aura vIrya chipAe binA aglAni se kAphI ekAgra
mana, vacana, kAyA ke yoga se udyama karanevAlA ho  /  isa taraha ke ziSya
jisameM ho vo gaccha haiN| sUtra - 726 guru mahArAja kaThora, kar3I, niSThura
vANI se seMkar3oM bAra ThapakA de to bhI ziSya jisa gaccha meM pratyuttara na de
to use gaccha kahate haiN| sUtra- 727 tapa prabhAva se acintya paidA huI labdhi
aura atizayavAlI Rddhi pAI ho to bhI jisa gaccha meM guru kI avahelanA ziSya na
kare use gaccha kahate haiN| sUtra - 728 eka bAra kaThina pAkhaMDIoM ke sAtha
vAda karake vijaya prApta kiyA ho, yaza samUha upArjana kiyA ho aise ziSya bhI
jisa gaccha meM guru kI helanA-avahelanA nahIM karatA use gaccha kahate haiN|
sUtra- 729 jisameM askhalita, eka duje meM akSara na mila jAe usa taraha
Ar3e-Ter3he akSara jIsameM bole na jAe vaise akSaravAle, pada aura akSara se
vizuddha, vinaya aura upadhAna pUrvaka pAe hue bAraha aMga ke sUtra aura
zrutajJAna jisameM pAe jAte hoM vo gaccha haiN| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 73

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' **Study/Purpose/Sutra Number**
Sutra-730 _A disciple who is devoted to the feet of the Guru, who is pleased
with the group, and who has attained the Alava, is called a Gachchha if he
studies with concentration._ Sutra-731 _A Gachchha is a group that includes the
Glana, Navadishita, Balaka, etc., and is conducted in accordance with the ten
types of procedures, where the Guru's instructions are being followed._
Sutra-732, 733 _A Gachchha is where the ten types of Samachari are not broken,
where the community of the Bhavy Sattv Jiva attains Siddhi and Bodhi._ 1.
Ichchhakar, 2. Micchakar, 3. Tathakar, 4. Avashyiki, 5. Naishediki, 6.
Prichchha, 7. Pratiprichchha, 8. Chhandana, 9. Nimantana, 10. Upasampada, these
ten types of Samachari should be performed when they are to be performed, that
is a Gachchha._ Sutra-734 _A Gachchha is where the younger Sadhus respect the
elders, where the difference between the young and the old is known, and where
even a single day's seniority in the Diksha-Paryaya is not disregarded._
Sutra-735 _Even if there is a terrible famine, even if the opportunity to give
up one's life arises, even then, O Gautam! a Gachchha is where the Sadhvi does
not use the things that she has brought with her._ Sutra-736 _A Gachchha is
where even the elder Sthavira, whose teeth have fallen out, does not speak to
the Sadhvi, and where the body or limbs of a woman are not observed._ Sutra-737
_A Gachchha is where things are not kept for the sake of beauty, proximity, or
enjoyment, where food, etc., is not prepared and brought before them, and where
the Sadhus are afraid of the impurities of food, and wash their plates
repeatedly, and are afraid of being contaminated, and where the Sadhus are
useful._ Sutra-738 _A Gachchha is where even if there is a Muni who is afflicted
by Kamadeva, who has five limbs that are working to inflame his passions, who
has a difficult life, and who has great pride, even if the celestial nymph
Tilottama stands before him, he does not look at her._ Sutra-739 _A Gachchha is
where the Guru teaches a disciple who is corrupt in conduct, but who has
attained a lot, by giving him instructions according to the rules._
Sutra-740-741 _A Gachchha is where the Muni is humble, steady in nature, has
given up laughter and haste, does not speak falsely, does not do anything
unexpected, and investigates the eight types of Gochari, i.e., goes to endure
them, and where the Devas, seeing the difficult Abhigraha, the Prāyaśchitta, and
the conduct of the Munis, are amazed._ Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith)
Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 74

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra-730
_ guru ke caraNa kI bhakti samUha se aura usakI prasannatA se jinhoMne AlAvA ko
prApta kie hai aise suziSya ekAgramana se jisameM adhyayana karatA ho use gaccha
kahate haiN| sUtra-731 glAna, navadIkSita, bAlaka Adi se yukta gaccha kI daza
taraha kI vidhipUrvaka jisameM guru kI AjJA se vaiyAvacca ho rahI ho use gaccha
kahate haiN| sUtra - 732, 733 jisameM daza taraha kI sAmAcArI khaMDIta nahIM
hotI, jisameM rahe bhavya sattva ke jIva kA samudAya siddhi pAtA hai, bodha pAtA
hai vo gaccha hai| 1. icchAkAra, 2. micchAkAra, 3. tathAkAra, 4. AvazyikI, 5.
naiSedhikI, 6. pRcchA, 7. pratipRcchA, 8. chaMdanA, 9. nimaMtraNA, 10.
upasaMpadA, yaha daza taraha kI samAcArI jisa samaya karanI ho taba kare vo
gaccha haiN| sUtra - 734 jisameM choTe sAdhu bar3oM kA vinaya kare, choTe-bar3e
kA pharka mAlUma ho  /  eka dina bhI jo dIkSA-paryAya meM bar3A ho  /  usakI
avagaNanA na ho vo gaccha hai| sUtra - 735 cAhe kaisA bhI bhayAnaka akAla ho,
prANa parityAga karanA par3e vaisA avasara prApta ho to bhI sahasAtkAre he
gautama ! sAdhvIne vahorakara lAI huI cIja istamAla na kare use gaccha kahate
haiN| sUtra - 736 jisake dA~ta gira gae hoM vaise bar3he sthavira bhI sAdhvI ke
sAtha bAta nahIM karate  /  strI ke aMga yA upAMga kA nirIkSaNa jisameM nahIM
kiyA jAtA use gaccha kahate haiN| sUtra-737 jisa gaccha meM rUpa sannidhi-
upabhoga ke lie sthApita cIja rakhI nahIM jAtI, taiyAra kie gae bhojanAdika,
sAmane lAkara AhArAdi na grahaNa kare aura pUtikarma doSavAle AhAra se
bhayabhIta, pAtarA bAra-bAra dhone par3eMge aise bhaya se, doSa lagane ke bhaya
se, upayogavaMta sAdhu jIsameM ho vo gaccha hai| sUtra-738 jisameM pA~ca aMga
jisa ke kAma pradipta karanevAle haiM, durjaya jIvana khIlA hai, bar3A ahaMkAra
hai aise kAmadeva se pIr3ita muni ho to bhI sAmane tilottamA devAMganA Akara
khar3I rahe to bhI sAmane najara nahIM karatA vo gcch| sUtra - 739 kAphI
labdhivAle aise zIlabhraSTa ziSya ko jisa gaccha meM guru vidhi se vacana
kahakara zikSA kare vo gaccha  /  sUtra - 740-741 namra hokara sthira
svabhAvavAlA ha~sI aura jalda gati ko chor3akara, vikathA na karanevAlA,
aghaTita kArya na karanevAlA, A~Tha taraha kI gocarI kI gaveSaNA kare yAni
vahorane ke lie jAe  /  jisameM manioM taraha ke duSkara abhigraha, prAyazcit
AcaraNa karate dekhakara devendra ke citta camatkAra pAe vo gaccha  /  muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 74

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' **Study/Purpose/Sutra Number
Sutra-742** The Gachchha where the mutual salutation ritual between the young
and old is maintained, where the rules of the Mandalika like Pratikramana are
known expertly, where there are gurus with unblemished conduct, and where there
are sadhus who are constantly striving to perform intense tapasya. **Sutra-743**
The Gachchha where the eight karmas, which are worshipped by the celestial
beings, are absent, and where there is no deviation from the commands of the
Tirthankara Bhagavants like Rishabhadeva. **Sutra-744** O Gautam! The
Tirthankara Bhagavants who establish the Tirtha and then their rule, O Gautam!
consider that as the Sangha. And within the Sangha, there are Gachchhas, and
within the Gachchhas, there are the Tirthas of knowledge, vision, and conduct.
**Sutra-745** Without right vision, there cannot be knowledge. If there is
knowledge, then vision is present everywhere. Vision is the worship of conduct
in knowledge. This means whether there is conduct or not. **Sutra-746** A knower
without vision or conduct wanders throughout the world. But one who has conduct
is definitely liberated, there is no doubt about it. **Sutra-747** Knowledge is
recognized by illuminating the object. Tapasya purifies the soul from karma.
Restraint brings about the pure inclination of mind, speech, and body. If even
one of these three is lacking, there is no liberation. **Sutra-748** If those
three, knowledge, etc., are in their own form, then there are ten types of Yati
Dharma like forgiveness, etc. The Gachchha is where one practices each of those
aspects. **Sutra-749** The Gachchha where they do not mentally grieve even at
the time of death for the earth, water, fire, air, plants, and various types of
Trasa beings. **Sutra-750** The Gachchha where even a drop of water with
consciousness, even if the throat is parched, even if there is intense thirst,
even if it is the time of death, the Muni does not desire even a drop of water
with consciousness. **Sutra-751** The Gachchha where even if there is a disease
like a boil, diarrhea, vomiting, or any other strange death-related illness,
they do not encourage anyone to create fire. **Sutra-752** The Gachchha where
they abandon such Aryas like Acharyas, etc., who possess knowledge, from a
distance of thirteen hands. **Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-
Hindi Translation** Page 75

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra-
742 jisa gaccha meM choTe-bar3e kA ApasI vaMdanavidhi sa~bhAlA jAtA ho,
pratikramaNa Adi maMDalI ke vidhAna ko nipuNa rUpase jAnanevAle ho  /  askhalita
zIlavAle guru ho, jisameM ugra tapa karane meM nitya udyamI sAdhu ho vo gcch|
sUtra-743 jisameM surendra-pujIta A~Tha karma rahita, RSabhAdika tIrthaMkara
bhagavaMta kI AjJA kA skhalana nahIM kiyA jAtA vo gcch| sUtra - 744 he gautama !
tIrtha kI sthApanA karanevAle tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta aura phira unakA zAsana,
use he gautama ! saMgha mAnanA  /  aura saMgha meM rahe gaccha, gaccha meM rahe
jJAna-darzana aura cAritra tIrtha haiN| sUtra-745 samyagdarzana binA jJAna nahIM
ho sakatA  /  jJAna hai to darzana sarvatra hotA hai  /  darzana jJAna meM
cAritra kI bhajanA hotI hai  /  yAni cAritra ho yA na bhI ho  /  sUtra - 746
darzana yA cAritrarahita jJAnI pUre saMsAra meM ghUmatA hai  /  lekina jo
cAritrayukta ho vo yakInana siddhi pAtA hai usameM saMdeha nhiiN| sUtra-747
jJAna padArtha ko prakAzita karake pahacAne jAtA hai  /  tapa AtmA ko karma se
zuddha karanevAlA hotA hai  /  saMyama mana, vacana, kAyA kI zuddha pravRtti
karavAnevAlA hotA hai  /  tIna meM se eka kI bhI nyUnatA ho to mokSa nahIM
hotaa| sUtra - 748 usa jJAnAdi tripuTI ke apane aMga svarUpa ho to kSamA Adi
daza taraha ke yati dharma haiM  /  usameM se eka-eka pada jisameM AcaraNa kiyA
jAe vo gaccha  /  sUtra-749 jisameM pRthvI, pAnI, agni, vAyu, vanaspati aura
taraha-taraha ke trasa jIva ko maraNa ke avasara para bhI jo mana se pIr3ita
nahIM karate vo gcch| sUtra- 750 jisameM sacitta jala kI eka bUMda bhI garmI meM
cAhe kaisA bhI galA sUkha rahA ho, tIvra tRSA lagI ho, marane kA samaya ho to
bhI muni sacitta pAnI kI bUMda ko bhI na cAhe  /  sUtra-751 jisa gaccha meM
zUlaroga, dasta, ulTI yA dUsare kisI taraha ke vicitra maraNAMta bimArI paidA
hotI ho to bhI agni prakaTa karane ke lie kisI ko preraNA nahIM dete vo gaccha
/  sUtra-752 jisa gaccha meM jJAna dhAraNa karanevAle aise AcAryAdika Arya ko
teraha hAtha dUra se tyAga karate haiM  /  muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 75

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  **Study/Purpose/Sutra Number**
That Gachcha where every woman, like the Shrutadevata, is renounced from the
mind. Sutra - 753-754  **Sutra - 755** That Gachcha where there is no indulgence
in sexual pleasure, playful laughter, amorous feelings, or flattery, where there
is no running, no crossing of ditches, no use of abusive language, and where
even if a reason arises, the touch of a woman's hand is avoided like a poisonous
snake, a blazing fire, or poison, by keeping the cloth in between.  **Sutra -
766** O Gautam! If an Arihant, who is a wearer of the robe, touches a woman's
hand, then surely know him to be outside the Mulaguna.  **Sutra - 757** That
Gachcha from which those who are born in a noble family, are virtuous, and have
attained knowledge, but who have fallen from the Mulaguna, should be expelled.
**Sutra - 758** That Gachcha where there is no consumption of gold, silver,
wealth, grain, bronze, or other metals, cushions, beds, seats, or other things
fit for household use.  **Sutra - 759** That Gachcha where even a moment, or the
time of a blink of an eye, is not spent touching foreign gold that has been
offered for some reason.  **Sutra - 760** That Gachcha where there are seven
thousand places of restraint for the sake of the difficult observance of the vow
of celibacy by the fickle-minded Arya.  **Sutra - 761** O Gautam! What is the
use of such a Gachcha where the Arya, in excessive anger, speaks harshly to the
Sadhu in response?  **Sutra - 762-763** O Gautam! Why is it called a Gachcha
where behavior is according to the words of the Arya, who has a fickle mind with
many kinds of options and fluctuations?  **Sutra - 764-766** O Gautam! Where a
single Sadhu, alone with a Sadhvi, walks outside, a hundred hands above, what
kind of restraint is there in that Gachcha? O Gautam! How can that Gachcha be
considered where there is repeated conversation, discourse, and other
interactions with the Sadhvi, apart from religious instruction?  **Sutra -
764-766** O Bhagvant! Sadhus do not have irregular or regular conduct, then what
is the truth of those who practice constant residence or fixed residence due to
some reason? O Gautam! One who is free from the sense of "mine", is selfless,
and strives in knowledge, vision, and conduct, is completely free from all
beginnings, and is free from the sense of "mine" even in his own body.  **Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation** Page 76

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
zrutadevatA kI taraha hara eka strI kA mana se tyAga kare vo gaccha  /  sUtra -
753-754 ratikrIr3A, hA~syakrIr3A, kaMdarpa, nAthavAda jahA~ nahIM kiyA jAtA,
daur3anA, gaDDhe kA ullaMghana karanA, mammAcaccAvAle apazabda jisameM nahIM
bole jAte, jisameM kAraNa paidA ho to bhI vastra kA AMtarA rakhakara strI ke
hAtha kA sparza bhI dRSTiviSa sarpa yA pradipta agni aura jhahara kI taraha
varjana kiyA jAtA ho vo gaccha  /  sUtra-755 liMga yAni veza dhAraNa karanevAlA
yA arihaMta khuda bhI strI ke hAtha ko chu le to he gautama ! use yakInana
mUlaguNa se bAhara jAnanA  /  sUtra - 756 uttama kula meM paidA honevAlA aura
guNa sampanna, labdhiyukta ho lekina jinheM mUlaguNa meM skhalanA hotI ho unako
jisameM se nIkAlA jAe vo gaccha  /  sUtra-757 jisameM hiraNya, suvarNa, dhana,
dhAnya, kA~sa Adi dhAtu, gaddI zayana, Asana Adi gRhastha ke istamAla karane ke
lAyaka cIjoM kA upabhoga nahIM hotA vo gaccha  /  sUtra-758 jisameM kisI kAraNa
se samarpaNa kiyA ho aisA parAyA suvarNa AyA ho to palabhara yA A~kha ke
ardhanimeSa samaya jitane pala bhI jisako chUA nahIM jAtA vo gaccha  /  sUtra -
759 capala cittavAlI AryA ke durdhara brahmacarya vratapAlana ke lie sA~ta
hajAra parihAra sthAnaka jahA~ hai vo gaccha  /  sUtra-760 jisameM uttara-
pratyuttara se AryA sAdhu ke sAtha ati krodha pAkara pralApa karatI ho to he
gautama ! vaise gaccha kA kyA kAma ? sUtra-761 he gautama ! jahA~ kaI taraha ke
vikalpa ke kallola aura caMcala manavAlI AryA ke vacana ke anusAra vyavahAra
kiyA jAe use gaccha kyoM kahate haiM ? sUtra - 762-763 jahA~ eka aMgavAlA kevala
akelA sAdhu, sAdhvI ke sAtha bAhara eka sau hAtha Upara Age cale, he gautama !
usa gaccha meM kauna-sI maryAdA ? he gautama ! jahA~ dharmopadeza ke sivA sAdhvI
ke sAtha AlApa-saMlApa bAra-bAra vArtAlApa Adi vyavahAra vartatA ho usa gaccha
ko kaisA ginanA? sUtra - 764-766 he bhagavaMta ! sAdhuoM ko aniyata vihAra yA
niyata vihAra nahIM hote, to phira kAraNa se nityavAsa, sthiravAsa jo sevana
kare usakI kyA hakIkata samaje? he gautama ! mamatvabhAva rahita hokara
niraMhakArapana se jJAna, darzana, cAritra meM udyama karanevAlA ho, samagra
Arambha se sarvathA mukta aura apane deha para bhI mamatvabhAva rahita ho, muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 76

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  **Study/Purpose/Sutra Number**
If a person practices the conduct of a Muni in a single area for a hundred
years, they are an Aradhak. **Sutra-767** A woman who places the Patra (bowl) in
the assembly of Sadhus during meals is a Stri Rajya, but not a Gachchha.
**Sutra-768** A Gachchha where a Sadhvi has to travel a hundred hands
(approximately 50 meters) upwards at night, should have at least four Sadhvis,
and ideally ten. If Sadhvis do not travel like this, it is not a Gachchha.
**Sutra-769-770** If there are less than four Sadhvis in a Gachchha, even with
exceptions and reasons, and they travel in a single village, what kind of
Gachchha is it? O Gautam! If there are less than eight Sadhus in a Gachchha who
travel with Sadhvis, even with exceptions, where is the Maryada (discipline) in
that Gachchha? **Sutra-771** If there is arousing of the Chakshur Agnagni (fire
of the eye) with 63 Bhedas (divisions), and the Sadhu-Sadhvi look at each other
in that way, what Maryada is maintained for the Gachchha? **Sutra-772** If a
Sadhu uses the Patra, Danda (staff), and other equipment belonging to an Arya, O
Gautam! How can it be called a Gachchha? **Sutra-773, 774** If a Sadhvi obtains
rare medicines that increase strength, intelligence, and nourish the body, and a
Sadhu uses them, how can there be Maryada in that Gachchha? Shashka, Bhask, even
hearing the movement of sister Sukumalik, do not trust a Shreyarthi (aspirant)
or a religious person easily (regarding Mohaniya Karma). **Sutra-775** A
Gachchha is not a Gachchha if anyone other than the Acharya and the elder of the
Gachchha with strong character and a group of qualities gives orders to a Sadhu
or Sadhvi. **Sutra-776** Just as one cannot recognize the sound of thunder, the
wind produced in the belly of a running horse called Kuhuka, or lightning,
similarly, one cannot recognize the fickle and deep mind of an Arya. If they are
not prevented from doing wrong by the Gachchha Nayak, it is a Stri Rajya but not
a Gachchha. **Sutra-777** A Gachchha where a Sadhvi works who is like the Shruta
Devi, who has received direct knowledge from Indra, who is endowed with
Tapollabdhi (spiritual attainment), is a Stri Rajya but not a Gachchha.  Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 77

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka munipana
ke AcAra kA AcaraNa karake eka kSetra meM bhI gItArtha sau sAla taka rahe to vo
ArAdhaka haiN| sUtra-767 jisameM bhojana ke samaya sAdhu kI mAMDalI meM pAtra
sthApana karanevAlI ho to vo strI rAjya hai, lekina vo gaccha nahIM hai|
sUtra-768 jisa gaccha meM rAta ko sau hAtha Upara sAdhvI ko jAnA ho to cAra se
kama nahIM aura utkRSTa se daza  /  aise sAdhvI vicaraNa na kare to vo gaccha
nahIM hai| sUtra-769-770 apavAda se aura kAraNa ho to cAra se kama sAdhvI eka
gAUM bhI jisameM calate ho vo gaccha kisa taraha kA? he gautama! jisa gacchameM
A~Tha se kama sAdhu mArgameM sAdhvI ke sAtha apavAda se bhI cale to usa gaccha
meM maryAdA kahAM sUtra- 771 jisameM 63 bhedavAle cakSurAgAgni kI udIraNA ho usa
taraha se sAdhu-sAdhvI kI ora dRSTi kare to gaccha ke lie kauna-sI maryAdA
sa~bhAlI jAe? sUtra-772 jisameM AryA ke vahore hae pAtrA daMDa Adi taraha-taraha
ke upakaraNa kA sAdhu paribhoga kare he gautama ! use gaccha kaise kaheM? sUtra
- 773, 774 ati durlabha bala-buddhi vRddhi karanevAle zarIra kI puSTi karanevAle
auSadha sAdhvI ne pAe ho aura sAdhu usakA istamAla kare to usa gaccha meM kaise
maryAdA rahe ? zazaka, bhasaka hI bahana sukumAlikA kI gati sunakara zreyArthI
dhArmika puruSa ko sahaja bhI (mohanIyakarma kA) bharosA mata krnaa| sUtra-775
dRr3ha caritravAle guNa samUha aise AcArya aura gaccha ke vaDIla ke sivA jo kisI
sAdhu yA sAdhvI ko hukuma kare to vo gaccha nahIM hai| sUtra - 776 megha
garjanA, daur3ate azva ke udara meM paidA hue vAyu jise kuhuka bolA jAtA hai,
bijalI jaise pahacAna nahIM sakate, usake samAna gUr3ha hRdayavAlI AryA ke
caMcala aura gahare mana ko pahacAna nahIM sakate  /  unako akRtya karate,
gaccha nAyaka kI ora se nivAraNa na kiyA jAe to - vo strI rAjya hai lekina
gaccha nahIM hai  /  sUtra-777 tapolabdhiyukta indra se anusaraNa kI gaI
pratyakSA zrutadevI samAna sAdhvI jisa gaccha meM kArya karatI ho vo strI rAja
hai lekina gaccha nahIM hai| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-
hindI anuvAda Page 77

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'** Study/Purpose/Sutra Number - 778
O Gautama! If there is even a slight lapse in any of the five great vows, three
guptis, five samitis, and ten types of sadhudharma, then it is not a gachchha.
Sutra-779-780 A newly initiated dramak sadhu, who has been initiated for only
one day, is worthy of respect and humility from a chirdikshit arya Chandanbala
sadhvi, who stands in front of him and does not sit on the seat. This is the
humility of all aryas. Even if a sadhvi has been initiated for a hundred years
and a sadhu has been initiated only one day ago, the sadhu is still worthy of
respect from the sadhvi with a heart full of devotion. Sutra-781-784 Those who
are greedy for the things received by sadhus and sadhvis and are dissatisfied
with what they themselves receive, are like the Arnikaputra Acharya, who was
broken by bhikchacharya. He had sent his disciples to a dry region during a
famine, but he himself was unable to perform bhikchacharya due to old age. This
fact was not known to the sinner. And they seek the benefit of the aryas. They
do not accept the qualities that are worthy of being accepted from them. For
example, during a famine, they made the disciples travel to the vihar. They
abandoned their affection for the disciples and stayed there permanently.
Instead of thinking about this, they talk about staying permanently in one area.
There are many objects of attachment in this world. The careless and ignorant
beings see such objects of attachment in the world and act accordingly.
Sutra-785 Where the munis are cursed and harassed by great kshayas, even a lame
man who is sitting well does not get up. Similarly, one whose kshayas are not
aroused is called a gachchha. Sutra-786 A muni who is afraid of the obstacles to
dharma, afraid of the womb of the world, should not arouse the kshayas of other
munis. That is a gachchha. Sutra-787 Many geetarthas who are afraid of the four
types of obstacles to dharma - dana, shila, tapa, and bhavana - and afraid of
bhava, should reside in a gachchha. Sutra-788 A muni who does not become angry
even at those who commit offenses, seeing and recognizing the four types of
beings suffering the results of their karma, is a gachchha. Sutra-789-790 O
Gautama! If there is even one of the five vadhasthanas (chakki-sambila-chulha-
panihari-jhadu) in a gachchha, then one should leave that gachchha and go to
another gachchha of the second type of Voshira. One should not reside in a
gachchha that has vadhasthanas and is bright with hair from the beginning. One
should reside in a gachchha that is bright with the qualities of character.
Sutra-791 One who violates the command of an acharya who is like a prati-malla
and a tirthankara, who is a conqueror of the eight karmas, which are like strong
wrestlers, is a coward, not a virtuous man. Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
(Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 78

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra -
778 he gautama ! pA~ca mahAvrata, tIna gupti, pA~ca samiti, daza taraha kA
sAdhudharma una saba meM se kisI bhI taraha se eka kI bhI skhalanA ho to vo
gaccha nahIM hai  /  sUtra-779-780 eka hI dina ke dIkSita dramaka sAdhu kI
sanmukha ciradIkSita AryA caMdanabAlA sAdhvI khar3I hokara usakA sanmAna vinaya
kare aura Asana para na baiThe vo saba AryA kA vinaya hai  /  sau sAla ke
paryAyavAle dIkSita sAdhvI ho aura sAdhu Aja se eka dina kA dIkSita ho to bhI
bhakti pUrNa hRdayayukta vinaya se sAdhu sAdhvI ko pUjya hai| sUtra-781-784 jo
sAdhu-sAdhvI ke pratilAbhita cIjoM meM gRddhi karanevAle haiM aura khuda
pratilAbhita meM asaMtuSTa haiM  /  bhikSAcaryA se bhagna honevAle aise vo
arNikAputra AcArya kA dRSTAMta Age karate haiM  /  akAla ke samaya ziSyasamudAya
ko sUkhe pradeza meM bheja die the, khuda bur3hApe ke kAraNa se bhikSAcaryA
karane ke lie samartha na the vo bAta vo pApI ko patA nahIM thI  /  aura AryA kA
lAbha DhU~r3hate haiM  /  vo pApI usameM se jo guNa grahaNa karane ke lAyaka hai
use grahaNa nahIM karate  /  jaise ki akAla ke samaya ziSya ko vihAra-pravAsa
karavAyA  /  ziSya para kI mamatA kA tyAga kiyA, vahA~ sthiravAsa kiyA  /  vo
socane kI bajAya eka kSetra meM sthiravAsa rahane kI bAta Age karate haiM  /
isa loka meM kaI paDane ke Alambana bhare haiM, pramAdI ajayaNAvAle jIva loka
meM aisA Alambana dekhate haiM, vaisA karate haiN| sUtra - 785 jahA~ munioM ko
bar3e kaSAya se dhikkAra-parezAna kiyA jAe to bhI jaise acchI taraha se baiThA
huA laMgar3A puruSa ho to vo uThatA nhiiN| usI taraha jIsake kaSAya khar3e nahIM
hote use gaccha kahate haiN| sUtra-786 dharma ke aMtarAya se bhayabhIta, saMsAra
ke garbhAvAsa se Dare hae muni anya muni ko kaSAya kI udIraNA na kare, vo gcch|
sUtra - 787 dAna, zIla, tapa, bhAvanA rUpa cAra taraha ke dharma ke aMtarAya se
aura bhava se bhayabhIta aise kaIM gItArtha jo gaccha meM ho vaise gaccha meM
vAsa karanA caahie| sUtra-788 jisameM cAra gati ke jIva karma ke vipAka
bhugatate dekhakara aura pahacAnakara muni aparAdha karanevAle para bhI krodhita
na ho vo gcch| sUtra- 789-790 he gautama ! jisa gaccha meM pA~ca vadhasthAna
(cakkI-sA~bilA-cUlhA-panihAru-jhADu) meM se eka bhI ho usa gaccha ko trividha se
vosirA ke dUsare gaccha meM cale jAnA, vadhasthAna aura Arambha-se pravRtta aise
ujjavala kezavAle gaccha meM vAsa na karanA, cAritra guNa se ujjvala aise gaccha
meM vAsa karanA  /  sUtra - 791 durjaya A~Tha karmarUpI malla ko jItanevAlA
pratimalla aura tIrthaMkara samAna AcArya kI AjJA kA jo ullaMghana karate haiM
vo kApuruSa hai, lekina satpuruSa nahIM hai| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 78

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, ‘Mahānishīth’ Study/Purpose/Sūtrāṅka Sūtra -
792-793 Those who commit corruption, those who neglect corruption, and those who
remain on the wrong path are the destroyers of the three paths. If the Ācārya
remains on a false path, and creates a model of the wrong path, then surely the
group of Bhavyas will follow that false path, therefore do not even take the
shadow of a wrong-path Ācārya. Sūtra - 794-795 In this world, one should
understand that a being who is suffering is awakened and established on the
path, and he has caused the proclamation of the Amari Padha in the world of
Devas and Asuras. In the past, present, and future, there have been, are, and
will be such great souls whose feet are worthy of being worshipped by the beings
of the world, and whose time is spent in solitary effort to benefit others. O
Gautama! This has happened in the past, from time immemorial. It will also
happen in the future, that the mere remembrance of their names will surely bring
about atonement. Sūtra-796-799 This kind of Gaccha arrangement will continue
until the time of the Duppasah Suri, but anyone who refutes it in the middle of
that time should surely be known as an eternal wanderer. The atonement that is
incurred by the one who destroys the Gaccha arrangement is the same as the
atonement incurred by the one who destroys the perfect, non-troublesome, Siddhi-
pada, which is for the benefit and well-being of all beings in the world.
Therefore, one who has an equal mind towards enemies and friends, who is eager
to benefit others, who desires well-being, and who is himself obedient to the
Ācārya's commands, should not violate the Ācārya's commands. Sūtra-800-803 Many
Ācāryas, attached to the three Garvas, even today cannot attain the true path of
Bodhi, by violating the Gaccha arrangement. Others will also wander in the four
Gati-rupa Bhavas and in the world for countless times, but will not attain
Bodhi. And they will remain in the painful world for a long time. O Gautama!
There is not even a space as small as the tip of a hair in the fourteen-raj-
praman Lokas where this being has not experienced death countless times. There
are eighty-four lakh places where beings are born, and there is not a single
Yoni, O Gautama!, where all beings have not been born countless times.
Sūtra-804-806 A red-hot needle, like fire, is applied to the body, and the pain
that is felt is eight times greater in the womb. When a being is born from the
womb and comes out, the pain of being squeezed through the Yoni-yantra is crores
or kroda-krores times greater than the pain of being born and the pain of death.
At the time of death, one forgets even his own caste in the experience of pain.
Sūtra-807-810 O Gautama! If one remembers the suffering of the consequences of
wandering in different types of Yonis, one cannot live. Oh! Leave aside the
matter of birth, old age, death, misfortune, and disease. But who, with a great
intellect, will not be ashamed of the womb and not be awakened? Who can bear to
be in a womb that is full of blood, dirty, foul-smelling, full of excrement, and
not even pleasant to look at, and that has a foul odor? Therefore, one should
not violate the command that leads to the destruction of solitary suffering and
the attainment of solitary happiness. Where will happiness come to one who
violates the command? Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi
Anuvāda Page 79

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra -
792-793 bhraSTAcAra karanevAle, bhraSTAcAra kI upekSA karanevAle aura unmArga
meM rahe AcArya tIna mArga ko naSTa karanevAle haiM  /  yadi AcArya jhUThe mArga
meM rahe ho, unmArga kI prarUpaNA karate ho, to yakInana bhavya jIva kA samUha
usa jhUThe mArga kA anusaraNa karate hai, isalie unmArgI AcArya kI parachAI bhI
mata lenaa| sUtra - 794-795 isa saMsAra meM duHkha bhugatanevAle eka jIva ko
pratibodha karake use mArga ke lie sthApana karate haiM, usane deva aura
asuravAle jagata meM amArI par3aha kI udghoSaNA karavAI hai aisA samajhanA  /
bhUta, vartamAna aura bhAvi meM aise kucha mahApuruSa the, hai aura hoMge ki
jinake caraNayugala jagata ke jIva ko vaMdana karane ke lAyaka haiM, aura
parahita karane ke lie ekAnta kozISa karane meM jinakA kAla pasAra hotA hai, he
gautama ! anAdikAla se bhUtakAla meM haA hai| bhAvi meM bhI hogA ki jina ke
nAmasmaraNa karane se yakInana prAyazcitta hotA hai| sUtra-796-799 isa taraha kI
gaccha kI vyavasthA duppasaha suri taka calegI magara usameM bIca ke kAla meM jo
koI usakA khaMDana kare to usa ko yakInana ananta saMsArI jAnanA  /  samagra
jagata ke jIva ke maMgala aura eka kalyANa svarUpa uttama nirupadrava siddhipada
viccheda karanevAle ko jo prAyazcitta lage vo prAyazcitta gaccha vyavasthA
khaMDana karanevAle ko lage  /  isalie zatru aura mitra meM samAna manavAle,
parahita karane meM utsuka, kalyANa kI icchAvAle ko aura khuda ko AcArya kI AjJA
kA ullaMghana nahIM karanA caahie| sUtra-800-803 tIna gArava meM Asakta aise
kaIM AcArya gaccha kI vyavasthA kA ullaMghana karake Aja bhI bodhi-saccA mArga
nahIM pA sakate  /  dUsare bhI ananta bAra cAra gati rUpa bhava meM aura saMsAra
meM paribhramaNa kareMge lekina bodhi kI prApti nahIM kareMge  /  aura lambe
arase taka kAphI duHkhapUrNa saMsAra meM raheMge  /  he gautama ! caudarAja
pramANa loka ke bAre meM bAla ke agrabhAga jitanA bhI pradeza nahIM hai ki jahA~
isa jIva ne anantabAra maraNa prApta na kie ho  /  caurAzI lAkha jIva ko paidA
hone kI jagaha hai, usameM eka bhI yoni nahIM hai ki he gautama ! jisameM anantI
bAra sarva jIva paidA na hue ho| sUtra-804-806 tapAe hae lAla varNavAle agni
samAna sUI pAsa-pAsa zarIra meM lagAI jAe aura jo darda ho usase jyAdAgarbha meM
A~Tha gunA darda hotA hai  /  garbha meM se jaba janma ho aura bAhara nIkale
taba yoniyaMtra meM pile jAne se jo darda ho (usa se) karor3a yA kroDAkror3a
gunA darda ho jaba paidA ho rahA ho aura mauta ke samaya kA jo duHkha hotA hai,
usa samaya to usake duHkhAnubhava meM apanI jAta bhI bhUla jAtA hai|
sUtra-807-810 he gautama ! alaga-alaga taraha kI yoni meM paribhramaNa karane se
yadi usa duHkhavipAka kA smaraNa kiyA jAe to jI nahIM sakate  /  are ! janma,
jarA, maraNa, durbhAgya, vyAdhi kI bAta eka ora rakha de  /  lekina kauna
mahAmativAlA garbhAvAsa se lajjA na pAe aura pratibodhita na ho  /  kAphI
rudhira paru se gaMdakIvAle, azuci badabUvAle, mala se pUrNa, dekhane meM bhI
acchA na lage aise durabhigaMdhavAle garbha meM kauna dhRti pA sake ? to jisameM
ekAnta duHkha bikhara jAnA hai, ekAnta sukha prApta honA hai vaisI AjJA kA
bhaMga na karanA  /  AjJA bhaMga karanevAle ko sukha kahA~ se mile? muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 79

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Cheda Sutra-5, 'Mahanisitha' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number Sutra-811
O Bhagavan! Uttsarga has prohibited the movement of eight sadhus or four sadhus
with an exception. And Uttsarga has prohibited going beyond one hundred hands
with less than ten Samyati or four Samyati with an exception. Then in the last
time of the fifth Ara, the solitary Duppasaha Anagara and Vishnu Shri Sadhvi
will be without any assistance, how will they be worshippers? O Gautama! In the
last time of the Dushama-kala, they will be endowed with Kshaayopashamika
Samyaktva, Jnana, Darshana, and Charitra. Among them, the great-souled, great-
virtuous Duppasaha Anagara, whose Darshana, Jnana, and Charitra are extremely
pure, who has well seen the path of good destiny, will be like the spotless moon
in the cloudless, clear sky, venerable even among the venerable, most
worshippable even among the worshippable. And that Sadhvi Vishnu Shri will be
like a flag of Samyaktva, Jnana, and Charitra, great-souled, great-virtuous,
great-noble, endowed with such qualities that one can easily remember her name.
And then there will be a couple of Shravaka-Shravika named Jinadata and
Phalguśri, whose virtues will be such that they can be described for many days.
Their lifespan will be more than sixteen years. After observing the eight-year
Charitra-paryaya, then after repenting for the sins, becoming free from bondage,
and being devoted to the remembrance of Namaskara, by observing the Upavasa-
bhakta-bhojana-pratyakhyana, they will attain Saudharma-kalpa. Then they will
come to the lower human world. Even then, they will not violate the order of the
Gaccha. Sutra-812-813 O Bhagavan! Why is it said so, that even then there will
be no violation of the Gaccha system? O Gautama! Here, in the near future, there
will be great ascetics named Shayambhava, who will possess great fame, great
virtue, great nobility, and great intellect, and will hold the knowledge of the
twelve Angas like a mountain. They, being impartial, will, through the
excellence of knowledge, extract the essence of the Dasavaikālika Shruta-
skandha, which is similar to the supreme essence and cream, for the benefit of
the short-lived, virtuous beings. O Bhagavan! For whose sake? O Gautama! For the
sake of Manak. Considering that this lineage of Manak, which is like a vast and
terrible ocean of suffering, how can it cross this ocean-like Samsara of four
Gatis? This is not possible without the teaching of the Omniscient. The teaching
of this Omniscient is such that it enables crossing beyond and frees from
suffering. It is endowed with infinite gati-paryayas. In a short time, one does
not attain the immersion in all the scriptures taught by this Omniscient.
Therefore, O Gautama! The highly knowledgeable Shayambhava will contemplate that
the ocean of knowledge has no end, the time is short, and there are many
obstacles, so they will grasp what is essential, just as the swan extracts sweet
water from saline water. Sutra-814 They have extracted the Dasavaikālika Shruta-
skandha from the great scriptures, knowing that this virtuous soul, Manak, may
gain the knowledge of the principles. At the time when the twelve Angas and
their meanings will be divided, the Duppasaha Anagaras until the end of the
Dushama-kala will study the Dasavaikālika Sutras and their meanings, studying
the Dasavaikālika Shruta-skandha, which is like the essence of the entire Agama.
O Gautama! These Duppasaha Anagaras will also follow the meaning of that
Dasavaikālika, but they will not engage in any self-willed conduct.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra-811
he bhagavaMta ! utsarga se A~Tha sAdhu kI kamI meM yA apavAda se cAra sAdhu ke
sAtha (sAdhvI kA) gamanAgamana niSedha kiyA hai  /  aura utsarga se dasa saMyati
se kama aura apavAda se cAra saMyati kI kamI meM eka sau hAtha se upara jAne ke
lie bhagavaMta ne niSedha kiyA hai  /  to phira pA~caveM Are ke antima samaya
meM akele sahAya binA duppasaha aNagAra hoMge aura viSNu zrI sAdhvI bhI sahAya
binA akelI hogI to vo kisa taraha ArAdhaka hoMge? he gautama ! duSamakAla ke
antima samaya ve cAro, kSAyopazamika samyaktva jJAna-darzana-cAritra yukta hoMge
/  usameM jo mahAyazavAle mahAnubhAvI duppasaha aNagAra hoMge unakA ati vizuddha
darzana jJAna cAritra Adi guNayukta, jisane acchI taraha se sadgati kA mArga
dekhA hai vaise AzAtanA bhIru, ati paramazraddhA saMvega, vairAga aura samyag
mArga meM rahe, bAdala rahita nirmala gagana meM zaradapUnama ke vimala
caMdrakirana samAna ujjvala uttama yazavAle, vaMdana lAyaka meM bhI vizeSa
vaMdanIya, pUjya meM bhI paramapUjya hoNge| aura vo sAdhvI bhI
samyaktvajJAnacAritra ke lie patAkA samAna, mahAyazavAle, mahAsattvavAle,
mahAnubhAga isa taraha ke guNayukta hone se acchI taraha se jinake nAma kA
smaraNa kara sake vaise viSNuzrI sAdhvI hoNge| aura phira jinadatta aura
phAlguzrI nAma ke zrAvaka-zrAvikA kA hoMge ki kaIM dina taka bayA~ kiyA jAe
vaise guNavAlA yugala hogA  /  una sabakI solaha sAla kI adhika Ayu hogI  /
A~Tha sAla kA cAritra paryAya pAlana karake phira pApa kI AlocanA karake
niHzalya hokara namaskAra smaraNa meM parAyaNa hokara eka upavAsa bhakta bhojana
pratyAkhyAna karake saudharmakalpa meM upapAta hogA  /  phira nIce mAnava loka
meM Agamana hogA  /  to bhI vo gaccha kI vyavasthA nahIM todd'eNge|
sUtra-812-813 he bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se aisA kahA jAtA hai, to bhI gaccha
vyavasthA kA ullaMghana nahIM hogA  /  he gautama ! yahA~ najadIkI kAla meM
mahAyazavAle mahAsattvavAle mahAnubhAga zayyaMbhava nAma ke mahA tapasvI
mahAmativAle bAraha aMga samAna zrutajJAna ko dhAraNa karanevAle aise aNagAra
hoMge vo pakSapAta rahita alpa AyuvAle bhavya sattva ko jJAna ke atizaya ke
dvArA 11 aMga aura 14 pUrva ke paramasAra aura navanIta samAna ati
prakarSaguNayukta siddhi ke mArga samAna dazavaikAlika nAma ke zrutaskaMdha kI
niryuhaNA kreNge| he bhagavaMta ! vo kisake nimitta se? he gautama ! manaka ke
nimitta se  /  aisA mAnakara ki isa manaka paramparA baDe ghora daHkha sAgara
samAna yaha cAra gati svarUpa saMsAra sAgara meM se kisa taraha pAra pAe? vo bhI
sarvajJa ke upadeza binA to ho hI nahIM sakatA  /  isa sarvajJa kA upadeza pAra
rahita aura duHkha se karake avagAhana kiyA jAe vaisA hai  /  anantagamaparyAya
se yukta hai  /  alpakAla meM isa sarvajJa ne batAe sarva zAstra meM avagAhana
nahIM kiyA jAtA  /  isalie he gautama ! atizaya jJAnavAle zayyaMbhava aisA
cintavana kareMge ki, jJAnasAgara kA anta nahIM, kAla alpa hai, vighna kaIM
haiM, isalie jo sArabhUta ho vo jisa taraha khAre jala meM se haMsa mIThA jala
grahaNa karavAtA hai usa taraha grahaNa kara lenaa| sUtra-814 unhoMne isa
bhavyAtmA manaka ko tattva kA parijJAna ho aisA jAnakara pUrva meM se - bar3e
zAstra meM se dazavaikAlika zrutaskaMdha kI niryuhaNA kI  /  usa samaya jaba
bAraha aMga aura usake artha kA viccheda hogA taba duSmakAla ke antakAla taka
duppasaha aNagAra taka dazavaikAlika sUtra aura artha se par3heMge, samagra
Agama ke sAra samAna dazavaikAlika zrutaskaMdha sUtra se par3heMge  /  he
gautama ! yaha duppasaha aNagAra bhI usa dazavaikAlika sUtra meM rahe artha ke
anusAra prataveMge lekina apanI matikalpanA karake kaise bhI svacchaMda AcAra
meM nahIM pravartege  /  usa dazavaikAlika muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 80

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
At that time, the twelve Anga forms of the Śruta Skandha will be established in
the Śruta Skandha. O Gautama! For this reason, it is said that you should not
violate the rules of the Gaccha's organization, however simple it may seem.
**Sūtra - 815**  O Bhagavant! If a very pure and accomplished Ganaka has a
disciple who is very wicked and disobeys his orders out of arrogance, or because
of his caste, etc., is he an Ārādhaka? A Ganī who is impartial towards enemies
and friends, who embodies the qualities of a Guru, and who always conducts
himself with pure intentions according to the Sūtras, has four hundred and
ninety-nine disciples who disobey his orders. They are Ānārādhakas, just as the
four hundred and ninety-nine disciples who disobeyed the orders of the Ārādhaka
are Ānārādhakas.  **Sūtra - 816**  O Bhagavant! Who were the five hundred
disciples who did not become Ārādhakas by disobeying the orders of such a
virtuous and great Guru? O Gautama! This was the Gaccha Adhipati named "Vaiir,"
who was born after the twenty-fourth Tirthankara attained Nirvana, during the
time of the twenty-three previous Tirthankaras of Ṛṣabha Deva's twenty-four
Tirthankaras. He was a great soul, a great being, and worthy of receiving the
name in the morning. He had a Gaccha with five hundred disciples, without any
Sādhvīs. If you count the Sādhvīs, there were two thousand.  O Gautama! Those
Sādhvīs were very fearful of the afterlife. They had very pure hearts, were
forgiving, humble, controlled their senses, were free from attachment, practiced
very diligently, and had more affection for the six-sensed beings than for their
own bodies. They were very brave and had practiced severe austerities and served
the feet of the Tirthankaras, as described in the scriptures by Bhagavant. They
were free from delusion, pride, ego, attachment, desire, laughter, play, lust,
and the desire to be worshipped, and they followed the Śramaṇya with a humble
mind, like the way the Tirthankara Bhagavant had shown them.  O Gautama! Those
Sādhus were not very attractive. O Gautama! One day, those Sādhus said to the
Ācārya, "O Bhagavant! If you give us permission, we will go on a pilgrimage to
pay our respects to the Dharmachakra of Chandra Prabhu Swami and then return."
Then, O Gautama! The Ācārya, without any hesitation or haste, replied to them in
a deep and sweet voice, "It is not appropriate for disciples to use such
beautiful words like 'Suvihitō' to go on a pilgrimage." When they return, I will
have you go on a pilgrimage and pay your respects to Chandra Prabhu Swami.
Secondly, there is a tendency to be unrestrained while traveling. For this
reason, pilgrimages are forbidden.  Then the disciples asked, "How do Sādhus
become unrestrained when they go on pilgrimages?" Then, again, they called out a
second time, "Icchakāreṇa," and answered with anger and agitation in front of
many people. But, O Gautama! At that time, the Ācārya thought, "Even if I forbid
them, they will surely go on the pilgrimage." For this reason, he spoke sweet
words. After thinking about it for a long time, the Ācārya said, "Do you
understand the meaning of the Sūtras easily? If you do, then you can understand
the kind of unrestraint that occurs during pilgrimages. What is the point of
saying more about this? Secondly, you have recognized the nature of the world,
the essence of living beings, and everything else as it should be. Now, I have
explained many things to you. Even if I stop you from going on the pilgrimage,
they will leave, filled with anger like Yama, and go on the pilgrimage,
abandoning the Ācārya."  As they went, they committed the fault of seeking food
in the wrong way, they came into contact with green plants, they chewed seeds,
they committed the fault of unrestraint due to the suffering, torment, and
disturbance caused by ants and other disabled beings, and they did not perform
Pratikramaṇa while sitting. They did not follow the proper procedures for both
large and small vessels and other equipment.  **Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt
(Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi Translation** Page 81

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
zrutaskaMdha meM usa samaya bAraha aMga rUpa zrutaskaMdha kI pratiSThA hogI  /
he gautama ! isa kAraNa se aisA kahA jAtA hai ki sarala lage usa tarIke se jaise
bhI gaccha kI vyavasthA kI maryAdA kA ullaMghana mata karanA  /  sUtra - 815 he
bhagavaMta ! ati vizuddha pariNAmavAle gaNanAyaka kI bhI kisI vaise duHzIla
ziSya svacchaMdatA se, gArava kAraNa se yA jAtimada Adi AjJA na mAne yA
ullaMghana kare to vo ArAdhaka hotA hai kyA ? zatru aura mitra prati
samabhAvavAle guru ke guNa meM vartate hae aura hamezA sUtrAnusAra vizuddhAzaya
se vicarate ho vaise gaNI kI AjJA kA ullaMghana karanevAle cAra sau ninnAnave
sAdhu jisa taraha anArAdhaka hue vaise anArAdhaka hote haiM  /  sUtra-816 he
bhagavaMta ! eka rahita aise 500 sAdhu jinhoMne vaise guNayukta mahAnubhAva guru
mahArAja kI AjJA kA ullaMghana karake ArAdhaka na hae, ve kauna the? he gautama
! yaha RSabhadeva paramAtmA kI covIsI ke pahale haI teIsa cauvIsI aura usa
cauvIsI ke cauvIsave tIrthaMkara nirvANa pAne ke bAda kucha kAla guNa se paidA
hue karma samAna parvata kA carA karanevAlA, mahAyazavAle, mahAsattvavAle
mahAnabhAva sabaha meM nAma grahaNa karane lAyaka "vaIra'' nAma ke gacchAdhipati
bane, sAdhvI rahita unakA pA~ca sau ziSya ke parivAravAlA gaccha thA  /  sAdhvI
ke sAtha ginA jAe to do hajAra kI saMkhyA thii| he gautama ! vo sAdhvI ati
paraloka bhIru thI  /  ati nirmala aMtaHkaraNavAlI, kSamA dhAraNa karanevAlI,
vinayavatI, indriya kA damana karanevAlI, mamatva rahita, ati abhyAsa
karanevAle, apane zarIra se bhI jyAdA cha kAya ke jIva para vAtsalya karanevAlI,
bhagavaMta ne zAstra meM batAne ke anusAra ati ghora vIra tapa aura caraNa kA
sevana karake zoSita zarIravAlI jisa prakAra tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ne prarUpela
hai usI prakAra dIna mana se, mAyA, mada, ahaMkAra, mamatva, rati, ha~sI, krIDA,
kaMdarpa, nAthavAdarahita, svAmIbhAva Adi doSa se mukta sAdhvI AcArya ke pAsa
zrAmaNya kA anupAlana karatI thii| he gautama ! vo sAdhu the vaise manohara na
the, he gautama ! kisI samaya vo sAdhu AcArya ko kahane lage ki he bhagavaMta !
yadi Apa AjJA do to hama tIrthayAtrA karake candraprabhusvAmI ke dharmacakra ko
vaMdana karake vApasa aae| taba he gautama ! mana meM dinatA lAe binA, utAvale
hue binA gambhIra madhura vANI se una AcArya ne unheM pratyuttara diyA ki-ziSya
ko icchAkAreNa aise sundara zabda kA prayoga karake 'suvihito kI tIrthayAtrA ke
lie jAnA na kalpe' to jaba vApasa AeMge taba maiM tumheM yAtrA aura candraprabhu
svAmI ko vaMdana karavAUMgA  /  dUsarI bAta yaha ki yAtrA karane meM asaMyama
karane kA mana hotA hai  /  isa kAraNa se tIrthayAtrA kA niSedha kiyA jAtA hai|
taba ziSya ne pUchA ki tIrthayAtrA jAnevAle sAdhu ko kisa taraha asaMyama hotA
hai ? taba phira 'icchAkAreNa' - aisA dUsarI bAra bulAkara kAphI logoM ke bIca
vyAkula hokara Akroza se uttara deMge, lekina he gautama ! usa samaya AcArya ne
cintavana kiyA ki merA vacana ullaMghana karake bhI yakInana vaha ziSya jAeMge
hI  /  usa kAraNa se hI mIThe mIThe vacana bolate haiM  /  aba kisI dina mana se
bahuta socakara usa AcArya ne kahA ki tuma sahaja bhI sUtra artha jAnate ho kyA
? yadi jAnate ho to jisa taraha ke asaMyama tIrtha yAtrAmeM hotA hai, usa taraha
ke asaMyama khada jAna sakate haiM  /  isa viSaya meM jyAdA kahane se kyA
phAyadA ? dUsarA tumane saMsAra kA svarUpa, jIvAdika cIja usakA yathAyogya
tattva pahacAnA hai  /  aba kisI dina kaI upAya samajAe  /  yAtrA jAte roke to
bhI AcArya ko chor3akara krodha samAna yama ke sAtha tIrthayAtrA ke lie nikala
pdd'e| vo jAte-jAte kahIM AhAra gaveSaNA kA doSa, kisI jagaha harI vanaspatikAya
kA saMghaTTa karate, bIja kAya cA~pate the  /  koI cIMTI Adi vikalendriya jIva,
trasakAya ke saMghaTana, paritApana, upadrava se honevAle asaMyama doSa lagAte
the  /  baiThe-baiThe (bhI) pratikramaNa na karate the| kisI bar3e pAtra choTe
pAtra upakaraNa Adi donoM kAla vidhivat muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha)
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 81

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' They could not observe the
study/purpose/Sutra number cleaning. While doing Padilehan, they dried the
clothes of the air-bodied being, how much to say? O Gautam! How much to describe
it? Eighteen thousand Sheelang, seventeen types of restraint external and
internal twelve types of tapas, forgiveness, etc. and non-violence
characteristics-filled ten types of Shraman Dharma, they have made the two limbs
of the great Shrautasthaskandha stable-familiar by reading and remembering each
and every step of the beginning many times for a long time. They have learned by
doing many Bhangas and hundreds of Jodan sorrows, they have followed the
Niratichar Charitradharma. All this, as it has been said, they followed with Ni.
Hearing all this, the Gachchadhipati thought that, in my indirectness, in my
absence, that wicked-minded disciple will consume excessive unrestraint due to
ignorance, they will seem to me to be all unrestrained, because I am their Guru.
Therefore, I will go after them and inspire them so that I do not become liable
for atonement in this matter of unrestraint. Making such a choice, the Acharya
went after them, and in the meantime, he saw them going even more unrestrained
and badly in violation of the law. Then, O Gautam! With the beautiful, sweet
words of the Alaap, the Gachchadhipati said - Oh, excellent lineage and pure
lineage ornaments like some great beings! You have found the wrong path, the
five great vows have been accepted, the great fortunate beings with bodies, the
omniscient Bhagvant has made a model for twenty-seven thousand Sthandeel places.
The one who uses the Shruti should examine its purity, but should not become a
user in others. So why are you walking with a zero-zero mind, with non-use? Use
it in it with your desire. Secondly, have you forgotten this Sutra and its
meaning? This Sutra is of the most essential kind of all the ultimate
principles. If a sadhu himself hits a two-sense animal with his hand or foot or
with others or with a stick etc. instrument, causes it to be hit or considers
the one who hits it to be right, the karma bound by it when it arises, then just
as the flour is ground in the machine, the karma is destroyed, if the karma is
bound by deep consequences, then the sinful karma is suffered for twelve years,
then that karma is consumed, if it is deeply afflicted, then for ten thousand
years, if it is deeply nailed, then after ten lakh years that sinful karma is
consumed and it causes trouble, that is, it gives all the sorrows except death.
By doing so, they can consume sinful karma by suffering for crores of years.
Understand the same way about the three-sense being. You can understand this
much, so don't be afraid. O Gautam! In the same way, even after the Acharya's
Sarana, the great sinners, in the restlessness of walking, all of them become
hasty together, they do not respect the Acharya's word, which is such that it
liberates from the sorrows of the eight karmas. Then, O Gautam! The Acharya
understood that surely this disciple is traveling on the wrong path, he is a
sinner of all kinds and my wicked disciple, so why should I follow him now by
speaking flattering words? This is like flowing in the flow of a dry, happy
river. Even if all these go through the ten doors, I will now practice for the
benefit of my soul. Secondly, will my little bit be protected by the group of
great merits that I have done? This is the order of the Tirthankar Bhagvant.
Sutra-817 Or do this self-benefit and if possible, definitely do the benefit of
others. If there is time to do both self-benefit and benefit of others, then
self-benefit should be practiced first. Sutra-818 Secondly, this disciple may
perform the action of tapas and restraint, then it will be for his own benefit,
and if he does not, then he will have to go to the unreturned hell. Still, I
have been given the Gachcha, I am the Gachchadhipati Muni Dipratsagar Krit
(Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 82

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka prekSaNa
pramArjana nahIM kara sakate the  /  paDilehaNa karate vAyukAya ke jIva kI
virAdhanA ho vaise vastra sUkhAte the kitanA kahanA ? he gautama ! usakA varNana
kitanA kare? aThThAraha hajAra zIlAMga, sattaraha taraha ke saMyama bAhya aura
abhyaMtara bAraha prakAra ke tapa, kSamA, Adi aura ahiMsA lakSaNa yukta daza
prakAra ke zramaNa dharma ko Adi ke eka eka pada ko kaIM bAra lambe arase taka
par3hakara yAda karake donoM aMga rUpa mahAzrataskaMdha jinhoMne sthira-paricita
kie haiN| kaI bhA~gAoM aura saikaDoM joDANa daHkha se karake jinhoMne sikhe
haiM, niraticAra cAritradharma kA pAlana kiyA hai  /  yaha saba jisa prakAra
kahA hai vo ni se pAlana karate the  /  vo saba sunakara usa gacchAdhipati ne
socA ki, mere parokSa meM, geramojudagI meM usa duSTa zIlavAle ziSya ajJAnapana
kI kAraNa se ati asaMyama sevana kareMge vo sarva asaMyama mujhe lageMge, kyoMki
maiM unakA guru huuN| isalie maiM unake pIche jAkara unheM preraNA detA hU~ ki
jisase isa asaMyama ke viSaya meM maiM prAyazcitta kA adhikArI na banU~  /  aisA
vikalpa karake vo AcArya unake pIche jitane meM gae utane meM to unheM asaMyama
se aura burI taraha avidhi se jAte dekhA  /  taba he gautama ! ati sundara,
madhura zabda ke AlApapUrvaka gacchAdhipati ne kahA ki-are, uttama kula aura
nirmala vaMza ke AbhUSaNa samAna kucha-kucha mahAsattvavAle sAdhu ! tumane
unmArga pAyA hai, pA~ca mahAvrata aMgIkAra kie gae dehavAle mahAbhAgazAlI sAdhu-
sAdhvI ke lie sattAIsa hajAra sthaMDIla sthAna sarvajJa bhagavaMta ne prarUpe
haiM  /  zruta ke upayogavAle ko usakI vizuddhi jA~canI cAhie, lekina anya meM
upayogavAlA na bananA cAhie  /  to tuma zUnyAzUnya citta se anupayoga se kyoM
cala rahe ho ? tumhArI IcchA se tuma usameM upayoga do| dUsarA yaha ki tuma yaha
sUtra aura usakA artha bhUla gae ho kyA ? sarva parama tattva ke paramasArabhUta
taraha kA yaha sUtra hai  /  eka sAdhu eka do indriyavAle jAnavara ko khuda hI
hAtha se yA pA~va se yA dUsaroM ke pAsa yA zalAkA Adi adhikaraNa se kisI bhI
padArthabhUta upakaraNa se saMghaTTA kare, karavAe yA saMghaTTA karanevAle ko
sahI mAne, usase bA~dhA gayA karma jaba udaya meM Ae taba jaise yaMtra meM ikha
pIsate haiM vaise usa karma kA kSaya ho, yadi gahare pariNAma se karma bA~dhA ho
to pApakarma bAraha sAla taka bhugate taba vo karma khapAe, gaharA paritApana
kare to daza hajAra sAla taka, usa prakAra AgAr3ha kIlAmaNA kare to daza lAkha
sAla ke bAda vo pApa karma khapAe aura upadrava kare yAni mauta ke alAvA sAre
duHkha de  /  vaisA karane se karor3a sAla duHkha bhugatakara pApa-karma kSaya
kara sakate haiN| usI prakAra tIna indriyavAle jIva ke bAre meM bhI samajhanA  /
tuma itanA samajha sakate ho isalie ghabarAnA mata  /  he gautama ! usI prakAra
sUtrAnusAra AcArya sAraNA karane ke bAvajUda bhI mahA pApakarmI, calane kI
vyAkulatA meM eka sAtha saba utAvale hokara vo sarva pApa karma aise A~Tha karma
ke duHkha se mukta karanevAlA aisA AcArya kA vacana bahumAnya nahIM karate  /
taba he gautama ! vo AcArya samaja gae kI jarura yaha ziSya unmArga meM prayANa
kara rahe haiM, sarva taraha se pApajAtivAle aura mere duSTa ziSya haiM, to aba
mujhe unake pIche kyoM khuzAmata ke zabda bolate -bolate anusaraNa karU~ ? yaha
to jala rahita sukhI nadI ke pravAha meM bahanA jaisA hai  /  yaha saba bhale hI
daza dvAra se cale jAe, maiM to aba mere Atma ke hita kI sAdhanA karU~gA  /
dUsare kie hae kAphI bar3e puNya ke samUha se merA alpa bhI rakSaNa hogA kyA?
Agama meM batAe tapa aura anuSThAna ke dvArA apane parAkrama se hI bhavasAgara
pAra kara skeNge| tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta kA yahI Adeza hai| sUtra-817 yA
Atmahita karanA aura yadi mumakIna ho to parahita bhI jarura karanA  /  Atmahita
aura parahita donoM karane kA samaya ho to pahale Atmahita kI sAdhanA karanI
caahie| sUtra-818 dUsarA yaha ziSya zAyada tapa aura saMyama kI kriyA kA AcaraNa
kareMge to usase unakA hI zreya hogA aura yadi nahIM kareMge to unheM hI
anuttara durgati gamana karanA par3egA  /  phira bhI mujhe gaccha samarpaNa huA
hai, maiM gacchAdhipati muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 82

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' I am a student/purpose/Sutra number,
I should show them the right path. And then the other thing to keep in mind is -
Tirthankar Bhagvant has told the thirty-six qualities of an Acharya, I will not
violate even one of them. Maybe my life will also go away by doing so, even then
I will become a devotee. Agam says that it is not against this world or the next
world, not to do it, not to make it happen or not to consider the one who does
it good, then they do not even do what the virtuous Tirthankar says, then I will
take their guise. The scripture has been described in this way that whoever is a
sadhu or sadhvi, even if he behaves falsely only by words, then he should be
corrected by Sarna, Varana, Choyana, Prati Choyana, even after doing Sarana,
Varana, Choyana, Parichoyana, whoever is lazy by rejecting the words of the
elders, according to the saying, does not back down from such misdeeds, he
should be taken out by taking his guise. In that way, according to the justice
described in Agam, O Gautam! That Acharya took the guise of one disciple. In the
meantime, the rest of the disciples ran in every direction. After that, O
Gautam! That Acharya slowly started going after them, but he didn't go fast. O
Gautam! If you go fast, you will have to transition from salty land to sweet
land. You will have to walk from sweet land to salty land. From black land to
yellow land, from yellow land to black land, from water to land, from land to
water, you will have to transition, so you should transition by ritually
cleaning your feet. If you don't clean your feet, you will get twelve years of
penance. Therefore, O Gautam! That Acharya is not walking in a hurry. Now, at
some point, they were transitioning from one place to another according to the
method described in the Sutra, then O Gautam! A Kesari Singh, who was weak in
body due to hunger for many days, appeared in front of that Acharya, with a
terrible Yama Raja like appearance with a visible beard, frightening like the
time of destruction. The great Gachhadhipati thought that if I walk fast and in
a hurry, I can escape from the claws of this lion, but it is better to be
destroyed, but it is not good to act in indiscipline. Thinking this way, he gave
back the guise of the disciple whose guise he had taken, and that Gachhadhipati,
who had a body of renunciation, stood there, adopting the vow of fasting. That
disciple also stayed accordingly. Now, at that time, O Gautam! The lion killed
both of them, remembering the five auspicious things with a very pure inner
mind, with the yoga of auspicious determination. Therefore, both of them became
Antakrit Kevali. They became Siddhas, free from eight kinds of karma-mal-kalank.
Now, those 499 sadhus, who were experiencing the suffering of that karma-dosha
and will experience it again, and will wander in the endless ocean of the world,
who is capable of telling the whole story even from time? O Gautam! Those 499 or
those who did not worship by violating the command of the virtuous great Guru,
they became eternal worldly beings. Sutra - 819 O Bhagvant! Should one not
violate the command of the Tirthankar or the command of the Acharya? O Gautam!
Acharya has been told of four types. They are as follows - Naam Acharya,
Sthapana Acharya, Dravya Acharya and Bhava Acharya. Among them, those who are
Bhava Acharya should be considered equal to Tirthankar. Their command should not
be violated. Sutra-820 O Bhagvant! When will they be called Bhava Acharya? O
Gautam! Those who have been initiated today, but still behave by following the
position according to the Agam method, they are called Bhava Acharya. Those who,
even after being initiated for a hundred years, hinder the Agam even by words,
should be employed in Naam and Sthapana Acharya. O Bhagvant! How much penance
does an Acharya get? The penance that a sadhu gets, that penance Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 83

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka hU~,
mujhe unako sahI rAstA dikhAnA cAhie  /  aura phira dUsarI bAta yaha dhyAna meM
rakhanI hai ki - tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ne AcArya ke chattIsa guNa batAe haiM
usameM se maiM eka kA bhI atikramaNa nahIM karU~gA | zAyada merI jAna bhI vaisA
karane se calI jAegI to bhI maiM ArAdhaka banU~gA  /  Agama meM kahA hai ki yaha
loka yA paraloka ke khilApha kArya ho usake lie AcaraNa na karanA, na karavAnA
yA AcaraNa karanevAle ko acchA na mAnanA, to aise guNayukta tIrthaMkara kA kahA
bhI vo nahIM karate to maiM unake vesa lU~Ta lU~  /  zAstra meM isa prakAra
prarUpaNA kI hai ki jo koI sAdhu yA sAdhvI kevala vacana se bhI jhUThA vyavahAra
kare to use galatI sudhArane ke lie sAranA, vAraNA, coyaNA, praticoyaNA karanI
cAhie, usa prakAra sAraNA, vAraNA, coyaNA, paricoyaNA karane ke bAvajUda bhI jo
bujurga ke vacana ko ThukarAkara Alasa kara rahA ho, kahane ke mutAbika vaise
apkArya meM se pIche haTha na karatA hai unakA veSa grahaNa karake nIkAla denA
caahie| usa prakAra Agama meM batAe nyAya se he gautama ! usa AcArya ne jitane
meM eka ziSya kA veza (grahaNa karake) a~TavA liyaa| utane meM bAkI ziSya hara
eka dizA meM bhAga ge| usake bAda he gautama ! vo AcArya jitane meM dhIre-dhIre
unake pIche jAne lage, lekina jaldI nahIM jAte the| he gautama ! jaldI cale to
khArI bhUmi meM se madhura bhUmi meM saMkramaNa karanA par3e  /  madhura bhUmi
meM se khArI bhUmi meM calanA par3e  /  kAlI bhUmi meM se pIlI bhUmi meM, pIlI
bhUmi meM se kAlI bhUmi meM, jala meM se sthala meM, sthala meM se jala meM,
saMkramaNa karake jAnA par3e usa kAraNa se vidhi se pA~va kI pramArjanA karake
saMkramaNa karanA cAhie  /  yadi pA~va kI pramArjanA na kI jAe to bAraha sAla kA
prAyazcitta mile  /  isa kAraNa, he gautama! vo AcArya utAvale nahIM cala rahe
aba kisI samaya sUtra meM batAI vidhi se sthAna kA saMkramaNa karate the taba he
gautama ! usa AcArya ke pAsa kaIM dina kI kSudhA se kamajora bane zarIravAlA,
prakaTa dAr3hA se bhayAnaka yamarAja samAna bhayabhIta karate hue pralayakAla kI
taraha ghora rUpavAlA kesarI siMha A paha~cA  /  mahAnubhAga gacchAdhipati ne
cintavana kiyA ki yadi tejI se utAvale hokara calU~ to isa zera ke paMje meM se
baca zake, lekina naSTa ho jAnA acchA hai magara asaMyama meM kAma karanA acchA
nahIM hai  /  aisA cintavana karake vidhi se vApasa Ae ziSya ko jisakA veSa
laeNTa liyA hai vo veza use dekara niSpattikarma zarIravAle vo gacchAdhipati
padApopagamana anazana apanAkara vahA~ khar3e rahe  /  vo ziSya bhI usI ke
anusAra rahA  /  aba usa samaya ati vizuddha aMtaHkaraNavAle paMcamaMgala kA
smaraNa karate zubha adhyavasAyapana ke yoga se vo donoM ko he gautama ! siMha
ne mAra DAlA  /  isalie vo donoM aMtakRt kevalI bana gae  /  A~Tha taraha ke
karmamala-kalaMka rahita vo siddha hue  /  aba vo 499 sAdhu usa karma ke doSa se
jisa taraha ke duHkha kA ahesAsa karate the aura phira se ahesAsa kareMge aura
ananta saMsAra sAgara meM paribhramaNa kareMge vo sarva vRttAnta kAla se bhI
kahane ke lie kauna samartha hai ? he gautama ! vo 499 yA jinhoMne guNayukta
mahAnubhAga guru kI AjJA kA ullaMghana karake ArAdhanA nahIM kI vo ananta
saMsArI bane  /  sUtra - 819 he bhagavaMta ! kyA tIrthaMkara kI AjJA kA
ullaMghana na kare yA AcArya kI AjJA kA? he gautama ! AcArya cAra taraha ke
batAe haiM  /  vo isa prakAra - nAma AcArya, sthApanA AcArya, dravya AcArya aura
bhAva AcArya  /  usameM jo bhAvAcArya haiM unheM tIrthaMkara samAna mAnanA  /
unakI AjJA kA ullaMghana nahIM karanA caahie| sUtra-820 he bhagavaMta ! vo
bhAvAcArya kaba-se kahalAeMge? he gautama ! Aja dIkSita haA ho phira bhI
Agamavidhi se pada ko anusaraNa karake vyavahAra kare vo bhAvAcArya kahalAte
haiM  /  jo so sAla ke dIkSita hone ke bAvajUda bhI kevala vacana se bhI Agama
kI bAdhA karate haiM unake nAma aura sthApanA AcArya meM niyoga karanA  /  he
bhagavaMta ! AcArya ko kitanA prAyazcitta lagatA hai ? jo prAyazcitta eka sAdhu
ko mile vo prAyazcitta muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 83

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
The Ācārya or the leader of the Gaccha, the Pravartani, receives seventeen times
the merit. If there is a violation of conduct, then three lakh times. Because it
is very difficult, but not easy. Therefore, the Ācārya and the leader of the
Gaccha should carefully protect their Paccakkāna. They should become one with
unblemished conduct.  **O Bhagvant!** If a Guru, due to some reason, makes a
mistake in a place like that, is he considered an Ārādhaka or not? **O Gautam!**
A Guru who possesses great qualities, has unblemished conduct, is diligent, free
from laziness, completely free from all attachments, has equal feelings towards
enemies and friends, is a supporter of the right path, gives Dharma-upadesha, is
righteous, should not become blood-stained by becoming a preacher of the wrong
path and becoming arrogant. In every way, the Guru should be diligent, but not
negligent. If someone becomes negligent, then understand that he is of very bad
future and has ugly characteristics. Not only that, but understand that he is a
great sinner, unworthy of being seen.  If he has the seed of Samyaktva, then he
should tell himself, his disciples, or others in the disciple community, in the
same way that he has become of bad character, "I am truly a Darant Pant,
unworthy of being seen, a doer of great sins. I am destroying the Samyag path."
By blaming himself, by humbling himself before the Guru, by criticizing himself,
by taking Prāyaścitta as stated in the scriptures, he may become an Ārādhaka. If
he is free from malice, free from deceit and illusion, then such a soul does not
deviate from the right path. Perhaps if he is corrupted from the right path,
then he is not an Ārādhaka.  **Sūtra - 821**  **O Bhagvant!** What kind of
qualities should a Guru possess so that we can deposit the Gaccha with him? **O
Gautam!** One who has good vows, beautiful conduct, firm vows, firm character,
joyful bodily parts, is worthy of worship, free from attachment, free from
hatred, whose stains of great Mithyātva have gone, who is calm, who knows the
state of the world well, who is deeply immersed in great renunciation, who is
against women's stories, who is against food-related stories, who is against
stories about thieves, who is very compassionate, who is afraid of doing sinful
deeds that harm the afterlife, who is against Kusīla, who knows the secrets of
the scriptures, who is insightful in the scriptures he has accepted, who is
always engaged in the ten types of Śramaṇa Dharma, such as forgiveness and non-
violence, who is engaged in the twelve types of Tapas, who is always engaged in
the five Samitis and three Guptis, who performs the worship of eighteen thousand
Śīlāṅgas according to his ability, who does not violate the seventeen types of
restraint, who is interested in the path of liberation, who is interested in the
truth, who has equal feelings towards both enemies and friends, who is free from
the seven types of fear, such as fear of this world and the afterlife, who has
completely abandoned the eight types of pride, who is free from fear of
violating the nine types of Brahmacharya Guptis, who is a holder of vast
knowledge, who is born in an Ārya family, who is never humble in any situation,
who is not angry, who is not lazy, who is diligent, who is opposed to the coming
and going of the restrained class, who is a constant giver of Dharma-upadesha,
who is a model of constant Oga Samachārī, who lives within the limits of
Sadhutva, who is free from the fear of Asamachārī, who is capable of giving
Prāyaścitta and charity that is worthy of criticism, who knows the violation of
the seven Mandalīs, such as Vandanadi, who knows the purpose and the purpose of
the violation of the great initiation, establishment, yoga, etc., actions.  One
who knows the time, the field, the substance, the feeling, and other feelings,
who is free from the causes of time, etc., who is skilled in guiding children,
elders, the sick, and newly initiated ones in restraint, who models the groups
of knowledge, vision, and character, who protects and upholds them, who is
influential, who has firm Samyaktva, who is free from sorrow, who is patient,
who is serious, who has excessive gentleness, who does not seek anything from
anyone, who is completely free from the six types of living beings, who is
afraid of obstructing Dharma, who is afraid of all desires, who has the pride of
Siddhi, etc.  **Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi
Translation** Page 84

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka AcArya yA
gaccha ke nAyaka, pravartanI ko sattaraha gunA milatA hai  /  yadi zIla kA
khaMDana ho to tIna lAkha gunA  /  kyoMki vo kAphI duSkara hai lekina sarala
nahIM hai  /  isalie AcArya ko aura gaccha ke nAyaka ko pravartinI ko apane
paccakkhANa kA acchI taraha se rakSaNa karanA cAhie  /  askhalita zIlavAlA
bananA caahie| he bhagavaMta ! jo guru acAnaka kisI kAraNa se, kisI vaise sthAna
meM galatI kare, skhalanA pAe use ArAdhaka mAne ki nahIM ? he gautama ! bar3e
guNa meM vyavahAra rakhate ho vaise guru askhalita zIlayukta apramAdI Alasa binA
sarva taraha ke Alambana rahita, zatru aura mitra pakSa meM samAna bhAvavAle,
sanmArga ke pakSapAtI dharmopadeza denevAlA, saddharmayukta ho isase vo unmArga
ke dezaka abhimAna karane meM rakta na bane  /  sarvathA sarva taraha se guru ko
apramatta bananA cAhie, lekina pramatta nahIM bananA cAhie  /  yadi koI pramAdI
bane to vo kAphI bUre bhAvI aura asuMdara lakSaNavAle samajhanA, itanA hI nahIM
lekina na dekhanelAyaka mahApApI hai, aisA smjhnaa| yadi vo samyaktva ke
bIjavAle ho to vo khuda ko duzcaritra ko jisa prakAra huA ho usa prakAra apane
yA dasaroM ke ziSya samadAya ko kahe ki maiM vAkaI daraMta paMta lakSaNavAlA, na
dekhane lAyaka, mahApApa karma karanevAlA huuN| maiM samyag mArga ko naSTa
karanevAlA hU~  /  aise khuda kI burAI karake guru ke sAmane gardA karake unakI
AlocanA karake jisa prakAra zAstra meM kahA ho usa prakAra prAyazcitta kA sevana
kara de to vo kucha ArAdhaka bane  /  yadi vo zalya rahita, mAyA kapaTa rahita
ho to, vaisI AtmA sanmArga se cUkatI nahIM  /  zAyada sanmArga se bhraSTa ho to
vo ArAdhaka nahIM hotI sUtra - 821 _ he bhagavaMta ! kaise guNayukta guru ho to
usake lie gaccha kA nikSepa kara sakate haiM ? he gautama ! jo acche vratavAle,
sundara zIlavAle, dRr3ha vratavAle, dRr3ha cAritravAle, Anandita zarIra ke
avayavavAle, pUjane ke lAyaka, rAga rahita, dveSa rahita, bar3e mithyAtva ke
mala ke kalaMka jisake cale gae haiM vaise, jo upazAnta haiM, jagata kI dazA ko
acchI taraha se pahacAnate ho, kAphI mahAna vairAga meM lIna ho, jo strIkathA ke
khilApha ho, jo bhojana viSayaka kathA ke pratyanIka ho, jo cora viSayaka kathA
ke khilApha ho, jo kAphI anukampA karane ke svabhAvavAle ho, jo paraloka kA
nukasAna karanevAle aise pApakArya karane se DaranevAle, jo kuzIla ke khilApha
ho, zAstra ke rahasya ke jAnakAra ho, grahaNa kie gae zAstra meM sAravAle, rAta-
dina hara eka samaya kSamA Adi ahiMsA lakSaNavAle daza taraha ke zramaNa dharma
meM rahe ho, bAraha taraha ke tapa meM udyamavAle ho, hamezA pA~ca samiti aura
tIna gupti meM upayogavAle ho, jo apanI zakti ke anusAra aThAraha hajAra zIlAMga
kI ArAdhanA karate ho, 17 taraha ke saMyama kI virAdhanA na karate ho, jo
utsarga mArga kI rucivAle ho, tattva kI rUcivAle ho, jo zatru aura mitra donoM
pakSa ke prati samAna bhAvavAle ho, jo ihaloka-paraloka Adi sA~ta taraha ke
bhayasthAna se vipramukta ho, A~Tha taraha ke madasthAna kA jinhoMne sarvathA
tyAga kiyA ho, nau taraha kI brahmacarya kI gupti kI virAdhanA se bhayamukta,
bahuzruta jJAna ke dhAraka, Arya kula meM janme hue, kisI bhI prasaMga meM
dInatAbhAva rahita, krodha na karanevAle, Alasa rahita, apramAdI, saMyatI varga
ke AvAgamana ke virodhI, niraMtara satata dharmopadeza ke dAtA, satata ogha
sAmAcArI ke prarUpaka, sAdhutva kI maryAdA meM rahane vAle, asAmAcArI ke
bhayamukta, AlocanA yogya prAyazcitta dAna meM samartha, vandanAdi Adi sAtoM
mAMDalI ke virAdhanA ke jJAtA, baDI dIkSA-upasthApanA yogAdi kriyA ke uddeza-
samuddeza kI virAdhanA ke jJAtA ho| jo kAla-kSetra-dravya-bhAva aura anya
bhAvAntaro ke jJAtA ho, jo kAlAdi AlaMbana kAraNoM se mukta ho, jo bAlasAdhu,
vRddhasAdhu, glAna, navadIkSita Adi ko saMyama meM pravartAne meM kuzala ho, jo
jJAna-darzana-cAritra Adi gaNoM kI prarUpaNA karate ho, unakA pAlana aura
dhAraNa karate ho, prabhAvaka ho, dRDha samyaktvavAle ho, jo khedarahita ho,
dhIrajavAle ho, gaMbhIra ho, atIzaya saumyalezyAyukta ho, kisI se parAbhAva pAne
vAle na ho, cha kAya jIva samAraMbha se sarvathA mukta ho, dharma meM antarAya
karane se bhayabhIta ho, sarva AzAtanA se Darane vAle ho, jo Rddhi Adi gArava
muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 84

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānīśītha'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
Free from Roudra and Ārtadhyāna, who is diligent in performing all necessary
actions and especially endowed with Labdhi.  **Who, even in an unexpected
situation, even if someone inspires or invites, does not engage in improper
conduct, does not sleep excessively or eat excessively, is a conqueror of all
necessary things, svādhyāya, dhyāna, pratimā, abhigraha, ghora pariṣaha-
upasarga, is a collector of excellent vessels, knows the method of correcting
apajñā, has an unbroken body, knows paramat and svamat, is completely free from
kṣaya like anger, ego, possessiveness, play, kandarpa, etc., tells dharmakatha,
generates vairāgya in worldly desires, etc., awakens the bhavyātmā, and is
capable of establishing the burden of the -gaccha, is the master of two ganas.**
**He is the holder of the gana, the form of the tīrtha, the performer of the
tīrtha, the arhant, the kevali, the jin, the influencer of the tīrtha, the
venerable, the worshipable, the worthy of salutation (worthy of being saluted).
He is worthy of being seen. He is supremely pure, supremely auspicious, he is
supremely auspicious, he is the cause of siddhi, he is liberation, he is mokṣa.
He is Śiva. He is the protector, he is siddha, he is liberated, he has crossed
over, he is deva, he is the deva of devas. O Gautama! Such a person, to
establish a gana for him, to have it established, and to approve of the deposit,
otherwise, O Gautama! It is a violation of the command. Sūtra-822**  **O
Bhagavan! For how long is this command to be enforced? O Gautama! As long as
there are mahāyāśavāla, mahāsattvavāla, mahāguṇabhāga, Śrī Prabhunāma aṇagāra,
the command will be enforced. O Bhagavan! After how long will there be Śrī
Prabhunāma aṇagāra? O Gautama! There will be a Kalki king who is not worthy of
being seen, who is cruel, angry, fierce, harsh, violent, punishing, without
restraint, merciless, cruel, a great sinner, a sinner, a wicked, false-sighted,
non-Aryan. That king will cause harm and trouble to the 'Śrī Śramaṇa Saṅgha' who
wish to go on alms rounds. Then, O Gautama! There will be some virtuous,
steadfast, ascetic aṇagāra who will be there. They will be accompanied by the
Sāudharma Indra Mahārāja, who rides on the elephant Airāvata, with a vajra in
his hand. **  **In the same way, O Gautama! The Śrī Śramaṇa Saṅgha, who have
seen the evidence with their own eyes, who have been saluted by Devendra, are
ready to give up their lives. But they are not ready for hypocrisy. O Gautama!
Those who have no support from each other, who have the characteristic of
ahiṃsā, who have the tenfold dharma of kṣamā, etc., who are alone, the
Devādhideva Arihant Bhagavan, one jinalaya, one venerable, worshipable, worthy
of respect, worthy of honor, mahāyāśa-mahāsattvavāla, mahānu bhāga, who are
such, firm in their vows, vows, rules, who are tapas-dhan sadhu. Those sadhus
were like the moon, gentle and cool, with a soft glow, like the sun, with a
bright glow of tapas, like the earth, capable of enduring pariṣaha-upasarga,
like Mount Meru, unshakable, with the characteristics of ahiṃsā, etc., with the
tenfold dharma of kṣamā, etc., the muni-vara were surrounded by a good community
of śramaṇa, like a clear sky without clouds, in which the pure moon of the Śarad
Pūrṇimā is surrounded by many stars and planets, like the planet Chandra, which
shines brightly, so these Śrī Prabhunāma aṇagāra gana community shone brightly.
O Gautama! Śrī Prabhu aṇagāra enforced this command for so long. Sūtra-823-824**
**O Bhagavan! What happened after that time? O Gautama! In the time after that,
any soul who abandons the beginning of the six kāya jīva is considered to be
blessed, worthy of worship, venerable, worthy of salutation, and living a
beautiful life. O Bhagavan! In general, what is to be said in this way? O
Gautama! What kind of soul is appropriate from the point of view of expectation?
And (for pravrajyā) there is no one appropriate. O Bhagavan! Why do you say so?
O Gautama! Because of those who are prohibited and those who are not prohibited,
it is said that one**  **Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt (Mahānīśītha) Āgama Sūtra-
Hindi Translation** **Page 85**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka aura
raudra evaM ArttadhyAna se mukta ho, jo sarva Avazyaka kriyA karane meM udyamI
evaM vazeSa prakAra se labdhiyukta ho  /  jo akasmAt prasaMga meM bhI, kisI kI
preraNA ho yA koI nimaMtraNa kare to bhI akArya AcaraNa na kare, jyAdA nidrA yA
jyAdA bhojana na karate ho, sarva Avazyaka, svAdhyAya, dhyAna, pratimA,
abhigraha, ghora parISaha-upasarga ko jItanevAle ho, uttama pAtra ke saMgrahI,
apAjJa ko paraThane kI vidhi ke jJAtA, akhaMDIta dehayukta, paramata evaM
svamata ke jJAtA, krodhAdi kaSAya, ahaMkAra, mamatva, krIDA, kaMdarpa Adi se
sarvathA mukta, dharmakathA kahanevAle, viSayAbhilAsa Adi meM vairAgya utpanna
karanevAle, bhavyAtmA ko pratibodha karanevAle evaM-gaccha ke bhAra ko sthApana
karane ke yogya, do gaNa ke svAmI haiN| gaNa ko dhAraNa karanevAle, tIrtha
svarUpa, tIrtha karanevAle, arhanta, kevalI, jina, tIrtha kI prabhAvanA
karanevAle, vaMdanIya, pUjanIya, namasaraNIya (namaskAra karane ke lAyaka) hai
/  darzanIya hai  /  parama pavitra, parama kalyANa svarUpa haiM, vo parama
maMgala rUpa hai, vo siddhi (kI kAraNa) hai, mukti hai, mokSa hai  /  ziva hai
/  rakSaNa karanevAle hai, siddha hai, mukta hai, pAra pAe hue hai, deva hai,
deva ke bhI deva hai, he gautama ! isa taraha ke guNavAle ho, usake lie gaNa kI
sthApanA karanA, karavAnA aura nikSepa karaNa kI anumodanA karanA, anyathA he
gautama ! AjJA kA bhaMga hotA hai| sUtra- 822 he bhagavaMta ! kitane arase taka
yaha AjJA pravedana kI hai ? he gautama ! jaba taka mahAyazavAle,
mahAsattvavAle, mahAguNabhAga, zrI prabhunAma ke aNagAra hoMge taba taka AjJA kA
pravartana hogA  /  he bhagavan ! kitane samaya ke bAda zrI prabha nAma ke
aNagAra hoMge? he gautama ! duranta prAnta-tuccha lakSaNavAlA na dekhane ke
lAyaka raudra, krodhI, pracaMDa, kaThina, ugrabhArI, daMDa karanevAle, maryAdA
rahita, niSkaruNa, nirdaya, kara, mahAkara, pApa mativAlA, anArya mithyAdaSTi,
aisA kalki rAjA hogA  /  vo rAjA bhikSAbhramaNa karane kI icchAvAle 'zrI zramaNa
saMgha' ko kadarthanA pahu~cAeMge, parezAna kareMge taba he gautama ! jo koI
vahA~ zIlayukta mahAnubhAva acalita sattvavAle tapasvI aNagAra hoNge| unakA,
vajra jinake hAthameM hai vaise, airAvata hAthI para baiThakara gamana
karanevAle saudharma indra mahArAjA sAnnidhya kreNge| usI taraha he gautama !
devendra se vaMdita pratyakSa dekhe hue pramANavAlA zrI zramaNasaMgha prANa
arpaNa karane ke lie taiyAra hote haiM  /  lekina pAkhaMr3a dharma ke lie
taiyAra nahIM hote  /  jitane meM he gautama ! jinako eka dUsare kA sahArA nahIM
hai, ahiMsA lakSaNavAle, kSamAdi daza taraha kA jo eka hI dharma hai, akele
devAdhideva arihaMta bhagavaMta hI, eka jinAlaya, eka vaMdanIya, pUjanIya,
satkAra karane ke lAyaka, sanmAna karane ke lAyaka, mahAyaza-mahAsattvavAle,
mahAnubhAga jinheM hai aise, dRr3ha zIla, vrata, niyama ko dhAraNa karanevAle
tapodhana sAdhu the  /  vo sAdhu candra samAna saumyazItala lezyAvAle, sUraja kI
taraha camakatI tapa kI teja rAzi samAna, pRthvI kI taraha pariSaha-upasarga
sahane ke lie samartha, meru parvata kI taraha ar3ola ahiMsA Adi lakSaNavAle
kSamAdi daza taraha ke dharma ke lie rahe, munivara acche zramaNa ke samudAya se
parIvarita the, bAdala rahita sApha AkAza ho, usameM zarada pUrNimA ke nirmala
candra kI taraha kaI graha-nakSatra se parIvarita ho vaisA grahapati candra
jaise kAphI zobhA pAtA hai vaise yaha zrIprabha nAma ke aNagAra gaNa samudAya ke
bIca adhika zobhA pAte the  /  he gautama !zrI prabha aNagAra ne itane samaya
taka isa AjJA kA pravedana kiyA sUtra-823-824 he bhagavaMta ! usake bAda ke kAla
meM kyA haA? he gautama ! usake bAda ke kAla samaya meM jo koI AtmA cha kAya
jIva ke samArambha kA tyAga karanevAlA ho, vo dhanya, pUjya, vaMdanIya,
namaskaraNIya, suMdara jIvana jInevAle mAne jAte haiM  /  he bhagavaMta !
sAmAnya pRcchA meM isa prakAra yAvat kyA kahanA ? he gautama ! apekSA se kaisI
AtmA ucita hai  /  aura (pravrajyA ke lie) koI ucita nahIM hai  /  he bhagavaMta
! kisa kAraNa se aisA kahate haiM ? he gautama ! sAmAnya se jinako pratiSedha
kiyA ho aura jinheM pratiSedha na kiyA ho, isa kAraNa se aisA kahA jAtA hai ki
eka muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 85

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'**  Study/Purpose/Sutra Number is
appropriate and one is not appropriate. So, O Bhagvant! How many are there who
are generally prohibited and who are not prohibited? O Gautam! There is one who
is against and one who is not against. The one who is against is prohibited, and
the one who is not against is not prohibited. O Bhagvant! Who is against and who
is not?  O Gautam! The one who is worthy of being condemned in that country, in
which countries he is condemned, in which country he is prohibited, he is
against in that country. The one who is not condemnable in any country, he is
not prohibited in that country, he is not against in that country. O Gautam!
There, in which countries he is considered against, do not give him pravrajya.
Whoever is not considered against in which country, they should be given
pravrajya.  O Bhagvant! In which country is who against and who is not
considered against? O Gautam! If any man or woman kills or causes to be killed,
troubles or causes trouble, a Shraman, a Shravak, a mother, a father, a brother,
a sister, a nephew, a son, a grandson, a daughter, a niece, a daughter-in-law, a
son-in-law, a wife, a partner, a gotra, a caste, a non-caste, a relative, a poor
person, a native, a foreigner, an Arya, a Mlechchha, out of attachment or
hatred, repentance, anger, greed, then he is unfit for pravrajya. He is a
sinner, condemned, blameworthy, worthy of being condemned. He is prohibited from
initiation. He is an obstacle, a hindrance, a bringer of disgrace, a bringer of
ill-repute, he has found the wrong path, he is immoral, even in the state he is
wicked, similarly defeated by some other vice, he is very complex, very hungry,
he is a thief, his caste, family, character and nature are unknown, he has a
body afflicted with many diseases and pains, and he is greedy for taste, he is a
great sleeper, he is a storyteller, he is a laughter, a play, a lust, a non-
believer, a master, a commander, and he is very arrogant, he is of a very low
class or a low caste, he is born in a womb against the truth or against the
rule, if any Acharya, Gachchhanayak, Geetarth or Ageetarth, who is endowed with
the qualities of an Acharya or who is endowed with the qualities of a
Gachchhanayak, who is going to be an Acharya or who is going to be a
Gachchhanayak, gives pravrajya to that (disciple) out of greed or pride even
within two hundred yojanas, then O Gautam! He is a violator of the rules of
preaching, a breaker of preaching, a breaker of pilgrimage, a breaker of the
Sangha.  And then he is equal to the one who is defeated by vice, he does not
see the loss of the afterlife, he is a promoter of immorality, he is a doer of
evil. He is a sinner, a great sinner, a great sinner among the great sinners. O
Gautam! Indeed, consider him to be a hypocrite, a demon, a fierce, a cruel, a
false-sighted.  **Sutra-825**  O Bhagvant! Why is it said so? O Gautam! There is
the path of liberation in conduct, but there is no path of liberation in
misconduct. Why is it said so? O Bhagvant! What are the conducts and what are
the misconducts? O Gautam! To behave according to the command of the Lord is
conduct, to behave against his command is called misconduct. In it, whatever is
against the command is to be completely avoided in solitude. And then, whatever
is not against the command is completely worthy of being practiced in solitude.
And O Gautam! If anyone is found who will contradict this Shramanapan, then
completely abandon him.  **Sutra-826**  O Bhagvant! How to test him? O Gautam!
Whoever is a man or woman who desires to embrace Shramanapan (from the hardship
of this initiation) trembles or shakes, sits down, vomits, desires his own or
others' community, speaks of non-belief, makes a relationship, starts walking
towards him or observes him, see in front of them

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka ucita hai
aura eka ucita nahIM hai  /  to he bhagavaMta ! aise kauna-kitane haiM ki jinheM
sAmAnya tora para pratiSedha kiyA hai? aura pratiSedha nahIM kiyA hai  /  he
gautama ! eka aise hai ki jo khilApha haiM aura eka khilApha nahIM haiM  /  jo
khilApha hai usakA pratiSedha kiyA jAtA hai  /  aura jo khilApha nahIM hai usakA
pratiSedha nahIM kiyA jAtA  /  he bhagavaMta ! kauna khilApha hai aura kauna
nahIM? he gautama ! jo jisa deza meM dugaMchA karane ke lAyaka ho, jina-jina
deza meM dugaMchita ho, jisa deza meM pratiSedha kiyA ho usa deza meM khilApha
hai  /  jo kisI deza meM duguMchanIya nahIM hai usa deza meM pratiSedhya nahIM
hai usa deza meM khilApha nahIM hai  /  he gautama ! vahA~, jisa-jisa deza meM
khilApha mAnA jAtA ho to use pravrajyA mata denA  /  jo koI jisa deza meM
khilApha na mAne jAte ho to unheM pravrajyA denI caahie| he bhagavaMta ! kisa
deza meM kauna khilApha aura kauna khilApha na mAnA jAe ? he gautama ! yadi koI
puruSa yA strI rAga se yA dveSa se, pazcAttApa se, krodha se, lAlaca se, zramaNa
ko, zrAvaka ko, mAtA-pitA ko, bhAI ko, bahana ko, bhANeja ko, putra ko, pautra
ko, putrI ko, bhatIje ko, putravadhU ko, jamAIrAja ko, bIbI ko, bhAgIdAra ko,
gotrIya ko, sajAti ko, vijAti ko, svajanavAle ko, Rddhirahita ko, svadezI ko,
paradezI ko, Arya ko, mleccha ko mAra DAle yA maravA DAle, upadrava kare yA
upadrava karavAe, vo pravrajyA ke lie anucita haiM  /  vo pApI hai, nindita hai
/  garhaNIya hai  /  duguMchA karane ke lAyaka haiM  /  vo dIkSA ke lie
pratiSedhita hai  /  vo Apatti hai  /  vighna hai| apayaza karavAnevAlA hai  /
apakIrti hRdayAnevAlA hai, unmArga pAyA huA hai, anAcArI hai, rAjya meM bhI jo
duSTa ho, aise hI dUsare kisI vyasana se parAbhavita, atisaMkiliSTa natIjevAlA
ho, aura ati kSudhAlu ho, devAdAra ho, jAti, kula, zIla aura svabhAva jisake
anajAna ho, kaIM vyAdhi vedanA se vyApta zarIravAle aura rasa meM lolupI ho,
kaIM nidrA karanevAle ho, kathA karanevAle - ha~sI krIDA kaMdarpa nAhavAda-
svAmItva kA bhAva hukuma karanevAlA aura kAphI katahalI svabhAvavAlA ho, kAphI
nimna kakSA yA preSya jAta kA ho, mithyAdaSTi yA zAsana ke khilApha kala meM
paidA huA ho, vaise kisI ko yadi koI AcArya, gacchanAyaka, gItArtha yA
agItArtha, AcArya ke guNayukta yA gaccha ke nAyaka ke guNayukta ho, bhAvi ke
AcArya yA bhAvi ke gaccha-nAyaka honevAle ho usa (ziSya) lAlaca se gArava se do
sau jojana bhItara pravrajyA de to vo he gautama ! pravacana kI maryAdA kA
ullaMghana karanevAlA, pravacana kA viccheda karanevAlA, tIrtha kA viccheda
karanevAlA, saMgha kA viccheda karanevAlA hotA hai| aura phira vo vyasana se
parAbhavita samAna hai, paraloka ke nukasAna ko na dekhanevAlA, anAcAra
pravartaka, akArya karanevAlA hai  /  vo pApI, ati pApI, mahA pApI meM bhI ucca
hai  /  he gautama ! vAkaI use abhigRhIta, caMr3a, raudra, krUra, mithyAdRSTi
smjhnaa| sUtra-825 he bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se aisA kahA jAtA hai ? he
gautama ! AcAra meM mokSamArga hai lekina anAcAra meM mokSamArga nahIM hai  /
kisa kAraNa se aisA kahA jAtA hai  /  he bhagavaMta ! kauna-se AcAra haiM aura
kauna-se anAcAra haiM ? he gautama ! prabhu kI AjJA ke mutAbika vyavahAra karanA
vo AcAra, usa ke pratipakSabhUta AjJA ke anusAra vyavahAra na karanA use anAcAra
kahate haiM  /  usameM jo AjJA ke pratipakSabhUta ho vo ekAnta meM sarva taraha
se sarvathA varjana ke lAyaka hai  /  aura phira jo AjJA ke pratipakSabhUta
nahIM hai vo ekAnta meM sarva taraha se sarvathA AcaraNa ke yogya hai  /  aura
he gautama ! yadi koI aisA mile ki isa zramaNapana kI virAdhanA kareMge to usakA
sarvathA tyAga karanA  /  sUtra- 826 he bhagavaMta ! usakI parIkSA kisa taraha
kare ? he gautama ! jo koI puruSa yA strI zramaNapana aMgIkAra karane kI
abhilASAvAle (isa dIkSA ke kaSTa se) kaMpana yA dhrujane lage, baiThane lage,
vamana kare, khuda ke yA dUsaroM ke samudAya kI AzAtanA kare, avarNavAda bole,
sambandha kare, usakI ora calane lage yA avalokana kare, unake sAmane dekhA muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 86

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  Study/Purpose/Sutra Number, be
ready to pull the robe, if there is an inauspicious occurrence or a bad omen,
then the Gītartha Acharya, Gachchādhipati or any other leader should explain
with great skill that such and such an omen, for which it is not possible to
give Pravrajyā. If perhaps Pravrajyā is given, then it becomes a great opposite
conduct - against. It completely corrupts the Dharma and character. They should
be considered to be eager to do inaction in solitude in all ways. No matter how
he boasts of Shruta or knowledge, he changes his form in many ways.
Sutra-827-830  O Bhagvant! Who is called a Bahurupi? One who has a lax
character, such a person who is eager to be a playful wanderer, pretending to be
a person of strict conduct, or one who is devoid of Dharma or has a corrupt
character, who assumes various forms in the land of drama, like a Charan or a
drama, one moment Ram, one moment Lakshman, one moment a ten-headed Ravana, and
then terrible ears, protruding teeth, an aged body, dull and faded eyes, a very
elaborate jester, such a person who changes his form, one moment a monkey,
Hanuman or Kesari Singh of the animal species. Such a Bahurupi, a jester, one
who does such Bahurupi, O Gautam! If perhaps, due to a slip, someone who is not
worthy has been given initiation, then keep him far away on the path, in
between. Do not walk with him closely. Do not talk to him with respect. Do not
give him any articles or equipment, do not make him study the scriptures, do not
give him permission, do not discuss secret matters with him.  O Gautam! Give
Pravrajyā to one who is free from the mentioned faults. And then, O Gautam! Do
not give initiation to an Anarya born in a Mlechchha country. Do not give
initiation to a son of a prostitute, and then do not give initiation to a
Ganika, and to one who is blind, one who has lost his hands and feet, one who is
mutilated, one who has pierced ears and nose, one who has leprosy, one who has
pus oozing from his body, one who has a rotten body, one who is lame in his
feet, one who cannot walk, one who is dumb, one who is deaf, one who has intense
Kashaya,  And to one who associates with many hypocrites, one who is attached to
strong raga-dvesha, moha, mithyatva, one who abandons his son, one who has
suffered the consequences of old and hollow gurus and Jinālaya, many Dev-Devi's
Sthanak, one who is a potter, and a Nat, a dramatic artist, a wrestler, a
Charan, one who is dull in reading Shruta, one whose feet and hands do not work,
one who has a large body, do not give him Pravrajyā.  Do not give Pravrajyā to
one who is nameless, weak, casteless, condemned, of a low family, foolish,
ignorant, of other types of low caste, whose family and nature are known. This
rule or any other rule, if there is a slip, if there is haste, then the
purification of that fault will take place in the previous crore years of the
country, or it may not. Sutra-831-832  As it is done in the scriptures, by
following the true system of the Gachchha, the infinite soul, freed from the
dirt and torment of karma-rupa-raj, has attained the path of liberation. Dev,
Asura and the humans of the world, bowing down to them, whose unparalleled fame
is sung in this world, as the Kevali Tirthankara Bhagvant has said, those who
remain in the Gan, those who strive for self-power, the Gachchādhipati attain
and will attain great liberation.  Sutra-833  O Bhagvant! Whoever is unaware of
the good qualities of the scriptures, whether by law or by lawlessness, in any
Gachchha's conduct or in the principles of the Mandalī Dharma, or in the thirty-
six types of knowledge, darshan, charitra, tapas and virya, in any way, in any
way, in any place of conduct, in the heart of any Gachchādhipati or Acharya,
even after the pure results have been obtained, repeatedly fails, slips, or acts
in a way that is not in accordance with the rules, then he is...  Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 87

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka kare,
veza khIMca lene ke lie hAjira ho, kisI azubha utpAta yA bUre nimitta apasaguna
ho, vaise ko gItArtha AcArya, gacchAdhipati yA dUsare kisI nAyaka kAphI nipuNatA
se nirUpaNa karake samajAe ki aise aise nimitta jisake lie ho to use pravrajyA
nahIM de sakate  /  yadi zAyada pravrajyA de to bar3A viparIta AcaraNa
karanevAlA-khilApha banatA hai| sarvathA nirdharma cAritra ko dUSita karatA hai
/  vo sabhI taraha se ekAnta meM akArya karane ke lie udyata mAne jAe  /  usa
taraha kA vo cAhe jaise bhI zruta yA vijJAna kA abhimAna karatA hai  /  kaIM
rUpa badalatA hai| sUtra-827-830 he bhagavaMta ! vo bahurupa kise kahate haiM ?
jo zithila AcAravAlA ho aisA osanna yA kaThina AcAra pAlanevAlA udyata vihArI
banakara vaisA nATaka kare  /  dharma rahita yA cAritra meM dUSaNa lagAnevAle ho
aisA nATaka bhUmi meM taraha taraha ke veza dhAraNa kare, usakI taraha cAraNa yA
nATaka ho, pala meM rAma, pala meM lakSmaNa, pala meM daza mastakavAlA rAvaNa
bane aura phira bhayAnaka kAna, Age dA~ta nIkala Ae ho, bur3hApe yukta
gAtravAlA, nisteja phike netravAlA, kAphI prapaMca bharA vidUSaka ho vaise veza
badalanevAlA, palabhara meM tiryaMca jAti ke baMdara, hanumAna yA kesarI siMha
bane  /  aise bahurupI, vidUSaka kare vaise bahurupa karanevAlA ho  /  isa
taraha he gautama ! zAyada skhalanA se kisI asati ko dIkSA dI gaI ho to phira
use dUra-dUra ke mArga ke bIca AMtarA rakhanA  /  pAsa-pAsa sAtha na calanA  /
usake sAtha sammAna se bAta-cIta na karanA  /  pAtra mAtraka yA upakaraNa
paDilehaNa na karAe use grantha zAstra ke uddeza na karavAnA, anujJA na denA,
gupta rahasya kI maMtraNA na krnaa| he gautama ! batAe gae doSa rahita ho use
pravrajyA denA  /  aura phira he gautama ! mleccha deza meM paidA honevAle
anArya ko dIkSA na denA  /  usa prakAra vezyAputra ko dIkSA na denA aura phira
gaNikA ko dIkSA na denA ora netra rahita ko, hAtha-pA~va kaTe hue ho, khaMr3ita
ho use aura chedita kAna nAsikAvAle ho, kor3ha rogavAle ko, zarIra se paru
nIkala rahA ho, zarIra sar3A huA ho  /  pA~va se lUlA ho, cala na sakatA ho,
gUMgA, baharA, ati utkaTa kaSAyavAle ko aura kaIM pAkhaMDI kA saMsarga
karanevAle ko, usa prakAra sajjar3a rAga-dveSa moha mithyAtva ke mala se lipta,
putra kA tyAga karanevAlA, purAne-khokhale guru aura jinAlaya kaIM deva devI ke
sthAnaka kI Avaka ko bhugatanevAle, kumhAra ho aura naTa, nATakIya, malla,
cAraNa, zruta par3hane meM jar3a, pA~va aura hAtha kAma na karate ho, sthUla
zarIravAlA ho use pravrajyA na denii| usa taraha ke nAma rahita, balahIna,
jAtihIna, niMdIta kulahIna, buddhihIna, prajJAhIna, anya prakAra ke adhama
jAtivAle, jisake kula aura svabhAva pahacAne ho aise ko pravrajyA na denA  /
yaha pada yA isake alAvA dUsare pada meM skhalanA ho  /  jaldabAjhI ho to deza
ke pUrva kror3a sAla ke tapa se usa doSa kI zuddhi ho yA na bhI ho  /  sUtra-
831-832 jisa prakAra zAstra meM kiyA hai usa prakAra gaccha kI vyavasthA kA
yathArtha pAlana karake karmarUpa raja ke maila aura kleza se mukta hue ananta
AtmA ne mukti pada pAyA hai  /  deva, asura aura jagata ke mAnava se namana kie
hue, isa bhuvana meM jinakA apUrva prakaTa yaza gAyA gayA hai, kevalI
tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ne batAe anusAra gaNa meM rahe, Atma parAkrama
karanevAle, gacchAdhipati kAphI mokSa pAte haiM aura paaeNge| sUtra-833 he
bhagavaMta ! jo koI na jAne hue zAstra ke sadbhAvavAle ho, vaha vidhi se yA
avidhi se kisI gaccha ke AcAra yA maMDalI dharma ke mUla yA chattIsa taraha ke
bhedavAle jJAna, darzana, cAritra, tapa aura vIrya ke AcAra ko mana se vacana se
yA kAyA se kisI bhI taraha koI bhI AcAra sthAna meM kisI gacchAdhipati yA AcArya
ke jitane aMtaHkaraNa meM vizuddha pariNAma hone ke bAda bhI bAra-bAra cUka jAe
/  skhalanA pAe yA prarUpaNA kare yA vyavahAra kare to vo muni dIparatnasAgara
kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 87

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number: Is a
worshiper or non-worshiper counted? Gautam: He is considered a non-worshiper.
Bhagvant: For what reason is this said? Gautam: He who is the form of the twelve
Angas, Shruta Jnana, a great proof, and endless. Whose beginning is not or
destruction is not, the one who has achieved the wonderful thing, has been well-
established from the beginning. Even Devendra is worthy of worship, such
unparalleled strength, vigor, extraordinary character, valor, great heroism,
radiance, brilliance, beauty, form, good fortune, a group of great arts, adorned
with prosperity, infinite knower, self-realized, Jinavar, and infinite,
beginningless, Siddha, present time, becoming Siddha, in the next near time,
achieving Siddha, such infinite ones whose names are worthy of being taken in
the morning, great beings, great souls, a tilak in the three worlds, the best in
the world, a brother of the world, a guru of the world, omniscient, knowing
everything, seeing everything, the best, the best, the propagator of Dharma
Tirtha, Arihant Bhagvant, past, future, beginningless, present, all
encompassing, all qualities, all things, the one who has recognized the harmony
of everything, not taking help from anyone, the best, alone, whose path is one,
such Tirthankar Bhagvant, he has described it from the Sutra, from the meaning,
from the scripture, in its true form, he has followed it as it is. Worthy of
being said, worthy of being recited, worthy of being described, worthy of being
spoken, worthy of being stated, such are these twelve Angas and their meaning,
the Ganipitaka. Those twelve Angas and their meaning, Tirthankar Bhagvant, who
is even worthy of worship by Devendra, the knower of all the substances and all
the categories of the entire world, including motion, stillness, history,
intellect, jiva, etc., the nature of things. They are also inviolable. They are
not to be transgressed, they are not to be desired. And then this twelve Anga
form of Shruta Jnana is beneficial to all the beings, souls, ghosts, and beings
of the entire world in solitude, it is capable of destroying karma, it is the
cause of liberation, i.e., moksha. They are the ones who follow along with the
births and deaths. They are the ones who show the way out of the world. It is
well-established, full of great meaning, it is full of great qualities, it is
very influential, because of the results being stated in it. The great sage,
Tirthankar Bhagvant, has preached it. Which is capable of destroying the twelve
Angas, the suffering, for the destruction of karma like Jnanaavaran, for the
liberation from the bondage of attachment, hatred, etc., for crossing over the
ocean of the world. Being so, I will wander by accepting the twelve Angas. I
have no other purpose. Therefore, whoever has not recognized the true nature of
the scriptures, or has known the essence of the scriptures, the Gachcha-Dhipati
or Acharya, whose results are pure from within, even then, he has missed the
essence of the Gachcha's conduct, the Dharma of the Mandal, the thirty-six types
of knowledge, etc., the conduct, the necessary things to be done, or the
preaching, he has found a slip, or he has preached or acted in a contrary way,
even a word or a letter within this twelve Anga form of Shruta Jnana, consider
him to be showing the wrong path. He who shows the wrong path, he becomes a non-
worshiper, for this reason it is said that he is a non-worshiper in solitude.
Sutra - 834 Bhagvant: Will there be anyone (soul) who will transgress, exceed,
violate, break, contradict, desire, transgress with mind, speech, or body, etc.,
this supreme guru, the inviolable, supreme refuge, the manifest, the very
manifest, the supreme welfare form, the one who ends all eight karmas and
suffering, the preaching, the twelve Anga form of Shruta Jnana, and become a
non-worshiper? Gautam: Infinite time passes, now there will be ten good eras. In
that time, countless Abhyavyo, countless Mithyadrishti, countless desirers,
living in the substance-form, will freely honor themselves according to their
own mind and imagination, they will desire honor, they will consider it to be
religious, they will not understand that it is welfare, they will adopt the
preaching of Jineswar, they will adopt it, they will suppress it with the greed
for the taste of the tongue, with the greed for the object, with suffering. Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 88

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka ArAdhaka
yA anArAdhaka ginA jAtA hai ? he gautama ! anArAdhaka mAnA jAtA hai| he
bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se aisA kahA jAtA hai ? he gautama ! jo isa bAraha aMga
rUpa zrutajJAna mahApramANa aura aMta rahita hai| jisakI Adi nahIM yA nAza
nahIM, sadbhuta cIja kI siddhi kara denevAle, anAdi se acchI taraha se siddha
huA hai  /  devendra ko bhI vaMdanIya hai aise atula bala, vIrya, asAmAnya
sattva, parAkrama, mahApuruSArtha, kAMti, teja, lAvaNya, rUpa, saubhAgya, ati
kalA ke samUha se samRddhi se zobhita, ananta jJAnI, apane Apa pratibodha pAe
hue jinavara aura ananta anAdi siddha vartamAna samaya meM siddha honevAle,
dUsare najadIkI kAla meM siddhi pAnevAle aise anantA jinake nAma subaha ko
grahaNa karane ke lAyaka haiM, mahAsattvavAle, mahAnubhAga, tIna bhuvana meM eka
tilaka samAna, jagata meM zreSTha, jagata ke eka baMdhu, jagata ke guru,
sarvajJa sarva jAnanevAle, sarva dekhanevAle, zreSTha uttama dharmatIrtha
pravartAnevAle, arihaMta bhagavaMta bhUta, bhAvi Adi anAgata vartamAna nikhila
samagra guNa paryAya sarva cIja kA sadbhAva jisane pahacAnA hai, kisI kI bhI
sahAya na lenevAle, sarvazreSTha, akele, jinakA eka hI mArga hai aise
tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta unhoMne sUtra se, artha se, graMtha se, yathArtha usakI
prarUpaNA kI hai, yathAsthiti anusevana kiyA hai| kahane ke lAyaka, vAcanA dene
ke lAyaka, prarUpaNA karane ke lAyaka, bolane ke lAyaka, kathana karane ke
lAyaka, aise yaha bAraha aMga aura usake artha svarUpa gaNipiTaka haiN| vo
bAraha aMga aura usake artha tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ki jo devendra ko bhI
vaMdanIya hai, samagra jagata ke sarva dravya aura sarva paryAya sahita gati
Agati itihAsa buddhi jIvAdika tattva cIja ke svabhAva ke sampUrNa jJAtA haiM  /
unheM bhI alaMghanIya haiM  /  atikramaNIya nahIM hai, AzAtanA na karane ke
lAyaka haiM  /  aura phira yaha bAraha aMgarUpa zrutajJAna sarva jagata ke jIva,
prANa, bhUta aura sattva ko ekAnta meM hitakArI, sukhakArI karmanAza karane meM
samartha niHzreyasa yAni mokSa ke kAraNa samAna hai  /  bhavobhava sAtha meM
anusaraNa karanevAle haiM  /  saMsAra kA pAra batAnevAle haiM  /  prazasta,
mahAartha se bharapUra hai, usameM phalasvarUpa Ada batAe hone se mahAguNa
yukta, mahAprabhAvazAlI hai, mahApuruSa ne jisakA anusaraNa kiyA hai  /  parama
maharSi ne tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ne upadeza diyA hai| jo dvAdazAMgI duHkha kA
kSaya karane ke lie jJAnAvaraNIya Adi karma kA kSaya karane ke lie, rAga, dveSa,
Adi ke baMdhana se mukta hone ke lie, saMsAra-samudra se pAra utarane ke lie
samartha hai  /  aisA hone se vo dvAdazAMgI ko aMgIkAra karake vicaraNa karU~gA
/  usake alAvA merA koI prayojana nahIM hai  /  isalie jisa kisI ne zAstra kA
sad bhAva na pahacAnA ho, yA zAstra kA sAra jAnA ho vo, gacchA-dhipati yA AcArya
jisake pariNAma bhItara se vizuddha ho to bhI gaccha ke AcAra, maMDalI ke
dharma, chattIsa taraha ke jJAnAdika ke AcAra yAvat AvazyakAdika karaNIya yA
pravacana ke sAra ko bAra-bAra cUke, skhalanA pAe yA isa bAraha aMgarUpa
zrutajJAna ke bhItara gUMthe hue yA bhItara hI eka pada yA akSara ko viparIta
rUpa se pracAra kare, AcaraNa kare use unmArga dikhAnevAlA samajhanA  /  jo
unmArga dikhAe vo anArAdhaka bane, isa kAraNa se aisA kahA jAtA hai ki vo ekAnte
anArAdhaka haiN| sUtra - 834 he bhagavaMta ! aisA koI (AtmA) hogA ki jo isa
parama guru kA alaMghanIya parama zaraNa karane ke lAyaka sphuTa-prakaTa, ati
prakaTa, parama kalyANa rUpa, samagra A~Tha karma aura duHkha kA anta karanevAlA
jo pravacanadvAdazAMgI rUpa zrutajJAna use atikrama yA prakarSapana se
atikramaNa kare, laMghana kare, khaMDita kare, virAdhanA kare, AzAtanA kare,
mana se, vacana se yA kAyA se atikramaNa Adi karake anArAdhaka ho sakate hai
kyA? he gautama ! anantA kAla vartate aba daza accherA hoMge  /  utane meM
asaMkhyAtA abhavyo, asaMkhyAtA mithyAdRSTi, asaMkhyAtA AzAtanA karanevAle,
dravyaliMga meM rahakara svacchaMdatA se apanI mati kalpanA ke anusAra se
satkAra karavAeMge, satkAra kI abhilASA rakheMge yaha dhArmika hai-aisA karake
kalyANa na samajanevAle jinezvara kA pravacana apanAeMge, use apanAkara jihvA
rasa kI lolupatA se, viSaya kI lolupatA se duHkha se karake damana kara sake
muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 88

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
Such sensory defects always destroy the true path and spread the wrong path. At
that time, they commit sins even to the extent of desiring the unbreakable
discourse of the all-knowing Tirthankara.  **Sūtra - 835** O Bhagvant! Which ten
auspicious events will occur in the infinite time? O Gautam! At that time, these
ten auspicious events will occur. They are as follows: 1. The Tirthankara
Bhagvant being subjected to an attack, 2. The fetus being turned around, 3. A
female Tirthankara, 4. The assembly of the community of those who are not
worthy, who do not take initiation, gathering in the Tirthankara's discourse, 5.
The arrival of the moon and the sun along with their vehicles in the
Tirthankara's Samavasarana, 6. Krishna Vasudeva going to Aparakanka to bring
back Draupadi, when the sound of the conch shell caused the Vasudevas to meet
each other out of curiosity, 7. The origin of the Harivaṃśa lineage in this
Bharatakṣetra, 8. The shedding of hair, 9. The attainment of Siddhi by 108
excellent-bodied beings at one time, 10. The worship and respect of the
unrestrained.  **Sūtra - 836** O Bhagvant! If someone, due to some kind of
negligence, desires the Jain teachings, can they attain the position of an
Ācārya? O Gautam! Whoever, due to some kind of negligence, repeatedly desires,
violates, or approves of any other place of discourse, or engages in misconduct,
or approves of misconduct, or desires the discourse, due to anger, pride,
deceit, greed, attachment, aversion, fear, laughter, delusion, or an unknown
defect, will not even attain enlightenment, let alone the position of an Ācārya.
O Bhagvant! Can an unworthy or a false-sighted person attain the position of an
Ācārya? O Gautam! They can, as the example of Angārapuruṣaka etc. shows. O
Bhagvant! Can a false-sighted person be established in that position? O Gautam!
They can be established.  O Bhagvant! This is certainly a false-sighted person.
How can they be identified by what sign? O Gautam! Whoever, for the sake of
being free from all attachments, utters all the Samayikas, and consumes food and
water with a conscious mind and breath, embraces the Āṇagāra Dharma, and
repeatedly consumes or causes others to consume liquor or intoxicating
substances, or approves of those who consume them, or refutes any of the nine
hidden practices of celibacy taught by a monk or nun, refutes them in mind,
speech, or body, or causes others to refute them, or approves of someone else
refuting or opposing them, is a false-sighted person. Not only a false-sighted
person, but also an Ābhigrāhika false-sighted person.  **Sūtra - 837** O
Bhagvant! If any Ācārya or Gaççanāyaka, due to some kind of reason, repeatedly
misrepresents this Nirgrantha discourse in a different way, what kind of fruit
will they receive from such an action? O Gautam! They will receive the same kind
of bad fruit that the Savadhācārya received. O Gautam! Who was that
Savadhācārya? What bad fruit did he receive? O Gautam! In a previous twenty-
four, before the twenty-four Tirthankaras of the present infinite time, there
was a Dharma Tirthankara who had a body of seven hands in length. In his Tirtha,
there were seven wonders. Now, at some point, that Tirthankara Bhagvant attained
Nirvana. Then, in due course, recognizing the group of devotees, a scholar of
the scriptures, with three kinds of pride, who was restless in liquor, and who
was only an Ācārya and Gaççanāyaka in name, gathered wealth from the Śrāvakas,
built a temple with a thousand pillars, high, with a sense of ego, in his own
name, and lived in it, being a cruel, wicked person with the characteristics of
a Duranta.  Despite having strength, power, courage, and determination, he
concealed his courage, strength, and power, and abandoned the practice of
unrestrained conduct, embracing the practice of daily life, in order to engage
in fierce attachment.  Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra -
Hindi Translation Page 89

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka vaisI
indriya ke doSa se hamezA yathArtha mArga ko naSTa karate haiM aura unmArga kA
phailAvA karate haiM  /  usa samaya vo sarva tIrthaMkara paramAtmA kA
alaMghanIya pravacana hai, usakI bhI AzAtanA karane taka ke pApa karate haiN|
sUtra - 835 he bhagavaMta ! anantA kAla kauna-se daza accherA hoMge? he gautama
! usa samaya yaha daza accherA hoMge  /  vo isa prakAra-1. tIrthaMkara
bhagavaMta ko upasarga, 2. garbha palaTAyA jAnA, 3. strI tIrthaMkara, 4.
tIrthaMkara kI dezanA meM abhavya, dIkSA na lenevAle ke samudAya kI parSadA
ikaTThI honA, 5. tIrthaMkara ke samavasaraNa meM caMdra aura sUraja kA apanA
vimAna sahita Agamana, 6. kRSNa vAsudeva draupadI ko vApasa lAne ke lie
aparakaMkA meM gae taba zaMkha dhvani ke zabda se kutUhala se eka dUsare
vAsudeva ko Apasa meM milanA huA, 7. isa bharatakSetra meM harivaMzakula kI
utpatti, 8. camarotpAta, 9. eka samaya meM 108 utkRSTa kAyAvAle kI siddhi, 10.
asaMyata kI pUjA satkAra kreNge| sUtra-836 he bhagavaMta ! yadi kisI taraha se
kabhI pramAda doSa se pravacana-jainazAsana kI AzAtanA kare kyA vo AcArya pada
pA sakate haiM ? he gautama ! jo kisI bhI taraha se zAyada pramAda doSa se bAra-
bAra krodha, mAna, mAyA yA lobha se, rAga se, dveSa se, bhaya se, ha~sI se, moha
se yA ajJAta doSa se pravacana ke kisI bhI dUsare sthAna kI AzAtanA kare,
ullaMghana kare, anAcAra, asAmAcArI kI prarUpaNA kare, usakI anumodanA kare yA
pravacana kI AzAtanA kare vo bodhi bhI na pAe, phira AcArya pada kI bAta hI
kahA~ ? he bhagavaMta ! kyA abhavI yA mithyAdRSTi AcArya pada pAe ? he gautama !
pA sakate haiM, isa viSaya meM aMgArapuruSaka Adi kA dRSTAMta hai  /  he
bhagavaMta ! kyA mithyAdRSTi ko vaise pada para sthApita kara sakate haiM ? he
gautama ! sthApana kara sakate haiN| he bhagavaMta ! yaha yakInana mithyAdRSTi
hai  /  aisA kauna-sI nizAnI se pahacAna sakate haiM? he gautama ! sarva saMga
se vimukta hone ke lie jisa ke sarva sAmAyika ucarI ho aura sacitta-prANa sahita
cIje aura pAnI kA paribhoga kare, aNagAra dharma ko aMgIkAra karake bAra-bAra
madirA yA teUkAya kA sevana kare, karavAe yA sevana karanevAle ko acchA mAnakara
usakI anumodanA kare yA brahmacarya kI batAI huI navaguptioM kI kisI sAdhu yA
sAdhvI usameM se eka kA bhI khaMDana kare, virodhe, mana, vacana, kAyA se
khaMDana karavAe yA virAdhanA karavAe yA dUsarA koI khaMDana yA virAdhanA karatA
ho to use acchA mAnakara, usakI anumodanA kare vo mithyAdRSTi hai  /  akelA
mithyAdRSTi hI nahIM lekina AbhigrAhika mithyAdRSTi samajhe  /  sUtra-837 he
bhagavaMta ! jo koI AcArya jo gacchanAyaka bAra-bAra kisI taraha se zAyada usa
taraha kA kAraNa pAkara isa nirgrantha pravacana ko anyathA rUpa se-viparIta
rUpa se prarUpe to vaise kArya se use kaisA phala mile? he gautama ! jo
sAvadhAcArya ne pAyA aisA azubha phala pAe, he gautama ! vo sAvadhAcArya kauna
the? usane kyA azubha phala pAyA? he gautama ! yaha RSabhAdika tIrthaMkara kI
cobIsa ke pahale ananta kAla gayA usake pahale kisI dUsarI cobIsI meM jaisA meM
sAta hAtha pramANa kI kAyAvAlA hU~ vaisI kAyAvAle dharma tIrthaMkara the| unake
tIrtha meM sAta Azcarya hae the| aba kisI samaya vo tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta kA
parinirvANa ho gayA taba kAlakrama se anurAgI hue samUha ko pahacAnakara usa
samaya na jAne hue zAstra ke sadbhAvavAle, tIna gArava rUpa, madirA meM becaina,
kevala nAma ka AcArya aura gacchanAyaka ne zrAvaka ke pAsa se dhana pAkara
dravya ikaTThA karake hajAra staMbhavAlA UMcA mamatvabhAva se apane nAma kA
caityAlaya banAkara vo duranta paMta lakSaNavAle adhamAdhamI usI meM rahane lge|
unameM balavIrya parAkrama puruSArtha hone ke bAvajUda bhI vo puruSakAra
parAkrama bala vIrya ko chipAkara ugra abhigraha karane ke lie aniyata vihAra
karane kA tyAga karake-choDakara nityavAsa kA sAzraya karake muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 89

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  The study/purpose/sūtra number
had become lax.  From behind, abandoning the fear of loss in this world and the
next, embracing the world for a long time, they, in the same monastery and
temple, became excessively attached, with intellect, delusion, attachment, ego,
etc., and after being defeated in the path of restraint, they began to strive to
worship the gods (like householders) with various garlands of flowers, etc. And
then they abandoned the word of the omniscient, which is the essence of the
scriptures, the best, from a great distance. According to it, one should not
kill all beings, all souls, all creatures, all entities, nor cause them pain.
One should not give them distress, nor capture them, nor restrain them. One
should not oppose them, nor insult them, nor harass them. Whether they are
subtle, mobile, immobile, sufficient, insufficient, one-sensed, two-sensed,
three-sensed, four-sensed, or five-sensed beings, one should not kill them, nor
cause them to be killed, nor consider the killer to be good, nor approve of
them. They forget even the vow of the great vow, which they themselves have not
adopted. And then, O Gautama! The muni himself should completely abstain from
sexual intercourse in solitude or with certainty and firmness, and from the
initiation of water and fire. This kind of dharma is firm, eternal, and
constant, as the omniscient Tirthankara Bhagavan, who knows the sorrow and
suffering of people, has declared. Sūtra-838  O Bhagavan! What should be said to
a sādhaka or sādhvi or a nirgrantha who commits dravyastava? O Gautama! Whoever
commits dravyastava, whether a sādhaka or sādhvi or a nirgrantha, is called an
unrestrained, improper, enjoyer of divine wealth, a worshiper of the gods, a
promoter of the wrong path, one who abandons virtue from a distance, a
deceitful, self-willed person. Sūtra-839  Similarly, O Gautama! Among many
ācāryas and gacchanāyakas who were engaged in misconduct, there was a great
ascetic nirgrantha named Kuvalayaprabha, who was like a shining emerald gem. He
had a great deal of knowledge about the sūtras and the meaning of the scriptures
concerning the great beings, etc. He was afraid of wandering in those wombs in
this ocean of the world. At that time, despite the prevalence of such
unrestraint and misconduct, and even after some sādharmikas continued to indulge
in unrestraint and misconduct, that nirgrantha Kuvalayaprabha did not violate
the command of the Tirthankara.  Now, at some point, he, who did not hide his
strength, vigor, heroism, and prowess, along with his entire family of
disciples, wandered around, preaching the beautiful dharma story that liberated
many noble souls from the prison-like world, according to the omniscient, the
Āgama Sūtra, its meaning, and both, free from attachment, aversion, delusion,
false belief, sense of possession, and ego, with non-attachment to all things,
in terms of substance, space, time, and state. He described their many virtues
in this way, in special places like mines, cities, fields, heaps, pavilions, and
droṇamukhas. His days passed in this way.  Now, one day, while wandering, he
came to the place where he had always resided in one place. Recognizing him as a
great ascetic, they honored him with appropriate humility, offering him worship,
a seat, etc. He sat there comfortably. After entertaining them with dharma
stories, etc., he tried to leave. Then, that great soul, Kuvalayaprabha, was
addressed by a deceitful, wrong-sighted, greedy person who earned his livelihood
by means of an evil, wicked, and corrupt character, who promoted the wrong path,
saying, "O Bhagavan! If you decide to stay here for the rainy season, the
Chaturmas, then, by your command, we will build as many Jina temples as you
wish. Please stay here for the Chaturmas."  O Gautama! At that time, that great
soul, Kuvalayaprabha, said, "Oh, speaker of sweet words! Even though it is a
Jinalaya, it is still like sin. I will never approve of it, even with words."
Thus, the scriptures... Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra -
Hindi Translation Page 90

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka zithila
hokara rahe the  /  piche se yaha loka aura paraloka ke nukasAna kI phIkra kA
tyAga karake, lambe arase kA saMsAra aMgIkAra karake vo hI maTha aura devakula
meM ati parigraha, buddhi, mUrchA, mamatvakaraNa, ahaMkAra Adi karake, saMyama
mArga meM pIche par3e parAbhavita hone ke bAda khuda taraha-taraha kI puSpa kI
mAlA Adi se (gRhastha kI taraha) devArcana karane ke lie udyamazIla hone lge|
aura phira jisa zAstra ke sAra samAna zreSTha aisA sarvajJa kA vacana hai, use
kAphI dUra se tyAga kiyA  /  usI ke anusAra sarva jIva, sarva prANa, sarva
bhUta, sarva sattva kA vadha na karanA, unako darda na denA  /  unheM paritApa
kA denA, unheM grahaNa na karanA yAni pakar3akara banda na karanA  /  unakI
virAdhanA na karanI, kilAmaNA na karanA, unakA upadrava na karanA, sUkSma
bAdara, trasa yA sthAvara, paryApta, aparyApta, ekendriya, jo koI beindriya,
teindriya, caUrindriya jIva ho, paMcendriya jIva ho vo sabhI trividha-trividha
se mana, vacana, kAyA se mAranA nahIM, maravAnA nahIM, mAranevAle ko acchA mata
samajhanA, unakI anumodanA na karanA, aisI khuda na apanAI huI mahAvrata kI
pratijJA bhI bhUla jAe  /  aura phira he gautama ! maithuna ekAnta meM yA
nizcaya se dRr3hatA se aura jala evaM agni kA samArambha sarvathA sarva taraha
se muni khuda varjana kare  /  isa taraha kA dharma dhruva, zAzvata, nitya hai
aisA logoM kA kheda duHkha ko jAnanevAle sarvajJa tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ne
prarUpaNa kiyA hai  /  sUtra-838 he bhagavaMta ! yadi koI sAdha yA sAdhvI yA
nirgrantha aNagAra dravyastava kare use kyA kahe ? he gautama ! jo koI sAdha yA
sAdhvI yA nirgrantha aNagAra dravyastava kare vo asaMyata-ayati devadravya kA
bhogika yA deva kA pUjArI unmArga kI pratiSThA karanevAlA, zIla ko dUra se tyAga
karanevAlA, kuzIla, svacchaMdAcArI aise zabda se bulAte haiN| sUtra-839 usI
taraha he gautama ! isa taraha anAcArame pravartanevAle kaIM AcArya evaM
gacchanAyaka ke bhItara eka marakata ratna samAna kAntivAle kuvalayaprabha nAma
ke mahA tapasvI aNagAra the  /  unheM kAphI mahAna jIvAdika cIja viSayaka sUtra
aura artha sambandhI vistAravAlA jJAna thA  /  isa saMsAra samudra meM una yoni
meM bhaTakane ke bhayavAle the| usa samaya usa taraha kA asaMyama pravartane ke
bAvajUda, anAcAra calatA hone ke bAda, kucha sAdharmika sasaMyama aura anAcAra
kA sevana karate rahane ke bAda bhI vo kuvalayaprabha anagAra tIrthaMkara kI
AjJA kA ullaMghana nahIM karate the| aba kisI samaya jisane bala vIrya
puruSakAra aura parAkrama nahIM chipAyA aise usa sabhI ziSya ke parivAra sahita
sarvajJa prarUpita, Agama sUtra usakA artha aura ubhaya ke anusAra, rAga, dveSa,
moha, mithyAtva, mamatvabhAva, ahaMkAra rahita, sabhI cIjoM meM dravya kSetra-
kAla aura bhAva se nirmamatva hue, jyAdA unake kitane guNa batAe isa taraha
khadAna, nagara, kher3a, kabar3a, maMDapa, droNamukha Adi sthAna vizeSa meM kaIM
bhavyAtmAoM ko saMsAra samAna kaidakhAne se chur3AnevAlI aisI suMdara
dharmakathA kA upadeza dete-dete vicaraNa karate the  /  usI prakAra unake dina
bItate the| aba kisI dina vihAra karate-karate vo mahAnubhAva vahA~ Ae ki jahA~
pahale hamezA eka sthAna para vAsa karanevAle rahate the| yaha mahA tapasvI hai
aisA mAnakara vaMdana karma Asana diyA ityAdika samucita vinaya karake unakA
sanmAna kiyA usa prakAra vo sukha se vahA~ baiThe  /  baiThakara dharmakathAdika
ke vinoda karavAte hue vahA~ se jAne ke lie kozIza karane lage  /  taba vo
mahAnubhAga kuvalayaprabha AcArya ko unhoMne durAnta prAnta adhama lakSaNavAle
veza se AjIvikA karanevAle, bhraSTAcAra sevana karanevAle, unmArga
pravartanevAle AbhigrAhaka mithyAdRSTi ne kahA ki-he bhagavaMta ! yadi Apa yahA~
eka varSAkAla kA cAturmAsa rahane kA taya karo to tumhArI AjJA se yahA~ utanate
jina caityAlaya taya karavAne ke lie hama para kRpA karake Apa yahIM cAturmAsa
kro| he gautama ! usa samaya vo mahAnubhAva kuvalayaprabha ne kahA ki-are priya
vacana bolanevAle ! jo ki jinAlaya hai, phira bhI yaha pApa samAna hai  /  maiM
kabhI bhI kevala vacana se bhI usakA anumodana nahIM karU~gA  /  isa prakAra
zAstra muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 90

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānīśītha'  Having stated the essential,
excellent essence of the study/purpose/sūtra number as it is, without any
distortion, without any doubt, he, the hypocrite with the appearance of a sādhū,
with a false view, earned the name and lineage of a Tīrthankara through the true
representation. He dried up the ocean of the world, leaving only one birth
remaining.  There was a gathering of the Sangha of the destined name, whose name
was not taken. He, along with many others who were sinful and wore the
appearance of sādhūs, gathered together and lamented the name of the great
ascetic, the great soul, whose name was Kuvalayaprabha. Not only that, but they
also clapped their hands together and established another name, 'Sāvadhācārya'.
They began to call him by that name. That name became famous. O Gautama! Even
though he was called by such an inappropriate word, even after speaking that
name, he did not become angry. Sūtra - 840  Now, some time later, those who were
wicked and turned away from good dharma, corrupted by both sādhū dharma and
śrāvaka dharma, only wearing the appearance of a sādhū, claimed to have embraced
the practice of renunciation. After some time, they began to think about the
Āgama among themselves: "In the absence of śrāvakas, it is the sādhūs who are
restrained who should take care of the temples, monasteries, and shelters. And
if the Jina temples are broken or have fallen, they should have them repaired
and renovated. If there is any beginning or commencement of such work, even if
there are sādhūs present, they should not be blamed." And then some people say
that restraint alone brings liberation. Some people say that it is the worship,
respect, and offerings to the Jina shrines and Jina stupas that bring about the
progress and influence of the Tīrtha and the Śāsana, and that is the means of
liberation. Thus, those who did not understand the true ultimate reality, the
sinners, spoke these words from their mouths, which seemed right to them.  At
that time, a dispute arose between the two parties. There was no skilled man
among them who was knowledgeable about the Āgama, who could think about what was
right or wrong in this matter, or who could resolve the dispute with evidence.
And one of them said that there were some Ācāryas who were knowledgeable about
this subject, who lived in some place. The other then mentioned another name. As
this dispute continued, one said, "What is the point of talking so much?
Whatever decision Sāvadhācārya gives us in this matter will be authoritative."
The other party on the opposite side also accepted this and said, "Call him
quickly."  O Gautama! They called him, and he, constantly engaged in unattached
conduct, arrived after seven months from a distant land. In the meantime, an
Āryā saw him. Seeing Sāvadhācārya, whose body was emaciated by arduous, intense
austerities and virtuous conduct, whose body was only skin and bones, whose body
was extremely radiant with the intensity of his austerities, she was filled with
wonder and began to think, "Is this great soul the Arhant, or is he embodied
dharma?" What more could she think? Even the Devas are worthy of worship. His
feet are worthy of my worship... Thinking this, with a heart full of devotion,
she circumambulated him and saw that she was suddenly and spontaneously
prostrating herself before Sāvadhācārya and touching his feet with her head. At
one time, that Ācārya, in the way that the Jina Bhagavants, the teachers of the
world, have taught, explained the sūtras and their meaning in order, as they
are, according to the teachings of the guru. He was engaged in that virtuous
activity.  One day, O Gautama! He said, "The eleven Angas, the fourteen Pūrvas,
the twelve Anga-like Śruta-knowledge, the essence, the secret, the nectar, are
the means of eliminating all sins and understanding the eight karmas. The fifth
study of the Mahānīśītha Śruta-skandha explains them. O Gautama! In this study,
as he was discussing, this verse came up. Sūtra - 841  "In the gaccha where such
a cause arises, and where the hand of a woman touches the hand of a man,
including the inner part of the garment, and even the Arhant himself touches it,
that gaccha should be considered devoid of the mula-guna."  Muni Dīparatnasāgara
Kṛt (Mahānīśītha) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi Translation Page 91

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka ke
sArabhUta uttama tattva ko yathAsthita aviparIta niHzaMka kahate hue vo
mithyAdRSTi sAdhuvezadhArI pAkhaMDI ke bIca yathArtha prarUpaNA se tIrthaMkara
nAmagotra upArjana kiyA  /  eka bhava bAkI rahe vaisA saMsAra samudra sUkhA
diyaa| vahA~ jisakA nAma nahIM liyA jAtA vaisA diSTa nAma kA saMgha ikaTThA
karanevAlA thA  /  usane evaM kaIM pApamati vAle vezadhArI Apasa meM ikaTThe
hokara he gautama ! usa mahAtapasvI mahAnubhAva kA jo kuvalayaprabha nAma thA
usake bajAya nAma kA vilApa kiyA  /  itanA hI nahIM, lekina sAtha milakara tAlI
dekara 'sAvadhAcArya' aise dUsare nAma kA sthApana kiyA  /  usI nAma se aba
unheM bulAne lage  /  vo hI nAma prasiddha huA  /  he gautama ! vaise aprazasta
zabda se bulAne ke bAvajUda bhI usI taraha nAma bolane ke bAda bhI vo sahaja bhI
kopita nahIM hue the| sUtra - 840 aba kisI samaya durAcArI acche dharma se
parAGmukha honevAle sAdhudharma aura zrAvaka dharma donoM se bhraSTa honevAlA
kevala bheSa dhAraNa karanevAle hama pravrajyA aMgIkAra kI hai-aisA pralApa
karanevAle aise unako kucha samaya gujarane ke bAda bhI vo Apasa meM Agama
sambandhI socane lage ki-zrAvaka kI gairamojudagI meM saMyata aise sAdhu hI
devakula maTha upAzraya kI dekhabhAla kare aura jinamaMdira khaMDita hue ho,
gira gae ho to usakA jIrNoddhAra karavAe, marammata karavAe, yaha kAma karate
karate yadi koI Arambha, samArambha ho usameM sAdhu ho to bhI unheM doSa nahIM
lgtaa| aura phira kucha loga aisA kahate haiM ki saMyama hI mokSa dilavAtA hai
/  kucha loga aisA kahate haiM ki-jina prAsAda jina caitya kI pUjA-satkAra-bali
vidhAna Adi karane se tIrtha se zAsana kI unnati-prabhAvanA hotI hai aura vo hI
mokSa gamana kA upAya hai  /  isa prakAra yathArtha paramArtha na samajhanevAle
pApakarmI unheM ThIka lage vo mukha se pralApa karate the usa samaya do pakSa
meM vivAda paidA huA  /  unameM kisI vaise Agama ke mAhitagAra kuzala puruSa
nahIM hai ki jo isa viSaya meM yukta yA ayukta kyA hai usake bAre meM soca sake
yA pramANapUrvaka vivAda ko samA sake  /  aura usameM se eka aisA kahe ki isa
viSaya ke jAnakAra kucha AcArya kucha sthAna para rahe haiM  /  dUsarA phira
dUsare kA nAma batAe, aise vivAda calate-calate eka ne kahA ki yahA~ jyAdA
pralApa karane se kyA ? hama sabako isa viSaya meM sAvadhAcArya jo nirNaya de vo
pramANabhUta  /  dUsare sAmane ke pakSavAle ne bhI usa bAta ko apanAyA aura kahA
ki unheM jalda bulaao| he gautama ! unheM bulAe yAni dUra deza se vo satata
apratibaddha vihAra karate karate sAta mahine meM A pahu~ce  /  bIca meM eka
AryA ko usake darzana hue  /  kaSTakArI ugra tapa aura cAritra se zoSita
zarIravAle, jisake zarIra meM kevala camar3I aura haDDI bAkI rahe haiM, tapa ke
teja se ati dIpAyamAna aise usa sAvadhAcArya ko dekhakara kAphI vismaya pAi huI
usa pala meM vitarka karane lagI ki-kyA yaha mahAnubhAva vo arihaMta hai ki yaha
mUrtimAna dharma hai ? jyAdA kyA soce? devendra ko bhI vaMdanIya hai  /  usake
caraNa yugala muje vaMdana karane ke lAyaka hai... aisA cintavana karake
bhaktipUrNa hRdayavAlI unakI aura pradakSiNA dekara mastaka se pA~va kA
saMghaTTA ho jAe vaise acAnaka sahasA vo sAvadhAcArya ko praNAma karate aura
pA~va kA saMghaTA hote dekhA  /  kisI samaya vo AcArya unako jisa taraha jagata
ke guru tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ne upadeza diyA hai  /  usa prakAra guru ke
upadeza ke anusAra kramAnusAra yathAsthita sUtra aura artha kI prarUpaNA karate
haiM, usa prakAra vo usakI saddahaNA karate haiN| eka dina he gautama ! usa
prakAra kahA ki gyAraha aMga; caudaha pUrva, bAraha aMga rUpa zrutajJAna kA
sAra, rahasya ho, navanIta ho to samagra pApa kA parihAra aura A~Tha karma ko
samajhAnevAle mahAnizItha zrutaskaMdha kA pA~cavA adhyayana hai  /  he gautama !
isa adhyayana meM jitane meM vivecana karate the utane meM yaha gAthA aaii|
sUtra-841 "jisa gaccha meM vaisI kAraNa paidA ho aura vastra ke AMtarA sahita
hasta se strI ke hAtha kA sparza karane meM aura arihaMta bhI khuda kara sparza
kare to usa gaccha ko mulaguNa rahita samajhanA  / " muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 91

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number Sutra-
842  Then, with his doubts, he thought that if I were to present the true form
here, then at that time, the Arya who was offering her respects had touched my
feet with her head, and all this had been seen by the resident of this Chaitya.
So, just as my name has become Savdhacharya, they will also give me another such
disrespectful name, which will make me unworthy of worship in all the worlds. So
now I will present the Sutra and its meaning in a different way. But doing so
will be a great sin, so what should I do now? Should I present this verse or
not? Should I present it in a different way? Or, oh dear, this is not right.
Both ways are very reprehensible. It is not right to present it in a
contradictory way, for the sake of self-interest. Because the intention of the
scriptures is that the monk who repeatedly misses the twelve-fold Anga form of
the Shruta-Vachan, who is negligent in obtaining Skhalana, who, out of fear of
doubt, etc., presents even a single word, syllable, or vowel in a different way,
who explains the Sutra and its meaning with doubt, who gives an inappropriate
reading, that monk becomes eternally bound to Samsara. So what should I do here
now? Whatever is to be, let it be. Thinking that I will tell the true meaning of
the Sutra according to the Guru's teachings, O Gautam! I presented the true
explanation of that verse, whose every part is pure. On this occasion, O Gautam!
That Veshdhari, who was of the lowest character and belonged to the distant
province, asked Savdhacharya, "If this is so, then you are also devoid of the
root qualities. Because if you remember that day, then that Arya was eager to
offer her respects, and while offering her respects, she touched your feet with
her head. At that time, this Savdhacharya, who was afraid of the ill-repute of
this world and was filled with excessive pride, was given a name. If such a name
is given now, I will become unworthy of worship in all the worlds. So what
solution should I give here now?" Thinking this, Savdhacharya remembered the
words of the Tirthankara: "Whoever is the Gachchanaayak or Gachchadhipati of any
Acharya, who is a bearer of Shruta, should know everything that the omniscient,
infinite knower, Bhagavan, has forbidden in the place of sin and exception, and
should act according to all the Shruta. Do not consider the one who acts well,
do not approve of him, do not repeatedly miss or make a mistake due to anger,
pride, Maya, greed, fear, laughter, arrogance, pride, or negligence, whether
alone or in the presence of others, whether asleep or awake, whether with the
mind, speech, or body, whether in the three ways or in the three ways, if there
is any contradiction in even a single word of this Sutra or its meaning, that
monk is repeatedly blameworthy, reprehensible, worthy of being scolded, worthy
of being despised, defeated by all the worlds, with a body afflicted by many
diseases and pains, wandering in the endless ocean of Samsara, which has ten
excellent qualities, and cannot find even a moment of peace in that wandering.
So, I, who am subject to negligence, a sinner, of the lowest, lowest, and
inferior nature, a cowardly man, have been faced with a great calamity here,
from which I am unable to give a reasonable solution. And in the afterlife, I
will wander in the endless cycle of births and suffer terrible pain for
countless times. Indeed, I am unfortunate. The wicked listener, who was a doer
of evil deeds, recognized this Savdhacharya, who was thinking in this way, as a
liar and a very proud person. Then, with a mind filled with anger, knowing him,
that wicked listener said, "Do not take up the lecture until this doubt is
dispelled. Therefore, give a solution to this, with a mature strategy that can
remove stubbornness."  Then he thought, "Now they will not leave without getting
a solution to this." So how should I give them a solution? Thinking this, again,
O Gautam! That wicked person said to him, "Why are you drowning in this ocean of
worry? Quickly give some solution to this matter. And then give such a solution
that your strategy is unobjectionable, without any contradiction, in the stated
faith." After that, Savdhacharya, feeling remorse in his heart for a long time,
thought in his mind and said, "For this reason, the Jagadguru has said that..."
Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 92

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra-
842 taba apanI zaMkAvAlA unhoMne socA ki yadi yahA~ maiM yathArtha prarUpaNA
karU~gA to usa samaya vaMdanA karatI usa AryA ne apane mastaka se mere caraNAgra
kA sparza kiyA thA, vo saba isa caityavAsI ne mujhe dekhA thA  /  to jisa taraha
merA sAvadhAcArya nAma banA hai, usa prakAra dUsarA bhI vaisA kucha avahelanA
karanevAlA nAma rakha deMge jisase sarva loka meM mai apUjya banU~gA  /  to aba
maiM sUtra aura artha anyathA prakhaNa karU~  /  lekina aisA karane meM mahA
AzAtanA hogI to aba mujhe kyA karanA? to isa gAthA kI prarUpaNA kare ki na kare?
agara alaga-alaga rUpa se prarUpaNA kare? yA arere yaha yukta nahIM hai| donoM
taraha se kAphI garhaNIya hai  /  Atmahita meM rahe, viruddha prarUpaNA karanA
vo ucita nahIM hai  /  kyoMki zAstra kA yaha abhiprAya hai ki jo bhikSu bAraha
aMga rUpa zrutavacana ko bAra-bAra cUka jAe, skhalanA pAne meM pramAda kare  /
zaMkAdika ke bhaya se eka bhI pada-akSara, dhuMda, mAtrA ko anyathA rUpa se
khilApha prarUpaNA kare, saMdehavAle sUtra aura artha kI vyAkhyA kare  /  avidhi
se anucita ko vAcanA de, vo bhikSu ananta saMsArI hotA hai  /  to aba yahA~ maiM
kyA karU~ ? jo honA hai vo ho  /  guru ke upadeza anusAra yathArtha sUtrArtha ko
batAUM aisA socakara he gautama ! samagra avayava vizuddha aisI usa gAthA kA
yathArtha vyAkhyAna kiyA  /  isa avasara para he gautama ! duranta prAnta adhama
lakSaNavAle usa vezadhArI ne sAvadhAcArya ko savAla kiyA ki-yadi aisA hai to
tuma bhI mula guNa rahita ho  /  kyoMki tuma vo dina yAda kare to vo Arya unheM
vaMdana karane kI icchAvAlI thI taba vaMdana karate karate mastaka se pA~va kA
sparza kiyaa| usa samaya isa loka ke apayaza se bhayabhIta ati abhimAna pAnevAle
usa sAvadhAcArya kA nAma rakha diyA vaise abhI kucha bhI vaisA nAma rakheMge to
sarva loka meM maiM apUjya banU~gA  /  to aba yahA~ maiM kyA samAdhAna dU~ ?
aisA socate hue sAvadhAcArya ko tIrthaMkara kA vacana yAda AyA ki-jo kisI AcArya
kA gacchanAyaka yA gacchAdhipati zruta dhAraNa karanevAlA ho usane jo kucha bhI
sarvajJa anantajJAnI bhagavaMta ne pApa aura apavAda sthAnaka ko pratiSedhe ho
vo sarva zruta anusAra jAnakara sarva taraha se AcaraNa kare, AcaraNa karanevAle
ko acchA na mAne, usakI anumodanA na kare, krodha se, mAna se, mAyA se, lobha
se, bhaya se, ha~sI se, gArava se, darpa se, pramAda se bAra-bAra cUka jAne yA
skhalanA hone se dina meM yA rAta ko akelA ho yA parSadA meM ho, sote hue yA
jAgate hue  /  trividha trividha se mana, vacana yA kAyA se yaha sUtra yA artha
ke eka bhI pada ke yadi koI virAdhaka ho  /  vo bhikSu bAra-bAra niMdanIya,
garhaNIya, khIMsA karane ke lAyaka, dugaMchA karane ke lAyaka, sarvaloka se
parAbhava-pAnevAlA, kaIM vyAdhi vedanA se vyApta zarIravAlA, utkRSTa dazAvAle
ananta saMsAra sAgara meM paribhramaNa karanevAle hote haiM, usameM paribhramaNa
karane se eka pala bhI kaIM zAyada bhI zAnti nahIM pA sakatA  /  to pramAdAdhIna
huA pApI adhamAdhama hIna sattvavAle kAyara puruSa samAna mujhe yahIM yaha bar3I
Apatti paidA huI hai ki jisase maiM yahA~ yuktivAlA kisI samAdhAna dene ke lie
samartha nahIM ho sakatA  /  aura paraloka meM bhI ananta bhava paramparA meM
bhramaNA karate hue anantI bAra ke ghora bhayAnaka duHkha bhugatanevAlA banU~gA
/  vAkaI maiM maMda bhAgyavAlA hU~  /  isa prakAra socanevAle aise sAvadhAcArya
ko durAcArI pApakarma karanevAle duSTa zrotA ne acchI taraha se pahacAna liyA
ki, yaha jhUThA kAphI abhimAna karanevAlA hai| usake bAda kSobha pAe hue
manavAle use jAnakara usa duSTa zrotAoM ne kahA ki jaba taka isa saMzaya kA
chedana nahIM hogA taba taka vyAkhyAna mata uThAnA, isalie isakA samAdhAna
durAgraha ko dUra karane ke lie samartha praur3hayukti sahita do  /  taba usane
socA ki aba usakA samAdhAna pAe binA vo yahA~ se nahIM jaaeNge| to aba maiM
usakA samAdhAna kisa taraha dU~? aisA socate hue phira se he gautama ! usa
durAcArI ne use kahA ki tuma aise cintA sAgara meM kyoM DUba gae ho ? jalda hI
isa viSaya kA kucha samAdhAna do  /  aura phira aisA samAdhAna do ki jisase
batAI huI AstikatA meM tumhArI yukti etarAja binA-avyaktacArI ho  /  usake bAda
lambe arase taka hRdaya meM paritApa mahasUsa karake sAvadhAcArya ne mana se
cintavana kiyA aura kahA ki isa kAraNa se jagadguru ne kahA hai ki - muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 92

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Cheda Sutra-5, 'Mahanisitha' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number Sutra-843
Just as water placed in an unfit vessel destroys the water and the vessel,
similarly, the sutras and their meanings given in an unfit vessel are destroyed.
This principle is the secret that the insignificant basis is destroyed. Sutra -
844 Even then, that wicked person said, "Why do you indulge in such crooked and
perverse speech without any proper relationship? If you are not capable of
providing a proper solution, then get up, leave this seat, and leave quickly.
Where the entire sangha has appointed you to expound the scriptures, considering
you as an authority." After that, even after a long time of repentance, O
Gautama! Unable to find any other solution, the cautious acharya said that the
Agam is endowed with the path of universal acceptance and exception. You do not
know that the one-sided view is false belief. The command of the Jineshvara is
of the nature of non-absolutism. O Gautama! Just as the new clouds of the rainy
season soothe the peacock tormented by the heat of summer, in the same way,
those discerning listeners accepted him with great respect. After that, O
Gautama! Without even repenting for the sin of uttering a single word, that
cautious acharya was born as a celestial being. From there, migrating, he was
born in the womb of the daughter of the priest of Vasudeva, who was living in a
foreign land. At some point, his mother, the wife of the priest, saw that her
husband had gone abroad and her daughter had become pregnant, knowing this, she
said, "Alas! My wicked daughter has defiled the entire family. The honor has
been stained." Hearing this, the priest, after suffering great anguish for a
long time, firmly decided in his heart and expelled her from the country,
because this is a very serious defamation that cannot be remedied, I am very
afraid of it. After being expelled by the father, unable to find a place
anywhere, after some time, troubled by the cold, heat, and wind, weakened by
hunger, she entered into servitude in the house of a merchant dealing in ghee,
oil, etc. There, they collect false liquor from the one who drinks a lot of
liquor, and repeatedly eat false food. At some point, she was constantly eating
false food and was seen drinking liquor and meat. Then she developed a strong
desire to drink a lot of liquor. After that, low-caste people like actors,
students, bards, diggers, servants, thieves, etc., who had properly renounced
the head, tail, ears, bones, corpses, etc., started eating the light, false meat
and drinking liquor. After that, she started eating the specially cooked meat in
the earthen bowls placed in the navel. After some days, she became very greedy
for liquor and meat. In the merchant's house, she started stealing copper
vessels, clothes, or other things and selling them elsewhere to buy liquor
without meat. The merchant came to know this whole truth. The merchant
complained to the king. The king ordered execution. Then in that kingdom, there
is such a family tradition that if a pregnant woman becomes a criminal and is
sentenced to death, but until she gives birth to the child, she is not killed.
The executioners and the police, etc. took her to their house and started
waiting for the time of delivery and started protecting her. At some time, the
violent people of the Harikesh caste took her to their house. Translation of the
Agam Sutra 'Mahanisitha' composed by Muni Deepratasagar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra-843
kacce ghar3e meM DAlA huA jala jisa taraha jala aura usa ghar3e kA vinAza karatA
hai, vaise apAtra meM diye sUtra aura artha ko aura sUtrArtha ko naSTa karate
haiM  /  isa taraha kA siddhAMta rahasya hai ki alpatuccha AdhAra naSTa hotA hai
/  sUtra - 844 taba bhI usa durAcArI ne kahA ki tuma aise Ar3e-Ter3he rizte ke
binA durbhASita vacana kA pralApa kyoM karate ho? yadi ucita samAdhAna dene ke
lie zaktimAna na ho to khar3e ho jAva, Asana chor3a de yahA~ se jalda Asana
chor3akara nIkala jAe | jahA~ tumako pramANabhUta mAnakara sarva saMgha ne
tumako zAstra kA sadbhAva kahane ke lie pharamAna kiyA hai| aba deva ke upara
kyA doSa DAle? usake bAda phira bhI kAphI lambe arase taka phikra pazcAttApa
karake he gautama ! dUsarA kisI samAdhAna na milane se lambA saMsAra aMgIkAra
karake sAvadhAcArya ne kahA ki Agama utsarga aura apavAda mArga se yukta hotA
hai| tuma yaha nahIM jAnate ki ekAnta pakSa mithyAtva hai  /  jinezvara kI AjJA
anekAntavAlI hotI hai  /  he gautama ! jaise grISma ke tApa se saMtApa pAnevAle
mora ke kala ko varSAkAla ke nae megha kI jaladhArA jaise zAnta kare,
abhinandana de, vaise vo dRSTa zrotAone use kAphI mAnapUrvaka mAnya karake
apanAyA usake bAda he gotama ! eka hI bacana uccArane ke doSa se ananta
saMsArIpana kA karma bAMdhA ? usakA pratikramaNa bhI kie binA pApa-samUha ke
mahAskaMdha ikaTThA karavAnevAle usa utsUtra vacana kA pazcAttApa kie binA
marakara vo sAvadhAcArya bhI vyaMtara deva meM paidA hue| vahA~ se cyavakara vo
paradeza gae hue pativAlI prati vAsudeva ke purohita kI putrI ke garbha meM
paidA huaa| kisI samaya usakI mAtA purohita kI patnI kI najara meM AyA ki, pati
paradeza meM gayA huA hai aura putrI garbhavatI huI hai, vo jAnakara hA hA hA
yaha merI durAcArI putrI ne mere sarva kula para mazI kA kucar3A lagAyA  /
ijjata para dAga laga gayA  /  yaha bAta purohita ko batAI vo bAta sunakara
dIrghakAla taka kAphI saMtApa pAkara hRdaya se nirdhAra karake purohita ne use
deza se nikAla diyA kyoMki yaha mahA asAdhya nIvAraNa na kara sake vaisA apayaza
phailAnevAlA bar3A doSa hai, usakA mujhe kAphI bhaya lagatA hai| aba pitA ke
nIkAla dene ke bAda kahIM bhI sthAna na pAnevAle thor3e samaya ke bAda zardI
garmI pavana se parezAna honevAlI akAla ke doSa se kSudhA se durbala kaMThavAlI
usane ghI, tela Adi rasa ke vyApArI ke ghara meM dAsapana se praveza kiyA  /
vahA~ kAphI madirApAna karanevAle ke pAsa se jhUThI madira pAkara ikaTThI karate
haiM  /  aura bAra-bAra jhUThA bhojana khAte haiM  /  kisI samaya hamezA jhuThA
bhojana karanevAlI aura vahA~ kAphI madirA Adi pIne ke lAyaka cIje dekhakara
madirA kA pAna karake aura mA~sa kA bhojana karake rahI thii| taba use usa
taraha kA dohalA (icchA) paidA huI ki maiM bahuta madyapAna karU~  /  usake bAda
naTa, nATakiyA, chAtra dharanevAle, cAraNa, bhATa, bhUmi khudanevAle, naukara,
cora Adi halkI jAtivAle ne acchI taraha se tyAga karanevAlI, mastaka, pU~cha,
kAna, haDDI, mRtaka Adi zarIra avayava  /  bachaDe ke toDe hae aMga jo khAne ke
lie ucita na ho aura pheMka die ho vaise halake jhUThe mA~sa madirA kA bhojana
karane lgii| usake bAda vo jhUThe mITTI ke kaTore meM jo koI nAbhi ke bIca meM
vizeSa taraha se pakva honevAlA mA~sa ho usakA bhojana karane lagI  /  kucha
dina bItane ke bAda madya aura mA~sa para kAphI gRddhivAlI huii| usa rasa ke
vyApArI ke ghara meM se kA~sA ke bhAjana vastra yA dUsarI cIja kI corI karake
dUsarI jagaha becakara mA~sa rahita madya kA bhugavaTA karane lagI, vyApArI ko
yaha sarva hakIkata jJAta huI  /  vyApArI ne rAjA ko phariyAda kii| rAjA ne
vadha karane kA hukuma kiyA  /  taba rAjya meM isa taraha kI koI kuladharma hai
ki jo kisI garbhavatI strI gunhegAra bane aura vadha kI zikSA pAe lekina jaba
taka bacce ko janma na de taba taka use mAra na DAle  /  vadha karane ke lie
niyukta kie hue aura koTavAlI Adi usako apane ghara le jAkara prasava ke samaya
kA intajAra karane lge| aura usakI rakSA karane lge| kisI samaya harikeza
jAtivAle hiMsaka loga use apane ghara le ge| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 93

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  In due course, the soul of
Savdhacharya was born as a child. Immediately after giving birth, she abandoned
the child and fled in terror of death. O Gautam! When she fled in one direction,
the Chandala realized that the sinner had fled. The leader of the executioners
pleaded with the king, "O Dev! The wicked woman has fled, abandoning the child
as tender as the womb of a Kel. The king replied, "Let her go, but take good
care of the child. Make every effort to ensure that the child does not die. Take
these five thousand dravyas for his expenses." Then, by the king's order, the
son of the Kulata was raised like a son. In due course, the wicked executioner
died. Then the king made the child his heir. He made him the leader of five
hundred Chandalas. While residing in the position of the leader of the butchers,
he engaged in such unrighteous deeds and went to the seventh hellish earth
called Apratisthan.  Thus, the soul of Savdhacharya, experiencing intense,
fierce, wrathful, and terrifying suffering in the seventh hell, equivalent to
thirty-three oceans, for a long time, emerged from there and was born in the
Uruga caste in Antaradvip. From there, he died and was born as a fish in the
Tiryanch Yoni. There too, he suffered for twenty-six years, enduring pain
similar to the pain of hell, and then, O Gautam, he was born as a human. From
there, the soul of Savdhacharya was born as Vasudev. There too, after fulfilling
his due lifespan, he died due to the sins of Mahaparigraha, which he had
accumulated through many battles, and went to the seventh hell. From there,
after a long time, he was born in the human caste called Gajakarna. There too,
due to the sin of meat-eating, he became cruel and determined, and died, again
going to the seventh hell, Apratisthan. From there, he was born again as a fish
in the Tiryanch Yoni. There, he suffered unbearable pain like hell and died.
Then, he was born in the womb of the daughter of a widowed Kulata Brahmin.  Now,
when the soul of Savdhacharya was in the womb of the Kulata, due to the sin of
using caustic substances and medicinal concoctions to secretly abort the fetus,
he was born with a body riddled with diseases and pain, decaying due to a
malignant disease, covered in scabs, with a swarm of wriggling worms, eaten by
insects, resembling hell, and dwelling in intense suffering. O Gautam! After
that, he was condemned, despised, and hated by all beings, rejected by all
worlds, deprived of food, drink, enjoyment, and consumption, and lived for seven
years, two months, and four days, enduring extraordinary physical and mental
suffering, and died, being born as a Vyantar Dev. From there, he became a human.
Then, he became the leader of the executioners, and again, due to the sin of
that deed, he went to the seventh hell. From there, he was born as a bull in the
Tiryanch Yoni, belonging to a potter. From there, he became a human. Then, he
became the leader of the executioners, and again, due to the sin of that deed,
he went to the seventh hell.  From there, he was born as a bull in the Tiryanch
Yoni, belonging to a potter. There, he was yoked to a mill, cart, plow, and
arghatta, and his neck was rubbed against the grinding stone day and night,
causing blisters and internal decay. Worms grew in his neck. Now, when his
master, the potter, realized that he was no longer strong enough to bear the
yoke on his shoulders, he started making him carry loads on his back. As time
passed, his back also became rubbed and decayed, just like his shoulders. Worms
grew in his back too. His entire back decayed, and the skin peeled off,
revealing the flesh underneath. After that, he was considered useless because he
could no longer work, and was abandoned. O Gautam! The soul of Savdhacharya was
abandoned as a bull, eaten by wriggling worms. After that, he lived for twenty-
nine years, with a decayed body, eaten by crows, dogs, and worms, both inside
and out, and died, being born as a human, with a body riddled with diseases and
pain, in the house of a very wealthy man. There too, he suffered from vomiting,
bitter, pungent, astringent, and delicious tastes,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka kAlakrame
usane sAvadhAcArya ke jIva ko bacce ke rUpa meM janma diyA  /  janma dekara
turanta hI vo bacce kA tyAga karake mauta ke Dara se ati trasta honevAlI vahA~
se bhAga gaI  /  he gautama ! jaba vo eka dizA se bhAgI aura usa caMDAla ko patA
calA ki vo pApINI bhAga gaI hai| vadha karanevAle ke AgevAna ne rAjA ko binatI
kI, he deva ! kela ke garbha samAna komala bacce kA tyAga karake durAcAriNI to
bhAga calI  /  deva rAjA ne pratyuttara diyA ki bhale bhAga gaI to use jAne do,
lekina usa bacce kI acchI taraha dekhabhAla karanA  /  sarvathA vaisI kozIza
karanA ki jisase vo baccA mara na jAe  /  usake kharca ke lie yaha pA~ca hajAra
dravya grahaNa karo  /  usake bAda rAjA ke hukuma se putra kI taraha usa kulaTA
ke putra kA pAlana-poSaNa kiyA, kAlakrama se vo pApakarmI phA~sI denevAle kA
adhipati mara gyaa| taba rAjA ne usa bacce ko usakA bArisa banAyA  /  pA~casau
caMDAla kA adhipati banAyA  /  vahA~ kasAI ke adhipati pada para rahanevAlA vo
usa taraha ke na karane lAyaka pApakArya karake apratiSThAna nAma kI sAtavIM
nAraka pRthvI meM gayA isa prakAra sAvadhAcArya kA jIva sAtavIM nArakI ke vaise
ghora pracaMr3a, raudra, ati bhayAnaka duHkha teMtIsa sAgaropama ke lambe arase
taka mahAkleza pUrvaka mahasUsa karake vahA~ se nIkalakara yahA~ aMtaradvIpa meM
eka UMruga jAti meM paidA huA  /  vahA~ se marakara tiryaMca yoni meM pAr3e ke
rUpa meM paidA huA  /  vahA~ bhI kisI naraka ke duHkha ho usake samAna nAmavAle
duHkha chabbIsa sAla taka bhugatakara usake bAda he gautama ! marake mAnava meM
janma liyA  /  vahA~ se nIkalakara usa sAvadhAcArya kA jIva vasudeva ke rUpa meM
paidA huA  /  vahA~ bhI yathA ucita Ayu paripUrNa karake kaIM saMgrAma Arambha
mahAparigraha ke doSa se marakara sAtavIM nArakI meM gayA  /  vahA~ se
nIkalakara kAphI dIrghakAla ke bAda gajakarNa nAma kI mAnava jAti meM paidA huA
/  vahA~ bhI mA~sAhAra ke doSa se krUra adhyavasAya kI mativAlA marake phira
sAtavIM nArakI ke apratiSThAna narakAvAsa meM gayA  /  vahA~ se nIkalakara phira
tiryaMcagati meM pAr3e ke rUpa meM paidA huA  /  vahA~ naraka samAna pArAvAra
duHkha pAkara marA  /  phira bAla vidhavA kulaTA brAhmaNa kI putrI kI kukSi meM
paidA huaa| aba usa sAvadhAcArya kA jIva kulaTA ke garbha meM thA taba gupta
tarIke se garbha ko girAne ke lie, sar3ane ke lie kSAra, auSadha yoga kA prayoga
karane ke doSa se kaIM vyAdhi aura vedanA se vyApta zarIravAle, duSTa vyAdhi se
sar3anevAle paru jharita, sala sala karate kRmi ke samUhavAlA vo kIr3oM se khAe
jAnevAlA, naraka kI upamAvAle, ghora duHkha ke nivAsabhUta bAhara nIkalA  /  he
gautama ! usake bAda sabhI loga se nindita, garhita, duguMchA karanevAlA,
napharata se sabhI loka se parAbhava pAnevAlA, khAna, pAna, bhoga, upabhoga
rahita garbhAvAsa se lekara sAta sAla, do mahine, cAra dina taka yAvajjIva
jIkara vicitra zArIrika, mAnasika, ghora duHkha se parezAnI bhugatate hue
marakara bhI vyaMtara deva ke rUpa meM paidA huA  /  vahA~ se cyavakara manuSya
huaa| phira vadha karanevAle kA adhipati aura phira usa pApakarma ke doSa se
sAtavIM meM pahu~cA  /  vahA~ se nIkalakara tiryaMca gati meM kumhAra ke yahA~
baila ke rUpa meM paidA huA  /  vahA~ se cyavakara manuSya huaa| phira vadha
karanevAle kA adhipati, aura phira usa pApakarma ke doSa se sAtavIM meM phuNcaa|
vahA~ se nIkalakara tiryaMca gati meM kumhAra ke vahA~ baila ke rUpa meM paidA
huA  /  use vahA~ cakkI, gAr3I, hala, araghaTTa Adi meM jur3akara rAta-dina
ghusarI meM garadana ghisakara pholle ho gae aura bhItara saDA gayA  /  khambhe
meM kRmi paidA huI  /  aba jaba khAMdha ghosarI dhAraNa karane ke lie samartha
nahIM hai aisA mAnakara usakA svAmI kumhAra isalie pITha para bojha vahana
karavAne lagA  /  aba vakta gujarane se jisa taraha khA~dha meM saDA ho gayA usa
taraha pITha bhI ghisakara sar3a gaI  /  usameM bhI kIr3e paidA ho gae  /  pUrI
pITha bhI sar3a gaI aura usake Upara kA camar3A nIkala gayA aura bhItara kA
mA~sa dikhane lagA  /  usake bAda aba yaha kucha kAma nahIM kara sakegA, isalie
nikammA hai, aisA mAnakara chor3a diyA  /  he gautama ! usa sAvadhAcArya kA jIva
salasala kIr3oM se khAe jAnevAle baila ko chor3a diyaa| usake bAda kAphI sar3e
hue carmavAle, kaIM kaue-kutte-kRmi ke kula se bhItara aura bAhara se khAe
jAnevAlA kATanevAlA unatIsa sAla taka Ayu pAlana karake marakara kaIM vyAdhi
vedanA se vyApta zarIravAlA mAnavagati meM ati dhanika kisI bar3e ghara ke AdamI
ke vahA~ janma liyA  /  vahA~ bhI vamana karane ke khAza, kaTu, tIkhe, kaSe hue,
svAdiSTa, muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page
94

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  **Study/Purpose/Sutra Number**
Triphala, Guggul, and other medicines had to be consumed, constant cleansing was
necessary, incurable, no relief, intense terrifying suffering, like being cooked
in fire, enduring such difficult suffering, the human existence they had
attained became unsuccessful.  In that way, O Gautam! The soul of Savdhacharya,
after enduring the suffering of birth and death in the fourteen Rajalokas for an
infinite time, was born as a human in the Avarvideha. There, due to the
influence of the world, he received the awakening to go and pay homage to the
Tirthankara Bhagvant, and after accepting initiation, he attained Siddhi in the
time of the 23rd Tirthankara, Parshvanath.  O Gautam! Savdhacharya experienced
such suffering. O Bhagvant! Such unbearable, intense, terrifying suffering
befell him. He had to endure it. For such a long time, why did he have to endure
all this suffering? O Gautam! At that time, he spoke as if saying, "The Agam has
been explained, including Utsarg and Apavad. It is not explained in isolation,
but through Anekanta. However, the consumption of Apkay, the commencement of
Teukay, and sexual intercourse, these three are prohibited in any other place,
in isolation, or with certainty, or firmly, or completely, for the sake of self-
benefit. If this Sutra is violated here, the path of Samyag Marg is destroyed,
the path of Unmarg flourishes, and due to the sin of disobedience, one becomes
an Anantasansari."  O Bhagvant! Did Savdhacharya engage in sexual intercourse? O
Gautam! He did and did not engage in sexual intercourse, meaning he did engage
in sexual intercourse, but also did not. O Bhagvant! Why do you say it in two
ways? O Gautam! The Arya, at that time, touched his head to his feet, and when
he touched, he did not shrink back his feet. Because of this, O Gautam! It is
said that he engaged in sexual intercourse, but also did not. O Bhagvant! Is
there such a bound, touched, withdrawn karma bandha that can liberate one from
such intense suffering just because of this reason? O Gautam! It is so. There is
no difference. O Bhagvant! He had accumulated Tirthankara name karma. He had
only one birth left, and he had crossed the ocean of births. Then why did he
wander in the world for an infinite time? O Gautam! Because of the fault of his
carelessness. Therefore, the Gachhadhipati, who has understood well the good
nature of the scriptures that desire liberation from births, should remain
completely and entirely free from carelessness in the place of restraint. Thus,
I tell you.  **Study-5-Complete Hindi Translation by Muni Diparatnasagar**
**Muni Diparatnasagar (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation**  **Page 95**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka triphalA,
gugala Adi auSadhi pInI par3atI, hamezA usake saphAI karanI par3e asAdhya,
upazama na ho, ghora bhayAnaka duHkha se jaise agni meM pakatA ho vaise kaThina
duHkha bhugatate bhugatate unako milA huA mAnava bhava asaphala huaa| usa
prakAra he gautama ! sAvadhAcArya kA jIva caudaha rAjaloka meM janma-maraNAdika
ke duHkha sahakara ananta kAla ke bAda avaravideha meM mAnava ke rUpa meM paidA
huA  /  vahA~ loka kI anuvRtti se tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ko vaMdana karane ke
lie gayA pratibodha pAyA aura dIkSA aMgIkAra karake yahA~ zrI 23 ve pArzvanAtha
tIrthaMkara ke kAla meM siddhi paaii| he gautama ! sAvadhAcArya ne isa prakAra
duHkha pAyA  /  he bhagavaMta ! isa taraha kA dussaha ghora bhayAnaka duHkha A
par3A  /  unheM bhugatanA par3A  /  itane lambe arase taka yaha sabhI duHkha
kisa nimitta se bhugatane par3e  /  he gautama ! usa vakta usane jaise aisA kahA
ki, utsarga aura apavAda sahita Agama batAyA hai  /  ekAnta meM prarUpaNA nahIM
kI jAtI lekina anekAnta se prarUpaNA karate haiM, lekina apakAya kA paribhoga,
teUkAya kA samArambha, maithunasevana yaha tInoM dUsare kisI sthAna meM ekAnta
meM yA nizcaya se aura dRr3hatA se yA sarvathA sarva taraha se Atmahita ke arthi
ke lie niSedha kiyA hai  /  yahA~ sUtra kA ullaMghana kiyA jAe to samyag mArga
kA vinAza, unmArga kA prakarSa hotA hai, AjJA bhaMga ke doSa se anantasaMsArI
hote haiN| he bhagavaMta ! kyA usa sAvadhAcArya ne maithuna sevana kiyA thA ? he
gautama ! sevana kiyA aura sevana nahIM kiyA yAni sevana kiyA yaha bhI nhiiN|
aura sevana na kiyA aisA bhI nahIM  /  he bhagavaMta ! aise do tarIke se kyoM
kahate ho? he gautama ! jo usa AryA ne usa vakta mastaka se pA~va kA sparza
kiyA, sparza huA usa vakta usane pA~va khIMcakara sikur3a nahIM liyA  /  isa
vajaha se he gautama ! aisA kahA jAtA hai ki, maithuna sevana kiyA aura sevana
nahIM kiyA  /  he bhagavaMta ! kevala itanI vajaha meM aise ghora duHkha se
mukta kara sake vaisA baddha spRSTa nikAcita karmabaMdha hotA hai kyA ? he
gautama ! aisA hI hai  /  usameM koI pharka nahIM hai  /  he bhagavaMta ! usane
tIrthaMkara nAmakarma ikaTThA kiyA thA  /  eka hI bhava bAkI rakhA thA aura
bhavasAgara pAra kara diyA thA  /  to phira ananta kAla taka saMsAra meM kyoM
bhaTakanA par3A? he gautama ! apanI pramAda ke doSa kI vajaha se  /  isalie
bhava viraha icchanevAle zAstra kA sadbhAva jisane acchI taraha se pahacAnA hai
aise gacchAdhipati ko sarvathA sarva taraha se saMyama sthAna meM kAphI
apramatta bane  /  isa prakAra maiM tumhe kahatA huuN| adhyayana-5-kA muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt hindI anuvAda pUrNa muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha)
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 95

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth' Study/Purpose/Sūtrāṅka
Study-6-Gītartha-vihāra Sūtra-845 O Bhagvant! He who reads, hears, explains, and
constantly contemplates the Siddhānta Sūtra day and night, will he engage in
immoral conduct? O Gautama! Even a single word known from the Siddhānta, he will
not engage in immoral conduct until death. Sūtra-846 O Bhagvant! Then why did
Nandiṣeṇa, who had the ten eastern Mahāprajñā, abandon his pravrajyā and enter
the house of a gaṇikā? It is said, O Gautama! Sūtra-847-852 He experienced the
consequences of his lapse in enjoyment. This truth is well-known. Yet, he
trembled with fear of bhava. And after that, he quickly accepted dīkṣā. Even if
Pātāla had an upward-facing mouth and heaven a downward-facing mouth, the words
of a Kevali never change. Secondly, he took many measures to protect his
saṃyama, thinking according to the śāstra, he went to a country where he would
not be recognized, offering his linga-veśa at the lotus feet of his guru.
Remembering that vow, he experienced the consequences of his actions in the form
of his character, the arising of mohaniya karma, the breaking of sarva, virati,
mahāvrata, and the consequences of bound, touched, and removed karma. O
Bhagvant! What measures did he think of, as described in the śāstra, that even
today, he sustains his life, abandoning such a beautiful śramaṇapan? O Gautama!
Will those who remember the Sūtra that describes the measures taken by a Kevali,
or will those who are overcome by the object, remember this session?
Sūtra-853-855 When the object arises, one should begin an eightfold austerity,
which is very difficult and severe. If one is unable to control the object on
any given night, it is better to fall from a mountain, sit on a bed of thorns,
drink poison, or hang oneself, but not break the vow taken for mahāvrata or
character. It is not appropriate to be unfaithful. If one is unable to perform
these measures, one should offer one's veśa to the guru and go to a foreign
country where news does not reach the familiar region, and observe aṇuvrata to
the best of one's ability, so that one does not experience nirdhvaṃsātā in the
future. Sūtra-856-864 O Gautama! When Nandiṣeṇa began to fall from the mountain,
a voice was heard from the sky saying that he would not die even after falling
from the mountain. As he looked towards the direction of the sound, he saw a
Cāraṇa Muni. He said that he would not die prematurely. Then he went to eat the
deadly poison. Even then, he could not bear the pain of the object, and he began
to suffer greatly. Then he worried, "What is the purpose of my living now? I
will truly be a sinner if I destroy the rule of this Lord, who is like a
fragrant flower and a pure, radiant moon. Where will I go, an uncivilized person
like me? Or is the moon marked with a blemish, and the fragrance of the jasmine
flower fleeting, while the Jinaśāsana, free from the dirt and stain of the
Kaliyuga, will last for a long time? If I slander this Jain preaching, which
destroys all poverty, sorrow, and suffering, where will I go to purify my soul?"
He went with sorrow, climbed a mountain with large rocks and a large quarry, and
jumped, breaking his body into pieces, before he could easily destroy the rule
while being subject to the object. Then, he climbed the mountain with a pierced
peak, and began to eat without storing food. Then,  Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt
(Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda Page 96

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
adhyayana-6-gItArthavihAra sUtra-845 he bhagavaMta ! jo rAta-dina siddhAMta
sUtra par3he, zravaNa kare, vyAkhyAna kare, satata cintana kare vo kyA anAcAra
AcaraNa kare? he gautama ! siddhAnta meM rahe eka bhI zabda jo jAnate haiM, vo
maraNAnte bhI anAcAra sevana na kare  /  sUtra-846 he bhagavaMta ! to daza pUrvI
mahAprajJAvAle naMdiSaNa ne pravrajyA kA tyAga karake kyoM gaNikA ke ghara meM
praveza kiyA ? aisA kahA jAtA hai ki he gautama ! sUtra-847-852 use bhogaphala
skhalanA kI vajaha huI  /  vo hakIkata prasiddha hai| phira bhI bhava ke bhaya
se kA~patA thA  /  aura usake bAda jalda dIkSA aMgIkAra kI  /  zAyada pAtAla
UMce mukhavAlA ho, svarga nIce mukhavAlA ho to bhI kevalI ne kahA vacana kabhI
bhI anyathA nahIM hotA  /  dUsarA usane saMyama kI rakSA ke lie kAphI upAya
kiyA, zAstra anusAra socakara guru ke caraNakamala meM liMga-veza arpaNa karake
koI na pahacAne vaise deza meM calA gyaa| usa vacana kA smaraNa karate hue apane
cAritra, mohanIya karma ke udaya meM sarva, virati, mahAvrata kA bhaMga aura
baddha, spRSTa, nikAcita aise karma kA bhogaphala bhugatatA thA  /  he
bhagavaMta ! zAstra meM nirupaNa kie aise usane kauna-se upAya soce ki aisA
sundara zramaNapana chor3akara Aja bhI vo prANa dhAraNa karatA hai ? he gautama
! kevalI prarUpita upAya ko batAnevAle sUtra kA smaraNa kareMge yA viSaya se
parAbhavita mani isa satra ko yAda kre| sUtra-853-855 jaba viSaya udaya meM Ae
taba kAphI duSkara, ghora aise taraha kA A~Tha gunA tapa zuru kare  /  kisI rAta
ko viSaya rokane meM samartha na ho sake to parvata para se bhRgupAta kare,
kA~TevAle Asana para baiThe, viSapAna kare, ubaMdhana karake phA~sI car3akara
mara jAnA behatara hai, lekina mahAvrata yA cAritra kI lI gaI pratijJA kA bhaMga
na kare  /  virAdhanA karanA ucita nahIM hai| zAyada yaha kie gae upAya karane
meM samartha na ho to guru ko veza samarpaNa karake aise videza meM calA jAe ki
jahA~ ke samAcAra paricita kSetra meM na Ae, aNuvrata kA yathAzakti pAlana
karanA ki jisase bhAvi meM nirdhvaMsAtA na paae| sUtra-856-864 he gautama !
naMdiSeNa ne jaba parvata para se girane kA Arambha kiyA taba AkAza meM se aisI
vANI sunAi dI ki parvata se girane ke bAda bhI mauta nahIM milegI  /  jitane meM
dizAmukha kI ora dekhA to eka cAraNa muni dikhAi die  /  to unhoMne kahA ki
tumhArI akAla mauta nahIM hogI  /  to phira viSama jhahara khAne ke lie gayA  /
taba bhI viSaya kA darda na sahA jAne para kAphI darda hone lagA, taba use
phikra lagI ki aba mere jIne kA kyA prayojana ? mogare ke puSpa aura candra
samAna nirmala, ujjvala varNavAle isa prabhu ke zAsana ko vAkaI pApamativAlA
maiM uDDAhaNA karavAUMgA to anArya aisA maiM kahA~ jAUMgA? yA phira candra
lAMchanavAlA hai, mogare ke puSpa kI prabhA alpakAla meM mujhAnevAlI hai, jaba
ki jinazAsana to kalikAla kI kaluSatA ke mala aura kalaMka se sarvathA rahita
lambe arase taka jisakI prabhA TikanevAlI hai, isalie samagra dAridrya, duHkha
aura kleza kA kSaya karanevAle isa taraha ke isa jaina pravacana kI apabhrAjanA
karavAUMgA to phira kahA~ jAkara apane AtmA kI zuddhi karU~gA ? duHkha se karake
gamana kiyA jAe, bar3I-bar3I zilAe ho, jisakI bar3I khadAna ho, vo parvata para
car3akara jitane meM viSayAdhIna hokara maiM sahaja bhI zAsana kI uDDAha na
karU~ usake pahale chalAMga lagAkara mere zarIra ke Tukar3e kara duuN| usa
prakAra phira se chedita zikharavAle mahAparvata para car3akara AgAra rakhe binA
paccakhANa karane lage  /  taba muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 96

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number Again in
the sky, these words were heard - You will not die untimely. This is your final
birth and body. Therefore, having enjoyed the fruits of your bound karma, accept
restraint again. Sutra- 865-870 Thus, when the Charan Muni stopped him (from
committing suicide) twice, he went to the lotus feet of the Guru, offered him
his robes, and then pleaded - I had gone to a foreign land remembering the
sutras and their meanings, and there I went to a prostitute's house to eat. When
I preached Dharma, she demanded wealth from me. Then, because my attainment of
that kind of wealth was certain, I said at that time, "Let it be so." At that
time, I caused a rain of gold worth twelve and a half crore to fall from her
temple and came out. The tall, large-breasted prostitute, with a firm embrace,
said, "Oh, you little one! Why are you going back after giving this wealth
unlawfully?" Nandiṣeṇa, thinking according to the occasion, said, "You give this
wealth as you deem fit." Sutra- 871-874 At that time, he accepted that kind of
vow and entered her temple. What vow did he accept? To enlighten ten people
every day, and not to eat or drink until he had enlightened even one person and
they had accepted initiation. Not to urinate or defecate until my vow is
fulfilled. Second, not to initiate those who are ready to take vows. Because, as
the Guru's conduct is, so is the disciple's. The prostitute, having arranged for
the golden treasure not to be wasted, worshipped Nandiṣeṇa, who had a shaved
head and a worn-out body, in such a way that he became bound by her love. Sutra-
875-877 From conversation, love arises, from love, desire, from desire, trust,
from trust, affection - thus there are five kinds of love. In this way, even
after being bound by the bonds of love, Nandiṣeṇa followed the teachings of the
scriptures, maintained his lay life, and every day enlightened ten or more
people and sent them to the Guru for initiation. Sutra- 878-881 Now, how did he
receive enlightenment from the evil-minded Soni? He said to Nandiṣeṇa, "You
preach Dharma to others, and you yourself are careless in your own spiritual
work. Indeed, is this Dharma something to be sold? Because you yourself do not
follow it." Hearing this wise saying of Durmukha, he trembled and began to
condemn his soul for a long time. Alas, what have I done, I with a corrupt
character? Like worms rotting in the filth of karma, I have rotted in the sleep
of ignorance. I am cursed, I am cursed. Look at my improper conduct. I have made
my noble soul, like pure gold, impure, like filth. Sutra- 882-884 Before this
fleeting body of mine is destroyed, I will go to the lotus feet of the
Tirthankara Bhagavan and atone for my sins. O Gautama! He will come here
repenting like this and will receive the benefit of severe penance. By
practicing severe and heroic austerities, he will consume his evil karma, ascend
to the category of pure meditation, attain omniscience, and attain liberation.
Sutra- 885 Therefore, O Gautama! From this example, think of many ways to
maintain restraint according to the scriptures. Think of the ways in which
Nandiṣeṇa offered his robes to the Guru, etc. Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
(Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 97

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka phira se
AkAza meM isa prakAra zabda sunAi die-akAle tumhArI mauta nahIM hogI  /  yaha
tumhArA antima bhava aura zarIra hai| isalie baddha spRSTa bhogaphala
bhugatakara phira saMyama svIkAra kara  /  sUtra- 865-870 isa prakAra cAraNa
muni ne jaba do bAra (AtmahatyA karate) rokA taba guru ke caraNa kamala meM
jAkara unake pAsa veza arpaNa karake phira nivedana kiyA ki-sUtra aura artha kA
smaraNa karate-karate dezAntara meM gayA thA, vahA~ AhAra grahaNa karane ke lie
vezyA ke ghara jA pahu~cA  /  jaba maiMne dharmalAbha sunAyA taba mere pAsa
arthalAbha kI mA~ga kii| taba merI usa taraha kI labdhi siddha hone se maiMne
usa vakta kahA ki bhale vaisA ho  /  usa vakta vahA~ sAr3e bAraha kror3a pramANa
dravya kI suvarNa vRSTi karavA ke usake maMdira se bAhara nIkala gayA  /  UMce
vizAla gola stanavAlI gaNikA dRr3ha AliMgana dekara kahane lagI ki are !
kSullaka ! avidhi se yaha dravya dekara vApasa kyoM calA jAtA hai? bhavitavya ke
yoga se naMdiSeNa ne avasara ke anurUpa socakara kahA ki tumheM jo vidhi iSTa ho
use tuma vo dravya denaa| sUtra-871-874 usa vakta usane aisA abhigraha grahaNa
kiyA aura usake maMdira meM praveza kiyA  /  kauna-sA abhigraha kiyA ? pratidina
muje daza logoM ko pratibodha denA aura eka bhI kama rahe aura dIkSA aMgIkAra na
kare taba taka bhojana aura pAnavidhi na karanA  /  merI pratijJA pUrI na ho
taba taka muja sthaMDilamAtra (dasta-pezAba) na karane  /  dUsarA pravrajyA lene
ke lie taiyAra logoM ko pravrajyA na denI  /  kyoMki guru kA jaisA veza ho (yAni
guru kA jaisA AcaraNa ho vaisA hI ziSya kA hotA hai  / ) gaNikA ne suvarNanidhi
kSaya na ho vaisA intajAma karake luMcita mastakavAle aura jarjarita dehavAle
naMdiSeNa ko usa taraha ArAdhana kiyA ki jisase usake snehapAza meM baMdha gyaa|
sUtra- 875-877 AlApa-bAtacIta karane se praNaya paidA ho, praNaya se rati ho,
rati se bharosA paidA ho  /  bharose se sneha isa taraha pA~ca taraha kA prema
hotA hai  /  isa prakAra vo naMdiSeNa premapAza se ba~dhA hone ke bAda bhI
zAstra meM batAyA zrAvakapana pAlana kare aura hararoja daza yA usase jyAdA
pratibodha karake guru ke pAsa dIkSA lene ko bhejate the| sUtra-878-881 aba vo
khuda durmukha sonI se pratibodha kisa taraha pAyA ? usane naMdiSeNa ko kahA ki
logoM ko dharmopadeza sunAte ho aura AtmakArya meM tuma khuda hI phikramaMda ho
/  vAkaI yaha dharma kyA becane kI cIja hai ? kyoMki tuma khuda to use apanAte
nahIM  /  aisA durmukha kA subhASita vacana sunakara kA~pate hue apanI AtmA kI
dIrghakAla taka niMdA karane lagA  /  arere, bhraSTa zIlavAle maiMne yaha kyA
kiyA ? ajJAnapana kI nIdrA meM karma ke kIcar3avAle gaDDhe meM azuci viSThA meM
jaise kRmi sar3ate haiM vaise sar3A  /  adhanya aise mujhako dhikkAra hai  /
merI anucita ceSTA dekho  /  jAtya kaMcana samAna mere uttama AtmA ko azuci
samAna maiMne bnaayaa| sUtra-882-884 jitane meM kSaNabhaMgura aise isa mere deha
kA vinAza na ho utane meM tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ke caraNakamala meM jAkara maiM
apane gunAha kA prAyazcitta karU~  /  he gautama ! aise pazcAttApa karate hue vo
yahA~ AegA aura ghora prAyazcitta kA sevana pAegA | ghora aura vIra tapa kA
sevana karake azubha karma khapAkara zukladhyAna kI zreNI para ArohaNa karake
kevalajJAna pAkara mokSa meM jaaeNge| sUtra-885 isalie he gautama ! isa dRSTAMta
se saMyama TikAne ke lie zAstra ke anusAra kaIM upAya soce  /  naMdiSeNa ne guru
ko veza jisa taraha se arpaNa kiyA Adi upAya soce  /  muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 97

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth' Study/Purpose/Sūtrāṅka
Sūtra-886-889 Understand well the way in which utsarga is described in the
सिद्धान्त. O Gautama! Despite doing tapas, he had the great rise of bhogavali
karma. Even then, he experienced the arousal of the object. When he performed
eightfold severe mahatapas, even then the rise of the object did not stop. Even
then, he consumed poison. He performed bhṛgupāta from the mountain. He desired
to do anashana. While doing so, the Cāraṇa Muni stopped him. After that, he went
to an unknown land after offering rajohaṛana to his guru. O Gautama! Know this
remedy described in the śruta. Sūtra-890-894 Just as one should not engage in
any misconduct against the conduct until the rajohaṛana and pravrajyā are
returned to the guru, so too, this veśa-rajohaṛana, taught by Jineśvara, should
not be left in another place, leaving the guru. One should offer rajohaṛana to
the guru with folded hands. If the guru mahārāja is capable and can understand
him, then he should be explained and brought back to the right path. If someone
else can understand him, then ask them to explain to him. If the guru has
perhaps been pacified by the words of others, then one should not object. The
one who is a bhavya, who has understood the advice, who recognizes the state of
the world, O Gautama! The one who hates this position, just as the 'āsadane'
wandered in the four gatis due to māyā, prapanca, and dambha, so too will he
wander in the four gatis. Sūtra-895-900 O Bhagavant! Who was the āsad who was
naturally inclined to māyā and prapanca? We do not know. Then, for what reason
did he wander here, troubled by great sorrow? O Gautama! In the tīrtha of
another, the last, tīrthankara, who was like a shining kāñcana, there was a
disciple named āsad, who was the ācārya named Bhūtikṣa. Having accepted the
mahāvrat, he studied the sūtra and the artha. At that time, the pain of the
object did not arise, but he began to think curiously that the सिद्धान्त
describes such a method. So, I will perform eightfold tapas, bhṛgupāta,
anashana, eating poison, etc., all of which will please the guru class, so that
they will also prevent me from becoming a deva and say that you have a long
lifespan, you will not die. Enjoy your desires. Return the veśa-rajohaṛana to
the guru mahārāja and go to another unknown land. After enjoying the fruits of
your actions, practice severe vīra tapas. Sūtra- 901-905 Or, indeed, I am
foolish. I am hurt by my own māyā-śalya. It is not considered appropriate for a
śramaṇa to have such a thought in his mind. I will also make atonement for it
later, lighten my soul, and accept the mahāvrat. Or, I will be called māyāvī
again after making atonement. Then, for ten years, I will perform māsa-khaman
and pāraṇa āyambil, for twenty years, I will perform continuous fasting for two
months and pāraṇa āyambil, for twenty-five years, I will perform cāndrāyaṇa
tapas. For eight years, I will perform chhathu, athūm, and four-four fasts, I
will perform such severe atonement here of my own free will. I will perform this
atonement here, staying at the lotus feet of the guru mahārāja. Sūtra - 906-909
Is this atonement not too much for me? Or, why would the tīrthankara Bhagavant
have conceived this method? I am practicing it. And the one who has joined me in
atonement, the all-knowing Bhagavant knows the truth, I will simply practice
atonement. Whatever I have seen and thought here, may my sin be false. In this
way, he performed severe atonement, which removes suffering, of his own accord,
and by doing so, the one with the śalya died and became a vāṇavyantara deva. O
Gautama! If he had made a proper atonement in front of the guru mahārāja and had
practiced that much atonement, then he would have been born in the vimāna above
the navagraiveyaka. Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi
Anuvāda Page 98

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
sUtra-886-889 siddhAnta meM jisa prakAra utsarga batAe haiM use acchI taraha se
samajhanA  /  he gautama ! tapa karane ke bAvajUda bhI use bhogAvalI karma kA
mahA udaya thA  /  to bhI use viSaya kI udIraNA paidA huI taba A~Tha gunA ghora
mahAtapa kiyA to bhI usake viSaya kA udaya nahIM rukatA  /  taba bhI viSa
bhakSaNa kiyA  /  parvata para se bhRgupAta kiyA  /  anazana karane kI abhilASA
kI  /  vaisA karate hue cAraNa muni ne rokA  /  usake bAda guru ko rajoharaNa
arpaNa karake anajAna deza meM calA gayA  /  he gautama ! zruta meM batAe yaha
upAya jaannaa| sUtra-890-894 jaise ki jaba taka guru ko rajoharaNa aura
pravrajyA vApasa arpaNa na kI jAe taba taka cAritra ke khilApha kisI bhI
apakArya kA AcaraNa na karanA caahie| jinezvara ke upadezIta yaha veza-
rajoharaNa guru ko chor3akara dUsare sthAna para na chor3anA cAhie  /
aMjalipUrvaka guru ko rajoharaNa arpaNa karanA cAhie  /  yadi guru mahArAja
samartha ho aura use samajhA sake to samajhAkara sahI mArga para lAe  /  yadi
koI dUsarA use samajhA sake to use samajhAne ke lie kahanA  /  guru ne bhI
zAyada dUsaroM kI vANI se upazAnta hotA ho to etarAja na karanA cAhie  /  jo
bhavya hai, jisane parAmarza jAnA hai  /  jagata ke hAlAta ko pahacAnatA hai, he
gautama ! jo isa pada kI napharata karatA hai vo jaise 'AsaDane' mAyA, prapaMca
aura daMbha se cAra gati meM bhramaNa kiyA vaise vo bhI cAra gati meM bhramaNa
kregaa| sUtra-895-900 he bhagavaMta ! mAyA prapaMca karane ke svabhAvavAlA
Asar3a kauna thA ? vo hama nahIM jAnate  /  phira kisa nimitta se kAphI daHkha
se parezAna yahA~ bhaTakA? he gautama ! dasare kisI aMtima kAMcana samAna
kAntivAle tIrthaMkara ke tIrtha meM bhUtIkSa nAma ke AcArya kA Asar3a nAma kA
ziSya thA  /  mahAvrata aMgIkAra karake usane sUtra aura artha kA adhyayana kiyA
/  taba viSaya kA darda paidA nahIM haA thA lekina utsukatA se cintavana karane
lagA ki siddhAMta meM aisI vidhi batAI hai  /  to usa prakAra guru varga kI
kAphI raMjana karake A~Tha gunA tapa karanA, bhRgupAta karanA, anazana krnaa|
jhahara khAnA Adi saba maiM karU~gA, jisase mujhe bhI devatA nivAraNa kareMge
aura kaheMge ki tUM lambI AyuvAlA hai, tumhArI mauta nahIM hogI  /  tumhArI
icchA anusAra bhoga bhugata  /  veza rajoharaNa guru mahArAja ko vApasa arpaNa
karake dUsare kisI anajAna deza meM calA jA  /  bhogaphala bhugatakara pIche
ghora vIra tapa sevanA  /  sUtra- 901-905 yA vAkaI maiM mUrkha huuN| mere apane
mAyA zalya se mujhe coTa pahuMcI hai  /  zramaNa ko apane mana meM isa taraha kI
dhAraNA karanI yukta na mAnI jAe  /  pIche se bhI usakA prAyazcitta Alovakara
AtmA ko halakA banAUMgA aura mahAvrata dhAraNa karU~gA  /  yA Alocakara vApasa
mAyAvI kahalAUMgA  /  to daza sAla taka mAsakhamaNa aura pAraNe AyaMbila, bIsa
sAla taka do mahine ke lagAtAra upavAsa aura pAraNe AyaMbila, paccIsa sAla taka
cAMdrAyaNa tapa  /  pUre A~Tha sAla taka chaThU, aThUma aura cAra-cAra upavAsa,
isa taraha kA mahAghora prAyazcitta merI apanI marajI se yahA~ kruuNgaa| yaha
prAyazcitta yahA~ guru mahArAja ke caraNakamala meM rahakara kruuNgaa| sUtra -
906-909 mere lie yaha prAyazcitta adhika nahIM hai kyA ? yA tIrthaMkara
bhagavaMta ne yaha vidhi kI kalpanA kyoM kI hogI ? maiM usakA abhyAsa karatA
huuN| aura jisane mujhe prAyazcitta meM jur3A, vo sarva hakIkata sarvajJa
bhagavaMta jAne, maiM to prAyazcitta kA sevana karU~gA  /  jo kucha bhI yahA~
dRSTa cintavana kiyA vo merA pApa mithyA ho  /  isa prakAra kaSTahArI ghora
prAyazcitta apanI mati se kiyA aura vaisA karake zalyavAlA vo marake
vANavyaMtara deva banA  /  he gautama ! yadi usane guru mahArAja ke samakSa
vidhivat AlocanA kI hotI to aura utane prAyazcitta kA sevana kiyA hotA to
navagraiveyaka ke upara ke hisse ke vimAna meM paidA hotaa| muni dIparatnasAgara
kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 98

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānīśītha'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number
Note:** In our Āgama Sūtra-39 Mahānīśītha, by mistake, 910 has been written
instead of 1000 in the sequence. Sūtra-1000-1003  O Gautama! From the Vaṇamantra
Deva, the one who fell, he came in the form of a donkey in the house of a king
in the animal realm. There, due to the fault of always associating with horses,
a disease arose in his testicles, and worms were born in them. O Gautama! The
testicles were suffering from pain due to not getting food from being eaten by
worms, and he licked the earth. At that time, a sage was returning from afar.
Seeing that, he remembered his own caste. Remembering his past life, he began to
blame and criticize his soul. And then he undertook fasting. Sūtra-1004-1010  O
Gautama! The one who was eaten by crows and dogs, remembering the Arhant with
pure devotion, gave up his body, obtained the time, and became a Sāmānika Deva
named Mahāghosa of that Devendra. There, he enjoyed divine powers well and fell.
From there, he was born as a prostitute. He did not reveal the deceit he had
done, so from there, he died and wandered in many low, insignificant, and end-
of-life families, and after a long time, he was born as the son of Shiva-Indra
named Divyajan in the city of Mathura. He attained enlightenment, embraced the
life of a Shraman, and attained Nirvana. O Gautama! I have told you the example
of the deceitful one. Those who contradict in their minds the words spoken by
any omniscient Bhagavant, not because of the pain of the objects, but also
desire the objects out of curiosity. And then, without requesting their Guru,
they perform atonement. They are the ones who wander in the cycle of births.
Therefore, one who knows should not teach the wrong path to even a single
principle speaker. Sūtra-1011  If anyone recognizes the meaning of a word spoken
by a Sarvaśruta or its meaning, and speaks it according to the path, then he
does not bind sin. Believing this, one should not even mentally deviate from the
right path. Thus, I tell you what I have heard from the mouth of Bhagavant.
Sūtra-1012-1015  O Bhagavant! If someone performs atonement by taking excessive
penance after doing a wrong deed, is it not better to not do the wrong deed in
the first place? O Gautama! After doing a wrong deed, I will purify myself by
performing atonement. In that way, it is not appropriate to even mentally hold
on to those words. Consider anyone who believes in such words or acts according
to them to be a carrier of all kinds of corruption. O Gautama! Perhaps even if
he performs such a difficult atonement as if it were equal to the doubt of life,
just as a butterfly enters the flame of a lamp and dies, so too, by breaking the
command, one earns many deaths and worldly existence. Sūtra-1016-1019  O
Bhagavant! What atonement will be given to a human who hides any strength,
vigor, heroism, or prowess within himself and performs penance? O Gautama! Such
a deceitful person may receive this atonement. Because knowing the strength of
the enemy, even though he has his own strength, he has expected from him, the
one who hides his strength, vigor, courage, and heroism, becomes a deceitful,
wicked, and twice-atoned person. He suffers in the hellish state of the low
caste, goes to the animal realm, and then wanders in the four realms.
Sūtra-1020-1024  O Bhagavant! Can a great sin be consumed by performing penance?
Because without experiencing the karma, it cannot be removed. So what is the
benefit of performing atonement there? O Gautama! Sins accumulated over many
crores of years...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka noMdha-
hamAre Agama sutANi-39 mahAnisIha me galatI se 910 kI bajAya 1000 anukrama likhA
gayA hai| sUtra-1000-1003 vANamaMtara deva meM se cyavakara he gautama ! vo
Asar3a tiryaMca gati meM rAjA ke ghara gadhe ke rUpa meM AegA  /  vahA~ hamezA
ghor3e ke sAtha saMghaTana karane ke doSa se usake vRSaNa meM vyAdhi paidA huA
aura usameM kRmi paidA hue  /  vRSaNa hisse meM kRmi se khAe jAnevAle he gautama
! AhAra na milane se darda se pIr3ita thA aura pRthvI cATatA thA  /  itane meM
dUra se sAdhu vApasa mur3ate the  /  vaisA dekhakara khuda ko jAti smaraNa jJAna
huA  /  pUrvabhava kA smaraNa karake apane AtmA kI niMdA aura gardA karane lagA
/  aura phira anazana aMgIkAra kiyaa| sUtra-1004-1010 kaue-kuttoM se khAe
jAnevAlA he gautama ! zuddha bhAva se arihaMta kA smaraNa karate-karate zarIra
kA tyAga karake kAla pAkara usa devendra kA mahAghoSa nAma kA sAmAnika deva huA
/  vahA~ divya Rddhi acchI taraha se bhugatakara cyavA  /  vahA~ se vo vezyA ke
rUpa meM paidA huA  /  jo chala kiyA thA use prakaTa nahIM kiyA thA isalie vahA~
se marake kaIM adhama, tuccha, anta-prAntakula meM bhaTakA kAlakrama se karake
mathurA nagarI meM ziva-indra kA divyajana' nAma kA putra hokara pratibodha
pAkara zramaNapana aMgIkAra karake nirvANa pAyA  /  he gautama ! kapaTa se bhare
Asar3a kA dRSTAMta tumheM batAyA  /  jo kisI bhI sarvajJa bhagavaMta ne batAe
vacana ko mana se virAdhanA karate haiM, viSaya ke darda se nahIM, lekina
utsukatA se bhI viSaya kI abhilASA karate haiM  /  aura phira, apane Apa guru ko
nivedana kie binA prAyazcitta sevana karate haiM  /  vo bhava kI paramparA meM
bhramaNa karanevAlA hotA hai| isa prakAra jAnanevAle ko eka bhI siddhAMta
AlApaka kI unmArga kI prarUpaNA nahi karanI caahie| sUtra-1011 yadi kisI sarva
zrutajJAna yA usa kA artha yA eka vacana ko pahacAna kara mArga ke anusAra usa
kA kathana kare to vo pApa nahIM bA~dhatA  /  itanA mAnakara mana se bhI unmArga
se pravRtti na karanI  /  isa prakAra bhagavaMta ke mukha se sunA huA maiM
tumheM kahatA huuN| sUtra-1012-1015 he bhagavaMta ! akArya karake agara aticAra
sevana karake yadi kisI prAyazcitta kA sevana kare usase acchA jo akArya na kare
vo jyAdA sundara hai ? he gautama ! akArya sevana karake phira maiM prAyazcitta
sevana karake zuddhi kara  /  usa prakAra mana se bhI vo vacana dhAraNa karake
rakhanA ucita nahIM hai  /  jo koI aise vacana sunakara usakI zraddhA karatA
hai, yA usake anusAra vyavahAra karatA hai vo sarva zilabhraSTa kA sArthavAha
samajhanA  /  he gautama ! zAyada usa prANa saMdeha ke vajaha samAna aisA
kaThina bhI prAyazcitta kare to bhI jaise tItalI dIe kI zikhA meM praveza karatI
hai, to usakI mauta hotI hai  /  vaise AjJAbhaMga kara ke kaIM maraNavAlA
saMsAra upArjana hotA hai| sUtra - 1016-1019 he bhagavaMta ! jo koI bhI mAnava
apane meM jo koI bala, vIrya puruSakAra parAkrama ho use chipAkara tapa sevana
kare to usakA kyA prAyazcitta Ae ? he gautama ! azaTha bhAvavAle use yaha
prAyazcitta ho sakatA hai  /  kyoMki vairI kA sAmarthya jAnakara apanI tAkata
hone ke bAvajUda bhI usane usakI apekSA kI hai jo apanA bala vIrya, sattva
puruSakAra chipAtA hai, vo zaTha zIlavAlA narAdhama dugunA prAyazcittI banatA
hai  /  nIca gotra, nArakI meM ghora utkRSTa hAlAtavAlA duHkha bhugatate,
tiryaMca gati meM jAe aura usake bAda cAra gati meM vo bhramaNa karanevAlA hotA
hai  /  sUtra - 1020-1024 he bhagavaMta ! bar3A pApakarma vedakara khapAyA jA
sakatA hai| kyoMki karma bhugate binA usakA chuTakArA nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /
to vahA~ prAyazcitta karane se kyA phAyadA ? he gautama ! kaIM kror3a sAla se
ikaTThe kie gae pApakarma muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-
hindI anuvAda Page 99

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  Just as snow and ice melt from
the touch of the sun, so too does atonement melt away with the touch of the sun.
Even in the darkest of nights, the darkness disappears with the rising of the
sun. Similarly, atonement removes sins like darkness with the rising of the sun.
However, one who performs atonement must ensure that they do not hide their
strength, vigor, courage, and prowess, but instead, with a pure heart, they
should remove the sin-burden. Otherwise, even if they perform atonement, they
will wander in the four realms for a long time. (Sūtra - 1025-1027)  O Bhagvant!
To whom should one confess? Who can give atonement? To whom can atonement be
given? O Gautam! One can confess to a Kevali with a pure heart, even if they are
a hundred yojanas away. In the absence of a Kevali, one can confess to a
Chaturjñānī, and in their absence, to an Avadhijñānī, and in their absence, to a
Śruta-jñānī, whose knowledge is most pure. (Sūtra - 1028-1030)  One should
confess their sins, reveal them, and accept atonement from a Guru who is a guide
on the path of renunciation, who travels on the path of renunciation, who has a
taste for the path of renunciation, who conducts themselves with renunciation in
all aspects, who is calm in nature, who controls their senses, who is
disciplined, who is an ascetic, who is a firm follower of the principles of
samiti-gupti, who is pure in heart. One should confess their sins to such a
Guru, either by themselves or through others, and then always perform atonement
according to the Guru's instructions. (Sūtra - 1031-1035)  O Bhagvant! What is
the definite atonement for this? How many and what are the stages of atonement?
Please tell me. O Gautam! A Śramaṇa with good conduct who commits a
transgression receives atonement, while a disciplined sādhvī receives nine times
more atonement. If the sādhvī violates her conduct, she receives nine times more
atonement. This is because nine lakh living beings reside between her and the
ordinary beings. Only a Kevali Bhagvant can see them. Only a Kevali can see
these beings with their knowledge. An Avadhijñānī can see them, but a
Manahparyavjñānī cannot. (Sūtra - 1036)  When a sādhvī or any woman or man
engages in sexual intercourse, the living beings in her womb are churned like
the grinding of flour in a mill, becoming intoxicated with lust. The five-sense
beings in the womb are churned and reduced to ashes. (Sūtra - 1037-1041)  When a
woman walks, these beings experience intense pain. When she urinates, two or
three beings die, and the rest suffer. O Gautam! There are countless stages of
atonement. If even one of them is neglected and the person dies with the sin-
burden, then the sin they accumulate is greater than that of a cruel human who
rips open the bellies of a hundred thousand women and removes their seven or
eight-month-old fetuses. The pain of the writhing fetus is greater than the sin
of the human who rips open the bellies. A sādhvī who engages in sexual
intercourse with a sādhvī accumulates nine times more sin than the human who
rips open the bellies. If a sādhvī engages in sexual intercourse with a sādhvī
once, she accumulates a thousand times more sin, if she does it twice, she
accumulates a crore times more sin, and if she does it a third time, she loses
her Bodhi-samyaktvā.  Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi
Translation Page 100

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka suraja se
jaise tuSAra-hIma pIgala jAe vaise prAyazcitta samAna sUraja ke sparza se pIgala
jAtA hai  /  ghanaghora aMdhakAra vAlI rAta ho lekina sUraja ke udaya se
aMdhakAra calA jAtA hai  /  vaise prAyazcitta samAna sUraja ke udaya se
aMdhakAra samAna pApakarma cale jAte haiM  /  lekina prAyazcitta sevana
karanevAle ne jarura itanA khayAla rakhanA cAhie ki jisa prakAra zAstra meM
batAyA ho usa prakAra apane bala, vIrya, puruSakAra parAkrama ko chipAe binA
azaTha bhAva se pApazalya kA uddhAra karanA cAhie  /  dUsarA sarvathA isa
prakAra prAyazcitta karake vo bhI jo isa prakAra nahIM bolatA, unheM zalya kA
thor3A bhI zAyada uddhAra kiyA ho to bhI vo lambe arase taka cAra gati meM
bhramaNa karatA hai| sUtra - 1025-1027 he bhagavaMta ! kisake pAsa AlocanA
karanI cAhie ? prAyazcitta kauna de sakatA hai ? prAyazcitta kise de sakate haiM
? he gautama ! sau yojana dUra jAkara kevalI ke pAsa zuddha bhAva se AlocanA
nivedana kara sake  /  kevalajJAnI kI kamI meM cAra jJAnI ke pAsa, usakI kamI
meM avadhijJAnI, usakI kamI meM zrutajJAnI ke pAsa, jisake jJAta atizaya jyAdA
nirmala ho, usako AlocanA dI jAtI hai| sUtra - 1028-1030 jo guru mahArAja
utsarga mArga kI prarUpaNA karate ho, utsarga ke mArga meM prayANa karate ho,
utsarga mArga kI ruci karate ho, sarva bhAva meM utsarga kA vartAva karate ho,
upazAnta svabhAvavAlA ho, indriya kA damana karanevAlA ho, saMyamI ho, tapasvI
ho, samiti gupti kI pradhAnatAvAle dRr3ha cAritrapAlana karanevAlA ho, asaTha
bhAvavAlA ho, vaisA gItArtha guru ke pAsa apane aparAdha nivedana karanA,
prakaTa karanA, prAyazcitta aMgIkAra karanA  /  khuda AlocanA karanI yA dUsaroM
ke pAsa karavAnI aura phira hamezA guru mahArAja ne batAe prAyazcitta ke anusAra
prAyazcitta AcaraNa kare  /  sUtra- 1031-1035 he bhagavaMta ! usakA nizcita
prAyazcitta kitanA hogA? prAyazcitta lagane ke sthAnaka kitane aura kauna-se
haiM? vo mujhe batAo  /  he gautama ! sundara zIlavAle zramaNa ko skhalanA hone
se Ae hue prAyazcitta karate saMyatI sAdhvI ko usase jyAdA nau gunA prAyazcitta
AtA hai, yadi vo sAdhvI zIla kI virAdhanA kare to use nau gunA prAyazcitta AtA
hai  /  kyoMki sAmAnya se usakI yoni ke bIca meM nau lAkha jIva nivAsa kara rahe
haiM  /  una sabako kevalI bhagavaMta dekhate haiN| una jIva ko kevala
kevalajJAna se dekha sakate haiN| avadhijJAnI dekhate haiM lekina
manaHparyavajJAnI nahIM dekha skte| sUtra-1036 vo sAdhvI yA koI bhI strI-puruSa
ke saMsarga meM A jAe to (saMbhoga kare to) ghANI meM jaise tala pIsate haiM usa
taraha usa yoni meM rahe sarva jIva ratikrIr3A meM madonmatta hue taba yoni meM
rahe paMcendriya jIva kA maMthana huA hai  /  bhasmIbhUta hotA hai| sUtra-
1037-1041 strI jaba calatI hai taba vo jIva gaharA darda pAte haiM  /  pezAba
karate haiM taba do yA tIna jIva mara jAte haiM  /  aura bAkI ke paritApa duHkha
pAte haiM  /  he gautama ! prAyazcitta ke anaginata sthAnaka haiM, usameM se eka
bhI yadi AlovaNa rahita raha jAe aura zalyasahita mara jAe to, eka lAkha strIyoM
kA peTa phAr3akara kisI nirdaya mAnava sAta, A~Tha mahine ke garbha ko bAhara
nIkAle, vo tilamilAtA huA garbha jo duHkha mahasUsa karatA hai usake nimitta se
usa peTa phAr3anevAle mAnava ko jitanA pApa lage usase jyAdA eka strI ke sAtha
maithuna prasaMga meM sAdhu nau gunA pApa bA~dhatA hai| sAdhvI ke sAtha sAdhu
eka bAra maithuna sevana kare to hajAra gunA, dUsarI bAra sevana kare to karor3a
gunA aura tIsarI bAra maithuna sevana kare to bodhi-samyaktva kA nAza hotA hai
/  muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 100

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:  The Agam Sutra 39, Cheda Sutra-5, 'Mahanisitha'
Study/Purpose/Sutra Number Sutra-1042-1043 The monk who, upon seeing a woman,
becomes lustful and engages in sexual activities with her, will be reborn in a
miserable state, having lost his spiritual attainment. The restrained monk or
nun who indulges in sexual intercourse accumulates the karma of non-
enlightenment. Through this, they bind karma suitable for rebirth in the animal
and fire-bodied realms. Sutra-1044-1049 Of these three, the one who commits the
offense, O Gautama! They follow the wrong path and completely destroy the right
path. O Bhagavan! From this example, what will be the fate of the householders
who are extremely intoxicated by passion and do not renounce women day or night?
Even if they cut their body into pieces as small as a mustard seed and offer it
in the fire, their impurity will not be cleansed. Even if they renounce other
women and observe the vows of a Shravaka, they will attain a middling state. O
Bhagavan! If they attain a middling state by practicing moderation, then why
should the one who offers his body in the fire not attain purity? O Gautama! One
who engages in sexual activities with his own or another's wife, or with any
other person, commits a sinful act. However, he does not become bound by it.
Sutra-1050-1051 If a certain soul is said to observe the Shravaka dharma and
renounces the life of another woman in the threefold manner for life, he attains
a middling state due to its influence. The crucial point to note here is that
the one who indulges in adultery binds karma, while the one who renounces it and
practices penance attains great fruit. Sutra-1052-1053 If someone, even in the
slightest measure, violates the renunciation of sin, merely by a mental act,
then just as the Arya named Meghamala went to a wretched state after death, so
too the one who violates even a small vow by mental means alone attains a
wretched state. O Kinsman of the World! I do not know what karma Meghamala
accumulated by even slightly violating her vow in her mind and attained a
wretched state. Sutra-1054 In the Tirtha of the Twelfth Tirthankar Lord
Vasupujya, there was a Sadhvi named Meghamala, who had a body dark as lampblack
and a weak mind. Sutra-1055-1058 While going out to beg for alms, she saw a
beautiful house and a woman sitting there. She desired to cross over to the
neighboring house. Then this Sadhvi mentally praised her, and in that moment,
both of them caught fire. The Sadhvi's subtle vow was broken, as she did not
criticize them there. Due to the fault of this vow-breaking, she first went to
hell. Realizing this, if you desire the imperishable, infinite, and unparalleled
happiness, do not allow even the slightest violation of your vows or
austerities. Sutra-1059-1061 The rules for austerity, restraint, or vows are
like a strict warden. One who violates these rules does not have true austerity
or restraint. The fisherman, who binds sin throughout his life by catching fish,
binds eight times more sin than the one who desires to break his vows. If one
gains power or prosperity in one's own country and then takes Diksha, without
violating one's vows, one accumulates so much merit. Translated by Muni
Deepratan Sagar (Mahanisitha), Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 101

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
sUtra-1042-1043 jo sAdhu strI ko dekhakara madanAsakta hokara strI ke sAtha
ratikrIr3A karanevAlA hotA hai vo bodhilAbha se bhraSTa hokara becArA kahA~
paidA hogA  /  saMyata sAdhu yA sAdhvI jo maithuna sevana karatA hai vo abodhi
lAbha karma upArjana karatA hai| usake dvArA apakAya aura agnikAya meM paidA
hone ke lAyaka karma bA~dhatA hai| sUtra - 1044-1049 isa tIna meM aparAdha
karanevAlA he gautama ! unmArga kA vyavahAra karate the aura sarvathA mArga kA
vinAza karanevAlA hotA hai  /  he bhagavaMta ! isa dRSTAMta se jo gRhastha
utkaTa madavAle hote haiM  /  aura rAta yA dina meM strI kA tyAga nahIM karate
usakI kyA gati hogI? vo apane zarIra ke apane hI hasta se chedana karake tala
jitane choTe Tukar3e karake agni meM homa kare to bhI unakI zuddhi nahIM dikhatI
/  vaisA bhI yadi vo parastrI ke paccakkhANa kare aura zrAvaka dharma kA pAlana
kare to madhyama gati prApta kare  /  he bhagavaMta ! yadi saMtoSa rakhane meM
madhyama gati ho to phira apane zarIra kA homa karanevAlA usakI zuddhi kyoM na
pAe ? he gautama ! apanI yA parAI strI ho yA svapati yA anya puruSa ho usake
sAtha ratikrIr3A karanevAlA pApa ba~dha karanevAlA hotA hai| lekina vo ba~dhaka
nahIM hotaa| sUtra - 1050-1051 yadi kisI AtmA kahA gayA zrAvaka dharma pAlana
karatA hai aura parastrI kA jIvana paryanta trividha se tyAga karata haiM  /
usake prabhAva se vo madhyama gati pAtA hai| yahA~ khAsa bAta to yaha dhyAna meM
rakhanI ki niyama rahita ho, paradArA gamana karanevAlA ho, unako karmabaMdha
hotA hai  /  aura jo usakI nivRtti karatA hai, paccakkhANa karatA hai, unheM
mahAphala kI prApti hotI hai| sUtra-1052-1053 pApa kI huI nivRtti ko yadi koI
alpa pramANa meM bhI virAdhanA kare, kevala mana se hI virAdhanA kare to jisa
taraha se meghamAlA nAmakI AryA marake durgati meM gaI usa prakAra mana se alpa
bhI vrata kI virAdhanA karanevAlA durgati pAtA hai  /  he bhuvana ke ba~dhava !
mana se bhI alpa pratyAkhyAna kA khaMDana karake meghamAlA se jo karma upArjana
kiyA aura durgati pAI, vo maiM nahIM jAnatA  /  sUtra - 1054 bArahaveM vAsupUjya
tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ke tIrtha meM bholI kAjala samAna zarIra ke kAle
varNavAlI durbala manavAlI meghamAlA nAma kI eka sAdhvI thii| sUtra-1055-1058
bhikSA grahaNa karane ke lie bAhara nIkalakara dUsarI ora eka sundara makAna
para eka strI baiThI thI  /  vo pAsa ke dUsare makAna se laMghana karake jAne kI
abhilASA karatI thii| taba isa sAdhvIne mana se use abhinandana karake itane meM
vo donoM jala uThI, usa sAdhvIne apane niyama kA sUkSma bhaMga huA unakI vahA~
nIMdA nahIM kii| usa niyama ke bhaMga ke doSa se jalakara pahale naraka meM gaI
/  isa prakAra samajhakara yadi tumako akSaya, ananta, anupama sukha kI abhilASA
ho to atinA ke niyama yA vrata kI virAdhanA mata hone denA  /  sUtra- 1059-1061
tapa, saMyama yA vrata ke lie niyama daMDanAyaka koTavAla samAna hai  /  usa
niyama ko khaMDita karanevAle ko vrata yA saMyama nahIM rahate  /  machavArA
pUre janma meM machaliyA~ pakar3akara jo pApa bA~dhatA hai usase jyAdA to vrata
ke bhaMga kI IcchA rakhanevAle A~Tha gunA pApa bA~dhate haiM  /  apane deza kI
zakti yA labdhi se dUsaroM kI upazAnta kare aura dIkSA le to apane vrata ko
khaMr3ita na karate hue utane puNya kA upArjana karanevAlA hotA hai  /  muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 101

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth' Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number -
1062 A householder is inclined towards restraint and austerity, and towards the
elimination of sin. Whatever religious practices they perform until they accept
initiation, they benefit from them. Sūtra-1063-1064 Here, one should understand
the category of sādhus and sādhvīs. O Gautama! Apart from inhalation and
exhalation, no other action should be performed without the permission of the
guru. Even that should be done only with jayana, not with ajayana. With ajayana,
there is absolutely no breathing or holding of breath. How can one who breathes
with ajayana attain austerity or dharma? Sūtra - 1065-1069 O Bhagavant! How can
one follow what one has seen or known to the same extent? Those who have not yet
known the ultimate truth, who are not aware of what is right and wrong, how can
they follow? O Gautama! Only the Kevali Bhagavant speaks words that are
beneficial for solitude. Even they do not force dharma upon a being by holding
their hand. But those who follow the words spoken by the Tīrthankara Bhagavan,
who are worthy of being called 'tahatti' because they behave accordingly, are
saluted by Indra and the community of gods who find joy in their feet. Those who
have not yet known the ultimate truth, who have not recognized the discernment
of right and wrong, are like a blind person following another blind person,
unaware whether the ground is water or land, mud or stone. Similarly, an
ignorant person does not know whether their worship of dharma is true or false.
Therefore, either one should be knowledgeable about the Gītartha-śāstra
themselves, or they should live in the company of such a knowledgeable person,
or they should live under the guidance of such a knowledgeable person. The
śāstrakāra has permitted this for the sake of the best sādhus. There is no third
option in the śāstra. Sūtra - 1070-1071 One should live with a Gītartha guru who
has experienced deep emotions, is free from laziness, has firm vows, always has
unblemished character, is free from attachment and aversion, has subdued the
four kṣayās, has conquered the senses, and possesses such qualities. Because
even though they are in a state of concealment (śruta), they are Kevalis. Sūtra
- 1072-1076 O Gautama! Where a single being with a subtle earth body experiences
kīlamāṇā, the all-knowing Kevali calls it alparambha. Where the life of a single
being with a small earth body ends, all Kevalis call it mahārarambha. If even a
little bit of a being with an earth body is crushed, it results in an
asātavedanīya karma-bandha, a sinful karma that is very difficult to shed.
Similarly, beings with apkāya, teūkāya, vāyukāya, vanaspatikāya, trasakāya, and
those who engage in sexual intercourse, acquire slippery sinful karmas.
Therefore, seeing the adverse and long-lasting fruits of the earth body and
other beings due to the thought of sexual intercourse, the jāvajīva should
abandon all three types of trividha. Sūtra - 1077-1082 Therefore, O Gautama!
Those who do not know the ultimate truth, who are ignorant, should practice
restraint and worship dharma under the guidance of a Gītartha guru, who will
lead them away from the path of hell. They should drink the poison of halāhala
according to the words of the Gītartha. Without any other option, they should
immediately consume the poison according to their words. If considered from the
perspective of the ultimate truth, it is not poison. Indeed, their words are
like the taste of nectar. In this world, one who follows their words without
thinking, even after death, attains nectar. Do not drink nectar from the words
of an agītartha. From the perspective of the ultimate truth, the words of an
agītartha are not nectar, but they are poison, a mixture of halāhala, kālakūta,
and poison. One cannot become immortal by their words. But after death, they go
to hell. Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda Page
102

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra -
1062 gRhastha saMyama aura tapa ke lie pravRtti karanevAlA aura pApa kI nivRtti
karanevAlA hotA hai  /  jaba taka vo dIkSA aMgIkAra nahIM karate taba taka jo
kucha bhI dharmAnuSThAna kare usameM unakA phAyadA hotA hai  /  sUtra-1063-1064
sAdhu-sAdhvI ke varga ko yahA~ samajha lenA cAhie ki he gautama ! uzvAsa nizvAsa
ke alAvA dUsarI kisI bhI kriyA guru kI paravAnagI ke sivA nahi karanA  /  vo bhI
jayaNA se hI karane kI AjJA hai  /  ajayaNA se nahIM  /  ajayaNA se sA~sa lene-
rakhane kA sarvathA nahIM hotA  /  ajayaNA se sA~sa lenevAle ko tapa yA dharma
kahA~ se mile? sUtra - 1065-1069 he bhagavaMta ! jitanA dekhA ho yA jAnA ho to
usakA pAlana utane pramANa meM kisa taraha kara sake ? jinhoMne abhI paramArtha
nahIM jAnA, kRtya aura akRtya ke jAnakAra nahIM hai  /  vo pAlana kisa taraha
kara sakeMge ? he gautama ! kevalI bhagavaMta ekAnta hIta vacana ko kahate haiM
/  vo bhI jIva kA hAtha pakar3akara balAtkAra se dharma nahIM karavAte  /
lekina tIrthaMkara bhagavAna ke batAe hue vacana ko tahatti' kahane ke lAyaka jo
usake anusAra vyavahAra karate haiM, unake caraNa meM harSa pAnevAle indra aura
devatA ke samudAya praNAma karate haiM  /  jinhoMne abhI taka paramArtha nahIM
jAnA, kRtyAkRtya kA viveka nahIM pahacAnA  /  vo aMdhe ke pIche aMdhA calatA jAe
aura gar3A-TekarI pAnI hai yA bhUmi hai, kIcar3a hai yA paththara hai usakA
bhAna nahIM hotA  /  vaise ajJAnI ko dharma kI ArAdhanA hotI hai yA virAdhanA
hotI hai vaisI bhI pahacAna nahIM hotI  /  isalie yA to khuda gItArtha-zAstra ke
jAnakAra ho, usakA vihAra yA vaise gItArtha kI nizrA meM, AjJA meM rahakara
vihAra karane kI uttama sAdhu ke lie zAstrakAra ne anujJA dI hai| ina donoM ke
alAvA tIsarA vikalpa zAstra meM nahIM hai| sUtra - 1070-1071 acchI taraha se
saMvega pAyA ho, Alasa rahita ho, dRr3ha vratavAle ho, hamezA askhalita
cAritravAle ho, rAgadveSa rahita ho, cAra kaSAya ko upazamAyA ho, indriya ko
jItanevAlA ho, aise guNavAle jo gItArtha guru ho unake sAtha vihAra karanA  /
kyoMki vo chadmastha hone ke bAvajUda (zruta) kevalI haiN| sUtra - 1072-1076 he
gautama ! jahA~ sUkSma pRthvIkAya ke eka jIva ko kIlAmaNA hotI hai to usa ko
sarvajJa kevalI alpAraMbha kahate haiM  /  jahA~ choTe pRthvIkAya ke eka jIva kA
prANa vilaya ho use sabhI kevalI mahAraMbha kahate haiM  /  eka pRthvIkAya ke
jIva ko thor3A sA bhI masalA jAe to usase azAtAvedanIya karmabaMdha hotA hai ki
jo pApazalya kAphI muzkila se chor3a sake  /  usI prakAra apkAya, teUkAya,
vAyukAya, vanaspatikAya, trasakAya aura maithuna sevana ke cIkane pApakarma
upArjana karate haiM  /  isalie maithuna saMkalpa pRthvIkAya Adi jIva virAdhanA
duranta phala dete dekhakara jAvajjIva trividha trividha se tyajanA  /  sUtra -
1077-1082 isalie jo paramArtha ko nahIM jAnate aura he gautama ! jo ajJAnI haiM,
vo durgati ke paMtha ko denevAle aise pRthvIkAya Adi ki virAdhanA gItArtha guru
nizrA meM rahakara saMyama ArAdhanA karanI  /  gItArtha ke vacana se halAhala
jhahara kA pAna karanA  /  kisI bhI vikalpa kie binA unake vacana ke mutAbika
tatkAla jhahara kA bhI bhakSaNa kara lenA  /  paramArtha se socA jAe to vo viSa
nahIM hai  /  vAkaI unakA vacana amRta rasa ke AsvAda samAna hai| isa saMsAra
meM unake vacana ke anusAra binA soce anusaraNa karanevAlA marakara bhI amRta
pAtA hai| agItArtha ke vacana se amRta kA bhI pAna mata karanA  /  paramArtha se
agItArtha kA vacana amRta nahIM hai lekina vo jhahara yukta halAhala kAlakUTa
viSa hai  /  usake vacana se ajarAmara nahIM bana sakate  /  lekina marakara
durgati meM jAte muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 102

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishītha'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra
Number:**  Those who travel on the path are hindered by obstacles, in the same
way, for those who travel on the path of liberation, the company of *agītartha*
and *kuśīla* is an obstacle, therefore, one should abandon their company from
afar. Sūtra - 1083-1084  It is better to enter a blazing fire without hesitation
and die by water, but never associate with *kuśīla* or seek their refuge. It is
better to be impaled on a stake for a million years and live in comfort, but
never dwell with *agītartha* even for a moment. Sūtra - 1085-1087  Even if a
snake with a terrifying gaze, devoid of mantras and tantras, is hissing, it is
better to seek its shelter than to associate with the unrighteousness of
*agītartha* and *kuśīla*. It is better to drink the poison of *halahl* because
it will kill you once, but never, even by mistake, come into contact with
*agītartha*, because I would rather die a million deaths. It is better to be
swallowed by a terrifying lion, tiger, or demon, than to come into contact with
*agītartha*. Sūtra - 1088-1089  Consider a seven-life enemy as your own brother,
but even if your father is a violator of vows and rules, consider him an enemy.
It is better to enter a blazing fire than to violate even the smallest rule. A
death with pure and righteous actions is beautiful, but it is not good to live
by breaking the rules. Sūtra - 1090-1094  O Gautama! When the first Tirthankara
Bhagavan attained liberation in accordance with the rituals, a beautiful
liberation festival was celebrated, and beautiful gods and demons descended and
ascended. Those who were nearby, seeing this, thought, "Oh! Today we are
witnessing a wonder in the human realm. We have never seen such magic and dreams
anywhere, anytime." Sūtra - 1095-1102  Thinking this, one human being remembered
his past life. He was stunned for a moment, but then he was reassured by his
mind. After regaining his senses, he trembled and reproached his soul for a long
time. He immediately became eager to embrace monkhood. Then, with great glory,
he performed the *panchamustika* ritual, and as soon as he began, the gods
respectfully offered him *rajoharan*. Seeing his arduous and fierce austerities
and his character, and seeing others worship him, the gods came to him and
asked, "Who initiated you? Where were you born? What is your lineage? At whose
lotus feet did you study the profound sūtras and their meaning?" He told them
everything, including his serpent lineage, family, initiation, sūtras, and
meaning, just as the Buddhas had told him. Hearing all this, the liberated one
thought, "This is different. These non-Aryan people are deceiving with their
show. The Jina will be just as they say." He didn't think about it anymore.
Believing this, he stood silent for a long time. Sūtra - 1103-1104  Or, if that
is not the case, if that Bhagavan, who has been saluted by gods and demons, can
remove the doubts in my mind, then I will believe. Then he thought, "Whatever is
to be, will be. What is the use of thinking here? I welcome the renunciation
that destroys all suffering." That is, he desired to accept it.  Muni
Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt (Mahānishītha) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi Translation Page 103

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka haiM  /
mArga meM saphara karanevAle ko cIra vighna karavAte haiM usa prakAra mokSamArga
kI saphara karanevAle ke lie agItArtha aura kuzIla kA samAgama vighna
karavAnevAlA hai, isalie unake saMgha kA dUra se tyAga krnaa| sUtra - 1083-1084
dhagadhagate agni ko dekhakara usameM praveza niHzaMkapana se karanA aura khuda
kA jala maranA acchA  /  lekina kabhI bhI kusIla ke samAgama ke na jAnA yA usakA
zaraNa mata apanAnA  /  lAkha sAla taka zUlI meM bIMdhakara sukha se rahanA
acchA hai  /  lekina agItArtha ke sAtha eka pala bhI vAsa mata karanA  /  sUtra
- 1085-1087 maMtra, taMtra rahita ho aura bhayAnaka dRSTiviSa sA~pa u~satA ho,
usakA Azraya bhale hI karanA lekina agItArtha aura kuzIla adharma kA sahavAsa
mata karanA  /  halAhala jhahara khA lenA, kyoMki usI vakta eka bAra mAra
DAleMge lekina galatI se bhI agItArtha kA saMsarga mata karanA, kyoMki usase
lAkha maraNa upArjana karU~gA  /  ghora rUpavAle bhayAnaka aise zera, vAgha yA
pizAca nIgala jAe to naSTa honA lekina agItArtha kA saMsarga mata krnaa|
sUtra-1088-1089 sAta janmAntara ke zatru ko sagA bhAI mAnanA, lekina vrata-
niyama kI viDambanA karanevAle pitA ho to bhI use zatru samAna mAnanA  /
bhar3abhar3a-agni meM praveza karanA acchA hai lekina sUkSma bhI niyama kI
virAdhanA karanI acchI nahIM hai  /  suvizuddha niyamayukta karmavAlI mauta
sundara hai lekina niyama tor3akara jInA acchA nahIM hai| sUtra-1090-1094 he
gautama ! kisI dUsarI caubIsa ke pahale tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta kA jaba vidhivat
nirvANa huA taba manohara nirvANa mahotsava pravartatA thA aura sundara rUpavAle
deva aura asura nIce utarate the aura Upara car3ate the| taba pAsa meM
rahanevAle loga yaha dekhakara socane lage ki are ! Aja mAnava loka meM tAjjuba
dekhate haiM  /  kisI vakta bhI kahIM bhI aisI indrajAla-sapanA dekhane meM
nahIM aayaa| sUtra-1095-1102 aisA socate-socate eka mAnava ko pUrvabhava kA jAti
smaraNa jJAna huA  /  isalie palabhara mU huA lekina phira vAyare se AzvAsana
milA  /  bhAna meM Ane ke bAda tharathara kA~pane lagA aura lambe arase taka
apanI AtmA kI kAphI nIMdA karane lagA  /  turanta hI munipana aMgIkAra karane ke
lie udyata huA  /  usake bAda vo mahAyaza vAlA paMcamuSTika loca karA jitane meM
zuru karatA hai utane meM devatA ne vinayapUrvaka use rajoharaNa arpaNa kiyA  /
usa ke kaSTakArI ugra tapa aura cAritra dekhakara aura logoM ko usakI pUjA
karate dekhakara izvara jitane meM vahA~ Akara use pUchane lagA ki tumheM kisane
dIkSA dI ? kahA~ paidA hue ho ? tumhArA kula kauna-sA hai ? kisake caraNakamala
meM atizayavAle sUtra aura matalaba kA tumane adhyayana kiyA ? vo hara eka
buddha use jitane meM sarpa jAti, kula, dIkSA, sUtra, artha Adi jisa prakAra
prApta kie vo kahate the utane meM vo sarva hakIkata sunakara nirbhAgI vo isa
prakAra cintavana karane lagA ki yaha alaga hai, yaha anArya loga dikhAve se
Thagate haiM to jaisA yaha bolate haiM usI taraha kA vo jinavara bhI hogA  /
isa viSaya meM kucha socane kA nahIM hai  /  aisA mAnakara dIrghakAla taka mauna
khaDA rhaa| sUtra - 1103-1104 yA phira aisA nahIM deva aura dAnava se praNAma
kie gae vo bhagavaMta yadi mere mana meM rahe saMzaya kA chedana kare to mujhe
yakIna ho  /  utane meM phira cintavana kiyA ki jo honA hai vo ho, mujhe yahA~
socane kA kyA prayojana hai  /  maiM to sarva duHkha ko naSTa karanevAlI
pravrajyA ko abhinandana detA hU~  /  yAni use grahaNa karane kI IcchA rakhatA
huuN| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 103

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth' Study/Purpose/Sūtrāṅka Sūtra -
1105-1107 In the meantime, he went to Jineśvara for knowledge. But he did not
see Jineśvara. Therefore, he set out to go to Gaṇadhara Bhagavant. Gaṇadhara
Mahārāja does the prarūpaṇā of the sūtra and meaning that Jineśvara Bhagavant
had explained. When Gaṇadhara Mahārāja was giving a lecture here, this speaker
came and said, 'One and the same earth-bodied being experiences trouble
everywhere. Who can be capable of protecting him?' Sūtra - 1108-1111 In this
matter, this great-renowned one belittles his own soul. It is not appropriate to
prove this point in this entire world. Why would he prarūpaṇā such a thing? His
lecture is quite harsh to the ears due to its bluntness. It needlessly dries up
the throat. There is no other benefit. Who can behave like this? Therefore, one
should abandon this teaching and preach a normal or a moderate kind of dharma.
So that those who come to us do not get bored. Sūtra - 1112-1116 Either I am
truly a foolish sinner, a wicked person, even though I do not behave like that,
but other people do behave like that. And then the infinite knower, the
omniscient Bhagavant, has prarūpaṇā this truth. Whoever speaks against his
words, his meaning cannot stand. Therefore, now I will do the most difficult,
excellent kind of prāyaścitta, as soon as possible, in the shortest possible
time, before my death. By desiring, I have committed such a sin that even the
accumulated punya of a hundred years of the devas is destroyed by it. Now he is
ready to do prāyaścitta. And with his own mind and imagination, he did that kind
of great, terrible prāyaścitta and went back to each Buddha. Sūtra - 1117-1123
There too, while listening to the explanation of the sūtra, the same right came
again, 'The beginning of the earth etc., the virtuous one should avoid the
three-fold, three-fold', being quite foolish, he started thinking like a
foolish, virtuous, ignorant person, that who in this world does not begin with
the earth-bodied etc.? He himself is sitting on the earth-bodied, eating food
cooked with fire, and all that is born from seeds and grains. Secondly, how can
one live even for a moment without water? So indeed, this directly shows the
opposite truth. I came to them, but they will not believe in this matter. So let
them stay here, this Gaṇadhara Bhagavant is much better. Or else, they will not
accept anything I say here. Why would they preach this kind of dharma? If the
dharma is extremely bitter and difficult, then don't listen to it now. Sūtra -
1124-1138 Or put them aside. I will tell you a dharma that I myself can be happy
with and everyone can do. This is not the time to do this harsh, difficult
dharma. As much as he was thinking, in that much time, that thunderous lightning
struck. O Gautama! He died there and was born in the seventh hellish earth. Due
to the opposite of the contact of the rule, śramaṇapan, śruta-jñāna, the being
suffered for a long time in hell, came here and became a great fish in the
ocean, again suffered for a long time in the seventh hellish earth, for thirty-
three oceans, suffered such terrible pain, came here, the being of the god, was
born as a crow among the birds. From there, he went to the first hellish earth,
completed his lifespan, was born here as a wicked dog, and went back to the
first hellish earth. From there, he came out, was born as a lion, died again,
went to the fourth, and came here. From here too, he went to hell, the being of
the god was born as a potter. There, he was a leper, suffered greatly, eaten by
worms, for fifty years, suffered such unbearable pain from dependence, became
inactive and withered, from there he was born in the deva-bhavana, from there...
Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi Translation Page 104

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra -
1105-1107 utane meM jinezvara ke pAsa jAna ke lie nIkalA  /  lekina jinezvara ko
na dekhA  /  isalie gaNadhara bhagavaMta ke pAsa jAne ke lie prayANa kiyA  /
jinezvara bhagavaMta ne batAe hue sUtra aura matalaba kI prarUpaNA gaNadhara
mahArAjA karate haiM  /  jaba yahA~ gaNadhara mahArAjA vyAkhyAna karate the taba
usameM yaha AlApaka AyA ki, 'eka hI pRthvIkAya jIva sarvatra upadrava pAte haiN|
vo usakI rakSA karane ke lie kauna samartha ho sakatA hai ? sUtra - 1108-1111
isa viSaya meM isa mahAyazavAle apane AtmA kI laghatA karate haiM  /  isa
samagra loka meM yaha bAta siddha karane ke ucita nahIM hai  /  aisI bAta yaha
kyoM prarUpate hoMge ? yaha unakA vyAkhyAna prakaTapana se kAphI kAna meM
kar3akar3a karanevAlA hai| niSkAraNa gale ko zoSita karatA hai  /  usake alAvA
koI phAyadA nahIM hai  /  aisA vyavahAra kauna kara sakegA? isalie yaha upadeza
chor3akara sAmAnya yA kisI madhyama taraha ke dharma kA upadeza karanA caahie|
jisase hamAre pAsa AnevAle loga Uba na jaae| sUtra - 1112-1116 yA to sacamuca
maiM mUMDha pApakarma narAdhama hU~, bhale maiM vaisA nahIM karatA lekina dUsare
loga to vaisA vyavahAra karate haiM  /  aura phira ananta jJAnI sarvajJa
bhagavaMta ne yaha hakIkata prarUpI hai  /  jo koI unake vacana ke khilApha bAta
kare to usakA artha Tika nahIM sakatA  /  isalie aba maiM isakA ghora ati
duSkara uttama taraha kA prAyazcitta jalda ati zIghratara samaya meM karU~gA ki
jitane meM merI mauta na ho  /  AzAtanA karane se maiM aisA pApa kiyA hai ki
devatAI sau sAla kA IkaTThA kiyA huA puNya bhI usase naSTa hotA hai| aba vo
prAyazcitta karane ke lie taiyAra huA hai| aura apanI mati kalpanA se usa taraha
kA mahA ghora prAyazcitta karake pratyeka buddha ke pAsa phira se gyaa|
sUtra-1117-1123 vahA~ bhI sUtra kI vyAkhyA zravaNa karate karate vo hI adhikAra
phira AyA ki, 'pRthvI Adi kA samArambha sAdhu trividha trividha se varjana
kare', kAphI mUDha aisA vo izvara sAdhu mUrkha banakara cintavana karane lagA ki
isa jagata meM kauna usa pRthvIkAyAdika kA samArambha nahIM karatA? khuda hI to
pRthvIkAya para baiThe haiM, agni se pakAyA huA AhAra khAte haiM aura vo saba
bIja-dhAnya meM se paidA hotA hai  /  dUsarA pAnI binA eka pala bhI kaise jI
sakeMge? to vAkaI yaha pratyakSa hI ulaTI hakIkata dikhAI detI hai  /  maiM
unake pAsa AyA lekina isa bAta meM koI bharosA nahIM kareMge  /  to vo bhale
yahA~ rahe, isase to yaha gaNadhara bhagavaMta kAphI uttama hai  /  yA to yahA~
vo koi bhI merA kahA nahIM kareMge  /  isa taraha kA dharma kisa vajaha se
kahate hoMge  /  yadi ati kar3avA-kaThina dharma hogA to phira aba mata sunanA |
sUtra - 1124-1138 yA unako eka ora rakha do  /  maiM khuda hI sukha se ho sake
aura saba loga kara sake aisA dharma batAUMgA  /  yaha jo kar3akar3a-kaThina
dharma karane kA samaya nahIM hai  /  aisA jitane meM cintavana karate haiM
utane meM to una dhar3adhar3a AvAja karanevAlI bijalI gira par3I  /  he gautama
! vo vahA~ marakara sAtavIM naraka pRthvI meM paidA huaa| zAsana zramaNapana
zrutajJAna ke saMsarga ke pratyanIkapana kI vajaha se izvara lambe arase taka
naraka meM duHkha mahasUsa karake yahA~ Akara sAgara meM mahAmatsya hokara phira
se sAtavIM nArakI meM teMtIsa sAgaropama ke lambe arase taka duHkha sahakara
vaise bhayAnaka duHkha bhugatakara yahA~ AyA izvara kA jIva tiryaMca aise paMchI
meM kaue ke rUpa meM paidA huA  /  vahA~ se phira pahalI nArakI meM jAkara Ayu
pUrNa karake yahA~ duSTa zvAna ke rUpa meM paidA hokara phira se pahalI nArakI
meM gayA  /  vahA~ se nIkalakara zera ke rUpa meM phira se marake cauthI meM
jAkara yahA~ AyA  /  yahA~ se bhI naraka meM jAkara usa izvara kA jIva kumhAra
ke rUpa meM paidA huA  /  vahA~ kuSThI hokara kAphI duHkhI, kRmi ne khAyA huA
pacAsa sAla taka parAdhIna-pana se vaisA pArAvAra duHkha sahakara akAma nirjarA
kI, vahA~ se devabhava meM paidA hokara vahA~ se muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 104

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
Here, the king went to the seventh Naraka (hell) due to his own actions. In the
same way, the soul of God, due to its own wrong conceptions, has been wandering
in the Naraka and animal realms, and in the most wretched and lowly human realm
for a long time, experiencing immense suffering and becoming extremely
distressed. This is the same soul of God. Therefore, to understand the ultimate
truth, one should quickly recognize the essence of such scriptures filled with
the essence and become a Gītartha Muni. **Sūtra - 1139-1140**  Without
recognizing the essence, the Rājju Ārya, due to the fault of being a Gītartha,
earned sin by just one word. The kind of terrifying speed of control she will
have to experience in the Naraka, animal realm, and the lowest human realm due
to that sin, who will be able to bear hearing it? **Sūtra - 1141**  O Bhagavant!
Who was that Rājju Ārya, and what kind of sinful act did she commit by just one
word due to the fault of being a Gītartha, that even hearing its consequences
would make one lose patience? O Gautama! In this very Bharat Kshetra, there was
an Ācharya named Bhadra. He had five hundred disciples and twelve hundred
Nirgranthi Sadhvis (female ascetics) who were great souls. In that Gachchha
(lineage), the fourth (Ayambil) type of Rasayukta Osaman (a type of water) was
used, which had three boils and three types of Achitta (unwholesome) water, but
the fourth type of water was not used. Once, due to the arising of the
unwholesome karma from a previous life, the Ārya named Rājja's body became
rotten due to leprosy, and worms were born in it and started eating her. Once,
seeing the Ārya, other Sanayatis (female ascetics) in the Gachchha asked her,
"Oh, Duskarakarike! What happened to you suddenly?"  Then, O Gautama! That Rājja
Ārya, who was born with the characteristics of a great sinner, replied to the
Sanayatis, "This destruction of my body is due to drinking this Achitta water."
As soon as she uttered these words, the hearts of all the Sanayatis were shaken.
"We will also drink this Achitta water, and we will die like her." But one
Sadhvi from that Gachchha thought, "Even if my body rots and breaks into pieces
in the blink of an eye, I will never drink the Satchitta water in this life. I
will not abandon the Achitta water." The other Sadhvi's body was destroyed by
the Achitta water. What is the truth of this matter? This is absolutely not
true. Because this happens due to the arising of unwholesome karma from a
previous life. In this way, she started thinking very beautifully. "Look, how
ignorant, foolish, and shameless this great sinner Sadhvi is, who has spoken
such a wicked word that even my ears cannot enter the cavity." So, whatever
poverty, misfortune, disgrace, false accusations, and suffering from leprosy and
other diseases arise due to the arising of unwholesome karma from a previous
life, there is no difference. Because the Āgama says in Sūtra - 1142:  "Who can
give or take the suffering or happiness earned by oneself? Who can bear the
karma done by oneself, and whose karma can one bear? One has to bear the
consequences of one's own karma and the happiness or suffering earned by
oneself." **Sūtra - 1143**  Thinking this way, that Sadhviji attained Kevalgyan
(omniscience). At that time, the Devas (gods) celebrated the festival of
Kevalgyan. That Kevali Sadhviji removed the veil of darkness of Samsara (cycle
of birth and death) in the form of human, Deva, Asura (demon), and Sadhvi. After
that, Rājja Ārya, whose heart was filled with devotion, bowed down and asked, "O
Bhagavant! Why did I get such a great disease of suffering?" Then, O Gautama!
Like the sound of rain-laden clouds and the Dundubhi (a type of drum), the
beautiful...  **Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kr̥t (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi
Translation** **Page 105**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka yahA~
rAjA banakara sAtavIM nArakI meM gayA  /  usa prakAra izvara kA jIva svakalpanA
karane kI vajaha se nAraka aura tiryaMca gati meM aura kutsita-adhama mAnavagati
meM lambe arase taka bhava bhramaNa karake ghora duHkha bhugatakara kAphI duHkhI
honevAlA abhI gozAlakarUpa huA hai  /  aura vo hI isa izvara kA jIva hai| isalie
paramArtha samajhane ke lie sArAsAra se paripUrNa aise zAstra ke bhAva ko jalda
pahacAnakara gItArtha muni bnnaa| sUtra - 1139-1140 sArAsAra ko pahacAne binA
agItArthapana ke doSa se rajjuAryA ne kevala eka vacana se jo pApa kA upArjana
kiyA, usa pApa se usa becArI ko nArakI-tiryaMca gati meM aura adhama mAnavapana
meM jisa taraha kI niyaMtraNa kI hairAna gati bhugatanI par3egI, vo sunakara
kise dhRti prApta hogI? sUtra-1141 he bhagavaMta ! vo rajju AryA kauna thI aura
usane agItArthapana ke doSa se kevala vacana se kaisA pApakarma upArjana kiyA ki
jo vipAka sunakara dhRti na pA sake ? he gautama ! isI bharatakSetra meM bhadra
nAmake AcArya the| unheM mahAnubhAva aise pA~casau ziSya aura bAraha sau
nirgranthI-sAdhvI thI  /  usa gaccha meM cauthe (AyaMbila) rasayukta osAmaNa
tIna ubAlAvAlA haA tIna taraha ke acitta jala ke sivA cauthe taraha ke jala kA
istamAla nahIM hotA thA  /  kisI vakta rajjA nAma kI AryA ko pahale kie gae
azubha pApakarma ke udaya kI vajaha se kuSTha vyAdhi se zarIra sar3a gayA aura
usameM kRmi paidA hokara use khAne lgii| kisI vakta AryA ko dekhakara gaccha meM
rahI dUsarI saMyatI unheM pUchane lagI ki-are are duSkarakArike ! yaha tumheM
acAnaka kyA huA ? taba he gautama ! mahApApakarmI bhagnalakSaNa janmavAlI usa
rajjA AryAne saMyatIoM ko aisA pratyuttara diyA hai, yaha acitta jala kA pAna
karane kI vajaha se yaha merA zarIra naSTa huA hai  /  jitane meM yaha vacana
bolI utane meM sarva saMyati ke samUha ke hRdaya kSobhita hue haiM  /  hama bhI
isa acitta jala kA pAna kareMge isase inakI taraha mauta milegii| lekina usa
gaccha meM se eka sAdhvI ne cintavana kiyA ki-zAyada yaha merA zarIra eka palaka
jitane alpa samaya meM hI sar3a jAe aura sar3akara Tukar3e-Tukar3e ho jAe to bhI
sacitta jala kA pAna isa janma meM kabhI nahIM karU~gA  /  acitta jala kA tyAga
nahIM karU~gA  /  dUsarA acitta jala se isa sAdhvI kA zarIra naSTa ho gayA hai
vo hakIkata kyA satya hai ? sarvathA yaha bAta satya nahIM hai  /  kyoMki
pUrvabhava meM kie gae azubha pApakarma ke udaya se hI aisA hotA hai  /  usa
prakAra kAphI sundara soca karane lagI  /  are ! dekho to sahI ki ajJAna doSa se
Avarita kAphI mUr3ha hRdayavAlI lajjA rahita hokara yaha mahApApa-karmaNI
sAdhvIne saMsAra ke ghora duHkha denevAle aisA-kaisA duSTa vacana kahA ? ki mere
kAna ne vivara meM bhI praveza nahIM kara sakatA  /  to bhavAntara meM kie gae
azubha pApakarma ke udaya kI vajaha se jo kucha daridratA, durbhAgya, apayaza,
jhUThe kalaMka laganA kuSThAdika vyAdhi ke kleza ke duHkha zarIra meM laganA,
Adi paidA hote haiN| usameM koI pharka nahIM hotaa| kyoMki Agama meM kahA hai
kisUtra-1142 'khuda ke upArjana kie hue duHkha yA sukha kauna kisako de sakatA
hai yA le sakatA hai ? khuda ke kiyA huA karma kauna hara sakatA hai aura kisakA
karma haraNa kara sakate haiM ? khuda ke kie hue karma aura upArjita kie gae
sukha yA duHkha to khuda hI bhugatane pdd'e|' sUtra-1143 aisA socate hue usa
sAdhvIjI ko kevalajJAna paidA huA  /  usa vakta deva ne kevalajJAna kA mahotsava
kiyA  /  vo kevalI sAdhvIjI ne mAnava, deva, asura ke aura sAdhvI ke saMzayarUpa
aMdhakAra ke par3ala ko dUra kiyA  /  usake bAda bhakti se bharapUra hRdayavAlI
rajjA AryA ne praNAma karake savAla pUchA ki-he bhagavaMta ! kisa vajaha se
mujhe itanI bar3I mahAvedanAvAlA vyAdhi paidA huA ? taba he gautama ! jalavAle
megha aura duMdubhi ke zabda samAna manohara muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 105

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishītha'  The Kevali, with a deep voice,
said, "O Duṣkarakārike, listen! Why did your body disintegrate? Your body was
already polluted by the doshas of blood and bile, and then you ate a full meal
of that oily food along with the food of the spider creature. Another reason is
that, even though there are hundreds of sādhus and sādhvīs in this gaccha, you
could not offer even a small amount of sachit water to the sādhus, even though
they could only wash their eyes with it. Instead, you went to receive cow urine
from someone whose nose and mouth were covered with rotting lint. Because of
this, a buzzing bee was flying around, and you washed the mouth of that śrāvaka
putra with sachit water. Because of this violation of the sachit water rule, you
also broke the inviolable gaccha rules that are worthy of the worship of gods
and asuras.  The devatas could not tolerate your outrageous behavior. Even in
the face of death, sādhus and sādhvīs should not touch the water of wells,
ponds, tanks, rivers, etc. The Vītarāga Paramātma has ordained that sādhus and
sādhvīs should only consume boiled water, even if it is completely achit.
Therefore, the devatas thought, "Let us teach this wicked person in such a way
that no one else will ever behave like him." With this in mind, they put some
powder in your food when you were eating. We are not able to know what the
devatas did. Because of this, your body was destroyed, but not by drinking achit
water.  At that time, Rajjā-Āryā thought, "It is as it should be. There will be
no difference in the words of the Kevali." Thinking this, she begged, "O
Bhagavant! If I perform the appropriate prāyaścitta, will my body be restored?"
The Kevali replied, "If someone performs prāyaścitta, then they can be
purified." Rajjā-Āryā said, "O Bhagavant! You are the one who should give me
prāyaścitta. Who else is like you?" Then the Kevali said, "O Duṣkarakārike! I
can give you prāyaścitta, but there is no prāyaścitta that can purify you."
Rajjā asked, "O Bhagavant! Why can I not be purified?" The Kevali said, "You
said in front of the sādhvī community that your body rotted because you consumed
achit water. Hearing your words, which are like a lump of this wicked sin, the
hearts of all the sādhvīs were shaken. They all began to think, 'Now we too must
give up achit water.' But those sādhvīs criticized, condemned, and condemned the
bad resolution in the presence of the guru. I have given them prāyaścitta.
Thus, you have earned a great sin, which is very painful, dull, frightening,
bound, and clearly manifested, because of giving up achit water and because of
your words. Because of that community of sin, you will become afflicted with
leprosy, disease, fistula, dropsy, wind, swelling, shortness of breath, asthma,
warts, goiter, and many other diseases. Then, you will suffer the pain of
poverty, misfortune, disgrace, false accusations, slander, grief, anxiety, and
distress for a very long time, even for countless births. You will suffer as
much in the night as you do in the day. Therefore, O Gautama! This Rajjā-Āryā,
because of the sin of agītārthapan, has earned such a great and painful sin
simply by her words. Sūtra-1144-1146.  The sin of agītārthapan does not lead to
bhāvaśuddhi. Without bhāvaśuddhi, a muni is polluted in mind. Even if there is a
small amount of pollution, impurity, pain, or illusion in the heart, then the
sin of agītārthapan will create a chain of suffering in the future, just as the
sādhvī Lakṣmaṇā Devī created a chain of suffering. Therefore, a wise person
should become gītārtha, completely free from pollution in the mind, by
understanding this completely.  Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt (Mahānishītha) Āgama
Sūtra - Hindi Translation Page 106

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka gambhIra
svaravAle kevalIne kahA ki-he duSkarakArike tu suna-ki tumhAre zarIra kA
vighaTana kyoM huA ? tumhArA zarIra rakta aura pitta ke doSa se dUSita to thA hI
aura phira usameM usa snigdha AhAra ke sAtha makar3e ke jantuvAlA AhAra
bharapeTa khAyA  /  dUsarI bajaha yaha bhI hai ki-isa gaccha meM seMkar3o
pramANa sAdhu-sAdhvI hone ke bAvajUda, jitane sacitta pAnI se kevala A~kheM dho
sakate haiM utane alpa lekina sacitta jala kA gRhastha kI vajaha se kabhI bhI
sAdhu ko bhogavaTA nahIM kara sakate  /  usake bajAya tune to gaumutra grahaNa
karane ke lie jAte-jAte jisa ke mukha nAsikA meM se galate lIMTa lapeTe hue the
para lage the  /  usa vajaha se baNabaNanevAlI madhumakkhI ur3a rahI thI, aise
zrAvaka putra ke mukha ko sacitta jala se prakSAlana kiyA vaise sacitta jala kA
saMghaTTA karane kI virAdhanA kI vajaha se deva asura kI vaMdana karane ke
lAyaka alaMghanIya aisI gacchamaryAdA ko bhI tor3a diyA  /  pravacana devatA
yaha tumhArA aghaTita vyavahAra saha na sake yA sAdhu-sAdhvI ne prANa ke saMzaya
meM bhI kUe, tAlAba, vAvar3I, nadI Adi ke jala ko hAtha se chUnA na kalpe  /
vItarAga paramAtmA ne sAdhu-sAdhvI ke lie sarvathA acitta jala ho to bhI samagra
doSa rahita ho, UbAlA huA ho, usakA hI paribhoga karanA kalpe  /  isalie devatA
ne cintavana kiyA ki isa durAcArI ko isa taraha zikSA karU~ ki jisase usakI
taraha dUsarI kisI bhI taraha kA AcaraNa yA pravRtti na kare  /  aisA mAnakara
kucha kucha cUrNa kA yoga jaba tuma bhojana karate the taba una devatAoM ne
tumhAre bhojana meM DAlA  /  una devatA ke kie hue prayoga hama jAnane ke lie
samartha nahIM ho sakate  /  isa vajaha se tumhArA zarIra naSTa huA hai, lekina
acitta jala pIne se naSTa nahIM huaa| usa vakta rajjA-AryA ne socA ki usa
prakAra hI hai  /  kevalI ke vacana meM pharka nahIM hogA  /  aisA socakara
kevalI ne binatI kI ki-he bhagavaMta ! yadi maiM yathokta prAyazcitta kA sevana
karU~ to merA yaha zarIra taba kevalI ne pratyuttara diyA ki yadi koI
prAyazcitta de to sudhArA ho sake  /  rajjA AryA ne kahA ki-he bhagavaMta ! Apa
hI mujhe prAyazcitta do  /  dUsare kauna tumhAre samAna AtmA hai ? taba kevalI
ne kahA ki he duSkarakArike ! maiM tumheM prAyazcitta to de sakatA hU~ lekina
tumhAre lie aisA koI prAyazcitta hI nahIM hai ki jisase tumhArI zuddhi ho sake
/  rajjA ne pUchA ki he bhagavaMta ! kisa vajaha se merI zuddhi nahIM hai?
kevalI ne kahA ki-tune jisa sAdhvI samudAya ke sAmane aisA kahA ki acitta pAnI
kA upabhoga karane se merA zarIra sar3a gayA  /  isa duSTa pApa ke bar3e
samudAya ke eka piMr3a samAna tumhAre vacana ko sunakara yaha sabhI sAdhvI ke
hRdaya hila gae  /  vo saba socane lage ki aba hama bhI acitta jala kA tyAga
kara de lekina usa sAdhvIone to azubha adhyavasAya kI AlocanA niMdA aura guru
sAkSI meM garhaNA kara lI  /  unheM to maiMne prAyazcitta de diyA hai| isa
prakAra acitta jala-tyAga se aura vacana-doSa se kAphI kaSTadAyaka virasa
bhayAnaka baddha spRSTa nikAcitta bar3e pApa kA r3haga tUne upArjana kiyA hai
aura usa pApa samudAya se tuma kor3ha, vyAdhi, bhagaMdara, jalodara, vAyu,
gumar3a, sA~sa phUlanA, harasa, masA, kaMThamAla Adi kaIM vyAdhi kI vedanA se
bhare zarIravAlI banogI  /  phira daridra ke duHkha, durbhAgya, apayaza, jhUThe
Aropa, kalaMka lagAnA, saMtApa, udvega, klezAdi se hamezA jalanevAlI aisI ananta
bhava taka kAphI lambe arase taka, jaisA dina meM vaisA lagAtAra rAta ko duHkha
bhugatanA par3egA, isa vajaha se he gautama ! yaha vo rajjA-AryA agItArthapana
ke doSa se kevala vacana se hI aise mahAna duHkhadAyaka pApakarma kA upArjana
karanevAlI haI sUtra-1144-1146 agItArthapana ke doSa se bhAvazaddhi prApta nahIM
hotI, bhAvavizuddhi binA muni kaluSatA yukta manavAlA hotA hai| dila meM kAphI
kama choTe pramANa meM bhI yadi kaluSatA, malInatA, zalya, mAyA rahe hoM to
agItArthapana ke doSa se jaise lakSmaNA devI sAdhvI ne duHkha kI paramparA
khar3I kI, vaise agItArthapana ke doSa se bhava kI aura duHkha kI paramparA
khar3I kI, isalie samajhadAra puruSa ko sarvathA bhAva se sarvathA vo
samajhakara gItArtha banakara mana ko kaluSatA rahita banAnA caahie| muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 106

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Cheda Sutra-5, 'Mahanisitha' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number
Sutra-1147-1156 O Bhagavan! I do not know about Lakshmanā Āryā, who was ignorant
and impure, and due to whom the tradition of suffering was obtained. O Gautama!
For the five Bharata and five Ārdraka regions, in the entire time of Utsarpinī
and Avasarpinī, this is an extremely unstable thing in each universe. The state
of the world is always lasting. O Gautama! I am like that, of the size of seven
hands, who is worshipped by devas and asuras, just as the last Tīrthaṅkara was.
At that time, there was a king named Jambūdvīpa. He had a wife named Saritā, who
had many sons. Since he had no daughter, at some point the king, along with his
wife, worshipped devas, clan deities, and the planets of the moon and sun to
obtain a daughter. In due course, a girl was born with lotus-like eyes. She was
named Lakshmanā Devī. Now, at some point, when Lakshmanā Devī reached the age of
youth, a svayaṃvara was arranged. In it, she married an excellent groom who was
delightful to the eyes and like a treasure house of arts. But immediately after
the marriage, her husband died. Therefore, she became completely unconscious,
fainted. Her kinsmen with difficulty revived her with the cool breeze of the
fan. Then, with loud wailing, she started beating her chest and head. She
started crawling, hitting and beating herself in all ten directions. The kinsmen
consoled her and after some days, she stopped weeping and became calm. Sutra -
1157-1163 At some point, the Tīrthaṅkara Bhagavān, who was like the blossoming
of the lotus-like living being, came there and preached in the garden. The king,
along with his inner apartments, army, and vehicles, went there to worship him
with devotion. After listening to the Dharma, he, along with his inner
apartments, sons, and daughters, accepted dīkṣā. With auspicious mental
dispositions, he started performing severe, extremely difficult, and arduous
austerities without any delusion. At some point, he made everyone enter the
state of the ascetic. But he did not send Lakshmanā Devī for the performance of
the ritual of non-study, as she was sitting alone in the upāśraya, contemplating
that the life of the loving couple is successful. She saw the pair of birds
playing and thought that this bird, which is caressing its beloved, is giving it
the highest bliss and happiness. Sutra - 1164-1169 Here, when the Tīrthaṅkara
Bhagavān is engaged in the erotic play of man and woman, why did we prohibit
seeing them? They, being free from the pain of suffering, cannot recognize the
happiness of others. Although fire has the nature of burning, if seen with the
eyes, it does not burn the seer. Or no, no, no, no, what the Bhagavān has
commanded is indeed true. They will not act in the opposite way. Seeing the pair
of birds playing, my mind was disturbed. The desire for a man has manifested in
me, that I should engage in sexual intercourse with him. But today I have
contemplated that I cannot even do it in a dream. And further, in this birth, I
have not desired a man even in my mind. If I have not even desired him in a
dream, then I am indeed an unfortunate sinner with a perverse nature, and I have
hoped for the Tīrthaṅkara by thinking crooked and false. Sutra - 1170-1173 The
Tīrthaṅkara Bhagavān has also taught the extremely difficult, severe, and
arduous vow that is to be observed. Then who can be capable of observing this
vow in the threefold manner? Even after properly practicing with speech and
body, it is not possible to protect with the third, the mind. Or the concern for
suffering is taken. This is still done comfortably, one who has become pure-
minded is considered skilled in all activities. So, having doubts on this
subject, if suddenly this lapse has occurred to me and I have incurred a fault,
let me quickly perform the expiation by self-reflection and observance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
sUtra-1147-1156 he bhagavaMta ! lakSmaNA AryA jo agItArtha aura kaluSatAvAlI thI
aura usakI vajaha se duHkha paramparA pAI vo maiM nahIM jAnatA  /  he gautama !
pA~ca bharata aura pA~ca airAvat kSetra ke lie utsarpiNI aura avasarpiNI ke
sarva kAla meM eka-eka saMsAra meM yaha atidhruva cIja hai  /  jagat kI yaha
sthiti hamezA TikanevAlI hai  /  he gautama ! maiM hU~ usa taraha sAta hAtha ke
pramANavAlI kAyAvAle, deva aura dAnava se praNAma kare, vaise hI antima
tIrthaMkara the  /  usa vakta vahA~ jambudAr3ima nAma kA rAjA thA  /  kaIM
putravAlI saritA nAma kI bhAryA thI  /  eka bhI putrI na hone se kisI vakta rAjA
sahita putrI pAne ke lie deva kI, kuladevatA kI, candra-sUraja graha kI kAphI
mAnatA kI thii| kAlakrama se kamalapatra samAna nainavAlI lar3akI paidA huI  /
lakSmaNA devI aise nAma sthApana kiyaa| aba kisI vakta lakSmaNA devI putrI
yauvanavaya pAyA taba svayaMvara racA  /  usameM nayana ko Ananda denevAlA, kalA
ke ghara samAna, uttama vara ke sAtha vivAha kiyA  /  zAdI ke bAda turanta hI
usakA bhartAra mara gayA  /  isalie vo ekadama mUrchita ho gai, behoza ho gii|
kA~pate hue use svajana parivAra ne vIMjhana ke pavana se muzkila se sabhAna
banAyA  /  taba hA hA aise AkraMdana karake chAtI-mastaka kUTane lagI  /  vo
apane-Apa ko daza dizA meM mAratI, kUTatI, pITatI reMgane lagI  /  bandhuvarga
ne use AzvAsana dekara samajhAyA taba kucha dina ke bAda rudana bandha karake
zAnta huii| sUtra - 1157-1163 kisI vakta bhavya jIva rUpI kamalapana ko vikasita
karanevAle kevalajJAna samAna tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta vahA~ Ae aura udyAna meM
samavasare, apane aMtaHpura, senA aura vAhana sarva Rddhi sahita rAjA unheM
bhakti se vaMdana karane ke lie gayA  /  dharma zravaNa karake vahA~ aMtaHpura,
putra aura putrI sahita dIkSA aMgIkAra kI  /  zubha parINAmavAle mUrchA rahita
ugra kaSTakArI ghora duSkara tapa karane lgaa| kisI vakta sabako gaNI ke yoga
meM praveza karavAyA  /  lakSmaNA devI ko asvAdhyAya kI vajaha se anuSThAna
kriyA karane ke lie na bhejA  /  upAzraya meM ekAnta meM baiThI lakSmaNA devI
sAdhvI ne krIr3A karate hae yugala ko dekhakara cintavana kiyA ki inakA jIvana
saphala hai| isa cIDiyA ko chunevAlI dUsarI cIDiyA ki jo apane priyatama ko
AliMgana dekara parama Ananda sukha detI hai| sUtra - 1164-1169 yahA~
tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ne puruSa aura strI ratikrIDA karate haiM to unako
dekhanA hamane kyoM manA kiyA hogA? vo vedanA duHkha rahita hone se dUsaroM kA
sukha nahIM pahacAna sakate  /  agni jalAne ke svabhAvavAlA hone ke bAvajUda bhI
A~kha se use dekhe to dekhanevAle ko nahIM jalAtA  /  yA to nA, nA, nA, nA
bhagavaMta ne jo AjJA kI hai vo yathArtha hI hai  /  vo viparIta Ar3aza kareMge
hI nahIM  /  krIr3A karate hue paMchI yugala ko dekhakara merA mana kSobhita huA
hai| mujhameM puruSa kI abhilASA prakaTa huI hai ki maiM usake sAtha maithuna
sevana karU~ | lekina Aja maiMne cintavana kiyA vo maiM sapane meM bhI nahIM
kara sakatA  /  aura phira isa janma meM maiMne mana se bhI Aja taka puruSa kI
IcchA nahIM kii| kisI bhI taraha se sapane meM bhI usakI abhilASA nahIM kI, to
vAkaI maiM durAcArI pApa karane ke svabhAvavAlI abhAgI hU~, Ar3A-Ter3hA jhUTha
socakara maiMne tIrthaMkara kI AzAtanA kI hai| sUtra - 1170-1173 tIrthaMkara
bhagavaMta ne bhI kAphI kaSTakArI kaThina ati durdhara, ugra, ghora muzkila se
pAlana kiyA jAe vaisA kaThina vrata kA upadeza diyA hai  /  to trividha trividha
se yaha vrata pAlana karane ke lie kauna samartha ho sakatA hai ? vacana aura
kAyA se acchI taraha se AcaraNa kiyA jAne ke bAda bhI tIsare mana se rakSA
karanA mumakIna nahIM hai  /  yA to duHkha kI phikra kI jAtI hai  /  yaha to
phira bhI sukhapUrvaka kiyA jAtA hai, jo mana se bhI kuzIla huA vo sarva kArya
meM kuzIla mAnA jAtA hai  /  to isa viSaya meM zaMkA karake acAnaka mere pAsa jo
yaha skhalanA hokara doSa lagA, usakA mujhe prAyazcitta huA to AlocanA karake
jalda usakA sevana karU~ | muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-
hindI anuvAda Page 107

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number Sutra-
1174-1177 I am the first great Sadhvi within all the virtuous and chaste. I am
ahead of all in the same way as a line. In the same way, there is an
announcement in heaven. And everyone worships the dust of my feet. Because
everyone is purified by its dust. In this way, my fame has spread in the world.
Now if I am being criticized. If I reveal my mental fault to the Bhagvant, then
my brothers, mother, father will be saddened by hearing this, or if I have
thought something in my mind by mistake in any way, I have criticized it, just
by hearing this, what sorrow will my relatives have? Sutra- 1178-1182 _ As soon
as I was ready to take criticism by thinking in this way, I was standing, then a
thorn pierced into the sole of my foot. At that time, the Sadhvi, being
disheartened and hopeless, started thinking that oh dear! A thorn had never
pierced my foot in this birth, so what will happen in this matter
(inauspicious)? Or I understood the Dharma that two birds were fighting, I
approved of them, because of that my virtuous vows were violated. Coral, deaf,
blind, leprous, rotten-bodied, ashamed, even the gods praise him until he does
not break his vows. The thorn pierced my foot, because of this, I have made a
mistake, I will get great benefit from it. Sutra- 1183-1188 _ A woman who breaks
her vows even in her mind, if she goes to the seven Narakas in the lineage of
seven generations within the underworld. Why did I make this mistake? So now,
until a thunderbolt or dust falls on me, until my heart is broken into a hundred
pieces, even that will be considered a great wonder. Secondly, maybe I will be
criticized for this, then people will think that the daughter of some people has
made such an inauspicious decision in her mind. Because of that, I will do such
an experiment, and others will have thought that how much penance should be
given to her. I will be criticized in such a way that I have thought in such a
way, no one else knows. The Bhagvant will give the penance for this sin, even if
it is very severe and firm, even then I will do that much penance after hearing
what he has said. Until the beautiful vows and character are free from the three
types of impurities, the sin does not go away. Sutra- 1189-1194 Now that
Lakshman Sadhvi started doing penance by accepting criticism on behalf of
others, she fasted for fifty years for the sake of penance, for six days and
eight days, she fasted for ten years. She did not do it for herself, nor did she
get it done, no one prepared food by taking a vow of a Sadhu, the food was left
over from the house of the householder who ate it, she would complete her fast
with that food, she would eat chickpeas for two years. She would do the
Masakshaman penance for sixteen years continuously. She would do the Ayambil
penance for twenty years. She would not leave any necessary action on any day.
She would do all this penance with a mind free from day and night, for the sake
of penance, O Gautam! Then she started thinking that the penance I did, did it
not remove the sin from my heart? What I had thought in my mind at that time. On
the other hand, I have accepted penance. Will it not be considered as conduct?
Thinking this, she died. Sutra- 1195-1198 By doing severe, painful, and
extremely severe penance, that Lakshman Sadhvi, due to her free penance, was
born as a light-hearted servant who did obscene work in the house of a
prostitute, her name was Khandoṣṭhā. She was very sweet-spoken, she carried
heavy loads of liquor and grass, she was humble to all the prostitutes. Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 108

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra-
1174-1177 samagra satI, zIlavaMtI ke bhItara maiM pahalI bar3I sAdhvI hU~  /
rekhA samAna maiM saba meM agresara hU~  /  usa prakAra svarga meM bhI udghoSaNA
hotI hai| aura mere pA~va kI dhUla ko saba loga vaMdana karate haiN| kyoMki
usakI raja se hara eka kI zuddhi hotI hai  /  usa prakAra jagata meM merI
prasiddhi huI hai  /  aba yadi maiM AlocanA hU~  /  merA mAnasika doSa
bhagavaMta ke pAsa prakaTa karU~gI to mere bhAI, mAtA, pitA yaha bAta sunakara
duHkhI hoMge, yA to pramAda se kisI bhI taraha se maiMne mana se cintavana kiyA
use maiMne Alocana kiyA kevala itanA sunakara mere riztedArI varga ko kauna-sA
duHkha hogA? sUtra - 1178-1182 _ jitane meM isa prakAra cintavana karake AloyaNA
lene ke lie taiyAra huI, utane meM khar3I hotI thI taba pA~va ke talave meM
r3hasa karake eka kA~TA cubha gayA  /  usa vakta niHsatvA nirAza hokara sAdhvI
cintavana karane lagI ki arere ! isa janma meM mere pA~va meM kabhI bhI kA~TA
nahIM lagA thA to aba isa viSaya meM kyA (azubha) hogA ? yA to maiMne paramArtha
samajhA kI do cIr3iyA~ saMghaTTa karatI thI, unakI maiMne anumodanA kI usa
vajaha se mere zIlavrata kI virAdhanA huI  /  mUMgA, baharA, a~dhA, kuSThI,
sar3e hue zarIravAlA, lajjAvAlA ho to vo jaba taka zIlakhaMDana na kare taba
taka deva bhI usa kI stuti karate haiM  /  kA~TA mere pA~va meM cubhA isa
nimitta se mujha se jo galatI huI hai, usakA mujhe mahAlAbha hogA
sUtra-1183-1188 _ jo strI mana se bhI zIla kA khaMDana kare vo pAtAla ke bhItara
sAta puztoM kI paramparA-zAkhA meM agara sAtoM nArakI meM jAte haiM  /  isa
taraha kI galatI maiMne kyoM kI? to aba jaba taka meM mujha para vajra yA dhUla
kI vRSTi na ho, mere dila ke sau Tukar3e na ho jAe to vo bhI eka mahA tAjjuba
mAnA jAegA  /  dUsarA zAyada maiM isake lie AlocanA karU~gI to loga aisA
cintavana kareMge ki kucha logoM kI putrI mana se isa taraha kA azubha
adhyavasAya kiyA  /  usa vajaha se maiM vaisA prayoga karake dUsare ne aisA socA
hogA use kitanA prAyazcitta de  /  aise AlocanA karU~gI, jisa se maiMne aisA
cintavana kiyA hai vaise dUsare koI na jAne  /  bhagavaMta isa doSa kA jo
prAyazcitta deMge vo ghora kAphI niSThara hogA to bhI unhoMne kahA huA sunakara
utanA tapa karU~gA  /  jaba taka trividha trividha se zalya rahita usa taraha kA
sundara zIla aura cAritra pAlana na kiyA jAe taba taka pApa kA kSaya nahIM
hotaa| sUtra - 1189-1194 aba vo lakSmaNa sAdhvI parAye ke bahAne se AlocanA
grahaNa karake tapasyA karane lagI, prAyazcitta nimitta se pacAsa sAla taka
chaThTha-aThThama cAra upavAsa karake daza sAla pasAra kie  /  apane lie na kie
ho, na karavAe ho, kisI ne sAdhu kA saMkalpa kara ke bhojana taiyAra na kie ho,
bhojana karanevAle gRhastha ke ghara bacA ho vaisA AhAra bhikSA meM mile usase
upavAsa pUrA kare, do sAla taka bhuMjela cane AhAra meM le  /  solaha sAla
lagAtAra mAsakSamaNa tapa kare  /  bIsa sAla taka AyaMbila kI tapasyA kare  /
kisI dina jarurI kriyA na chor3a de  /  prAyazcitta nimitta se dinatA rahita
mana se yaha sabhI tapasyA karatI thI, he gautama ! taba vo cintavana karane
lagI ki prAyazcitta meM maiMne jo tapa kiyA usase mere dila kA pApa zalya kyA
nahIM gayA hogA ? ki jo mana se usa vakta socA thA  /  dUsarI taraha se
prAyazcitta to maiMne grahaNa kiyA hai| kyA vo AcAra nahIM mAnA jAegA? aisA
cintavana karate hue vo mara gii| sUtra - 1195-1198 ugra kaSTadAyaka ghora ugra
tapa karake vo lakSmaNa sAdhvI svacchaMda prAyazcittapana kI vajaha se kleza
yukta pariNAma ke doSa se vezyA ke ghara kutsita kArya karanevAlI halkI
cAkarar3I ke rUpa meM paidA huI, khaMDoSThA usakA nAma rakhA gayA  /  kAphI
mIThA bolanevAlI madya-ghAsa kI bhArI ko vahana karanevAlI sabhI vezyA kA vinaya
karanevAlI muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page
108

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Cheda Sutra-5, 'Mahanisitha'  The study/purpose/sutra numbers and
their old women were four times more respectful. Even though her beauty and
radiance were endowed, she was bald-headed. One day, the old women started
contemplating that there is no such beauty, form, and radiance like mine in this
abode, so I should disfigure her nose, ears, and lips in such a way.  Sutra -
1199-1202 When she becomes youthful, my daughter will not have any desire for
her. Or it is not appropriate to do so to her like a daughter. This is quite
humble. If she goes somewhere else from here, I will make her such that she may
not find a place to live even in another country and return back. I will give
her such a subjugation that her private part gets rotten. I will put shackles on
her hands and feet so that she gets out of control and make her wear old clothes
and lie down with anguish in the mind.  Sutra-1203-1208 After that, seeing
herself in the dream with the rotten private part, shackled, ears and nose cut
off from the Khandoshtha, she fled from there in such a way that no one would
know the true meaning of the dream, and wandered around the village, town, city,
and pattana, and after six months, she reached a place called Sankheda. There
she joined with a wealthy son of a prostitute like Kubera. The first wife
started burning with jealousy. Trembling with their anger, she spent some days
in that way.  One night, when Khandoshtha was sleeping in deep sleep, she
suddenly went to the fireplace, took the burning wood, and inserted it into her
private part in such a way that it burst open and reached her heart. After that,
she started wailing in a sorrowful voice. She started crawling and rubbing back
and forth like a moving stone.  Sutra-1209-1214 And then the married woman
started contemplating that she should be made such that she cannot stand for
life, so that my beloved does not remember her for a hundred births. Then,
heating an iron pot in the potter's workshop until it becomes red-hot, she
forcefully inserted it into her yoni in such a way that, due to this severe
pain, she died there and was born as the jewel of a queen of a Chakravarti.  In
this way, the wife of the son of a prostitute, out of anger, pierced her body,
even though there was no life in it, and cut it into small pieces and threw it
in all directions for the dogs and crows to eat. Meanwhile, the son of the
prostitute who had gone out also returned home. He started contemplating in his
mind. Reaching the lotus feet of the ascetic, he accepted initiation and
attained liberation.  Sutra-1215-1219 Now the soul of Lakshmana Devi, after
being a jewel of a woman in Khandoshthipana, O Gautama! reached the sixth hell.
There, after enduring the extremely severe and terrifying suffering of the
hellish abode for a long time, this soul of hers was born in the animal womb as
a dog. There, she became obsessed with lust and started engaging in sexual
intercourse. There, a bull kicked her yoni, and an injury occurred. The yoni
came out, and for ten years, worms were born in it and started eating it. There,
O Gautama! she was born in the raw womb 99 times and suffered the pain of the
womb.  Sutra-1220-1226 After that, she was born in the house of a poor human,
but two months later, her mother died. Then her father, by going from house to
house, made her drink milk and kept her alive with great suffering. Then he kept
her in Gokula like a cowherd boy. There, the calves of the cows, while drinking
the milk of their mothers, were tied with ropes, and the cows were milked.
Translated by Muni Deepratan Sagar (Mahanisitha), Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation
Page 109

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka aura
unakI bur3hiyA~ kA cAra gunA vinaya karanevAlI thI  /  usakA lAvaNya kAnti se
yukta hone ke bAda bhI vo mastaka se keza rahita thii| kisI dina bur3hiyA~
cintavana karane lagI ki mere isa mastaka jaisA lAvaNya, rUpa aura kAnti yA
vaisA isa bhavana meM kisI kA rUpa nahIM hai to usake nAka, kAna aura hoTha ko
vaise virUpavAle badasUrata kara duuN| sUtra - 1199-1202 jaba vo yauvanavaMtI
hogI taba merI putrI kI koI IcchA nahIM rakhegA  /  yA to putrI samAna use isa
prakAra karanA yukta nahIM hai  /  yaha kAphI vinIta hai  /  yahA~ se kahIM ora
calI jAegI to maiM use vaisI kara dUM ki vo zAyada dUsare deza meM calI jAe to
kahIM bhI rahane kA sthAna na pA sake aura vApasa A jAe  /  use aisA vazIkaraNa
dUM ki jisase usakA guptAMga sar3a jAe  /  hAtha-pA~va meM ber3iyA~ pahanAUM
jisase niyaMtraNA se bhaTaka jAe aura purAna kapar3e pahanAUM aura mana meM
saMtApa karate hue zayana kare  /  sUtra-1203-1208 usake bAda khaMDoSThA se bhI
sapane meM sar3A huA guptAMga, ber3I meM jakar3e hue, kAna-nAka kaTe hue ho
vaisI khuda ko dekhakara sapane kA paramArtha socakara kisI ko patA na cale isa
taraha vahA~ se bhAga gaI aura kisI taraha se gA~va, pura, nagara, paTTaNa meM
paribhramaNa karate karate cha mAsa ke bAda saMkher3a nAma ke kheTaka meM jA
pahu~cI  /  vahA~ kubera samAna vaibhavavAle raMDa putra ke sAtha jur3a gii|
pahalI bIbI jalana se usa para kAphI jalane lgii| una ke roSa se kA~pate hue usa
taraha kucha dina pasAra kie| eka rAta ko khaMDoSThA bhara nidrA meM sotI thI
use dekhakara acAnaka cUlhe ke pAsa gaI aura sulagatA kASTha grahaNa karake AI
/  usa sulagate lakar3e ko usake guptAMga meM isa taraha ghuser3a diyA ki vo
phaTa gayA aura hRdaya taka vo lakar3A jA paha~cA usake bAda duHkhI svara se
AkraMda karane lagI  /  calAyamAna pASANa samAna idhara-udhara ragar3ate hue
reMgane lgii| sUtra-1209-1214 aura phira vo byAhatA strI cintavana karane lagI
ki jIvanabhara khaDI na ho sake vaise use DAma, ki sau bhava taka mere priyatama
ko yAda na kare  /  taba kumhAra kI zAlA meM se lohe kA koSa banAkara tapta lAla
ho jAe utanA tapAkara usakI yoni meM use jora se ghuser3akara usa prakAra isa
bhArI duHkha kI vajaha se AkrAnta honevAlI vahA~ mara ke he gautama ! cakravartI
kI strIratna ke rUpa meM paidA huI  /  isa ora raMDAputra kI bIbI ne usake
klevara meM jIva na hone ke bAvajUda bhI roSa se chedana karake choTe-choTe
Tukar3e kie aura usake bAda zvAna-kauA Adi ko khAne ke lie haraeka dizA meM
pheMkA  /  utane meM bAhara gayA huA raMDAputra bhI ghara A paha~cA  /  vo mana
meM vikalpa karane lagA  /  sAdhu ke caraNa kamala meM pahu~cakara dIkSA
aMgIkAra karake mokSa meM gyaa| sUtra-1215-1219 aba lakSmaNA devI kA jIva
khaMDoSThIpana meM se strIratna hokara he gautama ! phira usakA jIva chaThI
nArakI meM jA pahu~cA  /  vahA~ nArakI kA mahAghora kAphI bhayAnaka duHkha
trikoNa narakAvAsa meM dIrghakAla taka bhugatakara yaha AyA huA usakA jIva
tiryaMca yoni meM zvAna ke rUpa meM paidA huA  /  vahA~ kAma kA unmAda huA  /
isalie maithuna sevana karane lagI  /  vahA~ baila ne yoni meM lAta lagAI aura
coTa AI  /  yoni bAhara nIkala par3I aura usameM daza sAla taka kami paidA
hokara use khAne lage  /  vahA~ marake he gautama !99- bAra kacce garbha meM
paidA hokara garbha vedanA meM pkii| sUtra-1220-1226 usake bAda janma se
daridratAvAle mAnava ke ghara janma huA lekina do mahine ke bAda usakI mA~ mara
gii| taba usake pitA ne ghara-ghara ghumakara stanapAna karavA ke mahAkleza se
jindA rakhA  /  phira use gokula meM gopAla kI taraha rakhA  /  vahA~ gAya ke
bachar3e apanI mA~ kA dUdha pAna karate ho unheM rassI se bA~dhakara gAya ko
dohatA ho usa vakta muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 109

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
Due to the hindrance karma earned, the soul of Lakshmanā did not receive breast
milk until the Koḍakoḍī Bhavantara. Bound by ropes, halting, shackled,
suppressed, experiencing separation from mother etc., it wandered in the Bhava
for a long time. After that, it was born as a Dākana woman in the human womb.
There, the dog-keeper injured her and left. From there, after death, it attained
human form here and due to the defects of the body, in this Mahāpṛthvī Mandala,
in a village with five houses - a city, town or a Pattana, it did not experience
even a moment of happiness, not even half a Phora. **Sūtra - 1227-1232**  O
Gautam! Even in that human form, feeling many agonizing sorrows similar to the
suffering of the Naraka, the soul of Lakshmanā Devi, due to the fault of extreme
Raudra Dhyāna, died and was born in the Kharahaḍ Naraka in the seventh Naraka
Pṛthvī. Experiencing such great suffering there, after completing the lifespan
of thirty-three Sagaropama, it was born as a barren cow. It would enter other
people's fields and courtyards, causing damage, breaking bushes and eating
fodder. Then, many people gathered and took it to a muddy place where it could
not escape. It got stuck there and could not get out. While trapped, that poor
cow was eaten by aquatic creatures. Crows and jackals pecked at it. The soul of
that cow, filled with anger, died and was born as a snake with vision-poison in
the Marwaḍ desert, devoid of water and grains. From that serpent form, it again
reached the fifth Naraka Pṛthvī. **Sūtra - 1233-1239**  In this way, O Gautam!
The soul of Lakshmanā Sādhvī, after enduring intense suffering for a long time,
wandering in the four Gati forms of the world, in Naraka, Tiryanch and
Kumānavapan, will again be born as the soul of the श्रेणीक king, who will be the
first Tirthankara, Padmanābha, in the upcoming twenty-four. It will be born as a
Kubjikā in the village of Śarīrasībī, which is like a mine. It will not be able
to give joy by seeing its mother. At that time, everyone will think, "This is a
cause of anxiety," and will apply a paste of Meśagerū on its body, make it ride
a donkey and take it around. They will then attach birds on both sides of its
body, play a Didim with a hollow sound in front of it, take it around in one
village, then take it out to another place and it will not be able to enter the
village again. Then, living in the forest, it will eat roots and fruits. Due to
the sting of a poisonous insect in the middle of its navel, it will suffer pain
and develop skin diseases like scabies, eczema, and itch all over its body. It
will scratch itself and experience unbearable suffering. **Sūtra - 1240-1241**
While suffering, Padmanābha Tirthankara Bhagavan will hold a Samvasarana there
and it will see him. Therefore, immediately, it and other Bhavyas living in that
country, and women whose bodies are also afflicted with diseases and pain, will
be freed from all community diseases by the sight of the Tirthankara Bhagavan.
Along with it, the soul of Lakshmanā Sādhvī, who is Kubjikā, will consume
intense penance and end its suffering. **Sūtra - 1242**  O Gautam! This is the
Lakshmanā Āryā who, due to the fault of Agītārthapan, received the tradition of
suffering of a mind with slight pollution. **Sūtra - 1243-1244**  O Gautam! Just
as this Lakshmanā Āryā received the tradition of suffering, understand that to
receive the tradition of infinite Agītārtha suffering of a polluted mind, one
should be completely Gītārtha in all respects, or remain under their command
with Agītārtha, and have a very pure, clear, spotless, and free from impurities
mind. In that way, Bhagavan...  **Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama
Sūtra - Hindi Translation** **Page 110**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka jo
aMtarAya karma upArjana kiyA usa karma kI vajaha se lakSmaNA ke jIva ne
kor3Akor3I bhavAMtara taka stanapAna prApta na kiyA  /  rassI se ba~dhA huA,
rUkate hue, ber3I se jakar3e hue, damana karate hue mA~ Adi ke sAtha viyoga pAte
hue bhava meM kAphI bhaTakA, usake bAda mAnava yoni meM DAkaNa strI ke rUpa meM
paidA huA  /  vahA~ zvAnapAlaka use ghAyala karake cale ge| vahA~ se marakara
yahA~ manuSyatva prApta kara ke zarIra ke doSa se isa mahApRthvI maMDala meM
pA~ca gharavAle gA~va meM - nagara zahara yA paTTaNa meM eka phora AdhA phora
eka pala bhI sukha na paayaa| sUtra - 1227-1232 he gautama ! usa mAnava meM bhI
nArakI ke duHkha samAna kaIM rUlAnevAle ghora duHkha mahasUsa karake usa
lakSmaNA devI kA jIva ati raudra dhyAna ke doSa se marakara sAtavIM nAraka
pRthvI meM khar3Ahar3a nAma ke narakAvAsa meM paidA huaa| vahA~ usa taraha ke
mahAduHkha kA ahesAsa karake teMtIsa sAgaropama kI Ayu pUrNa karake vaMdhyA gAya
ke rUpa meM paidA huA  /  parAye khetara aura A~gana meM ghusakara usakA
nukasAna karate hue jhAr3I tor3akara cArA khAtI thI  /  taba kaIM loga IkaTThe
hokara nIkala na sake vaise kIcar3avAlI jagaha meM le gae, isalie usameM pha~sa
gaI aura aba bAhara nahIM nIkala sakatI  /  usameM pha~sI huI vo becArI, gAya ko
jalacara jIva khAte the  /  aura kaue-gIdhar3a coMca se mArate the  /  krodha se
vyApta usa gAya kA jIva marakara jala aura dhAnya rahita mAravAr3a deza ke raNa
meM dRSTiviSa sA~pa ke rUpa meM paidA huaa| vo sarpa ke bhava meM se phira
pA~cavI naraka pRthvI meM phuNcaa| sUtra - 1233-1239 usa prakAra lakSmaNA sAdhvI
kA jIva he gautama ! lambe arase taka kaThina ghora duHkha bhugatate hae cAra
gati rUpa saMsAra meM nArakI tiryaMca aura kumAnavapana meM bhramaNa karake
phira se yahA~ zreNIka rAjA kA jIva jo AnevAlI caubIsI meM padmanAbha ke pahale
tIrthaMkara hoMge unake tIrtha meM kubjikA ke rUpa meM paidA hogA  /  zarIrasIbI
kI khANa samAna gA~va meM yA apanI mA~ ko dekhane se Ananda denevAlI nahIM hogI
usa vakta saba loga yaha udvega karavAnevAlI hai, aisA socakara mezagerU ke lepa
kA zarIra para vilepana karake gadhe para savAra hokara bhramaNa karavAeMge aura
phira usake zarIra para donoM ora paMchI ke pIche lagAeMge, khokhare zabdavAlA
DiDima ke Age bajAeMge eka gA~va meM ghumAkara gA~va meM se dUsarI jagaha jAne
ke lie nIkAla deMge aura phira se gA~va meM praveza nahIM kara skeNge| taba
araNya meM vAsa karate hue vo kaMda-phala kA AhAra karatI rahegI  /  nAbhi ke
bIca meM jhaharIle chU dara ke i~sane se darda se parezAna honevAlI vo pUre
zarIra para gumar3a, darAja, khAja Adi camar3I kI vyAdhi paidA hogI  /  use
khujalAte hue vo ghora duHsaha, duHkha kA ahesAsa kregii| sUtra- 1240-1241
vedanA bhugatatI hogI taba padmanAbha tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta vahA~ samavasaraNa
kareMge aura vo unakA darzana kareMge isalie turanta hI usake aura dUsare usa
deza meM rahe bhavya jIva aura nArI ki jisake zarIra bhI vyAdhi aura vedanA se
vyApta hoMge vo sabhI samudAya ke vyAdhi tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ke darzana se
dUra hoNge| usake sAtha lakSmaNA sAdhvI kA jIva jo kubjikA hai vo ghora tapa kA
sevana karake duHkha kA aMta paaeNge| sUtra - 1242 he gautama ! yaha vo lakSmaNA
AryA hai ki jisane agItArthapana ke doSa se alpa kaluSatA yukta citta ke duHkha
kI paramparA paaii| sUtra - 1243-1244 he gautama ! jisa prakAra yaha lakSmaNA
AryA ne duHkha paramparA pAI usake anusAra kaluSita cittavAle ananta agItArtha
duHkha kI paramparA pAne ke lie yaha samajhakara sarva bhAva se sarvathA
gItArtha honA yA agItArtha ke sAtha unakI AjJA meM rahanA aura kAphI zuddha
sunirmala vimala zalya rahita niSkaluSa manavAlA honA, usa prakAra bhagavaMta
muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 110

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, ‘Mahānishīth’ Study/Purpose/Sūtrāṅka heard
from near. Sūtra-1245-1250 Oh Jagadguru! Lord of the world, Dharma Tīrthaṅkara,
recognizing the past and future, who have burnt the parts of all karma through
penance, destroyer of Kāmadeva, the enemy, ending the group of four kṣayās,
compassionate towards all beings in the world, destroying the deep darkness of
the night of Mithyātva, the form of intense darkness, illuminating the Lokāloka
with pure knowledge, conquering the enemy of delusion, who have renounced the
thieves of attachment, aversion, and delusion from afar, more gentle than a
hundred moons, giving happiness, with unparalleled strength, prowess, and
influence, with unmatched great fame in the three worlds, with incomparable
form, who cannot be compared to anyone, eternal form, giving liberation,
complete with all characteristics, adorned with the Lakshmi of the three worlds,
Oh Bhagavan! Whatever is done in order - by tradition - the work is achieved.
But how can the work be achieved without order, like the milk of a sheep,
suddenly, at an inopportune time? Sūtra-1251-1253 In the first birth,
Samyagdarshana, in the second birth, Anu-vrat, in the third birth, Samāyika
Charitra, in the fourth birth, Pauṣdha, in the fifth, Durdhara Brahmacharya-
vrat, in the sixth, the renunciation of Sachitta, according to that, in the
seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth births, the renunciation of food, etc., which was
prepared for oneself - to give - was resolved. In the eleventh birth, one
becomes like a Shraman in qualities. Why is it not said for the restrained
according to this order? Sūtra-1254-1256 Hearing such difficult things, the
children with little intelligence become anxious, the faith of some people is
shaken, just as elephants run away in all directions at the sound of a lion, so
children run away in all directions hearing the difficult Dharma. That kind of
difficult accumulation, the wicked, the evil-minded, the delicate-bodied, do not
even want to hear. So how can they be prepared to behave in that way? Oh Gautam!
Tell me, besides the Tīrthaṅkara Bhagavan, is there anyone else in this world
who behaves in such a difficult way? Sūtra-1257-1260 Even when they were in the
womb, Devendra had made an amrita-filled thumb. With devotion, Indra Maharaja
also gave food to Bhagavan. And always praised him. In the Devlok, when they
were Chavyas, and in the house where they took birth, their house was always
showered with gold due to their flower-like influence. Those who were born in
their womb. In that country, all kinds of calamities, death, disease, enemies,
due to their merit-influence, go away, as soon as they are born, the trembling
community, on Mount Meru, with all prosperity, celebrated the bathing festival
of Bhagavan and went to their place. Sūtra - 1261-1266 Oh, their wonderful
beauty, radiance, brilliance, and form are also incomparable. If one thinks
about the form of just one toe of Jinendra Bhagavan, then gather the form of all
the Devatas in all the Devlokas, multiply it by crores, even then the form of
Bhagavan's toe increases considerably. That is, it is like placing black coal
among red embers, there is so much difference in form. The Devatas took refuge,
the three knowledges, the group of arts, the wonder, the mind of the people, the
family members of relatives, the Devatas and Asuras, the worshiped, the hope of
the loving group, the place of supreme happiness for the world, the enjoyment of
the wealth, the royal splendor, which they had earned by penance in the previous
birth, for a long time, they knew from the knowledge of the period that this
Lakshmi is indeed of the nature of being destroyed as soon as it is seen. Oh,
this Lakshmi is the one that increases sin. So why don't we take Charitra? Muni
Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvād Page 111

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka ke pAsa
se zravaNa kiyA huA kahatA huuN| sUtra-1245-1250 jinake caraNakamala praNAma
karate hue deva aura anusarate mastaka ke mukuTa se saMghaTTa hue haiM aise he
jagadguru ! jagata ke nAtha, dharma tIrthaMkara, bhUta aura bhAvi ko
pahacAnanevAle, jinhoMne tapasyA se samagra karma ke aMza jalA die haiM aise,
kAmadeva zatru kA vidAraNa karanevAle, cAra kaSAya ke samUha kA anta karanevAle,
jagata ke sarva jIva ke prati vAtsalyavAle, ghora aMdhakAra rUpa mithyAtva rAtri
ke gahare aMdhere kA nAza karanevAle, lokAloka ko kevala jJAna se prakAzita
karanevAle, mohazatru ko mahAta karanevAle, jinhoMne rAga, dveSa aura moha
samAna cora kA dUra se tyAga kiyA hai, sau candra se bhI jyAdA saumya, sukha
denevAlA, atulabala parAkrama aura prabhAvavAle, tIna bhuvana meM ajor3a
mahAyaza vAle, nirUpama rUpavAlI, jinakI tulanA meM koI na A sake vaise, zAzvata
rUpa mokSa denevAle sarva lakSaNa se sampUrNa, tribhuvana kI lakSmI se vibhUSita
he bhagavaMta ! kramapUrvaka - paripATI se jo kucha kiyA jAe to kArya kI prApti
hotI hai| lekina akasmAt anavasara se bher3a ke dUdha kI taraha krama rahita
kArya kI prApti kaise ho sakatI hai ? sUtra-1251-1253 pahale janma meM
samyagdarzana, dUsare janma meM aNuvrata, tIsare janma meM sAmAyika cAritra,
cauthe janma meM pauSadha kare, pA~cave meM durdhara brahmacaryavrata, chaThU
meM sacitta kA tyAga, usake anusAra sAta, A~Tha, nau, daza janma meM apane lie
taiyAra kie gae - dAna dene ke lie - saMkalpa kiyA ho vaise AhArAdika kA tyAga
karanA Adi  /  gyArahave janma meM zramaNa samAna guNavAlA ho  /  isa krama ke
anusAra saMyata ke lie kyoM nahIM kahate? sUtra-1254-1256 aisI kaThina bAte
sunakara alpa buddhivAle bAlajana udvega pAe, kucha logoM kA bharosA uTha jAe,
jaise zera kI AvAja se hAthI ikaTe bhAga jAte haiM vaise bAlajana kaSTakArI
dharma sunakara daza dizA meM bhAga jAte haiM  /  usa taraha kA kaThina saMcaya
duSTa IcchAvAlA aura bUrI AdatavAlA sukumAla zarIravAlA sunane kI bhI IcchA
nahIM rakhate  /  to usa prakAra vyavahAra karane ke lie to kaise taiyAra ho
sakate haiM ? he gautama ! tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ke alAvA isa jagata meM dUsare
koI bhI aisA duSkara vyavahAra karanevAlA ho to btaao| sUtra-1257-1260 jo loga
garbha meM the taba bhI devendra ne amRtamaya a~gUThA kiyA thA  /  bhakti se
indra mahArAjA AhAra bhI bhagavaMta ko dete the  /  aura hamezA stuti bhI karate
the  /  devaloka meM jaba vo cavya the aura jinake ghara avatAra liyA thA unake
ghara usake paSpa-prabhAva se hamezA savarNa kI vaSTi barasatI thii| jinake
garbha meM paidA hae ho. usa deza meM hara eka taraha kI iti upadrava,
mArImarakI, vyAdhi, zatru unake puNya-prabhAva se cale jAe, paidA hone ke sAtha
hI AkaMpita samudAya meru parvata para sarva Rddhi se bhagavaMta kA
snAtramahotsava karake apane sthAna para ge| sUtra - 1261-1266 aho unakA adbhUta
lAvaNya, kAnti, teja, rUpa bhI anupama hai  /  jinezvara bhagavaMta ke kevala
eka pA~va ke a~gUThe ke rUpa ke bAre meM socA jAe to sarva devaloka meM sarva
devatA kA rUpa ikaTThA kare, use kror3a bAra kror3a gunA kare to bhI bhagavaMta
ke aMgUThe kA rUpa kAphI bar3ha jAtA hai  /  yAni lAla aMgAroM ke bIca kAlA
kolasA rakhA ho utanA rUpa meM pharka hotA hai  /  devatA ne zaraNa kie, tIna
jJAna se yukta kalAsamUha ke tAjjuba samAna loka ke mana ko Ananda karavAnevAlA,
svajana aura baMdhu ke parivAravAle, deva aura asura se pUjya, snehI varga kI
AzA pUrI karanevAle, bhuvana ke lie uttama sukha ke sthAna samAna, pUrvabhava
meM tapa karake upArjita bhogalakSmI aizvarya rAjavaibhava jo kucha kAphI arase
se bhugatate the vo avadhi jJAna se jAnA ki vAkaI yaha lakSmI dekhate hI naSTa
hone ke svabhAva vAlI hai| aho yaha lakSmI pApa kI vRddhi karanevAlI hotI hai|
to hama kyA cAritra nahIM lete? muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 111

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth' Study/Purpose/Sūtrāṅka
Sūtra-1267-1269 As many as such mind-results occur, so many times the Lokāntika
Devas request the Bhagavant - "O Bhagavant! You, the Dharma tīrtha, who benefits
the beings of the world, please initiate (the path)." At that time, abandoning
all sins, giving up the attachment to the body, abandoning the wealth of the
entire world like a straw, they engage in the practice of the fourfold conduct,
which is the essential cause of austerity and liberation, which is rare even for
Indra, which is detached, intense, painful, extremely difficult, and excellent
in the entire world. Sūtra- 1270-1274 And then, those who desire the happiness
of this birth, who are desirous of rare things, even though they are desirous of
things, cannot obtain them easily. O Gautama! Only as much as a drop of honey,
only that much happiness can be obtained even after enduring suffering until
death. How much is their ignorance? Or, O Gautama! You see directly the kind of
humans who experience trivial, small happiness, which no human is willing to
listen to. Some humans extract blood forcibly for the sake of crimson color, to
strengthen the human body. Some make them do the work of a farmer. Some make
them herd cows. Slavery, servitude, foot trade, various kinds of disciples,
jobs, farming, commerce, life-giving, such painful, laborious, courageous tasks,
poverty, lack of wealth, etc., and working from house to house. Sūtra -
1275-1278 Others, hiding themselves from others, walk making a "dhin-dhin"
sound, walking with a naked, open body, experiencing the pain of not having
clothes to wear, even those old, torn, and tattered clothes that are obtained
with great difficulty, they wear and use those torn clothes, saying, "I will sew
them today, I will sew them tomorrow." Even then, O Gautama! Understand clearly
and explicitly that, abandoning the customs of the world and the work of
relatives, abandoning enjoyment, enjoyment, and charity, etc., they eat bad
food. Sūtra- 1279-1280 Running around, hiding, saving, accumulating wealth, even
a small amount, for a long time, day and night, with anger, sending half, a
quarter, or a twentieth of it. In some way, they accumulate wealth, lakhs or
crores, over a long period of time. Where one desire is fulfilled, another
immediately arises. But other desires are not fulfilled. Sūtra- 1281-1283 O
Gautama! Such a desire for rare things and delicacy is obtained at the time of
initiation into Dharma. But they do not hinder in the Karimba. Because where one
has a morsel in his mouth, another comes and places a stick of wood near him,
but does not even set foot there. And he plays with lakhs of women. Even such
people, hearing about others who are more prosperous, desire to make their
country independent and make their master obey their orders. Sūtra- 1284-1289 If
they do not obey directly, then they make them obey by using the policies of
Sama, Bheda, Dama, Danda, etc. How many things does he have, such as an army,
etc.? To know his courage, he has him investigated through secret agents. Or, he
goes alone, wearing his own clothes, in secret. After crossing large mountains,
forts, forests, and rivers, after enduring many sorrows and pains for a long
time, he reaches there, with a weak throat from hunger, with pain,  Muni
Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda Page 112

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
sUtra-1267-1269 jitane meM isa taraha ke mana-parINAma hote haiM, utane meM
lokAntika deva bhagavaMta ko vinatI karate haiM -he bhagavaMta ! jagata ke jIva
kA hita karanevAlA dharmatIrtha Apa pravarto  /  usa vakta sAre pApa vosirAkara
deha mamatva kA tyAga kara ke sarva jagata meM sarvottama aise vaibhava kA
tinake kI taraha tyAga karake indra ke lie bhI jo durlabha hai vaisA nisaMga
ugra kaSTakArI ghora atiduSkara samagra jagata meM utkRSTa tapa aura mokSa kA
Avazyaka kAraNa svarUpa cAritra sevana kre| sUtra- 1270-1274 aura phira jo
mastaka phUTa jAe vaisI AvAja karanevAle isa janma ke sukha ke abhilASI,
durlabha cIja kI IcchA karanevAle hone ke bAvajUda bhI manovAMchita cIja
saralatA se nahIM pA sakate  /  he gautama ! kevala jitanI madhu kI bUMda hai
utanA kevala sukha maraNAMta kaSTa sahe to bhI nahIM pA sakate  /  unakA
durvidagdhapana-ajJAna kitanA mAne ? yA he gautama ! jisa taraha ke mAnava hai
vo tuma pratyakSa dekha ki jo tuccha alpa sukha kA ahesAsa karate haiM jinheM
koI bhI mAnava sunane ke lie taiyAra nahIM hai  /  kucha mAnava kIramajI raMga
ke lie, mAnava ke zarIra puSTa banAne ke lie usa kA lahU balAtkAra se nikAlate
haiM  /  koI kisAna kA vyApAra karavAtA hai  /  koI gAya caravAne kA kAma
karavAtA hai  /  dAsapana, sevakapana, pA~va kA vyApAra kaI taraha ke ziSya,
naukarI, khetI, vANijya, prANatyAga ho vaise kleza parizrama sAhasavAle kArya,
dAridra, avaibhavapana, ityAdika aura ghara-ghara bhaTakakara karma krnaa| sUtra
- 1275-1278 dUsare na dekhe isa taraha khuda ko chipAkara DhiNIM DhiNI AvAja
karake cale, nagna khUle zarIravAlA kleza kA ahesAsa karate hue cale jisase
pahanane ke kapar3e na mile, vo bhI purAne, phaTe, chidravAle mahA muzkila se
pAe ho vo phaTe hue or3hane ke vastra Aja sI lU~gA-kala sI lU~gA aisA karake
vaise hI phaTe hue kapar3e pahane aura istamAla kare  /  to bhI he gautama !
sApha prakaTa parisphUTanapana se samaja ki Upara batAe tarIko meM se kisI loka
lokAcAra aura svajana kArya kA tyAga karake bhogopabhoga aura dAna Adi ko
chor3akara bUrA azana bhojana khAtA hai| sUtra- 1279-1280 dauDAdaur3I karake
chipAkara bacAkara lambe arase taka rAta dina gussA hokara, kAgaNI-alpapramANa
dhana ikaTThA kiyA ho kAgaNI kA ardhabhAga, cauthA hissA, bIsavA~ hissA bhejA  /
kisI taraha ke kahIM se lambe arase se lAkha yA karor3a pramANa dhana ikaTThA
kiyA  /  jahA~ eka IcchA pUrNa huI ki turanta dUsarI khar3I hotI hai  /  lekina
dUsare manoratha pUrNa nahIM hote| sUtra- 1281-1283 he gautama ! isa taraha ke
durlabha cIja kI abhilASA aura sukumArapana dharmAraMbha ke samaya prApta hotI
hai  /  lekina kariMbha meM Akara vighna nahIM karate  /  kyoMki kisI eka ke
mu~ha meM nIvAlA hai vahA~ to dUsare Akara usake pAsa ikha kI gaMDerI dharate
para pA~va bhI sthApana nahIM karatA  /  aura lAkho strIyoM ke sAtha krIr3A
karatA hai| aise logoM ko bhI dUsare jyAdA samRddhivAle sunakara aisI IcchA hotI
hai ki usakI mAlikI ke deza ko svAdhIna karU~ aura usake svAmI ko merI AjJA
mnvaauuN| sUtra-1284-1289 sIdhI taraha AjJA na mAne to sAma, bheda, dAma, daMDa
Adi nIti ke prayoga karake bhI AjJA manavAnA  /  usake pAsa sainyAdika kitanI
cIje haiM  /  usakA sAhasa mAlUma karane ke lie guptacara-jAsUsa puruSa ke
jhariye jAMcapar3atAla karavAe  /  yA gupta caritra se khuda pahane hue kapar3e
se akelA jAe  /  bar3e parvata, kIlle, araNya, nadI ullaMghana karake lambe
arase ke bAda kaI duHkha kleza sahate hue vahA~ pahu~ce bhUkha se durbala
kaMThavAlA duHkha se karake muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-
hindI anuvAda Page 112

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Āgama Sūtra 39, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'**  A seeker, wandering from house
to house begging for alms, tries to find out the secrets and hidden matters of
that kingdom, but cannot find out. After that, if he somehow survives and starts
to accumulate merit, then he should enter the house after changing his body and
appearance. At that time, if he is asked who he is, he should reveal his
character in food, etc. He should defeat the king by fighting, being ready to
fight, with all his army, vehicles and prowess, and breaking into pieces. Sūtra
- 1289-1292  Perhaps he is defeated by that king, then he falls down with his
face down in the battlefield filled with elephants, horses and weapons, with his
body scarred by the blood flowing from many blows. Then, O Gautama! Where did
the desire to obtain rare things, bad habits and delicacy go at that time? Who,
being only a seeker of delicate things, never thought of setting foot on the
ground after washing only half of his body with his own hand. Such humans also
found such a state. Sūtra - 1293-1297  _ If he is told to do good deeds, he
replies that he is not capable. Then, O Gautama! Such a creature, who is poor,
unfortunate, and does evil deeds, never has the wisdom to be inclined towards
the place of religion. He says that this religion is easy to do in one birth,
just like eating and drinking will be available to us, then he should preach
religion according to the wishes of those who desire it. Then, even without
performing vows and rules, a living being desires liberation, such a creature
should not be angry, he should preach religion to them in that way. But do not
tell them about liberation, such people will not be liberated and it will be a
false statement. Sūtra - 1298-1302  The second Tirthankara Bhagavan also did not
have attachment, aversion, delusion, fear, and free behavior in the past, and
will not have it in the future. O Gautama! The Tirthankara Bhagavan never speaks
falsehood. Because they have direct omniscience, they see the whole world
directly. Past, future, present, merit-demerit, and everything that is in the
three realms is revealed to them, even if the underworld goes up to heaven and
heaven goes down, surely there will be no difference in the words of the
Tirthankara. They reveal the path of knowledge-vision, character, severe and
difficult penance, and liberation, as it is. Otherwise, they are not Tirthankara
by word, mind or action. Sūtra - 1303-1304  Perhaps the destruction of this
world happens immediately, even then, they are called Tirthankara by compassion
for the welfare of all the beings, creatures, and ghosts of the world, in the
way that they preach the true religion. There is no fear of misfortune, sorrow,
poverty, disease, sorrow, or bad destiny for those who practice the religion
well. And there is no suffering or anxiety. Sūtra - 1305-1306  O Bhagavan! We do
not want to say that we behave according to our own will. We only ask that he do
as much as possible. O Gautama! It is not right to do so, it is not beneficial
to think about it even for a moment, if you think so, know that his strength has
been killed. Sūtra - 1307-1310  One human is capable of eating ghee-candy rabdi.
Another is powerful enough to play with wine and meat, and a third is powerful
enough to play with women, and a fourth cannot do any of these, another can
argue, establishing the previous side, that is, he can debate. Another, who is
of the nature of suffering, cannot debate. What one does Muni Dīparatnasāgar
Kr̥t (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda Page 113

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka ghara
ghara bhaTakate hue bhikSA kI yAcanA karate hue kisI taraha se usa rAjya kA
chidra aura gupta bAte jAnane kI kozIza karatA hai, phira bhI patA nahIM cala
sktaa| usa ke bAda yadi kisI taraha se jindA rahA aura puNya pAMgarane lagA to
phira deha aura veza kA parAvartana kara ke vo gRha meM praveza kare  /  usa
vakta use tuma kauna ho? aisA pUche taba vo bhojanAdika meM apanA cAritra
prakaTa kre| yuddha karane ke lie sajja hokara sarva senA vAhana aura parAkrama
se Tukar3e-Tukar3e ho, vaise lar3akara rAjA ko harA de| sUtra - 1289-1292 zAyada
usa rAjA se parAbhava ho to kaIM prahAra lagane se galate-bahate lahU se
kharar3ita zarIravAlA hAthI, ghor3e aura Ayudha se vyApta raNabhUmi meM nIce
mukhavAlA nIce gira jAe  /  to he gautama ! usa vakta cAhe jaisA bhI durlabha
cIja pAne kI abhilASA, bUrI Adata aura sukumAlapana kahA~ calA gayA ? jo kevala
khuda ke hAtha se apanA AdhA hissA dhokara kabhI bhI bhUmi para pA~va sthApana
karane kA nahIM socate jo durbala cIja kI abhilASAvAlA thA  /  aise mAnavane bhI
aisI avasthA paaii| sUtra - 1293-1297 _ yadi use kahA jAe ki mahAnubhAva dharma
kara to pratyuttara mile ki maiM samartha nahIM huuN| to he gautama ! adhanya
nirbhAgI, pApakarma karanevAlA aise prANI ko dharmasthAna meM pravRtti karane kI
kabhI bhI buddhi nahIM hotI  /  vo yaha dharma eka janma meM ho vaisA sarala
kahanA jaise khAte pIte hameM sarva hogA, to jo jisakI IcchA rakhate haiM vo
unakI anukUlatA ke anusAra dharma pravedana karanA  /  to vrata-niyama kie binA
bhI jIva mokSa kI IcchA rakhatA hai, vaise prANI ko roSa na ho, usa taraha se
unako dharmakathana karanA  /  lekina unako mokSa kA kathana na karanA aise
logoM ko mokSa na ho aura mRSAvAda lge| sUtra - 1298-1302 dUsarA tIrthaMkara
bhagavaMta ko bhI rAga, dveSa, moha, bhaya, svacchaMda vyavahAra bhUtakAla meM
nahIM thA, aura bhAvi meM hogA bhI nahIM  /  he gautama ! tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta
kabhI bhI mRSAvAda nahIM bolate  /  kyoMki unheM pratyakSa kevalajJAna hai, pUrA
jagata sAkSAt dekhatA hai  /  bhUta bhAvi, vartamAna, puNya-pApa aura tIna loka
meM jo kucha hai vo saba unako prakaTa hai, zAyada pAtAla urdhvamukhavAlA hokara
svarga meM calA jAe, svarga adhomukha hokara nIce jAe to bhI yakInana
tIrthaMkara ke vacana meM pharka nahIM AtA  /  jJAna-darzana, cAritra ghora
kAphI duSkara tapa sadgati kA mArga Adi ko yathAsthita prakaTapana se prarUpate
haiM  /  varanA vacana, mana yA karma se vo tIrthaMkara nahIM hai| sUtra -
1303-1304 zAyada tatkAla isa bhuvana kA pralaya ho to bhI vo sabhI jagata ke
jIva, prANI, bhUta kA ekatva hita ho usa prakAra anukaMpA se yathArtha dharma ko
tIrthaMkara kahate haiM  /  jisa dharma ko acchI taraha se AcaraNa kiyA jAe use
durbhagatA kA duHkha dAridra roga zoka durgati kA bhaya nahIM hotA  /  aura
saMtApa udvega bhI nahIM hote| sUtra - 1305-1306 he bhagavaMta ! hama aisA
kahanA nahIM cAhate ki apanI marajI se hama vyavahAra karate haiM  /  kevala
itanA hI pUchate haiM ki jitanA mumakIna ho utanA vo kara sake  /  he gautama !
aisA karanA yukta nahIM hai, vaisA palabhara bhI mana se cintavana karanA
hitAvaha nahIM hai yadi aisA mAne to jAno ki usake bala kA vadha kiyA gayA hai|
sUtra - 1307-1310 eka mAnava ghI-khANDa kI rAbaDI khAne ke lie samartha hotA hai
/  dUsarA mA~sa sahita madirA, tIsarA strI ke sAtha khelane ke lie zaktimAna ho
aura cauthA vo bhI na kara sake, dUsarA tarka karane ke pUrva pakSa kI sthApanA
kare yAni vAdavivAda kara sake  /  dUsarA kleza karane ke svabhAvavAlA yaha
vivAda na kara sake  /  eka-dUsare kA kiyA huA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 113

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra number should be
seen and other nonsense should be done. No one steals, no one commits Jar Karma,
no one does anything. Some are not able to eat or leave their bed. And they are
powerful enough to sit on the stage. O Gautam! Truly, we do not call such giving
Miccha Mi Dukkadam. I will answer the other thing you say in Sutra-1311-1313
Even if a human being is not able to perform all the severe austerities in this
birth, he still desires to attain salvation. The milk of a bird, plucking a
hair, wearing a dashi of Rajoharan, observing such rules, but even these rules
are not able to be followed till Javajeev, then O Gautam! For him, will there be
any other field of Siddhi than this according to your wisdom? Sutra-1314-1317
Again, I answer your question that the masters of the four knowledges, the gods,
the demons, and the beings of the world, are definitely those who will attain
liberation in that very existence. There will be no other existence. Even then,
they consume the severe, painful, and extremely difficult austerities without
hiding their strength, vigor, effort, and courage. Then, the other beings who
are afraid of the birth, death, and other sorrows of the world in the form of
four motions, should follow the practice of all things as they are, as the
Tirthankara Bhagavan has commanded. Sutra-1318-1323 O Gautam! You have said that
one should perform the practices as described in the order of tradition. O
Gautam! Listen to an example! A turtle, frightened by the collision of many
crocodiles and other creatures in the vast ocean, sinks in the water, is bitten
by another powerful creature, is choked, is thrown up, is pushed, is swallowed,
is terrified, hides, runs, escapes, jumps and falls in every direction, is
tossed about, suffers many kinds of troubles, endures, barely finds a place
anywhere for a moment, is tormented by sorrow, after a long time, while wading
through the water, reaches the upper part. In the upper part was a forest of
Padmini trees, where the Lil Pushpa trees were so dense that nothing could be
seen in the upper part, but while wandering around, he saw a crack in the ground
with Neelphool flowers, at that time, as it was Sharad Purnima, the full moon,
adorned with planets and stars, was visible in the clear sky. Sutra - 1324-1328
And then he saw the developed, shining blue and white lotus, the hundred-petaled
moon, the blooming lotus, and other fresh vegetation, heard the sweet sounds of
swans and Karand birds, Chakravak, etc. He had never seen such a wonderful,
radiant moon in the seventeenth lineage, and for a moment he thought, "This must
be heaven?" Then, thinking, "If I show this beautiful picture to my friends,
they will also be happy," he went to call his friends. After a long time, he
found them and brought them back here. As he had returned on the night of
Krishna Chaturdashi in the month of Bhadrapada, which was a dark, deep night, he
could not see the prosperity he had seen before, and he wandered around many
times, but he could not see the beauty of the night of Sharad Purnima.
Sutra-1328-1329 In the same way, it is rare for a being in the ocean of
existence, which is in the form of four motions, to attain humanhood. After
attaining it, those who become complacent after obtaining the Dharma with the
characteristic of non-violence, will again be able to attain such humanhood,
which they can attain after suffering for millions of births, just as the turtle
could not see the prosperity again, so too, that being is not able to attain the
beautiful prosperity of Dharma. Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam
Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 114

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka dekhA
kare aura dUsarA bakavAsa kare  /  koI corI, koI jAra karma kare, koI kucha bhI
nahIM karatA  /  kucha bhojana karane ke lie yA apanI zayyA chor3ane ke lie
samartha nahIM ho sakate  /  aura maMca para baiThe rahane ke lie zaktimAna hote
haiM  /  he gautama ! sacamuca micchA mi dukkaDam isa taraha kA denA hama nahIM
kahate  /  dUsarA jo tuma kahate ho usakA uttara dUM sUtra-1311-1313 kisI mAnava
isa janma meM samagra ugra saMyama tapa karane ke lie samartha na ho sake to bhI
sadgati pAne kI abhilASAvAlA hai  /  paMchI ke dUdha kA, eka keza Ukher3ane kA,
rajoharaNa kI eka dazI dhAraNa karanA, vaise niyama dhAraNa karanA, lekina itane
niyama bhI jAvajjIva taka pAlana ke lie samartha nahIM, to he gautama ! usa ke
lie tumhArI buddhi se siddhi kA kSetra isa ke alAvA kisI dUsarA hogA?
sUtra-1314-1317 phira se tumheM yaha pUche gae savAla kA pratyuttara detA hU~ ki
cAra jJAna ke svAmI, deva-asura aura jagata ke jIva se pUjanIya nizcita usa
bhava meM hI mukti pAnevAle haiM  /  Age dUsarA bhava nahIM hogA  /  to bhI
apanA bala, vIrya, puruSakAra parAkrama chipAe binA ugra kaSTamaya ghora duSkara
tapa kA vo sevana karate haiM  /  to phira cAra gati svarUpa saMsAra ke janma-
maraNa Adi duHkha se bhayabhIta dUsare jIva ne to jisa prakAra tIrthaMkara
bhagavaMta ne AjJA kI hai, usake anusAra sarva yathAsthita anuSThAna kA pAlana
karanA cAhie  /  sUtra-1318-1323 he gautama ! Age tane jo kahA hai ki paripATI
krama ke anasAra batAe anaSThAna karane cAhie  /  he gautama ! dRSTAMta suna !
bar3e samudra ke bhItara dUsare kaIM magaramaccha Adi ke TakarAne kI vajaha se
bhayabhIta kachuA jala meM buDAbur3a karate, kisI dUsare tAkatavara jantu se
kATate hue, u~sate hue, Upara pheMkate hue, dhakke khAte hue, nIgalate hue,
trasa hote hue chipate, daur3ate, palAyana hote, hara eka dizA meM uchalakara
girate, paTakate vahA~ kaIM taraha kI parezAnI bhugatatA, sahatA, palabhara
jitanA bhI kahIM muzkila se sthAna na pAtA, duHkha se saMtApa pAtA, kAphI lambe
arase ke bAda vo jala ko avagAhana karate karate Upara ke hisse meM jA pahu~cA
/  Upara ke hisse meM padminI kA gAr3a jaMgala thA usameM lIla puSpa gAr3a par3a
se kucha bhI Upara ke hisse meM dikhAI nahIM detA thA lekina idhara udhara
ghUmate mahA muzkila se jamIM nIlaphUla meM par3I phATa-chidra dekhA to usa
vakta zarada pUrNimA hone se nirmala AkAza meM graha nakSatra se parivarita
pUnama kA candra dekhane meM AyA  /  sUtra - 1324-1328 aura phira vikasita
zobhAyamAna nIla aura zveta kamala zatapatravAle candra vikAsI kamala Adi
tarotAjA vanaspati, madhura zabda bolate haMsa aura kAraMr3a jAti ke paMchI
cakravAk Adi ko sunatA thA  /  sA~tavIMsa vaMza paramparA meM bhI kisI ne na
dekhA haA usa taraha ke adabhUta tejasvI candramaMDala ko dekhakara palabhara
cintavana karane yahI svarga hogA? to aba Ananda denevAlA yaha tasavIra yadi
mere baMdhuoM ko bhI dikhAUM aisA socakara apane baMdhuoM ko bulAne gayA  /
lambe arase ke bAda usako DhU~r3hakara sAtha vApasa yahA~ lAyA  /  gahare ghora
aMdhakAravAlI bhAdaravA mahine kI kRSNI caturdazI kI rAta meM vApasa AyA hone se
pahale dekhI huI samRddhi jaba use dekhane ko nahIM milatI taba idhara-udhara
kaIM bAra ghUmA to bhI zarada pUrNimA kI rAta kI zobhA dekhane ke lie samartha
nahIM ho skaa| sUtra-1328-1329 usI prakAra cAra gati svarUpa bhava samudra ke
jIva ko manuSyatva pAnA durlabha hai  /  vo mila jAne ke bAda ahiMsA lakSaNavAle
dharma pAkara jo pramAda karate haiM vo kaI lAkha bhava se bhI daHkha se phira
se pA sake vaisA manaSyatva pAkara jaise kachuA phira se samRddhi na dekha sakA,
vaise jIva bhI sundara dharmasamRddhi pAne ke lie samartha nahIM hotaa| muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 114

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishītha' Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number -
1330-1333 If one has to travel outside the village for two or three days, then
one takes all the necessary things for the journey, food allowance, etc., and
then sets out. Why then does one not contemplate the provisions of Dharma for
the long journey of the transmigration of the world, which has eighty-four lakh
Yonis and four states? As the hours, days, months, and years pass, so too does
the great, sorrowful death draw near. Such is the understanding that anyone who
does not know the time of death, perhaps even if they did know, no one in this
world has been or will be immortal. Sūtra - 1334 These sinful beings, being
heedless, are diligent in the work of the world, and even after suffering, they
do not get tired, and O Gautama! they are not satisfied even with happiness.
Sūtra - 1335-1338 This being has been born in hundreds of species and has shed
countless bodies, but even if all the bodies were gathered together, they would
fill the three worlds. Even the nails, teeth, head, nose, eyes, ears, etc., that
have been shed from the body, if they were all collected separately, would form
mountains as high as Mount Meru. All the food that this being has consumed, if
it were all gathered together, would be heavier than the Himalayas, Malaya,
Meru, the islands, the oceans, and the earth. The tears that this being has shed
due to the weight of suffering, if they were all collected, would not fit in all
the wells, ponds, rivers, and oceans. Sūtra - 1339-1341 Even the milk that was
drunk from the mother's breast would be greater than the ocean water. In this
infinite world, there are many Yonis of women, and among them, if a dog died
seven days ago and its Yoni has rotted, the worms that are born in it, and the
excrement that the being has left behind, if they were all collected and piled
up as high as the fourteenth Rajapramāṇaloka, from the seventh hell to the
Siddhikshetra, then there would be as many infinite piles of worms and excrement
as there are Yonis. Sūtra - 1342-1343 This being has enjoyed all kinds of
pleasures for an infinite time. Yet, every moment, the pleasures of the senses
seem incomplete. Just as a person suffering from itching and pain due to heat
and cold scratches their body and considers the pain to be pleasure, so too do
humans, in their delusion, consider the pain of worldly desires to be pleasure.
They recognize and experience the suffering caused by birth, old age, and death.
Yet, O Gautama! the being who is about to depart for a bad destination does not
become detached from the objects of the senses. Sūtra - 1344-1346 The evil
spirits, who are more powerful than the sun, moon, and all the planets, and who
are the instigators of all evils, are the tormentors of the entire world, and
are bound by desire. They are the great planets, the planets of desire.
Ignorant, dull-witted beings know that wealth and prosperity are the fruits of
all Dharma, yet they are very foolish and commit sins, leading them to a bad
destination. Sūtra - 1347-1349 The body of a being is subject to death at any
moment due to disturbances in the vāta, pitta, kapha, dhātus, and jathrāgni.
Therefore, strive for Dharma and do not be disheartened. It is very rare to find
such a beautiful opportunity for Dharma. In this world, it is very rare for a
being to be born with five senses, to be human, to be an Ārya, to be born in a
noble family, to have the company of a sage, to hear the scriptures, to have
faith in the words of the Tīrthankara, to have good health, to be ordained, etc.
Even after obtaining all these rare things, a being can die in a moment due to a
spear, a snake, poison, dysentery, water, weapons, fire, a wheel, etc., and be
reborn in another body. Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kr̥t (Mahānishītha) Āgama Sūtra -
Hindi Translation Page 115

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra -
1330-1333 do, tIna dina kI bAhara gA~va kI saphara karanI hotI hai, to sarvAdara
se mArga kI jarurate, khAne kA bhAthA Adi lekara phira prayANa karate haiM to
phira corAzI lAkha yonivAle saMsAra kI cAra gati kI lambI saphara ke pravAsa ke
lie tapazIla-svarUpa dharma ke bhAthA kA cintavana kyoM nahIM karatA? jaise
jaise prahara, dina, mAsa, sAla, svarUpa samaya pasAra hotA hai, vaise vaise
mahA duHkhamaya maraNa najadIka A rahA hai  /  vaisI samaja jisa kisI ko
kAlavelA kA jJAna nahIM hotA, zAyada vaisA jJAna ho to bhI isa jagata meM koI
ajarAmara huA nahIM yA koI hogA bhI nhiiN| sUtra - 1334 pramAdita hae yaha pApI
jIva saMsAra ke kArya karane meM apramatta hokara udyama karate haiM, use duHkha
hone ke bAda bhI vo Uba nahIM jAtA aura he gautama ! use sukha se bhI tRpti
nahIM hotii| sUtra - 1335-1338 isa jIvane seMkar3o jAti meM utpanna hokara
jitane zarIra kA tyAga kiyA hai lekina unameM se kucha zarIra se bhI samagra
tInoM bhuvana bhI bhara jAe  /  zarIra meM bhI jo nAkhUna, dA~ta, mastaka,
bhramara, A~kha, kAna Adi avayava kA jo tyAga kiyA hai una sabake alaga-alaga
r3haga kie jAe to usake bhI kula parvata yA meru parvata jitane UMce r3haga
bane, sarva jo AhAra grahaNa kiyA hai vo samagra ananta guNa ikaTThA kiyA jAe to
vo himavAna, malaya, meru parvata yA dvIpa sAgara aura pRthvI ke r3haga se bhI
jyAdA AhAra ke r3haga bhArI adhika ho bhArI duHkha Ane kI vajaha se isa jIva ne
jo A~sU girAe haiM vo saba jala ikaTThA kiyA jAe to samagra kUeM, tAlAba, nadI
aura samudra meM bhI na samA sake  /  sUtra-1339-1341 mAtA kA stanapAna karake
pIyA gayA dUdha bhI samudra jala se kAphI bar3ha jAe  /  isa ananta saMsAra meM
strIoM kI kaIM yoni hai usameM se kevala eka kuttI sAta dina pahale mara gaI ho
aura usakI yoni saDa gaI ho usake bIca jo kRmi paidA hue ho jIva ne jo klevara
chor3A ho vo saba ikaTThe karake sAtavIM naraka pRthvI se lekara siddhikSetra
taka caudaharAja pramANaloka jitanA r3haga kiyA jAe to usa yoni meM paidA hue
kRmi klevara ke utane ananta r3haga hote haiN| sUtra - 1342-1343 isa jIva ne
anantakAla taka hara-eka kAmabhoga yahA~ bhugate haiM  /  phira bhI haraeka
vakta viSaya sukha apUrNa lagate haiM  /  lU-khasa, khujalI ke dardavAlA zarIra
ko khujalAte hue duHkha ko sukha mAnatA hai vaise moha meM becaina mAnava kAma
ke duHkha kA sukha rUpa mAnate haiM  /  janma, jarA, maraNa se honevAle duHkha
ko pahacAnate haiM, ahesAsa karate haiM  /  vo bhI he gautama ! durgati meM
gamana ke lie prayANa karanevAlA jIva viSaya meM virakta nahIM hotaa|
sUtra-1344-1346 sUrya-candra Adi sarva graha se adhika sarva doSa ko
pravartAnevAle durAtmA pUre jagata ko parAbhava karanevAle kAmAdhIna bane
parezAna karanevAle ho to durAtmA mahAgraha aisA kAmagraha hai  /  ajJAnI
jar3AtmA jAnate haiM ki bhoga Rddhi kI saMpatti sarva dharma kA hI phala hai to
bhI kAphI mUr3ha hRdayavAle pApa karake durgati meM jAte haiN| sUtra-1347-1349
jIva ke zarIra meM vAta, pitta, kapha, dhAtu, jaTharAgni Adi ke kSobha se
palabhara meM mauta hotI hai to dharma meM udyama karo aura kheda mata pAnA  /
isa taraha ke dharma kA sundara yoga milanA kAphI durlabha hai  /  isa saMsAra
meM jIva ko paMcendriyapana, mAnavapana, Aryapana, uttama kula meM paidA honA,
sAdhu kA samAgama, zAstra kA zravaNa, tIrthaMkara ke vacana kI zraddhA, Arogya,
pravrajyA Adi ki prApti kAphI durlabha hai  /  yaha sabhI durlabha cIjoM kI
prApti hone ke bAvajUda bhI zUla, sarpa, jhahara, vizucikA, jala, zastra, agni,
cakrI Adi kI vajaha se muhUrttamAtra meM jIva marake dUsare deha meM saMkramaNa
karatA hai| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda
Page 115

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Āgama Sūtra 39, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth' Study/Purpose/Sūtrāṅka Sūtra-
1350-1354   Until you have a little bit of life left, until you can still do a
little business, practice self-interest. Otherwise, you will have the
opportunity to repent later. Like a rainbow, lightning, which disappears in an
instant, this body is like a dream, like water filled in an earthen pot, which
melts in an instant. Understanding this, until you are freed from this ephemeral
body, practice intense, painful, severe austerities. There is no guarantee when
the cycle of life will break. O Gautama! Even those who practice restraint for a
thousand years in great abundance, their defilements do not become pure like a
lotus at the end. Some great souls, like Puṇḍarīka Maharshi, achieve their goal
in a short time, just as they have taken on conduct and śramaṇya.
Sūtra-1355-1356 This being, surrounded by the suffering of birth, old age, and
death, has no happiness in the world, therefore liberation is the only worthy
object of instruction. O Gautama! To attain liberation in all ways and in all
respects, this human birth received is meaningful. Study-6-The Muni
Dīparatnasāgar's Hindi translation is complete. Muni Dīparatnasāgar's
(Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Translation Page 116

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra-
1350-1354 taba taka Ayu thor3A sA bhI bhugatanA bAkI hai, jaba taka abhI alpa
bhI vyavasAya kara sakate ho, taba taka meM Atmahita kI sAdhanA kara lo  /
varanA pIche se pazcAttApa karane kA avasara prApta hogA  /  indradhanuSa,
bijalI dekhate hI pala meM adRzya ho vaise saMdhyA ke vyAdhi aura sapane samAna
yaha deha hai jo kacce miTTI ke ghar3e meM bhare jala kI taraha palabhara meM
pIgala jAtA hai  /  itanA samajhakara ye jaba taka isa taraha ke kSaNabhaMgura
deha se chUTakArA na mile taba taka ugra kaSTakArI ghora tapa kA sevana karo,
Ayu kA krama kaba tUTegA usakA bharosA nahIM hai  /  he gautama ! hajAra sAla
taka ati vipula pramANa meM saMyama kA sevana karanevAle ko bhI antima vakta
para kaNDarika kI taraha kliSTabhAva zuddha nahIM hotA  /  kucha mahAtmA jisa
prakAra zIla aura zrAmaNya grahaNa kiyA ho usa prakAra puNDarika maharSi kI
taraha alpakAla meM apane kArya ko sAdhate haiN| sUtra-1355-1356 janma, jarA
aura maraNa ke duHkha se ghire isa jIva ko saMsAra meM sukha nahIM hai, isalie
mokSa hI ekAnta upadeza-grahaNa karane ke lAyaka hai  /  he gautama ! sarva
taraha se aura sarva bhAva se mokSa pAne ke lie milA huA mAnava bhava sArthaka
krnaa| adhyayana-6-kA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt hindI anuvAda pUrNa muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 116

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhedasutra-5, 'Mahanisitha' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number
Study-7-Prayashchitta Sutra (Chulika-1) "Ekanta Nirjara Sutra-1357-1359 O
Bhagavant! In this illustration, you had earlier said that according to the
prescribed order, why do you not tell me the Prayashchitta? O Gautama! If you
adopt it, then the Prayashchitta is indeed considered a more beautiful thought
than your manifest religious thought. Then Gautama asked, then the Bhagavant
said that as long as there is doubt in the body-soul, there is Mithyatva, and
its Prayashchitta does not occur. Sutra - 1360-1361 One who has been defeated by
Mithyatva, speaks contrary to the words of the Tirthankara Bhagavant, violates
their words, praises one who does so, then that contradictor enters the deep,
dense darkness and ignorant hell. But one who beautifully thinks that - the
Tirthankara Bhagavant themselves say this, and they themselves behave
accordingly. Sutra - 1362-1363 O Gautama! There are also such Jivas who, having
accepted Pravrajya in some way or the other, serve religion in such a manner
that they cannot be liberated from the worldly cycle. Which are the verses of
that method? O Gautama! Know that method of verses in this way. Sutra-1364-1365
Chaitya-vandana, Pratikramana, faith in the existence of Jiva-adika tattvas,
five Samitis, control of five senses, three Guptis, restraint of four Kashays,
being vigilant in all of them, knowing and trusting the conduct and activities
of Sadhupana, after examining the attached faults, free from Shalya, greatly
agitated due to the sufferings of the womb-abode etc., always fearful of the
sufferings of birth, old age, death etc., always meditates in the heart to burn
the karmas of the four gati-form Samsara. Sutra - 1366-1368 If one who has
obtained the excellent ship-boat of right belief, knowledge and conduct in this
human form, has fallen out of it, then I will wander and roam around in the
boundless ocean of Samsara without reaching the end of suffering. Then when will
that day come when I will wander, being impartial to enemy and friend, always
engaged in auspicious meditation, and then I will make efforts so that I do not
have to take birth again. Sutra - 1369-1371 Facing the great desired goal that
has been contemplated for a long time, exhilarated by the joy of that great
wealth, dependent on the grace of devotion, with hair standing on end, filled
with bliss in every limb, enthusiastically raising the eighteen thousand
Shilanga, eager to observe the thirty-six types of conduct, devoid of the entire
Mithyatva, O Gautama! Conduct accordingly. Sutra-1372-1373 One who is free from
attachment to any object or place like a bird, makes effort in knowledge,
darshana and conduct, free from wealth, relatives etc., greatly conquering
severe adversities and obstacles, subduing the intense attachment to Pratima-
adika,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
adhyayana-7-prAyazcitta sUtra (cUlikA-1) "egaMta nirjarA sUtra-1357-1359 he
bhagavaMta ! isa dRSTAMta se pahale Apane kahA thA ki paripATI krama anusAra
(vo) prAyazcitta Apa mujhe kyoM nahIM kahate ? he gautama ! yadi tuma usakA
avalaMbana karoge to prAyazcitta vAkaI tumhArI jo prakaTa dharma soca hai vo
aura suMdara soca mAnA jAtA hai  /  phira gautama ne pUchA taba bhagavaMta ne
kahA ki jaba taka deha meM-AtmA meM saMdeha ho taba taka mithyAtva hotA hai aura
usakA prAyazcitta nahIM hotaa| sUtra - 1360-1361 jo AtmA mithyAtva se
parAbhavita haA ho, tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ke vacana ko viparIta bole, unake
vacana kA ullaMghana kare, vaisA karanevAle kI prazaMsA kare to vo viparIta
bolanevAlA ghora gAr3ha aMdhakAra aura ajJAnapUrNa pAtAla meM naraka meM praveza
karanevAlA hotA hai  /  lekina jo sundara taraha se aisA socatA hai ki-
tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta khuda isa prakAra kahate haiM vo khuda usa ke anusAra
vyavahAra karate haiN| sUtra - 1362-1363 he gautama ! aise jIva bhI hote haiM ki
jo jaise taise pravrajyA aMgIkAra kara ke vaisI avidhi se dharma kA sevana
karate haiM ki jisase saMsAra se mukta na ho sake  /  usa vidhi ke zloka kauna-
se haiM? he gautama ! vo vidhi zloka isa prakAra jaannaa| sUtra-1364-1365
caityavaMdana, pratikramaNa, jIvAdika tattva ke sadbhAva kI zraddhA, pA~ca
samiti, pA~ca indriya kA damana, tIna gupti, cAra kaSAya kA nigraha una saba meM
sAvadha rahanA, sAdhupana kI sAmAcArI aura kriyA-kalApa jAnakara vizvasta
honevAle, lage hue doSa kI AlocanA karake zalyarahita, garbhAvAsa Adi ke duHkha
kI vajaha se, kAphI saMvega pAnevAlA, janma, jarA, maraNa Adi ke duHkha se
bhayabhIta, cAra gatirUpa saMsAra ke karma jalAne ke lie hamezA isa anusAra
hRdaya meM dhyAna karatA hai| sUtra - 1366-1368 jarA, maraNa aura kAma kI
pracuratAvAle roga kleza Adi bahavidha taraMgavAle, A~Tha karma, cAra kaSAyarUpa
bhayAnaka jalacara se bhare gahare bhavasAgara meM isa mAnavarUpa meM samyaktva
jJAnacAritrarUpa uttama nAva jahAja pAkara yadi usameM se bhraSTa huA ho to
duHkha kA anta pAe binA maiM pAra rahita saMsAra sAgara meM lambe arase taka
idhara-udhara bhaTakate paTakate bhramaNa karU~gA  /  to vaisA dina kaba AegA ki
jaba maiM zatru aura mitra ko ora samAna pakSavAlA, niHsaMga, hamezA zubha
dhyAna meM rahanevAlA hokara vicaraNa karU~gA  /  aura phira bhava na karanA
paDe vaisI kozIza kruuNgaa| sUtra - 1369-1371 isa anusAra bar3e arase se cintave
hae manoratha ke sanmukha honevAlA usa rUpa mahAsaMpatti ke harSa se ullAsita
honevAle, bhakti ke anugraha se nirbhara hokara namaskAra karake, romAMca khar3A
hone se roma-roma vyApta Ananda aMgavAlA, 18 hajAra zilAMga dhAraNa karane ke
lie utsAhapUrvaka UMce kie gae khaMbhevAlA, chattIsa taraha ke AcAra pAlana
karane ke lie utkaMThita, naSTa kie gae samagra mithyAtvavAlA, mada, mAna,
IrSyA, krodha aMgIkAra karake he gautama ! vidhivat isa anusAra vicaraNa kare  /
sUtra-1372-1373 paMchI kI taraha koI cIja yA sthAna kI mamatA rahita, jJAna,
darzana aura cAritra meM udyama karanevAlA, dhana, svajana Adi ke saMga rahita,
ghora pariSaha upasargAdika ko prakarSarUpa se jItanevAlA, ugra abhigraha
pratimAdika ko muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda
Page 117

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, ‘Mahānishītha’**  Adopting the
study/purpose/sūtra number, abandoning attachment and aversion from afar,
remaining with an earnest, fierce meditation, being averse to distortion. Sūtra
- 1374-1375  Whoever anoints their body and arms with the juice of forty-two
sandalwood trees, or shaves their body with a bamboo, whoever praises their
qualities or criticizes their faults, one who remains equanimous towards both,
without concealing their strength, vigor, effort, and courage, with an equal
mind towards grass and gems, a drum and gold, with vows, rules, knowledge,
conduct, austerities, etc., unique in the entire universe, auspicious,
characterized by non-violence, with a steady and unique characteristic for the
ten types of religious observances like forgiveness, etc., suitable for all
necessary study and meditation at that time, unimpeded for countless and
numerous places of restraint, striving for the complete avoidance of negligence,
being diligent and austere, and then again, repenting for past transgressions
and preventing possible future transgressions, being restrained from
transgressions, therefore abandoning sinful actions like those that are not to
be done in the present, being free from all faults, and then again, being free
from the root of worldly growth, i.e., being liberated, not performing the
worship of the liberated discourse for the sake of external happiness in this
world or the next, abandoning ‘lying with deceit’, such a sage or saint, endowed
with the qualities mentioned above, if I have found them to have slipped from
restraint through negligence in any way, at any time, in any place, through
mind, speech, or body, through the purification of the three instruments, with
all my being, then for them, if they are in a place of purification, there is
only atonement.  _O Gautama! For that reason, teach them purification through
atonement, but not in any other way. The atonement that is mentioned in each and
every place of atonement, as much as is mentioned, is certainly called the
determined atonement. O Bhagavant! Why is it said so? O Gautama! These atonement
sūtras are in an endless, continuous sequence. Many blessed souls, bound in the
prison house of the world, in the form of the four states of existence, will be
freed from the suffering of being bound and afflicted, and will quickly be freed
from the shackles of karma, in the form of chains, that they have accumulated in
their past lives. These atonement sūtras are endowed with many oceans of
qualities, they are firm in their vows and conduct, and are suitable for
solitude. They should be taught in a place where no one else can hear them, and
they should be explained in such a way that the atonement that leads to the
highest purification for each individual, according to their capacity, should be
given to them with words that arouse enthusiasm, with attachment and aversion,
creating an unprecedented taste for religion. Therefore, such atonement is
proven and authentic. It is called the determined atonement. Sūtra - 1376-1377_
O Bhagavant! How many types of atonement are prescribed? O Gautama! Ten types of
atonement are prescribed, and they are of many types even within the category of
‘pārancita’. O Bhagavant! For how long will the practice of these atonement
sūtras be carried out? O Gautama! Until the king named Kalki dies, the earth
will be adorned with a Jinalaya, and there will be an ascetic named Śrīprabha.
Until then, the practice of the atonement sūtras will be carried out. O
Bhagavant! What will happen after that? After that, there will be no one who is
fortunate enough to have this Śruta Skandha explained to them. Sūtra - 1378  O
Bhagavant! How many places of atonement are there? O Gautama! The number of
places of atonement is said to be countless. O Bhagavant! Which is the first
step of atonement among those countless places of atonement? O Gautama! Knowing
the daily actions. O Bhagavant! What are those daily actions called? O Gautama!
Those that are repeatedly performed, day and night, from the destruction of the
life force to the performance of countless necessary actions, are called
necessary actions.  O Bhagavant! Why is it called ‘necessary’ by that name? O
Gautama! Because it destroys all eight karmas, and it is the means of achieving
the highest right faith, knowledge, and conduct, and it is the practice of very
intense, heroic, fierce, difficult, and arduous austerities.  Muni
Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishītha) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi Translation Page 118

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka apanAte
hue, rAga-dveSa kA dUra se tyAga karate hue, Arta, raudra dhyAna se rahita,
vikathA karane meM arasika ho  /  sUtra - 1374-1375 jo koi bAvana caMdana ke
rasa se zarIra aura aura bAhU~ para vilepana kare, yA kisI bA~sa se zarIra
chile, koI usake guNa kI stuti kare yA avaguNa kI nIMdA kare to dono para samAna
bhAva rakhanevAlA usa prakAra bala, vIrya, puruSArtha parAkrama ko na chipAte
hae, tRNa aura maNi, DhephA aura kaMcana kI ora samAna manavAlA, vrata, niyama,
jJAna, cAritra, tapa Adi samagra bhuvana meM advitIya, maMgalarUpa, ahiMsA
lakSaNayukta kSamA-Adi daza taraha ke dharmAnuSThAna ke lie ekAnta sthira
lakSaNavAlA, sarva jarurI usa samaya karane lAyaka svAdhyAya dhyAna meM
upayogavAlA, asaMkhyAtA aneka saMyama sthAnaka ke lie askhalita karaNavAlA,
samasta taraha se pramAda ke parihAra ke lie kozIzavAlA, yatanAvAlA aura aba
phira bhUtakAla ke aticAra kI nIMdA aura bhAvi meM mumakIna aticAra kA saMvara
karate hue vo aticAra se aTakA, usa vajaha se vartamAna meM akaraNIya kI taraha
pApakarma kA tyAga karanevAlA sarvadoSa rahita aura phira niyANA saMsAra vRddhi
kI jar3a hone se usase rahita honevAlA yAni nirgrantha pravacana kI ArAdhanA
Aloka yA paraloka ke bAhya sukha pAne kI abhilASA se na karate hue, 'mAyA sahita
jhUTha bolanA' usakA tyAga karanevAlA aise sAdhu yA sAdhvI upara batAe guNa se
yukta maiMne kisI taraha se pramAda doSa se bAra-bAra kahIM bhI kisI bhI sthAna
para mana, vacana yA kAyA se trikaraNa vizuddhi se sarvabhAva se saMyama kI
AcaraNA karate karate asaMyama se skhalanA pAe to use vizuddhi sthAna ho to
kevala prAyazcitta hai| _ he gautama ! usa kAraNa se use prAyazcitta se vizuddhi
kA upadeza denA lekina dUsare tarIke se nahIM, usameM jina-jina prAyazcitta ke
sthAnaka meM jahA~ jahA~ jitanA prAyazcitta batAyA hai use hI-yakInana
avadhArita prAyazcitta kahate haiN| he bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se aisA kahA hai
? he gautama ! yaha prAyazcitta sUtra anaMtara anaMtara kramavAle haiM, kaIM
bhavyAtmA cAra gati rUpa saMsAra ke kaidakhAne meM se baddha spRSTa, nikAcita
duHkha se mukta ho sake vaise ghora pUrva bhava meM kie karmarUpa ber3I ko
tor3akara jalda mukta hoMge  /  yaha prAyazcitta sUtra kaI guNasamudra se yukta
dRDhavrata aura cAritravaMta ho, ekAnte yogya ho unako Age batAeMge vaise
pradeza meM dUsarA na suna sake vaise par3hAnA, prarUpaNA karanA aura jisa kI
jitane prAyazcitta se zreSTha vizuddhi ho sake usa anusAra use rAga-dveSa sahita
rUpa se dharma meM apUrva rasa pedA ho vaise vacana se utsAhita karake
yathAsthita nyUnAdhika nahIM vaisA hI prAyazcitta denA  /  isa kAraNa se vaisA
hI prAyazcitta pramANita aura TaMkazAlI hai  /  use nizcita avadhArita
prAyazcitta kahA  /  sUtra - 1376-1377 he bhagavaMta ! kitane prakAra ke
prAyazcitta upadiSTa haiM ? he gautama ! daza prakAra ke prAyazcitta upadiSTa
haiM, ve pAraMcita taka meM kaI prakAra kA hai  /  he bhagavaMta ! kitane samaya
taka isa prAyazcitta sUtra ke anuSThAna kA vahana hogA? he gautama ! kalkI nAma
kA rAjA mara jAegA  /  eka jinAlaya se zobhita pRthvI hogI aura zrIprabha nAma
kA aNagAra hogA taba taka prAyazcitta sUtra kA anuSThAna vahana hogA  /  he
bhagavaMta ! usake bAda kyA hogA ? usake bAda koI puNyabhAgI nahIM hogA ki
jinheM yaha zrutaskaMdha prarUpA jaaegaa| sUtra - 1378 he bhagavaMta !
prAyazcitta ke kitane sthAna haiM ? he gautama ! prAyazcitta ke sthAna
saMkhyAtIta batAe haiM  /  he bhagavaMta! vo saMkhyAtIta prAyazcitta sthAna meM
se prathama prAyazcitta kA pada kauna-sA hai ? he gautama ! pratidina kriyA
sambandhI jAnanA  /  he bhagavaMta ! vo pratidina kriyA kauna-sI kahalAtI hai ?
he gautama ! jo bAra-bAra rAta-dina prANa ke vinAza se lekara saMkhyAtA Avazyaka
kArya ke anuSThAna karane taka Avazyaka krnaa| he bhagavaMta ! Avazyaka aisA
nAma kisa kAraNa se kahA jAtA hai ? he gautama ! sampUrNa samagra A~Tha karma kA
kSaya karanevAlA uttama samyagdarzana, jJAna, cAritra kAphI ghora vIra ugra
kaSTakArI duSkara tapa Adi kI sAdhanA karane ke muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 118

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Cheda Sutra-5, 'Mahanisitha'  The Acharya says that the practice
(anushthana) of worshipping the Tirthankaras and others at any time, day or
night, from birth onwards, through study, contemplation, preaching, and
exposition, is certainly a must-do activity. It is considered essential.  O
Gautama! The monks who violate or are lax in the timely performance of this
practice are negligent, create disbelief in others by acting against the
prescribed procedure, and despite having strength and vigor, are negligent in
any essential activity. They cling to the support of indolence or sensual
indulgence, delay or hurry in performing the prescribed rituals. Such monks
incur a great penance.  O Lord! What is the second stage of penance? O Gautama!
The second, third, fourth, fifth, and so on, up to infinite stages of penance
are to be understood as included within the first stage of penance.  O Lord! Why
do you say so? O Gautama! The monk who carefully utilizes the time for all
essential activities, becomes completely free from the supports of inauspicious
contemplation, attachment, aversion, passions, pride, and possessiveness. He
immerses himself entirely in the activities of knowledge, perception, conduct,
austerities, study, meditation, and the beautiful Dharma, without concealing his
strength, vigor, and prowess, and becomes completely absorbed in them. When he
becomes engrossed in the essential activities of the beautiful Dharma, he
effectively blocks the inflow of karmic influx, and with the power of his soul,
destroys the entire group of eight inauspicious karmas accumulated since
beginningless time. He attains liberation from the bondage of the cycle of
birth, old age, and death, and resides on the summit of the three worlds, the
abode of the Siddhas, free from all suffering. Therefore, it is said that the
other stages of penance are included within the first stage.  O Lord! What are
those essential activities? Such as Chaitya-vandana, etc. O Lord! In which
essential activity, if one repeatedly violates the time, or performs it
negligently, or does not perform it properly at the prescribed time, or is not
ready, or does not depart, or does not complete it, or performs it late, or does
not perform it at all, or is negligent, what penance is prescribed for such a
person?  O Gautama! The monk or nun who, from the day of their initiation,
regularly and with great devotion, condemns past misdeeds, avoids future
transgressions, and refrains from committing any present misdeeds, who has
completely renounced all faults, and who, while reciting the sutras and their
meanings with one-pointed attention, without getting distracted, and with a
virtuous resolve, does not venerate the Chaitya at the three times, should be
given the penance of one day's fast for the first offense, Cheda-prayashchitta
for the second offense, and Upsthapana for the third offense, as not venerating
the Chaitya in the prescribed manner creates disbelief in others. Therefore,
this is considered a major penance.  Further, for plucking, causing to be
plucked, or approving the plucking of green vegetation, seeds, flowers, or using
them for worship, adornment, or decoration, the penances of Upsthapana, Kshaman-
upavasa, Chaturtha-bhakta, Ayanmbil, Ekasana, Nivigadha, and Agadha should be
understood in a gradual manner.  Translation by Muni Deepratan Sagar
(Mahanisitha), Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation, Page 119.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka lie
prarUpe  /  tIrthaMkara Adi ko Azrita karake apane-apane batAe hue niyamita
samaya kI jagaha-jagaha rAta-dina hara eka samaya janma se lekara jo yakInana
kiyA jAe, sAdhanA kI jAe, upadeza, prarUpaNA se hamezA samajAyA jAe, isa kAraNa
se gautama ! aisA kahate haiM ki yaha avazya karane lAyaka anuSThAna hai  /  use
Avazyaka kahate haiN| he gautama ! jo bhikSu usa anuSThAna ke samaya samaya kA
ullaMghana karate haiM, usameM DhIla karate haiM  /  anupayoga vAlA pramAdI hotA
hai, avidhi karane se dUsaroM ko azraddhA paidA karanevAlA hotA hai, bala aura
vIrya hone ke bAvajUda kisI bhI Avazyaka meM pramAda karanevAlA hotA hai,
zAtAgArava yA indriya kI laMpaTatA kA koI AlaMbana pakar3akara dera kara ke yA
utAvalA hokara batAe gae samaya para anuSThAna nahIM karatA  /  vo sAdhu mahA
prAyazcitta pAtA hai| sUtra - 1379 he bhagavaMta ! prAyazcitta kA dUsarA pada
kyA hai ? he gautama ! dUsarA, tIsarA, cauthA, pA~cavA yAvat saMkhyAtIta
prAyazcitta pada sthAna ko yahA~ prathama prAyazcitta pada ke bhItara aMtargat
rahe samajhanA  /  he bhagavaMta ! aisA kisa kAraNa se Apa kahate ho ? he
gautama ! sarva Avazyaka ke samaya kA sAvadhAnI se upayoga rakhanevAle bhikSu
raudra-ArtadhyAna, rAga, dveSa, kaSAya, gArava, mamatva Adi kaIM pramAdavAle
AlaMbana ke lie sarvabhAva aura bhavAntara se kAphI mukta ho, kevala jJAna,
darzana, cAritra, tapokarma, svAdhyAya, dhyAna, sundara dharma ke kArya meM
atyantarUpa se apanA bala, vIrya, parAkrama na chipAte hue aura samyag taraha se
usameM sarvakaraNa se tanmaya ho jAtA hai  /  jaba sundara, dharma ke Avazyaka
ke lie ramaNatAvAlA bane, taba AzravadvAra ko acchI taraha se ba~dha karanevAlA
ho, yAni karma Ane ke kAraNa ko rokanevAlA bane, taba apane jIva vIrya se anAdi
bhava ke ikaTe kie gae aniSTa duSTa ATha karma ke samUha ko ekAnta meM naSTa
karane ke lie kaTibaddha lakSaNavAlA, karmapUrvaka yoganirodha karake jalAe hae
samagra karmavAlA, janma jarA, maraNa svarUpa cAra gativAle saMsAra pAza
ba~dhana se vimukta, sarva duHkha se mukta hone se tIna loka ke zikhara sthAna
rUpa siddhazilA para birAje  /  isa vajaha se aisA kahA hai ki isa prathama pada
meM bAkI prAyazcitta ke pada samAviSTa haiN| sUtra- 1380 he bhagavaMta ! vo
Avazyaka kauna-se haiM ? caityavaMdana Adi  /  he bhagavaMta ! kisa Avazyaka meM
bAra-bAra pramAda doSa se samaya kA, samaya kA ullaMghana yA anupayogarUpa se yA
pramAda se avidhi se anuSThAna kiyA jAe yA to yathokta kAla se vidhi se samyaga
taraha se caityavaMdana Adi na kare, taiyAra na ho, prasthAna na kare, niSpanna
na ho, vo dera se kare yA kare hI nahIM yA pramAda kare to vaisA karanevAle ko
kitanA prAyazcitta kahe? he gautama ! jo bhikSu yA bhikSuNI yatanAvAle bhUtakAla
ke pApa kI niMdA, bhAvi meM aticAra na karanevAle, vartamAna meM akaraNIya
pApakarma na karanevAle, vartamAna meM akaraNIya pApakarma kA tyAga karanevAle
sarvadoSa rahita bane pApa-karma ke paccakkhANa yukta dIkSA dina se lekara roja
jAvajjIva paryanta abhigraha ko grahaNa karanevAle kAphI zraddhAvAle bhaktipUrNa
dilavAle yA yathokta vidhi se sUtra aura artha ko yAda karate hue dUsare kisI
meM mana na lagAte hue, ekAgra cittavAle usake hI artha meM mana kI sthiratA
karanevAlA, zubha adhyavasAyavAle, stavana aura stuti se kahane ke lAyaka tInoM
samaya caitya ko vaMdana na kare, to eka bAra ke prAyazcitta kA upavAsa kahanA,
dUsarI bAra usI kAraNa ke lie cheda prAyazcitta denA  /  tIsarI bAra
upasthApanA, avidhi se caitya ko vaMdana kare to dUsaroM ko azraddhA paidA hotI
hai  /  isalie bar3A prAyazcitta kahA hai| aura phira - jo harI vanaspati yA
bIja, puSpa, phUla, pUjA ke lie mahimA ke lie zobhAyamAna ke lie saMghaTTa kare,
karavAe yA karanevAle kI anumodanA kare, chedana kare, karavAe yA karanevAle kI
anumodanA kare to ina sabhI sthAnaka meM upasthApanA, khamaNa-upavAsa cotha
bhakta, AyaMbila, ekAsaNu, nivi gADha, agADha bheda se kramika smjhnaa| muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 119

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth' Study/Purpose/Sūtrāṅka Sūtra-
1381 If someone were to hinder or obstruct or cause someone else to hinder or
obstruct someone who is paying homage to a Caitya, praising it, or performing
the five types of Svādhyāya, and if the other person were to approve of the
hindrance, then they should not pay homage to that Staṅka for five Upavāsa, the
Kāranavāla for Ekāsana, and the Niṣkāraṇīka for a year. They should perform the
Upasthāpana by saying "Pārañciyam". Sūtra - 1382 One who does not perform
Pratikramāṇa should be given the Prāyaścitta of Upasthāpana. One who performs
Pratikramāṇa while sitting should be given Khamaṇa (Upavāsa), and one who
performs Pratikramāṇa in a Shūnyāshūnyarūpa manner, meaning that the Sūtra has
been spoken or not, in a useless and non-useful manner, should be given five
Upavāsa. One who does not perform Pratikramāṇa in the Māṇḍalī should be given
Upasthāpana. One who performs Pratikramāṇa with Kushīla should be given
Upasthāpana. One who performs Pratikramāṇa with someone who has fallen from
Brahmacharyavrata should be given the "Pārañcita" Prāyaścitta. One should not
forgive or be forgiven by the entire Śramaṇa Saṅgha for three types of offenses.
One who does not forgive and performs Pratikramāṇa should be given Upasthāpana.
One who speaks the Sūtras of Pratikramāṇa with mixed letters, not clearly and
distinctly, word by word, should be given four Bhaktas. One who performs
Santhāra without performing Pratikramāṇa, sleeps on a Khaṭīyā, changes sides,
should be given Upavāsa. One who sleeps during the day should be given five
Upavāsa. After performing Pratikramāṇa, one should receive permission to reside
at the Guru's feet, observe it with their eyes, and if they do not inform the
Guru after observing the residence, they should be given six Upavāsa. One who
performs Rajohaṛaṇa Paḍilehaṇa without informing the Guru about the residence
should be given Purīmaḍḍa. One who performs the Pratilekhana of Rajohaṛaṇa
according to the rules and does not receive Muhpaṭṭi Paḍilehaṇa from the Guru
before receiving the Upadhi Paḍilehaṇa, and demands the order of Sandisāūṁ
themselves, should be given Purīmaḍḍa. One who receives the Upadhi Sandisāūṁ
without such an order should be given Purīmaḍḍa. One who performs the
Pratilekhana of a useless Upadhi or residence should be given five Upavāsa. One
who performs the Pratilekhana of a residence or anything else, such as a Pātra,
Mātraka, or Upakaraṇa, in an improper manner, due to non-use or carelessness,
should be given five consecutive Upavāsa. One who consumes a residence, Upadhi,
Pātra, Mātraka, or Upakaraṇa without performing any Pratilekhana or by
performing a wrong Pratilekhana should be given five Upavāsa. One who does not
perform the Pratilekhana of a residence, Upadhi, Pātra, Mātraka, or Upakaraṇa
should be given "Upasthāpana". Accordingly, one who does not perform the
Pratilekhana of a residence or Upadhi should be given Upasthāpana. After
performing the Pratilekhana of a residence or Upadhi, one should not look at the
place where Santhāra was performed or where the Upadhi was Pratilekhana, and
should not gather it carefully and slowly with a Daṇḍapucchaṇaka or Rajohaṛaṇa.
One who does not separate a louse or an insect in the Kāja and place it in a
secluded and fearless place should be given five Upavāsa. One who takes a louse
or any living being and performs the Parṭhavna of the Kāja and does not perform
Iriyaavahī Pratikramāṇa should be given Upavāsa. One who performs the Parṭhavna
of the Kāja without looking at the place should be given Upasthāpana (even if
there is a louse or any living being in the Kāja, it is necessary to perform the
Pratiupekshaṇa of the Kāja). If there is a Ṣaṭpadikā Kāja and one says that
there is not, they should be given five Upavāsa. One who performs the
Pratilekhana of a residence or Upadhi accordingly and does not perform the
Parṭhavna without being disturbed after Samadhipūrva should be given four
Bhaktas. One who performs the Parṭhavna before sunrise, even without being
disturbed after Samadhipūrva, should be given Āyambila. One who performs the
Parṭhavna in a place containing Haritakāya, Līlotarī, Vanaspatikāya, Bījakāya,
Trasakāya, two Indriyādi living beings, even without being disturbed after
Samadhipūrva, or performs the Parṭhavna of something else in such a place, or
performs the Vosīrāva of something like excrement and urine, should be given
Purīmaḍḍa. One should understand that the Prāyaścitta is Ekāsana Āyambila, as
appropriate. However, if there is no possibility of disturbance from any living
being there, if there is a possibility of disturbance in the form of pain other
than death, then one should perform Upavāsa. One who does not perform the
appropriate Prāyaścitta after carefully examining the Staṇḍila again and being
certain that it is devoid of living beings, and criticizes it, should be given
Upasthāpana. One who performs the Parṭhavna after Samadhipūrva, even if they are
a Sāgarī-Gṛhastha or are going to be one, should be given Upavāsa. One who
performs the Vosīrāva of anything in a place where the Pratilekhana has not been
performed should be given Upasthāpana. Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishīth)
Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda Page 120

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra-
1381 yadi koI caitya ko vaMdana karatA ho, vaisI stuti karatA ho yA pA~ca taraha
ke svAdhyAya karatA ho use vighna kare yA aMtarAya kare yA karavAe agara dUsarA
aMtarAya karatA ho to use acchA mAne anumodanA kare to use usa sthAnaka meM
pA~ca upavAsa, kAraNavAle ko ekAsanA aura niSkAraNIka ko saMvatsara taka vaMdana
na karanA  /  yAvat 'pAraMciyaM'' karake upasthApanA krnaa| sUtra - 1382 jo
pratikramaNa na kare use upasthApanA kA prAyazcitta denA  /  baiThe-baiThe
pratikramaNa karanevAle ko khamaNa (upavAsa), zUnyAzUnyarUpa se yAni ki yaha
sUtra bolA gayA hai yA nahIM vaise upayogarahita anupayoga se pramattarUpa se
pratikramaNa kiyA jAe to pA~ca upavAsa, mAMDalI meM pratikramaNa na kare to
upasthApanA; kuzIla ke sAtha pratikramaNa kare to upasthApanA, brahmacaryavrata
meM paribhraSTa honevAle ke sAtha pratikramaNa kare to 'pAraMcita'' prAyazcitta
denA  /  sarva zramaNasaMgha ko trividha-trividha se na khame, na khamAe  /
kSamA na de aura pratikramaNa kare to upasthApanA, prAyazcitta pada se pada
spaSTa aura alaga na bolate hue eka duje pada meM mizrita akSaravAle
pratikramaNa ke sUtra bole to cotha bhakta, pratikramaNa kie binA saMthArA kare,
khaTiyA~ para soe, bagala badale to upavAsa, dina meM soe to pA~ca upavAsa  /
pratikramaNa karake guru ke caraNakamala meM vasati kI AjJA pAkara use dRSTi se
avalokana kare, vasati ko avalokana karake guru ko nivedana na kare to chaTha,
vasati ko saMpravedana kie binA rajoharaNa paDilehaNa kare to purImaDDa,
vidhivat rajoharaNa kA pratilekhana karake guru ke pAsa muhapatti paDilehaNa kie
binA upadhi paDilehaNa kA saMdisAUM kA Adeza khuda mA~ga le to purImaDDa, upadhi
saMdisAUM aisI AjJA lie binA upadhi paDilehe to purImaDDha, upayoga rahita
upadhi yA vasati kA pratilekhana kare to pA~ca upavAsa, avidhi se vasati yA
dUsarA kucha bhI pAtraka mAtraka upakaraNa Adi sahaja bhI anupayoga yA pramAda
se pratilekhana kare to lagAtAra pA~ca upavAsa, vasati, upadhi, pAtra, mAtraka,
upakaraNa ko koI bhI pratilekhana kie binA yA duSpratilekhana karake usakA
upabhoga kare to pA~ca upavAsa, vasati yA upadhi yA pAtra, mAtraka, upakaraNa kA
pratilekhana hI na kare to "upasthApana'' usake anusAra vasati upadhi ko
pratilekhana hI na kare to upasthApana usa prakAra vasati upadhi ko pratilekhana
karane ke bAda jisa pradeza meM saMthArA kiyA ho, jisa pradeza meM upadhi kI
pratilekhanA kI ho usa sthAna ko nipuNatA se dhIre-dhIre daMr3apucchaNaka yA
rajoharaNa se ikaTThA karake use najara se na dekhe, kAjA meM jUM yA jantu ko
alaga karake ekAnta nirbhaya sthAna meM na rakhe to pA~ca upavAsa, lUM yA kisI
jIva ko grahaNa karake kAjA kI paraThavanA kara ke irIyAvahI na pratikrame to
upavAsa, sthAna dekhe binA kAjA kI paraThavanA kare to upasthApanA (bhale hI
kAja meM jUM yA koI jIva ho ki na ho lekina kAjA kI pratyupekSaNA karanA jarurI
hai|) yadi SaTpadikA kAjA meM ho aura bole ki nahIM hai to pA~ca upavAsa, usa
anusAra vasati upadhi kA pratilekhana karake samAdhipUrvaka vikSubdha hue binA-
paraThavanA na kare to cautha bhakta sUryodaya hone se pahale samAdhipUrvaka
vikSubdha hue binA bhI paraThavanA kare to AyaMbila, haritakAya, lIlotarI,
vanaspatikAya yukta, bIjakAya yukta, trasakAya do indriyAdika jIva se yukta
sthAna meM samAdhipUrvaka vikSubdha hue binA bhI paraThavanA kare yA vaise
sthAna meM dUsarA kucha yA uccArAdika (mala-mUtra Adi) cIja paraThave, vosirAve
to purImaDDa, ekAzana AyaMbila yathAkarma prAyazcitta samajhanA, lekina yadi
vahA~ kisI jIva ke upadrava kI saMbhAvanA na ho to, yadi mauta ke alAvA vedanA
rUpa upadrava kI sambhAvanA ho to upavAsa  /  usa sthaMDila kI phira se bhI
acchI taraha jA~ca karake jIva rahita hai, aise niHzaMka hokara phira bhI usakI
AlocanA karake yathAyogya prAyazcitta grahaNa na kare to upasthApana,
samAdhipUrvaka paraThavanA kare to bhI sAgArI-gRhastha rahatA ho yA rahanevAlA
ho phira bhI paraThave to upavAsa  /  pratilekhana na kiyA ho vaisI jagaha meM
jo kucha bhI vAsirAve to upasthApana  /  muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha)
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 120

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  According to the
study/purpose/sūtra number, after transcribing the residence epithet, with a
concentrated mind, without being disturbed, one should recite it. Then, with a
concentrated mind, carefully following the sūtra and its meaning, if one does
not transgress the Iryāvahīyam, then one should perform Ekāsana, Vandana
Pratikramṇa, and Iryā Pratikramṇa without taking Muhpaṭṭi. One should eat
Bangasā without taking Muhpaṭṭi, perform Swādhyāya, give Vācanā, etc. In all
places, according to the Purimaḍḍu, one should perform Iryā Pratikramṇa. The
residence should be soft, smooth, free of grease, not hard, not riddled with
holes from insects, and not cleaned with a stick with a knot or a tail. If one
does not clean the residence with a stick with a knot or a tail, then one should
perform Ekāsana. If one cleans the residence with a broom, then one should
perform Upasthāpana. If one does not recite the garbage collected in the
residence with a stick with a knot or a tail, then one should perform Upavās. If
one recites the garbage without performing Pratipekṣaṇā, then one should perform
five Upavās. But if there is a Ṣaṭpadīkā or any other living being, then one
should perform Upavās. If there is no living being, then one should perform
Upasthāpana. If one observes the garbage in the residence and finds a Ṣaṭpadīkā
in it, one should search for it, separate it, collect it, and take it. If such a
Prāyaścitta is not shared among all the monks, then one should perform Ekāsana.
If one takes the Ṣaṭpadīkā oneself and does not perform Prāyaścitta division,
then one should perform Pārancit. If one does not accept each other from within,
then one should perform Pārancit.  According to that, one should clean the
residence properly with a stick with a knot or a tail, carefully observe the
Kājā, separate the Ṣaṭpadīkā from the Kājā, and recite the Kājā. A monk who
remembers the sūtra, its meaning, and both of them with a concentrated mind,
with proper method, with sufficient use, and with a concentrated mind, and does
not transgress the Iryā Pratikramṇa, should perform the Prāyaścitta of Āyambil
and Upavās.  According to that, O Gautama! We will explain further. One who
transgresses that - at a time when there is one and a half ghaḍī less than the
first pahora of the day, a monk who goes to the Guru with proper method, saying
"Sazzhāy Sandisāūṁ" - with a concentrated mind, with a firm determination, with
use in the Śruta, one who does not take Apūrvajnāna daily in the first porīsī
with one ghaḍī less, with the acceptance of Jāvajjīva, should perform the
Prāyaścitta of five Upavās. If one cannot read Apūrvajnāna, then one should
remember the sūtra, its meaning, and both of them with a concentrated mind, and
not divert one's attention. If one spends time in frivolous talk about food,
women, kings, thieves, countries, etc., and indulges in the mind, then one is
not worthy of Vandana. Those who have not read before, and for whom it is
impossible to take Apūrvajnāna, should also perform the Parāvartan of Pañca
Mangala in the first porīsī with one ghaḍī less. If one does not do so, and
indulges in frivolous talk or listens to meaningless external talk, then one is
Avandanīya.  According to that, a monk who performs Swādhyāya with a
concentrated mind in the first porīsī with one ghaḍī less, and then does not
transcribe the Pātra, Mātraka, Kāmaḍha-Pātra, or special garment, vessel,
equipment, etc., with proper method, with use without distraction, should be
considered to have performed the Prāyaścitta of Upavās. Now, the words "Bhikṣu"
and "Prāyaścitta" should be connected with each word.  If one does not use the
vessel or equipment, then one should perform Upavās. But if one consumes it
without transcribing it with proper method, with use without distraction, then
one should perform five Upavās. In this way, the first porīsī is completed. If
one does not understand the meaning in the second porīsī, then one should
perform Purimaḍḍu. If there is a lecture and one does not listen to it, then one
is Avandanīya. If there is a lack of lecture, and one does not perform
Swādhyāya, such as Vācanā, etc., then one should perform five Upavās.  While
doing this, when the time comes, one should perform the Nindana, Garhaṇa,
Ālocanā, and Pratikramṇa of any Atichāra that has been committed, as mentioned
in the Devasik Atichāra. Even after doing so, if one commits any Atichāra
through one's body, speech, mind, Utsūtra, conduct, by conducting oneself in an
improper way, by consuming the unpermissible, by performing the unperformable,
by having evil thoughts or evil intentions, by consuming misconduct, by
conducting oneself in a way that is not worthy of desire, by conducting oneself
in a way that is not worthy of a Śramaṇa, for the sake of knowledge, for the
sake of vision, for the sake of character, for the sake of Śruta, for the sake
of Samāyik, for the three Gupti, for the four Kaṣāya, for the five Mahāvrat, for
the six Jīvanikāya, for the seven types of Piṇḍeṣaṇā, etc., for the eight
Pravacanamatā,   Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi
Translation Page 121

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka usake
anusAra vasati upadhi ko pratilekhana karake samAdhipUrvaka kSubdha hue binA
paraThave phira ekAgra mAnasa vAlA sAvadhAnatApUrvaka vidhi se sUtra aura artha
kA anusaraNa karate hue iriyAvahiyaM na pratikrame to ekAsana, muhapatti grahaNa
kie binA iriyA pratikramaNa vaMdana pratikramaNa kare, muhapatti rakhe binA
ba~gAsA khAe, svAdhyAya kare, vAcanA de, ityAdika sarva sthAna meM purImaDDha
usa anusAra iriyA pratikrama karake sukumAla suvAlI DasIo yukta cikanAi rahita
sakhta na ho vaisI acchI i~sIvAle kIr3o se chidravAlA na ho, akhaMDa dAMDIvAle
daMDa pucchaNaka se vasati kI pramArjanA na kare to ekAsana, jhADu se vasati kA
kacarA sApha kare to upasthApana, vasati meM daMDa pucchaNaka dekara ikaTThA kie
gae kUr3e kI paraThavanA na kare to upavAsa, pratyupekSaNA kie binA kUr3A
paraThave to pA~ca upavAsa lekina SaTpadikA yA koi jIva ho to ya koi jIva na ho
to upasthApana, vasati meM rahe kUr3e kA avalokana karane se yadi usameM
SaTpadikA ho use DhU~r3hakara alaga karake ikaTThA karake grahaNa kare vaisA
prAyazcitta sarva bhikSu ke bIca hisse karake bA~TA na ho to ekAsana denA  /
yadi khuda hI SaTpadikA grahaNa karake prAyazcitta vibhAga pUrvaka na de  /
anyonya bhItara se eka duje ko na apanAe to pAraMcita  /  usa anusAra vasati
daMDa pucchaNaka se vidhivat pramArjana karake kAjA ko acchI taraha se avalokana
karake SaTpadikA ko kAjA meM se alaga karake kAjA paraThave samyag vidhi sahita
kAphI upayoga aura ekAgra mAnasavAlA sUtra, artha aura tadubhaya kA smaraNa
karanevAlA jo bhikSu iriyA pratikrama na kare to AyaMbila aura upavAsa kA
prAyazcitta  /  usa anusAra he gautama ! Age batAeMge usakA pratikramaNa kare -
dina ke pahale pahora kI der3ha ghar3I nyUna aise samaya meM jo bhikSu guru ke
pAsa vidhi sahita sajjhAya saMdisAUM - aisA kahakara ekAgra citta se zruta meM
upayogavAlA dRDhadhRti pUrvaka eka ghar3I nyUna prathama porasI meM jAvajjIva ke
abhigraha sahita roja apUrvajJAna grahaNa na kare use pA~ca upavAsa kA
prAyazcitta  /  apUrvajJAna par3hanA na ho sake to pahale kA par3hA huA ho usa
sUtra artha tadubhaya ko yAda karate hue ekAgra mana se parAvartana na kare aura
bhojana, strI, rAjA, cora, deza Adi kI vicitra vikathA karane meM samaya pasAra
karake mana manAe to vo vaMdana karane ke yogya nahIM  /  pahale par3he hue
nahIM hai, apUrvajJAna grahaNa karanA nAmumakIna ho unheM bhI eka ghaTikA nyUna
aisI prathama porIsI meM paMcamaMgala kA phira se parAvartana karanA ho, aisA na
kare aura vikathA hI kare yA nirarthaka bAhara kI phijhUla bAteM sunA kare to
vaha avaMdanIya hai| usa anusAra eka ghaDI nyUna prathama porisI meM jo bhikSu
ekAgracitta se svAdhyAya karake usake bAda pAtrA, mAtraka, kAmar3ha-pAtra yA
vastra vizeSa, bhAjana, upakaraNa Adi ko avyAkulapana se upayoga sahita vidhi se
pratilekhanA na kare to use upavAsa kA prAyazcitta samajhanA  /  aba bhikSu
zabda aura prAyazcitta zabda yaha donoM zabda ko hara eka pada ke sAtha
judd'naa| yadi vo bhAjana upakaraNa kA upayoga na kiyA ho to upavAsa lekina
avyAkula upayoga vidhi se pratilekhanA kie binA upabhoga kare to pA~ca upavAsa
/  isa krama se prathama porisI pUrNa kii| dUsarI porisI meM arthagrahaNa na
kare to purImaDU yadi vyAkhyAna ho aura use zravaNa na kare to avaMdanIya,
vyAkhyAna kI kamI meM vAcanAdika svAdhyAya na kare to pA~ca upavAsa  /  aisA
karate hue taba kAlavelA prApta ho usa samaya devasika aticAra meM batAe jo koI
aticAra sevana hue ho usakA nindana, garhaNa, Alocana, pratikramaNa karane ke
bAvajUda bhI, jo kucha kAyika, vAcika, mAnasika, utsUtra, AcaraNa karane se,
unmArga kA AcaraNa karane se, akalpya kA sevana karane se, akaraNIya kA
samAcaraNa karane se, durdhyAna yA duSTa cintavana karane se anAcAra kA sevana
karane se, na icchane ke lAyaka AcaraNa karane se, azramaNa prAyogya vyavahAra
AcaraNa karane se, jJAna ke lie, darzana ke lie, cAritra ke lie, zruta ke lie,
sAmAyika ke lie, tIna gupti, cAra kaSAya, pA~ca mahAvrata, cha jIvanikAya, sAta
taraha kI piMr3eSaNA Adi A~Tha pravacanamAtA, muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 121

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtrāṅka**  If
the refutation and refutation of the nine types of Brahmacharya's secrets, the
ten types of Śramaṇa Dharma, etc., and other many elaborate things mentioned in
the Āgama has happened, and due to that, the Āgama's skillful such Gītartha Guru
has told the atonement, then one should adopt it with full strength, vigor,
effort, and courage without hiding it, with a humble mind devoid of deceit, and
with twelve types of tapas karma, both external and internal, like fasting,
etc., again determining and confirming it with the Guru, and then openly and
humbly saying so, and then accepting the atonement tapas given by the Guru,
either all at once or in parts, and not doing it properly, then that monk
becomes Avandaniya.  **O Bhagavant!** Why should one perform tapas-prāyaścitta
by taking breaks in between, i.e., by performing tapas in parts? **O Gautama!**
A monk who is not able to perform the six months, four months, or Māsa-kṣamaṇa
all at once, should also perform the atonement by fasting for six, eight, four,
five, or fifteen days. On the other hand, if any other atonement is included
within it, then one should perform tapas-prāyaścitta according to one's ability,
taking breaks in between. While doing so, if there is a short time left for the
Purimaḍū at midday, and if, while performing Pratikramṇa, Vandana, Svādhyāya,
Paribhramaṇa, walking, going, standing, sitting, getting up, there is a touch of
the Teūkāya, and the monk does not pull away his limbs, does not stop the
collision, then he should not perform the fast, nor should he enter the
atonement properly, nor should he perform tapas karma according to his ability,
then he should be told to perform four times the atonement the next day. If
someone pretends to be performing Vandana or Pratikramṇa, and a snake or cat
passes by, then he should not flinch, or he should go to another place. He
should be happy in Ugratapas compared to that. If he does not do this, then he
should be expelled from the Gaccha.  **A monk who is the cause, creator, or
bearer of that great calamity, misfortune, and inauspiciousness, should be
considered fit to be expelled from the Gaccha.** If someone wanders here and
there in the first or second Porisī, travels, wanders at an inappropriate time,
looks for loopholes, and does not perform the four Āhāra-Cōvihāra-Pacchakkhāṇa,
then he should be given six days of penance. If he performs the Pratilekhanā of
the Sthaṇḍila place during the day and performs the Jayanā in the evening, then
he should be given Ekāsana for the Glana, and six days for others. If the
Sthaṇḍila place is not checked during the day for living beings, and the
Bhajana, Pūjanā-Pramārjana is not done, the place is not seen, and the Bhajana
for performing Mātrī is not seen with Jayanā, and at night, he performs Thalla
or Mātrī, then he should be given Ekāsana for the Glana, and twelve-five days of
fasting for others, or the Glana should be given Micchāmi Dukkadam.
**Similarly, in the first Porisī, leaving the study of the Sūtra, and in the
second Porisī, leaving the study of the Artha, if someone talks about women,
devotees, countries, kings, thieves, or the five things of householders, or
talks about other irrelevant things, or talks about things that arouse Ārta-
Raudradhyāna, or makes such a proposal or causes it, then he should be
Avandaniya for one year.** If, due to some big reason, there is a reduction of
even a moment or half a moment in Svādhyāya in the first or second Porisī, then
the Glana should be given Micchāmi Dukkadam. If, due to any reason, someone
repeatedly performs Pratikramṇa while sitting, even though the Gītartha Guru has
repeatedly forbidden it, then he should be Avandaniya for one month. He should
observe Maunavrata for four months. If someone takes food and water before the
completion of the first Porisī, and after the completion of the third Porisī,
then he should be given Purimaḍū. If he does not use it in front of the Guru,
then he should be given Cāuttham. If he takes anything without using it, then he
should be given Cāuttham. If he uses it improperly, then he should be given
fasting. For food, for water, for acceptance, for the Guru's work, for going out
of the land, he should not say the word "Āvassiāe" by colliding his forehead
with the Guru's feet, and he should enter the door of his own residence, and he
should not say "Nisih", then he should be given Purimaḍḍ. If he goes out of the
residence for reasons other than the seven reasons for going out, then he should
be expelled from the Gaccha.  **Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama
Sūtra - Hindi Translation** Page 122

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka nau
taraha kI brahmacarya kI gupti, daza taraha kA zramaNa dharma Adi aura dUsare
kAphI AlApaka Adi meM batAe gae kA khaMDana virAdhana huA ho aura usa nimitta se
Agama ke kuzala aise gItArtha guru ke batAe hue prAyazcitta yathAzakti apanA
bala vIrya puruSArtha parAkrama chipAe binA azaTharUpa se dInatA rahita mAnasa
se anazana Adi bAhya aura abhyaMtara bAraha taraha ke tapakarma ko guru ke pAsa
phira se avadhAraNa nizcit karake kAphI prakaTarUpa se tahatti aisA kahakara
abhinande guru ke die hue prAyazcitta tapa kA ekasAtha yA Tukar3e-Tukar3e hisse
karake samyag taraha se na do to vo bhikSu avaMdanIya banate haiN| he bhagavaMta
! kisa vajaha se khaMDa khaMDa tapa yAni bIca meM pAraNA karake visAmA lene ke
lie tapa prAyazcitta sevana kare ? he gautama ! jo bhikSu cha mahine, cAra
mahine, mAsakSamaNa eka sAtha karane ke lie samartha na ho vo chaThTha, aThuma,
cAra, pA~ca, paMdraha dina aise upavAsa karake bhI vo prAyazcitta cUkA de  /
dUsarA ora bhI koI prAyazcitta usake bhItara samA jAe, isa vajaha se khaMDA-
khaMDI bIca meM visAmA lene ke lie zakti anusAra tapa-prAyazcitta kA sevana kre|
aisA karate-karate dina ke madhyAhna ke samaya honevAle purImaDU ke vakta meM
alpasamaya bAkI rahA  /  usa avasara para yadi koI pratikramaNa karate hue,
vaMdana karate hue, svAdhyAya karate hue, paribhramaNa karate, calate, jAte,
khar3e rahate, baiThate, uThate, teUkAya kA sparza hotA ho aura bhikSu usake
aMga na khIMce, saMghaTTA na roke, to upavAsa, dUsaroM ko bhI yathAyogya
prAyazcitta meM praveza karavAe yA apanI zakti anusAra tapakarma kA sevana na
kare to use dUsare dina cAra gunA prAyazcitta batAe, jo vAMdate ho yA
pratikramaNa karate ho usakI Ar3a lekara sA~pa yA billI jAe to usakA loca karanA
/  yA dUsare sthAna para cale jAe  /  usakI tulanA meM ugratapa meM ramaNatA
karanA  /  yaha batAe hue vidhAna na kare to gaccha ke bAhara niikaalnaa| jo
bhikSa usa mahA upasarga ko siddha karanevAlA, paidA karanevAlA, danimitta aura
amaMgala kA dhAraka yA vAhaka ho, use gaccha bAhara karane ke ucita samajhanA  /
jo pahalI yA dasarI porisI meM idhara-udhara bhaTakatA ho, gamana karatA ho,
anucita samaya meM ghUmanevAlA, chidra dekhanevAlA  /  yadi vo cAra AhAra ko-
covihAra ke paccakkhANa na kare to chaThU, dina meM sthaMDila sthAna kI
pratilekhanA karake rAta meM jayaNA pUrvaka mAta yA sthaMDila vosirAve to glAne
ekAsana, dUsare ko to chaThTha kA hI prAyazcitta, yadi sthaMDila sthAna dina meM
jIvajantu rahita jA~ca na kI ho, aura bhAjana, pUMjanA-pramArjana na kiyA ho,
sthAna na dekhA ho, mAtR karane kA bhAjana bhI jayaNA se na dekhA ho aura rAta
ko, ThallA yA mAta paraThave to glAna ko ekAsana, bAkI ko duvAlasa-pA~ca upavAsa
yA glAna ko micchAmi dukkaDam usa prakAra prathama porisI meMsUtra kA, dUsarI
porisI meM artha kA adhyayana chor3akara jo strI kathA, bhaktakathA, dezakathA,
rAjakathA, corakathA yA gRhastha kI paMcAta kI kathA kare yA dUsarI asaMbaddha
kathA kare, Arta raudradhyAna kI udIraNA karavAnevAlI kathA kare, vaisI
prastAvanA udIraNA kare yA karavAe vo eka sAla taka avaMdanIya kisI vaise bar3I
vajaha ke vaza se prathama yA dUsarI porisI meM eka pala yA AdhA pala kama
svAdhyAya huA ho to glAna ko micchAmi dukkaDam  /  dUsaroM ko nivvigai, ati
niSThuratA se yA glAna se yadi kisI bhI taraha se koI bhI kAraNa utpanna hone se
bAra-bAra gItArtha guru ne manA karane ke bAvajUda Akasmika kisI dina baiThe-
baiThe pratikramaNa kiyA ho to eka mAsa avaMdanIya  /  cAra mAsa taka use
maunavrata rakhanA cAhie  /  yadi koI prathama porisI pUrNa hone se pahale aura
tIsarI porisI bIta jAne ke bAda bhojana pAnI grahaNa kare aura upabhoga kare to
use purImaDU, guru ke sanmukha jAkara istamAla na kare to caUtthaM, upayoga kie
binA kucha bhI grahaNa kare to caUtthaM, avidhi se upayoga kare to upavAsa,
AhAra ke lie, pAnI ke lie, svakArya ke lie, guru ke kArya ke lie, bAhara kI
bhUmi se nIkalanevAle guru ke caraNa meM mastaka kA saMghaTTa karake 'AvassiAe''
pada na kahe, apane upAzraya kI vasati ke dvAra meM praveza kare, nisIha na kahe
to purimaDDa, bAhara jAne kI sAta vajaha ke alAvA vasati meM se bAhara nIkale to
use gaccha se bAhara kara do| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 122

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Cheda Sutra-5, 'Mahanisitha'  If one goes out of the path of Raga
(attachment), and doubts arise regarding Chedopasthapana, Agitartha or Gitartha,
then one should accept Ahara (food), Pani (water), Aushadha (medicine), Vastra
(clothes), Danda (staff) etc. in an improper manner, and should not confess
before the Guru. This is the breach of the third vow. For one month, one should
be Avandaniya (not to be greeted) and observe Maunavrata (vow of silence).  If
one enters a village, town, capital, three roads, four roads, crossroads or
assembly hall for the purpose of Katha (discourse) or Vikatha (idle talk)
regarding Ahara, Pani, Aushadha or one's own or Guru's work, then it is
Upasthapana. If one goes there wearing Pag Rakshaka-Upanaha (foot-protectors),
then it is Upasthapana. If one accepts Upanaha, then it is Upavasa (fast). If
such an occasion arises and one uses Upanaha, then it is Upavasa.  If one goes
somewhere, stands there, and someone questions him, then he should reply with
politeness and sweetness, only as much as necessary for the work, not arrogant,
not contemptuous, blameless, pleasing to the minds of all people, beneficial to
this world and the next. If he does not reply in this manner, then it is
Avandaniya. If he speaks words that are free of sixteen defects but with
caution, then it is Upasthapana. If he speaks more, then it is Upasthapana. If
he speaks words with Kashaya (passions), then it is Avandaniya.  If he eats food
or stays at night with people who are agitated by Kashaya, then for one month he
should observe Maunavrata and Avandaniya Upasthana. If he makes others agitated
by Kashaya by giving them the occasion of Kashaya, or increases the Kashaya of
one with little Kashaya, or reveals the secret matters of someone, then in all
these cases he should be expelled from the Gaccha (monastic order).  If he
speaks harsh words, then five Upavasa. If he speaks harsh sounds, then five
Upavasa. If he speaks rough, harsh, rigid, cruel, unpleasant words, then it is
Upasthapana. If he abuses, then Upavasa. If he causes distress, quarrel,
turmoil, fight, then he should be expelled from the Sangha.  If he speaks
abusive words with 'Makara', 'Chakara', 'Jakara' etc., then Upavasa. If he does
it again, then Avandaniya. If he hits, then expulsion from the Sangha. If he
kills, then expulsion from the Sangha. If he digs, breaks, crawls, fights,
kindles fire, gets others to cook, then in each case he should be expelled from
the Sangha.  Even if he speaks such words in front of the Guru, or in any way
belittles the Gacchanayaka, or violates the conduct of the Gaccha or Sangha, or
the religious duties of the assembly like Vandana (salutation), Pratikramana
(confession) etc., or gives Diksha (initiation) improperly, or gives higher
Diksha, or expounds Sutra, Artha or both improperly, or performs Sarana-Varana-
Choyani-Parichchhoyani improperly or does not perform them properly, or does not
perform Saranadika properly for one going towards the wrong path, or says
anything in the presence of the whole world that glorifies his own side,
beneficial words, or deeds, then in each case he should be gradually expelled
from the Kula (family), Gana (group) and Sangha.  Even after being expelled, if
he becomes extremely devoted to the practice of severe austerities, then, O
Gautama! he is not worth seeing, therefore one should not stay even for a
moment, half a moment, Ghati or half Ghati near him who has been expelled from
the Kula, Gana and Sangha.  Without looking with the eyes, i.e. without visually
examining the place where he is to be placed, if he touches Thalla, Matri,
Balakha, Nasika-Mela, Shleshma, or the body's secretions, and does not clean the
joint of the toilet seat while sitting, then he should be given the gradual Nivi
and Ayambil Prayaschitta (penances).  If he improperly places, keeps, takes,
accepts, or gives any utensil, measure, or any other object like Danda etc. in
the unaffected area, then four Ayambil, and in the affected area, Upasthapana.
If he uses any equipment necessary for the vows such as upper garment,
Rajoharan, Padaponchanika, inner cotton cloth, Cholpatta, Varshakalpa blanket,
or Muhapatti, without proper recording, or with improper recording, or in less
or more quantity than the scriptural evidence, then in each case Kshapana-
Upavasa Prayaschitta.  If he improperly uses the upper garment, Rajoharan,
Danda, then Upavasa. If he suddenly places the Rajoharan (like an axe) on a
pillar, then Upasthapana. If he gets his body parts massaged or pressed, then
Upavasa. If he handles the Rajoharan with disrespect, then Chautham. If a
Pramatta (careless) Bhikshu's Muhapatti or any other equipment of the vow is
suddenly lost or destroyed, then from Upavasa to Upasthapana, as appropriate, he
should search for it diligently, say 'Micchami Dukkadam', and if not found, he
should confess, and if found, he should accept it again.  Translated by Muni
Deepratan Sagar (Mahanisitha), Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation, Page 123.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka rAga se
bAhara jAe to chedopasthApana, agItArtha yA gItArtha ko zaka paidA ho vaise
AhAra, pAnI, auSadha, vastra, dAMr3a Adi avidhi se grahaNa kare aura guru ke
pAsa AlocanA na kare to tIsare vrata kA cheda, eka mAsa taka avaMdanIya aura
usake sAtha maunavrata rakhanA  /  AhAra pAnI auSadha yA apane yA guru ke kArya
ke lie gA~va meM, nagara meM, rAjadhAnI meM, tIna mArga, cAra mArga, caurAhA yA
sabhAgRha meM praveza karake vahA~ kathA yA vikathA karane lage to upasthApana,
pA~va meM paga rakSaka-upAnaha pahanakara vahA~ jAe to upasthApana  /  upAnaha
grahaNa kare to upavAsa, vaisA avasara khar3A ho aura upAnaha ko istamAla kare
to upavAsa  /  kahIM gayA, khar3A rahA aura kisI ne savAla kiyA to use kuzalatA
aura madhuratA se kArya kI jarurata jitanA alpa, agarvita, atuccha, nirdoSa
samagra logoM ke mana ko Ananda denevAle, loka aura paraloka ke hitakAra
pratyuttara na de to avaMdanIya, yadi abhigraha grahaNa na kiyA ho vaisA
bhikSuka solaha doSa rahita lekina sAvadhayukta vacana bole to upasthApana,
jyAdA bole to upasthApana, kaSAyayukta vacana bole to avaMdanIya  /  kaSAya se
udIrata logoM ke sAtha bhojana kare yA rAta ko sAtha meM rahe to eka mAsa taka
maunavrata, avaMdanIya upasthAnarUpa, dUsare kisI ko kaSAya kA nimitta dekara
kaSAya kI udIraNA karavAe, alpa kaSAyavAle ko kaSAya kI vRddhi karavAke kisI kI
marma-gupta bAteM khulI kara de  /  isa saba meM gaccha ke bAhara niikaalnaa|
kaThora vacana bole to pA~ca upavAsa, kaThora zabda bole to pA~ca upavAsa,
khara, kaThora, kar3e, niSThura, aniSTa vacana bole to upasthApana, gAliyA~ de
to upavAsa, kleza karanevAle kalaha-kaMkAsa, tophAna lar3AI kare to use gaccha
ke bAhara nIkAlanA  /  makAra, cakAra, jakarAdivAlI gAliyA~ apazabda bole to
upavAsa, dUsarI bAra bole to avaMdanIya, mAre to saMgha ke bAhara nIkAlanA,
vadha kare to saMgha ke bAhara nIkAlanA, khudatA ho, tor3atA ho, reMgatA,
lar3atA, agni jalAtA, dUsaroM se jalAe pakAe, pakavAe, to haraeka meM saMgha se
bAhara karanA  /  guru ko bhI sAmane cAhe vaise zabda sunAe, gacchanAyaka kI
kisI taraha se halakI laghutA kare, gaccha ke AcAra, saMgha ke AcAra, vaMdana
pratikramaNa Adi maMDalI ke dharma kA ullaMghana kare, avidhi se dIkSA de, bar3I
dIkSA de, anucita ko sUtra, artha yA tadubhaya kI prarUpaNA kare, avidhi se
sAraNA-vAraNA-coyaNA-par3icoyaNA kare yA vidhi se sAraNA-vAraNA-
coyaNApar3icoyaNA na kare, unmArga kI ora jAnevAle ko yathAvidhi se sAraNAdika
na kare yAvat samagra loka ke sAnnidhya meM apane pakSa ko guNa karanevAlA,
hita, vacana, karmapUrvaka na kahe to hara eka meM kramika kula, gaNa aura
saMgha ke bAhara nIkAlanA  /  bAhara karane ke bAda bhI vo kAphI ghora vIra tapa
kA anuSThAna karane meM kAphI anurAgavAlA ho jAe to bhI he gautama ! vo na
dekhane ke lAyaka hai, isalie kula gaNa aura saMgha ke bAhara kie gae usake pAsa
pala, AdhA pala, ghaTI yA ardha ghaTIkA jitane vakta ke lie bhI na rahanA  /
A~kha se najara kie binA yAni jisa sthAna para paraThavanA ho usa sthAna kI
dRSTi pratilekhanA kie binA ThallA, mAtR, balakhA, nAsika mela, zleSma, zarIra
kA mela paraThave, baiThate saMDAsaga-jor3a sahita pramArjanA na kare, to use
kramika nIvI aura AyaMbila prAyazcitta  /  pAtrA, mAtraka yA kisI bhI upakaraNa
daMDa Adi jo koI cIja sthApana karate, rakhate, lete, grahaNa karate, dete
avidhi se sthApana kare, rakhe- le, grahaNa kare yA de, yaha Adi abhAvita kSetra
meM kare to cAra AyaMbila aura bhAvita kSetra meM upasthApana, daMDa,
rajoharaNa, pAdapoMchanaka bhItara pahanane kI sUtI kapar3A, colapaTTA, varSA
kalpa ka~bala yAvat muhapatti yA dUsare kisI bhI saMyama meM jarurI aise hara
eka upakaraNa pratilekhana kie binA, duSpratilekhana kie hoM, zAstra meM batAe
pramANa se kama yA jyAdA istamAla kare to hara eka sthAna meM kSapaNa-upavAsa kA
prAyazcitta  /  Upara ke hisse meM pahanane kA kapar3A, rajoharaNa, daMDaka
avidhi se istamAla kare to upavAsa, acAnaka rajoharaNa (kulhAr3I kI taraha)
khaMbhe para sthApana kare to upasthApana, zarIra ke aMga-upAMga caMpi karavAe
yA dabavAe to upavAsa, rajoharaNa ko anAdara se pakar3anA caUtthaM, pramatta
bhikSu kI lAparavAhI se acAnaka muhapatti Adi koI bhI saMyama ke upakaraNa guma
ho jAe, naSTa ho to usake upavAsa se lekara upasthApana, yathAyogya gaveSaNA
karake DhU~r3he, micchAmi dukkaDam de, na mile to vosirAve, mile to phira se
grahaNa kare  /  muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 123

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' The study/purpose/Sutra number
Bhikshu has been prohibited from the collision of Apkay and Agni Kay in
solitude, etc. If anyone is suddenly touched by a drop of rain falling from the
light or the sky, with or without use, then it is called Ayambil for him. If the
limb of a woman's body collides with the hand, foot, stick, the front part of
the straw held in the hand or the pillar, then Paranchit Pratikraman. The rest
will be explained in detail from their place. Sutra-1383-1384 _ While doing
this, the time for begging arrived. O Gautam! On this occasion, the Bhikshu, who
is humble in mind, as described in the Pindeshana Shastra, should avoid seeds
and plant bodies, water, mud, earth bodies, should avoid the uneven disturbances
caused by the king and the householder, should abandon the place of doubt,
should use the five committees, three guptis, should not avoid the alms of the
two faults of the name Prabhutik in the Gochar Charya, then he should do the
Chothbhakt Pratikraman. If he is not fasting, then if he enters the
establishment clan, then fasting, if he takes an unfavorable thing in haste,
then immediately after that, if he does not eat in a peaceful place, then
fasting, if he takes an unimaginable thing in alms, then fasting as appropriate,
etc., if he prohibits a conceivable thing, then Upasthapan, if the Bhikshu who
has gone out to take Gochari, makes a proposal of words-stories, inspires,
starts speaking, listens, then the sixth Pratikraman, after returning from
Gochari, the food, water, medicine that he has given, the way he has taken,
according to that and in that order, if he does not eat, then Purimdu, Iriyao
Pratikraman without eating rice-water, then Purimdu, without cleaning the feet
with dust, Iriya Pratikraman, then Purimdu, without cleaning the part of the
ground under the feet of the feet who want to do Iriyao Padikkan, then Nivi,
without keeping the mouth-offering on the ear and lip, Iriya Pratikraman, then
Micchami Dukkadam and Purimdu. Without reflecting the verse of Dhamo Mangalam
while eating Sajjhay, without bowing to the Chaitya and the Sadhu, if you
complete the Pacchakkhan, then Purimdu, without completing the Pacchakkhan, if
you consume food, water or medicine, then Chothbhakt, if you do not perform
Pacchakkhan in front of the Guru, then do not use, do not eat Prabhutik, do not
eat Sajjhay, in each of these establishments, if the Guru also does not become
the user towards the disciple, then they should do the Paranchit Pratikraman, if
the Sadharmik, Sadhu consumes some food, etc. without giving food, etc. from
Gochari without devotion, then the sixth, if the food falls down while eating,
serving, then the sixth, if you taste the bitter, pungent, astringent, sour,
sweet, salty taste, if you eat food with that taste by tasting it repeatedly,
then Chothbhakt, if you get attachment in that delicious taste, then Khaman or
Athum, if you use Kaussagg Ki Vigai, then five Ayambil, if you use more than two
Vigai, then five Nirvikrutik, if you use Nishkaran Vigai, then Athum, if you use
Ashan, Pan, Pathya, Anupan for Glana without giving it, then Paranchit. If you
eat without serving Glana, then Upasthapan, if you abandon all your duties and
take the responsibility of Glana's work, then you are Avandaniya, if you do not
do the work that is appropriate for Glana, then Athum, if Glana is called and
you do not follow the order immediately after speaking one word, then Paranchit,
but if that Glana Sadhu is healthy minded, then if he is confused due to
Sanepata, etc., then he should not do what he has been told to that Glana. Do
what is beneficial for him, if he does not do the work of Glana, then expel him
from the Sangha. _ Adhakarma, Audeshik, Purtikarma, Mishrajat, Sthapana,
Prabhutika, Pradushkaran, Krit, Pramityak, Abhyahrit, Ubhinna, Malopharit,
Achedya, Anisrisht, Adhyavpurk, Dhatri, Dutthi, Nimitt, Aajeevaka, Vanipka,
Chikitsa, Krodh, Man, Maya, Lobh, Purvapashchat Sansthav, Vidya, Mantra, Churn,
Yog, Mul Karmashakti, Mrkshit, Nikshipt, Pihit, Sanhrit, Dayak, Udbhinna,
Aparinat, Lipt, Chardit, if you consume food, water, medicine contaminated with
any of these forty-two food defects, then do Pratikraman of fasting, Ayambil as
appropriate. Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation
Page 124

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka bhikSu ko
apakAya aura agnikAya ke saMghaTTaNa Adi ekAnta meM niSedha kiyA hai  /  jisa
kisI ko jyoti yA AkAza meM se giranevAlI bArisa kI bUMda se upayoga sahita yA
rahita acAnaka sparza ho jAe to usake lie AyaMbila kahA hai  /  strI ke aMga ke
avayava ko sahaja bhI hAtha se, pA~va se, daMr3a se, hAtha meM pakar3e tinake ke
agra hisse yA khaMbhe se saMghaTTA kare to pAraMcita prAyazcitta  /  bAkI phira
apane sthAna se vistAra se batAe jaaeNge| sUtra-1383-1384 _ aise karate hue
bhikSA kA samaya A pahu~cA  /  he gautama ! isa avasara para piMr3esaNA-zAstra
meM batAe vidhi se dInatA rahita manavAlA bhikSu bIja aura vanaspatikAya, pAnI,
kIcar3a, pRthvIkAya ko varjate, rAjA aura gRhastha kI ora se honevAle viSama
upadrava-kadAgrahI ko chor3anevAlA, zaMkAsthAna kA tyAga karanevAlA, pA~ca
samiti, tIna gupti meM upayogavAlA, gocaracaryA meM prAbhRtika nAma ke doSavAlI
bhikSA kA varjana na kare to usako cothabhakta prAyazcitta  /  yadi vo upavAsI
na ho to sthApanA kula meM praveza kare to upavAsa, jaldabAjhI meM pratikUla
cIja grahaNa karane ke bAda turanta hI nirupadrava sthAna meM na paraThave to
upavAsa, akalpya cIja bhikSA meM grahaNa karane ke bAda yathA-yogya upavAsa Adi,
kalpya cIja kA pratibaMdha kare to upasthApana, gocarI lene ke lie nIkalA bhikSu
bAte-vikathA kI prastAvanA kare, udIraNA kare, kahane lage, sune to chaThu
prAyazcitta, gocarI karake vApasa Ane ke bAda lAe gae AhAra, pAnI, auSadha
jisane die hoM, jisa taraha grahaNa kiyA ho, usake anusAra aura usa krama se na
Alove to purimaDU, iriya0 pratikrame binA cAvala-pAnI na Alove, to purimaDDa,
rajayukta pA~va kA pramArjana kie binA iriyA pratikrame to purimaDU, iriyA0
paDikkamane kI IcchAvAle pA~va ke nIce kI bhUmi ke hisse kI tIna bAra pramArjana
na kare to nIvI, kAna taka aura hoTha para muhapatti rakhe binA iriyA pratikrame
to micchAmi dukkaDam aura purimdddd| sajjhAya paraThavate - gocarI Alovate
dhammo maMgalam kI gAthA kA parAvartana kie binA caitya aura sAdhu ko vande binA
paccakkhANa pUre kare to purimaDDa, paccakkhANa pUre kie binA bhojana, pAnI yA
auSadha kA paribhoga kare to cothabhakta, guru ke sanmukha paccakkhANa na pAre
to, upayoga na kare, prAbhRtika na Alove, sajjhAya na paraThave, isa hara eka
prasthApana meM, guru bhI ziSya kI aura upayogavAle na bane to unako pAraMcita
prAyazcitta, sAdharmika, sAdhu ko gocarI meM se AhArAdika die binA bhakti kie
binA kucha AhArAdika paribhoga kare to chaThTha, bhojana karate, paroMsate yadi
nIce gira jAe to chaThTha, kaTu, tIkhe, kaSAyela, khaTTe, madhura, khAre rasa kA
AsvAda kare, bAra-bAra AsvAda karake vaise svAdavAle bhojana kare to cotha
bhakta, vaise svAdiSTa rasa meM rAga pAe to khamaNa yA aThuma, kAUssagga kie
vigai kA istamAla kare to pA~ca AyaMbila, do vigai se jyAdA vigai kA istamAla
kare to pA~ca nirvikRtika, niSkAraNa vigai kA istamAla kare to aThuma, glAna ke
lie azana, pAna, pathya, anupAna hI Ae ho aura binA diyA gayA istamAla kare to
pAraMcita  /  glAna kI sevA-mAvajata kie binA bhojana kare to upasthApana,
apane-apane sAre kartavya kA tyAga karake glAna ke kArya kA Alambana lekara
apane kartavya meM pramAda kA sevana kare to vo avaMdanIya, glAna ke ucita jo
karane lAyaka kArya na kara de to aThUma, glAna, bulAe aura eka zabda bolane ke
sAtha turanta jAkara jo AjJA de usakA amala na kare to pAraMcita, lekina yadi vo
glAna sAdhu svastha cittavAlA ho to  /  yadi sanepAta Adi kAraNa se bhramita
mAnasavAle ho to usa glAna se kahA ho vaisA na karanA ho  /  usake ucita
hitakArI jo hotA ho vo hI karanA, glAna ke kArya na kare use saMgha ke bAhara
nIkAlanA  /  _ AdhAkarma, audezika, pUrtikarma, mizrajAta, sthApanA, prAbhRtikA,
prAduSkaraNa, krIta, prAmityaka, abhyAhRta, ubhinna, mAlopahRta, Achedya,
anisRSTa, adhyavapuraka, dhAtrI, dutti, nimitta, AjIvaka, vanIpaka, cikitsA,
krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, pUrvapazcAt saMstava, vidyA, maMtra, cUrNa, yoga,
mUla karmazakti, mrakSita, nikSipta, pihita, saMhRta, dAyaka, udbhinna,
apariNata, lipta, chardita, ina biyAlIza AhAra ke doSa meM se kisI bhI doSa se
duSita AhArapAnI auSadha kA paribhoga kare to yathAyogya kramika upavAsa,
AyaMbila kA prAyazcitta denaa| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 124

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  If one eats in the absence of
the six causes, it is Athuṁ. If one consumes food with Dhūmradoṣa and Angāra
doṣa, it is Upasthāpana. If one eats different foods or combinations of flavors
to nourish the tongue's taste, it is Āyambil and Bal. Despite having Vīrya,
Puruṣakāra, and Parākrama, if one does not drink water after bathing on Aṣṭamī,
Caturdaśī, Jñānapāñcamī, or Paryuṣaṇā, it is Cauṭṭh. If one drinks water from a
washed vessel, it is Duvālas. If one places a vessel, mātraka, tarpaṇī, or any
other utensil without drying it after removing the wetness, and keeps it without
cleaning, it is Cothabhakta. If one does not loosen the knot of the Patrabāṇḍh
or does not perform its Paḍilehaṇā, it is Cothabhakta. If one washes hands in
the food assembly, then walks with the foot touching the water, cleans the place
of eating, and does not take the Kāja with a Daṇḍapucchaṇaka, it is Nīvī. If one
cleans the place of the food assembly, gathers the Kāja, and does not perform
Iriya, it is Nīvī.  Similarly, if one does not reject the remaining day's
Tivīhāra or Covīhāra by saying Iriya, it is Āyambil. If one does not perform
Pacchakkhāṇa in front of the Guru, it is Purimaḍū. If one performs Pacchakkhāṇa
improperly, it is Āyambil. If one does not pay homage to the Caitya and the
Sadhu after performing Pacchakkhāṇa, it is Purimaḍū. If one pays homage to a
Kuśīla, it is Avandanīya. After that, if one goes out to fetch water on cold
ground for the sake of restraint, and returns with great effort, then at that
time, a little less than the third Porisī is completed. Even in that, if one
performs Iriya, criticizes the proper way of going and coming, and arranges the
vessels and utensils like Patra, Mātraka, etc., then the third Porisī is
completed properly. In this way, after the third Porisī has passed, O Gautama!
The monk who, in front of the Guru, asks for permission to drink water by saying
"Sandisāuṁ" according to the rules of Upadhi and Sthaṇḍil, and does not perform
Svādhyāya until the time of Kāla, should be considered to have committed the
sixth Prāyaścitta.  When the time of Kāla arrives, one should perform
Pratiupekshaṇā of the Guru's Upadhi and Sthaṇḍil, Vandana, Pratikramṇa,
Sajjhāya, Maṇḍalī, etc., and after that, perform Kāusagg for purification from
the daily transgressions with a calm mind, free from distractions. In each of
these, one should know the gradual Upasthāpana, Purimaḍḍa, Ekāsana, and
Upasthāpana Prāyaścitta. According to this, after performing Kāusagg, one should
write down the Muhpattī, perform Kr̥tikarma Vandana to the Guru Mahārāja
according to the rules, and from sunrise onwards, in any place, whether sitting,
going, walking, roaming, hurrying, or coming into contact with earth, water,
fire, air, plants, greenery, grass, seeds, flowers, buds, sprouts, corals,
vessels, two, three, four, or five-sensed beings, if one has committed any kind
of collision, suffering, Kilamaṇā, or disturbance, and if one has violated the
three Gupti, four Kaṣāya, five Mahāvrat, six Jīvanīkāya, seven types of water
and food, eight Pravacanamaṭā, nine Brahmacarya Gupti, ten types of
Śramaṇadharma, Jñāna, Darśana, and Cāritra, one should perform Nīndā, Garhā,
Ālocanā, and Prāyaścitta for that particular transgression. With a focused mind,
one should contemplate the meaning of the Sūtra, Artha, and both of them, and if
one does not perform Pratikramṇa, it is Upasthāpana. While doing this, the sun
sets. If one performs Pratikramṇa without paying homage to the Caitya, it is
Cothabhakta.  After performing Pratikramṇa, if one does not perform Svādhyāya in
the first Pahora of the night, according to the rules, it is Duvālas. If one
asks for permission to perform Santhāra before the first Porisī is completed,
according to the rules of Santhāra, it is Chaṭhū. If one performs Santhāra
without Sandisā and goes to sleep, it is Cauṭṭh. If one performs Santhāra
without Pratiupekshaṇā, it is Duvālas. If one performs Santhāra improperly, it
is Cauṭṭh. If one performs Santhāra without Uttarapatṭā, it is Cauṭṭh. If one
performs Santhāra on two beds, it is Cauṭṭh. If one performs Santhāra on a bed
with space in the middle, a bed with a rope, or a bed that is warm below, it is
100 Āyambil. If one does not forgive all the beings of the entire Śramaṇasaṁgha,
all the Sadharmika, and all the living beings of the entire Jīvarāśī, with all
kinds of feelings, with Trividha-Trividha, and does not offer them forgiveness,
and does not pay homage to the Caitya, and does not perform Pacchakkhāṇa of the
Guru's feet, the Upadhi, the body, and the food, and does not put cotton wool in
the ear, and sits in Santhāra, then in each case, it is Upasthāpana. After
sitting in Santhāra, if one does not protect the Dharma-Śarīra from snakes,
lions, wicked beings, light-bodied Vāṇamantra, Piśāca, etc., in the ten
directions, with this excellent Mantra-Akṣara obtained from the Guru Paramparā,
it is Upasthāpana. If one protects the ten directions and goes to sleep without
reciting the twelve Bhavanā, it is 25 Āyambil. One single sleep...  Muni
Dīparatnasāgara Kr̥t (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi Translation Page 125

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka cha
kAraNa ke gairamojudagI meM bhojana kare to aThuma, dhumradoSa aura aMgAra
doSayukta, AhAra kA bhogavaTA kare to upasthApana, alaga-alaga AhAra yA
svAdavAle saMyoga karake jihvA ke svAda ke poSaNa ke lie bhojana kare to
AyaMbila aura bala, vIrya, puruSakAra, parAkrama hone ke bAvajUda aSTamI,
caturdazI, jJAnapaMcamI, paryuSaNA dhokara pAnI na pIe to caUttha, pAtrA dhoe
hue pAnI paraThave to duvAlasa, pAtrA, mAtraka, tarapaNI yA kisI bhI taraha ke
bhAjana upakaraNa ko gIlApana dUra karake sUkhAkara cikanAivAle yA cikanAi
rahita binA sApha kie sthApita karake rakhe to cothabhakta, pAtrabA~dha kI
gaThAna na chor3e, usakI paDilehaNA na kare to cotha bhakta  /  bhojana maMDalI
meM hAtha dhoe, usake pAnI meM pA~va kA saMghaTA karake cale, bhojana karane kI
jagaha sApha karake daMDapucchaNaka se kAjA na le nIvI, bhojana mAMDalI ke
sthAna meM jagaha sApha karake kAjA ikaTThA karake iriyA na pratikrame to nIvI
/  usa prakAra iriyAvahI kaha kara bAkI rahe dina kA yAni tivihAra yA covihAra
kA pratyAkhyAna na kare to AyaMbila guru ke samakSa vo paccakkhANa na kare to
purimaDU, avidhi se paccakkhANa kare to AyaMbila, paccakkhANa karane ke bAda
caitya aura sAdhu ko na vAMde to purimaDU, kuzIla ko vaMdana kare to avaMdanIya,
usake bAda ke saMyama meM bAhara ThaMDila bhUmi para jAne ke lie pAnI lene ke
lie jAe, bar3I nIti karake vApasa Ae to usa vakta kucha nyUna tIsarI porisI
pUrNa bane  /  usameM bhI iriyAvahI pratikrama karake vidhi se gamanAgamana kI
AlocanA karake pAtrA, mAtraka Adi bhAjana aura upakaraNa vyavasthita kare taba
tIsarI porisI acchI taraha se pUrNa bane  /  isa prakAra tIsarI porisI bIta jAne
ke bAda he gautama ! jo bhikSu upadhi aura sthaMDila vidhivat guru ke sanmukha
saMdisAUM - aise AjJA mA~gakara pAnI pIne ke bhI paccakkhANa lekara kAla vakta
taka svAdhyAya na kare use chaTha prAyazcitta smjhnaa| isa prakAra kAlavelA A
pahuMce taba guru kI upadhi aura sthaMDila, vaMdana, pratikramaNa, sajjhAya,
maMDalI Adi vasati kI pratyupekSaNA karake samAdhipUrvaka citta ke vikSepa binA
saMyamita hokara apanI upadhi aura sthaMDila kI pratyupekSaNA karake gocara
carita aura kAla pratikrama karake gocaracaryA ghoSaNA karake usake bAda
daivasika aticAra se vizuddhi nimitta kAUsagga kare  /  isa haraeka meM kramika
upasthApana purimaDDa ekAsana aura upasthApanA prAyazcitta jAnanA  /  isake
anusAra kAUsagga karake muhapatti kI pratilekhanA karake vidhivat guru mahArAja
ko kRtikarma vaMdana karake sUryodaya se lekara kisI bhI sthAna meM jaise ki
baiThate, jAte, calate, ghUmate, jaldabAjhI karate, pRthvI, pAnI, agni, vAyu,
vanaspati, hariyAlI, tRNa, bIja, puSpa, phUla, kupala-aMkura, pravAla, pAtra,
do, tIna, cAra, pA~ca indriya vAle jIva kA saMghaTTa, paritApana, kilAmaNA,
upadrava Adi kie hoM aura tIna gupti, cAra kaSAya, pA~ca mahAvrata, cha
jIvanIkAya, sAta taraha ke pAnI aura AhArAdika kI eSaNA, A~Tha pravacanamAtA,
nau brahmacarya kI gupti, daza taraha kA zramaNadharma, jJAna, darzana, cAritra
kI jisa khaMr3a se virAdhanA hue ho usakI nIMdA, garhA, AlocanA, prAyazcitta
karake ekAgra mAnasa se sUtra, artha aura tadubhaya ko kAphI bhAnevAlA usake
artha socanevAlA, pratikramaNa na kare to upasthApana, aisA karate-karate sUraja
kA asta huA  /  caitya ko vaMdana kie binA pratikramaNa kare to cotha bhakta  /
pratikramaNa karane ke bAda rAta ko vidhi sahita bilakUla kama vakta nahIM aise
prathama pahora meM svAdhyAya na kare to duvAlasa, prathama porisI pUrNa hone se
pahale, saMthAro karane kI vidhi se AjJA mA~ge to chaThU, saMdisAe binA saMthArA
karake so jAe to caUttha, pratyupekSaNA kie binA saMthArA kare to duvAlasa,
avidhi se saMthArA kare to caUttha, uttarapaTTA binA saMthAro kare to caUttha,
do par3a kA saMthAro kare to caUttha, bIca meM jagahavAlA, DoravAlI khaTiyA~
meM, nIce garma ho vaisI khaTiyA~ meM bistara meM saMthAro kare to 100 AyaMbila,
sarva zramaNasaMgha, sarva sAdharmika aura sarva jIvarAzi ke tamAma jIva ko
sarva taraha ke bhAva se trividha-trividha se na khamAe, kSamApanA na de aura
caitya kI vaMdanA na kI ho, guru ke caraNakamala meM upadhi deha AhArAdika ke
sAgara paccakkhANa kie binA kAna ke chidra meM kapAsa kI rUI lagAe binA saMthArA
meM baiThe to haraeka meM upasthApana, saMthArA meM baiThane ke bAda yaha
dharma-zarIra ko guru paramparA se prApta isa zreSTha maMtrAkSara' se daza dizA
meM sA~pa, zera, duSTa prAnta, halake vANamaMtara, pizAca Adi se rakSA na kare
to upasthApana, daza dizA meM rakSA karake bAraha bhAvanA bhAkhe binA so jAe to
paccIsa AyaMbila  /  eka hI nidrA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 125

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'**  If a monk does not
study/understand/complete the sutra number and does not perform self-study until
the time of Pratikraman of Iriya Vahi Padikkama, then he should perform 100
Duwalas. If he has a bad dream or nightmare after sleeping, he should perform
Kausagg for 100 breaths. If he sneezes or coughs at night, or if his bed,
mattress, or pillow shifts or makes a noise, then he should perform Khaman. If
he laughs, plays, engages in sexual activity, or speaks disrespectfully during
the day or night, then he should perform Upasthapan.  In the same way, if a monk
transgresses the sutra and performs an act that is necessary, then O Gautam! he
should perform the Pratikraman of Micchami Dukkadam for the cause. If it is
without cause, then he should perform the Pratikraman of Chauthth etc. as
appropriate. If a monk speaks, causes someone to speak, or makes a loud noise
with a deep or shallow voice, then he should perform the Pratikraman in every
place, in every position, and in every step, with the appropriate relationship.
According to that, if a monk performs the act of sexual intercourse with a
woman, but does not experience pleasure, then he should perform 25 Ayambils. And
if he experiences pleasure with a woman, then he should not even look at the
face of the one who has the characteristics of Durant Prant. Such a perpetrator
of a great sin should perform the Paranchit Pratikraman.  Now, if he is a great
ascetic, then he should perform 70 Masakshapan, 100 Adharmmasakshapan, 100
Duwalas, 100 Chaar Upavas, 100 Athum, 100 Chhatth, 100 Upavas, 100 Ayambil, 100
Ekashaan, 100 Shuddha Achaaml, Ekashaan (in which no salt, pepper, or anything
else is mixed), 100 Nirvikrutik, and perform the Pratikraman in reverse order.
The Pratikraman given should be understood as coming soon for the monk who
performs it without any interruption. Sutra-1385  O Bhagvant! If he performs the
Pratikraman of every type of penance in this way, according to the number of
times, then for how long should he perform it? O Gautam! He should perform it
until he is established in that path of conduct. O Bhagvant! What should he do
after that? O Gautam! After that, he may or may not perform any penance. Those
who continue to perform penance according to what is described further are
worthy of respect, worship, and seeing. They are of the highest auspicious form,
worthy of being named in the morning. They are worthy of respect in all three
realms. Those who do not perform the prescribed penance are sinners. They are
great sinners. They are the greatest of sinners. They have the characteristics
of Durant Prant Adham. They are not even worthy of being looked at.
Sutra-1386-1387  O Gautam! When this Pratikraman Sutra is broken, then the
brilliance of the moon, sun, planets, stars, and constellations will not shine
for seven days and nights. When it is broken, there will be a lack of all
restraint, because this Pratikraman is the destroyer of all sins, the main part
of all penance and restraint, and the essence and core of the supreme purity of
the sermon. All these Pratikraman steps are described. Sutra-1388  O Gautam! If
all these Pratikraman are collected and counted, then the Pratikraman for a
Gachchadhipati, the leader of the Gachcha, and the leader of the community of
Sadhvis, the Pravartiini, should be four times as much. Because they are aware
of all this. And if this Gachcha Nayak, who is familiar with this, becomes
negligent, then even if he is strong, energetic, and mostly engaged in the Agam,
he should not perform it with such faith. But he should become one who is
engaged with a slow enthusiasm. The bodily effort performed by one who has a
broken result is useless. For the sake of which this is so, the Tirthankar
Bhagvant, who is inconceivable, unique, without attachment, and has a community
of merit, even though he experiences such merit, it is not appropriate for a
Sadhu to do so. The Gachchadhipati etc. should not be inclined towards any
fault. Therefore, it is said that the Gachchadhipati etc., the leaders of the
community, should be given four times the amount of all these Pratikraman
collected together.  Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi
Translation Page 126

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka pUrNa
karake jAnakara iriyAvahI paDikkamake pratikramaNa ke vakta taka svAdhyAya na
kare to duvAlasa, sone ke bAda duHsvapna yA kuHsvapna A jAe to sau sA~sa pramANa
kAUsagga karanA  /  rAta meM chIMka yA khA~sI khAe, khaTiyA, bistara yA daMr3a
khisake yA AvAja kare to khamaNa  /  dina yA rAta ko ha~sI, krIr3A, kaMdarpa,
nAthavAda kare to upasthApana  /  usa taraha se jo bhikSu sUtra kA atikramaNa
karake Avazyaka kare to he gautama ! kAraNavAle ko micchAmi dukkaDam prAyazcitta
denA  /  jo akAraNika ho use to yathAyogya caUttha Adi prAyazcitta kahanA, jo
bhikSu zabda kare, karavAe, gahare yA agAr3ha zabda se AvAja lagAe vo haraeka
sthAnaka meM haraeka kA haraeka pada meM yathAyogya riztA jur3akara prAyazcitta
denaa| usa anusAra jo bhikSu apakAya, agnikAya yA strI ke zarIra ke avayava kA
saMghaTo kare lekina bhugate nahIM to use 25 AyaMbila denA, aura jo strI ko
bhugate usa duranta prAnta lakSaNavAle kA mu~ha bhI mata dekhanA  /  aise usa
mahApApa karma kartA ko pAraMcita prAyazcitta  /  aba yadi vo mahAtapasvI ho 70
mAsakSapaNa, 100 adharmamAsakSapaNa, 100 duvAlasa, 100 cAra upavAsa, 100 aThuma,
100 chaThTha, 100 upavAsa, 100 AyaMbila, 100 ekAzana, 100 zuddha AcAmla, ekAzana
(jisameM lUNa mari yA kucha bhI mizra na kiyA ho), 100 nirvikRtika, yAvat ulaTa
sulaTa krama se prAyazcitta batAnA  /  yaha diyA gayA prAyazcitta jo bhikSu
visAmA rahita pAra lagAe use najadIkI samaya meM Age AnevAlA smjhnaa| sUtra-1385
he bhagavaMta ! ulaTa-sulaTa karma se isa anusAra so-so ginatI pramANa haraeka
taraha ke tapa ke prAyazcitta kare to kitane samaya taka karate rahe ? he
gautama ! jaba taka usa AcAra mArga meM sthApita ho taba taka karate rahe, he
bhagavaMta! usake bAda kyA kare? he gautama ! usake bAda koI tapa kare, koI tapa
na kare, jo Age batAne ke anusAra tapa karate rahate hai vo vaMdanIya haiM,
pUjanIya haiM, darzanIya haiM, vo atiprazasta sumaMgala svarUpa haiM, vo subaha
meM nAma grahaNa karane ke lAyaka haiN| tInoM loka meM vaMdanIya haiM  /  jo
batAe hue tapa kA prAyazcitta nahIM karatA vo pApI hai| mahApApI hai| pApI kA
bhI bar3A pApI hai  /  duranta prAnta adhama lakSaNavAlA hai  /  yAvat mu~ha
dekhane ke lAyaka nahIM hai| sUtra - 1386-1387 he gautama ! jaba yaha
prAyazcitta sUtra viccheda hogA taba candra, sUrya, graha, nakSatra aura tAroM
kA teja sAta rAtadina taka sphurAyamAna nahIM hogA  /  isakA viccheda hogA taba
sAre saMyama kI kamI hogI kyoMki yaha prAyazcitta sarva pApa kA prakarSarUpa se
nAza karanevAlA hai, sarva tapa, saMyama ke anuSThAna kA pradhAna aMga ho to
parama vizuddhi svarUpa pravacana ke bhI navanIta aura sArabhUta sthAna batAyA
ho to yaha sabhI prAyazcitta pada haiN| sUtra-1388 he gautama ! jitane yaha
sabhI prAyazcitta haiM use ikaTThA karake ginatI kI jAe to utanA prAyazcitta eka
gacchAdhipati ko gaccha ke nAyaka ko aura sAdhvI samudAya kI nAyaka pravartinI
ko cAra gunA prAyazcitta batAnA, kyoMki unako to yaha saba patA calA hai  /
aura jo yaha paricita aura yaha gacchanAyaka pramAda karanevAle ho to dUsare,
bala, vIrya hone ke bAvajUda jyAdAtara Agama meM udyama karanevAlA ho to bhI
vaisI dharmazraddhA se na kare, lekina maMda utsAha se udyama karanevAlA bane  /
bhagna parINAmavAle kA kiyA gayA kAyakleza nirarthaka hai  /  jisa vajaha ke lie
isa prakAra hai usake lie acintya ananya niranubandhavAle puNya ke samudAyavAle
tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta vaisI puNyAi bhugatate hone ke bAvajUda sAdhu ko usa
prakAra karanA ucita nahIM hai  /  gacchAdhipati Adi ko sarva taraha se doSa meM
pravRtti na karanA  /  isa vajaha se aisA kahA jAtA hai ki gacchAdhipati Adi
samudAya ke nAyaka ko yaha sabhI prAyazcitta jitanA ikaTThA karake milAyA jAe to
usase cAra gunA batAnA  /  muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-
hindI anuvAda Page 126

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number - 1389
O Bhagvant! If a Gani, without negligence, does not always take care of the
Gachch according to the scriptures, with the correct statement, what is the
Paranchit Prāyaśchitta for him? O Gautam! If he does not take care of the
Gachch, then it is called Paranchit Prāyaśchitta. O Bhagvant! And then, if any
Gani is free from all the supports of negligence, always takes care of the
Gachch according to the scriptures, with Saran and other things, and his
disciple, who is wicked or of that kind, does not practice the true conduct of
the right path, then does the Gani receive Prāyaśchitta? O Gautam! Certainly,
such a Guru receives Prāyaśchitta. O Bhagvant! For what reason? O Gautam!
Because he has given Pravrajya to the disciple without testing him with virtues
and vices. O Bhagvant! Can such a Gani also be given Prāyaśchitta? O Gautam!
Such a Gani with such qualities, but when such sinful Gachch, who are not
practicing self-benefit, are not purified by the three-fold purification, then
they should be expelled from the Sangha. O Bhagvant! When the Gani, the leader
of the Gachch, purifies the Gachch with the three-fold purification, can that
Gachch be respected? If, after repenting, gaining remorse, consuming the correct
Prāyaśchitta, receiving Upasampada in the residence of another Gachchādhipati,
and following the right path, he is to be respected. Now, if he remains free-
willed in the same way, does not repent, does not gain remorse, then do not
respect that Gachch, do not consider it, which is expelled from the four-fold
Shraman Sangha. Sutra-1390  O Bhagvant! When the disciple behaves in the correct
way of restraint, then some bad Guru, in the form of their initiation,
approaches that good disciple, then what is considered the proper duty of the
disciple? O Gautam! To practice severe heroic austerity. O Bhagvant! In what
way? O Gautam! By entering another Gachch. O Bhagvant! He cannot enter another
Gachch without giving up his relationship with his master. Then what should he
do? O Gautam! His relationship with his master should be completely erased. O
Bhagvant! How can his relationship with his master be completely erased? O
Gautam! By writing a letter. O Bhagvant! What are those letters? O Gautam! "I
will not accept myself as their disciple or disciple-woman at any time in the
future." O Bhagvant! If he does not write such a letter? O Gautam! If he does
not write such a letter, then tell the nearby Pravachni, and gather four or five
together, and forcefully make him write the letter. O Bhagvant! If even by such
force, that bad Guru does not write the letter, then what should he do? O
Gautam! If that bad Guru does not write the letter in that way, then advise him
to expel him from the Sangha. O Bhagvant! Why should he say this?  O Gautam! In
this world, the stake of the house and family, in the form of a great noose, is
stuck on the neck. With great difficulty, breaking that stake, born from many
physical and mental pains, terrified by the pain of the world in the form of the
speed of the arrow, somehow, by the effect of the destruction of attachment and
false belief, etc., attaining the right path, rising above the enjoyment of
desires, gaining detachment, if his tradition does not continue, he earns such
unattached merit. That merit is earned through the practice of austerity and
restraint. If the Guru himself becomes an obstacle in the practice of his
austerity and restraint, or causes obstacles and hindrances for others, if he
considers the obstacle-maker to be good and approves of him, if he ignores the
obstacle, whether from his own side or from the other side, that is, if he does
not stop him with his own power, then the existing Dharmavirya of such a
virtuous Sadhu is destroyed. As much as the Dharmavirya is destroyed, so much is
the merit of the one who was going to come forward destroyed. If he abandons the
Shramanlinga, then, being of such qualities, he abandons that Gachch and goes to
another Gachch. Even then, if he cannot enter, then perhaps he will abandon his
life unlawfully, perhaps he will attain false belief and join other deceivers,
perhaps he will enter the household life by collecting women, such a great
ascetic was now an un-ascetic, becoming a servant working in another's house.
Until such a light arrangement is made, the darkness of solitary false belief
will increase. As much as false belief increases, so much will the community of
such people increase.  Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi
Translation Page 127

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra -
1389 he bhagavaMta ! jo gaNI apramAdI hokara zrutAnusAra yathokta vidhAnasaha
hamezA rAta-dina gaccha kI dekha-bhAla na rakhe to use pAraMcita prAyazcitta
batAe ? he gautama ! gaccha kI dekha-bhAla na kare to use pAraMcita prAyazcitta
kahanA  /  he bhagavaMta ! aura phira jo koI gaNI sAre pramAda ke Alambana se
vipramukta ho  /  zrutAnusAra hamezA gaccha kI sAraNAdika pUrvaka sa~bhalakara
rakhate ho, usakA kisI duSTazIlavAle yA usa taraha kA ziSya sanmArga kA
yathArtha AcaraNa na karatA ho to vaise gaNI ko prAyazcitta AtA hai kyA? he
gautama ! jarura vaise guru ko prAyazcitta prApta hotA hai  /  he bhagavaMta !
kisa vajaha se ? he gautama ! usane ziSya ko guNadoSa se kasauTI lie binA
pravrajyA dI hai usa vajaha se, he bhagavaMta ! kyA vaise gaNI ko bhI
prAyazcitta de sakate haiM ? he gautama ! isa taraha ke guNa se yukta gaNI ho
lekina jaba isa taraha ke pApazIlavAle gaccha ko trividha-trividha se vosirAke
jo Atmahita kI sAdhanA nahIM karate, taba unheM saMgha ke bAhara nIkAlanA cAhie
/  he bhagavaMta ! jaba gaccha ke nAyaka gaNI gaccha ko trividhe vosirAve taba
usa gaccha ko AdaramAnya kara sakate haiM kyA ? yadi pazcAttApa karake saMvega
pAkara yathokta prAyazcitta kA sevana karake dUsare gacchAdhipati ke vAsa
upasaMpadA pAkara samyagamArga kA anusaraNa kare to usakA sammAna karanA aba
yadi vo svacchaMdatA se usI taraha banA rahe-pazcAttApa prAyazcitta na kare,
saMvega na pAe to caturvidha zramaNasaMgha ke bAhara kie usa gaccha kA Adara
mata karanA, mata samajhanA  /  sUtra-1390 he bhagavaMta ! jaba ziSya yathokta
saMyamakriyA meM vyavahAra karatA ho taba kucha kuguru usa acche ziSya ke pAsa
unakI dIkSA prarUpe taba ziSya kA kauna-sA kartavya ucita mAnA jAtA hai ? he
gautama ! ghora vIra tapa kA saMyama krnaa| he bhagavaMta ! kisa taraha ? he
gautama ! anya gaccha meM praveza karake  /  he bhagavaMta ! usake sambandhI
svAmItva kI phAragati die binA dUsare gaccha meM praveza nahIM pA sakate  /
taba kyA kare ? he gautama ! sarva taraha se usake sambandhI svAmItva miTa jAnA
cAhie  /  he bhagavaMta ! kisa taraha se usake sambandhI svAmItva sarva taraha
se sApha ho sakatA hai? he gautama ! akSara meM heM bhagavaMta ! vo akSara
kauna-se ? he gautama ! kisI bhI kAlAntara meM bhI aba maiM unake ziSya yA
ziSyaNI se apanAUMgA nahIM  /  he bhagavaMta ! yadi zAyada usa taraha ke akSara
na de to ? he gautama ! yadi vo usa taraha ke akSara na likha de to pAsa ke
pravacanI ko kahakara cAra-pA~ca ikaTThe hokara una para jabaradastI karake
akSara dilaanaa| he bhagavaMta ! yadi usa taraha ke jabaradastI se bhI vo kuguru
akSara na de to phira kyA kare? he gautama ! yadi usa taraha se kuguru akSara na
de to use saMgha bAhara karane kA upadeza denA  /  he bhagavaMta ! kisa vajaha
se aisA kahe ? he gautama ! isa saMsAra meM mahApAzarUpa ghara aura parivAra kI
zUlI garadana para lagI hai | vaisI zUlI ko muzkila se tor3akara kaIM zArIrika-
mAnasika paidA hue vAra gatirUpa saMsAra ke duHkha se bhayabhIta kisI taraha se
moha aura mithyAtvAdikA kSayopazama ke prabhAva se sanmArga kI prApti karake
kAmabhoga se UMbakara vairAga pAkara yadi usakI paramparA Age na bar3he aise
niranuba~dhI puNya kA upArjana karate haiM  /  vo puNyopArjana tapa aura saMyama
ke anuSThAna se hotA hai| usake tapa aura saMyama kI kriyA meM yadi guru khuda
hI vighna karanevAlA bane yA dUsaroM ke pAsa vighna, aMtarAya karavAe  /  agara
vighna karanevAle ko acchA mAnakara usakI anumodanA kare, svapakSa yA parapakSa
se vighna hotA ho usakI upekSA kare yAni usako apane sAmarthya se na roke, to vo
mahAnubhAga vaise sAdhu kA vidyamAna aisA dharmavIrya bhI naSTa ho jAe, jitane
meM dharmavIrya naSTa ho utane meM pAsa meM jisakA puNya Age AnevAlA thA, vo
naSTa hotA hai| yadi vo zramaNaliMga kA tyAga karatA hai, taba usa taraha ke
guNa se yukta ho usa gaccha kA tyAga karake anya gaccha meM jAte haiM  /  taba
bhI yadi vo praveza na pA sake to zAyada vo avidhi se prANa kA tyAga kare,
zAyada vo mithyAtva bhAva pAkara dUsare kapaTI meM sAmila ho jAe, zAyada strI kA
saMgraha karake gRhasthAvAsa meM praveza kare, aisA ekA mahAtapasvI thA aba vo
atapasvI hokara parAye ke ghara meM kAma karanevAlA dAsa bane jaba taka meM aisI
halakI vyavasthA na ho, utane meM to ekAnta mithyAtva aMdhakAra bar3hane lage  /
jitane meM mithyAtva se vaise bane kAphI logoM kA samudAya muni dIparatnasAgara
kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 127

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  The Dharma of a Shraman, marked
by non-violence, which eliminates misfortune and brings about a lineage of
happiness, is difficult to practice. When it is practiced, the severance of the
Tirtha occurs, and the distance to the ultimate liberation, the Parampad,
increases significantly. The path to attaining the Parampad becomes distant, and
therefore, a group of such Bhavyatmas, filled with sorrow, will be trapped in
the cycle of the four gatis (states of existence). For this reason, O Gautam! It
is said that such a Kuguuru (bad teacher) should not be given the Akshar (sacred
syllable), and the Sangha should be advised to expel him. Sutra-1391  O
Bhagvant! After how much time will such Kuguurus appear on this path? O Gautam!
From today, after 1250 years, a little more than that, such Kuguurus will
appear. O Bhagvant! What will be the reason for their appearance as Kuguurus? O
Gautam! At that time, those who practice the three Garvas (pride) of Riddhi
(power), Ras (taste), and Shaata (peace), and whose inner soul and body are
burning with the fire of Mamta (attachment) and Ahankar (ego), will become
Acharya Gachchhayaks, not knowing the true essence of the Shastra, believing
that they have done this work, that they have influenced the Shasana. Because of
this, they will be called Kuguurus. O Bhagvant! Will all the Gachchhayaks at
that time be of this kind? O Gautam! Not all of them will be like that. Some
will be of the Durant Praant (extreme) type, despicable, unworthy of being seen,
born as twins from the same mother, devoid of restraint, naturally inclined to
sin, engaging in evil deeds throughout their lives, adopting the false views of
Jaati (caste), Raudra (fierce), Prachand (intense), and Abhigarahik (greedy).
How will they be recognized? They will be recognized by their actions, such as
giving advice that leads to the wrong path, or giving permission for such
actions. Sutra-1392  O Bhagvant! Will the Acharya Gachchhayaks also be negligent
in their essential duties? O Gautam! Consider it as Avandaniya (unworthy of
respect) if a Gachchhayak is negligent for even a moment without any reason.
Those who are not negligent in their essential duties even for a moment, despite
the presence of great reasons, should be considered Vandaniya (worthy of
respect), Pujaniya (worthy of worship), Darshaniya (worthy of seeing), and equal
to the Siddha Buddhas who have attained the state of Kshina (diminished) karma,
free from the dust of karma. The rest will be explained in detail in its
respective place. Sutra-1393  According to this, those who, after hearing the
method of Prāyaścitta (atonement), do not practice the proper rituals for
consuming the doshas (faults) with a mind devoid of humility, and who put in as
much effort as is required in the place where it is needed, are called Aradhak
Atma (worshipping soul). Sutra-1394-1395  In times of fear from water, fire,
wild animals that tear flesh, thieves, kings, snakes, Yoginis, ghosts, Yakshas,
Rakshasas, Kshatras, Pisachas, death, disease, pain, obstacles, hindrances,
livelihood, forests, the sea, evil thoughts, bad omens, etc., remember this
Vidya (knowledge).  (This Vidya is in the form of Mantra-Akshar (sacred
syllables). The Mantra-Akshar cannot be translated. For the original Mantra-
Akshar, refer to our Agam Suttanni, Part-39, Mahanishith Agam, page 120.)
Sutra-1396  By properly chanting this excellent Vidya, one should chant it and
establish it in seven places: one head, two arms, the abdomen, and the soles of
the feet, using seven Aksharas (syllables) as follows: "Om" on the head, "Ku" on
the right shoulder, "Ru" on the right abdomen, "Ku" on the right sole, "Le" on
the left sole, "Swa" on the left abdomen, and "Ha" on the left shoulder.  Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 128

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka durgati
kA nivAraNa karanevAlA, sukha paramparA karavAnevAlA ahiMsA lakSaNavAlA,
zramaNadharma muzkila se karanevAlA hotA hai  /  jitane meM yaha hotA hai utane
meM tIrtha kA viccheda hotA hai isalie paramapada mokSa kA phA~salA kAphI bar3ha
jAtA hai yAni mokSa kAphI dUra calA jAtA hai  /  paramapada pAne kA mArga dUra
calA jAtA hai isalie kAphI duHkhI aise bhavyAtmA kA samUha phira cAragativAle
saMsAra cakra meM aTaka jAeMge  /  isa kAraNa se he gautama ! aisA kahA jAtA hai
ki isa taraha se kuguru akSara nahIM deMge, use saMgha bAhara nIkAlane kA
upadeza denA  /  sUtra-1391 he bhagavaMta ! kitane samaya ke bAda isa mArga meM
kuguru hoMge? he gautama ! Aja se lekara 1250 sAla se kucha jyAdA sAla ke bAda
vaise kuguru hoMge  /  he bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se vo kugururUpa pAeMge? he
gautama ! usa samaya usa vakta Rddhi, rasa aura zAtA nAma ke tIna gArava kI
sAdhanA kara ke honevAle mamatAbhAva, ahaMkArabhAva rUpa agni se jinake
abhyaMtara AtmA aura deha jala rahe haiM  /  maiMne yaha kArya kiyA  /  maiMne
zAsana kI prabhAvanA kI aise mAnasavAle zAstra ke yathArtha paramArtha ko na
jAnanevAle AcArya gacchanAyaka baneMge, isa vajaha se vo kuguru kahalAeMge  /
he bhagavaMta! usa vakta sarva kyA usa taraha ke gaNanAyaka hoMge? he gautama !
ekAnte sabhI vaise nahIM hoNge| kucha duranta prAnta lakSaNavAle-adhama-na
dekhane ke lAyaka, eka mAtA ne sAtha meM janma dekara jur3avA paidA hue hoM,
maryAdA binA pApa karane ke svabhAvavAle, pUre janma meM duSTa kArya karanevAle,
jAti, raudra, pracaMDa AbhigrAhika bar3e mithyAtva dRSTi ko apanAnevAle hoMge  /
use kisa taraha pahacAne ? utsUtra unmArga pravartanevAle upadeza denevAle yA
anumati batAnevAle ho vaise nimitta se vo pahacAne jAte haiN| sUtra-1392 he
bhagavaMta ! jo gaNanAyaka AcArya ho vo sahaja bhI Avazyaka meM pramAda karate
hai kyA ? he gautama ! jo gaNanAyaka haiM vo binA kAraNa sahaja eka palabhara
bhI pramAda kare use avaMdanIya samajhanA  /  jo kAphI mahAna kAraNa Ane ke
bAvajUda eka palabhara bhI apane Avazyaka meM pramAda nahIM karate vo vaMdanIya,
pUjanIya, darzanIya yAvat siddha buddha para pAe hue kSINa hue A~Tha
karmamalavAle karmaraja rahita ke samAna batAnA  /  bAkI kA adhikAra kAphI
vistAra se apane sthAnaka se khlaaegaa| sUtra - 1393 isa anusAra prAyazcitta
vidhi zravaNa karake dInatA rahita manavAlA doSa kA sevana karane ke ucita
anuSThAna nahIM karatA aura jisa sthAna meM jitanI zakti lagAnI par3e utanI
lagAtA hai  /  use ArAdhaka AtmA kahA hai| sUtra- 1394-1395 jala, agni, duSTa
phAr3a khAnevAle jaMgalI-prANI, cora, rAjA, sA~pa, yoginI ke bhaya, bhUta,
yakSa, rAkSasa, kSudra, pizAca mArI marakI kaMkAsa, kleza, vighna, rodha,
AjIvikA, aTavI, sAgara ke bIca meM pha~sanA, koI duSTa cintavana kare, apasaguna
Adi ke bhaya ke avasara ke vakta isa vidyA kA smaraNa krnaa| (yaha vidyA maMtra-
akSara ke rUpa meM hai  /  maMtrAkSara kA anuvAda nahIM hotA  /  mUla
maMtrAkSara ke lie hamArA Agama suttANi bhAga-39 mahAnisIha Agama pR. 120 dekhe
/ ) sUtra - 1396 isa zreSTha vidyA se vidhivat apanI AtmA ko acchI taraha se
abhimaMtrita karake yaha kaheMge to sAta akSara se eka mastaka, do bAhU, kukSI,
pA~va ke talave-aise sAta sthAna meM sthApana karanA vo isa prakAra- UM mastake,
'ku' - dAe khaMbhe kI grIvA para, 'ru' dAIM kukSI ke lie, 'ku-dA~e pA~va ke
talave ke lie, 'le' -bA~ye pA~va ke talave ke lie, 'svA' bA~I kukSI ke lie, 'hA'
bA~ye khaMbhe kI grIvA ke lie sthApita karanA  /  muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 128

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth' Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number
Sūtra-1397-1399  Fear of nightmares, bad omens, planetary afflictions,
obstacles, enemies, or misfortune, excessive rainfall, drought, lightning,
meteor showers, bad winds, fire, opposition from influential people, and all
other fears that arise in this world, are destroyed by the influence of this
knowledge. One who desires to perform atonement that brings auspiciousness,
removes sins, and bestows all other inexhaustible happiness, even if they may
not attain Siddhi in that life, will still attain the excellent Deva-Gati of the
Vāimānika, be born in a good family, and suddenly attain Samyaktvā, experiencing
the bliss of the lineage, and being forever freed from the bondage of the eight
karmas, the dust and impurities, and attain Siddhi. Sūtra - 1400  _O Bhagvant!
Is this the only atonement ordinance that is prescribed according to this? O
Gautama! This is the general atonement prescribed for all beings, from the very
young to the very old, newly initiated, calculators, those with abundant wealth,
and so on, including the Muni-gaṇas, and even for those who are not yet fully
enlightened, those who are Mahā-Avadhi, Manah-paryavagyanī, Chhadmastha
Vītarāga, such Bhikshus, in relation to the necessary actions of solitary
awakening yoga. But do not think that this is the only atonement. O Bhagvant!
Should those who are not fully enlightened, Mahā-Avadhi, Manah-paryavagyanī,
Chhadmastha Vītarāga, perform all the necessary actions? O Gautama! They should
definitely perform them. Not only the necessary actions alone, but they should
always perform all the necessary actions continuously. O Bhagvant! How should
they perform them? O Gautama! They should perform them with the strength of
inconceivable power, vigor, intelligence, superior knowledge, and ability. O
Bhagvant! Why should they perform them? O Gautama! Even if there is no
instigation or instigation from the Utsūtra Unmārga, they should perform the
necessary actions by doing so. Sūtra - 1401  O Bhagvant! Why don't you tell us
about a specific type of atonement? O Gautama! For violating the rules of the
Gaccha-āchāra regarding travel and dwelling during the rainy season, for
transgressing the rules of the Sangh-āchāra, for revealing a secret, for
transgressing the Dharma of the seven types of Maṇḍalī, for engaging in conduct
like bowing, offering food, etc., with a Kuśīla who has gone to a Gaccha that is
not mentioned in the scriptures, for giving improper ordination or for giving
the great initiation to someone who is not eligible, for exceeding the limits of
the Sūtra-artha, for exceeding the limits of both the Sūtra-artha and its
meaning, for giving a single letter in ignorance, for committing offenses
related to the daily, nightly, fortnightly, monthly, four-monthly, yearly,
light-related, otherworldly, diagnosed, for contradicting the fundamental
qualities, for contradicting the secondary qualities, for committing offenses
knowingly or unknowingly, for repeatedly consuming offenses with cruelty, for
consuming offenses with carelessness and pride, for consuming offenses due to
exceptions to the commands, for experiencing Roudra-ārta-dhyāna during
Mahāvrata, Śramaṇa-dharma, Samyama, Tapa, Niyama, and times of difficulty, for
experiencing offenses related to Rāga, Dvesha, Moha, Mithyātva, for experiencing
offenses related to evil, cruelty, and consequences, for experiencing offenses
related to ego, fainting, and attachment arising from the beginning, for not
following the Samiti, for sleeping in the absence of someone else, for
experiencing offenses related to enmity, anger, anxiety, and mental unrest, for
experiencing offenses related to speaking falsehoods, for accepting things
without giving, for experiencing offenses related to sexual intercourse, for
experiencing offenses related to the three types of karma, for experiencing
offenses related to attachment, for experiencing offenses related to eating at
night, for experiencing offenses related to mental, verbal, and physical
misconduct, for experiencing offenses related to committing, causing, and
allowing misconduct, for experiencing offenses related to knowledge, vision, and
character, for experiencing offenses related to sinful actions, what more can be
said? As many as there are places and forms of atonement like Trikāla-
Chaityavandana, etc., so many are specifically prescribed.  O Gautama! Countless
numbers of prescriptions are given. Therefore, one should understand well that O
Gautama! The Sūtra-artha, the number, the proof, the appointment, the
collection, the Anuyoga, the Dwāra, the Akshara, the Ananta-paryāya, have been
explained, taught, said, understood, and exemplified, either in terms of time,
acquisition, or in terms of sequence or non-sequence, i.e.  Muni Dīparatnasāgara
Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda Page 129

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
sUtra-1397-1399 duHsvapna, durnimitta, grahapIr3A, upasarga, zatru yA aniSTa ke
bhaya meM, ativRSTi, anAvRSTi, bIjalI, ulkApAta, bUrA pavana, agni, mahAjana kA
virodha Adi jo kucha bhI isa loka meM honevAle bhaya ho vo saba isa vidyA ke
prabhAva se naSTa hote haiM  /  maMgala karanevAlA, pApa haraNa karanevAlA,
dUsare sabhI akSaya sukha denevAlA aisA prAyazcitta karane kI IcchAvAle zAyada
usa bhava meM siddhi na pAe to bhI vaimAnika uttama devagati pAkara phira sukula
meM paidA hokara acAnaka samyaktva pAkara sukha paramparA mahasUsa karate hae
A~Tha karma kI bA~dhI raja aura mala se hamezA ke lie mukta hote haiM aura
siddhi pAtA hai| sUtra - 1400 _ he bhagavaMta ! kevala itanA hI prAyazcitta
vidhAna hai ki jisase isake anusAra Adeza kiyA jAtA hai ? he gautama ! yaha to
sAmAnya se bAraha mahine kI haraeka rAta-dina ke haraeka samaya ke prANa ko
naSTa karanA taba se lekara bAlavRddha navadIkSita gaNanAyaka ratnAdhika Adi
sahita munigaNa aura apratipAdita aise mahA avadhi, manaHparyavajJAnI,
chadmastha vItarAga aise bhikSuka ko ekAnta abhyutthAna yoga Avazyaka kriyA ke
sambandha se isa sAmAnya prAyazcitta kA upadeza diyA gayA hai  /  lekina kevala
itanA hI prAyazcitta hai aisA mata samajhanA  /  he bhagavaMta ! kyA apratipAtI
mahA avadhi manaHparyavajJAna kI chadmastha vItarAga unheM samagra Avazyaka kA
anuSThAna karane cAhie? he gautama ! jarura unheM karane cAhie  /  kevala akele
Avazyaka hI nahIM lekina eka sAtha hamezA satata AvazyakAdi anuSThAna karane
caahie| he bhagavaMta ! kisa taraha ? he gautama ! acintya, bala, vIrya, buddhi,
jJAnAtizaya aura zakti ke sAmarthya se karane cAhie  /  he bhagavaMta ! kisa
vajaha se karane cAhie ? he gautama ! bhale hI utsUtra unmArga kA mujhase
pravartana na ho yA huA ho to, vaisA karake Avazyaka karanA caahie| sUtra - 1401
he bhagavaMta ! vizeSa taraha kA prAyazcitta kyoM nahIM batAte ? he gautama !
varSAkAle mArga meM gamana, vasati kA paribhoga karane ke viSayaka gacchAcAra kI
maryAdA kA ullaMghana ke viSayaka, saMgha AcAra kA atikramaNa, gupti kA bheda
haA ho, sAta taraha kI mAMDalI ke dharma kA atikramaNa haA ho, agItArtha ke
gaccha meM jAne se honevAle kuzIla ke sAtha vaMdana AhArAdika kA vyavahAra kiyA
ho, avidhi se pravrajyA dI ho yA bar3I dIkSA dene se lage prAyazcittaanucita-
apAtra ko sUtra artha, tadubhaya kI prajJApanA karane se lage aticAra, ajJAna
viSayaka eka akSara dene se hue doSa, daivasika, rAtrika, pAkSika, mAsika, cAra
mAsika, vArSika, Aloka sambandhI, paraloka sambandhI, nidAna kiyA gayA ho,
mUlaguNa kI virAdhanA, uttaraguNa kI virAdhanA, jAna-bujhakara yA anajAne meM
kiyA gayA, bAra-bAra nirdayatA se doSa sevana kare, pramAda abhimAna se doSa
sevana kare, AjJApUrvaka ke apavAda se doSa sevana kie ho, mahAvrata,
zramaNadharma, saMyama, tapa, niyama, ApattikAla meM raudra-ArtadhyAna honA,
rAga, dveSa, moha, mithyAtva viSayaka, duSTa-krUra, pariNAma hone kI vajaha se
paidA huA mamatva, mUrchA, parigraha Arambha se honevAlA pApa, samiti kA
apAlana, parAye kI gairamojudagI meM usakI nIMdA karanA, amaitrIbhAva, saMtApa,
udvega, mAnasika azAnti se paidA honevAlA, mRSAvAda bolane se, die binA cIja
grahaNa karane se udbhavita, maithuna, sevana viSayaka trikaraNa yoga paikI
khaMDita pApa viSayaka, parigraha karane se udbhAvita, rAtribhojana viSayaka,
mAnasika, vAcika, kAyika, asaMyama karaNa, karAvaNa aura anumati karane se
udbhavita yAvat jJAnadarzana, cAritra ke aticAra se udbhavita, pApakarma kA
prAyazcitta, jyAdA kyA kahe ? jitane trikAla caityavaMdanA Adika prAyazcitta ke
sthAna prarUpela hai, utane vizeSa se he gautama ! asaMkhyeya pramANa prajJApanA
kI jAtI hai  /  isalie usake anusAra acchI taraha se dhAraNA karanA ki he
gautama ! prAyazcittasUtra kI saMkhyAtA pramANa niyukti, saMgrahaNI, anuyoga,
dvAra, akSara, anantAparyAya batAe haiM, upadezela haiM, kahe haiM, samajhAe
haiM, prarUpela haiM, kAla abhigraha rUpa se yAvat AnupUrvI se yA anAnupUrvI se
yAni muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 129

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  **Sutra-1402** There are
penances for study/purpose/Sutra number sequential or non-sequential as per the
merit.  **O Bhagvant!** You have mentioned many types of penances. There is a
conflict in these penances, O Bhagvant! Is there anyone who would accept such
penances, who would criticize, condemn, confess, and perform penance as per the
merit, and then worship the Shramanya, worship the teachings, and accept it for
self-benefit, and worship his own work, and achieve his own work?  **O Gautam!**
Understand the four types of criticism. Name criticism, establishment criticism,
substance criticism, and feeling criticism. These four terms are explained in
many ways and in four ways, in which, in brief, name criticism is understood
only by name. Establishment criticism is written in books, etc. In substance
criticism, the penance is explained in a simple way, but it is not done
accordingly. These three terms, O Gautam!, are not commendable.  **O Gautam!**
The fourth term, which is called feeling criticism, is to criticize the existing
fault, to make a true request to the Guru, to condemn, to confess, to perform
penance, to accept it for self-benefit, and to worship the ultimate meaning of
the soul for the ultimate benefit of the soul. This is called feeling criticism.
**O Bhagvant!** What is feeling criticism?  **O Gautam!** The monk who has
attained such feeling and detachment, who is a recluse in the worship of the
four skandhas of good Shraman Dharma, namely, conduct, penance, charity, and
feeling, who is completely free from the faults of pride, fear, arrogance, etc.,
who is free from all feelings and other feelings, who criticizes all sins, who
attains purity, who says 'Tahatti' before criticizing, who performs penance
well, and who follows the practice of restraint properly, is of this type.
**Sutra-1403**  **Sutra-1404-1407** The soul that is beneficial does not even
bind small sins. Their purity comes from the words of Tirthankara Bhagvant.
**Sutra-1408-1411** How will we be purified? By abandoning the sinful actions
that cause suffering in the terrible world, I will bear the burden of conduct
through the actions of mind, speech, and body. Just as all Bhagvants, Kevalis,
Tirthankaras, virtuous Acharyas, Upadhyayas, and Sadhus, and then just as the
five Lokapalas, who are familiar with the Dharma of beings, I will not hide any
sin, even as small as a grain of sand, in front of them. In the same way, I will
criticize all my faults. Even if it is as heavy as a mountain, but can be
attained through penance, I will perform it, so that the sin melts away
immediately and I can be purified.  **Sutra-1412-1413** Without performing
penance, the soul dies in the next life and goes to hell, to the animal realm,
to the Kumhipacak, to the Karvat, where it is cut from both sides, to the Shuli,
where it is pierced, to the earth, where it is dragged on thorns and pebbles
with a rope tied to its feet, to the standing position, to the piercing and
breaking of the body, and then to the binding with ropes, chains, and shackles.
Sometimes, one has to cross a waterless forest. Sometimes, one has to endure
oppression in the form of a bull, horse, donkey, etc. Sometimes, one has to
endure the burning of red-hot iron. Sometimes, one has to be led by a nose ring
in the form of a camel or bull. Sometimes, one has to carry heavy loads.
Sometimes, one has to carry loads beyond one's strength. Sometimes, one has to
be pierced with a sharp arrow. And then, the chest, back, bones, and waist are
broken. One has to endure thirst and hunger due to helplessness. One has to
endure suffering, anxiety, poverty, etc. again.  **_So, in return, I will reveal
my entire bad character, as I have performed it._**  **Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
(Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation** **Page 130**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka kramika
yA kramarahita yathAyogya guNaThANA ke lie prAyazcitta haiM  /  sUtra-1402 he
bhagavaMta ! Apane batAe vaise prAyazcitta kI bahulatA hai  /  isa prakAra
prAyazcitta kA saMghaTTa sambandha hotA hai, he bhagavaMta ! isa taraha ke
prAyazcitta ko grahaNa karanevAlA koI ho ki jo AlocanA karake nindana karake
gardA karake yAvat yathAyogya tapokarma karake prAyazcitta kA sevana karake
zrAmaNya ko ArAdhe, pravacana kI ArAdhanA kare yAvat Atmahita ke lie use
aMgIkAra karake apane kArya kI ArAdhanA kare, svakArya sAdhanA kare ? he gautama
! cAra taraha kI AloyaNA samajhanA  /  nAma AlocanA, sthApanA AlocanA, dravya
AlocanA aura bhAva AlocanA  /  yaha cAra pada kaIM taraha se aura cAra taraha se
batAe jAte haiM, usameM saMkSepa se nAma AlocanA kevala nAma se samajhanA  /
sthApanA AlocanA kitAba Adi meM likhI ho, dravya AlocanA meM saralatA se AlocanA
karake jisa prakAra prAyazcitta batAyA ho, usake anusAra na kare  /  yaha tInoM
pada he gautama ! aprazasta haiM  /  he gautama ! jo yaha cauthA bhAva AlocanA
nAma kA pada hai vo lage hue doSa kI AlocanA karake guru ke pAsa yathArtha
nivedana karake, nindA karake, gardA karake, prAyazcitta sevana karake, yAvat
Atmahita ke lie use aMgIkAra karake apane AtmA kI antima sAdhanA ke lie uttama
artha kI ArAdhanA kare, use bhAva AlocanA kahate haiM  /  he bhagavaMta ! bhAva
AlocanA kyA hai ? he gautama ! jo bhikSu isa taraha kA saMvega vairAga pAyA huA
ho, zIla, tapa, dAna, bhAvanArUpa cAra skaMdhayukta uttama zramaNadharma kI
ArAdhanA meM ekAnta rasika ho, mada, bhaya, gArava, ityAdika doSa se sarvathA
vipramukta ho, sarva bhAva aura bhAvAntara se zalyarahita hokara sarva pApa kI
AlocanA karake, vizuddhi pada pAkara 'tahatti' kahane ke pUrvaka AlocanA
prAyazcitta ko acchI taraha se sevana karake saMyama kriyA samyak taraha se
pAlana kare vo isa prakAra | sUtra - 1403 jo hitArthI AtmA hai vo alpa pApa bhI
nahIM bA~dhate  /  unakI zuddhi tIrthaMkara bhagavaMta ke vacana se hotI hai|
sUtra - 1404-1407 hama jaisoM kI zuddhi kaise hogI? ghora saMsAra ke duHkha
denevAle vaise pApakarma kA tyAga karake mana, vacana, kAyA kI kriyA se zIla ke
bojha maiM dhAraNa karU~gA  /  jisa taraha sAre bhagavaMta, kevalI, tIrthaMkara,
cAritrayukta AcArya, upAdhyAya aura sAdhu aura phira jisa taraha se pA~ca
lokapAla, jo jIva dharma ke parIcita haiM, unake samakSa maiM tala jitanA bhI
pApa nahIM chipAUMgA  /  usI taraha mere sAre doSa kI AlocanA karU~gA  /  usameM
jo kucha bhI parvata jitanA bhArI lekina prAyazcitta prApta ho sake to bhI maiM
usakA sevana karU~gA ki jisa taraha tatkAla pApa pIgala jAe aura merI zuddhi ho
ske| sUtra-1408-1411 prAyazcitta kie binA AtmA bhavAntara meM marakara naraka,
tiryaMca gati meM kahIM kumbhIpAka meM, kahIM karavata se donoM ora kaTatA hai|
kahIM zUlI se bIMdhAtA hai| kahIM pA~va meM rassI bA~dhakara jamIM para kA~Te-
kaMkara meM ghasiTa jAtA hai| kahIM khar3A jAtA hai| kahIM zarIra kA chedana-
bhedana kiyA jAtA hai| aura phira rassI-sA~kala-beDI se jakaDA jAtA hai  /
kahIM nirjala jaMgala kA ullaMghana karanA par3atA hai  /  kahIM baila, ghor3e,
gadhe Adi ke bhava meM damana sahanA par3atA hai  /  kahIM lAla tape lohe ke
DAma sahane par3ate haiM  /  kahIM UMTa-baila ke bhava meM nAka bIMdhakara
nAthanA par3atA hai| kahIM bhArI bojha uThAnA par3atA hai  /  kahIM tAkata se
jyAdA bojha uThAnA par3atA hai  /  kahIM dhAravAlI Ara se vIMdhAnA par3atA hai
/  ora phira chAtI, pITha, haDDiyA~, kamara kA hissA tUTa jAtA hai  /
paravazatA se pyAsa, bhUkha sahane par3ate haiN| saMtApa, udvega, dAridra Adi
duHkha yahA~ phira se sahane pddeNge| sUtra-1412-1413 _ to usake badale yahI
merA samagra duzcaritra kA jisa prakAra maiMne sevana kiyA ho usake anusAra
prakaTa karake muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda
Page 130

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
I will criticize, condemn, and censure in the presence of the Guru, and by
taking Prāyaścitta, I will burn and destroy the sinful karma that causes
suffering in the world, through intense penance, with fortitude, courage, and
valor. Sūtra - 1414-1415  I will practice that intense, very intense penance,
which is difficult and painful, with great effort, as it is the cause of all
welfare, as taught by Jinendra, with respect, even if it dries up my body while
standing. Sūtra - 1416-1418  I will restrain my mind, speech, and body, by
controlling the beginning of the flow of karma and the doors of inflow, by
abandoning ego, pride, and anger, free from attachment, aversion, delusion,
association, possessions, and possessiveness, with detachment even towards my
body, I will observe the five great vows. And I will certainly not allow any
transgression in them. Sūtra - 1419-1422  Alas, I am cursed! Indeed, I am
unworthy! I am a sinner and a sinner in thought! I am a sinner who commits
sinful acts! I am the lowest of the low, a great sinner! I am a wicked, corrupt
character, worthy of being compared to a hunter and a butcher! I am a Chandala,
a cruel, merciless sinner, a doer of cruel deeds, and I am worthy of
condemnation! Having obtained such a rare character, I will not criticize,
condemn, censure, and take Prāyaścitta, by contradicting knowledge, vision, and
conduct, and perhaps I will die with a faithless devotion, then I will surely
sink into the depths of the immeasurable, terrifying ocean of existence, from
which I will not be able to emerge even after millions of births. Sūtra -
1423-1425  So, until I am afflicted by old age, and then I am afflicted by some
disease, until my senses are sound, I will practice Dharma. I will condemn and
censure the sinful karma committed in the past, for a long time, and burn it to
ashes. By taking Prāyaścitta, I will become free from blemishes. O Gautama! I
will accept any difficult Prāyaścitta, before those pure, spotless, and
unblemished feelings are destroyed. Sūtra - 1426-1429  Thus, by expressing
criticism and taking Prāyaścitta, becoming completely free from suffering and
karmic impurities, perhaps they will not attain liberation in that moment or in
that birth, but they will go to a heavenly abode, a celestial realm, adorned
with hundreds of Apsaras, with the sweet sound of the self-illuminating,
eternally radiant, divine drum, Devadundubhi. From there, they will return here,
born into a noble family, and after indulging in worldly pleasures, they will
attain dispassion, practice penance, and then attain the state of a learned
sage, and reside in an incomparable celestial chariot, and coming here, they
will become the Dharma-Tīrthankaras, the equals of all beings in the three
realms. Sūtra - 1430  O Gautama! The name of this fourth stage, which is well-
established, is Ālocanā, the feeling that gives liberation, the state of
imperishable happiness. Thus I say. Sūtra - 1431-1432  O Bhagavant! Having
attained such a noble, excellent, and pure stage, if someone, due to
carelessness, repeatedly makes a mistake, errs, or slips in some matter, then is
there a purification stage, a stage of purity, that is sufficient for them?
Please resolve this doubt. Sūtra - 1433-1435  O Gautama! If someone, after
condemning and censuring sin for a long time, and taking Prāyaścitta, does not
then protect their great vows, etc., then it is like not carefully protecting a
washed garment, and it gets stained.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka guru ke
pAsa AlocanA karake nindanA karake, garhaNA karake, prAyazcitta kA sevana
karake, dhIra-vIra-parAkramavAlA ghora tapa karake saMsAra ke duHkha denevAle
pApakarma ko jalAkara bhasma kara duuN| sUtra - 1414-1415 kAphI kaSTakArI
duSkara duHkha se karake sevana kiyA jAe vaisA ugra, jyAdA ugra, jinezvara ke
batAe sakala kalyANa ke kAraNarUpa usa taraha ke tapa ko Adara se sevana karU~gA
ki jisase khar3e-khar3e bhI zarIra sUkha jaae| sUtra - 1416-1418 mana-vacana
aura kAyA daMr3a kA nigraha karake sajjar3a Arambha aura Azrava ke dvAra ko
rokakara ahaMkAra, aa, krodha kA tyAga karake rAga, dveSa, moha rahita, saMga
rahita, parigraha rahita, mamatvabhAva rahita, nirahaMkArI zarIra para bhI
niHspRhatAvAlA hokara maiM pA~ca mahAvrata kA pAlana karU~gA  /  aura yakInana
usameM aticAra na lagane duuNgaa| sUtra - 1419-1422 ahAhA, mujhe dhikkAra hai  /
vAkaI maiM adhanya hU~ | maiM pApI aura pApa mativAlA hU~ | pApakarma karanevAlA
pApiSTha hU~ | maiM adhamAdhama mahApApI hU~  /  maiM kuzIla, bhraSTa
cAritravAlA, bhilla aura kasAI kI upamA dene ke lAyaka huuN| maiM caMDAla,
kRpArahita pApI, krUra karma karanevAlA, nindya hU~  /  isa taraha kA durlabha
caritra prApta karake jJAna, darzana cAritra kI virAdhanA karake phira usakI
AlocanA, nindanA, garhaNA aura prAyazcitta na karU~ aura satva rahita ArAdhanA
se zAyada maiM mara jAUM to yakInana anuttara mahAbhayAnaka saMsAra sAgara meM
aisI gaharAI meM DUba jAUMgA ki phira karor3a bhava ke bAda bhI bAhara na nIkala
skuuNgaa| sUtra-1423-1425 to jaba taka bur3hApe se pIr3A na pAUM aura phira
mujhe koi vyAdhi na ho, jaba taka indriya salAmata hai  /  taba taka maiM dharma
kA sevana kara lU~  /  pahale ke lie gae pApakarma kI nindA, gardA lambe arase
taka karake use jalAkara rAkha kara dU~  /  prAyazcitta kA sevana karake maiM
kalaMka rahita banU~gA  /  he gautama ! niSkaluSa niSkalaMka aise zuddha bhAva
vo naSTa na ho unase pahale kaisA bhI duSkara prAyazcitta maiM grahaNa kruuNgaa|
sUtra - 1426-1429 isa prakAra AlocanA prakaTa karake prAyazcitta kA sevana
karake kleza aura karmamala se sarvathA mukta hokara zAyada vo pala yA usa bhava
meM mukti na pAe to nitya udyotavAlA svayaM prakAzita devaduMdubhi ke madhura
zabdavAle saiMkar3o apsarA se yukta aise vaimAnika uttama devaloka meM jAte haiM
/  vahA~ se cyavakara phira se yahA~ Akara uttama kula meM utpanna hokara
kAmabhoga meM UMbakara vairAga pAkara tapasyA karake phira paMDitamaraNa pAkara
anuttara vimAna meM nivAsa karake yahA~ Ae hae vo samagra tIna loka ke baMdhu
samAna dharmatIrthaMkara hote haiN| sUtra-1430 he gautama ! suprazasta aise isa
cauthe pada kA nAma akSaya sukha svarUpa mokSa ko denevAle bhAva AlocanA hai|
isa anusAra maiM kahatA huuN| sUtra-1431-1432 he bhagavaMta ! isa taraha kA
uttama, zreSTha, vizuddha pada pAkara jo kisI pramAda kI vajaha se bAra-bAra koi
viSaya meM galatI kare, cUke yA skhalanA pAe to usake lie kAphI vizuddhi yukta
zuddhi pada batAyA hai ki nahIM? isa zaMkA kA samAdhAna do| sUtra-1433-1435 he
gautama ! lambe arase taka pApa kI nindA aura gardA karake prAyazcitta kA sevana
karake jo phira apane mahAvrata Adi kI rakSA na kare to jaise dhoe hae vastra ko
sAvadhAnI se rakSaNa na kare to usameM dAga lagane ke barAbara muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 131

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  Study/Purpose/Sutra Number. Or,
consider it like someone who, after bathing in the pure, immaculate fragrant
water, falls into a pit filled with impurities, and repeatedly makes mistakes.
Even though the material for the destruction of all karma may be found by
chance, it is considered very difficult to uproot the inauspicious karma.
Sutra-1436-1438  According to that, after performing atonement, if someone
breaks any of the six Jivnikaya vows, rules, vision, knowledge, or the limbs of
character or conduct, due to anger, pride, delusion, greed, etc., the faults of
kshaya, fear, lust, or arrogance, or due to other reasons, arrogance, or by
taking unnecessary support, which breaks the vows, etc., consumes the fault,
they reach the plane of Sarvarth Siddhi and cause their soul to fall into hell.
Sutra-1439  O Bhagvant! What protects the soul, what protects the restraint of
the six Jivnikaya? O Gautam! Whoever protects the restraint of the six
Jivnikaya, protects the soul from the torment of endless suffering, the path of
hell, and the obstruction. Therefore, protecting the six Jivnikaya is considered
the protection of the soul. O Bhagvant! How many places of unrestraint are there
for the soul? Sutra-1440  O Gautam! There are many places of unrestraint. For
example, the places of unrestraint related to the stationary beings like the
Earth-bodied, etc. O Bhagvant! How many places of unrestraint are there for the
body? O Gautam, the places of unrestraint for the body are of many types. They
are as follows: Sutra-1441-1443  Touching the Earth, water, fire, air, plants,
and different types of Tris जीव with the hand, abstaining from it for the rest
of life, mixing the Earth-bodied beings with cold, hot, sour things, digging the
Earth, fire, iron, thorns, sour, slippery, oily things, considering them as
weapons that destroy and kill the Earth-bodied beings, etc. Many Apkay जीव are
destroyed while bathing by applying mud, etc., on the body, while washing the
face to enhance beauty, while cleaning the hands, fingers, eyes, etc., while
drinking. Sutra-1444-1445  The community of Agni-bodied beings is destroyed by
burning, igniting, illuminating, eating wind, blowing, compressing, etc. If the
fire burns well, it consumes things in all ten directions. Sutra-1446  Due to
fanning with leaves of Vijn, palm, etc., waving a chamara, beating a drum with
the hand, running, jumping, crossing, breathing, keeping, etc., the Vayu-bodied
beings are harmed and destroyed. Sutra-1447-1448  The Vanaspati-bodied beings
are destroyed by the touch of the hand, such as sprouts, seeds, buds, corals,
flowers, roots, leaves, etc. The Tris जीव with two, three, four, and five senses
are certainly destroyed and die due to disuse and excessive movement, walking,
coming and going, sitting and getting up, sleeping and waking. Sutra-1449  The
restraint from violence against living beings is the fruit of liberation. The
wise, having accepted such restraint, do not break it even if a death-like
calamity arises.  Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi
Translation Page 132

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka ho  /  yA
phira vo jisameM se sugaMdha nIkala rahI hai aise kAphI vimala-nirmala
gaMdhodaka se pavitra kSIrasAgara meM snAna karake azuci se bhare khaDDe meM
gire usakI taraha bAra-bAra galatI karanevAlA samajhanA  /  sAre karma kA kSaya
karanevAle isa taraha kI zAyada devayoga se sAmagrI mila bhI jAe lekina azubha
karma ko Ukher3anA kAphI muzkila mAnanA sUtra-1436-1438 usa anusAra prAyazcitta
karane ke bAda koI cha jIvanikAya ke vrata, niyama, darzana, jJAna aura cAritra
yA zIla ke aMga kA bhaMga kare, krodha se, mAna se, mAyA se, lAlaca Adi kaSAya
ke doSa se bhaya, kaMdarpa yA abhimAna se yaha aura dUsarI vajaha se gArava se
yA phijhUla Alambana lekara jo vratAdika kA khaMDana kare  /  doSa kA sevana
kare vo sarvArtha siddha ke vimAna taka pahu~cakara apanI AtmA ko naraka meM
patana dilAte haiN| sUtra-1439 he bhagavaMta ! kyA AtmA ko rakSita rakhe ki cha
jIvanikAya ke saMyama kI rakSA kare? he gautama ! jo koI cha jIvanikAya ke
saMyama kA rakSaNa karanevAlA hotA hai vo ananta duHkha denevAlA durgati gamana
aTakane se AtmA kI rakSA karanevAlA hotA hai| isalie cha jIvanikAya kI rakSA
karanA hI AtmA kI rakSA mAnA jAtA hai  /  he bhagavaMta ! vo jIva asaMyama
sthAna kitane batAe haiM? sUtra - 1440 he gautama ! asaMyama sthAna kAphI batAe
haiM  /  jaise ki pRthvIkAya Adi sthAvara jIva sambandhI asaMyama sthAna, he
bhagavaMta ! vo kAya asaMkhya sthAna kitane batAe haiM ? he gautama kAya
asaMyama sthAnaka kaI taraha ke prarUpe hue haiM  /  vo isa prakAra -
sUtra-1441-1443 pRthvI, pAnI, agni, vAyu, vanaspati aura alaga-alaga taraha ke
trasa jIva ko hAtha se chUnA yAvajjIvana paryanta varjana karanA, pRthvIkAya ke
jIva ko ThaMr3e, garma, khaTTe cIjoM ke sAtha milAnA, pRthvI khudanA, agni,
loha, jhAkala, khaTTe, cIkane telavAlI cIjeM pRthvIkAya Adi jIva kA Apasa meM
kSaya karanevAle, vadha karanevAle zastra samajhanA  /  snAna karane meM zarIra
para miTTI Adi puruSana karake snAna karane meM, mu~ha dhokara zobhA bar3hAne
meM hAtha, UMgalI, netra Adi kA zauca karane meM, pIne meM kaIM apkAya ke jIva
kSaya hote haiN| sUtra-1444-1445 agni saMghukane meM, jalAne meM, udyota karane
meM, pavana khAne meM, phUMkane meM, saMkorane meM, agnikAya ke jIva kA samudAya
kSaya hotA hai  /  yadi agni acchI taraha se jala UThe to daza dizA meM rahI
cIjoM ko khA jAtI hai  /  sUtra - 1446 vIjana, tAr3apatra ke paMkhe, cAmara
r3holanA, hAtha ke tAla ThokanA, daur3anA, kUdanA, ullaMghana karanA, sA~sa
lenA, rakhanA, ityAdika vajaha se vAyukAya ke jIva kI virAdhanA-vinAza hotA hai|
sUtra-1447-1448 aMkuraNa, bIja, kUpaNa, pravAla puSpa, phUla, kaMdala, patra Adi
ke vanaspatikAya ke jIva hAtha ke sparza se naSTa hote haiM  /  do, tIna, cAra,
pA~ca indriyavAle trasajIva anupayoga se aura pramattarUpa se calate-calate,
Ate-jAte, baiThateuThate, sote-jagate yakInana kSaya ho to mara jAte haiN| sUtra
- 1449 prANAtipAta kI virati mokSaphala denevAlI hai  /  buddhizAlI aisI virati
ko grahaNa karake maraNa samAna Apatti A jAe to bhI usakA khaMDana nahIM krtaa|
muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 132

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth' Study/Purpose/Sūtrāṅka
Sūtra-1450-1452 Having taken the vow of not speaking falsehood, do not speak
truth. Having taken the vow of not taking anything without giving, do not be
greedy even if someone gives you such a thing. Having taken the vow of strict
celibacy, abandoning possessions, abstaining from food at night, properly
restraining the five senses, giving Āloyanā in the matter of anger, pride,
delusion, greed, attachment, hatred, abandoning possessiveness, ego, etc. Sūtra
- 1453-1455 O Gautama! It is appropriate to strive in austerities, restraint,
self-study, meditation, etc., with pure intention in this living being, which is
like the flickering of a lightning bolt. O Gautama! What more can I say? After
giving Āloyanā, if one again violates the Earth-bodied, where will he go to
purify himself? O Gautama! What more can I say, that here, after performing
Āloyanā-prāyaścitta, if one drinks water at night in that birth, or violates the
life of an Apākāya, where will he go to attain purity? Sūtra-1456-1459 O
Gautama! What more can I say, that after taking Āloyanā, if one goes near the
flame of a fire to warm oneself, and touches it or becomes one, where will his
purification be? In the same way, where will the one who violates the life of a
Vāyu-kāya be purified? Where will the one who touches green plants, flowers,
etc., be purified? In the same way, where will the one who strikes a Bīja-kāya
be purified? Sūtra-1460-1462 Where will the two, three, four-sensed, disabled,
five-sensed beings attain purity after giving them Pari-tāpa? Where will the one
who does not properly protect the six-bodied beings attain purity? O Gautama!
What more can I say? Here, after giving Āloyanā, where will the monk who does
not protect the Trasa and sthāvara beings attain purity? Sūtra-1463-1470 Having
become free from the affliction, worthy of performing prāyaścitta by Āloyanā,
censure, and reproach, residing in a good place, avoid the beginning of the
Earth-bodied, do not touch fire, having become free from the affliction by
performing Āloyanā, etc., prāyaścitta, being compassionate, Residing in a good
place, the monk should not cause pain to the shelterless beings, having become
compassionate by performing Āloyanā, etc., the monk should not touch a broken
straw or a plant, even casually, repeatedly. Having become free from the
affliction by performing prāyaścitta of censure, reproach, and reproach for the
existing fault, being compassionate, the monk residing in a good place of
restraint should not cause affliction, torment, disturbance, etc., to the two,
three, four, or five-sensed beings until the end of life. The householder,
having become compassionate after performing Āloyanā, etc., does not even take
the ashes thrown up for amusement. Sūtra - 1471-1474 O Gautama! Where will the
compassionate, affliction-free soul attain purity if he converses with a woman?
The monk, having become compassionate after performing Āloyanā, etc., does not
possess any instrument other than the fourteen. He should be firm, ruthless,
unwavering, and unattached to the instruments that are the means of restraint. O
Gautama! If he becomes possessive of the object, he will not be purified. What
more can I say? Where will the one who drinks water at night after performing
Āloyanā in this matter attain purity? Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt (Mahānishīth)
Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda Page 133

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
sUtra-1450-1452 jhUTha vacana na bolane kI pratijJA grahaNa karake satya vacana
na bolanA, parAI cIja binA die hue na lene kI pratijJA grahaNa karake koI vaisI
cIja de to bhI lAlaca mata karanA  /  durdhara brahmacarya vrata ko dhAraNa
karake parigraha kA tyAga karake, rAtri bhojana kI virati apanAkara vidhivat
pA~ca indriya kA nigraha karake dUsare-lekina krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, rAga,
dveSa ke viSaya meM AloyaNA dekara, mamatvabhAva ahaMkAra Adi kA tyAga krnaa|
sUtra - 1453-1455 he gautama ! isa bijalI lattA kI caMcalatA samAna jIvatara meM
zuddha bhAva se tapa, saMyama, svAdhyAya-dhyAna Adi anuSThAna meM udyama karanA
yukta hai  /  he gautama ! jyAdA kyA kahe ? AlocanA dekara phira pRthvIkAya kI
virAdhanA kI jAe phira kahA~ jAkara usakI zuddhi karU~? he gautama ! jyAdA kyA
kahe ki yahA~ AlocanA-prAyazcitta karake usa janma meM sacitta yA rAta ko pAnI
kA pAna kare aura apakAya ke jIva kI virAdhanA kare to vo kahA~ jAkara vizuddhi
pAeMge? sUtra-1456-1459 he gautama ! jyAdA kathana kyA karU~ ki AloyaNa lekara
phira tApaNA kI jvAlA ke pAsa tapane ke lie jAe aura usakA sparza kare yA ho jAe
to phira usakI zuddhi kahA~ hogI? usa anusAra vAyukAya ke viSaya meM usa jIva kI
virAdhanA karanevAle kahA~ jAkara zuddha hoMge? jo harI vanaspati puSpa-phUla
Adi kA sparza karegA vo kahA~ zuddha hogA? usI taraha bIjakAya ko jo cAMpegA vo
kahA~ zuddha hogA? sUtra-1460-1462 do, tIna, cAra indriyavAle, vikalendriya,
paMcendriya jIva ko paritApa dekara vo jIva kahA~ zuddhi pAegA? acchI taraha se
jo cha kAya ke jIva kI rakSA nahIM karegA vo kahA~ jAkara zuddhi pA sakegA? he
gautama ! aba jyAdA kyA kahe ? yahA~ AloyaNA dekara jo bhikSu trasa aura
sthAvara jIva kI rakSA nahIM karegA to kahA~ jAkara zuddhi karegA?
sUtra-1463-1470 AlocanA, nindanA, garhaNA karake prAyazcitta karane ke lAyaka
niHzalya bane uttama sthAna meM rahe pRthvIkAya ke Arambha kA parihAra kare,
agni kA sparza na kare, AlocanAdi prAyazcitta karake niHzalya hokara saMvegavAlA
hokara ma sthAna meM rahA bhikSu zaraNa rahita jIva ko darda na dilAe,
AlocanAdika karake saMvega pAe hue bhikSu chedita tinake ko yA vanaspati ko
bAra-bAra yA sahaja bhI sparza na kare  /  lage hue doSa kI AlocanA nindanA
garhaNA prAyazcitta karake zalyarahita hokara saMvega pAkara bhikSu uttama
saMyama sthAna meM rahA ho vo jIvana ke anta taka do, tIna, cAra yA pA~ca
indriyavAle jIva ko saMghaTana paritApa kI kilAmaNA upadrava Adi azAtA na pedA
kare  /  AlocanAdi karane ke pUrvaka saMvegita gRhastha ne loca ke lie Upara
pheMkakara dI huI bhasma bhI grahaNa nahIM krtaa| sUtra - 1471-1474 saMvegita
zalyarahita jo AtmA strI ke sAtha bAtacIta kare to he gautama ! vo kahA~ zuddhi
pAegA ? AlocanAdika karake saMvegita bhikSu caudaha ke alAvA upakaraNa kA
parigraha na kare | vo saMyama ke sAdhanabhUta upakaraNa para dRr3hatA se,
nirmamatva, amUrchA, agRddhi rakhe  /  he gautama ! yadi vo padArtha para
mamatva karegA to usakI zuddhi nahIM hogI  /  ora kyA kahe ? isa viSaya meM
AlocanA karake jo rAta meM pAnI kA pAna kiyA jAe to vo kahA~ jAkara zuddha
karegA? muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page
133

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number -
1475-1482  If a monk, who has performed atonement for criticism, slander, and
reproach, and is free from blemishes, does not protect the first vow, then he
has committed a transgression with an unrefined attitude, which will have
terrible consequences. If he has violated the second great vow, called
*Mrishavaad* and *Viraman*, by speaking harsh, cruel, and severe words with
intense attachment or aversion, or if he has violated the third great vow,
called *Adattadaan Viraman*, by consuming something without the owner's
permission or by accepting an unwanted gift, with an unrefined attitude of
attachment or aversion, or if he has violated the fourth great vow, called
*Maithun Viraman*, by transgressing in the realm of words, taste, smell, touch,
and thought, or if he has violated the fifth great vow, called *Parigraha
Viraman*, by having a desire to obtain, by begging, by fainting, by seeking
purification, or by grieving over a lost object, which are all forms of greed
and anger, then he has committed a transgression in the fifth vow. If he has
consumed more food during the day, thinking that he will be hungry at night, or
if he has consumed food despite the doubt of sunrise or sunset, then he has
committed a transgression in the *Ratri Bhojan Viraman* vow. If a monk, who has
performed atonement for criticism, slander, and reproach, and is free from
blemishes, does not understand *Jayana*, then he is like a *Sushad* who wanders
in the cycle of birth and death. Sutra - 1483  O *Gavant*, who was that
*Sushad*? What kind of *Jayana* was it, or why did his world not end despite
performing atonement for criticism, slander, and reproach due to ignorance? O
*Gautam*, *Jayana* is the one who, even when faced with great calamities like a
deserted forest, lack of water, famine, or disease, with only a moment left to
live, and with the breath stuck in their throat, does not mentally abandon their
vows. They do not oppose, do not cause others to oppose, and do not approve of
opposition. They do not initiate or cause others to initiate any action until
the end of their life. Those who know and practice this complete *Jayana* are
devotees of *Jayana*, they are steadfast in *Jayana*, they are skilled in
*Jayana*, and they are familiar with *Jayana*. There is a very amazing and great
story about this *Sushad*.  Study-7 - Muni Diparatnasagar's Hindi translation
complete Muni Diparatnasagar's (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page
134

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra -
1475-1482 AlocanA, nindA, garhaNA karake prAyazcitta karake niHzalya bhikSu
pahalI cha pratijJA kI rakSA na kare to phira usameM bhayAnaka parINAmavAle jo
aprazasta bhAva sahita atikrama kiyA ho, mRSAvAda, viramaNa nAma ke dUsare
mahAvrata meM tIvra rAga yA dveSa se niSThura, kaThina, kar3e, karkaza vacana
bolakara mahAvrata kA ullaMghana kiyA ho, tIsare adattAdAna viramaNa mahAvrata
meM rahane kI jagaha mA~ge binA mAlika kI anumati lie binA upabhoga kiyA ho yA
anacAhA sthAna milA ho, usameM rAga-dveSa rUpa aprazasta bhAva ho usameM tIsare
mahAvrata kA atikramaNa, cothA maithuna viramaNa nAma ke mahAvrata meM zabda,
rasa, gandha, sparza aura pravicAra ke viSaya meM jo atikramaNa huA ho, pA~caveM
parigraha viramaNa nAma ke mahAvrata ke viSaya meM pAne kI abhilASA, prArthanA,
mUrchA, zuddhi-kAMkSA, ga~vAI huI cIja kA zoka usake rUpa jo lobha vo raudra
dhyAna kI vajaha samAna hai  /  ina saba meM pA~caveM vrata meM doSa gine haiM
/  rAta ko bhUkha lagegI aisA socakara dina meM jyAdA AhAra liyA, sUryodaya yA
sUryAsta kA zaka hone ke bAvajUda AhAra grahaNa kiyA ho usa rAtri bhojana
viramaNa vrata meM atikrama doSa batAyA ho  /  AlocanA, nindanA, garhaNA
prAyazcitta karake zalya rahita banA ho lekina jayaNA ko na samajhatA ho to
susar3ha kI taraha bhavasaMsAra meM bhramaNa karanevAlA hotA hai| sUtra - 1483
gavaMta ! vo susar3ha kauna thA ? vo jayaNA kisa taraha kI thI yA ajJAnatA kI
vajaha se AlocanA, nindanA, garhaNA prAyazcitta sevana karane ke bAvajUda usakA
saMsAra naSTa nahIM huA ? he gautama ! jayaNA use kahate haiM ki jo aThThAraha
hajAra zIla ke aMga, sattaraha taraha kA saMyama, caudaha taraha ke jIva kA
bheda, teraha kriyA sthAnaka, bAhya abhyaMtara-bhedavAle bAraha taraha ke tapa,
anuSThAna, bAraha taraha kI bhikSupratimA, daza taraha kA zramaNadharma, nau
taraha kI brahmacarya kI gupti, A~Tha taraha kI pravacanamAtA, sAta taraha kI
pAnI aura piMDa kI eSaNA, cha jIvanikAya, pA~ca mahAvrata, tIna gupti samyag-
darzana, jJAna, cAritra samAna ratnatrayI Adi saMyama anuSThAna ko bhikSu
nirjana-nirjala aTavI duSkAla vyAdhi Adi mahA Apatti utpanna huI ho,
antarmuhUrta kevala Ayu bAkI ho, prANa gale meM aTaka gae hoM to bhI mana se vo
apane saMyama kA khaMDana nahIM karate  /  virAdhanA nahIM karate, nahIM
karavAte, anumodanA nahIM karate  /  yAvat jAvajjIvaparyanta Arambha nahIM
karate yA karavAte isa taraha kI pUrI jayaNA jAnanevAle, pAlana karanevAle
jayaNA ke bhakta haiM, jayaNA dhruvarUpa se pAlanevAle haiM, jayaNA meM nipuNa
hai, vo jayaNA se paricita hai  /  isa susar3ha kI kAphI vismaya karavAnevAlI
bar3I kathA hai| adhyayana-7-kA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt hindI anuvAda pUrNa
muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 134

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth' Study/Purpose/Sūtrāṅka Study-8-
(Chūlikā-2) Susṛḍha Kathā Sūtra-1484  O Bhagvant! Why is this said? At that
time, there was a person named Susṛḍha here. He criticized many Asanyama
Sthānaka within a single day and performed a great, severe, and difficult
Prāyaśchitta. Still, he did not attain purity. This is why it is said.  O
Bhagvant! What was the story of Susṛḍha?  O Gautam! In this Bharatvarsha, there
is a country called Avanti. There was a small village called Sambhukk. In that
village, there was a Brahmin named Sujñaśiva, who was born poor, without any
sense of propriety, without grace, miserly, without compassion, extremely cruel,
merciless, with a fierce nature, difficult, learned, a greedy, wrong-sighted
person, whose name itself is a sin. Sujñaśrī was his daughter. Her beauty,
radiance, and splendor were unparalleled and superior to the beauty, radiance,
and splendor of all men and women in the three worlds. Sujñaśrī had a wicked
thought for the next life: "If this child's mother dies, it would be good. I
will be free from sorrow. Then, this child will live in sorrow. And royal
fortune will be obtained by my son." As a result of this wicked thought, she was
born with the karmic defect, and her mother died immediately after her birth.
After that, O Gautam! Sujñaśiva, her father, begged with great distress. He went
from house to house, worshipping mothers who gave birth to new children. His
daughter grew up. Then, a terrible famine, lasting twelve years, came, which
separated mother and son. When the entire population left, abandoning their
relatives, one day, Sujñaśiva, hungry for many days and filled with sorrow,
thought, "Should I kill this child and satisfy my hunger? Or should I sell her
flesh to a merchant and buy food to save my life? There is no other way to
survive. Or, I am truly cursed. It is not right to do this. But, I should sell
her alive." Thinking this, he sold Sujñaśrī to a Brahmin named Govinda, who was
a master of fourteen Vidya Sthāna, and had great wealth. Therefore, Sujñaśiva,
wounded by the words of hatred from many people, left his country and went to
another land. There, he also kidnapped another girl, sold her, and earned a lot
of wealth.  During that time, eight years of the famine passed. Then, all the
wealth of Govinda, the Seth, was destroyed. O Gautam! Due to the loss of wealth,
Govinda, the Brahmin, was filled with sorrow and thought, "Now, the time of
destruction for my family is near. I am not able to see my beloved wife even for
a moment. What should I do now?" Thinking this, a cowherd's wife came to sell
food. The Brahmin's wife bought four laddoos made of ghee and sugar, measured by
a cowherd's measure. As soon as she bought them, the children ate them. The
cowherd's wife said, "O Sethani! Give us the cowherd's measure in return. We
have to reach Gokul soon." O Gautam! After that, the Brahmin woman ordered
Sujñaśrī, "Go quickly and find the cowherd's pot that was sent by the king, so
that we can give it to the cowherd." Sujñaśrī went inside to search, but she did
not see the pot of rice. The Brahmin woman said, "It's not there." Then, the
Brahmin woman said, "Go and look in the upper part of the pot and find it." She
went to the courtyard to look again, but she did not see it. Then, the Brahmin
woman herself went there to look, but she also did not find the pot. Filled with
great wonder, she started looking everywhere. She saw her elder son eating rice
with a prostitute in a secluded place. Her son also looked at her. Seeing her
mother coming towards him, he was ashamed.   Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kṛt
(Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvāda Page 135

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
adhyayana-8- (cUlikA-2) susar3ha kathA sUtra-1484 he bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se
aisA kahA ? usa samaya meM usa samaya yahA~ susar3ha nAma kA eka anagAra thaa|
usane eka-eka pakSa ke bhItara kaIM asaMyama sthAnaka kI AlocanA dI aura kAphI
mahAna ghora duSkara prAyazcitta kA sevana kiyA  /  to bhI usa becAre ko
vizuddhi prApta nahIM huI  /  isa kAraNa se aisA khaa| he bhagavaMta ! usa
susar3ha kI vaktavyatA kisa taraha kI hai ? he gautama ! isa bhArata varSa meM
avanti nAmakA deza hai  /  vahA~ saMbukka nAma kA eka choTA gA~va thA  /  usa
gA~va meM janma daridra maryAdA-lajjA rahita, kRpA rahita, kRpaNa anukaMpA
rahita, atikrUra, nirdaya, raudra parINAmavAlA, kaThina, zikSA karanevAlA,
abhigrahika mithyAdRSTi jisakA nAma bhI lenA pApa hai, aisA sujJaziva nAmakA
brAhmaNa thA, sujJazrI usakI beTI thI  /  samagra tIna bhuvana meM nara aura
nArI samudAya ke lAvaNya kAnti teja samAna saubhAyAtizaya karane se usa lar3akI
ke lAvaNya rUpa kAnti Adi anupama aura bar3hiyA~ the vo sujJazrI ne kisI agale
dUsare bhava meM aisA duSTa socA thA ki yadi isa bacce kI mA~ mara jAe to acchA
to meM zoka rahita banU~  /  phira yaha baccA duHkhI hokara jI sakegA  /  aura
rAjalakSmI mere putra ko prApta hogI  /  usa duSTa cintavana ke phalarUpa vo
karma ke doSa se utpanna hone ke sAtha hI usakI mA~ mara gai usake bAda he
gautama ! usa sujJaziva pitAne kAphI kleza se binatI karake nae baccoM ko janma
denevAlI mAtA ne ghara-ghara ghUmakara ArAdhanA kI  /  usa putrI kA bacapana
pUrNa huA  /  utane meM mA~putra kA sambandha TAlanevAle mahA bhayAnaka bAraha
varSa ke lambe arase kA akAla samaya A pahu~cA  /  jitane meM riztedArI kA tyAga
karake samagra janasamUha calA gayA taba kasI dina kaIM dina kA bhUkhA, viSAda
pAyA huA vo sujJaziva socane lagA ki kyA aba isa baccI ko mAra DAla ke bhUkha
pUrI karU~ yA usakA mA~sa becakara kisI vaNika ke pAsa se rAzana kharIdakara
apane prANa ko dharU~  /  aba jIne ke lie dUsarA koI bhI upAya mere pAsa nahIM
bacA, yA to vAkaI mujhe dhikkAra hai  /  aisA karanA ucita nahIM hai  /  lekina
use jindA hI beca dU~  /  aisA socakara mahARddhi vAle caudaha vidyAsthAna ke
pAragAmI aise goviMda, brAhmaNa ke ghara sujJazrI ko beca dI isalie kaIM logoM
ko napharata ke zabda se ghAyala vo apane deza kA tyAga karake sujJaziva dUsare
dezAntara meM calA gayA  /  vahA~ jAkara bhI usI ke anusAra dUsarI kanyA kA
apaharaNa karake dUsarI jagaha beca-becakara sujJaziva ne kAphI dravya upArjana
kiyA usa avasara para akAla ke samaya ke kucha jyAdA A~Tha varSa pasAra hue taba
vo goviMda zeTha kA samagra vaibhava kA kSaya huA  /  he gautama ! vaibhAva
vinAza pAne kI vajaha se viSAda pAe hue goviMda brAhmaNa ne cintavana kiyA ki
aba mere parivAra kA vinAzakAla najadIka hai  /  viSAda pAnevAle mere ba~dhu ko
AdhA pala bhI dekhane ke lie samartha nahIM hai  /  to aba maiM kyA karU~? aisA
socate hue eka gokula ke svAmI kI bhAryA AI khAne kI cIje becanevAlI usa
govAlaNa ke pAsa se usa brAhmaNa kI bhAryA ne DA~gara ke nApa se bhI ghI aura
zakkara ke banAe hue cAra laDDu kharIda kie  /  kharIda karate hI bacce laDDu
khA gae  /  mahIyArI ne kahA ki are zeThAnI ! hameM badale meM dene kI DA~gara
kI pAlI de do  /  hameM jalda gokula meM pahu~canA hai  /  he gautama ! usake
bAda brAhmaNI ne sujJazrI ko AjJA dI ki are ! rAjAne jo kucha bhejA hai, usameM
jo DA~gara kI maTakI hai use jalda DhUMDhakara lAo jisase yaha govAlaNa ko
ddhuuN| sujJazrI jitane meM vo DhU~Dhane ke lie ghara meM gaI lekina usa taMdula
kA bhAjana na dekhA  /  brAhmaNI ne kahA ki nahIM hai| phira brAhmaNI na kahA,
are ! kucha bhAjana Upara karake usameM dekho aura DhU~Dhakara laao| phira se
dekhane ke lie A~gana meM gaI aura na dekhA taba brAhmaNI ne khuda vahA~ Akara
dekhA to usako bhI bhAjana na milA  /  kAphI vismaya pAnevAlI usane phira se
haraeka jagaha para dekhane lagI  /  doharAna ekAnta jagaha meM vezyA ke sAtha
odana kA bhojana karanevAle bar3e putra ko dekhA  /  usa putrane bhI unakI ora
najara kI  /  sAmane AnevAlI mAtA ko dekhakara adhanya muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 135

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, ‘Mahanishith’  The son, thinking to himself, “My
mother usually comes to take our rice. If she comes near, I will kill her,”
thought this and stayed away. When the Brahmin mother came near, he said to her
in harsh words, “O Bhattidarika! If you come here, then don’t say that I didn’t
warn you. I will surely kill you.” Hearing these inauspicious words, she fell to
the ground as if struck by a meteor. The Brahmin woman did not come back from
outside due to fainting, so after waiting for a while, the Mahhiyari said to
Sujnasri, “Oh girl! We are getting late, so tell your mother to give us the
Dhangar’s Pala. If the Dhangar’s Pala is not seen or found, then give us the
Mug’s Pala instead.” Then Sujnasri went to the granary where the grain was kept
and seeing the Brahmin woman in another state, she cried out in alarm. Hearing
this, the family, including Govind Brahmin and Mahhiyari, arrived. After being
reassured by the wind and water, they asked, “O Bhattidarika! What happened to
you suddenly?”  Then the Brahmin woman, becoming cautious, replied, “Oh! Don’t
make me suffer the bite of a poisonous snake, you who are without protection.
Don’t make me stand in a river without water. Oh, don’t establish me in
attachment, bound by a rope-less bond of affection, like this son, daughter,
nephew, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, mother, father, my husband, my beloved
family, relatives, friends, and relatives. They are all here, directly, false,
illusory. The hope of kinship from them is a mirage, a false delusion of
closeness; if considered from the point of view of ultimate reality, there are
no true relatives. As long as their self-interest is fulfilled, they maintain
the relationships of mother, father, daughter, son, son-in-law, nephew,
daughter-in-law, etc. Until then, everyone likes it. Beloved, dear, affectionate
family members, relatives, friends, and relatives maintain relationships only as
long as everyone’s own purpose is fulfilled.  In the accomplishment of one’s own
work, in separation, no one is anyone’s mother, no one is anyone’s father, no
one is anyone’s daughter, no one is anyone’s son-in-law, no one is anyone’s son,
no one is anyone’s wife, no one is anyone’s husband, no one is anyone’s master,
no one is anyone’s beloved, dear, affectionate family, relatives, friends, and
relatives. Because, see, then, after being conceived for nine years, she was
nourished with many sweet, delicious, hot, spicy, dry, and oily foods, bathed,
clothed, massaged, given wealth and grain, and great efforts were made to bring
her up. At that time, there was hope that my desires would be fulfilled in my
son’s kingdom. And I thought that I would spend my time in great happiness by
fulfilling the hopes of my loved ones. The reality has turned out to be
completely opposite to what I thought. Now, after knowing and understanding
this, it is not appropriate to have even a moment’s affection for the husband,
etc. As the story of my son has been, so has the story been in every household
in the past. It is happening in the present and will continue to happen in the
future. Those relatives also serve only for the time and affection that is
necessary to accomplish their own work. Therefore, O people! I have no use for
these artificial relatives and children who cause great suffering in the endless
world. Therefore, now, day and night, always serve Dharma with the best and
purest intention.  Dharma is wealth, beloved, dear, ultimate good, relatives,
friends, and relatives. Dharma is the one who makes one beautiful to behold,
strengthens, and gives strength. Dharma is the one who inspires, purifies, and
cultivates fame and glory. Dharma is the one who influences and gives the
tradition of the highest happiness. That is Dharma. Dharma is the embodiment of
all treasures. It is worthy of worship, nourishment, and protection. It is to be
done, practiced, served, taught, spoken, read, modeled, and made to happen.
Dharma is firm, inexhaustible, and permanent. It is the storehouse of all
happiness. Dharma is unashamed. Dharma gives unparalleled strength, vigor,
complete essence, courage, and togetherness. It is the one who brings together
the best, the best, the beloved, the dear, the beloved, and the visionaries.
Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 136

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka putrane
cintavana kiyA ki Ama tora para mAtA hamAre cAvala china lene ke lie AtI huI
dikhatI hai, yadi vo pAsa AegI to maiM use mAra DAlU~gA - aisA cintavana karate
putrane dUra rahe aura pAsa AnevAlI brAhmaNI mA~ ko kar3e zabda meM kahA ki - he
bhaTTIdArikA ! yadi tU yahA~ AegI to phira tuma aisA mata kahanA ki mujhe pahale
na kahA  /  yakInana maiM tumheM mAra DAlU~gA  /  aisA aniSTa vacana sunakara
ulkApAta se vadha kI huI ho vaise dhasa karate hue bhUmi para gira pdd'ii|
mUrchAvaza brAhmaNI bAhara se vApasa na AI isalie mahIyArI ne kucha dera rAha
dekhane ke bAda sujJazrI ko kahA ki are bAlikA ! hameM dera ho rahI hai, isalie
tumhArI mA~ ko kaho ki tuma hame DA~gara kA pAlA do  /  yadi DA~gara kA pAlA na
dikhe yA na mile to usake bajAya muga kA pAlA do  /  taba sujJazrI dhAnya
rakhane ke koThAra meM pahuMcI aura dekhatI hai to dUsarI avasthA pAI huI
brAhmaNI ko dekhakara sujJazrI hAhArava karake zora macAne lagI  /  vo sunakara
parivAra sahita vo goviMda brAhmaNa aura mahiyArI A pahu~ce  /  pavana aura jala
se AzvAsana pAkara unhoMne pUchA ki - he bhaTTIdArikA ! yaha tumheM acAnaka kyA
ho gayA ? taba sAvadha huI brAhmaNI ne pratyuttara meM batAyA ki are ! tuma
rakSA rahita aisI mujhe jhaharIle sA~pa ke DaMkha mata dilAo  /  nirjala nadI
meM mujhe mata khar3A karo  /  are rassI rahita snehapAza meM jakar3I huI aisI
mujhe moha meM sthApita mata karo  /  jaise ki yaha mere putra, putrI, bhatIje
haiM  /  yaha putravadhU, yaha jamAI, yaha mAtA, yaha pitA hai, yaha mere
bhartAra hai, yaha mujhe iSTa priya manacAhe parivAravarga, svajana, mitra,
bandhuvarga hai  /  vo yahA~ pratyakSa jhUThI mAyAvAle haiM  /  unakI ora se
bandhupana kI AzA mRgatRSNA hai,apanepana kA jhUThA bhrama hotA hai; paramArtha
se socA jAe to koI sacce svajana nahIM hai jaba taka svArtha pUrA hotA hai taba
taka mAtA, pitA, putrI, putra, jamAI, bhatIjA, putravadhU Adi sambandha banAe
rakhate haiN| taba taka hI hara eka ko acchA lagatA hai  /  iSTa miSTa priya
snehI parivAra ke svajana varga mitra bandhu parivAra Adi taba taka hI sambandha
rakhate haiM ki jaba taka haraeka kA apanA matalaba pUrA hotA hai| _apane kArya
kI siddhi meM, viraha meM koI kisI kI mAtA nahIM, na koI kisI ke pitA, na koI
kisI kI putrI, na koI kisI kA jamAI, na koI kasI kA putra, na koI kisI kI patnI,
na koI kisI kA bhartAra, na koI kisI kA svAmI, na koI kisI ke iSTa miSTa
priyakAnta parivAra svajana varga mitra bandhu parivAra varga haiM  /  kyoMki
dekho taba prApta hue kucha jyAdA nau varSa taka kukSi meM dhAraNa karake kaIM
miSTa madhura uSNa tIkhe sUkhe snigdha AhAra karavAe, snAna puruSana kiyA, usakA
zarIra kapar3e dhoe, zarIra dabAyA, dhana-dhAnyAdika die  /  use ucherane kI
mahAkozIza kii| usa samaya aisI AzA rakhI thI ki putra ke rAja meM mere
manoratha pUrNa hoMge  /  aura snehIjana kI AzA pUrI karake maiM kAphI sukha meM
merA samaya pasAra karU~gI  /  maiMne socA thA usase bilakula viparIta hakIkata
banI hai  /  aba itanA jAnane aura samajhane ke bAda pati Adi para AdhA pala bhI
sneha rakhanA ucita nahIM hai  /  jisa anusAra mere putra kA vRttAnta banA hai
usake anusAra ghara-ghara bhUtakAla meM vRttAnta bane haiM  /  vartamAna meM
banate haiM aura bhAvi meM bhI banate rheNge| vo bandhuvarga bhI kevala apane
kArya siddha karane ke lie ghaTikA muhUrta utanA samaya aura sneha parINAma
TikAkara sevA karatA hai  /  isalie he loga ! ananta saMsAra ke ghora duHkha
denevAle aise yaha kRtrima bandhu aura saMtAna kA mujhe koI prayojana nahIM hai
/  isalie aba rAta-dina hamezA uttama vizuddha Azaya se dharma kA sevana kro|
dharma hI dhana, iSTa, priya, kAnta, paramArtha se hitakArI, svajana varga,
mitra, bandhuvarga hai  /  dharma hI sundara darzanIya rUpa karanevAlA, puSTi
karanevAlA, bala denevAlA hai| dharma hI utsAha karavAnevAlA, dharma hI nirmala,
yaza, kIrti kI sAdhanA karanevAlA hai  /  dharma hI prabhAvanA karavAnevAlA,
zreSThatama sukha kI paramparA denevAlA ho to vo dharma hai  /  dharma hI sarva
taraha ke nidhAna svarUpa hai| ArAdhanIya hai| poSane ke lAyaka hai, pAlanIya
hai| karaNIya hai, AcaraNIya hai, sevanIya hai, upadezanIya hai, kathanIya hai,
par3hane ke lAyaka hai, prarUpaNIya hai, karavAne ke lAyaka hai, dharma dhruva
hai, akSaya hai, sthira rahanevAlA hai  /  samagra sukha kA bhaMDAra hai, dharma
alajjanIya hai, dharma atula bala, vIrya, sampUrNa sattva, parAkrama sahitapana
dilAnevAlA hotA hai  /  pravara, zreSTha, iSTa, priya, kAnta dRSTijana kA
saMyoga karavAnevAlA ho muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 136

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  The Dharma is that which
destroys all suffering, poverty, distress, anxiety, disgrace, false accusations,
old age, death, and all fear completely. There is no other helper like it, no
other unmatched lord in the three realms.  Therefore, family, relatives,
friends, kin, wealth, and other worldly things are no longer of use. And this
wealth and prosperity is more fickle than a rainbow, lightning, or a pile of
clothes. It is like a dream or Indra's water, fleeting and disappearing in an
instant. It is perishable, impermanent, and unsustainable. It perpetuates the
cycle of existence, obstructs the path to liberation, and brings endless
suffering.  Oh people! This time for Dharma is extremely rare. Such a time,
filled with the unparalleled material for practicing Dharma, for cultivating
right faith, knowledge, and conduct, will not come again. And this body, which
we have received, is decaying piece by piece, every moment, day and night. It is
becoming weaker every day. It is like a worn-out earthen pot, broken into
hundreds of pieces by the impact of a hard stone, useless for any purpose. It
has become completely worthless, like a drop of water on a new sprout, suddenly
disappearing like a bird flying away from a living tree. This human birth is
fruitless for those who do not earn merit for the afterlife. Therefore, I am not
capable of even the slightest negligence.  One should be equal in their attitude
towards friends and enemies in this human form. One should abstain from all
three types of violence against all living beings, speak truthfully, and not
accept even the smallest thing without giving something in return, like a
toothpick or ashes. One should practice the supreme, pure, and unwavering vow of
celibacy, with the complete integration of mind, speech, and body, and with
unwavering, newly acquired non-violence. One should be ruthless towards clothes,
utensils, and instruments of restraint. One should abstain from food and drink
at night, be free from the five defects of origin, production, desire, etc., eat
within a limited time, purify the five senses, cultivate the three types of
meditation, and practice the austerities of fasting, etc. One should follow the
twelve precepts of the monk, avoid acquiring various types of material
possessions, bathing, sleeping on the ground, cutting hair, and rubbing the
body. One should always behave according to the Guru's instructions. One should
endure hunger, thirst, and other hardships. One should conquer divine and other
afflictions. One should remain equanimous in both receiving and not receiving.
If one receives, one should think of it as an increase in Dharma, and if one
does not receive, one should think of it as an increase in austerity.  How much
more can I say? Oh people! This is a very difficult path, worthy of carrying the
burden of eighteen thousand sheelangs without rest, like a great soul. It is
like swimming across the ocean without respite. This virtuous Dharma is like
eating tasteless clay. It is like walking on the sharp edge of a terrifying
sword. The Dharma of conduct is like drinking the flames of a fire well-
nourished with ghee. The difficult Dharma of restraint is like filling a
container with a subtle breeze. It is more difficult than walking against the
flow of the Ganges, measuring Mount Meru with a scale of courage, conquering a
formidable army of four divisions with the strength of a single human being,
tying the right eye of a puppet that is moving in the opposite direction of
eight moons, or achieving victory in all three realms and receiving the flag of
pure fame and glory. It is the most difficult of all things, and through it, all
things are achieved. Sūtra-1485-1487  The burden on the head is carried with
rest. The burden of great conduct is carried without rest, throughout life.
Therefore, abandoning the affection for material possessions, children, etc.,
become detached, and serve the supreme Dharma of conduct without regret. There
is no hypocrisy, false praise, deception, or such behavior in Dharma. It is
Dharma free from the thorns of illusion and deceit.  Muni Dīparatnasāgar Kr̥t
(Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi Translation Page 137

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka to vo
dharma hai  /  samagra asukha, dAridraya, saMtApa, udvega, apayaza, jhUThe
Aropa, bur3hApA, maraNa Adi samagra bhaya ko sarvathA naSTa karanevAlA, jisakI
tulanA meM koI na A sake vaisA sahAyaka, tIna loka meM bejor3a nAtha ho to
kevala eka dharma hai| isalie aba parivAra, svajanavarga, mitra, bandhu varga,
bhaMDAra Adi Aloka kI cIjoM se prayojana nahIM hai  /  aura phira yaha Rddhi-
samRddhi indra dhanuSa, bIjalI, lattA ke ATopa se jyAdA caMcala, svapna aura
indra jala samAna dekhane ke sAtha hI pala meM guma honevAlI, nAzavaMta,
adhrava, azAzvata, saMsAra kI paramparA baDhAnevAlA, hone ke kAraNa rUpa,
sadgati ke mArga meM vighna karanevAlA, ananta duHkha denevAlA hai  /  are logo
! dharma ke lie yaha samaya kAphI durlabha hai  /  samyag darzana, jJAna,
cAritra rUpa dharma ko sAdhanevAlA, ArAdhanA karavAnevAlA, anupama sAmagrIyukta
aisA samaya phira nahIM milegA  /  aura phira milA huA yaha zarIra hamezA rAta-
dina haraeka pala meM aura haraeka samaya meM Tukar3e Tukar3e hokara sar3a gayA
hai  /  dina-pratidina zithila hotA jAtA hai  /  ghora, niSThura, asabhya,
caMr3a, jarA samAna, vajra zilA ke pratighAta se Tukar3e-Tukar3e hokara
saiMkar3o par3avAle jIrNa miTTI ke hAMDI samAna, kisI kAma meM na Ae aisA, pUrI
taraha binajarurI bana gayA hai| nae aMkura para lage jalabindu kI taraha
acAnaka ardhapala ke bhItara ekadama yaha jIvita per3a para se ur3ate hue paMchI
kI taraha ur3a jAte haiM  /  paraloka ke lie bhAthA upArjana na karanevAle ko
yaha mAnava janma niSphala hai to aba choTe-se choTA pramAda bhI karane ke lie
maiM samartha nahIM huuN| yaha manuSya rUpa meM sarvakAla mitra aura zatru ke
prati samAna bhAvavAle bananA cAhie  /  vo isa prakAra samagra jIva ke prANa ke
atipAta kI trividha-trividha se virati, satya vacana bolanA, dA~ta khutarane kI
zalAkA samAna yA loca karane kI bhasma samAna nirmulya cIja bhI binA die grahaNa
na karanA  /  mana, vacana, kAyA ke yoga sahita akhaMDita avirAdhita navagupti
sahita parama pavitra, sarvakAla durdhara brahmacarya vrata ko dhAraNa karanA  /
vastra, pAtra, saMyama ke upakaraNa para bhI nirmamatva, azana-pAnAdika cAra
AhAra kA rAta ko tyAga karanA, udgama-utpAdanA eSaNAdika meM pA~ca doSa se mukta
honA, parimita samaya bhojana karanA, pA~ca samiti kA zodhana karanA, tIna gapti
iryAsamiti Adi bhAvanA, azanAdika tapa ke upadhAna kA anuSThAna karanA  /
mAsAdika bhikSu kI bAraha pratimA, vicitra taraha ke dravyAdika abhigraha,
asnAna, bhUmizayana, kezaloca, zarIra kI TApaTIpa na karanA, hamezA sarvakAla
guru kI AjJA ke anusAra vyavahAra karanA  /  kSudhA pyAsa Adi pariSaha sahanA  /
divyAdika upasarga para vijaya pAnA  /  mile yA na mile donoM meM samabhAva
rakhanA  /  yA mile to dharmavRddhi, na mile to tapovRddhi vaisI bhAvanA rkhnaa|
jyAdA kitanA bayA~ kare ? are logoM ! yaha aThThAraha hajAra zIlAMga ke bojha
binA vizrAnti se zrI mahApuruSa se vahana kara sake vaisA kAphI durdhara mArga
vahana karane ke lAyaka hai  /  vizAda pAe binA to bAhA se yaha mahAsAgara
tairane ke samAna yaha mArga hai  /  yaha sAdhudharma svAda rahita miTTI ke
nIvAle kA bhakSaNa karane ke samAna hai  /  kAphI tIkSNa pAnIdAra bhayAnaka
talavAra kI dhAra para calane ke samAna saMyama dharma hai  /  ghI Adi se acchI
taraha se sIMcana kie gae agni kI jvAlA zreNI kA pAna karane ke samAna cAritra
dharma hai  /  sUkSma pavana se ba~TavA bharane ke jaisA kaThina saMyama dharma
hai  /  gaMgA ke pravAha ke sAmane gamana karanA, sAhasa ke tarAjU se meru
parvata nApanA, ekAkI mAnava dhIratA se durjaya cAturaMga senA ko jItanA, ApasI
ulTI dizA meM bhramaNa karate A~Tha candra ke Upara rahI pUtalI kI dA~I A~kha
bA~dhanA, samagra tIna bhuvana meM vijaya prApta karake nirmala, yaza, kIrti kI
jayapatAkA grahaNa karanA, ina sabase bhI dharmAnuSThAna se kisI bhI anya cIja
duSkara nahIM hai yAni usase sabhI cIjoM ko siddhi hotI hai| sUtra-1485-1487
mastaka para bojha visAmA lete-lete vahana kiyA jAtA hai  /  mahAna zIla kA
bojha vizrAnti rahita jIvanaparyanta vahana kiyA jAtA hai  /  isalie sArabhUta
putra dravya Adi kA sneha chor3akara niHsaMga hokara binA kheda sarvottama
cAritra dharma sevo  /  ADambara, jhUThI prazaMsA, vaMcanA, dharma ke vaise
vyavahAra nahIM hote  /  mAyAdika zalya, chalabhAva rahita dharma hai| muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 137

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number
Sutra-1488-1496 In a being, there is suffering, and within suffering, the five
senses are the most prominent. Among the five senses, humanity is the best. In
humanity, the Aryan land is the best, and within the Aryan land, the best family
is the best, and within the best family, the best caste and lineage are the
best, and then within that, the abundance of beauty, and within that, the
dominant power, the dominant strength, along with a long life, and within that,
knowledge and wisdom, and within knowledge, right faith is the most important.
And then, within right faith, the attainment of virtue is considered excellent.
In virtue, the absence of passions, and within the absence of passions, the
attainment of pure knowledge, the attainment of perfect pure knowledge, means
the attainment of liberation, free from old age and death. A being bound by the
suffering of birth, old age, and death, does not find happiness anywhere in this
world. Therefore, liberation alone is worthy of being taught. After wandering
through 84 lakh species for an infinite number of times and for a long time, you
have now obtained enough things to be worthy of attaining that liberation. If
you have obtained such excellent things today that you have never obtained
before, then, O people! You should quickly strive for it. Abandon this affection
that increases the tradition of the condemned world, as preached by the wise. If
you do not practice this beautiful Dharma properly here, then the attainment of
that Dharma will be difficult. What value will the attainment of enlightenment
have in the future life for someone who does not practice Dharma here according
to the attained enlightenment and prays to practice Dharma in the future life?
Sutra - 1497 When this was heard from the Brahmin woman due to the recollection
of her previous birth, O Gautam! The entire family and many other citizens were
awakened. O Gautam! On that occasion, the path of salvation was found well. In
the same way, Govinda Brahmin said, "Shame on me, for so long we have been
pretending, we have been fools, ignorance is truly a great suffering. It is very
difficult for those who do not know the terrible, fierce, otherworldly causes of
the insignificant, insignificant soul, who have a mind that is attached to
others, who are motivated to incite the fire of attachment to partiality, who
have a mind that is killed by attachment and aversion, and who have these other
faults, to understand this excellent Dharma. Truly, my soul has been pretending
for so long. This great soul was born in my house under the guise of being a
wife. But, if you think about it carefully, she has manifested herself to dispel
this darkness of doubt, to illuminate the world, and to show the great path
properly, just like the omniscient Acharya. Oh, the words of my beloved, who
strives for the attainment of the most excellent meaning. Oh, Yajnadatt!
Vishnudatt! Yajnadeva! Vishvamitra! Soma! Aditya, etc., my sons, along with the
gods and demons, the entire world, your mother is worthy of your respect and
reverence. Oh! Parandar, etc., students! Think about the words spoken by the
wife of this Upadhyaya, who has given joy to the three worlds, who has the
nature to burn and incinerate all evil deeds. The Guru is pleased with you today
because you have an extraordinary nature in worshipping the Guru. The Guru is
pleased with you because you have a strong mind, a desire to study and teach for
the purpose of performing sacrifices, and a desire to perform the six karmas. So
now, quickly conquer your five senses. Abandon such sinful, angry passions.
Understand how you obtain the state of birth, old age, and death, from the womb,
which is filled with mud, excrement, impurities, and urine, etc. Such excellent
words were spoken, which aroused great dispassion, and after listening to them,
many virtuous people, who were afraid of birth, old age, and death, began to
think about Dharma. Then, some people started saying, "This Dharma is excellent,
it is the best Dharma." Others also started saying the same. O Gautam! Everyone
considered this Brahmin woman to be a witness to the fact that she remembers her
caste. After that, the Brahmin woman explained the ten types of Shraman Dharma,
such as non-violence, forgiveness, etc., with examples and illustrations, so
that they would develop supreme faith. After that, considering that Brahmin
woman to be omniscient, they respectfully offered her a beautiful offering of
folded hands and bowed down to her. O Gautam! The Brahmin woman's... Muni
Diperatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 138

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
sUtra-1488-1496 jIva meM trasapana, trasapana meM bhI paMcendriyapana utkRSTa
hai  /  paMcendriyapana meM bhI mAnavapana uttama hai  /  usameM Aryadeza,
Aryadeza meM uttamakula, uttamakula meM utkRSTa jAti-jJAti aura phira usameM
rUpa kI samRddhi usameM bhI pradhAnatAvAlI zakti, pradhAnabala milane ke sAtha-
sAtha lambI Ayu, usameM bhI vijJAna-viveka, vijJAna meM bhI samyaktva pradhAna
hai| aura phira samyaktva meM zIla kI prApti baDhiyA mAnI hai| zIla meM kSAyika
bhAva, kSAyika bhAva meM kevala jJAna, pratipUrva kevalajJAna prApta honA yAni
jarA maraNa rahita mokSa prApta ho  /  janma, jarA, maraNa Adi ke duHkha se
ba~dhe jIva ko isa saMsAra meM kahIM bhI sukha nahIM milatA  /  isalie ekAnta
mokSa hI upadeza pAne ke lAyaka hai| 84 lAkha yoni meM ananta bAra dIrghakAla
taka bhramaNa karake abhI tumane usa mokSa ko sAdhane ke lAyaka kAphI cIjeM pAI
haiM to Aja taka pahale kisI dina na pAI huI aisI uttama cIjeM pAI haiM to he
logoM ! tuma usameM jalda udyama karo  /  vibudha paMr3ita ne nindita saMsAra kI
paramparA bar3hAnevAle aise isa sneha ko chor3o, dharmazravaNa karake aneka
kror3o varSoM meM durlabha aise suMdara dharma ko yadi tuma yahA~ samyak tarIke
se nahIM karoge to phira usa dharma kI prApti durlabha hogI  /  prApta bodhi
samyaktva ke anusAra yahA~ jo dharma pravRtti nahIM karatA aura AnevAle bhava
meM dharma kareMge aisI prArthanA kare vo bhAvI bhava meM kisa mUlya se bodhi
prApta kareMge? sUtra - 1497 pUrvabhava ke jAtismaraNa hone se brAhmaNI se jaba
yaha sunA taba he gautama ! samagra bandhuvarga aura dUsare kaIM nagarajana ko
pratibodha huaa| he gautama ! usa avasara para sadgati kA mArga acchI taraha se
milA hai  /  vaise goviMda brAhmaNa ne kahA ki dhikkAra hai mujhe, itane arase
taka hama banate rahe, mUr3ha bane rahe, vAkaI ajJAna mahAkaSTa hai  /
nirbhAgI-tuccha AtmA ko ghora ugra paraloka viSayaka nimitta jinheM patA nahIM
hai, anya meM AgrahavAlI buddhi karanevAle, pakSapAta ke mohAgni ko uttejita
karane ke mAnasavAle, rAga-dveSa se vadha kI gaI buddhivAle, yaha Adi doSavAle
ko isa uttama dharma samajhanA kAphI muzkila hotA hai  /  vAkaI itane arase taka
merI AtmA banatI rahI  /  yaha mahAn AtmA bhAryA hone ke bahAne se mere ghara
meM utpanna huii| lekina nizcaya se usake bAre meM socA jAe to sarvajJa AcArya
kI taraha isa saMzaya samAna a~dhere ko dUra karanevAle, loka ko prakAzita
karanevAle, bar3e mArga ko samyak tarIke se batAne ke lie hI khuda prakaTa hue
haiM  /  are, mahA atizayavAle artha kI sAdhanA karanevAlI merI priyA ke vacana
haiM  /  are yajJadatta ! viSNudatta ! yajJadeva ! vizvAmitra ! soma ! Aditya
Adi mere putra, deva aura asura sahita pUre jagata ko yaha tumhArI mAtA Adara
aura vaMdana karane ke lAyaka haiN| are ! parandara Adi chAtra ! isa upAdhyAya
kI bhAryAne tIna jagata ko Ananda denevAle. sAre pApakarma ko jalAkara bhasma
karane ke svabhAvavAlI vANI batAI use soco  /  guru kI ArAdhanA karane meM
apUrva svabhAvavAle tuma para Aja guru prasanna hue haiM  /  zreSTha
AtmabalavAle, yajJa karane-karavAne ke lie adhyayana karanA, karavAnA, SaTkarma
karane ke anurAga se tuma para guru prasanna hue haiM  /  to aba tuma pA~ca
indriya ko jalda se jIta lo  /  pApI aise krodhAnika kaSAya kA tyAga karo  /
viSThA, azuci, malamUtra aura Adi ke kIcar3a yukta garbhAvAsa se lekara prasUti
janma maraNa Adi avasthA kaise prApta hotI hai  /  vo tuma saba samajho  /  aise
kAphI vairAga utpanna karavAnevAle subhASita batAe aise caudaha vidyA ke
pAragAmI goviMda brAhmaNa ko sunakara kAphI janma-jarA, maraNa se bhayabhIta
kaIM satpuruSa dharma kI socane lage  /  taba kucha loga aisA kahane lage ki
yaha dharma zreSTha hai, pravara dharma hai  /  aisA dUsare loga bhI kahane lage
/  he gautama ! yAvat hara eka logoM ne yaha brAhmaNI jAti smaraNavAlI hai aise
pramANabhUta maanaa| usake bAda brAhmaNIne ahiMsA lakSaNavAle niHsandeha kSamA
Adi daza taraha ke zramaNadharma ko Azaya-dRSTAnta kahane ke pUrvaka unheM
parama zraddhA paidA ho usa taraha se samajhAyA  /  usake bAda usa brAhmaNI ko
yaha sarvajJa hai aisA mAnakara hastakamala kI sundara aMjalI racakara sammAna
se acchI taraha se praNAma karake he gautama ! usa brAhmaNI ke muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 138

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  Many men and women, with minds
free from greed, who were content with a short-lived happiness in their
families, relatives, friends, kin, homes, wealth, etc., renounced them all, and
with a firm and resolute mind, desiring the eternal bliss of liberation,
embraced the path of a Shraman. They adopted all the qualities of a Shraman,
became a fourteen-preceptor, attained the ultimate body, and were destined for
liberation. Such a Ganadhar Sthavir, with a firm and resolute mind, desiring the
eternal bliss of liberation, renounced all worldly possessions and embraced the
path of a Shraman. He adopted all the qualities of a Shraman, became a fourteen-
preceptor, attained the ultimate body, and was destined for liberation. Such a
Ganadhar Sthavir approached a Shraman and accepted the vows of Pravrajya.  O
Gautam! Thus, they engaged in intense austerities, heroic practices, and the
observance of vows, self-study, meditation, etc., and by destroying all their
karmas, they attained liberation along with that Brahmani, casting off the dust
of karma. Many men and women, including Govinda Brahmana, attained liberation.
They all became highly renowned. Thus, I say. Sutra - 1498  O Bhagvant! What did
that Brahmani do that she attained such easy enlightenment, became worthy of
receiving the name in the morning, and then, through her teachings, liberated
many noble beings, men and women, who were rotting in the intense suffering of
the endless cycle of birth and death, giving them eternal happiness through
beautiful Dharmadesha, etc.? O Gautam! In her previous birth, she had performed
atonement with pure intentions, free from any malice, for the faults she had
accumulated from birth to eternity, with beautiful intentions. She then attained
Samadhi and, due to its influence, was born in the Saudharma Devaloka as the
chief queen, Mahadevi, of Indra Maharaj.  O Bhagvant! Was the soul of that
Brahmani a Nigranthi Shramani in her previous birth, who performed atonement
with pure intentions, free from any malice? O Gautam! The soul of that Brahmani
had attained great wealth and liberation in her previous birth. She had attained
the great wealth of knowledge, vision, and character. She was the head of the
Anagar Gachchha, a great ascetic, the leader of her time, with a body adorned
with the best virtues, the foundation of all qualities, but she was not a
Shramani.  O Bhagvant! Due to the influence of what karma did she, being the
head of the Gachchha, acquire the karma of womanhood? O Gautam! Due to Maya, O
Bhagvant! What happened to her due to Maya? - The soul whose world has become
weak. Such a soul, due to the rise of all sins, is like a vessel of laddu made
from fragrant substances, ghee, sugar, and fine flour, which is enjoyed by all,
a place of all suffering and torment, a devourer of all happiness, a hindrance
to the pure and supreme Shraman Dharma, which is characterized by non-violence,
like the gate of heaven and the door of hell, a repository of all disgrace, ill-
repute, blemish, torment, etc., like the black soot of a dark chimney, which
stains the pure soul, making it incapable of doing good deeds. Did the head of
the Gachchha acquire the nature of a woman?  O Gautam! While she was the head of
the Gachchha, she did not indulge in even the slightest Maya. Previously, she
was a Chakravarti Raja, who, being tired of the worldly pleasures of the
afterlife, renounced the wealth of a Chakravarti, the fourteen jewels, the nine
treasures, 64,000 excellent women, 32,000 obedient noble kings, 96 crore foot
soldiers, and the entire Bharatvarsha, which was like the earth, and embraced
the path of a Shraman, motivated by great merit. She became a great ascetic, a
Shruta Dhar, in a short time. Recognizing her worth, the great Guru Maharaj
granted her the authority of the head of the Gachchha. O Gautam! Even there, she
recognized the path of liberation well. She followed the Shraman Dharma as
prescribed, embraced intense austerity, endured severe hardships, renounced the
passions of attachment and aversion, governed the Gachchha according to the
Agam, renounced the food offered by a Sadhvi throughout her life, avoided the
killing of any living beings, did not engage in sexual intercourse, even in a
subtle way, did not desire worldly pleasures in this world or the next, was
wise, free from the malice of Maya, performed atonement as prescribed, free from
any malice, and was completely free from the support of pleasure. She had
accumulated a large amount of karma in many births, which she did not exhaust.
Due to the small amount of karma she had left, she was born as a woman, like a
Muni Deepa Ratna Sagar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sAtha
dInatArahita mAnasavAle kaIM nara-nArI vargane alpakAla sukha denevAle aise
parivAra, svajana, mitra, bandhu, parivAra, ghara, vaibhava Adi kA tyAga karake
zAzvata mokSasukha ke abhilASI kAphI nizcita dRr3ha manavAle, zramaNapana ke
sabhI guNa ko dhAraNa karanevAle, caudaha-pUrvadhara, carama zarIravAle,
tadbhavamuktigAmI aise gaNadhara sthavira ke pAsa pravrajyA aMgIkAra kI  /  he
gautama ! isa prakAra vo kAphI ghora, vIra, tapa, saMyama ke anuSThAna ke sevana
svAdhyAya dhyAnAdika meM pravRtti karate-karate sAre karma kA kSaya karake usa
brAhmaNI ke sAtha karmaraja pheMkakara goviMda brAhmaNa Adi kaIM nara aura
nArIgaNa ne siddhi pAI  /  vo saba mahAyazasvI bane isa prakAra kahatA huuN|
sUtra - 1498 he bhagavaMta ! usa brAhmaNIne aisA to kyA kiyA ki jisase isa
prakAra sulabha bodhi pAkara subaha meM nAma grahaNa karane ke lAyaka banI aura
phira usake upadeza se kaIM bhavya jIva nara-nArI ki jo ananta saMsAra ke ghora
duHkha meM sar3a rahe the unheM sundara dharmadeza Adi ke dvArA zAzvata sukha
dekara uddhAra kiyA  /  he gautama ! usane pUrvabhava meM kaI sundara bhAvanA
sahita zalya rahita hokara janma se lekara ananta taka lage hae doSa kI zuddha
bhAva sahita AloyaNA dekara yathopadiSTa prAyazcitta kiyA  /  phira samAdhi kAla
pAkara usake prabhAva se saudharma devaloka meM indra mahArAja kI agramahiSI
mahAdevI ke rUpa meM utpanna huii| he bhagavaMta ! kyA usa brAhmaNI kA jIva usa
ke pIchale bhava meM nigraMthI zramaNI thI ki jisane niHzalya AlocanA karake
yathopadiSTa prAyazcitta kiyA ? he gautama ! usa brAhmaNI ke jIvane usake
pIchale bhava meM kAphI labdhi aura siddhi prApta kI thI  /  jJAna, darzana,
cAritra ratna kI mahARddhi pAI thI  /  samagra guNa ke AdhArabhUta uttama zIlA-
bhUSaNa dhAraNa karanevAle zarIravAle, mahA tapasvI yugapradhAna zramaNa aNagAra
gaccha ke svAmI the, lekina zramaNI na the| he bhagavaMta ! kisa karma ke vipAka
se gacchAdhipati hokara usane strIpana ke karma kA upArjana kiyA ? he gautama !
mAyA karane ke kAraNa se he bhagavaMta ! aisA use mAyA ke kAraNa kyA huA ki -
jisakA saMsAra dubalA ho gayA hai  /  aise AtmA ko bhI samagra pApa ke udaya se
milanevAlA, kAphI logoM se nindita, khuzabudAra dravya, ghI, zakkara, acche
vasANe kA cUrNa, pramANa ikaTThe karake banAe gae pAka ke laDDU ke pAtra kI
taraha sabako bhogya, samagra duHkha aura kleza ke sthAnaka, samagra sukha ko
nIgalanevAle parama pavitra uttama aise ahiMsA lakSaNa svarUpa zramaNa dharma ke
vighna samAna, svarga kI argalA aura naraka ke dvAra samAna, samagra apayaza,
apakIrti, kalaMka, kleza Adi vairAdi pApa ke nidhAna samAna nirmalakula ko
akSamya, akArya rUpa zyAma kAjala samAna kAle kUcar3e se kalaMkita karanevAlA
aise strI ke svabhAva ko gacchAdhipatine upArjita kiyA ? he gautama !
gacchAdhipatipana meM rahe aise usane choTe-se choTI bhI mAyA nahIM kI thii|
pahale vo cakravartI rAjA hokara paraloka bhIrU kAmabhoga se UbanevAle aise
usane tInake kI taraha cakravartI kI samaddhi, caudaha ratna, nava nidhAna,
64000 zreSTha striyA~, 32000 AjJAMkita zreSTha rAjA, 96 karor3a padAti yAvat
chaha khaMDa kA bhArata varSa kA dra kI upamA samAna mahArAjya kI samRddhi kA
tyAga kara ke, kAphI puNya se prerita vo cakravartI niHsaMga hokara pravrajyA
aMgIkAra kI | alpa samaya meM guNadhArI mahAtapasvI zrutadhara bane | yogya
jAnakara uttama guru mahArAjAne use gacchAdhipati kI anujJA kI  /  he gautama !
vahA~ bhI jisane sadgati kA mArga acchI taraha se pahacAnA hai  /  yathopadiSTa
zramaNa dharma ko acchI taraha se pAlana karate, ugra abhigraha dhAraNa karate,
ghora pariSaha upasarga sahate, rAgadveSa kaSAya kA tyAga karate, Agama ke
anusAra vidhi se gacchapAlana kara ke, jIvanaparyanta sAdhvI kA lAyA huA AhAra
ke paribhoga chor3a dete, cha kAya jIva samArambha varjana karate, sahaja bhI
dIvya audArika maithuna parINAma na karate, Aloka yA paraloka ke sAMsArika sukha
kI AzaMsA na karate niyANa, mAyA zalya se mukta, niHzalyatA se AlocanA, nindanA
garhaNApUrvaka yathopadiSTa prAyazcitta sevana karate pramAda ke Alambana se
sarvathA mukta kaIM bhava meM upArjita kie aise na khapAe hue karmarAzi ko
jisane khapAkara kAphI alpa pramANavAle strIrUpa ke kAraNa samAna muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 139

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' The text explains that the karma has
arisen due to the Maya (illusion) that the being had in other births. O
Bhagvant! How did that great being perform Maya in other births, which led to
such terrible karma? O Gautam! The soul of that Gachchadhipa was born as the
daughter of a common king, millions of births ago. Once, after her marriage, her
husband died immediately. Then her father told the princess, "O Bhadra! I give
you fifty kingdoms from my village. From its income, give food, water, clothes,
as much wealth, grain, gold, silver, or all kinds of happiness to the blind, the
half-bodied, the disabled who cannot walk, those suffering from severe diseases,
those defeated by everyone, the poor, the sorrowful, those stained by bodily
impurities, those born poor, the Shramanas, the Shravakas, the restless, the
relatives, and anyone who desires it. Give them complete compassion and
protection. This will prevent you from becoming the cause of unpleasantness and
defeat for all beings in future births. And do not become a barren, widowed,
unhappy woman, devoid of the means of enjoyment and consumption, such as good
fragrance, flower garlands, betel nut, ointments, body adornments, etc., with
incomplete desires and a sorrowful birth." Then, O Gautam! She accepted it with
humility. But her cheeks were washed with tears flowing from her eyes, and she
said in a hollow voice, "I don't know how to speak much. Go from here and
quickly make a large wooden pyre so that I can immerse my body in it. I, a
sinner, have no purpose in living now. Perhaps, subject to the fruition of
karma, I will become a stain on your lineage, which is renowned throughout the
world for its extraordinary name, its fame, and its pure glory, due to the
fickle nature of a great sinner like me. My actions might defile your entire
lineage." After that, the king thought, "Indeed, I am fortunate to have such a
jewel-like daughter, even though I am childless. Oh! The wisdom of this girl!
Oh! Her intelligence! Oh! Her knowledge! Oh! Her detachment! Oh! Her form that
will stain our lineage! Oh! This girl is worthy of worship every moment, with
such great qualities. As long as she remains in my house, my great welfare will
be ensured. Seeing her, remembering her, and speaking with her will purify the
soul. So, this daughter is like a son to me, who is childless." Thinking this,
the king said, "O daughter! According to the customs of our lineage, there is no
burning of a widow on a pyre. So, you should follow the path of virtue and the
Shravaka dharma, give charity, perform austerities and fasts as you wish, and
especially engage in acts of compassion for living beings. This kingdom is also
yours." Then, O Gautam! After her father said this, she remained silent,
stopping from jumping into the pyre. Then, the father entrusted her to the
guards and servants of the inner palace. As time passed, the king died. A wise
and great minister, gathering together, decided to crown this princess. Then,
she was crowned. O Gautam! After that, she sat in the assembly hall every day.
Now, one day, in that royal assembly, filled with hundreds of men, including
wise men, students, Bhattas, Tadingas, Musaddis, clever, discerning, ministers,
and Mahants, the princess, subject to the fruition of karma, sitting on the
royal throne, saw a handsome young man with beautiful features, radiance, and
wealth, with eyes full of desire and passion. The young man understood her inner
feelings. He thought, "This poor princess has fallen into a dark and endless
abyss of sorrow because of seeing me. Indeed, I am unfortunate that my body, a
machine for generating such desire, a collection of particles, makes me jump
into the fire of lust like a moth. What should I do now? I will quickly abandon
this sinful body. I will perform severe penance for this. I will embrace the
Aṇagāra dharma, which destroys all sins, just as it abandons all possessions."
Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 140

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka batAe
haiM, karma aise unhoMne bAkI anya bhava meM mAyA kI thI usa nimitta se bA~dhe
hue isa karma kA udaya huA hai| he bhagavaMta ! anya bhava meM usa mahAnubhAva
ne kisa taraha mAyA kI, jisase aisA bhayAnaka karmodaya huA? he gautama ! usa
gacchAdhipati kA jIva lAkha bhava ke pahale sAmAnya rAjA kI putrI ke rUpa meM
utpanna huI  /  kisI samaya zAdI ke bAda turanta usakA bhartAra mara gayA  /
taba usake pitAne rAjakumArI ko kahA ki, he bhadre ! maiM tumheM apane gA~va meM
se pacAsa rAjya detA huuN| usa kI AmadanI meM se tumhArI icchA ke anusAra aMdho
ko, Adhe aMgavAle ko, jo cala nahIM sakate aise apaMga ko, kAphI vyAdhi vedanA
se vyApta zarIravAle ko, sabhI logoM se parAbhavita, dAridra, duHkha, zarIrasIbI
se kalaMkita logoM ko, janma se hI daridra ho unako, zramaNa ko, zrAvaka ko,
becaina ko, riztedAroM ko, jisa kisI ko jo iSTa ho aise bhojana, pAnI, vastra
yAvat dhana, dhAnya, suvarNa, hiraNya yA samagra sukha denevAle, sampUrNa dayA
karake abhayadAna do  /  jisase bhavAntara meM bhI sabhI logoM ko apriyakAriNI
sabako parAbhava karane ke sthAnabhUta tuM na bane  /  aura suvAsa, puSpamAlA,
taMbola, vilepana, aMgarAga Adi icchA ke anusAra bhoga aura upabhoga ke sAdhana
rahita bane, apUrNa manorathavAlI, duHkha janma denevAlI bIbI vaMdhyA raMDA Adi
duHkhavAlI na bne| taba he gautama ! usane tahatti karake usa bAta ko apanAi  /
lekina netra se har3a har3a karate azrujala se jisakA kapola kA hissA dhula rahA
hai  /  khokharI AvAja meM kahane lagI ki jyAdA bolane maiM nahIM jAnatI  /
yahA~ se Apa jAkara jalda kASTha kI bar3I cittA banavAo ki jisase mere zarIra ko
usameM DUbo dU~  /  pApiNI aisI mujhe aba jIne kA koI prayojana nahIM hai  /
zAyada karma pariNati ko AdhIna hokara mahApApI strI ke caMcala svabhAva ke
kAraNa se Apake isa asAmAnya prasiddha nAmavAle pUre saMsAra meM jisakI kIrti
aura pavitra yaza bharA huA hai aise Apa ke kula ko zAyada dAga lagAnevAlI banU~
/  yaha mere nimitta se apanA sarva kula malIna ho jAe usake bAda usa rAjAne
cintavana kI ki - vAkai maiM adhanya hU~ ki aputravAle aise muje aisI ratna
samAna beTI mile  /  aho ! isa bAlikA kA viveka  /  aho usakI buddhi ! aho usakI
prajJA ! aho usakA vairAga ! aho usake kula ko dAga lagAnevAlA bhIrUpana ! aho
samacuma hara pala yaha bAlikA vaMdanIya hai, jisake aise mahAna guNa hai to
jaba taka vo mere ghara meM rahegI taba taka merA mahA kalyANa hogA  /  usako
dekhane se, smaraNa karane se, usake sAtha bolane se AtmA nirmala hogA, to putra
rahita mujako yaha putrI putratulya hai - aisA socakara rAjAne kahA ki - he
putrI ! hamAre kula kI rasama ke anusAra kASTa kI cittA meM raMr3ApA nahIM hotA
/  to tU zIla aura zrAvakadharma rUpa cAritra kA pAlana kara, dAna de, tumhArI
IcchA ke anusAra pauSadha upavAsa Adi kara aura khAsa karake jIvadayA ke kAma
kara  /  yaha rAjya bhI tumhArA hI hai  /  usake bAda he gautama ! pitAke isa
prakAra kahane ke bAda cittA meM giranA banda rakhake mauna rhii| phira pitAne
aMtaHpura ke rakSapAla sevaka ko sauMpa diyA  /  usa anusAra samaya bItane se
kisI samaya vo rAjA mara gayA  /  eka mahAbuddhizAlI mahAmaMtrIone ikaTThe
hokara taya kiyA ki isa rAjakumArI kA hI yahA~ rAjyAbhiSeka kara de  /  phira
rAjyAbhiSeka kiyA  /  he gautama ! usake bAda hararoja sabhA maMDapa meM
baiThatI thii| aba kisI dina vahA~ rAjasabhA meM kaIM buddhijana, vidyArthI,
bhaTTa, taDiMga, musaddI, catura, vicakSaNa, maMtrIjana, mahaMta Adi saiMkar3o
puruSa se bharI par3I isa sabhA maMDapa ke bIca rAjasiMhAsana para baiThe
karmapariNati ke AdhIna rAjakumArIne rAga sahita abhilASAvAle netra se uttama
rUpa lAvaNya zobhA kI saMpattivAlI jIva sundara jJAnavAle eka uttama kumAra ko
dekhA  /   /  kumAra usake manogata bhAva ko samajha gayA  /  socane lagA ki -
mujhe dekhakara becArI yaha rAjakumArI ghora aMdhakArapUrNa aura ananta
duHkhadAyaka pAtAla meM pahu~ca gaI  /  vAkaI maiM adhanya hU~ ki isa taraha kA
rAga utpanna hone ke yaMtra samAna, pudagala samUhavAle mere deha ko dekhakara
tItalI kI taraha kAmadIpaka meM chalAMga lagAtA hai| aba maiM jI ka kyA karU~ ?
aba maiM jalda isa pApI zarIra ko vosIrAUM  /  isake lie kAphI duSkara
prAyazcitta kruuNgaa| samagra saMga kA tyAga karane ke samAna samagra pApa kA
vinAza karanevAle aNagAra dharma ko aMgIkAra kruuNgaa| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 140

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  I will loosen the group of sinful
bonds that I was able to abandon due to the suffering accumulated in many past
lives.  A curse on this disorganized world of living beings where the category
of senses is so subservient.  Alas, what misfortune that the world does not look
towards the loss of the afterlife.  How has the mind become so attached for one
birth?  Ignorance of action and consequence, lack of restraint, lack of
sharpness, and even the abandonment of shame.  I do not find it appropriate to
delay even for a moment in this situation.  It is risky to stay in a place where
the arrival of immediate sin, which should be stopped by suffering, is
happening.  Ha ha ha, oh shameless enemy!  Such a heap of karma has risen today
for this royal girl.  Seeing the form of this body, which is like my storehouse
of sin, desire for attachment arose in her eyes.  Now I will abandon this
country and embrace renunciation.  Thinking this, Kumaravarna said, "I seek
forgiveness from all of you, being free from any pain."  And if I have committed
any offense, even unknowingly, may everyone forgive me.  With three-fold purity,
I seek forgiveness from the royal family, the citizens of the city, and everyone
else who is present in the assembly hall."  Saying this, he went outside.  He
reached his residence.  On the way, he took food for the journey.  He wore two
pieces of soft white cloth, like the waves of a lake.  He took a simple, vine-
like stick, like the heart of a good man, and a half-shield in his left hand.
Then, he walked, offering salutations, praise, and worship to the Arihant
Bhagvant, the unique Guru of the three worlds, the best Dharma Tirthankara in
the world, according to the proper method.  Walking like this, Kumar reached a
distant land, where the capital was Hiranyakkarudi.  He searched for news of the
arrival of a Dharmacharaya with special qualities, thinking, "Until the time is
right for a Dharmacharaya with special qualities, I will stay here."  Some days
passed.  He thought, "I will serve the king of this country, whose fame has
spread throughout many lands," and he met the king.  He made a suitable request.
The king honored him.  He received service.  At some point, the king asked
Kumar, "Oh noble one, great soul!  Whose name is inscribed on the gem-studded
ring that adorns your hand?  For how long have you served which king?  Or, how
did your master disrespect you?"  Kumar replied to the king, "I have served the
one whose name is inscribed on this gem-studded ring for this long."  Then the
king asked, "By what word is he called?"  Kumar said, "Without eating, I will
not utter the name of that wicked, eye-gouging wretch."  Then the king asked,
"Oh great soul!  Why is he called by that word?  And what is the reason for not
uttering his name without eating?"  Kumar said, "I will not utter the word 'eye-
gouging wretch' in full.  You will know it directly at some other place.  And
then, in a moment of peace, I will tell you the truth.  The reason I did not
utter his name without eating is that I did not want to lose the opportunity to
eat food during the day if I uttered the name of that wicked, eye-gouging wretch
without eating."  Then, oh Gautam!  The king, filled with wonder, asked for a
delicious meal out of curiosity.  He sat in the dining hall with the prince and
the entire family.  He ordered eighteen kinds of sweet dishes, food, snacks, and
various types of food.  At this time, the king said to Kumar, "After eating, you
will tell me."  The king said again, "Oh great soul!  You have a morsel in your
right hand, now tell me the name."  Perhaps if we face any obstacle in this
situation, we will also know it, so let everyone in the city, by your command,
strive for their own welfare.  Then, oh Gautam!  That Kumar said, "That wicked,
eye-gouging wretch, born in a terrible womb, unworthy of being seen, from the
distant province of Durant, has a name that is not worthy of being uttered in
words."  Oh Gautam!  As soon as Kumar uttered the name, the enemy's army
suddenly and unexpectedly surrounded them.  They were clad in armor, with flags
waving above them, and in their forehands were sharp swords, spears, and shining
discs, and they shouted, "Kill!"  They were terrifying, having experienced many
battles.  Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation
Page 141

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka kaIM
pUrvabhava meM ikaTThe hue duHkha se karake chor3a sake aise pApa bandhana ke
samUha ko zithila karU~gA, aise avyavasthita jIvaloka ko dhikkAra hai ki jisameM
indriya kA varga isa taraha parAdhIna hotA hai  /  aho kaisI kamanasibI hai ki
loka paraloka ke nukasAna kI ora najara nahIM uThAtA  /  eka janma ke lie citta
kA durAgraha kaisA huA hai ? kAryAkArya kI ajJAnatA, maryAdA rahitapana,
tejarahitapana, lajjA kA bhI jisane tyAga kiyA hai  /  mujhe isa hAlAta meM
palabhara bhI dera lagAnA ucita nahIM hai  /  duHkha se karake rokA jAe aise
tatkAla pApa kA Agamana hotA ho aise sthAna meM rahanA jokhima hai| hA hA hA he
nirlajja zatru ! adhanya aisI A~Tha karmarAzi isa rAja bAlikA ko Aja udaya meM
Ae haiM  /  yaha mere koThAra samAna pApa zarIra ko rUpa dekhane se usake netra
meM rAga kI abhilASA huii| aba isa deza kA tyAga karake pravrajyA aMgIkAra karU~
/  aisA socakara kumAravarane kahA ki - maiM zalya rahita hokara Apa sabakI
kSamA cAhatA hU~ | aura merA kisI anajAne meM bhI aparAdha huA ho to harakoI
kSamA de, trividha-trividha se trikaraNa zuddha se maiM sabhAmaMDapa meM rahe
rAjakula aura nagarajana Adi saba kI kSamA mA~gatA huuN| aisA kahakara bAhara
nIkala gayA apane nivAsasthAna para pahu~ca gayA  /  vahA~ se rAste meM khAne kA
pAtheya grahaNa kiyA  /  jhA~ka ke r3haga ke taraMga samAna sukumAla zveta
vastra ke do khaMr3a karake pahanA  /  sajjana ke hRdaya samAna sarala netara
latA kI soTI aura ardhaDhAla bA~ye hAtha meM grahaNa kI usake bAda tInoM bhuvana
ke advitIya guru aise arihaMta bhagavaMta saMsAra meM sabase zreSTha dharma
tIrthaMkara kI yathokta vidhi se saMstavanA, stuti, namaskAra karake calate rahe
/  aise calate kumAra kAphI dUra dezAntara meM pahu~ce ki jahA~ hiraNNakkarUr3I
rAjadhAnI thI  /  vahA~ viziSTa guNavAle dharmAcArya ke Ane ke samAcAra pAne ke
lie kumAra khoja karatA thA aura socatA thA ki jaba taka viziSTa guNavAle
dharmAcArya kA yoga na bane taba taka maiM yahIM rUkuM  /  aise kucha dina bIte
/  kaIM deza meM phailanevAlI kIrtivAle vahA~ ke rAjA kI sevA karU~ aisA mana
meM maMtraNA karake rAjA ko milA  /  yogya nivedana kiyA  /  rAjAne sanmAna kiyA
/  sevA paaii| kisI samaya prApta hue avasara se usa kumAra ko rAjAne pUchA ki-
he mahAnubhAva ! mahAsattvazAlin ! yaha tumhAre hAtha meM kisake nAma se
alaMkRta mudrAratna suzobhita hai ? itane arase taka tUne kauna-se rAjA kI sevA
kI thI? yA to tumhAre svAmIne tumhArA anAdara kisa taraha kiyA ? kumArane rAjA
ko pratyuttara diyA ki jisake nAma se alaMkRta yaha mudrAratna hai usakI maiMne
isa arase taka sevA kI  /  usake bAda rAjane pachA ki- use kisa zabda se bulAyA
jAtA hai ? kumArane kahA ki- bhojana kie binA maiM vo cakSukuzIla adhama kA nAma
nahIM lU~gA  /  taba rAjAne pUchA ki, are mahAsattvazAlin ! vo cakSukuzIla aise
zabda se kyoM bulAe jAte haiM ? aura khAe binA usakA nAma na lene kI kyA vajaha
hai ? kumArane kahA ki cakSukuzIla aisA nAma zabdapUrvaka bolU~gA nahIM kisI
dUsare sthAna meM kabhI tumheM pratyakSa patA calegA  /  aura phira kisI zAnti
ke pala meM vo hakIkata batAUMgA  /  khAe binA unake nAma kA zabda na bolanA,
usa kAraNa se maiMne usakA nAma nahIM liyA  /  zAyada binA khAe usa cakSukuzIla
adhama kA nAma lU~ to usa kAraNa se dina meM pAna-bhojana kI prApti na ho sake
/  taba he gautama ! vismaya pAnevAle rAjAne kutUhala vaza jalda rasavaMtI
ma~gavAI  /  rAjakumAra aura sarva parivAra ke sAtha bhojana maMDapa meM baiThA
/  aThAraha taraha ke miSTAnna bhojana sukhar3I, khAjA aura alaga alaga taraha
kI AhAra mNgvaayaa| isa samaya rAjAne kumAra ko kahA ki - bhojana kara ke bAda
batAUMgA  /  rAjAne phira se kahA- he mahAsattvavAn ! dAine hAtha meM nIvAlA
hai, aba nAma batAo zAyada yadi isa hAlAta meM hameM koI vighna ho to hameM bhI
vo patA cale isalie nagara sahita saba tumhArI AjJA se AtmahIta kI sAdhanA kare
/  usake bAda he gautama ! usa kumArane kahA ki vo cakSukuzIladhAma duranta
prAnta lakSaNavAle na dekhane ke lAyaka durjAta janmavAle usakA aisA kucha zabda
meM bolane ke lAyaka nAma haiM  /  he gautama ! jitane meM yaha kumAravarane
nAma liyA ki utane meM kisI ko patA na cale aise acAnaka akasmAta se ko zatru ke
sainya ne ghera liyA  /  bakhtara pahanakara sajja Upara jhaMDA laharAte hue
tIkSNa dhAravAlI talavAra, bhAlA, camakIle cakra Adi zastra jisake agra hasta
meM haiM, vadha karo aise haNa ke zabda se bhayAnaka, kaIM yuddha ke saMsarga
meM muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 141

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishītha'  Warriors, who never retreat,
who end life, who are of immense strength, valiant, and mighty, arrived. At this
time, the king, terrified by the sight of death, fled without regard for the
lineage of his family, falling at the feet of the Kumāra. Having found a
direction, the king fled with his family. O Gautama! At that time, the Kumāra
pondered, "In my lineage, no one has ever turned their back. On the other hand,
it is not right for me to strike those who know the Dharma of non-violence and
who renounce the taking of life. What should I do now? Should I practice the
austerities of fasting and water-abstinence? Even in taking the name of Kuśīla
from a single city, such a great loss has occurred. Now, I must also test my own
character here." Thinking this, the Kumāra said, "If I become a Kuśīla even in
word alone, then no one will be able to leave this capital city safe and sound.
If I become steadfast in character in all three ways - mind, speech, and body -
then do not strike me with your sharp and terrifying weapon that ends life.
'Namo Arihantāṇam, Namo Arihantāṇam' - chanting this, he started walking towards
the gate with its magnificent archway. As he took a step on the ground, someone
shouted, "This is the king in the guise of a mendicant!" Saying this, they
rejoiced and shouted, "Catch him! Catch him! Kill him! Kill him!" - uttering
these words, they rushed towards him, wielding swords and other weapons, like
valiant warriors, fierce and deadly enemies. Then, the Kumāra, with a calm mind,
fearless and unperturbed, said, "O wicked men! You come to us with such darkness
in your hearts. I am the one who has accumulated great merit through many
virtuous deeds. Some kings are your true enemies. Do not say that the king has
disappeared out of fear. If you have strength and valor, then strike!" As soon
as he spoke, they all stopped.  O Gautama! The words of a man adorned with
character are insurmountable even for the gods. He remained motionless. Then, he
fainted, falling to the ground, unconscious and lifeless. O Gautama! At that
time, the deceitful and cunning, wicked king, addressed all the people who were
moving around, and all the wise, strong, cowardly, discerning, foolish, brave,
fearful, clever, and cunning advisors, saying, "O people! Quickly take from this
capital city heaps of diamonds, sapphires, Suryakānta, Chandrakānta gems, the
best gems, and treasures, gold, Arjun Tapaniya, Jambunad gold, and so on,
weighing a lakh. What more can I say? Give the four-armed army a lakh of khāri
(a specific measure used at that time, similar to a pāli) full of pure pearls,
corals, and other precious stones, and especially give them news of that man-
lion, the pure and virtuous, excellent Kumāra, who is worthy of being received
in the morning, so that I may be at peace."  O Gautama! After paying homage to
the king, those royal servants, with swiftness and agility, like the wind,
mounted their excellent horses and went into the forest, the thicket, the cave
of the mountain, and other secluded places. In a moment, they reached the
capital city. Then, the prince, with his hands raised to his head, his hair
flowing, appeared before them. Before him stood the gods, adorned with golden
ornaments and garments, illuminating the ten directions, chanting auspicious
words of victory, holding dust-removing fans, and with folded hands, their minds
filled with wonder, like statues made of clay.  At that time, O Gautama! The
preaching deity, residing in the sky, with a joyful heart and a body filled with
excitement, uttered, "Namo Arihantāṇam," and said to the prince, "

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka kisI dina
pIchehaTha na karanevAle, jIvana kA anta karanevAle, atulabala, parAkramI,
mahAbalavAle yoddhA A ge| isa samaya kumAra ke caraNa meM girakara - pratyakSa
dekhe pramANa se maraNa ke bhaya se becaina hone ke kAraNa se apane kula
kramagata puruSakAra kI paravAha kie binA rAjA palAyana ho gayA  /  eka dizA
prApta karake parivAra sahita vo rAjA bhAgane lagA  /  he gautama ! usa samaya
kumArane cintavana kiyA ki mere kulakrama meM pITha batAnA aisA kisI se nahIM
huA  /  dUsarI ora ahiMsA lakSaNa dharma ko jAnanevAle aura phira prANAtipAta ke
lie pratyAkhyAnavAle mujha para prahAra karanA ucita nahIM hai | to aba mujhe
kyA karanA cAhie ? yA AgAravAle bhojana pAnI ke tyAga ke paccakkhANa karU~? eka
kevala nagara se kuzIla kA nAma grahaNa karane meM - bhI itanA bar3A nukasAna
kArya khar3A huA | to aba mujhe apane zIla kI kasauTI bhI yahA~ karanA  /  aisA
socakara kumAra kahane lagA ki - yadi maiM kevala vAcA se bhI kuzIla banU~ to
isa rAjadhAnI meM se kSema kuzala akSata zarIravAlA nahIM nIkala sakU~gA  /
yadi maiM mana, vacana, kAyA aise tIna taraha ke sarva tarIke se zIlayakta bana~
to mere para yaha kAphI tIkSNa bhayAnaka jIva kA anta karanevAle hathiyAra se
vAra mata karanA  /  'namo arihaMtANaM, namo arihaMtANaM' aise bola ko jitane
meM zreSTha toraNavAle daravajje ke dvAra kI ora calane lage  /  jitane meM
thor3I bhUmi ke hisse meM Daga bharatA thA utane meM zora karate hue kisIne kahA
ki bhikSuka ke veza meM yaha rAjA jAte hai  /  aisA kahakara Ananda meM Akara
kahane lagA ki-hara lo, hara lo, mAro mAro, ityAdika zabda bolate-bolate
talavAra Adi zastra uThAkara pravara balavAle yoddhA jaise vahA~ daur3akara Ae,
kAphI bhayAnaka jIva kA anta karanevAle, zatru sainya ke yoddhA A gae  /  taba
kheda rahita dhIre dhIre nirbhayatA se trasa hue binA adIna manavAle kumArane
kahA ki are duSTa puruSa ! aise tAmasa bhAva se tuma hamAre pAsa Ao  /  kaIM
bAra zubha adhyavasAya se ikaTThe kie puNya kI prakarSatAvAlA maiM hI hU~ |
kucha rAjA tumhAre sacce zatru hai  /  tuma aisA mata bolanA ki hamAre bhaya se
rAjA adRzya huA hai  /  yadi tumameM zakti, parAkrama ho to prahAra karo  /
jaise itanA bolA vaise usI pala vo saba rUka ge| he gautama ! zIlAlaMkRt puruSa
kI bolI devatA ko bhI alaMghanIya hai| vo nizcala dehavAlA banA  /  usake bAda
ghasa karate mUrchA pAkara ceSTA rahita hokara bhUmi para kumAra gira par3A  /
he gautama ! usa avasara para kapaTI aura mAyAvI usa adhama rAjAne sarva
bhramaNa karate logoM ko aura sarvatra rahe dhIra, samartha, bhIru, vicakSaNa,
mUrakha, zUravIra, kAyara, catura, cANakya samAna buddhizAlI, kAphI prapaMca se
bhare saMdhi karavAnevAle, vigraha karavAnevAle, catura rAjasevaka Adi puruSoM
ko kahA ki are ! isa rAjadhAnI meM se tuma jalda hIre, nIlaratna, sUryakAnta,
candrakAntamaNi, zreSThamaNi aura ratna ke Dhera, hema arjuna tapanIya jAMbunada
suvarNa Adi lAkha bhAra pramANa grahaNa karo  /  jyAdA kyA kahe? vizuddha bahu
jAtivaMta aise motI vidruma - paravAlA Adi lAkho khAri se bhare (usa taraha kA
usa samaya calatA pAlI samAna nApa vizeSa) bhaMDAra caturaMga senA ko de de,
khAsa karake vo sugRhita subaha meM grahaNa karane ke lAyaka nAmavAle aise usa
puruSasiMha vizuddha zIlavAle uttamakumAra ke samAcAra do jisase maiM zAnti pA
skuuN| he gautama ! usa ke bAda rAjA ko praNAma karake vo rAjasevaka puruSa
utAvale vega se capalatA se pavana samAna gati se cale vaise uttama taraha ke
azva para ArUr3ha hokara vana meM, jhAr3I meM, parvata kI guphA meM, dUsare
ekAnta pradeza meM cale gae  /  palabhara meM rAjadhAnI meM pahu~ce  /  taba
dA~I aura bA~I bhUjA ke kara pallava se mastaka ke keza kA loca karate hue
rAjakumAra dikhAI die  /  usake sAmane suvarNa ke AbhUSaNa aura vastra sajAvaTa
yukta daza dizAoM ko prakAzita karate jayajaya kAra ke maMgala zabda uccArate,
rajoharaNa pakar3e hue aura hastakamala kI racI aMjali yukta devatA use
dekhakara vismayita manavAle lepakarma kI banI pratimA kI taraha sthira khar3e
rhe| isa samaya he gautama ! harSapUrNa hRdaya aura romAMca kaMcuka se Anandita
bane zarIravAle AkAza meM rahe pravacana devatA ne 'namo arihaMtANaM' aisA
uccAraNa kara ke usa rAjakumAra ko isa prakAra kahA ki - muni dIparatnasAgara
kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 142

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Aagam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number Sutra -
1499-1503 Those who can break Mount Meru into pieces with a single punch,
swallow the earth, expel Indra from heaven, and in an instant, bring about the
welfare of all three worlds, even they cannot compare to one who possesses
unshakeable character. Indeed, it is believed that such a person is born, worthy
of being worshipped by all three worlds, whether male or female, whoever does
not violate their character in the family they are born into. Served by the
supremely pure Satpurusha, destroying all sins, a treasure trove of supreme
happiness, hail to such seventeen types of character. Saying this, O Gautama!
The preaching deities showered flowers on the Kumar, then the deities began to
say - Sutra-1504-1506 _ The ignorant souls of the world, afflicted by karma and
kshaya, blame their fate or the deities. They do not establish their soul in
virtue. They do not dwell in equanimity during times of sorrow. They devise
schemes to obtain happiness in vain or through liberation. These are those who
dwell in the middle ground of fate, who see everyone with the same eye and in
whom all beings have faith. Whatever is obtained according to karma, they do not
cause its deposit or abandonment. So now you all gain understanding. And with
the highest character and virtue, bow down to the lotus feet of such a Kumar,
free from darkness. Saying this, the deities disappeared. Sutra-1507 Seeing this
opportunity, the clever royal minister quickly went to the king and reported
what he had seen. Hearing this, the king, whose heart was like a sea of joy and
sorrow, full of waves of various possibilities, stood up in fear. The king, with
a heart filled with fear and wonder, slowly came through the small door of the
secret tunnel, his whole body trembling, with great curiosity, to the region
where he was eager to see the Kumar. The king saw the Kumar, the great, noble,
well-established, famous, and great-souled Kumar. With the perception of
infinite knowledge, he experienced the joys and sorrows of countless births, the
attainment of right faith, the world, nature, karma-bondage, its state, how to
be liberated from it? He preached the Dharma of non-violence to the king and
others who were bound by enmity. The king, Indra, the lord of the righteous,
sitting comfortably, saw the Kumar with a white umbrella held over his head, and
seeing such a wonder, which he had never seen before, he, along with his family,
attained enlightenment and accepted initiation. The king, the enemy of the
wheel-wielding king, also attained enlightenment and accepted initiation. At
this time, the deities of the four realms made a great sound with a beautiful,
resonant, deep-toned drum, and then proclaimed. Sutra - 1508-1509 O destroyer of
the eight knots of karma! O Supreme Lord! O glorious one! Hail to you, with your
character, vision, and knowledge. In this world, there is one mother who is
worthy of worship every moment, in whose womb a great sage, like Mount Meru, is
born and dwells. Sutra - 1510 Saying this, the deities, with hearts full of
devotion, showered fragrant flowers, folded their hands in salutation, and
descended from the sky, along with Indra. After that, the celestial nymphs
danced near the lotus feet of the Kumar. Then they praised him. After bowing
down and worshipping for a long time, the assembly of deities went to their own
place. Sutra - 1511 O Lord! How did that glorious Kumar, bearing the name
Sagrihit, become so wise? O Gautama! In a previous birth, he was in the state of
a Shraman, and then he used the rod of words. Because of that, Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Aagam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page 143

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka sUtra -
1499-1503 jo kevala muSThi ke prahAra se meru ke Tukar3e kara dete haiM, pRthvI
ko pI jAte haiM, indra ko svarga se bedakhala kara sakate haiM, palabhara meM
tInoM bhuvana kA bhI ziva kalyANa karanevAle hote haiM lekina aisA bhI akSata
zIlavAle kI tulanA meM nahIM A sakatA  /  vAkaI vo hI utpanna huA hai aisA mAnA
jAtA hai, vo tInoM bhuvana ko vaMdana karane ke lAyaka hai, vo puruSa ho yA
strI, koI bhI ho jisa kula meM janma lekara zIla kA khaMDana nahIM karatA  /
parama pavitra satpuruSa se sevita, samagra pApa ko naSTa karanevAlA, sarvottama
sukha kA bhaMDAra aise sataraha taraha ke zIla kA jaya ho  /  aisA bolakara he
gautama ! pravacana devatAoM ne kumAra para puSpa kI vRSTi kI, phira devatA
kahane lage ki - sUtra-1504-1506 _ jagata ke ajJAnI AtmA Apane karma se kaSAya
yA duHkhI hue ho to deva bhAgya yA devatA ko doSa dete haiM  /  apanI AtmA ko
guNa meM sthApita nahIM karatA  /  duHkha ke samaya samatA meM ramaNa nahIM
karatA  /  sukha phijhUla yA mukta meM mila jAe aisI tarakIba banAte haiM  /
yaha deva-bhAgya madhyastha bhAva meM rahanevAle, haraeka ko eka najara se
dekhanevAle aura usameM sarva loka bharosA rakhanevAle hote haiM  /  jo kucha
bhI karmAnusAra prApta hotA hai aura usakA nikSepa yA tyAga deva nahIM karavAte
/  to aba tuma sarvajana bodha pAo  /  aura sarvottama zIla guNa se maharddhika
aise kumAra ke caraNa kamala meM tAmasa bhAva rahita hokara praNAma kro| aisA
kahakara devatA adRzya ho ge| sUtra-1507 yaha avasara dekhakara usa catura
rAjapuruSane jalda rAjA ke pAsa pahu~cakara dekhA huA vRttAnta nivedana kiyaa|
use sunakara kaIM vikalpa rUpa taraMgamAlA se pUre honevAle hRdayasAgaravAlA
harSa aura viSAda pAne se bhaya sahita khar3A ho gayA  /  trAsa aura
vismayayukta hRdayavAlA rAjA dhIre-dhIre gupta suraMga ke choTe dvAra se kaMpate
sarvagAtravAle mahAkautuka se kumAra darzana kI kAphI utkaMThAvAle pradeza meM
AyA sugRhIta nAmavAle mahAyazasvI mahAsattvavAle mahAnubhAva kumAra ke rAjA ne
darzana kie  /  apratipAti mahAavadhijJAna ke pratyaya se anaginata bhava ke
mahasUsa kie hue sukha duHkha samyaktvAdi kI prApti, saMsAra, svabhAva,
karmabaMdha, usakI dazA, usase mukti kaise mile ? vaira bandhavAle rAjAdi ko
ahiMsA lakSaNa dharma upadeza diyaa| sukhapUrvaka baiThe saudharmApati indra
mahArAjAne mastaka para rakhe zveta chatravAle kumAra ko dekhakara pahale kabhI
bhI na dekhA huA aisA tAjjuba dekhakara parivAra sahita vo rAjAne pratibodha
pAyA aura dIkSA aMgIkAra kI  /  zatru cakrAdhipati rAjA ko bhI pratibodha huA
aura dIkSA aMgIkAra kii| isa samaya cAra nikAya ke devane sundara svaravAlI
gambhIra duMdubhi kA bar3A zabda kiyA aura phira udghoSaNA kii| sUtra -
1508-1509 he karma kI A~Tha gaThAna ke Tukar3e karanevAle ! parameSThin !
mahAyazavAle ! cAritra darzana jJAna sahita tumhArI jaya ho  /  isa jagatameM
eka vo mAtA hara pala vaMdanIya hai jisake udara meM meru parvata samAna
mahAmuni utpanna hokara bse| sUtra - 1510 aisA kahakara sugaMdhIdAra puSpa kI
vRSTi chor3ate bhaktipUrNa hRdayavAle hastakamala kI aMjali racAkara indra
sahita deva samudAya AkAza meM se nIce utara Ae  /  usa ke bAda kumAra ke
caraNakamala ke pAsa devasuMdarIone nRtya kiyA  /  phira stavanA kI  /
namaskAra karake lambe arase taka paryupAsanA karake devasamudAya apane sthAnaka
para ge| sUtra-1511 he bhagavaMta ! vo mahAyazavAle sagrahIta nAma dhAraNa
karanevAle kamAra maharSi isa taraha ke salabhabodhi kisa taraha bane ? he
gautama ! anya janma meM zramaNabhAva meM rahe the taba usane vacana daMDa kA
prayoga kiyA thA  /  usa nimitta se muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 143

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'  The student/purpose/sūtrāṅka
had observed the vow of silence throughout his life from the teachings of his
guru. Secondly, he had explained the three great sins, which are as follows:
Apkāya, Agnikäya, and Maithuna. All three should be strictly avoided by the
sādhus. He had also completely avoided them. Due to this, he became eligible for
enlightenment.  Now, one day, O Gautama! The Kumar Maharshi, surrounded by many
disciples, set out towards the peak of the Sammet Shikhar mountain to leave his
body in the final moments. While traveling, he reached the same path where the
princess, Cakṣukushīla, was. The news was given in the royal palace, and the
king came to the beautiful garden to pay his respects. The king sat in a
suitable place on the ground with his family, after paying respects to the Kumar
Maharshi. The Muniśvara gave a detailed discourse on Dharma. After listening to
the Dharma discourse, the king, along with his family, became ready to accept
renunciation.  O Gautama! The king accepted the initiation here. After accepting
initiation, he engaged in severe, heroic, fierce, painful, difficult penance and
restraint practices. He lived without attachment to any substance, place, time,
or emotion. He spent some time being indifferent to the bodily pleasures of the
Chakravarti Indra and other celestial beings, or to worldly pleasures. While
traveling, he reached near the peak of the Sammet mountain.  After that, the
Kumar Maharshi said to the princess, now a Śramaṇī: "O one who performs
difficult tasks! With a peaceful mind, from all perspectives, with your inner
self, give me a complete, pure, and free-from-fault criticism quickly, because
today we are determined to leave our bodies and are like arrows aimed at the
target. We have seen the benefit of removing the fault by performing atonement
according to the pure intention, as taught by the Bhagavant, through faultless
criticism, condemnation, reproach, and truthful words. After that, the princess,
now a Śramaṇī, gave criticism according to the proper method. After that, the
Mahāmuni reminded her of the remaining criticism: "When you were sitting in the
royal court, you had looked at me with a householder's emotion, with attachment
and desire. Give me criticism for that, O one who performs difficult tasks! So
that you can achieve the highest purity."  After that, she felt remorse in her
mind and thought: "Because of my sinful nature, which is a house of fickle
intentions and deceit, and because I am always dwelling in the community of
these sādhvīs, perhaps my reputation will be that of a princess, Cakṣukushīla,
or one who casts an evil eye?" Thinking this, O Gautama! The blameless Śramaṇī
said: "O Bhagavant! I did not look at you with an attached gaze because I did
not desire you. But, as you are adorned with the best form, youthful beauty,
grace, radiance, and the collection of auspicious qualities, and with an
abundance of knowledge and wisdom, I looked at you with an attached gaze to
measure you, to see if you were truly indifferent to worldly pleasures and
patient. But I did not look at you with the desire of attachment. Or, if there
is criticism, what other fault is there? I will also have to do this. What is
the benefit of going to the Tirtha and engaging in deceit and trickery?"  The
Kumar Muni thought: "If someone were to give a golden coin to a woman who has
experienced great emotional turmoil, then one could understand how fickle the
nature of women is in the world. Or, it is very difficult to understand their
inner feelings."  Thinking this, the Muni said: "What kind of deceit was found
in the fickle time? Alas! The fickle, unstable, and restless nature of these
wicked, fickle women. They do not establish their minds on one thing, they do
not keep their minds steady for even a moment. Alas! They are born wicked, alas!
They do all kinds of wrong things, they are deceitful, they are prone to slip-
ups, alas! They increase their disgrace and ill-repute, alas! They are proud of
their intentions to commit sinful deeds. They will have to go to hell, where
they will suffer terrible itching in the darkness of the afterlife, frying in
boiling oil, being cooked in a Kumbhi pot, and other such torments. Without
fear, a fickle woman exists."  In this way, the Kumar Śramaṇa felt great remorse
in his mind. He did not accept her words, but he was a devotee of Dharma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
jIvanabhara guru ke upadeza se maunavrata dhAraNa kiyA thA  /  dUsarA saMyatone
tIna mahApApa sthAnaka batAe haiM, vo isa prakAra - apkAya, agnikAya aura
maithuna yaha tInoM ko sarva upAya se sAdhu ko khAsa varjana karanA cAhie  /
usane bhI usa taraha se sarvathA varjana kiyA thA  /  usa kAraNa se vo sulabha
bodhi bne| aba kisI dina he gautama ! kaIM ziSya se parivarIta usa kumAra
maharSine aMtima samaya meM deha chor3ane ke lie sammeta zikhara parvata ke
zikhara kI ora prayANa kiyA  /  vihAra karate karate kAlakrama usI mArga para
gae ki jahA~ vo rAjakula bAlikAvarendra cakSakazIla thii| rAjamaMdira meM
samAcAra die vo uttama udyAna meM vaMdana ke lie strInarendra aae| kumAra
maharSi ko praNAma karane ke pUrvaka parivAra saha yathocita bhUmi sthAna meM
narendra baiThA  /  munezvara ne vistAra se dharmadezanA kI  /  dharmadezanA
sunane ke bAda parivAra saha strI narendra niHsaMgatA grahaNa karane ke lie
taiyAra huaa| he gautama ! vo yahA~ narendrane dIkSA aMgIkAra kI  /  dIkSA lene
ke bAda kAphI ghora, vIra, ugra, kaSTakArI, duSkara tapa saMyama anuSThAna kriyA
meM ramaNatA karanevAle aise vo sabhI kisI bhI dravya, kSetra, kAla yA bhAva meM
mamatva rakhe binA vihAra karate the  /  cakravartI indra Adi kI Rddhi samudAya
ke deha sukha meM yA sAMsArika sukha ke kAphI nispRhabhAva rakhanevAle aise
unakA kucha samaya bIta gayA  /  vihAra karate karate sammeta parvata ke zikhara
ke pAsa AyA usa ke bAda usa kumAra maharSine rAjakumAra bAlikA narendra zramaNI
ko kahA ki - he duSkarakArike ! tuma zAnta citta se sarvabhAva se
aMtaHkaraNapUrvaka pUre vizuddha zalya rahita AlocanA jalda se do kyoMki Aja
hama sarva deha kA tyAga karane ke lie kaTibaddha lakSavAle bane haiM  /
niHzalya AlocanA, nindA, garhA, yathokta zuddhAzayapUrvaka jisa prakAra
bhagavaMta ne upadeza diyA hai usa anusAra prAyazcitta karake zalya kA uddhAra
karake kalyANa dekhA hai jisameM aisI saMlekhanA kI hai  /  usa ke bAda rAjakula
bAlikA narendra zramaNIne yathokta vidhi se AlocanA kI  /  usake bAda bAkI rahI
AlocanA usa mahAmunine yAda karavAI-usa samaya rAjasabhA meM tuma baiThI thI
taba gahastha bhAva meM rAga sahita aura snehAbhilASa se mujhe dekhA thA usa
bAta kI AlocanA he duSkarakArike! kara  /  jisa se tamhArI sarvottama zuddhi ho|
usake bAda usane mana meM kheda pAkara capala Azaya evaM chala kA ghara aisI
pApa strI svabhAva ke kAraNa se isa sAdhvI ke samudAya meM hamezA vAsa
karanevAlI kisI rAjA kI putrI cakSukuzIla yA bUrI najara karanevAlI hai aisI
merI khyAti zAyada ho jAe to? aisA socakara he gautama ! usa nirbhAgiNI
zramaNIne kahA ki-he bhagavaMta ! isa kAraNa se maiMne tumako rAgavAlI najara se
dekhe na the ki na to maiM tumhArI abhilASA karatI thI, lekina jisa taraha se
tuma sarvottama rUpa tArUNya yauvana lAvaNya kAnti-saubhAgyakalA kA samudAya,
vijJAna jJAnAtizaya Adi guNa kI samRddhi se alaMkRta ho, usa anusAra viSaya meM
nirabhilASI aura dhairyavAle usa prakAra ho ki nahIM, aise tumhArA nApa tola ke
lie rAga sahita abhilASAvAlI najara jur3I thI, lekina rAgAbhilASA kI IcchA se
najara nahIM kI thI  /  yA phira AlocanA ho  /  usameM dUsarA kyA doSa hai ?
mujhe bhI yaha guNa karanevAlA hogA  /  tIrtha meM jAkara mAyA, chala karane se
kyA phAyadA? kumAramuni socane lagA ki - kAphI mahA saMvega pAI huI aisI strI ko
so sonaiyA koI de to saMsAra meM strI kA kitanA capala svabhAva hai vo samaja
sakate haiM yA phira usake manogata bhAva pahacAnanA kAphI duSkara hai| aisA
cintavana karake munivarane kahA ki capala samaya meM kisa taraha kA chala pAyA
? aho ! isa durjana capala striyoM ke cala-capala asthira-caMcala svabhAva  /
eka ke lie mAnasa sthApana na karanevAlI, eka bhI pala sthira mana na
rakhanevAlI, aho duSTa janmavAlI, aho samagra akArya karanevAlI, bhA~r3anevAlI,
skhalanA pAnevAlI, aho samagra apayaza, apakIrti meM vaddhi karanevAlI, aho pApa
karma karane ke abhimAnI AzayavAlI, paraloka meM aMdhakAra ke bhItara ghora
bhayAnaka khujalI, Ubalate kaDA~i meM tela meM talanA, zAmalI vRkSa, kuMbhI meM
pakanA Adi duHkha sahane par3e aisI nArakI meM jAnA par3egA  /  usake bhaya binA
caMcala strI hotI hai| isa taraha kumAra zramaNa ne mana meM kAphI kheda pAyA  /
usakI bAta na apanAte hue dharma meM eka rasika aise muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 144

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  **Study/Purpose/Sutra Number**
Kumar Muni, with a very peaceful face and peaceful, sweet words, preached Dharma
to the Rajakul Balika Narendrasramani and said, "O Duskarakari! You have
accumulated great punya-prakarasha, which does not increase the world, by
speaking such words of Maya, and by doing severe, heroic, fierce, difficult
tapas, samayam, swadhyay, dhyan, etc. Do not make it futile. There is no purpose
in doing such Maya-dambha, which gives endless samsara. By criticizing without
hesitation, you have made your soul free from shalya, just as the dance of a
river in darkness is meaningless, the effort of a goldsmith in a strong wind is
wasted, similarly, you have renounced the Rajagadi, your family, etc., and taken
the vow of kesha lochan. Will all the klesh that you have endured, such as
bhikhya, bhraman, sleeping on the ground, enduring the twenty-two parisha,
enduring upsarga, etc., be in vain? Then the Nirbhagine replied, "O Bhagvant! Do
you think I am speaking deceitfully to you? And especially when giving
criticism, I cannot deceive you. Believe my story to be true without hesitation.
At that time, I did not look at you with any desire for snehraga or raga, but to
test you, to see how much water you are in, how firm you are in your sheel, I
looked at you. Such a woman, bound by karma-parinati, who has earned the name-
karma of an excellent state, has been destroyed. O Gautam! The Rajakul Balika
Narendrasramani, with her nature of deceit, has earned the woman-veda for a long
time.  After that, the Shiष्यगण family, along with the Maha Tajjub-samaan
Swayambuddha Kumar Maharshi, duly performed the Atma's Sanlekhana, and after
fasting for a month on the food of plants, attained Nirvana with the Shiष्यगण on
the peak of the Sammet mountain, and attained Moksha. Sutra-1512  O Gautam! That
Rajakul Balika Narendrasramani, due to the fault of Maya-shalya, was born in the
Devlok as a female mongoose in the service of the Dev. From there, she was born
again and again, dying in the human and animal realms, experiencing all kinds of
misfortune, sorrow, and poverty, and being defeated, humiliated, and hated by
all the lokas, experiencing the fruits of her karma. O Gautam! Until she somehow
destroyed her karma through the true observance of Shramanapan, became free from
all the supports of pramada in all places, and became engaged in the practice of
samayam, she burned and destroyed the karma she had done with Maya in that
bhava, leaving only a sprout-like bhava. Even then, O Gautam! Due to the fault
of that karma, she was born as the wife of a Brahmin, because she did not
criticize the raga-filled vision at that time. The Nirvana of the Jiva of that
Rajakul Balika Narendrasramani (Samaan Sadhvi) happened. Sutra-1513  O Bhagvant!
Whoever undertakes the practice of Shramanapan, will surely attain Siddhi in the
first seven or eight bhavas. Then why did this Shramani have to wander in the
world for lakhs of bhavas, neither less nor more? O Gautam! Whoever practices
Niratichar Shramanapan, will surely attain Siddhi in one to eight bhavas.
Whoever is subtle or badar, whoever has Maya-shalya, who enjoys the bhogavata of
Apkay, who practices the Atichar of Teukay, will wander for lakhs of bhavas and
then attain the right to attain Siddhi. Because, if after attaining Shramanapan,
one practices Atichar in it, then one attains Bodhi with sorrow. O Gautam! This
Brahmani's Jiva had so little Maya, yet she had to suffer such terrible vipaka.
Sutra-1514  O Bhagvant! Did they give that Mahiyari - Gokulpati Bibi a vessel
filled with dangs or not? Or did they...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka kumAra
muni ati prazAnta vadana se prazAnta madhura akSara se dharmadezanA karane
pUrvaka rAjakula bAlikA narendra zramaNI ko kahA ki - he duSkarakArike ! aisI
mAyA ke vacana bolakara kAphI ghora, vIra, ugra, kaSTadAyaka, duSkara tapa,
saMyama, svAdhyAya dhyAna Adi karake jo saMsAra na bar3he aisA bar3A
puNyaprakarSa ikaTThA kiyA hai  /  usako niSphala mata karanA  /  ananta saMsAra
denevAle aise mAyA-daMbha karane kA koI prayojana nahIM hai  /  bejijaka AlocanA
karake tumhArI AtmA ko zalyarahita banA yA jaise aMdhere meM nadI kA nRtya
nirarthaka hotA hai, dhamela suvarNa eka joravAlI phUMka meM usakI mehanata
nirarthaka jAtI hai, usa anusAra Aja taka rAjagAdI svajanAdika kA tyAga karake
keza kA loca kiyA  /  bhikSA, bhramaNa, bhUmi para zayyA karanA, bAIsa pariSaha
sahanA, upasarga sahanA Adi jo kleza sahe vo saba kie gae cAritra anuSThAna
tumhAre nirarthaka hoMge? taba nirbhAgI ne uttara diyA ki he bhagavaMta ! kyA
Apa aisA mAnate ho ki Apake sAtha chala se bAta kara rahA huuN| aura phira khAsa
karake AlocanA dete samaya Apake sAtha chala kara hI nahIM sakate  /  yaha merI
kahAnI bejijaka saca mAno  /  kisI taraha usa samaya maiMne sahaja bhI sneharAga
kI abhilASA se yA rAga karane kI abhilASA se ApakI ora najara nahIM kI thI,
lekina ApakA imtihAna lene ke lie, tuma kitane pAnI meM ho - zIla meM kitane
dRr3ha ho, usakA imtihAna karane ke lie najara kI thI  /  aise bolatI
karmapariNati ko AdhIna honevAlI baddha-spRSTa nikAcita aise utkRSTa hAlAtavAlA
strI nAmakarma upArjana karake naSTa huI, he gautama ! chala karane ke svabhAva
se vo rAjakula bAlikA narendra zramaNIne lambe arase kA nikAcita strIveda
upArjana kiyaa| usa ke bAda ziSyagaNa parivAra sahita mahA tAjjuba samAna
svayaMbuddhakumAra maharSine vidhivat AtmA kIsaMlekhanA karake eka mAsa kA
pAdapopagamana anazana karake sammeta parvata ke zikhara para kevalIpana se
ziSyagaNa ke sAtha nirvANa pAkara mokSa padhAre  /  sUtra-1512 he gautama ! vo
rAjakulabAlikA narendra zramaNI usa mAyA zalya ke bhAvadoSa se vidyutkumAra
devaloka meM sevaka deva meM strI nevale ke rUpa meM utpanna huI  /  vahA~ se
cyavakara phira utpanna hotI aura mara jAtI mAnava aura tiryaMca gati meM
samagra daurbhAgya duHkha dAridra pAnevAlI samagra loka se parAbhava-apamAna,
napharata pAte hue apane karma ke phala ko mahasUsa karate hue he gautama !
yAvat kisI taraha se karma kA kSayopazama zramaNapana se yathArtha paripAlana
karake sarva sthAna meM sAre pramAda ke Alambana se mukta hokara saMyama kriyA
meM udyama karake usa bhava meM mAyA se kie kAphI karma jalAkara bhasma karake
aba kevala aMkura samAna bhava bAkI rakhA hai, to bhI he gautama ! jyoM-tyoM
samaya meM rAgavAlI dRSTi kI AlocanA nahIM kI usa karma ke doSa se brAhmaNa kI
strI ke rUpa meM utpanna huI  /  vo rAjakula bAlikA narendra zramaNI (samAna
sAdhvI) ke jIva kA nirvANa huaa| sUtra - 1513 he bhagavaMta ! jo kisI
zramaNapana kA udyama kare vo eka Adi sAta-A~Tha bhava meM yakInana siddhi pAe
to phira isa zramaNI ko kyoM kama yA adhika nahIM aise lAkha bhava taka saMsAra
meM bhramaNa karanA par3A? he gautama ! jo kisI niraticAra zramaNapana nirvAha
kare vo yakInana eka se lekara A~Tha bhava taka siddhi pAtA hai| jo kisI sUkSma
yA bAdara jo kisI mAyA zalyavAle ho, apkAya kA bhogavaTA kare, teUkAya kA
aticAra lagAe vo lAkha bhava karake bhaTakakara phira siddhi pAne kI ucitatA
prApta karegA  /  kyoMki zramaNapana pAkara phira yadi usameM aticAra lagAe to
bodhipana duHkha se pAe  /  he gautama ! yaha usa brAhmaNI ke jIvane itanI alpa
mAyA kI thI usase aise dAruNa vipAka bhugatane pdd'e| sUtra-1514 he bhagavaMta !
vo mahiyArI - gokulapati bIbI ko unhoMne DAMga se bharA bhAjana diyA ki na diyA
? yA to vo muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page
145

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishītha'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number**
Did Mahiyārī attain liberation by destroying all her karma with them? O Gautama!
When she was searching for Mahiyārī to give her a vessel of rice, she was going
thinking that she was the daughter of a Brahmin, then Sujnasrī was abducted in
the middle. Then, after eating honey and milk, Sujnasrī asked where she was
going? She was told another thing in Gokula that if you behave with me with
humility, I will give you milk and food filled with jaggery and ghee every day
as per your wish. When this was said, Sujnasrī went with Mahiyārī. The restless
and tormented minds of Govinda Brāhmaṇa etc. did not even remember Sujnasrī in
performing the afterlife rituals. After that, she used to give food like kheer
filled with ghee and sugar as Mahiyārī had said.  Now, somehow, the time of the
terrible famine of twelve years passed. The whole country became stable with
prosperity. Now, at some time, Sujnasīva, having bought twenty precious,
excellent gems like Sūryakānta, Chandrakānta etc. of the best caste, set out to
return to his country. Due to the sorrow of travelling a long distance, the
embodied one, while going on the same path, by the yoga of destiny, reached the
Gokula of Mahiyārī, whose name is a sin to even utter, that sinful Sujnasīva
reached there by a coincidence. Seeing Sujnasrī, who was superior in beauty and
radiance to any woman in the three worlds, due to the fickleness of the senses,
the pleasantness of the object, which is like the fruit of the poisonous
Kimpaka, which brings infinite suffering, Sujnasīva, who had committed a great
sin in the matter of Kāmadeva, who had conquered the entire three worlds, said
to Sujnasrī:  "O girl! If your parents allow, I will marry you. I will also make
your relatives free from poverty. Then I will make ornaments of gold for you for
the entire duration of the universe. Tell this to your parents soon." After
that, Sujnasrī, who was experiencing both joy and sorrow, told Mahiyārī this
truth. Mahiyārī immediately came to Sujnasīva and said: "Oh! You said you would
give gold for the entire duration of the universe for my daughter, show her the
best gems." Mahiyārī said: "Give that gold, the child does not need a toy."
Sujnasīva said: "Come, let's go to the city and check with the merchants there
how effective this toy is."  After that, in the morning, they went to the city
and showed the best pair of Chandrakānta and Sūryakānta gems to the king. The
king called the gem examiner and said: "Show the value of this excellent gem."
If the value is compared and examined, he is not able to tell its value. Then
the king said: "Oh! disciple of Mānikya! Is there no man here who can examine
the value of this gem?" Then, without getting the price, take the upper ten
crore wealth. Then Sujnasīva said: "Whatever grace the king has, it is right.
Another request is that we have a Gokula near this mountain, it has a grazing
land of one yojana, make it tax-free from the side of the kingdom." The king
said: "Okay, it will be so." In this way, making everyone free from poverty and
tax-free Gokula, Sujnasīva, whose name is not worthy of utterance, married his
daughter Sujnasrī.  Love arose between the two of them. They are spending their
time with minds coloured by affection and love. In the meantime, seeing the
sadhus who had come home going back without being fed, Sujnasrī cried out loud.
Sujnasīva asked her: "O beloved! Why are you in such a sad state seeing the
begging couple whom you have not seen before?" Then she said: "When I was my
mistress, she used to give a lot of food and water to these sadhus and fill
their bowls." After that, the happy mistress, filled with joy, bowed her head
and prostrated at their feet. Seeing them, I remembered my mistress. Then she
was asked again: "Who was your mistress?" Then, O Gautama! Sujnasrī, who was
crying with a choked throat, unable to bear the sorrow, shed tears of anguish,
and told the whole story till today. Then Sujnasīva, who was a great sinner,
realised that this Sujnasrī was his own daughter.  **Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt
(Mahānishītha) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi Translation** Page 146

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka mahiyArI
una ke sAtha samagra karma kA kSaya karake nirvANa pAI thI? he gautama ! usa
mahiyArI ko tAMdula bhAjana dene ke lie DhU~r3hane jA rahI thI taba yaha
brAhmaNa kI beTI hai aisA samajhakara jA rahI thI, taba bIca meM hI sujJazrI kA
apaharaNa kiyA  /  phira madhu, dUdha khAkara sujJazrIne pUchA ki kahA~ jAoge ?
gokula meM dUsarI bAta use yaha batAI ki yadi tuma mere sAtha vinaya se
vyavahAra karoge to tumheM tumhArI IcchA ke anusAra tIna bAra gur3a aura ghI se
bhare hararoja dUdha aura bhojana duuNgii| jaba aisA kahA taba sujJazrI usa
mahiyArI ke sAtha gaI  /  paraloka anuSThAna karane meM becaina aura piroe
mAnasavAle usa goviMda brAhmaNa Adi ne isa sujJazrI ko yAda bhI na kiyaa| usake
bAda jisa prakAra usa mahiyArI ne kahA thA aisI ghI-zakkara se bharI aisI khIra
Adi kA khAnA detI thii| aba kisI taraha se kAlakrama bAraha sAla kA bhayAnaka
akAla kA samaya pUrA haA  /  sArA deza RddhisamRddhi se sthira huA aba kisI
samaya anamola zreSTha sUryakAnta candrakAnta Adi uttama jAti ke bIsa maNiratna
kharIdakara sujJaziva apane deza meM vApasa jAne ke lie nIkalA hai  /  lambA
saphara karane se kheda pAe hue dehavAlA jisa rAste se jA rahA thA usa rAste meM
hI bhavitavyatA yoga se usa mahiyArI kA gokula Ate hI jisakA nAma lene meM bhI
pApa hai aisA vo pApamativAlA sujJaziva kAkatAlIya nyAya se A pahu~cA  /
samagra tIna bhuvana meM jo strI hai usake rUpa lAvaNya aura kAnti se bar3hiyA
rUpa kAnti lAvaNyavAlI sujJazrI ko dekhakara indriya kI capalatA se ananta
duHkha-dAyaka kiMpAka phala kI upamAvAle viSaya kI ramyatA hone se, jisane
samagra tInoM bhuvana ko jItA hai aise kAmadeva ke viSaya meM Ae mahApApakarma
karanevAle sujJazivane usa sujJazrI ko kahA ki he bAlikA ! yadi tuma tumhAre
mAtA-pitA anumati de to meM tumase zAdI karU~  /  tumhAre bandhuvarga ko bhI
dAridra rahita karU~  /  phira tumhAre lie pUre soM palapramANa suvarNa ke
alaMkAra bnvaauuN| jalda yaha bAta tumhAre mA~-bApa ko batAo, usake bAda harSa
aura saMtApa pAnevAlI sujJazrIne mahiyArI ko yaha hakIkata batAI  /  mahiyArI
turanta sujJaziva ke pAsa Akara kahane lagI ki-are ! tuma kahate the aise merI
beTI ke lie so-pala pramANa suvarNa batAo, usane zreSTha maNi dikhAe  /
mahiyArI ne kahA ki so sonaiyA do, bacce ko khelane ke lie pA~cikA kA prayojana
nahIM hai sujJaziva ne kahA -calo, nagarameM jAkara isa pA~cikA kA prabhAva
kaisA hai usakI vahA~ ke vyApArI ke pAsa jA~ca kre| usa ke bAda prabhAta ke
samaya nagara meM jAkara candrakAnta aura sUryakAnta maNi ke zreSTha joDalA rAjA
ko dikhAyA  /  rAjAne maNiratna parIkSaka ko bulAkara kahA ki-isa zreSTha maNi
kA mUlya dikhAo  /  yadi mUlya kI tulanA - parIkSA kI jAe to usakA mUlya batAne
ke lie samartha nahIM hai  /  taba rAjAne kahA are mANikya ke ziSya ! yahA~ koI
aisA puruSa nahIM ki jo isa maNi kA mUlya jA~ca kara sake ? to aba kiMmata
karavAe binA upara ke daza karor3a dravya le jA  /  taba sujJaziva ne kahA ki
mahArAja kI jaisI kRpA ho vo sahI hai  /  dUsarI eka vinatI yaha hai ki yaha
najadIkI parvata ke samIpa meM hamArA eka gokula hai, usameM eka yojana taka
gocarabhUmi hai, usakA rAjya kI ora se lenevAlA kara mukta karavAnA  /  rAjAne
kahA ki bhale, vaisA hogA  /  isa prakAra sabako adaridra aura karamukta gokula
karake vo uccAra na karane ke lAyaka nAmavAle sujJazivane apanI lar3akI sujJazrI
ke sAtha zAdI kii| una donoM ke bIca Apasa meM prIti paidA huI  /  snehAnurAga
se raMge hue mAnasa vAle apanA samaya bItA rahe haiN| utane meM ghara Ae hue
sAdhu ko unako vahorAe binA vApasa jAte dekhakara hA hA pUrvaka AkraMdana karatI
sujJazrI ko sujJaziva ne pUchA ki he priye ! pahale kisI dina na dekhe hue
bhikSAcara yugala dekhakara kyoM isa taraha udAsIna avasthA pAI ? taba usane
kahA merI mAlakIna thI taba isa sAdhuoM ko bahuta bhakSya anna-pAnI dekara unake
pAtra bhara dete the| usa ke bAda harSa pAI huI khuza mAlakIna mastaka nIcA kara
ke usake caraNAgrameM praNAma karatI thii| unheM dekhate hI mujhe mAlakIna yAda
A gaI  /  taba phira usa pApiNI ko pUchA ki - tumhArI svAminI kauna thI ? taba
he gautama ! galA baiTha jAe aisA rudana karanevAlI duHkha na samajhe aise zabda
bolate hue vyAkula azru girAnevAlI sujJazrIne Aja dina taka kI sArI bAte batAI
/  taba mahApApakarmI aise sujJaziva ko mAlUma huA ki - yaha to sujJazrI merI hI
beTI muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 146

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Āgama Sūtra 39, Chhedasūtra-5, 'Mahānishīth'** Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number.
Thinking that such a woman should not have such beauty, radiance, grace,
loveliness, good fortune, and splendor, he began to lament - Sūtra 1515 In doing
such sinful deeds, if a thunderbolt does not strike me with a loud roar, then
where will I go from here to become pure? - Sūtra 1516 Saying this, the one who
committed the great sin began to think - should I now cut my body into pieces as
small as sesame seeds with a weapon? Or should I fall from the peak of a high
mountain and break my wicked body into pieces, which is full of infinite sins?
Or should I go to a blacksmith's workshop and have my body hammered for a long
time like red-hot iron with a thick hammer? Or should I have my body cut open
with the sharp teeth of a saw and pour into it molten lead, copper, brass, iron,
salt, and the juice of alkali? Or should I pierce my own head with my own hand?
Or should I enter the house of a crocodile? Or should I be hung between two
trees with a rope, with my head down and my feet up, and fire lit below? What
more can I say? Should I go to the cremation ground and burn my body on a pyre
of wood? Thinking this, O Gautama! he built a large pyre there, and then, in the
presence of all the people, he condemned his soul for a long time and revealed
to everyone that I have done such a deed that I should not have done. Saying
this, he mounted the pyre, then, by the power of destiny, the contact of that
kind of substance and powder, all the wood was considered to be like that, even
though he blew on it and tried many ways, the fire did not burn. Then the people
said with hatred, "Even this fire is not giving you support. How difficult is
your sinful culmination that even this fire is not burning." Saying this, they
expelled both of them from Gokul. On that occasion, they saw a pair of monks
coming towards the garden on the same path, having taken food and water from
another nearby village. Seeing them, those two sinners followed them. When they
reached the garden, they saw Jagānanda, an Āṇagāra named Sugrīta, who was
adorned with four knowledgeable disciples, Devendira and Narendra, who were
bowing at the feet of the one who possessed all the virtues. Seeing them, they
thought, "How can I ask for my purification from this great and glorious monk?"
Thinking this, they bowed down and sat on the ground as appropriate in front of
the head of the order who was adorned with that group. The head of the order
said to Sujnasiv, "O Devanupriyā, quickly criticize the sin without any
hesitation and perform penance to end all sins. This girl is pregnant, so she
cannot perform penance until she gives birth to the child." O Gautama! After
that, Sujnasiv, who was overwhelmed with great sorrow, criticized all the sinful
deeds from birth without any hesitation, and after taking the severe, extremely
difficult, and great penance as instructed by the Guru Maharaja, he achieved
great purity and strength in his asceticism, and for twenty-six years and
thirteen nights and days, he practiced extremely severe, heroic, fierce,
painful, difficult, and true austerity, and for one, two, three, four, five, and
six months, he continuously fasted without any attachment to his body or its
parts, and he remained vigilant in all places, always day and night, striving in
self-study, meditation, etc., and burning away the remaining karmic impurities,
making them inactive, and taking the क्षपकश्रेणी, he became a Kevali in the
अंतगड़ and attained Siddhi. - Sūtra 1517 O Bhagavan! Why did Sujnasiv, who
committed such a terrible and great sin, attain liberation so quickly? Muni
Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt (Mahānishīth) Āgama Sūtra - Hindi Translation Page 147

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka hai| aisI
strI ko aise rUpa kAnti zobhA lAvaNya saubhAgya zobhA na ho, aisA cintavana
karake vilApa karane lagA sUtra - 1515 isa prakAra ke pApakarma karane meM rakta
aise mujha para dhar3agar3a AvAja karate vajra tUTa na par3e to phira yahA~ se
kahA~ jAkara maiM zuddha bana sakU~gA ? sUtra - 1516 aisA bolakara mahApApa
karma karanevAlA vo socane lagA ki-kyA aba maiM zastra ke dvArA mere gAtra ko
tilatila jitane TakaDe karake cheda kara DAla~? yA to UMce parvata ke zikhara se
girakara ananta pApa sama isa duSTa zarIra ke Tukar3e kara dU~ ? yA to lohAra kI
zAlA meM jAkara acchI taraha se tapAkara lAla kie lohe kI taraha moTe ghaNa se
koI TIpe usa taraha lambe arase taka mere zarIra ko TIpavAUM? yA to kyA maiM
acchI taraha se mere zarIra ke bIca meM karavata ke tIkSNa dA~ta se kaTavAUM
aura usameM acchI taraha se UbAle hue sIse, tAmra, kA~sa, loha, luNa aura
usanAsAjI khAra ke rasa DAlU~ ? yA phira mere apane hAtha se hI merA mastaka
cheda DAlU~ ? yA to maiM - magaramaccha ke ghara meM praveza karU~ yA phira do
per3a ke bIca mujhe rassI se bA~dhakara laTakAkara nIce mu~ha aura pA~va Upara
ho usa taraha rakhakara nIce agni jalAUM ? jyAdA kyA kahe ? masANa bhUmi meM
pahu~cakara kASTha kI citA meM mere zarIra ko jalA DAlU~? aisA socakara he
gautama ! vahA~ bar3I cittA banavAI, usake bAda samagra loka kI mojUdagI meM
lambe arase taka apanI AtmA kI nindA karake saba logoM ko jAhira kiyA ki maiMne
na karane ke lAyaka isa prakAra kA apa kArya kiyA hai  /  aisA kahakara citA
para ArUr3ha huA taba bhavitavyatA yoga se usa prakAra ke dravya aura cUrNi ke
yoga ke saMsarga se vo saba kASTa haiM - aisA mAnakara phUMkane ke bAvajUda kaI
taraha ke upAya karane ke bAvajUda bhI agni na jlaa| taba phira logoMne
napharata kI ki yaha agni bhI tumheM sahArA nahIM de rahA  /  tumhArI pApa
pariNati kitanI kaThina hai, ki yaha agni bhI nahIM jalA rahA  /  aisA kahakara
una logoM ne donoM ko gokula meM se nIkAla bAhara kiyA usa avasara para dUsare
najadIkI gA~va meM se bhojana pAnI grahaNa karake usI mArga udyAna ke sanmukha
AnevAle muni yugala ko dekhA  /  unheM dekhakara unake pIche vo donoM pApI gae
/  udyAna meM pahuMce to vahA~ sAre guNa samUha ko dhAraNa karanevAle cAra
jJAnavAle kAphI ziSyagaNa se parivarela, devendra aura narendra se caraNAraviMda
meM namana karAte, sugRhIta nAmavAle jagANaMda nAma ke aNagAra ko dekhA  /
unheM dekhakara una donoM ne socA ki yaha mahAyazavAle munivara ke pAsa merI
vizuddhi kaise ho usakI mA~ga kruuN| aisA socakara praNAma karane ke pUrvaka usa
gaNa ko dhAraNa karane vAle gacchAdhipati ke sAmane yathAyogya bhUmi para baiThA
/  usa gaNasvAmIne sujJaziva ko kahA ki - are devAnupriyA zalya rahita pApa kI
AlocanA jalda karake samagra pApa kA aMta karanevAle prAyazcitta kara  /  yaha
bAlikA to garbhavatI hone se usakA prAyazcitta nahIM hai, ki jaba taka usa bacce
ko janma nahIM degii| he gautama ! usake bAda ati mahA saMvega kI parAkASThA
pAyA haA vo sajJaziva janma se lekara tamAma pApakarma kI niHzalya AlocanA
dekara (batAkara) guru mahArAjAne batAe ghora ati duSkara bar3e prAyazcitta kA
sevana kara ke usake bAda ati vizuddha pariNAma yukta zramanapana meM parAkrama
karake chabbIsa sAla aura teraha rAta-dina taka kAphI ghora vIra ugra kaSTakArI
duSkara tapaHsaMyama yathArtha pAlana karake aura eka, do, tIna, cAra, pA~ca,
chaha mAsa taka lagAtAra ekasAtha upavAsa karake zarIra kI TApaTIpa yA mamatA
kie binA usane sarva sthAnaka meM apramAda rahita hamezA rAta-dina hara samaya
svAdhyAya dhyAnAdika meM parAkrama karake bAkI karmamala ko bhasma karake
apUrvakaraNa karake kSapakazreNI lekara aMtagar3a kevalI hokara siddha hue|
sUtra-1517 he bhagavaMta ! usa prakAra kA ghora mahApApa karma AcaraNa karake
yaha sujJaziva jalda thor3e kAla meM kyoM nirvANa muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
(mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 147

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 39, Cheda Sūtra-5, 'Mahānishītha'  **Study/Purpose/Sūtra Number
Found?**  Oh Gautama! With what kind of feeling was the Aloayana given, with
what kind of emotion was such a severe, difficult, great penance performed? With
what kind of pure determination was that kind of extremely severe, heroic,
fierce, painful, extremely difficult penance practiced? While practicing that,
following the unblemished, unoffending, fundamental, excellent qualities,
performing the duties of a Niratichar Shraman, freed from the fierce meditation,
the sorrowful meditation, the passions, hatred, delusion, false belief, pride,
fear, arrogance, etc., remaining in the middle path, free from humility, with a
noble mind, the wise and auspicious Shraman, after performing the Sanlekhana for
twelve years, accepting the Anashan of eating only fruits, with that kind of
solitary, auspicious determination, did not attain only one Siddhi, but if
perhaps he could transfer the karma done by others, then he would have attained
the destruction of all the karma of all the Bhavyasattvas and Siddhi.  But the
karma done by others is never transferred to anyone. The karma that one has
earned, one must suffer it. Oh Gautama! When you become the one who stops the
Yoga, then you become the one who destroys the entire karma-mass, but only
through the small divisions of time. The destruction of karma of the one who
binds karma well and the one who stops the Yoga has been seen, but the
destruction of karma by counting time has not been seen. It is said in
Sūtra-1518-1523:  Time consumes karma, time binds karma, one binds, one destroys
karma. Oh Gautama! Time is infinite, the one who stops the Yoga knows karma, but
does not bind karma. He destroys old karma, he has only a reduction of new
karma. This is how to know the destruction of karma. Do not count time in this
matter. Even though this being is from beginningless time, karma is not
complete. When the development of the Virati Dharma occurred due to the
destruction and pacification of karma, then, obtaining the time-field, the Bhav
and the Bhav dravya, the being, being vigilant, consumed karma, then the being
progressed in the Koti path. The one who is negligent binds karma for an
infinite time. In the four gatis, the beings who dwell in eternal suffering,
therefore, obtaining time, field, Bhav, and Bhav, the intelligent soul quickly
destroys karma. Sūtra-1524  Oh Bhagvant! Where was that wise and auspicious one
born? Oh Gautama! In the sixth hell, the earth. Oh Bhagvant! For what reason?
When the nine months of her womb were complete, she thought, "Tomorrow morning,
I will abort the fetus." With this determination, she gave birth to the child.
After giving birth, she died immediately. For this reason, the wise and
auspicious one went to the sixth hell.  Oh Bhagvant! The child she gave birth
to, did he live or not? Oh Gautama! He lived. Oh Bhagvant! How? Oh Gautama! As
soon as he was born, the child remained clinging to the fat and blood of the
womb, covered in foul-smelling substances, pus, salty, foul-smelling, impure
things, an orphan, wailing. A dog placed him on the potter's wheel and began to
devour him. Therefore, the potter saw the child, then he and his wife ran
towards the child. The dog ran away without destroying the child's body. Then,
the compassionate, kind-hearted potter, thinking, "Since I don't have a son,
this will be my son," gave the child to his wife. She, with true affection,
cared for him and raised him as a human being. The potter, out of social custom,
with pride in being his father, named him Susadhu.  Oh Gautama! In due course,
he met a virtuous person. Hearing the teachings, he became enlightened. And
Susadhu took initiation. He attained supreme faith, emotion, and detachment. He
performed extremely severe, heroic, fierce, painful, difficult, great penances.
But he did not know how to practice restraint. Due to the fault of Ajayana, he
committed offenses in all places where there was no restraint. Then his Guru
said to him, "Oh! Great powerful one! Due to the fault of ignorance, you...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka pAyA ? he
gautama ! jisa prakAra ke bhAva meM rahakara AloyaNA dI, jisa taraha kA saMvega
pAkara aisA ghora duSkara bar3A prAyazcitta AcaraNa kiyA  /  jisa prakAra kAphI
vizuddha adhyavasAya se usa taraha kA ati ghora vIra ugra kaSTa karanevAlA ati
duSkara tapa-saMyama kI kriyA meM vyavahAra karate akhaMr3ita-apirAdhita mUla
uttaraguNa kA pAlana karate niraticAra zrAmaNya kA nirvAha karake jisa taraha ke
raudra dhyAna ArtadhyAna se mukta hokara rAga-dveSa, moha, mithyAtva, mada,
bhaya, gArava Adi doSa kA anta karanevAle, madhyastha bhAva meM rahe, dInatA
rahita mAnasavAle sujJaziva zramaNa ne bAraha sAla kI saMlekhanA karake
pAdapopagamana anazana aMgIkAra karake usa taraha ke ekAnta zubha adhyavasAya se
kevala eka hI siddhi na pAe, lekina yadi zAyada dUsaroM ke kie karma kA saMkrama
kara sakatA ho to sarve bhavya sattva ke samagra karma kA kSaya aura siddhi pAe
/  lekina dUsaroM ke kie karma ke saMkrama kabhI kisI kA nahIM hotA  /  jo karma
jisane upArjana kiyA ho vo usako hI bhugatanA cAhie  /  he gautama ! jaba yoga
kA nirodha karanevAle bane taba samagra lekina A~Tha karmarAzi ke choTe kAla ke
vibhAga se hI naSTa karanevAle bane  /  samagra karma Ane ke aura acchI taraha
se ba~dha karanevAle aura yoga kA nirodha karanevAle kA karmakSaya dekhA hai,
lekina kAlaginatI se karmakSaya nahIM dekhA  /  kahA hai kisUtra - 1518-1523
kAla se to karma khapAtA hai, kAla ke dvArA karma bA~dhatA hai, eka bA~dhe, eka
karma kA kSaya kare, he gautama ! samaya to ananta hai, yoga kA nirodha
karanevAlA karma vedatA hai lekina karma nahIM bA~dhate  /  purAne karma ko
naSTa karate haiM, nae karma kI to use kamI hI hai, isa prakAra karma kA kSaya
jAnanA  /  isa viSaya meM samaya kI ginatI na karanA  /  anAdi samaya se yaha
jIva hai to bhI karma pUre nahIM hote  /  karma kA kSayopazama hone ke kAraNa se
jaba virati dharma kA vikAsa huA, taba-kAlakSetra bhava aura bhAva dravya prApta
karake yAvat apramAdI hokara jIva karma khapAe taba jIva ke koTi mArga meM Age
bar3he, jo pramAdI ho to vo anantakAla kA karma bA~dhe, cAra gati meM sarvakAla
ati duHkhI jIva vAsa karanevAle hote haiM, isalie kAla, kSetra, bhava, bhAva
pAkara buddhivAlI AtmA zIghra karma kA kSaya karatA hai| sUtra-1524 he
bhagavaMta ! vo sujJazrI kahA~ utpanna huI ? he gautama ! chaThI naraka pRthvI
meM, he bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se ? usake garbha kA nau mAsa se jyAdA samaya
pUrNa huA taba socA ki kala subaha garbha girA dUMgI  /  isa prakAra kA
adhyavasAya karate hue usane bacce ko janma diyA  /  janma dene ke bAda turanta
usI pala meM mara gaI  /  isa kAraNa se sujJazrI chaThThI naraka meM gii| he
bhagavaMta ! jisa bacce ko usane janma diyA phira mara gaI vo baccA jindA rahA
ki nahIM? he gautama ! jIvita rahA hai  /  he bhagavaMta ! kisa taraha ? he
gautama ! janma dene ke sAtha hI vo baccA usa prakAra kI ora carabI lahU~ garbha
ko lipaTakara rahe, badabUvAle padArtha, parU, khArI badabUvAlI azuci cIjoM se
lIpaTA anAtha vilApa karanevAle usa bacce ko eka zvAnane kumhAra ke cakra para
sthApanA karake bhakSaNa karane lagA  /  isalie kumhAra ne usa bacce ko dekhA,
taba usakI patnI sahita kumhAra bacce kI aura dor3A  /  bacce ke zarIra ko naSTa
kie binA zvAna bhAga gayA  /  taba karuNApUrvaka hRdayavAle kumhAra ko lar3akA
na hone se yaha merA putra hogA - aisA socakara kumhAra ne usa bacce ko apanI
bIbI ko samarpaNa kiyA  /  usane bhI sacce sneha se usakI dekha-bhAla karake usa
bacce ko mAnava ke rUpa meM taiyAra kiyA  /  usa kumhArane lokAnuvRtti se apane
pitA hone ke abhimAna se usakA susar3ha nAma rkhaa| he gautama ! kAlakrama se
susAdhu kA samAgama huA  /  dezanA sunakara pratibodha pAyA  /  aura usa
susar3hane dIkSA aMgIkAra kI  /  yAvat paramazraddhA saMvega aura vairAga pAyA
/  kAphI ghora vIra ugra kaSTa karake duSkara mahAkAya kleza karate haiM  /
lekina saMyama meM yatanA kisa prakAra karanA vo nahIM jAnatA  /  ajayaNA ke
doSa se sarvatra asaMyama ke sthAna meM aparAdha karanevAlA hotA hai  /  taba
use guru ne kahA ki - are ! mahAsattvazAlI ! tuma ajJAna doSa ke kAraNa se muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 148

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  **Study/Purpose/Sutra Number**
One who does not know how to achieve Jayana in restraint, becomes a great
sufferer of Kayaklesh. He does not always perform Pratikraman with Alochana.
Therefore, all your Tapas and restraint become futile. When the Guru inspired
him in this way, he always performs Alochana, and the Guru also gives him such
Pratikraman that he becomes capable of achieving Jayana in restraint.
Accordingly, he always wandered in auspicious Adhyavasaya, free from Artadhyan
and Raudra dhyan, day and night.  **O Gautam!** At some point, that sinful soul,
who performs Pratikraman according to the duration of fasts like Chhath, Athum,
four, five, half-month, one month, up to six months, or other great Kayaklesh,
but neglects, disregards, shows disbelief, or becomes lax in the Pratikraman
that is capable of burning and reducing the entire mass of sinful karma by the
power of the mind, speech, and body, which are the means of achieving Jayana in
restraint, the complete restraint of all Asrava, Swadhyay, and Dhyan, etc., and
considers it difficult, and does not perform such true Pratikraman. **O
Gautam!** That strong soul, after enjoying his due lifespan, died and was born
as a Mahardhik Samanik Dev in the Saudharma Kalpa, under the rule of Indra
Maharaj. From there, he was born as Vasudev in the seventh hell, the earth. From
there, he was born as a large elephant, and after dying in the state of sexual
desire, he went to the Ananta Kaya plant. **O Gautam!** This is the strong soul
who, despite performing Alochana, Ninda, Gardha, and Pratikraman, will wander in
the world for a long time due to not knowing Jayana. **O Bhagvant!** What Jayana
did he not recognize, that even after performing such difficult Kayaklesh, he
will wander in the world for such a long time? **O Gautam!** Jayana is said to
be the complete and uninterrupted observance of all eighteen thousand limbs of
Shila, day and night, throughout life, and the proper performance of all
restraint practices. He did not understand these seven things. Therefore, he
will wander in the world for a long time, being devoid of liberation.  **O
Bhagvant!** Why did Jayana not come to his mind? **O Gautam!** If he had
renounced the use of water with awareness, even for one-eighth of the Kayaklesh
he endured, he would have attained Siddhi. But he consumed water with awareness.
For one who consumes water with awareness, any Kayaklesh becomes futile.  **O
Bhagvant!** Apkay, Agni Kay, and Mithun are considered the places of great sin.
They are the causes of A-Bodhi. A truly restrained Sadhu should renounce these
three in solitude. He should not consume them. Therefore, he did not understand
that Jayana. **O Bhagvant!** Why are Apkay, Agni Kay, and Mithun considered the
causes of A-Bodhi? **O Gautam!** The beginning of all six Kayas is considered
the place of great sin, but the beginning of Apkay and Agni Kay is destructive
to infinite Satva. The consumption of Mithun leads to the destruction of
countless living beings.  **O Gautam!** The consumption of these three Kayas is
considered a great sin because it leads to the destruction of infinite Satva and
countless living beings. They are under the influence of A-prashast Adhyavasaya,
being filled with Sajjad Raga-Dvesha and Moha. Therefore, **O Gautam!** Those
living beings who engage in such sinful behavior, consuming the beginning of
these Kayas, do not become worthy of accepting the first Mahavrata. The lack of
the first Mahavrata leads to the lack of other Mahavrata and restraint
practices. Therefore, it is considered completely contradictory to the path of a
Shraman. Therefore, it is the destroyer of the path of Samyag Marg. Therefore,
whatever karma-bandhan one creates, one is born in hell, animal realm, and human
realm countless times, where one does not even hear the words of Dharma in
dreams, and wanders in the world without attaining Dharma. Therefore, water,
fire, and sexual intercourse are considered the causes of A-Bodhi.  **O
Bhagvant!** If one performs such great Kayaklesh, like fasting for six, eight,
four, five days, half a month, one month, up to six months, continuously, which
is very severe, heroic, fierce, painful, difficult, and devoid of Jayana, then
what...  **Muni Diparatnasagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra - Hindi
Translation** Page 149

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka saMyama
meM jayaNA kaise karanI vo mAlUma na hone se mahAna kAyakleza karanevAlA hotA
hai  /  hamezA AloyaNA dekara prAyazcitta nahIM karatA  /  to tumhArA yaha kiyA
huA sarva tapa-saMyama niSphala hotA hai  /  jaba isa prakAra guru ne usako
preraNA dI taba hamezA AlocanA dete haiM, vo guru bhI use usa taraha kA
prAyazcitta dete haiM ki jisa prakAra se saMyama meM jayaNA karanevAlA bane  /
usI ke anusAra rAta-dina haraeka samaya ArtadhyAna, raudradhyAna se mukta zubha
adhyavasAya meM hamezA vicaraNa karatA thA  /  he gautama ! kisI samaya vo
pApamativAlA jo kisI chaThTha, aThuma, cAra, pA~ca, ardhamAsa mAsa yAvat cha
mAsa ke upavAsa yA dUsare bar3e kAyakleza ho vaise prAyazcitta usake anusAra
acchI taraha se sevana kare lekina jo kucha bhI saMyama kriyA meM jayaNAvAle
mana, vacana, kAyA ke yoga, samagra Azrava kA rodha, svAdhyAya, dhyAna Avazyaka
Adi se samagra pApakarma kI rAzi ko jalAkara bhasma karane ke lie samartha
prAyazcitta hai, usameM pramAda kare, usakI avahelanA kare, azraddhA kare,
zithilatA kare, yAvat are isameM kyA duSkara hai ? aisA karake usa prakAra se
yathArtha prAyazcitta sevana na kare  /  he gotama ! vo susar3ha apanA
yathAyogya Ayu bhugatakara marakara saudharmakalpa meM indra mahArAjA ke
maharddhika sAmAnika deva ke rUpa meM utpanna hae  /  vahA~ se cyavakara yahA~
vAsudeva banakara sAtavIM naraka pRthvI meM utpanna huaa| vahA~ se nIkalakara
mahAkAyavAlA hAthI hokara maithunAsakta mAnasavAlA marakara anantakAya vanaspati
meM gayA  /  he gautama ! yaha vo susar3ha ki jisane - sUtra-1525-1526 AlocanA,
nindA, gardA, prAyazcitta karane ke bAvajUda bhI jayaNA kA anajAna hone se
dIrghakAla taka saMsAra meM bhramaNa karegA  /  he bhagavaMta ! kauna-sI jayaNA
usane na pahacAnI ki jisase usa prakAra ke duSkara kAya-kleza karake bhI usa
prakAra ke lambe arase taka saMsAra meM bhramaNa karegA? he gautama ! jayaNA use
kahate haiM ki aThAraha hajAra zIla ke sampUrNa aMga akhaMr3ita aura avirAdhita
yAvajjIva rAta-dina haraeka samaya dhAraNa kare aura samagra saMyama kriyA kA
acchI taraha se sevana kare  /  vo sAta usa susar3hane na samajhI  /  usa kAraNa
se vo nirbhAgI dIrghakAla taka saMsAra meM paribhramaNa kregaa| he bhagavaMta !
kisa kAraNa se jayaNA usa ke dhyAna meM na AI ? he gautama ! jitanA usane
kAyakleza sahA usa ke A~Thave hisse kA yadi sacitta jala kA tyAga kiyA hotA to
vo siddhi meM hI pahuMca gayA hotA  /  lekina vo sacitta jala kA upayoga
paribhoga karatA thA  /  sacitta jala kA paribhoga karanevAle kaisA bhI
kAyakleza kare to bhI nirarthaka ho jAtA hai| he bhagavaMta ! apkAya, agnikAya
aura maithuna yaha tInoM ko mahApApa ke sthAnaka batAe haiM  /  abodhi denevAle
haiM  /  uttama saMyata sAdhu ko una tInoM kA ekAnta meM tyAga karanA cAhie  /
usakA sevana na karanA cAhie  /  isa kAraNa se usane usa jayaNA ko na samajhA  /
he bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se apakAya, agnikAya, maithuna abodhi denevAle batAe
haiM ? he gautama ! jo ki sarva chaha kAya kA samArambha mahApApa sthAnaka batAe
haiM, lekina apkAya agnikAya kA samArambha ananta sattva kA upaghAta karanevAlA
hai| maithuna sevana se saMkhyAta, asaMkhyAta jIva kA  //  hai| sajjaDa rAga-
dveSa aura moha yukta hone se ekAnta aprazasta adhyavasAya ke AdhIna hote haiM
/  jisa kAraNa se aisA hotA hai usa kAraNa se he gautama ! una jIva kA
samArambha sevana paribhoga karanevAle aise pApa meM se vyavahAra karanevAle
jIva prathama mahAvrata ko dhAraNa karanevAle na bane  /  usakI kamI meM bAkI ke
mahAvrata saMyamAnuSThAna kI kamI hI hai, jisase aisA hai  /  isalie sarvathA
virAdhita zramaNapana mAnA jAtA hai  /  jisa kAraNa se isa prakAra hai isalie
samyag mArga pravartatA hai  /  usakA vinAza karanevAlA hotA hai  /  usa kAraNa
se jo kucha bhI karmabaMdhana kare usase naraka tiryaMca kumAnavapana meM ananta
bAra utpanna ho ki jahA~ bAra-bAra dharma aise akSara bhI sapane meM na sune
aura dharma prApta na karate hue saMsAra meM bhramaNa kare  /  isa kAraNa se
jala, agni aura maithuna abodhidAyaka batAe haiN| he bhagavaMta ! kyA chaThTha,
aThuma, cAra, pA~ca upavAsa, ardhamAsa, eka mAsa yAvat cha mAsa taka hamezA ke
upavAsa kAphI ghora vIra ugra kaSTakArI duSkara saMyama jayaNA rahita aisA ati
mahAna kAyakleza kiyA ho to kyA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 149

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith'  Is the study/purpose/sutra
number meaningless?  O Gautama! Yes, it is meaningless. O Bhagvant! For what
reason? O Gautama! Even animals like donkeys, camels, bulls, etc., without the
victory of restraint, are subjected to heat, warmth, burden, beating, etc.,
without desire, and suffer pain without desire, and become free from action, and
go to Saudharma Kalpa, etc. Even there, due to the destruction of the karma of
enjoyment, they deviate and go to the state of animals, etc., and become those
who follow the world or wander in the world. And they become the recipients of
the gross, terrible suffering of birth, aging, death, etc., and physical and
mental suffering, which is full of impure stench, melted flowing alkali, bile,
vomit, phlegm, fat clinging to the body, rough, dark, full of blood mud,
repulsive, dark group, pain in the womb, entry into the womb, birth, aging,
death, etc. The destruction of the gross, fierce, Maha-Roudra, terrible
suffering of birth, aging, death, etc., without the victory of restraint, does
not happen alone. Therefore, restraint without victory, or even great bodily
torment, is meaningless.  O Bhagvant! Does one who sees, observes, and performs
the victory of restraint well, quickly escape the suffering of birth, aging,
death, etc.? O Gautama! There are some who do not escape such suffering quickly,
and some who do escape quickly. O Bhagvant! Why do you say so? O Gautama! There
are some who, without seeing the assembly place, without expectation, without
attachment, and with pain, perform the torment of restraint. Those who are of
this kind, for a long time, are freed from the worldly suffering of birth,
aging, death, etc. There are also some souls who, by eradicating all pain,
become free from beginning and attachment, free from attachment and ego, whose
stains of attachment, aversion, delusion, and falsehood have gone, who are
extremely pure in intention, with a humble mind, who desire to become free from
action alone, who have supreme faith, emotion, detachment, and are free from the
support of fear, pride, various kinds of negligence, who have conquered severe
suffering and adversity, who have removed fierce attention, who have the
capacity to consume the victory of restraint as it should be, to observe it
well, to follow it, to follow the victory of restraint in a special way, and to
perform it properly. Those who are the recipients of such restraint and victory,
quickly escape the net of such worldly suffering as aging, death, etc. O
Gautama! Therefore, it is said that one escapes the world quickly, and one does
not escape quickly.  O Bhagvant! After being freed from the worldly net of
birth, aging, death, etc., where does the soul reside? O Gautama! Where there is
no aging, no death, no disease, no disgrace, no false accusations, no suffering,
no anxiety, no conflict, no strife, no pain, no poverty, no suffering, no
separation from the beloved. What more can be said? It resides in liberation,
which is alone, indestructible, firm, eternal, unique, and full of infinite
happiness. Thus it is said.  Study-8-The Muni Diparatnasagar's Hindi translation
of the complete Sutra-1527, 1528. This Sutra contains 'Vardhaman Vidya'.
Therefore, its Hindi shadow is not given. Curious people should see our Agam
Suttanni-Bhag-39 Mahanishih Sutra, pages 142-143. The 'Mahanishih' Sutra is
currently available in 4504 verses.  39 Mahanishih-Chhed Sutra-6 Hindi
translation complete Muni Diparatnasagar's (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi
translation Page 150

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka
nirarthaka ho? he gautama ! hA, nirarthaka hai  /  he bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa
se? he gautama ! gadhe, UMTa, baila Adi prANI bhI saMyama jayaNA rahitapana se
IcchA binA Ae hue tApa-garmI bhAra mAra Adi parAdhInatA se IcchA binA duHkha
sahakara akAma nirjarA karake saudharmakalpa Adi meM jAte haiM  /  vahA~ bhI
bhogAvalI karma kA kSaya hone se cyavakara tiryaMcAdika gati meM jAkara saMsAra
kA anusaraNa karanevAlA yA saMsAra meM bhramaNa karanevAlA hotA hai  /  aura
azuci badabUM pIgale pravAhI kSAra, pitta, ulTI zleSma se pUrNa carabI zarIra
para lipaTe ora paru, aMdherA vyApta, lahU~ ke kIcar3avAle, dekha na sake aisI
bibhatsa, aMdhakAra samUhayukta, garbhavAsa meM darda, garbhapraveza, janma,
jarA, maraNAdika aura zArIrika, mAnasika paidA hue ghora dAruNa duHkha kA
bhogavaTA karanA bhAjana hotA hai  /  saMyama kI jayaNA rahita janma, jarA,
maraNAdika ke ghora, pracaMDa, mahAraudra, dAruNa duHkha kA nAza ekAnte nahIM
hotA  /  isIlie jayaNArahita saMyama yA ati mahAna kAyakleza kare to bhI
nirarthaka hai| he bhagavaMta ! kyA saMyama kI jayaNA ko acchI taraha se
dekhanevAlA pAlana karanevAlA acchI taraha se usakA anuSThAna karanevAlA, janma-
jarA, maraNAdika ke duHkha se jalda chUTa jAtA hai  /  he gautama ! aise bhI koI
hote haiM ki jalda aise duHkha chuTa na jAe aura kucha aise hote haiM ki jalda
chuTa jAe  /  he bhagavaMta ! kisa kAraNa se Apa aisA kahate ho ? he gautama !
koI aisA bhI hote haiM ki jo sahaja thor3A sA bhI sabhAsthAna dekhe binA apekSA
rakhe binA rAga sahita aura zalya sahita saMyama kI yAtanA kare  /  jo isa
prakAra ke ho to lambe arase taka janma, jarA, maraNa Adi kaIM sAMsArika duHkha
se mukta bane  /  kucha aise AtmA bhI hote haiM ki jo sarva zalya ko nirmUlya
ukher3akara Arambha aura parigraha rahita hokara mamatA aura ahaMkAra rahita
hokara rAgadveSa moha mithyAtva kaSAya ke mala kalaMka jinake cale gae haiM,
sarva bhAva-bhAvAntara se ati vizuddha AzayavAle, dInatA rahita mAnasavAle
ekAnta nirjarA karane kI apekSAvAlA parama zraddhA, saMvega, vairAgI, samagra
bhaya gArava vicitra kaI taraha ke pramAda ke Alambana se mukta, ghora pariSaha
upasarga ko jisane jItA hai, raudradhyAna jisane dUra kiyA hai, samagra karma kA
kSaya karane ke lie yathokta jayaNA kA khapa rakhatA ho, acchI taraha prekSA-
najara karatA ho, pAlana karatA ho, vizeSa tarIke se jayaNA kA pAlana karatA ho,
yAvat samyaka taraha se usakA anuSThAna karatA ho  /  jo usa taraha ke saMyama
aura jayaNA ke arthI ho vo jalda jarA, maraNa Adi kaIM sAMsArika aise duHkha kI
jAla se mukta ho jAte haiM  /  he gautama ! isa kAraNa se aisA kahA jAtA hai ki
eka jalda saMsAra se chUTa jAtA hai aura eka jalda nahIM chUTa sktaa| he
bhagavaMta ! janma, jarA, maraNa Adi kaIM sAMsArika jAla se mukta hone ke bAda
jIva kahA~ vAsa kare? he gautama ! jahA~ jarA nahIM, mauta nahIM, vyAdhi nahIM,
apayaza nahIM, jhUThe Aropa nahIM lagate, saMtApa-udvega kaMkAsa, TaMTA, kleza,
dAridra, upatApa jahA~ nahIM hote  /  iSTa kA viyoga nahIM hotA  /  ora kyA
kahanA ? ekAnta akSaya, dhruva, zAzvata, nirUpama, ananta sukha jisameM haiM
aise mokSa meM vAsa karanevAlA hotA hai| isa anusAra khaa| adhyayana-8-kA muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt hindI anuvAda pUrNa sUtra-1527,1528 isa sUtra meM
''vardhamAna vidyA dI hai  /  isalie usakI hindI-chAyA nahIM dI  /  jijJAsu loga
hamArA Agama suttANi-bhAga-39 mahAnisIha sUtra pRSTha-142-143 dekhe  /
'mahAnisIha' sUtra 4504 zloka pramANa abhI milatA haiM  /  39 mahAnisIha-
chedasUtra-6 hindI anuvAda pUrNa muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 150

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 39, Chhed Sutra-5, 'Mahanishith' Study/Purpose/Sutra Number Namo Namo
Nimmaldansanas  Pujapaad Shri Anand-Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-Sudharmasagar Gurubhyo
Nam: 39 Mahanishith Agam Sutra Hindi Translation [Translator and Editor Agam
Diwakar Muni Dipratan Sagarji [M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. Shruta Maharshi] and Sat:-(1)
(2) deepratnasagar.in Meet Dress:- jainmunideepratnasagar@gmail.com Phone
09825967397 Muni Dipratan Sagar Krit (Mahanishith) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation
Page 151

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Agama sUtra 39, chedasUtra-5, 'mahAnizItha' adhyayana/uddeza/sUtrAMka namo namo
nimmaladaMsaNassa pUjyapAd zrI AnaMda-kSamA-lalita-suzIla-sudharmasAgara
gurUbhyo nama: 39 mahAnizItha AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda [anuvAdaka evaM saMpAdaka
Agama dIvAkara muni dIparatnasAgarajI [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. zruta maharSi ] va
sATa:-(1) (2) deepratnasagar.in bheta Dresa:- jainmunideepratnasagar@gmail.com
bhonA 09825967397 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt (mahAnizItha) Agama sUtra-hindI
anuvAda Page 151

